Bangladesh:
T h e U n ﬁn i s h e d
R e v o l u t i o n
L a w r e n c e
L i f s c h u l t z
r
r
i f
%
‘

--- PAGE BREAK ---r
Asia Series No.

2
Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution takes the lid off hitherto
unknown facts about Bangladesh’s turbulent political history since
1974.

Its author, askilled and experienced journalist, tracks down
the facts of the overthrow of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the founding
nationalist leader of Bangladesh, and of the execution ayear later
o f C o l o n e l A b u T a h e r .

Part Itells the moving story of Taher, one of the leading military
ﬁgures in Bangladesh's War of Liberation in 1971, and at one time
aclose colleague of the country's current head-of-state, Major-
General Ziaur Rahman (Zia).

On 7November 1975 ageneral
uprising shook Bangladesh and set off abroad mutiny inside the
Bangladesh Armed Forces.

This is the story of that uprising and its
betrayal.

Eight months later Abu Taher was secretly tried and
executed by his former friend, whose own life Taher had saved on
November 7th.

Zia and Taher broke over an issue critical for the
entire Third World.

What would it be?

Revolutionary socialism in
one of the poorest countries on earth, or apath of capitalist
development based on the largesse of the U.S.A.

and the plans of
t h e W o r l d B a n k ?

Part Mpresents the ﬁrst exhaustive investigation into the overthrow
of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman who died in the coup of 15 August
1975.

Working jointly with Kai Bird, Assistant Editor of The Nation
(New York), Lifschultz has unearthed astory which reaches back
into the clandestine history of more than adecade of South Asian
politics.

Their careful work shows how acohesive group of
conservative Bengalis, who rose to prominence in the Pakistan
period and were swept aside by Mujib after Independence in 1971,
ﬁnally staged acoup in alliance with afaction of Mujib's own party
and reinstated themselves in power, The investigation traces the
history of relations between these circles and the United States.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Working jointly with Kai Bird, Assistant Editor of The Nation
(New York), Lifschultz has unearthed astory which reaches back
into the clandestine history of more than adecade of South Asian
politics. Their careful work shows how acohesive group of
conservative Bengalis, who rose to prominence in the Pakistan
period and were swept aside by Mujib after Independence in 1971,
ﬁnally staged acoup in alliance with afaction of Mujib's own party
and reinstated themselves in power, The investigation traces the
history of relations between these circles and the United States. It
is acomplex story reaching from Henry Kissinger's obscure
animosities, to covert contacts in the midst of Pakistan's civil war,
to atime bomb inside the Mujib regime's own national intelligence
organization. Lawrence Lifschultz's unique sources encompass over 200 inter¬
views conducted in the United States, Europe and Bangladesh,
together with U.S. government documents obtained under the U.S. Freedom of Information Act. He also reproduces in aseries of
remarkable appendices the court record of the secret trial of Colonel
Taher: the author's own interview —the ﬁrst of its kind —with the
CIA's Station Chief in Dacca at the time of Mujib’s overthrow; a
summary of aconﬁdential study by the Washington based Carnegie
Endowment on American foreign policy in the midst of Pakistan's
civil war: and acareful account of the long-standing relationship
between the East Pakistan (Bangladesh) Security Services and the
U.S. Ofﬁce of Public Safety. f j
Lawrence Lifschultz was South Asia correspondent of the Far
Eastern Economic Review. During 1974 he was the resident corres-
pondnet of the Review in Bangladesh, and in 1975 moved to New
Delhi to cover the entire subcontinent from the Indian capital. He
has also written on South Asian affairs for The Guardian, The
Washington Post, New Statesman, and the B.B.C. He is currently
doing doctoral research at King's College, Cambridge. ISBN 0905762 07 X
Price: £3.50; $7.95on South Asian affairs for The Guardian, The
Washington Post, New Statesman, and the B.B.C. He is currently
doing doctoral research at King's College, Cambridge. ISBN 0905762 07 X
Price: £3.50; $7.95

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh:
The Unﬁnished
Revolution
I. Taher's Last Testament
Lawrence Lifschultz
II. The Murder of Mujib
Lawrence Lifschultz
with the assistance of
Kai Bird
To Paul, Samar Babu, and Derek
Zed Press, 57 Caledonian Road,
L o n d o n N 1 9 D N

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
was ﬁrst published by Zed Press, 57
Caledonian Road, London N1 9DN in July
1979. Part Ioriginally appeared in an earlier
version in the Economic and Political
Weekly (Bombay) in aspecial number,
August 1977.
Copyright ©Lawrence Lifschultz, 1979
ISBN 0905762 07 X
Printed by Billing &Sons Ltd., London
Typeset by Donald Typesetting
Designed by Mayblin/Shaw
Cover photo courtesy of Lawrence
Lifschultz and the Far Eastern
Economic Review
All rights reserved

--- PAGE BREAK ---illing &Sons Ltd., London
Typeset by Donald Typesetting
Designed by Mayblin/Shaw
Cover photo courtesy of Lawrence
Lifschultz and the Far Eastern
Economic Review
All rights reserved

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Contents
I n t r o d u c t i o n
I
1
Part I: Taher’s Last Testament
The Letter from Cell No.8
Prelude to Insurrection
The November 7th Uprising
The National Question and National Independence
The Bangladesh Left and the War of Independence
China and the Bangladesh Movement
Jashod: From ‘Nucleus’ Towards aParty
The Military Debate: People’s War versus Conventional War
The Conquest of Independence
Zia’s November 23rd Counter-Coup: Taher’s Arrest
The Trial to the End
Appendix to Part I: Taher’s Testimony
2
5
8
15
2 1
2 3
2 6
3 0
3 6
4 7
5 6
7 5
Part II: The Murder of Mujib
Murder at Midnight
The Ofﬁcial Story
The American Connection?
On the Periphery: the U.S. Strategy of Directed Transitions
War Breaks Out as Kissinger Reaches for Peking
Calcutta Days 1971: Secret Negotiations and the Mustaque Circle
The Eminence Grise
The Old Nexus and aNew Nemesis
Prior Knowledge and the Question of Complicity
The Great Canard
Kissinger’s ‘Foreign Enemies List’
The Perils of aClient State
‘The Need to Know’ —Nothing
9 8
9 8
1 0 0
1 0 3
1 0 8
1 1 1
1 1 3
11 7
11 9
1 3 0
1 3 2
1 3 6
1 3 9
1 4 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---reat Canard
Kissinger’s ‘Foreign Enemies List’
The Perils of aClient State
‘The Need to Know’ —Nothing
9 8
9 8
1 0 0
1 0 3
1 0 8
1 1 1
1 1 3
11 7
11 9
1 3 0
1 3 2
1 3 6
1 3 9
1 4 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Appendices to Part II
A. The Carnegie Papers
B. Interview with Henry Kissinger’s National Security Council
Assistant
C. Interview with the C.I.A. Bangladesh Station Chief, September
1 9 7 8
D. The East Pakistan (Bangladesh) Security Services and the
American Ofﬁce of Public Safety
155
169
1 7 7
1 8 5
ASelect Chronology
APolitical Glossary of Personalities and Organizations
2 0 3
2 0 6
I n d e x
2 0 9
Acknowledgements
Iwould like to give special thanks to Dr. Ajit Singh of the
Faculty of Economics at Cambridge University for the
time granted me to write this work apart from my other
responsibilities. Also to Paul Sweezy and Harry Magdoff
for their support and friendship during the summer and
autumn of 1976.
Kai Bird and Iboth wish to extend our thanks to Howard
Bray and the Fund for Investigative Journalism, Washington
D.C., for the modest ﬁnancial assistance extended to us
for the writing of Part Two of this volume. The names of
many Bengali and Western friends should also be listed
here, but for reasons ranging from personal security to a
desire merely to travel in and out of Bangladesh, they can¬
not be. Each will more than understand the difﬁculty of
mentioning them individually. Our appreciation, however, is
by no means diminished.
Finally, books are not produced by authors alone. Their
ﬁnal form is the result of much unnoticed effort by editors
and editorial staff. The efforts of Robert Molteno and
Miranda Davies of Zed Press, together with Penny Thomson’s
earlier work on the manuscript, were afundamental
c o n t r i b u t i o n .

--- PAGE BREAK ---rial staff. The efforts of Robert Molteno and
Miranda Davies of Zed Press, together with Penny Thomson’s
earlier work on the manuscript, were afundamental
c o n t r i b u t i o n .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Introduction
Just over two centuries ago acontingent of 800 European irregular soldiers
faced an army of nearly 50,000 troops from the Nawab of Bengal’s standing
forces. Not only was there numerical superiority on the Bengali side, but in
this instance artillery and technical supremacy were also against the European
force. Nevertheless, in ‘the most miserable skirmish ever to be called adecisive
battle’,1 the Europeans walked off with avictory which would change
world history. This was the Battle of Plassey. The date was 23 June 1757.
All sorts of racial, national and historical myths developed out of this
event, but the story of the conquest of Bengal was no mystery. In the modern
parlance of the Western intelligence community, what happened was aclassic
‘covert operation’ carried through with great clandestine success. There never
was amilitary defeat of the Nawab of Bengal’s army. The method of victory
was much more simple: the Commander of the Nawab’s armed forces had
secretly been bought off by the British before either side had ever reached
the mango groves around Plassey.
Through an astute and subtle understanding of the political factions within
the Bengali leadership and ruling class; by carefully distinguishing the patriotic
from the corrupt; and through the unabashed capacity to buy and sell com¬
prador loyalty from those who deal in their own ambitions for power, the
small British expeditionary force under Robert Clive secured its military
triumph by aneat gamble on aprior political arrangement. From the incident
at Plassey onwards, ‘the British waged more or less continuous warfare against
the Indian people’ consolidating their ‘power in India and the conquest of
other regions, breaking up the old system of self-sufﬁcient and self-perpetuating
villages, and supporting an elite whose self-interest would harmonize with
British rule.’^
Over the next century an entire world order was remade and reshaped
under the global expansion of the British Empire. In Bengal apre-capitalist
mode of production was totally transformed. Indigo, jute, tea, opium, private
property in land, Zamindari landlordism, land tax, and the right to buy and
seU apeasant’s property to extract debt from him were all introduced. And,
from its staging post in South Asia, the new European based epoch of com¬
merce and modern industry broke open markets throughout Asia with the
rumble of war and the ‘right’ to an open door.
1d. And,
from its staging post in South Asia, the new European based epoch of com¬
merce and modern industry broke open markets throughout Asia with the
rumble of war and the ‘right’ to an open door.
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---I n t r o d u c t i o n
But the opening key to all this was Plassey.

It is pertinent to the contents
of this book to be reminded of those events.

Familiar as they may be to
Bengalis who know their history and the tradition of their theatre, other
readers may not be so well informed about the tragedy of avery ancient coup
d’etat.

The modern relevance will already be clear to anyone who has followed
the press revelations and legislative investigations of recent years on what
happened to Arbenz in Guatemala, Mossadeq in Iran, Lumumba in the Congo,
Sihanouk in Cambodia, and Allende in Chile.

In away the story of Siraj-ud-
Daulah, the Nawab of Bengal, was apacesetter for the history of other societies,
and of his own in the future state of Bangladesh.

Siraj-ud-Daulah ascended the throne of the Nawab of Bengal upon the
death of his grandfather, Alivardi Khan, who died in April 1756.

The old man
had warned his grandson that the growing power and arbitrary actions of the
merchants of the East India Company were threatening the province’s
sovereignty and independence.

Before he died Alivardi reportedly urged
Siraj to take action:
Keep in view the power the European nations have in the country.

Their
wars and politics in the Telinga country [southern India] should keep you
waking.

On the pretence of private contests between their kings they have
seized and divided the country of the King [the Mughal] and the goods of
his people between them.

Think not to weaken all three together [the
En^sh, French, and the Dutch].

The power of the English is great ...

reduce them ﬁrst.

The others will give you little trouble when you have
reduced them.

Suffer them not, my son, to have fortiﬁcations or soldiers.

If you do, the country is not yours.^
On his accession to power Siraj-ud-Daulah immediately instituted measures
which would place the privileges of European merchants on an equal footing
with other foreign traders such as the Armenians.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Suffer them not, my son, to have fortiﬁcations or soldiers. If you do, the country is not yours.^
On his accession to power Siraj-ud-Daulah immediately instituted measures
which would place the privileges of European merchants on an equal footing
with other foreign traders such as the Armenians. This meant the withdrawal
of the privileges previously granted the English Company which permitted
free import-export trade without the payment of taxes. In its own time and
place Siraj’s new regime was acting not unlike, one might say, the way the
government of Mohammed Mossadeq did in Iran in 1951. Nationalist feeling
in Iran had focused on the continued ownership of the country’s oil by the
British owned Anglo-Iranian Oil Company.*^ Shortly after Mossadeq became
Prime Minister the oil industry was nationalized. This act put him in direct
conﬂict with Britain, the United States and their Iranian client, the young
Shah. By August 1953 acoalition of internal and external forces organized
by Kermit Roosevelt, the C.I.A.’s Bureau Chief for the Middle East, ousted
Mossadeq in atightly organized putsch and opened up the oil bonanza
which fed Western industry throughout the third quarter of the 20th Century.^
What took place in the case of Bengal is an old and familiar story which has
found its speciﬁc variation in many societies. But the details of what occurred
there in 1756-57 should not be lost on those readers who will concern them¬
selves with the events related in the rest of this volume. i i

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
In addition to ordering the East India Company merchants to pay com¬
mercial duties, the new Nawab directed the English to dismantle military
fortiﬁcations recently constructed in the Calcutta area.

An initial communi¬
cation was sent to Watts, the English commercial chief, and was followed by
aletter to Drake, the Enghsh Governor of Calcutta.

The Nawab indicated
that he viewed the British as acommunity of merchants who were welcome
to reside in Bengal within that context.

But, the construction of fortiﬁcations
was out of the question, and those which had been built were to be immed¬
iately demolished.

No foreign military bases would be allowed in Bengal.

The English Governor of Calcutta procrastinated in his reply and ultimately
responded with characteristic diplomatic obscurity, giving no indication
whether any action would be taken on demolishing the military fortiﬁcations.

Following Drake’s spurious response the Nawab marched from his capital
at Murshidabad on IJune 1756.

By the I6th Siraj and his army had reached
Calcutta.

Within three days, and after asomewhat pathetic show of resistance.

Governor Drake and the town’s commercial notables ﬂed by ship.

On June
20th Calcutta’s Fort William surrendered to the Nawab’s forces.

The legacy of this battle was for the ideologues of empire epitomised by
the incident of the Black Hole of Calcutta in which over ahundred English
prisoners were reported to have lost their lives.

The debate over the event,
which occurred apparently without the knowledge of the Nawab, has ﬁlled
volumes of both careful history and colonial propaganda.

‘For ﬁfty years
little notice was taken of the incident,’ writes Spear, ‘but it then became con¬
venient material for the compilers of an imperialist hagiology ....--- PAGE BREAK ---

The debate over the event,
which occurred apparently without the knowledge of the Nawab, has ﬁlled
volumes of both careful history and colonial propaganda. ‘For ﬁfty years
little notice was taken of the incident,’ writes Spear, ‘but it then became con¬
venient material for the compilers of an imperialist hagiology .... The
emphasis upon the incident grew so great that the Black Hole became, along
with Plasscy and the Mutiny, one of the Uiree things which “every schoolboy
knew” about India.But, in the end, any recollection of the politics behind
what had occurred frequently got lost. The story of the Black Hole became
something of an early English ‘bloodbath theory’, not unlike the one Americans
in Vietnam often fell back on 200 years later, to justify whatever came next. The British withdrew from Calcutta to an outpost at Fulta and began to
plot and organize their counter-offensive. It is at this stage one notices the
employment of so many of the classic techniques now identiﬁed with the
business of contemporary intelligence operations. The ﬁrst tactic was to
exploit rivalries and poUtical differences within the Bengali leadership. There
were two pretenders to the Nawab’s throne —Ghasiti Begam of Dacca and
Shaukat Jang of Purnea —both also descendants of Alivardi. The British had
made contact with both elements even prior to their defeat at Calcutta in
June 1756, and gave their backing to any challenge which could be mounted
against the Nawab, stating in aletter to Shaukat Jang their explicit hope that
‘he might defeat SiraJ-ud-Daulah’. But the new Nawab moved quickly, neut¬
ralizing Ghasiti by non-military means and, after defeating the English at
Calcutta, he also marched against Shaukat Jang and killed him. Meanwhile, to the south at the British enclave of Madras, it was decided to
dispatch amilitary expedition to Bengal to confront the Nawab. The armed
force was put under the command of the young Robert Clive, who had
111

--- PAGE BREAK ---I n t r o d u c t i o n
distinguished himself against the French ﬁve years earlier in Madras and who
would later become the Governor of Bengal.

The British military force arrived
at Fulta in December.

Between then and June 1757 aseries of negotiations
and armed incidents occurred between the two sides.

Calcutta itself was
recaptured by the British without the Nawab committing his main military
u n i t s .

It was during this interim period between December and June that Clive
set up what turned out to be possibly the most important intelligence coup
of British imperial history.

At the time it seemed quite an ordinary matter.

Through their previous links with the royal pretender, Shaukat Jang, by then
dead, the English were aware that secret contacts had existed between Shaukat
and certain of the most senior generals of the Nawab’s Army.

It was known
that these military men were prepared to betray Siraj-ud-Daulah, if it could
be made clear that there was gain and power in it for them should they co¬
operate with the English.

As the Nawab prepared to march against Clive’s
forces in Calcutta, Clive concluded asecret treaty with the Commander-in-
Chief of the Nawab’s Army, General Mir Jafar.

The go-between for the covert
pact were two Calcutta ﬁnanciers, Jagat Seth and Amin Chand, who were
each guaranteed apercentage.

The secret agreement was ﬁnalized on 10 June
1757, afortnight before the impending battle at Plassey.

In aformal docu¬
ment, according to Spear, ‘Mir Jafar promised to conﬁrm the Company’s
privileges, to pay amillion pounds as compensation for the loss of Calcutta,
and half amillion more to its European inhabitants.

By private agreement,
there were to be large consolations for the Chief Company ofﬁcers.’"^ In
return the English offered their backing for Mir Jafar’s ambition to become
the next Nawab of Bengal.

The outcome of the Battle of Plassey had been
carefully pre-arranged two weeks before the armies even saw each other.--- PAGE BREAK ---

By private agreement,
there were to be large consolations for the Chief Company ofﬁcers.’"^ In
return the English offered their backing for Mir Jafar’s ambition to become
the next Nawab of Bengal. The outcome of the Battle of Plassey had been
carefully pre-arranged two weeks before the armies even saw each other. On the 22nd of June Clive’s force arrived at Plassey to face the assembled
might of the Nawab under the command of Mir Jafar. On the morning of 23
June two small columns under two ofﬁcers, Mir Madan and Mohanlal, were
sent forward to destroy Chve. Astray shot killed Mir Madan, but Mohanlal’s
column continued to advance with Clive’s force retreating before it. Then
without explanation or any apparent rationality Mohanlal was ordered by his
High Command to retreat and pull back his forces. ‘This was not atime to
retreat,’ Mohanlal is reported to have said in astonishment, ‘the action was so
far advanced, that whatever might happen, would happen now.’^ The orders
were repeated and with disciplined reluctance Mohanlal’s units retreated. Elsewhere units linked to Mir Jafar’s plan began afrenzied withdrawal throwing
the entire front line military force into confused ﬂight. Senior ofﬁcers under
Mir Jafar failed to intervene to restore discipline or direction. Confusion was
exactly what the General wanted at this point. ‘Mir Jafar, like Stanley at
Bosworth,’ says Spear, ‘looked on from adistance, appearing cautiously the
next day to reap the expensive fruits of this circumspect treachery.’^
Within ﬁve days, on the 28th, Clive installed him as the puppet Nawab at
Murshidabad. Siraj-ud-Daulah was captured and four days later was executed
by Mir Jafar’s son. ‘Siraj-ud-Daulah was put down; Mir Jafar was put up. And
I V

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
there was nothing indeﬁnite this time,’ writes Woodruff.^® The year long
effort by Siraj, the ‘feudal nationalist’, to rid Bengal of British commercial
penetration was ﬁnished at the same moment it seemed so easily and com¬
pletely within his grasp.

And, as Spear later put it in poignant understatement,
‘A new era had begun.What followed was the longest and deepest colonial
experience in modern history.

Before Clive left Calcutta in ablaze of personal glory three years later, he
had pocketed by private agreement with Mir Jafar £234,000 in cash plus a
jagir, or tax collection estate, comprising the entire area of present-day 24-
Pargannas District, worth £30,000 ayear in income.

Mir Jaf^ar lasted three
years as head of apuppet regime at Murshidabad, becoming drunken, petulant,
and ultimately an annoyance to his British patrons at Calcutta.

In October
1760, like adiscarded wine bottle, he was replaced by British forces under
Clive’s successor and friend, Henry Vansittart.

Into his position was moved
Mir Kasim, his son-in-law.

After another three years, as British commercial
trade began to look more and more like alarge-scale looting operation, Mir
Kasim began to make objections and to affect astance of nationalist poli¬
tics.

In what by then had become aroulette of power, Kasim was removed
and Mir Jafar, as opportunist as ever, was reinstated in 1763.

Jafar, Clive’s
‘hero’ at Plassey, ﬁnally died two years later.

Why this old story of corruption and betrayal is worth recounting today is
not simply because of the signiﬁcance it continues to have in the national
consciousness of Bengal, where General Mir Jafar’s name lingers on like an
epic legend; but rather because the content of this book is an account of
modern day treachery and heroism in Bengal.

And, in many respects, it bears
similarity to past events.

The names, the entanglements, the deceptions, the
executions are, of course, all different.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And, in many respects, it bears
similarity to past events. The names, the entanglements, the deceptions, the
executions are, of course, all different. But the General —Ziaur Rahman —
who heads the regime in Dacca today is accused by his enemies of being the
Mir Jafar of modern Bangladesh. This may only be apolitical slogan. Never¬
theless, it is one worth studying carefully. And, if Zia is amodern day Mir
Jafar, he certainly is not the only one roaming the barracks of power in
Bengal today. This book revolves around two principal events. Part Iis an account of the
insurrection of 7November 1975 and the subsequent execution of Colonel
Abu Taher. Part II is also an account, but of the coup d’etat which overthrew
and killed Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the President of Bangladesh, on 15
August 1975. Both men were nationalists and each will be remembered for
his own distinct contribution in bringing Bangladesh into being as an inde¬
pendent state. Taher was aradical nationalist and aMarxist. Mujib was a
bourgeois nationalist and an admirer of social democracy, as practised in the
more advanced capitalist states. The account of Taker’s life and his hanging appears ﬁrst in this volume,
although chronologically the insurrection of which he was aleading ﬁgure,
occurred some months after the coup that killed Mujib. The reason for this
ordering bears some relation to the origin of the two manuscripts -that is
to the two parts of the volume. Taker’s Last Testament was written ﬁrst and

--- PAGE BREAK ---I n t r o d u c t i o n
derived from my position as aforeign correspondent in Dacca at the time of
the secret trial which led to his execution.

It was through investigation of the
Taher case that Icame across new information on the origins of the putsch
that had toppled Mujibur Rahman.

Through careful questioning of Bangladesh
and foreign sources, Islowly realized that the small group of ofﬁcials, who
from behind-the-scenes had pressed|and agitated for Abu Taher’s execution
in July 1976 (the ﬁrst such in 40 years), had themselves all come into leading
positions of power immediately after the putsch that pulled Mujib down.

Through abiographical study of anumber of these individuals, it emerged
that not only were most of them previously top intelligence or internal
security ofﬁcials of the old Pakistan regime, but many had also been among
those few Bengalis who had collaborated with the Pakistan Army in its bloody
crackdown on the Bangladesh nationalist movement in 1971.

During the
research which followed, the coincidences, surprises and leads to broader links
multiplied.

The original story of the Mujib coup, which Ihad reported as
South Asia Correspondent of the Far Eastern Economic Review, fell apart.

The reports that Iand other colleagues ﬁled at the time were, as ﬁrst reports
often are, superﬁcial and thus to acertain degree misleading.

Only the most
apparent aspects of what had happened were reported and discussed.

While
certainly care had been taken by those active in the coup to obscure and
deﬂect any focus upon themselves, the foreign and Bengali press in general
failed to go back and re-examine the underlying history, facts and impli¬
cations of what had happened.

In certain respects the reason for this is indicative of much of contem¬
porary journalism, particularly Western reporting in the Third World, where
the direction over the last decade or more has been towards Tire brigade’
style reporting and spot coverage.--- PAGE BREAK ---

While
certainly care had been taken by those active in the coup to obscure and
deﬂect any focus upon themselves, the foreign and Bengali press in general
failed to go back and re-examine the underlying history, facts and impli¬
cations of what had happened. In certain respects the reason for this is indicative of much of contem¬
porary journalism, particularly Western reporting in the Third World, where
the direction over the last decade or more has been towards Tire brigade’
style reporting and spot coverage. The old notion of aresident correspondent
who ‘sank-in-deep’, learned the language and history of the people he was
reporting on, and attempted to blend day-to-day political details into asense
of trend and perspective, has suffered asteep decline and is fast becoming
an anachronism. Moreover, as acolleague from The New York Times once
explained to me, the goal is to write ‘750 words which an intelligent 16 year
old will understand on aMonday morning.’ To go into depth or into amore
extended analysis, particularly in much of the American daily press, is to
overdo it. There is adistinct lack of what aformer Review colleague of mine,
Harvey Stockwin, once termed ‘scholar journalism’. Although this may be
too elevated aterm for getting beneath the surface of events, this is what is
needed. And too few writers go back to those reports they once put on page
one, only to discover years later the story was indeed avery different one. In some measure these criticisms also apply to sections of the press in
Bangladesh. Of course, censorship or implicit threats of retaliation has been
the dominant milieu in Dacca for some years now. Nevertheless, unlike India
during the Emergency or even Pakistan under Zia-ul Huq’s martial law censor¬
ship, the response from editors and writers has so far been rather subdued and
very little critical examination of the past few years has appeared. Ayear after Abu Taher was executed, ameeting was organized at Conway
V Irom editors and writers has so far been rather subdued and
very little critical examination of the past few years has appeared. Ayear after Abu Taher was executed, ameeting was organized at Conway
V I

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Hall in London by agroup of relatives and some of Taker’s former colleagues.

Iwas asked to speak at the meeting and certain of the remarks Imade then I
believe still have bearing in the current situation:
When the Taher Memorial Committee asked me to speak at this function
Iwas initially uncertain whether Iought to.

Ihave been ajournalist in
South Asia whose job has been to record developments and not to lead a
debate on the virtues of the various protagonists contending over the
great issues that divide classes and political parties in the subcontinent.

Ihave tried to keep my objectives conﬁned simply within the bounds of
being areporter: to record, analyse, and inform people of developments
as they happened in the way I.understood them.

Editors are always reminding their correspondents about asingular
quality -objectivity.

To be ‘objective’ is the by-word of the profession.

It is something many of us have given agreat deal of thought to.

In con¬
sidering it, Ihave come up with adistinction that Ibelieve relevant to the
case of Abu Taher.

For areporter there can be no compromise with the
principle of objectivity.

But, on some matters, there also can be no neut¬
rality.

One example: In 1975 the Government of India imposed strict
censorship on its domestic press and sought to impose such restrictions on
foreign correspondents reporting the crisis known as the ‘Emergency’.

As
ajournalist then in Delhi, Itried objectively to describe the structure of
censorship then being erected, and reported the arrests of Indian journalists
who failed to fall into line.

As straightforwardly as Icould, Idescribed in
my reports the new regulations and mechanisms by which they would
operate.

But, as regards my own views, Iwas not neutral as far as censor¬
ship was concerned.

Icould report it objectively —that is describe it,
giving an account of how it worked, who worked it, and who its victims
were.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But, as regards my own views, Iwas not neutral as far as censor¬
ship was concerned. Icould report it objectively —that is describe it,
giving an account of how it worked, who worked it, and who its victims
were. But there was no neutrality as regards my view of censorship. To
me it was repugnant, as were the bulldozing of bustees, the arrests of
beggars, the forced sterilization of seven million, the mass arrests and the
attendant tortures, all in the name of ‘Garibi Hatao ’[Abolish Poverty]. So Imake adistinction, which some may ﬁnd hard to see, between
objectivity and neutrality. There can be no compromise or qualiﬁcation on
objectivity, as there can be no compromise with the pursuit of accuracy,
but Ialso recognize there is no neutrality on certain questions. That is
why Ihave accepted the Taher Memorial Committee’s invitation to speak. Because, when it comes to aquestion of secret trials and secret executions,
Iam not neutral. Icondemn them whether they be Franco’s, or Stalin’s,
or Ziaur Rahman’s. And ayear ago, by acoincidence of timing, Ihappened
to arrive in Bangladesh as just such acase was about to begin, full of its
own dimensions of death, betrayal and tragic injustice .... Iwould like to say two things more. Iam an American by nationality,
and in America we too have had in our history famous incidents of excep¬
tional judicial debasement, where the institutions of law haye been used to
commit crimes ‘for reasons of state’. In America the names and memory
of the executions of the Rosenbergs, of Joe Hill, and of Sacco and Vanzetti
stand out most starkly. Today Iam reminded most clearly of Bartholomew Sacco and Giuseppi
Vanzetti, two poor Italian immigrants who came to America for abetter
v
u

--- PAGE BREAK ---I n t r o d u c t i o n
life and instead found aframe-up.

They were killed because we in America
also have our Salauddin Ahmeds and our Safdars.

In the time of Sacco and
Vanzetti they were called Attorney-General Palmer and J.

Edgar Hoover.

Today Imention Sacco and Vanzetti because last month —50 years after
their execution —Governor Michael Dukakis of the State of Massachusetts
declared that in the ofﬁcial view of the state, Sacco and Vanzetti were
innocent men and were wrongly executed.

Governor Dukakis has declared
that each year, on the anniversary of their execution, the people of the
State of Massachusetts where these two men were electrocuted, will
observe ‘Sacco and Vanzetti Memorial Day’.

Idoubt whether it will take
the people of Bangladesh so long to set right what happened on the
.gallows of Dacca Central Jail ayear ago.

Ihave one more thing to say before Iclose.

If Imay Iwould IDce to
quote from an essay Paul Baran wrote in 1961.

Baran was an American
economist whose book The Political Economy of Growth still stands as
aseminal work on the analysis of underdevelopment in the Third World.

What 1would like to read of Baran’s is not from his economic writings, but
from an essay entitled ‘The Commitment of the Intellectual’.

Ihope a
number of students, journalists, and lawyers among others in Bangladesh
will ﬁnd his comments pertinent.

Baran says in his essay, ‘The writings of C.P.

Snow leave no doubt
that he believes the commitment of the intellectual to be essentially
reducible to the obligation to seek the truth ....

And yet, while this
injunction goes along way toward formulating the basic commitment
of the intellectual, it falls short of taking care of the entire problem.

For the problem is not merely whether truth is being told but also what
constitutes truth in any given case as well as about what it is being told
and about what it is being withheld ....--- PAGE BREAK ---

And yet, while this
injunction goes along way toward formulating the basic commitment
of the intellectual, it falls short of taking care of the entire problem. For the problem is not merely whether truth is being told but also what
constitutes truth in any given case as well as about what it is being told
and about what it is being withheld .... Thus, in this domain of state
power, what constitutes truth is frequently sought and said about
things that do not matter, with the insistence on the pursuit and
pronouncement of that kind of truth becoming apowerful ideological
weapon of the status quo. On the other hand, telling the truth about
what does matter, seeking the truth about the whole, and uncovering
the social and historical causes and interconnections of the different
parts of the whole is often punished by professional discrimination,
social ostracism, and outright intimidation .... The desire to tell the
truth is therefore only one condition for being an intellectual. The
other is courage, readiness to carry on rational inquiry to wherever it
may lead, to undertake “ruthless criticism of everything that exists,
ruthless in the sense that the criticism will not shrink from its own con¬
clusions or from conﬂict with the powers that be. ”An intellectual is
thus in essence asocial critic, aperson whose concern is to identify,
to analyze, and in this way to help overcome the obstacles barring
the way to the attainment of abetter, more humane, and more rational
social order.. .as such he is inevitably considered a“troublemaker”
and a“nuisance” by the ruling class seeking to preserve the status quo
as well as by the intellect workers in its service who accuse the intel¬
lectual of being utopian or metaphysical at best, subversive or seditious
at worst.... Under such conditions it becomes amatter of supreme
importance and urgency to insist on the function and to stress the
v i u

--- PAGE BREAK ---aphysical at best, subversive or seditious
at worst.... Under such conditions it becomes amatter of supreme
importance and urgency to insist on the function and to stress the
v i u

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: TheUnﬁnished Revolution
commitment of the intellectual. For it is under such conditions that
it falls to his lot, both as aresponsibility and as aprivilege, to save from
extinction the tradition of humanism, reason, and progress that con¬
stitutes our most valuable inheritance from the entire history of
m a n k i n d . 
. .
Finally, may Iparaphrase Baran in saying all that can be hoped for now is
that Bangladesh too will produce its ‘quota’ of men and women who will
defend these principles and ultimately will succeed in presenting to the
Bengali people the true story of Taher’s life and legacy.
Lawrence Lifschultz
Cambridge
1May 1979
Notes and References
1. Philip Woodruff, The Men Who Ruled India, Vol. I, (Schocken Books,
New York, 1964), p. 100.
2. Harry Magdoff, Imperialism: From the Colonial Age to the Present,
(Monthly Review, New York, 1978), p. 24.
3. Ramsey Muir, The Making of British India 1756-1858, (Longmans,
Green &Co., London, 1917), pp. 40-1.
4. Fred Halliday,/ran.' Dictatorship and Development, (Penguin, London,
1979), p. 24.
5. ‘CIA Agent Planned Downfall of Mossadeq’, The Guardian, 30 March 1979.
6. Percival Spear, The Oxford History of Modern India, 1740-1947,
(Oxford University Press, London, 1965), p. 35.
7. Loc. cit., p. 24.
8. Ramakrishna Mukerjee, The Rise and Fall of the East India Company,
(Monthly Review, London, 1974), p. 267.
9. Spear, ci'r., p. 24.
10. WoodruH,op. ci7., p. 100.
11. Spear, op. cit., p. 24.
12. Paul A. Baran, The Longer View, (Monthly Review, New York, 1969),
p. 13.
I X

--- PAGE BREAK ---n, 1974), p. 267.
9. Spear, ci'r., p. 24.
10. WoodruH,op. ci7., p. 100.
11. Spear, op. cit., p. 24.
12. Paul A. Baran, The Longer View, (Monthly Review, New York, 1969),
p. 13.
I X

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Part I:
Taher’s Last Testament
During the spring of 1908 alegend took root in Eastern India around the life
of ayoung Bengali named Khudiram Bose. In May of that year he was
arrested and put on trial, charged with an attempt upon the life of D.H.
Kingsford, aBritish magistrate, who had earned an exceptional reputation
for the forms of punishment he passed on members of the underground
nationalist movement. It was Kingsford’s habit to sentence participants in
India’s early independence struggle to public whippings.
The attack on the British magistrate failed. Khudiram and his associates
were arrested. There followed alengthy trial known as the Alipore Con¬
spiracy Case which ended in averdict of death. When Khudiram and Kanailal
Datta were hanged, the city of Calcutta was overwhelmed by the funeral
procession. The vast and spontaneous character of the outpouring unnerved
the local colonial authorities and aban was imposed on any further public
funerals of revolutionaries. In the years which followed both the Public
Prosecutor and the Deputy Superintendent of Police who supervised the trial
were shot dead by nationalists. The British regarded this period a« the opening
phase of what their historians would term the ‘terrorist movement’. However,
to the colonized peasantry and intellectuals of the subcontinent, it was simply
the ﬁrst sign of militant nationalism.
In the villages of Bengal, Khudiram became something of alegend. Minstrels
sang of his bravery against the British and legend said he would be reborn
each day in ahundred men until independence. In this ﬂow of music and
history, in acountry where poetry and song have aquality of motion all
their own, the story of Khudiram’s act and trial spread across Bengal faster
than each year’s ﬂoods and penetrated deeper than any newspaper account
ever could. The myth arose that he still moved in ajourney through towns
and villages speaking for the nationalist cause. ‘If you fail to recognize me,’
his voice called from apopular folksong, ‘Look for the sign of hanging around
my neck.’
It was another twenty-six years before the British repeated apolitical
execution in the volatile atmosphere of Bengal. In 1934, Surja Sen, the
organizer of the famous Chittagong Armoury Raid, was sentenced and hanged.
In the years that followed there was never another political execution in
Bengal.
1sphere of Bengal. In 1934, Surja Sen, the
organizer of the famous Chittagong Armoury Raid, was sentenced and hanged.
In the years that followed there was never another political execution in
Bengal.
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---1934, Surja Sen, the
organizer of the famous Chittagong Armoury Raid, was sentenced and hanged.
In the years that followed there was never another political execution in
Bengal.
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
This hardly means there were not countless political murders and massacres.
The eastern subcontinent is one of the poorest areas of the world. Each day
there arise battles between those who own land and those who must work it.
For the peasantry life is aknife edge. Aknife edge on which questions of
food, land and water are constantly answered by cycles of revolt and sup¬
pression. Every day in the subcontinent men die over these issues trying to
determine who wiU command whom. And in arural economy where com¬
modity production is largely amatter of food, this issue always returns to the
ownership of land and the power of the state to preserve the existing arrange¬
m e n t .
Throughout this period of history, as state power moved from the British
into the hands of bourgeois nationalist regimes in India and Pakistan, and
then in 1971 onto Bangladesh, at least in Bengal no prisoner was ever ofﬁcially
executed for being arevolutionary. Thousands rotted in prison then, as they
do today. But the stigma of the death sentence passed by an ofﬁcial court
still smelled colonial, and the memory of Khudiram and Suija Sen tempered
the gallows instincts of the new authorities.
With state executions of Marxists almost amacabre routine from Iran to
Argentina, this apparent restraint in the Indian subcontinent’s political and
judicial culture may appear anomalous, merely adetail out of the ordinary,
and not worthy of special mention. However without focusing upon it
there would be no way to express the revulsion felt by so many Bengalis
when Colonel Abu Taker was hanged inside Dacca Central Jail on July 21st
1976.
The Letter from Cell No. 8
The story of Abu Taher’s life cannot be summed up easily or simply, nor can
the sequence of events which brought it to an abrupt heroic close. The time
involved spans more than half adecade. It has been acomplex period of
extraordinary violence and brutality. Since 1975 Bangladesh has been ruled
by asuccession of four regimes, each succeeding the other by force of arms.
Out of the struggle for independence in 1971 nearly amillion persons died in
war or from starvation. In 1974 the lives of ahundred thousand peasants
succumbed to afamine which was largely man-made. In 1975 Bangladesh
entered anew phase of political upheavds. Two military putsches involving
assassinations and grim jail house murders were followed by arevolutionary
army mutiny. It was asoldiers’ uprising the likes of which had not been
seen in the subcontinent since 1857, when the colonial army of India rebelled
against the British. It was this insurrection on November 7th 1975 which
deeply shook Bangladesh and more than any other event brought historic
prominence to Abu Taher.
Three days before he was hanged, Taher wrote aﬁnal letter from prison. It
shall be our starting point.
2deeply shook Bangladesh and more than any other event brought historic
prominence to Abu Taher.
Three days before he was hanged, Taher wrote aﬁnal letter from prison. It
shall be our starting point.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker’s Last Testament
D a c c a C e n t r a l J a i l
18th July 1976
Respected Father, Mother, my dearest Lutfa, Bhaijan, my brothers and
s i s t e r s .

Yesterday afternoon the tribunal announced its verdict against us.

Ihave
been sentenced to death.

Bhaijan and Major Jalil were sentenced to life
imprisonment.

All their property will be conﬁscated.

Anwar, Inu, Rab,
and Major Zia were given ten years rigorous imprisonment and apenalty each
of ten thousand takas.

Saleha and Rabiul have been given ﬁve years
rigorous imprisonment and ﬁnes of ﬁve thousand takas each.

Thirteen
others including Dr.

Akhlaqur, Mahmood the journalist, and Manna have
been set free.

At the very last moment the tribunal proclaimed my death
sentence; and in great haste they left the court like dogs in ﬂight.

Mahmood suddenly broke into tears.

When Itried to comfort him he
said, ‘I am crying because aBengali could have the audacity to pass a
sentence on Colonel Taher.’ Meanwhile, Saleha withdrew to the restroom
and broke down in tears.

When Icalled to her saying, idon’t ever expect
such weakness from you,’ she said, ‘These are not tears.

This is laughter.’
What awonderful vision of laughter are the tears of this sister of mine.

I
met her ﬁrst here in the prison’s courtroom.

Ihave such admiration for
her.

What nation can produce asister like her?

Among those convicted there was only asingle lament: why had they
not also been sentenced to death?

Suddenly there were cries from all
quarters of the jail house.

Deﬁant and ever louder: ‘Taher Bhai!

Red
Salute!

Lai Salami’ Can these high walls hold back this cry?

Will not the
echoes of this call reach into the hearts of the people of my country?

Our lawyers were stunned at the announcement of the verdict.

They
came and told me that, although there is no appeal from this tribunal,
they would issue awrit to the Supreme Court.

The entire workings and
procedure of the tribunal had been unconstitutional and illegal.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They
came and told me that, although there is no appeal from this tribunal,
they would issue awrit to the Supreme Court. The entire workings and
procedure of the tribunal had been unconstitutional and illegal. They
said that simultaneously they would issue an appeal to the President. Then Imade it clear to them that no such appeal was to be issued. We
had installed this President and Iwould not petition for my life from these
t r a i t o r s . Everyone wanted to hear me speak afew words. Meanwhile, the prison
authorities were becoming eager to separate us. Isaid, ‘When Iam alone,
f e a r a n d s e l ﬁs h d e s i r e f o r l i f e a t t a c k m e f r o m a l l s i d e s . B u t w h e n I a m w i t h
you, all fear and selﬁshness leave me. Ibecome brave and Ican see myself
with all the strength and courage of the revolution. An invincible calmness
d e t e r m i n e d t o o v e r c o m e a l l o b s t a c l e s e n t e r s i n t o m e . W e w a n t t o s a c r i ﬁc e
the isolation of our separate existences and ﬁnd our true expression among
the people —that is what our struggle is for.’
They are all leaving, bidding goodbye one by one. Their eyes wet. We
have spent quite awhile together. Who knows when we shall meet again? Saleha will go with me. Bhaijan and Anwar show me astoic calmness. But
Iknow them. This is an act for my beneﬁt. Belal’s eyes are strangely
luminous —it is as if they are on the verge of breaking into tears. Jalil,
Rab, and Zia ﬁrmly embrace me. It is abond that binds us to the entire
n a t i o n . A b o n d w h i c h n o o n e c a n b r e a k . They have left. All of them. Saleha and Icome out together. She goes
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
to her cell.

As Ipass, prisoners and political detainees peer out with .

eyes from behind the doors and windows of their locked cells.

Matin
Sahib, Tipu Biswas and the others raise their hands in the sign of victory.

This trial has united the revolutionaries almost without their knowledge.

1was taken to Cell Number 8.

It is the cell assigned to prisoners who
are to be hanged.

In the cells adjacent to mine there are three other
victims for the gallows.

It is asmall cell.

Quite clean.

It is all right.

When standing face to face with death, Iturn to look back on my life
and ﬁnd nothing to be ashamed of.

Isee many events which unite
irrevocably to our people.

Can Ihave agreater joy or happiness than this?

Nitu, Jishu, and Mishu ...everyone comes crowding into my memory.

Ihave not left behind any wealth or property for them, but our entire
nation is there for their future.

We have seen thousands of naked children
deprived of love and affection.

We wanted ahome for them.

Is this dawn
too distant for the Bengali people?

No, it is not too far off.

The sun is
about to rise.

Ihave given my blood for the creation of this country.

And now I
shall give my life.

Let this illuminate and infuse new strength into the
souls of our people.

What greater reward could there be for me?

No one can kill me.

Ilive in the midst of the masses.

My pulse beats in
their pulse.

If Iam to be killed, the entire people must also be killed.

What force can do that?

None.

This morning’s paper just came in.

They have published the news of
my death sentence and the sentences of the rest on the front page.

The
description of the proceedings that has been published is entirely false.

It has been alleged during the trial and on the evidence of state witnesses
that the Sepoy Revolution of the 7th November occurred under my leader¬
ship.

This Ido not deny.

Yet, the papers do not mention this nor that it
was under my orders that Ziaur Rahman was released.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This Ido not deny. Yet, the papers do not mention this nor that it
was under my orders that Ziaur Rahman was released. It was we who
installed the present government in its place of authority, only to be
betrayed. During the entire trial there was no reference whatsoever of the
Kader Bahini. It is my ardent hope that our lawyers Ataur Rahman, Zulmat Ali,
and all others who were present will expose the secret behind this trial and
protest its false propaganda. Ido not fear death. Zia is atraitor and a
conspirator and has had to take refuge in lies to discredit me before the
people. Tell Ataur Rahman and the others that it is their moral responsi¬
bility to expose the truth -and if they fail in this duty, history will not
forgive them. My greatest respect, my love, and my everlasting affection be with you
T a h e r
e a g e r
m
e
a l l . The purpose of this book is to describe the history of the events which
gave birth to the November 7th Uprising.^ But more than that the object is
to reveal the details of Taher’s secret trial and subsequent execution. The
men whom he calls upon to realize their moral responsibility or face the
condemnation of history, would today face arrest in Bangladesh were they to
publicly speak what they know. No doubt one day they will, but until then
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker ’s Last Testament
the report of this correspondent, and the publication of Taher’s own testi¬
mony must sufﬁce as an opening statement on the case.

The years ahead will
certainly provide many more.

Prelude to Insurrection
On November 7th 1975, arevolutionary insurrection exploded in Bangladesh.

The uprising was unexpected by the major foreign powers —the United
States, India and the Soviet Union -which since Bangladesh’s emergence as
an independent state have contended for aposition of dominance in this
remote but strategic corner of South Asia.

The November 7th events followed
two military coup d’etats (August 15 and November 3) which had badly
shaken the unity of the country’s ruling elite.

On August 15th 1975 the
government of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the founding nationalist leader of
Bangladesh, was brought down by an early morning military putsch led by
six junior ofﬁcers and the thousand troops under their command.

Although
many details of this event are still obscure and remain to be unearthed, we
show in Part Two that the political organizers of the August coup were the
circle within Mujib’s own ruling Awami League which for years had been
considered apro-American faction.

The principal and identiﬁable ﬁgures among this group on the morning of
the August putsch were Mabub Alam Chashi, aformer P^stan foreign
service ofﬁcer; Taheruddin Thakur, Mujib’s Information Minister; and Khon-
dakar Mustaque Ahmed, the Commerce Minister in Mujib’s administration.

The full extent of direct foreign involvement —if any —in the planning of
the August coup is yet to be established.

But serious allegations have been
made claiming prior knowledge and considerable involvement by the United
States and Pakistan, together with elements within the administrative, police
and intelligence apparatus of Bangladesh, who had remained unreconstructed
sympathizers of the old unity of Pakistan.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The full extent of direct foreign involvement —if any —in the planning of
the August coup is yet to be established. But serious allegations have been
made claiming prior knowledge and considerable involvement by the United
States and Pakistan, together with elements within the administrative, police
and intelligence apparatus of Bangladesh, who had remained unreconstructed
sympathizers of the old unity of Pakistan. Immediately after the coup many
of these individuals surfaced in prominent administrative positions. Mujib, his nephew Sheikh Fazlul Huq Moni, abrother-in-law Abdul Rab
Serniabat and nearly every member of their families were gunned down on
that August morning. The reaction in Bangladesh, although one of extra¬
ordinary shock, was not one of avast popular fury against the coup makers. To acertain degree there prevailed ageneral mood of deliverance from a
regime which had become nepotistic, corrupt and oppressive. Further on,
more wUl be noted about the reasons and forces behind Mujib’s political
decline, but it may simply be said that Mujibur Rahman, who had returned
from imprisonment in Pakistan in 1972 as an unparalleled national hero to
his people, within three years died almost without awhimper of support. Between August and November, 1975, an uneasy period of stalemate and
tension set in. Formally, the Commerce Minister Khondakar Mustaque Ahmed
took over as acting President. Aman highly sympathetic to the United States,
Mustaque had been Foreign Minister during the days of Bangladesh’s
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
provisional government in 1971.

Together v/ith his Foreign Secretary, Mabub
Alam Chashi, Mustaque had allegedly been the contact point for secret
negotiations with the U.S.

State Department in late 1971 on American
proposals for asettlement of the ‘East Pakistan crisis’.

After the coup which
toppled Mujib, the new president, together with the six majors, their tanks
and the artillery which had brought him to power, ensconced himself behind
the walls of the Presidential Palace.

Mustaque promised national elections
within eighteen months and alifting of the ban on open political activities
which Mujib had imposed.

He made no concession, however, on demands for
the release of an estimated 62,000 political prisoners.

But the real issue was
now apparent.

It was asituation where vying factions among Bangladesh’s
ruling class, each with their own distinct international alignment, were engaged
in astruggle for control of Bangladesh.

And most crucially, since the civilian
veneer of power had been blown away on the night of August 15th, this
struggle now engaged the upper echelons of the military ofﬁcer corps.

Anumber of senior ofﬁcers, including the Deputy Chief of Army Staff,
Major-General Ziaur Rahman (hereafter referred to as ‘Zia’), had apparently
been approached to join the coup against Mujib, but had held back from
active involvement in case it failed.

Zia, who would soon emerge as apower¬
ful ﬁgure, however, did nothing to expose the August conspiracy.

But following
its success severe tensions began to build up rapidly inside the armed forces.

While the three chiefs of staff under Mujib had, following the August coup,
been quickly sent abroad as ambassadors, the junior ofﬁcers who had pulled
off the putsch now began behaving like generds.

In the meantime Zaiur
Rahman took over as the new Army Chief of Staff and into the position of
Chief of General Staff moved Brigadier Khaled Musharraf.--- PAGE BREAK ---

While the three chiefs of staff under Mujib had, following the August coup,
been quickly sent abroad as ambassadors, the junior ofﬁcers who had pulled
off the putsch now began behaving like generds. In the meantime Zaiur
Rahman took over as the new Army Chief of Staff and into the position of
Chief of General Staff moved Brigadier Khaled Musharraf. Within Bangladesh’s military high command asharp debate now began
concerning the fate of the junior ofﬁcers who had killed Mujib. The troops
involved in the August coup had been ordered by senior ofﬁcers to return to
their barracks. They had refused, fearing they would be disarmed. Khaled
Musharraf argued among his ofﬁcer colleagues that two armies could not
exist in one country. Either the chain of military command existed or it did
not. And if six junior ofﬁcers and their troops now refused to return to their
barracks, they would have to be dealt with as insubordinates. However,
Major-General Zia, bead of the Army, refused to support any military action
against the August coup makers. Thus, barely three months later, on November 3rd 1975, the second coup
d’etat occurred. This time the rebellion was led by Brigadier Khaled Musharraf
with the support of the Dacca Brigade under the command of Colonel Shafat
Jamil. Their forces moved in the early hours of November 3rd and seized all
major strategic positions in the capital except the Presidential Palace. The
Army Chief of Staff, Major-General Zia, was arrested and forced to resign
his command. Khaled Musharraf immediately appointed himself to the position
of Major-General and declared himself Army Chief of Staff. Throughout
that day fear spread that acivil war might break out between contending
factions in the armed forces. The artillery and tank units of the Bengal
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker's Last Testament
Lancers, supporting the majors who had killed Mujib in August, threatened
to ﬁght alast ditch stand from the Presidential Palace.

Astand-off began and negotiations between the two sides ﬁnally took
place.

Through the intervention of intermediaries it was arranged that the
ofﬁcers who had engineered the August putsch against Mujib would be
allowed safe passage into exile.

That evening they were to leave on aspecial
ﬂight to Bangkok.

But moments before their departure, men, who were
allegedly under their command, entered Dacca Central Jail and in agrim
instant executed by bayonet four senior ministers of Mujib’s cabinet.

They
were killed in their jail cells.

The four men
Kamaruzzaman, Manzoor Ali and Syed Nazrul Islam
the leadership of any pro-Mujibist restoration that might perhaps have followed
asuccessful Musharraf coup.

But the most revealing element of Brigadier Musharrafs November 3rd
putsch was the exuberant reaction of India.

Before news of the jail house
murders became public on November 5th, the ofﬁcial Indian radio and
strictly censored press greeted this second putsch with such unrestrained
pleasure that few observers failed to suspect India’s covert hand.

The
‘ofﬁcial’ Indian press campaign of well-informed leaks seemed too well
organized to have been spontaneous.

On November 4th Khaled MusharraCs
mother and brother led amemorial procession from Dacca University to
the residence of the late Prime Minister Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

It had
been organized by the two pro-Moscow parties in Bangladesh, the National
Awami Party (Muzzafar) and the Communist Party of Bangladesh (Moni).

This was the ﬁrst public expression of sympathy for Mujib since his killing.

It was asmall procession and drew no crowds.

In Dacca itself rumours began
circulating that India’s covert intelligence organization RAW (Research and
Analysis Wing) had engineered the putsch in co-ordination with Khaled
Musharraf.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was asmall procession and drew no crowds. In Dacca itself rumours began
circulating that India’s covert intelligence organization RAW (Research and
Analysis Wing) had engineered the putsch in co-ordination with Khaled
Musharraf. Khaled’s own supporters in the Army insisted that there had been
no Indian backing whatsoever, and that the coup had occurred over issues
internal to the Army itself. As with the earlier August events where the
United States and Pakistan are alleged to have played asigniﬁcant role, the
extent —if any —of Indian and perhaps Soviet involvement in the November
3rd events still remains to be established.^ Nevertheless, within days of having
taken power Khaled Musharraf had been dubbed an ‘agent of the Indo-
Soviet axis’. These rumours spread like wild-ﬁre in acity which was turning
into apolitical tinderbox. Their impact, irrespective of their accuracy, had
created an explosive situation. In the last days of Mujib’s regime, following aperiod of severe famine
in 1974, enormous popular resentment had developed towards India and
Mujib’s political identiﬁcation with that country. The 1974 period evoked
the worst memories of the Great Bengal Famine in 1943 when three million
peasants perished.^ By 1975 the general antagonism towards India and the
hostility to Mujib had become virtually indistinguishable. In 1974, ayear of
severe crisis on the world’s commodity markets coincided with the worst
ﬂoods in twenty years in Bangladesh. The price of rice in some districts rose
Tajuddin Ahmed, A.M.S. would have constituted
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
1,000% above pre-independence levels.

It was amoment when many remem¬
bered Mujib’s promise that after independence from Pakistan rice would sell
at half its cost.

Now it was ten times that.

Every village, faced with growing
starvation, listened to stories of fantastic smugging and proﬁt-making from
the illegal shipment of rice and jute to India.

Among the kingpins of the
illicit trade was the Prime Minister’s own brother.

The black market operating
across the border was afact.

And India was no longer viewed as the ally which
had entered the war to bring Pakistan’s massacre to an end, but instead as a
new sub-imperialist power that was bleeding Bangladesh white.

When Khaled Musharrafs putsch garnered the stigma of being backed by
India, and All India Radio cemented these rumours with its jubilant news
reports, Khaled found his already narrow political and military base slipping
from under him.

None of the factions of Bangladesh’s ruling elite, engaged as
they were in aruthless struggle against one another, could perceive they were
on the verge of arevolutionary insurrection.

The November 7th Uprising
On the night of November 3rd, units loyal to Brigadier Khaled Musharraf took
up their positions in preparation for the second putsch of the year.

First,
they surrounded the residence of the Army Chief of Staff, Major-General Zia.

It was 4a.m.

and, as Zia awoke in his quarters, he made an urgent and
desperate call to the outskirts of Dacca.

The man on the other end was Abu
Taher, once aclose personal friend and battleﬁeld comrade from the 11th
Sector.'^ Zia reportedly appealed to Taher to do something.

This time Zia’s
own life was at risk.

The conversation was never completed for the line was
c u t .

Each night between November 4th and 6th, clandestine meetings of junior
ofﬁcers ahd'sepoys were held under faher’s organizational direction.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The conversation was never completed for the line was
c u t . Each night between November 4th and 6th, clandestine meetings of junior
ofﬁcers ahd'sepoys were held under faher’s organizational direction. B^
Taher and these cadres were functioning under the auspices of the Biplopi
Shainik Sangsha (Revolutionary Soldiers’ Organizatiori). The organization
had existed clandestinely for some time, but only on the morning of November
7th did it make its existence known openly. Jointly operating with the Biplopi
Gono Bahini (Revolutionary People’s Army), made up mainly of former
guefnTa'ﬁ^^rTfrom the independence struggle, the sepoys of Dacca Canton-
menftook tH^lead in an immediate piieral revolt against Khaied Musharrafs
putsch. Both organizations —the R.S.O. and the P.R.A. —wereTRe ofﬁcial
armed branches of the Jatyo Samajtantrik Dal (J.S.D./Socialist National
Party), one of Bangladesh’s more signiﬁcant Marxist tendencies. Vrtiat the J.S.D. and Taher, as the secret military commander of the
Biplopi Gono Bahini, were setting into motion on the morning of November
7th involved much more than asimple restoration of the status quo ante. At the time of Mujib’s overthrow the J.S.D. was already preparing for a
general insurrection some months ahead. When Mujib was brought down the
J.S.D. applauded his downfall, but condemned his assassination. They argued
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ta k e r ’ s L a s t Te s t a m e n t
that assassinations and palace coups fundamentally changed little.

After
August they encouraged their followers to study Marx’s Qass Struggles in
France and, in particular, Engels’ introduction which stressed the minority
and ruling class character of the military coup.

Since August the country had watched one coup follow another.

What
the J.S.D.

and Taher advocated was something else.

Rank and ﬁle soldiers,
they argued, had been pitted against each other by narrow, competing and
ambitious factions among the upper echelons of the ofﬁcer corps, none of
which represented the classs interests of the common soldiers or the oppressed
masses of the country.

On November 5th, under the authority of the Revo¬
lutionary Soldiers’ Organization, thousands of leaﬂets were spread among
troops in the military cantonments and among urban workers.

They called
upon the soldiers to cease being pawns of ofﬁcers’ plots and counterplots
and to ready themselves for ageneral uprising.

They issued aset of Twelve
Demands as the underlying principles of the insurrection.

There were to be ‘two prongs’ to the uprising.

On the evening of November
6th, at ameeting chaired by Taher which included representatives from every
military unit in the capital, ﬁnal instructions were issued for the ﬁrst stage
of the revolt.

Simultaneously orders went out to other cantonments around
the country.

In the ﬁrst ‘prong’ Major-General Zia was to be rescued from
detention, and if at all possible, Brigadier Khaled Musharraf and his
associates were to be captured alive.

The ‘second prong’ of the mutiny was to
be set in motion at the same time.

Demonstrations and processions supporting
the insurrection were to be organized for the morning of November 7th,
and the Twelve Demands of the soldiers were to be made the fundamental
issue once Khaled’s group had been defeated.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The ‘second prong’ of the mutiny was to
be set in motion at the same time. Demonstrations and processions supporting
the insurrection were to be organized for the morning of November 7th,
and the Twelve Demands of the soldiers were to be made the fundamental
issue once Khaled’s group had been defeated. Zia’s rescue would serve as a
symbol of the uprising, while the demands of the sepoys would constitute
the principled basis of the revolt. It was this second aspect, in addition to the
support of thousands of people who poured into the streets of Dacca to
cheer the rebel soldiers, which distinguished the mutiny of November 7th
from the narrow conspiracies of August 15th and November 3rd. The soldiers’ Twelve Demands ranged from acall for the establishment of
a‘revolutionary army’ to the total destruction of the British colonial rules
and regulations which still dominated military procedure thirty years after
independence from England. The opening declaration of the Twelve Demands
r e a d :
Our revolution is not simply to change one leadership for another. This
revolution is for one purpose —the interest of the oppressed classes. For
that the.entire structure of the armed forces must be changed. For many
days we were the Army of the richer class. The rich have used us for
their own interests. The events of August 15th are but one example. However, this time we have revolted neither for the cause of the rich nor
on their behalf. This time we have revolted alongside the masses of the
country. From today onwards the armed forces of the nation shall build
themselves as the defender of the country’s oppressed classes.^
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
The second demand of the soldiers called for the immediate ‘release of
all political prisoners’.

Other demands set out in the November 7th declaration
called for the end of differences and distinctions which separated ofﬁcers
from common soldiers.

The declaration demanded a‘classless army’ as a
fundamental step towards the establishment of aclassless society.

The recruit¬
ment of ofﬁcers from the country’s privileged elite via special schools was also
attacked.

Instead, the selection of ofﬁcers from among the ranks of the
common soldiers was advocated.

Among the existing British rules and regu¬
lations which were to be abolished was the so-called batman system which
compelled rank-and-ﬁle sepoys to serve as household servants to higher
ofﬁcers.

Anumber of economic demands were also put forward including
improved wages for soldiers and an end to rent being charged for their
a c c o m m o d a t i o n .

Most important of all was the call for the establishment of new organs of
military authority and decision making.

The declaration provided for the
establishment of committees similar to the ‘soldier soviets’ of the Russian
Bolsheviks.

Under asection entitled ‘The Duties of Revolutionary Soldiers’
an appeal was made to every military unit to form ‘revolutionary army
organizations’ which would link up with a‘central revolutionary army organi¬
zation to be formed for the whole of Dacca Cantonment’.

The declaration
stated:
This central organization will decide all policies.

General Zia will not
take any decision without consulting the general committee.

Only after
consultation will General Zia be able to take any ﬁnal decisions.

This
central body will keep contact with the other cantonments, the bodies of
revolutionary students, peasants, workers, and the common masses of the
country.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Only after
consultation will General Zia be able to take any ﬁnal decisions. This
central body will keep contact with the other cantonments, the bodies of
revolutionary students, peasants, workers, and the common masses of the
country. We must remember that with this revolutionary army all the pro¬
gressive revolutionary students, peasants, and workers are linked up.^
The emergence of apowerful radical force within an organized military
was for South Asia an unprecedented development. Its existence, however,
should have come as no surprise. The origins go back to March 1971 when
Bengali main force units within Pakistan’s Army were abruptly shaken out of
the role of conventional soldiers. Ofﬁcers and men of these units, who for
years had upheld the stuffy rituals of British colonial and military traditions,
and who had spent years putting down tribal and peasant insurgencies of one
sort or another, were themselves suddenly and brutally thrust into the role of
becoming insurgents organizing popular guerilla forces in the Bangladesh
countryside. Bangladesh’s War of Liberation in 1971 transformed the ideas of many of
these ofﬁcers and soldiers who, in their common struggle to defeat Pakistan
and win independence, came into contact with members of various Marxist
groups which proclaimed that their goal was not merely independence but
also socialist revolution. In the context of aSouth Asian landscape which
encompassed perhaps the worst poverty of the globe, it was an idea of
1 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker ’s Last Testament
persuasive appeal.

Early on November 7th it was these forces which after
years of quiescence erupted into rebellion.

The Calcutta weeHy, Frontier,
w r o t e :
The Bangladesh Army rose in ageneralized insurrection with rank and ﬁle
jawans defying their ofﬁcers and calling not only for the overthrow of ‘the
agent’ Khaled Musharraf, but also for the immediate implementation of their
own Twelve Demands.

They were not simple requests for acup of tea at
noon and abigger bowl of rice, but constituted aradical expression
never before seen in any regular army in South Asia.

This was the fruit of
aconventional army turned into aguerilla force during 1971 coming
ripe after four years of subterranean gestation.^
By midnight on November 6th all preparations for the rebellion were
complete.

Shooting broke out not long after midnight on the 7th.

The main
ﬁghting was centred in the capital’s cantonment area.

In Rangpur and Chitta¬
gong revolts also began.

From Comilla and Jessore troops converged on Dacca
in support of the mutiny.

Within hours the ﬁrst ‘prong’ of the uprising had
succeeded.

Khaled Musharraf and the group of ofﬁcers who had taken power
on November 3rd were overwhelmed.

During adesperate attempt to escape,
Khaled and several other ofﬁcers were killed by mutinous troops just outside
the Dacca Cantonment at aspot known as the second capital.

The city of Dacca itself was alive with rebellion.

Whereas in August and
November 3rd the streets of the capital had remained completely dead, the
day of the mutiny crowds poured into the streets to cheer the soldiers.

Sepoys joyously shooting their weapons into the air and shouting slogans —
‘The Soldiers and People Have United’ -rolled through the capital’s streets.

The mood was exuberant.

The political spirit of the year of independence,
that seemed to have died after so much famine, ﬂood and pretentious
corruption, once more appeared to be alive.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The mood was exuberant. The political spirit of the year of independence,
that seemed to have died after so much famine, ﬂood and pretentious
corruption, once more appeared to be alive. In the early hours of the 7th, Colonel Taher drove to the Second Field
Artillery Headquarters where Zia had been taken by the troops which had
rescued him. According to witnesses present at the encounter, the meeting
between Taher and Zia was highly emotional. Zia, who was still in his night
dress, reportedly embraced Taher as he entered the headquarters. In front
of the others he thanked Taher for saving his life. Later, when soldiers draped
garlands of ﬂowers around Zia’s shoulders, he reportedly removed them and
placed them on Taher, saying that this was the man who deserved them. The relationship between the two men had been aclose one over along
period. During the Liberation War they had fought in the same sector and
during repeated controversies within the military command they had shared
the same standpoint on important strategic issues. In the period following
independence, as sharp debates and divisions developed within the command,
Zia, as Deputy Chief of Staff, had continued to share and give tacit backing
to the positions taken by his two closest lieutenants —Colonel M. Ziauddin
and Colonel Abu Taher —the commanders of the Dacca and Comilla Brigades
o
n
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
respectively.

This support and friendship extended right through the period
in which Ziauddin and Taher were forced out of the army by Mujib because
of their leftist ideas on military organization.

The intimacy of these two men made it hardly surprising that it was Taher
to whom Zia cried out on November 4th in adesperate hope that he might be
rescued.

Nor could it be said that Zia was naive concerning Taher’s socialist
views.

Certainly what Zia did not imagine was the dimension an uprising pro¬
moted by Taher and his compatriots in the J.S.D.

would take.

The euphoria of November 7th was not to last.

The rebels believed -from
everything they knew of his personal history -that, although Zia might
not support the revolutionary dimension of the uprising, he would not
actively oppose the establishment of soldiers’ committees.

On the evening of
the 7th Zia signed the Twelve Demands and committed himself to their
implementation.

Whether it was aruse or momentary conviction
open question.

But the backing that the rebels gave Zia proved to be their
crucial error.

They did not expect that Zia would himself become the rallying
point of the rightist forces.® Lenin had remarked that there could not be a
socialist revolution in acountry unless half the country’s army had become
revolutionaries ﬁrst.

While the uprising and its aftermath certainly brought
many more into their ranks, the Bangladesh Army on November 7th had
clearly not reached the class-conscious stage which Lenin considered the
essential condition.

Perhaps only Shakespeare or Thucydides could do justice to the painful
drama of betrayal, courage and death which followed the mutiny.

Two
men -Zia and Taher -who once called each other brothers, would bitterly
break that bond over an issue which in essence could be said to divide the
entire underdeveloped world.

What would it be?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Two
men -Zia and Taher -who once called each other brothers, would bitterly
break that bond over an issue which in essence could be said to divide the
entire underdeveloped world. What would it be? Revolutionary socialism in
one of the poorest of the world’s nations, or apath of capitalist development
based on the largesse of the Americans and the plans of the World Bank? On the 7th and 8th of November the mutiny forged ahead in the country’s
other military cantonments. Serious confrontations occurred between ofﬁcers
and soldiers. In Dacca and Rangpur forty ofﬁcers were believed to have been
killed by their men. Ofﬁcers and their families ﬂed the cantonment
On the 9th of November asenior military ofﬁcial claimed that less than 35%
of the ofﬁcer cadre remained in control of their commands. The rest had
ﬂed. Afew of those killed were identiﬁed with Khaled Musharrat’s November
3rd coup, but others died as aresult of confrontations between ofﬁcers and
soldiers who were pressing their Twelve Demands. While many ofﬁcers had
supported the ‘ﬁrst prong’ of the uprising which rescued Zia, they ﬁercely
resisted the other demands. Numerous ofﬁcers at this stage attempted to
resume command of their troops and ordered them back to barracks. Several units in turn told their commanders that ofﬁcers were no longer
in command. Enlisted men were reported to have ripped badges of rank off
ofﬁcers’ lapels. Commanders in various brigades and battalions were told
they must agree to the demand for the establishment of revolutionary com¬
mittees in each unit as the new organs of authority. r e m a i n s 
a n
a r e a s . 1 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker’s Last Testament
At this point guns were often pulled by both sides in an attempt to press
their positions.

As ﬁghting broke out many sepoys and ofﬁcers were killed.

In Comilla the uprising reportedly developed without major loss of life.

Ofﬁcers were isolated and not allowed to resume command, but killings were
avoided.

Orders had been issued by the Revolutionary Soldiers’ Organization
that ‘reactionary’ ofﬁcers who failed to support the ‘revolutionary demands’
were to be segregated for eventual demobilization.

While the uprising began in the capital, it spread quickly to the district
towns, and from there to certain areas of the countryside.

Few reports have
focused on the relationship of the rural areas to these events.

One which did
describe the effect the uprising had in one village, Tarapur, is worthwhile
quoting at length:
Party activity in Tarapur had been sporadic in the last year consisting mainly
of occasional visits by local J.S.D.

cadres who tried to persuade some of
the young men of the village to join the party and ﬁght for socialism.

A
few of the young men had become very sympathetic and allowed cadres
to stay in their houses overnight.

However, the majority of the villagers
were sceptical of the party’s ability to accomplish anything.

After having
lived through the horrors of the 1971 war and the hardships of the Mujib
regime, the villagers were reluctant to trust any political ﬁgures although
anti-government and anti-rich slogans still struck aresponsive chord in
their hearts ....

After the November 7th uprising there was amarked
change of atmosphere in Tarapur.

The mutiny of the army in the nearest
cantonment and the execution of several corrupt police ofﬁcers were
exciting events much discussed in the village.

J.S.D.

cadres suddenly began
to move openly in the area during the daytime, barely concealing their
weapons.--- PAGE BREAK ---

J.S.D. cadres suddenly began
to move openly in the area during the daytime, barely concealing their
weapons. At ﬁrst, they called for support for Zia’s new regime as long as
he met their Twelve Demands, and called alarge and open demonstration
of all J.S.D. supporters in the area. When they thought that the new
Government had moved rightwards, the cadres openly attacked Zia and
demanded immediate elections and the release of all political prisoners. But most importantly, the party began to seriously organize the village of
Tarapur. Despite the failure of the J.S.D. to seize power, the way the
November 7th mutiny had broken Bangladesh politics wide open and had
mobilized the more radical elements in the armed forces gave even the
staunchest cynics of Tarapur agleam of hope that things could change. Several weeks after the uprising, ayoung J.S.D. cadre arrived in Tarapur
brandishing asawn-off shotgun. All the young men of the village quickly
gathered around him, and groups of women huddled in the entrances of
their homes, called him over to explain how the gun worked. The
mysterious weapon was thus demystiﬁed. Later that evening, ameeting
was held. Most of the attendants were the young men of the village, although
older peasants frequently passed by to lend an ear. The literate young
men of the village were given the responsibility of reading some simple
Marxist texts and then explaining them to the illiterate among them. Recruitment of members for the B.G.B. [Revolutionary People’s Army]
was also considered. Most of the young men were afraid to volunteer or
reluctant because of the work at home. But they all showed agreat
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
curiosity in tlje concept of the people’s war.

The immediate goal of the J.S.D.

in the village seemed to be the
zation of anucleus of supporters who, having been taught the basic
principles of Marxism-Leninism, would then proceed to organize and edu¬
cate other villagers in the area.

Several of the village young men were sent
to attend alarge meeting of the J.S.D.

cadres of several unions.

There
they became acquainted with the local leaders of the party.

The broader
strategy for the area, however, was the elimination of dacoits and corrupt
former Awami League members and the assumption of law and order
functions by the party.

Direct attacks on landlords and the upper strata
of rural society were considered premature.

However, anumber of local
leaders were threatened with assassination if they turned over party cadres
to the police or in any way obstructed the party’s work.

Fearing for their
life many eagerly agreed to cooperate with the party and some even made
contributions in kind ~warm shawls for cadres who moved around at
night and cigarettes and bidis for meetings.

During the course of afew weeks, two notorious dacoits (bandits)
were killed by the party and some smaller thieves received milder punish¬
ment.

Besides having harassed the local population, the two dacoits had
also committed robberies saying that they belonged to the J.S.D.

That
proved to be afatal mistake.

The villagers’ reaction to the party’s drive
against thieves was extremely positive.

Previously, cadres had had adifﬁcult
time ﬁnding places to sleep and eat: suddenly they were besieged with
invitations to stay at people’s homes.

One old lady conﬁded, ‘Now the
thieves are going to get it.

Just like Mujib got it in the end.

The party is
going to get them.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Just like Mujib got it in the end. The party is
going to get them. They came to us last night asking us who had stolen
all the rice from Awolmia’s house.’ People’s conﬁdence in the ability of
the party to govern the area grew steadily as they witnessed for the ﬁrst
time concrete action being taken against the real anti-social elements. The viUagers’ long experience of the police and army had been just the
opposite. In most cases, the government forces had been in close league
with the most corrupt and hated people of the area and whenever apre¬
text arose, they freely looted the houses of the villagers and made false
arrests. In taking over the law and order functions of the area, the J.S.D. demonstrated that their concept of justice differed fundamentally from
that of the state. One of the landlords who lived near Tarapur had formerly been amember
of the Awami League and under Mujib had misappropriated large amounts
of relief. Afew full-time cadres of the union were eager to ﬁnish him off
because of his past misdeeds. Supporters in the villages were approached
for their advice. All of them insisted that his murder would only bring
down the forces of government repression on the village and alienate
many potential supporters who would see the murder as unnecessary blood¬
shed. Instead it was decided to approach him and threaten him saying that
if he went against the party, he would be killed. Under Mujib afearless
and pompous politico, the landlord now began to say his prayers ﬁve
times aday and meekly approached party supporters asking them if there
wasn’t some way he could also join. Seeing the success of this strategy
many villagers felt anew strength in their unity and began to look ahead to
the future when the poor people of the village would be able to hold
o r g a n i -
1 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---of this strategy
many villagers felt anew strength in their unity and began to look ahead to
the future when the poor people of the village would be able to hold
o r g a n i -
1 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Taker’s Last Testament
public trials of men such as he. Raggedly dressed sharecroppers would
discuss among themselves what would ﬁnally happen when they could
organise retribution against the big landlords.
The November 7th mutiny was both an outcome and abeginning. Like
many such upsurges in world history the bottom rose up against the top
with aforce which threatened the entire social order. Instead of afew small
factions of the army or the top political elite being caught in adeadly game of
intrigue, whole classes of Bangladesh’s society were hurled into the circle of
political activity. The uprising, although it faltered, established anew political
terrain and all that followed would exist in its light.
The National Question and National Independence
The turmoil in Bangladesh during 1975 was the outcome of aperiod of
long gestation. Most immediately it represented the re-emergence of new
forces which traced their origins to 1971 and the Liberation War. But no
clear picture of these developments can be gathered outside of amuch wider
understanding of the history of the Indian subcontinent. In the very broadest
view any analysis must encompass the entire period of British imperialism
in South Asia, and in particular the way the Empire manipulated the relation¬
ship between various nationalities for its own purpose. At independence in
1947 British India was split into India and Pakistan. With the partition there
,particularly in the case of Pakistan, adeep and contradictory dilemma
of national deﬁnition. Pakistan’s ideological premise —the Islamic state —
died in the civil war which brought Bangladesh into existence.
Only aweek prior to the outbreak of open war between India and Pakistan
the question of Bangladesh, the British journalist, Neville Maxwell,
and China’s Premier, Chou En-Lai, reﬂected upon these issues during adis¬
cussion in Peking centred upon China’s own stand on the imminent wan
Neville Maxwell: There is another aspect to the situation. On the one hand,
the Bangladesh movement now certainly has India’s all-out backing; but
on the other hand, there is agenuine Bengali nationalist movement in East
Pakistan. And Pakistan herself is, in asense, the product of the British
Empire’s withdrawal from the subcontinent.
Chou En-Lai: It all stems from Britain, particularly the Mountbatten
policy. Mountbatten carried out the British Empire’s policy ‘divide and rule ,
and left many roots of trouble and planted many time-bombs. It can be said
that this is alaw of the development of colonialism. When colonialism
subjects aregion to its rule, it uniﬁes the region in its own interest to
facilitate exploitation. When it quits it leaves some roots of trouble to
facilitate its remote control.
Imperialism invariable trains abunch of ﬂunkeys for the control of its
colonies. India originally was not asingle entity. But the colonial rule of
the British Empire fostered the Brahmin upper stratum’s idea of building
a r o s e
o v e r
1 5unkeys for the control of its
colonies. India originally was not asingle entity. But the colonial rule of
the British Empire fostered the Brahmin upper stratum’s idea of building
a r o s e
o v e r
1 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
up an Indian Empire.

Nehru made this his policy ....

Once war breaks out it often develops independently of men’s subjective
will.

The turmoil could not be easily stopped ....

And from then on
there would be no tranquility on the subcontinent.

On August 14th, 1947, out of the partition of British India, Pakistan
emerpd as aseparate state.

The notion of Pakistan as adistinct state for
India’s Muslims was formally put forward on the 23rd of March 1940 in the
Muslim League’s Lahore resolution.

This declaration grounded the theory of
the Pakistani state in the theocratic concept that two nations existed in the
Indian subcontinent -one Hindu and one Muslim —and that the partition
of these two peoples was an ‘inevitable historical necessity’.

The Indian nationalist movement’s neglect of the Islamic minority’s fear
of Hindu religious domination, and the Muslim bourgeoisie’s own developing
hope for astate of its own, ultimately combined with Britain’s own plans for
apartition.

The manner of Britian’s exit from empire, however, left the sub¬
continent with ageopolitical legacy that thirty years later is still being violently
resolved.

India’s northwestern regions, comprising the provinces of Baluchistan,
Sindh, Western Punjab, Northwest Frontier and the eastern-most province of
East Bengal, were designated the Muslim majority areas and constituted the
new state of Pakistan.

In the process of this religious partition nearly half a
million persons lost their lives in abloodbath of communal carnage.

Atotal of
ten million refugees moved both ways across the new borders, and religious
zealots had their ﬁll in one prolonged religious riot.11
The new state of Pakistan, like India, was made up of diverse national
groupings with their own distinct languages and cultural histories.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the process of this religious partition nearly half a
million persons lost their lives in abloodbath of communal carnage. Atotal of
ten million refugees moved both ways across the new borders, and religious
zealots had their ﬁll in one prolonged religious riot.11
The new state of Pakistan, like India, was made up of diverse national
groupings with their own distinct languages and cultural histories. India’s
Congress Party, with its commitment to asecular form of parliamentary
democracy based on the power of the most developed and experienced bour¬
geois class in the Third World, did manage, following difﬁcult years of regional
and linguistic agitations, to redraw provincial boundaries along the geographic
lines that divide the country’s main national groupings. While the bourgeois
democratic institutions of the Indian state have dismally faded over three
decades to prod Indian capitalism into raising the basic standard of living
for the vast majority of India’s population, these same institutions were
able through federalism and provincial democracy to resolve adequately the
more intense regional antagonisms -the main exceptions being the insurgencies
of the Nagas and Mizos, and the stalemate over self-determination in Kashmir.l2
By contrast the authorities in Pakistan, imbued with an Islamic fundamen¬
talism whereby all are one under Allah, utterly failed in this task. In 1952
Pakistani authorities declared Urdu, spoken by less than 7% of the population,
to be the unifying and Islamizing national language. Its most immediate
consequence was language riots in East Bengal and the beginning of apopular
language movement intent on preserving Bengali culture. Unlike India, the
Pakistani authorities did not pursue apolicy of inter-regional compromise
and accommodation, but instead aggravated the national question within its
1 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker ’s Last Testament
borders by means of armed force and the characteristic arrogance of military
politics.

Thirty years after the establishment of Pakistan the underlying religious
ideology of the state remains aviolent issue.

Other than Israel, Pakistan is
the only national state in modem times to have been formed on the basis of
religious principles.

The original theory was that Islam alone would unite the
diverse cultures of the Sindhi, Baluchi, Pathan, Punjabi and Bengali.

In the
of Allah and the state each would be ﬁrst and foremost aPakistani.

e y e s
But to Pakistan’s ‘minority nationalities’ -and even to the ‘majority
nationality’, the Bengali -Pakistan’s state structure came to be dominated, if
not monopolized, by the more advanced province in the Punjab, which at
partition already controlled the military.

Also, Mahajirs, refugees who came
from India, rose quickly into dominant positions in business and the pro¬
fessions.

This arrangement was institutionalized in 1954, when provincial
boundaries were dissolved, and West Pakistan adopted the ‘one unit system
of national administration.

The struggle over the national question intensiﬁed.

Between 1955 and
1970 the internal politics of the country was an unending battle against the
‘one unit’ system.

Those who fought it said it denied and was intended to
destroy their own distinctive cultures while enhancing the privileges of the
Punjab and Mahajir elites.

After Ayub Khan’s decade-old Martial Law adminis¬
tration collapsed in 1969, the new military administration of General Yahya
Khan, which took power, promised two major reforms: areturn to civilian
rule through general elections to be held in December 1970, and the
elimination of the ‘one unit’ system.

In November 1969 Yahya Khan ofﬁcially
declared the end of the ‘one unit’ structure and re-established in West Pakistan
the boundaries of the provinces of Sindh, Baluchistan, Frontier and the
Punjab.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After Ayub Khan’s decade-old Martial Law adminis¬
tration collapsed in 1969, the new military administration of General Yahya
Khan, which took power, promised two major reforms: areturn to civilian
rule through general elections to be held in December 1970, and the
elimination of the ‘one unit’ system. In November 1969 Yahya Khan ofﬁcially
declared the end of the ‘one unit’ structure and re-established in West Pakistan
the boundaries of the provinces of Sindh, Baluchistan, Frontier and the
Punjab. But the national question was not destined to be so easily resolved, "pie
1970 elections brou^t asweeping victory for Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s
Awami League in East Pakistan. In the provinces of the Frontier and Balu¬
chistan the National Awami Party (N.AP.), led by Wall Khan, won control
of the provincial governments. Responsible for the political triumph of the
Awami League and the N.A.P. was the fact that both reﬂected the national
aspirations of Bengal, Baluchistan, and the Frontier. Each had laid down as
the leading principle of its programme the establishment of broad autonomous
rights for the provinces within ademocratic republic. The Awami League won 167 out of the 169 seats from East Bengal in the
National Assembly of the uniﬁed Pakistan. This constituted an absolute
majority in the assembly and meant that Mujibur Rahman should have become
the Prime Minister of Pakistan. But, as aBengali scholar pointed out:
At that point it was clear that if the elected National Assembly was called
into being, the Awami League would easily be able to enact aconstitution
based on its autonomy programmes, and this would in turn convert Pakistan
into nothing more than aloose confederation. As an elite group with high
1 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
salaries and entrenched privileges, spending more than half the country’s
yearly budget, the armed forces had amaterial stake in keeping East
Bengal as an integral part of Pakistan.

Pakistan’s military leadership chose not to transfer power to the elected
Awami League administration.

Zulﬁkar Ali Bhutto, leader of Pakistan’s
People’s Party, which had won majorities in the provinces of Sindh and the
Punjab with 81 seats in the National Assembly, was instrumental in the military
authorities’ refusal to convene the National Assembly.

In demagogic style
Bhutto declared that the Punjab and the Sindh were the ‘bastions of power’
in Pakistan and that, since his party now dominated those provinces, he
would not accept any constitution determined by the ‘brute majority’ of the
Awami League.

Bhutto threatened to boycott the assembly if Mujib became
Prime Minister on aplatform of transforming Pakistan into aloose
federation of provinces.

On March 1st 1971 the martial law authorities announced an indeﬁnite
postponement of the date for convening the National Assembly originally
scheduled for March 3rd.

The reaction in East Pakistan was immediate
and violent.

Demands for complete independence were issued by the powerful
and militant student federation, the Chattra League.

The Military Junta of
Pakistan entered into new negotiations with the Awami League leadership
while amass movement based on non-cooperation and strikes crippled East
Bengal.

The negotiations, however, were merely aruse for amassive military
build-up.

On the night of March 25th 1971 the most violent and brutal act
of political repression in South Asian history took place.

Tanks and armoured
personnel carriers of the Pakistan Army rumbled through Dacca.

It
remembered as KalaRatri’oi ‘The Black Night’,'nxidoviih.e ﬁrst evening alone
thousands were killed in the indiscriminate ﬁring and shelling.

DetaUs of these
events have been extensively published elsewhere.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It
remembered as KalaRatri’oi ‘The Black Night’,'nxidoviih.e ﬁrst evening alone
thousands were killed in the indiscriminate ﬁring and shelling. DetaUs of these
events have been extensively published elsewhere. The purpose of this book is
not to repeat ahistory of the massacres which followed the night of the 25th. But it was this event more than any other which opened anew and qualita¬
tively different phase in the history of South Asia.l'^
Debates on the national question have occupied Marxist writers for
than ageneration. The most well known of these discussions are those between
Lenin and Rosa Luxemburg during the early part of the century.l^ However,
in the context of contemporary history, Ban^adesh represents an important
example of the principles which occupied these earlier debates. There is
hardly asharper example where the right of national self-determination pre¬
sented itself in such deﬁnite and clear-cut terms. This work is not an appropriate place for acomprehensive discussion of
these issues. Nevertheless, certain of Lenin’s more signiﬁcant comments
bear repeating in the present context. For, more than any other element, the
national question, combining as it has with the frustrations of post-colonial
capitalist development, has become the driving force behind the emergence
of radical politics in Pakistan. In his Critical Remarks on the National Question,
Lenin commented that:
c o n -
w a s
m o r e
1 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker's Last Testament
The masses know perfectly well the value of geographical and economic
ties and the advantage of abig market and abig state.

They will, therefore,
resort to secession only when national oppression and national friction
make joint life absolutely intolerable and hinder any and all economic
intercourse.

In that case, the interests of capitalist development and of the
freedom of the class struggle wUl be best served by secession
The right of nations to self-determination implies exclusively the right
to independence in the political sense, the right to free separation from the
oppressor nation.

Speciﬁcally, this demand for political democracy implies
complete freedom to agitate for secession and for areferendum on secession
by the seceding nation.

This demand, therefore, is not the equivalent of a
demand for separation, fragmentation, and the formation of small states.

It implies only aconsistent expression of struggle against all national
oppression.

The closer ademocratic state system is to complete freedom
the less frequent and less ardent will the desire for separation be in practice,
because big states afford indisputable advantages, both from the standpoint
of economic progress and from that of the interests of the masses and,
furthermore, these advantages increase with the growth of capitalism.

Recognition of self-determination is not synonymous with recognition
of federation as aprinciple.

One may be adetermined opponent of that
principle and achampion of democratic centralism, but still prefer
federation to national inequality as the only way to full democratic
centralism.

It was from this standpoint that Marx, who was acentralist,
prefened even the federation of Ireland and England to the forcible sub¬
ordination of Ireland to the English ....

It is impossible to abolish national (or any other political) oppression
under capitalism, since this requires the abolition of classes, i.e.

the intro¬
duction of socialism.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is impossible to abolish national (or any other political) oppression
under capitalism, since this requires the abolition of classes, i.e. the intro¬
duction of socialism. But while being based on economics, socialism cannot
be reduced to economics alone. Afoundation —socialist production —
essential for the abolition of national oppression, but this foundation must
also carry ademocratically organized state, ademocratic army, etc. By
transforming capitalism into socialism the proletariat creates the possi-
bilityof abolishing national oppression; the possibility becomes reality
with the establishment of full democracy in all
i s
‘only’ -‘only!’
s p h e r e s . . . . Bangladesh’s independence in December 1971 did not end Pakistan’s
crisis over the national question. Less than two years later, the new authorities
of Pakistan’s central administration under Zulﬂkar Ali Bhutto dismissed the
provincial government of Baluchistan. Following years of agitation for the
right to ameasure of local self-government, Baluchistan had elected in 1970
the National Awami Party to head the provincial administration. When
Bhutto dismissed the local administration in February 1973 at the encourage¬
ment of the Shah of Iran, he aUeged that, like the Bengalis, the Baluchis
were nothing but abunch of secessionists. In the traditional Pakistani military
manner used to resolve difﬁcult and complex issues, massive numbers of
troops were sent into the province to crush support for the elected assembly. Open rebellion among the rugged Baluchi tribesmen broke out and since 1973
an intense and bitter guerilla struggle has been fought out in the hills of the
1 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
province.

In four years the Pakistani military forces are said to have suffered
nearly 6,000 casualties, aﬁgure which is comparable to their losses in the
1971 conﬂict.Unlike the Bengali situation, there is no issue of independence
being posed, but an interview conducted by this writer in Baluchistan with
the guerilla military commander, Chakar Khan Marri, sums up the question
which faced both Bengalis and Baluchis in the Pakistani state.

Marri’s remarks
bring into subcontinental focus the issues posed by Lenin’s comments on the
national question more than half acentury earlier.

Chakar Khan Marri is a
military commander of the Baluchistan People’s Liberation Front (Pakistan).

The Pakistani Army is reported to have set aprice of 50,000 rupees on his
head.

According to Marri:
We consider our struggle not to be asecessionist movement nor amove¬
ment towards independence.

It is amovement for autonomy within the
Pakistani state with equal rights for each nationality in its own governing.

But the roots of the current problem go back to the very founding of
Pakistan.

The very theory of ‘two nations’ living in India based on religion
is afalse theory we do not accept.

The Muslim leadership in India felt that
when the British left they would be in the minority and always in the
opposition, but never in power.

And therefore they wanted their own
state.

This expression of the Muslim bourgeoisie was the Muslim League.

They did not acknowledge the fact that the Pakistan which broke
away from India was a‘multi-national’ state of Bengalis, Sindhis, Baluch,
Punjabi, and Pathans.

They stuck to the point that religion is the basis of
Pakistan and that on the basis of religion there was only ‘one nation’ or
nationality in Pakistan.

We feel religion is apersonal matter of any indi¬
vidual and that no country in the world is based on religion alone except
Pakistan and Israel.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They stuck to the point that religion is the basis of
Pakistan and that on the basis of religion there was only ‘one nation’ or
nationality in Pakistan. We feel religion is apersonal matter of any indi¬
vidual and that no country in the world is based on religion alone except
Pakistan and Israel. But in Pakistan today the main crisis centres on the
rights of the minority nationalities. This cannot be obscured in the name
o f I s l a m . The whole national question concerns the rights of national minorities
which, in Pakistan today, encompass three provinces and nearly 40% of
the population. Prior to 1971 three-fourths of the country’s population
was facing this issue. In 1971 Bangladesh came into being and the national
question came into sharp perspective at that time. The basic question is
that in amultinational state the very fact that if one nation comes to
dominate the state and exploit the minority nationalities for its own
purpose, then those smaller nationalities are going to resist that exploita¬
tion. Let us try to deﬁne what anation is. We do not consider Pakistan to
be the sort of nation state that the government talks of. Anation is deter¬
mined by its language, culture, history, and geographical afﬁliations. The culture and language question is very apparent in Pakistan. It led
to civil war in 1971. From this point of view there are at the moment
four nations in Pakistan. We say that Pakistan is not aone nation state
but amultinational state, and we want that each nation should live in
this country on an equal basis. We want that each culture in each province
should develop on its own historical lines and that no other culture must
be imposed on any of the nations. 2 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ta k e r ’ s L a s t Te s t a m e n t
We feel that the solution to the problems of the national minorities
in Pakistan cannot take place in the bourgeois set-up in Pakistan as it is
today.

The way the bourgeoisie is using religion opposes the realisation of
these questions.

We feel that the problem of national minorities can only
be solved through ahard and long nationalist struggle; be it necessary for
it to take the shape of an armed struggle.

The exact form it will take
will resolve itself as the struggle goes on.

In our view it will most probably
take on asocialist aspect.^®
Although the Bengali and the Baluchi situations differ in anumber of
important respects, they share the fundamental feature of having confronted
an undemocratic state with the demand for autonomy and democratic rights.

In both instances parties representing this standpoint were elected at the pro¬
vincial level, and in the case of the Awami League it achieved an absolute
national majority.

Having been obstructed in establishing their elected position,
they were forced into conditions of armed struggle.

The Bangladesh Left and the War of Independence
At the time of the Pakistani crackdown in East Bengal the country’s revo¬
lutionary Left was far from uniﬁed on the national question.

The controversy
engendered by the issue reduced certain groups to impotent disarray and
created serious divisions which have persisted until the present day.

In
addition, the attitude adopted by China towards the ‘East Pakistan crisis’
further confused anumber of pro-Peking Bengali groups whose inﬂuence
among the country’s intelligentsia was signiﬁcant at the time.

All the pro-Peking factions shared asense of frustration over the Awami
League’s leadership of Bengal’s greatest mass political movement.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In
addition, the attitude adopted by China towards the ‘East Pakistan crisis’
further confused anumber of pro-Peking Bengali groups whose inﬂuence
among the country’s intelligentsia was signiﬁcant at the time. All the pro-Peking factions shared asense of frustration over the Awami
League’s leadership of Bengal’s greatest mass political movement. The Awami
League was abourgeois nationalist party whose principal objective in the
struggle, ﬁrst for autonomy and later for independence, was to establish the
Bengali bourgeoisie as aclass in its own right and not subordinate to West
Pakistan’s capitalist interests. While the pro-Peking Marxists unitedly con¬
demned the crackdown of the ‘fascist’ Yahya regime, several groups among
them were reluctant to back abourgeois nationalist movement which in their
view was supported by ‘Indian expansionism’ and ‘Soviet social imperialism’. Most important of these groups was the East Pakistan Communist Party
(Marxist-Leninist) led by Mohammed Toaha and Abdul Huq. The E.P.C.P.-
M.L.’s position on the national question was at best ambiguous and at worst
collaborationist. During the late sixties in aseries of bitter debates with
another pro-Peking faction, Toaha and Huq had condemned the thesis
advanced by the East Bengal Communist Party (E.B.C.P.) led by Abdul
Matin and Alauddin Ahmed. The E.B.C.P. had argued that the independence
of East Pakistan achieved under the leadership of aworker-peasant alliance
was the correct strategy for socialism in the region. Toaha’s party (E.B.C.P.-
M.L.) rejected this position, arguing that it over-emphasized the conﬂict
2 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
between different sections of the national bourgeoisie in East and West
Pakistan, and diverted the attention of the urban and rural proletariat in
both wings from astruggle against their common class enemy.

The E.P.C.P.-
M.L.

criticized Matin’s group saying their platform would only aid the East
Pakistani bourgeoisie, led by the Awami League, in bringing about the
secession of East Pakistan under bourgeois leadership.

The crackdown by the Pakistan Army and the extent of its brutality made
the independence of Bangladesh an irreversible certainty.

Nevertheless, within
the E.P.CP.-M.L.

deep disagreement persisted over the party’s position in
this the most wrenching crisis to grip the region.

Afaction led by Abdul
Huq still argued that the entire confrontation was the product of Indian
expansionism backed by the Soviet Union with the sole intent of destroying
the territorial integrity of Pakistan.

Huq’s colleague in the party, Mohammed
Toaha, could not agree fully with this position.

Nearly four months into the
Liberation War the party split in two.

Huq’s group maintained the party’s
original name including the title ‘East Pakistan’.

His group made contact
with the Pakistani martial law authorities indicating they would co-operate
against imminent Indian aggression, if only the army would stop its brutal
attacks on the people.

Following independence Huq was accused of collabora¬
tion with the Pakistan Army.

As of 1977 Huq’s group continued to exist as
an underground splinter group still calling itself the East Pakistan Com¬
munist Party (Marxist-Leninist).

This writer extensively interviewed Huq in
June 1976 in Dacca.

On the other hand Mohammed Toaha established abase in the Noakhali-
Chittagong region and organized his followers under anew banner, the East
Bengal Communist Party (M.L.).--- PAGE BREAK ---

This writer extensively interviewed Huq in
June 1976 in Dacca. On the other hand Mohammed Toaha established abase in the Noakhali-
Chittagong region and organized his followers under anew banner, the East
Bengal Communist Party (M.L.). While Toaha agreed with Huq that India
and the Soviet Union were the major forces behind the Awami League’s
Calcutta-based provisional government, Toaha remained ambivalent about
whether or not to support amovement for national independence led by the
Awami League. In both the towns and the countryside the population, almost
to the last villager, had turned against Pakistan and in favour of national
independence. Toaha’s faction ultimately adopted astrategic position they
termed a‘two-way war’. On the one hand they fought the Pakistani Army
and on the other they fought forces loyal to the Awami League. At times it
was difﬁcult to ascertain whether Toaha regarded the Mukti Bahini forces,
which he identiﬁed with the Awami League, or the Pakistani Army, to be
the main enemy. During an interview with this writer in April 1976 at the Baluchistan
port town of Gwadar on the Pakistan coast. Colonel Ashiq Hossain, the
Pakistan Army ofﬁcer who formerly commanded the Noakhali sector, claimed
that he personally conducted negotiations with Toaha on the possibility of
mutual co-operation in joint operations against the Mukti Bahini guerilla
forces. These discussions, accoridng to Hossain, had ended without agreement
and were ultimately broken off. Within Toaha’s camp further disagreements
arose over this very ambiguity. Badruddin Umar, one of the country’s leading
Marxist intellectu^s, left the party, citing as the reason Toaha’s inability to
2 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ta k e r ’ s L a s t Te s t a m e n t
understand the national question.

Umar regarded the Pakistan army as the
main enemy and argued in support of aunited front in the struggle for inde¬
pendence regardless of whether the Bengali bourgeoisie was to play aleading
role.

Other sections of what was regarded as the pro-Peking Left, under the
umbrella of the National Awami Party (led by the aged peasant agitator,
the ‘Red Maulana’ Bhashani, whom Toaha had once served as secretary),
unequivocably backed the struggle for independence.

China and the Bangladesh Movement
To understand the disarray of many so-called pro-Peking parties that developed
as the independence war gained momentum, it is necessary to understand
China’s standpoint during the crisis.

From the beginning China emphasized
that the entire question of East Pakistan was Pakistan’s internal affair which
did not warrant outside interference.

Radio Peking repeatedly warned that
India and the Soviet Union would attempt to intervene to cause the break-up
of Pakistan.

No public statement was ever issued by the Chinese with regard
to the military crackdown of March 25th.

The Chinese would have con¬
sidered any such statement interference in the internal affairs of Pakistan.

All their public comments focused purely on superpower rivalries and India’s
expansionist drive within the region.

No discussion of the national question
or of Lenin’s position on the ri^t to self-determination under certain condi¬
tions of severe national oppression ever appeared in these commentaries.

On April 13th, two weeks after the crackdown, the Pakistan Times
published aletter from Chou En-Lai to Pakistan’s military President, General
Yahya Khan.

In the message Chou stated that the ‘uniﬁcation of Pakistan
and the unity of the people of East and West Pakistan are the basic guarantees
for Pakistan to attain prosperity and strength.’ Chou also referred to ‘a handful
of persons’ who wanted to sabotage the unity of Pakistan.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On April 13th, two weeks after the crackdown, the Pakistan Times
published aletter from Chou En-Lai to Pakistan’s military President, General
Yahya Khan. In the message Chou stated that the ‘uniﬁcation of Pakistan
and the unity of the people of East and West Pakistan are the basic guarantees
for Pakistan to attain prosperity and strength.’ Chou also referred to ‘a handful
of persons’ who wanted to sabotage the unity of Pakistan. By printing this
letter and by sending Zulﬁkar Ali Bhutto on highly publicized visits to
Peking, the Pakistani authorities wished to create the impression of unequi¬
vocal Chinese backing, should war ultimately develop with India. Chou had
concluded his note to Yahya with the comment: ‘Your Excellency may
rest assured that, should the Indian expansionists dare to launch aggression
against Pakistan, the Chinese Government and people will, as always, ﬁrmly
support the Pakistan Government and people in their just struggle to safe¬
guard state sovereignty and national independence. In private, however, Chinese ofﬁcials were less than enthusiastic about
the military operations in East Pakistan. In November 1971 .when Bhutto
went to Peking as Yahya Khan’s emissary to enlist China’s support against
imminent military intervention by India, the Chinese presented him with a
list of sixty pro-Peking leaders who had been killed by the Pakistan Army .21
During the same visit, at adinner reception given in honour of the visiting
Pakistani delegation, an argument developed between Bhutto and aBengali
diplomat still on the Pakistan Embassy’s staff in Peking. Bhutto was loudly
2 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
praising the heroism and action of the Pakistani Army, when he said, ‘If
India attacks East Pakistan, the Ganges will turn red.’ The Bengali diplomat,
no longer capable of repressing his anger, shouted at Bhutto, ‘It is better, if
you ﬁrst make the Indus [West Pakistan’s principal river] red.’ The Chinese
were extremely embarrassed by this public ‘quarrel among brothers’ going
on before them in the midst of astate banquet.

Chou En-Lai reportedly
turned to Bhutto and said severely, ‘You cannot solve this problem in Peking.

Go to Dacca and solve it.’22
In 1974 evidence emerged indicating that the Pakistani authorities had
apparently tampered with the text of Chou En-Lai’s message when they
published it.

Anwar Hossain, the Bengali foreign-language expert at Peking
Radio from 1966 to 1972, and the only private citizen of Bangladesh living
in China at the time of the 1971 Indo-Bangladesh War, claimed in an interview
t h a t :
Chou En-Lai’s letter did not appear in full in the Pakistani press.

The
most important sentence of the letter was deleted by the Pakistanis.

I
know this, since Idid the translation from the original into Bengali for the
Peking Radio broadcast.

In the last paragraph of the letter, Chou En-Lai
wrote: ‘The question of East Pakistan should be settled according to the
wishes of the people of East Pakistan.’^3
Hossain said that the Chinese had, in private discussions, strongly urged
Pakistan to release the then imprisoned Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and return
to negotiations before the situation led to war with India.

In China Hossain
himself regularly visited communes and factories to condemn the actions of
the Pakistan authorities.

In Peking he was told by Chinese friends and ofﬁcials
that they personally condemned Yahya Khan’s military tactics.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In China Hossain
himself regularly visited communes and factories to condemn the actions of
the Pakistan authorities. In Peking he was told by Chinese friends and ofﬁcials
that they personally condemned Yahya Khan’s military tactics. But on numer¬
ous occasions when he urged them to make their views known in apublic
declaration, they replied that at the level of state-to-state relations they
could not interfere in the internal politics of another country. The spring and summer of Ban^adesh’s War of Independence was also a
period of great intra-party struggle within China over which line would win
in the area of foreign policy. Lin Piao’s alleged plot reached aclimax in
September, ending in his death. The formulation of apolicy towards the
conﬂict in South Asia occurred as asidelight to China’s new and improved
relations with America and Lin Piao’s reported attempt to capture power. Moreover, in 1971 the future of Taiwan was being raised as amajor issue in
the Western press. Strong lobbies in Japan and the United States were reviving
the Taiwanese Independence Movement with an unprecedented spate of
publicity. China again stated to the world that Taiwan was an integral part of
China and that the issue warranted no foreign interference. In these circum¬
stances the Chinese apparently would have found open support for the
Bengali independence movement, even within the traditional and speciﬁc
reference of Lenin’s position on the national question, adifﬁcult trial of
general principles. 2 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ta k e r ' s L a s t Te s t a m e n t
The Chinese leadership’s primary concern in this instance, as in others such
as Southern Africa, was the emerging role of the Soviet Union.

In its assess¬
ment of the balance of international forces, the Soviets represent arising and
powerful social imperialist force in the process of expanding its inﬂuence on
aworld scale.

The Chinese viewed post-Vietnam America as achastened
giant, adeclining imperialist power.

The main danger in this parallel rise and
fall of imperial strength is, in their view, the Soviet Union.

The Chinese, as
their public statements indicated, considered the ‘East Pakistan Crisis’ primarily
in its international or superpower context, and not with regard to the internal
contradictions of Pakistani society.

When India did eventually intervene militarily in the Bangladesh crisis.

Radio Peking broadcast one denunciation after another of Indian ‘expansion¬
ism’ and the Soviet Union’s role in Pakistan’s ‘dismemberment’.

As Indian
soldiers swept towards Dacca, eliminating the last pockets of the Pakistani
Army’s resistance, asenior Chinese diplomat at the United Nations in New
York asked this writer ‘How can the Indians be genuinely claiming to liberate
the Bengalis, when in over twenty years they have not liberated the millions
of Indian untouchables from the oppression of the caste system, poverty,
and landlordism?’^^
Chou En-Lai reportedly did say, however, that by intervening India was
picking up agreat stone which it would one day drop on its own feet.

The
Chinese Premier’s remarks proved prophetic as relations between India and
Bangladesh deteriorated in the post-independence period.

Nevertheless, the
Chinese position was acontinuous source of great disappointment for many
Bengali nationalists.

The Chinese were not the only ones on the left who opposed Indian inter¬
vention.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nevertheless, the
Chinese position was acontinuous source of great disappointment for many
Bengali nationalists. The Chinese were not the only ones on the left who opposed Indian inter¬
vention. In Calcutta, the weekly Frontier, aprominent left forum sympa¬
thetic to Indian Naxalite views of the time, supported the Bangladesh struggle
for independence while ﬁrmly opposing any Indian intervention in the
conﬂict. Except for the Calcutta-based leadership of the Awami League which
was pressing for arapid resolution of the conﬂict, many Bangladeshis, including
Taher, were opposed to Indian intervention. In their view, independence won
on the coat tails of foreign soldiers would be an independence of com¬
promise and only leave unﬁnished the revolutionary transformation they
hoped for. The Awami League and India’s authorities both feared that the leadership
of the liberation struggle might gradually slip from their control, into the
hands of those radical forces which were unambiguous in their stand on the
national question and deeply committed to the Liberation War. If aguerrilla-
style insurgency had persisted, these forces would undoubtedly have come to
dominate the politics of the movement. It was this trend that the Indian
authorities were determined to pre-empt by intervention. Bengali military
commanders estimated at the time that without Indian involvement Pakistani
forces would have been defeated within three years. At the end of such a
period, if the strategic course advocated by Taher, Ziauddin and other ofﬁcers
of the left-wing military group had been pursued, Bengladesh would have
2 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
emerged with an army of 100,000 peasants, organized into armed battalions
as the precursors of apeople’s army.

While Bengalis were ﬁtting for independence, India had another goal.

The pre-emptive quality of the intervention was not the only dimension.

The Bangladesh crisis provided the decisive opportunity for the most powerful
state of the subcontinent to destroy its principal national rival in South Asia.

Inﬂicting ahumiliating and irreversible defeat on Pakistani forces was not a
chance India’s leadership was about to pass up.

The confusion and disunity of Bangladesh’s pro-Peking parties over the
question of independence pushed them into isolation and into aposition of
peripheral insigniﬁcance during the events of 1971.

Certain groups ignored
the Chinese attitude towards Bangladesh and pushed ahead on the basis of
their own judgement.

In Rajshahi District, the local section of the E.B.C.P.

led by Ohidul Rahman gathered more than 1,000 guerillas under its banner
and completely co-operated with the guerrilla forces of the Mukti Bahini.

This section of the party played aleading role in liberating the Attrai region
of Rajshahi from Pakistani Army control.

The Pabna wing of the E.B.C.P., led
by Matin-Alauddin, initially took acommanding role in the early resistance
of its District immediately following the crackdown.

They killed more than
100 West Pakistani soldiers in early acts of resistance and advocated an alliance
of all nationalist classes, including the national bourgeoisie, in aunited armed
struggle of national liberation.

But Matin and Alauddin were reported to have
later modiﬁed their stand when China’s own position became known in April.

For Bangladesh’s radical movement the situation in 1971 was adifﬁcult
test case in the exercise of independent thinking.

This extended to groups
outside the Marxist ideological orbit.

Besides the pro-Chinese groups, there
existed asecond trend on the left.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This extended to groups
outside the Marxist ideological orbit. Besides the pro-Chinese groups, there
existed asecond trend on the left. The pro-Moscow parties —the Communist
Party of Bangladesh (Moni) and the National Awami Party (Muzzafar) —gave
their active backing and support to the Awami League’s struggle. However,
their actual activity remained of little signiﬁcance to the overall development
of events, like the C.P.I. in India, the pro-Moscow left advanced the thesis
that socialism could be achieved peacefully through the parliamentary path. Therefore, they advocated ageneral alliance of all leftist forces and secular
democratic political parties. In December 1970 they participated in the
elections and supported the 11-point programme of the East Pakistan Student
Action Committee, but their distinct form and ideological attraction was of
little consequence to the general movement. According to one observer,
“neither the pro-Peking leftists nor the Awami League paid any heed to
them.’2^
2 5
Jashod: From Nucleus To Party
Besides the two broad pro-Peking and pro-Moscow trends in Bangladesh’s
radical politics, athird Marxist stream existed. Before 1972 little was known
of this group. Only recently did details regarding its existence, as aself-
2 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker ’s Last Testament
conscious centre claiming to have functioned for adecade deep within the
Bengali nationalist movement, become known.

An understanding of the
November 7th insurrection in 1975 and the events leading to the execution
of Taher are inseparable from the history of this political stream.

Only in
1972 did it ﬁrst openly identify itself as the Jatyo Samajtantrik Dal (J.S.D.)
or Jashod (Socialist National Party).

The history of the J.S.D., according to recent party documents and
statements by its leadership, began in 1962 when ‘a group of conscious young
men’ formed a‘nucleus’ at Dacca University.

Their position differed from
other radical groups in several important, particularly strategic, respects.

Like many others, they held the view that socialism was the only solution to
East Bengal’s vast poverty, severe backwardness and increasing underdevelop¬
ment.

They argued, however, that the independence of East Bengal, or
Bangladesh, was anecessary element and condition in the struggle for a
socialist party.

They organized themselves into what they termed anucleus
which centred around anumber of personalities, including Sirajul Alam
Khan, the former General Secretary of the East Pakistan Students’ League.

The principal thesis of the group was that the national question had to be
approached as the major political contradiction of Bengali society at that
stage of history.

The exploitation of East Pakistan by capital based in the
western wing had taken on the form of ‘national’ oppression.

And the
economic bias of West Pakistani based capitalism provided, in their view,
the pivot for amass political movement.

Other Marxists, as we saw earlier, had argued that any analysis which
highlighted the national question between the two wings would only deﬂect
the masses from class struggle and encourage the secession of East Pakistan
under bourgeois leadership.

This strategy implied auniﬁed struggle throughout
all of Pakistan.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Other Marxists, as we saw earlier, had argued that any analysis which
highlighted the national question between the two wings would only deﬂect
the masses from class struggle and encourage the secession of East Pakistan
under bourgeois leadership. This strategy implied auniﬁed struggle throughout
all of Pakistan. On this strategic standpoint the early J.S.D. differed funda¬
mentally. Their early nucleus rejected notions calling for along-term co¬
ordinated struggle in both wings as being impractical and unrealistic. Pakistan with its thousand mile land breach, its multinational make-up,
and the highly distinct economic and social formations existing in the
separate halves, represented in their view aunique entity. The experience, they argued, of an intense nationalist movement in East
Bengal, which at the same time would struggle for democratic rights against
an autocratic military regime, would draw millions into the experience of
mass politics and agitation. Pakistan’s history of anti-democratic military
regimes made it certain that state violence would be used to crush such a
movement, and thus the ﬁnal achievement of democratic rights for the
people of East Bengal would ultimately have to take the form of armed
struggle. Once such astage had been reached the J.S.D. nucleus believed
it would be possible to transform an armed nationalist movement into a
revolutionary one. The failure of communist movements in South Asia had in many
important respects been afailure to link the politics of the communist
movement unequivocably with the ﬁght for national independence. In 1942
2 7
2 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
the Indian National Congress launched its ‘Quit India’ movement against the
English.

While tens of thousands of nationalists went to prison, India’s
communists at Stalin’s request formed aunited front with the British in the
world-wide ﬁght against fascism.

The Indian National Congress also opposed
fascism, but it was not willing to co-operate in acommon programme as long
as India remained acolony of Britain without ﬁrm guarantees of inde¬
pendence after the war.

After independence it took years for Indian
communism to overcome the stigma of having collaborated with the British.

In certain respects the thesis of the early J.S.D.

nucleus was shared by
other initially small Marxist tendencies such as the East Bengal Communist
Party, the Co-ordination Committee of Communist Revolutionaries, the East
Bengal Workers’ Movement and the Mythi group, in so far as they all called
for the separation of East Pakistan from West Pakistan.

While important
theoretical differences existed between these groups, over whether East
Bengal was abackward capitalist society or still semi-feudal, possibly the
most signiﬁcant difference appeared in terms of actual practice and the
carrying forward of along range political strategy.

While groups like the
E.B.C.P.

advocated the separation of East Pakistan under the leadership of a
workers party, the early J.S.D.

nucleus took adifferent tactical line.

Under
the leadership of Sirajul Alam Khan, they self-consciously joined the Awami
League and immersed themselves within the party.

Unto themselves they
were adeﬁnable, self-conscious, and independent nucleus within the party.

To others they were merely the most prominent, most militant and most
radical of the Awami League’s youthful cadres.

They had joined the Awami
League because it was nationalist in orientation and Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
was willing to advance the struggle for autonomy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

To others they were merely the most prominent, most militant and most
radical of the Awami League’s youthful cadres. They had joined the Awami
League because it was nationalist in orientation and Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
was willing to advance the struggle for autonomy. But from the very begin¬
ning of their association they took the view that in reality there existed ‘two
parties in one’. And when the appropriate moment came, they expected one
to emerge from the other. This group quickly developed acommanding position in the powerful
East Pakistan Students’ League (E.P.S.L.). Together with the pro-Peking East
Pakistan Students’ Union (E.P.S.U.) they played aleading role in the 1966
and 1969 agitations against Ayub Khan’s dictatorship. In 1969 the Field
Marshal, an autocrat who had lasted adecade, was ﬁnally toppled from power
in the face of extraordinary student and worker protests. Anew interim
military regime headed by Yahya Khan took over, which (as we noted
earlier), besides dissolving the one-unit system, promised national elections. These elections occurred in December 1970. In East Pakistan many
radical groups were against participation in the electoral campaign. The
J.S.D. nucleus, however, existing within the Awami League supported the
ballot and spread its cadres and student followers into the villages to
organize on behalf of the programme of autonomy. For them the campaign
opened up an important opportunity to send thousands of urban educated
youth to the villages. Two goals were accomplished: the urban youth with
their idealistic concepts of socialism, democracy and nationalism were put in
real and daily contact with the back-breaking oppression under which the
2 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker’s Last Testament
peasantry existed; and the peasants, needing no one to explain to them their
misery, did nevertheless garner from these book-learned students new ideas
about politics and class struggle.

Crucial decisions were being made long before the elections.

Six months
prior to the voting on August 12th 1970, at an extended meeting of the
Central Committee of the E.P.S.L., Swapan Kumar Choudliury, aprotege of
Sirajul Alam Khan, introduced aresolution for aSwadhin Samajtantrik
Bangladesh (Independent Socialist Bangladesh).

Three months earlier on
June 6th the group had drafted adeclaration of independence and prepared
the design for anew national ﬂag.

It was to be the image of ared sun having
risen on an emerald green background.^® Today it serves as the country’s
national banner.

If the situation developed as they anticipated, they were
prepared to push for independence.

The December elections brought alandslide victory for the Awami League.

As has been described earlier, this led to amajor impasse when the military
authorities refused to convene the National Assembly on schedule and accept
the results of the election.

On March 1st 1971, when the regime made then-
announcement of an indeﬁnite postponement, the nucleus within the Awami
League out of which J.S.D.

was later to grow, issued an immediate call for
independence.

Faced with this new situation Sheikh Mujib was uncertain and
wavering.

He was unable to decide whether to push beyond his existing
position in favour of federated autonomy or to make an unequivocal demand
for full independence.

On March 2nd, at amammoth rally which Mujib
attended, A.S.M.

Abdur Rab, who would later become General Secretary of
the J.S.D., ceremonially burned the Pakistani ﬂag and hoisted the new
national banner.

The following day, at another mass meeting on the Paltan
Maidan, Shahjahan Siraj, who also later emerged to become aleading ﬁgure
in the J.S.D., read out the Manifesto of an Independent Bangladesh.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Abdur Rab, who would later become General Secretary of
the J.S.D., ceremonially burned the Pakistani ﬂag and hoisted the new
national banner. The following day, at another mass meeting on the Paltan
Maidan, Shahjahan Siraj, who also later emerged to become aleading ﬁgure
in the J.S.D., read out the Manifesto of an Independent Bangladesh. Finally,
on March 7th the student leadership of what was now called the Bangladesh
(no longer East Pakistan) Students League presented Mujib with an
ultimatum: he must declare independence or they would abandon him and
take an independent course. At this stage Mujib openly complained to an
Agence France-Presse correspondent:
Is the West Pakistan government not aware that Iam the only one able to
save East Pakistan from communism? If they take aposition to ﬁght I
shall be pushed out of power, and the NaxaUtes will intervene in my
name. If Imake too many concessions, Ishall lose my authority. Iam in
a d i f ﬁc u l t s i t u a t i o n . ‘Since the strings of the movement were in our hands, Mujib did not dare
to defy us,’ Harunur Rashid, an activist of the 1971 movement told this
writer. Rashid later became the Acting General Secretary of the J.S.D.On
March 7th at arally of more than amillion persons at the Ramna Race
Course, Mujib ﬁnally declared that the struggle had now become one for
complete ‘emancipation and independence’. The 25th of March arrived. In
2 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---million persons at the Ramna Race
Course, Mujib ﬁnally declared that the struggle had now become one for
complete ‘emancipation and independence’. The 25th of March arrived. In
2 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
ablitzkrieg of death Bengali nationalism found the crucible of its birth: the
War of Liberation was on.
The Military Debate: People’s War versus Conventional War
Having established the situation in which Bangladesh moved towards inde¬
pendence, we can now return to the events of Taher’s life. Apre-condition
to this man’s biography is an understanding of the history of the inde¬
pendence movement. The two are so deeply intertwined that one cannot be
understood without the other.
At the time of the crackdown Taher was stationed in West Pakistan. He
was serving as an ofﬁcer with the elite commando unit known as the Special
Services Group. However, on the day of the 25th —the day Bengalis were to
call the Black Night —he was attending an advanced course at Pakistan’s
School of Infantry and Tactics at Quetta.
Four days later Taher was arrested for blunt remarks he had made about
the atrocities then taking place in the Eastern region. By the intervention of
the school’s Commandant, aclose friend, he was eventually released and
ordered to return to his headquarters at the Khariar Cantonment. His unit,
stripped of its Bengali ofﬁcers and jawans, had been sent into action in the
Eastern region.
The civil war brought many Bengali soldiers and ofﬁcers who were
stranded in the West, face to face with the most difﬁcult dilemma of their
lives: were they to remain safely in West Pakistan, aloof from the nationalist
cause, or should they risk their lives to escape and join the liberation struggle
which so desperately needed their military talent? The war trapped nearly
20,000 Bengali soldiers and 1,000 ofﬁcers in the West. But it also trapped
them in the vortex of the national question. They still had to choose: were
they Pakistanis or Bangladeshis? As in all such situations, some became the
cowards of their convictions, others risked all they had. Taher vividly cap¬
tured the atmosphere of this period in the testimony he read before the
secret tribunal which condemned him to death in July 1976. (Taher’s com¬
plete trial testimony remains asecret document in Bangladesh. Obtained
from Bengali sources, the full text is reproduced at the end of Part I.)
Speaking to the Tribunal Chairman, Colonel Yusuf Haider, an ofﬁcer
repatriated only in 1974 to an independent Bangladesh, and who had
remained in West Pakistan throughout the Liberation War, Taher said:
Irecall here the night of the 25th March 1971, when the Pakistani Army
unleashed brutal attacks against our people. We had no choice, but to
win that war which was thrust on us. Had we lost, aworse kind of slavery
would have been imposed upon us... Those were the days of trial for us
who were in West Pakistan. At that time Idid not hesitate to respond to
our nation’s call. The barbaric purpose of the Military Junta was not
u n k n o w n t o u s w h o w e r e i n W e s t P a k i s t a n w h e n f r o m t h e G e n e r a l H e a d -
3 0te to respond to
our nation’s call. The barbaric purpose of the Military Junta was not
u n k n o w n t o u s w h o w e r e i n W e s t P a k i s t a n w h e n f r o m t h e G e n e r a l H e a d -
3 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker’s Last Testament
quarters of the Pakistan Army the message went out: ‘Burn everything.

Kill everyone in sight.’...

On the 25th March Iwas at Quetta attending aSenior Technical Course
in the School of Infantry and Tactics.

When Iheard the announcement of
General Yahya Khan over the radio on the evening of the 26th of March, I
came to know what acatastrophe had fallen on my people: For the whole
night Iwalked on the lonely roads of Quetta...

At the time several junior ofﬁcers, lieutenants and second lieutenants
approached and sought my advice as to what they should do in this time.

Itold them in clear terms that their only concern was to escape from
Pakistan and join the Liberation War.

They also informed me that afew
senior Bengali ofﬁcers who were stationed at that time in Quetta had
refused to talk to them, refused to entertain them, lest their loyalty be
doubted by their master.

Some of these same senior ofﬁcers Iﬁnd today
holding important positions in the Armed Forces of Bangladesh and they
are now aparty in this attempt to try me here.^^
The Bengali nationalists trapped in West Pakistan believed there was only
one possible choice —escape.

After one unsuccessful attempt through the
Kashmir hills, which faltered when acrucial contact failed to show up at a
rendezvous, Taher planned asecond escape route.

This time the attempt
involved ayoung Bengali ofﬁcer, Mohammed Ziauddin, who was stationed at
the Army’s General Headquarters in Rawalpindi.

Along with two other
Bengalis, they made adaring late night crossing into India via the Sialkot
sector of the Pakistan border.

The escape of these two men was to have an
important impact on the development of the liberation struggle and the post¬
independence structure of the Bangladeshi armed forces.

Immediately after
independence Taher and Ziauddin would between them command 90% of
the country’s infantry.

Together they would begin to initiate forms of
military organization hitherto unheard of in the sub-continent.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Immediately after
independence Taher and Ziauddin would between them command 90% of
the country’s infantry. Together they would begin to initiate forms of
military organization hitherto unheard of in the sub-continent. On arrival at the front, both Taher and Ziauddin were given sector
commands. Fighting was already going on. Immediately after the 25th of
March, spontaneous resistance began from civilians who organized themselves
into irregular guerrilla units. Initially, isolated out-posts of Pakistani soldiers
suffered serious losses. Among the Bengali armed forces stationed in East
Pakistan nearly athousand troops of the East Bengal Regiment and 5,000
paramilitary police stationed in the capital were wiped out by the swift and
concentrated attacks of the Pakistan Army. The whole of the East Bengal
Regiment numbered roughly 6,000 men of whom only 3,000 survived to
regroup in India. Of the 14,000 lightly armed troops who constituted the
border security force, only 8,000 survived.^^ Except for ahandful of
collaborators —who were mainly in the police and intelligence branches —
all these units immediately joined the resistance. In the outlying cantonments and military barracks Bengali units had more
warning and time to react. Under the leadership of young Bengali ofﬁcers
such as Ziaur Rahman in Chittagong, Khaled Musharraf in Comilla, Usman in
Khustia and Shaﬁullah in Mymensingh, Bengali troops mutinied against the
3 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Pakistan Army and killed many of their former military colleagues.

At
Chittagong, units under the command of Major Ziaur Rahman managed to
hold the town for several days.

Over Chittagong Radio Zia declared Bangla¬
desh to be independent.

Nearly 100,000 Pakistani troops fanned out from the
capital and within afew days had recaptured all the major towns, inﬂicting
enormous casualties on the civilian population.

Regular Bengali military
units, by and large, soon retreated over the Indian border to reorganize.

As the slaughter continued during the night of the crackdown.

Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman chose to adopt the Gandhian tactic of non-violent
resistance.

While he waited at his house, the rest of the Awarai League
leadership ran for their lives.

Mujib was arrested and ﬂown to West Pakistan.

Most of the other leading ﬁgures in the party managed to reach India where
the New Delhi authorities welcomed them.

Immediate permission was
granted to establish the ﬁrst provisional government of Bangladesh with
Calcutta as its base.

By July, when Taher took over command of the 11th Sector comprising
Tangail and his home district of Mymensingh, an intense debate was already
underway within the Bangladesh Command over the strategic course to be
adopted and developed.

Both India and the Awami League’s government-in¬
exile were well aware that aprolonged nationalist struggle might evolve and
be transformed into arevolutionary war.

The military debate revolved around the three principal forms of armed
resistance to the Pakistani forces, each representing adistinct conception of
military strategy.

At times they ﬂowed together, at other moments they
moved independently; but each reﬂected aparticular political trend struggling
for ultimate hegemony in the Liberation War.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The military debate revolved around the three principal forms of armed
resistance to the Pakistani forces, each representing adistinct conception of
military strategy. At times they ﬂowed together, at other moments they
moved independently; but each reﬂected aparticular political trend struggling
for ultimate hegemony in the Liberation War. The ﬁrst, which may be termed ‘ofﬁcial’ resistance, came directly out of
the post-colonial army tradition and focused on the surviving members of
established Bengali military units which had escaped massacre. With the co¬
operation of the Indian authorities and under the auspices of anumber of
Bangladesh military ofﬁcers, these remnants were organized into two brigades
based in the Indian border territories of Assam and Tripura. In their com¬
mand structure and organization they were wholly conventional. Moreover,
the strategic concepts which they reﬂected were typical, in mentality and
outlook, of the subcontinent’s post-colonial armies. In many ways they still
seemed more British than the British. Ofﬁcers’ tents were carpeted, whisky
was swilled in the evenings and Bengali batmen waited hand and foot on their
o f ﬁc e r s . These main force units were under the command of General M.A.G. Osmany, aretired Pakistan Army ofﬁcer. Operational command of the
brigade stationed in the Indian territory of Tripura was under the direction
of Khaled Musharraf. With its headquarters at Agartala it took the name
of the K-Force. In the North, abrigade based in Assam was under the
direction of Ziaur Rahman and called itself the Z-Force. By concentrating
at an early stage the best existing military manpower in these two forces,
the Bangladesh High Command opted for astrategy of confronting Pakistani
3 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker's Last Testament
forces by staging cross-border raids against enemy targets within India.

While
each of these units expanded, it remained clear that neither the Z-Force nor
the K-Force were sufﬁciently strong in numbers or material resources to
defeat the 100,000 regular and irregular troops of the Pakistan Army.

Ultimately this strategic course would need to rely on an allied army —the
Indian Army —in order to vanquish Pakistani forces in the ‘set-piece’ battles
of conventional warfare.

Here Osmany, the Awami League and the Indian
commanders were all agreed: arapid resolution of the war was essential
from apolitical standpoint and their objective was to bring an Awami
League government to power in Bangladesh as soon as possible.

By the middle of April 1971 the Indian government had decided its own
national interests warranted massive backing of the Bangladesh cause.

India
had fought two expensive and inconclusive wars with Pakistan.

Now the
opportunity of acentury lay at its door.

It would cut Pakistan down to size
and establish itself as the unquestioned dominant power in the region.

The
Indian Congress Party’s interest in Bangladesh was to bring to power in
Dacca aregime similar in character to its own secularism and international
alignment.

The implication for Bangladesh of astrategy which stressed
reliance on conventional military formations was, inexorably, dependence on
India for bases, training and equipment.

Within the Bangladesh military command an alternate strategic approach
was being put forward.

It centred around agroup of experienced commando
ofﬁcers who rejected the strategic concepts being advanced by General
Osmany and the Indian ﬁeld commanders.

This dissident group’s views were
most clearly reﬂected in the military ideas of Taher and Ziauddin.

As sector
commanders ﬁghting inside Bangladesh, they rejected the main military
line of the time which called for all sector headquarters to be set up on
Indian territory.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This dissident group’s views were
most clearly reﬂected in the military ideas of Taher and Ziauddin. As sector
commanders ﬁghting inside Bangladesh, they rejected the main military
line of the time which called for all sector headquarters to be set up on
Indian territory. Taher and Ziauddin insisted on the contrary, urging that
the capital of the provisional government and all military headquarters be
based on Bangladesh territory. They also argued against the formation of
main force battalions. Instead, they wanted all experienced military personnel
to be dispersed into the districts and subdivisions of the country with orders
to raise and train guerrilla brigades drawn from the peasantry. Taher had
estimated that apeasant army of more than 100,000 men could be raised
within ayear. He argued that if this army was also a‘productive army’, as
many as 20 divisions could be raised and supported from the country’s own
resources. Stress was put on capturing enemy equipment rather than relying
on foreign supplies. Only through aform of people’s war, which relied upon
the mass mobilization and overwhelming support of the Bengali population,
could the Pakistani force, greater in numbers and with superior ﬁrepower, be
overcome. People’s war in their view was the only road to amilitary victory
where Bangladeshis —not Indians —would defeat Pakistan. This group
remained categorically opposed, as aresult, to Indian military intervention. Armed resistance to West Pakistan also took athird form. Civilians
acting on their own initiative, without formal organization or co-ordination
by any centre, took spontaneous action and organized guerrilla resistance in
3 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
hundreds of places.

Armed rebel groups ranged in character from those acti¬
vated by Abdul Matin’s East Bengal Communist Party in Pabna and the
Attrai to the private armies of bandit elements such as Kader Siddiqui in
the Tangail.

But most groups arose spontaneously without prior organizational
form and were led by the new young patriots of the Bangladesh movement.

It
was this last form of resistance which Taher in his testimony termed the
‘natural development of the forces struggling in our Liberation War’.

Ofﬁcers
like Taher and Ziau ldin struggled within the ofﬁcial command structure
for apolicy which would stress the fullest development of the irregular
forces of the Mukti Bahini.

They hoped to merge their trained personnel
with these new units and build up an armed force among the country’s
peasantry which would one day become the basis of asocialist army.

During the war, Taher commanded in two major engagements at Chilmari
and Kamalpur.

Both have gone down in the military history of the struggle
as moments of remarkable courage and tactical skill.

The campaign at Chil¬
mari was acritical battle in breaking Pakistan’s military control of North
Bengal.

There were several reasons for the town’s signiﬁcance as atarget.

Chilmari is ariver port on the west bank of the Brahmaputra.

It is also arail¬
head and possesses road access into the north.

By utilizing it as an inland naval
base, gunboats were able to range up and down the main course of the river
making attacks on riverside villages and towns.

Moreover, asmall group of
ultra-Islamic collaborators under the local Muslim League Chairman, Abu
Kasim, were terrorizing sympathizers to the nationalist cause in the Chilmari
area.

However, Chilmari’s deeper signiﬁcance lay in Taher’s hope to secure a
liberated area in which the provisional government could establish its political
headquarters inside Bangladesh.

The nearby Raumari subdivision had been
discussed as the best site.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, Chilmari’s deeper signiﬁcance lay in Taher’s hope to secure a
liberated area in which the provisional government could establish its political
headquarters inside Bangladesh. The nearby Raumari subdivision had been
discussed as the best site. But in August Pakistani gunboats based in Chilmari
began raiding into liberated areas of the subdivision. The strength of the
Pakistani outpost at Chilmari therefore had to be destroyed. During the month prior to the Chilmari assault aconference of sector
commanders was held. Taher put forward his strategic concepts in this
meeting. He opposed the formation of regular battalions and argued that
all military commands be moved inside Bangladesh’s borders and off Indian
territory. He was supported by Ziauddin and somewhat surprisingly by Ziaur
Rahman (Zia) who was commander of the Z-Force. Afew years later the
relationsihip between Taher and Zia, so ﬁrmly forged in this period of war,
would take on great importance. Until this conference they had operated
jointly in the 11th Sector. And at this important meeting Zia supported
Taher’s proposal on moving headquarters inside the country and moving to¬
wards aposition of minimal reliance on India. However, Colonel Osmani,
Major Khaled Musharraf and Major ShaﬁuUah opposed the plan. This history of
partnership between Taher and Zia made Zia’s betrayal of the Twelve
Demands raised during the November 7th Uprising in 1975 all the more
incredible for those soldiers and Mukti Bahini elements who had backed the
revolutionary objectives of the War of Independence. The radicals had re¬
garded Zia as acommitted nationalist who had avoided corruption where
3 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker ’s Last Testament
other ofﬁcers had not.

They considered him aman who might be won over to
the ideology of the oppressed classes.

But never did they expect he would
become the rallying point of the rightist forces within the army.

It was a
terrible miscalculation comparable to the trust the Chinese communists
had put in their alliance with Chiang Kai-Shek prior to the 1927 massacres.

Following this commanders’ conference adecision was made to move the
brigade commanded by Zia out of the 11th Sector where it had been jointly
operating with Taher’s forces.

The Z-Force was shifted to operations in the
Sylhet region while its main headquarters were positioned inside India at
Meghalaya.

Despite this sudden reduction of forces within the 11th Sector,
Taher chose to proceed with the attack on Chilmari.

Planning for the attack
began in the middle of September (1971) at the moment Zia’s forces were
being shifted out.

Relying mainly on newly trained recruits the Chilmari
assault force moved into position in early October.

On the 11th the difﬁ¬
cult task of secretly transporting 1,200 guerilla ﬁghters across the Brahma¬
putra under cover of darkness was accomplished by organizing aﬂeet of
deep-bottomed country boats.

The plan of operation called for the carrying
out of simultaneous attacks at Gourgacha, Rajvita, Thanshat and the main
Pakistani garrison headquartered in Cfulmari’s concrete-bunkered WAPDA
complex.

Other units were sent south of Chilmari to destroy road and railway
bridges.

The attack began and after bitter ﬁghting Pakistani forces were
overwhelmed.

The guerrillas occupied the town for 24 hours removing vast
quantities of captured arms and ammunition and taking with them alarge
number of prisoners.

The foodstores of the Pakistan Army were opened to
local villagers and two leading collaborators who commanded local Razakars
[Pakistani irregulars] were captured.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The guerrillas occupied the town for 24 hours removing vast
quantities of captured arms and ammunition and taking with them alarge
number of prisoners. The foodstores of the Pakistan Army were opened to
local villagers and two leading collaborators who commanded local Razakars
[Pakistani irregulars] were captured. After Chilmari, Taher’s forces turned their main attention to Kamalpur,
strategically acritical target. In Taher’s view the ﬁnal assault on Dacca would
come from the 11th Sector after sequential attacks through Kamalpur,
Jamalpur, Tangail and ultimately Dacca. The siege of Kamalpur began on
October 24th. The strategy was to encircle the Pakistani garrison, wearing it
down with small attacks and cutting its access to new supplies and reinforce¬
m e n t s . In one account of the Kamalpur battle, published in the Bengal weekly
Bichitra and written by ajournalist ﬁghting at the time with the 11th Sector’s
forces, Taher’s reﬂections on guerrilla war were summed up:
Taher not only seemed to us an authority on political philosophy, but he
was aguerrilla specialist as well. He had avery deep and extensive under¬
standing about the history of guerrilla warfare. When holding ameeting of
freedom ﬁghters, he would often talk about this history of the guerrilla
ﬁghter. One evening he said to us, ‘You are the nation’s freedom ﬁghters
and you must understand the history of liberation struggles. History
teaches us that weapons are not the ﬁnal determinant in the success of war. Courage and the people’s respect are the driving forces in war —especially
guerrilla war. From today onwards forget the word “attack”. In the dic¬
tionary of the guerrilla ﬁghter there is no place for words other than raid. 3 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---g forces in war —especially
guerrilla war. From today onwards forget the word “attack”. In the dic¬
tionary of the guerrilla ﬁghter there is no place for words other than raid. 3 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
ambush and gherao. Be sure the enemy has no scope to ﬁnd you. Search
for the enemy and keep him busy. If the enemy attacks, then you turn
back. If the enemylretreats, then you advance. And if the enemy breaks
through your lines, you disperse and encircle him. If the enemy encircles
you, then you break through his weak point with aﬁerce attack.’ On the
battleﬁeld there was no time for speeches. But in those words Taher
summed up the whole history of guerrilla struggle. That day his voice was
dispassionate. There was ascientiﬁc logic to what he said and the boys tried
to implement his line of thinking word for word.^^
On November 13th after three weeks of ambushes and small-scale assaults
had weakened the Pakistan garrison, Taher ordered aﬁnal full-scale attack on
Kamalpur. On November 14th, as he commanded the ﬁnal assault, Taher’s left
leg was blown off. While he was carried to the base’s ﬁeld hospital, Kamalpur
was attacked again and ﬁnally fell into Bangladesh hands. Initially there was
doubt whether Taher would live, but after several operations at the Poona
Military Hospital he recovered.
Despite opposition from the dissident group within the Bengali military
command, Indian forces intervened en masse in the conﬂict on December 3rd.
The Commander-in-Chief of the Bangladesh forces, M.A.G. Osmany, and his
regular Bengali brigades were virtual surrogates of the Indian High Command,
as the so-called Joint Headquarters of the two nations opted for aﬁnal con¬
ventional confrontation of forces against Pakistan. More than 150,000
Indian troops began their roll towards Dacca. Completely isolated from West
Pakistan and its will broken, the Army of Pakistan collapsed and surrendered
on the 16th of December. The ﬁrst forces to reach the Dacca Command
Headquarters of the Pakistan Army were those of the 11th Sector. Taher’s
brother, Abu Yusuf Khan, plucked the ﬂag from General Niazi’s (Pakistan’s
C-in-C Eastern Command) staff car as aprized symbol of the 11th Sector’s
last attack.
The Conquest of Independence
On the surface the intervention of Indian forces into the conﬂict was not
an unpopular development. The terror spread by the Pakistani Army had been
unrelenting and people were genuinely glad to be free of it. As Indian soldiers
arrived in Dacca and other towns, they were cheered. The defeat of the
Pakistani forces had been accomplished and this was itself agreat achievement
both for Bengalis and Indians —albeit for very different reasons. And in the
process of the war an object deeper than the religious bitterness which had
originally separated the sub-continent appeared to have been won.
However, while haloed portraits of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and Indira
Gandhi adorned homes and hung from tea shops all across anewly inde¬
pendent Bangladesh, the small incidents which would ultimately turn friend¬
ship into animosity had already begun. As Indian forces captured Pakistani
3 6d hung from tea shops all across anewly inde¬
pendent Bangladesh, the small incidents which would ultimately turn friend¬
ship into animosity had already begun. As Indian forces captured Pakistani
3 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker ’s Last Testament
supply depots, Indian commanders immediately began ordering the removal
of avast quantity of captured arms and ammunition.

Four divisions’ worth
of captured equipment was packed up and shipped across the border into
India.

Bangladesh commanders who objected were ignored.

At the lower
levels it was not so easy.

In Khulna District under the 9th Sector Command of
aBangladesh ofﬁcer, Major M.A.

Jalil, adirect confrontation occurred.

JaUl
objected to the movement of captured weapons into India.

Under Indian
pressure Bangladesh’s provisional government arrested him for insubordination
and ordered him to be courtmartialed.

Upon his release from prison ayear
later, following atrial which exonerated him, Jalil became the ﬁgurehead
President of the Socialist National Party (J.S.D.).

In Jessore and other districts actual ﬂuting broke out at several places
between Mukti Bahini irregulars and Indian troops attempting to remove
captured equipment across the border.

The Bengalis said that captured material
was Bangladesh property and not Indian war booty.

At the Chittagong Naval Base Indian units removed every last piece of
movable equipment from typewriters and ceiling fans to the silverware in the
Ofﬁcers’ Mess —only the Admiral’s desk was left untouched.

And while, in
all fairness, it must be noted that anumber of Indian ofﬁcers were ultimately
courtmartialed for looting, the mass removal of captured weapons was a
careful policy decision made by India.

New Delhi was determined to prevent
sophisticated weaponry from falling into the hands, either of Bangladesh’s
politically leftist guerilla forces, or for it to become the basis of awell
equipped national army on India’s eastern ﬂank.

India had fought this war to
neutralize its eastern front and it now made this clear to the Bengalis.

They
would be allowed second-hand vintage weaponry from Indian stocks for
purposes of internal security and no more.

But the ﬁrst insult came even earlier.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They
would be allowed second-hand vintage weaponry from Indian stocks for
purposes of internal security and no more. But the ﬁrst insult came even earlier. According to Taker’s military
colleagues, it was amatter he often referred to in private. The conquest of
the Pakistani Army was symbolized by the moment of defeat when in a
dramatic ceremony the Pakistani Commander, General Niazi, signed the
declaration of surrender. Niazi surrendered to the Indian Commander,
General Aurora Singh. No Bangladesh ofﬁcer was in attendance. Taker often
said that Osmany, Zia and other Bangladesh military men had failed the
country by depriving the Bangladesh forces of this moment of history. Taher
had been wounded during the Kamalpur assault, amonth prior to the war’s
end, but units under his command in the 11th Sector were among the ﬁrst to
enter Dacca on the 16th of December. He would later claim that, had he not
lost his leg at Kamalpur and been in Dacca on the 16th, Niazi would then
have had to surrender to aBengali and not an Indian. In April 1972 Taher returned to Bangladesh after further surgery on his
amputated leg. He was appointed Adjutant-General of the Bangladesh Army
and while in this post began proceedings against anumber of senior ofﬁcers
—most notably Shaﬁullah and Mir Sawkat Ali —for their illegal acquisition
of property during the war. Outside the army many senior ofﬁcials of the
Awami League had begun to acquire the ‘abandoned property’ of West
3 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Pakistanis who had ﬂed or who had allegedly collaborated with the Pakistani
Army.

Among asmall section of the military the looting spirit had also dev¬
eloped and Taher was determined to stop the rot in the troops under his
command.

‘My position,’ he told the Tribunal, Vas that everything any ofﬁcer
had illegally acquired must be returned.’
Within afew months Taher took command of the 44th Brigade at Comilla.

His close friend Ziauddin, with whom he had escaped from Pakistan, took
charge of the most important command in the country: the Dacca Brigade.

Both Taher and Ziauddin in their respective units began immediate measures
against corruption.

Taher ordered all ofﬁcers under his command to surrender
any property they had acquired illegally during or after the Liberation War.

In
adramatic gesture in front of the Dacca Brigade’s Signal Corps Ziauddin
built avast bonﬁre of the loot handed in by ofﬁcers and sepoys.

As the
entire brigade stood to attention, television sets, refrigerators and radios went
up in ﬂames.

‘I had aset of ofﬁcers whose consciences were completely
clear,’ Taher told the tribunal, ‘This is what Iregarded as leadership.

1always
sought to appeal to what was good in men.

Idetested and avoided taking
advantage of the weakness of an individual.’
Differences which had previously existed over questions of war strategy
took anew form in the post-independence period.

Attempts to restore and
rebuild an army in Bangladesh in accordance with the traditional concepts,
practices and colonial pattern of aconventional army began.

At the com¬
mand level Taher and Ziauddin [actively opposed such measures.

They argued
that, in apoor and backward coimtry like Bangladesh, only two choices
existed for an army that adopted aconventional pattern.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At the com¬
mand level Taher and Ziauddin [actively opposed such measures. They argued
that, in apoor and backward coimtry like Bangladesh, only two choices
existed for an army that adopted aconventional pattern. If the Army remained
simply the defence and security force of the state, as it had always been,
then in apoor nation the armed forces could only exist as agreat economic
burden, drawing off the small economic surplus necessary for investment and
expanded production. Either that or such an army must ultimately compro¬
mise national independence and become dependent on foreign military assis¬
tance or imperialist loans. During its twenty year history of association with the United States under
aseries of mutual security agreements, the Pakistan Army had grown to an
enormous size. In 1958 this sacred cow of the Pakistani state and child of
American aid pushed aside the nascent parliamentary institutions and im¬
posed an era of military dictatorship. It annually consumed close to 60% of
the nation’s revenue. The expansion was ﬁnanced by draining the domestic
economic surplus and by becoming one piece in the complex puzzle of
American military alliances. In return for Pakistan’s loyalty to both CENTO
and SEATO, the United States was willing to provide abillion dollars in mili¬
tary assistance. It was precisely this type of development which Taher and Ziauddin wished
to avoid. They proposed, therefore, apolicy of self-reliance. Soldiers would
not only carry agun, but would also work like peasants and workers. All
brigades were to raise their own food and begin productive work in villages
near their camps. During the summer of 1972, at aBrigade Commanders’
3 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ta k e r ' s L a s t Te s t a m e n t
meeting held in Dacca, units made their ﬁnal proposals for the designs which
would become brigade insignias.

It was at this meeting, when Taher was asked
what the symbol of the Comilla Brigade would be, that he reportedly pushed
adesign of aplough across the conference table.

From then onwards the men
of the Comilla Brigade were called the ‘plough soldiers’.

In Comilla itself
soldiers began intensive cultivation of crops and organized aplantation of
several hundred thousand pineapples.

All ofﬁcers and men were required to do
physical labour every day.

Special work teams were organized to visit villages
and identify fallow land which the army offered to help plough and plant.

Irrigation and ﬂood control works were also identiﬁed by army engineers.

Taher called it the ‘productive army’.

But three years later the euphemism
would be dropped when, in the language of the November 7th Uprising, the
rebelling soldiers would call for a‘People’s Army: an armed force of the
oppressed classes’.

The new modes of military organization which had been advanced by Taher
and Ziauddin were not to last.

By late in the summer of 1972 Ziauddin, in
particular, had become deeply disillusioned over the political direction of
the country.

In asigned article in the opposition weekly,//o/Wjy, he openly
stated his views;
Independence has become an agony for the people of this country.

Stand
on the street and you see purposeless, spiritless, lifeless faces going through
the mechanics of life.

Generally, after aliberation war, the ‘new spirit’
carries through and the country builds itself out of nothing.

In Bangladesh
the story is simply the other way round.

The whole of Bangladesh is
either begging or singing sad songs or shouting without awareness.

The
hungry and poor are totally lost.

This country is on the verge of falling
into the abyss.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The
hungry and poor are totally lost. This country is on the verge of falling
into the abyss. Ziauddin also argued that there had been a‘betrayal’ of the national
struggle because a‘secret treaty’ had been signed with India. He called for a
full public disclosure of the terms of this agreement. He then concluded with
aharsh statement against the Prime Minister, Mujibur Rahman. Referring to
Mujib, who had spent nine months of the war in aPakistani prison, Ziauddin
wrote: *We fought without him and won. And now if need be we will ﬁght
again .’3'^
For the Commander of the Dacca Brigade Ziauddin’s article was hardly an
act of soldierly obedience. It was published while Mujib was out of the
country. When he returned, the Prime Minister met Ziauddin and assured him
there would be no formal recriminations, if he offered an ofﬁcial apology. Ziauddin refused and late in 1972 he was dismissed from army service. Taher
and others who had supported him were also ‘released’ from active duty. Throughout 1972-73 radical elements in the state administration and army
structure who had opposed foreign aid and argued for an austere and self-
reliant approach toward reconstruction were being purged. Within afew
months of Ziauddin’s dismissal from the Army, others who held similar
3 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
views were ﬁnding themselves in an untenable position.

Dr.

Anisur Rahman of
Bangladesh’s Planning Commission, writing in The Business Review of Dacca,
reﬂected on the dilemma of the period:
On the morrow of the liberation, the Government of the People’s Republic
of Bangladesh had announced its intention not to accept aid from any
country which had been hostile to its liberation struggle, no matter what
this policy would cost the nation.

This was avery exciting decision.

If
followed, this would have meant no U.S.

aid for Bangladesh, and thus the
biggest single supply source of foreign aid would have been cut off ...

the
nation would have been forced to adopt amore austere reconstruction and
development policy than it has foUowed ..

.such ahighly respectable and
courageous policy, if faithfully followed, would have raised the prestige of
Bangladesh as anation ...Besides, agovernment which could sustain such
achallenging attitude to foreign aid, would certainly have adopted equally
bold distribution policies at home, so that the suffering from whatever
post-hberation shortages there would have existed, would have been widely
shared and hence much better tolerated.

Dedicated patriots who had taken
active participation in the liberation war under trying circumstances,
people’s committees and vigilance squads would naturally have featured
prominently in the distribution system.

In short, institutions would have
changed, and with it the very social landscape of the nation.

But all this is fantasy.

The radicals in the government did attempt a
policy coup.

The radic^ aid policy was followed by the one thousand taka
ceiling on salaries which for atime stunned the high salaried class.

But the
right-wing regrouped fast and the ‘counter-revolution’ was swift and
decisive.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The radic^ aid policy was followed by the one thousand taka
ceiling on salaries which for atime stunned the high salaried class. But the
right-wing regrouped fast and the ‘counter-revolution’ was swift and
decisive. Powerful right-wing pressure soon changed the aid policy and the
door was thrown open to any donor who would now pose as afriend
irrespective of past conduct; the salary ceiling was raised to two thousand
taka plus acar to be run and maintained at the public expense. All other
pronouncements about austerity and egalitarianism were reduced to
empty slogans. By now, the country has ﬁrmly entered into acourse of
heavy indebtedness, particularly to the very country [USA] which had
wanted the destruction of Ban^adesh as anation .. ..^^
As this commentary indicates, the beginning of the Awami League’s decline
had set in within the ﬁrst year of independence. The idealism and enthusiasm
which the party had inspired in its struggle against Pakistan’s military dictator¬
ship was being drowned in asea of corruption. And the corruption was funded
principally by nearly 2billion dollars’ worth of relief commodities, aid, con¬
tracts and international business which poured in from the bountiful overseas
cornucopia following independence. While the bribe, the kickback and the
payoff had all previously existed in the familiar form known as bakhsheesh,
what was new was the extraordinary sums now involved. In two and ahalf
years the regime in Dacca received more aid than it had received in its previous
23 years as the province in East Pakistan. Talk of ‘black money’ and stories
of illicit trade deals became part of the dark new folklore of the post¬
independence period. 4 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker's Last Testament
Prior to independence East Bengal had been arather quiet distant place —
the most remote province of Pakistan.

Travellers journeying from South¬
east to South Asia via Bangkok, Rangoon and Calcutta invariably skipped
Dacca.

There were few international ﬂights into the city and after 1965
there were no ﬂights via Calcutta, now the main transit point for Bangladesh.

Civil war and independence suddenly catapulted Bangladesh from abackwater
on the periphery of the world market into anation with increasing strategic
importance.

Radical critics, who found themselves being shunted out of the army
and the important ministries, charged that foreign aid had become the prime
source for the criminalization of the country’s politics and the destruction
of the idealism which had emerged from the period of the guerrilla war.

‘This was, of course, only to be expected,’ wrote Anisur Rahman on the
eve of his departure from the Planning Commission, ‘The revolution that
liberated Bangladesh was anational bourgeois revolution.

There was nothing
in the class character of the leadership to expect any commitment of self-
imposed hardship in pursuance of ideological goals.’^^
The most notorious example of the style of primitive accumulation
indulged in by members of the new regime was that of Gazi Gulam Mustafa,
President of Dacca City’s Awami League and Chairman of Bangladesh’s
Red Cross Society.

Mustafa established amulti-million dollar black market
operation in relief goods which became the principal ﬁnancial source for
party ﬁnancing.

At one stage the Director of the United Nations Relief
Operation in Bangladesh (UNROB) observed that it had become so bad
that only about one in seven tins of baby food and one in thirteen blankets
donated to relief ever reached the poor.

Besides John Stonehouse, the
British Labour Party M.P.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At one stage the Director of the United Nations Relief
Operation in Bangladesh (UNROB) observed that it had become so bad
that only about one in seven tins of baby food and one in thirteen blankets
donated to relief ever reached the poor. Besides John Stonehouse, the
British Labour Party M.P. whose illicit dealings ultimately put him behind
bars, anumber of other foreigners became enterprising soldiers of fortune in
the midst of misery. One European ofﬁcial from the United Nations’ transport
division, which at one point controlled the import and shipment of millions
of dollars’ worth of goods into the country, was himself reported to have made
over amillion dollars and to have purchased ahotel in Sardinia from his
Bangladesh earnings.^^ In 1974 the World Bank, that leading light of inter¬
national lending, became enmeshed in ascandal involving its northwest irri¬
gation project, when it was revealed that the Bank had knowingly paid $4
million in bribes.^®
It was in this situation that the Awami League’s most militant supporters
from 1970 turned into its most active opposition. By late 1974 government
ofﬁcials were openly admitting that more than 3,000 Awami League ofﬁcials
had been assassinated, either through intra-party rivalry or by various under¬
ground groups. Open forms of insurgency were developing in certain sections
of the country. Among the most active of the armed groups was Siraj Sikdar’s
Purba Bangla Sharbohara Party (East Bengal Proletarian Party), also known as
the East Bengal Workers’ Movement (E.B.W.M.). Prior to independence it had
existed as agroup of young communists committed to the thesis that the main
contradiction in Pakistan was aconﬂict between the ruling class of West
4 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Pakistan and the exploited masses of East Pakistan.

The E.B.W.M.

said that
revolution in East Pakistan had to take the form of arevolution for national
independence.

By denying this, it said, other so-called pro-Peking groups
were denying the main political contradiction of Pakistan.

After having taken
an active role in the independence struggle the Sharbohara Party reorganized
its guerrilla squads.

Following independence It identiﬁed the Mujib govern¬
ment as its main enemy, and gradually built up acampaign of assaults on police
outposts across the country.

In the spring of 1974 the Sharbohara Party and the Marxist underground
in general received an unusual recruit.

In May of that year leaﬂets appeared
in Dacca’s main military cantonment and in other sections of the city,
announcing that Lt.

Colonel M.

Ziauddin, the former commander of the
Dacca Brigade, had joined Sikdar’s East Bengal Proletarian Party.

After his
dismissal from the Army Ziauddin began to get to know aside of Bangladesh
his upper class education had led him away from.

Before the war he had
been more conversant in English or Urdu than Bengali.

Now he turned in a
new direction.

For half ayear he rode the rails of Bangladesh in third class
train compartments visiting rural areas and making efforts to change his old
personal habits in order to declass himself.

When he came to Dacca, as he
frequently did, Ziauddin would often stay with Taher’s family in Narayan-
ganj on the outskirts of the city.

He borrowed books from new found leftist
friends outside the Army and tried to learn something of the classics of
M a r x i s m .

In February 1974 Ziauddin’s closest friends suddenly lost touch with him.

He had disappeared.

But at the end of the month, afriend received aone-
sentence letter from the former Commander of the Dacca Brigade.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He had disappeared. But at the end of the month, afriend received aone-
sentence letter from the former Commander of the Dacca Brigade. It read: T
have crossed the line.’ Nothing more was heard until May, when the leaﬂet
under his signature appeared throughout Dacca, announcing he had joined
the Marxist underground. Over the same period parallel and important developments were taking
place within the Awami League itself. In 1972 the two trends which had
existed in the League for nearly adecade began to fall out. Ten years earlier
in 1962 anucleus of young men had joined the League with the conscious
notion of advancing the socialist cause by mobilizing amulti-class struggle for
national independence, through the vehicle of the Awami League. They had
fully expected that at acertain stage they would have to break off and
establish an independent position. The day Mujib returned to Bangladesh from
prison in Pakistan, January 10th 1972, this nucleus began publication of
their Bengali mouthpiece
(Voice of the People). Over the next
two years, before its ofﬁces were burned and ransacked and its editor arrested,
the paper would achieve adaily circulation second only to the leading and
traditional Bengali daily Ittefaq. Mujib returned to mass acclaim in Dacca. But on arrival he was immediately
approached by the same leaders of the Students’ League who, ayear earlier,
had pressed him into declaring an independent Bangladesh. They outlined
their proposals for avigorous programme of nationalization, co-operatives. 4 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker's Last Testimony
agrarian reform and post-war reconstruction.

They called upon the Awami
League to adopt aspeciﬁc programme for the transition to socialism.

They
also proposed the formation of agovernment of national unity including all
parties (not just the League) which had fought against Pakistan.

Mujib rejected
this and other proposals.

Instead, imbued with his own apparent popularity
and new found international image, he advanced his own vague ideological
package called The Four Pillars of Mujibism (The Mujibad): Nationalism,
Secularism, Socialism and Democracy.

To his militant supporters of 1970
Mujib’s new programme was simply an empty pot to be ﬁlled with the fruits
of aforeign aid bonanza, not the ideals of the independence struggle.

For the
militants the time for acomplete break had come.

In April 1972, four months after Mujib’s return and at the peak of his
popularity, the left nucleus broke the Students’ League in half.

The following
month, in May, they divided the peasant federation, the Jatyo Krishak League.

In June, they split the workers’ front, breaking up the Shramik League and
forming their own parallel organization.

On October 21st aConvening Com¬
mittee of the Jatyo Samajtantrik Dal (J.S.D ./Socialist National Party) was
founded, not calling itself aparty, but a‘socialist mass organization’.

Among
those who made up the committee were Bidan Krishna Sen, Shajahan Siraj,
Nur Alam Ziku, Abdur Rab, Sultan Uddin Ahmed and Major M.A.

Jalil.

In
December the Convening Committee of the J.S.D.

was expanded into the
Central Organizing Committee of the J.S.D.

It included anumber of im¬
portant, but secret members such as Colonel Abu Taher.

In May of 1973 the
Central Organizing Committee expanded further into aNational Committee
ofthe J.S.D.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It included anumber of im¬
portant, but secret members such as Colonel Abu Taher. In May of 1973 the
Central Organizing Committee expanded further into aNational Committee
ofthe J.S.D. In June of 1974, following an extended meeting of the National Com¬
mittee, asmaller Co-ordination Committee was formed, and at this session
the 1962 nucleus, known as the Bangladesh Biplopi Kendra (Revolutionary
Centre of Bangladesh), ofﬁcially dissolved itself, merging into the Co-ordination
Committee of the J.S.D. During the June ’74 session, adraft thesis and a
draft constitution for arevolutionary party were put forward. The document
had been drawn up by acommittee which, among others, included Sirajul
Alam Khan, Hasanul Huq Inu and Harunur Rashid. No party, however, was
ofﬁcially formed. The National Committee held the position that they were
in the process of forming arevolutionary party. No party could ofﬁcially
be formed until anational congress could be held. The National Committee
considered that the overall development of the movement in Bangladesh had
not yet reached such astage, although they thought it was close. Members
were directed to start forming nuclei at the district and lower levels where
the draft thesis would be discussed and Marxist-Leninist principles were to
be propagated to awider and wider circle. In April ’74 the National Committee
began publication of the party’s theoretical journal Samyabad {Communism)
and at the end of that year they began issuing Larai {Struggle), as the organ
of the ‘democratic movement’ supported by the J.S.D. In July the J.S.D. ofﬁcially founded its armed wing called the Biplopi Gono Bahini (People’s
Revolutionary Army), commanded by astill anonymous Colonel Abu Taher. 4 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
In the country as awhole, stability was deteriorating further as the econo¬
mic situation stumbled from disarray to disaster.

The period 1973-74, following
the war in the Middle East, was atime of grave crisis on international commo¬
dity markets.

The world price explosion in food grains and oil occurred
simultaneously with aperiod of deep internal crisis within Bangladesh.

Both
combined in such away that the country was driven into the agony of the
worst famine since 1943.

But the ineptness, arrogance and| proﬁteering with
which Mujib’s Awami League administration approached impending develop¬
ments only compounded the famine’s existing man-made dimensions.

Three reports ﬁled by this writer in the summer and fall of 1974 will
give some sense of the situation at the level of national administration, and
its subsequent consequences in the countryside.

August 1974: Inﬂation of over 40% has decimated real income and brought
enormous hardship to families whose margins for survival disappeared
years ago.

The Government’s cost-of-living index for industrial workers in
the Dacca-Narayanganj area reached 325.45 in May (1969-70 =100).

The
price index for workers’ clothing rose to 514.

In Chittagong and several
other district towns the situation is even worse.

Should monetary expansion be viewed as areason of equal or greater
cause for spiralling prices, then, logically, not only would smugglers and
hoarders be lined up before the ﬁring squad, but so would government
ofﬁcials responsible for monetary policy.

One need not be afollower of Milton Friedman in order to believe
that an extraordinary expansion in Bangladesh’s money supply, during
aperiod when the economy had not yet recovered to 1970 production
levels, is one very substantial cause of the country’s rampaging inﬂation.Should monetary expansion be viewed as areason of equal or greater
cause for spiralling prices, then, logically, not only would smugglers and
hoarders be lined up before the ﬁring squad, but so would government
ofﬁcials responsible for monetary policy.

One need not be afollower of Milton Friedman in order to believe
that an extraordinary expansion in Bangladesh’s money supply, during
aperiod when the economy had not yet recovered to 1970 production
levels, is one very substantial cause of the country’s rampaging inﬂation.

Ofﬁcial statistics published by the Bangladesh Bank state that, at the time
of independence in December 1971, money supply (currency in circulation
and demand deposits) stood at Ta 3,880 million.

At the end of June 1974,
the Planning Commission put the money supply at Ta 8,400 million, or a
116% increase in just two and ahalf years.

Since 1969-70, the period used
as a‘benchmark’ level for productive recovery, it has been at least 200%.

The Government’s monetary policy has served to ﬁnance enormous and
unplanned budgetary deﬁcits.

In the ﬁrst year and ahalf, the large-scale
inﬂux of relief commodities hid the inﬂationary power of the growing
money supply, as increased currency matched an increasing supply of relief
commodities.

However, since relief goods did not represent real additions
to production and production itself did not increase to match monetary
growth, the dragon of inﬂation was let loose when the ﬂow of relief goods
began to ebb ....

The poverty and increasing unemployment in the country’s 65,000
villages have, if anything, become even worse since independence.

46
million people out of atotal population of 74 million are living below the
poverty line.

These are people who do not earn enough to consume
2,100 calories aday.

They are mainly landless peasants and small
farmers.

Of arural population of 66 million in 1970, roughly 40%, or 26
million people, were landless.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They are mainly landless peasants and small
farmers. Of arural population of 66 million in 1970, roughly 40%, or 26
million people, were landless. Real wages for these agricultural labourers
have fallen despite amodest rise during the days of East Pakistan. In 1949,
4 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ta k e r ’ s L a s t Te s t a m e n t
agricultural workers earned Ta 697 per annum (with 1966 taken as the base),
in 1961 Ta 733, in 1964 Ta 852, and in 1969 Ta 834.

By 1973, however,
the real income of agricultural workers was Ta 580.

In short, the landless
peasants of Bangladesh were earning 17% less in 1973 than in 1949.

(‘A
State of Siege’, Far Eastern Economic Review, 30 August 1974).

October 1974: In the ﬁrst three days of October, nineteen ‘ofﬁcial’
starvation deaths in Dacca City were reported, but the actual number is
believed to be much greater.

Achain of stories from the districts are
linking the deteriorating situation in the rural areas with acomplacency
in the capital that has been born of months of rising prices and hardened
by political disillusionment.

Medical workers in Faridpur report villagers
refusing inoculations, declaring that they would prefer to die quickly
from disease rather than slowly from hunger.

And in Saidpur there have
been numerous stories of suicides in Bihari camps, where starvation has
been endemic for more than ayear ....

All the preliminary signs of amajor famine have been unfolding for
weeks.

Large numbers of peasants wandering into the towns, the reports of
starvation deaths, and now adecision by Dacca to open gruel kitchens in
the districts, are conﬁrmation.

The situation is expected to get much
worse, mainly because the authorities are unlikely to take effective action
on food prices.

The phenomenal rise in the price of rice over the past
half-year is the main factor in the starvation now overwhelming the ranks
of the poorer classes —the harvesters of months of proﬁteering, speculation
and corruption in the nation’s grain trade.

The markets are full of grain -
at aprice.

As the famine intensiﬁes, there will continue to be substantial supplies
of grain available from private stocks, but at an increasingly higher price.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The markets are full of grain -
at aprice. As the famine intensiﬁes, there will continue to be substantial supplies
of grain available from private stocks, but at an increasingly higher price. During the great Bengal Famine of 1943, anumber of famous families
made their fortunes in the merchant grain trade. It is widely believed in
Dacca that many fortunes are being made in the current situation. Referring
to proﬁteering, one high U.N. ofﬁcial in Dacca has said: ‘What is coming
up will be aman-made famine.’
During the third week in September the price of rice suddenly rocketed
to nearly Ta 400 (US J;30.77) per maund (35 kg.), or ten times the pre¬
independence level of three years ago. The increase would be the equi¬
valent of an American family paying S4 for aloaf of bread they bought at
40 cents three years back. {Ibid., 25 October 1974). November 1974: Rangpur District. Northern Bangladesh. It appears
the entire year has been aperiod of preparation for adreadful holocaust of
hunger; awaited, dreaded and yet, like the certainty of arising wave, a
tragedy reminiscent of Bengal’s 1943 famine appears to be being re-enacted
with all the attendant horror and indifference. For those who have soberly
observed the Bangladesh economy and administration, this last terrible
descent comes as no surprise. Rangpur District in northern Bengal has been most seriously affected,
although advanced starvation has become apparent in other areas, parti¬
cularly Jamalpur in western Mymensingh and parts of Faridpur, Noakhali
and Khulna. It is Rangpur, however, which has become the nation’s central
death trap. 4 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
On October 24 the Rangpur Treasury was asetting of frenzy, reminiscent
of the run-on-the-bank scenes in Europe and America during the 1920s
and 1930s, as thousands of people jammed and fought their way through
the ofﬁce to procure the ofﬁcial stamp to attach to the transfer of land
deeds.

By early October, small holders had gone through all their cash,
and so came the last desperate throw —an all-out effort to sell land for
money to buy rice.

Treasury ofﬁcials said they could not recall such amassive transfer of
land ownership in the district, estimating that more than 100,000 acres
of land have been sold in the past three months at half their normal price.

Abigha of land (third of an acre) which sold at Taka 2,000 six months
ago, is now fetching only Taka 1,000.

So the peasants are losing out in
two directions, with land prices plummeting and rice costs rocketing.

In
Rangpur rice is selling at Taka 400 amaund (77 lbs), but only three years
ago the price was one-tenth of today’s level, and six months ago it was half
as much.

District ofﬁcials conservatively estimate that between 15,000 and
25,000 people have died in the Rangpur area during the past three months.

According to amedical ofﬁcer, the cause is ‘absolute starvation’ and not
f r o m t h e f a m o u s s o - c a l l e d a i l m e n t o f m a l n u t r i t i o n .

Certain ofﬁcials speaking very much off the record, claim closer to
50,000 people have died.

The local unit of the opposition J.S.D.

claims
100,000 people have perished.

Whatever the true ﬁgures, all sides admit
that, with the onset of cold weather and the lack of any major relief
effort, the number of victims will roughly treble before the famine is
o v e r .

Rangpur ofﬁcials have agreed privately that one death per village per
week was afair, if not low, estimate.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Whatever the true ﬁgures, all sides admit
that, with the onset of cold weather and the lack of any major relief
effort, the number of victims will roughly treble before the famine is
o v e r . Rangpur ofﬁcials have agreed privately that one death per village per
week was afair, if not low, estimate. That means if even half the 4,000
villages of the district were free from starvation, which they are not, at
least 2,000 people would be dying each week. When projected to the rest
of the country’s nineteen districts, although they are not in such aserious
position as Rangpur, the magnitude can only be calculated in the realms
of the imagination reserved for the appalling. (‘A Death Trap Called
Reingpm\Far Eastern Economic Review, 15 November 1974). The year of the famine became the pivot of Mujib’s decline. Where in 1971
as the unchallenged leader of the nationalist movement, Mujib had spoken to
crowds of more than amillion, in 1974 he rarely ventured out to address an
open meeting. Disturbances were too likely. In December 1973 the J.S.D. was already holding mass rallies of crowds up to 100,000 on Dacca’s Paltan
Maidan. In January and February 1974 it led two successful nationwide
general strikes. Then, on March 17, after alarge meeting on the Paltan Maidan,
J.S.D. leaders led ahunger march on the Home Minister’s residence. As they
reached the Minister’s house, units of the Rakkhi Bahini, aspecial paramilitary
force trained under Indian Government auspices, arrived. Within moments
they opened ﬁre and the procession ended in the Minto Road Massacre An
ofﬁcial announcement conﬁrmed eight deaths while doctors at Dacca Medical
College spoke of more than 30. Following this incident many J.S.D. leaders
were arrested, the party’s ofﬁces were ransacked, and the premises of
4 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker’s Last Testament
Gonokontho.,Xh& J.S.D.

paper, were burned down and its editor arrested.

The
party was forced underground.

But by now two of the most active revolutionary groups in the country
had senior and experienced military personalities within their ranks.

That
Ziauddin had joined Siraj Sikdar’s Sharbohara Party was widely known from
the party’s leaﬂets.

Taher’s membership in the J.S.D., however, was aclosely
guarded party secret and known by very few.

During this period Taher moved
openly in Dacca and stayed in contact with military colleagues.

As individuals,
Taher and Ziauddin remained intimate friends.

Although Ziauddin was now
ahunted man, they continued to stay in close touch.

Ziauddin had been drawn
to the Sharbohara Party because it was the militarily most active form of
opposition to aregime he believed had betrayed the Liberation War.

While
Taher had ultimately hoped for unity among these various underground
groups, he considered Sikdar’s movement to be lacking in amass base and a
comprehensive programme of political and social analysis.

The J.S.D., how¬
ever, he regarded as being in the process of building up both abase and a
political programme capable of becoming the foundation of arevolutionary
socialist government.

In the Sharbohara Party the gun seemed to command
the party rather than the opposite.

As aleading though secret ﬁgure in the
J.S.D.’s armed force —the Biplopi Gono Bahini —Taher considered himself
under the political direction of the National Committee.

During 1974 revolutionary parties such as Sikdar’s Sharbohara Party were
stepping up their armed assaults on local police outposts.

In famine areas
there were stories of rebels breaking open government food warehouses and
distributing the stocks to the hungry.

In December 1974 Mujib put the
country under Emergency rule, suspending the Constitution and moving
towards declaring himself President.

The crackdown on underground parties
intensiﬁed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In December 1974 Mujib put the
country under Emergency rule, suspending the Constitution and moving
towards declaring himself President. The crackdown on underground parties
intensiﬁed. At the end of the month Siraj Sikdar was captured by apolice
dragnet in Chittagong. Within days of his arrest he was shot in the back while
‘trying to escape’. There was little doubt among most observers in Dacca that
Sikdar had been murdered in police custody. An explosive situation was
developing. Within six months Sheik Mujibur Rahman would be dead. Zia’s November 23rd Counter-Coup: Taher’s Arrest
This account opened with an execution. There followed aletter written by
Taher just before his death in which he appealed to those who attended the
secret sessions of Military Tribunal No. 1to ‘expose the secret behind this
trial... to expose the truth’. For the present the truth on this case is banned
in Bangladesh. Those responsible for Taher’s execution in 1976 and the hun¬
dreds of hangings which followed ayear later, would prefer for the whole
story to be forgotten, and that any memory of the November Uprising
should die shrouded in the same secrecy they imposed upon Taher’s trial. The
object of this text is to make that impossible. What follows makes no claim to cover the whole matter. There is much
4 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
more to be written, other details to be unearthed, further statements to be
made.

It is my hope that these will come from Bengali writers and that my
comments will only be the ﬁrst crack in the shell of secrecy encasing this
and other cases of the Special Military Tribunals.

Furthermore, even in this present account there are more details to be set
out before it can be considered closed.

Many dates have been touched upon —
August 15th, November 3rd, November 7th —but the full sequence is not
complete.

The year 1974 was the year of Bangladesh’s ‘revolutionary left’.

From the J.S.D.

and the Sharbohara Party to Maulana Bhashani and Toaha’s
Samyabadi Dal, they collectively developed and expressed the rising public
antagonism to Mujib’s corrupt and faltering regime.

But, while it was the
left which through open agitation and underground action had assiduously
prepared the ground for popular revolt, when the moment came it was the
right which struck.

The night (August 15th) that Mujib and some forty
members of his family died, Bangladesh and the world woke up to astory of
six army majors, and the soldiers immediately under their command, having
been the ones that pulled the trigger.

For the country they offered up little
more than the extreme right wing of Mujib’s own Awami League in the
ﬁgure of Khondakar Mustaque Alimed.

Ideologically they proposed athrow¬
back to the old Pakistan formula of Allah being the pillar of the state and
America the ﬁnancial and military underpin.

China’s antagonism to Soviet-
backed Indian expansionism could also be drawn upon, as Ayub Khan had
once done to frighten off New Delhi’s overbearing proclivities.

But most
importantly, the general impression had successfully been spread that the six
majors had acted alone and unilaterally.

However, as with much else, even
this well-constructed illusion is in the process of being unravelled, as will
become clear in Part Two of this book.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But most
importantly, the general impression had successfully been spread that the six
majors had acted alone and unilaterally. However, as with much else, even
this well-constructed illusion is in the process of being unravelled, as will
become clear in Part Two of this book. Having examined the underlying questions of political theory and history
which characterized these violent events, it is possible to return to the account
of Taher’s life with which this essay began. Following the violent insurrec¬
tionary morning of November 7th, Taher and Ziaur Rahman met as if they
were once again old comrades, ﬁghting in the 11th Sector. By several
accounts of the moment. Zia emotionally embraced Taher as he entered the
compound, expressing his deepest gratitude for the event which had saved
him. Only four days previously the two men had been cut off in mid¬
conversation as Zia, on the verge of being arrested, telephoned Taher hoping
he might rally forces opposed to Khaled Musharrafs putsch. Immediately after Khaled’s takeover, enormous tensions began to
develop within the rank and ﬁle of the armed forces. N.C.O.s and J.C.O.S
converged on Taher’s residence in Narayanganj, appealing for leadership
and action. Anumber of these ofﬁcers and men were members of the
Revolutionary Soldiers’ Organization (Biplopi Sainik Sangstha) which the
J.S.D. had anonymously been organizing for more than ayear. They had
been planning their own general uprising against Mujib at the time of his
assassination. But they opposed putsches and coups. Their plan had been to
deepen mass urban and peasant agitations before moving on the military
4 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker ’s Last Testament
front.

But the military putsches of August and November had created anew
situation.

The J.S.D.

chose to back an uprising which they judged would
have massive spontaneous support and, if successful, would break open the
straitjacket around the country’s political life.

Under Taher’s leadership it
activated the military organization and set the wheel of the rebellion in motion.

According to the J.S.D.’s journal Samaybad, their organizations acted for
the following reasons:
When Khaled Musharraf and his faction came to power, they immediately
engaged themselves in bringing about an increase in Indo-Soviet political
dominance over the country.

The Awami League and its tail —the parties
of the Moni-Muzzafar circle —came out openly and made alI_efforts to
re-establish the image of Sheikh Mujib.

However, by then, the armed
forces, in particular iﬁ^fawans of th^army, became disillusioned and agi¬
tated by the coups, the power struggles of their ofﬁcers, and the way the
sepoys were being used as tools only to serve the interests of the bourgeoisii
Their sentiments were expressed in the leaﬂets issued by the Revolutionary
Soldiers’ Organization (Biplopi Shainik Sangsha) and distributed in the
Dacca Cantonment on November 5th 1975.

On the night of November
6th, the revolutionary membership of the organization in direct communi¬
cation with the People’s Revolutionary Army (Biplopi Gone Bahini)
took aﬁrm decision to come out of the barracks and bring about the ﬁnal
downfall of the Khaled Musharraf group.

Khaled Musharraf’s faction was completely defeated through the
uprising of the sepoys —initiated by ajoint organization of the Revo¬
lutionary Forces and the People’s Revolutionary Army —thus giving
them their ﬁrst victory over the reactionaries.

The decision to act was
t a k e n :
First: to shatter the unity of the most active, organized and oppressive
armed group of the bourgeois state machinery.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Khaled Musharraf’s faction was completely defeated through the
uprising of the sepoys —initiated by ajoint organization of the Revo¬
lutionary Forces and the People’s Revolutionary Army —thus giving
them their ﬁrst victory over the reactionaries. The decision to act was
t a k e n :
First: to shatter the unity of the most active, organized and oppressive
armed group of the bourgeois state machinery. Second: to minimize the organizing capacities of the bourgeoisie. Third: to weaken the imperialist, revisionist and hegemonist forces
which are the patrons of the national bourgeoisie. Fourth: to force the new rule to bring back ademocratic situation as
far as possible with aview to ultimately eliminating the elements of
bourgeois democracy. Fifth: to prepare the ground for an introduction and growth of prole¬
tarian state power and political forces parallel to the bourgeois system
of state power. The full extent of our participation and achievements in the events of
November 7th and after, including our assessment and review of this
matter, have been published in the booklets Lorai (Struggle, ﬁfth issue)
and Jangi Janatar Gikya Gore Tulun (Forge Militant Mass Unity).^^
Unlike some interpretations of their activity, the J.S.D. on November
7th did not consider itself to be out to establish arevolutionary government. Their objective was more modest. They hoped ﬁrst of all to secure ageneral
release of political prisoners detained during Mujib’s regime and still held
throughout the months of Mustaque’s period in power. Alarge number of
4 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
political prisoners, mainly of radical political groups, were under detention.

The J.S.D.

had 10,000 members, including anumber of National Committee
members, in prison.

They proposed, on the 7th, the establishment of an
interim government that would include all parties which had suffered repres¬
sion during Mujib’s regime and which had supported the independence
struggle of the country.

Religious communal parties, such as the Muslim
League and the Jamat-e-Islami, which actively collaborated with the Pakistan
Army, were to remain banned.

The J.S.D.

called for such agovernment to
hold fresh elections, restore press freedom and allow open political meetings.

Within the army, the urban work force and in the rural areas, they called for
the setting up of new organs of authority in the form of soldiers’ committees,
thus by-passing the state bureaucracy as the source of authority.

What they
seemed to hope for was aKerensky style interim regime during which 1917
style soldiers’ and workers’ soviets would be set up.

New opportunities
would open for consolidation and the building up of bases before anew crisis
would either project their movement into power or drive it underground.

In the aftermath of the subsequent crackdown on the party, the J.S.D.’s
decision to back Ziaur Rahman on the morning of the uprising has remained
apoint of deep puzzlement.

It appears that Taher was inﬂuential in this
tactical choice.

He believed, as did others, that Zia, while not aradical, would
at least favour immediate democratic measures such as ageneral amnesty,
freeing of the press, and elections.

They believed that at least he would not
actively oppose these steps.

Taher and Zia had been close personal friends for
years.

After independence it was Taher and Ziauddin, more than any other
ofﬁcers, who had built up Zia’s popularity among the sepoys, as an honest
nationalist.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Taher and Zia had been close personal friends for
years. After independence it was Taher and Ziauddin, more than any other
ofﬁcers, who had built up Zia’s popularity among the sepoys, as an honest
nationalist. When Ziauddin had gone underground with the Sharbohara Party,
Zia had discouraged junior ofﬁcers from pursuing the chase too vigorously. In
’72 he had given quiet support within the High Command to Taher’s deploy¬
ment of a‘productive army’ unit at Comilla. So, on the 7th, there was some
basis upon which to expect his co-operation. On the evening of the mutiny
Zia went and joined Taher at Bangladesh Radio. There Zia signed adocument
committing himself to the support of the Twelve Demands. Next day Zia
ordered the release of the J.S.D. leadership from prison. Their President,
Major M.A. Jalil, and the party’s General Secretary, A.S.M. Abdur Rab,
were freed. Permission was given for apublic meeting at the central Baikal
Mukarram on the 9th. It was then that trouble developed. Police showed up at the Mukarram and
broke up the J.S.D. procession.^! The J.S.D. student leader, A.F.M. Mahbubul
Huq, President of the Chattra League, was shot and wounded by police. While
Zia at ﬁrst wavered and even initially indicated tacit backing of the radical
left inside the army, he soon completely reversed his stance. The aid for
which he had appealed to Taher on the night of November 3rd had come in a
form he had never imagined. While he had hoped for the overthrow of Khaled’s
putsch, he now suddenly found himself besieged by solders’ committees
calling for aclassless army without ofﬁcers. Forces fundamentally antagonistic to the radical dimensions of the upsurge
5 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker’s Last Testament
rapidly tried to re-establish their position.

Mabub Alam Chashi, an important
behind-the-scenes ﬁgure in the coup which toppled Mujib, reportedly was
able to persuade Zia onto anew course.

Basing its strength on the institutions
of the American-trained national police, particularly the Special Combat para-
mihtary police units and the National Security Intelligence (N.S.I.) agency of
the country, the right formed up its ranks.

AJ.SD.

document analysing the events described Zia’s role in the following
w a y :
Knowing full well that Major-General Zia was an ambitious man and lacked
aprogressive personality, he was nevertheless put in power mainly because
the prevailing situation called for the upholding of national unity.

By
placing at the top aseemingly non-political man like Zia, whom the people
in general and the army would support, this could be achieved.

In addition,
the weak position he was in due to having been saved from certain death
presented an opportunity to utilize him for the cause of working people’s
politics.

He would be used, if possible, for the release of political prisoners,
the staging of afree early election, the formation of an interim national
government, liberating the country from the Indo-Soviet-US inﬂuence,
and such other activities conducive to the revolutionary movement.

But shortly after having been put in such apowerful position, Zia
realized that his personal class-based hopes and ambitions would not
be materialized if he remained under the inﬂuence of progressive forces
....

By 10-11 November 1975 he assumed afull reactionary role.

Despite
whatever correct statements he put forward at the outset, Zia right from
the start moved towards the reactionary camp.'^^
By November 15th the J.S.D.

had publicly begun to disassociate itself
from Zia, after he refused to order further prisoner releases and continued a
ban on open pohtical meetings.

Newly issued leaﬂets sponsored by the
J.S.D.--- PAGE BREAK ---

had publicly begun to disassociate itself
from Zia, after he refused to order further prisoner releases and continued a
ban on open pohtical meetings. Newly issued leaﬂets sponsored by the
J.S.D. charged that Zia, who had been freed by the revolutionary/avvuns,
was being led in acounter-revolutionary direction by ‘the rightist reactionaries
and pro-USA elements’.'*^
Aparallel might be made here to events in Portugal during 1974-75, when
the radical Armed Forces Movement (M.F.A.) overthrew Portuguese fascism. Although the radicals in the army led by Otelo Carvalho had been the ones to
stage the April uprising, they temporarily aligned with more conservative
elements led by General Spinola. Both groups initially agreed that the
establishment of democratic rights and the dismantling of the fascist state
were the ﬁrst tasks of the democratic revolution. But this unity was soon to
be broken and Spinola emerged as the new symbol and rallying point of the
Portugese right. ‘Although Spinola could agree in principle to the Armed
Forces Movement’s programme’, noted one observer, ‘the interpretation of
that programme was another matter. The M.F.A. wanted much more than
the shifting of afew ministers while the structures that had supported and
sustained them for almost ﬁfty years remain intact.’^'^ In Portugal, however,
eleven months elapsed between the radical dynamic of the April ’74 revolt
5 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
and Spinola’s attempted coup d’etat on March 11,1975.

It was acrucial
period in which, under conditions of open politics, the M.F.A.

was able to
create mass organizations and organize abroad base of support.

Spinola’s
putsch failed.

In Bangladesh the crisis was vastly telescoped in time, and
where his Portuguese counterpart had taken months to end his surface equivo¬
cation with revolutionary politics and make his stand on the right wing
absolutely clear, General Zia, the Spinola of Bangladesh’s Army, resolved his
own well disguised ambiguity within afortnight of the insurrection.

On November 15th the newly freed J.S.D.

leaders, M.A.

Jalil and A.S.M.

Abdur Rab, urged the immediate formation of revolutionary councils among
the army/ﬂwa«s, industrial workers, peasants and intellectuals to assist the
Biplopi Gono Bahini usher in aproletarian revolution.

They considered these
to be pre-Soviet forms of state organization.

But events were moving fast.

Only aweek later, on November 23rd, Ziaur Rahman staged his counter¬
coup.

Where Spinola failed, Zia succeeded.

Relying again mainly on police
forces outside the army, Zia ordered the re-arrest of the J.S.D.

leadership.

On the night of the 23rd Jalil, Rab and Hasanul Huq Inu were suddenly
picked up.

On the 24th paramilitary police surrounded Taher and anested
h i m .

Two days after Taher’s arrest four sympathizers of the J.S.D., including
two of his younger brothers, attempted to take India’s High Commissioner,
Samar Sen, as ahostage.

Sen was grabbed as he entered the embassy.

While
his abductors shouted, ‘Don’t shoot!

Hostage!’, the Ambassador’s bodyguards
opened ﬁre with light machine guns, wounding the High Commissioner and
killing two of the kidnappers instantly.

One was Taher’s brother.

They never
ﬁred ashot.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One was Taher’s brother. They never
ﬁred ashot. The two surviving members of the attempt confessed later to
police that they had acted in the hope of holding Sen hostage in exchange
for the release of Taher, Jalil, Rab, Inu and other J.S.D. leaders. They in¬
formed the police that they had acted independently and without party
authority, but had done so because they believed Zia had betrayed the
revolution of November 7th. Ageneral crackdown began throughout the country against the J.S.D. In
the districts the police dragnet pulled in anumber of local student and trade
union leaders. In Dacca astrict curfew was imposed and areas cordoned off
police made house to house searches for party members. Severe trouble
was reported from anumber of cantonments following these arrests. In Dacca
itself two dissident battalions were reported to have been disarmed with
difﬁculty, while from Bogra, Comilla and Rangpur reports of hundreds of
soldiers being detained ﬁltered into the capital. In early December anew
mutiny broke out at the naval base in Chittagong, and again in March 1976
further disturbances developed in army units stationed with the Chittagong
Brigade. Immediate measures were taken by the Martial Law authorities to
build up areliable internal security force outside the now highly politicized
army. In early January the ﬁrst public announcement was made regarding
the founding of apolice Combat Battalion under the direction of the new
Home Secretary, Salauddin Ahmed, arehabilitated ofﬁcial who had directed
a s
5 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ta k e r ’ s L a s t Te s t a m e n t
internal security functions in East Pakistan under Ayub Khan.

According to
one Western news report, ﬁled by Columbia Broadcasting System’s Far East
Correspondent, then visiting Dacca:
In view of the question marks hanging over the loyalties of many persona¬
lities in the armed forces through their activities during November’s mutiny,
Zia is now engaged in afull-scale overhaul of Bangladesh’s police and the
formation of an elite 12,500-man special police force.

The concept of the
force was made public shortly after senior police ofﬁcials from throughout
the country met in Dacca with Zia and other Government leaders to discuss
how Bangladesh’s police could be ‘reorganized into an effective force to
face the challenge of the time’.

Although most details of the overhaul have
remained secret, sources in Dacca believe Zia reorganized the police in
order to secure its full loyalty since the armed forces were considered
unreliable.

It is believed that this factor caused Zia to place the new special
operations units, which would normally be part of the military, under
police control.

The new 12,500-man force, which is divided into ﬁve 2,500-man
armed battalions, is about the same size as the ill-fated Rakkhi Bahini.

Many observers here suspect that the new formation may have the same
function as the Rakkhi Bahini, although the Government says the force is
designed ‘to combat crimes of aspecial nature’, particularly where ‘sophi¬
sticated weapons’ are involved.

It will also carry out ‘special drives,
mopping-up operations and other activities requiring special training and
techniques’.

The battalions will have no permanent base, but will ‘always
be in combat readiness’ and available for duty anywhere in Bangladesh.

The force appears to be just what the Government needs to carry
through its rapidly accelerating campaign against the left-wing Jatyo
Samajtantrik Dal (Socialist National Party).--- PAGE BREAK ---

The battalions will have no permanent base, but will ‘always
be in combat readiness’ and available for duty anywhere in Bangladesh. The force appears to be just what the Government needs to carry
through its rapidly accelerating campaign against the left-wing Jatyo
Samajtantrik Dal (Socialist National Party). The crack-down, which
assumed large-scale proportions in Dacca after the abortive attempt to
kidnap the Indian High Commissioner, has now spread throughout Bangla¬
desh. Reports reaching the capital indicate that gunﬁghts, chases and mass
arrests are taking place regularly. In December, the Dacca press reported the seizure of ‘a huge number
of unauthorized weapons’ and the apprehension of over 1,000 ‘miscreants’
(the Government’s term for J.S.D. members). Westerners engaged in relief
work in eastern and northern Bangladesh claim police have threatened
village headmen with arrest if they did not identify J.S.D. cadres. These
Westerners also say that detention and harassment of family and friends
of suspected J.S.D. members have been occurring with increasing
frequency
Following the November insurrection old divisions on the radical left
reopened. In particular Mohammed Toaha’s pro-Chinese Purba Bangla Samay-
badi Dal (East Bengal Communist Party), which in 1971 had taken an
ambiguous stance on the national question and thus at that time had been in
conﬂict with the strategic thesis of the J.S.D. nucleus, now publicly con¬
demned the J.S.D. While Toaha supported the ﬁrst dimension of the uprising
5 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
that overthrew Khaled Musharraf, he quicki)^ began to accuse the J.S.D.

leaders of being covert Indian agents.

He alleged they were weakening Bangla¬
desh’s front line of national defence against an aggressive India by promoting
notions of class struggle inside the military.

Toaha openly condemned these
agitations, saying in an interview with the Far Eastern Economic Review that
t h e J .

S .

D .

w a s :
trying to sow seeds of discontent and dissension among the jawans of the
armed forces by raising the bogey of class differences in the different
strata of the armed forces.

Using this cunning tactic they have been
trying to disrupt the defence forces and to pave the way for the easy
walkover of the Indian Army into the soil of Bangladesh.'*®
The J.S.D.

leaders attempted to avoid divisive polemics with other radical
groups.

They considered left sectarianism aleading internal cause of earlier
setbacks in Bengal’s communist movement.

While the J.S.D.

has remained
openly sympathetic in its literature to the Chinese Communist Party’s general
polemic and critique against revisionism, it has resisted following any inter¬
national communist line.

It has attempted to maintain afriendly tenor toward
existing pro-Chinese Marxist-Leninist parties and factions in Bangladesh
despite bitter attacks from these quarters.

At most, the J.S.D.

has gently
criticized those who ‘blindly copy the statement of acertain foreign com¬
munist party’
While the J.S.D.

was driven underground, Toaha’s E.B.C.P.

came forward
in apattern similar to the Ayub days and gave open support to the martial
law authorities.

In Toaha’s view the principal contradiction was one of
defending national independence against imminent Indian aggression —not
class struggle.--- PAGE BREAK ---

came forward
in apattern similar to the Ayub days and gave open support to the martial
law authorities. In Toaha’s view the principal contradiction was one of
defending national independence against imminent Indian aggression —not
class struggle. Once this contradiction of national sovereignty was resolved,
Toaha argued in asomewhat remarkable discussion of dialectics, all others
would automatically be resolved.^®
One of the few serious scholars of radical politics in Bangladesh, Talukder
Maniruzzaman, in remarking on the re-emergence of earUer differences in
the period after the November 7insurrection, wrote:
Other radical parties issued leaﬂets accusing the J.S.D. leaders of being
covert Indian agents and of destroying the Bangladesh front line of defence
by killing trained army ofﬁcers and creating dissension among the soldiers. The J.S.D. leaders replied that Bangladesh could not be defended by the
poorly equipped Bangladesh armed forces, but only through the revo¬
lutionary unity of the oppressed classes who formed 95% of the people of
the country. The J.S.D. leaders asserted that their party was the true
nationalist party of the proletariat, and charged that other ‘so-called’
revolutionary parties had been behaving in the pattern of various ‘pseudo
revolutionary’ parties of Russia who had accused Lenin of being aGerman
agent.before the October Revolution of 1917.“^^
In the months which followed the arrest of Taher and other J.S.D. leaders. 5 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ta k e r ’ s L a s t Te s t a m e n t
those sympathetic to Zia’s new military regime argued that the J.S.D.

had in
fact had very little to do with the uprising.

Besides several groups on the
political right, such as the newly legalized Muslim League and the Democratic
League, anumber of leftist parties like Toaha’s Samyabadi Dal claimed that
foreign press reports had exaggerated the J.S.D.’s role and the part played by
Taher.

However, events came to belie these arguments when in June the
Martial Law Authorities opened asecret trial inside Dacca Central Jail accusing
Taher and 33 others of mutiny, treason and the ‘propagation of political
ideology and disaffection among the ofﬁcers and other members of the
Defence Services, the Bangladesh Riﬂes, the Police Forces, and the Ansars.

The J.S.D.

itself did not regard the reversals which followed November
7th to be either permanent or areﬂection of their having mistakenly pressed
the mutiny into motion.

No revolutionary movement could advance, they
claimed, without difﬁcult periods of struggle and the overcoming of defeats.

They summed up the period in their journal Samyabad as follows:
The powerful program and line of action taken by the revolutionary
sepoys under the leadership of the Revolutionary Soldiers Organization
warrants special mention.

On the day of the 7th November 1975 they
put forward the historic twelve point demands consisting of the release of
political prisoners, return of democratic rights, and the elimination of the
master-servant-like attitude and behaviour of the ofﬁcers towards the
sepoys.

They also objected to being used as tools for safeguarding the vested
interests of the ruling bourgeois class.

Although Zia had accepted these
demands under the existing situation, he was in fact deeply and secretly
involved in arepugnant conspiracy on behalf of his own personal interests
a n d t h o s e o f h i s c l a s s .--- PAGE BREAK ---

They also objected to being used as tools for safeguarding the vested
interests of the ruling bourgeois class. Although Zia had accepted these
demands under the existing situation, he was in fact deeply and secretly
involved in arepugnant conspiracy on behalf of his own personal interests
a n d t h o s e o f h i s c l a s s . At the very outset he attempted to disperse and weaken the strength of
the revolutionary forces by transferring them from cantonment to canton¬
ment and at the same time imposing anumber of brutal punishments. It goes without saying that, while he tried his utmost, he eventually
failed to subdue the revolutionary spirit and consciousness of the sepoys. Thus, his dependence on the police force was increased at the expense of
the army, with the consequent establishment of the ‘Combat Battalion’ and
the ‘Metropolitan Police’, etc. In the ﬁnal analysis, has the 7th November and the course of events
following it weakened the forces of the proletarian movement? Has the
freedom of working class men been pushed further back? The answer to
these questions is an unequivocal ‘no’, because —
First: ittejawans of the Bangladesh Army can no longer be used as an
effective tool in the interest of the ruling-exploiting class, since the Army
is now imbued with revolutionary consciousness;
Second: the development and evolutionary stages of the proletarian
political forces and its line of action have been clearly marked;
Third: the polarization of those forces for and against the proletariat
has been speeded up;
Fourth: the organizing capabilities of the bourgeois class have been
seriously affected;
5 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---: the polarization of those forces for and against the proletariat
has been speeded up;
Fourth: the organizing capabilities of the bourgeois class have been
seriously affected;
5 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Fifth: the imperialist revisionist-hegemonist groups have all
understood that_the revolutionaries of Bangladesh will never accept
their autocracy. 5 1
T h e T r i a l t o t h e E n d
On the 24th of November, as they locked Taher away in Dacca Central Jail,
those days of the Liberation War would seem long gone. At that time Zia
and Taher had been comrades. Now, within two weeks of Taher’s arrest, Zia
ordered him to be moved out of the capital and taken to Rajshahi District
Jail. Overland movement was considered too risky and on December 6th,
locked in handcuffs, he was ﬂown by helicopter to Rajshahi. For the next
six months Taher sat life out in solitary conﬁnement and waited, as Ziaur
Rahman manoeuvred to put the genie of rebellion back into the bottle which
Taher had uncorked.
Certain units, such as the Bengal Lancers, were disbanded and new trouble
among the troops was suppressed at Chittagong in March and at Bogra in April.
Pressure began to build up among the councils at the top echelons of the
ofﬁcer corps for an act of revenge against Taher from which there could be
no recall. The composition and ideological orientation of this ofﬁcer corps
had shifted signiﬁcantly following the repatriation, in 1973, of nearly 1,000
Bengali ofﬁcers from Pakistan. In general, this group reﬂected adeep-seated
military conservatism. In 1971 many had timidly stood by on the sidelines
not knowing which way the civil war might go. Nearly all the Bengalis who
were stranded in Pakistan and who were determined to join the liberation
struggle, had managed to escape. However, for the repatriates, as they are
called, discipline, order, aclear hierarchy and aglass of Black Label in the
evening remained the touchstone of their military philosophy.
Although the Army cannot be strictly divided between those who fought
in the Liberation War (the Mukti Bahini elements) and those who did not (the
repatriates), there is something in this distinction. For the war itself had
ideologically transformed many of its participants. Those who returned to
Bangladesh from the cantonments of Pakistan two years after independence
remained largely unchanged in spirit and in conceptual view, from their days
as ofﬁcers in the Pakistan Army. In 1976 the repatriates and their Islamic
oriented conservatism were to emerge from the background they had in¬
habited in the three years since their return. Zia, having turned against the
radicalized Mukti Bahini elements in the Army represented by T^er and the
J.S.D., was now compelled more and more to rely upon the most conservative
wing of the Army for backing. Zia, who had once openly despised these men
as ‘Johnny-Come-Lately’ nationalists, now listened quietly as they demanded
Taher’s death.
Other pressures built up from the top ofﬁcials of the National Security
Intelligence (N.S.I.) and the Home Ministry for atrial which would settle
the matter. Atrial of Ziaur Rahman’s left-wing friend would answer the
5 6t up from the top ofﬁcials of the National Security
Intelligence (N.S.I.) and the Home Ministry for atrial which would settle
the matter. Atrial of Ziaur Rahman’s left-wing friend would answer the
5 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker’s Last Testament
question as to where Zia’s loyalties truly lay.

These two organizations, the
ﬁrst directed by A.M.S.

Safdar, and the second by Salauddin Ahmed, were
now headed by men who had been the seniormost intelligence and internal
security ofﬁcials during the era of Ayub Khan.

These men moved into their
present positions immediately following Mujib’s assassination.

Anumber of
these suddenly rehabilitated technocrats had during 1971 been accused of
active collaboration with the Pakistan Army.

It was this lobby which collec¬
tively pressed for atrial.

Zia, recognizing that his main rival for leadership
in the armed forces had to be dealt with, moved with the wishes of the Islamic
right and ordered atrial.

On May 22nd 1976 Taher was ﬂown by helicopter from Rajshahi to Dacca.

Under tight security he was placed in solitary conﬁnement in Dacca Central
Jail.

No news of what was about to take place reached any newspapers.

However, on June 15th an-announcement was made that aSpecial Military
Tribunal, designated No.

1, had been formed.

It was to be chaired by afull
army colonel, Yusuf Haider, aconservative repatriate who had not fought
in ’71.

No information was given as to who would be tried before the military
board, but the sections of the old British colonial law which were cited
covered mutiny and high treason.

Within days of the tribunal’s formation,
The Bangladesh Times carried an obscure legal notice buried on its back page.

It ordered eleven people to surrender to the tribunal before June 21st, or they
would be tried in absentia.

The ﬁrst man listed was Sirajul Alam Khan, a
leading personality of the Jatyo Samajtantrik Dal (J.S.D.).

Of the ten others
listed, seven were members of the army or airforce.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The ﬁrst man listed was Sirajul Alam Khan, a
leading personality of the Jatyo Samajtantrik Dal (J.S.D.). Of the ten others
listed, seven were members of the army or airforce. In amild violation of an undeclared, but weD understood news blackout,
Dacca’s leading Bengali <\z)Xy,Ittefaq, had published aone-inch back-page
news item entitled ‘Conspiracy Case to Begin?’.editor, Anwar
Hossain, was imemdiately called to Army Headquarters and told if he tried it
again, he would be arrested. For those who wanted to understand what was
coming the news was there. The present writer arrived in Dacca in late May to report on the continuing
crisis Bangladesh then faced over the severe restriction of water ﬂowing
down the nation’s principal river, the Ganges. India had opened amulti¬
million dollar river diversion project known as the Farraka Barrage which
threatened agriculture in western Bangladesh with disaster. However, shortly
after my arrival sources inside Bangladedi’s Home Ministry, in the Army
and in the J.S.D.’s underground, all informed me that the country’s most
explosive political trial since Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was put before acourt
in the 1969 Agartala Conspiracy Case, was about to begin. Besides Taher 33 others, including 22 members of the armed forces,
to be put on trial. The civilians in the dock included all the leading perso¬
nalities of the J.S.D. then in detention. They were: M.A. Jalil, the J.S.D. President; A.M.S. Abdur Rab*, General Secretary of the J.S.D; Hasanul Huq
Inu, General Secretary of the Krishak (Peasants’) League; Mohammed Shajahan,
President of the Shramik (Workers’) League; and M.R. Manna, General
Secretary of the Chattra (Students’) League. Aleading Bengali economist,
w
e
r
e
5 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Dr.

Aklaquar Rahman, and K.B.M.

Mahmood, Editor of the English weekly
Wave, were also among the accused.

The trial opened on June 21st 1976 behind the tall yellow-stained walls of
Dacca’s Central Jail.

Never before in the history of either Bangladesh or ‘East
Pakistan’ had atrial been held within the conﬁnes of any jail.

Acomplete
news blackout on the case was imposed inside the country and lawyers
defending the accused had to take an oath of secrecy regarding the proceedings.

Security at the prison was exceptional: sand-bagged machine gun nests
surrounded every entrance.

It was assumed the authorities were convening the
tribunal inside the Jail to avoid the possibility of trouble occurring en route to
the courthouse.

There were many ironies that morning when the heavy iron gates at
Dacca’s Central Jail swung open and snapped closed again, admitting 30
black-coated barristers into the opening session.

The trial and the charge of
armed rebellion against established authority occurred at atime when there
had been four governments in the past year, each succeeding the other by
force of arms.

Moreover, those ofﬁcers who were part of Khaled Musharraf s
November 3rd coup d’etat and who were dubbed at the time by the ofﬁcial
press as ‘Indian agents’, had all been released from detention.

Most notable
among these was Brigadier Shafat Jamil who had been Khaled’s second-in-
command.

It was Shafat and Khaled who had placed Ziaur Rahman under
house arrest during the four days they had taken power.

So it was that those
ofﬁcers who were behind the November 3rd anti-Zia coup were freed, and
those men who staged the general uprising which freed Zia now went on trial
for their lives.

The tribunal, ﬁrst convened on June 21st and then recessed for aweek to
permit defence lawyers seven days to prepare adefence for acase which the
prosecution had been working on for six months.--- PAGE BREAK ---

So it was that those
ofﬁcers who were behind the November 3rd anti-Zia coup were freed, and
those men who staged the general uprising which freed Zia now went on trial
for their lives. The tribunal, ﬁrst convened on June 21st and then recessed for aweek to
permit defence lawyers seven days to prepare adefence for acase which the
prosecution had been working on for six months. The accused, despite
repeated requests throughout the period of their detention, had been denied
access to legal counsel and communication with relatives. Following the
opening session, this correspondent ﬁled despatches to the Far Eastern
Economic Review (Hongkong), The BBC and The Gwar(iiﬂ«(London). Trans¬
mission of these reports did not go through from Dacca due to censorship. However, copies ﬂown to Bangkok by apassenger on an outgoing international
ﬂight meant that in the end the news was transmitted from Thailand. As a
result, the ﬁrst report residents of Dacca had of the case came over the BBC
Bengali Service. On June 28th when the trial reopened, this correspondent, who had
reported from Bangladesh for afull year in 1974, stood outside the gates
of Dacca Central Jail taking photographs of the Chief Prosecutor, A.T.M. Afzal, the Chairman of the Tribunal, Colonel Yusuf Haider and others as they
entered the prison gates. Iwas told by the police ofﬁcials present that the
trial was top secret and Iwas not allowed to photograph anyone or anything. Isaid Ihad been reporting on events in Bangladesh for several years and was
unaware of any such ofﬁcial guidelines or orders. If they wished me to stop
photographing or reporting the case, Isuggested they should show me a
5 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ta k e r ’ s L a s t Te s t a m e n t
written order from the Information Ministry to that effect.

Otherwise, I
would continue my work as ajournalist without interruption.

Ithen photo¬
graphed the police ofﬁcer questioning me who threw up his hands in front
of his face and ran away.

Iwas left alone for more than two hours, as Iwaited outside the prison
gates for the day’s recess.

Ihad wanted to interview the Tribunal Chairman
so as to have an ofﬁcial statement of why the case was being held in such
secrecy.

But at 11.00 a.m.

on June 28th Iwas arrested and detained in Dacca
Central Jail.

Iwas asked to surrender the ﬁlm of the photographs Ihad taken.

Iinformed the police ofﬁcials and the army lieutenant who had taken me
into custody that Iwould not voluntarily give up the ﬁlm.

Calls were made
to the National Security Intelligence and Martial Law Headquarters.

Within
the hour ten ofﬁcials arrived to sort out the case.

Iwas asked by an N.S.I.

man calling himself Shamin Ahmed why Iwas
interested in the Taher case.

Iexplained secret political trials tended to rub
me the wrong way whether done by Stalin, Franco or Zia.

Isaid Iwas a
reporter and that if the six majors who killed Mujib had been put on trial
by Khaled Musharraf inside Dacca Central Jail, Iwould have reported it.

And
if Khaled had lived and Zia had put him on trial, Iwould have been at the jail,
as Iwas now, trying to report.

And if Zia was now putting Taher on trial,
inside aprison and with frightened lawyers sworn to secrecy, Iwould report
it.

Wliat was wrong with people knowing what was happening, 1asked Ahmed.

He picked up my camera and handed it to ayoung telecommunications
ofﬁcer, who some years earlier had trained in New York under the American
Ofﬁce of Public Safety programme.

This young fellow ripped the ﬁlm out.

Aphone call soon arrived from Martial Law Headquarters ordering my
release.

An army major said that Headquarters thought the detention of a
foreign correspondent might be embarrassing.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Aphone call soon arrived from Martial Law Headquarters ordering my
release. An army major said that Headquarters thought the detention of a
foreign correspondent might be embarrassing. That evening Icabled another
despatch concerning the trial. The cable ofﬁce accepted the story, but did not
transmit it. The next evening, as Ireturned to my residence, 1was met by
ﬁve Special Branch ofﬁcers who informed me Iwas again under arrest. They
were under orders to take me directly to the airport and put me on the ﬁrst
available ﬂight out of the country. TTie next ﬂi^t out was to India, from
where Ihad been expelled six months earlier for reporting Indira Gandhi’s
Emergency.Censorship was tough during those days in Delhi and no
foreign correspondent paid any attention to it. Thus, Ihad not been the only
journalist to be so honoured with deportation from India —merely the last. Iexplained patiently to the Special Branch ofﬁcers that they could not deport
me to India since Ihad already been deported from there. In the end, after a
modicum of intervention from the U.S. Embassy, Iwas kept for three days
under house arrest until the next ﬂight to Bangkok. On July 1st Iwas deported
to Thailand and the last foreign and for that matter domestic news report on
the Taher trial ended. The authorities now had their secrecy buttoned up. The case went on for seventeen more days. Taher initially refused to
attend the tribunal calling it ‘an instrument of the government to commit
crimes in the name of justice’. He also said that, if he were to be judged, the
5 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
panel must be made up of Mukti Bahini ofﬁcers from the Army, who had
fought for the independence of the country, and not by men l^e Yusuf
Haider who had taken no part in the Liberation War.

But when the tribunal
was formed no Mukti Bahini ofﬁcers would sit on it.

Taker’s lawyers were
ﬁnally able to persuade him to participate in the trial.

They believed at ﬁrst
the tribunal would be able to function without intimidation.

It was advice
many of them regretted later when it became known that Taker’s sentence
had been decided even before the tribunal opened.(On July 17th, the Chairman
of the Tribunal, Yusuf Haider, announced theisentence: Taher was to hang.

On July 18th the government ordered newspapers to publish an ofﬁcial
statement on the case and nothing more.

Banner headlines in the Bangladesh
Observer read: TAHER TO DIE.

It was the ﬁrst news through the Bengali
media that the country had of the case and it came at the end of the trial as
afait accompli.

An appeal for clemency made to President A.M.

Sayem was turned down.

Sayem was aformer Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.

Five years earlier,
he had written the most signiﬁcant legal decision on capital punishment and
the rights of an accused ever to be handed down by the Supreme Court.

In
the case against Puma Chandra Mondal, Sayem threw out adeath sentence
passed on the accused.

The judgement established alegal precedent as signi¬
ﬁcant as the Miranda decision in the United States.

Sayem argued that ‘the
last moment appointment of adefence lawyer for an accused virtually negated
the right of an accused to be properly defended in the case’.

In the Mondal case Sayem had written:
The Code of Crominal Procedure confers aright on every accused person
brought before aCriminal Court to be ‘defended’ by alawyer.

That right
extends to access to the lawyer for private consultations and also affording
the latter an adequate opportunity of preparing the case for the defence.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the Mondal case Sayem had written:
The Code of Crominal Procedure confers aright on every accused person
brought before aCriminal Court to be ‘defended’ by alawyer. That right
extends to access to the lawyer for private consultations and also affording
the latter an adequate opportunity of preparing the case for the defence. A
last moment appointment of an advocate for defending aprisoner accused
of acapital offence not only results in abreach of the provision of the 6th
Paragraph of Chapter XII of the Legal Remembrance’s Manual (I960), and
frustrates the object behind the elaborate provisions of that Chapter. Such
an appointment results also in adenial to the prisoner of the right conferred
on him by section 340 of the Code .... The denial of this right must be
held to have rendered the trial as one not according to law, necessitating
afresh trial.^^
Taher was not allowed access to alawyer until the day the case against
him opened. Nevertheless, Sayem, who as ajudge had written that no man
under law could be sentenced to death were he not given the right of an
adequate defence, now in the position of President of the country, reafﬁrmed
the death sentence on Taher. And he made his decision within twenty-four
hours of the sentencing. The Chief Prosecutor, A.T.M. Afzal, after the trial was to be rewarded with
an appointment to the position of Judge of the Dacca High Court, but, a
worried man, he anxiously claimed to his colleagues that he was more
6 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---r the trial was to be rewarded with
an appointment to the position of Judge of the Dacca High Court, but, a
worried man, he anxiously claimed to his colleagues that he was more
6 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ta k e r ’ s L a s t Te s t a m e n t
stunned than anyone at the sentence of death. As prosecutor, he claimed, he
had never asked for the death sentence. He said such ajudgement was imposs¬
ible. There was no law in existence under which Taher could be executed for
the crimes with which he was charged. Ten days after Taher was dead the
Law Ministry remedied this legal discrepancy.^^ On July 31st 1976 the
Ministry published the Martial Law Decree’s 20th Amendment which made it
acrime punishable by death for anyone to ‘propagate any political opinion’
among the armed forces of Bangladesh.
In London, Amnesty International’s Headquarters issued an urgent appeal
to the Bangladesh President to grant Taher clemency:
Amartial law trial held in camera inside jail falls short of internationally
accepted standards as laid down in the United Nations Declaration of
Human Rights. Before criminal courts the case against the accused can be
established according to the normal process of law and with all legal
safeguards, including the right of appeal to the highest judicial authorities.
Thus read the Amnesty cable. Amnesty International called for acomplete
retrial for Taher and other J.S.D. leaders. Its appeal to Sayem went out on
July 20th.
The next morning at 4a.m. Abu Taher was hanged in Dacca Central Jail.
Kishorganj
18th August 1976
My dear bora bhaijan,
Icannot think of what to write you today. Icannot realize that Taher is
no longer with me. Icannot imagine how 1will live after the partner of
my life has left. It seems that the children are in great trouble. Such tiny
children don’t understand anything. Nitu says, ‘Father, why did you die?
You would have been alive, if you were still here.’ The children do not
understand what they have lost. Every day they go to the grave with
ﬂowers. They place the ﬂowers and pray, ‘Let me become like father.’
Jishu says that father is sleeping on the moon.
Unfortunately Nitu saw father in November, but could not see him
up to the last moment, since she was in Kishorganj. But Iam very fortunate.
The path Taher has shown me is my chief weapon. When he was alive, he
gave me the greatest honour amongst Bengali women. In his death he gave
me the respect of the world. All my desires he has fulﬁlled in such a
short time. When the dear friends and comrades of Taher convey their
condolences to me, then Ithink: Taher is still alive amongst them, and
will live in them. They are like my own folk. 1am proud. He has defeated
death. Death could not triumph over him.
Ishall describe all that happened:
On Saturday July 17th at 3o’clock the verdict was delivered: the
death sentence for Taher. We all became speechless including our twenty-
ﬁve barristers. People all over the country were shocked because the
government could not prove anything. Even the state witnesses admitted
6 1or Taher. We all became speechless including our twenty-
ﬁve barristers. People all over the country were shocked because the
government could not prove anything. Even the state witnesses admitted
6 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
the contribution of Taher on November 7th.

The prominent barristers,
Ataur Rahman Khan, Zulmat Ali, Alam and others, became restless.

They
went to the President condemning the tribunal and declaring it had been set
up iUegally.

Taher told the barristers: ‘This government which 1have
brought to power —you are not to request anything from them.’ At the
same time hearing them declare the death sentence he broke out into a
tremendous laughter.

All the other prisoners broke down in tears.

He
told everybody, ‘If lives are not sacriﬁced in this way, how will the common
people be liberated?’ We have made every effort, though Taher has written
me, ‘Don’t bow your head.

Ido not fear death.

If you can feel proud, that
is enough.’
In the afternoon on the 19th he met all of us.

He was completely
natural and cheerful.

He read to us what he had written after the tribunal
gave the verdict.

To me he said, ‘It does not beﬁt you to feel sad.

After
Kudi Ram Iwill be the ﬁrst in South Asia to die like this.’ When Itold
him others had asked me to ﬁle amercy petition, he said, ‘Is that to bring
me the illusion of life?

Is my life smaller than the life of Sayem and Zia?’
He gave us so much courage that we came out laughing as well.

We did
not know this was our last meeting.

All politicians, teachers of the country,
as well as foreigners made requests to the government.

But the authorities
did not have the guts to let Taher live.

They have made Taher transcend
time, they made him immortal.

All the brothers of Taher were with him; Yusuf, Belal, Monu.

On the
20th in the evening Taher was informed that on the 21st, early in the
morning at 4o’clock, the death sentence would be carried out.

He accepted
their news and thanked those who had to deliver the message.

And then he
took his dinner completely normally.

Later the Maulvi [priest] was brought
and asked him to seek absolution for his sins.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And then he
took his dinner completely normally. Later the Maulvi [priest] was brought
and asked him to seek absolution for his sins. He said, ‘I am not touched
by the evils of your society, nor have Iever been. Iam pure. You go now. Iwish to sleep.’ He went to sleep quietly. At 3o’clock in the night he was
woken up. He asked how much time was left. After knowing the time
he cleaned his teeth and shaved himself and bathed. All those present came
forward to help him. He forbade them to do so, saying, ‘I don’t want you
to touch my body which is pure.’
After his bath he told the others to prepare tea and to cut the mangoes
we had given. He himself put on the artiﬁcial limb, shoes and trousers. He put on abeautiful shirt, his wristwatch, and combed his hair carefully. After that he took tea, mangoes, and smoked cigarettes with all those
present. Looking at his courage all burst into tears about the death sentence
of such aman. He consoled everybody, saying: ‘Come on, laugh. Why are
you so gloomy? Ihad wanted to make the face of the distressed bloom
with smiles. Death cannot defeat me.’ He was asked whether he had any
wish. He said, ‘In exchange for my death —the peace of the common man.’
After that Taher said: ‘Is there any time left?’ They answered; ‘a little
bit.’ He said: ‘In that case Ishall recite apoem to you.’ He read out a
poem about his duty and his feelings. And then he said: ‘All right, Iam
ready. Go ahead. Do your duty.’ He went towards the gallows and taking
the rope in his own hand he put it around his neck. And he said: ‘Good¬
bye countrymen. Long live Bangladesh! Long Live Revolution!’ He told
them to press the button, but nobody came forward. He said: ‘Why,
6 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ta k e r ' s L a s t Te s t a m e n t
don’t you have courage?’ Then somebody did it.

It was all over.

His
b r o t h e r s w e r e s h o w n .

No one amongst the 7,500 prisoners of the jail took any rice that day.

We were given the body at 2:50.

In the midst of the strictest security
acar was taken inside the jail and the body lifted into it.

After that 5
trucks and buses ﬁlled with heavy security guards escorted the body to
the helipad and lifted him onto ahelicopter.

It was 7:50 in the evening.

He was buried in the family graveyard.

Aspecial camp was set up and the grave was guarded for 21 days.

They
fear even the dead.

He has departed from us, but he has left behind arich
legacy.

In performing his great task to mankind he came upon both
poison and nectar.

He drank the poison and left us the nectar.

Although it
is total darkness all around me and Icannot ﬁnd my moorings, and am
lost, yet Iknow this distress is not permanent, there will be an end.

When
Isee that the ideals of Taher have become the ideals of all, then Iwill
ﬁnd peace.

It is my sorrow that when that day of happiness comes, Taher
w i l l n o t b e t h e r e .

Affectionately
L u t f a
‘History Will Absolve Me’
An unheard of situation had arisen.

Honourable Magistrates.

Here was a
regime afraid to bring an accused before the courts; aregime of blood and
terror which shrank in fear at the moral conviction of adefenceless man —
unarmed, slandered, and isolated.

Thus, having deprived me of all else,
they ﬁnally deprived me of the trial in which Iwas the principal accused.

What dreadful crimes this regime must have cornmitted, to so fear the
voice of one accused man!

As aresult of so many obscure and illegal machina
tions, due to the will of those who govern and the weakness of those who
judge, Iﬁnd myself here in this little room of the Civil Hospital —to
which Ihave been brought to be tried in secret; so that my voice may be
stiﬂed and so that no one may learn the things Iam going to say.--- PAGE BREAK ---

What dreadful crimes this regime must have cornmitted, to so fear the
voice of one accused man! As aresult of so many obscure and illegal machina
tions, due to the will of those who govern and the weakness of those who
judge, Iﬁnd myself here in this little room of the Civil Hospital —to
which Ihave been brought to be tried in secret; so that my voice may be
stiﬂed and so that no one may learn the things Iam going to say. Why,
then, do we need that imposing Palace of Justice which the Honourable
Magistrates would without doubt ﬁnd rather more comfortable? Imust
warn you: it is unwise to administer justice from ahospital room, surroun¬
ded by sentinels with bayonets ﬁxed; the citizens might suppose that our
justice is sick and that it is captive .... Iremind you, your laws of procedure provide that trials shall be ‘both
audible and public’; however, the people have been barred altogether
from this session of the court. The only civilians admitted here have been
two attorneys and six reporters, whose newspapers’ censorship will prevent
from printing aword that Isay. Isee, as my sole audience, in this chamber
and in the corridors, nearly ahundred soldiers and ofﬁcers. Iam grateful
for the polite and serious attention they give me. Ionly wish Icould have
the whole army before me! Iknow, one day this army will seethe with
rage to wash away the awful, the shameful bloodstains splattered across
the uniform by the present ruthless clique in their lust for power. On that
day, oh, what afall awaits those mounted, in arrogance, on the backs of
the noble soldiers! —provided, that is, that the people have not pulled
them down long before! Fidel Castro, 1953. 6 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
N o t ^ a n d R e f e r e n c e s
In his ﬁnal letter written from Dacca Central Jail on 18th July 1976,
Taher stated, ‘During the entire trial there was no reference whatsoever
to the Kader Bahini.’ However, The Bangladesh Observer and other
Dacca newspapers in their only report on the trial, published the day
following the sentencing, stated that the government had alleged that
Kader Siddiqui had been at the ‘beck and call’ of Taher.

He records in
his own testimony (see page 92).

his condemnation of those who in
1975 had gone ‘over to India and started carrying out armed action
along our border ....

In spite of my incarceration, my solitary conﬁne¬
ment and the accompanied harassment, Idid not fail to register my
protest against this threat.’ Taher was prevented by the Tribunal from
reading in full this section of his testimony.

Kader Siddiqui, the character concerned, ﬁrst developed his repu¬
tation during the 1971 War of Independence as aguerilla ﬁghter in
Tangail District.

Alumpen and bandit-style personality, Kader Siddiqui
appalled both Bengalis and foreigners when, in public, shortly after the
liberation of Dacca, he personally bayoneted three alleged collaborators
to death.

The entire incident was ﬁlmed from start to ﬁnish by foreign
ﬁlm crews whom he had invited to the spectacle.

He returned to Tangail
following independence and became the recipient of substantial Awami
League patronage.

Following the assassination of Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman in August 1975, Siddiqui and his followers began to offer resis¬
tance to the post-coup authorities headed by Khondakar Mustaque.

Elements identifying themselves with Siddiqui gradually withdrew to
India and, with the active and direct assistance of the Indian-Govern¬
ment’s Border Security Force, set up training camps in the Assam border
a r e a .

1.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Elements identifying themselves with Siddiqui gradually withdrew to
India and, with the active and direct assistance of the Indian-Govern¬
ment’s Border Security Force, set up training camps in the Assam border
a r e a . 1. In the period following the failure of Khaled Musharraf’s November
3rd counter-coup, Siddiqui’s followers began staging regular cross border
attacks from their bases in India. After the defeat of Indira Gandhi’s
government in India’s national elections, the new Janata government
reportedly ordered the closure of these bases, and the Indian External
Affairs Minister stated in Parliament that while ‘no force had been used
on Bangladesh nationals who had taken refuge in India to return to
their country ...the government would not extend the political
liberty enjoyed by citizens in the country to permit the use of Indian
soil for hostile activities against neighbouring countries.’ (The Statesman
Weekly,2}\x\y,\911). 2. No ﬁrm evidence has ever been produced to establish unequivocably
that Brigadier Musharraf acted on November 3rd with the prior know¬
ledge of the Indian Government or at their behest. Military sources close
to the Khaled Musharraf group in the Bangladesh Army have categori¬
cally denied to this writer that any such link existed and they say that
such allegations are complete fabrications. These sources claim that
Khaled’s coup had the objective of ‘restoring the chain of command’
in the Army. They argue that the command structure had virtually
ceased to function after the coup d’etat which killed Mujib. In short,
they wished to re-establish the lines of hierarchy characteristic of a
6 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---Notes and References
conventional bourgeois army command, and they claimed that, in their
minds, this issue stood apart from the question of civilian leadership.

Since late August Khaled, who was Chief of General Staff, had been
urging Major-General Ziaur Rahman, Army Chief of Staff, to take
action against the Majors who had killed Mujib and who had since then
been refusing senior ofﬁcers’ orders to return to the cantonments with
their troops.

In the period between August 15th and November 3rd
1975, the forces under the command of Majors Rashid and Farooq, the
Bengal Lancers and the Armoured Corps, remained ensconced around
the President’s House.

They refused to return to barracks out of fear of
being disarmed.

Moreover, Khondakar Mustaque in this period relied
on them militarily as the only units completely loyal to him.

According to sources close to Khaled, tension between Khaled and
Zia grew over Zia’s refusal to issue orders or to move militarily against
the Majors.

In late October, Zia reportedly argued to Khaled that the
time was still not ripe for action.

Khaled, in turn, argued that senior
ofﬁcers were fed up with taking orders from Majors acting as if they
were Generals.

Similarly, on the original night of August 15th, Khaled
had apparently urged immediate action against the Majors, but was
dissuaded by Zia who told him any such action would be premature.

It
seems clear that Khaled, like many others, was unaware of Zia’s pre-
August contacts with the Majors and representatives of the Mustaque
circle.

And Khaled himself had never been approached by the Majors
or Mustaque’s contact men; he had been considered aMujib loyalist.

Bengali military sources argue that Khaled’s coup against Zia on
November 3rd was perceived by Khaled as an exclusively internal
Army matter, and that Khaled was prepared for the sake of stability
to retain Mustaque as President.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And Khaled himself had never been approached by the Majors
or Mustaque’s contact men; he had been considered aMujib loyalist. Bengali military sources argue that Khaled’s coup against Zia on
November 3rd was perceived by Khaled as an exclusively internal
Army matter, and that Khaled was prepared for the sake of stability
to retain Mustaque as President. Mustaque conﬁrmed, in an interview
with this writer in June 1976, that Khaled had indeed asked him to
stay on in the ofﬁce of President, but that he, Mustaque, in light of the
new conditions had refused to do so. The Brigadier, say his friends, had
acted suddenly under pressure from other ofﬁcers, in the hope of
simply ‘restoring the chain of command’, which General Zia had
refused to do, leaving ‘the civilians’ to sort out the rest for themselves. But the Brigadier’s political naivete was extraordinary if he believed
he could truly separate the issue of military from political power. Mustaque could not maintain his position without the conﬁdence of
some military arm he could fully rely on. Moreover, with the military
units which had eliminated Mujib no longer intact, it was only to be
expected that forces loyal to Mujib would reassert themselves. Whether
Khaled was the conscious representative of such arestoration is highly
debatable. Sources in the Brigadier’s own family claimed to this writer
that Khaled had been enraged at his mother and brother when they led
apro-Mujib demonstration in Dacca on November 4th, thus implicating
him in what appeared to be aconscious pro-Mujibist coup. The photo¬
graph of Khaled’s mother and brother leading the pro-Mujib demon¬
stration, which appeared on the front page of Ittefaq on November 5th,
more than anything else, doomed his regime and made the image of
aBAKSAL restoration plausible to an anxious public. Two persons within Bangladesh who ﬁgured prominently_in slapping
6 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
the label ‘Indian agent’ on Khaled were the journalists.

Atioal Alam
aifd EhayethuUah Khan, the latter adistant relative of the Brigadier.

Alam, the Dacca correspondent of the B.B.C.

and Reuters, moved
through Dacca’s diplomatic community on November 4th and 5th,
claiming to possess aletter written by Tajuddin Ahmed, aformer
minister in Mujib’s government and prominent Awami League person¬
ality, then in prison in Dacca Central Jail.

The Tajuddin Letter, pur¬
portedly written to the Indian High Commissioner in Dacca, Samar Sen,
spoke of coup plans and preparations.

Alam, who showed the letter to,
among others, ofﬁcials of the German Embassy, claimed categorically
that it was written in Tajuddin’s hand and demonstrated Indian involve¬
ment in Khaled’s putsch.

The object of the coup, Alam told foreign
diplomats, was to bring the ‘pro-Indian’ Tajuddin Ahmed out of prison
and into the post of President.

From Alam’s display of this note, the
rumour spread along Embassy row that Indian intelligence was behind
the operation.

Alam, interviewed in London three months after the
events and again three years later, said he had returned the Tajuddin
Letter to his source, and had no copy to prove it ever existed.

Neverthe¬
less, he claims it to have been absolutely genuine.

Journalist colleagues
critical of Alam claim no such letter ever existed and that the whole
episode was ablack propaganda exercise.

[On other matters connected
to Atiqal Alam’s political journalism, see footnote 1, Part II.] The
author of the purported note, Tajuddin Ahmed, the ﬁrst Prime Minister
of Bangladesh, was bayoneted to death on the night of November 5
1975 in Dacca Central Jail.

Military and intelligence men allegedly
linked to Mustaque are claimed by prison sources to have been involved
in the jail murders.--- PAGE BREAK ---

[On other matters connected
to Atiqal Alam’s political journalism, see footnote 1, Part II.] The
author of the purported note, Tajuddin Ahmed, the ﬁrst Prime Minister
of Bangladesh, was bayoneted to death on the night of November 5
1975 in Dacca Central Jail. Military and intelligence men allegedly
linked to Mustaque are claimed by prison sources to have been involved
in the jail murders. Following the November 7th Uprising, the Editor of the Bangladesh
Times, Enayethullah Khan, wrote afront page editorial in the paper on
November 8th accusing the ‘forces of expansionism [India] and social
imperialism [Soviet Union] ’of having backed Khaled. ‘The alien hand in
the counter-coup of November 3was apparent,’ wrote Khan. ‘As the
usurpers attempted arestoration of afallen image of Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman, they took advantage of the ambition of some unpatriotic
army leaders ...and they struck, however brieﬂy, in their bid to undo
the change and succeeded for awhile to create asmokescreen.’ Khan,
who had previously edited the pseudo-leftist weekly Holiday, was
appointed Editor of the state owned Bangladesh Times by Khondakar
Mustaque immediately after Mujib’s killing. Following the Mustaque
regime’s collapse, Khan continued as Editor of the Bangladesh Times
and became asupporter of General Ziaur Rahman. In 1977 he became
aCabinet Minister in the military government and afounding organizer
of the General’s ﬁrst political front, JAGODAL. But, within ayear, due
to factional disputes within the regime, the General dropped Khan, once
his most important of publicists. Whatever the truth about Khaled Musharraf’s own motives and prior
contacts, the response his coup provoked within the Army and in the
country’s urban population was explosive. There was anationwide
lightning-like reaction, based on the judgement that Khaled’s coup
represented an Indian backed attempt to establish aclient regime in
6 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---Notes and References
Dacca.

This sharp nationalist reaction was developed by the J.S.D.

leadership and mass organizations into afull blown insurrection.

The
full story of the Khaled coup, however, has yet to come out.

3.

Kali Charan Ghosh, Famines In Bengal 1770-1943, (Indian Associated
Publishing Co., Calcutta, 1944); Ian Stephens, A/onjoon Morning
(Ernest Benn, London, 1966); and Amartya Sen, ‘Starvation and
Exchange Entitlements: AGeneral Approach and its Application to
the Great Bengal Famine’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol.

1
No.

1, March 1977.

4.

AC.I.A.

document provided to the author notes the early Taher-Zia
relationship.

The document entitled ‘Mukti-Bahini Operations In The
Rangpur-Mymensingh-Tangail Sector’ is an Intelligence Information
Report from the Directorate of Plans, U.S.

Central Intelligence Agency
(Report No.-311/08412-71), and is dated 3December 1971.

The docu¬
ment states: ‘The headquarters and training centers for the Rangpur-
Mymensingh-Tangail sector of the Mukti Bahini (Liberation Forces) are
located in India near the western Meghalaya-East Pakistan frontier.

The
Mukti Bahini commander in this sector is Brigadier Ziaur Rahman.

Other
principal ofﬁcers are Major Taher, Captain Ali Ahmad and Captain
Quader Siddique ....

Sector operation camps are located at Dalu,
Maherdraganj, Phorakhara, Bagniara, Mankachar and Maheshkola.

There
are ten training camps in the sector.

Dalu, the largest has acapacity of
1,250 trainees....

The Rangpur-Mymensingh-Tangail sector force con¬
sists of approximately 10,000 men and is commanded by Brigadier Ziaur
Rahman, alias Zia Khan, who was transferred from the (Chittagong sector
in July 1971.

Major Taher, subsector commander for Mymensingh, acts
as Rahman’s deputy.’ The rest of the document is adetailed list of all
Bengali military and civilian ofﬁcials serving in the sector, base locations,
accounts of engagements, and the role and identity of Indian ofﬁcers in
liaison with the Mukti Bahini.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Rangpur-Mymensingh-Tangail sector force con¬
sists of approximately 10,000 men and is commanded by Brigadier Ziaur
Rahman, alias Zia Khan, who was transferred from the (Chittagong sector
in July 1971. Major Taher, subsector commander for Mymensingh, acts
as Rahman’s deputy.’ The rest of the document is adetailed list of all
Bengali military and civilian ofﬁcials serving in the sector, base locations,
accounts of engagements, and the role and identity of Indian ofﬁcers in
liaison with the Mukti Bahini. The source of information for the C.I.A. report was ‘a middle level West Bengali journalist’ described as a‘com¬
paratively new source whose reliability has not been established’, but
‘who has provided credible information in the past’. 5. ‘The Twelve Demands’, Far Eastern Economic Review, 5December
1975. For the complete text of the twelve points see Larai, 6th Issue,
N o v e m b e r 1 9 7 5 . 6 . I b i d . 7. ‘Bangladesh: State and Revolution’, Frontier (Calcutta), 13 December
1 9 7 5 . 8. On the basis of numerous interviews with Bengali sources, it is now
clear that in the pre-August period Ziaur Rahman was simultaneously
maintaining two principal tracks of clandestine contacts, one with the
Mustaque camp and one with the J.S.D. Zia, who during this pre-
August period may have been genuinely ambiguous about his own stand
in the coming turmoil, was playing his cards cautiously and cleverly. He
told the Majors in March that he would not oppose any coup moves
against Mujib, but nor would he lead any. He appears also to have been
in contact with other representatives of the Mustaque group, allegedly
including Chashi, promising to neutralize any reaction from units in
the Army to asuccessful coup. (See footnote 2; Zia is reported to
6 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
have persuaded Khaled Musharraf not to move immediately against the
Majors on the night of August 14/15.]
Before Mujib was killed, Zia is also said, by asourcejclose to Mujib,
to have met the President.

In adiscussion with Mujib which took place
about ten days before the coup, Zia reportedly told Mujib in general
terms that there was trouble in the Army and discipline was becoming
difﬁcult to maintain.

He reportedly urged the President to adopt
measures against corruption, smuggling and inﬂation which would make
the restoration of order in the country an easier task.

This type of dis¬
cussion between Mujib and his Army Commanders was not unusual and
had been held many times before.

Discipline in the Army had become
d i f ﬁc u l t a f t e r t h e D e f e n c e F o r c e s h a d b e e n c a l l e d i n t o c o n d u c t a n t i ¬
smuggling and anti-hoarding operations in April 1974.

Within weeks the
Army had been piilled off the operation because of protests from party
functionaries in the Awami League, who were being arrested while in
possession of smuggled goods by Army units.

{Far Eastern Economic
Review, ‘A Declaration of Martial Democracy’, 13 May 1974; ‘Coup
in Bangladesh’, 29 August 1975.) The purpose, however, of Zia’s dis¬
cussion with Mujib in this instance is said to have been an act of insur¬
ance.

If the Majors failed in the execution of their coup attempt (Zia
had no deep trust or respect for their operational skills or capacities)
he would always be able to safely remind Mujib of their discussion in
early August.

At any rate Mujib, who was slipping further into his own
●'blind megalomania, reportedly told Zia, in characteristic style, that he
should not worry.

Mujib said he would take care of everything.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At any rate Mujib, who was slipping further into his own
●'blind megalomania, reportedly told Zia, in characteristic style, that he
should not worry. Mujib said he would take care of everything. Accor¬
ding to one knowledgeable government source, ‘In this period Zia was
putting bets on every number on the table.!He might lose some money
on afew, but he was certain to be with the winning number when it
came up.’
After Mujib was killed and the instability of the Mustaque regime set
in, Zia renewed his earlier contacts with the J.S.D. Meanwhile General
Shaﬁullah had been removed as Chief of Staff and packed off to
Malaysia as Ambassador. Zia took command of the Army. He still
tacitly supported Mustaque and opposed elements in the Army rep¬
resented by Khaled Musharraf, Shafat Jamil and other ofﬁcers who
wished to disarm the Majors and restore the ‘chain of command’. As
tension grew, Zia intensiﬁed his contact with'J.S.D. liaison men. At this
stage the popular political and military force represented by the J.S.D. was the only other signiﬁcant factor in the country besides pro-Mujib
and pro-Mustaque factions in the Army, bureaucracy and the old Awami
League. Pro-Pakistan elements, in the sense of those who had fully
identiﬁed themselves with the Pakistan Army in 1971, were in temporary
alliance with the Mustaque group in this period. (See Part II, ‘The Old
Nexus and aNew Nemesis’). As the Mustaque regime moved deeper
towards its own crisis, Zia reportedly gave ﬁrm assurances to the J.S.D. leadership through intermediaries that in the next crunch he would
support their transitional programme to restore democratic rights in
the country. In the main the programme wanted the immediate release
of an estimated 62,000 political prisoners, the withdrawal of arrest
warrants against thousands of other political workers, the lifting of
6 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---Notes and References
censorship regulations and the ban on opposition newspapers, and ﬁnally
the formation of an all party national democratic government (excluding
BAKSAL), constituted as an interim government which would immediately
move toward national elections.

On the basis of Zia’s previous history, the J.S.D.

made the judgement
that atactical alliance with the General based on these transitional prin¬
ciples was correct, possible and plausible.

Taher, himself, apparently
played an important role in structuring and establishing this association
in the period between August and November 1975.

Thus, it was no
accident that Zia immediately picked up his telephone on the night of
November 3rd, as he was being arrested by Khaled’s forces, and called
Taher.

With his life in the balance it was the only quarter he could
appeal to.

What the.

J.S.D.

did not realize in this period was the depth
and extent of contact which Zia had been maintaining with the Mustaque
camp long before the August putsch.

On the 7th of November, the time
had arrived when Zia could no longer keep bets going on every horse
and hope to ride into the future.

As in all great crises, the time for a
fundamental sorting out of true positions and characteristics had arrived.

Even on the 7th, Zia’s own position seemed to be characteristically
ambiguous.

Here was the political schizophrenia of aformer Pakistan
Army ofﬁcer imbued with discipline and conservative convention, who
for ayear had fought aguerrilla war, and been somewhat touched by
radic^ ideas.

During and immediately after the Liberation War, in dis¬
cussions with Taher, Ziauddin and other radical ofﬁcers, he had seen
their point and understood some of it, but been unable to make the
transition.

They, in turn, regarded him as an ofﬁcer who might be
won over at some stage.

But, as the Uprising progressed on the 7th, the struggle for Zia’s
loyalty began in earnest.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They, in turn, regarded him as an ofﬁcer who might be
won over at some stage. But, as the Uprising progressed on the 7th, the struggle for Zia’s
loyalty began in earnest. The two sides which had been pulling at Zia
since the beginning of 1975 —the pro-American/pro-Islamic Mustaque
camp versus the J.S.D. —began cashing in their chips with the General. Initially on the morning of the 7th, Zia had publicly supported the
most radical dimension of the Uprising, The Twelve Demands, signing a
copy of the document in the presence of troops at Dacca Radio. But,
although Mustaque had been driven into political oblivion by the
Uprising, his supporters renewed the battle to gain Zia’s adherence to
their side. According to Army sources, Mustaque’s leading protege,
Mabub Alam Chashi, arrived at Zia’s headquarters on the morning of
the 7th, soon after Taher had left to organize amass meeting of sepoys
at the Shahid Minar. Chashi, who is alleged to have been Mustaque’s
liaison man with the General in the pre-August period, pressed Zia to
stand fast and line up with the conservative camp. Meanwhile, the
Special Armed Police units, with their own intelligence Jinks and
dominated by INPOLSE graduates (see Part II, Appendix D) were
readying themselves for acrackdown on the J.S.D. (see note 41 below). Zia was in aposition where he had no choice but to get off the fence. Within two weeks it was crystal clear that he had opted to become the
new leader of what was virtually the Mustaque government, minus
Mustaque and his six Majors. Whether this was part of aconsidered con¬
tingency all along is not known, but, by failing to recognize this pros-
6 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
pect, the J.S.D.

paid heavily.

‘Bangladesh: JSD’s Role’, Frontier, 7February 1976.

The Sunday Times, 5December 1971.

For acritical assessment of how Britain’s withdrawal from India was
ﬁnally staged, see ch.

50, Ian Stephens, Unmade Journey, (Stacy
International, 1977).

Stephens, formerly Editor of the Statesman
(Calcutta), argues that astepped up, inadequately prepared and ineptly
executed partition policy decided on by Mountbatten, led to an enor¬
mous and tragically unnecessary death toll estimated at 500,000 lives.

Neville Maxwell, /ndw and the Nagas, (Minority Rights Group, London,
1973); Dilip Hiio, Inside India Today (Routledge &Kegan Paul, 1978),
pp.

209-18.

Talukder Maniruzzaman, Radical Politics and the Emergence of Bangla¬
desh (Bangladesh Books International Ltd., Dacca, 1975), pp.

41-2;
Paul Brass and Marc Franda (eds.), Radical Politics in South Asia (MIT
Press, 1973).

Fazlul Quader Quaderi, Bangladesh Genocide and The World Press,
(Dacca, 1972).

Rosa Luxemburg, The National Question: Selected Writings) Horace B.

Davis, Nationalism and Socialism: Marxist and Labor Theories of
Nationalism to 1917 (Monthly Review Press, 1967);Horace B.

Davis,
Toward aMarxist Theory of Nationalism (Monthly Review, 1978).

In
terms of the East Pakistan communist movement, Maniruzzaman has
cogently summed up the failure of the leading tendencies of the Marxist
left in the 1950’s and 60’s to come to grips with the national question
in Pakistan; ‘One of the major doctrinal lapses of Marxist international
communism has been the non-recognition of the force of nationalism
as afactor in the change of history.

Engaged in theoretical hairsplitting
on the division of the international communist movement.

East Pakistan
communist revolutionaries, while thrashing out their tactical moves,
failed at the beginning to take into consideration the force of East
Pakistan nationalism.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Engaged in theoretical hairsplitting
on the division of the international communist movement. East Pakistan
communist revolutionaries, while thrashing out their tactical moves,
failed at the beginning to take into consideration the force of East
Pakistan nationalism. In the mid 1960’s, the pro-Peking communists,
by siding with the Ayub Khan government on the grounds of Ayub’s
pro-Chinese stand in foreign policy, even found it necessary to oppose
the six-point autonomy movement, which ultimately gave the leader¬
ship of East Pakistan’s liberation struggle to the Awami League.’ See
yi^mnxzz^m2in, Radical Politics and the Emergence of Bangladesh, op. cit., p. 30. V.I. Lenin, ‘Critical Remarks on the National Question’ in Collected
Works, Vo\. 20, (Progress Publishers), pp. 17-51; and ‘The Right of
Nations to Self-Determination’, pp. 393-454. See also ‘The “Vexed
Questions” of Our Party: The “Liquidationist” and “National
Questions” ’in Collected Works, Vol 18, (Progress Publishers), pp. 405-23. For adetailed analysis of Lenin’s differences with Stalin on the
Georgian conﬂict and the treatment of the national question in the new
Soviet state, see Moshe Lewin, Lenin's Last Struggle, (Monthly Review,
New York). ‘Baluchistan: Festering Dilemma for Bhutto', Far Eastern Economic
Review, 28 May 1976. From an unpublished text of an interview with Chakar Khan Marri. A
9 . 1 0 . 1 1 . 1 2 . 1 3 . 1 4 . 1 5 . 1 6 . 1 7 . 1 8 . 7 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---Notes and References
few excerpts of the transcript were published in the Far Eastern
Economic Review, 28 May 1976.

For adetailed discussion of linguistic
divisions and the ‘nationality problem’ in South Asia, particularly India,
see Selig Harrison’s India: The Most Dangerous Decades (Princeton
University Press, 1960); also Harrison’s ‘After the Afghan Coup: Night¬
mare In Baluchistan’, Foreign Policy, No.

32, Autumn 1978.

On the
attitude of Pakistan’s National Awami Party (NAP) to post-Bhutto
developments in Baluchistan, see the interview with Wali Khan, Far
Eastern Economic Review, 23 June 1978.

Maniruzzaman, Radical Politics and the Emergence of Bangladesh, op.

cit., pp.

22-3.

Pakistan Times, 13 April 1971; see also Robin Blackburn, Explosion in
aSubcontinent (Penguin, 1975), pp.

358-9.

G.W.

Choudhury, The Last Days of United Pakistan (Indiana University
Press, 1974), pp.

358-9.

‘Bangladesh: ANew Bogeyman’ in ‘China Focus ’74”, Far Eastern
Economic Review, 11 October 1974.

‘A Bengali’s Grandstand View’, Far Eastern Economic Review, 11 Octo¬
b e r 1 9 7 4 .

‘A New F a r E a s t e r n E c o n o m i c R e v i e w, 11 O c t o b e r, 1 9 7 4 .

Maniruzzaman, Radical Politics and the Emergence of Bangladesh, op.

cit., pp.

51-2.

According to Maniruzzaman, ‘The pro-Peking leftists,
who had already split into several factions prior to the liberation
struggle, became totally confused when Peking chose to support the
Yahya regime in its brutal suppression of the liberation movement.’
In West Bengal the Bangladesh crisis produced similar splits in the
pro-Chinese Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist) [C.P.I.

(M-L)l
known as the Naxalites.

As with their counterparts in East Bengal, the
Indian Naxalites were deeply divided over the Bangladesh issue.

Ashim
Chatterjee, aCentral Committee member of the C.P.I.--- PAGE BREAK ---

As with their counterparts in East Bengal, the
Indian Naxalites were deeply divided over the Bangladesh issue. Ashim
Chatterjee, aCentral Committee member of the C.P.I. (M-L), in 1971
denounced the existing line of the party’s chairman, Cham Mazumdar,
as ‘opposed to the stand on this issue of the great, glorious and correct
Communist Party of China’. Chatteijee argued at the time in avein
similar to that of the E.B.C.P. (M-L)’s Abdul Huq, in maintaining
Pakistan was ﬁghting ajust war. Mazumdar, however, said that even if
India as an aggressive power intervened, it would not have been correct
for acommunist party to support Yahya Kham Taking aposition some¬
what similar to Toaha, Mazumdar said that communists would have to
ﬁght on two fronts: against Indian aggression and against Yahya Khan’s
forces. Neither Chatteijee nor Mazumdar opened aserious discussion on
the relevant aspects of the national question. What seemed apparent was that neither the Naxalites in West Bengal
nor the pro-Peking factions in Bangladesh had taken to heart one of the
most fundamental aspects of the Chinese Communist Party’s breach with
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The Chinese, despite their
1967 endorsement, ^so seemed to have become abit concerned with the
form of ‘Maoism’ emerging in South Asia which appeared more pre¬
occupied with China’s position on issues, than with developing its own
independent analysis of the conditions facing India and Pakistan. In
1970, ayear prior to the Bangladesh crisis, amember of the Central
1 9 . 2 0 . 2 1 . 2 2 . 2 3 . 2 4 . 2 5 . 71

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Committee of the C.P.I.

(M-L) visited Peking to discuss with the
Chinese leaders anumber of questions being debated inside the Naxalite
movement.

The visitor to Peking had extended discussions with Chou
En-lai and Kang Sheng.

It is also said that he met Mao Tse-tung.

In these discussions Chou En-lai reportedly criticized certain slogans
of the C.P.I.

(M-L).

The Naxalites had been actively plastering Calcutta
and other cities with posters of Mao and slogans such as ‘China’s Chair¬
man Is Our Chairman’ or ‘China’s Path Is Our Path’.

Chou En-lai men¬
tioned these in particular, saying, ‘The world is divided into classes and
nations.

The proletariat of each territory is the chief representative of
its own country.

So we cannot but take into consideration the national
limits.

To refer to the leader of our country as the leader of another
party is against the sentiments of the nation.

It is difﬁcult even for the
working class to accept it.

To respect agreat Marxist-Leninist is one
thing; but to declare him as one’s leader is adifferent matter.

It is a
question of principle.’ Kang Sheng was more explicit, ‘We cannot agree
that our party is leader.

Also we do not agree about your calling our
Chairman your chairman.

This is against principle and Mao Tse-tung
thought.

Our relation is fraternal and equal.’
Chou went on to say that conditions in each country differed and
each revolutionary movement must ﬁnd its own way.

‘This is not
modesty, but astatement of fact.

Your path can be worked out only
by you ....

The relation between our two parties is of fraternal friend¬
ship, arelation of exchange of opinions.

If you go beyond this limit, it
will be against Mao Tse-tung thought.

It is not right to take our party
leader’s name.

In 1957, the Chairman said in Moscow that he was
against any patriarchal party.’
For afull description of this meeting in Peking, see Shankar Ghosh’s
The Naxalite Movement, (K.I.

Mukhopadhyay, Calcutta, 1974), pp.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In 1957, the Chairman said in Moscow that he was
against any patriarchal party.’
For afull description of this meeting in Peking, see Shankar Ghosh’s
The Naxalite Movement, (K.I. Mukhopadhyay, Calcutta, 1974), pp. 1 2 - 2 3 . Maniruzzaman, Radical Politics and the Emergence of Bangladesh, op. cit., p. 29. See Richard Nation’s ‘The Economic Structure of Pakistan and
Bangladesh’ in Robin Blackburn (ed.), Explosion in aSubcontinent. The original design of the new national ﬂag contained amap of East
Bengal placed in the centre of ared sun. The image of the map was later
dropped, simplifying the design. Le Monde, 31 March 1971. See also Rehman Sobhan’s ‘Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman and the Contradictions of Bourgeois Society in Bangladesh’ in
Abdul Gaffar Choudhury {td.). Sheikh Mujib: ACommemorative
Anthology ,{K^dic3.\ Asia Books, London, 1977). ‘There was adeﬁnite
tendency within the party represented by the students and workers
wing of the party,’ writes Sobhan, ‘The Students League certainly had
astrong, perhaps dominant, group who thought of themselves as social¬
ists and some even accepted aMarxist perspective. This radical group
constituted the spearhead of the party and gave the party its militant
edge. It had already made inroads into the labour movement and along
with some working class union leaders had brought amilitant working
class faction into the party to reinforce the militancy of the student
wing. This group had avery close bilateral line with Mujib who knew
2 6 . 2 7 . 2 8 . 2 9 . 7 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---Notes and References
that in any confrontation with the military it would be the students and
workers who would again lead and sustain the mass movement.

The real
pressure on Mujib to take up uncompromising positions against the army
and to openly embrace radical postures came from this signiﬁcant ele¬
ment in his party.

It is this same element which eventually broke away
from the Awami League in 1972 after liberation to form the Socialist
National Party [J.S.D.] and to dominate the opposition to the Awami
League at the level of mass politics as distinct from underground
insurgency.’
From an unpublished interview with this writer conducted in Dacca in
June 1976.

Harunur Rashid, aNational Committee member of the
J.S.D., became Acting General Secretary of the organization following
the arrest by the Mujib Government (17 March 1974) of A.M.S.

Abdur
Rab, General Secretary of the J.S.D.

Rab was sentenced to ten years’
rigorous imprisonment in July 1976 as aco-defendant in the Taher
c a s e .

3 0 .

During June 1976 this writer also had an extended discussion with
Abdul Huq of the East Pakistan Communist Party (Marxist-Leninist),
and several short discussions with Mohammed Toaha of the East Bengal
Communist Party (Marxist-Leninist).

Huq and Rashid at the time were
underground, while Toaha was not.

See ‘The Taher Testimony’, which follows these notes.

Mohammed Ayoob and K.

Subramayam, The Liberation War, (S.

Chand,
New Delhi, 1972), p.

152.

‘Heroes of the Liberation War: Lt.

Col.

Abu Taher’, Bichitra (Dacca).

See also ‘Chilmari Raid: Landmark In The History of War’, Bichitra.

‘The Agony of Independence’, Eastern Economic Review, 16 August
1974.

Also ‘The Hidden Prize’, Holiday (Dacca), 12 August 1972.

‘Foreign Aid vs.

Self-Help’, The Business Review (Dacca), January 1973.

I b i d .

‘Bangladesh: Playground For Opportunists’, Far fcrrern Economic
Review, 6September 1974.

‘Letter From London', Far Eastern Economic Review,!

February 1975.--- PAGE BREAK ---

‘Letter From London', Far Eastern Economic Review,! February 1975. ‘Bangladesh: Miscreant Power’, Frontier, 6April 1974. ‘Political and Organizational Report: 7th November and Subsequent
Events’,
4th issue, 23 February 1976, pp. 13-14. Several sources interviewed in the course of this book raised questions
as to whether General Zia and the country’s military leadership, as it
then existed, actually ordered Special Police units into action against the
student demonstrators on November 9th. Some have argued that the
police were acting on orders not from Army Headquarters, but from
the National Security Intelligence Agency (N.S.I.) (see Part II, The Old
Nexus and aNew Nemesis, and Appendix Dof Part II). The N.S.I. and
the paramilitary police command were extremely anxious, as were
other political elements identiﬁed with Mustaque and the August coup,
for General Zia to make clear his stand on the politics of the insurrec¬
tion. By beginning, on their own initiative, the crackdown of the 9th,
the day after Zia had begun ordering the release of political prisoners,
the Security Services and the political nexus connected with the August
coup were immediately forcing Zia’s hand to declare where he stood -
3 1 . 3 2 . 3 3 . 3 4 . 3 5 . 3 6 . 3 7 . 3 8 . 3 9 . 4 0 . 4 1 . 7 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---political nexus connected with the August
coup were immediately forcing Zia’s hand to declare where he stood -
3 1 . 3 2 . 3 3 . 3 4 . 3 5 . 3 6 . 3 7 . 3 8 . 3 9 . 4 0 . 4 1 . 7 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
with them or with the revolutionaries (see note 8).
‘Political and Organizational Report: 7th November and Subsequent
Events’,
4th issue, 23 February 1976, p. 14.
Talukder Maniruzzaman, ‘Bangladesh in 1975: The Fall of the Mujib
Regime and Its Aftermath’, Survey (Berkeley, U.S.A.), February
1 9 7 6 .
K. Maxwell, ‘The Hidden Revolution in Portugal’, A^ew York Review of
Books, 17 April 1975.
‘Dacca’s Strongman Consolidates’, Far Eastern Economic Review,
16 January, 1976.
‘Toaha’s Call’, Far Eastern Economic Review, 5December 1975.
Toaha’s critics considered his views, which opposed class struggle within
the Armed Forces, to be completely anti-Leninist, although Toaha has
himself labelled his own theoretical position as Marxist-Leninist. Critics
of Toaha have frequently quoted Lenin’s remarks on ‘the disorganization
of the army’ as justiﬁcation for their own standpoint: ‘Not asingle great
revolution has ever taken place or ever can take place, without the
“disorganization” of the army. For the army is the most ossiﬁed instru¬
ment for supporting the old regime, the most hardened bulwark of
bourgeois discipline, buttressing up the rule of capital, and preserving
and fostering among the working people the servile spirit of submission
and subjection to capital. Counter-revolution has never tolerated, and
never could tolerate, armed workers side by side with the army. In
France, Engels wrote, the workers emerged armed from every revolution:
“Therefore, the disarming of the workers was the ﬁrst commandment for
the bourgeoisie, who were at the helm of the state.” The armed workers
were the embryo of anew army, the organized nucleus of anew social
order. The ﬁrst commandment of every victorious revolution, as Marx
and Engels repeatedly emphasized, was to smash the old army, dissolve
it, and replace it by anew one.’ (‘The Proletarian Revolution and The
Renegade Kautsky’, Lenin, Selected Works, Vol. 3, Progress Publishers,
1971.)
Unpublished interview with Harunur Rashid, Acting General Secretary
of the J.S.D., in Dacca, June 1976.
‘An Interview with Toa.hz\ Holiday (Dacca), 17 October 1976. See also
two separate and critical comments by Abed Illahi and H.A.K. Rano,
‘On Mohammad Toaha’s Views’, ibid, 24 October 1976.
Maniruzzaman, y4j/a/i Purvey, February 1976, pp. 126-7.
The Bangladesh Times, 3\July 1976.
‘7th November and Subsequent Events’, Samaybad, 4th issue, 23
February 1976.
‘Dateline Delhi —For The Last Time’, Far Eastern Economic Review,
20 February, 1976.
‘The State vs. Puma Chandra (Sayem, i.)\Dacca Law Reports (1970),
pp. 289-92.
‘Martial Law 20th Amendment Regulation 1976’, The Bangladesh Times,
31 July 1976.
4 2 .
4 3 .
4 4 .
4 5 .
4 6 .
4 7 .
4 8 .
4 9 .
5 0 .
5 1 .
5 2
5 3 .
5 4 .
7 4\Dacca Law Reports (1970),
pp. 289-92.
‘Martial Law 20th Amendment Regulation 1976’, The Bangladesh Times,
31 July 1976.
4 2 .
4 3 .
4 4 .
4 5 .
4 6 .
4 7 .
4 8 .
4 9 .
5 0 .
5 1 .
5 2
5 3 .
5 4 .
7 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---1970),
pp. 289-92.
‘Martial Law 20th Amendment Regulation 1976’, The Bangladesh Times,
31 July 1976.
4 2 .
4 3 .
4 4 .
4 5 .
4 6 .
4 7 .
4 8 .
4 9 .
5 0 .
5 1 .
5 2
5 3 .
5 4 .
7 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Appendix to Part I:
Taker’s Testimony
This is the statement of Colonel Abu Taher of the Bangladesh Army delivered
before the Special Martial Law Tribunal convened inside Dacca Central Jail
between June 21 and July 17,1976. The charges against Taher were treason
and mutiny. The trial was held in conditions of complete secrecy. Newspapers
were prohibited from reporting on what was widely considered the most
important political trial in Bangladesh since its independence. This testimony
is published here in spite of the ban which still exists inside Bangladesh on
any details of the case.
Aprevious version of the testimony, less complete than the text presented
here, was published in the summer of 1977. {Economic and Political Weekly
(Bombay), Special Number, August 1977.] The ﬁrst text, obtained from
sources inside Bangladesh’s Martial Law Administration who must remain
anonymous, represented excerpts not the complete text of Taher’s statement.
In late 1977 aBengali version of Taher’s testimony began to circulate in Dacca
under the title From the Front to The Gallows. It was more extensive and
contained greater detail than the ﬁrst published text. An introductory comment
to the Bengali version stated that its contents still represented only excerpts
from the complete statement. Taher spoke extemporaneously over aperiod
of four days (July 12-15). His statement was taken down in long hand notes by
several lawyers, co-defendants and military ofﬁcials present in the hearing
room. There was an ofﬁcial court recorder, but access to the ofﬁcial trans¬
script of the trial has so far been impossible. The writer of the introduction
to the Bengali version stated that T^er spoke at arapid and powerful pace,
making it at times difﬁcult to write down every word. When confronted with
two texts of the statement, it was found that certain paragraphs from the ﬁrst
text were more complete while other paragraphs from the second were more
comprehensive. With the object of presenting the fullest, most comprehensive,
and accurate statement of Taher’s testimony the two texts have been edited
together. Certain excerpts are still missing, but at some stage when the
archives of the secret Military Tribunals are one day opened to public scrutiny,
acomplete and unedited text will hopefully become available.
Colonel Abu Taher:
Mr Chairman and Members of the Tribunal. The man now standing before you
and the man who is accused in this court is the same person who gave his blood
7 5pefully become available.
Colonel Abu Taher:
Mr Chairman and Members of the Tribunal. The man now standing before you
and the man who is accused in this court is the same person who gave his blood
7 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
and sweat for the freedom of our country.

It is arecord of history that he
risked his own life and one day those achievements will indeed be judged.

The way Ihave felt for this country throughout all my work, thoughts, and
dreams cannot be explained or expressed now.

What an irony!

How can the country to which Iam bound in blood deny
that Iam anyth^g but apart of it.

The government which Iinstalled in
power, the man to whom Igave anew lease on life, now sits before me in
the form of this Tribunal.

They dare to try me for treason and other fabri¬
cated accusations.

The charges brought against me are malicious, baseless,
unfounded, conspiratorial and utterly false.

1am absolutely innocent.

It is part of the recorded document of this Tribunal that there was an
uprising of soldiers in Dacca’s Cantonment at my behest on the night of the
6th/7th of November 1975, and thereby the malicious objective of agroup
of conspirators was frustrated.

Major-General Ziaur Rahman was freed from
his captivity and the sovereignty of this country was preserved.

If this is the
act which constitutes treason, then Iam guilty.

If Ihave committed any
crime, it is the crime of restoring discipline;^ it is the crime of preserving the
nation’s independence and sovereignty; it is the crime of freeing the Army
Chief-of-Staff from captivity; and above all, it is the crime of restoring conﬁ¬
dence in the very existence of Bangladesh.

To establish this fact there was no need to go through the unpleasant
torture and threats which have been pursued against me since the 21st June
1976.

This fact is well known to Justice Sayem and his government which by
our own efforts we installed on the 7th November 1975.

There were agreed
principles that all political prisoners be released, political activities be diowed,
ageneral election be held, and apeople’s government be established.

This
fact is well known to my fellow countrymen who will remember it with
gratitude.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There were agreed
principles that all political prisoners be released, political activities be diowed,
ageneral election be held, and apeople’s government be established. This
fact is well known to my fellow countrymen who will remember it with
gratitude. It is an insult to this nation that there is now an attempt to try me inside
this jail and by such an inferior court as the present one. You have no right
to judge me. Before 1refute the false and concocted charges made against me, Iwant to
take you back to the days of our heroic national independence movement. It is particularly relevant here. 1recall the night of the 25th March 1971 when the Pakistani Army un¬
leashed brutal attacks against our people. We had no choice, but to win that
war which was thrust on us. Had we lost, aworse kind of slavery would have
been imposed upon us. The Pakistani Military Junta did not make it asecret
when they announced in the newspapers that Bengalis did not deserve any
higher education. Their education could be conﬁned to Madrasha Education. Bengalis are unpatriotic. Their culture is inferior. They should be compelled
to speak in one language —Urdu. From the time 1became conscious of the condition of our people, Iwas
not reconciled to the concept of Pakistan. 1could not accept the idea that a
nation like the Bengalis were unable to form an independent sovereign
state, to realise their own national hopes and aspirations. From that time
7 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker’s Testimony
onward Iconstantly thought and hoped for the liberation of our people and
the establishment of ajust homeland.

Ido not know how many other Bengali
ofﬁcers in the Pakistani Army ever thought of an Independent Bangladesh.

This much Ican say, for myself —this dream of independence guided all my
actions as if it were abeckoning star.

In the Pakistan Army we were taught that Bengalis were a‘nation of
traitors’; that they were bom to serve; and that it was the pious responsibility
of the Pakistanis to make the BengaUs ‘pukka Muslims’ and true patriots.

I
can still remember the intolerable way they either ignored or sneered down
o n 
u s .

Those were days of trial for us who were then in West Pakistan.

At
that time 1did not hesitate to respond to the nation’s call.

The barbaric
purpose of the Military Junta was not unknown to us who were in West
Pakistan, when from General Headquarters of the Pakistan Army the message
went out: ‘Bum everything, kill everyone in sight.’
Ihad no hestitation in escaping from Pakistan to join the Liberation War.

It is not unknown to the Chairman of this Tribunal that Iwas not aback
bencher in the Pakistan Army.

Iwas commissioned in the Baluch Regiment
and later Ijoined the Special Services Group, an elite para-commando force
in the Pakistan Army.

Six long years Iserved with this elite unit.

As asoldier
and an ofﬁcer Iwas never afraid to ﬁght the enemy face to face.

During the
Indo-Pak War, Ifought on the Kashmir Front and the Sialkot Sector.

Istill
bear wounds from that war.

Iam the only Bengali ofﬁcer who was awarded aMaroon Parachute Wing
and Ihad to my credit 135 static line jumps.

In recognition of my service I
was sent to the United States to attend various courses.

Iwas awarded the
Ranger Award by the Ranger Training Command, Fort Penning, Columbus,
Georgia.

Iam an Honours Graduate from the Special Forces Ofﬁcer Training
Institute, Fort Bragg, North Carolina.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Iwas awarded the
Ranger Award by the Ranger Training Command, Fort Penning, Columbus,
Georgia. Iam an Honours Graduate from the Special Forces Ofﬁcer Training
Institute, Fort Bragg, North Carolina. Imight as well mention here that
such service distinctions were never achieved by any Bengali ofﬁcer until
that time. Let us now go back to the days of the barbaric fascist attack of the Military
Junta. During the 1970 General Election Iwas attending acourse in the U.S.A
Ireturned to Pakistan in December when the election was over. Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman’s party, the Awami League, had won the election with an
overwhelming majority. On my return Iexchanged views with various quarters
It was not difﬁcult to understand that power would not be transferred to any
civilian government. The Military Junta and Zulﬁquar Ali Bhutto —acurse
upon the politics of Pakistan —would not allow the Awami League its
rightful claim to power. They were determined not to allow any BengaH to
take power in Pakistan. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was absolutely unacceptable
and intolerable to them. Icould sense dangerous omens. So in the month of
February Isent my wife and family to my home town, Mymensinghr The chill
of the winter was stiU with us. Iknew that Bengalis as anation would not allow any injustice to go un¬
challenged. Iknew they would resist. Ifelt that perhaps the days for liberating
7 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
our people were coming nearer.

Ido not know how many of us felt that way.

As the days were passing, we were undergoing rapid psychological changes
and we were preparing ourselves for the inevitable.

On the 25th March Iwas at Quetta attending aSenior Technical Course in
the School of Infantry and Tactics.

As darkness fell, we came to know that
serious measures were going to be taken that night in Bangladesh.

Ispent the
entire night restless and without sleep.

The whole night long Iwalked on the
lonely roads of Quetta.

Iwas trying to imagine what was happening.

Even
now Icannot conceive of the catastrophe which fell upon them that night.

It
was unsurpassed genocide in the heart of Bangladesh.

\
On the morning of 26th March we heard General Yahya Khan speak over
the radio.

It was aterrible moment.

Icould feel the birth pangs of anation.

Because of my open hatred towards the Pakistani occupation army for their
action and behaviour in Bangladesh, 1soon became the object of deep dis¬
satisfaction on the part of my superiors.

On the 28th March the course in the
School of Infantry and Tactics was called off and we were ordered to report
to our respective units.

At that time several junior ofﬁcers, Lieutenants and Second Lieutenants,
approached and sought my advice as to what they should do.

Itold them in
clear terms that their sole responsibility was to their motherland and their
only concern was to escape from Pakistan and join the Liberation War.

They
also informed me that afew senior Bengali ofﬁcers who were stationed at
that time in Quetta had refused to talk to them, refused to entertain them,
lest their loyalty be doubted by their master.

Knowing my attitude, these
ofﬁcers not only avoided me, they ceased speaking to me.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They
also informed me that afew senior Bengali ofﬁcers who were stationed at
that time in Quetta had refused to talk to them, refused to entertain them,
lest their loyalty be doubted by their master. Knowing my attitude, these
ofﬁcers not only avoided me, they ceased speaking to me. Some of these same senior ofﬁcers Iﬁnd today holding important
positions in the Armed Forces and they are now aparty in this attempt to
try me here.^ These ofﬁcers before the 25th of March went all out to announce
their acquaintance with Sheikh Mujib; after the 25th of March they termed
h i m a t r a i t o r. Taker at this point is interrupted by the Tribunal’s Chairman. He is told he
will not be permitted to read such astatement. There is shouting and arguing
in the courtroom. Taker tells the Chairman, Colonel Yusuf Haider, Tf you do
not give me the opportunity to depose my statement, Ihad better keep silent. It truly must be aheinous act on my part to argue on behalf of myself
before such an inferior ofﬁcer. ’There are further arguments and ﬁnally,
after the intervention of Taker’s lawyers, he is permitted to continue. Later, Iwas happy to learn that among the junior ofﬁcers Ihad encouraged
to escape. Second Lieutenant Noor and Second Lieutenant Enam were
successful and joined the Liberation War. After afew days at Quetta, Iwas
detained and charges were brought against me accusing me of expressing
my displeasure at the atrocities committed in the then East Pakistan. Due to the intervention of Major-General B.M. Mustafa, Commandant of
the School of Infantry and Tactics, with whom Ihad agood relationship. 7 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker's Testimony
the charges were withdrawn and Iwas allowed to move to the Khariar Canton¬
ment.

At Khariar Iwas attached to amedium regiment and not allowed to
join my own unit which was brought into the then East Pakistan to kill my
own people It was this unit which arrested Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

At Khariar Iconvinced Captain Delwar and Captain Patwari to escape and
join the war.

We established contact with aBengali engineer stationed at
Mirpur in Pakistani occupied Kashmir who agreed to give us shelter and
arrange transport up to the border.

At the appointed date and time we reached
Mirpur.

Unfortunately upon our arrival, to my utter surprise, we found the
engineer had left with his family and the house was locked.

That was the ﬁrst
time Icame across the unpatriotic quality of our Bengali gentry.

We spent the afternoon on the lawn of his house.

At nightMl we took to
the hills.

My companions, Captain Delwar and Captain Patwari, were not
used to rough hills and after afew hours they refused to proceed further.

We
were forced to come back to the Khariar Cantonment.

In West Pakistan at the time there were about 1,000 Bengali ofﬁcers, I
approached many of them and tried to induce them to escape and join the
Liberation War.

But it was unfortunate to ﬁnd that the patriotism of the
Bengali gentry is conﬁned to heated drawing-room discussion.

Later, when I
was posted to the Baluch Regimental Centre at Abotobad, Itried to encourage
the Bengali ofﬁcers there to join the Liberation War.

Iwas fortunate that of the lot.

Major Ziauddin, at that time serving at
General Headquarters if Rawalpindi, agreed to escape with me.

Accordingly
we made aplan.

With all my savings Ipurchased aused car by which we could
reach the border.

Myself and Ziauddin started from Pindi and on our way
connected up with Captain Patwari from Jhelum.

Since we had to pass some
daylight hours, we went to Major Manzoor’s house who was stationed at
Sialkot Cantonment.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Myself and Ziauddin started from Pindi and on our way
connected up with Captain Patwari from Jhelum. Since we had to pass some
daylight hours, we went to Major Manzoor’s house who was stationed at
Sialkot Cantonment. When Manzoor came to know of our plan of escape, he
remained quiet and expressed no enthusiasm. At the insistence of his wife, he
at last agreed to escape with us. In this way Major Manzoor, his family, and
his Bengali batman joined us. At nightfall we drove up to the border, abandone
the car, and walked across the boundary and reached India. We joined the War of Independence in the hope that we would free our¬
selves from all forms of exploitation and domination. We hoped to build a
society based on justice. But what really happened after the War of Indepen¬
dence? In fact the war, the major part of which was not fought on our own
soil, delivered very little to our own people. The unarmed, peace-loving, and
panicstricken people of Bangladesh crossed the border in search of safety and
food. Most of the surviving soldiers did the same. The leading mass organiza¬
tions and political parties, particularly the Awami League, also crossed the
border for the same reason. But the Awami League had agreater responsi¬
bility and duty because they had received the mandate of the people. Unfor¬
tunately, they never thought of the future an unarmed nation would face. They never prepared the people to face the dreadful possibilities which
might lie ahead. Aconfrontation of an unarmed people against the armed
might of amodern army was unquestionably foolish. But that is precisely
7 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
what happened in our case.

And we had to pay aheavy price for it.

If the
Awami leadership had sincerely thought of the future of millions of our
people and if they had themselves played acourageous role, then events would
have been different.

It just did not happen that way.

The same goes for our soldiers.

They never realized the reality of the
national war they would be faced with.

The result was there was no plan to
ﬁght in an unconventional method, through means of aprotracted war,
against one of the world’s most modern, well disciplined, and well trained
conventional armies.

India gladly agreed to give food and shelter to our
soldiers, people and children because India knew that, by so doing, her
prestige and image would be raised in the sphere of international politics
and diplomacy.

Moreover, her policy of hegemony in the subcontinent would
be strengthened.

In fact, it was India who mostly beneﬁted from the develop¬
ments in Bangladesh in geo-political, economic and resource terms.

This much
Ican say about the war —our ofﬁcers and soliders were mainly carrying out
the desires and strategic plans of the Indians.

On joining the Liberation War Iwas asked by Colonel Osmany, C-in-C of our
forces, to visit different sectors and ﬁnd out weaknesses in the conduct of the
ﬁghting and how to overcome them.

The ﬁrst sector which Ivisited was Sector
No.

11 comprising Mymensingh and Tangail Districts.

Major-General Zia, now
Deputy Chief Martial Law Administrator, was at that time raising abrigade
in the area.

The Sector was being commanded by Brigadier S.

Singh [Indian
Army].

It was asurprise to me that such an important sector was left to the
command of an Indian ofﬁcer.

The importance of that sector was enormous if
one was to hit Dacca.

Iinspected various other sectors.

Imixed with the free¬
dom ﬁghters and exchanged my views, opinions and plans with them.

We joined
in together in anumber of small skirmishes.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Imixed with the free¬
dom ﬁghters and exchanged my views, opinions and plans with them. We joined
in together in anumber of small skirmishes. It was as clear as daylight that
political and military leadership was lacking and those entrusted with it
failing in their responsibilities. Our national war became almost alost one. We were ﬁghting awell disciplined conventional army where
were militarily better educated. They had rigorous training and carried the
most sophisticated array of modern weaponry. On our side we did not have
any consolidated military leadership which could establish auniﬁed command. Thus, our forces were left in astate of indecisiveness and frustration. We did
not have essential training facilities, nor did we have sufﬁcient arms and
ammunition. The only reasonable option which remained to us at that stage
was to develop the tactics of guerrilla warfare. Unfortunately, our comman¬
ders were preoccupied then in raising afull ﬂedged conventional army
foreign soil. Our boys never lacked courage or patriotism, but they were
unorganized and dispersed across the country in small groups, imbued
only with the ideal of independence. They never anticipated Pakistan’s
military attack and being unprepared they fell victim to Pakistan’s act of
genocide. The weaknesses in our conduct of the war could be easily pinpointed. First: we waged awar; the people waged awar; but there was no political
w e r e
o u r 
e n e m i e s
o
n
8 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---e. The weaknesses in our conduct of the war could be easily pinpointed. First: we waged awar; the people waged awar; but there was no political
w e r e
o u r 
e n e m i e s
o
n
8 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Taker ’s Testimony
leadership. Without political leadership, guerrdla warfare can never develop.
And the Awami League failed to provide political leadership to our Liberation
struggle.
Second: the command structure had no theoretical concept of guerrilla
war. Few conventional ofﬁcers like Colonel Osmany, Major Zia, Major Khaled,
Major Shaﬁullah, and others, had any understanding of the organization of a
guerrilla struggle. These conventional ofﬁcers with their conventional mili¬
tary ideas were, in fact, ahindrance in the natural growth of guerrilla war¬
fare.
Third; the existing military leadership of the Liberation War was scanty.
Whatever adequately trained soldiers or ofﬁcers we had were concentrated
in regular force units. Independent units of freedom ﬁghters were deprived of
obtaining necessary military skills and leadership. This was due to the fact
that the commanders of the Liberation Forces had no concept whatsoever of
aLiberation struggle. Their only concern was to raise regular main force
brigades to consolidate their own power.
They said an army of 20 divisions would be raised in due course. Mean¬
while, the natural growth of anational people’s war was obstructed. The free¬
dom ﬁghters were carrying out acts of heroism inside the country, but there
was no one to inspire them. An effective farsighted leadership could have
spontaneously developed inside the country,had there been no external
interference. Had the two brigades of trained troops, one at Agartala under
Khaled Musharraf and the other at Meghalaya under Major Zia, been correctly
deployed, we could have raised 20 divisions of peasant ﬁghters within seven
or ei^t months within the country.
My ideas deeply annoyed Colonel Osmany. For him it was avery easy
life. He had asafe shelter to sleep in and agreat deal of time to move
around inspecting sector headquarters. But it was aparody of aliberation
War. The leadership was simply insane. There is agreat distinction
between people’s war and conventional war. This was not understood by
Colonel Osmany. It is not correct to attempt to raise aregular force at an
early stage of guerrilla struggle. At an appropriate time, aguerrilla force
will be converted into aregular force. Idecided to stay in Sector 11 because
of its strategic importance. Iconsidered it useless to waste time moving
around different sectors. Osmani grudgingly appointed me as the Sector
C o m m a n d e r.
Taker is interrupted again by the Tribunal, There is an argument in the court.
The Tribunal orders him to ﬁnish up. Taker says: ’Tfyou disturb me like this,
it will be impossible for me to depose. /have seen many small men in my
time, but none smaller than you. ’
Fourth: the forces which developed spontaneously inside Bangladesh under
the leadership of famous freedom ﬁghters such as Major Afsar, Khalil, Batem,
Marfat, and many others ~this form was the natural development of the
forces struggling in our Liberation War. Unfortunately the regular military
8 1reedom ﬁghters such as Major Afsar, Khalil, Batem,
Marfat, and many others ~this form was the natural development of the
forces struggling in our Liberation War. Unfortunately the regular military
8 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
command under Colonel Osmany and the Provisional Government looked at
the development of such aforce with suspicion.

Consequently, there was no
co-ordination between the freedom ﬁghters developing inside the country and
the conventional army.

Fifth: Under the evil inﬂuence of India’s Border Security Force personnel,
greed developed among some of the freedom ﬁghters who lacked ideological
understanding, and consequently they resorted to many unfortunate acts
of looting and arson.

The answer to all these problems was that the Provisional Government
should have shifted inside Bangladesh into aliberated area.

Sector Head¬
quarters and all ofﬁcers should have left Indian territory and taken up posi¬
tions inside Bangladesh.

Iput forward this suggestion and Major Zia readily
agreed with me.

We took the decision that all commands should be moved
inside the border.

We wanted that other sectors should do the same at an
appointed time.

Accordingly aconference of sector commanders was held.

Colonel Osmany,Major Khaled Musharraf, and Major Shaﬁullah opposed
the proposal.

Not only were we prevented from moving sector headquarters
inside Bangladesh and off Indian territory, but Major Zia’s Brigade was taken
away from my sector.

Iwas left with one Air Force ofﬁcer, Flight Lieutenant Hamidullah and
one battle injured ofﬁcer.

Second Lieutenant Mannan.

Only one jeep was
left for transport.

At the time.

Brigadier Singh [Indian Army] thou^t he
would be able to direct us as we were left with no resources.

He suggested
we set up Headquarters alongside his H.Q.

at Turag, which was 40 miles
away from the border.

Ishould mention here that most of sector Head¬
quarters were well inside India.

Most of our Sector Commanders used carpets
to cover their tent ﬂoors.

Irefused Brigadier Singh’s offer and set my Sector H.Q.

800 yards off
and opposite Kamalpur port.

Iknew well that Imust concentrate on the
access which would give us ﬁnal victory.--- PAGE BREAK ---

800 yards off
and opposite Kamalpur port. Iknew well that Imust concentrate on the
access which would give us ﬁnal victory. This access was Kamalpur, Jamalpur,
Tangad and Dacca. Here Iwould like to recall the memory of aheroic freedom ﬁghter called
Subedar Aftab. He was adedicated soldier of extraordinary courage. He never
left Bangladesh soil. Together with some young men he valiantly fought the
Pakistani occupation army and harassed them wherever there was an oppor¬
tunity. When Ireached Sector 11,1 was told Subedar Aftab is arebel. He
never listens to anyone’s orders. He had stationed himself at aplace called
Kodal Kanti in Roumari Thana. He never reported to Major Zia or Brigadier
Singh in spite of repeated orders, Iwas curious about him and Idecided to
go and meet this man. Iwalked 18 miles to reach Kodal Kanti. It was a
surprise for him. He never expected to see an ofﬁcer inside Bangladesh. We
discussed the war situation and after an exchange of views, we found that we
shared similar views on strategy. From then on together we fought as
comrades-in-arms. The Chairman of the Tribunal breaks in. Taher responds, ‘These portions are
8 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker’s Testimony
very relevant.

You [speaking to the Chairman] were not in the Liberation
War, how would you have any idea about freedom ﬁghters?’ Taher continues.

Subedar Aftab informed me that he was the one who kept avast area of
Roumari Thana liberated and it remained so until the 16th December.

Throughout he refused to go to Indian territory to establish abase.

Ispent
the night talking with him.

Ifound that he was anatural leader of men and
Ifound myself very small in front of him.

When he said he could do anything, Iproposed an attack to dislodge the
Pakistanis who had entrenched themselves on an island in front of his position.

There was ariver between the two.

The island on which the Pakistanis had
taken up their position was divided in two halves by asmall canal.

Subedar
Aftab and Icrossed the river with aferry boat and found the Pakistanis on
the furthest side.

The near side was covered with thick elephant grass.

I
advised that acompany of ﬁghters cross the river at night and take up
position inside the elephant grass on the bank of the small canal.

I
suggested that early in the morning asmall patrol should go out and allow
the Pakistani forces to chase them.

After four days Aftab was ready with
his plan.

As expected the Pakistanis attacked after the early morning patrol.

Their
units were drawn within the killing zone of the freedom ﬁghters.

In the ﬁrst
attack the Pakistanis suffered alarge number of casualties.

The Pakistanis
launched asecond and third attack, both of which were repulsed.

They
panicked and abandoned the position.

With this the whole of Roumari Thana
right up to Bakadurab came within our position.

Next we turned our attention to Chilmaii, abattle that is well known
and which Icommanded.

It was in the middle of September.

During one night
1,200 freedom ﬁghters crossed the Brahmaputra river.

The target was guarded
by two companies of Pakistani regulars supplemented by alarge number of
Razakars.--- PAGE BREAK ---

During one night
1,200 freedom ﬁghters crossed the Brahmaputra river. The target was guarded
by two companies of Pakistani regulars supplemented by alarge number of
Razakars. We held Chilmari under our control for 24 hours and returned with
ahuge quantity of arms and ammunition, and alarge number of prisoners. It was adaring raid, one of those that are rare in the history of warfare. From September onward, much of the news of the Liberation War was
broadcast from the radio in our sector. Even the American journalist. Jack
Anderson, noted the contribution being made in our area. He said, ‘With
the fall of Kamalpur the Pakistanis lost the war.’ It was v.'hUe leading the
attack on Kamalpur that Ilost my leg. Our units, were the ﬁrst to reach
D a c c a . When speaking about the Liberation War Imust mention the loyalty, the
courage and the patriotism of our freedom ﬁghters. The nation found its best
people in them. Imust also mention the poor and the villagers who gave us food,
who gave us shelter, who supplied information on enemy positions, and who
were constantly an inspiration to us. Ihad aweapon in my hand. They had
none. In helping us they faced Pakistani bullets, their houses were burnt, and
their womenfolk disgraced. They were the most courageous of all and it is to
them that Iwill always give my deepest loyalty. 8 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
By the 16th of December Bangladesh passed into the hands of the Indian
Army.

This was not surprising.

The carelessness, bankruptcy and inefﬁciency
of our political and military leadership made the Provisional Government an
ineffective force.

This made possible the interference of the Indians.

Our
regular forces were psychologically weak and subservient because of the
reliance of bases located in Indian territory.

When the Indian Army entered
the sacred soil of Bangladesh, they grabbed everything they could put their
hands on, like atypical victorious army.

Mr.

Chairman and Members of the Tribunal, Ican describe here with some
pride the example of one commanding ofﬁcer who dared to challenge this
plundering by the Indian Army.

He is Major M.A.

Jalil, the commander of
the 9th Sector.

He is also aco-accused in this case.

Jalil had to pay ahigh
price for his action.

For carrying out his patriotic responsibilities he was
jailed and spent many days behind bars.

After his acquittal from the charges
which had been brought against him, he carried out another historic respon¬
sibility.

Together with A.S.M.

Abdur Rab, the representative of the young
revolutionaries (he too is aco-accused in this case).

Major Jalil organized the
ﬁrst opposition party in Bangladesh —the J.S.D.

1should mention here that
it was A.S.M.

Abdur Rab who was the ﬁrst person to raise our national ﬂag
on the 2nd of March 1971 at the historic Bot-tala gathering.

Ishall also
mention with pleasure that Iwas the Chairman of the Tribunal which tried
and acquitted Major Jalil.

At this stage Iwould like to mention afew words about my brothers who
are co-accused in this case.

There appears to be adeliberate attempt to
victimize our family.

My brother, Abu Yusuf Khan, an accused in this case,
was in Saudi Arabia on deputation with the Saudi Air Force when the Liber¬
ation War broke out.

He escaped and joined the battle in our sector.--- PAGE BREAK ---

My brother, Abu Yusuf Khan, an accused in this case,
was in Saudi Arabia on deputation with the Saudi Air Force when the Liber¬
ation War broke out. He escaped and joined the battle in our sector. No
matter how it may sound today, Iwill say there were many Bengali ofﬁcers
at that base, but no others escaped to join the war. Instead they returned to
West Pakistan and were later repatriated to Bangladesh in 1973. My brother
distinguished himself in the battle of Jamalpur and was awarded the Bir
Bikram. He was the ﬁrst one to reach the Pakistani Command Headquarters
on the 16th of December and obtained the surrender of General Niazi. He is
the proud possessor of General Niazi’s car pennant. To me it seems the world
has known few better men. My brother, Anwar, is also an accused in this case. He is alecturer at Dacca
University. During the Liberation War he was astaff ofﬁcer at Sector 11 H.Q. He is the type who would refuse to have asecond shirt just because afreedom
ﬁghter or arefugee needed one. Imust also mention my brother, Bahar, whom
we recently lost along with three other heroic boys due to the treachery of the
present government. He commanded acompany of more than 200 boys and
by November had liberated the major part of Netrakona Sub-Division. Due
to his exceptional bravery he was twice awarded the gallantry award Bir-
Pratik. He, too, is our national hero. My brother Belal, who also could not
escape the treachery of this government, has been brought here as aaccused. He was awarded the Bir-Pratik twice. Six brothers and two sisters —we all
8 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker’s Testimony
took part in the Liberation War.

Iwas awarded the Bir-Uttam for my contri¬
bution.

In recognition of our contribution, four of us were decorated with
military honours.

It is all arecord of history.

Also due to our involvement in
the struggle our village was burned and ransacked.

My father was taken into
custody and persecuted by the occupation forces.

However, Iwould like to
express here my gratitude to Brigadier Quader, aPakistani ofﬁcer, who inter¬
vened and released my father from custody.

After the return of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and the withdrawal of the
Indian Army, it was hoped that national reconstruction work would be given
the highest priority and that the work of building asociety based on justice
would begin.

We hoped that adeveloped self-reliant Bangladesh would
emerge where there would be no exploitation of man by man and where there
would be no corruption.

We hoped that our country would be defended by
an army which would not behave toward the masses as amercenary army.

We hoped that our army would be an inseparable part of our production
system.

It is for these hopes that our people and this nation time and time
again struggled so hard.

It was in these hopes that our ideals and values were
expressed.

But they were never accomplished.

Before anyone could realize,
the degeneration started.

In the month of April 1972, after all necessary treatment following the
amputation was completed, Ireturned to Bangladesh.

Irejoined the Bangla¬
desh Army in the position of Adjutant-General.

Ireinforced discipline in the
Army when it was adifﬁcult task.

The Chairman of this Tribunal is awitness
to how Iinitiated disciplinary proceedings against certain senior ofﬁcers, such
as Brigadier Mir Sawkat and Major-General ShaﬁuUah concerning certain
illegalities.

There were accusations that they illegally acquired money, wealth
and property.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Chairman of this Tribunal is awitness
to how Iinitiated disciplinary proceedings against certain senior ofﬁcers, such
as Brigadier Mir Sawkat and Major-General ShaﬁuUah concerning certain
illegalities. There were accusations that they illegally acquired money, wealth
and property. My position was that everything any ofﬁcer had illegally
acquired must be returned, so that they may stand up as brave and clean
men before the nation’s freedom ﬁghters. The situation was indeed very
delicate. Inever compromised with these principles. Within afew months Iwas
posted as the new Commander of the 44th Brigade at Comilla. On assuming
command of the Comilla Brigade, Iasked my ofﬁcers to return everything
they had illegally acquired during and after the Liberation War. My ofﬁcers
complied with my orders and Ihad aset of ofﬁcers whose consciences were
completely clear. This is what Iregarded as leadership. Ialways sought to appeal to what
was good in men. Idetested and avoided taking advantage of the weakness of
an individual or of our nation. The experience of the War of Independence, and the experience at Dacca
and Comilla Cantonments, inspired me to organize aRevolutionary People’s
Army [R.P.A.], as opposed to an anti-production oriented standing army. During my career as asoldier, Irealized that astanding army was aburden on
the national economies of developing and underdeveloped countries. This
form of an army is an obstacle to any social progress. It makes no contribution
whatsoever to national production. The sense of loyalty, dedication and
8 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
sacriﬁce that Isaw among the freedom ﬁghters during our liberation War,
convinced me that it was not an impossible task to build such aproduction
oriented Revolutionary People’s Army in post-liberation Bangladesh.

More
than ever Iwas inspired by this concept.

My efforts at the Cornea Brigade to raise and organize an Army on the
lines of a‘people’s army’ is well-known among different sections of the
Army.

Iconstantly tried to develop astrong army based on those who had
fought for freedom.

Our organizing principle was that of a‘productive army’
where ofﬁcers and men worked as do peasants and workers.

We ploughed
our ﬁelds, grew our own food, and went to the villages to join in production.

This was the path to self-reliance.

It is with happiness that Irecall that,
within avery short time, my ofﬁcers in the Comilla Brigade understood these
principles and turned our unit into aproductive force.

But soon differences arose.

On one side the Mujib government utterly
neglected the development of the Army and instead began to recruit the
notorious paramilitary force called the Rakkhi Bahini.

Indian ofﬁcers and
advisors were directly involved in the organization of the Rakkhi Bahini.

Iexpressed my complete opposition to the concerned quarters.

Ialso pro¬
tested to the then Prime Minister about the secret treaty which was signed with
India during the war.

In Army Headquarters there is documentary evidence of my protest.

It
is on these two points and due to my insistence on acomplete and total
departure from the existing colonial pattern of the Army that differences arose
within the government.

Differences between the government and Lieutenant
Colonel Ziauddin also soon emerged.

As aconsequence lieutenant-Colonel
Ziauddin and myself found it necessary to dissociate ourselves from the
Army.

This occurred in the month of November 1972, Subsequently Ziauddin
and Ichose our own respective political lines, each going our own way.--- PAGE BREAK ---

As aconsequence lieutenant-Colonel
Ziauddin and myself found it necessary to dissociate ourselves from the
Army. This occurred in the month of November 1972, Subsequently Ziauddin
and Ichose our own respective political lines, each going our own way. When¬
ever possible, we kept in touch with each other, and apprised each other of
developments in the overall situation. In 1973 Itook up ajob with the Ministry of Flood Control and Water
Resources as Director of the Dredger Organization. Itook the job at atime
when the organization had already been absolutely shattered due to corrup¬
tion and mismanagement. Within ashort time we revived the organization
which achieved its highest income since its creation in 1952. From the watch¬
man to the Superintendent of Engineers you can ask how Iwas running that
organization. Taker says, following an interruption of his statement: Mr. Chairman and the
Honourable Members of this Court -1 must bring everything out. It will
bring you close tome
The role of the Awami League government until 15th August 1975 is
known to all. How the democratic institutions, one after the other, were
being demolished, and how the democratic rights of the people were ruth¬
lessly suppressed is amatter of record. In short, all our cherished goals, ideals
8 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker's Testimony
and values were destroyed one after the other.

Democracy was given an
indecent burial.

The people were trampled on and afascist dictatorship was
imposed on the whole nation.

In the womb of fascist repression there slowly developed an anti-fascist
mass resistance movement.

It was really tragic and painful to see Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, the leading personality among the founders of this state,
emerge as adictator.

Mujib in his chequered political career had never com¬
promised with autocracy or dictatorship.

He was once the symbol of demo-
racy and the national independence movement.

With all his shortcomings, he
was the only leader who had links with the masses and who had abroad base
among the masses.

In return the people accepted him as their leader.

It is
the people who gloriﬁed Mujib and magniﬁed his image as ahero.

In fact,
people thought of Mujib as they dreamed he should be.

The very name
Mujib was awar cry in our Independence War.

Sheikh Mujib was the leader
of the masses.

To deny this is to deny afact.

In the ﬁnal analysis it should
have been the masses who should have decided his fate.

The best path would
have been for the people to have risen and overthrown Mujib for deceiving
them.

It is my ﬁrm conviction that the people who installed Mujib as their
leader would have destroyed Mujib the dictator.

The people granted no rights
to anyone to intrigue or conspire.

On the 15th August 1975, Sheikh Mujib was killed by agroup of ofﬁcers
and asection of the Army.

On that day early in the morning an ofﬁcer from
the Second Field Artillery rang me up and gave me amessage which he said
came from Major Rashid.

He asked me to go to Bangladesh Betar (Bangladesh
Radio).

He also informed me of the killing of Sheikh Mujib.

Iwas told that
Khondakar Mustaque Ahmed, aclose associate of the late President, and a
member of the Awami League, was leading the ofﬁcers.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He also informed me of the killing of Sheikh Mujib. Iwas told that
Khondakar Mustaque Ahmed, aclose associate of the late President, and a
member of the Awami League, was leading the ofﬁcers. Iturned on the radio and came to know that Sheikh Mujib had been killed
and that Khondakar Mustaque had taken power. This was shocking news to
me. Ithought it would create political instability and that in this situation
we could even lose our inﬂuence. Meanwhile, several telephone calls came
urging me to go to Bangladesh Betar. Ithought Ishould go and see the
situation. At 9a.m. in the morning, Ireached Bangladesh Betar. On reaching there I
was taken by Major Rashid to aroom where Ifound Khondakar Mustaque
and Taheruddin Thakur along with Major Dalim and Major-General M. Khalilur Rahman. Ihad abrief discussion with Khondalar Mustaque and
emphasized that the need of the hour was to protect the country’s inde¬
pendence. Iwas taken to another room by Major Rashid where he asked me
whether Iwould like to join the Cabinet. Itold him to get hold of all the
Chiefs of the Defence Forces, discuss the problems with them, and to reach
asuitable solution. Major Rashid insisted that I, together with Lieutenant-
Colonel Ziauddin, could save the situation and that he had no faith in any
service chief or any politician. Irejected the offer and advised him that no
BAKSAL leaders should be taken into any cabinet and Isaid an all-party
government composed of all patriotic political parties should be formed. 8 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Iplaced the following proposals before Khondakar Mustaque for imple¬
mentation: 1) immediate abrogation of the constitution;-^ 2) the declaration
and enforcement of martial law throughout the country; 3) release of all
political detainees irrespective of party afﬁliation; 4) formation of an all
party democratic national government, excluding the BAKSAL; 5) arrange¬
ments for an immediate general election for aconstituent assembly-curn-
parliament.

Khondakar Mustaque gave apatient hearing to my proposals
and promised to take necessary steps.

Rashid kept insisting Iattend the
swearing in ceremony of Khondakar Mustaque at Banga Bhavan.

At 11:30
Ileft Bangladesh Betar with afeeling of deep concern.

Isensed Mustaque
would not keep his word and would probably do otherwise.

Ialso sensed
that this was not an affair of Mustaque alone or some ofﬁcers.

There seemed
to be someone else’s hand pulling the strings.

This became clear to me very soon.

In his broadcast to the nation Mustaque
mentioned nothing of the proposals Ihad discussed with him.

When Ireached
Banga Bhavan at mid-day, the swearing in ceremony was over.

In the evening
Isat down with the ofﬁcers who were involved in the killing.

They were
headed by Major Rashid.

Ionce again put forward to them the suggestions I
had m^de to.Mustaqye that morning and 1insisted that the release of all
political prisoners must be done immediately before any ﬁrm course of
action could be decided.

During the latter part of our discussion, Icalled General Zia to join in.

All
agreed with my discussions and considered it the only suitable course open for
the time being.

The next day Ihad along discussion with Major-General
Shaﬁullali and Major-General M.

Khalilur Rahman.

They all agreed to what 1
had recommended.

But at that stage on the 16th of August, Irealized that Major Rashid and
Major Farooq were using my name opportunistically to give their troops the
impression that 1was with them.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They all agreed to what 1
had recommended. But at that stage on the 16th of August, Irealized that Major Rashid and
Major Farooq were using my name opportunistically to give their troops the
impression that 1was with them. On the I7th of August it became clear to
me that the whole game was backed by the United States of America and
Pakistan. Ialso understood that Khondakar Mustaque, backed by afaction
of the upper echelon of the Awami League, was directly involved in the
killing of Sheikh Mujib. This group, it was also clear, had apre-determined
course set for themselves. From the 17th onwards Istopped going to the
Ganga Bhavan and severed all relations with this group. General Osmany was appointed Military Advisor to Khondakar Mustaque
and kept in close touch with me. He took me along with him to various
places in Bangladesh and constantly enquired about Lt.-Colonel Ziauddin and
showed his eagerness to meet him. 1told him that the government ﬁrst must
withdraw the death warrant which had been issued against Ziauddin’s life
by the Mujib government, and that all charges must be dropped. Only then
could Ziauddin meet him. In the last part of September, Major Rashid brought amessage from
President Khondakar Mustaque Ahmed that Iand Lt.-Colonel Ziauddin
should form apolitical party and that he would provide aU facilities of
ﬁnance. Irejected his proposal and sent back word that Iinsisted upon the
8 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker’s Testimony
release of all political prisoners.

It was clear that Mustaque had absolutely no
political base.

But for asmall faction, he had no support in the Army as a
whole, and he had no support among the people.

Let us now turn our attention to the Mustaque government.

The Mustaque
government could not offer abetter alternative than the Mujib government.

The only change that occurred was that the country, from having been under
the hegemony of Indo-Soviet inﬂuence, passed over to the hegemony of
American imperialism.

The entire situation in the country otherwise remained
the same.

No effective measures were taken to regain the conﬁdence of the
masses.

Political repression was increased.

The ruthlessness of the law enforce¬
ment agencies grew immensely.

The harassment and sufferings of the people
continued.

The arrest of political workers was as usual.

In the truest sense,
the country was plunged from acivilian dictatorship into amilitary-bureau-
era tic dictatorship.

The people were restless.

They could never accept such asituation.

Indo-
Soviet agents and social forces unacceptable to the masses were waiting to
turn the situation to their purpose.

Taking advantage of the Mustaque govern¬
ment’s failures, aconspiracy was organized threatening our national interest.

The ambitious Brigadier Khaled Musharraf led the conspiracy and, by a
counter-revolutionary coup d’etat, seized power on the 3rd November 1975.

On that day Iwas ill and conﬁned to bed at my house in Narayanganj.

Yet, early in the morning of that day at 4o’clock, Ireceived atelephone call.

It was Major-General Ziaur Rahman who implored me to help him.

We could
not ﬁnish our talk —the line was cut.

On the same day many soldiers,
N.C.O’s and J.C.O’s came to my Narayanganj house.

Iwas unable to speak
with all of them but Italked with afew in my room.

They informed me that
Khaled Musharrafs coup was backed by the Indians and that BAKSAL forces
were attempting to take power again.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Iwas unable to speak
with all of them but Italked with afew in my room. They informed me that
Khaled Musharrafs coup was backed by the Indians and that BAKSAL forces
were attempting to take power again. They also informed me that tensions
between the Bengal Regiment and the core troops were rising very high. At
any moment there could be shooting. Iadvised them to remain calm, establish quick contact among the soldiers,
and to exchange opinions among themselves regarding the situation. Itold
them to remain vigUant against any anti-national forces jeopardizing our
national existence. Ialso told them in clear terms that the duty of every
member of the Armed Forces was to defend the frontiers and the territorial
integrity of the republic. In asociety like ours the Armed Forces have no
business whatsoever interfering in state affairs. Behind the coups and counter¬
coups lay apower struggle between ambitious ofﬁcers. These ofﬁcers did not
understand anything beyond their own self-interest, and to achieve their
selﬁsh objectives they were using the ordinary soldiers as pawns. It is the
people who are to decide how the country should be run. Iasked the soldiers
to go back to the barracks, not to shoot each other whatever the provocation,
and to remain prepared to strike simultaneously to express our solidarity with
the masses. This was the only way to frustrate the ambitions of power hungry
military men. The terrifying and anarchic situation through which our nation was passing
8 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
after the 3rd November is well known to all.

The manner in which our
national self-respect was violated needs no further elaboration here.

It was
apparent to the people that Khaled was backed by India.

What apathetic
si^t it was to see Rear Admiral M.H.

Khan and Air Vice-Marshal M.G.

Tawab place the badges of aMajor-General’s rank on Khaled Musharraf while
the sovereignty of the country was at stake.

1pity these small minded men.

When these cowards fell on their knees begging for their lives, we had to move
to keep up the spirit and sense of initiative in the nation.

And Ziaur Rahman?

He was trembling helplessly in Khaled’s captivity.

Where were Tawab and
Khan then?

They were busy licking the boots of their new master.

This nation
cannot afford to keep such cowards in the service of their armed forces.

On the afternoon of the 4th November amessage reached me from Major-
General Zia through one of his relatives.

He appealed to me to use my inﬂu¬
ence with the troops to rescue him and save the sovereignty of the country.

Isent word to him to remain calm and gather courage.

Ialso assured him that
discipline in the Armed Forces would be restored soon, and there would be
an end to all underhanded actions.

In the meantime our vigilant soldiers and
ofﬁcers requested that Ishould take certain necessary decisions and plan the
overthrow of the treacherous Khaled Musharraf clique.

The highest initiative
in this regard came from the soldiers, particularly the NCOs and JCOs.

After intense consultation and contact among our forces, plans were made
to carry out the necessary steps.

On the 6th of November Iappealed through
representatives of all units in the Dacca Cantonment for the troops to remain
alert and to wait for instructions.

Everyone was on full alert on the late
evening of the 6th of November.

The uprising was to be carried out in the
early hours of the dawn of the 7th of November at 1a.m.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Everyone was on full alert on the late
evening of the 6th of November. The uprising was to be carried out in the
early hours of the dawn of the 7th of November at 1a.m. Our decisions were:
1) to oust the Khaled Musharraf clique from power; 2) to free Ziaur Rahman
from captivity; 3) to establish aRevolutionary Military Command Council;
4) to release dl political detainees irrespective of party designation; 5) to
withdraw ail warrants of arrest on political workers; 6) to form an aU-party
democratic national government excluding BAKSAL; and 7) to accept and
implement the Twelve Point Demands of the Revolutionary Soldiers Organi¬
zation (Biplopi Shainik Sangstha). All went according to plan. The radio, T.V., telegraph, post ofﬁce, airport,
and other important centres were captured at the ﬁrst instance. At dawn, Zia
was rescued and taken to the Second Field Artillery Headquarters. I, along
with my elder brother, Flight-Sergeant Abu Yusuf Khan, went to the Canton¬
ment at about 3ajn. There were truckloads of soldiers all around. Ifound Zia in his night dress with Brigadier Mir Shawkat and afew other
ofﬁcers and troops. Zia embraced me, embraced my brother and, with tears
in his eyes, expressed his gratitude for saving him. He said he owed his life
to me-and the efforts of the J.S.D. He was so grateful he promised to do what¬
ever we asked. We then had some discussions regarding the course of action
to be taken, and reached Betar Bhavan (Radio Bangladesh) at about 4a.m. On our way we discussed the immediate measures to be taken. 9 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---Taker ’s Testimony
The Tribunal interrupts Taker.

There are arguments in the Court.

Taker says:
‘You must listen to what Ihave to say.

Otherwise Iwill not make any state¬
ment.

Hang me...

Hang me now...

Ihave no fear.

But don’t disturb me
...

From where did we leave off Sharif?’He continued with his statement.

In the meantime radio announcements were made about the Soldiers’
Uprising and Zia was proclaimed as Chief Martial Law Administrator
[C.M.L.A.] On our way to the radio Zia agreed to address amass gathering
at the Shahid Minar (Martyrs Memorial).

Ihad accordingly instructed the
sepoys to assemble at the Shahid Minar where amass meeting would be
addressed by Zia and myself, so that no one would be able to go back on the
commitment they had made to the Revolutionary Soldiers —the soldiers
who, minus their ofﬁcers, had protected the sovereignty of the country.

Iset the time for the meeting at Shahid Minar for 10 o’clock.

The soldiers
out of joy were moving through the town and Ithought it would take some
time to gather.

Thousands of jubilant people danced in the streets shouting
slogans along with the Revolutionary Soldiers.

Flowers were everywhere.

The
capital was in afestive mood with thousands celebrating.

At 8.30 1was informed by the troops that Khondakar Mustaque Ahmed
had entered Bangladesh Radio and was attempting to make aspeech.

Iwent
to the radio station.

Itold Mustaque in clear terms that the days of political
conspiracy were over and that he must leave the radio station immediately.

He complied with my orders and left.

After that Iwent to the Cantonment to bring Zia to address the meeting.

When 1reached there, Ifound the atmosphere was alittle changed.

Zia had
shaved and was in uniform.

He seemed to have recovered from the shock of
his captivity.

When Itold him that it was time to go to the Shahid Minar, he
refused —although very politely.

He pleaded that he was asoldier and that
he need not go out and speak in apublic meeting.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When Itold him that it was time to go to the Shahid Minar, he
refused —although very politely. He pleaded that he was asoldier and that
he need not go out and speak in apublic meeting. He asked me to go and
address the troops. Instead Isent amessage to the Shahid Minar for the
troops to return to the Cantonment. At 11 o’clock we held ameeting at Headquarters. We decided in principle
to form an interim government. Present at that meeting were myself, Zia,
Tawab, M.H. Khan, Khalilur Rahman, Osmany, and the Principd Secretary
Malibub Alam Chashi.'^ Alegal question arose over the continuity of the
government. The others wanted Justice Sayem to be the President of the
country. [Sayem had been appointed by IGialed Musharraf on 5th November.]
Iagreed to that, but v/anted Zia to be the Chief Martial Law Administrator. After some discussion in which Zia balked at becoming C.M.L.A., it was
decided that he, along with Tawab and M.H. Khan, would each be appointed
Deputy Chief Martial Law Administrators. It was not decided in that meeting
that they would hold charge of any ministry. Justice Sayem as President and
Chief Martial Law Administrator dong with his three Deputy Chief Martial
Law Administrators would form an advisory council. But, most important
of all, it was decided that all political prisoners were to be released. After adiscussion with political leaders, political activities were to be
9 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
allowed and ageneral election held much earlier than had been promised by
President Khondakar Mustaque.

Sayem would be running only an interim
government.

Ia^ed the meeting to endorse the programme of the 7th
November uprising.

In the afternoon Iwent to the radio station.

The soldiers who had taken
part in this revolution wanted me present when they handed over their
‘Twelve Points’ to Major-General Zia.

From the radio station Itelephoned
Ziaur Rahman and informed him of the soldiers’ wish.

At the time the
troops were so excited they did not allow anyonelinside the radio station.

In
the evening at about 7.45 Sayem and Mustaque, who accompanied Zia, were
not allowed inside the radio station.

Only after representatives of the Revo¬
lutionary Soldiers had handed the Twelve Points to Zia who acknowledged
his agreement by signing acopy, were Sayem and Mustaque permitted inside.

Major-General Zia and myself sat down in theiT.V.

room of Radio Bangla¬
desh and watched Khondakar Mustaque and Sayem speak to the nation.

Sayem spelled out clearly the principles which had been argued upon in the
earlier meeting.

In keeping with these principles, on the 8th of November
1975, Major JalO and A.S.M.

Abdur Rab were released from prison.

On the
8th Irang up General Zia thanking him for this act and insisted that Matin,
Ohidur and other prisoners be released on the same day»
On 8th of November, in the evening, Iwas informed by Zia that there
were some incidents involving the killing of ofﬁcers.

Ioffered him all necessary
help in bringing this situation under control.

Ialso offered to move imme¬
diately up to the Cantonment and informed him that my orders to the soldiers
taking part in the revolution had been that no ofﬁcer should be hurt in this
manner.

Until the 11th of November Major-General Zia kept in constant contact
with me.

After the 12th Ifound he was unavailable, and all contact was lost.

Whenever Itried to contact him, he avoided me.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After the 12th Ifound he was unavailable, and all contact was lost. Whenever Itried to contact him, he avoided me. On the 23rd of November, alarge police contingent surrounded the house
of my older brother, Flight Sergeant Abu Yusuf Khan, and took him to the
police control room. When Icame to know about this, I*rang up Major-
General Zia and was told that he was not available. Instead of him, Major-
General Ershad, the Deputy Chief of Staff talked with me. When Iinformed
him about the arrest of my brother, he said that it was apolice action and
they knew nothing about it. At that time Idid not know that Major Jalil,
A.S.M. Abdur Rab, and other J.S.D. leaders and workers were also being
rounded up by the police. When Ilearned of it, it became very clear to me
that anew conspiracy had taken control of those we had brought to power
on November 7th. On 24th November Iwas surrounded by alarge contingent of police. The
police ofﬁcer asked me to accompany him to have adiscussion with Zia. I
said Iwas surprised, and Iasked him why there was need of apolice guard for
me to go to Zia. Anyway they put me in ajeep and drove me straight to this
jail. This is how Iwas put inside this jail by those traitors whom Isaved and
brought to power. Zia not only betrayed me, he betrayed the Revolutionary Soldiers and went
9 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---o this
jail. This is how Iwas put inside this jail by those traitors whom Isaved and
brought to power. Zia not only betrayed me, he betrayed the Revolutionary Soldiers and went
9 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Taker's Testimony
back on the commitments he made on the 7th, indeed he has betrayed the
entire nation. We were stabbed in the back. Compared to Khaled Musharraf,
Zia proved to be the other side of the same coin.
In our history, there is only one example of such treachery. It was the
treachery of Mir Zafar who betrayed the people of Bangladesh and the sub¬
continent and led us into slavery for aperiod of 200 years. Fortunately for
us it is not 1757. It is 1976 and we have revolutionary soldiers and arevo¬
lutionary people who will destroy the conspiracy of traitors like Ziaur
R a h m a n .
Once more Taker is stopped by the Tribunal. Procedures are stopped by
arguments in the court. Taker declares: ‘You have no power to hang me. No
power to convict or acquit me.'
After afew days in the Central JaU, Iwas ﬂown by helicopter to Rajshahi
Central Jail. There Iwas put in solitary conﬁnement. My family members
were not allowed to see me until today. And although Ihave been in prison,
Ihave still been able to sense the pulse of the country. It is presently passing
through adeep crisis. The country is faced with two immediate problems.
One is that alarge number of workers of aparticular political party went
over to India and started carrying out armed action along our border.^ The
second is India’s stopping of the ﬂow of water down the Ganges by use of
the Farakka Barrage. Both these actions were adirect threat to the sovereignty
and economy of our country. In spite of my incarceration, my solitary
conﬁnement, and the accompanying harrassment, Idid not fail to register my
protest against this threat. On the 10th May of 1976 Iwrote aletter to the
President of the country which Iwould like to read out to this court.
Taker is not allowed by the court to read the letter. The Tribunal also says it
will not allow him to give his statement unless he promises to cut it short.
After the intervention by Taker’s senior lawyers, he was allowed to speak.
Taker’s Advocate said to the Court: ‘Please allow him. It is the discretion of
the Tribunal not to, but because he is the principal accused, he must be
allowed, no matter how elaborately, to make clear his contention before you. ’
Mr. Chairman and Honourable Members of the Court, my letter to the
President is the manifesto of aman’s desire to protect the sovereignty of his
country from foreign aggression. Iam afree man. Ihave earned that freedom
by my deeds. The high walls of this jail, solitary conﬁnement,"and handcuffs,
cannot take away that freedom.
On the 22nd of May 1was ﬂown from Rajshahi, brought into this jail, and
kept in solitary conﬁnement. The whole jail was surrounded by amysterious
silence. Since my arrival Ihad heard that Iwould be tried by aMilitary
Tribunal inside this jail, and that aspecial Military Tribunal Law was promul¬
gated just for this purpose. On 15th June the present Chairman of the
Tribunal visited me in the jail. Irefused to attend because aMilitary Tribunal
9 3that aspecial Military Tribunal Law was promul¬
gated just for this purpose. On 15th June the present Chairman of the
Tribunal visited me in the jail. Irefused to attend because aMilitary Tribunal
9 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
inside ajail is only an instrument of the government to commit crimes in the
name of justice.

On the 21st of June, four lawyers came to my cell and
assured me on behalf of the Tribunal that justice would be done and the
Tribunal would function without intimidation from the government.

Only on
that assurance did Iagree to appear before this court.

But Iwould like to mention here that the ordinance under which this
Tribunal is constituted is illegal.

It was promulgated on 15th June 1976.

Yet,
the Tribunal itself was constituted well before the promulgation of the
ordinance; otherwise, how could the Tribunal have visited the jail on the 15th
June?

Moreover, the preparation of the court room inside the jail began on
the 12th of June.

And here Iam.

Iwas not allowed to consult my defence counsel.

1did not
have any opportunity to inspect the charge sheet.

Not asingle member of my
family has yet been able to see me.

The way this trial has been conducted —
the less said the better.

The whole thing has been done so hastily and in such
afrightened manner that anyone would be shocked.

Ihave been accused with certain civilians of conspiring since July 1974 to
overthrow agovernment established by law, and of creating dissension and
indiscipline in the Armed Forces.

1have also been accused of overthrowing
the government on the 7th of November.

And Ihave been accused of not
being apatriotic citizen.

Mr.

Chairman and Members of the Tribunal, Ido
not want to go into the merits of these allegations made against me.

The
allegations are so utterly false and fabricated that Ihave no desire to say any¬
thing whatsoever about them.

Those who suffered at the hands of the Awami
League government can clearly remember the condition of the country prior
to the overthrow of that regime.

Mass oppression, economic bureaucracy,
acomplete breakdown of order leading to anarchy, and the denial of demo¬
cratic and human rights were the order of the day.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Those who suffered at the hands of the Awami
League government can clearly remember the condition of the country prior
to the overthrow of that regime. Mass oppression, economic bureaucracy,
acomplete breakdown of order leading to anarchy, and the denial of demo¬
cratic and human rights were the order of the day. In such an adverse political
situation, the J.S.D. and other mass organizations were trying hard to build
up an anti-fascist democratic movement. Where were the princes and heroes
of patriotism at that time? Where was Ziaur Rahman? Where was Musharraf
Khan and M.G. Tawab? What were they doing? Iam accused of conspiring to overthrow agovernment established by law. But who killed Mujib and his family and overthrew his government? Who
came to power by Mujib’s kiUing? Who became the Chief of Army Staff with
the fall of Mujib? Did any of the accused sitting here accomplish all this? Or,
is it the people sitting before me —you and the others who are carrying out
the orders of those now in power —who are in fact the greatest beneﬁciaries
of Mujib’s killing? Ihave been accused of creating dissension and indiscipline in the Army. But, on the 15th of August and the 3rd of November, what happened in the
Army? Who were those majors who were giving orders to senior ofﬁcers?^
-After the November 3rd coup, who disrupted the chain of command in the
Army? To whom did the imprisoned Zia appeal for his life? Of course, under
my direction, Zia was rescued by an uprising. Our principal task was to
defend and consolidate our national independence and sovereignty. In
9 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---peal for his life? Of course, under
my direction, Zia was rescued by an uprising. Our principal task was to
defend and consolidate our national independence and sovereignty. In
9 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Taker's Testimony
accomplishing this we had to organize the soldiers and make them politically
conscious. Iam proud to say that Ihave been successful in this and that we
saved the nation and the Armed Forces from agreat catastrophe.
Ihave been accused of overthrowing alegal government. Yes, this is very
true! Who came to power before the 7th of November? Whom did Khaled
Musharraf represent? Who arrested Zia? Whose downfall did the frightened
people pray for? To ensure our national independence and to give anew
sense of direction to our nation, we along with the masses and the Revolution¬
ary Sepoys overthrew the traitor Khaled Musharraf. It has been alleged that I
am not apatriotic citizen. Aman who gave his blood, even apart of his body
for the freedom of his motherland —what else do you demand of him? In
what other way can Idemonstrate my allegiance to my country? To keep our
frontiers free, to uphold the nation’s self-respect, and the honour of the
Armed Forces —acrippled man risked his whole life in organizing the historic
Soldiers Uprising. What other forms of allegiance do you want from me?
It is for these reasons that Ihave asked the Tribunal to summon Major-
General Ziaur Rahman, Rear-Admiral M.H. Khan, Air-Vice Marshal M.G.
Tawab, and General M.A.G. Osmany, and Justice A.Shl. Sayem. If they all
would have been here, if this Tribunal had the power to summon them all
here, then Iam certain they would not have dared to face such lies and false
accusations. But this Tribunal has utterly failed in discharging its respon¬
sibility.
Alaw is not alaw unless it is agood law aiming at the good of the people
and the good of the country. The ordinance promulgated on 15th June 1976
is ablack law. It was promulgated merely to suit the designs of the govern¬
ment. The ordinance is illegal. So this Tribunal ceases to have any right
legally or morally to try me.
Iwould like to describe the events which have occurred since the 21st
day of June 1976, the day this trial opened.
Taker is not allowed to give this section of his statement. He says he has
never seen men of such low integrity as the Chairman and the members of the
Tribunal.
The action of this Tribunal has put to shame what good things human
civilization has achieved through constant endeavour from the beginning of
time until today.
Before Iconclude, Iwould like to say that Ihave stated in detail what
occurred on the night of the 6th/7th of November and also the day of the
7th. This Tribunal will understand now as to why Ihave asked for Sayem,
Zia, M.H. Khan, Tawab and Osmany to appear as witnesses. Let them come
and say if there be anything that is not true in what Ihave stated to this
Tr i b u n a l .
Iwould like to say afew words about the military personnel who have
been brought here along with me as accused. Ihave aresponsibility towards
them. They should have been tried, if they are accused of any offence, under
9 5w words about the military personnel who have
been brought here along with me as accused. Ihave aresponsibility towards
them. They should have been tried, if they are accused of any offence, under
9 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---litary personnel who have
been brought here along with me as accused. Ihave aresponsibility towards
them. They should have been tried, if they are accused of any offence, under
9 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
the Army Act and Service Rules. Iwas one of the top Tanking ofﬁcers in the
Bangladesh Army in its formative period. It pains me to see that now this
Military Junta, in order to achieve their malicious design, will sacriﬁce such
an important part of our army and thereby disable the Armed Forces. We
can be proud of these young men and their heroism.
This nation of 75 million people can never die. The people of Bangladesh
aheroic people. The lesson and sense of direction that they have gathered
from the 7th November Uprising will guide them in all their future actions.
It has been able to infuse an indomitable courage into our people. Iam proud
of whatever Ihave done. Iam not afraid. In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, Iwill
only say that Ilove my country and my people. Iam part of the soul of this
nation. No one dare separate us. There is no greater asset in life than the
possession of afearless mind. And Ihave that. Ioffer acall to my nation to
acquire the same determination.
a r e
Long live Revolution!
Long Live My Country!
Abu Taker was hanged at 4a.m. on the morning
of July 21,1976 in Dacca CentralJail.
Notes and References
1 .
Taher repeatedly states in his testimony that the Uprising on the 7th
‘restored discipline’. The ironic emphasis he placed on this point is to be
understood within the context of repeated references in the government’s
charge sheet and Chief Prosecutor, A.T.M. Afzal’s accusations that Taher
was guilty of spreading gross indiscipline in the Armed Forces. As he
makes clear in the rest of his statement, the so-called ‘indiscipline’
originated at the top of the ofﬁcer corps via coups and counter-coups, and
that the Uprising of the 7th was out to impose the ‘discipline’ of the
sepoys and the lower ranks, functioning through Soldiers’ Committees,
upon the indiscipline of the competing factions of the ofﬁcer corps.
Following the 1972 Simla Agreements between India and Pakistan under
which 90,000 captured Pakistani Army personnel were returned to
Pakistan, there followed in 1973-4 the repatriation of nearly 1,000
Bengali army ofﬁcers and 28,000 sepoys from Pakistan. On their return
to Bangladesh, many were required to explain in detail their activities
during the civil war period. Several senior ofﬁcers, who had had clear
opportunities to defect due to overseas postings, but did not, were
removed from army service. Anumber of repatriated ofﬁcers who
allowed to remain in service were often put into positions subordinate
to soldiers who had been below them in rank in the old days of the
Pakistan Army. The criteria after independence for rank and seniority in
the Bangladesh Army was the role ofﬁcers and sepoys had played in the
War of Liberation. Following Mujib’s death and the suppression of the
November 7th Uprising, this trend was reversed with repatriated ofﬁcers.
2 .
w e r e
9 6role ofﬁcers and sepoys had played in the
War of Liberation. Following Mujib’s death and the suppression of the
November 7th Uprising, this trend was reversed with repatriated ofﬁcers.
2 .
w e r e
9 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---oys had played in the
War of Liberation. Following Mujib’s death and the suppression of the
November 7th Uprising, this trend was reversed with repatriated ofﬁcers.
2 .
w e r e
9 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Notes and References
who had played no role in the Independence War, taking over the major
share of top brigade and middle echelon positions. Colonel Yusuf Haider,
Chairman of the Military Tribunal, was precisely in this mould. No
Mukti Bahini ofﬁcer would agree to sit as aTribunal member in the
Ta h e r t r i a l .
3. In the period between August 15 and November 3, 1975, various criti¬
cisms of the Mujib regime began appearing in the Bangladesh press.
Among the most prominent of these critiques was that he had arbi¬
trarily amended the Constitution in 1975 by passing the 4th Amendment,
abolishing the position of Prime Minister, and turning the form of the
state into an authoritarian-style presidential system. Acommon demand
being made of the new regime, even from among its outspoken supporters,
such as the newspaper Holiday, was that Mustaque should abrogate the
Constitution, dissolve Parliament, hold new elections, and restore the
democratic provisions of the Constitution which Mujib had abrogated.
Mustaque had refused to make any ﬁrm commitments on any of these
demands and evaded making any until the day he was overthrown. The
demands for the ‘abrogation of the Constitution’ and the election of a
new ‘constituent assembly cum parliament’ put by Taher to Mustaque
were thus precisely the main issues which would dominate public dis¬
cussion in the immediate post-Mujib period.
4. Later accounts from Bangladesh military sources claimed that it was
Chashi who persuaded Zia at this stage to change course and disassociate
himself from any commitments to the political path of The Twelve
Demands. (See note 8, Part I).
5. Taher is referring to pro-Mujib elements of the Awami League and
BAKSAL who ﬂed to India and, with the assistance of the New Delhi
authorities, set up border bases for armed operations. See The
Washington Post, 11 December 1975.
6. Taher is referring here to the tension which developed between Zia and
Khaled in the August 15-November 31975 period over Zia’s refusal to
act against the Majors and restore the chain of command. Taher is again
pointing to the hypocrisy of the charge being made against him in noting
that it was Zia who had refused Khaled’s demands that discipline in
command be restored. (See note 2, Part I).
9 7her is again
pointing to the hypocrisy of the charge being made against him in noting
that it was Zia who had refused Khaled’s demands that discipline in
command be restored. (See note 2, Part I).
9 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---g to the hypocrisy of the charge being made against him in noting
that it was Zia who had refused Khaled’s demands that discipline in
command be restored. (See note 2, Part I).
9 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

P a r t I I :
The Murder of Mujib
Murder at Midnight
On the night of 14 August 1975 Bangladesh’s capital city, Dacca, settled down
to one of those hot sweltering monsoon nights that blow up each summer from
the Bay of Bengal. The town was quiet and the political talk in the tea shops
that day was about the President’s speech planned for the next morning at
Dacca University. Life had been going from bad to worse and people wondered
if one of the leftist underground parties might try and make trouble during
the university ceremony the next day. Otherwise, the evening did not seem
much different from many others that summer. Bangladesh and the painful^,,
drama of its birth had long faded from the world focus it once inhabited.
As much as the outside world concerned itself at all with the subcontinent,
attention was focused on India. There Indira Gandhi was making news as she
had never done before by packing off tens of thousands of her political oppo¬
nents to prison, forcibly sterilizing seven million people, bulldozing bustees
in the cities and arresting beggars in abizarre rendition of the Congress
Party’s latest method of ‘abolishing poverty’. She called it, somewhat self-
righteously, an ‘Emergency’. Thus the world, if it noticed South Asia at all
that summer, watched India and Indira Gandhi riding out her political rage.
However, on that August evening, life in Dacca took asudden turn. Just
after midnight the Bengal Lancers and the Bangladesh Armoured Corps
slowly trundled out of the capital’s main cantonment towards the runways
of the abandoned half-built second airport on the capital’s edge. There was
nothing unusual in this. The Lancers regularly did night manoeuvres and that
night they were on schedule. As they lined up in formation on the main
runway, the Commanding Ofﬁcer of the column, Major Farooq, stood on a
Unk and told hi'sjnen what was on his mindi tonight. he said, they would
overthrow the regime of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. It was aﬁre-eating speech.
The Major told his troops what was their new duty; what was the depth of
their rage; and what he proposed as the latest course for Bangladesh’s
‘national salvation’. By the time Farooq had ﬁnished they were ready to go.
They moved out and split into three columns, \\hthin three hours Mujib and
more than forty members of Ws family were dead.
Half aworld away that day, in the most secure hearing room on Capitol
Hill, the windowless penthouse normally used by the Joint Committee on
Atomic Energy, U.S. Senator Frank Church’s Select Committee on U.S.
9 8away that day, in the most secure hearing room on Capitol
Hill, the windowless penthouse normally used by the Joint Committee on
Atomic Energy, U.S. Senator Frank Church’s Select Committee on U.S.
9 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
Intelligence Activities had the American people riveted to their televisions
and newspapers, as the Committee slowly pulled the wraps off the covert
empire of American power.

It was the summer when Americans ﬁrst heard
acronyms like MONGOOSE, COINTELPRO, AM/LASH and elaborate
details of assassination plots againt Lumumba in the Congo, Castro in
Cuba and AUende in Chile.

The covert hand of American power had touched
far and wide.

Now for the ﬁrst time the tip of the iceberg was emerging for
Americans to take alook at.

But all that was happening far away in
Washington, in amuggy heat as sultry as any South Asian monsoon.

In New Delhi on that same day, it was India’s Independence Day, and
celebrations were getting underway.

Indira Gandhi ascended the Red Fort
in the old city, the venue where her own father, Jawarhalal Nehru, had spoken
of his country’s ‘tryst with destiny’.

Now, with many of her father’s old
colleagues behind bars, she stood on the famed spot at the Fort and defended
herself in the same worn phrases which she would repeat again and again for
more than ayear until the general election swept her stunningly from ofﬁce.

That day press reporters in Delhi returned to their ofﬁces to tap out the
standard Independence Day story, garnished with abit of the Emergency’s
credo.

It was then that the news of Mujib’s death came over the wires.

It hit
everyone head on.

Suddenly the nationalist ﬁgure, who in 1971 had symbol¬
ized astruggle costing more lives and arousing greater hopes than any single
event in contemporary South Asian history, was gone.

Nearly amillion
people had died in the war and the war-induced starvation which brought
Bangladesh into being as an independent state.

No one could ever count
the exact number.

And now the South Asian deck was to undergo amajor
reshufﬂe with the violent fall of Mujib.--- PAGE BREAK ---

No one could ever count
the exact number. And now the South Asian deck was to undergo amajor
reshufﬂe with the violent fall of Mujib. For the proliﬁc stable of ‘knowledge¬
able’ observers, analysts and specialists, the future signiﬁcance of the sudden
change in the eastern subcontinent was not an easy matter to calculate. As with all such events when they happen, no one except the actual
participants knew what had really gone on. Yet everyone seemed to have a
theory. And very soon Indira Gandhi was talking about the sure hand of
.foreign involvement. As usual, she was graphically unspeciﬁc. But her avid
supporters during tﬁbse ﬁrst nuptial days of the Emergency, the pro-Moscow
Communist Party of India (C.P.I.), were more explicit: the C.I.A., said the
C.P.I. Mrs. Gandhi, spealdng of the tragedy of Mujib’s death, said that what
had happened in Bangladesh was added proof of the necessity of declaring
the Emergency in India. She once more, straining at analogy, compared herself
to Salvador AUende, saying outside forces were out to destabilize India and
bring down her government. Mujib’s death proved it beyond adoubt, she said. However, for those who were well aware of the less apparent aspects of
American policy in India, all of Mrs. Gandhi’s impUed rage at the aUeged
secret hand of the United States in Bangladesh was an expression of pure
demagogic theatre in the best of the Gandhi entourage’s dynastic style. There
was too rich ahistory, albeit much of it clandestine, for there to be any
element of sincerity in the Prime Minister’s suggestive remarks. Since the
sixties she had personally approved the continued collaboration of the
9 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
intelligence services of India and the United States.

She had approved new
projects and operations which further cemented the ﬁrm link between the
services of the two nations that had existed since the 1962 Sino-Indian
border war.

Their joint surveillance of China from Nepal in common violation
of Nepalese territory and neutrality; their combined cross-border operations
into China and the decade of clandestine support given the Khampa Tibetan
rebels; their illicit ﬁnancial ties between several American multinationals and
the business aspirations of Sanjay Gandhi’s patronage network with all its
attendant kickbacking; plus the active role ofﬁcials in the U.S.

Embassy’s
political section played in setting up ﬁnancial ties between American ﬁrms
and the Prime Minister’s relatives —all added up to the opposite of the pristine
purity of her public posture.

The statements of Mrs.

Gandhi’s awkward bed¬
fellows, the pro-Moscow communists, were to be expected.

Endlessly repeat¬
ing allegations of covert American involvement while providing absolutely
no detail or evidence was familiar fare.

Other, more neutral, observers during that summer of 1975 could not
have imagined amore absurd moment for the United States to have covertly
involved itself in the overthrow of aregime such as Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s
in Bangladesh.

It was the summer the world was watching Senator Church’s
hearings unfold on the details of American involvement in the assassination
of various foreign leaders.

Thus, that August n^rly the entire foreign press
corps in New Delhi, including the present writers, instinctively rejected the
notion of any American link with the fall of Muiib.

as simply specious propa¬
ganda from Indira Gandhi and the Moscow-oriented Communist Parties of
India and Bangladesh.

These conclusions made in the summer of 1975 must now be completely
re-examined.

According to new information obtained from interviews with
senior U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

These conclusions made in the summer of 1975 must now be completely
re-examined. According to new information obtained from interviews with
senior U.S. ofﬁcials present at the American Embassy in Dacca and from well-
informed Bengali sources, it appears that not only did the United States have
prior knowledge of the coup which kiUed Mujib, but that American Embassy
peTsonnel had held discussions with individuals involved^in the plot to over-
tliow Mujib more than six months prior to his death. These discussions were
held with the purpose of determining the attitude of the U.S. government
towards apolitical change in Bangladesh if acoup d’etat were actually to
happen. On the basis of investigative work which has spanned two years and
over two hundred interviews we are prepared to outline in detail the story
behind the men who killed Mujib. It is an intricate and complex story. We
wish to state from the outset that, although we have unearthed new and
fundamentally important information, without the power of legislative
subpoena, afull and exhaustive investigation of the affair is impossible. The Ofﬁcial Story
To start with, it is essential to set out the version of events which emerged
at the time of the coup. What was put o^r then became the ﬁrst and most
important myth surrounding the event. This was that six junior ofﬁcers, led
1 0 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
by Majors Rashid, Farooq and Dalim with the three hundred men underjligir
command, acted unilaterally and on their own in overthrowing Mujib.

This is
the version nearly all the foreign press corps adopted.

The motives for the
coup were attributed to acombination of personal grudges held by certain of
the ofﬁcers against Mujib and his associates, together with ageneral feeling
of frustration at the widespread corruption which had come to characte^e
Mujib’s regime.

Following Mujib’s murder most foreign reporters were barred
from Ban^adesh.

However, agroup of journalists did manage brieﬂy to gain
entry into Dacca from Bangkok late in the day of August 20th, ﬁve days
after the coup, but were expelled within forty-eight hours on the 22nd.

During the entire time they were conﬁned to the Intercontinental Hotel
and most of the details of the coup provided to the foreign press came
principally from one source —alocal Bengali journalist.

But what became crucial in all the reporting of the coup is that none of
the foreign or Bengali press probed beyond the most superﬁcial aspects of
what had happened.

In Bangladesh, the new regime which took power, of
course, would have obstructed any of the press from investigating.

But the
foreign press, in general, also let it drop.

\^at prior contacts the Majors had
before August (1975), which politicians had been contacted, what contacts
they themselves had made, were all ignored.

The version of events that the
M^j ors had acted alone and unilaterally with only prior military and withou t
prior political planning was the myth that came to stand as fact.

Amyth,^s
will be explained, which'most of the young ofﬁcers and soldiers under their
cornm'md by~ahd large themselves believed in.^
The morning Mujib and his family were killed, the political ﬁgure
installed by the young Majors as President was Khondakar Mustaque Ahmed,
a~^binet colleague of Mujib who held the portfolio of Commerce Minister.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The version of events that the
M^j ors had acted alone and unilaterally with only prior military and withou t
prior political planning was the myth that came to stand as fact. Amyth,^s
will be explained, which'most of the young ofﬁcers and soldiers under their
cornm'md by~ahd large themselves believed in.^
The morning Mujib and his family were killed, the political ﬁgure
installed by the young Majors as President was Khondakar Mustaque Ahmed,
a~^binet colleague of Mujib who held the portfolio of Commerce Minister. Mustaque was generally considered to be the representative of the rightist
faction within Mujib’s ruling Awami League. That morning, 15 August
1975, as Mustaque arrived at the Dacca studios of Bangladesh Radio to make
his ﬁrst broadcast to atense capital city, he was accompanied by two, crucially
important aides, Mahbub Alam Chashi and Taheruddin Thakur. Chashi is the
man whose behind-the-scenes activities allegedly played the most critical
organizing role in the entire affair. At the time of the August putsch Chashi
was Vice-Chairman of the Bangladesh Academy of Rural Development at the
district capital of Comilla.^ He is aﬁgure widely known for his populist right-
wing views on agrarian change. On the morning of August 15th there arrived
at Mustaque’s side, along with Alam Chashi, Taheruddin Thakur, aformer
journalist and Mujib’s State Minister for Information. Chashi and Thakur,
intimate personal friends, are alleged to have been the organizational keys
which unlocked and prepared well in. advance the political terrain for the
August military putsch. The history of Mustaque, Chashi and Takur, as far
back as 1971, is an important element in the story. Following the coup against Mujib, th^new President,Khondakar Mustaque
Ahmed, remained inpeccably reticent about any part he personally may have
1
1 0 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
played in Mujib’s downfall.

He neither conﬁrmed nor denied his prior involve-
m'ent.

He simply avoided any public discussion of the question, and in the
meantime desperately attempted to stabilize his regime.

Even after his own
removal from power in November 1975, only three months after Mujib’s
demise, Mustaque continued to maintain his reticence about the August events.

The following year, in June 1976, ﬁve months prior to his own arrest and
imprisonment, Mustaque granted athree hour interview at his home in old
Dacca to Lawrence Lifschultz, South Asia correspondent of the Far Eastern
Economic Review.

He denied any prior knowledge of the coup plan or prior
meetings with the army majof^who carried^uT the action.

Mustaque claimed
during the interview that he haTbeen as surprised as everyone else on the
morning of August 15th, and had acceded to the Majors’ request to assume
the Presidency only to avoid further bloodshed in the country.

‘When they
came to my house that morning,’ Mustaque told lifschultz, Tthought they
had also come to kill me.

1was completely surprised when they asked me
to become President.’
The Majors, however, tell avery different story, one which is at wide
variance with Mustaque’s version.

In aseries of interviews conducted from
exile in London for British television in August 1976 by The Sunday Times
journalist Anthony Mascarenhas, tl^e Majors claimed they were in direct con¬
tact with Mustaque In the weeks prior to the coup.

Major Rashid told
Mascarenhas, ‘I had the ﬁrst contact with him [Mustaque] around the ﬁrst
week of August and subsequently met him on the 13th and Mth.’'^ Sources
in Bangladesh claim that, while this was the ﬁrst direct meeting between
the Majors and Mustaque, prior contacts had existed with representatives
of Mustaque several months prior to the actual coup.

Unsatisﬁed with access
to intermediaries, the Majors insisted on adirect meeting before any action
would actually be carried out.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Major Rashid told
Mascarenhas, ‘I had the ﬁrst contact with him [Mustaque] around the ﬁrst
week of August and subsequently met him on the 13th and Mth.’'^ Sources
in Bangladesh claim that, while this was the ﬁrst direct meeting between
the Majors and Mustaque, prior contacts had existed with representatives
of Mustaque several months prior to the actual coup. Unsatisﬁed with access
to intermediaries, the Majors insisted on adirect meeting before any action
would actually be carried out. The Majors had themselves put the ﬁrst
aspects of their military plan into operation as early as March 1975, by initia¬
ting twice monthly ni^t manoeuvres which were to be held jointly by the
Bengal Lancers Tank Unit and the Second Field Artillery Regiment. The Majors who actually killed Mujib viewed themselves as the centre
piece of the entire dramatic event. To their understanding they were the
principal actors in the affair which had changed the course of Bangladesh’s
political history. But in the view of others they were politically naive indivi¬
duals who usefully offered up their armed talents to be used as pawns by
more sophisticated political forces. Both Farooq and Rashid did admit to
Mascarenhas their deeply felt need for political backing, which even their
political naivete recognized as essential if they were to survive the period after
the coup. Thus these cocky stars, before they would move out of the barracks,
needed anod from Khondakar Mustaque Ahmed. While in their own minds
they remained convinced that it was they who had taken on Mustaque Ahmed,
more accurately it was Mustaque and his political nexus who had taken them
on board. The more interesting issue is what Mustaque required before he would
give his own unqualiﬁed ‘nod’ of support. Knowledgeable Bengali sources
o
w
n
1 0 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
claim that Mustaque and his two principal operatives at the time, Mahbub
Alam Chashi and Taheruddin Thakur, had been involved for more than ayear
in asequence of events and plans designed to bring about the overthrow of
Mujib.

Following the famine of 1974 Mujib’s regime had been faltering and
becoming increasingly unpopular.

The main object of the Mustaque Con¬
spiracy at this stage was to recruit amilitary faction within the Army which
would stage acoup and back Mustaque’s leadership in the subsequent period.

Our sources allege that Chashi and Thakur were the principal go-betweens
for these contacts.

The Mustaque group reportedly felt that the most important ﬁgure to_fe£,
won over was Major-General Ziaur Rahman (Zia), the Deputy Chief of Army
Staff, whose seniority had been passed over following independence, when
Mujib had appointed another more junior ofﬁcer, Major General Shaﬁullah,
as the Chief of Army Staff.

Within Army circles it was known that Zia
was disturbed at this and at tHe genef^ humiliation the Army had received
after it had been called in to crack down on illegal border snruggling in the
Spring of ’74.

The Army had arrested important district level ofﬁcials of
Mujib’s party, the Awami League, in connection with the illicit cross-border
trade with Indi^.

Bufaffef fheh arrests the Awami Leaguers were freed on
Mujib’s orders and th?Afn^' wa's~c^ed off the anti-smuggling operation.

It was an insult many Army ofﬁcers would remember.

Bengali military sources claim that Major-General Zia was secretly
approached by representatives of the Mustaquei group, reported to include
Chashi, and asked for his support.

Zia reportedly agreed that there was need
for achange, but refused to commit himself to any action at that stage.

Mustaque’s circle carefully continued to search for the necessary military
contacts which could carry through the action.

Contact was made with
Majors Rashid and Farooq.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mustaque’s circle carefully continued to search for the necessary military
contacts which could carry through the action. Contact was made with
Majors Rashid and Farooq. The Majors on 20th March 1975 approached
Major-General Zia with their proposal for military action to effect a
‘political change’. According to j^shid’s interview with Mascarenhas he told
Zia, ‘We the junior ofﬁcers have already worked it out, we want your support
and your leadership.’ Zia’s reaction was still to remain aloof in these early
stages and to hedge. But most signiﬁcantly he indicated he would not throw
THe'wei^rdrhis command against such amove. Again, according to Rashid,
the response from Zia was the statement, ‘I am asenior ofﬁcer. Icannot be
involved in such things. If you junior ofﬁcers want to do it, go ahead.With
full knowledge that acoup was in the ofﬁng, Zia remained silent and waited
for his own moment. The American Connection? Crucial events were moving within other realms. According to ahighly placed
U.S. Embassy diplomat, who has insisted upon strict conﬁdentiality, ofﬁcials
at the American Embassy were approached in late 1974 by persons intending
to overthrow the government of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. According to this
1 0 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Embassy source aseries of meetings took place with Embassy personnel
between November 1974 and January 1975.

This was the same period in which
the Church and Pike Committee hearings in Washington on C.I.A.

assassina¬
tions of foreign leaders were gearing up.

The Committee hearings were having
their own impact within the American diplomatic and intelligence bureau¬
cracies, creating great nervousness and anxiety.

The American press was openly
speculating that senior American intelligence ofﬁcials might face imprison¬
ment for illegal clandestine action carried out in Chile and elsewhere.

In the atmosphere emanating from the Senate hearings, adecision was
made in January 1975.

According to asenior Embassy ofﬁcial, ‘We came to
an understanding in the Embassy that we would stay out of it and disengage
from those people.’ Although adecision was made at ahigh level in the
Embassy that there would be no further contact with the group which had
approached the Americans to ascertain what the U.S.

attitude would be
should achange of regime be effected, what happened subsequently is amatter
of controversy among U.S.

ofﬁcials interviewed.

Those who knew of the earlier
meetings deny any personal knowledge of what happened after early 1975.

Asenior U.S.

diplomat claimed: ‘In January 1975 we came to an under¬
standing in the Embassy that we would stay out of it.

Ican’t say whether
there was any approach to the Embassy by any of these people in the period
from January to August.

In the period before that they did try to approach
us.’ Others allege that, while contact was broken off at the level of diplo¬
matic and Foreign Service ofﬁcials who wished to remain ‘clean’, liaison was
taken over and carried on through the channel of the American Embassy’s
C.I.A.

Station Chief, Philip Cherry, and other station agents.

When interviewed, Cherry categorically denied this allegation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Station Chief, Philip Cherry, and other station agents. When interviewed, Cherry categorically denied this allegation. We had no
Bangladeshi come into the ofﬁce and tell us anything about any plans for
coups or anything like that,’ he said. We had all kinds of Bangladeshis coming
into the ofﬁce, but not for that reason. If anyone like that had come in, I
have heard from my colleagues who were there before, they would have been
listened to but told to go away.’ Cherry did, however, add an important
qualiﬁcation. ‘There is one thing,’ he said, ‘there are politicians who frequently
approach embassies, and perhaps have contacts there. They think they may
have contacts. But that’s afar cry from any of those embassies involved in
assisting them in involvement in acoup. Apolitical ofﬁcer’s job is to assist
his government by providing information on what is going on and agood
political ofﬁcer has many contacts. But that does not mean he is advising
these poUticans or coup leaders to overthrow governments.’^ Cherry insisted
throughout the interview that he had been completely under the supervision
of the Ambassador. Others present at the Embassy disagree. Asenior U.S. diplomat, formerly ahigh ranking ofﬁcial at the American
Embassy in Bangladesh, said when asked if Cherry or C.I.A. staff had con¬
tinued contact with those planning to overthrow Mujib without the knowledge
of the Ambassador, ‘Let me answer this question theoretically, outside the
context of Bangladesh. No, this kind of thing is not done by the Station
Chief. But as one American to another, it has been done. There have been
1 0 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
lapses.’ Another high level diplomat at the U.S.

Embassy during the same
period stated, ‘We should always be informed by the Station Chief about
his activities or contacts.

But, Icannot guarantee that Cherry was not making
contacts that were not approved by the Ambassador.’ The U.S.

envoy to
Bangladesh at the time was Eugene Boster, later the American Ambassador
to Guatemala.

As will be discussed in detail.

Congressional investigators
studying U.S.-backed coup initiatives in Chile in 1970 and 1973 unearthed
explicit directives from Nixon and Kissinger to the Central Intelligence
Agency that the U.S.

Ambassador, Edward Korry, and other Foreign Service
Ofﬁcials in the Embassy should be kept in the dark about covert operations
then being put into motion in that country.

Besides the Chile experience, there have been instances in many countries
where clandestine C.I.A.

operations have been carried forward, quite inde¬
pendent of the knowledge of ambassadors of reluctant political staffs, who
might have qualms or be unreliable from asecurity and secrecy point of view.

In these instances, the U.S.

Diplomatic Corps serves as an articulate ﬁg leaf
for actual operations.

This particular dimension of U.S.

foreign policy was
borne out in adetailed report published in The New York Times on Feb¬
ruary 3, 1978.

The report focused on the independence C.I.A.

Station Chiefs
maintain from their resident Ambassadors, when it concerns the conduct of
covert operations.

This dualism has been the centre of intense antagonism
between the State Department and the intelligence community.

Anumber of
ofﬁcials interviewed referred to the issue.

The Times reported:
An order by President Carter giving United States Ambassadors around the
world authority to supervise ‘all United States government ofﬁcers and
employees in their countries’ has produced widely divergent interpretations
by the Central Intelligence Agency and the State Department.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Anumber of
ofﬁcials interviewed referred to the issue. The Times reported:
An order by President Carter giving United States Ambassadors around the
world authority to supervise ‘all United States government ofﬁcers and
employees in their countries’ has produced widely divergent interpretations
by the Central Intelligence Agency and the State Department. The State
Department issued aguideline simply amplifying Mr Carter’s directive,
according to high-ranking Administration ofﬁcials. But the intelUgence
agency guidelines note ‘special exceptions’ to what an ambassador might
oversee, according to one ofﬁcial. These exceptions included prohibitions
on communicating details of covert operations and of administrative
procedures undertaken by C.I.A. Station Chiefs in foreign posts .... The
Carter letter dated Oct. 25, stated that the United States Ambassadors
‘have the authority to review message trafﬁc to and from aU personnel
under your jurisdiction’ —all presumably including C.I.A. ofﬁcers. Several
days later, both Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance and Admiral Stansﬁeld
Turner, Director of Central Intelligence, sent out guidelines interpreting
the Presidential letter, as Mr. Carter indicated they would. But the two sets
of guidelines differed and, according to high-ranking Administration
ofﬁcials, the C.I.A. directive tightened restrictions on what agency messages
an ambassador might see .... AWhite House spokesman said that President
Carter would have no comment on the divergent interpretations. AState
Department ofﬁcial, interpreting the Turner guidelines said, ‘In effect they
stated the President’s letter and the State Department guidelines do not
apply to the C.I.A.’ The ofﬁcial said that ambassadors had been freer to
oversee covert operations under the guidelines that applied before the
1 0 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Carter letter went out.

(State Department &C.I.A.

Split On Envoy Role:
Interpret Embassies’ Control Over Covert Operations Differently, by David
Binder, New York Times, 2March 1978.)
The issue was raised again three months later, when the House of Represen¬
tatives’ Intelligence Oversight Committee opened hearings in Washington on
the issue.

Stansﬁeld Turner, Director of the C.I.A., told the Committee that
American Ambassadors were better informed than before, but would still
be denied access to certain information.

Turner said the C.I.A.

in most cases
would withhold the identity of its sources and the names of its agents from
U.S.

envoys, especially if they are foreign ofﬁcials with whom an ambassador
deals on aregular basis.

All details of sensitive covert operations may also
not be given to Ambassadors.

The Washir^ton Post reported on 22 April 1978;
It’s not because we don’t trust the ambassadors, the C.I.A.

Director
declared, but under what he wryly called ‘Turner’s Law’, he said that the
danger of leaks increases in ‘geometric proportion’ to the number of
people who know of aparticular secret.

Especially hazardous, Mr.

Turner
said, was the prospect of an ambassador making some giveaway slip of
recognition on greeting aForeign Minister in areceiving line when the
A m b a s s a d o r k n o w s t h e M i n i s t e r t o b e a C .

I .

A .

a s s e t .

The real issue is more serious than quips about Turner’s Law’ or indiscreet
diplomatic slips indicate.

At issue is the continuing fact that agood deal of
American policy overseas is still ultimately linked to covert operations.

Intrinsic to this set-up is aprocess in which the left hand caimot be allowed
to know fully what the right is doing.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At issue is the continuing fact that agood deal of
American policy overseas is still ultimately linked to covert operations. Intrinsic to this set-up is aprocess in which the left hand caimot be allowed
to know fully what the right is doing. The crucial question in the Bangladesh
case is what liaison contacts Philip Cherry, the C.LA.’s Station Chief in Dacca,
his staff and attendant networks or other American channels independent of
the C.I.A., did or did not maintain with persons linked to one of the several
plans being formulated to overthrow the Mujib government. Cherry in arecent
interview has denied having prior knowledge of the coup that killed Mujib on
August 15, 1975. However, some months after the event, in December 1975
over drinks at his house in Dacca, Cherry told an American journalist in a
discussion of press coverage of the coup that no reporter had got the full
story. When asked if he had known what was about to happen, CTierry
indicated to the correspondent that they had not known the exact moment,
but they had known something was going to happen. Philip Cherry, the C.I.A.’s Bangladesh Station Chief, took up his post in
the Bengali capital ayear prior to Mujib’s overthrow. In fact, the coup
happened on the evening of Cherry’s forty-fourth birthday. He had joined
the Agency in 1959 after studying law at the University of Pennsylvania, and
at the International Academy of Law in the Hague. His early postings with the
C.I.A. were principally in Africa, serving at Salisbury in 1962 and Nairobi in
1964. However, his ﬁrst ﬁeld experience in Asia occurred soon after Pakistan’s
1 0 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder ofMujib
brutal crackdown in March 1971 had driven the Bengalis into open rebellion.

As the Bangladesh crisis developed, Agency stations in New Delhi and Calcutta
were expanded and Cherry arrived in the Indian capital in June 1971.

It would
be his ﬁrst direct operational involvement with Bangladesh affairs.

Three
years later, in August of 1974, he would move to Dacca to take over direction
of the Station.

Unlike his predecessor, George Walsh, Cherry got off to an unhappy start
in Dacca with the rest of the resident American community.

Walsh, who came
out to Dacca after the Liberation War to get the operation going in the post¬
independence period, cultivated the low proﬁle style that goes with the work
of the business.

In general, he made very little impression among Americans
in Dacca, although he is tenderly remembered by some for his delicate reci¬
tation of Casey At The Bat during the American annual amateur night.

In
contrast.

Cherry got himself mixed up in one of those small-minded emotional
affairs that isolated expatriate communities are well known for in less cosmo¬
politan postings.

After he arrived in Dacca he embarked on arather narrow
crusade which produced asurprising number of enemies among the American
expatriates in Dacca.

Having become aleading member of the American
Club, asports and social facility in the posh Gulshan suburb of Dacca known
as The Golden Ghetto, Cherry led abattle to exclude ‘non-ofﬁcial’ or non-
Embassy Americans from membership in the Club.

His efforts were successful.

Following aseries of angry meetings, which earned Cherry the enmity of
many non-Embassy U.S.

citizens, the Club closed its doors to all Americans
except those holding diplomatic rank.

He had won the Battle of the House
Rules.

But, besides ﬁghting out such signiﬁcant issues as who should have
access to American swimming pools and tennis courts.

Cherry’s name kept
cropping up in those quiet discussions among Americans in Dacca in the post¬
coup period.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But, besides ﬁghting out such signiﬁcant issues as who should have
access to American swimming pools and tennis courts. Cherry’s name kept
cropping up in those quiet discussions among Americans in Dacca in the post¬
coup period. Was the U.S. in any way mixed up in it, or was it all simply the
exaggerated rumours of plot-conscious Bengalis? Other leading C.I.A. ofﬁcials concerned with the subcontinent, such as
Alan Wolfe, asenior C.I.A. South Asian analyst and aformer Pakistan Station
Chief, have refused requests for interviews. Wolfe declined, saying any inter¬
view would be ‘a no win situation’. Adirect request to Stansﬁeld Turner
for ofﬁcial authorized interviews with William Grimsley, aformer C.I.A. Station Chief in New Delhi, Alan Wolfe, Philip Cherry, Angus Theurmer,
John Foster and other knowledgeable Agency ofﬁcials, has not been
granted. Requests made nearly ayear ago under the Freedom of Information
Act for C.I.A. cable trafﬁc and memorandums concerning the August 1975
coup have not yet been acted on. Similar requests under the Act for State
Department cable trafﬁc relating to the August and November 1975 coups
in Bangladesh resulted in 74 cables being identiﬁed as being ‘relevant’. How¬
ever, State Department sources have informed us that there actually exist
hundreds of cables relating to the period, including detailed reports and
memorandums. Of the 74 ofﬁcially identiﬁed, 36 were declassiﬁed. Out of
36 ‘relevant’ cables, 18 were substantially censored, blacking out material
which the State Department considers still classiﬁed in the interest of national
1 0 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
security.

Thirty-eight cables were withheld altogether.

Of the material which
was declassiﬁed and uncensored there remained almost no information which
was not already well known or obvious.

On the Periphery: the U.S.

Strategy of Directed Transitions
What ﬁrst presents itself is the difﬁcult and complex question: what possible
interest would the United States have had in involving itself in acoup in
Bangladesh?

State Department ofﬁcials are always at formal pains to empha¬
size that American interests in Bangladesh are not ‘strategic’, but purely
‘humanitarian’.

Whether American aid is an act of generosity to the Bengali
poor or astrategic subsidy to the ruling class of Bangladesh is an issue dis¬
cussed at length elsewhere and must be left aside here."^ However, the critical
question in 1975 was hardly aquestion of humanitarian assistance.

The
strategic issue of whether or not to get involved in acoup d’etat was one of
inﬂuencing an imminent transition.

In 1975 Mujib’s regime was in deep
crisis and facing growing popular opposition.

Following the famine of 1974
there was open talk throughout the country of how long Mujib would last,
not j/he would last.

Throughout 1974 leftist parties were organizing mass
anti-government rallies and in certain parts of the country open insurgency
had begun to develop.

In certain respects the situation might be compared
to Indonesia in 1965, when Sukarno’s declining health and political fortunes
made it obvious to any astute analyst that the once popular nationalist
leader would shortly be eclipsed by new forces of either the left or the right.

The question for the Americans in both instances, as in many others, was
whether they would inﬂuence the direction of the imminent transition.

Such achange of national Bangladeshi leadership would be occurring in
an area which historically has been aviolent political tinder-box.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The question for the Americans in both instances, as in many others, was
whether they would inﬂuence the direction of the imminent transition. Such achange of national Bangladeshi leadership would be occurring in
an area which historically has been aviolent political tinder-box. The under¬
lying context of the entire north-eastern region of South Asia is one of knife-
edged political instability, rooted in asociety that is one of the most im¬
poverished areas of the world. It is aregion which has long been sinking into
greater poverty and underdevelopment. Across the border from Bangladesh
in India’s state of West Bengal, aCommunist-led United Front has been
elected into provincial power three times since 1967, each time with alarger
majority, on the basis of an elusive mass hope of achieving at least half-way
measures in atransition to ‘socialism in one province’. It is aform of local
politics that stands out against the overriding power of the centralized
authority of the Indian state. In 1969 astudent and peasant rebellion in West
Bengal broke its moorings from the anchor of parliamentary Communism
and turned into awidespread rural and urban Marxist insurgency known as
the Naxalite Movement. The Naxalite agitation exploded into open ﬁghting
in parts of Calcutta and in the provinces of West Bengal, Bihar, Orissa and
Andrah Pradesh. It proved to be apowerful and difﬁcult force for the New
Delhi authorities who ultimately suppressed it with predictable brutality. Bangladesh is located at the vortex of this strategic and highly politicized
108

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
north-eastern region of South Asia.On its borders are Nagaland and Mizoram
where India has been contending for nearly two decades with an insurgency
on the part of these two national minorities.

Frorh Orissa, Bihar and West
Bengal to Bangladesh itself, there stretched apopulation of nearly 200
million people, more than 40% of whom are landless peasants living in abject
conditions of semi-starvation.

In Bangladesh since the early sixties the pro¬
portion of the population which consumes less than the nutritional minimum
intake of calories has risen dramatically.

According to arecent International
Labour Organization study the proportion of the population which lives
below what the I.L.O.

terms the ‘absolute poverty’ level, deﬁned as 1,935
calories aday, rose from 40.2% in 1963-64 to 78.5% of the population in
1973-74.

The ﬁgure is astonishing when juxtaposed to the U.N.

Food and
Agricultural Organization’s minimal requirement of 2,150 calories aday.

In
South Asia it is estimated that aﬁeld hand burns up 3,880 calories aday
duing peak seasons of heavy work and 2,780 during periods of light work.

Deﬁning amore appalling category known as the ‘extreme poverty’ level at
1,720 cdories, or less than 80% of the recommended daily nutritional intake,
the I.L.O.

states that in the same decade (1963-73) the proportion of Bangla¬
desh’s population below this level had risen from 5.2% to 42.1%; or, put
another way, four out of every ten people were in astate of ‘extreme starva¬
tion’, while seven out of every ten were at least facing ‘absolute malnutrition’.®
The trend is aclear one.

Apauperized landless peasantry, nearer to starvation
each year, is the leading issue for the entire region, and these people along
with small landholders have little to gain from the present social order.

These
economic and social trends are what underlie the radical political upheavals of
the region —both those of the past and of the future.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Apauperized landless peasantry, nearer to starvation
each year, is the leading issue for the entire region, and these people along
with small landholders have little to gain from the present social order. These
economic and social trends are what underlie the radical political upheavals of
the region —both those of the past and of the future. Within this context, the United States, when it has publicly articulated
any speciﬁc foreign policy objective toward the ostensibly peripheral position
of Bangladesh within America’s global strategy, has focused on the importance
which internal stability of the country implies for the entire region. This was
stated most explicitly in the State Department’s 1978 review presentation to
Congress on U.S. Security Assistance Programs. The exclusive emphasis in
the section QniiiXtﬁ Justiﬁcation of the Program concerned Bangladesh’s
postion in the link of an overall concern for internal and regional stability. U.S. military assistance to Bangladesh, although still modest in scale, began
only after the coup d’etat which killed Mujib. To most observers the two
phenomena are not unconnected. The State Department’s 1978 report states:
The present Government of Bangladesh is dominated by pragmatic military
leaders who follow anon-aligned foreign policy. It is U.S. policy to support
this non-alignment and to assist Bangladesh in its economic development. These objectives are tied to our interest in promoting overall regional
stability. The Government of Bangladesh must ﬁnd solutions to the myriad
problems which confront that impoverished nation. One problem is the
maintenance of internal stability in asociety whose fabric has been
weakened by adecade or more of turmoil .... The Bangladesh Government
1 0 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
has asked us to provide alimited amount of military training.

By proceed¬
ing with this training, we will help to improve an institution which con¬
tributes to stability in Bangladesh and in the region.^
‘Stability’ is mentioned jhere three times in one paragraph as the object of.

American policy in the country and the region.

While the State Department
report notes that Bangladesh is now ruled by ‘pragmatic military leaders who
follow anon-aligned foreign policy’ and that it is ‘U.S.

policy to support this
non-alignment’, the report in aseparate section curiously warns that
‘Bangladesh poses no threat to any neighbouring state, but it could affect
regional stability by ajchange in its international political alignment.’ In
and the same breath the State Department appears to be advancing opposite
arguments: the U.S.

supports Bangladesh’s ‘non-alignment’, but is anxious
lest ‘a change in its international political alignment’ affect regionsl stability.

Cutting through this foreign policy jargon, what has actually happened has
been aclear shift in Bangladesh’s international alignment since the coup
against Mujib.

The Mujib government’s orientation internationally was
politically identiﬁed with India under Indira Gandhi’s premiership and with
the Soviet Union.

This alignment dated from the contingencies of the 1971
war and Kissinger’s tilt towards Pakistan.

Today the new military regime’s
orientation in Dacca is clearly towards the United States, the Islamic bloc
as represented by America’s ally Saudi Arabia, and towards China to adegree
similar to that of Ayub Khan’s regime in Pakistan during the 1960s, when
Pakistan’s relations with Peking were utilized as acounterforce to New Delhi.

In astrategic sense, the Western powers rarely have an overt and over¬
riding interest in particular areas while certain conditions exist.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Today the new military regime’s
orientation in Dacca is clearly towards the United States, the Islamic bloc
as represented by America’s ally Saudi Arabia, and towards China to adegree
similar to that of Ayub Khan’s regime in Pakistan during the 1960s, when
Pakistan’s relations with Peking were utilized as acounterforce to New Delhi. In astrategic sense, the Western powers rarely have an overt and over¬
riding interest in particular areas while certain conditions exist. It matters
very little to the global balance of contending forces if apoor, backward,
non-communist nation starves. One might argue Afghanistan had even less
signiﬁcance to the strategic concepts of Western tacticians than Bangladesh
had, until the uprising in 1978 which brought the People’s Democratic Party
to power in Kabul. Then ‘unimportant’ Afghanistan became headline news
and was daily discussed as aserious threat to European and American interests
in the northern tier of the Persian Gulf region.If asocialist regime were to
come to power in Dacca, the old unimportance of Bangladesh would un¬
doubtedly suddenly dissolve into one of overriding and urgent signiﬁcance. Following the Bangladesh War of Liberation in 1971, ships of the Soviet
Navy moved into Chittagong Harbour in Southeastern Bangladesh to conduct
mine-clearing operations and remove sunken vessels. The Soviets remained
for over two years during aperiod in which the strategic position of the
Indian Ocean was ahot issue for Pentagon planners pressing for anew Guam-
style American base at Diego Garcia. Soviet ships at Chittagong were alleged
to have been involved in more than simple salvage operations, with
Bangladesh naval ofﬁcer commenting during an interview in 1974 that it
‘the longest salvage operation for asmall harbour’ he had ever known of. The
Soviets, of course, denied their presence was connected to any military
intelligence purposes. But the West was certainly less than pleased with the
o
n
e
o
n
e
w
a
s
o r
n
ohe had ever known of. The
Soviets, of course, denied their presence was connected to any military
intelligence purposes. But the West was certainly less than pleased with the
o
n
e
o
n
e
w
a
s
o r
n
o

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
Soviet presence in Chittagong and the Mujib government’s authorization of it.

Today, under the pro-Western martial law regime of General Zia, such aSoviet
presence would be unthinkable.

Bangladesh’s about-turn between the superpowers is only part of the story
of the coup against Mujib in 1975.

The whole story can only be understood
in the context of the conditions created by the 1971 War for Independence.

The links made in 1971, and even earlier, by the men who planned his over¬
throw in 1975, are integral to any complete understanding of Mujib’s ﬁnal
fall from power.

War Breaks Out As Kissinger Reaches For Peking
In December 1970, two years after the turmoil which ended Field Marshal
Ayub Khan’s decade of military dictatorship, Pakistan held what was widely
considered its ﬁrst genuinely democratic election since its establishment as a
state in 1947.

In the 1970 election the Awami League led by Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman swept the polls in East Pakistan with avote sufﬁcient to command
amajority in the National Assembly and to make Mujib the Prime Minister
of all Paldstan.

In West Pakistan the election turned in majorities for Zulﬁkar
Ali Bhutto’s Pakistan People’s Party in the Punjab and Sindh Provinces, while
the National Awami Party of Wall Khan and Khair Bux Marri gained majorities
in the Northwest Frontier Province and Baluchistan.

Under the agreed electoral
procedure the National Assembly would have convened and Mujib would
have assumed the position of Prime Minister of all of Pakistan.

This, however, would have meant adramatic shift in the twenty years of
political and economic domination West Pakistan had exercised over the East.

Intense political pressure built up in West Pakistan following the December
election and prior to the scheduled convening of the National Assembly in
March.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This, however, would have meant adramatic shift in the twenty years of
political and economic domination West Pakistan had exercised over the East. Intense political pressure built up in West Pakistan following the December
election and prior to the scheduled convening of the National Assembly in
March. The object was to ﬁnd away of preserving West Pakistan’s pre¬
eminence by extracting prior concessions from Mujib on his declared pro¬
gramme of greater inter-regional equality. The Awami League, having won
ademocratic election, would concede nothing and called for the convening
of the National Assembly as scheduled. The crisis which broke Pakistan apart
came to acritical head on 3March 1971, when the Martial Law authorities
postponed indeﬁnitely the convening of the Assembly. Massive civil dis¬
obedience and demonstrations began in East Pakistan. The entire province
encompassing aU classes went on strike. After two weeks, on March 25th, the
Pakistan Army cracked down in Dacca in the worst moment of violence and
general butchery South Asia had ever witnessed during asingle night. Pakistan’s civil war had begun and the inexorable basis for Bangladesh’s inde¬
pendence laid. We are not concerned with the general history of the civil war, but only
with the speciﬁc international alignments which developed in 1971 as they
relate to the 1975 coup. Relationships which developed in this earlier period
emerge with new importance in 1975. However, it should not be forgotten
1 1 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
that from the late ﬁfties Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and the Awami League had
been considered pro-Western and pro-American.

In 1954 Pakistan was inte¬
grated into the archipelago of American military alliances, the league of
CENTO and SEATO, while India remained aloof.

Ayear later the Bandung
Conference, inspired by Chou En-Lai and Nehru, made non-alignment atouch¬
stone of Third World politics.

In the period 1954-58, just prior to Ayub Khan’s
coup d’6tat, opposition developed within Pakistan over the issue of inter¬
national alignment with the United States.

Mujib’s party, the Awami League,
split over the issue.

The pro-Western faction led by H.S.

Suhrawardy and
Mujib declared itself in favour of the alliance.

Adissenting faction led by
Maulana Bhashani declared its opposition and broke off from the Awami
League to found what eventually became the (pro-Peking) National Awami
Party.Furthermore, Mujib had often expressed his preference for a
Westminster-style democratic state.

What friends he had in the Western demo¬
cracies were in general linked to the liberal wings of the Democratic Party in
the United States and the Labour Party in England.

However, 1971 in South Asia was adifferent matter.

Kissinger and Nixon
were not in the least inclined towards sympathy for the victims of the
Pakistan Army’s crackdown in East Bengal -even if these very victims had
won the national elections.

Global realignments were in motion and the
Bengal ‘problem’ appeared as athreatening and annoying sidelight.

At the
time of the appalling crackdown in Dacca, Pakistan’s military head of state,
General Yahya Khan, and Pakistan’s Ambassador in Peking, K.M.

Kaiser,
were crucial intermediaries in the ﬁrst delicate steps of Nixon’s reach for the
Forbidden City and Tien An Mien.

Kissinger was adamant that these nego¬
tiations should not be disturbed at any cost.

All other questions were sub¬
ordinate for the U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kissinger was adamant that these nego¬
tiations should not be disturbed at any cost. All other questions were sub¬
ordinate for the U.S. leadership —and few outside Nixon and Kissinger’s
inner circle knew anything of the China initiative. At this stage only four
people in .the entire United States knew anything of Kissinger’s contacts
with Peking. Furthermore, underlying Nixon’s Republican politics and
Kissinger’s realpolitik, there was ademonstrable and clear preference for
military dictatorships in the Third World. Anti-militarist democratic
ments such as Mujib’s Awami League in East Bengal were potential hotbeds
of yet more radical trends which the United States would never encourage. So it came about that the Bangladesh movement for independence gathered
almost no ofﬁcial support from the United States, despite the unprecedented
rebellion within the State Department ranks against Kissinger’s standpoint. Following the Pakistani Army’s crackdown in Dacca, the Awami League
leadership ran for refuge in neighbouring India. Indian support, for strategic
reasons, was crucial to the Bengalis as an initial base for military operations
and refuge. India’s own willingness to back amovement led by the Awami
League was obvious in many respects. Both the Awami League and the Indian
Congress Party stood for an ostensibly similar ideology: asecular parliamentary
state. Moreover, in India’s strategic view, the break-up of Pakistan would
as long as the war did
not become prolonged, and more radical Marxist elements did not achieve
m o v e -
remove New Delhi’s chief national rival in South Asia
1 1 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder ofMujib
dominance in aprotracted struggle.

Thus, the Indian Army intervened in the Bangladesh conﬂict in December
1971, imposing an immediate resolution to the nine months of guerrilla
struggle.

Prior to the actual intervention and in the face of American hostility,
India approached the Soviet Union for superpower backing.

The Indo-Soviet
Friendship Treaty was signed in August 1971 and the Russians in large part
ﬁnanced India’s military expedition.

The Awami League’s own military and
ﬁnancial dependence on the so-called Indo-Soviet Axis later opened Mujib
to attack from more radical Bangladesh nationalists who never wanted India’s
armed intervention on their behalf.

These attacks occurred during 1973-75
when deteriorating economic conditions made many take the view that
Bangladesh had traded Pakistani dominance for Indian hegemony.

In 1973, two years after the war, the Carnegie Endowment for Inter¬
national Peace, aWashington-based research foundation afﬁliated with the
quarterly Foreign Policy, undertook amajor study of U.S.

policy during the
Bangladesh crisis of 1971.

The investigation lasted nine months and was under
the direction of Roger Morris, aformer member of Kissinger’s staff at the
National Security Council.

Morris had come to the Carnegie Endowment
following his resignation from the Nixon Administration.

He had separated
himself from Kissinger’s entourage the day before the American invasion of
Cambodia.

Under Morris’ supervision the Carnegie study interviewed in detail more
than 150 ofﬁcials of the U.S.

State Department, Central Intelligence Agency,
Defense Department, Agency for International Development, Ofﬁce of Public
Safety, National Security Council and other agencies which had any connec¬
tion, even the most tangential, with the Bangladesh crisis.

The Carnegie
Endowment never issued aﬁnal report.

Due to internal dissension at Carnegie
the study was never completed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Carnegie
Endowment never issued aﬁnal report. Due to internal dissension at Carnegie
the study was never completed. Without the knowledge of Morris or others
connected with this study, these interviews and other raw research infor¬
mation have been made available to the present writers. The information they
contain, when taken as awhole, is profound and comprehensive. In an appendix to this Part of the book we discuss in detail information
based on ^e Carnegie Papers which offer rich new insights into the American
tilt towards Pakistan in 1971. In particular, we examine the signiﬁcance of
the then secret Kissinger negotiations aimed at America’s dramatic volte face
with China and also analyse the effect America’s exclusive obeisance to the
Pakistan channel with Peking had on U.S. policy toward Bangladesh. In addi¬
tion, Richard Nixon’s long-standing personal dislike for Indira Gandhi and his
old association with Pakistan’s military leadership is brought out from inter¬
views with senior U.S. ofﬁcials. [See Appendix A.]
Calcutta Days 1971: Secret Negotiations and the Mustaque Circle
The details of the 1971 period bear special importance when viewed from the
perspective of the violent developments in 1975 —particularly the coup d’etat
1 1 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
which killed Mujib.

The Carnegie interviews with senior U.S.

ofﬁcials con¬
clusively conﬁrm previous reports of the existence of eight secret contacts
which took place in Calcutta and elsewhere between U.S.

representatives and
Bengali ofﬁcials in 1971.

In June of that year the United States began making
atentative attempt to act as achannel between elements of the Bengali
leadership which Pakistan did not consider guilty of high treason, and General
Yahya Khan, head of Pakistan’s military junta.

The exact ofﬁcials and issues
involved in these negotiations in Calcutta remain classiﬁed information from
the American side.

But sources with detailed knowledge of the Calcutta events
claim all eight contacts were made exclusively with Khondakar Mustaque
Ahmed’s political coterie.

These sources include former members of Mustaque’s
staff and senior ofﬁcials in Bangladesh’s then Provisional Government.

While
most of the secret contacts reportedly occurred in Calcutta, other locations
are also said to have been used.

Asenior American ofﬁcial of the State Depart¬
ment’s Intelligence and Research (I.N.R.) Division told the Carnegie research¬
ers, ‘He [Kissinger] had been talking to the representatives directly.

Mustaque was at the time Foreign Minister in the Provisional Government
of Bangladesh.

Thus, from the American point of view, it might have seemed
most natural for the United States to be dealing directly with Mustaque.

However, the matter was not that simple.

Within the Bangladesh Provisional
Government there existed anumber of factions and developing trends.

The
Prime Minister was Tajuddin Ahmed.

From Kissinger’s point of view he
aman to be circumvented.

If it meant anything in the context of the period,
Tajuddin was considered pro-Soviet and pro-Indian, in the sense that he
recognized the strategic necessity of such an alliance against Pakistan, given
American backing of Yahya Khan.--- PAGE BREAK ---

From Kissinger’s point of view he
aman to be circumvented. If it meant anything in the context of the period,
Tajuddin was considered pro-Soviet and pro-Indian, in the sense that he
recognized the strategic necessity of such an alliance against Pakistan, given
American backing of Yahya Khan. But, most signiﬁcantly, Tajuddin favoured
the unrelenting pursuit of Bangladesh’s War of Independence. The refusal of
the Pakistan authorities in March 1971 to accept the results of the elections
which would have made Mujib the Prime Minister of all Pakistan, combined
with the brutal magnitude of the repression, made the Provisional Govern¬
ment’s standpoint clear and unconditional: there would be no going back
and no negotiated solution short of full independence for Bangladesh. Tajuddin and virtually the entire Bengali leadership were adamant regarding
complete independence.iThe stage had been reached where it was out of the
question for them or lor those ﬁghting at the front that acompromise only
granting autonomous status to East Bengal within the Pakistan union could
be negotiated. This was what Kissinger now belatedly favoured at apoint
when it was completely unacceptable to amajority of the leadership of the
Bangladesh movement. It was too little, coming far too late. With victory in
sight, and with world opinion clearly on their side, such aproposition would
have been politically absurd to adopt. The solitary exception to this among the exiled Bengali leadership
Khondakar Mustaque Ahmed. While Tajuddin was identiﬁed by reputation
with the Indo-Soviet strategic alignment, Mustaque had long been identiﬁed
the leading personality of the American lobby within the Awami League
leadership. In terms of the Awami League spectrum, Tajuddin was considered
w a s
w
a
s
a s
1 1 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---T h e M u r d e r o f M u j i b
aleft-wing social democrat in the context of underdevelopment in the Third
World.

He favoured widespread industrial nationalization in an independent
Bangladesh, including foreign capital.

Within the conﬁnes of internal Awami
League politics, Mustaque was Tajuddin’s theoretical opposite.

Mustaque openly
favoured laissez-faire capitahsm, highly favourable terms for foreign invest¬
ment, and he opposed nationalization.

Tajuddin was known to have been close
to anumber of members of the banned Pakistan Communist Party in the
ﬁfties and sixties.

In the early ﬁfties Tajuddin and Mohammed Toaha, later
the leader of the Maoist East Bengal Communist Party (Marxist-Leninist), had
shared the same house in Dacca.

Mustaque, on the other hand, was adeeply
religious Muslim and adevout Anti-Communist.

The United States, according to Bengali sources, did not open its nego¬
tiations with Tajuddin, who was the Prime Minister, but opened secret con¬
tacts with Khondakar Mustaque.

Tajuddin and the rest of the leadership were
kept carefully in the dark.

During this period of the negotiations, Mustaque’s
two most important proteges were his Foreign Secretary, Mahbub Alam
Chashi, and aspecial assistant, Taheruddin Thakur: the ‘Mustaque Triangle’,
as this little group was known among Calcutta’s ‘Bangladesh Watchers’.

Ofﬁcials of Bangladesh’s Provisional Government with intimate knowledge
of this period say that Chashi and Thakur played principal roles in the conﬁ¬
dential contacts with the United States in 1971.

Four years later this same
trio —Mustaque, Chashi and Thakur —would arrive together at Bangladesh
Radio to announce that Mujib was dead and that Khondakar Mustaque Ahmed
had taken over the Presidency of Bangladesh by coup d’6tat.

According to these former ofﬁcials, the agreement between Mustaque and
the Americans during the 1971 negotiations constituted the terms for areturn
to the status quo ante.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Four years later this same
trio —Mustaque, Chashi and Thakur —would arrive together at Bangladesh
Radio to announce that Mujib was dead and that Khondakar Mustaque Ahmed
had taken over the Presidency of Bangladesh by coup d’6tat. According to these former ofﬁcials, the agreement between Mustaque and
the Americans during the 1971 negotiations constituted the terms for areturn
to the status quo ante. Moreover, these sources report that Mustaque and his
Foreign Secretary, Mahbub Alam Chashi, had provisionally agreed to con¬
ditions for aseparate peace: one which would maintain the unity of Pakistan,
if the Pakistan Army would cease military operations, withdraw to barracks
and allow new negotiations to begin, ending open warfare. To the Nixon
Administration, this seemed adesirable and reasonable solution. For most
Bengalis, now irrevocably committed to full independence after what they
regarded as Pakistani genocide in East Bengal, this form of compromise was
virtual treason to the country’s liberation movement. In short, asell-out. One
Bengali compared it to George Washington and the American Continental
Congress, on the verge of military victory, suddenly accepting areturn to
colonial status on the basis of alast minute repeal of the Stamp Act. In the autumn of 1971 other ministers in the Provisional Government
reportedly discovered the secret contacts Mustaque had been having with
the United States. Tajuddin, the Prime Minister, is said to have been enraged
when he unearthed what had been going on behind the backs of the rest of
the Provisional Government. The Indians, who for their own distinct strategic
reasons were also fully committed to Bengali independence from Pakistan,
were similarly furious. There were demands that Mustaque be sacked as
Foreign Minister. He was temporarily allowed to maintain his post for an
1 1 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
outward semblance of unity, but exercised little power in the last months of
the war.

He was denied the right to travel to New York to represent Bangla¬
desh at the U.N.

General Assembly.

And following independence, Mustaque
was removed from the post of Foreign Minister and given the minor portfolio
of Commerce.

Mustaque’s dismissal as Foreign Minister was the ﬁrst major
administrative change that Tajuddin made immediately after the Pakistani
defeat.

It was the only major decision carried out prior to Mujib’s release
from prison in Pakistan in early January 1972.

Carnegie’s researchers were
told by asenior American ofﬁcial of the Intelligence and Research Division,
‘We believed that there was apossibility of negotiating with the Awami
League leaders in Calcutta.

Unfortunately, later —in October —we learned
that we couldn’t represent all the factions.

And they learned they couldn’t
....

Ican’t go into speciﬁcs.

In June 1976, nearly ayear after Mujib had been killed and eight months
after Mustaque had himself been thrown out of the Presidency by another
military upheaval, Lawrence lifschultz interviewed Mustaque.

During the
interview Mustaque conﬁrmed the contacts that had taken place in Calcutta
in 1971, but refused to specify what had been agreed with the Americans
at the time.

‘If you want to know,’ Mustaque told Lifschultz, Vou go ask
Nixon.

Iam not going to tell you.’ In November 1976, ayear after the
rebellion which toppled him, Mustaque was arrested by the Martial Law
authorities in Dacca, charged and tried for corruption.

He was ﬁned 100,000
Taka for abuse of his ofﬁcial position, and is now serving aﬁve year prison
sentence for corruption, not for the murder of Mujib.

The animosity between Mustaque and Tajuddin never died.

Tajuddin
never forgot what he regarded as Mustaque’s nearly successful covert betrayal
of the independence struggle to the Americans and Pakistanis.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The animosity between Mustaque and Tajuddin never died. Tajuddin
never forgot what he regarded as Mustaque’s nearly successful covert betrayal
of the independence struggle to the Americans and Pakistanis. Mustaque
for his part never forgot the humiliation he underwent in his summary dis¬
missal as Foreign Minister by Tajuddin and the pleasure of the Indian author¬
ities at his removal. Four years later, after Mujib was already dead and while
Mustaque was himself being toppled from power, agroup of as yet publicly
unidentiﬁed men entered Dacca Central Jail on the night of 4/5 November
1975. During Mustaque’s last hours in power his old rival from Calcutta days
—Tajuddin Ahmed —was bayoneted to death in his cell, along with three
other cabinet ministers from Mujib’s government. Mustaque had jailed all
four when he had seized power the previous August. Mustaque, in his
interview with Lifschultz, denied any involvement in the Dacca Central
Jail murders. But sources in the prison’s administration, who were at the
jail that evening, allege the jail killings were ordered by Mustaque and his
compatriots in the military and National Security Intelligence Service, so
as to insure there would never be aMujibist restoration by the Sheik’s
leading political lieutenants. During the events of August 1975, it must be remembered, the impression
the public had from the outset was that six junior ofﬁcers, led by Majors
Farooq and Rashid of the Bengal Lancers Armoured Corps and the Second
Field Artillery, had acted unilaterally and on their own initiative without
1 1 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
prior direction or political planning.

This was the impression given both by
the Majors themselves and the man brought in at ‘a minute past midnight’,
Khondakar Mustaque.

Although Mustaque had been amember of Mujib’s
new one-party formation (BAKSAL), the young ofﬁcers claimed Mustaque
would, nevertheless, rescue the country from Mujib’s tyranny.

The Majors
gave every impression that the show was theirs, and theirs alone, from start
to ﬁnish.

The 300 men under their command shared the same conviction.

They believed it was their ﬁnest hour.

However, it would last little more
than 60 days.

The ﬂaw in this version of events is vital to the purpose it served.

By
identifying six majors and 300 sepoys of the Armoured and Artillery Corps
as the sole actors, it obscured whatever prior political planning had gone
into the coup, and gave an aura of innocence to Mustaque’s new leadership.

Mustaque could then say that what had happened was past, the need now
was to bring stability.

He could affect the pose of anational statesman,
standing above the antagonisms and conﬂicts which had driven the Majors
and Mujib into such adeadly confrontation.

Indeed Mustaque was, in the
words of his principal propagandist of the period, EnayethuUah Khan, ‘a man
for all seasons’.

Moreover, the placing of full responsibility for the coup on
the Majors, and not Mustaque, fulﬁlled the specialist Bonapartist posturing
and egoism which the former, now self-appointed Colonels, required.

The
most important object of the story, however, was to obscure the details of
what had gone on in Mustaque’s camp prior to August 15th.

The Eminence Grise
Mustaque’s most important protege in this period prior to August 15th was
Mahbub Alam Chashi.

During the Calcutta days he had served as Mustaque’s
Foreign Secretary.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Eminence Grise
Mustaque’s most important protege in this period prior to August 15th was
Mahbub Alam Chashi. During the Calcutta days he had served as Mustaque’s
Foreign Secretary. Chashi in the late 1950s had been on the staff of the
Pakistan Embassy in Washington and since then had been known within the
Pakistan Foreign Service as one who kept up close relationships with his
American academic and diplomatic counterparts. Among the myriad factions
of the Pakistani bureaucracy, Chashi’s ideological commitment to the Ameri¬
can lobby was well known. Senior ofﬁcials who served in Bangladesh’s
Provisional Government in Calcutta allege Chashi was the principal inter¬
mediary in the secret negotiations conducted with the United States. Without question he is one of the more sophisticated personalities in
Bangladesh politics today, and is one of the more cultured political man¬
darins of Dacca society. As such, he has acquired the mantle of being both
an intellectual and aspecialist, besides that of ascrappy tactician in the ugliest
of situations. Mahbub Alam resigned from Pakistan’s Foreign Service in 1967. It was aperiod when the Green Revolution was being projected throughout
South Asia and the entire Third World, as the solution to rural poverty and
underdevelopment. As an ideological panacea, it was reaching its peak in the
late 1960s. Pakistan, like India, received substantial Western aid linked to new
1 1 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
agricultural programmes.

‘Green Revolution’ planning was the cutting edge
of national policy in Pakistan’s so-called Decade of Development, as it was
christened by the orthodox international economists who conceived it.

When Mahbub Alam resigned from the Foreign Service, he added the
sufﬁx Chashi, meaning ‘farmer’ in Bengali, to his name.

He then joined the
ranks of the green revolutionaries and organized adevelopment project in an
area called Rangunia outside of Chittagong where severe ﬂooding had
destroyed several thousand acres of arrum paddy.

In his own personal variation
on what is known in Bangladesh as the Comilla Model, Chashi organized aco¬
operative in the Rangunia area which, with asigniﬁcant infusion of govern¬
ment credit and foreign assistance, he soon turned into an international show¬
case of capitalist land reform.^'^
During Bangladesh’s War of Independence Chashi went back to the business
of foreign affairs as Secretary and protege to Mustaque.

But after the 1971
debacle of their indiscretion with the Americans, he returned to the safer
ﬁeld of agriculture and the development of atheory and practice of non¬
socialist rural populism.

After independence Chashi took over as Vice-
Chairman of the Bangledesh Academy for Rural Development at Comilla,
apost he still held at the time of Mujib’s death.

We mention all this detail about Mahbub Alam Chashi only because
numerous informed sources have spoken of his behind-the-scenes involvement
in the coup against Mujib.

His interest in the sociology of rural life was not
purely academic; it extended to the pinnacle of political power.

In the period
immediately prior to the coup, anumber of planning sessions regarding mili¬
tary action against Mujib are alleged to have taken place under Chashi’s
direction and mediation at ComiUa.

According to Comilla Academy sources,
in the months before August anumber of people, including Taheruddin
Thakur, were frequent visitors.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the period
immediately prior to the coup, anumber of planning sessions regarding mili¬
tary action against Mujib are alleged to have taken place under Chashi’s
direction and mediation at ComiUa. According to Comilla Academy sources,
in the months before August anumber of people, including Taheruddin
Thakur, were frequent visitors. In 1975 Thakur, aclose personal friend of
Chashi’s and the other principal personality on Mustaque’s ’71 Calcutta staff,
was serving as Mujib’s State Minister for Information. On the 13th of August, two days before the coup d’dtat, Chashi suddenly
disappeared from Comilla. In Dacca Major Rashid had already alerted
Mustaque to be ready. Chashi, sources allege, was then called in from Comilla. He could not be found by colleagues expecting to meet him on Academy
business. But on August 15th he was found. That morning Chashi and Tliakur
turned up at the Dacca studios of Bangladesh Radio to sit at Khondakar
Mustaque Ahmed’s side and to announce: ‘Mujib is dead. Mustaque is Presi¬
dent.’ Back at the Comilla Academy, Chashi’s colleagues nodded their heads
to each other. Now they understood why he could not be found for two
days and what aU those evening meetings on the Swanivar agricultural pro¬
gramme had been about. Bangladesh’s Eminence Grise had momentarily
revealed himself. The military men who actually killed Mujib appear to have been brought
ﬁrmly into the Mustaque circle’s scheme of things only in late March or early
April. The Majors had ideas of their own before that, but lacked apolitical
glove to ﬁt their gun hand into. Mustaque and his political circle were in the
1 1 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
process of carefully checking military contacts whom they could adopt and
integrate into their own strategy.

Major Rashid was arelative of Mustaque’s,
but Mustaque’s group preferred asenior ofﬁcers’ coup d’etat.

According to
Bangladesh military sources, approaches were made to the Deputy Chief of
Army Staff, Major-General Ziaur Rahman, or Zia, as he is generally known.

Within the Army’s upper echelon it was known that he was becoming more
and more restless over the growing corruption of the Mujib regime and the
humiliation the army had suffered when it was pulled off anti-smuggling
operations in May 1974.

In addition, the Army had become increasingly
disgruntled with the emergence and growth of aseparate paramilitary organi¬
zation known as the Rakhi Bahini.

It was considered to be Mujib’s most
loyal armed force and principal counterweight to any ambitions Bangladesh’s
military ofﬁcers might ultimately develop.

The Rakhi Bahini in the 1973-74
period earned areputation for ruthlessness in the suppression of internal
dissent, second only to what the Army itself would do three years later.

As
agreater share of new equipment and funds found its way to the Rakhi
Bahini and drew allocations away from the Army, resentment grew within the
traditional military services.

Mustaque’s representative in the approach to Zia is alleged by Bangladesh
military sources to have been Chashi.

General Zia, these sources report,
expressed interest in the proposed plan, but reluctance to take the lead in
the required military action.

Then on 20 March 1975 Major Rashid approached
General Zia with his own proposal.

The junior ofﬁcers had already worked
out aplan, he told Zia, and they wanted his support and his leadership.

Again Zia temporized.

According to Rashid, Zia told him that as asenior
ofﬁcer he could not be involved, but if the junior ofﬁcers were prepared, they
should go ahead.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Again Zia temporized. According to Rashid, Zia told him that as asenior
ofﬁcer he could not be involved, but if the junior ofﬁcers were prepared, they
should go ahead. Having failed to secure reliable leadership for the coup from the senior
ofﬁcer cadre, the Mustaque circle linked up with the junior ofﬁcers’ plot. While they may have preferred asenior ofﬁcers’ coup, they secured the next
best option. Once they believed they had Zia’s implicit agreement, they were
willing to go ahead with asecond echelon organization. For their part, with
General Zia’s neutrality or even tacit support assured, the junior ofﬁcers
could move ahead without fear that Zia would throw his forces against them
after the coup. With this set, from April onwards the scheme moved to maturity. The Old Nexus and aNew Nemesis
No comprehensive analysis of the coup d’etat against Mujib would be com¬
plete without adetailed examination of Bangladesh’s principal intelligence
agency, the National Security InteDigence (N.S.I.). It has been suggested by
severjd sources familiar with the N.S.I. and the events of August 1975, that
either it was completely incompetent in its detection of the coup, or that
what happened was with the complicity of asigniﬁcant faction in the agency. While the ﬁrst consideration is not implausible, the second is closer to reality. 1 1 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
From acareful examination of the sequence of events and appointments which
occurred immediately after Mujib’s killing, and according to statements
from high level civilian and military Bengali sources, asection of the N.S.I.

appears to have been intimately involved in the planning of the coup which
toppled Mujib.

Immediately after Mujib was killed, Mustaque appointed A.B.S.

Safdar as
Director-General of the N.S.I.

As with others of his colleagues, Safdar’s
career is worth examining in some detail within the context of the Mujib
coup.

Senior ministry sources, together with informants in the Bangladesh
Army, allege that Safdar was intimately linked to the plot against Mujib.

Moreover, Safdar is said to have acted as the principal liaison with the
American Embassy’s C.I.A.

Station Chief, Philip Cherry.

When interviewed,
Cherry initially denied ever having met Safdar.

Subsequently he did admit
having encountered Bangladesh’s leading intelligence ofﬁcial at aDacca sports
club, but denied that Safdar had ever communicated any information to the
U.S.

Embassy regarding coup plans.

Born in Mymensingh District in 1925, Safdar joined the Pakistan police
and intelligence services in 1950.

By 1959 he had risen to the post of Assis¬
tant Director in the Intelligence Bureau (I.B.).

He held his position as Assistant
Director l.B.

until 1965, when he was promoted to Deputy Director of
Intelligence responsible for intelligence throughout the entire province of
East Pakistan —present-day Bangladesh.

During the six months of national
agitations which ultimately brought down Field Marshal Ayub Khan’s decade-
old dictatorship in February 1969, Safdar became well known among Bengali
student and political activists as the leading intelligence ofﬁcer of the Ayub
regime in East Pakistan.

Across the province he was the man accumulating
dossiers, supervising interrogations, and in command of overall surveillance
operations.--- PAGE BREAK ---

During the six months of national
agitations which ultimately brought down Field Marshal Ayub Khan’s decade-
old dictatorship in February 1969, Safdar became well known among Bengali
student and political activists as the leading intelligence ofﬁcer of the Ayub
regime in East Pakistan. Across the province he was the man accumulating
dossiers, supervising interrogations, and in command of overall surveillance
operations. His ﬁrst major overseas intelligence and security training occurred in 1962/
63 when, as Assistant Director of the I.B., he went to Britain for aseventeen-
month training programme. It was during this period that Safdar’s ﬁrst signi¬
ﬁcant association with Western intelligence services allegedly began. As a
Bengali in Pakistan, however, he was second class. His West Pakistani superiors
were always considered by the Western agencies as superior assets. After the
Bangladesh crisis in 1971, Western governments, with their previous reliance
on senior West Pakistan-based ofﬁcers, found that useful Bengali intelligence
contacts were abit thin on the ground. But when Pakistan’s civil war erupted in March 1971, A.B.S. Safdar was
far away from the mass meetings and smouldering buildings of Dacca. He was
in Washington. As anew candidate under the U.S. AID’s Ofﬁce of Public
Safety (O.P.S.) programme, he was attending the Twelfth Senior Ofﬁcers’
Course at the International Police Academy. [See Appendix Dto this book
on the International Police Academy and the East Pa^stan Police.] The
programme under which Safdar was being trained was part of alarge operation
which brought thousands of foreign police ofﬁcials to the United States. The
training of police forces from Third World countries was begun by America
1 2 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
in 1955 under the Eisenhower Administration.

Overseas ofﬁces known as
Public Safety Missions were established in 34 countries.

Initial budgets were
modest until the Kennedy Administration ordered adramatic expansion and
formally established the Ofﬁce of Public Safety in 1962.

The conceptual
stance of the Kennedy strategists was aclear one, linked directly to the
Administration’s great push to develop global counter-insurgency capabilities.

At the 1965 graduating ceremonies at the International Police Academy,
General Maxwell Taylor, the Kennedy Administrations’s leading military theorist,
told the foreign police ofﬁcers; ‘The outstanding lesson is that we should
never let another Vietnam type situation arise again.

We were too late in
recognizing the extent of the subversive threat.

We appreciate now that every
young emerging country must be constantly on the dert, watching for those
symptoms which if allowed to develop unrestrained may eventually grow
into adisastrous situation such as that of South Vietnam.’ To General Taylor
there was no question but that the gentlemen sitting before him represented
the ‘ﬁrst line of defence’ against Marxism in the Third World.

‘We have learned
the need for astrong police force,’ he said, ‘and astrong police intelligence
organization to assist in identifying early the symptoms of an incipient
subversive situation.They had been brought to the United States to be
trained and ﬁnanced in that task.

The Ofﬁce of Public Safety continued training foreign police ofﬁcials until
it was dismantled under an Act of Congress in 1975.

However, before it was
shut down as an ofﬁcial U.S.

agency, it had distributed $200 million worth of
arms and equipment to foreign police organizations, haa trained over 7,500
ofﬁcers at the I.P.A.

and other U.S.

installations, and had provided basic
training to over amillion rank-and-ﬁle police at O.P.S.-afﬁliated academies
abroad.

What became the most well-known O.P.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

installations, and had provided basic
training to over amillion rank-and-ﬁle police at O.P.S.-afﬁliated academies
abroad. What became the most well-known O.P.S. connected operation was the
Phoenix programme in South Vietnam. The Phoenix ran under the direction
of William Colby who was later to become Director of the C.I.A. In testimony
before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee he described the Phoenix as
an intelligence operation designed to identify cadres and members of the
National Dberation Front. Before the Senate he stated that the years 1968-
72, while Phoenix was under direct American supervision, 26,369 Vietnamese
civilians were killed under the programme. Further testimony by C.I.A. employees conﬁrmed thousands of murders of prisoners. In August 1971,
Barton Osborn, aPhoenix ofﬁcial, told aCongressional Committee that not
one of the Vietnamese prisoners he had seen detained in two years with
Phoenix ever survived their interrogation.^”^
In response to investigations into O.P.S. operations in Vietnam, and due
to the controversy, which erupted over the Costa-Gravas ﬁlm State of Siege,
the American Congress moved toward legislative action. ASenate investi¬
gating team in 1971 returned from Brazil, Guatemala and the Dominican
Republic and concluded that O.P.S. ties with local security forces were so
great that the United States had become ‘politically identiﬁed with police
t e r r o r i s m ’ . 1 2 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
In 1973 the U.S.

Senator from South Dakota, James Abourezk, introduced
legislation aimed at restraining the American government from making
‘repressive regimes even more repressive’.

As of 1st July 1975 it became
illegal for American aid to ﬁnance the police, prison, or law enforcement
agencies of any foreign government.

“llie Ofﬁce of Public Safety and the
International Police Academy mocks the purpose of other AID programmes,’
said Abourezk in the Senate, ‘and has inﬂicted an indelible blemish’ on U.S.

foreign policy.^® However, before the Public Safety programme and the
Academy reached ﬁnal legislative death, the C.I.A.

openly entered into a
struggle to defeat the Abourezk Amendment.

In aletter to the Chairman of
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, William Colby appealed against
the new amendment declaring that police training programmes had been
highly useful in obtaining foreign intelligence co-operation from those trained.

The Washington Post reported in acolumn written by Jack Anderson:
The Central Intelligence Agency has admitted in an extraordinary private
letter to Senator William Fulbright that the Agency has penetrated the
police forces of friendly foreign countries.

The remarkable confession by
C.I.A.

Director WUliam Colby came in the course of adiscreet but intensive
lobbying effort to keep alive U.S.

support for foreign police programs.

Colby told Fulbright that the ‘relationships’ built up with policemen
through these programs have been highly useful in ‘obtaining foreign
intelligence’ from foreign constabularies ....

Insiders suspect that Colby’s
effort to defeat the Abourezk provision was actually aimed at preserving
the International Police Academy, an institution dear to the hearts of
spooks.

According to Victor Marchetti and John Marks, authors of The
C.I.A.

and the Cult of Intelligence, the agency has funded training of foreign
police at the academy and recruited spies there.--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to Victor Marchetti and John Marks, authors of The
C.I.A. and the Cult of Intelligence, the agency has funded training of foreign
police at the academy and recruited spies there. Further Congressional hearings in the summer of 1974 conﬁrmed C.I.A. penetration of foreign police forces through the O.P.S. programme. Daniel
Parker, Director of the Agency for International Development, told Represen¬
tative Donald Fraser, Chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee,
that the O.P.S. had ‘had aco-operative arrangement with the C.I.A. missions
abroad’.^® Press exposure of links between police training, public safety
programmes and American intelligence agencies continued throughout 1975
with the identiﬁcation of new schools and institutes geared to agent recruit¬
m e n t . The Ofﬁce of Public Safety Programme in Pakistan, as elsewhere, focused
upon the development of critical systems —communications, management,
training, intelligence and riot control —with the object of constructing a
modern police infrastructure. ‘Training in modern police administration
and operations is programmed for middle and senior level police executives,’
argued an O.P.S. Pakistan document, ‘in order to develop acadre of trained
administrators who will be in aposition to inﬂuence and initiate changes in
present traditional, conservative, colonial oriented procedures.’^! Within ten
years the trainees would be able to inﬂuence much more than ‘traditional
1 2 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
procedures’.

Before long they would be underpinning coups, counter-coups
and assassinations.

Between 1961 and 1971, when East Pakistan became Bangladesh, 113
senior and middle echelon Pakistani police ofﬁcers had undergone special
training in the United States.

In contrast to the South Vietnamese police
trained over tire same period and totalling 414 ofﬁcers, Pakistan’s contingent
was large, given the huge scale of U.S.

involvement in Vietnam.22 Among the
Pakistani trainees were more than 40 Bengali ofﬁcers.

The men who came for
training were important and, if they did not already, in the years ahead they
would dominate the branches of their respective services.

When the Liberation War broke out many of the O.P.S.

Bengali trainees —
steeped in the ideology of the Pakistani state and the security of that state —
remained at their posts and became part of that minute percentage of the popu
lation which actively collaborated with the Pakistan Army.

They were the
Vichy of Bangladesh.

What is most important about these ofﬁcers is not
simply their collaboration with the Pakistan Army in 1971, but their critical
involvement in the events of 1975.

Among the most prominent of the Bengali
O.P.S.

trainees was A.B.S.

Safdar.

Immediately after Mujib was killed, Safdar
moved into the country’s top intelligence post at the N.S.I.

It had been a
long road back for acollaborator.

Careful analysis of the events shows that
Safdar’s largely unnoticed, unscrutinized, but immediate appointment, along
with those of others, belied the spontaneous and autonomous character of the
coup which the Majors claimed for themselves.

In late February 1971, exactly amonth before the Pakistan Army swept
through Dacca in amassive wave of killing that turned the country’s poli¬
tical crisis into open civil war, Safdar and acolleague, Abdur Rahim, arrived
in Washington to attend the International Police Academy (I.P.A.).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Careful analysis of the events shows that
Safdar’s largely unnoticed, unscrutinized, but immediate appointment, along
with those of others, belied the spontaneous and autonomous character of the
coup which the Majors claimed for themselves. In late February 1971, exactly amonth before the Pakistan Army swept
through Dacca in amassive wave of killing that turned the country’s poli¬
tical crisis into open civil war, Safdar and acolleague, Abdur Rahim, arrived
in Washington to attend the International Police Academy (I.P.A.). While
Bengali diplomats at the Pakistan Embassy in Washington, and at embassies
around the world, declared their allegiance to an independent Bangladesh,
Safdar and Rahim continued with their studies at the Police Academy, taking
no stand. They were initially ordered to return to active duty at Pakistan’s
Intelligence Bureau. However, following action by Joseph Corr, the Chief
of the U.S. Public Safety Programme in Pakistan, who intervened with the
Director of the Intelligence Bureau, N.A. Rizvi, both men were permitted
to complete their Washington training. The following summer, with the civil
war entering its most bitter phase, both Safdar and Rahim chose to return
voluntarily to East Pakistan and take up active duty on the side of the Paki¬
stani authorities. Safdar returned to intelligence and counter-insurgency
duties, while Rahim took organizational command of the notorious Razakar
paramUitary forces. In the period immediately following independence, leading elements
among the Mukti Bahini (Liberation Army) forces called for trials of those
guilty of the worst atrocities and offences. Most of the trial demands focused
on captured senior ofﬁcers of the Pakistan Army. Demands for justice also
extended to leading Bengali police and intelligence personnel who had co¬
operated with the Pakistani Army throughout the civil war. After Mujib’s
1 2 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
release from detention in Pakistan, adeclaration was issued that war crimes
trials would be held, similar in form to those which Vichy collaborators had
faced in France in 194445.

Following Liberation in France, summary executions of Nazi collaborators
by the Resistance, mingled with an assorted settling of old scores, resulted
in at least 4,500 deaths.

In the more formal proceedings that followed, 124,750
people were tried, 747 were executed under sentence of treason or collabo¬
ration with the enemy in time of war and over 35,000 were sentenced to some
form of imprisonment.

In the bureaucracy thousands were dismissed from
their positions or demoted.

And yet, according to historian Robert Paxton,
‘Liberated France punished asmaller proportion of its total population with
prison terms than any other occupied Western European country and executed
asmaller proportion than Belgium.’^^ The heavy diplomatic pressure a
number of Western countries put on Bangladesh in 1972 to suspend any
trials and declare ageneral amnesty was therefore something of ahistorical
anomaly.

In the year that followed Bangladesh’s independence, aseries of inter¬
national appeals, particularly from the rich Islamic states who had stood beside
Pakistan, ﬁnally persuaded the now foreign aid seeking authorities in Dacca to
adopt an attitude of clemency towards Pakistani Army ofﬁcers accused of
war crimes.

Mujib ﬁnally agreed, despite protests from many who had them¬
selves fought and suffered.

The mass grave dug up at Dacca University was but
one example on the ledger.

However, once Pakistani ofﬁcers were released
from accountability, holding trials of Bengali collaborators became amore
difﬁcult process.

Many of the accused collaborators were simply detained
without trial for months, while others who had been in government were
denied ofﬁcial positions, as the new authorities weighed what action to take.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, once Pakistani ofﬁcers were released
from accountability, holding trials of Bengali collaborators became amore
difﬁcult process. Many of the accused collaborators were simply detained
without trial for months, while others who had been in government were
denied ofﬁcial positions, as the new authorities weighed what action to take. Few of the intelligence and police personnel who collaborated were
touched. Most were given minor posts and the rest kept their heads down or
went where they would not be noticed by students or Mukti Bahini ﬁghters. By 1973, however, the petals had started falling from the ﬂower of inde¬
pendence. Many of the most militant and armed of Mujib’s 1971 supporters
began to turn towards radical politics. Within two years of the Independence
War Mujib’s regime had moved from the heroic dimension to one stained
with corruption, popular disillusionment and ﬁnally national famine. In the
countryside pockets of open anti-government insurgency began to appear. In the year 1973-74 nearly 3,000 Awami League ofﬁcials were killed in
political incidents. Mujib’s advisers urged emergency measures which would
bring ‘law and order’ under control. As popular opinion turned from disillusionment in 1973 into aggressive
opposition in 1974, Mujib discovered aneed to rely on experienced police. This was the opening which the reclusive collaborators had been waiting for. In this period the graduates of Washington’s I.P.A. and INPOLSE programmes,
many of them active collaborators in 1971, spilled out of their closets and
worked their way back into positions of authority. Not unlike post-war
Germany, when the Western allies in need of reliable anti-communist security
1 2 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
police and bureaucrats began the rehabilitation of former fascists, Mujib,
faced with anew threat from radical independence ﬁghters going into the
streets or taking up arms against the Awami League, began his own rehabili¬
tation programme.

In the end this would prove to be akey to his own
destruction.

The only experienced state security police which he possessed
were the very men who had collaborated with Pakistan in 1971 and had been
die-hard ideological opponents of the Awami League for years.

Safdar, in
fact, had assisted in the preparation of intelligence ﬁles and dossiers used by
military prosecutors in the famous Agartala Conspiracy Case against Mujib
in 1969.

The Agartala Trial put the Bengali nationalist and democratic move¬
ment on the world map for the ﬁrst time.

According to one of Mujib’s trial
lawyers, ‘Safdar literally carried the prosecutor’s briefcase into the court
every day.’
It was areﬂection of Mujib’s own delusions that he now believed he could
use and control these same men for his own purposes in 1974.

When some of
his aides objected to restoring these men to positions of authority, Mujib
would say that, by keeping them close to him, he could keep awatchful eye
on their activities.

The truth was to the contrary; they would keep aclose
watch on him.

And they were now ideally placed to co-operate in acoup
against Mujib when the proper moment of crisis came.

In the end, the August
1975 coup would be very much an inside job.

In late 1973, as internal security and civil order began to assume prime
importance for the Mujib government, Safdar was appointed to the Presi¬
dent’s Vigilance Team —amonumental misnomer.

This was apolice security
unit ostensibly dealing with corruption, but its operations dovetailed with
the Special Branch and the N.S.I.

on matters of intelligence and domestic
order.

Besides Safdar, the administration rehabilitated Abdur Rahim who had
studied along with Safdar at the I.P.A.

in Washington in 1971.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Besides Safdar, the administration rehabilitated Abdur Rahim who had
studied along with Safdar at the I.P.A. in Washington in 1971. Rahim, the
former Director of Pakistan’s Razakar forces which had fought the Mukti
Bahini, was now appointed Secretary to the President. He was posted to the
bureaucratic rank of Full Secretary. No police or intelligence ofﬁcial had
ever held such senior rank, not even during Pakistan’s administration of East
Bengal. When Mujib was killed two years later, the entire staff of the President’s
Secretariat either ﬂed the country, or were arrested or dismissed, except
for Abdur Rahim. He remained in the Secretariat and in the immediate post¬
coup period became aclose aide to Mustaque. In October 1975, when Mustaqu(
met Awami League M.P.s to discuss whether new elections should be held or
martial law continued, it was Rahim who sat by his side listing the items
Mustaque instructed him to note down. And when Mustaque was himself
toppled from power in acoup in November, to be ultimately succeeded by
aright-wing military junta led by his own Chief of Staff and former co-
conspirator, General Zia, Abdur Rahim again was hardly displaced. In fact he
was promoted to Secretary of the Establishment Division which controls
all Civil Service appointments and transfers throughout the national bureau¬
cracy. Meanwhile, as already noted, Rahim’s old Washington I.P.A. colleague,
1 2 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
A.B.S.

Safdar, became Director-General of the National Security Intelligence
Agency (N.S.I.) immediately after Mujib’s death and also remained in place
as head of the N.S.I.

after Zia’s November takeover.

The old boys were back
in the saddle.

Other important appointments of former collaborators and Washington
I.P.A.

graduates were made after Mujib’s removal.

A.M.M.

Aminur Rahman, a
1969 I.P.A.

graduate, was appointed Commissioner of the newly organized
paramilitary police strike force known as the Dacca Metropolitan Police, or
‘blue shirts’.

Rahman is well known in Dacca for his right-wing political views
and his links to Islamic extremistsisuch as Mullanah Mannan, aformer member
of the Al-Badhr Command Council.

The Al-Badhr organization, afanatical
religious group which operated as aparamilitary arm to the Pakistan Army in
1971, was responsible for some of the worst killings during the war, particu¬
larly of nationalist intellectuals.

Other leading ﬁgures in the Bangladesh security apparatus who gained
prominence after Mujib’s killing were men like M.N.

Huda, who served as
Safdar’s Deputy Director at N.S.I.

As amember of Pakistan’s Special Branch,
Huda attended in 1963 the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s (F.B.I.) National
Academy in Washington and the C.I.A.-backed INPOLSE training school.

Interviewed at N.S.I.

headquarters in Dacca in June 1976, Huda said the
answers to many questions must remain unknown.

When asked whether the
N.S.I.

had been incompetent in discovering the conspiracy to kill Mujib or
whether it was true the N.S.I.

itself had been involved, Huda laughed and
said the question was avery, very clever one.

But he would not answer.

A.K.M.

Musleuddin, agraduate of both I.P.A.

(1968) and INPOLSE
(1969) courses, rose to ahigh position in the N.S.I.

after Mujib’s death.

Musleuddin, an alleged collaborator in 1971, is known in Dacca for his right-
wing political associations, and his close links to the Muslim League.--- PAGE BREAK ---

after Mujib’s death. Musleuddin, an alleged collaborator in 1971, is known in Dacca for his right-
wing political associations, and his close links to the Muslim League. Sayed Amir Khasru, an I.P.A. graduate and alleged collaborator in 1971,
was one of the disgraced members of the police cadre Mujib began reinstating. He was appointed to the Ministry of Relief and Rehabilitation, an agency
said to have misappropriated millions of dollars in relief commodities. Under
General Zia’s military junta, Khasru was promoted on the bureaucratic scale
to Full Secretary. Again, like Safdar and Rahim’s promotions, it represented
ahigh position unprecedented for amember of the state security services. I.P.A. and INPOLSE graduates turned up on many strategic fronts in the
period after the August coup. Most notable was the successful suppression of
1975’s November 7th mutiny and general uprising set in motion by the Socialist
National Party (J.S.D.). This was carried out under anewly organized para¬
military police strike force. According to Bengali Home Ministry sources
close to the national police, the new special units are commanded by
INPOLSE graduates such as Musa Miyan Chowdhury, who is also aDeputy
Director in the N.S.I. And according to the Far Eastern Economic Review,
the new authorities in post-coup 1975 began to undertake:
afuU-scale overhaul of Bangladesh’s police and the formation of an elite
1 2 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
12,500 man ‘special police force’....

The new 12,500 man force is
divided into ﬁve 2,500 man ‘armed battalions’..

.although the Govern¬
ment says the force is designed ‘to combat crimes of aspecial nature’,
particularly where ‘sophisticated weapons are involved’.

It will also carry
out ‘special drives, mopping-up operations and other activities requiring
special training and techniques’.

The battalions will have no permanent
base, but will ‘alway§ be in combat readiness’ and available for duty any¬
where in Bangladesh ....

Reports reaching the capital indicate that gun-
ﬁghts, chases and mass arrests are taking place regularly.

But, according to Bangladesh sources with ﬁrst-hand knowledge of the new
restructuring of the country’s paramilitary police forces, the entire reorgani¬
zation is being taken straight out of International Police Academy textbooks
and development plans drawn up by American Public Safety Advisers in the
1960s.

According to these same sources, ofﬁcers such as Musa Miyan Qiow-
hury are in charge of the reorganization operations.

In documents (obtained
under the U.S.

Freedom of Information Act), Superintendent Chowdhury
wrote of his training at the C.I.A.-ﬁnanced INPOLSE school:
The Riot Control Specialization Course introduced by the Academy has
been of immense importance to us.

It has afforded us an opportunity to
learn more about the causes attributed to different kinds of riots, police
intelligence in riot control, mob psychology, characteristics of the mob
and its change from acrowd, theories, principles, and practices to be
considered in our plan for prevention or control of riot or civil disorder.

We have also learnt agood deal about the importance of prior planning,
discipline, leadership, preparation for riot duty, organizational and general
planning, operations in riot control, riot control formations, looking
for snipers and use of force to be used in different phases of riots.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It has afforded us an opportunity to
learn more about the causes attributed to different kinds of riots, police
intelligence in riot control, mob psychology, characteristics of the mob
and its change from acrowd, theories, principles, and practices to be
considered in our plan for prevention or control of riot or civil disorder. We have also learnt agood deal about the importance of prior planning,
discipline, leadership, preparation for riot duty, organizational and general
planning, operations in riot control, riot control formations, looking
for snipers and use of force to be used in different phases of riots. We have
also learnt the new defence tactics and use of batons and ﬁrearms including
chemicals required in riot control situations .... The problems and their
solutions in the POCC IPolice Operations Control Center] have given us
the real idea, and practical knowledge of play and the rules of the job
meant for different ofﬁcers in the control of riots.^^
Whether an event is deﬁned as ‘riot control’, ‘counter-revolution’ or ‘police
terror’ often depends on the eye of the beholder, and is conditioned by
whether they are the victims or the executors. In the case of Bangladesh,
when Musa Chowdhury and his colleagues returned to Dacca from the
INPOLSE course in Washington, they established the Central Police Control
Room at the government’s Central Secretariat. According to those who have
seen it, it is areplica of the POCC in Washington. Avisitor to the Washington
training centre described the original centre, where elaborate tactical police
war games were conducted. The account appeared in The New Republic,
an American liberal weekly:
At the front of the POCC is amagnetic game board on which has been
1 2 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
constructed the map of amythical city, Rio Bravos, capital of the Repub¬
lic of San Martin.

Students elect ofﬁcers who sit at along, V-shaped desk
in front of the board.

Each has aphone and access to ateletype machine.

From the control booth, faculty ﬁeld commanders alert the students to a
communist-inspired riot at the city’s university, or to abombing attempt
by communist subversives from the hostile nei^bouring country, Maoland
[«'c].

The students deploy their forces on the board and plan strategies,
much as they would from areal police control center.^^
The pre-eminent purpose of such training and its replication in these countries
was to assure the containment of radical political movements within those
societies linked to the international system of American alliances.

In Bangla¬
desh radical politics has had astrong tradition, and for many represents a
compelling reﬂection of underlying social conditions.

Arecent International Labour Organization survey stated that, during the
much heralded‘Decade of Development’between 1963 and 1973, the per¬
centage of Bangladesh’s population consuming below 1,935 calories per day
increased from 40.2% to 78.5%.

This is the Third World’s ‘underdevelopment’
—not the much touted ‘development’ of articulate aid economists and inter¬
national lending agencies.

Overlaying this fundamental economic feature
of Bangladeshi society is apolice and paramilitary apparatus which is the
state authority’s ﬁrst line of defence against social unrest and rebellion —
the ‘Maolands’ of the International Police Academy’s Rio Bravos model.

In
recent years it had become an increasingly brutal and plotting apparatus.

Between 1975 and 1977 the theme and the model of Rio Bravos found
its speciﬁc variation in Bangladesh.

More than adecade and ahalf of such
training produced in August 1975 complicity in the coup d’etat against the
shaky, mildly Soviet-oriented civilian government of Mujibur Rahman.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Between 1975 and 1977 the theme and the model of Rio Bravos found
its speciﬁc variation in Bangladesh. More than adecade and ahalf of such
training produced in August 1975 complicity in the coup d’etat against the
shaky, mildly Soviet-oriented civilian government of Mujibur Rahman. Next
this intelligence nexus entered into aphase of violent suppression of new
revolts wiAin the armed forces; revolts directed against the pro-Western
military junta of General Ziaur Rahman. And by 1977, two years after the
August ’75 coup that killed Mujib, the country had entered an entirely new
chapter in modern South Asian history, albeit agrim one, with the ﬁrst mass
executions in the Indian subcontinent in this century(the last being those
carried out by the British following the 1857 Mutiny, when rebels were
tied to the mouths of cannon and disciplined by death). In the period after Mujib’s fall there were even more signiﬁcant appoint¬
ments than the spectacular promotions of men like Safdar. Mustaque, unlike
the Majors who did the killing for him, was no naive coup-maker. He and his
team were prepared for the transition. They immediately appointed an
experienced bureaucratic crew. The ﬁrst major appointment was Shaiful
Azam as Cabinet Secretary of the Central Secretariat. This position was the
most senior in the entire bureaucracy and was in direct authority over each of
the ministries and their secretaries. At the time of the crackdown in 1971,
Azam had been Chief Secretary of the East Pakistan Provincial Government. An ardent Bengali supporter of Pakistan’s cause, he remained in his post
1 2 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
throughout the civil war, leaving for (West) Pakistan only towards the end.

For Bengali nationalists Azam was acollaborator par excellence.

He was
repatriated to Bangladesh in 1973, following Mujib’s declaration that he and
others would be treated leniently in the interests of reconciliation among
Bengalis.

With Mujib dead in 75, the Vichy of 71 were now in the ascendant.

To head the Home Ministry, Mustaque immediately recalled from Rome
Salauddin Ahmed, an ofﬁcial at the United Nations’ Food and Agricultural
Organization.

Salauddin had awell-established reputation for both sophisti¬
cation and toughness.

In 1968-69 he had been the ofﬁcial in the East Pakistan
Home Ministry directing counter-measures against student and working class
agitation which ultimately brought down the decade-old military dictatorship
of Ayub Khan.

Now, after Mujib’s death and under Salauddin’s new suzerainty
at the Home Ministry, the police and internal security budget rose by nearly
60% within ayear.

Together with defence, the proportion of the budget
allocated for defence and internal security rose to 31% of total expenditure,
four times the level of 1973.

In addition to the creation of Special Police
Combat Units, measures were also adopted to expand the staff of the police
services from 40,000 to 70,000.^® In the mass executions of 1977 Salauddin
was the main ofﬁcial on the civilian side responsible, and was thus identiﬁed
with hundreds of hangings which took place at Dacca Central Jail and in the
district prisons.

The other major appointment Mustaque made among civilians was that
of EnayethuUah Khan to the Editorship of The Bangladesh Times, astate-
owned daily.

On the surface, it seemed apeculiar appointment.

Khan had
been the Editor of the
Holiday, apseudo-leftist Sunday paper, that
had been aggressively opposed to Mujib’s regime.

At the time, Khan was
vaguely identiﬁed ideologically with Mohammed Toaha’s East Bengal Com¬
munist Party (Marxist-Leninist).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Khan had
been the Editor of the
Holiday, apseudo-leftist Sunday paper, that
had been aggressively opposed to Mujib’s regime. At the time, Khan was
vaguely identiﬁed ideologically with Mohammed Toaha’s East Bengal Com¬
munist Party (Marxist-Leninist). The essence of Khan’s ideological view was
that Mujib’s Awami League, and its last incarnation as BAKSAL, was backed
by Indian interests which in turn were backed by Soviet interests, and there¬
fore it was incumbent upon every Bengali progressive to oppose Mujib’s
subordination to expansionism (India) and hegemonism (the Soviet Union). With this analysis Khondakar Mustaque was quite in agreement. Being himself
adevout anti-communist made no difference to Mustaque, if some people
presenting themselves as leftists would be willing to support his essenti^ly
pro-Western coup d’etat. In essence, Mustaque was trying to recreate Field
Marshal Ayub Klian’s old political coalition which had combined the support
of Pakistan’s pro-Western bourgeoisie and certain pro-Peking left-wing ﬁgures
who, since the Sino-Indian war in 1962, had regarded their principal political
role as one of opposing New Delhi’s pre-eminent power in South Asia, this
task being more important than the overthrow of their own ruling classes. EnayethuUah Khan, aprotege not only of Toaha, but also aclose associate
of Bhutto in the late 1960s, was aﬁgure precisely in this mould. 1 2 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Prior Knowledge and the Question of Complicity
We opened this account by describing and analyzing the dominant version of
the ‘facts’ sunounding the coup d’etat which killed Mujibur Rahman in August
1975.

Contemporary reporting established ageneral and prevalent inter¬
pretation of the events, which themselves were largely unexamined in any
depth.

The version accepted by both the foreign and Bengali press coverage
of the coup was asimple story.

Mujibur Rahman’s regime was in trouble.

The country had just suffered afamine that had killed an estimated 50,000
peasants, for which government incompetence had been blamed.

Democratic
rights were increasingly being crushed by the authorities who were closing
newspapers and locking more and more of Mujib’s opponents away.

Civil
unrest and rural insurgency were growing problems.

In this atmosphere, so
the story went, six young majors with 300 men under their command took it
upon themselves to organize amilitary putsch.

They were said to be dis¬
gruntled and disgusted young military men acting with amixture of motives
that stretched from personal embitterment to their own messianic delusions
of Islamic Bonapartism.

The story emphasized that they had acted alone
and unilaterally, and that after killing Mujib they suddenly decided to pick up
Khondakar Mustaque Ahmed as areplacement.

In taking on the Presidency,
Mustaque was portrayed with all the iimocence of avictim of circumstance.

But whether Mustaque himself had taken part in acomplicated plan nearly a
year old involving avariety of links, remained totally unexamined.

What we have tried to do is open up the view that what happened was by
means as simple as it was made to appear.

Since the coup occurred, there
has been no thoughtful an^ysis of even the most obvious of all the contra¬
dictory phenomena.--- PAGE BREAK ---

What we have tried to do is open up the view that what happened was by
means as simple as it was made to appear. Since the coup occurred, there
has been no thoughtful an^ysis of even the most obvious of all the contra¬
dictory phenomena. Ignored was the stark juxtaposition that, in the two years
prior to the coup, it was the country’s organized left-wing parties, such as
the J.S.D. (Socialist National Party), the National Awami Party (Bhashani),
and the underground organizations like the Sharbohara Party which had
developed and mobilized public sentiment against Mujib’s regime; but, when
the critical moment of collapse came for Mujib, it was not from aleftist
mass uprising —‘The Revolution’ -as had been feared, but from anarrowly
based conspiracy of the right. The challenge being developed and prepared
by radical forces was pre-empted by the August events. The coup itself was
an inside job by right-wing elements within Mujib’s own party, own cabinet,
own secretariat and his own national intelligence service who viewed Mujib’s
leadership as no longer capable of holding out against aleft-wing challenge
t o t h e i r i n t e r e s t s . Whether or not the United States had prior knowledge of these plans
cannot be conclusively settled without the power of Congressional subpoena. What is clear is that the United States had important prior relationships with
the political and intelligence leadership of the coup. Still, the issue of prior
knowledge is acritical one which any serious historical account must seek
to resolve. According to American criminal law, prior knowledge of acon¬
spiracy to commit murder deﬁnes the grouhds of complicity in murder. In
n
o
1 3 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder ofMujib
terms of international law and the practice of its foreign relations, the American
government has clearly followed adifferent standard, albeit largely clandes¬
tine.

Senate testimony on covert assassination operations against Lumumba,
Castro, AUende, Diem and others, not to speak of the 26^69 ofﬁcial victims
of the Phoenix Programme, had made this graphically clear.

But no criminal
charges have ever been brought against any ofﬁcial who planned or executed
these murders.

Beyond an incomplete public display of personal testimony
about their involvement in secret operations, there has been no accountability.

Since the Church Committee hearings on intelligence abuses, various legal
reforms have been proposed to regulate and thereby prohibit American involve¬
ment in illegal activity abroad.

Several bills before the American Congress,
such as S.2525, attempted to set forth new guidelines:
No person acting on behalf of an entity of the intelligence community
may instigate or commit any violation of the criminal statutes of the
United States unless such activity is undertaken pursuant to procedures
approved by the Attorney General.

..[Sec.

243].

No special activity may be initiated or continued which has as its objective
or is likely to result in ...(A.6) the violent overthrow of the democratic
government of any country; (A.7) the torture of individuals; or (A.8) the
support of any action which violates human rights, conducted by the
police, foreign intelligence or internal security forces of any foreign
country.

[Sec.

135a].

Among reformist elements in the American Congress there are still deep
doubts whether such criteria can be written into law, overriding the still
powerful opposition of the U.S.

intelligence community and its Congressional
allies.

Nevertheless, within the Carter administration there has emerged at
least some serious division on these questions and there has been evidence
of an awkward groping toward anew standard.--- PAGE BREAK ---

intelligence community and its Congressional
allies. Nevertheless, within the Carter administration there has emerged at
least some serious division on these questions and there has been evidence
of an awkward groping toward anew standard. How far these steps will go is
the question. In an unprecedented act for aU.S. administration. Carter ofﬁcials in July
1978 ﬁled extradition petitions in Santiago, Chile, against the Director of the
Chilean Secret Police, DINA, General Contreras. Two years earlier Orlando
Letelier, AUende’s outspoken Foreign Minister and aleader of the Chilean
exiled community, was assassinated along with his research associate, Ronnie
Mofﬁt, when their car was blown apart in Washington D.C. Press investi¬
gations and public pressure led to an unusual F.B.I. investigation which
revealed that the murders were aDINA operation. Most senior DINA ofﬁcials,
much like the N.S.I. and Safdar and company in Bangladesh, had passed
through American schools such as the IJ*.A./INPOLSE programmes, and had
long established links with U.S. intelligence services. They played crucial
roles in the Nixon/Kissinger plan to overthrow AUende in September 1973. That the United States was prepared to initiate proceedings against its former
clients in the killing of Letelier was itself unusual, although there is still wide¬
spread cynicism in Washington on the question of how far Carter will actually
1 3 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
go, and whether action hitherto is simply due to the blatancy of the crime
within amile of the White House.

‘Clients, even demoted ones,’ says aclose
Washington observer of the case, ‘should know better.

Uncle Sam has etiquette
at home, if not abroad.

DINA overstepped Papa [C.I.A.] and that isn’t done
in this town to aCommunist, aSocialist, or an anti-Communist politician.’
The proceedings against Contreras and others of the DINA indicate that the
Senate investigations, despite their serious limitations, have continued to have
some important after-effects.

In the case of Bangladesh in 1975 the important issue of control, direction
and responsibility for American policy returns repeatedly to the question of
prior knowledge of the coup which killed Mujib.

At the most superﬁcial
level some argue that if the United States had not had prior knowledge of
what was about to happen, then American intelligence would have been
failing in its capability.

This view abstracts from the precise mechanisms by
which such knowledge is acquired and presupposes the mythical all-knowing
dimension of Western intelligence capabilities.

If, however, such knowledge
were acquired from persons who for years had been directly linked to the
United States as intelligence assets, and these same people were in fact directly
involved in the execution of the coup, then the question of prior knowledge
takes on alarger, much deeper dimension.

When and under what conditions
does prior knowledge constitute complicity?

‘The C.I.A.

knew many times about planned coup attempts against foreign
leaders,’ said John Marks, ‘Assuming that the Agency was not directly involved,
the key decision was whether or not to tip off the leader.

If he were afriend of
the U.S.

government and the C.I.A., he would probably be warned.

And, if he
were somebody that they would just as soon be rid of, they would remain silent.’
What occurred in Cyprus was an example.

The U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And, if he
were somebody that they would just as soon be rid of, they would remain silent.’
What occurred in Cyprus was an example. The U.S. had tipped Makarios off
about numerous coup attempts, except for the last one. The U.S. appears to have
had prior knowledge of the action, but no longer considered the Archbishop’s
presence to be consistent with its objectives. On 14 July 1974 Makarios was
toppled from power in amilitary coup backed by the Greek mUitary junta.^^
The Great Canard
In an extended interview (printed at the end of this book), Philip Cherry,
the C.I.A.’s Chief of Station in Dacca at the time of the August ’75 coup,
has denied any prior knowledge of or U.S. involvement in the coup which
killed Mujib. Cherry’s denial of any prior intelligence, or link between the
coup actors and the United States, is in direct opposition to the statements of
State Department sources and to what he had previously discussed with an
American journalist in Dacca in December 1975. When asked if the U.S. had had prior information of the August coup, or
if any American ofﬁcial could have given encouragement to members of
Mustaque’s circle, Cherry replied;
1 3 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
Absolutely not.

Absolutely not in Bangladesh, in 1975, or 1974, or any¬
time that Iknow of.

There were several coups there, as you know.

At no
time did the U.S.

Government have prior knowledge that any of them would
take place.

We did not know when any of the coups were about to take
place.

Let me also say throughout those months and years there were all
kinds of coup rumours going on at all times.

And, there were many times
when political ofﬁcers there, all of us at the Embassy, would be writing
reports based upon the reports they were picking up, and these were from
avariety of people.

But, at no time to my knowledge did Mustaque, or
anybody under his command, come to the Embassy and tell us anything
....

Ican give you afull denial that 1or anybody 1knew at the Embassy
in Dacca had anything to do with the coup that overthrew Mujib.

We had
excellent relations with his government.

It was not up to us to decide how
that government was to be changed, and we were not involved in any coup
attempt.

And Ican say that for certain.

When Cherry discussed the serious instability of the Mujib regime from the
end of 1974 onwards, and the U.S.

attitude to this political uncertainty
and possible upheaval,he stated in the interview: ‘Look, we had long discus¬
sions about this very thing at the time.

And we knew that this was apossibi¬
lity.

We knew that Mujib was in trouble.

We also knew that no matter what
happened there, no matter who overthrew Mujib, or what overthrew Mujib,
also knew we would be blamed for it.

That the American Embassy would
be blamed for it.

Because Mujib had Mrs.

Gandhi’s backing and alot of
Soviet inﬂuence there as well; that no matter what happened [we would be
blamed].

So we were extra careful to be super clean; to make sure all of us
were directed by Ambassador Boster; to cut any contact which would possibly
give credence to the theory we knew was going to come about.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Gandhi’s backing and alot of
Soviet inﬂuence there as well; that no matter what happened [we would be
blamed]. So we were extra careful to be super clean; to make sure all of us
were directed by Ambassador Boster; to cut any contact which would possibly
give credence to the theory we knew was going to come about. We indeed
followed Ambassador Boster ’s instructions.’
Cherry denied in the interview that he knew Mahbub Alam Chashi, Taher-
uddin Thakur or A.B.S. Safdar —three people allegedly linked to the planning
of the coup. Cherry said he had of course heard some of their names, but
had never met any of them. Safdar became Director-General of the National
Security Intelligence agency of Bangladesh immediately after Mujib’s death. Cherry admitted later in the interview that he had in fact met Safdar. However,
he stressed that whatever happened in 1975 ‘the Bangladeshis were doing it
to themselves’. ‘It’s agreat canard,’ he said, ‘to think any coup takes place because of any
[outside] government involvement. Almost always coups take place because
of the people themselves.’ When reminded that Senate inquiries had established
that certain critical coups, such as those against Allende, Diem, Sihanouk and
others, had occurred with U.S. backing. Cherry said, ‘That may have happened
years ago. But, boy! That’s long since over! Many years over.’
Cherry did, however, try to make adistinction between politicians who may
have approached the U.S. Embassy for support in their coup plans and actual
U.S. government support. His comment was made in the context of aquestion
concerning the Mustaque network’s earlier contacts with the U.S. in Calcutta
w
e
1 3 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
in 1971.

‘There is one thing,’ he said, ‘There are politicans who frequently
approach Embassies and perhaps have contacts there.

They think they may
have contacts.

But that’s afar cry from any of those Embassies involved in
assisting them in involvement in acoup.

Apolitical ofﬁcer’s job is to assist his
government by providing information on what is going on and agood political
ofﬁcer has many contacts.

But, that does not mean he is advising these poli¬
ticians or coup leaders to overthrow governments.’
This is known as the ‘ﬁne line’.

In an era of super-power politics and con¬
tention over client states in the globe’s underdeveloped periphery, it has been
rare for crucially strategic putsches to be exercises of nationals of aparticular
country, as Philip Cherry has put it, ‘doing it to themselves’ without outside
assurances of strategic support from powerful centres.

But the ﬁne line
consists of the distinction between more or less passive involvement in a
coming pro-American coup d’etat and active involvement in its promotion.

In
the covert actions organized against Arbenz, Mossadeq, AUende, Castro,
Lumumba and others, the active organization of coup or assassination plans
was centrally organized, promoted and controlled by American intelligence.

But, even in the 1973 coup in Chile against Allende, the C.I.A.

claimed that
by the time it went off it had ‘separated’ itself from the military plots against
him.

Senate investigations revealed otherwise.

In the case of operations to
kill Castro and replace the Havana authorities with apro-Western regime,
Desmond Fitzgerald, the C.IA.

head of the Cuban operation, told Major
Rolando Cubela (known as AM/LASH) that the U.S.

would provide support
only after asuccessful coup.

At this stage, the U.S.

had given up on Maﬁa
co-operation and were looking to pull an ‘inside job’.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At this stage, the U.S. had given up on Maﬁa
co-operation and were looking to pull an ‘inside job’. Cubela, amedical
doctor and former Deputy Minister of the Interior, was sufﬁciently well
placed and reliable, the C.I.A. believed, to carry out the assassination, which
would be followed up by acoup organized by other operatives. But the Arbenz/Mossadeq/Allende/Castro activist model is not necessarily
the rule. In strategic cases, or even in important transitions such as that of
Diem’s fall in .’63, the alleged links with the Indonesian events in ’65, or
the Philippines’ move into Marcos’ Martial Law, the U.S. has historically
preferred the road of nationals ‘doing it to themselves’. That is, the pro-
Western factions in the military, police, intelligence, bureaucracy and appro¬
priate political parties ‘doing it to’ whatever anti-American democrats, socialists,
or communist elements may be threatening ‘normalcy’ and ‘regional stability’. The careful pre-programming aspect of U.S. military, police and intelligence
training for foreign nationals carried out over the past three decades has been
precisely developed to establish ‘contacts’ and ‘assets’ for just such strategic
eventualities. It is in such cases that the ‘winks’ and ‘nods’ and euphemisms
about ‘getting rid of and ‘eliminating’ or the U.S. ‘favouring better conditions
for economic development,’ are all that is needed to give asignal of support
to Bangladeshi, Indonesian, or Vietnamese right-wing military and political
factions, facing their own crisis of position, to go forward and putsch it out
with their enemies. The Lon Nol coup against Sihanouk in Cambodia was
precisely in this mould.^l Awell placed ‘nod’, asmall ‘shove’ for conﬁdence,
1 3 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
given to the right people at the right moment by amajor power, can invoke
asigniﬁcant historical transition, while hardly lifting aﬁnger, and without the
implied risks to careers or reputations by the kind of scrutiny potentially
involved in the more activist Allende-style covert operations.

According to
insiders, when acoup d’etat is viewed as apolicy necessity, then the
‘nodded’ form is the style most preferred by the more sophisticated strategists
of U.S.

policy execution.

Bengali sources have argued to us that this is precisely the mould in which
the August 75 events in Bangladesh occurred.

Bengali right-wing elements,
stretching from afaction of the Awami League to the Bengali intelligence and
military services, with long associations, largely clandestine, with U.S.

and
British agencies, did indeed organize the coup.

But in order to feel secure
enough to move forward on an operational level, they believed they must
have some indication, a‘nod’ so to speak, of American and Islamic bloc
support.

The United States, despite its deep disagreements with many of
Mujib’s ‘doubly-aligned’ policies, did support over 50% of the expenditure
of his government.

This continued support had to be assured after the coup
if asuccessor regime were not to collapse.

According to Bengali sources, the
type of assurance given by the U.S.

took the form: ‘If you succeed we are
with you, if you fail we've never heard of you.'
The difﬁculty, according to State Department sources, came after the initia
contacts were made, and as the impact of the Church Committee investi¬
gations began having its nervous effect on American Embassies around the
world.

Here one runs into conﬂicting statements from State Department
and C.I A.

sources over which sections in the Embassy ‘broke off contact’
and which sections allegedly did not.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Here one runs into conﬂicting statements from State Department
and C.I A. sources over which sections in the Embassy ‘broke off contact’
and which sections allegedly did not. With nearly aU relevant documents
denied to us despite Freedom of Information Act applications, it is as yet
impossible to corroborate and resolve these conﬂicts in testimony. However, if one were to accept on face value the statements of Philip
Cherry, former C.IA. Station Chief in Dacca, one might wonder if the
various U.S. intelligence agencies, C.I.A., N.S.A. and D.IA., having nurtured,
cultivated and developed anetwork over more than adecade, suddenly found
that its early creation had grown into amature assertive Juggernaut, ready for
action and difﬁcult to disengage from. This issue applies not simply to Bangla¬
desh, but to Iran, Brazil, Argentina, Nicaragua, Paldstan and elsewhere where
the legacy of Anglo-American constructed networks prone to military dictator
ship have become anew nemesis for the ‘human rights’ style foreign policy
of the Carterite liberals. For aquarter of acentury the United States has been
bent on apolicy of global counter-insurgency and in this time has reared-up
an enormous Juggernaut. These are the political, military and intelligence
structures, which today are the dominant power in many Third World dictator¬
ships. What Qierry expressed in his interview, when referring to those who
‘think they may have contacts’ when they approach U.S. Embassies for
support, may indeed reﬂect this very dilemma of the Juggernaut and the
changes then occurring in U.S. politics. But why did Cherry’s ‘they’ think
1 3 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
they had contacts?

On what basis, on what past experience?

Cherry would
have us believe that any Bangladeshi discussing coup prospects with American
ofﬁcials would have been listened to and shown the door.

State Department
sources contradict this; they state repeated contacts did happen in late 1974.

And covert contacts allegedly continued until the coup.

However, Cherry’s
statements may reﬂect what was areal internal dilemma for the American
government and its overseas branches.

The Church Committee hearings raised,
as never before, the possibility of public disclosure of legally questionable
covert operations.

If what Cherry has said is true —which we are not yet
prepared to accept without further evidence —then it might be plausible
that, in the midst of the 1975 crisis which the Senate Intelligence Committee
investigations had wrought for the Agency as awhole, the C.I.A.

station in
Dacca may have attempted to disengage from its former clients and assets, ‘to
be super clean’ as Cherry puts it, while Senator Frank Church was busy
digging up C.I.A.

skeletons across the globe.

But, while the U.S.

may, towards
the end, have tried to keep its distance in Bangladesh, the American trained
Juggernaut rolled on towards the coup it knew the United States would not
condemn once it had happened.

The Soviets would lose their semi-satellite
and America would regain its old SEATO-style friend once more, poor but
aligned with the West, after ahiatus of four years.

And that ﬁgure, Mujibur
Rahman, who had stuck so unpleasantly in Secretary of State Kissinger’s eye
in 1971, whose country’s crisis then appeared to threaten the success of
Kissinger’s crucial U.S.-China negotiations, would be gone without any
regrets from the Washington establishment.

But, if Cherry’s denials are not
accurate, then the investigative door is still wide open.

Kissinger’s ‘Foreign Enemies List’
This leads us to the last facet of this story.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But, if Cherry’s denials are not
accurate, then the investigative door is still wide open. Kissinger’s ‘Foreign Enemies List’
This leads us to the last facet of this story. Very little has been written about
Henry Kissinger’s attitudes or role in the crisis of Bangladesh’s emergence or
in subsequent events. There have been The Anderson Papers and afew
peripheral asides in biographical works on the former U.S. Secretary of
State. But, when compared to the public attention given to Vietnam, Chile or
the Middle East, Bangladesh has remained obscure and peripheral for the U.S. public and press, despite the extreme but generally unknown crisis it caused
within Kissinger’s foreign policy bureaucracy in 1971. [See Appendix A.]
What is not well known is the extent to which Kissinger regarded events
in Bangladesh as adeep personal defeat in the realm of foreign policy, and how
seriously they threatened his place in the Nixon administration at the time. In
an extended interview with the authors, aformer member of Kissinger’s staff
at the National Security Council, Roger Morris, recounted the deep ani¬
mosity toward Mujib which Kissinger sustained after 1971. Morris, who is
the author of the critical biography. Uncertain Greatness: Henry Kissingpr &
American Foreign Policy, resigned from Kissinger’s staff the day before the
United States’ invasion of Cambodia.‘In early 1975,’ said Morris, ‘I was
1 3 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
interviewing for my book aman who was then one of Kissinger’s closest
aides and most senior conﬁdants.

Ihad known him well.

In utter seriousness
and not at all as acriticism of Kissinger’s policy, he said, there had been three
nemeses of American foreign policy in the Kissinger era.

These were the
three ‘most hated men’ on Kissinger’s foreign ‘enemies list’.

He said they
were Allende, Thieu, and Mujib.^^
Allende was rather obvious, according to Morris.

America’s ally, Nguyen
Van Thieu, was abit more difﬁcult to fathom for aplace on such alist.

But Thieu was despised because he never performed precisely as the pliant
American puppet he was intended to be.

During the Paris peace negotiations
he emerged again and again as an obstruction to ‘the deal Kissinger was
trying to cut with the North Vietnamese’.

Each time Kissinger turned in
Paris, Thieu was expected to twist accordingly and simultaneously in Saigon.

But he did not perform on cue, and the Americans were always having to
send Alexander Haig or some other emissary to Saigon to twist his arm.

The
peace negotiations and their timing vis-a-vis other Kissinger initiatives were
extremely important.

Moreover, Kissinger’s style in Paris of making grand
announcements such as ‘peace is at hand’, only to be delayed by Thieu‘s
recalcitrance, were giving the Nixon Administration an embarrassing press at
home and fuelling the critics in an ever more strident anti-war movement.

So it was that Nguyen Van Thieu found himself alongside Allende on
Kissinger’s private ‘enemies list’.

‘It was not amatter of having allies or having
enemies or adversaries,’ explained Morris, ‘but simply these people had upset
the apple cart in various ways.’
‘When compared to the others,’ he said, ‘Mujib Iwould have thought
wasn’t quite in that league.--- PAGE BREAK ---

So it was that Nguyen Van Thieu found himself alongside Allende on
Kissinger’s private ‘enemies list’. ‘It was not amatter of having allies or having
enemies or adversaries,’ explained Morris, ‘but simply these people had upset
the apple cart in various ways.’
‘When compared to the others,’ he said, ‘Mujib Iwould have thought
wasn’t quite in that league. On the other hand, Kissinger felt the events in
East Pakistan [in 1971] were so damaging and so distracting and so poten¬
tially disastrous for his China diplomacy on which so much else rested,
including the Vietnam negotiations.... And here was this unnecessary
irritation on the ﬂank; akind of obstreperous politician who was not behaving
in aproper way.’ In addition, Kissinger’s position in the Nixon administration
was not at all secure at this stage. Nixon’s two closest advisers on domestic
policy, H.R. Haldeman and John Ehrlichman, both despised Kissinger and
sought his removal from the Administration’s inner circle. In 1971 it was not
at all certain that he would be carried over into the second administration. This, of course, was prior to the China breakthrough, the Paris negotiations
on Vietnam, and the Salt agreement. ‘It is hard to imagine now,’ says Morris,
‘but if one looks back at the time [1971] one remembers alot of talk about
John Connolly becoming Secretary of State and Kissinger saying to his friends
in the press that if that happens, “I will go”.’ In another, but rather sympa¬
thetic biography written by Bernard and Marvin Kalb, Kissinger recalls the
Bangladesh crisis and says, ‘Haldeman almost got me on that one.’
‘For the most part the only stain on the record up to this time,’ Morris
continues, ‘with the exception of the anti-war opposition, has been South
Asia. It is the only place the administration has been under public ﬁre in the
Congress or in the press. It is the only place where Kissinger diplomacy is
1 3 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
seen to be ineffectual and where no magic could be made to work.

It is the
only place where American interests have been reversed and where there is an
obvious Soviet inroad and obvious Soviet advantage
And in asense the
Bangladesh crisis is used as the last major challenge Kissinger’s rivals within
the White House mounted against him.

After that Watergate overtakes them
aU.’
What results, according to Morris, is aresidue, ablended aftermath of
embarrassment and political vindictiveness which sticks with Kissinger in the
years ahead.

It is worth quoting Morris’s remarks at some length in this respect:
1don’t want to exaggerate the importance of Bangladesh, because it wasn’t
astrategic defeat for American interests in the long run.

It didn’t create
any great shift in the balance of power, but it was an extraordinary embar¬
r a s s m e n t .

Mujib’s welcome back as an exiled persecuted leader, Ithink,
probably the most embarrassing single event in American foreign policy
since Castro rode into Havana on atank.

If you look at the record of
American intervention around the world, to keep various politicians from
assuming power, either covert or overt intervention, and if you look at
events in the world prior to the fall of South Vietnam, Washington is by
and large successful by hook or by crook.

There are really no obstreperous
regimes around.

The Makarios regime in Cyprus comes to power by com¬
promise, almost as an American creation ironically enough, although he is
regarded as aCastro-like ﬁgure.

Allende comes to power for sure in afree
election which the Americans try to buy off with alot of covert inter¬
vention.

But, it is not the national or international scandal at the time.

It
happens almost quietly.

And it’s because it happens so quietly that the
American intervention proceeds after he takes power.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It
happens almost quietly. And it’s because it happens so quietly that the
American intervention proceeds after he takes power. But, Mujib comes to
power as adeﬁance, as areal defeat for America and America’s client
[Pakistan]; and as agreat embarrassment for the Administration. One thinks of Henry Kissinger as being atraditional 19th century
diplomat. His mentors, models and heroes are all 19th century. One would
then think the adage would be, ‘No permanent friends or enemies, only
permanent interests’. This would have dictated that the United States
immediately welcome Mujib and embrace the regime; to try to keep it
within the camp. But there was, as Ihave said, Kissinger’s vindictive
streak. It ran through it, in the sense, he [Mujib] is not our man. And, if
he is not our man, there is no such thing as permanent interests. Now it
is amatter of getting our people in and their people out. Kissinger is really Bismarckian in the sense that the world is essentially
conducted by heroes and non-heroes or anti-heroes. Personalities matter
enormously. He undoubtedly did see Mujib, and Allende, and Thieu, and
Makarios, and others who gave him problems as being there on the stage to
give Hemy Kissinger abad time. He took the Bangladesh events as apersonal
d e f e a t . It certainly was perceived as amajor political setback for the administra¬
tion. It spoiled things badly for awhile .... The sense of paranoia, the
sense of being able to run the world at home and abroad, the sense of
irritation, betrayal, and venom toward people who get in the way is all
w
a
s
1 3 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
of apiece at this time.

It’s an era, as we know from the Watergate investi¬
gation, when lasting animosities are formed by the administration and
accounts are taken for later reckoning.

Their attitude toward the world,
toward Allende, toward Mujib, toward Thieu, toward Makarios, toward
anyone who got in their way in effect was very much avindictive one.

Very much amatter of you’re going to get your come-uppance.

The Perils of aQient State
In the autumn of 1974 Mujib visited the Uiited States.

Ostensibly he had
come to address the U.N.

General Assembly in New York.

It was less than a
year before the coup which would bring his death.

His three-year-old regime
was in severe crisis.

That summer, the worst South Asian ﬂoods in two
decades had combined with the regime’s own administrative ineptness and
internal corruption to bring about the worst famine the region had seen since
1943.

The famine spread not only across Bangladesh, but through the entire
northeastern belt of India.

In Bangladesh the price of rice rose 1,000%
above 1970 levels in some districts.

Mujib had once promised in 1970 that the
price of rice would fall by half, once East Bengal had been made free from
West Pakistan’s exptoitation.

During the autumn famine, it is estimated that
at least 50,000 peasants died in Bangladesh alone.

According to Bengali
diplomats in Washington, there was an air of smug satisfaction among Americai
ofﬁcials who had been known to sympathize with Pakistan in 1971, as Mujib
now arrived to appeal for more American relief assistance.

The pro-Bangladesh
lobby in the State Department had already been quashed in Kissinger’s
internal departmental campaign against ‘clientism’ in the foreign service.--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to Bengali
diplomats in Washington, there was an air of smug satisfaction among Americai
ofﬁcials who had been known to sympathize with Pakistan in 1971, as Mujib
now arrived to appeal for more American relief assistance. The pro-Bangladesh
lobby in the State Department had already been quashed in Kissinger’s
internal departmental campaign against ‘clientism’ in the foreign service. ‘Mujib was ﬂoundering and in trouble’, recalled one Bangladesh diplomat, ‘and
they seemed to take enormous pleasure in his awkward moment.’
It is customary that when aHead of State of afriendly country visits the
United Nations for the ﬁrst time, he is also invited to Washington and accorded
aformal reception by the American government as amatter of courtesy and
protocol. In Mujib’s case the U.S. authorities left any arrangements for a
Washington visit completely vague despite enquiries from the Bangladesh side. Finally, at the last moment, when it was clear Mujib would visit Washington in
any case to meet friends of Bangladesh in the Congress, the State Department
did arrange abrief 15 minute session with President Ford at the White House. According to Dr. Kamal Hossain, Mujib’s Foreign Minister who accompanied
him to Washington, ‘The level of protocol treatment accorded during the
Prime Minister’s visit to Washington following his visit to the U.N. General
Assembly reﬂected aclear degree of coolness. This was apparent from the fact
that there was only abrief meeting with the President and amarked absence
of the usual hospitality extended on such occasions.’^'^
Kissinger, who was Secretary of State by then, stayed away from any
Washington meetings, although it was normal and customary for him to have
been present. The Bangladesh delegation was offered an ofﬁcial luncheon
hosted by aminor cabinet ofﬁcial. Since such luncheons were normally hosted
by the President or Secretary of State, the Bengali side declined the invitation
1 3 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
believing it to be rude, if not an insult.

The Bangladesh delegation returned
to Dacca knowing what it is to be rebuffed in Washington.

Kissinger did meet Mujib brieﬂy while attending the U.N.

session in New
York.

The customary photographs were taken for home consumption.

However, requests for addition^ American food shipments fell on deaf ears.

It was the year ‘triage theory’ was avulgar intellectual cocktail point in
America.^^ Moreover, following the 1973 Yom Kippur War in ^e Middle
East, Kissinger had moved boldly to befriend Sadat, and what surplus wheat
was not being taken by the vast Soviet purchases that year, the Americans
were shipping to Egypt.

Strategy, not poverty, was the criterion.

‘In Kis¬
singer’s view there was very much adistant hands off attitude toward them,’
recalls Roger Morris, ‘Since they had the audacity to become independent
of one of my client vassals [Pakistan], they will damn well ﬂoat on their
own for awhile.

In effect, there was afeeling they were now somebody
else’s client.’
Bangladesh desperately needed food and ﬁnance.

Amajor foreign exchange
crisis loomed and shortages in government-held food reserves became severe.

It was the rude end to the high living of the ﬁrst two years of the post¬
independence relief bonanza when nearly 2,000 million worth of com¬
modities, aid, contracts and international business poured in from the over¬
seas cornucopia.

The Soviets, facing their own severe grain crisis in 1974,
were not giving much to anyone.

India was the Soviet Union’s ﬁrst subcon¬
tinental priority and their grain loans went to acrisis-ridden New Delhi, It
was under such circumstances that Mujib travelled to the United States in
the hope of realigning; of shifting the emphasis of his own ‘double alignment’
from one superpower to the other; of burying the indignities of Kissinger’s
‘tilt’ and insults from ’71; and of recovering the lost political alliance with
America.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Soviets, facing their own severe grain crisis in 1974,
were not giving much to anyone. India was the Soviet Union’s ﬁrst subcon¬
tinental priority and their grain loans went to acrisis-ridden New Delhi, It
was under such circumstances that Mujib travelled to the United States in
the hope of realigning; of shifting the emphasis of his own ‘double alignment’
from one superpower to the other; of burying the indignities of Kissinger’s
‘tilt’ and insults from ’71; and of recovering the lost political alliance with
America. After all, it had been Mujib who had supported Pakistan’s joining
of the American military alliance, SEATO, in the 1950s, thus splitting Paki¬
stan’s democratic movement down the middle. His refurbished theory argued
that if the White House in 1971 had followed the path of the State Depart¬
ment’s ‘30 Dissenters’ and had supported the results of the national elections
rather than their suppression, then the Awami League would never have
been forced into astrategic alignment with the Soviets. It was this that the
Bangladesh leader, faced with the conjuncture of his own desperate internal
economic crisis with that of the world commodity inﬂation of 1973-74,
now wished to make clear to the Americans. Frankly, Kissinger was not
interested. Instead, what the American AID economists and Western representatives
in the World Bank wanted was atelling quid pro quo prior to any ﬁnancial
bail-out. In October 1974, after more than two years of determined resistance,
Bangladesh crumbled before ‘aid donor’ pressure and agreed to the formation
of amultinational aid consortium. A24-nation Aid Bangladesh Club was
formed and was chaired by the World Bank. Previously, Bangladesh had only
accepted aid on anegotiated bilateral basis, agreed on state-to-state terms,
preferring to avoid what the State Planning Commission considered agreater
1 4 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
exercise of foreign economic leverage implicit in the co-ordinated consortium
approach.

The proposed so-called ‘reform’ package was one-directional and
typical of orthodox American AID cum World Bank economics: a50%
devaluation of the Bangladesh Taka, denationalization and disinvestment of
state owned industries, import liberalization and new rules favouring the
private sector and foreign investment.

We reported in the Far Eastern Econo¬
mic Review, ‘Critics of the new aid consortium argue that Bangladesh has
had to baiter away the last vestiges of its original commitment to the ideals
of ‘socialist planning’ in return for short term relief ...

Ihe outlines of fthel
reform” programme are said to have been made clear to the Prime Minister,
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, and his economic entourage during their recent
Washington visit
In November ’74 Kissinger made abrief whistle-stop tour of South Asia.

The main purpose of his visit was India where he announced America’s belated
recognition of New Delhi’s regional hegemony.

His advisers had been urging
even the briefest of South Asian trips for along time.

His travels around the
Middle East, Indochina, China and the Soviet Union had left the subconti¬
nental politicals feeling extremely neglected.

Kissinger booked an eight-hour
stop in Dacca at the end of his South Asian journey.

It was one of those
situations where you could not visit India without visiting its sensitive neigh¬
bours, Pakistan and Bangladesh —if only for amoment.

On the eve of this briefest of visits, Mujib made the supreme political
signal towards the Americans —at least from his point of view —and forced
the resignation of his Finance Minister, Tajuddin Ahmed, from his cabinet.

Reported the Far Eastern Economic Review:
i
i
The fact that Tajuddin’s removal occurred on the eve of American Secretary
of State Henry Kissinger’s ﬁrst visit to Dacca has implications which cannot
be brushed aside.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On the eve of this briefest of visits, Mujib made the supreme political
signal towards the Americans —at least from his point of view —and forced
the resignation of his Finance Minister, Tajuddin Ahmed, from his cabinet. Reported the Far Eastern Economic Review:
i
i
The fact that Tajuddin’s removal occurred on the eve of American Secretary
of State Henry Kissinger’s ﬁrst visit to Dacca has implications which cannot
be brushed aside. Tajuddin, as the ﬁrst Prime Minister, had once proudly
declared that Bangladesh could never accept aid from any country which
had been opposed to its move for independence. The unmistakable target
of Tajuddin’s original remark had been the United States and Kissinger’s
policy, which brought ships of the U.S. Seventh Fleet sailing into the Bay
of Bengal.... [Tajuddin’s] supporters insist that he was genuinely
frustrated with the deteriorating economic situation, the retreat from so-
called ‘socialist planning’, and the external drift toward the ‘capitalist’
world .... [On his return from Washington two weeks before his forced
resignation, Tajuddin’s] remarks to journalists went even further into
the realm of the taboo. He said his own impressions of the Prime Minister’s
recent visit to Washington and meeting with President Gerald Ford were quite
different from that which the Bangladesh press had given the public. At
the time of the visit, the ofﬁcial media lauded the journey as the diplo¬
matic pinnacle of the Prime Minister’s active foreign policy .... Only
four days before his forced resignation, Tajuddin was pictured on the front
page of every major Dacca daily, meeting the Soviet Ambassador, Andre
Fomin. The Indian High Commissioner also paid adiplomatic call on the
Finance Minister. Nevertheless, despite these two expressions of inter¬
national backing, Sheikh Mujib was determined to oust Tajuddin ... 1 4 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Just over ayear later on 5November 1975, three months after the pro-
American Mustaque coup d’etat|had killed Mujib, the ‘pro-Soviet’, ‘pro-
Indian’ Tajuddin would be bayoneted to death in Dacca Central Jail —
allegedly by amurder squad linked to Mustaque’s military faction and a
high level section of the American trained N.S.I.

But well before all that, Henry Kissinger arrived in Dacca for his brief
eight-hour visit.

The decks had been cleared for his touchdown: Tajuddin
had been eliminated from the nation’s cabinet and the regime had more
less agreed to capitulate to the economic terms set out by the World
Bank and USAID in Washington the month before.

Faced with international
bankruptcy and the suspension of Dacca’s ﬁnancial credit on international
markets, Mujib and his advisers had run to appease the United States.

But, as
in the past, even these concessions mattered little to the Americans and
Kissinger.

Such are the dilemmas and inequities of relations between powerful
patrons and relatively insigniﬁcant chent states in international affairs.

In
Bangladesh, Mujib had executed atraumatic reversal, cannibalizing some of his
main political supporters in the hope of American ﬁnance bailing him out of
the economic crisis.

In Bangladesh these manoeuvres and transformations
were of tremendous political signiﬁcance.

But to the sought after patron, the
U.S, government, it was like |dust on alapel.

Kissinger had many things on
his mind: Cyprus, the Middle East, Indochina.

In the great events of the ‘great
scheme’, Bangladesh counted mainly as adistraction and abitter memory
from the 1971 days.

Within amonth after Kissinger’s visit to Dacca, according
to ahigh-level U.S, source, then stationed at the American Embassy in Dacca,
the ﬁrst regular contacts with the ‘coup planning cell’ began.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the great events of the ‘great
scheme’, Bangladesh counted mainly as adistraction and abitter memory
from the 1971 days. Within amonth after Kissinger’s visit to Dacca, according
to ahigh-level U.S, source, then stationed at the American Embassy in Dacca,
the ﬁrst regular contacts with the ‘coup planning cell’ began. During that half-day he spent in Bangladesh, Kissinger emerged from atwo-
hour session with Mujib at Gonobhavan (The House of the People) to meet
the press. He told journalists that he was honoured to meet Mujib, and called
him aman of ‘vast conception’. Kissinger said he had rarely met aman who
was the Father of his Nation, and this was aparticularly unique experience for
him. For those who Ustened to Kissinger’s dead-pan delivery that day, there
was aslight trace of sarcasm in his voice. When asked by acorrespondent
why he had ordered the U.S. aircraft carrier. Enterprise, into the Bay of
Bengal in 1971, if indeed Mujib’s vision had been such a‘vast conception’,
Kissinger declined to answer journahsts’ questions. The press conference,
which reporters had waited two hours for, lasted only three minutes. In the end, the American-backed World Bank Consortium meeting in Paris
did provide the short-term ﬁnancial lease of life which the hard pressed regime
in Dacca had begged and overthrown all previous criteria for. The consortium
extended credits worth ^950 million, more than double the previous year’s
disbursement of S348 million.^8 Letters of credit from Bangladesh’s National
Bank were again being accepted on the international ﬁnancial markets. For
the short term the crisis would pass, but into afuture of even deeper in¬
debtedness. The political support which Mujib’s governemnt had hoped to gain from the
United States, following its numerous concessions on internal economic
o
r
1 4 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder ofMujib
policies, the administration of foreign aid and the elimination of known anti-
American personalities from the Cabinet, never really materialized.

Mujib s
concessions were, in asense, adesperate reaction to the crisis, not aﬁrm
commitment to principle, and not necessarily aposition apatron would bank
on for the future.

Many Western diplomats, then in Dacca, were already
openly speculating on how long he would last, faced with growing internal
unrest, in spite of how far he had gone.

Moreover, Mujib had asentimental
political streak, born out of the decade of his opposition politics and the
years he had spent in prison, which sometimes inhibited him.

After the ﬁrst
concessions, he moved slowly on the implementation of the complete econo¬
mic ‘reform package’, being pressed on him by the World Bank and AID
Consortium.

To have gone all the way would have meant the ﬁnal abandon¬
ment and alienation of those political forces in the working class and student
movement which had provided the mUitant basis of the Awami League’s
popularity in the 1970 elections.

Furthermore these forces had, by and large,
already become his most intense opposition.

Nevertheless, he hesitated.

Then, suddenly, partly because his gesture to the Americans had gained him
so little politically, partly as aresult of his own ambivalence and partly
because the sense of political crisis in the aftermath of the famine intensiﬁed
rather than let up, Mujib swerved again.

Like the ﬁnal act of amagician trying
to pull arabbit out of an old hat, Mujib announced the ‘Second Revolution’,
where indeed the ﬁrst had never occurred.

He amended the constitution,
eliminating the ofﬁce of Prime Minister, and made himself President without
the authority of aparliament over him.

This increased the central authority
of the executive.

Opposition newspapers and political parties were banned
and the old Awami League was reformed into agrouping called BAKSAL.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This increased the central authority
of the executive. Opposition newspapers and political parties were banned
and the old Awami League was reformed into agrouping called BAKSAL. It
single party formation which linked up with the two principal pro-
Moscow groups —the Communist Party of Bangladesh (Moni Singh) and the
National Awami Party (Muzzafar). Now, as President, Mujib announced
Emergency measures which would carry out the Second Revolution. For
Western embassies, it all smacked of Mujib’s return to Soviet political
inﬂuence and represented the moment where they ﬁnally gave up on this
Makarios-like ﬁgure. The pro-Western coup d’etat was only half ayear away,
rumours of Mujib’s doom boiled away in Dacca. w a s 
a
a s
‘The Need to Know’ —Nothing
Anumber of contradictions between State Department and C.LA. sources
emerge from our research into the coup which brought Mujib’s so-called
Second Revolution to such adeadly end in August 1975. This is hardly sur¬
prising. In an extended investigation of so involved an incident, we experienced,
contact with U.S. ofﬁcials, aphenomenon which the House Select
Committee on Intelligence, the Pike Committee, found quite standard. With
regard to our repeated requests, under the Freedom of Information Act, for
^ofﬁcial documentary evidence to resolve the obvious contradictions amongst
i n 
o u r
1 4 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
our interviewed sources, we experienced asequence of responses identical
to that of the Pike Committee.

In its ﬁnal report to Congress it stated the
following:
What arrived in response to our subpoenas showed nothing -because it
was mostly deletions.

The deletions came in all shapes 4nd forms.

Typically,
there would be one line left on apage saying, ‘A C.I.A.

project telephoni-
cally approved’ or ‘The Committee voted to approve aC.I.A.

Paper
entitled [title deleted] Often, if there had been numerous items
sidered at ameeting, the deletions themselves had been cut and pasted
together.

For example, item eight might follow item one, giving the
impression that only two items had been considered that day.

Some¬
times there would be only one word left on apage -‘Chile’ -nothing
else, anywhere; but it was still classiﬁed top secret.

The information,
needless to say, was worthless.

c o n -
Moreover, we found in the course of our research how effective the
practice known in the U.S.

intelligence community as ‘compartmentation’
actually is.

This is asystem, employed both by the State Department and
intelligence services, which restricts distribution of information, even among
ofﬁcials with security clearances.

What struck us, in the course of several
interviews, was how truly restrictive the procedure of a‘need to know’ or
knowledge by ‘compartment’ truly is in the foreign service and intelligence
bureaucracies.

Many ofﬁcials know only afew isolated parts, segments of
what makes up the whole history of aperiod.

The ‘need to know’ procedure
has thus, more often than not, become an ofﬁcial form of tuimel vision.

Many
may know asegment, but never the whole.

‘The key to exercising oversight
is knowledge,’ wrote the Pike Committee in its section on the Congressional
right to ofﬁcial documents.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Many
may know asegment, but never the whole. ‘The key to exercising oversight
is knowledge,’ wrote the Pike Committee in its section on the Congressional
right to ofﬁcial documents. ‘This translates into aneed for access to informa¬
tion often held by the agencies themselves, about events in distant places.’^®
Unlike the Pike Committee, we did not have subpoena power to command
documents denied to us. However, we did have something signiﬁcant which
Congressional investigators often lacked in comparable situations. We had
access to many conﬁdential sources and informants among Bengalis close to
the events, to information from diplomats of other nations, and also years of
experience reporting in the region itself. s
/
From these inquiries we have found it difﬁcult, without documentation,
to accept at face value the denials of the American C.I.A. Station Chief
concerning non-involvement and no prior contacts, particularly in the face
of contrary statements from State Department sources. Moreover, if Philip
Cherry’s denials are in fact accurate, it would have represented asigniﬁcant
change in the traditional modus operandi of the Agency. While this is not
impossible, it would have been unusual. As Roger Morris explained:
It is the natural tendency of any C.I.A. station, regardless of who is sitting
in Washington, regardless of the politics or the ideology of the situation,
1 4 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---r Morris explained:
It is the natural tendency of any C.I.A. station, regardless of who is sitting
in Washington, regardless of the politics or the ideology of the situation,
1 4 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Murder of Mujib
to respond to acoup and to keep its lines open. It was the chronic nemesis
of South Vietnamese regimes for years and years that almost any plotter
under any guise with any backing at all could go to the C.I.A. Station in
Saigon and get something like atacit go-ahead. The C.I.A. was very seldom
in the business of crossing them or being astaunch supporter of the regime
in aﬂuid situation like that. Now it doesn’t always happen. If you’ve got
afairly staunch client like the Shah of Iran, then the C.I.A. acts as abolster
to the regime and they tip off the secret police or whatever. But, in any
ﬂuid situation —one sees it in Africa, one sees it in Latin America, and
certainly in South Asia -aC.I.A. Station that may have had its ties out
earlier to these people, that certainly would have been concerned about the
instability of the regime, and might have had difﬁculty dealing with the
regime to begin with given the past history of the United States and
Bangladesh, would have instinctively said, ‘Sure. Okay. We won’t cut your
telephone lines.’'^^
But, what has made the validity of Cherry’s denials apossibility, is the fact
that the Bangladesh coup occurred at the peak of Congressional hearings on
covert operations and the plots to assassinate foreign leaders. Without question,
these hearings in Washington were spreading an air of anxiety and cautiousness
in the Dacca Embassy. According to one Embassy source, the decision of
certain State Department ofﬁcials to disengage and break off contact with
anti-Mujib elements was due to the Church and Pike Committee hearings. As
aconsequence, Washington sources have raised seriously with us the possibi¬
lity —while not ruling out direct C.I.A. involvement —that both senior
foreign service ofﬁcials and C.I.A. personnel at the Embassy could have
been ‘gone around’ or circumvented by ahigher level ‘independent channel.
This practice of ‘going around’ was afrequent and familiar mode of
operation used by Kissinger. The House Select Committee on Intelligence
reported:
This Committee was told by former C.I.A. Director Richard Helms of a
decision to undertake acovert action project in Chile. Mr. Helms had been
called into the Oval Ofﬁce and told by President Nixon, with Dr. Kissinger
and Mr. John Mitchell present, that he was to undertake the project in
spite of C.I.A. reservations. He was told ‘not to inform the Forty Com¬
m i t t e e ’ .
Apattern was emerging.
Not all covert actions were generated by the C.I.A. In particular, para¬
military operations of the worst type seemed to come from outside the
C.I.A. Some projects came from the President. Some projects came from
his Assistant for National Security Affairs [Kissinger], and some had their
beginning in the Department of State.‘^^
The meeting in the President’s Oval Ofﬁce described by Helms occurred on
September 15, 1970, ten days after the free election of Salvador Allende. In
1 4 5eir
beginning in the Department of State.‘^^
The meeting in the President’s Oval Ofﬁce described by Helms occurred on
September 15, 1970, ten days after the free election of Salvador Allende. In
1 4 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Helms’ notes of the meeting, later handed over to Congress, was the succinct
instruction; ‘no involvement of [U.S.] Embassy’.

Within amonth C.I.A.

operatives in Santiago made contact with right-wing assets in Chile’s national
police force and army, presenting them with offers of cash and support for
aputsch, prior to AUende’s conﬁrmation by the Chilean Congress on October
24th.

On Helms’ orders, money and machine-guns were passed to military
conspirators who planned to kill General Rene Schneider, the high ranking
military ofﬁcer who was aconstitutionalist and amajor obstacle to atakeover
by amilitary junta.

Schneider was killed on October 22nd by asquad, later
claimed by the C.I.A.

to be unconnected to its own group.

But Schneider’s
murder failed to provoke the hoped for coup and Allende was conﬁrmed as
the new President.

But this entire operation and subsequent covert measures were carried out
without the knowledge of the U.S.

Ambassador, Edward Korry.

Prior to the
conﬁrmation of Allende, Korry had been advocating amore traditional covert
method of preventing Allende’s conﬁrmation: buying votes in the Chilean
Congress in favour of the election of another candidate who, at the appropriate
moment, would step aside for along-time C.I.A.

associate heading the Chris¬
tian Democrats.

Aquarter of amillion dollars was approved for this operation,
over and above the half-million Korry had already been authorized to spend
in the period leading up to the September 1970 election.

This was only a
small proportion of the 18 million in covert funds (worth ﬁve times this
amount on the black market) which went into C.I.A.

projects, from ﬁnancing
newspapers to fomenting riots in the period 1970-73.

Korry’s option of
buying the election was known as Track I.

The September 15th decision
in the Oval Ofﬁce, to bring about an immediate military coup in order to
stop the course of the electoral process in Chile altogether, was known as
Track II.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Korry’s option of
buying the election was known as Track I. The September 15th decision
in the Oval Ofﬁce, to bring about an immediate military coup in order to
stop the course of the electoral process in Chile altogether, was known as
Track II. Signiﬁcantly, Korry and Embassy foreign service ofﬁcials were to
be excluded from any knowledge of Track II. As Nixon put it, Korry
simply too ‘soft-headed’ to be relied on or trusted for atough covert job. Buying an election is one thing; killing, another. ‘So in Santiago,’ according to one account, ‘the C.I.A. could, as Korry
put it afterwards, ‘disingenuously’ assure him that it had no liaison with
plotters —when in fact it was handing over money and machine-guns to others
certain to reach the conspirators. The C.I.A. was, Korry admitted to senators
ﬁve years later, indeed an ‘invisible’ government; Korry sensed for amoment
that autumn that ‘our’ C.I.A. people were ‘up to something behind my back’,
as he described it to his foreign service deputy, who investigated and found
nothing .... ‘To an abiding contempt for Allende and the democratic system
in Chile, Nixon now brought even greater fervour and matching distrust of
his own government in its most secret councils.’'*^
In Bangladesh on August 15, 1975, Ambassador Eugene Boster certainly
had no knowledge that the night of the 15th would be the night. According
to Embassy sources, Boster could not be found as Mujib fell in ahail of
machine-gun ﬁre. He was not at his residence, nor at any of his normal
haunts. It was adesperate night for Boster’s foreign service deputies, as they
w a s
1 4 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
frantically tried to locate the Ambassador to tell him the President was dead.

Embassy sources close to Boster, interviewed two years after the coup,
expressed doubts similar to Kerry’s about the C.I.A.

Station’s activities
in Dacca at the time.

The possibility of ‘circumvention’ through a‘high-level independent
channel’, not only around the Embassy, but also around local C.I.A.

person¬
nel, is aquestion which has been put seriously to us by several Washington
s o u r c e s .

The games being played inside the Executive Branch are almost impossible
to overestimate.

At this point Kissinger would have felt no hesitation at
all to unseat an already unstable regime and to replace that regime, how-
great the risk, with one he thought was at least no worse, perhaps
better, with American clients.

There was adecided distinction drawn
always by Kissinger and his people between the sort of plotting and con¬
spiracy that was involved in poisoning Fidel Castro or having Patrice
Lumumba murdered on one hand, and watching what Kissinger would
have called ‘the tide of political change’ on the other —and playing a
role in it.

Idon’t think Kissinger would have felt himself responsible for the
murder of Mujib or any other politician gunned down or hanged in acoup
of that kind, any more that he felt himself responsible for the round up
and imprisonment of people in South Vietnam.

Kissinger was shocked at
allegations that he had been responsible for the murder of Allende ....

Certainly, Kissinger could have said to himself: we’re not encouraging the
assassination of anybody, but if agroup of dissidents come to us, promise
to establish amore pro-Western American regime, and it means the replace¬
ment of aguy that has not been particularly friendly and is not avery
stable force; then who are we to stand in the way?

It’s that kind of mentality.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Certainly, Kissinger could have said to himself: we’re not encouraging the
assassination of anybody, but if agroup of dissidents come to us, promise
to establish amore pro-Western American regime, and it means the replace¬
ment of aguy that has not been particularly friendly and is not avery
stable force; then who are we to stand in the way? It’s that kind of mentality. Among them, again, has been Roger Morris:
e v e r
Morris argues that it is not only plausible, but was afamiliar occurrence for
‘nods’ to pro-American dissident groups to be passed through routes which
circumvented authorized channels, such as the Forty Committee, State
Department desks and local C.IA. operatives. Depending on the situation,
the form varied. At times the Agency was used to go around the State De¬
partment. At other times factions within the Agency itself were used to go
around other factions which opposed certain Kissinger operations. As both
the State Department and the Agency came in 1974-75 under close public
and Congressional scrutiny, channels were utilized which went entirely
around both. This type of operation was part of afamiliar style and intra-bureaucratic
tactic, again for reasons that have nothing to do directly with Bangladesh
.... Kissinger clearly had his people and his contacts with dissident
elements inside the C.I.A., not least of which was Angleton and the pro-
Israeli counter-intelligence section on the Middle East. Let me give you
another example entirely outside the realm. Kissinger is ostensibly
1 4 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
conducting peace negotiations with the Arabs and Israelis.

America’s posture
to the civillwar in Lebanon in 1975-76 is one of hands off neutrality.

But the
Israeli intelligence service with the connivance of the C.I.A.’s Israeli section,
not the C.I.A.

entirely, only the Israeli section, is running guns and support¬
ing all out with several million dollars the Christian side of the civil war.

That
is going on with Kissinger’s approval and direct knowledge.

It’s so much at
odds with the public stance of what’s happening that the American Ambas¬
sador is trying to shuttle back and forth to mediate between the two sides,
and is killed as he crosses the ‘no man’s land’ one day.

He is brought back to
Washington and is given astate funeral at the National Cathedral and Henry
Kissinger pronounces his eulogy.

The ruthlessness, the realpolitik of that
gambit suggest almost anything is possible.

It makes what happened in
Bangladesh positively tame by comparison.

Because Bangladesh, whatever
its notoriety, is not the Middle East in American politics.

Some sources have argued to us that 1975 was ayear in which the United
States held back from covert operations and involvement in coups.

This was
presumed by nearly the entire foreign press corps in New Delhi, when unsub¬
stantiated innuendos and accusations were made by Indian ofﬁcials and
certain South Asian Communist Parties at the time of Mujib’s fall.

The ﬁrm
view of most Western observers, then in New Delhi, was that no moment
could have been more absurd for the United States to have any covert link
with such an event.

Each day Western reporters in Delhi read the revelations
of the Washington intelligence investigations.

It was obvious, to the well-
informed, that any U.S.

connection with the Bangladesh August 1975 coup
was simply alogical and political impossibility.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was obvious, to the well-
informed, that any U.S. connection with the Bangladesh August 1975 coup
was simply alogical and political impossibility. However, despite this rational
calculation of what constituted an ‘impossible moment’ for such activity, a
year later the truth of the Angolan operation came to light. According to
M o r r i s ;
In late 1974 and early 1975, at the height of the revelations about the
C.I.A. and at the height of criticisms of American involvement, the C.I.A. with Henry Kissinger’s initiative in the Forty Committee is plunging into
Angola. It’s only after what is exposed by Seymour Hersh’s story in The
New York Times in January 1976 that Congress acts to cut off the money. But, the guns are being run into the factions in Angola. Kissinger is pro¬
ceeding all that year covertly with an intervention in avery obscure
place, where the national interest is at best marginal, but one which he
conceives as an important battleground with the Soviets. At the same time the Church Committee is playing with dart guns,
exposing assassination attempts, talking about Chile, and compiling avery
embarrassing record. These things are piling out on the front pages of The
New York Times and The Washington Post. The Administration is fending
them off and there is great embarrassment. Colby [Director of the C.I.A.]
is up on the Hill every other day. Meanwhile, Kissinger is proceeding to
conduct aclassic covert operation. If one is looking for any element of
shame or hesitation, one will not ﬁnd it in the record of the period. The
Bangladesh thing is much less prominent; much more quiet; much easier
t o d o . 1 4 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder of Mujib
Efforts to interview both Henry Kissinger and Harold Saunders on these
matters in April 1979 were unsuccessful.

Staff assistants to both men insisted
that telephonic interviews would not be possible, and that afull written
interrogatory be presented.

Adetailed list of questions was sent to each man
covering issues related to their knowledge of the secret 1971 Calcutta negotia¬
tions, and whether select senior American ofﬁcials, including themselves, had
ever had prior knowledge of the coup plans which toppled the Bangladesh
President, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

At the time of writing no response had
been received from either man to these inquiries.

Mujibur Rahman’s demise in Bangladesh marked, as did Bhutto’s four
years later in Pakistan,the end of an entire era of hopes and illusions
surrounding the prospects for social democracy in conditions of severe back¬
wardness and underdevelopment.

In both societies —Bangladesh and Pakistan —
the regression to forms of military and bureaucratic dictatorship has reasserted
itself like an old depressing cancer.

The source of these countries’ difference
from India and Sri Lanka originates in the late 1950s when aweak military
establishment in Pakistan was catapulted into adecade of vast growth and
power by the strategic imperatives of America’s global reach for military
alliances.

For the decade of the 1960s much of the democratic and socialist
opposition, including democrats like Mujibur Rahman, found themselves in
prison.

Only the arrival of mass politics and mass politicization swept the mili¬
tary dictatorships back to the barracks.

The cycle has spun around again in
both societies and, although elections under military hegemony is the order
of the generals, there are no illusions of apopular ‘new democracy’ emerging
under such conditions.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Only the arrival of mass politics and mass politicization swept the mili¬
tary dictatorships back to the barracks. The cycle has spun around again in
both societies and, although elections under military hegemony is the order
of the generals, there are no illusions of apopular ‘new democracy’ emerging
under such conditions. Whether, at least in Bangladesh, the long arm of
American power and the ‘security’ vision of Kissinger, assisted in this re¬
version to past authoritarian forms is yet to be dug out down to the last
detail. In the meantime, the long night of ‘Martial democracy’ will continue
in Dacca until the history of what has happened in the past half-decade ﬁnally
breaks out of obscurity into the open. Footnotes and References
1 . The principal source for this version of events was Atiqal Alam, the
local Bangladesh stringer for Reuters and the BBC. Those reporters
who gained access to Dacca on August 20, only to be expelled on the
22nd, were kept conﬁned to the Hotel Intercontinental. The principal
source for what became the established version of the August events was
Alam’s, who visited the hotel and spoke with his foreign colleagues
before they were deported. Alam, after Bangladesh’s War of Indepen¬
dence, had been arrested by Mujib’s new Awami League authorities on
charges of collaboration with the Pakistan Army. He had remained in
Dacca throughout the nine months of the Liberation War and worked at
P a k i s t a n R a d i o . A f t e r h i s a r r e s t h e s a i d h e h a d b e e n f o r c e d t o w o r k f o r
t h e P a k i s t a n a u t h o r i t i e s . D e t a i n e d w i t h o u t t r i a l f o r s e v e r a l m o n t h s A l a m
1 4 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
was ﬁnally released when Mujib began apolicy of leniency towards
collaborators and alleged collaborators.

After he was freed he eventually
joined the Dacca English daily, The People, and continued to represent
the BBC and Reuters in Ban^adesh.

In the last year of the Mujib
regime, The People and certain other newspapers were closed by the
BAKSAL authorities.

Following Mujib’s death Alam became the prin¬
cipal source of foreign news dispatches on Bangladesh’s internal develop¬
ments and functioned as an important publicist to the various successor
regimes in the post-Mujib period (a time in which foreign reporters were
frequently barred from entering the country).

In November 1975 the
left-wing uprising inspired and organized by the Socialist National
Party (J.S.D.) sent Alam ﬂeeing to London.

He returned to Dacca after
the uprising had been crushed and those who had physically threatened
him and accused him of prejudicial reporting had been arrested.

These
included ayounger brother of Colonel Abu Taher.

Alam at this stage
became an open backer of the Martial Law authorities under Major-
General Ziaur Rahman.

This went even to the extent of offering public
apologies for the regime’s involvement in mass executions during 1977.

In October 1977 arebellion in the Bangladesh Armed Forces against
Ziaur Rahman’s Military junta resulted in the most severe political
crackdown Bangladesh had witnessed since independence.

The Times
reported that at least 230 persons had died during the rebellion of 2
October.

Unofﬁcial estimates put the casualty ﬁgure mugh higher.

There followed an ofﬁcial announcement that Special Military Tribunals
had been formed to try ‘traitors’.

The New York Times reported on 20
October that Bangladesh’s military government had executed 37 mem¬
bers of the army and that others were awaiting trial.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There followed an ofﬁcial announcement that Special Military Tribunals
had been formed to try ‘traitors’. The New York Times reported on 20
October that Bangladesh’s military government had executed 37 mem¬
bers of the army and that others were awaiting trial. On 27 October,
The Financial Times reported that more than 1,000 persons, mainly
servicemen, were awaiting processing by the Speical Military Tribunals. Shortly afterwards another 55 death sentences were announced. A
detailed report appeared in The Guardian (29 November 1977): ‘The
exact number of people allegedly sentenced to death is not known, but
most observers put the ﬁgure in the hundreds. Foreigners living near
the Cantonment say they frequently hear volleys of riﬂe shots from
ﬁring squads in the middle of the night. Other sources claim that
people are being hanged at Dacca’s central gaol.’ On 5March 1978 The
Sunday Times reported aﬁgure of 600 persons having been executed in
the aftermath of the October incidents. According to human rights
organizations in Britain, these sentences represented the ﬁrst ofﬁcially
directed mass executions ever carried out anywhere in South Asia since
independence. At the end of October, Amnesty International cabled
Major-General Ziaur Rahman saying Amnesty ‘was gravely disturbed
about large-scale executions of military men now being carried out in
Bangladesh’. Amnesty called for ‘an end to the executions’ and the
commuting of death sentences on those awaiting execution. The
Amnesty statement said, ‘its experience of the Bangladesh trial pro¬
cedure of military tribunals trying civilians and military men without
legal safeguards in camera gave cause for deep concern that the trial of
the 92 so far sentenced to death has fallen far short of internationally
accepted standards.’
1 5 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Murder ofMujib
It was in this context that Atiqal Alam emerged as astrong public
defender of Ziaur Rahman’s martial law regime.

In asigned article in
the Dacca weekly Holiday, anewspaper once known during the Mujib
period as an active defender of civil liberties, prisoner rights and lawful
trial procedures, Alam attacked Amnesty International for ‘misplaced
sympathy’.

(See Holiday, 30 October 1977) Justifying the executions
Alam asked what Bangladesh should have done, ‘Let them go scot-free
and strike back again with telling vehemence?’ Alam also attacked the
Indian Leader Jayprakash Narayan who had called for an end to military
rule in Bangladesh.

The BBC correspondent concluded \\is Holiday edi¬
torial with apublic appeal to President Ziaur Rahman to throw ‘his hat
in the political ring’ and establish his own political party.

Shortly, there¬
after, the General founded his political front known as JAGODAL,
which later developed into the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP).

In July 1978 this writer intereviewed Atiqal Alam in London and
raised with him allegations made by members of the Awami League and
other Bengali political circles that he had ‘planted’ the story of the
August 1975 coup d’etat.

He said such allegations were ‘completely
false and utter fabrications’.

He stated that he had told his conﬁned
journalist colleagues, whom he visited at the Hotel Intercontinental on
the 20th and 21st of August, what had happened as best as he under¬
s t o o d t h e f a c t s a t t h e t i m e .

By March 1979, Alam began to sever his earlier political identiﬁ¬
cation with Ziaur Rahman’s military regime.

In amajor piece written
for The Guardian (1 March 1979), Alam publicy alleged that the
General had employed widespread rigging during the 18 February
1979 Parliamentary election.--- PAGE BREAK ---

By March 1979, Alam began to sever his earlier political identiﬁ¬
cation with Ziaur Rahman’s military regime. In amajor piece written
for The Guardian (1 March 1979), Alam publicy alleged that the
General had employed widespread rigging during the 18 February
1979 Parliamentary election. ‘There are few in Bangladesh,’ wrote
Alam, ‘who will be persuaded to agree that the BNP has won atwo-
thirds majority because this three-month-old party has become pre¬
eminently popular or that its helmsman. President Ziaur Rahman, has
attained asort of charisma which has replaced that of the late Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, the nation’s founding father who was killed in a
military coup in 1975.’
2. Other than Rashid, and possibly his brother-in-law Farooq, the rest of
the majors recruited into the operation appear to have been ignorant
of any previous links with Khondakar Mustaque. Major Rashid was the
only military ﬁgure in the operation fully trusted with knowledge of
earlier political liaisons; the other ofﬁcers and sepoys recruited were
kept in the dark about post-coup political plans. Rashid, after the coup,
was reported by some sources as being Mustaque’s nephew. 3. For adetailed discussion of the history and programmes of the Comilla
Academy see Harry W. Blair, ‘Institutional Approaches to Rural Devel¬
opment in Bangladesh’, (reprint: Rural Development Committee,
Center for Internationa Studies, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York). 4. ‘World In Action’, ITV/Granada Television, August 1976. 5 . I b i d . 6. See Appendix C, Interview with Philip Cherry, p. 180. 7. B. Hartman and J. Boyce, ‘Bangladesh: Aid To The Needy?’, May 1978,
Vol. IV, No. 1, (International Policy Report, Center for International
Policy, Washington D.C.); ‘Bangladesh Elite Said To Grab U.S. Aid’,
151

--- PAGE BREAK ---ladesh: Aid To The Needy?’, May 1978,
Vol. IV, No. 1, (International Policy Report, Center for International
Policy, Washington D.C.); ‘Bangladesh Elite Said To Grab U.S. Aid’,
151

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
International Herald Tribune, 20 June 1978;and ‘View from aBangla¬
desh Village’, The Nation, (New York), 4March 1978.
Azizur Rahman Khan, ‘Poverty and Inequality in Rural Bangladesh’,
Poverty and Landlessness in Rural Asia (I.L.O., Geneva, 1977), pp. 137-47.
State Dept., Congressional Presentation, FY 1978, Security Assistance
Program, Vol. 1.
‘Afghanistan After The Coup: Soviet Inﬂuence Grows’, Financial Times,
29 August 1978; F. Halliday, ‘Revolution In Afghanistan’,Left
Review, No. 112, Nov. 1978; S. Harrison, ‘After the Afghan Coup:
Nightmare in Baluchistan’, Foreign Policy, No. 32, Autumn 1978.
Bhashani’s N.A.P. was founded in Dacca in September 1957 at acon¬
vention of ‘anti-imperialist democratic forces’. In the aftermath of the
Sino-Soviet split, the N.A.P. itself ultimately divided —the pro-Peking
tendency being known as N.A.P. (Bhashani) and the pro-Moscow
tendency as N.A.P. (Muzzaffar), led by Professor Muzzafar Ahmed. See
T. Maniruzzaman, ‘Radical Politics and The Emergence of Bangladesh’,
(Bangladesh Books International, Dacca, 1975), pp. 12-13, reprinted in
Radical Politics in South Asia, (MIT Press, 1973); editors P. Brass and
M . F r a n d a .
See Appendix A, The Carnegie Papers, p. 165.
I b i d .
For asympathetic discussion of Chashi and his ‘Rangunia Alternative’,
see H. Blair, op. cit., pp. 32-4. For abroader view of non-socialist land
reform programmes in Asia and their political context, see A.W. McCoy,
‘Land Reform As Coutner-Revolution’, Bulletin of Concerned Asian
Scholars, Vol. 3, No. 1, Winter-Spring 1971.
Address by Maxwell D. Taylor, Graduation Exercise, International
Police Academy, Washington, D.C., December 17, 1965. (U.S. A.I.D.
press release, same date.)
M. T. Klare, Supplying Repression, (The Field Foundation, New York,
1977) p. 19; and War Without End (Vintage Books, New York, 1972),
C h . 9 .
The New York Times, 3Aug. 1971; see also the testimony of D. Luce
and K. Barton Osborn in U.S. Assistance Programs in Vietnam, and the
interview with Phoenix adviser, Jeffry Smith, in ‘From the Ashes,
Phoenix’, Commonweal, 20 April 1973, pp. 154-9.
Congressional Record, 1Oct. 1973, p. S18240.
Jack Anderson, The Washington Post, 8Oct. 1973.
U.S. House of Representatives, House Foreign Affairs Committee,
Foreign Assistance Request Hearings, June 1974.
U.S. A.I.D. Project Implementation Order/Pakistan (O/P No. 391-113-
1-00119), (obtained through Freedom of information Act).
YAaxc, Supplying Repression, op cit., p.21.
R.O. Paxton, Vichy France: Old Guard and New Order 1940-1944,
(Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1972), p. 331.
‘Dacca’s Strongman Consolidates’, Far Eastern Economic Review,
1 6 J a n . 1 9 7 6 .
U.S. A.I.D., ‘Participant Report: Musa Miyan Chowdhury’, IPA General
Course No. 30 and INPOLSE Specialization in Riot Control, June 1970,
(PIO/P No. 391-12710-113).
8 .
9 .
1 0 .
I I .
1 2 .
1 3 .
1 4 .
1 5 .
1 6 .
1 7 .
1 8 .
1 9 .
2 0 .
2 1 .
2 2 .
2 3 .
2 4 .
2 5 .
1 5 2e No. 30 and INPOLSE Specialization in Riot Control, June 1970,
(PIO/P No. 391-12710-113).
8 .
9 .
1 0 .
I I .
1 2 .
1 3 .
1 4 .
1 5 .
1 6 .
1 7 .
1 8 .
1 9 .
2 0 .
2 1 .
2 2 .
2 3 .
2 4 .
2 5 .
1 5 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---Specialization in Riot Control, June 1970,
(PIO/P No. 391-12710-113).
8 .
9 .
1 0 .
I I .
1 2 .
1 3 .
1 4 .
1 5 .
1 6 .
1 7 .
1 8 .
1 9 .
2 0 .
2 1 .
2 2 .
2 3 .
2 4 .
2 5 .
1 5 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Murder of Mujib
D. Sanford, ‘Agitators in aFertilizer Factory’, New Republic, 11 Feb.
1 9 6 7 .
‘Murder in Dacca: Ziaur Rahman’s Second
E c o n o m i c 
a n d 
P o l i ¬
tical Weekly (Bombay), 25 Mar. 1968; ‘Bangladesh Executions’, The
Washington Post, 10 Feb. 1978.
Hartmann and Boyce, op. cit., p. 11.
Interview with John Marks, author of The C.I.A. and the Cult of In¬
telligence. See also L. Stern, The Wrong Horse, (Times Books, New
York, 1977), pp. 103-9; and House Select Ctee. on Intelligence: The
Pike Papers, The Village Voice, (New York, Feb. 1976), p. 22.
‘Interim Report On Alleged Assassination Plots’, Book IV, U.S. Senate
Select Cte. on U.S. Intelligence Activities, Report No. 94-755, 23 April
1976, pp. 12M2.
Far Eastern Economic Review, 7-14 Jan. 1977, article by W. Shawcross.
Roger Morris, Uncertain Greatness: Henry Kissinger &American
Foreign Policy (Quartet Books, London, 1977).
See Appendix B, Interview with Roger Morris, p. 169.
Interview with Kamal Hossain, Foreign Minister of Bangladesh 1973-75,
in New York, September 1978.
The triage theory was acrude survivalist attitude which received much
attention in the western press during 1977. It was the period after the
1973 Middle East War, when world commodity markets were plunged
into crisis. Simultaneously with rapid oil price rises, there were bad
harvests in several parts of the globe, sending grain prices skyrocketing.
This was also aperiod of widespread famine in Bangladesh, India and
Ethiopia. Certain intellectual tendencies in the West came up with a
notion linking Social Darwinism with their vision of aworld based on
scarce resources. The triage theory argued that the weak and poor
nations would have to be ‘sacriﬁced’ and that it was the moral duty of
the strong to survive. The metaphor, of course, was an overloaded life
boat. When ‘scarcity’ gave way within afew years to overproduction
and commodity surpluses, triage theories went overboard.
‘South Asia Swallows Its Pride’, Far Eastern Economic Review, 21 Nov.
1 9 7 5 .
‘A Crack in Mujib’s Power Machine’, Far Eastern Economic Review, 15
N o v . 1 9 7 4 .
‘South Asia Swallows Its Pride’, Far Eastern Economic Review, 21 Nov.
1 9 7 5 .
The Pike Papers, op. cit., p. 9.
Loc. cit., p. 5.
See Appendix B.
The Pike Papers, op. cit., p. 9.
Morris, op. cit., p. 236.
‘Zulﬁkar Ali Bhutto: Condemned by “Rule of Law” ’, by L. Lifschultz,
New Statesman, 16. Feb. 1979.
2 6 .
2 7 .
2 8 .
2 9 .
3 0 .
3 1 .
3 2 .
3 3 .
3 4 .
3 5 .
3 6 .
3 7 .
3 8 .
3 9 .
4 0 .
4 1 .
4 2 .
4 3 .
4 4 .
1 5 3o: Condemned by “Rule of Law” ’, by L. Lifschultz,
New Statesman, 16. Feb. 1979.
2 6 .
2 7 .
2 8 .
2 9 .
3 0 .
3 1 .
3 2 .
3 3 .
3 4 .
3 5 .
3 6 .
3 7 .
3 8 .
3 9 .
4 0 .
4 1 .
4 2 .
4 3 .
4 4 .
1 5 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---e of Law” ’, by L. Lifschultz,
New Statesman, 16. Feb. 1979.
2 6 .
2 7 .
2 8 .
2 9 .
3 0 .
3 1 .
3 2 .
3 3 .
3 4 .
3 5 .
3 6 .
3 7 .
3 8 .
3 9 .
4 0 .
4 1 .
4 2 .
4 3 .
4 4 .
1 5 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Appendices to Part II:
A. The Carnegie Papers
In 1973, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace commissioned a
major study and analysis of the conduct of U.S. Government policy during
the 1971 Bangladesh crisis. The purpose of the project was to examine, in
detail, the more than apparent failure of American policy in responding to
the enormous human consequences of Pakistan’s civil war. Un !er the mandate
of what Carnegie terms its ‘Humanitarian Studies Program’, the Endowment’s
liberal researchers set out to examine and reveal the actual process whereby
U.S. policy could virtually countenance or Tilt’ towards asituation of geno¬
cide. Drawing on previous work concerned with Biafra and the Nigerian
civil war, the Endowment pressed on to an examination of the Bangladesh
crisis. Carnegie researchers interviewed, often in exhaustive detail, more than
ahundred senior ofﬁcials from the U.S. State Department, Central Intelli¬
gence Agency, Defense Department, White House’s National Security Council,
Agency for ^ternational Development, Ofﬁce of Public Safety, and other
agencies which had any connection, even tangential, with the Bangladesh
crisis. Research proceeded for ayear. However, the Carnegie Endowment
never issued aﬁnal report. Due to internal dissension at Carnegie, the study
was never completed. From sources within the Endowment, all interviews
and raw information gathered in the course of the study were made available
to the present writers. The documents ran into thousands of pages. The
material reveals new and fundamentally important information for historical
research pertaining to the 1971 period, but also provides important insights
into relationships established in this phase and earlier, that have great bearing
on later developments in Bangladesh, particularly the events of 1975.
In the Unied States, the Carnegie Endowment is one of two principal
established centres for foreign policy research outside ofﬁcial U.S. govern¬
mental organizations. The other is the Council on Foreign Relations, which
publishes the quarterly Foreign Affairs, and has had close identiﬁcation
with ﬁgures such as Henry Kissinger. The Carnegie Endowment, which
publishes its own major quarterly,Policy, v/as viewed during the
Kissinger era as acentre critical of Nixon Administration policies, and employed,
as researchers, anumber of former Kissinger staff members who had quit the
Administration over differences with Kissinger. When the Carter Administra¬
tion took over in Washington, m?ny of the Endowment’s resident staff moved
155rmer Kissinger staff members who had quit the
Administration over differences with Kissinger. When the Carter Administra¬
tion took over in Washington, m?ny of the Endowment’s resident staff moved
155

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
into top positions in the State Department.

In tWs appendix we try to unravel what the U.S.

Administration was doing
in South Asia in 1970-71; in doing so, we publish several excerpts, quotations
and summaries of the thousands of pages of The Carnegie Papers on Bangladesh.

We have followed aprocedure of not identifying, by name, junior ofﬁcials
still serving in U.S.

government departments against whom recriminations
could one day be taken for their more honest and telling remarks.

We were just opening up relations with China which were in adelicate
position.

Kissinger’s trip was in July [1971 ], President Nixon’s trip in
February, and General Haig’s trip [before that].

We were just beginning to
talk to Chou En-Lai and other leaders.

We had to demonstrate to China
that we were areliable government to deal with.

We had to show China
that we respect amutual friend and opposed the crossing of international
borders.

So it was not so much a‘thanks Yahya for helping us with China’,
as demonstrating to China we were areliable country to deal with, and
that we stand by amutual friend.

That is we would even take the domestic
heat to show that what we were pushing was the right thing —we’d
honour our commitments.

All of this was done in the recognition that
India is the dominant power on the subcontinent and that we had our
long-term global interests at stake.

However, we saw belatedly —and I’ll be the ﬁrst to recognize -that
we were kind of slow in recognizing the humanitarian thing and all the
atrocities.

(From The Carnegie Papers, Winston Lord, Kissinger’s Director
of Planning, National Security Council.)
Then Sisco [Deputy Secretary of State] went around the room.

The
meeting included Defense people, A.I.D., C.I.A., the White House, as well
as State.

There were only two out of that whole group who expressed the
opinion that Pakistan could survive.

One, surprisingly enough, was Peter
Cargo who was an old Pakistan hand.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There were only two out of that whole group who expressed the
opinion that Pakistan could survive. One, surprisingly enough, was Peter
Cargo who was an old Pakistan hand. He admitted he hadn’t studied the
problem and was just going on memory of the Pakistan Army. He said he
didn’t see how any group of Bengali irregulars could defeat that Army, and
I’ll admit that if you’ve seen the Pakistan Army, it does seem pretty illogi¬
cal. But it was happening. The only other one who disagreed was Hal
Saunders from the White House Staff [National Security Council] who
said he just didn’t think any organized force could be beaten by abunch
of guerrillas. Ithink Iimmediately got on Mr. Saunders’ bad list by pointing
out that it had happened, or was in the process of happening, in places
like Cuba and Vietnam and anumber of others; and that it was especially
likely to happen when, as in Vietnam, the country supplying the organized
force was far away. Saunders had studied the problem and he said that
the President was very friendly to Pakistan and not very friendly toward
India. This struck me as the kind of thing you would have expected at the
Bau Platz in Vienna. You know, ‘I Like Kaiser Wilhelm, therefore, how can
he lose?’ Imean, to me it was apropos of nothing who the President liked
or didn’t like. (Senior Political Analyst, Department of State.)
1 5 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Carnegie Papers
The Bengali Sideshow
On the eve of the American invasion into Cambodia in 1970, Henry Kissinger
remarked to his colleagues at the National Security Council, ‘We’re not inter¬
ested in Cambodia.

We’re only interested in it not being used as abase.’
Cambodia, as William Shawcross has termed it, was a‘sideshow’ for the
Americans.

In this exercise on the strategic periphery,,nearly 500,000 Khmers
were killed or wounded in American bombing, and an estimated two and a
half million peasants escaped the air war only by ﬂeeing to Phnom Penh and
other towns as refugees.

Kissinger’s attitude to Bangladesh ayear later was
little different.

There was small interest in Bangladesh itself or the issues of
democracy and self-determination being confronted within its society.

These
small nations were simply not interesting for global thinkers, except in terms
of manipulation and manoeuvre within the context of the larger strategic
arena.

If Cambodia was a‘sideshow’ for Kissinger, one can be sure Bangladesh
did not even make the back lot.

Nonetheless, the consequences of Kissinger’s
pro-Pakistan “tilt’, American supplied weapons and new shipments of ammu¬
nition, went way beyond Cambodian casualty and refugee statistics.

The two major debacles for Kissinger during Nixon’s ﬁrst administration
were Cambodia and Bangladesh.

For Americans, the developments around
the Cambodian invasion are well known and well remembered: the national
strikes at universities across the country, the killings at Kent State and
the mass demonstrations which followed in Washington.

From Kissinger’s
own entourage there were aspate of sudden resignations.

But the internal
crisis the Bangladesh events created within the Nixon Administration was
much less noticed and much less reported.

Nevertheless, within the ranks of
the State Department, the spontaneous revolt against Kissinger’s policy was
genuinely unprecedented, ‘Never before have we encountered that much
dissent from U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But the internal
crisis the Bangladesh events created within the Nixon Administration was
much less noticed and much less reported. Nevertheless, within the ranks of
the State Department, the spontaneous revolt against Kissinger’s policy was
genuinely unprecedented, ‘Never before have we encountered that much
dissent from U.S. foreign policy,’ Ronald Koven, The Washington Post’s
foreign editor told Carnegie researchers. ‘This had acompletely unique
quality in my experience. The only thing Ican compare it to is the dissent
against U.S. De Gaulle policy where many French diplomats were unhappy. But never before [from Administration ofﬁcials] ablow-by-blow, hit-by-hit
leaking like this.’
Let us review brieﬂy, again, the essential moments of the crisis and its
development. After adecade of military dictatorship, Pakistan held what was
widely considered the ﬁrst free and democratic elections in its history. These
occurred in December 1970. The East Pakistan based Awami League won an
absolute majority in the proposed National Assembly and, according to all
agreed procedures, the leader of the Awami League, Mujibur Rahman, was
expected to become Prime Minister of all of Pakistan. The political con¬
sequences of this result would have meant afundamental shift in the ﬁnancial
domination the Western wing had exercised over the economy of the East
for more than two decades. The military authorities, under pressure from
irredentist elements in the Punjab and Zulﬁkar Ali Bhutto’s party, the
P.P.P., refused to relinquish this dimension of the Western wing’s political
1 5 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
domination.

On 1March 1971, the country’s provisional military junta,
under General Yahya Khan, postponed the convening of the National Assembly
scheduled for 3March, provoking mass civil disobedience in East Pakistan.

Then, on March 25, in the worst bloodshed ever seen in asingle night in South
Asia, the Pakistan Army cracked down on the country’s democratic move¬
ment, driving Pakistan into an irrevocable civil war and Bangladesh toward
complete independence.

Within the American State Department the Bangladesh developments
created severe problems.

Despite the mass killings in Dacca, the fact they
were being carried out with American supplied CENTO/SEATO weaponry,
and that all this represented the crushing of ademocratic election, it none¬
theless became clear to those in the State Department sensitive to the area’s
crisis, that the upper echelons of the Administration were inexplicably and
dogmatically determined to ‘tilt’ towards the Pakistan junta.

The liberals in
the American Foreign Service, in particular those in Dacca watching the
mass murder, could not take it with the expected reserve and cynicism so
familiar to the diplomatic profession.

In what was arare, indeed unprece¬
dented, act of collective dissent for the U.S.

Foreign Service, 20 U.S.

Con¬
sulate ofﬁcials led by Archer Blood, the Consul-General in Dacca, cabled
from East Pakistan their common disgust with ofﬁcial American policy.

Provided to Carnegie researchers and dated 6April 1971, the cable was
entitled a‘Dissent From US Policy Toward East Pakistan’:
With the conviction that U.S.

policy related to recent developments
in East Pakistan serves neither our moral interests, broadly deﬁned, nor our
national interests, narrowly deﬁned, numerous ofﬁcers of AmConGen
Dacca, USAID Dacca and USIS Dacca consider it their duty to register
strong dissent with fundamental aspects of this policy.

Our government
has failed to denounce the suppression of democracy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

policy related to recent developments
in East Pakistan serves neither our moral interests, broadly deﬁned, nor our
national interests, narrowly deﬁned, numerous ofﬁcers of AmConGen
Dacca, USAID Dacca and USIS Dacca consider it their duty to register
strong dissent with fundamental aspects of this policy. Our government
has failed to denounce the suppression of democracy. Our government
has failed to denounce atrocities. Our government has failed to take force¬
ful measures to protect its citizens while at the same time bending over
backwards to placate the West Pak dominated government and to lessen
any deservedly negative international public relations impact against
them. Our government has evidenced what many will consider moral
bankruptcy, ironically at atime when the U.S.S.R. sent President Yahya
amessage defending democracy, condemning the arrest of aleader of a
democratically elected majority party, incidentally pro-West, and calling
for an end to repressive measures and bloodshed. In our most recent
policy paper for Pakistan, our interests in Pakistan were deﬁned as pri¬
marily humanitarian, rather than strategic. But we have chosen not to
intervene, even morally, on the grounds that the Awami conﬂict, in which
unfortunately the overworked term genocide is applicable, is purely an
internal matter of asovereign state. Private Americans have expressed
disgust. We, as professional public servants, express our dissent with current
policy and fervently hope that our true and lasting interests here can be
deﬁned and our policies redirected. 1 5 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Carnegie Papers
When the cable clattered through from Dacca at 4ajn., agroup of the
State Department’s South Asia area specialists gathered on the seventh ﬂoor
of the Department, where the Secretary of State presides and where night
trafﬁc comes in.

They all fully agreed with the Dissent and decided to add
their signatures.

In addition, they drafted their own letter.

The group
included: Howard Schaffer, Cra% Baxter, Douglas Cockran, Anthony
Quainton, Townsend Swayze, Andrew Kilgore, and Howies and Flatten.

Now numbering nearly thirty, the dissenters were listened to and then told
formally and superﬁcially how much the Department needed ‘internal
debate’.

In the days ahead they were systematically ignored and frozen out
from the making of policy.

When Kissinger two years later moved from the White House’s National
Security Council to take over the State Department, he began apurge against
what he euphemistically termed ‘clientism’ in the Foreign Service.

It was a
campaign which took the form of counterposing ‘disciplined loyalty’ to
‘area expertise’.

In Kissinger’s mind a‘clientist’ was one of those Foreign
Service experts who became ‘too involved’ with the issues, problems and
people of aspeciﬁc area.

This type of attitude was not compatible with the
principal imperatives of the Kissinger Doctrine, to which each and every
regional concern had to be clearly subordinate to global strategic goals.

Kissinger’s view was that regional specialists should be moved out of their
areas before they became too emotionally and sentimentally involved,
thus inhibiting their effectiveness when certain policies decided on at higher
levels were to be carried out.

Those who opposed Kissinger in this view
saw in his ‘pragmatic objectivity’ aeuphemism for his own ignorant cold¬
bloodedness.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kissinger’s view was that regional specialists should be moved out of their
areas before they became too emotionally and sentimentally involved,
thus inhibiting their effectiveness when certain policies decided on at higher
levels were to be carried out. Those who opposed Kissinger in this view
saw in his ‘pragmatic objectivity’ aeuphemism for his own ignorant cold¬
bloodedness. Both the Cambodian and Bangladesh crises were the source
of Kissinger’s bitterness at State Department specialists who could not grasp
or agree to his strategic subordination of every speciﬁc task to his global
planning. At any rate he rarely revealed to anyone, as with the dramatic
China reversal, what the higher strategic goals were until any prospective
new deal was afait accompli. It was known that experts, or the well-
informed, had opposed him on Cambodia and Bangladesh. From then on he
preferred loyal generalists who would implement White House policy without
second thoughts. In the years ahead, many of the Bangladesh dissenters
found themselves moved out of South Asia concerns, only to be rehabili¬
tated many years later under the Carter Administration. The Carnegie Papers reveal adimension of tragic, if not pathetic, opera
in the higher councils of American policy making. The meetings and inter¬
changes recalled by ofﬁcials seem to have reduced all the great issues of the
crisis —genocide in Bengal,-superpower rivalry, American policy toward
dictatorship and democracy in Pakistan —down to two crude denomi¬
nators: Nixon’s personal hatred of India and Kissinger’s obsession with China
negotiations. One State Department ofﬁcial recalling Nixon’s visit to South Asia in
1967 put it this way:
1 5 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---ixon’s personal hatred of India and Kissinger’s obsession with China
negotiations. One State Department ofﬁcial recalling Nixon’s visit to South Asia in
1967 put it this way:
1 5 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Back in April 1967,1 had Nixon in my house for about three hours. He’d
just been in ameeting with Indira Gandhi and he castigated her. He said
she was no better than her father; that none of them were any better
t h a n K r i s h n a M e n o n . H e s a i d h e c o u l d n ’ t u n d e r s t a n d h o w I c o u l d s t a n d
Indians; how Icould stand living in Calcutta or Bombay. 1think the
President’s dislike of India was an important consideration [in the ’71
crisis! ●●●●There’s aguy at Harvard now who has come up with the
theory that there are three models for foreign policy decision making.
Well, Ithink the fourth model is the important one: gut reaction foreign
policy. What’s the President’s gut reaction, [i.e,] these dirty mothers
have done this to us, so we’ll do that to them.
Another State Department source told the Carnegie researchers:
You’ve got this: we like Pakistanis, we always have. Don’t ask me why.
They do the right things. In the 1960s when Nixon was making his -
what was it, ‘three trips around the world’ —the Indians never failed to
do something to stick their thumb in his eye. While the Paks ﬁgured,
what can it cost us to make alittle fuss over him? He knows some
people, has some contacts that can be useful to us, so what can it cost us?
They made the investment.
What goes into the making of American foreign policy, of course, usually
bears little resemblance to mystical conceptions of well informed, systematic
and careful decisions being made by wise judicious policy makers v/ho are
in control of asituation and apolicy. Nonetheless, while vanity and prejudice
may play apart within certain constraints, they hardly explain the much
deeper determinants underlying U.S. foreign policy, or the origins of American
global paramountcy in the mid-twentieth century. The subjective dimension
of a‘dirty mothers/gut reaction’ theory of history adds merely, in our
view, superb and lurid details to what are more objective and underlying
processes. All such issues of deeper historical analysis, however, are beyond
the scope of this report.
Nixon’s personal prejudices were also recalled by Marvin Kalb, co-author
of the biography Kissinger, and the Columbia Broadcasting System’s State
Department correspondent during the Bangladesh crisis. In an interview with
Carnegie investigators, Kalb recalled the following incidents:
Carnegie: Was it amatter of our not having any plan or action, or one of
subordinating [our] Pakistan policy to larger more pressing policies?
Kalb: First, Idon’t think they [Kissinger and Nixon] had aplan. Number
two, Ithink they underestimated the situation in terms of its seriousness.
Number three, Nixon has apsychological thing about female leaders. He
just didn’t like Mrs. Gandhi, and he did like military generals like Yahya
Khan .... After four or ﬁve months of indecision, they had major
breakthroughs on China. In July, Kissinger had already made his trip.
1 6 0e Mrs. Gandhi, and he did like military generals like Yahya
Khan .... After four or ﬁve months of indecision, they had major
breakthroughs on China. In July, Kissinger had already made his trip.
1 6 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---e did like military generals like Yahya
Khan .... After four or ﬁve months of indecision, they had major
breakthroughs on China. In July, Kissinger had already made his trip.
1 6 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Carnegie Papers
By that time, they were interested in only one thing —to caress and coddle
their relationship with China -to maintain the link.
In the fall, as Mrs. Gandhi’s [U.S.] visit approached, the Kissinger
idea was, ‘Gee, we really have to do something about this.’ Partly because
they were running out of time, but mostly because it could affect the
triangle [U.S.A.-Pakistan-China]. These were not sentimental men, they
couldn’t let what has happening in Pakistan affect the alignment. I
remember Nixon referred to Mrs. Gandhi as ‘that bitch’ ten or twelve
times. The tenor of the conversation was, ‘If she’d only understand what
was good for her.’ She misunderstood her own interests, as they saw
them and that’s why she was abitch .... From the things that Kissinger,
Rogers and Sisco told Mrs. Gandhi, she realized they were operating on
two entirely different levels. Iremember one reception during Mrs.
Gandhi’s visit. Nixon made one of his blue sky toasts and Mrs. Gandhi
was very cold. The ‘that bitch’ references were even greater at the White
H o u s e a f t e r t h a t .
The Washington-Islamabad-Peking Rendezvous
During the spring of 1971 the overriding element of U.S. strategy into which
every speciﬁc, including, if not especially, the South Asian crisis, had to ﬁt
was Kissinger’s plans for adramatic shift in Sino-American relations. On
9July he would travel secretly in aPakistani aircraft from Islamabad to
Peking. Kissinger’s own political prospects within the Nixon Administration
were crucially hinged on this venture. All other questions took asubordinate
position. In this period the exclusive channel between Peking and Washington
were the Pakistan authorities. Few outside Nixon and Kissinger’s most
inner circle knew anything of the China initiative —in particular none of
those concerned with South Asia policy. According to Kalb there were no
more than four persons in the entire United States who had any knowledge
of Kissinger’s reach for China. When the secret China negotiations were later
revealed, they were used within the State Department to pacify disgruntled
elements who remained critical of American policy on Bangladesh. The logic
used was that the China negotiations were so delicate and of such consequence
to the United States, that no risks could be taken in disturbing them. A
‘tilt’ to Pakistan was anecessary ingredient to Kissinger’s China policy.
The Bengalis were acomplete sideshow.
But according to another Carnegie interview with aState Department
ofﬁcial who remained unconvinced by the ex post facto China justiﬁcation.
United States policy on China need not have compelled such an ineluctable
choice:
Of course, we were all operating within the old context during most of
this —the context of who gives adamn about what China thinks .... I
think, if Ihad known about the China trip, Iwould have suggested in
the memo, ‘What’s wrong with Trudeau?’ Imean, maybe we don’t like
1 6 1he context of who gives adamn about what China thinks .... I
think, if Ihad known about the China trip, Iwould have suggested in
the memo, ‘What’s wrong with Trudeau?’ Imean, maybe we don’t like
1 6 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---ves adamn about what China thinks .... I
think, if Ihad known about the China trip, Iwould have suggested in
the memo, ‘What’s wrong with Trudeau?’ Imean, maybe we don’t like
1 6 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
him, but it must be just as easy to ﬂy to Peking from Vancouver as
from Pakistan, and probably safer .... We all thought that China was
behaving kind of peculiarly on the thing (the Bangladesh crisis] ....
There is the possibility that China’s behavior was inﬂuenced by their
desire to keep Yahya steady on Nixon’s trip —just as ours was.
Asenior political analyst in the State Department’s South Asia Division
whose job was long-term strategic planning for the region gave the following
evaluation of the China relationship to Carnegie researchers.
1think Richard Nixon is avery rational man and ﬁnds himself able to
disregard humanitarian concerns. He went for the bigger prize. He thought
that Pakistan was abridge and if the U.S. failed to show support, China
would be lost .... D.O.S. [Department of State] suggested lots of
gestures that we could make to look better to the world after the crisis
had been resolved, but nothing of any great importance. The White
House opted for apolicy that would make us look better in the eyes of
Peking when it was all over .... Isaw it from the perspective of those
knowledgeable about and concerned with South Asian policy, so I
know that those Iworked with were of one opinion and there was very
little disagreement among us. We presented clear recommendations
which were disregarded .... Ithink it was strictly the sole policy of
one man who was concerned with big power politics. So, therefore,
recommendations that came from the D.O.S. which were based on a
South Asia perspective, were largely ignored by the White House.
In remarks already cited, Winston Lord, Kissinger’s deputy at the National
Security Council, stressed to Carnegie investigators the internal rationali¬
zation developed within the upper echelons of the Administration. Lord
told Carnegie, ‘We [the U.S. leadership] had to demonstrate to China we
were areliable government to deal with. We had to show China that we
respect amutual friend [Pakistan].’ How, after two decades of belligerent
animosity with the People’s Republic, mere support for Pakistan in its
bloody civil war was supposed to demonstrate to China that the U.S. was ‘a
reliable government to deal with’ was amystifying position which more
cynical observers of the events, both in and outside the U.S. government,
consider to have been an excuse justifying the simple convenience of the
Islamabad link —alink which Washington had no overriding desire to shift.
On the Chinese side, Kalb suggests there was asimilar sensitivity, ‘When
the Lin Pao incident [September 1971] happened —it could have upset
the whole thing.’ Describing Kissinger’s attitude at the time, Kalb recalled
him explaining that ‘after things stabilized with China, we could go back
and look at the Subcontinent.’
The Calcutta Negotiations
Carnegie: Did you know of attempts by the U.S. to mediate between
West and East Pakistan or to encourage asettlement with the Awami
1 6 2back
and look at the Subcontinent.’
The Calcutta Negotiations
Carnegie: Did you know of attempts by the U.S. to mediate between
West and East Pakistan or to encourage asettlement with the Awami
1 6 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Carnegie Papers
League?

There were statements that we had no less than eight such con¬
t a c t s i n C a l c u t t a .

D.O.S.

Source: Yes, we did contact the Awami League in Calcutta and
there were individual Bengalis in positions that were acceptable to
West Pakistan and were asource of hope to us.

But these individuals
w e r e n e v e r e f f e c t i v e .

Carnegie: How early were these contacts?

D.O.S.

Source: Ican’t say.

Iwon’t say!

(Senior Department of State Source)
For years among those familiar with South Asian affairs, in particular
with the events of Pakistan’s civil war, there have circulated vague stories
and rumours of secret contacts and negotiations carried out by the Ameri¬
cans in 1971.

However, there has never been any precise information con¬
ﬁrming the existence and nature of these contacts.

It is atopic which
senior U.S.

ofﬁcials, familiar with and intimately involved in the history of
the period, remain the most reticent on.

While acknowledging the existence
of some sort of contact, because Kissinger himself had obscurely but publicly
stated that something was going on, the details of what actually happened
and what personalities were actually involved remains, even eight years
later, astrict ofﬁcial secret.

Senior U.S.

ofﬁcials interviewed in 1978 con¬
tinued to avoid discussion of this incident with greater strictness than any
other detail of the period, saying information and documents of what
happened are still highly classiﬁed.

>^at the Carnegie Papers make unequivocally clear beyond adoubt is
that secret contacts were made with afaction of the Ban^adesh Provisional
Government, in the hope of splitting the independence movement and
arriving at asettlement short of independence.

According to aCarnegie
interview with an American D.O.S.

ofﬁcial, the contacts were ﬁrst begun in
June 1971, just alittle over two months after the civil war had started.--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to aCarnegie
interview with an American D.O.S. ofﬁcial, the contacts were ﬁrst begun in
June 1971, just alittle over two months after the civil war had started. How
they were carried out and through what channels, stiU remains amatter of
some confusion and mystery. But it seems clear that Kissinger was operating
at several levels and via different channels simultaneously, relying on those
he could personally trust in the State Department, the C.I.A., the Defense
Department and the N.S.C., while freezing out or giving meaningless tasks to
those ofﬁcials he knew or believed were against him on South Asian policy. An understanding of Kissinger’s own political camps within each of these
central bureaucracies, plus asense of those who were among the trusted
and those who were among the bureaucratically untrusted, is important
in order to grasp how the secret negotiations were organized. The State
Department after the Blood cable (from the U.S. Consul-General in Dacca)
was acentre of dissidence and leaks. In New Delhi, the American Ambassador,
Kenneth Keating, was adamantly against Kissinger’s entire orientation in the
conﬂict, making him atypical clientist in Kissinger’s view. From his roost
at the White House’s National Security Council, Kissinger offered the soft
choices to the State Department, broadly and vaguely issuing instructions
1 6 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
that U.S.

diplomats should explore the possibility of the U.S.

acting as an
intermediary between the Yahya and Mujib sides.

State Department liberals
had wanted apublic condemnation, if not full American disassociation
from West Paldstan’s repression.

Instead, Kissinger offered them the un¬
realistic task of busying themselves with ﬁnding anegotiated settlement to
adeepening civil war, which itself was sliding towards an international
conﬂict involving India.

With no guidance on speciﬁcs, anumber of junior
D.O.S.

ofﬁcials began to make contacts with the Pakistani and Bengali
sides in ahopeless exercise.

The military authorities in Pakistan knew
these were meaningless lower echelon gestures, no matter what the State
Department junior ofﬁcials may have thought.

Pakistan’s generals were
dealing with Kissinger directly on an almost daily basis over the sensitive
China liaison, and knew clearly that there was no American pressure on
them over Bangladesh.

According to independent Washington sources and Carnegie sources,
Kissinger’s principal protege during the entire South Asian crisis was one of
his most trusted deputies at the National Security Council, Harold Saunders.

In the history of American foreign policy Saunders is aparticularly obscure,
but interesting ﬁgure.

Following a1956 doctoral dissertation at Yale
University entitled The Group Concept in American Sociology and Political
Science 1863-1929, Saunders joined the C.I.A.

in 1959.

In 1961 he was
loaned by the Agency to the White House’s National Security Council,
where, over the next decade, he was to serve under McGeorge Bundy,
Walt Rostow and Henry Kissinger.

In 1973, when Kissinger took over the
State Department, one of the few ofﬁcials from the N.S.C.

he shifted with
him was Harold Saunders.

Kissinger appointed him Director of the State
Department’s Intelligence and Research Division (I.N.R.).--- PAGE BREAK ---

he shifted with
him was Harold Saunders. Kissinger appointed him Director of the State
Department’s Intelligence and Research Division (I.N.R.). The intimacy
between the two men, however, is said to have developed during the South
Asian crisis. Washington sources allege that Saunders is the ofﬁcial who ran
the secret contacts with the Mustaque faction of the Awami League in
Calcutta. Relevant documents which would conﬁrm or deny these allega¬
tions have been so far denied the authors under the Freedom of Information
Act (F.O.I.A.). Saunders himself has also refused comment when contacted. In the setting up of the contacts with Mustaque, great care was taken
not to involve or inform the large number of opponents of U.S. Pakistan
policy within the U.S. bureaucracies. Only the most trusted channels and
contacts were used and as was characteristic of Kissinger’s style, very few
ofﬁcials, possibly less than half adozen, knew at the time of these sensitive
contacts designed to split the Awami League on the question of independence. Washington sources have alleged that both the C.I.A. and trusted channels
within the D.O.S. were used in the contacts. Relevant C.I.A. documents
which would conﬁrm or deny this allegation have so far been denied the
authors under the F.O.LA. Our sources allege that prior C.I.A. assets and
contacts dating from the Pakistan period, but present already within the
Mustaque camp in 1971, were the ﬁrst contact points for the secret dis¬
c u s s i o n s . 1 6 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Carnegie Papers
In India, antagonistic U.S.

diplomats such as Ambassador Keating were
frozen out from any speciﬁc knowledge of the real character of the contacts.

In Calcutta, as areﬂection of the American ‘neutral’ tilt to Pakistan, the
American Consul-General, Herbert Gordon, was instructed to maintain
distance and agood measure of aloofness from the headquarters of Bangla¬
desh’s Provisional Government on Theatre Road.

This was to be the formal
appearance.

Lower down within the Consulate, George Grifﬁn from the
political section is said by D.O.S.

and Bengali sources to have taken on the
job of preliminary contact work.

Grifﬁn, aclose associate of Harold Saunders, would in 1975 be taken on
by Saunders as his deputy in the State Department’s Intelligence and
Research section, and made Chief of I.N.R.’s South Asia Division.

But, in
1971, with adirect channel to Saunders and Kissinger at the White House,
Grifﬁn is said by several American and Bengali sources to have been one of
the American ofﬁcials involved in the link.

The Carnegie Papers, in numerous
discussions with American ofﬁcials suggest direct C.I.A.

involvement in
these contacts, but this was never satisfactorily conﬁrmed by Carnegie
investigators.

However, there appears that at some stage Kissinger cut out
all intermediaries and dealt with the Mustaque faction directly.

Whether he
met their representative in Washington, Europe, or during his brief stop in
New Delhi en route to Islamabad and Peking in July 1971, was never pinned
down by the Carnegie study.

But Carnegie investigators did learn the follow¬
ing from atop ofﬁcial in the D.O.S.’s Intelligence and Research section:
I.N.R.ID.O.S.

Source: For awhile we believed that there was apossi¬
bility of negotiating with the Awami League leaders in Calcutta.

Un¬
fortunately, later on —in October —we learned we couldn’t represent
all the factions.

And they learned they couldn’t ....

1can’t go into
speciﬁcs.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And they learned they couldn’t .... 1can’t go into
speciﬁcs. Carnegie: When Kissinger referred to the possibility of negotiation
proving successful, was this credible considering they couldn’t reach
agreement on aman and considering the tensions of the period and all
the other inputs you have mentioned? LN.R.fD.O.S. Source: You are asking me to comment on Kissinger .... He had been talking to the representatives directly. So no one knows. George Grifﬁn, the only D.O.S. ﬁgure directly identiﬁed with the Calcutta
contacts, has been both discreet and evasive when interviewed by the authors
on this issue. When ﬁrst interviewed in 1978 he gave the impression he had
no such knowledge of any contacts and, except for one diplomatic cocktail
party in Calcutta, had had no social or political contact with representa¬
tives of the Provisional Government of Bangladesh. When re-contacted in
1979 and told that asenior ofﬁcial at the Calcutta Consulate had
identiﬁed him as the American D.O.S. ofﬁcial responsible for the Calcutta
liaison with certain elements in the Bengali leadership, Grifﬁn responded,
‘He ought to know. Idon’t think I’m at liberty to talk about that. The
last time Ichecked that was still classiﬁed.’ When the authors remarked
1 6 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
that we could see no reason for continued classiﬁcation of such ‘ancient
history’, Grifﬁn said, ‘Well, alot of the players are still alive.’
The contacts were highly sensitive because, as discussed already in the
body of this book, they bypassed the dominant leadership of the Provisional
Government, in the person of the Prime Minister, Tajuddin Ahmed.

Tajuddin,
like nearly the entire rank and ﬁle of the Bangladesh movement, was irrevo¬
cably committed to full independence for the country after the massacre
of the 25th March, and would breach no compromise on this issue.

There¬
fore, absolute discretion and secrecy was the key to splitting the Bengali
leadership and supporting that faction which would compromise with Paki¬
stan and not demand full independence.

Some sources have suggested that
the moment chosen was to be October 1971, when Mustque, as Foreign
Minister, was expected to arrive in New York to present the Bangladesh case
before the U.N.

General Assembly.

Had he suddenly, in New York, uni¬
laterally and without warning announced acompromise solution short of
independence —aposition that constituted asell-out and abetrayal in
the view of Tajuddin and the rest of the leadership —Mustaque might at that
stage have pulled off afull coup against the rest of the Awami Leadership
back in Calcutta, and the history of Bangladesh might have been very
different.

Whatever the plan, it was not to be.

Mustaque’s secret liaison was
discovered in October and he was placed under virtual house arrest in
Calcutta.

He made no trip to New York.

Whatever form the contacts took and whoever the individuals involved
were on the American side, it appears that Keating, the Ambassador in New
Delhi, and also Gordon, the Consul-General in Calcutta, were kept in the
dark about the real content of the discussions.

Reporting channels via
N.§.A.

and C.I.A.

communication networks, went directly to Kissinger
and Saunders at the N.S.C.--- PAGE BREAK ---

and C.I.A. communication networks, went directly to Kissinger
and Saunders at the N.S.C. (White House) bypassing the Ambassador
and other untrusted types. This became eminently clear in the ‘Keating
Cable, IOctober 1971, from the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi:
Iwas very interested to read byliner by I.P.S. White House correspondent
Sullivan in this morning’s wireless ﬁle (NESA-42) reporting ‘White House
ofﬁcials’ explanation of development of present conﬂict and U.S. role in
seeking to avert it. While Iappreciate the tactical necessity of justifying
our position publicly, Ifeel constrained to state elements of this parti¬
cular story do not coincide with my knowledge of the events of the
past eight months .... Story indicates that both the Secretary and Dr. Kissinger informed
Ambassador Jha that Washington favored autonomy for East Pakistan. Iam aware of our repeated statements that we had no formula for a
solution and our belief that the outcome of negotiations would pro¬
bably be autonomy if not independence. But Iregret Iam uninformed of
any speciﬁc statements favouring autonomy. Also [according] to story Jha was informed by Department on
November 19 that ‘Washington and Islamabad were prepared to discuss
aprecise timetable for establishing political autonomy for East Pakistan’. 1 6 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---a was informed by Department on
November 19 that ‘Washington and Islamabad were prepared to discuss
aprecise timetable for establishing political autonomy for East Pakistan’. 1 6 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Carnegie Papers
The only message Ihave on record of this conversation (State 211384)
makes no reference to this critical fact.
With vast and voluminous efforts of intelligence community, reporting
from both Delhi and Islamabad, and my own discussions in Washington,
Ido not understand statement that ‘Washington was not given the
slightest inkling that any military operation was in any way imminent’.
See for example DIAIB 219-17 of November 12 stating speciﬁcally that
w a r i s ‘ i m m i n e n t ’ .
Ihave made the foregoing comments in the full knowledge that I
may not have been privy to all important facts of this tragedy. On the
basis of what Ido know, Ido not believe those elements of the Sullivan
story either add to our position or, perhaps more importantly, to our
credibility.
K E A T I N G .
The extent to which the so-called ‘need to know’ sections of the State
Department were frozen out by Kissinger’s own personal style of patholo¬
gical secrecy became pathetically obvious when the Indo-Pakistan war
actually broke out in December. Without warning, almost without any
ration^ comprehensible quality to it at all, the White House announced
that the aircraft carrier, the U.S. Enterprise, with elements of the U.S.
Seventh Fleet, were steaming toward the Bay of Bengal in what surely
became the greatest act of impotent bluff exhibited by the United States
during the entire crisis. According to aCarnegie interview with Chip Whitter,
aformer staffer on the House Foreign Affairs Committee, the following
incident occuned on the heels of the White House announcement that the
Enterprise was shipping out.
Carnegie: When did you realize that policy was being made in the White
House rather than the State Department?
Whitter: There is one important indication that Iguess Ican tell you.
After the Enterprise went into the Bay of Bengal, Neil [Representative
Cornelius Gallagher] got acall from the State Department -[Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State] Christopher Van Hollen -and apparently
what he asked him was to try and ﬁnd out from the Indian Embassy
where the Enterprise was because the D.O.D. [Department of Defense]
wouldn’t tell him. Van Hollen really got screwed. He was forced to go
to [Congressional] hearings and testify while the real decision-makers
w e r e l e f t u n t o u c h e d .
Not only did the real decision makers remain untouched and suitably
anonymous, but anumber of them received rather signiﬁcant promotions
after the debris had cleared, and others caught holding the bag were sent
packing. As already mentioned, Harold Saunders within two years of the
crisis moved with Kissinger to the State Department, becoming Director of
the Department’s Intelligence and Research Bureau. George Grifﬁn, the supposed
White House man on the spot in Calcutta, returned after atour of Pakistan, and
was bounced upstairs to serve as Saunders’ deputy for South Asia.
1 6 7and Research Bureau. George Grifﬁn, the supposed
White House man on the spot in Calcutta, returned after atour of Pakistan, and
was bounced upstairs to serve as Saunders’ deputy for South Asia.
1 6 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---. George Grifﬁn, the supposed
White House man on the spot in Calcutta, returned after atour of Pakistan, and
was bounced upstairs to serve as Saunders’ deputy for South Asia.
1 6 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
When the Carter Administration arrived in Washington, one of the few
intimate Kissinger proteges who remained and was promoted was Saunders.
Under Carter he was elevated from Chief of State Department Intelligence
to the position of Assistant Secretary for Near East and South Asia. In 1978
he received rather wide acclaim for his role in the Camp David negotiations
on the Middle East and the new attention the United States was willing to
pay to the Palestinian issue. But his promotion to .the status of Assistant
Secretary, nevertheless, raised afew eyebrows. In the words of one of
his former colleagues on the National Security Council, ‘Hal has achieved
what Kermit Roosevelt only dreamed of.’ This refers to Roosevelt’s ambition
to become Assistant Secretary for N.E.A. Roosevelt had been the C.I.A.
ﬁgure credited with the successful execution of the 1953 Iranian coup
d’6tat which brought the Shah to power and toppled the nationalist govern¬
ment of Prime Minister Mossadeq. Roosevelt is said to have believed his
achievement warranted such aposition. But his C.I.A. history always stood
in the way of either the Republicans or Democrats appointing him. It was
always felt that top echelons of the State Department should not be stained
with former or active intelligence ofﬁcials. Saunders’ appointment as
Assistant Secretary of State ended that tradition.
When Mujib was killed in August 1975, the 1971 South Asian decision
makers at the National Security Council were all now top ofﬁcials of the
State Department. With the departure of William Rogers in 1973, the duality
of foreign policy, centred in the parallel and often rival structures of the
N.S.C. and D.O.S., were fused via Kissinger’s elevation to the position of
Secretary of State. Ayear later, in the autumn of 1974, according to ahigh
level U.S. Embassy source, the American diplomatic mission in Dacca was
approached by anti-Mujib elements to ascertain the U.S. government’s
attitude to apossible change of regime in Bangladesh. This intelligence
was forwarded back to the Secretary’s ofﬁce and to I.N.R. in Washington
—Kissinger, Saunders and Grifﬁn. When approached for interviews, both
Kissinger and Saunders had as of the time of writing refused to comment on
the question of their own ‘prior knowledge’ of the plan to overthrow Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman —that ﬁgure whom Kissinger had, less than ayear before his
death, so whimsically termed aman of ‘vast conception’.
1 6 8n of their own ‘prior knowledge’ of the plan to overthrow Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman —that ﬁgure whom Kissinger had, less than ayear before his
death, so whimsically termed aman of ‘vast conception’.
1 6 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---r knowledge’ of the plan to overthrow Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman —that ﬁgure whom Kissinger had, less than ayear before his
death, so whimsically termed aman of ‘vast conception’.
1 6 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

B. Interview with Henry
Kissinger’s National Security
Council Assistant
Roger Morris is former Staff Assistant to Henry Kissinger at the National
Security Council (N.S.C.), and author of Uncertain Greatness: Henry Kissinger
and American Foreign Policy. The interview was conducted in September
1 9 7 8 .
Lifschultz: Outside the State Department and other ofﬁcial U.S. agencies, it
is not at all well known how severe an internal crisis the events of 1971 in
Bangladesh created within the American foreign policy bureaucracy. Nor is
it well known how bitter an experience the Bangladesh events were for Henry
Kissinger, his plans and his prospects at the time. Could you tell us what you
know of this period?
Morris: In early 1975 Iwas interviewing for my book, aman who was then
one of Kissinger’s closest aides and most senior conﬁdants. Ihave known him
well. In utter seriousness, and not at all as acriticism of Kissinger’s policy,
he said there had been three nemeses of American foreign policy in the
Kissinger era. These were the three ‘most hated men’ on Kissinger’s ‘foreign
enemies list’. He said they were Allende, Thieu and Mujib.
It was not amatter of having allies or having enemies or adversaries, but
simply these people had upset the apple cart in various ways. Allende is
clear enough. Obviously he thought Thieu, as the record now shows, was an
obstruction to the deal he was trying to cut with the North Vietnamese. He
was always having to go back to Saigon to bomb or to do something to get
Thieu to agree.
Mujib, however, Iwould have thought, wasn’t quite in that league. Never¬
theless, Kissinger did feel at the time [1971] that the events in East Pakistan
were so damaging, so distracting, and so potentially disastrous for his China
diplomacy on which so much else rested —including the Vietnam negotiations;
and here was this uimecessary irritation —on the ﬂank —of an obstreperous
politician who was not behaving in the proper way. How an American foreign
policy maker could have imagined how one politican in East Pakistan could
have accounted for or complicated these separate problems shows acomplete
lack of understanding. Again, it reﬂects acurious ignorance and lack of
sophistication in certain areas, as opposed to great sophistication in others.
Instead of understanding that these forces were outside his control, and it
1 6 9reﬂects acurious ignorance and lack of
sophistication in certain areas, as opposed to great sophistication in others.
Instead of understanding that these forces were outside his control, and it
1 6 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
wasn’t amatter of thwarting Henry Kissinger or his plans for the world,
there was ahighly personal element in Kissinger’s diplomacy and therefore
an element of revenge.

Lifschultz: You seem to indicate Kissinger regarded his inability to control
and direct the course of the ’71 events in South Asia, as almost apersonal
defeat.

Morris: Kissinger certainly perceived the Bangladesh events as apersonal
defeat.

Idon’t want to exaggerate the importance of Bangladesh because it
wasn’t astrategic defeat for American interests in the long run.

It didn’t
create any great shift in the balance of power, but it was an extraordinary
embarrassment.

Mujib’s welcome-back as an exiled persecuted leader, Ithink, was probably
the most embarrassing single event in American foreign policy since Castro
rode into Havana on atank.

If you look at the record of American intervention
around the world, to keep various politicians from assuming power, either
covert or overt intervention, and if you look at events in the world prior to
the fall of South Vietnam, Washington is by and large successful by hook or
by crook.

There are really no obstreperous regimes around.

The Makarios
regime in Cyprus comes to power by compromise, almost as an American
creation ironically enough, although he is regarded as aCastro-like ﬁgure.

Allende comes to power, for sure, in afree election which the Americans try
to buy off with alot of covert intervention.

But it is not the national or inter¬
national scandal at the time.

It happens almost quietly.

And it’s because it
happens so quietly that the American intervention proceeds after he takes
power.

But, Mujib comes to power as adeﬁance, as areal defeat for America
and America’s client; and as agreat embarrassment for the Administration.

One thinks of Henry Kissinger as being atraditional 19th century diplo¬
mat.

His mentors, models and heroes are all 19th century.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One thinks of Henry Kissinger as being atraditional 19th century diplo¬
mat. His mentors, models and heroes are all 19th century. One would then
think the adage would be, ‘No permanent friends or enemies, only permanent
interests.’ This would have dictated that the United States immediately
welcome Mujib and embrace the regime; to try to keep it within the camp. But, there was, as Ihave said, Kissinger’s vindictive streak. It ran through it,
in the sense, he [Mujib] is not our man. And, if he is not our man, there is
no such thing as permanent interests. Now it is amatter of getting our people
in and their people out. Kissinger is really Bismarckian in the sense that the world is essentially
conducted by heroes and non-heroes or anti-heroes. Personalities matter
enormously. He undoubtedly did see Mujib and Allende and Thieu and
Makarios, and others who gave him problems, as being there on the stage to
give Henry Kissinger abad time. He took the Bangladesh events as apersonal
defeat. It certainly was perceived as amajor political setback for the Administration. It spoiled things badly for awhile
The sense of paranoia, the sense of
being able to run the world at home and abroad, the sense of irritation,
betrayal and venom toward people who get in the way, is all of apiece at
this time. It’s an era, as we know from the Watergate investigation, when
1 7 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---Interview with Henry Kissinger’s N.S.C.

Assistant
lasting animosities are formed by the Administration and accounts are taken
for later reckoning.

Their attitude towards the world, towards AUende,
towards Mujib, towards Thieu, towards Makarios, towards anyone who got
in their way in effect, was very much avindictive one.

Very much amatter
of you’re going to get your come-uppance.

For the most part, the only stain on the record up to this time [prior to
1974], with the exception of the anti-war opposition, has been South Asia.

It is the only place the Administration has been under public ﬁre in the
Congress or in the press.

It is the only place where Kissinger’s diplomacy
is seen to be ineffectual and where no magic could be made to work.

It is the
only place where American interests have been reversed and where there is
an obvious Soviet inroad, and obvious Soviet advantage.

There isn’t this
perception yet about Chile.

Chile was always much murkier.

After all, when
Allende is ‘disposed of and a‘nice responsible Junta’ comes to power,
people stop worrying about that.

The Cyprus crisis then breaks out in 1974
and sort of drags along.

There is apublic perception of disaster there, but
again the Turks seize the land and there is not the same perception of Soviet
gains, not the same Cold War balancing that went on in South Asia, and
there isn’t quite the hostility to American interests that is perceived in
Bangladesh.

And in asense the Bangladesh crisis is used as the last major
challenge Kissinger’s rivals within the White House mounted against him.

After that, Watergate overtakes them all.

Lifschultz: Moving forward in time Iwould like to hear your perception of
the events of 1974 and 1975.

The year ’74 was ayear of great deterioration
for the Mujib regime.

Within the country large political demonstrations had
already begun to develop against the regime, and intensiﬁed as famine over¬
whelmed the north of the country.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The year ’74 was ayear of great deterioration
for the Mujib regime. Within the country large political demonstrations had
already begun to develop against the regime, and intensiﬁed as famine over¬
whelmed the north of the country. Having been the hero of the nationalist
movement in 1971, Mujib in 1974-75 had become something of anational
scapegoat, aﬁgure now hated, born out of bitterness and disillusionment. Now we have been told that the group the U.S. had secretly been in contact
with in ’71, during the secret Calcutta negotiations, allegedly approached the
Americans in the autumn of 1974 to determine what the U.S. attitude would
be to apossible coup d’etat, if it could be pulled off. Given what you know
of the background of the relations of the two countries and Kissinger’s
attitude to Mujib, as you have stated it, is it at all conceivable to you that
Kissinger could have given a‘nod’ or any indication that the U.S. would
approve of such achange? Morris: Oh, yes. It is absolutely plausible for two reasons. First, because at
this point Kissinger would have felt no hesitation at all to unseat an already
unstable regime. Secondly, because it is the natural tendency of any C.I.A. station, regardless of who is sitting in Washington, regardless of the politics
or the ideology of the situation, to respond to acoup and to keep its lines
open. It was the chronic nemesis of South Vietnamese regimes for years
and years, that almost any plotter, under any guise, with any backing at all,
could go to the C.I.A. Station in Saigon and get something like atacit go-
ahead. The C.I.A. was very seldom in the business of crossing them, or being
1 7 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
astaunch supporter of the regime, in aﬂuid situation like that.

Now it doesn’t
always happen.

If you’ve got afairly staunch client like the Shah of Iran,
then the C.I.A.

acts as abolster to the regime and they tip off the secret
police or whatever.

But, in any ﬂuid situation —one sees it in Africa, one
sees it in Latin America, and certainly in South Asia —aC.I.A.

Station that
may have had its ties out earlier to these people, that certainly would have
been concerned about the instability of the regime and might have had
difﬁculty dealing with the regime to begin with, given the past history of the
United States and Bangladesh, would have instinctively said, ‘Sure.

Okay.

We won’t cut your telephone lines.’
Lifychultz: But this is now in 1975, at the height of the Church Committee
hearings on the assassinations of foreign leaders.

In these circumstances
would not Kissinger hesitate to give such a‘nod?’
Morris: The games being played inside the Executive Branch are almost im¬
possible to overestimate.

At this point Kissinger would have felt no hesitation
at all to unseat an already unstable regime and to replace that regime, however
great the risk, with one he thought was at least no worse, perhaps better,
with American clients.

There was adecided distinction, drawn always by
Kissinger and his people, between the sort of plotting and conspiracy that was
involved in poisoning Fidel Castro or having Patrice Lumumba murdered on
one hand, and watching what Kissinger would have called ‘the tide of poli¬
tical change’ on the other —and playing arole in it.

Idon’t think Kissinger would have felt himself responsible for the murder
of Mujib or any other politician gunned down or hanged in acoup of that kind
any more than he felt himself responsible for the round up and imprisonment
of people in South Vietnam.

Kissinger was shocked at allegations that he
had been responsible for the murder of Allende ....--- PAGE BREAK ---

Idon’t think Kissinger would have felt himself responsible for the murder
of Mujib or any other politician gunned down or hanged in acoup of that kind
any more than he felt himself responsible for the round up and imprisonment
of people in South Vietnam. Kissinger was shocked at allegations that he
had been responsible for the murder of Allende .... Certainly, Kissinger
could have said to himself we’re not encouraging the assassination of any¬
body, but if agroup of dissidents come to us, promise to establish amore
pro-Western American regime, and it means the replacement of aguy that
has not been particularly friendly and is not avery stable force; then who
are we to stand in the way. It’s that kind of mentality. Lifschultz: It has been argued to us by several sources that a‘nod’ passed to
adissident faction looking for American aid and support in the period follow¬
ing the coup, could have been given through an independent channel, which
may have circumvented both local C.I.A. and Department of State (D.O.S.)
ofﬁcials who were nervous about the Church Committee hearings and the
possible criminal charges against Helms and others. With local Embassy
personnel being highly cautious about the appearance of any ‘nod’, with
certain D.O.S. ofﬁcers attempting to break off liaison, might Kissinger
have operated through another channel? Was it his style of operation to go
around both the State Department and the C.I.A.? In ’71 he allegedly went
completely around the State Department via Saunders at N.S.C. [National
Security Council] and it appears through the C.I.A. in Calcutta and Delhi. Was it like him to go completely around the Department and the Agency
acting through adirect channel in such asituation? 172

--- PAGE BREAK ---Interview with Henry Kissinger’s N.S.C.

Assistant
Morris: It is absolutely plausible and, again, independent of events directly
connected to Bangladesh.

We know from Colby’s memoirs [a former Director
of the C.I.A.] and from the events of that period, that there was aconﬂict
between the White House on one hand and those in the C.I.A.

who felt there
was apublic reckoning coming and felt they ought to own up and clean house.

Kissinger was certainly opposed to Colby going up on Capitol Hill and spilling
his guts.

There’s this great quote from Colby saying Kissinger stopped him
one day and said, ‘You know, Bill, you’re just like aCatholic going to con¬
fession when you go up the Hill.

That’s no good.’
This type of operation was part of afamiliar style and mtra-bureaucratic
tactic, again for reasons that have nothing to do directly with Bangladesh ....

Kissinger clearly had his people and his contacts with dissident elements
inside the C.I.A., not least of which was Angleton and the pro-Israeli counter¬
intelligence section on the Middle East.

Let me give you another example,
entirely outside the realm.: Kissinger is ostensibly conducting peace negotia¬
tions with the Arabs and Israelis.

America’s posture to the civil war in Lebanon
in 1975-76 is one of hands-off neutrality.

But, the Israeli intelligence service,
with the connivance of the C.I.A.’s Israeli section, not the C.I.A.

entirely,
only the Israeli section,Ts running guns and supporting all out with several
million dollars, the Christian side of the civil war.

That is going on with
Kissinger’s approval and direct knowledge.

It’s at odds so much with the
public stance of what’s happening, that the American Ambassador is trying
to shuttle back and forth to mediate between the two sides, and is killed as
he crosses the ‘no man’s land’ one day.

He is brought back to Washington
and is given astate funeral at the National Cathedral and Henry Kissinger
pronounces his eulogy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It’s at odds so much with the
public stance of what’s happening, that the American Ambassador is trying
to shuttle back and forth to mediate between the two sides, and is killed as
he crosses the ‘no man’s land’ one day. He is brought back to Washington
and is given astate funeral at the National Cathedral and Henry Kissinger
pronounces his eulogy. The ruthlessness, the realpolitik of that gambit
suggest almost anything is possible. It makes what happened in Bangladesh
positively tame by comparison. Because Bangladesh, whatever its notoriety,
is not the Middle East in American politics. The other factor to take into account here is that in late 1974 and early
1975, at the height of the revelations about the C.I.A. and at the height of
criticisms of American involvement, the C.I.A., with Henry Kissinger’s initia¬
tive in the Forty Committee, is plunging into Angola. It’s only after what is
exposed by Seymour Hersh’s story in The New York Times in January
1976, that Congress acts to cut off the money. But the guns are being run into
the factions in Angola. Kissinger is proceeding all that year, covertly, with
an intervention in avery obscure place, where the national interest is at best
marginal, but one which he conceives as an important battleground with the
Soviets. At the same time the Church Committee is playing with dart guns, exposing
assassination attempts, talking about Chile, and compiling avery embarras¬
sing record. These things are piling out of the front pages of The New York
Times and The Washington Post. The Administration is fending them off
and there is great embarrassment. Colby is up on the Hill every other day. Meanwhile, Kissinger is proceeding to conduct aclassic covert operation. If
one is looking for any elements of shame or hesitation, one will not ﬁnd it
173

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
in the record of the period.

The Bangladesh thing is much less prominent;
much more quiet; much easier to do.

Let me add one more comment in this context.

If you look at events
from the spring of ’73, Kissinger is increasingly operating without the kind of
ad referendum arrangement he always had with Nixon.

And, God knows, he
was probably the single most powerful ofﬁcial of the 20th century.

Ican’t
imagine anybody before him —even Dean Acheson, who had agood deal
of authority and autonomy under Truman —negotiating with the free¬
wheeling authority Kissinger had when Nixon was at the peak of his power
after the re-election.

But even during that period, Kissinger is also obliged to
cable back to Washington and he’s damn careful, he’s still being challenged
by Haldeman and Ehrlichman, and it is not at all certain at the end of 1972,
the beginning of 1973, that Kissinger will necessarily stay on in the second
administration.

It is hard to imagine that now, but if one looks back at that
time one remembers alot of talk about John Connolly becoming Secretary
of State, and Kissinger saying to his friends in the press that if that happens
T’ll go’.

When Kissinger is appointed Secretary of State in late 1973, it is
after the period when the Administration has already begun to decline.

The
ﬁrst expose of Watergate had come out and Kissinger is in effect akind of
legitimizing factor for the regime.

He emerges very quickly during 1973 as
the principal advisor and, foreign policy being the only redeeming factor the
regime has had throughout its life, Kissinger becomes the focus of all things.

Practically speaking, once Nixon goes, even in the months before the resig¬
nation, Kissinger becomes the de facto President for foreign policy.

There is
no one above him and no one he need consult.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Practically speaking, once Nixon goes, even in the months before the resig¬
nation, Kissinger becomes the de facto President for foreign policy. There is
no one above him and no one he need consult. Lifschultz: Throughout this period, Kissinger’s principal aide on South Asian
affairs, both in 1971 and 1975, and the man who is said to have handled the
Mustaque negotiations in 1971, was Harold Saunders. [Saunders was Kissin¬
ger’s aide on the N.S.C. for Near East and South Asia, and later moved with
Kissinger to the State Department as Director of Intelligence and Research. Under the Carter Administration Saunders was promoted to Assistant Sec¬
retary of State for N.E.A. (Near East and Asia) under Cyrus Vance.] It is not
generally well known about his C.I.A. history, but I’ve heard it said that
Saunders has achieved what Kermit Roosevelt only dreamed to achieve. [Roosevelt was the C.LA.’s Chief of Station in Tehran during the coup
d’etat which removed Prime Minister Mossedeq and put the Shah of Iran into
power.] During the Eisenhower and Kennedy Administrations, even into
the Johnson Administration, it was considered indiscreet and ill-considered
to put C.I.A. ofﬁcials into top State Department posts. What can you say
about Saunders and his role in the history of these events? Morris: Saunders has built his career by two devices. One, by being the perfect
and loyal and ever diligent staff man. He’s totally without apparent guile
and totally without politics. By that, Imean, if the bureaucrat and the civil
servant is conceived as someone who carries out orders regardless of the
regime, regardless of ideology, and represents the permanent consensus core
of American policy, then Saunders is it. People like Saunders, and in Saunders’
1 7 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---Interview with Henry Kissinger’s N.S.C.

Assistant
case speciﬁcally, are the explanation as to why American foreign policy
doesn’t change with elections.

You can impeach aPresident and elect some¬
one who is pledged to change things, but the Saunders somehow survive,
Saunders is now aveteran of ﬁve administrations.

It is quite arecord.

The other device is he is not perceived as aC.I.A.

operative.

He is after
all absent from the C.IA.

in the sense of being absent from the building and
from the direct payroll since the early 1960s.

So he’s almost purged of his
taint.

He’s not perceived as an operator or an institutional representative.

He
is perceived of as akind of permanent civil servant in other institutions.

He’s
aC.I.A.

*loan’ to the N.S.C., then he becomes the N.S.C.

man, and he becomes
the Department of State man.

His relations are all very cordial and all very
good.

He got this job because he had so impressed the people around Vance
now, who had previously worked for Kissinger and Rogers or Rostow.

That
is, Richard Holbrooke, Tony Lake, William Bains, Donald McHenry and Ben
Reed.

Saunders is one of these people who survive political changes in Admini¬
strations because ‘they’ know, they being the ‘in and outers’ of the Democrats
or the Republicans, that Saunders will be as loyal, discreet, and as useful to
them as he was to the previous Administration.

It is very interesting.

The paradox is that probably few ofﬁcials have been
so directly responsible for agiven line of American policy, because his oppo¬
sition or shading of intelligence or his presentation of staff memos could have
changed things directly and, at the same time, so absolved of that responsi¬
bility by those who come and go inside the government.

He is not conceived
of as being apolicy maker, yet he has obviously, in direct ways, made policy
for avery long time indeed.The paradox is that probably few ofﬁcials have been
so directly responsible for agiven line of American policy, because his oppo¬
sition or shading of intelligence or his presentation of staff memos could have
changed things directly and, at the same time, so absolved of that responsi¬
bility by those who come and go inside the government.

He is not conceived
of as being apolicy maker, yet he has obviously, in direct ways, made policy
for avery long time indeed.

In part, it is the arrogance of the upper echelon
who thirik they are making policy on the basis of what their underlings tell
them.

And in part, it is the ignorance of the public and the Congress who
never have quite understood what the hell bureaucrats are about and how
important they can become.

It is chronic in the American political system
because we have away of understanding all of that in domestic politics.

We
somehow know that aH.E.W.

[Health, Education and Welfare] bureaucrat,
an Agricultural bureaucrat, aCommerce or Labour bureaucrat, can, over
time, have tremendous inﬂuence on programmes which reach out into the
economy or race relations.

But in Foreign Policy we’ve never quite under¬
stood the impact of bureaucracy or how people like Saunders operate.

Saunders is avery rare breed.

He is not aForeign Service Ofﬁcer in any
sense.

He’s never served abroad in his life.

He came to the [Central Intelli¬
gence] Agency, served his apprenticeship and then was picked up by Robert
Komer as abright young staffer for the National Security Council, as awriter
of memos and aresearcher.

By sheer longevity and by sheer blandness of
manner, if not of policy, he survived.

One survived at the N.S.C.

in Rostow’s
era by indulging Rostow’s madnesses and whims, and by being solid and
chatty as astaff man.

One survived in the Kissinger era by being fecklessly
loyal to Kissinger and by never making waves and by doing what you were
told.

Saunders obviously did.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One survived in the Kissinger era by being fecklessly
loyal to Kissinger and by never making waves and by doing what you were
told. Saunders obviously did. One survives in Cyrus Vance’s State Depart¬
ment by doing half what the bureaucrats want and half what Vance orders
1 7 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
from the top, and since those things are nearly always the same, there’s no
problem. Saunders is not an evil man. He is not aparticularly forceful person.
He is by no means atheorist. But by this time he has developed acore of
prejudices and preconceptions. He is inﬁnitely discreet. He is faceless and
voiceless as abureaucrat.
Harold Saunders is what’s wrong with American foreign policy. It would
be so easy to purge the bureaucracy and to give it its necessary yank or jerk,
if one could ﬁnd patently evil misguided men. But policy, as it is in Great
Britain or in any of the large industrial states, is no longer run by such people.
It is run by relatively bland, faceless and ‘decent’ sorts, who you can have
tea or coffee with without any problem, and who never really discuss sub¬
stance; who operate at acertain mushy middle level of ‘options’; and who, if
called upon, can do very ruthless and savage things. Jesus, the guys who
ordered the bombing in Vietnam and the bureaucrats in the Pentagon who
toted up the body counts were not green-eyed monsters who went home at
night to beat their wives and kids. They were relatively Saunders-like
bureaucrats.
1 7 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---in the Pentagon who
toted up the body counts were not green-eyed monsters who went home at
night to beat their wives and kids. They were relatively Saunders-like
bureaucrats.
1 7 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

B. Interview with the C.I. A.
Bangladesh Station Chief,
September 1978
This interview with Philip Cherry, C.I.A. Station Chief in Bangladesh 1974-
76, was conducted by Lawrence Lifschultz when he spoke on 26 September
1978 by telephone from New York with Cherry in Lagos, Nigeria. What
follows is the transcript:
Lifschultz: The reason I’m calling is that for some time now, Iand another
colleague have been working on astory relating to Bangladesh and the events
there in 1975. Your name has come up in this story through people we have
been talking to in the State Department. In the near future we will be going to
press with an article and we wanted to speak with you and afford you every
opportunity to present your viewpoint on the events, and whether the state¬
ments made about your involvement are inaccurate or accurate. Iwould
like to ask some questions over the telephone. And to see if we can discuss
some of these issues. People at the State Department, discussing with us
events of what happened in August ’75, have raised the point that representa¬
tives of agroup intending to overthrow the Mujib government had approached
the Embassy in the autumn of 1974 and we are curious to know what you
knew of these meetings. Or whether you participated in them at all.
Cherry:]^o, Idid not. Ididn’t get there until September 1974.1 was apolitical
ofﬁcer then. We had no Bangladeshi come into the ofﬁce and tell us anything
about any plans for coups or anything like that. We had all kinds of Bangla¬
deshis coming into the ofﬁce, but not for that reason. If anyone like that had
come in, Ihave heard from my colleagues who were there before, they would
have been listened to but told to go away. You know the information would
have been interesting, but [we would have been] unable to substantiate, and
that would be the end of it.
Lifschultz: State Department sources told us that, while discussions were
held in the autumn of ’74 with representatives of agroup that wanted to know
the U.S. attitude to apossible change [in Dacca], that as far as the State
Department people knew they had disengaged from this group as of late
1974/early 1975. The way your name has come up is that the State Depart¬
ment source has alleged to us that the C.I.A. Station maintained liaison with
the group down to the day Mujib was overthrown on the 15th [August].
Would you have any comment on that?
1 7 7ate Depart¬
ment source has alleged to us that the C.I.A. Station maintained liaison with
the group down to the day Mujib was overthrown on the 15th [August].
Would you have any comment on that?
1 7 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---rce has alleged to us that the C.I.A. Station maintained liaison with
the group down to the day Mujib was overthrown on the 15th [August].
Would you have any comment on that?
1 7 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Cherry: Well, not to my knowledge. Idon’t think so. Who were you talking
to in the State Department?
Lifschultz: Iwish Icould tell you speciﬁcally. But our sources have asked
their names not to be used. They have said those allegedly involved in these
contacts were people such as Mahub Alam Chashi, Taheruddin Thakur, A.B.S.
Safdar. People such as these. Do you know any of these people? Have you
ever met any of these people while you were in Bangladesh?
Cherry: Iknow some of those names, but I’ve never met any of those people
you’ve named.
Lifschultz: What then is your understanding of how the August coup actually
occurred?
Cherry: Oh, it’s an interesting story and we certainly tried to ﬁnd out an
awful lot about that after the coup occurred, but we had no indication it
was occurring. Or we had no information at all, as far as Iknow at the Em¬
bassy, that acoup was about to occur. We had no advance warning of it
whatsoever. There was some confusion in that. Iremember the rumours
after the event. Our communications there is so good that we were able to
get the information of the coup back to the United States very very early.
The fact acoup was going on was quite apparent. There was alot of shooting
going on. One of our political ofﬁcers lived right across the street from
where one of the families was killed. Lot of ﬁring. All of us who had any
substantive role at the Embassy, went directly to the Embassy. This was about
four or ﬁve in the morning. We sent our messages in that the coup was occur¬
ring. You could hear the guns. We didn’t know what was going on. Well, the
messages got back because of the time zone change, it got back in time to
be released by the Department for the evening news. And this is what incited
an awful lot of people there to conclude that the American Embassy knew
about it in advance. Ifor one can tell you we did not.
Lifschultz: So, as [C.I.A.] Station Chief in Dacca, you had absolutely no
prior knowledge of the coup which was about to occur.
Cherry: As apolitical ofﬁcer in Dacca, Ihad no prior knowledge that acoup
was about to occur. That’s right.
Lifschultz: So you would deny these allegations to us, that members of the
Dacca Station of the Agency had maintained direct liaison with persons
such as Chashi, Safdar and others who were directly linked to the Mustaque
conspiracy to overthrow Mujib?
Cherry: As apolitical ofﬁcer there, Ihad absolutely no information in that
regard. And as an individual there, Idon’t know those people. Iknow of them
by name, but Ihad not met them. Inever met any of them.
Lifschultz: We have some difﬁculty with this status of political ofﬁcer.
People in the State Department have directly told us you were the Station
Chief at the time.
Cherry: Well, Idon’t know why they said that.
Lifschultz: Is that untrue?
Cherry: Pardon?
Lifschultz: Is that incorrect information?
1 7 8have directly told us you were the Station
Chief at the time.
Cherry: Well, Idon’t know why they said that.
Lifschultz: Is that untrue?
Cherry: Pardon?
Lifschultz: Is that incorrect information?
1 7 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---s you were the Station
Chief at the time.
Cherry: Well, Idon’t know why they said that.
Lifschultz: Is that untrue?
Cherry: Pardon?
Lifschultz: Is that incorrect information?
1 7 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Interview with C.I.A. Bangladesh Station Chief
Cherry: Well, as anybody can see from my ﬁle and the biographic registry,
I’m apolitical ofﬁcer. And have been in Dacca.
Lifschultz: You were not the C.I.A. Station Chief in Dacca at the time?
Cherry: Well, Idon’t know where you got that allegation.
Lifschultz: Sources which we consider high level have come to us with a
story of your involvement in the coup against Mujib ...
Cherry: That’s ridiculous.
Lifshultz: We’d like to have your statement on that and afull denial. If
n e c e s s a r y . . .
Cherry: Ican give you afull denial that Ior anybody Iknew at the Embassy
in Dacca had anything to do with the coup that overthrew Mujib. We had
excellent relations with his government. It was not up to us to decide how that
government was to be changed, and we were not involved in any coup attempt.
And Ican say that for certain.
Lifschultz: State Department ofﬁcials and other sources have informed us
of contacts with the Mustaque group going back to 1971 in Calcutta, where
secret negotiations were conducted by Secretary of State Kissinger on a
possible separate peace in the Bangladesh/Pakistan war. Now it is our under¬
standing that these contacts were renewed in the fall of ’74 with the same
individuals the U.S. had been in contact with in ’71. And it has been alleged
they approached the Embassy for asense of the U.S. attitude if apolitical
change occurred.
Cherry: Absolutely false. Absolutely false. Have you spoken to Ambassador
Boster who was there at the time?
Lifschultz: We have spoken to nearly every political ofﬁcer and member of
the Embassy we’ve been able to reach.
Cherry: If you spoke to Ambassador Boster or anybody else. I’m sure they’ve
told you the same thing Ihave —that all of that is absolutely false. Iserved
in New Delhi at the time of the Indo/Pak war. There was nothing to do with
Mustaque in Calcutta. I’ve never met Mustaque. Of course, Iknow of him.
There was none of this.
Lifschultz: As far as your understanding as a‘political ofﬁcer’ there, did the
coup against Mujib occur simply by six majors pulling up to his house with
the troops under their command and killing him? What is your understanding
of any prior political involvement of Mustaque or his group? Do you have
any understanding of that?
CTier^.'Well, to the best of my knowledge of what Ifound afterwards, when
they came into power, that Ithink this was purely amilitary move by agroup
of young majors, who then selected or perhaps they did have some prior
arrangement with Mustaque, this we weren’t able to ascertain exactly. But
most of this was pretty much in the press at the time. And that was basically
accurate. But there was absolutely no U.S. involvement. My God, what would
the U.S. Government possible get out of attempting to be involved in acountry
1 7 9press at the time. And that was basically
accurate. But there was absolutely no U.S. involvement. My God, what would
the U.S. Government possible get out of attempting to be involved in acountry
1 7 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
like that?

Acountry with such major problems.

Lifschultz: Mr.

Cherry, in my own reporting when Mrs.

Gandhi and the pro-
Soviet parties were making these allegations, Idismissed them completely,
and reported them as nonsense.

Cherry: I’ve always had great respect for your stories.

Lifschultz: Well, thank you.

But now, in the midst of new information with
people approaching me with various documentation.

I’ve been forced to re¬
examine aversion of astory Itook, as six majors pulling up to Mujib’s house
and, out of their own personal grudges and resentments, deciding to do away
w i t h h i m .

Cherry: Yes, well, as far as Iknow, with any coup there is prior planning ...

Lifschultz: And what we’re trying to look into is the prior link-up with the
Mustaque network and circle within the Awami League.

Furthermore, there
are curious antecedents with the contacts in 1971 which you say you know
nothing about, but which we have documentation of.

Mustaque was dis¬
missed as Acting Foreign Minister by Tajuddin.

He was dismissed for en¬
gaging in the eight secret contacts.

We have been able to conﬁrm this
deﬁnitively.

Cherry: On that very point.

There is one thing, there are politicians which
frequently approach Embassies and perhaps have contacts there.

They think
they may have contacts.

But that’s afar cry from any of those Embassies
involved in assisting them in involvement in acoup.

Apolitical ofﬁcer’s
job is to assist his government by providing information on what is going on
and agood political ofﬁcer has many contacts.

But that does not mean he
is advising these politicians or coup leaders to overthrow governments.

That’s where it goes off.

Lifschultz: What we are trying to determine is if the U.S.

had prior knowledge
arid whether this prior knowledge constituted asense in any way which may
have given people connected to the Mustaque group asense of an American
nod, that if they went ahead the U.S.

would have no objection.--- PAGE BREAK ---

had prior knowledge
arid whether this prior knowledge constituted asense in any way which may
have given people connected to the Mustaque group asense of an American
nod, that if they went ahead the U.S. would have no objection. Cherry: Absolutely not. Absolutely not in Bangladesh in 1975 or 1974. Or
any time that Iknow of. There were several coups there as you know. At no
time did the U.S. government have prior knowledge that any of them would
take place. We did not know when any of the coups were about to take
place. Let me also say, throughout those months and years, there were
all kinds of coup rumours going on at all times. And there were many times
when political ofﬁcers there, all of us at the Embassy, would be writing
reports based upon the reports they were picking up, and these were from a
variety of people. But at no time to my knowledge did Mustaque or anybody
under his command come to the Embassy and teU us anything. Lifschultz: We have heard allegations about persons such as A.B.S. Safdar
who took over direction of the National Security Intelligence ... [Cherry:
Right] ... Allegations have been made that he attended various schools
which were C.LA.-backed in the United States, and that he had been a
direct informant to the United States of much of what was about to happen
in August 1975. Do you have any knowledge of such an allegation? 1 8 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---Interview with C.I.A.

Bangladesh Station Chief
Cheny: Ihave never heard of that allegation.

Iknow it’s false.

Safdar was a
member of one of the Sports Clubs, Ithink he was president of it, and 1
met him when Ijoined.

But Safdar never passed any information to the
U.S.

Government to my knowledge.

If he did, maybe it was before Igot
there.

But Ihave no idea.

Lifschultz: Did you know anything of another man who attended the
International PoUce Academy in 1971 with Safdar named Abdur Rahim?

Cherry: 1don’t know the man.

I’ve never heard of his name.

Lifschultz: Iwant you to understand that as ajournalist Ihave been
approached with anew version of astory 1was very much interested in at
the time ...

[Cherry: Well, we both are.] ...

And I’m interested in getting
to an accurate view of what happened.

This is aversion of events alleging
U.S.

involvement, that Icompletely dismissed as propaganda on Mrs.

Gandhi’s
part and on the part of the Communist Parties of India and Bangladesh ...

Cherry: That’s right.

And my name has been linked to it in the communist
press.

Blitz and some of the Calcutta papers, Iunderstand.

And it is absolutely
ridiculous.

To begin with, why should we?

We were pouring aid into Bangla¬
desh under Mujib.

Lifschultz: It is aquestion Ihave asked myself agood deal.

Again our source
indicates, as you know and as Iknow, that Mujib at the end of ’74 and through
’75 was in deep political trouble ...

[Cherry: True] ...

The whole political
situation was deteriorating ...[Cherry :li certainly was] ...

It was clear
something was going to happen ...

[Cherry: Yes, of course] ...

Whether
it was going to be from the Left or from the Right was up in the air.

Our
sources allege the Mustaque circle decided to move and that to do so they felt
the need for U.S.

support in the period afterwards.

And that was what went
into their decision to organize their operation.

Now that is what 1am checking
out.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And that was what went
into their decision to organize their operation. Now that is what 1am checking
out. In terms of the motivation of what the hell we would be involved in,
this was that there was going to be an imminent change in ahighly unstable
area of South Asia and that the U.S. was interested in non-communist stability. Cherry: Yes, look, we had long discussions about this very thing at the time. And we knew that this was apossibility. We knew that Mujib was in trouble. We also knew that no matter what happened there, no matter who overthrew
Mujib, or what overthrew Mujib, we also knew we would be blamed for it. That the American Embassy would be blamed for it. Because Mujib had
Mrs. Gandhi’s backing and alot of Soviet inﬂuence there as well. That no
matter what happened [we would be blamed]. So we were extra extra
careful to be super clean. To make sure all of us were directed by Ambassador
Boster. To cut any contact which would possibly give credence to the theory
we knew was going to come about. We indeed followed Ambassador Boster’s
i n s t r u c t i o n s . Lifschultz: So why does ahigh level Embassy ofﬁcial tell me there were
meetings over afour or ﬁve months period, with groups inquiring into the
U.S. attitude, and that the Embassy decided in December/January to dis¬
engage from these people at the height of the Church Committee hearings in
Washington? Why does ahigh level Embassy person tell me that? 1 8 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Cherry: Idon’t know why.

[Lifschultz: And then allege that you and the
Station maintained contact wiA these people down to the day of the coup.]
...

Well, that’s absolutely false.

Idon’t know why.

There may be somebody
who has agrudge against somebody there, and is now making these statements.

But 1wish 1would have the opportunity to confront him and discuss this
with him in your presence.

Lifschultz: What we want to do is pose your denials against his statements.

We are writing this story to be as truthful and accurate as the facts we can get.

We do not want to make any false allegations.

We know people have careers
and lives to live.

And we have no desire to drag people into something that is
n o t t r u e o r a c c u r a t e .

Cherry :Yes, that’s right.

Iappreciate that because from your writing 1have
followed —Idon’t get it anymore unfortunately, being here in Lagos —Iread
your articles with great interest.

And Ialways found them to be as you state.

But in this one, if you believe that individud over others, and I’m sure you’ve
been talking to more people than myself, Ihope you come up with abalanced
article.

Lifschultz :Let me ask you this.

Could any of these things have happened
without your knowledge?

Could there have been people on your staff in
c o n t a c t 
.

.

.

Cherry :There was nobody on my staff in the political section who had any
of this.

It would not be done without my knowledge.

Lifschultz :The reason I’m saying that is some of us have been much interested
in the work done by Larry Stern on events which occurred in Athens in 1967.

Stern has just ﬁnished this book called The Wrong Horse for the Carnegie.

In
that instance certain developments occurred without the knowledge of the
Station Chief or the politick section’s knowledge of certain other members
of their staff.

And there were links with the Papadopolous group that were
without the knowledge of the Station Chief, with certain people operating
autonomously.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In
that instance certain developments occurred without the knowledge of the
Station Chief or the politick section’s knowledge of certain other members
of their staff. And there were links with the Papadopolous group that were
without the knowledge of the Station Chief, with certain people operating
autonomously. None of that, to your knowledge, occurred in the Bangladesh
situation? And as far as you knew people on your staff were completely under
control? Cherry: To my knowledge there wasn’t anything that went on in that Embassy
that Ambassador Boster and any other responsible individuals there didn’t
have full knowledge of. [exchange of telephone numbers ...] Now this
article that you’re writing, you are writing it for the Far Eastern Economic
Review'! Lifschultz: We are not sure yet where we are going to publish it. We are
discussing with several editors. Frankly, it’s about what happened in 1975 ... Cherry: Are you writing it yourself? Lifschultz: Iam writing it with Mr. Bird [Assistant Editor, The Nation, New
York] who has been doing alot of interviewing and digging in Washington
over the last six to eight months. Cherry: Some of the things that you’ve mentioned, Iknow are way off. Lifschultz: Okay, Iwant accuracy. Iam not trying to grind any axes here. Cherry :Well, what you’re gonna do? .. .there was no U.S. government
182

--- PAGE BREAK ---u’ve mentioned, Iknow are way off. Lifschultz: Okay, Iwant accuracy. Iam not trying to grind any axes here. Cherry :Well, what you’re gonna do? .. .there was no U.S. government
182

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Interview with C.I.A. Bangladesh Station Chief
involvement, or any other government involvement that Iknow of, in any of
the coups that occurred there .,. [Lifschultz: We stayed completely out of
it?] ... That’s right. We stayed out of every one of them. Completely out of
it. People there [if they] did things, they did them completely on their own.
What you’ll do, if you write an article or abook or whatever and you make
that allegation and back it up, it’s going to distort whatever else you did.
Because it’s agreat story; it’s interesting and Iknow it fairly well, but...
{Lifschultz: What’s agreat story?] .... once you put in the other, you lose
the rest of it [Lifschultz: What’s agreat story?] ... The history of what
went on there. In those years, in ’75, in Bangladesh. It’s interesting, but it has
nothing to do with any U.S. government or any government’s involvement.
The Bangladeshis were doing it to themselves. It’s agreat canard to think any
coup takes place because of any government involvement. Almost always,
coups take place because of the people themselves.
Lifschultz: Mr. Cherry, as you know and as Iknow, certain critical coups
have occurred with U.S. backing. Need Iname AUende? Need I
number of other people ... Diem ...
Cherry: That may have happened years ago, but boy that’s long since over.
Many years ago.
Lifschultz: What struck me as ridiculous in the ’75 instance, is how could we
possibly be involved at the height of the Church Committee hearings on those
kinds of issues, ever be expected to be involved in such athing. [Cherry: Exact¬
ly. Absolutely correct. And the answer is that we weren’t] ... That’s what
I’m trying to ﬁnd out. [Cherry: I’ve been telling you that.] ... When top
State Department people come to us with opposite information, we must
check it out.
Cherry: Fair enough.
Lifschultz: Iwould like to know what the prior political planning Mustaque
was involved with going back to even 1971.
Cherry: As Isay, there’s one thing: he may have thought he had contacts,
but as far as any type of machinations going on there, Idoubt it very much.
Lifschultz: Why was he dismissed as Foreign Minister as far as you remember?
Cherry: Idon’t remember the details of that. Ijust don’t.
Lifschultz: It is an ‘amazing’ coincidence that the three men who made up
the Mustaque Triangle in Calcutta show up the morning Mujib is killed, at
the Dacca Radio Station —Chashi, Thakur and Mustaque —and we have very
solid information about prior meetings at Comilla and other places in the
months beforehand, planning and meeting with people on what they in¬
tended on the 15th.
Cherry: They may have done so, but to my knowledge they never met with
any American Embassy ofﬁcials. As far as Iknow.
Lifschultz: Or any go-between?
Cherry: Not to my knowledge. No.
Lifschultz: Okay. We’ll be back in touch if we need to. You call us if you
n a m e 
a
1 8 3American Embassy ofﬁcials. As far as Iknow.
Lifschultz: Or any go-between?
Cherry: Not to my knowledge. No.
Lifschultz: Okay. We’ll be back in touch if we need to. You call us if you
n a m e 
a
1 8 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
have any additional thoughts you want to add. I’ve been taking stenographic
notes as we’ve been talking on your denials which, if we go ahead with this
article, we want to print. Okay?
Cherry: It would be nice to have me double-check them before you do print.
Lifschultz: Okay. We will and will call you back and check the quotes with
you. Or if you yourself would like to write astatement, please do that.
Cherry: Ihave no wish to do so.
Lifschultz: Well, all right. And thank you.
Cherry: Good-bye.
1 8 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---tes with
you. Or if you yourself would like to write astatement, please do that.
Cherry: Ihave no wish to do so.
Lifschultz: Well, all right. And thank you.
Cherry: Good-bye.
1 8 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

D. The East Pakistan
(Bangladesh) Security Services
and the American Ofﬁce of
Public Safety
From the early 1950s until late 1973, the C.I.A. operated aproprietary,
International Police Service (I.P.S.), in the Washington D.C. area. It had
the dual purpose of improving allies’ internal security, and evaluating
foreign cadets for pro-U.S. orientation, which might later enable C.I.A. to
recruit them as intelligence assets. In the early 1960s the Agency for
International Development’s Ofﬁce of Public Safety (A.I.D.-O.P.S.)
became actively involved in foreign police training .... C.I.A. documents
indicate that, with the co-operation of O.P.S., lists of O.P.S. and I.P.S.
students were made available, along with biographical information, to
C.I.A. components for operational use.
(House Select Committee on Intelligence, The Pike Committee Report,
19 January 1976).
Assistant Inspector-General Najmuddin went then into along and irate
diatribe saying in essence ...that several of the participants were saying
that the I.P.A. was run by the C.I.A., that he always opposed these rumours
but now he was inclined to change his mind .... With all this emphasis
on ‘Internal Security’ at the I.P.A., the U.S.A. was bringing the partici¬
pants here to buy their souls ....
(Conﬁdential O.P.S. Memorandum, 24 May 1971. Subject: Assistant
Inspector-General Dilshad Najmuddin. From: A. Bonneﬁl, Chief, Participant
Relations Section, International Police Academy, Washington.)
The school [INPOLSEj serves as aparallel institution for the [International]
Police Academy, and several instructors referred to it as akind of ‘graduate
school’ for I.P.A. Philip Agee said INPOLSE was used to conceal C.I.A.
training experts you didn’t want kicking around the Police Academy.
(John Marks and Taylor Branch, Harpers Weekly, ‘Reports on INPOLSE’.)
Mr. Fraser: Has O.P.S. been used by [the] C.I.A. abroad? Have any C.I.A.
personnel ever worked in O.P.S. missions abroad?
Mr. Parker: Yes sir, A.I.D./O.P.S. has had aco-operative arrangement with
C.I.A. missions abroad. Further details of these arrangements should be
solicited from that agency ....
(House Foreign Affairs Committee Hearings, June 1974. Donald Fraser,
Chairman; Daniel Parker, Director A.I.D.)
1 8 5ad. Further details of these arrangements should be
solicited from that agency ....
(House Foreign Affairs Committee Hearings, June 1974. Donald Fraser,
Chairman; Daniel Parker, Director A.I.D.)
1 8 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Senator Abourezk’s amendment considerably expands the restriction on
U.S.

support to police and related programs that was enacted last year ....

The amendment would appear to restrict activities now undertaken by
the C.I.A.

under the National Security Act of 1947 for the purpose of
obtaining foreign intelligence information from co-operative foreign
security and intelligence services, some of which are with national police
forces ....

An essential ingredient of many C.I.A.

relationships with
foreign security and intelligence services is some limited and special
training and other support, as well as the exchange of information and
advice.

If the Agency were restricted in these activities, our ability to
perform our assigned intelligence mission would be severely curtailed ...

the amendment would curtail various C.I.A.

activities abroad which are in
support of approved national intelligence objectives.

We therefore recom¬
mend that it not be adopted.

(William Colby, Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, in aletter to
William Fulbright, Chairman, Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
31 July 1974.)
Icould go on, with other reports of O.P.S.

activity which Ihave found
in the last year, including letters from Americans indicating U.S.

com¬
plicity in the use of torture in countries abroad, but Ithink the point is
clear.

This country is involved in an activity which is totally divorced from
the scope and intention of U.S.

foreign aid.

The Ofﬁce of Public Safety
and the International Police Academy mocks the purpose of other A.I.D.

programs and has inﬂicted an indelible blemish on the past records and
accomplishments of U.S.A.l.D.

programs ....

It is time, Ibelieve, that the
Congress terminates this program and all related activities in regard to
police and prison support.

(Senator James Abourezk, U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is time, Ibelieve, that the
Congress terminates this program and all related activities in regard to
police and prison support. (Senator James Abourezk, U.S. Senate, 20 June 1974.)
Counter-insurgency and Public Safety
The tactics and theories of global counter-insurgency reached their most
mature development as acentrepiece to American strategic planning during
the decade of the 1960s. Crucial to the conceptual debates then going on
within the more sophisticated military and intelligence circles of the West
was the important, if not subtle, difference which was drawn between national
police forces and national armies, and the role each ought to play in the
destruction of radical movements within Third World societies. Insurgencies
or opposition movements contained at the level of police actions were con¬
sidered eminently preferable to deeper crises where national armies, in their
inimicably heavy-handed and usually cumbersome style, often drove large
sections of apopulace into deeper sympathy with opposition movements. This distinction was part of alarger concept that regarded Malayan (1954)
style police actions in pro-Western client regimes of the Third World as
being preferable to Indonesian (1965) style massacres. By avoiding the
intervention of anational army and the setting-up of martial law type regimes. 1 8 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---East Pakistan’s Security Services and the U.S.

Ofﬁce of Public Safety
the semblance oi formal democratic institutions in these societies might be
preserved and would, within the global system of Western ‘free world’ alliances,
be much less of an embarrassment than allies in the form of juntas.

In addition, within the Kermedy Administration rather simple ‘cost effec¬
tive’ notions were also used to argue that effective prior police work would
make the need for massive style interventions on the scale of Vietnam un¬
necessary.

One American analyst, David Burks, testifying before aU.S.

Senate
Subcommittee put it this way;
1
Ithink we have to face areality.

The reality is that when insurgents appear,
the government will call upon the army to eliminate the insurgents.

There can come apoint when the army cannot handle this kind of situa¬
tion simply because the military establishment tends to use too much
force, tends to use the wrong techniques and tends, therefore, to polarize
the population and gradually force the majority of those who are poli¬
tically active to support the revolutionary or insurgent force ....

Whereas
acivil police force is with the people all the time, carrying on the normal
functions of control of or apprehension of ordinary or common criminals
and can, therefore, move very quickly whenever an insurgent problem
develops.^
Burks was echoed in his remarks by the Director of the Agency for Inter¬
national Development (A.I.D.), who said in his 1964 Congressional testi¬
mony on A.I.D.

appropriations that ‘the police are amost sensitive point of
contact between government and people, close to the focal points of unrest,
and more acceptable than the army as keeper of order over long periods of
time .’3
It was out of this type of strategic thinking that avast expansion of
American training of foreign police forces got under way.Whereas
acivil police force is with the people all the time, carrying on the normal
functions of control of or apprehension of ordinary or common criminals
and can, therefore, move very quickly whenever an insurgent problem
develops.^
Burks was echoed in his remarks by the Director of the Agency for Inter¬
national Development (A.I.D.), who said in his 1964 Congressional testi¬
mony on A.I.D.

appropriations that ‘the police are amost sensitive point of
contact between government and people, close to the focal points of unrest,
and more acceptable than the army as keeper of order over long periods of
time .’3
It was out of this type of strategic thinking that avast expansion of
American training of foreign police forces got under way.

The Kennedy
Administration revitalized and reorganized this aspect of the overall counter¬
insurgency effort under the Ofﬁce of Public Safety (O.P.S.).

Until the
American Congress dismantled the programme in 1975 because, in the words
of one Senate report, the U.S.

had become ‘politically identiﬁed with police
terrorism’ in recipient countries, the O.P.S.

had trained over 7,500 senior
ofﬁcers at the International Police Academy and other U.S.

institutions,
and over amillion rank-and-ﬁle police at OP.S.

afﬁliated academies abroad.**
Soon after the Kennedy Administration’s 1962 reorganization of this
special bureau for ‘public safety’ within A.I.D., the O.P.S.

began to gear up a
major programme in Pakistan.

Over the next decade Pakistan would become
the fourth largest recipient of American assistance to aforeign police force,
after Vietnam, Thailand and Indonesia.

The programme, like others else¬
where, had two essential dimensions: the training of personnel to equip
expanded institutional forces and the development of atechnical infrastructure.

In the words of one 0J.S.

document, obtained under the Freedom of Infor¬
mation Act, the object of U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the words of one 0J.S. document, obtained under the Freedom of Infor¬
mation Act, the object of U.S. based training was;
...to improve the administrative and operational practices of the internal
187

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
security forces.

It is best approached by acombination of participant
training and technical assistance.

Training in modern police administration
and operations is programmed for middle and senior level police execu¬
tives in order to develop acadre of trained administrators who will be in a
position to inﬂuence and initiate changes in present traditional, conserva¬
tive, colonial oriented procedures.^
Within the decade the trainees would be in aposition to inﬂuence much more
than ‘traditional procedures’.

Before long they would be underpinning coups,
counter-coups, assassinations, and by the 1976-78 period in Bangladesh this
same police cadre would move into control of key economic positions in the
state apparatus.

In pursuing their research into U.S.

foreign policy choices at the time of
the Banglade^ crisis of 1971, Carnegie researchers [see Appendix A] also
investigated the role and relationships which existed between American
government organs and Pakistan’s security services.

In an interview with
Jack Coin, Director of A.I.D.’s Public Safety Programme, Carnegie staffers
were given asimple summary of the strategic and tactical rationale of such
programmes:
Now, different countries, different governments, are organized differently
and have different ways of doing things.

But one thing they all have in
common is they maintain order with acivil police force.

When acountry
says to us that it can’t do it alone and needs some help doing this, well
it’s part and parcel of the whole development process.

Part of how the
U.S.

determines whether to send in apublic safety program is whether the
U.S.

sees the individual country as part of the family of free nations.

If
we see that nation as part of the family, we do try to insure their safety ..

.

No government wants to turn to its military to do the job of the
police, but this is along-standing problem that A.I.D.

police can do
nothing about.--- PAGE BREAK ---

No government wants to turn to its military to do the job of the
police, but this is along-standing problem that A.I.D. police can do
nothing about. That’s what happened in Uruguay, for example; you don’t
want soldiers on the streets enforcing order, because the only way the military
knows how to enforce order is the way it’s been trained to do things,
and that’s by force. So it costs agovernment politically to turn to the army. In 1963 the United States sent anumber of study missions to Pakistan to
formulate apolice aid programme for the next decade. While ﬁeld studies
were being conducted by the O.P.S. in East Pakistan, the ﬁrst Bengali candi¬
dates for U.S. based training under it began arriving in Washington in March
1963, for courses given at the International Police Academy (I.P.A.), the Inter¬
national Police Services School (INPOLSE), the F.B.I. National Academy,
and more specialized training institutions. By the mid-sixties, the O.P.S. had
permanent ﬁeld personnel at the American consulate in Dacca to supervise
the in-country programme and to recruit and select Bengali police and intelli¬
gence personnel for Stateside training. Between 1966 and 1971 Robert
Janus, Leon J. Clements and Orval L. Wooner staffed the O.P.S. in Dacca. In July 1967. ahigh level O.P.S. ofﬁcial from Vietnam, Charles F. Sloane,
1 8 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---East Pakistan’s Security Services and the U.S.

Ofﬁce of Public Safety
arrived to direct the East Pakistan programme.

Three of the four men, accord¬
ing to American sources, had alleged C.I.A.

coimections.

Sloane, prior to his
Dacca tour, had been the Assistant Co-ordinator of the Vietnam Public Safety
Affairs Division and Assistant Co-ordinator of thejVietnam Division of the
O.P.S.

When his tour ended in Dacca in January 1969, he returned to Viet¬
nam the following month and joined CORDS (Civil Operations and Revo¬
lutionary Development Support), aC.I.A.

programme under the supervision
of William Colby, who later became Director of the C.I.A.

Colby’s special
operations for counter-insurgency programme in Vietnam, the well known
Phoenix assassination programme, was part of the overall CORDS effort.

In
1971, when the Pakistani crackdown in East Bengal forced the evacuation of
Americans, Wooner and Janus both returned to Vietnam and joined CORDS.

Like Sloane they had both previously served in Vietnam.

Clements was also
posted to Vietnam from Dacca, but not with CORDS.

From Pakistan and its eastern wing asteady stream of intelligence, special
branch and police communications ofﬁcers ﬂowed into the I.P.A.

and
INPOLSE in Washington and other institutions elsewhere in the United
States.

Between 1961 and 1971, when East Pakistan became Bangladesh, 113
senior and middle level Pakistani police ofﬁcials had undergone U.S.

based
training.

According to information obtained under the Freedom of Informatior
Act, at least 40 of the group were from the Bengali police and intelligence
cadre.

In East Pakistan, as it was later in Bangladesh, there was no distinction
between the police and intelligence bureaucracies in the upper echelons of
the services.

They were, and are still, interlocking.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In East Pakistan, as it was later in Bangladesh, there was no distinction
between the police and intelligence bureaucracies in the upper echelons of
the services. They were, and are still, interlocking. When compared to the 414
members of the South Vietnamese national police trained over the same
period, and considering the relatively huge scale of American involvement
in Vietnam at the time, the number of Pakistani trainees sent to the American
institutes was not insigniﬁcant. The men who came for training were impor¬
tant and, if they did not already, would soon dominate the branches of their
respective services in the years ahead. A.B.S. Safdar, Abdur Rahim, S.A. Hakim,
Musa Miyan Choudhury, Syed Amir Khasru, M.N. Huda, A.K.M. Musleuddin,
Abu Syed Shahjahan, A.M.M. Aminur Rahman, Ghulam Murshed, Ali M. Jamshed, Abdul Khaleque Khan, A.H. Nurual Islam, Zafarul Huq, Khondakar
G o l a m M o h i u d d i n
all the leading personalities of Bangladesh’s internal
security apparatus —moved tlirough the classrooms of the I.P.A. and
INPOLSE institutes. In Bangladesh they came to form something of asecret
state within astate, obscure but crucial in their behind-the-scenes involve¬
ment in many of the events in the country’s bloody and traumatic history. In the years prior to 1971, nearly all these leading Bengali police and
intelligence ofﬁcials had been involved in the surveillance, detention and
prosecution of democratic and nationalist politicians in East Pakistan. With
the exception of one senior police and intelligence ofﬁcer who joined the
Mukti Bahini and survived the Liberation War, the entire senior Bengali
ofﬁcer cadre of the East Pakistan Police Service, Intelligence Bureau and
Special Branch actively collaborated or were alleged to have collaborated
with the Pakistan Army, following the crackdown in Dacca on 25 March
1 8 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---ervice, Intelligence Bureau and
Special Branch actively collaborated or were alleged to have collaborated
with the Pakistan Army, following the crackdown in Dacca on 25 March
1 8 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
1971 which sparked off the civil war. These were the Vichy of Bangladesh.
As has been examined in this book, despite demands from younger nationalist
elements no recrimination was taken against these men after independence,
except for relieving them of their ofﬁcial responsibilities. As has also been
discussed in the book, the Mujib government began, in 1974, the paradoxical
and ironic rehabilitation of these security service personalities in the face of
aradicalized opposition then emerging out of the regime’s once most mili¬
tant, but now disillusioned supporters. Their reintegration into positions
in Bangladesh’s intelligence structure placed anumber of them, such as Safdar,
in posts ideally suited for their alleged co-operation with the coup d’etat
against Mujib in August 1975. It was from these positions, according to
Bangladeshi and American sources, that they also allegedly maintained
liaison with their Western counterparts.
C.I.A. Police Training versus the Abourezk Amendment
The training programmes which brought nearly all the leading ﬁgures of what
was to become Bangladesh’s National Security Intelligence agency (N.S.I.)
to the United States were abolished in 1975 by an Act of the U.S. Congress.
As of 1July 1975 it became illegal for U.S.A.I.D. funds ‘to provide any
ﬁnancial support for police, prisons, or other law enforcement forces for any
foreign government’. The campaign to abolish the O.P.S. was led by Senator
James Abourezk of South Dakota. Speaking on his controversial amendment
to the Foreign Assistance Act, Abourezk said in June 1974 on the ﬂoor of
the U.S. Senate:
Since the late 1950s aparamount concern of American policymakers
has been the preservation of social stability in countries deemed favorable
to U.S. trade and investment. U.S. military planning has been shaped by
the need to provide on amoment’s notice courtter-insurgency forces that
can be ﬂown in to the aid of friendly regimes threatened by popular
insurrection. The military assistance program has been used to upgrade
the capabilities of indigenous forces to overcome the rural guerrilla forces.
Finally on the premise that the police constitute the ﬁrst line of
defense against subversion, the Agency for International Development
has funnelled American funds and supplies into the hands of Third World
p o l i c e f o r c e s . . . .
The public safety program is not large in comparison to the military
aid program -but its supporters can muster some impressive-arguments
in its favor. It is argued, for instance, that the police —being interspersed
among the population —are more effective than the military in controlling
low-scale insurgency. Supporters of the police assistance program also
point out that police forces are cheaper to maintain than military forces,
since they do not require expensive ‘hardware’ like planes, tanks and
artillery.
These arguments advanced by men like Col. Edward Lansdale, formerly
1 9 0are cheaper to maintain than military forces,
since they do not require expensive ‘hardware’ like planes, tanks and
artillery.
These arguments advanced by men like Col. Edward Lansdale, formerly
1 9 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---East Pakistan’s Security Services and the U.S.

Ofﬁce of Public Safety
of the C.I.A., received their most favourable response from President John
F.

Kennedy and his brother Robert, then the Attorney General, in the early
1960s ....

The State Department memorandum establishing the Ofﬁce of
Public Safety is noteworthy for its stronger language —the memo, issued
in November 1962, declared that A.I.D.

will ‘vest the Ofﬁce of Public
Safety with ..

.powers greater than any other technical ofﬁce or division
o f A .

I .

D .

’
The Ofﬁce of Public Safety is empowered to assist Third World police
organizations in three ways: ﬁrst, by sending ‘public safety advisers’ who
provide ‘in-country’ training for rank and ﬁle policemen only, at the
expense of the host country; second, by providing training at the Inter¬
national Police Academy and other U.S.

schools for senior police ofﬁcers
and technicians; and third, by shipping weapons, ammunition, radios,
petrol, cars, jeeps, chemical munitions, and related equipment ....

Mr.

President, there are other programs in the Ofﬁce of Public Safety
which concern me agreat deal.

According to reports which Ireceived last
year, the U.S.

Government has been training foreign policemen in bomb¬
making at aremote desert camp in Texas.

At the U.S.

Border Patrol
Academy in Los Fresnos, Texas, foreign policeman are taught the design,
manufacture and potential uses of home-made bombs and incendiary
devices by I.P.A.

instructors.

At least 165 policemen have taken this
‘Technical Investigations Course’ since it was ﬁrst offered in 1969 ....

In addition to the bomb school, Ihave learned that International
Police Academy graduates also attend aSchool for Psychological Opera¬
tions at Fort Bragg, N.C.

The School which is held at the U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In addition to the bomb school, Ihave learned that International
Police Academy graduates also attend aSchool for Psychological Opera¬
tions at Fort Bragg, N.C. The School which is held at the U.S. Army
Institute for Military Assistance at Fort Bragg, N.C., includes courses with
such titles as: subversive insurgent methods, psychological operations in
support of internal defense and development, the role of intelEgence and
internal defense. According to Adkins the purpose of the School is to
‘teach police how the military handles psychological warfare problems’. Icould go on, with other reports of O.P.S. activity which Ihave found
in the last year including letters from Americans indicating U.S. com¬
plicity in the use of torture in countries abroad, but 1think the point is
clear. This country is involved in an activity which is totally divorced
from the scope and intention of U.S. foreign aid. The Ofﬁce of Public
Safety and the International Police Academy mocks the purpose of
other A.I.D. programs and has inﬂicted an indelible blemish on the past
records and accomplishments of U.S .A.I.D. programs .... It is time, I
believe, that the Congress terminates this program and all related activities
in regard to police and prison support.^
Before the Abourezk Amendment ﬁnally passed the American Congress,
acounter-campaign was initiated to prevent passage of the new legislation. Leading the effort was William Colby, Director of the C.I.A. In late July
1974, in aprivate letter written to William Fulbright, Colby argued against
the Abourezk Amendment, declaring that the police training programmes had
been highly useful in ‘obtaining foreign intelligence’ co-operation from those
trained’. The Colby letter was leaked to the press. Colby wrote to Fulbright:
191

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Senator Abourezk’s amendment considerably expands the restriction on
U.S.

support to police and related programs that was enacted last year as
part of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1973.

The 1973 restrictions apply
only to activities funded under the Foreign Assistance Act whereas Senator
Abourezk’s amendment would extend the restriction to speciﬁed activities
funded under any law.

Another important aspect of Senator Abourezk’s
amendment is that it applies restrictions not just to involvement with
foreign police services and related programs as the 1973 law did, but also
to ‘internal security forces’ of any foreign government or any program of
internal intelligence ...

The amendment would appear to restrict activities now undertaken by
the C.I.A.

under the National Security Act of 1947 for the purpose of
obtaining foreign intelligence information from co-operative foreign
security and intelligence services, some of which are with national police
forces.

In addition, in many areas of the world the protection of U.S.

personnel, installations and security interests depends heavily on the
effectiveness and support of foreign internal security services, as does
effective action to counter terrorist activities and narcotics trafﬁc.

An
essential ingredient of many C.I.A.

relationships with foreign security
and intelligence services is some limited and special training and other
support, as well as the exchange of information and advice.

If the Agency
were restricted in these activities, our ability to perform our assigned
intelligence mission would be severely curtailed ..

.the amendment would
curtail various C.I.A.

activities abroad which are in support of approved
national intelligence objectives.

We therefore recommend that it not be
adopted.^
Further Congressional hearings in the summer of 1974 conﬁrmed C.I.A.

penetration of foreign police through the OP.S.

programme.--- PAGE BREAK ---

penetration of foreign police through the OP.S. programme. In hearings
before the House Foreign Affairs Committee concerning U.S. funded training
at the International Police Academy, Daniel Parker, Director of the Agency
for International Development (A.I.D.) admitted to the Chairman of the
Foreign Affairs Committee, Donald Fraser, that A.IJD. and O.P.S. had been
utilized by the C.I.A. Mr. Fraser: Has O.P.S. been used by [the] C.I.A. abroad? Have any C.I.A. personnel ever worked in O.P.S. missions abroad? Mr. Parker: Yes sir, A.I.D./O.P.S. has had aco-operative arrangement with
the C.I.A. missions abroad. Further details of these arrangement should be
solicited from that Agency .... Mr. Fraser: Does I.P.A. [International Police Academy] training include
interrogation methods? Do you think in some cases that might conceivably
help the police of an anti-democratic government smash the democratic
opposition? Mr. Parker: The subject ‘Interviews and Interrogations’ is taught as part of
criminal investigation speciality courses at the I.P.A. It is our view that this
course is one element in helping build effective civil police institutions and. 1 9 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---East Pakistan's Security Services and the U.S.

Ofﬁce of Public Safety
in turn, that such institutions are one of the necessary conditions for
development.

The means are neutral and it is quite possible that at some
later date the police trained here may participate in repression.

But I
would deny that the contents of the academy curriculum bear on the
causes of such repression ....

Mr.

Fraser: Igather that one of the basic assumptions behind the O.P.S.

program is that the violent overthrow of democratically elected govern¬
m e n t s i s u n d e s i r a b l e .

A m I c o r r e c t ?

I n t h a t c a s e w e r e A .

I .

D .

a n d O .

P.

S .

unhappy with the overthrow of the AUende government?

Mr.

Parker: You are, of course, correct in your statement that one of the
basic assumptions of U.S.

foreign policy and A.I.D.’s public safety pro¬
grams is that the violent overthrow of democratically elected governments
is undesirable.

Iwas not happy at the overthrow of the Allende govern¬
ment.^
Press exposure of links between police training, public safety programmes
and American intelligence agencies continued throughout 1975 with the
identiﬁcation of new schools and institutes directed to agent recruitment.

In
1975 John Marks, author of The C.I.A.

and the Cult of Intelligence, and
Taylor Branch uncovered apreviously unknown police training school called
INPOLSE.

According to documents and information subsequently obtained
under the Freedom of Information Act, it has been conﬁrmed that numerous
top ofﬁcials of Bangladesh’s present National Security Intelligence (N.S.I.)
Agency attended INPOLSE.

According to Marks and Branch’s report pub¬
lished in Harpers ’Weekly:
Independent sources provided us with hard evidence that International
Police Services Inc.

[INPOLSE] operated for nearly 23 years as an arm of
the C.I.A., under cover as aprivate ﬁrm.--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to Marks and Branch’s report pub¬
lished in Harpers ’Weekly:
Independent sources provided us with hard evidence that International
Police Services Inc. [INPOLSE] operated for nearly 23 years as an arm of
the C.I.A., under cover as aprivate ﬁrm. Part of its business was to export
police wares to foreign police forces —guns, ammunition, nightsticks,
handcuffs, holsters, uniforms, radios, and relatively unsophisticated kinds
of bugging and surveillance equipment. But according to INPOLSE ofﬁcials,
this export was only asideline to the larger task of education. Over the
years, INPOLSE provided specialized training in police techniques to
thousands of foreign policemen from 87 countries around the world. Philip Agee, an ex-C.I.A. operative of nine years experience in Latin
America, described how in 1965 he sent one of the Agency’s Uruguayan
agents, Alejandro Otero, to INPOLSE for training. Otero was then CWef
of Intelligence for Montevideo, Uruguay, police department. In an inter¬
view in London, Agee said that the special courses in Washington were
designed ‘to jack up’ Otero and ‘get him going against the Tupamaros’,
the strongest group of Uruguayan revolutionaries at one time .... He told us that A.I.D.’s own International Police Academy, aschool
similar to INPOLSE that is run out of an old trolley barn in Georgetown,
was originally established by the C.I.A. He went on to say that C.I.A. operatives regularly used the A.I.D. Public Safety programs for cover in
Uruguay and elsewhere, and that the Agency took advantage of A.I.D.’s
contact with foreign police forces to recruit its agents from among the
1 9 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
local cops.

Agee recounted how his request to have Otero trained was
forwarded to James Angleton’s counter-intelligence staff at C.I.A.

head¬
quarters, and how Otero was assigned to 12 weeks at the International
Police Academy followed by four weeks at the C.I.A.’s ‘private’ school,
I N P O L S E .

Angleton is the same senior C.I.A.

ofﬁcial who resigned last month in
the wake of disclosures that his ofﬁce had been involved in large-scale
domestic operations —seemingly in violation of the C.I.A.’s charter.

Agee
stated —and three other C.I.A.

sources conﬁrmed —that Angleton’s
counter-intelligence ofﬁce also controlled the C.I.A.’s worldwide police
liaison, inﬁltration and training programmes.

We have learned that the actual
C.I.A.

operation that funneled people like Otero into training assignments
was known by the acronym ‘DTBAIL’, and that aformer Angleton staffer
named Byron Engle moved from the C.I.A.

in 1962 to head the entire
Ofﬁce of Public Safety in A.I.D..

..

None of the Congressional hearings or probes disclosed the operations
of INPOLSE, even though it was older and at least as large as the Police
Academy ....

The school serves as aparallel institution for the Police
Academy, and several instructors referred to it as akind of ‘graduate
school’ for I.P.A.

Philip Agee said INPOLSE was used to conceal C.I.A.

training experts whom ‘you didn’t want kicking around the Police Aca¬
demy’.

One high C.I.A.

ofﬁcial, who retired two years ago from Agency
headquarters here, observed that INPOLSE ‘performed services that
I.P.A.

was not capable of performing’.^
Documents obtained under the Freedom of Information Act conﬁrm that
at least one-third of the Bengali personnel trained in the United States went
on from instruction at the International Police Academy and other institutes
to INPOLSE training.--- PAGE BREAK ---

ofﬁcial, who retired two years ago from Agency
headquarters here, observed that INPOLSE ‘performed services that
I.P.A. was not capable of performing’.^
Documents obtained under the Freedom of Information Act conﬁrm that
at least one-third of the Bengali personnel trained in the United States went
on from instruction at the International Police Academy and other institutes
to INPOLSE training. Currently nearly every one of these men is atop
ofﬁcial in Bangladesh’s National Security Intelligence Agency or in the
country’s paramilitary police. Police Telecommunications and Military Aid
Besides the training of senior police/intelligence persormel in the United
States, the OP.S., in 1963, began aseries of ﬁeld-studies designed to evaluate
what technical infrastructure would be necessary and consistent with the
overall expansion of Pakistan’s internal security set-up. In the ﬁrst phase,
great emphasis was placed on the development of aprovincial communi¬
cations grid in East Pakistan. In September 1963 Paul Katz, asenior tele¬
communications engineer from OP.S. Technical Services Division, arrived in
East Pakistan. Katz was greeted by Brigadier Azar Khan, Joint Director of
Pakistan’s Intelligence Bureau and principal liaison ofﬁcer for the Public
Safety Programme in its opening period. Katz’s mission to Dacca was to
conduct adetailed communications survey of the needs of Pakistan’s Intelli¬
gence Bureau, West Pakistan’s Provincial Police, West Pakistan’s Rangers, the
Frontier Constabulary, the East Pakistan Riﬂes and the East Pakistan
1 9 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---East Pakistan’s Security Services and the U.S.

Ofﬁce of Public Safety
Provincial Police.

According to Katz’s Mission Report, obtained under the
Freedom of Information Act, ‘Brigadier Khan suggested that priority be given
East Pakistan due to the serious lack of police communications in that
area ....

The communications survey disclosed that while the communi¬
cations needs of East and West Pakistan’s civil internal security forces are
great, those of the East Pakistan Provincial Police (E.P.P.) are considered to
be of ahigher priority as no police communication system exists in this
area.’ Katz’s 42 page report dso made anumber of broader conclusions and
r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s :
The problem facing the East Pakistan Provincial Police (E.P.P.) can be
appreciated if one realizes that, virtually without communications capa¬
bility, a25,000 man police force is responsible for effective control of
crime, maintenance of law and order, checking subversive activities, pre¬
vention and control of civil disturbances in acountry with apopulation
of over 50 million people, covering an area of more than 55,000 square
m i l e s .

.

.

In most internal security operations, it is also imperative that communi¬
cations be secure from interception and compromise.

Therefore, ameans
of sending coded messages is needed.

This feature is not presently obtain¬
able ....

There are many recorded instances of the transmission of unauth¬
orized orders designed to subvert or undermine control in internal security
agencies.

This danger would be minimized were E.P.P.

to have physical
and operational control over their system ....

Further, civil communications systems are notoriously subject to en¬
suing disruption of service.

The recent threat of strike by the Pakistan
Postal and Telephone Departments, which was fortunately averted, further
demonstrates the paramount need for aself-sustaining police security
telecommunications network ....--- PAGE BREAK ---

Further, civil communications systems are notoriously subject to en¬
suing disruption of service. The recent threat of strike by the Pakistan
Postal and Telephone Departments, which was fortunately averted, further
demonstrates the paramount need for aself-sustaining police security
telecommunications network .... Apolice security telecommunications
system must be self-sustaining particularly in times of civil strife.^®
Four months before arriving in East Pakistan Katz did asimilar tour in
Latin America, inspecting the communications of the Colombian National
Police and the Administrative Department of Security (D.A.S.), the country’s
political police. His recommendations in Bogota were not unlike those made
in Dacca. The principles were global. Katz argued that both the D.A.S. and
the civil police were operationally hampered because each maintained separate
and inadequate communications systems. Katz argued that the two be merged
and jointly operated. He proposed that general A.I.D. funds being provided
to the Bogota authorities be linked to Colombia’s acceptance of the proposal. The Colombian government ultimately agreed to the Katz plan, and amulti¬
million dollar programme was organized which established amodem nation¬
wide radio/teletype communications network. Communications set-ups such
as these within Third World countries, designed and supplied by the U.S.,
would of course allow, during future crises within these states, cmcial access
by Western signals and electronic intelligence. Recent exposures in the American and British press have revealed how the
1 9 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
building of communications networks during the 1950s and 1960s had a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the development of Western global capabilities for
SIGINT, signals intelligence.

According to the British weekly, Aew Statesman:
[Great Britain’si G.C.H.Q.

[Government Communications Headquarters]
is apartner in amultinational ‘Sigint pact’, whose task is to monitor the
entire globe.

The basic instrument of unity is an agreement signed between
the United States and the U.K.

in 1947, known as the UKUSA pact, which
Canada, Australia and New Zealand later joined.

Each of the main parti¬
cipants —N.S.A., G.C.H.Q., Australia’s Defence Signals Division (D.S.D.)
and Canada’s Communication Branch of the National Research Council
(C.E.B.R.C.) —is in charge of Sigint activities in agiven region.

G.C.H.Q.’s
territory is Africa and Europeiwest of the Ural mountains ....

The scale
of international communications has increased enormously over the last
30 years and the Sigint agencies have swollen to acorresponding size.

N.S.A.

[America’s National Security Agency] employs more than 120,000
people in different parts of the world.

In 1975 the Church Committee of
the U.S.

Senate uncovered N.S.A.

programmes to intercept the inter¬
national telephone and telex messages of targeted American citizens.

Other
intelligence agencies provided ‘watch lists’ to N.S.A.

By 1974 there were
extensive ﬁles on 75,000 people ....

Sigint has shifted its aim toward
weaker targets: Third World governments, dissident civilian nationals,
economic intelligence and low grade communications from major powers
....

Allies must be spied upon because one day they might become
enemies; countries which seem remote now must nevertheless be monitored
because they might one day become part of alarger conﬂict.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sigint has shifted its aim toward
weaker targets: Third World governments, dissident civilian nationals,
economic intelligence and low grade communications from major powers
.... Allies must be spied upon because one day they might become
enemies; countries which seem remote now must nevertheless be monitored
because they might one day become part of alarger conﬂict. Iﬁ East Pakistan, Paul Katz proposed for astart that, as ‘an initial phase,
acomplete telecommunications system to provide adequate service from the
provincial headquarters in Dacca to the range headquarters at Cliittagong,
Khulna, and Rajshani, and to 18 districts would be required’. According to
Joseph J. Corr, the Chief O.P.S. adviser to Pakistan, who was interviewed by
Carnegie researchers in their study of the ’71 conﬂict, the police assistance
programme developed in the following manner:
For several years we had been working with police on an extensive program
with East Pakistan. There were three tranches to this, and atotal projected
cost of three million dollars. You have to understand that in this country,
communication facilities are extremely limited —primitive, not only
military and police communications, but ordinary phone lines and cables
that you have to hook into. We set it up so that the ﬁrst increment would
link Dacca to the principal towns in East Pakistan. The second tranche —
this was part of the ﬁrst tranche rather —was to set up communications
with Dacca. Next we were going to go outside of the principal cities to the
subdistrict level, then from there ﬁnally to the lowest level. Before civil war broke out in March 1971, the O.P.S. communications
1 9 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---East Pakistan’s Security Services and the U.S.

Ofﬁce of Public Safety
programme had completed two tranches of the development scheme.

Follow¬
ing Independence the new government under|Mujib was uninterested in re¬
newing the programme.

Two rather straightforward factors were responsible
for the new government’s attitude: Kissinger’s policy had been to support
the Pakistanis throughout the Liberation War and most of the Bengali O.P.S.

trainees had been part of that minute percentage of the population who
actively collaborated with the Pakistan Army.

On both counts the new
nationalist authorities in Dacca were uninterested in this type of American
largesse.

Immediately after Mujib was killed, measures were taken to revive the old
O.P.S.

development programme.

After the August coup d’6tat, I.P.A.

and
INPOLSE graduates assumed powerful roles and began to exercise adegree
of political and bureaucratic authority none of them had possessed before,
even during the days of Pakistan.

The snag in the rehabilitation of the old
O.P.S./A.I.D.

connection lay in the fact that the Abourezk Amendment had
abolished all the O.P.S.

operations amonth before Mujib’s murder.

According
to Western diplomatic sources, however, an alternative was worked out via
the British government.

Ayear after the coup, the British High Commissioner
to Bangladesh, B.G.

Smallman, and the Bangladesh Home Secretary,
Salahuddin Ahmed, signed an aid agreement whereby the British authorities
were to provide £720,000 ‘for the improvement of police telecommunications’.

This was the ﬁgure needed to complete the third tranche of the original
O.P.S./A.I.D.

scheme.

Funds, impossible to obtain from the U.S.

Congress,
were now readily made available from British overseas aid allocations.

The
British Parliament had no Abourezk Amendment which set regulations or
standards for foreign security assistance.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Congress,
were now readily made available from British overseas aid allocations. The
British Parliament had no Abourezk Amendment which set regulations or
standards for foreign security assistance. According to the report in The
Bangladesh Times at that time, ‘the project when implemented will provide
the Bangladesh Police with abasic system of direct radio communications to
all important police stations and posts in the rural areas, and aV.H.F. back-up
system from Dacca to the main outlying district stations for use at night. Under its technical assistance programme the British government will also
provide experienced consultant services to participate in the implementation
of the project.’ Besides the British authorities the governments of Saudi
Arabia, and Iran under the Shah, also exhibited little restraint in their new
found interest in Bangladesh’s post-Mujib era. It was not unusual or unexpected that the British authorities should take
up the slack where the United States, due to internal constraints, was now
somewhat restrained externally. In fact, in the era of the Malaya Emergency
in the ﬁfties, the British government had initiated the development of a
science of post-colonial counter-insurgency under the auspices of Robert
Thompson and other Sandhurst experts. The training of Third World para¬
military police and intdligence expertise was undertaken by the Common¬
wealth during the 1950s and ’60s before the United States got into the ﬁeld
in abig way. Men like Safdar had received security intelligence training in
Britain as far back as 1963 and in Canada in 1954. But within ayear of committing itself to the completion of the O.P.S. 1 9 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
telecommunications grid, the British government expanded its commitment
to security assistance for Bangladesh with the arrival of aspecial British Mili¬
tary Mission in Dacca.

In November 1975, following the coup d’etat which
had killed Mujib in August of that year, atotally unanticipated Marxist-
orientated insurrection occurred, summoning up surprising support from
the ranks of the armed forces.

This development reportedly caught the Western
powers and the Soviets completely by surprise and revealed, at least to the
West, how shallowly developed its military links, sources and assets within
the Bangladesh Armed Forces were.

Networks within the police and national
intelligence were more or less intact from the Pakistan period.

But the new
and extremely young leadership of the Bangladesh Army was drawn from an
ofﬁcer cadre which during the period of aunited Pakistan had been insigni¬
ﬁcant and lower echelon, in keeping with the general discrimination against
the Bengalis in the Pakistani services.

In contrast to Western knowledge of
and links with the Pakistan Army, or even the Indian Armed Forces, Euro¬
pean and American perceptions of the power relations, personalities and
political dynamics within the Bangladesh Army were inferior in the extreme,
as of 1975.

The arrival of the British military advisory group was reportedly
intended to ﬁx all that.

However, the unit’s tasks were not without contro¬
versy.

Discussion of the Mission was censored from the Bangladesh press, but
the [London] Guardian’s South Asia Correspondent, Simon Winchester,
reported from Dacca on 20 December 1977:
Considerable opposition is being voiced in Bangladesh to anumber of
British government aid programmes which critics say are helping to re¬
inforce suppression of political opposition to General Ziaur Rahman’s
military dictatorship.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, the unit’s tasks were not without contro¬
versy. Discussion of the Mission was censored from the Bangladesh press, but
the [London] Guardian’s South Asia Correspondent, Simon Winchester,
reported from Dacca on 20 December 1977:
Considerable opposition is being voiced in Bangladesh to anumber of
British government aid programmes which critics say are helping to re¬
inforce suppression of political opposition to General Ziaur Rahman’s
military dictatorship. In particular, British assistance now being given to
the Bangladesh police force and army, as well as British participation in
acontroversial development programme in aremote hill region near the
Burmese border, have been singled out for criticism. In all cases opponents
of the schemes protest that, instead of helping the poor people of Bangla¬
desh, the British government is helping to support aregime which prac¬
tises detention without trial, summary execution and suppression pf free
speech, as often as not directed against the people the Western governments
should be trying to help. The aid programmes which are at the focus of the storm are not by
Bangladesh aid standards especially large. One worth £750,000 is an Over¬
seas Development Ministry project to give the national police force of
Bangladesh radio communications. Marconi, the contractor, is setting up
aseries of V.H.F. stations that will enable the police in all parts of the
country to be in touch with national HQ here in Dacca. The second plan cost the British government almost nothing, but is
seen as symbolic of what critics call ‘the British sense of priorities —law
and order ﬁrst, real aid second’. Eight senior British military ofﬁcers —six
soldiers (including one colonel in the S.A.S.), asailor and an air force
ofﬁcer —are on loan to the Bangladesh government to set up an ofﬁcers’
staff college north of the capital. ‘The problem is that for too long the Western media have portrayed
1 9 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bast Pakistan’s Security Services and the U.S.

Ofﬁce of Public Safety
Bangladesh as anation of famine and ﬂoods,’ said the ofﬁcial of an inter¬
national organization.

‘But it should also be remembered that for the past
two years this has been acountry ruled by apeculiarly tough military
dictatorship.

There are thousands of people in political prisons.

More than
255 people have been executed since the attempted coup of October [1977]
The senior ofﬁcer of an English aid organization agreed, ‘Britain seems to
have this obsession with law and order.

It seems to think that unless you
have apolice force that can be mobilized at the ﬂick of aswitch, or army
that is well up on contemporary counter-insurgency techniques, there is
no point in pouring out money for food or shelter or clothing.

Well, we
disagree.

Food for the hungry is truly vital.

Radios for the police and roads
for the army can come later.

At least the taxpayers in England should
have achance to decide.’
(‘Where Britain May Be Aiding an Armed Dictatorship’, The Guardian,
London, 20 December 1977.)
Winchester’s story appeared following reports of mass executions having
been carried out against opponents of the military government.

Further
details about the British military advisory mission were reported in the
Economic and Political Weekly of Bombay in March 1978.

According to
this source:
In July 1977 an eight-man British military advisory team commanded by
Colonel T.A.

Gibson arrived in Dacca.

The ostensible object of the Gibson
Mission is to set up aMilitary Staff College at Savar outside Dacca.

This is
where Indian military advisers trained Mujib’s Rakkhi Bahini in 1972.

What is generally not known is the extent of opposition which existed
inside the Bangladesh Armed Forces to allowing the Gibson Team into
the country.

The rebellions in September and October are believed to have
been in part connected to objections to the British Military Mission.--- PAGE BREAK ---

What is generally not known is the extent of opposition which existed
inside the Bangladesh Armed Forces to allowing the Gibson Team into
the country. The rebellions in September and October are believed to have
been in part connected to objections to the British Military Mission. Of
the Twelve Demands which constituted the principles of the Soldiers’
Mutiny of November 7, 1975 the ‘complete abolition of British colonial
practices within the armed forces’ had been one of the fundamentals of
the uprising. Now within ayear and ahalf of the revolt aBritish military
training mission was setting up permanent shop in Bangladesh. The more serious objection to the Gibson Mission was that its main
alleged purpose was not training but military intelligence. Gibson and
other members of his unit are described in Bangladesh Army circles as
senior members of the British Army’s ‘Special Air Services’ Brigade. The
S.A.S. is the crack counter-insurgency unit of the British Army. It is the
legacy of Robert Thompson’s Malay Emergency strategy and continues
on active operations in Oman, Malaysia, and Northern Ireland among
other places. Ex-S.A.S. members have turned up in Africa as mercenaries
in the Angolan civil war and in the Rhodesian Army. ‘The November 1975
uprising took the Western countries by complete surprise here,’ says a
well-informed Bengali. ‘They realised how poor their intelligence was,
having historically based it on [West] Pakistan contacts. Within the
government and the armed forces it is generally believed, and privately
discussed, that the real purpose for the British Military Mission is to
1 9 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
dossiers for Western intelligence on the entire ofﬁcer corps forces
p r e p a r e
and the Bangladesh Army in particular.

They want to know when Zia
fails, who can be the next pro-Western Ayub Khan.

But they also want
to be able to spot any Marxists like Abu Taher.

They want to know
who is politically reliable.

You can’t do that sitting in London or in an
ofﬁce in the Pentagon.

Computers will not tell you.

Personal contact
12
m i g h t .

The Ascendancy of the National Security Intelligence Agency
In the period after Mujib’s death, another quiet, rather unnoticed, but signi¬
ﬁcant phenomenon emerged out of the senior ranks of Bangladesh’s Security
Services.

In one sense what happened had not been seen since 1958, when
Field Marshal Ayub Khan’s coup d’6tat in Pakistan not only presaged the
extraordinary expansion of the country’s Armed Forces budget, but also led
to the direct control of economic ministries, state corporations and private
ﬁrms by military ofﬁcers and their families.

Yet, in Ayub’s time, this privilege
of patronage and access to corrupt gain was kept within the ranks of the
senior military cadres.

Police and intelligence ofﬁcials were conﬁned to
smaller crumbs at the banquet table of international aid and the attendant
foreign contracts.

Following the 1975 developments in Dacca, the police
and internal security apparatus received an economic boost which was quali¬
tatively above anything it had ever previously known, even in the ‘security
decade’ of Ayub’s military dictatorship.

In the Pakistan era no police or intelligence ofﬁcial had ever reached the
ministerial rank of Secretary.

The Director of Intelligence was always sub¬
ordinate in.authority to the Home Secretary.

But following the coup which
killed Mujib, not only was Safdar, as Director-General of the National Security
Intelligence Agency (N.S.I.), promoted to the level of ministerial Secretary,
but so were numerous other police and intelligence personnel.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Director of Intelligence was always sub¬
ordinate in.authority to the Home Secretary. But following the coup which
killed Mujib, not only was Safdar, as Director-General of the National Security
Intelligence Agency (N.S.I.), promoted to the level of ministerial Secretary,
but so were numerous other police and intelligence personnel. To those
outside Bangladesh’s bureaucratic ranks, these intra-bureaucratic niceties
may seem of small importance, but within them the signiﬁcance of the re¬
arranged hierarchy was not lost. Police and intelligence ofﬁcials took over
ministries and state corporations in critical locations of economic power
and patronage. In ahighly dependent economy, such as Bangladesh, where
over 50% of state expenditures are foreign ﬁnanced, control of crucial loca¬
tions in the structure through which external funds and commodities are
channelled can mean an important economic base on which to build inﬂuence. Following the events of 1975, Bangladesh’s intelligence and police service
began to build its economic power with unprecedented style. The former
Inspector General of Police, A.H. Nurul Islam, a1968 graduate of the Inter¬
national Police Academy, took over control of the local municipal corporation
known as the Dacca Improvement Trust (D.I.T.). The D.I.T. controls the
allocation of all permits for construction in the capital and is the controlling
agent authorizing the purchase of plots in exclusive new suburbs such as
Gulshan. The patronage and ﬁnancial potential of the D.I.T. is awell-known
2 0 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---East Pakistan's Security Services and the U.S.

Ofﬁce of Public Safety
cliche in Dacca.

Permits are often had at aprice.

At the Consumer Supply
Corporation (C.S.C.), another highly placed police ofﬁcer, aformer Additional
Inspector-General of Police, K.C.

Mohiuddin, took over as Chairman.

All
commodities imported into Bangladesh must pass through the C.S.C.’s autho¬
rizing channel before being distributed within the country.

In the Ministry
of Relief and Rehabilitation, Syed Amir Khasuru, another graduate of the
I.P.A.

in 1968 and apolice ofﬁcial who in fact was partially rehabilitated by
Mujib during the 1973-74 period and appointed aJoint-Secretary in the
Relief Ministry, was promoted after Mujib’s death and took over direction of
the Ministry; like the others, with the rank of full Secretary.

Other police/
intelligence ofﬁcials rose similarly, such as Salauddin Ahmed, who became
Chairman of the Jute Mills Corporation (jute being Bangladesh’s principal
export), and later Chairman of the Sugar Corporation.

The Ministry of
Fisheries, Livestock and Forestry was taken over by another previous Inspec¬
tor-General of Police, Abdul Khaleque, in this same period.

Others such as Abdur Rahim, who has been discussed in detail earlier in
this book, moved in 1976-77 to take over direction of the country’s Establish¬
ment Division.

This is one of the most powerful ministries in the overall
control of the national bureaucracy.

Rahim, later in 1978, moved on to become
Director of the Administrative Staff College in Dacca, from which all civil
servants, and more recently senior military ofﬁcers, have begun to receive
specialised training.

Again, all these positions were never previously held by
police or intelligence personnel.

The takeover of such positions by the
country’s intelligence cadres is simply another reﬂection of the discreet, but
powerful position this ‘old boy’ network assumed after 1975.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Again, all these positions were never previously held by
police or intelligence personnel. The takeover of such positions by the
country’s intelligence cadres is simply another reﬂection of the discreet, but
powerful position this ‘old boy’ network assumed after 1975. With all this said, it still tells us little or nothing about the family business
relationships which, with great coincidence, seem to extend outwards from
the security services. One of the better known of several contemporary
scandals is associated with Shall Ahmed Chaudhury, afood importer who as
the agent of the American ﬁrm. Continental Grains, handles the importation
of American wheat under the U.S. PL480 programme. Chaudhury is the
brother of E.A. Chaudhury, one of the top senior police and intelligence
ofﬁcials in the country. According to ahigh level Bangladesh government
ofﬁcial with intimate knowledge of the family’s business operations, ‘In
terms of liquid assets Shaﬁ Chaudhury is now the richest man in Bangladesh.’
He is compared frequently to Jahurul Islam, aman popularly known as
Bangladesh’s ‘Rockefeller’ and aformer business associate of the convicted
swindler and British M.P., John Stonehouse. Islam allegedly made asub¬
stantial fortune by walking off with $4 million in World Bank funds. Accord¬
ing to press reports this was done under an inﬂated contract set up to drill
tube weUs in the Bank’s vast Northwest irrigation project. When ﬁxed capital
assets and foreign holdings are taken into account, Islam, who now runs his
own multinational ﬁrm based in Abu Dhabi, is still considered the entre¬
preneur with amore substantial fortune than Chaudhury. In 1978-79 Islam
became asigniﬁcant ﬁnancial contributor to General Ziaur Rahman’s new
political creation, the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (B.NJP.); and at least two
2 0 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---udhury. In 1978-79 Islam
became asigniﬁcant ﬁnancial contributor to General Ziaur Rahman’s new
political creation, the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (B.NJP.); and at least two
2 0 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
previous company directors of Islam’s Dacca based Navada Traders, Zakaria
Chaudhury and Habidullah Khan, joined General Zia’s cabinet. By the end of
the 1970s Bangladesh had settled down to the familiar pattern of ahighly
dependent, corrupt, right-wing regime dominated by its military and security
services establishments with all the attendant daily populist rhetoric of
nationalism and development. But this very condition was the antithesis of
the goals, the hopes and the sacriﬁces with which the decade of Independence
had opened.
Notes and References
Lobe, United States National Security Policy and Aid to the Thailand
Police, (University of Denver, Colorado, 1977), p. 5. Lobe writes: ‘The
CIA was also vitally interested in collecting intelligence from foreign
police ofﬁcers who had access to information on communists, ‘trouble¬
makers’, politicians, ambitious military men, labor agitators, and other
individuals who might possibly create difﬁculties for the U.S. To this
end, the CIA cultivated surreptitious relationships with foreign police¬
men and assisted police departments in creating special intelligence
gathering units .... The Agency could now easily place their own
“covers” into the programmes to develop contacts and recruits in the
local police force. CIA covers could also work undetected to bolster the
foreign police department’s political surveillance units.’
U.S. Senate, Cte. on Foreign Relations, Subcte. on American Repub¬
lics’ Affairs, Survey of the Alliance for Progress, Compilation of Studies
and Hearings, 91st Congress, 1st Session, p. 414.
U.S. Senate, Cte. on Appropriations, Foreign Assistance Appropria¬
tions, 1965, Hearings, 89th Congress, 2nd Session, 1964, p. 82.
U.S. Senate, Cte. on Foreign Relations, U.S. Policies and Programs in
Brazil, Hearings, 92nd Congress, 1st Session, 1971; ibid., Guatemala
and the Dominican Republic, Staff Memo, 92nd Congress, 1st Session,
1971; and M.T. Klare, Supplying Repression, (The Field Foundation,
New York, 1977), p. 19.
U.S. A.I.D., Project Implementation Order/Pakistan (0/P No. 391-113-
1-00119).
Congressional Record, 22 June 1974; see also 1Oct. 1973.
Letter from William E. Colby to Senator J. William Fulbright, 31 July
1974; see also Jack Anderson, The Washington Post, 19 Aug. 1974.
U.S. House of Representatives, House Foreign Affairs Cte., Foreign
Assistance Request Hearings, 1974, pp. 175-89.
T. Branch and J. Marks, ‘Tracking The CIA’, Harpers Weekly, 24 Jan. 1975.
P. Katz, Pakistan Police Communications Survey Report: East Pakistan
Provincial Police (A.I.D., Washington, D.C., Dec. 1963), pp. 3-6.
‘Tentacles —the World of Electronic Spying’, A^ew Statesman, 2Feb. 1979.
‘Murder in Dacca’, Economic and Political Weekly (Bombay), 25 March
1 9 7 8 .
1.
2 .
3 .
4 .
5 .
6 .
7 .
8 .
9 .
1 0 .
1 1 .
12.
2 0 2les —the World of Electronic Spying’, A^ew Statesman, 2Feb. 1979.
‘Murder in Dacca’, Economic and Political Weekly (Bombay), 25 March
1 9 7 8 .
1.
2 .
3 .
4 .
5 .
6 .
7 .
8 .
9 .
1 0 .
1 1 .
12.
2 0 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ASelect Chronology
1 9 4 7
August 15
Pakistan and India declared formally independent from
B r i t a i n .
1 9 5 2
M a r c h
Language Movement —agitation for adoption of Bengali as
one of Pakistan’s national languages.
1 9 5 4
Mutual Defence Assistance Agreement signed with the United
States.
May
1 9 5 5
September
October 14
Pakistan joins CENTO
‘One Unit’ system in West Pakistan; all provincial boundaries
and elected assemblies dissolved.
1 9 5 8
October 7
Pakistan Army seizes power in coup under General Ayub Khan.
1 9 6 7
December 19
Agartala Conspiracy Case opened by Pakistan Government
against Awami League leadership.
1 9 6 8
Mass agitations against Ayub government begins.
November 7
1 9 6 9
February 22
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman released from prison; Agartala
Case dropped.
Ayub government collapses; General Yahya Khan assumes
power; elections promised and ‘One Unit’ system dissolved.
March 26
1 9 7 0
December 7
Awami League wins absolute majority in Pakistan National
Assembly election.
Bhutto declares his People’s Party will not sit in opposition,
says ‘majority alone doesn’t count in national politics’.
D e c e m b e r 2 0
1 9 7 1
March 1
General Yahya Khan postpones convening of National
Assembly.
Students League leaders at mammoth rally hoist Bangladesh
ﬂag; ‘non-violent non-cooperation movement’ begins.
March 2
2 0 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---ral Yahya Khan postpones convening of National
Assembly.
Students League leaders at mammoth rally hoist Bangladesh
ﬂag; ‘non-violent non-cooperation movement’ begins.
March 2
2 0 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
March 7
Mujib declares at Race Course meeting struggle is for complete
‘emancipation and independence’.
The Black Night: Pakistan Army cracks down in Dacca;
Mujib arrested and ﬂown to West Pakistan; civil war begins.
Abu Taher arrested in Quetta, West Pakistan; released and
escapes to India.
Ban^adesh Provisional Government declared in Calcutta.
Kissinger begins China initiative via Pakistan military authorities
Secret contacts between U.S. and Mustaque faction of
Awami League in Calcutta.
Taher assumes command of 11th Sector in Liberation War.
Taher commands at siege of Kamalpur, badly wounded, loses
left leg.
Dacca liberated after Indian Army intervenes.
M a r c h 2 5
March 29
April 12
Spring/Summer
June/Oct
July
Oct/Nov
December 16
1 9 7 2
January 10
Mujib returns to heroic welcome in Dacca after Bhutto
orders his release from prison in Pakistan.
J.S.D. (Socialist National Party) founded in Dacca as
‘socialist mass organization’.
October 21
1973 &1974 Over 1,000 Bengali ofﬁcers repatriated from Pakistan.
Jan/Feb
Two general strikes against Mujib government protesting
shortages, prices and corruption.
Minto Road Massacre —30 persons killed and wounded
during aJ.S.D. led ‘hunger march’. J.S.D. President Jalil
and General Secretary Rab arrested.
Mujib visits Washington and rebuffed by Americans on aid.
Famine deepens; estimated 50,000 peasants starve.
March 17
September
O c t o b e r
1 9 7 5
D e c e m b e r
Facing growing unrest Mujib declares one party (BAKSAL)
presidential system, terms it the ‘Second Revolution’;
underground Maoist leader Siraj Sikdar, of the Sharbohara
(Proletarian) Party, captured and killed in police custody.
Majors Rashid and Farooq meet Major-General Ziaur
Rahman (Zia) to discuss coup plans.
Mujib killed in coup; Mustaque takes over as President;
Zia becomes Army Chief of Staff.
Counter-coup led by Brigadier Khaled Musharraf; Zia
arrested and forced to resign as Chief of Staff.
Brig. Khaled’s relatives lead pro-Mujib demonstration.
Four Mujib government ministers killed in Dacca Central Jail.
General insurrection in Dacca and outlying districts organized
by Colonel Abu Taher and mass organizations of J.S.D.;
‘Twelve Demands’ declared by Revolutionary Soldiers
Organization; Taher releases Zia from custody.
March 20
August 15
November 3
November 4
November 5
November 7
2 0 4nd mass organizations of J.S.D.;
‘Twelve Demands’ declared by Revolutionary Soldiers
Organization; Taher releases Zia from custody.
March 20
August 15
November 3
November 4
November 5
November 7
2 0 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ASelect Chronology
November 8
November 15
Jalil, Rab and other political prisoners released.
J.S.D. disassociates itself from Zia as paramilitary police
begin crackdown on insurrectionary forces.
Zia’s counter-coup; J.S.D. leaders Jalil and Rab re-arrested.
Abu Taher arrested.
November 23
November 24
1 9 7 6
June 21
July 21
Secret trial of Taher opens in Dacca Central Jail.
Taher executed, Dacca Central Jail, 4.a jn.
2 0 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---e-arrested.
Abu Taher arrested.
November 23
November 24
1 9 7 6
June 21
July 21
Secret trial of Taher opens in Dacca Central Jail.
Taher executed, Dacca Central Jail, 4.a jn.
2 0 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APolitical Glossary of Personalities and Organizations
Personalities
Afzal, A.T.M.:
Ahmed, Salauddin:
Chief Prosecutor in Taher trial.
Home Secretary at time of mass executions October-
December 1977.
President of Pakistan 1958-69.
Chairman, pro-Peking National Awami Party.
Ayub Khan:
Bhashani, Maulana:
Bhutto, Zulﬁquar
Prime Minister of Pakistan 1972-77.
Aide to Mustaque and later, Zia.
C.I.A. Station Chief Bangladesh 1974-76.
Chairman, Special Military Tribunal No. 1, which
secretly tried Taher and 33 others.
Director, National Security Intelligence.
Leader pro-Peking, East Pakistan Communist Party
(Marxist-Leninist),
President of Socialist National Party (J.S.D.).
Leader of 3November 1975 counter-coup; killed
7 N o v e m b e r .
Journalist; served Mustaque and later in General
Zia’s cabinet.
Leading ﬁgure in Socialist National Party (J.S.D.).
Prime Minister of Bangladesh 1972-75; l^led in
coup of 15 August 1975.
President of Bangladesh after murder of Mujib;
toppled from power November 1975.
First C-and-C, Bangladesh Armed Forces during 1971
War of Liberation.
One of the Majors who overthrew Mujib.
One of the Majors who overthrew Mujib.
Director-General of National Security Intelligence;
served Mustaque and Zia.
Chief of Staff, Bangladesh Army prior to overthrow
of Mujib.
Leading ﬁgure in Sharbohara Party; killed in police
custody December 1975.
Military leader of 7November 1975 uprising.
First Prime Minister of Bangladesh; killed in Dacca
Jail 5November 1975.
State Minister, Mujib government; close aide to
Mustaque after August 1975 coup.
Leader, pro-Peking East Bengal Communist Party
(Marxist-Leninist).
President of Pakistan, March 1969 to December 1971.
Army Chief of Staff after Mujib’s fall; saved by, then
A l i :
Chashi, Mabub Alam:
Cherry, Philip:
Haider, Yusuf:
Huda,M.N.:
Huq, Abdul:
Jalil, M.A.:
Khaled, Musharraf:
Khan, EnayethuUah:
Khan, Sirajul Alam:
Mujibur Rahman:
Mustaque,
K h o n d a k a r A h m e d :
Osmany, M.A.G.:
Rahman, Farooq:
Rashid, (Major):
Safdar, A.B.S.
ShaﬁuUah:
Sikdar, Siraj:
Taher, Abu:
Tajuddin Ahmed:
Thakur, Taheruddin:
Toaha, Mohammed:
Yahya Khan:
Ziaur Rahman (Zia):
2 0 6m e d :
Osmany, M.A.G.:
Rahman, Farooq:
Rashid, (Major):
Safdar, A.B.S.
ShaﬁuUah:
Sikdar, Siraj:
Taher, Abu:
Tajuddin Ahmed:
Thakur, Taheruddin:
Toaha, Mohammed:
Yahya Khan:
Ziaur Rahman (Zia):
2 0 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---.G.:
Rahman, Farooq:
Rashid, (Major):
Safdar, A.B.S.
ShaﬁuUah:
Sikdar, Siraj:
Taher, Abu:
Tajuddin Ahmed:
Thakur, Taheruddin:
Toaha, Mohammed:
Yahya Khan:
Ziaur Rahman (Zia):
2 0 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APolitical Glossary of Personalities and Organizations
turned against, November 7th 1975 uprising. Now
P r e s i d e n t . .
Ziauddin, Mohammed: Commander Dacca Brigade after Independence;
joined underground Sharbohara Party in 1974.
Organizations
Awami League:
Leading party advocating secular parliamentary demo¬
cracy in Pakistan and provincial autonomy for East
Pakistan; won majority in 1970 elections.
Mujib’s new party, formed in December 1974
‘Second Revolution’.
BAKSAL(Banglat
desh Workers
League):
Bangladesh
Nationalist Party:
Biplopi Gono
B a h i n i :
Biplopi Shainik
Sangstha:
Chattra League:
General Zia’s creation for 1979 elections held under
martial law.
People’s Revolutionary Army active in 7November
1975 uprising.
Revolutionary Soldiers’ Organization, radical force
in Bangladesh Army.
Students League (pre-1971 known as East Pakistan
Students League); split in 1972 into pro-Awami and
proJ.S.D. wings.
Students Union, pro-Moscow (pre-1971 known as
East Pakistan Students Union).
Pro-Moscow C.P. led by Moni Singh.
Chattra Union:
Communist Party of
Bangladesli (Moni):
East Bengal Com¬
munist Party
Split led by Mohammed Toaha from E.P.C.P. (M-L);
fought in 1971 War of Liberation.
(M-L):
Pro-Peking tendency that, unlike others, recognized
paramountcy of national question; led by Sikdar
after 1971.
Pro-Peking, led by Abdul Huq and Mohammed
Toaha; after independence Huq retained name
‘East Pakistan’.
Washington based A.I.D. training school.
East Bengal Workers
Movement (later
Sharbohara Party)
East Pakistan Com¬
munist Party
(Marxist-Leninist):
International Police
Academy:
International Police
Services School:
Jatyo Samajtantrik
Dal (J.S.D. or
Jashod):
Mukti Bahini:
Muslim League:
National Awami Party
(Bhashani):
National Awami Party
(Muzzafar):
C.I.A. proprietary in Washington providing
specialized courses.
Socialist National Party formed October 1972.
Guerrillas of the Bangladesh Liberation Forces, 1971.
Founding Party of Pakistan.
Front of pro-Peking groups led by Maulana Bhashani.
Front of pro-Moscow Marxists led by Professor
M u z z a f a r A h m e d .
2 0 7the Bangladesh Liberation Forces, 1971.
Founding Party of Pakistan.
Front of pro-Peking groups led by Maulana Bhashani.
Front of pro-Moscow Marxists led by Professor
M u z z a f a r A h m e d .
2 0 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
National Security
Intelligence:
Ofﬁce of Public
Safety:
Rakkhi Bahini:
Razakars:
Sharbohara Party:
Leading security service and intelligence organization
of Bangladesh.
American A.I.D. programme training Third World
police forces.
Paramilitary force set up by Mujib government.
Paramilitary forces of Pakistan during civil war.
See East Bengal Workers Movement.
2 0 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---ogramme training Third World
police forces.
Paramilitary force set up by Mujib government.
Paramilitary forces of Pakistan during civil war.
See East Bengal Workers Movement.
2 0 8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I n d e x
Bot-tala Gathering 84
Abourezk, James, 122, 190, 192, 197
Afzal, A.T.M.58,60,96
Agartala Conspiracy 125
Agee, Philip 185, 193-4
Agency for International Develop¬
ment (A.I.D.) 113,121,140,143,
155-6, 159, 185-8, 190-95, 197
Ahmed, Salauddin 52, 57, 129, 197,
Central Intelligence Agency (C.I.A.)
99, 104-7, 113, 120-2, 134-6,
156, 164-4, 168; 177-84 (Cherry
interview); 185-201 (C.I.A.&
Foreign Police Training);143-8
(Covert Operations, C.I.A./State
Dept. Relations); 67 (Document
on Taher &Zia); 171-5 (Roger
Morris interview)
Chashi, Mabub Alam 5, 51,67, 69,
91, 101, 103, 114, 115, 117-9,
178,183
Chatterjee, Ashim 71
Chattra League 18, 50
Cherry, Philip 104, 106-7, 120
132-6, 144-5; 177-84 (interview)
Comilla Brigade 39, 86
2 0 1
Ahmed, Tajuddin 66 (Alleged
Letter); 6(Murder); 166 (Mus-
taque’s house arrest); 141-2
(Sacking); 113 (Stand on Inde¬
pendence)
A 1 B a d h r 1 2 6
Alam, Atiqul 66, 149-51
Alipore Conspiracy Case 1
Amnesty International 61
Awami League 5, 14, 48, 70, 73, 77,
79, 124-5, 129, 140, 143, 157,
162-3, 180; 40-4 (Decline); 17-8
Elections 1970); 25-6, 32 (Fear
of Revolution); 103 (Illicit border
trade); 111-16 (Independence
Movement); 97, 101 (Mustaque
faction); 86-94 (Taher’s Assess¬
ment of &Mujib’s overthrow)
Azam,Shaiful 128-9
Dacca Brigade 38-9, 42
Dalim (Major) 101
Democratic League 55
East Bengal Communist Party
[E.B.C.P.1 21,26,28,34
East Bengal Communist Party
(Marxist-Leninist) [E.B.C.P.
(M.L.)] 21,22.71, 115
East Bengal Workers Movement
28,41,47, SQ\see also Sharbohara
P a r t y
East Pakistan Communist Party
(Marxist-Leninist) [E.P.C.P.
(M.L.)] 22,73
East Pakistan Students League
[E.P.S.L.] 27,28-9,43,72
East Pakistan Students Union
[E.P.S.U.] 28
Ershad (Maj-Gen) 92
Bahini, Kader 4
BAKSAL 65,69,87-8,97, 117, 129,
1 4 3
Baluchistan People’s Liberation
F r o n t 
2 0
Bangladesh Academy for Rural De¬
velopment 101,118
Bangladesh Nationalist Party 201
Bangladesher Biplopi Kendra 43
Bhashani, Maulana 23, 112
Bhutto, Zulﬁquar Ali 18-9, 24, 77,
1 1 1
Farraka Barrage 57, 93
Farooq Rehman (Major) see Rehman
Frontier 11,24, 67, 70, 73
Biplopi Gono Bahini (People’s Revo¬
lutionary Army) 8, 13, 43, 47, 49
5 2 , 5 5 , 8 5
Biplopi Shainik Sangstha (Revo¬
lutionary Soldiers’ Organization)
8 , 4 8 , 4 9 , 9 0
Boster, Eugene 105, 133, 146, 179,
1 8 1 - 2
Gandhi, Indira 36, 59, 98-100, 110,
113,133
Gibson, T.A. 199
2 0 95
Biplopi Shainik Sangstha (Revo¬
lutionary Soldiers’ Organization)
8 , 4 8 , 4 9 , 9 0
Boster, Eugene 105, 133, 146, 179,
1 8 1 - 2
Gandhi, Indira 36, 59, 98-100, 110,
113,133
Gibson, T.A. 199
2 0 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---angstha (Revo¬
lutionary Soldiers’ Organization)
8 , 4 8 , 4 9 , 9 0
Boster, Eugene 105, 133, 146, 179,
1 8 1 - 2
Gandhi, Indira 36, 59, 98-100, 110,
113,133
Gibson, T.A. 199
2 0 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bangladesh: The Unﬁnished Revolution
Grifﬁn, George 165-6, 168
Maniruzzaman, Talukdar 54, 70-1
Marks, John 132, 193-4
Mascarenhas, Anthony 102
M i n t o R o a d M a s s a c r e 4 6
Morris, Roger 169-76 (interview)
Mujibur Rahman 5-8, 12, 14, 36,
59, 64-8, 72-3, 77-9, 84, 87-9,
103-8 (American Connection?);
32 (Arrest in Dacca); 98 (August
15 Operation); 24 (China urges
release);44 (Corruption); 17
(Elections 1970); 28-9 (J.S.D. &
Mujib); 136-9 (Kissinger On);
42-3 (Mujibad); 98-148 (Murder);
139-43 (Perils Client State/Washing¬
ton Visit); 141 (Sacking of Tajud-
din); 46-51 (Second Revolution,
Famine &Decline); 39 Ziauddin
Hailder, Yusuf 30, 57-8, 60, 78, 97
Hakim, S.A. 189
Huda M.N. 126, 189
Huq, Abdul 22, 71,74
Indo-Soviet Friendship Treaty 113
International Police Academy (I.P.A.)
120-8, 131, 181, 184-202
I n t e r n a t i o n a l P o l i c e S e r v i c e s S c h o o l
INPOLSE) 69, 124, 126-7, 131,
1 8 5 - 2 0 2
Islam, Jahurul 73, 201
Jam, M.A. 37, 43, 50, 52, 57, 84, 92
J.S.D./Jatyo Samajtantrik D^
(Socialist National Party) 8, 37,
73^, 84, 126, 130; 27-9 (Forma¬
tion of); 46 (Minto Road Mas¬
sacre); 43 (National Committee)
13-5 (7th November Uprising);
56-7, 61 (Trial of Leaders); 67-9
(Zia pre-November link to); 47-
55 (Zia turns on J.S.D.)
o n )
Mukti Bahini 22, 26, 34, 37, 56, 60,
67,96, 123^, 189
Musharraf, Khaled 48-9, 54, 58,
64-7,81-2,89-91,95,97;7-12
(3rd November Counter-coup);
31-2 (1971 War of Liberation)
Muslim League 16, 34, 50, 55
Mustaque Ahmed, Khondakar 5,
48, 125, 128-30, 132-3, 142,
164, 178-81, 183; 101-3 (August
coup); 114-7 (Calcutta contacts);
65-7 (Khaled’s 3rd November
coup); 87-9, 91-100 (Taher on);
67-9 (Zia’s links)
Kader Bahini 64
Kala Ratri (The Black Night) 18
Kamaruzzaman,A.M.S. 7
Katz, Paul 194-6
Keating, Kenneth 166-7
Khaled, iee Musharraf
Khan, EnayethuUah 66, 117, 129
Khan, Sirajul Alam 4, 27-9
Khan,WaU 17, 111
Khan, Yahya 17, 21,234, 28, 31
71,78, 112, 114, 156, 158, 160
Kissinger, Henry 105, 110, 131, 197;
111-3 (Bangladesh in context of
U.S. China initiative); 145-8
(Covert Action: Cliile, Angola,
etc.); 136-9 (Enemies List);
139-42 (Kissinger on Mujib);
169-70 (Morris on Kissinger);
155-68 (South Asia crisis 1971/
Carnegie Papers)
National Awami Party (Bhashani)
2 3 , 1 1 2 , 1 3 0
National Awami Party (Muzzafar) 7,
26,49, 143
National Awami Party (Wali Khan)
17,19,111
National Security Intelligence
(N.S.I.) 51,56, 59, 72, 116, 119-
20, 125-6, 131, 133, 190, 1934,
2 0 0
Niazi (General) 36-7, 84
Ofﬁce of Public Safety (O.P.S.)
s e e I . P . A . & I N P O L S E
Osmany, M.A.G. 32-3, 36-7, 80-2
8 8 , 9 1 , 9 5
Lenin, V.I. 234, 73; 18-9 (National
Q u e s t i o n )
2 1 00
Niazi (General) 36-7, 84
Ofﬁce of Public Safety (O.P.S.)
s e e I . P . A . & I N P O L S E
Osmany, M.A.G. 32-3, 36-7, 80-2
8 8 , 9 1 , 9 5
Lenin, V.I. 234, 73; 18-9 (National
Q u e s t i o n )
2 1 0

--- PAGE BREAK ----7, 84
Ofﬁce of Public Safety (O.P.S.)
s e e I . P . A . & I N P O L S E
Osmany, M.A.G. 32-3, 36-7, 80-2
8 8 , 9 1 , 9 5
Lenin, V.I. 234, 73; 18-9 (National
Q u e s t i o n )
2 1 0

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I n d e x
Taher, Lutfa 61-3
Pakistan People’s Party 18, 111, 157
People’s Revolutionary Army (P.R.A.) Tajuddin, Ahmed see Ahmed, Tajud-
see Biplopi Gono Bahini
Phoenix Programme 121, 131
d i n
Thakur, Taheruddin 5,87, 101
103,115,118,133,178,183
Toaha, Mohammed 21-2, 48, 53-4,
73-4,129
Twelve Demands 9-13, 34, 69
9 0 , 9 2 , 9 7
Rahim, Abdur 123, 125-6, 181, 189,
2 0 1
Rahman, Dr. Aklaquar 3, 58
Rahman, Dr. Anisur 40
Rahman, Mujibur^e^ Mujibur
R a h m a n
Rakki Bahini 46, 53, 86, 119
Rashid, Harunur 29, 73, 74
Rashid (Major) 65, 88, 101, 103,
116, 119
Razakars 35, 123, 125
Rehman, Farooq 65, 88, 98, 101,
Umar, Badruddin 22
U.S. Security Assistance Programme
1 0 9
Walsh, George 107
Ziaur Rahman (Zia) 4, 125-6, 128,
202; 198 (British Military Aid);
6, 103,119(Chashi&Zia);
67 (C.I.A. Document); 47-56
(Counter-coup, arrests Taher);
65-6 (Khaled &Zia); 30-6 (Mili¬
tary Debate 1971) 8-12 (7th
November Uprising); 73 (9th
November Crackdown); 6, 103
(Prior contacts Mujib coup);
75-96 (Taher on Zia); 68-9
(Zia’s two-way links: Mustaque
& J . S . D . )
Ziauddin, Mohammed 31,33, 38-9
1 1 6
Revolutionary Soldiers Organization
see Biplopi Shainik Sangstha
Rogers, Williams 168, 175
Safdar, A.M.S 57, 120, 123, 125
128, 133, 178, 180, 189, 197, 200
Sayem, A.M. 60, 74, 76, 91-2, 95
Saunders, Harold 156, 164-5, 167-8,
172, 174-6
Sen, Bidan Krishna 43
Shaﬁullah (Maj-Gen.) 31,34,37, 68,
81-2,85,88, 103
Shajahan, Siraj 29, 43
Sharbohara Party, 47, 50 see also
East Bengal Workers Movement
Shramik League 43, 57
Siddiqui, Kader 34, 64
Sikdar, Siraj 42, 47 see also Sharbo¬
hara Party
Sobhan, Rehman 43, 72
Socialist National Party see J.S.D.
Taher, Abu 25, 200 (Arrest); 36-40
(Comilla Brigade/Productive Army);
67 (C.I.A. Document on Taher &
Zia); 61-3 (Exeuction); 43 (Joins
J.S.D ./Commands Gono Bahini);
30-6 (Military Debate 1971); 2-4
(Letter from Prison); 8-15 (7th
November Uprising); 69 (Pre-
November links with Zia); 56-60
(Secret trial); 75-97 (Testimony)
211