GOVERNMJSNT OF INDIA

DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY

CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL
LIBRARY


Class _ 5~3 i 1 _

Call No 2aH*afl952__Su£

as.A. 79, .


THE COMPLETE WORKS OF D. T. SUZUKI

Edited hf

Gi£ KiSTSi Ai HlJMPH&EiYS
FrssideiU of zhr Biiddidti Sot'uiy^ Latvian


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


Other W orks in the Cdteckd Series, published by RimR Sc Co +

An Introduction tn Zen Buddhbm
The Zen Doctrine of No-Mind
Essays la Zen Buddhism (First Series)

Esay? in Zen Buddhism (Second Series)

Essays in Zen Buddhism (Third Series)
living by Zen
* Studies in Zen


THE TItr\‘DER!NC SILENCE OF V1\3AI \KIK||


\ inuiKkiril h ihc hero o\
«in- sutra bearirs^ hk name
I he su Cm w(rnniiai cd mlt -
Chinrw: by Kumarti \ Eva „ jjuG
C-*- ismt ever since has lirm
one Lvf tile mrjat popular
ftijEjtlhjst books both Sn China
an lI fa 3 mm. YimaJakiru mean¬
ing ‘‘tflddiy Fiune'"
w.illhy householder m
s;tH thoroughly acquainSctL
iviih cl m■ Mahiyansi n-acliing
a ml ■■ 11 i r i: When he u Em I ls-
jw®cd, she Buddliu wmiu
sn vnd some ol' hi* di-w iplr
to inquire .sfirr him. bo I
iKie is Ibrdiconucij ' ~™
llud ill mi uhk* for the explana¬
tion. they have tine CVCUIC
fijW smother. The it&uil
reason k tJuii none of hk

d unpin .ire equal in the
hi nIrr^iisriding of BucMhkm
So ihk hOcmrhuJtlrr-phiCcuo
plirr. Finally, 1 liL- ■Ar.-l^hiy
t.i'rL -if railing upon Yima-
lakarli tails m: dir fcVjdhis-
■nil vis M-isijimri. Thi- biter k
\ * 1.1 m 11 in™ mate ai Sam;nL-
tabhAdfa* and k Love Enear-
iiiii r Aft r [ r numc prelinuna i y
com-eniaLifun in which Vims-
lnkirti saya lll.it hr k nirle
lieiasiw of all hu fellow*-
betftgR being sii k wish yifirrli
■oilier, and lolly, the dialogue

brLWiTNi dir llvo gresit figure*

of MaJiayaria Binhltikm

tiitfr^ III I lie d EiCUiSion of

whit is means Li the doc-
irEiij- of non-duality. Min-
Ju>ri expounds lik view ukI
then asks whit YmuLLIrti
ibfnkn nf Hif- doctrine. r flK

philosopher docf mu ulin u

wufih FETEiaininE' perfectly
lilcsl. The IScKihitiititva
|]i 4 iIwt» him meal higbEy. The
„ drawing here repi r^rns* thtj

sijecifr h if V rrriLila.li.Lrtj by the modem father nfllir Rii] 7 na school of ZtiL Dmld-
liijm in Japan. Hakuin k nos a pFotcsnosial painter, anitriTuj thk mason all
* die more liiy spiris of the wiae old to*ii of Vinsuli a m
fine of this picture in black and white.


seen quivering hi n.r


MANUAL

OF ZEN BUDDHISM


DAISETZ TEITARO SUZUKI, D.Litt.

PrtftNVr 0 / Budtpuil Phihwpfrf

in lAf C/iii.T-t Untfxriihti Kfute


Sewnd Impmiim


S’-'-'J)

Published for the Buddhist Society, London


by


RIDER AND COMPANY

tjS^xQX Crrat PmtlnnJ Lotiffcfl, W.t

KP.LDOlW SVfiKtY AUCBLA-ND Dr-UUAV

jOHAimctBuno kkw yor*


rfi, aia


f int ptrbihfud fr.fftrTzbrr 455.0
Rrprinfcd . . Jm* tg$6

Cnjwghl, All ri\$ti rfsnrtsl.


UlN'i' HA i A K< H a ttfUU Jinnn


A*r

D« f
n«. ■


mhim v \-^v [ikleil


Fritf/ft/ ifi Crrai Brifilfit

/'jr T/e- Anshtr Przii, ! id,

rv/Jfrff, £jr/rv j


I


f


CONTENTS


15 I.
[K


ll H.


hi.


I


Page


Editor’s Foreword 9

Editor’s Note i i

Author’s Preface i i

Gathas and Prayers 13-20

1. On Opening the Sutra 13

2. Confession 13

3. The Threefold Refuge 14

4. The Four Great Vows ■*. 14

5. The Worshipping of the Sarira . 14

6. The Teaching of the Seven Buddhas 15

7. The Gatha of Impermanence 15

8. The Yemmei Kwannon Ten-Clause Sutra 16

9. Prayer on , the Occasion of Feeding the

Hungry Ghosts 16

10. General Prayer 19

11. Prayer of the Bell 20

The Dharanis 21-25

1. Dharani of Removing Disasters 21

2. Dharani of the Great Compassionate One 22

3. Dharani of the Victorious Buddha-Crown 23

The Sutras 26-72

1. The Prajnaparamita-hridaya-sutra, or

Shingyo (complete) 26

2. The Kwannongyo, or “Samantamukha Pari-

varta” (complete) 30

3. The Kongokyo, or Vajracchedika (the first

half and extracts from the second half) 38

4. The Lankavatara Sutra, or Ryogakyo (ex¬

tracts) 50

5


CONTENTS


S

5, The Ryogrtnkyo, or Surangama Sutra


(resume) 64

IV. Frou the Chinese Zem Masters 73-144

1. Bodhidharma on the Twofold Entrance to

the Tao 73

а. The 'third Patriarch on '‘Believing in

Mind” 7 6

3. From Hui-neng’s Tan-ching 83

4* Yoka Daishi’s “Song of Enlightenment” 89

5. Baso (Ma-tsu) and Sekito (Shih-tou) 104

б. Obaku’a (Huang-po) Sermon from "Trea¬

tise on the Essentials of the Transmission
of Mind” uz

7. Gensha on the Three Invalids {from the

Hekig/mshu or Pt-jtn Chi) ] 30

8. The Ten Oxhcrding Pictures, I 127

The Ten Oxherding Pictures, II 135

V. From the Japanese Zen Masters 145-152

1. Daio Kokushi on Zen 145

2. Daio Kokushi’s Admonition j,j6

3. Daito Kokuihi's Admonition and Last Poem 147

4. Kwanzan Kokushi’s Admonition 143

5. Muso Kokushi's Admonition 150

6. Hatuiu’s “Song of Meditation” 151

VL The Buddhist Statues and Pictures lx a Zen

Monastery 153-186

Buddhas, 153; Bodhisattvas, tGi; Arhats, 168;
Protecting Gods, 172; Historical Figures, 182

Index ^7


f


LIST OF PLATES


Vimatakiru, by Hakuin

Frontisputs

Plate r.

Kwannon, by Seuetsu Seki

Faring pag* 32

II.

The Ten Oxhcrding Pictures, by Sbubun, i

128

ILL

The Ten Oxlierding Pictures, n

Follow page ta8

IV.

The Ten Oxhcrding Pictures, in

|> *s

128

V.

The Ten Oxherding Pictures, iv

W PS

128

VL

The Ten Oxherding Pictures, v

SI is

128

VII.

The Ten Oxherding Pictures, vi

s s Pi

128

VIII,

The Ten Oxherding Pictures, vn

u ii

128

IX.

The Ten Oxherding Pictures, vm

ii 11

128

X.

The Ten Oxherding Pictures, tx

is si

128

XL

The Ten Oxherding Pictures, x

Facing page 129

XII.

Daito Kokushi, by Hakuin Zenji

11 SI

144

XIII.

Hakuin Zenji

is II

*45

XIV.

Bhadrapala, by Soycn

11 }J

145

XV.

Kanzan (Han-shan) and Jittoku (Shi-te),


by Kaihoku Yusho

» w

H5


*


7


■


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Bodhidharma, a Chinese Slone Rubbing Facing page 33

The Ten Oxherding Pic:lures, II, by an unknown Page

master 135-144

Sakyamuni 156

Buddha with His Attendants 157

Buddha's Birth 158

Buddha’s Entrance into Nirvana 159

Bhaishajynguru 1G0

Manjn.sri jgg

Samantabhadra 164

Avalokitesvara 165

Maiixeya 1S6

Kshitigarbha igy

The Sixteen Arhats 169-171

The Two Door-keeping Gods 175

The Four Guardian Gods 176

Bcnzaiten (Sarasvati) 177

Sambokojin j 73

Skandadeva (Idaten) 179

Ucchushma (Ususamatcn) xSo

Mahaknia (Daikokuten) i8(

The Sixteen Good Gods oft hr Prajnaparjimita Facing page 182
Daruma {Bodhidharma), Founder of Zen 184

Shoioku Taishi
Fudaishi


EDITOR'S FOREWORD

Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki, D.Lkh, Professor of Buddliist
Philosophy in the Otani University, Kyoto, was born in
1B69. He is probably now the greatest living authority on
Buddhist philosophy, and is certainly the greatest authority
on Zen Buddhism* His m^tjor vyorki in English on the
subject of Buddhism number a dozen or more, and of his
works in Japanese as yet unknown to the West there are
at least eighteen. He is, moreover, as a chronological
bibliography of bonk* on Zen in English clearly show?, the
pioneer teacher of the subject outside Japan, for except
fiir Kalten Nukariya’s Religion of tht Samurai (Luzac and Co + ,
1913) nothing was known of Zen as a living experience, save
to the reader? of Thr Eastern Buddhist (igai -1939), until lUc
publication of Essays in Buddhism (tirst Scries) in 1527.

Dr. Suzuki writes with authority. Not only has he
studied original works in Sanskrit, Pali, Chinese and
Japanese p but he has an up-to-date knowledge of Western
thought in German and French as well as m the English
which he speaks and writes so fluently. He is, moreover,
more than a scholar; he is a Buddhist. Though not a priest
of any Buddhist sect, he is honoured in every temple in
Japan, for Ins knowledge of spiritual things^ :is all who
have sat at his feet tn-ar witness, is direct and profound.
When he speak? of the higher stages of consciousness he
apenks as a man who dwells therein, and the impression
he makes on those who enter die fringes of his mind is that
of a man who seek? for the intellectual symbols wherewith
to describe a stale of awareness which lies indeed “beyond
the intellect 3 \

To those unable to sit at the Teel of the Master lus
writings must be a substitute. All these, however, were
out of print in England by 1940, and all remaining stocks
in Japan were destroyed in the fire which consumed three*
quarters ciT Tjjkyo in J 945 “ When,, therefore, 1 reached

9


t


p


IO editor’s foreword

Japan in 194®? I arranged with the author for the Budd¬
hist Society, London—my wife and myself as its nominees
to begin the publication of his Collected Works, reprinting
the old favourites, and printing as fast as possible translations
of the many new works which the Professor, self-immured
in his house at Kyoto, had written during the war.

This undertaking, however, was beyond the powers of
the Buddhist Society, and we therefore secured the assistance
of Rider and Co., who, backed by the vast resources of the
House of Hutchinson, can honour the needs of such a
considerable task.

Of Zen itself I need say nothing here, but the increas¬
ing sale of books on the subject, such as The Spirit of Z™
by Alan Watts (Murray), my own Z m Buddhism (Heine-
mann), and the series of original translations of Chinese
Zen Scriptures and other works published by the Buddhist
Society, prove that the interest of the West is rising rapidly.
Zen, however, is a subject extremely easy to misunderstand,
and it is therefore important that the words of a genuine
expert should come readily to hand.

It is proposed to publish the works of Dr. Suzuki in
groups of three, each group to contain, if possible, one of
his larger works, a smaller work, and a work as yet unpub¬
lished in English. The first three chosen were the first series
of his Essays in Z*n Buddhism , his valuable Introduction to Z m
Buddhism , with a translation by Miss Constance Rolfe of
Dr. C. G. Jung’s long Foreword to the German edition, and
a new work which appears under the title of The ZDoctrine
of No-Mind (The Significance of the Sutra of Hui-neng [Wei
Lang]). The Sutra itself is published for the Buddhist
Society by Luzac and Co. as The Sutra of Wei Lang .

The second group, of which this is one, also includes the
second series of Essays in Z en Buddhism , and a completely new
work, Living by Z The choice for later groups will be
influenced by popular demand.

Christmas Humphreys

I 95 ° President of the Buddhist Society, London


EDITOR'S NOTE

All references to the Author's Essays in £en Buddhism,
Series One and Two, and to his Introduction to J?en Buddhism*
an: to the second edition of these works, published in “The
Complete Works of D + T. Suzuki/ 1


PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION

In my Inlrodurtim to Buddhism (published 1934 ) * an
outline of Zen teaching is sketched, and in Tie Training of
the J$m M$nk (1934) a description of the Meditation Hall and
iLs life is given- To complete a triptych the present Manual
has been compiled. The object is to inform the reader of the
various literary materials relating to the monastery life-
Foreign students often express their desire to know about
what the Zen monk reads before the Buddha in his daily
service, where his though is move in his leisure hours, and
what objects of worship he has in the different quarters ofhls
Institution, This work mil partly, it is hoped> satisfy their
desire. Those who find my Essays too bulky or loo elaborate
may prefer these smaller works on Zen.

Kyoto 0AJ5ETZ TatTAito Suzuki

August 1935


p


11


I. GATHAS AND PRAYERS


Gatha is a Sanskrit term meaning “verse” or “hymn”. In
Buddhist literature it is used to designate the versified portion
of the sutras. Chinese scholars have adopted this word for their
versified compositions, which are known as chieh, an abbreviation
of chieh-t c o , or as chieh-sang , which is the combination of the
Sanskrit and the Chinese. The gathas collected here are not
exclusively those of the Zen sect; some belong to general
Buddhism.


GATHAS AND PRAYERS

i

On Opening the Sutra

The Dharma incomparably profound and exquisite
Is rarely met with, even in hundreds of thousands of
millions of kalpas;

We are now permitted to see it, to listen to it, to
accept and hold it;

May we truly understand the meaning of the
Tathagata’s words!


ii

Confession

All the evil karma ever committed by me since of old,
On account of greed, anger, and folly, which have
no beginning.

Bom of my body, mouth, and thought—

I now make full open confession of it.

13


14


MANUAL Of ?! RN HUDUHISM


111

The Threefold Refuce

I take refuge m the Buddha;

I take refuge in the Dhanna;

X take refuge In the Sangha.

I take refuge in the Buddha, the incomparably
hfsnuured one;

I take r^bige in the Dharmaj honourable for its
purity;

I take refuge in the Sun glia* honourable for its
harmonious life:,

X have finished taking refuge in the Buddha;

1 have finished taking refuge in the D harm a;

I have finished taking refuge in the Sangha,


IV

The Four Great Vows 1

However innumerable beings are, 1 vow to save
them;

However inexhaustible the passions are, I vow to
extinguish them;

However immeasurable the Pharma* arc, I vow to
master them;

However incomparable the Buddha--truth ix f I vow
to alinm it.


V

The Worshipping or the Sarira

We prosinUn ourselves in all humbleness before die
holy Sanra representing the body of Sakyamumi, ihn

1 1 hew: vmm are ret Elm] oiler every service, *


GATHAS AND PRAYERS


*5


Tathagata, who is perfectly endowed with aU the virtues,
who has the Dharmakaya as the ground of his being, and
Dhnrmadhatu as the stupa dedicated to him. To him we
pay out res pee L with due deference. Manifesting himself
in a bodily form for our sakes, the Buddha enters into uh
and makes us enter into him. His power being added to us,
we attain Enlightenment; and [again] dependent on the
Buddha’s miraculous power, all beings are benefited}
become desirous for Enlightenment* discipline themselves
in the life of the Bodhisauva, and equally enter into perfect
quietude where prevails infinite wisdom ui absolute identity.
We now prostrate ourselves before him*


vt

The Teaching of the Seven Buddhas

Not to commit evils,

But to do all that is gooch

And to keep one's thought pure-

This is the teaching of all the Buddhas.


VTI

The Gat ha of Impermanence 1

All composite things are impermanent.

They are subject to birth and death;

Put an end to birth and dcalh,

And there is a M&afui tranquillity.

1 For the safcc of ihr -^ond Ea^ll ot tli^ j'Jtha the Buddha L* said is have
bem wf)Uue tu hi* cun life. For tht* rtssem mis » nhc known a* the

1 gaum of uerihee 1 \


i6


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


VHI

The Yemmei Kwannon Ten-Clause Sutra 1

[Adoration to] Kwanzeon!

Adoration to the Buddha!

To the Buddha we are related
In terms of cause and effect.

Depending on the Buddha, the Dharma, and the
Sangha,

[Nirvana is possible which is] eternal, ever-blessed,
autonomous, and free from defilements.

Every morning our thoughts are on Kwanzeon,

Every evening our thoughts are on Kwanzeon.

Every thought issues from the Mind,

Every thought is not separated from the Mind.

IX

Prayer on the Occasion of Feeding
the Hungry Ghosts

If one wishes to know all the Buddhas of the past,
present, and future, one should contemplate the nature of this
Dharmadhatu essentially as the creation of Absolute Mind.
Adoration to the Buddhas in the ten quarters;
Adoration to the Dharma pervading the ten quarters;
Adoration to the Sangha in the ten quarters;

Adoration to Sakyamuni the Buddha who is our Master;
Adoration to Kwanzeon the Bodhisattva, who is the
great compassionate and pitying one, ready to save beings
from afflictions;

Adoration to Ananda the Arhat who is the expounder
of the Teaching.

1 Yemmei means “prolonging life”; when one daily recites this short docu¬
ment in ten clauses relating to Kwannon, one’s health is assured for doing
good not only for oneself but for the whole world. #


GATHAS AND PRAYERS


*7


Namu sabo totogyato boryakite, yen!
Sammola sammola, un!

Namu suryoboya totogyatoya tojito, yen!
Suryo suryo boya suryo boya suryo, somoko!
Namu samanda motonan, ban l 1
Adoration to Hoshin 2 the Tathagata;
Adoration to Taho 3 the Tathagata;
Adoration to Myoshishin 4 the Tathagata;
Adoration to Kohashin 5 the Tathagata;
Adoration to Rifui 6 the Tathagata;
Adoration to Kanroo 7 the Tathagata;
Adoration to Omito 8 the Tathagata.

Namu omitoboya totogyatoya,

Toniyato,

Omiritsubomi,

Omirito,

Shitabomi,

Omirito bigyaratei,

Omirito bigyarato gyamini,

Gyagyano shitogyari,


1 It is difficult to tell how this dharani came to be inserted here. As most
dharanis are, it is devoid of sense from the human point of view; but it may
not be necessarily so to the hungry ghosts, for whom the prayer is offered.
Can this be restored to the original Sanskrit as follow's?

Namah sarva-tathagatavalokitc! Om!

Sambala, sambala! hum!

Namah surupaya tathagataya!

Tadyatha,

Om, suru[paya], surupaya, surupaya, suru[paya], svaha!

Namah samantabuddhanam, vam!

“Re adored! O all the Tathagatas who are regarded [as our protectors];
Om! Provision, provision! Hum! Adored be the Tathagata Beautifully-
Formed ! Namely: Om! To the Beautifully-formed One! To the Beautifully-
formed One! To the Beautifully-formed One! Hail! Adored be all the
Buddhas! Vam!”

* “Jewel-excelled ( ratnaketu ).

* “Abundant-in-Jewel” (prabhutaratna ).

4 “Fine-form-body” (surupakaya ).

• “ Broad-wide-body” ( vipulakaya ).

• “Freed-from-fear” ( abhqyankara).

1 “Nectar-king” (anritaraja ).

•“Amida” ( amitabha ).

B


i8


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


Somoko. 1

By the supernatural power of this Dharani the food and
drink is purified, and this we offer to the spiritual beings as
numerous as the sands of the Ganga. We pray that they
shall all be fully satisfied and abandon their greed; that
they shall all leave their abodes of darkness and be bom
in the blissful paths of existence; and further that taking
refuge in the Triple Treasure they shall awaken the desire
for supreme enlightenment and finally come to the realiza¬
tion of it. The merit they thus attain is inexhaustible and
will continue on to the end of time, making all beings
equally share in this Dharma-food.

O you hosts of spiritual beings, we make this offering
of food to you all, which we pray will fill the ten quarters
and that all beings of your kind will partake of it.

By the practice of this meritorious deed we pray that
we repay what we owe to our parents, who have done all
they could for our sakes. May those who are still alive
continue to enjoy their happy and prosperous lives for ever,
while those who are no more with us be released from
suffering and bom in the land of bliss.

We pray that all sentient beings in the triple world who
are recipients of the fourfold benefaction, together with
those beings suffering in the three evil paths of existence and
tormented with the eight kinds of calamities, may repent
of all their sins and be cleansed of all their sores, so that they
may all be released from the cycle of transmigration and be
bom in the land of purity.

We pray to all the Buddhas, all the Bodhisattva-
Mahasattvas in the ten quarters, of the past, present, and
future, and to Mahaprajna-paramita, that by virtue of
this merit universally prevailing, not only we but all beings
shall equally attain Buddhahood.

1 Namo ‘mitabhaya tathagataya! Tadyatha, amritodbhave, amritasiddhe,
(?)-bhave, amritavikrante, amrita-vikranta-gamine, gaganakirtikarc! Svaha!

“Adored be the Tathagata of Infinite Light! Namely: O Nectar-raising
one! O Nectar-perfecting one! [O Nectar-] producing one! O One who
makes nectar pervade! O One who makes nectar universally pervade! O One
who makes nectar known as widely as space! Hail !” *


GATHAS AND PRAYERS


*9


X

General Prayer 1

By the Bhikshus all present here

The mystic formula of Surangama has been recited
as above,

Which is now dedicated to all the Nagas and Devas
who are protectors of the Dharma,

And also to all the holy assemblies of the spiritual
beings who are guardians of this monastery and
surrounding district.

May all beings in the three evil paths of existence
variously suffering the eight kinds of disasters be
thereby released from the afflictions!

May all beings in the triple world who are recipients
of the fourfold benefaction thereby participate in
the merit!

May the state continue in peaceful prosperity with all
its warlike activities stopped!

May the wind blow in time, the rain fall seasonably,
and the people live happily!

May the entire congregation sharing in the exercise
cherish the higher aspirations

To go beyond the ten stages with a leap, and this
without much difficulty!

May this monastery keep on its quiet life, free from
disturbances.

And the patrons and devotees grow not only in faith
but in wisdom and bliss!

[We pray this to] all the Buddhas and Bodhisattva-

Mahasattvas in the ten quarters, of the past, present,
and future, and to Mahaprajna-paramita!


1 This is read, as fasi be inferred from the text, after the recitation of the
Surangama dharani.


MANIA!. OF ZF.S BUDDHISM


90


XI

Prayer of the Bell

Would that the sound of the bell might go beyond our
earth.

And be heard even by all the denizens of the dark-
ness outside the Iron Mountains [eakracala) £
Would that, their organ of hearing becoming pure,
beings might attain perfect interfusion [of all the

senses].

So that every one of them might come finally to the
realization of supreme enlightenment! 1


X


Ml k r.iislojnni v in ilie Zrn nuxiastcry Ni the while

itrikinff xhc big belt, which in d L-ne three Uraci a day. The pmtnt *£atha is
m ii^r when Ih* striving in firiisJi-rd. Aa wiU I?# bduw* from Kwimimi]
ktLtfd a found which ii heard by those who linttrtly bdieve in hk power of
fckaaing I hern frum every IWm of ilflilster. Each sound enlisted by the bed
k the Voice of Kw .mnfln fdllnj; on ui TO purify dur spijk rjf hearing, whereby
si spijHtuai eapcriaice cgiled ^intcrfurioD" wiU finally lake place in ia. See
under llie and the JTnw WW^ fl bckiw. m


II- THE DHARANIS


Properly speaking, the dharani has no legitimate place in Zen.
That it has nevertheless crept into its daily service is due to the
general characteristics of Chinese Buddhism of the Suug dynasty*
when the Japanese Zen masters visited Girina and imported it as
they Tound it then, together with, the Skingon elements of Chinese
Zen. In China the Shingnn did not tlirlve very long but left its
traces in Zen.

Dkarani^ the root of which is dhr , “to hold” or + 'to convey* Vis
ordinarily translated by the Chinese tetmg-ch*ih r “general holder”*
or nmg-fh'ihi "that which holds". A diiararri is considered as
holding magical power in it or bearing deep meaning. When it is
pronounced, whatever evil spirits there are ready io interfere
with (lie spiritual effect of a ritual* are kept away from in

In the Following pages the three most frequently read
dharanis are given. When translated they convey no intelligent
signification. They mostly consist of its vocations and rxeLama-
tions. Tice invocation is an appeal to the higher powers*and the
e^datuallon Is to frighten away the evil spirits. That the prac¬
tical result of these utterances h not to be judged objectively
goes without saying.


THE DHARANIS

i

Dharani of Removing Disasters

Adoration to all the Buddhas!

Adoration to die Teaching that knows no obstructions l
Thus;

OmS Khya khya khyahi khyahi f speak, speak)!

Hum hum!

Jvala jvala prajvala prajvala (blaze, blase)!

Tiatha thihTt [up, up) !

41


*


sa


MANUAL OF Zt£N UUDDHISU


Stri stri (?) I
Sphata (burse, burst)!
One who is quiescent!

To the glorious one, hail!


Dharani of the Great Compassionate One

Adoration lo the Triple Treasure!

Adoration to Avaloki tesvara the Bodhi sattva-Mahasatt va
who is the great compassionate one!

Om, to the one who performs a leap beyond all fears!

Having adored him, may I enter into the heart of the
blue-necked one known as the noble adorable Avaloki tes-
vara! It means the completing of all meaning, it is pure,
it is that which makes all beings victorious and cleanses
the th of existence.


Thus:

Om, the seer, the world-transcending one I
O Hari the Mahabodhisattva!

All, ail)


Defilement, defilement!

The earth, the earth!

It is the heart.

Do, do the w'ork!

Hold Tast, hold fast!

O great victor!

Hold on, hold on 1

1 hold on.

To Indra the creator!

Move, move, my defilement-free seal t
Come, come!

Hear, hear!

A joy springs up in me!

Speak, speak! Directing!


f


THE DHARANI5


*3


Huluj hulu, main, bull), hulu, hile!

Sara, sara! siri, siri! suru, suru 1
Be awakened, be awakened!

Have awakened, have awakened!

O merciful one, blue-necked one!

Of daring ones, to the joyous, hail l
To ihe successful one, hail!

To the great successful one, hail!

To the one who has attained mastery in the discipline,
hatl!

To the bluc-ncckcd one, liail!

To the hoar-fated one, hail!

To the one with a lion’s head and face, hail I
To the one who holds a weapon in his hand, hail!

To the one who holds a wheel in his hand, hail!

To the one who holds a lotus in his hand, hail!

To the blue-necked far-causing; one, bail!

To the bcncficicnt one referred to in this Dharani
beginning with '‘Namah,’ 1 hail!

Adoration to the Triple Treasure!

Adoration to Avalokitcsvara!

Hail!

May these [prayers] be successful!

To this magical formula, hail!


hi

DharaNI of the Victorious
Bupd ba-Crown

Ailoration to the Blessed One who is the most excellent
one in the triple world 1

Adoration to the Enlightened One, to the Blessed One!
Namely:

Om! Cleanse [us], cleanse [us]! O one who is always


24


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


impartial! One who, being in possession of all-pervading,
all-illuminating light, is pure in his self-nature, cleansed
of the darkness of the five paths of existence!

Baptize us, O Sugata, with an immortal baptism which
consists of the best words, of the great true phrases!

Remove disasters, remove disasters, O one who holds
an eternal life!

Cleanse us, cleanse us, O one who is as pure as the
sky!

O one who is as pure as the victorious Buddha-crown!

O one who is inflamed with a thousand rays of light!

O all the Tathagatas who look over [the entire world]!

O one who is perfect in the Six Paramitas!

O one who holds the great seal empowered with the
spiritual power which emanates from the heart of every
Tathagata!

O one whose body is as hard and pure as Vajra!

O one who is thoroughly pure, cleansed of all impedi¬
ments, all fears, and all the evil paths!

Turn us away [from evils] O one who enjoys a purified
life!

O one who empowers us with [the power of] the original
covenant! O jewel, jewel, the great jewel! O Suchness which
is reality-limit and absolute purity!

O one who is pure in his evolved enlightenment!

Be victorious, be victorious, be ever victorious, be ever
victorious!

Bear in mind, bear in mind!

O one who is pure being empowered by all Buddhas!

O Vajragarbha who holds the Vajra! Let my. body be
like Vajra! Let those of all beings too be like Vajra!

O one who is in possession of an absolutely pure body!
O one who is absolutely pure from all the paths of existence!
And let me be consoled by all the Tathagatas!

O one who is empowered with the consoling power of
all the Tathagatas!

Be enlightened, be enlightened, be ever enlightened, be
ever enlightened! .


€


THE D HA RANTS


a 5

Have the hi enlightened, have them enlightened, have
them ever enlightened, have them ever enlightened!

O one who is most pure in a most thoroughgoing "'ay I
O one who holds a great seal empowered with the
spiritual power which emanates from the heart of every
Tathagata!

Hail!


III. THE SUTRAS

The sutras most read in Zen are the Shingyo {.Prqjnapara-
mitahndaya), the Kwannongyo ( Samantamukha-parivarta ), and the
Kongokyo (Vajracchedika ). The Shingyo being the shortest is read
on ahnost all occasions. The Ryoga (.Lankavatara ) is historically
significant, but being difficult to understand is very little studied
nowadays by followers of Zen. For further information see the
author s works on the sutra. The Ryogon (Suramgama ) is not so
neglected as the Ryoga. It is full of deep thoughts, and was
studied very much more in China than in Japan. There are some
more sutras of the Mahayana school with which Zen students will
do well to become better acquainted, for example, the Kongo-
sammaikyo (Vajrasamadhi ), the Tengakukyo (Sutra of Perfect
Enlightenment), the Yuimakyo (Vimalakirti-sutra), and the Han-
nyakyo {Prajnaparamita). None of them have been translated into
hnghsh, except the Yuima which is difficult to obtain now.


THE SUTRAS


English Translation Of The Shingyo

When 1 the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara was engaged in
the practice of the deep Prajnaparamita, he perceived that
there are the five Skandhas; 2 and these he saw in their
self-nature to be empty. 3

“O Sariputra, form is here emptiness/ emptiness is
torm; lorm 1S , no other than em Ptiness, emptiness is no other
than form; that which is form is emptiness, that which is
emptiness is form. The same can be said of sensation,
thought, confection, and consciousness.

O Sariputra, all things here are characterized with
emptiness: they are not bom, they are not annihilated:
they are not tainted, they are not immaculate; they do not
increase, they do not decrease. Therefore,. O Sariputra,

26


THE SUTRAS


27


in emptiness there is no form, no sensation, no thought,
no confection, no consciousness; no eye, 6 ear, nose, tongue,
body, mind; no form, 6 sound, colour, taste, touch, objects;
no Dhatu of vision, 7 till we come to 8 no Dhatu of con¬
sciousness; there is no knowledge, no ignorance, 9 till we
come to there is no old age and death, no extinction of
old age and death; there is no suffering, 10 no accumulation,
no annihilation, no path; there is no knowledge, no attain¬
ment, [and] no realization,* because there is no attainment.
In the mind of the Bodhisattva who dwells depending on
the Prajnaparamita there are no obstacles;! and, going
beyond the perverted views, he reaches final Nirvana. All
the Buddhas of the past, present, and future, depending
on the Prajnaparamita, attain to the highest perfect en¬
lightenment.

“Therefore, one ought to know that the Prajnaparamita
is the great Mantram, the Mantram of great wisdom, the
highest Mantram, the peerless Mantram, which is capable
of allaying all pain; it is truth because it is not falsehood:
this is the Mantram proclaimed in the Prajnaparamita. It
runs: ‘Gate, gate, paragate, parasamgate, bodhi, svaha !* (O Bodhi,
gone, gone, gone to the other shore, landed at the other
shore, Svaha!)”


NOTES


i. There are two texts with the title of The Hridaya : the one
is known as the Shorter and the other the Larger. The one
printed above is the shorter sutra in general use in Japan and
China. . ,

The opening passage in the larger text in Sanskrit and
Tibetan, which is missing in the shorter one, is as follow's: Line
Tibetan has this additional passage: “Adoration to the Prajna¬
paramita, which is beyond words, thought, and praise, whose


* Nabhisamayah is missing in the Chinese translations as well as m the

H °7^or N ^amx all the Chinese have “obstacle”, and this is in full accord
with the teaching of the Prajnaparamita. Max MuUer s rendering, envelop ,
is not good. •


28


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


self-nature is, like unto space, neither created nor destroyed,
which is a state of wisdom and morality evident to our innp r con¬
sciousness, and which is the mother of all Excellent Ones of the
past present, and future”.] “Thus I heard. At one time the
World-honoured One dwelt at Rajagriha, on the Mount of
Vulture, together with a large number of Bhikshus and a large
number of Bodhisattvas. At that time the World-honoured One
was absorbed m a Samadhi (Meditation) known as Deep
enlightenment. And at the same moment the Great Bodhisattva
Aryavalokitesvara was practising himself in the deep Prajna-
paramita. r J

The concluding passage, which is also missing in the shorter
text, runs as follows:

♦i? S , aripUt T i : a ’ ■ *hus should the Bodhisattva practise himself
m the deep Prajnaparamita. At that moment, the World-
honoured One rose from the Samadhi and gave approval to the
Oreat Bodhisattva Aryavalokitesvara, saying: Well done, well
done, noble son! so it is! so should the practice of the deep
Prajnaparamita be carried on. As it has been preached by you,
it is applauded by Tathagatas and Arhats. Thus spoke the World-
honoured One with joyful heart. The venerable Sariputra and
the Lrreat Bodhisattva Aryavalokitesvara together with the whole
assemblage, and the world of Gods, Men, Asuras, and Gand-
harvas, all praised the speech of the World-honoured One.”

- *• t ' ie modem scientific point of view, the conception

of Skandha seems to be too vague and indefinite. But we must
remember that the Buddhist principle of analysis is not derived
from mere scientific interest; it aims at saving us from the idea
ot an ultimate individual reality which is imagined to exist as
such for all the time to come. For when this idea is adhered to
as nnal, the error of attachment is committed, and it is this
™ « f ^ever enslaves us to the tyranny of external

ry, The five Skandhas (“aggregates” or “elements”) are
torm (i rupam ), sensation or sense-perception ( vedana ), thought
(samjna), confection or conformation {samskara), and conscious¬
ness (mjnana). The first Skandha is the material world or the
materiality of things, while the remaining four Skandhas belong
mrrl “j' ed ? na is what we get through our senses; samjna
m;^j P ? n iP *° thou ght in its broadest sense, or that which
mind elaborate;; samskara is a very difficult term and there is
no exact English equivalent; it means something that gives
rm, formative principle; vijnana is consciousn&s or mentation.


THE SUTRAS


*9

There are six forms of mentation, distinguishable a* seeing,
hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, and thinking.

3. Hsuait-thuang r s translation has this added: “He wa$
delivered from all suffering and misery,’•

4. ""Empty” (sur&a) or “emptiness** (sunyata) is one of the
most important notions in Malayans philosophy and at the same
time tile most puzzling for non-Buddhist readers to comprehend.
Emptiness does not mean “relativhy” or “phcnumenaliiY", or
“nothingness 1 , but rather means the Absolute, or something of
transcendental nature, although t his rendering is also misleading
as we shall see later* When Buddhists declare all things to be
empty, they are not advocating a nihilistic view; on the contrary
an ultimate reality is hinted at, which cannot be subsumed
under the categories of logic, V- iih them, to proclaim the con¬
ditionality of tilings is to point to the existence of something
altogether unconditioned and transcendent of all dttermination
Sunyata may thus often be most appropriately rendered by the
Absolute. When the sutra says that the five Skandhas have the
character of emptiness, or that in emptiness there b neither
creation nor destruction, neither defilement nor immaculacy,
etc., the settse is : no limiting qualities are lo be attributed to the
Absolute; while It is imm anent in all concrete and particular
objects, it is not in itself definable. Universal negation, therefore,
in the philosophy of lYajna is an inevitable outcome.

5. No eye, no ear, err,, refer to the six senses. In Buddhist
philosophy, mind (m&mmjwma) is the special sense-organ Sr>r the
apprehension oY dhama^ or objects or thought.

G h No fortcij no sound, etc., are the six quarries of the
external world, which hreome objects of the six senses.

7, “Dhatu of vision, etc.” refer to the eighteen Dhulus or
elements of existence, which include the six srn-wx (vidriyu) r the
six qualities (mskqp i) 5 and the six consciousnesses (vijnami),

ft. ^"Ti 3 ! we come tu” (jnwqI in Sanskrit, and nai Mlt in
Chinese) lr quite frequently met with in Buddhist literature in
avoid repetition of wdl-knuwti subjects. These clarifications may"
serai somewhat confusing and overlapping.

9. “There b no knowledge, no ignorance, tic.” b the whole¬
sale denial of die Twelvefold Chain of Causation {pratitya ronnf-
pada ), which are ignorance [fmdya ], deed (samstetfa}* conscious¬
ness [tijmma), name and form (nammtpn) p six scnse-drt^nS
(Mtapatma)' contact ( sparse,), sense-perception (rtdana}, desire
{trisftm z), attachment (upadarial, being [bham) t hirth ( jati ), and old


30


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


age and death (jaramarana). This Chain of Twelve has been a
subject of much discussion among Buddhist scholars.

io. The allusion is of course to the Fourfold Noble Truth
( satya ): i. Life is suffering ( duhkha ); 2. Because of the accumu¬
lation ( samudaya ) of evil karma; 3. The cause of suffering can be
annihilated ( rtirodha ); 4. And for this there is the path ( marga ).


H

The Kwannon Sutra 1

At that time Mujinni 2 Bosatsu rose from his seat, and,
baring his right shoulder, turned, with his hands folded,
towards the Buddha, and said this: World-honoured One,
for what reason is Kwanzeon Bosatsu so named?

The Buddha said to Mujinni Bosatsu: Good man, when
those innumerable numbers of beings—hundred-thousands
of myriads of kotis of them—who are suffering all kinds
of annoyances, hearing of this Kwanzeon Bosatsu, will
utter his name with singleness of mind, they will instantly
hear his voice and be released.

Even when people fall into a great fire, if they hold the
name of Kwanzeon Bosatsu, the fire will not scorch them
because of the spiritual power of this Bosatsu. When they are


1 Generally known as Kwannon-gyo in Japanese and Kuan-yin Ching in
Chinese. It forms the Twenty-fifth Chapter in Kumarajiva’s translation of the
Saddharma-bundarika , “the Lotus of the Good Law”. Its Sanskrit title is
Samantamukha Parivarta. It is one of the most popular sutras in Japan, especially
among followers of the Holy Path, including Zen, Tendai, Shingon, Nichiren,
etc.

The Sanskrit for Kwannon seems, according to some Japanese authorities,
originally to have been Aualokitasvara , and not AvalokiUsvara. If so, Kwannon
is a more literal rendering than Kwanzeon ( Kuan-shih-yin) or Kwanjizai ( Kuan -
tzu-isai). The Bodhisattva Avalokitasvara is “the owner of voice which is viewed
or heard”. From him issues a voice which is variously heard and interpreted
by ail beings, and it is by this hearing that the latter are emancipated from
whatever troubles they are in.

The present translation is from Kumarajiva's Chinese. In the reading of
the proper names, the Japanese way of pronunciation has been retained

* Bodhisattva Akshayamati in Sanskrit, that is, Bodhisattva of Inexhaustible
Intelligence. •


THE. SUTRAS


31


tossed up and down in the surging waves, if they pronounce

his name they will get into a shallower place.

When hundred-thousands of myriads of kotis of pcop«c
tro out into the great ocean in order to seek such treasures
as gold, silver, lapis lazuli, conch shells, cornelian, coral,
amber, pearls, and other precious stones, their boats nia>
be wrecked bv black storms, and they may find themselves
thrown up into the island of the Rakshasas; if among the in
there is even a single person who will utter the n*™ of
Kwanzeon Bosatsu all the people will lie released from the
disaster [which is likely to befall them at the hand] of the
Rakshasas. For this reason the Bosatsu is called Kwanzcon

When, again, a man is about 10 sutler ail injury, u nC
will utter the name of Kwanzcon Bosatsu, the swor or
the stick that is held [by the executioner] will be at once
broken to pieces and the man bereieased. ,

When all the Yakshas and Rakshasas filling the three
thousand chiliocosms come and annoy a man, they may
hear him utter the name of Kwanzcon Bosatsu, and no
wicked spirits will dare look at him with their evil eyes,

much less inflict injuries on him. . ,111

When again a man, whether guilty or innocent, turns
himself bound in chains or held with manacles, he uueiuig
the name of Kwanzeon Bosatsu will sec all these broken to

PlC Wh^ab the^ands in the three thousand chiliocosms
arc filled with enemies, a merchant and his caravan loaded
with precious treasures may travel through the dangero is
passes. One of the company will say to the others. O t, _
mm W no fear; only with singleness of thought u«er the
name of Kwanreon Bosatsu- As this Bosatsu gives us fear¬
lessness, utter his name and you will be delivered from your
enemies.” Hearing this, all the company jom m the flc na¬
tion, saying, "Kwanzeon Bosatsu be adored! Because of
this uttering die name of the Bosatsu they will be released
O Mujinni, such is the awe-inspiring spiritual power ot

Kwanzcon Bosatsu Makasatsu. . , . , .

When people are possessed of excessive Lust, let diem


32


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM

always reverentially think of Kwanzeon Bosatsu and they
will be freed from it. If they are possessed of excessive anger,
let them always reverentially think of Kwanzeon Bosatsu,
and they will be freed from it. When they are possessed of
excessive folly let them always reverentially think of Kwan¬
zeon Bosatsu, and they will be freed from it. O Mujinni, of
such magnitude is his spiritual power which is full of blessings.
Therefore, let all beings always think of him.

If a woman desire a male child, let her worship and
make offerings to Kwanzeon Bosatsu, and she will have
a male child fully endowed with bliss and wisdom. If she
desire a female child, she will have one graceful in features
and in possession of all the characteristics [of noble woman¬
hood], and because of h r having planted the root of merit
the child will be loved and respected by all beings. O
Mujinni, such is the power of Kwanzeon Bosatsu.

If all beings worship and make offerings to Kwanzeon
Bosatsu, they will derive benefits unfailingly from this.
Therefore, let all beings hold the name of Kwanzeon
Bosatsu. O Mujinni, if there is a man who holds the names
of all the Bodhisattvas equal in number to sixty-two billion
times as many as the sands of the Ganga, and till the end of
his life makes them offerings of food and drink, clothing and
bedding and medicine, what do you think? Is not the merit
accumulated by such a man very great?

Mujinni s aid : Very great, indeed, World-honoured One!

1 he Buddha said: Here is another man; if he should hold
the name of Kwanzeon Bosatsu even for a while and make
offerings to the Bosatsu, the merit so attained by this one
is tully equal to that [of the previous one], and will not be
exhausted even to the end of hundred-thousands of myriads
of kotis of kalpas. Those who hold the name of Kwanzeon

r S ^ SU r ? am ? uch immeasur able and innumerable masses
ot blissful merit.

Mujinni Bosatsu said to the Buddha: “World-honoured
Une, how does Kwanzeon Bosatsu visit this Saha world? 1


1 That is, sahaloka , world of patience.


i


V


KWANNON
By Seise tsu Seki,

**V>bot of the Tenryuji Monastery, Kyoto
(See page 30)


• •*


Plate I


‘i


D&dhidhstimi (T:i.iisri b E'S: i r i tecLa.«
[,¥or past 73)


THE SUTRAS


33


: ° w does he preach the Dharma to all beings? What is the
'.tent of his skilful means?

The Buddha said to Mujinni Bosatsu: O good man, if
lere are beings in any country who are to be saved by his
issuming a Buddha-form, Kwanzeon Bosatsu will manifest
imself in the form of a Buddha and preach them the
)harma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Pratyeka-
uddha-form, the Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form
of a Pratyekabuddha and preach them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Sravaka-
form, the Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of a
Sravaka and preach them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Brahma-
form, the Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of a
Brahma and preach them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Sakrendra-
form, the Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of a
Sakrendra and preach them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming an Isvara-
form, the Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of an
Isvara and preach them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Mahesvara-
form, he will manifest himself in the form of a Mahesvara
and preach them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Chakra-
vartin-form, the Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form
of a Chakravartin and preach them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Vaisravana-
form, the Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of a
Vaisravana and preach them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming the form of a
provincial chief, the Bosatsu will manifest himself in the
form of a provincial chief and preach them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a householder’s
form, the Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of a
householder and preach them the Dharma.

If beings areio be saved by his assuming a lay-disciple’s


34 MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM

form, the Bosatsu will manifest. himself in the lhrm of a lay*
disciple and preach them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a state-officer's
form, the Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of a
state-officer and preach them the Dharma.

If beings art: to be saved by his assuming a Brahman-
form, the Bosatsu will manliest himself to them in the fonn
of a Brahman and preach them the Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Bhikshu-
fotm, or a Bhikshuni-, or an Up^aks-, or an Upasika-form,
the Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of a Bhikshu,
or a Bhiksliuni, or an Upasaka, or an Upasika, and preach
them (he Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a female form
of the f:n nily of a householder, or a lay-disci pie, or a suite-
officer, or a Brahman, the Bosatsu wiil manifest himself in
the form of such a female and preach them the Dharma.

If beings arc to lx; saved by his assuming a youth* or
a maiden-form, the Bosatsu will manifest himself in the
form of a youth or a maiden and preach them the
Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by Ills assuming a Dev a-, Naga-,
Yaks ha-, Gandharva-, Asura*, Garuda-, kinnara*, Maho-
raga-, Manushya*, or Amaiuishya-fonn, tlie Bosatau will
manifest himself in any of these forms and preach them ihe
Dharma.

If beings are to be saved by his assuming a Vajrapani-
form, the Bosatsu will manifest himself in the form of
Vajrapani and preach them the Dharma,

O Mujinni, this Kwanzeon Bosatsu performs such
meritorious deeds by assuming varieties of forms, and by
visiting different lands saves and releases beings. Therefore,
you will make offering - with singleness of thought to Kwan-
zeon Bosatsu. In the midst of fears, perils!, and disaster,
it is he who gives us fearlessness, 1 and for this reason he is
called in this Saha world the one who give* fearlessness.

Mujinni Bosatsu said to the Buddha: I wish now to make
1 K Sif«ty", or better ‘ Jaith”. •


THE SUTRAS


35


an offering to Kwanzeon Bosatsu. So saying, he took off his
ncdda.ee strung with all kinds of precious gems worth
hundreds of thousands i>i gold pieces, and presented It to
Kwanza® Bosatsu with this word: Venerable Sir, accept
tins necklace of precious gems as a Dharma offering!

Kwanzeon Bosatsu refused to accept It, ;vhereupon
Mujinnt said to him : Venerable Sir, Pray accept this out of
compassion for us all.

Then the Buddlia said to Kwaim-nn Bosatsu: Out of
compassion for Mujinni Bosatsu and all the four classn of
beings, and also for the Devas, Nagas, Yakshas, GandharvsLs
As unis, Garudas, Kinnaras, Mahoragas, Manushyas, Ania-
nushyas and others, accept, O K wan aeon Bosatsu, this
necklace of his.

Then because of his compassion for all the four classes
of beings and for Devas, Nagas, Mam.shyas, Anumushyas
and others, kwanzeon Bosatsu accepted the necklace and
dividing it into two parts he presented the one toShakammu-
butsu (Sakyamum Buddha) and the other to die shrine of
lanobutsu (Prabhutaratna Buddha).

O Mujinni, Kwanzeon Bosatsu who is tin: possessor of
such a miraculous spiritual power, visits in this wise this
ban a world.

^ l hat time Mujinni Bosatsu asked in verse, saying:

O vV a rid-honoured One who U in possession of exquisite
features, j now again ask him : For what reason is the son of
the Buddlia called Kwanzeon?

The Honoured One in possession of exquisite features
answered Mujinni in verse: Just listen to the life or Kwan~
zcon! He is always ready to respond to calls from all quarters,
ilis universal vows are as deep as the ocean. For ages beyond
conception, he Las served myriads of Buddhas and made
great vow* of purity.

I will briefly tell you about them. When people hear
his name and set his body and think of him in their minds
not vamly, they will see every form of'ill effaced in all the
worlds.

If an enemy wishing to harm a man pushes him down


MANUAL Oi- tf&N BUDDHISM


3«

to a pit of great firr. let his thought dwell on the power of
Kwannon and the fiery pit will be transformed into a pond.

Or if drifting m the vast ocean a man is about to be
swallowed up by the Nagas, fishes, or evil lieings* let hi*
thought dwell on the power of Kwannon, and the waves
will not drown him.

Or if from the top of Mount Sumcni a man is hurled
down by an enemy, let Ins thought dwell on the power of
Kwannon, and he will stay in the ah like the sun.

Or if pursued by wicked persons a man falls on the Vajra
mountain, let hid thought dwell on the power of Kwaimon,
and not a hair on him will be Injured.

Or if surrounded by an army of enemies a man is
threatened by them, each of whom with a sword in hand
is about to injure him, let his thought dwell on the power
of Kwannon, and the enemies will cherish a compassionate
heart.

Or if persecuted by a tyrant a man h about lo end his
life at the place of execution, let his thought dwell on die
power of Kwannon, and the executioner's sword will at once
oe broken to pieces*

Or if a man should fiml himself imprisoned and en¬
chained with his hands and feet manacled and fettered* let
his thought dwell on the power ofKwannon, and he will be
released from the shackles*

If harm i i going to be done to a man by means of magic
or poisonous herbs, let his thought dwell on the power of
Kwannon, and the curse will revert to the people from whom
it started.

Or if a man should encounter a party of Rakshasas, or
Nagas exhaling poison, or evil spirits, let Ids thought dwell
on the power of Kwannon, and no harm will ever be done
to him.

It a man is surrounded by wild beasts whose sharp teeth
and claws arc to be dreaded, let his thought dwell on the
power of Kwaimon, and they will quickly nm away in all
directions,

11 a man is attacked by venomous snaJ&s and scorpions


T HK SUTRAS


37


breathing poisonous gas ready to scorch him, tat his thought
dwell on the power of Kwannon, and they will all turn
away from him shrieking.

When thunder-clouds burst with flashes of lightning,
causing 3 storm of hailstones or pouring rain in torrents,
let your thought dwell on the power of K warm on and the
storm will in no time dear away.

If a calamity falls on beings and they are tortured with
interminable pam, [let them resort to] Kwannon who,
being endowed with the mysterious power of wisdom, will
save them from ail troubles in the world.

Kwannon is the possessor of miraculous powers, widely
disciplined in knowledge and skilful means, and in all the
lands of the ten quarters there is not a place where he does
not manifest himself

The various evil paths of existence such as hells* evil
spirits, beastly creatures, etc., and the pains arising from
birth, old age, disease, and death—they will all by degrees
be annihilated*

[Kuannon is] the one who views the world in truth,
free from defilement, with knowledge extending far, and
full of love and compassion; he is to be always prayed to and
always adored.

He is a pure, spotless light and, like the sun, dispels all
darkness with wisdom, and also subverts the disastrous effects
of wind and fire; his all-illuminating light fills the world.

His body of love he keeps under control like thunder
that shakes the world; hb thought of compassion resembles
a great mass of cloud from which a rain of the Dharma comes
down like nectar, destroying the flames of evil passions*

If a man is held at court with a case against him, or if he
is intimidated at a military camp, let his thought dwell on
the power of Kwaimon, and all his enemies will beat retreat.

[His is] a most exquisite voice, a voice that surveys the
world, the voice of Brahma, the voice of the ocean—one that
excels all the voices of the world* For this reason tat our
thought always dwell on him.

Let us never cherish thoughts of doubt about Kwanzeon


3 d manual OF ZEN* BUDDHISM

who is thoroughly pure and holy and is really a refuge and
pruLector in trouble,, grief, death, and disaster.

He is in possession or all merits, regards all tilings with
an eye of compassion, and like Liu; ocean holds In himself an
inestimable mass of virtues. For this reason he Is to be
adored.

At that time Jiji Bosatsti 1 rose from his seat, anti standing
before^ the Buddha said ) World-honoured One, they are
tiuly 11 t mashed with no small amount of merit who listen
to his Chapter on Kwansscori Bosatsu, in which his life or
perfect activities is described——the life of one who, endowed
with miraculous powers, manifests himudf in all directions.

When the Buddha finished preaching this Chapter on
the All-sided One all the people: in the assembly, amounting
to 8 4,000 m number, cherished the dr sire for the supreme
enlightenment with which there is nothing to compare.


nt


The Konrqkyo or Diamond Sutra-
i. Thus I have heard.

At one time the Buddha stayed at Ana tii aphid aka's
harden m die grove ol Jcta in the kingdom ofSravasri; he
was together with r,2<]o great Bhikshus, When the meal
time caine the World-honoured One put on his cloak and,
holding his bowl, entered die great city of Sravasti, where he
begged For food. Having finished his begging from door to
ctoor a he came back to hh own place* and took Ids meaL


' Dhuttirmdhara in SMukiit, " the Supporter of the earth”.

AffMllfcwtra. It bctnnRi Co (he I'rajna r.Uv! of Mkhayaiw lilenuUM Thrill-

“ *“* Kva ***?* «*"* Vttdoo


THE SUTRAS


39


When this was done, he put away his cloak and howl, washed
his feet, spread his scat, and sat down.

a. Then the Venerable Subhuti, who was among the
assembly, rose from his scat, bared his right shoulder, set
his right knee on the ground, and, respectfully folding his
hands, addressed the Buddha thus:

“U is wonderful, World-honoured One, that the Tatha-
gatii thinks so much of ail the Bodhisativas and instructs
them so well* World-honoured One, in case good men and
good women ever raise ihe desire ior the Supreme En¬
lightenment,, how would they abide in it? how would they
keep their thoughts under control?’'

The Buddha said: “Well said, indeed, O Subhuti! As
you say, the Tutlcigiiiu thinks very much of all the Btid-
hisattvas, and so instructs them well. But now listen atten¬
tively and I will tell you. In case good men and good women
raise die desire for the Supreme Enlightenment, they should
thus abide in it, they should ill us keep their though is under
control.'*

“So be it. World-honoured One, I wish to listen to


you."

3. The Buddha said to Subhuti: “All the Bodhisattva-
Msrha&attvas should thus, keep their thoughts under control.
•All kinds of beings suirh as the egg-bom, the womb-born,
the moisture-bom, die miraculously-bom, those with form,
those without form, those with consciousness, those without
consciousness, those with nu-consciousneSS, and those without
no-consciousness—they are alt led by me to enter Nirvana
that leaves nothing behind and to attain linal emancipation.
Though thus beings unmeasurable, innumerable, and
unlimited arc emancipated, there are in reality 110 beings
that are ever emancipated. Why, Subhuti? It a Bodhisattva
retains ihe thought of an ego, a person, a being, or a soul, he
is no more a Bodhisattva,

4. “Again, Subhuti, when a Bodhisattva practises


4°


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


a touch, or a quality. 1 Subhuti, a Bodhisattva should thus
practise charity without cherishing any idea of form. Why?
When a Bodhisattva practises charity without cherishing any
idea of form, his merit will be beyond conception. Subhuti,
what do you think? Can you have the conception of space
extending eastward?”

“No, World-honoured One, I cannot.”

“Subhuti, can you have the conception of space extend¬
ing towards the south, or west, or north, or above, or below?”

“No, World-honoured One, I cannot.”

“Subhuti, so it is with the merit of a Bodhisattva who
practises charity without cherishing any idea of form; it is
beyond conception. Subhuti, a Bodhisattva should cherish
only that which is taught to him.

5. “Subhuti, what do you think? Is the Tathagata to be
recognized after a body-form?”

“No, World-honoured One, he is not to be recognized
after a body-form. Why? According to the Tathagata, a body-
form is not a body-form.”

The Buddha said to Subhuti, “All that has a form is an
illusive existence. When it is perceived that all form is no¬
form, the Tathagata is recognized.”

6. Subhuti said to the Buddha: “World-honoured One,
if beings hear such words and statements, would they have
a true faith in them?”

The Buddha said to Subhuti: “Do not talk that way.
In the last five hundred years after the passing of the Tatha¬
gata, there may be beings who, having practised rules of
morality and, being thus possessed of merit, happen to hear of
these statements and rouse a true faith in them. Such beings,
you must know, are those who have planted their root of
merit not only under one, two, three, four, or five Buddhas,
but already under thousands of myriads of asamkhyeyas of
Buddhas have they planted their root of merit of all kinds.
Those who hearing these statements rouse even one thought


iDIwma, that is, the object of manovijnana, thought, as form (ruba) is the
object of the visual sense, sound that of the auditory sense, odour that of the
olfactory sense, and so forth. •


THE SUTRAS


4 1

of pure faith, Subhuti, are all known to the Tathagata, and
recognized by him as having acquired such an immeasurable
amount of merit. Why? Because all these beings are free
from the idea of an ego, a person, a being, or a soul; they are
free from the idea of a dharma as well as from that of a
no-dharma. Why? Because if they cherish in their minds the
idea of a form, they are attached to an ego, a person, a being,
or a soul. If they cherish the idea of a dharma, they are
attached to an ego, a person, a being, or a soul. Why? If
they cherish the idea of a no-dharma, they are attached to
an ego, a person, a being, or a soul. Therefore, do not cherish
the idea of a dharma, nor that of a no-dharma. For this
reason, the Tathagata always preaches thus: ‘O you
Bhikshus, know that my teaching is to be likened unto a raft.
Even a dharma is cast aside, much more a no-dharma/

7. “Subhuti, what do you think? Has the Tathagata
attained the supreme enlightenment? Has he something
about which he would preach?”

Subhuti said: “World-honoured One, as I understand
the teaching of the Buddha, there is no fixed doctrine about
which the Tathagata would preach. Why? Because the
doctrine he preaches is not to be adhered to, nor is it to be
preached about; it is neither a dharma nor a no-dharma.
How is it so? Because all wise men belong to the category
known as non-doing ( asamskara ), and yet they are distinct
from one another.

8. “Subhuti, what do you think? If a man should fill
the three thousand chiliocosms with the seven precious
treasures and give them all away for charity, would not the
merit he thus obtains be great?”

Subhuti said: “Very great, indeed, World-honoured
One.”

“Why? Because their merit is characterized with the
quality of not being a merit. Therefore, the Tathagata speaks
of the merit as being great. If again there is a man who,
holding even the four lines in this sutra, preaches about it to
others, his merit will be superior to the one just mentioned.
Because, Sublftiti, all the Buddhas and their supreme


42


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


enlightenment issue from this sutra. Subhuti, what is known
as the teaching of the Buddha is not the teaching of the
Buddha.


9. “Subhuti, what do you think? Does a Srotapanna
think in this wise: ‘I have obtained the fruit of Srotapatti’?”

r Subhuti said: “No, World-honoured One, he does not.
Why? Because while Srotapanna means ‘entering the
stream there is no entering here. He is called a Srotapanna
who does not enter [a world of] form, sound, odour, taste,
touch, and quality.

Subhuti, what do you think? Does a Sakridagamin
think in this wise, ‘I have obtained the fruit of a Sakrida-
gamin’?”

Subhuti said: “No, World-honoured One, he does not.
Why? Because while Sakridagamin means ‘going-and-
coming for once’, there is really no going-and-coming here,
and he is then called a Sakridagamin.”

“Subhuti, what do you think? Does an Anagamin
think in this wise: ‘I have obtained the fruit of an
Anagamin’?”

x*n. S o bhuti Said: £ ‘. No > World-honoured One, he does not.
Why? Because while Anagamin means ‘not-coming’ there
is really no not-coming and therefore he is called an
Anagamin.”


“Subhuti, what do you think? Docs an Arhat think in
this wise: ‘I have obtained Arhatship’?”

sa ’ d * ^°> World-honoured One, he does not.
K because there is no dharma to be called Arhat. If,
World-honoured One, an Arhat thinks in this wise: ‘I have
obtained Arhatship,’ this means that he is attached to an
C u °’t P erson > a Being, or a soul. Although the Buddha says
that I am the foremost of those who have attained Arana-
samadhi, that I am the foremost of those Arhats who are
liberated from evil desires, World-honoured One, I cherish
no such thought that I have attained Arhatship. World-
honoured One, [if I did,] you would not tell me: ‘O Subhuti,


l .Th a t Is, Samadhi of non-resistance. Arana also
Yogin retires to practise his meditation.


means a forest where the


THE SUTRAS


43


you are one who enjoys the life of non-resistance. 5 Just be¬
cause Subhuti is not at all attached to this life, he is said to
be the one who enjoys the life of non-resistance. 55

io. The Buddha said to Subhuti: “What do you think?
When the Tathagata was anciently with Dipankara Buddha
did he have an attainment in the Dharma? 55

“No, World-honoured One, he did not. The Tathagata
while with Dipankara Buddha had no attainment whatever
in the Dharma. 55

“Subhuti, what do you think? Does a Bodhisattva set
any Buddha-land in array? 55

“No, World-honoured One, he does not. 55

“Why? Because to set a Buddha-land in array is not to
set it in array, and therefore it is known as setting it in array.
Therefore, Subhuti, all the Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas should
thus rouse a pure thought. They should not cherish any
thought dwelling on form; they should not cherish any
thought dwelling on sound, odour, taste, touch, and quality;
they should cherish thoughts dwelling on nothing whatever.
Subhuti, it is like unto a human body equal in size to Mount
Sumeru; what do you think? Is not this body large? 55

Subhuti said: “Very large indeed, World-honoured
One. Why? Because the Buddha teaches that that which is
no-body is known as a large body. 55

n. “Subhuti, regarding the sands of the Ganga,
suppose there are as many Ganga rivers as those sands,
what do you think? Are not the sands of all those Ganga
rivers many? 55

Subhuti said: “Very many, indeed, World-honoured
One. 55

“Considering such Gangas alone, they must be said to
be numberless; how much more the sands of all those Ganga
rivers! Subhuti, I will truly ask you now. If there is a good
man or a good woman who, filling all the worlds in the three
thousand chiliocosms—all the worlds as many as the sands
of these Ganga rivers—with the seven precious treasures,
uses them all for charity, would not this merit be very
large? 55


44


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


Subhuti said: “Very large indeed, World-honoured
One.”

Buddha said to Subhuti: “If a good man or a good
woman holding even four lines from this sutra preach it
to others, this merit is much larger than the preceding
one.


12. “Again, Subhuti, wherever this sutra or even four
lines of it are preached, this place will be respected by all
beings including Devas, Asuras, etc., as if it were the
Buddha’s own shrine or chaitya; how much more a person
who can hold and recite this sutra! Subhuri, you should
know that such a person achieves the highest, foremost, and
most wonderful deed. Wherever this sutra is kept, the place
is to be regarded as if the Buddha or a venerable disciple of
his were piesent."

13. At that time, Subhuti said to the Buddha : “World-
honoured One, what will this sutra be called? How should
we hold it?"


The Buddha said to Subhuti: “This sutra will be called
the Vajra-prajna-paramita, and by this title you will hold it.
The reason is, Subhuti, that, according to the teaching of
the Buddha, Prajnaparamita is not Prajnaparamita and
therefore it is called Prajnaparamita. Subhuti, what do you
think? Is there anything about which the Tathagata
preaches?"

Subhuti said to the Buddha: “World-honoured One
there is nothing about which the Tathagata preaches.”

“Subhuti, what do you think? Are there many particles
of dust in the three thousand chiliocosms?”

Subhuti said: “Indeed, there are many. World-honoured
One.”


Subhuti, the Tathagata teaches that all these many
particles of dust are no-particles of dust and therefore that
they are called particles of dust; he teaches that the world is
no-world and therefore that the world is called the world
Subhuti, what do you think? Is the Tathagata to be
recognized by the thirty-two marks [of a great man]?”

No, World-honoured One, he is not.” •


THE SUTRAS


45


"The Tathagata is not to be recognised by the thirty-
two marts* because what are said to be ihc thirty-two marts
are told by the Tathagata to be no-marks and therefore to
be the thirty-two marks. Subhuti, if there be a good man
or a good woman who gives away his or her lives as many
aa the sands of the Ganga* his or her merit thus gained does
not exceed that of one who* holding even onegatha of four
lilies from lids syitra, preaches them for others.”

14, At that time Subhuti, listening to this suEra* had
a deep understanding of its signification* and, Idled with
tears of gratitude, said this to the: Buddha: "Wonderful,
indeed* World-honoured One, liiat the Buddha teaches us
this sutra full of deep sense. Such a sutra has never been
heard by me even with an eye of wisdom acquired in my

I ^ast lives. World-honoured One* if there be a man who
isteniug lo this sutra acquires a pure believing heart he
will then have a true idea of things This one is to be known
as having achieved a most wonderful virtue. World-
honoured One* what is known as a true idea is no-idea, and
for this reason it is called a true idea.

41 World-honoured One, it is not difficult for rm* to
believe* to Linders I and, and to hold this sutra to which I
have now listened; but in the ages to come* in die next five
hundred years, if there are beings who listening to this suira
are able to believe, to understand, and to hold it* they will
indeed be most wonderful beings. Why? Because they will
have no idea of an ego* of a person, of a being, or of a 3011b
For what reason? The idea oi an ego is no-idca [of ego], the
idea of a person* a being, or a soul is no-i dca [of a person, a
being, or a *oul|. For what reason? They are Buddhas who
are free from all kinds oT ideas."

The Buddha said to Subhuti, "It is just as you say. If
there be a man who* listening to this sutra* is neither
frightened nor alarmed nor disturbed* you should know
him as a wonderful person, 'Why? Subhuti, it Is taught by
the Tathagata that the first Faiamita is no-first-Pa rami ca
and therefore it is called the first Paramka. Subhuti* the
F&ramiu* of lianulity (patience) is said by the Tathagata


+e


manual of ZEN BUDDHISM


Lo lie no-Pa rantita of humility, and therefore it is the
Paiamiui of humility. Why? Subhuti, anciently, when my
body was cut to pieces by the King 0 f Kaluiga, I had
neither the idea of an ego, nor the idea of a person, nor Lhe
idea of a being, nor the idea of a ord. Why? When at that
time my body was dismembered, limb after limb, joint after
joint, if I had the idea either of an ego, or of a person, or of
a being, or a soul, the feeling of anger and ill-will would have
been awakened in me, Subhuti, I remember, in my past
five hundred births, 1 was a rishi called Kshanti, and during
those times I had neither tin: idea of an ego, nor that of a
person, nor that of a being, nor that of a soul.

“Therefore, Subhuti, you should, detaching yourself
from all- ideas. rou?t the desire ibr the supreme'enlighten¬
ment. You should cherish Thoughts without dwelling on
form, you should cherish thoughts without dwelling on
sound, odour, taste* touch, or quality. Whatever thoughts
you may have, they arc not to dwell on anything. If a
dm Eight dwells on anything, this is said to be no-dwelling.
Therefore, die Buddha teaches that a Bodhisattva is not to
practise charity by dwelling on form. Subhuti, the reason he
practises charity is to benefit, all beings.

"The Tatliagatn teaches that all ideas are un-ideas and
:i L’ :nn ih ' ,E al1 are no-brigs. Subhuti, the Tathagata

is the one v. ho speaks what is true, the one who speaks
what j$ real, the one whose words arc as they are, the cm-
who docs not speak falsehood, the one who does not sneak
equivocally. ^

“Subhuti, in the Dharma attained by the Tailraexta
there is neither truth nor falsehood. Subhuti, if a Bodhisattva
riiould practise chanty, cherishing a thought which dwd Is on
lhe Dharma, he is like unto a person who enters the daikn^s
he see, nothing. If he should practise chariLv without
cherishing a thought that dwells on the Dharma,' lie is like
umo a person with eyes, he sees all kinds of forms illumined
by the sunlight.

“Subhuti, if there are good men and good women in
the tune to come who hold and recite thLi'suira, they will


THE SUTRAS


47


b £ seen and recognized by the Tathagata with his Buddha*
knowledge, and they will all mature immeasurable and
innumerable merit-

15. “Subhuti, If Lhere is a good man or a good woman
who would in the first part of she day sacrifice as many
bodies of his or hers as the sands of the G&nga, and again
in the middle part of the day sacrifice as many bodies at his
or hers as the sands of the Ganga* and again in die latter
part of the day sacrifice as many bodies of his or hers os the
s&wh of the Ganga, and keep up these sacrifices through
hundred-diousands of myriads of kalis of kalpaa; and if
there were another who listening to this sutra would accept
it with a believing heart* the merit the latter would acquire
would far exceed that of the former. How much more Lhc
merit of one who would copy, hold* learn, and recite and
expound it for others!

^Subhuti, to sum up,, there is in this sutra a mass of
merit, immeasurable! innumerable, and incomprehensible.
The Tathagata has preached this Tor those who were
awakened in the Mahayana (great vehicle), he ha? preached
itfor those who were awakened in the Srcshthayana ‘highest
vehicle). If there were beings who would hold and learn and
expound it for others, they would all be known to the
TuthagaUi and recognized by him, and acquire merit
which is unmeasured, immeasurable, hummer able, and
incomprehensible. Such beings are known to lie carrying
the: supreme enlightenment attained by the fathagata.
Why? Subhuti, those who dohrt: inferior doctrines are
attached to the idea oT an 1:1*0, a perron, a being, and a souk
They arc unable to hear, hold, learn, recite, and for ochci-s
expound this sutra, Subhuth wherever this sutra is preserved,
there all beings* including Devas and Asuras, will come
and worship it. This place will have to be known as a
c baity a T the object of worship and obeisance where the
devotees gather around, scatter flowers, and burn incense*

iti. “Again* Subhuti, there are some good men and
good women who will be despised for their holding and
reciting this sulfa. This is due to their previous evil karma


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


4*

for Lilt: reason of which they were to fall inlO the evil paths
of existence; but because of their being despised in the
present life* whatever evil karma they produced in their
previous Jives will be thereby destroyed, and they will be
able to attain the supreme enlightenment,

“Subhuti, as I remember, in my past lives innumerable
agatttfchycya kalpas ago I was with Dipankara Buddha, and
at that rime I saw Buddhas as many as eighty-four hundred-
thousands of myriads of nayutas and made offerings to them
and respectfully served them all, and not one of them was
passed by me.

l 'If again in the last [five hundred] years, there have
been people who hold and recite anti learn ilus sutra, die
merit they thus attain [would be beyond calculation], for
when this is compared with the merit I have attained by
serving all the Buddhas, the latter will not exceed one
hundredth part of die former, no, not one hundred thousand
ten millionth part. No, it is indeed beyond calculation,
beyond analogy.

"Subhuti, if there have been good men and good women
in the last five hundred years who hold, recittj and learn
tliis sutra, the merit they a L lain thereby T cannot begin to
enumerate in detail. If I did, those who listen to it would lone
thrir minds, cherish grave doubts, and not believe at all
how beyond comprehension is the significance of this sutra
and how also beyond comprehension the rewards are*” 1

18. The Buddha said to Subhuli: “Of all beings in
those innumerable lands, the Tathagaia knows well all their
menial traits. Why? Became the Tathagitta teaches that all
those mental traits are no-traits and therefore they are

1 Tills fi 11 L-.!irt (jut firit jmrt of the DluttumJ Sutra aj il u usually divided
here and pua on w the second pin. The teal un in n aimiiir twain
though Its ramintTib scutum. Indeed, there are »mt*choiai* who think ihot
die xcond pin L* really in-petitlon uf tin-: bni, nr dial they are merely different
rvpirs uf «n 11- and the same onjpmi text, and that Whateiw Vftrlnliutn there
ire in sheffi 1 WO copies ire the rault of (hr mixed into the tact Liw-IF.

While I tiumot willy mbdbc to Uiti virw, tht £an » tlmt psi-sagei CDD-
liining xLmllir ihaughti recur thr^uut the whole Prajnapirinm.L lliera-
[ure. In view of t§U* I quolc- in ihe fallowing ranlj- inch ideal u hive not
fully been cjcprcAvrrl in the ftfit pari. .»


THR SUTRAS &

inouu to be mental trail*. Subhuti, thoughts 1 nf the past
are beyond grasp, thoughts of iUr present are beyond grasp,
and thoughts of Lhr future arc beyond grasp,”

4 a 3 - Again, Subhuti, this Dharmu is even and has
neither elevation nor depression | and it is called supreme
enlightenment. Because a man practises everything that
is good, without cherishing the thought of an ego, a person,
a being, and a soul, lie attains the supreme enlightenment.
Subhuti, what is called good is no-good, and therefore it
is known as good.”

aG. Subhuti, what do you think? Can a man see the
TathagiiLii by the thirty-two marks [ofa great man]?”

Subhuti said: “So it i$, so it is. The Tathagata is seen
by his thirty-two marks.”

7 lie Buddha said to Subhuti, “If the Tathagata is to be
seen by his thirty-two marks, ran the CakravarUn be a
Tathagata?”

Subhuti said to the Buddha: “World-honoured One,
as I understand the teaching of the Buddha, the Tathagata
is not to be seen by the thirty-two marks.”

Then the Vy t>H d-honoured One uttered this gatha;

“If any one by form sees me.

By voice seeks me,

Tills one walks the false path.

And cannot see the Tathagata.”

29. “Subhuti, if a man should declare that the Tatha-
gata is the one who comes, or goes, or sits, or lies, he does
no) understand the meaning of my teaching. Why? The
Tathagata does not came from anywhere, and does not
depart to anywhere; therefore he is called the Tathagata.


1 Lttlj stands for bath minrl and thought. The h|r:i expressed htft u dial
■here u no pnrtimkrly dctcimiiirtl entity in ui which 1 = n,v t ho!c>eicjUly
designated as tumd or thought. The moment we think we have token hold of
t]nm ¥ ht . M IS no more with US. So will, the idea of il Saul . m cvo. or a bdmr.
or a person, there is no fcleh particular entity oWet lively 10 be M d iilLugii ithed,
and which remains u nieb Eternally separated from the subject who JO thinks.
Thu utiprispa t jiJj c y of a mind or thought, which it lantimomit in cininir
Ulat there is no 1 out-luhi lance Hi a mlkary unrelated “thing" in the rtectEM
of onnSOiyrmt-ss, is one of the balk doctrines of Buddhiibi. Mulniyririn and
Hmaymna.


5 *>


manual or US BUDDHISM

.,rj “How dues a man impound i< lor others? \Vlicn
one is' tux attached to form, it is of Suchness remammg
unmoved. Why? 4

“All composite things (jffmrknto) , .

Are like a dream, a phantasm, a bubble, and a shadow,
Ajc like a dew-drop and a flash ol lightning.

They are thus to be regarded/'


tv


The Lankavatara Sutra

This sutra is said to have been given by Bodhidl.arpia
to his chief disciple Hui-k'e as eomammg the essential
teaching of Zen. Since then it has been studied chiefly by
Zen philosophy. But being full of difficult technical terms
ill combination with a rugged style of writing, the text has
not been so popular for study as other Mahayana sutraa, for
instance, the rwtdarika, the Vimnkhrlu or the iqjraiefsedika.

Tlic chief interlocutor is a Bodhisattva called Mahamatt,
and varied subjectsofjpbiloaophical speculation are discussed
against ;i background [if deep religious concern. The tuple
most interesting For the reader of this book is that ol xvapra-
toatmtgati, i.e. self-realization of the highest truth.

Some of the terms may be explained here: ' Birth and
death” [samara in Sanskrit) always stands contrasted to
“Nirvana”. Nirvana is the highest truth and the norm of
existence while birth and death is a world of particulars
governed by karma and causation. As long as we arc subject
to karma we go from one birth to another, and suffer all die
ills necessarily attached to this kind of life, though it is a form
of immortality. What Buddhists want isnoL iliis.

“Mind only” [ciUamatra) is an uncouth term. It means
absolute mind, to be distinguished from an empirical mind
which is the subject of psychological study. When it begins
■with a capital letter, it is the ultimate reality on which


THK SUTRAS


51


the entire world of individual objects depends for its value.
To realize this truth is tlic aim of the Buddhist life.

By "what is seen of the Mind-only" is meant shis visible
world inducting iliut which is generally known as mind. Our
ordinary' experience takes this world Ibr something that has
it* "seif-nature", i.e. existing by Itself. But a higher intuition
tells us that this is not so, that it is an illusion, and that what
really exists is A find, which being absolute knows no second.
All that we see and hear and drink of as objects of the
vijnanus arc what rise and disappear in and of the Mind-
on]


This absolute Mind is also cal I id in the Lankavafara the
Dharma of Solitude (vitnkla~d/iamui), because it stands by
itself-11 also signifies the Dharma's being absolutely quiescent.

There is no "discrimination” in Dharnia ol Solitude,
which means that disc rimin a tio n belongs to this 'ide of
exiatcricc where multiplicities obtain and causation rules.
Indeed, without this discrimination no world is possible.

Discrimination is bom of “habit-energy" or “memory”,
which lies latently preserved in the “alayavijnana” or all-
conserving consciousness. This consciousness alone has no
power to act by itself. It is altogether passive, and remains
inactive until a particularizing agency touches it. The
appearance of this agency is a great mystery which is not
to be solved by the intellect; it is something to be accepted
simply as such. It is awakened "all of a sudden”, according
to Asvaghuctha.

To understand what this suddenness means is the
Function of "noble wisdom” (spajnatui). But as a matter of
experience, the sudden awakening of discrimination has no
meaning behind it. The (act is simply that it is awakened,
and no more; it is not an expression pointing to something
rise.

When the Afoyavijnana or the all-conserving conscious¬
ness is considered a store-house nr iletter, a creative matrix
from which all the Tathagatas issue, it is called "Taihagata-
garbha”. The Garbha is the womb.

Ordinarily, nil our cognitive apparatus is made to


MANUAL OF 2EEN EUBDHTS&t

work outwardly in a world of relativity* and for this reason
we become deeply involved in it that we fail to res
the freedom wt all intrinsically possess, and as a result we aie
annoyed on all sides. To turn away from all this, what may
psychologically be called a “revulsion" or “revolution 1 must
take place in our inmust consciousness. This is not however
a mere empirical psychological Cart to be explained in terms
of consciousness. It takes place In the deepest recesses of our
beins- Tire original Sanskrit is paranrittasrayn.

The following extracts are from my English translation
(1932) of the original Sanskrit text edited by Bimyu Nanjo,

1923 -


xvm

further, Mahamati, those who, afraid »f sufferings
arising Ifom the discrimination of birth and death, seek tor
Nirt.ma, dn not know that birth and death and Nirvana
are not to be separated the one from the other; and, seeing
that all thin gs subject to discrimination have no reality,
imagine that Nirvana consists in the further annihilation
of the senses mid their fields- They are not aware, Mahamati,
of the fact that Nirvana is the Alayavijnana when: a revulsion
takes place by self-realization. Therefore, Maliamati, those
who are stupid talk of the trinity of vehicles and not of the
state of Mind-only whom there are no shadows. Therefore,
Maliamati, those who do not understand the teachings of the
Tathagata-s of the past, present, and future, concerning the
external world, which is of Mind itself, cling to the notion
that there is a world outside what is seen of the Mind and,
Mahamati, go on rolling themselves along the wheel of
birth and death.


THE SUTRAS


XXX

Further, Mahaimti* according to the teaching of the
Tathagatas of the past, present, and future, a SI things are
unborn. Why? Because they have no reality, being mani-
rbsuttkms of Mind itself; and, Mahamati r as they arc not
bom of being and non-being, they are unborn. Mahamad*
all things arc like the horns of the hare, horse, donkey r or
carm 1 5 but the ignorant and simple-minded, who are given
up to their false and erroneous imaginations, discriminate
things where they arc not; therefore* ail things are unborn.
That ail thbigs are in their self-nature unborn, Mohair at i,
belongs to the realm of self-realization attained by noble
wisdom, and does not bdong essentially to the realm of
dualistic discrimination cherished by the ignorant and
si mple-mi nded.

The self-nature and the characteristic marks of body,
property, and abode evolve when the Alayavijiuma is con¬
ceived of by the ignorant as grasping and grasped; and then
they fall into a dualistie view of existence where they
recognize its rise* abiding, and disappearance* cherishing
the idea that all things are bom and subject to discrimina¬
tion as tu being and non-being. Therefore, Mahamati, you
should discipline yourself therein [i.e. in self-realization].


xxrv

Further again, Mahamnti* let the ftKllusattva-Maha-
sattva have a thorough undemanding as to the nature ol
the twofold egolessncss* Mahanmti, what is this twofold
egoless™:^? [It h the egolessncss of persons and the egoless-
ucs:s of tilings. What is meant by cgohxsness of persons? Il
means that] in the collection of the Skandhos* Dhatus* and
Ay a tanas there is no ego-subs t once, nor anything belonging
to it; the Vijuana is originated by ignorance, deed* and
desire* and kt€ps up its function by grasping objects by


54 MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM

means of the sense-organs, such as the eye, etc., and by
clinging to them as real; while a world of objects and bodies
is manifested owing to the discrimination that takes place
in the world which is of Mind itself, that is, in the Alaya-
vijnana.

By reason of the habit-energy stored up by false imagina¬
tion since beginningless time, this world (vishaja) is subject
to change and destruction from moment to moment; it
is like a river, a seed, a lamp, wind, a cloud; [while the
Vijnana itself is] like a monkey who is always restless, like
a fly who is ever in search of unclean things and defiled
places, like a fire which is never satisfied. Again, it is like
a water-drawing wheel or a machine, it [i.e. the Vijnana]
goes on rolling the wheel of transmigration, carrying
varieties of bodies and forms, resuscitating the dead like the
demon Vetala, causing the wooden figures to move about as
a magician moves them. Mahamati, a thorough under¬
standing concerning these phenomena is called comprehend¬
ing the egolessness of persons.

Now, Mahamati, what is meant by the egolessness of
things? It is to realize that the Skandhas, Dhatus, and
Ayatanas are characterized with the nature of false dis¬
crimination. Mahamati, since the Skandhas, Dhatus, and
Ayatanas are destitute of an ego-substance, being no more
than an aggregation of the Skandhas, and subject to the
conditions of mutual origination which are causally bound
up with the string of desire and deed; and since thus there
is no creating agent in them, Mahamati, the Skandhas are
even destitute of the marks of individuality and generality;
and the ignorant, owing to their erroneous discrimination,
imagine here the multiplicity of phenomena; the wise,
however, do not. Recognizing, Mahamati, that all things
are devoid of the Citta, Manas, Manovijnana, the five
Dharmas, and the [three] Svabhavas, the Bodhisattva-
Mahasattva will well understand what is meant by the
egolessness of things.

Again, Mahamati, when the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva
has a good understanding as regards the* egolessness of


THE SUTRAS


55


things, before long he will attain the first stage [of the
Bodhisattvahood], when he gets a definite cognition of Uie
imageless. When a definite acquisition is obtained regarding
the aspect of the stages [of Bodhisattvahood], the Bodhisattva
will experience joy, and, gradually and successively going
up the scale, will reach the ninth stage where his insight is
perfected, and [finally the tenth stage known as] Great
Dharma-megha.

Establishing himself here, he will be seated in the great
jewel palace known as C£ Great Lotus Throne which is in
the shape of a lotus and is adorned with various sorts of
jewels and pearls; he will then acquire and complete a world
of Maya-nature; surrounded by Bodhisattvas of the same
character and anointed like the son of the Cakravarti by
the hands of the Buddhas coming from all the Buddha-
lands, he will go beyond the last stage of Bodhisattvahood,
attain the noble truth of self-realization, and become a
Tathagata endowed with the perfect freedom of the Dharma-
kaya, because of his insight into the egolessness of things.
This, Mahamati, is what is meant by the egolessness of all
things, and in this you and other Bodhisartva-Mahasattvas
should well exercise yourselves.


xxvm

At that time, Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva
said this to the Blessed One: Now the Blessed One makes
mention of the Tathagata-garbha in the sutras, and verily
it is described by you as by nature bright and pure, as
primarily unspotted, endowed with the thirty-two marks
of excellence, hidden in the body of every being like a gem of
great value, which is enwrapped in a dirty garment, en¬
veloped in the garment of the Skandhas, Dhatus, and
Ayatanas, and soiled with the dirt of greed, anger, folly,
and false imagination, while it is described by the Blessed
One to be eternal, permanent, auspicious, and unchangeable.
Is not this TatKagata-garbha taught by the Blessed One the


MANUAL OV ZEN PUPBIIISM

same as the ego-substance taught by the philosophers? The
ego as taught in the systems of the philosophers is an eternal
creator, unqualified, omnipresent, anti imperishable.

The Blessed One replied ; No, Mahamati, my Tuihagat*-
garbha is not the same as the ego taught by the philosopher;
for what the Tatliagata^ teach is the Tathagata-garbha in
the sense, Mahamati, that it in emptiness, reality-1 imitj
Nirvana, bring unborn, unqualified, anti devoid of will-
effort; the reason why the Tathagatas, who are Ailiats and
Fully-Enlightened Ones, teach the doctrine pointing to the
I athngata-garbha is to make the ignorant cast aside thrir
fear when they listen to the teaching of egoJessness and to
have them realize the state of non-discrimination and
imagdessness*

1 also wish, Mahamati, that the lk^Ihisattva-Mahasattvaa
of the present and future would not attach themselves to the
idea of an ego (in i agin mg it to be a soulj. Mahamati, it is
like a porter who manufactures various vessels out of a mass
of clay of one sort by his own manual skill and labour
combined with a rod, water, and lliread, Mahamati, that
liic Tathagatai preach the cgolessncss of things which
removes all the traces of discrimination by various skilful
means issuing Prom their transcendental wisdom; that is,
sometimes by the doctrine of the Tathagata-garbha, some¬
times by that of egok&mcss, and like a potter, by means
of various terms, expressions, and synonyms. For this reason,
Mahamati, the philosophers' doctrine of an ego-substance
is not the same as the tracking of the Tathagata-gui bha.

Thus, Mahamati, the doctrine of the Tathagata-garbha
is disclosed in order to awaken the philosophers from their
clinging to the idea of the ego, so that those minds that have
fallen into the views imagining the non-existent ego as real,
and also intu the notion that the triple emancipation is final*
may rapidly be awakened to the state of supreme enlighten-
mem. Accordingly, Mahamati* the Tathagatas who are
Arhats and Fully-Enlightened Ones disclose the doc nine
of the Tathagata-gnrbha, which is thus not to be known as
identical with the philosopher's notion of an ego-substance.


THE SUTRAS


57


Therefore* Maham&ti, in order to abandon the miscon¬
ception cherished by Lhc philosophers, you musr strive after
the teaching of egolessness and me Tathagala-garbha.


xxxv


At lIihl lime, Muhmnati the BodMsat^-Mahasattva
again said this to the Blessed One:

Pray tell me, Blessed Otic, about die attainment of
self-realization by noble wisdom, which does not belong to
the path and the usage of the philosophers;

Which is devoid of fall such predicates as] being and
non-being, oneness and otherness, bothness and jiot-
bothness, existence: and non-existence, eternity and non-
eternity;

Which has nothing to do with the false imagination,
nor with individuality and generality; w hich manifests itself
as the truth of highest reality;

Which, going up continuously by degrees ihe stages of
purification, enters upon the stage of Tathagatahood;

Which, because of die original vows unattended by any
striving, mil perform its works in infinite worlds like a gem
reflecting a variety of colours;

And which is manifested [when OttC perceives how] signs
of individuation rise in all things as one realises the course
and realm of what is seen of Mind itself, and thereby I and
other Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas are enabled to survey things
from the point of view which is not hampered by mark* of
individuality and generality nor by anything of the false
imagination, and may quickly attain supreme enlightenment
and enable ail beings to achieve the perfection of all their


virtues.


Replied the Blessed One: Well done, well done, Maha-
mail! and again, well done, indeed * Maharaati j Because of
our compassion for the world, for the benefit of many people,
sr ihe happiness of many people, for the welfare* benefit,


58 MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM

happiness of many people, both of celestial beings and
humankind, Mahamati, you present yourself before me and
make this request. Therefore, Mahamati, listen well and
truly, and reflect, for I will tell you.

Assuredly, said Mahamati the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva,
and gave ear to the Blessed One.

The Blessed One said this to him: Mahamati, since the
ignorant and the simple-minded, not knowing that the world
is what is seen of Mind itself, cling to the multitudinousness
of external objects, cling to the notions of being and non-
being, oneness and otherness, bothness and not-bothness,
existence and non-existence, eternity and non-eternity, as
having the character of self-substance (. svabhava ), which idea
rises from discrimination based on habit-energy, they are
addicted to false imaginings.

Mahamati, it is like a mirage in which the springs are
seen as if they were real. They are imagined so by the
animals who, thirsty from the heat of the season, would run
after them. Not knowing that the springs are their own
mental illusions, the animals do not realize that there are
no such springs. In the same way, Mahamati, the ignorant
and simple-minded with their minds impressed by various
erroneous speculations and discriminations since beginning¬
less time; with their minds burning with the fire of greed,
anger, and folly; delighted in a world of multitudinous
forms; with their thoughts saturated with the ideas of birth,
destruction, and subsistence; not understanding well what
is meant by existent and non-existent, by inner and outer,
these ignorant and simple-minded fall into the way of grasping
at oneness and otherness, being and non-being [as realities].

Mahamati, it is like the city of the Gandharvas which
the unwitted take for a real city, though it is not so in fact.
This city appears in essence owing to their attachment to the
memory of a city preserved in seed from beginningless time.
This city is thus neither existent nor non-existent. In the
same way, Mahamati, clinging to the memory ( vasana ) of
erroneous speculations and doctrines since beginningless
time, they hold fast to ideas such as oneness and otherness.


THE SUTRAS


59


being and non-being, and their thoughts are not at all clear
about what is seen of Mind-only.

Mahamati, it is like a man, who, dreaming in his sleep
of a country variously filled with women, men, elephants,
horses, cars, pedestrians, villages, towns, hamlets, cows,
buffalos, mansions, woods, mountains, rivers, and lakes,
enters into its inner appartments and is awakened. While
awakened thus, he recollects the city and its inner apart¬
ments. What do you think, Mahamati? Is this person to be
regarded as wise, who is recollecting the various unrealities
he has seen in his dream?

Said Mahamati: Indeed, he is not, Blessed One.

The Blessed One continued: In the same way the
ignorant and simple-minded who are bitten by erroneous
views and inclined towards the philosophers, do not recog¬
nize that things seen of the Mind itself are like a dream, and
are held fast by the notions of oneness and otherness, of being
and non-being.

Mahamati, it is like the painter’s canvas on which there
is neither depression nor elevation as imagined by the
ignorant. In the same way, Mahamati, there may be in the
future some people brought up in the habit-energy, men¬
tality, and imagination based on the philosophers’ erroneous
views; clinging to the ideas of oneness and otherness, or
bothness and not-bothness, they may bring themselves and
others to ruin; they may declare those people nihilists who
hold the doctrine of no-birth apart from the category of
being and non-being. They [argue against] cause and effect,
they are followers of the wicked views whereby they uproot
meritorious causes of unstained purity. They are to be
kept away by those whose desires are for things excellent.
They are those whose thoughts are entangled in the error
of self, other, and both, entangled in the error of imagining
being and non-being, assertion and refutation; and hell will
be their final resort.

Mahamati, it is like the dim-eyed ones who, seeing a hair¬
net, would exclaim to one another, saying: “It is wonderful!
it is wonderfulf Look, O honourable sirs!” And the said


6o


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


hair-net has never been brought into existence. It is in fact
neither an entity nor a non-entity, because it is seen and not
seen. In the same manner, Mahamati, those whose minds
are addicted to discrimination of the erroneous views as
cherished by the philosophers, and who are also given up
to the realistic ideas of being and non-being, oneness and
otherness, bothness and not-bothness, will contradict the
good Dharma, ending in the destruction of themselves and
others.

Mahamati, it is like a firebrand-wheel which is no real
wheel but which is imagined to be of such character by the
ignorant, but not by the wise. In the same manner, Maha¬
mati, those whose minds have fallen into the erroneous views
of the philosophers will falsely imagine in the rise of all beings
[the reality of] oneness and otherness, bothness and not-
bothness.

Mahamati, it is like those water-bubbles in a rainfall
which have the appearance of crystal gems, and the ignorant
taking them for real crystal gems run after them. Mahamati,
they are no more than water-bubbles, they are not gems, nor
are they not-gems, because of their being so comprehended
[by one party] and being not so comprehended [by another].
In the same manner, Mahamati, those whose minds are
impressed by the habit-energy of the philosophical views and
discriminations will regard things bom as non-existent and
those destroyed by causation as existent.


XXXVII

Further, Mahamati, there are four kinds of Dhyanas.
What are the four? They are: (i) The Dhyana practised by
the ignorant, (2) the Dhyana devoted to the examination of
meaning, (3) the Dhyana with Suchness for its object, and
(4) the Dhyana of the Tathagatas.

What is meant by the Dhyana practised by the ignorant?
It is the one resorted to by the Yogins exercising themselves


THE SUTRAS


61


in the discipline of the Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas, who
perceiving that there is no ego-substance, that things are
characterized with individuality and generality, that the
body is a shadow and a skeleton which is transient, full of
suffering, and is impure, persistently cling to these notions
which are regarded as just so and not otherwise, and who
starting from them successively advance until they reach the
cessation where there are no thoughts. This is called the
Dhyana practised by the ignorant.

Mahamati, what then is the Dhyana devoted to the
examination of meaning? It is the one [practised by those
who,] having gone beyond the egolessness of things, indi¬
viduality and generality, the untenability of such ideas as
self, other, and both, which are held by the philosophers,
proceed to examine and follow up the meaning of the
[various] aspects of the egolessness of things and the stages of
Bodhisattvahood. This is the Dhyana devoted to the exami¬
nation of meaning.

What, Mahamati, is the Dhyana with Tathata for its
object? When [the Yogin recogjiizes that] the discrimination
of the two forms of egolessness is mere imagination, and that
where he establishes himself in the reality of suchness
(yathabhuta) there is no rising of discrimination, I call it the
Dhyana with Tathata for its object.

What, Mahamati, is the Dhyana of the Tathagata?
When [the Yogin], entering upon the stage of Tathagata-
hood and abiding in the triple bliss which characterizes
self-realization attained by noble wisdom, devotes himseL
for the sake of all beings to the [accomplishment of] incom¬
prehensible works, I call it the Dhyana of the Tathagatas.

Therefore, it is said: .

There are the Dhyana for the examination of meaning,
the Dhyana practised by the ignorant, the Dhyana with
Tathata for its object, and the pure Dhyana of the
Tathagata.

The Yogin, while in the exercise, sees the lorm ot the
sun or the moon, or something looking like a lotus, or the
underworld, or# various forms like sky, fire, etc.


6a


manual op zf,n buddhism


All these appearances lead him to the way of the philo¬
sophers ; they throw him down into the stale of Sravakahood,
into the realm of the Pralyckabuddh&s.

When all these arc tossed aside and diere is a state of
imagelcssnesSj then a condition in conformity with Tatliata
presents itself; and the Buddhas will come together from all
their countries and with their shining hands will stroke the
heat! of this benefactor.


utvm

At the time, M aha mat i the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva
asked the Blessed One to explain concerning the deep¬
ened attachment io the existence of all tilings and ihc way
of emancipation, saying: Pray tell me, Blessed One, pray
tell me Tathagata, Arhat, fully-Enlightened One, fen¬
ce mi ng the characteristics of our deep attachment to
existence and of'out detachment from it.

When I and other Bodhisutlva-Mahasativas understand
well the distinction la:tween attachment and detachment,
u( ' 'haf] know what is the skilful means concerning them, and
sh?.!J no more become attached to words according to which
we grasp meaning.

When we understand well w hat is meant bv attachment
to Lite existence of all things and the detachment from them
we shall destroy our discrimination of words anti letters;
and by means of our wisdom (buddhi), enter into all the
Tiudd ha-lands and assemblies; be well stamped with the
stamp of the powers, the self-control, the psychic faculties,
and ! he Dharanis; and, well furnished with the wisdom
{buddhi) m the ten inexhaustible vows, and shining with
varieties of ruys pertaining to the Transformation Bodv
behave ourselves with effortlessness like the moon, the sun
the jewel, and the elements; and hold U ch view-at every
stage as are Irre Irom all the signs or self-discrimination':
and, smug that nil things are like a dream, like Maya, etc..


THE SUTRAS


?3


fnha.ll be able to] enter the stage and abode of Buddha hoot!,
and deliver discourse:-! on llie Dhartna in the World til all
b eing * and in accordance with their needs, and free them
from the dnalisiic notion of being and non-being in the
contemplation of ail things which arc like a dram and
Maya, and free them aha from the false discrimination of
birth and destruction; and, finally, [shall be able to]
establish ourselves w here there is a revulsion at the deepest
recesses [of our consciousness], which is more than words

[can express], .

Saud the Blessed One: Well said, well said, Mahamati!
Listen well to me then, Mahamati, and reflect well within
yourself; I will tell you.

Mahamati the BodJusattv^»Mahasattva said' Certainly,

I will, Blessed One; and gave car to the Blessed One,

The Blessed One said to him thus: Mahamau, im¬
measurable is our deep-seated attachment to the existence
of all things the significance of which we try' to understand
with words. For instance, there are the deep-seated attach¬
ments to signs of individuality, to causation, to the notion of
being and non-being, to the discrimination of birth and
Qo-birtlt, to the discrimination of cessation and no-cessation,
to the discrimination i >1 vehicle and no-vehicle, oi Samshriia
and Asamskrita, of the characteristics of the stages and no-
stages. There is the attachment to discrimination itself, aud
to that arising from enlightenment the attaclmtent to the
discrimination of being and non-being on which the philo¬
sophers an: so dependent, ami the aUJchnu ut to the tuple
vehicle and the one vehicle, which they disci im mate.

These and others, Mahamati, arc the deep-seated
attachments to their discriminations cherished by the
ignorant and simple-minded. Tenaciously attacking them¬
selves to these, the ignorant and simple-minded go on ever
discriminating like the silkworms, which, with their own
thread of discrimination anti attachment, enwrap nut only
themselves but others and are charmed with the thread;
and thus they are ever tenaciously attached to the Tuitions
of existence and non-existence. [But really] Mahamau,


I


S+ MANUAL OF Z K N BUDDHISM

there sire no signs hurt; of deep-seated attachment or detach¬
ment. All things are to be seen as abiding in Solitude where
there is no evolving of discrimination. Mahanmti, the
Bodhisattva-Mahasattva should have his abode where he
can sue all things from the viewpoint of Solitude.

Further, Mahamaii, when the existence and non¬
existence of the external world are understood to be due to
the seeing of the Mind itself in these signs, [the Bodhisattva]
can enter upon the staLe raf imagdttuncas where Mind-only
is, and [there] see into the Solitude which underlies the
discrimination of nil things as being and non-being* and die
deep-seated attachment resulting therefrom. Tins being so*
there are in all things no signs of a deep-rooted attachment
or of detachment. Here Mahamati, is nobody in bondage*
nobody in eruancipndon* uxcepL those who fay reason of
their perverted wisdom recognize bondage and emancipation.
Why? Because in all things neither being nor non-being h
Lcj he taken hold of.

Further* Mahamati* there are three attachments deep-
seated in the minds of the ignorant and simple-minded.
They arc greed, anger, ant! folly; and thus Lliere is desire
which is procreative and is accompanied by joy and greed;
closely attached to this there hikes place a succession of
bird Li iti the [five] paths. Thus there arc the five paths of
existence for all beings who are found closely attached
[to greed * anger* and fully]* When one is cut off from Uiis
attachment* no signs will be seen indicative of attachment
or of non-attachment,


v

The Ryoconkyo, or Surakuama Sutra 1

There are in the Chinese Trips taka two Sutras bearing
die title* "Sumngarna”, but they are entirely different
in contents. The first one was translated into Chinese by

1 "Sutra of Heroic Utcd rp _


THE SUTRAS


65

Kumarajiva between 402-412 and consists of two fascicles.
The second one in ten fascicles was translated by Paramiti
in 705, and this is the one used by the Zen and also by the
Shingon. The reason why it is used by the Shingon is because
it contains the description of a mandala and a mantram
called “Sitatarapatala” (white umbrella), the recitation of
which, while practising the Samadhi, is supposed to help
the Yogin, as the Buddhas and gods will guard him from the
intrusion of the evil spirits. But the general trend of thought
as followed in this sutra is Zen rather than Shingon. It was
quite natural that all the commentaries of it belong to the
Zen school. The terms used here are somewhat unusual—
especially those describing the Mind. The sutra is perhaps
one of the later Mahayana works developed in India. It
treats of highly abstruse subjects. Below is a synopsis of it.

1. The sutra opens with Ananda’s adventure with an
enchantress called Matanga who, by her magic charm,
entices him to her abode. The Buddha, seeing this with his
supernatural sight, sends Manjusri to save him and bring
him back to the Buddha. Ananda is thoroughly penitent and
wishes to be further instructed in the art of controlling the
mind. The Buddha tells him that all spiritual discipline
must grow out of a sincere heart and that much learning
has no practical value in life, especially when one’s religious
experience is concerned. Ananda had enough learning, but
no Samadhi to stand against the influence of a sorceress.

2. The reason why we go through the eternal cycle
of birth and death and suffer ills incident to it is our ignorance
as to the source of birth and death, that is, because Mind-
essence is forgotten in the midst of causal nexus which
governs this world of particular objects.

This Mind-essence is variously characterized as something
original, mysterious, mysteriously bright, illumining, true,
perfect, clear as a jewel, etc. It is not to be confused with
our empirical mind, for it is not an object of intellectual
discrimination.

Ananda is asked to locate this Mind-essence. But, as
his mind moves .along the line of our relative experience,

E


MANUAL OK 2 K S BUDDHIHM


6G

he Fa ih to give a satisfactory answer. He pursues objective
events whirli are subject to birth and death; he never
reflects within 1 tin 1 sc If to try to find the Mind bright and
illumining which mates all his experiences possible.

3. Even the Bodhisattva cannot pick up this mysteri¬
ously transparent Essence out of a world of individual things.
Fie cannot demonstrate its reality by means of Ms discerning
intelligence. It k not there- But that the Essence Is then: is
evident from the fact that the eye secs, the ear hears, and the
mind thinks. Only it Is 110L discoverable as an individual
object or idea, objective or subjective; for it has no existence
in the way we talk of a tree or a sun, of a virtue or a thought .
On the other hand, all these objects and thoughts are in
the Mind-essence, true and original and mysteriously bright.
Our body and mind is possible only when thought of in
connection with it.

4. Because >incc the beginciinglcss past we are 1 uxuimg
after objects, not knowing where our Self is, we lose track
of the Original Mind and are tormented all the time by the
threatening objective world, regarding it as good or bad,
true or false, agreeable or disagreeable. We are thus slaves
of ddugs and circumstances. The Buddha advises that our
real position ought to be exactly the other way* Let things
follow us and wait our commands. Let Lhc (nic Self give
directions in all our dealings with the; world. Then we shall
all be Tathagatas. Our body and mind will retain its
original virtue bright and 5 hi rung. While not moving away
from this sent of enlightenment, wc shall make all die
worlds in the ten quarters reveal themselves even at the tip
of a hair*

5. Mimjusri is Manjusri; he k absolute as he is; he
is neither to be asserted nor to be negated. All assertions
and negations start from the truth of this absolute Identity,
and Lhis is no other than the originally dluminating Mind-
cs&crtcc. Based on this Essence, all the conditions that make
up this world of the senses arc fulfilled: we see, we hear, we
feel, wc learn, mid wc lliink-

6. Causation belongs to a world of opposites. It cannot


THE SUTRAS


67

be applied to the originally bright and illumining Essence.
Nor can one ascribe to it “spontaneous activity”, for this
also presupposes the existence of an individual concrete
substance of which it is an attribute. If the Essence is any¬
thing of which we can make any statements either affirma¬
tive or negative, it is no more the Essence. It is independent
of all forms and ideas, and yet we cannot speak of it as not
dependent on them. It is absolute Emptiness, sunyata , and
for this very reason all things are possible in it.

7. The w T orld including the mind is divisible into five
Skandha (aggregates), six Pravesha (entrances), twelve
Ayatana (seats), and eighteen Dhatu (kingdoms). They all
come into existence when conditions are matured, and
disappear when they cease. All these existences and con¬
ditions take place illusively in the Tathagata-garbha which
is another name for the Mind-essence. It is the latter alone
that eternally abides as Suchness bright, illumining, all-
pervading, and immovable. In this Essence of eternal truth
there is indeed neither going nor coming, neither becoming
confused nor being enlightened, neither dying nor being
bom; it is absolutely unattainable and unexplainable by
the intellect, for it lies beyond all the categories of
thought.

8. The Tathagata-garbha is in itself thoroughly pure
and all-pervading, and in it this formula holds: form is
emptiness and emptiness is form. Rupam sunyata , sunyateva
rupam. This being so, the Essence which is the Tathagata-
garbha reveals itself in accordance with thoughts and
dispositions of all beings, in response to their infinitely-varied
degrees of knowledge, and also to their karma. In spite of its
being involved in the evolution of a world of multiplicities,
the Essence in itself never loses its original purity, brilliance
or emptiness, all of which terms are synonymous.

9. The knowledge of an objective world does not come
from objects, nor from the senses; nor is it mere accident;
nor is it an illusion. A combination of the several conditions
or factors is necessary to produce the knowledge. But mere
combination is not enough. This combination must take


68


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


place in the originally pure, bright, illuminating Essence,
which is the source of knowledge.

When this is realized, all the worlds in the ten quarters
including one’s own existence are perceived as so many
particles of dust, floating, rising, and disappearing like foam,
in the vast emptiness of space which the one illuminative
Mind-essence eternally pervades.

10. The question: When the Tathagata-garbha is in
itself so pure and undefiled, how is it possible that we have
this world of mountains, rivers, and all other composite
forms which are subject to constant changes and trans¬
formations?

This doubt comes from not understanding the absolute
nature of the purity of the Essence. For by purity is not
meant relative purity, which is only possible by establishing
a dualistic conception of reality. The Essence is neither
in the world nor of the world, nor is it outside the world.
Therefore the question, which is based on a dualistic inter¬
pretation of reality, is altogether irrelevant when applied to
the nature of the Essence and its relation to the world.

Hence this remarkable statement: The Tathagata-
garbha, which is mysteriously bright and illuminating as the
Mind-Essence, is neither to be identified nor not to be
identified [with the world]; it is at once this and not-
this.

11. Yajnadatta, a citizen of Sravasti, one morning
looked into the mirror and found there a face with the most
charming features. He thought his own head disappeared
and thereby went crazy. This story is used to illustrate the
stupidity of clinging to relative knowledge which rises from
the opposition of subject and object. As we cling to it as
having absolute value, a world of topsyturviness comes to
extend before us. The original bright and charming face is
possessed by every one of us only when we realize the
fact by reflecting within ourselves, instead of running after
unrealities.

12. Now Ananda wants to know how to get into the
palatial mansion, which he is told to be his own. He is not in


THE SUTRAS


6 $

possession of the key wherewith he can open the cm ranee
door. The Buddha teaches him in fhis way, There are two
methods to effect the entrance, both nl r which being com¬
plementary must be practised conjointly. The one is Samatha
and the other Yipasyana. Samaiha means “tranquil Uzaticm”
and mfaspma ‘Ytmteinplaiiun'l

By Samatha die world of forms is shut out of one’s
consciousness so that an approach is prepared for the
realization of the final stage of enlightenment. When one's
mind is full of confusion and distraction, it is no fit organ
for contemplation. By Vipasyana is meant that the Yogin
is first to awaken the desire for enlightenment* to be firmly
determined in living Lhc life of BiidhisaLtvalioEid^and to have
an illuminating idea as regards the source of the evil passions
which arc always ready to assert themselves in the Tathagata-
garbha.

13* When this source is penetrated by means of Prajna,
die entrance is effected 10 the inner sanctuary, where all the
six senses art: merged in one, T a :t the Prajna penetration
enter through the auditory sense as was the case with
Kwannon Bosatsu, and the distinctions of the six senses will
thereby be effaced ■ that is to say, there will then take place
an experience called “perfect interfusion 1 '. The ear not only
hears but sees* smells, and feels. All the harrier* between the
.sensory functions are removed, and there is a pet feci inter¬
fusion running between them ; each Vijnana then functions
for the Olliers.

The Buddha tells Rahula to strike the bell and asks the
assembly what they hear. They all say that they hear the
bell The bell is struck again, and they again say that there
is a sound which they hear; and that when die bell ceases
to ring i here is no sound. This questioning and answering
n repeated for a few times* and finally the Buddha declares
shat they are all wrong, for they arc just pursuing what does
nut properly belong to them* forgetting altogether their
inner Essence which functions through those objective
mediums or conditions. The Essence is to be grasped and
not the hearing^ nor the sound. To take the latter for reality


70


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


is the result of confused mentality. By the practice of Vipa-
syana this is to be wiped off so that the Mind-essence is
always recognized in all the functions of an empirical mind
as well as in all the phenomena of the so-called objective
world. By thus taking hold of the Mind-essence, there is a
“perfect interfusion 55 of all the six Vijnanas, which constitutes
enlightenment.

14. The root of birth and death is in the six Vijnanas
and what makes one come to the realization of perfect
interfusion is also in the six Vijnanas. To seek enlightenment
or emancipation or Nirvana is not to make it something
separate from or independent of those particularizing agents
called senses. If it is sought outside them, it nowhere exists,
or rather it becomes one of particular objects and ceases to
be what in itself it is. This is why the unattainability of
Sunyata is so much talked about in all the Mahay ana sutras.

In the true Essence there is neither samskrita (created)
nor asamskrita (uncreated); they are like Maya or flowers
bom of hallucination. When you attempt to manifest what
is true by means of what is erroneous, you make both untrue.
When you endeavour to explain object by subject and
subject by object, you create a world of an endless series of
opposites, and nothing real is grasped. To experience perfect
interfusion, let all the opposites, or knots as they are called,
be dissolved and a release takes place. But when there is
anywhere any clinging of any sort, and an ego-mind is
asserted, the Essence is no more there, the mysterious Lotus
fades.

15. The Buddha then makes some of the principal
persons in the assembly relate their experience of perfect
interfusion. That of Kwannon among them is regarded as
most remarkable. His comes from the auditory sense as his
name implies. It leads him up to the enlightened state of
consciousness attained by all the Buddhas, and he is now
Love incarnate. But at the same time he identifies himself
with all beings in the six paths of existence whereby he knows
all their inner feelings and aspirations reaching up towards
the love of the Buddha. Kwannon is thus able to reveal


THE SUTRAS


71


himself anywhere his help is needed, or to any being who
hears him. The whole content of the Kwannon sutra is here
fully confirmed.

16. Learning is not of much avail in the study of
Buddhism as is proved by the case of Ananda, who being
enticed by the. magical charm of a courtesan was about
to commit one of the gravest offences. In the practice of
Samadhi the control of mind is most needed, which is Sila
(moral precept). Sila consists in doing away with the sexual
impulse, the impulse to kill living beings, the impulse to take
things not belonging to oneself, and the desire to eat meat.
When these impulses are kept successfully under restraint,
one can really practise meditation from which Prajna grows;
and it is Prajna that leads one to the Essence when the
perfect interfusion of all the six Vijnanas is experienced.

17. We here come to the esoteric part of the Surangama
Sutra where the establishment of the mandala is described,
together with the mantram. In this mandala the Samadhi
is practised for three weeks or for one hundred days, at the
end of which those richly endowed may be able to realize
Srotapannahood.

18. Next follows the description of more than fifty
stages of attainment leading to final enlightenment and
Nirvana; then effects of various karma by which beings
undergo several forms of torture in hell are explained; then
the causes are given by which beings are transformed into
varieties of evil spirits and of beast forms. They, however,
come back to the human world when all their sins are
expiated. There are beings who turn into ascetics or heavenly
beings.

19. While disciplining himself in meditation the Yogin
is liable to be visited by all kinds of evil beings whereby he is
constantly assailed by hallucinations of various natures.
These are all due to highly-accentuated nervous derange¬
ments, and the Yogin is advised to guard himself against
them.

When the Yogin has all these mental disturbances well
under control, his mind acquires a state of tranquillity in


72


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


which his consciousness retains its identity through his
waking and sleeping hours. The modem psychologist would
say that he is no more troubled with ideas which are buried,
deeply repressed, in his unconsciousness; in other words, he
has no dreams. His mental life is thoroughly clear and calm
like the blue sky where there are no threatening clouds. The
world with its expansion of earth, its towering mountains, its
surging waves, its meandering rivers, and with its infinitely
variegated colours and forms is serenely reflected in the
mind-mirror of the Yogin. The mirror accepts them all and
yet there are no traces or stains left in it—just one Essence
bright and illuminating. The source of birth and death is
plainly revealed here. The Yogin knows where he is; he is
emancipated.

20. But this is not yet all. The Yogin must be philo¬
sophically trained with all his experiences and intuitions to
have a clear, logical, penetrating understanding of the
Essence. When this is properly directed, he will have no
more confused ideas introduced by misguided philosophers.
Along with the training in Samatha, the cultivation of
Vipasyana is to be greatly encouraged.


IV. FROMTHE CHINESE ZENMASTERS


There is a large mass of literature to be called especially
Zen because of its style and terminology. Until the time of
Hui-neng (Yeno in Japanese) and his immediate disciples, there
was not much, as far as literary expressions were concerned, to
distinguish treatises specifically on Zen from the rest of Buddhist
literature. But as time went on there grew up what is now known
as the Yu-lu (goroku in Japanese), containing the sayings and
sermons, “gatha” poems, and other literary works of a Zen
master. Strictly speaking, the Yu-lu or Goroku is not limited
to Zen. One of the chief characteristics of the Zen Goroku is the
free use of colloquial expressions which are not found in the
classical literature of China. As long as Zen appeals to one’s
direct experience, abstraction is too inane for the mind of a
master.

FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS

i

Bodhidharma on the Twofold Entrance
to the Tao 1

There are many ways to enter the Path, but briefly
speaking they are of two sorts only. The one is “Entrance
by Reason” and the other “Entrance by Conduct”. 2 By
“Entrance by Reason” we mean the realization of the spirit
of Buddhism by the aid of the scriptural teaching. We then
come to have a deep faith in the True Nature which is the
same in all sentient beings. The reason why it does not
manifest itself is due to the overwrapping of external objects
and false thoughts. When a man, abandoning the false and
embracing the true, in singleness of thought practises the

1 From The Transmission of the Lamp , XXX.

1 “Entrance bv Reason” may also be rendered “Entrance by. Higher
Intuition”, and “Entrance by Conduct”, “Entrance by Practical Living”.

73


74


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


Pi-kuari 1 he finds that there is neither self nor other, that the
masses and the worthies are of one essence, and he firmly holds
on to this belief and never moves away therefrom. He will
not then be a slave to words, for he is in silent communion
with the Reason itself, free from conceptual discrimination;

Reason*” 6116 not ' actin S- This is called “Entrance by

By “Entrance by Conduct” is meant the four acts
m nr j a °^ er acts are included. What are the four?
i. lo know how to requite hatred; 2. To be obedient to

a ^ 5 na ,’ 3 -^'' ot to crave anything; and 4. To be in accord
with the Dharma.

. 1 ‘ . ^ at is mea nt by “How to requite hatred”? He
who disciplines himself in the Path should think thus when
he has to struggle with adverse conditions: “During the
innumerable past ages I have wandered through a multi-
p lcity o existences, all the while giving myself to unim¬
portant details of life at the expense of essentials, and thus
rea mg infinite occasions for hate, ill-will, and wrong-
.' Vhde n ° violations have been committed in this life,

NeitW e ^ S .^ n tBe P as ,t a „ re to be gathered now.

pon me.

; ills that

* ' —- - ui* complain. The Sutra

YVW^r 16 n0t t0 L WOrry over ills that may happen to me.
Wir Becau ? e r when things are surveyed by a higher
mtelhgence, the foundation of causation is reached.” men

the R° USht if awakei ? ed in a man, he will be in accord with
lumsh !m ,l CaUSC he makes the use of hatred and

SiscXV^f ‘f™ 6 m h is advance towards the Path.

1 his is called the way to requite hatred”.

is no self bemgobedient to karma” is meant this : There
the internal S? m whatever beings are produced by
I suffer arell armaic conditions; the pleasure and pain
rewarded of my P revious ac tion. If I am

my past deSwh. r honour ’ etC ” this is the outcome of
1 y reason causaHon affect my present


75


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS

life. When the force of karma is exhausted, the result I am
crypyiag now will disappear- what \& then die use of being
joyful over it? Gain or loss, let me accept the Lamia as II
bring* to me the one or the others the Mind itsell knows
neither increase nor decrease* The wtud of pleasure [and
pain] will not stir me, for I am silently in harmony with the
Path. Therefore this is called “being obedient to karma".

3. By "not craving {ch'iu) anything” is meant this:
Men of the world* in eternal confusion, are attached every¬
where to one thing or another, which is called craving.
The wise however understand the truth and are not like
the ignorant. Their minds abide serenely in the uncreated
while the body moves about in accordance with the laws of
causation. All things are empty and there is nothing desirable
to *eek after. Where there is the merit of brightness
there surely lurks the demerit of darkness* This triple world
where we stay altogether too long is like a house on fire; all
Unit ha* a body suffers, and nobody really knows what peace
is. Because the wise are thoroughly acquainted with this
truth, they are never attached to things that change j their
thoughts are quieted, they never crave anything. Says the
Sutras Wherever there is a craving, there is pain; cease
from craving and you are blessed, 11 Thus we know that not
to crave anything is indeed the way to the Truth. Therefore#
it is taught not “to crave anything***

4. By 11 being in accord with the Dharma** is meant
that the Reason which wc oall the Dharma in its essence is
pure, and that this Reason is the principle of emptiness
(jionuid) m all that is manifested; it is above defilements
and attachments* and there is no 4 "self”, no “other* 1 in it.
Says die SuLrii: <l hi die Dharma then: are no sentient beings#
because it is free from the stain of being; in the Dharma
there is no £ sdf 1 became it is free from the stain of selfhood*”
When the wise understand this truth and believe in it, their
lives will be <£ in accordance with the Dharma .

As there is in the essence of the Dharma no desire to
posset t Hl: wise are ever ready tu practise charity with
their body, life# and property, and they never begrudge, they


76


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


never know what an ill grace means. As they have a perfect
understanding of the threefold nature of emptiness, they
are above partiality and attachment. Only because of their
will to cleanse all beings of their stains, they come among
them as of them, but they are not attached to form. This is
the self-benefiting phase of their lives. They, however, know
also how to benefit others, and again how to glorify the
truth of enlightenment. As with the virtue of charity, so with
the other five virtues [of the Prajnaparamita]. The wise
practise the six virtues of perfection to get rid of confused
thoughts, and yet there is no specific consciousness on their
part that they are engaged in any meritorious deeds. This
is called “being in accord with the Dharma”. 1


n


On Believing in Mind (Shinjin-no-Mei) 2

i. The Perfect Way knows no difficulties
Except that it refuses to make preferences;

Only when freed from hate and love,

It reveals itself fully and without disguise;


Smce this translation from the Transmission of the Lamp , two Tun-huang
MSS. containing the text have come to light. The one is in the Masters and
* *v 5 c! °^ e I f nka (^S-chiaShihtiu Chi), already published, and the other still

in MS., which however the present author intends to have reproduced in facsi¬
mile before long. They differ in minor points with the translation here given.

By Seng-t 4 san (Sosan in Japanese). Died 606 c.e. Mind = hsin. Hsin is
one of those Chinese words which defy translation. When the Indian scholars
were trying to translate the Buddhist Sanskrit works into Chinese, they dis¬
covered that there were five classes of Sanskrit terms which could not be
satisfactorily rendered into Chinese. We thus find in the Chinese Tripitaka
such words as prajna, bodhi , buddha, nirvana , dhyana, bodhisattva , etc., almost
always untranslated; and they now appear in their original Sanskrit form
among the technical Buddhist terminology. If we could leave hsin with all its
nuance of meaning in this translation, it would save us from the manv diffi-
5 “*** l « at £“ 115 English rendering. For hsin means “mind”, “heart”,
soul , spint —each singly as well as all inclusively. In the present com¬
position by the third patriarch of Zen, it has sometimes an intellectual conno¬
tation but at other tunes it can properly be given as “heart”. But as the
predominant note of Zen Buddhism is more intellectual than anything else,
though not m the sense of being logical or philosophical, I decided here to
translate hsin by mind rather than by “heart”, and by this mind I do not
mean our psychological mind, but what may be called absolute mind, or Mind.


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS


77


A tenth of an inch’s difference,

And heaven and earth are set apart;

If you wish to see it before your own eyes,

Have no fixed thoughts either for or against it.

2. To set up what you like against what you dislike—
This is the disease of the mind:

When the deep meaning [of the Way] is not understood
Peace of mind is disturbed to no purpose.

3. [The Way is] perfect like unto vast space,

With nothing wanting, nothing superfluous:

It is indeed due to making choice

That its suchness is lost sight of.

4. Pursue not the outer entanglements,

Dwell not in the inner void;

Be serene in the oneness of things,

And [dualism] vanishes by itself.

5. When you strive to gain quiescence by stopping

motion,

The quiescence thus gained is ever in motion;

As long as you tarry in the dualism,

How can you realize oneness?

6. And when oneness is not thoroughly understood,

In two ways loss is sustained:

The denying of reality is the asserting of it,

And the asserting of emptiness is the denying of it. 1

7. Wordiness and intellection—

1 This means: When the absolute oneness of things is not properly under¬
stood, negation as well as affirmation tends to be a one-sided view of reality.
When Buddhists deny the reality of an objective world, they do not mean that
they believe in the unconditioned emptiness of things; they know' that there is
something real which cannot be done aw’ay with. When they uphold the
doctrine of emptiness this does not mean that all is nothing but an empty
hollow, which leads to a self-contradiction. The philosophy of Zen avoids
the error of one-sidedness involved in realism as well as in nihilism.


7 s MANUAL OF HEN BUDDHISM

The more with them the further astray we go;

Away therefore with wordiness and intellection.

And there is no place where we cannot pass freely.

8 , When we return in the root, we gain the meaning;
When we pursue external objects, we lose the reason.
The moment we are enlightened within,

We go beyoml the voidness of a world confronting us.

&- Transformations going on in an empty world which
a mfronts us

Appear real al] because of Ignorance:

Try not to seek after the true*

Only cease to cherish opinions.

id. Abide not with dualism,

Carefully avoid pursuing it -
As soon as you have right and wrong,
tkmfusion ensues, and Mind 1 is lo^t.

11. The two exist because of the One,

Bui hold not even to iliLs One;

When a mind is not disturbed.

The ten thousand things offer no offence.

*No offence offered t and no ten thousand things;

No disturbance going, and no niind set up io work :
The subject is quieted when, the object ceases.

The object ceases when the subject is quieted*

[ 3 * The object is an object for the subject,

The subject h a subject for the object:

Know that the relativity of the two
Rests ultimately on one Emptiness,

f f* In one Emptiness the two are not distinguished.

And each contains in itself all the ten thousand tilings;
1 "Hie Mind -list Wky—ihc O&c -EmpOnm,


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS 79

When no discrimination is made between this and that.
How can a one-sided and prejudiced view arise?

15. The Great Way is calm and large-hearted,

For it nothing is easy, nothing is hard;

Small views are irresolute,

The more in haste the tardier they go.

16. Clinging is never kept within bounds,

It is sure to go the wrong way;

Quit it, and things follow their own courses,

While the Essence neither departs nor abides.

17. Obey the nature of things, and you are in concord

with the Way,

Calm and easy and free from annoyance;

But when your thoughts are tied, you turn away from
the truth,

They grow heavier and duller and are not at all sound.

18. When they are not sound, the spirit is troubled;

What is the use of being partial and one-sided then?

If you want to walk the course of the One Vehicle,

Be not prejudiced against the six sense-objects.

19. When you are not prejudiced against the six sense-

objects.

You are then one with the Enlightenment;

The wise are non-active,

While the ignorant bind themselves up;

While in the Dharma itself there is no individuation.
They ignorantly attach themselves to particular objects.
It is their own mind that creates illusions—

Is this not the greatest of all self-contradictions?

20. The ignorant cherish the idea of rest and unrest,

The enlightened have no likes and dislikes:

All forms of dualism


80 MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM

Are contrived by the ignorant themselves.

They are like unto visions and flowers in the air;

Why should we trouble ourselves to take hold of them?
Gain and loss, right and wrong—

Away with them once for all!

21. If an eye never falls asleep,

All dreams will by themselves cease:

If the Mind retains its absoluteness,

The ten thousand things are of one Suchness. 1

22. When the deep mystery of one Suchness is fathomed,
All of a sudden we forget the external entanglements;
When the ten thousand things are viewed in their

oneness,

We return to the origin and remain where we ever
have been.

23. Forget the wherefore of things,

And we attain to a state beyond analogy;

Movement stopped and there is no movement,

Rest set in motion and there is no rest;

When dualism does no more obtain,

Oneness itself abides not.

24. The ultimate end of things where they cannot go any

further

1 The Masters and Disciples of the Lanka also quotes a poetical composition
of So-san on “The Mysterious* * in which we find the following echoing the
idea given expression here:

“One Reality only—

How deep and far-reaching!

The ten thousand things—

How confusingly multifarious!

The true and the conventional are indeed intermingling,

But essentially of the same substance they are.

The wise and the unenlightened are indeed distinguishable,

But in the Way they are united as one.

Desirest thou to find its limits?

How broadly expanding! It is limitless!

How vaguely it vanishes away ! Its ends are never reached!

It originates in beginningless time, it terminates in endless time.”


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS 81

h not bound by rules and measures:

In the Mind harmonious [with the Way] we have the
principle of identity.

In which we find all strivings quieted ;

Doubts and irresolutions arc completely done away

with,

And the right J’siith is straightened;

There is nothing left behind.

There h nothing retained.

All is void, !udd, and self-illuminating;

There is no exertitin, no waste of energy—

This is where thinking never attains,

This is where the imagination fails to measure.

25. In the higher realm of true Suchness
There is neither "self” nor "other 1 ':

When direct identification is sought.

We can only say, "Not two”* 1

26. In being "not two" all is the same,

All that is is comprehended in it;

The wise in the ten quarters,

They all enter into this Absolute Reason*

27. This Absolute Reason is beyond quickening [time] and

extending [space].

For it one instant is ten thousand years;

Whether we sec it or not,

It is manifest everywhere in all the ten quarters.

28. Infinitely small things are as large as large things can

be,

Fur here no external conditions obtain ;

Infinitely large things are as small as small things can

Fur ob jective limits are here of no consideration.

29. Whal is is the same as what is not,

1 Lt. Tat Warn mi

F


1


02


MANUAL OF ZKN BUDDHISM


Whitt is not is the same as what is;

Where this nLatc of things fail* to obtain,

Indeed, no tarrying there.

jo. One in All,

All in One—

If only this is realized,

No more worry about your not being perfect!

31 . Where Mind and each believing mind arc not divided*
And undivided are each believing mind and Mind,
This is where words fall ;

For it is not of the past, present, and future,


HI

From Hui-neno's Tan-chiNG 1

^4- Mahapr&jn&psrsmta is a Sanskrit term of the
Western country; in Tang it means “great-wisdom (c/tik-
fmi', other-shore reached 11 \ This Truth {dharma—fa) h to
be lived, it is not to be [merely} pronounced with die mouth.
\\ hen it is not lived, ic is like a phantom, like an apparition.
The Bharmakaya of the Yogin b the same as tin: Buddha.

W hat is maim ? Maha means "great", The capacity of
^lind h wide and great, it is like emptiness of space. To siL
with a mind emptied makes one fall into emptiness of
indifTt re nee. Space omtams the sun, the moon, stars,
constellations, great earth, mountains, and rivers. Ail grasses
and plants, good men and bad men, bad things and good
tilings, Heaven and hell—they are all in empty space. The
emptiness oT [Self-] nature as It Ls in all people is just like this.

y 5* [Sdl-J nature contains in it at! objects; hence it is
great. Alt objects without exception are of Self-nature*
Seeing all human beings and non-human beings as they are,

1 The TiuiJium,- copy, editn] hy 0 . j, Suzuki 193^, IEu.nrn S =- Yi-nO,


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS 83

evil ;md good, evil tilings and good things, it abandons them
not, nor is it contaminated with ihrm; it is like the emptiness
of space. So it is called great, that is, trmhn. The confused
pronounce it with thdr mouths, the wise live it with their
imn<h ; Again, there art: people confused [in mind]; they
conceive this to be great when they have their minds emptied
td thoughts—-which U not right. The capacity of Mind is
great; when there i.s no life accompanying it it h small. Do
not merely pronounce it with the mouth* Those who fail to
discipline themselves to Live this life, are not my disciples-

iz6. W Iull is prajna ? Prajna is ckih-hui Twisdom). When
every thought of yours is not benighted at all timesj when
you always live rfnh-lmi {=prqjm r wisdom), this is called the
life of Prajna. Wheil a single thought of yours is benighted,
then Prajna ceases to work. When a single thought of yours
is o fthihy i.e. enlightencd, then, Prajna h bom. Being always
benighted in their minds, people yet declare themselves to be
living Prajna. Prajna has no shape, no form, it is no other
than the essence (hsmg) of ckih-Aut (wisdom).

What is Pawnita? This is a Sanskrit term of the Western
country* In I "ang it means u the other shore reached 1 - VVhen
the meaning (arfha in Sanskrit) i$ understood, tine is detached
from birth and death. When the objective world U'tidyu; is
clung to, there is the rise of birth and death ; it is like the
waves rising from the water; tins is called "this shore 5 \
Wlieii you are detached from the objective world, there is
no birth and death for you; it is like the water constantly
miming its course; this is "'reaching the other shore 5 . Hence
ParamvJa*

The confused pronounce [Prajna] with their mouths;
the wise live it in their minds. When it h merely pronounced,
there is at that very moment a falsehood; when there is a
falsehoodj it h not a reality* When Prajna is lived in every
thought oJ yours, this is known jh* reality. Those who under¬
stand this truth, understand the truth of Prajna and practise
the life of Prajna. Those who do not practise it are ordinary
people. When you practise and live it in one thought of yours,
you are equal to the Buddha.


fl* MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM

Good friends* the passions are no other than enlighten¬
ment (hadhi). WTien your antecedent thought is confuted
yours is an ordinary mind; as soon as your succeeding
thought is enlightened, yon are a Buddha.

Good friends* Prajnaparamiia is the most honoured* the
highest, the foremost; it is nowhere abiding* nowhere
departing, nowhere coming; all the Buddhas of die past;
present* and future issue out of it + By means of Great Wisdom
(ta-thih-kri=77tahapTqj7m) that leads to the other shore
(parntmid), the five skandhas* the passions* and the innumer¬
able follies are destroyed. When ihm disciplined, one is a
Buddha* and the three passions [he. greed* anger, and folly]
will turn into Morality (r£k) s Meditation {dhyana) y and
Wisdom {prajm ).

27, Good friends, according to my way of under¬
standing this truth, 84,000 wisdoms [chik-Iuii) are produced
From one Prajna. Why? Because there are 84,000 Follies- If
there were no such innumerable follies* Prajna is eternally
abiding, not severed from Self-nature. He who has an insight
into tliLs truth is free from thoughts* from recollections* from
attachments; in him there is no deccu and falsehood. This is
where the essence of Suchness is by itself When all things
arc viewed in the light of wisdom [titifi-hui — pmjnn)j there is
neither attachment nor detachment. This is seeing into one’s
Nature and attaining the truth of Buddhahood.

28. Good friends* if you wish to enter into the deepest
realm of Truth {d}mrmadhatiL) y and attain the Prajnasamadhi.
you should at once begin to exercise yourselves in the life of
Pntjnaparamita; you just devote yourselves to die one
volume of the Vajubcdifdika -p rajtmparam ita Sutra y and you will*
seeing into the nature of your being* enter upon the Pnyna-
samadhi. It should he known that the merit of such a person
is immeasurable, as is distinctly praised in the sutras* of
which T need not speak in detail.

This Truth of the highest order is taught to people of
great intelligence and superior endowments. If people of
small Intelligence and inferior endowments happen to hear
it, no faith would ever be awakened in their minds. Why?


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS 85

It is like a great dragon pouring rains down in torrents
over the Jambudipa: cities* towns* villages are all deluged
and carried away in the flood* as ii r they were grass-leaves.
But when the rain, however much, falls on the great ocean,
there is in it neither an increase nor a decrease.

When people of the Great Vehicle listen to a discourse
On the Vajmccht'dika their minds are opened and there is an
intuitive understanding. They know thereby that their own
Nature is originally endowed with Prajna-wisdom and that
all things arc to be viewed in the fight of this wisdom
(tklh-imi) of theirs, and they need not depend upon letters.
It is like rain-waters not being reserved in the sky; but the
water is drawn up by the dragon-king out of the rivers and
oceans, whereby alt beings and all plants* sentient and niin¬
sentient, universally share die wet. All the waters flowing to¬
gether once more are poured into the great ocean, and the
ocean accepting all the waters fuses them into one single
body of water. It is the same with Prajim-wbdom which is
the original Nature of all beings.

Hg< When people of inferior endowments hear this
^abrupt* 1 doctrine here discoursed tm s they arc like those
plants naturally growing small on earth, which, being once
soaked by a heavy rain, are all unable to raise themselves up
and continue their growth, Tt is the ^me with people of
inferior endowments. They are endowed with Prajna-
wisdom as much as people of great intelligence ; there is no
distinction. Why is it then that they have no insight even
when listening to the Truth? It b due to Lhe heaviness of
hindrance caused by false views and to the deep-rootedness
of the passions. It is like an overcasting cloud screening the
sun; unless it blows hard no rays oflighL arc visible.

There h no greatness or smallness in Pi ajua-wisdom,
but since all beings cherish in themselves confused thoughts,
they seek the Buddha by means of external exercises* and
arc unable to see into their Self-nature. T'liat is why they
arc known to be people of inferior endowments.

Those beings who, listening to the ‘'Abrupt” doctrine*
do not take themselves to external exercises f but reflecting


SB


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


Within themselves raise this original Nature all the time
to the proper viewing [of the Truth], remain [always
undeEled by] the passions and the innumerable follies; and
at that moment they all have an insight [inLo the Truth].
It is like the great ocean taking im all the rivers, large and
small, and merging them into one body of water—this is
seeing into one*s own Nature. [He who thus aces into his
mvn Nature] does not abide anywhere inside or outside; he
freely comes and departs; he knows how to get rid of attach¬
ing thoughts; his passage has no obstructions. When one is
aide to practise tins life, he realizes that there Ls Irorn the
first no difference between [his Self-Nature] and Prajna-
pararrdta. 1

30. AH the Sutras and writings* all the letters, the two
vehicles Major and Minor, the twelve divisions [of Buddhist
literature]—these arc all set forth because of the people of the
world. Because there is wisdom-nature (chikmti^hsing ),
therefore there is the establishment of all these works. If
thcie were no people of the world, no multitudinous objects
would ever lie In existence. Therefore, we know that all
objects rise originally because of the people of the world.
All the Sutras and ^vritings aie said Lo have thdr existence
because of die people of the world.

The distinction of stupidity and intelligence is only
possible among the people of die world. Those who are
stupid are inferior people and those who are intelligent are
superior people. The confused ask the wUe, and the wise
discourse lnr them on the Tiuih in order to make the stupid
enlightened and have an intuitive understanding of it. When
the contused are enlightened and Have their mind* opened,
they are not to be distinguished from the people of great
intelligence*

I here Fore, we know that Ruddhas when not enlightened
are no other than ordinary beings; when there is one thought
of enlightenment, ordinary beings at once turn into Buddhas-
There!ure, we know that nil multitudinous objects are every

1 The teu j'lht Fr^niLiMuiuEuta Stum" h «r, But 1 take k to mean
Frajr.a, ;uclf jililcjiJ ok [ht mini.


FRO\i THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS 0 ?

one of them m our 5 * own mind* 1 Why not, from within one's
own mind, at once reveal the original essence of Sucfmess?
Says the BodhhattMSila Sutra : “My original Self-nature h
primarily pure; when my Mind is known and my Nature
h seen into I naturally attain the path of Buddhahoocl.' 1
Says the Vimaldkirii Sulra: “When you have an instant
opening of view you re turn to your original Mind.*'

46. The Great Master died on the third day of the
eighth month of the second year of Haicn-rten (713 e.E.).
On the eighth day of the seventh month of this year he had
a farewell gathering of his followers as he felt that he was
to leave them forever In the following month, and Odd them
to have all the doubts they might have about lus teaching
once for all settled on this occasion* As he found them
weeping in tears he said: “You are all weeping, but for
whom arc you so sorry? If you are sorry for rny not knowing
where I am departing to, you are mistaken; for I know where
I am going. Indeed^ if I did not, I would not pan with
you. The reason why you are in tears k probably that you
do not yourselves know whither I am going, if you dir!,
you would not be weeping so. The Essence of the Dharrna
knows no birth-and-death, no coming-and-going. Sit down,
all of you, and let nie give you a gatha with the title, “On
the Absolute*' ;*

There is nothing true anywhere.

The true is nowhere to be seen;

If you say you sec the true.

This seeing is not the true one.®


1 The hju ihc ''body", while (lie Ko*tioji edition and lhc current one
hwc l 'misxr.

* TIlh title literally reacts ,J Lhr Lruf-faljc movirig-rjuiel^V sl Tmc Fp iLUidJ
against^ ,i lalsfs FP Find "moving'' agoiriat L-l ^ULCt b ' and" ai tong HI there » itn
oap,-PiiEL..kn of any kind, w* [fur ? fj 3 ritual msight ii ptfv.iblr- And iMi imigbi
docs not grow from a quietude ecercuc ot meditation.

That El* lhc AWIutc return lo divide iwdfinto twos Ibl whirl* i
Uut which b ;


1 and


8S


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


Where the true is left to itself.

There is nothing false in it, which is Mind itself.

When Mind in itself is not liberated from the false,

There is nothing true, nowhere is the true to be found.

A conscious being alone understands what is meant by
“moving”

To those not endowed with consciousness, the
moving is unintelligible;

If you exercise yourself in the practice of keeping
your mind unmoved, [i.e. in a quietistic medi¬
tation].

The immovable you gain is that of one w ho has no
consciousness.

If you are desirous for the truly immovable,

The immovable is in the moving itself,

And this immovable is the [truly] immovable one;
There is no seed of Buddhahood where there is no
consciousness.

Mark well how varied are aspects [of the immovable
one],

And know that the first reality is immovable;

Only when this insight is attained,

The true working of Suchness is understood.

I advise you, O students of the Truth,

To exert yourselves in the proper direction;

Do not in the teaching of the Mahayana
Commit the fault of clinging to the relative knowledge 2
of birth and death.

Where there is an all-sided concordance of views

1 “Moving” means “dividing” or “limiting”. When the absolute moves,
a dual is tic interpretation of it takes place, which is consciousness.

* Chih , jnana in Sanskrit, is used in contradistinction to Prajna which is the
highest form of knowledge, directly seeing into the Immovable or the Absolute.


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS

You may talk together regarding the Buddha’s
teaching;

Where there is really no such concordance.

Keep your hands folded and your joy within yourself.

There is really nothing to argue about in this teaching;
Any arguing is sure to go against the intent of it;
Doctrines given up to confusion and argumentation
Lead by themselves to birth and death.


IV

Yoka Daishi's “Song of Enlightenment’' 1

t. Knowest thou that leisurely philosopher who has gone
beyond learning and is not exerting himself in
anything?

He neither endeavours to avoid idle thoughts nor seeks
after the Truth;

[For he knows that] ignorance in reality is the Buddha-
nature,

[And that] this empty visionary body is no less than
the Dharma-body.

7, When one knows what die Dharma-body is, tiicre is
not an object [to be known as such].

The source of all tilings, as Far as Its self-nature goes,
is the Buddha in his absolute aspect ;

The five aggregates [skandha) are like a cloud floating
hither and thither with no fixed purpose.

The three poisons {klesa) are like foams appearing and
disappearing as it so happens to them.

‘Yota Dabtii (*!ird 713, Yung-clu» Tm-shih. in Ctmcit), otiwwisc
known as Genftiiku i HjiiaH-chidnoL wnt one of the: tlltd diviples ol
the lucih patriarcii of Zr*3i Hi si 1 i-Sh itm. B^icrc Dr wai Cuiivrftfd [cr Zen H-C w™
2 undent of the Ticn-iair Hu interview with liui-ntnff » record mj m the
Tan-chin* He died 111713 tavitiffa number ofjhorl wOrb W Zen phila»pby+
and nf 3 win the praertt composition in vene is the mod popular tme- The
odfiui lillc reads; Chmg-laA hV t ,H realii 1 cion-WBv- w n g


9 ° MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM

3. When Reality is attained, it is seen to be without an

ego-substance and devoid of all forms of objectivity,

And thereby all the karma which leads ns to the lowest
hell is ini tan tly wiped out;

Those, however, who cheat beings with their false
knowledge,

Will surely see their tongues pulled out for innumerable
ages to come.

4. In one whose mind is at once awakened to [the intent

of] the Tathagata-dhyana

The six paramitas and all the other merits are fully
matured;

While in a world of dreams the six paths of existence
are vividly traced.

But after the awakening there is vast Emptiness only
and not even a great chiliocosm exists.

5- Here one secs neither sin nor bliss, neither loss nor
gain;

In die midst of the Eternally Serene no idle questionings
are invited;

The dust [of ignorance] has been since of old accumu¬
lating on the mirror never polished.

Now is the time once fur all to see the clearing positively
done.

6. Who is said to haw no-thought? and who not-bom?

If really not-bom, there is no nu-Eiinh either;

Aik a machine- man and find out if this is not so;

As long as you seek Buddhnhood, specifically exercising
yourself for it, there is no attainment lor you.

7. Let the four elements go olf your hold,

And in Lhc midst of the Eternally Serene allow yourself
to quafFor to peek, as you like;

Where all things of relativity are transient and ulti¬
mately empty.


91


FROM the CHINESE ZEN MASTERS

There is seen the great perfect enlightenment of the
Tilth ay at a realized.

B. True monkhood consists in having a firm conviction;

If, however, you fad to have it, ask me according to
your ideas, [and you will be enlightened].

To have a direct understanding in regard to the root
of all things, this is wliat the Buddha affirms;

If you. go on gathering leaves and branches, there is
no help for you.

9, The whereabouts of the precious maBi-jfevel is not
known to people generally,

Which lies deeply buried in the recesses of the Tatlia-

gata-garbhit; . .

The sixfold function miraculously performed by it is
an illusion and yet not an illusion,

The rays oflight emanating from one perfect sun belong
to the realm of form and yet not to it.


10. The fivefold eye-sight 1 is purified and the fivefold
power 2 is gained, _

When tint has a realization, which is beyond [intel¬
lectual] measurement; _ , .

There is no difficulty in recognizing images m die
mirror,

Bid who can take hold of the moon reflected m waters'


11, [The enlightened one] walks always by himself, goes
about always by himself;

Every perfect one saunters along ouc and the same
passage of Nirvana; _ ,

His tone is classical, Ids spirit is transparent, his airs
arc naturally elevated,


lTire Gvcfeld WO-right (<dbft«l)l (0 Physical, (a) Heavenly, {3) Prsjn*^
[±\ Dhamu-. ind (5) BuitJlii-eve. .. * . . E

> Tim fivefold Jinwer (iufc): (i) Faith, faj Eaeifv. (9) Memory, (4) Mali-
UllUhi s and (5;. Pfajtta-


5 fl MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM

His features are rather gaunt, his bones are firm, hr
pays no attention to others.

1 8« Sons of ihc Sakya are Jchovpti to be poor j

But their poverty is of the body, their spiritual JiTe
knows no poverty;

The poverty' -Stricken body is wrapped in rags,

But their spirit holds within itself a rare invaluable
gem,

1 3- The rare, invaluable gem is never impaired however
much one uses it.

And beings are thereby benefited ungrudgingly as
required by occasions;

The triple Ijodv 1 and the fourfold jnana* are perfected
withm it.

The eightfold emancipation 1 and the sixfold miraculous
power 1 are impressed on it,

x 4 * TJ 1 *- Superior one has it settled once for all and for ever,

The middling one learns much and holds much in
doubt;

The point is to cast aside your soiled clothes you so
dearly keep with you;

W hat is the use of showing off your work before others?

1 5 - If 11 others speak til of me, let others spite me;

Those Who try to bum the sky with a torch end in
tiring themselves out;

1 listen to them and taste [their cvil*st>ealdngl as
nectar; r &J


and (3) iht Body


or (a) ** * * Enioy^,,

• *—*■«*•


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS 93

All melts away and X find myself suddenly within the
Unthinkable itself

iG, Seeing others talk ill of me, I acquire the chance of
gaming merit,

For liicy are really my good friends;

When I cherish, being vituperated, neither enmity' nor
favouritism.

There grows within me the power of love and humility
which is bom of the: Unborn.

1 7. Let us be thoroughgoing not only in inner experience
but in its interpretation!

And our discipline will be perfect in Dhyana as well
as In Prajna, not one-sidedly abiding in Sunyata
(emptiness) -

TLiis is not where we alone have finally come to^

Bui all the Buddhas, as numerous as the Ganga sands*
are of the same essence*

ifr. The Hon-ro&ring of the doctrine of fearlessness

Hearing this p the timid animals 1 brains are tom in
pieces,

Even the scented elephant runs wild forgetting its
native dignity ;

It Is die heavenly dragon alone that feels elated with
joy 3 calmly listening [to the lion-roaring of the
Buddha].

ij. I crossed seas and rivers^ climbed mountains, and
forded freshets.

In order to interview* the masters* to inquire after
Truth, to delve into the secrets of Zen;

And ever since I was enabled to recognize the path of
Sokei, 1

I kno^v that birth-and-death is not die thing I have
to be concerned with*

1 Tsu-ch'i ii the name of the bcahly Wlhm Hui-neng hid hil monwlnyp
nsT-aia the umstcr tup^wrlf.


94


MANUAL OF £E.V BUDDHISM

so. For walking is Zen* sitting; is Zen,

Whether talking or remaining silent* whether moving
m L standing quiet, the Essence itedfij ever at case;

Even when greeted with swords and spears it never
loses its quiet way.

So with poisonous drug*, they Fail to perturb its
serenity.


ai - Our Master, [Sakyamimflj anciently served Dipankara
the Buddha,

And again For many kalpas disciplined humid f as an
ascetic called Kshanti,

[I have also] gone through many a birth and many a
death;

Births and deaths—how endlessly they recur!

22. But ever since my realisation of Kn-birth^ which quite

abruptly came s m me f

Vicissitudes of fate, good and bad* have lost their
power over me.

Far away in the mountains I live in an humble hut;
High arc the mountain*, thick the arboreous shades*
and under an old pine-tree
I sit quietly and contentedly in my monkish home;
Perfect tranquillity and rustic simplicity rules here.

23. When you are awakened [to the Dharma], all is under¬

stood, no strivings are required;

Things of die sam.vkrik^ are not of this nature;

Charity practised with the idea of form may

result in a heavenly birth*

But it b like shooting an arrow against the sky #

When the force is exhausted the arrow rails on the
ground.


1 AcrtFtfJin^ to JHuddlkiit pTiHcnophy, cxIiepm ce is divided mio twa ermim,
Thc TO anything that doa any kind

“i 1 ^ banner, whflt the is-Himskrita accomplishes nolluntf.

1 in c asa Aft J P q f c r-rRardnl m n mode of reality, Kltvi i fc and non-
ov. iiLff to LfJt uj necessary GO»ltlkm* +


FROM THE CHINESE EEN MASTERS §5

Similarly, [when (hr heavenly reward conies to an,
end], the life that follows is sure to be one of
fortune*

Is it not ihr letter then to be with Reality which is
GStinukriita and above all strivings,

And whereby one instantly enters the itage ofTatlm-
gaiahood ?

^ 4 * Only let us take bold of the root and nut worry about
die branches;

It is like a crystal basin reflecting the moon.

And I know now what (hi a mimi-g cm is,

Whereby not only oneself k benefited but others,
inexhaustibly;

Hie moon is serenely reflected on the stream, the
breeze passes softly through the pines.

Perfect silence reigning unruffled—what is it for?

25, The morality-jcwd inherent in the Buddha-nnturc
stamps itself on the mind-ground [of the en¬
lightened one];

Whose robe is cul out of mists, cloudy and dews,

W hose bowl anciently pat.died the fiery dragons, and
whose staff once separated the fighting tigers;

Listen now to the golden rings of his staff giving out
mellifluous tunes.

These arc not, however, mere symbolic expressions,
devoid of historical contents;

Wherever the holy staff of Tathagatahood moves, the
traces are distinctly marked.

a(i. He neither seeks the true nor severs himself from the
defiled,

He dearly perceives that dualities are empty' and have
no reality,

That to have no reality means not to be one-sided,
neither empty nor nonempty.

For this is the genuine form of Tat hagai 3 hood.


96 MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM

27. The Mind like a mirror is brightly illuminating and
knows no obstruction-;.

It penetrates the vast universe to its minutest crevices;

All its contents, multitudinous in form, are reflected
in the Mind,

Which, shining like a perfect gem, has no surface,
nor the inside.

v8. Emptiness negatively defined denies a world of
causality,

All is then in utter confusion, with no orderliness in it,
which surdy invites evils all around ;

The same holds true when beings are clung to at the
expense of Emptiness,

For it is like throwing oneself into a flame, in order
to avoid being drowned in the water.

29. When one attempts to take hold of the true by aban¬

doning the false,

This is discrimination and there arc artificial!tiers and
falsehoods;

When the Yogin, not understanding [what the Mind
is], is given up to mere discipline.

He is apt, indeed, to take an enemy for his own cliild.

30. That the Dharma-materials are destroyed and merit is

lost.

Comes in every case from I he relative discriminatory
mind ■

For this reason Zrn teaches to have a thorough insighL
into the nature of Mind,

When die Yogin abruptly by means of Ids intuitive
power realizes the truth of No-birth.

3 1 * A man of great will carries with him a sword of Prajna,

Whose flaming Vajra-btade cuts all the entanglements
of knowledge and ignorance;


FROM THE CHINESE SEN MASTERS


97

It not only smashes in pieces the intellect of the
philosophers

But disheartens the spirit of die evil ones.

He causes the DJi arm a-thunder to roar, he beats the
Dharma-druin,

He raises mercy-clouds, he pours nectar-showers,

He conducts himseir like the lordly elephant or dragon
and beings innumerable arc thereby blessed.

The three Vehicles and the five Families are all equally
brought to enlightenment.

Hini the herb grows on the Himalaya where no other
grasses are found,

And the crows feeding on it give the purest of miJJt,
and this I always enjoy.

One Nature, perfect and pervading, circulates in all
natures;

One Reality, all comprehensive, contains within itself
all realities;

The one moon reflects itself wherever there is a sheet
or water,

*And all the moons In the waters are embraced within
the one moon;

The Dharina-body of all the Buddhas enters into my
own being.

And my own being is found in union with theirs.

In one sta^e arc stored up all the stages;

[Reality] is neither form, nor mind, nor work;

Even before fingers are snapped, more than eightv
thousand holy [cachings are fulfilled;

Even in the space of a second the evil karma of three
asamkliyeya kalpas b destroyed;

Whatever propositions arc made by logic arc no [true]
propositions.

For they stand in no intrinsic relation to rav inner
light. 1


MANUAL OF ZEft BUDDHISM

34. [This inner Light] h beyond both pmiac and abuse,

Like unto space it know^ no boundaries;

Yet i t is right here with us ever retaining its serenity
and fulness;

It h only when you seek it that you lose it.

You cannot take hold aHt, nor can you get rid of it;

While you can do neither, it goes on its own way;

You remain silent and it speaks; you speak and it is
silent;

The great gate of charity is wide open with no in¬
structions whatever before it,

35. Should someone ask me what teaching 1 understand,

I tell him that mine is the power of Mahaprajna :

Affirm Is or negate iL as you like it is beyond your

human intelligence;

Walk against it or along with it, and Heaven knows
not its whereabouts*

3G. 1 have been disciplined in it for ever so many kalpas

of my life;

This h no idle talk of mine, nor am I deceiving you ;

I erect the Dharma-banner to maintain this teachings

Which 1 have gained at Sokei and which is no other
than the one proclaimed by the Buddha.

37, Mahakashyapa was the first, leading the line of trans¬
mission ;

Twenty-eight Fathers followed him m the Welt;

The Lamp was then brought over the sea to this
country;

And Bodhidharma became the First Father here:

Hh mantle, as wc all know, passed over sis Fathers*

And by them many minds came to see the Light.

30, Even the true need not be [specifically] established,
ax to the False none such have ever been m existence;


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS 39

When both being' and non- being are put asid^ rvrn
n 011 -em p ih less loses its sense ;

The twenty forms of Emptiness are not from the first
to he adhered to;

The eternal oneness of Tathagatahood remains ab¬
solutely tlie same,

39- The mind functions through the seme-organs, and
thereby an objective world is comprehended—

This dualism marks darkly on the mirror;

When the dirt is wiped off, the light shines out;

So when both the mind and the objective world are
forgotten, the Essence asserts its truth.

40. Alas! this age of degenera Lion h Full of evils;

Beings are most poorly endowed and difficult to
Control;

Being further removed from the ancient Sage* they
deeply cherish false views;

The Evil One is gathering up his forces while the
Dharma is weakened, and hatred is growing rampant;

Even when they learn of the 1 'abrupt** school of the
Buddhist teaching*

What a pity (hat they fail to embrace it and thereby
to crush evils like a piece of brick!

41 + The mind is the author of all works and (he body the
sufferer of ail ills;

Do not blame others plaintively for what properly
belongs to you;

If you desire not to incur upon yourself the karma for
a hell,

Cease from blaspheming the Tat hagata-wheel of the
gisod Dharma,

43. There arc no inferior trees in the grove of sandal-
WDOtUj


too MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM

Among its thickly-growing primeval forest lions alone
find thdr abode;

Where no disturbances reach* where peace only reigns,
there is the place For Hons to mam;

All the other beasts are kept away, and birds do not fly
in the vicinity.

It is only their own cubs that follow* their steps in the
woods*

When the young ones arc only three years old, they
roar.

How can jackals pursue the king of the Dharma?

With all their magical arts the elves gape to no purpose,

44. The perfect "abrupt 11 leaching has nothing to do w ith
human imagination;

Where a shadow of doubt is still left* there lies die cause
for argumentation;

My saying this is not the outcome of my egotism*

My only fear is lest your discipline lead you astray
either to nihilism or positivism,

45* "'No** is not necessarily “No 15 * nor is “Yes* 1 "Ye* 11 i

But when you miss even a tenth of an inch, the differ¬
ence widens up 10 one thousand miles;

When It is “Yes? 1 * a young Naga girl m an instant
attains Buddha hoof 1 *

When iL is “No”, the most learned Zcnsho 1 while alive
falls into hclL

46- Since early years I have been eagerly after scholarly
attainment,

X have studied the sutras and sastras and comment

tunes*

l have been given up to the analysis of names and
forms, and never known what fatigue meant;

But diving into die one &ti to count up its sands h Surely
an exhausting task and a vain one ;

J Sbungf-iui csg, lit. “g wdi wca a great tdi^Lir o \ h Li age.


FROM THE CHINESE MASTERS *0i

The Buddha has never spared such, his scoldings are
just to tike point,

For what is the use of reckoning the treasures that are
not mine?

All my past achievements have been efforts vainly and
wrongly applied—I realize it fully now*

I have been a vagrant monk For many years to no end
whatever.

47. When the notion of the original family is not properly

understood*

You never attain to tlie understanding of the Buddha's
perfect “abrupt" system;

The two Vehicles exert themselves enough, but Jack
1 hr aspirations [of the BnHhi-sattvn];

The philosophers are intelligent enough but wanting
in Prajna ;

[As to die nest of us,] they are either ignorant or puerile;

They take an empty liat as containing something real,
and L lie painting finger for die objecE pointed;

When the finger is adhered to as the moon itself, all
their efforts are lost;

They arc indeed idle dreamers lost in a world of senses
and objects.

48. The Tathagata is interviewed when one enters upon

a realm of no-forms,

Such is to be really called a Kwanjizai (Avnlokftes-
vara);

When this b understood, the karma-hindrances are by
nature empty;

When not understood, wc all pay for the pa:U debts
contracted.

4g. A royal table is set before the hungry, but they refuse
to cat;

If the sick turn away from a goad physician, how arc
they cured?


MANUAL OF ZEN R 1.7 nil Tf ISM


Practise Zen wjlik in a world of dcaircs, and the
genuine power of in tuition is manifested;

’When the lotus blooms in the midst of a fire, it is never
destroyed.

YuSe (Yung-shih) the Bhtfoshu* wits an offender in
one of the gravest crimes, but when he had an
enlightened insight into No-birth

He instantly attained to Buddhahood and is still living
in another world.

go> The doctrine of fearlessness is taught as loudly as a
lion roars:

What a pity that confused minds inflexibly haideucd
like leather

Understand only that grave offences arc obstruct inns
to Enlightenment,

And are unable to see int: ■ the: secrets qfthc Tatimgata^
teaching.

51. Anciently, there were two Bhikshus, the one com¬

mitting an circle r and the other a carnal offence:

Upa!i J s insight was like that «f the glowworm, and
ended only in tightening the knots of offence;

But when ihcy were instantly enlightened by the
wisdom of Vimalaklrtij

Their griefs and doubt* melted away like the frost and
snow before the blazing sun*

52. The power of incomprehensible emancipation

Works wonders as innumerable as the sands of the

Ganga and knows no limits;

[To him] the four kinds of offerings arc most willingly
made,

By him thousands of pieces of gold are disbursed
without involving anybody in debts;

The bones may be crushed to powders, the body cut

JThc Btijry of this BhLklhu £1 tatd £11 ilic Sutra vn Cttauini th* forwi-

hpmwmi [CMng Cfcwj).


F&OM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS

up to pieces, and yet we cannot repay him enough
for what he does for us;

Even a phrase [issuing from him] hoick true for
hundreds of thousands ol kotb of kalpas.

yg, He is the Dharma-king deserving the highest respect;

The TathagsiUisi, as many in number as the Ganga-
sands, all testify to the truth of his attainment;

I now understand what this wuad -jewel in.

And know that all those who accept it in faith are m
correspond dice [with it].

54* As to seeing it, the seeing is dear enough, but no objects
are here to be seen,

Not a person here, nor the Buddha ;

Chiliocosms numberless are mere bubbles in the ocean,

All the sages and worthies arc Jlasher of lightning,

55* However rapidly revolves the iron-wheel over my
head.

The perfect brightness of Dhyana mid Prajna in me
Is never effaced;

The sun may turn cold and the moon hot;

With all the power of the evil ones the true doctrine
remains forever IndusLmctibie.

The elephant-carriage steadily climbs up the steepest
hill.

Before whose wheels how can die beetle Stand?

56. The great elephant does not walk on the hsire's lane,

Supreme Enlighten: icnl goes beyond the narrow- range
of in tel lection ;

Cease from measuring heaven with a tiny piece of
reed;

If you have no insight yet, 1 will have the matter
settled for you*


MANUAL OF ZEN BL-DDHJSM


V

BaSO (MA-TSu) and SeKITO (5hIK-T*0u)I Two
Great Masters of the T s ang Dynasty

Ma-isu (Baso) whose posthumous title was the Zen
Master of Great Quietude (ta^hi) was to be properly called
Tao-i (Boichi). Hb fa mi I \ name was Ma* From the district
of Han-ehou. His teaching which was originally propagated
in die province of Ghiang-hsi proved of great influence in
the Buddhist world of the rime, and he came to be
generally known as Ma die Father, that, Ma-Lsu.

Historicallyj Zen Buddhism was inti educed to China
by an Indian monk called Bodhidharma during the South¬
end North Dynasties, probably late in the fifth century.
Bu t it was not until the time of Hm-ndng and Shen-hsiu
that Bodhidharma was rccognkcd as the first patriarch
of Zen Buddhism in China ■ for this was the time when
Zen to be properly so called came to establish itself as one
of the strong Buddhist movements created by Chinese
religious genius. The movement firmly took root with
Ma^tsu (-786) and Shih-don (700-790) p The latter had
hb monastery in the province of Hn-imn, and thus Hu-nan
and Cbiang-hsi became the hot-bed of the Zen movement.
All the followers of Zrn in China as well as in Japan at
present trace back their lineage to these two masters of the
T'ang.

Shih-t'ou f$ekiio) whose family name was Chen came
lmm the district oi Tuan-dnuu His other name was Hri-
chicn. While still young, his religious feding was strongly
stirred against a barbarous custom whidi was practised
among the Liao race. Tin: custom consisted in sacrificing
bulls in order to appease the wrath of the evil spirits whidi
were worshipped by the people. Shih-i'ou destroyed many
such shrinci dedicated to the spirits and saved the victims.
Ho probably acted quite decisively and convincingly so that
even the riders ol liid village failed to prevent him from so


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS 105

rashly working against popular superstitions. He later
embraced Buddhism, becoming a disciple of Hui-neng. The
latter however died before this young man had been formally
ordained as a Buddhist monk. He then w'ent to Hsing-ssu
(-740), of Chi-chou and studied Zen Buddhism. Hsing-ssu
like Nan-yueh Huai-jang who was the teacher of Ma-tsu,
was also a disciple of Hui-neng.

Before quoting Ma-tsu, let me acquaint you with some
of Shih-t‘ou’s questions-and-answers ( mondo=wen-to ) as
recorded in the Transmission of the Lamp.

Hsing-ssu one day asked: “Some say that an intelligence
comes from the south of the Ling.”

T‘ou: “There is no such intelligence from anybody.”

Ssu: “If not, whence are all those sutras of the Tripi-
taka?”

T‘ou: “They all come out of here, and there is nothing
wanting.”

Shih-t’ou, “Stone-head”, gains his name because of his
having a hut over the flat surface of a rock in his monastery
grounds in Heng-chou. He once gave the following sermon:
“My teaching which has come down from the ancient
Buddhas is not dependent on meditation ( dhyana ) or on
diligent application of any kind. When you attain the insight
as attained by the Buddha, you realize that Mind is Buddha
and Buddha is Mind, that Mind, Buddha, sentient beings,
Bodhi (enlightenment), and Klesa (passions) are of one and
the same substance while they vary in names. You should
know that your own mind-essence is neither subject to
annihilation nor eternally subsisting, is neither pure nor
defiled, that it remains perfectly undisturbed and self-
sufficient and the same with the wise and the ignorant, that
it is not limited in its working, and that it is not included in
the category of mind ( citta ), consciousness ( manas ), or thought
( vijnana ). The three worlds of desire, form, and no-form, and
the six paths of existence are no more than manifestations of
your mind itself. They are all like the moon reflected in


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM

water or images in the mirror How can we speak of them as
being boi n or as passing away? When you come to this
underfunding, you will be furnished wilh all the things you
arc in need of.”

Tao-wu, one of Shih-t‘ou’s disciples, tlien asked : “Who
has attained to the understanding of Hui-ucng’s teaching?”

T'ou : “The one who understands Buddhism.’ 1

Wu: “Have you then attained it?”

Ton: “No, I do not understand Buddhism.”

A monk asked : “How does out; get emancipated?' 1

The master said: “Who has ever put you in bondage? 11 '

Monk: “What is the Pure Land?”

Master: “Who has ever drilled you?”

Monk: “What is Nirvana?”

Master: “Who has ever subjected you to birth-and-
death?"

Shih-t'ou asked a monk newly arrived ; “Where do you
come from?”

f *From Chhmg-hsi.”

‘"Did you sec Ma the groat teacher?* 1
master*”

Shih-t ou then pointed at a bundle of kindlings and said;
11 How does Ma the teacher resemble this?”

The monk made no answer. Returning to Ma ilie
teacher, hr reported the interview with Shih-tViu. Ma
a^ked: * L Did you notice how large the bundle was?”

“An immensely large one it was.”

h Yqu arc a very strong man indeed,”

"How?” asked the monk,

"Because you have carried that huge bundle from
Nan-yueh even up to this monastery. Only a strong man
can accomplish such a feat.”

A monk asked: r What is the meaning of the First
Patriarch’s coming from the West?”

Master; 4 ‘Ask the post over there,”


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS 1&7

Monk: “I do not understand you/ 5

Master: “I do not either, any more than you- 11

Ta-tien asked: “According to an ancient sage it is a
dualism to take the Tao either as existing or as not-existing.
Please tell me how to remove ibis ohsimclion.: pt

“Not a tiling here, and what do you wish to remove? M

Shih-t’ou turned about and demanded; 18 Do away with
your throat and lips, and let me see what you ran xay/ 1

Said Ta-tiejij “No snu:h tliiisgji have I,”

“If so, you may enter the gate** 5

Tan-wu asked ; “What is Lite ultimate teaching of

Buddhism? 1 *

“You won't understand it until you have it, 5 "

“Is there anything over and above it whereby one may
have a new turn?* 1

“Boundlessly expands the sky and nothing obstructs the
white clouds from freely dying about, 11

“What i$ Zen? 11 a^ked a monk.

“Brick and stone/*

“What is the Tao? H

“ A block of wood / 1

^Someone asked Ma-tm: “How docs k man disripline
himself in the Tao? 51

The master replied: “In the Tao there is nothing to
discipline oneself in. If there is any discipline in it, the
completion of such discipline means the destruction of the
Tao. One then will be like the Sravoka. But if there is no
discipline whatever in the Tao, one remains an ignoramus/ 1

“By what kind of understanding does a man attain the
Tan? 11

On this, the master gave the following sermon:

“The Tao in its nature is from the first perfect and

* The fdlUr.viiig arc all taken from l book known bs »/

Ajtcieni iYwthiti, fju. t (iTtf tnor-ibwjv*^).


lofl MANUAL OP ZEN BUDDHISM

self-sufficient. When a man finds himself tmhalting hi his
management of the afFairs of life good or bad, he is known
as one w ho Is disciplined in the Tao. To shun evils and to
become attached to things good, to meditate on Emptiness
and to enter into a state ofsam&dhi—this is doing aoinetliiiig.
If those who mn after an outward object, they are the
farthest away [from die Tao],

Only let a man exhaust all his thinking and imagining
be can possibly have in the triple world. When even an Lota
of imagination is left with him, this is his triple world and the
source of birth and death in it. When there is not a trace of
in nig inatinn, he has removed all tin: source of birth and
death, he then holds the unparalleled treasure belonging
to the Dharmaraja. AH the imagination harboured since the
IrCgbiningless past by an ignorant being, together with his
falsehood, flattery, self-conceit, arrogance, and other evil
passions, are united in the body of One Essence, and all melt
away.

“It is said in the sutra that many elements combine
themselves to make this body of ours, and that the rising
of the body merely means the rising together of all these
element* and the disappearance of the body means also
merely that of the elements. When the latter rise, they do
not declare that they are now to rise; when they disappear
they do not declare that they are now to disappear.

So with thoughts, one thought Follows another without
interruption, the preceding one dors not wait for the
succeeding, each one is self-contained and quiescent. This is
called i he Sagaraniudra-sainadhi, ‘‘Meditation of the
Ocean-stump' , in which are included all tilings, like the
ocean where all the rivers however different in size, etc.,
empty themselves. In this great ocean of one salt-water, all
the water:; in it partake of one and the same taste, A man
living in it diffuses himself in all the streams pouring into it.
A man batliiug in the great ocean uses all the waters emptied
into it,

“The Sravaka is enlightened anti vet going astray; the
ordinary man is out of the right path and yet in a way


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS I&9

enlightened. The Sravata fails to perceive that Mind ** it is
in itself knows no stago** no causation t no imaginations.
Disciplining himself in the cause he has ailained the result
and abides in the Samadhi of Emptiness itself for ever so
many kalpas, However enlightened in his way* the Srayaka
is not at all on the right track. From the point of view of the
fiodhisattva. this is like suffering the lorLurc of hclh The
Sravaka has buried himself in emptiness and does not know
how to get out of his quiet contemplation* For he has no
insight into the Buddha^naturC itself.

“If a man is of superior character and intelligence he will^
under the instruction of a wise director, at once sec into the
essence of the thing and understand that this in not a matter
of stages and processes. He has an instant insight into his own
Original Nature. So we read in the sutra that ordinary
beings change in ihrir thoughts but the Sravaku knows no
such changes [which means that he never comes out of his
meditation of absolute quietude].

* J "Going astray 5 stands against 'being enlightened*;
but when, there is primarily no going astray there is no being
enlightened either. All beings since the bcgiimingless past
have never been outride the nharrna-cssence itself; abiding
for ever in the midst of the Dharma-esscnce, they eat, they
are clothed, they talk, they respond; all the functioning of
the six senses, all their doings arc of the Dharma-e^euce
itself. IVhen dies fail to understand to go back to th Source
they (fallow names* pursue fbifttt, allow' confuting imagina¬
tions to rise, and cultivate all kinds of karma. Let them once
in one thought return to the Source and their entire iR.mg
will be of BuddHa-mind.

tT G monks, let each of you see into HLs own Mind, Do
not memorise what I tell you. However eloquently I may
talk about all kinds of things as innumerable as die sands
of the Ganges the Mind shows no increase; e ven when no
talk is possible, the Mind shows no decrease. You may talk
ever so much about it, and It is still your own Mind; you
may not at al! talk about it, and it is just the .same your own
Mind. You may divide your body into so many forms, and


no MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM

emitting rays of supernatural light perform the eighteen
miracles, and yet what you have gained is after all no more
than your own dead ashes.

“The dead ashes thoroughly wet have no vitality and
are likened to the Sravaka’s disciplining himself in the
cause in order to attain its result. The dead ashes not yet
wet are full of vitality and are likened to the Bodhisattva,
whose life in the Tao is pure and not at all dyed in evils.
If I begin to talk about the various teachings given out by
the Tathagata, there will be no end however long through
ages I may go on. They are like an endless series of chains.
But once you have an insight into the Buddha-mind, nothing
more is left to you to attain.

“I have kept you standing long enough, fare you well!”

P‘ang the lay-disciple 1 asked one day when Ma-tsu
appeared in the pulpit: “Here is the Original Body alto¬
gether unbedimmed! Raise your eyes to it!” Ma-tsu looked
straight downward. Said P‘ang, “How beautifully the master
plays on the first-class stringless lute!” The master looked
straight up. P c ang made a bow, and the master returned to
his own room. P‘ang followed him and said, “A while ago
you made a fool of yourself, did you not?”

Someone asked: “What is the Buddha?”

“Mind is the Buddha, and there’s no other.”

A monk asked: “'Without resorting to the four statements
and an endless series of negations, can you tell me straight¬
way what is the idea of our Patriarch’s coming from the
West?” 6

The master said: “I don’t feel like answering it today.
You go to the Western Hall and ask Shih-tsang about it.”

The monk went to the Western Hall and saw the priest,
who pointing at his head with a finger said, “My head aches
today and I am unable to explain it to you today. I advise
you to go to Brother Hai.”

1 Ho-koji in Japanese. He was one of the greatest disciples of Ma, and for
further quotations see my Essays on Z<n, I, II, and III.


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS


III


The monk now called on Hai, and Hai said: “As to that
I do not understand.”

The monk finally returned to the master and told him
about his adventure. Said the master: “Tsang’s head is
black while Hai’s is white.”

A monk asked: “Why do you teach that Mind is no
other than Buddha?”

“In order to make a child stop its crying.”

“When the crying is stopped, what would you say?”

“Neither Mind nor Buddha.”

“What teaching would you give to him who is not in
these two groups?”

“I will say, ‘It is not a something.’ ”

“If you unexpectedly interview a person who is in it
what would you do?” finally, asked the monk.

“I will let him realize the great Tao.”

The master asked Pai-chang, one of his chief disciples:
“How would you teach others?”

Pai-chang raised his hossu.

The master remarked, “Is that all? No other way?”

Pai-chang threw the hossu down.

A monk asked: “How does a man set himself in harmony
with the Tao?”

“I am already out of harmony.”

Tan-yuan, one of Ma-tsu’s personal disciples, came
back from his pilgrimage. When he saw the master, he drew
a circle on the floor and after making bows stood on it
facing the master. Said Ma-tsu: “So you wish to become
a Buddha?”

The monk said: “I do not know the art of putting my
own eyes out of focus.”

“I am not your equal.”

The monk had no answer.


I 12


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


One day in the first month of the fourth year of Chen-
yuan (788), while walking in the woods at Shih-men Shan,
Ma-tsu noticed a cave with a flat floor. He said to his
attendant monk, “My body subject to decomposition will
return to earth here in the month to come.” On the fourth
of the second month, he was indisposed as he predicted, and
after a bath he sat cross-legged and passed away.


VI

Huang-po’s Sermon, from “Treatise on the

Essentials of the Transmission of mind”
(Denshin Hoyo)

The master 1 said to Pai-hsiu:

Buddhas and sentient beings 2 both grow out of One
Mind, and there is no other reality than this Mind. It has
been in existence since the beginningless past; it knows
neither birth nor death; it is neither blue nor yellow; it has
neither shape nor form; it is beyond the category of being
and non-being; it is not to be measured by age, old or new;
it is neither long nor short; it is neither large nor small; for
it transcends all limits, words, traces, and opposites. It must
be taken just as it is in itself; w'hen an attempt is made on
our part to grasp it in our thoughts, it eludes. It is like space
whose boundaries are altogether beyond measurement; no
concepts are applicable here.

1 VVobaku Ki-un in Japanese, died 850.

* One of the first lessons in the understanding of Buddhism is to know
what is meant by the Buddha and by sentient beings. This distinction goes on
throughout all branches of the Buddhist teaching. The Buddha is an enlightened
one who has seen into the reason of existence, while sentient beings arc ignorant
multitudes confused in mind and full of defilements. The object of Buddhism
is to have all sentient beings attain enlightenment like the Buddha. The ques¬
tion is whether they are of the same nature as the latter; for if not they can
never be enlightened as he is. The spiritual cleavage between the two being
seemingly too wide for passage, it is often doubted whether there is anything
in sentient beings that will transform them into Buddhahood. The position of
Zen Buddhism is that One Mind pervades all and therefore there is no distinc¬
tion to be made between the Buddha and sentient beings and that as far as
Mind is concerned the two are of one nature. What then is this Mind ? Huang-
po attempts to solve this question for his disciple Pai-hsiu in these sermons.


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS


“3


This One Mind only is the Buddha, who is not to be
segregated from sentient beings. But because we seek it
outwardly in a world of form, the more we seek the further
it moves away from us. To make Buddha seek after himself,
or to make Mind take hold of itself—this is an impossibility
to the end of eternity. We do not realize that as soon as our
thoughts cease and all attempts at forming ideas are for¬
gotten the Buddha reveals himself before us.

This Mind is no other than the Buddha, and Buddha
is no other than sentient being. When Mind assumes the
form of a sentient being, it has suffered no decrease; when
it becomes a Buddha, it has not added anything to itself.
Even when we speak of the six virtues of perfection ( paramitas )
and other ten thousand meritorious deeds equal in number
to the sands of the Ganges, they are all in the being of Mind
itself; they are not something that can be added to it by
means of discipline. When conditions 1 are at work, it is set up;
when conditions cease to operate, it remains quiet. Those
who have no definite faith in this, that Mind is Buddha and
attempt an achievement by means of a discipline attached
to form, are giving themselves up to wrong imagination;
they deviate from the right path.

This Mind is no other than Buddha; there is no Buddha
outside Mind, nor is there any Mind outside Buddha. This
Mind is pure and like space has no specific forms [whereby
it can be distinguished from other objects]. As soon as you
raise a thought and begin to form an idea of it, you ruin the
reality itself, because you then attach yourself to form. Since
the beginningless past, there is no Buddha who has ever had
an attachment to form. If you seek Buddhabood by prac¬
tising the six virtues of perfection and other ten thousand
deeds of merit, this is grading [the attainment of Buddha-
hood]; but since the beginningless past there is no Buddha
whose attainment was so graded. When you get an insight
into the One Mind you find there that is no particular reality


1 Yuan in Chinese and pratyaya in Sanskrit. One of the most significant
technical terms in the philosophy of Buddhism.


Il 4 MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM

[which you can call Mind]. This unattainability is no othci
than the true Buddha himself.

Buddhas and sentient beings grow out of the One Mind
and there are no differences between them. It is like space
where there are no complexities, nor is it subject to destruc¬
tion. It is like the great sun which illumines the four worlds.
when it rises, its light pervades all over the world, but space
itself gains thereby no illumination. When the sun sets,
darkness reigns everywhere, but space itself does not shaie
this darkness. Light and darkness drive each other out and
alternately prevail, but space itself is vast emptiness and

suffers no vicissitudes. .

The same may be said of the Mind that constitutes the
essence of Buddha as well as that of sentient bemg. When
you take Buddha for a form of purity, light, and emancipa¬
tion and sentient beings for a form of defilement, darkness,
and transmigration, you will never have the occasion
however long [your striving may go on] for attaining en¬
lightenment ; for so long as you adhere to this way of under¬
standing, you are attached to form. And in this One Mind
there is not a form of particularity to lay your hand on.

That Mind is no other than Buddha is not understood
by Buddhists of the present day; and because of their
inability of seeing into the Mind as it is, they imagine a
mind beside Mind itself and seek Buddha outwardly after a
form. This way of disciplining is an error, is not the way ot

enlightenment. .

It is better to make offerings to a spiritual man who is
free from mind-attachment 1 than to make offerings to ai


1 Wu-hsin, or mu-shin in Japanese. The term literally means no-min
“no-thought”. It is very difficult to find an English word corresponding •
“Unconsciousness” approaches it, but the connotation is too psychologic^.
Mushin is decidedly an Oriental idea. “To be free from mind-attachment is
somewhat circumlocutionary, but the idea is briefly to denote that state
consciousness in which there is no hankering, conscious or unconscious, aue
an ego-substance, or a soul-entity, or a mind as forming the structural un
of our mental life. Buddhism considers this hankering the source of all evus
moral and intellectual. It is the disturbing agency not only of an individual me
but of social life at large. A special article in one of my Z en Essay* ^ oevo ci

to the subject.


FROM THE GHIN.KS& MASTER# 115

the Buddhas in die len quarters* Why? Because to he free
from mind-attachment means to be free from all forms of
im&giruil tofu

Sudine&s as it expresses itself inwardly may be likened
to wood or rock, it remains there unmoved, unshaken;
while outwardly it Is like space, nothing is obstructed or
checked. Such ness, as it is free both from activity and
passivity* knows no orientation, it has no furm^ there is in
it neither gain nor Joss. TJiose who arc running [wildly] do
not dare enter this path* for they arc afraid of falling into
an emptiness where there is no foothold to keep them
supported. They beat a retreat as they face it. They are as
a rule seekers of learning and intellectual understanding.
Many are indeed such seekers, like hair, while those who sec
into the truth are as few as horns.

Manjusri corresponds to li (reason or principle) and
Samantabhadra to hstng (life or action), fits the principle
of true emptiness and non-obstruction^ hsbtg is a lift: of
detachment from form, and inexhaustible. Avaiokitcsvara
corresponds to perfect love and Sthamaprapta to perfect
wbdom. Vimalakirti means “unddiled name 11 ; undetiled
is Essence and name is form. Essence and form are not two
different things, hence the name Vimala-kirti ("pure-
name*')* All chat h represented by each one of the great
Bodhisattvas is present in each of us, for it is the contents of
One Mind. AH will be well when we air awakened to the
truth-

Buddhists of the present day look outward, instead of
inwardly into their own minds* They get themselves attached
to forms and to the world—which is the violation of Lite
truth.

To the sands of the Ganges the Buddha refers in this
way: these sands are trodden and passed over by all the
Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, Sakrendia* and other devas* but
the sands an? not thereby gladdened; they arc again trodden
by cattle, sheep, in sects, and Lints, but they are not thereby
incensed ; they may hide within themselves all kinds of
treasures and scented substances, but they arc not covetous;


Ii6 MANUAL OF ZEN BUDCIH19M

tjicy may be- soiled with all kind? of Fillh and ill-smelling
material, but they do not loathe them. A mental attitude of
this nature is that of one who lias realized the state of
mmftin (“being free From mind-attachment”).

When, a mind is free from all form, it sees into [the fact]
that there is no distinction between Buddhas and sentient
beings; when once this state ormut/uK is attained it completes
the Buddhist life. If Buddhists are unable to see into the
truth of miishm without anything mediating, all their
discipline of aeons would not enable them to attain enlighten¬
ment. They would ever be in bondage with the notion of
discipline and merit as cherished by followers of the Iriple
Vehicle, ihey would never achieve emancipation.

In the attainment of this state of mind (fjuitifen), some
are quicker than others. There are some who attain to a
state of TTuuhm all at once by just listening to a discourse on
the Dhanna, while there are others who attain to it only
alter going through all the grades of Bodhisattyaship such
as the ten stages of faith, Lhe ten stages of abiding, the ten
stages of discipline, and the ten stages of turning-over. More
or less time may be required in the aUainment of tmisfdtlf but
once attained it puts an cud to all discipline, to all realization
and yet there is really nothing attained. It is truth and not
falsehood. Whether this Tnashin is attained in one thought or
mi.tined after going through the ten stages its practical
working is the same and there is no question of thr one being
deeper or shallower than the other. Only the one has passed
through long ages nfhard discipline.

Committing evils or practising goodness—both arc the
outcome of attachment to form. When evils arc committed
mi account of attachment to form, one lias to suffer trans¬
migration ; when goodness is practised on account of attach¬
ment to form, one has to go through a life of hardships. It is
better therefore to see all at once Into the essence of the
Dbarma as you listen to it discoursed.

By the Pharma is meant Mind, for there is no Pharma
apart front Mind. Mind is no oilier ihan thr Pharma, for
there is no Mind apart from the Pharma. This Mind in


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS 117

itself is no-mind ( mushin ), and there is no no-mind either.
When no-mind is sought after by a mind, this is making it
a particular object of thought. There is only testimony of
silence, it goes beyond thinking. Therefore it is said that
[the Dharma] cuts off the passage to words and puts an end
to all form of mentation.

This Mind is the Source, the Buddha absolutely pure
in its nature, and is present in every one of us. All sentient
beings however mean and degraded are not in this particular
respect different from Buddhas and Bodhisattvas—they are
all of one substance. Only because of their imaginations and
false discriminations, sentient beings work out their karma
and reap its result, while, in their Buddha-essence itself,
there is nothing corresponding to it; the Essence is empty and
allows everything to pass through, it is quiet and at rest, it is
illuminating^it is peaceful and productive of bliss.

When you have within yourself a deep insight into this
you immediately realize that all that you need is there in
perfection, and in abundance, and nothing is at all wanting
in you. You may have most earnestly and diligently dis¬
ciplined yourself for the past three asamkhyeya kalpas and
passed through all the stages of Bodhisattvahood; but when
you come to have a realization in one thought, it is no other
than this that you are from the first the Buddha himself and
no other. The realization has not added anything to you
over this truth. When you look back and survey all the
disciplinary measures you have gone through, you only find
that they have been no more than so many idle doings in a
dream. Therefore, it is told by the Tathagata that he had
nothing attained when he had enlightenment, and that if he
had really something attained, Buddha Dipankara would
never have testified to it.

It is told again by the Tathagata that this Dharma is
perfectly even and free from irregularities. By Dharma is
meant Bodhi. That is, this pure Mind forming the source of
all things is perfectly even in all sentient beings, in all the
Buddha-lands, and also in all the other worlds together with
mountains, oceans, etc., things with form and things without


H8 MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM

form. They are all even, and there are no marks of dis¬
tinction between this object and that. This pure Mind, the
Source of all things, is always perfect and illuminating and
all-pervading. People are ignorant of this and take what
they see or hear or think of or know for Mind itself; and
their insight is then veiled and unable to penetrate into the
substance itself which is clear and illuminating. When you
realize mushin without anything intervening [that is, in¬
tuitively], the substance itself is revealed to you. It is like the
sun revealing itself in the sky, its illumination penetrates the
ten quarters and there is nothing that will interfere with its
passage.

For this reason, when followers of Zen fail to go beyond
a world of their senses and thoughts, all their doings and
movements are of no significance. But when the senses and
thoughts are annihilated, all the passages to the Mind are
blocked and no entrance then becomes possible. The original
Mind is to be recognized along with the working of the senses
and thoughts, only it does not belong to them, nor is it
independent of them. Do not build up your views on your
senses and thoughts, do not carry on your understanding
based on the senses and thoughts; but at the same time do
not seek the Mind away from your senses and thoughts, do
not grasp the Dharma by rejecting your senses and thoughts.
When you are neither attached to nor detached from them,
when you are neither abiding with nor clinging to them,
then you enjoy your perfect unobstructed freedom, then you
have your seat of enlightenment.

When people learn that what is transmitted from one
Buddha to another is Mind itself, they imagine that there
is a particular object known as a mind w'hich they attempt
to grasp or to realize; but this is seeking something outside
Mind itself, or creating something which does not exist.
In reality, Mind alone is. \ ou cannot pursue it by setting up
a ?r^ er m ^ nc ^ ’ however long, through hundreds of thousands
of kalpas, you are after it, no time will ever come to you when
you can say that you have it. Only when you have an
immediate awakening to the state of mushin you have your


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS H 9

own Mind. It is like the strong man’s seeking for his own
gem hidden within his forehead: as long as he seeks it outside
himself in the ten quarters, he will not come across it; but
let the wise once point at it where it lies hidden, and the man
instantly perceives his own gem as having been there from
the very first.

That followers of Zen fail to recognize the Buddha is due
to their not rightly recognizing where their own Mind is.
They seek it outwardly, set up all kinds of exercises which
they hope to master by degrees, and themselves work out
diligently throughout ages. Yet they fail to reach enlighten¬
ment. No works compare with an immediate awakening to
a state of mushin itself.

When you come to a most decided understanding to
the effect that all things in their nature are without pos¬
sessions, without attainments, without dependence, without
an abiding place, without mutual conditioning, you will
become free from cherishing imagination, which is to realize
Bodhi. When Bodhi is realized, your own Mind which is
Buddha is realized. All the doings of long ages are then found
to have been anything but real disciplining. When the strong
man recovered his own gem in his own forehead the recovery
had nothing to do with all his efforts wasted in his outside
research. So says the Buddha, “I have not had anything
attained in my attainment of Enlightenment.” Being anxious
about our not believing this, he refers to the five eyes 1 and
the five statements . 2 But it is truth, not falsehood, for it is
the first true statement.


1 The five eyes are: (1) the physical eye, (2) the heavenly eye, (3) the
eye of wisdom, (4) the eye of the Dharma ; and (5) the eye of the Buddha.

a In the Diamond Sutra ( Vajracchedika ), the Buddha makes five statements
as regards the truth of his teaching.


120


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


vn

Gensha on the Three Invalids 1
Preliminary Remark

When gates and courts are established, then there are
twos, there are threes, there is a realm of multiplicities;
when a deep discourse is carried on on the highest subjects
of intuition a world of sevens and eights is thoroughly broken
through. In whatever ways views and opinions may be
presented, they are crushed to pieces so that the barricades
even when they are of golden chains are successfully brushed
aside. When orders are given from the highest quarters, all
traces are wiped off, leaving nothing whereby trailing is
made possible. When do we come across such a koan ? Let
one who has an eye on the forehead see to it . 2


Illustrative Case

Gensha gave the following sermon:

“It is asserted by all the worthy masters of the present
time that they are working for the benefit of all beings.
[“ Each keeps a shop according to his means.—Some are
rich and others are poor.]

This being the case, what will you do if there suddenly
appear before you three kinds of invalids? [—By beating
up the weeds, we mean to frighten snakes out.—As for me,
it makes my eyes open wide and my mouth close.—We all
have to beat a retreat even for three thousand /£.]

Those who are blind fail to see you even when you

i “ a translation of Case

^ HI of the Pi-yen Cht , which is one of the most important and at the
same time the most popular of Zen texts. The words in brackets in the ‘‘Illus¬
trative Case and in Seccho’s verse are those of Yengo. As to the nature and
composing of the Pi-yen Chi , see my Essays , Series II, p. 237 ct seq.

. he Remark purposes to make the reader abandon his usual relative point
ol view so that he can reach the absolute ground of all things.


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS ISI

hold up a mallet or a hossu. [—Blind to the very core.—
This is no other than ‘benefiting all beings’.—Not neces¬
sarily failing to see.]

“Those who are deaf fail to hear you even when
you talk volubly enough. [—Deaf to the very core!—This
is no other than ‘benefiting all beings’.—Not necessarily
altogether deaf.—That something is still unheard.]

“Those who are dumb fail to speak out, whatever under¬
standing they may have inwardly. [—Dumb to the very
core!—This is no other than ‘benefiting all beings’.—Not
necessarily altogether dumb.—That something is still left
untold of.]

“What treatment are you going to accord to such
people? If you do not know how to go on with them,
Buddhism must be said to be lacking in miraculous works.”
[—Quite true, this world—I am ready to give myself up
with my hands folded.—“Benefiting” already accom¬
plished !—“He then struck.”]

A monk asked Ummon (Yun-men) to be enlightened.
[—It is also important to go about and inquire.—Hit!]

Said Ummon, “You make bows.” [—As the wind blows,
the grass bends.—Ch'ua!]

When the monk rose from making bows, [—This monk’s
staff is broken!]

Ummon poked him with a staff, and the monk drew
back. Said Ummon, “You are not blind then?” [—Blind
to the very core!—Do not say that this monk has a failing
eye-sight.]

Ummon now told him to approach, and the monk
approached. [—Washed with a second dipperful of dirty
water.—Kwan-non is come! To give a “ Kwatz !” was better.]
Said Ummon, “You are not deaf then?” [—Deaf to
the very core!—Do not say that this monk is deaf in his ears.]
Ummon further continued, “Do you understand?”
[—Why does he not feed him with the right forage?—Pity
that he then uttered a word at all.]

“No, master, I do not,” was the reply. [—A double
koan!—What a pity!]


122


MANUAL OF ZF.N BUDDHISM

Unimnn said, ‘‘You art: not dumb then?'’ [—Dumb
to the very eon;!—What eloquence!!—Do not say dial thk
monk is dumb.]

I he monk now grasps the point. [—Stretching the
bou when die: burglar is oil—What old bow] khc after?]


Commentary J\fotej

Gensha gives this sermon from his standpoint where
hr }< now abJc to sit, after years of his study of Zen, in
absolute nakedness with no trumpery trimmings about him*
altogether Sihmn of imagiuaLions and free from conccptualkm.
In those days there were many Zen monasteries each or
which rivalled the others. Gensha used to give this sermon
to his monks:

'*It is asserted by all the worthy masters of’the present
time that they are working for the- benefit of all be mgs. This
c:ase i what will you do if three kinds of invalids
suddenly appear before you here? Those who are blind fail
n> see you even when you hold up a mallet 01 a haw. Those
w , arc deaf fail to hear you even when you may talk
volubly enough. Those who are dumb fail to speak out
whatever understanding they may have inwardly. What
treatment are you going to accord to such people? If you
do not know how to go on with them, Buddliism must be
said co be lacking in miraculous works **

If people undmtand hue here as merely making re-
Terence to the blind, to the deaf, to the dumb, they are
vainly groping in the daik. Therefore, it is said that you are
not to search lor the meaning in the words which kill; vou
are requeued to enter directly into the spirit itself of Gensba.
when you will grasp the uicitTimg*

Ai Gens ha ordinarily tested his monks with this state¬
ment, a monk who was staring for some time with him one

Tv 111111 w J] en he carne up to the Dharma-haiJ, and

asked. Wi ll you allow me to present my way of reasoning
about your sermon on the three invalids?" Gcnsfm said,
Ya » you may go on.’ Whereupon the monk remarked.


FROM THK CHINESE ZEN MASTERS n*3

■ L Fanc thee well, O master I” and left the room, Gensha said,
“Not that* not that/" We can see that ihi.s monk h:es 1 \illy
grasped Gensha,.

Later on, Hogeri (Fa-yen* died 95O) made this statement:
s A Mien I listened to Master Jizo {Ti-tsang) mating reference
to this monk's remark, 1 was enabled lo understand Gendin's
sermon on the three invalids.”

I ask you now* "[Here is a puzzle for you, O monks!]
If that monk did not understand Gensha* how was it that
Hagen made this statement caf his? If Lint monk understood
Gens ha* w hy did the latter declare, ‘Not that, not Liiat 7 JJ

One day Jizo said to Gensha, “I am told that you have
given a sermon on the three invalids* is that so? 1 ' Gensha
answered* B< Yes/* Jizo then said, s 'l have my eyes* cars* nose*
and tongue; what treatment would you give me? 1 * Gensha
was quite satisfied with this request on the part of Jizo.

When Gensha is understood* you will realize that his
spirit is not to be sought in words. You will also see that those
who understand make themselves naturally distinguishable
from the rest.

Later when a monk came to Ummon (Yun-men* died
949) And asked him about Gcn»ha*s sermon* Ummon
was ready to demonstrate it in the following way, for he
thoroughly understood Gensha. Said Ummon to the monk*
l 'You make bows.” When the monk rose from making bows,
Ummon poked him with a staff, and the monk drew back.
Said U nun on* ''You are not blind then ?* 1 Ummon now told
him to approach* and the monk approached. Said Ummon*.
“Von Are not deaf then?” Finally, he said* “Du you under¬
stand ? 11 ‘‘No* master/* being the reply, Ummon remarked,
"Yon arc not dumb then ?* 1 This made the monk grasp the
point.

IT this monk of Umiiion*s had any sort of understanding
about Gensha, he would have kicked up the master’s chair
when he was I old to make bows* and no more fussing would
have been necessary. In the meantime let me ask you whether
Ummon and Gensha both understood the problem in the
same way* or not. I tell you Lhat their understanding is


124


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


directed to one point. That the ancient masters come out
among us and make all kinds of contrivance is because they
wish to see somebody bite their hook and be caught up. They
thus make bitter remarks in order to have us see into the
great event of this life.

My own master Goso (Wu-tsu, died 1104) had this to
say: “Here is one who can talk well but has no under¬
standing; here is another who understands but is unable
to talk about it. When these two present themselves before
you, how will you distinguish the one from the other? If you
cannot make this discrimination, you cannot expect to free
people from their bondage and attachment. But when you
can, I will see to it that, as soon as you enter my gate, I put
on a pair of sandals and run through the inside of your body
several times even before you realize. In case, however, you
fail to have an insight in this matter, what is the use of
hunting around for an old bowl? Better be gone!”

Do you wish to know what is the ultimate meaning of
these complications in regard to the blind, deaf, and dumb?
Let us see what Seccho says about it.


Seccko’s Remarks in Verse

Blind, deaf, dumb! [—Even before any word is uttered.
—The three sense-organs are perfectly sound.—
Already finished is one paragraph!]

Infinitely beyond the reach of imaginative contrivances!
[—Where do you wish to hunt for it?—Is there
anything here which permits your calculations?—
What relationship have they after all?]

Above the heavens and below the heavens! [—Perfectly
free is the working of Truth.—Thou hast said!]

How ludicrous! How disheartening! [—What is it that
is so ludicrous, so disheartening?—Partly bright and
partly dark.]

Li-lou does not know how to discriminate the right
colour. [—Blind fellow!—A good craftsman leaves
no trace.—Blind to the very core!]


125


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS

How can Shih-k c uang recognize the mysterious tune?
[—Deaf in his ears!—There is no way to appreciate
the greatest merit.—Deaf to the very core!]

What life can compare with this?—Sitting alone quietly
by the window, [—This is the way to go on.—Do not
try to get your livelihood in a cave of ghosts.—Break
up all at once this cask of coal tar!]

I observe the leaves fall and the flowers bloom as the
seasons come and go. [—-What season do you think
it is now?—Do not regard this as doing-nothing¬
ness.—Today, morning is followed by evening; to¬
morrow, morning is followed by evening.]

Seccho now remarked: “Do you understand, or not?”

[—“Repeated in the gatha.”]

An iron bar without a hole! [—Coming up with your
own confession!—Too bad that he was released too
easily,—“Then be struck.”]

Yengo's Comment on Seccho
“Blind, deaf, dumb!

Infinitely beyond the reach of imaginative contri¬
vances !”

In this, Seccho has swept everything away for you
what you see together with what you do not see, what you
hear together with what you do not hear, and what you talk
about together with what you cannot talk about. All these
are completely brushed off, and you attain the life of the
blind, deaf, and dumb. Here all your imaginations, con¬
trivances, and calculations are once for all put an end to, they
are no more made use of, this is where lies the highest point of
Zen, this is where we have true blindness, true deafness, and
true dumbness, each in its artless and effectless aspect.

“Above the heavens and below the heavens!

How ludicrous! how disheartening!”

Here Seccho lifts up with one hand and with the other
puts down. Tell me what he finds to be ludicrous, what he


*36 MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM

finds to be disheartening. It is ludicrous that riiis dumb
person is not after all dumb, that this deaf one is not after
ali deaf; it is disheartening that the one who is not at all
blind is blind for all that, and that the one who is not at all
deaf is deaf for all th&±L

“Li-lou does not know how to discriminate the right
001001 .”

When he k unable to discriminate between blue and
yellow^ nrd and white, he is certainly a blind man- He lived
in the reign of the Emperor Huang. He is said in have been
able to discern the point of a soft hair at a distance of one
hundred steps. His eye-sight was extraordinary, ’When the
Emperor Huang had a pleasuie-trip to ihe: River Ch'ih, he
dropped Ills precious jewel in the water and made Li letch
h up. But he failed. The Emperor made Ch'ih-kou search
for it, hut he also failed to locate it. I .a ter Hsiang-wang was
ordered to get it, and he got it. Hence:

"When Hsiang-wan g goes down, the precious gem
shines most brilliantly-

But where Lidou walks about, the waves rise even
to the sky."

Wh™ we come up to these higher spheres, even the eyes
of Li-lou are incapacitated to distinguish which is Lire right
colour.

“How can Shih-kuang recognize the mysterious tune ? 11

Shih-kuang was sou of Ghing-ku&ng of Chin in the
province of Cl Jang in, the Chou dynasty, His other name
was Tzu-ych. He could thoroughly distinguish the five
sounds and the six notes, he could even hear the ants fight
on the other ride of a lull, When Ohiri and Ch<u were at war,
Shih-kuang could idl, by merely quietly playing on the
brings of his lute, that die engagement would sureiv be
unfavourable for Ch'u, In spite of his extraordinary sensi¬
tiveness* Srccfao (flsueli-L'ou) declares dial he is unable to
recognize the mysterious tunc. After all, one who is not at all


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS


127


deaf is really deaf in his ears. The most exquisite note in the
higher spheres is indeed beyond the ear of Shih-kuang. Says
Seccho: “I am not going to be a Li-lou, nor to be a Shih-
kuang, but

“What life can compare with this?—Sitting alone
quietly by the window,

I observe the leaves fall, the flowers bloom as the
seasons come and go.”

When one attains this stage of realization, seeing is
no-seeing, hearing is no-hearing, preaching is no-preaching.
When hungry one eats, when tired one sleeps. Let the leaves
fall, let the flowers bloom as they like. When the leaves fall,
I know it is the autumn; when the flowers bloom, I know it
is the spring. Each season has its own features.

Having swept everything clean before you, Seccho now
opens a passageway, saying: “Do you understand, or not?”
He has done all he could for you, he is exhausted, only able
to turn about and present to you this iron-bar without a hole.
It is a most significant expression. Look and see with your
own eyes! If you hesitate, you miss the mark for ever.

Yengo (Yuan-wu, the author of this commentary note)
now raised his hossu and said, “Do you see?” He then struck
his chair and said, “Do you hear?” Coming down from the
chair, he said, “Was anything talked about?”


vm

The Ten Oxherding Pictures
Preliminary

The author of these “Ten Oxherding Pictures” is said
to be a Zen master of the Sung Dynasty known as Kaku-an
Shi-en (Kuo-an Shih-yuan) belonging to the Rinzai school.
He is also the author of the poems and introductory words
attached to the pictures. He was not however the first who
attempted to illustrate by means of pictures stages of Zen


128


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


discipline, for in his general preface to the pictures he refers
to another Zen master called Seikyo (Ching-chu), probably
a contemporary of his, who made use of the ox to explain his
Zen teaching. But in Seikyo’s case the gradual development
of the Zen life was indicated by a progressive whitening of
the animal, ending in the disappearance of the whole being.
There were in this only five pictures, instead of ten as by
Kaku-an. Kaku-an thought this was somewhat misleading
because of an empty circle being made the goal of Zen
discipline. Some might take mere emptiness as all important
and final. Hence his improvement resulting in the “Ten
Oxherding Pictures ’ 5 as we have them now.

According to a commentator of Kaku-an’s Pictures,
there is another series of the Oxherding Pictures by a Zen
master called Jitoku Ki (Tzu-te Hui), who apparently knew
of the existence of the Five Pictures by Seikyo, for Jitoku’s are
six in number. The last one, No. 6 , goes beyond the stage of
absolute emptiness where Seikyo’s end: the poem reads:

“Even beyond the ultimate limits there extends a
passageway,

Whereby he comes back among the six realms of
existence;

Every worldly affair is a Buddhist work,

And wherever he goes he finds his home air;

Like a gem he stands out even in the mud,

Like pure gold he shines even in the furnace;

Along the endless road [of birth and death] he
walks sufficient unto himself,

In whatever associations he is found he moves
leisurely unattached.”

Jitoku’s ox grows whiter as Seikyo’s, and in this particular
respect both differ from Kaku-an’s conception. In the latter
there is no whitening process. In Japan Kaku-an’s Ten
Pictures gained a wide circulation, and at present all the
oxherding books reproduce them. The earliest one belongs
I think to the fifteenth century. In China however a different
edition seems to have been in vogue, one belonging to the


I

Searching for the Ox


Platt II


II

Seeing the Traces

Plate III


Ill


Seeing the Ox


Plate IV


Plait V


IV

Catching the Ox


V

HfTtJmK; the Ox


Piair VI


PhlLr 17 /


VI

Comiflp Nomr fjd the Ch'^ back


VII

The Ok Forgotten, Leaving the Man Abnc


r/i/


, v (


virr

Tiic Ox nnd Uic Man, Both vui of Sight


Plate IX


IX

KrturmTig to the Origin, Rack lo ihr Source


Piatt X


Plate XI


X

Entering the City with Bliss-bestowing Hands


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS 129

Seikyo and Jitoku series of pictures. The author is not known.
The edition containing the preface by Chu-hung, 1585, has
ten pictures, each of which is preceded by Pu-ming’s poem.
As to who this Pu-ming was, Chu-hung himself professes
ignorance. In these pictures the ox’s colouring changes
together with the oxherd’s management of him. The quaint
original Chinese prints are reproduced below, and also
Pu-ming’s verses translated into English.

Thus as far as I can identify there are four varieties of
the Oxherding Pictures: (1) by Kaku-an, (2) by Seikyo,
( 3 ) by Jitoku, and (4) by an unknown author.

Kaku-an’s “Pictures” here reproduced are by Shubun,
a Zen priest of the fifteenth century. The original pictures
are preserved at Shokokuji, Kyoto. He was one of the
greatest painters in black and white in the Ashikaga period.


The Ten Oxherding Pictures, I.
by Kaku-an

1

Searching for the Ox. The beast has never gone astray, and
what is the use of searching for him? The reason why the
oxherd is not on intimate terms with him is because the
oxherd himself has violated his own inmost nature. The
beast is lost, for the oxherd has himself been led out of the
way through his deluding senses. His home is receding
farther away from him, and byways and crossways are ever
confused. Desire for gain and fear of loss bum like fire; ideas
of right and wrong shoot up like a phalanx.

Alone in the wilderness, lost in the jungle, the boy is
searching, searching!

The swelling waters, the far-away mountains, and
the unending path;

Exhausted and in despair, he knows not where to go,

He only hears the evening cicadas singing in the
maple-woods.


1


130


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


n

Seeing the Traces . By the aid of the sutras and by inquiring
into the doctrines, he has come to understand something,
he has found the traces. He now knows that vessels, however
varied, are all of gold, and that the objective world is a
reflection of the Self. Yet, he is unable to distinguish what is
good from what is not, his mind is still confused as to truth
and falsehood. As he has not yet entered the gate, he is
provisionally said to have noticed the traces.

By the stream and under the trees, scattered are the
traces of the lost;

The sweet-scented grasses are growing thick—did he
find the way?

However remote over the hills and far away the beast
may wander,

His nose reaches the heavens and none can conceal it.


m

Seeing the Ox. The boy finds the way by the sound he
hears; he sees thereby into the origin of things, and all his
senses are in harmonious order. In all his activities, it is
manifestly present. It is like the salt in water and the glue
in colour. [It is there though not distinguishable as an
individual entity.] When the eye is properly directed, he will
find that it is no other than himself.

On a yonder branch perches a nightingale cheerfully
singing;

The sun is warm, and a soothing breeze blows, on the
bank the willows are green;

The ox is there all by himself, nowhere is he to hide
himself;

The splendid head decorated with stately horns—
what painter can reproduce him?


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS


■3i


IV

Catching tin Ox. Long lost in the wilderness, the boy has
at last found the ox and his limit! - arc on him* But # owing to
the overwhelming pressure of the outside world, die ox k
hard to keep undcr control. He constantly longs for the old
sweet-scented field. The wild nature is still unruly, and
altogether refuses to be broken. If the oxherd wishes in see
the ox completely in harmony with himself, he has surely
to use the whip freely.

With (he energy of his whole being, the boy has at
last taken hold of the ox:

But how wild his will, how ungovernable his power!

At times he struts up a plateau.

When Jo! he is lost again in a misty unpenetrable
mountain-pass.


v

Herding the Ox. When a thought moves, another follows,
and then another—an endless train of lhoughts is thus
awakened. Through enlightenment all this turns into truth;
but falsehood asserts itself when confusion prevails. Things
oppress us not because of an abjective world, but because of
a selfdccdvmg mind. Do not let the nosc-gtrjng leasts hold
it tightj and allow no vacillation.

The boy is not to separate him.se] f with his whip and
tcthcr fl

Lest the animal should wander away into a world of
defilements;

When the ox is properly tended to, he will grow pure
and docile;

Without a chain, nothing binding^ he will by himself
follow die oxherd.


132


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


VI

Coming Home on the Ox's Back . The struggle is over; the
man is no more concerned with gain and loss. He hums a
rustic tune of the woodman, he sings simple songs of the
village-boy. Saddling himself on the ox’s back, his eyes are
fixed on things not of the earth, earthy. Even if he is called,
he will not turn his head; however enticed he will no more
be kept back.

Riding on the animal, he leisurely wends his way
home:

Enveloped in the evening mist, how tunefully the
flute vanishes away!

Singing a ditty, beating time, his heart is filled with
a joy indescribable!

That he is now one of those who know, need it be
told?


vn

The Ox Forgotten , Leaving the Man Alone . The dharmas are
one and the ox is symbolic. When you know that what
you need is not the snare or set-net but the hare or fish, it is
like gold separated from the dross, it is like the moon rising
out of the clouds. The one ray of light serene and penetrating
shines even before days of creation.

Riding on the animal, he is at last back in his home,

Where lo! the ox is no more; the man alone sits
serenely.

Though the red sun is high up in the sky, he is still
quietly dreaming.

Under a straw-thatched roof are his whip and rope
idly lying.


FROM THE CHINESE SEEN MASTERS


*33


vm

77 * O* (he Mm Both Gong mt of Sight , 1 All confusion
is set aside, and serenity alone prevails; even the idea of
holiness does not obtain. He does not linger about where
the Buddha is, and as to where there is no Buddha ho speedily
passes by e When there exists no form of dualism, even a
thousand-eyed one fails to detect a loop-hole* A holmes
before which birds offer flowers is but a farce*

All is empty—the whip, the rope* the man* and the
ox:

Who can ever survey the vastness of heaven?

Over the furnace burning ablaze, not a flake of snow
can Fall:

When this state of tilings obtains, manifest is the spin!
of the ancient master.


DC

Re turning to ikt Origin^ Buck to the Source. From die very
beginning, pure and immaculate, the man has never been
affected by defilement. He watches the growth of things*
while himself abiding in the immovable serenity of non-
assertion. He does not identify himself with the maya-lifce
transformations [that are going on about him], nor has he
any use of himself [which is artificiality]* The waters are
blue, the mountains are green; sitting alone, he observes
things undergoing changes*


_ 1 ll will be interfacing xo note wfcit a myitic philosopher haa to iay abend
thta: man (ball breornr truly pour afiJ a) free from mature ^ til ai lie

w&j when he wai bom. And I ury to you, by ihe eternal irutlt, dx&t u Iohe
41 yc desire lo fulfil tiie will qf God, and tuive any dnire nfler eternity and
God; lO lone; are ye nut truly poor, lie alone bath true apirituaJ poverty who
wiD# nothing. knowi niching, dcaira Willing.,' 1 —(Flora Eekliart 05 niPUini
by Inge in Lift, ^ #


s 34


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


To return to the Origin, to be back at the Source—
already a false step this!

Far better it is to stay at home* blind and deaf, and
without mudi ado;

Sitting in the hut, he takes no cognisance of things
outside*

Behold the streams flowing—whither nobody knows'
and the (lowers vividly red—for whom are they?


x

Entering the City with Bliss-bestawing Hands. His thatched
cottage gate b dosed, and even the wisest know' him not.
No glimpses of his inner life are to he caught; for lie goes on
hh own way without following the steps of dm ancient sages.
Carrying a gourd 1 he goes out into the market* leaning
against a staff* he comes home* He is found in company with
wtue-bibbers and butchers* he and they are aU converted
into Buddhas.

Barc-chcstcd and hare-footed* he comes out into the
marketplace;

Daubed with mud and ashes, how broadly he smiles 1

There is no need for the miraculous power of the gods.

For he touches, and lo t the dead trees are in full
bloom.


* Symbol uT emptiDcs

* No Mira property lie liau, 1W he knows that the desire to pqraeM h the
curie of huriiim life.


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS


The Ten Oxherding Pictures, IL
i * Undisciplined

With liis horns fiercely projected in the air the beast

snortSj

Madly running over ihc mountain paths, farther and
farther he goes astray!

A dark cloud is spread across the entrance of the
valley,

And who knows how much of the fine fresh herb is
trampled under his vyld hoofs!


136


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


2 . Discipline Begun


I am in possession of a straw rope, and I pass it
through his nose,

For once he makes a frantic attempt to run away, but
he is severely whipped and whipped;

The beast resists the training with all the power there
is in a nature wild and ungoverned,

But the rustic oxherd never relaxes his pulling tether
and ever-ready whip.


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS


>37


3. In Harness

Gradually getting into harness the beast is now
content to be led by the nose,

Crossing the stream, walking along the mountain
path, he follows every step of the leader;

The leader holds the rope tightly in his hand never
letting it go,

All day long he is on the alert almost unconscious of
what fatigue is.


138


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


After long days of training the result begins to tell
and the beast is faced round,

A nature so wild and ungoverned is finally broken,
he has become gentler;

But the tender has not yet given him his full con¬
fidence,

He still keeps his straw rope with which the ox is now
tied to a tree.


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS


>39


Under the green willow tree and by the ancient
mountain stream,

The ox is set at liberty to pursue his own pleasures;

At the eventide when a grey mist descends on the
pasture.

The boy wends his homeward way with the animal
quiedy following.


140


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


On the verdant field the beast contentedly lies idling
his time away,

No whip is needed now, nor any kind of restraint;
The boy too sits leisurely under the pine tree,

Playing a tune of peace, overflowing with joy.


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS


141


The spring stream in the evening sun flows languidly
along the willow-lined bank,

In the hazy atmosphere the meadow grass is seen
growing thick;

When hungry he grazes, when thirsty he qua®, as
time sweetly slides,

While the boy on the rock dozes for hours not
noticing anything that goes on about him.


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


I -l*


ft. AH Forgotten

The beast all in white now is surrounded by the
white clouds.

The man L* perfectly at his ease and care-free* so is his
companion;

The white clouds penetrated by she moon-light cast
their white shadows below,

The white clouds and die bright moon-light—each
following its course of movement.


FROM THE CHINESE ZEN MASTERS


9. Tkz Solitary Moon

Nowhere is the beast, and the oxherd is master of his
time.

He is a solitary cloud wafting lightly along the
mountain peaks;

Clapping liin hands he sings joyfully in the moon-light,

But remember a List wall is still left barring his
homeward walk*


*44


MANUAL OF KEN BUDDHISM


io. Bulk Vmiskid


Roth the man and the animal have disappeared:, no
traces are left*

The bright moon-light h empty and shadow less with
all the ten-thousand objects in it;

If anyone should ask the meaning; of this.

Behold the lilies of the field and its fresh sweet-
scented verdure.


I 1»


DAITO KOKUSHI HAKUIN ZENJI

By Hakuin Zenji Said lo have been carved by himself

(See page 145) (See page 151)


V, FROMTHE JAPANESE ZEN MASTERS

Dai-n (1*35-1308), Dalto (1282-1336), and Kwaraan (1^77—
1360) arc the three outstanding luminaries in the history of the
Japanese Rinztd school oFZem All the masters of this school now
in Japan are their descendants Duhq went to China and studied
Zen under Kudu (Hsu-t’ang) in southern China, whose high
expectations uf the foreign dSciplc were fully justified as we ran
teatify in the Japanese history of Zen* Daito is the founder of
Duhukuji monastery and Kwanza n that of the Myoshinji, both
of Kyoto. Muso [1273-135!) who followed another lineage of the
Zen master wa s versatile in artistic accomplish men Ul There
are many noted gardens designed by him which are still well
pieserved* He was the founder of many Zen temples throughout
Japan, among which the most notable one is Tenryuji at Saga,
near Kyoto. Hakuin (1685-1768) is the father of modem Rimtai
Zen. Without him ii would he hard to tell the fate nf Zen in
Japan. He was no founder of a temple of any ecclesiastical
importance; he lived his unpretentious life in a small temple in
Suruga province, devoting himself to fhe bringing up of Zen
monks and to the propagation of his teaching among laymen-

FROM THE JAPANESE ZEN MASTERS

1

Dai-o Kqkushi u On Zen * 1

TTict c is a reality even prior to heaven and earth;

Indeed, il has no form, much less a name;

Eyes fad to see it;

It has no voice for ears Ln detect;

To call it Mind or Buddha violates its nature.

For it then becomes like a visionary flower in the air;

It h not Mind, nor Buddha;

Absolutely quiet, and yet illummatingiu amyatcriousway,

It allows itself to be perceived only by die dear-eyed.

It is Dharma truly beyond form and sound;

It h i'ao having nothing to do with words.


K


X46


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


Wishing to entice the blind,

The Buddha has playfully let words escape his golden
mouth;

Heaven and earth are ever since filled with entangling
briars.

O my good worthy friends gathered here,

If you desire to listen to the thunderous voice of the
Dharma,

Exhaust your words, empty your thoughts,

For then you may come to recognize this One Essence.

Says Hui the Brother, “The Buddha’s Dharma

Is not to be given up to mere human sentiments.”

2

Dai-o Kokushi’s Admonition 1

Those who enter the gate of Buddhism should first of
all cherish a firm faith in the dignity and respectability of
monkhood, for it is the path leading them away from poverty
and humbleness. Its dignity is that of the sonship of the
Dharmaraja of the triple world; no princely dignity which
extends only over a limited area of the earth compares
with it. Its respectability is that of the fatherhood of all
sentient beings; no parental respectability belonging only
to the head of a little family group equals it. When the monk
finds himself in this position of dignity and respectability,
living in the rock-cave of the Dharma where he enjoys the
greatest happiness of a spiritual life, under the blissful
protection of all the guardian gods of the Triple Treasure,
is there any form of happiness that can surpass his?

The shaven head and the dyed garment are the noble
symbols of Bodhisattvahood; the temple-buildings with all
their ornamental fixtures are the honorific emblems of
Buddhist virtue. They have nothing to do with mere
decorative effects.

1 Left to his disciples as his last words when he was about to pass away.


FROM THE JAPANESE ZEN MASTERS 147

That the monk, now taking on himself these forms of
dignity and respectability, is the recipient of all kinds of
offerings from his followers; that he is quietly allowed to
pursue his study of the Truth, not troubling himself with
worldly labours and occupations—this is indeed due to the
loving thoughts of Buddhas and Fathers. If the monk fails
in this life to cross the stream of birth-and-death, when does
he expect to requite all the kindly feelings bestowed upon
him by his predecessors? We are ever liable as time goes on
to miss opportunities; let the monk, therefore, be always on
the watch not to pass his days idly.

The one path leading up to the highest peak is the
mysterious orthodox line of transmission established by
Buddhas and Fathers, and to walk along this road is the
essence of appreciating what they have done for us. When
the monk fails to discipline himself along this road, he
thereby departs from the dignity and respectability of monk¬
hood, laying himself down in the slums of poverty and misery.
As I grow older I feel this to be my greatest regret, and,
O monks, I have never been tired day and night of giving
you strong admonitions on this point. Now, on the eve of
my departure, my heart lingers with you, and my sincerest
prayer is that you are never found lacking in the virtue of the
monkish dignity and respectability, and that you ever be
mindful of what properly belongs to monkhood. Pray, pray,
be mindful of this, O monks!

This is the motherly advice of Nampo; 1 old monk-
mendicant of Kencho Monastery.

3

Daito Kokushi’s Admonition

O you, monks, who are in this mountain monastery,
remember that you are gathered here for the sake of religion
and not for the sake of clothes and food. As long as you have

1 This is Dai-o Kokushi’s own name, Dai-o being his posthumous honorary
title.


$


MAHQAh OF ZEN BUDDHISM

^ U !'?'i rs “* ! , he bod >J- y° u have clothes to wear,

nf^r^y fr you , have 1 a mouth > y° u ^ ^ve food to eat.
Bt e\er mindful, throughout the twelve hours of the dav, to

apply yourselves to the study of the Unthinkable. Time passes
like an arrow, never let your minds be disturbed by worldly
cares. Ever, ever be on the loot-out. After my departure
son,r Of you may preside over five temples in prospered
coadtaanw wth towers and halls and holy boob all decorated

® ' j and Sl ^ ve:r > ™ d devotee* may noisily crowd into the
grounds ; some may pass hours in reading the sutnu and re-

“ ) n j *Jf t dbar f tu3 * aild Slttin ff long in contemplation may

^1 nhtt ' mW L VC r up 1 ° $lttp; thcy ma >’’ ^ting once a day
and observing the fastdays, and, throughout the six periods

T pfa S l,Se t 1 ^^ous doeda. Even when they
Efc dw *f d to ifthdr thoughts arc not really

dwe] mg On the mysterious and untransmissible Way of I he

ofmtZ i Cy ™ ay yet comc 10 Jg«ore the law

rL“^ causation, ending in a complete downlal] of the

true religion. AH such belong to the family of evil spirits-
however long my departure front the world may bef they
?uVon- H * 5 C , d Tdescendants. Let, however, there be

h!55STJh d i Wld * , S lj wh L ma> ' hc hxin S ^ Wilderness in a
hut thatched With one bundle or straw and passing his da vs

by eahng the roots of wild herbs cooked in a pot with

swiT rF* bLJl '? h * ^nglc-mindedly applies himself to the

affhirs ’ be **■ very one who
luis a daily interview with me and knows how to be grateful

txt.h«saj" r ^ such •°—*


D.^ito Ko rubhi’s Last Poem

Buddhas and 1-at hers cut Lu pieces_

The sword is ever kept sharpened I
Where the wheel mrris s
The void gnashes its teetli.


FKOM TFfE Japanese zen masters


*49


IV


Kw anzan Kokushi’s Admonition 1

’ Sh0getl P ? ri ? d t ra 59 ) that our forefather
the venerable Dm-o crossed the stormy waves of the great

£" m 7S ? f d >- Z “ - S “'“s- He rnicrvS

rw .r^ W Ztl1 mastcr at Ching-tz' u

Jmzu) dj]rf under him Dai-o whole-heartedly devoted
hjjiisdf to die realization of Zeii experience. Finally at
Ching-shan Kuizanj he was able to master all the secrets
lx:longing to it For this reason hr u.. l:!


. . S'™ « 1f n 'hat his descendants would ever be

SSSfn • Tliai the rightful lineage of the Yang-chi
(Yoffi) school was transported to this country of ours is to be
ascribed to the mem of our venerable forefather.

Dauo my old venerable teacher, followed the steps of
Uai-o who stayed in the western part or the capital; per-
sonaily attending on him, he was in close contact with the

K>nrh d '^ W £ hl3 . re3lt](:ilce ** Manju m Kyoto and at
mend? m k ^ ln - tku ^- Ihroughout the many years of
attendance Dauo never laid himself on a bed for sleep. He
reminds us in many respects of the ancient worthies. When
Dually he mastered Zen, the venerable Dai-© gave him his
testimony but ordered him to mature his experience for
twenty years m quiet retirement. Surely enough, he proved
to be a great successor truly worthy of his illustrious master,
L aw>. He resuscitated Zen which had been in a stale of
decline; he left an admonition for his followers to be ever
mindluf of keeping vigorously alive die true spirit of Zen
discipline - all this is his merit.

1 Mum Del Uku U ihr hmori&C tide Ip^tbummxlv fdvrn bv an Km^rm hi

AH the Zen masla, „[ U* prarr,. day
Of “ cheralwtl about .Hr geiwinfoen


15U MANUAL OF ZEN RUDDHISM

Thai in obedience to the august ©rdcr of fits Holiness
the £x-Emperor Hanazono 1 have come to establish this
monastery, is dtie to the motherly love of my bite master
who chewed food for his helpless baby. O my followers,
yon may some day forget mi:* but if you should forget the
loving thoughts of Dai-o and Dai to, you are not my descen¬
dants; X pray you to strive to grasp the origin of things*
Po-vun (Hakuun) was impressed with the great merit of
Pahehang (Hyakjo), and Hu-cH'hi (Kokyu) was touched
with the words of warning given by Po-yun (Hakuun). Such
are our precedents. You will do well not to commit the fault
of picking leaves or of searching for branches [instead of
taking hold of ihe root itself].


v

Muso KoKUiafs Admonition

X have: three kinds of disciples: those who, vigorously
shaking off all entangling cireurmtarices, and with single¬
ness of thought apply themselves to the study of their own
[spiritual] affairs, are of the first class. Those who are not
SO single-minded in the study 7 but scattering iheir attention
are fond of book-learning, are of the second. Those who,
covering their own spiritual brightness, are only occupied
with the dribbling* of the Buddhas and Fathers are called the
lowest. As to those minds that arc intoxicated by secular
literature and engaged in establishing themselves as men of
letters and arc simply laymen with shaven heads, they do not
belong even to the lowest. As regards those who think only
of indulging in food and sleep and give themselves up to
indolence—could such be called members of the Black
Robe? They are truly, as were designated by an old master,
dcihes-racks and rice-bags. Inasmuch as they are not monks,
they ought not to be permitted to call themselves my
disciples and enter the monastery and sub-temples as well;
even a temporary sojourn is to be prohibited, not to speak


FROM THE JAPANESE ZEN MASTERS ijt

of their application as student-monks. When an old man like
myself speaks thus, you may think he is lacking in all-
embracing Jove, buL the main thing is to let them know of
their own faults, and, reforming themselves, to become
growing plants in the patriarchal gardens.


vt

Kakuin’s “Sono of Meditation”

Sentient beings arc primarily all Buddhas:

It is like ice and water.

Apart From water no ice can exist;

Outside sentient beings, where do we find the
Buddhas?

Not knowing how near the Truth is,

People seek it far away,—what a pity!

They are like him who, in the midst of water,

Cries in thirst so imploringly;

They are like the soil of a rich man
Who wandered away among the poor.

The reason why we transmigrate through the six
worlds

Is because we arc lost in the darkness of ignorance;
Going astray further and further in the darkness.
When arc we able to get away from birth-and-
deuth?

As regards the Meditation practised in the Maha*
yana,

We have tin words to praise it fully:

The virtues of perfection such as charity, morality,
etc..

And the invocation of the Buddha's name, confession,
and ascetic discipline,

And many other good deeds of meri t,—

All these issue from the practice of Meditation;


15a


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM

Even those who have practised it just for one sitting
Will see all their evil karma wiped clean;

Nowhere will they find the evil paths,

But the Pure Land will be near at hand.

With a reverential heart, let them to this Truth
Listen even for once.

And let them praise it, and gladly embrace it,

And they will surely be blessed most infinitely.

For such as, reflecting within themselves.

Testify to the truth of Self-nature,

To the truth that Self-nature is no-nature,

They have really gone beyond the ken of sophistry.
For them opens the gate of the oneness of cause and
effect,

And straight runs the path of non-duality and
non-trinity.

Abiding with the not-particular which is in parti¬
culars,

Whether going or returning, they remain for ever
unmoved;

Taking hold of the not-tbought which lies in thoughts,
In every act of theirs they hear the voice of the truth.
How boundless the sky of Samadhi unfettered!

How transparent the perfect moon-light of the
fourfold Wisdom!

At that moment what do they lack?

As the Truth eternally calm reveals itself to them,
This very earth is the Lotus Land of Purity,

And this body is the body of the Buddha.


VI. THE BUDDHIST STATUES AND
PICTURES IN A ZEN MONASTERY


Visitors to a Zen monastery in Japan will be greeted by
various Buddhist figures enshrined in the different parts of the
institution. This section is devoted to the description of such
figures.

I

The Buddha

Each Buddhist sect in Japan has its own Honzon, i.e. “the
chief honoured one” as its main object of worship: for
instance, the Jodo and the Shin have Amida Nyorai; the
Shingon, Dainichi Nyorai (Mahavairocana); the Nichiren
and the Zen, Shaka Nyorai (Sakyamuni). But this tradition
is not uniformly observed by the Zen sect and much latitude
has been allowed to the founder of each temple or monastery.

The Buddha Sakyamuni is the proper one no doubt for
all Zen institutions, for Zen claims to transmit the Buddha-
heart — the first transmission taking place between Sakya¬
muni and Mahakashyapa. Sakyamuni thus occupies the
main seat of honour on the Zen altar. But frequently we find
there a statue of Kwannon (Avalokitesvara), or Yakushi
(Bhaishajyaguru), or Jizo (Kshitigarbha), or Miroku
(Maitreya), or even a trinity of Amida, Shaka, and Miroku.
In this latter case Amida is the Buddha of the past, Shaka of
the present, and Miroku of the future.

When the Honzon is Sakyamuni he is sometimes at¬
tended by a pair of Bodhisattvas and another of Arhats.
The Bodhisattvas are Monju (Manjusri) and Fugen (Saman-
tabhadra), and the Arhats are Kasho (Mahakashyapa) and
Anan (Ananda). Sakyamuni is here both historical and
“metaphysical”, so to speak. Seeing him attended by his
two chief disciples, he is a historical figure, but with Monju
and Fugen who represent or symbolize wisdom and love, the

• >53


*54


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


two ruling attributes of the highest Reality, Sakyamuni is
Vairocana standing above the world of transmigrations.
Here we see the philosophy of the Avatamsaka or Gandavyuha
incorporated into Zen. In fact, our religious life has two
aspects—the experience itself and its philosophy.

This is represented in Buddhism by the historical trinity
of Sakyamuni, Kashyapa, and Ananda, and by the meta¬
physical one of Vairocana, Manjusri, and Samantabhadra.
Ananda stands for learning, intellection, and philoso-
phizmg; Kashyapa for life, experience, and realization;
and Sakyamuni naturally for the unifying body in which
experience and intellection find their field of harmonious
co-operation. That religion needs philosophy is sometimes
forgotten, and one of the great merits achieved by Buddhism
is that it has never ignored this truth, and wherever it is
pr°pag a ted it helps the native genius of that land to develop
its philosophy or to supply an intellectual background to its
already-existing beliefs.

Perhaps it is only in the Zen monastery that the birth
of the Buddha, his Enlightenment, and his Nirvana are
commemorated. Mahayana Buddhism is much given up to
the idealistic or metaphysical or transcendental interpreta¬
tion of the historical facts so called in the life of the Buddha,
and the evolution of the Bodhisattva-ideal has pushed the
historical personages to the background. Vairocana or
Amitabha has thus come to take the place of Sakyamuni
tli Arli' t* n< ^ a ®°dhisattvas has completely displaced

n jjl , Z ?-r *“* ? ot for go«en the historical side of the
uddha s life. While Zen is not apparently concerned with
earthiy affairs, the fact that it has been nurtured in China,
where history plays an important role in the cultural life of
the people, points to its connection again with the earth. So

T?^^ ee m ° St Slgm< ? cant events 1,1 the development of
Buddhism are properly remembered and elaborate rituals
are annually performed at all the main Zen monasteries in
Japan for the Buddha s birth-day, his attainment of En¬
lightenment, and his entrance into Nirvana. 1

1 Respectively: April 8 , December 8 , ard February 15.


THE BUDDHIST STATUES AND PICTURES 155

The Buddha’s birth as represented by Zen followers
places him in the most remarkable contrast to that of Christ.
The baby Buddha is made to stand straight up with his
right hand pointing at heaven and with his left at the earth,
and he exclaims: “Above the heavens and below the heavens,
I alone am the honoured one!” The voice reaches the
furthest ends of the chiliocosm, and all the living beings—
even matter is not dead in Buddhism—share in the joy of the
Buddha’s birth, realizing that they too are destined to be
Buddhas.

On April 8 this baby Buddha standing in a bronze basin
is taken out of the shrine, and the ceremony of baptizing the
baby with sweet tea made of some vegetable leaves is
performed; the tea thus used is afterwards given away to
children. Recently, the celebration of this day takes place
on a grand scale in all the larger cities of Japan, not only by
Zen followers but by all Buddhists including monks, priests,
laymen, laywomen, and children.

Sakyamuni as the Enlightened One sits on the lotus
throne enshrined in the main hall of the Zen monastery.
He is generally in the meditation posture.

The Nirvana scene is generally represented pictorially,
except perhaps the one at the Nirvana Hall of Myoshinji,
Kyoto, which is a bronze-slab. The most noted Nirvana
picture is by Chodensu, of Tofukuji, the whole length of
which is about sixteen yards.


Sakyamuni the Buddha in Meditation Posture


156


0


158 ,


*


Buddha's Entrance tniv Jfirvam


Bhaishajyaguru (Takushi Nyorai)


i6o f


THK BUDDHIST STATUES AND PICTURES


l6(


n

The Bodhieattvas

When Saltyammii is not found in the Main Buddha
Hali, one of the following; Bodhisattvas is enshrined in his
plai:*:: Mbnju (Manjiisri), Fugcn fSaraantabhadml, Kwan-
non (Avaloldu-svara), Yakushi (Bhabhajyagunij, Miraku
(Maitreya), Jbo (Kshitigarbha), or sometimes Kokuzo
(Akasagarbha).

Aloiiju and Fugcn generally go in pairs and arc the chief
Bodhisattvas in the Avatamsaka (Krgon) conception of the
world, Monju stands Tor Prajna, Sitting on a lion he holds
a sword which is meant to cut all the intellectual and
affetdona! entanglements in mder to reveal the light of
transcendental Prajna. Fugcn is found on an elephant and
represents love, Kamim. Kanina is contrasted with Trajuain
that Prajna points to annihilation and to identity whereas
Kanina points to construction and lo multiplicity. The one is
intellectual and the other emotional; the one unifies and the
other diversifies. Fugen’s ten vows arc well known tn students
of the Kegon.

Kwannon is exclusively the Bodhisattva of compassion.
In tliis respect he resembles Fugcn. A special chapter is
devoted to him in the Hokkekyo {SaddhaTma-puttdurika) and
also in the Ryogonkya (Suramgam). He in one of the most
popular Rosatsus Or Bodhisattvas of Mahayana Buddhism.
For an English translation of the KwmnaJigf o as rendered into
Chinese by Kumarajiva see p. 30 ofihr present Manual,

Yakushi is the Bodhisattva-doctor. He holds a medicine
jar in his hands and is attended by twelve gods each of whom
represents one of his twelve vows. The main object of his
appearance among us is to cure us of ignorance, which is th e
most fundamental of all die ills the flesh is heir to.

Jizo is principally or popularly the protector or children
nowadays, but his original vows are to save us from wander-
ing in the six paths ol existence. He thus divides himself into


162


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


six forms each of which stands as guardian in each one of the
six paths. Hence the six Jizo we often find by the country
roadside. He is generally represented in priestly robe, with
a shaven head, and carries a long walking staff in his hand.
In the Kamakura and the Ashikaga period he was quite a
popular object of worship, and we find many fine artistic
sculptures of this Bodhisattva in Kamakura.

Miroku is the future Buddha and at present has his abode
in the Tushita Heaven waiting for his time to appear among
us. He is also essentially compassionate as his name implies.
He is sometimes called a Buddha and sometimes a Bod¬
hisattva. Although he is supposed to be in one of the heavens,
he is frequently encountered on earth.


Manjusri (Monju Bosatsu)


I63


Samantabhadra (Fugen Bosatsu)


164

<


1


Avalokitesvara (Kwannon Bosatsu)


165


Maitr&a (Miroku Bosatsu)


166


KshUigarhha [JizQ Bosatfv)


1S7


MAtfVAL OF ZEN HUDDHI 5 M


m


m

Tiie Aehats

The Arbats* generally sixteen in number, arc enshrined
in the second storey of the Lower gate. They are all registered
as dwellers in some remote mountains, and each h the
leader of a large Following* Their superficially grotesque
arid irregular appearances contrast in a strange iW with
those of the Bodhisattvas, They arc miracle workers and
tamers of the wild beasts. This characteristic seems to hat e
excited the interest of the Zen monk-artist who has turned
them into one of the favourite objects of his artistic imagina-

In a Jargc Zen monastery the five hundred Arhats arc
given a special shelter in the premises.

hlmdrapala is one of the sixteen Arhats and had his
while bathing. He h now enshrined in a niche in the
bath-room attached to the Meditation Hall When the
monks take their bath, they pay respect to his figure. 1 The
picture shown below belongs to Engakuji* Kamakura, and
13 one of the national treasures of Japan.


1 Tkt Trtlining p B 4Qm


Fine of tht Six tan Arhats


*


170


Foe of tht Sixteen Arkafs


171

*


172


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


IV


The Protecting Gods

Of the many protecting gods of Buddhism the following
may be counted as belonging more or less exclusively to Zen,
and they have each his or her own special quarter where they
perform their several official duties for Buddhism.

The Niwo or “two guardian kings” are found enclosed
at either side of the entrance gate. They represent the
Vajra god in two forms; the one is masculine with the mouth
tightly closed, and the other is feminine with an opened
mouth. They guard the holy place from intruders.

The Shitenno or the four guardian gods are enshrined
in the Buddha-hall at the four corners of the altar. Of these
gods the most popular one is Tamonten (Vaisravana), the
guardian of the North. This fact comes perhaps from his
being the god of learning and also of wealth.

It is difficult to trace historically how Benzaiten (Saras-
vati), who is the goddess of the River, finds her shrine in a
Zen monastery. Some say that Benzaiten is not Sarasvati
but Sridevi. Whoever she may be, a female form is often
found among the audience of a saintly priest, and later she
appears in his dream telling him how she who was formerly
an enemy of Buddhism is now enlightened and will be one
of its protectors, and so on. In any event there is room even
in the Zen monastery, where the severest kind of asceticism
is supposed to prevail, for a goddess to enter.

Idaten is a god of the kitchen looking after the provisions
of the Brotherhood. The original Sanskrit term for it seems
to be Skanda and not Veda as may be suggested from i-da
or wei-t'o. He is one of the eight generals belonging to Viru-
dhaka, the guardian god of the Southern quarter. He is a
great runner and wherever there is a trouble he is instantly
found there. In the Chinese monastery he occupies an
important seat in the hall of the four guardian gods, but in


THE BUDDHIST STATUES AND PICTURES


*73


the Japanese he is in the little shrine attached to the monks’
dining-room. 1

Ususama Myowo is a god of the lavatory. Ucchushma
in Sanskrit means “to dry”, “to parch”, that is, to clean up
filth by burning, by fire, for fire is a great purifying agency.
Myowo is Vidyaraja, a special class of the gods who assume
a form of wrath. 2

Sambo Kojin seems to be a Japanese mountain god in
the form of an Indian god. He is found outside the temple
buildings. As the monasteries are generally located in the
mountains this god who is supposed to preside over such
districts, is invited to have his residence in the grounds so
that he would be a good protector of the Brotherhood against
the inimical influence of evil spirits.

Daikokuten whose Indian prototype is sometimes re¬
garded as Mahakala is at present a purely Japanese god.
He carries a large bag over his shoulder and stands on rice
bales. Though his phallic origin is suspected, he has nothing,
as he is, to do with it. He is a god of material wealth and like
Idaten looks after the physical welfare of the Brotherhood.
He is not such a universal object of respect in the Zen
monastery.

Wherever the Prajnaparamita is preached or copied
or recited, the sixteen “good gods” stand about the place
and guard the devoted spirits against their being lured
away by the enemy. As Zen is connected with the philosophy
of Prajna they are also the gods of Zen. The picture below
shows more than sixteen figures. Of the extra four personages
standing in the foreground the two on the left are the Jotai
Bosatsu (Sadaprarudita) and Jinsha Daio while the two on
the right are Hsuan-Chuang with a kind of carrying-case on
his back and Hoyu Bosatsu (Dharmodgata). Jotai and Hoyu
are the principal characters in the Prajnaparamita as told in the
second series of my Essays in Buddhism . Hsuan-chuang

is the translator of the Mahaprajnaparamita Sutra in six
hundred fascicles and also that of Nagaijuna’s commentary


i


See also my


Training of the Zen


Monk, p.


106.


T7+ MANUAL OF ZEN BC'DDHISM

on the sutra m one hundred fascicles. While he was travelling
through tiie desert, he was accosted by Jinsha, the god of
the wilderness, who was responsible for the unsuccessful
trips repeatedly attempted by the devoted Chinese pilgrims
to India prior to Hsuan-chuang, The god was carrying sis
of the skulls of such victims about hi# neck, fastening to ihc
Prajnaparamifa as recited by H&uan-diuang, he was converted
and became a most devoted protector of the holy text. Hence
his presence here.


The Two Door-Keeping Cods (J/iwq)


« 76 ,


<


The Four Guardian Gods


Bmzaiten


V


«


*77


u


Sambokojin


178 *

f


180 t


c


.« 8 ,


i8a


MANUAL OF ZEN BUDDHISM


V

Some of the Historical Figures

Besides these mythical personages the Zen monastery
gives shelter to some other historical characters deeply con¬
nected not only with Zen but with Buddhism as a whole.
Bodhidharma as founder of Zen Buddhism naturally
occupies a chief seat of honour beside the Buddha Sakya-
muni. With Japanese Zen followers, however, the founder
of a given temple is more highly honoured, and in each of the
principal Zen institutions in japan there is a special hall
dedicated to the founder of that particular monastery, where
an oil-lamp is kept burning all day and night. Bodhidharma
is a unique figure and may be identified wherever he is. He
is one of the favourite subjects for the Zen masters to try
their amateurish brush. Kwannon is perhaps another such
subject.

Fudaishi (Fu Ta-shih), also known as Zennc Daishi
(Shan-hui), 493-564, was a contemporary of Bodhidharma.
Although he does not belong to the orthodox lineage of Zen
transmission, his life and sermons as recorded in the Trans -
mission of the Lamp ( Ch'uan-teng Lu) 1 are full of Zen flavour, so
to speak. His famous gatha is well known to all Zen students. 2
Tradition makes him the inventor of what is known as
Rinzo ( luntsang ), which is a system of revolving shelves for
keeping the Chinese Tripitaka. For this reason he, together
with his two sons, is set up in the Buddhist library as a kind
of god of literature.

The Zen monastery harbours many old eccentric
characters of whom the most noted of a Chinese origin
are Kanzan (Han-shan) and Jittoku (Shih-te). 3 They are
vagabond poet-ascetics. Another belonging to this group of

1 Fas. XXVII.

• Introduction to Zen Buddhism , p. 58.

8 Zen Essays, III, Plates XIV and XV, with their accompanying explana-


The Buddha with Sixteen Good Gods of the Prajnaparamita
(Hannya Juroku Zenjin)


i


THE BUDDHIST STATUES AND PICTURES . 183

characters is Hotei (Pu-tai). 1 That Hotei plays quite a
different role in Japanese Buddhism from what he does in
China I have explained in my article in the Eastern Buddhist ,
VI, 4, “Impressions of Chinese Buddhism”.

Shotoku Taishi (574-622) was really one of the most
remarkable figures in the cultural history of Japan, and^ it
is no wonder that all the Japanese Buddhists pay special
tribute to his memory by enshrining his statue in one of the
monastery buildings. One of the legendary stories circulating
in Japan with regard to Bodhidharma is that he came to
Japan after he had finished his work in China and was found
in the form of a miserable beggar at Kataoka Yama, near
Nara. Shotoku Taishi met him there and it is said that they
exchanged poems.


M


1 Ibid. Plates X and XVI, and|also Second Series.

\


Damrria {Ta-mo t Bodkid&ama)


f


ia+ j


i Shotoku Taishi


*


| <05

i


I«T) |


f


‘cfipg jo) it/sjppuj


INDEX


Hl abrupt'' iciioal for leaching),
85, 86,9b, 100, 10!

Absolute Riniswi* 31
Aggregate*, five (skandha), 39
AkshayaniatL, 30 fn-
Aiuyajijntina, 51, 52, 53, 5-!
Alluded One, 33
1-34, 35

Amtda Nyorat {Amitabha}* 17,
133, J54
Anagamin, 42

Arnnda (Anan), 16 1 65* 63, l 53, I54
^WitkipixulLuLi, 33
Arartaaamadhi, 42
Arhauhip* 42
Ai fha, S 3

Aiyavalokhesvani* 28
AsamxknJtaj 70, 94 fn Jp 95
Asura, 35, 44,. 47
Ajvpsbwka, 51

Attachment, deep-sealed, 62, $3
Av-iSiikiLv^nnij i) in.

AvailedLira, See under JT«vwtrtdW
Aoatamjaka (Kegun), 154, 161
Attifya> 29

AyvkWh 53 P 54 s 55p 67

uaso (Mp-tju), the great teacher,

104, 106 r 107, llQ r 111
Hcingi, four clajsea of, 35
“Believing in Mind”, 76
Bell, 20; lu strike the, 69
EienCLkCLton, fourfold, 19
Benzaiten (SirMVRti), 172, 177
Bhadrupali^ 1GS
Mjtj, 29
Bhitahum, 34
Bhikshu*, 1% m 34,38
Birth-and'dr^tli (^1?^), 50,

52, 87, 93, 94, 106, 109, 147
Blut-nccked one, 22
Bodhi r 27, 76 fa s 84, 105, 117
Bodhidharma (Tamo? Damma),
50, m f 1S3. LS4
Bydbi^itva flkuatau), 27, 28, 30j
76 in.; ike life of the, 15 p 32, 33 r
34, ^5

N


IkjdhisaUTO-Mali^aitvas, 18, 19
Eadhhottoaiila Sttira, 37
Body-form {rupa^a), 40

Bdsatiu, See Bodhtfatim
Brahma, 33, 37
Brahman, 34

Buddha, 14, 16, 17 fa M 18, !9i 21 1
27, 30, 32, 33, 76 fa-, Ml, 117,
145; and sen dent beings, 112 fa.;
ikUended by two BodhinttyM,
157; body of die* 152; Mind is
the, 113, 119 ; One Mind only is
the. I S3; Seven Buddhas, 15
Guddhu-crowu, 21
Buddha-csscncc, 117
Buddha-farm, 33
Bnddha-kiaowIcdgCfc 47
Buddhadand, 43, 62, 117
Buddha~mind T 109, 110, 11 ?
Buddha-narujrc* 89* 95
Buddha's Birth, 158
Buddha-trutb, 14
Bu&ihi} 62

CAKKAVARTlSj 33 * 49 , 55
Calamities or dis^lcis, tight kinds
nf t 1$, 19

Ca uiatJon + or Cauuhty, 74, 75,
109, 148 ; Twelvefold CJiaio
of [ frTaUtyasmmdpQilti) , 29
Chad va d 47

Charity (dWi), m, 40, 41, 43, 76,
91, 98, 151

"Ghcng-tau Kt M * 69 fa.

Chit or Ckkh-tc, or CMeh-jmg t 13
C:h ih-kmt, 128
CliodcnsUp 155
Chu-hung* 129
CiUa f 49 k, 54, 105
Qtouftv the Kam&jmdraaixii Sulra
m, 102 fa.

Compassion, 35 r 37, 38 r 57
Compiiiionaie hart, 22, 36
Goortssion fc 13 s 151
dai ic. cp k. f ten ( Madia kala), 178* 181
Dmodii Nyurai (MahaYairotatm),
153

,a 7


188


Dw-o Kokiwhi, 145, 148, 149,150
Daiio Kdkusbi, 145, 147. 149,150
Jlrfil^mqnt (nr the defiled} 16,
22, 29, 75, 95, 131, 133

Dauhhi Htrpv, 1J2
Oeva, 19, 35, 44, 47
Dbirani, 17 fr., IS, 62; explained,
21

Dhafuni of Kemoviiig Disajtcrs ta ,

21

“Dharatii of ihe Victorious
Buddh.i-Cruwn”, 23
DEmanindiiari, 30 fn,

Dharmi, the, 13, 14, 16, 19. 39,
33, 34, 35, 40 Jh., 41.42, 43, 46,
GO, 6J, 79, M2, 37, 94. 93, 99,
113, 117, US, 145, 146. See also

]~i diking

Dharnia of 5w>litude (prutA/d-

51

Blmnm-hauler, 9S
Dharjiut -body, K3 h 97
OhwmQeikatu f 15. 16, 81
BliarmaHiruiii* 97
Dharnii^scnee, 1Q9
Dharina-food j 18
Bh^rma-halTp 133
Dharnukayii, 15* Sfr, S2
DhatnwMng, 103, 108
Dfiiiima^niRteriiib,, S3

Dhartriei-mtgh 3 r 55

J0a + 103
riharma-thiincfrrp 97
Dlmtu t 27, 29, 53, 54, fT7
Dh?ana t 76 fn., 103, 105: four
tindsf of, 541

Dipa^kara Buddha* 43, 4g* 84,

Domination* &I r 52, 58, 61, 53,

73, 96
Duhkh, j, 30

EASTERN BmUIrr. Tit, 1S3
Eckliart, 133 fn,

*■ *■ •*<

Egn-suhjtiuux, 56. 6i, DO
Einnm.-ipation (mo kiha), 39: e^ht-
Wd, 92; the triple, 56


INDEX


Emptiness {ntnyiia}, 26,29, 56, 67,
73 , 76 , 77, 73 , 90 , 96 , 100 , 117 ,
13-1 fk; form jj, 67
Sumadlii (if, 109; the threefold
Mtiire of, 76; twenty forms of,

Enlighten tnem, 15, 40, 79, 102,
119, 154, 155; deep, 23; final,
71; perfect, 91; supreme, IS, 20,
36,39,41, 17,48,49, 56, 57, 193
Entrance, the twofold, 73
'‘Entrance by Conduct", 73, 74
'‘Entrance by lteBOn", 73, 74
Essence, 70. 94, 99, 115
Evil paths, 24. Sec aka tinder
ErL fijw#

Excellence, ihtrty-two mruis of,
55

Existence* five path* of* 24 ? 64 *
paths of* 18’ six u tiilis of, 90]
time evil p^hi fi f r tQ f
Kycsj the five, or the fivefold eye-

^ffhlp 81* 118

FAUIUSSj five* 9(7
Fearlessness 34, 93* 102

First Patriarch* 106, Sec d»
Bzdkuffiurma

Five hundred Arhais 16S
Form 28* 94; one sees by,

4i?, 5f>; (Le Idei of, 39, 40
Fodsiistti (Fu Ta-ahih), 132, 186
Fugen ^amantabhadra)* US* 153*
154, 104

Fuocriciii., .sixfold* yi
(Vaspharva, 34* 53
Gaiidavyuhiii 154
Gan^a* ihe, 43

Gan^a^inds, 18* 43* 45, 47, 9S,
103 , US
Gaibha, 51
Cwruda, 34, 35
C^flthSs 73; explained, 13
Omt 119; a perfect. 96
Geisha (Hsuaa-sha), 120* 122 t

Gmvku \ r yuJu) f 73
* kted ( Wu-tm), 124
Gqral Vehicle (Malmyan^ 85


INDEX


iSg


Great Way, 79

Greed, linger, and folly ([he ihrce
pobom), 1$, 55, 55, 84, S4

IIA BIT-ENE RfiY (oUdUd), 51* 5S t

59,#

Hiikmn Zef^ji, 145, 151

Hwiny^yo (Fr&jmparamiia) , 2tS
Himalaya, 97

Hinayaina BuddHsm, 49 fb.

Hogen (Fa-yen), 123
Hokkd&v (Soddhorma-puntlcrika),

30 fa. f 50, 161
Hokoji {Pang-yunij 1 10
Holy Pulh, SO fn-
Hfinzan , 153
Httfhin, 3 7
Hotei (Pu'iai), 183
Heyu Bosatsu iDharmodi^ata),
173

Hsjang-wang, 120
H^ing-s 105
Hjuan-chtiang, 29
Huang-po (Wob&kxi Kiim). 112
Hu-ch'iu (Kokyu), 150
Hiii-tV, 50

Hui-neng, 73, 82, 89 fh*j 104j 105,
105, 146

Hungry gho&ls (prrifl], 16
tLA , or KVi-Ftf, 172
Ida ten (Sbindad^va), 172, 179
Ignorance faridjHa), 27, 73, 89
Impermanence* the Ciatha nf, 15
fomjto* £9 i due six senses, 29
Interfusion, 20, 20 fn^ 69; perfect,
70

fnir&lzKiim t# 7tn Buddhism* Ait M
132 fn-

Iuvslida, three kinds of, 120
Iron Mountain^ 20
Isyam, 33
jam bud-pa, 85
j^ara/Tiaxarur, 30

i cta, 38
iji Bwatfrij 38
Jimha Daio, 173, 174
Jitoltu Ki fTtei-te Hui} fl 123, L29
TiU&ku flWi-le), 182 *


'fnma, S3 fn.; fourfold, 92
jndo* 153


Jotal Bosatsu (Sadapfai odlta), 173
kaku-am' Shi-on (Kuaan Shih-
yuan), 127 t 128, 129
Kalinga, 46
KwtiOQi 17

Kansan 'Han-dun;, 3 S2
Karma, 13, 30, 47, 43, 67, 71, 74,
75, 90*97, 99, It Hi, 117, 152
K annn-i ila idra n«s, 101
Kcmna, 161

Kasha Mahakashvapa 98, 153,
154

Kido [Htthtl&og), 145, 149
KLnnara, 34, 35
Klii d, 8B, 105
Koan, 120
Kohajhin, 17

KoJasxn (Aka&ignrbha), 161
JfiOTjdftw or Diomid Srdm+ 38,
43 fn. See abo T 'ojraedtedika

KxngtvtnmumikyA ( £6

Kihonti, 46, 84
Au bunsfeiiu yu~h. 107 fb,
Kumarajiva, 30 fn., 33 fn., 65, 161
KwnnjlrAi, 30 fa,, 101
KvkTiiuiga BosaisUt or Kwanzeon
Bosh ten (Aval old t c-js^ra) * 16,

2U fn., 22, 23, 26, 30 fc 30 fn., 31,
32, 36, 37, 38, 69, 121, 133> IB1,
365, 182

JSbuuKlv [Stnfiind&ifJukhQ^pGn---
Mrtfl). 20 fa., 26, 30 fa.. 70, 7L,
161

Kwanza n KaWOn* 145* 149,

149 fa.

"AuMte/", 121

Smtra t RjuvtJ&v},

26, 50, 51

LiJodb 124, 126, 137
Mrf/Jil, 82, 83
Mahakashyapa. See /TasAo
Mabmmad, 50
MahaprajnsL, 93
Makaprajnaparamita, 13, 32


* 9 *


INDEX


Mafinyuna, 28, 2fl, 38 fo„ 47,
49 fa., 50, 65, S3, 151, 184
Mahayana *ut™, 7U
Malics\'urfl 1 33
Mabmg a* 34, 35

A/jm*f p 54 f 10$

Mani^cm, or Manl-fewd, 9L
103

Manjusri. See jWm/u
Aiiinodj7uuia t 40 fh. s 54
Mantram, 27 ; eaOtd Jl Sitatam-
pata|a p ^ G5
Mvmslffa t 34, 35
Mar^a, 3()

Master* attd Dixipki of th* Lanka^

t$ie > 76 fn.j, BO fn*

Matanga, 69
Mapi 55 t 66, 70
Meditation, 151
Memory (©MGr™)* 51, 53
Merit, root ^ 40
Alind [or absolute mind)* 16, 59.
51, 52, 54, 57, 58> 5% 65 f 75,
76 fh., 78, 80* 82 P 83 r 96,

105, 100j One, 112, M3, 114,
JI5, 116; Gmjirt.il, f?6, 37
Miiid-tJUathmcn^ 114
Moid-ewence, $5 r 6B S 67 t G@, 89
70p 72, 105

Mm id-only (eit&unairuh 50, Sl f 58
MjVoku (Mairreya), 153, 161, IGS P
IBS

*l^i3iij[i?, 105


Monju (Manjuiri), 65, 66, 115
153, 154, 161. 163
Mount Surntm, 33, 13
Miijinn Banliu, 30, 31, 33, 33,
34,35

Mfltttnritnnmum 0 f
objects, 53
Miuo D.thlu, 149 f„.

Mum Kokushi, 1-15, J49 fh.,
Mycjibtahin, 17
Myowo I Vidyju ujaj, 173
XAOA, 19, 31, 35, 36, 100
rsaRarjuna, 173

j\xunttTuptt 7 29

N.in-yuch Huai-jang, 105, 106


Nichiren, 30 In., 153

.MreJkif 30

Nirvana, 16, 27,39, 50, 52,56, 70,
11, 76 fa, 91, 94 Ik, 106, 154,
155, 159
Niwo, 172, 175
No-birth, 59, 94, 90, 102
Noble Truth, Fourfold, 3U
Noble Wisdom {arttyajittina), 51,
53, 57, 61
No-body, 43
Nu-dharma, 41
N’onwiw ri 111 ! m> | fj | n t 50
Non-doing (aiamikara), 41
Noiwcsii Lance, 43
QUITO, 17
Otic Essence, 108
One Nature, 97
Origiiw I Body, 110
Original Nature, 85, 86, 109
Original Vows (pranidhaw) , 57,161
pai-chano (Hynkjo), 111, ISO
Pai-hsiu, 112
PWg, 110

Parauila, 83; sis, 24, 00; the first,
45

Faramiti (?), 65
PartaTiituSTUfa, S3
£“*><*», evil, 37, 60, 108; rhme,
84, 85,86
Path (Taoj, 73

Pat h*. iLl- rix, £H), 161, Sff a Isn
under Existent*

Perfect Way, 76
Perfection, six virtues of, 113

**4*W, ‘Svall-garing 11 , 74
Piy*M Chi, 120 fij.

Poisons, the three, JO, See aLw

Gftnt, He.

Power, the fivefold, 91
Po-yun (IInkuun), 150
Pcajno, 29, 38fn..69, 71,76 fa,83,
88 In., 93, 96, 101, 103, 161.173
Pnynaparamitii, 26, 27, 28, 44,
48 In., 76, 84, 86, 173
Frfyuapmumila-htultya Sufia, yr
, Jlannya Shm Gyv, 26
ImJiu-vjmadhi, 84 /''*


INDEX


Ptajna-wkdom, $5

Pratyajdi 113 fn r

Pmlyckabuddha, 33, Gi, 62
Pratxsh ti, fix, 67
Prayer, 1G. 19, 20
Pu-diLu^ > jaa

Pure Land, or Ijnd of Purify, 13,

106, m

Puriry, vows d“ 33

ftAF r* 41

R^ihuJa, 69

Rajagriha, 29

Rakslmsaa* 81* 36

Heathy, SO fa., 89, 90, 95, 97, 134

Reality4brut [bhuuduti), 24 T 58

Revulsion (par<ivnitasT^a} r 52

RJildtii, the six, 92 £n.

RiAn, 17

Riiuso 132

Rjffl&mfyo (S^amgama), 19, 2U f t \.,
36, 71, 64 r 161

29

Saharan, ■ j dra-bunad hi p 108
Salm world, or JoAaMiJ, *EZ f 31, 35,
Sakrendraj, 33 , 115
SaLridi^amiri, 12
Sikyaintmi, Ka?hyapa, and
Ananda, huinrical trinity &f_
154* 157

S'amwtkij 28s 108, ls2
S^mantabhkdra. See Fugin
SmualmmtkJbn Mw4 5) £h.

^U7fcdl&z t 6% 72

Snmbu Kojin, 173, 178
Snjjoof 23
Samskiini, 29, 29

SdHuftri/tf, S0, 63, 70, 94, 94 £n,

.SanW,TMt 30

San^ha, 14 t 16

Saripumi, 26, 28

Shriftf* 14

iSflfnri, 166

Seccho, ISO El, 124, 125 p 126
Sfikyo (Ching-cdiu), 123, 129
Sekiio (Shiiw'mi}, 104, 106* 107
Self 66

Sdf-nnture, 24^ SI, 84, 87, 152
Self-rey^atiuQ, 52* 57, 61 *


MPstibstanccj 58
Seng-t^san (Soian} + 76 fb,

Shaha Nyorai (Saky-tummi), 14,
*6, 35, 94, 133, 154, 155, 356,
161, 182
Shen-hsiii, 104
Shih^k Liang, 125, 126
Shin, 153

£Eitngun F 30 fn., OS, 3 53

Shingjw (PmjTw^QTtfitajpidifya) t ag
.Silicon no, the Four OiLiriiian
Gods, 172, 176
Sbotoku Tuhf, 183, 135
Shu bun, 129

Sia paths, the, 90, 161, L«2. See
aEo Emtern*

Sixteen Arhati, 168, 189-71
Sixteen Good Goda of the Praj-
riaparamitu (Humya Jurmku
Eenji), 173; picture, Facing 182
M 28, 54, 55, 67
Skilful means 3^E ?

56

Sokci, 93, 93
Soli Elide* 64

M Song uf Enlightenment* \ 89

Spnr.i# f 29

Srav-afca, 33,61, I07 t 103,109,110
Siavakahoodj 82
Sravasd* 38

47

Sridevi, 172
■SrotapaiciiriH 42
Sfylapaimahaod, 7 i
Stages, the ien t 19, 116
Statements, the five, U9
SihaiLjj2ptapta r 115
SuhhulE, 39, 40, 4 ]

Suchneas ffaf/j.-icu), 24, 50, 67, 30,
8b 84, 87p 88, 115
Sugntu, 24
StmjoiSj 29, 70
iSmAAorp, the three, 54
tAIIO > 17

TnhybuUu {Prabhutar.ttna Bud¬
dha), 35

Tamonten fVaaravkmii), 172
Tm<hmg y 82, 89 lb.


INDEX


192

Tao, 73, 107, 108
Tao-wu (Dogo), 106
Tathagata, 13, 17, 24, 25; defined,

49; of Infinite Light, 17 fn., 18
fh.

Tathagata-dhyana, 90
Tathagata-garbha, 51, 55, 56, 67,

68, 69, 91

Tathagatahood, 57, 61, 95, 99
Tathagata-wheel, 99
Tathata, 61, 62

Teaching, of the Buddha, 15, 21,

41,49,97,99; oftheTathagatas,

53, 102. See also Dharma
Teisho, 148 fh.

Ten Oxherding Pictures, the, 127
Tendai, 30 fh.

Thirty-two marks, 49; of a great
man, 44, 45

Training of the %en Buddhist Monk,

173 fn.

Transformation Body ( nirmana -
kaya), 62

Transmigration (samsara), 18, 54,

Transmission of the Lamp , They
76 fh., 182

Treasures, seven precious, 41, 43
Triple Treasure {triratna), 18, 22,

23

Triple Vehicle {triyam), 116
Triple world ( triloka ), 18, 19, 23
Trishna, 29

Tsmg-ch'ih, or Nmg-ch'ih, 21
Tushita Heaven, the, 162
ummon (Yun-men), 121, 123
Unborn, 53, 56, 93
Unthinkable, the,

Upadam, 29 ^

Upali, 102 J/ '

Upasaka, 34 W ' ' '

Upasika, 34 / ^

U ra“8o My °t?3^»‘w*). §

VAIROCANA, 154 'c>\ K

Vaisravana, 33 ' « , v,__ &

Vajra, 24; god, 172; mountain/^


Vajra-blade, 96

Vajraechedika y or Vajracchedika -
prajnaparamita Sutra, 26, 38 fn.,
50, 84, 85
Vajragarbha, 24
Vajrapani, 34
Vajra-prajna-paramita, 44
Vedana, 28, 29

Vehicles (yana). Major and Minor,
86; three, 97; two, 101
Vetala 54

Vtjnana, 28, 29, 51, 53, 54, 105;

the six, 29, 70
Vimalakirti, 50, 102, 115
Vimoksha, the eight, 92 fh.
Vipasyana , 69, 70, 72
Virudhaka, 172

Vishaya, 54, 83; the six qualifies,
29

Vows, Four Great, 14; inex
haustible, 62; universal, 35
way, 80; untransmissible, 148
Wisdom, fourfold, 152
Wu-hsin, or mu-shin, 114 fn., 116,
117, 118

yajnadatta,68
Yaks has, 31, 34, 35
Yakushi (Bhaishajyaguru), 153,
160, 161

Yang-ch*i (Yogi), 149
Yathabhuta, 61
Yemmei, 16 fn.

Yemmei Kwannon, 16
Yengakukyo, 26
Yengo, 125, 127
Yoka Daishi, 89
Yuan, 113 fh.

Yuxmakyo ( Vimalakirti-sutra), 26,

87

(goroku), 73
(Yung-shih), 102
13, 26,30 fn., 50,94,96,102,

[, 107, 118, 122, 145, 153
literature, 73
monastery, 20 fh.
ie Daishi (Shan-hui), 182
(Shan-hsing), 100


Z«*V gjvQ'SJvC^./


*

■


»


1.


eA 1 '* -wGUQD t


B>3VU".lw-


j


/


IDANDaa q/iOK CO

Of r- S<ic. ;-j* Hiliif

» . .. , p


D.G.A. SO.

CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL LIBRARY
NEW DELHI

_„_ Issue Becord^ _

Call No,— j>94 * 30&£ Jd/Su z , - £301,


Author— Suzuki, Daisetz Peitaro


TitJe_Manual of Sen Bu.-idbism,


Efamwcr K s N am* Dai c of Issue


Dstc of Return


fcfljfc rtaf t5 shut is but a block"

c ^AEOLo c

^ ,

GOVT. OF INDIA <a

^ DtipariuiEiit of Aichat'ulogy ^

£jr* NEW DELHI. T.

S' ft


Please help 11 a to keep the book
clean and moving*


a* Ml. hr, PLLHI>


T
