NERIN E. GUN
Red Roses From Texas
FREDERICK MULLER LIMITED
LONDON

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lustrations
The fateful visit to Dallas begins ...
facing page
32
The assassination
33
Dallas police guard the building believed to house
the assassin
48
Aplain-clothes officer carries the high-powered
rifle uscd to kill thaPresident
48
Detective Bill Walthers pictured retrieving
the author believes'was the fourth bullet
49
Robert and Jacqucline Kennedy watch as the
Kenncdy witnesses the swearing in of the new
President, Lyndon Johnson
80
The arrest of Lec Harvey Oswald
81
No. I suspect Lee Oswald, his mother and wife,
Marina
96
The moment of death for Lee Oswald
6
ThePresident‘'s casket is carried at the beginning
of its journcy toWashington's St Matthew's
Cathcdral; the procession Icaves the Capitol
128
The newPresident,LyndonJohnson,and his wife
lcave thcMass at StMatthcw's Cathcdral
129
Thc Kennedy family attend the funeral of the late
President
144
Mrs Kennedy at the graveside in the Arlington
National Cemctary
145
The copyrights to the pbotographs intluried in the bovt
A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

First published in Great Britain in ig64
byFrederickMullerLimited
Printed by Tonbridge Printers Limited,

m paia aiam om sox un lop ioy s say
bouquets of the yellow roses of Texas. Only in Dallas they
gave me red roses. I remember 'thinking: How funny-red
roses for me.
Copyright  Nerin E. Gun, 1g64
MRs JoHn F. KEnNeDY

--- PAGE BREAK ---ay
bouquets of the yellow roses of Texas. Only in Dallas they
gave me red roses. I remember 'thinking: How funny-red
roses for me.
Copyright  Nerin E. Gun, 1g64
MRs JoHn F. KEnNeDY

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nerin
E. Gun
Treo
ion
rSes
from
Texas
Thirty-one minutes past twelve on a
Novemberafternoonin Dallas,Texas.
The sun was shining,Texanswere
welcoming theKennedyswithunexpected
friendliness and thePresidenthimself had.
just agreed that"You can neversay after
this that theydon'tlove youin Texas."It was
then thatoneof themostablepoliticiansthe
world has known was assassinated by
someone'whoseidentityhasneverbeen
proved.
Exactly how he was assassinated is also
unknown.ItmighthavebeenanAmerican
politicalaction,itmighthavebeen
Castro-inspired,it might merely have been
theworkofapsychopath.
v0S3
In attempting to throw new light on the
assassination, Nerin Gun has investigated
Ke
the hour-by-houreventspreceding and
following the tragedy and fully examines the
xas
background of the leading protagonists
involved.He traced the steps of Lee Harvey
Oswald asfaras Mexicoandpresents a
penetrating portrait of the No. 1 suspect. He
also posesmanypertinent questions
regardingthe alleged assassin.Who,for
example,exactlywas he?WasheaU.S.
SecretServiceagent?Washetheonly
killerrwerethereothersWhyhasnt.
(continued on backflap)
MULLER
Nerin E. Gun
25/- net:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Contents
1Noon Cavalcade in Dallas
II
Counting.Our Blessings
2
24
3
Join The Marines -- They will make a Man
out of You!
38
4
It is the Fashion to Hate . .
53
5
He didn't like the ‘Sardine Can’
67
6
The Promoter
85
7
The Chatelaine
001
8
*They're Going to Kill Us All!
110
9
"Si Vivis, Ego Te Absolvo”
121
10
“Mummy, Why isn't there any Mickey Mouse
on the Television ?'
132
II
A Bad Tipper
147
12
Anatomy of the Accused
161
13
“I could stay here for ever'
178
14
The Devil's Advocate
192

--- PAGE BREAK ---“Mummy, Why isn't there any Mickey Mouse
on the Television ?'
132
II
A Bad Tipper
147
12
Anatomy of the Accused
161
13
“I could stay here for ever'
178
14
The Devil's Advocate
192

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER ONE
Noon Cavalcade in Dallas
THE PITILEss GLARE of the Texan sun was makingJacque-
line Kenncdy.vcry uncomfortable,but she dared not put
on her blue-tinted sunglasses; she must kecp on waving and
smilingatthe crowds
heering along both sides of the route.
The enthusiasm of the towns-
folkhadsurprisedall thosein
proccssion.John Fitz
gcrald Kennedy, seated on
the
ehuge
eblue
Lincoln-Continental bearing
ate
GG-300of
the Columbia district,was th
vingitall.He
keptturningfromrighttoleft,
again,wavingand
bcaming thatwidepresidential
Hchad bcen warncd
hing quitc diffcrcnt
from thisfromthchair-tr
Texans.He had
beentoldthattheywouldspiti
-- as had happened
afewweeksbeforetoAdlaiStevenson.
This was,after all,
the domain of his bitter rival,SenatorBarry Goldwater,who
wanted to turn back the clock to the days ofKing Gcorge
II1.
Yet now he was bcing
receivedwithacclamation,
“"Howdy Jack” and “Viva Jacuelina”resounding on every
side,reccived yet more warmly than in Paris,Mexico or
evenBerlin.The very weather had changed for him,despite
rain and mist. The temperature was 85° F in the shade. It
was Friday, November 22nd, 1963.
1I

--- PAGE BREAK ---12
RED ROSES FROM TEXAS
NOON CAVALCADEINDALLAS
13
The presidential procession was prccedcd only by motor-
vanished like the fog and mists of the previous cvening.

cycle outriders from the local policc.

Thcy had bccn
Smiling and shaking hands, he got willingly into the
Johnsons'car.

cheers of the crowd, expected to be far less warm, should be.

heard to the full.

THE joHNsoNs’ car was the third in the procession, being
At midday, the procession arrived at the centre of Dallas,
preceded by the“Queen Mary”-the Secret Service men’s
that wide-spreading town - in Texas evcrything and cvery-
shuttered vchiclc, with oficers armed with sub-machinc-
guns on the running-boards.

Some of thcse faced forward,
centre is relativcly tiny.

There is just,thc one principal road,
and othcrs back towards Johnson, an added precaution
MainStreet,reflectedinscveral parallel byways.

sincc for obvious reasons the President and Vice-Presidcnt
President Kenncdy glanced at thc small whitewashed
should never travel together.

building,pseudo-Spanish in style,standing at the sharp
“But here in Texas,”
grumbled Winson G.Lawson, hcad
corncr where Harwood Strect turnsintoMainStreet.This
of the prcsidential bodyguard, “"nobody listcns to reason."
was the City Hall, whose bascment houscs the police head-
Athissidebutoutsidethecar,standingbalancedupon
quarters.

From a window of his office on the third floor,
left running-board,was special agent Clint Hill,complain-
DistrictAttorneyWade was watching thc passing of the
ing of thc great hcat, and that he was hungry.

cavalcade.Just above him was the detention centre for
The press car was further back.

The reporters wcrc also
"his"suspects.

hungry, and still more thirsty.

.Theywerewondering
whether theywould be abletogetsomeScotch attheTrade
ON THE two bucket-seats of the special Lincoln,opposite
Mart,their destination,while the banquet was going on.--- PAGE BREAK ---

hungry, and still more thirsty. .Theywerewondering
whether theywould be abletogetsomeScotch attheTrade
ON THE two bucket-seats of the special Lincoln,opposite
Mart,their destination,while the banquet was going on. the Presidcnt and Mrs Kennedy, were John Connally,
Dallas is a“dry” town, where alcohol cannot be bought
also on the right, and his wife Nellic.Connally is the
in a public bar; you have to belong to a club, or buy a
Govcrnor of Texas, and aloyal supporter of thePresident --
bottle and take it back to your hotel room to drink.For-
whose Navy Minister he had been not long previously. tunately,a collcague on the Dallas Times had passed round
The original plan had been for the Texas Senator,Ralph
some booklcts of vouchers authorising the purchase of
Yarborough,tohave the honour of travelling with the
drinks at thePress Clubpremises.So from time to timc one
presidential couple.Yarborough is the lcader of the Texan
of the journalists stopped the press bus, lcaving the proccs-
liberals, and was at the time making things difficult all
sion and making tracks for the Press Club. round becausc of the prcsence of Vicc-President Johnson,
Rear-Admiral George Buckley, the President's doctor,
whom he considered a rival.Infact,hehad obstinately and
dozed in the last car of all, far away from thc Kennedys. persistently refused to sit beside Lyndon Johnson, calling
These affairs tired him out, and he had not properly
him“the sleeping mummy”; and Kennedy, who had come
digested his hotcl breakfast. toTexas in order to re-unite the party there, tried to
smooth him down by offering him a placein his own car. PRESIDENT KENNEDY smiled across at a dark, wcll-
But that morningYarborough's ill-humour seemed to have
built woman who was applauding spiritedly. This was.

--- PAGE BREAK ---14
RED ROSES FROM TEXAS
NOONCAVALCADEINDALLAS
15
Antonietta Stella, prima donna of the Dallas Opera,
fock could eat their steaks in the Prcsident's honour.

who had interrupted rehearsals for Ballo in Maschera,
David Miller, a seventcen-year-old cashicr at a ncarby
soon to have a gala first night, because she wished to see
supermarket, had finished work, and taken along his new
Kennedy.

instantprint camera,meaning to use it this same afternoon
Then,for a moment forgetting the crowds,thePresident
for the first time.

He saw the procession near the Neiman:
studied the bunting strung from building to building,
Marcus crossing,but decided to take his pictures further
prettily transforming the appearance of MainStreet.These
along, where it was more opcn, with no skyscrapers to
decorations were not for him; the silver angels with gilded
shadow his subject.Thcrc.was plenty of time,since the
wingsandred-and-white
plastic Santa Clauscs,hand-in-
procession was moving forward at only about fifteen miles
hand were part of the traditional display which cvery self-
anhour, and now and then coming to a stancdstill.

respectingAmerican town puts on as Christmas draws ncar.

Certainly,December 25th was still far off-but inDallas,
ALLDALLAs seemed to beon the strect:thc schoolchildrcn
the town of the newly-rich,where evcryone is extremely
waving fags,mostly Confcderate oncs, true,but what did
rich, they always start well ahcad of "the rest".respectingAmerican town puts on as Christmas draws ncar.

Certainly,December 25th was still far off-but inDallas,
ALLDALLAs seemed to beon the strect:thc schoolchildrcn
the town of the newly-rich,where evcryone is extremely
waving fags,mostly Confcderate oncs, true,but what did
rich, they always start well ahcad of "the rest".

that matter?Shirt-slceved men cricd·"Hooray”.Confetti
JohnKennedymusthavethought then of thepresents he
poured from the windows.The police looked on smiling,not
would take back to his children whcnhe returned home on
interfering as pcople swarmed all over thefootpaths toget
Monday.It would be a special occasion.John-John (as he
nearer the presidential car.They lookcd rathcr as if thcy
lovingly called him,disliking the bourgeois term“junior")
had stepped out of a John Ford film, these Dallas
would be three years old on that day.And Caroline,the
policemcn, in their gold-embroidered grey uniform,
charming, impudent “big girl", would be six on Wednes-
with huge stetsons pulled down over their eyes,revolvers
day.That very morning, the President had been given an
inlaidwith silvcrandbelts dottedwithsemi-precious
enormous cowboy hat;he couldimagineJohn-John’s joy
stones.

when he took it back to him...Would there be time to buy
Yes, all Dallas was out on the strcet - exccpt, perhaps,for
something else as well?that matter?Shirt-slceved men cricd·"Hooray”.Confetti
JohnKennedymusthavethought then of thepresents he
poured from the windows.The police looked on smiling,not
would take back to his children whcnhe returned home on
interfering as pcople swarmed all over thefootpaths toget
Monday.It would be a special occasion.John-John (as he
nearer the presidential car.They lookcd rathcr as if thcy
lovingly called him,disliking the bourgeois term“junior")
had stepped out of a John Ford film, these Dallas
would be three years old on that day.And Caroline,the
policemcn, in their gold-embroidered grey uniform,
charming, impudent “big girl", would be six on Wednes-
with huge stetsons pulled down over their eyes,revolvers
day.That very morning, the President had been given an
inlaidwith silvcrandbelts dottedwithsemi-precious
enormous cowboy hat;he couldimagineJohn-John’s joy
stones.

when he took it back to him...Would there be time to buy
Yes, all Dallas was out on the strcet - exccpt, perhaps,for
something else as well?

the duty cditorial staff of the Dallas News,preparing the
1：
eveningedition.Obviously theyhadn't toomuch to do:the
AT THE Trade Mart-a sort of exhibition hall-hundreds
of the town’s leading citizens had begun their meal,
visit written up in advance, and a photo of the arrival at
expecting to hearKennedy's speech at dessert.The text had
the airport already in place above six columns of“copy”on
alreadybcen distributedin advance tothejournalists
the front page.The unexpectcd apart,all was ready.In any
present by a White House aide.The gucsts had paid a
case,theFriday cvening cditionwas always rather routine
hundred dollars a head for the privilege of being there.For
people don't read much on a Saturday, day of odd-jobs and
this, they were scrved great wedges of Kansas steak and
departures for the week-end.

baked potatoes Idaho.

The Reverend J.

A.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Reverend J. A. Schumacher,
of the Dallas diocese,had granted a special dispensa-
ToNI zoppl, cditor of the show busincss page, had a
tion for the day, although a Friday, so that his Catholic
visitor,a certainJackRuby,who came in to talk about his

--- PAGE BREAK ---16
RED ROSES FROM TEXAS
NOON CAVALCADE IN DALLAS
17
club, the Carousel.He scemcd quite unconcerncd with what
of Picassos or Bracques for you, and send a profcssor to.

was going on in the town.

instruct you in the rudiments of the history of art ...

Or
Sidney Marcus, boss of Nieman-Marcus, the most
hire guests for your daughter's wedding ...

exclusive store in Texas, certainly in America, perhaps in
Nieman, Marcus is the pride of Dallas, as Dallas is the
the world,was waiting on the main entrance steps.Hewas
pride of Texas.

wonderingwhetherJacquelineKennedywouldfind time
to come and buy something there.Thank goodness, the
THE“snoss”who live there claim that Dallas is the Paris
storedidnotneed thepublicity
- petrol millionaires queuc
of the oil-millionaircs.But the Chambcr of Commcrcc
up to get in - but to have as a'customer a First Lady
frowns upon any such comparison.

For nincty per cent of
renowned for her elegant good taste would certainly do no
the town's 634.462 inhabitants havc ncver in their lives
harm.

hcard of Paris- unless you mcan the'village of that name
A remarkable shop, this Nieman-Marcus: and everyone
about a hundred miles away to.

the cast, lost in thc great .

in the procession instinctively looked into its windows, as
Texan plains.

they drewlevcl.Perhaps they recalled the story oftheTcxan
Dallas is a smart city,whimsically and artificially con-
blessed by the Oil-gods who came to Marcus one morning,
structed in the desert.

It sparklcs likc one of those shining
a few days before Christmas,and declared:
cars all over chrome, in brilliant colours, with push-button
"I'l1 buy all the window-displays as they stand.

Just
conversion, radio, pick-up and bar, abandoncd jn a sand-
shift the lot tomy ranch, around my wife's window-it‘s my
dune.It sparklcs likc one of those shining
a few days before Christmas,and declared:
cars all over chrome, in brilliant colours, with push-button
"I'l1 buy all the window-displays as they stand.

Just
conversion, radio, pick-up and bar, abandoncd jn a sand-
shift the lot tomy ranch, around my wife's window-it‘s my
dune.

It is a mctropolis not only bccause it has a thcatrc and
Christmas present to her."
occasional opera (vcry rate things in the Far West), and’ a
The story is true.True, too, the one about the farmwife
fine university,but above all because it is the capital for
who came to the store bare-footed.She madc purchases
cotton, banking and oil.

right and left, to the value of hundreds of thousands of
Dallas is a fabulous city, with homes whcrc the kitchen
dollars, and finally bought one pair of shoes, which she put
taps run not only with cold and hot watcr,and iccd water,
on on the spot.

but also with foaming winc on demand..It has a building
"But - forgive me, Madame - why did you come bare-
whose tenants can watchwhatgoes onin thic vcstibule and
footed?""
corridors through closed-circuit colour tclcvision.It has.

a p   o  s  
a sixteen-lane motorway,the biggest in the world.Biggest in
day.

I've never had any shoes in my life before."
the world,too,isits motel,where the waitresscs are dressed
At Nieman, Marcus they sell more mink
kcoatsthan
as slaves of ancicnt Rome, and scrve thcir customcrs on
anywhere else in America, and that in a region whcre it is
terraces decorated like those of thePalace of the Caesars..

almost always tremendously hot.They have a Bargain
Dallas owes its name to one of thc most obscure.vice-
Counter with.a minimum price of ten thousand dollars.

.presidents of the United States, a Philadelphian who served
The sugar in the sugar-bowls of the restaurant is sea-blue,to
.under Polk.It has an airport'where the public move from
match the walls.--- PAGE BREAK ---

almost always tremendously hot.They have a Bargain
Dallas owes its name to one of thc most obscure.vice-
Counter with.a minimum price of ten thousand dollars. .presidents of the United States, a Philadelphian who served
The sugar in the sugar-bowls of the restaurant is sea-blue,to
.under Polk.It has an airport'where the public move from
match the walls. For eight thousand dollars you can buy
a ready-made library.Or Marcus will choose a collection
has the most luxurious villas of the continent-John
B
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---18
RED ROSES FROM TEXAS
NOON CAVALCADEIN DALLAS
19
Murchcson's is as big as the White House, and in Dallas
"Mrs Kennedy's still getting ready ...

She takcs a bit
lives H.

L.

Hunt, whose income is $150,0o0 a day.

Dallas is
longer than we do, but then shc's a lot bcttcr-looking!

also veryproudofitsDistrictAttorney,HenryWade,who
They had bcen married exactly ten years, two months
has the reputation of being infallible: out of twenty-four
and ten days,give or take a minute or so,at that moment
accused persons forcapital offences,he has sent twenty-two
when the.car drew near to Houston Strcet, a road running
to theelectricchair.

along the South side of the rectanglc regarded as the
“downtown"of Dallas-the ccntre of the city.Madge
DouGLAs KIKER, special correspondent of the New Tork
Yaltin,an employee of the Survey Department,remarked
！
Herald Tribune,was wondering if the press car would arrive
to hcr friend Julie Tarati:
atitsdestinationin time to allowhim totelephone tohis
"You'd think they were on honeymoon!"
officc: it was now a quarter past twelve.

Evcn thc hardencd prcssmcn wcre astonished to sce
He had decided to write a picce about Jacqueline.

That
Jacqueline Kcnnedy so gay, so lively, so very much the
day she was radiant.

Such, at lcast, was Kiker's impression
“politician’s wife”.At the start of the.journey,when
as he watched her smiling,slightly waving a hand,making
AndrewHatcher,the negro Assistant Press Secretary,had
remarks to her husband which seemed to amusc him.

Her
announced that Mrs Kennedy would be there, there had
strawberry-pink wool dress suited her like a dream,her pill-
been some sarcastic comments.

box hat was of the same colour and Chanel could be proud
TheFirst Lady hated clectoral tours; she had kept out of
ofher.

electioneering'
since
the
presidentialnominationand
Ordinarily, Jacqueline dislikes hats; so much so, that
candidature.--- PAGE BREAK ---

box hat was of the same colour and Chanel could be proud
TheFirst Lady hated clectoral tours; she had kept out of
ofher. electioneering'
since
the
presidentialnominationand
Ordinarily, Jacqueline dislikes hats; so much so, that
candidature. But today she was more the“professional”
on one occasion shereceived apetition from a national
than even theparty diehards.She was in her elemcnt. delegation of despairing milliners.But on this particular
It was twenty seven minutes past twclve. day she wanted to
pleasc the local matrons.For all its
Detcctive Buddy Walthcrs was on the corncr of Main and
dreamsofgrandcur,Dallasisstillonlyaprovincial city,and
Houston Strects when thc presidential Lincoln passed,
inAmcricaprovincialladics consider thehatindispcnsable
turning right close up to the pavement.Walthcrs was not
-as.much for thcmselves as for a gencral in uniforin.They
on duty.One of thie County Shcriff's mcn,who had no
wear hats togo shopping,while taking tca,at church and at
responsibility at all for public order in the town, he had
concerts.Even at the offce, they work with hats on their
just come to see the show.But from time to time he looked
heads... towards the provincial lock-up on the top three floors of the
The President was obviously delighted with his wife at
building there,wheremany ofthe prisoners had been given
that moment,proud of her charm,her elcgance,her
permission to look out of the windows. popularity ...He knew that Jacqueline was his greatest
To be precise, it should be said that there were two
electoral asset, and was the first to say so. That morning,
buildings under the Sheriff's.jurisdiction. One, on the
while speaking to the crowd assembled before his hotel at
opposite side of the road,on the left, looked like an old
Fort Worth, he had explained why he had come out
deserted castle,Here were the court-house, the Records
alone:
Department and certaini administrative offices. Sheriff

--- PAGE BREAK ---NOON CAVALCADE INDALLAS
21
20
RED ROSES FROM TEXAS
Texas Book Depository Building, hcadquarters of a private
Decker's officcs, and the prison, were in the new building
firm supplying theState's schoolswith text-books,cxercisc
on the right.

books and atlases.

The top floors had bccni turncd into a
The presidential
1 procession had littlc more than a
warehouse.

hundred yards to go along Houston Street before making
yet another turn,sharp leftinto Elm Street.

NEARLY ALL the employees were at the windows: on the
Just in front of the Sheriff's ofices was a kind of monu-
fourth floor,at the right,were RalphErwing and Washing-
ment, apparently copied from thc Jolictte of thc Schoen-
ton Harris,twonegroes very excited at the thought ofsceing
brunn Palace atVienna,its centre-piece a statue of Sam
the Presidcnt for thefirst time in theirlivcs.The windows
Houston, the Texan hero.Beyond were grecn lawns hap-
ofthe loor above were deserted.One was half-open; on the
sill was a cardboard box, left there no doubt by a thought-
theStcmmons motorway,which cuts Dallas in two.Oncc
less employec.

, 3
on this motorway,the procession would pick up spced and
Roy'S.

Truly, the managcr, was outside the door facing
arrivc within a fewminutes at the TradeMart,just a fcw
thc junction of Houston and Elm Strcets.

Hc was talking
miles further on.

Further still, again at the right of the
toafriend,a certain Abraham Zapruder, proprietor of
motorway, was the Parkland Municipal Hospital.

“Jennifer Junior”,a gown shop nearby.Zapruder was an
There were almost no more police left along Elm Street;
economicalperson.Hewas explaining to Truly that while
Jamcs M.

Chancy, the motorcyclist preceding the presi-
he wanted to film Kennedy's passing, he wanted to use up
dentialcarby afewyeards notedthathere the crowdwas
aslittlefilm aspossiblc.

much less dense, and mainly consisted of negroes.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chancy, the motorcyclist preceding the presi-
he wanted to film Kennedy's passing, he wanted to use up
dentialcarby afewyeards notedthathere the crowdwas
aslittlefilm aspossiblc. much less dense, and mainly consisted of negroes. "Kodachrome costs money-four dollars for twcnty-five
The negrocs rather looked uponK
Kcnnedy as thcir
fect - and the camera cats it up..I'll gct Kcnnedy just as he
champion,buthad preferred to group togetherhere,apart
passes ..."
from the whites.At Dallas, despite a seeming veneer of
He decided upon a more favourablc angle,and wcnt
liberalisation,racial barriers rcmain firm. twenty yards or so furtheron,to the platform in front of a
little arcade overlooking the grassed area towards Elm
PHOTOGRAPHER JACKsON,of the Dallas Times Herald,was
Street. There he was right in the middlc,between the cross-
trying toget a refection of Kennedy in thewater of a small
roads and the bridge over the motorway.Thcrewas no-one
rectangular pool lying between the statue in the centre and
in front of him,and on the opposite sidc of theroadonly a
the Elm Street crossing.Suddenly he realised that he had
few sightsecrs sitting on the grass as if for a picnic. used up his film, and began to rc-charge his camera. The pool alsoreflected the image ofa big yellowbuilding
AT rwELvE-THIRTy (one-thirty Washington time) Caro-
topped by a huge neon sign.In the water, the building
line and John were sleeping peacefully in thcir separate
seemed tohave somethinggraceful about it,but infactit
rooms on the second floor of theEastWingof theWhite
was horribly ugly-a cubic structure with dead-level
House. Usually John was.troublesomc, but today he had
windows,starkinthesesemiruralsurroundings,anoutrage
been very good when the time came for their afternoon rest. to its idyllic setting of lawns and gardens. This was the

--- PAGE BREAK ---day he had
windows,starkinthesesemiruralsurroundings,anoutrage
been very good when the time came for their afternoon rest. to its idyllic setting of lawns and gardens. This was the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
RED ROSES FROM TEXAS
NOON CAVALCADE IN DALLAS
23
He had been promiscd that when he woke up he could
history of the United States.The chain of events thcn about
watch his parents’arrival at Austin, the Texan capital, on
to unfold would have such consequenccs as to bc like an
the television. Their stop at Dallas had not becn con-
earthquake to all America, and thcrcforc to the rest of the
sidered important enough to be televised as a whole.
world - since nothing important could happen thcre with-
For the first time in his life“John-John”had not cried
.out the whole world necessarily being affected.
i
when his father left on the previous day. But he had
Yet despite the huge crowds, despite the presence of
watched silently,and then asked sadly:"Why docs Daddy
forty-six Secret Scrvice men,of policemen,officials,journa
always leave me alone ?"
lists, the County detectivcs at the window of the prison
opposite, and of the thousands of cameras of every make and
IT wAs twelve-thirty exactly as thie blue Lincoln turned the
all sizes, there was to be not one single real witness to what
corncr.David
Millcr took his photograpl,but having
happcncd.
noted that just at that momcnt Kcnncdy and his wife were
This was a country the smallest phascs of whose cxistcncc
looking the opposite way,he decidcd to run round the
are telcvised night and day,
wherephotographersworm
their way into the most private sectors of the lives ofimpor-
picture when the car reached the motorway.
tant people,where technology is so advanced that one can
Secrct Service man Clint Hill looked attentively ahcad,
photograph the planets electronically, see in the dark, and
towards the bridge, beneath which the procession must
transmit sound andpicturesfrom continentto continentby
shortly pass. There were three or four pcople on it, and
means of mirrors floating in spacc.Yet,in that same coun-
Secret Service men are always wary of bridges and bal-
try, by a strange irony of Fate, there was to be no singlc
reallyconcrete
documentation of themost significant
conies.
Kennedy, too, was looking towards this bridgc, and
happening ofthc.ccntury.Apart from the blurred snaps ofa
beyond it, at the silhouettes of several sun-gilded sky-
few amateurs,nothing
scrapers in the direction of Oak Cliff- regarded as one of
All the world was there,but nobody saw a thing,on that
the town's moreproletarian suburbs.
fatal day of November 22nd, 1963, at twelve thirty-one,
The chauffeur slowed down again, enabling the tailor-
American continental time.
turned-film-man Zapruder to get abetter picture.
It was twelve-thirty and fifty-five scconds.
It was then that'Nellie Connally, still clutching her
i.bouquetof pale yellow
Vroscs,turncdto Kennedy·and
exclaimedtriumphantly:
"What. a reception, Mr President! You can never say
iafter this that they don't love you in Dallas..
1THEFEw secondswhichfollowedwill lastaneternityin thes,turncdto Kennedy·and
exclaimedtriumphantly:
"What. a reception, Mr President! You can never say
iafter this that they don't love you in Dallas..
1THEFEw secondswhichfollowedwill lastaneternityin the

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd
exclaimedtriumphantly:
"What. a reception, Mr President! You can never say
iafter this that they don't love you in Dallas..
1THEFEw secondswhichfollowedwill lastaneternityin the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

COUNTING OUR BLESSINGS
25
toPicassos, and some picces of sculpture and pottery from
her own collcction and those of other local notables.In cach
room she had put huge bouquets of yellow roscs, the
national fower of Texas.
CHAPTERTWO
THE Firsrlady was,in any case,too worn out that night to
cxamine her little temporary museum.She had becn
Counting Our Blessings
standing almost all day, since at 1.31 p.m. she had left
the blue and white Boeing 707 presidential jet at San
Antonio airport.A wonderful day, certainly ... there had
been 1oo,ooo people, according to the mayor, to wclcomc
ON THAT FATEFUL Friday, a drama was bcing cnacted in
them.And at Houston, twicc as many.
several different places at oncc, as if on a revolving stage. It
Jacquelinemade a little specch in Spanish at'a gathcring
began under a finc rain at FortWorth.
at the RiceHotel:
It was a little after midnight when the Kennedys entered
"Estoy muy'contenta de estar en el gran estado de Texas"
their apartment at the Texas Hotel,
All thosepresentmostofMexicanorigin,gavehrawild
They had not bccn given the most expensivc quarters -
ovation.The“mariachi”(itinerant musicians)yclled“Thc
No.1348, called the Will Rogers Suitc, after thc old Holly-
Yellow Rose”in her honour, and some cried“Ole”as if at a
wood actor,an idol of a former gcncration- bccause the
bullfight.
Secret Servicchadobjected that it had severaldifferent
There was a short stop at the Centre for Space Medicinc
access doors. It was the Johnsons who had to occupy it,
at Brooks Base;then on to arrive at FortWorth,illuminated
to thc great annoyance of Lady Bird, who, as a good
with small yellow lamps in thcir honour.
economical housekeeper,did not scc why she should pay
Now Jacqueline was dropping with slcep, and with a
$100 the night while the President himself paid only
tendergoodnightwenttoherroom.
$75.
This was the price of apartment No. 85o, on the eighth
THE PREsiDENT was also tired,and had to be up very carly
foor,which had only one accss door (guarded by a pair of
in the morningforhislast and most taxing day of thcTcxan
Secret Service men and a City policcman), despitc its two
tour.But he wanted first to listcn to thc local tclcvision
bedrooms, sitting-room and thrce bathrooms.
news,to hear what was said of his visit; and since thcre was
Thc apartment had reccntly been decoratcd in“modcrn
still another ten minutcs to go bcfore the ncws bullctin, hc
oriental” style, with very low couches covered in gold
looked through a copy of Life magazine.
brocade, standing out from walls covered in blue silk paper.
A prominent illustrated article caught his attention.
In addition,Mrs J. Lee Johnson II1, a lady prominent in
Splashed across several pages was a series of picturcs and
FortWorth“aristocracy"
',had turncd theplacc into an art
photographsof the time,showing thefuneral cercmonies of
gallery by installing thirty or so pictures, from Rembrandts
King Edward VII of England. Here were almost all the
24turncd theplacc into an art
photographsof the time,showing thefuneral cercmonies of
gallery by installing thirty or so pictures, from Rembrandts
King Edward VII of England. Here were almost all the
24

--- PAGE BREAK ---26
RED ROSES FROM TEXAS
COUNTING OUR BLESSINGS
27
rulers of the earth, following the'coffin.of the sovereign best
like Venezuela.

Still you would have had to go a long way
remcmbered as the architect of the“ententc cordiale".

back to find a day which began as screnely as that Novem-
Wilhelm II,in the glittering uniform of the Grenadier
ber 22nd.

Guards, his famous moustaches pointing aggressively_up-
ward,rode beside England’s new King, Gcorge V.

They
JoE Brown,his wife and their seven childrcn were waiting
headed a showy parade ofuniforms,decorations andjcwels
at thatmoment,some minutes aftcr onein the morning,for
from seven other kings, five Crown Princes, forty princes of
their train at Pennsylvania Station,NewYork.Theyhad
the blood, seven queens and a multitude of diplomats
to get toVermont, to spend the holiday with the rest of the
family.

representing seventynationsoftheworld.

Never again could thisgrandiose spectacle of May 1910
Although so late,the station was full of travcllcrs,for
this was the beginning of the great exodus of thc long wcck-
realistic to waste time over one man’s funeral.

The
end of"Thanksgiving”
This
stakcsplaceonthclast
President smiled as he saw that the United States repre-
Thursday in Novcmber, and is thc most Amcrican of all.

sentative was one of thelast in the cortege:ex-president
festivals,since on that day everyonc,without distinction
Theodore Roosevelt, ill at ease in his tight frock-coat...

of religion, origin or race,'stays at home to give thanks to
TheUnited States hadn't countcd for much in those
Providence.

The tradition stems from the pionccrs who
days.

debarkcd at Plymouth more than threc centuries ago.Like
The article which so caughtKcnnedy's attention was
them, one eats a turkey dinner and "counts one's blessings".--- PAGE BREAK ---

The tradition stems from the pionccrs who
days. debarkcd at Plymouth more than threc centuries ago.Like
The article which so caughtKcnnedy's attention was
them, one eats a turkey dinner and "counts one's blessings". inspired by a bedside book of his, August 1914 by Barbara
W.Tuchman.Kennedy had given copics of it to his
THE NATioN had plenty.for which to give thanks: it was
friends; the British Prime Minister,
，Macmillan,had
only necessary to look through the newspapcrs bearing to-
received one on his last visit. Kennedy was particularly
morrow's date, but already on sale in the big towns, to sec
struck,in this book, by the way in which a whim of Fate
that.Thc papers were all very thick,with lots of adyertising;
can overturn the world.1914 was a Golden Age inEurope-
gigantic Christmas sales were cxpected. but it had needed no more than a fewpistol-shots from an
Thc Queen Elizabeth had weighcd anchor with a rccord
unknown at Sarajevo to change everything, destroy every-
number of passengers on board,and that day more than
thing,wipe it all out. thirty other ships werc to take 22,ooo Amcricans on holiday
Kenncdy remembered what he had said to Senator Mike
cruises to the four corners ofthe world. Mansicld, head of the Democrat majority in the Senate,
The Daily News, the best-selling American newspaper,
beforeleavingWashington:
with a 4,ooo,ooo circulation,announccd on thc front page
"I am'very worried about Romulo Bethancourt”(the
that Zsa Zsa Gabor had'been robbcd,but that the police
Venezuelan President).“These Venezuelans are mad. had recovered part of the booty. But the day's big news, at
They're capable of shooting him and in a few seconds
any rate for those interested in criminal cascs, was that of
reducing the country to nothing ..*"
the Minneapolis lawyer, Gene Thompson, accused of hav-
The United States, certainly, was not a turbulent nation
ing procured the murder of his wife, Carol. The affair

--- PAGE BREAK ---28
RED ROSES FROM TEXAS
COUNTING OUR BLESSINGS
29
fascinated thc public because of the cxtraordinary dctails
$550,ooo by the Court of Appcal.

But cven this limitcd
rcvcalcd by thc prosccution.

Thompson had hired thc
verdict was a severe setback for the political calumniators;
serviccs of a killcr, and thc conspiracy showed marked
it would havc been inconceivableunder any othcr president
resemblancc to one uncovered by thcItalianpolicewhen
butKennedy.

the wife ofa Milanese business man was murdered in Rome.

At Harvard University,the mcmbers of thc student
That night, an entirelynew edition.of Whos Who in
rugby team had gone to bcd early; the traditional clash
Caff Society went on sale,cditcd by Cleveland Armory.For
with their rivals of Yale(America's “Oxford-and-Cam-
thefirst time,alongside those of thencgro leaderDr Martin
bridge') would take place on Saturday.Harvard, though
Luthcr King and the inevitable Elizabeth Taylor, it con-
usually bcaten, wanted to have a brilliant revengc this
tained the name of Caroline Kennedy..

time, by way of showing their gratitude to their “old boy”,
That night, at Springficld, in the Federal prison, died
Kenncdy,who had not only fillcd the top jobs in his
Robcrt Stroud, known to the world as “The Bird-Man of
administrationwith Harvard graduatcs,but had strictly
Alcatraz", the Dr Faria of "Thc Rock" in San Francisco
barrcd thoscofYale.

Bay; the old man,kept in solitary confinement since 1910,
Nonetheless, there was one member of Yalc University
knewhow to talkto thebirds.

with a very personal reason to be.grateful to the Prcsident
In the big stores, Father Christmas costumes were being
at that moment.At a few minutes after midnight,hc
given out to the mcn who for the next month would spend
cnteredhisapartment on thcelevcnth floor of1oo,York
all their time taking kiddies on theirknee to hearwhat they
Avenue,at New Haven.

wanted for Christmas.with a very personal reason to be.grateful to the Prcsident
In the big stores, Father Christmas costumes were being
at that moment.At a few minutes after midnight,hc
given out to the mcn who for the next month would spend
cnteredhisapartment on thcelevcnth floor of1oo,York
all their time taking kiddies on theirknee to hearwhat they
Avenue,at New Haven.

wanted for Christmas.

Despite the prcsence of an armcd policcman sent by
At the Central Post Office in Washington the postal
the State Dcpartmcnt,all was quiet in that university
code number 25ooo had bcen given to Father Christmas,
residencc.Professor Frederick C.Barghoorn had come in
who was alrcady receiving thefirst hundrcds of the some
late,and tired out-but happy to bc therc,and not in the
half a million lctters which would be addrcsscd tohim by
narrow little cell 87, at the Lubianka Prison in Moscow.

American children.

That year, progrcss was making itself
The professor,an expert in Soviet social problems, had
felt.everywhere.

An clectronic brain would reply to the
bcen arrcsted inMoscow,for no apparcnt good rcason-
lctters-which was thcrcasonfor the announcement that
while lcaving the American Embassy,where he had been
it wouldn't do any longer for the young ones to address
for cocktails -- and accused of espionagc.Without the very
them to Santa at the North Polc, but must put the ZIP-
energctic intcrvention of Kennedy,who madeimmcdiate
Code number 25ooo on the envelope instead.

reprcsentations to the Kremlin,Barghoorn would probably
In Scattle, they had just finishcd installing in a shop-
still bc'confincd in the celebrated fortrcss of Cathicrinc II,
windowanother electronic machine;this one toldparents
cut off from therest of theworld.

instantly what they should buy for their children's presents.--- PAGE BREAK ---

reprcsentations to the Kremlin,Barghoorn would probably
In Scattle, they had just finishcd installing in a shop-
still bc'confincd in the celebrated fortrcss of Cathicrinc II,
windowanother electronic machine;this one toldparents
cut off from therest of theworld. instantly what they should buy for their children's presents. Kruschev had freed him in order to plcase Kcnncdy, and
John HenryFaulk,a former radio commentator banned
that victory was perhaps thc AmericanPresident's most
as an alleged Communist sympathiser in the McCarthy
personal and most human diplomatic triumph.The time
era,had his $3,511,0o0 in damages reduced to a mere
had gone by when whole fleets wcre scnt to sccurc the

--- PAGE BREAK ---COUNTING OUR BLESSINGS
31
30
RED ROSES FROM TEXAS
likely that a new anti-U.S.

intrigue was brcwing there -
safety of a single citizen; yet Kennedy had achieved some-
hadn't de Gaulle himself announced avisit toKennedyfor
thing similarfor an unknownpedagogue.

next year?

At the Vatican, the Eucumenical Council had just
YEs, KENNEDy could be proud that night, listening to the
authorised the use of the English language during the
latest news about Barghoorn on the television.Yale
sacraments-a litle compliment from Rome to the first
University had organised a mecting in the President's
Catholic president of the United Statcs.

honour by way of showing their gratitude.

All the newspapers had the photo of an aged Texan,
wearing,of course,a ten-gallon hat, and watching two tele-
ANOTHER INTELLECTUAL Was awake late that night.He
vision receivers at once,because just one picturc borcd him.

was working in his studio at Princeton University on a
Thc aged Texan was John Nance.(called “Cactus")
speech which he was to deliver a few·days later,at the
Garner,famous in the U.S.A.not only for having becnVice
presentation of theEnricoFermiPrize,at theWhiteHouse.

President under Rooscvclt,but for bcing ninety-five years
Dr J.

Robert Oppenhcimer, one of thc scientists to whom
old.

Kennedy had telephoned him’ this evening.

All
America owes her atomic superiority,had becn barred
presidents with an elcction ahead telephone Garner.

from the programme undertheEisenhowerAdministration
as “a risk".

But Kennedy, showing grcat political courage,
was going toreceivehim publicly and givehim the$5o,0o0
Richard M.

Nixon and his wife, waiting at Dallas airfield
prize,whose symbolical value was probably a hundred
for the plane which would take thcm to New York.

It is not
times greater.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nixon and his wife, waiting at Dallas airfield
prize,whose symbolical value was probably a hundred
for the plane which would take thcm to New York. It is not
times greater. exactly known what Nixon (who claimed to be intercsted
only in the Bar,but was miost active politically) was doing
AT THE United Nations a resolution had becen passed with
in Dallas several hours before Kenncdy's arrival.He had
made a'vague speech there in which hc criticised the
operation". President's policics; but in Texas he had not much follow-
The world's day was bcginning peacefully. Certainly,
ing,the darling of the opposition there being still Scnator
the Soviets had brought down an Iranian plane, but
Barry Goldwater. as.their president, Brezhnev,was at that moment the
Thinking back three years, to the election night of
guest of the Shah, the incident did not seem grave. November1g6o,it is difficult torealise that this sameNixon
Prcmier Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodge hadrenounced
only just missed being clected Prcsident; a. few thousand
Amcrican economic aid.Far from irritating public
more votes would have bccn cnough for him to bcat
opinion, this had caused some amusement in Washington:
Kenncdy.A.flood which'had put out of action a few
at last the head of a foreign state who was not going on
Democrat villages; a tactical error in Chicago; a few
beggingfordollars. Republican voters who had given up their fishing trips on
Nothing new in Viet-Nam. Election Day in favour of going to vote - and it would have
Erhard, the new German Chancellor, had gone to Paris
been Nixon who now rode triumphantly into Dallas, and
to pay his respects to General de'Gaulle,but it was un-

--- PAGE BREAK ---and it would have
Erhard, the new German Chancellor, had gone to Paris
been Nixon who now rode triumphantly into Dallas, and
to pay his respects to General de'Gaulle,but it was un-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

32
RED ROSES FROM TEXAS.
Kennedy who waited, unnoticed by anyone, on that rustic
chair at thc airport restaurant.
There was some talk of Dwight Eisenhower having been
back to Columbia University, to receive a medal marking
the tenth anniversary of the day on which he assumed its
presidency. The general was welcomed by a young under-
graduate,David Syrett,who once as a child had met him
in the road outside the University and offered him a plastic
gun. Dwight D. Eisenhower did not talk politics, preferring
not toriskhis prestige in abattle he believes already lost for
The fateful visit to.
the Republicans.
Dallas hegins as the
Another president slept, watched over by a nurse, in
Kennedys arrive at
his vast apartment in theWaldorf-Astoria Towcrs:Herbert
'Love Field airport.
Hoover, despite age and cancer refusing still to give up.
Right,Vice-President
Johnson makes the
Harry Truman, that night, was awake in his studio on
introductions to
the third foor of his house at Independence, Missouri. He
Dallas dignitaries
was writing an article for the next day’s papers,an article
whilebehind the
in which he launched an indirect attack upon Kennedy's
President, Governor
policy of racial equality.
Connally helps his
wife from the plane.
Macy's, the big New York store, had published an
Below,Mrs Kennedy
advertisement,splashed across several pagcs:
holds her red roses
"Tomorrow, Friday November 22nd, there's just one
thing to do:Buy our bargain-priceWhisky.It'll cheer us
up- we shall need it."
Another advertisement, by a motion-picture company,
announccdanewfilm.
"There are other ways of gctting rid of a president than
by an election,"' it proclaimed.
In allthe papers appearing that Friday, Novcmber 22nd,
Paramount published an advertisement in huge type of its
film Seven Days in May,in which a right-wing fanatic,Burt
Lancaster,plots to get rid of the president of the United
States, played by Frederic March.
"The president,” ran the advertisement, “"knew more
than 25,ooo people - but could trust no more than five."Lancaster,plots to get rid of the president of the United
States, played by Frederic March.
"The president,” ran the advertisement, “"knew more
than 25,ooo people - but could trust no more than five."

--- PAGE BREAK ---et rid of the president of the United
States, played by Frederic March.
"The president,” ran the advertisement, “"knew more
than 25,ooo people - but could trust no more than five."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

COUNTING OUR BLESSINGS
33
It is strange to note howmany films werc being made at
the time,or had just been released,which had this themc of
an attempt on a president‘s life.Peter Sellers, the celebratcd
British actor,had played a president threatened by rcbels,
and in Fail Safe the president's life was also in dangcr.
A fantasticplot to kil the president during a Madison
Square Garden meeting occurs in The Manchurian Candidate.
TheDesMoinesTelevision Station thatnight showcd
the film Suddenly,
with
FrankS
Sinatra,as its midnight
matinee;an old“B"
film,which was probably being shown
at the same time by a dozen other stations,and which had
been telecast all ovcrAmerica
the previous ycar.It
shows Frank Sinatra as a killer
payofconspirators
whoarriveinasmall townwh
Americanprcsidentis
1 house ovcrlooking
the station and the road down which thc presidcntial pro-
The assassination. Aboue, Mrs Kennedy helps agent Clint Hill
cession will pass.He sets up an automatic rifle with telc-
climb into the car.Below, the race to Parkland Hospital
scopic lens at a window .. but in the film, the Sccret
Service men intervene in tinie.
ON BRoADwAy, the night's shows were coming to an end.
The programmes were rather more cheerful: Charlie
Chaplin (no longer banned) in City Lights;Walt Disncy's
charming story, pleasing to both old and young, of the
search by two dogs and·a siamese cat for thcir master;
Fellini's mystifying 84.
Meanwhile,at starlevel,at Sardi's Restaurant,at the El
Morocco and Roma di Notte, all the talk was of who would
be lucky cnough to be invited to the great reception the
Kennedys were to give at the White House for the clite of
· the film world.
The Kennedys had done a great deal for the theatre.The
shows they had been to, How.To Succeed in Business Without
Really Trying and Beyond The Fringe, had had enormous
success.Another,The Best Man,a kind of reconstruction of
Ceat deal for the theatre.The
shows they had been to, How.To Succeed in Business Without
Really Trying and Beyond The Fringe, had had enormous
success.Another,The Best Man,a kind of reconstruction of
C

--- PAGE BREAK ---34
RED ROSES FROM TEXAS
COUNTING OUR BLESSINGS
35
the atmosphere of an electoral campaign, had had an
Themen of Moscow had made it known that they wanted
indifferent reception; Kennedy wcnt 'to see it, and im-
to buy soya oil.A speculator,Anthony de Angelis,president
of Allied Crude Oil, had bought up almost all available
By organising the first-cver performances of the ballet
supplies.

To finance the deal (according to the findings of
at the White House, Jacqueline Kennedy had done much
the later enquiry) he borrowed some go% of the neccssary
for dancing.It was she who,with her husband,influenced
capital from his stockbrokers.In freezing the negotiations,
the decision of the Ford Foundation to grant $2o,ooo,000
Kennedy had given a shock to the Stock Exchangc, and
to the principal dance schools in America.There was there-
sharevaluesfell sharply.

fore a great crowd that night pouring out after secing the
Wall Strcet could meanwhile have ignorcd this con-
Mexican Ballet.

tretemps,sinceshare values had showna constant rise since
At the paybox of the Biltmore’Theatre, two steps off
the bcginning of the year-from 20 to 35% omitting in-
from Broadway,hopeful provincials were still being told
creases in dividends.

The Telephone Company had that
thatBarefoot in thePark(with a young actress closely re-
very evcning announced a doubling of revenue for its two
semblingJacqueline)was sold out until April.

million sharcholders.But since the quarrcl with Roger
Mary,Mary had been running for three ycars.There
Blough, Chairman of the Board of the gigantic U.S.Steel,
would be a long wait, too, for anyone wanting to see the
Wall Street was always a bit suspicious of John F.

British revue, Stop the World, I Want To Get Of, which
Kennedy.

Jacqueline had seen with her sister, Princess Radziwill.--- PAGE BREAK ---

British revue, Stop the World, I Want To Get Of, which
Kennedy. Jacqueline had seen with her sister, Princess Radziwill. ThePresident had deplored this that vcry afternoon,to a
Broadway,therefore,had good reason,despite the ever-
journalist in the aeroplane,while the air-hostess, Jan
increasing competition of television,for expecting a record
Tyrell, had becn serving their coffee:
season. "I talked for a long time the other day at Miami to a
business man and begged him to undcrstand that I am not
ALTHouGH IT was half-past one in the morning (Ncw York
‘anti-business'... You accuse me of putting obstacles in
time being an hour ahead of Texas)the officcs of the
your way, I told him,and blame it on me each time the
finance house,Ira Haupt and Co.,one of the most impor-
Exchange has a tremor ... but whcn you make record
tant on the stock market, wcre not in darkness. The firm
profits, you don't give'me the credit:*"
was facing_bankruptcy, to the tune of $3o,ooo,ooo, and
the Stock Exchange had frozen the accounts ofits 2o,oo0
BuT TuE Stock Exchangc was onc of the lesser Kennedy
clients:All Wall Street was in a hubbub and share values
worries.The President had cvcry rcason, that night,before
going to bed, to count his blcssings -hc too, like cvcry
since the last grcat crisis of more than two years before. other American. Kennedy was unintentionally the cause of this fall. He
On his night-table was a little gold' plaque, one of· a
had delayed the conclusion of an agreement which would
number which he had.had cngraved to give away to his
have allowed the Soviets to buy large quantities of grain in
friends.It was a calendar, the calendar of October 1962. order to supplement their bad harvests. He thought back now to those thirteen days in October,

--- PAGE BREAK ---large quantities of grain in
friends.It was a calendar, the calendar of October 1962. order to supplement their bad harvests. He thought back now to those thirteen days in October,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36
RED ROSES FROM TEXAS
COUNTING OUR BLESSINGS
37
those of thc Cuba crisis. He had saved his country and the
THE NExT day's horoscope, syndicated in hundrcds of
world from the horrors of atomic destruction,yet at the
American newspapers, read:
same timc confirmed his stature as a great President and
Seriouspoliticalsurprisesmaybeexpected.
put Communism on the run.The plaque bore his initials
And in Paris,where the newspaper kiosks were already
andJacqueline's,JFKand7BK,forwithouthis wife at his
re-opened, there was widely displayed a strange booklet of
sidehecould nothave gonc through that time.
astrological predictions by Andre Barbault,published by
Since that October ofcrisis,ayear had gone by,a yearof
Albin Michel. On page go it forecast “for Novembcr 1963,
many dramatic events which Kennedy had confronted
the tragic end of the President of the United States."
with dignity and fair.He had overcome thc Mississippi
Had Kennedy read that book, hc would only have
crisis,kept hold on the Atlantic Aliance,preventcd Viet-
laughed at it. One of his friends,Stefan Lorcnt,had rc-
Nam from falling into chaos,inspired the historic Negro
marked to him some days carlier on thc evil coincidencc
march on Washington, and stood up against the whims of
that eversince 184o,the president elcctedin every twentieth
Congress. Above all, he had concluded the pact ending
year had died in office.Roosevelt, re-elected in1940, did
in office in 1945. Kennedy had replied:
achievementofpost-waryears.
. uonnsidns sem ot' pus ue nd IlI "os Ino,,
Kennedyhad hoped
 toreceivetheNobelPrize for that,
andwasveryd
ntedtolearn thatProfcssorLinus
Paullinghadbcen chosen
Paulling, who this very day had
lefthisCalifornianhometobegin thejourney toStockholm
for the prize-giving ceremony. Never mind!Thc Soviets
were talkingnow of closerrclations,and ofco-operation in
Space.The end of the cold war was in sight.
As theyoungSenatorEdmundsen was to say later:
"I don't knowwhythePresident needs to make anelection
tourhere.Hewillbe elected withacclamation nextNovember."
He was right. But Kennedy loved the crowds, loved
talking to them, loved the fight.
Hemust also bow to the political rule that every president
must give up one year in four of his term of office to his re-
election.Perhaps he wanted toget such electoral unanimity
that his“dynasty”would thereby be firmly established in
American political life.
So it is likely that Kennedy went to sleep that night
thinking of his chances of conquering the votes of a reluctant
Dallas.his“dynasty”would thereby be firmly established in
American political life.
So it is likely that Kennedy went to sleep that night
thinking of his chances of conquering the votes of a reluctant
Dallas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ereby be firmly established in
American political life.
So it is likely that Kennedy went to sleep that night
thinking of his chances of conquering the votes of a reluctant
Dallas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

‘JOIN THE MARINES..
39
as regularly at about nine o'clock. He read in his room, or
listened to the radio.Sometimes,at midnight,hc would go
intothebigsitting-roomfor the tclevision ncwsbulletin.
CHAPTER THREE
silentperson.
Join the Marines-They will
That night, he did not come in at news-time. No-one
noticed his absence.MrsJohnson was at the restaurant,and
make a Man out of You!
the housekeeper, Helen Roberts, had other things to do
than bother with the tenants.
Some wceks before, an unknown woman had telcphoned
and asked to speak to a certain “Oswald".
THE sHABBY wooDEN bungalow at 1026 North Beckley,
"No-one of that name here - and I'm not a telephonist,”
in the Oak Hill quarter -“on the other side of the tracks"
Mrs Roberts had snapped, cutting off the caller's protests.
was in darkness.Mrs A.C.Johnson owns that jumble of a
Had she bcen a bit more fricndly, she might perhaps have
house,whose buildermust have thought he was constructing
realised that the initials of O:H.Lee were thosc of this Lec
a maze, it is so difficult to find your way round.
Harvey Oswald -and might have put a spoke.in the
Mrs Johnson is a very good manager indeed. She has
whecls of destiny...
seventeen rooms, let furnished at modest prices. The tenant
whoonOctober14thhadtaken thesmallroomoffthe
IN THE same district, a quarter of an hour's walk away,
main sitting-roomnear theentrancepaidonly$8a week-
lived policeman J. D. Tippitt,who had at last made up his
which is reasonable in any country in the world,and above
all in Dallas.
home with his family,helping his wife,Marie.
The room was no bigger than a railway carriage, some
6ft.by 8ft;with a window (and air-conditioning it is true),
Thcy owned their own little house,but in.theory only,
since it was heavily mortgaged.A salary of $4go was quite
avcry small,plainbed,and a child’s cupboard,white with
insufficient; there-was nobutter on the bread after the
bluepaintedflowers -bed and cupboard taking up almost
2oth of each month-and Tippitt,who at thirty-nine had
all the available space.Anyway,the tenant had almost no
served for ten years in the City police,worked on Fridays
posscssions:a smallradio and a half-cmpty suitcase, said
and Saturdays in a restaurant.
Mrs Johnson.The room was too small to hide anything.
The next day he would be free (he did not-havc to go to
The tenant behavedverywell, givingno trouble,never
.the restaurant until the evening), and had thcrcfore becn
asking for anything and paying the rent regularly.What
able to chat at length to his eldcr son. This was Allen,
more could Mrs Johnson-who, with her husband, was
fourteen years old, whose ambition it was to be an astro-.
busy not only with this nice little place but also with a
naut.
restaurantnearby-havewishcd for?
Brenda Kay, ten, was helping her mother wash up;
The tenant, whose namc was O. H. Lce, went rcgularly
littleCurtis Ray,four, had long since been in bed:
to work every morning and returned every evening almost
38ten, was helping her mother wash up;
The tenant, whose namc was O. H. Lce, went rcgularly
littleCurtis Ray,four, had long since been in bed:
to work every morning and returned every evening almost
38

--- PAGE BREAK ---40
RED ROSES FROM TEXAS
‘JOIN THE MARINES...

41
"Tippitt?

A good guy, a real buddy," his Sergeant said
together by choice,and they continue tobe givcn that
of him.*"Never talks about anything except his family ...

name.His father,Joseph,a building contractor,brought
They're poor, but they're happy."
him up very strictly, together with his three brothers and
Next day was tobe a holiday for them, since owingto
four sisters.

Kennedy's arrivalandthefestivities whichwould follow,the
But Ruby early detached himself from thc family; at
childrenwouldnotgoto school.

fiftcen hc was already well known in Chicago's under-
world, selling tickets for sporting events and acting as
JAcK RuBy,.the proprietor of the Carousel Club,had not
bookie's runner.

yet gone home.Despite its pretentious sign, the Carousel
He becamc one of the characters of the“Loop”(the
city's Soho).They callcd him:“Sparky”,because although
tease” show the customers bought morc and more drinks
he never seemed to have any moncy he always managed to
for the hostesses.Ruby usually stayed at the club until the
be flashily dressed.The Chicago police did not takc him.

middle of the last show,about two'in the morning, then
very seriously.

Once he tried to get into a boxing match
checked the cash and deposited the evcning's takings in the
without paying, was severely beaten and has evcr sincc
night-safe of a ncarby bank.

carried a steel plate in his skull.Later,Rubinstcin became a
His rcal name was Jack Leon Rubinstein, but he had
commercial travellerin cruets;then organiscd the more or
shortened it.Either because that is often done in Amcrica,
less shady activitics of a syndicate of road-swecpers.

or because in Dallas, despite the presence of a strong and
Rubyleft Chicago for San Francisco,where during the
lean years of the Deprcssion he tried to make his wayin
Ruby's mitier one cannot afford the luxury of making
that jumble of dance-halls,houscs of assignation, nude
enemiesfornon-commercialreasons.--- PAGE BREAK ---

carried a steel plate in his skull.Later,Rubinstcin became a
His rcal name was Jack Leon Rubinstein, but he had
commercial travellerin cruets;then organiscd the more or
shortened it.Either because that is often done in Amcrica,
less shady activitics of a syndicate of road-swecpers. or because in Dallas, despite the presence of a strong and
Rubyleft Chicago for San Francisco,where during the
lean years of the Deprcssion he tried to make his wayin
Ruby's mitier one cannot afford the luxury of making
that jumble of dance-halls,houscs of assignation, nude
enemiesfornon-commercialreasons. shows and sleazy dives which is the“Barbary Coast”.But
the native gangsters chased him off. club proprietor must be-above all with the police.The
He'went back to Chicago, and timidly and unnoticed
Headquarters mcn, and those of the Sheriff's office, often
frequented the violent world ofTonyAccardo,Partin Ochs
came in.They ate and drank free,joked with thc girls, and
and Paul “No-Nose” Labriola.He,offered to“tell ail to
Kefauver's Senate Committce,which was enquiring into
waiter, but giving “Jack, my pal” a friendly tap on the
crime in the United·States.Washington laughed at him;
humiliated,Ruby in1952 agreed to his sister,Eve Grant's,
Texas, where alcohol is sold in clubs, you have obviously
suggestion that he should take over the management of a
to keep in with the police. bar which she had inherited. JackRuby gave himself “little Al Capone of Dallas”airs,
In Dallas Jack Ruby found fortune.He at oncc bccamc
believed he resembled “Scarface",and dressed to imitate
"the Chicago cowboy", looked on by everyone. as a
him.He was born obscurely in the ghetto of Chicago's West
tourist sight.Hebought another bar,then the Carousel,and
Sidc. The word ghetto is not a metaphor here: every big
despitefiverccordedarrestsseemsnever tohavepaid thc
American city has its ghetto,where theJewish poor herd
smallest penalty.

--- PAGE BREAK ---42
RED ROSES FROM TEXAS
‘JOIN THE MARINES..

43
“Really, he was never interested in politics,”said his best
thc language.

She was born in Ncw York, but grcw up in
strip-tease artiste, Jada Conforto, a red-head of twenty-
Philadelphia, and had livcd at Dallas for only four ycars.

seven.

“And I didn't think he could hurt a fly.

He could
She mixed a great deal with Whitc Russians, and
never make up his mind."
militant anti-Communistswho also wanted-in order to
pursue their activities -to increase their knowlcdge of
THAT NIGHr, Ruby returned late to his apartment.

He had
Russian.

three roomsin theMarsala Building,233Erwing Street.

In Dallas, everyone is anti-Communist in the same way.

The rent was only $125, but Ruby, always careful with
that at the Vatican everyone is Catholic.

money, shared it with a postcard seiler, Gcorge Senator.

One day, a chemist invited her to a small cocktail party..

They had been fricnds for a long timc,and Senator.

“We're expecting a man callcd Oswald, who has livcd in
thought him a “"regular guy, good-hearted, with a code of .

Russia and came back disillusioncd about ten months ago.

his own - not everybody's, but still a code."
His wife is also Russian, born during thc Stalin era.

To her,
Ruby was a bachelor, and gave all his love to his basset-
America must be likefairyland."
hound,a chestnut-coloured dog.called Schatzi.Neither
Ruth Paine was to say later that Oswald made a very bad
Senator, nor his staff at the club, nor the police knew that
impression on her:
he also had a revolver.

"Obstinate, violent, always arguing .

.." But Marina,
the young Russian,was charming, gcntle, cagcr to plcasc,
THE woMAN whohad sounseasonablytelephoned the
always talking about her little girl, June Lce.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Obstinate, violent, always arguing . .." But Marina,
the young Russian,was charming, gcntle, cagcr to plcasc,
THE woMAN whohad sounseasonablytelephoned the
always talking about her little girl, June Lce. rooming-house at Beckley Strect was a pleasant blonde,
“We got on together like sisters, and as her husband had
very tall and well-built,ofRussian origin(like her husband)
not taught her English she was a valuablc teacher,sincc wc
and professing the Quaker faith. always talked Russian together."
"Oswald rcproached me very much for that telephone
TheWhite Russians and othcr rcfugccs from Communist
call,"Mrs Ruth Paine said later.“Then he calmed down
persecution were to confirm that Oswald was an impossiblc
when I explained that his wife, who was pregnant, wasn't
person, and that he treated his young and lovcly wifc very
well and nccded him.Sure,I ought'to have bcen alarmed
badly indeed.He hit her,did not buy milk for thc child,
by this business of the false name.ButI knew how much
and treated her like a servant.Marinawas to admit that
trouble he'd had to get work in Dallas, with his past.And
he did not make love to her morc than oncc cvcry two
it isn't a crime in the United States to go under an alias."
months or so. But Marina loved him, and a woman in
Howhad it come about that thisquietmiddleclass
love puts up with everything. woman -living at Irving,a snall village some ten miles
They say that she did try two or threc timcs to lcave hini,
from Dallas,and whose husband Michael worked in the
and even thought of asking the help of thc Soviet cmbassy. Bell factory making helicopters -- should know Oswald? But she did not dare,believing hcrself too dceply com-
It's an odd story. promised in the eyes of Moscow becausc of the friends shc
Mrs Painc studied Russian at St Marks School in
had made in Dallas and because of her marriage. Dallas, and never missed a chance of perfecting herself in
Ruth Painc often visited Marina,but believed that thcc studied Russian at St Marks School in
had made in Dallas and because of her marriage. Dallas, and never missed a chance of perfecting herself in
Ruth Painc often visited Marina,but believed that thc

--- PAGE BREAK ---44 .

:
RED ROSES FROM TEXAS
‘JOIN THE MARINES...

45·
couple got on well togcther.

Then, one morning in April,
LEE HARVEY osWALD.was born on October 18th, 1939 in
she found the youngRussianin tears.

New Orleans,city ofjazz,slaves and carnival.His father,an
"Lcc has lost his job, and here I am pregnant .""
insurance agent, had dicd a few months before.

Oswald had bcen working for six months at Jaggers, Chiles
His mother,Margucrite Oswald,who today lives on the
and'Stowall, a photo-engraving firm.

outskirts of Fort Worth, at 22oo Thomas Place, where she
The official reason, as given by Robert Stowall, its head,
works as aliving-in nurse,was in her second marriage.She
was:
hadhad one child of her first husband,John Edward Pic,
"He made no progress at all as a specialist printer in the
now a regular officer in theAmerican Air Force.Lee had an
photographic lab."
eldcr brother,Robert,who·today has his own family,and
The true reason was quite different.

The other workers
works.near Dallas as a brick merchant.

wcre indignant at seeing Oswald reading a copy of the
TroublewasthelotoftheOswalds.

Daily Worker,organ of the American Communist Party,
At the age of three, little Lee and his brothers were
while cating his lunch.

They insisted on his dismissal.

placed in a Lutheran institution.

Mrs Paine,-who lived apart from her husband,took pity
The mother decided to re-marry, to a certain Edwin A.

onthem andoffered toshelterMarina and littleJune
Eckdahl, an enginccr living at Fort Worth.

This proved a
while Oswald went to New Orleans, his native town, to
tumultuousmarriage,and in1948Eckdahl accusedhis wife
.lookforwork.

of cruelty and of going through his pockets.

His lawyer,
The real lifc-story of Lec Harvey Oswald will not be
Fred Korth,who later became Navy Minister,got him a
revealed for somc time, when the“Secret” stamp is re-
divorce --and one without alimony.--- PAGE BREAK ---

of cruelty and of going through his pockets. His lawyer,
The real lifc-story of Lec Harvey Oswald will not be
Fred Korth,who later became Navy Minister,got him a
revealed for somc time, when the“Secret” stamp is re-
divorce --and one without alimony. moved fromhis dossier.Perhaps even then the whole truth
In order to bring up her children, Mrs Oswald worked
will not.be known about him -his past, his ideas, his
in a sweet factory.Lee went to theFort Worth clementary
plans. school:a quiet child,a great reader,who did notjoin much
Yes, there are hundreds and hundreds of witnesses; but
in the games of his classnates. As a pupil, his rating was
thiehumanmemoryisnot anelectronicbrainwhich
average. rccords every dctail
1passively and objectively.Uncon-
When his mother·decided to go to live in New York,
sciously,people remember only what is derogatory to
where the elder son was doing his military service,Lee was
him. sent to the public high school in the Bronx. But he very
What is certain is that apart from his.wife,whom he
often played truant:forty-seven days in fourmonths.It was
loved, Oswald had not a single friend in the world. It may
decided thathe should beputin the care of the children’s
thereforenevcrbeknownwith certainty ifhereallywas
court. the centralfigure of that fatal Friday,November 22nd;or
The investigator John Carro discovered that the fourteen-
simply the victim of afreak of destiny. year-old boy prefcrred staying at home to watch television. However that may be, he now belongs to history, and we
His mother refused to take the matter seriously,and Lee
shall try to give a true picture of that strange man who had
was summoned before the children's court despite all her
allhislifebeen arebel-a rebelwithout a cause. protests. To this day, Mrs Oswald claims that the only

--- PAGE BREAK ---46:
RED ROSES FROM TEXAS
‘JOIN THE MARINES ...'
47
reason for her son's trouble was that in class he was mocked
landings at Tripoli, Havana, Normandy, Iwo Jima, or in
because of his Southern accent.

Korea.

The Marines makc a cult of super-patriotism and
"But,”"'she says, “"we were poor, and with the poor'they
give hope of glory.

dowhat they like."
Lee Harvey Oswald had at last found the keytohisfuture.

Dr Renatus Hartogs examined the weedy little boy for a
Oswald must have been an excellent soldier.

He was
month, and classed him as “potentially dangerous".

He was
mentioned several times in despatches, and received a
found to be violent under his quict appearance, to have a.

medal for his excellent marksmanship.But he was not over-
hatred of authority, to be aggresive,unfeeling, obstinate
popular with his companions in arms.

and solitary.

"He wasn't tough enough, and he didn't talk much.

But the NewYork authorities,.whohave managed to
When he did talk, you couldn’t understand a word,” says
prcscrve and find this curious medical report ten years
Donald Goodwin,his sergeant instructor.

later,did nothing to cure him.

The town hadn't the
John E.Donovan, who commanded the section at the
necessary funds for such small matters.

Tustin Radar Base in California,where Oswald served,
The mother returncd to New Orleans.Lee seemed to
says that he read many Soviet newspapers and studied
inprove,and somehow got his high school graduation
Russian literature.

diploma.He haunted the libraries,and discovered Karl
His room-mate, Mack Osborn, says that Lee praised
Marx's Das Kapital.

Later he was to say:
Marxism.

That day I was like a very religious man who opens the
All this happened while he was in the Marines...

Bible for the first time in his life."
·Yet anothcr move, and the Oswalds were back in Fort
HE wAs sent to Japan.

He was immediately court-
Worth.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bible for the first time in his life."
·Yet anothcr move, and the Oswalds were back in Fort
HE wAs sent to Japan. He was immediately court-
Worth. Herc, at the high school Lee attended, a girl fell
martialled for the improper possession of a pistol.A second
madly in lovc with him.The youth was gauche,danced
court-martial followed, this time for having insulted a
badly, was not gencrous -and with good reason - but
sergeant-major. there wcrc moments when he could show a great deal of
Back in the United States, and after completing three
passion. The affair did not last long. Lee was seventeen. years of service, Oswald asked to be discharged on the pre-
Sevcnteenis theminimum agefor volunteeringfor the
text that his mother was in uncertain health. The request
Marines. The Marines (or expeditionary corps of soldier-
was granted. sailors) are the clite of the United States Forccs -rather
He did in fact go back to Fort Worth. He had on him
likc the S.S.under Hitler, or the parachutists under de
$1,6oo,his pay and gratuity.But he stayed only one night
Gaulle. A marine is a hero, a superman, a legend. The
with his mother.Next morning he announced coldly that
corps takes only volunteers,andin a few months transforms
he was going to embark at New Orleans on a ship bound for
boys into men. Leningrad. In the United States, more films and books are produced
"Why did he go? Do you think I could have stopped
tothe gloryof theMarines than on any other subject. him?He wanted to write a book which would make him
Without theMarincs there would never havebeen the
famous,"Marguerite Oswald was to say later.