MOST SECRET


John Dickson Carr

Set in 1670, in the reign of Charles II, this fast-moving and romantic mystery
reflects John Dickson Carr’s detailed knowledge and love of the period.

Here are royal intrigues, murder, a plot against the king, and piracy on the
high seas, all centered on the beautiful blue ring young Roderick Kinsmere
inherited from his father.

“The king and the court, the theater, the art, the London streets, the continous
intrigue, all glow with vivid colorah’on.” -DOROTHY B. HUGHES

“Mr. Carr has contrived a fine, adventurous entertainment of politics and
piracy, espionage and murder.” — The Times

John Dickson Carr is the Anglo-American author of numerous mysteries,
including The Demoniacs, published this season by Carroll & Graf, and Papa La~
Bas, Deadly Hall, Dark of the Moon, Captain Cut-Throat, ^nd others available
from Carroll & Graf.

Mystery Mass Market $3.95

0-88184-542-6 235 pages October


THE 92nd TIGER ,

Michael Gilbert

Fast and furious entertainment from one of the most stylish of mystery writers.
The always urbane Michael Gilbert mixes an amusing story and fine plot with his
characteristic touches of realism.

Hugo is the muscular hero of a television adventure series. His career is
beginning to founder on the shoals of middle age when the Foreign Office calls. It
seems the ruler of a tiny but oil-rich, and therefore most important, Arab
kingdom needs a military adviser — and Hugo is itl

“Michael Gilbert makes a novelistic gimmick believable. He seems to know a
great deal about tbe Near East and the minds of the men who live there. Escape
reading at its best.” — The New York Times Book Review

“It is a bright and amusing thriller with some knov. iedgable sidelights on the
international arms trade.” — The Times

Michael Gilbert, a Grand Master of the Mystery Writers of America, is also a
noted EngWh solicitor, and was Raymond Chandler’s legal adviser. His many
books include Smallbone Deceased, Came Without Rules, and Overdrive, the
latter two available from Carroll & Graf.

Mystery Mass Market $3.95

0-88184-545-0 212 pages October


14 CARROLL & GRAF


OCTOBER


CROSSFIRE:

The Plot that Killed Kennedy

Jim Marrs


Jim .Marrs, a veteran journalist, here pulls together for
the first time all the available facts concerning that tragic
day in November 1963. Marrs has spoken at length with
key figures and numerous police, government and news
media officials involved in the case. Now, after more than
20 years, he sifts through theories and rumors to give a
clear and concise overview of what really happened,
including new and fascinating evidence on Lee Harvey
Oswald’s political background.

Backed up by abundant photos, Marrs examines first
the "kill zone” (the motorcade, the Texas Book
Repository, the Grassy Knoll) before going on to discuss
“means, motives and opportunities.” ’These include
disturbing connections with the FBI, CIA, the Mafia, the
Cubans and the American military among others. New
light is also shed on J. Edgar Hoover’s close friendship
with Lyndon Johnson and the latter’s unpredictable
behavior after the assassination. Then the author
evaluates The Warren Commission findings and contrasts
them with the House Select Committee on Assassinations
which boldly refuted the lone gunman theory. Marrs also
explores the "convenient deaths ” after the killing, deaths
which few Americans know about.

The facts and photographic evidence presented in this
startling book make it a necessary addition to the library
of anyone with the slightest interest in learning what
actually happened in Dallas at a time when Americans in
large numbers began to be openly cynical about their
government’s respect for the truth. Crossfire is a
disturbing book which — by its very thoroughness —
questions and provides answers to crucial aspects of the
crime that have long been taken for granted.


Jim Marrs teaches an assassination course at the
University of Texas. He is also an award-winning
freelance author, photographer and script writer.


Photo section

History Cloth $24.95

0-88184-524-8 608 pages November


NOVEMBER


CARROLL & GRAF 15
