To Quin Shea fron: larold Woinberg re JirK recordo,PA apjealo 5/28/79
Doyle,Fartin,WbsuV,WvTV ilu; Muwy Moorman pictures
Oswald associate-"gciedban"
FyfoiArequeste-rucortofnotprovidod;appoalsnotactedon
Warren Coiaoion tetimony tmd other records,PBl comanentarios,analyses withheld
In purior appetl: T lnivo rppealod continuod vitldoldinga of copien offtho oaptlonod
photpgraphs nd records relating wu to them und. the photographers.To now the FBI. hag
refused to provide copic: of auy of thc photpgraphs and began by refusing to inalce the
appointment it rcquires for y examination of any copies in its public reading room.
Subsequently I muade for you copies of 105-32555 Serials 5655-9 inclusive. Chey
areattachod hereto.At thris point ia the tiles it appeurs thet the roquest and DJ-118
foru are not attached aithough I believe they have been disclosed。No rosponse is attached
at this ppint eithor。
Refercnco to those requeats asbeing of 12/15/70 is not accurate。Almost three yoars
afo I prcpared a list of my iinored requests for uoc in C.A.75-1996,vhon I testified to
them (vithout rebuttal）tudi save a copy to the Department。A year of more ago I providod a
copy to your ofrice vhou i war told thu PuT could not provido copies of my roIA/PA requestao
Tho first listing for 1go9 follow:s
"Jauary 1,pl photos, reports filed,not given to Warren Commission, taken
by Moormn,iovel.，Doylo cnd Hartin。Hunber.of ropetitions of this rcquest。Thoy in
ctudo WDsU and llasilm.Nocompliance."
Although thc attached records make no reforence to the lioorman picturas and the FBt
:and Sccrot Service vent through elaborate bituals of returning them to her and then
ftfching thuca ryzcin Ter tlke: Comaiasion, the netuality ia that the Dallaa office made and
kept copios und kopt the: fact cocret。(I have had no conpliance vith this raquest)
As the inconplete list of rcquortsstateo, to thcn there had beon no compliance with
the matters reforrod to in tho attachcd records。chero since has‘bcen no compliance.
It is faithful to ny expericnces vith the FBI and my rcading of many records for FBIHQ
to have roprogcnted rotA requosts as "allegations." (5655)。
It is faithrful to lie PHl'e dodication to Orvollian practuse for it to indicate to
the fiold officos tlnt thoy are not to inforn it whethcr they have copios of the photobt
whieh I did reg uef:5655)。
It is faithrful to lie PHl'e dodication to Orvollian practuse for it to indicate to
the fiold officos tlnt thoy are not to inforn it whethcr they have copios of the photobt
whieh I did reg uef:

--- PAGE BREAK ---ul to lie PHl'e dodication to Orvollian practuse for it to indicate to
the fiold officos tlnt thoy are not to inforn it whethcr they have copios of the photobt
whieh I did reg uef:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"Tf tle Rmm fleld office did/Bive filn,so stateIf film in field office
9t
possession at oncino,state date and circunstances of disposition。"(5655).
As I irfomned you carlier, J。Pat Doyle and John lartin informed me that the film
returned to thon was: not thoir original film and had becn edited。I also informed you
that tho WDsU ncus di.cctor provided the sume infornation.What is relevant to this
follows vhero I will call it to your attention.
Plouso noto tluat on 5656 the Portland office noted ita filing of filn on Oswald
being arre:tod aa a HCivil Ryghts" filo, 44-225. Other filing for it follows。 From thia
J'ALILEOM
airtel. it appoars that 4-225 is "captioned 'HAoK LBoN RUBY..." There appears to be no
basia consiatcnt vith norml filing practise, even for the FBl, to filep an 8/16/63
movio of 0svaldl under Ruby's 11/24/63ki.lling of Osvald。
onx1
The concluding scntonicoroquires other records to exist and atates the purpose of
forvarding tho original(or unmentioned copy）of the Doyle film to FBIHQ "in order that
the Burcau might make copteg of the pertinent scenes if it so desirod."
Page 2 fails: to utatc vhether copies were made at HQ or Portlahd but does reprosent.
what vould appear tobo:long dolay,from 1/31until.3/10/G4"for roturn to J.PArDoyLE。"
The doscription of the Hartin filn matches ncithor the film nor lartin's representation
of it。kinncapolio（5657） ia consiotent vith Portland in maslcing the brue nature of the
movie。It is not "of a grpup of Cubang after Oswald was arrested" but rather is ofO8wALB
and three Cuban's bcing aurrestod, vitl:many other persons also included。
The elapsed tine with the "artin film was a month tnd 11days,rather long for the
ebanination andreturn of filn allegedly of novalue。
While the Comimsion vas informcd of rBT intervieus rolating to the Doyle film from
the records in the Archives it appenrs that the FBL withhyed all lmowledge of the Martin
filn fron the Comio:si.one
Minneapolis providod mn cqually misinfornative description of this film on 12/31/63,
only as"apmrontly deyictinQswAuD's presence in lew Orleans."
None ol tho pugcs of this Sorial or any othor rofer to the making or not malcing of
any copy of this film cithcr。of this film on 12/31/63,
only as"apmrontly deyictinQswAuD's presence in lew Orleans."
None ol tho pugcs of this Sorial or any othor rofer to the making or not malcing of
any copy of this film cithcr。

--- PAGE BREAK ---1/63,
only as"apmrontly deyictinQswAuD's presence in lew Orleans."
None ol tho pugcs of this Sorial or any othor rofer to the making or not malcing of
any copy of this film cithcr。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3
Serial.5658 rellocts thc inconsistoncy, arbitrariness and capriciousness of the with-
holding of the Pan American lilms names,an oarlier appeal that has not been acted upon.
The namen aro not vi.thheld fron thi.s record, which waa processed by tho same FoIA unlt only
muchoarliera
(It is not unusunl. in both so-called historical cases for this FBI FOIA. Unitto
withhold in records procossed lator what it had already disclosed。This.relates to
specifics and.gonerics both。)
Page 2 of 5658 rofors to the WDSU photographer Johann Rush having provided copies.of
six difforent franes of lrls 16 mm movie filn。Here the representation is of Mmm
"OSWALD and a person later identified as CHARLES HAIL SMceLE,JR。" The representation is
of kmowing untruthfulncss,us other attachnents show and as I informed you earlier.
As I also informod you,Sccrot Service recordo place the number of individual
photographs provided by Rush as 17n. the FBt gave the Warron Commisasion onl.y two.
quoted abovc。It thcn providos an cntiroly different file nunber for the Portland records
89-21。Thero is no explanation of how Dallas could havc hnd this number if it had only
the indicated recordswrich bear the Portland number 44-225 only。Or，it appears that
other rocordsexistandothor files should bosearched。
The Doyle and Hnrtin films aro of an incident of'exnctly a week before thoseof the
TV stations.In all oflicial accountg Oswald.was entiroly alone when on 8/9/63he was
distributing FPCC literatuic of his own crcation。Houever,Gemberling slipped up a bit in
his description of the allegedly worthless Doyle film:"..motion pictures of twQindividuale
on 8/9/63 on Canal Strcct,Nev Orleans,garrying sigmg bearing pro-Castro inscrlptions with
leaflets in thoir hando."(cmphasis added。)
Tothe best of my recollection any and all other roforences to,an Oswald associate on
amdaleetnlspnondel,
that date wusmchnory-holed fronallothcrFBl roportingrgurdllogsof the souroeg of the
records and most inportantly from uny Warren Cormmission records I saw at the Archives
My own inquiries inNew Orleans leuve no doubt that Oswaldhasothcr associates inngrgurdllogsof the souroeg of the
records and most inportantly from uny Warren Cormmission records I saw at the Archives
My own inquiries inNew Orleans leuve no doubt that Oswaldhasothcr associates in

--- PAGE BREAK ---ouroeg of the
records and most inportantly from uny Warren Cormmission records I saw at the Archives
My own inquiries inNew Orleans leuve no doubt that Oswaldhasothcr associates in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

his literzature operations。 My sources includes FBI sources。I have and have read the FBl's
reflcctions of its intorviows with those I also interviewed。 The FBI's versions do not
include what I vas told,vhich is to say than among their omiasions is the foregoing about
ahotherpersonvithOsvaldon 8/9/63。
(Iy this connection I remind you that you have not acted on my appeal relating to the
fingeryprint not thatof Ouwald on a loaflet obtained by tho New Orleans police on the
occasion of an oarlier Oswald literature operation, at the dock where the carrier Wasp
the 1/1/G9 dato of my roquest above I also mado an IrofA requost relating to this。 I have
uppealed and ro-appealed that denial。The infornation remains withheld as of today.)
On pigo 3 of 5659 tlere is roference to "a third white male" in what Steele allegedly
told the FBI。I hapyon to have interviewed. him as well as Jesse Core, mentioned above on
this page。It was not morely an unidentified other man,it was another Oswald accomplioe.
These tvo are not tic only ones who reported this to me and I am sure to the FBI, whioh
managed not to report it。Core was a regular FBI sourte and he identified the other sup-
posodly ulnown mon in tho picturoa the FBIuaod。Thoro aro atill other suoh roforenoebut
Jhbw/
of
an important one（m page 4）states what the FBI's pictures do noteither/the two
named ncn doing,"passing out handbills." The covering up of this in the next paragraph
mheMpnt,EHARAamlALICE
states that the.othe1 two of thesc throc ro tho tvo naned above,lboth of whomhad officeg
They
in the buiding involved sa/ were not leatlotting. Thty Wart obseru img .
As I informed. you carlier, the vDsU filma were three soparate films when given to the
FBI。 The bottom of this puyge identifies each of thcse three separately and does not even
indicate that vhen the FjI received them,which it also does not state,they had boen
splicod togothor。Rathcr than stating that WDsU loaned the FBI the filn for copying the
top of the next pages Says that Pan Ameri.can"made available a duplicate copy" of all three
in one。Pan Americun did not hvc WDsU'g film,WDSU did。
These records raisc questions about the Dallas indox. Does it have a section on
photographs? Is there a separate filing of them of vhich I have not been provided with
copies,vlhat I vould asuume to be u norn? Or a list or inventory? Neither is provided。Does it have a section on
photographs? Is there a separate filing of them of vhich I have not been provided with
copies,vlhat I vould asuume to be u norn? Or a list or inventory? Neither is provided。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

My requests include copies of the photographs. These rocords no not say the FBI does
Six Rush stills are montioned repeatedly。I have not been gven copies of them or
of the enlargements.This raisos additional questions: did the FBI fail to glve the
CommiSSIon
八
referrod to appear to be of parts of those frames onlye
The top one of the attached pages shows other distritutionaThose of most interest
tome ere to W.C。 Sullivan and Alex Rosen.Their Domestic Intelligence and General
nvestigative Divisions represent two of the many sources of information within my requests
In this connection I remind you of the history of the Long tickler,a separate record
that did not oxist anywhcro else in the FBI so far as is lnown and was in one ofthe plaoen
Iaskedtobesoarchedbackin 1976。
FBIHQ did not tell. the fiel.d offices "Here is an FOIA request for photographe.Please
sond ohpiog if you have thom alongwi.th tho othor rolatod information roquogted.That
would have easy,direct and could have lofto prompt compliance。Instead there was the
elaborate means of telling the field offices not.to let FBIHQknow it they had copies
There is no record reflecting whether or not FBIHQ had copies of the pictures and other.
information requested。Jnstead there is the also elaborate repetition of the earller in-
1savoided。Their photographs also are withheld。There is no record showing what FBIHQ did
with the picture it received.(Generally the Lab was included in routings and for exami-
nation of photographs。）There is no DI or GID record。