THE JFK ASSASSINATION AND THE FAILURE OF INSTITUTIONS:
THE SOCIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF A MAJOR HISTORICAL EVENT
t
by
Gerald Ginocchio, Ph.D.
Wofford College
Spartanburg, South Carolina
Dennis W. MacDonald, Ph.D.
Saint Anselm College
Manchester, A'eiv Hampshire
Presented at:
Society for the Study of Social Problems
Washington, D.C.
August 18, 1995

--- PAGE BREAK ---Carolina
Dennis W. MacDonald, Ph.D.
Saint Anselm College
Manchester, A'eiv Hampshire
Presented at:
Society for the Study of Social Problems
Washington, D.C.
August 18, 1995

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE JFK ASSASSINATION AND THE FAILURE OF INSTITUTIONS:
The Sociological Significance of a Major Historical Event
by
Gerald Ginocchio, Ph.D.
' Wofford College
Spartanburg, South Carolina
Dennis W. MacDonald, Ph.D.
Saint Anselm College
Manchester, New Hampshire
Introduction
The assassination ^President John F. Kennedy on November 22, 1963 was one of those defining moments
in American history which deeply affected the people of this country and the world. A young, intelligent, dynamic,
and charismatic leader, he was loved and admired by many the world over. His murder was a shock, and left among
many a feeling of personal loss. The murder of the John F. Kennedy, however, was not just a murder, not just the
death of a widely-loved person. More importantly, it also had profound implications for the institutions on which
our society depends and through which we live. The assassination itself, whether brought about by an organized
conspiracy or a lone-nut gunman, was, in effect, a coup d'etat. As Harold Weisberg has noted, “It was a political
crime and, whether by design or not, was followed by political changes within this country and without”
(Weisberg, 1965:ix)
1 Perhaps most notable among these changes was the cancellation and eventual reversal of
Kennedy's cautious moves toward disengagement from Vietnam. (See, e.g., Newman, 1992)
As President of the United States, John F. Kennedy occupied an office vested with enormous power, both
real and symbolic. (Guth and Wrone, 1980:xi) His murder did violence not just to an individual but to a
fundamental tenet of democracy. As the Bellah et al. (1991:3) note in The Good Society, “Democracy requires a
‘The work of Harold Weisberg constitutes the major source of data used in this paper. This is not merely
because Weisberg has written more extensively and authoritatively than anyone else on the assassination of
President Kennedy. It is also because Weisberg has compiled an archive of once secret documents on the case that
exceeds a quarter of a million pages. These documents were the fruit of his years of expensive and exhaustive suits
under the Freedom of Information Act. His books are based on these documents, and he provides access to all. He
has nearly single-handedly built a historical record on this case. Unless otherwise indicated, the documents referred
to herein are from Weisberg.
1ese documents, and he provides access to all. He
has nearly single-handedly built a historical record on this case. Unless otherwise indicated, the documents referred
to herein are from Weisberg.
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---e provides access to all. He
has nearly single-handedly built a historical record on this case. Unless otherwise indicated, the documents referred
to herein are from Weisberg.
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
degree of trust that we often take for granted,” trust that political debate and change can be accomplished
peacefully, without threats or violence.
Beyond the destabilizing institutional consequences of the assassination itself, an even more threatening
chain of events unfolded as America, both officially and unofficially, tried to get to the bottom of what happened
and to discover who was ultimately responsible. With the death of the prime suspect, Lee Harvey Oswald, less than
48 hours after his arrest, there obviously could not be a trial and a public airing and testing of the evidence in the
case. In lieu of this, a government commission, which came to be known as the Warren Commission, was
established to look into all the facts surrounding the assassination. (See Appendix, Exhibit A) The Warren
Commission, along with th^Secret Service and especially the F.B.I., investigated this case for nearly a year.2
Although significant discrepancies exist among their separate reports,3 all concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald was
the sole assassin. He, alone and unaided, killed President Kennedy and severely wounded Governor Connally who
rode in the same limousine with the President
That conclusion, we contend, as have responsible critics4 throughout the history of the Kennedy
assassination controversy, was based not on evidence but on a presumption of Oswald's guilt As early as 1965,
Harold Weisberg, in his pioneering critical analysis of the Warren Report entitled Whitewash: The Report on the
Warren Report, demonstrated that the Commission's own evidence stood in blatant contradiction to the conclusions
it drew. An even more devastating picture of deceit and cover-up began to emerge as suppressed documents were
disclosed through Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests and litigation.5 Indeed, it became clear that there
2Even after the Warren Report was published and released to the public on Sept. 27, 1964, the F.B.I.
continued to investigate, which seems strange considering the fact that the Report was supposed to have definitively
closed the case. (See especially, Weisberg, 1966)
3Neither the F.B.I.’s nor the Secret Service's account of the shooting includes the “single-bullet theory.”
But, as we will see, it is absolutely essential to the Warren Commission's “solution.”
4As Guth and Wrone observe: “The single most important characteristic making these critics responsible is
their common goal to define, secure, and expose documentary evidence in this murder case, most of which
governmental agencies choose to keep controlled and secret.” (I980:xxvi)
5Harold Weisberg discusses many of these records for the first time in his recently released Never Again!:
The Government Conspiracy in the JFK Assassination. (1995)trolled and secret.” (I980:xxvi)
5Harold Weisberg discusses many of these records for the first time in his recently released Never Again!:
The Government Conspiracy in the JFK Assassination. (1995)

--- PAGE BREAK ---(I980:xxvi)
5Harold Weisberg discusses many of these records for the first time in his recently released Never Again!:
The Government Conspiracy in the JFK Assassination. (1995)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3
never was any real interest in investigating the crime; the government's overriding concern was to pin it all on the
dead Oswald.
The possible motives for this range from the relatively benign rationale of national security, to the more
reprehensible bureaucratic protection and promotion, especially in the case of the to the most disturbing and
destructive motive of protecting those actually involved. Whatever the motive or motives, the facts demonstrate a
massive institutional failure, extending well beyond the Warren Commission itself, to determine who killed
President Kennedy and why.
In his authoritative and well-documented analysis of the Kennedy assassination, Howard Roffinan wrote:
Whoever killed President John F. Kennedy got away with it because the Warren
Commission, the executive commission responsible for investigating the murder, engaged in a
cover-up of the truth and issued a report that misrepresented or distorted almost every relevant
fact about the crime. The Warren Commission, in turn, got away with disseminating falsehood
and covering up because virtually every institution in our society that is supposed to make sure
that the government works properly and honestly failed to function in the face of a profound
challenge; the Congress, the law, and the press all failed to do a single meaningful thing to correct
the massive abuse committed by the Warren Commission. (1975:9)
Writing on the heels of Watergate, Roffinan adds, "To anyone who understood these basic facts, and there were few
who did, the frightening abuses of the Nixon Administration that have come to be known as ‘Watergate’ were not
unexpected and were surprising only by their nature and degree.” (1975:9)
It is the basic hypothesis of this paper that of all the sociologically significant aspects of the Kennedy
assassination and its aftermath, none is more significant than the institutional implications to which Roffinan refers.
Sociologists have long recognized the centrality of institutions to both the life of the society and the life of the
person.6 When institutions malfunction, the continued existence of society is undermined, as are the lives of people
^ere are, of course, many issued involved in the defining the nature of institutions, as well as their
meaning and significance for the person and society. Although a discussion of these is beyond the scope of this
paper, we suggest that the idea of institution developed by the founder of human ecology, the Chicago School
sociologist, Roderick D. McKenzie represents a valuable insight. McKenzie suggested that institutions are the
fundamental units of modem social life and, thus, need to be the focus of our analysis. (McKenzie, 1936) See alsoMcKenzie represents a valuable insight. McKenzie suggested that institutions are the
fundamental units of modem social life and, thus, need to be the focus of our analysis. (McKenzie, 1936) See also

--- PAGE BREAK ---a valuable insight. McKenzie suggested that institutions are the
fundamental units of modem social life and, thus, need to be the focus of our analysis. (McKenzie, 1936) See also

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4
who live and work through these larger institutional structures. In terms of the maintenance and organization of
society, polity is arguably the most fundamental institution. And it is through the political structures that society as
a whole is organized and the appropriate functioning of other institutions is ensured. It is the failure of the political
institution and aspects of other institutions as they relate to it that is most evident in an analysis of the institutional
response to the assassination of President Kennedy.
This paper represents a modest effort to draw out some of the implications of this failure of institutions as it
relates specifically to the Kennedy assassination.* * * * 7 We will point to several examples of this institutional failure.
First, we will examine the failure of various governmental institutions. These include most importantly the Warren
Commission itself, law enfycement institutions, principally the Dallas police and the F.B.I.; the legal profession
and judiciary, including the lawyers who constituted the staff of the Warren Commission and judges who sanctioned
government secrecy, suppression, and deception. Secondly, we will examine several of those institutions whose
social functions include, as Roffman put it, “mak[ing] sure that the government works properly and honestly.”
These include principally the media, broadly including both television and the print media; the publishing industry
as the forum for the dissemination of critical scholarship; the scientific community, mainly as represented by the
forensic pathology involved in the case; and the academy whose critical thought and analysis of society and its
institutions is essential to their proper functioning.
Liazos (1972) and his discussion of the importance of focusing on institutional as opposed to individual deviance.
More recently, several important insights are found in Bellah et al. (1991: 3-18) particularly in their Introduction,
“We Live Through Institutions.” Finally, the writings of American social philosopher, Elijah Jordan, offers, we
believe, the most insightful discussion of the importance of institutions. (MacDonald, 1994; Jordan, 1927)
7It is important to note that this paper will not and cannot address the questions of who in fact killed
President Kennedy and why? Given the fact that the crime itself was not properly investigated to begin with, along
with the simple passage of time, those questions may never be answered. Nonetheless, much can be learned from
readily available information about how major institutions in our society failed in the face of the profound challenge
of getting to the bottom of this great tragedy.eless, much can be learned from
readily available information about how major institutions in our society failed in the face of the profound challenge
of getting to the bottom of this great tragedy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---earned from
readily available information about how major institutions in our society failed in the face of the profound challenge
of getting to the bottom of this great tragedy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5
The Failure of Government to Investigate the Crime
Most basic among the obligations of government in the face of this profound crisis was a thorough
investigation of the crime to determine the truth and bring to justice the perpetrators. Two major “investigations” of
the assassination were undertaken by the federal government shortly after the assassination, the first by the Federal
Bureau of Investigation and the second by the so-called Warren Commission.
Just as federal power was invoked to take the President’s body out of Dallas before an autopsy could be
performed locally, as required by law, so too the F.B.I. was deeply involved in investigating the crime right from the
start.* After Oswald's death, the F.B.I. clearly became the principal investigative agency. Before there even was a
Warren Commission, the ^.B.I.'s director, J. Edgar Hoover, had set the tone for his agency by pronouncing Oswald
guilty. (Weisberg, 1995:vii, 251) And since its director had already presumed Oswald’s guilt, the F.B.I.’s
investigation focused exclusively on Oswald. This presumption had taken hold well before any real evidence had
been gathered, before autopsy results were examined, and before the rifle could be tested and other scientific tests
conducted to see it is was even physically possible for Oswald, or any one person for that matter, to have done it.
The F.B.I. was interested in no one else and even declined to investigate other possible suspects that had been
brought to its attention.8 9
With Oswald’s death on Sunday morning, November 24, 1963, there were also discussions at the very
highest levels of our government, including Kennedy’s successor and the chief beneficiary of the assassination,
Lyndon Johnson,10 about what could be done to squelch rumors and speculation regarding a possible conspiracy and
convince the public that Oswald was indeed the assassin. (Weisberg, 1995:viii-xiv) This was set forth quite
8As Hoover told Johnson in telephone conversation at 7:25 PM, November 22, the F.B.I. had already
entered the case, though Hoover was aware that he lacked legal authority to do so. (Weisberg, 1995:17)
9On the very day of the assassination, the Dallas office of the F.B.I. was advised that Jimmy George
Robinson and other members of the National States Rights Party should be considered suspects. On the bottom of
the Memo is a handwritten note, “Not necessary to cover as true subject located.” (See Appendix, Exhibit B.)
l0This is not to suggest that Lyndon Johnson was involved in the crime. However, under the circumstances,
the President having been assassinated while hosted by Johnson in Texas, an act that made Johnson president, it
seems at best inappropriate for Johnson to have taken charge of the case.rcumstances,
the President having been assassinated while hosted by Johnson in Texas, an act that made Johnson president, it
seems at best inappropriate for Johnson to have taken charge of the case.

--- PAGE BREAK ---esident having been assassinated while hosted by Johnson in Texas, an act that made Johnson president, it
seems at best inappropriate for Johnson to have taken charge of the case.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
explicitly in a memo written by then Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach and disseminated on the
Monday (November 25, 1963) following the weekend's tragic and bizarre events. Katzenbach wrote:
The public must be satisfied that Oswald was the assassin; that he did not have
confederates who are still at large; and that the evidence is such that he would have been
convicted at trial.
Speculation about Oswald's motivation ought to be cut off, and we should have some
basis for rebutting thought that this was a Communist conspiracy or (as the Iron Curtain Press is
saying) a right-wing conspiracy to blame it on the Communists....(See Appendix, Exhibit C, for
full text o£the Katzenbach memo)
Katzenbach goes on to suggest that the F.B.I. should compile a report as soon as possible to overcome the
deficiencies in the Dallas police investigation. And, as a last resort, Katzenbach holds out the possibility of
establishing a Presidential Commission.11
Katzenbach's words were not without effect in at least two important respects. First, the F.B.I. leaned on
the Washington Post to kill an editorial it planned calling for the establishment of a special commission to
investigate the assassination.12 This F.B.I. interference, at the request of President Johnson, in the editorial policy
of the Washington Post did not ultimately stop a commission from being formed, but it revealed the extent to which
the government (in particular, the executive branch) wanted to control any investigation.13
Secondly, Katzenbach suggested the F.B.I. compile a report in an effort to address the problem that: “The
matter has been handled thus far with neither dignity nor conviction. Facts have been mixed with rumor and
“The following evening (November 26), Katzenbach phoned the F.B.I. to ask when he might be receiving
the report on the assassination. According to an F.B.I. memorandum of the conversation, “One of the dangers which
Katzenbach sees is the possibility that the state hearings to be held in Texas may develop some pertinent
information not now known.” He went on to add that he would confer with state officials “in an effort to have them
restrict their hearing to the proposition that Oswald killed the President....” (See Appendix Exhibit H for full text.)
,2See Appendix, Exhibit D.
l3LBJ Library transcript of telephone call: The President to J. Edgar Hoover, Nov. 25, 1963, 10:30 AM.
(See Appendix, Exhibit I) Also, a Memorandum from Hoover to his top F.B.I. officials states, “I called Mr. Walter
Jenkins at the White House and advised him that we had killed the editorial in the Post.” (See Appendix Exhibit J)o, a Memorandum from Hoover to his top F.B.I. officials states, “I called Mr. Walter
Jenkins at the White House and advised him that we had killed the editorial in the Post.” (See Appendix Exhibit J)

--- PAGE BREAK ---7
speculation.

We can scarcely let the world see us totally in the image of the Dallas police when our President is
murdered.”
Two major themes, then, characterized the planning of the federal effort at investigating the crime.

First,
there was a presumption of the guilt of Lee Harvey Oswald as the lone, unaided assassin, a presumption made
immediately after the assassination by the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and his agency which
ended up being the chief investigators, really the only investigators, of the crime.

The “conclusion,” in other words,
was reached in advance of any investigation whatsoever.

Secondly, the major objectives of any investigation as
clearly set forth by Deputy Attorney General Katzenbach, but also expressed by the President, the F.B.I.

Director,
and the President’s press secretary, and the Chief Justice, were to control and manage information and to shape
public knowledge of and reaction to the crime.M In addition, the efforts were characterized by a sense of urgency, a
need for a quick solution, that was incompatible with a thorough, honest investigation.

Not only did Katzenbach
pressure the F.B.I.

to speed up its investigation, but the sense of urgency of “solving” the case quickly to end
speculation and rumors permeates these preliminary discussions.15
Clearly, not only was the truth about the assassination not the objective of “investigations” by the F.B.I.

and the Warren Commission, the discovery of the truth was precluded by political motives and presumptions of
,4According to notes of the January 20, 1964 staff meeting of the Commission, Warren himself, in
discussing the role of the Commission, expressed similar concerns with “quenching rumors, and precluding future
speculation....” (Eisenberg memorandum, printed in Weisberg, 1974:24)
15 In any case, there was no need to press the F.B.I.

They had the case closed by the evening of the
assassination.--- PAGE BREAK ---

and the Warren Commission, the discovery of the truth was precluded by political motives and presumptions of
,4According to notes of the January 20, 1964 staff meeting of the Commission, Warren himself, in
discussing the role of the Commission, expressed similar concerns with “quenching rumors, and precluding future
speculation....” (Eisenberg memorandum, printed in Weisberg, 1974:24)
15 In any case, there was no need to press the F.B.I. They had the case closed by the evening of the
assassination. By the time he wrote his November 25 memorandum, Hoover had the basic “facts” down, as he
expressed them to Jenkins at the White House:
I said there can be no doubt at all from a technical point of view that Oswald bought the gun from a mail-
order house in Chicago, handwriting identified; came to a post office box maintained by his mother; had
the gun at his house; his wife admitted gun was there but couldn’t identify gun; but on morning of the
assassination, the men who picked Oswald up to bring him to work said Oswald carried a package and
Oswald said they were curtain rods the lady had given him as he was going to decorate his own house with
them; and the paper was found in the building, together with the gun and three shells. I told Mr. Jenkins
that Oswald had four shells and only fired three shells; that we have one complete bullet found on the
stretcher on which the President was carried into the hospital, which apparently fell out of the President’s
head; that the other two bullets were pretty well broken up but sufficiently complete to allow us to identify
them as being the three fired by this particular gun. Mr. Jenkins stated that this is very conclusive. He said he would advise President Johnson about it
and that the President will be very pleased. (See Appendix Exhibit J for complete text.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---8
guilt.

Whatever justifications might be offered, this is more characteristic of the functioning of authoritarian
institutions than of free, democratic ones.

The F.B.I.

did conduct its own “investigation,” and had, by December 9, 1963, outlined its conclusions in a
five volume report, most of which was an anti-Oswald prosecution brief.

The F.B.I.

included barely 500 words on
the assassination itself— an account so grossly deficient that it failed to account for one of the victims, a bystander
by the name of James Tague, and one of the wounds to the President, his throat wound!

(Weisberg, 1965:192-193)16
The F.B.I.

had not even consulted the results of the autopsy, an essential piece of evidence in any murder
investigation, for this pretense of a report.

(Weisberg, 1995:32)
Although this repeat was not available for public inspection until it was deposited in the National Archives
months after the Warren Commission had issued its Report and closed shop, the conclusion that the FJB.I.

had con-
firmed that Oswald was the sole guilty party was leaked to the press and became national headlines.

(Weisberg,
1995:xiv) The Warren Commission had barely been established and had yet to get down to its task when it
appeared that the then highly-touted F.B.I.

had wrapped up the case.

So what was the Warren Commission to do,
especially since it would have to rely almost exclusively on the F.B.I.

in conducting its own investigation?17
According to the Warren Commission Report, at the very first session of the Commission, on December 5, .

1963, “the Commission viewed the Executive order [the Presidential order creating the Commission — Executive
Order #11130] as an unequivocal Presidential mandate to conduct a thorough and independent investigation.”
(Warren Commission, 196^f4:x) What is not mentioned in the Report is that on the very same day, the Commission ^
heard in a session classified as TOP SECRET from the Deputy Attorney General that the F.B.I.--- PAGE BREAK ---

in conducting its own investigation?17
According to the Warren Commission Report, at the very first session of the Commission, on December 5, . 1963, “the Commission viewed the Executive order [the Presidential order creating the Commission — Executive
Order #11130] as an unequivocal Presidential mandate to conduct a thorough and independent investigation.”
(Warren Commission, 196^f4:x) What is not mentioned in the Report is that on the very same day, the Commission ^
heard in a session classified as TOP SECRET from the Deputy Attorney General that the F.B.I. itself had leaked to
the press its major conclusions from its investigation of the case, namely, that Lee Harvey Oswald, alone and
,6These gross deficiencies were first reported in Harold Weisberg's Whitewash in 1965! Note also the
following synopsis provided by Guth and Wrone (1980:29). “An error ladened, severely distorted report of the
F.B.I. investigation into the assassination that preceded the formation of the WC and became the controversial
Procrustean base for its inquiry. The WC assigned it Commission Document number CD1. Only 450 words appear
on the murder, and these exclude the shot that wounded citizen James T. Tague and the wound on President
Kennedy's throat. From this paltry base the F.B.I. asserts Oswald was the lone, psychologically disturbed assassin, a
conclusory statement. In advance of delivery to the WC the F.B.I. secretly released the findings to the press in a
successful effort to mold public opinion....”
,7The Warren Commission did not have any investigators of its own, relying instead on the F.B.I. and the
Secret Service to conduct investigations for it. (Warren Commission, 1964a:xii)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Warren Commission did not have any investigators of its own, relying instead on the F.B.I. and the
Secret Service to conduct investigations for it. (Warren Commission, 1964a:xii)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
unaided, murdered the President. From the beginning, the Commissioners knew that they were boxed in by Hoover
upon whom they had to rely. It is, thus, not surprising that the Warren Commission basically followed the lead of
the F.B.I. and embarked on an “investigation" with a built-in verdict, regardless of the facts." Commission
%
members were aware of the gross deficiencies in that F.B.I. report: its failure to follow out numerous leads and
provide a more thorough account of the crime itself. But they also saw the handwriting on the wall as revealed in
the following exchange which took place in an executive session meeting on January 22, 1964 (the record of which
survived by accident):
Why would it be in their (F.B.I.) interest to say he (Oswald) is clearly the guilty one?
fliey would like to have us fold up and quit.
This closes the case, you see. Don't you see?
They found the man. There is nothing more to do. The commission supports their
conclusions, and we can go on home and that is the end of it...
I don’t even like to see this being taken down.
Yes, I think this record ought to be destroyed19
As Harold Weisberg observed in “Conclusions First,” the Preface to his Post Mortem, “The government
never really intended to investigate the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, and it never did .... There never
was any let-the-chips-fall-where they-may’ inquiry.” (1975:1) For example, despite its assertions to the contrary,
(Warren Commission, 1964a:x) the Commission never seriously investigated the possibility of a conspiracy. One
significant indication of this can be found in examining its file classification, which is tantamount to an outline of
the areas into which the Commission at least intended to look. There was, as Weisberg has noted, no file for
“conspiracy.” Furthermore, the classification makes it clear that the Commission predetermined the number of shots
fired, consistent with its “theory” of a lone assassin. There are three files, one each for the first, second, and third
shots. (Weisberg, 1975:5) A further indication of this is found in the suggested outline of the Commission’s report
,sThere is no better, more logical and concise analysis of the Warren Commission's presumption of
Oswald’s guilt than Chapters 1 & 2 of Howard Roffman's Presumed Guilty. (1975:45-91)
9For a complete discussion of the significance of this executive session transcript and how it was obtained,
see Harold Weisberg, Whitewash IV: JFK Top Secret Assassination Transcript. (1974).
Dulles:
(Rankin):
Boggs:
Rankin:
Boggs:
Dulles:of this executive session transcript and how it was obtained,
see Harold Weisberg, Whitewash IV: JFK Top Secret Assassination Transcript. (1974).
Dulles:
(Rankin):
Boggs:
Rankin:
Boggs:
Dulles:

--- PAGE BREAK ---ssion transcript and how it was obtained,
see Harold Weisberg, Whitewash IV: JFK Top Secret Assassination Transcript. (1974).
Dulles:
(Rankin):
Boggs:
Rankin:
Boggs:
Dulles:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
prepared by Norman Redlich on March 26, 1964, long before the “investigation” was completed. Most notable is
the major heading “Lee Harvey Oswald as the Assassin,” under which are outlined the major items which the
Commission will allege support the conclusion that Oswald was a lone assassin. (Printed in Roffman, 1972:265-
270) There can be no doubt that there was an overriding interest in laying questions concerning the assassination to
rest with the death of Lee Harvey Oswald.
Despite its best efforts to avoid crucial evidence,20 there was much that could not be avoided that created
difficulties for the Commission’s preconceived conclusion that Oswald was the lone assassin. The failure of
government here takes the form of blatant deceit
Among the more ^jgnificant contentions made by the Warren Commission was that Oswald had the
capability with a rifle to carry out the assassination. We know from an analysis of the famous Zapruder film and the
physical layout of Dealey Plaza the time frame in which all three shots allegedly fired by Oswald would have had
to occur. The Warren Commission basically concluded that Oswald had roughly 5.6 seconds to fire three shots with
his World War II vintage bolt-action rifle, two of those shots doing all the damage to Kennedy and Connally and
one missing the limousine entirely. (Warren Commission, 1964a: 117)
In having tests conducted to see if such a feat could be duplicated, no effort was made to replicate the
actual conditions under which the shots were allegedly fired, or the actual capability of Oswald with a rifle. As
Sylvia Meagher aptly observed: “The tests actually conducted at Aberdeen remain supremely irrelevant as a
measure of Oswald's rifle capability.” (1967:107) The rifle Oswald allegedly used was modified before it was
tested. Genuine marksmen, which Oswald was not,21 shot at stationery targets from a thirty-foot tower, taking all
the time they needed to aim and fire the first shot. Oswald's alleged actual performance was from a sixth floor
window at a moving target, having just a split second to get off the first clear shot as the limousine passed beneath
20The Commission repeatedly and systematically failed to seek essential evidence and failed to elicit crucial
testimony. A few examples of note would include the failure to obtain the death certificate of the President, the
failure to obtain crucial photographic evidence even when offered it, the failure"tolSkTestimony from the"
President’s physician. Admiral George G. Burkley, the only medical expert present in both Parkland Hospital and
Bethesda during the autopsy, among innumerable others..
21 Despite the Warren Commission’s assertion to the contrary, Oswald was, according to the testimony of its
witnesses, “a rather poor shot.” (See, e.g., Roffman, 1975:230)among innumerable others..
21 Despite the Warren Commission’s assertion to the contrary, Oswald was, according to the testimony of its
witnesses, “a rather poor shot.” (See, e.g., Roffman, 1975:230)

--- PAGE BREAK ---hers..
21 Despite the Warren Commission’s assertion to the contrary, Oswald was, according to the testimony of its
witnesses, “a rather poor shot.” (See, e.g., Roffman, 1975:230)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
an oak tree, and with a weapon that had several serious defects including a scope that was not properly sighted.
(Meagher, 1967:106-110; Roffman, 1975:225-247; Weisberg, 1965:24-29; 1995:301-306)
Despite the vastly improved conditions and their superior skill, only one of these expert marksmen was
able to hit the target on two out of the three shots within the required time frame.12 There is no question that they
could not have done what Oswald is alleged to have done, had the test been properly conducted. In the face of this,
for the Warren Commission to conclude that Oswald had the capability to cany out the assassination is as blatant a
misrepresentation of their own evidence as one can find. These tests, among many other pieces of information,
should have led the Commission to explore other possibilities, which, of course, they failed to do.
Another examplefcf an important link in the Commission's case against Oswald involves its conclusion that
Oswald carried the rifle used in the assassination to the Texas School Book Depository on the morning of the
assassination. This conclusion flies in the face of all of the evidence the Commission obtained and ail the testimony
they heard. Both of the eyewitnesses who saw Oswald leave for work that morning testified that the bag he was
carrying was significantly shorter (by half a foot) than could have carried the disassembled rifle. The person whose
job it was to watch employees as they entered the Depository, swore twice that Oswald had nothing in his hands as •
he entered the building. And the bag found on the sixth floor which is supposed to have contained the disassembled
weapon, had no indications of ever having contained the ‘‘well-oiled’’ rifle. (Weisberg, 1965:15-23; Meagher,
1967:62) Again, the Warren Commission chose to ignore or misrepresent its own evidence in concluding that
Oswald brought the rifle to his place of work that morning. In a “let-the-chips-fall-where-they-may” inquiry such
evidence would have been treated as exculpatory rather than incriminating.
The Warren Commission failed in its task to get to the bottom of who killed President Kennedy and why,
although it might have succeeded at the time in convincing the public that Oswald was the sole assassin. That
success, of course, was based on a fraud. Two decades ago, Howard Roffman offered what stands as an
appropriate summation:
“The professional riflemen each fired two series of three shots each at the three stationary targets. Hendrix
achieved two hits and a miss in the first series in 8.25 seconds, and two hits and a miss in the second in 7 seconds;
Staley hit two out of three in 6.75 seconds in the first, and hit three in the second series in 6.45 seconds; Miller hit
two out of three in each, the first series in 4.6 seconds and the second in 5.5 seconds. (Warren Commission
1964b:443-445)n the first, and hit three in the second series in 6.45 seconds; Miller hit
two out of three in each, the first series in 4.6 seconds and the second in 5.5 seconds. (Warren Commission
1964b:443-445)

--- PAGE BREAK ---three in the second series in 6.45 seconds; Miller hit
two out of three in each, the first series in 4.6 seconds and the second in 5.5 seconds. (Warren Commission
1964b:443-445)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
Whatever new platitudes the accessories after the fact may concoct to portray themselves
as honest and decent men, the implications of their actions remain. One implication is particularly
obvious and threatening: the federal government has sacrificed its credibility. A government that
lies without restraint about the death of its chief executive can not be believed on anything.
A government that exculpates presidential assassins and denies an accused man his every
right can not be trusted to protect its presidents or the rights of its citizens .... Government that
denies its people the true story of their president's murder undercuts, if it does not prevent, the
working of democracy. (1975:254JU
t
Law Enforcement
Law enforcement agencies which had the primary responsibility for investigating the crime, principally the
Dallas police and the F.B.I., not only failed to conduct proper investigations, but compounded that failure by
violating the rights of the accused and, in the case of the F.B.I., violating the rights of those who criticized their
work.
The investigative work of the Dallas police is flawed in many respects. But among the greatest of their
failings was their treatment of the tangible evidence on the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository.
(Weisberg, 1965:31-51) For example, an important part of the Warren Commission's case against Oswald is the so-
23Years later, because of persistent questions and criticism of the Warren Report along with skepticism
regarding the resolution of the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr., the House Select Committee on
Assassinations (HSCA) was created and conducted its own investigation. Its hearings were clearly aimed at
debunking the many conspiracy theorists who had put forth their own, highly speculative, scenarios. But it was
silent with respect to the many well-documented deficiencies of the Warren Commission's original work. (See
Weisberg, 1995:92 for more background and an example of how the HSCA operated). Although it ended up
endorsing the idea that there was a conspiracy, the HSCA Final Report basically absolved the Warren Commission
and said it had conducted a thorough and professional investigation. The government demonstrated once more its
inability to get to the truth or to make amends for its wrongdoing. An excellent summary of several gross
deficiencies in the HSCA's probe can be found in Guth and Wrone, The Assassination of John F. Kennedy: A
Comprehensive Historical and Legal Bibliography, 1963-1979. (1980:xxvi-xxxiv)f several gross
deficiencies in the HSCA's probe can be found in Guth and Wrone, The Assassination of John F. Kennedy: A
Comprehensive Historical and Legal Bibliography, 1963-1979. (1980:xxvi-xxxiv)

--- PAGE BREAK ---iciencies in the HSCA's probe can be found in Guth and Wrone, The Assassination of John F. Kennedy: A
Comprehensive Historical and Legal Bibliography, 1963-1979. (1980:xxvi-xxxiv)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
called "sniper's nest” that Oswald supposedly built around the window from which the shots were fired.24 There
was a major problem, however, which Lt. J.C. Day admitted in his testimony to the Warren Commission: that the
boxes which made up this “sniper's nest” were moved before the photographs (which the Warren Commission
%
accepted as evidence) were taken. (Weisberg, 1965:32-33) Therefore, any fingerprint evidence found on those
boxes and any reconstruction of the crime based on these photos would be worthless because of this careless
approach to the crime scene. This did not stop the Warren Commission, however, from using this tainted and really
worthless evidence. (Warren Commission, 1964a: 137-142)
While Oswald was in police custody, he was interrogated off and on for a total of about 12 hours. Not only
was he not represented by legal counsel, despite his expressed wishes, at any time during these interrogations,
incredibly, no stenographic or taped record was made of these sessions. Instead, the only reports of these
interrogations were prepared after the fact from only some of the participants, and these reports are inconsistent with
each other. No one attempted to reconcile these inconsistencies. (Weisberg, 1965:70-73; Meagher, 1967:223-237)
The Warren Report accepted the implausible explanation that Capt. Will Fritz's office was too small to permit a
stenographer or even a tape recorder! It is hard to imagine such an explanation holding up in any court. Whether
incompetence, negligence, or some more sinister motive was operating, there is no doubt the Dallas police failed in
their duty to conduct a credible investigation.
Far and away the greatest failure of the Dallas police was the murder of their prime suspect while in their
custody in the basement of police headquarters. There was no reason that basement had to be so crowded with
reporters as it was and why Oswald had to be exposed to them at all, except for publicity purposes which the Dallas
police seemed keen to exploit throughout that weekend. In fact, there was no reason a police car could not have
backed up all the way to the jail door so that Oswald would not have been exposed to anyone. Having ignored other
rights an accused person is supposed to be guaranteed, the Dallas police failed to protect the most precious right, the
right to life. (Weisberg, 1965:85-96) And their failure really set the stage for the whole sordid chain of events: the
24Not only did the Warren Commission utilize this tainted evidence, Gerald Posner uncritically accepted it
in his widely praised Case Closed: Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of JFK {1993). Posner's book is, in
fact, a stellar instance of deceit and dishonesty as Harold Weisberg proves in Case Open: The Omissions,
Distortions and Falsifications of "Case Closed" (1994).n of JFK {1993). Posner's book is, in
fact, a stellar instance of deceit and dishonesty as Harold Weisberg proves in Case Open: The Omissions,
Distortions and Falsifications of "Case Closed" (1994).

--- PAGE BREAK ---ner's book is, in
fact, a stellar instance of deceit and dishonesty as Harold Weisberg proves in Case Open: The Omissions,
Distortions and Falsifications of "Case Closed" (1994).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
charade of an investigation, the cover-up and lies, and the pervasive commercialization and exploitation of the
assassination for the past thirty years.
The Dallas police department’s ineptitude was more than matched by the F.B.I.'s so-called investigation.
Katzenbach's concern about not wanting the world to see America in the eyes of the bungling Dallas police was why
he thought the F.B.I. needed to take over the case in the first place. (See Appendix, Exhibit C) Imagine the
judgment of that same world to the F.B.I.'s own (willful) ineptitude, as reflected in their initial report discussed
above.15 But, since that report and other evidence of the F.B.I.’s woefully deficient and clearly deceitful work did
not surface until well after the Warren Commission Report was released and praised by the media, there was little
chance for any widespread public criticism to develop.
The presumption that Oswald was the sole assassin emerged early and remained in force throughout the life
of the Warren Commission and indeed well beyond it. This presumption governed what “investigation” the F.B.I.
did conduct For example, it led the F.B.I. to turn down potentially crucial photographic evidence because it did not
support the case they were building against Oswald. There is no better example of this than the F.B.I.'s refusal of
valuable film of the assassination offered it by Charles Bronson. (See Appendix, Exhibit E) The agents who went
to view the film wrote a memo stating that although the “Film did depict the President's car at the precise time shots
were fired;...the pictures were not sufficiently clear for identification purposes” and that an 8mm film taken by
Bronson “failed to show the building from which the shots were fired.” Both statements were later discovered to be
blatant falsehoods. As Harold Weisberg reports, “There were ninety-two individual frames or individual pictures of
the very window the F.B.I. deemed \the sniper's nest(1995:29, emphasis in original) Other crucial photographic
evidence was also ignored. Guth and Wrone (1980:68) point out that “the Special Agent in Charge of the Dallas
Field Office sent an AirteL.to Director J. Edgar Hoover on 19 Dec. 1963 stating: ‘No effort is being made to set
forth the names of news media throughout the country who made photographs and films in Dallas on 11-22-63.'”
For months the F.B.I. ignored one of the victims of the shooting, James T. Tague, who was slightly
wounded by a spray of concrete from a bullet which hit a curbstone where he had been standing. It is not as if what
25As Alex Rosen, head of the General Investigative Division, characterized the F.B.I.'s investigative
strategy as, “Standing with pockets open waiting for evidence to drop in.” (Weisberg, 1995:36)t
25As Alex Rosen, head of the General Investigative Division, characterized the F.B.I.'s investigative
strategy as, “Standing with pockets open waiting for evidence to drop in.” (Weisberg, 1995:36)

--- PAGE BREAK ---head of the General Investigative Division, characterized the F.B.I.'s investigative
strategy as, “Standing with pockets open waiting for evidence to drop in.” (Weisberg, 1995:36)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
happened to Mr. Tague was unknown. A Dallas police officer was standing near him when it happened; it was
reported in the Dallas papers, and photographs of the mark in the curb accompanied the newspaper story which
appeared the next day. And the F.B.I. had no interest! It was not until Texas authorities brought it to the attention
%
of the Warren Commission several months later that Tague's experience was officially acknowledged. He gave
testimony as the Warren Commission was wrapping up its work, and the F.B.I. was finally called upon to go down
and investigate.
Through readily available photographs, the F.B.I. was able to locate that portion of curbstone.
Unfortunately, the bullet hole had been patched, a patch that is clearly visible on the piece of curbstone they dug up
and which now resides in the National Archives. And there is no doubt Oswald could not have covered up this bit
of evidence. So, who did? When the F.B.I. laboratory did a spectrographic analysis of that curbstone, it scraped a
sample not from the original, fresh bullet hole (as it should and certainly could have in any decent pretense of an
investigation) but from the cement patch. So there was no way that test could reveal whether the bullet that made
that mark was of the same type as bullets allegedly fired by Oswald. (See Weisberg, 1994:138-166, for an excellent
discussion of the Tague incident)
The F.B.I. photographic lab worked overtime producing unclear, indistinct pictures of crucial pieces of
evidence, such as the President's clothing. (Weisberg, 1995:235-250) This allowed it and the Warren Commission
to make statements about the damage to that clothing which were patently false; for example, that the bullet that
struck the President in the back had exited his throat and made bullet holes in his shirt collar and tie. Harold
Weisberg insisted on clearer photographs of the President's shirt and tie, which confirmed what had already been
indicated by sworn testimony from a doctor and nurses at Parkland Hospital: the damage had been caused by a
scalpel which was used to cut off President Kennedy's tie and open his shirt front before emergency procedures to
try to save his life could be started.
Before we leave the F.B.I. and its manifest failures, we need to acknowledge its immoral and illegal
campaign to discredit it critics. Although other abuses of that era are widely known and have been condemned,
such as the F.B.I.’s efforts to undermine Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., or destroy the Black Panthers, its efforts
against critics of the official story of the Kennedy assassination remains largely unknown but certainly no lesss to undermine Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., or destroy the Black Panthers, its efforts
against critics of the official story of the Kennedy assassination remains largely unknown but certainly no less

--- PAGE BREAK ---artin Luther King, Jr., or destroy the Black Panthers, its efforts
against critics of the official story of the Kennedy assassination remains largely unknown but certainly no less

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
reprehensible. (See Appendix, Exhibit F; Weisberg, 1995:6-10) On the other hand, in an effort to influence the
W/1fT
press on this issue, the F.B.l. established what they called a “Special Correspondent's List;” that Is, journalists they
were confident would accept what the F.B.l. said as gospel and defend it against attacks. (See Appendix, Exhibit G)
The essential job of law enforcement, whether at the local level of the Dallas police or at the federal level
of the F.B.L, is to uphold and enforce the law, and to conduct thorough, competent, honest investigations when the
law is violated. There is virtually no evidence of these two law enforcement agencies even attempting to do a
proper job. They failed. And the fact that both agencies, especially the F.B.L, have hardly been taken to task for
their manifest shortcomings makes it likely that law enforcement will fail us again, both in time of great national
crises and in the more mundane crises our country faces daily. One wonders if this kind of investigative work is
done to attempt to solve what many have called “the crime of the century,” what realistic faith can one have in the
day-to-day operation of these law enforcement agencies?
The Legal Profession and the Judiciary
Although the image of lawyers and judges has become tarnished in recent years, society continues to look
to the legal profession and judiciary to function as competent, responsible interpreters and defenders of the law.
When these institutions fail, individuals, and indeed society as a whole, are in jeopardy of succumbing to the rule of
whim and arbitrary power. In the case of the Kennedy assassination, lawyers who served as the staff of the Warren
Commission and really did the bulk of the work of that Commission, (Weisberg, 1965:xiii-xv) failed to act as
lawyers whose knowledge of the requirements of law, rules of evidence, and skillful questioning are supposed to
help elicit the truth. In fact, as we will see, it is clear that they used their knowledge and skill to try to avoid the
truth. Judges, especially those who sat in judgment of Freedom of Information Act suits through which some critics
sought to wrest from the government suppressed information, largely failed to uphold that law and, in effect,
allowed the government to continue to deceive the American people.
The work of the Warren Commission legal staff can be characterized at best as irresponsible and deceitful,
with numerous examples found throughout the Commission’s work. Often these lawyers worked alone, taking
testimony from key witnesses with only a stenographer present to record it. But even in the presence of Warrenxamples found throughout the Commission’s work. Often these lawyers worked alone, taking
testimony from key witnesses with only a stenographer present to record it. But even in the presence of Warren

--- PAGE BREAK ---hout the Commission’s work. Often these lawyers worked alone, taking
testimony from key witnesses with only a stenographer present to record it. But even in the presence of Warren

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
Commission members (most of whom also had legal backgrounds) their questioning was plainly inadequate, not
infrequently badgering and hostile, especially when a witness had some unwelcome information. As Sylvia
Meagher observed:
%
A reading of the full testimony .... leads to the irresistible conclusion that the witnesses
fall into two general categories — the ’friendly' and the ‘unfriendly’ — which again is alien to the
impartial fact-finding process. In the case of some ’unfriendly’ witnesses the Commission went
beyond a show of antipathy and set out to discredit character. As Paul L. Freese wrote in the New
York University Law Review, “The technique of character impeachment used by the Commission
has disturbing implications.... It is striking that the Commission regarded as unimpeachable a
number of witnesses whose testimony is inherently disordered and strongly suggestive of
falsification or mental incompetence or both. (1967:xxix)
No better example of the failure of these lawyers could be found than the work of assistant counsel Arlen
Specter (currently a Republican Senator from Pennsylvania and presidential candidate) who took the bulk of the
crucial medical testimony and is the primaiy architect of the infamous “single-bullet theory.” With the
acknowledgment that at least one shot missed the limousine altogether and struck a curb wounding Jim Tague
slightly (among other considerations), for the Commission to insist that Oswald did it alone firing only three shots,
one of those bullets had to have caused seven separate wounds in President Kennedy and Governor Connally and
emerge in near pristine condition. (See, e.g., Weisberg, 1995:3) Rather than seriously consider the distinct
possibility of other shots, meaning at least one other assassin, the Commission chose to go with this “single-bullet
theory,” which Arlen Specter promoted in his questioning of witnesses.
One tactic Specter used was to preface his questions to the various experts before him by speculating about
a hypothetical bullet — could a bullet do this damage. Specter was able to get on the record qualified positive
responses to this hypothetical question. However, in each and every case when he bothered to show the actual— could a bullet do this damage. Specter was able to get on the record qualified positive
responses to this hypothetical question. However, in each and every case when he bothered to show the actual

--- PAGE BREAK ---18
bullet (CE399) to these same experts they emphatically rejected the idea that bullet could have done that kind of
damage and emerge in such near perfect condition.26
Specter kept out of the record crucial information which contradicted his single bullet theory.

Not
*
publishing or even referring to the official death certificate signed by the President's personal physician, Admiral
George G.

Burkley, is a significant omission in its own right.

But it takes on added significance in that the death
certificate locates the wound to the President's back too low to accommodate the single-bullet theory.

(Weisberg,
1975:302-306) The same can be said of an interview Specter conducted with the two F.B.I.

agents, James Sibert
and Francis X.

O'Neill, who observed the autopsy.

(Weisberg, 1975:71-74) These agents whose accounts of their
observations would have discredited, and, at the very least, cast doubt on, the theory were not called to testify before
the Commission, nor was their interview published in the Report or the 26 volumes of hearings and exhibits.

Another expert witness who was never called to testify because of his strong disagreement with the single-
bullet theory was Dr.

Joseph Dolce, the Army's chief consultant on wound ballistics who supervised the tests
conducted at Aberdeen proving grounds to see if similar bullets could do what CE399 is alleged to have done.

These tests showed that similar bullets doing that kind of damage were significantly deformed.

In a conference
conducted on April 21, 1964, at which Mr.

Specter was present.

Dr.

Dolce registered his strong objections to the
single-bullet theory.

(Weisberg, 1995:297-301) He subsequently was not called to register those objections in
Commission testimony.

In fact, “His name appears nowhere in the Report or its appended twenty-six volumes...”
(Weisberg, 1995:291)
One final example of blatant disregard for the truth and the obligations of a lawyer should suffice.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(Weisberg, 1995:297-301) He subsequently was not called to register those objections in
Commission testimony. In fact, “His name appears nowhere in the Report or its appended twenty-six volumes...”
(Weisberg, 1995:291)
One final example of blatant disregard for the truth and the obligations of a lawyer should suffice. When
Specter had the chief autopsy surgeon, Dr. Humes, before him, Humes made the astounding admission that he had
MFor an excellent discussion with excerpts from the testimony, see Meagher, Accessories After the Fact. Included is the following example from Specter’s questioning of Dr. Gregory:
Specter: Assume, if you will, another set of hypothetical circumstances: That the 6.5 millimeter bullet
traveling at the same muzzle velocity, to wit, 2,000 feet per second, at approximately 165 feet between the
weapon and the victim, struck the President in the back of the neck passing through the large strap muscles,
going through the fascia channel, missing the pleural cavity, striking no bones and emerging from the
lower anterior neck, after striking the trachea. Could such a projectile have then passed into the
Governor’s back and inflicted all three of or all of the wounds which have been described. Dr. Gregory: I believe one would have to concede the possibility, but I believe firmly that the probability is
much diminished. (Meagher, 1967:168-169)

--- PAGE BREAK ---which have been described. Dr. Gregory: I believe one would have to concede the possibility, but I believe firmly that the probability is
much diminished. (Meagher, 1967:168-169)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19
burned the first draft of the autopsy report on the President in his recreation room fireplace on Sunday morning after
hearing that Oswald had been shot in Dallas. (Weisberg, 1975:524-525) More astounding is that assistant counsel
Specter asked nfl questions, sought OQ explanation for this willful destruction of crucial evidence.”
*
That a Freedom of Information Act was necessary to guarantee access by the public to documents and
information withheld by the government itself raises serious questions about the degree to which our institutions are
free and democratic. The Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) has been the principal vehicle through which a few
critics have been able to compel the government to release suppressed documents. Like any law, FOIA is really
only as strong and effective as it is vigorously enforced. And that requires a principled, perhaps even courageous,
judiciary willing to competfederal agencies to divulge information they have no right withholding from the public.
In fact, judges have more often than not allowed the government to stonewall, delay, and unjustly deny the public
information they have a right to know about how their President was killed.
Harold Weisberg filed numerous FOIA suits, ultimately gamering a quarter million pages of previously
withheld documents.3' His success, however, should not overshadow the fact that this was a painstaking, frustrating
process frequently stonewalled by federal agencies and complicit judges. A good example of the failure of the
judiciary in this regard can be found in CA75-0226, Harold Weisberg v. United States Department of Justice,
United States Energy Research and Development Administration, Judge John Pratt presiding. (Weisberg, 1995:258-
262; 1975:412-430) In essence, Weisberg proved, and even attested to under oath, that F.B.I. Special Lab Agent
John Kilty committed perjury in submitting two contradictory affidavits regarding the testing of bullet fragments
and CE399. Rather than becoming outraged at the lawless behavior of the F.B.I., Judge Pratt expressed his irritation
at Weisberg and his attorney, Jim Lesar, for bringing this up, even suggesting they might be sued. But there was no
And it was not until years later, after critics had raised questions about this, that an explanation was
offered by Humes - one that was wholly inadequate and itself deceitful. (See Harold Weisber° Never Aeain'
(1995:87-96). * ”
“For a listing of these cases, see Weisberg, 1995:461-463.xplanation was
offered by Humes - one that was wholly inadequate and itself deceitful. (See Harold Weisber° Never Aeain'
(1995:87-96). * ”
“For a listing of these cases, see Weisberg, 1995:461-463.

--- PAGE BREAK ---red by Humes - one that was wholly inadequate and itself deceitful. (See Harold Weisber° Never Aeain'
(1995:87-96). * ”
“For a listing of these cases, see Weisberg, 1995:461-463.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
suit and the F.B.I. was allowed in a federal court to get away with perjury.29 Judges have acted as handmaidens of
the government they are supposed to make sure works properly and honestly and in the public interest.
%
The Media, The Press and Publishers
Despite the checks and balances built into our governmental system, democracy can ultimately be
maintained only with an informed citizenry. Thus, our society depends on a number of related institutions to keep
the people informed and the government honest. The press, and in the present day, the mass media, bear the major
burden. So also the publishing industry in general ideally provides a forum for discussion and critical analysis of
society and social institutions. Serious criticism of the official government version of the Kennedy assassination has
rarely found its way into the newspapers or the evening news broadcasts and special reports, and perhaps even more
rarely have the major publishers deemed it appropriate to publish serious, factual, critical analyses of the official
governmental position on the assassination of President Kennedy. Cutting across the ideological spectrum,
journalists, publishers, and TV producers have all shown a distinct preference either for the most unfounded,
sensational (but entertaining and lucrative) conspiracy theories or for what is often portrayed as the more sober and
factual official story (which in reality is as unfounded and illogical as some of its competitors in the conspiracy
field). On balance, major news organizations have always defended the government and have either ignored or
misrepresented well-documented criticisms of it The New York Times and CDS News can be singled out as being
among the government’s most vocal and persistent defenders, but they are far from alone.
The media as a whole has failed to meet its fundamental obligation in a democratic society of informing
the people about what its government is doing. To fulfill this obligation, the media must not simply report what
government officials tell the press, but must seek out and report all the facts. Doing so often leads to criticism of
government and other institutions in our society.
29The curious defense of the F.B.I.’s perjury, accepted by Judge Pratt, was that Weisberg t4could make such
claims ad infinitum since he is perhaps more familiar with events surrounding the investigation of President
Kennedy’s assassination than anyone now employed by the F.B.I.” (See Appendix, Exhibit K)claims ad infinitum since he is perhaps more familiar with events surrounding the investigation of President
Kennedy’s assassination than anyone now employed by the F.B.I.” (See Appendix, Exhibit K)

--- PAGE BREAK ---since he is perhaps more familiar with events surrounding the investigation of President
Kennedy’s assassination than anyone now employed by the F.B.I.” (See Appendix, Exhibit K)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21
That the government can continue to insist on its official story and defend its indefensible and
reprehensible conduct in the so-called investigation of President Kennedy’s assassination is, as Harold Weisberg
wrote in 1975, ‘‘possible only because the press has abdicated its responsibilities and converted itself into an agency
of government, assailing those who, having sought the truth, declare it. Were the press under actual government
control, the harm would be less, for this would be known and allowed for by citizens in evaluating its message.
That it is not an official press but acts as one is subversive in a democratic society, for we expect the press to be the
watchdog over government, not its bedmate.” (1975:3) Unfortunately, these words are as true today, two decades
later, if not more so.30
The failure of the media and the press to respond critically upon the release of the Warren Commission
Report and, later, its massive 26 volume appendix was governed, in large part, by the demand to get out a story. The
masterful propaganda techniques of the Commission successfully discouraged the media and press from digging
deeper into the story. On the surface, the Report certainly looks impressive, and only a careful reading of it in
conjunction with the testimony and exhibits could begin to reveal its serious flaws. The Report was published with
a summary of the Commission’s conclusions, albeit without references necessary to checking its validity, as a first
chapter in a rather lengthy volume. The twenty-six volumes of evidence on which these conclusions are presumably
based were published long after the report itself, long after the Commission’s findings were “hot news.” In addition,
the Report with its volumes of evidence and testimony amounting to an estimated 10,000,000 words were
published with no subject index, a necessity for checking its conclusions against its evidence. Nonetheless, the
press acted irresponsibly in lavishing praise on the Report when it was first released, and it has more than
compounded that initial error by continually re-affirming that first uninformed reaction, even in the face of some of
the most damning and well-documented revelations. (Meagher, 1967:xxvi-xxvii)
In his recently published Never Again!, Harold Weisberg (1995:187) provides an insightful overview of the
press’s failure in the immediate aftermath of the so-called investigation:
As noted earlier, Gerald Posner’s book, Case Closed, (1993) stands as one of the most error-laden,
dishonest books in the whole history of Kennedy assassination literature. Yet, it was lavished with rave reviews by
the media. See Harold Weisberg’s Case Open( 1994).as one of the most error-laden,
dishonest books in the whole history of Kennedy assassination literature. Yet, it was lavished with rave reviews by
the media. See Harold Weisberg’s Case Open( 1994).

--- PAGE BREAK ---rror-laden,
dishonest books in the whole history of Kennedy assassination literature. Yet, it was lavished with rave reviews by
the media. See Harold Weisberg’s Case Open( 1994).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
There were no public hearings, no hearings at which the press and public could be
present, no opportunity for what leaps from the printed page to be known and objected to. As a
result, testimony that would inevitably lead to expressions of outrage was lost in the vast volume
of those ten million words disclosed at a single moment. Nobody in the media was going to read
that many words in time to inform the people about their meaning, and no media organization was
about to make the enormous investment that would have meant. The way it worked out, the
Report having been issued two months earlier than the testimony and greeted by the media as the
unquestionable truth, what media perusal there was of the testimony and exhibits was in seeking
confirmatkm of what the media already had printed and said in support of the Report.
It is truly difficult to select any one specific example of the media's failure; they are legion. But one
involving The New York Times will suffice to make the point. It involves an interview conducted by then
correspondent Fred Graham with Dr. John Lattimer who had been granted exclusive access to the Kennedy autopsy
materials. (1972:1,4) The only apparent qualification Lattimer had was previous writing in defense of the Warren
Commission Report, his expertise in medicine was urology, not forensic pathology (as it should have been to even
gain access to these materials). In Graham's exclusive, which made headlines throughout the country, Lattimer
displayed his patent bias by asserting, for example, that examination of the autopsy photos and X-rays proved
Oswald did the shooting — to which Weisberg responded and specifically pointed out to Graham who had
conducted the interview: “...that QQ pictures or X-rays, separately or combined, can show who fired what shots.”
(1975:388) Numerous other statements Lattimer made in that interview were either false or displayed an ignorance
of forensic pathology. (Weisberg, 1975:386-402) But it was all treated uncritically. And Dr. Lattimer continues to
pop up from time to time as a credible expert, for example, on both CBS and PBS during the 25th anniversary of the
assassination in 1988.
If the media cannot bring itself to correct this disgraceful record and finally display some intelligence and
courage on this subject, difficult questions arise regarding the capability of the media of keeping the public
informed in other important areas of social life. If the principle that an informed citizenry is the key to a healthy
democracy remains valid, the health of American democracy seems in serious jeopardy.ormed in other important areas of social life. If the principle that an informed citizenry is the key to a healthy
democracy remains valid, the health of American democracy seems in serious jeopardy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tant areas of social life. If the principle that an informed citizenry is the key to a healthy
democracy remains valid, the health of American democracy seems in serious jeopardy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23
The A.M.A. and the Failure of “Science”
Science was involved in many aspects of the investigation of the Kennedy assassination: the testing of the
rifle, the comparison of bullets, the ballistics, and so forth. In most of these instances it failed. (See Roffman, 1975;
Weisberg, generally) But nowhere was the failing so great as in the development and analysis of the crucial medical
evidence. Forensic pathology is an exact science. Because it involves the obtaining of evidence that may determine
whether a murder case is solved and whether a defendant will be found guilty or not, it is essential that procedures
be meticulously adhered to and detailed information be carefully sought and accurately recorded. This
characterization does not apply to the autopsy performed on the body of the President. To this day, serious
questions remain about the fluality of the autopsy, the accuracy of its records, the freedom of the autopsy surgeons
from external control, and the evidence and testimony sought by the Warren Commission and provided by the
autopsy surgeons. (Weisberg, 1975) Among the many problems with the autopsy are the burning of autopsy
protocol by Dr. Humes, the chief autopsy surgeon; the mislocation of the President’s back wound as a neck wound;
the failure to properly analyze the throat wound. (Weisberg, 1965:178-187, 196-199) Perhaps of greater
significance is the alteration of the autopsy report by Dr. Humes after the murder of Oswald, alterations which had
serious implications for the question of whether the President had been murdered as the result of a conspiracy. For
example, where Humes had originally written “puncture wound,” he crossed out “puncture”(meaning entrance
wound, a shot from the front) and replaced it with “lacerated.” (Weisberg, 1975:515)
One of the best illustrations of that failure of medical science is the most recent example. In 1992, the
American Medical Association, through its journal, The Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA), lent
its prestige to the official theory of the Kennedy assassination and, in particular, to the autopsy surgeons. In its May
27, 1992 issue is a report of JAMA editor George Lundberg’s interview with the Kennedy autopsy surgeons, J.
Thornton Boswell and James Joseph Humes.31 (Breo, 1992) At a major press conference in New York, Lundberg
claimed that he was using JAMA to “end the talk of conspiracy" in the case. That “as the professional publication
devoted to scientific research [it] had a very good chance, perhaps the best chance, of setting to rest the talk of
J1The third autopsy surgeon, Pierre Finck, refused to be interviewed, but later agreed to an interview which
was the basis of an article in the October 7, 1992 JAMA. Also in the May 27,1992 JAMA, four of the Dallas
doctors were interviewed.refused to be interviewed, but later agreed to an interview which
was the basis of an article in the October 7, 1992 JAMA. Also in the May 27,1992 JAMA, four of the Dallas
doctors were interviewed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---viewed, but later agreed to an interview which
was the basis of an article in the October 7, 1992 JAMA. Also in the May 27,1992 JAMA, four of the Dallas
doctors were interviewed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24
conspiracy.” (Quoted in Weisberg, 1995:44) The resulting article, not surprisingly, given Lundberg’s purpose, is
more aptly described as propaganda than science. Neither Lundberg nor the reporter who wrote the article
demonstrate familiarity with the fundamental facts of the case. Nor, clearly, do they attempt to raise any of the
significant issues that have revolved around tlie autopsy. Under the guise of scientific inquiry in a peer review
journal, the autopsy surgeons were provided with the opportunity to reassert their position without challenge,
question, or critical comment. While the errors, false assertions, inaccuracies and contradictions in the JAMA
reports are numerous, the fundamental problem is the fraudulent use of science for political purposes.”
Conclusion r
In a seminal essay written many years ago at the height of a period of critical self-examination in American
sociology, Alexander Liazos called upon his colleagues specializing in the study of criminal and deviant behavior to
look beyond the individuals who are typically studied, in his words, the “nuts, sluts, and perverts,” and focus more
on the less visible, but deeper, institutional problems. (Ginocchio:1981; Liazos, 1972) He focused not on individual
deviants and their behavior, but rather on what he called “covert institutional violence.” Covert institutional
violence may be defined as the unrecognized institutional actions which have destructive consequences for society.
They can properly be regarded as major instances of deviant and/or criminal behavior.
A more subtle form of “covert institutional violence” might be called, after Liazos, “covert institutional
fraud.” Throughout our discussion of the failure of various institutions to deal properly and honestly with the
assassination of President Kennedy, we have documented numerous instances of such “covert institutional fraud.”
From the Warren Commission, to law enforcement, to the legal profession and judiciary, and finally to the media
and science, an account of the assassination has been foisted on the American people which is a knowing fraud.
”A few examples of the particular problems with the JAMA reports are: the false assertion that these
doctors were breaking 28 years of silence by granting these interviews, when in fact they had spoken out publicly
many times since the assassination; (Weisberg, 1995:41-60) the assertion that there were “no generals” in the
autopsy room when the records indicate otherwise; (Weisberg, 1995:151-156); false assertions regarding the
burning of “autopsy notes” because they were stained with the President’s blood, when it was not these notes, but
the original draft of the autopsy protocol that Humes destroyed after learning that Oswald had been murdered;
(Weisberg, 1995:90-96) and a misleading account of the mislocation of wounds. (Weisberg, 1995:173fT)l draft of the autopsy protocol that Humes destroyed after learning that Oswald had been murdered;
(Weisberg, 1995:90-96) and a misleading account of the mislocation of wounds. (Weisberg, 1995:173fT)

--- PAGE BREAK ---25
Although countless books and articles have been written on the Kennedy assassination, this fraud has been little
exposed, hence covert.

Only in the works of a handful of responsible critics, critics who have been virtually ignored
by the media all these years, has this story been told.

This “covert institutional fraud" not only reveals serious flaws
%
in major institutions, but on the whole continues to erode the foundation of trust and confidence on which our
government and other major institutions depend.

One final institutional failure needs to be addressed.

Scholars, on whom society depends for critical
analysis, knowledge, information and insight into society, its institutions, and its problems and issues, have
remained virtually silent on the Kennedy assassination and the institutional failure that accompanied it.33 The
complexity of the subject-n^atter, the difficulty of access to materials, the pressures on professors for “scholarly
productivity," and the need to avoid association with controversial topics, may in part explain the failure of
historians, sociologists, criminologists, and political scientists to undertake serious, scholarly examination of this
topic.

It is a topic that presents more than the usual difficulties.

As David R.

Wrone, one of the few professional
historians to work on the assassination, has observed: “The serious student of the assassination of President John F.

Kennedy confronts a subject riven by controversy, saddled with numerous theories, overwhelmed by a seemingly
impossible mountain of facts, issues, and questions, and lost in the complexity of the issues.” (1993:1 )34 We hope
that we have demonstrated that the issues involved are of such significance that these difficulties are worth
confronting.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Wrone, one of the few professional
historians to work on the assassination, has observed: “The serious student of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy confronts a subject riven by controversy, saddled with numerous theories, overwhelmed by a seemingly
impossible mountain of facts, issues, and questions, and lost in the complexity of the issues.” (1993:1 )34 We hope
that we have demonstrated that the issues involved are of such significance that these difficulties are worth
confronting. It might be argued that the Kennedy assassination represents a somewhat special case, but the history of the
intervening decades of Vietnam, Cointelpro, Watergate and Iran-Contra — would suggest that this institutional
failure was not a temporary deviation in an exceptional time of crisis, but, rather, suggests fundamental and
53Despite the wealth of opportunity that the topic provides to gain insight on so many issues in history, law
and justice, politics, and sociology, a recent DIALOG search of the journal literature in these fields yielded only 18
papers and articles in the more than three decades since the assassination. It should also be noted that half of these
citations were from journals focusing on communications and public opinion. 3“Indeed, part of the deliberate strategy of deception on the part of the Warren Commission staff was to
dump all its information on the American public with little chronological or logical order to it and without an index. “For example, during the course of the Commission investigation the archives began to index the hundreds of
thousands, indeed million, of names found in the documents files, not only a normal step for research but also
essential for the Commission investigative staff to perform its work properly. Howard Willens, then the number
three man in the Commission staff and an assistant counsel, ordered them to stop.” (Wrone, 1993:1)

--- PAGE BREAK ---nvestigative staff to perform its work properly. Howard Willens, then the number
three man in the Commission staff and an assistant counsel, ordered them to stop.” (Wrone, 1993:1)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26
systematic institutional failure. Many questions remain to be explored. A deeper probing of the failures suggested
in this paper would itself seem to be a promising course of study. Similarly, the question of the extensiveness of
institutional failure needs further examination. Does such failure also characterize other major institutions — the
school, the family, the economy, the health care system? Are the failings of these related in any way to those
discussed in this paper? And, perhaps of greatest importance, it is not enough to know that our institutions are
failing; we must attempt to find out why they are failing us and how they can be made to function more
appropriately. There can be no doubt that many of our social problems are deeply embedded in our society and its
institutions. To expose these problems for the purpose of analysis and possible correction, there can be no substitute
for the kind of patient, thorough study necessary to unravel the complex, interdependent institutional reality of
I
modem society.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ossible correction, there can be no substitute
for the kind of patient, thorough study necessary to unravel the complex, interdependent institutional reality of
I
modem society.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

27
Sources Cited
Bellah, Robert N., Richard Madsen, William M. Sullivan, Ann Swidler, and Steven M. Tipton
1991 The Good Society. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Breo, Dennis L.
1992 JFK s Death — the Plain Truth from the Mds Who Did the Autopsy.” JAMA 267:2794-2803.
Ginocchio, Gerald
1981 The Sociological Critique of American Sociology-Its Shortcomings and Its Promise, 1960-1978.
Durham., N.H.: University of New Hampshire, Ph.D. Dissertation.
Graham, Fred P.
1972 “Doctor Inspects Kennedy X-Rays: John K. Lattimer Supports Warren Report on Bullets,” New
York Times, 9 January: 1,44.
Guth, DeLloyd and David R. Wrone
1980 The Assassination of John F. Kennedy: A Comprehensive Historical and Legal Bibliography,
1963-1979. Westport, Conn.:Greenwood Press.
Jordan, Elijah
1927 Forms of Individuality: An Inquiry Into the Grounds of Order in Human Relations. Indianapolis:
Progress
Liazos, Alexander
1972 “The Poverty of the Sociology of Deviance: ‘Nuts, Sluts, and Perverts’”, Social Problems 20
MacDonald, Dennis W.
1994 “R. D. McKenzie and E. Jordan On Institutions as the Fundamental Unit of Social Life.”
Conference Proceedings: Social Thought of Elijah Jordan. Manchester, N.H.: Saint Anselm
College.
McKenzie, Roderick D.
[cl 936] “The Ecology of Institutions.” In Amos Hawley (ed.) Roderick D. McKenzie on Human Ecology:
1968 Selected Writings. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Meagher, Sylvia
1967 Accessories After the Fact: The Warren Commission, The Authorities & the Report. New York:
The Bobbs-Merrill Co., Inc.
Newman, John
1992 JFK and Vietnam. New York: Warner Books.
Posner, Gerald
1993 Case Closed: Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of JFK. New York: Random House.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ll Co., Inc.
Newman, John
1992 JFK and Vietnam. New York: Warner Books.
Posner, Gerald
1993 Case Closed: Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of JFK. New York: Random House.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28
Rofftnan, Howard
1975 Presumed Guilty: Lee Harvey Oswald in the Assassination of President Kennedy. New
Brunswick, N.J.: Associated University Presses.
Warren Commission
1964a Report of the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office.
1964b Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President kennedy.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Weisberg, Harold
1965 Whitewash: The Report on the Warren Report. Hyattstown, Md.: Harold Weisberg, 1965) p. ix.
1966 Whitewash II: The FBI Secret Service Cover-up. Hyattstown, Md.: Harold Weisberg, Publisher.
1974 Whitewash IV: JFK Top Secret Assassination Transcript. Frederick, Md: Harold Weisberg,
Publisher?
1975 Post-Mortem: JFK Assassination Cover-up Smashed. Frederick, Md: Harold Weisberg, Publisher.
1994 Case Open: The Omissions, Distortions and Falsifications of “Case Closed.” New York: Carroll &
Graf Publishers/Richard Gallen.
1995 Never Again!: The Government Conspiracy in the JFK Assassination. New York: Carroll & Graf
Publishers/Richard Gallen.
Wrone, David R.
1993 “Publications of the Warren Commission.” Stevens Point, WI: David R. Wrone.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cy in the JFK Assassination. New York: Carroll & Graf
Publishers/Richard Gallen.
Wrone, David R.
1993 “Publications of the Warren Commission.” Stevens Point, WI: David R. Wrone.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIX
Executive Order fto. 11130 establishing Warren Commission EXHIBIT A
FBI Memorandum to SAC, DALLAS on Suspects  EXHIBIT B
Katzenbach Memorandum for Mr. Moyers  EXHIBIT C
FBI Memorandum to Mr. Mohr re: Washington Post  EXHIBIT D
Two FBI Memoranda to SAC, DALLAS re: Bronson Film  EXHIBIT E
FBI Memoranda to Mr. DeLoach re: Harriet Van Home  EXHIBIT F
FBI Memorandum: DeLoach to Mohr: Re: Buchanan EXHIBIT G
FBI Memorandum to Mr. Belmont re: Katzenbach Phone Call ... EXHIBIT H
LBJ to Hoover Phone Call EXHIBIT I
Hoover Memorandum re: Phone Call to Jenkins at White House ... EXHIBIT J
Justice Department Motion: Civil Action No. 75-226  EXHIBIT K

--- PAGE BREAK ---HIBIT H
LBJ to Hoover Phone Call EXHIBIT I
Hoover Memorandum re: Phone Call to Jenkins at White House ... EXHIBIT J
Justice Department Motion: Civil Action No. 75-226  EXHIBIT K

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EXHIBIT A
APPENDIX I
Immediate Release November 30, 1963
Office of the White House Press Secretary
THE WHITE HOUSE
EXECUTIVE ORDER
No. 11130
Appointing a Commission To Report Upon the
Assassination of President John F. Kennedy
Pursuant to the authority vested in me as President of the
United Statdfe, I hereby appoint a Commission to ascertain,
evaluate and report upon the facts relating to the assassination
of the late President John F. Kennedy and the subsequent
violent death of the man charged with the assassination- The
Commission shall consist of —
The Chief Justice of the United States, Chairman;
Senator Richard B. Russell;
Senator John Sherman Cooper?
Congressman Hale Boggs?
Congressman Gerald R. Ford;
The Honorable Allen W. Dulles?
The Honorable John J. McCloy.
The purposes of the Commission are to examine the evidence
developed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and any
additional evidence that may hereafter come to light or be
uncovered by federal or state authorities; to make such further
investigation as the Commission finds desirable? to evaluate all
the facts and circumstances surrounding such assassination, in-
cluding the subsequent violent death of the man charged with the
assassination, and to report to me its findings and conclusions.
The Commission is empowered to prescribe its own procedures
and to employ such assistance as it deems necessary.
Necessary expenses of the Commission may be paid from the
"Emergency Fund for the President."
All Executive departments and agencies are directed to furnish
the Commission with such facilities, services and cooperation as
it may request from time to time.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
THE WHITE HOUSE, November 29, 1963.

--- PAGE BREAK ---are directed to furnish
the Commission with such facilities, services and cooperation as
it may request from time to time.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON
THE WHITE HOUSE, November 29, 1963.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

UN1TED*STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
i *
EXHIBIT B
ExhLvib 13
v*-. ■*
t:
jzci:
BAC, DALLAS
1C ROOKllT G. R.KNFKO
ASSASSINATION OF ^RESIDENT tENNED^
DATE: H/22/63 /•.. .
V vJ
i
•ranircr«555x«:. rvi5^4ri«bS; M”"
An 5 5213 advised J1 Y GEQltOk considered posoible
St vonll StateB PtrtJst/ent ^NNEDY , duo to
guBpects ID the blL: He reminded that ROBINSON
their strong feeling against “x"‘ the lawn of f
the individual who burned year ago. Be a'dvl-od
Richardson residence * lorvlce Btatlon located
ROBINSON, white »“le* * . [d Road, Garland, Texti.
»t Belt Line Roadtand Kayfieia KO ^
IS '/"* ,J
<J J - /jVf >
l
1 y Dallas
R: mb
u UW-
i-r
• r * ‘r •

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EXHIBIT C
Hov«mb«r 26, 1963
MZHORAHUUM TOR MR. MQYLR3
It L important that .11 ot th« fact.
sas/ui. m
rad* public in * way wn* fact*
s:.usi:^«s
oti*d,^a«.*t6r
.
b« **d« now*
1 Th. r.ublLc n»n«t b« aatl.flad that
—w -« urtil a sr«
S'^SSUS -ch’UU "hi ,
convict** at trial.
7 SeaculatLon about O.wnld*. BOti!*tit"
aonaplr.cy or l*® t hs _ it on tha Coaaunl.t..
* rlfiht-wing conspiracy to blaM It on xn ^
t^Tbri^^lMl'rxiir/Juba
53 rtU ^-S.-^. in oh.r,o
,h.n h. V.. shot and thus. «U.«e.d.
3. Tho nstt.r has jlo t^h"vi”b««n
»lth n.i.h.r ^nnit, nor convlot o,,. 5carc.ly
•^..d with ruoour iMe. of th.
”*.nUaoor Pr..ld.», U -rd.rv.vl.
T think this obJtctWo may ha satlsflsd
by -.kin, pobllo a. aoon «. y^ni” t Val””!"' «1°" •
tl.orov.bh rol T*P°r'”" faculty of pointlny to ln-
sss - s: ->■ 1*.
ZA±=//....
DE?APfVCMT HjTV
21j MAY 1965
turnons nwiitHH
Y\\e ,
VIS'"

--- PAGE BREAK ---a. aoon «. y^ni” t Val””!"' «1°" •
tl.orov.bh rol T*P°r'”" faculty of pointlny to ln-
sss - s: ->■ 1*.
ZA±=//....
DE?APfVCMT HjTV
21j MAY 1965
turnons nwiitHH
Y\\e ,
VIS'"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

c
The only other step would be the appointment
of a Presidential Commission of unimpeachable personnel
to review aad examine the evidence and announce it*
conclusion*. Thi* has both advantage* and disadvantages
It think it can await publication of the TBI report
and public reaction to it here and abroad*
I think f however, that a statement that
all the facts will be made public property in an
orderly and responsible way should be made now. We
need something to head off publia epeculation or
Congressional hearings of the wrong sort*
Nicholas deB. Katxenbach
Deputy Attornsy General

--- PAGE BREAK ---sponsible way should be made now. We
need something to head off publia epeculation or
Congressional hearings of the wrong sort*
Nicholas deB. Katxenbach
Deputy Attornsy General

--- PAGE BREAK ---

/
EXHIBIT D
- •— •
•i MI: n SIAIM <:nvr.HN^_f
Memorandum
I rfuM
Mr., ’.linin’
C. D. DcLoach
i>ATr.: November 25, 1963
•i
f~ .
•.
•unjKrr: ASSASSINATION OF THE PRESIDENT
S
For the Director's Information, 1 talked with A1 Friendly, Vice President
•mo Managing Editor of the "Washington Post and Times Herald" at 10:50 AM this morning.
« I told Friendly that I wanted to be perfectly honest with him, however, ‘
I must insist that our conversation remain completely off the record. I mentioned we \
nao had numerous cordial arguments in the past and the fact was well established that
we usually had diffemiy points of view on most matters. I mentioned that the purpose
1
of my call, however, was a matter of grave concern and I felt certain be would recognizes
this fact. Friendly agreed and stated our conversation would be maintained strictly
,ln coi^ficcnce.
• >
1 tolu Friendly that apparently there had been a "leak" to his paper to the
effect that a "Presidential Comm'ssion" had been suggested to look into the assassination
of the i resident and the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald. I mentioned we had received s
information indicating l.is paper planned to prepare an editorial strictly affirming the
necessity of a "Presidential Comm'ssion." It was mentioned that such an editorial v
would be most unwise at the present time. Friendly interrupted me at this point and statei
iie did m.i personally know whether this had been a "leak" or merely the idea of one oi
tneir staff members. He affirmed the fact an editorial was being considered.
1 told Friendly I had just conferred with the Director regarding this
matter and wanted him to know that such an editorial on the part of his paper would
merely "muddy the waters" and would create further confusion and hysteria. It was
mentioned that the President had personally asked the Director to have the FBI conduct
a full investigation both into the assassination of the President and into the murder
of Lee Harvey Oswald. I told him Mr. Hoover was personally supervising these
investigations and that reports would be submitted to the Department of Justice and to the
White House in two phases: (1) the assassination uf the President and (2) the murder
of Lee Harvey Oswald. I mentioned that Mr. Hoover had seen to it that the best trainea
men in the FBI were on these investigations and that our inquiries were proving to be
swift and intensive. 1 told him no stone is to be left unturned. I further told him that
uie .’’resident had additionally discussed this matter with the Director today and that the
Enclosure
I
1 - Mr. Belmont
1 - Mr. Rosen
l - l-.'r. Evans
CBJrejr (7)
1 - Mr. M. A. Jones / V
1 - Mr. Morrell I 'L
£J:ejr fU
I ... ___<
NOP RKCORUKI) -
199 OEC » 19m £2 DEC £*3953
l.
- jMiawrr'rr irr
*- •frk*Tr^rKrr. in •asrrvTsr: t v* yin i
r )
s
l*
V /V1 - Mr. M. A. Jones / V
1 - Mr. Morrell I 'L
£J:ejr fU
I ... ___<
NOP RKCORUKI) -
199 OEC » 19m £2 DEC £*3953
l.
- jMiawrr'rr irr
*- •frk*Tr^rKrr. in •asrrvTsr: t v* yin i
r )
s
l*
V /V

--- PAGE BREAK ---e •.

c
*nu> Do Loach lo Moln*
«o: Assassination of the President
11/25/63
I #/
Director had assured the President that thorough investigations were proceeding at lull
•peed.

1 mentioned to Friendly that our investigation would include and lay to rest
my rumnrn of substance that had been flying around with respect to the two matters.

I menii.

* to him also the fact th^t the Slate of Texas was concerned with the matter
'.and uas conducting inquiry.

I told Friendly that, as a matter of personal interest
’•* him.

our investigation into the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald would determine
•he adequacy of security given to Oswald and that the facts, regardless of what they'
tmighl be, would allow the Department of Justice to determine whether a Civil Rights
'violation had occurred.

Friendly replied he was most interested in this phase.

| I mentioned to Friendly that considering all the above, an editorial
.

>y his paper suggesting a "Presidential Commission" would merely serve to confuse .

i *u* issue.

1 lulu him i} was hoped that he would understand our viewpoint In this matter-
;.ino would, therefore, eliminate the editorial.

*
i /
Without any hesitation, Friendly told me the editorial would be eliminated.

J.le stated he would, ol course, have to mention this matter to Russ Wiggins, the Editor,
m a confidential basis.

1 told him there were no objections to this, however, Wiggins *
ihould specifically understand my reasoning in approaching him, Friendly, in this
manner.

Friendly slan.d there would be no misunderstanding.

Friendly added that
while he would respect our viewpoint, he sincerely hoped I would bring to the Director's
•lUenlion the need for some outstanding group or body of men affirming and issuing
he FBI report other than the U.

S.

Attorney General or that "boob" (Waggoner/Carr)
,.vho calls himself the Attorney General of the State of Texas.--- PAGE BREAK ---

S. Attorney General or that "boob" (Waggoner/Carr)
,.vho calls himself the Attorney General of the State of Texas. Friendly mentidnedhe
•lad every confidence.fiTllie Director and the FBI in conducting a fair and impartial ■
.investigation. He add^d, however, if the FBI investigative report was issued by either
he Attorney General of the United States or the Attorney General of the State of Texas,
be report would bear little weight in later suppressing rumors, ill-advised books, making
; martyr out of Oswald. I told Friendly that in view of his cooperation, I would, of course
jring his personal thoughts to the attention of the Director and I felt sure that the Director
vould mention this to the President tf the occasion arose. Friendly reiterated his
.-onfldence in thp FBI and he stated he was glad to be of service. The Director was advised of the above facts and specifically of Friendly's
’.ommitmenl not to print the editorial. ‘ . ’• Friendly called back at 11:30 AM. He stated he had thought the matter over
he oUiously had talked with l'vuss Wiggins) and wanted to let me know that while b*
• •greed with some of our viewpoints, he could not make any definite commitment, i.e
„<tateu .r»is was a matter for Wiggins to decide upon. 1 told him in view of his statements
I
»
- 2 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---ith some of our viewpoints, he could not make any definite commitment, i.e
„<tateu .r»is was a matter for Wiggins to decide upon. 1 told him in view of his statements
I
»
- 2 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mo DcLunch to Mohr
Re: Assassination of tin* President
U'25/63 •
; during i-unprevious conversation, I thought the decision had already been made not
10 publish I lie editorial. He staled that had been only his personal opinion that'alter all
, his paper lad an obligation to the general public. I told him I was not asking him to
• suppress anything but merely to listen to a point of common sense during a very trying
Mime, he staled this was all very true but we should recognize that his paper had an
obligation to print what was felt might be the best for the general public. He indicated
that no t.ecision had yc-t been made concerning the editorial and In all probabilities
; it v.ouUi not be printed, however, he did want to let me know as of this time no definite
jcommitment could-be given.
This, of course, is the usual ’’hogwash" on the'part'oi;'Wiggins who cannot
be trusted and usually attempts to run opposite good judgment in orderTd~satisfy his
own ego.
t •
The Director was advised immediately of the above fact6.
\ *
. * 1 went over to see Gulhman at 12:05 PM. Guthman was told that apparently
there had been a "leak'* to the "Washington Post and Times Herald" in connection with
the "Presidential Commission" idea. I asked if he knew how this had come about. He
replie.1 that Jim Clayton, a reporter for the "Washington Post," had contacted him this
morning and had referred to an article in today's issue of the "New York Times" by
James "Scotty" Reston which specifically recommended a "Presidential Commission"
'column attached). Clayton asked for comment from the Department of Justice and Guthmm
.iold him he had no comment to make, that the FBI was apparently conducting an intensive
investigation and nothing could be said until the FBI investigation had been completed.
Deputy Attorney General Katzenbach was in Guthman's office at the time
ol my conversation with Guthman. After hearing our conversation, Katzenbach asked
my opinion as to whether he should personally call Russ Wiggins. I told him it was
entirely up to him. 1 asked him how well he knew Wiggins. lie stated he hardly knew him
at all. 1 outlined briefly to Katzenbach the results of my conversation with A1 Frienciy,
' ihe Managing Editor. Katzenbach stated he knew he could not trust Wiggins but he
‘would give him a call.
Katzenbach called Wiggins at approximately 12:20 PM. He told Wiggins
■ ie felt that, all facts should be, of course, made available to the public but that the
>pUi vou'ift of Justice seriously hoped that the "Washington Post" would not encourage
• ii:y .sjvrilic means or instrument by which these should be made available to the pa'olic.
4
’J “Ll.'T.'Tri :r: Titl!
•TBrajiv- c* iKTOt’STr-r:ped that the "Washington Post" would not encourage
• ii:y .sjvrilic means or instrument by which these should be made available to the pa'olic.
4
’J “Ll.'T.'Tri :r: Titl!
•TBrajiv- c* iKTOt’STr-r:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

D
ile: Assassination of the President
C'
U/25/63
•
.Yiggins •tnted he, of course, could make no commitment to not write an editorial, .
however, tkiat the conversation that the FBI representative had previously had Jith
Friendly, ^he Managing Editor, had merit to it and he was inclined to go along. - '
.te slated he would give the matter serious consideration. '
ACTION:
This matter will be followed closely.
«
- 4 -
.irU«

--- PAGE BREAK ---had merit to it and he was inclined to go along. - '
.te slated he would give the matter serious consideration. '
ACTION:
This matter will be followed closely.
«
- 4 -
.irU«

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tfJlfxcn i ' ' ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT XENNEDT -^T-iV"•!
• ’- '• *v • • — —
  ^ n.~...,- ..:
i77'-^--
:'* Hr* WALTER BENT, Calcs Ecrricc Manager, Xtitaaa •
* * r M rwl iV r'nmm n v D T* <V' a»od MAP ^ u 4 /»• B< <>4 MM w I o I t#     * y*l •; “
Kodak Coapany, Processing Service Division, 3131 Minor Wayf-^^'*^
♦-lepbone FL 7-4654, Dallas, telepbonically advised *
mpany bad received two rolls of 8 ailiaeter Kodacbroae *- ■>■•4.-rrO • •
* one roll of 35 ailiaeter fila In a package froa Mr. CRAR_LXS *>?>
Chief .Engineer, Karel Mfg. Coapany, 9230 Denton Drive.-"
• - ••• ' • • * '.•• • * ^ • - ’i •* —*A *. 11.
Mr. BRONSON enclosed a letter with bis Ilia, stating
that the fila had been taken at the Instant President KENNEDY -
■ was assassinated. BRQNSCti also advised in the letter that froa ijr
the position he was stationed shen he took the fila, he feels s4._.
quite certain the Texas 6chobl Book Depository building was '.v.*? •* *
clearly photographed and he feels that the sindov froa which Xbe ’*
v ' shots were fired will be depicted In the* fila. Be stated tor —Vi-
this reason he believes he aay have a picture of the assassin, -
as he llred the shots. .
" . . • * ■ — * — .. * |J * . J—• ..T • -4
7 Mr. BENT stated Hr. BRONSON's letter Indicated he l’“ - ~
desired to be cooperative regarding the fila with proper .-ITS*' • '
. T . authorities and BENT Is of the opinion that BRONSON will have*~>;* * - -
ao objection to turning the fila over to proper authorities in *; '
the event it is of value to the investigation, v-u--.•■-.c.?*****-•
Mr. BENT stated that he 'would aake"a'rrange
Mr. BRONSON to view the fila at the Kodak Processing Center and *•
would arrange this aothat FBI Agents could be present/atathe ease
tiae interview BRONSON concerning bis fila of the acens.
•*-! • ••;.;• . • • •„ . v'S'.vt
'J: ’k ’• • •- • Mr. BENT assured his full cooperation regarding all _
. fila received of a like nature that aay possibly be connected
with this aatter and arrangeaents were made with hla to iaaediately
notify SA NEWSOM of any film of possible value.--V*: -' *TV-*w'
— - •. *. • • • * • .* . -** * 1. —. * •. - - V' " r.. —» .*
Sv-pJiu. -A •*. - • fa
KOi: rah T- •• *— ’*"r • . J *
I
•• ' . 9 w • • s a* « • •
— ^ » %
■^/5 * ' ’V.#
/^zJ^S/2^
4 . • — 7"-‘ - a
• * b - *• •.
. * . V’. . * r * ‘
’ -A i h ‘ .4. , -r • * * .- • . * «■ • .
**X -la]4i— '"M \ A r vt
i, *'t •%'. vv’ • T ’ -***%••* **■
W0V*251963
f-T ‘.v-~ w.—.v.-d*:'.'-*#'
, • V* • • k
W j | 1 •’ e ■ l I | ; * f . I;* ••
If’ -A i h ‘ .4. , -r • * * .- • . * «■ • .
**X -la]4i— '"M \ A r vt
i, *'t •%'. vv’ • T ’ -***%••* **■
W0V*251963
f-T ‘.v-~ w.—.v.-d*:'.'-*#'
, • V* • • k
W j | 1 •’ e ■ l I | ; * f . I;* ••
If

--- PAGE BREAK ---

- ' 'c7>''r^ The Kastman Kodak Processing Service Division receives^’
* all* color lil« made by 8 alliseter Kodachrome In this area and ;V.^
also Boat other fils lor the area la processed by this division.*
1—
* * Mr BUNT explained that hla employees have not worked sines **'
Saturday and they are due back to work at li«30 (JhL, 11/25/63j;
When processing of recent file orders begin, be expects other:* J
2ilas taken at the approximate else of President s assessinat^on«rt
-7. ; *."T Be said that BHCWSON’s fils should be processed and “
— wie.tne bv 3:00 PM. He was told that SI HE1S0M would..-*- *
• m. . — • a • ^ e a • —A
v a ...
B> . . %
X
r-
. . - t -- % »*•%*;* •»
• : ir-. * . > r
• ‘ •

--- PAGE BREAK ---rocessed and “
— wie.tne bv 3:00 PM. He was told that SI HE1S0M would..-*- *
• m. . — • a • ^ e a • —A
v a ...
B> . . %
X
r-
. . - t -- % »*•%*;* •»
• : ir-. * . > r
• ‘ •

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.w w- — ^ '■y ^ v
... •• •• - • -V-V7-.—-•
   Kr. VALTER tptfl, Sties Service Manager, Eastman -•
Kodak Compartly, Processing Service Division, 3131 Manor KiyJi’iXfi
end Mr^CHARLES BRpKSOR, Chief Engineer, Zarel Manufacturing Z'fZ.
Kl'
11
president1  _   .P,_.
which were taken with a Lelca Camera, and 6 mm. Kodachrome »
film were reviewed. The**? mma failed toihnw the building
from which the shots were fired. FlTm did"'de'Pjfct—the ■* - r^— v
jPreiideht'T8—
 car at the precis-time shots were fired; hcwever,--r.
the pictures were pot sufficiently clear for Identification vr»•>'-.
purposes, .. • •   "
L— - - ~--.v-.-_.iJi-
v, W- .a
One of the 35 sm. color slides depicted s female
wearing a brown coat taking pictures from an angle, which \ ;
would have, undoubtedly, included thU- Texas School Bock -
Depository Building In the background of her pictures. Ber i.--.
pictures evidently were taken Just as .the President was ahot,_:..-
Approxlmately five other Individuals In the 5w*T%ere taking
pictures at the tlae. «•' #' v ~: y* ■
it;*;:--.**’.-:.’ - Arrangements have been made with Mr. VALTER BETO
whereby etch package of film received for processing ty -
that company, will be returned to the owner of the film *•*V..'
with a ellp of paper attached requesting the Individual to ;
notify the local FBI Office In the event pictures In the ' •’‘-'vV
package,reflect the scene when the President was assassinated.- -
Mr. B9f»T advised this company does the processing for all the -
eoutJ&eatern states. An alrtel is being furnished southwest'
offices notifying them of the above arrangements In the event ^ *
they receive calls of this type, . * «
I
N0V-2519& ;•*'
FBI— DALLAS rffli * J-
‘ - >c* - L'L
• w*- •vk-..s,r'*.T-.* ^ :
-r. — ■* P*’.*- * •
• ^ -S.7 :f the above arrangements In the event ^ *
they receive calls of this type, . * «
I
N0V-2519& ;•*'
FBI— DALLAS rffli * J-
‘ - >c* - L'L
• w*- •vk-..s,r'*.T-.* ^ :
-r. — ■* P*’.*- * •
• ^ -S.7 :

--- PAGE BREAK ---ents In the event ^ *
they receive calls of this type, . * «
I
N0V-2519& ;•*'
FBI— DALLAS rffli * J-
‘ - >c* - L'L
• w*- •vk-..s,r'*.T-.* ^ :
-r. — ■* P*’.*- * •
• ^ -S.7 :

--- PAGE BREAK ---

UNITED STATES CO v RNMENT
» /
Memorandum
ro
mow
Mr. DeLoach
DATE: 5-27-64
M,
SUBJECT:
_HARRIET_VAN HORNE
CRITICISM OF FBI
NEW. YORK WORLD-TELEGRAM AND-THE SUN _
DATED MAY 26, 1964
= •! ! :
BACKGROUND:
\
4
.1 i
r About Dallas'
Captioned Individual In her cplummof May.26, 1964, entitle^Doubts
refers to recent writings about the assassination of President jfennedy
1
<•
\
--In referring to historical writings In general she states she Is a skeptic and refers
i^-to 6ome of the recent net/s stories about Lee Harvey Oswald and the doubt that has
been expressed by some that he Is the assassin. Miss Van Horne refers to the
- rumors and erroneous stories already discredited by the FBI such as the recently
released photograph allegedly showing an Individual who resembled Oswald ln.the
doorway of the Texas Schoolbook Depository at the time President Kennedy was shot; 3
there were five bullets Involved In the assassination, some of the shots coming from Q'
In front of President Kennedy; Oswald was working as an informant for the FBI. 3
Miss Van Ilorne claims these questions will be argued by historians for years and fc’*
refers to the Ineptitudes of the Dallas Police Department and the Secret Service and t£je
"arrogant, abovc-the-fray altitude of the FBI. In a democracy there is no place for o
'secret police,' however holy their reputation." v'. / •' Q
tiotnctHeu*S * - a
—  WAC •••; • - * •-
According to iho current edition of "Who's Who of American Women, D
IlarrietVan Horne was born 5-17-20 at Syracuse, New York. She received a B, A.
.degree from Urn University of Rochester In 1940. She Is married to DavithDowe. She
I Is a television critic and columnist with the New York World Telcgr’amTand the Sun
where ^’he has been employed since 1942. ‘She has also been associated with the .
Scripps-Ijoward Newspapers as a TV columnist since 1962. She Is a frcc-lance/wTuer
and Is a /refluent panelist on radio and television. She resides In Now York City.
,L!.'t '/.!#■ ' ££C 10 M-1040 bO -3299
| According to the current Issue ol "Celebrity Register, ' Harriet Van '
Horne has made news several times with her columns;, a parody of an Ed Sullivan
INFORMATION IN BUREAU FILES:
|i
C >■ (i
8
•according to the current Issue ol "Celebrity Register, ' Harriet Van '
Horne has made news several times with her columns;, a parody of an Ed Sullivan
INFORMATION IN BUREAU FILES:
|i
C >■ (i
8
•a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

•. s,
r. *• « J ^
w..ui.«
*;; *. -*T v—=7—r» r'T-."
([>'
M. A. Jones to DeLoach Memo
RE: Harriet Van Horne
./■v:.;:VC:V>:v,-:fer,7V
VJ   .V
. i -
l -
_ p nt. . ln-5u.roau 1 les rcve^ only thrce references to Miss Van Hornef? In 1958
one of her television columns referred to the television industry's efforts to improve
le evislon ptograms. In connection with violence on television she referred to typical
letters she had received from TV viewers one of whom referred to the Director as
^fn/rthn *|at TT ly
,PC? °f t?.I<M!,IS,Ion Programs are unhealthy entertainment and a '• 1
contributing factor to Juvenile delinquency. ,The two other references deal with her
name being mentioned during our investigation of subjects of Bureau cases who
referred to her radio or television column but there was no indication that Harriet Van
Horne was associated with these individuals? . ... . . . Van
A check or the New York Indices today failed to disclose any pertinent
references to Miss Van Horne. . .. ...
c l n Plch.a?di* Pclers* Edilor of the New York World-Telegram and the
Sun s on the Special Correspondents' List and we have had cordial relations with him
“f. h..s "™spaper. Last outgoing correspondence to him was 5-13-64 in connection
with the Director's 40lh Anniversary.
RECOMMENDATION: ...
For information. *
- 2 -
s
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---h him
“f. h..s "™spaper. Last outgoing correspondence to him was 5-13-64 in connection
with the Director's 40lh Anniversary.
RECOMMENDATION: ...
For information. *
- 2 -
s
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

• W CJ- *>• ••
- vf • C ■«-*r/*.— ;**•
, IwYoin *>«'»)(_, ™tNT '
Memorandum . .r . ' * -
• i \
•h>
• ’ • .V >.•
•. '* *
jiyuiM •.«■ ••
'•/ ■ "V.;:
sriljltl .
Mr. Mohr
/
,1
DATE: June 5, .1964 .
•. - -V.- :.»•
Tiettet c
v~-L\ T«U. r~*
C. D. DcLoach j-t . //;>•’* *v V■• -• ■'tt'j.f*V;“.~i
HARRIET VMi HORNE *; ^ r; •; . sUy :
'SSWOTW'°vf0RUD-T^M AND THESyN V i
DATED MAY 26, 1964 t .:rr, l J'■■ ; •
nialter. Harriet Van Horne, n refer g ^ argued by historians for years. :
; several specific questions that she be Department, the Secret Service
1' She referred to the Ineptitudes ol the^ FBI.M she added, "In a democracy
.•** and the "arrogant, above-the-fraj ( hoiy ihelr reputation." It was • .*
• . there is no place foresee re P^ig^°CWcI Edilqr_of.the Sc ripps-Howard,-
recommended that I talk with Widker^one, . _ . ..
Newspapers, regarding this woman. I rf ' * ff
I
t
ACTION;
For record purposes. .
i.
jrposes. . A
}lX- M:£r.
*//+, ' l.^Vv 'r
_ I cory SENT TO Mk. TOLSON J ^ \ *
1- Mr. Rosen • ' '• 1 : ~y n WO V:V:~ ‘
1- Mr. Jones... | p'lffi (. •> ' '
1 - Mr. Belmont
1 Mr. Sullivan
T - Mr. Rosen
ir^jua .«**—
•M.
' "
• * ri ^ ^ ^ ^

--- PAGE BREAK ---TOLSON J ^ \ *
1- Mr. Rosen • ' '• 1 : ~y n WO V:V:~ ‘
1- Mr. Jones... | p'lffi (. •> ' '
1 - Mr. Belmont
1 Mr. Sullivan
T - Mr. Rosen
ir^jua .«**—
•M.
' "
• * ri ^ ^ ^ ^

--- PAGE BREAK ---

. % — • • r . .
*. I'Wrai ST A tES <AQ.RNMENT „ . .
; Memorandum'ji?
■ ; ...
.Mr. Mohr
INTERNAL SECURITY - C ” » 7
, . • • , .A-ij?:3° p- m>» 3_3*64» Jerry O’Leary of the Washington Eveninc&r?^
p*7 !rl^\ l«leP,)0"ed «"d talked to Wick. He sald.that one of the t<* official*"
The Etenhig Star is In Paris and reported to officials Jo Washington that above-
•aptloned is writing scurrilous stories abcwtj.ee HarveyTlswald In a Paris newspaper
infornwnfof theFaL^1” i>rimarIly deai Wllh ^Ke^IaTraty Buchanan that Oswald^as LK
.% . '• «-• •„ ..*»
1— r.*
.   •—,• . ; 1 Mjr /
: ‘ O’Leary said it Is the belief of officials of the Star that this Buchan
•* !,elame ma/‘,w'10 was fIred ** the Star in 1948 when he admitted he was a member
luml?:rr'S\?*Tl> ln Ball,more* °’Leary asked if he could be confidentially told
. nether llus vas the same man 60 that the Star official In Paris could be so InformedL '
ACTION TAKEN: * * • • .. *' - /?\*V
- — ■■ ■■ — , - . ■
• ■ * .• • •• :* * ’ # \
... • „ , Ar!*r checking, and reviewing files 100-354341 (which is an Investigative
lie on the subject), it was determined that we are fully aware of subject's presence In
Paris where he has resided since October, 1961, and has been employed in the 5
e j
Cpr,°,niCj [ield/®r Le Malerlel Telephonlque. Re also has written a couple of books
and CIA advised that subject describes himseH as "a famous American communist
lournalist. FDr Agents have Inter\l?.\od subject on several occasions between 1952 and
1957. He has told us he resigned from CP membership prior to August, 1956, because
.^C. loss of interest. He has publicly admitted in 1948, after he was fired from the Star
In Washington, that he was a member of the CP. . • •
O’Leary was told that the man in Paris currently writing articles about
Jswald is the same individual who was fired by the Star in March, 1948.
//)**. y J ^ ^ j*.’*
The above is for record purposes. I. L __
. : . Mr EKeoKDEa • , i * 0
l :* Mr. .Dclmont IS ,, 13’j tMR 2aJ9=$
I-Mr. Sullivan. CVp >S) ^1
UEHT:S4J^'>.V- ■ . mj. ^7^1 l±-l-
• 78HAR25WW. vQUt
TF'P5>-s:f>- • T . '   WIBV. CQS11-0**
■
1 " ■ ■■ ■rc- V . .. ....
*S * , • . ’ * ‘ ’ r ’*V v .
.\4Ij tMR 2aJ9=$
I-Mr. Sullivan. CVp >S) ^1
UEHT:S4J^'>.V- ■ . mj. ^7^1 l±-l-
• 78HAR25WW. vQUt
TF'P5>-s:f>- • T . '   WIBV. CQS11-0**
■
1 " ■ ■■ ■rc- V . .. ....
*S * , • . ’ * ‘ ’ r ’*V v .
.\4I

--- PAGE BREAK ---Sullivan. CVp >S) ^1
UEHT:S4J^'>.V- ■ . mj. ^7^1 l±-l-
• 78HAR25WW. vQUt
TF'P5>-s:f>- • T . '   WIBV. CQS11-0**
■
1 " ■ ■■ ■rc- V . .. ....
*S * , • . ’ * ‘ ’ r ’*V v .
.\4I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

;{
Memorandum
.UNITED STATES COVER!
TO
'*{1
Mr. Belmonl
C. A.Kvamj/^
J | .
n / , J- •* '•
ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT KENNEDY
)
O.
|
1 Pcpuly Attorney General Katzenbach telephoned last evening.
He said that he recognized the tremendous task which faced the Bureau in
I getting out the reporLs in this matter. He asked, however, if we could
give him some idea as to when they might be coming over to him. He / A/jrJi
particularly noted that he did not want his call regarded as any kind of a _J^g
pressure for speed, because he knew it was more important to have them
done right and this would Lake time. Nevertheless, he is trying to make
plans to handle this in the Department. To this end he has assigned
attorneys to review the published material, particularly the rumors and
speculations llul have been printed in the press. These are being com-
pared with those contained in telegrams and letters received in the Department.
In this regard, Katzenbach has noted that there are many
extremes. For example, he said one telegram had been sent to the
Department by a private citizen slating that Oswald must have had
accomplices in killing the President because Oswald was not a sufficiently
talented marksman to have committed the crime alone. Katzenbach
recognized that obviously no report can resolve minutia of this kind but ' /•
he cited It as the extremes to which the speculation has gope. " /.-.A'
• I
One of the dangers which Katzenbach sees is the possibility
that the slate hearing to be held in Texas may develop some pertinent
biformation not now known. In an effort to minimize this, he is having
Assistant Attorney General Miller confer with the state officials in Texas
in an effort to have them restrict their hearing to the proposition of
stowing merely that Oswald killed the President, together with any inquiry
the state feels necessary as to the activities of local authorities. He hopes
to avoid the 6tate hearing going into the question of motive or trying to
resolve the communist angle. He, of course, at this time does not know
how sucessful these efforts will be. , • ,. .
lo. u
As a sidelight, Katzenbach said he liad learned on an extremely 1
confidential basis llul Alit
I
1 - Mr.
1 - Mr.
1 - Mr.
1 - Mr.
Mohr • 1
I)e Loach
Rosen I; •
Sullivan A f. '
it*FortaSj the Wa^lmy^^hiwycr, had been Ln^. < ••
- J *
1
XEROX
.M y\
orn u B63
B D‘:c IT le;
J f i+H'H lt-~Mr.
1 - Mr.
1 - Mr.
1 - Mr.
Mohr • 1
I)e Loach
Rosen I; •
Sullivan A f. '
it*FortaSj the Wa^lmy^^hiwycr, had been Ln^. < ••
- J *
1
XEROX
.M y\
orn u B63
B D‘:c IT le;
J f i+H'H lt-~

--- PAGE BREAK ---r.
1 - Mr.
Mohr • 1
I)e Loach
Rosen I; •
Sullivan A f. '
it*FortaSj the Wa^lmy^^hiwycr, had been Ln^. < ••
- J *
1
XEROX
.M y\
orn u B63
B D‘:c IT le;
J f i+H'H lt-~

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TELEPHONE GALL
THE PRESIDENT TO
J. EDGAR HOOVER
HoT.mb,r 15, 1<?63
10:30 a. a.
Pret.
JXH
Two things. Apparently tome lawyer in Justice is
lobbying with the Po«t because that1* where the
suggestion cams from for this Presidential Commission
which ws think would bs very bad and put it right in the
Whits House. Row we can’t bs checking up on every
• hooting scraps in the country, but they4re gone to the
Poet now to get tliam an editorial, and the Post is
cal Meg up and sayipg they're going to run an editorial
if we don’t do things. How we1 re going to do two things
and 1 wanted you to know about it*
One: TT« bailers that the way to handle this as we said
ysstsrday -- your suggestion — that you put at every
facility at your ccmmasd, making a full report to the
Attorney General axxi then they make it available to the
country in whatever form may seem desirable.
Second: It’s a state matter, too, and the State Attorney
General Is young and able aad prudent and very cooperative
with you — he’s going to rum a court of inquiry which is
provided for by a state Law and he's going to have associated
with him the roost outstanding jurists in the country. But
he’s a good cornservative fellow and we don’t start invading .
local Jurisdictions that way and he understands what you're
doing anti he's for it, aad l wanted you to understand
what he was doLng, aad he's eery strong for it and he's
going to announce it today. How if you get too many cooks
messing with the broth it mak.ee ~ mess It up. And I
think that these two are trained organirations and the
Alta rosy dTZflh General of the state holds Courts of
Inquiry every time a law is violated, and the FBI makes
these Investigations. So I wasted you to know that and
jam ought to Ull yowjr pzwee mew that that’* what's
happening and they cam expect Tfagguner Cary the Attorney
General of Texas to make an aaoouacamsnt this rooming,
to have a state inquiry and you can offer them your fall
cooperation and vice versa, kt’ll do It with you.
We'Ll work together 01 it.
Copy LSJ Libraof Texas to make an aaoouacamsnt this rooming,
to have a state inquiry and you can offer them your fall
cooperation and vice versa, kt’ll do It with you.
We'Ll work together 01 it.
Copy LSJ Libra

--- PAGE BREAK ---

/
Praa.
JEH
LBJ
JEH
LB J
JEH
LBJ
JEH
LBJ
JEH
And any inflaanca you got srilh tha Post, hare them
point to them that yoa don't •wont too many thing«
and ju.it pitting oat a Tom Da way lawyer from New
York and a ending him down - - hauling new facia - -
thia Commieiion thing, Ur. Harbatt Hooter tried
that and so met Imam a Counrdiaion that'* not trained
hurt! more than it haipa.
It's a regular eircaa than.
That'a right.
Becauie It’ll ba corerad by TV and ererythJLng like that.
Jual like an inveatlgaling comnriltii.
Exactly. I don't hare myth Influence with the Poat
f because I frankly don't raad it. 1 riew L like the
Daily Worker.
Tou told me that once before.
I Juat want your paopLe to know the facta, and your people
can aay that and that kind of negates It, you see?
Taa air.
Thank you
Thank you, Mr. President.
Copy LBJ Lib

--- PAGE BREAK ---efore.
I Juat want your paopLe to know the facta, and your people
can aay that and that kind of negates It, you see?
Taa air.
Thank you
Thank you, Mr. President.
Copy LBJ Lib

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EXHIBIT J
f •
• . I
A
■v
V)
\
*
.>
/)
'v
.**\
<NK
• ( KJ\ k-vv^'v ^^Vv:'^
' ••' J ■:. v~." •
i * I % A ^ ^ * • 1 I • * *
• •••*-*
. ' >
A *
’]
K
5?1G: • -/
1 MO
,«n. •
-, •
% * • * •. I S'. c
.**-.?.* \ -c* loi^rv
•, - •. : • ? .v *, • *?>. I v^fcAi
4 *. l
Koy#mbcr IS," 1PD3
" ’• *-;•■ - •'-' iJ,~V ••*• T* - i
• ••* MITMWIAMDTJ:.: pen MR. TOUCN ‘v'vV"-
. Wn. BELMONT *• *•" ‘:
-
. >in. WOHA *. - V !
• • .. ‘ WR. CONRAD .■SA^vyX;.: \‘-
•■ - • **R. £>K LOACII
. . * * • Wn, K VANS : -V: v.
.* ••. ' •• . . Mn. KOGEN • •. -c-./A’-rp
• * ' * Mil. 1ULU.VAM vk f *\'v’V
\ * ’ •  -• /• . : ..
9 ^ k v“ ^ ,
la<J b.«D dl/cuti^Vut'lho
1! OU nal^.lik VT* *‘U' Frl'n''11 te3 «M H
>>; u.« A«on»,r o,„ r,"1* icpor1 w»m 15 b* •:• ■=
• houkl bt r»ln«vd «ui.lr MVJ ^rta*Q* °* Ju,llcp;
*bo would itrlrv U ^ ^ r,t*,d*nl w »©“• <N»Uniul»hwl JurUt.. y
*• 0ue,lt U) wVi^Vrt’lJirt faJd 1
u» AuZ.rS’cV.v.^pn" • ;
■Itnort .port^MU." U.'lVu rwWMM ^V***'
JEILrm.'(l2) •*
• ,4i* n,f *r
. r ' .. fc/M
1 %
#
) .•. ko
.- <7 MOV 27 1953
T \

--- PAGE BREAK ---lt U) wVi^Vrt’lJirt faJd 1
u» AuZ.rS’cV.v.^pn" • ;
■Itnort .port^MU." U.'lVu rwWMM ^V***'
JEILrm.'(l2) •*
• ,4i* n,f *r
. r ' .. fc/M
1 %
#
) .•. ko
.- <7 MOV 27 1953
T \

--- PAGE BREAK ---

w
1 • •
/.
y
..* '**.
*t. *w. ’•*--f A
WfuiorunJara for Mfiui. Tolnon, B*Lqiout, f/ohr, tfyrtmterlD, 19W
^Cfi&rtd, DfLc**^ Krani, Hoiru, JilUnua .•• • -w-r^4‘
f • • .*».•,. • * I'MIJ'VM V- *
••••/* " •••* •-• VV. • • -. •• • :•:• * _ .5747
IMcX v# abcroW hold that «ntll w» icl the report oa tU» OawiJd ilttnljoaj '.\r:
la Ihal eui It may b* a aUaaUon *h«r* Va kaa been mad* a mirt/r by -l_-V
being »hot bj Ruby. I otMel lb*l I am aiming lor a dcadlUvt of K'edniidaj •
©I lUi tnk for a report oo both. . -.I,/
. * * ♦* * . * . * 4 ‘ .... * • :
• • *•..«• *.• •«. '/ rt,. .\»
1 aUo adrlMd Mr. Jrnhlni Dial we are jotting In touch wlib •' .
UJftrlcl Alloraa/ ^ad* In Dalla* and olferlng any aaaldRnct and all .:A~'-."•"•••
aoopertdloa which a» underrUryt be will glre os. I aald there eta be BO *.*' r>
4*mbi at all front a Uchniial point ©f tl*w that Qawald bought the jtra LTOJO V
a uull-oriler hernia la Cblctgoj kan-J* riling Identified; tana lo a post - .
•file* bat In Dillai tr*inlaUi»d by bli woUieri had the gin at hl« boaa«;'l>*/ ' i-
tils wit* admitted gun wai Ike re bil couldn't Identify jun; but on looming •*. *
of th» MMiilJulloy, Cbe p-.rn who picked Oeiakl op to bring him to work £*.’
•*ld Oewtld carried a 7»rk*|n wrapped In brown paper; hi tahed Gesrald
Wbwl win U lh* package ani Umtld an Id thoj were corlala iodi the tidy
htd firm Vim u ha am jolrg: to dreorat* Via own boast with them; arid ;v
tbi paper »M found In tbt ball ting, together with the tan and three ehello. ;
l told k‘.r. JankUa that Gerald bid four ehtlli and eolj llred Lh.roa ahells; . •
that wi lUTh 'owa con.plrte ball'd frond on the etretdm on which lb*
Treelderrl wai carried Into lb* hor-pllrl, which apparently fill oat of the '~f
rritldent'c bead; ttal lb* otlwir two bullet! were pretty well broken up
bwl safflctaiUly complete to allow at lo Identify them OJ btlng th* thru
llrad by IbU partiniUjr gTin. • •
•..
Vt. Jenkim titled Ibl* It * try toncluilTO. Ua nld hf wouM
adUaa FriaMeot Johnson abort Jl and that Uvo rxeildant will br eery pltued.
• ' . ,r : ‘ "?v •• f Tory traly yoori/^.'^r.H^'.V, •..■*
* . ’ ‘ <. . .♦ “*'v- ~^y ’. •
 ^C._.    • . J.EIL~t—tr'-rTTr'
-I «
John Edgar Iioorir
.. Dlraelor .......
• , J • •ll br eery pltued.
• ' . ,r : ‘ "?v •• f Tory traly yoori/^.'^r.H^'.V, •..■*
* . ’ ‘ <. . .♦ “*'v- ~^y ’. •
 ^C._.    • . J.EIL~t—tr'-rTTr'
-I «
John Edgar Iioorir
.. Dlraelor .......
• , J • •

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-J'K-
_ v
EXHIBIT K
x. i
r
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
.. FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
HAROLD WEISBERG,
Plaintiff
-v-
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE,
et al., • . ,
Defendants
f
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
) )
Civil Action No. 75-226
•DEFENDANTS' OPPOSITION’TO PLAINTIFF'S
MOTIONS TO STRIKE,.TO COMPEL ANSWERS
TO INTERROGATORIES, FOR PRODUCTION OF
DOCUMENTS, AND RESPONSE TO MOTION TO
POSTPONE CALENDAR CALL AND STAY ALL
 FURTHER PROCEEDINGS
On February 19, 1975, plaintiff filed thia suit under the
Freedom of Information Act, as amended, 5 U.S.C. 552, seeking
disclosure of the epectrographic analyses and other tests made
by the F.D.I. for the Warren Commission in connection with the
investigation into the assassination of President John F. Kennedy,
aa well as any tests made by the Atomic Energy Commission in
connection with said investigation.
(m March lh, 1975, plaintiff and his atenrnay mat with
representatives of the F.B.I. for the purpose of specifically
Identifying the scope of plaintiff's request. Defendants attach
to flT(.,v ^ia,1Ml££l?,<ll:l:0
1r"ey !'“s advloed by correspondence prl<
Fno“! , ac**1<m bbat the Atomic Energy Commission (now
energy Research and Development AdrnfnfuiroHnn^ . . .

--- PAGE BREAK ---flT(.,v ^ia,1Ml££l?,<ll:l:0
1r"ey !'“s advloed by correspondence prl<
Fno“! , ac**1<m bbat the Atomic Energy Commission (now
energy Research and Development AdrnfnfuiroHnn^ . . .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was served with plaintiff's motion to strike the Kilty affidavit
on grounds, inter alia, of bad faith, and other discovery-related
motions calculated to probe behind defendants' assertions of •
• I t *
m *
good faith compliance with plaintiff's Freedom of Information Act
request. Plaintiff alleges in his motion to strike and attached
*
affidavit that the Kilty affidavit is deliberately deceptive,
not based upon personal knowledge, and should have been made by
Special Agent Robert A. Frazier who plaintiff believes is still an
active agent with the F.B.I. Laboratory. Defendants respectfully
inform counsel apd the Court, however, that Special Agent Robert
*
A. Frazier retired from the F.B.I. on April 11, 1975 after
___ • • , •
thirty-three years, ten months and three days service, and that
*
supervisory Special Agent Kilty is the most knowledgeable active
service Special Agent to give this testimony on behalf of the
F.B.I.
In the motion to strike (pp. 2-3), plaintiff also alleges the
I
existence of certain documents which he claims have not been
provided by the F.B.I. In a sense, plaintiff could make such
claims ad infinitum since he is perhaps more familiar with events
surrounding the investigation of President Kennedy^ assassination
than anyone now employed by the F.B.I. However, in a final
attempt to comply in good faith with plaintiffs request, a still
- 3 -