LNITED STA'TES GOA
Memorandum
Aioh
LAT'E:
June
1964
WILEIAMANCKESTER
AUTIOROFKENSEDYBOOK'UEEPUBLISHEDIN1969
A2POiNTMENT WITH DIRECTOR,10:10A.M.,6-4-64
By appointment, I introcced william Manchester, who has beea
cenm.ssianed by kirs.john F.Kennecy to write 2 book concerning the four days
surround.; the assassination.and funercl of the late President, to the Director at
10:i0 a. m., today in the Director's Oifice.
Mr. Manchester first thani:ed the Director for seeing him. He exploinu
had not set gone to Dallas, Texas, irasmuch as Cinief Justice Warren fell that he shovle
mOj conduct inter.iews in Dallas until after the Warren Commission report had been issved
In in.stituting a series of questions to the Director, Mr. Manchesi gfirst 
-
inqyired zs to wh.t the Director was doirg on November 22, 23, 24 and 25, 1963.
Manchester added that he would first like to start with November 22, 1933, at the precise
mome:t the Director first received the news that the President had been shot. The '
Director replied that he had just returned from lunch. This was approximately 1:10 p. mg
Irmediately'called the Attorney General who was at his home dining with the U. S.
Attorney irom New York, Mr.Morgenthai.The Director advised the Aitorney General
hal 2 news announcement had bcen made that the President had been wounded. The
Director suated he next talked to the SAC of our Cifice in Dallas, Texas.He was informg
hat the President ha.d been wounded and had been taken to the Parkland Memorial Hospit
TieS..C2lso acvised that Governor Connallyhad been shotand was now in the emergency
oom vith Kennecy at the same hospital. Mrs. Keinedy and Mrs. Connally, wko were
-cing in the same car, had not been hit. The SAC told the Director that it appeared that
be siots hd come from an upper Sory window of the Texas Book Depository buiqing.
Cnclosure
62-109090
=Miss Gandy
NOT RRAORDED
SNVS5
1957
-iss Holmes
-Vr.Belmont
ir.Siivan
CONTINUED
Mir. Jones
.orre

--- PAGE BREAK ---from an upper Sory window of the Texas Book Depository buiqing.
Cnclosure
62-109090
=Miss Gandy
NOT RRAORDED
SNVS5
1957
-iss Holmes
-Vr.Belmont
ir.Siivan
CONTINUED
Mir. Jones
.orre

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DeLccchioMohr6-4-64
3：
Vliam Mianchester, Author of Kennedy Book
ToBePublished in i9c9
Rpssintmeik.witn Director, 10:i0 a,m, 0-4
that day that thc P.esident had died. The Direcior immediately calied the Altorrey
Genera) once again and told kim of the death c; his brother. At this time the Direstor:
ingzirec as to whether the F..torney Gener.' plarned to go to Dallas. The Director stated
that he I..e advisec the Attorney Gonerul that if such pians were in thie nrking he wouid t
facilhate lis ceparbure and arrival. The Direc'or tod Manchester that shortly thereafte?
Qr Dallas S:fice calicd once again to incicate thr.t the Presicent's body would be . -
immediately flown back to Wishington and that theVicefPresident had aireacy beeasworn
in as Presicent. The Director later called the Attcrney General once again and tol& him
w
that thsFE!was n.oving into the investigation.The Director 2dvised Manchester thz: the
FBl tcok this 2ction despite the fact that there was no law making it a Federal violation 
s.ss:ssinate the President.
A.t this point the Director gave Manchester a brief history of the
6s3assination of SAC Shanahan in Chicago, Mlinois, in the midde 1920's. There was no
Federal Iaw against assaulting or murcering an FEI Agent at that time. The Dirertor..
told Mancrester he initiated action to make it a Federal crime to assault or kill an FBI
Agent so tiat proper action could be taken in Federal court rather than a local court in.
soch maturs.
The Director told Manchester that if the FBI had taken custody of ..
Lee Kiarvey Oswald, Jr., Osvald wouid rever have been killed by Jack Ruby. Tne
Pirector stated that the murder of Osw2ld by Ruby naturally gave rise to considerable
spcriation and rumor.All of this could have been avoided had the Dallas police taken
proper 2ciion toprotect Oswald
The Director told Manchester that the FBI imme@iately entered the case,
d&pite ron-jurisdiction, and that we interviewed Oswald as soon as he was made available
The Director stated that on the evening of November 22, 1963, at approximateiy 7:25 p.m..
President Johnson called him at his home and requested that the FBi take compiete charge,
s! the case involving the assassination. The Director stated he advised the Presicant
matter.The Director also told the President that he was concerned about the great :
imcuntofpublicitycomingautofDallas..
The Director then told Manchester that the Dallas police had glven out*s
ousiderable information reccived as a result of FBI findings, particularly fron cur
abcratory. He aaded that on the 4th or 5th day following the assassination he instrueted
tatements to the press with respect to the evicence or investigation surrcunding the
ssassination. The Director told Manchester that this Chief of Police could lave toldhe assassination he instrueted
tatements to the press with respect to the evicence or investigation surrcunding the
ssassination. The Director told Manchester that this Chief of Police could lave told

--- PAGE BREAK ---instrueted
tatements to the press with respect to the evicence or investigation surrcunding the
ssassination. The Director told Manchester that this Chief of Police could lave told

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DeLach:oMiohr6-4-64
Re: Visim Ma.nchester, Author ot Kennedy Book
To Be Pubiished in is69
Fgyvintmenl.witn Direcior, 10:10 a, m., C-4-64
bovcver, he had recognized the obvious necessity and iogic of such
instncdtons and mae complied. The Director exylained to Manchester at some lengtk
thenecessity to keep piysical evidence confined prior to the prosecution of an indtyid
1963. our Dallas Ciice had received zn anonymous telephone call indicating that plans'
had beer nade to murier Oswald when he was remgved frem the Dalias City Jail.
FBl infor.ed the Dailas Chief of Police immediataly.The Director told Mianctester'
that original plans for removal of Oswald had been made fcr 10:00 p.r. that Saturday?
nigh, Ths Chief of Police, however, changed these plans by acceding to the pressure
QJhe yress that Oswald be removed at a convenient time so that communicatio.s mavia.
Sun day morning, November 24, 1se3, 2nd reminded that Depertment of the same' ::--.,
snonymous telephone call. At that tme the Chief of Policc a'dus
pur Dallas Citice that
The Director informed Manchester that followingthe Fresident's call
at 7:25 p.:n., November 22, 1963, he gave sp: cific instruction3 that the FBi do everything
possible, to thorcughly investigate this case.The Director stated that 2aditional..: ..
persgnasl were irimediately sent to Dallas. He told Manchester this was necess2ry 
inesmuci zs our Dallas Oifice and FBI Headquarters, as well as other orfices, received
hundrecs and hundreds of phone calls, telegrams and letters setting forth leads in tzs.
case.
Manchester inquired as to whether the Director placed any significance !- -:
to the anonymous phone call concerning the plan to murder Oswald. The Diractor replied:
thu.t we had no way of kmowing at the time whether any inportance should be attached or
not; however, we did have the responsibiity to immediately notify the Dallas police, ,-
whiehwedid
Tie Director characterized Jack Ruby as somewhat of a' "police' buff." ::
As a result of his friendship with a number of police officers he had easy accessibility'" .*
to the Dallas Police Department. The Director stated that he did not kmow whetier Raby's
reported irsanity was of the sincere or faked type inasmuch as we were not psychiatrists.:
He stated tat Ruby had given the excuse that ne had killed Oswald because of his obvious :
xfiection for the late President and the fact tirat he wanted to prevent any further sorrow.
0 Mirs. Kenneay inasmuch as she would necessarily have to return to Dallas and testity
2gainst Oswald
2.:
xfiection for the late President and the fact tirat he wanted to prevent any further sorrow.
0 Mirs. Kenneay inasmuch as she would necessarily have to return to Dallas and testity
2gainst Oswald
2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---late President and the fact tirat he wanted to prevent any further sorrow.
0 Mirs. Kenneay inasmuch as she would necessarily have to return to Dallas and testity
2gainst Oswald
2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Loach toMichr .6-4-64
V.ali.m Mianchester, Autor of Kennedy Book
To Be Pcbiished in 1s69 :.
poiirellVitiDirector,1oDa.m.,6-4-64
Magerester inquired as to the exact locztion of the Director at the time
ome. Ee stated that the Dallas Ofice contacted him immediately following tiis event
:nchester inguired as to the Director's iinmeciste reaction. The Director replied trat
s first thought was hew such an cvent ccuid take place, particularly under a system of :?
ivilizel justice. The Director added that he had ordered an immediate check Ga Jack*:
cty kid pariicuiarly to ascerlain if there had been a relationship between Ruby and
swald
Manchester inguired as to whether the Director was watching teievision
t the time o Oswald's nurder.·The Director replied in the negative. He stated ie wzs
ovking on official papers at the time. The Director added that he usually saved Sundays
; review lengthy dscuments and memoranca as well as to prepare himself for interviews,
arings, etc.
Manchester inguired as to what the Director was doing on Friday morwing
ovember 22, 1963, prior to the assassin.tion. Tne Director replied that he was : :
)nducting business as usual, that he had had a rumber of interviews that particular
orning..
Manchester inquired as to the piysical location of the wire service ticker :-
2chine.He was told that it is located across the hall and that pertinent wire service
ems are brought in to the Director immeaiately..
The Director told Manchester that his first conversation on November 22,
:83, with our Dallas Office occurred at approximately 1:48 p.m. The Director was
vised at that time that the President was not believed to be dead yet but that he had
lfered a mortal waind. The Director mentioned that on the occasion of his second :
U1 to the Attorney General, the Attorney General had indicated that he had also been in
uch witi a number of the Presicential Staff and had been inforimed of a number of.
tails concerning the shooting and the fact that the President had died
Manchester inquired as to theDirector's opinion of the Attorney General's
2ction upon being informed that the President had been shot.The Director replied
t the Attorney General had been silent for a few moments and had then requested that
e Directcr keep him inforined of any further facts received concerning this mattes. ?
:e Director told Mianchester that the Attorney General is usually very quiet in man.lex
til he has all the necessary facts of a given situation. The Director stated tiat tho :
torney General was not the explosive ty?e unless he becaine angry.
.、y General is usually very quiet in man.lex
til he has all the necessary facts of a given situation. The Director stated tiat tho :
torney General was not the explosive ty?e unless he becaine angry.
.、

--- PAGE BREAK ---LcnchtoMohr6-4-64
te: Williaim Manchester, Author cf Kennedy Book
To Ee Publist-d jn 19s9.

yoointmentitnDirector,10:10a.m..

6--E4
Magehester told the Director thst the President's call to the Director gt
:2S p.

m:, Noverber 22, 1se3, appeare& to bs cne of the first callis tizt the President
Aade up om :etwrirg to V.ashington that erening.

The Director replied that he wo:id
urmise tha?

this was covrect.

The Direclor added that our investication proceeded.

orthwllh: i.owever, it wzs not until Mionday or Tuesday of the following week that the
'resiceni ceciced to name a Presidential Commission tg look into the assassination
e Lirecior told Manchcster that 2n FB: report had been sent to the Warren Commission
itlin taa days aiter the President had set up tihis bocy.

The Director stated that he'::
Ersom lly rad apper.red before the Warren Commission and that he considered their
cesticring of him to be quite thorough.

He stated that thoroughness was necessary on
0 p.rt o?

the Commission inasmuch as this wou'd serve to assist in quelling gossip end
jesuieticn in the future.

The Director quicllyzdded,
o.inue cc:cerring thic .cese, especialiy in Etrope where there is widespread gossip
however, that rumors will.

2 suyposed conspir2cy, for many years.

The Director told Manchester that the statement that some of the-.r
iormation may be withheld by the Warren Commission naturally gave rise to further .t.

imor.

Mia.nchester replied that he could understand the Chief Justice's statement in this
Nard iras:nuch as not just any individval shculd be allowed to look at the classified
.aterinl sent to the Coinmission by some agencies.

The Director replied that the issue
: point is such that excessive precautions of security is unwise.

The Director explainred
 he had rever been a great believer in wasteful precautions or going overboard .

szardinz cxcessive securily.

He stated tat an item is either classified or else it isnt
assified.--- PAGE BREAK ---

szardinz cxcessive securily. He stated tat an item is either classified or else it isnt
assified. The Director gave examples of leaks in Government thzt have' given several
resicents extreme cause and worry. He stated trat the FBI is usually called upon to
urces. The Director stated that if newspaperimen did reveal such sources that quite
bi:aily the sources would dry up. Manchester inquired of the Director as to whether the assassination czse
:came ore of mzjor concern following the President's call at 7:25 p.m., November 22,
;S3. The Director statcd that as he had previously indicated, the FBI had already.. :
:tered this case. He adied, however, that after the President's call we went ail out in
birg such things as working around the clock, sending a Washington-bxased FBl sficial
. Dallas ard 2acing 2pproximately 30 Agents to the Dallas personnel complement. The
rector st:.ted thatwe still have at least s0 nien who are tied up in renning down leads .'
1 this yarticular case throughout the FBl's service. He stated that this case will nover
-W
: clcsed from an investigative point of view inasnuch as we will continuraly receive'!::
ads, many irom mental cases, which necessarily have to be checked aut -
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---3LoachtoMor6--64
W!iam Mianchester, Author of Kennedy Book
o BPbishod in1959
ppoint:entvith Director, 10:10 cm.?

6-6-64
.

Mape:hester asked if the riatter cf 2 President being assassinated net
ing 2 Federal cvime had ever been discussca fully by the Congress, or anyone e!se
co:iing to the Directcr's kmowledge.

The Director replied that there had been no ~
scvsslon to a:y extent.He stated the rztter iad just never been consicered.

Manchester inguired 2s to whetier the FBI had prior material on Oswaid
:fore the assassination.Tne Director replied tiat we Cid have some information ·.

's:
:Sard'ns Oswald, however, it was quite flimsy in nature.

The Director then exp'zined
so:e length the background o: Oswald.

He told Manchester of the press releases that
svzid inzce in Moscow.

He told Manchester of Oswald's employment in a factory in
insk, Russia, and of the fact that Oswald had later returned to Moscow.

The Diractor
etedthat he certainly did not understard why the Department of State bad failed to tave
Svald sign an aifidavit forfeitting his American citizenship at the tme Oswald reburned
Moscot/ and visited the U.

S.

Embassy.

Manchester spoke up and stated that the
at?

Fefarpnent claimec they had wanted to find out if Oswald had committed an v: : *"
tradzable 'crime in the Soviet Union, tierefore, no signed affidavit wzs taken from 2
in.: The Dlrector again deplored the failure to have such an afficavit executed.

The Director continued that we had interviewed Oswald within two or tree
iW
.ys following his arrival in the United States.

He explained that we, of caurse, desired
find ou: if Oswald had been recruited as an intelligence agent by the Soviet Union.The
安
:rector told Manchester that this did not appear to be true.He added that Oswald had
ssiiied nimself as a Marxist rather than a communist.

The Director added that .--- PAGE BREAK ---

He explained that we, of caurse, desired
find ou: if Oswald had been recruited as an intelligence agent by the Soviet Union.The
安
:rector told Manchester that this did not appear to be true.He added that Oswald had
ssiiied nimself as a Marxist rather than a communist. The Director added that . i
swal& tad later been interviewed in New Orleans after getting into a street scuabble
:h ant:-Castroites over leaflets being banded out by OswaldThe Director told:
anciester that Oewa!d couid best be termed a "Moner." He explained Oswald’s
)r.unic2.tiors with the Communist Party in the United States but added that Oswald
:d never joined the Party. The Director told of the'incidents surrounding Oswald's :
tempt to kill Gereral Walker in Dallas. He added that Oswald's wife, Marina, had *::
lvised us cf tiis incident following the assassination. The Director summarized this
:*t o! the inte:view by indicating there appeared to be nothing in Oswald's background
ich would reflect that he was a man of violer.ce and most certainly nothing which :... Cicated that Oswald had any intentions of assassinating the President. Manchester asked if the Di:ector did not find it odd that Mrs. Oswaid.. d failed to tell ar.yone about the attempted assassination'of Gereral V/alker until after
 nurdor of President Kennedy. The Director replied that he did not find tiis oad in'
ew of tl:e cold relationship, between Oswald and his wife, the language barrier cn the : :
:rt of Mirs. Oswald and the fact tha.t Mrs. Oswald did not have the n2.tural instis.cts of
1 'Arrerican woman but lo the contrary had a diferent attitude altogether': He stated he
:cec no significance in Mrs. Oswald's failvre to advise of this incident prior to ths . ssassinztion.c...

--- PAGE BREAK ---DeLo.cl:ioMohr8--64
Re: Wi....

Manchester, Author of Kennecy Book
o Bs Ptblised in 1s69
ppointme.t witi Director, 10:10 a, m.

, 6-4-84
C.

tie motivaiiorg c: Oswald to kil the Fresicsnt.

The Director stated it w2s enttrely
possible Osuald m.y have wanted to kll Gcvernor John Connally.

He expiained thzt
Cswald Re.d written communications to Coverror Connally protesting his particuiar bpe
ofciseharge from the U.

S.

karine Cc.ye.

The Director acded that President Kenresy
.cs an intellectual liberal type.

He stated that Presidait Kennecy had been desirous of
Keeping peace with honor.

He stated that President Kennedy desired peaceful co-existence
--kn.e:ican style.

The Director added that the President, aithoush he had been frm
:n His Gealings with Khrushchey, had a fairly good reiationship with Khuushchey and tce
ovet Urion.

The Director summed up by stating that Oswald could not have Cesired to
il te Presicent because the President had dealt harshly, or spoken harshly, agairst
he Ccmriunist Party and Chairman Khrushchev.

Manchester speculated that perhaps the communists, including Oswald,-'..'
d not like the relationship between the late Fresident and Khrushcl:ev; thereiore, the
com:nurists desired to do away with President Kennedy so that this obstacle to their.ss.

lesirec philosophy could be removed.

The Director replied that this w2s entirely :
)ossibie, however, he wanted Manchester to clearly understand that Khrushchey was not
: person to be trcsted and that Chairman Khrushchev had a very cold and evil mind.

*-
The Director, at this point, gave examples of Khrushchev's understanding of the English
sngusge cespite the fact that he hadGroyanovsty, an excellent interpreter, with him .

.t cll times while on his visits to the United States.The Director told Manchester that
.e had always felt it better to kick individuals like Khrushchey on the shins once in a:
le rather than to boot-lick them.--- PAGE BREAK ---

*-
The Director, at this point, gave examples of Khrushchev's understanding of the English
sngusge cespite the fact that he hadGroyanovsty, an excellent interpreter, with him . .t cll times while on his visits to the United States.The Director told Manchester that
.e had always felt it better to kick individuals like Khrushchey on the shins once in a:
le rather than to boot-lick them. The Director explained that Khrushchey was ..x
Rsically an oriental and that individuals opposing orientals usually lost face in the:
:iental's opinion when fear or trepidation was shown. Manchester inquired as to whether the Director's duties and .. ..：
csponsibilities allowed him to participate personally in the funeral ceremonies. The :. jirector replied in the negative. He stated he had been at his desk constantly. He :.s.:
ddec that he had issued instiuctions that FBI personnel participate orficially in the
eremonies by assisting Secret Service as much 2s possible. The Director spoke of the
any visiting foreign dignitaries and of the dangers involved in the march from the.. hite House to St. Matthew's Cathedral. He told Manchester that over 40 Special ·sz. .gents had been assigned to assist Secret Service, particularly at St. Matthew's .. .-.. :2tedral. He further told Manchester that the authority to protect the President was '*. learly a function of the Secret Service; however, since the assassination we bava :
ssisted when calle2 upon. The Director briefiy &cvised Manchester at this pcint o: te
nmeciate widesprgad ramifications of this c2se following the actual shooting: he tod
ar.chester that ieias had spread to Mexico as well as throughout the ertire Unitec States. horefore, it has been decessary for hin personally to remain at his desk so as to.'.:
pervise this matter. .:
.....

--- PAGE BREAK ---spread to Mexico as well as throughout the ertire Unitec States. horefore, it has been decessary for hin personally to remain at his desk so as to.'.:
pervise this matter. .:
.....

--- PAGE BREAK ---

E--64
uthor c:Kennedy Book
To E32ubiiesdin 1s69
p)oi:niment w::i Director, 10:10 a.m。, 6-4-64
At this poirt I reminced Manchester of hisprevious statement to me that
ac tc ba ct the Vrite Eouse at 1i:15 a.m.Aianchester thanked the Director twice
on his ceyartare and sxted that he was very cypreciative d the Director's cooperation
 censicerable time taken from a busy schedule to be of assistance.
The Director may desire to send the Attorney General the attached lettar
cating tiathe had sean Manchester.
人