ffitetorical Jf act JHo, 2

NUREMBERG

and

OTHER WAR CRIMES TRIALS


A NEW LOOK
by

RICHARD HARWOOD


CONTENTS

V

Introduction .1

Facts & Figures . 1

The Scene is Set .3

The Occupation.5

De-Nazification . 7

The Role of the OSS .9

Belsen . 11

The International Military Tribunal..11

Jackson’s Speech .18

Psychology of Defendants.19

The Defendants .19

The Witnesses .29

The Sentences .34

The Executions . 34

The Imprisonments .34

The American Military Tribunal .35

AMT4 .36

AMT6 .37

AMT7 .39

AMT9 .40

AMT10 .41

The Prosecution .44

Trial of-Manstein .45

Dachau Trials .48

Trial of Eichmann .51

Eichmann the Zionist .54

Recent German Trials .55

Italian Trials .56

Criticism of the Trials ..57

The Charges.57

The Court .58

The Defendants .58

The Hidden Aspect .59

APPENDICES

A The Katyn Massacre .59

B Bombing of Civilians .61

C The ‘Repatriations’ .64

D Palestine .. . 66

Bibliography .69

Cover photo shows the funeral pyre set up in a Dresden street of
some of the 135,000 civilian victims of Allied bombing of that
German city.

© 1978

All Rights Reserved

Printed & published by Historical Review Press,

Chapel Ascote, Ladbroke, Southam,-Warks., England


INTRODUCTION

The execution in 1976 of British and American
mercenaries in Angola for ‘war crimes’ has brought back to
public attention this peculiar and disturbing subject.

During the Angolan trial, the judges intervened at several
points to restrain the defence counsel from putting its case
too well. The court could not tolerate any evidence which
might help the accused criminals, they said.

The British press whined hypocritically about this
travesty of justice. Yet the simple-minded Angolans were
only doing as their European mentors had taught them:
the Angolan trial was virtually a carbon-copy of the Inter¬
national Military Tribunal at Niimberg in 1946. All the
ingredients were there: the pretence of justice, the
restrictions on the defence, the presumption of guilt before
the trial had even started, the supervision of an inter¬
national tribunal, the hysterical accusations of prosecution
witnesses etc., etc. It is easy for the press to complain
about the standards of ‘justice’ in a backward and far-off
land in darkest Africa. But it is not so easy for them to
criticise a series of trials for which we were responsible, at
least in part, and which have gone down in history and
subsequent protocol agreements, as legal precedent.

We are subject to no such restrictions. In this short
volume, we hope to examine as thoroughly and objectively
as possible the vexed subject of the trials at Niimberg, and
in so doing make some contribution to a rational under¬
standing of this aspect of recent history which has, along
with other events, been grotesquely twisted by the enemies
of truth. One such example is the allegation that six million
Jews were gassed as part of an official extermination pro¬
gramme on the part of the German government of the
Hitler era and which formed one of the major charges
against the Nazi leaders at Niimberg.


FACTS & FIGURES

The peak period for Nazi war crimes trials was the three
years immediately after the war, although trials are still
going on to this day.

Various nations dealt first of all with their own citizens,
in a series of treason trials. Anton Mussert was executed by
the Dutch. Vidkun Quisling was executed by the Norwegian
government. William Joyce (“Lord Haw-Haw”) was tried
for treason by the British government, who were able to
‘prove’ that Joyce was British, and therefore capable of
committing treason, because he had at one stage forged a
British passport. In fact, Joyce was bom in America of
Irish parents, and became a German citizen in 1939. He
too was executed, but it was not until August 1976 that
his remains were shipped back to Ireland for burial in the
family grave at Galway — a rather belated recognition of
the fact that Joyce was indeed an Irishman, after all. As a
citizen of a neutral country there was no way Joyce could
have committed treason against a foreign, belligerent
country; Britain.

The Americans put on trial the famous poet, Ezra Pound,
but a jury found him to be insane. The French executed
thousands of ‘traitors’ during the anarchic days after the
Liberation. Few of these received proper trials. We shall
never know how many Russians were put to death by the
Soviet Union, but a general outline of these atrocities is
gradually coming to light today, thanks to the writings of
Alexandr Solzhenitsyn and others.

Holland tried and executed Rauter. Czechoslovakia dealt


similarly with K. H. Frank, Ludin and Wisliceny. Poland
executed Biihler, Greiser, Stroop and Hoss. Yugoslavia
officially executed Kasche and Lohr. But these ‘show-
trials’ were only the tip of the iceberg. We shall never
know how many were really put to death behind the Iron
Curtain.

In Germany itself, 1000 cases had been tried, involving
about 3500 German defendants, by March 1948.

21 of the leading Nazis were tried by an International
Tribunal at Niimberg. All the other trials were unilateral,
i.e. they were ran by one nation only, although on occasion
there was representation by a second nation at the trial. At
the Peleus trial, for example, there were Greek naval
officers sitting on the British military tribunal because the
SS Peleus had been a Greek ship.

The Americans managed to grab for themselves the
prestige and satisfaction of trying the 199 ‘second string’
Nazi leaders in twelve subsequent trials, also held at
Niimberg. 38 were acquitted (but later faced de-nazification
tribunals), 36 were given death sentences (18 of which
were carried out), 23 were sentenced to life imprisonment,
and 102 were given shorter sentences. Summaries of the
trials were published in 1949 as a 15 volume set, although
there is also a more complete 117 volume edition which is
just a bound collection of the duplicated court transcripts.
The documentary evidence at the American Military
Tribunal (AMT) is now lodged at the American Documen¬
tation Centre at Alexandria, Virginia, just outside Washing¬
ton, DC. Most of it is on microfilm, and members of the
public can order reproductions therefrom. One of the
members of the War Documentation Project, whose task it
was to index the mountain of captured Nazi war records at
Alexandria, was Raul Hilberg, the famous ‘holocaust
expert’. Hilberg was himself a refugee from Nazi Germany
who fled to America, subsequently becoming a political
scientist at the University of Vermont. His famous book,
The Destruction of the European Jews is supposed to be
the definitive work on the holocaust, but it has subsequently
been shown to be highly dubious, thanks mainly to the
work of Paul Rassinier.

The Americans also ran trials at Dachau, where 420
death sentences were handed down. The Dachau trials
represented an all-time low in Western concepts of justice.
Brutality, torture and cruelty were the order of the day.
On trial were some of the staff of Mauthausen, Dachau,
Flossenburg and Buchenwald concentration camps, as well
as some German soldiers accused of murdering Americans
captured at Malm^dy during the Ardennes counter¬
offensive.

In the British zone of occupation, 356 war crime trials
were held involving more than 1000 defendants. In charge
of administering the trials was Sir Henry MacGeagh, who
was head of the UK office of the United Nations War
Crimes Commission. His legal advisor was Lord Russell of
Liverpool, who died in 1975. The British military trials
were held at Luneberg, Hamburg and in Italy. At Liineberg,
Josef Kramer, Irme Grise and 43 others from the staffs of
Belsen and Auschwitz were tried. Thirty of the accused
were found guilty and eleven were sentenced to death by
hanging. In the Zyklon B case, Bruno T'esch and two others
were tried for supplying Zyklon B pesticide to the concen¬
tration camps administration. Tesch and one other were
hanged. In the Natzweiler trial, Alphons Klein and five
others were charged with killing four British women
parachute commandos by injection. One of the accused
was hanged and the rest received terms of imprisonment.
In the Peleus trial at Hamburg, the captain and four


members of the crew of German U-boat 852 were charged
with murdering the survivors of the cargo ship SS Peleus ,
which they had just sunk. Three were sentenced to death
by firing squad, and the other two were sentenced to
prison. The British also tried several German generals in
Italy; at Rimini and Venice. General von Falkenhorst was
tried for the murder of British commandos in Norway. The
British trials were published, with many useful appendices,
in a series by Wm. Hodge & Co. in 1948/9, under the
editorship of Sir David Maxwell Fyfe, the Deputy British
Chief Prosecutor at the original IMT trial. Manstein’s 1949
trial is described by his defence counsel, Reginald Paget in
Manstein (Collins, 1951).

The French trials were held at Rastatt, and included
that of Saar industrial magnate Hermann Rochling, whom
the French had also tried in absentia after World War I. In
1953, they also attempted to try 21 SS men for the 1944
massacre at Oradour, when an entire village with its
population were destroyed. When it turned out that 14 of
the men were Frenchmen themselves, from Alsace, the
trial became a political hot-potato. The Alsace government
claimed that Alsatians were being victimised. In the middle
of the trial, the law against ‘collective guilt’ was repealed,
rendering the trial little more than an academic exercise.
When the trial finished, two death sentences and various


terms of imprisonment were handed down, but within
days the government had granted the men amnesty. In
disgust, the council of Oradour handed back the medals
which had been awarded to the town.

By 1963, the total of war crime sentences was as follows:


Court

Total

Sentences

Death

Sentences

IMT

21 (+1)*

ii (+i)*

USA

1814

450

UK

1085

240

France

2107

104

USSR

c.10000

?

West Germany

12846

?


*Note: Bormann was tried and sentenced to death in absentia.


Most of the death sentences were carried out, although
some were reduced to terms of imprisonment. The chrono¬
logical list of trials in the West is as follows (few details are
available for Communist trials behind the Iron Curtain):


Year

Court

Venue

Defendants

1945/6

IMT

Niimberg

21 Nazi leaders

1946/9

USA

Niirnberg

12 subsequent trials (AMT)

1945/6

UK

Liineberg

Belsen, Auschwitz staff

1946

UK

Hamburg

Peleus trial

1946

UK

Italy

German generals

1946

USA

Dachau

Mauthausen, Dachau,
Flossenbiirg, Buchenwald staffs
& Malmedy SS

1949

UK

Hamburg

von Manstein

1950

W. Germany

Augsburg


1951

W. Germany

Ravensburg

1951

France

Paris

German generals

1953

France

Paris

Oradour soldiers

1956

W. Germany

Dortmund


1957

W. Germany

Kempten


1958

W. Germany

Cologne


1958

W. Germany

Ansbach


1959

W. Germany

Augsburg


1959

W. Germany

Cobourg


1959

W. Germany

Landshut

•

1959

W. Germany

Kempten


1959

W. Germany

Munich


1959

W. Germany

Ansbach


1960

W. Germany

Fulda


1960

W. Germany

Kempten


1960

W. Germany

Ansbach


1960

W. Germany

Limburg


1960

W. Germany

Stuttgart


1960

W. Germany

Munich


1961

Israel

Jerusalem

Eichmann

1961

W. Germany

Berlin


1961

W. Germany

Hamburg


1961

W. Germany

Duisburg


1962

W. Germany

Baden-

Baden


1962

W. Germany

Wiesbaden


1963

W. Germany

Frankfurt

Auschwitz staff

1967

W. Germany

Cologne


1976

W. Germany

Hamburg


1976

Holland

Roermond

SS camp guard

1976

W. Germany

Diisseldorf Majdanek guards


The bodies of the eleven Germans sentenced to death by
the IMT were cremated at Dachau and the ashes sifted into
the River Isar. The hundreds of others executed by the
subsequent military tribunals are buried in prison graves at
various places. There are 247 graves at Hamelin, 758 at
Landsberg, and 14 at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas,
worth, Kansas.


THE SCENE IS SET

In the United States, the chorus of demands for the trial
of the Nazi leaders developed mostly out of the hate-
mongering campaign operated by various official and semi¬
official propaganda agencies. At the beginning of the war,
the American people regarded the ordinary Germans as
quite pleasant people who had been railroaded into the
war by that tyrant Hitler. Such a corporate view would not
tolerate Washington’s plans for a mass-murder of German
civilians through day and night bombing raids. Nor would
they accept the degradation and humiliation of the
Germans after the Nazis’ defeat.

Early on in the war, the main protagonist of frenzied,
anti-German hatred was Sir (later Lord) Robert Vansittart,
the British diplomatist. In a series of radio broadcasts of
fantastic fury in 1941, Vansittart wove a paranoid picture
of “German evil and viciousness” which stretched back
two thousand years. He compared Germany to the shrike
or butcher-bird, which preys on its weaker neighbours.
President Roosevelt, whilst officially disassociating himself


from Vansittart’s way-out hate-mongering, was sufficiently
impressed with his approach that he sent tapes of Van¬
sittart’s British radio hate speeches to William B. Donovan,
Co-ordinator of Information, and later chief of the OSS
(the fore-runner of the CIA), to be used as American radio
propaganda.

Vansittart’s hymn of hate against Germany was soon
taken up and echoed on the other side of the Atlantic too.
A writer by the name of Theodore N. Kaufman, in Germany
Must Perish (Argyle Press, Newark, 1941) insisted that the
Nazis were “merely mirrors reflecting the centuries-old
inbred lust of the German nation for conquest and mass
murder.” It was the “German people” who were “respon¬
sible” for the war and hence “must be made to pay.” To
rid the world of these “war-lusted souls” Kaufman advo¬
cated the “eugenic sterilisation” of 48 million Germans.
By such a policy he estimated that “Germanism” could be
extinguished in two generations. Meanwhile, German PoWs
could, after sterilisation, be placed in “labour battalions”
while the Reich itself could be partitioned among its
deserving neighbours. Kaufmann even illustrated his tract
with a hand-drawn map, showing France stretching as far
as Erfurt, Holland trebling its size to reach almost to the
gates of Berlin, and Poland and Czechia (?) dividing what
is now East Germany equally between them. All this was
the more remarkable in that Kaufmann’s rant was written
and published before the USA entered the war!

As the war progressed, the hate campaign was stepped
up too, and the first official demands for bloody revenge
started to be made. Early in 1943, the former US
ambassador to Germany, James W. Gerard, urged that
when the Allies conquered Germany they hang 10,000
Prussians as a starter. Joseph E. Davies, a confidant of
Roosevelt’s and a former ambassador to the USSR, said
that the Germans should be treated like insane asylum
inmates for two or three generations and, as if to justify
his hate, confidently predicted that the Germans would
begin using poison gas and bacteriological warfare very
shortly. A New Jersey radio station ran a competition to
select the best replacement word for ‘kindergarten’, because
it was borrowed from the German language. A prominent
judge and a newspaper publisher agreed to act as
adjudicators.

But the greatest hate-generation source of all was the
Writers’ War Board, a quasi-governmental agency set up
early in the war by Roosevelt’s adviser Morgenthau.
Morgenthau selected as WWB director Rex Stout, an author
of third-rate detective stories and other pot-boilers. Stout
in turn hand-picked other writers of sensationalist, popular
fiction to contribute their talents to the Board. Members
received no compensation for their efforts, but the govern¬
ment paid for overheads such as secretarial staff and office
expenses. The Board worked closely with the Office of
War Information, the propaganda off-shoot of the OSS.

Two weeks after the Allies’ Casablanca conference, the
Board swung into action with an article written by Stout
in the New York Times Sunday Magazine, rather appro¬
priately entitled “We Shall Hate or We Shall Fail”. Stout
asserted that four generations of German leaders had been
guided by the “adoration of force as the only arbiter, and
skulduggery as the supreme technique in human affairs.”
Hatred of the Germans, he wrote, was necessary “to
establish the world on a basis of peace.” Obviously the
American public was not yet ready for such paranoia, for
the editor of the Times was deluged with letters in oppos¬
ition to Stout. Several church groups made official protests.

Stout’s campaign was rabidly supported by Clifton


Fadiman, who at that time was the book review editor of
the New Yorker weekly magazine. Fadiman, who was
Stout’s right-hand man on the WWB, used his magazine
position to promote more anti-German hatred. Fadiman
noted that there was “only one way to make a German
understand and that’s to kill them, and even then I think
they don’t understand.” (original grammar).

The WWB also “advised” radio stations and even
arranged programmes and wrote speeches. ‘One of the
Board’s most prominent front-men, Quentin Reynolds the
war correspondent and Collier's magazine columnist,
announced on the popular radio programme “America’s
Town Meeting of the Air” that hatred was a “healthy”
emotion, and that the mental disease of Germany could
not be cured — “you must kill.” On another edition of the
same programme, on 30 September 1943, the British hate-
monger Lord Vansittart was the principal guest, along with
Richard M. Bruckner, the author of a book Is Germany
Incurable? which the WWB was promoting. Bruckner,
introduced as a “noted psychiatrist”, proposed the incarcer¬
ation in institutions and labour battalions of large numbers
of “paranoid-tending” Germans. They would be treated as
“typhoid carriers”; their children would be taken away
from them and placed in foster homes. Later in the war,
the programme presented Louis Nizer, the author of yet
another book on What to Do with Germany, who proposed
that death penalties should be demanded not only of
about 5000 high Nazi officials, but also of 150,000 sub¬
ordinates and civil servants. Every German officer above
the rank of colonel, along with members of the Reichstag,
and many others, would be tried. Hundreds of thousands
of Germans would be given jail sentences ranging up to
life, which they would serve in labour battalions. But this
alone would not cure the German “lust for war”, he
asserted. All heavy industry must be removed from
Germany in order to prevent any ideas about a new war.
On the same radio programme, Samuel Grafton, a syndi¬
cated columnist, also urged the permanent exiling or
imprisonment without trial of at least 10,000 “members of
the leading Nazi circles”.

Both “America’s Town Meeting of the Air” and its
sister programme “America’s Forum of the Air” were
heavily influenced by the WWB. Stout not only selected
many of the speakers on programmes relating to Germany
but was also able to influence the choice of subjects and
titles. Some of this influence was wielded indirectly
through a WWB offshoot, the Society for the Prevention of
World War III, which preached even greater vindictiveness
than its parent body. The Society was also controlled by
Stout, and was financed privately by Robert Woods Bliss,
a former US ambassador to the Argentine; funds being
channelled through the leftist Brookings Institute in
Washington. Oddly, the Society’s main target in America
was the Council for a Democratic Germany, a group of
anti-Nazi German refugees who hoped to restore demo¬
cracy and reconstruct Germany as soon as possible. Stout
made sure that the Council got little publicity, and publicly
condemned efforts to “salvage Germany”.

But the most amazing example of the WWB’s power
was its ability to actually re-write history, in exactly the
same way that Winston Smith used the “Memory Hole” at
the Ministry of Truth in George Orwell’s 1984. In order to
promote the idea of German war guilt, it was necessary to
overturn the historical verdict on World War I. Most
historians conducting research into the origins of the first
war had by that time concluded that exclusive blame could
not be allocated to Germany or any participant. Their


collective findings were reflected in the 1930 edition of
the Encyclopaedia Britannica, where an 8000-word article
on War Guilt elaborated on this view. First the WWB
softened up public opinion for the project re-writing, with
an article by Stout in the NYT Book Review. Stout com¬
plained, at some length, that those who “excused” the
Germans of First World War guilt were “fatally deceiving
their countrymen”. That the Times should give such
prominent space to the dismissal of the collective
conclusions of most, serious, historians, by a writer of
cheap detective novels, is an indication of the power the
WWB wielded. But there was more to come. The revisionist
view of history first voiced by Stout was echoed and re¬
echoed by innumerable government officials, newspaper
editors and media men: Germany had again become solely
guilty of starting World War I; after all, they had started
five wars in 80 years, hadn’t they? In its 1944 edition, the
Encyclopaedia Britannica cut out the 8000-word article,
and substituted a brief note saying there was not sufficient
space for adequate treatment of the subject of War Guilt.
History had been re-written.

Although the WWB was officially restrained from
making political attacks, the Board was still able to “draw
attention to” certain points in its mail-outs. The Board
regularly monitored the radio comments of independent
broadcasters, and attempted to silence anyone who was
too soft on Germany by putting pressure on the pro¬
grammes’ sponsors. Commentators such as Fulton Lewis Jr.
who were attacked in material mailed out by the Board,
and who protested to the Office of War Information, were
told that the Board was not a governmental agency and
hence not under its control.

One of the best-known broadcasters who took the
WWB’s hate-Germany line was Walter Winchell (real name
Isadore Lipschitz). Winchell’s views on Germany were
expressed to millions of listeners in terms of “a rattlesnake
never deserves another chance”.

July 1944 saw the appearance of an influential book
Time For Decision, by the then recently-retired Under
Secretary of State Sumner Welles. Welles wrote that even at
this late stage in the war, the Germans were already
making plans for a third world war. The book was awarded
a prominent review in the New York Times, the reviewer
commenting that the obvious solution to this danger would
be for Germany to be deprived of all its heavy industry,
since “no one need fear an agricultural, small-crafts
economy”. Naturally, the book also received heavy WWB
promotion.

Films too were grist to the WWB mill. Hate films
proliferated depicting shining American heroes pitted
against brutal Nazis. When The North Star showed German
army doctors bleeding children to death to top up their
blood-banks, Time magazine hailed the picture as the
“most successful attempt to show a sickening German
atrocity in credible terms.” Hollywood did not forget box
office receipts either, and many of the hate films were
heavily flavoured with sex, much of it of the sado¬
masochistic variety.

Academics and educators joined in the baying for
German blood. Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler, president of
the (Communist-infiltrated) Carnegie Endowment for
“International Peace” and former president of Columbia
University, said that when the war ended Germans could
not be regarded as anything but convicted criminals. In a
statement circulated by the WWB, he asserted that for a
generation Germans could not be accepted as equal citizens
of the post-war world. Several educationalists proposed
4


that all Axis schoolteachers who had willingly stayed at
their posts throughout the war should be discharged and
“forever barred from teaching again”. But the most pre¬
posterous suggestion of all — from any source — came
from an eminent anthropologist, Dr. Ernest A. Hooton
of Harvard University. He proposed to dilute the German
stock (and thereby “adulterate the Nazi strain”) by a
process of outbreeding, i.e. miscegenation. This would be
accomplished by sending Czechs, Austrians and others into
Germany, where they would settle and interbreed with the
German people. Men of the German army would be kept
out of their native land while the “outbreeding” was going
on, probably by being put into forced labour in formerly
occupied countries. (Astute readers will of course realise
that this plan was eventually to involve ethnic groups
much more exotic than the “Czechs” and “Austrians” and
it was not only the Germans who would be made to suffer
this dreadful fate, as the residents of towns and cities
throughout Britain are only too aware.)

By January 1945, WWB material was being sent to
3500 writers, 1150 army information services, 2600
industrial newspapers and 270 comic strip editors.
Syndicated editorials were sent to 1600 daily newspapers.
Radio scripts went to 750 local radio stations.

The all-out effort to induce hate had worked. As the
war ended, a packed meeting at Carnegie Hall (arranged by
Stout’s Society) welcomed the demand by St. Louis Post-
Despatch editor Joseph Pulitzer that punishing the guilty
would require the execution of approximately a million
and a half Germans. The guilty, “with no differentiation as
to their degree of guilt” should be shot.


THE OCCUPATION

In the early days of the Allied occupation of Germany,
brutality was the order of the day. German prisoners in
one PoW camp were deliberately kept on a starvation diet
by the commandant. At another camp, Americans “used
Nazi torture devices” to make prisoners confess misdeeds,
according to Robert Murphy’s Diplomat Among Warriors
(Doubleday, 1964).

Constantine Fitz Gibb on’s book Denazification (Michael
Joseph, 1969) reveals that

Being devoted to the free enterprise system, they looted indi¬
vidually. The kitbags of GIs who returned from occupation duty in
Germany immediately after the war contained many curious items,
and some American officers made small fortunes at this time. They
also left a lot of half-American babies behind, for that is another
form of loot. All this is quite normal post-war practice and perhaps
taught the Germans one of the stern lessons that they had apparently
failed to learn after the First World War, namely, that it is excessively
foolish to fight a war and lose it.

A fairly senior Public Relations Officer attached to a very senior
US headquarters informed me in mid-1946 that he had ‘liberated’
$180,000-worth of ‘Nazi’ property. With this loot he proposed to
buy himself a TV station in the US.

In Brittany in 1944 a GI was arrested for rape, court-martialled
and duly sentenced. It was generally agreed among the officers of
the court that such behaviour was best postponed until the GIs had
crossed the German border.

At Le Havre, in March of 1946, I watched my luggage being
loaded onto the Liberty Ship that was transporting myself and other
American officers home. The temporary longshoremen (dockers Ed.)
were SS prisoners. In order to humiliate these arrogant racists,
American negro soldiers had been detailed to guard them.

Such stories could be, and indeed have been, endlessly
multiplied.

(The hyper-race-consciousness of the Americans is
rather curious in view of the fact that the war was sup¬
posedly fought against ‘racism’. This quote lends even


more weight to Julius Streicher’s allegation that he was
beaten up by negro American soldiers whilst in jail at
Niimberg.)

Efforts were of course made to prevent fraternisation
between the American troops and the German civilians. In
June, the military police arrested a thousand offenders and
reported them for court martial. This stemmed from a
United States directive (JCS 1067) of April 1945, which
forbade fraternisation. Most of the ideas in this directive,
sent to General Eisenhower from Washington, came (yet
again) from Morgenthau. A special study of the widespread
infringement of the regulations was made by an officer of
the Psychological Warfare Branch of the OSS, Saul K.
Padover, an historian and psychologist. The study was later
published as a book: Psychologist in Germany (Phoenix
House, 1946), which FitzGibbon describes as “highly
emotional, with the standard left-wing views of intellectuals
in those days: violently pro-Russian and anti-German.”

The ordinary GIs could not fathom the logic of the
order — or its nomenclature. For as one culprit remarked:
“I never wanted to treat her like she was my brother.” On
12 June 1945, Field Marshal Montgomery partially
rescinded the order as far as British troops were concerned,
and three months later, when he raised the whole matter at
the Allies’ Control Council, it was agreed that the policy
should be scrapped in all zones.

Although this aspect of Morgenthau’s directive ended
in failure, most of the instructions were successfully carried
out. The directive, which was kept highly secret for
months, ordered that numerous categories of industrial
plant should be uprooted and moved to Allied countries.
What could not be moved was to be destroyed. All courts,
schools and universities were to be closed down and not
re-opened until their staffs were purged of all Nazi
personnel. Persons holding responsible positions in
industry, commerce, agriculture, finance, and the media
were likewise to be arrested and “assumed to be Nazis in
the absence of any evidence to the contrary.” The terms of
the directive so shocked the advisers of General Lucius D.
Clay, deputy commander in chief for military government,
that one of them was despatched to Washington in an
effort to get the directive modified. Unsuccessful, the aide
finally resigned. When in October, the military government
was permitted to make it known, General Clay, himself a
hard-liner, flew to Washington to urge modification of its
unworkable terms. This too ended in failure.

At the Potsdam conference in July, 1945, President
Truman denied that the controversial Morgenthau Plan for
the pastoralisation of Germany was being put into effect.
Yet the results of Potsdam were there for all to see. All
industry, finance and scientific bodies were to be controlled
by the victors. All external assets were to be seized. In
addition to the industrial plants in their zone, the Soviets
were to receive a bonus of 25% pillaged from the other
three zones. In return, they would hand over foodstuffs
and commodities looted from their zone. A wave of
German suicides followed the Potsdam agreements, more
than 2500 persons taking their lives within four days.

When the occupation began, the daily food ration in
the American zone was 900 to 1000 calories, although an
extra 200 calorie allowance was made to “persecuted
persons” (i.e. Jews). It was reported that more than half
the babies bom in Berlin in August died of starvation. In
November, 1945, Washington decided that food would be
sent to Germany to prevent starvation and disorder. The
ration was raised to 1550 calories, but it fell to 1275 a few
months later, but even that was greater than the ration in


the British zone: a basic ration of 1048 calories; just
enough to keep an idle man alive. In the French zone, on
1 February 1946, the ration was, in theory, slightly higher
at 1075. The internees at Auschwitz received a higher daily
ration than this until very near the end of the war. Despite
the higher rations given to Jews in post-war Germany, a
US Senator pointed out that the Jews “do not desire to
work, but expect to be cared for, and complain when
things are not as well done as they think they should be. It
is doubtful that any country would want these people as
immigrants.”

The winter of 1946-47 was one of the coldest in history.
Schools were closed down as were three-quarters of the
remaining industries in the British and American zones. No
coal had been delivered to Germans for heating since


Emotive photograph of Dachau despatchees on train. When 200
Germans similarly froze to death on a train in 1947 no such photo¬
graphs were published.


October, and Germans were reduced to following carts
delivering coal in order to pick up any pieces that fell off.
In Berlin two hundred people froze to death on a train.
Hoover reported at the end of February 1947 that Germany
had sunk to a level of existence not known in Europe in a
hundred years. He proposed large shipments of potatoes
and other foodstuffs in order to stave off famine. He also
suggested that the dismantling of non-military factories
should stop. The delusion that Germany could be reduced
to a pastoral state had to be abandoned, despite Morgenthau.
Europe could not recover without Germany. Hoover’s plan
was eventually translated into the Marshall Aid plan, but
not without opposition from Stout’s Society for the
Prevention of World War III (still in existence in 1947)
which laid on a national conference to attack the recon¬
struction plan. Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt, sponsor of
many Communist-front organisations, lent her name to
the project. Morgenthau himself participated in the
conference, as did Albert Einstein and Sumner Welles.

Although the food programme got under way quite
rapidly, it took a little longer for enthusiasm for the dis¬
mantling of German industry to wane. Even as Allied
planes were flying bulldozers into Berlin during the Soviet
blockade, German plants which could have made them
were being destroyed. Britain and France sometimes
openly aimed at eliminating competition. Soap factories
were destroyed and Britain even blew up the Hamburg
harbour installations, in order to hamper future German
shipping rivalry. The French helped themselves to large
parts of the Black Forest; the timber from this well-known
tourist attraction being used for pit-props. The vandalis-
ation of Germany did not stop until 1950.

But for more than a decade, up to 3,000,000 German
soldiers were held in captivity to work in the mines and
forests of Russia. It is estimated that more than one
million died. The conditions under which they laboured in
France were so harsh as to bring about United States inter¬
vention, but nothing could be done about their condition
in the Soviet Union. General Clay reported that German
prisoners returned by the Soviets needed from three to six
months to become fit for work. The public health branch
of the military government pointed out that such prisoners
averaged sixteen pounds below the minimum for health,
and that half were suffering from disease. In 1947, Britain
was still using the labour of 350,000 Germans. France still
held 300,000 out of the 440,000 who had been turned
over to them by the Americans. The Americans had freed
all their prisoners by August 1947, and in March, France,
yielding to American pressure, began sending prisoners
home at the rate of 20,000 a month. Britain returned the
last of its prisoners in July 1948. The Soviets claimed to
have returned the last of their military prisoners in 1955.
On 22 February 1949 the New York Times reported that
of the 800,000 German civilians forcibly taken to the
Soviet Union between 1944 and 1949, 400,000 had died
and 180,000 were still in captivity.

Although the Allies are no longer pillaging Germany of
war-loot, West Germany continues to this day to pay
financial reparation to Jews and even the State of Israel
itself, which did not come into existence until 1948 —
three years after the war ended. These reparations are
based on the theory that six million Jews were exterminated
by the Nazis — a theory which has been effectively
demolished by the French writer Paul Rassinier,
Professor A. R. Butz of Northwestern University, Illinois,
and many others. East Germany has never paid a
penny.


DENAZIFICATION

As stability and some sense of order returned to
Germany in the months after the occupation, the Allies
had to sooner or later sit down and formularise their
attitude towards, and treatment of, Nazis. It would not do
to just continue on the ad-hoc basis which had heretofore
prevailed, resulting as it did in tremendous variations in
persecution of, or leniency towards, suspects.

On 8 August 1945, the four major powers had signed
the London Agreement, which set up the three categories
of crimes, and criminals, who would be tried at Niimberg.
These categories were crimes against peace, war crimes,
and crimes against humanity; each with their own wide-
ranging ‘definitions’.

But even these rather subjectively defined ‘crimes’
could not possibly be stretched to include the hundreds of
thousands of ordinary German citizens whom the Allies
wished to punish. New ‘crimes’ had to be thought up, and
litigation procedures codified, in order to make sure that
nobody slipped through the net.

In April 1945, days before the official end of the war,
a directive (JCS 1067) had been issued to the American
Army chiefs in Germany by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in
Washington concerning the administration of the
occupation. Although the directive was issued by the
Washington military, its policies had been worked out by
the politicians, with the main contribution coming from
Henry Morgenthau.

Paragraph 6 of the directive concerned ‘Denazification’,
and ordered that the Nazi Party should be dissolved, all
Nazi laws repealed, all Nazis removed from public office
and all Nazi property confiscated. At the Potsdam con¬
ference in July 1945, this US military directive was given
three-power approval.

On 2 August 1945, the Official Gazette of the Control
Council, the Allies’ joint occupation government, had
published an outline of the principles governing denazifi¬
cation. German education was to be taken over so as to
eliminate all Nazi ideas. The judicial system was to be
reorganised along ‘democratic’ lines, and the law would be
re-written so as to eliminate all forms of discrimination
along lines of race, nationality or religion. ‘Freedom of
speech’ was to be restored, subject to the restrictions
necessary for maintaining military security.

On 20 October 1945, Control Council Proclamation
No. 3 announced that German courts were being set up,
whilst Proclamation No. 4, ten days later, pointed out that
these civil courts would not be allowed to try crimes com¬
mitted against the Allies.

On 12 January 1946, the Control Council published a
directive concerning the “Removed from Office and from
Positions of Responsibility of Nazis and of Persons Hostile
to Allied Purposes”. And on 12 October 1946 the Council
followed this up with an edict for “The Arrest and Punish¬
ment of War Criminals, Nazis and Militarists, and the
Internment, Control and Surveillance of Potentially
Dangerous Germans”. It was these two particular procla¬
mations which paved the way for the denazification
tribunals which were to follow. The tribunals were basically
an attempt to overcome the problem of de-nazifying a
state where the Nazi Party was the state. To have purged
every single Nazi Party member from public office would
have meant that the entire state would grind to a standstill.
It would also raise the problem of what to do with the
millions upon millions of persons thus purged. There were
over 3K million ex-Nazis in the US Zone alone; they


could not all be interned or even deprived of their civil
rights: this would create an extremely dangerous situation
where the Allies would be one minute preaching self-
righteously about ‘equality before the law’ and next
minute creating a vast population of second-class citizens.

In the Soviet Zone, denazification played a subordinate
role to that of economic destruction. They were too busy
carting off tons and tons of German industrial equipment
— they even stripped away hundreds of miles of railway
track — to be much bothered with sorting out sheep from
goats. Their denazification programme was much more
elastic than the western Allies’. They were at liberty to
punish or employ any man they chose, without regard to
whether he was more than a ‘nominal Nazi’ or not. The
official figure given for dismissals from office is something
over half a million in the Soviet Zone, but like all Soviet
figures, this statistic is virtually meaningless. Any Nazis
who had been handed over to the Soviet authorities by
the United States were, of course, doubly suspect, since
they would be immediately suspected of being ‘capitalist
agents’ as well as ‘Hitlerite thugs’. According to figures
issued in East Berlin, the Soviets’ denazification programme
was largely completed by the end of 1945. The official
end to the programme was not announced until 1948,
however, and it was not until 1950 that the Soviets ordered
the dissolution of the forced labour camps where those
purged under the scheme had been interned. Since that
time, the two German governments have carried on a
lengthy slanging match, each accusing the other of
employing former Nazis in high places.

In the French Zone, there was more emphasis on
educating the Germans away from Nazism, rather than
chastising them. In certain French circles, the idea of
balkanising Germany back into duchies and statelets held
some support, since a dismembered Germany would present
no threat to the rest of Europe. But all in all, the French
were too concerned with their own internal problems in
the post-war years to bother very much with sorting out
Germany’s. In any case, there was an underlying French
attitude of hostility and resentment towards the British
•and Americans which led to the build-up of a kind of
cameraderie between the French soldiers and the Germans.
Both countries had suffered the humiliation of defeat and
occupation, whilst the ‘Anglo-Saxons’ had been consistently
victorious. All in all, the French were in no mood to
entangle themselves with Germany any more than was
necessary. This led to various accusations by the other
Allies that France was being ‘soft’ on the Nazis, but the
French attitude was due more to lack of concern rather
than sympathy for Nazism.

In order to bring at least the three Western occupation
administrations into line on this matter of denazification,
on 12 October 1946 the Control Council issued its Directive
No. 38, which laid down the categories to be used in the
denazification system. The entire German nation was to be
divided into five categories: major offenders, offenders,
lesser offenders, followers and persons exonerated. Each
classification was given a few paragraphs of definition,
and it was then up to the local administration to decide
who fell into which category.

In the British Zone only persons in positions of
authority were screened, but in the US Zone an attempt
was made to sift the entire adult population. An elaborate
questionnaire — called a Fragebogen — was issued to every
adult German in the American Zone. (In fact more
questionnaires were issued them there were adults: thirteen
million were issued to a population of about fourteen


million, of which many more them two million were
children.)

The operation was a bureaucrat’s dream. At its height
the mere reading of the questionnaire required the full¬
time work of 22,000 Germans. 545 tribunals, or Spruch-
kammern, in the US Zone were dealing with as many as
50,000 cases a month. The members of these tribunals,
normally three to each, were supposed to include a lawyer,
but there were not enough ‘denazified’ lawyers to go
round. The other members of these courts were supposed
to be ‘right-thinking’, non-Nazi Germans, but there were
hardly enough of these to go round either, nor was it
possible for the Americans always to check these men’s
credentials since so many documents had been destroyed
during the war. The tribunals were so short of ‘reliable’
Germans that they had to import German-speaking
American Jews to help out. One such was Henry Kissinger,
later to become the American Secretary of State. A detailed
description of the conduct of the tribunals is published in
Forced to be Free by John D. Montgomery (U. of Chicago
Press, 1957):

There were no full public hearings;no rules of evidence governed
the presentation of testimony. All proceedings were “ex parte”,
offering no opportunity for “prosecution” or “defence”. Until a
candidate was cleared by these tribunals, he could not occupy any
position of importance, and so millions of capable and politically
indifferent Germans had to remain idle or engage in ordinary labour
for an indefinite period.

The findings of these tribunals were followed either by
a pronouncement of innocence and discharge or by more
or less automatic sentences for those found guilty. Major
offenders received from two to ten years of forced labour,
confiscation of property, permanent loss of civil rights and
pensions plus restrictions on where they might live.
Offenders in the second category were given a maximum
of five years’ forced labour. Minor offenders received
shorter sentences. Followers were, in general, fined. A
fairly reliable chart of Denazification statistics from the
US Zone is reprinted in Hilberg, chapter II, Table 94.

There were few who failed to fill in the Fragebogen: it
was necessary to complete one in order to obtain a ration
card. Thus the alternative to submitting to the denazifi¬
cation system was starvation. The burden of proof was
reversed in the tribunals, i.e. it was the duty of the
defendant to prove that he should be in a lesser category.
In consequence of this practice, the tribunals were flooded
with semi-official character references issued by local
clergymen. These soon became known as Persilscheine
(Persil certificates) after the brand of soap flakes of the
same name. Secret denunciations and false accusations
were not uncommon, according to Professors Roth and
Wolff of Ohio State University, who published a study of
the tribunals in 1955. Thus a defendant could lose his job
or be incarcerated in an internment camp without even
knowing the origin and nature of the evidence which had
condemned him.

In 1950 General Lucius D. Clay, the head of the US
Military Government, transmitted to Washington a detailed
report on The Present State of Denazification. He revealed
that over 27% of the German population in his zone
(31/2 million people) fell into categories 1—4. In order to
somehow reduce this vast number of people who had to be
punished, an amnesty for persons under the age of 27 was
announced. This was followed by another, known as the
Christmas Amnesty, which let off the hook those who
were disabled and those who were on low incomes. Clay
concluded by recommending that the denazification
process be phased out, due to increasing German resent¬


ment towards these ‘Star Chambers’.

Washington took the point, and by 1953 the tribunals
were a thing of the past. Instead the West German govern¬
ment took over the fight against Nazism, via the less-
obvious medium of propaganda. In 1953 it set up the
Federal Centre for Service to the Homeland, as a result of
two conferences attended by sociologists, historians,
psychologists and philosophers. The purpose of the Centre
was to combat anti-semitism, and to this end it sponsored
a large number of articles, pamphlets and supplements.
Most of these dealt with the history of the Jews, but some
were simply smear attacks on the ‘extreme right-wing’
parties which were beginning to re-emerge in Germany.
The Centre paid particular attention to the indoctrination
of school-children, and sponsored a supplement on the
Nazis’ persecution of the Jews in the weekly magazine Das
Parlament, which is distributed to schools throughout the
country. 65,000 anti-Nazi wall posters were mailed out to
schools every year, and 40,000 school classes took part in
the Centre’s annual Christmas competition on Jewish
history. Films were also used to spread the message, with
such titles as Concentration Camp Henchmen and The
People and Country of Israel. But the Centre’s major inter¬
national achievement has been the financing of The Final
Solution, an “authoritative” account of the “extermination
programme” by Gerald R. Reitlinger. One would have
thought that with so much ‘evidence’ of exterminations
available, the Centre would have been able to find an
historian to document this aspect of the war. Reitlinger is
an art-dealer and amateur artist who now lives near Rye in
Sussex.

Both the Federal and Lander (County) governments in
West Germany continue to finance yet another agency for
combating anti-semitism, the Institute of Contemporary
History in Munich. This operates very much like the
Wiener Library in London, providing a research centre for
the study of Nazism and its “extermination programme”.
The Institute regularly publishes research documents, and
in 1960 brought out the “diaries” of Rudolf Hoss, the
Commandant of Auschwitz. The “diaries” originated from
behind the Iron Curtain; they had originally been published
by the Communist Polish regime. The Institute also
provides information and assistance to individual Jews
claiming compensation from the Government, and to
prosecution counsel conducting war crimes cases. And like
the Federal Centre, the Institute provides teaching aids to
schools and polytechnics. It also publishes a quarterly
journal of research, the Vierteljahrshefte fur Zeitgeschichte
— somewhat similar to the Institute of Jewish Affairs’
Patterns of Prejudice.

So concerned was the Federal Government over the
apparent re-emergence of anti-semitism in West Germany
during the late 1950s, that a full-scale investigation was
laid on to discover why the indoctrination programmes
operated by the Federal Centre and the Institute had not
worked. The government even went to the great lengths of
publishing a White Book on Antisemitic and Nazistic
Incidents in 1960. One of the more enlightening aspects of
this report was the revelation that two swastika-daubers
were discovered to have been Communists acting as
agents-provocateurs. The investigation revealed that they
were wearing Communist badges behind their lapels and
had recently been on a Young Communist camp in East
Germany.

In 1958 the West German government also set up a
Central Agency for the Investigation of Nazi Crimes, at
Ludwigsburg. The prime mover behind this agency for

8


tracking down any stray Nazis who may have been over¬
looked at Niimberg, Belsen, Dachau etc. was Eugeri Kogon,
author of several popular books on Nazi atrocities. The
Agency was responsible for bringing about the 1963
“Auschwitz” Trial, and proved so efficient at “Nazi-
hunting” that they even discovered that the first head of
the Agency was himself an ex-Nazi.

THE ROLE OF THE O.S.S. (CIA)

One participant in the promotion and administration of the
Niirnberg Trials which is often overlooked is the Office of Strategic
Services, later to become better known as the Central Intelligence
Agency — the United States’ secret service.

The origins of the OSS can be traced back to 1941, when
President Roosevelt appointed Colonel William “Wild Bill” Donovan
as director of a propaganda agency known as the Office of the Co¬
ordinator of Information. The main function of the agency was to
steer American public opinion towards favouring joining in the war
against Germany. The OCI was staffed by prominent journalists and
authors, but policy was directed by James P. Warburg, one of
Roosevelt’s political advisers. It was housed in a government
building in Washington on the corner of 25th and E. Streets, which
had been up until then an experimental laboratory. The scientists
and their menagerie of animals for experimentation were hurriedly
evicted to make room for Donovan’s organisation. This bizarre
episode allowed Nazi propagandists the opportunity of deriding the
OCI as consisting of “fifty professors, twenty monkeys, ten goats,
twelve guinea pigs, and a staff of Jewish scribblers.”

But by 1942, with the war in full swing, the situation called for
a different kind of agency. A more elaborate outfit was needed
which would not only direct public opinion at home, but would
undermine enemy morale through black propaganda and rumour
mongering. Donovan, despite his anti-British Irish Republican back¬
ground, received vital advice and assistance from the British govern¬
ment, who had had decades of experience in foreign espionage work
with the Secret Service. Lord Mountbatten met Donovan in London
in June 1942, and showed him around all Britain’s secret espionage
establishments. Vital secret equipment such as miniature radios was
handed over to the Americans.

The same month, the OCI was revamped. Domestic propaganda
was to be handled by a new Office of War Information. Foreign
espionage and black propaganda was to be controlled by the Office
of Strategic Services under Donovan.

From the beginning, the OSS was able to obtain the services of
the wealthy and the famous. Its staff seemed to be predominantly
drawn from both the echelons of New York Jewish banking and
academic families and the New England (Gentile) jet-set. The staff
included:

Arthur Goldberg, head of the OSS Labour Desk, later a US Supreme Court
judge and US Ambassador to the United Nations.

Junius Morgan, head of Morgan, Stanley & Co. merchant bankers, who was
“of invaluable assistance in supervising the expenditure of OSS funds,
particularly ‘unvouchered’ funds. ”

Dr. Henry A. Murray of Harvard, who organised the OSS Assessment
School, for analysing new recruits.

John Ford, the famous film director, headed the OSS Field Photographic
Unit.

Allen Dulles, diplomat and lawyer, later head of OSS in Switzerland, later
head of CIA.

Richard Helms, head of OSS in occupied Germany, later head of the CIA.

James B. Donovan, OSS General Counsel. After the war this Donovan (no
relation to “Wild Bill”) was defence counsel for the Soviet master-spy Rudolf
Abel.

Abraham Polonsky, on the staff of the Morale Operations Branch, a Holly¬
wood film director, later cited as having Communist sympathies by a 1947
congressional committee.

Leonard Meeker, on the staff of the Research & Analysis Branch, exposed
in 1953 by J. Edgar Hoover as being a Communist. Subsequently fled to
Moscow, then Havana. Now teaches at a Canadian university.

Paul Sweezy, editor of the OSS London bulletin called European Political
Report; Sweezy was an open Marxist.

Sidney Rubenstein, on the staff of the Counter-Intelligence Branch in the
Far East. He was also an FBI agent and a Baltimore attorney.

Ralphe Bunche, an “African Affairs” specialist on the R&A Branch. Later
this negro Leftist professor helped set up the United Nations.

Walt Rostow, later to become President Lyndon Johnson’s ‘adviser’’ and
chairman of the National Security Council; planned USA’s surrender in
Viet-Nam.

Rabbi Nelson Gluck, OSS intelligence agent in Palestine, using bogus
archaeological explorations as a front. Gluck was President of Cincinnati
Hebrew College after the War.

Frank Wisner, OSS agent in Istanbul and Bucharest. A prominent Wall
Street lawyer. Joined the staff of the Londqn station of the CIA in the late
*50s. Committed suicide in 1965.

Richard Weil, OSS liaison officer with Tito’s forces in Yugoslavia. One of
the Macy (department store) family.


John Zuckerman, operated OSS Black Propaganda radio station in Far East.

John Birch, OSS officer in China, killed whilst helping Mao Tse Tung’s
Communist bandits. Inexplicably promoted as a martyr of “anti-Communism”
by having an American supposedly right-wing society named after him.

Jane Foster-Zlatovski, OSS agent in Indonesia; indicted by a grand jury in
1947 for passing OSS secrets to the NKVD.

Herbert Marcuse, the Communist lecturer and psychologist.

Robert Kempner, the Niimberg prosecutor.

Hans Hirschfeld, later to become Willy Brandt’s press aide; named in a
1961 US espionage case as a Soviet agent.

Many rich corporations were only too glad to ‘loan’ their
executives to the OSS. The Secret Intelligence Branch (which was a
particular haven for Communists, liberals and Lincoln Brigaders) was
headed by a vice-president of International Railways of Central
America (the corporate twin of the United Fruit Company).

The Morale Operations Branch, which employed so many left-
wing Hollywood Jewish script-writers, was directed by the vice-
president of an Ohio steel corporation.

The Special Operations Branch, which maintained liaison with
Communist partisans throughout the world, was successively com¬
manded by two New York business lawyers and two Pennsylvania
investment bankers.

The OSS Commander in Cairo was the vice-president of a Boston
bank.

The J. Walter Thompson organisation supplied: the Chief of the
OSS Planning Staff, the head of Morale Operations Branch in
London, the executive officer of OSS in Cairo, and a black
propaganda specialist in Casablanca.

Standard Oil provided officers to spy on Axis oil shipments in
neutral countries. Paramount Pictures provided foreign currency for
espionage purposes. The Goldman, Sachs banking firm handled the
payment of two million francs to finance Algerian terrorist groups.

The OSS agents were on extremely friendly terms with Com¬
munist partisans throughout the world. The OSS gave decisive aid
and assistance to Mao Tse Tung in China, Ho Chi Minh in Viet-Nam,
Tito in Yugoslavia and sundry lesser-known bandits in Eastern
Europe.

In fact, one OSS agent, Beverly Bowie, an assistant editor of
National Geographic , was the first OSS man to reach Bucharest after
the German withdrawal in 1944. Other American officers arrived to
find Bowie already installed as an ‘adviser’ to the newly-formed
Roumanian cabinet. Bowie explained, “Before they vote on any¬
thing, they ask me what I think. I go into a trance and figure out
what Franklin D. Roosevelt would do, then give ’em the answer.
They pass all my laws unanimously. I never thought running a
country was so easy.”

In lesser capacities the OSS staff roll read like an excerpt from
the Social Register, with names like Ryan, DuPont, Vanderbilt,
Roosevelt, Morgan, Mellon, Guest and Tolstoy. It was this aspect of
the OSS which enabled the newspapers to have a field day with the
organisation’s initials, with headlines like “Oh, So Secret” and “Oh,
So Social”. Columnist Drew Pearson commented that the staff was
mostly made up of “Wall Street bankers”.

One of the prime functions of the OSS was that undertaken by
the Morale Operations Branch. The mission of the MO was black
propaganda; distributing bogus newspapers and military orders from
within the ranks of the enemy, operating clandestine radio trans¬
mitters purporting to be enemy stations, and starting rumours in
Axis-occupied territory.

A particularly relevant facet of the OSS operations was that they
had enlisted the co-operation of the Jewish Agency in Palestine
(which was really the unofficial Israeli government at that time). The
Jewish Agency, on account of its extensive and elaborate contacts
with Jews in Europe, including those in Nazi-occupied territory, was
able to undertake many important missions for the OSS, particularly
in the Balkans, Slovakia and Hungary.

Towards the end of the war, the staff of Eisenhower’s Psycho¬
logical Warfare Branch was drawn largely from the OSS, since there
were so many Jewish psychologists on the payroll. The OSS also
acted in close concert with the War Crimes Branch, in the collation
of ‘evidence*.

OSS staff members were also very prominent on the prosecution
staff of the trials, especially in the early stages. In fact the Chief
Prosecutor at the Dachau Trials, “Jack Taylor” was himself an OSS
agent who had been captured and interned during the War, at Leising
in Vienna. Donovan himself was appointed a deputy prosecutor
under Jackson, but as the preparations for the trial went ahead
Donovan began to have personal doubts about the wisdom of the
entire concept of the trials.

Fabian von Schlabrendorff, a member of the German anti-Nazi
resistance during the war, and a close friend of Donovan’s, writes in
The Secret War Against Hitler (Hodder & Stoughton, 1966):

Knowing that I was a jurist, and familiar with my role within the anti-
Hitler resistance, he wanted to get my professional opinion and asked me to


come to Nuremberg to look at the draft of the indictment against the accused
Nazi leaders. I accepted that invitation, and spent some time carefully studying
the lengthy draft Donovan gave me. After going over the document word by
word, I set down my professional opinion rejecting the entire indictment on
four counts:

1) It used retroactive laws — precisely the kind of method we had come to
consider one of Hitler’s most repugnant and unlawful acts. No law against so-
called “crimes against humanity” had been in existence at the time the
defendants had committed the offences they stood accused of at Nuremberg.
(The same argument I found out later, was advanced by the late Senator
Robert Taft as one reason for his rejecting the Nuremberg trials.)

2) The indictment was based upon Anglo-Saxon trial law, with which the
defendants were completely unfamiliar, and which had no validity in German
legal custom.

3) The accusations dealt exclusively with offences against Allied citizens.
Justice, however, demands that no such discrimination be made — all human
beings, no matter of what nationality, who have been victims of the Nazis
should have been included.

4) Contrary to every basic juristic rule, the accusers in this case were also the
judges. An old proverb says: “Only God can help him whose accuser is also his
judge.”

After reading my memorandum on the draft Donovan was more than ever
convinced that he had been right in questioning the wisdom of the trials. He
began to search for ways of shortening and limiting the proceedings as much as
possible. He finally hit upon the idea of having Goring assume all responsibility
for what had happened in the Third Reich, so that Goring alone would be
indicted, as the representative of Hitler. In this way, the trial would have been
over in the shortest possible time, with the conviction, sentencing and
execution of Goring by the Allies . . .

When Donovan asked me what I thought about the chances of persuading
Goring to assume all responsibility for the policies of the Third Reich and
plead guilty, I advised him to wear full uniform and all the medals he had ever
received for that visit to Goring in prison. I also urged him to appeal to what¬
ever was left of Goring’s sense of officer’s honour, making it plain at the same
time that his life was forfeit in any case.

I was not mistaken in my appraisal of Goring. After returning from his
visit in Goring’s cell, Donovan informed me that the latter was willing to co¬
operate. The Allies, however, most certainly were not, as Donovan soon found
out when he submitted his plan to Chief Prosecutor Jackson. The idea of
seeing their carefully prepared, mammoth trial going down the drain did not
appeal to the Allied officials, who were looking forward to months in the spot¬
light while the case against the accused Nazis was being presented to the world.

When I next saw Donovan, he was shaking with anger and frustration after
what had evidently been a stormy session with Chief Prosecutor Jackson. He
told me that he was resigning from his post as deputy prosecutor because he
did not wish to be in any way connected with the coming trials; he had
become thoroughly convinced that they were legally and politically unsound.
He also suggested it would be wise for me to get out of Nuremberg at once —
advice I lost no time in following. Years later in New York, Donovan told me
that he was more than ever convinced that history would justify his decision
to walk out of the Nuremberg trials.

We have included this excerpt in some length, because it appears
to be the only real clue which goes some way towards explaining the
rather rapid demise of both Donovan and the OSS in 1945. Donovan
had shown himself to be politically unreliable, no matter what his
abilities as an espionage expert might be. He had to go.

On 28 September 1945, the OSS was officially and rapidly
wound up with a farewell staff dinner at the Riverside Skating Rink
in Washington. For a time, Donovan returned to his New York law
practice, but insisted on voicing his opinions on the threat of Com¬
munism rather too loudly. He was packed off into the political
wilderness as US Ambassador to Thailand. The debilitating Asian
climate was too much for Donovan. He suffered a series of strokes
and died in 1958. The full story of the OSS, particularly its support
for ‘left-wing* bandits throughout the world, is told in great detail in
OSS by R. Harris Smith (U. of Cal., 1972).

But Washington had by no means scrapped the idea of a national
intelligence organisation; they had merely cleared the way for a
bigger and better agency than the OSS, under less eccentric leader¬
ship than Donovan’s. The new Central Intelligence Agency was set
up officially in June 1947, this time under governmental, rather than
military, control. But the CIA was staffed mostly by ex-OSS
employees, particularly the East Coast Jewish academics and Leftists
who had been so prominent in the earlier organisation.

One such remarkable operator was Jay Lovestone (real name
Jacob Liebstein), who during the war had switched literally overnight
from being leader of orie of America’s Trotskyist parties, to working
secretly as an OSS agent in Europe. He had been instrumental in
raising funds from America’s huge trades unions (the AFL-CIO) to
finance the setting up of unions in Europe. As the Allied armies
advanced, Lovestone’s men followed as political commissars, trying
to make sure that the ‘liberated’ workers were provided with trade
union and political leaders acceptable to Washington. Many of these
leaders were themselves refugees from Nazi Germany, who had
ended up* in London. They even published a magazine, called
Socialist Commentary , which has now become the semi-official
mouthpiece of the ‘right* wing of the Labour Party.

Lovestone also recruited, his political commissars from New
York, where another group of dmigr^s published a similar magazine
to Socialist Commentary; the New Leader. Officially, New Leader
was the political voice of the American Federation of Labor/Congress
of Industrial Organisations (AFL-CIO for short; the American
version of the TUC). Its guiding spirit, editor and business manager


BUDD SCHULBERG

He was O.S.S. officer in charge of photographic and film “ evidence ”
at. N’urnberg and a well-known dramatist and sensationalist film-
producer — rather an appropriate occupation considering the origins
of much of the N’urnberg “evidence”. Schulberg had also written a
novel — What Makes Sammy Run? —in 1941 , about a “smart little
Yid ” crook by the name of Sammy Glick. Schulberg received a
military award for his efforts at N’urnberg , according to the US
Negro newspaper supplement, “Tuesday” magazine (August 1972).

was one Sol Levitas, who had worked with Trotsky during the
Bolshevik coup in 1917, but had had to flee from Stalin’s purges in
1923.

Amongst Levitas’s “boys”, as he liked to call them, were Melvin
J. Lasky; an ex-Trotskyist from New York City College, Daniel Bell;
a professor at Columbia University, and Irving Brown; who became
Lovestone’s right-hand man in the European trade union operation.

The New Leader claimed to be independent, but in 1949 it
carried a piece by Allen Dulles, advocating a commission of internal
security to examine subversive influences in the US. It will be
recalled that Dulles had been head of the key Berne OSS station
during the war, which channelled so many “atrocity” stories out of
Nazi-occupied territory to the West. It was he too who liaised with
Wilhelm Hottl, the assistant of Eichmann’s who was probably an
Allied agent. Dulles later became head of the CIA. After the appear¬
ance of Dulles’s articles (which was rather like one of the chiefs of
MI5 writing for the New Statesman about MI5 policy!) the magazine
suddenly started appearing in a much more expensive format.

Anthony Crosland and Dennis Healey (an ex-Communist), both
prominent British politicians, wrote regular articles for the two
magazines. Healey was in fact London correspondent for the New
Leader.

During the 1950s, the Leftists at New Leader had a field day in
Europe, with seemingly endless sources of funds. In 1948, Melvin
Lasky was ‘lent’ by the New Leader to the US Military Government
in Berlin to set up a parallel German magazine, Der Monat. In 1950
Lasky chaired an enormous meeting at the Titania Theatre in the US
Zone of Berlin, where it was decided to launch the Congress for
Cultural Freedom, a body whose purpose was to “defend freedom
and democracy”. The man chosen to head the permanent secretariat
of the Congress was an official of the American Military Government,
Michael Josselson. The Congress was lavishly financed, supposedly
from Jay Lovestone’s union funds. It soon began to organise political
seminars and student exchanges. It was involved in the setting up of
the International Student Conference at Leiden in the Netherlands.
In 1953, the CCF launched yet another magazine, Encounter\ under
the editorship of Irving Kristol, another of Levitas’s New Leader
proteges, and an ex-Lovestonite. The international political seminars

10


were organised by Melvin Lasky, Michael Josselson and Daniel Bell.
Anthony Crosland and Hugh Gaitskell, the leader of the Labour
Party during the 1950s, both played an active role in these seminars.
In 1967, Michael Josselson admitted that he had for 17 years been
channelling CIA money into the CCF. Ninety per cent of the finance
of the International Student Conference had come from the CIA.
The New Leader had also been receiving regular CIA subsidies
through a front organisation — the J. M. Kaplan Foundation. After
these revelations, in Ramparts magazine, and in the New York Times ,
the CCF changed its name to the International Association for
Cultural Freedom. Michael Josselson was switched from being head
of the organisation to be'ing ‘consultant*. A new financial benefactor
was located in the form of the Ford Foundation. And the new
Director was none other than Shepard Stone.

Shepard Stone was yet another mysterious distributor of large
funds who moved in high government circles. In Willy Brandt’s
biography, he is described as Brandt’s “closest American friend”.
Brandt even left his cabinet meetings, when Premier, to greet Stone.
In May 1948, as a political aide with the US Military Government
in Berlin, Stone organised a huge conference at The Hague which
launched the European Movement. 750 top people were flown in,
lodged and entertained for a week at the expense of the organisers.
Stone’s link man in Holland was one Joseph Retinger, an elderly
Polish diplomat who had finally come to rest at the court of Prince
Bernhard. In 1949, a parallel organisation was set up in the US —
the American Committee on United Europe. The leaders of this
organisation were openly advertised in the New York Times as
including General Donovan, the recently-retired head of the OSS,
George Marshall, the US Secretary of State, General Lucius D. Clay,
chief of the US Military Government in Germany, Allen Dulles, the
rising star of the CIA, and Tom Braden, the head of the CIA’s
‘Department of Dirty Tricks’. Dulles became vice-chairman of the
ACUE. Braden was ‘employed* as its executive director. In 1954 the
ACUE launched a youth campaign under Cord Meyer Jr., who is
now CIA chief in London. The ACUE was merely a conduit for
passing CIA funds to the nascent European Movement. Their
subsidies comprised almost half the European Movement’s total
budget. Virtually all of the European Movement’s Youth Campaign
financing came from the CIA. Secretary of the Youth Campaign was
Maurice Foley, later a Labour MP and Minister in Charge of the
Secret Service. Foley’s son is an ardent supporter of the IRA. The
current (1976) director of the European Movement in Britain is
Ernest Wistrich, whose wife is a prominent London councillor.

Stone and Retinger were also involved in the setting up in 1954
of the Bilderberg Group, an international cabal of business tycoons,
bankers and politicians. The group meets every year at a secret venue
and got its name from the De Bilderberg Hotel at Oosterbeek in
Holland, where the very first meeting took place. Dennis Healey has
been one of the most regular attenders from Britain, and it was at
the 1957 meeting in Fiuggi, Italy, that he first met Shepard Stone,
who was by that time a prominent department head of the Ford
Foundation. Stone agreed that the Foundation would finance, to the
tune of @150,000, Healey’s pet-scheme, the Institute of Strategic
Studies. Nowadays, Stone describes himself as Berlin Director of the
Aspen (Colorado) Institute for Humanistic Studies, which in 1976
acted as go-between in the takeover of the Observer newspaper by
the Atlantic Richfield Oil Company. Allen Dulles has also attended
Bilderberg meetings. However the subject of the Bilderberg Group is
worth an entire book in itself, so we can no more than scratch the
surface here.


BELSEN

The very first trial of ‘war criminals’ after the Allied
victory was not the IMT, but the trial of the staff of
Belsen, by a British military court at Liineberg. The
principal defendant was SS Captain Josef Kramer (the
“Beast of Belsen”) whose trial was conducted during the
autumn of 1945, and concluded in November 1945, just
as the IMT was beginning. Kramer was hanged in December
1945.

We are fortunate in having access to Kramer’s lengthy
first statement, which he made under British interrogation.
The importance of this statement lies in the fact that it
was made during the brief period just after the German
defeat, when the Germans had still not realised that the
Allies were serious in pursuing the ‘extermination’ charge.


The Germans were still expecting that any time soon, the
Allies would ‘come clean* and admit that the whole
extermination story had been just another example of war¬
time propaganda, similar to the World War I stories about
the “Belgian baby with no hands” and the “factory which
made soap from human flesh”.

Kramer’s first statement displayed little of the courtroom
logic which was to become apparent in the behaviour of
certain Niimberg defendants, who were prepared to admit
that ‘ ‘gas-chambers-existed-but-they-had-nothing-to-do-with-
it” — just to placate the pourt and endeavour to extricate
themselves from a very difficult situation. For to have
denied the existence of gas-chambers would have been to
challenge the very raison d'etre of the court, and thereby
risk a heavier sentence for such intolerable contempt of
court.

Kramer’s story was in complete accord with objective
investigations undertaken after the dust had settled, such
as Professor Butz’s masterpiece of research The Hoax of
the Twentieth Century. Kramer agreed that there were
high death rates at many concentration camps, but this
was due to overcrowding and the rapid spread of typhus.
He agreed that there had been crematoria at all the camps,
but these were to facilitate the hygienic disposal of
diseased corpses. He denied that there had ever been
‘extermination chambers’ at Auschwitz-Birkenau where he
had previously been camp Commander:

I have heard of the allegations of former prisoners in Auschwitz
referring to a gas chamber there, the mass executions and whippings,
the cruelty of the guards employed, and that all this took place
either in my presence or with my knowledge. All I can say is that it
is untrue from beginning to end.

However, after Kramer had been further interrogated,
he changed his tune, and was now willing to agree that
there had-in fact been a gas chamber at Auschwitz, but
that he had not been responsible for it. He ‘explained’ that
he had told lies the first time because he had been sworn
to secrecy. However, neither he nor his lawyers managed
to explain why it should be necessary for him to remain
secretive about something which was being spewed forth
from every newspaper and radio station in the world.

For further details on this highly suspicious about-face,
the reader is referred to the Butz book, where the two
contradictory statements are reproduced in Appendix D.

An interesting description of the behaviour of the
British soldiers at Belsen is given in Leonard Mosley’s
Report from Germany (1945):

The British soldiers . . . beat the SS guards and set them to
collecting the bodies of the dead, keeping them always at the double
. . . When one of them dropped to the ground with exhaustion, he
was beaten with a rifle-butt. When another stopped for a break, he
was kicked until he ran again, or prodded with a bayonet, to the
accompaniment of lewd shouts and laughs. When one tried to
escape, or disobeyed orders, he was shot.


THE INTERNATIONAL MILITARY TRIBUNAL (IMT)

The propaganda work of the Writers’ War Board, the
Office of War Information and the Office of Strategic
Services was throughout the war co-ordinated towards one
definite objective. They hoped to so orchestrate the media
into a hymn of hate against Germany that genuine public
opinion would be swept along by the tide, and that by the
time Germany was defeated, there would be no public
qualms about the Allies taking bloody revenge. Unknown
to either the British or the American public, steps were
being taken quite early on in the war, to organise the


The International Military Tribunal


official lynchings of the German leaders.

Churchill himself was more in favour of doing without
the formalities. He tended to favour simply taking the Nazi
leaders out early one morning, putting them against a wall
and despatching them. During the preliminary negotiations
to set up the IMT, he wrote a long aide-memoire to Roose¬
velt’s ‘adviser’ on this particular question, Judge Samuel I.
Rosenman. Churchill wrote that a long trial would arouse
public reaction, and would look too much like a put-up
job. Churchill had some support at the White House, from
Secretary of State Hull and Treasury Secretary
Morgenthau. They too favoured the ‘no-frills’ treatment.
Oddly, this view was also held once by Robert Jackson,
who was to become the United States’ Chief Prosecutor at
Niimberg. A profile of Jackson in Life magazine (28.5.45)
revealed that he had once warned against “the use of the
judicial process for non-judicial ends”. No one knows why
Jackson came to change his mind, but he was certainly a
politically ambitious individual, and it may well be that
Roosevelt (or one of his ‘advisers’) was able to dangle a
political carrot in front of him. But it would appear that
his efforts were not sufficiently rewarded, for in the
August/September 1949 edition of the Canadian Bar
Review , he was again expressing doubts about the trial, in
an article entitled “Nuremberg in Retrospect”.

Stalin too originally favoured the ‘informal’ approach to
revenge-taking. According to President Roosevelt’s son


Elliott, writing in his book As He Saw It (previously
published in Look , 1.10.46), Stalin first mooted the idea
at the Big Three’s Teheran Conference in November 1943.
During a banquet at Teheran, Stalin tottered to his feet
(having consumed several bottles of 90% proof vodka) and
much to everyone’s surprise proposed a toast to the
“swiftest possible justice for all Germany’s war criminals —
before a firing squad.” He went on, “I drink to our unity
in despatching them as fast as we capture them, all of
them, and there must be at least 50,000 of them.”

Churchill, apparently, was rather sceptical about the
feasibility of this proposal. “The British people,” he
declared, “will never stand for such mass murder!” (Pre¬
sumably it was only the Nazi leaders he wanted to put
before a firing squad.)

The American President attempted to take the heat out
of the exchange by intervening with what appears to be a
macabre joke: “Perhaps we should say that instead of
summarily executing 50,000 we should settle on a smaller
number. Shall we say 49,500?”

Stalin refused to let the subject drop, and turned to
Roosevelt Junior for his views. “Isn’t the whole thing
pretty academic?” replied Elliott Roosevelt. “The soldiers
will settle the issue for most of those 50,000 in battle. And
I hope that not only those 50,000 will be taken care of,
but many hundreds of thousands of Nazis as well.”

Up until this time there had only been vague pronounce-

2


ments made by the Allied powers and the govemments-in-
exile that punishments would be sought. On 13 January
1942, the Allies had issued the Declaration of St. James
which spelt out their aims. And on 7 October 1942, they
set up the United Nations War Crimes Commission in
London. However it was not until after Teheran that the
Commission actually commenced operations; gathering
information regarding war crimes and suspects and carrying
out extensive investigations into the theory of law. It was
largely British-staffed. The first chairman was Sir Cecil
Hurst, the second was Lord Wright.

Churchill wanted the Nazi leaders given summary
executions. Stalin wanted a mass murder programme of
horrific proportions. It was only the Americans who were
really keen on the elaborate show-trial which was eventually
to be brought about. In August 1944, the American Joint
Chiefs of Staff considered their own programme for
dealing with war crimes, naturally from a military point of
view. Their proposals were approved by the Judge Advocate
General of the US Army and on 1 October 1944 a War
Crimes Branch of the military was set up in the Department
of the Judge Advocate General. This original War Crimes
Branch, headed by Brig. Gen. John M. Weir, with Col.
Melvin Purvis as his assistant, was responsible for handling
all war crimes matters for the State, War and Navy Depart¬
ments.

However, the army proposal did not survive for very
long, for its character had been rather traditional, in that it
contemplated merely the prosecution of persons who had
broken the accepted laws of war in the field, as laid down
by the Hague Convention. Under this scheme, offences
committed before the outbreak of war or acts by enemy
authorities against their own nationals would not come
within its scope. For example, all Nazi measures against
the German Jews would be outside the jurisdiction of such
a trial.

Roosevelt made it clear that such parameters would be
much too restrictive. On 21 November 1944, he summoned
the Secretary for War, Stimson, and ordered that the Army
proposals should be scrapped. Two months later, in
January 1945, Roosevelt designated his Special Adviser
Judge Samuel I. Rosenman to be his personal representative
in discussions on war crimes matters. (Rosenman remained
‘Special Adviser’ to the President even when Roosevelt
died and was succeeded by Truman.)

Eventually, an agreement was reached which satisfied
the political criteria rather more than the Army’s scheme
did. A meeting on 18 January 1945 between Stimson,
Rosenman and Attorney General Francis Biddle and others
resulted in general agreement on very much expanded
conceptions of war crimes to be tried. Even at this early
stage, the verdicts had already been decided. That same
month, Biddle prepared a brief for Roosevelt’s participation
in the Yalta Conference, wherein he advised the President
that: “the chief German leaders are well known and the
proof of their guilt will not offer great difficulties.”
Astonishingly, Biddle himself, who was a prominent free¬
mason and whose main adviser was a Jew by the name of
Wechsler, was later to sit as a judge at the main Niimberg
trial.

Roosevelt’s sudden death in 1945 prevented him from
seeing the war trial plans come to fruition. Instead it was
his successor Truman who approved the final arrangements.
In May 1945 he appointed Robert H. Jackson, an Associate
Justice of the Supreme Court, to act as the United States’
chief negotiator with foreign governments in the setting up
of the trials — and also to act as chief US Prosecutor in the


trials themselves! Although Jackson himself was a Gentile,
he had the ‘assistance’ of several Jewish advisers, including
Sheldon Gliick, Harold Leventhal and Murray C. Bemays.

A key member of Jackson’s London staff was Col. Murray C.
Bernays, who was one of the first people to have grappled with the
theoretical and practical problems involved in setting up war crimes
trials. After graduating from Harvard in 1915, he established a law
practice in New York City. He was given a commission in the Army
in 1942, and in October 1943 he was made chief of the Special
Projects Branch, Personnel Division, Army General Staff. His major
responsibilities in this position were the preparation of plans for the
trials, and the efficient handling of the international negotiations
necessary for setting them up. Shortly after the appointment of
Jackson, Bernays was awarded the Legion of Merit for his efforts.
The citation read in part:

Early recognising the need for a sound basis in dealing with the problem of
war criminals and war crimes, he formulated the basic concept of such a policy
and initiated timely and appropriate action which assured its adoption as the
foundation of national policy.

Bernays returned to the US in November 1945 and immediately
resigned from the Army, his task having been completed. Free from
Army restrictions, Bernays vented forth with his rather novel views
on the standard of justice the Germans were going to experience.
In an interview with some editors (who characterised him as “the
man behind the gavel”) he answered questions as to “how the small
fry are going to be hooked”:

“There are a good many Nazi criminals who will get off if the roundups
aren’t conducted efficiently. But if we establish that the SS, for example, was
a criminal organisation, and that membership in it is evidence per se of
criminality, the Allies are going to get hold of a great many more criminals
in one swoop. You know, a lot of people here at home don’t realise that we
are now the government of Germany in our zone and that no judicial system
can exist other than one we approve. We are the law. If we wanted to, for
instance, we could try Germans for crimes twenty, thirty, forty years old.
We’ll be too busy with the current crop of war criminals, though, to have
much time to look into ancient wrongdoings.”

On 6 June 1945 Jackson made an interim report to the
President wherein he spelt out how the actual machinery
of the trial would operate. Curiously, much of the text of
this report appeared to be ‘lifted’ from an earlier book on
war crimes by the Soviet law professor Trainin, who was
himself later to help draw up the international protocol
agreement. George A. Finch, writing in the American
Journal of International Law quotes from Trainin’s book:

In meting out punishment to the Axis war criminals, Russia
would not permit herself to be restricted by traditional legalisms.
The reason that no international law exists is that the powers of the
World want a united front against the Soviet Union. This is by no
means accidental. Its roots can be traced to the general character of
international relations during the period of imperialism.

(Just in passing, Finch also points out that much of the
United States’ submissions to the United Nations founding
meeting at San Francisco in April 1945 was couched in the
same kind of style. The frequent use of terms such as
“Hitlerite organisations” and “Hitlerite leaders” in the
American documents does seem exceedingly odd, since
such idiosyncracies are usually only used by the Soviet
Union and other Communists.)

After the President had approved his outline plans for
Niimberg, Jackson set off for London, where much of the
preliminary IMT work was to be done. It was here that
the plans for Niimberg first became ‘International’ (if only
in name) for up until now, the United States had done all
the ground work.

Although the US Army’s War Crimes Branch (which was set up
in 1944 to plan the trials) was superceded by the ‘more imaginative’
Rosenman committee, it did not cease operations. In fact, the War
Crimes Branch expanded, but in the direction of trials adminis¬
tration, rather than actual policy making. It functioned as an agency
for the IMT, particularly the (most important) American part of the
EMT, until the Tribunal was able to set up adequate machinery of its
own. In the early months of the IMT trial (and perhaps also later)
the ordinary prosecution staff, with the exception of Jackson
himself, was on the payroll of the Judge Advocate General (the US
Army’s legal department which ran the War Crimes Branch).

The Judge Advocate General’s Department (JAG Dept.) of the
US Army played a very significant role in the administration of post-


war Germany, since a large part of the country was under American
military control. The traditional role of the JAG Dept, had been the
administration of military justice e.g. courts martial and related
matters. However, during the war, the operations of the JAG Dept,
had spread to cover many more aspects of military legal matters. It
even got involved in litigations relating to war production contracts.

In May 1945, the Judge Advocate General, Major General Myron
C. Cramer, made a speech in which he declared that the pursuit and
arraignment of Nazis was to tax to the utmost the capacity of the
War Crimes Branch and become a major activity of the entire JAG
Department, whose resources he pledged to Jackson. This was no
vacuous promise, since the organisation headed by Cramer had much
more substance in 1945 than that headed by Jackson. The main
contribution made by the War Crimes Branch to the work of the
Jackson team was in the field of personnel; recruiting prosecution
and defence lawyers, translators and administrative staff.

It was this same War Crimes Branch which itself administered the
nightmarish “trials” at Dachau, where prisoners were beaten, kicked,
starved and brutalised by Jewish-American jailers. The events which
took place at Dachau are discussed in detail in a later chapter, but
attention is drawn to those events here because it was the same War
Crimes Branch involved in both the Dachau and IMT trials; in the
former in a supervisory role, and in the latter in an administrative
and supportive capacity. However, its administrative functions and
responsibilities at Numberg did not prevent the War Crimes Branch
from actually submitting evidence itself. For example, Document
2309-PS is a report drawn up by the War Crimes Branch on con¬
ditions in the liberated Flossenburg camp. Document 2176-PS is a
War Crimes report on Mauthausen.

Early in 1946, the War Crimes. Branch had a new head — Colonel
Mickey Marcus — who later was to go to Israel to fight for the
Haganah and to die in very mysterious circumstances. A detailed
profile of Marcus appears later in this book.

The ‘London Agreement’, as it came to be known, was
negotiated by representatives of all the Allied powers.


These were:


USSR

Gen. I. T.Nikitchenko
Prof. A. N. Trainin

France

Robert Falco

Prof. Andr4 Gros

UK

Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe

USA

Robert Jackson


There was some dispute over the detail of the Agree¬
ment, which Jackson had tried to set before the represen¬
tatives as a fait accompli. Gros, one of the French
representatives, was against including amongst the charges
one of “waging aggressive war”, as this might prove
embarrassing if anyone mentioned the Soviet invasion of
Poland, or the abortive Anglo-French invasion of Norway.

Trainin (the Soviet professor whose books had made
such an impression on Jackson that he had had to plagiarise
half of the content) was against the whole idea of a
criminal trial: such a trial would per se be restricted by
criminal law. Trainin felt it would be much less bothersome
just to have a plain, straightforward political trial — after
all they had been having those in his country for twenty-
five years without any problems!

Eventually the Soviets were allowed to redraft the
passage on aggressive war to read:

Aggression or domination over other nations carried out by the
European Axis in violation of international laws and treaties.

There was also some mild dissension from the Soviets
and the French over the charge of ‘conspiracy’, in relation
to the ‘criminal organisations’. Such a charge was foreign
to both their legal systems. But Jackson pointed out the
great use in America of laws against criminal organisations,
such as the laws against the Ku Klux Klan. Fyfe backed
him up, quoting the British precedent of laws to outlaw
the Thug cult in imperial India.

Just in case any of the defendants or their defence
counsel might start to get too clever and actually start
arguing back against the prosecution, the Agreement con¬
tained a clause whereby no one could challenge the


constitutionality of the court. Another rule was included
to the effect that:

The Tribunal shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence. It
shall adopt and apply, to the greatest possible extent, expeditious and
non-technical procedure, and shall submit any evidence which it
deems to have probative value.

On 8 August 1945, the London Agreement was signed
by:

France Robert Falco

USSR Gen. I. T. Nikitchenko

USA . Robert Jackson

UK Sir William Jowett

Jackson announced that the Agreement was the
“solemn judgement of 23 governments representing 900
million people.” In fact the “Agreement” had been
nothing more than the rubber-stamping of Jackson’s plans
by the rest of the Allies. And just to make sure that the
plans would be properly carried out, the same people who
drew up the arrangements for Numberg promptly had
themselves appointed as prosecutors and judges.
Nikitchenko and Falco became judges. Jackson was
American Chief Prosecutor, Fyfe was Deputy-Chief British
Prosecutor. Thus, virtually the same people were judges,
prosecution and court.

Nikitchenko was the most candid of all. He admitted:

We are dealing here with the chief war criminals who have already
been convicted and whose conviction has already been announced
by both the Moscow and Crimea declarations and by the heads of
governments.

The Tribunal, he thought, had only to cany out the just
punishment immediately. Nor was there any necessity, he
said,

to create the sort of fiction that the judge is a disinterested
person who has no legal knowledge of what has happened before ...
that would only lead to unnecessary delays.

Up until now, no one had really bothered to actually
draw up a list of those to be charged as war criminals.
Early on in the war, the Soviet Foreign Minister Molotov
had written that “the whole of mankind knows the names
and the bloody crimes of the leaders of the criminal
Hitlerite clique: Hitler, Goring, Hess, Gobbels, Ribbentrop
and Rosenberg.” At Potsdam, the Soviets presented
Churchill and Truman with an expanded list of those they
wanted charged. The list was accepted by both the British
and Americans, although there were some British reser¬
vations about the inclusion of Gustav Krupp, the elderly —
in fact senile — head of the German armaments firm. The
Soviets indicated they were open to suggestions for a
replacement! (Later, at the trial, the Americans suggested
that if Krupp was too old, then his son Alfred could be
charged instead!) Eventually it was this Soviet list of 26
names which was included in the indictment. Three of the
26 did not stand trial. Krupp was too ill to appear in court.
Robert Ley committed suicide shortly before the trial was
to commence. Martin Bormann was never found, but was
tried in absentia anyway.

There were four main counts on the indictment:

1. Conspiracy to wage aggressive war (involving the crimes
in 2, 3 and 4);

2. Crimes against peace (starting the war);

3. War Crimes (wanton destruction, ill-treatment of PoWs
etc.),

4. Crimes against humanity (extermination, persecution
etc.).

Whenever the actual indictment was circulated amongst
the Chief Prosecutors in October 1945, it was discovered
that somehow the Soviet-occupied Baltic nations of
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania were stated to be Soviet

14


territory. On October 6, Jackson had to write a formal
letter to all the other Prosecutors, many of whom had
expressed reservations about this clause:

This language is proposed by Russia and is accepted to avoid
delay which would be occasioned by insistence on an alteration in
the text.

Presumably the same also applied to that part of the
indictment which accused the Germans of the Katyn
massacre, which everybody knew had been committed by
the Soviets.

The indictments were read out to the accused in Berlin
on 18/19 October 1945, and a month later the trial
opened officially at the Palace of Justice in Numberg.
There were two judges from each country, as follows:

UK Lord Justice Lawrence (President)

Sir William Norman Birkett
USA Attorney General Francis Biddle

Judge John J. Parker
France Prof. Donnedieu de Vabres

M. le Conseiller R. Falco
USSR Maj. Gen. I. Nikitchenko

Lt. Col. A. F. Volchkov

The American Prosecution team:

Chief Prosecutor Robert H. Jackson

Executive Trial Counsel Col. Robert G. Storey

Thomas J. Dodd

Associate Trial Counsel Sidney S. Alderman

Brig. Gen. Telford Taylor
Col. John H. Amen
Ralph G. Albrecht

plus 16 Assistant Trial
Counsel including Def./Pros.

Liaison Officer Dr. Robert Kempner.

The American documentary evidence was assembled by:

Capt. Seymour Krieger
Lt. Brady Bryson
Lt. Frederick Felton
Sgt. Isaac Stone
Hans Nathan

Dr. Jacob Robinson
Lt. Kenyon
Dr. Derenberg
Dr. Jacoby

The British prosecution team consisted of:

Chief Prosecutor Attorney General Sir Hartley

Shawcross

Deputy Chief Prosecutor Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe

Leading Counsel G. D. Roberts

Junior Counsel Lt.Col. J. M. G. Griffith-Jones

Col. H. J. Phillimore, Maj. F.
Elwyn-Jones, Mr. Airey Neave,
Maj. J. Harcourt-Barrington,
Wing Comm. Peter Calvocoressi
Liaison Officer Clement Freud.

Shawcross was made a Peer in 1959. He has been Chair¬
man of the Press Council since 1974 and Chancellor of
Sussex University at Brighton since 1965. He donated
many of his private papers to the library at Sussex,
including some relating to the Numberg Trials. Shawcross
has held a host of positions on the board of directors of
many prominent businesses, including London & Conti¬
nental Bankers, Shell, EMI, Rank-Hovis-McDougall, Times
Newspapers, Thames Television, Morgan Guaranty Trust
Co., and Hawker Siddeley.

David Maxwell-Fyfe was from a part-Jewish Scottish


family and was educated, like so many other ‘progressives’
at Baliol College, Oxford. He was Conservative MP for
Liverpool, West Derby from 1922 to 1954. From 1942
until 1945 he was Solicitor General, when he became
Attorney General. From 1951 to 1954 he was Home
Secretary in Churchill’s second administration. He became
Lord Kilmuir in 1962, and during the latter years of his
life devoted much of his time to the Wolfson Foundation,
of which he was a trustee. He died in 1967.

Clement Freud went on to make a name for himself in
a variety of fields. He became a well-known TV personality,
comedian, chef and writer during the 1960s. He is perhaps
best-known for his role in dog-food advertisements. He is
also a director and trustee of the London Playboy Club. In
1973 he became Liberal MP for Isle of Ely.

Griffith-Jones is currently a High Court judge. Elwyn-
Jones was Labour MP for Newham South (previously
known as West Ham South, and previous to that, Plaistow)
from 1945 to 1974, when he was appointed Lord High
Chancellor. He had previously served as Attorney General
from 1964 to 1970. Although he himself is Welsh, his wife
has the very un-Welsh name of Pearl Binder.

Peter Calvocoressi was educated at the ultra-liberal
Baliol College, Oxford, and did his war service in RAF
Intelligence. He stood as a Liberal candidate for Nuneaton
in the General Election of 1945. After the Numberg Trials
he wrote a rather woolly book, Nuremberg: the Facts, the
Law and the Consequences (Chatto & Windus, 1947). He
joined the staff of the notorious Royal Institute for Inter¬
national Affairs (Chatham House) in 1949 and was
promoted to its governing Council in 1955. He became
Reader in International Relations at Sussex University
around the same time that Shawcross was appointed
Chancellor. He has served on the councils of the Ford
Foundation-financed Institute of Strategic Studies, the
proto-Marxist Institute of Race Relations, the United
Nations sub-committee on the Prevention of Discrimin¬
ation and Protection of Minorities, Amnesty International,
and the North London Conciliation Committee of the
Race Relations Board. He is currently (1976) Chief
Executive of Penguin Books.

The Chief of the French prosecution team was M.
Francois de Menthon, and the Soviet Chief Prosecutor was
General R. A. Rudenko.


The defence counsel were as follows:

Goring

Otto Stahmer

Hess

Gunther von Rohrscheidt

Ribbentrop

Fritz Sauter

Keitel

Otto Nelte

Kaltenbrunner

Kurt Kauffmann

Rosenberg

Alfred Thoma

Frank

Alfred Seidl

Frick

Otto Pannenbecker

Streicher

Hans Marx

Funk

Fritz Sauter

Schacht

Rudolf Dix

Donitz

Otto Kranzbohler

Raeder

Walter Siemens

von Schirach

Fritz Sauter

Sauckel

Robert Servatius

Jodi

Franz Exner

Bormann

Friedrich Bergold

von Papen

Egon Kubuschok

Seyss-Inquart

Gustav Steinbauer

Speer

Hans Flaschner

von Neurath

Otto von Liidinghausen

Fritszche

Heinz Fritz


)

| extermination
j evidence

)

)

| Germanisation
; evidence (U Series)


Reich Cabinet
Leadership Corps
SS&SD
SA

Gestapo
General Staff


Egon Kubuschok
Robert Servatius
Ludwig Babel
Georg Bohm
Rudolf Merkel
Franz Exner


Throughout the trials, the defence counsel were treated
as inferiors. The entire defence staff had to work in one
dimly-lit room, under the constant surveillance of American
Military Police. Often they were harrassed by Military
Police guarding the entrance to the court room. On one
occasion the guards arrested one of the defence counsel
and brought him before army superiors, charging him with
having behaved with “inadequate respect to Allied
authority”. On another occasion Prof. Metzger, Neurath’s
counsel, was suddenly arrested in Niimberg, and spent six
weeks in the same jail as his client without learning the
charges against him. Another member of the defence team
was refused admission to the court after the lunch-break,
and had to apologise profusely to the tribunal for keeping
the court waiting. Although both the defence counsel and
the defendants were given proper meals each day, far in
excess of the ordinary German civilian ration, there was
not enough crockery or cutlery in the dining room.

But the most disturbing shortage of all was the shortage
of copies of prosecution evidence. At the start of the trial,
the defence had been assured by Kempner, their Liaison
Officer, that they would receive copies of these documents
in advance of their presentation in court. Throughout the
trial, the defence continually pointed out that they were
failing to receive these vital documents. When they did
manage to get hold of copies, they were delivered to the
defence’s room at 10.30, half an hour after the court had
started, and there was inevitably only half a dozen copies
to share amongst fifty-odd defence staff and defendants.
The prosecution continually apologised for this oversight,
and blamed it on lack of photo-copying facilities. However,
this did not prevent them doling out 250 copies of one
document to the gaggle of press men outside the court,
while the defence staff had to make do with two!

The defence faced continual difficulties in collecting
any evidence at all. The only publication they could freely
obtain was the US Army propaganda newspaper Stars &
Stripes. They could not even get hold of American domestic


Around-the-clock watches were kept on all prisoners at Niimberg


newspapers such as the ones which carried General
Marshall’s final war report, saying that there had been no
collusion or liaison between Germany and Japan over Pearl
Harbour. (This was an essential piece of evidence on the
“conspiracy to wage war” charge.)

Neither were the defence allowed to obtain a book
which had recently been published by the Roumanian
ambassador to the USSR, Gafencu, which dealt with the
Molotov-Ribbentrop pact. This book was freely available
in Switzerland, yet was unobtainable in Germany. In fact
when Fritzche mentioned this pact during his verbal
evidence, the Soviet prosecutor said he had never heard of
it!

If the defence wanted to introduce any witnesses or
documentary evidence, they had to explain the relevance
of both before they could be admitted by the court. Of 19
witnesses called by Jodi’s defence, only 4 were allowed.
When one potential witness, a Col. Sottmann, telegraphed
his willingness to give evidence about the British plans to
invade Norway, he was promptly arrested.

Certain defence submissions were refused outright. No
challenges to the court’s authority were allowed. The court
refused to hear any defence argument based on the impli¬
cations of the Versailles Treaty. No mention was permitted
of the Soviet’s treatment of German prisoners-of-war. A
question was refused which asked why only 5000 out of
123,000 German soldiers captured at Stalingrad were ever
returned. Although the prosecution could expound at
great length about the bombardment of Warsaw and
Rotterdam, the defence were forbidden any mention of
the horrific Dresden bombings. No mention could be made
of the uprootings and expulsions of German settlers from
Eastern Europe, or of Soviet atrocities committed against
German PoWs. The defence were not allowed to introduce
a vital piece of evidence, the British Army manual of
Irregular Warfare, which advocated categories of execution
which the Germans had been charged with. Only once was
the Tu quoque argument (thou also) allowed. This was in
relation to submarine warfare, when Donitz and Raeder
were permitted to show that they had used identical rules
of attack to the Royal Navy.

Despite a rule to the contrary in the IMT’s Standing
Orders, the defendants were not allowed to cross-examine;
only their counsel could do this, and if they were not
competent that was just too bad.

Throughout the trial, the defence were treated as
naughty children who were continually getting in the way.
The transcript is littered with admonitions from Lawrence
to move along with the case, pay attention, stop talking
about irrelevant matters (like Versailles and Allied war
crimes). Whenever the defence complained about being
treated differently from the prosecution, Lawrence told
them that this was because of “technical difficulties” in
the areas of transportation, translation and duplication.

The defence were allowed to send out questionnaires
to German PoWs in Allied camps, but few of these were
returned. None came back from French camps, and
only two from Soviet ones. But these were full of stock
phrases such as “Hitlerite aggressors”, “Fascist criminals”
and “the peaceloving USSR”.

Some of the court’s peculiar legal practices were
outrageous in the extreme. When the Soviet lawyer Andrei
Vyshinsky (who had run the 1920s Soviet purge trials)
visited the court, he was permitted to sit on the prosecution
benches. During the trial, an elaborate banquet was held in
his honour, attended by all the judges and the prosecution
staff.


16


When the news came through to Nib The toast at the
banquet, which all the judges joined ~in, was “To the
German prisoners, may they all be hanged!” This is quoted
in Judge Francis Biddle’s essay on Niirnberg in American
Heritage , Vol. XII, No. 5, August 1962. Biddle also candidly
admits, on the preceding page 70, that the American judges
knowingly permitted the Soviet prosecutor to admit false
evidence against the defendants,
btone ueacr .)

The defendants themselves were kept under extremely
tight security measures throughout the trials. They were
housed in separate cells, with one guard to each cell day
and night. They were stripped of their military insignia,
and none of their ranks was officially recognised. Since
the Hague convention prohibited solitary confinement for
prisoners-of-war, the defendants were not regarded as
soldiers! They were not allowed to talk to each other
during exercise periods or in the showers; the only time
they could exchange words (those who were on speaking
terms, that is) was in the dock. The courtroom was on the
second floor of the Palace of Justice in Niirnberg. The
defendants were taken by lift from the cells and then had
to pass through an elaborate series of check-points, with
each guard calling ahead to the next.

There is no doubt that Niirnberg was deliberately selected
as the venue for the trial because it was a special place in
Nazi history. The Niirnberg synagogue was one of the first


to be attacked. The Gauleiter of Niirnberg was Julius
Streicher, whose newspaper Der Sturmer was the most
virulently anti-Semitic publication ever published. It was
here that the Niirnberg laws against Jewish inter-marriage
were first promulgated. And it was at Niirnberg that Hitler
had held some of his most spectacular political rallies. The
Soviets had wanted to hold the trial in the capital, Berlin,
but the rest of the Allies had doubts about being allowed
free movement around that city, as it was in Soviet hands.
In any case, it was doubtful if there was a big enough
building still standing in Berlin. In the end, the indictment
hearing was held in Berlin, and the trial proper in Niirnberg.

The American documentary evidence at Niirnberg was
gathered by the OSS and the War Crimes Branch, and
forwarded to the prosecution staff for sifting. As each
concentration camp was liberated, a team of investigators
would be one of the first detachments to be sent in.

Some of the American documents arrived at Niirnberg
via an extremely roundabout route. The series with L
prefixes all came from the Yivo — the Jewish Scientific
Institute — in New York. Apparently, the documents had
been ‘discovered’ in the Rosenberg ministry in Berlin by
a Sergeant Szajko Frydman of the US 82nd Airborne
Division. Frydman was a staff member of Yivo (both
before and after the war) so he promptly appropriated the
documents for the Institute.

The British also had their own War Crimes Investigation
7


Unit, which worked with the Special Operations Executive
(SOE), the British equivalent of the OSS.

Altogether over 100,000 documents were screened for
possible use at Niimberg. The documents on the SS alone
filled six freight cars. To cope with this mammoth task of
sifting the Americans employed a staff of 600; as many as
the other three powers put together. About 10,000
documents were finally numbered, with a view to using in
evidence, but in the event, only 4,000 were submitted to
the IMT. After the trial, the original documents were
deposited at the International Court at The Hague.

As the trial was conducted simultaneously in four
languages, the transcript had to be quadruplicated. There
were five million pages in the type-written record, which
was later printed in 24-volumes, under the imprint of the
IMT. There is also another English language edition of the
transcript, published by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
Both editions devote additional volumes to a document
index, but in each case this is rather arbitrarily drawn up.
For example, it is impossible to find indexed any mention
of allegations of Soviet war crimes, which were raised
several times during the trial (although these suggestions
were rapidly ruled out of order by the Tribunal).

The IMT held 403 open sessions, with 33 witnesses
appearing for the prosecution, and 61 (in addition to the
defendants themselves) for the defence.

The only really detailed book about Niimberg to be
published so far is Eugene Davidson’s Trial of the Germans
(Macmillan, New York 1966). This is an American book,
and is not readily available in Europe.

A list of 400 or so prominent Nazi ‘war criminals’,
together with their fates, appears in chapter 11 of Hilberg.
There is also a hard-to-get Black Book, published by the
Black Book Committee in New York, which gives a more
detailed listing. The most up to date lists of Nazis and their
present whereabouts are kept in Jewish Holocaust libraries
and research centres in London, Vienna and Israel.


JACKSON’S OPENING SPEECH

Legalistic sleight-of-hand was the order of the day at
Niimberg. During the opening speech of Chief Prosecutor
Robert Jackson, mention was made of a letter said to have
been written by Baron Wemer von Fritsch, the pre-war
Commander-in-Chief of the German Armed Forces.

According to Jackson, the letter revealed that Fritsch
was wholeheartedly in favour of Hitler’s aims:

It is very strange that so many people should regard the future
with growing apprehension, in spite of the Fuhrer’s indisputable
successes in the past . .. Soon after the War (World War I) I came to
the conclusion that we should have to be victorious in three battles,
if Germany was again to be powerful:

1. the battle against the working class; Hitler has won this one;

2. against the Catholic Church, perhaps better expressed Ultra-

montanism; and

3. against the Jews.

We are in the midst of these battles, and the one against the Jews
is the most difficult.

Jackson read out the statement as if he was actually
quoting from the letter, but he was in fact reading from a
“type-written copy”; no original letter was ever produced,
either at Niimberg or later. Lord Justice Lawrence refused
to admit the item as evidence, saying that a document that
could not be produced would be ignored. But the damage
was already done, thanks to Jackson’s deliberate trickery
and fabrication. The “letter” had been read out in open
court, and was fully minuted in the Tribunal record, and
given a document number (1947-PS).


The letter in question was supposed to have been one of
several written by Fritsch to the Baroness von Schutzbar-
Milchlingen, and confiscated by the Allies after the war.
Later, the Baroness testified that she had never even seen
this particular letter before. In the National Archives in
Washington there are photocopies of all the other Fritsch
letters except for this one. And although the letter gets a
mention on page 483 of the English edition of William
Shirer’s Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, nowhere is the
letter discussed in the German edition. German readers
would not be so easily taken in. They would probably
know that the so-called Fritsch letter was a direct contra¬
diction of everything Fritsch had ever said or done.

According to Fabian von Schlabrendorff’s Secret War
Against Hitler, Fritsch was the one military commander
whom the anti-Nazis looked up to. Originally they had
hoped that he would be able to stand up against Hitler, but
they were wrong. In 1938 the Gestapo hatched a plot
against the ‘old-guard’ in the Army. First of all they got rid
of Field Marshal von Blomberg, at that time Minister of
War, by revealing that his new wife was a prostitute. Next
they produced documents and affidavits alleging that
Fritsch had had a homosexual relationship with an ex¬
convict by the name of Schmidt, and was regularly paying
Schmidt blackmail money. Fritsch was brow-beaten into
resigning.

It was not until some time later that a police investigation
revealed that the ‘evidence’ had been a complete Gestapo
forgery right from the beginning. The case was brought
before a Military High Court, and during the cross-
examination Schmidt got entangled in his own contra¬
dictions and finally admitted that the story was false. The


court completely cleared Fritsch’s name. Schmidt was
disposed of soon afterwards by the Gestapo, without any
formalities such as a trial. The complete transcript of the
Military High Court investigation is published in the
appendix of the Schlabrendorff book.

But Fritsch was a broken man. He lived for only another
year and a half, killed in action during a battle in the
Polish campaign. Little was Fritsch to know that he was
to be persecuted and defamed even long after his death, by
the “defenders of democracy”.


PSYCHOLOGY OF DEFENDANTS

Probably one of the most accurate accounts of the
behaviour and attitudes of the Niirnberg defendants is
provided by the Niirnberg prison psychologist Dr. G. M.
Gilbert in his book Niirnberg Diary. Most of the material
consists of summaries of conversations the defendants had
in prison, either with each other or with Gilbert.

The IMT defendants were arrested shortly after the
German capitulation in May 1945, imprisoned separately,
and interrogated and subjected to propaganda for six
months prior to the opening of the IMT trial in November,
when they met each other for the first time since the
surrender (and in some cases for the first time ever). There
are four particularly important observations which can be
drawn from an objective study of Gilbert’s notes.

First, not surprisingly, all (except Kaltenbrunner) had
developed essentially the same defence strategy: they
would duck the issue of whether or not the gas chambers
existed, but would disclaim any responsibility themselves
— it was all the fault of Hitler and Himmler (both con¬
veniently dead).

Secondly, it would appear that several of the defendants
had themselves been taken in by the Allied propaganda to
which they had been subjected. Few of them had had any
connection with camps during the war, and consequently
could offer no viable alternative explanation to the
harrowing film scenes of ‘extermination victims’ being
shovelled up by bulldozers.

Thirdly, it is apparent that several of the defendants had
calculated that the Allies were not completely serious
about carrying out executions and long-term prison
sentences. The trial was certainly a novelty, and the
defendants were well aware that there was considerable
public hostility to the trials, on both sides of the Atlantic.
Many must have calculated that their immediate objective
should be to say or do whatever seemed necessary to
survive the transient wave of post-war vengeance hysteria.
There would always be a time in the future, when the dust
had settled, when they could set the record straight, they
figured.

Lastly, the extermination of the Jews was only one of
many serious accusations involved at Niirnberg. Today, the
‘extermination’ charge may appear to have been the
central theme, but in 1945, the principle accusations in the
minds of almost everybody concerned responsibilities for
“waging a war of aggression” — so-called “Crimes Against
Peace”.

With the preceding four observations in mind, we can
see that the behaviour of the defendants during the trial
was rather what one would expect from such an arbitrary
collection of Nazis, technocrats, army officers and
politicians. They displayed an abundance of mutual
recrimination, buck-passing and back-biting — hardly
surprising under the circumstances.


THE DEFENDANTS

Fritzsche

The “crimes” which Hans Fritzsche was alleged to have
committed, were essentially no different from those of the
Allies. He had been a prominent Nazi propagandist, and
had successfully helped to keep up morale against over¬
whelming odds.

The Soviets claimed to have a transcript of one of his
radio broadcasts, but every time Fritzsche’s defence
counsel asked them for a copy, they refused, even though
they referred to it continuously throughout the trial. They
also produced a “confession.” which he had signed whilst
being interrogated at the Lubjanka prison in Moscow.
Fritzsche said that he had signed this so that he could be
executed and have the interrogation and solitary confine¬
ment over and done with.

Fritzsche had been an able propagandist. During the war,
when the British press ran a series of smear stories on
German massacres of Czechs, Fritzsche had the sense to
immediately organise a visit to the alleged site for a party
of foreign (neutral) press correspondents. When the
Germans were accused of stealing a Polish icon, again
Fritzsche organised a trip for the foreign press to see it
intact.

Fritzsche, the wily Public Relations man was able to
pull it off at Niirnberg. He was acquitted. He was not to
get off scot-free however. A year later he was arraigned
before a Denazification Tribunal where he was sentenced
to nine years’ hard labour and loss of civil rights. He was
pardoned in 1950 and died three years later of cancer.

Sauckel

One of the most startling sentences handed down at
Niirnberg was the death penalty given to Ernst Sauckel,
the head of the German labour programme. His superior,
Speer, was “let off” with a twenty-year sentence.

Sauckel had been found guilty of doing exactly what
the Allies did after the war — using forced labour in
factories. Under Allied Control Law No. 3 of 17 February
1946, all German males from 14 to 65 and women from
15 to 50 were subject to compulsory labour, the penalty
being imprisonment and withdrawal of ration cards. This
was exactly the “crime” which the IMT declared inhuman
when it was carried out by the Germans. The USSR was
the most draconian of the Allies in the use of forced
labour. Literally millions of Germans were rounded up
after the occupation and shipped off to Russia, where
many remained until well into the 1950s. France was
given hundreds of thousands of German PoWs captured by
the Americans, and their physical condition became so
bad that the US Army authorities had to intervene. Britain
and the United States also made use of such prisoners,
although their welfare was markedly better than their
counterparts’ in France and the USSR.

Perhaps this was the most blatant hypocrisy of all at
Niirnberg, for the Allies were trying Sauckel and company
for a practice which the Allies themselves were carrying
out right outside the front door of the Palace of Justice,
and throughout Germany.

Seyss-Inquart

One of the principal pieces of Niirnberg evidence against
Artur Seyss-Inquart was a telegram allegedly sent by him
instructing the German army to take over Austria “to
preserve order”. Seyss-Inquart strenuously denied that he


had sent it, and in fact there was no real evidence that he
did.

In fact as Davidson admits, “Nothing he did in Austria,
where he served for fourteen months as Reich Governor of
Vienna, or later in Poland, would have marked him as one
of the chief war criminals.”

Even when Seyss-Inquart was moved to Holland as
Reichkommisar, he still played no part in decision-making;
he simply carried out orders from Berlin. It was true that
he passed on orders for the execution of hostages, but such
executions were permitted by the rules of war.

Rather predictably, Seyss-Inquart was sentenced to
death and executed along with his colleagues.

Frank

Hans Frank was Governor General of what was left of
dismembered Poland — a tract of territory some two-fifths
its pre-war area.

Frank lived in grand style at his Governor’s palace at
Cracow, consuming vast quantities of food while the rest
of Europe, including Germany, starved. He surrounded
himself with priceless works of art, looted from all over
the occupied territories. Himmler maintained a file on the
Franks’ “endless corruption”, but little was ever done
about it.

As most of the “extermination programmes” were
alleged to have taken place in Poland, it was inevitable that
Frank would carry the blame for them. He realised this
himself. But even he was startled by the bizarreness of the
allegations, as they were spelled out in the Niimberg
courtroom.

Frank joined his colleagues on the gallows.

Jodi

Colonel General Alfred Jodi was one of the best-loved
of German generals. His defence counsel, Prof. Franz
Exner was a personal friend of his, who believed implicitly
in Jodi’s impeccable character. Precious packages of
cigarettes would arrive at the Niirnberg jail, addressed to
“Our Dear Jodi”. American guards and officers would
present arms and salute him. The families of concentration
camp inmates, including Jews, would write to him,
offering to testify on his behalf.

Altogether Jodi’s counsel asked for nineteen witnesses
to be called, but the court only permitted four. One of the
witnesses was Field Marshal Paulus, who had been wheeled
out by the Soviets especially for the trial. To courtroom
observers, Paulus appeared to be under heavy psychological
pressure, no doubt due to the fact that he knew he faced


Arthur von Seyss-Inquart Alfred Jodi


almost certain death when returned to the Soviet Union.

There was little, if any, evidence that Jodi had infringed
the laws of war. He had simply fought on the wrong side.
But according to Davidson, “Shawcross was intent on
hanging not only Keitel and Jodi, Donitz and Raeder, but
the German Army and Navy. ... It seems unlikely that
Jodi would have been sentenced to death by a later court.
(Other generals) were all released in the space of a few
years. Jodi had the misfortune to be tried too early.”

In fact, in 1953 Jodi’s widow applied to a Munich de¬
nazification tribunal to have Jodi posthumously rehabili¬
tated. The tribunal heard that one of the Niimberg judges,
de Fabres, had said in 1949 that the verdict against Jodi
had been a mistake. The de-nazification tribunal found
him not guilty of all the main Niimberg charges, and
annulled the German penalties against his property.

Donitz

Admiral Karl Donitz, the chief of the German Navy, was
the only defendant who was allowed to use the tu quoque
(thou also) argument as a defence. His counsel was allowed
to point out that the Germans had used precisely the same
tactics against enemy shipping as the Allies. In fact, as
Davidson notes, the testimony that undoubtedly saved
Donitz’s life at Niimberg came from the US Admiral
Nimitz and from the British Admiralty. Nimitz replied to
a questionnaire sent to him by the lawyers representing
Raeder and Donitz, where he admitted that throughout
the Pacific, American submarines had been ordered to
attack without warning any enemy vessel, save hospital
ships. The British Admiralty admitted that their ships had
been ordered to sink at sight any German ship passing
through the Skagerrak.

German witnesses testified that German naval regulations
had not permitted such policies until well into the war.
Also a former German naval judge, Fritz Jackel, testified
as to the German navy’s strict military discipline: several
sailors had been executed for rape and theft from Allied
civilians.

But Donitz had to be found guilty — he had, after all,
become head of the Reich on Hitler’s death. In an effort
to scrape together some ‘evidence’ to back up the verdict,
the tribunal actually blamed him for the fact that “his
U-boats, few in number at the time, were fully prepared
to wage war.” This was indeed a most curious accusation
to throw at any naval commander.

Donitz was sentenced to ten years, and served ten years
and twenty days in Spandau prison in Berlin.

Raeder

Like most of the other servicemen on trial at Niimberg,
Erich Raeder, the original head of the German Navy, could
not be directly connected with allegations of infringements
of the Hague Convention. He had Jewish in-laws, and
consequently was not in the least anti-Semitic. Jews even
testified for him at Niimberg, saying how he had helped to
keep them out of internment camps. Raeder had also
intervened on behalf of Pastor Niemoller the anti-Nazi
leader interned at Buchenwald.

The charges against Raeder were very curious indeed.
One of the accusations was that Raeder had encouraged
Japan to join in the war. Attempting to, or succeeding in,
the recmiting of allies was never defined as a war crime at
Niirnberg, yet here was Raeder charged with it! Indeed, it
was just as well that recmiting allies was not a crime, for
both America and Britain had used all their powers to


Karl Donitz Joachim von Ribbentrop


persuade the USSR to breach its non-aggression pact with
Japan. It would seem that such persuasion was only
criminal if it was (a) successful (the Anglo-American
overtures were abject failures) and (b) German.

Raeder was also charged with passing on an order of
Hitler’s that commandos should be shot. Strictly speaking,
this was not an infringement of the Hague Convention,
since there was no part of the Convention dealing with the
subject. Those commandos who were shot were wearing
civilian clothes under their uniforms, and some were found
carrying orders to kill all prisoners. Some of the captured
commandos were provided with an ingenious device: two
guns under their armpits would fire when the commando’s
arms were raised in surrender. The method of trussing
prisoners described in the commando handbook was also
somewhat less than gentlemanly: a noose was passed over
the head and around the neck of the prisoner so that every
time he stretched his legs he strangled himself a little more.
However, the commando handbook was not allowed as
evidence. The President of the Court reminded the defence
counsel that it was not the Allies who were on trial.

In all the cases of execution of commandos, Raeder did
not give any specific orders himself, he simply passed on
Hitler’s standing instructions for such cases.

Although Raeder was over 70, he was sentenced to life
imprisonment — a sentence he begged the court to change
to shooting. His wife, who had committed no identifiable
crime, was kept prisoner by the Soviets until September
1949. Raeder was suddenly released in 1955.

He survived long enough to write his memoirs and to
attend a few ceremonies, including the dedication of the
German naval war memorial at Wilhelmshaven in 1957.
He died soon afterwards.

Ribbentrop

Joachim Ribbentrop was one of the few Nazis to have
been reasonably well known in Britain before the outbreak
of war — he had been German Ambassador to Britain since
1936.

The man was a snob of the first degree; he had added a
‘von’ to his surname in 1925, and was almost universally
disliked amongst his colleagues in the Niimberg dock for
his arrogance, conceit and incompetence. Although before
the war, he had had a number of Jewish and partly-Jewish
friends, through his liquor importing business, he had
obligingly become an anti-Semite when Hitler promoted
him to be head of his war-time Foreign Office. Of course,
his pragmatic attitudes and phoney sophistication did not


fool anybody, especially the more wily Nazi leaders.
Goring had had one memorable row with him in 1944, and
had taken a swipe at him with his baton and derided his
pretentious ‘von’ in front of his name. “You champagne
peddler,” Goring had shouted, “shut up!” Ribbentrop
dodged the blow and shouted back, “I am still the Foreign
Minister and my name is von Ribbentrop.”

Ribbentrop’s first reaction on being arrested as a war
criminal was one of feeling flattered. When he was being
interrogated at the Ashcan (or Dustbin, as it was known to
British soldiers), the Allied collecting depot outside
Niimberg, he vehemently maintained that he had been a
very important official in Hitler’s government, and it was
only after the actual trial had started that he realised the
full implications of such vanity. He attempted to do an
about-face, and claim that in fact he had been very
unimportant, but it was too late. He was found guilty on
all four charges and hanged.

Frick

Besides the eccentric Hess, the only other defendant
in the Niimberg dock who declined to take the witness
stand was Wilhelm Frick, the Nazi Minister of the Interior.

It had been Frick’s duty to put into legal effect all the
Fiihrer’s decrees, over a whole range of issues. What little
specific evidence there was against Frick at Niimberg
revolved around his implementation of the various
euthanasia and racial segregation laws. It was not he who
carried out these policies, he was simply the clerk who
drew up the wording of the laws, in accordance with
Hitler’s wishes.

With the exception of his closing statement to the court,
Frick chose to remain silent throughout the trial. He told
his fellow defendant Fritzsche that it would be useless. He
explained to the prison psychologist that the tribunal was
on a totally different wavelength, and whatever he said or
did, he would still be sentenced to death.

Frick was proved right. He was found guilty on all
except one count and was sentenced to hang.

Keitel

Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel, the chief of the German
High Command (OKW), held little respect amongst his
military colleagues. During the war, he had managed to
collect several rather disparaging nicknames, including
Nickesel (a toy donkey that nods its head) and La-keitel,
a pun on the word ‘lackey’.

It was Keitel’s servility which enabled him to last out
the war, when so many able men were relieved of their


Wilhelm Frick Wilhelm Keitel


commands, or even shot. But even though it was patently
obvious at Niimberg that he had been “only carrying out
orders,” Keitel was still held responsible for his own
actions.

He had signed and issued many of Hitler’s more
fanatical orders, such as those authorising the execution of
hostages, the murder of PoWs and the destruction of
villages. General von Falkenhorst, the German commander
in Norway, testified that he tried to save the lives of
British commandos captured at Stavanger, but that Keitel
had told him they had to be shot. The same thing
happened, he said, when Norwegian seamen were captured
trying to escape to England. According to another witness,
Keitel had supported the suggestion that captured Allied
bomber crews should be executed.

In defence, Keitel tried to introduce the tu quoque
argument by exhibiting in evidence the British Handbook
of Instructions on How to Conduct Irregular Warfare. In
this book, British commandos were told to “use any
weapons including broken bottles” in hand to hand
fighting with the emeny. The tribunal refused to allow the
handbook to be admitted. Keitel was sentenced to death,
which he meekly accepted. All he wanted from the court
was permission to be shot instead of hanged. This symbolic
token of a soldier’s death was denied him.

Schirach

Baldur von Schirach was an unlikely defendant at
Niimberg. He was not even an ethnic German — he was
three-quarters American. As head of the Hitler Youth,
he could not really be described as a war criminal at all,
since the Hitler Youth was not a military, or even para¬
military formation. It was just a politicised version of the
Boy Scouts and Girl Guides, probably very similar in
style to the present-day (Communist-run) Woodcraft Folk.

Attempts at Niimberg to prove otherwise proved rather
fruitless. It was alleged that Schirach desired to militarise
the Hitler Youth when he had said, “We are the future
soldiers.” In fact this was a mis-translation; what he had
really said was, “We are the militant shapers of the future.”

The Soviet prosecution team produced an affidavit
which claimed that teams of Hitler Youth members had
shot-up a village in Russia and killed several Russian
children. But this ludicrous, indeed bizarre, accusation did
not get very far, even in the unreal Alice-in-Wonderland
world of Niimberg.

Nonetheless, the court found Schirach guilty of crimes
against humanity, and sentenced him to twenty years’
imprisonment. His main crime, the tribunal said, had been
the “misleading of youth”.

He served his sentence to its very minute before being
released in 1966.

Funk

Walter Emanuel Funk was rather a late starter in the
Nazi movement, but was introduced to Hitler early on and
consequently rose rapidly in the party ranks. In 1938 he
succeeded Schacht as Minister of Economics, and in 1939
as President of the Reichsbank.

Funk, who by profession was a financial journalist, was
very much a pragmatic minister in Hitler’s government: he
always agreed that the Fiihrer was right. What economic
policies of his own he did have were garbled and erratic.
This may have had something to do with his personality;
Funk was both a homosexual and an alcoholic.

The charges against Funk at Niimberg alleged that as


head of the Reichsbank, he had received and assayed tons
of valuables taken from gassed Jews. The prosecution
stated that from 1942 onwards, the SS had deposited at
the Reichsbank tons of gold teeth, spectacle frames,
platinum and gold rings, diamonds, watches, earrings,
cutlery, foreign currency and stocks and bonds. The
valuables were allegedly used to finance the various
industrial enterprises set up at concentration camps. An
affidavit was produced from one Emil Puhl, Funk’s
second-in-command at the bank, who declared that he had
told Funk all about the deposits and that Funk had even
seen the valuables when he visited the vaults. However,
when Puhl was produced as a witness, he formally retracted
the affidavit, denying that either he or Funk had known
the contents of the SS deposit boxes. In an effort to shore
up their fast collapsing case, the prosecution then produced
Oswald Pohl (no relation to Puhl) head of the SS industrial
activities section. In his affidavit, 4045-PS, Pohl alleged
that he had accompanied Funk and Puhl to the vaults of
the bank to inspect the loot. At Pohl’s own trial, AMT4, it
transpired that Pohl’s evidence had been wrought from
him by torture, including having faeces smeared on his face.

The prosecution then presented a film of piles of gold
teeth, jewellery and pearls that made the Reichsbank look
more like a pawn shop than a national bank.

Funk, as degenerate and opportunistic as ever, threw
himself on the court’s mercy, and begged forgiveness. In
mitigation he pleaded, “I placed the will of the State
before my own conscience and my inner sense of duty.”
He was found guilty on charges 2, 3 and 4, but was let off
on charge 1. However, the tribunal was duly impressed
with Funk’s humility and it was this which undoubtedly
saved him from the gallows. He was sentenced to life
imprisonment.

While he was in prison, his denazification case was put
before a Spruchkammer, but he was not allowed to leave
Spandau to appear in his own defence. Nor would the
prison authorities allow his lawyer to visit him in prison,
for the subject of trials was forbidden for visitors to
discuss with prisoners. The denazification tribunal decided
to confiscate his entire property.

But in 1957, Funk’s lawyer applied to the court and had
the Spruchkammer decision reversed. In the same year,
Funk was released from Spandau because of ill health, and
three years later he died.


Schacht

Hjalmar Schacht was undoubtedly the brains behind the
German economic recovery of the late 1930s. It was he


Baldur von Schirach Hjalmar Schacht


who had brought about the stabilisation of the mark, the
curtailment of unemployment, and the enormous achieve¬
ments in industrial development. He was not a Nazi, but
believed that National Socialist ideas contained a great deal
of truth. He reckoned that Hitler was best suited to be
Chancellor, despite his obvious shortcomings. It was
Schacht’s fundamental lack of faith in Nazi principles that
led to his demise within the Hitler government even before
the war. He resigned as Minister of Economics in 1938 and
was dismissed as President of the Reichsbank in 1939. He
alienated a large section of the party by being an outspoken
critic of the wilder accusations of Der Sturmer, Streicher’s
freelance hate-sheet. In 1942, Schacht burned his boats by
complaining about unfulfilled promises by the military
that the war was being won. He drew attention to Goring’s
promise, “You can call me Meyer if a single bomb is
dropped on German cities.” Schacht also pointed out that
the German people had repeatedly been promised that the
war in Russia was won. But as it was the Fiihrer himself
who had made these promises, Schacht had committed the
ultimate heresy. In 1943 Hitler dismissed him as Minister
without Portfolio. At the same time, Goring sacked him
from the Prussian State Council. Schacht was arrested on
21 July 1944, the day after the attempt on Hitler’s life,
and he was to spend the next four years in twenty-three
prisons, German and Allied. Before the end of the war, he
even spent some time in three Nazi concentration camps:
Ravensbriick, Flossenbiirg and Dachau. The Americans
took him into custody in Pustertal in Austria.

At Niimberg, Schacht was indicted on charges 1 and 2.
In the dock, he complained that he and the other
defendants were being treated as if they had already been
found guilty. He objected to being subjected to the noise
of GIs’ radios in his cell, and to not being allowed to look
out of his cell window. Once, when he was photographed
without a collar and tie on while he was eating, he threw
the contents of a pot of coffee over the cameraman
(coming from a conservative family, he had rather strict
ideas about propriety). The American guards loved the
episode, and happily replaced the coffee (which he should
not officially have had) and even provided him with as
much as he could drink. However, the prison commandant
called Scacht’s action a defamation of the American
uniform; almost everyone involved in the American
occupation —reporters, cameramen, priests, secretaries etc.
— wore military uniform, in order to distinguish them
from the native population. This would otherwise have
been a real problem for the American authorities, since so
many of their interrogation and intelligence staff spoke
English with marked mid-European accents. Once, when
Schacht apologised to an American member of the
prosecution staff for his bad English, the officer replied,
“It’s a lot better than most of my colleagues’.” Indeed, the
trial transcript itself reveals several points where the
American prosecutors were themselves confused as to the
correct meaning of English words.

Schacht was able to produce copious evidence that he
had opposed the Nazis’ attacks on the Jews. In fact, he
himself had liaised with Jewish banking interests in
Germany and overseas in order to provide the finance for
Germany’s recovery. He requested that a Mr. Jeidels be
called from America as a defence witness. According to a
war-time edition of Time, dated 3.7.42, Jeidels had been
Schacht’s link-man in New York, raising loans for Germany
on Wall Street, including Goldman, Sachs & Co., a Jewish-
owned bank. In 1934 Jeidels had even acted on behalf of
Hitler’s government in the famous Paltreu Standstill


Agreement. By 1942, Jeidels had become a partner in the
Jewish Lazard Freres bank in Manhattan, but still “had
access to choice Continental pipelines into Hitlerism.”

Schacht also requested that the US Secretary of State,
Sumner Welles, be called to give evidence on his behalf.
Welles came to Germany in 1940 (after the outbreak of
war in Europe, but before the US joined in) and had
private talks with Schacht, when Schacht apparently made
it clear that he had already broken with Hitler. Schacht
felt that Welles could have demolished the charges against
him at Niimberg if he had testified on his behalf, but
neither Welles nor anyone else from the State Department
ever appeared.

During one of Schacht’s many visits to the USA he had
made friends with David Samoff, the Russian-Jewish head
of the Radio Corporation of America. Sarnoff invited him
to a dinner with mostly Jewish fellow-guests, and
apparently Schacht made a big impression with them with
his speech. It may be that it was Schacht’s intimacy with
the powers-that-be which led to his being found innocent
on both the Niimberg charges, although the Soviet judges
were outraged. Jackson, the Chief Prosecutor, found his
acquittal “regrettable”.

But Schacht was not to get off the hook so easily. After
his acquittal at Niimberg, German courts were to be busy
with him for the next five years. A denazification tribunal
in Stuttgart sentenced him to prison as a ‘major offender’,
but an appellate court annulled the prison sentence, whilst
still depriving him of his property and civil rights; even
including his driving licence. The US denazification officer
for Stuttgart said that the decision was “incomprehensible”.
The Military Governor for Wiirttemberg-Baden, Charles M.
La Follette (later to be Deputy Chief Prosecutor in AMT 3)
said that his comments on the acquittal would be un¬
printable. In fact, the court later reversed its decision, but
by then Schacht had moved to the British Zone.

It was not long before Schacht’s undisputed economic
abilities were back in demand, and soon he was being
consulted on economic problems by governments East and
West. (Even at Niimberg his advice on the economic plight
of post-war Germany had been sought by the Allied
occupation government.) In 1951 he visited Indonesia, and
even stopped off at Lydda International Airport in Israel
on the way.

There is a book which covers Schacht’s five years of
legal arraignments called Verdict on Schacht by Earl R.
Beck (Tallahassee: Florida State University Press, 1955).
Schacht also wrote his memoirs which were published in
German under the title 76 Jahre meines Lebens (Kindler
& Schiemeyer, 1953).

Goring

Unlike most of the other defendants, Goring assumed
throughout the trial that he was to be sentenced to death.
So, as he had nothing to lose, Goring’s testimony appears
to be the truth (as he saw it). Neither did he back down
from challenging prosecution evidence, which the other
defendants were wary of doing too vigorously, in case it
offended the sensibilities of the court.

Although he never conceded the existence of an exter¬
mination programme (he declared that the first time he
had ever heard of it was “right here in Niimberg”), he was
not in a position to offer any alternative explanation for
the chaotic scenes which the Allies found when they
liberated the concentration camps. He assumed that
Himmler had indeed engaged in unauthorised mass murder


in these cases. However, he disputed that the total could
ever have reached six million.

Goring had no difficulty in defending himself against
the American Prosecutor Jackson. At one point, Jackson
had to appeal to the President of the Court for help, when
Goring defended Germany’s secret mobilisation by
comparing it to America’s. Jackson turned to Lawrence,
the President, and denounced what he called the witness’s
“arrogant and contemptuous attitude towards the Tribunal
which is giving him the trial which he never gave a living
soul, nor dead ones either!” Lawrence refused to support
this childish outburst, although he did not attempt to
reprimand Jackson for pre-judging Goring’s guilt. (Nor did
he ask Jackson to endeavour to explain how Goring could
have “given a trial to dead souls”!!)

Goring’s counsel also attempted to raise the politically
embarrassing subject of Katyn. He had contacted General
Anders, the Commander of the Polish Army in the USSR,
for material in his possession which the Poles had collected.
Anders had responded that he was ready to comply, so as
to bring the Katyn issue out into the open for once, but


Goring in the witness box


pointed out that as an Allied officer, he would need the
permission of Allied Command before being able to come
along and give evidence. When Goring’s counsel asked why
Anders had not been allowed to come along as a defence
witness, Jackson replied that he had never heard of
Anders’ offer.

Jackson had met his match with Goring. He asked
Goring if he and his colleagues had deliberately set out to
bring down the Weimar government. Much to Jackson’s
frustration, Goring answered “Yes, of course; that was at
all times our intention” — just like any modern-day
revolutionary hero, full of pride and arrogance. Finally,
Jackson was reduced to cranking out all the war propa¬
ganda cliches which he knew perfectly well were untrue.
At one point he demanded of Goring:

You have testified on interrogation that it was Hitler’s information
that the US would never go to war, even if attacked?

Goring: Such nonsense I never could have uttered, because if any
country is attacked it defends itself!

Goring also gave short shrift to Jackson’s bizarre
description of the Mauthausen “Bullet Decree” which was
supposed to be a fiendish Nazi method of execution,
where the prisoner was duped into thinking he was having
his height measured, but in fact was being lined up for a
bullet through the neck from a hidden SS man with a


specially designed rifle. Neither Goring nor anyone else
except Jackson, it seemed, had ever heard of this ludicrous
“Bullet Decree”: if the Nazis were so brutal, why would
they go to all the trouble of building such a Heath-Robinson
contraption? The only evidence Jackson could produce to
back up this suggestion was a telegram from Berlin to all
State Police Directorates, instructing them that escaped
prisoners-of-war who had been recaptured should be
transported to Mauthausen under the auspices of the
“Kugel” programme. As kugel can mean “bullet”, the War
Crimes Branch were able to deduce from this one word,
that what was really intended was a height-measuring-
device-which-was-really-an-execution-machine. But because
this imaginative exercise in etymology was awarded the
prestige of an official mention in the Niimberg evidence,
the Mauthausen “Bullet Decree” has now gone down as
part of the official history of concentration camps. It
features prominently in Mrs. Evelyn Le Chene’s
Mauthausen: The History of a Death Camp (Methuen,
1971), although she does express some puzzlement as to
why the Nazis continually felt obliged to disguise their
death programmes with innocuous-sounding euphemisms
(p.78). She remarks that some sick inmates from Maut¬
hausen were sent to be gassed at Hartheim Castle, and their
transfer was disguised by the fiendish use of the term
“convalescent home” next to their name in the camp
register. Why “convalescent home” should mean “gassing”
and not “convalescent home” Mrs. Le Chene does not
explain, which is especially disturbing in view of the fact
that Hartheim Castle was originally built as a hospital. But
we shall have to depend on the authoress’s good graces for
such an explanation, for Hartheim was “the only prison in
use during the Second World War from which there were
no survivors.” And as the castle has now been converted
into flats, nor will there be any trace of the gas chamber(s).

Just in passing, it may be worthwhile to deviate here to
examine another Niimberg myth: that Goring was a
pathetic drug addict — “a simpering slob” according to the
prison commander. Another Niimberg psychiatrist,
Douglas Kelley, has attempted to set the record straight in
this respect. During the abortive Nazi putsch of 1923,
Goring had suffered a serious wound in his right thigh. The
wound developed an infection which caused him to be
hospitalised for a long time, during which time he was
injected with large doses of morphine. He developed a mild
addiction, but cured it shortly after his release from
hospital in 1924. Much later, in 1937, he developed a
condition of aching teeth, and began taking tablets made
from paracodeine, a mild morphine derivative in common
use at that time. He continued taking the tablets through¬
out the war, but the habit was terminated by Dr. Kelley
who simply reduced his daily dosage in gradual stages.

Ironically, Dr. Kelley became an ardent admirer of
Goring’s will-power; even after his death:

He stoically endured his long imprisonment that he might force
down the Allied Tribunal and browbeat the prosecuting lawyers on
their own terms. His suicide was a skilful, even brilliant, finishing
touch, completing the edifice for Germans to admire in time to
come. History may well show that Goring won out at the end, even
though condemned by the high court of the Allied Powers.

A decade later Dr. Kelley emphasised his bizarre
admiration for the Nazi Air Minister when he too com¬
mitted suicide by taking one of several potassium cyanide
capsules which he possessed, said to be “souvenirs” taken
off Goring’s body. When Goring first arrived at the prison,
he was discovered to have a phial of cyanide taped to his
belly, but this was quickly confiscated. To this day, no one


knows how Goring got hold of more, hours before the
time set for his execution. (It has been alleged that Dr.
Kelley slipped him the drug.) Not to be daunted, the
Allied authorities simply added Goring’s body to those of
his hanged colleagues, so that the world’s press could take
gory group photos.


Hermann Goring Rudolf Hess


Hess

Rudolf Hess had been Hitler’s right-hand man in the
early days. Both had been in the Landsberg prison together,
where Hess had helped Hitler to write Mein Kampf. By the
time war broke out, Hess was Deputy Fiihrer. Very much
an Anglophile, Hess was aghast when Britain joined in on
Poland’s side. By 1941 he had realised that the war against
Britain was pointless, and he determined to make a
personal attempt to bring about peace. On 10 May 1941,
Hess borrowed a plane from Augsburg airfield, and saying
he was flying to Stavanger in Norway, flew direct to
Britain. He baled out over Scotland, hoping to make peace
proposals through his pre-war friend, the Duke of
Hamilton. Hess was arrested and interned for the duration
of the war. On 10 October 1945, he was flown from
Abergavenny to Furth, near Numberg, where he would
stand trial as a war criminal.

By this time, Hess was beginning to act very strangely
indeed. He claimed to be suffering from amnesia, together
with severe stomach cramps and insomnia. On 27
November, a special session of the court was held in order
to decide whether Hess was fit or not to stand trial. A
minute before the start of the session, Hess told his
counsel that he felt fit to stand trial, but his counsel
simply ignored him and made a long speech about why he
was hot fit to stand. Hess endeavoured to get a chance to
speak himself, but when one of the judges pointed this out
to Jackson, the American prosecutor Jackson replied that he
did not believe this wish to be genuine. After two hours
of argument, Hess was finally allowed to speak. The court
rocked with astonishment as Hess stated that his ‘amnesia’
had been faked from beginning to end.

After further rows with his counsel, Hess asked to be
allowed to defend himself. This was refused by the
tribunal, which gave Hess’s case to Dr. Stahmer, who was
already overloaded with Goring’s defence.

When the defendants were finally allowed to address the
court, in a closing statement only, Hess was cut short by
the President, who said that defendants could not be
allowed to make lengthy statements at that stage in the
proceedings.


Hess was found Not Guilty on Counts 3 and 4, but
Guilty on 1 and 2. He was sentenced to life imprisonment.
Hess and the six others who were sentenced to terms of
imprisonment were sent to Spandaujail in Berlin. Although
the others have since been released, Hess remains as the
sole prisoner in a jail designed for 600. Now in his 70s, it is
likely that Hess will die in Spandau. Ironically, although he
was the only one of the defendants to have made such an
effort to stop the war, he is the one to stay in prison the
longest.

Several books have been written about Hess’s inhuman
incarceration, but undoubtedly the most accurate is The
Loneliest Man In the World (Seeker & Warburg, 1974) by
•Eugene Bird, the American Governor of Spandau Prison.

Julius Streicher

Julius Streicher had originally made an abortive attempt
to escape Allied-occupied Germany by growing a beard to
disguise himself. However, he was quickly recognised and
arrested by an American-Jewish lieutenant. During the
Numberg Trial he was to claim that he had been beaten up
by American negro soldiers, and made to kiss their feet
and drink their saliva. He said he was kept in a cell for four
days without clothes. His mouth was forced open with a
piece of wood and he was spat upon. When he asked for a
drink of water he was taken to a latrine and told to drink
out of that. Jackson protested at the minuting of this
accusation, and successfully put a motion that it be
stricken from the court record. If the testimony had been
admitted, he said, then the court would have had to
conduct an investigation.

On the third day of the trial, an official announcement
was made that Streicher had been classified as sane,
although he had the lowest IQ of all the defendants —102.
Throughout the trial, Streicher continually fought with his
own defence counsel — a Hans Marx. Lawrence threatened
to have Streicher sent back to his cell. Jackson wanted him
cited for contempt of court.

Streicher had had a stormy career in the Nazi party. He
had always been a freelance hate-monger, as publisher of
his private magazine Der St'urmer, which pulled no punches
in attacking all and sundry: Jew and Gentile alike. In fact
Streicher had been in and out of jail on many occasions for
libelling prominent public figures. In 1928 he had been
sacked from a teaching job for indoctrinating the school-
children, and since then he had been involved in a wide
variety of property rackets, pornography and perverted sex.
Hitler appointed him (honorary) Gauleiter of Numberg in
1925, and it was in this role that he set in motion the
crane which demolished Numberg synagogue. But it was
not long before Streicher became an embarrassment to the
Nazi party. He was deprived of his Gau in 1940, and
shortly later a Nazi party court decided that he should be
expelled from the party. However, Hitler never gave.his
official approval for this decision, and so he remained a
Nazi until the end.

Streicher was the only one of the Germans on trial to
have come anywhere near advocating “exterminating
Jews”. On 3 April 1925, he had told a Numberg audience
that, “For thousands of years the Jews have been
destroying peoples: make a beginning today so that we can
destroy Jewry!” Whether Streicher meant physically exter¬
minating Jewry, or whether he meant simply destroying
the power of organised Jewry, is of course open to debate.

Streicher was found not guilty on the charge of con¬
spiring to wage aggressive war, since he was not privy to


Julius Stretcher Ernst Kaltenbrunner


Hitler’s plans. But he was found guilty on the “crimes
against humanity” charge and sentenced to hang. He was
the only one of those executed to fight physically to the
scaffold. He is alleged to have shouted at the American GIs
that “these Jewish Bolsheviks will hang you next”. Just
before the trap door opened, he is supposed to have given
the Nazi salute and shouted “this is Purim 1946!”

Kaltenbrunner

Kaltenbrunner was undoubtedly sitting as an IMT
defendant as a substitute for Himmler. Since Himmler was
dead, the Allies had to have someone on trial to carry the
can for the SS. However, Kaltenbrunner was ill when the
trial opened, arid did not join the other defendants until
the trial was a few weeks old. When he did appear, the
other defendants shunned him, and said very little to him
during the course of the next ten months.

Kaltenbrunner’s position seems to us today to have been
somewhat hopeless, but he nevertheless had to present
some sort of defence. It rested on two main points.

The first point he made was that he was head of the
RSHA, which was in charge of security, and not the head
of the WVHA, which administered the concentration
camps. The only known instance of Kaltenbrunner’s
involvement with the internal operations of the camps was
in his order of March 1945, concerning permission for the
Red Cross to establish itself in the camps. (How he assumed
authority for giving this order we do not know — it is
likely that in the closing stages of the war, the usual chain
of command had largely broken down, and officers were
attempting to make do as best they could.) He made a
great deal of play with this matter in his defence and,
rather than setting the record straight in regard to the
catastrophic conditions in the camps at the end of the war,
instead he inflated his action in connection with the Red
Cross to make it appear to be an act against concentration
camps themselves, “which, of course, he had always
deplored anyway,” he said.

Kaltenbrunner’s second point was that it was his pre¬
decessor Heydrich, and not he, who had organised the
details of the Jewish policy, whatever that policy was. He
took over the RSHA in 1943 with a directive from Himmler
to build up the intelligence service of the SD. He claimed
that he had been given specific instructions not to interfere
with the security functions of the RSHA, in particular, the
Gestapo, which was responsible for sending Jews to the
camps. He said that Himmler was very wary of giving
anybody all these areas to look after, in case they grew in


power and stature the way Heydrich had. Thus, according
to Kaltenbrunner, there was -no respect in which he himself
could be held responsible for the extermination of the Jews.

However, he did agree that extermination had taken
place, but it had started earlier, in 1940, he said, but it was
not until the summer of 1943 that he learned of the exter¬
mination programme which Eichmann and his department
were conducting. He claimed he had learned from the
foreign press and radio. He got Himmler to admit it early
in 1944 and then protested, first to Hitler, then to
Himmler. “The extermination programme was stopped in
October 1944,” he said, “chiefly due to (his) intervention.”

Kaltenbrunner did manage to hold firm on one particular
point. In cross-examination, Col. John Amen, for the
prosecution, tried to get Kaltenbrunner to admit that the
term “ Sonderbehandlung ” (“special treatment”) actually
meant execution. In an attempt to implicate Kaltenbrunner
personally with “special treatment”, Amen triumphantly
produced a document where he had ordered Sonder¬
behandlung for certain people. Amen wanted Kaltenbrunner
to comment on the document without even reading it, and
there was an angry exchange in this connection, but
Kaltenbrunner was finally allowed to read the document.
The reason for Amen’s reticence soon became clear. In the
context of the document, it turned out that Kaltenbrunner
was ordering Sonderbehandlung for those people at
“Winzerstube” and at “Walzertraum” — two fashionable
hotels which quartered interned notables — and that
Sonderbehandlung in their cases meant such things as
permission to correspond freely and to receive parcels, a
bottle of champagne per day, etc.

On another occasion, Kaltenbrunner ran into a similar
problem over documentary ‘evidence’. An affidavit
(PS-3319) by a mysterious Ludwig Kohlhammar reported
that an anti-Jewish congress had been held on 3/4 April
1944, under the auspices of the Reich Foreign Ministry.
One of Ribbentrop’s defence witnesses, von Steengracht,
gave evidence that Ribbentrop had prevented the congress
ever taking place. Completely ignoring this fact, the
French prosecutor Faur4 went on a few days later to grill
Ribbentrop over whether or not he agreed with the anti-
semitic sentiments expressed at the ‘congress’. Ribbentrop
replied, “What was this congress? I have never even heard
that such a congress took place. Will you please put the
document at my disposal so that I may answer?” Faur4
answered, “I have no intention of showing you this docu¬
ment.” Nevertheless, PS-3319 was admitted in evidence,
although attempts were made to give the item a ‘low
profile’ by omitting Kohlhammar’s name from the
affidavit index.

Alfred Rosenberg

Alfred Rosenberg, the Nazi Party’s self-acclaimed chief
theorist on racial questions, was naturally enough a prime
target for the Nixmberg assize although it appears that
both Rosenberg and the Tribunal overestimated his impor¬
tance in the Third Reich. Despite his Jewish-sounding
name, he was a German through and through, although
bom and brought up in (German settled) Estonia.

In the early 1920s he had written several books on the
Jewish question, including his most famous Myth of the
Twentieth Century. In 1941 he became Minister for the
Occupied Eastern Territories. In this position he adopted
the typically reactionary posture of the German volks-
deutsch petty bourgeoisie — he aspired to aping the
patronising grandeur of the Tsars (themselves largely of
German blood). He spoke up against the brutalities of the


SS against the peasantry, but at the same time he opposed
the raising of a Free Russian army under General Vlasov.
He complained bitterly about German soldiers destroying
Soviet works of art; so that he could pillage them himself.
Rosenberg was so pompous that at the end of the War he
wrote a letter to Field Marshal Montgomery, from Donitz’s
HQ at Flensburg, placing his services at Montgomery’s
disposal. He was rather taken aback when two British
officers arrived soon afterwards to arrest him.

At Niimberg, Rosenberg attempted to defend his
confiscation of Jewish and Masonic property by pointing
out that the Allies were at that very moment seizing
German assets even including libraries. He insisted that he
himself had never received anything of value out of the
Nazi confiscations. When the prosecution reminded him
that three Dutch paintings had been discovered in his
house, he replied that these had been “gifts”.

One of the documents which was produced by the
prosecution was 212-PS, which was supposed to be an
instruction from Rosenberg that any Jews who flouted the
Nazis’ labour laws should be killed. Rosenberg’s defence
pointed out that the document did not bear his, or any,
signature. And Rosenberg himself testified that he had
never seen the document before.

The prosecution also alleged that Rosenberg had
advocated in a speech the “extermination of the Jews”
{“die Ausrottung des Judentums"). But Rosenberg was
able to show that “ Ausrottung ” had been mis-translated;
in fact it meant “uprooting”. Likewise, “Judentum" did
not mean “Jews” as individuals (this would have been
Juden) but should be translated as “Jewry” or “Jewish
power”.

One of the documents which was produced (135-R)
which appeared to be a genuine one recovered from the
files of the SS, was a letter from one of Rosenberg’s
assistants, Heinrich Lohse, to Rosenberg, dated 18 June
1943, which mentioned the term “ sonderbehandlung ”
(“special treatment”) for the Jews. The prosecution alleged
that this referred to extermination. But as Rosenberg’s
counsel quite logically pointed out, the term could relate
to a whole variety of things. (Indeed, when the same trick
was tried with Kaltenbrunner, he was able to show that in
the particular document presented in his case, “ sonder¬
behandlung ” meant special privileges for prisoners, such as
receiving a bottle of champagne every day!)

Many of the documents presented in Rosenberg’s trial
had arrived at Niimberg by a very roundabout route.
About 70 of the documents which were finally presented
in evidence had been ‘discovered’at the Rosenberg Ministry
in Berlin by a Sergeant Szajko Frydman, of the US 82nd
Airborne Division. Frydman was a staff member of the
Yivo (the New York Yiddish Scientific Institute) both
before and after his war service, and his ‘finds’ were first
handed over to the Yivo for ‘screening’ before they finally
put in an appearance at Niimberg.

Many of the Yivo documents were supposed to be letters
to or from Heinrich Lohse, the assistant of Rosenberg’s
whose other letters were discovered in the SS files. Oddly,
Lohse was never called as a witness at Niimberg; he main¬
tained a very low profile. As for the documents attributed
to him, Reitlinger the Jewish Holocaust ‘expert’ remarks
that they “saved him from the Allied Military Courts and
perhaps the gallows”; for although the documents mention
atrocities and exterminations, they are so worded as to put
Lohse himself as being in opposition to the crimes. Lohse
was not to get away scot-free however; in 1948 he stood
trial before a German court and was sentenced to 10 years’


imprisonment. He was released in 1951 on grounds of ill-
health, but at least his Niimberg letters had saved his skin.
But for Rosenberg, they spelt conviction.

Rosenberg’s over-inflated ego was rather confused by
the trial. He still thought that National Socialism was the
solution to Europe’s ills, but felt that Hitler had made one
or two drastic errors of judgement. The main one, it
seemed, had been the Fixhrer’s promotion of men like
Gobbels and Bormann, instead of himself. If only Hitler
had recognised Rosenberg’s towering abilities, the outcome
of the War might well have been different, he indicated.

The Tribunal obviously went some way towards agreeing
with Rosenberg’s high opinion of his own importance.
They reckoned that he was responsible and guilty in all
four areas of war crimes — a finding usually only reserved
for the really top rank Nazi leaders.

Rosenberg at last achieved the sense of importance and
self esteem which had so eluded him during his life-time
when he joined his high-ranking colleagues on the gallows
in the Niimberg jail gymnasium the following October.


Alfred Rosenberg Franz von Papen


Papen

One of the most unlikely defendants at the IMT was
Franz von Papen, Hitler’s penultimate predecessor as
Chancellor. He was born into an aristocratic Westphalian
family in 1879, and was a leading member of the
conservative/Catholic Zentrum Party.

His period as Chancellor lasted only a few months, for
he was rapidly deposed and replaced by General Schleicher.
Two months later, Schleicher too was replaced by Hitler.
For eighteen months Papen attempted to work with Hitler
in the cabinet, but gradually found out that any kind of
compromise was impossible. In 1934 he made a long
speech at Marburg, attacking the excesses of the Nazi
regime. Papen was quickly removed from the government
and despatched to political exile as German ambassador to
Austria. In 1939, his star waned even further as he was
packed off to obscurity as ambassador in Turkey.

When Papen returned to Germany at the end of the war,
he was astounded to be placed under arrest by the
Americans, and rapidly hauled up before the Niimberg
court as a ‘war criminal’. Although the trial itself began on
6 September 1946, Papen himself did not get a chance to
speak until 14 June 1947. Since he had never fired a shot
during the whole war, never made a policy decision and
never done anything very much except vegetate, Papen was
charged with the most vague of charges on the list: crimes
against peace.


The essence of the accusation was put by the British
prosecutor, the Jew Sir David Maxwell Fyfe (later Lord
Kilmuir):

What I am putting to you is that the only reason that could have
kept you in the service of the Nazi government, when you knew all
these crimes, was that you sympathised and wanted to carry on with
the Nazis' work. That is what I am putting to you — that you had
this express knowledge; you had seen your own friends, your own
servants, murdered around you. You had the detailed knowledge of
it, and the only reason which could have dominated you, and made
you take one job after another from the Nazis was, that you
sympathised with their work. That is what I am putting against you,
Herr von Papen.

Fyfe’s admission that all they could pin on Papen was
his “Nazi sympathies” held little sway with the court. In
his summing up, Chief (later Lord) Justice Lawrence
pointed out that the court had already had to lay down a
date line, to determine when the Nazis had begun planning
“aggressive war”. The date had been fixed at 5 November
1937 (the date of a conference between Hitler and his
military leaders). Papen had not been at this meeting, in
fact he was dismissed from his Vienna job some three
months later. Papen was found not guilty, and as far as the
Allies were concerned could walk from the court a free
man, much to the Soviets’ chagrin.

But he was not set free. The Bavarian puppet-government
had become so enamoured with its novel role of denazi¬
fication that they immediately applied for Papen’s arrest
and re-trial before a Bavarian court. Papen remained in
prison for some time, whilst he unsuccessfully applied for
permission to move from the American to the French and
British zone, where he anticipated greater leniency. When
he eventually was released from prison he was immediately
placed under house arrest by the Bavarian authorities, first
in the house of a friend, later in hospital.

The Denazification Court was presided over by a Jew;
President Camille Sachs of the District Court. The members
of the court included a doctor, a civil engineer, a depart¬
mental manager, a police superintendent and a commercial
agent. There were three reserve members: a plumber, a
decorator and a trade unionist. Prosecuting counsel was
Dr. Werner Fiebig, a High Court Judge. Defending Counsel
was the lawyer Dr. Kubuschok, who had defended Papen
before the IMT.

The proceedings went on for a month. Many well-known
witnesses were called, including President Hindenburg’s
son Oskar. In many cases, the Court decided that the oath
should not be administered, since they had doubts about
the witnesses’ credibility! On 3 February 1947, the Court
found Papen guilty and sentenced him to eight years’ hard


Constantin von Neurath Albert Speer


labour, plus the deprivation of his civil rights for good.

The Prosecution appealed against the eight years — they
wanted ten. Papen too appealed, his case being heard on
18 January 1949. In the meanwhile, he was kept in
custody in an internment camp outside Numberg. The
Appeal Court found in Papen’s favour and cancelled the
term of imprisonment; they regarded his past incarceration
as having been sufficient punishment. However they
approved of the loss of his civil rights, and also ordered
that he pay a fine of DM30,000 plus costs estimated around
DM90,000.

For some obscure reason, the transcript of Papen’s
denazification trials is lodged in the library of St. Anthony’s
College, Oxford. A precis of the case appears in Constantine
FitzGibbon’s Denazification (Michael Joseph, London,
1969).

Bormann

It was never properly explained at the IMT why it was
that Bormann could be tried in absentia. Since the court
had concluded that the elder Krupp could not be tried in
his absence, one would have thought that the same would
apply to Bormann. But in the typical manner of the
Numberg Trials, the court acted completely erratically,
ignoring both established legal procedure and even its own
decision in another case.

In its own world of judicial make-believe, the Tribunal
even appointed legal counsel for the absent Bormann, in
the form of Friedrich Bergold. Bergold faced insuperable
odds in presenting any form of defence for his client, since
his client was not there to instruct him. So, instead of
struggling with a rickety skeleton of a defence, Bergold
confined his argument to a submission that Bormann was
dead and therefore no sentence could be passed on him.
Even in the bizarre world of the Numberg Palace of Justice,
a dead man could not be hanged, therefore neither could
he be tried.

Although Bergold himself was fully convinced of
Bormann’s absence from the land of the living, the Tribunal
found his evidence somewhat lacking. As there was no
evidence to show that Bormann’s body had been found, it
followed, they conjectured, that Bormann must still be
making use of it. Bormann was found guilty on charges 3
and 4, and was sentenced to death. However, the errant
Bormann failed to pay due respect to the esteemed Inter¬
national Military Tribunal, and neglected to turn up at the
appointed time for his execution.

Naturally, this has caused considerable anguish amongst
dedicated Tribunalophiles and Naziphobes. The absence of
Martin Bormann at his own execution has stimulated large
numbers of Nazi-hunters to scour the four comers of the
earth for this man, anxious that he should not miss all the
fun which his erstwhile colleagues enjoyed. Although
irregular sightings have occurred in sundry, obscure, South
American banana republics, none of these has resulted in a
positive ‘find’.

Just supposing for one moment that Bormann was still
extant, and was run to earth, it is rather interesting to
speculate as to what fate he would meet. It is doubtful if
the Allies would have the tenacity to carry out a thirty-
year old sentence, particularly as all the Western Allies
have now abolished the death penalty. Probably the way
out of it would be for Bormann to ‘accidentally’ fall into
the hands of the Mossad, the Israeli secret intelligence
service, who would ‘persuade’ Bormann to accompany
them to Israel ‘voluntarily’, where he could ‘make a clean
breast of things so that future generations would beware


of the ancient, indeed Mediaeval, mental disorder known
as anti-Semitism’. As fate would have it, Israel too has
abolished capital punishment, but with the exception of
crimes related to the ‘Holocaust’. Thus Martin Bormann
would finally meet his ‘just deserts’, handed down at
Niimberg over a quarter of a century ago.

Von Neurath

The conservative diplomat Neurath was appointed
Reichsprotektor of Czechoslovakia by Hitler in 1939. It
was a role which was to win him no friends, since the
Czechs detested him as a symbol of Nazi imperialism and
the Nazis derided him for being too lenient.

Indeed, Neurath was able to demonstrate at his trial that
under his rule Czech theatres, concert halls, cinemas, and
synagogues remained open. His policy was to Germanise
the Czechs and welcome them as cives Germanii. It was his
moderation which led to his downfall. In 1941, Hitler sent
Heydrich to Prague to toughen up the German adminis¬
tration. This eventually led to Neurath’s resignation in
October 1943.

One of the main witnesses against Neurath at Niimberg
was an erratic American diplomat by the name of George S.
Messersmith, a former US Consul in Berlin and in Austria.
Messersmith claimed that Neurath and Papen had told him
in advance of the Nazi Anschluss plans. Naturally enough,
Messersmith stood out (in his own testimony) as a beacon
of humanitarianism standing up against the wicked
tyrannical plans of the Nazis. But as Eugene Davidson
comments in The Trial Of the Germans:

Messersmith’s affidavit palpably exaggerated in important places,
and his testmony . . . was unlikely on the fact of it. The trials at
Niimberg, and later Eichmann’s trial in Jerusalem, were to elicit such
testimony on the part of witnesses who not only wanted to inflate
their own roles, but were determined to take part in bringing the
accused to justice. The court does not seem to have given much
weight to testimony which was obviously part of a fantasy in which
the witnesses played momentous roles against tyranny.

Despite the flights of fantasy engaged in by US Govern¬
ment witnesses, Neurath was found guilty on all four
counts. He was sentenced to fifteen years’ imprisonment,
of which he served eight, at Spandau prison in Berlin. He
was released on account of ill-health in 1954 and died two
years later at the age of 83.

Speer

Speer’s trial strategy was simple, and also relatively
successful, since he did not hang. Conceding the existence
of the extermination programme, he denied all knowledge
of it dining the war. Even today he still maintains this
absurd position.

In fact, Speer and his assistants were deeply involved in
the deportation of (employable) Hungarian Jews for work
in the underground aircraft factories at Buchenwald.
Therefore any rail transport priority given to Hungarian
Jews to be exterminated (as alleged at the IMT) would
have become known to Speer if such had actually been the
case. If Speer had testified truthfully, he would haVe
declared that he had been so situated that if an exter¬
mination programme of this kind existed, he would have
known about it, and that to his knowledge, none did. But
it seems rather obvious that such a statement would have
ranked as heresy to the IMT, and Speer would have joined
his colleagues on the gallows.

In Speer’s book, the only reference to “gas-chambers”
appears in the Introduction, which was written by Eugene
Davidson and added to Speer’s original manuscript on the
insistence of the publishers.

29


Speer was sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment, which
he served, to the very minute, in Spandau Prison in Berlin.
He was released in 1966 and is still alive today, although
he maintains a rather low profile.


THE WITNESSES

TheSS

One of the star witnesses against the SS, which was
charged with being a “guilty organisation”, was General
Erich von dem Bach-Zelewski. He was prepared to be “co¬
operative” with the court, as he himself was under threat
of arrest, trial and execution on account of his role in the
suppression of the Warsaw uprising.

The evidence of Bach-Zelewski is contained in volume
IV of the IMT report. In March 1941, he claimed, Himmler
(the head of the SS) invited his SS chiefs (including Bach-
Zelewski) to his castle at Wewelsburg for a conference.
Himmler spoke in grandiose terms about the liquidation of
the peoples of Eastern Europe, he said.

Goring, in the dock, denounced Bach-Zelewski to his
face for the falsity of his testimony. One especially out¬
rageous allegation concerned a supposed declaration by
Himmler that one of the aims of the Russian campaign was
to “decimate the Slav population by thirty millions”.
What Himmler really said is given by his Chief of Staff,
Wolff: that war in Russia was certain to result in millions
of dead (cf. Manvell & Frankl, The Incomparable Crime,
P-117).

Another brazen falsehood was Bach-Zelewski’s accusation
that on 31 August 1942, Himmler personally witnessed the
execution of one hundred Jews by an Action Group at
Minsk, causing him nearly to faint. It is known, however,
that on this particular date Himmler was in conference at
his field headquarters at Zhitomir in the Ukraine (cf.
K. Vowinckel, Die Wehrmacht im Kampf, vol.4, p.275).

Much is made, even today, of Bach-Zelewski’s evidence.
Books such as Willi Frischauer’s Himmler: Evil Genius of
the Third Reich draw heavily on it. However, in April
1959, Bach-Zelewski publicy repudiated his Niimberg
testimony before a West German court. He admitted that
his earlier statements had not the slightest foundation in
fact, and that he had made them for the sake of expediency
and his own survival. The German court, after careful
deliberation, accepted his retraction.

Ironically, the truth concerning Himmler and the SS
was provided long after the Niimberg Trials by an anti-
Nazi — Felix Kersten, Himmler’s physician and masseur.
In his Memoirs 1940—1945 he reveals that from his close
personal knowledge of Himmler he is convinced that
Himmler did not advocate liquidating the Jews, but
favoured their emigration overseas.

However, Himmler was not around to be able to stand
trial. He had committed “suicide” whilst in British
captivity. If he had lived to give evidence, it is likely that
he would have been the only one of the defendants who
was able to give a true interpretation of the harrowing
scenes found in the camps at the end of the war, since he
was most closely responsible. In fact, in an interview with
a representative of the World Jewish Congress, just a few
weeks before the end of the war, he indicated what that
evidence would have been:

In order to put a stop to the epidemics, we were forced to bum
the bodies of incalculable numbers of people who had been
destroyed by disease. We were therefore forced to build crematoria,
and on this account they are knotting a noose for us.


To have presented such an interpretation at the IMT
would have meant challenging the whole sine qua non of
the trial. It was acceptable for the other defendants to
admit exterminations whilst disclaiming personal respon¬
sibility, or even to dispute the extermination whilst failing
to provide an alternative explanation for the crematoria.
But to actually put forward a logically feasible alternative
explanation was heresy that could not be allowed.
Himmler’s death is even today shrouded in mystery.

Hoss

The commandant at Auschwitz from May 1940 to late
1943 was SS Colonel Rudolf Hoss. During the IMT trial
he had signed several affidavits for the prosecution, the
most noted being signed on 5 April 1946.

In order not to make things too obviously rigged, it was
arranged that he would be called by the defence, during
the Kaltenbrunner trial on 15 April 1946. The major part
of his testimony was merely assenting to his 5 April
affidavit.

Hoss was to become the star prosecution witness of the
entire Numberg trial, and his evidence has gone down in
history, unchallenged, as the Authentic Auschwitz Story.
Perhaps it is about time that the Hoss testimony was
effectively questioned. The full text appears in Prof. Butz’s
book, The Hoax of the Twentieth Century.

Not even Hoss clung to the figure of 2,500,000 victims
gassed, cited in paragraph two. At the time of his own trial
in Poland in 1947 he used a figure of 1,135,000. (Various
other ‘authorities’ use figures ranging from 750,000
through 4,000,000 to 7,000,000.) The special mention
accorded to the Hungarian Jews arouses some suspicion,
as it has since transpired that large numbers of Jews who
disappeared from Hungary were secretly spirited away to
Palestine and the U.S.A. via neutral countries under a
covert agreement between Eichmann and Jewish com¬
munity leaders Biss, Brand and Kastner. (see Andr£ Biss,
A Million Jews to Save .)

In paragraph 4, Hoss claims that even after he was
promoted to the Inspectorate of Concentration Camps in
Berlin, he still knew that the gassings were continuing. Yet
in his verbal testimony at Niirnberg, Hoss said that while
he was Commander of Auschwitz his inspector was
allowed to know nothing about the exterminations. Also
during his own trial in 1947, Hoss said that gassings began
in the summer of 1942, not 1941.

According to Hoss in paragraph seven, Jews not fit to
work were gassed immediately upon arrival, but an
account directly in conflict with this claim appears in a
War Refugee Board report compiled, allegedly, from the
testimony of Auschwitz survivors. The survivors stated
that new arrivals were kept in quarantine for six months,
in case they brought in disease.

Hoss claims that Jews were separated into extermination-
and work-groups simply as they walked past a doctor. Yet
according to Dr. E. A. Cohen, a Dutch Jew who claims he
was a doctor at Auschwitz, Jews were only selected for
special treatment after a proper medical examination at
the camp hospital.

It seems very strange indeed that Hoss would write such
an important statement in a foreign language. There is no
documentary evidence extant to show that Hoss knew any
English at all. But even if he did speak English, it would be
logical to assume that, being a European, he would have
learned English as it is spoken in England. At several points
in the affidavit the idiom used is of the American variety.
Consider for example the word “Fall” in the first sentence


of paragraph 4. “Fall” is the American word; the English
say “Autumn”. Consider also the use of the terms “one-
half year” (paragraph 6, sentence 6) and “one-half hour”
(paragraph 6, penultimate sentence). These are distinctly
American terms; the English would say “half-a-year” and
“half-an-hour”.

There is no doubt that Hoss hoped to buy his life by
co-operating with the IMT prosecution. There is also
evidence that he was subject to torture and brain-washing;
his testimony at Numberg was delivered in a mindless
monotone as he stared blankly into space. Even Jewish
‘holocaust experts’ such as Reitlinger reject his testimony
as hopelessly untmstworthy. However, Hoss’ reward for
his services was to be packed off to Poland about a month
after his IMT testimony.

The Communists admit that they “ordered him to write
the story of his life” which was published as Wspomnienia
in the Polish language in 1951. A hand-written original
supposedly exists, but no one in the West has ever seen it.
German and English translations followed in 1960 under
the title Commandant of Auschwitz. One of the most
illuminating keys to this whole bizarre hoax is contained
in these Hoss memoirs, where he is supposed to have said
that the Jehovah’s Witnesses at Auschwitz approved of
murdering the Jews because the Jews were the enemies of
Christ. Now, it is well known that in the USSR today and
in all Iron Curtain countries, the Communists conduct a
bitter campaign of suppression against the Jehovah’s
Witnesses, whom they regard as being anti-Communist.
That this sect is deliberately and grossly defamed in the
Hoss memoirs proves the document’s Communist origins
beyond any doubt.

However Hoss did not live even to see his ‘memoirs’ in
print. He was ‘tried’ by the Polish government in March
1947, and the following month he was executed, ironically,
at Auschwitz.

Hottl

Another star witness at the trials was a Dr. Wilhelm
Hottl, an assistant of Adolf Eichmann’s at the office of
Jewish Emigration in Budapest, Hungary.

Hottl was born in Vienna in 1915 and grew up with
Kaltenbrunner, one of the IMT defendants. Hottl entered
the SD in 1938 and soon acquired a reputation for mixing
official business with personal deals. In 1942 the SS
investigated a land deal he had conducted in Poland, in
liaison with a Polish countess friend of his. The SS report
characterised Hottl as “dishonest, scheming, fawning . . .
a real hoaxer” and concluded that he was not even suitable
for membership of the SS, let alone such a sensitive branch
as the SD. He was, accordingly, reduced to the ranks.

However when his boyhood friend Kaltenbrunner was
appointed to head the RSHA, after Heydrich’s assassination
by British commandos, Hottl’s fortunes started to look up
again, and he rose to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel with
special responsibility in foreign intelligence work. Towards
the end of the war he worked with Eichmann in Budapest.

With the war over, Hottl very obligingly co-operated
fully with the Allies and signed several affidavits for the
IMT prosecution. In his affidavit 2793-PS, signed on
26 November 1945, Hottl stated that Eichmann had
visited his office in a depressed mood because he was
convinced that the war was lost. Eichmann thought that
the Allies would punish him as a major war criminal. He
then declared, with no other witnesses present, that four
million Jews had been killed in extermination camps and
that two million had met their deaths in various other


ways, mainly through executions carried out by Action
Groups.

This was the only evidence produced throughout the
Niimberg trials to back up the six million figure — the
written affidavit of a highly dubious character that a minor
civil servant (then missing) had told him, with no other
witnesses present, that six million Jews had been killed.

There is considerable evidence that Hottl was an Allied
agent, at least during the latter part of the war. Some
authorities suggest that he may have been more of a
‘Walter Mitty’ character, revelling in the intrigue of
‘espionage’ purely for reasons of personal inadequacy. But
whatever his motivations, Hottl certainly played a highly
suspect role.

For towards the end of the war, Hottl was in contact
with Allen Dulles, of the Office of Strategic Services (now
the CIA) in Switzerland. This may have been in order to
receive instructions, but on the other hand it may have
simply meant that Hottl was endeavouring to negotiate a
German surrender. When the war officially ended however,
Hottl was given the sensitive job of interrogating his ex-SS
comrades on behalf of the US Army Counter-Intelligence
Corps — hardly the kind of position the Americans would
give to a Nazi or to an erratic Walter Mitty.

During the Niimberg trials, Hottl met up with two
American-Jewish members of the Niimberg staff — Verber
and Ponger, who later turned out to be Soviet agents.
Verber and Ponger worked as translators at the trials (they
were both recently-naturalised Americans who had
emigrated from Russia). Kurt Ponger also acted as a
prosecution lawyer in the later AMT trial 4. Ponger and
Verber stayed on in Europe after the trials and were
arrested and charged with espionage for the Soviets in
Vienna in 1953. Hottl was also arrested by the US
authorities in March 1953, suspected of complicity in the
case, but due to lack of evidence he was released a few
weeks later.

In the mid-fifties, under the pseudonym of Walter
Hagen, Hottl published two books about his war-time
experiences — The Secret Front and Hitler's Paper Weapon.

In 1961, the popular British magazine Weekend published
a feature article on Hottl, claiming that during the war he
had been a British agent. ( Weekend , 25/29.1.61.)

This article coincided with Hottl’s re-emergence as a
‘war-crimes expert’, this time at the trial in Israel of his
former boss, Adolf Eichmann. Hottl again submitted an
affidavit, largely similar to his Niimberg testimony. Not
unexpectedly, Eichmann disputed that the interview had
ever taken place. And again not unexpectedly, the court
preferred to believe Hottl. Eichmann was hanged on 31
May 1962.

Gerstein

Yet another Niimberg “star witne'ss” who turned out to
be highly unreliable was one Kurt Gerstein, an SS First
Lieutenant whose lugubrious title was Chief Disinfection
Officer in the Office of the Hygienic Chief of the Waffen-
SS. In this role it was Gerstein’s responsibility to supervise
the deliveries of disinfection supplies to all the camps
administered by the SS.

Two versions of what happened to him at the end of the
war are offered to us by different authorities. In one
version, he encountered American interrogators by chance
on 26 April 1945 in a hotel in Rottweil, in the Black
Forest. Apparently, he had told them that he had obtained
a responsible post in the Nazi Party while operating as a
secret agent on behalf of the anti-Nazi co-ordinator Rev.


Niemoller. He went on to reveal that he had been involved
in the operating of gas-chambers, and said that he was
quite willing to give evidence to this effect in court. He
then handed them a seven page document, typed in
French, together with a note in English and some Zyklon
invoices, and then vanished.

In the second version, he somehow found himself in the
Cherche-Midi military prison in Paris, where he composed
a document in French, in his own hand, added the Zyklon
invoices, and then hanged himself in July 1945. In either
case, neither he nor his body has ever been produced.

The Gerstein Statement together with the Zyklon
invoices was introduced as document 1553-PS at Niimberg.
However, the Statement is possibly the most ludicrous and
obviously fake piece of evidence introduced during the
whole series of trials.

The full text is included in Appendix A of Butz’s Hoax
of the Twentieth Century, and is well worth examination
in order to get some idea of just how bizarre the entire
Niimberg episode was. Suffice it to say here that the
Statement is riddled with inaccuracies and fantasy. It is
simply not true that Hitler ever visited Lublin camp
(paragraph 4). It is physically impossible to pack 700—800
people into a gas-chamber of 25 square metres (paragraph
7). Nor can August be described as being “in winter”
(paragraph 7). Neither could there have been 25 million
people gassed (paragraph 7), which even the AMT had to
tacitly admit, since they edited this figure out of the
particular version of the Statement submitted as document
1553-PS.

One of the more reliable aspects of the Gerstein State¬
ment is undoubtedly the admission in paragraph 3 that
there is a streak of insanity running in his family. However,
this did not hinder the West German government in 1955
issuing an edition of the Gerstein Statement for distribution
in German schools.

A drastically edited version of the Gerstein Statement
was also introduced at the Jerusalem trial of Adolf
Eichmann in 1961.

SS Colonel Kurt Becher and Reszo Kastner

One of the less well remembered prosecution witnesses
at Niimberg was SS Colonel Kurt Becher, who was Adolf
Eichmann’s superior officer in Budapest. Becher’s overall
responsibility was for securing horses, supplies and equip¬
ment for the SS troops, after the occupation of Hungary in
1944.

What is not generally acknowledged is that Becher, like
his colleague Eichmann, was actively pro-Zionist, and
carried out many helpful tasks for the Jewish community
in Budapest. Now a remarkable book has been written
about this period by one of the Budapest Jewish leaders,
Andrd Biss, A Million Jews To Save (New English Library,
1973; previously published in German as Der Stopp der
Endlosung, 1966).

Biss describes how Becher first became popular with the
Jewish community in Budapest when he negotiated with
the prominent Weiss family the purchase from them of a
major share-holding in the biggest industrial and banking
conglomerate in Hungary. Later, he also arranged for them
to be granted exit visas, so that they could sit out the rest
of the war in peaceful Switzerland or Portugal. Becher
became extremely friendly with the Weiss family during
the negotiations; he even lodged at the same block of flats
where some members of the family housed their collections
of art, antiques and tapestries (p.73). He also found that
in order to buy any kind of supplies for the German forces,


he nearly always had to buy from a Jewish dealer, since,
according to Biss “commerce, industry and banking came
to be almost exclusively in their hands ... even agricultural
business, such as horse trading, had been up until then
mainly conducted by Jews” (p.74). Later on in the war,
Becher had the full support of the Weiss family in the
removal westwards of all their factories, so as to prevent
their seizure by the invading Soviets (p.169).

On 26 June 1944, Becher met with a prominent
member of the Budapest Zionist Committee for Mutual
Assistance (the Waada), a Dr. Rezso Kastner, who proposed
that larger numbers of Hungarian Jews — up to a million —
should be allowed to emigrate, in return for Kastner
supplying substantial supplies of money for the Germans
to use as they sought fit, presumably in the purchase of
war materials: trucks were suggested. Biss tells us that
Becher readily agreed to the scheme, and personally
arranged for a representative of the Budapest Jews to be
flown to neutral Turkey, where he could negotiate the
gathering together of the necessary finance with Jewish
interests in Allied countries. The man chosen to go was
Joel Brand, Biss’s cousin, whom Biss variously describes
as an ex-Communist (p.33), a drunk (p.34), a Zionist
(p.35), a garment-manufacturer (p.36), a black-marketeer
(p.36), a smuggler (p.37), a philanderer who was living
with the mistress of one of Canaris’s men (p.24) and a
shirker who had avoided compulsory labour service by
claiming to be diabetic (p.38). It was hardly surprising,
therefore, that once Brand had left Hungary, he was not
inclined to return, with or without the necessary funds.
According to Biss, Brand deliberately had himself arrested
by the British authorities in Syria, so that he would have
an adequate excuse for not returning to Budapest. (On the
whole, Brand would appear to have been a rather different
character from the heroic one portrayed in The Joel Brand
Story, shown on German TV in November 1964.)

But Becher was still determined to get the scheme under
way. He agreed to the despatch of a first train-load of Jews
to Switzerland, although the journey was a roundabout
one, involving several weeks’ wait at the transit camp of
Bergen-Belsen. The emigrants consisted of prominent
rabbis and Zionist leaders, about fifty friends and relations
of Kastner’s from his home town of Kluj, and the most
numerous group — the Zionist Youth pioneers, who had
already trained at Nazi-sponsored agricultural camps for
colonising work in Palestine.

With Brand’s failure to return from Turkey, Becher and
Kastner were obliged to do their own negotiating for the
trucks-for-Jews deal with Jewish interests outside the Reich.
On 21 August 1944, the Nazi Becher and the Jew Kastner
both travelled to the Austro-Swiss border at Sankt-
Margrethen, where they conversed, rather dramatically
across the actual frontier demarcation line, with Saly
Meyer, an elderly Jewish banker who was the Swiss repre¬
sentative of the American Joint Distribution Committee,
the New York based Jewish charity. Meyer explained that
the Allied governments were not at all keen on allowing
US currency to go to the Nazis, even if it was for a ‘good
cause’, i.e. “rescuing Jews from extermination”. However,
Biss explains that the Jews’ tactics were to string the Nazis
along, always promising that money would be coming
soon, in order to ensure the well-being of all the potential
£migr£s.

Kastner’s Waada was in constant contact with the leaders
of the Jewish community in Slovakia, Dr. Oskar Neumann
and Rabbi Michael Weissmandel, and they in turn were in
touch with Polish Jewry, particularly with Alexander


Weissberg in Cracow, who kept an eye on nearby
Auschwitz. Biss admits that it was the Budapest Waada
which first fed the reports of “Auschwitz exterminations”
to the outside world, having collected information via
these contacts (p.65). Becher’s office was even involved in
this network. In September 1944, after a minor Jewish
uprising in Slovakia, Becher’s aide-de-camp SS Captain
Griison accompanied Kastner and Biss to Bratislava in
Slovakia, to see what could be done to aid the Jewish
community, which was suffering from the Nazis’ vigorous
methods of restoring order.

Becher was also involved in the Waada’s links with the
War Refugee Board, the American government’s committee
for the welfare of (chiefly Jewish) refugees, which was run
by Henry Morgenthau Jr., the leftist Jew who had the ear
of President Roosevelt. On 5 November 1944 Becher was
allowed into Switzerland for talks with Roswell D.
McClelland, a prominent American Quaker, who ran the
key Berne office of the War Refugee Board. McClelland
worked extremely closely with both the Jewish community
organisations and the OSS — the Office of Strategic
Services which was later to become the CIA. (In fact, the
then head of the OSS in Switzerland, Allen Dulles, has
now become overall head of the CIA.) It was McClelland
who was able to fix up a Swiss visa for Becher, through
the US Embassy.

It was McClelland who several months previously had
been responsible for forwarding to Washington the dossier
on Auschwitz which was later to become the WRB Report,
and submitted as an important item of evidence at
Niimberg. The report, allegedly a compilation of interviews
with five anonymous Auschwitz escapees, was passed to
McClelland by Rabbi Weissmandel, the Slovakian Jewish
leader who worked closely with Kastner and Biss. Kastner
and Biss, in turn, liaised with another WRB agent in
Budapest, Raoul Wallenberg, a Jewish member of the
Swedish diplomatic staff. Relations were so cosy, it seems,
that Biss’s chauffeur (!) was allowed to park Biss’s new
American car (!) in the Swedish Embassy yard in Budapest.
(On page 184 of his book, Biss complains bitterly that
after the Soviet occupation, the car was appropriated.)
Wallenberg’s disappearance at the end of the war remains
a mystery: he was last seen heading for the Soviet Army
HQ in Budapest to complain about the exactions of the
Red Army.

Becher met McClelland at the Hotel Savoy-Baur-en-ville,
near Zurich, after visiting Berlin for last minute instructions
from Himmler. The minutes of the McClelland-Becher
interview remain to this day one of the tightest-kept
secrets of the entire war, although the actual meeting itself
is quite well known to historians. According to Biss (whose
book incidentally is not just badly translated into
fractured English but also extremely chaotically written)
Becher agreed with the American that the “exterminations
would be immediately stopped”, in return for Washington
giving permission for the transfer of cash from the Joint
Distribution Committee to a Nazi bank account in
Switzerland.

During the Niimberg evidence, Becher claimed that
when he reported back to Himmler, the Reichsfiihrer
suddenly flew into a rage, and yelled that “the Americans
wanted to stop things that had never existed”. Then,
“yielding to Becher’s prudent advice” Himmler issued a
written order to Pohl and Kaltenbrunner stating, “With
immediate effect I forbid all extermination of Jews and I
order, on the contrary, that care be taken of those weak or
sick. I hold you personally responsible even in cases where
32


this order may not be strictly carried out by subaltern
authorities.” However, no example of this damning
document was produced at Niimberg; Becher’s text was
drawn purely from his own memory. Indeed, in La Terre
Retrouv&e of 15 December 1960, Dr. Kubovy the
director of the World Centre of Contemporary Jewish
Documentation in Tel-Aviv admitted that there is in
existence not one single mention or order for extermin¬
ations from either Hitler, Himmler, Heydrich or Goring.

Kastner too sent evidence to the IMT at Niimberg, in
the form of affidavit 2605-PS, written in London and
submitted on 13 September 1945. Although Kastner
himself had never seen a gas-chamber or an extermination
camp, he regarded himself as an ‘authority’ on the exter¬
mination programme by virtue of his intelligence-gathering
operations in the Waada and his intimate contacts with
Becher and Wisliceny. But Kastner was also at pains to
portray Becher as a “good Nazi” — a point of view for
which he was later to pay the ultimate penalty.

After the Niimberg Trials, all the characters in this
bizarre tale went their separate ways.

Kastner went to live in Switzerland, and in 1946
hurriedly threw together a dossier, the Rapport du Comity
juif d’Assistance de Budapest, which he presented to the
following year’s Zionist Congress held in Israel. The report
was later published in book formy with “certain modifi¬
cations”, as Rapport Kastner, edited by Ernest Landau at
Munich in 1961. In 1947, Kastner went to Niimberg in
person, to become “Gen. Taylor’s adviser on matters
relating to the extermination of the Jews”, at the AMT.
Later on, Kastner emigrated to Israel, where he continued
to publish his Hungarian language newspaper Uj Kelet. He
joined Ben Gurion’s Mapai party, eventually becoming the
Prime Minister’s press officer. But during the parliamentary
election campaign of 1954, his political adversaries taunted
him about his former contacts with the Nazis, particularly
his close relationship with Becher, claiming that there had
been financial irregularities and that Kastner had used the
deal to allow his family and friends to escape. Kastner sued
for libel and won a farthing damages. He was about to
appeal, with the support of the Israeli government, when
he was gunned down in a Jerusalem street by “a young
zealot” (in fact a Mossad agent). Nine days later, on 12
March 1957, he died in hospital.

Andr£ Biss was privileged enough to be allowed out of
Soviet-occupied Hungary at the end of the War. He went
to Switzerland and then Austria, where he gathered funds
with the intention of returning to Budapest to finance the
welfare of destitute Jews. However he was arrested by the
French government of occupation, and spent two months
in prison on a charge of fraudulent currency dealings. Biss
settled down in Switzerland, although he made an excursion
to Israel in 1961 with the intention of giving evidence
against Adolf Eichmann. However, when Biss refused to
omit from his evidence any mention of the Kastner-Becher
negotiations (since the subject was still a hot potato for
the Mapai party) Prosecutor Hausner decided to do
without Biss’s evidence. Biss commented, “What had
started by being just and objective became an act of
collective accusation against the whole German people”
(p.191). Biss explained this strange Israeli aversion to
publicising a “Jewish victory over Eichmann” (the
successful convoys) by saying that such a victory “had no
place in the official version of the Jewish martyrology,
that is to say, the total extermination of Jews in central
Europe” (p.194, original emphasis).

Joel Brand, Biss’s wayward cousin who had managed to


get himself locked up in the security of a British jail for-
the duration of the war, also turned up at the Eichmann
Trial. He declared to the court that in the month of May
1944, when the German troops entered Budapest, he was
under “preventive arrest”, when in fact he had abandoned
his family and was co-habiting with a dancing-girl. Brand
tried to compensate for his erratic behaviour on the
Istanbul mission by deriding the entire scheme and heaping
abuse on both Kastner (even though dead) and Becher.
Although Brand had only met Becher once before he left
for Turkey, he was still able to describe Becher as “a war
criminal of the worst sort”. However, Brand’s low regard
for Becher had not prevented him from going to see
Becher immediately after the war and asking him for a
certificate to use in his claim for compensation being heard
in the German courts at that time. Biss reckoned that there
were no less than seven false statements in Brand’s
evidence, and applied to both the Minister of Justice and
the Prime Minister himself to have Brand arrested for
perjury; but to no avail. Biss also assessed that out of the
102 witnesses called by the prosecution, at least 90 of
them had not only never met Eichmann, but until the end
of the war had never even heard his name.

Dr. Alexander Weissberg, the Cracow Jew who kept an
eye on nearby Auschwitz, ended up doing scientific
research in the USSR after the war. He was deported
during the Stalin purges, and in 1956 published his version
of the Trucks-for-Jews deal under the title Die Geschicte
von Joel Brand (Cologne, 1956). It was this eulogy of
Brand which formed the basis for a German TV film in
1964.

Rabbi Weissmandel, the leader of the Slovakian Jews,
who was responsible for the collating, and probably
writing, of the Auschwitz dossier published by the War
Refugee Board, emigrated to the United States after the
war and set up an orthodox Talmudic seminary in New
York State. He died in November 1957. However his war
memoirs, which dealt in depth with his contacts with
Kastner, Becher and McClelland, were published post-
umously in Hebrew in 1960.

Dr. J. Oskar Neumann, Weissmandel’s colleague in
Bratislava, also put his memoirs into print, as Im Schatten
des Todes, published in Tel-Aviv in 1956.

Even though Becher had taken the “correct” line at
Niimberg, he himself was held in prison while the
authorities decided what to do with him. In 1947 he faced
a de-Nazification tribunal, and was released, chiefly thanks
to a supporting affidavit from his old friend Rezso
Kastner. It was this affidavit which eventually caused
Kastner to be accused of being a “Nazi-lover” in Israel.


The International Military Tribunal: from Left to Right: Falco and
de Vabres (France), Parker and Biddle (USA), Lawrence and Birkett
(Britain), Nikitschenko and Volchkow (USSR).


THE SENTENCES


COUNT

1

2

3

4

SENTENCE

Goring

G

G

G

G

Death

Hess

G

G

I

I

Life imprisonment

Ribbentrop

G

G

G

G

Death

Keitel

G

G

G

G

Death

Kaltenbrunner

I


G

G

Death

Rosenberg

G

G

G

G

Death

Frank

I


G

G

Death

Frick

I

G

G

G

Death

Streicher

I


G

Death

Funk

I

G

G

G

Life imprisonment

Schacht

I

I


Acquitted

Donitz

I

G

G


10 years

Raeder

G

G

G


Life imprisonment

Schirach

I


G

20 years

Sauckel

I

I

G

G

Death

Jodi

G

G

G

G

Death

Bormann

I


G

G

Death

von Papen

I

I


Acquitted

Seyss-Inquart

I

G

G

G

Death

Speer

I

I

G

G

20 years

Neurath

G

G

G

G

15 years

Fritzche

I


I

I

Acquitted

Reich Cabinet

Not criminal


General Staff &

High Command

Not criminal


Leadership Corps

Partly criminal


Gestapo

Party criminal


SD

Partly criminal


G = Guilty
I = Innocent

A blank space indicates that no charge was made on that count.


THE EXECUTIONS

Goring escaped the hangman’s noose by committing
suicide shortly before the scheduled time for execution.
The other ten were hanged on 15 October 1946, which
just happened to coincide with the Jewish feast-day of
Hoshana Raba.

The executions took place in virtual secrecy, for they
were deliberately bungled. The prisoners were given a
short drop so that their necks would not be instantaneously
broken and they would strangle slowly. The official timing
between the springing of the trap and the extinction of life
in the ten victims were Minutes 18, 24, 13,10,10*4 12,14,
14, 16 and 11. The man in charge of the executions was


one John C. Woods, a sergeant in the US Army, who in
1952 was himself mysteriously electrocuted on the remote
island of Eniwetok. An article in Stag magazine (Vol. 3,
No. 1) by the official US Army undertaker, who was
present at the executions, states that “The Jewish-
American boy in charge of the execution” (of Julius
Streicher) “let him strangle horribly for a long, long
minute”. Several of those executed also suffered face and
head injuries, as they struck the edges of the trap door
opening, on the way down.

Streicher was the only one of the ten to have fought
physically with his executioners. When he was finally
subdued he gave a Heil Hitler salute before he died.

Kempner had authoritatively predicted in the New York
Times that the Nazi war criminals would be buried in
unmarked paves to “avoid fanatical pilgrimages by still
ardent Nazis”. In actual fact, the ultimate procedure was
even more hysterical and paranoid. The ten bodies, plus
Goring’s, were displayed to waiting newsmen (and gory
photographs splashed over the next day’s sensationalist
press, except in Britain where they were considered too
disturbing).

The bodies were then disguised in US Army uniforms,
taken secretly to Dachau and cremated there; their ashes
being sifted into the nearby River Isar.


THE IMPRISONMENTS

Seven of the Niimberg defendants received terms of
imprisonment. On 18 July 1947, the seven were transferred
in a Dakota aircraft to Berlin-Gatow, and each prisoner,
handcuffed to a US soldier, was loaded into an RAF bus
with barred windows, and taken to Spandau prison. The
seven were:


Name

Age (in 1947)

Sentence

Prison No.

Baldur von Schirach 40

20 years

1

Karl Donitz
Konstantin von

56

10 years

2

Neurath

74

15 years

3

Erich Raeder

71

life

4

Albert Speer

42

20 years

5

Walter Funk

57

life

6

Rudolf Hess

53

life

7


Spandau, an ugly red-brick civilian prison, built in 1876,
was to be run in rotation by each of the Great Powers.
Britain’s months would be January, May and September;
France was in charge in February, June and October; the
USSR in March, July and November, and the USA in
April, August and December. When the Soviets’ turn came
round, they would be allowed to march their guard into
West Berlin from the Eastern sector — a privilege which
they have closely guarded to this day.

When the prisoners arrived, they were stripped stark
naked and paraded into a medical office where all their
orifices were examined to make sure they were not con¬
cealing capsules of poison. Initially, the prisoners were
not allowed to speak to either the guards or their
colleagues. Their diet was kept to the bare minimum
necessary for survival, until their condition began to
deteriorate. The Americans decided to put up the ration,
but the Soviets returned them to minimum when they
took over guard duty. The prisoners were not allowed to
receive newspapers, with the exception of a weekly church
paper. Prisoners were not allowed to either sit or lie on
their beds during the day.

34


Six concrete watch-towers were built around the prison
perimeter, and a 4000-volt electric fence ran the whole
way round. It was decided that the prison’s guillotine
could be dismantled, and the execution chamber was
instead turned into an operating theatre, so that the
prisoners would not have to go out of the prison for
hospitalisation.

The prisoners were all obliged to do prison work,
although it was debatable whether this was part of their
sentence. The Soviets continually insisted that the
sentence had implied compulsory hard labour with solitary
confinement. Each prisoner was in fact allowed one visitor
for 15 minutes every two months, although Hess always
refused to allow his family to see him in such a miserable
state. Von Schirach’s wife divorced him quite early on
during his confinement.

As the years passed, it was inevitable that some of the
warders took pity on their charges. When a bottle of wine
was smuggled to the prisoners, and they got a little merry,
the Soviets immediately suspected the communion wine in
the prison chapel, which was promptly banned. When a bar
of chocolate was found in Neurath’s cell, questions were
asked in the House of Commons about this unforgiveable
misdemeanour by Arthur Lewis (still the) Labour MP for
West Ham North.

But as the older prisoners’ health deteriorated rapidly,
the prospect of some of them dying in prison had to be
taken into account. Coffins were made for each of them,
from measurements used for their prison clothes. But
before such a contingency should arise, out of the blue the
Soviets agreed that the chronically ill Neurath should be
released. On 6 November 1954, he was released into the
care of his relatives, with whom he lived for two years
before dying of asthma.

The next name on the list of likely deaths was Raeder’s.
But as the rumours began to spread of his impending
release, a chorus of reaction was encountered from certain
elements. In the Sunday Despatch of 11.9.55, Lord Russell,
one of the British legal advisers at Niimberg, contributed
an article headed “Would You Set These Villains Free?”
Beneath a picture of Admiral Raeder was the caption
“Sink-at-Sight Admiral”. However, as Veale points out in
a most cynical commentary on page 231 of Crimes
Discreetly Veiled, not a line of the article relates to any of
the ‘war criminals’ pictured at the top of the page. Veale
relates that he wrote to the Sunday Despatch editor to ask
him to correct some of the wilder inaccuracies in Russell’s
article, such as the untrue allegations that the Spandau
prisoners’ sentences were subject to continual review by
a Review Board, but the letter was never published.
Despite the sensationalist outpourings of the Sunday
tabloids, Admiral Raeder was released fifteen days later on
26 November 1955, on account of his rapidly deteriorating
health. He died shortly afterwards.

A year later it was Donitz’s turn, but not because of any
‘clemency’ on the part of the Allies. Donitz had served his
10 year sentence to the minute, at the Soviets’ insistence.
Funk was released in 1957 after a period of severe illness.
Speer and Schirach both served their entire 20 year
sentences and were released on 30 September 1966.

Rudolf Hess still remains in Spandau today, the sole
prisoner in a jail built for 600. He is looked after by a
prison force of 38 soldiers, 22 cooks and sundry cleaners
and waitresses. The cost, now borne by the German
government, is in the region of a million Deutschmarks a
year. There is no doubt that the Western powers would
have liked to have released him long ago, but the Soviets


insist on keeping him incarcerated so that they can have
continued military access to West Berlin.


THE AMERICAN MILITARY TRIBUNAL (AMT)

After the International Military Tribunal had reached
its foregone conclusions, each of the participant nations
decided to go their own way and hold unilateral trials in
their own zones of occupation.

As Niimberg was in the American zone, they were able
to continue with their trials at the same Palace of Justice
where the Nazi leaders had just been tried. This
undoubtedly gave their trials, rather than those of the
other Allies, that extra seal of ‘authority’. Indeed, with the
passing of time, many people, including historians, have
started to confuse the two totally separate trials, and one
can sometimes read about the American trials at Niimberg
being described as “International”. This is incorrect. There
was only one international trial:, that of the 21 Nazi
leaders.

The Americans held twelve subsequent trials at Niimberg,
involving 199 defendants including Alfried Krupp, whom
the Americans had wanted to try during the IMT in place
of his hospitalised father, Gustav. The American Prosecutor
Jackson had claimed that this was a “trial for posterity”.
But Sir Norman Birkett strongly opposed this suggestion,
which he called “shocking” and pointed out that this was
not a game of football in which a reserve could be fielded.
The younger Krupp had to wait until the AMT for his
share of Niimberg ‘justice’, therefore. He was sentenced to
12 years’ imprisonment, but was released after 7, and had
his confiscated property returned to him.

There is not room here to go into each of the twelve
cases in great detail, but we will examine in some depth
those cases which represent the greatest examples of
intrigue.

By August 1946 the AMT staff had drawn up a list of
close to 5000 names of Nazis whom they wished to arraign.
The list proved to be too ambitious, and had to be cut
down because of lack of “time, staff and money”. Although
an attempt was made to retain some kind of “balance”
with respect to the types of offence and occupation of
the defendants, sometimes the rationale used in deleting
names was rather arbitrary, to say the least. A cut-off
point was drawn across a list of names according to “the
size of the defendants’ dock in the particular courtroom
which was to be used.”

The trials were referred to variously according to the
case number, the name of the major defendant or a


descriptive title, as follows:

Case No. US vs. Description

AMT vols.

1

Brandt

Medical case

1,2

2

Milch

Milch case

2

3

Alstotter

Justice case

3

4

Pohl

Concentration camps case

5, 6

5

Flick

Businessmen case

6

6

Krauch

I.G. Farben case

7,8

7

List

Hostages case

9

8

Greifelt

RuSHA case

4, 5

9

Ohlendorf

Einsatzgruppen case

4

10

Krupp

Krupp case

9

11

Weizsacker

Wilhelmstrasse or

12-14

12

von Loeb

Ministries case

High Command case

10, 11


The official title of the trial summaries is: Trials of War
Criminals Before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals Under
Control Council Law No. 10 October 1946 — April 1949,
and the volumes are published under the imprint of the US


Government, Washington, at various dates between 1946
and 1949.

The AMT administration functioned through two
separate organisations. One was the collection of Tribunal
members — the judges, who functioned through a
Secretariat headed by a Secretary General. The judges were
recruited in the US by the Department of the Army. There
were three or more judges at any one trial.

The second organisation was the Office, Chief of Counsel
for War Crimes (Telford Taylor) which had come into
existence on 24 October 1946; the same day the IMT
executions were carried out. It filed its first indictment
against the second-rank Nazis the next day.

Taylor, who had been an associate trial counsel at the
IMT, really took over where Jackson left off, as the AMT
trials were held in the same Niimberg courthouse.

Taylor was responsible for almost everything except
the appointment of the judges. His Office was also charged
with determining who should or should not be tried, what
the charges should be and how prisoners should be
disposed of if they were not to be charged. The Office also
took over the functions of the Niirnberg staff, and was
formally responsible for interrogations, field work,
examination of documents, court reporting, and translating
and interpreting.

However, as with the earlier IMT hearings, there is a
considerable amount of evidence to show that it was in
fact the War Crimes Branch which made the running, not
the Chief of Counsel.

The new head of the War Crimes Branch was Col. David
“Mickey” Marcus, a fanatical Zionist whose career is even
now shrouded in mystery. We do know that Marcus was a
West Point graduate who before the War was Commissioner
of Corrections in New York. As an army officer during the
War he helped draft the German and Italian surrender
terms, and he also acted as a legal aide at the Potsdam
conference in the summer of 1945. He appears to have had
a real importance quite incommensurate with his relatively
common rank of Colonel, since we are told that during the
War he had made a “favourable impression on F.D.R. . ..
he was one of the anonymous handful who charted
American policy behind the scenes.”

Marcus’ precise position was that of Chief of the Planning
Branch of the Army’s Civil Affairs Division, which had
been set up under General Hilldring in 1943 to prepare for
military government in (occupied) Germany.

In fact it was because of his responsibilities and
experience at the CAD that Marcus later became “number
three man in making American policy” in the American
zone.

Early in 1946 Hilldring pulled him out of his military
government position and assigned him to take over from
Brig. Gen. John M. Weir as head of the War Crimes Branch,
which had been transferred from the JAG (legal) Dept, to
the CAD (government) Dept, on 4 March 1946.

According to Josiah du Bois, who headed the AMT
trial number 6 against I.G. Farben, and later described the
case in The Devil's Chemists, Marcus had been specifically
appointed in order “to take over the mammoth task of
selecting hundreds of judges, prosecutors and lawyers” for
the AMT and Tokyo trials.

His appointment was effective as of 18 February 1946,
but he spent a few months sizing up the situation in Japan
before moving back to the Washington head office of the
War Crimes Branch in June.


AMT 4

The main defendant in AMT 4, Oswald Pohl, had been
chief disbursing officer of the German Navy until 1934,
when Himmler requested his transfer to the SS. For eleven
years he was the principal administrative chief of the entire
SS in his position as head of the SS Economy and Adminis¬
trative Office. After 1941 he and his office were concerned
with the industrial productivity of the concentration
camps.

Pohl was an extremely sensitive and intellectual individual
who was reduced to a broken man in the course of his trial.
As Senator McCarthy pointed out on 20 May 1949, Pohl
had signed some incriminating statements only after being
subjected to torture, including having his face smeared
with faeces. His torturers managed to extract from him the
bogus admission that he had seen a gas chamber at
Auschwitz in 1944. The prosecution strenuously pressed
this point, but Pohl successfully repudiated it. The aim of
the prosecution was to depict this dejected man as a fiend
in human form, an impression which was totally at
variance with the testimony of those who knew him.

One such character witness was Heinrich Hopker, an
anti-Nazi friend of Pohl’s wife who had been in frequent
contact with him during the latter part of the war. Hopker
noted that Pohl was essentially a serene and mild-mannered
person. During a visit to Pohl in the spring of 1944,
Hopker was brought into contact with some concentration
camp inmates who were working on a local project outside
their camp. He noted that the prisoners worked in a
leisurely manner and relaxed atmosphere without any
pressure from their guards. Hopker declared that Pohl did
not hold an emotional attitude towards the Jews, and did
not mind his wife entertaining her Jewish friend
Annemarie Jacques at their home. By the beginning of
1945, Hopker was fully convinced that the administrator
of the concentration camps was a humane, conscientious
and dedicated servant to his work, and he was astonished
when he heard later in 1945 of the accusations being made
against Pohl and his colleagues.

Frau Pohl noted that her husband retained his serenity
in the face of adversity until March 1945, when he visited
the camp at Bergen-Belsen at the time of the typhus
epidemic there. Hitherto the camp had been a model of
cleanliness and order, but the chaotic conditions at the
close of the war had reduced it to a state of extreme
hardship. Pohl, who was unable to alleviate conditions
there because of the desperate stage which the war had
reached by that time, was deeply affected by the
experience, and according to his wife, never regained his
former state of composure.

Dr. Alfred Seidl, the highly respected lawyer, who acted
as principal defence counsel at the IMT, went to work
passionately to secure the acquittal of Pohl. Seidl had been
a personal friend of the accused for many years, and was
thoroughly convinced of his innocence. The American
judgement which condemned Pohl did not prompt Seidl
to change his opinion in the slightest. He declared that
the prosecution had failed to produce a single piece of
valid evidence against him.

One of the most eloquent defences of Oswald Pohl was
made by SS Lieutenant Colonel Kurt Schmidt-Klevenow, a
legal officer in Pohl’s office. However, for some odd reason,
the affidavit which Schmidt-Klevenow made on 8 August
1947 has been omitted from the records of the AMT. The
affidavit stated that Pohl had given his fullest support to
Judge Konrad Morgen of the Reich Criminal Police Office,
whose job it was to investigate irregularities in the concen-


tration camps. Pohl had been so disturbed by brutalities
at Buchenwald camp that he pressed for the death penalty
against the camp commandant Koch, who was arraigned
before a public SS court on a charge of misconduct.
Schmidt-Klevenow also explained that Pohl was instru¬
mental in arranging for local police chiefs to share in the
jurisdiction of concentration camps, and took personal
initiative in securing strict discipline on the part of camp
personnel.

The defence were also able to show that the prosecution’s
main item of evidence was falsified. The prosecution had
presented an affidavit, which had already been used in the
Kaltenbrunner trial, written by one Alois Hollriegel, a
member of the staff at Mauthuasen concentration, camp
in Austria. The affidavit claimed that a mass gassing
operation had taken place at the camp. The defence were
not only able to show that Hollriegel had signed the
affidavit under torture but also that all deaths at the camp
were systematically checked by the local police authorities.
The deaths were also entered on a camp register, which
was produced in evidence. The defence also obtained
numerous affidavits from former inmates at Mauthausen
(a prison camp chiefly for criminals) testifying as to the
humane and orderly conditions which prevailed there.

Yet another unreliable witness in Case 4 was one SS
Major Wolfgang Grosch. Grosch was supposed to confirm
that the shower-baths at Auschwitz were in reality gas-
chambers. This he did in his affidavit of 20 February and
5 March 1947 (NO-2154). However the day before he was
due to testify in person at the trial, he retracted all these
statements, and denied any knowledge of gas-chambers.
(This is mentioned in his interrogator’s affidavit NO-4406).
But when it came to the crunch, he again changed his
mind, and agreed that there had been gas-chambers after
all. This testimony should appear in the AMT transcript,
pages 3565 — 3592 for 27 and 28 June 1947, but for some
odd reason these pages are missing from some editions.

Pohl was hanged in 1951, after he had extended his life
by several years by giving prosecution evidence at various
other war crimes trials.

AMT 6 I.G. Farben

The Niimberg case against the staff of I.G. Farben was
chiefly based on the giant chemical combine’s installation
near Oswiecim (Auschwitz) in Poland.

It was claimed that I.G. Farben had been party to the
maltreatment of internees, the use of slave labour, and the
extermination of Jews.

Contrary to popular opinion, Auschwitz was not
primarily a concentration camp. It was a giant industrial
complex, set up by the Germans to exploit the massive
resources of coal in this part of Polish Upper Silesia.
Auschwitz, or to use its Polish name, Oswiecim, was well
situated on the main Vienna—Cracow railway line. Three
rivers met there, which could be harnessed to provide
power for the plants, and a fourth river could be used to
dispose of waste. Until 1941, the only camp of any
description there was an old Polish army barracks near the
town, which the Germans used to house Russian prisoners-
of-war. The camp became the nucleus for a rapid pro¬
gramme of expansion. The Russian PoWs were used to
build the main industrial installation a mile and a half to
the North-West, at a place referred to both as Birkenau and
Auschwitz II. The Russians then went on to build a third
complex, to the East of Auschwitz at a place called
Monowitz, and it was here that the I.G. Farben plant was
set up. Monowitz was also known as Auschwitz III. The


Hague Convention allowed for the use of prisoners-of-war
in non-military tasks. Indeed, there were a significant
number of British PoWs at Monowitz, who never com¬
plained about having to work (and incidentally, never saw
any evidence of “gas-chambers”). There were also a dozen
or more satellite installations, scattered throughout the
region, such as a farm at Harmensee and a botanical
laboratory at Raisko. One of the botanists on the staff of
Raisko, Thies Christopherson, has written an authoritative
description of Auschwitz, The Auschwitz Lie, which
denies the existence of gas-chambers or any other kind of
extermination programme. So too does Dr. Wilhelm
Staglich, who is now a Hamburg judge, but during the war
was stationed at an anti-aircraft battery at Osiek, six miles
south of Auschwitz.

Once the industrial complex started operations, extra
labour had to be brought in to work in the various
processes. Besides the small numbers of British and
Russian PoWs, there were 20,000 workers at Auschwitz I,
35,000 at Birkenau and 15,000 at Monowitz. More than
half of these workers were free foreign workers who had
enlisted voluntarily for labour, just as guest workers travel
to Northern Europe from the Mediterranean today. Less
than thirty per cent of the workers at the Farben plant
were in the prisoner category, and the remaining twenty
per cent or so were ordinary German soldiers and civilians
like Christopherson.

The working hours at Auschwitz were those standard
for the German concentration camps; eleven hours a day,
six days a week. As a large ‘company town’, Auschwitz
was able to supply a wide range of recreational activities:
concerts, cabaret, films and athletics. There was even a
brothel for the male prisoners.

The overall responsibility for the three camps lay with
the SS, whose main administrative office was located at
Auschwitz I, although there were other SS-run facilities,
such as a large hospital, at Birkenau. The SS rented out the
internees to I.G. Farben and the other factories in the area,
in an early form of ‘lump-labour’. When the Farben plant
grew big enough to lay on their own ancillary facilities for
prisoners, naturally the fees paid to the SS were reduced.
This caused some friction between the two organisations,
especially as Farben tried to exploit the situation even
more by off-loading all their sick workers onto the SS
hospital at Birkenau.

However, the three camps were beset by difficulties
right from the start. The ground was extremely flat without
drainage; it was dotted with stagnant ponds which were a
breeding ground for malaria, even in peace time. Also the
original Russian prisoners had brought in typhus, which
was never properly eradicated, and at one point flared up
so much that all work at the camp had to be halted.

At Niimberg, several witnesses claimed that they knew
of the extermination programme because they could not
escape the stench of burning flesh which pervaded
Auschwitz. However, both Christopherson and Staglich
were unaware of any such smell, apart from the occasional
unpleasant waft of scorched hooves and molten iron from
a nearby farrier’s. Of course, this is not conclusive counter¬
evidence in itself, since both men were stationed at
installations five or six miles away from the main complex.

What the AMT overlooked was the rather obvious fact
that I.G. Farben was a chemicals industry, and chemicals
do tend to give off rather an unpleasant odour, particularly
in times when pollution and emission controls were
unheard of. The I.G. Farben factory at Monowitz produced
artificial oil and the chemical process involved did give off
37


a strong stench. There were also five blast furnaces and
five collieries in the vicinity, as is confirmed by Reitlinger.
It is obvious that the witnesses at Niirnberg confused
(either deliberately or otherwise) the stench of industry
with the smell of “burning bodies”.

Of course, this is not to deny the existence of
crematoria. There was a crematorium attached to each of
the three camps to facilitate the disposal of the bodies of
workers who had died of typhus — this was and is the most
sanitary means of disposal. After all, there were up to
200,000 inhabitants of the complex, and any city of that
size would have its own crematorium. Naturally people
died there; but not only prisoners. In fact the wife of
Christopherson’s commander died there and was cremated.
After the war, Christopherson was astounded to hear
allegations from Niirnberg and elsewhere that there had
been an enormous central crematorium with five chimneys
which processed 24,000 corpses a day. Christopherson was
not the only one who missed this amazing building.
According to Reitlinger, the building was demolished “in
full view of the camp” but only one witness, a certain Dr.
Bendel, has ever testified to this occurrence. Despite the
publication of pot-boilers such as Olga Lengyel’s ludicrous
Five Chimneys, there is no proof whatsoever that this
building ever existed.

It is also true that there were ‘gas-chambers’ of a sort at
Auschwitz. These fell into two categories. Firstly, there
were underground gas-generation chambers, which
produced gas vapour from coke or coal, to be burnt
upstairs in the crematoria. The second was a disinfection
chamber, where prisoners’ clothes were deloused by
fumigating them with pesticide, in this particular case
Zyklon B. The US Army had similar chambers, but they
preferred to use the less-dangerous DDT. Lice were, of
course, the source of typhus.

All of these points are more fully documented in Butz’s
Hoax of the Twentieth Century.


The largest single item of evidence against I.G. Farben
which was submitted at Niirnberg was Document Book 89,
which had previously put in a brief appearance at the IMT
as document 022-L. The document was an anonymous
report, supposedly based on the evidence of five
Auschwitz escapees, which had ended up with the War
Refugee Board in Washington. A US Army Major Walsh
had signed an affidavit on 14 December 1945, confirming
its authenticity. However, the Farben defence counsel
objected to the introduction of anonymous material, and
this objection was sustained by the court. But after some
more legal argument, the court decided to take a rather
ambiguous “judicial note” of the document.

The anonymous escapees had apparently absconded
from Auschwitz where they had been on the hospital
staff. Their report first turned up in Geneva, claiming that
the Germans were conducting an extermination pro¬
gramme, and using Jewish corpses to make fertiliser. Their
report was forwarded to Washington, where strenuous
efforts were made to authenticate the report, via the
Vatican. A month later, in October 1942, the Vatican
replied that they could uncover no evidence to back up
the allegations. The report lay in the pending tray, until
bit by bit, more allegations in the same style started to
drift out of Nazi-occupied Europe.

Then in November 1944, over two years after the arrival
of the report, it was suddenly decided to publish it in
booklet form: German Extermination Camps: Auschwitz
and Birkenau. Although the imprint was the Executive
Office of the President, the actual impetus for publishing
came from the newly-formed War Refugee Board. The
WRB was run largely by Henry Morgenthau Jr., the
Secretary of the Treasury, later to publish the infamous
Morgenthau Plan for the pastoralisation of Germany. He
was assisted by Henry Dexter White (Weiss), later to be
exposed as a Soviet agent.

The general counsel of the War Refugee Board was one


v.


ft#*!


Russian ‘ soap * evidence from Auschwitz, Such allegations bare an uncanny resemblance to World War I horror stories of Belgian babies

turned into soap by the Huns.

38


Josiah Du Bois, who was later to become chief prosecution
counsel at the Niimberg trial of I.G. Farben. Du Bois’
career had been closely intertwined with that of the Soviet
agent White, as well as that of another Communist agent
William L. Ullmann. Du Bois was held in such high regard
by White that White made him a witness of his will.

Even after the report came out, the State Department
remained sceptical about the validity of the extermination
rumours: “Stuff like this has been coming from Bern ever
since 1942 . . . Don’t forget, this is a Jew telling about the
Jews . . . This is just a campaign by that Jew Morgenthau
and his Jewish assistants.” But by the time the WRB report
was submitted as Niimberg document 022-L, so much
supplementary ‘evidence’ of exterminations had been
‘uncovered’ that the authenticity of the report was
‘beyond doubt’.

When it was first published in Washington, the WRB
report consisted of two anonymous reports, one written
by “two young Slovakian Jews” and the other by “a Polish
major”, all of whom had been inmates at Auschwitz from
1942 until they escaped separately in 1944. There is also
a supplement said to have been written by two more
young Jews who escaped later in 1944.

Amongst the lurid fantasies given vent in the report is a
description of an ‘inauguration ceremony’ for the first
Auschwitz crematorium in March 1943. The ‘programme’
consisted of the gassing and burning of 8000 Cracow Jews.
The audience, consisting of prominent guests from Berlin,
were “extremely satisfied with the results.” It seems rather
odd that for such a gathering of prominent dignitaries, no
names are forthcoming.

The report tells of German interrogation of the block-
mates of the two earlier escapees; in direct contradiction
of the foreword, which states that the Germans were com¬
pletely unaware of the identity of the escapees; hence the
‘necessity’ for anonymity.

At several other points, the various accounts in the
report are contradictory. The two Slovakian Jews say that
the Auschwitz crematoria started operation in February
1943, whereas the Polish major maintains that they
commenced operation in autumn 1942.

Although the ‘necessity’ for anonymity passed with the
defeat of the Nazis, the ‘authors’ of the report were not
exactly rapid in their endeavours to claim responsibility
for this very interesting document. It was not until the
trial of Adolf Eichmann in 1961 that the two young
Slovakian Jews finally acquired identities — 16 years after
the Nazi threat had passed! The prosecution stated that
they were actually Alfred Wetzler, by then a civil servant
in (Communist) Czechoslovakia, and Rudolf Vrba (alias
Rosenberg, alias Rosenthal), a hospital biochemist in
Cardiff. Surprisingly, the WRB report was rejected by the
Jerusalem court, on the grounds that there were too many
contradictions in the statistics (this did not seem to
prevent the admission of reams of other contradictory
documents). Late in the trial, the prosecution produced
a hastily written affidavit from Vrba in Britain, explaining
that the figures were rather confused because they were
not his own. However, this too was rejected by the court,
on the grounds that Vrba should have been at the trial in
person.

Vrba did manage to put in an appearance at the
Auschwitz trial in Frankfurt in 1964, as did Wetzler.
According to their evidence, they escaped from Auschwitz
to Czechoslovakia, where they gave their report to Jewish
elders, including a Rabbi Weissmandel who distributed it
to various agencies throughout Europe, including the


American Embassy in Switzerland. The two went into
hiding for the rest of the war. This 1964 version differs
considerably from the 1945 evidence presented at Niimberg.
According to the affidavits of the investigation staff, the
two escapees had given their story to a Protestant pastor,
who had in turn passed it on to an activist in the Hungarian
resistance, who smuggled it to Italy.

The 1964 evidence also differs from the 1945 version, in
that the Niimberg evidence gives Wetzler as the source of
the various tables of statistics, whereas at the Frankfurt
trial (and at the 1961 Eichmann trial in Jerusalem) we are
told that it was Vrba who compiled the figures.

Latching on to his emergence as an ‘Auschwitz Expert’,
Vrba published a book I Cannot Forgive in 1964; at the
same time as his Frankfurt appearance. However, this book
compounds the various contradictions even more. Also
Vrba provides no explanation for the 16 year delay in
coming forward with his much-sought authentication for
the WRB report.

To date, the other three escapees — the Polish major and
the other two Slovakian Jews — have not been identified.

Needless to say, the 12 Auschwitz I.G. Farben defen¬
dants were found guilty. Two of them, Diirrfield and
Ambros, got eight years. Ter Meer got seven, and Krauch
and Biitefisch six. They were released in 1951.

One of the judges in the case threw some interesting
light on the trial when he said that there were “too many
Jews on the prosecution”, although he was undoubtedly
taken to task by his superiors for daring to be so candid. In
actual fact, not only were the prosecution mostly Jewish,
but they were all good friends. Minskoff, one of the
prosecuting attorneys, had worked under chief prosecuting
attorney Du Bois before, when they were both at the US
Treasury. (Du Bois had also been legal counsel for the War
Refugee Board.) In 1952, Du Bois wrote a book about the
trial, The Devil's Chemists, which makes interesting reading.

After Niimberg, I.G. Farben was broken up into several
smaller industries, all of which have since done remarkably
well, including Bayer Chemicals, BASF electronics and
Hoechst. Recently declassified U.S. State Department
documents shed much light on a previously unexplored area
of -Farben’s activities. The documents, now in the U.S.
National Archives, reveal that the American conglomerate
Du Pont/General Motors together with Standard Oil (later
Esso, now Exxon) maintained extensive contacts with
Farben during the War. A fascinating article about these
contacts, including actual trade with Nazi Germany,
appeared in the “men’s magazin e" Penthouse, 1976, Vol. II,
No. 3. But the authority on the matter is Joseph Borkin’s
Crime and Punishment of I.G. Farben (N.Y. 1978).

AMT 7

Immediately after the sentences had been announced in
Case 7, the presiding judge, Charles F. Wennerstrum, gave
an outspoken statement to a Chicago Tribune reporter,
attacking the trials:

If I had known seven months ago what I know today, I would
never have come here.

Obviously, the victor in any war is not the best judge of the war
crime guilt . . . The prosecution has failed to maintain objectivity
aloof from vindictiveness, aloof from personal ambitions for
convictions . . .

The whole atmosphere here is unwholesome. Linguists were
needed . . . Lawyers, clerks, interpreters and researchers were
employed who became Americans only in recent years, whose back¬
grounds were imbedded in Europe’s hatreds and prejudices . . .

Most of the evidence in the trials was documentary, selected from
the large tonnage of captured records. The selection was made by
the prosecution. The defence had access only to those documents
which the prosecution considered material to the case.

39


Artefacts made from human skin were produced by Russians at Niimberg, but even Jewish holocaust experts expressed doubts as to their

authenticity.


Our tribunal introduced a rule of procedure that when the
prosecution introduced an excerpt from a document, the entire
document should be made available to the defence for presentation
as evidence. The prosecution protested vigorously. Gen. Taylor tried
out of court to call a meeting of the presiding judges to rescind this
order. It was not the attitude of any conscientious officer of the
court seeking full justice.

Also abhorrent to the American sense of justice is the prosecution’s
reliance upon self-incriminating statements made by the defendants
while prisoners for more than 2 l A years and repeated interrogations
without presence of counsel.

The lack of appeal leaves me with a feeling that justice has been
denied . . .

The Chicago Tribune reporter, Hal Foust, sent the
Wennerstrum story to Berlin for transmission to Chicago
on a wireless channel which was supposedly free from
prying. However within a few hours, the prosecution
managed to obtain a copy of the message. Ernest C. Deane,
Taylor’s press officer, immediately telephoned Foust in
order “to talk him out of sending the story”. But the story
had already been sent, and Foust replied that “Taylor
could not properly have knowledge of the article until its
publication.” Taylor thereupon prepared a reply to
Wennerstrum’s remarks, and the reply was actually made
public before the Tribune published the Foust story con¬
taining Wennerstrum’s attack. Taylor accused the judge,
among other things, of making remarks “subversive to the
interests and policies of the United States.” Wennerstrum,
on arrival in the US shortly after the publication of both
the Tribune article and Taylor’s reply, stood firm on his
remarks, and yet again criticised Taylor.

This incident was one of the notable “government
spying” incidents of the year 1948. The Army issued an
order against such spying, and there was much speculation
that Taylor himself might be court martialled. When
reporters asked Taylor for his opinion on the legality of
his action, the following exchange occurred:

“I don’t know whether it was legal or not,” he replied.

“Weren’t you General Counsel of the Federal Communications
Commission for two years before being commissioned in the Army?”


“Yes, but what does that have to do with it?”

Foust later revealed that this was the second instance of
Army interference with the filing of his stories. He had
earlier been picked up by Army agents for interrogation
after a previous story had been sent.

AMT 9: Ohlendorf — Einsatzgruppen

One case during the Niimberg Trials which receives little
attention today is that of the Einsatzgruppen — the Action
Groups which were set up by Hitler in 1941 to suppress
guerilla activity in German-occupied Russia. It was alleged
by the Soviets at Niimberg that the Action Groups operated
as roving exterminators, a la Zardoz, murdering a million
Jews and gypsies either by shooting or in special gas-vans,
poisoned by exhaust fumes. Yet any objective examination
of the evidence will show that there is even less reason for
believing this allegation than there is for the entire “exter¬
mination camp” myth.

Four groups of about 700 SD men were set up. Ohlendorf
commanded Group D in southern Russia. Rasch of Group
C operated immediately to the north of D. Groups A and
B operated around the Baltic states, commanded by
Stahlecker and Nebe respectively.

Although masses of documentary ‘evidence’ was
produced at Niimberg to ‘prove’ the case against the
Action Groups, most of these documents are highly
suspect. Most of them came from the Soviets, who claimed
to have captured them when they pushed back the
Germans in 1943.

The only points where signatures appear on the
documents are on irrelevant pages. Not a single page was
produced which mentioned “extermination” and bore the
signature of any Nazi commander. Document NO-1128,
said to be a report from Himmler to Hitler about the
execution of 363,211 Jews in Russia, bears only initials
(said to be Himmler’s) on the essentially irrelevant first
page. Documents 180-L, 2273-PS, 119-USSR, NO-3159


and many others too numerous to list, all mention exter¬
mination, but the signatures are either type-written or on
irrelevant pages. In passing, it is worthwhile mentioning
that in referring to the IMT and AMT volumes one should
note that a reference to a “signed” document always
means a type-written signature, unless it is specifically
noted as a hand-written one.

A large number of the documents produced in this trial
came via the Yivo — the Yiddish Scientific Institute in
New York. Document 3663-PS was one of 70 documents
supposedly found at the Rosenberg Ministry in September
1945 by a Sergeant Szajko Frydman of the US 82nd
Airborne Division. Frydman was a staff member of the
Yivo both before and after his military service. Like the
Soviet documents, none of the Yivo papers bears a signature
on a page which directly refers to extermination.

Many of the reports cited in evidence were obvious
forgeries. Even the Jewish holocaust historian Reitlinger
expresses unease at some of these “rather amateurish
essays”.

As in the other trials, testimonial evidence was admitted
willy-nilly. One such statement was that of SS Capt. Dieter
Wisliceny, an assistant in Adolf Eichmann’s office and later
Gestapo Chief in Slovakia. Wisliceny fell into the hands of
the Czech Communists and was interrogated (by both
Soviets and Americans) at the Soviet-controlled Bratislava
Prison in November 1946. Subjected to torture, Wisliceny
was reduced to a nervous wreck and became addicted to
uncontrollable fits of sobbing for hours on end prior to his
execution. Although his written confession is peppered
with obvious factual inaccuracies, it was still admitted as
‘proof’ of the Action Groups’ misdeeds. Again, Wisliceny
displayed a remarkable linguistic ability, for his affidavit
was submitted in the English language.

The major defendant at the Action Groups trial was also
subjected to torture — SS General Otto Ohlendorf, the
chief of the SD who commanded Action Group D in the
Ukraine, attached to Field Marshal von Manstein’s Eleventh
Army. During the last phase of the war he was employed
as a foreign trade expert at the Ministry of Economics.

Service on the Eastern front was by no means popular
with the German soldiers (the degenerate Commandant
Koch of Buchenwald was initially given the choice of
either serving on the Eastern Front or being executed) and
there is a certain amount of evidence to show that
Ohlendorf was only sent there because he had crossed
Himmler.

After his torture, Ohlendorf appeared as a prosecution
witness at the IMT and agreed that exterminations had
taken place. But Ohlendorf was in for a surprise when he
found that he too was going to stand in the dock, regardless
of his co-operation in the trial of his bosses.

At the AMT Case 9, Ohlendorf attempted to refute his
previous testimony. He retracted the affidavit he had made
on 5 November 1945 when he admitted that 90,000 Jews
had been killed under his command alone. He now claimed
it was only 40,000. In a main speech before the Tribunal,
Ohlendorf took the opportunity to denounce Philip
Auerbach, the (Jewish) Attorney-General of the Bavarian
State Office for Restitution, who at that time was claiming
compensation for “11 million Jews” who had suffered in
Nazi concentration camps. Ohlendorf dismissed this
ridiculous claim, stating that “not the minutest part” of
the people for whom Auerbach was demanding compen¬
sation had even seen a concentration camp. (Ohlendorf
lived long enough to see Auerbach convicted for embezzle¬
ment and fraud; forging documents purporting to show

41


huge payments of compensation to non-existent people.)

Ohlendorf explained that his units often had to prevent
massacres of Jews by anti-Semitic Ukrainians. He insisted
that the partisans, which his units were sent in to suppress,
had taken a far higher toll of lives from the regular German
army — an assertion confirmed by the Soviet Government,
which boasted of half a million German troops killed by
guerillas. In fact, Franz Stahlecker, commander of Group
A, was himself killed by partisans in 1942.

Another defendant, SS Lieutenant Col. Hansch, who
was in charge of a commando group in Group C for about
seven weeks, disputed that any orders had ever been given
which even mentioned Jews. He estimated that whilst he
was in charge, only about sixty partisans had been killed,
and all of these had been armed. The distinguished English
jurist, A. J. P. Veale, in dealing with the Action Groups,
explains that in fighting on and behind the Russian front
no distinction could be properly drawn between partisans
and the civilian population, because any Russian civilian
who maintained his civilian status instead of acting as a
terrorist was liable to be executed by his countrymen as a
traitor. Veale says, “There is no question that the Action
Groups’ orders were to combat terror with terror” and he
finds it strange that atrocities committed by the partisans
were regarded as blameless simply because they turned out
to be on the winning side. Ohlendorf took the same view,
and in a bitter appeal written before his execution, he
accused the Allies of hypocrisy in holding the Germans to
account by conventional laws of warfare while fighting a
savage Soviet enemy who did not respect those laws.

The prosecutors were anxious to utilise Ohlendorf to
the full. Consequently, even while he was under sentence
of death, he was again presented as a prosecution witness
at the High Command Trial (AMT No. 12) when his
commanders stood in the dock. However, they did not
dare produce him in the case of the regular army chief on
the Eastern Front, Field Marshal Manstein, since they
knew that Manstein’s brilliant defence counsel Reginald
(now Lord) Paget would be able to demolish him. Instead
they submitted Ohlendorf’s written affidavit, which could
not be challenged.

Ohlendorf and Hansch were both sentenced to hang.
Ohlendorf’s sentence was carried out in 1951, when there
was no further use for him. Hansch’s sentence was com¬
muted to fifteen years.

Ironically, it is thanks to a Russian that the bogusness of
the “gas-van” legend is finally being exposed. Aleksandr
Solzhenitsyn, in The Gulag Archipelago, mentions the case
of a Bavarian, Jupp Aschenbrenner, whom the Soviets
persuaded to sign a declaration that he had worked on
wartime gas-vans. Aschenbrenner was later able to prove
that, at the time he had supposedly been working on the
vans, he was actually in Munich studying to become a
welder.


AMT 10: Krupp

Thanks to Jackson’s bungling in the IMT, the prosecution
had failed to ‘field’ the right Krupp. They had been deter¬
mined to have at least one armaments baron on the list of
defendants, but it was unfortunate, from their point of
view, that they had selected the wrong one; the senile
Gustav who was in a perpetual coma on his death bed.
Even the International Tribunal did not have the gall to try
someone who was incapacitated (although they did feel
able to try Bormann of whose state of health nobody had
the slightest idea). Jackson applied to the court to have


the aged Gustav tried in absentia, but was turned down. A
few days later he applied for Gustav’s son Alfried to be
tried in his father’s place. “No greater disservice to the
future peace of the world could be done than to excuse
the entire Krupp family from this trial,” he said. But
Lawrence wanted no part of it. “This is not a football
game where another player can be substituted for one who
is injured,” he said sharply, and enquired whether such a
motion would be acceptable in an American courtroom. In
fact Gustav was to cling on to the thread of life for
another few years; he did not die until 1950.

There is no doubt that if Jackson had done his homework
properly, he would have ‘fielded’ Alfried at the IMT in the
first place, rather than the old man. As William Manchester
(an arch-liberal) says in The Arms of Krupp (Michael
Joseph, 1969), if the facts about Gustav’s illness and the
full scope of Alfried’s involvement with the family firm
had been fully known to Jackson before the trial, “it is
highly improbable that (Alfried) Krupp would have left
Nixrnberg alive. ”

And interestingly:

It is generally conceded by scholars of the trial, however, that
several of the eleven who were hanged in the Palace of Justice on the
morning of October 16, 1946, were victims of the time. Alfred Jodi,
for example . . . died for a fraction of the crimes of which Alfried
was later found guilty, and for which he could have been convicted
before the first court. Chance favoured Krupp.

Because of the mass of documents relative to the case
which had to be sifted, the Krupp trial did not finally
come to court until near the end of the AMT series. It
became trial number ten out of the twelve. But as the trial
date approached, rumblings of discontent about the trial
of a fellow industrial baron increased amongst the inter¬
national financial community. But General Taylor, in
charge of the AMT series, held firm, for he had the support
of the American Zone military governor, General Clay. As
Taylor later recalled in an interview with William Manchester
for his book on Krupp, “General Clay supported me
unfailingly. He’s from Marietta, Georgia, a really small
town, and he had the rural Southerner’s distrust of ‘wicked
bankers’.”

Taylor’s aides ran into a tricky problem during 1947, as
they were still preparing the prosecution brief for the
Krupp case. American Chief Justice Fred Vinson issued a
decree that federal judges would no longer be granted
leaves of absence to serve on the AMT tribunals. Undeterred,
Clay obliged by combing the state supreme courts, and
recruited their judges instead. He finally obtained the
services of Justice H. C. Anderson of the Tennessee Court
of Appeals, Justice Edward J. Daly of the Connecticut
Superior Court, and Justice William J. Wilkins of the
Superior Court of Washington. Taylor recruited a prose¬
cution team nominally led by an ambitious young
Kentuckian by the name of Rawlings Ragland, but whose
actual driving force was the arrogant, fanatical Benjamin B.
Ferencz. According to Berthold Krupp, Alfried’s brother,
“The fire in the prosecution staff came from German Jews
who had become naturalised Americans and then lawyers.
In the courtoom they were acting from hate. They made
the trial political.”

Because of the Krupp family’s vast wealth, they were
able to secure for Alfried the very best in defence counsel.
Chief of the defence team was Otto Kranzbiihler, who had
earlier demonstrated his rhetorical abilities in his defence
of Donitz at the IMT, and of Odilo Burkhart in AMT 5,
and of Saarland industrialist Hermann Rochling before a
French military court. Kranzbiihler knew that if he got
Krupp off with only a light sentence he would be hand¬


somely rewarded, so he really went to town employing
researchers and junior counsel — three researchers for
every one the Americans were employing. There was even
an expensive American attorney in his retinue — former
US Col. Joseph S. Robinson. The defence team was able to
gather 1309 affidavits (to the Americans’ 380) and two
defence witnesses for every prosecution witness.

Alfried Krupp was tried along with eleven of the firm’s
managers — Houdremont, Eberhardt, Lehmann, Janssen,
‘Kanonen-Miiller’, Max Ihn, Hans Kupke, Karl Pfirsch,
Heinrich Korschan, Ewald Loser and Fritz von Bulow.
They were indicted on 15 August 1947, and the trial
proper opened three weeks later. Although the first and
last days of the trial were held in the splendour of the
mahogany and marble hall of the Palace of Justice where
the IMT defendants had met their fate, for the ten months
in between, the trial was held in a freezing cold, dingy
fourth-floor chamber. The ornate appointments were left
for the I.G. Farben Tribunal (AMT 6) which proceeded
contemporaneously. The Krupp defendants were guarded
by two negro G.I.’s, much to the indignation of Krupp and
Billow.

The charges were identical to those at the IMT. All the
defendants pleaded not guilty. Despite the glamour of the
chief defendant, the press paid little attention to the trial.
Throughout the whole ten months, the New York Times
printed a sum total of two columns on the case.

It was while the Krupp trial was under way that the
winds of change started to blow through Germany, and
this was to prove Krupp’s eventual salvation.

Early in September 1947, the new US Secretary of State
James Byrnes boarded the German state train with his
‘adviser’ Benjamin V. Cohen (Byrnes sleeping in Hitler’s
bed and Cohen in Goring’s), and set off for Stuttgart for
a meeting with Germany’s nascent leaders. Bymes/Cohen
laid out the USA’s re-vamped European strategy. Now that
Germany had been cleansed of the evil of anti-semitism,
she was fit to take her proper place in Europe — as
America’s chief trans-Atlantic staging post. Western
Germany was to become “a bulwark against Soviet expan¬
sionism”, “a corner-stone of European union”; in other
words, an American satellite. The German ‘leaders’ gave
the plan their full approval; to be fair, they had little
alternative.

Early in 1948, the first moves were made to hand over
government to the Germans, by now installed in their new,
but singularly pedestrian and unimpressive, ‘capital’ of
Bonn. A new Deutschmark was introduced, and a block
was put on further consignments of ‘reparations’ (looted
machinery) being shipped to the Soviet Zone.

Then, as the Krupp proceedings reached midpoint, on
1 April 1948, as one of Kranzbiihler’s star turns was venting
forth, a military policeman passed a crumpled note to the
bench and an immediate recess was called. The Red Army
had blockaded Berlin. Tension mounted rapidly in the
succeeding days. A British plane was shot down over Berlin
by a Soviet fighter. Clay dissolved the Allied Council, and
the United States closed its zonal border to all Soviets.
Partial mobilisation had begun. Fresh troops were arriving
from America, and a massive aerial convoy of C47s was
daily ferrying 13,000 tons of supplies to Berlin.

It was against this background of acute ‘East-West’
tension that Kranzbiihler unfolded his elaborate defence
portfolio. As Manchester points out:

Another wind was blowing through the post-war Reich (sic),
warming the defeated nation. Otto Kranzbiihler was sensitive to it,
set his sails to catch it, and conducted a defence wholly unlike any

42


other at Niirnberg. The prosecution lived in the immediate past; the
world of Die Fahne Hoch. Alfried’s chief counsel saw that regardless
of the outcome here, politics would be far more important to his
client’s future than justice, for the new wind, now approaching gale
force, was political.

It was this aspect of Kranzbiihler’s strategy that saved
Krupp from the gallows more than any other. He realised
that America would need a strong Germany as its European
staging-post. A strong Germany meant an industrialised,
not pastoralised, Germany. And an industrialised Germany
meant a Kruppsche Germany. In any case, previous exper¬
ience in other trials had shown that the validity or
otherwise of past evidence bore no relation to the end
result of the trial, so Kranzbiihler reckoned that it would
be a better risk to spin out the trial long enough and
appeal to the tribunal’s continually growing awareness of
the potential usefulness of Krupp and his industries to the
Bundesrepublik puppet government and its Washington
string-pullers.

His brilliant stratagem had several other, lesser, aspects
worthy of note. For example, the defence declined to put
Krupp himself in the witness box, because they knew that
the prosecution would have a field day throwing all kinds
of ludicrous accusations at him, most of which he would
be unable to answer (since they were either prosecution
inventions or totally removed from Krupp’s sphere of
influence). It was only because Kranzbiihler had done his
homework that he was able to come up with this tactic.
Any other German barrister would have assumed that a
defendant’s silence would weigh against him, as it does in
a German court. The wiley Kranzbiihler knew that the
AMT went by American court procedure, where a
defendant had a Constitutional right to remain silent,
without prejudicing the verdict. Here, he was one step
ahead of the prosecution, who were left in dismay holding
sheaves of ‘damning’ atrocity affidavits.

Kranzbiihler won an unexpected propaganda coup even
when he was absent from the Niirnberg proceedings. Whilst
he was in the Saarland defending Krupp’s counterpart
Rochling, a row developed between several of the other
Krupp defenders and the bench, over whether all witnesses
had to appear in person, or might give depositions elsewhere
in the building. The Krupp defence team promptly walked
out; an acceptable form of courtroom protest on the
Continent. In America and Britain such an action is illegal.
The judges believed that they had been deliberately
slighted, and ordered the court marshall to round up all
the Krupp defenders he could find and lock them up. This
proved to be a god-send to Kranzbiihler when he hurried
back. He was able to demonstrate to the German people
that “Krupp was being deprived of defence counsel by the
court.”

In a more deliberate piece of staging, Kranzbiihler was
able to show that Krupp was being deprived of a vital
American lawyer by the name of Earl J. Carroll. Carroll, a
genial Irish-American with a law practice in California and
a flair for publicity, had himself been expelled from
Germany in 1946 for highlighting “grave abuses in the
army and the American Military Government.” After
resigning from the army, he sailed back to Germany and
tried to set up his own law practice. General Clay personally
accused him of “abusing his German entry permit” by
getting involved with merchandising alcohol and similar
nefarious activities. But Carroll was allowed to stay, so
long as his legal practice was restricted to defending
American servicemen and civilians. So, when Kranzbiihler
asked for permission for Carroll to join his defence team,


hoping to draw on the Irishman’s inside knowledge of the
Military Government, the court refused. Kranzbiihler
attempted to resign his post in protest, but the court
would not accept his resignation. Here again, Kranzbiihler
was able to martyr Krupp in the eyes of the German
people, since “the court refused Krupp the lawyers he
wanted.”

On 31 July 1948, the judgement was read out. Its
wording was harsh, and its sentences surprisingly severe,
after all the effort Kranzbiihler had put into the case. Not
only was Krupp to go to jail for twelve years, but his entire
personal and industrial wealth was to be confiscated. An
appeal to a review panel that autumn was turned down.

However, what the tribunal had failed to take into
account was the implementation of the confiscations.
Nearly all the Krupp factories were in the British zone.
Those in the Soviet zone had been seized long ago anyway.
General Clay notified the British authorities of the confis¬
cation decree and waited for a response. There was none.
The Krupp factories awaited the return of their Krupp
owner, and they did not have long to wait.

With the Cold War threatening to become a hot one, the
new High Commissioner in the American Zone, John J.
McCloy, a New York banker, realised only too well that
the US would have to pander a little to the Germans in
order to gain their whole-hearted co-operation in defending
the ‘free’West. The only stumbling block was the continued
imprisonment of prominent Germans as ‘war criminals’.
Therefore, on 20 March 1950, McCloy set up a Clemency
Board to re-examine the sentences of the Niirnberg
internees, under the chairmanship of David W. Peck,
Presiding Justice of the New York Supreme Court. McCloy
gave the three-man committee five months to review the
sentences involved in the whole 12-case AMT series — a
mammoth task. After initial meetings in Washington, the
Peck Panel, as it came to be known, moved to Munich,
where it heard submissions from fifty lawyers speaking on
behalf of 90 of the prisoners interned at the Landsberg.
Krupp’s appeal was presented by Carroll, the Irish-
American lawyer, who was still at large in Germany. Visits
were also made to the Landsberg to interview some of the
prisoners. Although the Panel did not hear submissions
from the prosecution, most of whom had scattered to the
four comers of the earth, some of the more fanatical
prosecutors from 1948 insisted on writing to the members
of the Panel. One such was Benjamin Ferencz, the brains
behind the Krupp prosecution, who wrote offering his
services. Ferencz was one of the members of the prosecution
team who was still in circulation in Germany; he was
working to secure financial compensation for Jews who
alleged that they were due reparations of some kind
because of the war. When Ferencz received but a short
note of acknowledgement to his offer, he made it his
business to keep an eye on the deliberations of the Peck
Panel. Manchester reports:

Out of curiosity he dropped into the High Commissioner’s office
from time to time during the Peck deliberations. On his first visit, at
the very beginning of the new enquiry, he found the records of the
Krupp trial. They were packed in crates six feet long and shaped
curiously like coffins. Knowing the evidence that lay inside, he kept
wondering when the lids would be removed. They never were.

Despite the interference of Ferencz, and a broadside
from Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt, the Peck Panel recommended
clemency; 101 prisoners would be freed from Landsberg.
At the stroke of 9 a.m., on the bitterly-cold morning of
Saturday, 3 February 1951, Krupp led the first batch of
28 other freed prisoners through the heavy gates of the
fortress to freedom.


But as a sop to the Roosevelt-led revenge lobby, McCloy
also turned down final appeals for clemency from five
AMT defendants — Pohl, Blobel, Braune, Naumann and
Ohlendorf — and they were hanged a few months later on
7 June 1951. It has since been suggested that Pohl and
Ohlendorf in particular had outlived their usefulness as
star prosecution witnesses, and had to be got rid of before
they started to retract any of their testimony.


AMT PROSECUTORS

Kempner

One of the chief advisers in Taylor’s office, and the chief
prosecutor at AMT Trial 11, was Robert M. W. Kempner.

Kempner, a Jew, was born in Germany in 1899, studied law, and
joined the Prussian Ministry of the Interior during the 1920s. Between
1928 and 1933 he was a senior counsel for the Prussian State Police
(under the Ministry of the Interior) and specialised in investigating
the rising Nazi Party. He became a vehement anti-Nazi, and
energetically but unsuccessfully attempted, in his official capacity,
to have the party outlawed. When the Nazis took over the German
Government in 1933 he was dismissed from his government position.
Although Jewish, he was able to continue his legal practice,
specialising in international law, Jewish migration problems and laws
affecting taxi drivers. In 1935 he moved first to Florence in Italy,
then to Nice, France and finally to the USA in 1939.

He managed to obtain a job as “research associate” at the
University of Pennsylvania, where his mother was already employed.
He immediately resumed his anti-Nazi crusade, and in 1943 published
a book based on his past experiences, with extensive use of some
Prussian government papers he had managed to smuggle out of
Germany. He gained something of a reputation as an anti-Nazi
expert, and he contributed many of his smuggled records to the
University library. As the war was drawing to a close, he floated the
idea that the Nazi leaders should be tried in the USA before ordinary
American courts. In the meantime, he had acquired US citizenship.

During the war he worked for both the US Department of Justice
and the Office of Strategic Services (later to become the CIA). In the
latter agency he was charged with drawing up lists of “German” anti-
Nazis who could be trusted with posts in the coming occupation
government of Germany. Kempner was one of a large group of
German Jews in the OSS at that time. One of his colleagues was
Herbert Marcuse, now a Marxist university lecturer.

At the end of the war, Kempner switched to the War Department
and accompanied the US Army during the invasion of Germany. At
this time he was “on the payroll of the Judge Advocate General.”

Prior to the opening of the EMT trial, he served in the fairly
significant role of prosecution/defence liaison officer. Later he was
in charge of the division which prepared US trial briefs against
individual defendants. During the trial, he was apparently an
ordinary member of the prosecution staff, but with special respon¬
sibility in the prosecution of the Nazi Minister of the Interior, Frick.

Certainly the establishment press regarded Kempner as an
important personality in the trials. The New York Times described
him as “Jackson’s expert on German matters” (6.10.46) and “chief
of investigation and research for Jackson” (7.10.46).

Immediately after the trial he contributed a magazine article to
the NY Times on the great work the trial had done in educating the
Germans. He predicted that when the Nazi leaders were finally dealt
with, their bodies would be buried in unmarked graves, to “avoid
fanatical pilgrimages by still ardent Nazis.” (In fact their bodies
were taken secretly to Dachau and cremated there; the ashes being
sifted into a nearby stream.)

When German civilian government was restored in 1949, Kempner
warned of the inherent dangers of allowing the Germans to govern
themselves. Two years later he was in negotiation with the self-same
Bonn government, as Israel’s representative in ‘reparations’ claims.
The following month he was back on his anti-Nazi crusade, attacking
the reprieves and sentence reductions which had be--u g: anted to
several small-fry “war criminals”.

After putting in an appearance at the US House of Representatives’
1952 investigation of the Katyn massacre, Kempner was left with
little to do, except ‘maintain vigilance’. Then in 1960 Adolf
Eichmann was kidnapped by the Israelis and Kempner was back in
action assembling ‘evidence* for the trial. He contributed an article
to the Yad Vashem Studies on methods of examining Nazis on trial,
and he published a book in German which churned out most of the
old Nazi propaganda myths in re-hashed form. In 1971 he expressed


approval of the conviction of Lt. Calley after the Mi Lai incident and
in December 1972 he endorsed the ‘evidence’ which Ladislas Farago
had gathered in connection with the supposed discovery of Martin
Bormann in Argentina. Evidently in a fit of nostalgia, Kempner
declared that the “United States and its Allies should re-open the
Bormann case within the framework of the International Military
Tribunal.” (In actual fact Bormann had been tried and sentenced to
death in absentia ; obviously Kempner had no regard for the legal
principle of not being tried twice for the same offence.) Kempner
now has a legal practice in Frankfurt-am-Main.

Hilldring

A man whose career was remarkably intertwined with that of
Marcus was General John H. Hilldring, who headed the Army’s
Civil Affairs Division which Marcus was assigned to in 1943. The
CAD had been created in 1943 within the Army General Staff in
anticipation of US military rule in Germany. It had been thought
that Fiorello La Guardia (later to become Mayor of New York) was
to head the CAD, but instead the job went to Hilldring.

Marcus became a member, and later chief, of the Planning Branch
of the CAD. When the War Crimes Branch was transferred to
Hilldring from the JAG Dept., he immediately put Marcus in charge
of it.

Then Hilldring moved over to the State Department as an
Assistant Secretary of State in charge of occupied area problems; in
this capacity he headed a secretariat which co-ordinated Army, Navy
and State Department policies in the American zone. And it was
while he was working at the Pentagon early in 1947 that he gave
official permission for Col. Marcus to go off and fight for the
Haganah in Palestine.

In September 1947 Hilldring left the State Department and
became an Adviser to the US delegation at the newly-formed United
Nations, where the diplomatic battle between the Zionists and the
Arabs was hotting up.

When the time came in November 1947 for the United Nations to
vote on whether or not to establish a Jewish state in Palestine, the
result of the vote rested on a very fine balance, where the votes of
small and insignificant countries could make all the difference.

A frantic drive was launched to bully the Third World countries
into voting for Israel. The campaign operated through the American
UN Delegation, particularly Eleanor Roosevelt and General Hilldring
who “had been persuaded by his investigation of Nazi atrocities and
the plight of Jewish survivors that a Jewish State was necessary.”

The Liberian vote was assured by pressure brought to bear
through Harvey Firestone, president of the Firestone rubber
company, which had extensive interests in Liberia.

The Haitian vote was taken care of with a promise of a $5 million
loan from the United States.

The Philippines Ambassador in Washington was paid a visit by
Felix Frankfurter, the left-wing Supreme Court judge, who impressed
on him the importance of seven aid programmes currently pending
in the Congress. That took care of the Philippines’ vote.

In conjunction with other Watergate-style tactics, such as planting
a bug in the British delegation’s limousine (rented from a Jewish car-
hire firm), putting another listening device in the Syrian delegation’s
room at the Hotel MqAlpin (which had a Jewish house-detective)
and reporting the sexual activities of a female delegate to her govern¬
ment, the Zionists were able to swing the necessary two-thirds vote
to bring about the partition of Palestine.

According to the Zionists themselves, “Hilldring was a tower of
strength frdtn the outset ... as an information link with the Jewish
representatives he frequently conversed with Zionist strategists.”

After the diplomatic crisis had passed, Hilldring went back to the
State Department, this time as Assistant Secretary of State for
Palestine.

Zionist sources have subsequently boasted that both Hilldring’s
appointments (at the UN and at the Palestine desk) were direct
results of Zionist lobbying.

Marcus

Marcus remained chief of the Branch until April 1947, when he

Marcus remained chief of the Planning Branch until April 1947,
when he went into private law practice, although according to the
Daily Telegraph (24.6.48) “He was at the time of his death a full
colonel . . . Although not subject to military discipline he had agreed
to remain subject to recall.”

It is likely that this rather unusual, if not far-fetched, description
was merely a cover for Marcus* real activities.

For, according to Dan Kurzman in Genesis 1948 , Marcus was
working at the Pentagon in a “planning job”, when he was
approached by a Zionist recruiting agent. “Marcus was glad to take


COL. ‘MICKEY’ MARCUS

He later went to fight for Israel and his career was mythologised in
the film “Casta Giant Shadow”


the assignment,” reports Kurzman, “and his superior, General
Hilldring, who later joined the American United Nations mission,
was happy to grant him leave.” But just in case of controversy “The
Israelis called Marcus “Stone” in order to avoid embarrassing the
American government.”

One of Marcus* last jobs with the US Army was organising the
sale of tons of gold teeth, which had allegedly been taken from the
“millions of Jews who had died in Hitler’s gas chambers,” but had
come into the possession of the US Army as war loot. Tfie gold was
sold at an extremely reasonable $1 million to the Israeli terrorist
group Haganah to buy arms.

In January 1948 Marcus arrived in Palestine and took charge of
the Negev Brigade, a special mobile force of armoured jeeps. In April
he returned to the US for three weeks and was actually awarded a
medal at the British Embassy in Washington — despite the fact that
the Zionists had been murdering British soldiers in Palestine during
the past two years. (It has been suggested that the Marcus visit was
actually a cover for negotiations to bring about a British withdrawal:
British forces pulled out on May 15 — almost immediately after his
visit.)

Marcus returned to Palestine and on May 28 he was appointed
Supreme Commander on the Jerusalem front, on the personal
intervention of David Ben-Gurion himself, with whom Marcus was
“extremely close.”

Marcus then became “the first soldier since Biblical times to hold
the rank of General in the Army of Israel.”

On the night of June 11, Marcus was shot dead by one of his own
sentries. He had been staggering drunkenly around the monastery
which the Zionists had requisitioned as a billet, and had failed to


respond to the sentry’s challenge (in Hebrew). In the pitch blackness,
the sentry had not recognised his commander, and had felled him
with a single shot from his 7.92-calibre Czech rifle. There were
suggestions that the killing might not have been all that Accidental’,
since the guard was a soldier of the Palmach (“striking force”) the
autonomous and elite spearhead of the Haganah, which had
previously displayed resentment at the appointment of an
“American” over the “home-grown” Jerusalem army.


MANSTEIN

One of Germany’s most brilliant and most honourable
generals of the Second World War was Erich von Lewinski,
who had been adopted at an early age into the von Manstein
family, and had taken their name. Both the Lewinski and
Manstein families were Prussian militarists through and
through, with a very strict code of honour and behaviour.
Therefore, it was all the more ridiculous that such a man
should be arraigned before a ‘war-crimes’ tribunal, accused
of war atrocities.

Reginald Paget, an English barrister and Labour MP,
thought so too, and disobeyed the instructions of the
English bar association that English barristers should not
defend war crimes defendants. He was so disturbed that
Manstein should have to face a British military tribunal
without the benefit of experienced British counsel, that he
volunteered his services free of charge. Expenses were
covered by a special defence fund set up by Lord de L’Isle
and Lord Bridgeman; one of the first subscribers being
Winston Churchill. A separate German fund paid for the
services of additional German defence counsel, which
included Dr. Laternser, who had already defended the
General Staff at the IMT, von Leeb at AMT 12 and
Kesselring at a British Military court in Italy. Paget was
also assisted, rather inexplicably, by Sam Silkin, a Jewish
barrister who later became a Labour MP like Paget, and
since 1974 has been Attorney General. Silkin had a great
deal of experience in war crimes trials — he had been
President of the Court in the Far Eastern trials of 1946.
One can only but speculate as to Silkin’s real function at
the Manstein trial. It may be that he was there to keep an
eye on the phlegmatic Paget, who was liable to put the
defence case rather too forcefully and bluntly. It may be
that the revenge lobby realised that the trial of a respected
general four years after the end of the W 7 ar would outrage
public opinion too much, so they sent Silkin along to
smooth things out a little. Whatever the real reason for his
presence at the trial may have been, Paget provides no
clues in his book, and has nothing but praise for him. If
Silkin was being sincere in his defence of Manstein it was
totally out of character with his subsequent attitudes.
Sam Silkin is a fervent Zionist and speaks on platforms
promoted by the (Zionist) Board of Deputies of British
Jews, the Zionist Federation and AJEX (the anti-British
Nationalist gangster organisation).

Manstein was charged on 1 January 1949 and the trial
eventually opened in the Curio House, Hamburg, on 23
August 1949, before a British military tribunal. The
prosecution was in the hands of Sir Arthur Comyns Carr
(who had previously served at the Tokyo War Crimes
trial) and Mr. Elwyn Jones (previously on the IMT
prosecution team).

On the first day of the trial, Paget at once submitted
that the court had no jurisdiction to try Manstein, and the
Royal Warrant under which he was held was illegal. He
submitted that as Britain was still (officially) at war with
Germany, then Manstein was a prisoner of war, and if it


could be proved that he had broken any of the rules of
war, then he should be tried by a court martial, not a
military tribunal dressed up as a civilian court. The
prosecution replied that Manstein was no longer a PoW;
he had been transformed into a common criminal prisoner
on the discretion of his captors. They went on to state that
as a war crime was so serious it could be proved by
evidence that would be inadequate in the case of a lesser
crime. From this startling argument, says Paget, it would
seem to follow that evidence that would justify a conviction
for murder might be insufficient to support a conviction
for riding a bicycle without a lamp!

While the tribunal retired to consider this submission,
the newspaper reporters at the trial were thrown into a
tizzy wondering what ‘angle’ they should take when they
wrote the story up. Several concluded that they would
have to ring their employers to get advice on what angle to
take. Paget writes that he overheard a journalist from one
famous daily newspaper observing, “I sometimes wish I
was on The Times and only had to report what had
happened.”

Needless to say, the tribunal rejected Paget’s submission
and the trial proper began next day. As in the other war
crimes trials, the charges were nebulous accusations rather
than allegations of infringing specific acts of legislation.
There were 17 charges: 15 brought at the instigation of the
Soviet government and two brought on behalf of the
Communist Polish regime. A Polish government represen¬
tative in the court was moved to complain vehemently that
Paget was defending his client too vigorously, and that the
court should not allow it. He felt that this was a negation
of the promises made by the British authorities, who had
refused Manstein’s extradition to Poland on the grounds
that he would be dealt with in the British Zone.

The basis of the charges against Manstein was that he
had committed acts in breach of the Hague Convention on
Land Warfare of 1907. But as Paget pointed out, the
Hague Convention was only applicable if all the belligerent
countries agreed to it. Several did not. And even those
which did, did not adhere to it. By a curious coincidence,
another trial was proceeding in Hamburg simultaneously
with Manstein’s, concerning a shipyard owner who had
dared to try to smuggle machine tools out of his own
shipyard to prevent them being expropriated as ‘reparations ’
by the British authorities. The defence submitted that the
Hague Convention protected individuals’ property in times
of war and occupation. The British prosecution said that in
modem conditions the Hague Convention was inapplicable.
In both trials, therefore, the diametrically opposite con¬
tentions of the two British prosecution teams were upheld!

The allegations against Manstein revolved around
atrocities committed against Russian PoWs and civilians,
mass shootings of Jews and Gypsies, and seizure and
destruction of property. The case was presented over a
period of twenty days, by the reading of some 800
documents to the court, and the examination of one
solitary human witness, an Austrian corporal named Gaffa.
Some of the documents were hearsay affidavits of con¬
demned prisoners who were still alive, such as Ohlendorf,
the Einsatzgrtippe commander. Paget demanded the
appearance of such witnesses so that they could be cross-
examined. He questioned the methods of obtaining
‘affidavits’ from such men, and cited the Simpson Report,
which had investigated 139 cases of the torturing of
German prisoners by Jewish-American jailers, for the
specific purpose of extracting such affidavits. Of course,
Paget was not suggesting that these witnesses had had their


Field Marshal von Manstein


testicles kicked to destruction like the Dachau prisoners;
on the contrary Paget reckoned that it was

highly probable that their testicles were in perfect order. As
Gestapo men they would, of course, appreciate the desirability of
saying exactly what the American investigators wanted. _ The
importance of the Simpson Report was that it showed the alternative
to saying just what the prosecution wanted.

Although Paget’s demand for the appearance of the
affidavit authors was turned down, he was still able to
demolish their claims that Manstein had known about the
mass-shootings of Jews when he discovered an earlier
affidavit by one of the SD men which contradicted his
later one. With the production of this original affidavit, the
evidence of the SD men disappeared from the trial.

Paget’s discovery of the vital affidavit was the result of
relentless and painstaking sifting of the documentary
evidence. The previous year a British War Crimes Investi¬
gation team had been sent to Washington to inspect the
tons of documentary evidence stored at Alexandria,
Virginia (just outside the capital). The British team was
allowed to borrow hundreds of thousands of documents
relating to the war on the Eastern Front; those relating
specifically to Manstein were sent first of all to London,
and the remainder were sent direct to Hamburg. The
documents sent to London were analysed there by a team
of German Jews, and 800 items were selected for intro¬
duction as evidence at the trial. Unlike previous trials, this
time the defence was allowed to have copies of all
prosecution documentary evidence. The enormous balance
of paperwork sent direct to Germany was stored in rows of
filing cabinets, six feet high, all along one wall of the
concert hall in Hamburg, which had been requisitioned as
a document centre. Although Paget’s small team of four or
five was allowed access to this store-house, they had no
hope of having enough time to sift the entire collection.
Even if they did, the collection had been so filtered
already — first by an American war crimes team, then by a
British one — that there was unlikely to be any evidence
left in the collection which might have been of any
assistance to a determined defence counsel.

Therefore Paget was left to rely on legal argument and
dialectics if he was to provide his client with an adequate
defence. First, he pointed out that the charges were not
based on any known or defined laws, enacted by any
legislature. The indictment was just a list of confused and
unconnected accusations.

Secondly, there were no rules of evidence in use.
Hearsay affidavits were introduced willy-nilly, leaving the
defence with no way of verifying the truth of the content,
46


or indeed, the identity of the author, under cross-
examination. Neither had the defence (or any previous war
crimes defence) been allowed to sift the captured German
war records stored in Washington. The only documents
available to them were those which had already been
vetted by the prosecution.

Paget also pointed out that potential defence witnesses
were reluctant to come forward, in case they too were
arrested, or in case their relations in the Soviet Zone
suffered reprisals.

He went on to describe the retrospective nature of the
war crimes charges, and their one-sidedness. He disputed
the prosecution’s suggestion that ‘superior orders’ was no
defence. He quoted Field Marshal Montgomery’s speech at
Glasgow in 1946, when he said that, “Men must learn to
obey orders, when all their instincts cry out for them not
to be obeyed.” He cited Admiral Somerville’s reluctant
sinking of the French fleet at Oran — with a loss of 1500
French lives — which was ordered by the War Office
regardless of Somerville’s protests.

Paget then tinned to the ‘evidence’ itself. The charges
of German atrocities during the invasion of Poland were
supported by depositions from witnesses. Most of these
were so contradictory or full of holes that he was able to
dispose of them quite easily. In his book, he mentions
one such affidavit which told

a story of a Jewish member of a working party who had accidentally
happened to drop a bottle on the pavement, and for this ‘crime’ the
Germans shot 12 men out of the group who were working with him.

Those allegations which did stand up to rigorous analysis
were so general that they in no way implicated Manstein.
Such misdeeds which did occur were the work of Himmler’s
SS, over which Manstein had no control. Paget concludes
that

The Polish charges were so flagrantly bogus that one was left
wondering why they had been presented at all . . . The Polish charges
had had to be included for political reasons.

The Russian charges were based on allegations that
partisans, communists and Jews had been exterminated in
mass-shootings by Manstein’s soldiers. First of all, Paget
endeavoured to put anti-guerilla actions into their proper
context. He quoted a Soviet-book Behind the Front Line,
by General Pomarenko, which praised the operation of the
guerillas’ “extermination battalions”. According to the
Soviet book, these roving bands killed 18,910 soldiers,
blew up 64 troop trains, destroyed 1,621 lorries, exter¬
minated more than 300 ‘traitors’ and captured tons of
equipment. Iri response, the Germans had imposed tough
martial law on the civilian population, and some civilians
were executed for carrying arms, using forged passes,
ignoring the curfew and refusing to work. Paget pointed
out that the Allies adopted exactly the same stringent
regulations — Ordinance No. 1 of the Military Government
— when Eisenhower’s forces reached the Rhineland.

Next, Paget examined the charge that Manstein had
ordered the execution of civilian hostages. It was admitted
that fifty hostages had been shot in the town of Simferopol,
after a bomb had gone off and Germans killed. Paget
produced a proclamation in precisely similar terms to
Manstein’s warning at Simferopol; issued by the Allies in
Berlin. Amazingly, the court refused to receive this in
evidence! When Paget further applied to call a British
general to confirm that British soldiers would do likewise,
this too was refused! All he was allowed to do was submit
an excerpt from the British Manual of Military Law, where
Article 453 stated that “Reprisals are . . . indispensable as
a last resource.” Shortly after the trial ended, indeed,


American soldiers in Korea were acting under anti-guerilla
orders identical to those issued by Manstein.

Paget then turned to the vexed question of the murder
of Jews. He pointed out:

The Germans believed that the Jews were the ruling sect of
Bolshevism. So far as the Ukraine was concerned there was a sub¬
stratum of truth in this. The only ethnic group in the Ukraine that
was solidly behind the communist government was the Jews. They
had every reason to be. The communist government was the first
government of Russia that had effectively protected them from
pogroms.

He then proceeded to destroy, piece by piece, the
affidavit of Ohlendorf, the Einsatzgruppe commander who
‘confessed’ to all kinds of murderous deeds whilst operating
in Manstein’s area. According to Ohlendorf, single com¬
panies of about 100 soldiers, with about 8 lorries, were
reporting the killing of up to 10,000 or 12,000 Jews every
couple of days. Paget worked out they could not have
loaded more than 20 or 30 Jews, with their luggage, into
each lorry. It would take at least two hours to make each
round trip to the killing place, 10 km away. Therefore,
with the short Russian winter day restricting operations
to eight or nine hours each day, it would have taken such a
company at least three weeks to kill 10,000 Jews.

In one instance, the defence team were able to check
the alleged figures. One of the SD affidavits claimed that
they had killed 10,000 in Simferopol during November,
and that by the following month, the town was clear of
Jews. By a series of cross-checks, Paget showed that the SD
company were only in Simferopol for one day during
November — the 16th. And as the place of execution was
supposed to be 15 km outside the town, no more than
300 people could have been killed. This allegation received
a good deal of publicity, since it was supported by the
prosecution’s only live witness, an Austrian corporal by
the name of Gaffa, who claimed that he knew the killings
were going on because he had heard rumours of the killings
being bandied about in the mess hall. As a result of this
publicity, Paget received a large number of letters from
people who had been in Simferopol at the time of the
alleged killings. As a result, the defence was able to call
several new witnesses who had been billeted with very
much alive Jewish families, and who spoke of the normal
functioning of a synagogue, and of a Jewish market where
they bought icons and similar bric-a-brac, during the entire
period of the German occupation.

As Paget incisively commented:

Ohlendorf had reported that not only Simferopol but the whole
Crimea was cleared of Jews. He was clearly a man who was prepared
to say anything that would please his employers. The Americans had
found him the perfect witness ... I do not myself believe that the
Jews murdered in the Crimea number more than 2000 to 3000.

The court gave its decision on 19 December 1951. The
Polish charges were thrown out altogether. Only two
charges of the original 17 were sustained intact: that
Manstein had used Russian PoWs in clearing minefields,
and that Russian civilians had been deported to work in
Germany. Of course, this judgement completely overlooked
the fact that all the Allies used PoWs in mine-clearing
operations. Eight of the charges, including the most serious
one of being involved in the killing of Jews, were thrown
out.

But the remaining seven charges were curiously altered
by the court during its deliberations, i.e. after the defence
had completed its submission on the original charges.
Several had the vital words “deliberately and recklessly”
deleted from them. The charges concerning taking reprisals
against hostages were largely upheld — the Judge Advocate


in his summing-up advised the court that the execution of
hostages was at all times illegal; a direct contradiction of
the British Military Manual. This was yet another example
of one law for the British and another law for the Germans.

Manstein was sentenced to 18 years’ imprisonment; a
virtual life sentence for a man of his age. An appeal reduced
the sentence to 12 years. However he was released in one
of the general amnesties of 1952.

Paget’s description of the trial was published as Manstein
His Campaigns and His Trial (Collins, 1951). This book
was one of the earliest attempts to criticise the war crimes
trials, and remains one of the best ever published. For
more details of the book, the reader is referred to the
chapter on ‘Criticisms of the Trials’.

DACHAU TRIALS

Whilst the IMT and AMT trials were taking place,
identical proceedings were being heard at nearby Dachau;
the concentration camp was used to house the defendants.
The Dachau trials were under the direct supervision of the
War Crimes Branch, and represented an all-time low in
third-degree tactics on the part of the Americans.

On trial were the staffs of three concentration camps —
Dachau itself, Buchenwald and Flossenbiirg. Also arraigned
were some German soldiers accused of killing 83 American
prisoners at Malm4dy during the Battle of the Bulge. Later,
in 1946, the staff of Mauthausen were tried at Dachau too.

Confessions were extracted from prisoners by the use of
torture and brutality. Interrogators posed as priests in
order to extract confessions. Eventually news of the
brutality and convictions on dubious evidence began to
filter through to the American public. A special Simpson
Army Commission was set up to investigate the standards
of ‘justice’ meted out. The American Judge Edward L. van
Roden, one of the three members of the Commission,
revealed what had been going on at the Dachau trials in
the Washington Daily News of 9.1.49. (This account was
later reprinted in the British Sunday Pictorial on 23.1.49.)

He described the methods used to extract confessions
as follows:

“Posturing as priests to hear confessions and give absolution;
torture with burning matches driven under the prisoners’ finger¬
nails; knocking out of teeth and breaking jaws; solitary confinement
and near-starvation rations. The statements which were admitted as
evidence were obtained from men who had first been kept in solitary
confinement for three, four and five months . . . The investigators
would put a black hood over the accused’s head and then punch him
in the face with brass knuckles, kick him and beat him with rubber
hoses . . . All but two of the Germans, in the 139 cases we
investigated, had been kicked in the testicles beyond repair. This was
standard operating procedure with our American investigators.”

During interrogation, low rank prisoners were assured
that convictions were being sought only against higher
ranking officers, and that they had absolutely nothing to
lose by co-operating and making the desired statements.
Such “evidence” was then used against them when they
joined their superiors in the dock. The latter, on the other
hand, had been told that by “confessing”, they would take
all responsibility onto their own shoulders, thus shielding
their men from trial.

A favourite stratagem, when a prisoner refused to co¬
operate, was to arrange a mock trial. The prisoner was led
into a room in which civilian investigators, dressed in US
Army uniforms, were seated around a black table with a
crucifix in the centre, with two candles providing the only
light. This “court” then proceeded to hold a sham trial, at
the conclusion of which a sham death sentence was passed.


Interior of so-called Dachau Gas Chamber: it was in fact a de-lousing
and disinfection chamber. The hooks are obviously to hang clothes
from. There is no way that thousands of people could have perished
in so small a room. Photo: Arthur Butz


The “condemned” prisoner was later promised that, if he
co-operated with the prosecutors in giving evidence, he
would be reprieved. Sometimes interrogators threatened
to turn prisoners over to the Russians. In many cases the
prisoner’s family was threatened with loss of ration cards
or other hardships if co-operation was not obtained.

The “American” investigators responsible for this
brutality, and who later functioned as the prosecution in
the trials, were predominantly Jewish — Lt.Col. Burton F.
Ellis, Capt. Raphael Shumacker, Lt. Robert E. Byrne, Lt.
William R. Perl, Mr. Morris Ellowitz, Mr. Harry Thon and
Mr. Kirschbaum. The prosecution lacked any legal training
at all, as did the “court” (which consisted of ten US Army
officers) and the “defence counsel”. In fact, many of the
defence counsel were Americans who could speak not a
word of German. Competent interpreters were not
provided by the court. There was only one person present
with any legal training, the head of the Administration of
the Dachau Trials, Col. A. H. Rosenfeld, whose rulings on


the admissability of evidence were final.

When he resigned from this post in 1948, he was asked
by newspapermen if there was any truth in the stories
about mock trials, at which sham death sentences had been
passed. He replied, “Yes, of course. We couldn’t have made
those birds talk otherwise ... It was a trick, and it worked
like a charm.”

The conduct of the trials was a mockery. The indictment
itself made only general reference to very broad categories
of crimes allegedly committed between the years 1942 and
1945, and then proceeded to present a long list of
defendants accused of being criminal in the extremely
general sense stated. Specific crimes by specific people on
specific dates were not part of the indictments (e.g.
document 3590-PS).

While the prosecution could hunt all over Europe for
witnesses and, if necessary, torture prisoners in order to
get “evidence”, the accused, cut off from the outside
world and without funds, were rarely able to summon
anybody to their defence. In addition, the “Association of
Persons Persecuted by the Nazis”, by a propaganda
campaign, forbade and bullied former internees from
testifying on the side of the defence.

The American lawyer George A. McDonough later wrote
to the NY Times to state:

“Hearsay evidence was admitted indiscriminately and sworn state¬
ments of witnesses were admissible regardless of whether anybody
knew the person who made the statement or the individual who
took the statement. If a prosecutor considered a statement of a
witness to be more damaging than the witness’ oral testimony in
court, he would advise the witness to go back to his home, submit
the statement as evidence, and any objection by defence counsel
would be promptly over-ruled.”

McDonough was no “right-wing crank”: he himself had
served in other trials as both a prosecutor and defence
counsel, and later on was a member of a review board
arbitrating on clemency petitions.

One notable incident occurred when investigator Joseph
Kirschbaum brought a certain Einstein into court to testify
that the accused Menzel had murdered Einstein’s brother.
When the accused was able to point out that the brother
was alive and well and, in fact, sitting in court, Kirschbaum
was deeply embarrassed and scolded Einstein: “How can
we bring this pig to the gallows if you are so stupid as to
bring your brother into court?”

The ‘American’ Chief Prosecutor at the trial of the
Mauthausen staff went under the name of “Jack Taylor”.
He had himself been interned by the Nazis in Austria, for
being an OSS agent.

The Malm4dy defendants had a competent defence
counsel in Lt.Col. Willis M. Everett, Jr., and it was thanks
to his efforts that the behind-the-scenes brutalities came to
light. After his repeated appeals to the US Supreme Court,
plus a chorus of protests from German clergymen, the
American military governor General Lucius D. Clay finally
instigated an investigation into the Dachau trials. On 29
July 1948, the Secretary of the Army appointed a com¬
mission consisting of two American judges, Gordon
Simpson of Texas and Edward van Roden of Pennsylvania,
both JAG Department reserve colonels. They were assisted
by JAG Department Lt.Col. Charles Lawrence, Jr. The
Commission submitted its report to the Secretary of the
Army in October 1948, and selected portions were made
public in January 1949 — as referred to earlier.

Further public remarks by van Roden and Simpson
stimulated a further investigation by an independent
review board appointed by Clay. The total weight of
evidence was so damning that in the end the proponents of

49


the trials could only haggle about the numbers of German
prisoners subjected to brutalities.

There was so much public concern about the trials, after
these two reports, that a special US Senate sub-committee
was set up, under Senator Baldwin, to investigate the
claims of torture. One witness, formerly a court reporter
at the Dachau trials, testified before the committee that he
was so repelled by what had gone on there that he quit his
job. He said that the most brutal had been Lt. Perl, Frank
Steiner and Harry W. Thon. He explained that both Perl
and his wife had been in Nazi concentration camps, and
that the Nazis had killed Steiner’s mother. Judge Simpson
conceded that this was probably a “poor team”, but
proffered the rather lame excuse that because of the


The door of a disinfection chamber at Dachau. The inscriptions on
the door specify that the chamber is used from 7.30 to 10 in the
morning. The warning reads “Caution! Gas! Life Danger! Do not
open!” The U.S. Army caption for this photograph declares that
“Gas chambers, conveniently located to the crematory , are examined
by a soldier of the U.S. Seventh Army. These chambers were used by
Nazi guards for killing prisoners of the infamous Dachau concentration
camp. ” Photo: U.S. Army


shortage of German-speaking American lawyers and inter¬
preters, the Army had been forced to “draw on some of
the German refugees”. Steiner, Kirschbaum and Thon
(later chief of the Evaluation Section of the Civil Adminis¬
tration Division of the US military government) appeared
later and denied all. But they appeared rather shaken-up
when their fellow investigator Bruno Jacob admitted a few
things. Rosenfeld too denied almost all.

Out of 1672 persons tried at Dachau, 1416 were
convicted. 420 of these were given death sentences.

In an ironic twist of fate, Dachau was the scene of the
‘final solution’ for the Nazi leaders. After their botched-up
hanging at Numberg, the bodies of the Nazi leaders were
photographed (in order to be gloated over, shortly later, in
the press and newsreels). Their bodies, disguised in US
Army uniforms, were taken to Dachau, where they were
cremated in the single Dachau gas-oven, and their ashes
sifted into the nearby River Isar. The authorities were
determined that there would be no remains, not even a
grave, which could provide a shrine for the ‘re-emergence’
of Nazism in years to come.

Neither had Dachau seen the last of its use as a concen¬
tration camp. Since its liberation, Dachau had also been
used by the Allies as a concentration camp for 300 Russian
prisoners-of-war. These were men who had, either willingly
or unwillingly, served with the German forces. Early in
January 1946, the American authorities allowed Soviet
officers to visit the men to tell them that they should
come home, “All is forgiven.” The Russians remained
unconvinced of the Soviets’ sincerity, and refused to
budge. They barricaded themselves into their huts, singing
hymns and chanting prayers. When the American troops
finally burst in, the scene that met them was appalling.
The Russians were hysterically trying to commit suicide.
Two prisoners tried to disembowel themselves with bits of
broken glass. Others stood side by side, slashing with
pieces of glass at each other’s throats. Another struck his
head straight through a pane of glass, then shook it from
side to side, pressing his neck down against the jagged
edges. The room was simply awash with blood. The
wounded men fought like demons to stop the Americans
patching up their bleeding necks. The guards resorted to
beating the Russians unconscious with truncheons in order
to quieten them. One of the injured men died later of his
wounds in an American hospital near Munich. The New
York Times acknowledged his death with a small paragraph
headlined “Russian Traitor Dies of Wounds.” The
American and British newspapers had received instructions
not to publicise the affair, since this might cause offence
to our wonderful Soviet allies. In fact, the whole operation
was laid on simply to pander to the Soviets. It was feared
that to fail to send back these men, would mean that the
Soviets would fail in their promise to hold free elections in
Eastern Europe. As it turned out, of course, no such
elections ever took place anyway. The full story of this
disgraceful episode is fully documented in Lord Bethell’s
book The Last Secret.

Buchenwald

One of the defendants at Dachau was Frau Ilse Koch, the widow
of the Buchenwald. commandant who was executed by the SS for
corruption in 1943. It was alleged at the trial and at the IMT, in the
disjointed affidavit of one Pfaffenberger, who had since disappeared,
that she had made lamp-shades out of tattooed human skin, taken
from the bodies of murdered Jews. A whole array of macabre items
was solemnly produced, including shrunken heads and jars of soap.
One is immediately struck by the similarity of the “human soap”
allegation to the famous “Corpse Factory” myth which was


circulated deliberately by the British in World War 1! All of these
bizarre pieces of “evidence” originated from the War Crimes Branch
itself (3421-PS). Even Jewish authors acknowledge that the lamp¬
shade evidence “later appeared to be dubious.” (Manvell & Frankl,
The Incomparable Crime , p.84)

Indeed, after the storm of public controversy over the conduct of
the Dachau trials, General Clay was obliged to review Frau Koch’s
case. He determined that there was, after all, no way in which Frau
Koch could be related to the lampshades and other items which were
supposedly “discovered” at Buchenwald. For one thing, she had not
lived there since her and her husband’s arrest and replacement in
1943. Also her “family journal”, said to be bound in human skin,
and which was one of the major accusations against her, was never
located (and obviously never existed). Clay thus commuted her life
sentence to four years’ imprisonment.

However, Clay had reckoned without the influence of organised
Jewry, and he quickly found himself at the centre of a fierce
controversy over the commutation, orchestrated mainly by Rabbi
Wise. Yet another Senate investigation into the matter neatly side¬
stepped the issue. Clay stood firm on his decision and explained that:

“Examination of the record, based upon reports which I received from the
lawyers, indicated that the most serious charges were based on hearsay and not
on factual evidence. For that reason the sentence was commuted.”

Despite this emphatic stand by the American military governor,
the .powers-that-be found a way out by passing Frau Koch over to
the German authorities to be tried all over again — regardless of any
technicalities regarding ‘double jeopardy’. She was again faced with
the (by now familiar) lampshade charges. Although the defence was
able to show that the testimonies of two of the prosecution witnesses
contradicted their own previous statements, Ilse Koch was found
guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment. She hanged herself in her
cell in 1967.

By way of a bizarre footnote to the Buchenwald story, an article
in the Catholic Herald of 29 October 1948 describes the showing of
a film in Germany which was supposed to depict all the horrors of
Buchenwald camp. When the film was shown in Kassel, where every
adult was compelled to watch, a doctor from Gottingen was
extremely surprised to see himself on the screen, apparently looking
after the victims. After a period of bewilderment he realised that
what he was seeing was part of a film taken after the terrible Allied
air raid on Dresden on the night of 13 February 1945. After the
raid, which killed a record 135,000 civilians, the bodies of the
victims were piled up and burned in heaps of 400 or 500 during a
period of several weeks. These were the scenes, purporting to be
from Buchenwald, which the doctor had recognised at the Kassel
film-show.


Dachau

Ironically, we must turn to one of the officials at the Dachau War
Trials for evidence regarding the existence of “gas-chambers” at
Dachau camp.

Stephen F. Pinter served as a lawyer for the US War Department
with the occupation forces in Germany and Austria for six years
after the war. In the widely-read Catholic magazine Our Sunday
Visitor (14.6.59) he wrote:

I was in Dachau for 17 months after the war, as a US War Department
Attorney, and can state that there was no gas chamber at Dachau. What was
shown to visitors and sightseers and erroneously described as a gets chamber
was a crematory. Nor was there a gas-chamber in any of the other concen¬
tration camps in Germany. We were told that there was a gas chamber at
Auschwitz, but since that was in the Russian zone of occupation, we were not
permitted to investigate since the Russians would not allow it. From what I
was able to determine during the six postwar years in Germany and Austria,
there were a number of Jews killed, but the figure of a million was certainly
never reached. I interviewed thousands of Jews, former inmates of concen¬
tration camps in Germany and Austria, and consider myself as well qualified
as any man on this subject.

Pinter is, of course, very astute on the question of the crematorium
being represented as a gas chamber. Often the deliberately misleading
term “gas oven” is used, to further confuse the two. Of course, a
crematorium would be a requisite facility at any community of such
a size, particularly for the cremation of the victims of infectious
diseases like typhus.

This fact was conclusively proved by the German archbishop
Cardinal Faulhaber of Munich. He informed the Americans that
during the Allied air raids on Munich in September 1944, 30,000
people were killed. The archbishop requested the authorities at the
time to cremate the bodies of the victims in the crematorium at
Dachau, in order to curb the spread of disease. But he was told that,
unfortunately, this plan could not be carried out; the crematorium
having only one furnace, would not be able to cope. Clearly,
therefore, it could not have coped with the 238,000 Jewish bodies
which were allegedly cremated there. In order to do so, the


crematorium would have to be kept going for 326 years without
stopping and 530 tons of ashes would have to be disposed of.

The figure of 238,000 Jewish victims at Dachau was immortalised
in a plaque unveiled in 1946 at the camp by Philip Auerbach, the
State Secretary of Bavaria, who was later convicted for embezzling
money which he claimed as compensation for non-existent Jews.
Since that time, there has been a steady revision downwards, with
the present official figure standing at only 20,600.

Even the extreme left-wing Institut fur Zeitgeschichte in Munich
(“the paragon of hostility and resistance to Nazism”) declared in
1960 that:

“The gas chamber at Dachau was never completed and put into operation.”

The German Communist leader Ernst Ruff testified in his
Niirnberg affidavit of 18 April 1947 that the treatment of prisoners
on the work details at Dachau was humane. The Polish underground
leader Jan Piechowiak, who was interned at Dachau from 22 May
1940 until 29 April 1945, also testified on 21 March 1946 that
prisoners there received good treatment, and that the SS personnel
at the camp were well disciplined. Berta Schirotschin, who worked
in the food service at Dachau throughout the war, testified that the
working inmates continued to receive their customary second break¬
fast at 10 a.m. every morning until well into 1945 — despite
increasing privation in Germany.

Of course, none of this is to deny that deaths did occur at
Dachau. Since the beginning of 1945, there had been an estimated
15,000 prisoner deaths from typhus, mostly in the camp’s last two
months. When the Americans captured the camp on 29 April 1945,
they also found 500 dead bodies huddled in open trucks on a train
standing in the railway yard next to the camp. However, these
people had not been ‘exterminated’ either: they had died of
exposure. Finding dead people on trains in Germany in the closing
stages of the war was by no means unusual. In January 1945 800
Germans, frozen to death, had been found on a train which had
arrived in Berlin. It must be borne in mind that the German railway
system was in utter chaos in 1945. Most of the passenger carriages
had either been destroyed or were scattered to every corner of the
Reich. Many of the lines had been cut by Allied bombing. It was
literally impossible to get food through to the camps; consequently
there was severe malnutrition. Many of the camp administrators had
abandoned their posts; with the resultant breakdown in order and
sanitation. The truth about the Dachau deaths is to be found in a
1948 publication of the American Association for the Advancement
of Science:

“There were great accumulations of cases (of typhus) in the concentration
camps and prison camps . . . The number of patients with typhus fever at the
time the (Dachau) camp was first occupied will never be known. Days passed
before a census of patients could be accomplished.”

But this did not prevent American propagandists from claiming
that an “extermination gas chamber” existed at Dachau, and that
the deaths were the result of a systematic murder programme.

Two types of room were claimed as “gas chambers” by the
propagandists. One was indeed a gas chamber, but it was a chamber
for delousing prisoners’ clothes through the use of Zyklon B
pesticide gas, i.e. an extermination chamber for exterminating lice.

The second type was an ordinary shower room, which, it was
claimed, was actually a gas chamber disguised as a shower. The
‘proof* for this is supposed to be that the shower-room was next to
the crematorium. Doubtless the architects of every city crematorium
in the world will be interested to know that every time they site a
shower for the staff close to the incinerators they are risking being
accused of planning an extermination programme.

Usually the propagandists present the shower-room as the “exter¬
mination chamber”, rather than the disinfection chamber, which was
only ten feet square, and therefore would patently not have the
capacity required to ‘verify’ the myth.

Today, there is no longer any pretence that a gas chamber was
used at Dachau. Visitors are shown the shower-room, and told that
“This gas chamber, camouflaged as a shower-room, was not used.
The prisoners selected for gassing were transported from Dachau to
the Hartheim Castle, near Linz (Austria) or to other camps.” Why on
earth the Germans should have gone to all this trouble, when they
had a real, working “gas-chamber” right there on site is not
explained.


EICHMANN

Nothing conjours up ghastlier images in the minds of
people today than the name of Adolf Eichmann. Before
his abduction by Israeli agents in 1960, not many had


heard of the man. After his trial and execution, the world
was flooded with sensationalistic novels, all purporting to
be based on Eichmann’s activities. One example is Comer
Clarke’s Eichmann: The Savage Truth. According to Clarke,
“The orgies went on until six in the morning, a few hours
before consigning the next batch of victims to death.”

In fact, Eichmann was merely an unimportant adminis¬
trator, the head of Office A4b in Department IV (the
Gestapo) of the Reich Security Head Office. His office was
responsible for the internment of enemy aliens, in the case
of Office A4b — the Jews.

Eichmann’s capture, trial and execution were all hall¬
marked with the same ‘high’ standards of justice which the
earlier trials had displayed.

On 23 May 1960, David Ben Gurion announced to the
Knesset that the Israeli Security Forces had captured “one
of the greatest Nazi criminals, Adolf Eichmann, who
together with the Nazi leaders was responsible for ... the
destruction of 6 million European Jews.” Ben Gurion was
obviously unworried by any annoying rules of sub judice.
Nor was Professor Theodor Heuss, the former German
President, who happened to be visiting Israel at the time.
Heuss commented, “Eichmann is one of the chief war
criminals. He did enormous evil and caused untold suffering
all over Europe.” He added that he was sure Israel would
handle the Eichmann case correctly and justly (i.e. by
making sure he was found guilty).

The Israeli government was determined to make as
much political capital as possible out of the trial. As Ben
Gurion himself wrote in Davar on 27 May 1960:

The importance of Eichmann’s capture and trial in Israel lies . . .
in the fact that the entire episode of the Holocaust can now be laid
bare in an Israeli court so that the youth of this country . . . will
know and remember. I have no doubt that in the service of the
dictators of the neighbouring countries there are scores and hundreds
of Nazis; German and Arab, who took part in the slaughter of the
Jews then and are now plotting the same thing for the nation of
Israel in its own country. Public opinion in the world must be
reminded whose disciples are those now planning Israel’s destruction.”

By chance, the President of the World Zionist Organis¬
ation, Dr. Nahum Goldmann, happened to be visiting Israel
at the time of Eichmann’s capture. He publicly expressed
reservations about the idea of Eichmann being tried before
an all-Israeli court. Goldmann felt that a better show could
be made by resurrecting an international tribunal, Niirnberg-
style. Ben-Gurion quickly put Goldmann in his place, and
pointed out:

It is not the penalty to be inflicted on the criminal that is the
main thing — no penalty can match the magnitude of the offence —
but the full exposure of the Nazi regime’s infamous crimes against
our people. Eichmann’s acts alone are not the main point in this
trial.

The Soviet government agreed. At a news conference at
the United Nations the Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei
Gromyko expressed his approval of the trial. Also, the
Soviet Ambassador in Washington declared that although
the USSR had serious differences with Israel over the
matter of Israel’s imperialism, his government felt that
Israel was entitled and indeed, obliged, to try Eichmann.
Should Israel relinquish this right, he went on, the Soviet
Union would demand Eichmann’s extradition to the USSR
for the crimes he had committed against Soviet citizens,
including numerous Jews.

But one country which was not so keen on the
proceedings was Argentina, from where Eichmann had
been abducted. Argentinian nationalists were annoyed that
their sovereignty had been violated by Israel. The Israeli
Ambassador to Argentina was summoned by the
Argentinian Foreign Minister and asked for an official


explanation about the Israeli commando raid.

The Israeli Foreign Ministry replied:

The Government of Israel had no knowledge whatsoever that
Eichmann came to Israel from Argentina, as the Israel Security
Services did not inform it of this . . .

Ever since the end of the Second World War, Jewish volunteers
(among them some Israelis) had begun to look for Eichmann, the
person principally responsible for the extermination of the Jews of
Europe . . .

The searches were renewed more vigorously and the address of
Eichmann, where he was living under a false name, was discovered.
The group of volunteer searchers made contact with Eichmann and
asked him if he was prepared to come for trial to Israel. When
Eichmann realised that he had been recognised, he admitted his true
identity and stated that he was living in Argentina with false papers
and under an assumed name; as to the question whether he was
prepared to stand trial in Israel, he requested a delay of twenty-four
hours before giving his agreement to come to Israel of his own free
will to be tried. He also handed the group a letter to the Argentine
government written in his own handwriting (a photostatic copy of
which has been forwarded to the government of Argentina). The
following is the text of Eichmann’s letter (as translated from its
German original):

“I, the undersigned, Adolf Eichmann, state herewith of my own free will:
Since my true identity has now been revealed, I realise that there is no point
in my continuing to try to avoid justice. I declare myself willing to proceed to
Israel and to stand trial there before a competent court.

“It is understood that I will receive legal counsel and I shall try to recount,
without any embroidery, the facts relating to my last years of service in
Germany, so that a true picture of the events may be transmitted to future
generations. I am submitting this declaration of my own free will, I have not
been promised anything and I have not been threatened. I want at last to
achieve inner peace.

“As I am unable to remember all the details and may also mix things up,
I request that I be helped by the putting at my disposal of documents and
testimony to assist me in my endeavour to establish the truth.

(signed) Adolf Eichmann, Buenos Aires, May I960.”

On May 23, 1960, the group of volunteers informed the Govern¬
ment of Israel that Eichmann was in their custody . . .

The Government of Israel requests that the extraordinary
significance of bringing to trial a person who bears the responsibility
for the murder of millions of our people be taken into consideration ...

The ‘Big Lie’ technique of the Israeli Government did
not work with the canny Argentinians. In June 1960, they
referred the matter to the Security Council of the United
Nations, despite much behind-the-scenes effort to induce
them to stand down. The Soviet Ambassador made a
strong attack on Argentina. The USA, Italy and France all
took a strongly pro-Israel stance. In the end, the Security
Council voted that Israel should have to apologise for
infringing Argentina’s sovereignty, and that would be the
end of the matter. In order to preserve face with their
nationalist supporters, the Argentine Government stated
that an apology would be insufficient. On 25 July 1960
they broke off diplomatic relations with Israel. But a week
later, when the fuss had died down, relations were quietly
resumed again.

The Israeli statement was a pack of lies from beginning
to end. Eichmann was not “approached by Jewish volun¬
teers”. He was bundled into a car in the street by Israeli
Secret Service agents (David Ben-Gurion, Israel: A Personal
History). He did not go to Israel of his own free will — his
family spent the whole night searching for him after his
abrupt disappearance. As for his so-called ‘letter to the
Argentinian Government’, it just defeats description.

The “letter” bears all the hallmarks of a bogus
confession: numerous assurances about writing the letter
of his own free will, willingness to go to Israel, confidence
in the “competence” of the court, requests for legal
counsel and documentary “aide-memoires”, and above all,
the tone of humility, guilt and “wanting to make a clean
breast of things.” The line about “a true picture of the
events” being transmitted “to future generations” bears a
startling resemblance to Ben-Gurion’s original Davar state¬
ment about “the entire episode” being “laid bare so that
the youth in this country will know and remember”.


Indeed, Eichmann’s ‘confession’ could not have been
better written if the Israelis had written it themselves — as
seems most likely.

Eichmann was charged with crimes against the Jewish
people under Section A(l), and crimes against humanity
under Section A(2) of the Nazi Collaborators (Punishment)
Law, 1950 — the only law in Israel to carry the death
penalty. On 5 June 1960 Deputy Commander Ephraim
Hofstater-Elrom (who in an ironic sequel eleven years later
was himself kidnapped and murdered in Istanbul) requested
that an order be issued forbidding publication of
Eichmann’s place of incarceration, the security precautions,
or anything else which might indicate his whereabouts. In
the Jewish Chronicle of 2 September 1960, an account is
given of all the third-degree methods which were used to
render Eichmann ‘more co-operative’.

A special police squad, Bureau 06, was set up to co¬
ordinate investigation into Eichmann’s career. The Bureau
consisted of thirty men in five squads. One squad conducted
Eichmann’s official interrogation for ‘four or five hours a
day’. Another squad unearthed and examined documents.
A third took affidavits from witnesses. The fourth examined
thousands of documents in various Jewish archives and
government data-banks around the world. And the fifth
prepared the evidence and investigation material for the
trial. The head of 06 was Commander Avraham Selinger,
and almost all his men were German-Jews.

The trial began on 11 April 1961 in the Beit HaAm Hall
in Jerusalem, which had been rushed to completion for the
purpose. A bullet-proof glass cage was installed around the
dock. The three judges were Moshe Landau (chairman),
Dr. Benjamin Halevi and Dr. Yitzhak Raveh. The Prosecutor
was Attorney General Gideon Hausner. The defence
attorney was Dr. Robert Servatius, assisted by Dieter
Wechtenbruch, both Germans.

As soon as the indictment had been read out, Servatius
intervened to challenge the validity of the court. He
suggested that (a) the judges were not objective, because of
their preconceived opinions, and (b) the court was not
qualified to try Eichmann because (i) he had been illegally
abducted from Argentina and (ii) the crimes he had been
charged with had been enacted post factum. Servatius
further pointed out that the acts attributed to the accused
were committed before the creation of the State of Israel,
against persons who were not citizens of Israel. He said
that Eichmann’s written declaration that he had come to
Israel of his own free will had been extracted by force: it
was highly unlikely that a man who had been in hiding for
fifteen years to avoid trial would suddenly wish to appear
in court. He said Eichmann was merely a functionary; just
a cog in a machine, and therefore did not deserve to stand
trial like the Nazi leaders had. But even if he should be
tried, it should be before an international tribunal. It
would be well-nigh impossible to convince defence witnesses
that it would be safe for them to come to Israel.

The Attorney General, Gideon Hausner, answered the
objections. First he dealt with the claim that Jewish judges
could not be objective. No decent person in the world
could be objective in such a trial, he maintained. (However,
he did not explain why decent neutral people from non-
combatant countries like Sweden or Switzerland should
not be asked to judge the evidence.)

Regarding Servatius’ objection that Eichmann had been
illegally abducted, Hausner argued that this was irrelevant.
In any case, he said, the negotiations over the affair between
Israel and Argentina had ended successfully. (But he did
not endeavour to explain how the breaking off of diplomatic


relations between the two countries could be described as
successful; someone must have pulled him up on this point
during the lunch-break, for in the afternoon session
Hausner was at pains to point out that of course the Israeli
Government did not admit to abducting him, anyway.)

Servatius had argued that it would be impossible to get
any defence witnesses to come to Israel for the trial.
Hausner replied that he would be generous and allow the
introduction of written affidavits. He would even go one
step further and agree to the submission of evidence from
witnesses who had testified in German courts.

Hausner had to admit that the Israeli law was ex post
facto, but he argued that this was by no means unprece¬
dented: he cited the Yalta Agreement, the London Agree¬
ment and the subsequent Numberg Trials. Without
retroactive law, he suggested rather candidly, the Nazis
would have been immune from punishment. (Undoubtedly
the same rule would not apply to Israeli war-crimes, such
as the massacre at Deir Yassin.)

Hausner rejected a further claim by Servatius that
Germany had already atoned for the crimes of the Nazis
by paying financial reparations to Israel. The Reparations
Agreement could never serve as an atonement or make us
forget, he maintained. He further rejected the claim that
Eichmann was just a small cog in a large machine — Hausner
intended to prove that it was Eichmann who had initiated,
planned, organised and implemented the attempt to
exterminate the Jewish people of Europe. (If Eichmann
was totally responsible for all this, one wonders why
hundreds of Nazis were executed at Numberg for the same
crime. How could hundreds of people all have “initiated”
the plan?)

To the claim that Eichmann could not be tried for
crimes committed before the State of Israel was created,
Hausner countered that despite the fact that Israel did not
exist de jure at the time, the Great Powers had recognised
the ‘Nation of Israel’ as a party to the war against
Germany. He submitted a document, dated 1950, in which
the governments of the USA, Britain and France invited
Israel, rather belatedly, to join them in putting an end to
the state of war with Germany. (So if the Nation of Israel
was “at war with Germany”, then the Germans were quite
entitled to put the Jews in concentration camps — as
interned enemy aliens, just like the Americans did with the
Japanese in California, and the British did with stray
Germans on the Isle of Man.)

Needless to say, the judges were not impressed by
Servatius’ last-ditch efforts. They ruled that the indictment
was valid. Judge Landau reiterated that justice would be
guaranteed, as every man was presumed innocent until
proved guilty. (Neatly ignoring the public utterances of
almost the entire Israeli establishment, including the Prime
Minister himself.)

Eichmann pleaded Not Guilty.

Hausner opened his case with what appeared to be a ten-
hour long precis of some cheap Holocaust pot-boiler. He
distorted and misrepresented almost every single point of
evidence he referred to. He attempted to portray Eichmann
as a vehement anti-Zionist, when in fact he was quite the
reverse, as the Kimche brothers relate at some length in
The Secret Roads. He referred to the Numberg affidavit
of Dieter Wisliceny, Eichmann’s assistant, as if it was
genuine, when in fact Wisliceny was tortured by the
Soviets into signing the affidavit, which was written in
English. He referred to the affidavit of Rudolf Hoss, the
Commandant at Auschwitz, saying that Eichmann and
Hoss had jointly chosen the site for the Auschwitz exter¬


mination plant. Here again, the affidavit was a blatant
forgery (which is rejected even by Jewish ‘Holocaust
experts’ such as Reitlinger), again written in English, and
again written by a man who was himself executed by the
Communists shortly after his ‘confession’.

Hausner went on to try to explain away the ‘Jews for
trucks’ deal which the Nazis had conducted with Jewish
representatives in Budapest. He claimed that Eichmann
had done all in his power to stop Jews being allowed to
emigrate, in exchange for material or financial ransom. In
fact, Eichmann was the main German supporter of the
scheme, as explained in A Million Jews to Save, by Andr6
Biss, one of the Hungarian Jews involved. (It has since
been suggested that there may have been Israeli party
political factors involved in Hausner’s pejorative dealing
with the scheme. One of Biss’s colleagues involved in the
deal was Rezso (Rudolf) Kastner, who gave an affidavit at
Numberg (2605-PS), emigrated to Israel and became a
leading member of Ben Gurion’s Mapai party. A scandal
erupted in 1957 when another Hungarian Jew accused
Kastner of having worked too closely with the Nazis.
Kastner sued him for libel, and soon afterwards was
mysteriously assassinated.)

Hausner tried to pin on Eichmann responsibility for the
alleged Action Group executions in occupied Russia. He
claimed that a Niimberg document (003-L) by SS Gruppen-
fuhrer Katzmann told how 434,329 Jews had been
destroyed. In actual fact, the Katzmann letter described
this number of Jews as having been resettled ( ausgesiedelt ),
and receiving “special treatment” ( sonderbehandelt ).
Neither of these terms indicate extermination.

The first prosecution witnesses, on 18 April 1961, were
police officials from the data-collation section of Bureau
06, run by Naftali Bar-Shalom. Most of the documents he
presented had been gleaned from Jewish documentation
centres throughout the world, in particular a source in
London which had had access to the entire German
Foreign Ministry records from 1870 to 1945. The records
had been captured almost in their entirety and shipped to
England at the end of the war.

On 20 April, Chief Inspector Avner Less, in charge of
the 06 Interrogation squad, submitted the tapes of
Eichmann’s interrogation, together with the 3564-page
transcription. However, Eichmann’s attitude during the
interrogation sessions was remarkably different from that
he displayed otherwise. A Protestant minister, Rev.
William Hull, who had access to Eichmann during his
incarceration, admitted that the contrast was puzzling. On
tape Eichmann had said, “I am prepared to be punished
for the black events and I know that the death sentence
awaits me. I do not request mercy for I do not deserve it.”
Hull reported that when he had asked Eichmann to make a
confession before God, Eichmann had replied, “I have
done nothing wrong.” Even Servatius had to acknowledge
that Eichmann “did not anticipate the death sentence.”

The trial was interrupted for a few days for Israel’s
Independence Day celebrations. In a special broadcast to
the nation, Ben Gurion did not miss the chance to make
political capital out of Eichmann’s demise; again paying his
usual regard to sub judice rules:

This is not an ordinary trial nor only a trial. Here, for the first
time in Jewish history, historical justice is being done by the sovereign
Jewish people ... It is not an individual that is in the dock at this
historic trial and not the Nazi regime alone but anti-Semitism
throughout history. The judges whose business is the law and who
may be trusted to adhere to it will judge Eichmann the man for his
horrible crimes, but responsible public opinion in the world will be
judging anti-Semitism.

53


After the celebrations, the court got back to work again,
going through Eichmann’s interrogation records. It trans¬
pired that Eichmann had sown the seeds of his own
downfall in 1957, when he had bumped into an ex-SS man
by the name of Sassen in Buenos Aires. Sassen had
suggested that the two should make a bit of money by
writing a book about the war, based on Eichamnn’s
experiences. Eichmann agreed, and submitted to hours of
question-and-answer sessions with Sassen, which were all
put down on tape. But after the sessions got under way,
Sassen began to get a little bit frustrated, partly because
Eichmann’s memory was so hazy, and partly because what
he could recall was chronically boring. Eichmann agreed
that Sassen should use some poetic licence to liven up the
story. Sassen transcribed the tapes, and then Eichmann
added comments and corrections in the margins. He also
wrote out by hand a further 83 pages of comments.

Sassen found that it was more difficult than he had
imagined, trying to sell the story, and ironically it was not
until Eichmann was arrested three years later that Sassen
was able to find a market. The story was featured in Life
magazine for the week 28 November/5 December 1960,
thus indicating that the work was no historical archive; it
was popularised semi-fiction. The feature was full of
factual errors; for example it was stated that Himmler was
already in command of the Reserve Army by April 1944,
when in fact he did not become head until after the July
1944 plot against Hitler’s life.

The prosecution had obtained some of the interview
material direct from Sassen. The tapes themselves had
‘disappeared’. Instead, they produced photo-copies of the
83 pages of Eichmann’s hand-written notes, which were
admitted, and a 300-page transcription (again photo¬
copied) of 62 out of 67 tape sessions, which the defence
challenged. The court agreed to admit only those pages
which bore Eichmann’s handwritten margin-notes.

On 25 April, Hausner went to town with the Wisliceny
affidavit. The affidavit claimed that Eichmann had “told”
Wisliceny that Himmler had ordered the Jews to be exter¬
minated in April 1942. At the end of 1944, “Hitler had
ordered that all executions of Jews were to cease, but
Eichmann refused to obey unless he received a written
directive signed by Himmler.” The affidavit also noted
Eichmann’s ties with the Mufti of Jerusalem, and made it
clear that the Mufti was “most impressed” with the Nazis’
solution to the Jewish question, and they with him.
According to Wisliceny, the Mufti had asked for one of
Eichmann’s assistants to be loaned to him in Palestine after
a German/Arab victory. He went on to say that the only
reason the “trucks for Jews” plan had failed was because
the Mufti had intervened with Himmler, anxious lest the
ransomed Jews should decide to go to Palestine.

From beginning to end, the Wisliceny “affidavit” stinks.
The un-natural emphasis on the Mufti of Jerusalem, the
attempts to smear him as a Nazi and the ludicrous portraying
of him as a lever on German policy in Hungary — these are
just the kind of propaganda points which Zionists would
think of, not minor Gestapo functionaries in Slovakia. As
previously pointed out, Wisliceny signed the affidavit,
which was written in English, after being tortured by
Soviet jailers and interrogated by ‘American’ investigators
at Bratislava Prison in Czechoslovakia. He was executed
immediately afterwards, before he could change his mind.
Factual errors abound in the affidavit; for example it is
claimed that the German invasion of Poland added 3
million Jews to the Reich — in fact there were only around
one million.


Sundry human witnesses were then called to testify to
the vigour, dynamism and heroism of the Jewish people.
Out of 102 witnesses for the prosecution, at least ninety
had not only never met Eichmann, but until the end of the
war had never even heard his name. A Professor Salo Baron
asserted that in 1939, the world Jewish population was
I 6 V 2 million (an accurate figure) but that after the war
only IOV 2 million remained. This figure is rather doubtful,
to say the least. The New York Times on 22.2.48 estimated
the post-war world Jewish population at between 15 V 2
million and 18% million. The official American Jewish
Committee estimate published in the 1945 World Almanac
was 15 million. The 1946 figure was 15% million, which
was retained for the 1947, 1948 and 1949 editions. Baron
also alleged that the Nazis had 9.8 million Jews under their
rule. This again is wildly inaccurate. According to Chambers
Encyclopaedia, there were only 6 V 2 million Jews in the
whole of pre-war Europe; 3 million of these escaped to
Allied countries, and V 2 million were living in Britain or
neutral European countries anyway. So there were only
around 3 million Jews remaining within the Reich.

Eichmann’s defence strategy was essentially an acknow¬
ledgement of reality. Like the Niimberg defendants before
him, to have challenged the extermination legend would
have been to have challenged the whole basis of the court’s
political being. His only possible line of defence was to
admit that exterminations had happened, but deny any
personal involvement. His fundamental attitude was that
he had been only a cog in a machine, merely organising
transportation, in obedience to orders which could not be
disobeyed. In fact at no point throughout the trial was any
evidence produced to the contrary. There was no way that
Eichmann could have been responsible for what went on
in the camps — his task was administering transportation,
not formulating policy. A secondary feature of his
testimony was that, however lowly he was, he had done his
best to sabotage the extermination programme as soon as
he had learnt of its existence.

Eichmann’s attempts to explain away, rather than
explain, his role, cut little ice with the court. The trial
lasted four months. Four more months passed before the
judges handed down their verdict — guilty on all fifteen
counts of the indictment. In his summing up, Justice
Landau spoke of the many questions to which the trial had
drawn attention:

What are the psychological and social causes of the group hatred
known as anti-Semitism? Can this ancient disease be cured, and if so,
how?

The court passed sentence of death on 15 December
1961, having noted that Israeli law precludes the death
penalty, except in Holocaust cases. On 31 May 1962, after
appealing in vain as far as the highest functionary in the
land, President Ben-Zvi, Eichmann mounted the scaffold.
The Rev. Hull again offered his assistance, but Eichmann
told him that he would go to his death calmly, believing in
Nature rather than God. He gave his blessing to Germany,
Austria and Argentina and was hanged on the stroke of
midnight. His body was cremated in a gas-oven, and next
day his ashes were carried three miles out to sea by a police
launch and unceremoniously dumped into the Mediter¬
ranean.


EICHMANN THE ZIONIST

The irony of Eichmann’s trial by the Israelis is that he himself
was a staunch Zionist and gave much assistance to the Zionist cause,
both before and during the war.

54


He first became converted to Zionism in 1935, after reading, as
part of his SS training, the Zionist classic The Jewish State , written
by the inventor of Zionism, the journalist Theodor Herzl. (The
original title of the book was An Address to the Rothschilds.)
Eichmann described himself as being promptly and permanently
converted to Zionism. Henceforth, he thought of npthing but a
“political solution” for the Jewish question and how to “get some
firm ground under the feet of the Jews.”

He was reported as having protested against the desecration of
Herzl’s grave in Vienna in 1939 and was seen in civilian clothes at
the commemoration ceremony on the thirty-fifth anniversary of
Herzl’s death. In 1937, Eichmann and a functionary from his office
made a visit to Palestine at the formal invitation of a Zionist official.
But only after climbing Mount Haifa, he was arrested by the British
authorities and deported to Egypt. In Cairo, he was visited by a
representative from the Zionist para-military organisation Haganah.
Nowadays, the Zionists try to shift responsibility for Eichmann’s
visit to the Mufti, but there is no doubt that Eichmann empathised
more with the Zionists, as their political philosophy directly
coincided with that of the Nazis, i.e. the dissimilation of the Jews
from Europe and their despatch to a land of their own (usually
thought of as Palestine — but Madagascar, Uganda and Kazakhstan
have all been considered).

The liaison did not end with the internment of Jewish dissidents.
In The Secret Roads , two prominent British Zionists Jon and David
Kimche describe how Eichmann co-operated in the recruitment of
Jewish pioneers to be illegally and secretly settled in Palestine. The
Kimches describe how two young Jewish settlers made their way
back to Berlin and Vienna in 1938 in order to put the scheme to the
Gestapo. Eichmann readily agreed to the plan, and even expelled a
group of nuns from a convent to provide a training farm for the
young Jewish 4migr4s. By the end of 1938, about a thousand Jews
were being provided with training in these establishments. The two
emissaries were allowed to visit internment camps and select the
most able Jewish youngsters for training and subsequent passage to
Palestine.

The Kimche brothers paid eloquent tribute to Eichmann*s efforts
on behalf of the Jews in The Secret Roads: “Eichmann may go
down in history as one of the arch murderers of the Jewish people,
but he entered the lists as an active worker in the rescue of the Jews
from Europe.” They go on to point out that the Zionist agents in
Europe regarded the British as “the chief enemy” — not Germany.

Even during the war itself, Eichmann still liaised with his Zionist
friends. In 1944, when he was stationed in Budapest, he negotiated
a deal with Dr. Reszo Kastner, a leader of the Hungarian Jewish
community, whereby Jews would be allowed to emigrate to neutral
countries in exchange for the Germans being supplied with trucks,
tractors, food supplies and foreign exchange. However, the deal
hardly got off the ground — only a couple of thousand Jews got to
Switzerland — when the Allied governments squashed the scheme.


RECENT TRIALS

The Eichmann Trial in Israel had one major side effect
in that it sparked off yet another wave of “war-guilt
hysteria” in West Germany. In order to assuage their
public consciences, the German authorities swooped on a
number of unsuspecting citizens and promptly put them
on show-trial. One of the first victims was Richard Baer,
successor to Hoss and last commandant of Auschwitz, who
was arrested on 20 December 1960 near Hamburg, where
he was working as a lumberjack. He was imprisoned and
interrogated, but steadfastly denied that the Auschwitz
“gas-chambers” had ever existed. Unfortunately he did not
live long enough to take this position in court, for he died
in prison on 17 June 1963, at the age of 51, apparently
from a circulatory ailment, although his wife considered
his death rather mysterious.

When the trial finally opened in Frankfurt in December
1963, the principal defendant was one Robert K. L. Mulka,
an ex-SS Captain who had served briefly as adjutant to
Hoss at Auschwitz. Mulka had been tried and sentenced,

55


by a German court, immediately after the war, in
connection with his role at Auschwitz, and quite a few of
the other 21 defendants at this Auschwitz Trial were
standing trial for the second time on basically the same
charges. The Bonn Government refused to allow as an
observer at the trial the writer Paul Rassinier, who had
himself been interned at Buchenwald and had written
several books denying the existence of gas-chambers.

The court did not, of course, ignore legal matters
entirely, and it took the trouble to explain that the Bonn
Government considered itself the legal successor to the
Third Reich, and was thus competent to try persons for
infringing laws which were in force in Germany during the
war period. Killing Jews had been illegal in Nazi Germany,
and thus the majority of the defendants were charged in
that respect.

Being a normal court of law, rather than an ad-hoc
Military Tribunal, a rather higher standard of evidence was
demanded at Frankfurt than at Numberg. However, such
high-standard evidence was not forthcoming. The court
was forced to acknowledge that the only documentary
proof was “a few not very valuable documents.” The
evidence was “almost exclusively witness testimonies.”
Unlike a normal trial, they said, in this case there was no
corpse to examine, no post-mortem, no murder weapon,
no finger-prints, no forensic evidence and no proof linking
the defendants with any victim. They pointed out that
previous convictions on such weak evidence had proved
unjust: “Only a few weeks ago we read in the newspapers
that a member of the Buchenwald concentration camp
staff had been convicted of murdering an inmate who, it is
clear today, is alive and was certainly not murdered.”

The court was careful to skate around the thorny
problem of the witnesses’ objectivity. Almost all the
witnesses were from Iron Curtain countries. They had all
been circulated with portfolios of notes, to “refresh their
memories”, by self-appointed organisations such as the
“Comity International d’Auschwitz” and the “Comity des
Camps”. Even the mayor of Frankfurt had made improper
suggestions regarding what kind of evidence the witnesses
should give.

In the end, the only charges which stuck were of a
nature completely isolated from the extermination charge.
Mulka was found guilty of having signed an order form for
a batch of Zyklon B pesticide, of having been in charge of
the motor pool, which transported internees to and fro,
and of having been involved in the construction of the
crematoria for the victims of typhus. He was sentenced to
14 years’ hard labour, but was released after only four
months on health grounds. Defendant Franz Hofmann, ex-
SS Captain who had been in charge of Auschwitz I,
received a life sentence for having thrown a bottle at a
prisoner who later died from the head injury received. But
Hofmann too was released shortly afterwards, on the
grounds that he had previously served a sentence.

In June 1976, the trial finally ended in Hamburg of six
former Nazis charged with involvement in the murder of
“more than a million” Jews in wartime ghettos and
concentration camps. The trial, interrupted by frequent
illness among the six, had lasted 3V£ years — the longest in
Hamburg’s history. All were acquitted due to lack of
evidence.

Karl Streibel, 72, former SS officer and commandant of
Trawnike Labour Camp was the chief accused. The others
were Michael Janczak (72), Kurt Reinberger (65), Erwin
Mittrach (67), Theodor Pentzick (68) and Joseph
Napietralla (68).


THE ITALIAN TRIALS

Probably the first achievement of the backlash of
opinion against the war trials was the commutation in
1947 of death sentences passed on several German generals
tried in Italy.

The best known of these was Field Marshal Kesselring,
chief of the German forces in Italy. In 1945 this aged
German soldier was interned in the so-called Ash Can at
Mondorf Camp near Luxembourg, along with many others
from the German military top brass. From there he went
to Numberg, where he was kept in solitary confinement
for five months, with no reason being given for this punish¬
ment. His solitude was only interrupted by several sessions
as a defence witness for Goring during his trial as a war
criminal. Kesselring notes only two episodes from the trial
in his memoirs.

He recalls that he had gone to great lengths to explain to
the court that the German air attacks on Poland in 1939
had been scrupulously planned in accordance with the
Hague Convention. But in a deliberate act of obtuseness,
the British prosecutor Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe fired a
parting shot with the rhetorical question, “So you allowed
Polish towns to be attacked in violation of international
law?”

Kesselring’s reply sounds haughty today, but at that
time was the perfectly sincere response of a principled
German officer: “I have given my evidence as a German
officer with over forty years’ service, as a Field Marshal
and on oath! If my statements are so little respected I shall
make no further depositions.”

Later, one of the defence counsel Dr. Latemser, wanted
to know about the activities of the Communist partisans
in Italy. Immediately the Soviet prosecutor, General
Rudenko, sprang to his feet to object. “The witness,” he
declared, “seems to me the least fitted on this subject.”
After lengthy deliberations, most of the discussion out of
court, the tribunal ruled that that was the end of the
subject.

Kesselring next found himself at Dachau, the war-time
concentration camp which the Allies were using as a
clearing house for PoWs and war criminals. The Field
Marshal was squashed into a tiny cell with Field Marshals
von Brauchitsch and Milch, Secretary of State Bohle,
Ambassador von Bargen plus an ordinary soldier.

From there it was back to Numberg again, to be grilled
by the American Army’s 1984-ish Historical Division. The
Historical Division had been set up to write, or rather re¬
write, the history of the war, and needed to interrogate
Kesselring in order to make allowance for any unfortunate
contingencies, such as facts, or eye-witness accounts,
which might otherwise throw the Division’s authoritative
description into some disarray at some stage in the future.

In the autumn of 1946, the Field Marshal was moved to
London, where he spent a month in the well-known
Kensington Cage, where he was again de-briefed about his
war experiences. Kesselring’s memoirs note that during one
of his sessions with a Jewish interrogation officer, he
warned the Jew that if they insisted on pursuing their
stated policy of revenge against the German nation, they
would only be sowing the seeds of anti-semitism, not just
in Germany, but throughout the western world.

Around this time, the trial opened in Rome of Generals
von Mackensen and Malzer, who were accused of the
shooting of 335 Italians in the Ardeatine catacombs near
Rome on 24 March 1944. Kesselring was able to give
evidence on behalf of his comrades, but his six days on the


witness stand were in vain. The two were sentenced to
death.

But Kesselring himself was very quickly to find himself
on the receiving end of British military “justice”. His trial
at Venice lasted three months from February to May 1947.
On the first day of the case, Kesselring’s defence counsel
had been unavoidably delayed, , but the prosecution
demanded to be able to proceed without him being
represented at all. Fortunately a British officer intervened
and told the prosecutor: “This trial must not be allowed to
become a farce from the very start.”

The military tribunal contained only one person with
any legal training whatsoever — the same judge who had
presided over the Rome trial three months earlier. There
were two charges. One was the same charge of murdering
the Italians, which had resulted in death sentences on
Kesselring’s colleagues. The second was a charge of incite¬
ment to murder, which alleged that Kesselring had issued
two orders to his troops to murder civilians. The only
prosecution evidence which was presented was a portfolio
of affidavits. There were no human witnesses on the
prosecution side. The affidavits had not been taken down
by any person authorised to administer an oath, but had
somehow been ‘compiled’ on the basis of third-hand
information, passed on years after the incidents took place.
When such affidavits were presented to Italian courts, most
of them were proved to be either untrue or wildly
exaggerated. It turned out that many of the misdeeds
which had actually taken place were not the work of
German soldiers, but of Italian Fascists, such as the Brigata
Nera, or partisans wearing stolen German uniforms.

Kesselring was able to obtain the assistance of four
extremely able defence counsel: Dr. Latemser, Dr.
Frohwein, Dr. Schutze and Prof. Schwinge. They pointed
out to the court that all responsibility for reprisals against
guerilla operations had been transferred from the army to
the SD, so Kesselring could not have borne any guilt for
what excessive reprisals did occur. In fact, according to
Kesselring, the- army attempted to circumvent many of the
SD’s reprisal plans, but their hand was forced by
continuous assassinations and ambushes, not just of
Germans, but of Italian businessmen and police, by com¬
munist partisans. Kesselring was obliged to issue his own
authorisation for local army commanders to take whatever
anti-guerilla actions necessary. He emphasises that this was
not an order to take such action, simply an authorisation
that such could be taken. The authorisation was a direct
reply to the broadcasts of Field Marshals Alexander and
Badoglic, who were exhorting the Italians to murder as
many Germans as possible and step up the guerilla war.
Kesselring points out that the official US Army handbook
Rules of Land Warfare also authorises such tactics, even
including the execution of hostages (article 358d).

Although an Italian court returned a not guilty verdict
against one Kappeler, a member of the SD who was facing
similar charges to the Field Marshal, the British military
tribunal found Kesselring guilty on all counts. On 6 May
1947, he was sentenced to death by firing squad.

There was considerable public unrest about the verdict.
A Col. Scotland, who had befriended Kesselring whilst he
was interned in the Kensington Cage, published a booklet
on the trial, The Kesselring Case, which focused public
attention on the affair even more. The Italian Archbishop
of Chieti declared that Kesselring had at all times behaved
in an exemplary fashion during the German occupation.
“The attitude and behaviour of Field Marshal Kesselring
deserve all public praise,” he wrote, “The name of the


Field Marshal will always be blessed here” (in Chieti).

Eventually the death sentences on Kesselring and his
comrades were commuted to life imprisonment. He spent
five years in forced labour at internment camps in Austria
before being released, due to ill health, in 1952. In 1950
and 1951, the Bavarian denazification courts had looked
yet again at the Italian anti-guerilla operations (regardless
of any technical principles of double jeopardy) and had
found those involved to be not culpable.

Field Marshal Kesselring died at the age of 75 in 1960.


CRITICISM OF THE TRIALS

To a certain extent, Churchill had been proved right
over Niimberg; the long, drawn-out trial did tend to create
public sympathy for the defendants, rather than achieve its
objective of “exposing the Nazi war crimes in all their
horror.” It was not long before books began to be published
which questioned the whole validity of the trials. July
1948 saw the publication of the first such title Advance to
Barbarism, by “A. Jurist”, published by Thomson & Smith
Ltd. An American edition, revised and enlarged, appeared
in May 1953, published by the Nelson Publishing Co. of
Appleton, Wisconsin. This American edition was translated
into Spanish and published by Editorial Ahr of Barcelona
in March 1954 under the title El Crimen de Nuremberg.
The book finally got into German in October 1954 under
the title Der Barbarei Entgegen, published by Nolke Verlag
of Hamburg. A revised German edition was also published
by Priester Verlag of Wiesbaden in April 1962. The
American edition was serialised in the Dublin Sunday Press
in six instalments, during January and February 1955. “A.
Jurist” finally acquired an identity during this time; he
turned out to be F. J. P. Veale. The book received
surprising support from various prominent people. Lord
Hankey mentions it in the preface to his own book Politics:
Trials & Errors, and expresses his indebtedness for the
inspiration. In fact, Hankey even supplied the preface for
Veale’s follow-up book Crimes Discreetly Veiled, published
by Cooper Book Company in 1958, which deals with
Allied war-crimes.

Another early work to challenge the principles of
Niimberg was Montgomery Belgion’s Epitaph on Nurem¬
berg, also published in 1948. Although this too went into
an American edition, as Victor’s Justice, its rather
eccentric style did not attract a wide circulation.

1951 saw the publication of Viscount Maugham’s
weighty book UNO and War Crimes, which put forward
polite criticism, and R. T. Paget’s more forthright Manstein
— Campaigns and Trial. Mr. Paget (now Lord Paget) was
the chief defence counsel for General Manstein in the
British Military Tribunal at Hamburg in 1951. Paget was
Labour MP for Northampton from 1945 to 1974, and was
probably one of the most unusual Labour MPs ever to sit
in the House of Commons. For a time he was Honorary
Secretary of the CIA-financed European Movement. In
1958 he published a book, together with fellow Labourite
Sidney Silverman MP attacking capital punishment. For
many years Paget was Master of the Pytelly Foxhounds,
much to the embarrassment of his fellow MPs. And even
more worrying to them, a few years before he retired he
suggested that for every British soldier murdered in
Northern Ireland, IRA internees should be shot. It has
since been suggested that Paget was ‘booted upstairs’ to
the House of Lords to keep him out of the way.


In recent years there has not been any attempt to look
at the war crimes trials from a clinical point of view. The
odd feature on Niimberg in part-work history serials is
usually so fatuous as to be ridiculous. A photo caption in
World War II No. 110 reads “Even the defendants, their
counsel, and contemporary opinion in Germany admitted
that it had been a fair trial.”

In the United States too, there were rumblings of dis¬
content about Niimberg. Rather ironically, Chief Justice
Stone, on whose death the Niimberg proceedings were
interrupted for a few minutes for the participants to
express their respect, was opposed to the trials. Just before
he died, he had written that:

It would not disturb me greatly if the power (of the victors) were
openly and frankly used to punish the German leaders for being a bad
lot, but it disturbs me some to have it dressed up in the habiliments
of the common law and the constitutional safeguards to those
charged with crime.

(quoted by Alpheus Mason in Harvard Law Review, Dec. 1953)

Stone was not alone in voicing this disquiet. Senator
Taft spoke out openly against the hypocrisy of Niimberg
(see New York Times, 6.10.46), as did Pitman B. Potter,
the secretary of the American Association of International
Law (see NYT, 2.6.46) and Federal Judge Charles E.
Wyzanski Jr.

A vigorous debate ensued, with outraged newspaper
columnists leaping vocally to the defence of the trials.
Walter Lippman writing in the New York Times (8.6.46)
compared Niimberg with Magna Carta, habeas corpus and
the American Bill of Rights. (It is rather ironic that
Lippman should have compared Niimberg as a development
from habeas corpus, since that legal right had largely been
negated, as far as the Nazis were concerned. Even the Nazis’
wives were locked up for months on end without charge.)
He described it as:

A development in human justice which our descendants may well
consider the event of modern times.

Certainly the holding of the war crimes trials was a mile¬
stone in world history, but whether Niimberg can be
properly compared with the Magna Carta, or whether it
might not have rather more in common with the Star
Chamber, is rather open to debate. Let us now look at the
trials critically, but clinically.

THE CHARGES could have been drawn up by some
poet or philosopher, for no specific item of legislation,
passed by any specified legislature, was alleged to have
been broken. For someone to be charged with a crime
necessitates their breaking a law. No country had, or has, a
law against waging war. Neither does any country have a
law against waging ‘aggressive’ war. Who defines the
aggression? When Britain and France invaded Egypt in
1956, their leaders and generals were not arrested and
charged with waging aggressive war.

Every single one of the charges could have been equally
well laid at the Allies’ door. Consider:

1. Conspiracy to wage war

the Anglo-French planned invasion of Norway

Stalin’s planned invasion of Poland

Roosevelt’s plans to enmesh the USA in the war

2. Crimes against peace

Stalin’s invasion of Poland and Finland

Britain’s invasion of Iraq

Britain’s sinking of the French fleet at Oran

American invasion of Iceland and Greenland

3. War crimes

the wanton destruction of German cities


57


the Soviets’ murder and ill-treatment of German PoWs

the use of Germans as slave labourers after the war, in all
the Allied European countries

4. Crimes against humanity

the Soviet massacre of Poles at Katyn, the Anglo-
American bombing of civilian targets; the Soviet atrocities
against their own people, before and during the War; the
American concentration camps for American-Japanese.

There were some truly brazen examples of double¬
standards in the indictment. In order for the Soviets to
avoid looking like hypocrites on the aggressive war charge,
they demanded the insertion of a clause in the indictment
which specified that only “Aggression carried out by the
European Axis” was to be the basis of the charges! They
tried a different tactic with Charge 4. In order to avoid any
counter-charges over Katyn, they insisted that the
Germans be charged with this crime! When it became clear
during the trial that the subject was going to be an
embarrassing one for all concerned, it was quietly dropped,
and no mention of it was included in the final verdict.

The fourth charge on the indictment, “crimes against
humanity”, specifically included atrocities committed
against the Jews etc. before the outbreak of war, viz.:

murder, extermination, enslavement, deportation, and other
inhumane acts committed against any civilians before or during war;
and the persecution on religious, racial or political grounds in
execution of or in connection with any crime within the jurisdiction
of the tribunal, whether or not in violation of the domestic law of
the country where perperated. (our emphasis)

This wide-ranging definition would appear to attribute
to nations, or groups of nations, the right to interfere in
others if they assess that ‘crimes against humanity’ are
being perpetrated. Secondly, how could this charge be
included in a war crimes trial, if the act complained about
took place before the war?

In fact' there were already laws in Germany which
specifically forbade murder and atrocities, including those
against Jews. Surely if the case against the Nazi leaders was
so open-and-shut, then why could they not have been tried
under ordinary German domestic law?

The truth is that the ‘crimes’ were invented to fit the
occasion. An historic event needed spectacular-sounding
terminology. Several writers have complained that the
charges at Niimberg involved ex post facto (i.e. retro¬
spective) legislation, but even this criticism is inadequate,
for no legislature passed any legislation. The ‘crimes’ were
just picked out of thin air.

THE COURT was composed entirely of the victors.
Several of the judges — Nikitchenko and Falco — had
actually been party to the London Agreement which set
up the court in the first place, as had two of the prosecutors
— Jackson and Fyfe. Nikitchenko was the most candid of
all, when he announced before the trial that “we are
dealing here with the chief war criminals who have already
been convicted.” The others were more guarded in their
sub judice comments.

Part of the IMT’s terms of reference specified that no
challenges to the court’s authority would be permitted. In
any Court, either side can claim that they are in the wrong
type of court, e.g. criminal instead of civil, magistrates’
instead of county. No such arguments were tolerated at
Niimberg. Neither was there any appeal. In Britain, one
can appeal to the High Court, then the Court of Appeal
and then the House of Lords. The Germans were afforded
no such formalities.

The defence counsel were allocated to the defendants
by the court, and if they were not found to be adequate


by the defendant, that was just too bad. Ribbentrop’s
counsel told him that the defendants ought to be clear in
their minds that the defence counsel were not their clients’
‘lackeys’. Rosenberg had the impression that the defence
counsel literally hated their clients. Hess’s counsel once
worked for the Berlin taxi-drivers’ union. The defendants
were not allowed to examine witnesses themselves, only
their counsel could do this, despite a rule in the court’s
Standing Orders which stated otherwise.

Formal rules of evidence were disregarded, and the
tribunal was allowed to “take judicial note” of hearsay
evidence, unsigned affidavits, in fact anything which the
prosecution thought might be of “probative value”. The
defence were not allowed access to much vital evidence,
and when they did locate any they had to explain its
relevance before its introduction could even be considered.
Despite promises to the contrary, the' defence counsel
hardly ever received copies of prosecution evidence, or
knew which prosecution witnesses were to be called.
Throughout the proceedings they were treated like naughty
children by tribunal and court staff alike.

Only one tu quoque (thou also) argument was allowed
during the defence case, in relation to the less contentious
issue of submarine warfare. The defence were not allowed
to raise any arguments based on the Versailles Treaty,
Soviet atrocities, Allied bombing, the expulsion of German
settlers or maltreatment of German PoWs.

In case the defence tried to mitigate their clients’ role,
by claiming they were acting under orders, the Allies had
taken the precaution in 1944 of altering both the American
and British army manuals to delete the clauses which said
that soldiers must obey orders whether they are illegal or
not. Thus any defence argument would fall flat on its face,
since the Allies could not possibly accept that orders were
to be obeyed regardless of the law!

Accepted legal rules were ignored when a visiting Soviet
commissar was allowed to sit in on the trial — on the
prosecution bench. Likewise, to interrupt a trial in order
to make a speech of appreciation for a dead judge was
totally preposterous.

One cannot help wondering why, if the Nazis were as
evil and criminal as the indictment said they were, the
defence were so ham-strung. Why were not neutral judges
invited from Switzerland, Spain, Sweden or Ireland? Surely
the whole idea was for justice to be done? Or was the idea
more to find the Nazis guilty with the greatest possible
theatre, so that future generations would forever be wary
of ‘racialism’? For did not Niimberg ‘prove’ that racialism
leads to gas-chambers? Was not the ‘evidence’ there for all
to see? Were not the racialists condemned out of their own
mouths? These are the kind of ideas which Niimberg was
set up to instill in the minds of the public.

THE DEFENDANTS had been arbitrarily selected
according to a list thrown together by the Soviets at
Potsdam. Because Himmler was dead, Kaltenbrunner was
drafted in in his place. When Kmpp was taken ill, the
Americans wanted to “field” his son instead.

Several of the defendants’ wives were also taken into
custody. Frau von Schirach, Frau Funk, Frau Goring and
the Gorings’ daughter were all arrested and kept in prison
without charge for several months. Much of their family
property was confiscated.

We must conclude that it did not really matter who was
in the dock at Niimberg, it was really the whole Nazi
philosophy which was on trial. Although this was not
stated in so many words at the IMT, at the Eichmann Trial
in Jerusalem this attitude was spelt out in precise detail.

58


THE HIDDEN ASPECT of Niimberg et al. which no
one has properly examined to date, is the all-important
factor of Jewish representation among the prosecutors.
Although there were four different charges facing the
Niimberg defendants, it is the last — the extermination
charge — which has taken on more prominence than the
others.

To discover the reason for this, it will prove useful to
examine the number of Jews who were on the staff of the
war crimes administrations.

Two of the judges were Jews: Volchkov and Falco. The
Gentile Biddle had a Jewish adviser by the name of
Wechsler. The British Prosecutor Maxwell-Fyfe was part-
Jewish. The British Liaison Officer Clement Freud is a
Jew, according to the Jewish Year Book (although he
wrote to the Jewish Chronicle to ask them to omit him
from their list of Jewish MPs). Elwyn-Jones married a
Jewess. Calvocoressi is probably a Jew.

The American Chief Prosecutor Jackson was not a Jew,
but he had several Jews on his staff of advisers: Gluck,
Leventhal, Bemays and Kempner. The American documen-
taiy evidence was collated by a team of Jews: Krieger,
Bryson, Felton, Stone, Nathan, Robinson, Kenyon,
Schulberg, Derenberg and Jacoby. The War Crimes Branch,
which did the groundwork of evidence collation, and later
administered at Niimberg and Dachau, was headed by
another Jew, Mickey Marcus, who later went to Israel to
fight for the Haganah — “the first Israeli general since
Biblical times”. The War Crimes Branch team at Dachau
which tortured prisoners into making bogus confessions
was also composed of Jews: Ellis, Shumacker, Byme, Perl,
Ellowitz, Thon and Kirschbaum. The head of administration
at the Dachau trials was a Col. Rosenfeld.

The administration staff at Niimberg were also largely
Jewish. In charge of translations were A. Jacoubovitch and
W. Frank. The documentary films were prepared by Karl
Jacobi. Col. B. C. Andrus was in charge of the prisoners
before the trial, and another Jew, S. N. Binder took charge
between sentence and execution. One of the prison
psychiatrists was L. N. Goldensohn. Many of the staff were
drawn from the predominantly-Jewish OSS. The executions
were carried out on the Jewish Feast Day Hashana Raba
by a Jewish-American sergeant John C. Woods.

Several of the judges, especially Wennerstrum in AMT7,
were very well aware of this phenomenon, and said so after
the trial, although in the case of the AMT6 judge, his
remarks were not meant for publication.

Since Jews represented only a tiny proportion of the
population, it would seem very peculiar indeed that so
many of them were involved with Niimberg. Such a
realisation immediately raises the question of who the real
instigators of the trials were. Churchill wanted the Nazi
leaders put up against a wall. Stalin wanted 50,000 put up
against a wall. The French were in no position to want
anything, they just had to go along with what the other
powers decided. It was only the Americans who were
pushing for the trials. They conceptualised them. They
planned them. They arranged them. And the American
Presidential Adviser (to both Roosevelt and Truman) was
none other than Samuel Rosenman, yet another Jew.

Indeed, if we examine the more recent Eichmann trial
in Jerusalem, which was run by the official Jewish state,
and compare it to the Niimberg proceedings, which were
supposedly mn by an ‘International Tribunal’, we can
detect an almost uncanny similarity. In both cases, ‘crimes’
were picked out of thin air. In both cases, witnesses were
introduced who had never even known the defendant. In


both cases, formal rules of evidence were dropped especially
for the trial. In both cases, the defence counsel was ham¬
strung by restrictions. In both cases, public pronouncements
were made about the guilt of the defendants before the
trial had even started. In both cases, it mattered little who
the individual was in the dock; it was ‘anti-Semitism’
which was on trial. And in both cases, the end result was
inevitable. The only difference is that at the official Jewish
trial in Jerusalem, as opposed to the unofficial Jewish trial
at Niimberg, those officiating at the trial ritual felt a little
more at liberty to be candid; at Niimberg there were all
those stupid Goys who had to be pandered to.

At this point it may be useful to reflect on the most
recent ‘war-crimes’ trial of all, in Angola, where as we said,
the Angolans endeavoured to follow the example of
Niimberg, Dachau, Jerusalem et al. Just in case the simple-
minded Angolans should begin to snarl things up, who
should be on hand but one Stephen Sedley, a London
Jewish barrister with a long record of ‘combatting anti¬
semitism and racialism’. In 1974, Sedley was one of a
gaggle of Jewish barristers who represented various Marxist
organisations at the Scarman Inquiry into the Red Lion
Square riots of June 1974, when a left-wing student died.
Sedley was one of the most vehement of the counsel, when
it came to pillorying the National Front, the right-wing
organisation whose demonstration had been subjected to
attack by the Marxists in Red Lion Square.

In order to confirm all this speculation, we must turn,
not to some ‘right-wing crank’, but to the Jewish com¬
munity themselves. In the Jewish Chronicle of 16.12.49,
there is a report of a meeting in Glasgow addressed by a
Mr. M. Perlzweig, of the World Jewish Congress. Mr.
Perlzweig told the meeting that it was the WJC which
“had secured the holding of the Niimberg trials at which it
had provided expert advice and much valuable evidence”
(our emphasis).

Perhaps this quote from the ‘inside’ will help to settle
the question of whether the Niimberg trials were really “a
development in human justice” comparable to Magna
Carta and habeas corpus, or whether they were a cynical,
hypocritical demonstration of revenge; revenge against the
one movement which had ever dared to challenge the
power of International Jewry. In short, were the Niimberg
and subsequent trials an exercise which could more properly
be termed: Trial By Jewry?


ALLIED & ISRAELI WAR CRIMES
LEFT UNPUNISHED


APPENDIX A

THE KATYN MASSACRE

In early 1940, after the simultaneous assault upon Poland by the
Soviets and the Nazis, all but a handful of the 15,000 Polish officers
taken prisoner by the USSR disappeared. When, two years later, the
Smolensk region was overrun by invading German troops, the bodies
of some 4,300 of these Polish officers were found buried in Katyn
wood. Each man had been shot in the back of the head. All these
officers (most of whose corpses were identified) came from one of
the three camps in the USSR in which the Polish officer PoWs had
been confined. The precise fate of the other 10,000 has never been
definitely established. They were never found.

In Katyn —A Crime Without Parallel (Tom Stacey, 1971) Louis


FitzGibbon details the hideous atrocity. As soon as the Germans
discovered the mass graves in April 1943, their announcement to the
world was treated as a propaganda plot. But the Germans frustrated
this by inviting the International Committee of the Red Cross to
investigate the find, and this request was backed up by the Polish
government-in-exile in London. The Soviets’ reaction was erratic.
First of all they said that the Germans had found an historic burial
ground. Then they furiously attacked the Poles for “collaborating”
with the Germans and cut off relations with them. They also refused
their (necessary) consent for the independent Red Cross investigation.

Deprived of the impartiality of the Red Cross, the Germans
mustered an impressive team of forensic experts, which they called
the International Medical Commission, and which included one
scientist from each of the Nazi occupied countries plus one Swiss (a
well-known anti-Nazi). They also brought several American prisoners-
of-war to Katyn to see for themselves that the investigation was fair.

After examining over 900 of the 4,250 corpses, the Commission
unanimously came to the conclusion that the crime was committed
not later than April or May 1940, at a time when the Soviets
controlled the area. Documents in the pockets of the victims, trees
growing on the graves, the stage of decomposition — all provided
clues.

But the tide of the war was turning, and by that Autumn the
Soviets were advancing westwards, taking Katyn in September 1943.
The Communists were only too alive to the Allied suspicion which
the Germans had directed towards them. So they too set about
organising an ‘investigation’. Once again the bodies were dug up,
filmed and photographed and probed by scientists. But the Soviet
team was composed entirely of Soviets! The scientists did not even
do their own first-hand investigation of the site; their judgements
were based on ‘evidence’ produced for them by an un-named group
working on the graves. The Soviets managed to produce newspapers
and other documents dating from 1941, which they said they found
on the bodies. An old peasant who lived nearby, whom the Inter¬
national Commission had interviewed, had suddenly become deaf.
When Allied journalists in Moscow asked why the bodies were clad
in winter greatcoats, when the Soviets were alleging they had been
killed by the Germans in late summer, the Soviets gave the absurd
response that it must have been a cold summer in 1941!

In fact, everything pointed to Soviet guilt. Winston Churchill
wrote long afterwards that he had believed from the beginning that
the Soviets were guilty. But while the USSR was an ally of Britain
and America, both countries stooped to the lowest levels to cover
up the embarrassing truth.

In fact, the Americans had known of the Katyn massacre long
before the Germans had exposed it. The US Embassy in Moscow had
compiled a dossier on the subject from its extensive intelligence
and surveillance studies of the KGB. The Embassy had sent the
report to Washington early in 1942 — a year before the Germans
took Katyn. The report had been suppressed.

When the Germans approached the International Red Cross to lay
on an independent investigation, Churchill promised Stalin that he
would “vigorously oppose it.” Roosevelt sent a secret message to
Stalin expressing confidence that Churchill would find a way of
prevailing upon the Polish government in London “to act with more
common sense.” Churchill found a way. Pressure was put on General
Sikorski, the Prime Minister of the Polish government-in-exile and
the Poles agreed to withdraw their request for a Red Cross inquiry.

As far as can be ascertained, only one newspaper, the New York
Times , mentioned the finding of the corpses. They gave this
momentous discovery exactly two sentences near the bottom of the
fourth page, under a tiny heading which merely said “Nazis Accuse
Russians.” The story ran:

London, April 15 — The latest German attempt to sow discord between
Allies is a story of the alleged finding of graves of 10,000 Polish officers in a
forest near Smolensk. In broadcast accounts the Germans suggested these
officers, taken prisoner during the invasion of Poland in the winter of 1939—
40, had been shot in the spring of 1940.

During the controversy over the Red Cross inquiry, most of the
papers were obliged to make some mention of the affair, although
none went into details and most were at pains to portray the massacre
allegation as a propaganda trick of Goebbels’. Only the Chicago
Tribune spoke plainly about the Bolsheviks’ capacity to commit
such a crime:

As the Bolsheviks have murdered millions of their own people, including
many hundreds of revolutionary comrades, there is no inherent reason to
believe that the man who ordered all these executions would hesitate on
humanitarian grounds to kill a relatively small number of Polish leaders.

Syndicated columnists turned intellectual somersaults in an effort
to explain away the affair. Dorothy Thompson claimed it was a
German fabrication. Identification of the corpses after three years
would be impossible, she said. Trees would not grow in such clay
soil, she asserted; they must have been transplanted. As to a Red


Cross inquiry, no “valid investigation” could be conducted.

William L. Shirer said it was suspicious that the Germans had
“waited” nearly two years before discovering the mass grave, and
said that “to fall for German propaganda” seemed “a good way of
trying to lose the war.” Walter Lippmann ignored the story entirely.
In his April 29 column, he achieved the feat of discussing the
Soviets’ break with Poland in detail without ever mentioning the
gruesome story which the Soviets had used as an excuse.

Stronger methods were used to keep the story off the commercial
air-waves. American radio stations operated under licences granted
by the Federal Communications Commission, and the FCC used its
power to influence the stations’ news broadcasts, particularly the
Polish language stations in Buffalo and Detroit. Since 1942, FCC
pressure had been applied to any station daring to broadcast the
mildest criticism of the USSR. Now they went to town, arraigning
station representatives before the FCC and the Office of War Infor¬
mation. By indirect pressure, the OWI and the FCC “accomplished
their purpose, namely keeping the full facts of the Katyn massacre
story from the American people,” according to a 1952 House of
Representatives inquiry.

One American official attempted to break the embargo on facts.
In May 1944, George Earle, the President’s special emissary in
Turkey and the Balkans, brought evidence of Soviet guilt directly to
Roosevelt, but got nowhere. Earle produced photographs and
affidavits from officials of the Bulgarian and Rumanian Red Cross
who had visited Katyn, and who had testified that there was no doubt
that the Soviets were responsible. The President’s response was that
it was “entirely German propaganda and a German plot.” Earle
threatened to make public his findings, but was rapidly posted to the
remote island of Samoa in the South Pacific.

The two US Army officers who had been taken to Katyn by the
Germans were both convinced of Soviet guilt. The senior of these
officers, Col. John H. van Vliet, was released from a German PoW
camp in April 1945. In Washington on 22 May, he handed a written
report to Major General Clayton Bissell, Assistant Chief-of-Staff in
charge of Army Intelligence. It was suppressed and kept secret, and
van Vliet was given a written order not to discuss it. After the war,
as official attitudes towards the USSR changed, rumours of the
suppressed report started to gain currency. Finally the Army
searched, but it had “disappeared”. In 1950, van Vliet prepared a
second report from memory.

Questioned at length by the 1952 investigation committee,
General Bissell said he thought the original report had been sent to
an official of the Department of State, but that official denied
receiving it. No transmittal receipt could be produced. (An
independent investigation by the Army’s inspector general in 1950
concluded that the report had never left Army Intelligence.) The
conclusion of the House of Representatives committee was
unequivocal: the van Vliet report “was either removed or purposely
destroyed by Army Intelligence.” According to the testimony of
officers who were stationed in Army Intelligence during the war,
they had had to contend with a clique of pro-Soviet civilian and
military personnel who exerted great efforts to suppress anti-Soviet
reports. Top ranking officers who were too critical of their Soviet
allies were passed over when it came to promotion.

But in 1946, with the war barely over, the Katyn cover-up
operation had become so much part and parcel of (manufactured)
‘public opinion’ that the Allies were unable to come clean as quickly
as they would have liked. And to make matters worse, the Soviets
insisted on having the Katyn massacre pinned on the Germans as
part of the Niimberg Trials indictment. The Soviets having taken the
position they had on Katyn, it was politically inescapable that they
would have to do so.

So it was that the Soviet prosecutor, Col. L. N. Smirnoff, called
as a witness Dr. M. D. Markov, the Bulgarian member of the
Germans’ International Commission. Dr. Markov had already been
on trial himself, in Bulgaria, after that country was invaded and
seized by the Soviets in 1944. After Markov had confessed on
Bulgarian Radio that he had been forced to take part in the Katyn
inquiry and that all the results were false, he was acquitted by the
‘People’s Court*.

When he gave evidence at Niimberg, he again repeated that he had
been pressurised into taking part in the Katyn Commission, Col.
Smirnoff extracted most of Markov’s testimony by putting leading
questions; to such an extent that Lord Justice Lawrence had to
intervene: “I don’t think it is proper for you to put leading
questions to him. ”

The Soviets also produced a certain Boris Basilevsky, who was
deputy mayor of Smolensk during the German occupation. In
evidence, he stated, rather mechanically, as if reading the answers,
that the Katyn Wood was not the fenced-off KGB execution area


which the Germans had maintained it to be. He claimed that there
had been a Yoang Communist camp there before the war. This may
well have been true, but Katyn was a whole series of woods and
covered quite an extensive area. It was quite feasible that someone
at one end would not know what was secretly going on at the other.
Two other witnesses were called who claimed to have seen Polish
prisoners working on the roads in the general area during September
1941, after the Germans had occupied the region.

The German officer, Col. Ahrens, named in the Soviet report as
having been in charge of the massacre, volunteered to testify. For a
week he stood up to a barrage of Soviet questions and abuse. When
it was proved beyond doubt that he was not present at the alleged
time of the alleged German massacre, and was not even commander
of the unit alleged to have been involved, the Soviets suddenly
decided that it was his predecessor, Col. Bedenk, who was responsible.
When Bedenk was produced by the German defence, the Soviets
dropped the case.

Later, Dr. Hans Laternser, counsel for the German General Staff
and High Command, asked: “Who is to be made responsible for the
Katyn case?” To which Lawrence retorted in typically judicial
manner: “I do not propose to answer questions of that sort.”

Katyn never appeared in the final verdicts at Numberg. It was
just quietly forgotten.

As for Dr. Markov, nothing more has been heard of him. However,
he was referred to in passing during a Swiss governmental investigation
into the participation of the Swiss forensic expert, Prof. Naville, in
the German International Commission. The investigation was
demanded by a Communist member of the Swiss legislature. Prof.
Naville co-operated fully with the Swiss authorities and made a
lengthy statement wherein he stated that all the participants,
including Dr. Markov and himself, had had the widest possible
freedom to conduct their scientific investigation at Katyn. Although
Prof. Naville was an ardent anti-Nazi, he had received the fullest
co-operation from the Germans. Nor was the Katyn investigation
conducted to provide German propaganda, said Naville, it was
conducted to serve the interests of Truth and the massacred Poles.


Prof. Naville was completely exonerated by the Swiss government.

A memorial to the Polish officers murdered at Katyn was finally
unveiled in Hounslow, London, in September 1976. The Church of
England refused to allow the memorial to be put up in a church
cemetery in Chelsea. The British Government refused to allow a
military guard to appear at the ceremony.

There is also a small Katyn memorial in Stockholm.

An enormous Soviet ‘memorial* at Khatyn (hundreds of miles
from the original Katyn) is completely bogus. President Nixon paid
homage to it in a 1974 visit, but it is a monument simply to ‘war
atrocities*, without further elaboration.

APPENDIX B

BOMBING OF CIVILIANS

One of the most widespread myths about the bombing campaigns
of the Second World War is that the Germans started the bombing of
cities. In fact it was the Royal Air Force which deliberately started
this form of aerial warfare, and the Luftwaffe’s blitzkrieg was only
their reply to it.

In discussing the bombing of cities, one must leave aside the
bombardment of cities, which is totally different. A city is
bombarded, either from the air or by artillery, in support of
approaching troops, whereas a place is bombed for no other reason
than to destroy as many buildings and kill as many people as
possible. The Nazis were put on trial for allegedly deliberately killing
Jewish civilians. Yet the British were not put on trial for deliberately
murdering German civilians during aerial bombing raids on civilian
targets, such as Dresden.

During the war approximately 537,000 German civilians were
killed by Allied bombing. In Britain, an estimated 60,000 civilians
were killed by German bombing. Sixty-one German cities, with a
total population of 25 million, were totally destroyed. In Britain,
large-scale devastation was limited to the central parts of London,
Coventry and Plymouth.


•u


is. •


j $ F^asi


Hr Iwffl

W.[f

£* A


jk- : v


rjpjT; :


Victims of Allied Bombing: Allied propaganda used such scenes as fake concentration camp photos.

61


Five pyres were burning simultaneously as these photographs were taken. Scattered across the square can be seen the heaps of ashes waiting

to be transported to mass graves.


The British decision to provoke these tit-for-tat murders, described
by military expert and historian Capt. B. H. Liddell Hart as “the
most uncivilised method of warfare the world has known since the
Mongol invasions” was taken in secret. Mr. J. M. Spaight, a former
Principal Secretary at the Air Ministry writes:

Because we were doubtful about the psychological effect of propagandist
distortion of the truth that it was we who started the strategic bombing
offensive, we have shrunk from giving our great decision of May 11th, 1940
the publicity it deserved. That, surely, was a mistake. It was a splendid
decision.

That night, eighteen Whitley bombers attacked railway stations in
western Germany. On the 15th, 99 planes were despatched to bomb
the Ruhr. More raids were made against Hamburg, Bremen, the Ruhr
area again and Frankfurt. In June, Bomber Command was preparing
to use a special incendiary pellet to burn German crops and forests.
Throughout June, the Germans refrained from responding in like
manner. Finally, they reacted to stop the raids, by bombing British
airfields, to prevent the RAF taking off. But to Churchill, the
moving force behind the new policy, this was not enough. The
Germans must be provoked into bombing cities, so that the British
people would really hate the enemy who, up until then, had appeared
rather remote. On 25 August, 81 bombers were despatched in the
first of a series of night raids on Berlin. It was not until 7 September,
three months after the first British attack, that the Luftwaffe replied
in kind, with an attack on London. A few weeks later, the Germans
took the initiative and proposed a bombing truce, although the
Luftwaffe still had an enormous advantage in bombing strength. But
the British wanted no such truce. Heavier bombers for the RAF were
already under production, and the blitz against Germany was
stepped up. The German raids against Britain dwindled in the spring
of 1941, and all but ceased as the Luftwaffe was shifted towards the
Eastern front; the Germans, it seemed were more interested in


fighting and destroying Communism than massacring British civilians.
The Germans did conduct reprisal raids on British historic cities,
Coventry and Plymouth, as retaliation for the RAF incendiary
attacks on Rostock, Liibeck and Cologne in the spring of 1942. But
apart from these isolated attacks, there was little strategic bombing
of Britain until the arrival of the first robot bombs and rocket
bombs — the infamous doodlebugs — in 1944.

Although the British had originally envisaged destroying the
enemy’s industrial power through attacks on specific targets, it was
soon found that these were difficult, or impossible, to hit at night.
It was an easy progression to move from accidental bombing of
civilian targets to deliberate civilian bombing.

In September 1943 bomber captains were told to attack any
target in a built-up area if they could not find the target specified.
When Mannheim was attacked in December 1943, the orders were to
concentrate “on the centre of the town.” Prime Minister Winston
Churchill was a strong proponent of bombing people as people. In
July 1941, according to the RAF official historians, he was an
“enthusiast . . . for the mass bombardment of German towns” and
in August “repeatedly” urged it. In January 1941, when oil
installations were named as the principal target, he “regretted that
oil plants were for the most part removed from the centres of
population.”

By the summer of 1941, British bombing was, in effect, indis¬
criminate. Only one-third of all aircraft were recorded as having
dropped their bombs within five miles of their target. This was
illustrated on 1 October 1941, when with the specified objectives
being Karlsruhe and Stuttgart, planes of Bomber Command were
reported over 27 other German cities.

In July, bombers were ordered to make “heavy, concentrated
and continuous area attacks on large working class and industrial


areas ” Sir Archibald Sinclair, the Minister for Air, expressed himself
as being in “complete agreement” with another MP who had urged
“the bombing of working-class areas . . . slaying in the name ot the
Lord ” Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden suggested attacking mainly
lightly-defended towns under 150,000 population in order to
produce greater psychological effects.

Bomber Command rose to its new vocation, mass extermination
from the sky, with a series of giant attacks using new incendiary
techniques. The ancient and historic city of Liibeck was chosen;
although it was “a relatively unimportant place, it was one of the
most inflammable parts of Germany” wrote the official RAF
historians. A large area of the city was burnt to the ground on the
night of 28 March, including the cathedral and numerous other
historic buildings. The place went up like a tinder-box, on account
of the old, narrow streets and the heavy timbering.

Liibeck’s twin-town of Rostock met the same fate a few weeks
later. Like Liibeck, according to the official historians, Rostock
“was inflammable because it contained many mediaeval buildings
and again, like Liibeck, it was only lightly defended.” In a series of
four night attacks, 60 per cent of the city was destroyed by fire.
There was so little defence of the towns that bombers flew as low
as 2000 feet.

On 30 May, the first thousand-bomber raid was despatched
against Cologne. Again, a giant fire-storm was created which could
be seen for 150 miles. A whole square mile of the city centre was
burnt to the ground.

Throughout 1943, the destruction campaign was stepped up.
Attacks were aimed at the cities of the Ruhr river area: Diisseldorf,
Essen, Duisburg and also Cologne again. With the exception of the
Krupp works at Essen, these attacks were aimed directly at the
centre of the town because it would btim more easily. The
destruction of factories, according to Air Marshal Harris, “could be
regarded as a bonus.”

In the month of July, Hamburg was bombed solidly for four days;
the Americans by day and the British by night. Techniques had so
progressed that 400 planes in 15 minutes could drop as many bombs
as 1000 planes had dropped on Cologne in an hour. To make things
worse, Hamburg was in the grip of an extraordinary heat wave which
raised even night temperatures above 90 degrees. As a result, the
incendiary bombs raised a giant fire typhoon which destroyed ten
square miles of the most densely-populated section of the city. More
than 48,000 inhabitants were killed; three-fifths being female.

Berlin received the same treatment from November 1943 into
1944. In the spring of 1944 the attacks waned, as the bombers were
put to use supporting the Allied invasion of Normandy. However,
here too their accuracy left something to be desired. Allied bombers
reduced the centre of Caen to rubble, with heavy civilian casualties,
leaving the few German soldiers in the citadel unharmed. Later Le
Havre was destroyed, long after the Germans had withdrawn. After
the RAF announced the bombing of a petrol tank in a Dutch village,
it was discovered that the petrol tank had actually been a water
tower and the German soldiers, Dutch orphans. Later in the war, the
US Air Force was to bomb Basle, Zurich and Schaffhausen (twice) —
all in neutral Switzerland.

But the most destructive example of this “terror bombing”, as
the RAF historians described it, was yet to come. In February 1944
it was decided to bomb Dresden, in eastern Germany, a beautiful
baroque city whose normal population of half a million had been
swollen by hundreds of thousands of refugees fleeing from the
Soviet advance, now only 70 miles to the east. The city was
undefended. Sir Robert Saundby, deputy commander of Bomber
Command, could not believe the order to bomb when it came
through. He was so disturbed by it that he queried it with the Air
Ministry. His message was forwarded to Churchill in Yalta. Anxious
to impress the Soviets, Churchill replied that Dresden should be
bombed at the first opportunity.

The RAF struck on the night of 13 February, with a carefully
prepared plan which envisaged the raising of a gigantic fire-storm
such as the one which engulfed Hamburg by chance. The target
area, which was the centre of the city, was first marked out by
indicator bombs. The first indicator was dropped on the largest
hospital complex in Saxony — from a height of less than 800 feet.
This was followed by a bombing attack which carpeted the area
and left the city in flames. The second attack, chiefly with thermite
incendiary bombs, was set for three hours later, so that the fire¬
fighters who would arrive from other cities to fight the blaze, would
themselves become victims. There was no opposition at all; no
German fighter planes and no anti-aircraft guns. The city was a
‘sitting duck’. The fire-storm could be seen from 200 miles away.

Next day 1350 USAAF Flying Fortresses attacked the city in
daylight, even though the flames were still burning. Accompanying
fighter planes had instructions to drop to roof-top level and strafe


“targets of opportunity”. They opened fire on the masses of people
jamming the roads out of Dresden and almost anything else in sight
The river bank, already piled with corpses, to which survivors had
also fled from the flames, was a special target. A group of children
from the famous Kreuzkirche choir were strafed in Tiergartenstrasse.
British PoWs, who had been released from their burning camps, were
also machine-gunned. One plane flew so low in its efforts to strafe
the survivors that it collided with a wagon and exploded.

Despite the daylight conditions, one Bombardment Group lost its
way and delivered quite a heavy attack on Prague by mistake. This
was a particular blow for the navigator of one plane, who had been
born and bred in the city and had fled to America to escape the Nazi
invasion.

A simultaneous attack on nearby Chemnitz was even less
successful. Most of the bombs were dropped on Hof and Sonnenberg
by mistake. Several planes attacked Cheb, in Czechoslovakia, and
Plauen and Magdeburg.

That night, the British air-crews, who had only had six hours’
sleep after the Dresden attack, were given instructions for another
Chemnitz raid. Thus No. 1 Group crews were informed:

Tonight your target will be Chemnitz. We are going there to attack the
refugees who are gathering there, especially after last night’s attack on Dresden.

No. 3 Group crews were briefed:

You are going there tonight to finish off any refugees who may have
escaped from Dresden.

730,000 incendiary bombs were dropped on Chemnitz that night,
but with only minor damage compared to the Dresden holocaust. On
their way back, the RAF flyers could see the flames of Dresden still
ablaze. In fact, the city burned for seven days and eight nights,
according to the diary of a British prisoner of war there.

For days after the Dresden attack, the city was obscured by a pall
of smoke and soot. A steady shower of wet and sooty ash descended
on the surrounding countryside. British PoWs at Stalag IVB, twenty-
five miles away, were showered with particles of smouldering
clothing and charred paper for three days.

Relief convoys of supplies were immediately despatched to the
city from the entire province. Incredible scenes of carnage awaited
them.

Two trains full of evacuee children had received direct hits. Their
bodies were piled up in heaps in the station forecourt. Six hundred
refugees sheltering in the vaulted basement of the station had been
killed: one hundred burnt to death by incendiary bombs and the rest
suffocated by fumes.

Out of Dresden’s nineteen major hospitals, sixteen had been
damaged and three totally destroyed. At the Vitzthum High School,
which was being used as an emergency hospital, only 200 of the 500
patients had been evacuated in time. The rest had perished in their
beds. At the Johannstadt maternity hospital, 200 people had also
been killed, but they were so horribly mutilated that only 138 could
be identified.

For several days after the attack, the streets remained strewn with
corpses. The first priority was to dig out the cellars where people
had taken shelter. Some of these people were still alive. But when
one cellar was opened up, the Roumanian soldiers doing the digging
refused to go in. Eventually an official marched down the steps and
found the bottom steps very slippery. The cellar floor was covered
with an eleven or twelve inch deep liquid mixture of blood, flesh
and bone. A small high-explosive bomb had penetrated four floors
of the building and exploded in the basement. The official ordered
that the basement should be covered in chlorinated lime, and left to
dry out. An estimated 200 people had died there.

Rescue workers also found dozens of people dead in emergency
water tanks that had been constructed in the main city squares.
People had climbed into the water to extinguish burning clothes, but
in the panic could not climb out again. All had drowned.

Lindenau Platz was scattered with corpses. Hundreds of naked
corpses, their clothes torn off, were sprawled around a tram shelter.
At Seidnitzer Platz, 200 people were sitting around, just as they had
been doing on the night of the raid. But this time they were all quite
dead.

Animals had escaped from the city’s zoo and indoor circus.
Llamas, lions and horses roamed the streets. Vultures were feeding
off the bodies of dead circus horses on the river bank.

Many of the victims were so shrivelled and charred that they had
to be literally prised off the asphalt, and then levered apart. Many of
the corpses had shrivelled to less than half their normal size. These
kind of remains had to be shovelled into paper sacks, gathered from
a nearby cement works.

The task of identifying, counting and burying victims of a
holocaust of this scale remained a daunting one. A special bureau
was set up to try to keep track. But eventually only estimates of the
number of dead could be made, for identification was slowing down

63


burial, with the consequent danger of disease. Bodies were stacked
up in piles in the city streets and on the railway lines to be taken
away in horse-drawn carts and buried in mass graves outside the city.
But the task was so great that police lorries had to be called in from
88 ^ wa y as Berlin to cope. Weeks passed, and still the task was
unfinished. The stench of rotting flesh pervaded the town. Unusually
large rats were seen scurrying about amongst the ruins, their coats
streaked with quick-lime.

Eventually, the authorities had to start cremating bodies in the
streets. The area around the Atlmarkt was cordoned off and vast
funeral pyres were made, using girders and bricks from wrecked
buildings as a hearth. 9000 bodies were disposed of in this way.

Seven or eight large buckets of wedding rings, mostly gold, had
been taken from the bodies, to assist in identification. The rings,
worth nearly a million pounds, were taken by the Red Army as war
loot when they invaded Dresden on 8 May. The 300 clerks who
worked in the identification bureau were evicted from their offices
as the Soviets took over. During an interview with the bureau
director, the Soviet commander insisted that the Allied air forces
could not possibly be so effective a weapon of war, refused to accept
the director’s estimate of 135,000 dead, and calmly struck off the
first digit.

The raid on Dresden has gone down in our history books as the
deadliest ever bombing raid. (According to official statistics, the fire¬
bombing of Tokyo killed 84,000 and the atomic bomb dropped on
Hiro-Shima, 71,000.)

Possibly it was the sheer magnitude of the massacre which
inhibited the Allies from prosecuting the Nazis for organising the
blitz on London: the double-standard involved would have been just
too obvious. But not it seems to the Soviets, who demanded at
Niimberg that Goring be charged with such a crime. They argued:
“The German attacks had been the work of Nazi war criminals, who
had rained death on innocent workers and their wives and children.
The Allied attacks, on the other hand, had been carried out by the
avenging forces of democracy in order to seek out the Fascist beasts
in their lairs and stamp out imperialism and Nazism.”

In an ironic sequel to this bloody tale, some years ago it was
reported that a member of the Zionist 62 Group, Gerry Gable, had
broken into the home of the author of a book about Dresden, David
Irving, in order to determine whether or not he was a “secret Nazi”.
(Many of the above references are taken from this detailed book
The Destruction of Dresden, published by William Kimber in 1963
in London.) Gerry Gable now works as a “researcher” on London
Weekend Television’s London Programme.


APPENDIX C

THE ‘REPATRIATIONS’

At the end of the Second World War the Allies suddenly discovered
that many of their ‘German’ prisoners of war were in fact nothing of
the sort. Many of them were Cossacks, Ukrainians, Lithuanians,
Latvians, Estonians and Russians. After the Nazi invasion of the
Soviet Union, many of these men had willingly donned German
uniforms with the objective of once and for all ridding their country
of the Communist dictators. Many too had been drafted by the
German occupation forces, first of all into labour batallions, then
into para-military platoons and finally into fully-fledged Wehrmacht
units.

The Allies also found that many of the displaced persons who had
fallen under their control were also originally from the Soviet
Empire. Some of these were refugees from the Red Army advance
and others were the wives and children of Cossacks serving with the
German forces. It was the custom of the Cossacks to have their
families tagging along wherever they were posted.

At a meeting in Moscow in October 1944, Churchill and Eden
readily agreed to Stalin’s demand that the Soviet expatriates should
be sent back. They were afraid that if they did otherwise, then the
Soviets might be reluctant to hand back British PoWs whom they
had liberated from internment camps in eastern Germany.

Sure enough, on 31 October, 10,000 prisoners left British ports
for Murmansk in northern Russia. This first batch consisted of men
who had no violent objection to returning. Only twelve men showed
any resistance and it was a simple matter to put them on the ships
by force. When they reached Murmansk, an American diplomat
reported, they were marched off under a heavily armed escort. Sir
Geoffrey Wilson, who looked after Foreign Office relations with the
USSR, pointed out that the lack of any welcome for the men was
quite usual in Russia. “Nor is the armed guard in the least surprising,”
he added. Wilson presumably did not know that in actual fact the
men were being marched to a nearby camp where they would be


Cossacks shown standing on their horses with the German army near
Kislovodsk in the Caucasus.


‘processed’ and sentenced to years of hard labour in Siberian concen¬
tration camps, regardless of whether they had fought for or been
taken prisoner by the Germans. But Sir Geoffrey Wilson’s sense of
awareness of and sympathy for any sense of patriotism and
nationalism can be gauged by the fact that since 1971 he has been
Chairman of the traitorous Race Relations Board, which was set up
with the prime objective of destroying these fine sentiments.

The Americans too held non-German prisoners-of-war at Fort Dix
(New Jersey), Winchester (Virginia) and Rupert (Idaho). In
November 1944, 10,000 men from the Idaho camp were moved to
San Francisco and put on board the SS Ural , which sailed for
Vladivostock. Out of the 10,000, 70 showed an unwillingness to
go, and three attempted suicide. In the end, the three were also put
on the Ural after receiving medical treatment.

In February 1945, Churchill and Roosevelt met Stalin at
Yalta. An agreement was reached amongst the three that liberated
Soviet citizens would be repatriated, although this was kept secret
for the next two years. In fact it was only in 1972 that the official
records became declassified. - In return for the Anglo-American
promise, Stalin pledged to hold free elections in ‘liberated’ Poland
as soon as possible. And it was on this basis that future repatriations
were carried out: if they were not then Poland would have no
democracy. Hindsight tells us, of course, that Stalin no more
intended free elections in Poland than did Hitler, but Churchill and
Roosevelt were impressed with his sincerity. Both were by this time
becoming rather senile.

On 15 February, three British ships — Duchess of Richmond ,
Moreton Bay and Highland Princess — left Liverpool for Odessa with
a total of 7000 Soviet prisoners. Throughout the journey, the
prisoners were jumping into the sea any time they came near land; at
Gibraltar and at the Dardanelles.

By now it was obvious that there was going to be serious trouble
in the internment camps if many of the prisoners refused to go. An
Anglo-Soviet commission was set up to decide on which of the


prisoners were in fact Soviet citizens, and which were not. Those
who were judged Soviets were sent to a transit camp centred on a
small hotel at Newlands Corner, near Guildford, Surrey. By
coincidence, next door to the hotel lived the Strachey family, whose
son John Strachey was to become Minister of War in 1950. John
Strachey, both a former communist and a former fascist, held no
sympathy for the men. He declared that they were quislings who
deserved everything that was coming to them.

The Russians had confidence in the British authorities, who (with
the exception of Mr. Strachey) had always appeared sympathetic,
because these prisoners too were despatched from Hull in early
1945. All, that is, except one unfortunate man who hanged himself
in a quayside warehouse; such was his desperation. The same thing
happened when another 6000 Russians were repatriated via
Liverpool. One man hanged himself at Scarsbrook Camp in Yorkshire
before they set off for Liverpool, and another cut his throat at the
port. At the inquests, the press were ‘advised’ not to report the
circumstances. When the ship, the AImanzora, reached Odessa, there
were salvoes of machine-gun fire as soon as the men had been
disembarked. One of the British interpreters reported that one of the
Soviet guards had told him that two men had immediately been
executed because they “had sold out to the capitalists.”

In May, trouble again broke out on the quayside at Liverpool
when 3000 Russians were embarking on the Empire Pride. 40
prisoners had to be frog-marched on board by military policemen.
One of them smashed his china tea-mug and proceeded to slash his
own throat with the jagged edges. The Soviet liaison officers insisted
that he be put on board, despite his injuries. A doctor was called to
stitch him up, there and then on the quayside. Again, on the
journey, men leaped overboard, although one or two were picked up
by Turkish police launches and returned to the Empire Pride. One of
them then tried to slash his wrists with a razor blade. When he was
unloaded at Odessa, a single pistol shot was heard from behind a
warehouse. 31 other prisoners were dragged off the ship by the
Soviets and fifteen minutes later machine-gun fire was heard from
inside the warehouse on the quay. Twenty minutes later a covered
lorry drew up. A Canadian interpreter who later examined the
warehouse reported fresh chips knocked out of the walls, and stains
and blotches everywhere.

After the collapse of the Nazi regime in April 1945, the British
and American authorities now found it easier to repatriate the
Russians direct across the occupation zone boundaries. On 2 June
1945, the Daily Herald reported that 10,000 Russians, mostly
women, were passing through the lines every day. A pontoon bridge
across the Elbe had to be built to carry them. Many others were just
shoved onto east-bound trains without too many formalities.

Many of the liberated Russian PoWs were undoubtedly a nuisance
for the British and Americans. When they were released they
rampaged through villages breaking into houses, looting, raping and
drinking as much alcohol as they could lay their hands on. On one
occasion 400 of them died after drinking gallons of methyl alcohol
looted from a hijacked train near Niirnberg. The American military
health authorities reported that alcohol poisoning was second only
to typhus as a health problem among DPs. At the end of May, so
many refugees were pouring into the Anglo-American zones that
bridges had to be blown up to stem the flow. Within only two
months, more than half the two million Soviet citizens in western
Germany had been repatriated.

In May 1945, 200,000 Croat soldiers plus 500,000 civilians, also
Croatian, were handed over to Tito’s army on the Austro-Hungarian
frontier. There is no doubt that tens of thousands of these were
executed, either by rudimentary murder or after a communist-run
show-trial.

But the biggest betrayal was yet to come. In May 18,000 Cossacks
under the German General von Pannwitz were tricked into being
delivered into Soviet hands. For weeks and weeks they had been
assured that they were not going to be handed over, and so they had
gullibly agreed to being “transferred to another camp.” Inexplicably,
500 German soldiers were handed over with the Cossacks. Pannwitz’s
execution was announced in Pravda on 17 January 1947. The
ordinary soldiers were sent to Siberia, for a minimum of ten years’
hard labour. Only one or two of the Germans have ever come back.

A different technique was used for the transference of 25,000
more Cossacks under General Domanov. First of all the officers were
separated and transported to another camp nearer the border, under
the ruse of “attending a conference.” It was here that they were told
of their fate. There were many suicides. And when the time came
to load up the lorries to take them to the frontier, there were wild
scenes. The officers had to be practically beaten senseless by the
guards before they could be put on board. The British soldiers beat
them with rifle butts, pick-axe handles and even bayonets. Even
after the convoy moved off, Cossacks were still trying to commit


III HT: RuttUlt rrpAUUUr ( With pftlfl

4ftrr hr htwwrrjf tfer < hr*t itutif I? time* ili * iMllcide

attempt to bvmri brtn$ rriur*iril U* tie b held t»F ft|»i Kenoj

Gardner ot the inf t .onto a oft * *1* the flr*t of

ttlemy»t<*d *mi* **♦*««** ihf fr*»m PiftttlnK to ** PW*.

A rare photograph , taken from the US Army newspaper Stars and
Stripes, of March 6, 1946 , showing a Russian who attempted, suicide
during operations at Plattling.


suicide: one jumped out and over a precipice. At the actual hand¬
over, another five slashed their throats with razors.

Meanwhile back at Lienz, there was increasing commotion
amongst the families and ordinary soldiers. They had been expecting
the officers to return that night. When no one returned, they finally
realised the truth; that they had been handed over to the communists
and that they too were destined for the same fate. When the day
came, the Cossacks held a massive and continuous open-air religious
service. Again they had to be physically man-handled onto the
lorries, the reluctant ones being encouraged with blows from
truncheons and starting-handles. The crowd contained 4000 women
and 2500 children, but they too were thrust onto the transport.

Dozens were seriously injured during the loading, and six Cossacks
were suffocated to death in the panic. On the way to the trains that
would take them into the hands of the Bolsheviks, many committed
suicide. Several, including mothers with babies, threw themselves
into the turbulent waters of the River Drau. Eventually the
Cossacks were loaded into goods wagons with only a bucket of water
to drink and another bucket to use as a lavatory. Thirty people were
put into each van and the doors locked. After a nine-hour journey,
many of the Cossacks were found dead on arrival, either through
suffocation or through suicide. But even those still alive did not last
very long. Machine-gun fire echoed from behind a station building
as soon as they were unloaded. The rest were sent to labour camps
for ‘re-education’. Survivors of these camps report that more than
7000 Cossacks died of malnutrition and disease in these camps,
during the first year alone. It has only been with the publication of
The Gulag Archipelago that the true facts about these camps are
beginning to come out.

65


On 17 January 1947, Pravda announced that P. N. Krasnov,
A. G. Shkuro, Sultan Klych Girey, S. N. Krasnov, T. I. Domanov
and Helmut von Pannwitz had pleaded guilty to “forming White
Guard detachments” and to “carrying out espionage, diversionary
and terrorist activities against the Soviet Union.” They had been
condemned to death and the sentences carried out. Of the six men
whose execution was publicly announced only one, Domanov, was
liable to repatriation under the Yalta Agreement. Von Pannwitz was
a German through and through. The other four had not lived in the
Soviet Union at any time since its creation, and could not therefore
be described as “Soviet citizens”.

As mentioned previously, the Americans too had problems in
implementing their repatriation programme. When they attempted to
move 154 Russians from the Fort Dix Camp, to board a ship on New
York’s North River, serious rioting broke out. Two American officers
were slightly injured and seven Russians suffered gunshot wounds.
Three others hanged themselves. Eventually seven were adjudged non-
Soviets and allowed to stay in the USA. The rest were drugged up to
the eyeballs and bundled on board a USSR-bound ship.

The Americans also held 20,000 more probable Soviet citizens in
Europe. In August 1945 they began to repatriate those held at a
camp at Kempten near Munich. Here again, the guards were obliged
to wade into a church service, wielding truncheons, rifle butts and
bayonets.

By this time, some of the facts about the brutality were beginning
to come to light. Eventually, the American government was forced
to moderate its policy, so that only prisoners who had actually
fought for the Nazis would have to be sent back. But'of course, this
was exactly the category of prisoner which had the most to fear
from being repatriated. Early in 1946, the Americans repatriated
their penultimate batch of internees from Dachau — ironically the
site of a war-time concentration camp. The gruesome events that
took place during the operation are more fully detailed in the
chapter dealing with Dachau. Despite the intervention of the Pope,
the last batch of 1500 Russians was despatched into Soviet hands
from Plattling, near Dachau. Elaborate precautions did not prevent
many attempts at suicide, six of them successful.

But it was the British who carried out the final operations in this
bloody programme. In June 1946 the British cabinet agreed to
copy the Americans in modifying the scope of the forcible
repatriations. This left them with about 170 men in the repatriation
category, at that time interned in Italy. Elaborate plans were drawn
up to make sure the handover went smoothly. The transfer from Pisa
to the transit camp at Rimini was labelled ‘Operation Keelhaul*. The
handover of the Soviet citizens was called ‘Operation East wind* and
the delivery of the few Croats to Tito’s government ‘Operation
Highjump’. (In later years the descriptive term ‘Operation Keelhaul’
was mistakenly applied to the entire two years of forcible
repatriations.) Even in this final operation, no sympathy was spared
for the unfortunate prisoners, many of them being sent to their
deaths. When it was discovered that nine of the men had families
in the camp, they were given 24 hours to make up their minds
whether or not they wanted their wives and children to be sent back
with them — an agonising choice. A specially stripped train had to be
laid on for the journey, but even so many of the men attempted
suicide.

One of the British officers who witnessed the round-ups later
wrote a detailed, but anonymous report on the brutalities involved.
The report was widely circulated by his superiors, many of whom
were disturbed by being ordered to carry out this dirty job.
Eventually it was put into print, by the American journalist Julius
Epstein, in The Sunday Oklahoman of 21 January 1973. After the
publication of a fully documented book on the repatriations, The
Last Secret , by Lord Bethell, the author of the anonymous report
turned out to be none other than Dennis Hills, the university lecturer
who was sentenced to death in Uganda in 1975 for daring to criticise
General Amin.

But what neither Bethell nor Epstein examined in their writings
was the hypocrisy of the repatriations in comparison to the Niirnberg
war trials. If the Germans could be put on trial and executed for
keeping people in camps and then sending them to their deaths, why
was it that the British government actually ordered the internment
of tens of thousands of people and their sending to their deaths? No
one, least of all the British government, was under the impression
that the repatriates would come to no harm in the Soviet Union.

The only Member of Parliament to try to get to the bottom of
the affair at the time was Richard Stokes. He did not get very far,
due to the fact that every time he asked a question, he was answered
with a lie. On 7 June 1945, he asked Churchill in the House of
Commons if there had been any secret parts to the Yalta Agreement.
Churchill told him, incorrectly, that there were none. On 21 May
1947, Stokes asked how many attempted suicides there had been


during Operation Eastwind. Christopher Mayhew, then a junior
minister in the Foreign Office (but who has recently left the Labour
Party and joined the Liberals) replied that there had been none.
These two blatant lies indicate just how much the government hejd
its own policy to be honourable. It was because they recognised the
criminality of the repatriations that the British government tried to
cover its own tracks by deceit. Otherwise there might well have been
some awkward questions asked at the contemporaneous Niirnberg
trials. Strangely Sir Geoffrey Wilson who collaborated in the com¬
pulsory repatriation of Russian PoW’s now strongly objects to the
repatriation of non-Europeans who settled in Britain since the war.


APPENDIX D

JEWISH WAR ATROCITIES IN PALESTINE

Needless to say, the countless war atrocities committed by Jews
have gone completely unpunished. In one case, the USA has even
paid Israel for massacring American sailors.

It was during early 1944 that the Jews in Palestine turned against
the British mandatory government, stabbing her in the back even
while Britain was still struggling to conquer Nazi Germany in order
to rescue European Jewry.

In February 1944, one of the Jewish terrorist organisations, the
Stern Gang, killed a British police inspector and a constable. In
March, the Jews killed a further eight British policemen, including
the Assistant Superintendent in Jerusalem.

On 8 August 1944, the Stern Gang tried, and almost succeeded,
in assassinating the British High Commissioner in Palestine, Sir
Harold MacMichael, and killed ten British police constables in the
process. On 1 November, two Jews from Palestine murdered Lord
Moyne, British Resident Minister of State in the Middle East, in
Cairo. As the War in Europe drew to a close, the Irgun — another
Jewish terrorist organisation — produced the slogan: “VE Day for
the British is D Day for us.”

The Jews vastly increased their campaign of murder in 1946;
killing 49 British soldiers and 28 British policemen. Among their
achievements that year were the attack on 25 April on a military car
park in Tel Aviv, where they entered soldiers’ tents and murdered
them as they slept, and on 22 July, the blowing up of the King
David Hotel in Jerusalem, with a loss of 81 lives.

In December they captured and whipped a major of the 2nd
Parachute Brigade and three sergeants. One of the sergeants reported
that the attackers had been hysterical with enjoyment throughout
the whipping.

Throughout 1947, the Jews enthusiastically continued their ‘kill
the British* campaign. On 1 March, the Irgun destroyed the Goldsmith
Officers* Club in Jerusalem, killing 13. On 18 April, Jews attacked
No. 61 Field Dressing Station in Nathanya, killing a sentry and
blowing up the medical inspection room. On 20 April, a bomb was
thrown at a Red Cross convalescent station cinema. On 22 April, the
Stern Gang attacked the Cairo—Haifa train, killing five soldiers.

On 12 July 1947, possibly the most ghastly atrocity of the Jews*
bloody campaign was perpetrated. Two British sergeants were
kidnapped by the Stern Gang, and it was not until a fortnight later,
on the 31st, that their bodies were discovered hanging from
eucalyptus trees in a grove in Nathanya. Their hands had been tied
behind their backs and pieces of shirt had been wrapped around
their heads. A notice was fastened to their clothes which read “This
is the sentence of Irgun*s High Tribunal.” The area round about was
mined, and as one of the bodies was being cut down it exploded,
having been booby-trapped, and severely wounded a British officer.
A few days later the Irgun posted notices in Haifa announcing that
the two Britons had been hanged as belonging to “The criminal Nazi-
British Army of Occupation.” A photograph of the atrocity was
taken by an Associated Press photographer and a radioed copy
appeared on the front page of the Daily Express of 1 August 1947.
The publication^ of this photo was met with a storm of Jewish
protests, and eventually the photo, and any record of it, was
removed from the Associated Press archives.

The terror campaign continued unabated. In September, the
Irgun killed nine Palestine police in a bomb attack on Haifa police
HQ. Letter bombs were mailed to prominent British politicians. A
statement in the House of Commons revealed that since the end of
the War, the Jews had killed a total of 127 British soldiers, and had
wounded a further 331.

1948 arrived, and the Jews continued their murder campaign. In
February they killed 27 British soldiers and airmen in an attack on
a train at Rehoboth, shot two policemen in bed in the Wallach
Hospital, Jerusalem, and killed another British policeman when they
broke into the Hadassah Clinic also in Jerusalem.


The Stern Gang posted more letter-bombs, this time to British
diplomats around the World. In May a parcel-bomb killed a soldier’s
brother in England. An unsuccessful attempt was also made to place
a time-bomb under the seat of Foreign Secretary Aneurin Bevan in
the House of Commons.

By the time the British forces were withdrawn from Palestine in
1948, leaving the Jews to grab the Palestinians’ land ad lib , some 150
British soldiers and 70 British policemen had been done to death by
Jewish assassins. The Jews’ mentality in committing these war-crimes
is chillingly described in Memoirs of an Assassin: Confessions of a
Stern Gang Killer by ‘Avner’, published by Anthony Blond, 1959:

For the Lehi (Stem Gang) on the other hand, an Englishman would always
be a filthy Goy, who could be killed for this reason alone . . . Later, I saw this
biological hatred appear in the course of operations, as in the case of the 18-
year old Sabra who, after having fired a burst of sub-machine gun fire point-
blank into a policeman, instead of running away, lingered for a long time
battering the already cooling body with the butt of his weapon.

These atrocities were not committed by a gang of hot-heads,
disowned by the ‘moderate-minded Jewish majority’, as modern-
day Israelites would have one believe. The British Colonial Office
White Paper of 1946 (Ref: Cmnd. 6873) revealed that the Haganah
and Ben Gurion’s Jewish Agency were also party to this extermin¬
ation programme.

While the British government were preparing to surrender the
Levant to tribes of Jewish gangsters, the Jews themselves were re¬
directing their murder programme against the native Palestinians. On
10 April 1948, only a month before the British soldiers were pulled
out, the Irgun and Stern Gang jointly launched a military assault on
the village of Deir Yassin, on the outskirts of Jerusalem itself. The
600 inhabitants were rounded up, and relieved of all their valuables.
The Jews then set about systematically murdering the Arabs. On this
occasion, approximately 260 Arabs were butchered. Included in this
total were 25 pregnant women whose bodies were ripped open with
bayonets, 52 mothers with young babies, as well as about 60 other
women and young girls. Children were cut to pieces in front of their
mothers. Several bodies were stuffed down wells. Some of the
‘luckier’ Arab women were not murdered, but were stripped of their


Arab bodies after the massacre at Deir Yassin


clothing and herded into open trucks and paraded through the
streets of Jerusalem Jewish Quarter, where they were insulted and
spat upon by the local populace.

Again, modern-day Zionist apologists like to make out that (i) the
inhabitants were warned by loudspeaker to clear out, (ii) the attack
was the work of ‘hotheads’ and (iii) the Arabs fired first. In fact, the
loudspeaker was not working as it had been damaged when the
(stolen) vehicle it was mounted on ran into a ditch. Although the
attack was carried out by the Irgun and Stern Gangs, the official
Haganah knew perfectly well it was planned. In fact, at one stage,
the £lite Palmach brigade of Haganah joined in the massacre, but
were hastily withdrawn when the political implications of their
participation dawned on their commanders. It is true that the Arabs
did fire the first shot, but this was a vain effort to ward off an
overwhelming attack by the bloodthirsty Jews. The leader of the
Irgun, which participated in the slaughter at Deir Yassin was
Menachem Begin, who was later to become Israeli Prime Minister.
At a Press Conference in Tel Aviv on 28 October 1956, Begin had
this to say about Jews and humanitarianism:


You Israelites, you should never become so lenient if you kill your enemies.
You shall have no pity on them until we shall have destroyed their so-called
Arab culture, on the ruins of which we shall build our own civilisation.

When this man was invited to speak at a dinner laid on by a
prominent Jewish organisation in London some years ago, his record
of atrocities and butchery of Britons and Arabs alike was exposed by
patriotic British demonstrators. The visit was quickly
knocked on the head. However, Begin is still feted on his travels to
various other parts of the World, notably the Republic of South
Africa.

Probably the most bizarre, and one of the most bloody, Jewish
war-crimes was the massacre of the crew of the USS Liberty , an
American spy-ship anchored off the coast of Israel during the 1967
war. The Liberty , a converted freighter, had a defence capability of
two archaic .50 calibre machine-guns. Her main function was as a
radio surveillance vessel; in fact she was an exact sister ship of the
USS Pueblo which was to be captured by the North Koreans in
January 1968.

On 8 June 1967 the Liberty was attacked by three Israeli Mirage
jet aircraft. In five or six strafing runs, the aircraft criss-crossed the
ship with cannon fire; a later count showing 821 separate hits. Even
before the Liberty could escape, it was then attacked by three high¬
speed motor torpedo boats. The ship was peppered with more
cannon fire from the torpedo boats, and was finally crippled by two
torpedoes. 34 American crewmen were killed and another 164 were
injured, including the captain.

Shortly afterwards, two Israeli helicopters circled the ship and
tannoyed through a loudspeaker to ask whether the Americans
needed any help. Captain McGonagle hailed back, “Go to Hell, you
bastards!” The Liberty limped away to the West, and seven days
later arrived at Malta. In mid-July she was patched up sufficiently to
cross the Atlantic, but was broken up for scrap at Norfolk, Virginia,
shortly afterwards.

The Israelis immediately apologised for the attack, claiming that
they had mistaken the Liberty for an Egyptian supply ship El Quseir.
Yet the Liberty looked nothing like the Egyptian ship. It was clearly
marked, was flying the US flag, and was in international waters.

A couple of American congressmen made noises about compen¬
sation from the Israeli government, but apart from that, there was a
deathly silence about the affair from both government agencies, and
the normally voluble newspaper columnists. The parents of one


U.S.S. Liberty Was Riddled Hulk After Israeli Sneak Attack Killed
34 U.S. Seamen —


67


seaman who suffered permanent brain damage in the attack set up a
fund to claim compensation through the World Court at The Hague,
but they were visited by a representative of the State Department
who tried to persuade them to withdraw.

The Hague court rejected the claim, saying that the US govern¬
ment should claim direct from Israel. Initially the Israelis refused
any liability whatsoever, since they claimed that the Liberty's
presence in the area was ‘provocative*. When one congressman
attempted to append a Liberty compensation clause to a US Foreign
Aid to Israel Bill, Washington would not even contemplate it.

Eventually the Israelis did pay ?3m in compensation to the
families of the 34 dead. They later paid $SV 2 m to the 164 injured.
But according to Congressman John R. Rarick of Louisiana, the
‘compensation* was paid out of extra US Aid funds pushed through
especially for the purpose.

It is certainly true that the Israelis never paid a cent in compen¬
sation for the physical destruction of the Liberty — neither did the
US government press for any. When Captain McGonagle received his
Congressional Medal of Honour for his efforts on board the Liberty ,
the Israeli lobby in Washington made sure that his citation bore no
mention of Israel. The citation referred only to attacks by “foreign**


aircraft and boats. Although the Israelis promised a court martial bf
those involved in the ‘mistake’, no such trial has ever taken place.
Instead it has been the victims, and those who spoke up on their
behalf such as Rarick, who were subjected to harrassment by various
government’agencies, such as the Internal Revenue Service.

The truth is that the Israelis deliberately attacked the Liberty ,
since the ship was listening in to Israeli military radio broadcasts.
There was a real prospect of the Americans discovering that Israel
was not the ‘humble David versus the Arab Goliath* which she was
pretending to be. In fact the Israelis had planned to seize the Syrian
Golan Heights as part of a strategic expansionist programme. With
the Americans attempting to steer the Arabs away from the Soviet
camp, it would have been in their interests to expose the Israeli plan
to the World. The attack on the Liberty , the murder of 34 Americans,
and the maiming of 164 others, put paid to that.

Until recently, the only mention of the subject of the USS Liberty
atrocity has been in conservative American publications such as
Herald of Freedom and the weekly Spotlight (300 Independence
Avenue, S.E., Washington, DC 20003). However, in the summer of
1976 the British men’s magazine Penthouse published a two-part
analysis, and this proved so popular that the author Anthony Pearson
followed this up with a book, Conspiracy of Silence (Quartet,
London, 1978), where the author advanced the further theory that a


HOT OFF THE PRESSES!

THE SIX MILLION
RECONSIDERED


A distinguished American journalist threads his way
skilfully through the tomes and tombs of Judaica.
This Odyssey through the Jewish psyche is related
with a candour and wit that only a professional
word-smith could display. Photo chapters could
easily be a book by themselves, bringing together
ever-so-telling portraits, astounding newspaper
clippings and startling archive documents for the
first time. You simply cannot describe yourself as
"aware” unless you have absorbed this fascinating
book. Read:

★ How "Anti-Semitism" is really anti-semanticism

★ How the Talmud preaches mass extermination
of Goys

★ How the 'gas-oven' fantasy dates back to
Ancient times

★ How 'The Mafia' is run by Israelis

★ How the 'survival business' is a multi-million
dollar racket

★ How Nurnberg 'evidence' was 'collated' by
Hollywood movie moguls

★ How Marxism is really the Siamese twin of
Judaism and the 'Russian' revolution was
really a Jewish revolution

"Once you've read this book, you'll never be the
same again" — Richard Harwood,

University of London

PRICE: £3.50 inc. postage


68


BIBLIOGRAPHY, SOURCE NOTES & FURTHER READING


Niimberg Trials

Since the first edition of this book, several other books have been
published, which deal directly or indirectly with this vexed subject.
So perhaps it is now better to list them in some sort of chronological
order.

The first author to openly criticise the trials was the Brighton
lawyer A. J. P. Veale with Advance to Barbarism , which was later
translated into several languages and even serialised in the Dublin
Sunday Press. Veale followed this up with a book about Allied war
crimes, Crimes Discreetly Veiled (London, 1958).

The American (ex-) Rear Admiral Dan V. Gallery was next with
his book comparing Allied and Axis “war crimes” at sea in Twenty
Million Tons Under the Sea.

1951 saw the publication of Viscount Maugham’s UNO & War
Crimes , which put forward mild criticism. Then came the rather
eccentric Epitaph on Nuremberg , by Montgomery Belgion, which
was issued in the USA as Victors' Justice. Captain Russell Grenfell RN
authored Unconditional Hatred about the Allied propaganda
campaign.

One of the British legal team at Niimberg, Peter Calvocoressi,
penned a short volume on the trials entitled Nuremberg: the Facts ,
the Law and the Consequences. Since the title was almost longer
than the book, it made little impact. One of the American legal
team, Telford Taylor, who was an assistant at the IMT and in charge
at the AMT, went on to write Nuremberg & Vietnam: An American
Tragedy (New York, 1970). Here he bemoaned the fact that Niirn-
berghad not “taught us the lesson of the futility of war.”

Another member of the American team, Francis Parker Yockey,
resigned from his position in disgust, and ended up living as a recluse
in Brittas Bay in Ireland. Here he wrote Imperium (reprinted by
Noontide Press, P.O. Box 76062, Los Angeles) — a mad, rambling
treatise largely lifted from Spengler and Hitler. Yockey was eventually
arrested at the home of a homosexual Jewish school superintendent
in Oakland in 1960, on a charge of passport fraud. He committed
suicide eleven days later in jail, by means of a potassium cyanide
capsule; identical to Goring’s death.

The first really detailed study of Niimberg came out in 1966: The
Trial of the Germans by Eugene Davidson (Macmillan, NY). Both it
and the later Reaching Judgement at Nuremberg by Bradley F. Smith
(London, 1977) put forward slight criticisms of the procedures, but
do not really challenge the basis.

More recent books are well worth attention. The Iron Fist , by a
Jewish author Leo Kessler (London, 1977) describes the torture
trials of the Waffen SS at Dachau in 1946 with surprising candour,
since the torturers were Jewish also.

Doenitz at Nuremberg: A Re-Appraisal by Thompson & Stutz
(NY 1976) is a collection of quotes from famous military person¬
alities, all hostile to the trials.

The Crime & Punishment of I.G. Farben by Joseph Borkin (NY,
1978) contains interesting data about AMT6.

The Allied Occupation

One of the most thorough books on the Occupation is Denazifi¬
cation (London, 1969) by Constantine FitzGibbon, the brother of
Louis FitzGibbon, the Katyn expert. Needless to say, Constantine
FitzGibbon tends to skate over certain matters, probably because
his wife at that time was a Jewess. Thankfully, his brother exhibits
none of these tendencies in his writings, and in fact tends more
towards candour. An insight into the sinister mind-bending activities
of the ‘American* personnel is given in Saul Padover’s Psychologist in
Germany. Another book, Diplomat Among Warriors by Robert
Murphy (New York, 1964) recounts how German prisoners were
tortured by the peace-loving American liberators. The war-time, and
later, roles of the OSS and CIA, are described in great detail in OSS
by R. Harris Smith (U. of Cal., 1972). Some of the behaviour of the
British soldiers in Germany is described by Leonard Mosley in his
Report from Germany (1945). But the most stunning book of all on
Allied jiggery-pokery is Benjamin Colby’s 'Twas a Famous Victory
(New Rochelle, 1974).

‘Extermination* Epics

A small library could be stocked with allegedly first-hand
accounts of the ‘Final Solution*. No more than the best-known can
be mentioned here. Commandant of Auschwitz , supposedly by
Rudolf Hoss, was originally published by the Communist Polish
government, and is undoubtedly a fabrication. Eichmann: The
Savage Truth by Comer Clarke is a sado-masochistic pot-boiler based
on little except the author’s lurid and perverted imagination.


Recently, doubt has been cast on the famous Diary of Anne Frank.
Certainly her father has made plenty of money out of the book,
since he was able to sue the playwright, one Otto Frank, for §550,000
in stage rights.

The diary of Emmanuel Ringelblum is another dubious journal.
The American publishers admitted that they were denied access to
the original manuscript in (Communist) Warsaw. But having got
away with such chutzpah so often, there is no end to the stream of
hate churned out by the international paperback houses. Olga
Lengyel’s Five Chimneys is titled after an aspect of Auschwitz
architecture which only she can recall. Even more bizarrely, Doctor
at Auschwitz is supposed to have been written by one Dr. Miklos
Nyiszli, who does not appear to have ever existed! Recently, such
trash has gone too far, and Martin Gray’s For Those I Loved has
even been panned by the normally wailing-and-gnashing-of-teeth
Jewish Chronicle. Of course, the necessity to continue churning out
such hysteria continues, and the latest example is a paperback
reprint of Lord Russell’s 1954 ravings, Scourge of the Swastika
(London).

One or two Jewish authors have made a pretence at academia
in their out-pourings. The best known is Raul Hilberg with his
Destruction of the European Jews (Chicago, 1961), and its follow¬
up, Documents of Destruction (London, 1972). There is also Gerald
Reitlinger’s The Final Solution (London, 1968) and Lucy
Davidowicz’s War Against the Jews 1933-45 (New York, 1975).

Several works do give a remarkable insight into the war-time
Jewish mentality, especially Andr£ Biss’s A Million Jews to Save
(London, 1973) and Alex Weissberg’s Advocate for the Dead
(London, 1958; translated from German by the aforementioned
Constantine FitzGibbon).

Most of the above works have been torn to shreds by later, rather
less subjective, reviewers of history. The earliest, and most
courageous, was the French socialist Paul Rassinier’s milestone The
Drama of the European Jews (Steppingstones, Box 612, Silver
Spring, Md. 20901, 1975). The next revisionist work of any
consequence was The Myth of the Six Million by an anonymous
American professor (Noontide, Ca., 1969). This provided much of
the groundwork for the next opus to appear, Did Six Million Really
Die? by Richard Harwood of London University. This magazine-style
publication has achieved a world-wide circulation greater than all the
other works put together, and has been translated into nearly a
dozen languages. But the most authoritative work to date has
undoubtedly been Prof. Butz’s Hoax of the Twentieth Century
(Historical Review Press, London, 1976).

There have also been several peripheral works, which are worth
examination, such as a German Jew’s denial of the ‘Holocaust* in
Josef Ginsburg’s trilogy (written as J. G. Burg), Debt & Destiny ,
Scapegoats and Nazi Crimes. The short but impressive Auschwitz
Lie (Quebec, 1974) by Thies Christophersen gives an insight'into
camp conditions as they really were. David Irving’s weighty Hitlen’s
War (London, 1977) does not deny the Holocaust, but claims Hitler
had no knowledge of it. Udo Walendy’s Bild Dokumente fur die
Geschichtsschreibung is a useful collection of fake atrocity
photographs.

Allied & Israeli War Crimes

David Irving’s earlier work The Destruction of Dresden (London,
1963) is the only work available on this subject. Katyn — A Crime
Without Parallel (London, 1971) is the principal of a series of books
on that Soviet atrocity written by Louis FitzGibbon, who also
designed the Katyn Memorial at Hounslow.

The repatriations are sympathetically dealt with in Lord Bethell’s
Last Secret (London, 1974) and Count Tolstoy’s Victims of Yalta
(London, 1978).

Israeli atrocities are brazenly dealt with by Jewish authors in
Genesis 1948 by Dan Kurzman (London, 1970) and in David Ben
Gurion’s Israel (London, 1971). The Six Million Reconsidered by
the USA-based Committee For Truth in History is a masterpiece of
research into the whole Jewish megalomaniac-paranoid psyche, and
draws heavily on Jewish hatred of, and atrocities against, Gentiles;
both European and Palestinian.

Many of these revisionist works are available direct from
Historical Review Press.


69


HOLOCAUST or HOAX?


At last it has been written: the book to silence all but conscious liars. In THE HOAX OF
THE TWENTIETH CENTURY, Professor Arthur Butz conclusively demolishes the
greatest propaganda jegend of our times — the legend that the Germans attempted to
"exterminate" the Jews during World War Two. Combining the historian's mastery of
documents with the technical knowledge of a scientist. Prof. Butz's book is the produci
of a truly massive research effort lasting three years. The author takes his theme far
beyond all previous work done in this field, and his book, we feel sure, will remain the
standard volume for many years to come. The Historical Review Press takes pleasure in
presenting a classic work, a monument of scholarship.

This book contains four APPENDICES which reproduce key documents in full. A
comprehensive BIBLIOGRAPHY of reference literature is provided and.the work has
copious notes including an amusing excursion into the fantastic Jewish atrocity charges
of Antiquity, notably the Talmud's claim that 4 billion (or elsewhere 800 million) Jews
were killed by the Romans in Hadrian's siege of Bethar, causing a tidal wave of blood
that rolled boulders to the sea. The reader will experience a remarkable sense of
historical d6ja vu!

315 pages, 32 plates and diagrams


THE JEWS SAY:

"We have known of it for some time. But we didn't want to give it any publicity and help the sales. Now it's too
late, it's in the open and we have to face it squarely."

Abbot A. Rosen, Chicago Executive Director of the Anti-Defamation League,

Pittsburgh Press, Wed. January 26 1977

PRICE (including post): U.K. & Europe £2.00 U.S.A. & Canada S5.00


Did Six Million Really Die?

by RICHARD HARWOOD. 28pp.

Worldwide best seller on the Holocaust myth, an easy-to-read, well illustrated magazine, ideal for mass distribution.
It has been translated into at least 7 languages. The following are available from the Historical Review Press:

English: 40p inc. postage; „ ^ .. , .

German, French, Spanish, Dutch, Swedish editions: 50p each inc. postage ^ discounts available on request.


Jewish attempt to have DID SIX MILLION REALLY DIE? suppressed under Race Relations Act flops

In 1974, the Board of Deputies referred the publication to the Attorney-General. "The Attorney-General (Sam Silkin)
apparently felt that prosecution would have provided undesirable publicity for the author's unsavoury views."—Jewish
Chronicle, 2.8.74.

The Board of Deputies of British Jews then told Parliament to strengthen the 1965 Race Act, which resulted in the
1976 Race Relations Act. Even this has proved ineffective to suppress the truth, as Lord Fisher complained that "not
one country in which this obscene literature denying the Holocaust has been disseminated has so far found it possible
to use the power of the law to ban it."—Jewish Chronicle, 24.9.77.


NUREMBERG AND OTHER WAR CRIMES TRIALS

ISBN 0 9505505 3 1

- A NEW LOOK


U.K. & Europe

U.S.A. & Canada

PRICES (including post) 1 copy

75p

S 2.00

10 copies

£ 5.00

SI 5.00

50 copies

£22.00

S60.00

This and the other publications mentioned may be obtained directly from the Historical Review Press, Chape1

Ascote, Ladbroke, Nr. Southam, Warwickshire, England.
