6/11/78 to Mr.Mcbreight,continued 6/12/78
Because of what onerged when I made the inaicated coaparisons ot versions of 44=
38861recordaitappearedtobeworthdoingtheaanawlththe renalningftvaitensin
your Attachment A.

Your failure to indicate the source of the files has made this more
aefieult.I have located tuo ot them.The other muubezs are aot ferdlisr to me
Bxoept foz the oblitezatlon of the note and the failure te canoel tha classlfieation
on the recozd released to me eazlier these are ldentical ooples.

It sppears that thers was no classirieation until aatar ay xequest,indeed until
long after this case was in court.

It appears that oo May 18,1977 the record was olasai
fled Contidentia2by.s049 and hald to be oxenpt fron G06 by 6049 and that t was de
elaesified on may 22)by2333.

1428
Tbelieve thle rakses guestzons akout tho lagltimaoy or the use of alaesification in
this and in many other recorde.While I am by no means ezpert in the xelavant Bxeeutive
poses of my request this and others like it are not olassified records.

Youz ozginal elains on mithholding were both （b）（i） and （7）(D）.Thi，wth your
new claim, means that what you have released now is what you wi thheld under (o)(1).

Before addressing thls I balievo aeveral explaiations are aporoprlate.

Under most conditions I do not questtan the wlthholaing or the laentiflcation or
Anfoxmatso
With regard to thls particular zecord the withholaing of what you now zelease could
easily Zead to a confusion with another xeleased set or reoorda relating to a Chtoago
informant.In hdstorleal cases I believe there should not be such confusion.

This is one of the many zecorda that is not within zay orglnal zequest but was
provided in the FBl'e suhstituthon for ny aotual reguest.

I have no personsl or
writing iaterest in the content.But I do xegard all the MURkiN recoxds that have been
released as having other and considerable values.

Irecall very well that on the mozaing ot Movember 11.I have no personsl or
writing iaterest in the content.But I do xegard all the MURkiN recoxds that have been
released as having other and considerable values.

Irecall very well that on the mozaing ot Movember 11.

1977 n a conference
attended by several of your steff Mr.Wiliam Sehafrer said he had cone over sone or
the withheld intormation and was completely satisfled that they met （b)(i)standards.

What was clasairled (b)(i) In this recerd is the following: Negro sanitatlon vozkers
have been on strike in Memphis,Tannesaee,since early February.The Southern Christian
Leadership Conferance and Martin Luther King.

Jr., have boan supporting the stikera.

Arter the zremeining obliteratlon of about six lines thla ls not disclosed: Louisville
uauos spsanbaz au xT suanaogug aog Aeuou csuadze SLe uog uoraazgzouzne pepsenboz
There appears to have been no basts for classifying this information tnder any
oriteria of which I know.Tmts is consistent with all ay fairly extensive axpezlence
with what was initlally withheld umder olaim to (b)(t); that the reasons were other
than those sanetioned by any B.o.

I you can cite eny erteria ter (b)(1) applieabdlity
in this case I woula mueh appreciate it.

Your #EXPLANATIoN OF EXEMPTIoNs thet you proviae does cot use tha pnedise lenguage
of the statute.It reads lnformation whieh is currently and properly classified pursuant
to Exeoutive Order 11652 in the interest ot the natlonal defense oz foreign polioy.

The
order to be kept seczet in the ipterets of the natlonal defense or Yoreign polioy and (B)
are in fact properly claasified pureuant to such Bxecutive order.

Your alterations are signiflcant.You heve climtnated the statutory reguirement that
the record from the first was "in fact properly elassified" and substituted "currently...The
order to be kept seczet in the ipterets of the natlonal defense or Yoreign polioy and (B)
are in fact properly claasified pureuant to such Bxecutive order. Your alterations are signiflcant.You heve climtnated the statutory reguirement that
the record from the first was "in fact properly elassified" and substituted "currently... classiried" for it.You slao havg eliminated both “specifioally authorized"end the
"oriteria estabiiahed by an Exeeutive order." (There ls aleo the standard of requiring
that the zeeord be kept seeret which you eliminate.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---If your stafr uses the FBI's rewording of the language of the statute,improper
withholding, frustation of the Act and enormous wastes of time and money for the
Goverament, regueaters and the courts is lnevitable.Tiis record, 157-9146-57 is a
Gaaeiapoint。
aumcead op T 4red fotrod ueatosn ou agufufre 4ou op nof aoneooganges eu yo
thatt neither the sanitation Btrike nor the fiyed ofrices fnvolve any consideratlen of
foreign poliey.

Thia zeduces what can be applicable to "in the lntereat of the national
defense"In your “axglanation, which as I have noted, eliminates the reguirement
of the statute of "under oriteria established...

Ta oven the PBt'g revision of the Aet thers appears to be no natlonal defensen
consideration in the Information now released in the note.

If you can show me any
ana I suggest thts n partloular because the questlon is before a court of law，I
certainly would like to know of any legltimate "national defense" issue or questicn.

defense" purpose in conpdling any of the recordg within my requwat or in the FBI's
Hoover was intensely dedicated to certain beliefs he held but I am also aware that
the Departmort emd the Senate and I belleve the FBt!s cwm witnesaes before the Senate
contrlvegyoy whdch the FBL spent enozmous amounts of time and money ia an eztra-
ordinary and extra-legal campaseo egainst .King ana mhat is often forgotten in
all of this, so many other Amerleans.I know of no legltimate basis for any clatm to
the national defense" with regard to any afthe msny thousands pfpages I have read.

I would welcome any proofs of applioability the FBI can provide.

Absent such proofs there
is no basis under the aet for any (b)(1) elains in any of these racords.

Any claim to (a)(D) requires the meeting of the eciteria of the Act.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Absent such proofs there
is no basis under the aet for any (b)(1) elains in any of these racords. Any claim to (a)(D) requires the meeting of the eciteria of the Act. Ia your
"explanetlan" you begin with the language ot the Aot as it spplies to all the provieions
of（b)（7）,"nvestigatory files compiled for law enforcement purposes.Your “explanation#
of (D)is not Identical with the language of the statute.Xour worda ane raveal the
identity of a individual who has furnished information to the FBI under contidential
cirounstanees or reveal information furnished only by suoh a person and not apparently
knowm to the public or otherwise accessible to the PBT by ovart means. The way the
Congrass lntended is "afselose the laentity ofs confidential source ana.in the case of
a record compiled bya criminal law enforcement autbority in the course of a eriminal
investigatlon, or by any ageney coadueting a Lasfui national secutity tntelligence
investigation, gonfidential information furni shed only by the confiaential source.#
in an effort to make it apply to what it does not apply to.I believe explanation is
not required so Ido not takeyou time for what eppears to be so obvioue.I ao again
note,however,the extraordinary waste of time and money that results and has resulted. Under the Aot to olaln (7)(o) the FBI is required first to have a Law enforcenent
Dr.King or his soie.But if there hed been a Law aaforcenent purgoae fgr any of the
records compiled to meet the grlteria of the act there would also have had to have been
"aorimdnal investigation.Thie Was part ofapolitical rather than a criainal n
vestigation.The file number Itsaaf indicates “racial matters."
Your dlthholding appears to be outside the provisione of the Aot on all oounts. apply to.The legelity of what the FBT was doing is also a pertinent question. Your
revieion of the Aet appears also to be intended to make whst was not legel activity
into legal aetivity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---oSuT4erat spxooaqueaorattouo pueerzauotaeguug su4opntout seop4sanba A
a Sroup caliing Itsalf the Invaders.The caption on this FBiHQ teletyre inoludes aani
tation workers strike and "racial mattera." It neither states nor suggeats a law endoroe
ment purpons or an authentiotcmiminal investigatton
Ihave zead all of the rqcozds provided ralating to the stzize and the Lavaders.There
is much cross-over in content.

Mot only do these reoords hot refleot any Law enforce-
ment purpose,thay reflect the Fat'g refussl to do anything about lau violations within
fedaral jurisdletion (as the strite was not)and Ite refusal to arrest those who were
wanted on federal charges when informants identified and located thoae who were wanted
The raason ie apparant ta tharecorda I have recelved and read: the FBr's interests weze
8Ing ou4 3o qaed se oaxy eq o4eedoadpequanyasaun peuTsap 4t pue Teot4Ttod Ateztauo
politieal intergsto.

Ibelieve it is apparentthat your claims to exenption are contradictory and in
additionn are not sanctioned by tho language of the Aet.I thereare believe that you
have no right under the Sot to hava withhela what you now release to begin vith andthat
you now have no right to withholl what you still obliterate.

At the same time I respeot the right to withhold the identifieation of the intomn
antevenifhowag ongaged taaottvltyforwhdchtheze isnolegal Bauotlon.Thewith
holding of anything else is,I believe,impofper and I am appealing.all other withholdings.Ibelieve it is apparentthat your claims to exenption are contradictory and in
additionn are not sanctioned by tho language of the Aet.I thereare believe that you
have no right under the Sot to hava withhela what you now release to begin vith andthat
you now have no right to withholl what you still obliterate.

At the same time I respeot the right to withhold the identifieation of the intomn
antevenifhowag ongaged taaottvltyforwhdchtheze isnolegal Bauotlon.Thewith
holding of anything else is,I believe,impofper and I am appealing.all other withholdings.

Thooonceetonaboutwlthhoiaingthe ldentifloationdossnotmeanthatTbelievethe
Act enables this.As s praotlcalmatter Ido not contest it becauae or the possible
conseguonceao
Tne nezt reoord you listin Attaehment A is n157-1092-336-Source notation after
eeeTo onsou apnottauouoa）（)oeouosatanoy
You claimed (b)(1)and(b)(2)。
Originally the entize source notation was withhela by oblitezatlon.What you
basis for what you have now raleased to have been withheld.I also see no applileability
ofeither of the axemptions oiginally claimed.This also is not exceptioual.with
regard to (b)(2).as any examination you may chose to nake will disolose,(b)(2)was
used often in subatitution for (7)(o).

Thde contimued, even intensified,after your
analyst told ne that you should not be using (b)(2) at all,with whieh I agree.(Your
revisions of the Aet with regard to this exemption eliminate the controliing wora
"personnel.") In no case haveI seen a record thath meets the standard "related
Solely...

In this cese while the source may be ahuman being the language does not eliminate
other possibilities.It could have becn a newspaper.In context there does not appear to
be any need for confidentiality although for other reasons that may be possible.

The
information itself is not confidential.A reporter,even for e publleation the FBl aid
not like.ie publiely knovn as a rezortez.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In this cese while the source may be ahuman being the language does not eliminate
other possibilities.It could have becn a newspaper.In context there does not appear to
be any need for confidentiality although for other reasons that may be possible. The
information itself is not confidential.A reporter,even for e publleation the FBl aid
not like.ie publiely knovn as a rezortez. Once again the content is politital and not directiy zelated to the santtation strike. The criteria of the lot do notappear to be applicable. was several months prior to your iving me this record,two months to the day ifIzead
already conplained abant to the PT without response and I believe called to the attention
ofthe Qourt as aviolation of the stigulations sought by the FBl. OnJuly 30 or 311977 2040 olssifad thisrecord Confidentialand ezempp from G08.

--- PAGE BREAK ---This and another stamped notation do not appear on the copy origtnally providedi"Ap-
wdtten 2040 and the date
by2333.

I do question the propriety of all of this fram the orlginal withholding to the
ex poste faeto classifieation and ezemypion from GDS after a copy was glven to me to
ageneies and fiela offioes and the clains to ezenption.

I do not find the three zemaining original records of Attachment A under the file
numbers you have provided.If there are other file nunber and you proviae them I may be
able to provide you and the Civil Division with information similar to the foregoing.

source notations after paragraph 3." Your ezemption olaim ia now (b)(7)(D).

All read, with numbers changtag,“Pirst Source =（obiiterated)." If originally both
Third Source  and "Foutth Souroe  wera withhead, this would seem to be farout.

I do not recall thia record Sn particular.T have seen many lilte It.In all cases
they were attached to other records.

This one stated there was an attached LaM.I do
not recall that as released to me they wers classlfted.I also Bse no basks for any
classificatione
It would be helpful all around if you would please pzoviae me with oopies of this
and the two following records as they were originally provided to me because I recall
no such clasaiflcations and because the classification on this was ot 5-16-77.after
I osup aua au o peptaoxd sen pzooal au azogeg suauou snog ueu4 exou pus qeonban An
note,ol the original record ls the day before Dr.King was kiiled.

next
to 1988.

The zecord reflects claseification by 6049 on 5-20-77 and GDs exemption claimed.

Iee mo fol Beolassification aotion recordeay
2333m5723/8.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The zecord reflects claseification by 6049 on 5-20-77 and GDs exemption claimed. Iee mo fol Beolassification aotion recordeay
2333m5723/8. Wthout the original copy of 170-1067-12-#subject'a name"meens mothing to me becanse
you do not provide it now.This also was elassified by 6049 on 5-20-77,with GDs
exemption elaimed.It was deelassified by 2333 on May 23:1978.The totaiity of elimination
after Subjeot in the caption may also elimonate the subject matter as distinguished
Peoples Gampaign as of more than three months after Dr.King was killed, as of 7/17/68. Raz for a city. (The reminds me, you made a simiaar privacy claim for & rundown hotel
in Memphis, the Ma len.I recall no reaponse to my appeal.) This olain mey be for as many
as three different cities on page 2.I do not believe it is possible for disolosure of
any eity to enable identifioation of the source.That the soureo wes not an intozmant
appears to be indicated by "Nyo is closing this case on the subjeet" and "wro may
desire contaeting subjeot for further developnent ss a PRI."
The obliterations on the third page are not explained. It states.Xi was declassified
on 5/23/77 by 6049 but it beara ao cleasifieation makings etai1. The Lam attached to the original record is stated to have been #elassified &on-
fidential' inasruch as the source utillzed thezein should not be revealed,because the
mauthorized disclosure of source's identity could be injurious to the national defense.#
mMataonal detense" suro does cover evexything. but ls this within the B.0.? gtated above, because no classificatlon appears on it.In addition, the subject appears
to have been identified to the House Select Conmittee on Aasassinations.This appears not

--- PAGE BREAK ---.0.? gtated above, because no classificatlon appears on it.In addition, the subject appears
to have been identified to the House Select Conmittee on Aasassinations.This appears not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

direot the committee can be conceived.Bspeeially if the Comnittee did not begin with
knowledge of this zecord and the recerd was called to its attention by the FBl.
In what I wrote yesterday I indicated my raasons for laying other work sside to
writo you pronptly about Attachmat 4.In ordez to be able to get this in the morning
Admod aouy uoo uoTetaTa TTo u sptoap os au JT puexesor · pue no u os Te
Ihave had to get up quite early.I vill reaunc review of the other Attachments when
Of course I also want to register the appeal as promptly as possible and I ahall,
inoluaing copies.I do hope you will consiaer what Ihave wmitten in tine to be able
to zespond to any questions that may be asked in the processing ot the appeal.The
Departaent has indicated its intention to move for summary Judgement soon.
(人
Siacerey
HaroldWelsbers