MY PILGRIMAGE TO
THE WISE MEN OF THE EAST
BY
MONCURE DANIEL CONWAY
BOSTON AND NEW YORK
HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY
(Cbe tliber0ibe pre##, €ambrfDge
1906

--- PAGE BREAK ---

COPYRIGHT I9o6 BY MONCURE DANIEL CONWAY
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Published October 1906

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS
Prolegomena 
1-13
CHAPTER I
The Cult of Patriotism - Robert G. Ingersoll - A black mark on the
Declaration of Independence - Pilgrimages to Virginia- The ori-
ginal aborigines - The first church in North America- Cruelties
of colonization- Christmas reunions of revolutionary veterans -
A Song of Seventy-six -Mary Washington -Seamy side of the
Revolution
15-36
CHAPTER II
A witch hunt at Washington - Yellow Springs, Ohio - Cincinnati -
Judge badly - Journey to Salt Lake City - John W. Young -
Mormonism and human nature -Elder Penrose as a preacher -
Mormon wives and Mormon , husbands -The fate of repudiated
wives
37-46
CHAPTER III
San Francisco- Red Cross Knights - Chinese Joss and theatre - Voy-
aging southward - Flying fish and sunfish - Delia Bacon - Shake-
speare-Baconism-Honolulu Sabbath -Cryptain Cook - Legends
- Pele-Jehovah - Rev. Titus Coan - Samoans - Phenomena-
New Zealand - Dr. Richard Gannett - Pearl-divers - Our floating
Utopia 
47-69
CHAPTER IV
The Melbourne Cup - Joss House - Sects in Victoria - Governor of
Victoria- Bishop of Melbourne - Rev. Charles Strong - Austra-
lian insanity - Ballarat gold mines - Hon . Peter Lalor- Hon . A .
Inglis Clark-Hobart -Campbellites- Nature's oddities -Relics
of transportation times -Extinction of Tasmanians -My ordeal in
Sydney - Impaled with Bishop Moorhouse and Rev. Charles Strong
-Fusion of Freethought and Spiritualism - The Botany Bay myth
-Justice Windeyer 
70-96

--- PAGE BREAK ---on of Tasmanians -My ordeal in
Sydney - Impaled with Bishop Moorhouse and Rev. Charles Strong
-Fusion of Freethought and Spiritualism - The Botany Bay myth
-Justice Windeyer 
70-96

--- PAGE BREAK ---

vi
CONTENTS
CHAPTER V
Colonial Chauvinism - King George's Sound - Weird coast names -
Australian aborigines - An uncivilizable maiden - Dangers of fed-
eration - Krakatoan lava - Voltaire and Wesley on the Lisbon
earthquake 
97-107
CHAPTER VI
Ceylon- Plain living and high thinking - Talks with the Buddhist
Perera-Origin of Whittington's cat -"Rodyas"-A Sinhalese
law eourt - Judge Arundchalam and his wife at Kattura-A ram-
ble with Sinhalese gentlemen - My Buddhist plea for a suffering
snake -Hindu shrines in Buddhist temples -The learned priest
Subhfiti- Sinhalese homes -A Moslem on Heber's verse about
Ceylon - Temple at Kbandy - A Moslem sermon - Kellania-
Buddhist folk-tales-"Merits"-Nirvana-My Christmas
lec-
ture at Colombo-High priest of Adam's Peak -Conferences with
Buddhists in their college-An unpublished Pitaka-"Covetous-
ness " - Of actions at once right and sinful- The extinct order of
female priests - English masqueraders- Bishop Mcllvaine and
Bishop Temple
.
108-142
CHAPTER VII
New Year's eve in Cinnamon Gardens - Hon . P. Ramanathan's ban-
quet-Devil-dances-Sinhalese demonology-Entertainment
in
the palace of Mutu Kumara Swamy -The Nautch dancers -" The
Martyr of Truth " (Harischandra) - Wagnerite music
143-161
CHAPTER VIII
Arabi in Exile- Relations between Egyptians and English in Colombo
-Arabi's Mohammedan Christianity -Adam's Peak and Ararat -
How Arabi's life was saved -The English defenders of Arabi -
Arabi's situation at seventy-Conjurers-The giant
turtle of
Colombo-The heart and life of Buddhism in Ceylon
162-173
CHAPTER IX
Madras -Temple dancers - Talk with students - Juggenauth - St.
Thome -A Portuguese Thomas - Legend of Savatri -New Dis-
coveries concerning Thomas - Pain and piety - A Jain parable
- Good will to man - A Buddhist carol
.
.
.
.
174-194students - Juggenauth - St.
Thome -A Portuguese Thomas - Legend of Savatri -New Dis-
coveries concerning Thomas - Pain and piety - A Jain parable
- Good will to man - A Buddhist carol
.
.
.
.
174-194

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS
vii
CHAPTER X
Adyar -Mme. Blavatsky and her confession - The Theosophists
An American receiving the Buddhist pansala -The attempted
fraud on the Broughtons - Letter of Commissioner Broughton -
- Origin of Koothoomi-Revelations of Mme . Coulomb
.
195-214
CHAPTER XI
Calcutta - Keshub Chunder Sen and his death -Jogendra Chandra
Ghosh and Positivism - Mozoomdar and Dr . Tyndall - Exposition
- Holy pictures - Miracle plays and Hindu theatres - Kalighat
festival-Sir William Hunter - A learned fakir-Bali-Salva-
tion Army- Entertainment by Prince Furrok Shah - Christian
errors about " idols " - A dream interview with Bali
215-247
CHAPTER XII
Exploring Bengal - A conference of religions -Moslem Christianity
-Dr. RdjendraMla Mitra on Christian polytheism- Hon. Syed
Ameer Au - Dr. Ananda Cumara Swamy - The marvellous dolls
- Maharajah Sir Jotendra Motion Tajore -The demonized Buddha
Buddha-Gaya- Root of Buddha's Bo-tree -Letter from Dr .
Mitra-Buddhist-Hindu-philosophy-Benares-Monkey Temple
- Deer Park and legend of the Mango Girl -" The Toy-Cart "-
Our Western Buddha
.
248-276
CHAPTER XIII
Delhi palaces-Pillar of Asoka-The Miner Pillar -Purana Keels
- The Taj at Agra - Akbar -The Parliament of Religions-
Oriental ethics - The Jehanara mosque
.
277-301
CHAPTER XIV
Allahabad-Manwaysh festival-Ganges immersions-A Chris-
tian-Brahman debate-Relic of cobra-worship - River deities-
Christian and Brahman doctrines of sacrifice
302-316
CHAPTER XV
Bombay-Alexander Agassiz -Missionaries -England in India-
"The Old Missionary "-Nelacantah Goreh -Professor Peterson
- Hindu hymn - A drive with Judge West - Shankuran Pandit
- The Towers of Silence -Zoroastrianism-The zenana-Ra-
mabai-Keshub Chunder Sen and his monument - Bhakti (faith)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Peterson
- Hindu hymn - A drive with Judge West - Shankuran Pandit
- The Towers of Silence -Zoroastrianism-The zenana-Ra-
mabai-Keshub Chunder Sen and his monument - Bhakti (faith)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

vm
CONTENTS
- Indian sects-Faults of English colonists -Samuel Laing, M . P.,
"A Modern Zoroastrian "-The ideal Jain temple
317-342
CHAPTER XVI
Homeward - The Flying Dutchman - Our `Lady of the Peking'
- A letter of John Bright -" Chinese Gordon " in the Soudan and
in Palestine-Pilgrimage to the Krupp Gun Works at Essen, Ger-
many-Address at Dickinson College, Pennsylvania
.
343-350
CHAPTER XVII
Seeking the Beloved 
351-381
CHAPTER XVIII
Addenda 1905, 1906 
382-409
Index 
411

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
MoxcYRE D. CONWAY (photogravure)
.
.
.
Frontispiece
LETTER of R . G. INGERSOLL
.
22
WASEADUWE SUBHQTI, A LEARNED BUDDHIST AUTHOR
118
A BUDDHIST TEMPLE 
120
KHANDY TEMPLE
122
SUMANGALA, PRIEST OF ADAM'S PEAK
.
130
BUDDHIST PRIESTS OF CEYLON
.
132
HON. P. RAMANATHAN, SOLICITOR-GENERAL OF CEYLON
134
DEVH.-DANCERS 
144
ACHMET ARABI, " THE EGYPTIAN "
.
162
VIRCHAND R. GANDHI, THE CHIEF RELIGIOUS LEADER AMONG
THE JAINS OF INDIA 
190
THE JAIN SYMBOLICAL PICTURE
.
192
MADAME BLAVATSKY 
196
KESHUB CHUNDER SEN 
216
How. SPED AMEER ALI
.
252
STUPA
264
CASTLE OF THE PANDAVAS
.
282
PUNDITA RAMABAI 
332
SAMUEL LAING, M. P., AUTHOR OF " A MODERN ZOROASTRIAN "
340
LETTER OF JOHN BRIGHT
.
346
SIR WILLIAM W. HUNTER
.
404

--- PAGE BREAK ---252
STUPA
264
CASTLE OF THE PANDAVAS
.
282
PUNDITA RAMABAI 
332
SAMUEL LAING, M. P., AUTHOR OF " A MODERN ZOROASTRIAN "
340
LETTER OF JOHN BRIGHT
.
346
SIR WILLIAM W. HUNTER
.
404

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MY PILGRIMAGE TO THE WISE
MEN OF THE EAST
PROLEGOMENA
A
MID the fantastic Apocryphal fables one poetic tale
has found its way into the Arabic Gospel of the
Infancy .
11 And it came to pass when Jesus the Lord was born
at Bethlehem of Judah, in the time of Herod the King,
behold Wise Men came from the East to Jerusalem, as
Zoroaster had predicted : and they had with them gifts,
gold, incense, and myrrh ; and they worshipped him and
offered unto him their gifts .
Then lady Mary took one
of his swaddling bands and gave it to them as a little
reward, and they received it from her with great honour .
And the same hour there appeared unto them an angel in
the form of the star which had been the guide of their way
before ; and following the leading of its light they departed
into their own country .
°1 And there the kings and their princes came to them
asking what they bad seen or done, how they had gone
and returned, what they had brought with them .
And
they showed them the swaddling band which lady Mary
bad given them ; wherefore they celebrated a festival, and
kindled fire according to their custom and worshipped it,
and cast the swaddling band into it, and the fire seized it
and absorbed it into itself. But when the fire went out,
they drew forth the swaddling band just as it was at first,
as if the fire had not touched it . Therefore they began to

--- PAGE BREAK ---it
and absorbed it into itself. But when the fire went out,
they drew forth the swaddling band just as it was at first,
as if the fire had not touched it . Therefore they began to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
MY PILGRIMAGE
kiss it, and to place it on their heads and eyes, saying,
Verily this is undoubted truth ; it is indeed a great thing
that the fire could not burn nor destroy it .
They took it
thence and with the greatest honour deposited it among
their treasures ."
It is evident from the context that this little tale has
been inserted from some foreign source .
The next sen-
tence begins, "Now when Herod saw that the Wise Men
had departed and not returned to him," but nothing is
said of their having seen Herod at all . Their star-angel
is Zoroaster himself, who shines through this legend of
primitive pilgrims from Persia treasuring even the small-
est new truth which their flame could absorb but not con-
sume .
I have dreamed of missionaries travelling to the East
as if returning this visit of the Wise Men
: they say,
" Show us, 0 elder brothers, the swaddling band your
fire could .not consume, that we may press it to our eyes
and lips ; for the bands borne west are consumed ! "
It was in studying the Oriental books in my youth that
I learned that in all the earth were growing the flowers
and fruits of the human heart, concerning which one Wise
Man said, "Keep thy heart above all that thou guardest ;
for out of it are the issues of life."
On May 1, 1859, I preached in Cincinnati a discourse
on " East and West," my text being, " The night is far
spent, the day is at hand ; let us therefore cast off the
works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light ."
It was at the first assembling of the congregation after
nearly half of them had left us to found a new Unitarian
society, " The Church of the Redeemer."
Along with
my personal distress at parting with so many friends who
could not follow me in my repudiation of Supernatural-

--- PAGE BREAK ---d a new Unitarian
society, " The Church of the Redeemer."
Along with
my personal distress at parting with so many friends who
could not follow me in my repudiation of Supernatural-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PROLEGOMENA
3
ism, I still felt a sort of relief in having no further need
for compromise with the Past . All the rationalists of the
city had crowded to my side ; and in the enthusiasm of a
crisis I said : -
'° The sun of civilization rose in the East, and ever
journeys Westward. And it is not a fancy, but a fact,
that Humanity, as much as the earth, is divided into night
and day -historically, East and West .
What is the dif-
ference of night and day? One is the time for dreams,
the other for realities ; one has visions, the other actual-
ities. Let us not undervalue the Night out of which our
race has emerged ; it was a healthful and beautiful slum-
ber which it found there, and by which it was made
strong for the day of toil which awaited it.
Sciolists
speak of the
' dark ages,' as if darkness were the sole
characteristic of those times .
I tell you glorious stars
shone, and splendid worlds rolled on their orbits of light,
in that primal darkness. It was a time of dreams, indeed,
but they were dreams which the Earth exists and toils to
carve into reality.
It was the mission of that Oriental
world to dream, and it fulfilled its mission grandly : it
dreamed out an Eden, a Golden Age ; it caught the per-
fect vision which is bequeathed to our Day under the
name of Christianity. We may safely judge this child-
hood of the world by the phenomena of our own indi-
vidual childhood ; you know that in our childhood we
are not practical, but build air castles, yet a true man-
hood will follow youth's visions .
So the Orient achieved
no great practical works ; its Edens and Ages of Gold
fade into poems under the analysis of history . These
grandeurs were the rearing of that skilful architect, Im-
agination, out of very insignificant materials.
But there
came a time of waning. Visions and speculations grewthe analysis of history . These
grandeurs were the rearing of that skilful architect, Im-
agination, out of very insignificant materials.
But there
came a time of waning. Visions and speculations grew

--- PAGE BREAK ---ory . These
grandeurs were the rearing of that skilful architect, Im-
agination, out of very insignificant materials.
But there
came a time of waning. Visions and speculations grew

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4
MY PILGRIMAGE
fainter and fainter ; the moon and the stars were paling
in the sky . No prophet could add another tint to the lunar
rainbow, which hovered with mystic light over the young
world, but could only tell of golden treasures which the
future was to find at the rainbow's end .
The East had
given its message to the world, and must retire."
The doctrinaire provincialism of that discourse is ex-
cusable in part by my youth, which was disproportionate
to my twenty-seven years, but still more by the exaltation
in which American reformers were all living before War
came to show that our idealized New World was to repeat
and intensify the brutal regime of Europe .
After the
terrible decade I published (1870) " The Earthward Pil-
grimage." I allowed the work to go out of print, when it
was having a fair sale, because some of its statements
no longer satisfied me . At the request of the Rationalist
Press Association in London I recently revised the vol-
ume to find if the publication might not be made with
supplementary notes, but conclude that the task is im-
possible .
In reporting "how I left the world to come for that
which is," my criticisms on the abandoned dogmas and
delusions do not seem unfair, but the world into which I
entreated people to follow me is not " that which is," but
a mirage of the " Celestial City " thrown by Transcen-
dentalism on the horizon of the world . Millennial dreams
survive in my necessitarian " progress," my deity is still
dynamic and external, the "collectivist " superstition of
some divinity in masses of men lingers ; and, worst of all,
there pervades the book the fatal fallacy that evil is good
in the making.
There are indeed many pages which in an empirical
way, or by implication, are inconsistent with the errors, asworst of all,
there pervades the book the fatal fallacy that evil is good
in the making.
There are indeed many pages which in an empirical
way, or by implication, are inconsistent with the errors, as

--- PAGE BREAK ---pervades the book the fatal fallacy that evil is good
in the making.
There are indeed many pages which in an empirical
way, or by implication, are inconsistent with the errors, as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PROLEGOMENA
5
I now deem them ; and I am reminded by the first chap-
ter of " The Earthward Pilgrimage " of my consciousness
of being far from any shrine in the direction I was travel-
ling . " There came to me one who spoke with a voice not
to be disobeyed . He laid on me a burden, and gave me
a shield called Truth, and said : ' Henceforth thou shalt
be a pilgrim. From a world believing in the incredible,
adoring where it should abhor, thou shalt depart never
to return.
Whither, shall be opened to thee as thou shalt
journey ;
whence, is already plain .' "
The concluding
pages of that first chapter, written on the threshold of my
new world, may fairly preface the present work, originally
prepared as a part of my Autobiography : -
"The Interpreter lit his candle and said :
'Do you
remember the picture I formerly showed you, in a private
room, of a very grave person ?' ' I do, indeed,' I said ;
'and this was the fashion of it ; it had eyes lifted up to
heaven, the best of books in its hand, the law of truth
was written upon its lips, the world was behind its back,
it stood as if it pleaded with men, and a crown of gold
did hang over its bead .'
' That picture,' he said, ' gradu-
ally became so dingy, that once, when an old artist came
hither, I accepted his offer to clean and retouch it ; you
shall see it as he left it.' On entering the well-known
room, I saw that the portrait had been changed in several
particulars . The grave person's eyes now looked down-
ward ; the book, partially closed, was placed on one side
;
and the world, which had been behind, was now immedi-
ately under his eyes, and covered with inscriptions ; the
crown of gold suspended over his head had changed to
luminous dust. When I asked the meaning of this change,
the Interpreter said : ' I will show you a new scene com-
manded by this house, which will unfold the significanceover his head had changed to
luminous dust. When I asked the meaning of this change,
the Interpreter said : ' I will show you a new scene com-
manded by this house, which will unfold the significance

--- PAGE BREAK ---hanged to
luminous dust. When I asked the meaning of this change,
the Interpreter said : ' I will show you a new scene com-
manded by this house, which will unfold the significance

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
MY PILGRIMAGE
of the picture.' Thereupon, he took me to the top of the
house, from which could be seen the two rival cities . What
was my surprise to see a dark cloud gathered over the
City of Otherworldliness, with lightnings flashing from it,
while over the so-called City of Destruction shone a beau-
tiful rainbow ! ' Thus,' said the Interpreter,
' that which
exalteth itself must be abased, and that which humbleth
itself shall be exalted. The city which, from being the
domain of the lowly friend of man, the carpenter's son,
has been given over to those who care more for bishoprics
and fine livings than for mankind, has become the City of
Destruction ; while that which has cared rather for man
whom it can, than for God whom it cannot, benefit, has
become the City of Humanity, which shall endure for
ever.'
11 The Interpreter then said that, as there were unhap-
pily few pilgrims as yet going in my direction, he would be
able to accompany me on a part of the way .
I was not so
near, he said, as I might suppose.
' That great metropolis
which you see is not the city you seek ; it is Bothworlds-
burg, and, though commercially connected with the City
of Humanity, owns allegiance to the Prince of Otherworld-
liness, whose powerful agencies therein are marked by its
spires. Its inhabitants pass six sevenths of their time in
this world, and during the other seventh pray to their
Prince, and protest louldly against taking any thought at
all for this life . The confines of Bothworldsburg blend
with those of the City of Humanity, which you can hardly
trace out from here, and, indeed, may have some difficulty
in finding. You must go through the tedious paths of
Study, Reality, and Devotion, and when you arrive at the
suburbs you will still have to be a pilgrim amid many
nights and days before you reach the heart of the city .go through the tedious paths of
Study, Reality, and Devotion, and when you arrive at the
suburbs you will still have to be a pilgrim amid many
nights and days before you reach the heart of the city .

--- PAGE BREAK ---ous paths of
Study, Reality, and Devotion, and when you arrive at the
suburbs you will still have to be a pilgrim amid many
nights and days before you reach the heart of the city .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PROLEGOMENA
7
After arriving there, you will be left a good deal to your
own guidance : the inhabitants are very busy
; they do not
sit on purple clouds blowing golden trumpets
.
The only
prayer to the Lord of that city is work ; the only praise
is virtue. Its treasures are not obvious, but in hard ores .
You will find the pavements golden only when you can
transmute them to gold ; and only if you have found a pearl
to carry in your own breast will its gates become pearl."'
When a mind starts out under the impulse of a religious
sentiment in a direction radically different from that in
which it had been trained, it is not a revolution but an
evolution that is begun . The important thing is not this
or that incident of experience, but the new way of looking
at things. Assuming that such a mind would not break
with its Past, its circle of sympathies and friendships,
except for loyalty to truth, and consequently not bend the
commanding facts to suit personal prejudices or interests,
it can hardly fail to find that it undergoes a new birth .
It
then follows steadily that its whole mental environment
must become new, -even as an early apostle discovered
that in Christ neither circumcision nor uncircumcision
availed anything, but a new creation .
Thus my whole
little world of conceptions must be revised from a new
standpoint.
How many books are to be found which deal with the
mental and moral facts of human life without prejudice
and without estimating them by some traditional stand-
ard or authority? How many travellers have told me
about Eastern and Oriental religions, - about Catholics,
Mormons, Jews, or
G 0 Pagan " systems, - without merely
measuring them by their remoteness from or proximity to
their own particular beliefs? How many can tell me, -
without any thought whatever about what they think goodPagan " systems, - without merely
measuring them by their remoteness from or proximity to
their own particular beliefs? How many can tell me, -
without any thought whatever about what they think good

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
MY PILGRIMAGE
for those foreign " souls,"- exactly what fruits of simple
human happiness those trees are bearing for individual
hearts and homes ?
When one ceases to regard mankind as masses rushing
into prmternatural heavens and hells, the torments or
joys of human beings in this world become of supreme
importance .
Intellectually we all necessarily stand on the shoulders
of the Past, but here too the revision must determine
whether our stand is on real or unreal shoulders. With
far less learning than the great writers on Buddha, Zoro-
aster, Solomon, Jesus, I was compelled to bring on them
the searchlight of my simple earthly point of view, apart
from all academic or theological interpretations, whether
of their worshippers or their antagonists .
In 1882 an invitation was received by me to give lec-
tures in Australia . Two eminent gentlemen of Melbourne,
Robert J. Jeff ray and Henry G . Turner, who on occasional
visits to London had attended my chapel, volunteered to
make arrangements for the lectures ; my South Place
people were content that after nearly twenty years in
their service I should enjoy a voyage round the world,
lecturers being at hand to take my place ; my wife, whose
mother (beloved of all who knew her) was able to stay
with her, decided that I should go ; and so, after being
honoured by our fellow-villagers of Bedford Park with
a dinner, I found myself -July 21, 1883 - on the ship
Arizona bound for New York .
I have always been healthy and happy at sea, but on
that beautiful July day when we passed out of land there
rolled from my shoulders a burden of which I had been
hardly more conscious than of the weight of the atmos-
phere. Since my youth a public teacher, in the stormy

--- PAGE BREAK ---out of land there
rolled from my shoulders a burden of which I had been
hardly more conscious than of the weight of the atmos-
phere. Since my youth a public teacher, in the stormy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PROLEGOMENA
9
life-voyage of more than thirty years I had been as one of
the crew always under orders, and with but few intervals
wherein I could enjoy the easy chair of a passenger and
be myself a learner instead of a preacher . And now at
fifty, having reached the conscious need of revising my
beliefs and taking stock of my ideas, - lo, here shone
my splendour of opportunity
In one of my early years I became curious about the
infinitesimal world, and, providing myself with a micro-
scope and some books on that study, was sufficiently
interested to begin an essay which I called " The Circum-
navigation of a Dew-drop ." But I did not get far .
The
dew-drop was too deep for me . Out of it swarmed surmises
about the origin of life, the development of forms, and the
moral mysteries of infusorial combats and cannibalism .
For such problems I had no competency ; and as for the
physical revelations of the microscope, I could only recite
the discoveries of scientific investigators . And in the great
globe which I was to circumnavigate, how little had I seen
except through the eyes and lenses of others !
So it might continue in matters of large import,-the
physical, political, commercial conditions of the countries
through which I was to travel .
Grateful am I to sit at the
feet of any master, and nothing could give me more hap-
piness than to find a master in the field to which the en-
ergies of my life have been given, - religion and religions .
But herein my researches and experiences gradually
developed eyes of my own . Whether they are strong or
feeble, exact or inexact, they are my own organically, my
only ones ; and if they cannot weigh the full value of
what they see there is always the hope that others will
derive from a truthful report some contribution to know-
ledge, - if only an example of visual perversity
!they cannot weigh the full value of
what they see there is always the hope that others will
derive from a truthful report some contribution to know-
ledge, - if only an example of visual perversity
!

--- PAGE BREAK ---he full value of
what they see there is always the hope that others will
derive from a truthful report some contribution to know-
ledge, - if only an example of visual perversity
!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
MY PILGRIMAGE
A company of gentlemen travelling in a far country -
savants, artists, writers - casually met together after
they had travelled over the same road, and talked about
what they had observed . One had added some rare spe-
cimens to his collection of butterflies, but could not recall
the exquisite landscapes of which an artist had sketches
;
nor had either noticed the peasants photographed by the
anthropologist ; and none of those remembered seeing a
wondrous mirage which had been observed by another
of the company. While they were exchanging their in-
teresting observations, in no case the same, a child passed
by with a fragment of yellow-tinted stone in its hand ; a
geologist present examined the stone, saw gold in it, was
guided by the child to the spot where it was found, and
the company formed themselves into a syndicate to buy
up a new gold district.
Each of us has his own experiences, his particular train-
ing of cares and trials, a personal history combined with
his individuality ; each of us sees really only what he has
a mind (of his own) to see . Even impressions that some
thought childish have proved to be of equal importance
with the most imposing phenomena .
I sat on the deck of the Arizona and read a wonderful
work - "The Undiscovered Country," by W . D. How-
ells. It would have brought joy to Shakespeare had he
foreseen that words of his own would make the title of a
book so veined with poetry and wisdom .
" Wisdom " is
a word one connects with a man or a book less frequently
as one grows older ; but it is surely a secret of Wisdom
to see the romance of our time while it is passing . It is
easy to recognize the fairyland of our childhood when it
is irrevocably lost, easy to recognize the romance of fore-
going generations when it has written itself in events andle it is passing . It is
easy to recognize the fairyland of our childhood when it
is irrevocably lost, easy to recognize the romance of fore-
going generations when it has written itself in events and

--- PAGE BREAK ---t is
easy to recognize the fairyland of our childhood when it
is irrevocably lost, easy to recognize the romance of fore-
going generations when it has written itself in events and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PROLEGOMENA
11
contrasts : but who will rehearse the romance of the hour
that is shining? In this novel Howells takes up the su-
perstitions grouped under the name of Spiritualism, shows
us the depth of human tenderness to which this despised
thing appeals, reveals the religious sentiment that plays
into the hands of impostors .
In a sense, the whole world is mainly an undiscovered
country . Ancient Spiritisms, systematized and grown re-
spectable, hide the realities under veils of fable embroid-
ered by poetry and art. Naked truth is ashamed . And
there is pathos in this .
Had the real earth been sweet
and maternal, mankind would not have woven for it those
veils lustrous with loves and graces, angels and madonnas .
Through rents in the veils made by science the reality
revealed in glimpses is so cold and hard that even the
disillusioned must use the illusions (quasi-pathologically)
for their urgent effects .
In Howells's novel the two Har-
vard scholars detect the lovely " medium," but are dis-
armed, and even made virtual accomplices, when they
discover that she is there alone in mortal combat for the
life of her father, saved from fatal despair by her pre-
tended messages from his dead wife . The sympathetic
youths represent all scientific sceptics in their tenderness
for the illusions that are happy. Bigotry is not so tender,
but eager to reduce to tatters all veils but its own, espe-
cially if the others are pretty .
Tout comprendre c'est tout pardonner .
In an undis-
covered world we do now and then, fortunately, discover
each other - individually - and especially when out of
our habitat .
On the Arizona the famous Catholic, Mon-
seigneur Capel, took evident pleasure in promenading
with an eminent Jewish writer ; an evangelist going out
to assist revivalist Moody chatted pleasantly with thehe Arizona the famous Catholic, Mon-
seigneur Capel, took evident pleasure in promenading
with an eminent Jewish writer ; an evangelist going out
to assist revivalist Moody chatted pleasantly with the

--- PAGE BREAK ---s Catholic, Mon-
seigneur Capel, took evident pleasure in promenading
with an eminent Jewish writer ; an evangelist going out
to assist revivalist Moody chatted pleasantly with the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
MY PILGRIMAGE
accomplished actress, Georgie Cayvan, without warning
her that on the stage she was charming crowds to hell .
A Baltimore Doctor of Divinity, aware of my heresies,
conversed with me without the least
" holier-than-thou "
accent. In a vision I saw the Catholic Monseigneur leap
at the Jew's throat, and the Doctor of Divinity preparing
a stake - the evangelist bringing faggots and fire - for
my poor heretical self . But Steam is a comrade of Lati-
tudinarianism. The ancient persecutors never experienced
long voyages away from their conventicles, with non-elect
companies and schismatics, through fogs, near icebergs,
amid ocean wastes, with only a thin partition separating
them and their opponents from a common abyss .
Goethe said to a friend that be believed in immortality
but did not wish to enjoy it with the people who believe in
it here. Could we all content ourselves with one world at
a time we could fraternize on our planet as on a larger
ship floating through space, its passengers
races and
nations, all eager to get at each other's wit and wisdom ;
even as at an entertainment on the Arizona our orthodox
Doctor of Divinity, in presiding, invited the Jew, the
Catholic, the actress, and the heretic to amuse the com-
pany, -invited us with a cordiality which gave mystical
significance to his opening words : " We feel secure on
this ship, thanks to the heavenly Father ; but on some
other ships people are not so safe ! "
Ah, if this amiable Doctor of Divinity could only attain
to the idea of a heavenly Father watching as vigilantly
and lovingly over the Buddhist ship, - the Brahman,
Moslem, Parsi, Confucian ships, - as over the " Ship of
Zion" bearing him and his co-religionists! the sun to rise
on them, the winds to waft, the waves to support them
!
It seems that Protestantism, the religion of the mostships, - as over the " Ship of
Zion" bearing him and his co-religionists! the sun to rise
on them, the winds to waft, the waves to support them
!
It seems that Protestantism, the religion of the most

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PROLEGOMENA
13'
powerful race, has become the only one that excludes any
human being from the paternal care of its deity . The
Roman Catholic Church has so universalized its Purga-
tory that the doctrine of an eternal hell has virtually
diminished into an antiquated phrase. Parsism even in
the time of Zoroaster prophesied the conversion of
Ahriman, as Judaism did that of Leviathan .
Educated
Christians do not believe in the old hell, nor in the eter-
nity of any kind of misery, but the tenacity with which
they maintain the old terrors in catechism and creed
proves that their '° religion " does not aim or hope for a
happy earth. Happiness is reserved for another world.
But has not this world as much right to happiness as
any other? Unhappiness is the root of all evil .
From it
springs meanness, vice, crime, bitterness, injustice .
Hap-
piness is the sacred spirit, the mother of virtues . What
imaginable function has religion except to promote human
happiness? If there be a universal Heart it suffers from
every human sigh and tear, it bleeds with every falling
sparrow, it "answereth man in the joy of his heart ."

--- PAGE BREAK ---promote human
happiness? If there be a universal Heart it suffers from
every human sigh and tear, it bleeds with every falling
sparrow, it "answereth man in the joy of his heart ."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER I
The Cult of Patriotism -Robert G. Ingersoll-A black mark on the
Declaration of Independence - Pilgrimages to Virginia - The original
aborigines- The first church in North America- Cruelties of coloni-
zation - Christmas reunions of revolutionary veterans -A Song of
Seventy-six - Mary Washington -Seamy side of the Revolution .
A
S we were entering New York harbour one of the
wealthiest Americans came out on his fine steam-
yacht and carried off his returning son . This young
man had been such a genial and unpretending comrade
on our voyage that it was only when we were approaching
the figure of Liberty that her torch enlightened us as to
her remoteness from Equality, the lesson being further
impressed upon us-the millionless and yachtless - by
our slow progress through the Customs .
But the inequality created by pecuniary conditions is
not all to the advantage of the millionaire. The com-
paratively impecunious are sure to invest him, without
respect to his merits or demerits, with an unpleasing
reputation . I never met this millionaire, but was told by
honourable and well-informed business men that he was
an irreproachable domestic character, not luxurious or
self-indulgent, forbearing and generous towards those
with whom he had dealings, and that like Dives in the
parable be was popularly consigned to a bad place simply
because he was rich .
In New York my two sons, who had settled there, had
made pleasant plans for me, and I remained long enough
to meet eminent men ; among them John Jay, Cyrus

--- PAGE BREAK ---ly
because he was rich .
In New York my two sons, who had settled there, had
made pleasant plans for me, and I remained long enough
to meet eminent men ; among them John Jay, Cyrus

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
MY PILGRIMAGE
Field,
William and
Joseph
Choate,
Whitelaw Reid,
Evarts, Stedman, Youmans, Godkin, Gilder, Charles A .
Dana, Randolph Robinson, Horace White . I found them
all optimists in their view of public affairs . North and
South were now hand in hand, they said, and municipal
corruption in New York nearly at an end .
At that time the Jingo did not exist in America : in
Europe one might occasionally meet countrymen who paid
tribute for passing most of their time abroad by loud
encomiums of everything in America and disparagement
of "the Old World." One of these, a cultured gentleman
from Massachusetts, a bachelor of some wealth, passed
his time with literary men and artists in Europe
.
Once
when we were dining together in Paris be broke out with
denunciations of Europe as a century behind America,
and I said, " My friend, I have been meeting you, and
always gladly, for twenty-five years, but never in America .
It is always in London, Paris, or in Rome .
Even when I
have been occasionally in Boston and have inquired for
you, they have reported you in Europe . How can you
bear to absent yourself from that perfect country? "
After a few moments he whispered : "The fault is not
in America, but in me ; I am not good enough to live in
America ! "
For myself, it was at a moment when I was not warlike
enough for America, as related in my Autobiography, that
I was transplanted to London .
Always retaining my
American citizenship, I yet could not conceive of a country
as lovable apart from the people in it . There survives in
us the instinct that leads a bird to brood on its eggs
; but
as it is not supposable that the bird has any maternal
sentiment towards an egg, it seems hardly natural that
any enthusiasm should arise in a nation for the inanimatebird to brood on its eggs
; but
as it is not supposable that the bird has any maternal
sentiment towards an egg, it seems hardly natural that
any enthusiasm should arise in a nation for the inanimate

--- PAGE BREAK ---s eggs
; but
as it is not supposable that the bird has any maternal
sentiment towards an egg, it seems hardly natural that
any enthusiasm should arise in a nation for the inanimate

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE CULT OF PATRIOTISM
17
materials out of which its population is produced. In early
youth I was possessed by a passionate love of Virginia
because the State was personified as the fair " Mother of
States and of Statesmen," and was denounced by North-
ern people because of Slavery, - which had become our
new religion . When I gave up that religion I was able to
analyze "patriotism," and recognize that it was largely a
cult. An ancient Persian said, " Diversities of religion
have divided the world into seventy-two nations." Our
proslavery religion endeavoured to add another . So soon
as the gods mingle in human discussions soul is sundered
from soul. The story of Babel looks like a poetic fable
by which some primitive sceptic conveyed his theory that
mankind worked together harmoniously to build up civ-
ilization, but when they reached a point where disputes
about gods arose they could no longer understand each
other, and all their achievement went to ruin. Each
builder surrounded his god with some " sacred soil " and
defensive frontiers, and when he had persuaded or tempted
others to join him, and others had been compelled to
come in, the cult of " patriotism" arose. All enthusiasm
for one's country not based on the wise and just men and
women in it, and the freedom and happiness of its inhab-
itants, is of artificial cultivation . And for that very reason
patriotism, in this egoistic sense, is able to overpower
natural instincts and emotions ; just as a religious cult
in all time has shown its power to train men to worship
and fight for cruel deities whom their unsophisticated
sentiment would abhor .
The natural evolution of patriotism would be to consider
it as the expansion of the family sentiment . It is not an
egoistic but an unselfish feeling which causes us to be
especially concerned with that which is within our reach,iotism would be to consider
it as the expansion of the family sentiment . It is not an
egoistic but an unselfish feeling which causes us to be
especially concerned with that which is within our reach,

--- PAGE BREAK ---onsider
it as the expansion of the family sentiment . It is not an
egoistic but an unselfish feeling which causes us to be
especially concerned with that which is within our reach,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18
MY PILGRIMAGE
and for which we are to some extent responsible . A child
run over at my door, or a murder near my residence, pro-
duces a more profound emotion in me than the destruction
of multitudes in some distant land .
It is an artificial
patriotism which leads men to national expansions dic-
tated by pride, and it is also a subversive patriotism when
it leads to aggressions for the sake of any national interest .
The gentlemen whom I have mentioned as having met in
New York, some of my early friends, had like myself
memories of the years when as boys we lit patriotic bon-
fires for our country's criminal victories over Mexico
; we
remembered well the glories gained by our flag by the
massacres of our poor aborigines ; and how patriotism had
summoned us to run with the bloodhounds to hunt men
and women escaping from slavery and return them to
bondage. It could not occur to any of them that in a
few years that same kind of patriotism would summon
us to rejoice in a repetition on Spain of the outrage on
Mexico, or to be elated when, after freeing four millions
of coloured people, we should proceed to purchase ten mil-
lions of them, and slay and torture them into submission .
Still less could any of us imagine that the artificial cultiva-
tion and cult of flag-worship could blind our nation as a
whole to the monstrous absurdity that we should assume
control over any foreign - especially any coloured - race
when we are unable to protect our own negro citizens
from being freely slain and even burned alive .
It was inevitable that an old student of literature and
art should estimate a country by its great men and
women, - thinkers, writers, artists, - to whom he could
look up . Many of those at whose feet I had sat in
America were dead, and American art was to such an ex-
tent transplanted to Europe that it was difficult to setwriters, artists, - to whom he could
look up . Many of those at whose feet I had sat in
America were dead, and American art was to such an ex-
tent transplanted to Europe that it was difficult to set

--- PAGE BREAK ---to whom he could
look up . Many of those at whose feet I had sat in
America were dead, and American art was to such an ex-
tent transplanted to Europe that it was difficult to set

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ROBERT G . INGERSOLL
19
my native land above England and France
; but it seemed
a sufficient compensation for the loss of the high peaks if
the plains were smiling with fine harvests . I was assured
by good observers that the American people were receiving
better wages and living in happier homes than the masses
of any other country, that they were being educated, and
there must spring up a race of thinkers greater than our
lost masters .
It was a stage in my pilgrimage to visit in his hand-
some mansion in New York a man who had for some
time appeared to me the most striking figure in religious
America,-Robert G . Ingersoll .
Many years before a
young relative of my wife, William Jenckes, bad sent me
to London a book on "The Gods," apparently made up
of occasional addresses by Ingersoll .
He was then styled
Colonel Ingersoll because of his services in the Union
War, and be had also been a member of Congress . In one
of these lectures be had said, " An honest God is the no-
blest work of man," which became a sort of Western pro-
verb. In 1881, being on a visit to Boston, my wife and I
found ourselves in the Parker House with the Ingersolls,
and went over to Charlestown to hear him lecture .
His
subject was " The Mistakes of Moses," and it was a mem-
orable experience. Our lost leaders, - Emerson, Thoreau,
Theodore Parker, - who had really spoken to disciples
rather than to the nation, seemed to have contributed
something to form this organ by which their voice could
reach the people . Every variety of power was in this ora-
tor, - logic and poetry, humour and imagination, sim-
plicity and dramatic art, moral earnestness and bound-
less sympathy. The wonderful power which Washington's
attorney-general, Edmund Randolph, ascribed to Thomas
Paine of insinuating his ideas equally into learned andic art, moral earnestness and bound-
less sympathy. The wonderful power which Washington's
attorney-general, Edmund Randolph, ascribed to Thomas
Paine of insinuating his ideas equally into learned and

--- PAGE BREAK ---tness and bound-
less sympathy. The wonderful power which Washington's
attorney-general, Edmund Randolph, ascribed to Thomas
Paine of insinuating his ideas equally into learned and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
MY PILGRIMAGE
unlearned had passed from Paine's pen to Ingersoll's
tongue. The effect on the people was indescribable. The
-large theatre was crowded from pit to dome . The people
were carried from plaudits of his argument to loud laugh-
ter at his humorous sentences, and his flexible voice carried
the sympathies of the assembly with it, at times moving
them to tears by his pathos.
That which especially attracted me in Ingersoll's lec-
tures and pamphlets was that his affirmations were con-
veyed by negations . My friend and relative, Moncure
Robinson, Sr ., of Philadelphia, recognized the great power
of Ingersoll, but deplored its being used to pull down
without building up . But I found that what my venerable
friend was thinking of was not the destruction of dogmas
or of creeds, but his feeling that churches were valuable in-
stitutions, and that Ingersoll did not even attempt to found
any institution that could assist in the spiritual culture
and charities of which families bad need . But I felt that
this was the only kind of work that could be done really
by free thought . Were it to build up any institution it
might be founded on scientific doctrines necessarily tran-
sient, and imitate the pious habit by fortifying and de-
fending some particular form of unbelief .
The perfect freedom of Ingersoll's mind was often
illustrated in his lecture ; as for instance, after having
cited from the Bible some narrative of terrible cruelty
ascribed to the command of Jehovah, he paused for nearly a
minute, then lifting his hand and looking upward he said
solemnly, " I trust that God, if there be a God, will take
notice that I am down here on earth denouncing this libel
on his character ."
The country was full of incidents and anecdotes relat-
ing to these marvellous lectures. Once when he was lectur-ill take
notice that I am down here on earth denouncing this libel
on his character ."
The country was full of incidents and anecdotes relat-
ing to these marvellous lectures. Once when he was lectur-

--- PAGE BREAK ---I am down here on earth denouncing this libel
on his character ."
The country was full of incidents and anecdotes relat-
ing to these marvellous lectures. Once when he was lectur-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INGERSOLL'S PLEA
Ql
ing at San Francisco on a Sunday evening in a crowded
theatre, some man in the audience cried, " Do you believe
in baptism? "
Ingersoll replied good-naturedly, " Yes, -
especially with soap ! "
Long before his reputation as a free thinker was made
he was noted in the West for his great ability in defend-
ing persons in danger of injustice. George Hoadly, for-
mer governor of Ohio, told me that on one occasion he
defended an humble man charged with manslaughter,
which had occurred in some broil . Ingersoll came into
court and after listening to the prosecution arose and said,
" On my way to this room I stopped at the house of a
poor woman . She had been confined while her husband
was in prison - the prisoner at the bar . The . woman lay
on her bed with the infant beside her, and with tears in
her eyes she said to me, ` Send me back my husband ; he
is a good husband, a good father, an industrious man .
Oh, send me back my husband ! ' " There was a moment's
silence after Ingersoll said this in his tender voice, and
then one of the jury cried out, " By God, Bob, we'll do
it!"
Ingersoll never started out in life to be a leader of free
thought. He was a very able lawyer, and by his profes-
sion gained reputation and wealth ; his religious icono-
clasm was incidental. In his experience in many States
he saw much of the provincial narrowness and intolerance
arising from what he considered superstition, and now
and then in the intervals of the court sittings he would
speak to small clubs of secularists or admirers of Thomas
Paine ; these addresses found their way to the public and
excited pulpit denunciations, and as he was always ready
to answer, his audiences swelled until it was difficult to
get a seat in the always crowded theatres .resses found their way to the public and
excited pulpit denunciations, and as he was always ready
to answer, his audiences swelled until it was difficult to
get a seat in the always crowded theatres .

--- PAGE BREAK ---ay to the public and
excited pulpit denunciations, and as he was always ready
to answer, his audiences swelled until it was difficult to
get a seat in the always crowded theatres .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
MY PILGRIMAGE
There was nothing of the scoffer about Ingersoll
; he did
not fling epithets, but argued his case before the crowd as
if they were judges and jurymen . In all the lectures of
his which I have heard I remarked the chastity of his
mind and speech . Even at the cost of a strong point he
would avoid dwelling on biblical details which he thought
obscene. Of course he did not fail to assert that there
were such passages, and in answer to clergymen contend-
ing that morality depended on the Bible, Ingersoll said,
" I will give any respectable clergyman a thousand dollars
if he will read to his congregation on-Sunday every word
of a chapter I shall select from the Bible." This challenge
was of course not accepted, and it was a blow all the more
effective because of the orator's always unblemished per-
sonal character and his charities.
There were several months during which an ailment of
the throat prevented Ingersoll from speaking in public .
Curiosity and interest in the South led me to an assembly
in Brooklyn met to welcome a Southern revivalist, -
Rev. Sam Jones, -who said in his address, "The only
way with infidels is to stop their talking ; a touch on the
throat of Ingersoll "-a burst of laughter from the
preachers present ended the sentence. It was something
like the scene in Lucian where the gods descend to attend
invisibly a debate on their own existence between two
Athenians. The atheist getting the better of the argu-
ment, the champion of the gods breaks out with personal
vituperation, much to the delight of Zeus, who says, " That
is the way ! when you try to argue you are dumb as a
fish ! "
There being no possibility of personal abuse in
Ingersoll's case, this revivalist suggests to Jupiter the
only method by which the great lawyer's arguments could
be met, - strangulation. But meanwhile Ingersoll in hisssibility of personal abuse in
Ingersoll's case, this revivalist suggests to Jupiter the
only method by which the great lawyer's arguments could
be met, - strangulation. But meanwhile Ingersoll in his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[Letter Jrom Robert G. Ingersoll]
/001
/Ctwoo

--- PAGE BREAK ---e
only method by which the great lawyer's arguments could
be met, - strangulation. But meanwhile Ingersoll in his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[Letter Jrom Robert G. Ingersoll]
/001
/Ctwoo

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INGERSOLL AND WHITMAN
23
enforced repose was preparing, and was presently deliver-
ing, lectures more formidable than ever .
I was somewhat amused by Mrs . Farrell, who in her
boundless devotion to her brother confided to me that she
had remarked that " every public speaker who had de-
famed Robert had somehow come to a bad end :"
No doubt
this lady, a very spirituelle and attractive freethinker, has
in her mind some chain of cause and effect in the pheno-
mena, - of which she mentioned several examples, - but
it recalled the widespread feeling of Thomas Paine's com-
rades, that his many escapes from imminent death were
somehow providential. But there is no doubt whatever
about the special providence that surrounded Ingersoll in
his own home. As at Harvard Divinity School we used
the title of Professor Andrews Norton's book and described
his daughters as the
11 Evidences of Christianity," the
happy faces of those lovely ladies, - wife, daughters, sister,
- and the domestic happiness of Ingersoll himself, were
widely felt as evidences of the benign influences of free-
thought . Indeed, it could not fail to be remarked in how
many tender and touching passages in his lectures were
reflected the family affections of this large-hearted orator .
On Ingersoll's last visit to Walt Whitman, - to whom
he was bountiful, -he said, "Walt, the mistake of your
life was that you did not marry. There ought to be a
woman here," he added, looking around at the poor cha-
otic room. (Ingersoll's address at the funeral of Walt
Whitman was the grandest and most impressive utterance
of that kind which I have ever heard .)
One very intimate in the family told me that whenever
one of them applied for money, Ingersoll never asked
how much, or what it was for, but pointed to a drawer
and said, 11 There it is ; help yourself."very intimate in the family told me that whenever
one of them applied for money, Ingersoll never asked
how much, or what it was for, but pointed to a drawer
and said, 11 There it is ; help yourself."

--- PAGE BREAK ---e family told me that whenever
one of them applied for money, Ingersoll never asked
how much, or what it was for, but pointed to a drawer
and said, 11 There it is ; help yourself."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24
MY PILGRIMAGE
I have gone far ahead of the year when I first talked
with Ingersoll in his own home . My call had no purpose
except to pay some homage to the ablest freethinker
America has produced . I remember nothing of our con-
versation except that he surprised me by his thorough
knowledge of Shakespeare. He interested me also by some
of his conjectures ; for instance, that the habit of closing
the eyes in prayer may have originated in prayers to the
dazzling sun .
I did not agree with some of Ingersoll's
opinions, but I had recognized the hatred swelling against
a man of genius, -more religious in my sense than the
old preacher, his father, - and I knew that he was leading
an insurrection of human hearts against the inhumanities
of the Bible and the cruelties of dogmatic propagandism.
I did not, however, then imagine it possible that orthodox
hatred could ever so override the old traditions of reli-
gious liberty in America as to compel Ingersoll to resign
the nomination as minister to Germany, conferred on him
by President Hayes .
At Washington I took a long look at the original
draft of the Declaration of Independence, and especially
noted the long black mark of Jefferson's pen cancelling
the paragraph denouncing negro slavery.
That mark,
dictated by South Carolina and Georgia, widened in less
than three generations into the vast battlefield where
from South Carolina was fired the first gun .
The chief
centre of that battlefield was the region of Virginia I was
about to visit. I found there that the people had no longer
any hatred of the North, and that the whites and blacks
were dwelling together peaceably and kindly . The plague
of lynching had not yet broken out even in the far South
(and indeed it has never ravaged Virginia) .
On my
two previous visits since the war its traces on the countryeaceably and kindly . The plague
of lynching had not yet broken out even in the far South
(and indeed it has never ravaged Virginia) .
On my
two previous visits since the war its traces on the country

--- PAGE BREAK ---. The plague
of lynching had not yet broken out even in the far South
(and indeed it has never ravaged Virginia) .
On my
two previous visits since the war its traces on the country

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VIRTUAL OUTLAWRY
25
were more visible than in 1883 ; the fields were now more
smiling. But somehow the desolation of the inhabitants
appeared greater .
Old age seemed to have overswiftly
come upon them. George Sand's grandmother, speaking
of her husband, twice her age, said he never got old. " In
those days French gentlemen never got old
; it was the
Revolution that brought old age into France ."
The personal events that strike deepest in a man work
out their effects slowly .
The tree whose root lightning
has touched may seem unscathed, but after some months
the foliage loses the old freshness, and in another season
it stands bare amid the flourishing grove .
The mysterious
and indefinable lightning that touched the innermost life
in me was the virtual outlawry I suffered in 1863 for hav-
ing proposed to abandon the war against the Confederates
on condition of a guaranteed emancipation of all their
slaves. There were just two voices that came to me from
America declaring that I was right, -that of my wife
and that of the Hon . Martin F . Conway, who had just
lost his seat in Congress for opposing the war in the in-
terest of justice to both black and white .
Those whose
friendship I valued much were not unfriendly .
L 0 We
know you are sincere and your heart right, but we have
a country now, we glory in the Union we once wished to
dissolve, we worship what we had burned, and we see
that you are following a delusion ! "
Such in substance
was what my old anti-slavery comrades said .
That I had
committed a mistake in supposing that they would not sup-
port a war merely for the sake of a political or territorial
Union it was easy to confess . For the sake of my family
I bent before the storm. But the work of the lurid flash
that came out of me could not be undone. I was driven
- yes, driven - by every force of mind and heart intoconfess . For the sake of my family
I bent before the storm. But the work of the lurid flash
that came out of me could not be undone. I was driven
- yes, driven - by every force of mind and heart into

--- PAGE BREAK ---ke of my family
I bent before the storm. But the work of the lurid flash
that came out of me could not be undone. I was driven
- yes, driven - by every force of mind and heart into

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26
MY PILGRIMAGE
myself .
I was compelled to the painful and humiliating
certainty that the whole world was wrong . My heart and
mind had no relation to a Union that required a half mil-
lion human sacrifices for its continuance .
My country
then was not of this world, nor yet of any heavenly world .
What then could I do but set me down in London and
from 11 the little chapel in my own mind " preach to the
large chapel of reasoning and humane men and women
who desired my ministry?
There little by little the hope - almost the faith -
grew that the peaceful and happy country was forming
on earth . But along with this came an awakened interest
in the Past, in the dreams that led the old voyagers, as
sung by Tennyson in 1° Ulysses," the colonists who built
up happy communities before the revolutionary demon
had taken possession of the world .
My own native State,
Virginia, was a land of old romances, one of which in-
spired me to imagine the tale which opens my Christmas
volume, 11A Necklace of Stories" (1880) . The tale entitled
"The Invisible Queen" relates to the lost Virginia col-
ony (1587-1591), and to Virginia Dare, the first English
child born in America (August 18, 1587) . Seven English
youths yachting in that region are led blindfold
by
merry Indian maidens from their yacht, The
Fancy,
to the interior of an island, -" Croatan," -and find
there an ideal city founded by Eleanor Dare and her
daughter Virginia, - the only persons (according to my
tale) preserved by the Indians when
they destroyed
the colony of 1589. 1
The letters C R 0 (supposed to
mean Croatan) carved on a post, had been the only sign
left in the perished English settlement nearly three hun-
t The coincidence of my plot and some details with Mr. Rider Haggard's
She (1886) is close enough to constitute one of the curiosities of literature
.the perished English settlement nearly three hun-
t The coincidence of my plot and some details with Mr. Rider Haggard's
She (1886) is close enough to constitute one of the curiosities of literature
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---settlement nearly three hun-
t The coincidence of my plot and some details with Mr. Rider Haggard's
She (1886) is close enough to constitute one of the curiosities of literature
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE ABBE'S DREAM
27
dred and fifty years before the seven youths were led to
the beautiful city of the same name .
They lived there
for a time in perfect happiness, but duties carried them
back. The years bring them family and fame, but in each
household, and each heart of wife and child, there is a
legend and dream of the happy island . And finally the
coast-steamer, The Iron City, starts out from Baltimore
with an English party - the seven and their wives and
children -to visit Croatan . For days they explore island
after island, but' the poor and ragged people on them
never heard of any Croatan and say there have been no
Indians in that region for a hundred years .
Some excursionists in the Yellowstone Park remarked
a Catholic abbe who was an indefatigable sight-seer,
and attracted every one by his sociability and intelligence .
Sir Norman Lockyer, I think, was along, and expressed
his pleasure at meeting an abbe so observant and joy-
ous. The Catholic confided to him a curious dream ; he
had died, and found himself at the gate of heaven
; when
about to ask admission the sad reflection came to him
that he had hardly seen anything of the country in which
he had been living. The thought awakened him, and he
at once packed his trunk.
My own reflection, on the eve of visiting other hemi-
spheres, was that even naturally observant eyes can see
in youth but little of what is around them, because they
are set to study dead languages and nations, and set to
dreaming of the gates of Heaven . When I
first met
Sir Charles Lyell and said something about coming to
see the Old World, he said it might yet be shown that
America is the oldest world . He meant geologically, but
in after years, reading traditions of the Vikings and Vin-
land, and the letters of Columbus, I queried whethersaid it might yet be shown that
America is the oldest world . He meant geologically, but
in after years, reading traditions of the Vikings and Vin-
land, and the letters of Columbus, I queried whether

--- PAGE BREAK ---shown that
America is the oldest world . He meant geologically, but
in after years, reading traditions of the Vikings and Vin-
land, and the letters of Columbus, I queried whether

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28
MY PILGRIMAGE
Eden, so far as actual, was not veritably in my native
region where my tale had fixed the Indian Utopia.. For
Eden is where love and innocency and peace are
. The
natives whom Columbus found were, as he wrote, " a lov-
ing uncovetous people, so docile in all things that I as-
sure your Highness that I believe in all the world there
is not a better people or a better country
; they love their
neighbours as themselves, and they have the sweetest and
gentlest way of talking in the world, and always with a
smile." This in Hispaniola . At San Salvador " they had
much friendship for us," " they neither carried arms nor
understood such things," " they are of good understand-
ing." At the Rio de Mares the houses " made of palm
branches were very beautiful," " and within were very
clean, and their fittings in good taste." Elsewhere -
G° These Indians are very gentle, without knowing what
evil is, neither killing nor stealing."
" I believe," writes Columbus again, " they would eas-
ily be converted to Christianity, for it appeared to me
they had no creed." But, alas, Columbus had no idea of
judging trees by their moral fruits . He was seeking the
enchanted land of Prester John -Presbyter John, i . e .
aged John, tarrying till the Lord come, in a palace of un-
imaginable splendour . Some mediaeval wag had hoaxed
the world with a letter to the Pope signed by this fictitious
John describing his throne of diamonds in the land of gold,
surrounded by mirrors, in which he could see what was
being done in every part of the globe .
This letter was
taken seriously, and to the mythical monarch Columbus ac-
tually brought a letter of introduction penned by the hand
of Queen Isabella . The name of Prester John had disap-
peared before the title Hombre de tamano, "the great
man," which survives in the St . Tammany of New York.er of introduction penned by the hand
of Queen Isabella . The name of Prester John had disap-
peared before the title Hombre de tamano, "the great
man," which survives in the St . Tammany of New York.

--- PAGE BREAK ---enned by the hand
of Queen Isabella . The name of Prester John had disap-
peared before the title Hombre de tamano, "the great
man," which survives in the St . Tammany of New York.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE FIRST CHURCH
IN AMERICA
29
This St. Tammany, on whom had so strangely fallen
the mantle of the beloved disciple, was as an individual
fabulous, but he was the typical representative of all that
gentleness and humanity of the races which were found
not only by Columbus but by the first settlers of Vir-
ginia. The tragedies which Columbus initiated in the
Southern islands, by turning the gentle natives into gold
by enslaving them under the pretext of making them
Christians, bad spread terror all along the coast, and to
that inhumanity were due the tragical events which oc-
curred in this same Virginia neighbourhood where these
notes were made .
I am convinced that Maryland was named after the
mother of Jesus by the Spaniards who first discovered
the Chesapeake and named it the Bay of Santa Maria
;
and that Virginia was not named after the
'virgin'
Queen Elizabeth, but for the Virgin Mary .
The first
church built in our country was " the log chapel on the
Rappahannock," about 1572 . The Indian name for Vir-
ginia was lacan, and the chapel was dedicated to " La
Madre de Dios de lacan ."
It may have stood where our
little town of Falmouth now stands, for Father Segura
and his little company of priests and five native converts
journeyed up the Rappahannock to a village, and prob-
ably the largest on the river was near the falls.
One of
the " converts," a brother of the king of Iacan, christened
Don Luis de Velasco, had been carried off years before
to Spain (1566). It looks as if this conversion had been
under coercion, for soon after his return as a missionary
Don Luis resumed his aboriginal character : the entire
mission was exterminated, - in Catholic tradition massa-
cred, - except one native (Cuban) convert, christened
Alphonsus, on whose evidence eight of the Iacans weres aboriginal character : the entire
mission was exterminated, - in Catholic tradition massa-
cred, - except one native (Cuban) convert, christened
Alphonsus, on whose evidence eight of the Iacans were

--- PAGE BREAK ---er : the entire
mission was exterminated, - in Catholic tradition massa-
cred, - except one native (Cuban) convert, christened
Alphonsus, on whose evidence eight of the Iacans were

--- PAGE BREAK ---

30
MY PILGRIMAGE
banged by Menendez to the yardarm some years later. It
is said that there still exists in some sacristy in Havana
the cross which alone was saved from the log chapel .
In the more cruel time of Anglo-Saxon colonization in
Virginia the only living Madonna was the Indian princess
called Pokahuntas, who repeatedly rescued the whites from
the retribution richly deserved . One of my uncles, John
Moncure of Carmora, named a son Powhatan, and wished
to name a daughter Pokahuntas, - this not being done
because the name was found to be an epithet invented by
the whites, the real name being Amonate . I tried to track
this exquisite lady in all of the records of the time and
gradually reached the painful and humiliating conclusion
that she was not the exceptional personage she was gener-
ally supposed to be, but the fair type of a gentle and
intelligent as well as comely and shapely race . The people
found by Columbus in Cuba and by Menendez in Florida
and elsewhere were similarly kind and attractive. These
happy and hospitable peoples have been steadily destroyed
by our white race, which now judges the American abori-
gines by the red man of to-day . But this contemporary
red man is not the creation of nature but of the Anglo-
Saxon and the Spaniard, who by their massacres left the
only survivor in this silent, grim, irreconcilable figure
.
He is the monument of the innumerable tribes that have
perished, but who might have contributed to our English
blood an element of geniality and unselfishness which
would have made the American something better than a
reproduction of the Englishman . As it is, we are like
our fathers, going through the world turning once happy
islands and coasts into cemeteries and calling it civiliza-
tion and christianization .
My pilgrimages in Virginia were to historic spots inike
our fathers, going through the world turning once happy
islands and coasts into cemeteries and calling it civiliza-
tion and christianization .
My pilgrimages in Virginia were to historic spots in

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng through the world turning once happy
islands and coasts into cemeteries and calling it civiliza-
tion and christianization .
My pilgrimages in Virginia were to historic spots in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"THE SENTRY BOX"
31
which I had taken little interest in boyhood and after-
wards was too deeply in the current of affairs to think of,
until now turned fifty. I strolled over the farm associated
with legends of Washington's childhood, which really re-
port with more veracity the childhood of his country .
I
visited the old homestead Chatham, so named by Wash-
ington's friend William Fitzhugh in honour of the earl
who bad so eloquently defended the rights of the Ameri-
cans. Kenmore, where Colonel Fielding Lewis
lived,
his wife being Washington's sister, and the home near
by where Washington's mother dwelt in her last years,
were in fair condition, but the beautiful foliage in which
they were embowered had largely disappeared .
The
monument to Washington's mother was still the pictur-
esque feature of the neighbourhood, and in my eyes the
more worthy of preservation because it was scarred all
over by the shot and shell which had raged around it near
ninety years after the old lady's body was there laid .
A house in Fredericksburg gained during the Revolu-
tion the name " The Sentry Box ." It was the residence
of General Weedon who distinguished himself in the bat-
tle of Trenton, and was left by Washington in charge of
the Hessians. He was not therefore in the struggle that
ensued at Princeton, where his brother-in-law, General
Hugh Mercer, fell . For a good many years after the war
was over the officers of this region, including General
Washington, used to enjoy a Christmas Night revel in
General Weedon's " Sentry Box." They used to dress up
two little negroes as sergeants on guard at the door, and
the colored waiters were in uniform . Judge Beverly R.
Wellford, belonging to a historic family of Fredericks-
burg, gave me the song - probably composed by Weedon
- which was always sung by these old comrades .waiters were in uniform . Judge Beverly R.
Wellford, belonging to a historic family of Fredericks-
burg, gave me the song - probably composed by Weedon
- which was always sung by these old comrades .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

32
MY PILGRIMAGE
On Christmas Day in Seventy-six
Our ragged troops with bay'nets fiat
For Trenton marched away ;
The Delaware ice, the boats below,
The light obscured by hail and snow,
But no sign of dismay.
Our object was the Hessian band
That dare invade fair Freedom's land
And quarter in that place :
Great Washington, be led us on
With ensigns streaming with renown,
Which ne'er had known disgrace .
In silent march we spend the night,
Each soldier panting for the fight,
Though quite benumbed with frost :
Greene on the left at six began,
The right was with brave Sullivan,
Who in battle no time lost .
Their pickets stormed, the alarm was spread
That rebels risen from the dead
Were marching into town ;
Some scampered here, some scampered there,
And some for action did prepare -
But soon their arms laid down .
Twelve hundred servile miscreants
With all their colours, guns, and tents
Were trophies of the day :
The frolic o'er, the bright canteen
In centre, front, and rear was seen,
Driving fatigue away.
And, brothers of the cause ! let's sing
Our safe deliverance from a King
Who strove to extend his sway ;

--- PAGE BREAK ---e bright canteen
In centre, front, and rear was seen,
Driving fatigue away.
And, brothers of the cause ! let's sing
Our safe deliverance from a King
Who strove to extend his sway ;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MARY WASHINGTON
33
And life you know is but a span,
Let's touch the tankard while we can
In memory of the Day ! 1
Ab, how small appears that once grand 11 Sentry Box!"
How strange in the distance appears to me that school-
boy bearing my name who once strolled with awe along
this pretty riverside street and dreamed of the giants that
peopled Fredericksburg in Seventy-six !
My brother Richard, a diligent collector of Virginia
traditions and documents, gave me a letter of
Mary
Washington to her son John Augustine Washington in
Westmoreland, Virginia, undated but evidently written
during the Revolution, in which she says : 11 I am a going
fast, and it, the time, is hard. I am borrowing a little
Cornn - no Cornn in the Cornn house . I never lived soe
poore in my life . Was it not for Mr . French and your
sister Lewis I should be almost starved, but I am like an
old almanack quite out of date . Give my love to Mrs .
Washington-all the family.
I am dear Johnne your
loving and affectionate Mother." Apart from this note
there were traditions which convinced my brother that
during that war Washington's mother was what was then
called a "Tory," and had no sympathy with the cause
for which her famous son was contending .
Out there be-
side her monument I pondered the matter, and also re-
membered certain things that I had heard from venerable
friends and relatives concerning excellent Virginians who
had suffered because they would not fight against the Brit-
ish crown, which as official men they had sworn to support .
1 1905. If the shades of these merry comrades could revisit the earth,
they would wonder at Washington City, and most of all perhaps at seeing
there a statue of the man really guilty of the Hessian invasion, the only
monarch who to the last refused to recognize American Independence, -
Frederick the Great., and most of all perhaps at seeing
there a statue of the man really guilty of the Hessian invasion, the only
monarch who to the last refused to recognize American Independence, -
Frederick the Great.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

34
MY PILGRIMAGE
I did not at that time know much of the seamy side of the
American Revolution, but I knew enough of the mean-
nesses and injustices, as well as of the horrors of war, to
conceive a misgiving concerning the heroics which in most
minds supplied the place of exact knowledge about that
struggle . It brought not only to Washington's mother
but to many of the best families just such distress as the
Union war brought, - a distress
. to the conquerors and
conquered alike .
And the two wars were branches of the same poison-
ous tree . What was it that in 1776 enabled two col-
onies-South Carolina and Georgia-to set aside the
anti-slavery feeling of eleven colonies, and compel Jeffer-
son to cancel the denunciation of slavery in the Declara-
tion of Independence ? War. It was necessary for victory
that the colonies should be united ; as Franklin said, " We
must all hang together or all bang separately ." It was
equally necessary after the victory that a union of all the
colonies should be formed to prevent defeated and hu-
miliated England from reconquering them singly, and the
compulsory cancelling mark reappeared in the concessions
to slavery in the Constitution . It was that black mark
persistent in the war between North and South which
slew half a million .
But little is told by the mere figures . The uniforms
hid individual hearts and minds, and those who survive
can never be the same . The moral and psychological
effects of a war are immeasurable, and no one escapes
them, not even those unborn when the visible war oc-
curred. I was three thousand miles away from the Union
War, in a beautiful English homestead, when a stroke
came from across the sea which not only at once changed
my whole outer life but ultimately my inner vision .ree thousand miles away from the Union
War, in a beautiful English homestead, when a stroke
came from across the sea which not only at once changed
my whole outer life but ultimately my inner vision .

--- PAGE BREAK ---way from the Union
War, in a beautiful English homestead, when a stroke
came from across the sea which not only at once changed
my whole outer life but ultimately my inner vision .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AN OMNIPOTENT WILL
35
The old people in Virginia were kneeling, and some
heads prematurely grey were bent to the God of their
fathers. Some humiliation of defeat was in their hearts,
-perhaps in those who had been soldiers of the Confeder-
acy some bitterness,- so that I had to use tact in speaking
of the past . Were they kneeling to exactly the same God
whom they had invoked during the war? How few are
they who in using the word
" God " realize that in that
collectivist term are included many various and some con-
trarious ideals . The only point in which they unite is
an omnipotent Will. Among the papers of Abraham
Lincoln was found this note written in September, 1862,
a fearful moment of the war : -
The will of God prevails .
In great contests each party
claims to act in accordance with the will of God .
Both
may be, and one must be, wrong . God cannot be for and
against the same thing at the same time . In the present
civil war it is quite possible that God's purpose is some-
thing different from the purpose of either party, and yet
[that] the human instrumentalities, working just as they
do, are of the best adaptation to effect his purpose .
I am
almost ready to say that this is probably true ; that God
wills this contest, and wills that it shall not end yet . By
his mere great power on the minds of the now contestants
he could have either saved or destroyed the Union without
a human contest. Yet the contest began .
And having
begun, he could give the final victory to either side any
day. Yet the contest proceeds .
Even the historian Froude, in his rectorial address at
St. Andrews used the phrase " God of Battles ." In that
form the biblical
11 God of Hosts" (that is, the stars of
heaven) is anglicized into a terrestrial war-god who makes
virtual atheism the only hope of peace on earth .
Well, the corn was waving luxuriantly on the Virginia
battlefields, the people were bravely endeavouring tocized into a terrestrial war-god who makes
virtual atheism the only hope of peace on earth .
Well, the corn was waving luxuriantly on the Virginia
battlefields, the people were bravely endeavouring to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36
MY PILGRIMAGE'
repair their losses ; the negroes gave me good reports of
their condition ; and my own reception and welcome in
the old home helped no doubt to incline me towards the
optimistic view . It was a pure happiness to meet again
my parents, and to find in them no distress about my
heresies ; they were even reading my " Sacred Anthology"
with satisfaction. In the old Methodist church I saw the
silken white head of my father bent in prayer -in which
I was surely thought of - and when next day the hour of
my departure came he had disappeared .
Courageous in
everything else, he could not face the parting with one he
loved. I never saw him again .

--- PAGE BREAK ---ht of - and when next day the hour of
my departure came he had disappeared .
Courageous in
everything else, he could not face the parting with one he
loved. I never saw him again .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER II
A witch hunt at Washington -Yellow Springs, Ohio - Cincinnati -
Judge Hoadly -Journey to Salt Lake City -John W. Young- Mor-
monism and human nature - Elder Penrose as a preacher - Mormon
wives and Mormon husbands-The fate of repudiated wives.
A
T Washington I had a strange witch hunt !
James
Parker, once the body-servant of my father, -to
remain with whom he had actually fled from freedom with
the Northern troops to the Confederate lines, -had set-
tled with his family in Washington .
He had a beautiful
mulatto daughter who was employed by the wife of
a
high government official as her maid, but shortly before my
arrival the girl (about nineteen) began to waste away .
Her mistress was much attached to her, and the best
physicians were consulted, but none could explain the ail-
ment that was apparently carrying her to the grave .
When I called on her she barely raised her head, saying,
1° I am sorry for you to see me in this condition ." My
effort to get from her some explanation was fruitless .
When I asked her if she was in love she shook her head,
and it was the same when I suggested religious trouble .
But I saw that the ailment was mental, and on question-
ing her father closely he admitted, with some shame, that
his daughter once said to him that she feared she was be-
witched. With that clue I consulted her employer, and a
searching investigation revealed a strange situation .
The
black cook, having become jealous of their mistress's devo-
tion to the mulatto maid, determined to frighten her away .
Knowing that the girl was sensitive and imaginative, she

--- PAGE BREAK ---The
black cook, having become jealous of their mistress's devo-
tion to the mulatto maid, determined to frighten her away .
Knowing that the girl was sensitive and imaginative, she

--- PAGE BREAK ---

38
MY PILGRIMAGE
sought to make her believe herself bewitched, and one
morning the maid in making up her bed found beneath
the mattress at each corner some bags of powdered glass,
with scrawled letters and figures . The cook bad kept her
face of kindness, and on seeing the charms affected pity
and said their fatal influence could not be escaped but by
flight . The poor maid was ashamed to tell her mistress,
and could not bear to leave her, and was gradually pros-
trated by terror . The cook being at once dismissed, the
girl was soothed and restored by the affection of her mis-
tress, and all went well .
This family was one that I had settled at Yellow
Springs, Ohio, in 1862. My dear friend, Mrs . Julia Law-
rence, who resided there, had long seen after them for me,
and when I met her on my westward journey, reported
that though many had settled in other towns, those who
remained were doing well .
In Cincinnati there was excitement about an approach-
ing gubernatorial election . The quietest place I found
there was the home of the Democratic candidate, Judge
Hoadly, whose guest I was during my stay . His residence
(on Walnut Hills) had shortly before been struck by
lightning, which had penetrated solely to the drawing-
room, which contained admirable works by Turner, Corot,
Courbet, Frere, and others, but the thunderbolt had so
well conducted itself that nothing whatever was touched
except the gilded cornice, which was changed to a sort of
gilt-toothed comb. This heavenly decoration had been
preserved . In 1857 Hoadly had left his party and coop-
erated with the Republicans against slavery
; that issue
settled, the Democrats had now summoned him to be their
leader. Hoadly was elected, and it was under his admir-
able administration that the Cincinnati jail was success-s against slavery
; that issue
settled, the Democrats had now summoned him to be their
leader. Hoadly was elected, and it was under his admir-
able administration that the Cincinnati jail was success-

--- PAGE BREAK ---that issue
settled, the Democrats had now summoned him to be their
leader. Hoadly was elected, and it was under his admir-
able administration that the Cincinnati jail was success-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JUDGE HOADLY
39
fully defended against a mob of lynchers, which endeav-
oured to seize and murder a negro youth awaiting trial
for murder .
I had some fear of my dear and intimate friend Judge
Hoadly entering upon a political career. As a judge he
had shown such ability that he really belonged to the
United States Supreme Court. But the Democrats had
need of him ; they had votes enough to elect their candi-
date if they could find an eminent leader, but nothing
succeeds like success, and although the Republican party
bad lost many virtues it had never parted from that of
success. Hoadly was a Democrat on philosophical princi-
ples ; he believed in the Declaration of Independence, and
was such a Jeffersonian that when I asked permission to
dedicate to him my °° Life of Paine," whom he placed next
to Jefferson, he consented, but with some anxiety lest I
should repeat the exposure of Jefferson's duplicity given
in my work on Edmund Randolph .
I made the most of this opportunity to obtain light on
the subjects I had dealt with in my little book " Republi-
can Superstitions." Judge Hoadly inclined to think that
Paine, Franklin, and Jefferson were mistaken in oppos-
ing bicameralism in Congress. The Union being by the
judge's theory a federation of nations, they needed a
federal assembly in addition to a popular one, but he did
not deny the anomaly I pointed out, that the Senate -
the House of these Nations (States) - should have a
power over the purse of the people unknown to the House
of Lords. Though an advocate of free-trade, always pre-
vented by the Senate, the judge considered the chief
defect of the Constitution to be in the words of its pre-
amble - G° general welfare ." In urging Congress and the
President to eradicate slavery when it was trying to, the judge considered the chief
defect of the Constitution to be in the words of its pre-
amble - G° general welfare ." In urging Congress and the
President to eradicate slavery when it was trying to

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed the chief
defect of the Constitution to be in the words of its pre-
amble - G° general welfare ." In urging Congress and the
President to eradicate slavery when it was trying to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

40
MY PILGRIMAGE
destroy the Union, on the ground that the Constitution
ordered them to " provide for the general welfare," few
of us reflected that the phrase was double-edged and
might be used to interfere with local self-government in
the future or even with any individual liberty which a
perhaps momentary majority of congressmen considered
detrimental to the "general welfare ." When I quoted this
clause in England, as justiflying some policy of Congress,
an able writer in the "Pall Mall Gazette," evidently a
learned jurist, answered that the phrase was meant to ex-
clude the federal government from interfering with state
or municipal interests and to restrict it to the general
(e. g. foreign or territorial) interests as distinguished from
those of the States . This reply led me to examine the
debates of the Constitutional Convention of 1787, but I
was unable to discover that the phrase "general welfare "
was discussed at all or introduced in that convention .
The steady encroachment of the federal government
on personal liberty and on religious equality is traceable
in the treatment of the Mormons . The persecutions origi-
nally left to mobs were adopted and systematized by our
"general welfare" rulers at Washington . Although poly-
gamy appeared to me as the outcome of an extreme bibli-
cal letter-worship, I had long recognized, with some of the
ablest men I knew in London, that the congressional per-
secution of the Mormon Church was an unconstitutional
policy animated by an immoral spirit under the mask of
morality . The law against polygamy had been worded so
that a man might maintain as many women as he pleased
provided they were not conceded the dignity and legal
protection of " wives ."
I looked forward with dread to the five days and nights
by railway needed to reach Salt Lake City, but it washe pleased
provided they were not conceded the dignity and legal
protection of " wives ."
I looked forward with dread to the five days and nights
by railway needed to reach Salt Lake City, but it was

--- PAGE BREAK ---they were not conceded the dignity and legal
protection of " wives ."
I looked forward with dread to the five days and nights
by railway needed to reach Salt Lake City, but it was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JOHN W. YOUNG
41
travelling in a fine hotel, and I never had a pleasanter
journey. This was partly due to a fellow traveller, John
W. Young, son of the famous President Brigham Young .
John W . Young was an affable man, with the intelli-
gence derived from the university of life and experience .
There was some sternness about his mouth, but his eye
was genial. I told him that I should probably use pub-
licly my conversations with him . He held in his hand a
book on Mormons by Philip Robinson, and also the state-
ments of Judge Jeremiah Black. I freely agreed with him
that there was much in human nature that accorded with
polygamy and which had a disastrous development in
great cities .
The evolution of man, in conquering the
lands and seas of the world, his life in camps and ports,
had tended to make him a natural polygamist . Mr. Young
said, "You can't go contrary to man's nature ." "But,"
I answered, " man's nature is only half the human nature
in the world ; there is the nature of woman, whom all the
conditions of life have tended to make monogamist . Cir-
cumstances in some regions have developed other instincts
in woman, as in the swarming Asiatic populations, where
she finds no career or even support but in marriage, and
where the excessive number of women made polygamy a
natural, even inevitable, social economy ; but these condi-
tions do not exist in the West, where the economic advan-
tages to her of monogamy have developed a corresponding
instinct." Mr. Young said, " Woman is necessarily the
inferior of man . There are religious reasons why she
should be the one to surrender her feelings in that respect ."
"But was it not found among you that the romance of life
and the charm of the relation between man and maid were
diminished by this plurality of wives?" He said, "Court-
ship went on among us the same as elsewhere. I believeong you that the romance of life
and the charm of the relation between man and maid were
diminished by this plurality of wives?" He said, "Court-
ship went on among us the same as elsewhere. I believe

--- PAGE BREAK ---ance of life
and the charm of the relation between man and maid were
diminished by this plurality of wives?" He said, "Court-
ship went on among us the same as elsewhere. I believe

--- PAGE BREAK ---

49.
MY PILGRIMAGE
in love but not infatuation . Whatever woman may sup-
pose she loses by being one among other wives is compen-
sated in a greater devotion to her children, for in our
system the maternal feelings are regarded as supreme
those feelings are very early developed, and form the chief
earthly happiness of women. They also increase the affec-
tion of man, who cannot fail to feel a deep tenderness for
the mother of his children . It must be remembered that
in our faith this feeling concerning the production of the
race is a profoundly religious feeling, and brings a happi-
ness not realized where the relations are merely worldly ."
I asked him whether, in the growth of society in Utah, it
was not found that there were not enough wives for all ;
and was not this to some extent a reason for the hostility
of the " Gentiles ." He replied, " The men who settle in
this region are largely adventurers ; they do not wish to
settle down in permanent homes ; they no doubt desire
our women, but they are not generally of the marrying
kind." He dwelt largely upon the good order and free-
dom from crime which had always marked their settle-
ment, even though many outsiders had come among them .
Entering Salt Lake City on a beautiful summer day, I
could realize how its site had appeared to the first Mor-
mon pilgrims a land of Beulah . Even before cultivation it
blossomed like a rose amid the mountains . William Godbe,
whom I had met in London, and his wife had invited me
to be their guest, and arranged a Sunday afternoon lec-
ture for me in the Opera House . I found the Mormons
were by no means the vulgar people some supposed them,
nor the puritanical sectarians I had imagined them, but
the Salt Lake aristocracy . In driving about the neighbour-
hood I met a company of young ladies with fine horses
and fashionable riding-habits : all Mormons. At the bath-ans I had imagined them, but
the Salt Lake aristocracy . In driving about the neighbour-
hood I met a company of young ladies with fine horses
and fashionable riding-habits : all Mormons. At the bath-

--- PAGE BREAK ---hem, but
the Salt Lake aristocracy . In driving about the neighbour-
hood I met a company of young ladies with fine horses
and fashionable riding-habits : all Mormons. At the bath-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A MORMON SERMON
43
ing beach many merry ladies in gay costumes were swim-
ing : nearly all Mormons. In the Opera House Ada Rehan
delighted a large audience by her acting in " Article 47,"
and I remarked the beauty and elegance of the young
ladies : mostly Mormons . My lecture in the same house
was attended by a fine audience, two thirds being Mormon
families, quite as well dressed and intelligent as the fami-
lies of other regions .
On Sunday morning in the finely festooned Tabernacle
the crowd, more than ten thousand, was made up of people
gathered from many lands, and some of the devout ap-
peared more rustic than those seen in the theatre .
But
here I remarked an old-fashioned simplicity somewhat like
that of Methodist meetings in the South .
It was very hot,
and occasionally during the sermon some one would go for
a drink to one of the water buckets provided at each door .
The scene was unique . There was an organ, stringed in-
struments, and admirable choir ; but in two hymns the
multitude joined, and the fervent singing of so many
voices was as impressive as the refrain of the people re-
sponding to the choir in St . Peter's at Rome .
The air was
cooled by a large fountain playing in the centre of the
building.
And what shall I say of the sermon ?
It was given by
Elder Penrose, editor of the °° Deseret News ."
He stands
in my memory as a rather tall and lank figure, with small
bead and well-chiselled features, a large grey eye, and a
voice of wonderful flexibility-even his low tones reaching
me distinctly in the middle of the Coliseum-like edifice .
He took no text and spoke without notes, without hesita-
tion, and with little gesture except in a few dramatic
passages. I was astonished by the ability of the sermon,
which lasted an hour and was listened to with that deepe without notes, without hesita-
tion, and with little gesture except in a few dramatic
passages. I was astonished by the ability of the sermon,
which lasted an hour and was listened to with that deep

--- PAGE BREAK ---hout hesita-
tion, and with little gesture except in a few dramatic
passages. I was astonished by the ability of the sermon,
which lasted an hour and was listened to with that deep

--- PAGE BREAK ---

44
MY PILGRIMAGE
attention which was so impressive in Plymouth Church
when Beecher preached . I doubt not that if this Mormon
preacher had been a Congregationalist he would have had
national distinction. He was, however, in his Tabernacle
freer than Beecher in Plymouth Church, having no com-
punction in occasionally (though rarely) raising the loud
laughter that Beecher generally reserved for the lecture
hall. It was a complete doctrinal discourse . After a care-
ful account of the patriarchs and their wives, he quoted
the promise of Jesus that "many shall come from the
east and the west, and shall sit down with Abraham and
Isaac and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven ." After this
he looked on us for a moment with solemn silence, then
lifting his hand with an aspect of despair, expressed his
sympathy for the immaculate "gentiles " of Salt Lake ;
"for," he said, "if Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are in
heaven their wives must be there too ; and of course these
sinless men who declare themselves so much holier than
we will not for a moment remain in any kingdom of
heaven where Abraham is seen along with both Sarah
and Keturah, his wives." The Elder then on the wide
platform gave a little step or two off, indicating the op-
ponents of polygamy rushing off in horror from the patri-
archs with whom Jesus said his disciples would sit . There
was no extravagance in this or the Elder's other little dra-
mas, resorted to only for satirical purposes. His hour was
occupied mainly with a vigorous lawyer-like argument
for his system. From my point of view his defence, so
far as it was biblical, was unanswerable . I was not sur-
prised by observing in the pew next in front of me a ma-
tronly lady, apparently English, with her three youthful
daughters, becoming nervous as quotation after quotation
from the Bible was set forth . The girls listened with in-w next in front of me a ma-
tronly lady, apparently English, with her three youthful
daughters, becoming nervous as quotation after quotation
from the Bible was set forth . The girls listened with in-

--- PAGE BREAK ---e a ma-
tronly lady, apparently English, with her three youthful
daughters, becoming nervous as quotation after quotation
from the Bible was set forth . The girls listened with in-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONFERENCE WITH MORMONS
45
tense interest ; the mother grew fidgety and whispered to
them, perhaps a proposition to leave ; the breathless still-
ness of the audience would have made flight a disturbance,
and the matron contented herself with fanning vigorously
her flushed face .
That same evening I met in Mr . Godbe's house a large
company of Mormons, invited in my behalf . There was
among them only one " gentile " besides myself - the
witty and beautiful wife of a general at the neighbouring
Camp Douglas . I was acquainted with some of her rela-
tives, and was much pleased to hear her experiences and
impressions at Salt Lake City. Though reared in ortho-
doxy, she told me that in arguing with Mormons she had
long ago ceased to quote Scripture . " If I appeal to the
Bible I am lost ."
Those who gathered in the conference were Mormons
friendly to some kind of reform, and known as " Godbe-
ites." I gave them to understand that my chief interest
lay in their experiences, in the doctrines that had led them
into that religion, and the degree of spiritual satisfaction
they had found in it . They were intelligent people of some
education ; they were not
°G cranks," and every speaker
had to be taken seriously. In one thing they all agreed,
namely, that the outer world was mistaken in supposing
that any individual was attracted to a Mormon church by
sensuality. It was rather the ascetic who left the sensual-
ism of great cities and undertook the burden of supporting
a number of wives and their always different residences.
They had one and all been attracted by the patriarchal
idea, combined with the early Christian communism ; and
although each person who spoke realized that the political
situation in Utah demanded an adaptation of the system
to a new order, and the relinquishment of polygamy, theirly Christian communism ; and
although each person who spoke realized that the political
situation in Utah demanded an adaptation of the system
to a new order, and the relinquishment of polygamy, their

--- PAGE BREAK ---

46
MY PILGRIMAGE
inner spiritual experiences were not very unlike those I
remembered in Methodist class meetings .
Some of the personal narratives were of thrilling inter-
est, and if America could produce a George Sand, Salt
Lake would become a classic land of romance . Some of
these men and women had come from remote parts of the
world where they had suffered poverty and been brought
up in ignorance ; they had listened to the tale of some way-
side missionary concerning the far land flowing with milk
and honey, temporal and spiritual ; they bad journeyed as
poor pilgrims, working their way on boats, climbing moun-
tains, and here had secured comfortable livelihood and
education such as would have been impossible in their
native countries .
I called by request on an intelligent and handsome
woman who had been one of several plural wives from
whom a well-to-do Mormon had parted in obedience to the
law. She was residing alone in a pleasant home, and told
me that nothing could exceed the vigilance and kindness
with which her former husband and the one wife remain-
ing to him, and to whom he was perfectly loyal, supported
her and the two other wives from whom he had separated.
She suffered no disrespect in the community . I have often
thought of this happy woman in later years while remark-
ing the little consideration given by Americans in their
rage against polygamy to the fate of repudiated wives .
A story is told of an American missionary on a savage
island who managed to make one convert but refused
to baptize him because he had four wives . But one day
the convert came and said be had now but one wife .
" What has become of the others ? " asked the missionary .
"I ate them," said the convert .

--- PAGE BREAK ---ause he had four wives . But one day
the convert came and said be had now but one wife .
" What has become of the others ? " asked the missionary .
"I ate them," said the convert .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER III
San Francisco - Red Cross Knights - Chinese Joss and theatre - Voy-
aging southward - Flying fish and sunfish - Delia Bacon - Shake-
speare-Baconism - Honolulu Sabbath - Captain Cook - Legends -
Pele-Jehovah-Rev. Titus Coan- Samoans - Phenomena- New Zea-
land-Dr. Richard Garnett-Pearl-divers -Our floating Utopia.
S
AN FRANCISCO blossomed with banners . Five thou-
sand Knights Templars were holding their "Great Tri-
ennial" there ; the Palace Hotel was sadly congested, and
the whole city swarmed with men masquerading in badges,
emblems, sashes, swords, and proudly bearing their cross .
When one looks back upon the ages when the Knight
Templar was a real figure, and every sword of his frater-
nity stained with the blood that made the Red Cross, it
seemed a strange thing to find them in the far west become
pageantry . There are penalties on taking a thing out of
its historic habitat . Here was the cross, radiant on caps
that called for bells, not only decorating Joss houses, but
vile dens, even labelling the whiskey bottles.
In the Chinese temple was a figure of the Joss, in which
I recognized a degradation of Buddha .
On his altar was a
dish containing vari-coloured candies . The Chinese idled
around without reverence or solemnity .
One told me that
it was a three-day festival or mission . At the end of three
days I went that way in the evening, and at midnight
witnessed a strange procession. The street for two hun-
dred yards was fringed with fire from little bundles of tow,
at which hundreds of Chinese were lighting candles, much
in the same way as at the festival of torches (Moccoli),

--- PAGE BREAK ---hun-
dred yards was fringed with fire from little bundles of tow,
at which hundreds of Chinese were lighting candles, much
in the same way as at the festival of torches (Moccoli),

--- PAGE BREAK ---

48
MY PILGRIMAGE
which closes the Carnival at Rome . Between these multi-
tudes marched the procession, with mechanical noises
meant for music. Midway in the procession were six or
seven priests in red garb, and behind these, uplifted on
the shoulders of four men, was the Joss, a variegated
dummy with uplifted arms which startled me . It was like
some mockery of the Pope borne in on shoulders to bless
'
the crowd on New Year's Day.
I found the Chinese theatre interesting . An attentive
Chinaman sat in my box and undertook to explain to me
the plot . The interest of this was that the hero and his
wife, pursued by enemies, find that they cannot both be
saved ; he prepares to die, but she seizes his sword and
kills herself. But he, still pursued, cannot be saved except
by touching the altar of the Joss. In order, however, to
seek that asylum he must needs become a priest ; but by
becoming a priest he divorces himself from his other wife,
who is a sister of the Emperor. This highly decorated wife
enters the temple and finds her husband beside the altar,
turned priest. With loud lamentations she tries to drag
him from the altar. Failing that, she tries cajolery, and
we witnessed the fascinations of a Chinawoman trying to
captivate her lord. My Chinaman again explains : "She
velly sorry. She will have him back. She have no priest .
She cry good deal ." She did cry a good deal, but while
the two were talking the curtain came down, and I under-
stood that the conclusion would come next evening . At
any rate, I know not to this day whether the heroine coaxed
her lord back or not, or whether he was slain by his pur-
suers. But it was an ancient story, and in it were the
ideas of asylum and of priestly celibacy.
San Francisco struck me as cosmopolitan, occupying a
place similar to that of ancient Venice . Along its streetst it was an ancient story, and in it were the
ideas of asylum and of priestly celibacy.
San Francisco struck me as cosmopolitan, occupying a
place similar to that of ancient Venice . Along its streets

--- PAGE BREAK ---story, and in it were the
ideas of asylum and of priestly celibacy.
San Francisco struck me as cosmopolitan, occupying a
place similar to that of ancient Venice . Along its streets

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SAN FRANCISCO
49
were costumes and complexions of various tribes, appar-
ently exciting no attention . There was also cosmopolitan-
ism in the absence of any blase air in those I met,-
refined and educated people. They appeared notably free
from provincialism . Mrs. Norris told me that when Ralph
Waldo Emerson was there she asked him how he liked
the Yosemite ; he replied, "It is the only thing I have
seen out here that comes up to the brag." But San Fran-
cisco travels fast ; it has left brag behind so far that
nobody advised me to see Yosemite .
I met some parted from in boyhood and then thought
of as if passing into another world .
Mr. Valentine Pey-
ton and his sister, relatives whose parting from us in
Virginia I could just remember, gave me a grand re-
ception. He had founded a race in San Francisco, and in
his house I was surrounded by his children and grand-
children. Mrs. Norris, whom I had known in my student
days as the beautiful young wife of Thomas Starr King,
entertained me in her mansion, and gave me an amusing
account of her journey to the Yosemite with the Emer-
son party. At the house of Mr. and Mrs. De Young of
the "Chronicle" I met people so charming that I began
to think San Francisco was after all the proper place to
migrate to from London .
Seated on a tug, awaiting mails from the East, with
which I am to go out to our royal Pacific ship, an old
gentleman beguiled the hours till midnight with his memo-
ries of California.
He had been one of the " Argonauts ; "
he bad sought the Golden Fleece, and could tell me of the
many who fleeced and the more who were fleeced
.
He was
unimaginative, but his dry narrative strung facts suffi-
ciently poetic . He named the millionaires whose mansions
stand where once they sold whiskey and their wives cookede who were fleeced
.
He was
unimaginative, but his dry narrative strung facts suffi-
ciently poetic . He named the millionaires whose mansions
stand where once they sold whiskey and their wives cooked

--- PAGE BREAK ---

50
MY PILGRIMAGE
for miners . One generation had witnessed the growth of
a camp of nomads to a brilliant city, but to this day he
said the majority of those who came to San Francisco
have deep in them the hope of spending their last years
somewhere else.
Presently we accompanied one hundred and fifty huge
mail bags to the ship Australia. Every sack was a witness
to the vast numbers who had come to the golden shore
only to find it a gate to shores beyond .
At one o'clock our ship moved noiselessly along a glitter-
ing path toward a moon just risen like a double eagle ; but
we soon left it behind us, and felt the warm breath of the
southern Pacific . Ah, the South ! the South !
Deep down
in every breast there is a Mignon sighing for the finer
gold-
The land where the citrons bloom,
And the gold orange lights the leafy gloom .
Voyaging these summer seas, gently gliding to soft
ripple of bluest waves, between Elysian dawns and Hes-
perian sunsets, sinking more and more into a sweet day-
dream, drinking deeper the draught of Lethe, - we on
this floating Pacific island learned more in a week than
anthropology can tell us about the islanders . We experi-
enced their evolution. By the time we reached the Hawai-
ians I was one of them . It took only three days to make
our upper deck one of the Society Islands . We had no
clique nor caste . Our ship rolled out of Frisco waters,
but as it approached the tropic its rolls turned to the easy
swing of a hammock . We had hammocks swung on deck,
but the Australia having turned into one, they were left
for the play of the younger children . I say younger, for
though some of us are old, yet all children -or nearly all .
The husband who watched so anxiously beside a pale wife,

--- PAGE BREAK ---left
for the play of the younger children . I say younger, for
though some of us are old, yet all children -or nearly all .
The husband who watched so anxiously beside a pale wife,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SHAKESPEARE-BACONISM
51
answered a bloom on her cheek with a smiling certainty
that health is gained at last (credulous child!) . The spec-
ulator who had brooded over lost thousands recovered
them all when his number in the sweepstakes on the
boat's run turned up winner .
When we first gathered in the smoking-room the con-
versation fell on Shakespeare . In St . Louis I had been
visited by Mr. Holmes, who had written a book to prove
that Lord Bacon wrote the plays ascribed to Shakespeare .
An Australian gentleman mentioned that the late Dr .
Thompson of Melbourne - a great authority on typhus
- was an enthusiastic believer in the theory that Lord
Bacon wrote the plays attributed to Shakespeare .
He
wrote a work to prove that theory, and his friend said Dr
.
Thompson would have parted from anything on earth
sooner than that conviction . This is of psychological in-
terest .
What is there in the substitution of one name
for another on the title-page of a book, to excite such
enthusiasm?
Just before leaving California I received from a gentle-
man in that region an elaborate manuscript advocating
this notion, and a note saying that he was "as serenely
and joyfully and exultingly sure of this as of any mortal
thing " - language one might expect from a Salvationist .
I once met Mr. Atkinson, Harriet Martineau's famous
friend, and found the
11 Baconian " theory was his substi-
tute for Christianity.
That this idea about Bacon writ-
ing Shakespeare should flit around the world and fill its
believers with an exaltation and peace which the world
cannot give, is phenomenal .
One morning a flying fish alighted on our upper deck,
causing a sensation among us. His graceful, silvery little
body was sent to the cook ; his wings were preserved by

--- PAGE BREAK ---henomenal .
One morning a flying fish alighted on our upper deck,
causing a sensation among us. His graceful, silvery little
body was sent to the cook ; his wings were preserved by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

52
MY PILGRIMAGE
the doctor . Poor little transcendentalist ! how long had
he dreamed of this huge Unknown Power, propelled by an
inscrutable screw, passing through the firmament above
his element? One resolute flight into the empyrean, one
wild effort to penetrate the Unknowable, and he gained
full sight of the chess-playing, novel-reading Olympians
;
but it was only to perish . Meanwhile, among his less
aspiring companions of the deep he has perhaps left the
legend of an ascension . Less sorrowful was the fate of
the huge sunfish caught under the bow of the ship, whence
it could not free itself . It was large and heavy enough to
retard the progress of the Australia . Efforts were made
to secure it ; for we all saw it and would have lovingly
eaten it ; but when the obstructed ship was stopped, and
the pressure of the water that held the great fish removed,
it darted away. Happy sunfish, that your solar affinities
were limited to your name
! Alas for your winged con-
temporary that perished in mounting to our steam-winged
sea-monster
I lay in my hammock dreaming on "the attribute of
wings ." This was the title of an essay by Toussenel trans-
lated by Dr . Lazarus for my " Dial "
(Cincinnati, 1860) .
In his exquisitely winged fantasy Toussenel spoke of the
" queen of dance," Taglioni as La Sylphide, "" whose wings
fall at the first kiss of love." I was too late in Europe to
see Taglioni on the stage, but had the honour of being
seated beside her in London at a dinner given by the
lord mayor to authors and artists ;
and a lovely and
spirituelle lady she was, happy in teaching others her
beautiful art . For her genius had not all lodged in her
feet .
What a contrast between her and the brilliant Puritan
lady, Delia Bacon, whose wings expanded under the jointppy in teaching others her
beautiful art . For her genius had not all lodged in her
feet .
What a contrast between her and the brilliant Puritan
lady, Delia Bacon, whose wings expanded under the joint

--- PAGE BREAK ---rs her
beautiful art . For her genius had not all lodged in her
feet .
What a contrast between her and the brilliant Puritan
lady, Delia Bacon, whose wings expanded under the joint

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DELIA BACON
53
touch of her eloquent brother, Rev . Leonard Bacon, and
Emerson, and led her - unkissed of love - to leap aloft
to death! For it is my belief that her delusion about
Shakespeare had birth in Emerson's lecture, "Shake-
speare ; or The Poet" (Representative Men, 1850) .
After
all his exaltation of Shakespeare the ghost of Puritanism
seized Emerson's pen and added
: "He was master of the
revels of mankind .
.
.
. I cannot marry this fact to his
verse ;
.
.
. it must even go into the world's history that
the best poet led an obscure and profane life, using his
genius for the amusement of mankind ." Two or three
years after this, Delia Bacon, a teacher in Boston, sent to
" Putnam's Magazine" her denial that the great poems
could have been written by the "illiterate" manager of the
G 0 sordid play-house ." The magazine hesitated to print it,
and it did not appear until January, 1856 .
It was anon-
ymous, and the name of Lord Bacon was not in it ; but
the concluding paragraph intimates that there was " one "
who would be connected with the plays in a further article .
But no other article appeared, for Delia had gone to Lon-
don in 1853, and was deep in her volume, " The Philoso-
phy of the Plays of Shakespeare," which appeared there
in 1857. Delia Bacon's chief aim was to preserve the
greatest works ever written from association with
the
greenroom and the playhouse and connect them with
the serious purposes of the great and learned men at the
head of whom stood Lord Bacon .
She was no Bacon
worshipper.
But to what a rambling digression have I been led by
~° Baconian " discussions of the Australia !
It gave me much pleasure to know that we were to pass
a whole day in Honolulu, where early travellers
had
reported a charming play of human life
; but alas, weaconian " discussions of the Australia !
It gave me much pleasure to know that we were to pass
a whole day in Honolulu, where early travellers
had
reported a charming play of human life
; but alas, we

--- PAGE BREAK ---s of the Australia !
It gave me much pleasure to know that we were to pass
a whole day in Honolulu, where early travellers
had
reported a charming play of human life
; but alas, we

--- PAGE BREAK ---

54
MY PILGRIMAGE
were all in a manner wrecked there. The desert on which
we were cast was the Sabbath. The old Blue Laws of
New England, supposed by some to be mythical, were very
real at Honolulu. Sabbatarianism is remorseless enough
in the South : one who was asked whether he had ever been
in a certain Virginia town answered, "Yes, I was there
three weeks one Sunday." But nowhere else in the world
was I ever so waylaid and plundered by the Sabbath as in
Honolulu. A man may be arrested even for having his
shop window open. Our ship's company went about in the
fervid heat with parched throats, unable to get even a
glass of soda water - nor indeed any cold water at all, the
sale of ice being prohibited . So far as the natives were
concerned, instead of their sports and dances which a civ-
ilized Sunday would have shown us, they were about as
lively as a cemetery . Apparently the police were doubled
for the purpose of pouncing on any poor Hawaiian
attempting to sell little souvenirs or fruit, and to prevent
our having comfort, much less fun, on shore . How
pleased the Lord must have been to observe from his
throne how we were offered as human sacrifices to his
Sabbath !
Observing just inside the open door of a small conven-
ticle a bucket of water with a cocoanut dipper, I entered
and got a cool drink. A Hawaiian preacher was speak-
ing to a small company of his own race in English . All
were dressed in solemn and heavy black, - on that
burning day, -and after listening a little the black garb
seemed but too true a symbol of the gloomy gospel im-
ported into the once happy islands . Passing on through
the sepulchral 'streets, I entered a church where a white
preacher was holding forth to humble Hawaiians, offering
them dogmatic stones where they needed bread . I imagine
slands . Passing on through
the sepulchral 'streets, I entered a church where a white
preacher was holding forth to humble Hawaiians, offering
them dogmatic stones where they needed bread . I imagine
s

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A HONOLULU SABBATH
55
that he was at Honolulu because elsewhere no congrega-
tion would listen to such stuff.
The Sabbath is a great snob . In Honolulu it accommo-
dated itself to royalty, for we saw the king enjoying his
yacht ; also to commerce, for the sailors, assisted by
Hawaiians, passed the whole day unloading and reload-
ing our ship .
I was glad to meet one young gentleman, Mr . Frank
Damon, who was interesting himself in the health and
comfort of the half-caste population, - a mixture of
Chinese and Hawaiian, - and who showed me through
a large home for the orphans of such parentage . He was
thoroughly educated, and familiar with the Chinese lan-
guage. His father, the Rev. Dr. Damon, whom I also met,
gave me some copies of a monthly they were editing, " The
Friend" (founded in 1843) . In it I read an authentic
account of the death of Captain Cook in 1779 .
His
sailors had seized an old wooden god to use for kindling
wood. The natives tried to recover their god ;
there
was a fight ; and Captain Cook, running up to know
what was the trouble, was speared in the back .
In 1811
a native youth named Obookiab, questioned about this
wooden god, said that the Hawaiians believed that when
they had made such a form and set it up the spirit " would
come and live in the wood, and when the wood gets old
they make a new wooden god, and the spirit goes out of
the old one and comes to live in the new."
I received a
strong impression that the spirit of that wooden god had
passed into the Sabbath Idol .
A young Englishman and myself managed, however, to
get a Hawaiian to drive us in an open carriage six or seven
miles into the country along the seaside .
We had thus a
few hours' enjoyment of the beautiful trees and flowers

--- PAGE BREAK ---ver, to
get a Hawaiian to drive us in an open carriage six or seven
miles into the country along the seaside .
We had thus a
few hours' enjoyment of the beautiful trees and flowers

--- PAGE BREAK ---

56
MY PILGRIMAGE
and birds, a delicious bath in the sea, the happiness of our
expedition being enhanced by a religious satisfaction in
having defied the Wooden Idol .
On the ship we had beautiful days, always blue with
soft zephyrs, and I lay in my hammock, gently swung by
the ship's motion .
In a slumbrous way I read some
little papers picked up at Honolulu, the most interesting
being an almanac (1883) containing some Hawaiian pro-
verbs collected by H . L. Sheldon. Several of them were
original .
"Daubed with white" is said of a silly grey-
haired person. "Don't be friends with the dog, for the
tail will show it," has reference to disreputable acquaint-
ances .
" Children always begin at the fountain ."
One proverb particularly impressed me
: "The kalo
root is dead, but there are live maggots enough ." Kalo
is the taro of New Zealand-arum esculentum, a kind
of lily, whose root is between a yam and a potato - and
when it dies is soon full of maggots . Mr. Sheldon says
this proverb was " formerly applied to battles in which the
bravest bad perished, but in these modern times has been
applied by scoffers to the overthrow of paganism and the
growth of Christianity in its place ."
The story of the overthrow of paganism in the Hawaiian
Islands will never be fairly told, but there is endlessly
repeated the dramatic legend of the lady convert Kapio-
lani defying the volcanic goddess Pele by approaching
the blazing crater of Mauna Loa, despite predictions of
disaster by the priestess of Pele . The lady of rank, it is
said, cried out to the fearful crowd, "Jehovah is my God .
He kindled those fires . I fear not Pele . If I perish by
the anger of Pele, then you may fear the power of Pele
;
but if I trust in Jehovah and be should save me from the
wrath of Pele, then you must serve and fear the LordI fear not Pele . If I perish by
the anger of Pele, then you may fear the power of Pele
;
but if I trust in Jehovah and be should save me from the
wrath of Pele, then you must serve and fear the Lord

--- PAGE BREAK ---f I perish by
the anger of Pele, then you may fear the power of Pele
;
but if I trust in Jehovah and be should save me from the
wrath of Pele, then you must serve and fear the Lord

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VOLCANIC THEOLOGY
57
Jehovah .
All the gods of Hawaii are vain. Great is Jeho-
vah's goodness in sending teachers to turn us from these
vanities to the living God ."
Pele thenceforth lost her
popularity .
Kapiolani is a saint among the missionaries, but accord-
ing to the legend she bad simply substituted a Jewish for
a Hawaiian name for the "kindler" of volcanoes . Out of
volcanoes came the belief in a fire-and-brimstone hell ;
Mauna Loa took up the burden of Etna, and Hawaiians
are still terrorized by volcanic theology .
In G° The Friend "
I read its fiery gospel . After witnessing an eruption a mis-
sionary writes : " We knelt upon the rocks and joined our
feeble voices in adoration of the wise, the good, the great,
and glorious Author of all ." When lava was threatening
the town Hilo, a missionary writes : " What a work this
fiery serpent is doing, eating every herb and tree, drink-
ing up the rivers, and licking up the dust .
All is life and
verdure below - all ebon blackness and desolation be-
hind." Thus one of these brethren sees a fiery serpent in
what the other kneels to .'
The most painful aspect of the course of human events
is the frequency with which " self-sacrificing " efforts for
human benefit bear evil results. Some of the early mis-
sionaries to the Hawaiian Islands, living at a time when
even some able men believed that the so-called "heathen"
would be damned, left beautiful homes and fairest pros-
pects for wild and dangerous regions to rescue those they
i The substitution of Jehovah for Pele was a transfer of the title of
Hawaii from the natives to the Christians . It also inflicted on the natives
the cruel Sabbath . And further it made more malarious the moral atmos-
phere ; for in 1887 the Princess Liki Liki was said to have starved herself to
death as a sacrifice to Jehovah to appease flaming Manna Loa . She was
educated in America, and married an American (A . B. Cleghorn), but the
ancient exaction of Pele of a royal victim survived with fatal force under
the volcanic Jehovah .se flaming Manna Loa . She was
educated in America, and married an American (A . B. Cleghorn), but the
ancient exaction of Pele of a royal victim survived with fatal force under
the volcanic Jehovah .

--- PAGE BREAK ---. She was
educated in America, and married an American (A . B. Cleghorn), but the
ancient exaction of Pele of a royal victim survived with fatal force under
the volcanic Jehovah .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

58
MY PILGRIMAGE
supposed perishing. A pathetic history is that of the Rev .
Titus Coan (father of the well-known writer Dr . Titus
Munson Coan of New York), who, escaping from long cap-
tivity among the Patagonians, reached his home and his
betrothed bride, Fidelia Church of Churchville, New
York, but only to set out again for mission work . In
November, 1834, he started with his bride for Hawaii,
exiles from all they held dearest save their united hearts .
In such service their fine qualities were given to save
and benefit a race which, instead of being cultivated and
developed under Christianity, has become extinct . What
worth they put into their work was returned to them in
their own homes, and in the happiness of some individual
natives around them ; but as to the Hawaiian race, their
power to benefit was not so great as the power of their
regime to destroy those poor islanders . Their theology
alone might have been innocuous, for the Hawaiians could
not have understood it ; the moral system, the supersti-
tion that nudity is wicked, that gaiety and pleasure are
offensive to God, and consequent changes in their ways
of life, as Charles Darwin pointed out, - these are
the things fatal to tropical tribes . Dr. Titus M. Coan,
quoted by Darwin in his " Descent of Man," says : " The
[Hawaiian] natives have undergone a greater change in
their habits of life in fifty years than Englishmen in a
thousand years ."
It is the philosophy of "La Grande Duchesse" that "if
you can't get what you set your heart upon, you must set
your heart upon what you can get ." It is a philosophy
I found confirmed by experience on the ship Australia .
It was tantalizing to voyage with a consciousness that a
few hours on one or another of the islands might repay
one for all the trouble of coming so far ; but our ship wasence on the ship Australia .
It was tantalizing to voyage with a consciousness that a
few hours on one or another of the islands might repay
one for all the trouble of coming so far ; but our ship was

--- PAGE BREAK ---tralia .
It was tantalizing to voyage with a consciousness that a
few hours on one or another of the islands might repay
one for all the trouble of coming so far ; but our ship was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

OFF TUTUILA
59
cynically indifferent to beauty and anthropology . It aimed
to make Sydney in time not to be fined for dilatoriness
in bringing the mail. As we sailed past the island of
Tutuila some natives were considerate enough to pad-
dle around our ship in their canoes, and we felt grateful
enough to pay them well for their breadfruit. They were
handsome in form and figure and their voices musical .
At a little distance they appeared to have on bluish
drawers, but close inspection showed that it was artistic
tattoo in imitation of clothing from hip to knee .
The
nautilus-like canoe seemed to be born and loved of the
waves on which it floated . In the distance we saw a church
steeple, and a gentleman familiar with the island told us
that the only trouble of these islanders is a never ceasing
civil war between Catholics and Protestants .
It breaks
out afresh when an official is to be elected, priests and
preachers arousing animosities that lead to blows .
From week to week on our little floating world we saw
no sail. One can adapt himself to a very small environ-
ment. Nobody seemed to find the voyage tedious . An
hour passes swiftly to one watching the albatross (with
eyes touched by Coleridge), the flying-fish flushed by our
prow, the little mystical fleets of pearly
" Portuguese
men-of-war."
Whatever we see in nature that is beautiful or grand
appears so real that we forever renew the Vedic visions,
and in each fair object feel that we have surprised some
feature of a supreme Artist. The immemorial ages have
determined that we shall never see nature as it really is .
Like a pious Scotchman who objected to the stained
church window, "they might better have left the glass
as God made it," we all credit nature with the many-tinted
veils woven for it by poet and mythist .a pious Scotchman who objected to the stained
church window, "they might better have left the glass
as God made it," we all credit nature with the many-tinted
veils woven for it by poet and mythist .

--- PAGE BREAK ---ho objected to the stained
church window, "they might better have left the glass
as God made it," we all credit nature with the many-tinted
veils woven for it by poet and mythist .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

60
MY PILGRIMAGE
The protoplasm of all gods and myths is present with
us at sea, and it required only a week or so to evolve them
all in a quasi-realistic way not known in learned books .
Afreets appeared in guise of water-spouts. We saw Pro-
teus and his flock in endless illusions, and heard old Tri-
ton blow his wreathed horn in the small hours of night.
Classic geographers may conjecture the regions visited by
Odysseus, but we found them all in cloudlands of the
western twilight, with palms, groves, and grottoes of the
Sirens. With every dawn Aphrodite rises from the waves .
I watched two stars of the first magnitude ; they became
the Vedic twin horsemen (Aswins), next the Centaurs
;
when one sank beneath the horizon, clearly Romulus had
slain Remus, and Cain Abel .
As for the sun, he got up for us special performances
which interpreted the whole solar mythology . One day he
came forth as mariners had never seen him before - pure
blue ; all day everything and everybody looked blue .
Captain Bannerman said this was new in his experience
;
the astonishment of the crew was evident, and it became
anxiety when about three in the afternoon there appeared
around the sun a vast ring of copper-tinted mist . Two
hours later this mist sank and made the horizon seem
brass; after sunset there flamed up an afterglow that ap-
peared mingled of blood and fire . On the following day
the sun was blood-red and an hour before the time for
sunset sank behind the wall of copper that made our west-
ern horizon. I say " wall," for it was not a cloud ; it was
fixed there motionless and opaque evening after evening,
the rest of the sky being clear . On reaching New Zealand
we heard of the terrible earthquake and volcanic eruptions
in Batavia.
One evening we all crowded on deck for the first sightg after evening,
the rest of the sky being clear . On reaching New Zealand
we heard of the terrible earthquake and volcanic eruptions
in Batavia.
One evening we all crowded on deck for the first sight

--- PAGE BREAK ---rest of the sky being clear . On reaching New Zealand
we heard of the terrible earthquake and volcanic eruptions
in Batavia.
One evening we all crowded on deck for the first sight

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE SOUTHERN CROSS
61
of the Southern Cross. There it shone, just above the
southern horizon, politely veiling its fifth star-which
ought to be at the juncture of the imaginary bars but
is not, and when seen renders it difficult to run the bars
regularly between the stars that conduct themselves in a
more Christian-like way . When we first saw the Southern
Cross its long bar was parallel with the horizon, but after
some hours it stood upside down, as if for Peter to be
crucified with his head downwards, and slowly sank out
of sight beneath the Centaur .
The swift apparent revolution of the Southern Cross
did not escape the Pacific islanders ; they have a belief
that one watching carefully would see it at some moment
turn half around. In several islands " Quick as the turn-
ing of the Southern Cross " is a proverbial phrase .
One or two passengers whispered in my ear that they
could not see any cross, and all who saw it the first night
were silent, being plainly disappointed . By the second
night faith had been summoned and the Southern Cross
was clear to nearly all. How little the constellation could
suggest a cross to unsophisticated eyes is shown in the
label given it by the Pacific tribes :
"The Nose of the
Man that fell after eating sugar-cane ." This refers to some
legend so ancient that no one can explain it .
The rough horse-play once usual on all ships crossing
the equator is now suppressed on respectable steamships
;
but probably there was some potent origin for that usage,
for about that line sports are commonly got up . We had
them on the Australia -foot-race, steeple-chase, handi-
cap, high jump, low jump, and tug-of-war . In this last the
English and Americans were outpulled by the Austra-
lians. There was a pretty race around the deck between
three little girls ; three ladies ran an egg and spoonump, and tug-of-war . In this last the
English and Americans were outpulled by the Austra-
lians. There was a pretty race around the deck between
three little girls ; three ladies ran an egg and spoon

--- PAGE BREAK ---. In this last the
English and Americans were outpulled by the Austra-
lians. There was a pretty race around the deck between
three little girls ; three ladies ran an egg and spoon

--- PAGE BREAK ---

62
MY PILGRIMAGE
race, won by her who first reaches the winning-post with-
out letting the egg fall from her spoon . A pretty young
bride from Shropshire won the prize against an American
and an Australian competitor . The English lady's success
was due to dressing for her task in a way that her com-
petitors were too prudish to imitate ; her skirt fell a little
below the knee.
In the evening we had concerts, readings, recitations,
lectures. I spun for them all the yarns I knew of the sea,
-the Flying Dutchman, Atlantis, the search for Prester
John, and the Miemac Saint carried by the original
Whale to the Happy Isle . A learned rabbi disposed of
the notion that the English are " the lost Tribe," or that
any tribe was lost, - this
" Anglo-Israelite "
delusion
being then abreast with the Baconian . There was some-
thing striking in the venerable figure of the rabbi dis-
claiming for his race all connection with the race on whose
empire the sun never sets, - a certain half-conscious pride
as of an old aristocratic family repudiating a parvenu
connection. The venerable Jew declared there was to be
no return of Jews to Jerusalem, and no personal Messiah
to come ; but he repeated a poem prophetic of the glory
of Israel in the future - itself the Messiah .
His ecstasy
of faith in this Israel-Messiah was pathetic, - as of some
devoted woman ever waiting for the return of her beloved
.
He can never return, as others know, but she never doubts ;
girlhood has grown to maidenhood, age has silvered her
hair, but she has denied every other wooer, and through
her spectacles still gazes on the horizon where his sail dis-
appeared. Yet her constancy is not without some reward .
Even here, thousands of miles from Palestine, she on
Sunday sits invisible beside the rabbi on deck, and listens
to Gentiles in the saloon chanting the prophecies andancy is not without some reward .
Even here, thousands of miles from Palestine, she on
Sunday sits invisible beside the rabbi on deck, and listens
to Gentiles in the saloon chanting the prophecies and

--- PAGE BREAK ---some reward .
Even here, thousands of miles from Palestine, she on
Sunday sits invisible beside the rabbi on deck, and listens
to Gentiles in the saloon chanting the prophecies and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AN UNWELCOME SABBATH
63
psalms with which she has sustained her heart in the long
night-watches .
In crossing the 180th parallel it is necessary to drop a
day. On our voyage the omitted day would by calendar
be Sunday, and the prospect of getting a fortnight with-
out a Sabbath gave joy to the card-players
.
But they had
a cruel disappointment .
Captain Bannerman could not
venture to drop a Sabbath ; Saturday must be substituted .
Efforts were made to dissuade him, but he answered,
" What would the pious ladies say? It would disturb them
all the rest of the voyage to feel themselves on a godless
ship ! "
Nevertheless some of the card-players appeared to feel
that this particular Sunday was not a genuine one, and as
it was rainy the lack of amusement in the smoking-room
was serious. As the captain did not keep a vigilant eye
on the room that day, three young poker-players resolved
to go as far as whist. Their difficulty was to find a fourth
hand. Only two others were present-myself, absorbed
in a volume, and a large middle-aged man who appeared in
his corner to be asleep . Had I been invited I would gladly
have taken a hand, but my ministerial office probably
denied me that pleasure .
The other man bad boarded
our ship at Honolulu and for some reason had not made
acquaintance of the smoking-room
.
On this Sunday be
had all the appearance of a Presbyterian preacher . He
was six feet, his face clean shaven, his countenance
severe. He was dressed in black broadcloth from head to
foot, and his standing collar and plain shirt-front did not
need a white cravat to stamp him as a Puritan minister .
However, the three were desperate, and when the impos-
ing man unclosed his eyes a little one of them said, °" Would
you, sir, object -ah-to-ah-taking a band at whist?"amp him as a Puritan minister .
However, the three were desperate, and when the impos-
ing man unclosed his eyes a little one of them said, °" Would
you, sir, object -ah-to-ah-taking a band at whist?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---minister .
However, the three were desperate, and when the impos-
ing man unclosed his eyes a little one of them said, °" Would
you, sir, object -ah-to-ah-taking a band at whist?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

64
MY PILGRIMAGE
The black-garbed man turned on them fiercely, his dark
eye flashing. " I am surprised," he said solemnly, " that
men well dressed, on a respectable boat, should ask me
on the Lor-rd's Day to join in a game of whist ! "
The
three young men cowered before the rebuke, but the min-
isterial figure added, "Whist, sir?-no! But I don't
mind joining in a little poker." There was a shout, and
the " puritanical " man, who turned out to be a granger
of New Zealand, seemed to keep his pile of money at a
good height. My impression was that the stage had lost
an admirable actor in that granger .
The patron saint of the good traveller should be the
god Krishna, who so multiplied himself that every shep-
herdess believed she had him for her partner in the dance .
It is important that every traveller likely to be cited shall
find the most beautiful lady he ever saw in Boston, in New
York, in Richmond, and in each of the western cities . It
is especially important that a voyager round the world
shall find each harbour he visits the most beautiful in the
world .
And after all, is not the most beautiful place
always that you are in? The others are too distant to be
lovely. The Golden Gate being three weeks distant, I had
no hesitation in declaring the approach to New Zealand
the finest I ever saw, while a score of voices warned me
not to commit myself till I had entered Sydney harbour .
However, ever since I left London, I had felt a grow-
ing consciousness that my admiration for the
" grandeurs
of nature " had become more slight than formerly. It was,
as I afterwards realized, a result of my going deeper and
deeper into the corollaries of Darwin's discovery .
Day by
day as I swung in my hammock on the Australia, seeing
around me the play of human life, the expressions and
interchanges of affection and kindliness, the contrast ofies of Darwin's discovery .
Day by
day as I swung in my hammock on the Australia, seeing
around me the play of human life, the expressions and
interchanges of affection and kindliness, the contrast of

--- PAGE BREAK ---overy .
Day by
day as I swung in my hammock on the Australia, seeing
around me the play of human life, the expressions and
interchanges of affection and kindliness, the contrast of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A DAY IN NEW ZEALAND
65
these with the terrible water-spouts forming and re-form-
ing here and there, -once dangerously near our ship,
which would have foundered under its touch, - and the
cruel monsters of the deep pursuing their prey, our own
monster ship destroying fleets of the pearly nautilus, and
many things pressed in on my long interval of leisure the
recognition that Nature is fundamentally predatory .
My real interest was in man . I could only pass a day
in New Zealand, and it was devoted to seeing as much of
the New Zealanders as possible. I had an English-speak-
ing native to guide me about, and made myself welcome
in their homes by little gifts to the children and pur-
chases from any who had things to sell . They impressed
me pleasantly, and I was inclined to think well of their
English rulers on seeing the happy well-fed look of these
humble people. They had pretty costumes also - the
women, that is, for these are the last in all colonies to
affect the garb of the white race. Most of them wore a
sort of "jersey " of some bright colour, sometimes nearly
diaphanous, and they were shapely enough for it to be
becoming. In my conversations with them through my
guide I found them candid and witty .
On returning to our ship the passengers told me of
various crags and waterfalls and distant prospects they
had managed to see by drives, but I felt satisfied with
the glimpses I had secured of a variety of humanity .
I
left New Zealand with reluctance, and with hope in my
heart that I might some day return . For in a certain
part of the island an influential family belonging to my
London chapel had settled, and in laying out a village
they had after a sharp controversy succeeded in naming
the streets after the great scientific heretics- Darwin,
Huxley, Tyndall streets, etc ., and they had often de-tled, and in laying out a village
they had after a sharp controversy succeeded in naming
the streets after the great scientific heretics- Darwin,
Huxley, Tyndall streets, etc ., and they had often de-

--- PAGE BREAK ---out a village
they had after a sharp controversy succeeded in naming
the streets after the great scientific heretics- Darwin,
Huxley, Tyndall streets, etc ., and they had often de-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66
MY PILGRIMAGE
manded that I should come over and lecture in that ideal
village .
But in the course of time what will these names signify
to the people of that region? Even while those men lived
there were comparatively few to comprehend their precise
addition to knowledge, and it was impossible that they
themselves could perceive the logical results of their own
generalizations. Every individual light must shine at last
(if at all) in the sum of the average mind ;
the thinker's
undergraduate or casual or superannuated words are con-
fused with his real contribution to science ; the emanci-
pator of thought in his own time is liable to become its
oppressor in the farther time. I had pleasure in telling
Dr. Tyndall and Huxley that they had named streets in
New Zealand. I remember that Carlyle, though he de-
clined a title offered by Queen Victoria, was gratified when
a pretty place at Chelsea was named " Carlyle Square ."
The company on our ship consisted mainly of well-to-
do and fairly educated people, most of them rather young .
They showed enthusiasm for natural scenery, and those who
resided in Australia supplied me with advice where to go
in that country. " Such a view ! Such superb precipices ! "
" Are there any aborigines ? " " Oh no, they have long
disappeared." But they have left behind them curious
folk-lore, proverbs, legends about all those hills and pre-
cipices, and my fellow travellers also are seeing their
admirable scenes, not as they really are, but as trans-
figured or decorated by their faith or by their favourite
poets .
On my way to Sydney I fell in with Mr. Young, a
nephew of James Bryce, M . P., engaged in the pearl busi-
ness ; and his charming tales about the divers and the
pearl oysters so illuminated the ocean's depths that thereI fell in with Mr. Young, a
nephew of James Bryce, M . P., engaged in the pearl busi-
ness ; and his charming tales about the divers and the
pearl oysters so illuminated the ocean's depths that there

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A FLOATING UTOPIA
67
appeared a new mythology even down there .
The Persian
Isle of Aval linked itself with our English Avalon, the
Arthurian paradise. Two months before a poor fisherman
had found a pearl which brought him four thousand
pounds : long ago Browning's Paracelsus had seen and
named the two points in the adventure of that diver :
One, when a beggar, he prepares to plunge ;
One, when a prince, he rises with his pearl .
And who of us trained in the Solomonic similitude of
wisdom, in the parable of the lost pearl, in visions of
the Celestial City whose every gate is one pearl, could
ever see a pearl as a mere bit of encisted dust diseasing
an oyster?
Flash ! a great light blazes over our ship ; it is not
St. Elmo's fire, but the wondrous searchlight at Sydney
sweeping our sea at midnight like an all-seeing eye.
It
was the last evening of our voyage together, which for
a full lunar month we had managed to make merry and
even ideal. Much is said about civilization, but really
there is no such thing except in small oases here and
there in the great swarming nations .
But I feel bold
enough to say that the Australia on that occasion was
a little floating example of civilization
; and it was made
so chiefly by the sovereignty of the ladies .
Nearly all of
these were young married ladies with their husbands
along, some on their honeymoon voyage ; but there being
on board more gentlemen than ladies by a third, these
ladies showed themselves gracious and agreeable to the
companionless with that charming freedom of which only
innocence and refinement are capable .
A shade of sadness
therefore comes over some of us, even as we gaze on the
sublimities of Sydney Harbour at dawn
: a beautiful and

--- PAGE BREAK ---which only
innocence and refinement are capable .
A shade of sadness
therefore comes over some of us, even as we gaze on the
sublimities of Sydney Harbour at dawn
: a beautiful and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

68
MY PILGRIMAGE
unique thing had budded off the Golden Gate and flow-
ered through its month ; its petals were now to be scattered
through the prosaic streets of cities, never again to be
united. Everything passes .
That poor Australian who under pressure of poverty
sold his little field for a pittance and became insane on
learning that the sterile field was a gold mine, can be
sympathized with by the pilgrim who discovers too late
that he has passed some rich treasure and seen only the
earthen vessel containing it. Could I only have known
even a little of the wonderful story of New Zealand
told by Dr . Richard Garnett (1898) I should not have
returned to England without really seeing more of that
colony. I had long known Dr. Garnett, as far as it was
permissible to encroach on that scholar who long sat in
the British Museum as preeminently the interpreter for
literary inquirers, always the most modest of the chief-
tains of culture, and the most gracious . But as much as
I appreciated his varied knowledge, it was with surprise
that I read his contribution to Fisher Unwin's series of the
Builders of Greater Britain,
11 Edward Gibbon Wakefield,
the Colonization of South Australia and New Zealand ."
I do not believe that there is any other volume of four
hundred pages which contains so much well-digested know-
ledge of the motives and forces that go to the founding
of an English colony, and such clear and comprehensive
insight into the conditions -physical, political, and reli-
gious, which modify and complicate such ideals and aims
as those of Wakefield . Nor does any romance of our time
surpass in interest the story told without embellishment,
of the admirable man Wakefield, who alone of the many
English idealists gave his entire life to the practical reali-
zation on earth of the Utopia he had written on paper .told without embellishment,
of the admirable man Wakefield, who alone of the many
English idealists gave his entire life to the practical reali-
zation on earth of the Utopia he had written on paper .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

" MOTHERLESS " MAORIS
69
In 1882 a company of Maoris came to London for the
purpose of seeing Queen Victoria and laying before her
sympathetic heart their grievances . My wife and I met
these still nominal chieftains in London at the house of
Mr. and Mrs . (Ottilia Blind) Hancock, always anxious
to comfort the distressed . And these Maoris were in deep
distress, not so much because of the troubles that had
brought them all the way from New Zealand, but because
they were not permitted to meet or see their Queen .
One
of them who spoke English, speaking for the rest, moved
the large company of ladies and gentlemen almost to
tears as he told of the grief with which they had jour-
neyed so far only to find themselves motherless . They did
not, so far as I can remember, tell us what their
griev-
ances were at home, but in reply to our questions spoke
of the cherished dream of all their race that they had in
England a supreme and benevolent Mother who could
and would end all the troubles of her remotest children if
she knew of them. Since reading the work of my old
friend Dr. Garnett, I have written to ask him about this
New Zealand deputation, and he says in a private note
"They bad several interviews with the colonial secre-
tary, Lord Kimberley, but he prevented their seeing the
Queen, who would, I think, have insisted upon their
being admitted to her presence if she had known the
circumstances ."

--- PAGE BREAK ---re-
tary, Lord Kimberley, but he prevented their seeing the
Queen, who would, I think, have insisted upon their
being admitted to her presence if she had known the
circumstances ."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER IV
The Melbourne Cup-Joss House-Sects in Victoria-Governor of
Victoria-Bishop of Melbourne-Rev . Charles Strong- Australian
insanity - Ballarat gold mines - Hon . Peter Lalor - Hon. A. Inglis
Clark - Hobart - Campbellites -Nature's oddities - Relics of trans-
portation times - Extinction of Tasmanians -My ordeal in Sydney-
Impaled with Bishop Moorhouse and Rev. Charles Strong -Fusion of
Freethought and Spiritualism - The Botany Bay myth -Justice Win-
deyer.
I
T is odd that Melbourne, rigidly Presbyterian, should
have for its Pan-Australian synod a horse-race . Mel-
bourne has, however, made its racing week a social con-
gress of the colonies. The betting is universal . Sweep-
stakes were arranged in the schools (by the teachers), and
Cup Day is a holiday. It was stated that after the Cup
race a carriage horse was observed to throw down a
mouthful of hay given him, which his mate pounced on .
Early in the morning I walked over the course, so to
say. Byron Moore, secretary of the Racing Club, guided
me, and I saw the artistic arrangements for this great
event. The apartments for the governor and his com-
pany, the committee rooms, the medical rooms, the ladies'
rooms, -all were elaborately elegant. There was fine floral
decoration everywhere
; cosmetics in the ladies' room, and
needles threaded with every colour, ready for use .
In the element of grotesquerie the English Derby has
large advantages over the Cup, where respectability was
carried to an extreme ; there was hardly a side-show,
nothing characteristic of the country, no aborigines, no
boomerangs. It all impressed me as too much a Presbyte-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ctability was
carried to an extreme ; there was hardly a side-show,
nothing characteristic of the country, no aborigines, no
boomerangs. It all impressed me as too much a Presbyte-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JOSS HOUSE IN MELBOURNE
71
rian Vanity Fair ; no one could fail to be struck by the
multitude of beautiful ladies and fine looking men, but
they appeared so serious ! It was pleasant to see so many
people without any tipsiness, but there might have been
some fun .
The Chinese Joss House in Melbourne presented more
primitive peculiarities than I discovered in the San Fran-
cisco institution. There was a mortuary where the Chinese
who can afford it can keep little four-inch tombstones of
themselves while they are alive ; at death the man's in-
scribed stone is set up on a consecrated shelf
.
There
were over twelve thousand Chinese in Victoria (1883),
and their chapel suggested wealth. In the main temple
one approaches the altar past the ferocious but impossi-
ble lions and sees six pink candles arranged like those on
Christian altars ; at the end of each row of candles is a
foliated pillar about two feet high, set in a pot, around
which coils a dragon whose head is bearded and horned.
He guards a little tree growing out of another pot . Near
by is a bell and drum, the object of which is to drive
away evil demons, -for it is universal demonology that
demons cannot stand order ; when the air is made mu-
sical or rhythmic they must fly to a wilder atmosphere .
Over the altar is a well-painted picture of a Chinese
triad - Kwan-yin, Kawn-Tom, Ti-tom . The last two of
these names I had to take phonetically from my China-
man, and now write them with misgivings .
About Kwan-
yin much might be written, for she is a classic saint, or
may even be called the Madonna of the Chinese Budd-
hists. She is the woman who refused to enter paradise
so long as any human being is excluded .
" Never will I
receive individual salvation," she said, and still remains
outside the gates of heaven .-
hists. She is the woman who refused to enter paradise
so long as any human being is excluded .
" Never will I
receive individual salvation," she said, and still remains
outside the gates of heaven .

--- PAGE BREAK ---woman who refused to enter paradise
so long as any human being is excluded .
" Never will I
receive individual salvation," she said, and still remains
outside the gates of heaven .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

72
MY PILGRIMAGE
The census
of
1881 gave Victoria a population of
862,246 and registered 144 denominational names . Some
of these names in the official Year-book are novel
God-
fearing,"
" Saved Sinners,"
" Silent Admirer," " Free-
Trade," "Nature," and three men gave their name as
" L. S. D." To the " church of Eli Sands " five belonged
-all women. This I suppose to be the eloquent New
York Methodist (1830-1868) . One woman records her
faith as a " Walkerite," Mr . Walker being a secularist
lecturer in Melbourne. And there was one " Borrowite ."
Numerous entries indicate the fermentation in Australia,
-"Believers in parts of the Bible," "Liberty of Con-
science," " Liberal Views," "Justice and Liberty," "Free
Religion," "Natural Religion," "Rational Christians,"
" Reasonists," "Eclectic," "Neutral," "Humanitarian ."
There were 53 "Agnostics," 37 "Atheists," 14 "Infi-
dels," while 7277 registered themselves as without creed
or sect. The number of those who rejected every form
of Christianity was 20,000 .
The Unitarians numbered about one thousand . In 1851,
when registration of opinions was compulsory, seventeen
hundred confessed the Unitarian faith . In that year the
Victorian government voted to divide fifty thousand
pounds among all the churches in proportion to their
members (giving the five talents to him who had five and
the two to him who had two), and the subsidy was contin-
ued many years. Under that arrangement the Unitarians
received a good piece of property. It now had for its
minister Mrs. Webster, who began preaching there as
Miss Turner. She is a sister of Henry G. Turner of the
Commercial Bank of Australia, himself a literary man
and editor of the "Melbourne Review." Mrs. Webster
is a rationalistic Unitarian, and her discourses are veryis a sister of Henry G. Turner of the
Commercial Bank of Australia, himself a literary man
and editor of the "Melbourne Review." Mrs. Webster
is a rationalistic Unitarian, and her discourses are very

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AUSTRALIAN LOYALTY
73
impressive.
I had
the
pleasure
of preaching
to her
society, which consists of educated and influential fam-
ilies.
The Australians had the infirmity of most colonists
of imitating the nomenclature of the mother-country
.
One finds poor little villages named Brighton, Chiswick,
etc., and the imitation extends to things gastronomic . At
the mayor's banquet in Melbourne, held on the same day
as that of the Lord Mayor in London, nothing could
have been richer than the hall and its decorations, -
the flags of many nations ; but the imitativeness of the
affair was amusing . There was turtle soup, the only
occasion on which I saw it in Australia.
Turtle abounds
in Queensland, but the neighbouring colonies care little
for it, and not at all for the delicious kangaroo-tail soup,
nor for the beche de mer, but stick to everything English .
The Australians go beyond the English in loyalty . Not
only Queen Victoria's birthday but that of the Prince of
Wales (now Edward VII) was a general holiday .
I was
told that there were more holidays in Australia than in
any other country .
The Marquis of Normanby, then (1883) governor of
Victoria, politely entertained me in his palace and gave
me much information concerning the condition of Aus-
tralia. At Lord Normanby's drawing-room, which was
brilliant, I met my London friends, Eustace Smith, M . P.,
and his wife and daughter, and afterwards travelled with
them to various places . Lord and Lady Rosebery min-
gled very affably with the gay company .
The ladies at
the drawing-room were all in full court costume .
Throughout Australia gentlemen often wear evening-
dress on informal occasions when it would be omitted in
London, but ladies even in large evening companies

--- PAGE BREAK ---n full court costume .
Throughout Australia gentlemen often wear evening-
dress on informal occasions when it would be omitted in
London, but ladies even in large evening companies

--- PAGE BREAK ---

74
MY PILGRIMAGE
mostly wear the convenient and high-necked black silk .
I have remarked in various parts of the world that' in
every country the sex that exceeds the other in numbers
arrays itself finely, the minority sex dressing plainly.
In
Australia the women, being relatively few, are sure of hus-
bands without resorting to decoration .
A great deal was said in the religious press about
" lar-
rikins," that is, insolent rowdies . The crowd appeared
to me decent and orderly, and I do not recall having ever
seen a drunken person in Australia . In fact the whole
population are tea-drinkers . The nearest approach to
L° larrikinism " I observed was in the pious press itself .
My' reputation for rationalism had been made for me
by a lecture agent selected by my friends Mr. Jeffray
and Mr. Turner. Some handling of religious themes was
expected of me, but my opening lecture (on Darwin) must
have revealed to the keen-eared sectarians heresies of
which I was not yet conscious. I afterwards realized that
during the months elapsed since my last sermon in Lon-
don I bad been taking stock of my beliefs, and that
especially during those four weeks on the Pacific my
Theism had been analyzed severely .
What I now de-
scribe as the "collectivist deity"-that is, a mind in
nature creative and controlling the evolutionary forces-
was rejected. I felt myself one with those who eighteen
centuries before me had turned from worship of a cruel
cosmic deity to the suffering god- ,, forsaken" by the
Power he had trusted. These ideas had not crystallized in
my mind sufficiently for me to formulate them, but they
had affected my modifications on the Australia of a London
lecture on Darwin . In giving this first in Australia I put
my worst foot foremost.
Melbourne also put its worst
foot foremost by giving me the most unscientific hall man
tn the Australia of a London
lecture on Darwin . In giving this first in Australia I put
my worst foot foremost.
Melbourne also put its worst
foot foremost by giving me the most unscientific hall man
t

--- PAGE BREAK ---London
lecture on Darwin . In giving this first in Australia I put
my worst foot foremost.
Melbourne also put its worst
foot foremost by giving me the most unscientific hall man
t

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHEERFUL MARTYRS
75
ever spoke in . Every word I uttered returned in star-
tling echoes, and a third of the fine audience could not
hear. For the next lecture I had the desk moved to a
side of the hall, and was fairly heard .
The first lecture,
however, well reported in the admirable " Argus," elicited
public letters vehemently vindicating the functions of pain
in nature. The ablest of these I had to answer, simply
maintaining that no advantages could justify Omnipotent
Love in selecting pain and wholesale torture of sensitive
creatures as the method of Evolution . My argument was
not answered, but I was angrily abused .
My case, however, was of slight importance compared
with that of Bishop Moorhouse and the Rev. Charles
Strong.
The Bishop of Melbourne and the minister of
the Scots church were admittedly the ablest men in the
Australian pulpit. They were " broad "
in their views,
and had managed to get gibbeted together as " pals " pro-
pagating infidelity in the southwestern hemisphere . They
were both imprudent enough to invite me to their houses,
and I found them cheerful martyrs, quite able to appre-
ciate the amusing features of the combination of Scotch
Presbyterians and English Hard-churchmen by whom
they were pelted . Strong's offences were manifold. He
never preached dogmas ; he introduced Emerson's essays
into a class of young people ; and he invited a rationalist
- Judge Higinbotham of the Supreme Court - to lec-
ture in his church on " Science and Religion." There was
another offence of which Mr . Strong did not tell me, and
which I discovered by attending his grand and crowded
church : he was too eloquent . The National Church of
Scotland to which he belongs is united with the two others
in the Victoria Presbytery, but that did not prevent the
latter from feeling some emotion at seeing their congre-nt . The National Church of
Scotland to which he belongs is united with the two others
in the Victoria Presbytery, but that did not prevent the
latter from feeling some emotion at seeing their congre-

--- PAGE BREAK ---urch of
Scotland to which he belongs is united with the two others
in the Victoria Presbytery, but that did not prevent the
latter from feeling some emotion at seeing their congre-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

76
MY PILGRIMAGE
gations becoming thin and the Scots church plethoric .
Nor did they fail to observe that notorious liberal thinkers
had pews in Strong's church, among them R . J. Jeffray,
a man of remarkable ability and influence .
The Bishop of Melbourne became implicated by con-
senting that a Broad-churchman, Rev. Mr. Bromby,
should exchange pulpits with Strong . In answer to ac-
cusations the bishop delivered an address before the
General Assembly so full of catholicity and liberalism
that in the discussion that followed his lordship was fairly
baited. He and his sister gave me an account of incidents
suppressed by the papers . Some of the laymen who arose
to speak were unable to do so because of their excite-
ment .
One, rising to call another to order, could get no
farther than " I ca-ca-ca " - The bishop entreated the
speakers to be calm and polite ; whereupon an opponent
exclaimed, " Your lordship, I call a spade a spade ."
"I am glad to hear it," said the bishop ; "from your tone
just now I should have expected you to call the spade a
sanguinary shovel ."
Bishop Moorhouse was entirely too fine a man to be hus-
tled by ignorant people . They were just at him again when
I met him. Miss Jennie Lee was having a grand success
as Jo in " Bleak House," and offered a benefit perform-
ance for a charity with which the bishop was connected .
The appearance of his name as patron of a theatrical per-
formance was the signal for an evangelical fire all along
the line . The pious hostility to the bishop was augmented
by his popularity among the cultured men of the world,
but I could see that he and his sister were tired of the
provincial tempests in teapots, and it was a relief to both
of them when he was made Bishop of Manchester .
In Australia I heard of several cases of insanity thatt he and his sister were tired of the
provincial tempests in teapots, and it was a relief to both
of them when he was made Bishop of Manchester .
In Australia I heard of several cases of insanity that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BALLARAT GOLD MINES
77
struck me as " antipodal." One was literally so - that of
a lunatic at Sydney, who, maintaining that at the anti-
podes all customs of the other hemisphere should be re-
versed, held his knife and fork by the blade and prongs,
ate with their handles, wrote from the bottom of a sheet
upwards, and so on . At the asylum near Hobart there
was a man who alternately fancied himself Christ and
Antichrist, his changes from one to the other being
sudden.
I saw a woman at Hobart who believed herself the queen
of England . She went about freely, and was treated with
a certain mock respect .
Brunton Stephens wrote a striking poem on a case said
to be genuine, -that of a shepherd who went mad on
hearing of the discovery of gold in a field where he bad
long tended herds, and which he had sold for a pittance .
The Australian gold-fields have been largely populated
with men who made each his pile of gold .
There is a
story that at Ballarat some were seen eating sandwiches
made of bread and bank-notes, in sheer bravado . The
absence of any near market depreciated their gold, and
they scattered it like chaff .
A few women who found
their way out among the tents that occupied the site of
Ballarat in 1860 were bid for and bought at auction for
sixty or seventy pounds apiece .
With Eustace Smith, M . P., I sank at Ballarat down
a narrow aperture eight hundred feet into the earth . We
had to dress for the descent in mud-spattered garb, huge
boots, and horrible hats, insomuch that we agreed to call
each other "bloke," and to divide any " swag " we could
annex in the mine . Through the slimy sides of the grave
we descended shuddering, and after sundry blood-curd.
ling creakings and stoppages, were deposited in a puddle .

--- PAGE BREAK ---" we could
annex in the mine . Through the slimy sides of the grave
we descended shuddering, and after sundry blood-curd.
ling creakings and stoppages, were deposited in a puddle .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

78
MY PILGRIMAGE
Clutching candles, we waded through white mud-puree
till we came upon men who, with a grunt or groan at
each stroke, picked at the hard quartz. For nine hours'
daily toil in this Hades each obtained seven shillings .
The workman's eye flashed as he told us, adding that he
had had about enough of it.
Then we went over the adjacent establishment, where
the quartz is crushed and washed, where the gold dust ad-
heres to the carpets and blankets over which the yellow
water passes, and so on through the stages by which the
mint is finally reached, and the gold goes forth with
saintly George and his bright-scaled dragon stamped on
it. That serpent on the English sovereign must eat the
dust all its days .
The first Australian digger was Edward
Hargraves,
who, having been reduced to sell his sheep as tallow in
Australia, migrated to the newly discovered gold-fields of
California. He did not do well there, but he observed the
similarity of the auriferous soil in California to some be
had noticed in New South Wales, whither he returned .
The Hon. Mr. McIntyre of the Victorian Parliament told
us that Captain Devlin met Hargraves in California and
assisted him to return to Sydney .
On an old horse, to
obtain which he had borrowed money at a hundred per
cent, Hargraves travelled to the Blue Mountains, telling
every one he met of his hopes .
All laughed at him save
one Mrs. Lister, at whose inn he stopped and who sent
her son to be his guide.
The gold was found and Har-
graves broke into a laugh, saying to young Lister,
1° This
is a memorable day in the history of New South Wales .
For this day's work I shall be created a baronet, you will
be knighted, and this old horse will be stuffed and sent
to the British Museum!"
But he was plain Edward

--- PAGE BREAK ---ew South Wales .
For this day's work I shall be created a baronet, you will
be knighted, and this old horse will be stuffed and sent
to the British Museum!"
But he was plain Edward

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PETER LALOR
79
Hargraves
still
(1883)
in Sydney, and had been re-
warded by fifteen thousand pounds for the Pactolus he
discovered for others .
He was more fortunate than the discoverer of gold in
Victoria, James Esmond, who also got his training in
California.
His discovery was near Ballarat, at a place
then called " Poverty Flat ." After getting a fair fortune,
poor Esmond lost it all in trying to make it bigger .
I had the pleasure of meeting the Hon. Peter Lalor,
speaker of the Victorian Parliament .
He was a striking
figure, but his glory was the stump of an arm lost while
fighting against the Victorian soldiery at the Eureka mine .
The government (under Governor Hotham) had imposed
on each digger the necessity of a license costing thirty
shillings a month. A man was liable to be suddenly ac-
costed by a policeman and his license demanded, and if he
did not happen to have it about him was at once chained
to a log, there to remain for trial next day .
The diggers'
blood boiled over at last, and in the way of old English
agitators they took to soldiering. They made Peter Lalor
captain, raised a flag, - the Southern Cross, - and built
a stockade. Government blood can boil too . At Ballarat
the soldiers attacked the stockade, and after a consider-
able number of lives were lost on both sides, the matter
was settled. The leading rioters were tried and acquitted ;
the license was reduced to one pound, then to ten shillings,
and finally to five .
My friend Mr . Jeffray, who was
among the early diggers, told me that once when some
measure was before the legislature involving the rights of
diggers, Peter Lalor, in speaking, made a gesture with the
stump of his arm which elicited a wild cheer from the
assembly and helped to carry his case .
So far as I could learn, comparatively few of the greatPeter Lalor, in speaking, made a gesture with the
stump of his arm which elicited a wild cheer from the
assembly and helped to carry his case .
So far as I could learn, comparatively few of the great

--- PAGE BREAK ---

80
MY PILGRIMAGE
fortunes of Australia had been built up on gold mines .
As we drove through Ballarat many houses were pointed
out far sunken in the earth by reason of the excavations
beneath them, and the wealth excavated appears to have
rested largely on a similarly insecure foundation . There
are true legends haunting these Australian gold-fields
which sound as if invented by some sage to teach the vanity
of luck. There is in Victoria a town of ruined
houses
-Matolock . Its life began in 1864, with a rush of dig-
gers. The last inhabitant left in 1879 .
In that fifteen
years Matolock bad found a fortune and seen it turn to
dross . The diggers lost their wits, as at Ballarat, lit their
pipes with bank-notes, and played at skittles with bottles
of champagne .
Deeson, the poor man who went out one day with his
children's hungry cries in his ears and returned with the
nugget (" Welcome Stranger ") that sold for ten thousand
pounds, was a man of good habits, but he did not know when
he had enough . He invested his fortune in machinery and
lost it all .
He toiled on through life in poverty a hun-
dred yards from the spot where a single stroke of his pick
turned up a fortune .
My visit to Tasmania was in response to an eminent
young barrister, Hon . A. Inglis Clark, just entering on
the public career which has given him fame as a jurist
and legislator.
(He is now (1906) attorney-general of
Tasmania.) He told me of a small club of liberal think-
ers who met together to read liberal works and discuss
important subjects.
The novel "For the Term of his Natural Life," by
Marcus Clarke, with its tragical power, had so darkened
that island that I shuddered at the thought of visiting it .
And on the voyage thither from Melbourne there was atTerm of his Natural Life," by
Marcus Clarke, with its tragical power, had so darkened
that island that I shuddered at the thought of visiting it .
And on the voyage thither from Melbourne there was at

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CAMPBELLITES
81
night an uncanny phenomenon : on one side of the ship
there appeared to be a hundred yards distant a gloomy
forest past which we sailed for hours. While walking the
deck about midnight I asked some passing officer what
land that was ; he said we were several hundred miles
from land.
All gruesome imagination about Tasmania vanished
when I found myself in the delightful home circle at Rose-
mont, residence of the Clarks at Hobart .
Beautiful for situation is Hobart, with its opalescent
harbour and the green mountains surrounding it . Over
it watches Mount Wellington, whose cloud-capped summit
I could not reach, but from whose high shoulder I saw the
finest scene I beheld in the colonies . Still more interest-
ing did I find my walks and talks in the fields with my phi-
losophical friends, at every step seeing new and curious
plants, flowers, birds, whose near acquaintance I was en-
abled to make by their scientific interpreter, Robert M .
Johnston. His intimacy with the fauna and flora and the
charm of his personality revived in me recollections of my
beloved teachers, Baird, Thoreau, Agassiz .
On Sunday morning I selected out of the list of
churches the smallest conventicle in Hobart, simply be-
cause it was " Campbellite." Alexander Campbell was
the only Virginian who ever founded a sect, a little brick
chapel in our town, Fredericksburg, being by tradition
the first built by Campbellism . I never entered that ex-
cept to hear Gough on temperance, but now availed
myself of my first opportunity to hear a "Campbellite"
sermon .
It turned out, however, that there was no
preacher. A shipwright and a saddler spoke briefly to
about thirty people, and one or two others said a few
words ; but all sang with fervour familiar hymns . Itturned out, however, that there was no
preacher. A shipwright and a saddler spoke briefly to
about thirty people, and one or two others said a few
words ; but all sang with fervour familiar hymns . It

--- PAGE BREAK ---

82
MY PILGRIMAGE
was all so humble as to be touching, and the pathos was
increased by the little fraternity's history, which I had
the curiosity to search out . Some years before there
had come to Hobart an evangelist from Kentucky . He
had a rapturous kind of eloquence, also a magnetic per-
sonality ; he drew large audiences, and filled some with
the enthusiasm that built for him this little chapel.
After a time family affairs called him back to Ken-
tucky, but he left a promise that he would return . But
year after year passed without their hearing from him
;
some of the fathers fell asleep ; their children asked,
" Where is the promise of his coming? " and fell away ;
and only a few of the old congregation remained. These
poor people still cherished the faith that their inspired
founder would come again to them . I had reasons for
believing that he would never return .
Ah, my poor " Campbellite " brothers, how many times
in later years have I remembered you sitting there in
Hobart and keeping alive the memory of your leader
As I have strolled through Concord and about Walden,
remembering how we walked there with Emerson and
Thoreau, and about London, meeting no more the morning
face of Browning or the deep eyes of Carlyle - but the
list would be long of the bereavements that remind me
of those lowly watchers for their Beloved, who would
never return.
After listening to the Campbellites we walked to a hill,
which having no name I insisted should be called Tran-
sit Hill. On this pleasant elevation, covered with sward,
many children were playing around the queer iron pillar
four feet high and the square flat stone which the Amer-
ican astronomers set there when they observed the transit
of Venus. In climbing this height and the great Mountng around the queer iron pillar
four feet high and the square flat stone which the Amer-
ican astronomers set there when they observed the transit
of Venus. In climbing this height and the great Mount

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AUSTRALIAN BIRDS
83
Nelson, we made our way over the fallen trunks of
enormous tree ferns which were piled one on another,
and looked like huge saurians .
Agassiz said to our class at Cambridge, "There are
jokes in nature." One or two examples I remarked in
the fauna of Australia. There is a funny pertness in the
"hand-fish" that climbs up on the beach and props
itself on its fingers and inspects one curiously .
The
°1 laughing-jackass " cannot be heard without responsive
laughter, especially if one can see the bird while it is
"performing, for it seems so very solemn just before and
after it has filled the air with inextinguishable laughter .
The he-haw inhalations ending the laugh suggest
the
"jackass." It seems a kind of burly kingfisher, dressed
in white and brown, with slightly crested head and a
remarkably bright eye.
It is never killed - not in
Victoria because its skill in destroying snakes protects
it legally, and in other colonies a friendly feeling pro-
tects it.
In the bush it is called the « settler's clock,"
because it sings - though not exclusively - at sunrise
and sunset .
There is a general belief that the Australian birds,
though fine in plumage, are poor songsters, and when
pretty songs are heard in the Botanical Gardens it is
common to hear them ascribed to imported varieties .
But in this the Australians are in danger of falling
into the mistake that the old Virginians made in calling
their best songster the
11 English mockingbird ."
In the
Australian woods and gardens are some notes not to be
beard elsewhere : those of the honey-eater, which is like
touches on a guitar ; the bell-bird, hearing whose tinkle
a wanderer, it is said, knows that water is near ; and the
flute-like notes of the magpie . The magpie' is the pet ofney-eater, which is like
touches on a guitar ; the bell-bird, hearing whose tinkle
a wanderer, it is said, knows that water is near ; and the
flute-like notes of the magpie . The magpie' is the pet of

--- PAGE BREAK ---like
touches on a guitar ; the bell-bird, hearing whose tinkle
a wanderer, it is said, knows that water is near ; and the
flute-like notes of the magpie . The magpie' is the pet of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

t
r
84
MY PILGRIMAGE
colonial homes and is taught songs. In Hobart I was
awakened the morning after my arrival by a neigh-
bouring magpie, whose matin was " Polly, put the kettle
on," to which another responded with half the theme
of " The Bould Soldier Boy ." As to plumage, the won-
derful decoration of the lyre-bird is hardly paralleled ;
but I was especially interested in the "firetail," because
of the native fancy that the touch of pure fire on its tail
came through its ancestors having been scorched in
saving an ember for man when some demon was robbing
him of the Promethean blessing.
In California I had been admonished to be careful
about the " Tasmanian Devils." At Auckland I heard
this animal described as fierce, untamable, dangerous . At
Sydney the Tasmanian Devil was described as fierce but
not often encountered ; at Melbourne he diminished into
" an ugly little beast." In Tasmania the little nocturnal
creature is very timid and so rare that I sought it in vain .
Sic transit gloria diabolorum .
The queerest thing I saw was the so-called
" bulrush
caterpillar " or " vegetable caterpillar." This also is found
in New Zealand, where the natives name it " Aweto-Ho-
tete ;" but two specimens found in Tasmania were given
me by the librarian of Hobart, Alfred Taylor, to whom I
am indebted for the facts about it. The plant is a fungus,
a sphoeria, which grows seven or eight inches above the
ground, generally in a single stem, round, and curving at
the end like a serpent . This end is thickly covered with
brown seed for some three inches . It grows near the root
of a particular tree, the "rata ." When pulled up its
single root is found to consist of a large caterpillar three
inches long, which is solid wood . Every detail of this
grub is preserved . The sph aria always grows out of therata ." When pulled up its
single root is found to consist of a large caterpillar three
inches long, which is solid wood . Every detail of this
grub is preserved . The sph aria always grows out of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---up its
single root is found to consist of a large caterpillar three
inches long, which is solid wood . Every detail of this
grub is preserved . The sph aria always grows out of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

s
EX-CONVICTS
85
nape of the neck, strikes root, and completely turns the in-
terior of the creature into its own substance .
Externally
the shell is left intact, no smaller rootlet appearing any-
where. The aborigines in New Zealand eat this pure
white grub, and Mr . Taylor said that taken raw it is de-
licious. They also burn the caterpillar-root and
rub it
into their tattoo wounds. A good many white people be-
lieve *that the plant actually develops the caterpillar form,
and we cannot laugh much at our ancestors who believed
in the vegetable Scythian Lamb and the Mandrake Man,
of which last a specimen is preserved at London in the
Sloane Museum .
The great surprise that awaited me in Tasmania was
its representative character in an important feature of
civilization. It is probable that the thrilling novel of
Marcus Clarke, " For the Term of His Natural Life," with
its terrible pictures of prison life at Norfolk Island, had
something to do with making the institution compara-
tively excellent, - I went through it observingly, - but
also with the steady emptying of it by the passing of its
inmates to the freedom of good service in Tasmania .
The
stout arms and strong passions which in the crowded cities
of Great Britain ,were trained only to crime had here made
Tasmania into a garden . By good behaviour and service
the exiles after a time obtained release from penal labour,
though not liberty to leave Tasmania . With some little
means to begin with they generally become useful inhabit-
ants, and rarely return to crime .
A lady told me that
the best nurse for her children she ever had was a young
woman who, as she afterwards discovered, had been trans-
ported from England for killing her illegitimate child . A
good many of the sentences are for limited periods, but
most of the exiles prefer to remain in Tasmania .erwards discovered, had been trans-
ported from England for killing her illegitimate child . A
good many of the sentences are for limited periods, but
most of the exiles prefer to remain in Tasmania .

--- PAGE BREAK ---had been trans-
ported from England for killing her illegitimate child . A
good many of the sentences are for limited periods, but
most of the exiles prefer to remain in Tasmania .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

86
MY PILGRIMAGE
Numerous stories are told about these criminals . One
was of an English judge who visited Hobart, and went
into a barber-shop. The barber while shaving him said,
"Judge, you don't remember me." The judge said he
did not, and the barber continued, " I have the advantage
of your honour ; you gave me six years out here ! "
The
razor moved gently, however, over the judge's throat, and
he paid a good fee for a good story to tell in London .
I cannot vouch for the exactness of that incident, but
one occurred in my own experience . In company with a
young Englishman I drove about in a thinly settled part
of Tasmania. At noon we halted at a small tavern to
get refreshments for ourselves and our horse . In the
parlour we found two respectable men with greyish hair
and spectacles, playing cribbage . In conversation we in-
quired something about convicts said to be working in
that district, and they said there were a good many and
doing well . One of these pleasant persons went out with
my companion to see about our horse ; the other one, when
we were alone, advised me to be careful how I talked
about convicts, adding, " That man I was playing with
came out from England under unpleasant circumstances ."
After our good luncheon and departure, my companion
told me that the man who went with him gave the same
advice, remarking that his opponent at cribbage had come
out originally as a convict. Of course I cannot be certain
that these elderly persons had not devised a little comedy
for the entertainment of inquisitive strangers .
The last of the Tasmanians has perished. In English
imaginations the natives had loomed up into ferocious crea-
tures ; the phrase
G° Native Devils" paralleled "Tasmanian
Devils." A considerable number of troops were sent out to
search for natives, but could find none . At last they madeup into ferocious crea-
tures ; the phrase
G° Native Devils" paralleled "Tasmanian
Devils." A considerable number of troops were sent out to
search for natives, but could find none . At last they made

--- PAGE BREAK ---ea-
tures ; the phrase
G° Native Devils" paralleled "Tasmanian
Devils." A considerable number of troops were sent out to
search for natives, but could find none . At last they made

--- PAGE BREAK ---

0
EXTINCTION OF TASMANIANS
87
a cordon across one end of Tasmania and advanced day
by day across the whole island, catching in their net two
aged people! Their photographs were said to be those of
the native king and queen : the faces are haggard and dis-
figured by want and woe.
The extermination of a race by no means bloodthirsty
was not due to British violence, but to ignorant and puri-
tanical missions. The earlier missionaries were self-sacri-
ficing, but as of old it was not the worldly pagan em-
perors who persecuted, but the religious ones, so it was
those missionaries who took their dogmas seriously who
did the great mischief in Tasmania . In 1834, as Aus-
tralian annals record,
11 a fund was raised in England
for the purpose of clothing the native women . Among
the subscribers were the Duchess of Kent, Lady Noel
Byron, and the Hon . Mrs. Wilbraham ." It was these
pious prudes who killed off the Tasmanians . It was the
belief of every scientific man I met that they all were
attacked by tuberculosis soon after they put on clothing .
I lectured in various parts of Tasmania, and had the
honour of being attacked in the papers by orthodox writers .
My lectures were not theological, but my account of Lon-
don, my sketches of scientific men, and the fact that I
was there by invitation of distinguished rationalists gave
sufficient ground for this clerical imprudence, which filled
my halls wherever I went .
One thing especially impressed me in the religious
atmosphere throughout Australia : there was a friendly
alliance between Freethinkers and Spiritualists. The
whole population seemed to have their eyes set inviolably
on the future life . Most of them or their fathers had
migrated to that distant shore to seek their fortunes, and
then to return to the old threshold and the loved heartsave their eyes set inviolably
on the future life . Most of them or their fathers had
migrated to that distant shore to seek their fortunes, and
then to return to the old threshold and the loved hearts

--- PAGE BREAK ---

88
MY PILGRIMAGE'
at home. The emigrants were no doubt mostly of san-
guine temperament, eagerly looking forward, and per-
haps there may have been thus engendered the spirit
that "never is, but always to be, blest ."
I was shown a paper read to the club by the natu-
ralist Robert M. Johnston, on " Common Fungoid Illu-
sions," accompanied by a diagram showing the relative
value of observations, as determined by the nature of the
testimony and other conditions under which the obser-
vations are made . There are shown the gradations from
the scientific evidence, where all the senses in their health,
specially trained, in good position, equipped with tested
instruments, conduct the inquiry, through observations
made where these aids one after another fail, down to
the lowest degree, the zero of intelligence - insanity .
"The insane are forced by disease to live always within
a world of wonders such as those sought after at times by
the ignorant."
On my voyage from Tasmania I read three novelettes
about ideal islands or societies,
The Garden of Eden,"
"The Island of Dubitadiva" (by James Smith), "A Few
Hours in a Far-off Age " (by Mrs. H. A. Dugdale), and
closed them all with a feeling that it would suffice could
I dwell with that circle of aspiring spirits at Hobart to
whom I had just bidden a last farewell .
Between Melbourne and Sydney one travels nearly a
day amid gum-trees, whose trunks, according to one's
mood, may seem silvery or blanched in death .
Many of
them are indeed dead, girdled by the farmers . The bush
has a desolate look. In the grey morning, as our train
passed, a large "native bear" was seen clasping a tele-
graph pole. As to bears are attributed a passion for honey,
I believed it was a cub deluded into the belief that thegrey morning, as our train
passed, a large "native bear" was seen clasping a tele-
graph pole. As to bears are attributed a passion for honey,
I believed it was a cub deluded into the belief that the

--- PAGE BREAK ---r train
passed, a large "native bear" was seen clasping a tele-
graph pole. As to bears are attributed a passion for honey,
I believed it was a cub deluded into the belief that the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INAPPROPRIATE NAMES'
89
humming of the wires indicated the proximity of a hive .
My theory was speedily upset by the reminder that the
" native bear " is no bear at all, but a marsupial (koala)
;
however, it loves fruit, and possibly honey . A way the
Australians have of calling things by inappropriate names
is inconvenient . Their bear is no bear, their whiting fish
is no fish, their flying fox is only a big bat, their cherry
is no cherry. Most of us have heard it reported that
"Australia is a place where the oysters grow on trees,
the fences are made of mahogany, and cherries grow with
their stones outside." There is no real mahogany-tree
in the country, so far as I could learn ; the so-called
" cherry " is a kind of cypress whose stones do grow out-
side its red berry ;
and the truth of the oyster saying
is that about some harbours oysters cover the beach rocks
and occasionally the roots and fallen trunks of trees grow-
ing near the water.
When I was seated at the hospitable table of Bishop
Moorhouse and listening to Rev. Charles Strong in Mel-
bourne, I little supposed that I should ever add to the
troubles of either of those gentlemen ; still less that they
would ever add to mine . So, however, it came about .
Be-
fore my arrival in Melbourne the agent into whose hands
my scheme of lectures had been entrusted had issued cir-
culars that when I saw them took my breath away . I
was proclaimed as "the famous Champion of Civil and
Religious Liberty," etc., and all this was
succeeded by
the following quotations : -
As yet struggles the twelfth
hour of the Night .
Birds of darkness are on the wing ; spectres uprear ; the
dead walk ; the living dream. Thou, Eternal Providence,
wilt make the Day dawn . -Jean Paul.
God speed Mr . Justice Higinbotham, and teach him,irds of darkness are on the wing ; spectres uprear ; the
dead walk ; the living dream. Thou, Eternal Providence,
wilt make the Day dawn . -Jean Paul.
God speed Mr . Justice Higinbotham, and teach him,

--- PAGE BREAK ---on the wing ; spectres uprear ; the
dead walk ; the living dream. Thou, Eternal Providence,
wilt make the Day dawn . -Jean Paul.
God speed Mr . Justice Higinbotham, and teach him,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

90
MY PILGRIMAGE
by methods which we cannot follow, secrets of divine
truth which may glorify his Master and ours .
He is
still our brother by virtue of his true love for Christ
. -
Bishop Moorhouse .
There are plain enough
indications - witness the
bringing out of Mr. Moncure Conway - that sooner or
later the Battle must come . - Rev. D. A% M'F,achran.
In view of recent events and of the present ferment
in the public mind, Mr. Conway's visit to this city ap-
pears to be very opportune . - The Argus .
The three quotations following that from Jean Paul
Richter fairly conscripted me into the vanguard of an
imminent battle of whose conditions I knew nothing .
The very names of the four generals were given . My
lectures closed at Melbourne on October 16, and on No-
vember 12 the General Assembly of the Presbyterian
Church of Victoria was to meet.
The Melbourne organ
of the anti-Strong party, " Daily Telegraph " (which had
ingeniously utilized my statements), detached from their
context, to fling at Moorhouse and Strong, mixed my
humble self up with those leaders on the morning of the
General Assembly's meeting in an adroit leader .
I cite a
specimen : -
The chief disturbing influence which threatens the Pres-
byterian Assembly comes from outside .
One, at least, of
our contemporaries undertook long ago the cheerful task
of writing the Presbyterian Church out of existence .
The only thing it has yet succeeded in destroying is its
own literary reputation and the patience of its readers
;
still it sticks to its curious policy with a perseverance
worthy of a better cause . Mr. Moncure D. Conway's
cheerful theory about the churches is that they are inspired
and kept going by the devil.
He "keeps the churches
flourishing," and " provides Christians with their reli-
gion." It would "be impossible," Mr . Moncure D . Con-e churches is that they are inspired
and kept going by the devil.
He "keeps the churches
flourishing," and " provides Christians with their reli-
gion." It would "be impossible," Mr . Moncure D . Con-

--- PAGE BREAK ---hey are inspired
and kept going by the devil.
He "keeps the churches
flourishing," and " provides Christians with their reli-
gion." It would "be impossible," Mr . Moncure D . Con-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MY FAME IN SYDNEY
91
way assures mankind, "for any church to last long without
the devil."
Our contemporary publishes this remarkable
theory of the origin and nature of churches to the world,
and evidently itself acts upon it .
The statement in my lecture on Demonology, thus clipped
up for a purpose, was an account of the part played by
Satan and Antichrist in ancient times in terrorizing the
people, and the degree to which in recent times " the ter-
rors of the Law " stimulated revivals . I invited an inter-
view with a representative of the "Melbourne Argus" for
the purpose of relieving the bishop and Mr . Strong from
any participation in my views, and went off to Sydney
with sorrow that I should be made to add any weight to
the millstone around their neck .
But when I reached Sydney I found reason for dismay
at the millstone those gentlemen had hung around my neck .
The "Melbourne Daily Telegraph" and other sectarian
organs, also an ingenious Melbourne correspondent of the
" Sydney Herald," had given me a fame in Sydney ludi-
crously disproportionate to my deserts
; and though prob-
ably none of my accusers reverenced the character of
Jesus more than I did, I found myself a full-blown apos-
tle of Antichrist. The eyes of all Australia, and especially
of Sydney, were fixed on the General Assembly that met
for combat November 12, and on the evening of November
13 my opening lecture in Sydney had to be given. The
subject I had announced was " Toleration of Opinion, or
Pleas for Persecution." My first lecture in Melbourne
was on " The Pre-Darwinite and Post-Darwinite World ."
Although introduced with personal recollections of Darwin
that were applauded, my statement of the extent to which
religious philosophy had been affected by his great gener-
alization excited an outburst in the sectarian organs, andl recollections of Darwin
that were applauded, my statement of the extent to which
religious philosophy had been affected by his great gener-
alization excited an outburst in the sectarian organs, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---arwin
that were applauded, my statement of the extent to which
religious philosophy had been affected by his great gener-
alization excited an outburst in the sectarian organs, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

99,
MY PILGRIMAGE
I resolved to put my right foot foremost in Sydney . I bad
taken the utmost pains to make my lecture on Toleration
conciliatory . It was given in Protestant Hall, the chief
one in Sydney, to a good audience which included the Pre-
mier, Sir Joseph Parkes, other ministers, and eminent
citizens. But hardly had I given the exordium when
crowds assembled at the doors and windows, shouting Sal-
vation Army hymns. Each crowd sang a different hymn,
the result being a confusion of yells which my voice could
hardly surmount . When, however, these noisy saints dis-
covered that my voice was not quite drowned, some of
them repaired to a bowling alley adjoining a wall of the
hall and zealously rolled the balls .'
Care was taken by the managers of Protestant Hall
that the annoyance should not be repeated, but the balls
went on rolling in the °° Sydney Herald," where in anony-
mous letters my lectures were distorted. For instance, I
gave a sketch of Cardinal Newman, and of my going some
distance on a terribly wintry morning at daybreak to his
oratory (Birmingham), where he usually conducted mass,
i My case, however, was mild compared with that of an Orangeman who
ventured to speak in the hall shortly before. This was at a Home Rule
meeting gathered to listen to John Redmond, M . P. Redmond's thrilling
eloquence had excited his Irish audience to the last degree of intensity . After
he had finished, the bland Irish chairman said that if any one wanted to
put a question Mr. Redmond would answer it . Whereupon the Orange-
man rose and said sharply, " I wish to put a question." He was invited to
the platform, where he began some sharp criticisms, when an excited Home
Ruler on the platform steps jumped up and felled him . He lay apparently
dead, and had to be carried out into a back room, a doctor following . There
was a wild scene, the crowd rising up and yelling " fair play, " " served him
right," etc. It was long before quiet could be restored . The little chair-
man, totally without humour, then said politely, "Does any other gentleman
wish to ask a question ? "
No one responded . I afterwards met Mr. Red-
mond, who told me that this story was very near the fact.totally without humour, then said politely, "Does any other gentleman
wish to ask a question ? "
No one responded . I afterwards met Mr. Red-
mond, who told me that this story was very near the fact.

--- PAGE BREAK ---our, then said politely, "Does any other gentleman
wish to ask a question ? "
No one responded . I afterwards met Mr. Red-
mond, who told me that this story was very near the fact.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FRIENDS AND ENTERTAINERS
93
though hardly expecting that the aged man would arise on
such a bitter morning, substitutes being at hand . His pre-
sence on that occasion, when only two or three attended,
was mentioned with admiration, and every word I said
was to his credit. Yet some silly - or malicious - Catho-
lic described what I said as an attack on the cardinal
!
Though other statements about my twelve lectures were
equally misleading, this particular one annoyed me most
because it had been a sort of specialty of my ministry for
thirty years to maintain that Protestantism, theologically
and morally, was a relapse into the stony ages from the
height to which evolution had carried Catholicism, with
its merry Sunday, antiquated dogmas, exaltation of a
feminine divinity, and cult of the fine arts.
But a good many in Sydney were ashamed of its hor-
nets. The chief club (Union) elected me an honorary
member, and I met there cultured gentlemen, besides
being able to escape from the poor " chief hotel " to good
accommodations in the club.
I was invited to give the
annual lecture before the philosophical and
scientific
institution, and for some days was the guest of the admir-
able Justice Windeyer, who presided on that occasion .
Several ladies whom I had known in London, married in
Sydney to excellent men, entertained me in their houses,
arranged pretty excursions for me, and introduced me
to the best people .
The Fates, who during my first week
in Sydney were ugly as Furies, presently took on the
lineaments of the Windeyer ladies, of Mrs . Heron, Mrs .
Harris, and in their beautiful homes my hurts were healed .
In fact I b-pgan to excuse the hornets .
As a lecturer I
was a disappointment to the average lecture-goer ; I was
not a " spell-binder," taking up large world-themes, with
a millennial magic-lantern throwing on the popular eyethe hornets .
As a lecturer I
was a disappointment to the average lecture-goer ; I was
not a " spell-binder," taking up large world-themes, with
a millennial magic-lantern throwing on the popular eye

--- PAGE BREAK ---lecturer I
was a disappointment to the average lecture-goer ; I was
not a " spell-binder," taking up large world-themes, with
a millennial magic-lantern throwing on the popular eye

--- PAGE BREAK ---

e
94
MY PILGRIMAGE
visions of England, America, Australia, transfigured in
the near future. My mission, if I had any, was still to
individual minds . I lectured about the great literary and
scientific men whom I had known in Europe and America,
trying to interpret their influence and their contributions
to thought and knowledge . In a sense these were to the
masses another-worldly interests, while I was not other-
worldly enough in religion . An eminent scholar said to
me, "Nearly every thinker in Sydney agrees with you, but
we do not speak publicly on such subjects . Why reason
with people who do not know the meaning of reason? "
The fusion of Freethought and Spiritualism (or Theoso-
phy), elsewhere referred to, had become so complete in
Sydney that an orator combined both in his lectures in a
theatre every Sunday evening . I regretted not hearing
this able man, Charles Bright, who insisted that I should
take his place on my only remaining Sunday. The theatre
was crowded, more than three thousand being present .
This strange movement had, I was told, almost swallowed
up Unitarianism. Thewidow of the latest Unitarian min-
ister (Mr. Pillars) .had married Charles Bright, and had
been occasionally lecturing for her husband in the theatre
with much effect.
About the same time a female evan-
gelist, Mrs. Hammond, was drawing larger crowds than
any regular preacher attracted . This revivalist was preach-
ing in Sydney while I was there, and in my fifth lecture
(°° Woman and Evolution ") I referred to her apostolate
as showing how far society had travelled away from the
Pauline doctrine against women preachers, and congratu-
lated the city on having two eloquent ladies in the reli-,
gious conflict of the time .
In the Museum I saw the newly discovered skull of the
Thylacoles. When Professor Owen was in Australia hegratu-
lated the city on having two eloquent ladies in the reli-,
gious conflict of the time .
In the Museum I saw the newly discovered skull of the
Thylacoles. When Professor Owen was in Australia he

--- PAGE BREAK ---y on having two eloquent ladies in the reli-,
gious conflict of the time .
In the Museum I saw the newly discovered skull of the
Thylacoles. When Professor Owen was in Australia he

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BOTANY BAY
95
was shown a small bone which puzzled his friend Dr .
George Bennett (who repeated to me the story) and other
naturalists in Sydney. Owen drew an outline of the head
of the unknown animal suggested to him by the bone . I
was able to compare the drawing with the complete skull
(found in 1881), and the two - especially the jaws - con-
formed remarkably.
In the admirable Zoological Gardens I saw some large
ground parrots, a New Zealand bird once of good char-
acter, but sadly demoralized by the introduction of Eng-
lish sheep . For a long time it contented itself with thefts
of fleece, but at length took to perching on the back of
sheep and digging down till it drew out the kidneys . This
was the only part of the sheep it seemed to relish . It
may have been once a pretty parrot, but those I saw were
ugly assassins, the breast coloured like rusty iron. I
showed my horror of their crime by lunching on cold
parrot at the first opportunity, and during the indiges-
tion speculated on the moral effect likely to be produced
on Anglo-Saxon humanity by transplantation amid the
strange fauna of the southwestern hemisphere .
Some friends took me on an afternoon excursion down
the harbour to Botany Bay . I thought it a gruesome direc-
tion, but found to my amazement that Botany Bay was not
and never had been a convict settlement. When anciently
the first shipload of convicts arrived, it was decided that
the place would not answer at all, and the prison was
erected far away near Darling Point. But consignments
from England, where the change was for a time unknown,
continued to be directed to Botany Bay . In this way the
name of a favourite bathing place has become proverbial
for the wretchedness that is nearer to the sweet name
"Darling." Here, then, was another parable !o be directed to Botany Bay . In this way the
name of a favourite bathing place has become proverbial
for the wretchedness that is nearer to the sweet name
"Darling." Here, then, was another parable !

--- PAGE BREAK ---

96
MY PILGRIMAGE
Justice Windeyer, a learned Freethinker and Spirit-
ualist, told me that a large number of those who listened
with highest appreciation to my lectures still remarked
with regret the absence from them of anything relating
to the spirit-world . I discovered that the same "medium,"
Foster, who twenty-five years before had made a ridiculous
fiasco in my house in Cincinnati, had afterwards con-
verted multitudes in Australia. After his lectures, said
Justice Windeyer, he gave all who came up to him mes-
sages from their departed friends, the recipients bursting
into exclamations of joy and happy tears . Another very
learned gentleman, Professor John Smith, was inclined to
credit the marvels of Madame Blavatsky, and made me
promise to visit her in India and test her powers .
I derived from my experiences in Australia a suspicion
that veracity affects but little beliefs involving the im-
mediate happiness of the world . If an error increases
what the mass of men deem their well-being and happi-
ness, no demonstration of its erroneousness can do more
than cause it to cast an old skin and slip into another .
One of my lectures in Sydney was on "The New Pro-
metheus, or the Martyrdom of Thought," in which I re-
lated -the legend that Prometheus, in order to make man
attend to his present world, took from him faith in a future
life, and left him only the hope .
But evolution has over-
ruled Prometheus. The majority of mankind find that life
is hardly worth attending to, or even worth living, unless
it be the vestibule to a world in which their ideals are
realized . Human evolution, therefore, has turned the Pro-
methean hope into a faith, and this, true or not, will con-
tinue under one form or another unless a new human
species is formed .ideals are
realized . Human evolution, therefore, has turned the Pro-
methean hope into a faith, and this, true or not, will con-
tinue under one form or another unless a new human
species is formed .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER V
Colonial Chauvinism -King George's Sound - Weird coast names- Aus-
tralian aborigines - An uncivilizable maiden - Dangers of federation -
Krakatoan lava - Voltaire and Wesley on the. Lisbon earthquake .
T
HE Australians could never forgive Anthony Trollope
for calling them " a nation of blowers ." The novelist
said a hundred good things of them, but his whole pot of
ointment was ruined by that fly . No doubt it was a hasty
generalization on his experience of some gentleman whose
loyalty to his colony amounted to lunacy. I met one such
on my travels . He had travelled around the world, and
found nothing of any kind comparable to the correspond-
ing thing in Australia. He had visited every theatre in
Europe, and never seen any actor who would be more
than tolerated on the Melbourne stage . He would not
deny that England contained some fine people, but he
had not seen a gentleman in America. Nor had he seen
a well-formed sheep or cow in America. And so on. The
Australians who heard all this sat on the enthusiasm of
their countryman, and snubbed him fiercely ; they feared
I would 1 1 trollop " their whole country on his account, and
explained him away as well as they could. But I reassured
them, by rather taking the side of the fanatic, and cit-
ing the opinion of a philosopher that no great enterprise
is ever completely carried out without its assuming celes-
tial proportions in some minds. It requires a degree of
enthusiasm amounting to semi-craziness to cause a man
to do his whole part in the development of a colony . An
old farmer, who had toiled sixty years near little Abbots-

--- PAGE BREAK ---degree of
enthusiasm amounting to semi-craziness to cause a man
to do his whole part in the development of a colony . An
old farmer, who had toiled sixty years near little Abbots-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

98
MY PILGRIMAGE
bury in England without leaving it, was visited when
dying by the clergyman, who spoke to him of the joys of
heaven .
" It may be a very good place," said the dying
farmer, "but for a constancy give me Abbotsbury ."
Yet oftener was I reminded, especially in the way so
many speak of England as "home," that with all their
loyalty to Australia a majority of the people have a sub-
conscious feeling of exile .
When our homeward-bound
ship was about leaving Melbourne, large numbers crowded
to the deck to see us off .
There were partings, and I
thought I observed more tears shed by those left behind
than by those departing .
Somehow the multitude sug-
gested a vision of shades on either side of the Styx, some
longing for Charon to ferry them over to Elysium, the
Elysians longing to voyage back to the upper earth
.
We stopped half a day in beautiful Adelaide, where I
was able to pass a few happy hours with a family of dear
friends I bad known in London .
Early in the morning we approached the coast of West
Australia, and a forbidding coast it is -low, sandy, tree-
less land, breaking up at length into promontories and
islets of scarred rock .
Who could have been the bold
man who first fixed his abode at King George's Sound?
It was amid such blanched crags that Mephistopheles ad-
vised Faust that theologians displayed less wisdom than
peasants who called such places after the devil-Devil's
bridge, Devil's punch-bowl, and the like . They who
named these sea rocks guarding King George's Sound
have not gone the length of the Mephistophelian theory,
but they have interpreted the stern chaos of the coast .
The first island, a black rock, resembles a pallid cof-
fin in the distance, and is named "Coffin Island." Far-
ther on we find " False Island " and
11 Mistaken Island ."he stern chaos of the coast .
The first island, a black rock, resembles a pallid cof-
fin in the distance, and is named "Coffin Island." Far-
ther on we find " False Island " and
11 Mistaken Island ."

--- PAGE BREAK ---e coast .
The first island, a black rock, resembles a pallid cof-
fin in the distance, and is named "Coffin Island." Far-
ther on we find " False Island " and
11 Mistaken Island ."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

COAST NAMES
99
On enquiring of some one familiar with the coast the
origin of some of the names, he did not know, but sug-
gested explanations of a depressing character : " Eclipse
Islands " were probably named after some ship wrecked
on them, and perhaps 11 Two People's Bay " marked where
two people perished. Why might it not be that two young
people - like the eloped and forgiven young people whose
bon eymoon began on our ship - there found their para-
dise ?
Up Rhode Island harbour the early mariners sailed
past islands named Faith, Hope, and Charity, landing at
Providence, where Roger Williams had founded the first
religiously free and tolerant state ever known in Christen-
dom .
But no Christian colony on our planet is now
benign enough to suggest optimistic names' for its hard
features. The aborigines of Australia, if they ever believed
in any beneficent powers, have lost them under British
rule, and now believe only in the evil ones . And the Eng-
lish navigators followed them in their instinctive pessi-
mism, as we follow the navigators. None of us looks at the
hard, unfriendly coast without feeling that the two people
never went to Two People's Bay willingly ; they were
drowned, or perhaps gibbeted there .
And yet there were
a thousand people dwelling at Albany willingly, nestling
between the sea and the rock hills .
We entered Albany Harbour between an ugly Scylla
and a dismal Charybdis, listening to an account of how the
Clyde was wrecked there. Having gone ashore on a launch,
I caught sight of a newspaper sign and promptly entered .
The editor of the "Albany Mail" was cordial and in-
telligent, and his four weekly pages were well worth the
sixpence they cost . The paper, started that year (1883),
had collected facts about the settlement .
In 1826 a
rumour reached Sydney that the French intended to occupyweekly pages were well worth the
sixpence they cost . The paper, started that year (1883),
had collected facts about the settlement .
In 1826 a
rumour reached Sydney that the French intended to occupy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

100
MY PILGRIMAGE
King George's Sound, and a military force with a gang of
convicts was sent to take possession . The panic about
the French proved idle, the conversion of the natives was
undertaken, and in 1834, though no clergyman could be
got to go, the pious ladies in London sent out the evan-
gelical clothing by which the poor Australians were
rapidly killed off.
Albany was delightfully primitive . The walls were
placarded with notices signed by its two justices of the
peace, giving a list of names of persons (Europeans) to
whom it is forbidden to sell alcoholic drinks . A law for-
bade selling liquor to aborigines, only about twenty of
whom. were left at Albany . It was said that eighty miles
away there were five hundred. They are communists,
those who earn anything from the whites sharing it with
the rest .
I saw a lovely half-caste girl of about ten years in the
village, but had to go a mile out to find other aborigines .
Five or six of us went, and the natives were evidently
expecting visitors from the ship. Twelve - all pure
blooded- presented themselves, petitioning for " bobs."
They have that word for shillings, and I also observed
that their best talker in English dropped and inserted
her " h " in cockney style . They were all related to each
other, and were in trouble because one of their number
had been locked up for fourteen days. The prisoner's
wife walked in proud distress, a conscious object of com-
passion. Finding that she spoke English fairly well, I
asked her what had been her husband's offence . « De-
serted his master," she answered .
" It is wrong, it is
wrong," said the oldest of the men .
The language in which those people conversed with each
other was musical, and their voices in pleasant contrast

--- PAGE BREAK ---answered .
" It is wrong, it is
wrong," said the oldest of the men .
The language in which those people conversed with each
other was musical, and their voices in pleasant contrast

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ABORIGINAL
" KISSES"
101
with their general appearance . They were darker than I
expected, though the men and two of the women had made
themselves like chromo-lithographs with ochre, which
they called " wilgee ." The women used it only on their
cheeks, but most of the men were smeared from head to
foot. Some one told me it was put on to keep away ver-
min, and I did observe that the peculiarly pertinacious
flies of Albany did not alight on these living chromos so
much as on the rest of us . But the more probable expla-
nation is the fierce, fiery appearance it gave them, making
them terrible and demoniac to their foes . That may be
the reason why the ochre is mostly used by the men .
The men were pleasant to their women, but it was told
me in the village that when a man was leaving home for
a hunt requiring some weeks' absence he sometimes
wounded his wife with a spear sufficiently to make sure
of her remaining at home until his return. On the back
of every woman's shoulder a regular series of five or six
scars, each about two inches long, excited my curiosity ;
a " gin " woman told me they were her lover's " kisses ."
Such lacerations . are made at regular intervals by the
lover up to the time of marriage .
" On my breast, too,"
she said, but that was carefully concealed by a kanga-
roo skin . She then pointed to a jagged four-inch scar on
the inside of her forearm and said proudly, "When he
make that I am married ." It is not easy to astonish
these astonishing people, but I managed to do it by ask-
ing the men to show me the corresponding caresses
gashed on them . No such scar existed, of course, but
smiles were exchanged by the women . The most aged
of the women bad her face also scarred, which looks as if
the earlier treatment of her sex might have been even
more severe.existed, of course, but
smiles were exchanged by the women . The most aged
of the women bad her face also scarred, which looks as if
the earlier treatment of her sex might have been even
more severe.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

102
MY PILGRIMAGE
We were shown their exercises with spear, waddy,
and boomerang. The performances were most wonderful .
With their ten-foot finger-thick switch of a spear they
struck a shilling on a stick fifty feet away . The waddy, a
heavy yard-long inch-thick stick, was also thrown with
precision. The hurling of the boomerang was as beautiful
as amazing. Thrown at a point near the ground twenty
yards ahead, it gradually rises beyond, and curving up-
ward a hundred feet, soars back and alights behind the
thrower at the distance he desires. The boomerang re-
volves swiftly on its passage through the air and has a
beautiful falcon-like appearance . I was never weary of
watching this marvel of savage skill and strength, and
they were delighted with hly admiration, especially so
long as it was represented in shillings . I purchased the
best boomerang, though the owner was reluctant to sell it.
But nobody believes in the boomerang miracle who has
not seen it.
An amateur photographer was with us, and the natives
were all glad to be photographed, their chief remarking,
"When I go into the ground I will still live in that
picture ."
They all wore garments of kangaroo skin, those of the
men falling behind and leaving them in front naked
except for the groin cloth . The women were thickly
wrapped from below the shoulder to the knee . Neither
sex had stout legs. The feet of the women were delicate
and shapely. The group presented apathetic appearance,
and it was painful to observe the repugnance of the
Australian whites generally regarding them . Were it not
for the filthy skins and blankets on which the British
prudes insist, they would by no means be repulsive . They
possess considerable intelligence and humour . One need

--- PAGE BREAK ---Were it not
for the filthy skins and blankets on which the British
prudes insist, they would by no means be repulsive . They
possess considerable intelligence and humour . One need

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AN UNCIVILIZABLE MAIDEN
103
only read Brough Smith's book on the Australian abori-
gines to recognize the remarkable character of
their
legends and folk-lore. We paid them well for entertain-
ment, but for which our half day in Albany would have
been dull, and left them squatting in a row, backs to
fence, each with his and her clay pipe.
They cast no envious looks towards us, these survivors
of a dying race . Repeatedly has the experiment of sur-
rounding them with
" civilization " been tried .
Mr .
Knight, the commissioner at Albany, and Mrs . Knight,
took into their home an exceptionally bright and pretty
native girl, christened her Mary Cameron, taught her to
read, write, and play the piano. It was hoped she would
do something for the aborigines, and a schoolhouse, I
believe, was built for her to teach in .
But soon Mary
was found with her civilized clothing cast off, far away
in a cave beside a stream, enjoying a feast of raw crabs
and lizards. She stoutly refused to return to " civilization,"
from which she retained only one thing, a passion for
reading novels. Her discoverers gave her some blankets
and novels, and left her to her cave and freedom .
Per-
haps there was too much catechism and too much brim-
stone in the " civilized" regime, and she may have been
saving her soul from a false God .
What a distance stretches from these haggard shreds
of a wild tribe to the handsome Anglo-Australians before
whom they melt away! But how will the descendants of
these last appear to the traveller of the far future ? The
evolutionary forces that produced the aborigines do not
altogether cease to work .
On the evening when our ship left King George's
Sound, while we sat at dinner, an English journalist
humorously invited me aloud to drink a glass of cham-aborigines do not
altogether cease to work .
On the evening when our ship left King George's
Sound, while we sat at dinner, an English journalist
humorously invited me aloud to drink a glass of cham-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ltogether cease to work .
On the evening when our ship left King George's
Sound, while we sat at dinner, an English journalist
humorously invited me aloud to drink a glass of cham-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

104
MY PILGRIMAGE
pagne with him in felicitation on our leaving Australia .
The jest was not liked, and I did not respond even merrily .
The Australians could not quite like Darwin because he
expressed the little regret he felt on leaving Australia
nearly fifty years before .
The journalist had probably suffered in the poor hotels,
the dull churches, and the remorseless Sabbaths . I bad
enjoyed lavish hospitalities, charming companies, and the
society of some of the most intellectual men I ever met .
But I left Australia with a feeling that I had seen it at
its best, and that the tendencies were in a direction of retro-
gression . Many of the best people were already looking
forward with favour to that federation of the colonies
which has since been achieved, and which I felt would be
as adverse to intellectual and moral development as the
union of Scottish churches had been to the liberalism of
such men as Charles Strong and Bishop Moorhouse .I
Where either individuals or states are fettered together,
their movement must be that of the slowest
; and the slow-
est is apt to be the colleague that refuses to move at all,
unless backward . The more free individuals, whether men
or communities, the more chances for those variations
from which higher forms are developed . The old shout of
i The day before I sailed' for India I dined at the house of Rev . Charles
Strong with our friend R . J . Jeffray. Strong had resigned his pulpit and
looked like a Daniel rescued from the lions' den. In April, 1884, when he
was at Balfurming, Ilelensburg, Scotland, I received a note from him in
which he said, " I was delivering a short lecture last night on Australia .
Strange and horrible to say, a young lady who was playing the harmonium
on the occasion took fire, her dress having come in contact with one of the
footlights . What a scene !
Luckily the fire was got out, but her arms
were badly burnt . What interpretation might not the Melbourne Presby-
tery place upon this ! "
Mr. Strong returned to Melbourne, where an independent church was
erected for him .ot out, but her arms
were badly burnt . What interpretation might not the Melbourne Presby-
tery place upon this ! "
Mr. Strong returned to Melbourne, where an independent church was
erected for him .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

KRAKATOA LAVA
105
"Liberty and Union, one and inseparable," has a fine
sound, but so has the prophecy of the lion and the lamb
lying down together. The lamb will be inside the lion, and
Liberty be devoured by over-centralization .
On our voyage towards Ceylon our ship sailed a whole
day through thick masses of floating lava, which rattled
perpetually against the hull . Now and then we passed
floating palm-trees which had been hurled and then per-
haps drifted until they were a vast distance from Kra-
katoa, where they were uprooted . Their leaves were still
green, and on them perched many different birds . We
passed within a few yards of one of those palms .
Its
trunk was completely covered by sea-birds of all sizes and
varieties. Side by side they stood in a row, motionless,
silent, peaceful, but all looked disconsolate .
They were
not disturbed by our ship or our shouts .
Enough of the lava was drawn up from the sea in
buckets for all of us to carry away souvenirs of that
Batavian event which, had Krakatoa been under control
of any purposing Power, should have renewed in every
heart the defiance of Prometheus. How many of us might
have found in our handful of lava a symbol of the frag-
ments of volcanic theology hidden in the brain of the
most rationalistic ?
In the middle of the eighteenth century two men divided
the religious attention of Europe - Voltaire and John
Wesley. Voltaire was a lion in London among the aris-
tocrats at the very time Wesley was ordained a deacon ;
and thirty years later the two men respectively repre-
sented to " salvationists " of the time Christ and Anti-
Christ. While these two men were promoting each a
revival of his own kind in Europe, the great Lisbon earth-
quake occurred, when men, women, and children wereationists " of the time Christ and Anti-
Christ. While these two men were promoting each a
revival of his own kind in Europe, the great Lisbon earth-
quake occurred, when men, women, and children were

--- PAGE BREAK ---

106
MY PILGRIMAGE
destroyed like flies. Both issued pamphlets upon it . Vol-
taire invited the theologians to stand with him beside
that vast grave in which innocent people were buried
alive, and say whether it were the work of a providence
whom men ought to worship . Wesley summoned the
world to witness the judgment of Jehovah upon a region
where the Inquisition had flourished, and added an account
of a landslide at Whiston Cliffs, which, though it hurt
nobody, was meant as a sign of what God could do if he
wished .
In New England Thoreau thought that Atheism must
be comparatively popular with God himself . No doubt
any respectable deity would rather have on his side one
Voltaire than millions of "larrikin" devotees . But never-
theless, so long as the Collectivist deity has to bear the
burden of the volcano and the agonies of the world, and
suffer the patronage of brainless masses, the orthodox
have a good chance of making the world as depraved and
miserable as their creeds declare it. The gospel of lava -
of fire and brimstone , especially for the Voltaireans - is
vomited still from thousands of pulpits, and we rational-
ists are somewhat like the disconsolate birds on their
floating palm-tree .
But what about even our palm? It looks green enough
while we are sitting on it, but after all it is uprooted, and
we must seek some other ark . Voltaire, though his faith
in providence perished in the Lisbon earthquake, held on
apparently to some ghost of deity ; but a deity practically
useful only so far as churches make him so has disap-
peared from unbiassed philosophy .
As I write out these notes (May, 1902) in New York, a
volcano is devastating Martinique . By some unexplained
coincidence that volcano bears the name of the terriblepeared from unbiassed philosophy .
As I write out these notes (May, 1902) in New York, a
volcano is devastating Martinique . By some unexplained
coincidence that volcano bears the name of the terrible

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONFESSED DELUSIONS
107
Hawaiian goddess, " La Pelee." It is, however, notable
that no voice important enough to be heard is proclaiming
with John Wesley that these disasters are the judgment
of Jehovah . Nay, the destruction occurs simultaneously
with the beginning of a retreat by the General Assembly
of the Presbyterian Church in America from dogmas that
grew out of just such destructive courses of nature . It
was the destructive forces of nature that proclaimed a god
of wrath, and the indiscriminateness of such destruction
-not even babes and helpless animals being spared -
which proclaimed a curse on the earth and on mankind .
The old Westminster Creed is now turned into a literal
"confession ." It is confessed that for many generations
a great church has been imposing on mankind as divine
truth a grievous error. The physical sufferings of
the
two finest scholars in Geneva slain by Calvin, of
the
Catholic victims sacrificed in Ireland by Cromwell, and
the victims of Puritanism in America are slight com-
pared with the inward tortures of human hearts, the
parents weeping for the possible damnation of their babes,
the ruin of happiness for many millions terrorized
for
centuries by dogmas now confessed to be delusions .

--- PAGE BREAK ---an hearts, the
parents weeping for the possible damnation of their babes,
the ruin of happiness for many millions terrorized
for
centuries by dogmas now confessed to be delusions .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER VI
Ceylon- Plain living and high thinking -Talks with the Buddhist Perera
- Origin of Whittington's cat -"Rodyas"-A Sinhalese law court -
Judge Arunichalam and his wife at Kattura - A ramble with Sinhalese
gentlemen - My Buddhist plea for a suffering snake - Hindu shrines
in Buddhist temples-The learned priest Subhuti-Sinhalese homes -
A Moslem on Heber's verse about Ceylon-Temple at %handy-A
Moslem sermon -Kellania-Buddhist folk-tales-"Merits"-Nir-
vana - My Christmas lecture at Colombo - High priest of Adam's Peak
-Conferences with Buddhists in their college -An unpublished Pitaka
-"Covetousness"-Of actions at once right and sinful -The extinct
order of female priests - English masqueraders - Bishop Mdlvaine and
Bishop Temple .
O
N a warm summer day, in the middle of December,
voyaging on a sea of glass, I beheld a seeming long
white cloud low on the horizon . It was Ceylon, -the
land of my dreams. Poor Columbus ! You who saw a
cloud that turned into America, and were welcomed by
gentle natives, - unarmed Buddhists in their peacefulness,
- how pitiable you appear ! " They knew not the use of
weapons, and cut their hands in handling our swords ; they
know no evil ; what a pity they must be damned because
they know not Jesus ! " So wrote the discoverer who, dis-
appointed in not finding the land of gold, bethought him
of transforming the gentle natives into gold and into
Christians. Four centuries have passed and Christendom
is singing of the vileness of the Sinhalese, the most inno-
cent people on the face of the earth !
It was a new world I was entering . I had studied the
Sinhalese Buddha and Buddhists, and knew I was leaving
behind Anglo-Saxonism, -cruel, ambitious, canting, ag-

--- PAGE BREAK ---e of the earth !
It was a new world I was entering . I had studied the
Sinhalese Buddha and Buddhists, and knew I was leaving
behind Anglo-Saxonism, -cruel, ambitious, canting, ag-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

UNWORLDLINESS OF BUDDHISTS
109
gressive, - to mingle with people who knew " the blessed-
ness of being little." Here at last was a country without
any revolutionary party . They were free to think and
feel and dream, to find happiness in making their wives
and children happy, and in sharing the thoughts of the
world's teachers .
But I was too sophisticated to adapt my mind at once
to the extreme unworldliness of the . Buddhists .
To find
philosophers living in thatched cottages with earthen floors
was an astonishment . Sitting with one such man, talking
of Emerson and Carlyle and Max Muller, - he knew their
works by heart, - I could not forbear contrasting the
abode of even well-to-do Buddhists with the villas of their
English and Hindu neighbours . We were not far from
the governor's palaces, and he pointed to a mounted escort
entering the palace court on prancing steeds .
He said,
"Would you like to be in the place of that captain with
his red coat, high cap, and steed?"
"No," I answered.
" Well, that is the way we look upon these planters and
officials and their fine houses . They do not appeal to us
in the least . We are glad to be quite out of their sphere .
We have good food, good wives ; we love to see our chilr
dren, as you see, nearly naked, playing on the grass ; and
to read, think, converse on great subjects, and are content
to let the world go prancing on its way while we go on
ours."
Mr. Perera, a highly educated Buddhist, told me that
the story of some English authorities of Buddha's birth
from a virgin is unknown in Ceylon .
Buddha's mother,
Maia, died some days after Buddha's death, and in popu-
lar belief she was born a male god. My expressed hope
that Buddha's father had become a goddess amused him .
The great Buddha tree at Kellania, believed to have beenafter Buddha's death, and in popu-
lar belief she was born a male god. My expressed hope
that Buddha's father had become a goddess amused him .
The great Buddha tree at Kellania, believed to have been

--- PAGE BREAK ---

110
MY PILGRIMAGE
part of the original Bo-tree in India, is said to have been
brought thence by a queenly priestess .
Mr. Perera also gave me some specimens of the domes-
tic form taken by the Buddhagosha parables . In illustra-
tion of the effects of bad company Buddha once related
that a certain king had everything perfect around him, -
his wife was the best, his horse the best, and be especially
prided himself on having the finest elephant in the world .
But this elephant went mad . Great doctors were sum-
moned, but none could cure him . The elephant-keeper,
questioned sharply, said :
"One night wild animals in
the jungle near by talking together said, ' This would have
been the king of elephants ; here he is a prisoner chained
up ; we who live in freedom in the jungle are far hap-
pier.' The elephant heard this and it made him wild and
mad. But the priests came and preached to the elephant
high morality, how to do good, and the dangers of hell .
So the elephant was cured and the Buddhist proverb
arose, ' Even the wild beasts may be converted by good
company ."'
My friend was a loving reader of Emerson, but could not
at all feel the interest of our philosopher in immortality .
Indeed he said that he thought a belief that death was
entire extinction would be to the vast majority of the
human race glad tidings . What he said on this matter
reminded me of Shakespeare's thoughts as expressed by
Hamlet and also by the condemned youth in " Measure
for Measure." The humble millions of the world fear
death largely because they have been terrified by notions
of torment after death, or of interminable journeyings
through vile forms .
It seems that there is a sort of popular belief that
the lower animals are immortal . The sufferings of animalsd by notions
of torment after death, or of interminable journeyings
through vile forms .
It seems that there is a sort of popular belief that
the lower animals are immortal . The sufferings of animals

--- PAGE BREAK ---ent after death, or of interminable journeyings
through vile forms .
It seems that there is a sort of popular belief that
the lower animals are immortal . The sufferings of animals

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE RODYAS
111
which so troubled the- faith of Sarah Flower Adams, the
writer of " Nearer, My God, to Thee," and of Sir Henry
Taylor, and Frances Power Cobbe, who could conceive
of no future redress or moral benefit for animals, is
escaped by the Buddhists, who look upon these inferior
forms as their humble spiritual ancestors and poor
relations. The familiar London folk-tale of Whittington
and his Cat, which I once traced through many parts of
the world, originated in a Buddhist parable whose moral
was the base ingratitude of man to the animals that
befriended him . The cat, having ingeniously made the
fortune of a poor peasant, is cast aside to perish in
wretchedness. This lesson against ingratitude faintly
reappears in the early versions of " Puss in Boots," but
has entirely disappeared in the story of Whittington, in
which the cat is supplanted by the Providence which
watches over the speculations of the pious and loyal
British merchant .
Some relics of tribes are found in India whose passive
and unprogressive character was probably derived from
ages of subjugation . The raid of John Brown in Virginia
was enough to prove that in the evolution of a docile
slave the old insurrectionary elements that had produced
such leaders as Toussaint l'Ouverture and Nat Turner
had long been trampled out of the negro race in America .
It was no doubt so with the taciturn Tamils in Ceylon,
and traceably so in the " Rodyas," who have their legend,
according to which an offence against some half-mythical
monarch by his "nobles " led to a decree isolating them,
and their descendants had become a separate tribe . Their
women were forbidden to wear clothing above the waist,
and the men bad some similar disqualification which
kept them from mingling with people in cities. Twondants had become a separate tribe . Their
women were forbidden to wear clothing above the waist,
and the men bad some similar disqualification which
kept them from mingling with people in cities. Two

--- PAGE BREAK ---separate tribe . Their
women were forbidden to wear clothing above the waist,
and the men bad some similar disqualification which
kept them from mingling with people in cities. Two

--- PAGE BREAK ---

112
MY PILGRIMAGE
Americans accompanied me to the forest of the Rodyas,
and when we saw the men with long knives sheathed in
their loin cloth we felt as if we had strayed beyond the
line of safety. But the knives were relics falling to a
harmless generation . The women had cultivated long hair,
and when we passed covered their breasts with it, Godivar
like. One of these held in her arms a very beautiful baby,
into whose hand I put a coin. The mother smiled, and
said something to her husband . He advanced and walked
with us to a house where there was a person who con-
versed with us pleasantly in English .
I made an excursion to Kattura . A law court was in
session there, and the proceedings were mostly in English,
the case being between a native and an Englishman . The
chief lawyer was a fine-looking Sinhalese gentleman,
whose golden tint was occasionally revealed by a gesture .
The young judge had an attractive face which I had
somewhere seen before, and he sent down a note from the
bench requesting me to remain near by, as he had known
me at Cambridge, England . Judge Arunachalam was an
undergraduate at Cambridge at the time of my Sunday
evening lectures there, which be had heard . He also pos-
sessed several of my books and sympathized with my
religious views. He insisted on my visiting him in his -,
house, and as the court was not to be resumed for three or
four days, said it would be- a pleasure to him to go with
me through the neighbourhood. The opportunity was
welcomed. The- judge (Hindu) had recently married a
Sinhalese lady, and they resided in a beautiful villa . His
young wife bad an English governess, and was assiduous
in her studies . One of her favourite books was my "Sacred
Anthology," and when her husband took me to his house
and went off to inform her that he had brought a guest,sh governess, and was assiduous
in her studies . One of her favourite books was my "Sacred
Anthology," and when her husband took me to his house
and went off to inform her that he had brought a guest,

--- PAGE BREAK ---s assiduous
in her studies . One of her favourite books was my "Sacred
Anthology," and when her husband took me to his house
and went off to inform her that he had brought a guest,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A SINHALESE LADY
113
he presently returned with the pleasing information that
his wife would be present to receive me at dinner. He
told me that she had never in her life met any gentleman
of the English race, and felt a little nervous at the
venture ; she could not depart from usage so far as to eat
at the table with us, but was anxious to meet me and for
the first time to try her English with one from abroad.
The house and garden filled up all my old visions of
Saadi's"Gulistan" or Rose Garden . The villa, embowered
by palms, twined about with blossoming vines, the open
sides of the drawing-room tapestried with flowers, the air
perfumed by the breath of roses, made a station in my
" Earthward Pilgrimage."
But when the Sinhalese lady
appeared all of these flowers and decorations wove them-
selves into a sympathetic frame around her.
The English governess was handsome, but no type of
beauty previously seen had prepared me for that of Lady
Arunachalam.
Her complexion was of lightest gold-
tint, a slight rose-mist appearing and vanishing on her
cheek ; her features small and fine, her ample black tresses
fell around her oval face . The timidity in her large eyes
was scarcely veiled by the long lashes, but there was also
an expression of infantine curiosity . She was hardly
seventeen, I suppose. It was in December, the tropical
summer, and the lady was not burdened with garments
;
her simple white but toned drapery folded softly around
her with two or three coils, and she wore jewelled armlets .
She said something in Sinhalese, which the
judge
interpreted : "She welcomes you and begs that you will
be seated." She herself took a seat on a divan and said
presently with an accent I might have thought comical in
another, but now found charming, that she loved to study
English . With some aid from her governess she told metook a seat on a divan and said
presently with an accent I might have thought comical in
another, but now found charming, that she loved to study
English . With some aid from her governess she told me

--- PAGE BREAK ---an and said
presently with an accent I might have thought comical in
another, but now found charming, that she loved to study
English . With some aid from her governess she told me

--- PAGE BREAK ---

114
MY PILGRIMAGE
that she bad heard that in England women were free,
that they were able to enter into the employments of life ;
in India and even Ceylon women had few advantages .
I gave her an account of the progress in that direction in
England and America, telling her particularly about the
female physicians and artists . Her colour went and came
as she listened and answered, " I am very glad." She bad
beard that when the Prince of Wales (Edward VII) was
in India, and made grand parade in the cities attended
by all the Hindu princes in their richest costumes, he had
requested that on each such occasion the ladies should be
allowed to witness the scene . The Prince had acted the
part of many a fairy prince in oriental folk-lore, and in
the impression made on Lady Arunachalam, the only lady
of high caste with whom I was able to converse in that
region, I could perceive that be had not only left his image
in the zenana along with the canonized heroes, but had
been the means of placing slightly ajar those close-barred
doors which ultimately perhaps may be thrown open
.
The judge was delighted with the freedom of his wife
in conversation with a stranger, and now and then put in
an encouraging word or two, but she was left to follow
her own will. She requested some suggestion of interest-
ing books in English, and before leaving I made out a list .
Judge Arunachalam had arranged that on the next
day, Sunday, the most intelligent Buddhists of the neigh-
bourhood should meet me at the train and bring . me by an
interesting road to his house ; by breakfast time his pre-
parations for Monday's court would be finished, and we
could together visit villages and temples . About twenty
met me, headed by the English-speaking lawyer .
On our way we came upon a snake reduced to helpless-
ness by red ants. It was a harmless "rat-snake," valuedr visit villages and temples . About twenty
met me, headed by the English-speaking lawyer .
On our way we came upon a snake reduced to helpless-
ness by red ants. It was a harmless "rat-snake," valued

--- PAGE BREAK ---temples . About twenty
met me, headed by the English-speaking lawyer .
On our way we came upon a snake reduced to helpless-
ness by red ants. It was a harmless "rat-snake," valued

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A PLEA FOR A SNAKE
115
as the chief exterminator of rats . It had received no
wound, but these red ants have power to paralyze and
bind a creature five feet long. The snake was coloured
red by the Lilliputian swarm, and I proposed that it
should be delivered by death from its motionless misery
.
But there were murmurs against this. I was given to
understand that it was contrary to their religion to take
life, even that of the ants . We went on some sixty yards
in silence, when I turned and requested that the snake
might be brought. It was brought on a pole, then at my
request was dipped in a pool and cleared of ants, and
finally laid across the road. It was evidently half dead,
but if left might linger in agony some days . It was on
the first Sunday of 1884 that I thus found myself in a
forest of Ceylon preaching to Buddhists in behalf of a
snake, bringing back to them from the West a more
humane interpretation of their own doctrine . I told them
how painfully it impressed me that the mercifulness of
Buddha should result in the torture of any creatures .
The compassionate heart of that great teacher, recoiling
from the cruel sacrifices of altars, from the agonies
inflicted by man on man, and the disregard of animal
sufferings, had testified against such cruelties ; but what
would he say could he now see that his tenderness had
ended in leaving a harmless animal to be slowly devoured
alive during several days? What would the compas-
sionate Buddha, for whom a serpent is said to have made
a throne with his coils -what would he do if he were
in the presence of this misery which we cannot relieve
but can end ?
As I said this, each word being translated
to them as uttered, a youth stepped forth and with
one vigorous blow of a stick ended the snake's life.
The company then began to talk among themselves,nd ?
As I said this, each word being translated
to them as uttered, a youth stepped forth and with
one vigorous blow of a stick ended the snake's life.
The company then began to talk among themselves,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

116
MY PILGRIMAGE
and presently the lawyer communicated to me their point
of view. The snake's situation was the result of its pre-
vious history in other forms, and its death by ants might
be a necessary condition of reaching a higher future,
such death being its self-determined path . To this I an-
swered that our passing by was as much its destiny as
the attack of ants . The merciful hand that struck the
blow of deliverance was the poor reptile's destiny . And
why, I urged, should we not at all times and to all crea-
tures be a good destiny, counteracting the cruelties of
nature ? This won some favour .
After a luxurious breakfast with Judge Arunachalam,
we began our ramble by visiting a temple in which by
the side of Buddha stands a small shrine of Vishnu, to
whom offerings of flowers are subordinately made . We
found hanging from the hand of Vishnu a Buddhist's
written vow of a certain number of baskets of flowers and
one hundred lamps in case of the offerer's success in de-
fending himself on a trial for theft. Judge Arunichalam,
before whom the man had been acquitted, was amused
by observing these duly paid debts to Vishnu. Among
these gods transformed to guardian genii is now Maia,
the mother of Buddha . She introduced Buddha among
the gods to humanize them . I was scandalized that her
sex should be changed ; but a priest explained to me that
by continued merits a woman might be promoted to be a
man in the next world . I could not forbear saying that
I hoped the time might come when it would be believed
that a man, by extraordinary virtues, might be rewarded
by becoming a woman.
At one temple we met the priest Waskaduwe Subhfiti, to
whom the judge paid marked honour . He was known to
European scholars by his Pali Grammar (1876), and Is, might be rewarded
by becoming a woman.
At one temple we met the priest Waskaduwe Subhfiti, to
whom the judge paid marked honour . He was known to
European scholars by his Pali Grammar (1876), and I

--- PAGE BREAK ---by becoming a woman.
At one temple we met the priest Waskaduwe Subhfiti, to
whom the judge paid marked honour . He was known to
European scholars by his Pali Grammar (1876), and I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE PRIEST'S SUBSTITUTE
117
had in my pocket a letter to him from Max Muller . He
spoke excellent English, and was a gracious old gentle-
man. His residence was some distance, and he was brought
in a sedan carried by four men . I ventured to allude to
this devotion on the part of his people . . " It is," he said,
"because I have been with them very long and am now
too feeble to walk the distance from my house ."
But I
was desirous of knowing why he did not come in a car-
riage drawn by horses. He said that life was so sacred
that he was afraid a horse might be vitally injured by
carrying him.
" But," I said, " might it not be the same
with one of those men while he is carrying you?"
After
a moment's silence he said very sweetly,
" But a man
can tell me if he is suffering ."
Subhuti was an exact thinker, and the elevation and
sweetness of his spirit excited my veneration . He was the
Buddhist I had dreamed of . The affection of his people
for him was touching. He had some pleasant word to say
to each of them. The mothers brought their children to
him
.that be might smile on them, and some of them
brought him white lotos flowers .
I got information from Subhuti on the popular Bud-
dhist folk-lore and ideas of future existence, for I knew
that the " will to live " had long pressed Nirvana (annihi-
lation) to a remote place. Siva has transferred his puni .
tive power to Yama, whose throne is on a sword's edge,
and over him a mountain : should he show the very least
partiality in any judgment the mountain will fall on him
and the sword cleave him. One's evil deeds turn to his
devil. Killing animals is the sin most severely punished,
but a Buddhist may eat meat of an animal slain by an-
other. A man killed a goat to give food to a noble who
visited him ; the slayer had to suffer as many years as
Is the sin most severely punished,
but a Buddhist may eat meat of an animal slain by an-
other. A man killed a goat to give food to a noble who
visited him ; the slayer had to suffer as many years as
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---ely punished,
but a Buddhist may eat meat of an animal slain by an-
other. A man killed a goat to give food to a noble who
visited him ; the slayer had to suffer as many years as
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

118
MY PILGRIMAGE
the goat had hairs !
In heaven all of inferior merits wait
on those of superior merits . The next Buddha will not be
found under the Bo-tree but under the Iron-wood-tree, -
a tribute to beauty, as this tree has rosy leaves . There is
no marriage in heaven, but the sexes remain. (In a fresco
I remarked only one she-demon among many male ones .)
As we were walking through one of the villages a
woman ran out from her house and threw herself on her
knees before the judge, the tears flowing down her cheeks .
She touched her forehead on his feet, then laid aside her
cape, and thus naked to the waist (symbol of utter abase-
ment) clasped her hands. While she was pouring forth
her heart-broken prayer, the judge whispered to me, "Her
son has just been arrested ." After listening to her story
her son, her only support, excited by tree-toddy, had
struck somebody -the judge placed her garment on her
shoulders, and lifted her gently . He then went to the
doors of several neighbours and enquired about the case .
The reports were all favourable to the character of the
youth, the blow was not serious, and he spoke words that
brought hope into the widow's face .
The judge told the group who had collected (so he in-
formed me) that I honoured Buddha and read his teach-
ings to assemblies in England ; and he desired me to be
shown their household arrangements . I was shown through
several houses, and women brought out their utensils and
implements . One young woman brought a stone mortar
and pestle and beat corn into "haddy " (meal). Another
exhibited the stone oil-press . All such things were done
by women. Their flesh was like the lightest bronze ; their
forms and movements graceful, and in their faces was
the happiness and innocence of children . The only tears
I saw in Ceylon were those of the widow about her son .s like the lightest bronze ; their
forms and movements graceful, and in their faces was
the happiness and innocence of children . The only tears
I saw in Ceylon were those of the widow about her son .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SUBHUTI, A LEARNED BUDDHIST AUTHOR

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BISHOP HEBER'S HYMN
119
The judge (not a Buddhist) said that crime in Ceylon
was very rare so far as Buddhists were concerned . They
had few and simple wants and no hunger for riches or
splendour. I received an account of a curious case of
theft which had occurred in the cold months . A Buddhist
had stolen a ring from an English lady, confessed the
theft, and been imprisoned. He then sent word to the
English lady where she would find her ring . She found
it, and was curious about the proceeding . It was dis-
covered that the man's hut was so out of repair and wet
that he could not live in it during the cold season, and
had determined by this theft to obtain for a time comfort-
able support in her Majesty's agreeable prison
.
Among European men of the world acquainted with
Ceylon, the lines about that island in the Missionary
Hymn -
Though every prospect pleases,
And only man is vile -
are regarded as a huge joke . A Moslem jeweller, of
whom I was making some purchases and who was fluent
in English, told me that it was perfectly well known
there how Bishop Heber came to write those lines : a
Eurasian Christian jeweller in Colombo sold Heber a
big emerald that when he got home turned out to be
glass, so he sat down and wrote that man in Ceylon is
vile! It is certain that in any great city of Christendom
there is more crime in one day than Ceylon knows in a
year.
There are in Colombo several
11 vile " houses depend-
ing for patronage on travellers . When our ship arrived,
agents came out on the tender and went about recom-
mending those houses, declaring that the inmates were all
Christians .

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing for patronage on travellers . When our ship arrived,
agents came out on the tender and went about recom-
mending those houses, declaring that the inmates were all
Christians .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

120
MY PILGRIMAGE
When I arrived in Ceylon there was much excitement
about an attack that had just been made by the Catholics
upon a Buddhist procession. A bit of what was believed
to be the alms-bowl of Buddha, found at Sopara near
Bombay, having been presented to the Buddhists of
Ceylon, they were bearing it to a shrine when they were
attacked . The Catholics thought they were mimicking
their own processions and carrying aloft a crucified ape .
The Buddhists were following usages older than the
Christian era .
In Canterbury, England, there is an English Church
training-school for missionaries, in which I once saw
youths fresh from universities learning carpentering and
other mechanic work that might be helpful to primitive
tribes, but the one art needful they were not learning -
that their first duty was to comprehend a religion before
trying to destroy it. That ancient seaport town, Sopara,
which one tradition pronounces Buddha's birthplace, and
where the relic sent to Ceylon was found, has been
identified by Benfey as the Ophir of Solomon
; the Por-
tuguese made converts there over seven centuries ago,
and the Christians continue as a caste, though in rites and
dress and beliefs hardly distinguishable from the Brah-
mans. The Portuguese are usually the most friendly
missionaries, and their only outbreak, that of 1883,
though nobody was harmed, was unfortunate. It gave
the American theosophist, Colonel Olcott, an opportunity
to pose as the patron and advocate of the Buddhists, - an
opportunity he made the most of, -and to ally Blavat-
skyism with Buddha, lowering the latter in the unlearned
mind. On the other hand, the disgrace of the Portuguese
missionaries in Colombo was the means of admonishing
all missionaries that the Empress of India was the headowering the latter in the unlearned
mind. On the other hand, the disgrace of the Portuguese
missionaries in Colombo was the means of admonishing
all missionaries that the Empress of India was the head

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A BUDDHIST TEMPLE

--- PAGE BREAK ---, the disgrace of the Portuguese
missionaries in Colombo was the means of admonishing
all missionaries that the Empress of India was the head

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A BUDDHIST TEMPLE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE EVILS OF NATURE
121
of the Buddhist Church in Ceylon, and that no disrespect
to it would be tolerated .
In the ancient temple at Khandy the priest unfolded
for me the various sacred vestments, which bore striking
resemblance to those of Catholicism. I mentioned this
to the priest, who said that they (Buddhists) well knew
the origin of the Catholic vestments, but did not wish to
cause irritation by talking of the matter .
I observed just outside the inner door of this very
ancient temple a small lamp with red light over a basin
of holy water, from which each one coming out touched
his or her forehead ; there were also shrines, relics, altar
bells, and rosaries . It is not easy to believe that the
Buddhist and Catholic forms are of independent origin
and very difficult to determine which was the chief
borrower. On the outer walls of the temple were mural
paintings representing monstrous hells and devils, and
the torture of human bodies . I asked a learned Buddhist
how it was that a religion of mercifulness, which in all
history never shed blood nor harmed even dangerous
animals, could thus menace mortals with supernatural
terrors. Surprised by my question, he replied that it was
the great aim of Buddha to save mankind from those
sufferings .
" But who, then," I asked, " is responsible for
the existence of such tortures in the universe ? " " No
one is responsible . These are the evils of nature, the con-
ditions of existence, which no God or demon originated
or causes, which not even the power of Buddha could
abolish, but which he taught us how to escape." I wished
to know the popular, as distinguished from the theo-
logical view of this matter, and asked an intelligent lay-
man what was his own view of punishment after death .
His reply was : "None is ever punished by other thanr, as distinguished from the theo-
logical view of this matter, and asked an intelligent lay-
man what was his own view of punishment after death .
His reply was : "None is ever punished by other than

--- PAGE BREAK ---from the theo-
logical view of this matter, and asked an intelligent lay-
man what was his own view of punishment after death .
His reply was : "None is ever punished by other than

--- PAGE BREAK ---

122
MY PILGRIMAGE
himself.
All the evil that a man does during life, if not
overbalanced by the good he has done, forms at his death a
retributive self of that man ; an image of himself, uncon-
scious as a machine, tortures him according to his demerits ."
In one ancient fresco at Khandy temple there is pic-
tured a man of noble figure on a cross in hell . The de-
mons vainly try to harm him, while the human forms
worship him. The painting is too dim for me to discover
how the form -was attached to the cross, or to make out
the precise shape of the cross. It seems to me much ear-
lier than the Portuguese mission in Ceylon four centuries
ago, but I naturally ascribed that particular picture to
Christianity. Nevertheless the word Stauros in the New
Testament, which we translate L° cross," really means stake,
the cruciform appearing only at the close of the third
century. I possess an old Persian picture representing a
personage of great dignity in hell, seated on a sort of
throne, and unharmed by the demons . It may be that
the figure in the Persian picture is meant for Zoroaster,
and in its transition to Khandy caught up the Christian
emblem. However this may be, the Parsi and the Sin-
halese conceptions of the future are nearly the same . In
one of our talks Subhuti said, " One's deeds change to
his devil." In the vision of the ancient Parsi, Arda Viraf,
it is written : " In a region of bleak cold wandered a
soul which had departed from the earth
; and there stood
before him a hideous woman, profligate and deformed .
Who art thou, who art thou, than whom no demon could
be more . horrible ? ' To him she answered,
' I am thy
actions!"' The good meet their actions in the form of
beautiful maidens .
I passed a night at Khandy, and in the evening my
interpreter, a Moslem, told me that there was to be a dis-wered,
' I am thy
actions!"' The good meet their actions in the form of
beautiful maidens .
I passed a night at Khandy, and in the evening my
interpreter, a Moslem, told me that there was to be a dis-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

KHANDY TEMPLE

--- PAGE BREAK ---s in the form of
beautiful maidens .
I passed a night at Khandy, and in the evening my
interpreter, a Moslem, told me that there was to be a dis-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

KHANDY TEMPLE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A MOSLEM SERMON
123
course by a missionary of his faith in a private house, to
which, being a Moslem, he could take me . The rdom was
crowded by perhaps sixty people . Unfortunately my guide
could not whisper any translations of what the speaker
said, but I managed to gather from the exercises some-
thing about them. The preacher or mollah was clearly
not a Sinhalese, and I believe he was a Persian ; he was
perhaps forty, with some colour in his cheeks, an eye
alternately expanding and closing, a small intellectual
face, and a voice which easily passed from one tone to
another, -didactic, pathetic, humorous,-with quick
gestures of arms and fingers for every turn . There was
nothing notable about his dress, but he had beside him
four readers in solemn garb, each with atlas-like Korans
before them. From these they recited in unison suras on
which the mollah made commentaries, introducing nar-
rative illustrations which deeply impressed and moved
his hearers. My guide told me afterwards that the nar-
ratives were those of great leaders and teachers of Islam
who had passed through ordeals and perils and achieved
great results. The Koran readers recited the verses with
rhythmic beat and measure,
staccato
monotone, as if
the four had one tongue . The speaker waited in silence,
then suddenly joined them with exact rhythm and tone
for one line, at the end of which the readers stopped,
while the orator without any pause linked that line to his
next sentence, in which his own style was resumed . At
the end of that comment he fell into the staccato mono-
tone, which the readers caught instantly, and went on
with another Koranic passage, while the teacher sat still .
The man's art was perfect ; there was no loudness, no
trick, but an uninterrupted flow of thought and feeling
as of a fountain, his whole form and face shimmeringassage, while the teacher sat still .
The man's art was perfect ; there was no loudness, no
trick, but an uninterrupted flow of thought and feeling
as of a fountain, his whole form and face shimmering

--- PAGE BREAK ---acher sat still .
The man's art was perfect ; there was no loudness, no
trick, but an uninterrupted flow of thought and feeling
as of a fountain, his whole form and face shimmering

--- PAGE BREAK ---

l24
MY PILGRIMAGE
with its play . At times there was an instant of something
like laughter in his voice, but it was quasi-hysterical,
and no one smiled . I could not understand a word, but
was sorry when it was over, and went off with thoughts
of the bird said to have once perched on the shoulder of
Mohammed while he was preaching .
An extremely ancient temple in Ceylon is Kellania .
Near it is an enormous Bo-tree said to have descended from
a slip of the original tree at Gya under which Sakyamuni
received his illumination and became the Buddha . It is
nearly a day's journey in the heifer-drawn vehicle
; the
sun was very hot, the region thinly settled, and there being
no inns it became trying. My driver knew little English,
and it required pantomime to tell him I was thirsty .
Instantly he dropped his rein, quickly climbed a palm, and
plucked off several green cocoanuts . With his knife he
cut a hole in the husk of one, transforming it into a flask
of perfectly cool nectar .
When I reached the temple a beautiful boy, nude but
for his loin girdle, approached me. He .was about twelve,
spoke English, and was delighted at the prospect of guid-
ing a visitor. There was no village near the temple, which
was a good deal dilapidated. The tree was wonderful,
but that which most interested me was the crop of Bo-tree
legends which had grown around it and were related to me
by the boy. One was represented in an isolated wooden
house. To this the lad conducted me, opening the door
with a key. Inside was an image of Buddha seated under
a tree artificially modelled and erect in the middle of the
room. The leaves on this tree were all spear-heads . When
I enquired about this the lad related the legend in words
that I wrote down as nearly as I could : -
11 Our Lord, when the evil Mara tried to tempt himleaves on this tree were all spear-heads . When
I enquired about this the lad related the legend in words
that I wrote down as nearly as I could : -
11 Our Lord, when the evil Mara tried to tempt him

--- PAGE BREAK ---were all spear-heads . When
I enquired about this the lad related the legend in words
that I wrote down as nearly as I could : -
11 Our Lord, when the evil Mara tried to tempt him

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FOLK-TALES
19.5
many ways, would not yield to his evil will ; then the evil
Mara went and brought a great many horrible monsters
to make our Lord afraid ; but he was not made afraid ;
then the evil Mara made his horrible monsters to swoop
down on our Lord ; but all at once every leaf on the holy
tree was a spear, and the horrible monsters were all stuck
fast on the spears ; and our Lord sat there ; he was not
tempted, not afraid, not hurt 1 "
I can hardly believe that the boy's tale was literally
memorized, for his face was radiant as he told it ; there
were also hesitations, and probably I was more concerned
to get the legend exact than to write down his every word
.
I was often impressed by the- care with which children of
Buddhist families are instructed in the moral tales and
parables of their religion . While the Christian mother is
telling her child the story of the Prodigal Son, the Pearl
searched for, the Leaven and Meal, the Buddhist mother
is telling her child tales and parables just as sweet ; and
so far as they come from the unsophisticated mother's
heart such instructions are alike in justice and compas-
sionateness .
There are many folk-tales in the region of Kellania, and
one of them is similar to a legend, of Charlemagne . Elala,
the Tamil king, placed beside his bed a bell to which a
rope was attached extending to the gate of his palace. Any
person in his kingdom, however humble, who suffered any
injustice might ring this bell at any hour and the king
would instantly arise and never sleep again until the
wrong was redressed. This was in the region of the
" Nagas," or serpent-men, which may possibly be con-
nected with the legend that a snake once coiled around
the rope and rang the bell of Charlemagne, who re-
sponded, and followed the snake to its nest, found occu-rpent-men, which may possibly be con-
nected with the legend that a snake once coiled around
the rope and rang the bell of Charlemagne, who re-
sponded, and followed the snake to its nest, found occu-

--- PAGE BREAK ---possibly be con-
nected with the legend that a snake once coiled around
the rope and rang the bell of Charlemagne, who re-
sponded, and followed the snake to its nest, found occu-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

126
MY PILGRIMAGE
pied by some other animal, which was duly tried, sen-
tenced, and slain .
When I -bad the happiness of receiving a call from
Subhuti I questioned him about the Christian mission-
aries. I knew him to be incapable of untruth or unfairness .
He said that some of the missionaries troubled Buddhist
families ; they obtruded into the homes of the humble
people and frightened them . They could only worry them,
as a Buddhist peasant was quite unable to comprehend
any of their dogmas .
The idea of salvation by one's own merit prevails in
every religion on the face of the earth except Christianity .
In the Buddhist world it is the lesson taught from the
cradle ; it is the daily bread in every household . In one
of the villages through which I passed with Judge Aruna-
chalam I noticed a beautiful baby in its mother's arms,
and pressed a piece of silver into its pink hand . The child
whimpered faintly, and the mother said something to it as
if it could understand . When we left, the judge repeated
what the mother said : " Why should you fret when you
have received a gift from a meritorious hand? "
The word
" meritorious " was a definitive religious expression, and
referred to what my indulgent friend had said of me .
I do not remember a child really crying in Ceylon
.
I mentioned this to a gentleman from Philadelphia while
we were walking through the crowds on a market day
.
There were swarms of children, but we failed to hear
any crying, nor did we hear an angry word exchanged
between grown-up people. I could see something of the
serene Buddha of the temples in every Sinhalese face
.
Of course it was different with the dark-visaged Tamils ;
these are taciturn, and have a look of melancholy .
On Christmas eve I heard the beating of tom-toms inthe temples in every Sinhalese face
.
Of course it was different with the dark-visaged Tamils ;
these are taciturn, and have a look of melancholy .
On Christmas eve I heard the beating of tom-toms in

--- PAGE BREAK ---y Sinhalese face
.
Of course it was different with the dark-visaged Tamils ;
these are taciturn, and have a look of melancholy .
On Christmas eve I heard the beating of tom-toms in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHRISTMAS EVE IN CEYLON
127,
Colombo, and learned that from immemorial times Decem-
ber 25 was the sacred day of Buddha .
Evil beings were
frightened away by the tom-toms .
By this time I had
formed friendships with several Buddhists in the town,
and one of them - a learned man - went about with me .
I found that the beating of the tom-tom was altogether by
women. My friend took me into several houses .
Behind
each was a tiny yard and a circle of women seated on
the ground, all beating little drums and singing, though
they paused now and then to converse. At the centre of
each circle was a small fire. As the night was warm, the
fire was no doubt of some religious importance .
It is only within the memory of many now living that
Buddha has become an eminent name in England and
America, even among scholars . The popular enthusiasm
for him was largely due to Sir Edwin Arnold's poem
" The Light of Asia," an adaptation of Buddha to occi-
dental pietism of little value to critical students . The long
and universal circulation of Bunyan's
` 1 Pilgrim's Pro-
gress " was a good preparation for the exaltation of a fab-
ulous Buddha who, after seeing the various types of human
misery, abandons family and friends like ' , Christian ;"
and it was natural that Sir Edwin should discover some
sort of Celestial City in the Nirvana -the living suicide
- sought by Buddha. Lady Arnold's father, Rev. W. H .
Channing, on one of his pilgrimages to Concord (one of
his old homes) gave there a lecture on Buddha, whom he
so exalted that next day a company of ladies called on him
to demand another lecture to say why they should not all
become Buddhists . Channing replied that he was exceed-
ingly distressed that they should have such an idea, but
that it was impossible for him to give another lecture .
In
Channing's earlier years, under the stimulating breath ofplied that he was exceed-
ingly distressed that they should have such an idea, but
that it was impossible for him to give another lecture .
In
Channing's earlier years, under the stimulating breath of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ceed-
ingly distressed that they should have such an idea, but
that it was impossible for him to give another lecture .
In
Channing's earlier years, under the stimulating breath of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.128
MY PILGRIMAGE
New England Transcendentalism, the word " Come-outer "
was not jargon, but a solemn title of pilgrims coming out
of their several Cities of Destruction. Though Buddha was
known as a Hindu nonconformist, he remained an academic
figure, not being associated with any ideal of progress or
reformation then appreciable in the West . Since then a
great Buddha literature has arisen, but without bringing
out any original or distinctive teaching by Buddha which
can explain the enormous proportions of Buddhism . Both
in the East and West interest and enthusiasm centre in
the supposed or the real man . What mankind want is a
divine master, a preternatural person ; and when the par-
ticular cause or urgent occasion which raised the leader
into eminence has disappeared the authority of his name
remains to be claimed and utilized as a label by each and
every competitive sect and school of philosophy . There
have thus been two Buddhas running side by side through
the ages, -the Teacher and the miraculous Person . We
owe . to a few modern scholars, and chiefly to Professor
T. W. Rhys Davids, LL. D., the discovery of a real indi-
vidual under all those legendary and spiritistic wrappages
which Sir Edwin Arnold has glorified in "The Light of
Asia." There was then a great man named Siddhartha,
but he has left no writings, and it is difficult to discover
in teachings ascribed to him any original idea of an
affirmative or constructive kind . The phenomena seem
to imply vast and radical negations .
If there is anything historical about Siddhartha it is
that he denied the existence of any deity, and denied
conscious immortality . And no one who has studied the
superstitions that passed for
G° religion " in his time can
wonder that clearance of the universe from deified phan-
tasms and substitution of eternal repose for a frightfulno one who has studied the
superstitions that passed for
G° religion " in his time can
wonder that clearance of the universe from deified phan-
tasms and substitution of eternal repose for a frightful

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LECTURE IN COLOMBO
129
future were then glad tidings . Of course evolutionary
laws modified such negations . If Nirvana (annihilation)
is the supreme thing the unborn are there, and no logical
Buddhist could bring any human being into existence .
Their race would come to an end .
On my arrival in Ceylon a delegation of young Brah-
mans and Buddhists had invited me to give a public lec-
ture on Christmas day, and I consented . I had with me
a comparative study of the Birth-legends of Jesus and
Sakyamuni, of which modifications were suggested by my
experience in Ceylon. The lecture was appointed for the
afternoon, and I passed the morning in the great Colombo
temple. There, in a series of ancient frescoes, the Earth-
ward Pilgrimage of Buddha is told . The earth blossoms
when he is born, all gems in the earth send up flames,
and from afar Wise Men (not angels) come to foretell
peace and good will of man to man . In another picture
the babe is seen walking, and every step brings forth
a lotos flower .
The legendary sign of Christ's birth is a
star ; that of Buddha's birth a flower .
A wondrous Christmas day for me
!
The Brahmans
and Buddhists had united to make my lecture a grand
event ; canopies had been raised over a large open space
;
a platform had been made for leading natives,
and
benches for the crowd, which was large, the lecture being
gratuitous . All had come in fine raiment, - many-col-
oured robes, jewelled turbans, - and nothing European
to mar the effect . Around us were no walls but palms
and flowers.
Was it a dream? How had I got there ? Was I in
any sense the same as that Methodist youth who thirty-
two years before had left his home beside the Rappa-
hannock to preach Methodism?

--- PAGE BREAK ---it a dream? How had I got there ? Was I in
any sense the same as that Methodist youth who thirty-
two years before had left his home beside the Rappa-
hannock to preach Methodism?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

130
MY PILGRIMAGE
I was assured that my every hearer understood English,
that most of them were familiar with religious discussions,
and some were men of letters . The object of my lecture
was not to establish resemblances between the Birth-
legends of Christ and Buddha, but rather to point out
that in their respective myths were reflected their differ-
ent aims, -one, happiness in another world
; the other,
happiness in this world .
Beside me on the platform sat Sumangala, Priest of
Adam's Peak, Primate of the Buddhist world, with whom
I afterwards had much conversation . He was amiable as
well as erudite and acute . Our first conversation related
to the Theosophists, who had a hall in Colombo in
which I heard a Buddhist neophyte preach Sunday morn-
ing, in English, a sermon showing familiarity with Inger-
soll's works. In the recent attack of Catholics on the
Buddhist procession, Colonel Olcott had hastened to
Colombo and demanded of the government redress for the
Buddhists. These were naturally grateful to him, but
Sumangala was troubled by the expositions of Buddhism
given by the Theosophists . The pretended Mahatmas,
such as "Kotthume," he declared non-existent . In Bud-
dhist traditions there were famous ancient Rishis, but they
are now thought of only as Abraham and other patriarchs
are by Christians ; no real Buddhist imagines any of them
still living.
The Priest of Adam's Peak presides over Widyoaya
College, the Buddhist institution some miles out of Co-
lombo, whose faculty invited me to meet them and the
students there . My particular friend, the Hon . P. Rama-
nathan (Brahman), solicitor-general of Ceylon, called
to say that if I would go he would accompany me and
interpret what was said . It was arranged that the seance

--- PAGE BREAK ---e Hon . P. Rama-
nathan (Brahman), solicitor-general of Ceylon, called
to say that if I would go he would accompany me and
interpret what was said . It was arranged that the seance

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mma oxmv ao igaimi'vavoxvicas

--- PAGE BREAK ---l of Ceylon, called
to say that if I would go he would accompany me and
interpret what was said . It was arranged that the seance

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mma oxmv ao igaimi'vavoxvicas

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AT WIDYOAYA COLLEGE
131
should occur about dawn, in order to escape the heat in
our drive. Mr. Ramanathan came to my hotel with his
carriage at daybreak, and we drove five or six miles
through the enchanted land . For by this time I had
fairly delivered myself up to the sense of being in Fairy-
land, and it was without any surprise that I alighted at
the ideal college .
About twenty-five were present, a third of them being
priests, others Pali scholars and young students . They
were all Buddhists except the friend who came with me,
he being, however, a sympathetic student of Buddhist lit-
erature. I was conducted to a chair in front of the chief
priest, who sat on a circular platform, with a table before
him, on which lay his ancient palm-leaf books . We were
sheltered from the glowing sky, but no walls were around
us. The palm-trees rustled in the breeze, the birds sang
their matins, the breath of flowers and blossoming trees
interfused incense of the fresh day with thoughts that,
after two thousand years, had power to blossom out of
their palm leaves and send forth an odour sweeter than
laurel or lotos. Sumangala in his orange-coloured gar-
ment smiled on us all as be took his place . Opening one
of the three Pitakas, the Arugutta-ranikaya Sutta, written
before 250 B . c ., he read in a clear sweet voice Buddha's
plea for free thought -then never translated into Eng-
lish and to me new. At certain parts he was moved, his
voice tended to intone, and his eyes rose glowing upon us,
as if demanding homage for sublime ideas . I obtained
a careful version of the passage as read (Sumangala bad
slightly abbreviated it), and it is here given
.
Buddha came to Bihar . There certain princes welcomed
him, telling him whence they came . They said :
11 Vari-
ous priests and Brahmans pass through our towns andbreviated it), and it is here given
.
Buddha came to Bihar . There certain princes welcomed
him, telling him whence they came . They said :
11 Vari-
ous priests and Brahmans pass through our towns and

--- PAGE BREAK ---t is here given
.
Buddha came to Bihar . There certain princes welcomed
him, telling him whence they came . They said :
11 Vari-
ous priests and Brahmans pass through our towns and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

132
MY PILGRIMAGE
preach their own doctrines, speaking ill of the doctrines of
others. Each set is followed by another, who tell us what
was preached before them is not true, saying
' Listen to
us!' They who go into and they who come from the wilder-
ness meet here. Thus our mind is unsettled ; we do not
know what to believe ." Buddha said : "That is but natu-
ral. Now hear what I have to say ! Accept not the doc-
trines that are mere hearsay -what somebody says another
is preaching . No doctrine is to be accepted because believed
by one's father or grandfather . Sometimes a clever man
clothes a doctrine in fine language . Not because a doc-
trine is thus decorated is it to be believed . Not because a
doctrine is written in a book is it to be believed . Some-
times a preacher will express a doctrine logically
; but
not because it is so expressed is it to be believed . Some-
times a doctrine is conveyed by the Nyaya system of
logic, but not even for that is it to be accepted . Some-
times a doctrine may appear acceptable on its face ; not
merely for that is it to be believed . Sometimes a preacher
caters to the existing belief of his hearers
; not for that is
his doctrine to be believed . Not because a preacher con-
ducts himself according to orthodox rules is his doctrine
to be believed . Not because your master or teacher says
it is true should you accept a doctrine .
" But this is the way doctrine should be accepted . In
your own mind you must judge. What the wise have
rejected, and you yourself know to be bad, that reject
.
There is covetousness ; will it bring good or evil?"
"Evil," answered the princes . "The coveteous man,"
said Buddha, " might murder, steal, commit adultery, bear
false witness, influencing others and causing them to
follow his ways ; will he not suffer a long time? " " Yes,"
they replied . `° Supposing hatred engendered, will good
or evil follow? Through hatred a man may murder, steal,
bear false witness ; will he not suffer pain?" " Yes," re-
plied the princes. " Mental obscurity, demerits, crimes
- have the wise praised or rejected them?" "They have
rejected them ."
" If one accepts these as good, evil will
follow . If a man purifies his mind of covetousness, he
will enjoy happiness . If a man destroys all hatred, heor rejected them?" "They have
rejected them ."
" If one accepts these as good, evil will
follow . If a man purifies his mind of covetousness, he
will enjoy happiness . If a man destroys all hatred, he

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BUDDHIST PRIESTS OF CEYLON

--- PAGE BREAK ---e as good, evil will
follow . If a man purifies his mind of covetousness, he
will enjoy happiness . If a man destroys all hatred, he

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BUDDHIST PRIESTS OF CEYLON

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BUDDHA'S DOCTRINE
133
will enjoy happiness . If a man have wisdom, he will enjoy
all happiness. Now ye have judged for yourselves . He
who covets not, who hates not, is the disciple of Buddha .
Good will come to him ; he will be enlightened, he will
love all beings. He will be merciful, he will be happy in
others' happiness . He will not hate one and love another,
but be equal toward all . His friendship, mercifulness,
sympathy, good will, shall go forth to all. His equanimity
shall be boundless. In this life he will obtain fearlessness
in- four things : He may say, 'If there be another world,
and if ill or well affects it, I shall be happy . If there be
no other world, I have harmed none and benefited others,
and am happy. If after death only the wicked suffer, I
have done no evil, and need not fear . If there be no
punishment for the wicked, I am secure ."' Buddha said
to the princes : " Are these doctrines good or bad? "
They replied,
" They are good ; better than any taught
us before," and they became his disciples .
So ended the reading from the Sutta, and for a few
moments there was silence . Mr. Ramanathan whispered
to me : "Is it not strange that you and I, come from
far different religions and regions, should together listen
to a sermon from Buddha in favour of that free thought,
that independence of traditional and fashionable doctrines,
which is still the vital principle of human development? "
" Yes," I said, " and we, with the princes, pronounce his
doctrines good ."
To me, indeed, it was thrilling that
from a past of seventy generations should come this voice
summoning man to rest his faith on his own reason, and
trust his life for eternity to virtues rooted in his own
consciousness .
Invited to question, I asked the priest about covetous-
ness, and why it occupied such a cardinal place among
the sins . I observed that all commerce is developed from
man's desire for what belongs to his neighbour . I asked
whether it might not be possible that originally the covet-ch a cardinal place among
the sins . I observed that all commerce is developed from
man's desire for what belongs to his neighbour . I asked
whether it might not be possible that originally the covet-

--- PAGE BREAK ---among
the sins . I observed that all commerce is developed from
man's desire for what belongs to his neighbour . I asked
whether it might not be possible that originally the covet-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

134
MY PILGRIMAGE
ous eye meant the evil eye ; it being still believed in some
parts of England that if one strongly desires a thing be-
longing to another, that thing may be so rendered useless
to its owner or even destroyed . The priests knew of no
such superstition, and Sumangala said that covetousness
was not associated with the things a man desired to ex-
change, and that it was regarded by Buddhism as espe-
cially evil because of its lasting effects .
" There are short
sins and long sins . Anger is a great sin, but does not last
long. Covetousness is a small sin, but endures long and
grows. Even if a man loves his own things strongly, it
brings unhappiness ;
still more if he strongly desires
what belongs to others . He cannot ascend in the path to
Nirvana, -the extinction of desire . There are five sins
especially destructive of what bears man to Nirvana, and
these we reckon worst, though in immediate effects they
may appear least ."
" But suppose," I asked, " a man
strongly desires to go to heaven ; is that covetousness ? "
" Yes," said the priest, resting his chin upon the table
and levelling his eyes like arrows at the head of Christian
faith ; " yes, it is covetousness to desire paradise strongly .
One who goes there with such desires is as a fly stuck
fast in honey. Paradise is not eternal. One who goes
there must die and be born again elsewhere . Only the
desire for Nirvana escapes from the mesh that entangles
all other desires, because it is not desire for any object at
all." I asked : " Have those who are in Nirvana any con-
sciousness ? "
I was then informed that there is no Sin-
halese word for consciousness . Sumangala said, "To reach
Nirvana is to be no more." I pointed to a stone step and
said : " One is there only as that stone is here? " " Not
so much," answered the priest ; "for the stone is actually
here, but in Nirvana there is no existence at all ."I pointed to a stone step and
said : " One is there only as that stone is here? " " Not
so much," answered the priest ; "for the stone is actually
here, but in Nirvana there is no existence at all ."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HON . P. RAMANATHAN, SOLICITOR GENERAL OF CEYLON

--- PAGE BREAK ---o much," answered the priest ; "for the stone is actually
here, but in Nirvana there is no existence at all ."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HON . P. RAMANATHAN, SOLICITOR GENERAL OF CEYLON

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THINGS RIGHT YET SINFUL
135
A few days after this interview I received from the
high priest an invitation to renew our conversation at the
Pali College. On this occasion he had with him several
of the most eminent priests in Ceylon, and generally con-
sulted them before giving me answers . I enquired about
the Buddhist doctrine of never taking the life of any
creature . This doctrine he affirmed very strongly . I put
a crucial test : a man sees a tiger about to leap on his
child ; a gun is in his hand ; should he kill the tiger or
let it kill the child? There was considerable consultation
among the priests over this crux, at the end of which I
received the following reply
:
"It would be right to kill
the tiger, but it would be a sin ." To persons unfamiliar
with theology this might appear a supersubtle distinction
.
In fact, however, in western as well as oriental theology
there are things at once right and sinful . In England it
is sinful to disobey the New Testament, yet if a man
strictly obeys the prescription for the sick given in
James v, 14, and does not seek medical aid for his sick
child, the law holds him guilty if the child dies . The
development of a similar anomaly in Buddhism suggests
that the so-called " atheism " of Buddha himself was not
philosophical anti-supernaturalism but moral insurrection
against the vile and cruel phantasms of popular fear.
Buddha's Sinhalese hymn would run -
What though the spicy breezes
Blow soft o'er Ceylon's isle
;
Though every prospect pleases
And only gods are vile .
But his purely human protest shared the fate of every
religion invested with supernaturalism
: it will develop
theological, i. e. fictitious, notions of right and wrong
with the invariable result that the real is subordinated to

--- PAGE BREAK ---every
religion invested with supernaturalism
: it will develop
theological, i. e. fictitious, notions of right and wrong
with the invariable result that the real is subordinated to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

136
MY PILGRIMAGE
the unreal good and evil. It is possible, however, that
Buddhism caught this notion of " sin " from Christianity.
If Bishop Heber had been asked about the people of
Ceylon, after his visit there in 1826, he would have
described them as innocent and kind ; his word "vile "
means no more than the
L° miserable sinners " which pure
English maidens and children call themselves in their
Litany ; it has nothing to do with human virtues or
morals, but with mysterious failures in observances or
etiquette towards God . This is the Solomonic explanation
of the reason why benefits come to the unjust as well as
to the just. A hundred offences will not harm one who
fears God properly. (Eccles . viii, 13, 14 .)
Every Buddhist priest I met impressed me favourably.
They are celibate, but it is perfectly easy for one who
wishes to marry to "disrobe," as they say ; he is not dis-
liked. Possibly this complacency is the result of old
experience . One of them told me an amusing legend
a god disguised himself as a monster dog whose function
was to devour immoral priests ; immediately every mon-
astery became vacant! Easy divorce from priesthood
appeared preferable. If a priest "falls" without °" dis-
robing " he is disgraced .
Subhuti told me that there was once a body of female
priests in Ceylon . It was necessary for a woman to ordain
a woman. The line became extinct, he said, by reason of
the wars. In telling me this, Subhuti suggested to me
more than he intended . It helped to confirm my belief
that the inferior position of woman and her political
disability were due to her unfitness for bloodshed .
In 1906 it may be pardoned that Reginald Heber, a
young theologian of 1826, ignorant of Ceylon or its lan-

--- PAGE BREAK ---an and her political
disability were due to her unfitness for bloodshed .
In 1906 it may be pardoned that Reginald Heber, a
young theologian of 1826, ignorant of Ceylon or its lan-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MAKE-BELIEVE MOSLEMS
137
guage or religion, wrote such lines as
" they call us to
deliver their land from error's chain," " only man is vile,"
" bows down to wood and stone " (the chief example of
bowing to wood being homage to a cross from which the
crucified has vanished). That is pardonable
; but that such
a hymn should remain in any modern hymnal can gratify
only those who find satisfaction in everything discredit-
able to Christian missions. It does not gratify me, because
I know that where the Protestant missionary becomes
incompetent there is a soldier behind him able to make
up for his failure .
We had a story in London of two young English
scholars (I will not name them) perfected in eastern lan-
guages, who were travelling together in Arabia . They had
got themselves up with the exact Arab complexion and
dress. At one old village where they arrived they found
themselves without money, their London remittances being
sent to a farther city . While thinking what to do they
observed a deserted mosque in bad condition. They
awaited the proper hour for Moslem prayer, and from the
little outside pulpit sounded the loud usual call. The
startled villagers hastened out, and the two stained Eng-
lishmen recited finest passages from the Koran, professed a
mission to look after all desolations, and warned them to
renovate that mosque or else prepare for hell . Then they
took up a good collection and went on their way rejoicing .
If any of the Bedouins had suspicions they were allayed
by the collection . The collection is a sign of orthodoxy in
all religions .
Both of these masqueraders were admirers of Moham-
med, and one of them always called himself a Moslem .
But practically he could hardly be a Moslem. It ap-
pears that none of the older religions now wish to makee masqueraders were admirers of Moham-
med, and one of them always called himself a Moslem .
But practically he could hardly be a Moslem. It ap-
pears that none of the older religions now wish to make

--- PAGE BREAK ---admirers of Moham-
med, and one of them always called himself a Moslem .
But practically he could hardly be a Moslem. It ap-
pears that none of the older religions now wish to make

--- PAGE BREAK ---

138
MY PILGRIMAGE
converts .
They are pleased by the sympathy of aliens
with their doctrines, but it is doubtful if any one born
outside could obtain practical membership as a Brahman,
Parsi, Buddhist, or Israelite . Buddhism, Christianity,
and Islam started as missionary religions, but now Chris-
tianity alone seems to be very active in that respect, and
its older churches seem tending to confine missions to
their own scattered flocks .
It is no joke when the youngest of nations, whose con-
stitution ignores religion, stains itself morally with pre-
cisely that criminal complexion which was once attributed
to Mohammedanism . Fifty years ago Protestant preach-
ers were never weary of accusing Mohammed of propa-
gating his religion by the sword ; but in the opening
twentieth century, our government sends warships to the
chief Moslem nation and says in effect, "Pay for that
American missionary property damaged by a mob or we
will murder your people and burn your capital ." And I
heard a missionary, lecturing in our Century Club, New
York, boast that by this menace the American mission was
the only one that got its money !
Of course, so long as
comfortable "collections" can be made in this way it can
hardly be expected that churches will turn from the spu-
rious " Go ye into all the world," to the genuine words,
"Go not into any way of the Gentiles, and enter not
into any city of the Samaritans ."
" If they persecute you
in one city, go to the next." That will not do for mission-
aries wrapped in the stars and stripes !
But how far have we fallen below President George
Washington, who in 1796 sent to the Senate a treaty
with Tripoli, whose opening words are these : -
As the Government of the United States of America
is not in any sense founded on the Christian religion, -gton, who in 1796 sent to the Senate a treaty
with Tripoli, whose opening words are these : -
As the Government of the United States of America
is not in any sense founded on the Christian religion, -

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt to the Senate a treaty
with Tripoli, whose opening words are these : -
As the Government of the United States of America
is not in any sense founded on the Christian religion, -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AN ANGLO-AMERICAN FUNCTION
139
as it has in itself no character of enmity against the laws,
religion, or tranquillity of Mussulmans, - and as the said
States have never entered into any war or act of hostility
against any Mahometan nation, it is declared by the par-
ties that no pretext arising from religious opinions shall
ever produce an interruption of the harmony existing be-
tween the two countries .
On July 3, 1872, St . Paul's Cathedral, London, was the
scene of a combination of functions of international inter-
est. A large number of dignitaries of the English Church
gathered on that Wednesday to receive a present from
the American Episcopal Church . This was a silver alms-
basin. It was brought by the eminent Bishop Mcllvaine
of Ohio, who was an excellent representative
of the
American clerical type as
distinct from the English .
He had an intellectual face, delicate features under a
strong forehead . Dressed in plain black, he bore the enor-
mous basin (nearly a yard in diameter) up to the altar,
where he had to support it while the Bishop of Lichfield
gave an address. This bishop then received the basin and
carried it before the altar ; there he was met by the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury, before whom he kneeled, and who
made a good fraternal address. The archbishop then set
the basin on the communion table, and proceeded to read
the texts suggestive of alms. There were about ten other
bishops present, with a great deal of scarlet in their robes,
and each in succession walked up alone, knelt before the
basin, dropped a coin into it, and retired .
(I saw a Jap-
anese near me make a note of this apparent worship of
the silver basin!) After the bishops the vergers came
up with a dozen red velvet purses . The Anglo-American
function had been united with the anniversary of the Soci-
ety for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts .the bishops the vergers came
up with a dozen red velvet purses . The Anglo-American
function had been united with the anniversary of the Soci-
ety for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts .

--- PAGE BREAK ---gers came
up with a dozen red velvet purses . The Anglo-American
function had been united with the anniversary of the Soci-
ety for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

140
MY PILGRIMAGE
The alms-basin thus began its career by receiving gifts
for the propagation of the Gospel around the world, which
now, thirty years since the good Bishop Mcllvaine was
buried with honour in London (1873), has come to mean
a propagation by the edge of the sword. The humility of
the Ohio gentleman could not conceal the complacency
of the sect which in its address spoke of itself as the
"American Church," which with that of England made
the "two branches of the one Holy Catholic Church ."
I
remember an exchange of smiles among the large con-
tingent of Broad Church clergymen at the high ecclesi-
astical tone of the address ; and indeed it had for some
time been a sort of proverb among them that the
" apos-
tolic succession" notion was American . Mrs. Hewson,
daughter of Bishop Mcllvaine, told me that her father
was cabled while in Europe to present the basin, and,
his episcopal robes being in America, the English bish-
ops tried to find among their own one that would fit him .
In vain. All were too small for the tall American, who, his
silk stockings being out of sight, was hardly distinguish-
able from an ordinary clergyman . Was this inadequacy
of the English prelatical dress for the American prelate
symbolical? It was noticed by the Bishop of Lincoln that
the gift from America nearly coincided with the date of
the Declaration of Independence, and it appeared to me
droll that in theology independence should be more char-
acteristic of the English than of the American Episco-
pal Church . A demonstration of this was given in the
fact that the sermon on the occasion was by the Bishop
of Exeter, -even that Dr . Frederick Temple, author of a
rationalistic chapter in °° Essays and Reviews," whose pro-
motion to the Bench of Bishops was so heavy a blow to
the protesting Evangelicals . Those who hoped that in. Frederick Temple, author of a
rationalistic chapter in °° Essays and Reviews," whose pro-
motion to the Bench of Bishops was so heavy a blow to
the protesting Evangelicals . Those who hoped that in

--- PAGE BREAK ---author of a
rationalistic chapter in °° Essays and Reviews," whose pro-
motion to the Bench of Bishops was so heavy a blow to
the protesting Evangelicals . Those who hoped that in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. TEMPLE'S SERMON
141
this sermon on the Propagation of the Gospel the Bishop
would unsay what he had said, as simple Dr . Temple, in his
startling essay on " The Education of the World," were
disappointed . The sermon was a concio ad clerum, and
those who had ears to hear recognized in it the same cen-
tral idea as that of the censured essay .
His text was Rom . xi, 15, " For if the casting away of
them be the reconciling of the world, what shall the re-
ceiving of them be but life from the dead? " The bishop
showed that the casting away of the Jews was due to the
expansion of the gospel to include the Gentiles . The Jews
had gathered in great numbers to the religion of Christ,
until Paul and others began to interpret it as a religion
for mankind. They were ready to embrace it so long as
they could regard it as only a reformed Judaism . He
then went on to suggest that the spread of Christianity
among the nations of the earth was very slow, and its
conversions in foreign parts very few, chiefly because it
(Christianity) was undergoing a process of expansion .
Christians will not see their religion triumph in the world
until they have learned their own lesson better. It must
first become a larger thing in their own minds .
This tall, large-framed bishop, with his glittering black
eyes, and black hair and whiskers, and his loud clear
voice, spoke without any accent of timidity either towards
the right-wing churchmen, whose eyes were fixed sharply
upon him, or towards Dean Stanley and his group, who
were all present. He said that although the foreign pro-
pagation of Christianity was at a standstill, the impor-
tant fact remained that Heaven had married heavenly
light to earthly light .
" The wisest and most civilized
nations are Christian."
This almost seemed true when that same bishop bedstill, the impor-
tant fact remained that Heaven had married heavenly
light to earthly light .
" The wisest and most civilized
nations are Christian."
This almost seemed true when that same bishop be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

149,
MY PILGRIMAGE
came Archbishop of Canterbury . But alas ! since his time
the American churches have apparently resolved not to
let foreign enlargement wait for their own spiritual en-
largement at home. The marriage is of Gospel to Gun-
powder. As the late Lord Salisbury said, the missionary
is regularly followed by the soldier . Of course there are
some rationalists who, believing that the process makes
ultimately for " progress," may see with satisfaction Chris-
tianity rendering itself odious all round the world . The
missionary already alluded to, who lectured for us at the
Century Club, invoked our horror at Turkish intolerance
because they are forbidden to sing such hymns as " On-
ward, Christian Soldier!" For myself, that gave me an
impression that the Moslems have now become the peace-
makers, and that they know by long experience that the
" Christian Soldier " has never been contented with a mere
spiritual sword. The title of Chinese Gordon in the Sou-
dan was 11 Our Christian Soldier ."

--- PAGE BREAK ---by long experience that the
" Christian Soldier " has never been contented with a mere
spiritual sword. The title of Chinese Gordon in the Sou-
dan was 11 Our Christian Soldier ."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER VII
New Year's eve in Cinnamon Gardens - Hon. P. Ramanatban's banquet
- Devil-dances- Sinhalese demonology - Entertainment in the palace
of Mutu Kumara Swamy - The Nautch dancers -" The Martyr of
Truth " (Harischandra) - Wagnerite music .
A
MONG the conceivable sensations of existence I had
never imagined -unless in some early day-mare
dream of transmundane torments -any comparable with
those which made memorable my New Year's eve . The
Hon. P. Ramanathan invited me to his beautiful bunga-
low in Cinnamon Gardens, and there I met at dinner a
number of Hindu and Sinhalese gentlemen who possessed
scholarly knowledge of the history and traditions of their
island. It was no heavy prosaic dinner such as their Eng-
lish neighbours might have imported to give them the
ailments they ascribed to the climate, but light and dainty
Sinhalese oysters, snipe, curries, salads, bandaka (egg-
plant), other delicate vegetables, island fruits, and the
lightest French wines .' While we were taking our cigars
and coffee on the veranda, soft breezes whispering through
the palm and mango, fireflies fringing the entire gardens,
the air laden at once with fragance and rhythmic cadence
of a myriad tiny creatures in their slumbrous vespers,
' At the Gall Face Hotel, Colombo, our Scotch host had a poor table,
but on Christmas we saw "sweetbreads" on the menu, and prepared for a
treat . The sweetbreads were little cakes of dough sweetened with sugar 1
Surrounded by coffee plantations, we could not get a cup of coffee, but only
tea. He promised one day to procure us coffee, but when it came two morn-
ings later, it was so suggestive of a decoction of burnt corks that we con-
tented ourselves with the tea . Between San Francisco and Venice I found
no good hotels .

--- PAGE BREAK ---came two morn-
ings later, it was so suggestive of a decoction of burnt corks that we con-
tented ourselves with the tea . Between San Francisco and Venice I found
no good hotels .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

144
MY PILGRIMAGE
wafted me into dreamland . Presently, I said, a turbaned
magician will clap his hands and all will disappear -
these pleasant gentlemen, these palms, the fireflies - all
I shall rub my eyes, see a London fog, turn over, and
doze again . Not so! But the dream is destined to pass
into a fantastic realm .
My host had read my "Demonology and Devil-Lore ;"
he knew my interest in the diabolic fauna of Ceylon, and
determined that for once I should have enough of them .
The wild people called " devil-dancers " are not found in
or near Colombo ; English customs have frightened them
into remote places. My host with characteristic consid-
erateness had brought twenty or more devil-dancers from
the hills to perform their weird orgies before the door .
The Hindu servants of the family are accustomed dur-
ing the month between December 12 and January 12 to
design a mosaic of flour and flowers with small animal
figures on the ground in front of the veranda . At five
points of it are flowers, their stems stuck in small balls of
a substance which it requires all a cow's sanctity to dig-
nify. Petals are also strewn about over the figures, whose
object is to drive away the devils ; and one may remember
how in Goethe's 11 Faust " the angels pelt the devils with
flowers, which sting them like flames . But these Hindu
charms had no effect upon our devil-dancers. It was just
there that the scene took place . Unforewarned of any per-
formance, I was bewildered by a flare of torches approach-
ing from various quarters, held by men nearly naked .
Then there was low beating of tom-toms. Presently a
man began to drawl out a wild wailing chant, in which
another and then another joined. There were words, but
the gentlemen present, though all linguists, could not
make out the patois ; one of them told me the singersl out a wild wailing chant, in which
another and then another joined. There were words, but
the gentlemen present, though all linguists, could not
make out the patois ; one of them told me the singers

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DEVIL DANCERS

--- PAGE BREAK ---nother joined. There were words, but
the gentlemen present, though all linguists, could not
make out the patois ; one of them told me the singers

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DEVIL DANCERS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE DEVIL-DANCE
145
themselves probably did not know the meaning of their
rune. By this time a considerable crowd of people had
gathered about the outer columns of the portico, and the
flaring of the torches on their shining black bodies and
eager faces made a wondrous scene .
At length a robust fellow cleared a space, and we were
informed that the devil-dance would be preceded by a
" kolum "
(extravaganza) .
Thereupon two appear in
grotesque masks, embroidered red and green blouses,
belts with jingles, white trousers reaching to midway the
leg, and plumed caps . After a minute's dancing around
each other they stopped and conversed . Their words were
translated for me : " Can you dance? " " Yes." " How do
you dance? " "As you have seen me doing all this time ."
" Can you turn a somersault?" " I am going to do that ."
The questioner grapples and hugs him roughly .
G° I have
been stopped from a somersault by your embrace." " I am
Don Helenes de Silva, soldier."
" And I am Milord the
soldier." Both of them then recount the terrific battles
through which they have passed, conquering all their foes,
and compare their multitudinous wounds. They then
dance slowly around in cautious pursuit, as if for a grap-
ple, but suddenly take tb their heels .
An old man with a long white beard now approaches -
led by a young woman whitened by chalk . After some
dancing by these two, the old man stops to cough and
gasp. The young woman mimics the cough and everything
else done by this aged man, whom they call " Pannikera,"
which may mean " pantaloon." A young man enters
and tells the bystanders that the aged man is his son .
They cry out at the impossibility. The old man says that
he bad been three times married, and adds (to the youth),
11 1 am here to dance by the king's order, but have re-hat the aged man is his son .
They cry out at the impossibility. The old man says that
he bad been three times married, and adds (to the youth),
11 1 am here to dance by the king's order, but have re-

--- PAGE BREAK ---his son .
They cry out at the impossibility. The old man says that
he bad been three times married, and adds (to the youth),
11 1 am here to dance by the king's order, but have re-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

146
MY PILGRIMAGE
ceived no invitation ; as penalty you must dance and go ."
This the youth did, and the ballet ended .
During this performance the tom-toms and the unison
of intoning voices were incessant . But when
" kolum "
had ended, and the devil-dance was about to begin, the
vocal and instrumental overture was furious . There was
no change in the tune, but the time was accelerated, the
beats changed, the voices became louder and wilder. There
was something distinctly diabolical in the notes, which, in
combination with the silent throng of nearly naked people,
their white eyes lighting up their dusky faces, along with
the lurid torches, caused sensations to shoot through one's
nerves.
A deafening succession of tom-tom thumps accompanied
the entrance before us of the Serpent King, Naga Rajah .
His mask, face and crown together, represented every ter-
rible and beautiful curve and contortion of the cobra .
Serpents (realistic in the dusk) coiled out of the corners
of his many-fanged mouth and about his huge protruding
eyes and made the pendants of his ears, the heads and
hoods of five cobras rising to make the canopy of his
crown .
With him came his prime minister, who also
succeeded well in his mask of serpent decorations, having
above his head three huge hooded cobra-heads and three
smaller .
With these was a third, crowned with five co-
bras. The three faces were blood-red, goggle-eyed, tusky,
the forms dressed in red with touches of green, beneath
which patches of black skin were discernible as they
threw themselves about in sinuous ecstasies . The theme
of their dance, though they spoke no word, was evidently
the serpent ; they coiled, twisted, twined, and wrung their
necks so long as to make one uneasy . Possibly we were
witnessing a travesty of ancient rites of serpent-worship .ke no word, was evidently
the serpent ; they coiled, twisted, twined, and wrung their
necks so long as to make one uneasy . Possibly we were
witnessing a travesty of ancient rites of serpent-worship .

--- PAGE BREAK ---ently
the serpent ; they coiled, twisted, twined, and wrung their
necks so long as to make one uneasy . Possibly we were
witnessing a travesty of ancient rites of serpent-worship .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LEGEND OF THE BLACK PRINCE
147
These Nagas (serpents) are the legendary beings believed
to have inhabited Ceylon before it was occupied by human
beings. Ferguson identifies them as serpent-worshippers,
but I incline to the conjecture that the serpent was their
ensign. Besides the Nagas the Sinhalese believed in Yak-
khos, a sort of hobgoblin formed from human beings who
lived wickedly, or who were not burned or buried with
proper ceremonies . There were swarms of these whom the
priests were often required to expel from the houses, all
domestic mishaps being attributed to these mischievous
creatures. These two classes of demons - Nagas and
Yakkhos - have official leaders, and some of these have
special traditions . I recognized a legendary personage in
a performer who followed the three Nagas just described .
They called him Kalu Cumara, the Black Prince, but
none present seemed to know his legend, with which I
met some years before . The manager of the show told
me, through a gentleman, that this Black Prince " lived on
a mountain and was surrounded by she-devils ." I asked if
it were not true that women attributed all their ailments
to him, and was promptly answered, "Yes." The early
legend, which had died out of popular tradition, was that
this prince was once beautiful ; a race of female warriors
besieged his kingdom, but on seeing him all fell in love
with him. Each tried to appropriate him, and among
them he was torn to pieces . He then became a demon,
and has since avenged himself on the whole female race
.
The classic Amazons have thus survived as she-devils . I
glanced around me and thought I could see a shrinking
back in the crowd when this Black Prince came dashing
in. He flared large torches with both hands, and two
other torches were held in each corner of the mouth of his
hideous mask. He never rested an instant, but dancedwhen this Black Prince came dashing
in. He flared large torches with both hands, and two
other torches were held in each corner of the mouth of his
hideous mask. He never rested an instant, but danced

--- PAGE BREAK ---ce came dashing
in. He flared large torches with both hands, and two
other torches were held in each corner of the mouth of his
hideous mask. He never rested an instant, but danced

--- PAGE BREAK ---

148
MY PILGRIMAGE
and leaped furiously, going through movements express-
ing convulsions, gripings, delirium, epilepsy, often setting
fire to his beard and clothes in an alarming way
.
When this fiery demon had vanished the tom-toms
became slower, the chant more solemn, and there marched
in King Nala and his Queen Damayanti . The king's
crown was a sort of pyramid of small gods and goddesses,
that of the queen a temple . The complexions of the two
were fair, and their movements majestic . They were fol-
lowed by a hideous snaky Naga, whom I took to be the
serpent-king -said in Hindu legend to have bitten King
Nala. This king gambled away his kingdom, and while
wandering was transformed to a misshapen dwarf by the
Naga's bite . Nala recovered his wife (Damayanti) and
kingdom again, and forgave his brother, who by charmed
dice had won his kingdom . All that we here saw of the
great episode of the Mahabharata, which Dean Milman
translated into English verse, was but the ideal king and
queen and the possible Naga. There was next a female
Naga, said to personify some disease . A Sinhalese phy-
sician presently told me that when a woman is ill of chorea
or other nervous complaint, they place before her some
such hideous image .
Then the devil-dancers begin to
dance in order to draw the " possession " from the patient
to themselves, and presently the patient gets up and dances
with them. Then they speak to the demon supposed to
possess her, and say, " When do you mean to leave this
woman?" Generally there is no reply until after they
have flogged the patient once or twice, when through her
lips the demon says be will leave when a certain branch
of a certain tree falls . She names with precision the tree
and branch, and somebody always manages to have that
branch fall soon. This physician said it was all mesmer-ll leave when a certain branch
of a certain tree falls . She names with precision the tree
and branch, and somebody always manages to have that
branch fall soon. This physician said it was all mesmer-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ain branch
of a certain tree falls . She names with precision the tree
and branch, and somebody always manages to have that
branch fall soon. This physician said it was all mesmer-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHARACTERS OF THE DANCE
149
ism ; but that the only ailments cured are imaginary, as
is the method of cure .
Next we had some Hindu demons - Rakshasas, for the
Yakkhos, formidable in Ceylon, are in India the gen-
erally harmless goblins called Yakkhos . The grand king
of the Rakshasas (Ravana) made his appearance, about
which the most notable thing was his terrible teeth . This
conqueror of nature, prince of this world, for whose de-
struction Vishnu was incarnate as Ramachandra, seems to
have been shorn of some of his terrors in Ceylon, notably
of the ten heads and twenty arms ascribed to him in the
Ramayana . However, he was sufficiently ugly, as indeed
was Purnakaya, the Sinhalese Devil . The latter was fol-
lowed by Kotiya, " the tiger-demon (spotted and crouch-
ing), and " Mukara Toranaye," a fish-demon . Not so ugly,
yet fierce, was Kalinga, the lion-man, from whom the
Veddahs (primitive inhabitants of Ceylon, of whom two
thousand remain) are traditionally descended . A fox-
demon, a house-devil, passed before us ; and then there was
an interval in which were represented oriental costumes and
characters - a Pariah, a Dobi (washerwoman), Chitty
(tradesman), etc. Among these was a negro (the only one
I saw in Ceylon) in military dress, his cap marked
" 1882." One performer had the headdress of a Mudliar
(personage of high rank), but otherwise wearing only the
Tamil loin-cloth .
This caused merriment .
" Who are
you? " asked our host.
" A Mudliar," was replied from
beneath the mask .
" Why have you not the Mudliar's
dress and sword? " " I was too sleepy to put them on ."
There was good cause for the poor fellow's sleepiness
; it
was midnight. In the finale there moved before us an
embodiment of malaria that recalled to me Blake's pic-
ture of the same as a slimy green sower scattering seeds
;the poor fellow's sleepiness
; it
was midnight. In the finale there moved before us an
embodiment of malaria that recalled to me Blake's pic-
ture of the same as a slimy green sower scattering seeds
;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

150
MY PILGRIMAGE
then delirium appeared, and finally a fearful livid mask,
with abysmal mouth, and teeth like a saw, - Death. This
was the last.
The chief Hindu deity, Indra, and Sakra, his personi-
fied alias in Ceylon, came to bid us good-night and re-
ceive compliments on the interesting demons provided in
their universe . They were all demons, personifying the
diseases and obstructions of the physical man ; there was
not a devil among them, for devils do not repel but
allure ; they are not ugly but fascinating . In the seventh
century the Rakshasas of Ceylon were pictured as beauti-
ful seductive women .
At length the torches were extinguished, the dusky
crowd at the doors disappeared among the mangoes and
palms. Our revels were ended ; the demons had all
changed into painted cardboard and spangles, borne in
bundles on the shoulders of men and women, moving
under the silent stars and past their silent temples
.
As I drove to my hotel beside the sea, after midnight,
the houses of the Sinhalese city were dark, except for the
English church, from whose windows brilliant lights
streamed out over the lake and the Common . These
Christians were keeping Watch-Night, and wrestling with
the invisible principalities and powers of the universe . If
these should be given visible forms and faces, how far
would they resemble those of the demonology of Ceylon?
Among the so-called devils on the ancient church walls
of Europe one rarely discovers the tempting Satan, but
much such grotesque forms of pains, diseases, obstruc-
tions, as those that played their phantasmagoria in a fair
garden on that New Year's eve, 1883 . Mephistopheles
reminds Faust that the Devil participates in modern cul-
ture, but really it has evolved him out of existence .ayed their phantasmagoria in a fair
garden on that New Year's eve, 1883 . Mephistopheles
reminds Faust that the Devil participates in modern cul-
ture, but really it has evolved him out of existence .

--- PAGE BREAK ---goria in a fair
garden on that New Year's eve, 1883 . Mephistopheles
reminds Faust that the Devil participates in modern cul-
ture, but really it has evolved him out of existence .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EXORCISM
151
In 1854, when the opera of " Don Giovanni " was per-
formed in Boston, I remember well a swarm of little red
devils - girls and boys in scarlet tights - coming out
of a mediaeval " mouth of hell " and carrying the wicked
Don into it . It did not awe the spectators but amused
them, and I suggested to the poet Longfellow, in whose
box I sat, that the devils had better be omitted .
" It is
some satisfaction to see some practical infliction of the
condign," he said. It would not be enough to trust, as
Shakespeare usually did, to the scourge of a conscience
no longer existing. I remembered those little red devils
while in Ceylon, and wondered how such an innocent
population could have been built up without any punisher
of moral offences . But Buddha declared virtue to be as
natural to man as grass to the fields .
In an article on Demonology and Witchcraft in Ceylon
Journal of the Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic
Society," 1865-66), the very learned Dundris Gooneratue
Modliar quotes literally formulas for exorcising demons
from persons whose ailments were believed to be
" posses-
sions." In some Hindu divinities, in others Christian
names are invoked . When an exorcism begins the "devil"
demands through the lips of the possessed a ~° human
sacrifice ; " a cock is generally substituted. If the devil
still troubles his victim he (the devil) is " bound and
nailed to a tree." A nail of consecrated kind is driven
into a living tree, and a consecrated thread coiled around
it, with charms, and by this pantomime and sufficient faith
- the patient in ninety-nine cases of a hundred
is a
woman- the afflicting demon is expelled .
This combina-
tion of notions foreign to any native religion in Ceylon, -
human sacrifice, vicarious substitution, nailing to a tree, -
impresses me as something made up from the early Portu-
6lled .
This combina-
tion of notions foreign to any native religion in Ceylon, -
human sacrifice, vicarious substitution, nailing to a tree, -
impresses me as something made up from the early Portu-
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---tion of notions foreign to any native religion in Ceylon, -
human sacrifice, vicarious substitution, nailing to a tree, -
impresses me as something made up from the early Portu-
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

152
MY PILGRIMAGE
guese instructions by the native medicine-men . There is,
or was, in each remote neighbourhood a native Catholic
official called the Annery, in the potency of whose exor-
cisms the natives have a good deal of faith . He shows
the demon in the patient a cross and images of saints, and
asks if she knows what they are. At this some tremble and
try to avoid looking at them . The Lord's Prayer and a
prayer to the Virgin are read over to her seven times
;
after it a written native charm (Rattu mandiram) is
folded in paper, sprinkled with holy water, and bung at
her neck. The Annery then says
: "Leave this woman
and go thy way !
I charge thee, demon, in the name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost - name of the Virgin
Mary and all the saints -leave her this instant, or thou
shalt be punished severely ." If the demon says through
the woman's lips, `° I won't," she is struck on the back
with the tail of a skate-fish over which a charm (kattu)
has been said . After seven or eight blows the demon is
overpowered ; the woman usually recovers her senses .
There is no twilight in Ceylon. When the sun sets dark-
ness falls suddenly upon the earth, and the stars shine out
as if some hand had turned on the starlight. And it is
thick darkness too ; so thick that an anthropological spec-
ulation is born in my mind, that the dark complexions
are due to a primitive survival of the night-like . A dark
Sinhalese or Tamil is invisible against the night, and
the tread of his bare feet is inaudible . The lighter, more
visible varieties of their race would have been killed
off by invaders and wild beasts, and the dark would be
passed by . In addition to this the predatory class would
be successful in the proportion that, as is said in the
Book of Job, they were marked by the night. The Co-
lombo coachman will not drive a step after six o'clockion to this the predatory class would
be successful in the proportion that, as is said in the
Book of Job, they were marked by the night. The Co-
lombo coachman will not drive a step after six o'clock

--- PAGE BREAK ---atory class would
be successful in the proportion that, as is said in the
Book of Job, they were marked by the night. The Co-
lombo coachman will not drive a step after six o'clock

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A SINHALESE MANSION
153
unless his lamps are lit, lest he should run over a sleep-
ing native .
This darkness lends a special beauty to the bungalows
of the rich, which appear illuminated, the rays from their
lamps shining through the foliage in a mystical way,
especially if they be cocoanut-oil lamps, which give a soft
spiritual light.
The most palatial bungalow I saw in Colombo was that
of Mutu Kumara Swamy, whose hospitality and that of
his brothers was extended to me in consideration for my
friendship for their deceased uncle, Sir Kumara Swamy .
Sir Kumara while studying in London had given a course
of lectures in my chapel, on the various Indian philoso-
phies ; he had attended our receptions, and at one of them
met a beautiful young English lady whom he married .
As I drove up through the large park of palms radiant
with fireflies, the bungalow looked like -but I am sadly
in need of new similitudes . I have used up Fairyland,
and am trying to write without referring to the
11 Arabian
Nights," but it is not easy when I recall the verandas, por-
ticoes, rooms of Mutu Kumara Swamy's mansion, and the
entertainment he gave me . The tropical heat was made
pleasant by the gentle wind blowing from the neighbour-
ing sea through the open doors . It was difficult, as one
passed amid the flowering trees and floral festoons, to say
just where the garden ended and the veranda began, or
even the drawing-room, which had flower-laden trees in
each corner-flowers and wreaths everywhere. In front
of the chair of honour to which I was conducted, stood a
high table, and thereon a silver salver covered with stem-
less flowers carefully arranged . From the centre of the
salver, nearly a yard long, rose slowly burning stems,
whose incense filled the air with sweet and subtle per-silver salver covered with stem-
less flowers carefully arranged . From the centre of the
salver, nearly a yard long, rose slowly burning stems,
whose incense filled the air with sweet and subtle per-

--- PAGE BREAK ---d with stem-
less flowers carefully arranged . From the centre of the
salver, nearly a yard long, rose slowly burning stems,
whose incense filled the air with sweet and subtle per-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

154
MY PILGRIMAGE
fume .
The odours, mingled with the soft light of the
cocoa lamps, shed their influence upon seers and scene
with a strange effect. When our beautiful hostess entered,
with her rich oriental robe, and the turbaned Tamil took
his place behind her with a large peacock fan, I said,
"No doubt that is Maya, goddess of Illusion, who has
waved her wand and begun her air-woven masque ." But
when presently a blonde young English lady entered, in
unmistakable evening dress, realism came with her hu-
morous clear eyes .
It was pretty Mrs . Thwaites, who had given me a din-
ner company on their coffee plantation, and who wickedly
laughed when I coughed, and my host had to remove the
stems of incense . There were two or three other English
ladies present, and we had an opportunity of satisfying
our curiosity in several things - for instance, chewing a
little betel and making our teeth red with it .
On the walls were sacred pictures, one of the infant
Krishna and his mother, the new-born babe's head ha-
loed with light. One side of the drawing-room was partly
open, and from the room beyond we presently heard a
slight jingling of silver ornaments, next caught flashes
from jewelled hair, and the dark eyes glancing into the
room. Five Nautch girls entered with five male singers
and musicians . The girls sat in a row on the floor facing
us, and the men behind them - the plain white dress of
the latter making a background for the rich costumes of
the dancers . These Nautch costumes, though glowing with
colour and laden with jewels, were not gaudy nor even
gorgeous ; they were somewhat barbaric, but had an an-
tiquarian character very pleasing . In old conventional
pictures of sacred women - Draupadi, Damyanti, Sita -
one sees similar dresses, with the exception of the silkenmewhat barbaric, but had an an-
tiquarian character very pleasing . In old conventional
pictures of sacred women - Draupadi, Damyanti, Sita -
one sees similar dresses, with the exception of the silken

--- PAGE BREAK ---had an an-
tiquarian character very pleasing . In old conventional
pictures of sacred women - Draupadi, Damyanti, Sita -
one sees similar dresses, with the exception of the silken

--- PAGE BREAK ---

NAUTCH DANCES
155
trousers . These are probably the addition of a prudish
age. The Sinhalese Nautch girls are dressed with deco-
rum. They are small of stature, several of them pretty,
and the pearls and gold they wear -always excepting
the nose-gems -and the silver anklets above their bare
feet well become their complexion . Soon after they had
seated themselves on the floor, all - men and women -
began to sing. It sounded as a chant with grace-notes at
the end of each bar, and my host, who sat beside me, told
me it was a hymn to Siva. I did not like it much
: it im-
pressed my ear as nasal, not to say whining, and monoto-
nous. Then followed a love-song, and for a few moments
it sounded like the same tune over again
; but as I lis-
tened more closely, and tried to detach the accompani-
ment of tom-tom, pipe, and viol, I perceived that there
was more variety and more science in this music than my
ear could easily take in . For the first time it occurred to
me that part of the fault I found in oriental music might
lie in my ear not being sufficiently cosmopolitan . But at
the same time I felt sure that this music was not a pro-
duct of art in the European sense of art ; it was not a
thing that aimed at beauty ; it had ulterior purposes
: to
move the compassion of a god or lover - a cry wrung out
of struggle. It is a remarkable fact that all the ancient
love-songs of India are uttered by women to men. My
host, whose studies of such subjects have been extensive,
told me that, judging by the ancient songs, the love-mak-
ing used to be entirely on the part of women.
These Nautch girls belong to the Hindu temple, and
they sing and dance only these very ancient themes,
transmitting them to their children with extreme literal-
ness, precisely as
. they received them . The great piece
of the evening was a long dramatic love-song of greatnly these very ancient themes,
transmitting them to their children with extreme literal-
ness, precisely as
. they received them . The great piece
of the evening was a long dramatic love-song of great

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt themes,
transmitting them to their children with extreme literal-
ness, precisely as
. they received them . The great piece
of the evening was a long dramatic love-song of great

--- PAGE BREAK ---

156
MY PILGRIMAGE
antiquity, sung by all the performers, male and female,
accompanied by full instrumentation, and danced by the
leading Nautch girl, who alone did not sing . Her ges-
tures were very expressive, and I was at times reminded
of the French saying,
1° What can't be said can be sung,
and what can't be sung can be danced ." The feet had
little more to do with the dance than to bear forward and
backward the swaying or undulating form, - not at all
the danse du ventre, - while the arms were ever on the
move and the fingers twisted themselves into many varia-
tions. None of these hand-movements were the same, and
each meant something . The opening scene pantomimed
was the first glimpse of the beloved, told in embarrass-
ment, meditation, and then the flinging up of the arms in
appeal to the god of Love . Then followed the first coquet-
tish attempt to fascinate him - now by coyness, next by
a display of charms. Then follows dismay - the beloved
makes no sign of requital . The maiden becomes melan-
choly, weeps ; then she becomes passionate and confesses
to him her love . He is still cold and she is jealous. Find-
ing he loves no other, she asks if be is a man who is thus
unmoved by woman's love . He then proposes illicit love
;
this she refuses with an indignation that turns to sorrow .
Then she becomes angry, and when her anger melts, the
heart of her beloved also melts . Then her finale of joy
is danced. Much in this dance was touching, much was
exciting, and it was all of absorbing interest
; when the
girl sat down breathless, it for the first time occurred to
me that she had been dancing fifteen minutes without an
instant's pause .
I might have enjoyed this dance a little more bad I
not had to act passively the part of the beloved object .
The girl approached me, clasped her hands passionatelyinutes without an
instant's pause .
I might have enjoyed this dance a little more bad I
not had to act passively the part of the beloved object .
The girl approached me, clasped her hands passionately

--- PAGE BREAK ---stant's pause .
I might have enjoyed this dance a little more bad I
not had to act passively the part of the beloved object .
The girl approached me, clasped her hands passionately

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE DRAMA OF HARISCHANDRA
157
under my obdurate eyes, kneeled to me . I dared not
glance at the English ladies, who I knew were smiling
behind their fans, and foresaw the narrative witty Mrs .
Thwaites would send to our mutual friends in London .
In an interval for ices and sherbets the Nautches came
up in a perfunctory way to have their mystical ornaments
looked at, -armlets, bracelets, etc., - silent, impassive,
and automatic during the process .
There were other dances, one of the most striking being
a dance to the words, " Mother, a scorpion has stung me ."
These words are endlessly repeated in the chant, though
in varying tones, while the dancer goes through all the
drama of pain, illness, parting, faintness, death . This
was skilful, and so were all the dances . Those in which
all the Nautch girls danced - especially one in which they
fenced with each other-were more beautiful ; but the
very ancient dances, representing love and death, were the
most interesting .
After, the dances were over I had an unexpected de-
light in hearing the singing of the closing acts of the
great Tamil drama of " Harischandra ." I first made the
acquaintance of this wonderful Passion Play through a
translation by Sir Kumara Swamy . Harischandra is "the
Martyr of Truth." The prologue is in the court of the
supreme deity, Indra, where the truthfulness of the king
is by one declared inflexible, this being denied by another .
The result is a wager. Harischandra is subjected to the
most terrible ordeals in order to induce him to tell a lie .
He stands by his word at cost of his kingdom, his wife, his
child, - these and himself becoming slaves. In the end
all their persecutors throw off disguise and are shown to
be gods, and everything is restored . The story is much
like that of Job in the Puranic version, where the test isbecoming slaves. In the end
all their persecutors throw off disguise and are shown to
be gods, and everything is restored . The story is much
like that of Job in the Puranic version, where the test is

--- PAGE BREAK ---the end
all their persecutors throw off disguise and are shown to
be gods, and everything is restored . The story is much
like that of Job in the Puranic version, where the test is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

158
MY PILGRIMAGE
not of Harischandra's veracity, but of his fidelity to his
promise of gold for a sacrifice to the gods when he no
longer has the gold, - his property being destroyed, as
in the case of Job. This gold he obtains by selling him-
self and family into slavery . The popular and dramatic
form has humanized the earlier and religious motive from
which Job was probably derived . My friend who sat by
me translated in a low voice every thought as it was
sung, and then I began to appreciate something of the
meaning of Hindu music . The singer was a man over
thirty, with a fine voice, very flexible ; and though a
slight occasional inclination of the head was his only ges-
ture, the persons of the drama seemed to live in his tones .
There is one part of the drama where the wife of Haris-
chandra, Sandramati, finds her only son dead, bitten by
a serpent . She says to him, " Why do you not speak to
me ?
What have I done that you do not reply or look at
me ? "
One could hardly refrain from tears when the
man sang these words . And again when Harischandra,
ordered to be the executioner of his wife (charged with
child-murder), says, " Sandramati, my wife, lay thy bead
on the block, thy sweet face turned to the east ! " The
voice was here most plaintive, and suddenly rang out tri-
umphantly when the sword of execution becomes a neck-
lace of pearls on her neck, and the gods pay homage to
the inflexible " Martyr of Truth ."
There is a favourite popular picture in India of San-
dramati bringing to her husband in the cemetery their
dead son .
During this last dramatic cantata I felt the sounds
weaving a spell around me such as I had a vague remem-
brance of having once before felt . On my way home it
came to me : the secret of Wagner lay in this Hindu-Sin-dramatic cantata I felt the sounds
weaving a spell around me such as I had a vague remem-
brance of having once before felt . On my way home it
came to me : the secret of Wagner lay in this Hindu-Sin-

--- PAGE BREAK ---elt the sounds
weaving a spell around me such as I had a vague remem-
brance of having once before felt . On my way home it
came to me : the secret of Wagner lay in this Hindu-Sin-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HON . P. RAMANATHAN
159
halese music . He had fitted to every emotion its sound,
its moan, its cry, its fear or joy . This Sinhalese " music "
(hardly the name for it) was not meant to please the ear
or gratify the taste, but to move the gods .
That is why
it had given me, like Wagner's " Lohengrin," a sort of
hypersesthetic thrill. I never heard of Wagner's visiting
any oriental countries, but I learned after his
death,
which occurred shortly before I left London, that he had
planned an opera about Buddha .
The Hon. P. Ramanathan, to whom I was so much
indebted at Colombo, has since (1906) become a notable
figure in the religious developments of the East .
While
engaged in his duties as solicitor-general he was visited
by a New York gentleman of his own profession, Mr .
Myron H. Phelps, who seems to have been one of the
western pilgrims seeking more light in the East
.
I have
just had an interview with this gentleman, who resided
for a year with Ramanatban and learned from him, not
only a new oriental religion, but a new Christianity. He
loaned me two substantial volumes - one on the first
gospel, the other on the fourth - written down by Miss
R. L. Harrison from the lips of her "teacher," whose
name is given as " Sei Parananda." As Buddha's kins-
man and first apostle was " Ananda," the selection of
Paranknda as a pseudonym seems to be suggestive of the
composite root out of which Ramanathan has developed
his religion . The Indian teacher reconciles Brahmanism,
Buddhism, and Christianity by giving them all
a new
birth, but the reconciliation is not for the sake of any
racial benefit or for progress ;
it is merely incidental to
the great end, - individual self-renunciation, atrophy of
the senses to enlarge the soul, and absorption of the soul
in deity. The old religions are not entirely lost, but;
it is merely incidental to
the great end, - individual self-renunciation, atrophy of
the senses to enlarge the soul, and absorption of the soul
in deity. The old religions are not entirely lost, but

--- PAGE BREAK ---ental to
the great end, - individual self-renunciation, atrophy of
the senses to enlarge the soul, and absorption of the soul
in deity. The old religions are not entirely lost, but

--- PAGE BREAK ---

160
MY PILGRIMAGE
folded away as a sheath under a glowing spiritual flower
in which their essence is expressed .
On the representations of Mr. Phelps his Indian
teacher was invited to visit Harvard University
; and an
address given there by Ramanathan, in November, 1905,
in his admirable English, may fairly be regarded as a
landmark in the history of the famous college founded
by Puritanism. He vigorously assailed the notion that
developments of invention and machinery imply either
progress or civilization. The only " progress " is that of
individual soul into harmony with " God." (But which
God, 0 friend!)
Judge Arunachalam is also a fine writer, and has sent
me an essay printed in Colombo on "Luminous Sleep ."
It is an extremely interesting comparison of the mysti-
cal statements in Plato concerning the power of "pure
abstraction," "absolute knowledge," obtained through
sleep of the senses, beyond dreams, with the like doc-
trines in India .
" To the wise men of the East these
are matters quite as amenable to the test of experience
and verifiable by it as the facts of physical science. Ac-
cordingly in India systematic study has been made and
sedulously pursued for centuries, and the methods of at-
tainment, involving physical, intellectual, and moral
discipline, have been reduced to something like a science,
which teachers, carrying on the ancient traditions, still
teach, not for gain or show, but from pure love, to pupils
found worthy of instruction ." The judge does not hint
that he has himself ever had any inner experiences of
this kind. Such visions are not " verifiable," because soul-
senses cannot be trusted like bodily senses, and cannot
like these be checked by scientific apparatus . In any
insane asylum we may find persons whose minds are fillednot " verifiable," because soul-
senses cannot be trusted like bodily senses, and cannot
like these be checked by scientific apparatus . In any
insane asylum we may find persons whose minds are filled

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LOST PERSONALITY
161
with delusions while in their bodies every nerve is fulfil-
ling its function, a thousand valves opening and closing
with precision .
And then cui bono?
Why should any one desire to
have his personality swallowed up by any deity? What
happiness is in these abstractions and visions ?
One
lovely Lady Arunachalam or Lady Ramanathan moving
about her garden and household is surely worth more
than all the fair phantoms of wisdom and the translunary
beauties without blood or passion .

--- PAGE BREAK ---unachalam or Lady Ramanathan moving
about her garden and household is surely worth more
than all the fair phantoms of wisdom and the translunary
beauties without blood or passion .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER VIII
Arabi in exile -Relations between Egyptians and English in Colombo
- Arabi's Mohammedan Christianity - Adam's Peak and Ararat-
How Arabi's life was saved- The English defenders of Arabi- Arabi's
situation at seventy - Conjurers -The giant turtle of Colombo - The
heart and life of Buddhism in Ceylon.
A
MILE along the seashore, behind a red-turbaned
Tamil and a Persian pony, then two miles through
slumbrous villages and leafy lanes, brought me to a gateway
marked " Bonair," the villa of exiled Arabi . The road
wound through some two acres of thick palms to the pretty
bungalow. On the veranda sat four or five gentlemen of
the Egyptian type, and I knew that the large fine-looking
man who arose to receive me was Arabi, though I had
never seen his portrait. A friend had prearranged this
meeting, which I desired mainly because he was the most
learned representative of Islam in Egypt . He held my
hand for a moment, and his eye seemed to ask, "Friend
or foe?" He then turned to a young man, who spoke
English and introduced us .
Arabi was a more striking figure than I had expected .
The only immediate sign of his nationality was his fez ;
otherwise he was dressed in pure white garments of
French fashion, everything about him being scrupulously
neat. He was under fifty, full six feet tall, and of ad-
mirable proportions, with the lightest of eastern com-
plexions, a large soft eye, clear-cut features, and a face
so smooth, a brow so furrowless, that one could hardly
associate him with any great struggle or tragedy . He
offered me cigarettes, lit one himself, and through the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACHMET ARABI THE EGYPTIAN
" Froni my prison in Cairo, in the day of my trouble, to John Macdonald, the friend of
the oppressed, correspondent of the Daily News"f, and through the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ACHMET ARABI THE EGYPTIAN
" Froni my prison in Cairo, in the day of my trouble, to John Macdonald, the friend of
the oppressed, correspondent of the Daily News"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ARABI IN EXILE
163
interpreter
began conversation by saying that he had
received many friendly expressions from England, which
surprised him . I told him I had repeatedly heard in-
fluential Englishmen express friendly feelings
towards
him. « What is the cause? "
11 Because the English love
freedom, and numbers believe that the Egyptians
you
led were under oppression." He was silent a moment,
then said, " There are millions bound under one ."
In
further conversation he said, °° No, I do not feel so much
mental trouble now .
I have not been away from Co-
lombo, though I may move hereafter .
I have sat in
this veranda every day. The house is pleasant ; I am
kindly treated by the English ; in mind I am not troubled,
because I have perfect faith that Egypt will be free .
The world will find it necessary .
I look on with deep
feeling, but with no fear as to the final result ."
In
another connection he said, "Well, yes ; the idea has
sometimes entered my mind of a visit to England ; but
that rests with another will than mine ."
He several
times alluded to the kindness of the English
in Co,
lombo. No unpleasant incident of his residence there
was known to him, but an English lady told me that at
a ball to which Arabi and his companions were invited
some ladies were annoyed, supposing they were laughed
at while dancing.
The custom of dancing is one to which
the rigid Moslem mind cannot adapt itself ; and while
the English are sometimes shocked by eastern nudity,
Orientals are equally shocked by the deliberately decollete
dress .
I did not know then that the life of Arabi had been
privately pleaded for by John Bright, but found much
satisfaction in reminding him that the great Commoner
had withdrawn from the Gladstone Cabinet because of thethen that the life of Arabi had been
privately pleaded for by John Bright, but found much
satisfaction in reminding him that the great Commoner
had withdrawn from the Gladstone Cabinet because of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---of Arabi had been
privately pleaded for by John Bright, but found much
satisfaction in reminding him that the great Commoner
had withdrawn from the Gladstone Cabinet because of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

164
MY PILGRIMAGE
bombardment of Alexandria. The grand old Quaker was
told by Gladstone that Arabi was a bad man and deserved
the fate to which he had led so many, but the hope of get-
ting the great popular leader back into his Cabinet was
probably a potent reinforcement of the gallant English
band that induced the premier to commute the Egyp-
tian's sentence to exile .'
In common with other friends of Professor Edward
' John Macdonald, then representative of the London Daily News in
Cairo, wrote the letters that brought the English conscience and sentiment
to shield Arabi from fury in Cairo, where proud Cherif Pasha was threat-
ening that if Arabi was not executed he (Cherif) would leave Egypt
.
Macdonald's letters brought vividly before us the honest and heroic, albeit
fanatical, prisoner, whom he constantly visited .
With Macdonald and
his wife (biographer of Rousseau) I have recently (1906) talked over the
case of Arabi . A photograph of Arabi in prison - somewhat dim - was
given by him to Macdonald, with an inscription in Arabic which may be
thus translated : " From my prison in Cairo in the day of my trouble to
John Macdonald, the friend of the oppressed, correspondent of the Daily
News . - Achmet Arabi the Egpytian ."
Arabi always added " the Egyptian " to his signature .
Wilfred Blunt spent about £5000 to save the life of Arabi, and valuable
aid in London was given by Henry Labouchere, M . P ., and Jesse Collings,
M . P. Mr . A. W. Broadley was very active in the whole affair, and his
book, How we defended Arabi, tells the true story .
Arabi's exile in Ceylon ended about seven years after my visit, but it
appears that his enemies have contrived to give him a worse exile in
Cairo . In a note of June 29, 1906, Mr . Broadley writes me : " I formed
a very high opinion of Arabi's patriotic conduct and absolute disinterest-
edness.
We have corresponded ever since . I heard from him only a few
days ago. He is now about seventy years old -a great age for an Egyp-
tian -and is very miserable . He gets £650 a year, and that sum is not
sufficient for the wants of his abnormally large family, -for Arabi is
married and has seventeen or eighteen children . He is boycotted by all
the official set in Cairo and is still deprived of all civil rights. He was
much happier in Ceylon ."
Brentano's house in Cairo sought in vain to find for me a portrait of
Arabi !
In the oubliette of this brave man it may be hoped will be buried
the delusion that a people can successfully fight any devil with fire-his
own element .t in vain to find for me a portrait of
Arabi !
In the oubliette of this brave man it may be hoped will be buried
the delusion that a people can successfully fight any devil with fire-his
own element .

--- PAGE BREAK ---r me a portrait of
Arabi !
In the oubliette of this brave man it may be hoped will be buried
the delusion that a people can successfully fight any devil with fire-his
own element .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONVERSATIONS WITH ARABI
165
Palmer, I had deplored the death in that Egyptian strug-
gle of the finest linguist in England . But amid our grief
in London I had pointed out in a public discourse that
his execution by the Bedouins was a legitimate act of war ;
and bad solemnly arraigned the English government for
utilizing the knowledge of eastern languages in which
young Palmer excelled to turn him into a spy and send
him off with money to bribe the soldiers of Arabi and
make them traitors to their cause .
Alas, that a bril-
liant scholar should have allowed any government to tear
him from his university for an inglorious mission .
But
so do governments cast their children to the wolves for
the sake of victory.
I was told that some had heard sobs issuing from Ara-
bi's chamber at midnight . Nor did I feel sure the story
was mere gossip. Proud and strong in faith as that big
Egyptian felt himself, he rarely smiled, and there was
something pathetic in his remark, "I wait to see what
England will do."
A servant entered with coffee, and I was glad that the
trials of exile did not include the necessity of drinking
the stuff called coffee in Ceylon . The coffee was Egyp-
tian, and was served in tiny cups holding each about two
thimblefuls .
On one cup was inscribed, in English,
"Think of me," and on another, "From a Friend ." Anx-
ious to avoid politics, I alluded to the Moslem tradition
that Ceylon was selected as the place of Adam's exile,
its beauty being some compensation for the loss of Para-
dise, and expressed the hope that he, Arabi, also found
in its charms some mitigation of exile .
I saw his face
brighten ; the Wahabi - the enthusiast of Cairo Uni-
versity - was revealed. He went on with rapidity to de-
scribe bow, divorced from his wife, Adam had come toe mitigation of exile .
I saw his face
brighten ; the Wahabi - the enthusiast of Cairo Uni-
versity - was revealed. He went on with rapidity to de-
scribe bow, divorced from his wife, Adam had come to

--- PAGE BREAK ---e .
I saw his face
brighten ; the Wahabi - the enthusiast of Cairo Uni-
versity - was revealed. He went on with rapidity to de-
scribe bow, divorced from his wife, Adam had come to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

166
MY PILGRIMAGE
Ceylon (the isthmus is still called Adam's Bridge), and
how at length he travelled away, finding the charms of
Ceylon nothing compared with those of Eve . Her he
found at Ararat, - which signifies " great woman." She
had become a giant huntress, and Adam had to woo her
again before she would give up her freedom .' I could not
gather clearly whether he shared the notion that the huge
oblong mark on Adam's Peak is Adam's footprint .
He
was willing, I think, to surrender that footprint to Buddha .
Knowing that Arabi was a scholar, I had hoped that be
might be interested in the Persian poets, - Firdusi, Hafiz,
perhaps even Omar Khayyam. I found, however, that he
knew only that they were unorthodox. He was a Wahabi,
a Moslem Puritan, and all the poetry in the world was
worthless beside a line of the Koran .
"There is one
God," he said, "the creator of all things, -of moun-
tains, sea, earth, sky! Do you not believe in a God?"
In Arabi's Wahabi deity I did not believe, the Koranic
Allah being to my mind one of the least lovable or be-
lievable images in the pantheon of invisible idols .
While
our interpreter was conveying his question I framed some
vague statement from my point of view, which I fear
mystified him, and hastened to change the subject .
The most curious and obstinate error in Christendom
is the notion that the Moslems are not Christians, and
that Mohammed occupies the place of Christ . They are
not only Christians, but the only ones in the East who
maintain literally all of the miracles ascribed to Christ in
the gospels, or relating to his birth. It is very rare to
find among them a sceptic .
1 This legend that Adam and Eve had quarrelled, apparently on the issue
of feminine " freedom," looks as if in some regions there had blended with
it the legend of Lilith, Adam's first wife, who left him because he declared
himself her divinely authorized master.he issue
of feminine " freedom," looks as if in some regions there had blended with
it the legend of Lilith, Adam's first wife, who left him because he declared
himself her divinely authorized master.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHRIST AND MOHAMMED
167
In my talk with Arabi we spoke of the Mahdi (Mo-
hammed Ahmed) in the Soudan . The soldiers of Arabi
had been dragged to fight against the Mahdi, but Gordon
had not yet been sent to bring back these
" garrisons ."
Arabi said to me
:
" There is an expectation generally
prevailing in the Moslem world that the Mahdi is to
appear about this time and lead in the transformation
of the world. He will overthrow the powers of wrong and
all idolatry ; and with him will presently appear Jesus
Christ, who will rebuke the errors of those who claim to
be the only Christians, and will unite all in the worship
of one God . The religion so formed will thenceforth be
that of the whole world ." I asked why it should not be
Mohammed himself instead of Christ who would appear
with the Mahdi and unite his followers with those of
Christ. He said : "Mohammed cannot appear again on
earth ; he is dead ."
" But is not Christ similarly dead? "
" No, Christ never died . There are two men who never
died, - Elias and Jesus. He who hung upon the cross
was a mere effigy of Jesus. The crucifiers were deceived .
Jesus still lives, and at the right hour will appear . Elias
found the water of immortality in a cave and drank of
it ; he cannot die . But Mohammed is a dead man -he
is in Paradise."
Arabi's voice became fervid as he said this, and his eye
expanded, as if holding the vision of innumerable millions
turning from adoration of a crucified effigy to worship of
Allah.
Arabi expressed a lively interest in America . He con-
sidered the late civil war, " which ended with the liber-
ation of four million slaves," the ideal event of the century,
and added : "Alas, there are still so many slaves !
There
are, as I said, twelve millions bound to the will of oneended with the liber-
ation of four million slaves," the ideal event of the century,
and added : "Alas, there are still so many slaves !
There
are, as I said, twelve millions bound to the will of one

--- PAGE BREAK ---

168
MY PILGRIMAGE
man . But it cannot remain so . I sit here on this ve-
randa from week to week and study English every day .
That is my main occupation . What will the English do
in Egypt? " This last question was not uttered exactly to
me ; it was a problem slowly put to the horizon toward
which his eyes were directed . I then arose to go. Again
his form towered before me with its grand proportions ._
There was the utmost polish and gracefulness in the way
in which he parted from me . He invited me to call again,
but I could not do so. There was a good deal of fascina-
tion about the man, and I did not wonder at his influence
over his countrymen. I left him with the conviction that
he was a very able man indeed - a genuine patriot -the
true representative of a people, but also with a dawning
suspicion that religious enthusiasm, not to say fanaticism,
had more to do with his agitation in Egypt than most of
his English sympathizers supposed .
Just as I was bidding farewell to Arabi and his com-
rades a man and boy emerged from the woods, -for there
was no habitation near Bonair, - the man bearing a
sort of rattle with which he accompanied his song, the
boy a bowl. None of us present understood the song, but
the theme was sweet . They were well dressed, and the
boy, a yellow-tinted Eros, did not extend his bowl for
money. They made obeisance and passed on . Arabi re-
garded the visit as one of respect and sympathy, and was
evidently moved . His face flushed with sensibility, and
he touched the beautiful long hair of the boy with a little
caress.
I do not believe that any one of the English rulers in
Egypt, or of the English generals there, was a grander
man than Arabi .
What most impressed me about Arabi was, I think, his

--- PAGE BREAK ---I do not believe that any one of the English rulers in
Egypt, or of the English generals there, was a grander
man than Arabi .
What most impressed me about Arabi was, I think, his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONJURERS
169
veracity .
It
was
inconceivable
that
this
transparent
man was strategist enough to be a successful minister of
war. Indeed candour appeared to me characteristic of all
the Mohammedans I met on my travels . A Christian
African envoy from Liberia to a European court told me
of a poor negro who was puzzled as to the right religion,
and an English agent said to him, " If you want to be
a good man you had better be in this neighbourhood a
Mohammedan ; if you want to make money, be a Chris-
tian ."
While wandering about the streets in Colombo I en-
countered a Sinhalese boy of about sixteen years who
entreated me to witness his conjuring tricks . He cheated
my senses cleverly, but interested me most with his cobra .
He took from a basket the large hooded reptile which
reared half its body from the ground and when he piped
to it swayed in good time from side to side . He pressed
the rupee I loaned into the cobra's mouth several times,
each time exclaiming " Poison ! " then offered it back to
me and was saddened by my accepting it. However, I
returned it. I came to Ceylon expecting to be waylaid
by cobras, but at length was willing to pay an extra rupee
to see even a performing one.
Later I saw another conjurer performing the renowned
trick of making a mango grow from the ground . It did
not impress me much ; but simply because of the stories
told about it by travellers, I beckoned this conjurer
into a lonely place and offered him five rupees to tell me
his secret. He then opened his property-bag and showed
me three slips of the mango plant, the largest having
one little mango on it . The smallest is put into a mus-
sel shell ;
but the stem, bent under compression, will,
when the lid is removed, stand erect. In planting succes-

--- PAGE BREAK ---st having
one little mango on it . The smallest is put into a mus-
sel shell ;
but the stem, bent under compression, will,
when the lid is removed, stand erect. In planting succes-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

170
MY PILGRIMAGE
sively the other and larger two, the dexterity required
is assisted by the "priest," a confederate, also by the
frequent lifting of the horse blanket for the performers
before the public is allowed to see the growth. The
trick is rendered easy by the length of time required,
during which the spectators are apt to move about and
look at other curious things, returning only when the
final miracle is announced . It is not the mango that is
so wonderful, but the growth of the narrative about it
between Bombay and London .
There was, however, no deception about the great Ceylon
turtle. It is about six feet long by four or five wide . It is
quite blind, never drawing in its head at the approach of a
stick. When thirsty it bellows like a bull. In the back of
the thick shell a hole of three inches diameter has been
bored so that the turtle may be spurred with a stick into
motion. According to the tradition it was over a hundred
years old, but that is a moderate estimate . I visited an
old man of ninety who told me that the turtle was
nearly of the same size in his boyhood . It occupies a field
of several acres alone, and nothing is charged for see-
ing it ; but a keeper goes over to carry it water when it
roars .
I shall always think of Ceylon as an Eden, and of the
Sinhalese as happy children who have not yet eaten of
that tree which Pessimism calls, Consciousness . In the
Padma Purana beautiful Parvati asks the god Siva to
show her the finest garden in the earth ; he conveys her
to Naudana. In the garden's centre there is a wondrous
tree, the Kalpa-tree, which
" bestows all that gods de-
sire." Its seeds are gems . Parvati longs for the "beauti-
ful gem of a maiden," so Asokasundari was born . But
this tree? Kalpa means Time, or an immeasurable erae, which
" bestows all that gods de-
sire." Its seeds are gems . Parvati longs for the "beauti-
ful gem of a maiden," so Asokasundari was born . But
this tree? Kalpa means Time, or an immeasurable era

--- PAGE BREAK ---ll that gods de-
sire." Its seeds are gems . Parvati longs for the "beauti-
ful gem of a maiden," so Asokasundari was born . But
this tree? Kalpa means Time, or an immeasurable era

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE KALPA-TREE
171
does the Puranic fable mean that Time brings about all
that the gods desire ? It does not always bring about what
man desires, and I do not suppose the famous founders
and priesthoods of any temples would be satisfied with the
shape Time has given their gods in Ceylon, which re-
ceived them all with the large tolerance with which Roger
Williams welcomed in Rhode Island the heretics exiled
from other regions . Modliar quotes a Sinhalese as saying
to a European sceptic : " I don't know whether these
things be true or false. When we fall sick we try every
means within our reach of getting better .
We worship
Buddha, the gods, and the demons, all at once, to take our
chance of recovering from the sickness through the help
of some of them . All my countrymen do so, and I am only
doing like them." It does not seem to have occurred to
the lowly man that any one of these potent beings might
be a "jealous god" and object to being mixed up with
other deities. The philosophy derived from Buddha is
pure pessimism, and Ceylon is its academic centre ; but
the Kalpa-tree, Time, in that garden has produced a
people practically optimist . The seeds of that
tree are
gems, and each has the priceless gem -contentment -
which keeps the heart young to its last beat .
The Kalpa-tree in oriental folk-lore probably originated
~~ La Peau de Chagrin ." Balzac's centenarian says, "The
Brahman to whom I owe this talisman explained that
it would effect a mysterious accord between the desires
and the destinies of its possessor ." But it required Euro-
pean sophistication to connect with the Wish-talisman
the moral that every fulfilled desire is another step in sui-
cide. Whatever may be the natural penalties of violent
western passions, there are none for the simple affections
of these Sinhalese vegetarians, with their chaste nudity,sire is another step in sui-
cide. Whatever may be the natural penalties of violent
western passions, there are none for the simple affections
of these Sinhalese vegetarians, with their chaste nudity,

--- PAGE BREAK ---in sui-
cide. Whatever may be the natural penalties of violent
western passions, there are none for the simple affections
of these Sinhalese vegetarians, with their chaste nudity,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

172
MY PILGRIMAGE
the womanliness even of the men, whose long hair is coiled
with combs. I counted twenty-nine various vegetables in
one market-stall, and wondered whether these various
contributions of Armaiti, genius of the Earth, had any
connection with the varieties of expression, voice, fancies
of the Sinhalese, and their freedom from friction. They
spoke and moved - women, children, men - sponta-
neously, as if never used to being sat upon .
Buddha said of Truth that it was as the rain which each
plant, flower, grass-blade sucked up in accordance with its
nature and its need . What matters any dogma, theology,
philosophy, uttered thousands of years ago, compared
with the life that is quickening hearts to-day ?
Each
great Bo-tree (Ficus religiosa)
beside its temple is a
Kalpa, giving each several heart its sustenance
; and I
am leaving Ceylon with a serene confidence that if Allah
or Jesus are ever welcomed there it will be because they
will be seen sitting beside Buddha under his fig-tree, as
Vishnu and Agni have long been sitting, and like these
conveying to native hearts sweet secrets of private inter-
pretation. The Buddhist Kalpa will, I believe, continue
its gifts after the Trees rooted in deities and dogmas have
withered. For in the course of ages the accumulated sen-
timents projected into and nursed by every religion bring
human hearts in fatal conflict with any falsities in their
foundation . George Sand, in her " Pauline," says : -
She [Pauline] was not really pious .
.
.
. She found
in Catholicism the nuance adapted to her character, for
all the shades (nuances)
possible are found in the old
religions ; so many centuries have modified them, so
many men have had a hand in the building, so many
intelligences, passions, and virtues have borne to it their
treasures, their errors, or their lights, that a thousand
doctrines are ultimately stored in one, and a thousandnd in the building, so many
intelligences, passions, and virtues have borne to it their
treasures, their errors, or their lights, that a thousand
doctrines are ultimately stored in one, and a thousand

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE OLD RELIGIONS
173
different natures are able to draw thence the palliation
or the stimulant suited to them . It is by that these
religions are built up, and also by that they crumble .
(George Sand wrote these words in 1840, and while I
quote them (1906) the world is witnessing the fulfilment
in France of her last clause -" c'est aussi par la, qu'elles
s'ecroulent .")

--- PAGE BREAK ---ge Sand wrote these words in 1840, and while I
quote them (1906) the world is witnessing the fulfilment
in France of her last clause -" c'est aussi par la, qu'elles
s'ecroulent .")

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER IX
Madras - Temple dancers - Talk with students - Juggenauth - St.
Thome - A Portuguese Thomas - Legend of Savatri - New dis-
coveries concerning Thomas - Pain and piety - A Jain parable -
Good will to man- A Buddhist carol.
I
T is the custom on P. and 0. boats for the steward to
awaken one at dawn with an offer of coffee . I began
by storming against this dream-murder, and ended with
ordering my coffee still earlier . Every oriental dawn is a
pictorial rapture out of the Vedas. Especially resplendent
was the sunrise under which we approached India . A
great sun arose out of the sea, stretched himself, then
sprang aloft and hurled darts on Ahi, serpent of darkness,
revealing Madras in the distance. The colours of dawn
descend to earth, breaking over an ocean that knows no
twilight, transmuting every wave to opal, tinting each
towering temple .
Carried ashore in a boat of bamboo tied with strings
of palm bark, no nail in it, I entered on the grand estate
of two days in Madras . Not a wavelet of daylight or
moonshine to be lost !
Straight I went rambling in the
streets, and to my joy found that a lunar festival was just
beginning . In front of an ancient temple a procession
was forming, and a goddess brought out to her palanquin .
It was Sira, a sister goddess (of Prosperity) with Lakshmi .
She sat in a round red-and-gold frame, surrounded with
tongues of flame representing rays of the sun. The great
disc rested on a chariot driven by some Hindu Phaethon,
and drawn by five metal horses painted green and red .
I was the only white person present ; and as the man-

--- PAGE BREAK ---sun. The great
disc rested on a chariot driven by some Hindu Phaethon,
and drawn by five metal horses painted green and red .
I was the only white person present ; and as the man-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TEMPLE DANCERS
175
agers of the affair were polite, making an opening through
the crowd that I might see the dancers, I followed them
an hour. Whenever a temple or shrine was passed the
five Nautches danced before their goddess . The march
of the procession was to the beating of tom-toms and music
of pipes ; but now and then a leading personage made a
tinkling sound on a metal cup he held, whereupon the
procession paused, the palanquin was let down from its
bearers' shoulders, all other instruments ceased, and to
the tinkle of the bell and chant of him who beat it the
Nautches danced. They were covered with jewels and
richly dressed . The embroidered cape fell loosely over
the upper part of the breasts, leaving the waist naked ;
the skirt descended just below the knees, the legs being
bare except for anklets . The dancers were of lighter com-
plexion than others in the procession ; they wore less cloth-
ing than the temple-nautches of Ceylon ; but they were
so childlike, and so absorbed in their divine pantomime
that there was no effect of indecency. Their feet moved
slowly to and fro ; their jewelled hands were contin-
ually moving, -the fingers, sometimes crossed, now and
then stretched out, or lifted as if in benediction, were
yet never raised heavenward . They were rehearsing the
deeds of Sira.
The next morning I went out at seven o'clock to the
same temple. The deity brought out on this occasion was
the elephant-headed Ganesa, god of wisdom . He was
mounted on the same sun-chariot, drawn by the five mod-
elled horses, whose attitudes were much like those of St .
Mark's at Venice. Two poles upheld large red hearts
with sun and moon (featured) embroidered on them . On
this occasion three of the five Nautches were girls of about
ten years. The little things watched their leader ando poles upheld large red hearts
with sun and moon (featured) embroidered on them . On
this occasion three of the five Nautches were girls of about
ten years. The little things watched their leader and

--- PAGE BREAK ---red hearts
with sun and moon (featured) embroidered on them . On
this occasion three of the five Nautches were girls of about
ten years. The little things watched their leader and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

176
MY PILGRIMAGE
imitated her every movement. The dance, interesting as
a novelty and study, seemed perfunctory ; there was no
appearance of any emotion, much less passion or ecstasy,
about dancers or dance. When the dancers and the deity
first emerged from the temple beneath an arch of palm
branches, they were preceded by a very fair woman who
bore in her band a brass pot, on the top of which burned
a flame. When the procession had started she moved back
into the temple and was seen no more .
While I was standing near the palanquin a young
Hindu approached me .
" You seem, sir," he said in per-
fect English, " to be cosmopolitan." I turned at the quaint
remark and saw before me a refined, eager young face,
a bright, penetrating eye, a frank, pleasant smile . On
his forehead was the round spot of Siva. He was dressed
in a snow-white robe from neck to feet . This youth, as
it afterwards appeared, had been standing, with a few
fellow-students of Madras University, on the roof of their
house ; they had observed my interest in the ceremonies
and the deity to whom they were offered, and resolved to
invite me to their rooms . When accosted, I said that I
was indeed much interested in oriental religions .
" I shall
be very glad to be of any assistance to you," said my new
friend, " and so will my companions whom you may see
standing on that house ." I looked and saw three white-
robed youths some fifty yards away, gazing steadily at us.
"We are students of the university ; we speak a little
English, and would be glad of some conversation with
you." I would have followed a youth with such a counte-
nance anywhere .
11 I will come presently," I said, and he
left me. Having made a few more notes of the Ganesa
service, I repaired to the house of the students . Three,
apparently brothers, welcomed me at the door . The roomsl come presently," I said, and he
left me. Having made a few more notes of the Ganesa
service, I repaired to the house of the students . Three,
apparently brothers, welcomed me at the door . The rooms

--- PAGE BREAK ---said, and he
left me. Having made a few more notes of the Ganesa
service, I repaired to the house of the students . Three,
apparently brothers, welcomed me at the door . The rooms

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TALK WITH STUDENTS
177
of these well-to-do students were comfortable and venti-
lated, but bare of ornament. They sat on benches, but
brought a chair for me . I found them deeply interested in
English science and in their own sacred literature .
Strange combination had their generation provided for
these young beads . I was told of a Burmese student at Cal-
cutta whose father secured him against Christian heresies
by means of a praying machine perpetually turned by a
stream of water, but I was curious to know how these
young Hindus were protected . I found that they studied
and respected everything English except its theology. All
the theology of Christendom was as a mushroom beside
the stately forest of their own sacred books and tradi-
tions. They were just then engaged on the Ramayana
and Bhagavat Purana. The latter, which gives the fullest
account of Krishna, led to a conversation on the resem-
blances between that legend of the incarnation of Vishnu
and that of Christ in the New Testament . One of these
youths called my attention to a point which has not, I
believe, been noted by western scholars. The next in-
carnation expected by the Hindus is Kalki . This name
has usually been translated
G° white horse" and understood
to mean that at the end of the Kalki, or Iron Age, Vishnu
will come on a pure white horse to judge the world . But
these students say Kalki means
" the severe face," the
idea conveyed being very nearly that ascribed by Chris-
tians to the Messiah at his second coming . It is believed
that Kalki will appear beside the river Rhambrapurny,
south of Tinnivelly. These students spoke of Buddha as
a very great Rishi and sage who founded a new school of
philosophy-the Sankhya. Theosophy having come under
discussion, they were surprised to hear me speak of it as
claiming to be "Buddhist." They had seen the 1 1 Countess "ge who founded a new school of
philosophy-the Sankhya. Theosophy having come under
discussion, they were surprised to hear me speak of it as
claiming to be "Buddhist." They had seen the 1 1 Countess "

--- PAGE BREAK ---school of
philosophy-the Sankhya. Theosophy having come under
discussion, they were surprised to hear me speak of it as
claiming to be "Buddhist." They had seen the 1 1 Countess "

--- PAGE BREAK ---

178
MY PILGRIMAGE
Blavatskyand"Colonel "Olcott, had attended Theosophist
meetings and lectures, and had always supposed it to be
a revival of Hinduism . They had never heard of the
veiled Mahatma, Khotume . The Theosophists must have
been adapting their cult to different regions . They be-
lieved " Colonel " Olcott bad been successful in healing
some diseases . They had not personally witnessed such
cures, but heard that at Combaconum, where their parents
resided, he had cured a boy of paralysis of the leg and arm .
The students appeared to me unfamiliar with the ideas
of scientific men concerning such subjects, or with the
pathology of imagination . They seemed to think all such
things immediately connected with preternatural or oc-
cult causes . Otherwise they were keeping well abreast of
European ideas. The most significant thing about their
talk was the evidence given that they were alive to the
resemblances between Christian and oriental traditions :
Besides the example already referred to, they remembered
the Hindu saints and heroes born of miraculous concep-
tion ; and among the legends common to India and Eu-
rope they mentioned the name of one (Awasthama) doomed
to immortality on earth like the Wandering Jew, while
another (Vabisbana), a blessed undying one, might be
compared with sleeping St . John at Ephesus . They say
that the heaven for which they hope is not very different
from that of the Christian
(1° We shall be fair there,"
they said) ; but they looked with horror upon the Chris-
tian doctrine of hell. They claimed moral and philo-
sophical superiority for their belief that sinful souls are
given the forms of animals - higher or lower, according
to their merits and disciplinary needs - the object being
not at all punishment, but the deliverance of a soul from
evil and its ascent to unity with God. All lower forms- higher or lower, according
to their merits and disciplinary needs - the object being
not at all punishment, but the deliverance of a soul from
evil and its ascent to unity with God. All lower forms

--- PAGE BREAK ---according
to their merits and disciplinary needs - the object being
not at all punishment, but the deliverance of a soul from
evil and its ascent to unity with God. All lower forms

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JUGGENAUTH
179
are
therefore purgatorial, and every soul that sins is
accorded this seventy times seven if he shall so often die
in his sin.
" There is no eternal punishment ." To my en-
quiry whether a soul sank lower by immorality or by athe-
ism, they answered,
G° By atheism ." I said that European
opinion was different ;
that every thinker who renounced
a popular idol was an atheist to the worshipper of that
idol, and that if people were to be frightened by such epi-
thets there could never be any advance from ancient error
to new truth.
" Why then," said one, " was the editor
of the
I Freethinker' imprisoned in London ? "
I ex-
plained that it was not because of atheism ; that the judge
in that case declared that every man was entitled to ex-
press disbelief in deity ; but that the exhibition of certain
pictorial caricatures of sacred persons had been consid-
ered contrary to public decency. The caricatures were
not obscene, and many of us considered the conviction
illegal, although disliking such caricatures . This expla-
nation appeared to interest them very much . After this
conversation the student who had accosted me on the
street accompanied me to the museum, where I was much
assisted by his intelligence . He had an ardent desire to
visit England, and told me that no Hindu now lost caste
by such a journey, as in former times . On his return
such Hindu traveller need only call at the shrine of Jug-
genauth and bring home a certificate of having made a
"pilgrimage to Juggenauth," to have "no questions
asked" as to how much farther his pilgrimage may have
extended .
I found learned men in India, both native and English,
puzzled by the evil reputation of Juggenauth and his
famous Car, throughout Christendom . He is a form of
Vishnu, the Lord of Life, to whom all destruction ised men in India, both native and English,
puzzled by the evil reputation of Juggenauth and his
famous Car, throughout Christendom . He is a form of
Vishnu, the Lord of Life, to whom all destruction is

--- PAGE BREAK ---h native and English,
puzzled by the evil reputation of Juggenauth and his
famous Car, throughout Christendom . He is a form of
Vishnu, the Lord of Life, to whom all destruction is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

180
MY PILGRIMAGE
abhorrent. The death of the smallest creature beneath the
wheels of that Car, much more of a human being, would
entail long and costly ceremonies of purification . It is
surmised that the obstinate and proverbial fiction about
the Car of Juggenauth must have originated in some
accident witnessed by a missionary who supposed it a reg-
ular part of the ceremonies . There have been suicides in
India, as in Christian countries, from religious mania,
but the place where they are least likely to occur is in
the neighbourhood of Juggenauth .
In 1876 I gave a discourse in London in which this
subject was alluded to, a newpaper report of which led
Professor A. Bain of Aberdeen to address a letter to
the "Academy" citing high authorities in England for
the traditional belief about Juggenauth . I was able to
fortify my statement, and Professor Bain wrote me a
private letter saying that he was convinced that it was
correct. Even Professor Max Muller told me that until
he read the letters in the " Academy " he supposed that
suicides had formerly occurred under the Car .
The late Sir William Hunter, gazetteer-general of
India, made a special investigation into the matter, and
in his " Orissa " (1872) said : "So far from encouraging
self-immolation, the gentle doctrines of Juggenauth tended
to check the once universal custom of widow-burning .
Even before the government put a stop to it, our officials
observed its comparative infrequency at Puri ."
When the Prince of Wales (Edward VII) visited St .
Paul's after his recovery, several persons were crushed to
death. One can imagine this fact reaching some distant
island in such a shape as to leave there a tradition that
it is usual to sacrifice human victims in England on the
recovery of a prince, as a part of a thanksgiving service .act reaching some distant
island in such a shape as to leave there a tradition that
it is usual to sacrifice human victims in England on the
recovery of a prince, as a part of a thanksgiving service .

--- PAGE BREAK ---stant
island in such a shape as to leave there a tradition that
it is usual to sacrifice human victims in England on the
recovery of a prince, as a part of a thanksgiving service .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PROCESSION AT TRIPELCANE
181
Especially might this be the case if the sentence were re-
ported and interpreted by priests anxious to place Chris-
tianity in its worst light . If we were to smile at such a
notion we should only be doing what every educated
Hindu probably does, so often as he finds Englishmen
believing that human sacrifices were part of the normal
worship of Juggenauth, Lord of Life .
It is a notable example of the irony of mythology that
this same calumniated Juggenauth should for many years
have been the deity under whose protection Buddha has
been steadily returning into India. Wherever we see an
image of Juggenauth-whose noble countenance is pic-
tured in Caristian imagination as ferocious - there is
nearly always beside him an image of Buddha . When
we remember that this deity is not only the source of
that catholicity which is renewing Buddhism in India,
but also of the liberty that enables Indians of rank to
travel abroad without losing caste, there is brought before
us one more lesson in the untrustworthiness of the mis-
sionary reports on which popular notions of distant coun-
tries are founded .
At Tripelcane stands the only grand temple near Ma-
dras. There I had the luck to arrive just as the goddess
of good luck - Lakshmi - was promenading. The god-
dess was enthroned in her palanquin amid gems under a
many-coloured solar arch, and borne on the shoulders of
moving bronze statues, recognizable, as they came closer,
as men. The tableau was very pretty when they came
from their circuits in front of the temple again . These
temples, which of course none but Hindus are permitted
to enter, have lofty truncated pyramidal portals, which,
with the columned portico, are the only things notable .
This portal-tower at Tripelcane is carved all over withnone but Hindus are permitted
to enter, have lofty truncated pyramidal portals, which,
with the columned portico, are the only things notable .
This portal-tower at Tripelcane is carved all over with

--- PAGE BREAK ---permitted
to enter, have lofty truncated pyramidal portals, which,
with the columned portico, are the only things notable .
This portal-tower at Tripelcane is carved all over with

--- PAGE BREAK ---

182
MY PILGRIMAGE
figures in deep relief, not an inch being without its fin-
ished sculpture . All the popular deities may be picked
out. Beneath the pillared portico several score of women
and children are sheltered from the glowing sun, now and
then purchasing something from the stalls, loaded with
oranges, bananas, and other fruits. So soon as I began
to examine closely the figures sculptured on the pediments
I was surrounded by a swarm of small naked forms, which
displayed quite as much curiosity as would be excited by
a Hindu inspecting Westminster Abbey. In front of the
large temple there is a sort of palm-thatched chapel-of-ease,
in which Laksbmi was placed with due ceremony on her
return. Beside it is the car - for every temple keeps a
sort of Lord Mayor's coach- and in front the square
tank, covering over an acre, in the centre of which is a
small sculptured edifice, apparently ornamental . One of
the profane must not approach this tank near enough to
pollute it by a touch, and thereby no doubt render a hun-
dred elaborate ceremonies necessary to purify it! When
the goddess had been carried within, the chanting ended,
the veil drawn, I strolled away about fifty yards, and pre-
sently heard loud calls Turning I saw the huge elephant
which had attended the procession making straight for me,
brandishing his huge trunk, while the Hindu on his back
was uttering various cries, pointing to me and then to the
swiftly advancing animal . I was just considering whether
a sudden bath in the holy tank might not be the better
part of valour, when the driver of my gharrie ran up and
said, " The elephant wants some money ." Ah ! I have not
often found relief from an application for "baksheesh ."
I waited until this elephantine devotee of the goddess of
Wealth approached, and placed a bit of silver in his pro-
boscis. He raised it over his head to the hand of his driver,tion for "baksheesh ."
I waited until this elephantine devotee of the goddess of
Wealth approached, and placed a bit of silver in his pro-
boscis. He raised it over his head to the hand of his driver,

--- PAGE BREAK ---."
I waited until this elephantine devotee of the goddess of
Wealth approached, and placed a bit of silver in his pro-
boscis. He raised it over his head to the hand of his driver,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ST . THOME
183
then moved off to his neat enclosure, where, kneeling for
his driver to alight, he presently stretched himself with
a stentorian yawn to enjoy his doles far niente till next
day .
From Madras I made a pilgrimage to St . Thome, about
twenty miles away. My constitutional liking for the Doubt-
ing Disciple was not shared by any of the hundred Eng-
lish passengers on our ship Teheran . I could find no
one to accompany me . All alone save for my driver with
Siva's ashen sign on his forehead, and a golden-brown
boy reclining on the footboard behind, I passed through
the villages and lanes of a land whose strange growths,
houses, people, birds, made every mile a delight . But the
country was sparsely inhabited, and when I came to St .
Thome it was almost uncanny in its loneliness . Climbing
a long stone stairway to the top, I found a queer rambling
edifice that seemed neither church nor convent . Enter-
ing, I found a Portuguese priest reading a large book
that lay on a plain wooden table, this and three chairs
being the only furniture . The floor was stone, the walls
plain plaster . The priest received me cordially . He was
a man of perhaps forty years, tall and slender ; his face
was pitted, but the fine features, large and expressive eye,
sensitive mouth with its sweet and simple voice, drew my
heart out to him. To my apology for obtruding on him
he answered, with a gentle smile, that it was very rare
for him to meet any one from Europe, and he was glad
to see me. I told him that I was not a Catholic, but had
an especial interest in St. Thomas, on whom I had writ-
ten a pamphlet. I wished to study the story of his apos-
tolate and martyrdom in ancient India . The priest told
me that be dwelt alone save for the neighbouring Hindus
;
there had been no congregation there for many years ;to study the story of his apos-
tolate and martyrdom in ancient India . The priest told
me that be dwelt alone save for the neighbouring Hindus
;
there had been no congregation there for many years ;

--- PAGE BREAK ---of his apos-
tolate and martyrdom in ancient India . The priest told
me that be dwelt alone save for the neighbouring Hindus
;
there had been no congregation there for many years ;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

184
MY PILGRIMAGE
there was no public function required of him except when
a few pilgrims came on the saint's day . (He said this in
tolerable English, but preferred to speak in French .) He
could not tell me the age of the building, some parts of
which were very old . When, after walking about it, I
suggested that some parts appeared to be too ancient to
have been originally Christian, he inclined to the same
opinion, but had sought in vain for the facts, -for be
had been there a good many years. The priest led me
to a small cave at the back of the edifice, in which is
a spring believed to have been miraculously evoked by
St. Thomas. Some sixty feet off is a large flat rock sur-
mounted by a small monument, where the saint passed
most of his time "amid what was then a solitude ."
In
the floor of the little chapel are memorial tablets with
mainly Portuguese inscriptions, - one, however, being
English, - nearly all of the eighteenth century . The
chapel is dedicated to
11 Notre Dame de Sante," who
stands far up against the wall on an altar poorly off for
decorations. St. Thomas's Day- the solstice, December
21, when day and night are Didymuses (twins), and
Time stands in doubt between the powers of Light and
Darkness-had brought but few pilgrims the month be-
fore. By a curving stairway beside the altar we descended
-stooping low and following a candle -into a cave where
the saint is said to have hidden from pagan pursuers . One
small aperture is cut through the rock (five feet thick),
and we could stand erect only in one corner .
On a rock-
hewn shelf is a little crucifix, and behind it a tiny framed
picture of Christ, but there were no ornaments . Emerging
into the light, we passed by a long stone stairway to the
foot of the hill . There the priest pointed out an inscrip-
tion in characters "concerning which there are doubts ."e no ornaments . Emerging
into the light, we passed by a long stone stairway to the
foot of the hill . There the priest pointed out an inscrip-
tion in characters "concerning which there are doubts ."

--- PAGE BREAK ---rging
into the light, we passed by a long stone stairway to the
foot of the hill . There the priest pointed out an inscrip-
tion in characters "concerning which there are doubts ."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ST . THOMAS'S FOOTPRINT
185
Two dagoba-like structures, each six feet square and about
nine feet to the apex, cover mysteriously indented rocks,
supposed by some to be marked by the saint's bones . " It
is doubtful what they were built for," said the priest . Near
by is another rock retaining the impression of the saint's
foot after he was wounded. This "footprint," larger than
that of an ordinary man, is but very vaguely traceable in
a discoloration of faint yellow and red on the light sand-
stone. It is slightly indented, as if worn by many kisses .
The legend of St . Thomas's death is peculiar. It is said
that a Hindu arrow aimed at a peacock accidentally and
fatally struck the heel of St . Thomas. This looks as if the
Hindus had long ago repudiated some tradition of the
saint's " martyrdom " being on their hands, and had
shaped it after the legend of their own Saviour, Krishna,
who also died of a wound in the heel from the arrow of
a huntsman not aimed at him . Near the stone with the
reddish stains there was found at a considerable depth
a tablet on which was a rudely designed dove, and an
inscription in Pali and Persian : -
" In punishment of the cross was the suffering of this
one :
he who is the true Christ, and God above, and
Guide ever pure ." '
The Portuguese priest, when I asked his opinion of the
alleged footprint, shook his head silently, but thought the
long continuance of the legend interesting . He believed
that the relics, which he had seen, were in the church at
Mount St. Thome, and I resolved to go there.
When we turned away from this spot and walked to a
Hindu village, the children ran to greet the priest, bowing
their foreheads to the ground . As he passed along the little
1 The late Mr. Burnell gave an account with plates of these relics in
the Indian Antiquary, vol . iii, p. 308 .o greet the priest, bowing
their foreheads to the ground . As he passed along the little
1 The late Mr. Burnell gave an account with plates of these relics in
the Indian Antiquary, vol . iii, p. 308 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---bowing
their foreheads to the ground . As he passed along the little
1 The late Mr. Burnell gave an account with plates of these relics in
the Indian Antiquary, vol . iii, p. 308 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

186
MY PILGRIMAGE
street the women came to their doors, the men paused, and
he spoke pleasantly to them all, patting the children on
the head. I asked if they were Christians and he said,
" None of them ." So deep had this man gone into their
"heathen " hearts
!
And now I began to think on what he had pointed out,
and stopped a moment or two to enter some items in my
note-book . Then a theory began to dawn on me . Was it
not the ecclesiastical metier of the priest in charge of St .
Thome to believe all of the Catholic traditions concerning
the miraculous well, the footprint, and the rest? Yet this
man had spoken hesitatingly and dubiously about every
one of them . I looked into his large smiling eye and felt
certain that I was in the presence of a Doubting Disciple.
This learned and intellectual man, with his fine personal-
ity, worshipped by those humble Hindus, - why was he
sent out at middle age to live alone without congregation
or function in this remote spot? Was it because he was
found to be a sceptic, a doubting Thomas?
I find among my notes written that day, " How I would
like to have a day of intimate talk with that man!"
He saw that I loved him, and urged me to stay longer
; he
could give me food and lodging ; but it could not be ; the
Teheran was to sail early next morning . So we parted .
I drove on two miles to Mount St. Thome. A long suc-
cession of stone stairways, up which on the saint's day
pilgrims climb on their knees, brought me to the solitary
white church. It was all silent, every door closed, the
windows made fast with shutters, so that I could not
get a glimpse of the interior. Two tricolors were flying
from a signal station at one corner of the grounds, and
after a good deal of calling an Englishman appeared, with
evident reluctance, who informed me that the priest wasior. Two tricolors were flying
from a signal station at one corner of the grounds, and
after a good deal of calling an Englishman appeared, with
evident reluctance, who informed me that the priest was

--- PAGE BREAK ---ere flying
from a signal station at one corner of the grounds, and
after a good deal of calling an Englishman appeared, with
evident reluctance, who informed me that the priest was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MOUNT ST. THOME
187
absent .
He (the priest) was a native, and was in the habit
of going now and then to stay among the villages of the
district for a fortnight at a time. He had now been absent
for five days, and none could tell his whereabouts . "Is
there anything interesting in the church to see ? " I asked .
" I don't know," replied the sole occupant of the hill, " I
never was inside it. I don't belong to that, but to the
Church of England ." I found consolation for my climb in
the grand view which the height commands - a vast plain
of banyans and palms, with a few villas and gleaming
streams .
As I passed through the village at the foot of the mount
I observed " Hindu Mount" on a sign, and on enquiry
learned that the Hindus have another name for the place,
which I cannot remember. No doubt it was, like every
other " high place " in oriental plains, a sacred hill before
the Christian era, and probably passed to the Catholic saint
by natural selection .
I drove two miles along a grand avenue of banyans
extending from the base of the mount . Of many the
branches, hereafter to take root, hung down nearly to the
earth in large numbers, like vines. The lower horizontal
branches of others were gracefully festooned. But a num-
ber were already buttressed by branches turned to trunks
seven or eight inches thick . I counted as many as thirteen
trunks to one tree . The road on each side was hedged
with cactus, and beyond were beautiful palms, rising out
of lakelets formed by inundations . But after all, there
was no other scene so picturesque as the thatched villages
and the villagers in their combinations of colours and dark
skins . The people in this neighbourhood, particularly tall
and well shaped, formed pretty groups in the fields, where
they were so still as to be tableaux .in their combinations of colours and dark
skins . The people in this neighbourhood, particularly tall
and well shaped, formed pretty groups in the fields, where
they were so still as to be tableaux .

--- PAGE BREAK ---ns of colours and dark
skins . The people in this neighbourhood, particularly tall
and well shaped, formed pretty groups in the fields, where
they were so still as to be tableaux .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

188
MY PILGRIMAGE
A graceful young Hindu woman was seated beneath the
shade of the great banyan, her children grouped pleasantly
around her, and all so absorbed with what she was saying
to them that they hardly observed my approach . The
musical voice continued on one side while I was counting
the downward branches on the other . What was she telling
them? Perhaps the tale of the Madras Princess Savatri,
who refused all powerful suitors for love of homeless Sat-
yavan ; and who when her husband was killed by the fall
of a tree in the forest, and Yania came for his own, so
moved that King of Death by her beauty and her gentle
pleading that he restored Satyavan to her. This tale is
the central trunk of an invisible banyan spread in many
versions, -Love subduing Death ; but it appears to me
sweeter and truer than the legends of resurrections where
the muscular power of a Herakles or the magic might of
a Christ have prevailed over the king of terrors . There is
no need, however, that we should seek any other origin
of the banyan-growth of such legends of Love than in the
mother's heart there . That is the universal witness that
there is Love in the heart of nature despite inorganic
cruelties. If there was any Hindu Thomas of old to say
he would not believe in Satyavan's resurrection unless he
saw and touched the scar on his head, there would be a
friendly prophet in fez to .say., " Satisfy yourself, Thomas ;
you are right to demand evidence ; but blind belief makes
people happier." Every missionary -unless my gentle
Portuguese sceptic of St . Thome - must be a Thomas in
denying the resurrection of Satyavan in order to signalize
that of Jesus, but the Savatri and Satyavan folk-tale will
still be in the heart, whatever names are on the lips .
Savatri is a type, as Mary Magdalene at the sepulchre
« while it was yet dark" is a type, of the Love that heals,ri and Satyavan folk-tale will
still be in the heart, whatever names are on the lips .
Savatri is a type, as Mary Magdalene at the sepulchre
« while it was yet dark" is a type, of the Love that heals,

--- PAGE BREAK ----tale will
still be in the heart, whatever names are on the lips .
Savatri is a type, as Mary Magdalene at the sepulchre
« while it was yet dark" is a type, of the Love that heals,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THOMAS AND
JUDAS
189
that quickens dead hearts . Thomas and Judas are by their
aliases Didymus and Iscariot made as allegorical as if they
were named Mr . Doublemind and Mr. Facing-both-ways .
These two, indeed, seem to have been originally one figure
;
in the Acts of Thomas occurs repeatedly the double
name, " Judas also called Thomas." But to meet Jewish
scepticism there was used a character proving that Jesus
was not arrested because he could not prevent it, but be-
cause in order to fulfil the minutest messianic prophecies
and conditions he had knowingly included a satanic agent
among his disciples ; and the personification of this agent-
Judas, i . e. incarnation of Judaism -had to be detached
from Thomas (twin) because Gentile sceptics (who might
say that the form the disciples declared to be their risen
Lord, but admittedly could not recognize, was that of
some impostor) must be met by the assertion that they
(the sceptics) had a representative among the disciples
who identified Jesus by his wounds .
It is all very simple, so far as the points which the dark
twin and the luminous twin were created to establish are
concerned, but it cannot be safely asserted of Thomas, as
of Judas, that he is purely fictitious . The Thomas-saga has
not been sufficiently explored as yet, and there are traces
of a gospel bearing his name suppressed on account of its
heresies.'
1 Ten years after my visit to St . Thomd, Drs . Grenfell and Hunt of Ox-
ford discovered the Papyri of Oxyrhynchus, apparently of the third cen-
tury, which, omitting editorial conjectures, opens : "These are the words
which the living Jesus said to
.
. . and Thomas, and said to them, Every
one that hearkens to these words shall never taste of death ."
" Let not
him who seeks cease until he finds, and when he finds he shall be aston-
ished ; astonished he shall reach the kingdom, and having reached the
kingdom he shall rest." Professor Lake thinks the lost name before
Thomas was Judas ; he also says that an Athos MS. asserts that the story
of the woman taken in adultery was in the earlier Gospel of Thomas . (Ithall rest." Professor Lake thinks the lost name before
Thomas was Judas ; he also says that an Athos MS. asserts that the story
of the woman taken in adultery was in the earlier Gospel of Thomas . (It

--- PAGE BREAK ---r Lake thinks the lost name before
Thomas was Judas ; he also says that an Athos MS. asserts that the story
of the woman taken in adultery was in the earlier Gospel of Thomas . (It

--- PAGE BREAK ---

190
MY PILGRIMAGE
Although everything attributed to Christ - that is to
the post-resurrectional supplanter of Jesus - has to be
doubly scrutinized, I think that on some occasion he may
have said to his sceptical friend, probably with a smile,
"Thomas, you can believe only what you see ; they are
happier who can believe without seeing ."
In my long experience I have found very few even
among rationalists who were able to get along without
believing something for which they could find no reason
.
Theodore Parker was unable to harmonize with his faith
the cruelty of a cat playing with a terrified mouse before
devouring it, yet he could not on that account part from
belief in the omnipotence of a benevolent Creator . His
English friend and editor, Frances Power Cobbe, who
devoted many years to the protection of animals from
cruelty, used to quote Sir Henry Taylor's terrible lines,
Pain in man
Bears the high mission of the flail and fan,
In brutes 't is purely piteous .
But I have in vain asked of eminent theists why Omni-
was erased from the Synoptics .) The "Gospel according to Thomas "
(probably near the close of the second century) was condemned by Hip-
polytus in a passage quoted by Grenfell and Hunt which shows that there
was a sect which believed that Thomas had received especial confidences
from Jesus. The extract from Hippolytus (Refut . v. 7) is as follows : -
" But they (the Naassenes) assert that not only is there in favour of their
doctrine testimony to be drawn from the mysteries of the Assyrians, but
also from those of the Phrygians concerning the happy nature, concealed
and yet at the same time disclosed, of things that have been and are com-
ing into existence and moreover will be (a happy nature), which (the
Naassene) says is the kingdom of heaven to be sought for within a man
.
And concerning this [nature] they hand down an explicit passage occurring
in the Gospel inscribed `according to Thomas,' expressing themselves
thus
: 'He who seeks me will find me in children from seven years old
;
for there concealed I shall in the fourteenth age (or peon) be made mani-
fest .' "`according to Thomas,' expressing themselves
thus
: 'He who seeks me will find me in children from seven years old
;
for there concealed I shall in the fourteenth age (or peon) be made mani-
fest .' "

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VIRCIIAND R . GANDHI

--- PAGE BREAK ---eks me will find me in children from seven years old
;
for there concealed I shall in the fourteenth age (or peon) be made mani-
fest .' "

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VIRCIIAND R . GANDHI

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PAIN AND PIETY
191
potent Love should use tribulation - the flail and fan -
on human beings? No good parent would chastise a child
if he were omnipotent . No surgeon would cause pain if
he were omnipotent . I once lectured for Dr . Felix Adler's
Ethical Culture Society in New York on "The Religion
of Humanity," my contention being that the dogmas of
hereditary sin, imputed guilt, endless punishment were
fair transcripts of the laws of nature, the great error being
in the belief that these injustices and agonies of nature
were the laws of omnipotent deity, and that there was
any creation or Creator. My argument was that either
the omnipotence or the goodness or the existence of deity
must be surrendered by Ethical Religion . Dr. Adler arose
at the close of my discourse and announced that on the
following Sunday he would review it and state his differ-
ences from me . An engagement in another city prevented
my hearing him, and I could find no report of his criti-
cisms, but in a conversation he planted himself on Kant's
" categorical imperative," and told me about a young lady
friend of his whom pain had brought into a beautiful and
patient spirit as she was slowly dying . Of course I knew
of many such cases, and may have mentioned to him -
though I am not certain of this - the case of a young
author in Brooklyn whose talent and culture had been
developed by the confinement consequent on the breaking
of his back in childhood. The development was credit-
able to the young man, but by no means creditable to the
careless cause of his misfortune . Of course a wise moralist
has to be somewhat pathological in dealing with sufferers,
but he will none the less say with Jesus, Woe to him by
whom the suffering comes. Nor do I believe that the evils
and agonies of the world will ever be much diminished so
long as generations are trained to see in such horrors aay with Jesus, Woe to him by
whom the suffering comes. Nor do I believe that the evils
and agonies of the world will ever be much diminished so
long as generations are trained to see in such horrors a

--- PAGE BREAK ---o him by
whom the suffering comes. Nor do I believe that the evils
and agonies of the world will ever be much diminished so
long as generations are trained to see in such horrors a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

192
MY PILGRIMAGE
divine hand, instead of seeing that hand solely in the
" eternal feminine," as Goethe calls it, - the loving and
maternal force, weak but unwearied, gently pushing back
the frontiers of wild and inorganic nature .
This of course is about equivalent to saying that the
evils and agonies of the world will never be healed at all
until the altars of the existing deities so-called are en-
tirely deserted . In nearly all religions there is a sort of
Pain-worship, which continues in the favourite word of
liberal Christianity, " Self-sacrifice," and in the faith ex-
pressed in Tennyson's " Divine depths of sorrow." Why
not the divine depths of happiness? Why should our
children be trained to think their giving up some pleasant
thing to gratify others a sacrifice of self when they are
thereby gaining grateful smiles, far more delightful and
precious than what they give away? After all the ages,
we are unable to see with Jesus that it is greater happi-
ness to give than to receive, and must needs go on say-
ing " It is more blessed," that is, that God pays it back
to us .
One of the most mild and liberal religions in India is
the Jain. They have no priests, but some public teachers .
One of these, Virchand R . Gandhi, stayed at my house
in London nearly a week, and my wife and I found him
attractive in conversation, though we could not under-
stand his very mystical ideas. He shrank from even the
smallest thing that inclined towards self-indulgence . He
would not remain alone with a lady . (This is a Talmudic
regulation .) He gave me a picture-it is now before
me-which represents the Jain idea of the moral con-
dition of mankind . There is a banyan-tree on a limb of
which bees have hived a mass of honeycomb, and be-
neath is a dilapidated well in which are seen venomousesents the Jain idea of the moral con-
dition of mankind . There is a banyan-tree on a limb of
which bees have hived a mass of honeycomb, and be-
neath is a dilapidated well in which are seen venomous

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE JAIN SYMBOLICAL PICTURE

--- PAGE BREAK ---banyan-tree on a limb of
which bees have hived a mass of honeycomb, and be-
neath is a dilapidated well in which are seen venomous

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE JAIN SYMBOLICAL PICTURE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A COMPOSITE PICTURE
193
serpents .
A man has fallen into the well. He is kept
from sinking and drowning by holding on to the end of
a frail branch which descends from the tree. As he holds
on, the honey drops down to his lips, and so absorbed is
he with the sweetness of this honey that he does not no-
tice the serpents gathering near him, nor a rat above
gnawing the slender limb he clings to, nor an elephant
whose trunk is about to pull down the entire tree ; nor
does he regard at all a holy teacher with his staff offering
to save him. This holy man is in the garb of a Buddhist
priest, but he has beard and hair much like an early
conventionalized Christ, and a sort of aspersoir under his
left arm. I suspect the picture to be composite, - Brah-
manism, Buddhism, and Catholicism perverting some sim-
ple fable reminding man that he may be so absorbed in
one pleasure or passion as to suffer by the atrophy of other
senses and faculties. It may be feared that unphilosophi-
cal little Jains are brought up with some suspicion that
sweet things generally are wicked and dangerous . When
we go back to the earliest ages we find more religion of
joy than in the modern world : it is so in the Vedic hymns
and Zend litanies.
While Christianity, claiming to have come into the
world with glad tidings of great joy to all mankind, has
shed more blood and caused more misery than all other
religions put together, the Buddhist religion, beginning
with a philosophy that seems pessimistic, -without deity
or faith in any paradise, heavenly or millennial,- has pro-
duced the happiest believers on earth . Many a Christian
child moping under a miserable Sabbath, forbidden games
and sports, overshadowed by equal fear of deity and
devil, giving his pennies or dimes to send his gloom to
Ceylon's isle, - ah, many a child might envy the joyousa miserable Sabbath, forbidden games
and sports, overshadowed by equal fear of deity and
devil, giving his pennies or dimes to send his gloom to
Ceylon's isle, - ah, many a child might envy the joyous

--- PAGE BREAK ---

194
MY PILGRIMAGE
innocence of those children in Ceylon, growing up under
the spirit of the ancient carol derived from Buddha : -
This is what should be done by him who is wise in
seeking his own good, and gaining a knowledge of the
tranquil lot of Nirvana : -
Let him be diligent, upright, and conscientious
; not
vainglorious, but gentle and lowly ;
Contented and cheerful ; not oppressed with cares ;
not burdened with riches ; tranquil, prudent, free from
arrogance and avarice .
Let him not do any mean action, nor incur the re-
proval of wise men .
Let all creatures be prosperous and happy, let them be
of joyful mind
; all beings that have life, be they feeble
or strong, be they minute or vast
Seen or unseen, near or afar, born or seeking birth, let
all beings be joyful .
Let no man deceive another ; let none be harsh to any ;
let none wish ill to his neighbour .
Let the love that fills a mother's heart as she watches
over an only child, even such love animate all towards all .
Let the good will that is boundless, immeasurable,
impartial, unmixed with enmity, prevail throughout the
world-above, below, around .
If a man be of this mind, wherever he moves, and in
every moment, the saying is come to pass,
11 This place is
the abode of holiness."

--- PAGE BREAK ---l throughout the
world-above, below, around .
If a man be of this mind, wherever he moves, and in
every moment, the saying is come to pass,
11 This place is
the abode of holiness."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER X
Adyar - Mme . Blavatsl;y and her confession - The Theosophists-An
American receiving the Buddhist pansala - The attempted fraud on the
Broughtons - Letter of Commissioner Broughton - Origin of Koo-
thoomi- Revelations of Mme . Coulomb.
W
HEN Mme. Blavatsky was on her way from New
York to India she stopped for some days in Lon-
don, and my wife and I were invited to meet her at the
house of Mr. and Mrs. William Tebb . Mrs. Conway was
not attracted by her, but I found her entertaining . She
had nothing that could be described as culture ; and though
the work, " Isis Unveiled," ascribed to her, was without
value to me so far as I read it, I have never believed
she could write anything so elaborate .
In fact, though
Mme. Blavatsky was entertaining, it was because of her
gossipy knowledge of contemporary persons and events .
Such at any rate was the kind of conversation she car-
ried on with myself, and I wondered how my thoughtful
friends, the Tebbs, could take her so seriously .
After a time reports came from India of Mme . Blavat-
sky's new religion called Theosophy, and of her miracles .
Marion Crawford introduced a mysterious " Mahatma "
into his romance, "Mr. Isaacs," and was proudly claimed
by Theosophists (whom, however, and their wonders he
ridiculed in conversation on my mentioning the matter) .
At length Mr. Sinnett came to London from India as an
apostle of the new faith, of which he gave strange narra-
tives, mostly to the elite gathered in fashionable drawing-
rooms. I listened to several of his addresses, and after
one in which he told of the wonderful Mahatmas, who

--- PAGE BREAK ---ange narra-
tives, mostly to the elite gathered in fashionable drawing-
rooms. I listened to several of his addresses, and after
one in which he told of the wonderful Mahatmas, who

--- PAGE BREAK ---

196
MY PILGRIMAGE
had lived for ages and were now semi-visibly revealing
themselves, I had some conversation with him . I was
about to go to India, and enquired whether I could find
out one of the Mahatmas. He gave a start, and with a
look of surprise said, "Do you mean, can you see and
talk with a Mahatma as you are talking with me now? "
"Yes," I replied, unconscious of my naivete .
"No," he
answered, and went on with a nebulous explanation .
Mr. Sinnett's book, " Esoteric Buddhism," gave me an
impression that Mme . Blavatsky had simply invented a
new set of archangels and saints to supply that rever-
ential fog amid which all impostures are possible . It was,
however, a serious thing that such notions should infect
excellent people, and it became one of my duties as a
public teacher to investigate it . All the way around the
world I was urged by persons of influence to examine
Theosophy in India. In Sydney, Judge Windeyer, in
whose house I passed several days, and who was one of
the best of men, assured me that I would find the evi-
dences of Theosophy irresistible . In the same city the late
Professor John Smith said he had been impressed by his
interviews with Mme . Blavatsky, and I promised him and
his wife, to whom I owed much for their hospitality, that
I would investigate the matter .
And thus it was that on a bright day in 1884, begin-
ning with the elephant-headed god of wisdom at Madras,
and travelling to the shrine of Doubting Didymus and
his lonely priest, I proceeded to visit the high priestess of
Theosophy .
The centre of the Theosophic cult is Adyar . On the
gateway was written, "Headquarters of the Theosophical
Society." At the entrance of the park was the dilapi-
dated carcass of a blue pasteboard elephant, which it ap-

--- PAGE BREAK ---dyar . On the
gateway was written, "Headquarters of the Theosophical
Society." At the entrance of the park was the dilapi-
dated carcass of a blue pasteboard elephant, which it ap-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MADAME BLAVATSKY

--- PAGE BREAK ---adquarters of the Theosophical
Society." At the entrance of the park was the dilapi-
dated carcass of a blue pasteboard elephant, which it ap-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MADAME BLAVATSKY

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ADYAR
197
peared some Madras believer had set up on a recent Theo-
sophic anniversary.
The carriage-road wound through
a leafy park up to a handsome bungalow .
The spacious
veranda displayed every elegance, but it was unoccupied.
For a few minutes my driver vainly tried to find some one
about the place, and I was conscious of a half hope that no
one might be' at home . My arrival, however, was known
a young Babu came to bring me the " Countess " Blavat-
sky's welcome, and to say she would presently receive me .
Next a Hindu youth of remarkable appearance - deli-
cate, almost maidenly - advanced ; but when, in response
to his greeting, I held out my band, he said sweetly,
" I cannot shake hands with you ." I afterwards learned
that this youth was " a lay chela," that he already pos-
sessed the power of appearing at a distance in his "astral"
body, and that if he shook hands his magnetism might be
impaired .
I was sorry to hear that the president, "Colonel" Olcott,
was absent . He was founding a new branch of the soci-
ety somewhere. The " Countess " Blavatsky was cordial,
and urged my remaining till the morning . I accepted her
invitation so far as the rest of the evening was concerned,
and was there nearly six hours. Besides the two men-
tioned, there were two other native gentlemen, one of them
(Norendronath Sen) known to me by reputation as editor
of the "Indian Mirror." America was represented in the
company by a Dr . Hartmann of Colorado . Another per-
son present was Mr. W. T. Brown of Glasgow, a young
man of pleasant manners, who told me some of his mar-
vellous experiences ; but when I intimated that I would
like to carry away some little marvel of my own expe-
rience, the reply unpleasantly recalled vain attempts made
through many years to witness a verifiable spiritualisticwhen I intimated that I would
like to carry away some little marvel of my own expe-
rience, the reply unpleasantly recalled vain attempts made
through many years to witness a verifiable spiritualistic

--- PAGE BREAK ---t I would
like to carry away some little marvel of my own expe-
rience, the reply unpleasantly recalled vain attempts made
through many years to witness a verifiable spiritualistic

--- PAGE BREAK ---

198
MY PILGRIMAGE
" phenomenon ."
I was once more put off with narratives
of what had occurred before I came, and predictions of
what might occur if I should come again . There was a
cabinet shrine in which letters were deposited and swift
answers received from the wonderful Mahatmas ; but when
I proposed to write a note, I was informed that only a few
days before the Mahatmas had forbidden any further cab-
inet correspondence. I said that was just my luck in such
matters ; wherever a miracle occurs I was always too soon
or too late to see it. My experience was that of Alice in
the Looking-glass,-"Jam yesterday, jam to-morrow, but
never jam to-day."
Mme. Blavatsky had been forewarned by Professor John
Smith of my visit, and as a shrewd reader of thoughts saw
that I regarded the new order against letters as aimed at
my investigation . I was careful, however, not to say that
I thought it unreasonable for the Mahatma to foreclose
the cabinet test just as his omniscience knew that one
was coming who needed the wonders so much more than
the convinced already . My self-restraint in not pressing
the point in company pleased her . Some of the young
neophytes moved off the veranda and strolled medita-
tively under the palms . Their faces were serenely solemn
;
they did not talk or smile ; they impressed me out there
as rare plants in a nursery, that must be severally kept
under glass in cold weather . These Hindu neophytes, not
one of them feminine, were of wealthy families and of high
caste ; I was told that the handsome mansion was furnished
by them. Mr. Sinnett and others in England and Amer-
ica were talking a good deal about great sacrifices made
by the " Countess " for the sake of her cause, but I saw
no trace or suggestion of martyrdom at the headquarters .
The house, surrounded by a fine park, was spacious andal about great sacrifices made
by the " Countess " for the sake of her cause, but I saw
no trace or suggestion of martyrdom at the headquarters .
The house, surrounded by a fine park, was spacious and

--- PAGE BREAK ---fices made
by the " Countess " for the sake of her cause, but I saw
no trace or suggestion of martyrdom at the headquarters .
The house, surrounded by a fine park, was spacious and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MME. BLAVATSKY
199
pretty ;
the long veranda was well supplied with easy
chairs softly cushioned, and a table with English and
American magazines and the new novels ;
and madame
drove in her own neat carriage with fine horses, as I had
grateful reason to know, having returned to Madras in
it. While never regarding Mme. Blavatsky's career as
inspired by desire for gain, I cannot but smile whenever
I hear Theosophists talk about her movement in India as
wrought by self-sacrificing devotion . Certainly there was
no pretence of that kind in Mme . Blavatsky herself. She
sat in her large decorated chair, in an airy white beltless
gown much in the style of the midsummer dress of Rus-
sian ladies, endlessly smoking cigarettes, conversing in a
free and easy way, and putting on no airs at all . Madame
was not pretty, but she was a notable figure, her eyes capa,
ble of every variety of expression, and her humour always
playing.
At a certain moment when we happened to be alone on
the veranda madame arose and asked me to follow her .
She led me through a hall and along a corridor, then up
a stairway to a boudoir richly decorated . There she in-
vited me to take a seat, and proffered a box of cigarettes,
lighting one for herself. I preferred my cigar, and was
ready for an apparently intended encounter . She asked
what was my particular proposal or desire . I said, " I
wish to find out something about the strange performances
attributed to you . I hear of your drawing teapots from
under your chair, taking brooches out of flowers, and of
other miracles . If such things really occur I desire to
know it, and to give a testimony to my people in London
in favour of Theosophy. What does it all mean?"
She said with a serene smile, " I will tell you, because
you are a public teacher [here she added some flattery],ive a testimony to my people in London
in favour of Theosophy. What does it all mean?"
She said with a serene smile, " I will tell you, because
you are a public teacher [here she added some flattery],

--- PAGE BREAK ---

200
MY PILGRIMAGE
and you ought to know the truth : it is all glamour- people
think they see what they do not see - that is the whole
of it ."
It was impossible not to admire the art of this confession .
Mme. Blavatsky, forewarned by Professor John Smith of
my intended investigation, bad arranged precisely the one
manoeuvre that could thwart it. Had I continued it, cross-
examining her adherents, proposing plans for verification,
I might have awakened doubts and suspicions among her
" neophytes ." But she spiked my guns ; her confession
was made without witnesses, and should I use it publicly
it was easy enough to say I had misunderstood her . And
moreover she had used the vague word " glamour," which
might preserve her personal throne while giving up the
reality of the things attested by her miracles .
I did not press the matter at all. I felt that madame
was a genius in her way, and a moral phenomenon to be
studied, but she made no pretences with me . Of the
common Theosophic talk about a new era, welfare of
humanity, reincarnation, there was no trace whatever.
Not a word about " Occultism " or any other " ism " came
from her, nor anything in the way of an abstraction .
She gossiped wittily and sometimes satirically about this
or that person she had met in America, London, Paris,
and told amusing anecdotes .
About seven a signal for dinner interrupted the bou-
doir interview . There were seven or eight at the large
round table, all of us whites. The dinner was excellent,
but one or two of the young men did not eat the meat
.
Mme. Blavatsky ate little and smoked most of the time .
In the ' talk, which was all about Theosophic marvels,
Mme. Blavatsky did not participate except with some
such remark as, "There, Mr . Conway, what can be saidte little and smoked most of the time .
In the ' talk, which was all about Theosophic marvels,
Mme. Blavatsky did not participate except with some
such remark as, "There, Mr . Conway, what can be said

--- PAGE BREAK ---most of the time .
In the ' talk, which was all about Theosophic marvels,
Mme. Blavatsky did not participate except with some
such remark as, "There, Mr . Conway, what can be said

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ORIGIN OF KOOTHOOMI
201
of such events?" etc. She limited herself to mild inter-
jections, but meantime exchanging with me
humorous
looks ; for the situation was indeed amusing .
There was at the table a woman to whom I was not in-
troduced, but whom I remarked because she did not say
a word nor even smile during the meal, and I thought
watched me closely .
There were named three Mahatmas in the Blavatsky
system : Koothoomi, Morya, and Djual Khoot .
I strongly
suspect the latter to be another of Mme . Blavatsky's jokes .
Having created the imaginary Koothoomi (originally Kot-
thume) by piecing together parts of the names of
her
two chief disciples, Olcott and Hume, that success prob-
ably led her to create another Mahatma,-a second
Cott (Olcott) travestied as a dual or Djual Khoot .
After dinner the young men were all eager to have
me go into the sacred room, though Mme . Blavatsky was
rather reluctant . It was a small room and its only fur-
niture the so-called " shrine,"- really a cabinet such as
Spiritualists ordinarily use, though smaller, and such as
Mme. Blavatsky herself probably used when a spirit-rap-
ping medium in America. The only persons I remember
present besides Mme . Blavatsky were two young Hindus,
and on entering they instantly prostrated themselves on
the floor, flat on their stomachs, burying their eyes under
folded hands. It occurred to me that I myself could per-
form miracles among such witnesses . Madame stood with
an amused smile looking from the neophytes to me .
She
then opened the doors of the cabinet, which was about five
feet high by four wide. It was tastefully decorated, and
when opened richly wrought metal was disclosed.
In it
sat a small Buddha, and on each side, in frames about
seven inches high, a picture . These were of two light-brownt was tastefully decorated, and
when opened richly wrought metal was disclosed.
In it
sat a small Buddha, and on each side, in frames about
seven inches high, a picture . These were of two light-brown

--- PAGE BREAK ---orated, and
when opened richly wrought metal was disclosed.
In it
sat a small Buddha, and on each side, in frames about
seven inches high, a picture . These were of two light-brown

--- PAGE BREAK ---

202
MY PILGRIMAGE
persons, the chief "Mahatmas," done by some process
said to be occult . The portrait of 11 Koothoomi " was, I feel
sure, from one of Rammohun Roy made in London by my
old friend James Philp. A copy of the portrait of that
famous founder of Brahmo theism, given me by Franklin
Philp in Washington, had been on my wall thirty years be-
fore I saw him faked up as "Koothoomi," with a praying
machine on his head. The other Mahatma in the cabinet
was Morya, who seemed to be a Rajah from some sacred
picture, perhaps a manipulated Rama . I again proposed
to leave a letter to one of the Mahatmas, but madame
shrugged her shoulders and closed the cabinet .
When we had returned to the veranda most of the
young men declared they had at times seen Koothoomi .
Knowing well that Koothoomi was a name twisted from
O1[cott-Hume], and that no such being existed, I still
did not question the good faith of these young men ; but
I quietly cross-examined them, without seeming to do so,
and found that they had seen him generally in his
"astral" body . Three thought they had seen him once
in his physical body, but their testimony was unsatisfac-
tory, especially as I had observed in the sacred room their
method of observing things with their eyes close to the
floor. Mr. Brown of Glasgow was candid in his narrative
of his three meetings with Koothoomi . On the first occa-
sion he said he was so overwhelmed with awe that he
"could not look upon him." On the next occasion the
Mahatma was at some little distance, his head and lower
face being covered after the manner of sacred Rajahs.
On the last occasion it was at night, Mr . Brown being in
bed, and he only knew that he had been with Koothoomi
by a handkerchief marked " K. H." slipped into his hand
with a letter. It was evident that Mr. Brown was sincere,as at night, Mr . Brown being in
bed, and he only knew that he had been with Koothoomi
by a handkerchief marked " K. H." slipped into his hand
with a letter. It was evident that Mr. Brown was sincere,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THEOSOPHIC MIRACLES
203
and also that he had no perception of the nature of evi-
dence. Several of the letters received from " K. H." were
shown me ; they were the merest commonplace notes,
without any value whatever unless read with occult emo-
tions.
When I left in the evening for Madras, Madame
Blavatsky said merrily that she would make me
an
" astral " visit in London. I reminded her that I had in
the morning looked with doubt on the footprint of St .
Thomas, the disciple who would not believe in the ex-
istence of his Mahatma without touching him, and that
his sceptical spirit is still in the earth .
I was surprised next morning, when we were out at sea
on the Teheran to find on board Norendronath Sen, whom
I had seen at Adyar, still more to hear from him that
while I was in the presence of the cabinet a "sign" had
been given of which I took no notice. The young men
had told him that when I entered the room a bell rang in
a place where there was no bell .
I remarked only that
it was unaccountable that my attention should not have
been called to it at the time. This Mr. Sen, of the "Indian
Mirror," was a relative of the Brahmo leader, Keshub
Chunder Sen. That he did not have perfect faith in the
Theosophic miracles was evident to me from the fact of
his expressing regret that the movement should be per-
mitted to be anything more than an ethical and religious
reformation . He rather complained of myself and others
who were interested only in the "signs and wonders,"
being thus the means of preventing Theosophy from de-
veloping into the great Reformed Religion of India . He
was an intelligent man, and I received from him a clear
idea of the causes which had given so-called Theosophy its
success. While Madame Blavatsky had, in my opinion,t Reformed Religion of India . He
was an intelligent man, and I received from him a clear
idea of the causes which had given so-called Theosophy its
success. While Madame Blavatsky had, in my opinion,

--- PAGE BREAK ---of India . He
was an intelligent man, and I received from him a clear
idea of the causes which had given so-called Theosophy its
success. While Madame Blavatsky had, in my opinion,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

204
MY PILGRIMAGE
no real interest in the moral and religious
00 regeneration "
of India, and would I think have sympathized with my
own dislike of the Christianizing propaganda, these schol-
arly Hindus were dreaming of an ideal religion built out
of their own history and literature . And it was an event
whose importance we western people can hardly compre-
hend when there appeared from America this company of
people who had abandoned every form of Christianity,
taken up their abode in India to lead in the work of at
once rehabilitating and revising these ancient systems, and
pointed Hindus and Buddhists to their own scriptures
and prophets as fountains of faith and hope . They natu-
rally gained a hold on the hearts of these people, and in
a few years moved and attracted them more than did the
Christian missionaries in as many centuries .
I have spoken of Dr . Hartmann of Colorado . In Co-
lombo the chief priest Sumangala told me he had re-
ceived from ~° Colonel " Olcott of New York a request for
u permission " to administer pansala to Dr. Hartmann,
and had granted it . Pansala means the five precepts of
Buddhism, and their administration to any individual
means his initiation into the higher grade of Buddhism
.
This ceremony had been performed in Madras by " Colo-
nel "
Olcott. In the midst of a circle of devout orien-
tal people stood these two Americans . The one repeated,
the other responded to, the ancient and solemn for-
mula, " I take refuge in Buddha !
I take refuge in re-
ligion !
I take refuge in truth ! " Before the assembly
Dr. Hartmann pledged his honour to observe the five
precepts, -to abstain from theft ; to abstain from lying ;
to abstain from taking life ; to abstain from intoxicating
drinks ; to abstain from adultery. The spectacle, two
Americans abandoning Christianity and adopting anfrom theft ; to abstain from lying ;
to abstain from taking life ; to abstain from intoxicating
drinks ; to abstain from adultery. The spectacle, two
Americans abandoning Christianity and adopting an

--- PAGE BREAK ---tain from lying ;
to abstain from taking life ; to abstain from intoxicating
drinks ; to abstain from adultery. The spectacle, two
Americans abandoning Christianity and adopting an

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MME .
BLAVATSKY'S
GLAMOUR "
9.05
oriental religion, touched the Hindu imagination . It was
unique, even among the anomalies of theological history .
But Mme. Blavatsky was not a woman of imagination,
she was a woman of the world . It is said that she ran
away from her Russian home in girlhood to travel with a
circus, and she appeared to me as an actress trained by
many adventures to a morbid desire to sway men .
With-
out beauty, she made the most of her wit, and had man-
aged to get a few able men to commit themselves to her
magical pretensions. Possibly she possessed some of the
power now called "hypnotic." When I met Mrs . Anne
Besant, whom I had so long known as a freethinker, after
her conversion to Theosophy, I told her what Mme . Blavat-
sky had said to me about its being all " glamour." Mrs .
Besant said that "glamour" implied a good deal; to make
one see a person in one's room, even if there was no person
there, was a marvellous power . But she thought I must
have been mistaken in thinking madame had added
' 1 that
is the whole of it ."
Mme. Blavatsky's fault as a thaumaturgist was
too
great eagerness to capture distinguished people . I was
told at Bombay that she had to give up her residence
there by the exposure of her effort to deceive the prince
(now Edward VII), and a daring attempt at fraud in 1882
no doubt led to her leaving Calcutta .
About this latter
affair I was able to ascertain the facts.
I had brought a letter of introduction from a leading
barrister in London, Charles C . Macrae, to an eminent
English official in Calcutta, Commissioner Broughton,
who with his wife, a lady distinguished in society, were
persons whom Mme. Blavatsky naturally desired to have
in her train. Mr. Broughton told me the story of the
collusion between Mme . Blavatsky and Mr . Eglintonfe, a lady distinguished in society, were
persons whom Mme. Blavatsky naturally desired to have
in her train. Mr. Broughton told me the story of the
collusion between Mme . Blavatsky and Mr . Eglinton

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9.06
MY PILGRIMAGE
(a London « medium," who had been holding seances in
Calcutta) to impose on his wife and himself .
The facts
were subsequently written for me in detail by him and are
curious enough to be placed on record in the Blavatsky
annals.
3 OUTRAM ST., CALCUTTA.
MY DEAR SIR,- I am happy to tell you all I know
about the letter said to have been brought from the
Vega, and as some of the passengers are now here I
showed your letter to them, and enclose their respective
accounts. My wife is in Europe, and may write to you
herself. I have sent these letters to her, with your own.
With regard to my own knowledge of the transaction, I
was in Calcutta, and a friend was staying with me,-
Mr. H. Blanford, a Fellow of the Royal Society and head
of the Meteorological Department, a practical man, not
I think disposed to judge wrongly one way or the other.
We both know Mrs. Gordon, the lady to whom Mr . Eglin-
ton wrote, or says he wrote, from the Vega while at sea,
and I am on friendly terms with her, as is Mr . Blan-
ford, to the best of my belief . She called at my house a
day or two after the Vega had left Colombo, and pro-
duced a letter, an envelope, and two or three
cards.
The letter was from Mr . Eglinton ; it was not in the en-
velope, but was attached to it by a string in the corner,
which was also passed through the corners of the cards .
These cards had writing upon them, which we were told
was the writing of Mme . Blavatsky, then at Poona ; the
writing on the cards referred to
the contents of the letter .
The
envelope had three crosses upon
it in the positions I have indi-
cated. Mrs. Gordon stated that these letters had been

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing on the cards referred to
the contents of the letter .
The
envelope had three crosses upon
it in the positions I have indi-
cated. Mrs. Gordon stated that these letters had been

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MR. BROUGHTON'S LETTER
207
brought to her the day before by what are called " astral "
means, having been conveyed from the Vega -then on the
way from Colombo to Aden -first to Poona, and then
from Poona to her residence in Hourah, a suburb of
Calcutta. I have not the slightest doubt that Mrs. Gordon
firmly believed this, and I am under the impression that
she believes it still, but I have not had the pleasure of
meeting her for some time . Mr. Blanford and I, however,
ventured to ask a few gentlemen as to the circumstances
under which the letters made their appearance at Hourah,
and the replies led us to form an opinion that the lady
might have been imposed upon .
The circumstances, which were, I believe, considered to
amount to strong proof in favour of the " astral " theory,
were published in a paper called the " Psychic Notes,"
which for a short period in that year had been published,
I think weekly, in Calcutta .
I wrote to my wife, and sent this account, substan-
tially as I have now stated it, to her
; and she replied
that Mr . Eglinton had brought a letter to her to be
marked, that it had a cross upon it, that she was asked
to mark another or others, and that she did so, crossing
the first cross in this manner .
I will add that when my wife
left Calcutta I accompanied her,
with some other passengers, in
a steam launch, and she embarked on board the Vega at
Diamond Harbour or thereabouts, some hours' run from
Calcutta. I was the bearer of a letter to Mr. Eglinton .
It was given to me for him by Mrs. Gordon, I think, but
I won't be positive, and of course I do not know by
whom it was written . I gave it to Mr. Eglinton, who was
playing a rubber in the smoking-room when we arrived

--- PAGE BREAK ---rdon, I think, but
I won't be positive, and of course I do not know by
whom it was written . I gave it to Mr. Eglinton, who was
playing a rubber in the smoking-room when we arrived

--- PAGE BREAK ---

208
MY PILGRIMAGE
at the ship. I took leave of him, and have never seen
him since. I had known Mr . Eglinton ; he was in the
habit, when in Calcutta, of giving exhibitions of
his
powers at private houses for a fee .
He generally dined
at the house, and the company afterwards adjourned to
a darkened room, where musical-boxes played and tam-
bourines were thumped by, as it was said, mysterious
agencies. He came to our house in this way, but nothing
occurred. I think lie considered it a failure .
Mr. Sinnett we do not know .
I am, yours faithfully,
L. P . DELVES BROUGHTON .
Mrs. Broughton says in her letter (October 24, 1885)
" When Mr. Eglinton brought me the envelope it had
one cross upon it, and I said in a vague way, ` Let me see,
how shall I mark it?' whereupon Mr . Eglinton promptly
proposed I should make a second cross
+ +
so,
which naturally decided me not to do so, and no doubt
in this consisted `the bad behaviour' Mr. Sinnett spoke
to you of. As Mr. Eglinton found occasion to open the
envelope I had marked, it seems singular he should not
have found it worth while to tell me be had done so .
He
made an unfortunate mistake in referring the matter to
me at all, as he did not find me the pliable being he ex-
pected ! "
Mrs. Broughton was travelling to London with friends,
- Mr. and Mrs. W. K. Eddis and Mr. A. Wilson. Letters
from these gentlemen were enclosed to me by the Brough-
tons. They were elicited by my report to them of an
explanation sent me by my friend Mrs . Caroline Gor-
don, a devout Spiritualist, who before her husband (an
officer) was transferred to Calcutta attended my chapel

--- PAGE BREAK ---rt to them of an
explanation sent me by my friend Mrs . Caroline Gor-
don, a devout Spiritualist, who before her husband (an
officer) was transferred to Calcutta attended my chapel

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EGLINTON'S ATTEMPTED FRAUD 9.09
in London. She had learned from Mr . Eglinton that
after the envelope was marked by Mrs . Broughton, he con-
cluded to enclose a note to Mme . Blavatsky in it, and put
the contents into a new envelope
; but it was late (why
the haste ?) and he could not find Mrs . Broughton, so he
marked the envelope himself ! Of all this, however, not
a word was heard from Eglinton during the rest of the
voyage, -not even when he was held up to ridicule on
the Vega, where a letter was brought on board at Graves-
end from Mr . Broughton saying that the envelope had
three crosses ; for the matter had been the talk of all
the passengers . That Eglinton had not in any mark im-
itated Mrs. Broughton's asterisk Mrs. Gordon (sincere as
she was credulous) ascribed to his strange ignorance of
test-conditions . Eglinton was no idiot. Like Mme. Bla-
vatsky he was an actor, and I was told that in Calcutta
they affected contempt of each other's pretensions .
-My wife," writes Mr. Eddis, "was sitting by Mrs .
Broughton when Eglinton read to her the letter he was
going to send by astral means . Both noticed at the time
that there was not one word in the letter which might
not have been written in Calcutta before the steamer
started,-not a single allusion to anything which had
occurred since we left Colombo, which would have put
suspicion out of the question." These ladies were too
witty to point out to the Spiritualist this defect in his
letter, and allowed him to go on digging the pit into
which he and Mme. Blavatsky fell.
One evening at a dinner company at the Salisbury
Hotel, London, where Mr. Sinnett was present, I asked
him how he could explain that Blavatsky-Broughton inci-
dent. He answered, "It is a long story, but I can say
this much : Mrs. Broughton behaved very badly."on, where Mr. Sinnett was present, I asked
him how he could explain that Blavatsky-Broughton inci-
dent. He answered, "It is a long story, but I can say
this much : Mrs. Broughton behaved very badly."

--- PAGE BREAK ---t was present, I asked
him how he could explain that Blavatsky-Broughton inci-
dent. He answered, "It is a long story, but I can say
this much : Mrs. Broughton behaved very badly."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

210
MY PILGRIMAGE
One day when I was at the house of General Pitt Rivers
in London " Colonel " Olcott called. The Hon . Mrs. Pitt
Rivers, one of whose sons bad been a believer in Theoso-
phy, repeated the story of the attempted fraud on the
Broughtons and asked him to explain it .
" Colonel "
Olcott answered, "Your question implies the possibility
of a collusion between the Theosophists of India and Mr .
Eglinton, and before such a suggestion I am dumb ."
It
was the best -indeed, the only - reply that could be
made, and Mrs. Pitt Rivers tried in vain to get any other .
But the evasions of Sinnett and Olcott prove the truth of
what Mme. Blavatsky said in a letter to Mme . Coulomb,
when the latter resolved to expose her tricks, " God him-
self cannot take out of my hand those who believe in me ."
That Mme. Blavatsky without beauty or wealth should
be able to bind men to her proves that she possessed some
of those " occult " qualities in which Lord Bacon finds
the secret of success . I do not believe that she was char-
acteristically crafty or shrewd. Although she had ex-
hibited art in her confession to me, she afterwards made
a blunder about it by getting a premature explanation
printed iii England. I had not reported or used what she
said, but only had it under consideration when I saw it
stated in some paper, on her authority, that the answer
she gave me was what she was directed by her "Guru"
to give !
She was imprudent also in allowing some of
the earlier signatures of the chief Mahatma, as
" Kot-
thume," to remain in circulation after the change
to
"Koothoomi ." One of her young disciples, Mobini, ex-
hibited a sort of book-mark (" Kotthume ") once given
him by Mme . Blavatsky in a company at my house in
Bedford Park, London, and unwittingly confirmed the
belief that the name was made up of Olcott-Hume
; thesort of book-mark (" Kotthume ") once given
him by Mme . Blavatsky in a company at my house in
Bedford Park, London, and unwittingly confirmed the
belief that the name was made up of Olcott-Hume
; the

--- PAGE BREAK ---Kotthume ") once given
him by Mme . Blavatsky in a company at my house in
Bedford Park, London, and unwittingly confirmed the
belief that the name was made up of Olcott-Hume
; the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MME . COULOMB'S REVELATIONS 2ll
change to " Koothoomi " having been made as a better
disguise of the combination . (Sir William Hunter told me
in Calcutta that in either form the name is outside all
analogies of any language ever known in India .)
I repeat my conviction that Mme . Blavatsky's impos-
tures were not for the purpose of getting money .
At
times she lavished all the money she had on some scheme
to amaze a distinguished person or secure an influential
follower.
The silent woman at the Adyar table was Mme . Cou-
lomb, who soon after made the fatal revelations concern-
ing Mme . Blavatsky's tricks .
The French woman, I am
now certain, was resolved that if any attempt to impose
on me were made she would warn me .
She had already
ceased to be an assistant, and it is possible that Mme .
Blavatsky's explanation to me, that her mysterious famil-
iars had just. forbidden further correspondence through
the miraculous cabinet, was due to Mme . Coulomb's with-
drawal of her connivance. The awful conflict was even
then going on in secret, and I did not suspect the extent
of Mme. Blavatsky's histrionic powers until the publi-
cation of her letters to her penitent accomplice revealed
that during all that time when she was so serenely pre-
siding at her table, and conversing with me so merrily,
she was just over a rumbling volcano threatening every
instant to burst out with ruin to her whole empire
in
India. However, it is more probable that Mme . Blavatsky
would not in any case have attempted to convert me
; she
must have heard from her London friends that I was so
exacting in evidence, about all such wonders, as to be
a hopeless case . What she really wished was, I think,
to forestall the ugly reports about her that I was likely
to hear in Calcutta and Bombay, and by her personale, about all such wonders, as to be
a hopeless case . What she really wished was, I think,
to forestall the ugly reports about her that I was likely
to hear in Calcutta and Bombay, and by her personal

--- PAGE BREAK ---nders, as to be
a hopeless case . What she really wished was, I think,
to forestall the ugly reports about her that I was likely
to hear in Calcutta and Bombay, and by her personal

--- PAGE BREAK ---

212
MY PILGRIMAGE
cordiality and hospitalities to me induce me to talk of her
in a friendly way among our mutual friends in London .
I was indeed in a tolerant spirit towards Spiritualism,
having found so many excellent people who were made
happy by it, and I regarded Theosophy as simply Spirit-
ualism in a fez.
The letters written by Mme . Blavatsky to Mme. Cou-
lomb to persuade her or to threaten her silence are nu-
merous and unquestionably genuine . The French woman
could no more have written anything in them than she
could have written Browning's
°1 Mr. Sludge,
' the Medi-
um,'" and, moreover, the originals were opened to public
inspection in a community where Mme. Blavatsky's pecul-
iar handwriting was well known. It is due, I think, Mme .
Coulomb's inability to have them printed anywhere except
in an obscure Madras magazine, that the strange situation
revealed in the correspondence has not attracted the atten-
tion of some novelist or playwright. Every sentence in
the Blavatsky letters is born of a life-and-death struggle .
Her alternate wrath and soft persuasiveness, her audacity
and her ingenuity, reveal wonderful powers, and remind
me of the ablest subtlety and invective I have ever heard
at the bar .
I received from Mme. Coulomb in London a long and
piteous letter showing that the publication which ended
Mme. Blavatsky's thaumaturgy in India had a terrible
recoil on herself. The disclosure she made was certainly
conscientious .
She had met Mme . Blavatsky in Cairo, I
think, and being a Catholic was easily persuaded that the
Theosophic miracles were genuine . She and her husband
invested all the money they possessed, -a considerable
sum, -and after they discovered that some things re-
quested of them were of doubtful honesty, the two Frenchwere genuine . She and her husband
invested all the money they possessed, -a considerable
sum, -and after they discovered that some things re-
quested of them were of doubtful honesty, the two French

--- PAGE BREAK ---and her husband
invested all the money they possessed, -a considerable
sum, -and after they discovered that some things re-
quested of them were of doubtful honesty, the two French

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A REPULSIVE SERMON
9.18
people had no means at all of recovering their money or
of living except by receiving support at the Theosophic
headquarters . Mme. Coulomb was a believer in super-
naturalism ; she naively says that she did not mind very
much the deceptions worked on Hindus because they
already believed such miracles, but when the frauds began
to impose on English people she could not stand it.' The
situation was thus really unique . In order to reveal the
whole thing and publish all the letters that Mme . Bla-
vatsky bad written to her, poor Mme . Coulomb had to
confess that she had been an accomplice, and also lose all
the money that she and her husband had invested in the
concern. She was thus a sort of martyr . She was reduced
to pauperism, for I do not believe that the missionary
magazine which published the letters paid her even a pit-
tance for them ; and what became of her I know not .
On our way from Madras to Calcutta a Sunday morn-
ing was occupied by Mr . Muller of Bristol, who bad gained
celebrity by carrying on a sort of religious hospital there
which he claimed was supported by prayer alone . Miss
Mary Carpenter and Miss Frances Power Cobbe had dis-
covered the imposture of that claim, which indeed all
intelligent people well knew, the scandal being that so
many subscribers lent themselves to the pious fraud.
Muller, whom I had some curiosity to see, preached the
most repulsive sermon that I ever heard . His theme was
the blessing of those whose "sin is covered " (Ps. xxxii, 1),
1 In her letter to me Mme . Coulomb bitterly complains of a gentleman
who repaid her effort to save him from a deception by assisting in her
ruin.
" I do not think that ever since the world began there has been an
impostor like Madame Blavatsky. I am not ashamed to be called a The-
osophist, and would I were able to devote my time to it, but what I would
like very much would be to tear out of my life the page that eoncerns my
life with Madame Blavatsky."amed to be called a The-
osophist, and would I were able to devote my time to it, but what I would
like very much would be to tear out of my life the page that eoncerns my
life with Madame Blavatsky."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

214
MY PILGRIMAGE
and he asserted that if a man or woman were only believ-
ers in the blood of Christ, the Almighty did not see their
sins at all . Whatever crimes or villainies they had done,
they were entirely hidden under the name of Christ, and
the all-seeing eye would never look beyond that covering .
After this sermon I was conversing on deck with a num-
ber of educated Hindu gentlemen who were astounded
that any preacher could talk in that way. There were
three or four of these educated Hindus, and they were
unanimous in the opinion that if any such doctrine as
that were really to get into the mind and heart of any
large number of Hindus, the amount of crime that would
ensue would be unimaginable . I told them that the fruits
of such preaching were already visible in England, but
that fortunately very few preachers could be found even
in the most ignorant conventicles to believe such stuff, and
that the masses of English and American people got their
morals mainly from the law courts .
To those who like myself desire to preserve and con-
tinue all the varieties of religion in their own structural
development, it is a satisfaction to realize the extent to
which the literalism of missionaries prevents their doing
much real harm.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e varieties of religion in their own structural
development, it is a satisfaction to realize the extent to
which the literalism of missionaries prevents their doing
much real harm.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER XI
Calcutta -Keshub Chunder Sen and his death - Jogendra Chandra Ghosh
and Positivism -Mozoomdar and Dr. Tyndall - Exposition - Holy
pictures - Miracle plays and Hindu theatres - Kalighat festival - Sir
William Hunter - A learned fakir - Kali - Salvation Army - Enter-
tainment by Prince Furrok Shah - Christian errors about " idols " - A
dream interview with Kali.
I
REACHED Calcutta just in time to be present at the
banquet in celebration of the one hundredth anniver-
sary of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal . Its president,
the viceroy (Marquis of Ripon), was a Catholic .
The
Catholics often secure fraternal relations with peoples of
dark complexion where Protestants fail . The viceroy had
already shown the Catholic spirit by a disposition
to
include native gentlemen further in the affairs of India,
and was entertaining mixed colours at the vice-regal table .
He made an excellent speech, as also did the Hon . Mr.
Ilbert and Dr. (afterwards Sir) William W. Hunter .
On my way from Madras I travelled with the Brahmo
minister, Protap Chunder Mozoomdar, who told me that
I would find their chief, Keshub Chunder Sen, much
expanded intellectually since he was in London
.
But on
arrival at the wharf we learned that Sen was dead .
His
followers gave vent to their grief in utterances rather
startling. A disciple in "New Dispensation" wrote that
their " master " had been killed by " the poisonous darts
of unbelief, indifference, and disobedience
which were
repeatedly levelled against him."
" Thus the light that
was shining in darkness, and the darkness knew it not,
was suddenly extinguished ; thus the Son of God bad been

--- PAGE BREAK ---e
which were
repeatedly levelled against him."
" Thus the light that
was shining in darkness, and the darkness knew it not,
was suddenly extinguished ; thus the Son of God bad been

--- PAGE BREAK ---

216
MY PILGRIMAGE
crucified a second time, though in a novel fashion, but no
less cruel and corrupt than the first ."
" Have we called
our Master the Son of God ?
Yes. He came first to
show us the Father, and now he came again to show us
the Mother." All this shows that the movement of Sen
had mingled with the Hinduism, toward which it had re-
lapsed, Christian modes of thought and expression .
One
who knew him intimately declared to me that his death
was an unconscious suicide ; he was killed by Yoga. This
idea of spiritual sanctification and absorption, taking the
form of ecstatic austerities, reducing the food necessary to
nourish his large frame and sustain his labours, resulted
in elephantiasis. Mr. Dall, the American Unitarian mis-
sionary in Calcutta, who loved Sen, told me that the scene
at his death was very painful . When he (Dall) entered
the room a devotee sat at his head crying in a mournful
voice, ~~ Hari, Hari ! " [name of Chaitanya's 11 Salvation
Army" god centuries ago] .
His son, weeping continu-
ally, called "Baba, Baba! " Sen's mother asked mourn-
fully, " What have I done, that thou shouldst suffer such
agony ? " The dying man said that this agony was the
apparently stern face of his Divine Mother, and that he
saw her countenance full of love and beauty . A Singing
Apostle sang in the room hymns that are thus translated
I. If possible, 0 beloved, remove this cup, yet not
my will but thine be done . In this dire distress, body,
mind, and life are thine .
Do with them as Thou wilt
only ;
with clasped hands I ask for this blessing, - Grant
unto me peace, patience, and strength .
II. In the darkness of peril, Mother, what a frightful
look is Thine. The body trembles at that terrible counte-
nance. In the midst of the dismal ground of cremation
Thou seemest to be dancing in the armour of battle .
Thy intelligent form, deep in its immensity, appears tingedtrembles at that terrible counte-
nance. In the midst of the dismal ground of cremation
Thou seemest to be dancing in the armour of battle .
Thy intelligent form, deep in its immensity, appears tinged

--- PAGE BREAK ---

KESHUB CHUNDER SEN

--- PAGE BREAK ---dismal ground of cremation
Thou seemest to be dancing in the armour of battle .
Thy intelligent form, deep in its immensity, appears tinged

--- PAGE BREAK ---

KESHUB CHUNDER SEN

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE DIVINE MOTHER
X17
with blood. But, Mother, in thy inward nature there is a
deep ocean of love that surges constantly . What fear then?
Mother, I have found Thee out, - Thou art that Merci-
ful, Infinite Ocean of Love .
It is curious to observe in this second hymn the picture
of Kali dancing that terrible dance which threatened uni-
versal destruction which Siva, her lord, could arrest only
by casting himself beneath her feet. One can hardly
fail to appreciate the power of that faith which bad found
even that most dreadful image the mask of the maternal
spirit in the universe .
In one of the Brahmo annuals was an article on the
"Divine Mother " in which the writer expresses his belief
that Brahmos ought to call god their Mother instead of
Father. He says
: "The Christian Madonna and Hindu
Amba convey all that is holy ." Amba is now a general
Hindustani word for mother but it is also the name of a
mythological character. She was the reverse of that which
is conveyed in the term mother. She was disappointed in
her affections, and retired to a forest, where she concen-
trated all her heart and soul into prayer for one thing .
That was that she might obtain revenge on the king who
bad been the means of her disappointment . Siva, god of
destruction, heard her ; but be could not grant her prayer
so long as she was a woman. She ascended the pile, was
burned, and born again as a man . In that form revenge
was obtained ; the author of her misfortune was pierced
with arrows.' It seems thus that the Madonna carried
to India by the early missionaries had gradually become
associated with fierce Kali, who is at least better than the
1 Amba means mango, in the dictionaries, and it seems that this curious
myth of the vindictive woman turned man was of onomatopoetic
origin
ambya, the young mango, is feminine ; am, the full-grown mango, is mas-
culine.in the dictionaries, and it seems that this curious
myth of the vindictive woman turned man was of onomatopoetic
origin
ambya, the young mango, is feminine ; am, the full-grown mango, is mas-
culine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, and it seems that this curious
myth of the vindictive woman turned man was of onomatopoetic
origin
ambya, the young mango, is feminine ; am, the full-grown mango, is mas-
culine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

218
MY PILGRIMAGE
masculinized Amba . It is a necessity of Theism to see
Evil as a mask of Good, but it is not pleasant to find the
Madonna in such company, as she is almost the only divine
being of human imagination absolutely without any frown
at all .
The Brahmo Somaj was indeed not very different from
early Christian Unitarianism . That heresy, however, was
developed among learned and aristocratic people in Eng-
land and America who could have no conception of the
ascetic ideas associated with piety among the poor Hindus .
Indeed, I well remember that after ministering to the
humble Methodists in Maryland I was rather shocked, on
joining the Unitarians in Boston and Cambridge, to find
them so luxurious. Keshub Chunder Sen, when he came
to London, suffered chiefly by the grand fetes given to
him .
He told me that at the first fashionable dinner
party every dish of meat seemed to him a cooked baby .
It was on account of the increasing Christianism of
Keshub Chunder Sen that the separate society was formed,
- the Sandharan Brahmos . I had some conversation with
their venerable President Deb . He said that the society
was simply theistic and rationalistic . It was entirely free
from ceremonies and superstitions, and in sympathy with
all progressive, social, and ethical movements .
I was interested at finding in Calcutta a school of Posi-
tivists -small indeed, but consisting of able men . This
society was led by Mr . J. S. Cotton of the Bengal Civil
Service, well known to the Positivists of London, and es-
pecially by an able address delivered by him at Dr . Con-
greve's church on "England and India." I have related
in my Autobiography the facts of Mr . Cotton's romantic
marriage at Farringdon, and Tennyson's interest in that
affair. By his favour I witnessed the ceremony of ad-England and India." I have related
in my Autobiography the facts of Mr . Cotton's romantic
marriage at Farringdon, and Tennyson's interest in that
affair. By his favour I witnessed the ceremony of ad-

--- PAGE BREAK ---I have related
in my Autobiography the facts of Mr . Cotton's romantic
marriage at Farringdon, and Tennyson's interest in that
affair. By his favour I witnessed the ceremony of ad-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A POSITIVIST SACRAMENT
219
ministering to a native gentleman the Positivist Sacra-
ment of Maturity. (Maturity is the age of forty-two .)
The gentleman initiated on this occasion was Jogendra
Chandra Ghosh. Mr. Ghosh was a very attractive gen-
tleman, as well as a scholar and a writer of ability .
His
contributions to the "Calcutta Review" and his pamphlets
show mastery of the English language and comprehensive
learning. The ceremony was held in a room of the British
Indian Association . Sixteen were present (all men), Mr .
Cotton, Mr . Fordyce, and myself being the only white
persons. The official priest of the Ghosh family was con-
spicuous. This venerable Brahman was alluded to by
Mr. Cotton in his remarkable address on this the first
occasion of the kind that had occurred in India . Mr .
Cotton stated that he had asked and received from Dr .
Congreve (London), his superior, permission to admin-
ister this rite . Positivism, he said, was in sympathy with
respect for ancestral ideas .
" We come not to send a
sword upon the earth, but peace : and so the ceremonial of
to-day is not like the administration of a Christian sacra-
ment, which would have the effect of alienating you [Mr .
Ghosh] from the past and from all the surroundings of
your ordinary life." After Mr. Ghosh had elaborately
stated his reasons for adopting Positivism, his Brahman
priest felicitated him cordially in almost equally good
English. I had read Sir Alfred Lyall's statement of the
absorbing power of Brahmanism, and it occurred to me
that a Brahman Positivism might some day arise, and
Auguste Comte be another avatar of Vishnu . I said this
to the eminent Dr. Rajendralala Mitra, who reminded
me that three great systems of the East were fundamen-
tally atheistic, - Buddhism, Jainism, and
the Sankya
philosophy. The beautiful
Jain Temple in Calcutta,nent Dr. Rajendralala Mitra, who reminded
me that three great systems of the East were fundamen-
tally atheistic, - Buddhism, Jainism, and
the Sankya
philosophy. The beautiful
Jain Temple in Calcutta,

--- PAGE BREAK ---a Mitra, who reminded
me that three great systems of the East were fundamen-
tally atheistic, - Buddhism, Jainism, and
the Sankya
philosophy. The beautiful
Jain Temple in Calcutta,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

220
MY PILGRIMAGE
whose
lord is a wide-awake Buddha,
is attended by
Brahmans, one of whom, who showed me through
it,
stopped to say in it his prayers. In answer to my in-
quiry he said, " I can say my prayers anywhere ." 1
The Brahman family priests are largely occupied in
performing ceremonies and invocations over the food, etc.,
of those wealthy enough to employ them. They may be
seen in every Rajah's garden, relieving each other's watches
in the unbroken incantation over him day and night . I
observed from my window a priest in a garden engaged in
spiritual exercises over dish after dish brought out before
I From time to time I corresponded with Mr. Ghosh. His last letter
(April 8, 1901) being, as I think, characteristic of the type of thinker
likely to be developed in the Indian universities, an extract is subjoined : -
"I send you herewith a pamphlet of mine which contains a reprint of
your article in the Glasgow Herald.
"Your letter brought me sad news : the death of Mrs. Conway. But per-
haps I should be wise not to recall the past to you when time might have
brought to you any relief. Only we oriental people are so tied up to
home that home-matters rivet our attention very much, and such mis-
fortunes excite our strongest sympathies .
"I am ashamed to confess that I have not read your English edition of
Tom Paine. The French book is sealed to me. I wonder if your religious
sentiments have turned towards Christian or farther off towards freer
thought. I continue to stand fast by Comte's teaching and my own Hindu
antecedent. I ought not to judge between Positivism, Brahmoism, and
Hinduism. I am not in favour of the Indian form of Christian religion. I
am afraid Raja Rammohun Roy was swayed a little too much by his Per-
sian culture and his personality, or rather his traditions ; and the visible
grandeur of Christian domination led away Keshub Chunder Sen . Keshub,
as your account shows, made a feeble attempt to reconcile his opinions
with Hinduism, and failed . I do not know if you made the acquaintance of
Pandit Iswar Chandra Vidya-Sagar . If you did you would be in a posi-
tion to judge whether Positivism is not more suited for reconstruction of
Hinduism than either Christian or Parliamentary Government .
" Your kind efforts for famine-stricken India are very touching to my
mind . But as the Hindu proverb says, it is like drops of dew for a sea of
salt water."er Christian or Parliamentary Government .
" Your kind efforts for famine-stricken India are very touching to my
mind . But as the Hindu proverb says, it is like drops of dew for a sea of
salt water."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PROTAP CHUNDER MOZOOMDAR
29.1
being conveyed
to
the breakfast-table, -perhaps the
origin of the Briton's grace before meat .
It would appear
that the Brahman Pandit is without hostility to any philo-
sophical views of his employer that do not affect the latter's
relation to the ceremonial machinery of which the Pandit
is a part .
There was already a good deal of speculation in Cal-
cutta as to the probable successor of Keshub Chunder Sen
.
A name frequently mentioned was that of Mozoomdar,
well known in England and America, between which and
India he seemed to oscillate. Mozoomdar, in appearance
the typical "mild Hindu," spoke good English, and like
his chief, Keshub Cbunder Sen, got his first
London
hearing in my chapel . But Mozoomdar showed towards
us afterwards a shyness that was natural though rather
droll : although ours was the only Unitarian society which
had renounced the Christian name, largely because it
excluded other religions, a Brahmo apostle in England
needed many pulpits, and these could be supplied only
by Unitarian Christians. I continued on friendly terms
personally with Mozoomdar. He was really in spirit no
Hindu at all, but a preacher of average English Unita-
rianism.
Mozoomdar's great trouble was the extent to which
educated Young India, in casting off the old deities, set
nothing in their place . He longed to obtain in England
some scientific patronage of his Theism, and requested me
to arrange for him an interview with Tyndall, my memo-
randum of which I conclude to insert here .
The interview took place at the Royal Institution . We
three were alone, and Mozoomdar, after alluding to the
high reputation of Tyndall in India, said, « I feel the need
for a few axioms of religion ." Tyndall said, 11 Should wehe Royal Institution . We
three were alone, and Mozoomdar, after alluding to the
high reputation of Tyndall in India, said, « I feel the need
for a few axioms of religion ." Tyndall said, 11 Should we

--- PAGE BREAK ---. We
three were alone, and Mozoomdar, after alluding to the
high reputation of Tyndall in India, said, « I feel the need
for a few axioms of religion ." Tyndall said, 11 Should we

--- PAGE BREAK ---

222
MY PILGRIMAGE
call them by such a precise term as axiom ? "
Mozoomdar
suggested that the term principles might be substituted,
adding in illustration, " Such as God and the soul ."
Tyndall in his gracious way said, " It is not possible
for me to use those words except with reservations and
explanations ." Mozoomdar asked in what form possible
those ideas or principles could be expressed . Tyndall
asked, " Is any form possible or even desirable?" Mozoom-
dar said, " In India we do stand in need of some form to
embody our new religious ideas, for the sake of morality .
Young men abound there who are not only parting with
their old beliefs, but with their morality at the same time ."
Tyndall expressed a hope that Mozoomdar might be mis-
taken, and added, " I cannot believe that there would be
any such result if these young men were properly taught
in moral principles ." Mozoomdar acknowledged that they
were not, properly speaking, taught morality at all . Tyn-
dall said, "I cannot believe that any man requires the
aid of theology to teach him that an honest man is better
than a rogue." Tyndall stated that certain purely moral
passages in a work of Fichte had wrought an important
effect in himself in early life, and he did not deny that
sacred books might stimulate into activity the higher
principles in every human mind and heart - where they
always exist though sometimes latent unless influenced
from without. Mozoomdar said with emphasis,
" I feel
that religion must conform to science ." Tyndall rejoined,
`° Such religion as that I cannot condemn, but the reverse .
In true religion there is a permanent and indestructible
element ; the forms may frequently have to be abandoned,
the essence never . I think it is not wise to mould this
fluid element into form, however new . They who see
farthest cannot discern the ultimate forms into which thisfrequently have to be abandoned,
the essence never . I think it is not wise to mould this
fluid element into form, however new . They who see
farthest cannot discern the ultimate forms into which this

--- PAGE BREAK ---e abandoned,
the essence never . I think it is not wise to mould this
fluid element into form, however new . They who see
farthest cannot discern the ultimate forms into which this

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MOZOOMDAR'S DEITY
223
religious sentiment will mould itself ."
On hearing this
Mozoomdar stretched forth his hand to Tyndall, who cor-
dially grasped it .
I bad not met Mozoomdar since that interview (1874)
until we travelled together from Madras to Calcutta.
We had a good deal of conversation, but could not reach
any kind of agreement because his demand was for a de-
monstrably working, mine for a lovable, deity .
He wished
to clear away the gods and goddesses of India as so many
idols, but who was responsible for the ignorance from
which they grew? And what was his own one Brahmo
deity but all of those nature-gods consolidated into one,
- that one responsible for all the cruel and destructive
forces represented by Siva and Kali?
Once he said to me,
" Is there anything at all that you reverence ? " " Yes,"
I replied, " a lovely and lovable woman, a sweet child, a
man of wisdom, a mind consecrated to pure reason, a true
and loving heart." Mozoomdar tried to persuade me that
all these beautiful qualities were deep in the heart of his
dynamic, universal, omnipotent deity ; I could not see
love in cancers, Indian famines, etc ., but was as tender
as I could be with the faith of this Hindu so pathetically
anxious to build up a new religion for his race .'
The great Exposition at Calcutta was open, and Sir
William Hunter, the director, gave me facilities for see-
ing it, even including me among the few men admitted on
the day reserved for Hindu ladies .
Among these ladies
were about a dozen " converts " belonging to a Christian
Home in Calcutta . They had a costume of their own, and
grouped themselves apart . Their unconverted
sisters in
I P. C. Mozoomdar did preach in Keshub Chunder Sen's pulpit, with
what success I know not . Since this volume was in press I have beard of
his recent death .elves apart . Their unconverted
sisters in
I P. C. Mozoomdar did preach in Keshub Chunder Sen's pulpit, with
what success I know not . Since this volume was in press I have beard of
his recent death .

--- PAGE BREAK ---unconverted
sisters in
I P. C. Mozoomdar did preach in Keshub Chunder Sen's pulpit, with
what success I know not . Since this volume was in press I have beard of
his recent death .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

29.4
MY PILGRIMAGE
passing by paused to gaze on the Christians with serious
curiosity, and always with entire respect . The uniform
of the converts - all fine looking - was a snowy white
garment flowing from the neck, and a sort of long sash
folding around the waist and also below it to the feet.
The garment, though perhaps devised for modesty, was
semi-transparent above the waist, and impressed me as
less refined than the unconscious and childlike exposures
of the unconverted ladies in their varied draperies . These
multitudes streaming along the corridors and from room
to room appeared so full of sunshine and mirth that they
seemed to be grown-up children ; they were found of play-
ing little tricks on each other as they marched along,
such as reaching over the shoulders before them to give a
slight pull at the hair or clothing of some acquaintance,
then gazing innocently away, and when detected breaking
into laughter that was never loud but shook the entire
form. It appeared to me that never in England or Amer-
ica or Australia had I seen so many happy female faces
as in that Exposition where they were gathered from many
regions .
In the Indian section four boys were weaving a carpet,
whose colours were shuttled musically . A man sat in front
with a pattern in his hand, chanting each colour to be
inserted. The boys responded in chorus, each with the
colour he had to touch, and the little shuttles were selected
deftly enough. This was a pretty instance of verse sweet-
ening toil, and seemed to unite the beauty wrought by
man with that which clothes the butterfly and flower.
In the Calcutta section stood a group of life-sized Cath-
olic images, and one morning I was moved to some reflec-
tions by seeing a Hindu, duster in hand, trying to clean
these sacred figures. He evidently found it difficult . Thegroup of life-sized Cath-
olic images, and one morning I was moved to some reflec-
tions by seeing a Hindu, duster in hand, trying to clean
these sacred figures. He evidently found it difficult . The

--- PAGE BREAK ---Cath-
olic images, and one morning I was moved to some reflec-
tions by seeing a Hindu, duster in hand, trying to clean
these sacred figures. He evidently found it difficult . The

--- PAGE BREAK ---

IN A CALCUTTA PRINT-SHOP
225,
groups of outlandish people crowding the Exposition were
particularly attracted by these Christian images in blue
and gold with their brass glories .
It was a good -place for ethnographical observations .
There were a good many living representatives of tribes,
but most of them were shown in life-sized models . There
had been some difficulty in obtaining these models, and
the effort to get an Aka for modelling bad brought on
a small war. A Babu was sent into the neighbourhood of
Assar to find a typical Aka, but the Aka locked him up,
and it required a regiment and a skirmish to recover him .
I gathered from the print-shops of Calcutta several
popular pictures, - highly coloured, - among them the
Goddess of Learning, who, with her Greek robe and pile
of books, resembles some mediaeval personifications
of
Grammar. Mahadar, bearing Sati on his shoulder, - a
giant with flowing beard and hair, toiling, staff in hand,
between steep and rugged cliffs, -is a fair image of St .
Christopher. Jagadhatri, the Universal Nurse, seated on
her lion, recalls Una. Devaka, father of Krishna, flying
with the new-born babe into the wilderness to escape King
Kansa, is notable for the beautiful and exquisitely-haloed
head of the child, which seems to have come from an old
Italian canvas. But I shall have more to say of pictures
presently.
On the curtain of one of the Hindu theatres was a
picture apparently of Adam and Eve . It was in a Parsi
theatre, and would therefore represent the old Persian
legends of the first parents of mankind, Meschia and
Meschiane. In India
Adam" is now the ancient name
of the first man
; but in the Sanskrit it was Adima, "the
first," while the Hebrew Adam means "red earth .
It is
noteworthy that these sacred personages are often
pic-ia
Adam" is now the ancient name
of the first man
; but in the Sanskrit it was Adima, "the
first," while the Hebrew Adam means "red earth .
It is
noteworthy that these sacred personages are often
pic-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ancient name
of the first man
; but in the Sanskrit it was Adima, "the
first," while the Hebrew Adam means "red earth .
It is
noteworthy that these sacred personages are often
pic-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9.26
MY PILGRIMAGE
tured very fair, and generally with different complexions
from those of the present oriental races . The houris of
the Moslem Paradise are so called, not, as some suppose,
because they are dark-eyed, but because they are fair .
The theatres of India are of indigenous growth, and no
doubt were originally formed to represent deeds of the
heroes and divinities that still chiefly figure on its stage .
Several plays of Shakespeare have been translated into
Sinhalese, and in 1884 a company was rehearsing them
in Colombo. But the old Star Theatre in Calcutta was
occupied with Hindu Miracle Plays . The audience at first
appears to be made up entirely of men, but presently one
sees what seems to be a faded tapestry surrounding the
amphitheatre ; the figures, however, occasionally move,
and are then discovered to be women . They are seated be-
hind thinnest gauze, and are in just the same upper rows,
separate from men, that women occupied in the ancient
Greek theatre (Atheneus, xii, 534) .
The first play I saw was the combat of the hero Rama
with the demon Ravana. (Ravana was a king of Ceylon
who was demonized in India, and popularly given many
heads, just as the Czar is in England, which sees his mi-
raculous ubiquity in every villainy that occurs through-
out Russia!) The performance opened with a chorus of
nymphs beautifully draped, marching to and fro, singing
an ancient ballad in praise of the hero. The terrible god-
dess Kali was personated by a blackened man . She pro-
mises Ravana, the demon king of Lanka (Ceylon), her
protection. Vibhi Shana, younger brother of Ravana,
warns the demon of his fate . Ravana is heavily whiskered
and ferocious, though he takes the hero's side in the end .
We pass to the forest where Rama invokes the goddess
Durga. The nymphs sing around him in the forest . Theate . Ravana is heavily whiskered
and ferocious, though he takes the hero's side in the end .
We pass to the forest where Rama invokes the goddess
Durga. The nymphs sing around him in the forest . The

--- PAGE BREAK ---ily whiskered
and ferocious, though he takes the hero's side in the end .
We pass to the forest where Rama invokes the goddess
Durga. The nymphs sing around him in the forest . The

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A HINDU MIRACLE PLAY
227
sensational scene is where Rama is about to tear out his
eye and offer it as a sacrifice to the goddess . Durga, thus
far a wooden image, starts forward, prevents this sacrifice,
and promises to protect Rama's wife, Sita, whom Ravana
has abducted and placed with his daughter in-law .
The conflict is for the rescue of Sita . When Ravana
approaches, his daughter-in-law of course hides. A mes-
senger warns Ravana of his peril. Ravana boasts that he
has a magic arrow, and cannot be defeated . The mon-
key god, however, in disguise of a holy fakir, manages
to obtain this arrow from Ravana's wife . The combat
between the hero and the demon caused excitement in the
audience, but it was indicated only by low vocal utterances
.
When Ravana is dying in the forest his conqueror Rama
and others ask him questions . They approach and say he
has peculiar and occult knowledge, being a very aged king,
and therefore will be able to instruct the youthful Rama
for his royal career. Ravana replies to him :
11 Thou art
the incarnation of God, and canst not learn anything of
me ; yet will I say to thee,
' Be quick to do what is good,
slow to do what is evil.' All the good things I meant
to do are now unavailing ; I meant to build a stairway
to heaven, to make the salt ocean sweet ." The wife of
Ravana mourns over him and cries, " After I have wor-
shipped all the gods and goddesses so long, this is the
result." Her adopted son consoles her by saying that
since Ravana was killed by Rama, a divine being, be must
necessarily go to Indra's paradise . Rama then tells her that
her husband will never die. Then we have the exciting
episode in which Sita, suspected by Rama, casts herself
into the fire . Rama, raving in his anguish, is about to kill
himself, when Agni, god of fire, withdraws the flames, and
Sita rises in pure apotheosis ; after which the orchestray Rama, casts herself
into the fire . Rama, raving in his anguish, is about to kill
himself, when Agni, god of fire, withdraws the flames, and
Sita rises in pure apotheosis ; after which the orchestra

--- PAGE BREAK ---f
into the fire . Rama, raving in his anguish, is about to kill
himself, when Agni, god of fire, withdraws the flames, and
Sita rises in pure apotheosis ; after which the orchestra

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9128
MY PILGRIMAGE
plays " God save the Queen," and the audience silently
retires .
In the course of this play an incident occurred not set
down on the programme. The Hon. Mr. Ilbert and a
Babu who interpreted the play (Hindustani) for me were,
with myself, the only occupants of the dress-circle . The
manager of the theatre came up during an entr'acte and
invited us behind the scenes . We readily accepted, when
Mr. Ilbert, who supposed himself incognito, suddenly
found himself the object of a patriotic demonstration. The
Hindus had recognized the author of the famous Ilbert
Bill for enlarging the rights of natives, and now Rama,
Ravana, their retinues, and even their wives, came forward
and prostrated themselves before the astonished states-
man. The nymphs with the chorus stood round and made
profound obeisance, and the god Angi said in good English,
"See, sir, even our women, ignorant as they are, have been
moved with admiration of you, for your justice to our race,
and desire to pay you homage ." Mr. Ilbert, abashed at this
unexpected scene, after a brief acknowledgment, introduced
me to the group in a flattering way as the compiler of an
oriental Anthology, whereupon the manager exclaimed,
" This is Mr. Ilbert's friend," and straightway I had the
honour of seeing Agni, Vibhi, Rama, and Ravana in their
splendour and all the epical heroines kneeling on the floor
before me !
This incident behind the scenes was my nearest glimpse
of the contemporary world in the Calcutta theatre . I was
presently back in my seat near the women seated in ancient
Greek fashion, while the actors just now kneeling to us,
resuming their grandeur, bore me back to poetic visions of
primitive man. Having before got the tale completely in
my memory, it was so illuminated by the Puranic cos-actors just now kneeling to us,
resuming their grandeur, bore me back to poetic visions of
primitive man. Having before got the tale completely in
my memory, it was so illuminated by the Puranic cos-

--- PAGE BREAK ---eling to us,
resuming their grandeur, bore me back to poetic visions of
primitive man. Having before got the tale completely in
my memory, it was so illuminated by the Puranic cos-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE STAGE A MISSIONARY
229
tumes, the preordained movements of the performers, the
miracles that seem so natural at a million years' distance,
that I found myself floating familiarly in immemorial
time. I was present at the birth and development of
deities and demons, saw them take the shape in which they
could engrave themselves indelibly on the human heart
by charming or terrifying the senses .
Priesthoods of the great missionary religions-Bud-
dhism, Christianism, Mohammedanism -account for the
rapid diffusion of their systems in the earth by claiming
supernatural interposition and favour .
This is really a
confession that no new religion could have been spread
among many millions in many nations merely by sermons .
The miracles undoubtedly occurred, but it was on the
stage. The " Miracle Plays " are so named with naivete
and truth. It is only on the stage that demons and dragons
are securely slain, and justice prevails, and virtue always
triumphs over vice . And it is on the stage that a great
and faultless hero can be developed from a striking per-
sonality marching to the martyrdom where crown and
halo await him .
Paul reminds the Galatians (iii . 1) that the execution
of Christ had been set forth publicly before their eyes,
and in that far Asiatic city, peopled from different races,
it is probable that a Buddhist theatre was used for the
scene, -these two religions not having been enemies in
those simple days .
In the thirteenth Tibetan tale translated by Anton von
Schiefner from the Kah-Gyur, and by W . R. S . Ralston
from the German (Triibner's Oriental Series), there is a
complete account of the play in which the Buddha saga
was embodied, composed by an actor to please believers
and 11 convert unbelievers."
11 He pitched a booth in Raha-'s Oriental Series), there is a
complete account of the play in which the Buddha saga
was embodied, composed by an actor to please believers
and 11 convert unbelievers."
11 He pitched a booth in Raha-

--- PAGE BREAK ---there is a
complete account of the play in which the Buddha saga
was embodied, composed by an actor to please believers
and 11 convert unbelievers."
11 He pitched a booth in Raha-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

230
MY PILGRIMAGE
griga on the day when the festival of the Nagarajas Girika
and Sundara was celebrated, and sounded a drum . _ And
when a great crowd had collected he exhibited in a drama
the above-mentioned in the life of Bhagavant (Buddha)
in harmony with the Abhinishkramanasutra . Thereby the
performers and the assembled crowds were confirmed in
the faith. And they uttered sounds of approval, and be
made a large profit ." But this actor, in order to impress
the unbelievers, had made up two of his performers in the
guise of eminent Bhikshus, -holy personages of rank, -
adding a little fan, and these, angry at being taken off by
the actor, put up a booth near his and performed a grander
Bodisat play. As they were in disguise the actor followed
them, and one turned on him and said, " You wretch, who
live by our art! as you have brought us on to the stage
we will go to every place where you perform, and we will
annoy you." The actor craved pardon, because he got his
living by his performance, and received it by giving up
the whole of his receipts to the Bhikshus .
The words of the Bhikshu, "our art," are significant .
It appears that the offence was in a performance of the
Buddhist Miracle Play by an unsanctified person for
personal profit. Anything received by a Bhikshu was
supposed to go to the holy brotherhood, - which in the
Tibetan tale consisted of twelve .
At the Parsi theatres all the female parts are acted by
men, and it is wonderful how feminine they make them-
selves. Over the drop scene in the Parsi theatre at Cal-
cutta there was a portrait in which I was much interested,
and found to my astonishment that it was meant for Shake-
speare. The play was the opera of " Nairung-Ishk." The
language used was Ghuzerati . It is a tale of apparently
Persian-Mohammedan origin, and in it I discovered a re-ent that it was meant for Shake-
speare. The play was the opera of " Nairung-Ishk." The
language used was Ghuzerati . It is a tale of apparently
Persian-Mohammedan origin, and in it I discovered a re-

--- PAGE BREAK ---t for Shake-
speare. The play was the opera of " Nairung-Ishk." The
language used was Ghuzerati . It is a tale of apparently
Persian-Mohammedan origin, and in it I discovered a re-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A PARSY OPERA
231
semblance to our European legend of the mother of
Charlemagne. In the first scene we see two very young
people -a sister and a brother -who bewail their cruel
treatment at the hands of their royal stepmother. The
stepmother enters, and is angry at seeing them together.
This stepmother has a son of her own . She intends to kill
the stepson, heir to her husband's throne, and have her
own son marry the girl, in defiance of custom . The girl,
however, is firm in her determination to resist this. The
two young people are next nearly starved, and repair to the
tomb of their mother . There they tell her what they have
to suffer, and long to rest beside her . The spirit of the
mother rises out of her tomb and says to them, 11 Be patient,
do not grieve so much . Attend to what I say. The tree that
grows beside my tomb has on it fruit, which you must eat
morning and evening." They eat this fruit and continually
eat it . The stepmother, seeing that they do not starve,
makes her son act as a spy upon their movements . He re-
ports how they are obtaining food . The stepmother then
pretends illness, and tells her husband that an astrologer
declares she can be cured only by the root of a tree near
the tomb of his former wife. The king, about to leave for
the wars, consents that the tree should be pulled up by the
roots. When the king has gone, the stepmother orders a
slave to take the two young people into the jungle and slay
them. When the slave has taken them into the jungle he
reveals to them his errand, and says he will not slay those
whom he has attended since their infancy . They implore
him to carry out his instructions, their lives being wretched .
The slave says, " I will never kill you ; I have eaten salt
with you ; if you please you may kill me . I have an obe-
dient heart, and if you will, we will fly together and never
return." It is arranged, however, that he shall return andou ; I have eaten salt
with you ; if you please you may kill me . I have an obe-
dient heart, and if you will, we will fly together and never
return." It is arranged, however, that he shall return and

--- PAGE BREAK ---lt
with you ; if you please you may kill me . I have an obe-
dient heart, and if you will, we will fly together and never
return." It is arranged, however, that he shall return and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

232
MY PILGRIMAGE
report their death, and in parting he says,
Happiness is
not perpetual ; nor unhappiness . Be patient." When he
has left them, the two kneel and pray, concluding with
the words, "Almighty, we are faithful to thee ! "
As
they wander they become hungry. The brother sees some
animal, and proposes to kill it, but his sister says, " We
must not kill." He replies, "Yes, for it is sent by God
in answer to our prayer ." He fires at the animal, and kills
it, but they have no means of cooking. He goes to beg
a little fire . The sister remains alone . She bemoans the
fate of the animal .
L° Poor deer, your fate brought you
near us, and you are dead . In the same way all will die ."
As she sings this a serpent bites her and she falls sense-
less. While she is in this condition robbers enter the for-
est, and rob her of her jewels ; but seeing that she is a
beauty who would bring a good price, they desire to restore
her. One of them has a charm from a serpent's head, and
with it cures her . She rises with the words, " Why did
you waken me from sleep? "
They tell her what has hap-
'pened. She asks for her brother ; they tell her that he is
near by at a house, and they will guide her to him . When
she has gone, her brother returns, deploring that he had
missed the road . At this moment the people from the
city of the Yaman enter, and declare that he must be their
king. Whenever the king dies, the stranger that first arrives
must be made king . They bear him off by force, he calling
for his sister. She meanwhile is a prisoner. One of the
robbers falls in love with her, but she rejects him . Whilst
they are together, the other robbers enter, showing their
suspicion of their comrade's good faith, which he allays
by declaring she must be sold . She is sold in the city (for
5000 rupees) to a hag, who takes her to a disreputable
house, where she is compelled to sing for money . Whilstgood faith, which he allays
by declaring she must be sold . She is sold in the city (for
5000 rupees) to a hag, who takes her to a disreputable
house, where she is compelled to sing for money . Whilst

--- PAGE BREAK ---allays
by declaring she must be sold . She is sold in the city (for
5000 rupees) to a hag, who takes her to a disreputable
house, where she is compelled to sing for money . Whilst

--- PAGE BREAK ---

" THE COURT OF INDRA "
233
the brother, now king of Yaman, is sorrowfully seeking
his sister, her beauty has attracted the son of the prime
minister ; he in turn purchases her from the bag. She tells
him her sad story, and pleads with him against disgrace,
when he informs her he had visited the house only because
he had discovered that an innocent person was a prisoner
there. The father of this virtuous youth will not believe
ber story ; but its truth is brought out, and the sister finds
at once a noble husband and a royal brother.
Another play that I saw in India was called °°Indra
Sabha," that is, '° The Court of Indra ." The story is
this. One day a celestial nymph of Indra's court went out
to walk, and saw lying on a seat a handsome prince . She
falls in love with him, and summoning a demon bids him
bring to her abode both the prince and the garden seat
on which he slept. On the prince's awakening she con-
fesses her love, and for a time all bids fair to go on hap-
pily, but a demon informs Indra of this intrigue . The
prince and the nymph are brought before the king of
gods (Indra), who orders the prince to be thrown into a
well-prison, and the fairy to be expelled from court.
Bewailing her lover she wanders through Persia and Hin-
dustan in the guise of a hermit. In this disguise she at
length returns to Indra's court. She exerts her powers
of sweet song . Indra listens, is charmed, and orders the
singer to be brought before him . On her repeating the
song, he promises to grant her any favour she may ask .
She thereupon throws off her yogi garment and begs for
the release of her lover, the prince, which is granted . The
charm in this piece was chiefly in the singing and dancing
of the nymphs .
At a Parsi theatre I saw a modern piece, - apparently
a satire upon infant marriages. As the Parsis have longs granted . The
charm in this piece was chiefly in the singing and dancing
of the nymphs .
At a Parsi theatre I saw a modern piece, - apparently
a satire upon infant marriages. As the Parsis have long

--- PAGE BREAK ---m in this piece was chiefly in the singing and dancing
of the nymphs .
At a Parsi theatre I saw a modern piece, - apparently
a satire upon infant marriages. As the Parsis have long

--- PAGE BREAK ---

234
MY PILGRIMAGE
followed the same custom, I infer that the play must have
been written by one of the reformers who had caused a
schism by demanding the release of woman from the or-
deals to which she is subjected by Hinduism, and also the
abolition of infant marriages . In this amusing little play
a wealthy youth who had been married to a distinguished
child bad fallen into the hands of a fascinating woman .
Among other things she dictates to him an exceedingly
comical letter to his wife, stating that he was having a
very pleasant entertainment where he was, but would come
to her again when be got tired.
On inquiring at Calcutta about the family of the famous
Rammohun Roy, founder of Brahmoism (Theism) in In-
dia, whose mission to England fifty years before was an
event of historic importance, I learned that be was repre-
sented by a grandson, Hurreinihun Roy, a wealthy gentle-
man interested chiefly in a menagerie he had established
on his estate, along with a circus !
Of course I went out
to the circus, and at the entrance found a programme
printed in the best style of " English as she is spoke : "
"Look! Look!! Look!!! The unprecedented scene in
Bengal. The Blossoming Rose, or the Daughter of Flowers .
The Fairy Knohumkumni. The most attractive Young
Equestrian in the New and Wonderful feats on the Pad
Horse. A Boy of five years is the most attraction ! "
As a matter of fact, a primary gymnastic school in
London could show better acrobatic feats, and the horse-
riding was comically commonplace . The manager of the
show, seeing me taking notes, came to me and apologized
for the spectacle, saying that it was entirely by amateurs .
On payment of a few additional pice I visited the me-
nagerie, where there was a brass band that had an accom-
paniment for each particular cry or growl of the animals .it was entirely by amateurs .
On payment of a few additional pice I visited the me-
nagerie, where there was a brass band that had an accom-
paniment for each particular cry or growl of the animals .

--- PAGE BREAK ---amateurs .
On payment of a few additional pice I visited the me-
nagerie, where there was a brass band that had an accom-
paniment for each particular cry or growl of the animals .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

KALIGHAT
235
I did not meet the grandson of Rammohun Roy, to my re-
gret, for I might have got some memoranda on
1° heredity "
for my friend Sir Francis Galton . But after all, is it not
natural that the progeny of infant marriages should often
remain infants?
On the morning of January 18,
sat for a time in
the Council Chamber of the Indian Empress observing the
large-headed viceroy sitting beneath a portrait of Warren
Hastings, and remarking other good heads surrounded by
portraits representing the continuity of British rule in
India. After a time the ablest man among them, and the
man best informed on Indian affairs, Sir William Hunter,
was ready to accompany me on an appointed expedition .
This was to Kalighat, the ancient and original shrine of
the goddess Kali, after whom Calcutta is named . It was
the great annual festival of the Hooghly River, whose
sanctity is associated with a divine being born of a hu-
man virgin .
It was hardly an hour's drive from Calcutta to Kalighat,
but on arrival the Council of Statesmen and Scholars in
their splendid halls were as if removed to an inconceiv-
able distance . The city of palaces seemed a thousand
years away from this city of huts (sprung up, however,
within a few days) . These huts, massed together, were
made of mud, leaves, grass, and amid them thousands of
men, women, and children moved without rest. Are these
huts enlarged ant-hills, and these hurrying swarms huge
termites ?
But no . ; in a colony of ants all seem busy at
something real - they are carrying loads or fighting an-
other colony . But all this swarming and hurry of dark
human forms seem aimless . No work is going on - none,
that is, save an enterprising mendicancy, active and per-
sistent enough to have secured wealth in other lines ofthis swarming and hurry of dark
human forms seem aimless . No work is going on - none,
that is, save an enterprising mendicancy, active and per-
sistent enough to have secured wealth in other lines of

--- PAGE BREAK ---rry of dark
human forms seem aimless . No work is going on - none,
that is, save an enterprising mendicancy, active and per-
sistent enough to have secured wealth in other lines of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

236
MY PILGRIMAGE
business ; but everybody is on the move, all are noisy,
many frantic . It is as if a vast population were hag-
ridden . So soon as we alighted from our wagonette two
or three men speaking pigeon-English fastened on us,
anxious to be our guides ; around our group over a hundred
people of all ages and both sexes massed themselves, hold-
ing out their small or large or skinny arms, and clamour-
ing for
G° baksheesh ." We needed the guides simply to
clear a path before us, which they did by yells and blows
.
As we tried to move it was hardly possible to take a step
without running down some of the innumerable children,
.whose only clothing was a bit of metal in the nostril, to
which some added a string around the pit of the stomach .
No Hindu deity or demon was ever more many-handed
than each of these their worshippers . One boy of ten or
twelve years, particularly urgent in his entreaties, supplied
us with a naive specimen of some of these beggars . As
we were nearing a point where many genuine sufferers
were displaying their physical distortions and ailments,
Sir William wanted some pice to distribute, and de-
manded copper change for silver . On the instant the lad
who bad begged so piteously drew out a well-loaded
money-bag, counted out the change, and instantly began
again his whine for baksheesh.
The first crowd that beset us became discouraged when
they found that Sir William knew their language and them
perfectly, so our way through the throng became easier
for a little time. We came upon several small shrines in
small booths, in which rude effigies of aboriginal deities
were huddled together in anomalous fashion . Beside the
bloodthirsty Kali was Ganesa, god of wisdom ; on either
side of these were the Linga ; while before them were
five large green pumpkins, each with green leaves onher in anomalous fashion . Beside the
bloodthirsty Kali was Ganesa, god of wisdom ; on either
side of these were the Linga ; while before them were
five large green pumpkins, each with green leaves on

--- PAGE BREAK ---hion . Beside the
bloodthirsty Kali was Ganesa, god of wisdom ; on either
side of these were the Linga ; while before them were
five large green pumpkins, each with green leaves on

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SIR WILLIAM HUNTER
237
its top. Indeed the Linga appeared at every step, and
by no means so much conventionalized as in the temples .
In one or two instances it was rather startling to observe
the degree of realism with which the symbols of reproduc-
tion were displayed . It seems admissible for anybody to
set up a red ugly figure, with goggle-eyes and monstrous
teeth, call it by the name of some deity, and beg pice for
looking at it. Sir William, however, paused only at places
which displayed forms of mythological or archaeological
interest. His explanations of them to me - their origin,
history, meaning -were listened to by our pigeon-Eng-
lish guides with mute astonishment.
They had at first
attempted to give us explanations, but when they found
that the Englishman proceeded to disclose a knowledge
infinitely beyond their own, and heard the coarsest kind
of symbol raised into significance, they were awestruck .
" We cannot tell you anything, sir," said one .
Presently we came to a large, round, open building,
in the centre of which was a linga-shaped fountain, into
which priests were casting flowers (marigolds) and ladles
of water, and beside which were figures of a bull and the
elephant-headed Ganesa. This was a comparatively quiet
spot, the people about it being fewer and more respect-
able. Sir William gave me a clear and full explanation,
and while he did so a group of natives drew near ; all
voices ceased ; it was written on their faces that they
never before had associated any serious meaning with
those forms. One of our guides, who spoke fair English,
translated parts of what Sir William said to some young
people, and as we passed on said, "We have never be-
fore heard any such meaning connected with these things .
We have never before had here any Englishman like you,
sir."r William said to some young
people, and as we passed on said, "We have never be-
fore heard any such meaning connected with these things .
We have never before had here any Englishman like you,
sir."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

238
MY PILGRIMAGE
Just as this was said we passed six or seven naked,
long-haired, and long-bearded yogis, each squatted be-
neath his separate rude shelter of leaves or rushes,
mutely contemplating a smoking log . Some one said to
Sir William, " There is a man from the university," and
on turning we saw a fine-looking
yogi, younger than
the rest, who seemed to be out of place . On approach-
ing him we found that he could not only speak good
English, but was a B. A. and D . L. of Calcutta University .
It was appalling to find a graduate of the university and
of the law school in such situation . This yogi had excited
unusual interest, and a crowd hung round him. The
following conversation, of which I made careful notes,
ensued : -
Bunter . What led you to become a yogi?
Yogi. The government made me a yogi .
Hunter . How did they do that?
Yogi.
They ordered me to go through the exercises
necessary to become a yogi .
Hunter. You are not telling me the facts. You must
have had some inducement to become a yogi .
Yogi (smiling) .
I am the largest native landowner
about here ; I inherited three hundred acres ; I thought
I could fulfil the obligations and duties of the estate bet-
ter by becoming a yogi. The government said so .
Hunter. Do you spend the whole day here?
Yogi.
Yes, and the night - when there is less noise.
Hunter. How do you occupy yourself ?
Yogi.
Worshipping the fire there .
Hunter.
Do you expect to become better by it?
Yogi.
Yes. By exercises, by prayers, I may make my-
self better, and gradually become an abdur.
M. D. C. Will you sit here then as now?

--- PAGE BREAK ---unter.
Do you expect to become better by it?
Yogi.
Yes. By exercises, by prayers, I may make my-
self better, and gradually become an abdur.
M. D. C. Will you sit here then as now?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A "GOVERNMENT YOGI"
239
Yogi.
Yes .
.M D. C. Will you then have power to work miracles?
Yogi. No. Christ alone could work miracles.
That was the last of our interview with this bachelor
of arts and of laws . On his forehead, as he again bent
it towards the burning log, I observed a special Siva-mark
(one red between two ashen lines), and thought it was
about time for another avatar of Vishnu when any partner
of the Triad can so bring a man of talent to the dust
.
Sir William thought it probable that the
yogi's state-
ment that the government had directed him to become
such must be based on some clause in the title to his
land, which may have been originally
deeded to an
ancestor, as "Mr . So-and-so, yogi,"
and that he may
have erroneously inferred that his tenure might not
be
secure unless he also became a yogi .
The fiction of
being a " government yogi " would also give him excep-
tional importance. But of what utility could the acres, or
all the wealth of Indies, be to a man doomed for life to
sit looking at a smoking log? I had witnessed a living
cremation, and yet there was no trace of sadness in the
victim's countenance, -indeed he was cheerful .'
Another yogi, with long black hair and beard surround-
ing a face that seemed a hundred years old, gazed at me
with eyes that never winked, and in which there was no
1 The motive of this yogi, at once worldly and virtually suicidal, sug-
gests a clue to the rage with which atheism is commonly met . Denial of
the existence of God is dreaded more than crime. Why is that ? Who has
informed the world that God objects to having his existence denied
? It
cannot be imagined that the existence depends on whether men believe it
or not, or that divine happiness can be affected by the disbelief of men
; but
there are many human institutions and interests, of a social, political, and
pecuniary kind, which have the name of God in their titles, and seem to
rest upon his genuineness . If there is no God such as is therein described,
they might look absurd, and their authority might be questioned ., which have the name of God in their titles, and seem to
rest upon his genuineness . If there is no God such as is therein described,
they might look absurd, and their authority might be questioned .

--- PAGE BREAK ---e of God in their titles, and seem to
rest upon his genuineness . If there is no God such as is therein described,
they might look absurd, and their authority might be questioned .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

240
MY PILGRIMAGE
speculation .
His nearly naked form was motionless, not a
gesture exhibited any sign of life ; he looked like painted
wood. I remembered how in early life I used to find a
certain romance in reading about yogis - the picture of
the holy man in the forest, given in " Sakuntala," who had
sat motionless so long that birds built their nests in his
rags, and the serpent cast its skin across his lap . But the
yogi is much more attractive in the verse of Kalidasa than
when seen near to .
We passed through streets about ten feet wide between
booths bristling with begging hands, and came upon a
lane of howling malformations, monstrosities, madnesses .
One had no legs, another no thighs
;
armless boys, leg-
less men, several whose arms end in bone or their legs in
clubs ;
an epileptic crone beating her head against the
earth ; another who looked like a ball on two bones . As,
scattering coppers to each, we pressed beyond these rav-
ing sufferers, their cries sounded as if gathered in one
agonized, sharp voice, the scream of some monster, that
curdled the blood .
But now we were caught in a crowd even more uncanny,
were that possible . It was a crowd of convulsionaires,
fresh from the annual pilgrimage to Sagar, mouth of the
river, all struggling to get near one shrine . The slight
garment each wore was nearly torn from some of them,
but they forgot that and everything else as with shouts
and cries they pushed and elbowed each other . A path was
laboriously made for us until we reached the entrance of
the portico, beyond which profane feet cannot go . The
great goddess Kali was now only a few yards away, but
shut from our view by a wall of naked backs, every
muscle standing out in knots . I was almost in despair of
seeing Kali at all ; but Sir William had a silver talisman,now only a few yards away, but
shut from our view by a wall of naked backs, every
muscle standing out in knots . I was almost in despair of
seeing Kali at all ; but Sir William had a silver talisman,

--- PAGE BREAK ---s away, but
shut from our view by a wall of naked backs, every
muscle standing out in knots . I was almost in despair of
seeing Kali at all ; but Sir William had a silver talisman,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

KALI'S IMAGE
9.41
at sight of which three or four stalwart fellows pum-
melled the wall of backs until one after another veered
aside, and through a rift in the mass I saw the renowned
image of Kali . Her visage was black as tar, save for her
three blood-red eyes (one in the forehead), red eyebrows,
and red tongue lolling down and dripping blood on her
breast. Two erect cobras made the ornaments of her
cheeks, and a crown of gold and red, baloed with black
smoke-rays, was on her head . She had four jewelled arms
and hands -two blood-red, one held upward, the other
downward, the others bearing respectively a rapier and
the head it had cut off . Her form below the breast was in
a sort of pit, where several people stood making offerings .
While I was gazing one of these turned, and I beheld
close beside Kali's fearful face a countenance tender and
lovely enough for a Madonna .
Kali's image was too antiquated and impossible to
shock me very much, but the horror was that she should
be worshipped, and cruel sacrifices offered . For the space
of twenty or thirty feet the pavement was wet with blood
.
Kids were lying about in dying convulsions.
At dinner that evening the meat first served was kid
;
I could not touch it, and it disgusted me with all the
meat. For the first time I pondered with interest what
is said in Corinthians of eating things offered to idols
.
Paul's objection (1 Cor . x, 20), that the Gentile sacri-
fices were
G0 to demons and not to God," and ' 1 ye cannot
partake of the table of the Lord and of the table of
demons," - the substitution of human sacrifice for an-
imal sacrifice, - set me to reconsidering the story of the
violence of Jesus in the temple, which I once rejected as
preposterous.
At such shrines one sees mostly the picked people ofacrifice for an-
imal sacrifice, - set me to reconsidering the story of the
violence of Jesus in the temple, which I once rejected as
preposterous.
At such shrines one sees mostly the picked people of

--- PAGE BREAK ---l sacrifice, - set me to reconsidering the story of the
violence of Jesus in the temple, which I once rejected as
preposterous.
At such shrines one sees mostly the picked people of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

249
MY PILGRIMAGE
superstition collected from many neighbourhoods, and by
no means representative of the country generally. And
for these, too, it should be said that Kali, in their hearts,
is by no means so black as she is painted .
In a strict sense there could be no such thing as devil-
worship. A devil, being pure evil, without any heart at
all, could not be reached more than a stone by an appeal
to compassion. Demon-worship is a different thing . Dr.
Rajendralala Mitra recalled with emotion that on his re-
covery from a dangerous pleurisy he accompanied his
aged mother to Kalighat, where tottering before Kali she
bared her bosom and with a knife drew some drops of
blood between her breasts . This was in fulfilment of a
vow made during his illness . It occurred about 1875 . I
observed no such ceremony at Kalighat, though such may
have occurred. That a few drops of blood alone are suffi-
cient shows that Kali does not feed on it, but accepts it as
an evidence of respect or of earnestness . It is somewhat
like the baptismal sprinkling, which no longer means to
most parents the actual exorcism of a devil from the babe,
but only its consecration .
The good fairy of our own European mythology is
sometimes disguised as a hag, and in Norse fable as a
dragon, and there are stories of Kali which suggest a soft
place in her heart. In Lal Behari Day's " Folk-Tales of
Bengal " there is one of a dead child placed by its mother
near the shrine of Kali and restored to life. Perhaps that
woman with the Madonna face whom I saw making of-
ferings to Kali was pleading with the fierce goddess for
some little sufferer at home .
It has often been remarked that it is the women who
mainly attend churches and keep them going. In my
Methodist days I had many more female than malefierce goddess for
some little sufferer at home .
It has often been remarked that it is the women who
mainly attend churches and keep them going. In my
Methodist days I had many more female than male

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WOMAN AND THE CHURCH
R43
hearers, but this was not the case during my ministry as a
rationalist. In Washington, Cincinnati, and London the
proportions were about equal . The average greater num-
ber of women in the orthodox churches may be in part
accounted for by their being less logical than men, and
more able to escape the real sense of odious dogmas,
while in their more tender hearts they are able to spirit-
ualize them.
But may not the phenomena be partly due to a habit
transmitted from ages and regions when, in attendance at
temples, women secured some release from their social
bondage? In the great festivals at Kalighat and Allaba-
bad I saw many Hindu women moving from shrine to
shrine, and bathing freely and sportively in the sacred
rivers, who ordinarily are shut up in the domestic zenana .
And during the centuries in which something like the
zenana survived, though young maidens could leave home
only under close guardianship, their dragons might be
bribed, and it was on the way to church that the lover
could be met . From Boccaceio's Fiammetta to Goethe's
Gretchen it is church going that furnishes the
lover's
opportunity. The severe old father cannot deny wife or
daughter the right to worship and save their souls . And
at the present day women are accorded an equality in
churches denied them in the political world .
They in-
herit unanalyzed motives other than piety to "keep the
churches going."
Returning to Calcutta we met a noisy parade of English
Salvationists, men and women, on which scholarly Hin-
dus (and there are many) look with the same feelings of
mingled disgust and wonder that Christians feel on behold-
ing the scenes at Kalighat. It is the unfamiliar fanaticism
that is revolting. The secret of success in Protestanismith the same feelings of
mingled disgust and wonder that Christians feel on behold-
ing the scenes at Kalighat. It is the unfamiliar fanaticism
that is revolting. The secret of success in Protestanism

--- PAGE BREAK ---s of
mingled disgust and wonder that Christians feel on behold-
ing the scenes at Kalighat. It is the unfamiliar fanaticism
that is revolting. The secret of success in Protestanism

--- PAGE BREAK ---

244
MY PILGRIMAGE
lies largely in the commandment against visible images .
If the dogmas inside the heads of those poor Salvationists
were suddenly to take shape in fit images, they would be
more monstrous than any figures at Kalighat .
For they
too are saved by the blood, and not that of a mere kid .
Kali does not torture men and women in hell, nor demand
a human sacrifice as the condition of salvation . And Kali
is admittedly worshipped by the multitude through fear,
and that but occasionally . She is not held up as an ideal
being. The deities of India have since Buddha's rebellion
been generally converted to benignity, and not one -not
even Siva -is "angry every day," nor with any one for
what his ancestor did . The demonstrations of fanaticism
in India may appear greater than those of Salvationism
in England because the population there is five
times
larger, and because the people are much poorer and can-
not surround their festivals with artistic decorations .
But
relatively to numbers the proportion of those free from
religious superstition is as large in India as in England
and America .
On the day following my visit to Kalighat a dinner was
given in my honour by Prince Furrokh Shah, in his fine
residence, Russapugla, four miles out of Calcutta, the com-
pliment being I suppose on account of my compilation,
" The Sacred Anthology," of which my South Place friend,
Walter Thomson, sent an edition to India for presentation
to leading men and public teachers .
The book was my
best passport in India, and the splendid dinner given by
this Moslem prince presented a pretty and almost mystical
illustration of the unity of the hearts out of which grew the
flowers I had gathered from many different religions .
All
present were Hindu gentlemen, mainly professional men,
so fluent in English, and talking with so much wit, that Iearts out of which grew the
flowers I had gathered from many different religions .
All
present were Hindu gentlemen, mainly professional men,
so fluent in English, and talking with so much wit, that I

--- PAGE BREAK ---rew the
flowers I had gathered from many different religions .
All
present were Hindu gentlemen, mainly professional men,
so fluent in English, and talking with so much wit, that I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

IDOLS MISUNDERSTOOD
245
could fancy myself dining with my brother Omarites of
our Omar Khayam Club in London. The Hon . Mouloy
Mahomed Yusoof took me out in his carriage, and the
other guests the Maharajah Sir Jogendra Mohun Tajore
Bahadoor, Jogendra Chandra Ghosh, Maharajah Narendra
Krishna, Kristodas Pal, Baboo Joy Kissen Mokerji and
his brother Peary, Councillor Syed Ameer Ali, the bril-
liant young lawyers Bannerji and Chatterji .
They were
all friends, men of the world in a high sense ; and if, with
their culture, their refined faces and manners, they could
all be transferred to Boston, there would be a glad cry there
that its literary era had returned . Yet these are the men to
whom Boston sends missionaries ! No dozen missionaries
in India, were their brains packed together, could equal any
one of these heads . The talk was mainly of English and
American literature and philosophy, in which they were
well read . Little was said about religion, but I had some
conversation with one barrister (Chatterji, I think), a na-
tive of Benares, about the festival going on at Kalighat
.
I mentioned the repulsion I felt on seeing the sacrifice of
kids, and that I could not eat the flesh when offered at my
hotel. He said the vulgar fanaticism was equally repulsive
to educated Hindus ; then remarked that there was mis-
understanding among foreigners of what they call " idols."
Even the humble people do not worship the images in
themselves. The images are covered with symbolical orna-
ments representing the character or legendary deeds of
this or that divinity .
Each divinity has a certain day in
the month, and a certain hour, when he or she enters
his or her temple, and by a temporary transubstantiation
enters the image . After receiving due offerings the deity
departs, and from that moment until the return of their
festival the image is without any sanctity whatever
.
Ittemporary transubstantiation
enters the image . After receiving due offerings the deity
departs, and from that moment until the return of their
festival the image is without any sanctity whatever
.
It

--- PAGE BREAK ---ntiation
enters the image . After receiving due offerings the deity
departs, and from that moment until the return of their
festival the image is without any sanctity whatever
.
It

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9.46
MY PILGRIMAGE
possesses no continuous sanctity like the cross
.
After the
blood has been shed before Kali she departs, and the kids
may be sold and eaten like any other meat .
"We boys at
Benares used for fun to strip and roll ourselves in the
blood of the kids, then go and plunge into a tank or
stream for a swim ."
All this talk was across the table, heard of all the circle
in which all religions had their evolved representatives .
There was nothing secret, no whispers, but perfect free-
dom, so that our host, the Moslem Prince Furrokh Shah,
was presiding over a sort of Akbar assembly from which
the polemics had died away .
This experience of the Rationalist Brahman barrister
interested me still more in the goddess Kali.
In my
"Demonology and Devil-Lore" my account of Kali was
academic. The picture (vol. i, fig. 18), copied from a
Hindu print, does not represent her as without comeli-
ness, and probably it was chiefly the smearings of blood
which made the large image at Kalighat so repulsive
;
but I must now see in that image only a decorated an-
tique casket in which an invisible being enters at certain
times. The Hindu scholars with whom I conversed could
not give me any idea of that invisible Kali.
She is tread-
ing Siva, her husband, under her feet, -the legend being
that he threw himself there to arrest her dance, that
threatened to destroy the universe . The dance was for
joy in having decapitated the hundred heads of a giant
demon (euphemistically demigod) . Siva himself being the
god of Destruction, the myth taken strictly is that of a
house divided against itself. The position of Siva is that
of Satan under the archangel's foot . As for her girdle of
beads, they are those of the many-beaded demon she had
destroyed before Siva could stop her dangerous dance .f. The position of Siva is that
of Satan under the archangel's foot . As for her girdle of
beads, they are those of the many-beaded demon she had
destroyed before Siva could stop her dangerous dance .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MAN'S ABDICATION
247
What of Kali's right hand, raised upward in bene-
diction? As I sat at midnight on my hotel portico, I saw
again as in a dream that Madonna-like woman who stood
nearest to the goddess at Kaligbat ; and amid the out-
ward silence a still small voice said to my inward ear,
" I am Kali. When, in an age far past, prophets arose
to tell mankind that their agonies were inflicted by cruel
and heartless deities, I went forth, a princess turned
prophetess, to point the sufferers upward to a paradise
where all their sorrows would be compensated, and all
tears wiped away . 'After death?' the people cried ; ' why
not now?' Then I went into retreat, and reflection, to
reappear with the faith that all human agonies and evils
are disguises of a universal maternal love which by such
terrible discipline trains the sufferers for eternal felicity.
Alas, that heavenward hand drew on the three hands of
destruction assigned me after death .
My casket was cov-
ered equally with flowers and with the symbols of ferocity
and disease in nature . I bad by my optimism consecrated
the horrors of this predatory world .
You see me pedes-
talled on the genius of Destruction, whom my love should
have trodden down . Ah, thou traveller unknown, the fatal
teaching in this world is that all is under divine Provi-
dence, and all evil good at heart. That is man's abdi-
cation ! "

--- PAGE BREAK ---ave trodden down . Ah, thou traveller unknown, the fatal
teaching in this world is that all is under divine Provi-
dence, and all evil good at heart. That is man's abdi-
cation ! "

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER XII
Exploring Bengal - A conference of religions - Moslem Christianity -
Dr. Rdjendralgla Mitra on Christian polytheism - Hon. Syed Ameer Ali
- Dr Ananda Cumara Swamy - The marvellous dolls-Maharajah
Sir Jotendra Mohun Tajore - The demonized Buddha - Buddha-Gaya
- Root of Buddha's Bo-tree -Letter from Dr . Mitra-Buddhist-Hindu-
philosophy - Benares -Monkey Temple - Deer Park and legend of the
Mango Girl-"The Toy-Cart"-Our Western Buddha .
S
IR WILLIAM HUNTER came in his carriage one
day and said, " I intend to show you Bengal ." I
had only a day or two more in Calcutta, but my simple
faith in the Gazetteer-general of India prevented my hav-
ing any doubt about his ability to show me a great province
in that time . We drove nearly ten miles into the country,
and visited the homes of several humble Hindu families of
which he knew something . Sir William told them in their
own language that he wished me to see the interior of the
houses, and these were cheerfully shown . Even the women
(most of them comely) were not shy of us ; they smilingly
made a half movement aside but not out of sight
; and it
was especially notable that those who in the hot weather
bad scanty clothing did not show any consciousness of that
at all. In one house a woman scampered out of sight in
earnest, but it was because her father-in-law had come in
at the gate .
In no case must a wife meet her husband's
father!
The houses were poor to look at, but comfortable enough
inside. One man took us to see a curious thing in the
woods near his house, - an enormous stone, about ten feet
square and more than two thick, held seven feet in the air

--- PAGE BREAK ---le enough
inside. One man took us to see a curious thing in the
woods near his house, - an enormous stone, about ten feet
square and more than two thick, held seven feet in the air

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A CONFERENCE OF RELIGIONS
9.49
by four trees. The trees clamped it at the corners, having
grown around them and then gone on into stately forest
trees. The stone which the trees had raised by their growth
was known as "the dog's grave," the legend being similar
to that of the Beth Gelert stones in Wales celebrated in
the ballad "Llewellyn's Dog."
In most European ver-
sions - e.g . in Rome, Munich, and Ireland - the faithful
animal, slain on suspicion of having killed the infant it
had saved, is an ape .
When we had visited eight or ten of these houses and
several shrines, Sir William said, " I have now shown you
Bengal. You may travel from one end of it to the other
and see only just such houses and shrines and such people
as those we have visited ."
This generous friend arranged an assembly of learned
Brahmans, Brahmos, Moslems, and Parsis to meet me for
conference on religious and philosophical subjects .
The
meeting was held in the government Council Chamber
and the grand native personages came in their fine robes .
The Pandits were apparently rationalists ; the principal
one, a grand looking man who spoke excellent English,
asked me my opinion about
the miraculous concep-
tion of Christ. I regarded it as like the legend of the
virgin-born deity of the Hooghly River, whose annual
fete was going on ; a story of mythological and poetic
interest, but not to be regarded as historical .
The Pandit
said that such was exactly his opinion of both the Chris -,
tian and the Hooghly legends, and it was the general
opinion of educated Brahmans . Other Pandits confirmed
his view, and also several English scholars present .
The
Moslems, of whom there were a dozen of high rank in
the room, had said nothing, and I remarked that I would
like to hear their opinion. Thereupon the Moslems benteveral English scholars present .
The
Moslems, of whom there were a dozen of high rank in
the room, had said nothing, and I remarked that I would
like to hear their opinion. Thereupon the Moslems bent

--- PAGE BREAK ---ars present .
The
Moslems, of whom there were a dozen of high rank in
the room, had said nothing, and I remarked that I would
like to hear their opinion. Thereupon the Moslems bent

--- PAGE BREAK ---

250
MY PILGRIMAGE
their richly turbaned heads together in private consulta .
tion. At length one of them arose and said that they all
felt "bound to accept the narrative just as it stands in
in the New Testament ."
As the Moslems were the only orthodox Christians pre-
sent, but would not argue about their faith, our confer-
ence amounted only to a high appreciation on the part of
the Pandits of English science and literature, responded
to by our exaltation of the sacred books and poems of
India. The most notable thing was that in a large com-
pany in Calcutta, of which a third were influential and
official Englishmen, the only believers in Christian super-
naturalism were the Moslems ! I was also impressed by
the familiarity of the Brahmans with all those vital prob-
lems with which we were so occupied in Europe and
America, -divine existence, fate, freedom, animism, im-
mortality, -these issues being raised in their own philo-
sophical systems. Discussions, in the western world have
no doubt revived the interest of Hindu thinkers in such
questions, but have given them no idea not found in their
own ancient books .
James Sime, biographer of Lessing, told me that on
Schopenhauer's last day he said, " I am Buddha ! " Those
around him supposed that his mind was wandering, but
the pessimist's words had meaning . Dr. Rhys Davids says
" Gotama Buddha was the Auguste Comte born two thou-
sand years too soon," but I should rather describe him, as
the Schopenhauer of that time .
The venerable author, Dr. Rajendralala Mitra, was un-
able to attend the conference, but requested me to visit him .
I found him in his large fine library, and but for his com-
plexion I might have fancied myself conversing with some
eminent orientalist in Europe. He was simply the philo-requested me to visit him .
I found him in his large fine library, and but for his com-
plexion I might have fancied myself conversing with some
eminent orientalist in Europe. He was simply the philo-

--- PAGE BREAK ---t him .
I found him in his large fine library, and but for his com-
plexion I might have fancied myself conversing with some
eminent orientalist in Europe. He was simply the philo-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR . MITRA
251
sophic scholar and interpreter of religious phenomena,
without, I believe, any connection with the temples . His
countenance was handsome and full of sensibility, his
individuality and humour reminding me at times of our
American Ingersoll . The Christian propaganda in India
having fallen mostly into the hands of missionaries without
culture and the Salvation Army, these have brought about
this strange situation : the West boasting of its Science
sends to India a religion resting on a claim to authority,
and is there confronted by a religion appealing only to its
reasonableness. The signs and wonders and the dogmas
being thus emphasized, the Hindu scholars are provided
with a sort of Museum of Antiquities . " Like every other
religion, Christianity is a polytheistic system," said Dr .
Mitra ; "Satan and the `sons of God,' and the archangels
are just as much deities as the so-called gods of India,
who are subordinate to the Triad just as Satan and the
angels are to the Trinity. Educated Christians put these
things into the background, just as educated Indians do
their minor deities, the priests turning them into allego-
ries." He had something like enthusiasm for Buddha, but
could not make a genuine human character out of Christ.
I mentioned some of the suppressed and recently discov-
ered Sayings of Jesus, and he was impressed by them,
especially the declaration that he had "come to dissolve the
sacrifices ." He took from a shelf his English translation
of " The Yoga Aphorisms of Pantanjali " and presented it
to me, after pointing out in it a quotation from the an-
cient (Sanscrit) Lalista-Vistara recording an utterance of
Buddha closely resembling that of Jesus about sacrifices .
After mentioning the fallacious ways in which people
seek purification ("fancying the image of a divinity in
one's mind, saluting supposed divinities," etc.), Buddhag that of Jesus about sacrifices .
After mentioning the fallacious ways in which people
seek purification ("fancying the image of a divinity in
one's mind, saluting supposed divinities," etc.), Buddha

--- PAGE BREAK ---

252
MY PILGRIMAGE
adds :
"To persons deluded by ascetic works and by
sacrifices I shall show the destruction of all works and
sacrifices."
Dr. Rajendralala Mitra enriched me by sending to my
lodgings his great work on the Aryan race and that on
Buddha-Gaya, which I was about to visit. In one of his
volumes I remarked a significant mistranslation
of a
couplet in an old Methodist hymn : -
The world is all a fleeting show
For man's illusion given .
The word in the hymn is delusion, and the meaning is as
far from the oriental doctrine of illusion as the East is
from the West .'
Although, as I have said, it is rare to find a sceptical
Moslem, there is in India a rationalistic sect (Mutarza-
lite) whose chief interpreter is Syed Ameer Ali . It was
pleasant indeed to meet in Calcutta Syed Ameer Ali, whose
friendship I had enjoyed in London, and whose
ideas
were so individual and his spirit so sweet that he
had
often suggested to me the refined Sufi Mohammedanism
of Persia which one breathes in the Rose-Garden of Saadi,
-the
G° Gulistan ."
When Syed Ameer Ali was a law student at the Inner
Temple, London, he was often at our house ; we loved him,
and his beautiful spirit seemed to transfuse his face, form,
voice, manner, - his entire being. At that time he wrote
" A Critical Examination of the Life and Teachings of
Mohammed" (1873), which I found a delightful book ;
it raised all Islam - which I bad deemed a hard eastern
Calvinism - in my esteem that such a man could love
it, and draw so much truth and beauty out of it .
I still
1 1906. The hymn is omitted in the new American Methodist hymnal .

--- PAGE BREAK ---ern
Calvinism - in my esteem that such a man could love
it, and draw so much truth and beauty out of it .
I still
1 1906. The hymn is omitted in the new American Methodist hymnal .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SYED AMEER ALI
Q53
regard this little book as the best known to me on the
subject.
The young author and barrister - of fairer complexion
than most Hindus - fell in love with a young English
lady, Miss Kohnstram -who with her mother sometimes
came to my chapel, - and his love was requited. Her
mother came to converse with my wife and myself about
Syed Ameer Ali personally, and asked what I thought of
the wisdom of marriage between an English lady and an
Indian. How was her or his social position likely to be
affected in India ?
My wife and I had heard nothing about
the matter from him, and it was by a spontaneous out-
burst that we both declared that after knowing him for
some years we considered him worthy even of her cultured
and fair daughter . For the rest I did not believe that any
vulgar race-prejudice would be found in Calcutta among
those whose acquaintance could be of any value to either
of them .
When I visited Calcutta Ameer Ali was a member
of the Supreme Legislative Council . In their beautiful
home hearty welcome was given me, though I do
not
know to this day whether they were aware that I had
been consulted about the marriage . I saw that it had
proved an ideal marriage ; happiness was written on their
faces ; they were surrounded by the most intellectual peo-
ple, and could pick and choose their acquaintances in
" society."
I should add that I observed several Hindu ladies at
receptions in Calcutta, and that there appeared no sign
of colour-prejudice . The Hindu ladies must have distin-
guished themselves by emancipation from the restrictions
of the zenana and were rather lionized .
But an intermar-
riage between one of the ruling race and one of the ruled

--- PAGE BREAK ---distin-
guished themselves by emancipation from the restrictions
of the zenana and were rather lionized .
But an intermar-
riage between one of the ruling race and one of the ruled

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Q54
MY PILGRIMAGE
race, at the very moment when reformers were demand-
ing increased rights for the natives, could hardly fail to
excite misgivings of the `1 conservatives." The personal
equation, however, was too potent in this case for any man-
ifestation of religious or race prejudices .'
A gentlemanly young English traveller whom I chanced
1 1908 .
Ameer Ali has bad a unique career. In 1879 he was appointed
Chief Presidency Magistrate ; he sat for several years in the Bengal
Legislative Council, and in 1884 was appointed by Lord Ripon to the
Imperial Council ;
he was created by Lord Dufferin Companion of the
Indian Empire ; in 1890 he was at Lord Lansdowne's request appointed a
Justice of the High Court. In all of these positions Ameer Ali's services
were universally recognized, and at the same time he has written works
of the most painstaking character and the highest value :
"The Mahom-
medan Law ; " " Personal Law of the Mahommedans ; " " The Spirit of
Islam ; " " The Ethics of Islam ; " " A Short History of the Saracens ." In
1904 Justice Ameer Ali retired from the bench and is at present in Eng-
land (where his sons are at college) and engaged on a
" History of Ma-
hommedan Civilization in India ." He is the only Mohammedan author,
and it is a happy event that he can devote himself to literature .
From the Dufferins and from Sir William Hunter I heard of the high
esteem in which Justice Ali and his wife were held . Their house was a
favourite social centre, and Mrs. Ameer Ali's Friday receptions and her
parties always drew the best people together.
Another intermarriage which much interested me was that of the late
Sir Mutu Cumara Swamy of Ceylon with a beautiful lady of my London
chapel (Miss Elizabeth Beeby) . To this I have alluded in my seventh
chapter in connection with the brilliant entertainments given me by his
nephews . These gentlemen are now the chief representatives of the ancient
ruling race - Tamil -in Ceylon. The widow of Sir Mutu I remember re-
turning to London with her pretty little boy ; and by a letter I have just
received from Hon . P . Arungchalam I learn that this boy, Ananda Cumara
Swamy, has made a name for himself in Science (D . Sc . Loud., F . L . S,
F . S . S.), and is now employed in Ceylon as Director of the Mineralogical
Survey. He has also edited, in connection with another able man, W . A .
de Silva, " The Ceylon National Review," an organ of the Ceylon Social
Reform Society, which aims to prevent the Sinhalese and Tamils from
being westernized or Christianized, and to liberate women from the social
seclusion (the "purdah, in India " zenana ") which was "borrowed from
the Mohammedan conquerors of India."ese and Tamils from
being westernized or Christianized, and to liberate women from the social
seclusion (the "purdah, in India " zenana ") which was "borrowed from
the Mohammedan conquerors of India."

--- PAGE BREAK ---being westernized or Christianized, and to liberate women from the social
seclusion (the "purdah, in India " zenana ") which was "borrowed from
the Mohammedan conquerors of India."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MARVELLOUS DOLLS
255
to meet told me that he had seen a Hindu cut a boy to
pieces with his sword, then throw the severed limbs in a
bag ; in a minute the boy came running up, and the bag
was opened and found empty . "Can you believe that?"
he asked.
"No," I replied. "Nor can I," said he ; "I be-
lieve the conjurer mesmerized me."
"You would have
seized the assailant at the first gash," I said.
" Yes, cer-
tainly, if I had been in my senses." I was sceptical about
the exactness of this testimony, knowing nothing of the
,witness ; and if he should see this page he will be equally
sceptical about the " doll trick " which I saw in Calcutta.
Having two visits to make to eminent personages, Dr .
Hunter placed his carriage at my disposal, and also his
secretary, an intelligent Babu who spoke English . As we
were driving along the street I saw a tent in an open
space, beside which a man was shouting, a crowd of boys
pressing around him . The Babu said it was a conjurer,
and I asked to be driven to the tent . The Babu evi-
dently did not think it was suited to our dignity ; but I
was eager, and the driver with some astonishment obeyed
the order. The conjurer, overwhelmed by seeing a fine
carriage with liveried coachman approach, beat off the
boys with a stick, and bowed to the ground . The show
had not opened, and the Babu and myself had the tent
all to ourselves . It contained a plain wooden table with-
out cover or any hangings around it . Nothing else was
in the tent, which was about twenty feet in diameter,
without floor and open at the top. It was flooded with
the noon light. The conjurer, who wore only a loin-cloth,
went out at the back and returned with his doubled hands
filled with tiny figures, each about two inches high, with
straw legs, sealing-wax beads, and buttons to stand on .
He stood them all in the centre of the wooden table, thenned with his doubled hands
filled with tiny figures, each about two inches high, with
straw legs, sealing-wax beads, and buttons to stand on .
He stood them all in the centre of the wooden table, then

--- PAGE BREAK ---hands
filled with tiny figures, each about two inches high, with
straw legs, sealing-wax beads, and buttons to stand on .
He stood them all in the centre of the wooden table, then

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9,56
MY PILGRIMAGE
stood off two yards and talked to them . Presently they
began to stir, to move, to dance . Waving a little wand,
beating time, but never coming within two yards of them,
-talking to them all the time,-he made them dance in
every direction . I examined the table above and beneath,
and passed my arm above the dolls to discover whether
there might not be invisible threads attached to them .
The conjurer, through the Babu, asked me where I wished
them to dance, and they moved in every direction I indi-
cated. I requested that two should separate from the rest
and dance apart, the others remaining stationary.
This
was done. Finally be desired me to put a penny on the
table ; the penny danced across the table and pitched
itself into a little box. This was the most inexplicable
performance I ever saw .
The man who exhibits the dolls performs nothing else .
The Babu was troubled at my giving the conjurer two
rupees, - two or three cowries being the usual fee, - but
said it was the most wonderful performance known in
India, the secret being kept close .
It is the only trick I
have ever seen of which I can imagine no explanation .
We drove from the tent to the house of the distinguished
Maharajah, Sir Jotendra Mohun Tajore, K. C. S . I., who
could not suggest any explanation, though he had seen
through a trick with which Mme . Blavatsky tried to de-
ceive him . The Maharajah did not go into the particu-
lars of this attempt, and appeared to be disappointed that
Theosophy had turned out an imposture .
If Mme . Blavatsky had been animated by any serious or
religious purpose she would have known that it could not
be furthered in India by miracles, even were they genuine .
Educated Hindus are too familiar with such signs and
wonders to care for them, and where believed they areould have known that it could not
be furthered in India by miracles, even were they genuine .
Educated Hindus are too familiar with such signs and
wonders to care for them, and where believed they are

--- PAGE BREAK ---it could not
be furthered in India by miracles, even were they genuine .
Educated Hindus are too familiar with such signs and
wonders to care for them, and where believed they are

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SHRINE AT BUDDHA-GAYA
957
associated with the dark and evil powers rather than with
religion. Theosophy might have attained a large success
in India but for its vulgarization by counterfeiting the
superstitions that give rise to such fanaticisms as those
at Kalighat, of which educated India is ashamed .
Such
power for evil as Satan had over Job, Visvamitra also had
over Harischandra, the Indian Job . The learned yogi we
found at Kalighat, who said, " Only Christ could work
miracles," never thought of believing Christianity on that
account .
From Calcutta I journeyed to the most sacred place in
Buddhist tradition, Buddha-Gaya. I there found a nota-
ble legendary illustration of the total separation between
preternatural power and holiness in the ancient theologi-
cal mind. On a hill called Bhurmoilla (Holy Stone) there
is an ancient shrine with the following history : A certain
demon acquired by prolonged rites and austerities celes-
tial powers in addition to his infernal powers, and thereby
caused the altars to be deserted . The gods therefore united
to bury the "holy demon," and place on his head a huge
stone to keep him down. Should that stone be rolled away
the whole country would be overwhelmed by the super-
divine power of the demon and the temples all go to ruin .
There is always this danger, for the stone has to be held
in its place by an exceptional number of offerings and
sacrifices every year. There is a footprint of Vishnu on
the stone, but meanwhile Vishnu, under his form of Jug-
genauth, is bringing back the " holy demon " into India as
his latest and highest avatar. For Rajendralala Mitra has
fully identified the " holy demon " as Buddha himself, and
in the very town consecrated by his spiritual birth there
remains this legendary stone-witness to his contemporary
reception as one who 11 hath a devil 1 "ed the " holy demon " as Buddha himself, and
in the very town consecrated by his spiritual birth there
remains this legendary stone-witness to his contemporary
reception as one who 11 hath a devil 1 "

--- PAGE BREAK ---" as Buddha himself, and
in the very town consecrated by his spiritual birth there
remains this legendary stone-witness to his contemporary
reception as one who 11 hath a devil 1 "

--- PAGE BREAK ---

258
MY PILGRIMAGE
Not one Brahman priest attending this Bhurmoilla knew
the origin of its legend, and they would probably regard
it as blasphemy to call Buddha a demon . In my pilgrim-
age from that stone to the temple that has had its resurrec-
tion over the place of Buddha's " enlightenment" I was
in a sense following the pilgrimage of all India in many
preceding centuries from the demonized to the deified
Buddha . And the towering temple, risen out of its ruins,
also denotes an English pilgrimage . I can easily remem-
ber a time when it would have been impossible for any
English government to rebuild the temple of any founder
of a " heathen " religion which Christian missionaries
were sent out to destroy .
Buddha-Gaga is not in the path of ordinary travel .
There was no hotel, but my letters secured hospitable enter-
tainment in the government bungalow. The old Moslem
servant and I were the only persons in the bungalow . He
provided me a good luncheon and asked in good English
what I would have for dinner, and at what hour . I told
him I would drive to the ancient Buddhist temple (nearly
fifteen miles away) and return at night ; that I would eat
anything at all except snake and monkey, - my unwill-
ingness to feed on this poor relation being especially strong .
He took my remark gravely, and said he would avoid those
dishes. The only vehicle I could get was an ox-cart, which
took me out in two hours . The driver's English was lim-
ited to "Yes, sir," and the road being lonely the silence was
leaden. Even the birds were silent, bright and warm as
was the day. I remember no villages nor any wayfarers .
Across an almost treeless plain was visible for miles the
great temple, - to Buddhists sacred as to eastern Chris-
tians the Holy Sepulchre . One wonders that such a struc-
ture should arise far from any city, and in a region thatn was visible for miles the
great temple, - to Buddhists sacred as to eastern Chris-
tians the Holy Sepulchre . One wonders that such a struc-
ture should arise far from any city, and in a region that

--- PAGE BREAK ---les the
great temple, - to Buddhists sacred as to eastern Chris-
tians the Holy Sepulchre . One wonders that such a struc-
ture should arise far from any city, and in a region that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE TEMPLE AT GAYA
259
could never have been populous . The spot must have been
genuinely associated with Sakyamuni .
The temple itself is
surrounded by the poppy, - the plant that can surround
the brain with insubstantial visions, or sometimes bring to
insomnia and pain their Nirvana . Also there is the Mowa-
tree, with its feathery flower, which bears grape-like fruit ;
this mixed with jaggree (molasses) and steamed yields an
intoxicating liquor. Castor oil trees, too, abound.
These
nasty trees, -did the evil Mara plant them, after
his
failure to subdue Buddha, to suck away sap from the Bo-
trees? Of these not one could I discover .
(The only edifice at Gaya larger than the temple is the
prison (English) in which the malefactors of many regions
are incarcerated. I was told there were in it then (1884)
four thousand prisoners .)
My reader will remember that the young Prince Sakya,
overwhelmed by seeing the agonies of the world, repelled
by the pious fables and phantasms supplementing
the
tortures of nature, fled from his father's
palace, and
wandered away to a lonely spot to try and think out the
truth of things. Ancient tradition places here, where
the oldest Buddhist temple in the world stood, the Bo-
tree under which he sat on the grass, and attained the
" enlightenment " that gave him the title "Buddha ."
The work on the temple was not yet completed .
The
original plan of the central edifice was made out by the
studies in India architecture of Dr. Rajendralala Mitra,
and was nearly finished. But the buildings connected with
this yellow tower-like temple - two hundred feet high -
bad covered several acres, and the ground was strewn with
their fragments. These annexes can never be restored .
Sir William Hunter had given me a note to the English
engineer employed by the Asiatic Society, Mr . J. D. Beg-s, and the ground was strewn with
their fragments. These annexes can never be restored .
Sir William Hunter had given me a note to the English
engineer employed by the Asiatic Society, Mr . J. D. Beg-

--- PAGE BREAK ---s strewn with
their fragments. These annexes can never be restored .
Sir William Hunter had given me a note to the English
engineer employed by the Asiatic Society, Mr . J. D. Beg-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

260
MY PILGRIMAGE
ler, who introduced me to a learned Hindu, Gopel Chun-
der Mokerjee, and a Buddhist priest, Mahont Hammreinjal .
With these I examined the many small figures and sym-
bols with which every square foot of the locality was
covered. But before doing this I examined the footprints
of Buddha in the neighbourhood, of which there were
about twenty. They were all unnaturally large, one being
two feet long, and the toes all of one size except the big
toe, which was slightly longer than the others . There is
a Buddha between two women, to whom he holds out his
hands, in the palm of each being a round mark with a dot
in the centre .
The most holy spot was that where the Bo-tree is sup-
posed to have grown. It is about ten yards from the tem-
ple, and the deep space between was covered over . On
the site was a marble platform inscribed "Buddhawasse
2427," and beneath a statement declaring it the place
of the Master's illumination . On it were sculptured the
" grand beings " who came with offerings - all human .
Five candles were burning before this sacred spot . A
company of Burmese pilgrims present had laid fresh lotus
flowers on the marble, and gone off to bathe in the sacred
tank. Far away I saw a solitary Moslem, one of the work-
men, kneeling on his mat towards Mecca. The pilgrims
had happy faces like those of children . I remember when
first gazing on the huge bronze Buddha in South Ken-
sington Museum a lady approached with her little daugh-
ter, to whom she explained what a good man he was. The
child, after some silence, said : " How I would like to
climb up and sit in his lap !
I might get some of his
goodness!" She was the little sister of these pilgrims,
journeying far to nestle close to the beloved one
.
In conversing with Mr. Begler I asked him if he hadsit in his lap !
I might get some of his
goodness!" She was the little sister of these pilgrims,
journeying far to nestle close to the beloved one
.
In conversing with Mr. Begler I asked him if he had

--- PAGE BREAK ---ight get some of his
goodness!" She was the little sister of these pilgrims,
journeying far to nestle close to the beloved one
.
In conversing with Mr. Begler I asked him if he had

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BUDDHA'S BO-TREE
261
found any Bo-tree (Ficus religioua) in the vicinity, as it
appeared improbable (although any tree may be a Bo-tree)
that the legend should be located where there were none .
He smiled, and said he would confide to me a discovery
made that week .
He then took me out to the covered
place adjoining the marble, unlocked a door of the little
shanty, and there showed me the branching roots of what
must have been an enormous tree.
The roots branched
downward several yards from the sacred spot
; they looked
like cork, but were perfectly traceable . He desired me
not to mention the discovery at Gaya ; were it known, it
would be impossible to restrain the pilgrims from tearing
up the whole bank for bits of the root .
About the middle of the third century before our era
the great King Asoka came on a pilgrimage to this spot
because of this Bodhi Tree, or Tree of Knowledge, under
which his adopted Lord Buddha had sat. He caused a
monastery to be established here, and devoted much of
his wealth to embellish the tree and monastery. His queen
became jealous of the tree, and also troubled because her
gods were neglected, and employed a secret agent to de-
stroy the tree by "sorcery ." Asoka was so inconsolable
that his queen got the " sorceress " to resuscitate this Tree
of Knowledge . But the Banyan of Ignorance has so over-
grown Christendom in the ages that many of us
can
remember the time when Buddha began to be talked
about in Europe and America . My old friend Mrs . Man-
ning, who resided for some years in Bengal, and wrote
an admirable book on "Ancient and Mediaeval India"
(1869), says that "not until the year 1837, in which Mr .
James Prinsep deciphered the written character of King
Asoka's edicts, was anything known of the Buddhism of
ancient India." The religious and moral sentiment aboutuntil the year 1837, in which Mr .
James Prinsep deciphered the written character of King
Asoka's edicts, was anything known of the Buddhism of
ancient India." The religious and moral sentiment about

--- PAGE BREAK ---

262
MY PILGRIMAGE
Buddha began yet later, but so rapidly did it grow that
the same English generation first interested in that reli-
gion witnessed the reconstruction by their government of
this first Buddhist temple .
Vast and imposing as it is, the original edifice was
thrice as large, as is proved by the acres of fragments
that defy all architectural speculation. That this colossal
temple preceded the cathedrals of Europe by a thousand
years is explained by the fact that Christendom was para-
lyzed by the expectation of the end of the world at that
period.
The ancient Hindu temples are pretty but small,-
large and embellished shrines. The religion of the sects
that make what is called Hinduism is domestic ; the so-
called temples are not constructed for sermons or any
services to attract the people. There is no desire to con-
vert anybody, -no propaganda . To placate some invis-
ible ghost or demon who, if his or her oblations are
neglected, may do the people some mischief, these shrines
and altars with their decorated domes were erected . The
legends of these phantasms were transmitted orally, and
they too were embellished, so that the masses learned
them by means of dramas, - miracle plays . But this new
missionary movement called Buddhism was a preaching
and teaching sect . Around this edifice, towering up as
a landmark for pilgrims, were hospitals for men and ani-
mals, monasteries, a college for teachers like that near
Colombo, and no doubt a theatre for rehearsing the legends
of Buddha and his disciples . Hence the acres of fragments .
And it is the great secular power in India -England
- that rebuilds the temple which the grand secularist,
King Asoka, founded!
But this first temple of Buddha cannot be reconstructed

--- PAGE BREAK ---it is the great secular power in India -England
- that rebuilds the temple which the grand secularist,
King Asoka, founded!
But this first temple of Buddha cannot be reconstructed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. MITRA'S LETTER
263
a large proportion of the original stones - among them
many finely-carved stupas -are strewn about the field.
They symbolize the debris of Buddha and his religion
long strewn about the world - China, Japan, Burmah, also
now about Christendom - to be fitted into sects and sys-
tems of their own . I went off with a beautiful little stupa
presented to me by the engineer, on which is a seated
Buddha with every line as true as if it had been carved
a few years before instead of two thousand .
I presented
it to Dr. Paul Carns, editor of " The Open Court " (Chi-
cago), out of respect for his assiduous efforts to diffuse
knowledge of Buddhism and reverence for Buddha.
I feel as if I know something of Zoroaster and of Jesus,
and these two are to me the men who knew the true reli-
gion. The real Buddha is more dim ; but at Gaya the
thought of that young prince burdened with the sorrows
and delusions of mankind reached far down in me and
touched some subconscious source of tears and love for
the man, and I longed to clasp his knees .
I at once wrote to Rajendralala Mitra, LL . D., at Cal-
cutta, about the calcined root.
I also mentioned my con-
versation with a Buddhist who had not quite met my
question why, if existence be an evil, Buddhists should,
by bringing children into the world, deprive them of the
Nirvana of non-existence.
I give an extract from Dr .
Mitra's answer : -
When I examined the mound which marked the site of
the Bodhi Tree, it consisted of such a miscellaneous mass
of rubbish, broken pottery, kitchen midden, cinders, etc .,
that I could not make any use of it for historical purposes .
The mound was moreover at the time all but intact, and I
was not at liberty to dig into it. Mr. Begler carted away
the whole of it, and therefore had full opportunity to study
the charred root in situ, and when he publishes his reportall but intact, and I
was not at liberty to dig into it. Mr. Begler carted away
the whole of it, and therefore had full opportunity to study
the charred root in situ, and when he publishes his report

--- PAGE BREAK ---I
was not at liberty to dig into it. Mr. Begler carted away
the whole of it, and therefore had full opportunity to study
the charred root in situ, and when he publishes his report

--- PAGE BREAK ---

264
MY PILGRIMAGE
we shall be in a position to know whether the said root is
a part of the tree which was burnt down by the Hindus
or only the charred debris of kitchen fuel .
I am not surprised that the idea should have struck you
about the antecedent Nirvana of an unborn child . Start-
ing as you must from the European dogma of a frst crea-
tion, the corollary follows as a matter of course, and Scho-
penhauer tried to get over it by putting down marriage .
The Sankhyas, the Yogis, and the Buddhists of my coun-
try felt the difficulty quite as much, but they did not yield
to it. The ideas of blotting out creation by abstaining
from marriage seemed to them to be too childish to be re-
cognized as a principle of philosophy, and they rose far
above it. They hold that where everything is governed
by laws, immutable and eternal, it is absurd to think of
first creation under a personal agency, however supernat-
ural and transcendental we may choose to assume it . What
is happening every day now must have happened in the
past without a limit, and the world therefore exists from
eternity ; and inasmuch as every action, every dream,
every idea, every conception, leaves a mark or impression
or residuum on the field of the mind, the mind of the un-
born child is not and cannot be in Nirvana - it is always
tinder the influence of the impressions or residua of its
former births or terms of existences, and the will to live
and multiply is inherent in it. This theory of course in-
volves a regresses ad infinitum, but our people do not ad-
mit that to be a logical defect. It requires, moreover, the
theory of metempsychosis, and that forms the corner-stone
of all Hindu systems, except that of the Chorvakas . The
theory of residua may at first sight appear very like that
of predestination, but in reality it is not so . The one im-
plies an irresistible and never failing law of sequences,
every act must be followed by its corresponding fruit, -
an inevitable scald after dipping the fingers in boiling
water, -whereas the other assumes an extraneous supe-
rior governing power which settles beforehand in an ar-
bitrary and capricious manner what will happen hereafter,
- the fates writing down that a particular person is to
have his finger scalded at such a time, however cautioussettles beforehand in an ar-
bitrary and capricious manner what will happen hereafter,
- the fates writing down that a particular person is to
have his finger scalded at such a time, however cautious

--- PAGE BREAK ---

STUPA

--- PAGE BREAK ---cious manner what will happen hereafter,
- the fates writing down that a particular person is to
have his finger scalded at such a time, however cautious

--- PAGE BREAK ---

STUPA

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A PARABLE OF THE SOUL
965
he may be, or whatever precautions he may take to avoid
such a contingency .
It was not to the merely unborn child that I had
referred, but to the creation of an embryonic germ of
being where none exists . Schopenhauer is the only pessi-
mistic writer who ever faced that question. With him the
youth and maid falling in love are the traitors, but for
whom the great mistake of the universe-. consciousness
- would be remedied, and the misery of life end .
For the rest, Dr. Mitra's letter shows that the seating
of Buddha side by side with Juggenauth in the popular
festivals of India corresponds with a union of Brahman
and Buddhist philosophies in learned minds . It is a con-
solation to those who, amid theories ever shifting, fix their
eyes on human happiness as the fruit by which the reli-
gious Trees are to be judged, that in the religions seem-
ingly most incongruous the peoples find similar satisfaction .
A philosophic Hindu in whose mind Brahmanism,
Buddhism, and Jainism blended described to me in a
parable the condition of the individual soul : a frog
swallows a gem ; by geologic changes the frog is imbedded
in mud, the mud hardens to rock, the rock overwhelmed
by an avalanche is at the bottom of the interior of a
mountain. The pessimistic philosophy said that to reach
that gem many kalpas are needed . A kalpa means the
time that would be required for a man striking a mountain
with a silk handkerchief once an hour to wear that moun-
tain away. All the religions of the great teachers rest on
schemes for perforating the mountain and reaching the
frog with the gem inside it .
My Hindu philosopher's parable has recurred to me
at times as illustrating the impossibility of ever rescuing
mankind from irrational systems . That which neverching the
frog with the gem inside it .
My Hindu philosopher's parable has recurred to me
at times as illustrating the impossibility of ever rescuing
mankind from irrational systems . That which never

--- PAGE BREAK ---the gem inside it .
My Hindu philosopher's parable has recurred to me
at times as illustrating the impossibility of ever rescuing
mankind from irrational systems . That which never

--- PAGE BREAK ---

266
MY PILGRIMAGE
entered into them by reason cannot be got out of them by
reason. It would require a kalpa to get even the learned
free from every moral and social heritage from the dogmas
they discredit ; and for one I would be glad to see these
practical sequelce exchanged for ceremonial and meta-
physical superstitions which have become comparatively
harmless abstractions . Evolutionary forces steadily make
dogmas academic, but it is at the cost of developing out
of what George Sand called" les vertus austeres de la
mediocrite " a moral inquisition more fatal to human hap-
piness and ethical progress than the old anti-heretical
inquisition .
My first morning at Benares was passed on a barge
witnessing the immersions in the Ganges, -a much multi-
plied reproduction of the baptism of our coloured folk in
the Rappahannock, which I used to witness in boyhood .
Every time a priest immersed a person he threw a little
water with his hand towards the sun, and the baptized one
took a sip of the water . My guide was a Moslem and said,
°' Drinking cholera." He also inveighed against the cre-
mation of dead bodies going on at one point, and was
amazed to find that I approved of it .
The pleasantest scene was the "Widow's Ghat ."
These
pretty young dames, not far from the spot where they
would once have been burnt with their husbands, were
reclining on their Ghat (marble stair to the river) and
disporting themselves merrily in the water, and, being
apart from the crowd, had no need of garments . That they
were visible from our barges concerned them not .
They
poised on their marble like light bronze statues, and their
loud laughter was musical across the water.
The Ganges is the Hindu Jordan, and Benares beside
it is the Hindu Jerusalem. It is the City of Temples ;their marble like light bronze statues, and their
loud laughter was musical across the water.
The Ganges is the Hindu Jordan, and Benares beside
it is the Hindu Jerusalem. It is the City of Temples ;

--- PAGE BREAK ---ight bronze statues, and their
loud laughter was musical across the water.
The Ganges is the Hindu Jordan, and Benares beside
it is the Hindu Jerusalem. It is the City of Temples ;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MONKEY TEMPLE AT BENARES
9,67
its only trade is in gods . Its chief god is Siva, the De-
stroyer -properly so, for the Ganges is there a sewer,
and as each pilgrim must drink some of the liquid cholera,
disease is diffused far and wide . They have a famous
well - the Well of Knowledge - of whose waters hun-
dreds were drinking, though to my unbelieving nostril
the stench of it was insupportable . I journeyed through
the temples all day, along with my Moslem interpreter,
who was scandalized by my purchases of little gods and
goddesses, which be carried with reluctance .
I am not
sure whether his trouble was due to fears for his soul in
handling such " idols," or jealousy that his idolatrous
neighbours should have the triumph of western patronage
of their religion . He did not fail to inform me that there
was only one God .
I was much interested in the Monkey Temple .
Before
I was holy enough to enter it a priest came out and threw
a wreath of yellow flowers around my neck . Then a boy
brought a salver of sweet things with which I was to feed
the monkeys. The multitudinous monkeys came from roof,
cornice, holes, corners, altars,- several hundreds . Some
did not come at all, but eyed me curiously or with an air
of superiority. I read clearly in the eyes of one venerable
chimpanzee his explanation that they considered them-
selves in their place and me out of mine .
Those that came
ate the sugar-plums lazily . They were of many varieties
and colours . One large patriarchal personage took a cake,
but did not eat it ; he gazed at me steadily a long time,
and I returned the gaze. I perceived that he was a Solo-
mon of his race. In some way he conveyed to me a query
why I should consider myself and other men the higher
development of monkeys, rather than monkeys should be
regarded as evolved men. He must
have read myis race. In some way he conveyed to me a query
why I should consider myself and other men the higher
development of monkeys, rather than monkeys should be
regarded as evolved men. He must
have read my

--- PAGE BREAK ---he conveyed to me a query
why I should consider myself and other men the higher
development of monkeys, rather than monkeys should be
regarded as evolved men. He must
have read my

--- PAGE BREAK ---

268
MY PILGRIMAGE
thoughts, for at that moment I was thinking that the
religious observances I had been witnessing were those
representing the ancient religion of chimpanzees, and that
men had kept it up, but taken away from the original
founders all their temples except this one .
But this sim-
ial Solomon gave me a new idea ; namely, that these mon-
keys were once men, and found themselves so oppressed
by the priestly powers and degraded by the superstitions
that they had concluded to evolve into monkey forms .
They could thus enjoy the services and sweetmeats of the
priesthood without participating in their ceremonies .
In my pretty little hotel at Benares I began a series of
papers, afterwards published in "The Open Court" under
the title, "Chats with a Chimpanzee ."
Every morning
began with a visit to this delightful Temple of the Mon-
keys .
I made a delightful excursion from Benares to the
"Deer Park," which Rhys Davids speaks of as the deer-
forest where Buddha passed much of his time . But I
had also heard a conjecture that it was there that the
courtesan Ambapali (or Amrapali) resided, -the most
romantic figure in the Buddha legend, and under
the
name of Magdalene the most romantic figure in Chris-
tian legends. Ambapali is spoken of in the most ancient
account as "the courtesan of
Vaisali."
But where was
Vaisali ?
In Eugene's Burnouf's "Introduction a
1'his-
toire du Buddhisme indien," vol . i, p. 76
(edition of
1876), there is a footnote (2) showing that Cosma had lo-
cated Vaisali near Allahabad, and Hamilton near Patna,
-Burnouf himself inclining to the latter opinion . The
site being thus undetermined, why may not one suppose
that if Buddha loved this Deer Park, and made it the
headquarters of his fraternity, it was because the castleclining to the latter opinion . The
site being thus undetermined, why may not one suppose
that if Buddha loved this Deer Park, and made it the
headquarters of his fraternity, it was because the castle

--- PAGE BREAK ---r opinion . The
site being thus undetermined, why may not one suppose
that if Buddha loved this Deer Park, and made it the
headquarters of his fraternity, it was because the castle

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VAISALI
9.69
and park were presented to him for that purpose by the
famous courtesan? But was there any city or realm of
Vaisali (or Vesali, as Rhys Davids writes it, or Belasi,
as Hamilton writes it) ? In the old Tibetan (Sanscrit)
tale, "Prince Jivaka," it is said : " Only in Vaisali did
the people rule.
. . . There were three districts in Vaisali .
In the first district were 7000 houses with golden towers,
in the middle district were 14,000 with silver towers, and
in the last district were 21,000 houses with copper towers .
In these lived the upper, the
middle, and the lower
classes according to their position .
The people of Vaisali
had made it a law that a daughter born in the first dis-
trict could marry only in the first district, not in the see-
cond or third ;
that one born in the middle district could
marry only in the first and second ; but that one born in
the last district could marry in any one of the three ;
moreover, that no marriage was to be contracted outside
Vaisali, and that a woman recognized as a pearl among
women should not be married to any one, but should
appertain to the people for common enjoyment ."
In search after such a city is one trying to locate Bun-
yan's Vanity Fair or the Vale of Humility? Is Vaisali
built out of visal, which means " meeting of lovers," "sex-
ual intercourse "? or related to bazar (bazan ki methai, -
" bazar sweetmeats" being a proverbial phrase for the
demi-monde)? I can get so much out of Fallon's Hindu-
stani-English Dictionary, but have not the knowledge
to pursue the point, which may be dealt with in works I
have not read. The fairly historical thing is that a fa-
mous courtesan presented Buddha and his disciples with
her mansion and park, and as it is not likely that they
could have come in possession of this Deer Park except
by a donation, I moved about it reverently ; having longed Buddha and his disciples with
her mansion and park, and as it is not likely that they
could have come in possession of this Deer Park except
by a donation, I moved about it reverently ; having long

--- PAGE BREAK ---sciples with
her mansion and park, and as it is not likely that they
could have come in possession of this Deer Park except
by a donation, I moved about it reverently ; having long

--- PAGE BREAK ---

r
9,70
MY PILGRIMAGE
ago formed the habit of saying cherchez la femme, not
when a disaster is to be accounted for, but when the
source of a great inspiration and character is sought .
The narrative is (condensed) as follows : -
Hearing of Buddha as the wisest of men, Ambapali
started in her chariot with a grand escort to visit him .
Arriving after a long journey at the place, she sat near
Buddha and listened . When his discourse had ended, she
approached and desired that he would, when he came to
her region, take his meal in her house . To this Buddha
consented, and Ambapali journeyed to her home . Mean-
while the princes of her neighbourhood arrived and pre-
sented their invitations, but Buddha told them that so
long as he was in their region his sojourn would be in
the house of the courtesan Ambapali . The princes said
to each other, " The Mango Girl has got ahead of us ! "
According to existing etiquette one who held an engage-
ment to give a feast to any personage might transfer it to
another host . The princes therefore overtook the chariot
of Ambapali and offered her a large sum to give up to
them the right of entertaining Buddha. She told them
that she would not surrender her privilege ; and when
they went on to pile up the amount of gold they would
give for it, she answered that not if they should offer her
their united kingdoms would she yield .
On the appointed day Buddha came with his imme-
diate disciples into the palace of the beautiful courtesan
.
Ambapali personally waited on them, the feast being,
however, simple, -rice and fruit. Afterwards Buddha
delivered a discourse in which there is no allusion to
Ambapali's mode of life .'
1 " Great is the fruit, great the advantage of earnest contemplation when
set round with upright conduct .
Great is the fruit, great the advantage ofthere is no allusion to
Ambapali's mode of life .'
1 " Great is the fruit, great the advantage of earnest contemplation when
set round with upright conduct .
Great is the fruit, great the advantage of

--- PAGE BREAK ---to
Ambapali's mode of life .'
1 " Great is the fruit, great the advantage of earnest contemplation when
set round with upright conduct .
Great is the fruit, great the advantage of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AMBAPALI
271
Ambapali at once conveyed to Buddha and his dis-
ciples a complete title to her mansion and park .
Calling
her chariot and attendants, she drove away, and passed
out of history .
Nothing is said of Ambapali's " conversion," and there
is no intimation that she abandoned her "vocation ."
In
a country of infant marriages, always matters of negotia-
tion, it is probable that a great ethical teacher might
regard a courtesan as not morally inferior to those cere-
monially married . At Gaya I observed near the temple a
unique " Bodisata," -a finely carved stupa representation
of a young woman, seated in the posture of a Buddha .
There are a good many women mentioned in early annals
as having become fervent disciples of Buddha, but the
donor of the mansion and park remains in early oriental
folk-tales always the splendid courtesan .
Dr. Rhys Davids told me that no early Buddhist
writer seems to have considered any defence necessary,
whether of Ambapali or of Buddha's silence concerning
her life. But in the Tibetan tale, " Prince Jivaka," it is
stated that' she was made a courtesan by a law of Vaisali,
though she imposed, as was her right, rigorous and costly
conditions. She was not a common mortal, but a kind of
dryad ; she came out of a mango-tree and was therefore
called Ambapali .
In a famous play of the ancient Hindu theatre, " The
Toy-Cart," the heroine (Vasantasena) is a courtesan
. She
lives in a palace of great splendour, is noted for her
charities, and by her boundless wealth raises a Brahman
intellect when set round with earnest contemplation. The mind set round
with intelligence is freed from the great evils, - that is to say, from sen-
suality, individuality [egoism ?], from delusion and from ignorance." -
Discourse in Ambapali's grove, Buddhist Sutras, tr. by J. W . Rhys Davids,
p . 34.the great evils, - that is to say, from sen-
suality, individuality [egoism ?], from delusion and from ignorance." -
Discourse in Ambapali's grove, Buddhist Sutras, tr. by J. W . Rhys Davids,
p . 34.

--- PAGE BREAK ---that is to say, from sen-
suality, individuality [egoism ?], from delusion and from ignorance." -
Discourse in Ambapali's grove, Buddhist Sutras, tr. by J. W . Rhys Davids,
p . 34.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

272
MY PILGRIMAGE
and his family (wife and child) out of extreme poverty .
She becomes enamoured of this Brahman (Charudatta) .
Seeing his little child with an earthen toy-cart, she sub-
stitutes a cart of gold ; she sends a string of diamonds
to the Brahman's wife, with the message, " I am Charu-
datta's handmaid and your slave ." It is returned, with
the words, "You are favoured by the son of my lord ; it
is not proper for me to accept this necklace . Know that
the only ornament I value is my husband ." Eventually
the wife meeting the courtesan, says, " Welcome, happy
sister!" This is the formula for recognizing a "new
wife ;" they embrace, and a veil is thrown over Vasan-
tasena to mark that " she is no longer a public char-
acter ." But she does not appear to have been quite that,
and is first seen escaping from a_ brutal prince .
Mrs. Manning, in her account of the play, thinks the
dramatic effect would be better if it ended with this recog-
nition of Vasantasena by the wife and child. Probably the
original drama did so end, and the rise of Buddhism sug-
gested the complications which extend the play to ten
acts. The courtesan is strangled by a prince she had re-
buffed, and, left for dead, is found by a " Sramana," or
Buddhist devotee. This man had been a gambler, and
having lost everything at dice was about to be sold as a
slave, when Vasantasena, with her usual generosity, re-
deems his debt ; whereon he renounces gambling and
becomes a Buddhist devotee. He arrives just as the cour-
tesan is recovering, and exclaims, " It is the lady Vasan-
tasena, the devoted worshipper of Buddha," and takes
her to a "convent, where dwells a holy sister ."
The authorship of this play is unknown . It opens with
the manager's announcement that its author was a King
Sudraka,
1 1 who lived a hundred years, and then burntnvent, where dwells a holy sister ."
The authorship of this play is unknown . It opens with
the manager's announcement that its author was a King
Sudraka,
1 1 who lived a hundred years, and then burnt

--- PAGE BREAK ---a holy sister ."
The authorship of this play is unknown . It opens with
the manager's announcement that its author was a King
Sudraka,
1 1 who lived a hundred years, and then burnt

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LEGEND OF THE MAGDALENE
273
himself, leaving his kingdom to his son ." Its present
form was arranged about the beginning of our era, but
it is really much earlier . Siva and Buddha are equally
revered in it, and it is shown that both Brahman and
Buddhist regarded a " courtesan " in much the same way
as a " concubine ." of Hebrew antiquity. Vasantasena may
be a " courtesan " and at the same time " the devoted
worshipper of Buddha ."
My belief is that in the narrative of Jesus and the
woman arrested for adultery, the words " sin no more "
have been added ; for though he said, " Neither do I con-
demn thee," the words seem to be recalled when he does
condemn her for sin . At any rate, there is not the slightest
reproach by Jesus of the woman of Samaria, and Edmond
Rostand in " La Samaritaine " has had to invest her with
the legend of the Magdalene. The moral system in both
India and Judea was built upon the priestly system
; it
was unreal and unjust so far as the moral sentiment of
simple humanity was concerned
; and a very great thinker
might naturally disregard such sacramental arrangements
just as George Fox and the Quakers did, who preferred
having their marriages called illegitimate rather than be
married by priests .
In France the Buddhist legend was cleverly taken by
Armand Silvestre to disguise a romance between Jesus
and the Magdalene. In the tragedy of " Izeyl " Sarah
Bernhardt appeared to me to exceed all of her other im-
personations, except her f° La Samaritaine ." The heroine,
with a Magdalene make-up, seeks to fascinate Siddartha
(a Christ-like make-up)
; she is converted, becomes a
penitent devotee, and bestows her wealth on the poor .
But Siddartha (Buddha) conceives a passionate love for
her, - as she has for him, - and it is Izeyl who with a-up)
; she is converted, becomes a
penitent devotee, and bestows her wealth on the poor .
But Siddartha (Buddha) conceives a passionate love for
her, - as she has for him, - and it is Izeyl who with a

--- PAGE BREAK ---ted, becomes a
penitent devotee, and bestows her wealth on the poor .
But Siddartha (Buddha) conceives a passionate love for
her, - as she has for him, - and it is Izeyl who with a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

274
MY PILGRIMAGE
breaking heart and at cost of her life keeps him true to
his great
G° cause," which he is willing to desert for her sake .
The most noted event in the career of Ambapali as a
courtesan was that she was for a time the mistress of
Bimbisara, the renowned king of Magadha . The Talmud
says that Miriam of Magdala derived this title from an
ancient city which was destroyed because of its licentious-
ness. The king of Magadha is described in the Kah-Gyur
as " always longing after strange women," and among
his intrigues one resembles that of David with Bathsheba
(though the husband is not slain), the result being the
birth of the great Scientific (Solomonic ?) Javaka, who
healed Buddha . The king of Magadha's son by Amba-
pali was Prince Abhaye (the Fearless) . Is this " Ma-
gadha " the origin of the title which found its way to the
lady in Jerusalem? It is always to be borne in mind that
there is nothing in the New Testament suggesting that
she bad ever been immoral and there was no legend of
that kind during the first two centuries of our era.
Although there is no indication that Ambapali became
a Buddhist devotee, the king of Magadha, Bimbisara,
with whom she was associated, was converted, and he
established great Buddhist festivals in his kingdom, of
which Gaya was a part. At these festivals -as shown in
the Kah-Gyur - Buddhist " Mysteries " were performed,
and it can hardly be doubted that the famous mistress of
the king (" Amrapfili," in Magadha), who made the mag-
nificent donation to Buddha, was a figure in those dramas .
When these dramas, acted everywhere, were succeeded
by Christian
" Mysteries," the role of the wealthy cour-
tesan who endowed Buddha might easily pass to the
wealthy lady of Jerusalem who
" administered to him
[Jesus, in some versions
' to them'] of her property."" Mysteries," the role of the wealthy cour-
tesan who endowed Buddha might easily pass to the
wealthy lady of Jerusalem who
" administered to him
[Jesus, in some versions
' to them'] of her property."

--- PAGE BREAK ---le of the wealthy cour-
tesan who endowed Buddha might easily pass to the
wealthy lady of Jerusalem who
" administered to him
[Jesus, in some versions
' to them'] of her property."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

STORY OF BRAHMADATTA
275
In the ancient " Mystery " of " Mary Magdalene " she
has inherited the " Castle of Maudleyn ." Her beauty and
splendour are such that Satan covets them for his own
realm and summons a council to devise her seduction .
This corresponds to the assembly of Vaiiili which de-
manded the presence of Amrapali . " When the perfection
of her youth and beauty were seen," they cried,
" This is
a pearl of a woman, and therefore she belongs to the
enjoyments of the people." In the Christian " Mystery "
Satan employs the seven Capital Sins to besiege Mary
Magdalene, and this way our English translators were
tempted to the falsehood of importing the word " devils "
into Luke viii, 2 .
There is another interesting story connected with Be-
nares which Mr. R. C. Childers gave me, saying that it
was traceable to the sixth century before our era .
There was once a king of Benares named Brahmadatta,
whose righteous administration of justice put an end to
litigation in his kingdom, and left him time to turn his
attention to his own faults, with a view to their correc-
tion.
He accordingly questioned first his own retinue,
then the public officials, then the citizens of Benares,
then the suburban inhabitants, and lastly, mounting his
chariot, he drove through the length and breadth of the
land, begging all whom he met to tell him his faults . But
all with one accord told him only of his virtues, and he
was returning baffled from his expedition, when in a nar-
row defile his chariot met that of Mallika, King of Kosala,
who was bound on a precisely similar mission . It at once
became evident that one of the chariots must make way
for the other, and the charioteers of the rival monarchs
commenced a dispute for the precedence, which seemed
hopeless when it was ascertained that neither could claim
any advantage over the other in age, wealth, fame, or
military power. At length, however, it was decided that
the more virtuous should have the precedence
; and thescertained that neither could claim
any advantage over the other in age, wealth, fame, or
military power. At length, however, it was decided that
the more virtuous should have the precedence
; and the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

276
MY PILGRIMAGE
charioteer of King Mallika, challenged to describe the
virtues of his royal master, replies as follows
: "King
Mallika overthrows the strong by strength, the mild by
mildness ; good he overcomes with good, and evil with
evil." The other charioteer said, " If these are his virtues,
what are his faults?" Then he said of his own master,
" With meekness he conquers anger, he overcomes evil
with good, he disarms avarice with liberality, and the liar
with truth." Hearing this, Mallika and his charioteer
alight, and their chariot is drawn aside .

--- PAGE BREAK ---nger, he overcomes evil
with good, he disarms avarice with liberality, and the liar
with truth." Hearing this, Mallika and his charioteer
alight, and their chariot is drawn aside .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER XIII
Delhi palaces - Pillar of Asoka-The Minar Pillar - Purana Keels -
The Taj at Agra-Akbar-The Parliament of Religions - Oriental
ethics -The Jehanara mosque.
A
T last I am in Delhi,- cemetery of splendours. Amid
its silent palaces the fables of Saadi are written in
stone, and their morals pointed in minarets .
The legend-
ary Hall of Afrasiab, where the spider weaves his web,
the pleasure-dome of Mahmoud, of which not one stone
was left upon another, rise as thin air over fields strewn
with fine fragments. On the marble vacancy where the
Peacock throne once stood -solid gold, inlaid with gems
- is invisibly set the inscription of Ferideen's portico,
" The world, 0 my brother, continues not to any one
; place
your affections on the Creator of the universe, and that
,will suffice . Make no reliance, neither rest upon the king-
dom of this world, seeing how many like thyself it hath
nourished and killed . When the soul is about to depart,
what is difference between expiring on a throne or on the
bare ground?"
My guide supposed that my object in coming to Delhi
was to see the locality of the siege of 1857 and its memo-
rial monument, " 110 feet high, built at a cost of 20,000
rupees." It was with difficulty that I made him understand
my slight interest in that little affair, and my deep feeling
about the neighbouring Pillar of Asoka, which still pub-
lishes its edicts of peace and good will to men . This guide
(Hindu) told me with some feeling that the British
guns had broken this Pillar of Asoka into five fragments.

--- PAGE BREAK ---still pub-
lishes its edicts of peace and good will to men . This guide
(Hindu) told me with some feeling that the British
guns had broken this Pillar of Asoka into five fragments.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

278
MY PItG.RIMAGE
The pieces have been put together again as neatly as
possible, and the pillar stands beside the modern monu-
ment in a lowly way . Time has, however, better spared
the " Golden Pillar ." Five centuries ago legend declared
it the staff of Krishna, which could not be removed from
Kumaon till the Last Day. Ferozshah, to end this super-
stition, removed it to the precincts of his palace,- a palace
now visible only as the pedestal of Asoka's Pillar, which
still shines golden in the sunlight, fulfilling its final words,
"Let this religious edict be engraved on stone pillars and
stone tablets, that it may endure forever ."
In a mosque its keeper showed me the footprint of
Mabomed Shah neatly carved in marble . The passion
for holy footprints has gone round the world ;
I have
seen scores -footprints of Vishnu, Siva, Buddha, Christ,
St. Thomas, John Wesley ;
and the general impression I
have derived from them all is that devotees of the great
are apt to take their saints au pied, - at their lowest.
One morning I stumbled on a curious old place, where
stood "the bleeding tree," beside which a Hindu was keep-
ing watch . In this dead trunk's hollow was a picture of
a prince with silver head, - the Prince Dara beheaded by
his brother Aurungzeb, - and beside it a perpetual lamp .
The tree is a " Neem," a sacred tree among the Hindus .
The Mohammedans repudiate ancient trees or relics, but
the Hindu atmosphere is too strong for them .
There are also moral relics of Moslem supremacy . At
the downfall of their reign the harems of these palaces
were suddenly emptied. The helpless beauties of famous
courts were thrown upon the streets to make a communal
harem. They whose predecessors were the favourites of'
shahs and viziers flaunted their seductive beauty along
the balconies, and I saw in the streets a parade, with music,streets to make a communal
harem. They whose predecessors were the favourites of'
shahs and viziers flaunted their seductive beauty along
the balconies, and I saw in the streets a parade, with music,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DELHI
9.79
of young women said to be of this class.
Occasionally
they may be seen dancing near the gate of the great
mosque, especially on Fridays, when thousands of Moslems
repair thither for prayer .
I saw a decorated little boy mounted on an orna-
mental pony, attended by priests and a band of music, on
his way to the marriage altar, followed by a closed palan-
quin, whose smallness disclosed how young must be the
bride of that little lord.
I bad a hot-air bath in Delhi ; the room was low-vaulted,
with mosaic floor, and like those portrayed in ancient, Per-
sian pictures. But I could not get the fuller's earth which
inspired Saadi's fable . In a bath at Damascus they gave
him fuller's earth (long wrapt in rose-leaves), and
he
asked it whether it was of heaven or earth, so sweet was
its odour. It replied, " I am but humble clay, but some-
time I kept company with the rose ." Perfumes are still
dear to the Moslem, Mohammed's love of them having
given freedom to this kind of luxury .
Old Delhi is eleven miles distant from the main city.
In the famous pillar Minar (238 feet and 1 inch) are
inscriptions from the Koran and the ninety names of
Allah, also the laudations of Mazoodeen Abdul, Muzafur
Mahomed Bin Sam. On the neighbouring iron pillar,
one Rajah Dhava is compared to the sun and moon . Tra-
dition' has, however, been uncomplimentary enough
to
associate with the iron pillar the fame of Rajah Pithora,
the last of the Hindu sovereigns .
The legend is that
Rajah Pithora, having consulted the Brahmans as to the
continuance of his empire, was informed that if he sank
an iron shaft into the ground he might pierce the head of
the snake-god Lishay, who supports the world, and then
his kingdom would last forever .
Some time after sinking, was informed that if he sank
an iron shaft into the ground he might pierce the head of
the snake-god Lishay, who supports the world, and then
his kingdom would last forever .
Some time after sinking

--- PAGE BREAK ---if he sank
an iron shaft into the ground he might pierce the head of
the snake-god Lishay, who supports the world, and then
his kingdom would last forever .
Some time after sinking

--- PAGE BREAK ---

280
MY PILGRIMAGE
the shaft the Rajah was desirous of discovering whether
the snake had been touched, and, contrary to the warning
of the Brahmans, had the pillar taken up . The end of it
was covered with blood, and the Rajah was informed that
his dynasty would soon cease. Although the pillar was
again set up, the charm had been broken ; Shahaboodeen
took Pithora's life and kingdom, and thenceforth no
Hindu king has reigned in Delhi .
From the top of the Minar is seen an interminable
cemetery of sultans, shahs, and sublime courtiers . A
picture of splendid desolation! On one tomb sat a kite,
and on another two owls, whose ancestors some centuries
ago enabled a certain poet to bring a shah to a sense of
his wickedness. As they drove past a ruin the shah and
his court poet passed two owls seated on the ruin, and the
shah remarked that they seemed to be conversing . The
poet said, " Yes, and I can understand what they say."
"What do they say?" asked the shah . "They are utter-
ing the praises of your Majesty, and saying that so long
as your reign continues, they will never want for ruined
villages in which to house themselves ." The shah took
these words to heart and mended his ways, as they always
do in fables .
Near old Delhi I visited the tomb of the poet Khrus-
roo, at the side of which stands the grander mausoleum of
his patron Nizam-ooden, - supposed founder of the order
of devout murderers called Thugs . The inhabitants of
one village, generally avoided by tourists, struck me as
an uncanny set, and I was not sorry to leave their neigh-
bourhood. In this vicinity I had the good fortune to find
in the magistracy a young gentleman I had met in Cam-
bridge University (Mr . Rennie) . His office was in the
rehabilitated tomb of some old shah. He drove abouticinity I had the good fortune to find
in the magistracy a young gentleman I had met in Cam-
bridge University (Mr . Rennie) . His office was in the
rehabilitated tomb of some old shah. He drove about

--- PAGE BREAK ---od fortune to find
in the magistracy a young gentleman I had met in Cam-
bridge University (Mr . Rennie) . His office was in the
rehabilitated tomb of some old shah. He drove about

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE BROKEN PITCHER
281
with me during the morning, and I learned from him
that petty crime among the natives is encouraged by the
superiority of the prisons to their dwellings .
The hollow tanks of the neighbourhood are now sunken
and stagnant pools
; where pilgrims once washed their
sins away boys now earn pice by making frightful leaps
from the lofty walls . Having seen one of these leaps, I
refused the request of others to witness their perform-
ances, saying to my guide, " I do not wish to see anything
that endangers life." He replied, " But, sir, this is their
life."
In driving on I saw a picturesque old Hindu with a
small pitcher of yellow clay in his hand near an old well .
Being thirsty after a long drive, I made my driver stop
there and ask for a draught of water . The old Hindu
made me obeisance, and from the bucket he bad just
drawn up filled the little pitcher and offered it to me .
When I had quenched my thirst and handed back the
pitcher, he tossed it on the ground a little way and again
made obeisance. My guide told me that it was out of
respect, and I have many a time seen in Europe a wine-
glass broken after the toast to some great man or
his
memory. But something in the old man's proceeding
made me doubt this interpretation. I bade my guide tell
him that I was sorry the pretty little vessel was broken,
and that I would gladly have purchased it to take home
with me. The old Hindu, who did not speak English,
said to my guide that it was not possible on account of
their religion that he or any of his family should drink
out of a vessel that had been used by a stranger .
By
" religion" he really meant his caste . He was very kindly
and polite, and requesting me to wait a moment, went to
his house near by and brought me three little pieces ofbeen used by a stranger .
By
" religion" he really meant his caste . He was very kindly
and polite, and requesting me to wait a moment, went to
his house near by and brought me three little pieces of

--- PAGE BREAK ---nger .
By
" religion" he really meant his caste . He was very kindly
and polite, and requesting me to wait a moment, went to
his house near by and brought me three little pieces of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

282
MY PILGRIMAGE
different shaped vessels of baked clay, which he begged
me to* accept. I asked my driver how much they were
worth and was told that they were very cheap. I offered
the old man a rupee for each, but he absolutely refused
to receive payment. He said to my guide that it was a
happiness to him to present anything that he could to
a passing traveller.
Aladdin's tower !
I found myself childish enough to
enjoy most the association of Aladdin with the finest
piece of architecture here . The association of Altomisb,
who from a slave became emperor, with the hero of the
Wonderful Lamp was arbitrary of course ; but, as Talley-
rand said, facts are manageable .
" The unfinished window
of Aladdin " is fairly represented
; one of the entrances
of the superb structure had lost its ornamental edge .
A genuine poetic charm invested the ancient fortified
village Purana Keela. In my youth Emerson loaned me
the Bhagavat Gita (Wilkins's translation), and my inter-
est in oriental thought began with the dialogue between
Arjuna and Krishna. Later I found the whole story of
the Mahabharata finely told by my friend Mrs. Manning
in her " Ancient and Mediaeval India." Even forty years
ago one had to search out what is now accessible to all .
It was thrilling to find myself at the pillared gateway of
the fortified city, traditionally supposed to be the capital
of the Pandavas during their long struggle with the Ku-
ravas. Here dwelt Draupadi and her five husbands -the
Pandu princes. From these gates went forth Arjuna him-
self, driven by the charioteer who presently revealed
himself as the god Krishna . It was on yonder field that
the hero wept and declared that he could not fight against
his kindred, when the charioteer, throwing off his dis-
guise, uttered to him those wonderful discourses which. It was on yonder field that
the hero wept and declared that he could not fight against
his kindred, when the charioteer, throwing off his dis-
guise, uttered to him those wonderful discourses which

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CASTLE OF THE PANDAVAS

--- PAGE BREAK ---e could not fight against
his kindred, when the charioteer, throwing off his dis-
guise, uttered to him those wonderful discourses which

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CASTLE OF THE PANDAVAS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LEGEND OF YUDHISHTHIRA
283
have become
Holy Scriptures to the mystical oriental
minds turning from Hinduism. It was around these still
mighty walls that the gods descended to take part in the
struggle ; and when the kingdom of the Pandavas was
established, here was the scene of the Golden Age : "every
subject of the Rajah Yudhishthira was pious ; there were
no liars, no thieves, no swindlers ; there were no droughts,
no floods, no locusts, no conflagrations, no foreign in-
vaders, and no parrots to eat up the grain ."
It was from this place that, when his kingdom was lost
by dice, Yudbishthira with his wife Draupadi and family
went to wander in the jungle for twelve years .
One by
one the king's companions perished by the way, and
Draupadi herself.
He was alone at last, with only his
faithful dog to keep him company . He comes to the gate
of Indra. The King of Gods meets him and tells him that
in heaven he shall find again his brothers and his wife.
With joy Yudhisbthira is about to enter, when Indra drives
away his dog. Yudhishthira cannot part from this faith-
ful companion, who never deserted him, and brought
game from the forest, though starving itself
.
Indra de-
clares, " My heaven hath no place for dogs," but Yudhish-
thira refuses to enter heaven unless his dog may enter
also. His fidelity to the faithful animal thus having been
proved, the dog himself throws off his disguise and ap-
pears as Yama, King of Death. All the pains and trials
of the long wandering are proved to be illusions, and the
trials of the Pandavas end in joy, like those that close
the kindred drama of Job .
Inside the vast fortress associated with the poetic le-
gends (I have mentioned but one) is a village of the poor-
est people I saw anywhere in the East . Their houses are like
ant-hills, with little curving paths running between them,with the poetic le-
gends (I have mentioned but one) is a village of the poor-
est people I saw anywhere in the East . Their houses are like
ant-hills, with little curving paths running between them,

--- PAGE BREAK ---gends (I have mentioned but one) is a village of the poor-
est people I saw anywhere in the East . Their houses are like
ant-hills, with little curving paths running between them,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

284
MY PILGRIMAGE
and my guide says, "Nobody knows how they manage to
live." What a contrast with the legendary splendours
connected with that castle and fortress
!
It may have
been partly my imagination that gave the men and wo-
men their aristocratic air . Several women appeared whose
features were not unworthy of Draupadi herself . A very
handsome little boy of ten summers - no winters seemed
to have touched him - volunteered to do the honours of
the little city of huts . In front of each there was a group
of busy women ; I did not encounter a beggar there .
The only edifice of importance within the fortress was an
ancient mosque. Workmen were engaged in repairing it
-"by order of the government," I was told . I could not
help thinking that the old mosque might well enough wait
until the living temples around it were better housed .
Such, no doubt, would have been the decree of the Bud-
dhist Asoka, whose pillar, with its humane edicts, shines
against the blue sky as I leave the gates of this castle, so
haunted with poetry and poverty .
Let that day be marked round with a many-coloured
pencil of light when I first saw the Taj !
For that beauti-
ful dream in marble stands in my memory tinted with the
rose of dawn beneath which I first beheld it, and flushed
with the soft evening sky when I parted from it ; and be-
tween the dawn and the moonrise, as I returned to it again
and again, I beheld not one Taj but many . As the statue
of Memnon was said to emit music when the sun touched
it, one may say without fable that the changing sky of the
day brings forth varied architectural harmonies from the
Taj. Now it is of the faintest snow-blue tint, now purest
white, and again pink-faint in its response to dawn or
sunset.
When wandering about the great mosque-like tombschitectural harmonies from the
Taj. Now it is of the faintest snow-blue tint, now purest
white, and again pink-faint in its response to dawn or
sunset.
When wandering about the great mosque-like tombs

--- PAGE BREAK ---s from the
Taj. Now it is of the faintest snow-blue tint, now purest
white, and again pink-faint in its response to dawn or
sunset.
When wandering about the great mosque-like tombs

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE TAJ AT AGRA
285
elsewhere and seeing the life of the people beside them,
it seemed painful that the dead should sleep in palaces
while so many of the living burrowed in mud huts .
This
feeling did not mar the happiness with which I beheld the
Taj, for I felt that Love built it in its beauty - that it
had here created a mystical rose in whose light and joy
all the living find a fairer life. It is literally, too, as well
as spiritually, the treasury of the people of Agra . A young
American lady I saw there seemed to require more shades
for these lines of light . "Is it certain," she said, "en-
tirely certain, that Shah Jehan built it for love of his
wife? Was he not thinking of himself at all? Ah, I'm
sure be married somebody else before his queen's monu-
ment was finished ." I do not know that she remembered
the fact that the queen begged Shah Jehan not to marry
again and "get children to contend with hers for his
favour and dominions," but it was some reassurance to
remember now that it is all one to those concerned, and
that popular sentiment has smothered in oblivion any
subsequent wife or children, if the shah had such .
It would require a volume to explore the flora of the
Taj alone
; in its ornamentation the rarest flowers and
leaves are traceable, and the way in which they twine and
frame the sentences of the Koran reminds one of the plea-
sant fact that the materials of ancient literature were the
leaves, bark, or tablets of trees, still preserved in the words
paper, library, book .
Beside the Taj flows the Jumna, on whose banks Krishna
dwelt among the milkmaids, charmed the lowly with his
lute, and danced with the rustic beauties in those marvel-
lous dances where each believed that he was her partner .
It is a peaceful, languid river, with alternating mead-
ows and sandy beaches, where in the warm morning the
1ustic beauties in those marvel-
lous dances where each believed that he was her partner .
It is a peaceful, languid river, with alternating mead-
ows and sandy beaches, where in the warm morning the
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---ose marvel-
lous dances where each believed that he was her partner .
It is a peaceful, languid river, with alternating mead-
ows and sandy beaches, where in the warm morning the
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

t
9186
MY PILGRIMAGE
mild-eyed lotus-eaters were visible seated on the yellow
sand or bathing in the sacred stream . The whole land-
scape was a picture of pastoral beauty . There are beauti-
ful riverside gardens, well kept, one being the Asam
Bogh, where Babar, founder of the Mogul dynasty, had
his fountain of wine and his revels.
But all emperors are dwarfed in presence of the shade
of Akbar. His tomb is five miles from Agra, and the road
is very pleasant, past interesting old places of which plea-
sant stories are told and some unpleasant ones forgotten .
An old church recalls the catholicity of Akbar and the
wit of his son who proposed that the Jesuit Father with
his Gospel under his arm, and the Mollah with the Koran
under his, should try the virtue of their respective beliefs
by casting themselves together into a fiery pit, promising
to embrace the religion of the one that came out safe .
This appears, however, to have been somewhat of a decline
from the large way of Akbar. His mausoleum is second
only to the Taj in beauty . But I could not help feeling
that the Albert Memorial in Hyde Park, with all its
faults, represents an advance in the idea of a great man's
memorial. How far more precious to us now than this
great silent palace rising over the small marble tomb
would be a pedestal carved with the forms and faces of
the men of all religions who gathered around Akbar in
his wonderful assemblies
!
How valuable would be a
statue there of Akbar himself, and statues of his scholarly
friends, - Abulfazl, Bir Bar, and Faizi the poet, who de-
scribed himself as "a freethinker who belongs to a thou-
sand sects ! "
Akbar's palace in Agra is beautiful, and has the charm
of holding the marble slab on which his throne rested
.
It might be called Akbar's Vedi, or pulpit-"the pulpitbelongs to a thou-
sand sects ! "
Akbar's palace in Agra is beautiful, and has the charm
of holding the marble slab on which his throne rested
.
It might be called Akbar's Vedi, or pulpit-"the pulpit

--- PAGE BREAK ---sand sects ! "
Akbar's palace in Agra is beautiful, and has the charm
of holding the marble slab on which his throne rested
.
It might be called Akbar's Vedi, or pulpit-"the pulpit

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AKBAR
287
of light " of which his friend Faizi wrote . Here he sat
to judge his people. There is a red stain on it, said to be
of blood, as if the marble still remembered the heart's
blood of a true man . Before this marble dais came the
learned men from all parts of the world, and from the
religious camps into which creeds bad divided it. Each
brought his Sacred Books, - studied by Akbar seven gen-
erations before known to the scholars of Europe, -and
each bad his gospel and his argument heard and heeded .
None was permitted to affront another ; the throne of
one emperor at least should be the throne of impartial
justice and calm reason ! Three hundred years before
Akbar the same large hospitality to all religious ideas
and systems was known in China before an emperor
whose hard Moslem faith had been softened by Buddhism
- even in that stately " pleasure-dome " of Kubla Khan,
which some suppose the dream of Coleridge .
But it reappeared in the Jumna, beside which rose this
pleasure-dome and palace of truth, where Akbar brought
India its day of grace, so soon sinned away ! There are
some indications in the ancient accusations brought against
Solomon for idolatry that the wise king was the prototype
of these oriental liberals . They are all fairly followed by
the catholicity of the English regime, which maintains
perfect equality of all religions, and protects every temple
and every so-called " idol " from affront .
The chief obstacle to a full appreciation of the poetic
ideals embodied in oriental mythology by English and
American people lies in our ethical limitations . It re-
quires close study of the early social conditions of India
to see that the morality by which the legends and im-
ages of India are judged is the result of local conditions,
and its standard provincial . All through this region they social conditions of India
to see that the morality by which the legends and im-
ages of India are judged is the result of local conditions,
and its standard provincial . All through this region the

--- PAGE BREAK ---of India
to see that the morality by which the legends and im-
ages of India are judged is the result of local conditions,
and its standard provincial . All through this region the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9188
MY PILGRIMAGE
legends of Krishna and his dances with the milkmaids,
multiplying himself miraculously, are particularly strong .
To the average Englishman they suggest immoral ideas,
and it is rare to find a mind so elevated as Renan, who
intended to compose a sacred ballet on Krishna . The
scientific mind guards itself from confusing even such
institutions as polygamy and polyandry with immorality.
Immorality depends on the actual wrongs caused, not on
the supposed spiritual injuries, by any conduct . In a
conference of Protestant missionaries at Calcutta it was
made clear that it would be unjust and cruel, therefore
immoral, for their Hindu converts to send all their wives
adrift except one . This conference, consisting of Epis-
copalians, Presbyterians, Methodists, Baptists, Independ-
ents, came unanimously to this conclusion : -
If a convert, before becoming a Christian, has married
more wives than one, in accordance with the practice of
the Jewish and primitive Christian churches, he shall be
permitted to keep them all, but such a person is not eli-
gible to any office in the church .
Although General Sleeman, in his delightful
" Ram-
bles," and others, have said much of the virtues of the
Emperor Akbar's wife, there would appear to be some
possibilities that the father of her first son after his mar-
riage was the famous hermit to whom the childless pair
came for miraculous assistance. The historians are care-
ful to say that this hermit, Sheik Saleen, was ninety-six
years old. The statement bears a suspicious resemblance
to the extreme age ascribed to Abraham, and in medi-
aeval art to the husband of Mary . This eldest son of
Akbar and the Hindu princess who had become his wife,
born 1569, was at any rate named Saleen after the her-
mit. He ascended the throne under the name of Jehangir,usband of Mary . This eldest son of
Akbar and the Hindu princess who had become his wife,
born 1569, was at any rate named Saleen after the her-
mit. He ascended the throne under the name of Jehangir,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A DROLL ADVENTURE
289
and, if indeed he were the hermit's son, did more justice
to his amatory propensities than to the good name of
Akbar. In obtaining his wife, he went beyond the exam-
ple of David in the Uriah affair, which it closely resem-
bles in all except the repentance.
That the great-hearted Akbar's liberality and toler-
ance should have proved the very means of leading on
the strife, cruelties, murders, which culminated in
the
enthronement of Aurungzeb, the murderous
11 Man of
Prayers," is enough to make one a pessimist .
While
moving among the memorials of these events I came upon
a fair symbol of that saintly assassin -a huge crocodile
just caught in the Jumna.
Its face and the hungry cru-
elty of its roaming eye were a study.
It was dragon-like,
and the crowd of half-naked, dusky people around this
reptile, well secured with ropes, opened a sort of vista
into the saurian age. The St. George who had conquered
the monster was making money by it, as it is said the
saint did.
And now I had a droll adventure in this crowd . I had
managed, or thought I had, to convey to my guide my
desire to see the poorest parts of Agra -dwellings of
the poor. It puzzled him exceedingly . After profound
meditation on what I had said, by the assistance of a
chance Babu, he directed the driver to stop in the mid-
dle of the street . He then went forth right and left and
brought back a swarm of ragged and mutilated beggars,
and pointing to them, said, -There
! there!" or some-
thing that sounded like those words .
He evidently had
concluded that my desire was to form a sort of collection
of Agra paupers and deformities . In one minute my car-
riage was completely blocked by a crowd of these wretched
people holding out their hands and their babies, withwas to form a sort of collection
of Agra paupers and deformities . In one minute my car-
riage was completely blocked by a crowd of these wretched
people holding out their hands and their babies, with

--- PAGE BREAK ---f collection
of Agra paupers and deformities . In one minute my car-
riage was completely blocked by a crowd of these wretched
people holding out their hands and their babies, with

--- PAGE BREAK ---

too
MY PILGRIMAGE
cries of "Boxes" (Baksheesb). Fortunately, I was pro-
vided with pice enough to divert the attention of the
crowd to another part of the street by throwing them
there. In this way we escaped from the siege, and al-
though I was followed by certain beggars whose muti-s
lations made them swift, found refuge in the Jumna
Mosque .
The Jumna Mosque, built in honour of the Princess
Jehanara, - whb with her brother Dara (murdered by his
brother Aurungzeb) had maintained the great liberalism
of their grandfather (Akbar), - has fitly become asso-
ciated with schools in which various languages and lit-
eratures are taught . On the right of the great court there
are large spaces something like open cloisters . Next to
the pleasure of seeing the Taj, if not even greater, was
that I experienced in seeing these children-Hindu,
Moslem, and Christian - studying Persian, Arabic, Urdu,
and these from their great literatures . I lingered near,
and listened to their musical voices reading to their vener-
able teachers Suras of the Koran, sentences from Saadi's
" Gulistan " and "Bustan," tales from Nizami, verses from
Hafiz. Several of the teachers with whom I conversed
were pleased with my interest in the Persian and Ara-
bian poets, and showed me the books used . At my
request some children were selected who sang quatrains
of Omar Khayyam . I purchased some of these works, and
in the neighbourhood bought queer picture-books of Hindu
mythology put forth by some freethinking caricaturist .
On the whole, this mosque of the lowly and liberal Jeha-
nara, with its schools, -possibly following similar ones
founded by herself,- where children are taught the real
beauties of oriental literature, - seems to me of equal
beauty in one sense with the Taj . Here was the last lampossibly following similar ones
founded by herself,- where children are taught the real
beauties of oriental literature, - seems to me of equal
beauty in one sense with the Taj . Here was the last lamp

--- PAGE BREAK ---

KRISHNA'S DANCE
291
burning from the sacred tomb of Akbar
!
Its light
reflected a beautiful light from the Taj, the tomb of her
mother. To this again I repaired to linger motionless
before it until the night train should tear me away .
Through all the park doves were cooing, the flowers
breathing their passionate perfume, while here and there
man and maid wandered in the deep foliage
; and I
caught the theme of that old, old music which has built
,
the walls of many cities before and since Thebes, but
never built in stone a more beautiful monument than the /
i
Taj .
The American poet Park Benjamin wrote a charming
" Song of the Stromkerl," based on the following quota-
tion from Washington Irving : -
11 The Swedes delight to tell of the Stromkerl, or boy
of the stream, who haunts the glassy brooks and steals
gently through green meadows, and sits on the silver
waves at moonlight, playing his harp to the elves who
dance on the flowery margin ." It would be a fair subject
for any investigator of folk-lore to search out how far
has extended in Europe this romance of the youthful
Krishna and his dance, while his career as a renowned
and crafty warrior has no distinct representations in
the west. The legend of Krishna's dance with the cow-
maidens, each believing she bad him for a partner, bears
a notable resemblance to a scene in George Sand's mar-
vellous novel, " Les Maitres Sonneurs." The fascinating
young genius of the mysterious Band suddenly appears at
a village fete, with his exquisite cornet sets them all to
dancing, manages to dance with all the prettiest, and van-
ishes in the forest at daybreak . George Sand's picture is
too realistic for one to be certain of anything more than
that if any such rustic performance suggested the Krishnal the prettiest, and van-
ishes in the forest at daybreak . George Sand's picture is
too realistic for one to be certain of anything more than
that if any such rustic performance suggested the Krishna

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Q9Q
MY PILGRIMAGE
dance-legend it must have been in an India long ex-
tinct .
There is a popular Puranic legend which has not yet,
I believe, received attention from the students of com-
parative mythology. In a discourse in London (which
was printed) relating to the legend of St . Agnes I traced
her steps through the Miracle Plays to Lady Godiva of
Coventry, but I had not then connected her with the Hindu
princess Draupadi . St. Agnes, it will be remembered,
was a Christian convert who refused the suit of a Roman
nobleman, saying that she was betrothed to a heavenly
lover. The youth's father, Prefect of Rome, unable to
bend her resolution, condemned her to public exposure
and dishonour. But when she was divested of clothing,
the Prefect's son, as he approached her, was struck
blind, and when she was led forth her hair had miracu-
lously grown so as to envelop her as a garment . After-
wards, however, she pitied him who had been struck blind,
and her prayer restored his sight .
The beautiful Draupadi, wife of the five Pandavas
princes, was taken captive by King Duryodhan, who was
about to marry her. The loyal wife scornfully refused,
and the fierce king ordered that she should be cut to
pieces, and first, he said, ' Strip her so that all may see
her ! "
His officer seized her by the hair and began to
strip her. She prayed to Krishna, who appeared before
her. When Dushasan stripped her he found another
dress ; he stripped her of that and found yet another
;
and thus be went on until he found a dress which adhered
to the skin and could not be removed. These miracles
converted her oppressors, and all went well .
In a conversation I once had with Anthony Froude
concerning the resemblances between certain narratives

--- PAGE BREAK ---not be removed. These miracles
converted her oppressors, and all went well .
In a conversation I once had with Anthony Froude
concerning the resemblances between certain narratives

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HEBREW AND INDIAN MYTHS
293
in the oriental books and those of the Bible, he said
that a number of such coincidences used to be talked
of among the students at Oxford when he was there,
and that they were explained by a theory that there had
been a divine preparation of the ancient pagan race,
for the reception of the Christian revelation . Since that
time, however, the study of Christian mythology has at-
tained the proportions of a science .
The only satisfactory method of discriminating between
a natural coincidence of one myth with another and those
that could not have had independent origin is, as I think,
the simple literary method . It does not follow because
some of the things said in the Bible to have been imported
by Solomon have Sanscrit names that Solomon visited
India. The American turkey never came from Turkey, and
our American Indians never came from India . But the
"Judgment of Solomon," for instance, is traceable to as
Indian source . In the oriental legend the wise judge is a
maiden. For Visakha, son of the prime minister of Kosala,
a bride is sought in various regions by a Brahman . Among
the many maidens conversed with one gave evidence of ex-
traordinary wisdom . She was brought to Kosala with great
pomp, but before being asked for her hand she was enter-
tained in the palace in order that her wisdom might be
tested. Among the various tests she was asked to decide
between two women claiming to be mother of the same
child. She said : -
Speak to the two women thus : " As we do not know
to which of you the boy belongs, let her who is the strong-
est take the boy." When each of them has taken hold
of one of the boy's hands, and he begins to cry out on
account of the pain, the real mother will let go, being full
of compassion for him, and knowing that if her child re-
mains alive she will be able to see it again
; but the other,begins to cry out on
account of the pain, the real mother will let go, being full
of compassion for him, and knowing that if her child re-
mains alive she will be able to see it again
; but the other,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

294
MY PILGRIMAGE
who has no compassion for him, will not let go . Then
beat her with a switch, and she will thereupon confess
the truth of the whole matter.
Thus far one might say that this tale, from the Tibetan
" Kah-Gyur," might have been suggested by the story of
Solomon. But in the Biblical tale there is a missing link
why should the false mother, who bad so desired the
child, consent to have it cut in two ? What motive could
she have? In the Tibetan tale one of the women is the
wife, the other the concubine, of a householder . The
wife bore him no child, and was jealous of the concubine
on account of her babe. The concubine, feeling certain
that the wife would kill the child, gave it to her, with her
lord's approval ; but after his death possession of the
house had to follow motherhood of the child . If, however,
the child were dead, the false claimant would be mistress
of the house. Here, then, is a motive wanting in the story
of Solomon, and suggesting that the latter is not the
original .
In the ancient "° Mahosadha Jataka " the false claimant
proves to be a Yakshini (a sort of vampire) who wishes
to eat the child . To Buddha himself is here ascribed the
judgment, which is much the same as that of the "wise
Champa maiden," Visakha. Here also is a motive for
assenting to the child's death which is lacking in the Bib-
lical story .
It may be mentioned as an interesting parallel that
the wise maiden in the Hindu tale bears the same
name as the young man whose bride she becomes -
Visakha, -and that the bride in Solomon's Song of
Songs is named Shulamith, -feminine of Shelomoh,
Solomon .
All the Hindus I met impressed me by their politeness

--- PAGE BREAK ---ide she becomes -
Visakha, -and that the bride in Solomon's Song of
Songs is named Shulamith, -feminine of Shelomoh,
Solomon .
All the Hindus I met impressed me by their politeness

--- PAGE BREAK ---

KRISHNA AND CHRIST
9.95
and tact. Perhaps their superiority to the average mis-
sionary in manners is that the Hindu is not a propagandist
of his religion. He is not addicted to the rudeness of tell-
ing others, " Your religion is all false, mine is true, and
you will be damned, as your ancestors are, if you don't
agree with me ." I have no doubt that these learned Brah-
mans, who know English and are students of the Bible,
are convinced that Christianity has derived ideas from
India, but in no instance have I known any one of them to
suggest this unless the subject was introduced by myself .
They not only avoid treading on Christian toes, but even
on corns.
In recent times educated Christian writers have been
inclined to follow Paul's example on Mars Hill, and quote
the poets of alien religions, claiming indeed that "Provi-
dence " has prepared in all races furrows for the gospel
seed, there being only one or two coincidences that excite
their fear . Principal among these is the similarity be-
tween the birth-legends of Krishna and Christ. The ques-
tion of precedence is too academic to be dealt with here,
but an examination of the old Hindu pictures leads me to
the conclusion that at no period could the name " Christ "
or his birth-legends have been appropriated for an amo-
rous deity like Krishna. In later times European and Hindu
authors have tried to give mystical interpretation to the
love romances of Krishna, just as the Bible translators
headed the chapters of the " Song of Songs " with such
absurdities, but it seems that this eighth incarnation of
Vishnu (Krishna) represents a reaction of human nature
against the extreme Sivaite asceticism . One may even
conjecture that the Buddha legend was a sort of Sivaite
protest against some flute-playing and Epicurean philoso-
pher, and that their conflict passed through the ages frome asceticism . One may even
conjecture that the Buddha legend was a sort of Sivaite
protest against some flute-playing and Epicurean philoso-
pher, and that their conflict passed through the ages from

--- PAGE BREAK ---

296
MY PILGRIMAGE
the Jumna to the Jordan to be represented in a childish
rune -
We piped unto you and ye did not dance
We wailed, and ye did not beat the breast .
The well-known description of the young Prince Sid-
dartha's last great fete in his palace
; the " bevy of the most
lovely and fascinating girls surrounding him, striving by
dancing, music, and songs to attract his thoughts to plea-
sure ; " his regarding " his royal palace, full of lovely wo-
men, as if it were but a cemetery full of horrid corpses
; "
his leaving this splendour, also his wife and child, to become
a mendicant, - all these traditions picture the earthly and
present paradise with which Krishna and his beautiful
Radha have been for many centuries - and are to this day
- associated .
Of Buddha and Christ alike it is said that they were
rich but became poor. Alike they are of royal lineage .
Krishna is predestined to a throne, which be finally attains .
Born at Mathura, on the river Jumna, between Agra and
Delhi, Krishna springs from the tribe of Yuda . A Krish-
naite might quote literally Hebrews vii, 14 : "It is clear
beforehand that our Lord has sprung out of Judah "
(Iouda) . His father was Vasudef, his mother Devaki (i . e .
Divine Lady). On the night of his birth his uncle, King
Kansa, bad been warned by a voice from heaven that the
eighth son of Devaki would slay him, and consequently
had every nephew killed when born . But Vasudef fled
with the child across the river and placed him with the
shepherd Nanda and his wife Yosada, - this lady becom-
ing famous as Krishna's reputed mother . The tyrant
Kansa then orders a general massacre of infants, but
Krishna and his brother, Balarama (Rama the strong) are
saved and the two are brought up by Yosada as her own .ishna's reputed mother . The tyrant
Kansa then orders a general massacre of infants, but
Krishna and his brother, Balarama (Rama the strong) are
saved and the two are brought up by Yosada as her own .

--- PAGE BREAK ---er . The tyrant
Kansa then orders a general massacre of infants, but
Krishna and his brother, Balarama (Rama the strong) are
saved and the two are brought up by Yosada as her own .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

KRISHNA IN HINDU ART
297
The persecution by Kansa and his death by the hand of
Krishna or Vasudef are mentioned in Pantajali's " Great
Commentary " (second century B . C.) .
There is evidence,
too, that there was then a dramatic representation of the
story,-as there is to-day. But the Kansa legend has
long been eclipsed in popular interest by the stories of
the childhood and youth of Krishna in the shepherd's
home .
Among the popular coloured prints representing the
conventionalized story of Krishna, which I brought home
with me, two are of especial interest and beauty. One
represents the fair foster-mother Yosada holding some
little fruit or sugar-plum in her hand for the beautiful
dark blue babe which in moving on the floor, on hands
and knees, turns his face to her and lifts his right hand .
They are in a fine hall with pillars and arches
; she is
elegantly draped, in dark red cloak and hood, arms and
feet jewelled, but no nose-ring : the child is naked but
covered with jewels, - one heart-shaped pendant on his
breast, another above his forehead, a circle above which
rise three feathers forming a sort of cross . A vague halo
surrounds the head . Still more striking is the other pic-
ture. Yosada comes out of a fine arched doorway to a
veranda following blue Krishna, a boy of ten years, with
her hands on his shoulders, where they are met by his
brother Balarama, of the same size, who leans forward to
kiss him. This brother is white, and bears a staff. Out-
side is a flock of sheep watched by the shepherd, who has
a long white beard and a crook in his hand . There is the
same disparity of age between Nanda and Yosada that is
noticeable in pictures of Joseph and Mary . Yosada and
both children are richly dressed and adorned with pearls,
each having one on the upper lip . I find it impossible toeen Nanda and Yosada that is
noticeable in pictures of Joseph and Mary . Yosada and
both children are richly dressed and adorned with pearls,
each having one on the upper lip . I find it impossible to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

298
MY PILGRIMAGE
look at this picture without feeling that it is related to the
Catholic picture of the Holy Family and St . John the
Baptist, although there is here no halo .
There are many theories about the dark blue colour of
Krishna. The name means "black." Possibly it was ori-
ginally meant to show that he was sprung from the dark
aborigines (non-Aryan) and the blue tint given later when
he was declared an avatar of Vishnu, whose throat was
blue .
"Krishna teaching Radha to play the flute" is a favour-
ite subject of Hindu art . The merry youth possessed the
magic flute, and no cowherdess could resist its charm .
According to Eusebius the original Prodigal Son had
in the far country devoured his substance with "flute-
women ."
The early Christians destroyed, utterly, more than a
hundred gospels and epistles now known to have existed,
among them three by St. Thomas, traditionally the apos-
tle to India . We are left, then, to conjecture what scan-
dals to ascetics like John the Baptist and his disciples,
who fasted while Jesus fasted not, led to the reputation
of his being " a glutton and a wine-drinker, a friend of
bankers and sinners," also to the narratives of worldliness
and fine entertainments in Egyptian palaces of Joseph,
Mary, and the child, related in the Arabic Gospel .
It must be always borne in mind that with Buddhism
arose the first missionary religion ; their propagandists went
through the nations, like the Franciscans of later times, and
in cities where their language was popularly unknown they
must depend on scenery and pantomime . There are evi-
dences of Buddhist missions in Palestine and Arabia, and
the scenes of gaiety and licentiousness associated with
Krishna and his flute and dancing girls beside the Jumnaand pantomime . There are evi-
dences of Buddhist missions in Palestine and Arabia, and
the scenes of gaiety and licentiousness associated with
Krishna and his flute and dancing girls beside the Jumna

--- PAGE BREAK ---e are evi-
dences of Buddhist missions in Palestine and Arabia, and
the scenes of gaiety and licentiousness associated with
Krishna and his flute and dancing girls beside the Jumna

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LEGEND OF ST. GIOSAFAT
299
would naturally be the background of the Prince Buddha
turning his back on all worldly revelries.
The beautiful statue of St. Giosafat in the ancient
church bearing his name at Palermo is one of the most in-
teresting in Europe . John of Damascus (born A. D . 676)
came into contact there with the story of a prince who
prepared two boxes, one of gold the other of some base
substance, between which his nobles were summoned to
make their choice ; they all chose the gold box which was
found full of dead bones, while the other was found to con-
tain rarest gems . The prince then rebuked his nobles for
judging by the senses . This prince, as is now known, was
no other than Buddha, but on the representations of John
of Damascus at Rome he was declared a saint and recog-
nized as such by a succession of Popes from Sixtus V to
the present day, -November 27 in the Calendar being
solemnly set apart for his commemoration . This beautiful
example of the continuity of religious history is fitly en-
shrined in the beautiful statue . The crown and the nimbus
rise above a face, in which manliness and womanliness are
combined, turned to the crucifix upheld in the right band,
the left being folded around a large volume .
I was interested to find all the young people in India and
in Ceylon speaking of the Brahmans as the
11 Catholics."
I asked several of them bow they managed to get that
term for the original religion of their country, and they
could not tell me anything except that it was inherited
from time immemorial. In looking at the favourite house-
hold pictures of Brahmanism, I feel certain that their so-
called
I I goddesses " are simply a sisterhood of symbolical
figures. There is a goddess of music (Benapani), who
holds a long, uniformly narrow stringed instrument which
rises up above her solar halo ; she is seated on a throne ofly a sisterhood of symbolical
figures. There is a goddess of music (Benapani), who
holds a long, uniformly narrow stringed instrument which
rises up above her solar halo ; she is seated on a throne of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ymbolical
figures. There is a goddess of music (Benapani), who
holds a long, uniformly narrow stringed instrument which
rises up above her solar halo ; she is seated on a throne of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

300
MY PILGRIMAGE
unopened white lilies over a lake, her footstool being a
red-leaved lotus . She is a sister, no doubt, of Radha, learn-
ing to play the flute from her beloved Krishna . And both
are glorified in the supreme goddess Lakshmi, the goddess
of Prosperity. The beautiful face of Lakshmi and her
superb jewelled crown surmounted by the Phallic emblem
is baloed by the sun ; her right hand holds a large golden
vase with turreted cover ; the affluence of earth and sea
surrounds her, - all varieties of shells and lotuses, and be-
yond her a field of golden wheat. But there are two sym-
bols that set one dreaming of her kinswomen in other
lands : prominent beside her is a large owl, which tells of
the Wisdom that crowned Prosperity in Athens
; and at
Lakshmi's breast is clasped a sheaf of wheat which will
reappear in the image of Ceres at Rome .
The owl is universally a bird of ill omen . From it came
the fatally fascinating Lilith, whose name is foolishly
suppressed under the name screech-owl in the old version
of Isaiah xxxiv, 14 : "Lilith shall abide there and find
her a place of rest ." Lilith, in Jewish tradition Adam's
first wife, would more nearly resemble Radha . The owl of
Lakshmi is always white, its uncanny reputation being
thus perhaps softened into that of a white witch . Its great
eyes, unwinking, able to see into and through the darkness,
made it the symbol of Fortune and of Wisdom so long
as Paradise was conceived as on earth
; when Indra's Par-
adise was superseded by a Paradise in the sky the owl was
superseded by the carrier pigeon, which on Egyptian mon-
uments the priests are seen sending off to bear the secrets
of earth to the gods .
At every moment in India I bad to lament the narrow-
ness of our English and American theologians and pro-
fessors who, in their gratuitous jealousy for the originalitysecrets
of earth to the gods .
At every moment in India I bad to lament the narrow-
ness of our English and American theologians and pro-
fessors who, in their gratuitous jealousy for the originality

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ORIGIN OF WESTERN FOLK-LORE
301
of everything in the Bible, implanted even in the most
liberal of us their pupils a notion that there was at and
before the beginning of our era a great gulf fixed between
the " Holy Land " and India, so that nothing could have
been possibly derived therefrom by Christianity
.
That
error is now exploded, even in Protestant countries, -
for the Greek and Roman churches must be credited with
having for the most part ignored this error .
In fact,
nearly all of our European and American folk-lore is the
debris of Asiatic usage and superstition, such as blessing
people when they sneeze ; the indication by a burning
ear or cheek that somebody is talking about you ; the
symbolism of the stork ; the dog howling at night as a
presage of death ; and the horseshoe as protection against
sorcery .
The Covenant of Salt in the East, which in Europe simply
represents an idle notion that to spill salt in offering it
bodes a quarrel, possesses a meaning traceable to the time
when men carried with them on their journeys all supplies
except a few very cheap things. Every man was supposed
to be " worth his salt," which thus became a symbol of
universal brotherhood. If a man were a secret enemy he
must manage to spill the salt which a suspicious stranger
might demand . In India it is usual for every child to
begin a birthday by taking a little salt .
It is a sufficient evidence that the book of Job is
adapted from an Asiatic original that in the West one of
its most significant sentences (i, 22) has been translated,
" In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly ; "
the real translation being, " In all this Job sinned not,
nor offered his sacrifice without salt ."
Job fulfilled his
part of the covenant without faltering .sinned not, nor charged God foolishly ; "
the real translation being, " In all this Job sinned not,
nor offered his sacrifice without salt ."
Job fulfilled his
part of the covenant without faltering .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER XIV
Allahabad - Manwaysh
festival - Ganges immersions - A Christian-
Brahman debate - Relic of cobra-worship - River deities - Christian
and Brahman doctrines of sacrifice .
I
WAS sorry not to find Sir Alfred Lyall at Allahabad,
but two gentlemen in the Club treated me politely and
secured for me a good guide for the great annual festival
called Manwaysh- that is, the Junction of the Waters .
It is here that the Ganges and the Jumna meet
; and to
the eyes of faith there is a third river, the Saraswati,
which unites with them. The three form the most sacred
of the seven streams that fall from the right foot of
Vishnu, according to the Vishnuites-from the brow of
Siva according to the Sivaites. Inside the fort at Alla-
habad are the remains of a subterranean temple in which
is a sacred fountain believed to be fed by the waters of
Saraswati. I was reminded of Coleridge's "Alph"-
Where Alph, the sacred river, ran,
Through caverns measureless to man,
Down to a sunless sea .
Here too a fountain " flung up momently the sacred
river ;" and around it was a strange collection-the
Bleeding Tree, an upright log at whose base are two foot-
prints of Vishnu ; a phallia linga said to have been cut
through at a blow by the Moslem Aurungzoo, whereon
from one side flowed milk, from the other blood ; foot-
prints of Rama and of his wife Sita ; and many remark-
able images of Krishna, one or two of which appeared to
me inclining to be Buddhas. Emerging from this subter-

--- PAGE BREAK ---blood ; foot-
prints of Rama and of his wife Sita ; and many remark-
able images of Krishna, one or two of which appeared to
me inclining to be Buddhas. Emerging from this subter-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ALLAHABAD
303
ranean hiding-place of images sufficiently rude to seek
concealment, my eyes were greeted by the sight of a
superb Pillar of Asoka, with its moral laws in good pre-
servation, finely pedestalled and surrounded by a parterre
of flowers tended by English bands .
It is three miles from the fort to the junction of the
rivers, but it was necessary to leave there my carriage, and
move on foot through the dense crowd . It was estimated
that two millions were present during the two days' fes-
tival. As these people were to my eye all alike, the men
mostly naked, I bad to pin a bit of red on the head-dress
of my guide in order to follow him as he pressed on rap-
idly, shoving people aside . As we drew near to the pro-
montory between the rivers the bazars multiplied, and
many banners floated through the air, pictured with all
manner of totems, nondescripts, and symbols. On one side
was an acre of ground, where a large population, squatted
on the ground, were having their heads shorn by barbers .
The ground was carpeted with black hair, every hair sac-
rificed meaning an added year in Paradise . No woman,
however, was sacrificing her glory in this way, nor did the
women imitate the zeal of many male pilgrims, who cov-
ered themselves with mud before plunging into the wat-
ers. A priest standing in the water received each muddy
pilgrim and besought the river deities to purge him of sin
even as the waters washed the mud from his body .
The rivers are shallow at their junction, and a continu-
ous procession was wading from bank to bank. The
banks far and near were black with the swarm of people.
There were lines of barges moving to and fro, and an
island made of bamboo boats, from which Hindus were
leaping every second . I was soon on a barge, observing
the ecstasies of the multitude, and their loud invocationsbarges moving to and fro, and an
island made of bamboo boats, from which Hindus were
leaping every second . I was soon on a barge, observing
the ecstasies of the multitude, and their loud invocations

--- PAGE BREAK ---d fro, and an
island made of bamboo boats, from which Hindus were
leaping every second . I was soon on a barge, observing
the ecstasies of the multitude, and their loud invocations

--- PAGE BREAK ---

304
MY PILGRIMAGE
when immersed . The men wore only the regulation loin-
cloth. The women on the bank passed in frank nudity
from their clothes to transparent bathing wrappers .
There was no sign of conscious or recognized indecorum,
but on the other hand no solemnity,-all were merry .
A large portion of the plain had the appearance of a
pleasure fair. It was a kind of combination of Nijni-Nov-
gorod and many Methodist campmeetings . There were
little extemporized villages (of shanties) intersected by
small pathways, and tents with their shrines ; there were
innumerable fakirs covered with ashes, their foreheads
frescoed with symbols, receiving worship and coppers . In
one enclosure, to which my guide took me accidentally,
some person in authority warned us off . My guide moved
away rapidly, but gave me no explanation . It may not
have been a religious performance at all .
There were many low, broad tables about the grounds,
which did service as chairs also, supporting the fruits,
grain, and sugar cakes sold as refreshment for both man
and gods. There were little burnt offerings for ancestors
always going on . Priests were performing some kind of
ceremony over devotees who bent their heads to the
ground ; the priest covered the low bent head with his
skirt, muttered prayer or formula with open eyes, received
his coppers or cowries, and moved on to the next . At va-
rious points boys rang small bells, apparently to attract
the people to some priest ready to do something for them .
Large numbers of sacred cows were led about, decorated
with mystical symbols and chains of coins or imitations of
them, besides ribands about their horns. Those who led
the little slate-coloured animals expected pice, which were
given, however, chiefly to those whose cows exhibited some
deformity . The number of these was large enough to betheir horns. Those who led
the little slate-coloured animals expected pice, which were
given, however, chiefly to those whose cows exhibited some
deformity . The number of these was large enough to be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MANWAYSH FESTIVAL
305
zoologically interesting .
The monstrosities consisted of
little legs or tails coming out of the animal's forehead,
shoulder, or rump .
These excrescences were handled
freely, several of them by myself .
Goethe says, °° Nature
reveals her secrets in monsters," but the Hindu notion is
that the secret of some god or demon is contained in
each monstrosity .
It must be on this principle they
placate their fierce persecutor General Nicholson, who fell
in the siege of Delhi
; and elsewhere an Englishman is
worshipped who killed his wife and drank himself to
death .
A certain reverence seemed to be paid to human infirm-
ities, some of these being frightful enough . The sufferers
displayed their "losses " as proudly as Dogberry. Amazing
was a female yogi, quite naked, writhing on the ground
and filling the air with her ravings .
She was said to be
°' possessed," and received pice therefor .
Not far from
this was a tent in which a Nautch dancer was performing
in pantomime some divine fable .
I observed at various points two small boys with painted
faces and decorated pasteboard hats, each holding a bow
and arrow. They were motionless, and I could not under-
stand the meaning of this recurring wayside tableau, but
suspect that it is the last diminutive outcome of Arjuna
and Abhimonzu, -the boy warrior now pictured as the
11 boy hermit." At another point a man was telling a
gaping circle something mysterious about a veiled woman
who sat near him .
The most pathetic sight was that of a London mis-
sionary in his tent contending single-handed against a
circle of acute Brahmans . There was a large crowd around
the disputants. The heat alone was enough to handicap
the Englishman ; but, apart from that, his task was suf-

--- PAGE BREAK ---d against a
circle of acute Brahmans . There was a large crowd around
the disputants. The heat alone was enough to handicap
the Englishman ; but, apart from that, his task was suf-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

306
MY PILGRIMAGE
ficient to cause perspiration . I was careful to secure a
translation of every word as it was uttered on either side .
As I entered, the Brahman was saying, " You say we must
have faith ; well, we have faith." Missionary : " But you
must have the right faith ." "Our faith seems to us as
right as your faith seems to you ." " But you have faith
in such things as the water of the Ganges ." "But if it
is as you say, - we are saved by faith, - why should
we not be saved by faith in the holy Ganges?"
" How
can the Ganges wash away your sins? "
The water of
the Ganges washed away my sins this morning." " How
do you know that it has washed away your sins ? " " How
do you know that the blood of Christ has washed away
your sins?" "I know it by the grace of God in my heart ."
"And I," said the Brahman, "know it by the grace of
God in my heart." A freethinking Babu remarked to me,
" That missionary, if he only knew it, is carrying coals to
Newcastle ." I could not help smiling that our proverb
should have travelled so far .
On the second day of the festival I saw and heard a
clever missionary, who realized that he had in his audi-
ence two parties, -one from the Punjab who differed on
some pet dogma from more southern Hindus . The mis-
sionary was similarly hard pressed by his Brahman adver-
sary, - a fine-looking and able man, - but he managed
dexterously to shift the controversy round to the point of
difference referred to . The Punjab men soon rose against
the Brahmans, and the missionary had the satisfaction of
sitting for a quarter of an hour complacently wiping his
brow while the Hindus disputed with animation . Their
voices were not very loud, but their feeling seemed in-
tense. One of them gesticulated in a strange way, and
illustrated some point, which my interpreter did not quitedisputed with animation . Their
voices were not very loud, but their feeling seemed in-
tense. One of them gesticulated in a strange way, and
illustrated some point, which my interpreter did not quite

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion . Their
voices were not very loud, but their feeling seemed in-
tense. One of them gesticulated in a strange way, and
illustrated some point, which my interpreter did not quite

--- PAGE BREAK ---

STRANGE SIGHTS
307
catch, by taking off his slipper, treading on it, then put-
ting it on again.
I had observed that a good many pilgrims came from
a direction in which I had been told by a Hindu scholar
that there was something peculiar to be seen . I devoted
an afternoon to an exploration, and found myself amid
scenes so unusual that I felt as if I must have slept away
a century or two backward and waked u p in a remote past .
At last I approached a village whose name was given
me as Dabarwanga, - five miles perhaps from Allahabad .
Near it I came to a crowded common, where I got out of
my carriage and walked. Presently I came upon a human
bead lying in my path on the ground . Starting back, I
perceived that this painted head, though its eyes were
closed, belonged to a living man, the rest of his body
being buried . A small tent had been raised over another
head farther on to shade it from the sun . Scenes like
these began to multiply . I came upon several naked bodies,
apparently decapitated, their heads alone being buried
and the gravel smoothed flat over them . There were a
number of children in this situation, stretching out their
hands for gifts. So little respect, however, did their com-
panions feel for these infant devotees that they sometimes
put bits of tin or flint in their hands, which were promptly
thrown away. At one point a young woman was just
burying a child up to the neck . She indicated to me her
expectation of pice, which, of course, she did not get .
As I walked on, men and women seemed to be frantic
in the same degree that I had witnessed at the temple of
Kali at Kalighat. They were all pressing to a small and
ancient temple . Thither I followed . Approaching the
altar I beheld there one image alone - a huge five-
headed carved cobra, blackened by time. A crowd, mainlyThey were all pressing to a small and
ancient temple . Thither I followed . Approaching the
altar I beheld there one image alone - a huge five-
headed carved cobra, blackened by time. A crowd, mainly

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing to a small and
ancient temple . Thither I followed . Approaching the
altar I beheld there one image alone - a huge five-
headed carved cobra, blackened by time. A crowd, mainly

--- PAGE BREAK ---

308
MY PILGRIMAGE
of women, were prostrate before this weird form. It was
the first time I had seen serpent-worship, pure and simple .
There was a horrible splash of blood on the pavement in
front of the entrance. What poor animal it was that had
there shed its blood as an offering to the Old Serpent I
knew not ; but I felt that there fear had paralyzed pity,
and reason sunk lower than the brute it sacrificed .
For two pice I bought one of the popular prints of the
Allahabad festival, hawked by the wayside . It is a rude
and primitive representation of Krishna standing on a
lotus on the sands ; on the surface of the Ganges a deity
floats on a crocodile ; on the Jumna a deity rides on a
turtle ; while between, presumably on the unseen Saras-
wati, a deity rides on a goose . It appeared at first a fair
triad, and fairly mounted on the zoologic types of cruelty,
slowness, and silliness, but it is the brute forms subject
to divine forms . I returned to enlightened Akbar's be-
loved Allahabad, which Moslem zealots changed to "City
of Allapast," passing the night-camps of innumerable
pilgrims, whose fires and cauldrons made appropriate
incidents in the big Witches' Sabbath I had witnessed .
There were no tents ; they were spreading their straw
beds on the ground in the open air, a motley multitude
of men and women, there being, however, no indications
of licentiousness. I passed by the spot where the great-
hearted, catholic-minded Akbar lived-where the noble
Pillar of Asoka, with its sublime Buddhist edicts, still
rises -and wondered if they who now hold the fort
which guards that spot will ever rise to a corresponding
height, and confront the superstitions and dogmas of the
poor missionary labouring so vainly in his tent .
While at Allahabad, under the vivid impressions ofhat spot will ever rise to a corresponding
height, and confront the superstitions and dogmas of the
poor missionary labouring so vainly in his tent .
While at Allahabad, under the vivid impressions of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ise to a corresponding
height, and confront the superstitions and dogmas of the
poor missionary labouring so vainly in his tent .
While at Allahabad, under the vivid impressions of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HINDU AND CHRISTIAN FANATICS
309
what I had seen, I wrote some account of them for a jour-
nal, which excited the attention of religious papers . I
was mortified to learn that my testimony was cited to
show the need of missions in India, its importance being
that I was known to be an admirer of the oriental reli-
gions .
I did not blame the religious journals and the
preachers for making the most of my description ; it was
my own mistake to forget that I was carrying my South
Place platform along in whatever I wrote, and in giving
to the world a description of certain morbid phenomena
in India detached from my account of things healthy and
beautiful .
What I witnessed at Allahabad was the elite of the fa-
naticisms of the country, represented by two millions out
of a population of 300,000,000 . The proportion of Hindus
who deplore such things to those who act in them is as
large as the proportion of Americans who hold aloof from
spirit-rapping, Christian Science, and the Salvation Army .
And for the rest, what were these harmless orgies of
three days, during which no accident or injury occurred
to any one, compared with what I had witnessed for many
days together on Christian battlefields?
Of course it will
appear differently to Christians fanatical enough to be-
lieve that all these devotees are passing into eternal fires,
but for my part I would far rather see the crowd of people
in my native South gathered to sacrifice kids before Kali
or Cobra, than gathered to burn a living negro .
The late Professor F. W. Newman, brother of the car-
dinal, in early life discovered that there was no possibil-
ity of converting the " heathen " until Christendom had
earned a new reputation among them .
Christians are
known among them as great conquerors, avengers, traders,
often lax in morals, indifferent to religion . Newman im-" heathen " until Christendom had
earned a new reputation among them .
Christians are
known among them as great conquerors, avengers, traders,
often lax in morals, indifferent to religion . Newman im-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ristendom had
earned a new reputation among them .
Christians are
known among them as great conquerors, avengers, traders,
often lax in morals, indifferent to religion . Newman im-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

310
MY PILGRIMAGE
agined a little colony among these aliens, so animated by
primitive faith, love, disinterestedness, that their moral
influence might be felt. Several Irish youths sympathized
with his vision, and in 1830 they left for Bagdad . New-
man, then about twenty-five, held a conversation at Aleppo
with a Mohammedan carpenter, which left on him a last-
ing impression .
" Among other matters," says Newman,
" I was peculiarly desirous of disabusing him of the cur-
rent notion of his people, that our gospels are spurious
narratives of late date . I found great difficulty of expres-
sion ; but the man listened to me with much attention,
and I was encouraged to exert myself . He waited pa-
tiently till I had done, and then spoke to the following
effect :
' I will tell you, sir, how the case stands. God
has given to you English a great many good gifts . You
make fine ships, and sharp penknives, and good cloth and
cottons ; and you have rich nobles and brave soldiers ; and
you write and print many learned books (dictionaries
and grammars) : all this is of God . But there is one thing
that God has withheld from you, and has revealed to us
;
and that is the knowledge of the true religion, by which
one may be saved.' When he thus ignored my argument
(which was probably quite unintelligible to him), and
delivered his simple protest, I was silenced, and at the
same time amused . But the more I thought it over, the
more instruction I saw in the case ."
After years of mental trouble Newman found that the
Mohammedan carpenter was near the truth so far as
English ignorance of religion was concerned. While in
India I often recalled the incident, about which I had
a talk with Newman, in the course of which he mentioned
the impression made upon him during a voyage in Persian
waters. "The Persians sat on deck all day motionless,ed the incident, about which I had
a talk with Newman, in the course of which he mentioned
the impression made upon him during a voyage in Persian
waters. "The Persians sat on deck all day motionless,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ut which I had
a talk with Newman, in the course of which he mentioned
the impression made upon him during a voyage in Persian
waters. "The Persians sat on deck all day motionless,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE DOCTRINE OF SACRIFICE
311
never lifting their eyes from their books, their scriptures
and poets, which seemed to give them serene happiness ."
The late Professor Palmer of Cambridge, when giving me
his translation of a Persian poem for my " Sacred Antho-
logy," said, "I tell my friends that if they study care-
fully Persian literature they will know something about
religion." Would it not be well if young men aspiring
to missionary work were first sent out to these oriental
countries under engagement not to criticise their existing
religions until they had passed a year or two in studying
them? Were they to sweep diligently even among these
repulsive sacrifices and ceremonies of the more uneducated
Hindus, such uncommitted students might find a pearl of
price which the Christian fathers possessed, but which
has been lost under the invasions of metaphysics and the-
ology. If one reads the works of Iremeus, Tertullian,
Origen, and Gregory of Nyssa, he finds a doctrine of Re-
demption which, however mingled with superstition, at
least harmonizes with Divine Love and Justice .
Their
faith never imagined that the Father had required the
death of his Son . The sacrifice was solely to Satan, to
whom the human race was under a bond which not only
doomed mankind to a future hell, but also so corrupted
them in this world that they were not admissible to the
divine kingdom. This morally sublime idea of a divine
being spontaneously offering himself to be subject to Satan,
and go to hell for the ransom of mankind, was repudiated
by Athanasius towards the end of the fourth century
. The
jealousy of the Hebrew deity, unwilling to admit any
limit to his power, even in the domain of Diabolism,
brought Christendom to that conception which we think
especially horrible among savages,-Human Sacrifice!
Where Origen beheld a pure God so loving the world aspower, even in the domain of Diabolism,
brought Christendom to that conception which we think
especially horrible among savages,-Human Sacrifice!
Where Origen beheld a pure God so loving the world as

--- PAGE BREAK ---domain of Diabolism,
brought Christendom to that conception which we think
especially horrible among savages,-Human Sacrifice!
Where Origen beheld a pure God so loving the world as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3 12
MY PILGRIMAGE
to sacrifice himself to the dark and evil Powers of
nature as a substitute for the doomed race, the modern
theologian now sees a God substituted for those evil
Powers and demanding the death of Christ for his own
satisfaction .
I have gone into this anomaly of Christian history
in order to illustrate what I mean by the lost Pearl . The
religious spirit of the oriental world is just that of the
early Christian believers . All of these sacrifices of goats
which I saw at Kalighat and Allahabad were offered to
those same dark and evil Powers . They are meant to
placate the personified diseases and agonies which I saw
in the " devil-dances " at Colombo . To Vishnu or his ava-
tars no human sacrifices were ever sanctioned by any real
Hindu religion. Suttee (Sati) was never a sacrifice ; it was
a wife gladly accompanying her lord in a chariot of fire to
an earthly paradise there to dwell with him in joy forever.
The effort to prove that human sacrifices occurred under
the car of Juggenauth has totally failed . The lower
classes still continue the animal sacrifices on great festi-
val occasions, but one cannot say how far this is due to
the motive of propitiation, or simply the continuance of
old usages without any conscious purpose . At any rate,
the presence of blood on any altar in India means a sac-
rifice to some demon. The only offerings on the altars of
the supreme deities are flowers . The following sentences I
picked out of a translation from the Agni Purana by H . H .
Wilson, F. R . S.,-a manuscript in the India House
library in London : -
That is the best worship which is made without the
expectation of the attainment of any particular object ;
the worst is that which is performed for the accomplish-
ment of a particular end .ndon : -
That is the best worship which is made without the
expectation of the attainment of any particular object ;
the worst is that which is performed for the accomplish-
ment of a particular end .

--- PAGE BREAK ---best worship which is made without the
expectation of the attainment of any particular object ;
the worst is that which is performed for the accomplish-
ment of a particular end .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ANCIENT HINDU
CHRISTIANS
313
He who adores Vishnu should behold him in every
creature and every creature in him .
The worshipper shall do homage to himself
.
He shall
think in himself that the spirit which exists in the crown
of his head has dispelled the darkness of his body, inter-
nal and external, and endowed the whole form and the
sense, so that he may consider and say, " I am divine," and
lay bold on the sword of knowledge.
The Lord of Life (Vishnu) should not be worshipped
with flowers that have faded . Those that grow in thine
own garden are far better than those of any other .
With
the flowers gathered there must be reverence - itself a
flower.
There is in the intellect a sacred lotus to which every
breath is wafted, and in it lost . He who shall contemplate
this flower in the intellect shall find it full of splendour,
beyond the collective light of many moons, and near unto
the Deity .
The Hindu Christians found by Cosmas Indicopleustes
in the sixth century-a large number of congregations with
a bishop ordained in Persia-were called
11 Christians of
St. Thomas." They were united with the Roman Catholic
Church in 1599, and seven years later the Jesuit father,
Robert De Nobili, conceived the plan of accommodating
himself and his mission to Hindu customs .
He encoun-
tered strong opposition in his order, but the violent con-
troversy after thirteen years was decided by Pope Gregory
XV in his favour, and the church in India largely in-
creased until the sacrificial dogmas were introduced about
two centuries later . The whole subject requires a minute
historical and critical examination never given
it. But
it is certain that if the Hindus could be induced to adopt
the theology of a blood sacrifice to any deity that deity
would fall to the level of those evil beings to whom goats
are now sacrificed .But
it is certain that if the Hindus could be induced to adopt
the theology of a blood sacrifice to any deity that deity
would fall to the level of those evil beings to whom goats
are now sacrificed .

--- PAGE BREAK ---at if the Hindus could be induced to adopt
the theology of a blood sacrifice to any deity that deity
would fall to the level of those evil beings to whom goats
are now sacrificed .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

314
MY PILGRIMAGE
The fundamental division between the oriental religions
and Christianity is the merit principle of the former and
the vicarious principle of the latter . The missionaries in
sounding the changes on the superiority of the Christian
nations in wealth are using their best argument . People
who can relieve their consciences by claiming indemnity
for their sins through Christ are more free in action, and
if the indemnity did not equally include bad actions a
philosophic secularist might rejoice in what strikes the
oriental mind as worldliness. The grievous burden of
oriental religion is that the personal merits are in the
larger part not real and practical merits, but a heritage
of rites and ceremonies, points of etiquette demanded by
imaginary deities . These deities were no doubt evolved
out of mere phrases, - as if out of such Christian phrases
for Jehovah as " Ancient of Days," " Creator," " Maker,"
,, Almighty," -Heavenly Father," "First Person," etc .,
each epithet was severally personified, each personification
giving rise to a new brood.
By this process the poetic beauty was lost from the
early conceptions . In 1838 Emerson in his address to the
divinity students at Cambridge said : " The idioms of
his (Jesus') language and the figures of his rhetoric have
usurped the place of his truth ; and churches are not built
on his principles, but on his tropes . Christianity became
a Mythus, as the poetic teaching of Greece and of Egypt,
before ." The result of the similar process in India has
apparently been more serious, because it was not so much
churches that were built on the tropes as homes and
haunted minds . Max Muller noticed that the sky is never
spoken of as " blue " in the Bible or in the Vedas. In the
Vedas the singers could hardly think of colour or beauty
in a sky that had already become the all-searching eye oficed that the sky is never
spoken of as " blue " in the Bible or in the Vedas. In the
Vedas the singers could hardly think of colour or beauty
in a sky that had already become the all-searching eye of

--- PAGE BREAK ---never
spoken of as " blue " in the Bible or in the Vedas. In the
Vedas the singers could hardly think of colour or beauty
in a sky that had already become the all-searching eye of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INTEREST IN INDIAN RELIGIONS
315
Varuna reflected even in the water. Varuna was the spe-
cial guardian of morals, but unfortunately not merely of
human morals .
Thus, childless Harischandra .
having
made a vow to Varuna that if granted children he would
immolate his first-born to him, a son (Rohita) was born
.
The father evaded his vow and Varuna afflicted him (the
father) with dropsy . And the vengeance for that unful-
filled vow went on .
Varuna was ultimately supplanted by Dyaus, a name
which survives
in Jupiter (Dyaus-pater, father
of
Heaven). And what the outcome of this development of
egoistic divinity was we know by Aristotle's remark,
" It
would be ridiculous for any one to say that he loves Jupi-
ter." But fear may remain after love ceases, and haunts
the nursery after becoming merely formal among the ma-
ture.
Since the English government has assumed in India
the attitude of a purely secular power, entirely neutral
between all religions, Christianity included, the English
residents in India have manifested a good deal of interest
in the various systems around them
.
The cultivated
gentlemen of the civil service are apt to be those who
sought office in India because of their appreciation of
the grand literature and historic interest of the country .
There is no longer among the chaplains sent out by the
English Church any talk about "heathenism ."
All of
which is favourable for leavening the Brahman measures
of meal with that polite social interest which dissenters
and Hindus alike regard as " worldliness." It is, however,
possible that this literary and philosophical
interest of
English scholars may be too academic.
One feels at every
step the vast distance of the popular worship from the wit
and wisdom of the ancient books . Respect and charityand philosophical
interest of
English scholars may be too academic.
One feels at every
step the vast distance of the popular worship from the wit
and wisdom of the ancient books . Respect and charity

--- PAGE BREAK ---

316
MY PILGRIMAGE
do not require that one shall applaud any religion so
indiscriminately as to include the practical excrescences
in which are accumulated the small occasional fanaticisms
of ages. The hurtful thing in theological error is not in
any catechetical formula ; into that an individual mind
will be certain to read its own ideas : but the evil is done in
the nests of old custom where the new ideas warm into life
forces of practical evil. What India really needs is not
that universal political suffrage which is the European
and American kingdom of Heaven, nor the abolition of
Brahman caste, -which is not at all like the luxurious
and privileged aristocracy of other countries, but more
like that scholars' caste which Emerson hoped for in
America : the need is for a happier social life, with gen-
tlemen and ladies meeting in it on equal terms, and the
practical emancipation of manners and habits from the
ascetic usages which the cultured Pandits regard as an
exoteric necessity for popular morality . It is that schol-
arly Pandit who has to learn from scholarly England that
the greatest immorality is any system that sits authorita-
tively on every woman and child and prevents the devel-
opment of the moral freedom essential to real virtue as
well as to happiness.

--- PAGE BREAK ---immorality is any system that sits authorita-
tively on every woman and child and prevents the devel-
opment of the moral freedom essential to real virtue as
well as to happiness.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER XV
Bombay - Alexander Agassiz - Missionaries - England in India-"The
Old Missionary" -Nelacantah Ooreh - Professor Peterson-Hindu
hymn - A drive with Judge West - Shankuran Pandit - The Towers
of Silence - Zoroasstrianism - Parsis - The zenana - Ramabai - Ke-
shub Chunder Sen and his monument -Bhakti (faith) - Indian
sects - Faults of English colonists - Samuel Laing, M. P., " A Modern
Zoroastrian "- The ideal Jain temple.
A
S I was approaching Bombay I observed with delight
a group of large monkeys sporting in the forest .
They looked like truant children come out to see our train
pass. We were moving slowly and I had a chance to
wave my handkerchief to them, and to see them dancing
about and some running up the trees. I was travelling
with Colonel Miller of Bombay, a clever and solid Eng-
lish gentleman, who was equal to any amount of war but
could not forgive Haeckel for having killed one monkey .
(It was a peculiar monkey which the naturalist wanted
for his college museum at Jena .) Colonel Miller, an am-
ateur artist also, knew monkeys well, and agreed with
the Sinhalese that to kill a monkey was murder even
though done for science .
Those forest monkeys made me
realize the truth of Oersted's chapter on the " Unbeauti-
ful in Nature," in which he affirms that it is only when
we see creatures out of their natural place that we do not
recognize their beauty .
In Bombay, by the introduction of my South Place
friend Mr. Phipson, I was accorded a room in the Eng-
lish Club. There were eminent scholars in the place who

--- PAGE BREAK ---ognize their beauty .
In Bombay, by the introduction of my South Place
friend Mr. Phipson, I was accorded a room in the Eng-
lish Club. There were eminent scholars in the place who

--- PAGE BREAK ---

318
MY PILGRIMAGE
made
my stay happy and instructive . With Professor
Peterson of Elphinstone University I visited the caves of
Elephanta, and there had the pleasure of meeting my
old acquaintance Alexander Agassiz . He resembled his
father in various ways . I am not sure that he is old
enough to remember the time when his father was the
most widely denounced heretic in America, and from
that retrospective point of view saw with me the pictur-
esqueness of the same heretic becoming a darling of the
pulpits because of his opposition to Darwinism. It re-
quired only a decade for the storm that raged around
the heresy that mankind was not descended from a single
pair to sink into a teapot tempest beside the tornadoes
caused by the discovery of our anthropoid ancestry .
The offence given by Agassiz was not really the denial
of any Biblical statement, it being indeed easy to find in
the Bible suggestions of various origins of mankind, - as
for instance Cain's emigration to the Land of Nod, finding
a wife there and building a city. The trouble was that the
theory of Agassiz did away with the fundamental faith " in
Adam's fall we sinned all," and logically upset the entire
system of missions to peoples not descended from the
fair and perfect Adam and Eve created by Milton in the
Garden of Eden . And that corollary was not evaded by
Agassiz
; he said it was a grievous mistake to try and
in-
troduce our own doctrines and institutions among races
totally distinct by origin and development .
After my travels in India I reached the conclusion that
the possession of that vast country by England is a great
blessing to mankind as well as to India, this being
largely due to the fact that religion had nothing to do with
its origin ; also that the English monarch being the official
head of Brahmanism, it is a sort of disloyalty for Chris-o India, this being
largely due to the fact that religion had nothing to do with
its origin ; also that the English monarch being the official
head of Brahmanism, it is a sort of disloyalty for Chris-

--- PAGE BREAK ---largely due to the fact that religion had nothing to do with
its origin ; also that the English monarch being the official
head of Brahmanism, it is a sort of disloyalty for Chris-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ENGLAND IN INDIA
319
tianity to interfere with the natural religion of the country .
The old East India Company was a purely mercantile con-
cern ; instead of caring about the institutions or morals of
the country, the harems of some old tradesmen are still
associated with several groups of houses ; they never con-
sidered it necessary that the natives should be clothed like
the English. In this way the traditions of personal liberty
in India were solidified before the country passed under
what is called the " benevolent despotism " of England .
And whatever may be said of the faults of the government
in India, benevolent it certainly is in the most important
sense, - namely, that it has entirely ended the old chronic
wars between tribes and races on points of theology . In
China and Manila, American missionaries, - especially no-
torious since the time of Judson for their ignorance, - can
continue to advance the cross by the sword, but in India
Christianity is compelled to depend on its merits and at-
tractions. The Taeping insurrection and massacres in
China were not the work of any native religionists in that
country, but of a powerful chief excessively converted by
some American missionaries, who began butchering Confu-
cians and Buddhists in accordance with the divine orders
in the Bible for exterminating the Canaanites and the
priests of Baal . If the missionaries in India only knew
more of the people they would tremble to reflect what
might occur if those people should accept the Bible as their
guide. English and American Christians adapt themselves
at home to their systems, and do not accept literally the
sayings ascribed to Jesus that he had come not to send
peace but a sword, and that his disciples should sell their
garments to buy swords . But a long and tragical history
has shown that the Hindus are apt to take abstractions in
serious and practical ways .ce but a sword, and that his disciples should sell their
garments to buy swords . But a long and tragical history
has shown that the Hindus are apt to take abstractions in
serious and practical ways .

--- PAGE BREAK ---that his disciples should sell their
garments to buy swords . But a long and tragical history
has shown that the Hindus are apt to take abstractions in
serious and practical ways .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

320
MY PILGRIMAGE
A little book by Sir William Hunter, entitled " The
Old Missionary," -he told me it was drawn from fact,
- reveals the reason why men of ability and learning
have withdrawn from the missionary field in India. The
missionary, albeit not unorthodox, had emphasized the
gentle, benevolent, and humane elements of his religion,
and blended them with the same elements in the religion
of the humble people around him. He had gained their
affection, and built up a peaceful and happy parish of
native Christians, none of whom could understand a word
of the creeds, but were all able to feel the charm of his
spirit and his charities. But one brilliant Hindu youth of
his parish resolved to become a clergyman ; he studied
the Bible and the Church formulas critically and discov-
ered what the old missionary had kept in the background
.
He insisted on the letter of the creeds and sacraments,
split up the old missionary's parish, ruined all his work,
and brought his grey hairs with sorrow to the grave .
A. gentleman at the English Club at Allahabad sent me
to an old Hindu Solomon there, who spoke perfect Eng-
lish, and of whom I inquired how many Hindu Christians
there were in the place . He asked me how many English
officials there were there . I answered, " Let us say twenty."
"How many servants are allowed each family?"
Per-1
haps five." " Five times twenty is one hundred . There
are one hundred Hindu Christians in Allahabad as long
as those families stay ." '1 But what do their priests and
relations say?" "Not a word . Nobody supposes their
religion is changed any more than their complexion ."
The "Cowley Brothers" are connected with the Church
of England in a technical way, but their mission at
Poonah is not, I was told, adopted by the Church, and
amounts only to a small colony of extreme ritualists gath-hers" are connected with the Church
of England in a technical way, but their mission at
Poonah is not, I was told, adopted by the Church, and
amounts only to a small colony of extreme ritualists gath-

--- PAGE BREAK ---with the Church
of England in a technical way, but their mission at
Poonah is not, I was told, adopted by the Church, and
amounts only to a small colony of extreme ritualists gath-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

NELACANTAH GOREH
821
ered under the headship of Nelacantah Goreh .
I was
sorry that I could not visit Poonah for the purpose of
seeing this man, of whom I had heard much from Max
Miiller, but I was told by friends in Bombay that I would
see in him only a ruin . He was a man of high caste and
of great learning, who by careful study became dissatis-
fied with his Hindu religion, and went to the neighbouring
mission station and asked to be received as a Christian .
It was a mission of illiterate preachers from London con-
venticles, who could not in the least appreciate the great
man who had come into their hands .
They sent him to
their mission house in London, where he was set to do
the drudgery of the establishment, - carrying boxes of
books and tracts, and in the intervals doing manual
work.
All the brains of the mission in India and in
London put together would not have made one brain
equal to that of this poor Hindu scholar. He endured this
for two or three years . "One day," said Max Muller,
"there entered my library a fine-looking man who gave
his name as Nelacantah Goreh, and in attempting to
speak to me in English faltered, and sat down and wept .
I recognized at once that I had before me an Indian of
importance, and began talking to him in Sanscrit. On
bearing this, he arose with shining face, and clasped my
hand, and answering me in Sanscrit, said that he had
been a slave in London, and that at last his patience and
strength had broken down. He had read some of my
books and sought me out. His story deeply impressed
and even moved me ; I called my wife, and after together
making out the whole case, she insisted that he should
remain in our house for the time . He was a most modest
man, but full of knowledge, and we found his conversation
-for he spoke fair English -very interesting .
His ac-se, she insisted that he should
remain in our house for the time . He was a most modest
man, but full of knowledge, and we found his conversation
-for he spoke fair English -very interesting .
His ac-

--- PAGE BREAK ---t he should
remain in our house for the time . He was a most modest
man, but full of knowledge, and we found his conversation
-for he spoke fair English -very interesting .
His ac-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

322
MY PILGRIMAGE
quaintance with the various schools of Indian philosophy
was so great, and his powers of expression so excellent,
that I persuaded him to write a treatise on the subject . I
had in my library all the books to which he might wish to
refer, and with eagerness he set himself to the
.work on a
table provided in his chamber. His little book was pub-
lished, and duly valued by those interested in its sub-
ject - the Vedic Philosophy - and a good literary career
seemed to open before him, but his religious ideas and
feelings were overwhelming ; possibly, too, some of the
High Churchmen had beard of his story and got hold of
him. At any rate, he determined to return to India, and
the last I heard of him was from a friend who recog-
nized him in a motionless figure prostrated before a cross ."
I have followed pretty closely Max Muller's statement,
which I wrote down at the time, and gave a discourse on
Nelacantah Goreh to my people at South Place . I was
told at Bombay that Nelacantah Goreh was entirely with-
out influence at Poonah on his countrymen, that he was
still kneeling before the cross . A living entombment !
In the gigantic image at Elephanta of the Hindu Triad,
Professor Peterson enabled me to trace their transfigu-
ration into the peaceful grandeur of the Buddha . The
professor presented me with the subjoined translation
which he had made from the ancient '° Subliaishitavali "
(garland of sweet sayings) of Vallabhandeva : -
Heart, my heart ! You go down into hell and mount
high above the heavens ; in emptiness of spirit you wan-
der over the universe ; but not by wandering abroad will
you lay hold on God, who is within you, who only can
give you rest.
There is this bond between me and thee - I am of all
men the most miserable, thou art of all beings the most
merciful : it cannot be, Lord, that thou wilt not save me .ou, who only can
give you rest.
There is this bond between me and thee - I am of all
men the most miserable, thou art of all beings the most
merciful : it cannot be, Lord, that thou wilt not save me .

--- PAGE BREAK ---e you rest.
There is this bond between me and thee - I am of all
men the most miserable, thou art of all beings the most
merciful : it cannot be, Lord, that thou wilt not save me .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE WALKISHWUR TANK
393
If I were not a great sinner, if I were not distracted by
fear, if I were not consumed by passion, what need should
I have of a saviour?
In our sickness Himself is the physician and Himself
the medicine ; in darkness, a light ; in rough places, a
path ; in danger, a protection, and in adversity, a brother
;
He is the ship that shall bear me safely over life's un-
sounded sea.
Judge West, whose studies of ancient Parsi literature
had helped me in my " Sacred Anthology," was deep in
Indian lore. He drove with me about the country in his
carriage and took pains that I should see every object of
special interest and significance .
Among the places we visited was the Walkishwur
Tank, associated with a beautiful passage in the " Ra-
mayana." The lake is said to have sprung up at a point
where the arrow of Dasaratha, father of Rama, fell upon
what be supposed to be a stag, but which was Shravan,
seeking water for his parents, athirst in their wanderings .
It is in Hindu romance what fountains called from rock
or desert by Jewish or Christian saints are in other tradi-
tions. The water is surrounded by temples of remarkable
beauty. There is a narrow cleft leading down to the sea,
through which plucky pilgrims are said to be drawn, as a
means of being ' 1 born again "- similar rock clefts, with
similar associations, being known in England .
In Bombay Shankuran Pandit, editor of the " Rig Veda,"
one of the noblest men I ever met, invited a company of
his friends to meet me. Originally from different religions,
they were emancipated minds ; but none of them appeared
to dream of the religious institutions of India ever being
changed. They had fraternally formed their little oasis
of thought and culture in Bombay, and the vast deserts
and jungles of superstition working on by processes ofs institutions of India ever being
changed. They had fraternally formed their little oasis
of thought and culture in Bombay, and the vast deserts
and jungles of superstition working on by processes of

--- PAGE BREAK ---dia ever being
changed. They had fraternally formed their little oasis
of thought and culture in Bombay, and the vast deserts
and jungles of superstition working on by processes of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3P.4
MY PILGRIMAGE
natural evolution, supplied them with materials for psy-
chological and social studies. Having no notion that such
phenomena were caused by any supernatural power, their
reason was not haunted by deity or demon. In these con-
versations the few Parsis present were rather silent and
shy, though it was my especial desire to get at their ideas .
In Cambridge, England, I was told an anecdote of the
Rev. Professor King, author of an excellent work on "The
Gnostics." A Parsi student confided to him that he had
some thought of becoming a Christian. The antiquarian
being stronger than the clergyman in the professor, he
remarked, "There are so many Christians in the world,
and so few Parsis, don't you think you had better stay
where you are?" Unfortunately, however, many of these
Parsis have travelled far away from the noble religion of
Zoroaster,-about as far as Christians from the similar
religion of Jesus . For Jesus and Zoroaster alike said of
the tares, "An enemy hath done this." It is only in the
traditional Parsi ceremonies that I could discover that
morally essential recognition of Ahriman which relieved
Zoroaster's deity from responsibility for the evils of
nature .
By the kindness of a Parsi gentleman I was enabled to
visit the Towers of Silence . There is a strange, almost
mystical, solemnity about this garden, in which at sunrise
I stood for a time alone, gazing at the towers from the
distance of thirty yards, beyond which none must pass who
would return to the abode of men. As soon as a body is
dead it becomes the possession of Ahriman . A demon
tenant of his occupies it .
A chant reached my ear and presently a group of men
in snow-white garments and turbans entered the gateway,
bearing their shrouded burden . They passed silently andA demon
tenant of his occupies it .
A chant reached my ear and presently a group of men
in snow-white garments and turbans entered the gateway,
bearing their shrouded burden . They passed silently and

--- PAGE BREAK ---s occupies it .
A chant reached my ear and presently a group of men
in snow-white garments and turbans entered the gateway,
bearing their shrouded burden . They passed silently and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AT THE TOWERS OF SILENCE
395
quickly towards the towers . Presently there appeared,
twenty yards behind them, another group in snow-white
robes chanting as they rapidly moved, their chant being very
different from any I had heard about Hindu temples. It
was entirely in minor or whining tones, and must have come
from some era in which human nature had not yet found
the consolation represented in the features of this funeral,
which recalled the Egyptian festivities on the entrance of a
soul into paradise. The singers speedily returned to the
garden, where they formed a regular group and intoned
their conversation, occasionally breaking out into a chant .
I was informed that they spoke of the virtues of the
deceased and chanted hymns of the Avesta . I listened,
gazing at the top of the tower, whereon the body had been
deposited and its limbs fastened, face upward to the sun .
Already at its coming a circle of vultures had descended
to perch around the parapet, where they sat perfectly still
during the presence of the corpse-carriers . The moment
when the body was abandoned by its bearers was reported
by the slow and dignified disappearance of these birds,
which presently rose into the air, each bearing some last
contribution of a mortal to the immortal Cosmos . Some-
how this scene impressed me more than the burning pyres
of the Ganges . There I felt how much pleasanter than
burial to the imagination it would be to contemplate in
one's last moments ascending in that fiery chariot to cloud
and ether ; here I felt that the Parsi had a more poetic
prospect of mingling in the currents of organic life, smiling
in flowers, singing in the throats of birds, smiling again in
human loveliness.
The modern Parsis are rarely Zoroastrians . They make
much of the ancient Zoroastrian phrases and details and
names, which, however, only form the frame around the cen-ling again in
human loveliness.
The modern Parsis are rarely Zoroastrians . They make
much of the ancient Zoroastrian phrases and details and
names, which, however, only form the frame around the cen-

--- PAGE BREAK ---loveliness.
The modern Parsis are rarely Zoroastrians . They make
much of the ancient Zoroastrian phrases and details and
names, which, however, only form the frame around the cen-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

326
MY PILGRIMAGE
tral and essential principle of Zoroaster-DUALISM . Per-
haps it might be strictly described as religious and ethical
Dualism, as one cannot feel certain that Zoroaster applied
his generalization to the entire constitution of nature,
though even this is suggested in his division of the universe
into "the living and the not-living." 1 I once had a conver-
sation at the Sorbonne with James Darmesteter, translator
of the Zendavesta, and could not get from him any say-
ing of Zoroaster justifying the notion of an original being
from whom Ormuzd and Ahriman -the Good Mind and
the Evil Mind -both descended. This notion has been
imported by Parsi theology, and I cannot help suspecting
that this importation was from the more western world,
where the idea of an omnipotent Creator and supreme
Ruler of the universe was evolved.
Under a like pressure from Science the belief in a per-
sonal Satan steadily declined, and with him the concep-
tion of a redeemer of mankind from satanic thraldom .
The mind of the Protestant world became substantially
deistic. The time foreseen by Paul (1 Cor. xv, 28) had
come in a subconscious spiritual way, - "When all
things have been subjected unto him, then also shall the
Son himself be subjected to him, that God may be all
in all ."
A fortiori
the devil was subjected, became
God's devil, and it being no longer admissible that God
should be even indirectly the author of sin or a tempter,
Satan virtually disappeared from Christian theology
.
But when all of these preternatural powers had faded
out of the scientific and philosophic mind, the idea re-
mained of a Cosmos, and of its corollary, the essential
i "Gaya and ajyaaiti," translated by Haug "reality and unreality ."
The translation "living and not-living" was sent me by Max Muller in
answer to my request for an exact rendering .ry, the essential
i "Gaya and ajyaaiti," translated by Haug "reality and unreality ."
The translation "living and not-living" was sent me by Max Muller in
answer to my request for an exact rendering .

--- PAGE BREAK ---"Gaya and ajyaaiti," translated by Haug "reality and unreality ."
The translation "living and not-living" was sent me by Max Muller in
answer to my request for an exact rendering .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ZOROASTRIAN DUALISM
327
unity of nature .
This Monism is almost a scientific
axiom in England and America, but on what evidence
did it rest? Why should things all come from one sub-
stance instead of two, or even more?
In reading my
friend Herbert Spencer's theory of the " unknowable from
which all things proceed," I felt that this idea of unity
was a sequel to Deism, and the survival of a superstition .
Though I was not able to search nature scientifically,
the Zoroastrian generalization - " the living and the
not-living " - organic and inorganic - supplied a fair
provisional theory for ethical studies, where I had more
competency. I always regret that it was only after John
Stuart Mill's death that I discovered (in his Autobio-
graphy) that he inclined to the Zoroastrian Dualism .
I
was much impressed by the work of Rev. Dr. Abbot, a
learned educator in London," Kernel and Husk," in which
he concedes to rationalism most of its reclamations, but
insists on the existence of a force of evil in nature not
divinely controlled . He could not, be said, visit the poor
and suffering and tell them their agonies were inflicted by
his deity. It was this transfer of the issue from the old
metaphysical one of moral responsibility to the tortures
in nature which was so striking in Master Abbot's book .
Ormuzd (Ahuramazda, the shining one) in the Zend-
avesta is not in our modern sense a god at all ; he is a
source of light trying to inspire men and women to con-
tend against the forces of darkness ; he asks for no glori-
fication, claims no majesty ; he is lowly and in pain, and
tells Zoroaster that he is unable to achieve anything ex-
cept through the souls'of good and wise men and women .
Woman is central in Zoroaster's religion ;
the Holy
Spirit is female (Anahita), and her sister-saviour on earth
is Armaiti. There are no beings higher than these women .good and wise men and women .
Woman is central in Zoroaster's religion ;
the Holy
Spirit is female (Anahita), and her sister-saviour on earth
is Armaiti. There are no beings higher than these women .

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd women .
Woman is central in Zoroaster's religion ;
the Holy
Spirit is female (Anahita), and her sister-saviour on earth
is Armaiti. There are no beings higher than these women .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

828
MY PILGRIMAGE
Ahuramazda's struggle with Ahriman is not a celestial
one -not against rebel angels or giants -but to repress
savagery and violence on earth, to humanize the people,
develop fine souls, sow the fields, and make the wilderness
blossom like a rose .
One afternoon when Judge West, the great scholar in
Parsi religion and literature, was taking me on
a drive
about a league outside Bombay, it appeared to me pre-
sently that I was making an
excursion into Eden .
Whether it was the flowers and vines, the trees and birds,
or the riches of this man's mind lavished on me when he
found that Zoroaster was my star in the East, it seemed
a sufficient end of existence to be out there under the soft
sky. Suddenly the judge stopped his horse, as something
caught his eye. On the trunk of a large tree some natural
formation suggestive of the phallic yoni had been made
realistic by fresh paint . It struck me as coarse and ob-
scene, but on thinking it over afterwards I concluded that
the impression was due to my own provincialism .
There
was really a suggestion of the primitive pure imagination
to which all things are pure recognizing the symbol of
creative life. The sanctified snake had not yet crept into
this little garden to make the Hindu Eve ashamed, and
there were several floral offerings and sacrificial cakes at
foot of the tree.
How often do the old Biblical legends occur to me in
India! The tree-and-serpent legend- so unrelated to He-
braism that it is not alluded to afterwards in the Bible
until Paul dug it up as a stone to throw at womankind -
finds its right place in oriental mythology . Cain (smith)
and Abel (passing)
are allegorical representatives of
the great schism between the two wings of the Aryan race,
- the agriculturists, founders of settlements and cities,ental mythology . Cain (smith)
and Abel (passing)
are allegorical representatives of
the great schism between the two wings of the Aryan race,
- the agriculturists, founders of settlements and cities,

--- PAGE BREAK ---in (smith)
and Abel (passing)
are allegorical representatives of
the great schism between the two wings of the Aryan race,
- the agriculturists, founders of settlements and cities,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ENGLISH, OR ARYAN ?
829
workers in metal, in Persia, where blood sacrifice was
abhorred ; and the nomads who after vainly besieging the
settlements descended ou India and enslaved its tribes
and continued to offer blood like Abel until it became
human blood. There is a significant oriental
tradition
that the wife found by the artisan (Cain) in the land of
Nod was named" Azura ." The general name in Persia
for a divinity is " Asura," and of course the word means
demon in India .
Walking in a crowded and rather poor part of Bom-
bay, in company with an intelligent Babu, I remarked
just before us a large and shapely woman whose legs, bare
to the knees, were white .
4° Do European women also go
barelegged out here?" I asked the Babu . " She is Hindu,"
he said ; " the whiteness is leprosy .
We could not see
the woman's face, being behind her, but I felt certain that
the white legs, with some pink tint, were not diseased . She
was carrying a basket, - or rather something of that kind,
-and her dress was like that of others around her, none
of them seeming to notice her peculiarity. One sees now
and then a Eurasian of light complexion, but my Hindu
companion did not suggest that as an explanation in this
case, and I concluded that it was either that of an Eng-
lishwoman or of " reversion " to the Aryan type . All of
the great European races are derived by ethnographers
from those Aryans ("nobles"), but bow did the latter
lose their white complexion? It was told of a Methodist
preacher, in slavery times, that on coming to his Southern
circuit he said from the pulpit, "This county has the
reputation of being particularly religious and moral, but
where did all those mulatto faces in that negro gallery
come from ? " Those singers of the Vedas, come from the
paradise of the gods in the Himalayas, who describedrticularly religious and moral, but
where did all those mulatto faces in that negro gallery
come from ? " Those singers of the Vedas, come from the
paradise of the gods in the Himalayas, who described

--- PAGE BREAK ---and moral, but
where did all those mulatto faces in that negro gallery
come from ? " Those singers of the Vedas, come from the
paradise of the gods in the Himalayas, who described

--- PAGE BREAK ---

330
MY PILGRIMAGE
themselves as " fair," and subdued the
G 1 dark " aborigines
of India and ruled them two thousand years, may have
given rise to the legend that the sons of the gods were
fascinated by the daughters of men .' The high-caste
Brahmans are of lighter complexion than the lower castes,
but if their ancestors were ever as white as the Indo-Ger-
manic, the dark pigment of the aborigines must have been
much more potent than the white of their masters .
Deterioration is the inevitable fate of the conquerors
and enslavers of weaker races . Much is said of spreading
civilization ; but whatever civilization -if there be any -
goes into the subjugated, goes out of the conquered . The
finest-looking and the fairest of the descendants of the
ancient Aryans are not the Brahmans but the Parsis, and
before they were driven out of their country by the Mos-
lems they produced a literature surpassing that of India .
Although there were among the Parsis in Bombay sev-
eral erudite Pahlavi scholars, - Anklesaria, Minochiharji,
Patel, - I was disappointed to find the few I met - per-
sonally attractive as they were -unaware of the surpass-
ing beauty of their ancient religion !
That no great Parsi
writer appears may be due to the fact that the sombre
genius of Buddha, renouncing the world, is more attractive
to the puritanical spirit of England than the sunshine of
Zoroaster telling men that heaven is in their own homes
and fields .
I experienced a sense of social suffocation in meeting
companies of cultivated Hindu gentlemen without the
1 The paradise of the gods, not unpoetically located in the shining heights
one sees across the plains of India, are still populated by the theosophic
imagination with Mahatmas, -the "Brothers," -some of whom have
lived hundreds or even thousands of years 1 It must have been an over-
sight of our admirable Sir Martin Conway that in climbing the highest
of those peaks he did not "interview" Indira nor even Koathoomi.hundreds or even thousands of years 1 It must have been an over-
sight of our admirable Sir Martin Conway that in climbing the highest
of those peaks he did not "interview" Indira nor even Koathoomi.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ousands of years 1 It must have been an over-
sight of our admirable Sir Martin Conway that in climbing the highest
of those peaks he did not "interview" Indira nor even Koathoomi.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

RAMABAI
331
presence of ladies. Some of these scholars confessed to
a similar feeling . They deeply deplored the then recent
conversion of Ramabai to Catholicism . This highly edu-
cated Hindu lady, having emancipated herself from the
zenana, went about giving lectures to her sex on their
duties and rightful position . Her lectures were attended
by many Hindu ladies, and it appeared that the zenana
glacier was about to melt under her eloquence ; but she
came under the influence of Nelacantah Goreh of the
Cowley Brothers, and went farther than he desired in
the Christian direction he pointed her . She went into a
Roman Catholic sisterhood. This ended all her influence
among her sisters and her own race . The
C° progressive"
Hindus regarded this as the going out of a shining light
from which they had hoped much. And some of us who
have listened to Ramabai in England and America share
in the disappointment .
It is probable that the zenana in India and the convents
for women in Europe alike originated in the ages of tribal
wars and invasions when the protection of sanctuary or
asylum established itself. My friend General Pitt Rivers
studied the various caps worn by women in Brittany and
discovered that they were all variations of the nun's cap . In
emerging from the convent-asylum the women would proba-
bly continue this badge of protection, as on battlefields a
cross on the arm protects those who are there for succour
.
Bgt the same evolutionary forces which have drawn the
vast majority of European women out of the convent have
been steadily drawing the women of India from the zenana .
The streets of Indian cities already swarm with women,
and if the peaceful regime of English rule is not overthrown
by the recrudescent militarism, the zenanas are likely to
become as antiquated as the convents of France. Theies already swarm with women,
and if the peaceful regime of English rule is not overthrown
by the recrudescent militarism, the zenanas are likely to
become as antiquated as the convents of France. The

--- PAGE BREAK ---th women,
and if the peaceful regime of English rule is not overthrown
by the recrudescent militarism, the zenanas are likely to
become as antiquated as the convents of France. The

--- PAGE BREAK ---

332
MY PILGRIMAGE
women seen on the streets, and in the sacred bathing-tanks,
and at the many religious festivals, are by no means all of
the "pariah" class ; the majority of them, though not so
richly dressed as those of the zenana, -judging by the
high-caste ladies I saw at the Calcutta Exposition on
Ladies' Day, - are quite as good-looking . The presence
in India of so many English families, whose ladies drive
about and enjoy themselves, and show themselves kind and
charitable to their Hindu neighbours, is doing much to
unbar the doors of the zenana .
These English ladies
rarely try to " convert" their neighbours ; that is " bad
form."
There was a good deal of conversation among the ra-
tionalistic Indians in Bombay, of all types, concerning the
deceased Brahmo leader, Keshub Chunder Sen, apropos
of the proposal of leading English scholars and statesmen
to erect a monument to him . At the risk of some reitera-
tion I must say something more about him .
It became plain to me that Brahmoism (Hindu theism)
had proved a failure so far as the hopes of its founders
and friends in England were concerned .
It was in my
South Place Chapel that Rammohun Roy was welcomed
to England by its eloquent minister, W. J. Fox, in 1834 .
That was a dawn of the new interest of cultured England
in Hindu religion. Mr. Fox was surrounded by the best
men and women, - Harriet Martineau, Leigh Hunt, J . S .
Mill, Eliza and Sarah Flower (who wrote "Nearer, my
God, to Thee ! ") and all of the leading Unitarian minis-
ters. It was in that homage to the grand Indian orator who
had begun the work of emancipating his countrymen from
°~ idolatry," as it is called, that the Unitarian Association
dropped the title " Christian " and called itself " The Brit-
ish and Foreign Unitarian Association ."
But Rammohunng his countrymen from
°~ idolatry," as it is called, that the Unitarian Association
dropped the title " Christian " and called itself " The Brit-
ish and Foreign Unitarian Association ."
But Rammohun

--- PAGE BREAK ---

RAMABAI

--- PAGE BREAK ---led, that the Unitarian Association
dropped the title " Christian " and called itself " The Brit-
ish and Foreign Unitarian Association ."
But Rammohun

--- PAGE BREAK ---

RAMABAI

--- PAGE BREAK ---

KESHUB CHUNDER SEN
333
Roy was a man of the world-though by no means a
worldly man -and wished to free his countrymen from
their ecstatic superstition about absorption in deity. He
was not much interested in Christianity but had formed a
conception of Jesus which led him to protest against the
European paintings representing him (Jesus) as a white
man. Keshub Chunder Sen bad perhaps heard of this. He
wrote me a letter from India saying that a friend of his
there had discovered that most of the story of Christ was
derived from India, and asked if I could secure a London
publisher for such a work . I replied that the resemblances
between the narratives in the New Testament and several
in Hindu legends bad been much discussed in Europe
and America, but a learned and ably written book of that
kind would surely find a publisher in London . Keshub
was such an egoist that he could not learn anything .
When he visited England he began his discourses in my
Chapel, and with several of his companions was the guest
of our beloved chapel treasurer, George Hickson, at
Earlswood House, Highbury . His first discourse as well
as his conversation revealed to me that he had come to
England to teach, not to be taught, which was what he
needed. At the great reception given him in St . James's
Hall, where many distinguished men and women were
present, he appealed to them passionately, " Come unto
me ! " He used the phrase repeatedly, and the impression
was not pleasant. I cannot help thinking that he held
some vague messianic theory of his mission . Professor
Newman told me that some of his followers once knelt
and worshipped him, and when criticised because he did
not prevent them he said that he did not like to stop the
flow of devout religious feeling . He used the word Bhakti,
I think, in the sense of divine exaltation, the benefit ofiticised because he did
not prevent them he said that he did not like to stop the
flow of devout religious feeling . He used the word Bhakti,
I think, in the sense of divine exaltation, the benefit of

--- PAGE BREAK ---did
not prevent them he said that he did not like to stop the
flow of devout religious feeling . He used the word Bhakti,
I think, in the sense of divine exaltation, the benefit of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

334
MY PILGRIMAGE
which did not depend on its cause or the object to which
it was directed . I had some hopes of him when he led his
people into the movement for the suppression of infant
marriages, but in the midst of it all he gale his own
infant daughter in marriage to a little personage of title,
and that was fatal to his general influence . Max Muller,
Sir William Hunter, and others found excuses for him,
but his congregation in Calcutta diminished, and it is
probable that the severe judgments of Hindu reformers
unbalanced his mind and led to that ascetic fasting under
which, as I have already stated, his large frame suc-
cumbed. I contributed something for his monument at
Calcutta because Sir William Hunter thought it would
produce a good general effect there, and also because the
Brabmo movement was in its origin connected with my
London chapel .
But with none but kind feelings towards Keshub Chun-
der Sen personally I had some fears about the effect on
young Hindus of seeing a monument erected chiefly by
influential Englishmen to the leader of a sect, -and that
sect strictly fenced off by creed and usages from the
unorganized fraternity of scholars in India reared in
different religions . I dreaded, too, the puritanical leaven .
Mozoomdar spoke of the theatres with the horror that
our old Methodists had made me familiar with, and said
the Hindu actresses were bad characters . This I knew to
be mere prejudice against institutions in Calcutta which
were doing much for civilization and happiness .
Similar feelings exist even among many theists in Eng-
land. I once gave a Sunday lecture at St . George's Hall,
London, surrounded by a scenic landscape remaining from
some play given there during the previous week, and Miss
Frances Power Cobbe wrote me that though she was pre-ay lecture at St . George's Hall,
London, surrounded by a scenic landscape remaining from
some play given there during the previous week, and Miss
Frances Power Cobbe wrote me that though she was pre-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BHAKTI
335
sent she could not enjoy it because of her distress at seeing
anything suggestive of a theatre.
Some English writer complained of Renan that he not
only made Jesus a man, but a Frenchman
! The criticism,
however, was inspired by the fact that in Great Britain
Jesus has been made a Puritan Englishman . Renan's
"Life of Jesus," whatever its faults, revealed in Jesus
wit and humour, impulsiveness, enthusiasm of humanity,
poetic genius, appreciation of feminine beauty . Are these
exclusively French?
In truth, that ancient antagonism between the hard
ascetic sacrificial spirit and the genial human and gentle-
manly spirit, which so long made the conflict between the
Jahvist and the Solomonic schools of Jerusalem, keeps
them fighting their eternal duel in Europe and America,
and gradually extending their war over the world .
The modern enthusiasm for Buddha, despite his atheism,
is because of his supposed moral asceticism and Puritan-
ism. It is accompanied by a sort of rage against Krishna
because of his supposed Solomonic disregard of conven-
tionalities, his mythical sixteen hundred wives, his flute,
and the unpardonable similarity of his birth-legend with
that of Jesus .
There is no doubt that later efforts to give mystical
interpretation to the youthful pranks of Krishna, after his
deification, developed a religion of Bhakti (Faith) which
must be morally dangerous . Professor Wilson, a great
orientalist, states that in the Puranas the doctrine of Faith
renders Conduct wholly immaterial .
It matters not how atrocious a sinner a man may be,
if he paints his face, his breast, his arms, with certain
sectarial marks, or, which is better, if he brands his skin
permanently with them with a hot iron stamp ; if he is

--- PAGE BREAK ---may be,
if he paints his face, his breast, his arms, with certain
sectarial marks, or, which is better, if he brands his skin
permanently with them with a hot iron stamp ; if he is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

336
MY PILGRIMAGE
constantly chanting hymns in honor of Vishnu ; or, what is
equally efficacious, if he spends hours in the simple reit-
eration of his name or names
;
if he die with the word
Hari or IRama or Krishna on his lips, and the thought
of him in his mind, he may have lived a monster of ini-
quity, - he is certain of heaven .
Wilson thought that in this particular of the vital im-
portance of faith the Vishnu-Krishna worship was " indi-
rectly" influenced by the diffusion of Christianity . John
M. Robertson, M . P., commenting on the paragraph just
quoted from Wilson, says, "It cannot be denied that all
this bears a very close resemblance to the practical appli-
cations of the Christian doctrine of faith in European
history, and that that is of all Christian doctrines the one
which may with most plausibility be held to have origi-
nated, in Europe, with the New Testament ." 1 Robertson,
however, finds the doctrine implicitly given in the Bha-
gavat Gita, which he regards as too early to have been
influenced by Christianity .
The date of that work is
variously placed between the second century before, and
the second after, our era. It is doubtful whether the doc-
trine of salvation by faith could have been carried from
Palestine to India without connecting with it the doc-
trine of vicarious martyrdom. There is no suggestion of
that kind in the life or death of Krishna . Indeed, one may
almost suspect a repudiation of that doctrine in the com-
monplace deaths of Krishna and Buddha - the former by
an accidental wound in the heel, the latter from an illness
brought on by eating pork.
In the beginning of the sixteenth century, Chaitanya,
recognized by Keshub Chunder Sen as "the Prophet of
Nuddea," revived Vishnuism, and has had worshippers
1 Christ and Krishna, p . 117.ating pork.
In the beginning of the sixteenth century, Chaitanya,
recognized by Keshub Chunder Sen as "the Prophet of
Nuddea," revived Vishnuism, and has had worshippers
1 Christ and Krishna, p . 117.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eginning of the sixteenth century, Chaitanya,
recognized by Keshub Chunder Sen as "the Prophet of
Nuddea," revived Vishnuism, and has had worshippers
1 Christ and Krishna, p . 117.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VISHNU-KRISHNA SECTS
887
even to this day who believe him to have been an incar-
nation of Vishnu. It was he who gave exaltation to the
divine name, by the utterance of which he is said to have
worked miracles . His followers discard all luxuries, touch
not meat or wine, live on the bare necessaries of life, dis-
regard caste, and consider mendicancy for the purpose of
entire self-dedication to God honourable. After his death
(1527) a sect arose among his followers who asserted the
spiritual independence of women . They seem to be not
very different from our American Shakers .
11 In their mo-
nastic enclosures," says Sir William Hunter, "male and
female cenobites live in celibacy, - the women shaving
their heads, with the exception of a single lock of hair . The
two sexes chant together the praises of Vishnu and Chai-
tanya in hymn and solemn dance. But the really impor-
tant doctrine of the sect is their recognition of the value
of women as instructors of the outside female community .
For long they were the only teachers admitted into the
zenanas of good families in Bengal . Fifty years ago,
they had effected a change for the better in the state of
female education
; and the value of such instruction was
assigned as the cause of the sect having spread in Calcutta ."
Out of these movements arose in the same century the
rather aristocratic Krishnaism of which Vallabha-Swami
was the apostle . "The special object of his homage," says
Sir William Hunter, '° was Vishnu in his pastoral incar-
nation, in which he took the form of the divine youth
Krishna, and led an Arcadian life in the forest . Shady
bowers, lovely women, exquisite viands, and everything
that appeals to the luscious sensuousness of a tropical
race are mingled in his worship. His daily ritual con-
sists of eight services, in which Krishna's image, as a
beautiful boy, is delicately bathed, anointed with essences,s sensuousness of a tropical
race are mingled in his worship. His daily ritual con-
sists of eight services, in which Krishna's image, as a
beautiful boy, is delicately bathed, anointed with essences,

--- PAGE BREAK ---tropical
race are mingled in his worship. His daily ritual con-
sists of eight services, in which Krishna's image, as a
beautiful boy, is delicately bathed, anointed with essences,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

338
MY PILGRIMAGE
splendidly attired, and sumptuously fed ."
11 This sect per-
forms its devotions arrayed in costly apparel, anointed
with oil, and perfumed with camphor or sandal-wood . It
seeks its converts not among weavers, or leather-dressers,
or barbers, but among wealthy bankers and merchants,
who look upon life as a thing to be enjoyed, and upon
pilgrimage as a holiday excursion, or an opportunity for
trade."
Keshub Chunder Sen spoke to me a good deal when he
was in London of the ill-treatment of the Hindus by the
average unofficial English business men resident in India .
He gave me instances in which some of them were struck
and many insulted . In my journeyings between Calcutta
and Bombay, in first-class carriages, I was constantly
thrown with such residents, and the burden of their talk
was angry abuse of the Hon . Mr. Ilbert for his proposal to
combine native with white jurymen
in trials where per-
sons of both races were equally involved . Their tone was
much the same as that with which some of the Southern-
ers in America denounce the provisions for negro equality .
What I have said about inappreciation of the great
advantages of English rule to India is quite consistent
with possible disadvantages to the British colonists . It is
hardly possible for a white race to dwell with a race of col-
oured subjects without deterioration . I remember hearing
an ethnographical lecture by Professor Huxley, in which,
while pointing out on a map the smallness of Great
Britain in contrast with India, he said casually, " That
this small island should rule that vast country, with many
times its population, is the most striking instance I know
of the power of mind over matter ." It was the only time
I ever heard Huxley speak with the slightest jingoist
accent, and I doubted that the ruler was not altogetherthe most striking instance I know
of the power of mind over matter ." It was the only time
I ever heard Huxley speak with the slightest jingoist
accent, and I doubted that the ruler was not altogether

--- PAGE BREAK ---stance I know
of the power of mind over matter ." It was the only time
I ever heard Huxley speak with the slightest jingoist
accent, and I doubted that the ruler was not altogether

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ENGLISH RULE IN INDIA
339
" mind " nor the ruled " matter." I found in India that
the peaceful rule of England there was indeed due to the
good sense of England in sending out many eminent
scholars and men of science to fill the chief offices, and
comparatively few military men and soldiers .
The young
men passing through English universities revered Huxley
and the scientific men and the scholars sent out of them,
and yet the Hindus generally did not love the English
among them, nor their government . There were heredi-
tary traditions of wrongs and cruelties transmitted from
the ages before such scholars as Max Muller and others
had awakened the western world to the splendours of
oriental literature .'
In India I steadily realized not only that the true reli-
gion was that of Zoroaster, but that fundamentally the only
practicable religion is the struggle of Good against Evil .
That is what everybody is necessarily doing. Why then do
I feel disappointed about these masses of the ignorant in
' " Blessed are the lowly, for they shall inherit the earth ." Sublime para-
dox, which young ambition may despise but gray experience knows true I
The conquerors of the earth do not really possess the earth
; it possesses
them. Gibbon smiles at Livy, who, he says, tries to persuade us that Rome
conquered the world in self-defence . But such are the conditions. When-
ever a nation makes a conquest, it must live up to it or down to it ; must
surround every subjugated country with a Monroe doctrine, ever expanding
till it involves hostility to the whole world and loss of all that free-will,
which alone can really inherit the earth, and enjoy it . Daniel Webster's
rhetoric was splendid when in the Senate he spoke of Great Britain as
that "Power whose morning dram-beat, travelling with the sun and keep-
ing time with the stars, encircles the earth with one continuous strain of
the martial airs of England ." But what has it profited England to encircle
the whole world and lose its real soul, its freedom, so that it has had to
fight nearly every race, - Hindu, Russian, American, French, Chinese,
Spanish, Egyptian, Kaffir, Boer, Tibetan, - in self-defence
; every war
being one for which England now hangs its head for shame . - From my
oration at Dickinson College, June 6, 1906
.ench, Chinese,
Spanish, Egyptian, Kaffir, Boer, Tibetan, - in self-defence
; every war
being one for which England now hangs its head for shame . - From my
oration at Dickinson College, June 6, 1906
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---sh, Egyptian, Kaffir, Boer, Tibetan, - in self-defence
; every war
being one for which England now hangs its head for shame . - From my
oration at Dickinson College, June 6, 1906
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

340
MY PILGRIMAGE
India? I suppose that unconsciously I expected to see the
great epics reflected in their religious festivals instead of
sacrificial superstitions . But after all, were not these poor
people struggling against Evil, - disease, hunger, death,
- in the only way they could? They are not physicians, nor
learned, nor wealthy, nor even voters
; are they then to
give up even the feeling that their humble altar offerings
and prayers may be doing some little to help the good
side ? And when I hesitate about this, and fear that when
Evils are resisted as persons -Satans, Ahrimans - the
resistance is ineffectual, because unscientific, the over-
whelming sense of Fate confounds me . A population of
300,000,000 whose most imperative religious duty is to
multiply, must inevitably act inorganically. It cannot have
the free thought or free agency of an individual .
Those little boys I saw in the Calcutta Exposition weav-
ing with shuttles obedient to a tune sung to them - each
note signifying a thread colour - were only the more com-
plex cerebral part of the loom . What, then, is this vast
automatic loom called India, -what is it weaving?
English threads . Even the missionaries, who dread the
Darwinians and sceptics at home, are cooperating with
them in India. For the logic with which they expose the
Hindu "idols " is a boomerang recoiling on their own
Christian idols, and the result is that the Indian mind is
steadily becoming irreligious. And it is the new song of
the mind educated by England which spins and increas-
ingly directs the children with their shuttles . But the
children will go on with their old happy festivals until
English wealth and knowledge give them happier ones .
While I was working at my own little loom, and weav-
ing an ideal India with Zendavestan threads, a fine
scholar in London, Samuel Laing, M . P., who had madeth and knowledge give them happier ones .
While I was working at my own little loom, and weav-
ing an ideal India with Zendavestan threads, a fine
scholar in London, Samuel Laing, M . P., who had made

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SAMUEL LAING

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SAMUEL LAING
341
his pilgrimage in India long before, was developing a like
conclusion . I cannot leave Bombay without inserting
here some tribute to that admirable man and author,
whom I used to meet in the house of my dear friends Mr .
and Mrs . Charles C . Macrae (she was his daughter), and
with what delight I found on my return to England that
a scientific Zoroaster had appeared in him . In his mar-
vellous work, "A Modern Zoroastrian" (the most impor-
ant religious volume written in my time), he maintains
that Christianity has become practically Zoroastrian, with
Christ for their Ormuzd. His grand work-long out of
print, I fear, - rises finally into song : -
Hail 1 gracious Ormuzd, author of all good,
Spirit of beauty, purity, and light
;
Teach me like thee to hate dark deeds of night,
And battle ever with the hellish brood
Of Ahriman, dread prince of evil mood -
Father of lies, uncleanness, envious spite,
Thefts, murders, sensual sins that shun the light,
Unreason, ugliness, and fancies lewd -
Grant me, bright Ormuzd, in thy ranks to stand,
A valiant soldier faithful to the end
;
So when I leave this life's familiar strand,
Bound for the great Unknown, shall I commend
My soul, if soul survive, into thy hand-
Fearless of fate if thou thine aid will lend.
The ideal temple in Bombay is the Jain. I was told
that there are only half a million Jains in India, but
they are wealthy and educated, and erect their beautiful
temples - which all may freely enter - each in the cen-
tre of a flower garden . The " images " are works of art .
The statue resembling Buddha is not reclining nor slum-
bering in any Nirvana, but upright and open-eyed . There
is fair Padmava,
11 Lady of the Lily," and her husbandhe " images " are works of art .
The statue resembling Buddha is not reclining nor slum-
bering in any Nirvana, but upright and open-eyed . There
is fair Padmava,
11 Lady of the Lily," and her husband

--- PAGE BREAK ---

342
MY PILGRIMAGE
Parsanatha -both purely human .
On a glass door stained
with pictures were side by side Yasoda nursing Krishna
and Mary nursing Jesus . Without priesthood, without
sacrifices, the Jain's daily worship is to gather flowers
from the temple-garden, or from his own, and
strew
them before those forms -man and woman -
saying" Salutation
to the saints, to
the pure beings,
to the
sages, to the devout in all the world! "

--- PAGE BREAK ---le-garden, or from his own, and
strew
them before those forms -man and woman -
saying" Salutation
to the saints, to
the pure beings,
to the
sages, to the devout in all the world! "

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER XVI
Homeward - The Flying Dutchman - Our
` Lady of the Peking' - A
letter of John Bright-" Chinese Gordon " in the Soudan and in Palestine
-Pilgrimage to the Krupp Gun Works at Essen, Germany -Address
at Dickinson College, Pennsylvania .
A
ND now Homeward
Every week the "Bombay Times" prints a list
of the deaths there, and usually several caused by cholera
.
These are generally ill-fed and poorly housed natives,
and the list causes no alarm. But while I was there an
English gentleman died of cholera, and this was so unlike
the snobbish character of Death that the event was tele-
graphed to Europe, and after we left Aden none on our
homeward bound ship was permitted to land in Egypt .
Even the mails were not admitted, and an urgent dispatch
was sent to the canal bank in a bottle. My hope of pass-
ing a week in Palestine was thus defeated .
The most interesting acquaintance I made on the voy-
age was a Zanzibar workman, -the blackest man I ever
saw and one of the most finely formed . He generally
stripped to the waist for his work, and his head, profile,
features were as refined and beautiful as his bust . He
spoke English, and I used to go to the fore part of the
ship before sunrise to talk with him when he was not
much occupied. From him I learned some of the Zanzi-
bar folk-lore . One morning he told me that if I had. only
risen a little sooner I might have seen the Flying Dutch-
man. He had seen its dark sail on the horizon, but it
never remains visible for more than a few moments . So

--- PAGE BREAK ---f I had. only
risen a little sooner I might have seen the Flying Dutch-
man. He had seen its dark sail on the horizon, but it
never remains visible for more than a few moments . So

--- PAGE BREAK ---

$44
MY PILGRIMAGE
long lasts the Promethean legend of Captain Bernard
Fokke, who defied the Creator by plating his ship with
sheet-iron, which instead of thereby sinking was the swift-
est ship afloat. Indeed to this day steam and solid iron
ships cannot overtake the heaven-defying craft
which
must speed without reaching any port till Judgment Day !
Between Aden and Venice there was in our fairly large
company only one woman,- Mrs . Fraser of Melbourne .
There was not even a female servant on the Peking
.
The
attractive and literary young lady had the wit to appreciate
the humorous aspects of the situation, -one of these being
the fact that she bad recently obtained a divorce.
She
was familiar with the works of W . D. Howells and needed
no explanation of my allusion to
t° The Lady of the
Aroostook." Had Howells been along he might have writ-
ten a variant of the story in which the lady instead of
being taken under chivalrous protection of some youths
would extend a sort of protection to the desolate bachelors
who for more than a week could see no feminine face but
hers. No queen in history ever reigned over her realm so
modestly, gracefully, and graciously as this fair young
dame over her floating empire . We were quarantined in
the gulf of Venice four days-ninety-eight hours,-and
so rigidly that when the captain opened the pigeon-house
to let the birds enjoy the air, officers came
out near
enough to command that they should be housed, lest one
should travel to Venice (miles away) and carry the ebol-
era !
In Venice, Carnival was beginning, and the street
scenes vividly reminded me of George Eliot's descriptions
in "Romola." When I reached Paris the Mardi-gras
mirth and grotesquerie were in full glory .
On Wednes-
day (March 13, 1884) 1 was at my home in Bedford Park .minded me of George Eliot's descriptions
in "Romola." When I reached Paris the Mardi-gras
mirth and grotesquerie were in full glory .
On Wednes-
day (March 13, 1884) 1 was at my home in Bedford Park .

--- PAGE BREAK ---Eliot's descriptions
in "Romola." When I reached Paris the Mardi-gras
mirth and grotesquerie were in full glory .
On Wednes-
day (March 13, 1884) 1 was at my home in Bedford Park .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

,, CHINESE GORDON "
345
On my return to England I found the nation pro-
foundly moved by the death of General Gordon in the
Soudan. The mingled grief and rage was something like
that which filled New England when John Brown was
executed in Virginia, but as Gordon was slain in
fair
combat while invading a foreign country there was none
to rage against except the government.
The Prime Min-
ister (Gladstone) had to defend himself as well as he
could in a case where the attack was animated solely by a
recrudescence of the crusading spirit .
" Chinese Gordon,"
as he has been called, was now spoken of by the national
clergy as " Our Christian Soldier ." The wrath of the
clerical aristocracy, reinforced by that of the Queen her-
self, seemed about to flood the Soudan with a deluge of
blood, and the one great voice which in every such crisis
had pleaded for peace- that of John Bright - was silent.
After a good deal of consultation with his influential
friends, 1 resolved to write to John Bright . My twenty
years of friendship with him was a sufficient warrant for
doing so, 4nd in addition I had been engaged by some
of his admirers in America to convey to him an invi-
tation to visit our country. So the letter was written and
the following answer returned : -
Oxz Asa, ROCHDALE, April 9, '85.
MY DEAR MR . CONWAY, - I am very sensible of the
kindness of your letter. It is not likely that I shall visit
your country
I am too far on in life for such an adven-
ture .
As to the main purport of your letter I could write
much, but shall only write little . I left the Government
nearly three years ago, giving up what men prize greatly,
and separating myself from Mr . Gladstone, with whom
I had acted for many years.
This was my protest
against the bombardment of Alexandria . I retired fromyears ago, giving up what men prize greatly,
and separating myself from Mr . Gladstone, with whom
I had acted for many years.
This was my protest
against the bombardment of Alexandria . I retired from

--- PAGE BREAK ---what men prize greatly,
and separating myself from Mr . Gladstone, with whom
I had acted for many years.
This was my protest
against the bombardment of Alexandria . I retired from

--- PAGE BREAK ---

346
MY PILGRIMAGE
the Government, and abstained from any further open
condemnation of my late colleagues . The outrage at
Alexandria has been followed by other blunders and
other crimes. I have looked on with grief and shame -
but in public I have said nothing or almost nothing
.
When war is on there is little use in protesting or con-
demning - I discovered that thirty years ago, during
the Crimean war. If I could have done anything, it could
only have been done by the overthrow of the Government
- and their successors must have been those whose policy
was and is worse than that of those they followed - a
policy which, if insisted upon, would probably have in-
volved a war with France. Viewing all the circumstances
of the case, I have thought it was right for me to be silent .
My position in regard to this unhappy business is peculiar,
and I must follow such light as I have . I could not speak
upon it without the use of language such as I am not
willing to utter when dealing with the mistakes of my
late colleagues, and of my personal friends . My lan-
guage and purpose would be misunderstood, and wrong
motives be attributed to me . One member of the Govern-
ment is my colleague in the representation of Birming-
ham ; it would be painful for me to discuss the question
before our Constituency, and I have spoken on other
topics - partly on Foreign policy, but without direct re-
ference to the Egyptian muddle .
You speak of the good people you know who ask why
I am silent. I cannot now give them an answer - if they
could trust me in so great a question, perhaps they will
trust me even though I am silent when they would expect
me to speak . If I have any influence with the Govern-
ment it has not been withheld, but I have not appeared
in public as their accuser . I believe, looking to the home
interests of the Country, and to its foreign interests also
I have done what was my duty in this difficult case . We
want a thorough change in our notions of foreign policy
- when it will come I know not. Perhaps some great ca-
tastrophe is approaching . I sometimes suspect it . Earth-
quakes come without noise of footstep . Europe is nearly
ready for one, and its nations, we amongst them, may
need a lesson.s some great ca-
tastrophe is approaching . I sometimes suspect it . Earth-
quakes come without noise of footstep . Europe is nearly
ready for one, and its nations, we amongst them, may
need a lesson.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[Letter from John Bright]
ONE ASH,
ROCHDALE
.
w

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
I
,a+,A4
-/
ra G-, a, . J t L4
~F,
Lei..
`6 11,, .l .
J pAt.11
vG ZL3 4.
4/ u
J7a J 'G."I/"-
I
A 4/.."/ 447h L.-/
.
1,x L.,
•-4-- '
,( iv,,,
h-A 7Twaa4
7uc" 7tz `2I.:-C4,
Az4
'
4. c `r"R"
;.,"I /
h.a.
/A /2c
"" A. la
.
!'+
a' 4-"0.
4-- ifil'
4.
~ctw, 4
t 3
t•
el c.,.
T
4 ` 1--
I&`*/%/
p'J ,(/•
`' 4-
4- 4 o c /4- 1-
4
Q ~~ S
&..,
4-,4 -1.1.q
~,! c ..a a a .
4
,
IV

--- PAGE BREAK ---

v AL.J..,/ 4&
IS.CI.
"~!{
t/,
~
,,J ~!d
/
J.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A'.. ) i.../Z ._)
A
4,4
~~ •
-scc_t
h
4j
k
4•y4 7
S Acts
A• .
. dr?
ktcl a te.
~~YA"
r"-0IL rZ
I Id
1t/a S f 1'ia, .
L~
A:_3 S
d4-, s+.
4.i,

--- PAGE BREAK ---t/,
~
,,J ~!d
/
J.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A'.. ) i.../Z ._)
A
4,4
~~ •
-scc_t
h
4j
k
4•y4 7
S Acts
A• .
. dr?
ktcl a te.
~~YA"
r"-0IL rZ
I Id
1t/a S f 1'ia, .
L~
A:_3 S
d4-, s+.
4.i,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

GORDON'S MISSION
347
Forgive this unsatisfactory reply to your very friendly
letter. I feel sure you will not misunderstand me .
I am,
Very respectfully yours,
JOHN BRIGHT.
Meanwhile from the Foreign Office, and from Gordon's
friend, W . H. Mallock, and from Gordon Hake, his rela-
tive, the facts and documents concerning Gordon and
his mission flooded the papers and reviews, revealing the
strangest character and wildest conduct known to modern
history .
Gordon seemed to have passed much time in devout
saunterings in the "" Holy Land," discovering sacred local-
ities. For instance, a hill near the Mount of Olives ap-
pearing something like a human form, its skull-like knoll
reveals the exact spot of the Crucifixion. Gordon had
made friends with the Soudanese and repeatedly declared
Egyptian rule there to be "the curse of the country ."
As he also knew their language, be appeared the'best man
to send on a mission, -not military, but for persuasion
and negotiation, -to secure release of the Egyptians held
by the Mahdi .
Gordon accepted the mission and the instructions with
perfect agreement, but when he arrived in Egypt the
Khedive held up before him a divine mission, and Jahvist
instructions. He was to command the hosts of the Egyp-
tians, subdue the false Messiah (Mahdi) and prepare the
way of the True Messiah . Gordon's diary contains entries
that one might expect in a diary of Peter the Hermit .
'°I
take this prophecy as my own" (Isa . xix) :
"And it
shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the Lord of
hosts in the land of Egypt." When the Mahdi has sent
him a warning, Gordon writes the word and interrogation

--- PAGE BREAK ---. xix) :
"And it
shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the Lord of
hosts in the land of Egypt." When the Mahdi has sent
him a warning, Gordon writes the word and interrogation

--- PAGE BREAK ---

348
MY PILGRIMAGE
"Armageddon?"
One need only read the passage in
Revelation xv, 12-16, to realize the fatal fanaticism of
that word "Armageddon" in such a crisis.
It was Mahdi
meeting Mahdi . But these revelations seemed only to in-
crease English enthusiasm for " Our Christian Soldier,"
and I reached the conclusion that if one scratches an Eng-
lishman with a Moslem spear he will find a crusader .
About this time I was requested by my friend the late
Joseph Harper to visit Essen, and write for " Harper's
Magazine" an account of the Krupp works . It was a rather
droll commission for a Peace man like myself, but it was
not inappropriate except by reason of my deficiency in the
science of guns . I find that at that time I was still under
the dominion of the belief in some universal law of pro-
gress. That implies of course that the work of destruc-
tion has its legitimate moral place .
In India, whose most
popular deity is Siva the Destroyer, I journeyed for many
weeks amid peaceful homes and villages, charmed by the
fact that over those innumerable people no cloud of war
appeared. And now my first pilgrimage was to the land
of European Siva, well represented by Von Moltke, this
most accomplished commander of Europe, whom I had
seen at the head of his armies in France, and who bad
just answered a Peace Association : " Your dream is not
merely unpractical, it is not even beautiful ."
At that
time I was naive enough to believe that war had crushed
.
slavery in America and Cxsarism in France .
So at Essen, with sixteen thousand people dwelling in
an ideal town created by the Works, I saw the huge
guns as the glittering vertebra of monster saurians pre-
paring the way for a human development attainable only
through their extinction. They are, I thought, rude pio-
neers of a civilization whose peaceful abodes shall be pavedra of monster saurians pre-
paring the way for a human development attainable only
through their extinction. They are, I thought, rude pio-
neers of a civilization whose peaceful abodes shall be paved

--- PAGE BREAK ---ns pre-
paring the way for a human development attainable only
through their extinction. They are, I thought, rude pio-
neers of a civilization whose peaceful abodes shall be paved

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE KRUPP GUN WORKS
349
with their fossil bones . As I write now, long after these
illusive rainbows have vanished, I may report my pilgrim-
age to the Krupp Works as visible through the vista of
my later pilgrimage in time .
This may be done by the
following extract from an address given at Dickinson
College (Carlisle, Pa.) : -
Hence that dread doubleness of nations, each sending
out sweet waters and bitter. Thirty-five years ago my
duties as a journalist carried me to battlefields of France,
where men were mowed down like grass and villages
burned and desolated.
Some time after, like duties
carried me to the town of Essen, in Germany, seat of the
Krupp Works, the largest forge of arms in the world .
There I saw two kinds of perfection . One was the town of
the Krupp workpeople. Socialistic reformers, -Babeuf,
Fourier, St. Simon, Robert Owen, -have for more than
a century been trying in vain to build ideal communities,
and such have been successfully built only in romances.
But where social enthusiasts have failed the Krupp Gun
Works have succeeded. Exploring those beautiful habita-
tions with happy wives and children, the library, read-
ing-room, school, baths, church, gymnasium, playground,
hospital, I walked through a veritable Utopia, -all the
visionary romances become real. Then I saw the other
perfection, - the exquisite evolution by which the iron ore
passed from furnace to furnace, forge to forge, - announ-
cing to the scientific refiner by tints of flame, red, yellow,
blue, when it was ready to advance another stage towards
that purity of heart when it becomes Bessemer steel, and
then attain total sanctification as a gun able to carry a
shell for miles . They entrusted me to a scientific manager
who knew English, and revealed certain things I was not
to print, - secrets of state. He showed me a transcendent
gun, - a beauty. This dainty creature was surrounded by
artistic shells, as Venus might be by Cupids, each shell
with a face or dial, on which a hand is turned to a figure .
The shell flies, and at the exact second pointed to by the
dial hand infallibly explodes . When I saw the array of
these perfect guns, with their families of shells nestlingnd is turned to a figure .
The shell flies, and at the exact second pointed to by the
dial hand infallibly explodes . When I saw the array of
these perfect guns, with their families of shells nestling

--- PAGE BREAK ---

850
MY PILGRIMAGE
around them, and the workmen's pretty and well-dressed
children playing around, the touching scene recalled the
early western epitaph of
f° Jeames Hambrick, who was
shot with a revolver, one of the old-fashioned kind, brass-
mounted, and of such is the kingdom of Heaven."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER XVII
SEEKING THE BELOVED
F
ROM the deck of our quarantined ship in the waters
of Egypt, gazing towards the consecrated land I was
forbidden to enter, I asked myself the reason of my keen
disappointment.
Was it a real sentiment about
the
1 1 blessed acres " which the feet of Jesus had trod, or was
it curiosity, that caused my longing? Something of both
perhaps, but one thing seemed certain, -my pilgrimage
to the Wise Men of the East could not be continued in
Palestine . What Wise Men were there?
But what I had seen and learned in Asia inspired me
with a feeling that I had not yet come close enough for
personal recognition to the wise man to whom Chris-
tendom was crying Lord, Lord, while doing the reverse
of what he said . I had known him as the crucified, had
recognized him in the oppressed slave, and in many a
suffering Cause, but my occasional tentative essays about
the individual Jesus - the flesh-and-blood man - still
left him a sort of figure-head. There remained then a pil-
grimage of exploration to be made, and I settled myself
down to make it on shipboard during our week (nearly)
of quarantine. But that exploration has continued to the
day when this volume goes to press, and from notes writ-
ten from time to time during twenty years are selected
those contained in this final chapter.
It is in my own
mind some justification of its inclusion here that it partly
grew out of my oriental pilgrimage .

--- PAGE BREAK ---g twenty years are selected
those contained in this final chapter.
It is in my own
mind some justification of its inclusion here that it partly
grew out of my oriental pilgrimage .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

352
MY PILGRIMAGE
In the tale from the Arabic Gospel with which I set
out (Prolegomena), the Zoroastrian pilgrims who had fol-
lowed a star till it took human shape, then led them back
to their own country, were asked by the princes
what
they had brought back . They displayed a child's swad-
dling-band given them by its mother, and which their
sacred fire could not consume . This they pressed to their
lips and to their eyes . My own princes-my learned mas-
ters - will find that in the preceding pages I have brought
back little that is new, unless errors about names and
Hindu philosophies .
But I have brought back a swad-
d~ing-band too! Yosada used it for the infant Krishna,
and Maia for the babe Buddha, and Bathsheba for
Solomon (Wisdom vii, 4 : "I was nursed in swaddling
clothes, and that with cares ") ; and when, after pressing
it to my lips and eyes, I looked over towards Palestine,
and saw in vision Lady Mary and her babe (as I had
seen them in the Jain temple and the Positivist temple),
the swaddling-band revealed itself as a symbol of religion
in its loving, unsophisticated infancy . Fear may be the
mother of Devotion, but Love is the mother of that real
faith in all hearts which no fire - nor menaces of fire -
can consume. Amid all the metaphysical and ceremonial
cinders of oriental religions, and the fierce demons pla-
cated in temples but not worshipped, the humble homes
know only the tender light shed from sweet faces on
their walls, -mothers, lovers, wives, children, heroic men,
-each picture with its simple tale or idyl
.
From my swaddling-band point of view polytheism has
its advantages . "To worship a god not your own is
mere flattery," says Confucius . It is no flattery of the
god but of some devotee of his who will hate you or kill
you if you do not sacrifice your supreme ideal to his idol.hip a god not your own is
mere flattery," says Confucius . It is no flattery of the
god but of some devotee of his who will hate you or kill
you if you do not sacrifice your supreme ideal to his idol.

--- PAGE BREAK ---wn is
mere flattery," says Confucius . It is no flattery of the
god but of some devotee of his who will hate you or kill
you if you do not sacrifice your supreme ideal to his idol.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LOVE PERSONIFIED
353
A collectivist deity has for me no religious meaning at
all .
"Do you believe in a God? "
Which? Ormuzd,
Brahma, Jupiter, Jehovah, Allah, Trinity, Triad, Mumbo-
Jumbo? The mind may be " god-fearing," but the heart
believes in the beloved ; a universal " God " would be as
unreal as a universal sweetheart . That which the heart
loves it enshrines, and to me it is the loving, unselfish,
giving, beautiful side of nature
; it is Love, not omnipo-
tent, but feminine . Should I personify it, there would be
in my vision a composite picture of the lovely and beloved
faces that watched over my infancy, and smiled on me
through life, and rendered it impossible for my heart to
bow at any shrine of Will or Omnipotence .
To Power I
offer no prayer, but to a beloved woman I have often said,
and said beside her deathbed, " Forgive me my sins ! "
" My mother," said Jesus, - " My mother the Holy
Spirit bore me up to the great mountain Tabor."
There is perhaps some mystical significance
in the
faith that the perfect man is born of woman alone .
In 1876 I printed a collection of discourses in London,
under the title, " Christianity," the motto beneath being,
Whoso will be great, let him serve .
The six sections were
headed : Its Morning Star ;
Its Dawn ; Its Day ;
Its
Decline ; Its Afterglow ; The Morrow.
In 1877 I ap-
pended it to my volume entitled, " Idols and Ideals ."
There is nothing in the essay that is of much importance
to me now to cancel, but what I feel to be wanting in it
is the lack of any deep personal feeling about Jesus
.
I
exalt his character and teachings, but in a philosophic
way, as if carving a novel figure on the sepulchre of his
spirit, - sepulchre to me represented by the ecclesiastical
system called Christianity ; and the following words ap-
peared to me then a sufficient epitaph : -g a novel figure on the sepulchre of his
spirit, - sepulchre to me represented by the ecclesiastical
system called Christianity ; and the following words ap-
peared to me then a sufficient epitaph : -

--- PAGE BREAK ---the sepulchre of his
spirit, - sepulchre to me represented by the ecclesiastical
system called Christianity ; and the following words ap-
peared to me then a sufficient epitaph : -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

354
MY PILGRIMAGE
"Nor will the Morrow take away Christ. It will restore
him to the World from which patristic metaphysics have
removed him. It will no longer be considered any degra-
dation to call him a man . He will be seen as one of a high
and holy fraternity of seers and teachers, stretching
through all ages, whom no one race can claim, who speak
for universal right and reason ."
I then preferred the name " Christ " to " Jesus," be-
cause Christ was a " royal title " which Jew and Gentile
united to bestow on a poor man whose only claim to
kingship was that he bore witness to the truth . Before
passing through Egypt I had reached a definite belief that
Jesus was the real name, probably given by his parents in
homage to Jesus Ben Sira, principal author of the brilliant
heretical book entitled "Wisdom," to which Christians
gave the title " Ecclesiasticus." The name would thus be
an indication that Jesus was brought up in an anti-jahvist
household and trained in the secular wisdom associated
with the Solomonic school ; and that he was himself
trained in boyhood in the academy of cosmopolitan Hillel .
In my belief Jesus was, as Paul says, a rich man, who by
devoting himself to a public cause became sufficiently
poor to accept the pecuniary support of certain persons of
rank, -such as Mary entitled the Magdalene
; Joanna,
the wife of Herod's steward ;
Susanna,
" and many
others."
In the absence of any mention of Jesus by any con-
temporary writer I could reach my conviction of his actual
existence only by a purely literary investigation .
At the close of one day we were compensated for our
quarantine imprisonment on Suez -Canal by a sort of after-
glow which shaped itself into a mirage . It needed but
slight help of imagination to see lake and palms on theay we were compensated for our
quarantine imprisonment on Suez -Canal by a sort of after-
glow which shaped itself into a mirage . It needed but
slight help of imagination to see lake and palms on the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONFRONTING THE SPHINX
355
horizon, and perhaps all my " lost bowers " of faith might
have reappeared had not the black curtain of Egyptian
night fallen .
My friend Charles Dudley Warner, who visited me in
London on his return from the Nile, -about which he
wrote two charming books, -was impressed by an incident
which would not have been noticed by any mere traveller .
It made me recognize in him a brother pilgrim who had
come as far from the old Methodist meetings in Madison
County, New York, as I had from those of Stafford in
Virginia. Amid the solemn monuments of an immemorial
Past, sitting alone on his barge far in the depths of night,
with the mysteries of Sphinx and Pyramid and Temple
around him, he heard from a neighbouring barge a flute
sending out in the midnight the air of the familiar hymn, -
How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord,
Is laid in your faith by his excellent word .
Warner knew by instinct that this was some happy
Yankee confronting the Sphinx with his solution of the
enigma of the universe. There was a story that when
Ralph Waldo Emerson first stood before the Sphinx she
said to him, -You're another ." This is a fair enough
story to derive from lines in Emerson's first poem . : -
The old Sphinx bit her thick lip, -
Said, "Who taught thee me to name?
I am thy spirit, yoke-fellow,
Of thine eye I am eyebeam ."
But this humble believer, with his flute and his "firm
foundation," coming from the same region as the philoso-
pher who floated my foundation in early youth, far away
in Virginia, gave me a mystical theme to ponder as I sat
on the deck, able to visit Egypt only in dreams .
I began then to turn my little searchlight upon my

--- PAGE BREAK ---early youth, far away
in Virginia, gave me a mystical theme to ponder as I sat
on the deck, able to visit Egypt only in dreams .
I began then to turn my little searchlight upon my

--- PAGE BREAK ---

356
MY PILGRIMAGE
own consciousness. What remained of my old founda-
tion? Especially did that being whom my early faith be-
held moving amid the people over there, healing their
sick, raising their dead, and teaching renunciation of the
world, -did he ever exist at all? Or did any great man
exist there in the remote past who could have any value
for me? I could croon hymns as well as Warner's invisible
neighbour with the flute ; and I did remember over there
a favourite old hymn of which my experience had changed
only a word or two : -
Hark, my soul, it is the Lord 1
'T is the Spirit, hear her word :
Jesus speaks, he speaks to thee,-
' Say poor pilgrim, lovest thou me ?
I delivered thee when bound,
And when bleeding healed thy wound,
Sought thee wandering, set thee right,
Turned thy darkness into light .'
Did these lines have more than pathos for me,-did they
hold any truth for me? It is perfectly true that in every
vicissitude of thought, belief, life, that man had led me .
It was he who when, in my twentieth year, I ceased to be-
lieve that he was Almighty God, led me gently out of my
pulpit and bade me follow my light. It was he who gave
me strength to leave father, mother, and home for the
sake of what I believed the truth, and gave me courage to
suffer exile and face peril for the sake of the negro slave
.
That carried me to the feet and the friendship of Emer-
son, of Longfellow, and ultimately of the poets and leaders
of thought and science in my time . Could I not, then just
past my fiftieth year, take to myself what Jesus said to
one of his friends, "Are you sure you love me?"
Yes, I love thee, but it is since leaving thee as a pre-
ternatural being . I find indeed that even in the old days

--- PAGE BREAK ---at Jesus said to
one of his friends, "Are you sure you love me?"
Yes, I love thee, but it is since leaving thee as a pre-
ternatural being . I find indeed that even in the old days

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MESSIANIC "MYSTERY"
357
my breast was unconsciously detaching Jesus from the
Cosmos. Who can love a Cosmos?
Also, I had to detach Jesus from the
libretti of the
second and third century plays, which show him as the
central messianic figure of allegorical dramatis personae,
- Judas (type of Jewry) Iscariot (a word made up of
Issachar, couching between two burdens, - servant under
tribute,-and scortea suggesting the money-bag, it being
necessary to explain the unbelief of the Jews, despite
miracles, as arising from self-interest)
; Mary Magdalene
(see chapter xii) ; Saul, alias of Paul, in adaptation to the
proverb, "Is Saul also among the prophets
;
Jesus Ba-
rabbas, and Bar Jesus, equivalents of Antichrist ; Elymas
the "sorcerer" (magus), i . e. Mr. Worldly-wise-man . The
figure of John is a notable example of the freedom with
which theatrical exigencies determined things .
Although
John is called a son of thunder (Boanerges), and Jesus
repeatedly rebukes him for his ferocity and murderous in-
tolerance, he is assumed to be the specially beloved dis-
ciple, so called in the gospel traditionally ascribed to him
(John) though his name is not on it nor in it . The tableau
of a beloved leaning on Christ's bosom and a Satan (Judas)
on the other is too picturesque for any spectator to reflect
on the morality of this favouritism for one disciple and
the selection of the Satan to be treasurer .
In witnessing Rostand's play, " La Samaritaine," I re-
marked the religious feeling produced in the audience by
the deception with which Jesus introduces himself to the
woman. He says the sun is hot, and asks for water, but
when after some talk she offers him water he says, " I have
no thirst except for thy soul ." It must be that all Chris-
tians feel that the incident at Jacob's well is a scene,
none being troubled by the affectation of saying,
11 Call thyter he says, " I have
no thirst except for thy soul ." It must be that all Chris-
tians feel that the incident at Jacob's well is a scene,
none being troubled by the affectation of saying,
11 Call thy

--- PAGE BREAK ---e
no thirst except for thy soul ." It must be that all Chris-
tians feel that the incident at Jacob's well is a scene,
none being troubled by the affectation of saying,
11 Call thy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

358
MY PILGRIMAGE
husband," when be knew she had none . Some instinctive
sense of dramatic licence must be charitably credited to
readers of the story of the resurrection of Lazarus who feel
no shock at the succession of untruths and deceptions
attributed to Jesus . He is represented as staying away
from the sick man, in order that he may die ; he affects to
believe that Lazarus is only asleep, but finding his disci-
ples pleased with the prospect of recovery, in which case
there would be no miracle, he becomes frank
(parresia)
and assures them that Lazarus is dead ; be tells his disci-
ples privately he is glad Lazarus is dead ; he tells Martha,
when she comes out to him alone, that her brother shall
rise ; but when her sister Mary comes out, accompanied by
her Jewish consolers, Jesus breaks out into vehement
groans and lamentations, lashing himself (etarasen eauton)
into this sham grief over a man at whose death he has
connived and who would presently be alive !
Even in his
prayer over Lazarus the pretence is kept up, and his fa-
ther is informed, in an aside, " I know that thou bearest
me always, but because of the multitude around I said it,
that they may believe that thou didst send me ." Thus does
the Fourth Gospel if taken prosaically sink Jesus morally
into the grave of Lazarus .
But the resurrection of Lazarus is a transparent drama
made out of the parable of the rich man and the beggar .
This parable is Zoroastrian and very ancient, being found
in the Bahman Yast .' Among the visions of Zoroaster
was a
11 celebrity with much wealth, whose soul, infa-
mous in the body, was hungry and jaundiced and in hell .
And I saw a beggar with no wealth and helpless, and his
soul was thriving in paradise ." (It will be noticed that
in the Christian version the rich man's only sin was his
1 Sacred Books of the East, vol. v. p . 197 .ar with no wealth and helpless, and his
soul was thriving in paradise ." (It will be noticed that
in the Christian version the rich man's only sin was his
1 Sacred Books of the East, vol. v. p . 197 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---d helpless, and his
soul was thriving in paradise ." (It will be noticed that
in the Christian version the rich man's only sin was his
1 Sacred Books of the East, vol. v. p . 197 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

RESURRECTION OF LAZARUS
359
riches.)
Abraham's words to the rich man-"neither
will they be persuaded if one rose from the dead"-
were not adapted to a faith built on a resurrection, and
that parable is not found in the Fourth Gospel .
The
resurrection of a supernatural man is not sufficient for a
people not supernatural . Those who had been looking
for a returning Christ had died, just like the unbelievers .
There was a tremendous necessity for an example of the
resurrection of an ordinary man . There is audible in the
story the pathetic cry of the human heart, and the demand
that must be met by any gospel claiming the faith of
humanity. "Lord, if thou hadst been here my brother
had not died ! " Through what ages has that declaration
ascended to cold and silent skies?
It is found in the
Vedas, in Job, in the Psalms . If there is a heart up there,
why are we tortured? To the many apologies and expla-
nations and pretences which imperilled systems had given,
Christianity had to add something more than Egyptian
dreams and Platonic speculations. A dead man must arise ;
it must be done dramatically, amid domestic grief and
neighbourly sympathy ; it must be done doctrinally, with
funeral sermon turned to rejoicings .
And this is all done
in the story of Lazarus in such a way that it might sur-
round every grave with happy visions .
For who, while
tears are falling, will pause to handle the wreaths, and
find whether they are genuine? Who, while the service
is proceeding, will analyze the details, and ask whether it
is possible that Jesus could have practised such deception
and assumed such theatrical attitudes as those described
in . the Fourth Gospel?
The forerunners of the freethinkers of our modern world
were active founders of institutions, political and educa .
tional, but did not dream of building up anything practicalin . the Fourth Gospel?
The forerunners of the freethinkers of our modern world
were active founders of institutions, political and educa .
tional, but did not dream of building up anything practical

--- PAGE BREAK ---pel?
The forerunners of the freethinkers of our modern world
were active founders of institutions, political and educa .
tional, but did not dream of building up anything practical

--- PAGE BREAK ---

360
MY PILGRIMAGE
without the aid of religion . Thomas Jefferson even while
at William and Mary College was a disbeliever in Chris-
tianity, but it was he who at the outbreak of the Revolu-
tion decreed for Virginia a day of fasting . Dr. Benjamin
Rush was a Universalist and Governor John Dickinson
a deist, but in together founding Dickinson College in
Pennsylvania they imported from Scotland a president
and faculty of Calvinists, avowedly because they regarded
it as essential for success to attract the Presbyterians.
Benjamin Franklin was what would now be pronounced
an "infidel," but it was he who moved that the Constitu-
tional Convention (1787) should be opened with prayer .
Wakefield, the founder of the New Zealand Colony, was
a theistic rationalist, but he did not even try to begin or
carry on the work without obtaining aid of the English
clergy, and establishing there the Church of England .
It is probable that such men assumed as an axiom that
the features of religion which they repudiated were
merely incidental to the ethical system on which society
was based . Thomas Jefferson, writing privately to John
Adams, said : -
4° Among the sayings and discourses imputed to him
[Jesus] by his biographers, I find many passages of fine
imagination, correct morality, and of the most lovely be-
nevolence ; and others, again, of so much ignorance, of so
much absurdity, so much untruth, and imposture, as to
pronounce it impossible that such contradictions should
have proceeded from the same being . I separate, therefore,
the gold from the dross, restore to him the former, and
leave the latter to the stupidity of some and the roguery of
others of his disciples ."
Many years ago, Jefferson's granddaughters showed me
the little book in which he pasted passages from the Newnd
leave the latter to the stupidity of some and the roguery of
others of his disciples ."
Many years ago, Jefferson's granddaughters showed me
the little book in which he pasted passages from the New

--- PAGE BREAK ---to the stupidity of some and the roguery of
others of his disciples ."
Many years ago, Jefferson's granddaughters showed me
the little book in which he pasted passages from the New

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4
ETHICS ASCRIBED TO CHRIST
361
Testament which be considered the "gold," everything
miraculous being omitted as dross .
This had already been done (1820) by the learned
Brahman dissident, Rammobun Roy, who published
in
Sanscrit, Bengalee, and English his book "The Precepts
of Jesus, the Guide to Peace and Happiness ."
This book
did not guide the Hindu author to " peace and happiness,"
but brought on him the wrath of both Brahmans and
missionaries . But every pilgrim, from unnatural to nat-
ural religion, has made for himself a similar selection .
Such compilations, -including my own "Sacred Antho-
logy" (1874),-however restricted (by intention) to eth-
ical instructions, leave the mind still in an atmosphere
charged with superstitions . The ethics ascribed to Christ,
such as the " Sermon on the Mount," are largely post-
resurrectional and quasi-miraculous.
They are meant in
large part for people expecting a speedy end of the world .
Therefore they are exhorted to lay up no treasures on the
existing earth, take no thought for the morrow, give all
their property to the poor, disregard family ties, mourn,
make themselves sexless, hate the world, and do or ab-
stain from other things, - conduct which for men and
women living in a permanent world would be immoral
and insane.
The tentative effort of Jefferson to separate gold from
dross in the " Gospels" is creditable, and he shows, I think,
especial acumen in describing Paul as the "first corrupter
of the doctrines of Jesus ." No miracle ascribed to Jesus
is alluded to by Paul, but his fatalism, clerical ambition,
and falsehood in pretending to receive private revelations
from Jesus after death, corrupted the morals of the reli-
gious movement. His immeasurable crime was to restore
in the form of Jesus himself the sacrificial victims Jesuso receive private revelations
from Jesus after death, corrupted the morals of the reli-
gious movement. His immeasurable crime was to restore
in the form of Jesus himself the sacrificial victims Jesus

--- PAGE BREAK ---velations
from Jesus after death, corrupted the morals of the reli-
gious movement. His immeasurable crime was to restore
in the form of Jesus himself the sacrificial victims Jesus

--- PAGE BREAK ---

862
MY PILGRIMAGE
drove from the temple . It is due to Paul that Christianity
rests upon a human sacrifice .'
Turning from the messianic myth and the "mystery," I
find a Jesus in contrast with the post-resurrectional utter-
ances ascribed to him and the accretions which have in-
vested the "Christ" during the ages, and been put into the
New Testament by translators, -such as deriving Jesus
from peasant parents, making his father and even himself
a carpenter. (The word TEKT(0v means any worker in wood.
Joseph may have been a sculptor in wood .) Were the nar-
ratives read as if dug up in Persia and related to Zoroaster,
we should find in them a gentleman, traditionally of high
birth, educated, and in the best sense a man of the world .
He eats and drinks with personages of rank, admires
the Greeks, exalts cosmopolitan Solomon and the " Gen-
tile " Queen of Sheba above the provincial sectarians of his
time, and repudiates priesthood, sacrifices, sabbath, and
pharisaic morality . His familiarity with refined and polite
social life appears in poetic parables and metaphors often
drawn from grand and elegant life, -a lost pearl, masters
of fields and vineyards, wedding garments, royal ambas-
sadors, precedence at feasts, the fine robe and ring, and
the fatted calf.2
1 Paul found the early separatists enjoying annually a merry wine
supper (1 Cor. xi) which Jesus himself had substituted for the Passover,
and suppressed it by pretending that Jesus had appeared to him and told
him it was a sacrament in which his disciples ate his flesh and drank his
blood . The Romans charged the Christians with cannibalism, and grad-
ually this became an accusation of secret human sacrifices . As the Romans
made no distinction between the Christian and non-Christian Jews, the
Christians passed the accusation on to the Passover Jews, and multitudes
of these have suffered - many suffer to this day - under an accusation of
"ritual murder" which originated in the flesh-and-blood sacrament insti-
tuted by Paul's pretence of a personal interview with the dead Jesus .
2 1 cannot quote the parable of the Prodigal Son as a veritable utterancehich originated in the flesh-and-blood sacrament insti-
tuted by Paul's pretence of a personal interview with the dead Jesus .
2 1 cannot quote the parable of the Prodigal Son as a veritable utterance

--- PAGE BREAK ---he flesh-and-blood sacrament insti-
tuted by Paul's pretence of a personal interview with the dead Jesus .
2 1 cannot quote the parable of the Prodigal Son as a veritable utterance

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PREPOSTEROUS LANGUAGE
363
The notion that Jesus drew around him ignorant and
poor "fishermen " is fostered by a democratic age whose
creed is vox populi vox dei . Fancy the absurdity of saying
to poor fishermen the words Jesus is reported as address-
ing (Luke xvii, 7-10) to his apostles alone
: "Who is
there of you, having a bond servant ploughing or keeping
sheep, that will say unto him, when he is come in from
the field, Come straightway and sit down to meat
; and
will not rather say unto him, Make ready wherewith I
may sup, and gird thyself and serve me till I have eaten
and drunken ? "
No matter whether Jesus really said
this or not, the writer of Luke could never imagine any-
thing so preposterous as the use of such language to men
of the lower class .
Divesting all the traditional accounts of everything
that could be called post-resurrectional and
everything
miraculous, -no miracle ascribed to him being known to
any of the early books of the New Testament, the Epis-
tles,- I had to consider whether there were utterances,
original in form if not in substance, derivable from those
fragmentary accounts which could not have been invented
by any of the persons who report them ; and whether put-
ting these together they indicated the presence about that
time of an integral mind, and one of extraordinary genius .
of Jesus, because I think it was twisted by Pauline influence (see Eph . ii,
12, 13, and 14) to represent the relation of Jew and Gentile in the Church .
The Gentile is the licentious prodigal, the Jew the elder brother . But
that Jesus did utter some parable concerning individual immoralities seems
probable from a passage in Eusebius : " The Gospel which comes to us in
Hebrew characters has directed the threat not against the hider but against
the profligate. For it has included three servants, one which devoured the
substance with harlots and flute-women, and one which multiplied, and one
which hid the talent : afterwards that one (the profligate) was received
back, one simply blamed, and one (the hider) cast into prison ." (It seems
that in the original parable the chief usurer was censured .)the talent : afterwards that one (the profligate) was received
back, one simply blamed, and one (the hider) cast into prison ." (It seems
that in the original parable the chief usurer was censured .)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ards that one (the profligate) was received
back, one simply blamed, and one (the hider) cast into prison ." (It seems
that in the original parable the chief usurer was censured .)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

364
MY PILGRIMAGE
St. Augustine, in his Commentary on John, says that
some had removed from their manuscripts the story of
the woman taken in adultery . "I imagine," he adds, "out
of fear that impunity of sin were granted to their wives ."
In that case, too, the story, suppressed in other gospels,
could be preserved only by making Jesus partly take back
his words, " Neither will I condemn thee," by adding, " Go
and no longer sin ." The addition is cant .' As for the
story in itself, -the writing on the ground, the ac-
cusers slinking away, and the title of courtesy with which
Jesus addresses the woman, " Mistress " (Gunai), - I
cannot discover anything similar in eastern or oriental
books . It would have required a first-century Boccaccio
to invent such an exquisite story .2
The most important revelation to me of the Gospel
according to the Hebrews, the only gospel written in Ara-
maic, the language spoken in Jerusalem in the time of
Jesus, is that to which I alluded in my conversation with
Dr. Rajendralala Mitra in Calcutta (chapter xii) . The
sentence has been preserved from this suppressed Ara-
maic Gospel by Epiphanius, who writes (Hi r. xxx, 16)
"And they say that be both came, and (as their so-called
Gospel has it) instructed them that he had come to dis-
solve the Sacrifices : I and unless ye cease from sacrificing,
1 At Grimsby, England, when all doors were closed against John Wes-
ley, a woman of bad repute offered him, without evil intent, a room in her
house . He persuaded her to return to her husband in Newcastle-on-Tyne
and accompanied her thither . That was not cant.
2 My learned friend, John M . Robertson, M . P ., to whom I mentioned the
originality of the story, quoted from one or two Latin authors the sentiment
that an accuser should be himself without the fault he charges . This is
indeed our law maxim, that a plaintiff must come into court with clean
hands, but the art of genius is displayed in the form and colour . As Con-
fucius said, "The hide of a dog and the hide of a panther are the same if
stripped of their decorative hair."ourt with clean
hands, but the art of genius is displayed in the form and colour . As Con-
fucius said, "The hide of a dog and the hide of a panther are the same if
stripped of their decorative hair."

--- PAGE BREAK ---s, but the art of genius is displayed in the form and colour . As Con-
fucius said, "The hide of a dog and the hide of a panther are the same if
stripped of their decorative hair."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WHY JESUS WAS PUT TO DEATH
365
the wrath shall not cease from you ."' Dr. Nicholson is
shocked at this threat, and suspects the Ebionites of hav-
ing altered what Jesus said . But surely it is a true and
grand admonition by one superseding a phantasm of hea-
venly egoism, demanding gifts from men for pacification,
with the idea of Supreme Love .
Dr. Nicholson connects
it, no doubt rightly, with Luke xiii, 1-3, which should
probably read : "There were some present at that very sea-
son who told him of the Galileans whose blood Pilate had
mingled with their sacrifices . And he answered, Think ye
these Galileans were sinners rather than all other Galileans
because they suffered these things? I tell you, No ! And
unless ye cease from sacrificing, the wrath will not cease
from you." That is, they would always be haunted by
the delusion of a bloodthirsty god, a god of wrath, and
see a judgment, not only in every accident, but in every
calamity wrought by fiendish men .
Here for the first time I discovered why the Jews
sought the death of Jesus.
In my Essay on Christianity
(1876) I expressed the belief that Jesus "was not put
to death because of his beautiful moral teachings or his
pure life," but because his religion "rendered a priesthood
totally unnecessary," and because he turned the people
against him by overthrowing their hopes of a national
political Messiah and military deliverer and their future
glory. But the insufficiency of these teachings, or any
teachings, to excite a murderous purpose against Jesus had
already been felt by me before I weighed the words of
the Aramaic Gospel, and even these words alone did not
explain the tragedy.
Denunciations of the sacrifices are
found in several prophetic Psalms, and in the peculiar ex-
pression used by Epiphanius in citing the Aramaic Gospel
(' 1 he both came and instructed them that he had come toions of the sacrifices are
found in several prophetic Psalms, and in the peculiar ex-
pression used by Epiphanius in citing the Aramaic Gospel
(' 1 he both came and instructed them that he had come to

--- PAGE BREAK ---es are
found in several prophetic Psalms, and in the peculiar ex-
pression used by Epiphanius in citing the Aramaic Gospel
(' 1 he both came and instructed them that he had come to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

366
MY PILGRIMAGE
destroy the sacrifices") did not refer exactly to verbal
teaching, but to something done. In revising the life of
Jesus I perceived that the story of the alleged attack on
the money-changers in the temple had been tampered
with, and that the original story in the Fourth Gospel
was : "He made a whip of small cords and drove out of
the temple the sheep and oxen, and to those that sold
doves said, Remove them ." The clumsy importation into
this text of the painstaking effort of the Synoptics to turn
the action of Jesus from a demonstration against animal
sacrifice into zeal for the temple and wrath against a
legitimate business led me to reconsider that legend which
I had totally discarded . I reached the conclusion, that he
whom Church traditions have without scriptural warrant
represented as a sort of peasant surrounded by peasant
disciples, was on the contrary a gentleman of local dis-
tinction, enjoying the friendship of high personages, in-
cluding Pilate and his wife, and that he gathered around
him a number of anti-sacrifice reformers large enough to
protect him in driving the animals out of the temple .
In the narrative of the trial of Jesus in the Fourth
Gospel (xix) the English translations have massed to-
gether the clauses of verse 12, making it appear that the
effort of Pilate to release Jesus was only to secure his
acquittal at the trial. But in the original the first clause
is a distinct sentence : "Thenceforth Pilate sought to re-
lease him." Taken in connection with the warning sent
Pilate by his wife to do nothing against the just man, and
the care of the Roman soldiers not to break any bones,
and the entombment in a rich man's sepulchre without
embalmment, a fair argument may be made that Pilate,
while affecting to surrender Jesus to the mob, continued
his effort to save him, and that when Mary Magdaleneent in a rich man's sepulchre without
embalmment, a fair argument may be made that Pilate,
while affecting to surrender Jesus to the mob, continued
his effort to save him, and that when Mary Magdalene

--- PAGE BREAK ---sepulchre without
embalmment, a fair argument may be made that Pilate,
while affecting to surrender Jesus to the mob, continued
his effort to save him, and that when Mary Magdalene

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DEATH OF JESUS ESSENTIAL
367
went to the sepulchre while it was yet dark, it was to a
living Jesus that she cried, "My Master!" It is possible
that this lady of title and property acted with the advice
of Pilate and his wife, and went while it was yet dark in
order that she might spirit off Jesus to a place of safety .
There is no evidence that Jesus received any fatal wound .
However this may be, it was essential for pious and
ecclesiastical purposes that the purely human Jesus should
be declared dead, and that there should emerge from his
sepulchre a Messiah, -a Christ, - and also that the local
traditions reporting the real man should be entombed,
after selecting from them just such passages as might be
edited and adapted to the supernatural founder of the
Church and Priesthood. For human love and sympathies
had to be preserved, as well as divine sanctities of the
sword and of creeds and inquisitorial power . Fortunately,
however, literary art at the end of the first century and
in the second was not equal to the delicate task of weld-
ing the human Jesus with the Christ finely enough to
prevent criticism from separating them sufficiently to re-
cover, as I think, to some extent at least, the man some
have thought irrecoverable and others entirely mythical
.
Before quoting the ideas that appear genuine in the
alleged utterances of Jesus, let me warn my reader that
they are not selected for their intrinsic truth nor for
their originality . The belief that Jesus was the son of a
peasant or a carpenter, or particularly a man of sor-
rows, -traditional vestment given him to attract the
sympathies of the poor and excite their wonder,-can-
not remain in unprepossessed eyes . There are in the
Solomonic books more than fifty sayings that flower in
the parables and metaphors of Jesus, who was without
any pretension to originality. He was no prophet, nounprepossessed eyes . There are in the
Solomonic books more than fifty sayings that flower in
the parables and metaphors of Jesus, who was without
any pretension to originality. He was no prophet, no

--- PAGE BREAK ---. There are in the
Solomonic books more than fifty sayings that flower in
the parables and metaphors of Jesus, who was without
any pretension to originality. He was no prophet, no

--- PAGE BREAK ---

368
MY PILGRIMAGE
rabbi, and but incidentally a public teacher
; he was, I
believe, a scholar of genius trying to deliver the people
from practically pernicious superstitions, and freely-
eloquently, too-using for that end all the wisdom he
could get hold of .
Next to Siddartha (Buddha) stands in the earliest an-
nals of his life his relative and devout disciple, Ananda.
It is related that Ananda, after a long walk in the
country, met Matangi, a woman of low caste, near a well
and asked her for some water. She tells him she must
not come near him, being of lower caste . Ananda replies,
" My sister, I ask not for thy caste or thy family, I ask
only for a draught of water." She becomes a devotee of
Buddha. There is no reason why this Buddhist anecdote
should not have been known to the scholars of Jerusalem
College, where the great liberal thinker Hillel presided,
and where probably Jesus, as said in Luke (ii, 40, 52),
grew strong, advanced in wisdom, and was beloved .
In Judea the caste was racial, that of being the " chosen
people" of Abrahamic descent, and the especial application
of its pretensions was against the Samaritans . There is
every reason why a man of genius and of high position
should take pains to visit Samaria, natural that he should
talk with a woman there, again natural that when his
friends marvel at his talking with the woman he should
have reminded them of Ananda and the woman of low
caste at the well. The Samaritans themselves could indeed
provide the scenery : they were Assyrians, and Babylon
had long been a great centre of Buddhism, whose mission-
aries and actors were going through all the world .' They
1 "Babylon dtait devenue depuis quelque temps un vrai foyer de
Bouddhisme
;
Boudasp (Bodhisattva) 6tait rdputd un sage chaldeen et
le fondateur du sabisme . Le sabisme lui-meme, qu'dtait-il ?
Ce que son"Babylon dtait devenue depuis quelque temps un vrai foyer de
Bouddhisme
;
Boudasp (Bodhisattva) 6tait rdputd un sage chaldeen et
le fondateur du sabisme . Le sabisme lui-meme, qu'dtait-il ?
Ce que son

--- PAGE BREAK ---ue depuis quelque temps un vrai foyer de
Bouddhisme
;
Boudasp (Bodhisattva) 6tait rdputd un sage chaldeen et
le fondateur du sabisme . Le sabisme lui-meme, qu'dtait-il ?
Ce que son

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A BASE INTERPOLATION
369
would readily associate the Well of Ananda with their
Well of Jacob . But the coincidence relates solely to the
frame around the picture. The repudiation of caste is a
small thing compared with the sublime and far-reaching
thought of Jesus : °° Mistress, believe me, the hour comes
when neither in this mountain nor yet in Jerusalem shall
ye worship the Father : the hour comes, and now is, when
the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit
and in truth ." Who would have been bold enough, even
had he been liberal enough, to clear away all the most
sacred places in one tremendous affirmation? Who could
invent it? Matthew, Mark, Luke suppress it . Even in
the one gospel that ventures to preserve the grand utter-
ance it could only be done by attaching to it a sentence
retracting it : " Ye worship that which ye know not ; we
worship that which we know : for salvation is from the
Jews."
This interpolation in the Fourth Gospel (iv, 22) is the
basest in the New Testament, as the utterance it perverts
is the highest .. It began the sectarian work of choking
up the Well which ,symbolized a human religion in the
water refreshing all without regard to sect or dogma.
'° There is nothing to be seen," says
Stuart-Glennie
("Pilgrim Memories"), concerning Jacob's Well, "but
4tymologie indique : le
baptisme, c'est-a-dire la religion des baptemes
multiplies, la souche de la secte encore existante qu'on appelle chr4tiens
de Saint Jean on mendaites, et que les Arabes appellent
el-mogtasila, les
baptistes." - Renan .
It is even possible that in the Samaritan woman's legend we have a
reappearance of Draupadi, who with Krishna's advice was the wife of the
five Pandava princes, and who pretended to be enamoured of one "who
was not her husband," the warrior Kichaka, who perished because of his
attempts on her loyalty and modesty . In the ancient time of polyandry,
Draupadi was the ideal wife, woman, and princess . She was widely
famous, and is still on the stage in India .ed because of his
attempts on her loyalty and modesty . In the ancient time of polyandry,
Draupadi was the ideal wife, woman, and princess . She was widely
famous, and is still on the stage in India .

--- PAGE BREAK ---tempts on her loyalty and modesty . In the ancient time of polyandry,
Draupadi was the ideal wife, woman, and princess . She was widely
famous, and is still on the stage in India .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

370
MY PILGRIMAGE
beside a little mound of ruins, a shallow pit half choked
with rubbish ." The rival sects surrounding the "holy
places " with their gaudy temples - each maintaining its
Gerizim or its Jerusalem, its Mecca or Rome or Constan-
tinople -are all unconsciously attesting by their neglect
of Jacob's Well that in two thousand years Christendom
has never been able to appreciate, much less invent the
sublime utterance associated with it . The utterance -
wheresoever or to whomsoever spoken - is that of a great
thinker and a great heart . Who was it?
It is not a question of whether there had not been as
great thinkers -or greater -who spoke with equal catho-
licity before our era
; but the simply historical question
whether there was one such at the beginning of our era,
and whether we are to identify him as the individual to
whom the paradox is ascribed, with timid reservation, in
the (anonymous) Fourth Gospel.
Setting aside all that is of messianic, post-resurrectional,
perfunctory, or supernatural accent in the reported sayings
of Jesus, and conceiving him as a man of genius who
never dreamed of founding a new religious organization,
I subjoin the sentences and statements which I accept (on
literary grounds) in substance just as I accept the reported
utterances of Socrates and Confucius .
I begin with that declaration which, translated into
action, risked - and possibly cost - his life .
I am come to dissolve the Sacrifices ; and unless you
cease from sacrificing, the Wrath shall not cease from you .
Go you and learn the meaning of this :
I desire merci-
fulness, not sacrifice .
If you carry a gift to an altar, bethink thee whether
thy fellow man has any claim upon thee ; leave there thy
gift for the altar unoffered and first answer the need of
man.-
fulness, not sacrifice .
If you carry a gift to an altar, bethink thee whether
thy fellow man has any claim upon thee ; leave there thy
gift for the altar unoffered and first answer the need of
man.

--- PAGE BREAK ---fice .
If you carry a gift to an altar, bethink thee whether
thy fellow man has any claim upon thee ; leave there thy
gift for the altar unoffered and first answer the need of
man.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SAYINGS OF JESUS
371
If you love not your brother man whom you have seen,
bow can you love God whom you have not seen?
If thy brother hath offended in anything and bath
made thee amends, seven times in a day receive him .
Simon said, Seven times in a day? Jesus answered, I
tell thee also unto seventy times seven ; for in the pro-
phets likewise after they were anointed by the Holy Spirit
utterance of error was found .
The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sab-
bath .
Beholding a man working on the Sabbath, Jesus said
to him, Man, if thou knowest what thou doest, blessed are
thou ; but if thou knowest not, thou art under a curse, a
mere law-breaker.
Let your light shine before men . A lamp is not lit to
be put under a bushel .
The lamp of the body is the eye . If thine eye be sound,
the whole body is illumined ; if the eye be diseased, the
whole body is in darkness. If the inner eye be darkened,
how great is the darkness!
Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof .
By their fruits both trees and men are known.
Each tree is known by its own fruit.
Just now my mother the Holy Spirit took me by one
of my hairs and bore me up on to the great mountain
Tabor. 1
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do
ye even so to them : on this hang all the law and the
prophets .
The lawyer to whom Jesus said, Love thy neighbour
as thyself, asked, Who is my neighbour? Jesus said : A
certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho
;
and he fell among robbers, which both stripped him and
beat him, and departed leaving him half dead . And by
chance a certain priest was going down that way ; and
when he saw him he passed by on the other side. And
i This isolated fragment is quoted simply because of the significance
of
the fact that in the only reference, to the Holy Spirit by the pre-resurrec-
tional Jesus he personifies it as a woman .
This heresy alone was enough
to suppress the Aramaic Gospel .e significance
of
the fact that in the only reference, to the Holy Spirit by the pre-resurrec-
tional Jesus he personifies it as a woman .
This heresy alone was enough
to suppress the Aramaic Gospel .

--- PAGE BREAK ---e fact that in the only reference, to the Holy Spirit by the pre-resurrec-
tional Jesus he personifies it as a woman .
This heresy alone was enough
to suppress the Aramaic Gospel .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

379
MY PILGRIMAGE
in like manner a Levite also, when he came to the place,
and saw him, passed by on the other side. But a certain
Samaritan as he journeyed, came where he was : and when
he saw him he was moved with compassion, and came to
him, and bound up his wounds pouring on them oil and
wine ; and he set him on his owil beast, and brought him
to an inn and took care of him . And on the morrow he
took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said,
Take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, I,
when I come back again, will repay thee . Which of these
three, thinkest thou, proved neighbour to him that fell
among the robbers? And he said, He that spewed mercy
on him. And Jesus said unto him, Go, and do thou
likewise.
Now as they went on their way, he entered into a
certain village : and a certain woman named Martha
received him into her house. And she had a sister called
Mary, which also sat at the Lord's feet, and heard his word .
But Martha was cumbered about much serving ; and she
came up to him, and said, Lord, dost thou not care that my
sister leaves me to serve alone? bid her help me . Jesus
said Martha, Martha, thou art anxious and troubled about
many things
; one dish is enough : Mary hath chosen a
good share, which must not be taken from her . (No doubt
said with some humour .)
The divine sway comes not visibly, so that a man may
say, Lo here ! lo there !
for it is with (or within) you. It
is like unto leaven which a woman hid in three measures
of meal, till it was all leavened .
Suffer the little children to come to me
; forbid them
not ; of such is the kingdom of the heavens .'
Many that are first shall be last, and last that shall
be first .
The mother and brothers of Jesus said to him, John
the Baptist baptizeth for remission of sins : let us go and
be baptized by him . But he said to them, Wherein have
1 Although Jesus at times uses this phrase, " kingdom of the heavens," it
is oftener ascribed to him in a sense he repudiated with emphasis ; it was
not something external, in another world, nor in the future, nor was it
anything royal.phrase, " kingdom of the heavens," it
is oftener ascribed to him in a sense he repudiated with emphasis ; it was
not something external, in another world, nor in the future, nor was it
anything royal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the heavens," it
is oftener ascribed to him in a sense he repudiated with emphasis ; it was
not something external, in another world, nor in the future, nor was it
anything royal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SAYINGS OF
JESUS
373
I sinned that I should go and be baptized by him except
perhaps this very thing that I have said is ignorance .
John the Baptist is great, yet he that is but little in
the (real) kingdom of the heavens is greater . For from
the days of John the Baptist till now this kingdom (that
is within) suffers by violence, and by the violent who
would take it by force.
It is like unto a grain of mustard seed, which a man
took, and cast into his own garden ; and it grew, and
became a tree ; and the birds of the heavens lodged in
the branches thereof .
The woman (of Samaria) said to him, Our fathers wor-
shipped in this mountain ; and ye say, that in Jerusalem
is the place where men ought to worship . Jesus said
Mistress, believe me, the hour is coming when neither
in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, shall ye worship the
Father_ But the hour comes, and now is, when true wor-
shippers shall worship the Father in mind and heart
: for
such the Father also seeks . God is spirit : they that
worship him must worship in spirit and sincerity .
The scribes and the Pharisees bring a woman taken up
for adultery : and having placed her in the midst they said
to him, Teacher, this woman has been taken up in adul-
tery, in the very act ; and in the law Moses commanded
us to stone such :
what dost thou say? Jesus having
bent down, wrote with his finger upon the ground . But
as they continued asking him, be unbent and said to them,
Let the sinless one of you first cast against her the
stone. And having bent down again, he kept writing
upon the ground . But they went out one by one, beginning
from the elder ones, and Jesus was left alone with the
woman . And Jesus having unbent, said to her, Mistress,
where are they? Hath none condemned thee ? She said,
None, sir. Jesus said, Neither will I condemn thee .
Say not ye, There are yet four months, and then com-
eth the harvest? Behold I say unto you, Lift up your
eyes, and look on the fields, that they are white already
unto harvest .
Ye have heard it said, An eye for an eye, a tooth for
a tooth, but I say, Resist not him that is evil . Ye haveu, Lift up your
eyes, and look on the fields, that they are white already
unto harvest .
Ye have heard it said, An eye for an eye, a tooth for
a tooth, but I say, Resist not him that is evil . Ye have

--- PAGE BREAK ---, and look on the fields, that they are white already
unto harvest .
Ye have heard it said, An eye for an eye, a tooth for
a tooth, but I say, Resist not him that is evil . Ye have

--- PAGE BREAK ---

374
MY PILGRIMAGE
heard it said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour and hate thine
enemy : I say, Love your enemies .
Why are ye anxious about raiment? Consider the
lilies of the field, how they grow : they toil not, spin not ;
yet Solomon amid all his glory never arrayed himself like
one of these. (The Palestine lilies are gorgeous .)
Be not anxious for the morrow : the morrow will be anx-
ious for itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof .
Judge not !
Give not that which is holy to the dogs, which turn
and tear you ; cast not your pearls before swine, which
trample them under their feet .
Wide and broad is the path to destruction, and many
enter the wide gate
: how narrow the gate and straitened
the way (of true) life, and how few find it!
Certain scribes and Pharisees said, Teacher, we would
see a sign from thee. Jesus answered, An evil and sen-
sual time looks for a miracle : no miracle will occur.
Jesus (speaking in the temple to the chief priests)
said, Did ye never read in the Scriptures, The stone
which the builders rejected was made the head of the
corner ?
He that falleth on this stone shall be broken,
but on whomsoever it shall fall it will grind him to dust .
Call no man master.
One of the Pharisees desired him to eat with him .
A woman of the town when she knew that he was sitting
at meat in the Pharisee's house brought a flask of oint-
ment and began to wet his feet with tears and wiped
them with the hair of her head and kissed his feet and
anointed them with the ointment.
She has loved much .
The house was filled with the odour of the ointment ;
but some said, To what purpose this waste ? The ointment
might have been sold for three hundred pence and given
to the poor, and they murmured against her . Jesus said,
Let her alone ; why trouble her? On me she has wrought
a good work. She has done what she could.
Put not new wine into old wine-skins, lest they burst .
Be wise as serpents, and harmless as doves .
If any man will be great, let him serve .she has wrought
a good work. She has done what she could.
Put not new wine into old wine-skins, lest they burst .
Be wise as serpents, and harmless as doves .
If any man will be great, let him serve .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SAYINGS OF JESUS
375
The lowly shall be exalted, the proud humbled .
Blind guides strain out on the gnat, and swallow a
camel.
Give, and it shall be given you .
The measure ye mete shall be measured to you.
Cast the beam from thine eye, before noticing
the
mote in tby neighbour's eye .
He is a great criminal, who hath grieved the spirit of
his brother.
No thank to you if you love them that love you, but
there is thank if you love your enemies and them that
hate you.
Be ye never joyful save when you have looked upon
your brother in charity .
Be as lambkins (though) in the midst of wolves .
The son and the daughter should inherit alike .
It is happier to give than to receive .
No servant can serve two masters .
Out of entire heart and out of entire mind .
What is the profit if a man gain the entire world, and
lose his life?
Become proved bankers .
If ye have not been faithful in the little, who will
trust you with the large?
Happy are the lowly ; they enjoy the earth .
Happy are they that hunger and thirst after justice
in them it is fulfilled .
Happy are the compassionate ; they shall receive com-
passion.
Happy are the pure in heart.
Happy are the peacemakers .
The evil one is the tempter .
Give no opportunity to the evil one.
A man sowed good seed in his field, but while he
slept his enemy sowed tares amid his wheat and went off.
When the blade sprang up and bore forth fruit there
appeared the tares also, and the servants of the house-
holder came and said, Sir, didst thou not sow good seed
in thy field? Whence then has it tares? And be said
unto them, An enemy hath done this .

--- PAGE BREAK ---lso, and the servants of the house-
holder came and said, Sir, didst thou not sow good seed
in thy field? Whence then has it tares? And be said
unto them, An enemy hath done this .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

376
MY PILGRIMAGE
In these selections I have included only what I believe
Jesus said . There are several things reported in the New
Testament in which there
is reality and beauty, but so
much disguised that it is difficult to give them precise
expression . No doubt there was some real remark in the
concluding reference to John the Baptist in Luke vii,
31-34, but Jesus could not have used the phrase 'Son of
man' as a title. For the rest, there is both humour and
pathos in the incident :-
Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this genera-
tion, and to what are they like? They are . like unto chil-
dren that sit in the market-place, and call one to another
;
which say, We piped unto you, and ye did not dance ; we
wailed, and ye did not weep. For John the Baptist is
come eating no bread nor drinking wine ; and ye say, He
bath a devil. The Son of man is come eating and drink-
ing; and ye say, Behold a gluttonous man, and a wine-
bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners! But wisdom is
justified of all her children .
It is not be considered that those who do not accept
narratives of supernatural events as history are indifferent
to their significance. It is not merely as poetry that such
legends as that of the Nativity are valuable, but as serious
witnesses to the mental and moral conditions amid which
were shaped traditions literally unhistoric . In the Nativ-
ity we have a dramatic and realistic composition based
on an earlier story of the baptism of Jesus . The earliest
account is certainly that of the Aramaic Gospel : -
When the people had been baptized, Jesus also came
and was baptized by John. And as he went up the hea-
vens were opened, and be saw the Holy Spirit in shape of
a dove descending and entering into him. And a voice out
of the heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee
I am well pleased :
and again, I have this day begotten
thee. And straightway a great light shone around theentering into him. And a voice out
of the heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee
I am well pleased :
and again, I have this day begotten
thee. And straightway a great light shone around the

--- PAGE BREAK ---And a voice out
of the heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee
I am well pleased :
and again, I have this day begotten
thee. And straightway a great light shone around the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BAPTISM OF JESUS
377
place . And when John saw it be saith unto him, Who
art thou, Lord?
And again a voice out of heaven unto
him, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased .
Then John fell down before him and said, I pray thee,
Lord, baptize thou me .
But he prevented him, saying,
Let be ; for thus it is becoming that all things should be
fulfilled . And it came to pass, when the Lord bad come
up from the water, the entire fountain of the Holy Spirit
descended and rested upon him and said to him, My son,
in all the prophets did I await thee, that thou mightest
come and I might rest in thee ; for thou art my rest ; thou
art my first born Son that reignest forever .
In no other gospel are found the words, "This day
have I begotten thee . "
When that was written it could
not have been believed that this divine paternity dated
back to a physical event thirty years before .
That story
was not yet completed in the middle of the second cen-
tury, when we find Clement of Alexandria (Stromateis)
saying that some people in his time were maintaining that
Mary was a virgin, an opinion which he condemns .
The
Holy Spirit overshadowing Jesus at baptism is the same
that later overshadows Mary, to whom was transferred the
title he had applied to the Holy Spirit, - " My mother ."
The great light which shines over the baptism, not men-
tioned in the other Gospels, becomes afterwards the glory
that shone around the shepherds . The maternal words of
the Spirit entering Jesus at baptism in the Aramaic nar-
rative -a dove which he alone saw or heard - correspond
with the words of Simeon, who came by the Spirit into
the Temple .'
1 In the ancient Lalita Vistara it is related that an inspired rishi or
sage, dwelling in the Himalayas, named Asita, became informed by por-
tents of the birth of a future lawgiver, as the son of King Suddhodana,
at Kapilavastu, and journeyed thither to pay his homage to the infant
.
Among the portents Asita beard joyful gods acclaiming in the sky Buddha's
name, and he saw far off the babe in his cradle
.ana,
at Kapilavastu, and journeyed thither to pay his homage to the infant
.
Among the portents Asita beard joyful gods acclaiming in the sky Buddha's
name, and he saw far off the babe in his cradle
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---and journeyed thither to pay his homage to the infant
.
Among the portents Asita beard joyful gods acclaiming in the sky Buddha's
name, and he saw far off the babe in his cradle
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

378
MY PILGRIMAGE
Theologians have naturally claimed that the words ad-
dressed to Jesus by the Jews, " We were not born of for-
nication," were a sneer, and prove their knowledge that
Joseph was not the father of Jesus. The Jewish tradition
that Jesus was the son of a young Roman named Panthera
might seem fortified by the alleged rudeness of Jesus to
his mother, " Woman, what have I to do with thee ? " and
his apparent refusal to see her and his brethren when they
asked to see him (Mark iii, 31-35) . It is also said that the
brothers of Jesus did not believe in him . But such texts
are mainly messianic and mean that Jesus did not derive
his wisdom from earthly parentage, but as one begotten
" not of the will of man, but of God." In the genealogy
of Jesus (Matt. i) the only wives mentioned are those
about whom some irregularity was traditional -Tamar,
Ruth, Bathsheba, Mary, -and it is possible that in the
post-resurrectional era it had become important to accept
and magnify the alleged illegitimacy .
It is not improbable that the superstition about illegiti-
macy, as under some conditions a sign of a hero's heavenly
origin, may have had some foundation in the facts of he-
redity. In times when love or even passion had little con-
nection with any marriage, and none with royal marriages,
the offspring of an amour might naturally manifest more
force of character than the legitimate, and the inherited
sensual impulses, often displayed in noble energies, might
prove of enormous importance in breaking down an old
oppression continued by an automatic legitimacy of suc-
cession .
The phrase, "entire fountain of the Holy Spirit," is Zoroastrian
:
in
the Avesta the Holy Spirit is Antihita ; her influence is always described
as a fountain descending on the saints or heroes to whom she gives
strength.ountain of the Holy Spirit," is Zoroastrian
:
in
the Avesta the Holy Spirit is Antihita ; her influence is always described
as a fountain descending on the saints or heroes to whom she gives
strength.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Spirit," is Zoroastrian
:
in
the Avesta the Holy Spirit is Antihita ; her influence is always described
as a fountain descending on the saints or heroes to whom she gives
strength.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE RESURRECTION MYTH
879
The narrative of the Annunciation and Nativity is in-
serted in the New Testament with simplicity, and without
any fraudulent effort to harmonize it with the earlier bio-
graphy .
Mary says to Jesus,
°G Thy father and I have
sought tbee ; " she makes the usual sacrifice in the Temple
for purification ; and despite the offerings to the infant of
gold, frankincense, and myrrh, it is said his brothers did
not believe in him. The story has become to us a Christ-
mas carol which testifies, however, to the exaltation of pop-
ular faith and hope when it was believed that Jesus had
risen from the dead, and that he would speedily reappear
in resplendent power to bring peace on earth and joy to
all mankind. My own belief is that it was written out as
a play, with borrowings from old Buddhist plays, and was
acted in the villages . And all this brings me testimony
that there actually was at that period a great original
orator who so uplifted and charmed the best minds around
him - probably not many - that they could not bear the
thought of his death ; and that one of these, the Mag-
dalene, reporting that she had seen him after his supposed
death, though, as Luke says, the disciples regarded her
story as idle talk, nevertheless gave rise to dramas of
martyrdom and resurrection
.
Out of the womb of one
Mary Jesus was born, out of the heart of another Mary
he was born again . As she sat alone beside the sepulchre,
she heard a voice saying, « Why weepest thou?" "Because
they have taken away my master and I know not where
they have laid him!" "Mary!" " Rabboni- my master!"
Mary does not speak as if she supposed Jesus had died,
and it cannot now be determined whether the Jesus she
saw " while it was yet dark " was living or a vision .
Had the loving lady - the most calumniated that ever
lived -foreseen what was to come, the vision, if suchow be determined whether the Jesus she
saw " while it was yet dark " was living or a vision .
Had the loving lady - the most calumniated that ever
lived -foreseen what was to come, the vision, if such

--- PAGE BREAK ---ther the Jesus she
saw " while it was yet dark " was living or a vision .
Had the loving lady - the most calumniated that ever
lived -foreseen what was to come, the vision, if such

--- PAGE BREAK ---

380
MY PILGRIMAGE
it was, could not have occurred. Mary's heart would
have said, "Rest, my beloved! Sleep on till a purer age
can raise thee for a higher, not a lower, career, -for a
loving, not cursing, career! The earth is dark without
thee, but thou must not rise to incarnate the authority of
cruel gods, and crown the power of cruel men, and trace
thy steps through history in blood of hearts most like
thine own!" But Mary saw not that ; her love was not
that of the penitent of Christian fiction, but that of the
pure human lover of a great lover ; and if Jesus is ever
released by the angel Imagination from his tomb of pious
and moral mediocrity, there will come forth with him
grand epics and romances, among these that of the Lady
of Maudleyn Castle, whose wealth helped to support her
Beloved when from being rich he had become poor .
An intelligent American fellow-traveller said to me,
~~ Don't feel distressed at not visiting Palestine . My wife
there and I came all the way from Boston, chiefly to visit
the places associated with Jesus ; and both of us came
away, feeling rather sorry we had gone . It is difficult to
explain our disillusion, but it was partly the vulgarization
by showmen of everything sacred, and the sectarian mon-
uments, splendid memorials of intolerance, continually
exciting disgust, instead of the sweet and happy emotions
we bad expected."
I easily recognized in this Boston gentleman an old-
fashioned intellectual Socinian, whose ideal was a Jesus
not too far, nor yet too near . My early Methodist train-
ing in the South had continued through all vicissitudes,
as an increasing love for my teachers, for those who
helped me at a pinch, whether they were ancient or mod-
ern. There are in my "Sacred Anthology" some selec-
tions from Buddha, - such as his "Excellencies," - andg love for my teachers, for those who
helped me at a pinch, whether they were ancient or mod-
ern. There are in my "Sacred Anthology" some selec-
tions from Buddha, - such as his "Excellencies," - and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a
MY VISION
381
some from Saadi, which I ceased to read to my congrega-
tion as Lessons, because they brought those men before
me so vividly that the strain on my feeling was too great .
The ideas I gradually formed of Jesus as a man, and my
interpretations as given above, of what he really thought
and felt (so far as there were any data before me) awak-
ened in me a great love for him . Out there on our ship,
in the Suez Canal, in the darkness, it was as if he sat on
the deck beside me, and said softly, "I was lonely in life
because the age was frantic about religion, and everybody
was trying to make me out some kind of a priest or prophet
or messiah ; only one or two men loved me for my real
human self, but there were some affectionate ladies, with
one of whom, Mary of Magdala, my relations were tender
and intimate . Mary of Bethany anointed me at the table
as if I were a king, but what I prized were her tears and
kisses. She, too, had a heart, and loved me ."
"And the tears," I said, " were they not then simply
penitential? "
"Not at all."
Then I repeated the words preserved from the sup-
pressed Gospel :
" The disciples say, ' Where wilt thou
that we prepare for the passover to eat?'
Jesus an-
swered,
' Have I desired to eat this flesh, the passover,
with you? ' "
Through the darkness came the words : " Nothing sac-
rificial could I tolerate, nor could I participate in a
memorial feast based upon the wild and guilty supersti-
tion of an angel killing one in every Egyptian home, and
passing over the homes of Israelites . My little circle of
friends had been accustomed to the -feast, long become
merry, and I invited them to a wine-supper where we
enjoyed ourselves . It was quite a simple affair ."

--- PAGE BREAK ---. My little circle of
friends had been accustomed to the -feast, long become
merry, and I invited them to a wine-supper where we
enjoyed ourselves . It was quite a simple affair ."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER XVIII
ADDENDA 1905, 1906.
T
HE Oxford scholars engaged in the Exploration of
Egypt, principally Dr. Bernard Grenfell of Queen's
College, and Dr. Arthur Hunt of Lincoln College, were
rewarded in 1897 by the discovery on the site of Oxy-
rhynchus, one of the chief cities of ancient Egypt, of a
page from a book containing some Sayings ascribed to
Jesus. In 1903 their search was renewed with even
greater success. These gentlemen have edited the papyri
in a pamphlet of 45 pages, published for the Egypt Ex-
ploration Fund in 1904, with facsimiles of the inscriptions
and English translations. From these I cite certain pas-
sages that impress me as presenting in a reflected way,
though sometimes refracted, genuine utterances of Jesus .
In reading the New Testament and these writings from
the early centuries of our era it is important to remember
that classical Greek had been a good deal modified . The
word basileia, kingdom, for instance, had become very
elastic and represented any kind of sway, so that the
Cromwellians were not far wrong when they prayed,
'° Thy Commonwealth come ! "
One of these sayings is : -
Jesus said, Thou hearest with one ear, but the other
thou hast closed .
Still more striking is the following : -
Jesus said, Wherever there are two, they are not
without God, and wherever there is one alone, I say, I am
0

--- PAGE BREAK ---t the other
thou hast closed .
Still more striking is the following : -
Jesus said, Wherever there are two, they are not
without God, and wherever there is one alone, I say, I am
0

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SAYINGS ASCRIBED TO JESUS
383
with him. Raise the stone, and there thou shalt find me
:
cleave the wood, and there am I .
Does this mean that God is simply a collectivist term
and conception, and that Jesus represents the interior
individual mind? Also that he is found in the heart of
him who has done hard work?
One of the fragments shows that in what Jesus said
about the clothing of the lilies, and that " the life is more
than the food, and the body more than raiment," he uttered
something too startling to be canonically reproduced : -
Who could add to your stature?
He himself will give
you your garment. His disciples say unto him, when wilt
thou be manifest to us, and when shall we see thee ? He
said, When ye shall be stripped and not be ashamed? 1
The longest of the Sayings is considerably broken, and
in giving it as conjecturally made out by Grenfell and
Hunt I must express grave misgivings about the words
they have supplied paranthetically : -
Jesus saith, (Ye ask? who are these) that draw us
(to the kingdom, if) the kingdom is in Heaven?
.
.
. the
fowls of the air, and all beasts that are under the earth
or upon the earth, and the fishes of the sea,
(these are
they which draw) you, and the Kingdom of Heaven is
1 On this saying may be based a passage from an early Gospel according
to the Egyptians referred to by Clement of Alexandria . It is quoted by
the Oxford editors and suggests the process by which the celibacy of priest
and nun was developed : -
Salome asked how long death would prevail . The Lord said, So long as
ye women bear children . For I have come to destroy the works of the
female . And Salome said to him, Did I therefore well in bearing no chil-
dren ? The Lord answered and said, Eat every herb, but eat not that which
is bitterness. When Salome asked when those things about which she
questioned should be made known, the Lord said, when ye trample upon
the garment of shame ; when the two become one, and the male with the
female neither male nor female .those things about which she
questioned should be made known, the Lord said, when ye trample upon
the garment of shame ; when the two become one, and the male with the
female neither male nor female .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

384
MY PILGRIMAGE
within you ; and whoever shall know himself shall find it .
(Strive therefore?) to know yourselves, and ye shall be
aware that ye are the sons of the (almighty?) Father ;
(and?) ye shall know that ye are in (the city of God ?)
and ye are (the city?) .
There is a notable absence from most of these newly
discovered fragments of things post-resurrectional, and in
them Jesus appears as an unworldly man of the world,
original and witty, philosophical and profound, looking
to the clearing away of oppressive prejudices rather than
to any Utopia. In the second Epistle of Clement it is
said that when Jesus was asked when his kingdom should
come, he replied, "When the two shall be one, and the
outside as the inside, and the male with the female
neither male nor female ." This appears to be a humorous
way of saying Never .
I have little doubt that if these admirable Oxford
scholars were permitted the free exploration of the Vati-
can library, and a few other guarded collections, they
would find copies of the Aramaic and other lost Gospels .
Meanwhile they may take to heart more literally than the
rest of us two of the Sayings they have discovered : -
Jesus saith, Everything that is not before thy face and
that which is bidden from thee shall be revealed to thee .
For there is nothing hidden which shall not be made
manifest, nor buried which shall not be raised .
Jesus saith, let not him who seeks
.
. . until he
finds, and when he finds he shall be astonished
; aston-
ished he shall reach the kingdom, and having reached
the kingdom he shall rest .
" He who knows only one religion knows none." This
fine generalization of Max Miiller I often recalled in the
East, but oftener since my return . The oriental swaddling-

--- PAGE BREAK ---all rest .
" He who knows only one religion knows none." This
fine generalization of Max Miiller I often recalled in the
East, but oftener since my return . The oriental swaddling-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ARCHBISHOP MANNING
385
bands pressed to my eyes, I found that I had not really
interpreted the religions around me at home, -in America
and Europe, -and my little excursions, and my records
of former excursions reread, were found to be continua-
tions of my pilgrimage to the Wise Men of the East . The
star that drew me thither had taken a purely human face,
and when it led me back westward I could see in Christian
sects not their creeds but solely the extent to which that
human face was reflected in them .
Archbishop Manning gave in London a lecture
on
" Progress," which interested me a good deal.
I had a
pleasant feeling towards Manning because, when he was
trying to have fountains provided throughout London, so
that people should not be driven into the liquor shops by
sheer thirst, he invited all the ministers in the city to
meet him at the Archbishop's palace (plain as a Quaker
meeting-house), and did not exclude even such a test of
tolerance as myself . Not many ministers attended the
assembly in the palace, but I did, and was pleased by the
earnestness of Manning in the matter.
I never heard Manning preach, but in his lecture he
made no effort at eloquence .
His tall, thin form often
moved backward and forward, but his face did not change,
nor his voice, which was not entirely agreeable.
His aim
was simply to make a clear statement, and that it should
be heard in every part of the hall. He began by relating
as serious history a legend of Pope Hildebrand's boyhood .
His father was a wood-cutter, and once when the lad was
cutting a tree the flying chips shaped themselves into let-
ters and into this sentence : Regnabit ex mare ad mare .
It was the prophetic sign of his destiny -to reign from
sea to sea - and steadily fulfilled .
That, declared the
Archbishop, was progress, and all progress means sim-ence : Regnabit ex mare ad mare .
It was the prophetic sign of his destiny -to reign from
sea to sea - and steadily fulfilled .
That, declared the
Archbishop, was progress, and all progress means sim-

--- PAGE BREAK ---are ad mare .
It was the prophetic sign of his destiny -to reign from
sea to sea - and steadily fulfilled .
That, declared the
Archbishop, was progress, and all progress means sim-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

386
MY PILGRIMAGE
ply the fulfilment of the pointings of Providence . That
masses of people and their leaders should pursue their in-
terests and follow their ambitions was natural, but not
progress ; it might indeed be retrogression . It was a sug-
gestive line of thought, but it affected me strangely that
a man should be trained amid the modern culture and sci-
ence of England to find the salient example of the world's
progress in the development of the temporal power of the
Church -visibly crumbling under the Archbishop's eyes .
The regime Hildebrand of centuries having terminated,
and the Catholic Church having been set on the way of
depending on its merits, wherefore the hatred of it?
Was
not this sincere Archbishop, whose every physical and
mental trait represented a distinct individual evolution,
-was he not a nobler figure than any conventionalized
Protestant? At any rate, he had individuality enough to
make his pilgrim-progress from his inherited to his genu-
ine church .
My belief is that the persistent animosity against the
Catholic Church in England and America is a Protestant
heritage from Hildebrandism . Protestantism, having
dropped the individual man from the cross, has made it
the ensign of the most powerful race, and vowed that it
shall reign from sea to sea . Trade travels with it, and
pride of empire. The crucifix bars the way of the cross
in many regions, and hatred of it is fostered in the demo-
cracy by constant and vivid descriptions of papal oppres-
sions that have long ceased . It is terrible to think of the
brutal disregard by the Protestant Hildebrand of all the
tenderness and happiness intertwined with the ancient
religions, and of the cost to the destroyers . When the
cross reigns from sea to sea those who win that victory
will have meanwhile become werewolves .rness and happiness intertwined with the ancient
religions, and of the cost to the destroyers . When the
cross reigns from sea to sea those who win that victory
will have meanwhile become werewolves .

--- PAGE BREAK ---intertwined with the ancient
religions, and of the cost to the destroyers . When the
cross reigns from sea to sea those who win that victory
will have meanwhile become werewolves .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONGRESS OF FREETHINKERS
387
In September, 1904, I was requested by the American
United Secularist Societies to represent them at the Con-
gress of Freethinkers at Rome, and,by the Committee
of that International Congress I was requested to give be-
fore it an address on " Science and Dogma." My address
was carefully translated into French in Paris, and part of
it read to the Congress by my friend, John M . Robertson,
M. P., -my successor at South Place Chapel,-as I could
not trust my French pronunciation nor my ability to deal
with a crowd of nearly two thousand in the large hall
provided for us by the Italian government .
I had been
especially warned by the fate of Haeckel, from
whose
large form sounds a feeble voice, and whose carefully
prepared German speech was beard by few except those
on the platform. The managers demanded that I should
deliver an address in English, which I did ; but it speedily
became plain that the delegates from France, Italy, Spain,
and most of those from Switzerland, had come simply for
a demonstration in favour of the separation of Church
and State. The careful studies of Haeckel and Robertson,
and of the eloquent Chicago minister Mangasarian, like
my discourse on "Science and Dogma," had to find their
way into print as they could .
The Church and State
issue brought into play a party of Anarchists who wished
to make their cause a rider on both free thought and
separation. The Anarchists, however, were inferior in
numbers to the Socialists, who silenced them and ulti-
mately were themselves silenced when they tried to utilize
the Congress for their propaganda .
The proceedings of the Congress, daily reported in a
Catholic journal in a way fittest to horrify the Pope, cul-
minated in a procession with banners to the monument of
Bruno. My friend Robertson and myself did not marchhe Congress, daily reported in a
Catholic journal in a way fittest to horrify the Pope, cul-
minated in a procession with banners to the monument of
Bruno. My friend Robertson and myself did not march

--- PAGE BREAK ---eported in a
Catholic journal in a way fittest to horrify the Pope, cul-
minated in a procession with banners to the monument of
Bruno. My friend Robertson and myself did not march

--- PAGE BREAK ---

388
MY PILGRIMAGE
with the procession, as we desired to see several collec-
tions, especially the Lateran, which we had been officially
informed would be opened that day . But when we arrived
at the door we found it closed . W e managed to summon
the janitor inside, who opened the little wicket and asked
in Italian if we were pilgrims, -there being at the time a
pilgrimage from some country in the city. Robertson said,
"No," and imprudently showed our official ticket of ad-
mission to all such places. The wicket-slide was sharply
closed in our faces, and we went off feeling that we had
been consigned to Gehenna by order of the vicar of Christ
.
There was little inconvenience in this exclusion to my-
self personally, for I had repeatedly explored Rome, but
Robertson had not, and we had to soothe ourselves with
the satisfaction of having celebrated the burning of Bruno
by a little martyrdom of our own . There was some ab-
surdity in my own case, as I had been the only member of
the Congress who had warned the French, in my English
speech, that after they bad swept and garnished their house,
before the mind of the masses was swept clear of super-
stitions, they would be likely to find their house entered
by a combination of sects like that virtually established
in America, and their last case be worse than the first .
One may hope, that now, when the political issue with
Papacy is out of the arena in France, the many men and
women of genius in that nation will be able to recognize
more clearly the fine elements potential in their system, as
they are recognized by a good many foreign rationalists
who have never had cause for concern about the Pope .
None of us, I suppose, who have been brought up under
the paralyzing Sabbaths, the horrible dogmas, the undeco-
rated church walls, and the unlovely deities of Protestant
countries, have visited France without envying the peopleave been brought up under
the paralyzing Sabbaths, the horrible dogmas, the undeco-
rated church walls, and the unlovely deities of Protestant
countries, have visited France without envying the people

--- PAGE BREAK ---under
the paralyzing Sabbaths, the horrible dogmas, the undeco-
rated church walls, and the unlovely deities of Protestant
countries, have visited France without envying the people

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHRISTIANITY SECTARIAN
889
their free and happy Sunday, their sweet feminine deity,
their churches shining with saintly forms, their Univer-
salist doctrine of Purgatory . As it is not to be supposed
that the people generally will be transformed into Renans
and Zolas, were it not well that the great scholars and
writers of France should recognize that the disestablish-
ment of a world of religious usages and habits evolved
through many ages is impossible, but that it is not im-
possible by sympathetic art to cultivate the good seeds
in any system . It is by human art that briers have been
changed to roses and these to many-leaved roses, and
finally to thornless roses .
A good many years of my ministerial life were passed
in the development of Theism as opposed to Christianity
.
This was largely because Christianity as a system is sect-
arian ; it demands the exclusion of all other religions as
untrue and needing to be supplanted and destroyed . The
most vulgar and ignorant Christian must confront a Con-
fucius, a Zoroaster, a Buddha, with, so to say, a holier-
than-thou attitude. The work of social humanization is
thereby confined to Christendom at most, and the system
tends to degeneration within because many of the learned
and thinking do not believe in it and withdraw from it,
and their leaven of sweetness and light is lost. My belief
is that the real faith of educated Christendom is deism .
That which so many of us contended for seems to be in a
sense triumphant, but for myself it has come in a dogmatic
form, turning to ashes on my lips .
Christ Jesus at any rate carries flesh and blood into the
godhead. But who or what is this cosmic, creative, omni-
potent, overruling force responsible for everything in this
unlovable universe? A French author, deeply interested
in religion, recently travelled about France interviewinghis cosmic, creative, omni-
potent, overruling force responsible for everything in this
unlovable universe? A French author, deeply interested
in religion, recently travelled about France interviewing

--- PAGE BREAK ---

390
MY PILGRIMAGE
people of every rank and condition about their religious
ideas. One incident was an exchange of question and
answer with a poor woman hard at work .
C° May I ask
what is your idea of God?" "He has never shown any
concern about me, and I don't see why I should concern
myself about him." Probably in the little shanty of this
humble woman there looked from the wall a holy mother
and babe or a crucified friend, and the simple reply she
gave held in it the secret of those tender divinities .
So did mankind turn from the cold and distant deities,
unconcerned about their agonies, to weak and sorrowful
deities compassionately regarding them . They love him
because he first loved them .
The primitive Hindu cosmic Pantheism broke up grad-
ually into multitudinous divinities, so that each heart and
home can cherish its ideal being.
One Sunday evening in Paris I went to the Gaiete-
Montparnasse, a cheap popular theatre, and witnessed a
spectacular revue in which local events are ridiculed or
celebrated in travesty, tableau, and dance . It was all
pretty and musical, but a succession of trivial jests and
scenes, some of them audacious. In one scene a repulsive
tramp appears and informs the gaily dressed commere
and compere of the repairs on a bridge which deprive him
of his only sleeping place under one of its arches . A
wretched woman then enters and complains of some other
repairs which deprived her of her chief haunt . The com-
pere and commere shrink away from the brazen woman
and the thief . Then slowly moving from behind the scene
appears the white-robed Jesus . The vast audience, which
had been roaring with laughter and at times calling out
to favourite figurantes, suddenly, on the appearance of

--- PAGE BREAK ---d the scene
appears the white-robed Jesus . The vast audience, which
had been roaring with laughter and at times calling out
to favourite figurantes, suddenly, on the appearance of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A MONTPARNASSE CHRIST
391
u Le Christ," was breathlessly silent. Jesus -a beautiful
figure-standing between the man and woman, said to
the audience, " These are the people you create by your
passions and your selfishness, and then shrink from ! " In
this grave way he began, with low voice, but gradually his
words grew passionate, his rebuke of inhumanity pathetic
and almost intoned. Then he paused, and silently moving
towards the miserable two placed his arms around their
necks and between them slowly walked off the stage .
That
was the end. The curtain fell. But the crowd would not
leave. After a few moments of awed silence they shouted
" Le Christ ! Le Christ ! " so long that the curtain rose
again and the white-robed figure was seen again gazing on
the tramp and the bag-who at first had been brazen but
now hung their beads .
That Jesus from a Montparnasse manger was not for-
gettable like the automatic Christ at Oberammergau . His
raiment and parted flowing hair were just artistically
conventional enough for recognition by all .
He recited
no text, made no allusion to the sins of ancient tribes,
but without cant spoke to the Latin Quarter, and touched
every heart by a simple appeal for justice and consider-
ation for all, however degraded .
My English or American reader may feel that the in-
troduction of Jesus amid such frivolity was objectionable .
But my companions -John and Kate Macdonald, serious
English writers - felt with me that much of the charm
was due to contrast with the caricatures and sparkling
audacities of the revue . The aged Faust in his cloister,
on Easter Day, hears the young
' people outside singing
" Christ is risen ! " and reflects that they themselves have
risen, - out of their hovels and workshops, - and will
have the holiday frolic . The Gaiete-Montparnasse wasyoung
' people outside singing
" Christ is risen ! " and reflects that they themselves have
risen, - out of their hovels and workshops, - and will
have the holiday frolic . The Gaiete-Montparnasse was

--- PAGE BREAK ---de singing
" Christ is risen ! " and reflects that they themselves have
risen, - out of their hovels and workshops, - and will
have the holiday frolic . The Gaiete-Montparnasse was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

392
MY PILGRIMAGE
crowded with the poor, who for that glad Sunday even-
ing had risen from the dens of drudgery and seen beauti-
ful actresses and costumes, and heard merry songs, and it
was fitting that the humanly haloed man should be there
to remind each that he or she must diffuse gladness, and
press no thorns on any head .
Jesus will remain in the popular mind and share its
development, whether upward or downward . The " bon
sansculotte " of the Revolution, bringing not peace but a
sword, the carpenter, the communist, the hater of priest-
hood, as may be demanded politically, he will also be
ideally the holy babe in every mother's arms, the bringer
of peace on earth and good will to men, the saviour of
the suffering and the fallen . The higher criticism will
never reach the Jesus of popular imagination ; the ideal
has struck too deep - it has been adopted by the law of
natural selection . We can hope to make it more and
more a source of justice, kindness, and happiness .
And even in the legends that seem to sceptics cruel the
human heart often hives sweetness. One of my pilgrimages
was to the Salpetribre hospital in Paris, under the guid-
ance of a specialist in epilepsy . The cases in which I was
interested were those of which I had beard as of a reli-
gious type . These were all women and of the humble class .
One I saw, as we passed through their ward, sitting with
uplifted eyes and clasped hands, as if in beatitude . The
most interesting case was that of a comely woman who
once every week underwent a sort of crucifixion .
This I
did not witness, but the physician described it and gave
me photographs representing every stage of the strange
convulsion . The crucifixion generally lasted three hours,
but sometimes nearly all day, -and during the time the
woman's attitude reproduced closely the conventional pie-g every stage of the strange
convulsion . The crucifixion generally lasted three hours,
but sometimes nearly all day, -and during the time the
woman's attitude reproduced closely the conventional pie-

--- PAGE BREAK ---strange
convulsion . The crucifixion generally lasted three hours,
but sometimes nearly all day, -and during the time the
woman's attitude reproduced closely the conventional pie-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AN EPILEPTIC CRUCIFIXION
393
ture of the churches . Even one foot was placed upon the
other and there rigidly remained as if a spike were driven
through the two. When I expressed some horror that the
young woman should undergo such agony the physician
told me that my sympathy was misplaced.
When she first
came she had lain in the rigid attitude over four hours,
then waked as from a dream, and exclaimed : " Where
am I ? I have been so happy up there !
It was so beauti-
ful!" When asked what she had seen, she answered
" I was in heaven amid dazzling light. There was a mea-
dow and little St. John with curly sheep. There were shin-
ing diamonds, pictures, stars of all colours . Our Lord had
long chestnut hair, curling, and a grand red beard . He is
beautiful, large, strong, all in gold.
The holy Virgin is in
silver. Our Lord spoke to me but I cannot remember his
words. I did not answer him, for I was dumb ."
Such was the bliss going on four hours under an exterior
of protracted agony . In such a type, as through a small
crevice, one may see, down a long vista of self-inflicted
martyrdoms, the evolution of the cult of pain and sorrow
as the portal to paradise . The Hindu saying was, " Cool
to the widow's breast is the flame of her husband's pyre ."
But the widow-burning has ceased, and human sacrifices
seem to be now confined to Christendom .
" Without the
shedding of blood there is no remission of sins " is the
consecration of all violence, - war, lynchings, revolutions .
In social life educated people do not sacrifice themselves
really, but many of them have a notion that " crosses" are
good for the masses to bear, and hence the weekly epileptic
crucifixion of England and America on the Sabbath . ,
i France, too, has now (1906) adopted a hebdomaire day of rest from
labour, - from noon Sunday to noon Monday, - obligatory on employers.
But every individual is free to work or play during that time, and indeedoo, has now (1906) adopted a hebdomaire day of rest from
labour, - from noon Sunday to noon Monday, - obligatory on employers.
But every individual is free to work or play during that time, and indeed

--- PAGE BREAK ---dopted a hebdomaire day of rest from
labour, - from noon Sunday to noon Monday, - obligatory on employers.
But every individual is free to work or play during that time, and indeed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

394
MY PILGRIMAGE
If-some of the violent invective ascribed to Christ were
genuine there would be some ground for the charge of
casting out devils by Beelzebub . It is not, however, in
language but in spirit and method that the possessed and
the prepossessed are made manifest . I had a talk with
the famous communist Louise Michel after her return
from exile . In her homely and stormbeaten countenance
the look of the beatified epileptic was visible in perfect
sweetness, but in her pleading for a socialism involving the
destruction of Christianity the crucified epileptic was ap-
parent. Kropotkin and Gorki, in Russia, and the Social-
ists everywhere are labouring for the early Christian com-
mune and millennium under an antichristian flag. They
would take it by violence . They would seat on the throne
of Authority a multi-million-armed despotism of masses
under which individual liberty would be impossible .'
the main object of the new law is to enable the workpeople to enjoy the
Sunday theatres and the sports .
1 A French journal, referring (1906) to the so-called "revolution " in
Russia, said : "There is too much Tolstoi in the Russian masses and too
much Nietsche in their masters." Tolstoi, while rejecting the Apostles'
Creed, has with apostolic fervour insisted on the primitive communism
which is the corrollary of that creed . He has raised before the ignorant
masses visions which cannot be realized without every owner of property
falling like Ananias and Sapphira. It is doubtful if Tolstoi himself is not
keeping back part of the price i Being a man of peace he is appalled by
the violence caused by his retention of a primitive communism which is
an integral part of the miraculous system he rejects . The great writer
has sadly misled the youth everywhere who having abandoned old creeds
still long to believe in something . Among the instances I have person-
ally known one is that of a young woman who belonged to South Place
Society, London . In one of my discourses I alluded to the ancient notion
that the Holy Ghost never pardoned . The sin of Ananias and Sapphira
was not, as Peter explained, keeping their property but
" lying to the
Holy Ghost." The woman waited for me at the chapel door
; she was
ready to give up the whole New Testament except part of Acts iv and v .
She believed herself a freethinker, but that Ananias and Sapphira perished,The woman waited for me at the chapel door
; she was
ready to give up the whole New Testament except part of Acts iv and v .
She believed herself a freethinker, but that Ananias and Sapphira perished,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HUMAN SACRIFICE
395
Guizot described himself as a republican who believed
in no republic. °" The republic begins with Plato and ends
in the policeman ."
This policeman, who metes out to every citizen his mea-
sure of freedom and thraldom, is the ignorant, vulgar
creature of the many-headed mediocrity around him . He
is the agent of the aggregate apehood surviving in hu-
man society in their determination that no variation shall
be tolerated .
Goldwin Smith fears that the decay of faith may be
followed by a decline of morality, but my old friend may
depend on the policeman for the protection of the virtues
of mediocrity, especially from those who would elevate or
liberalize them . The grand publicist of Toronto belongs
to a generation whose standard of morality demanded
self-truthfulness, - independence in thought, speech, and
action, -justice, -protection of the weak and lowly,-
defence of peace . It is buried in the graves of Boers,
Filipinos, lynched negroes, -beyond the reach of help or
harm .
Were my public ministry to begin again, I should as-
sume that the old theological ideas exist no more in minds
capable of ideas, but make for the nests in which the ova
of defunct superstitions are bred into living wrongs . These
nests are in the nerves, in timid complaisance, in the tor-
por of habit, the dread of isolation, which lead the leaders
to a conformity with the ritual of human sacrifice .
For
every sacrifice is a human sacrifice, -be it sacrifice of
reason, veracity, moral freedom, pleasure, happiness, or
of the senses, -and implies a low and mean conception
justly albeit mysteriously, for the unspeakable crime of keeping back
money pledged to their commune. She never entered my chapel again .

--- PAGE BREAK ---es, -and implies a low and mean conception
justly albeit mysteriously, for the unspeakable crime of keeping back
money pledged to their commune. She never entered my chapel again .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

396
MY PILGRIMAGE
of deity .
" I am come to end the sacrifices," said Jesus .
They are offerings to Abaddon-to Wrath .
Love needs
no conciliation .
Is there no courageous young orator in the orthodox
pulpit to take up this recovered Gospel of Jesus?
It does
not require a whip of small cords, -there are no animals
to be driven from the temple, -but it is human beings who
need the bringer of tidings of Joy . The other day a young
and valiant Presbyterian in America, of poetic insight and
fine culture, Van Dyke by name, confronted and with soft
invincibility led out of that Confession a dogma of pre-
destination which had preyed vampire-like on the hearts
of parents and children for eight generations . A revo-
lution gentle as that of the earth passing from winter
snows to summer blossoms, a victory in which the wintry
antagonists are equally victorious, is a shining revelation
in our dark time of the strength that dwells in a right
and true man inspired by a longing to save human souls
from real and present torments .
Now let a chorus be heard in the churches, - stop the
sacrifices !
Cease to immolate one seventh of human time
to the sabbath idol
!
Unbind those hearts fettered on the
marriage altar by chains forged out of antiquated notions
of divorce !
Stop beating that child with a rod from some
ancient proverb, instructing him to beat others smaller
than himself !
Cease to sacrifice social welfare and justice
to a barbaric text enjoining the punishment of a murderer
by imitating him ! Cease to call love and generosity " self-
sacrifice," -sweep all these sacrificial savageries out of
good hearts and healthy minds, and out of our language,
so that the woman may find fair measures of honest meal
in which to mingle her leaven of civilization ! There is no
other hope of a better world .od hearts and healthy minds, and out of our language,
so that the woman may find fair measures of honest meal
in which to mingle her leaven of civilization ! There is no
other hope of a better world .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SUNSHINE IN RELIGION
897
One of the " Cowley Brothers" at Poonah, India,-
Mr. Congreve, -is reported as preaching a new doctrine
called "Self-anatomization ." The indefiniteness of the
phrase is definitive, in a sense
: such familiar phrases as
" self-examination,"
" self-denial," " self-sacrifice," could
only have been set aside for some new variety of self-
immolation. But after all, why call these investments of
bodily health and pleasure for splendid futures,-why
call them "self-sacrifice?" The ancient Hindus offered
sacrifices to placate one or another adversary of man, -
or what may be plainly called devils,- and it is a strange
anomaly that learned Anglicans should be the first to
carry to India a deity demanding sacrifices of human hap-
piness !
The old Methodist aim was to secure the bliss of souls,
not only in another world but in this, and we used to con-
sider every sermon good that elicited joyful exclamations .
I remember preaching on the anecdote of a sceptic who
found a negro woman - a slave - singing a hymn loudly
while at work. "What are you singing for, aunty ? " he
asked. "'Cause Jesus make my soul happy ." " Soul ! why
you have n't any soul, - nobody has ." " Well, massa, Jesus
make my body happy ."
The Christmas carol heard in childhood -the angel's
song -
Glad tidings of great joy I bring,
To you and all mankind -
gave me a standard of every religion ; and having de-
tached Catholicism from all political questions, I long
ago found that there was in it as a faith more sunshine
than in the average Protestantism .
Nathaniel Hawthorne's notes in Rome reveal himself
as a figure striking as any novel he ever wrote . He had

--- PAGE BREAK ---e was in it as a faith more sunshine
than in the average Protestantism .
Nathaniel Hawthorne's notes in Rome reveal himself
as a figure striking as any novel he ever wrote . He had

--- PAGE BREAK ---

398
MY PILGRIMAGE
been so crushed by the cruelty of his ancestors in New
England to Quakers and " witches " that, except at his
marriage, he could never be persuaded to enter a church
in America. In Rome he sees religion illustrated by art
and laments that " Protestantism should have entirely laid
aside this method of appealing to the religious sentiment ."
He seems unable, however, to recognize the Madonna .
In the Sistine Chapel' he is troubled by Michel Angelo's
Last Judgment.
" Above sits Jesus, not looking in the
least like the Saviour of the world, but, with uplifted arm,
denouncing eternal misery on those whom He came to
save. I fear I am myself among the wicked, for I found
myself inevitably taking their part, and asking for at
least a little pity, some few regrets, and not such a stern,
denunciatory spirit on the part of Him who had thought
us worth dying for." Hawthorne is consoled at Florence
by the Jesus of Fra Angelico's 1° Last Judgment."
" Above sits Jesus, with the throng of blessed saints
around Him, and a flow of tender and powerful love in
His own face, that ought to suffice to redeem all the
damned, and convert the very fiends, and quench the fires
of hell. At any rate, Fra Angelico had a higher concep-
tion of his Saviour than Michel Angelo ."
New England Protestantism had not only deprived
Hawthorne - its first imaginative genius - of the picto-
rial gospel which alone could move him, but of the eyes
for interpreting the heart of that gospel when at fifty-
eight it was before him . For the soul of Michel Angelo's
Last Judgment is not the wrathful judge, but his mother,
full of compassion, restraining the wrath .
Protestantism
had eliminated the Madonna but gradually transferred
her compassionateness to Jesus, whose feminine face and
hair are conventionalized in modern pictures . And aftertraining the wrath .
Protestantism
had eliminated the Madonna but gradually transferred
her compassionateness to Jesus, whose feminine face and
hair are conventionalized in modern pictures . And after

--- PAGE BREAK ---Protestantism
had eliminated the Madonna but gradually transferred
her compassionateness to Jesus, whose feminine face and
hair are conventionalized in modern pictures . And after

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE EVERYDAY MADONNA
399
looking at Fra Angelico's picture of the Last Judgment,
blessing those on his right, Hawthorne does not doubt
that the benignity includes the damned . That was quite
in accord with the Jesus of New England Universalism,
and Hawthorne had no eyes to see or even look for the
conpanion picture near by in which Fra Angelico painted
Jesus turning to the wicked on the left, his face distorted
with anger .
Critics may doubt whether Jesus was the son of Mary,
but it is certain that the gentle and loving and humane
Jesus is the child of the Madonna . It is she who has
given cultured Protestantism eyes unable,
like Haw-
thorn's, to see a Christ crying, " Depart, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire," and " He that bath no sword let him sell
his cloak and buy one," and "I came not to send peace
but a sword ." It is not '° Higher Criticism " that has di-
vested Jesus of such trappings of ancient war-gods, but
the Madonna .
Calvin and Luther and John Knox, and the Puritans
in England and America, instead of building up their
revolution against Papacy on the maternal and feminine
principle, restored the throne of the man of war, Jehovah,
and set forth the Old Testament with its ferocities as the
word of God. The innumerable wars followed and the
nations organized by and for bloodshed and conquest .
Civilization means the boundless domination
over the
earth. Those who regard all this as retrogression, dete-
rioration, and the spread of misery, are still not left help-
less and hopeless . For woman, with her leaven of love,
her beauty and charm, is still in the earth, and by her
exclusion from armies, navies, political functions and ec-
clesiastical shams is enabled to build beautiful homes and
happy societies . These Madonnas of everyday life havell in the earth, and by her
exclusion from armies, navies, political functions and ec-
clesiastical shams is enabled to build beautiful homes and
happy societies . These Madonnas of everyday life have

--- PAGE BREAK ---by her
exclusion from armies, navies, political functions and ec-
clesiastical shams is enabled to build beautiful homes and
happy societies . These Madonnas of everyday life have

--- PAGE BREAK ---

400
MY PILGRIMAGE
steadily humanized their Christ, and in the cloister as
well as in worldly society a force finer than that called
virile is steadily evolved .
I visited the ancient Convent of Marmoutier near
Tours, mainly to see the graves of the Seven Sleepers . I
carried a good note of introduction, and an Irish lady
came out to be my guide . She was only about thirty, but,
as I understood, the abbess of the English-speaking
sisters of the convent. She was large and handsome,
also cheerful and very intelligent. When we had passed
through the beautiful garden and grounds to the grotto
with its seven coffin-shaped open and empty graves she
told me their local version of the legend
: the earlier legend
of the Seven Sleepers of Ephesus bad travelled into cen-
tral France in the form of pilgrims from the East who
came to see St. Martin, who gave them the sacrament,
which when they died preserved their bodies from decay .
I was careful not to inquire too far, but looked up from
the empty graves to the active woman before me, who -
as I well knew by two summers passed in that neighbour-
hood - represented a Sisterhood sleeplessly watching over
all sufferers around them . I spoke to her of the noble
services rendered by her ladies two or three years before
to the wounded soldiers, both French and German, and to
the suffering families of that region . She gave me some
account of the terrible trials they had passed through,
with the rough soldiers passing about their grounds, but
never rough enough, it seemed, to invade the asylum of
the Sisterhood. The wounded man, however rough, was
sacred enough to be nursed by these refined Samaritaines .
The abbess appeared beside the seven graves as a Sleep-
ing Beauty very wide awake .
It was from the threshold of Marmoutier that Peter, was
sacred enough to be nursed by these refined Samaritaines .
The abbess appeared beside the seven graves as a Sleep-
ing Beauty very wide awake .
It was from the threshold of Marmoutier that Peter

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JESUS AND MADONNA
401
the Hermit made his appeal for the Crusades, and in the
centuries the convent had become famous as an asylum
of Peace. In parting from this attractive lady she said,
perhaps with reference to some remark of mine (which I
forget): "This is an abode of happiness ; every hour
brings us a task we love, and we continually offer thanks
for our happiness in having such a home, and such con-
stant opportunities for charity and helpfulness ."
The belligerent Christ of the Crusades has no part in
the ideal of the humble and the cultured Catholics of our
time, but the feminine heart cannot adore a feminine
divinity alone . One finds in the pious meditations of Ma-
dame Guion, Madame Adorna, and other devout and
refined Catholic women, a Jesus and Madonna combined
in an incarnation of blended force and gentleness to which
the modern Christian rationalism has steadily led
the
pews, if not yet the pulpits, of nearly all Protestant
churches. Many years ago I picked up somewhere a copy
of the New York " Catholic World " (xx, 665) and copied
from it an anonymous poem : -
Friend, the way is steep and lonely,
Thickly grows the rue ;
All around are shadows only :
May I walk with you ?
Not too near -for oh! your going
Is upon the heights
Where the airs of heaven are blowing
Through the morning lights .
Dare I brush the dews that glisten
All about your feet ?
Can I listen where you listen,
Meet the sights you meet ?

--- PAGE BREAK ---Where the airs of heaven are blowing
Through the morning lights .
Dare I brush the dews that glisten
All about your feet ?
Can I listen where you listen,
Meet the sights you meet ?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

402
MY PILGRIMAGE
Not too far - I faint at missing
You from out my way -
Vain is then the glory kissing
All the peaks of day :
Vain are all the laughing showers
Leading on the Spring,
All the Summer green and flowers,
All the birds that sing.
At your side my way is clearest :
Tell me I may stay!
Not too far -and yet, my dearest,
Not too far away .
It is said that Jesus in a crowd once paused and said,
~° Who touched me?" Through the miraculous veil one
may discern the sensitive man who could distinguish the
lightest caress from all accidental touches . Amid the
multitudinous throng in New York crying," Lord, Lord,"
to a conventionalized Jesus there may be recognized in
the above poem one who really touched him . I feel cer-
tain that it is the song of a Madonna who bad spiritually
conceived and borne and exalted above herself, but not
too far, a Son of the universal motherhood . For her
" Friend " is not commonplace nor conventional, but an
original and genuine expression of that force which
a great man of science, W. K. Clifford, enunciated in a
lecture in London which filled me with emotion when I
heard it, and in which my old age now finds one of the
few contemporary evangels and prophecies which survive
my many vanished illusions
: -
In this principle (evolution) we must recognize the
mother of life, and especially of human life, powerful
enough to subdue the elements, and yet always working
gently against them ; biding her time in the whole ex-

--- PAGE BREAK ---st recognize the
mother of life, and especially of human life, powerful
enough to subdue the elements, and yet always working
gently against them ; biding her time in the whole ex-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MOTHER TRIUMPHANT
403
panse of heaven, to make the highest cosmos out of inor-
ganic chaos ; the actor, not of all the actions of living
things, but only of the good actions ; for a bad action is
one by which the organism tends to be less organic, and
acts for a time as if inorganic . To this mother of life,
personifying herself in the good works of humanity, it
seems to me we may fitly address a splendid hymn of Mr
Swinburne's ("Mater Triumphalis ") : -
Mother of man's time-travelling generations,
Breath of his nostrils, heart-blood of his heart,
God above all Gods worshipped of all nations,
Light above light, law beyond law, thou art .
Thy face is as a sword smiting in sunder
Shadows and chains and dreams and iron things ;
The sea is dumb before thy face, the thunder
Silent, the skies are narrower than thy wings .
All old grey histories hiding thy clear features,
0 secret spirit and sovereign, all men's tales,
Creeds woven of men thy children and thy creatures,
They have woven for vestures of thee and for veils .
Thine hands, without election or exemption,
Feed all men fainting from false peace or strife,
0 thou, the resurrection and redemption,
The godhead, and the manhood, and the life 1
In the recently discovered Gospel of Peter it is said
that Jesus in dying cried, " My power, my power, why
hast thou forsaken me?" It is not likely, as Professor
Estlin Carpenter says in his able work on the Synoptics,
that any disciple would invent such a cry of despair from
his dying master. There are indeed various indications in
the New Testament that Jesus tried to escape from the
mobs, and the termination of his life when it was just
unfolding must have been bitter indeed. But it is to be
hoped that his last days were not haunted by any fear

--- PAGE BREAK ---escape from the
mobs, and the termination of his life when it was just
unfolding must have been bitter indeed. But it is to be
hoped that his last days were not haunted by any fear

--- PAGE BREAK ---

404
MY PILGRIMAGE
that his ghost would appear and unsay all that he had
taught. For it is certain that side by side with the beau-
tiful and humane teachings which I have quoted, others
are ascribed to him which deny every one of them .
His
"power" passed into the hands of the deified forces of
predatory Nature, and the still small voice of Jesus is
drowned by the dogmas born of volcano and lightnings.
It is terrible to consider how hard it is to nurse any
brierless rose of religious faith in a world where the cruel
phenomena of hereditary diseases, the fatal and never-
ending consequences of even small errors, the indiscrim-
inate sufferings of both innocent and guilty, proclaim
so loudly a creative Demiurgos. An eminent Unitarian
preacher, teaching unweariedly that God is
Love, re-
lates the following incident : " One day a lady in Boston
came to me, a member of the Old South Church, one of
the finest and richest. churches in Boston .
She belonged
to the best society. She was cultivated and intelligent
;
and she sat down beside me, and said,
' Mr. Savage, won't
you tell me what you believe?' I told her .
When I was
through, she said,
' I would give the world if I dared to
believe as you do .' Then she added,
' How do I know,
after all, how can I be sure, that there is no such God in
the universe as I have been taught to believe in P and if
there is, I am afraid of him."'
The ages of Christian theology had brought this Boston
lady to the mental condition of some of the aboriginal
tribes of India. The Santals, who know not distinctions
of caste nor polygamy, and respect women, cannot, says
Sir William Hunter, imagine " one omnipotent and bene-
ficent deity, who watches over mankind ." A Santal said
to an eloquent missionary who had discoursed of the Chris-
tian God, "What if that Strong One should eat me?"imagine " one omnipotent and bene-
ficent deity, who watches over mankind ." A Santal said
to an eloquent missionary who had discoursed of the Chris-
tian God, "What if that Strong One should eat me?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SIR WILLIAM W. HUNTER

--- PAGE BREAK ---er mankind ." A Santal said
to an eloquent missionary who had discoursed of the Chris-
tian God, "What if that Strong One should eat me?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SIR WILLIAM W. HUNTER

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A HUMANIZED SAINT
405
My friend Henri Monod of Paris told me of a little
girl who said to her mother, -" Mamma, if the good God
and the devil were both dead I would feel more tranquil ."
She was brought up a Catholic, and her case - as she was
still taught to believe in a devil -was happier than the
Boston lady trained to believe in one single omnipotent
creator responsible for all the evils and agonies proceed-
ing from his creation. Of such a dread power why should
a sweet and tender woman not be afraid?
From such deities Buddha and Confucius and Zoroaster
and Jesus led their friends, and in America Emerson led
the descendants of the terrible Calvinist deity in the same
direction by calling them to the religion of their own
hearts. When I was studying in the Unitarian Divinity
School, Cambridge (Massachusetts), I occasionally went
to preach in the temporarily vacant Unitarian pulpit at
Plymouth.
The church was the ancient foundation of the
Pilgrims, and I never entered it without a feeling of ex-
altation. The prickly Calvinistic cactus planted there in
1621 had then budded into the beautiful faith of Channing
and was finally flowering in the idealism of Emerson !
Emerson had married a Plymouth lady and bad warm
friends there ; among these being Mrs . Lucia Briggs, who
stands in my memory as a humanized saint, - sympathetic
and individual, serene and smiling, cultured and simple .
" She is one of the precious persons," said Emerson, when
I spoke of her, but I did not know then that he had been
an influence in her life. In a book written by her son,
" Routine and Ideals," appears a letter of Emerson to
little Lucia at Plymouth, aged thirteen, which contains
a paragraph not surpassed by any saying of the haloed
sages : -

--- PAGE BREAK ---r son,
" Routine and Ideals," appears a letter of Emerson to
little Lucia at Plymouth, aged thirteen, which contains
a paragraph not surpassed by any saying of the haloed
sages : -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

406
MY PILGRIMAGE
I would gladly know what books Lucia likes to read
when nobody advises her, and most of all what her
thoughts are when she walks alone or sits alone . For,
though I know that Lucia is the happiest of girls in hav-
ing in her sister so wise and kind a guide, yet even her aid
must stop when she has put the book before you ; neither
sister nor brother nor mother nor father can think for us ;
in the little private chapel of your own mind none but you
can know the happy thoughts that follow each other, the
beautiful affections that spring there, the little silent hymns
that are sung there at morning and at evening. And I
hope that every sun that shines, every star that rises, every
wind that blows upon you will only bring you better
thoughts and sweeter music .
Here, then, I find the inscription on my final shrine.
After voyaging around the world and visiting many tem-
ples I come at last to the " little private chapel in my own
mind," where the ideals are small but intimate and the
services lowly but loving .
Many years ago an American spoke to me after my dis-
course at South Place Chapel, London, and asked me to
call on him at his hotel. He was gentlemanly and attrac-
tive, and invited me so earnestly that I complied . It was
a fashionable hotel and be received me in a fine large
room. A table was covered with large drawings and de-
signs of an invention this American had made for tunnel-
ling mountains. He showed me clearly that a mountain
could be perforated with far less cost in money, time, and
labour, and he enumerated the mountain chains still sep-
arating nations and peoples, impeding commerce and
civilization, rendering impossible the "federation of the
world." Some London engineers and men of wealth were
interested in his invention, and a syndicate would be
formed. He did not require any help from me, but having
listened to my discourse thought I would be interested inengineers and men of wealth were
interested in his invention, and a syndicate would be
formed. He did not require any help from me, but having
listened to my discourse thought I would be interested in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TWO INVENTORS
407
his invention. I was indeed interested, and hoped to hear
from him again, but did not, and the matter passed from
my mind.
Years later I was accosted by a stranger near King's
Cross, a haggard man in threadbare coat, who said plea-
santly, "You do not remember me, but you came to see
me once at Charing Cross Hotel ."
" Ah, yes, you had an
invention of some kind, what came of it?"
"Well, the
capitalists would not go into it, but I have another inven-
tion now,- I wish you would let me show it to you ."
" I
can go now." I followed the inventor to a poor lodging-
house near by, felt my way through the narrow passages
and up the creaking stairways to a dingy little attic, with
cot and two wooden chairs . There he showed me his new
invention, - a little machine for sharpening knives and
forks .
Pathetic comedies are not rare in London, so I soon
forgot the inventor .
I never saw him again and do not
remember his name, but in later years think of him .
Could I meet him to-day I would take that man by the
hand and say, " Brother, we are in the same case . I too
started out with my invention for tunnelling barriers
between races and nations and promoting universal peace
and fraternity ; but I have come down to something small,
-not exactly sharpening knives and forks, possibly less
useful. I am now content if I can win a smile to the faces
that surround me, or bring a little cheer to homes that
look to me for help ."
As I write this in the happy home of my daughter Mil-
dred and her husband, in New York, the midnight chimes
are ringing in Christmas, 1905 . My devoted two children
and children-in-law do all that affection can to withdraw
me from memories of the bereavement we suffered in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ght chimes
are ringing in Christmas, 1905 . My devoted two children
and children-in-law do all that affection can to withdraw
me from memories of the bereavement we suffered in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

408
MY PILGRIMAGE
death of their mother on Christmas day, 1897. The Christ-
mas tree is dressed for the little children, although none
of us believe in any supernatural birth . The human Jesus
is with us in human kindness, and the house is full of
the odour of the love poured out from our little alabaster
boxes to gladden the hearts that surround us .
In a sentence preserved by Hippolytus from a lost Gos-
pel of St. Thomas, Jesus says, 11 He who seeks me shall
find me in children from seven years old ."
In a newly discovered logic Jesus says, " I stood in the
midst of the world
.
. . and found all men drunken, and
none found I athirst among them, and my soul grieves
over the sons of men because they are blind in the hearts
and see not" -
The rest of the papyrus is broken. My
conjecture is that Jesus felt that his efforts to reform
mankind had failed, and that none were eager for the
beatitude, " Happy are they that hunger and thirst for
justice ." (Even now Christians thirst so little for justice
that they hide it under the mongrel " righteousness " !)
But with Jesus to the last were the women
; and shall
I forget that sweetest of all parables, the woman hiding
her leaven in the measures of meal till the whole was
raised? So long as the earth still produces lovely and
loving women, one cannot despair of the happier world,
that is not seen but is within every true and loving heart .
In all the world loving women are bowing down before
deities that seem to me loveless and heartless, but those
hearts are still singing, " Jesus, lover of my soul." Deep
beneath those maternal breasts is a potent alchemy like
that which in the flower turns the foulest mud and slime
at its root into purity and fragrance of lily and rose . It is
said with some truth that the hand that rocks the cradle
rules the world ; but it is not a visible rule, -not a ruleoulest mud and slime
at its root into purity and fragrance of lily and rose . It is
said with some truth that the hand that rocks the cradle
rules the world ; but it is not a visible rule, -not a rule

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE LEAVEN OF HAPPINESS
409
of which men may say, Lo here! lo there ! Were woman
to be withdrawn by public ambition from her realm of
beauty and lowliness, she would be added to the measures
of meal, but where would be the leaven?
O sisters, our sorest need is to end the Wrath by end-
ing the sacrifices, as Jesus said, - like him to clear the
temple of every victim . But that leaven, for which we
must also with Jesus look to woman - constitutionally
deriving happiness from giving rather than receiving -
can reach the temple best by being hid in hearts and
homes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ABBOTT, EDWIN A.,
" Kernel and
Husk," 327.

Adler, Dr.

Felix, 191 .

Adyar, Theosophic centre, 196-203 .

Agassiz, Alexander, 318 .

Agassiz, Louis, heresy of, 318.

Agnes, St., legend of, 292.

Agra, the Taj at, 284, 285
; Akbar's
palace in, 286,287 ; beggars in, 289.

Akbar, mausoleum of, 286 ; palace of,
287.

Aladdin's tower, 282.

Albany, Australia, settlement of, 99,
100 ; primitive laws, 100 ; natives,
100-103.

Ali, Syed Ameer, author and barrister,
252-254 .

Allahabad, 302-309 ; number of Hindu
Christians in, 320 .

Ambapfli (or Amrapali), famous cour-
tesan, 268, 271 ; and Bimbisara, 274 .

Ananda, legend of, 368.

Apocryphal fables, poetic, 1 .

Arab!, Achmet, exiled in Ceylon, 162-
168 .

Arnold, Sir Edwin, his "Light of
Asia," 127 .

Arunachalam, Judge, 112
; wife of, 113,
114 ; acts as cicerone,
114-119 ; his
"Luminous Sleep," 160 .

Asoka, King, 261, 262 ; pillars of, 277,
278, 284, 303, 308 .

Augustine, St., 364.

Australia, nomenclature, 73 ; loyalty
to England, 73 ; social conventions,
74 ; "antipodal" Insanity, 77 ;
gold
fields, 77-80 ; fauna and flora, 83-85 ;
extinct Thylacoleo, 94, 95 ;
colo-
nial chauvinism, 97, 98 ; west coast
names, 98, 99 ; coast natives, 100-103.

Babar, founder of the Mogul dynasty,
286.

Bacon, Delia, 52, 53.

Bain, Professor A ., 180 .

Balzac, Honors de, origin of "La Peau
de Chagrin," 171, 172 .

Benapani, goddess of music, 299, 300.

Benares, the Hindu Jerusalem, 266 ;
Monkey Temple at, 267 ; story con-
nected with, 275, 276 .

Bengal, women of, 248 ; houses, 248,
249 ; conference of religions, 249, 250
;
home of Dr.

Mitra, 250- 252 ; home of
Ameer Ali, 253.

Benjamin, Park, " Song of the Strom-
kerl," 291.

INDEX
Besant, Mrs.

Anne, and Theosophy,
205.

Bbagavat Gita, 282 .

Bhakti (Faith), religion of, 335, 336 .

Bhurmoilla (Holy Stone), 257, 258.

Bimbisara, king of Magadha, 274 .

Blavatsky, Madame, 96,178 ; entertain-
ing but uncultivated, 195 ; at home
of, 196-203 ; alleged frauds, 205-213 ;
mistakes of, 256, 257 .

Bombay, 317-341.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Blavatsky, Madame, 96,178 ; entertain-
ing but uncultivated, 195 ; at home
of, 196-203 ; alleged frauds, 205-213 ;
mistakes of, 256, 257 . Bombay, 317-341. Botany Bay, 95 . Brahmanism, and Positivism, 219
;
priestly rites, 220, 221 . Brahmans, called "Catholics," 299. Brahmos, Somaj, 218 ; Sandharan, 218. Briggs, Mrs. Lucia, 405, 406 . Bright, Charles, 94 . Bright, John, letter from, 345-347 . Broughton, L. P. D., and Theosophic
impostures, 205-209. Brown, W. T ., Theosophist, 197 ; his
meetings with Koothoomi, 202 . Buddha, temples of, 116, 121, 122, 124,
257-262 ; Maia, mother of, 116 ; tradi. tional birthplace, 120 ; alms-bowl of,
120 ; teachings of, 121, 126, 131-136 ;
sacred Bo-tree, 124 ; sacred day of,
127 ; " The Light of Asia " and, 127,
Western interest in, 128 : Siddhar. tba, the real, 128,129 ; Earthward Pil-
grimage of, 129 ; lotus his symbol,
129
;
his plea
for
free thought,
131-133,
" atheism " of, 135 ; pessi-
mistic philosophy derived from, 171 ;
on Truth, 172 ; and Juggenauth,
181 ; ancient carol, 194 ; and Scho-
penhauer, 250 ;
sacred place of,
257, 258 ; footprints of, 260 ; statue of,
in South Kensington Museum, 260
;
religious and moral sentiment about,
261, 262 ; and Ambapali, 268-271 ; can-
onized, 299. Buddhism, new missionary movement,
262 ; a missionary religion, 298. Buddhist, unworldliness of, 108, 109
;
fables and parables, 109-111 ; ven-
erable priest, 116, 117, 122 ; religious
beliefs, 117, 118 ; crime rare among,
119 ;
religious
procession,
120
;
priestly vestments, 121
; moral tales,
124, 125 ; idea of salvation,
126 ;
Christmas among, 127
; Primate of,
130 ; college for, 130-134 ; subtle the-
ology of, 135
; priests celibate, 136 ;
element in Jain religion, 193 ; ` Eso-
teric Buddhism " by Sinnett, 196 ;

--- PAGE BREAK ---412
INDEX
"pansala," the five precepts, 204,
205 ; priests claim supernatural fa-
vour, 229 ; miracle play, 230 ; tradi-
tional sacred place, 257.

Burnouf, Eugene, his opinion on site
of Vais3$, 268.

,
Calcutta, 215 ; Positivist school at, 218,
219 ; beautiful temple at, 219, 220
;
exposition, 223, 225 ; print-shop, 225 ;
Star Theatre, 226-229 ; Parsi Thea-
tre, 230-234 ; circus and menagerie,
234 ; original shrine of Kali, 235-237 ;
yogis, 238-240 ; street beggars, 240 ;
Hall's image, 241
; Salvationists in,
243,244 ; a prince's dinner-party, 244,
245 .

Campbellism, in Tasmania, 81, 82.

Capel, Monseigneur, 11.

Carpenter, Prof.

J.

Estlin, 403.

Carus, Dr .

Paul, editor of " The Open
Court," 263.

Caste, incident of, 281 .

Catholic Church, reason for the per.

sistent animosity against, 386 .

Cayvan, Georgie, 12.

Ceylon, peace-loving natives, 108,109 ;
Buddhists, 108-112 .

116,117, 120, 121,
122, 124, 127,130-136 ; Sinhalese, 112-
116 ; optimism of natives, 118,126 ;
misconceptions of Heber and others,
119,120,136,137 ; crime in, 119 ; Bud.

dha's birthplace, 120 .

ancient tem.

pies, 120,121,124 ; Christmas in, 127 ;
Buddhist college, 130-134 ; devil-dan.

eers,144-150 ; serpent worship, 146,
147 ; devil exorcism, 151, 152 ; no
twilight in, 152 ; Nautch dancers, 154-
157 ; Tamil drama of
` Harischan.

dra," 157-159 ; conjurers, 169, 170 ;
great turtle of, 170 ; simple life of
Sinhalese, 171, 172 .

Chaitanya, reviver of Vishnuism, 336,
337.

Christianity, its claims and its results,
193 ; fundamental difference from
oriental religions, 214 ; derived ideas
from India, 295, 301 ; sectarian, 389.

"Christianity," collection of discourses
by C., 359.

Christians of St.

Thomas, 313 .

Civil War, effects of, in Virginia, 24,
25 ; C.'s expatriation because of, 25,
26.

Clark, Hon.

A .

I., 80.

Clarke, Marcus, his " For the Term of
His Natural Life," 80, 85 .

Clifford, W.

K ., quoted, 402 .

Coan, Rev.

Titus, pathetic history of,
58.

Cobbe, Frances Power, 190,strong .Titus, pathetic history of,
58.

Cobbe, Frances Power, 190,strong .

ly opposed to the theatre, 334, 335 .

Colombo, jeweller of, and Bishop
Heber, 119 ; Christmas in, 127 ; hotels
of, 143 ; palatial bungalows at, 143,
153 ; devil-dancers, 144-150 ; street
jugglers, 169, 170 .

Colton, J.

S ., Positivist, 218.

Columbus, 28 .

Conway, Hon .

Martin F., 25.

Conway, Moncure D., Cincinnati pas-
torate, 2, 3 ;
The Earthward Pil.

grimage," 4,5 ; voyage to New York,
8-13 ; meets prominent citizens, 15,
16 ; conception of patriotism, 16-18 ;
appreciation of Ingersoll, 19-24; post-
helium conditions, 24, 25 ; war policy
regretted, 25, 26 ;
A Necklace of
Stories," 26, 27 ; reflections on visit
home, 27-30 ; Virginia historical
pilgrimage, 30 ; effects of war, 34-36 ;
witch hunt, 37 ; visits Judge Hoadly,
38-40 ; visits Utah, 40-45 ; converses
with John W.

Young, 41 ; meets
prominent Mormons, 44, 45 ; arrives
in San Francisco, 47 ; visits China-
town, 47, 48 ; visits friends and rela-
tives, 49 ; Shakespeare-Bacon con-
troversy, 51, 63 ; in Hawaii, 53-59 ;
diversions of Pacific voyage, 62-64 ; in
New Zealand, 65,66 ; at Melbourne,
70-76 ; visits gold-fields, 77-80 ; in Tas-
mania, 80-88 ; Melbourne lectures
misunderstood, 89,90 ; Sydney lec-
tures, 91-94; at Botany Bay, 95 ; visits
Albany, 99-104 ; voyage to Ceylon,
105 ; a Buddhist friend, 109-111 ; ex-
pedition to Rodyas country, 111,112 ;
entertained by Sinhalese, 112-114 ; ad-
monishes Buddhists, 115,116 ; meets
Subhnti,116,117 ; visits Khandy tem-
ple,121,122 ; hears Moslem preacher,
123,124 ; visits Kellania temple, 124 ;
questions SubhIIti about mission-
aries, 126 ; spends Christmas in Co.

lombo, 127-130 ; at Buddhist college,
130-134 ; conversation with priests,
135,136 ; attends international church
function, 139-142 ; entertained at Cin-
namon Gardens, 143 ; sees devil.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Young, 41 ; meets
prominent Mormons, 44, 45 ; arrives
in San Francisco, 47 ; visits China-
town, 47, 48 ; visits friends and rela-
tives, 49 ; Shakespeare-Bacon con-
troversy, 51, 63 ; in Hawaii, 53-59 ;
diversions of Pacific voyage, 62-64 ; in
New Zealand, 65,66 ; at Melbourne,
70-76 ; visits gold-fields, 77-80 ; in Tas-
mania, 80-88 ; Melbourne lectures
misunderstood, 89,90 ; Sydney lec-
tures, 91-94; at Botany Bay, 95 ; visits
Albany, 99-104 ; voyage to Ceylon,
105 ; a Buddhist friend, 109-111 ; ex-
pedition to Rodyas country, 111,112 ;
entertained by Sinhalese, 112-114 ; ad-
monishes Buddhists, 115,116 ; meets
Subhnti,116,117 ; visits Khandy tem-
ple,121,122 ; hears Moslem preacher,
123,124 ; visits Kellania temple, 124 ;
questions SubhIIti about mission-
aries, 126 ; spends Christmas in Co. lombo, 127-130 ; at Buddhist college,
130-134 ; conversation with priests,
135,136 ; attends international church
function, 139-142 ; entertained at Cin-
namon Gardens, 143 ; sees devil. dance, 144-150 ; entertained at Swa-
my bungalow, 153-159 ; sees Nautch
dances, 154-157 ;
` Harischandra, "
Tamil drama, 157-159 ; visits Achmet
Arabi, 162-168 ; watches street con-
jurer, 169 ; at Madras temple cere-
monials, 174-176 ; talks with stu-
dents, 176-179 ; opposes traditional
belief about Juggenauth,180, 181 ; at
Tripelcane temple, 181-183 ; pilgrim-
age to St . Thomd, 183-187 ; lectures
on "Religion of Humanity," 191 ; vis-
ited by Jain teacher, 192,193 ; with
Mme . Blavatsky at Adyar, 196-203
;
witnesses " pansala " administered,
204, 205 ; investigates Theosophie
miracles, 205-213 ;
attends Royal
Asiatic Society banquet in Calcutta,
215 ; travels with Mozoomdar, 215 ;
at Positivist school, 218-220 ; intro-
duces Mozoomdar to Tyndall, 221-
223 ; at Calcutta Exposition, 223-225 ;
print-shop, 225 ; theatres, 226-234 ;
circus, 234 ; visits shrine of Kali,
0

--- PAGE BREAK ---235-237, 241, 242 ; conversation with
yogi, 238, 239 ; dines with Indian
prince, 244-246 ; seeing Bengal, 248,
249 ; holds religious conference, 249,
250 ;
visits Dr .

Mitra,
250-252 ;
Ameer Ali, 252-254 ; sees conjurer's
marvellous dolls, 255,256 ; journeys
to Buddha-Gaya
257-262 ; at Be.

nares, 266-268 ;
his "Chats with a
Chimpanzee " begun, 268 ; excursion
to " Deer Park," 268 ; opinion of the
narrative of Jesus and the woman
of Samaria, 273 ; at Delhi, 277-281
;
at Purana Keela, 282-284 ; sees the
Taj, 284, 285 ; adventure at Agra, 289 ;
at Allahabad, 302-309 ; in Bombay,
317-332 ; sails for home, 343 ; his
search for Jesus, 351-381 .

Cook, Captain, authentic account of
his death, 55 .

Coulomb, Mme ., exposes Theosophic
marvels, 211-213 .

Crawford, F.

Marion, his "Mr.

Isaacs"
and Theosophy, 195.

Crocodile, a fair symbol of Aurung-
zeb, 289.

Daharwanga, strange sights at, 307 .

Damon, Frank, 55.

Damon, Rev.

Dr., 55.

Darmesteter, James, 326 .

Darwin, Charles, on tropical tribes, 58,
65 ; C .

lectures on, 74, 91,94 ; disliked
by Australians, 104 .

Davids, T.

W .

Rhys, LL.

D., 128, 250.

Day, Lal Beharl, his " Folk-Tales of
Bengal," 242.

" Deer Park," 268, 269 .

Delhi, 277-281 .

Demons and demonology, C.'s book
on, 144,246,247 ; in Ceylon, 147, 151,
152 ; in India, 242 .

De Siva, W.

A ., co-editor of "Ceylon
National Review, " 254.

Devil-dance, 144-150 .

"Dew-drop, The Circumnavigation of
a,"9.

Dickinson College, extract from ad-
dress at, 349.

Dolls, marvellous, 255, 256 .

Draupadi, and her five husbands, 282,
283 ; and St.

Agnes, 292 ; and the
Samaritan woman, 369, note.

Dualism, the central principle of
Zo-
roaster, 326 .

Earthward Pilgrimage, The, 4, 5.

Eglinton, a medium, 205-209 .

Elephants, 318, 322 .

Emancipation, chief end of Civil War,
25.

Emerson, Ralph Waldo, " The Sphinx"
quoted, 355.

England, influence of, on India, 318,
319, 339.

Esmond, James, 79 .

Essen, town of, 348-350.

INDEX
413
Fitzhugh, William, 31.

Fokke, Capt.

Bernard, legend of, 344.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fokke, Capt. Bernard, legend of, 344. Folk-lore the debris of Asiatic usage
and superstition, 301 . Fox, W. J., minister of South Place
Chapel, 332. Franklin, Benjamin, 360 . Fraser, Mrs., of Melbourne, 344 . Freethinkers, International Congress
of, 387. Froude, James Anthony, 292, 293 . Gaietf-Montparnasse, a Sunday even-
ing revue at, 390, 391 . Gandhi, Virchand, 192, 193. Ganges, immersions in the, 266 . Garnett, Dr . Richard, his " Edward
Gibbon Wakefield," 68 . Gaya, temple at, 257-263 ; discovery
at, 261 . Ghosh,
Jogendra Chandra, adopts
Positivism, 219. Giosafat, St ., beautiful statue of, 299. " Golden Pillar," 278 . Gordon, Charles George ("Chinese
Gordon "), 345-348 . Goreh, Nelacantah, 321, 322, 331 . Gospel of the Infancy, Arabic, 1 . Grenfell, Dr. Bernard, 382 . Guizot, F. P. G., quoted, 395. Happiness, religion promotes, 13 ; and
self-sacrifice, 192 . Hargraves, Edward, discovers gold in
Australia, 78, 79. Hartmann, Dr ., 197, 202 ; "pansala"
administered to, 204, 205 . Hawaii, strict Sunday laws in, 54, 55 ;
half-caste population, 55 ; overthrow
of paganism in, 56, 57 ; missionary
efforts futile, 57, 58 . Hawthorne, Nathaniel, in Rome, 397-
399 . Heber, Bishop Reginald, misconcep . tions of, 119, 136, 137 . Higinbotham, Judge, 75, 89 . Hindu, exorcising devils, 144, 151 ; de-
mons, 149, 150 ; chief
deity, 15o
;
temple dancers, 155-157, 175,
176 ;
music, 158,159 ; deities, 174,175,178-
182 ; students, 176-179 ;
kills St . Thomas, 185 ; tale of Savatri, 188,
189 ;
Theosophists, 197-199 ;
reli-
gions, 218-221 ;
theatres, 225-234 ;
miracle play, 226-228 ;
Kali wor-
ship, 235-237,241-244 ; yogis, 238-240 ;
women, seclusion of, 243 ; fanaticism
repulsive to educated, 245 ;
idols
only symbols, 245, 246 ; conjurers,
255, 256 ; politeness and tact of, 294,
295 ; ill-treated by some of the Eng-
lish, 338 . Hoadly, George, 21 ; political career,
38 . Hobart, situation, 81 ; a Sunday in, 81. Hunt, Dr. Arthur, 382 . Hunter, Sir William, 180, 211, 215, 223,295 ; ill-treated by some of the Eng-
lish, 338 . Hoadly, George, 21 ; political career,
38 . Hobart, situation, 81 ; a Sunday in, 81. Hunt, Dr. Arthur, 382 . Hunter, Sir William, 180, 211, 215, 223,

--- PAGE BREAK ---414
INDEX
259 ; with C .

at Kalighat, 235-244 ;
with C.

at Bengal, 248 ; on mission.

aries, 320 ; quoted on some develop-
ments of Vishnuism, 337 .

Huxley, T .

H ., 338.

Ilbert, Hon.

Mr ., 228.

Ingersoll, Robert G., persuasive pow.

er of, 19,20 ; freedom of mind, 20 ; his
iconoclasm incidental, 21 ; purity of
mind, 22 ; attacked by Rev .

Sam .

Jones, 22 ; family life, 23 ; compelled
to resign nomination as minister to
Germany, 24.

Inventor, American, anecdote of an,
406,407.

Jacob's well, 369, 370.

Jain religion, 192,193 ; temple in Bom-
bay, 341 .

Jefferson, Thomas, religious attitude
of, 360.

Jeffray, Robert .I., 8.

Jehan,Shah, 285 .

Jehanara, Princess, 290 .

Jenckes, William, 19 .

Jesus, quest of, 351-381 ; why put to
death, 365 ; a gentleman, and rich,
366 ; sayings of, 370-375 ; his baptism,
376, 377 ; his birth, 378 ; resurrection,
379 ; sayings ascribed to, 382.

Jingo, defence of a, 16.

Job, book of, 301 .

Jones, Rev.

Sam ., 2-2.

Judas, identified with doubting Thom.

as, 189, 190 .

Juggenauth, 179-181, 257, 265 ; car of,
312.

Jumna, the river, 285, 287 .

Jumna Mosque, the, 290.

Kali, shrine of, 235-237 ; image of, 241 ;
vows and sacrifices to, 242 ; not ideal
deity, 244 ; invisible, 246, 247.

Kalpa-tree, in Oriental lore, 171, 172 .

Khrusroo, the poet, tomb of, 280 .

King, Charles William, anecdote of,
324.

Krishna, and Arjnna, 282
; legend of
his dancing with milkmaids, 285, 288,
291 ;
answers Draupadi's prayer,
292 ; similarity between legends of
his birth and Christ's, 295,296 ; popu-
lar coloured prints of his story, 297,
298 .

Krupp Gun Works, at Essen, 349 .

Laing, Samuel, "A Modern Zoroas-
trian" quoted, 340, 341 .

Lakshmi, goddess of prosperity, 300 .

Lalor, Hon .

Peter, speaker of Victo-
rian Parliament, 79.

Lazarus, Bible story of, a drama, 358,
359 .

Lewis, Colonel Fielding, 31 .

Lilith, 300.

Lyell, Sir Charles, 27 .

Mcllvaine, Bishop, 139-141 .

Madonna, the Everyday, 399 ; Jesus
and, 401.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mcllvaine, Bishop, 139-141 . Madonna, the Everyday, 399 ; Jesus
and, 401. Madras, dawn in, 174 ; temple dan-
cers, 175, 176 ; university students,
176-179 ; temple at Tripelcane, 181-
183 ;
Princess Savatri of, legend
about, 188, 189 . Magdalene, legend of the, 273 . Manning, Archbishop, on progress,
385, 386 . Manning, Mrs ., her
"Ancient and
Mediaeval India," 261 ; her opinion
of " The Toy Cart," 272. Manwaysh, annual festival, 302-306 . Maoris, deputation of, 69 . Marmoutier, convent of, 400 . Maryland, origin of name, 29 . Melbourne, " Cup Day," 70, 71 ; Joss
House, 71 ; mayor's banquet, 73 ;
Bishop of, 75, 76 . Michel, Louise, 394 . Miller, Colonel, of Bombay, 317. Minar Pillar, 279, 280. Missionaries, 2, 214,319 ; in Hawaii, 56-
69 ; misconceptions of, 119, 120, 136,
137 ; in Ceylon, 126 ; Moslem, 123,
124 ; inconsistency of, 138, 142 ; an-
ecdotes of, 305, 306. Mitra, Dr. Rajendralala, Indian schol-
ar, 250-252, 259 ; extract from letter
to C., 263, 265. Monkeys, sporting in the forest, 317. Monkey Temple at Benares, 267, 268 . Mound, Henri, 405. Moorhouse, Bishop, martyr to liber-
alism, 75, 76, 89, 90,104 . Mormons, persecutions of, 40 ; polyg-
amy, 41, 42 ; elder's sermon, 43, 44
;
" Godbeites," 44, 45 . Moslem, sermon by a, 123,124 ; make. believe, 137, 138 ; exile in Ceylon,
162-168 ; religion misunderstood, 166
;
orthodox beliefs, 250 ; scholar, Ali,
252-254 . Mozoomdar, Protap Chunder, Brahmo
minister, 215 ; his religion, 221 ; and
Tyndall, 221, 222 . Miiller, George, of Bristol, 213, 214 . Miiller,
Professor
Max, 180
;
and
Nelacantah Goreh . 321, 322 ; quoted,
384. "Mysteries," Buddhist and Christian,
274. " Necklace of Stories, A," 26,27. Newman, Prof. F . W., 333 ; anecdote
of, 309, 310. Newman, John Henry, 92 . Nizam-ooden, supposed founder of
the order of Thugs, 280. Normanby, Marquis of, 73. Norton, Andrews, 23 . Olcott, Colonel,
Theosophist, patron
of Buddhists, 120. 130 ; and Hindus,
178 ; name part of " Djual Khoot,"upposed founder of
the order of Thugs, 280. Normanby, Marquis of, 73. Norton, Andrews, 23 . Olcott, Colonel,
Theosophist, patron
of Buddhists, 120. 130 ; and Hindus,
178 ; name part of " Djual Khoot,"

--- PAGE BREAK ---201,c:2 ; evades questions, 210 ; and
Khoomi," 210, 211.

Orient, books of, 2 ;
religions of, 7 ;
folk-lore, 170,171 ; dawn in the, 174.

Ormuzd, 327.

Owen, Prof.

Richard, 94.

Owl, bird of ill omen, 300.

Pandit, Shankuran, 323.

Pars1 theatres .

225, 230-234 .

Parsts, 324-326, 330.

Patriotism, a cult, 17 ; evolution of, 17,
18 .

Paul, St., and Christianity, 361, 362.

Penrose, Elder, sermon by, 43.

Peter, St., Gospel of, 403 .

Peterson, Professor, of Elphinstone
University, 318, 322 .

Pithora, Rajah, legend of, 279, 280 .

Pokahuntas, 30.

Polygamy among Christian converts
in India, 288 .

Positivism, 218, 219 .

Prester John, 28 .

" Prince Jivaka" quoted, 269.

Prodigal Son, parable of the, 262 note .

Purana Keela, ancient fortified vil .

lage, 282-284 .

Ramabal, Pundita, 331 .

Ramanathan, Hon .

P., solicitor-gen.

eral of Ceylon, 130, 131, 133 ; beauti-
ful bungalow of, 143 ; his new religion,
159 ; lectures at Harvard, 160 .

Rammohun Roy, 332, 361 .

Rationalists, support C., 3 ; press asso-
eiation of London, 4 ; reservations
of, 190.

Religion, rationalistic,4,190 ; Oriental,
7 ; limitations of, 12,13 ; and happi-
ness, 13 ; Mormon, 40-45 ; conserva-
tism in Australia, 91-94 ; Buddhist,
117,118,120,121,126,131-136,204,205 ;
Hindu, 150,155-157,174,175,176,178-
182 ; of Ramanathan, 159 ; of human .

ity,191; of pain and sacrifice, 191,192
;
Jain,
192 ;
Theosophy,
195-203 ;
Brahmo Somaj, 218 ;
Sandharan
Brabmos, 218 ;
Brahmanism, 219-
221 ; supernatural in Oriental reli-
gion, 229 ; Bhakti, 336.

Renan, Ernest, criticised for making
Jesus a Frenchman, 335.

Ripon, Marquis of, Viceroy of India,
215 .

Rivers, General Pitt, 331.

Robertson, John M., 364 note ; " Christ
and Krishna" quoted, 336.

Robinson, Moncure, 20 .

Rostand, Edmond,
his play,
" La
Samaritaine," 357.

Rush, Dr.

Benjamin, 360 .

Sacrifice, the doctrine of, 311, 395-397 .

St.

Agnes, legend of, 292 .

St.

Augustine, 364.

St.

Giosafat, beautiful statue of, 299.

INDEX
415
St.

Paul and Christianity, 361, 362.

St.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Paul and Christianity, 361, 362. St. Peter, Gospel of, 403. St. Thomas, church and relies of, at St. Thom6,183-187 ; indentified originally
with Judas, 189, 190 . Baleen, Sheik, 288. Salpetriere, the, religious epileptics
in, 392, 393 . Salt, the covenant of, 301 . Sand, George,
"Pauline"
quoted,
172, 173 ; quoted, 266 ; "Les Maftres
Sonneurs," 291. Sapara, Buddha's traditional
birth-
place, 120. Satan in Christian theology, 326 . Savage, Minot J ., 404 . Savatri, Princess, legend of, 188, 189. Schopenhauer, Arthur, 264, 265. Segura, Father, 29. Sen, Keshub Chunder,332-334 ; death
of, 215-217 ; asceticism of, 218 ; suc-
cessor mentioned, 221. Sen, Norendronath, Theosophist, 197,
203, 204. Siddhartha, see Buddha. Sinnett, Alfred Percy, Theosophist,
195 ; his "Esoteric Buddhism," 196 ;
and Mme . Blavatsky, 199 ; and im-
postures, 208, 209. Siva, chief god of Benares, 267. Smith, Goldwin, 395. Smith, Professor John, 196, 200 . Solomon, the " Judgment "
of, trace. able to an Indian source, 293. Spiritualism, in Howells's "The Undis . covered Country," 11 ; in Australia,
87, 96 . Strong, Rev . Charles, martyr to Tiber . alism, 75, 76, 89, 90, 104 . Subhuti,
Waskaduwe,
Buddhist
priest, 116, 117, 122, 126, 136 . Supernaturalism, C .'s repudiation of,
2, 3. Swamy, Ananda Cumara, co-editor of
"Ceylon National Review," 254. Swamy, Sir Muter Kumara, his bun. galow,153 ; his translation of "Hari-
sehandra," 157-159 ; his marriage,
254. Swinburne, A . C., "Mater Triumpha-
lis " quoted, 403. Sydney, religious conservatism in, 91-
94; Museum, 94 ; Zoological Gardens,
95 ; Botany Bay, 95. Taj Mahal, the, 284, 285 . Tajore, Sir Jotendra Mohun, 256. Tammany, origin of the name, 28, 29. Tasmania, penal settlements, 81, 86 ;
fauna and flora, 84, 85 ; extinction of
natives, 86, 87. Taylor, Sir Henry, quoted, 190 . Temple, Dr. Frederick, 140, 141. Theosophy, Mme . Blavatsky and, 195 ;
centre of, 196-203 ; origin of Mahat-
mas, 201, 202 ; miracles of, 203 ; im-
postures of, 205-213 .lor, Sir Henry, quoted, 190 . Temple, Dr. Frederick, 140, 141. Theosophy, Mme . Blavatsky and, 195 ;
centre of, 196-203 ; origin of Mahat-
mas, 201, 202 ; miracles of, 203 ; im-
postures of, 205-213 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

416
INDEX
Thoreau, Henry D., 106.
Towers of Silence, the, 324, 325.
Toy-Cart, The," play of ancient
Hindu theatre, 271-273.
Turner, Henry G., 8, 72, 74 .
Tyndall, John, 221-223.
" Undiscovered Country, The," 10 .
Vaisali, site undetermined, 268, 269 .
Vallabha-Swami, 337 .
Varuna, 215.
Velasco, Don Louis de, Indian prince,
29 .
Victoria, Chinese of, 71 ; religious sta-
tistics, 72 ; abandoned town in, 80.
Vishnu, 257.
Vishnuism revived by Chaitanya,
336 .
Voltaire, 105,106.
Walkishwur Tank, the, 323 .
Warner, Charles Dudley, anecdote of,
355.
Washington, John Augustine, 33 .
Washington, Mary, letter to her son,
33.
Weedon, General George, revels at
the "Sentry Box," 31-33 .
Well of Knowledge, 267 .
Wesley, John, 105-107.
W
West, Judge, of Bombay, 323, 328.
estminster Creed, 107 .
` Widow's Ghat," 266.
Wilson Prof. H . H ., 335, 336 ; transla-
tion from the Agni Purana quoted,
312, 313.
Windeyer, Justice, 93, 96, 196 .
Wisdom, the secret of, 10, 11.
Witchcraft, a mulatto girl's delusion,
37.
Woman in Zoroastrianism, 327.
Yogi, Indian ascetic, 238-240 .
Yosada, foster-mother of Krishna, 296,
297.
Young, John W., defends polygamy,
41, 42.
Yudhishthira, Rajah, legend of, 283 .
Zanzibar, native of, 343.
Zenanas, 331 .
Zoroaster, essential principle of, 326,
327 ; religion of, the true one . 339.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(Cbe iRiberoibe prey
Electrotyped and printed by H . 0. Houghton & Co.
Cambridge, Mass., U. S . A .