POST
Easter Bonnets
The mad hatterswho make them
Canadian Elections
Will anti-Americanism friumph?
THE SATURDAY EVENING POSTAPRIL6.196320C
A WORRIED PRESIDENT:
THE
CRISIS
INHIS
FOREIGN
POLICY
BYSTEWARTALSOP
THE BOXING MESS by ex-promoter Bil Fugazy
DOROTHY
SILVER SPRING MD
10605-SHADY CIR
REV ARLYN D STEWART
10605SHAD&SKP03&SEP 63

--- PAGE BREAK ---The collapse of Kennedy's
grand
design
By STEWART ALSOP
f you ask me whether this was the winter
equally loudnon to theAtlantic partner-
called to Washington,and such elder
from the Pentagon, and that Kennedy's
of our discontent I would say no.If you
statesmen as former Secretaries of State
would ask me whether we were quite as
Dean Acheson and Christian Herter were
therefore a trap.

what France has wanted."
recruited for consultation.But most of
More-serious reports were also re-
in the fall, I might say no.

The military-strategic portion of the
the agonizing has been done by the same
ceived.There were intelligence reports on
This oddly phrased remark by President
Grand Design was the brainchild of Sec-
men to whom Kennedy turned in the Oc-
de Gaulle's conversations with German
Kennedyatarecent press conference is
retary of Defense Robert McNamara and
tober crisis.

The leading agonizers have
Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, in which
a vast understatement.

The contrast be-
his “whiz kids" in the Pentagon.

It can
been Secretary of State Dcan Rusk;Sec-
deGaulle was pictured as warning Ade-
tween the winter Kennedy and the fall
also be summarized in three sentences.

nauer that the United States was about to
Kennedyisnfactamostremarkabl
The United States would contribute to the
Whitman Rostow,the StateDepartment's
make a deal with Russia on Berlin and
conast.LastOctoberafterehadforced
Atlantic partnership acentrally con-
chief policy planner, and Paul Nitze,
East Germany，preparatory to a total
Nikita Khrushchev to blink in their fa-
trolledatomic deterrent—meaning con-
Rostow's counierpart in ine Fentagon.

withdrawai from the ContentThsre
mous confrontation, Kennedy was riding
The agonizing is still in progressas this
were parallelreports picturingdeGaulle
high—about as high as any President in
the Europeans would bring NATO's
is written.The first result of the agonizing
as himself dickering for just such a deal
recent memory.

And now look at him.withdrawai from the ContentThsre
mous confrontation, Kennedy was riding
The agonizing is still in progressas this
were parallelreports picturingdeGaulle
high—about as high as any President in
the Europeans would bring NATO's
is written.The first result of the agonizing
as himself dickering for just such a deal
recent memory.

And now look at him.

strength up to 30 divisions,to provide the
was a simple, if depressing, conclusion.

with Khrushchev.

Trouble with Canada, our oldest friend.

The vacuum of sensible communication
Turmoil in the Middle East.

The Vietnam
could resist a limited Soviet attack with-
Gaulle’s nons into ouis.

Indced, there is
between Paris and Washington has been
war going badly.Unemployment high.

out resorting to the weapons which might
one reason for Washington's moodof
The Kennedy tax program bogged down
destroy the United States as well as the
frustration.

The peculiar strength of de
on Capitol Hill.Irony of ironies,the Re
Soviet Union.

hand.

Gaulle's position has been another.As
publicans beating him over the head with
DeGaulle has said non to the“centrally
"De Gaulle is the most goddam undeal-
the agonizingreappraisal continued，the
Cuba, where less than six months ago
controlled deterrent." He will build his
able-with human being that's ever ex-
strength of de Gaulle's position became
Kennedy seemed to have scored the
isted,"says one agonized rcappraiser,
more and more evident.

“He wants noth-
greatest triumph of his career.

frappe.And he has said non to the“con-
ing from us,” says one of the agonizers,
And de Gaulle.

Above all Charles de
ventional option.

He has committed just
dent Roosevelt and Prime Minister
“and there'snothing we cando that will
Gaulle.For Charles de Gaulle has kicked
two underequipped divisions to NATO.

really hurt him."
the liver and lights out of President Ken-
Without a serious French contribution,a
Theusual wayforone chiefofstateto
AllsortsofcounterslapsfordeGaulles
nedy's famous GrandDesign.He has committed just
dent Roosevelt and Prime Minister
“and there'snothing we cando that will
Gaulle.For Charles de Gaulle has kicked
two underequipped divisions to NATO.

really hurt him."
the liver and lights out of President Ken-
Without a serious French contribution,a
Theusual wayforone chiefofstateto
AllsortsofcounterslapsfordeGaulles
nedy's famous GrandDesign.

30-division NATO is not in the cards.

“get to”another chief of state is， of
slap in the face have been considered by
The “de Gaulle crisis,” which is still
In short,deGaullehas saidawintry
course, through the subordinates of cach.

the reapparaisersForexample,the Pe-
going on, and may go on for years, is less
nonto thewhole Grand Design.So where
In a crisis the two may communicate di-
tagon has agreed to supply de Gaulle's
dramatic than last October's two-week
do we go from here?

rectly,as in th famousstillsecret x
force defrappe withjetrefuelingplanes.

Cuban crisis.

It has involved no U-2 over-
This reporter has asked that question
changes between Kennedy and Khrush-
The agreement could be cancelledthus
flights, no midnight calls to a sleeping
of just about all the President's chief for-
chev during the Octobercrisis.There have
cutting the range of the force de frappe.

President, no mobilization of the Stra-
eign and defense advisers.The simplest
been no similar exchanges between Ken-
The French mission in Washington ner-
tegicAircwksve
way to summarize their answers would be
nedy and de Gaulle.

vously expected the Pentagon to do just
if anyone has blinked, it has been John F.

in two words:“God knows.

Communication between subordinates
that.But the reappraisers concluded it
Kennedy.

But although it has been less
That is abit too simlebutnotmuh
has been almost totally fruitless, simply
would be a futile pinprick.

dramatic,thedeGaullecrisiscouldun
too simple.But although it has been less
That is abit too simlebutnotmuh
has been almost totally fruitless, simply
would be a futile pinprick.

dramatic,thedeGaullecrisiscouldun
too simple.

The mood of Kennedy's
because de Gaulle does not consult subor-
More-serious consideration was given
out in the long run to be more difficult
Washingtndasuzzldusrat
to finding some way to rearrange the com-
and even,conceivably,more dangerous
and,below the bland surface,angry
mand and logistic structure of NATO to
than the great October confrontation.

mood.To understand the frustration,itis
Couve de Murville [French foreign min-
bypass France.

But aside from being im-
As Walter Lippmann has written, de
only necessary to list the successive re-
practical,this would not even hurt de
actions to deGaulle's series ofnons.

de Gaulle would say than I did.

That's
Gaulle'sfeelings.DeGaulleasPresien
tions" of American defense and foreign
The President's first reaction was typ-
Kennedy has remarked, “does not much
policy.

In fact, he has struck not one blow
ically Kennedy:"That's what he thinks."
to deal with-we know more about
admire NATO anyway."
but several.

The President, in short, was just plain
Khrushchev's plans and purposes than
Consideration wasalso giventomaking
The Grand Design was in two parts.

angry.His second and wiserreaction was
about de Gaulle's."
some sortofspecialexclusive economic
The politico-economic part was largely
to give time for tempersincluding his
This communications vacuum has been
inspired by France's Jean Monnet.

Its
own,to cool,and toadopt anAdministra
filled, inevitably,by secondhand rumors
States, Great Britain and the Common-
tion line piaying down the real signif-
and reports.angry.His second and wiserreaction was
about de Gaulle's."
some sortofspecialexclusive economic
The politico-economic part was largely
to give time for tempersincluding his
This communications vacuum has been
inspired by France's Jean Monnet.

Its
own,to cool,and toadopt anAdministra
filled, inevitably,by secondhand rumors
States, Great Britain and the Common-
tion line piaying down the real signif-
and reports.

Paris is like a sieve, and de
retary of State George Ball and White
cance of de Gaulle'sblow at the founda-
Gaulle, when in the mood, talks with hair-
House sccurity adviser McGeorge Bundy,
tions.ThusGeorge Ball isresponsible
raising candor.“If you are rude enough
Gaulle with economic reprisals.At the
bothpersonalfriends andpassionatead
same time, de Gaulle's five Common
mirers of the brilliant Monnet.

This por-
said after his famous press conference in
tion of the Grand Design can be summa-
istic”invention.The President‘s third re-
January,they will sooncome toyou hat
veto of Britain,could be cncouraged to
rized in three sentences.First, the British
action belies this complacency.

in hand."This purported remark reached
threaten de Gaull with the breakup of
would join the Common Market.This
His third reaction was to order a root-
the White House, where it cooled no tem-
the Common Market.

would lead toa“UnitedEurope,”incld-
and-branch reexamination of all the basic
But such measures were,in the British
ing Britain, united politically as well as
White House adviser, “he knows nothing
economically.

The United States would in
about John F.Kennedy."
ingold anddollarreserves safely tucked
turn form with United Europe what the
All sortsofotheroddreportsreached
away in the Bank of France, de Gaulle
President in more hopeful days called a
JohnFosterDulles isstudiously avoided.--- PAGE BREAK ---

would lead toa“UnitedEurope,”incld-
and-branch reexamination of all the basic
But such measures were,in the British
ing Britain, united politically as well as
White House adviser, “he knows nothing
economically. The United States would in
about John F.Kennedy."
ingold anddollarreserves safely tucked
turn form with United Europe what the
All sortsofotheroddreportsreached
away in the Bank of France, de Gaulle
President in more hopeful days called a
JohnFosterDulles isstudiously avoided. Washington-forexample,thatdeGaulle
can make alot more economic trouble for
"concrete Atlantic partnership."
To this end, the chief American ambassa-
“les Anglo-Saxons" than the other way
DeGaulle hassaid non to theBritishin
dors in Europe (except Ambassador to
the firing mechanisms of the Polaris mis-
aroundDe Gaulle is convinced that the
the Common Market. He has said an
France Charles Bohlen, who was ill) were
siles were controlled by clectronic “rays"
French economic boom is far more
78

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ThePresident's first reactiontodeGaullesannouncement was typicallyKemnedy—"That's what he thinks.But then began the“agonizingreappraisal"
79

--- PAGE BREAK ---KENNEDY
defend Europe.

It is no use making this
to Europe but to the United States.Thus
disclose certain closely held American
kind of threat unless you mean to follow
the United States, like the little Dutch
atomic secrets.So the proposal Merchant
through on it.

boy, is immobilized.

The strongest power
took with him to Europe calls instead for
De Gaulle is perfectly confident that
in the Western alliance has amazingly lit-
a 25-ship surface fleet armed with 200
Should
Kennedy cannot and will not make this
tle bargaining power in the alliance.

Polaris missiles.

threat.In February,at a reception for the
In this situation there is really no way
Even this would cost the United States
French National Assembly, de Gaulle re-
on earth to put the Humpty-Dumpty of
and the other NATO countries upward of
marked complacently:*There will not be
theKennedy Grand Design back on the
five billion dollars, which is one reason
we
a worid war, I can assure you that.

Under
wall.This is the basic, if unacknowiedged,
why the Europeans have responded
these circumstances the future of our
conclusion which has resulted from all the
tepidly to Merchant‘s overtures.

But the
country is assured."
agonizing, The conclusion echoes the re-
chief reason is that the multilateral force
1no iind
mark of British Prime Minister Harold
isn’t really multilateral.

Barring a revision
Because,as de Gaulle has also said, the
Macmillan: “I do not believe there is a
of the McMahon Act, which would re-
American nuclear deterrent is “the essen-
simple alternative,in the sense ofa ready-
quire a revolution of attitudes in the
of
tial guarantee of world peace.” The nu-
made plan." What the Kennedy planners
U.S.

Congress, the President of the
clearrentindyuth
have come up with, instead of a ready-
United States would still control any
army, or the 400,000 American troops in
made plan, is a holding operation, de
firing of the missiles.

This is why the
Europe?

Europe.This is why the
Europe?

Europe.

De Gaulle agrees with President
signed to prevent a bad situation from
French sneer at the “multilateral force”
Eisenhower's dictum that anyone who
becomingworse.

as a “multilateral farce.” It is why, al-
would fight a nonnuclear war in Europe
The two chief field captains in the hold-
though the Germans have expressed
ingoperationare former Secretary of
polite interest, Merchant's job may be
the same time he is convinced that “there
State Christian Herter and Special Am-
even more difficult than Herter's.

will not be a world war" as long as the
bassador Livingston Merchant.As the
For Merchant is grappling with that
American nuclear force is committed to
President's European trade representa-
“new and gigantic fact” which was never
attributable to France and de Gaulle
Europe's defense.

He is equally convinced
tive, Herter will try to prevent the Com-
fully faced until de Gaulle made it
than to the Common Market.Any threat
that the Kennedy Administration cannot
mon Market from turning into the
to break up the Common Market would
and will not withdraw the commitment.

narrowly exclusive continental system
scare his partners far more than de Gaulle.

And of course he is right.

that de Gaulle envisages.

It is a dificult
the very life of America” has caused a
Thus de Gaulle has the lofty power of
Some future American President, de
task,butnot impossible,for two reasons.

creeping malaise throughout Europe.

Gaulle warnsthe Europeansmight refuse
De Gaulle can veto mutual tariff reduc-
The malaise can be put in the form of a
said one reappraiser, “and we have no
to honor the commitment,because of the
tions, but he cannot increase Common
question:Would theUnited States really
sticks and stones to break his bones.creeping malaise throughout Europe.

Gaulle warnsthe Europeansmight refuse
De Gaulle can veto mutual tariff reduc-
The malaise can be put in the form of a
said one reappraiser, “and we have no
to honor the commitment,because of the
tions, but he cannot increase Common
question:Would theUnited States really
sticks and stones to break his bones.

“new and gigantic fact” that “the Soviets
Market tariffs, and even his veto power
risk the destruction of its major cities in
There is,to be sure,one foreign tie that
have also acquired a nuclear arsenal, and
ends on January 1, 1966, when the Com-
order to defend Europe?

President Ken-
de Gaulle does care about, and that is his
that arsenal is powerful enough to en-
mon Market rule ofunanimity gives way
nedy has suggested that this question
carefully nurtured “special relationship"
danger the very life of America." This
to a system ofweighted voting.Moreover,
impugns the honor of the United States.

with Chancellor Adenauer's Germany.

fact is the primary justification for de
de Gaulle's Common Market partners do
But put yourself in a European’s skin,
That relationship was advertised to the
Gaulle's force defrappe.

not want the kind of narrow *European
and it is easy to see why it is asked.

And
world only a few days after de Gaulle's
Any reporter can go to the Pentagon
construction” that de Gaulle wants.

So
yet,as Scretary MeNamara has said
famous press conference,when Adenauer
and get a convincing briefing to prove that
although the dream of an economic
“there is no substitute”for the American
traveled to Paris to sign the German-
theforcedefrappeisjustwhatSecretary
Atlantic partnership has gone glimmer-
nuclear force-and the Senate is pro-
French treaty of cooperation,amid much
McNamara says it is: “Dangerous, ex-
ing, Herter may be able to prevent the
foundlyunlikelyto place any portion of
pageantry and bussing of cheeks.And
world only a few days after de Gaulle's
Any reporter can go to the Pentagon
construction” that de Gaulle wants.

So
yet,as Scretary MeNamara has said
famous press conference,when Adenauer
and get a convincing briefing to prove that
although the dream of an economic
“there is no substitute”for the American
traveled to Paris to sign the German-
theforcedefrappeisjustwhatSecretary
Atlantic partnership has gone glimmer-
nuclear force-and the Senate is pro-
French treaty of cooperation,amid much
McNamara says it is: “Dangerous, ex-
ing, Herter may be able to prevent the
foundlyunlikelyto place any portion of
pageantry and bussing of cheeks.

Noth-
pensive,prone to obsolescence and lack-
adoption of a Common Market economic
that force under European control.

ing, not even the press conference itself,
ing in credibility as a deterrent.” But this
angered Kennedy more than this display
misses the point.

The point is that de
Americans need apply." But even this is
ofGerman support for de Gaulle so soon
Gaulle's nuclear force has an essentially
by no means certain.

after his slap in the face for “les Anglo-
political, not a military,purpose.It is to
Saxons."In early February Kennedy
The sight of the gallows
called German Ambassador Karl Hein-
is designed to give de Gaulle the power to
rich Knappstein to the White House.

The
influence the “Go-No Go” decision—
Merchant's job is in some ways more
interview,according to German sources,
dificult than Herter's.

His job is to sell
was "terse.” It was that and more.

nuclear weapons of his own, de Gaulle
France's European partners, and above
would lack that power.

all the Germans, on a “mutilateral” nu-
American-British-French “directory”of
De Gaulle, in short, has played a judo
clear force.nuclear weapons of his own, de Gaulle
France's European partners, and above
would lack that power.

all the Germans, on a “mutilateral” nu-
American-British-French “directory”of
De Gaulle, in short, has played a judo
clear force.

The idea for such a force was
NATO, Kennedy said, he had turned him
trickontheUnitdStatesjudobeingde
born in the Eisenhower Administration,
down largely on the grounds that de
fined in the dictionary as a “method of
but de Gaulle'sblow at the foundations"
Gaulle's proposal excluded the Germans.

offense and defense which employs the
has lent it special urgency.

As one Ken-
Was this the sort of support he could ex-
weight and strengthof the opponent to
nedy planner says,quoting SamuelJohn
pect in return irom the Germans?

his disadvantage." De Gaulie ineans io
Knappstein anxiously explained
that
fashion his “European construction,"
trates the mind wonderfully."
the datefor the treaty signinghad beenset
based on the force de frappe and the
Merchant's essential purpose is to
weeks in advance and that there was really
Franco-German axis,led by France and
exorcise a nightmare-the gallowslike
nothing the Germans could have done
thus by de Gaulle and excluding the Brit-
nightmare of some future German chan-
about it.

This was true—that wily old
ish and Americans.

And he means to do
cellor's demanding his own equivalent of
brd, Adenauer, had been trapped by that
this under the umbrella ofthe American
de Gaulle's force de frappe.In Vienna in
wilier ld ird,deGaull,into appearing
nuclear deterrent.

1961 Khrushchev flatly warned Kennedy
a fellow nay-sayer.

And the fact is that
The more the reappraisers agonized,
that he would regard it as a casus belli if
there is really nothing much the Ger-
the more apparent it became that there is
the Germans were permitted their own
mans-whether Adenauer or his suc-
precious little the Kennedy Administra-
nuclear weapons.

For that matter, the
cessors—can do about de Gaulle.And the fact is that
The more the reappraisers agonized,
that he would regard it as a casus belli if
there is really nothing much the Ger-
the more apparent it became that there is
the Germans were permitted their own
mans-whether Adenauer or his suc-
precious little the Kennedy Administra-
nuclear weapons.

For that matter, the
cessors—can do about de Gaulle.

tion can do about de Gaulle's judo trick-
thought of a German force de frappe is a
Certain Kennedy advisers are fond of
short of removing its nuclear protection.

nightmare on both sides of the Iron
saying that"the Germans know where the
And this has not even been seriously con-
Curtain.Yet the reasoning that led the
choose between de Gaulle and Kennedy,
real power lies-if they are forced to
sidered.

It is not pleasant to be the victim
British and the French to develop their
of a judo trick.

It is a wonder that the
own nuclear system is, after all, at east as
they will choose Kennedy." This sounds
entire top level of the Kennedy Admin-
valid for the Germans.

sensible.

But it has a fatal flaw.

The flaw
istration has not developed galloping
The multilateral force is designed to
lies in the “if." The last thing the Ger-
ulcers.

offer the Germans an alternative.In its
mans want is to be iorced io “cnoose ve-
We're a bit like that litte Dutch boy
present form it is chicffy the brainchild of
tween de Gaulle and Kennedy." And how
with his finger in the dike," says one Ken-
State Department planner Walt Rostow.

do you force them to choose?

nedy adviser.

Remove the finger from the
The original Rostow plan called for eight
There is oneway.Thatisbythreatening
dike, and the Dutch boy drowns along
Polaris atomic submarines under NATO
to adopt a “Fortress America”policy-a
with everybody else.

Remove the Amer-
command,
，with mixed international
return to American isolationism, a with-
ican commitment to defend Europe,and
crews.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Remove the finger from the
The original Rostow plan called for eight
There is oneway.Thatisbythreatening
dike, and the Dutch boy drowns along
Polaris atomic submarines under NATO
to adopt a “Fortress America”policy-a
with everybody else. Remove the Amer-
command,
，with mixed international
return to American isolationism, a with-
ican commitment to defend Europe,and
crews. But this idea turned out to be
drawal of the American commitment to
the result is unmitigated disaster, not only
hideously expensive. Moreover, it would
Kennedy’s reappraisers include，left to
80

--- PAGE BREAK ---If there is any way out of this dilemma,
400,000 American soldiers in Europe no
President Kennedy and his reappraisers
DeGaulle'shaughty non has served as
stander on the world scene.In the years
have not found it.

Meanwhile, there is
matter what.

The ground defense of Eu-
apainful reminder that times have
changed.Andtimeshavechangedsince
immediately after the war, the power of
another unpleasant question which de
theUnitedStates wassuch that what we
Gaulle's series ofnons has forced the
Thus the Kennedy Administration's
response tode Gaulle'sshattering of the
said went.

Now we have suddenly dis-
Kennedy planners to face.

If de Gaulle
when French premiers used to trot
Grand Design comes down to this: First,
covered, galling as it must be to a
and the other Europeans do not believe
anattempt toholdthelineviatheHerter
around to the American Embassy to ask
Kennedy， that “what he says"—what
in the “conventional option,” how long
Ambassador David Bruce what to do
and Merchant missions.

Second, a deci
Charles de Gaulle says-gocs.

are we going to keep 400,000 American
next.

The Kennedy Administration, in its
De Gaulle has demonstrated once and
zeal and “vigah,” has rather often acted
decision on the central question of the
as though times had not changed.

for all that what British commentator
all, to build a bridge halfvay across a
D.W.Brogan once called the ilusion
Amcrican troop commitment'in Europe.

Foriexampie,theEuropeanswere
river?

These results of the agonizing re-
ofAmerican Omnipotenc”is indeed an
Those 400,000 troops account for a
infuriated when Kennedy named Gen.

illusion.

This in turn has led to what
appraisal seem rather small mice for the
Lyman Lemnitzer to succeed Gen.Lauris
large part of the U.S.

deficit in its inter-
laboring mountain to bring forth.Butas
national balance of payments.This in turn has led to what
appraisal seem rather small mice for the
Lyman Lemnitzer to succeed Gen.Lauris
large part of the U.S.

deficit in its inter-
laboring mountain to bring forth.Butas
national balance of payments.

As Mc-
Norstad as commander of NATO with a
American leadership." To meet that
Namara is fond of pointing out, the
bare formal minimum of consultation
you've got a better policy, you name it.

crisis calls for as difcult, as dangerous
United States has twice as many men in
with the European members of NATO.

Anotherhighforeign-policyofficialsays:
For another example, there was the
and as delicate an exercise in the arts
uniform per thousand ofpopulation as
"Weregard deGaulle asaboulder inthe
ofdiplomacy as has ever faced any
Polaris-for-Skybolt deal with the British
Germany, which is on the Cold War's
stream of history.

The stream will part
American Administration.

front line.

The Germans, in turn, con-
atNassaujustbforethedeGaullprs
For the United States is now in the un-
tribute more than twice as many divisions
and flow around him."
conference.The deal wason technical
happy position ofa famous beauty who
to NATO as the French and British
grounds, a very good one for the British.

has outlived her loveliness.Accustomed
combined.Bothin publi and inprivate
The chance for optimlsm
But because of the way it was done,in
tobeing wooed andflattered,she sees her
Kennedy has been hinting that, if the
the manner of throwing a fish to a seal,
Perhapsin the longrun,this hpful
it was made to scem a very bad deal.

In
once passionate admirers begin to stifle
Europeans do not think our troops are
view willprove correct.Forit istrue that
yawns in her presence,or even to forget
nceded, he would be delighted to with-
the rest of Europe is not wildly enthu-
toshowupforthoseintimatetete-a-tetes
draw them.has outlived her loveliness.Accustomed
combined.Bothin publi and inprivate
The chance for optimlsm
But because of the way it was done,in
tobeing wooed andflattered,she sees her
Kennedy has been hinting that, if the
the manner of throwing a fish to a seal,
Perhapsin the longrun,this hpful
it was made to scem a very bad deal.

In
once passionate admirers begin to stifle
Europeans do not think our troops are
view willprove correct.Forit istrue that
yawns in her presence,or even to forget
nceded, he would be delighted to with-
the rest of Europe is not wildly enthu-
toshowupforthoseintimatetete-a-tetes
draw them.

theBritishwhatweaponstheycould have
siastic about the de Gaulle plan for a
for which they once clamored.This sort
Kennedy's planners have given serious
to defend their country.

"Little Europe”dominated by France
We've gotto learntorelaxabout the
of thing comes as a shock to a former
consideration to an immediate,sharp
and Charles de Gaulle.

But for the time
Europeans,” says one Kennedy adviser.

beauty,just as it comes as a shock to this
reduetion in-ourtroop strengthcsa
being de Caulle iooks more ikaiarg
weve got to stopfussig overc
country to find that it is no longer om-
quick answer to de Gaulle.

But this
well-constructed dam thanamereboulder.

ipoten.But sucn shocks can'be heaitny
answerwasrejectedfor the timebng
when they lead to the facing of facts.

Meanwhile, the sky has not fallen in.

partly in order to deprive de Gaulle of
As the Kennedy advisers are fond of
Winston Churchill once asked aques-
the pleasure of saying“I told you so."
lems-including the de Gaull problem."
pointingoutdeGaulle hasnotchanged
tion of this reporter:Will America stay
After Adenauer retirespresumably in
But it will not be enough simply to
the existing situation—he has only shat-
“relax about the Europeans.”The fact is
the course?Despite Charles de Gaulle,
the autumn, the tentative decision not to
tered the Kennedy dreams for the future.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Meanwhile, the sky has not fallen in. partly in order to deprive de Gaulle of
As the Kennedy advisers are fond of
Winston Churchill once asked aques-
the pleasure of saying“I told you so."
lems-including the de Gaull problem."
pointingoutdeGaulle hasnotchanged
tion of this reporter:Will America stay
After Adenauer retirespresumably in
But it will not be enough simply to
the existing situation—he has only shat-
“relax about the Europeans.”The fact is
the course?Despite Charles de Gaulle,
the autumn, the tentative decision not to
tered the Kennedy dreams for the future. thatisstillthekeyquestion;foralthough
reduce ourArmyinEuropewill certainly
that Kennedy's Washington faces a test
The Western alliance still existsand the
the United Statesisnotomnipotent，the
be reviewed.“Sooner or later,” says one
which Washington,unlike other world
power of the United States remains the
Kennedy adviser,“either the Europeans
capitals,has never faced before. strongest power in that allianceItmay
In the isolationist period before the
keystone in freedom’s arch. If John F. come up or we go down.Another says:
Second World War,theUnited States,
Kennedy has his way, the answer to
even turn out in the end that de Gaulle
has done the Kennedy Administration,
Churchill's question will continue to be
the notion that we're going to maintain
despite occasional andoften clumsy inter-
and with it the United States, a favor. "yes.” But it will not be an easy course
ventions, was essentially an interested by-
to stay. THE END
right,Gen.MaxwellTaylor,SecretariesMcNamaraandRusk,andUnderSecretaryBall.Ifyouvegotabeterpolicy”emarkedoneoffcial,“younameit. 81