ESCA 9/20/78 FBI 
Hosty not to be live witness.

(Was beard in x.

sess.) After ex sess he accused 
committee of "containment," of not telling whole story.

Volz notes none of agents directly involved called as witnesses, 1i k~e Hosty 
and ref to Gemberling not named.

Blakey*s intro says that FBI's first involvement was over statute relating to 
assault on federal officers, then assigned by LBJ as national security case- no times 
given.

Says confused situation , which I doubt, andrbelieve intended to cover FBI.

Hoover testified that FBI put In charge as special residential investigation and 
this within first 24 hours.

From then until LBJ appointed WC FBI was in charge.

From 
time Commission apointed it was in charge.

Thus no confusion.

From this he goes into 
his kind of history of FBI in which Mitchell ^almer* s campaign was given as against 
bolshevits and radicals, without quotes of limitation or definition.

Transces "un- 
lawful wiretapping to before Burns day, saying Burns continued this practise in 
arding administration.

Says that Bureau started fighting organized crime in early 
1930 (but limits to such things as bootlegging).

Says FBI had no internal security functions until 1936.

This hides the fact 
that illegally It exercized such functions vis-a-vis those Hoover considered "red." 
Coes otu of his way to say out of context,which gives false context, that , oover op- 
posed "relocation" of Japanese in WW II.

Ass inv.

"of a magnitude unsurpassed in American law inforcement." Gives WC 
statistics, which are wrong and inadequate If impressive in that they understate.

HSCA considering 4 principle issues on quality of FBI inv.; 
IDid the FBI's early conclusion of slone assassin hamper subsequent investigation?

1964 position paper concluded lone assassin, according to Church committee; 
25/ Hid senior FBI officials wanting to close case quickly foreclose field agents?

3.

Was the FBI investigation internally mismanaged?

Central in.Was the FBI investigation internally mismanaged? Central in. div in charge of assembling facts under bank-robbery expert) 
Domestic Intel, div assigned conspiracy and keeping LEO background together. 4. Was the FBI inv conducted in such a way that its experts on Cuba and organized 
crime did not participate? i 
Witness James R. Halley, GJD inspector and principla assistant to Alex R. Rosen. Also 
li.ai son officers with WC. etired 1971 .Counsel .ames McDonald questions. Be saw all mail going to Rosen and handled what did not require Rosen* s personal 
attention. Learned of assassination when he turned radio on in Rosen's office. Contacted 
by Associate Director A1 Belmont, who "knew that we had no actual juriMIction." 
Belmont told him about 3 that the G3D would be handling assassination, despite no 
jurisdiction, Rosen on annual leave but did not leave city because he was ill. Did not 
take his leave then. Halley had no connection with Hoover that day. Until about 7 o'clock "there was/ / definitite undertainty as to what juris- 
diction the Bureay had. After Ruby shot Oswald he went to office. Courtney Evans was 
in office. Evans then assistant director in charge of Division. He 
sent ■Galley to Dallas on the spot. Without instructions, which were to reach him when 
he got to Dallas. Called Belmont, who said Director had been in toich with LBJ. LBJ 
wanted everyone in Dallas to stop talking about assassination. Ordered to have complete memos in DC bu Tuesday a.m. on both cases and that two 
men from DC familiar with type of memo wanted would be sent to Dallas. (Bureaucratic 
predominance- Jiad ta_.write. night kind of memo* )mplete memos in DC bu Tuesday a.m. on both cases and that two 
men from DC familiar with type of memo wanted would be sent to Dallas. (Bureaucratic 
predominance- Jiad ta_.write. night kind of memo* )

Asked what he was told to do he does not say offer FBI cooperation to ,local 
authorities, who did have jurisdiction. 
.e so“ mar“F' thing to do when he got to Dallas he did not have time to find 
out what the status of the investigation was. What a commentary on what he was told to 
do or his own concept of his function when initially it was so totally detached from 
any investigation. 
McDonald reads Hoover memo to Walter Jenkins saying that they have to convince 
public of Oswald's lone guilt. When he says the memo does not mean what it says he is 
not questioned. 4 days later another memo, "no question....Oswald was the man..j" Added 
is Hoover note,"Just how long do you estimate it will take....Seems to me we have the

--- PAGE BREAK ---2 
basic facts now,.."four days after assassination.

On Tuesday or Wednesday he was asked if they had enough personnel, ^e asked for 
40 more agents and got them.

But how late?

Why not initially?

11/29/63 Senate intel.

coBfo Book V, p 34: Gbover redounting-^g^ne conversation 
with LBJ:"we hope to have the investigation wrapped up today but won^t have it until 
the end of the week." (Here again Malley argues that the earlier memo dees not mean 
what it says but his explanation here does not get to what I think was being talked 
about, the report that became CB1.

The distinction does not exist but I think the 
reference is misleading.) 
Malley says there was "active" interest in conspiracy "from the minute it happened." 
Malley claims to have handled 9C$> or more of the phone conversations with ^asho 
Records do not reflect this.

Still refers to FBIHQ as "the seat of government."Wot asked about this.

Orgabization chart is F456 exhibit.

Tolson associate dir.

One of assistant to dir was Alan H.

B&lmont.

Under Belmont 
was Bonestie Intel Divi.

director Wm.

C.

Sullivan;Gen Inv A1 Rosen and §!ab anri Special 
nvestigation division ^ 
Joseph A.

Smzoo Wo 2 man Donal Moore; Wm A.

^ranigan and supervisors under2,$rc ^Sullivan.

Gen.

Inv.

he was Wo 1 man and assi ged to WC Liaison .Grim section was under 
^ames a Handley.

Richard Rooge and Fletcher -hompson supervisors* These are the two 
sent to alias to write memo.

Clem McGowan section chief of civil rights section.

Primarily in charge on assassination Gen.

Inv.

Div.

he was after return front Dallas.

This was when WC established.

Says that he immediately had note from hoover to get in 
touch with J.

^ee Rankin, ^his is impossible because Rankin w^s not appointed for some 
time, a month or more as Irecall.

.

e then gives date as December 12, which was Icing after 
WC appointed.

That was on 11/27.

Maybe orders for him to re ton coincided with appoint- 
mentiiof Rankin, who probably h:d Hoover's approval.--- PAGE BREAK ---

That was on 11/27. Maybe orders for him to re ton coincided with appoint- 
mentiiof Rankin, who probably h:d Hoover's approval. « had to read and review all that went to Commission. ®ives date of release of report as 12/12, This is formal release date only. Said he wrote two memos on ^jtxxjxdBnjWfcxvcBsniTlT! two memos, of about 15 
pp on assassination and 8 Or 9 on Ruby. Re sent these memos from Dallas. Said he never heard of any Bureau reaction to creation of WC. until told by HSAC. (i guess he also never read the papers on the JFK releases.) 
Dealt more with Section Chief Branigan than with Wm. C. Sullivan. They hdd primary 
responsibility for "conspiracy aspects". "They were the only ones doing it, - - 
He got reports, all, before they went to Belmont, "both charged with reading 
every word." 
Bureau's leading Uuban expert in Bivision five knew nothing about CIA attempts 
against gastro and not involved in this end of investigation. Re told Church com. he 
knew of no communications seeking any i£fo from Cuban sources. (McDonald omits his name.) 
Malley says it was that Division that had responsibility and "somebody was amiss 
in not keeping him aware," But Malley does not say that as in charge of liaison he 
did not see anything indicating that involvement, that kind of work. They let him get 
away with brushing off his failure to see ot it that this was done. Courtney Evans division did not have any specific assignment. Their jurisdiction 
included organized crime. Initial questions on Ruby as part of org. crime. Ruby's shooting 
of Oswaldgave jurisdiction because he was shot while in hands of police. “Evans appeared as ex s^sim'Sthess. He said "they ^^su^ did^^come to me."f  
his empji. (it is beginning to look as though the Blakey-Committee criticism of the FBI will 
be restricted to what is already public and well known.) 
u

--- PAGE BREAK ---5 
His WC relationship "strictly a business relationship," neither friendly nbr 
unfriendly, but leaving no question he would offer nothing unless asked by WC for it.

"They did not attempt to take over what we were doing.

We continued ou± own 
investigation "which he seems to say was as long as he was there, 1971.

But 
" «we did our own work" and all they did for WC "was when they had specific items they 
wanted to check on, " when "they did tell us." 
On Hoover's dozziers on Commission and staff, asked if familiar, "Id don8t recall 
that I was ever told" but "it seems to me it would be a norami procedure," when asked 
as separate from any security investigation.

"I can well understand why thev might have 
had t3hhem.

In hindsight, was overall inv of both "handled properly." 
He turns around ans says you have had benefit of other investigators, so 
"maybe you can tell me what you think we did wrong" and maybe I can answer.

% refuses 
to respond, saying "if I'm not entitled to thzt, well, that's tough." And her Me 
onald ends.

Stokes takes over, for committee.

ho recollection of material from CIA re source in Mexico giving info on TJffi 
there.

Interrupted by phone call here.

Claims no knowledge of Hosty note destruction until read about in papers.

lot responsive when Dodd asks if business relationship reflect re WC is another 
indication Bureay resented its creation.

Pesonalizes to evades.

Asked about Hosty 
letter says he did not know, pressed hi says not knowing can t answer.

Dodd does not 
ask about such things as HaiitEoward Odio thing, which they did know about.

1ri8b to defend destruction and not giving to WC as mistake t n judgement only.

Did anyone who served on the Warren Commision, was requested to provide info from 
ex:, sessions.

Claims not to know, but it has been published re Ford.

Mekxnney&s questions lead him to say that he believes the hearings of WC exhausted 
all fundamental aspects.

Was on phone close to 16-18 hours a day in Dallas.Mekxnney&s questions lead him to say that he believes the hearings of WC exhausted 
all fundamental aspects.

Was on phone close to 16-18 hours a day in Dallas.

Fithian tries to develop the idea that it is not only a nut who would try to kin 
a president-probably an effort to lead to a left conspiracy notion, -^ases questions 
on his interpretayion of what 1om elley said, not exactly what Kelley said.

So F asks 
if either agency would be able to detect a politically-motivated type of assassina- 
tion, with reference to today*s terrorists* 
Edgar asks who was .actually in charge.Malley asys Belmont was actually overseeing, 
overall, for FBI.

Rosen between hi® and ^elmont.

” 
Asked about any investigative plan sgys had many,many conferences with elmosnt.

Asked^^Did the FBI have a plan?" he does not refer to anything put on paper i Asked of 
this, if it was I am not aware of it.') It appears that there was none and that there 
were no formal conferences with other agencies to coordinate parts of a plan.

, /alley says he has no idea of exact purpose for Which Commission was established 
but that they wefe looking for facts about what happened.

Devine says he has known ^alley for about 35 years, both as signed to HI 
when Belmont also was.

Belmont dead about a year ago past spring.

Asks if "sullivan was looked upon with disfavor by a majority of Bureau personnel." 
Snn+VTc; Su^r1Van Wfs not ^ easy 131311 *> Set along with." hint up on Sullivan 
about 3 of 5 times they spoke by phone.

Sullivan's attirude that he alone was always 
i —- Would not trust Wm.C.

Sullivan.

Can't say that he lied deliberately.

Would "not 
Hoover powerful man and so regarded throughout Bureau?

Did he intimidate men by 
posxtxon.

Answer some fellows may have felt that way” but he didn’t, hasn’t it 
commonly knone that he intimidated men?" Evades by saying "if tsomething went wrongZ 
there woula be^ discim|>inary action.coverups to his knowledge to avoid this wrath.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Did he intimidate men by 
posxtxon. Answer some fellows may have felt that way” but he didn’t, hasn’t it 
commonly knone that he intimidated men?" Evades by saying "if tsomething went wrongZ 
there woula be^ discim|>inary action.coverups to his knowledge to avoid this wrath. ^Hoover picked a tough one and a staunch Hooverite to have WC relations.) '

--- PAGE BREAK ---4 
Sawyer He made notes on investigation to aee if all followed through and done well.

(Nothing of this sort provided.) 
Fithlan, anyone else serve as lilison with ¥C?

Wrong question— SAs had direct 
contact with it.

Asked about omission of Hosty page from LHO's notebook can t explain.

On any possible alterations in notebook would have to be by Bureau.

Fithian 
corrects to refer to transcription of rather than notebook itself.

Page of this 
transcription that is missing.

(The committee's approach to the FBI consists in bringing nothing new to light 
and in rehashing old stuff with a live witneses.) Phone interruption from time 
Edgar began until Malley given his 5 minutes.

He has nothing to" say.

Although here a f ew minutes after 12 they 
continue with Blakey introducing with opening of LHO files at time he went to TipiRMB 
in Moscow.

James H.

Gale,^retired FBI inspector, called on how Bureau performed.

Refers to 
uale report, which och got under FOIA.

Had been Assistant Director of two divisions.

Blakey says they have deposed and redently spoken to Hosty and he has no new information.

Hews stories not based on fact if they say to contrary.

Robert JensonQ committee counsel.

Asst Dir chg.

Inspection Division in 1965.

Had 
seven inspectors and about 25 inspector's aides.Retired 10/l/71.

Investigated LED 
security case about which he has not previously testified.

Exhibit 460 is his memo 
°f 12/(lO/65 to dolson on LHOXnt Sec—R.

R=Russian.

bays that day after assassination ^undoubtedly a commission would be appointed 
to look into all facets," so he wanted ale to determine if FBI had fulfilled all its 
investigative responsibilities* 
Fiust he pulled and reviewed all HQ files, then Interviewed Internal Security 
division personnel, then sought info from filed offices involved.

Concluded there were investigatuve and reporting deficiences that justified 
administrative action against personnel responsible.bays that day after assassination ^undoubtedly a commission would be appointed 
to look into all facets," so he wanted ale to determine if FBI had fulfilled all its 
investigative responsibilities* 
Fiust he pulled and reviewed all HQ files, then Interviewed Internal Security 
division personnel, then sought info from filed offices involved.

Concluded there were investigatuve and reporting deficiences that justified 
administrative action against personnel responsible.

Hone of FBI agents or supervisors believe LHO met qualification of "security index." 
But claims had he been on it would have made no difference in assassination.

He is 
not even asked if this meant the FBI would have told local police or Secret Service.

17 disciplined, supervisors and field agents.

Censored and/or probation.

Ex 461 is his 1/30/64' to ^olson on FBI's LHO matter shortcomings, "^ecause the 
Warren Commission Heport tears us to pieces." ^oover ordered it to be done and to 
consider further administrative actions agist those who had "publicly embarrassed the 
Bureau." 
As a result of this memo t/here was additionaly disciplinary action.He says these 
were commonplace as a result of usual inspections.

Never called on to look into 
gureau s performance in JFK assassination investigation.

Questioned about half hour, 
tokes takes over for Members.

FBI had a rule that all leads had to be handled in 30 days, report filed in 45.

One example of what he regarded as "flambouyant" testimony to WC wqs describing 
conditions in Dallas police station as like grand Central Station..

Claims that while it would not have effected Dallas at all the criteria were 
met for security index.

Being on the index would not have made any difference in 
.

was known in alias., .he says,, implication.no.

dif^ with Secret Service, - 
„ i??

- ep-dence t&at °s»ald had been an FBI informant?"Absolutely not" because he had 
all files and thme was no reflection.

Did not know of Hosty note until after- he retired, 
h .--- PAGE BREAK ---

- ep-dence t&at °s»ald had been an FBI informant?"Absolutely not" because he had 
all files and thme was no reflection. Did not know of Hosty note until after- he retired, 
h . Recommended disciplinary action against Hosty. because of delinquencies in reporting. . his memo after sa?ing he ^ no clear recollection. But had no direct contact 
with Hosty in person. Usual inspection procedure was It to be in writing. Only seldom 
was agent ever interviewed personally, *ound Hosty deficient in several areas. What would he have done if he had known of note and its destruction all he says 
is that "I certainly would have made inquiries." Not even a Suggestion of faction 
for destruction of evidence and ^tokes asks no question about this. I 
^ithian refers to JFK Exhibit 460 and memo of he sent to dolson 12/10/63. not 
what

--- PAGE BREAK ---a Suggestion of faction 
for destruction of evidence and ^tokes asks no question about this. I 
^ithian refers to JFK Exhibit 460 and memo of he sent to dolson 12/10/63. not 
what

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5 
11 
Asks about last Paragraph on apage without reading it aloud or asking Gale to. 
Gale reads Belmonts note. It refers to the fact that because all interpreted the 
standards for the security index Belmont took the position that the criteria should 
be clarified so that they would be correctly understood. Disciplinary action even 
though. Gale agreed the standards should be clarified, 
Devine asks the same kind of cover—the—Bureau self-serving questions. 
Does not even know if the SS would have had access to security index, 
Pithian asks what he hoped to achieve by ©econuaedding disciplinary action, Not 
connected to assassination. 
Never crossed my mind” that ^swald could have been an informant for any agency. 
What was he dissatisfied with Hosty*s performance in ■uaiiaS.All he can recall is 
now ahat is in record because "I certainly have no personal recollection" of whv
L 
action was taken 15 years earlier. Does it reflect his total thinking of time? Yes. 
Says there has to be other records in files. 
When Stokes asks about pre-assassination FBI performance he starts to respond 
evasively in terms of post. When corrected he limits to Oswald and says certain 
deiiciencies in that. But this is restricted to whether he should have been in security 
iddex. Further than that I cannot comment" bedause had no other personal involvements. 
Not even asked if FBI should have told Dallas police about LHO. 
Declines any comment in his 5 minutes. Adjourns to 9 a.m, tomorrow. 
Nine lot and ^olz commentary