Jack Brooking (Jack Beach) 
1212 Cathleen Circle 
Gulf Breeze, Florida 32561 
Phone: 904/932-6359 
REST STOP III 
At Billy Joe Johnson's Tredler 
It was pushing 3:00 p.m. on Monday, October 1, 1995, whai I pulled into 
the Gautier Rest Stop. The day was overcast with splashes of light rain along 
the way. I was again drowsy (a pattern in driving this route, I guess), so 
pulled down into the roundabout and, coincidentally, into the same slot where 
I'd met Billy seme three weeks before. I had determined earlier in the day to 
try to find Billy's residence on this trip. But I hung around the Rest Stop 
long enough to wade through the News-Journal. working all the puzzles and 
tearing out the O.J. Simpson Trial items. 
I inquired at two convenience stores in Gautier, but nobody knew where 
Mackeral Drive was, though cme woman had heard of it. But I struck gold at a 
Circle K further on, vdiere a bright-eyed young woman said, "Sure, I got a 
girl friend who lives out on Mackeral," and she drew me a map on a piece of 
paper. I knew I was in the right area when I saw that the streets had names 
of fish ~ Bass, Bream, Amber jack . . . but no Mackeral. A black chap pointed 
it out to me — the caie street where the sign had been broken off. Mackeral 
wound like a nervous snake through a clutter of broken-down trailers, each 
more patched, junk-littered, and weathered than the next. When I found

--- PAGE BREAK ---gn had been broken off. Mackeral 
wound like a nervous snake through a clutter of broken-down trailers, each 
more patched, junk-littered, and weathered than the next. When I found

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brooking (Beach)—RestIII/2 
Billy's mjTcber, "[something] and JOHNSON" was scrawled on the mailbox. A 
barking nast-colored mutt greeted me by snarling and showing its teeth. But 
when I yelled, Billy Joe came to the door holding a glass of something red and 
looking just as he had at the last Rest Stop encounter. As neighbors gawked 
from next door, he invited me up crumbling concrete and brick steps past a big 
wicked-looking cactus and into the shambled interior, Billy was grinning that 
tight little grin and sweating despite the small ceiling fan. There was a 
sharp odor of mildew, old grease, and sweat. He fumbled around behind three 
TV's stacked on one side of the room, only one of which was blaring. "Let's 
get this TV off," he said, not having much luck by tugging at connectors and 
punching buttons. He finally just pulled the cord from the wall. "I was 
just taking rry lover a glass of Kool Aid," he said, and proceeded to step 
outside and deliver it to a skinny shirtless man with tattoos and a face that 
looked as if it had been mashed by some heavy object. They chatted there a 
moment, the lover eyeing me suspiciously, while a fat woman in a house dress 
stood behind him, one hand shading her eyes. Returning, Billy Joe said, 
"Jack, I think we’ll be more comfortable out on the patio." So saying, he 
led me back behind the trsdler, the lover following like a hawk our detours 
around various objects in the yard, until we disappeared back behind, where 
Billy motioned me to the one rusted metal chair while he squatted on a cement 
step. Sure, he said, it was OK if I took notes on the manila file folder I'd 
brought from the car. I said I hadn't been back to New Orleans since I last 
saw him at the Rest Stop. He said he hadn't been "up there" since then ei- 
ther. Catching a look at the lover who had slid along the fence to where heI hadn't been back to New Orleans since I last 
saw him at the Rest Stop. He said he hadn't been "up there" since then ei- 
ther. Catching a look at the lover who had slid along the fence to where he

--- PAGE BREAK ---to New Orleans since I last 
saw him at the Rest Stop. He said he hadn't been "up there" since then ei- 
ther. Catching a look at the lover who had slid along the fence to where he

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brooking (Beach)—RestIII/3 
could keep an eye on us, Billy leaned forward and said, ’’That guy is gittin’ 
on my nerves. He thinks we’re up to something. We been together two years, 
but I’m gittin’’ rid of him . . . soon. I don’t need him. It’s easy to meet 
guys in Mobile. All this here is mine,” he said sweeping his hand toward 
tredler and yard, ’’but he thinks he’s got rights ...” 
Looking back, I see that this meeting developed quite a different focus 
from the others. We both seemed to steer away from the Kennedy Assassination 
and to concentrate more on Billy himself. Throughout, I had difficulty pin- 
ning him down timewise. The chronology of events in Billy’s life keeps get- 
ting tangled — but, I thought, so would it, probably, if I tried to trace 
events in my own life that long ago. Time may ease pain, but it can warp the 
logic of events. The first thing he said was, ’’How’s the book coming?” I 
hastened to assure him I was just an interested amateur and really didn’t have 
a book in mind — article, maybe. Then I told him about my two friends in 
Pensacola who were also ”Assassination buffs” and would like to meet him. 
’’Sure,” he said. ”I coxild come over by bus. Over a weekend, if your 
friends work. Easy to get a bus out of Pascagoula. ” 
It was slow getting started. He mentioned somebody had taken him to 
dinner in New Orleans a couple of months back at Maximo’s, a good Italian res- 
taurant on Decatur St.. ”I went there once with Archie,” he added. ”I 
talked with Archie on the phone that night, but didn’t see him. Maximo*s is 
down across from the French Market. Clay Shaw designed the Market, you know. 
And all those streets leading into the square.” 
I decided to pursue a line of inquiry I’d been thinking about the past 
week — his life as a hustler in those years between 1961-1963 [though thenow. 
And all those streets leading into the square.” 
I decided to pursue a line of inquiry I’d been thinking about the past 
week — his life as a hustler in those years between 1961-1963 [though the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brooking (Beach)—RestIII/4 
tinve kept expanding and contracting like a rubber band]. He said when he 
first reached town at age 15 or 16, he picked odd jobs and lived where and 
how he could. **Qnce/’ he volunteered, [the following would have had to be 
May through Sept., 1963, when all records indicate that the Oswald's lived at 
4905 Magazine St. with their only child June, and Marina was expecting their 
second baby] "I lived in the same rooming hoiise on St. Ann as Lee Harvey Os- 
wald and his wife and two or three kids — three houses along St. Ann from 
Burgundy toward Ranpart. The Oswald's buried a dead baby there because they 
didn't have money for a proper funeral. Once I was planting tomatoes back 
there and I hit this object and it was a little skull." [The Oswald's second 
child was bom Oct. 20 in Dallas; no record of any infancy death or still- 
birth. ] 
"I went to New Orleans when I got out of the Navy." 
"When was that?" 
"Oh . . . when I was 16 in '61. I was only in the service four or five 
months. I hated it. So I told them I was gay and they dischaurged me. Then I 
went to stay with Archie Bland. You can't believe how beautiful I was in 
those days. Weighed 114 pounds, 24-inch waist, beautiful physique. I was a 
centerfold in Mardl Gras — I don't think that magazine exists anymore. I was 
sleeping in the nude," he chuckles, "when this flash bulb went off and woke 
me up. I was also in Physique. I used to box a little. Everybody was after 
my body. Artist Bill Mayhood wanted to paint me, but he never did. Every- 
body. I wasn't like the other hustlers. I only went with men of culture and 
intelligence and money . . ." 
"When were you in these magazines, Billy?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---me, but he never did. Every- 
body. I wasn't like the other hustlers. I only went with men of culture and 
intelligence and money . . ." 
"When were you in these magazines, Billy?"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brooking (Beach)—RestIII/5 
**0h, I don’t know. Late 60's, I guess.” 
’’And what were your days like living at Archie’s?” 
’’Well, Archie was a big decorator, you know. Worked with Maison 
Blanche and won several awards. He was very busy. But we went places to- 
gether — good restaurants, the opera, cultural things. He introduced me to 
all kinds of people. We lived in this beautiful apartment on St. Peter. I 
was with him a year, year and a half. ” 
’’And he’s the one who introduced you to Clay Shaw?” Billy grins. 
”0h, no. I met him on my own.” 
’•Where?” 
” In a gay bar over on Rampart. ” 
’’Was he using the name Clay Bertrand?” 
”I wouldn’t be surprised. I saw him twice a week and did what he 
wanted. ” 
’’What was that?” 
”Oh, Shaw was weird. Liked to stretch out on the bed and have me get 
on top and beat and slap him and talk mean and call him dirty names. ” 
’’And Archie didn’t know?” 
With the grin, ”Oh, no. He would have been jealous. But I was wild. 
Every afternoon while Archie was working, I’d go out and get drunk and hustle. 
I didn’t have to. Archie looked after me good. Just did it for the hell of 
it. Once I danced naked at The Golden Lantern — drunk — made a lot of tips 
doing that. But I gave it all away, blew it — buying drinks . . . Grasshop- 
pers, Bourbon and Cokes . . . you name it! I knew everybody. They couldn’t 
keep their hands off me. Once an Episcopalian priest took me out to dinner at

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng drinks . . . Grasshop- 
pers, Bourbon and Cokes . . . you name it! I knew everybody. They couldn’t 
keep their hands off me. Once an Episcopalian priest took me out to dinner at

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brooking (Beach)—RestII1/6 
the Sterling Club. I didn’t like him much. Also, once I was in this club, 
depressed, sitting watching the fire, whe^^^Morris^^ (well-known N.O. 
family who owned Crocker Bank) put the make on me. But I didn’t take to him. 
He was arrogant. I wouldn’t go with him. Borenstein eventually lost all his 
money. Deserved it. Ended up on the streets. He had been a friend of Ar- 
chie’s. Archie tried to help him out, give him a hand — Archie was like 
that. I was always meeting people . . . 
’’Archie was married you know. To Art [Bob?] Bodine, a Dr. who lived on 
Bourbon above Dixie’s. Beautiful apartment. All white design. Bob Bodine 
was nice and took me around, too. Took me to Tennessee Williams’ places. He 
had three, you know. The one on Dumaine had a pool. Not very big, though.” 
”I'm a Tennessee Williams fan. What was he like?” 
”Oh, he was nice. Humble, witty, smart.” 
’’Did you have sex with Tennessee Williams?” 
With that grin, ”I may have. I also met Pete Fountain. He knew Ar- 
chie. Sometimes I hustled at the Cornstalk Guest House [very posh Guest House 
still on Royal St.]. I guess I told you about the time I wais with Charlton 
Heston at the Monteleone? He was in town promoting a movie in which he played 
an American president.* We took ”coke” while having sex. I got drunk and 
went swimming nude in the pool. Some people came out and started taking 
pictures, but Heston grabbed the cameras and got the film. I was something 
Heston portrayed Andrew Jackson in The President’s Lady in 1953 and the same 
character in The Buccaneer in 1958. Of course, he could have been promoting 
any one of his other famous 61-63 films: Diamond Head, El Cid, ^ Days in Pe- 
king. etc.

--- PAGE BREAK ---and the same 
character in The Buccaneer in 1958. Of course, he could have been promoting 
any one of his other famous 61-63 films: Diamond Head, El Cid, ^ Days in Pe- 
king. etc.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brooking (Beach)—RestIII/7 
else in those days. He wanted me to come to Hollywood. Said I could always 
contact him. Believe I still could. 
’’Just what did you do sexually with these people?” 
’’Anything they wanted.” 
’’Did you enjoy it? Any of it repulsive to you?” 
”No. All kinds of sex got me off. Sonetimes, when things got too 
busy, I’d have to fake it.” 
”Do you have any pictures of yourself in those days, Billy?” 
A pause. ”No.” 
’’None?” 
”No, they all burned up when my house caught on fire. Well, I may have 
one. ” 
”I’d like to see it.” 
’’Don’t know where it is right now. I’ll look.” 
We were interrupted by the tattooed lover steering a wheelbarrow of 
bricks. ’’She don’t want these bricks,” he said, eyeing me. ’’They’s good 
bricks. We can use them for the patio.” He dumped them and returned to the 
neighbor’s yard. 
”I’m gittin’ rid of him,” Billy said matter-of-factly. ”He gets on 
my nerves. He thinks we’re fuckin’ around over here — way he is.” 
There was a pause. 
”So,” I finally ventured, ’’after the Assassination you went to At- 
lanta. ” 
’’For twelve years. I had a lover and was in the tile business. Hus- 
tled on the side. Saw Marty Marcello on a regular basis — guess I told you

--- PAGE BREAK ---sination you went to At- 
lanta. ” 
’’For twelve years. I had a lover and was in the tile business. Hus- 
tled on the side. Saw Marty Marcello on a regular basis — guess I told you

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brooking (Beach)—RestIII/8 
about him, right?** 
•*SGme. ” 
**Mother was Carlos Marcello’s sister. He was a lawyer, but I think he 
ran seme clubs, etc., too. He was even weirder than Clay Shaw. He liked to 
be pissed on. After Shaw died, I went back to New Orleans. Stayed with Ar- 
chie again. But I was at a lot of other places, too. [Dates and chronology 
of these incidents ^e vague.] Like, I left Archie and went to live for a 
time at the Roosevelt Hotel in Little Rock with a Jewish judge named Ike Allen 
Laws. Met him in New Orleans and he took me to Arkansas. He spoiled me rot- 
tom. Each night he*d leave a corsage (little bunch of flowers) and a $100 
bill on pillow. Ike knew a lot of mobsters. Really involved in the under- 
world. He eventually got arrested. Once when I was in Little Rock (I think - 
- wouldn’t swear to it), I met a young man named Bill Clinton. He just came 
over in a restaurant and wais introduced and patted me on the shoulder. I’m 
not real sure about that. 
Then, I spent some time in Baton Rouge before New Orleans [?]. I knew 
Bill Percy who was a World History Professor at the University. He wrote 
books. Had a book about world coins. I also stayed with Roy Dupont — de- 
signed the Elxpressway [N.O. or Baton Rouge?]. Also went with Ray Bradford, an 
Assistant DA who was an alcoholic. He was married to a German girl, but he 
was gay. Killed himself. Would you like a Kool Aid?” 
”No thanks. I had a Coke at the last Rest Stop.” 
A pause. The rusty dog comes over and starts nuzzling my leg and wag- 
ging his tcdl.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Killed himself. Would you like a Kool Aid?” 
”No thanks. I had a Coke at the last Rest Stop.” 
A pause. The rusty dog comes over and starts nuzzling my leg and wag- 
ging his tcdl.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brooking (Beach)—Rest 111/9 
*'Well, Billy/* I angled, ’’those were some days, weren’t they? Look- 
ing back what do you feel about them?” 
”What do you mean?” 
”0h . . . were they good times? Sorry they’re gone? Wish they had 
been different? Like that.” 
For the first time, he was at a loss for words. ’’Well . . . nobody 
from my family ever met those kinds of people — so many; lived so well, 
was so popular . . . Sometimes I’d get sick of it, though. People always 
wanting to touch you, use you, own you — all over me, you know. Sometimes 
it was like I was suffocating. Know what I’d do? At night, I’d sneak down 
to the patio with a candle. It was quiet and peaceful with just the moon and 
the night sky. I’d bring poetry with me. I read a lot of poetry in those 
days: Shakespeare was a favorite . . . Macbeth; Elegy in a Deserted Graven 
yard ...” Then to my surprise, he began to recite the ’’Tomorrow and to- 
morrow ...” soliloquy from Macbeth. I joined him in the last few lines and 
it was an harmonious duet there in the middle of shantytown with a man who had 
slept with Clay Shaw, detested David Ferrie and talked Marxism with Lee Harvey 
Oswald. 
•'Ever write any poetry yourself, Billy?” 
”Naw, not really. Oh, once when I was eleven I wrote a poem.” 
”Do you have it, by any chance?” 
’’Not on paper. Got it up here,” pointing to his forehead. ”My daddy 
died in our house when it burned. It was specially hard on my younger 
brother. One day I took him to Dad’s grave and told him to kneel down. Then 
I explained to him how Dad was at peace and how we’d all be together one day.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ially hard on my younger 
brother. One day I took him to Dad’s grave and told him to kneel down. Then 
I explained to him how Dad was at peace and how we’d all be together one day.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brooking (Beach)—RestIII/10 
I went home and wrote a poem about it.” Billy recites a short poem of pass- 
able verse and deep feeling. 
”So, when Shaw died, you ...” 
”At 31 I took a complete turn in my life. After 12 years, I left At- 
lanta, Marty, the tile business, my lover . . . everything. Came to Pasca- 
goula where the Ingalls Shipyards took me on. They trained me in pipe fitting 
— I pulled down 98 Vi on their exam. I always knew I had a good mind. Once 
I took an Intelligence Test, and they said I should go into computers. But 
that looked like mystery land to me. Was with Ingalls for years. Put my 
money into land. Guess I told you ...” 
”Well, Billy, it’s been a roller coaster life, hasn’t it?” 
"Yep, you could say that. You know. Jack, shortly after I began work- 
ing in the shipyard, somebody from New Orleans came down for a visit. He was 
shocked. 'Lord, Billy,’ he said, ’you used to be so handsome. You’ve got so 
fat and ugly! ’ 
’’And you know. Jack,” Billy said, eyes beginning to moisten, ’’that 
was the nicest thing anybody could have said to me. Thank God, I thought! 
Now people can take me for what I really am; see the real Billy. They used to 
fall in love with my body, my face. What’s that? That’s nothing. I’ve 
learned to look past the outside and into people’s souls . . . isn't that 
good?’ 
He walked me to the car. We agreed to meet in Pensacola shortly. I as- 
sured him I’d pop for the bus ticket and put him up. As I drove back through 
Trailerville, I realized I hadn’t learned much more about the Kennedy Assassi-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brooking (Beach)—RestIII/11 
nation. But I sure did know a hell of a lot more about Billy Wayne (Joe) 
Johnson. 
JB/lj 
— Jack Beach