10 San jfrantisto (Qironitlr ★ .

Mon., Nov.

13.

1978
SALT Leak by CIA
New York
A strategic analyst for the Central
Intelligence Agency was forced to resign
last summer after confessing that he had
supplied copies of top-secret CIA reports
on Strategic Arms Limitation Talks to a
key staff aide of Senator Henry M.

Jackson, a leading Senate critic of the
current arms negotiations, administra-
tion and intelligence sources said.

The analyst, David S.

Sullivan, ad-
mitted passing the documents to
RichardPerle, Jackson’s aide for disar-
mament matters, after being ordered to
take a lie detector test, the government
sources said.

Sullivan now is working as
an adviser on the arms talks and other
issues for Senator Lloyd Bentsen (Dem-
Tex.)
Admiral Stansfield Turner, director
of the CIA was described as being
outraged by Sullivan’s “insubordina
tion’’—as one official put it—as well as
the decision of Jackson.

(Dem-Wash.),
and Perle, who have high security
clearances, to receive the working-level
documents.

The Sullivan materials in-
cluded some of the governments most
closely held information on sources and
methods of obtaining information about
the Soviet Union, government officials
said.

In recent conversations, some offi-
cials involved in the arms limitation
talks depicted Sullivan’s act as an
example of the kind of “hardball ”—as
one senior official said—that will be
played next year over the pending
ratification of a new arms limitation
agreement with the Soviet Union.

Other
officials saw the CIA's decision not to
seek further sanctions against Sullivan,
who recently was issued top-secret clear-
nances by the Department of Defense
and the Department of Energy, as an
example of a double standard on the
part of the Carter administration in so-
called whistle-blow'ing” cases, in which
government employees make public
what they consider to be wrongdoing or
incompetence.In recent conversations, some offi-
cials involved in the arms limitation
talks depicted Sullivan’s act as an
example of the kind of “hardball ”—as
one senior official said—that will be
played next year over the pending
ratification of a new arms limitation
agreement with the Soviet Union.

Other
officials saw the CIA's decision not to
seek further sanctions against Sullivan,
who recently was issued top-secret clear-
nances by the Department of Defense
and the Department of Energy, as an
example of a double standard on the
part of the Carter administration in so-
called whistle-blow'ing” cases, in which
government employees make public
what they consider to be wrongdoing or
incompetence.

The administration chose
to file a civil suit against Frank Snepp.

a
former CIA employee with a liberal
point of view who wrote a book on his
experiences in Vietnam without CIA
clearance.

Admiral Turner has met at least
•twice with Jackson since Sullivan left
the agency last August 25, officials said,
and urged him to dismiss Perle.

“That's
what we did on our end,’’ one source
quoted the admiral as telling the senator,
in effect, “and that’s what you should do
on your end.”
Jackson and Perle have apologized
to Turner for their part in receiving the
documents, which were returned to the
CIA, the sources said.

Jackson could not be located for
comment.

Perle, reached yesterday at
his home in Washington, refused to
comment on his role.

“I don’t have
anything to say,” he said.

“Frankly, I
don’t think there’s much of a story.”
One government official explained
that Turner was unable to do more than
dismiss Sullivan for insubordination and
issue a subsequent letter of reprimand
because no federal law had been violat-
ed by Sullivan.

The Sullivan affair is widely knowm
among top disarmament officials in the ;
Carter administration, who are now »
concluding negotiations with the Soviet
Union on a new disarmament agree-
ment.“Frankly, I
don’t think there’s much of a story.”
One government official explained
that Turner was unable to do more than
dismiss Sullivan for insubordination and
issue a subsequent letter of reprimand
because no federal law had been violat-
ed by Sullivan. The Sullivan affair is widely knowm
among top disarmament officials in the ;
Carter administration, who are now »
concluding negotiations with the Soviet
Union on a new disarmament agree-
ment. If such an agreement is reached
by next year, a major debate is expected
when the accord comes up for ratifica-
tion by the Senate. The documents passed by Sullivan
were described as analyses he had made
of Soviet Intentions regarding the strate-
gic arms negotiations. Sullivan, who has
told friends he worked four years on the
papers, received permission last month
from the CIA to publish an unclassified
version of his research. In one such
* i
paper, to be published in the Winter,
1978. edition of the magazine Strategic
Review, Sullivan argues that “the Soviets
have used the SALT negotiations process
as a smokescreen behind which to
conceal their increasing strategic supe-
riority from a complacemt U.S.” #
Sullivan further says that the Unit-
ed States, nuclear arsenal has been
losing ground strategically to the Soviet
Union since 1963. This retreat, he said, was sanctioned
in the arms limitation agreement in 1972
Ex-Aide
negotiated by President Nixon and ! Henry A. Kissinger, Nixon’s national
security adviser. Friends of Sullivan said that the
former CIA analyst is convinced that the
classified materials he supplied to Jack-
son and Perle contained proof—as
gleaned from highly classified sources—
that the Soviet Union deceived the
United States during the 1972 negotia-
tions and is continuing its deception. I
/Vew York Times