BILL EPPRIDGE
FOREIGNRELATIONS
OneMann&20Problems
(See Cover)
"I am a pragmatist, not a dogmatist,”
says Thomas Clifton Mann,“and I am
not a miracle worker.”Mann, 51, will
need all of his pragmatism and may
even have towork afewmiraclesif he
is to succeed in his new job as U.S.

Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs and President John-
son's toppolicymaker andadviser on
the difficult, demanding world of Latin
America.

"We expect to speakwith one voice
on all matters affecting this hemisphere，
said Johnson when he appointed Mann
last month.“Mr.

Mann will be that
voice.”Too often in the recent past,
U.S.policy toward Latin America,ex-
pressed by a babble of confused voices,
has been dangerously diluted by a divi-
sion of responsibilities in Washington.

MANN & PENTAGON'S CYRUS VANCE ON FLIGHT TO PANAMA
It now becomes Mann's task to bring
Where the ties are strongest,so is self-interest.

order and direction to U.S.relations
to ours-not because of sentiment,but
ishness like the army.Why do you keep
with animmenselyimportant area that
in their own self-interest.Democracy is
talking about taxes？ Taxation is an
is crying out for change.

a tie in these cases,economics is a tie,
Anglo-Saxon fetish.”Most important of
The "Invisible” Ones.That area is
and Christianity is another tie.The total
all,it means listening to—and heeding
basically one of a relatively few“haves,”
of these ties is where our interest lies,
complaints like thisfrom anArgen-
and millions of “have nots”whose mood
and when these ties are strong enough,
tinean lawyer:“The U.S.projects one
ranges from hopeless to revolutionary.

no Marxist can separate us."
specificpolicyfor the whole of Latin
In Different Packages.Welding those
America.What works well inMexico
$400a year.

Since 1961,seven constitu-
ties into something really strong will
cannot_possiblywork effectivelyin Bo-
tionalgovernments havebeen toppled
takea staggering amountof workand
livia.Conditions are basically different.no Marxist can separate us."
specificpolicyfor the whole of Latin
In Different Packages.Welding those
America.What works well inMexico
$400a year.

Since 1961,seven constitu-
ties into something really strong will
cannot_possiblywork effectivelyin Bo-
tionalgovernments havebeen toppled
takea staggering amountof workand
livia.Conditions are basically different.

by militarycoups.Nearly all ofLatin
imagination.Itmeans selling theidea of
All this has led to a dwindling of U.S.

America—about 8,500,000 sq.mi.and
constitutionalgovernment,for example,
prestige-a tragic fact when you con-
220 million people-is teeming with un-
tomen likea leader in theDominican
sider the opportunities open to the U.S."
rest.The“invisible”ones,as Colombian
Republic who gives this raticnale of
That criticism is all too valid.From
Writer German Arciniegas said of the
Latin American politics:“There are only
TeddyRoosevelt'sbig-stickdiplomacy to
masses,may be at a point where they
three ways tohandle people inLatin
Franklin Roosevelt's genial GoodNeigh-
willmake themselves heard in“a con-
America:kill them,jail them or have
bor policy to John Kennedy's ambitious
suming fire or a flood of light.”And
drinks with them.I prefer the latter,
but disappointingAlianzaparaelPro-
despitejubilantreceptionsforPresident
but I am not averseto either of the
greso,the U.S.has long tended to treat
Eisenhower whenhevisitedin1960 and
former if it cannot be avoided."It means
Latin America like an entity.In fact,
for President Kennedy in 1962,Latin
selling tax reforms to thewealthy,deep-
the area never has been and never wili
America's feelings toward the U.S.

are
ly entrenchedoligarchslike theBrazilian
be a package deal.

oftenfar from cordial.are
ly entrenchedoligarchslike theBrazilian
be a package deal. oftenfar from cordial. industrialist whotoldaU.S.visitor:
Pragmatist Mann seems to under-
What can the U.S.do?Drawls Texan
“You know,Brazil's growth is based in
stand this,to realize that Latin Amer-
Mann:“Our jobis to convince theLatin
part on not paying taxes.If we paid,
ica ismany lands requiring many ap-
Americans that their interests lie parallel
the governmentwould spend it onfool-
proaches. Says he:“Cultures, conditions
TASS
andproblemsvaryfrom country to
country，andexact conformity is neither
practical nor desirable.”Each of Latin
America’s 20 sovereign nations (all but
one of them non-Communist)is en-
meshed in its own problems,and each
offers the U.S. a separate-and by no
means equalforeign policy challenge:
Panama has been the Latin Ameri-
can crisis spot so far in 1964.Diplo-
maticrelations with the U.S.were bro-
ken after riots ostensibly caused bya
dispute over howPanamanian and U.S. flags should be flown in the U.S.-con-
trolled Canal Zone.But the dispute goes
much deeper than that, stems from bur-
geoning Panamanian nationalism and
long-held resentment about the1903
treaty that gave the U.S. rights “in per-
petuity”over the canal.Panama's Pres-
ident Roberto Chiari insists now that
the U.S.must promise to renegotiate
the treaty. Tom Mann,who rushed to
Panama himself right after the riots,
CASTRO &KHRUSHCHEV AFTERA HUNT
along with then-Army Secretary Cyrus
Whiledealscan still bemade,agreement toagree. Vance, says the U.S. will be happy to
TIME,JANUARY 31,1964
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---And last week while Castro was in Mos-
Forces are in Colombia to give advice.

cow,a new Soviet-Cuban trade agree-
Colombia's democratic government is
ment was announced.In return for the
relatively progressive but is less impres-
favor,Castro promised to sign the
sive than wastheregimeofbrilliant
atomic test ban treaty.

All the while,
ex-President Alberto Lleras Camargo,
he continues to try to export his revolu-
who left office in 1962.

tiontootherLatinAmerican countries.

>Costa Rica in prospering under one
Argentina is wealthy,92%literate,
of Latin America's strongest democrat-
has relatively good transport and com-
icgovernments.

munications systems-and chronic po-
The Dominican
Republic has em-
litical
problems.

Thegovernment,
barrassed the U.S.for decades.After
backed by the military,which threw out
the U.S.-encouraged assassination of
the previous freely elected President,
Dictator Trujillo in 1961,the U.S.in
has strong nationalistic leanings-some
1962 ardently supportedAuthor Juan
StateDepartment officials.are worried
Bosch,an exile for 24 years,in presi-
that the country could turn toisolation-
dential elections.He won,then allowed
ism.The party of exiled Dictator Juan
Dominican Communists to organize
Peron is stilla force,but the strength
openly and proved to be inept.Fed up,
of Castro Communism has declined.

theDominican army threwBosch out,
>Boliviahasaliberal,anti-Communist
but the U.S.-with a fixedpolicyin
government that gets heavyU.S.aid to
favorof constitutionalgovernment even
ease thethreatofa toughCommunist
when it is bad--broke off relations with
Partymovement well-stocked with Cas-
the junta.

Later it got promises that
EISENHOWER IN BUENOS AIRES, 1960
tro-trained saboteurs.

there would be free elections,and re-
The greetings were jubilant.

>Brazil lives in an endless financial
lations were restored.

But U.S.>Brazil lives in an endless financial
lations were restored.

But U.S.

Am-
crisis,is so deeply in debt to other
bassador John Bartlow Martin,primary
discuss the situation,but that it will
countriesthat it ison thebrink of
backer of Bosch,resigned,and a new
accept no “preconditions” to the meet-
bankruptcy.The country's inflation is
ambassador has notyetbeen named.

ing-such as.apromise to change the
incredible:priceswentup about 85%
Ecuador'smilitaryleaderslastyear
treaty.The crisis is along way from
lastyear.Much toblame is the govern-
oustedliquor-loadedPresident Carlos
over,even though a committee of the
ment of demagogicPresident Joao Gou-
Arosemena,now promise free elections
Organization of American Stateslast
lart,whohints that hewould turn to the
in 1965.The government isfriendly to
weekthoughtitwasnearingatem-
SovietUnion if theU.S.cut itsfinan-
the U.S.,recently headed off a bloom-
porary solution.Ironically,the current
cial aid.

The U.S.

continues to pour
ingCastro-Communistmovement.

messmighthavebeeneased or delayed
in money,will probably reschedule all
>El Salvador has a good democratic-
had there been a U.S.ambassador in
Brazil's debts soon for easier payment.

reformist government,is prospering,
Panama.There was none-nor is there
Chiles government is conservative,
gets powerful U.S.

support and aid.

yet.No replacementhas been sentfor
but the popular trend is toward nation-
Guatemala'sPresident Miguel Ydi
abie Ambassador joseph Farland,who
goras Fuenteswasousted by amilitary
leftlastAugustindisgust atWashington
U.S.

companies.A powerful and wor-
junta last spring.Despite the fact that
policies on foreign aid.

risome CommunistParty controls 30%
Ydigoras is along and fervent foe of
>Cuba remains the-bone in theU.S.

of Chilean voters,but Chile remains a
Communism,the junta saw the pos-
throat.TheU.S.is committed to a rela-
solid U.S.friend.--- PAGE BREAK ---

risome CommunistParty controls 30%
Ydigoras is along and fervent foe of
>Cuba remains the-bone in theU.S. of Chilean voters,but Chile remains a
Communism,the junta saw the pos-
throat.TheU.S.is committed to a rela-
solid U.S.friend. sibilitythat Communistswouldtake
tivelyinactivepolicyoftryingtoisolate
>Colombia has been cursed by a sense-
over in approaching elections.The new
Castrofrom foreign trade.The embar-
less spree of murder and looting that
government got quick U.S.recognition
gois not working perfectlyby any
began with a political assassination in
and now,with free elections promised,
means,for Britain recently made a
1948,has since claimed more than
is promoting a string of democratic
trade deal with the Communist dictator. 200,000
lives.U.S.Army
Special
reforms. >Haiti'smurderousDictator Francois
MICHAELE
LIFE
（"Papa Doc")Duvalier survivedef-
forts, applauded by the U.S., to over-
throw him last spring,looked on with
stonysatisfactionlastmonth whenthe
U.S.quietly resumed full diplomatic
relations.His country is poverty-strick-
enand in a state of chaos. >Honduras is run by a junta that took
over in a barracks-room coup last Oc-
tober.The U.S.severed relations and
cut off aid money,then restored it all
after a promise of free elections. Mexico's democraticPresident Adol-
fo Lopez Mateos is one of the U.S.'s
warmest friends,and since last year's
settlementofthecentury-olddispute
over the Chamizalborder strip(nego-
tiated byTomMann whileambassador
to Mexico)，the friendship has never
been warmer.But Mexico maintains
diplomaticrelations with Cubaandis
neutral in the U.S.-Cuba conflict. Nicaragua,although it has an elected
President,is run by the U.S.-inclined
Somoza family,which owns outright a
greatpart of the nation. Paraguay's “elected”Dictator Alfre-
Time for the U.S.to speak with a single voice. do Stroessner has instituted some dem-
16
TIME, JANUARY 31,1964

--- PAGE BREAK ---ocratic reforms-under U.S.urging-
—watching Axis business operations in
and seems to be a reliable friend.

the whole area.Just before the war end-
>Peru electedaliberalgovernment
ed,Mann went to Mexico City for the
last summer,after a military junta had
Chapultepec Conference.That meeting
ruled for a year.The U.s.is leary of
set down the concept for a U.S.-Latin
American defense plan thatwas to be-
tonationalize some of therichoilin-
come the Rio Treaty of 1947—still the
dustry now owned by U.S.

companies.

WesternHemisphere's key joint-defense
Uruguay's middle-roading nine-man
document.

governing council is on the best of terms
Starting Over.Ever since,Mann has
with the U.S.

been close toLatin American affairs.In
>Venezuela's powerful President R6-
1947,he let Spruille Braden,then Harry
mulo Betancourt, one of the U.S.'s fin-
Truman's Assistant Secretary of State
est friends,steps out of power this year.

forAmerican RepublicAffairs,talkhim
He will be replaced byRaul Leoni,who
into joining the U.S.foreign service at a
was elected lastfall despite vicious ter-
40%pay cut-from the $11,000 he got
rorist tactics of Castro Communists.

in his special State Department civilian
VenezuelaisoneofLatinAmerica's
rank to $7,0o0 as aregular foreign serv-
most progressive democratic countries,
ice officer.“I started all over again as
but the U.S.is worried thatLeoni may
a second secretary at the embassy in
prove to be not so strong as Betancourt.

Caracas,”recalls Mann.He turned in a
Speaking in Tex-Mex.From this tur-
fine job,was recalled to Washington
moil of differing governments,personal-
and in1950 was made a deputy assistant
ities,politics,ethics and economies,Tom
Acheson Democrat’at that time”he re-
KENNEDY IN MEXICO CITY, 1962
Mann will try to produce a viable set of
But the feelings are not always cordial.in his special State Department civilian
VenezuelaisoneofLatinAmerica's
rank to $7,0o0 as aregular foreign serv-
most progressive democratic countries,
ice officer.“I started all over again as
but the U.S.is worried thatLeoni may
a second secretary at the embassy in
prove to be not so strong as Betancourt.

Caracas,”recalls Mann.He turned in a
Speaking in Tex-Mex.From this tur-
fine job,was recalled to Washington
moil of differing governments,personal-
and in1950 was made a deputy assistant
ities,politics,ethics and economies,Tom
Acheson Democrat’at that time”he re-
KENNEDY IN MEXICO CITY, 1962
Mann will try to produce a viable set of
But the feelings are not always cordial.

policies for U.s.action andreaction in
members.“Later,I was called an‘Eisen-
the months ahead.A solid (5 ft.10 in,
hower appointee，and nowI hear they
the CIA.“I was an activist in that case，”
180 lbs.), firm-jawed man who likes to
call me a‘crony of thePresident.”
he recalls.

A short time later,the U.S.-
callhimself“a country lawyer from
Those were tough,frustrating times
backed exiles stormed into Guatemala
Texas,”he has spent his entire lifetime
for State Department careerists inWash-
City,ousted Arbenz.

in dealings,both personal and profes-
ington, and in 1953 Mann got “fed up
Mann was offered the ambassador's
sional,with Latin America.

with all the McCarthy stuff,”asked for
postinGuatemalabut turneditdown
Born in Laredo,with a population
an overseas assignment,went to Athens
because“I didn't feelI was really quali-
thatwas 85%Mexican-American,Mann
as embassy_counselor.But even if he had
fied by age or service experience.”He
grewup speakingboth English anda
wanted to,Mann could not shakehis rep-
went instead as deputy chiefof mission
border-townpidgin Spanish calledTex-
utation as an experton Latin America.in dealings,both personal and profes-
ington, and in 1953 Mann got “fed up
Mann was offered the ambassador's
sional,with Latin America.

with all the McCarthy stuff,”asked for
postinGuatemalabut turneditdown
Born in Laredo,with a population
an overseas assignment,went to Athens
because“I didn't feelI was really quali-
thatwas 85%Mexican-American,Mann
as embassy_counselor.But even if he had
fied by age or service experience.”He
grewup speakingboth English anda
wanted to,Mann could not shakehis rep-
went instead as deputy chiefof mission
border-townpidgin Spanish calledTex-
utation as an experton Latin America.

toGuatemala,ayearlater wasnamed
Mex.His father was a lawyer who “laid
A Communist-riddledgovernment,with
ambassador to El Salvador,and in 1957
down very stern.standardsaboutethics
President Jacobo Arbenz as the front
returned to Washington to serve with
and the law in our house.” The family
man,had taken over Guatemala.The
Douglas Dillon, then Ike's Deputy Un-
code was backedby the austerebeliefs
StateDepartment began its strategy
der Secretaryof State for Economic
of the Southern Baptist Church（We
to isolate the country under theRioTrea-
Affairs.

didn't even play cards").In high school,
ty.But at the same time the Central
Symbol of Victory.The years of the
young Mann was chosen“mostpopular
Intelligence Agency plunged aheadwith
Latin Americanrevolutionwere at hand.

boy”in his senior year, scoredwell
aplot toback an armedassault on
One of the first inklings of the deep and
enough in his studies (all A's and B's),
Arbenz'gangbyGuatemalan exilesfrom
dangerous emotions brewing in Latin
butis bestremembered as adiminutive
neighboring Honduras and Nicaragua.--- PAGE BREAK ---

didn't even play cards").In high school,
ty.But at the same time the Central
Symbol of Victory.The years of the
young Mann was chosen“mostpopular
Intelligence Agency plunged aheadwith
Latin Americanrevolutionwere at hand. boy”in his senior year, scoredwell
aplot toback an armedassault on
One of the first inklings of the deep and
enough in his studies (all A's and B's),
Arbenz'gangbyGuatemalan exilesfrom
dangerous emotions brewing in Latin
butis bestremembered as adiminutive
neighboring Honduras and Nicaragua. America came in1958,when Vice Pres-
(138 Ibs.) quarterback who led Laredo
Mann was summoned from Athensfor
ident Richard Nixon was nearly killed
to anundefeated1927seasonby singing
a consultation,heard both plans,favored
under a rain of saliva, stones and sticks
out his signals in a mixture of English
PETER ANDERSON
and Spanish, to the vast confusion of
monolingual opponents. AtBaylorUniversityhemet Nancy
Aynesworth, daughter of aprominent
Waco,Texas,physician.Theywere mar-
ried in1933 duringMann’s senioryear
atBaylorLawSchool and wenttoLa-
redo,where Tom went into practicewith
his father andbrothers for $100a
month. Then came Pearl Harbor,and
Tom drove 150 miles to Corpus Christi
to join the Navy.When he took hisphysi-
cal exam,he found he couldn't even
read the largest E on the eye chart.I
hadread somuch inpreparing those
appellate cases,”he says,“that I had
a muscle-freeze in my eyes. The Navy
wouldn't take me,and I felt pretty
despondent.I was 29,and Iwanted to
dosomething for my country."
He volunteered todolegal work for
the State Department, wound up in
Montevideo,Uruguay,keeping a cioak-
without-dagger eye onNazi shipping in
the area.Within a year he was recalled
to the StateDepartment in Washington,
wasmade a divisional assistantin charge
STREET FIGHTING IN HONDURAS AFTER MILITARY COUP (1953)
of“economic warfare inLatinAmerica”
Willtheanswerbe consuming fire,or aflood of light? TIME, JANUARY 31, 1964
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---during a visit to Caracas.

The U.S.was
trieda trip to Latin America; so did
shocked,frightened,incredulous at such
Adlai Stevenson and Kennedy himself.

fierce hatred from a supposedly Good
Eventually, Edwin Martin was made
Neighbor.

A few months later,Fidel
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
Castro and his followers swept out of the
American Affairs.He served until Presi-
hills of Oriente province in Cuba and
dent Johnson,in his first major appoint-
overthrew the cruelregime of Dictator
ment,returned Mann to the jobhe had
Fulgencio Batista.No sooner had he tak-
leftnearly threeyears before and sent
en over thanCastro turned dictatorhim-
Martin off as ambassador toArgentina.

self,began slaughtering those who had
During this entire period,the Alianza
opposed him.Even in his scurrilous at-
paraelProgresoremained thetop con-
tacks on the U.S.,Castro became an idol
versational subject in U.S.-Latin Ameri-
to many Latin Americans,for they saw
can relations.TheAlianza pledged $20
him as a heroic nationalist-a symbol
billion in aid (mostly U.S.) over ten
ofvictory by the oppressed.

In a faltering way, the U.S.

set out
years,plus a highly ambitious invest-
ment of another $8 billion annually
to meet the situation.It loosened up
from Latin American business and gov-
its economic policies,made loans easier
ernment.Asits goal,the Alianza aimed
to get.

In 1960, with decisive U.S.set out
years,plus a highly ambitious invest-
ment of another $8 billion annually
to meet the situation.It loosened up
from Latin American business and gov-
its economic policies,made loans easier
ernment.Asits goal,the Alianza aimed
to get.

In 1960, with decisive U.S.

sup-
at increasing the per-capita growth rate
port,the Inter-American Development
of each country by a whopping 2.5%a
Bank was set up,with a $1 billion lend
year.To get the cash,each Latin Ameri-
ing capacity.Then DwightEisenhower
cancountrywouldsubmit ablueprint
went before the Congress and asked for
MANN WHILE IN HIGH SCHOOL
for socialreforms--from schools to
$500million thatwouldbe spent on
"Most popular boy."
housing to tax collection to cutting up
projects “designed to contribute to op-
the wealthy landowners’huge holdings
portunities for abetter way of lifefor
Richard Goodwin,whom John Kenne-
for small farmers'use.

the individual citizensof the countries
dyfanciedasarealideamanabout
So far,the Alianza has fallen far
of Latin America."
Latin America.Berleand Goodwin su-
shortof its promises.Fewgovernments
The dream of a Latin America pros-
perimposed their decisionsandadvice
have accomplishedmuch towardreal
pering with U.S.help seemed on the
on those State Departmentregulars,
reforms;yet nearly all have collected
way tobecomingreality.Andwith the
and there islittle doubt that onereason
millions of dollars-as“emergency
arrival of theKennedyAdministration
for theBay ofPigsinvasionfiascowas
loans.” Said Alfonso Gumucio Reyes,
in 1961 came the brightest hopes of all.

thenumber of fingers dipping into the
Bolivia's Minister of Economy:“To
During his campaign,Kennedy talked
Cuban problem.U.S.policy toward Lat-
speak the truth,Iam not satisfied with
atlength andwith devastatingpolitical
inAmerica was in a state of confusion,
the Alianza.It is an engine that is idling.the individual citizensof the countries
dyfanciedasarealideamanabout
So far,the Alianza has fallen far
of Latin America."
Latin America.Berleand Goodwin su-
shortof its promises.Fewgovernments
The dream of a Latin America pros-
perimposed their decisionsandadvice
have accomplishedmuch towardreal
pering with U.S.help seemed on the
on those State Departmentregulars,
reforms;yet nearly all have collected
way tobecomingreality.Andwith the
and there islittle doubt that onereason
millions of dollars-as“emergency
arrival of theKennedyAdministration
for theBay ofPigsinvasionfiascowas
loans.” Said Alfonso Gumucio Reyes,
in 1961 came the brightest hopes of all.

thenumber of fingers dipping into the
Bolivia's Minister of Economy:“To
During his campaign,Kennedy talked
Cuban problem.U.S.policy toward Lat-
speak the truth,Iam not satisfied with
atlength andwith devastatingpolitical
inAmerica was in a state of confusion,
the Alianza.It is an engine that is idling.

effectiveness about the“battlefield”of
confict and frustration.Once more
Did it raise toomuchhope？Kennedy
Latin America and about its being “the
Mann asked to get out,soonleftforthe
suggested thatamiraclewas about to
most critical area in the world.”But in
ambassador's post in Mexico.

happen.But unless this sense of urgency
practice,the Kennedy Administration's
For months there was no Assistant
isdulyacknowledged,it will be dificult
Latin Americanpolicy proved tobe
Secretaryof StateforInter-American
to stem the masses² loss of faith."
more aproliferation ofpersonnel than
Affairs.ThenKennedy brought in Rob-
TwoKinds of Nationalism.Thomas
of promises kept.effectiveness about the“battlefield”of
confict and frustration.Once more
Did it raise toomuchhope？Kennedy
Latin America and about its being “the
Mann asked to get out,soonleftforthe
suggested thatamiraclewas about to
most critical area in the world.”But in
ambassador's post in Mexico.

happen.But unless this sense of urgency
practice,the Kennedy Administration's
For months there was no Assistant
isdulyacknowledged,it will be dificult
Latin Americanpolicy proved tobe
Secretaryof StateforInter-American
to stem the masses² loss of faith."
more aproliferation ofpersonnel than
Affairs.ThenKennedy brought in Rob-
TwoKinds of Nationalism.Thomas
of promises kept.

ert Woodward,a career diplomat.He
Mann,theTexas pragmatist,still thinks
The CrowdedAct.Mann himself was
lasted ayear.In the meantime,Harvard
there is hope.“I believe in the Alianza，”
then Assistant Secretary of State for
Historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr.joined
he says,“But we must not believe that
Inter-American Affairs.Around and
GoodwininmakingWhiteHousepolicy
it is going to solve all problems.It is
about him was a “task force”headed
togoalongwith theStateDepartment
not a panacea.Countries lacking a good
by aging,imperious Adolf Berle,a Lat-
policyBerle wasmakingand the pro-
internal structure cannot expect topros-
in expert under F.D.R.

There was also
gramsputforthbytheCIAand the
per with Alianza help-or,for thatmat-
a youthful White House speechwriter,
Defense Department.Bobby Kennedy
ter, with all the money in the world.

AP
Each country has to be studied as an
individual case with individual idiosyn-
crasies and approaches.Our intention is
toworkwithanybodywhoseriously
wants to survive."
Mannbelievesthattherealhopefor
a peaceful,prosperousLatinAmerica in
thefutureliesbeyondtheAlianza
in each nation's pride in itself.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There was also
gramsputforthbytheCIAand the
per with Alianza help-or,for thatmat-
a youthful White House speechwriter,
Defense Department.Bobby Kennedy
ter, with all the money in the world. AP
Each country has to be studied as an
individual case with individual idiosyn-
crasies and approaches.Our intention is
toworkwithanybodywhoseriously
wants to survive."
Mannbelievesthattherealhopefor
a peaceful,prosperousLatinAmerica in
thefutureliesbeyondtheAlianza
in each nation's pride in itself. Says
he:“There are twokinds of nationalism
afoot in Latin America.The first kind,
I believe,is the best bulwark we've got
against the Communists,and the Latin
American who doesn't sense it isn't
doing his country a bit of good.This
kindofnationalism means knowing who
you are and for what your country
stands.But there's another kind-xeno-
phobic nationalism.This is what can
impedetheachievementof theAlianza
goals:xenophobic nationalism tears
down allthat thehemisphere stands
for.When people in this hemisphere
believe that their country's interests lie
on aparallel course with another—like
ours-then we have a coincidence of
MANN AT SIGNING OF CHAMIZAL PACT WITH MEXICAN FOREIGN MINISTER TELLO
interest.And that is the only means for
Thefriendship has never beenwarmer. solidunderstanding."
18
TIME, JANUARY 31, 1964