|
Sanitized Copy Bee for Release 2010/07/07 : CIA-RDP90-00552R000201710013-8


ee.


sneer APPEARED 9 NATION
“E_2 LS “ 1 December 1984


‘The Strange Correspondence ot


_ Morris Ernst and John Edgar Hoover
po” 19891964 om


HARRISON E. SALISBURY


r was it so strange a correspondence? After eating: raised by. the Warren commission’s conor on President Ken-

FA and rereading the more than 300 letters exchanged “ney § assassination.
fj over twenty-five years by Morris Ernst, the great _ Those letters, of no enduring consequence, are typical of
r civil liberties lawyer, and J. Edgar Hoover,a most __ the Ernst-Hoover exchange and indicate a basic feature of it:.
opposite number, I find myself at a loss to select the precise _‘ the secret, unauthorized sharing of letters from third parties.
adjective to describe that cascade of epistles. . The existence of an Ernst-Hoover correspondence first


“There are many words that might be applied: bizarre (but came to light in 1977, a year after Ernst’s death, in the
that is surely too strong); incongruous (yet often the two course of an inquiry by the American Civil Liberties Union


men were laboring in the same vineyard); devoted (the ap- into hidden connections between the A.C.L.U. and the
pearance of that was there, but it was less than skin-deep); F.B.I. The A.C.L.U. retrieved some 45,000 pages of Bureau
collegial (sometimes, but often not). If at moments Ernst files under a freedom of information suit, but those included
wrote as a petitioner and acolyte, there were also times when only a handful of Ernst’s letters, which gave no indication
he appeared as a magisterial Cassandra, forecasting the fall of the extent of his epistolary relationship with Hoover.
_of the temple—the Federal Bureau of Investigation—or | Only now do we know about it, thanks to the distinguished
even as indulgent headmaster, catching his favorite pupil, scholarly specialist in F.B.1. affairs Prof. Athan Theoharis
Edgar, with a crib up his sleeve. - , of Marquette University, who obtained more than 200 items


But the correspondence characterizes itself, Sid this is under the F.O.I.A. Included in that oeuvre are Ernst-
” true from the first tentative letter (at least the first that has  . Hoover letters, Hoover-Ernst letters, letters:‘to Ernst from |
been retrieved under the Freedom of Information Act), Hoover’s amanuensis, Louis B. Nichols, and F.B.]. internal


_ written by Hoover to Ernst November 8, 1939. Hoover en- . memorandums. Additional material is contained in the cor-
closed, for Ernst’s information, a copy of a letter written to’ | respondence that Ernst deposited at the University of Texas |
him by Lucille B. Milner, secretary of the American Civil © Humanities Center in Austin, That cache consists of one
Liberties Union, of which Ernst was then general counsel, hundred or so documents, many of them duplicates. This
and a copy of his reply. The exchange dealt with wire- _ study is based also on the Ernst materials in F.B.I. files on :
tapping, ‘‘a matter which we have discussed + on recent the Galindez case (of which, more later), by a handful of
. occasions.”’ ‘ other random Ernst materials and by interviews with per-

The first Ernst letter we have is dated April 14, 1941, Init - sons close to Ernst.-
Ernst enclosed a copy of a “‘hate-mail’’ letter addressed to ~° #TheErnst-Hoover connection involved far more than the
newscaster Raymond Gram Swing, ‘“‘which may be worth — “‘clubby relationship’’ described in the A.C.L.U.’s official
putting in your files.” That the Ernst-Hoover relationship report, which exonerated Ernst of any ‘‘overt improprieties.””
was still in the greening stage can be adduced by the factthat © In addition to the hundreds of letters, there were telephone
Ernst addressed his letter, ‘‘Dear John.’? It would not be calls and personal visits, of which only a fragmentary record
until November 21, 1941, that “Dear J ohn” became “Dear .- remains. There is, incidentally, no reason to believe that the
Edgar.” i - ~ F.B.L. files have yielded all the Ernst materials they contain.


» The last letter of Ernst’s that has been peinaved is dated .. The bulk of the letters should have been placed in Hoover’s
Oueber 8, 1964, and opens, ‘‘My dear Edgar.’”’ ‘For your Personal and Confidential file which was supposedly de-


eyes alone,’’ writes Ernst, ‘‘I am sending a copy ofa letter stroyed by his personal secretary after his death, in 1972.
addressed by Mr. Pemberton, Director of the ACLU, to Os- _. Most.of the letters we possess have come from the Official
mond X. Fraenkel [of the A.C.L.U. Board of Directors].”’ and Confidential file of Assistant Director Louis B. Nichols, .
The letter to which he refers deals with civil liberties issues who was actually Ernst’s primary correspondent. According


to F.B.I. regulations these should have been destroyed
Harrison E. Salisbury was a correspondent and editor of every six months—but they were not, for reascns that are


The New York Times for many years. He is now at work on not clear. They were part of the Bureau’s Do Not File files |
a book titled The Long March: The Untold Story, fo be - and were not indexed or subject to normal F.B.I. retrieval -


published next autumn by Harper & Row. — procedures. Others were part of the Behind the Do Not File


CONTINUED
Sanitized Copy ener for Release 2010/07/07 : CIA-RDP90-00552R000201710013-8
