The Presidential Nuclear "Football" From Eisenhower to George W. Bush

Published: Jul 18, 2023 | Briefing Book # 834 | Edited by William Burr

Football’s Emergency Decrees of “Doubtful Legality” or “Even Illegal,” Said U.S. Officials
Documents Show Assignment of Football to Vice President Walter Mondale
Pentagon Officials Worried VP Johnson Not Briefed on Football at Time of JFK Assassination

[Assistant Secretary of Defense Finucane sent White House Staff Secretary General Andrew Goodpaster the latest version of the “War Emergency Check List and Master Readiness File,” which had been renamed the “Joint Chiefs of Staff Emergency Actions File.” The file would be included in the “President's emergency actions pouch” (later known as the Satchel or the Football). A new item for the file was an Emergency Message, EM-5, which would make “available atomic weapons to NATO and to such other allies as may be programmed to use U.S. atomic weapons.” As the purpose of the stockpile was for emergency use in a military crisis, a presidential order to make those nuclear weapons available to NATO allies was a necessary element in the Satchel.]

Presidential Football Documents and Photographs

Part I: The Early Years

Part II: Developments During the Carter Administration

White House Military aide General Chester Clifton with President Kennedy, 23 March 1962. (Source: John F. Kennedy Presidential Library )

White House Air Force Aide Colonel Godfrey McHugh, 1 February 1962 (Source: John F. Kennedy Presidential Library )

White House Naval Aide Tazewell Shepard, 30 April 1962 (Source: John F. Kennedy Presidential Library )

This photo of Vice President Walter Mondale sitting with National Security Adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski and Secretary of State Cyrus Vance (from left to right) on 1 December 1978 illustrates Mondale’s role in national security planning during the Carter administration. (Photo from Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, NLC-WHSP-C-08563-15)

Special Assistant for Administration Hugh Carter, Jr. with President Carter on 15 May 1980. Standing in the background are members of First Lady Rosslyn Carter's family. (Photo from JImmy Carter Presidential Library)

Washington, D.C., July 18, 2023 – A set of highly secret emergency action plans kept inside the closely guarded “Football” that traveled with the President at all times and that would give the federal government sweeping emergency powers were of “doubtful legality,” “badly out of date,” and “even illegal,” according to top government officials whose views are memorialized in declassified records posted today by the National Security Archive.

Since the late 1950s, U.S. military personnel traveling with the President have carried a special case known variously as the “satchel,” the “black bag,” the “emergency actions pouch” and, as it is perhaps best known, the “Football.” Epitomizing presidential control of nuclear weapons, the Football and the military aides who carry it enable the President to make decisions about the use of nuclear weapons in the event of a sudden military crisis.

While the existence of the Football has been known since the 1960s, reliable details about its contents have been relatively scarce. During the Cold War, and possibly later, they included proclamations and executive orders known as Presidential Emergency Action Documents (PEADs) for use in a national emergency. Edward A.During the Cold War, and possibly later, they included proclamations and executive orders known as Presidential Emergency Action Documents (PEADs) for use in a national emergency. Edward A. McDermott, who led the federal Office of Emergency Planning in the 1960s, said the purpose of the documents was “to clothe the President with formal emergency powers,” although he said some were of “doubtful legality,” perhaps because they included the suspension of habeas corpus, a declaration of martial law, and the authorization of mass arrests and arbitrary detentions.

Today’s posting by the National Security Archive includes several documents about the contents of the PEADs and the Carter administration’s efforts to revise directives considered “badly out of date.” The President’s second cousin, Hugh Carter, Jr., who played a leading role in White House emergency planning, said he was “concerned that the entire PEADs series is obsolete given the total devastation which could be expected from a thermonuclear attack.” By 1980, the PEADs had been revised and updated and were ready to be placed in the President’s “emergency portfolio.”

Also included in the posting are documents on the Carter administration’s arrangements to assign a Football to Vice President Walter Mondale, with one permanently stationed at his residence. This was in keeping with Mondale's substantive and innovative role in national security policy. It remains unclear whether the four vice presidents who held the office between Johnson and Mondale were assigned Footballs, but so far there is no evidence to suggest that they were.

The posting also includes excerpts from interviews conducted by William Manchester while researching his book, The Death of a President (New York: Harper and Row, 1967), which shed light on the Football arrangements during the Kennedy administration.This was in keeping with Mondale's substantive and innovative role in national security policy. It remains unclear whether the four vice presidents who held the office between Johnson and Mondale were assigned Footballs, but so far there is no evidence to suggest that they were.

The posting also includes excerpts from interviews conducted by William Manchester while researching his book, The Death of a President (New York: Harper and Row, 1967), which shed light on the Football arrangements during the Kennedy administration. General Chester Clifton, one of the White House military aides who was with Kennedy in Dallas on the day he was assassinated, explained that a military aide was always near the President because the Football included "emergency war orders.”

According to Captain Tazewell Shepard, Naval Aide to President Kennedy, the military aides had responsibility for the contents of the Football “whenever and wherever the President goes.” The exception was when the President was in Washington, D.C., in which case the satchel stayed at the White House and did not “chase him around.”

Today’s posting also features a gallery of recently released photos from the George W. Bush Presidential Library showing military officers carrying the Football in a variety of situations, including during overseas travel with the President. Released as the result of a Freedom of Information Act request, the images show the routine and unique role played by the Football and its handlers in presidential entourages.Bush Presidential Library showing military officers carrying the Football in a variety of situations, including during overseas travel with the President. Released as the result of a Freedom of Information Act request, the images show the routine and unique role played by the Football and its handlers in presidential entourages. Some of the photos were released with excisions while other images were denied in full.

Background

The existence of the Football became publicly known in the first few years of the Johnson administration. The first mention of it in the national press may have been in the syndicated “Allen-Scott Report” in July 1965 which quoted White House aide Jack Valenti saying that that “the ‘black bag’ or ‘football,’ as we call it, goes wherever the President travels.” The Football connected the President to the Strategic Air Command, according to Valenti, who added that there were a “dozen military aides who carry the briefcase on a shift basis.” The article also suggested that President Johnson may have been uncomfortable with the arrangement because Valenti denied “published reports President Johnson is transferring some of the functions of his military aides to the Pentagon.” [1] Four months later, Bob Horton of The Baltimore Sun reported that the “satchel” included a “portfolio of cryptographic orders” to the Joint Chiefs to authorize a nuclear retaliation. An authorizing message could be sent by telephone, teletype or microwave radio.The first mention of it in the national press may have been in the syndicated “Allen-Scott Report” in July 1965 which quoted White House aide Jack Valenti saying that that “the ‘black bag’ or ‘football,’ as we call it, goes wherever the President travels.” The Football connected the President to the Strategic Air Command, according to Valenti, who added that there were a “dozen military aides who carry the briefcase on a shift basis.” The article also suggested that President Johnson may have been uncomfortable with the arrangement because Valenti denied “published reports President Johnson is transferring some of the functions of his military aides to the Pentagon.” [1] Four months later, Bob Horton of The Baltimore Sun reported that the “satchel” included a “portfolio of cryptographic orders” to the Joint Chiefs to authorize a nuclear retaliation. An authorizing message could be sent by telephone, teletype or microwave radio. Horton also learned that, through arrangements established by the Defense Communications Agency, the authorizing messages could be sent to the North American Air Defense Command or the Strategic Air Command. [2]

Manchester’s book was probably the first to mention the Football, and with his focus on interviewing the people who were with and near President Kennedy at the time of his assassination, Manchester learned a great deal about the military aides and warrant officers who traveled with the President and who were responsible for the Football. Among the interviewees were White House military aides, including Tazewell Shepard, Godfrey McHugh, and Chester Clifton, and Joint Chief of Staff Chairman Maxwell Taylor. Excerpts from the interviews, on file at the Wesleyan University Library, are published here for the first time and include rich details about the Football, its contents, and the arrangements for carrying it.Among the interviewees were White House military aides, including Tazewell Shepard, Godfrey McHugh, and Chester Clifton, and Joint Chief of Staff Chairman Maxwell Taylor. Excerpts from the interviews, on file at the Wesleyan University Library, are published here for the first time and include rich details about the Football, its contents, and the arrangements for carrying it. While such interviews have to be read cautiously and skeptically, the fact that they took place only months after the events lends them credibility.

One interesting episode that Manchester describes in a footnote is how, in early 1961, President Kennedy’s security staff offered a satchel and a military aide to Vice President Lyndon Johnson, who turned down the arrangement for reasons still unknown.Excerpts from the interviews, on file at the Wesleyan University Library, are published here for the first time and include rich details about the Football, its contents, and the arrangements for carrying it. While such interviews have to be read cautiously and skeptically, the fact that they took place only months after the events lends them credibility.

One interesting episode that Manchester describes in a footnote is how, in early 1961, President Kennedy’s security staff offered a satchel and a military aide to Vice President Lyndon Johnson, who turned down the arrangement for reasons still unknown. While future revelations may help clarify Johnson’s reasons for declining the offer, Manchester’s discussion with Maxwell Taylor confirmed that high level military leaders were concerned that he had not received a briefing about the “contents” of the Football before he became President in Dallas on November 22, 1963. [3] Years later, after he left office, Johnson suggested that he found the presence of the military aide and the Football to be stressful. [4]

One element of the Football’s contents that is seldom discussed is a set of Presidential Emergency Action Documents—previously known as Emergency Action Papers—consisting of presidential proclamations and executive orders on a range of issues for use in a national emergency. [5] Originating during the Eisenhower administration as Emergency Action Documents (or EADs), they derived their presumed “legal authority” from the “extraordinary powers of the President under the Constitution.” While none of them appear to have been declassified, Federal Emergency Plan D-Minus , dated April 1959, outlined them, including one declaring “the existence of an unlimited national emergency and a state of civil defense emergency.” Left unsaid was an imponderable: Who, after nuclear war had begun, would be around to implement, much less obey, such edicts?

One of the proclamations authorized the Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization to determine when a state government or one of its political subdivisions was “unable or unwilling to perform essential civil functions” and to “take responsibility for those functions” with the assistance of military commanders who had resources “not needed for the conduct of military operations.” This and another proclamation authorizing the Secretary of Defense “to maintain public order and enforce Federal, State and local laws” when “necessary” would have created the conditions for the imposition of martial law.While such interviews have to be read cautiously and skeptically, the fact that they took place only months after the events lends them credibility.

One of the proclamations authorized the Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization to determine when a state government or one of its political subdivisions was “unable or unwilling to perform essential civil functions” and to “take responsibility for those functions” with the assistance of military commanders who had resources “not needed for the conduct of military operations.” This and another proclamation authorizing the Secretary of Defense “to maintain public order and enforce Federal, State and local laws” when “necessary” would have created the conditions for the imposition of martial law. Another proclamation authorized the “apprehension of persons considered dangerous to national security,” while an executive order established an Office of Censorship to “censor communications crossing the borders of the United States.”

The EADs were later renamed Civil Emergency Action Documents and then Presidential Emergency Action Documents, and their contents have been revised over time, but most of the details remain classified.While future revelations may help clarify Johnson’s reasons for declining the offer, Manchester’s discussion with Maxwell Taylor confirmed that high level military leaders were concerned that he had not received a briefing about the “contents” of the Football before he became President in Dallas on November 22, 1963. [3] Years later, after he left office, Johnson suggested that he found the presence of the military aide and the Football to be stressful. [4]

The EADs were later renamed Civil Emergency Action Documents and then Presidential Emergency Action Documents, and their contents have been revised over time, but most of the details remain classified. The results of a 1962 updating, consisting mostly of changes in presentation and organization, were forwarded from Edward McDermott, the Director of the Office of Emergency Planning, to Captain Tazewell Shepard on the White House staff on October 29, 1962.Another proclamation authorized the “apprehension of persons considered dangerous to national security,” while an executive order established an Office of Censorship to “censor communications crossing the borders of the United States.”

The EADs were later renamed Civil Emergency Action Documents and then Presidential Emergency Action Documents, and their contents have been revised over time, but most of the details remain classified. The results of a 1962 updating, consisting mostly of changes in presentation and organization, were forwarded from Edward McDermott, the Director of the Office of Emergency Planning, to Captain Tazewell Shepard on the White House staff on October 29, 1962. The contents were essentially the same as the EADs that Eisenhower had turned over to the Kennedy administration, although McDermott had plans to “improve” them and add new directives. McDermott said the directives included documents designed to clothe “the President with formal emergency powers, to provide control over individuals for internal security purposes, to dispose of normal administrative requirements, to augment the armed forces, to assume functions of State and local governments in exceptional circumstances, to mobilize resources, and miscellaneous others.” McDermott also had some misgivings, suggesting that some of the orders, which he did not specify, were of “doubtful legality.”

Where McDermott took the PEADs review process after October 1962 remains to be learned but reviewing and updating occurred during the Carter administration. One of the characteristics of Jimmy Carter's Presidency was his significant interest in crisis planning, including the problem of emergency relocation and continuity of government arrangements in the event of nuclear war.McDermott said the directives included documents designed to clothe “the President with formal emergency powers, to provide control over individuals for internal security purposes, to dispose of normal administrative requirements, to augment the armed forces, to assume functions of State and local governments in exceptional circumstances, to mobilize resources, and miscellaneous others.” McDermott also had some misgivings, suggesting that some of the orders, which he did not specify, were of “doubtful legality.”

Where McDermott took the PEADs review process after October 1962 remains to be learned but reviewing and updating occurred during the Carter administration. One of the characteristics of Jimmy Carter's Presidency was his significant interest in crisis planning, including the problem of emergency relocation and continuity of government arrangements in the event of nuclear war. This was a period when perceived vulnerabilities made government and military officials more and more apprehensive about the security of command and control systems. Moreover, as recent biographers have pointed out, compared to many of his predecessors, Jimmy Carter was personally secure enough to give Vice President Walter Mondale a significant role in national security policy because he recognized that in a dire emergency the Vice President had to be ready to assume the presidency. Accordingly, Mondale was assigned a Football and one was eventually deployed to his official residence. [6]

In keeping with the strong interest in emergency planning, White House officials worried about the status of the PEADs.This was a period when perceived vulnerabilities made government and military officials more and more apprehensive about the security of command and control systems. Moreover, as recent biographers have pointed out, compared to many of his predecessors, Jimmy Carter was personally secure enough to give Vice President Walter Mondale a significant role in national security policy because he recognized that in a dire emergency the Vice President had to be ready to assume the presidency. Accordingly, Mondale was assigned a Football and one was eventually deployed to his official residence. [6]

In keeping with the strong interest in emergency planning, White House officials worried about the status of the PEADs. Not only was Zbigniew Brzezinski’s military assistant, William Odom, troubled over the “legality” of some of them, President Carter’s second cousin, Hugh Carter, Jr., who played a key role in White House emergency planning, had become “concerned that the entire PEADs series is obsolete given the total devastation which could be expected from a thermonuclear attack on the US.” Those concerns necessitated “an updated approach to reconstituting order and organization at the local, state and federal levels of the Government.”

What exactly Hugh Carter’s worries meant for the updating of the PEADs is not clear, but the review had been completed by May 1980, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) turned over the updated documents to the White House so they could be included in the Football. What happened to the order concerning habeas corpus is not known. However, it is clear that some legal issues had not been entirely resolved. What happened to the order concerning habeas corpus is not known. However, it is clear that some legal issues had not been entirely resolved. In one case, FEMA director John Macy said it was inappropriate to seek OMB and DOJ clearance for a PEAD on national resources mobilization that was initially approved by President Richard Nixon in 1970 “because of its reliance on the ‘implied’ powers of the President and in the absence of a definitive legal basis for the PEAD.”

Future declassifications and archival research may shed additional light on the role of the PEADs in federal emergency planning and their evolution during the decades of the Cold War. In particular, long-pending declassification requests now before the Interagency Security Classification Appeals Panel may someday lead to the release of more details on the Football arrangements during the 1960s.

Note: Thanks to Brenna Larson, Special Collections, Wesleyan University Library, for providing access to the William Manchester interviews, the West Virginia Department of Archives and History for providing a copy of an article from the Bluefield Daily Telegraph , and Bill Geerhart for sharing information and insights on the history of the Football. Thanks also to Sarah Barca, George W. Bush Presidential Library, and Youlanda Logan, Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, for information on photographs.

The review of the new set of PEADs was apparently in its final stages with Clift observing that he considered the “proposed changes primarily in terms of whether or not they make it easier or more difficult to govern under circumstances following a nuclear exchange.” He said that two that he saw as the “most significant directives in terms of actually governing the country” had “been modified in ways which are to me not altogether clear in their impact.” What specifically concerned Clift were the “limits and/or constraints placed on the authority of the Office of Defense Resources (new PEAD 5) to carry out its many tasks” and “the Secretary of State’s (new PEADs 16 and 17) ability to constrain foreign diplomatic and other related activities within the United States.” Two previous PEADs concerning censorship and the temporary suspension of habeas corpus had been recommended for deletion.

Especially concerning to Clift was that some of the language in the PEADs concerning the role of Congress and the “peacetime rights and privileges” of citizens could have the effect of “unnecessarily constraining the effectiveness of those who would be charged with attempting to govern the country during a time of extreme hardship and deprivation.” The implication was that, in a nuclear crisis, presidential authority was necessary to supplant traditional constitutional rights.

Clift reported that Hugh Carter has become “concerned that the entire PEADs series is obsolete given the total devastation which could be expected from a thermonuclear attack on the US -- and the need for an updated approach to reconstituting order and organization at the local, state and federal levels of the Government.” President Carter had written on one of Hugh Carter’s memos that Brzezinski and Mondale needed to look into this further. Noting how “complex” the problem of updating the PEADs was, Clift observed that Hugh Carter was under pressure from the Pentagon on SIOP and on National Command Authority survivability issues, problems that were compounded by understaffed and ineffective civilian emergency planning leadership. The Federal Preparedness Agency has “not been up to the challenge.”

According to Clift, a “full time FEMA Director with savvy and political clout should be appointed to take the lead for the NSC in the PEAD update.” His closing recommendation was that Mondale “schedule a meeting with Zbig and Hugh Carter to receive a status report on the PEADs update and to invite their recommendations on steps to expedite the update.”

Click on the image to see all photos

[1] . Allen-Scott report, Bluefield (West Virginia) Daily Telegraph , 27 July 1965. Confirming some degree of presidential discomfort with the Football system was a 1965 memo in the files of General Chester Clifton reporting that Johnson discussed with McNamara an arrangement to eliminate the “need for an aide to be in constant attendance upon him.” See Untitled two-part draft memorandum , n.d. [1965] in files of Lyndon B. Johnson Presidential Library. The quoted language is crossed out in the memorandum, suggesting that Clifton did not want it to appear in a final version (if one was ever produced).

[2] . Bob Horton, “Instant Nuclear Readiness; ’Box’ Follows President,” The Baltimore Sun , 21 November 1965.

[3] . William Manchester, The Death of a President November 20-November 25, 1963 (New York: Harper and Row, 1967), 261.

[4] . Garret Graff, Raven Rock The Story of the U.S. Government’ s Secret Plan to Save Itself—While the Rest of Us Die (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2012), 177, 250.

[5] . An important exception is the Brennan Center’s research report on Presidential Emergency Action Documents , updated 26 May 2022.

[6] . For Mondale’s precedent-setting vice-presidency, see Jonathan Alter, His Very Best: Jimmy Carter, A Life (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2020), 288-290, and Kai Bird, The Outlier: The Unfinished Presidency of Jimmy Carter (New York: Penguin Press, 2021).

[7] . Also cited in David Krugler, This Is Only a Test: How Washington D.C. Prepared for Nuclear War (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006), 176.

[8] . Manchester, The Death of a President, 230.

[9] . Bill Gulley with Mary Ellen Reese, Breaking Cover (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1980), 14-15, 178-191.

Part III: Photos of the Football and Its Holders During the George W. Bush Presidency

Documents

Letter from Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower, Personnel, and Reserve Charles Finucane to General Andrew J. Goodpaster, 9 December 1959, Top Secret
Dec 9, 1959 | Source DDEL, Office of the Staff Secretary Records, Subject Series, Department of Defense Subseries, Box 2, Dept. of Defense Vol. III (9)

Memorandum from Edward A. McDermott to Captain Tazewell Shepard, “Civil Emergency Action Documents,” with attachments, October 29, 1962, Top Secret
Oct 29, 1962 | Source National Archives, Record Group (RG) 396, Records of Office of Emergency Preparedness, Accession 64A927, box 2, Emergency Planning [7]
One of the early elements of the Football or “black bag” were Civil Emergency Action Documents, later known as Presidential Emergency Action documents (PEADS). Eisenhower had bequeathed the Kennedy administration 24 of the documents, which Office of Emergency Planning Director Edward McDermott sent in a repackaged and reorganized format to President Kennedy’s Naval Aide Captain Tazewell Shepard, who had the emergency planning portfolio at the White House. President Kennedy had not formally approved the documents. organized format to President Kennedy’s Naval Aide Captain Tazewell Shepard, who had the emergency planning portfolio at the White House. President Kennedy had not formally approved the documents. Whether the Cuban Missile Crisis encouraged the update or if it was already in the works is not known. According to McDermott, the 24 documents that he was sending to Shepard were ones that had been cleared by the agencies, not necessarily the most important items. According to McDermott, the contents of the EADs were essentially the same as the ones that Eisenhower had left the Kennedy administration, although he had plans to “improve” them and add new directives. He thought some were of “doubtful legality,” although he did not specify which ones. Their purpose was to “to clothe the President with formal emergency powers, to provide control over individuals for internal security purposes, to dispose of normal administrative requirements, to augment the armed forces, to assume functions of State and local governments in exceptional circumstances, to mobilize resources, and miscellaneous others.”

William Manchester Interview with Major General Chester Clifton, 21 April 1964, excerpts
Apr 21, 1964 | Source Wesleyan University Library, Special Collections, William Manchester Papers
General Chester Clifton, one of the White House military aides who was with Kennedy on the day he was assassinated, explained that they always stayed close to the President because of the “emergency war orders” kept inside the Football. According to Clifton, “Kennedy was the first President to realize” that the exceedingly short period of warning before a missile attack necessitated the Football arrangement. “The Joint Chiefs of Staff got through to him and explained it.” The warrant officers who carried the black bag would be in closer proximity to the President than the military aides, but in a crisis the aide was responsible for getting the emergency orders “to the President and ‘instanter as possible.’” According to Clifton, Kennedy “had us brief Lyndon Johnson on the black bag,” and that “we told Lyndon Johnson on Air Force One,” just after Kennedy was assassinated, “that this black back was around.” Nevertheless, as the interviews with Maxwell Taylor and Tazewell Shepard suggest, neither were confident that Johnson was aware of the Football’s contents.

William Manchester interview with General Godfrey McHugh, 6 May 1964, excerpts
May 6, 1964 | Source Wesleyan University Library, Special Collections, William Manchester Papers
Also at Dallas with Kennedy on the day of his assassination, McHugh also provided Manchester with details on some of the Football’s contents. In addition to information on how to communicate with the British Prime Minister and the French President, the Football included booklets with explanations of attack options and estimated casualties. The military information was presented in “cartoons and color schemes to make the thing more understandable to the President.” The warrant officer who carried the satchel knew the combination for unlocking it but did not know what was inside. Only the military aide knew the contents.

William Manchester Interview with Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Maxwell Taylor, 5 May 1964, excerpt
May 5, 1964 | Source Wesleyan University Library, Special Collections, William Manchester Papers
Taylor explained his concern about the Football on the day of the Kennedy assassination. “I knew that the courier with the satchel was with the President and that the contents of the satchel had not been explained to Lyndon Johnson.” According to Manchester’s account in Death of a President , the previous Vice President, Richard Nixon had been assigned a “satchel,” and Naval Aide Shepard saw to it that one was given to Vice President Lyndon Johnson, but said it was “returned with the explanation that Johnson did not want it.” [8]

William Manchester Interview with Captain Tazewell Shepard, 1 May 1964
May 1, 1964 | Source Wesleyan University Library, Special Collections, William Manchester Papers
According to McHugh, Tazewell Shepard, who ran the White House emergency plans office, was “closest” to the Football set-up. Shepard recounted that his responsibilities included developing plans for relocating the President in a crisis and managing the contents of the Football “whenever and wherever the President goes.” The exception was when the President was in Washington, D.C., in which case the satchel stayed at the White House and did “not chase him around,” in part because the President remained in constant contact with the Defense Department. The protocol eventually extended to local events. For example, when Ronald Reagan was at the Washington Hilton in March 1981, a Football carrier was in his entourage. Like others, that officer ducked to the ground during the attempted assassination of the President. n his entourage. Like others, that officer ducked to the ground during the attempted assassination of the President. Shepard did not travel to Texas after the assassination but met Air Force One when it returned to Andrews Air Force Base with President Johnson, who had just been sworn in. He recalled that General Taylor and Secretary of Defense McNamara were there and “were concerned that I brief the new President on emergency plans.” Following Taylor’s instructions, Shepard met with Johnson at the Executive Office Building that evening.

[Federal Preparedness Agency] Briefing for Vice President Mondale, prepared by Dalimil Kybal, 11 August 1977, Unclassified
Aug 11, 1977 | Source Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, National Security Adviser Brzezinski Material: General Odom File. box 26, Federal Preparedness Agency, 2/76-12/77

Memorandum from William Odom to Zbigniew Brzezinski, “Weekly Report,” 26 October 1978, Secret
Oct 26, 1978 | Source Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, National Security Adviser Brzezinski Material: General Odom File, box 59, Weekly Reports, 2/77-12/78
Briefing Brzezinski on the problem of “badly out of date” PEADs, Odom suggested that some were “even illegal.” With OMB continuing to sit on the revised PEADs, the problem reached Hugh Carter, Jr., the President’s second cousin, who played an informal role in emergency management issues. Carter and the NSC told OMB Director James McIntyre about the problem, who quickly approved the PEADs (apparently he was unaware of them). Nevertheless, Odom believed it necessary to do more to improve the PEADs once “we work out how the civil side of the Federal government would transit from peacetime to wartime functions.”

Memorandum from Denis Clift, Assistant to the Vice President for National Security Affairs, to Tred Davis and Marty Beaman, Assistant Director, White House Military Office, “PEADs,” 29 November 1978, Secret
Nov 29, 1978 | Source Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, Walter F. Mondale Papers, box 112, Vice Presidential Chronological Files, 11/1978

Memorandum from Denis Clift to Vice President Mondale, with Mondale memorandum attached, “PEADS,” 1 March 1979, Secret
Mar 1, 1979 | Source Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, Walter F. Mondale Papers, box 113, Vice Presidential Chronological Files, 3/1979
Denis Clift, Mondale’s national security assistant, referred to a memorandum from Hugh Carter (not attached) concerning the update of the PEADs. While further review and refinement was necessary, the “interim” PEADs had been filed in the Footballs assigned to the President and the Vice President. In his memorandum, Mondale expressed agreement with that approach.

Memorandum from Denis Clift to Hugh Carter/Marty Beaman, “Security for the Second Vice Presidential FOOTBALL,” 28 March 1979
Mar 28, 1979 | Source Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, Walter F. Mondale Papers, box 113, Vice Presidential Chronological Files, 4/1979
This memo from Clift reports that, in accordance with the White House Emergency Plan (WHEP), a Football has been placed at the Vice President’s residence. Clift recommends that Beaman and Hugh Carter “take the time to inspect the arrangements which have been made for its control” so they would all “feel confident about the security of that very sensitive item.”

Memorandum from Denis Clift to Vice President Mondale, “Update of Presidential Emergency Action Documents (PEADs),” 26 April 1979, Top Secret
Apr 26, 1979 | Source Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, Walter F. Mondale Papers, box 113, Vice Presidential Chronological Files, 4/1979

Memorandum from William Odom to Zbigniew Brzezinski, “Meeting with the Vice President and Hugh Carter on the PEADs and FEMA,” 14 May 1979, Secret
May 14, 1979 | Source Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, National Security Adviser Brzezinski Material: General Odom File, box 8, Chron, 2/1/79-6/18/79
Odom believed that nothing could be decided at the meeting with Mondale and Hugh Carter, but he saw a few points about C 3 I and FEMA that were worth making. The PEADs updating has been completed. The larger question was whether “the system of NCA survivability and war mobilization, implicit in the PEADs [is] adequate for today.” Odom explained that, “Our mobilization and economic emergency management system (as spelled out briefly in the PEADs) is neither adequate for nuclear war conditions nor adaptable to lesser contingency plans.” He saw a “real danger that FEMA's Executive Order will not even include the proper authority to permit a solution to this problem.” The confirmation of John Macy as FEMA director was necessary “to make us more confident” in the ongoing review of emergency management and economic mobilization policy.

Memorandum from William Odom to Zbigniew Brzezinski, “Presidential Emergency Action Documents (PEADS),” with attachments, 6 May 1980, Secret
May 6, 1980 | Source Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, National Security Adviser Brzezinski Material: General Odom File, box 11, Chron, 3/1/80-6/30/80
Odom informed Brzezinski that FEMA director John Macy had sent in the revised PEADS, the result of “the first thorough up-date in a decade.” Brzezinski sent the revised PEADs to Hugh Carter for “proper disposition.” In his letter enclosing the PEADs, Macy informed Brzezinski that they “should be transmitted directly to the White House Military Office and substituted for the documents which are now in the President’s ‘emergency portfolio.’” He noted that President Nixon had approved PEAD No. 5, “Providing for the Mobilization of the Nation's Resources,” in March 1970 and that it had been only slightly revised during the recent update. “Because of its reliance on the ‘implied’ powers of the President and in the absence of a definitive legal basis for the PEAD, it was deemed inappropriate to seek OMB and DOJ clearance at this time.”

Memorandum from [Chief of Staff] Richard Moe to the Vice President, “Talking Points for Luncheon with the President --Tuesday, August 5, 1980,” with attachments, 4 August 1980, Secret
Aug 4, 1980 | Source Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, Walter F. Mondale Papers, box 203
One item for discussion in the conversation recorded here was the recent publication by Bill Gulley, former Director of the White House Military Office, of a “kiss and tell” memoir, Breaking Cover (Simon & Schuster). Moe found pages 178-194 “quite remarkable for the detailed revelations they offer on certain parts of the National Command Authority, White House Emergency Procedures, the NEACP aircraft, the Football, relocation sites and emergency procedures.” Odom had copies of the pages and was preparing a guidance memorandum. Moe recommended to the Vice President that Harold Brown and Zbigniew Brzezinski provide him “and the President with an assessment of any damage caused -- clearly this does cause damage – and recommendations for remedying the problem.” Among the revelations in Gulley’s book was that the “White House Emergency Procedures” manual “sets out exactly what’s supposed to happen in the event of a sudden attack,” including the steps that the Pentagon will “take to notify the White House and how the White House will respond.” In a crisis, it was the task of the White House Military Office to ensure that the President gets the Football “because it’s only the President who can issue the orders.” Nevertheless, Gulley found that the “entire retaliatory strike capability is vulnerable” because the President is “scandalously underprotected against a full military attack.” [9]
