CBS NEWS INQUIRY
"The Warren Report"!
Part IV
as broadcast over the
CBS TELEVISION NETWORK
Wednesday, June 28, 1967
10:00-11:00 PM, EDT
With CBs NEwS Correspondents
Walter Cronkite
Dan Rather
Eric Sevareid
and
KRLD-TVNews DirectorEddie Barker
EXECUTIVE PRODUCER: Leslie Midgley
1967. Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc. All rights reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---dents
Walter Cronkite
Dan Rather
Eric Sevareid
and
KRLD-TVNews DirectorEddie Barker
EXECUTIVE PRODUCER: Leslie Midgley
1967. Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc. All rights reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WALTER CRoNKITE: Good evening.  For the past three nights
we have been examining the circumstances of the assassination
of President John F.Kennedy.(
On Sunday, we returned to
Dealey Plaza to recreate that fatal motorcade ride beneath·
the windows of the Texas School Book Depository.
Believing that rifle tests conducted by the Warren Commission
were less than adequate, we conducted new tests, more closely
simulating the conditions of the actual murder.’
Wefound
hitherto undiscovered evidence in film of the murder itself,
          a
indicated in the warren Report to get the shots off. And we
concluded that beyond reasonable doubt, Oswald was indeed
at least one of the killers.
But was there more than one? On Monday night, we interviewed
eyewitnesses who said all the shots came from the School Book
Depository. And others equally insistent that there were
shots from the grassy knoll overlooking the motorcade itself.
We tested more exhaustively than did the Warren Commission the
extremely controversial single bullet theory, found that one
bullet could, indeed, have wounded both the President and
Governor Connally. We heard autopsy surgeon, James Humes,
break three and a half years of silence to report that he'has
re-examined the X-rays and photographs of the President's
body,.and still has no doubt that ail the shots struck from
behind.
Weconcluaed that in the absence of solid evidence that there
were other assassins, and with the indications that one killer
could account for ali the shots, there was 'no second gunman.
But, even as the only gunman, was Uswald, as the warren Report
suggests, a lone madman? Or was he the trigger-man for a
conspiracy to kill the President?
On Tuesday, we considered such frequently mentioned indications
of conspiracy as the murder of Officer J. D. Tippit, found
that he was legitimately ordered from his normal patrol area
as part of a redeployment of police forces to cope with the
assassination.
Found too, that a partial descripticn of the
assassin, _broadcast on police radio, could account for Tippit's
stopping 0swald.
We found the nightclub owner, Jack Ruby, the man who killed
Oswald, was a strange, mercurial creature given to hitting
first and asking questions afterward. And none of his closest
verylong.
We presented the conspiracy theories of New Orleans District
Attorney Jim Garrison, theories which Garrison says he will
present in a court of'law, but which today remain a series
of largely unsupported statements. And we concluded that, forew Orleans District
Attorney Jim Garrison, theories which Garrison says he will
present in a court of'law, but which today remain a series
of largely unsupported statements. And we concluded that, for

--- PAGE BREAK ---Attorney Jim Garrison, theories which Garrison says he will
present in a court of'law, but which today remain a series
of largely unsupported statements. And we concluded that, for

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
now at least, no conspiracy theory of the assassination has
been proved.
Tonight, we turn from the assassination to the Warren Commission
itseif.’ Having found that the Commission's conclusions, in the
main, still stand up almost three years after published, we: "
now ask our fourth and last fundamental question:
Why doesn!t
America believe the warren Report?
ANNOUNCER:  This is a CBS NEWS INQUIRY: "The Warren Report."
Here is Walter Cronkite.
CRONKITE: Tonight, as in our preceding reports, my_colleague
Dan Rather and I are going to break this fundamental question
into subsidiary questions. For the first part of the broadcast,
we will ask: Should America believe the Warren Report? we
will explore just how well and honestly the Warren Commission
operated, to what extent it deserves belief.
The second question will be: Could America believe the Warren
Report? And we'll try to determine whether there are elements
in' the way people, and particularly Americans, think about
great events, which would prevent their accepting the warren
Report, however trustworthy it might be.
But this final broadcast will be different.. The questions we
will ask tonight, we can only ask. T
Tonight's answers will be
not ours, but yours.
RATHER:As we take up whether or not America should believe
the warren Report, we'll hear first from the man who perhaps
was the gadfly of'the warren Commission. He demanded the right
to appear before it as a defense counsel for the dead Lee Harvey
Oswala. Refused, he began his own investigation of the
President's death, a'study that produced first the best selling
attack on the Warren Commission, "Rush To Judgment," and now
a movie of the same name.
Mark Lane has lectured all over the world on his owm theories
of the assassination, theories which he spelled out for Bill
Stout.
MARK LANE: "There was one conclusion, one basic conclusion that
the Commission reached, I think, which can be supported by the
facts, and that was the Commission's conclusion that Ruby killed
Oswald.
But, of course, that took place on television. . It
would have been very difficult to deny that.·But, outside of
that,·there's'not an important.conclusion which can be
supported by the facts and--and this is the problem.took place on television. . It
would have been very difficult to deny that.·But, outside of
that,·there's'not an important.conclusion which can be
supported by the facts and--and this is the problem.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3
And what the Commission was thinking and what they were doing
is still hidden from us， of course.
The minutes of the
Commission meetings are'locked up in the National Archives
and no one can see them.
A vast amount of the evidence，F.B.I.
reports, C.I.A. reports, which may be directly related to the
information we should have, are also locked up in the Archives..
No one can see that.
The photographs and X-rays of the President's body, taken at
was begun, taken by Naval technicians, which in and of .themselves
might resolve the whole question as to whether or not there, was
a conspiracy, cannot be seen by anyone today and, in fact, not .
documents in the case, the photographs and the X-rays.
Andnot
one lawyer for the Commission ever saw--was curious enough to
examine the most important evidence.
people,'that the apathy which has seized us for all of these
years be permitted to remain uninterrupted by a factual
presentation of what happened. The American people woulde most important evidence.
people,'that the apathy which has seized us for all of these
years be permitted to remain uninterrupted by a factual
presentation of what happened. The American people would

which took the life of ycur President.
CRONKITE: But Mr. Lane, who accuses the Commission of playing
fast and loose with the'evidence, does not always allow facts
to get in the way of his own theories.1
In "Rush To Judgment,"
came from the right and not from the rear."]
Lane then quotes
Associated Press photographer James Altgens, and another
eyewitness,(
Charles Brehm, as giving testimony that would support
the idea of a killer on the grassy knoll.
Yet Mr. Aitgens, as
we saw Monday night, is entirely certain that all of the shots
came from behind, a fact that Mr. Lane does not mention.
As for Mr. Brehm, Eddie Barker discovered that he holds no
brief either for'the grassy knoll theory or for the use of his
words by Mark Lane.
EDDIE BARKER: Well now, some critics of the Warren Report have
taken your testimony, or interviews with you, to indicate that
you thought :the shots came from behind the fence over there.
what about that?:
CHARLES BREHM: well, as I say, it was not a number_of critics.
It was one critic, Mark Lane, who takes very great liberties with
adding to my quotation. I never said that the_-- any shot came

meto have positively identified the--what I saw fly over
here -- his skull -- although I told him I could not -- I did
not -- I thought it was but I could not. So, he has added

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4
his interpretations to what I said, and consequently thatis
where the story comes from that --'that I said that the shots
comefromupthere.
No shot came from up there at any time
auring the whole fiasco that afternoon.ns to what I said, and consequently thatis
where the story comes from that --'that I said that the shots
comefromupthere.
No shot came from up there at any time
auring the whole fiasco that afternoon.

remarks out of context to support his theories。
Perhaps the
        o
himself a defense attorney for Lee Harvey Oswald--and a defense
attorney's primary duty is not to abstract truth, but to his
client.
There exists, however, a less partisan, and therefore perhaps.
more disturbing critique of the Warren' Commission Report.
RATHER:
One of the most influential attacks on the work of
Edward J. Epstein. It began as a thesis in political science,
Mr Epstein deciding to find out just how the Warren Commission
had gone about solving this crime of the century.
He studied the 26 volumes of hearings, then interviewed five
of the seven Commission members, General Counsel J. Lee Rankin
that began to emerge disturbed him.
EPSTEIN: well, there were three, I think, levels of complaint。
The first one was the institutional, you might say: the general
problem that a government has when it searches for truth.
The
problem of trying to have an autonomous investigation, free
from political interference and at the same time, itis dealing
by its very nature with a political problem.
Thesecond level might becalled theorganizational levelof-
was the Warren Commission organized in a way that prevented it
from finding facts.
And here my findings were that by using
a part time staff and by the Commission's detaching themselves
from the investigation--in other words, not actively partaking
in the investigation--it raised some problems as to whether
the Warren Commission's investigation went deep enough, so
that if there was evidence of a conspiracy, they would'have in
factfoundit.
The third level of my criticism concerned the evidence itself,
and this concerned_the problem of when the Warren Commission
was come--confronted with a very complex problem. 1
For example,
the contradiction.between the F.B.I. summary report on the
Aau mou. -- pueu ut peu Aaua taodai Asdone aut pue Asdone
solved this problem,whether they simply glossed over it or
whether they: called witnesses and -- and this -- this, of
course, brought up the questions of -- of a second assassin.Asdone aut pue Asdone
solved this problem,whether they simply glossed over it or
whether they: called witnesses and -- and this -- this, of
course, brought up the questions of -- of a second assassin.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5
RATHER: One of the men Mr. Epstein interviewed for his
"Inquest" is Arlen Specter, now District Attorney of
Philadelphia, but in 1964, one of the principal investigators
for the warren Commission, charged with establishing _the basic
facts of the assassination.Mr.Specter thinks the Commission
did its job well and came up with the right answers.
cases that seldom would you ever find a case which was as
persuasive that Oswald was the assassin and, in fact, the lone
assassin, and we convict people in _the criminal courts every
day right here in City Hall, Philadelphia. And the times·the
death penalties are imposed'or life imprisonment - so thatg-
so that the case does fit together.
RATHER:  In separate interviews we asked critic Epstein and
investigator Specter to discuss some of the central issues
did its work.r life imprisonment - so thatg-
so that the case does fit together.
RATHER:  In separate interviews we asked critic Epstein and
investigator Specter to discuss some of the central issues
did its work.

confidence in the American government.And for this he had to
pick_seven very respectable men, men who would lend their name
and lend probity to' the report.' And so that the problem was,
in any seven men he picked of this sort, they would have very
little time for the investigation.
They would also have two purposes.
One purpose would be to
find the truth，all the facts.
The other purpose would be to
allay rumors, to dispel. conspiracy theories and material of
that sort.
SPECTER:
My view is that there is absolutely no foundation for
that type of a charge.when the President selected the
Commissioners, he chose men of unblemished reputation and very
high standing.
The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of·the
or to search for political truths.
Nor would Allen W. Dulles,
the former head of the.C.I.A., nor would John McCloy, with
his distinguished service in government, nor would the
Congressional or Senatorial representatives.
Now, the same thing. was true of the staff members. When it
came'time to select the individuals to serve as assistant
counsel and.general_counsel, men were chosen from various
.government.
EPSTEIN: For example, there were rumors concerning, the F,B.I,
or various intelligence agencies.
I noticed that there were
a number of memorandums.where.the--where--from Warren to the
Secretary of the Treasury, who was in charge of the Secret
Service, assuring that their findings wouldnit impair the
efficiency or the morale of the Secret Service.
And the same

--- PAGE BREAK ---he
Secretary of the Treasury, who was in charge of the Secret
Service, assuring that their findings wouldnit impair the
efficiency or the morale of the Secret Service.
And the same

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
thing again with the F.B.I., a question of whether there was
ever any possible connection between Oswald--and by connection
I don't mean anything sinister, I simply meant that he was
furnishing information and there were some rumors to this
effect--and they, rather than investigating these rumors, they
preferred to give it to the F.B.I. to investigate the rumors
themselves.As J. Lee Rankin, their General Counsel, said.
they would rather that agency clear its own_skirts.
Wel1
what this meant, of course, is that if the F.B.I. would have
discretion if it did find a connection between Oswald and
itself, the discretion of either reporting it or not reporting` 
it。
SPEcTER: In the main, the F.B.I. conducted the basic line"of
investigation. But the Commission used its independent
judgment wherever, say, the F.B.I. or the Secret Service was
involved itself so that'they would not investigate themselves
on the subjects where they were directly involved, and I think
criticizing the Federal Bureau'of Investigation and by
  o      
criticism.
On every subject where the Federal Bureau of Investigation had
contact with the area of investigation with which I was
intimately connected, I was fully satisfied with their
thoroughness and with their competency and with their integrity.
CRONKITE: Despite Mr. Specter!s defense, it is the opinion of
CBS NEwS that the role of the F.B.I.as well as the Secret
Service, both in the assassination and its aftermath, has been
less than glorious. And, to some extent, the performance of
these agencies weakens the credibility of the warren Report.
the assassination, we need look no further than the Report
itself.
It notes the Secret Service agents assigned to protect the
President had been drinking beer and liquor into the early
hours of the morning, that no search was made of buildings
along the route, and'that, quote: "The procedures of the
Secret Service,'designed to identify and protect against
persons considered serious threats to the President, were not
adequate prior to the assassination," end of quote.'
That is,
 a a   4 a      4g
did not know about him,.the F.B.I. did, and did not·see- fit to
mention his existence to the Secret Service.
The report issues
a mildly phrased yet devastating rebuke to the F.B.I.,.
charging
that it took an unduly restrictive view of its responsibilities.
Knowing what the F,B.I. knew about Oswald, the Report says, an
alert agencyshould have listed him as a potentialmenace to
the President. Yet, after the assassination, the Commissionresponsibilities.
Knowing what the F,B.I. knew about Oswald, the Report says, an
alert agencyshould have listed him as a potentialmenace to
the President. Yet, after the assassination, the Commission

arms.

--- PAGE BREAK ---what the F,B.I. knew about Oswald, the Report says, an
alert agencyshould have listed him as a potentialmenace to
the President. Yet, after the assassination, the Commission

arms.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

conducted by them for the Warren Commission were unsatisfactory.
In the first of these broadcasts we pointed out that to simulate
Oswald's problem_of hitting a moving target from a sixty foot
high perch, the F.B.I. conducted its firing tests on a fixed
target, from a 3O-foot height. Certainly, if CBs NEwS could
duplicate the conditions of the actual assassination for a
firing test, the feat's not beyond the capability of the F.B.I.
RATHER: There is also the case of the famous exhibit 399, the
bullet which the Commission thought wounded both the President
and Governor Connally, winding up on the Governor's stretcher
in Parkland Hospital.(
Critics of the Report, you will-remember,
on the President's stretcher. Yet, part of the now permanent
confusion surrounding the bullet and where it was found, must
be charged to the cavalier attitude of agents of both the F.B.I.
and the Secret Service at Parkland Hospital.
On Monday night, hospital attendant Darrell Tomlinson
described
how, in shoving a stretcher into place, he dislodged a spent
hospital's chief of security, O. P. Wright. Mr. Wright describes
whathappenedthen:
wRIGHT:I told him to withhold and not let anyone remove the
bullet, and I would get a hold of either the Secret Service or
the F.B.I., and turn it over to them.T
Thereby，it wouldn!t
have come through my hands at all.
Icontactea the F.B.I.and
they said they were not interested because it wasn't their
responsibility to make investigations.
So, I got a hold of a
Secret Serviceman and they didnit seem to be interested in
So I went back to the area where Mr. Tomlinson was and picked
up the bullet and put it. in my pocket, and I carried it some
30 or 40 minutes."A
And I gave it to a'Secret Serviceman that
was guarding the main. door into the emergency area.
BARKER: Mr. Wright, when you gave this bullet to the Secret
Service agent, did he mark it in any way?
WRIGHT:
No, sir.
BARKER:
whatdid hedowithit?
WRIGHT:.
Put it in his.lefthand coat pocket.
BARKER:
Well now,. did he ask your name or who you were or any
question at all about the bullet?
WRIGHT: No, Sir.
BARKER:
How did the conversation go? Do you remember?it in his.lefthand coat pocket.
BARKER:
Well now,. did he ask your name or who you were or any
question at all about the bullet?
WRIGHT: No, Sir.
BARKER:
How did the conversation go? Do you remember?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
wRIGHT:I just told him this was a bullet that was picked up
might be involved in the moving of Governor Connally.  And I
handed him the bullet, and he took it and looked at it and said,
"O.K.," and put it in'his pocket.him this was a bullet that was picked up
might be involved in the moving of Governor Connally.  And I
handed him the bullet, and he took it and looked at it and said,
"O.K.," and put it in'his pocket.

single piece of evidence in the assassination case.. Moreover,
the Warren Commission seriously compromised itself by allowing
the Secret Service, the F.B,I. and .the C.I.A. to investigate, 
questions involving their ow actions.
RATHER:The Commission had before it the hard fact that Oswald's
notebook contained the name, phone number and license_plate
number of Dallas F.B.I. agent, James Hosty. The F.B.I.'s
explanation was that Hosty had asked Ruth Paine,with whom
Marina Oswald was living, to let him know where Oswald was
staying, that he jotted down his phone number and that Marina
under prior instructions from her husband, also copied dow
Hosty's license plate.
CRONKITE:
a legitimate part of the investigation.
The Commission's handling
of that question is scarcely justifiable. What it did was to
accept as conclusive_ sworn affidavits from J. Edgar Hoover, and
other F.B.I. officials, that Oswald was never employed in any
capacity by the F.B.I.
The Commission says it also checked the F.B.I.'s own files,
but mentions no other investigation.  It foilowed the same
curious_procedure with the C.I.A., taking the word of top C.I.A.
was absolutely no type of informant or undercover relationship
between an agency of. the U. S. Government and Lee Harvey Oswald
at any time.
Now, elsewhere, the warren Report argues persuasively the
difficulty of proving a negative, of proving in that case that
Oswald was not a member of a conspiracy. You will remember that
. it hedged its conclusion, saying only that there was no evidence
. of a conspiracy.
Yet the Commission had no hesitation in asserting another far
of the U. S. Government ever.
Oswald's mother, Marguerite,
has always maintained that her son was a government agent--she
favors the C.I.A.--and that he was innocent of the assassination.another far
of the U. S. Government ever.
Oswald's mother, Marguerite,
has always maintained that her son was a government agent--she
favors the C.I.A.--and that he was innocent of the assassination.

--- PAGE BREAK ---U. S. Government ever.
Oswald's mother, Marguerite,
has always maintained that her son was a government agent--she
favors the C.I.A.--and that he was innocent of the assassination.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
BARKER:Mrs.Oswald,what sort of proof do you have that your
son was an agent of this government?
MARGUERITE C. OSwALD: Now, proof, Eddie - thatis a very strong
question.
I think the Warren Commission members themselves_gave
Marguerite Oswald the proof. They want us to believe that Lee
Dire Need discharge. Now, this is documented. This is what
they tell the American people.
They go into great details,
ahead of time because his mother had an accident - which'was
the truth, and it all went through the Red Cross legitimately.
And when he came home, he stayed with his mother three days.
We sort of know that story. And then he left for Russia. And,
so, this is supposed to be all cut and dried. But when you
read the Warren Report, and when you know the case - and this
is my case, and my sonis - so I know it, then you see a little
part where'the warren Commission says, the documentation says,
that Lee Harvey Oswald was given a passport by the State
Department to travel to Russia, the Dominican Republic, Cuba,
and et cetera; and at that time these countries were not
restricted.
Now, how can Lee Harvey Oswald get out of the Marine Corps
three months ahead of time on a Dire Need discharge, and at the
same time be issued a passport to travel?
CRONKITE:The evidence is overwhelming that Mrs. Oswald is
wrong as to whether her son did assassinate the President.
Yet, there remain disturbing indications that she may not be
quite so wrong about some kind of link between Oswald and
various intelligence agencies of the United States. The question
of whether Oswald had any relationship with the F.B.I. or^the
C.I.A. is not frivolous.
The agencies, of course, are silent.
Although the warren Commission had full power to conduct its
own independent investigation,it permitted the F.B.I.and the
C.I.A. to investigate themselves - and so cast a permanent
shadow on the answers.
(ANNOUNCEMENT)n Commission had full power to conduct its
own independent investigation,it permitted the F.B.I.and the
C.I.A. to investigate themselves - and so cast a permanent
shadow on the answers.
(ANNOUNCEMENT)

--- PAGE BREAK ---l power to conduct its
own independent investigation,it permitted the F.B.I.and the
C.I.A. to investigate themselves - and so cast a permanent
shadow on the answers.
(ANNOUNCEMENT)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
S         
Here again is Dan Rather.
RATHER: More than one critic of the Warren Report has attacked
it over the question of witnesses: which ones it heard, and.which
ofthoseitdecidedtobelieve.
Once again Edward Jay Epstein:
EPSTEIN:  I'm not sure that the Commission went below the
surface, but then no one could be sure of whether they did or
not because from what's visible, what we can see, the Commission
did seem to bring forth most of'the testimony, most of'the
relevant witnesses. ' whether these witnesses were saying all .
they knew, or whether there were other witnesses they should
have called is another.I think there are.You can show
examples of other witnesses the Commission didn't call.
There was a witness, Mrs. Eric Walther.
MRS. CAROLYN WALTHER: When I saw this man in the window with
a gun, and there was another man beside him, and he was holding
the gun down. His arms were resting on the window.
EPSTEIN: Well, they never called her, nor did a Commission
lawyer ever investigate her, or go down and ask her any questions.
RATHER: The Warren Commission and its staff interviewed 552
Yet the question of whether it interviewed the right witnesses;
and how it evaluated the testimony_ it did hear, are basic to any
decision on how well it did its job.
For instance, what about Mrs. Carolyn Walther,_who saw two men
and a gun in'a different window of the School'Book Depository;
and who never got to tell her story to the Commission?
CRONKITE:  David Belin, an attorney for the Commission staff,
who had a hand in the'decision not to call Mrs. walther after
her interviews with the F.B.I., has said that the Commission
simply could not hear every single person who had been in the
plaza that day。 He pointed out that Mrs. Walther's woman
companion,.standing next to her, told investigators Mrs. Walther
had never mentioned seeing_any men. Nevertheless, among those
 552 witnesses who were called by the Commission were many whose
testimony was considerably less relevant than Mrs. Walther's.
Perhaps. the Commission. should have had the chance to decide
whether or not she saw what she says she did.
     r 1    
being out, right now, what bothers you most about the Report?, s
Are there any - is there a central question, or central questions
that bother you most?not she saw what she says she did.
     r 1    
being out, right now, what bothers you most about the Report?, s
Are there any - is there a central question, or central questions
that bother you most?

--- PAGE BREAK ---says she did.
     r 1    
being out, right now, what bothers you most about the Report?, s
Are there any - is there a central question, or central questions
that bother you most?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
and that is - involves the autopsy that was performed on
President Kennedy.
And there was a conflict - really， a
contradiction, between the F.B.I. report on the autopsy, which
the F.B.I. says they received from the autopsy doctors - at
least they said in these reports, and the autopsy report
published by the Warren Commission. And I don't think we have
to get into.the exact details, but it wasn't absolute - if one
was true, the other couldn't be true.I
It concerned the path
of the bullet through President Kennedy's body. The F.B.I. said
it didn't go through, it only went in a short distance.T
The
Warren Report said it went - or the autopsy in the Warren'Report
said it went clean through and exited.
There was evidence, evidence that I think any lawyer or law
court would have demanded, and that is the actual photographs
of the autopsy and the X-rays.
CRONKITE:  Almost from the day the Warren Commission published
its report, its decision to omit those vital X-rays and
photographs has been under attack.
Only that physical evidence,
say the critics, can finally resolve the debate over how many
bullets struck the President, where they came from, and where
they went - the central questions in the argument over how
many assassins opened fire in Dealey Plaza.
  a   a o  o   
Warren Report is not the original autopsy, but has been changed
toconform with the Commission's theories.
You will remember
that after a silence of three and a half years the doctor who
headed the autopsy team at Bethesda Naval Hospital agreed to
re-examine those disputed photographs and X-rays, and review
his findings for these broadcasts.
And here is whatCaptain
James Humes told Dan Rather.
HUMES: The Report, as I stated, is exactly the way it was
delivered, and the way it was written.
CRONKITE: Yet it seems to CBS NEwS that one of the most serious
errors made by the Warren Commission was its decision not to
look at those photographs and X-rays, an error now compounded.
For the Kennedy family, which had possession of the autopsy
pictures, agreed last year to donate them to the National
Archives, but only with the stipulation that the pictures be
locked away.for five years - with only certain authorized
government personnel allowed to see them.
Now, no one would propose that those grim and tragic relics be
made generally available, to be flashed across television screens
and newspaper pages. But in view of their crucial bearing ,on
the entire assassination we believe that those films should now
pathologists, with the high qualifications of Captain Humes -
but without his status as a principal in the case.eir crucial bearing ,on
the entire assassination we believe that those films should now
pathologists, with the high qualifications of Captain Humes -
but without his status as a principal in the case.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
film of the actual assassination. The original is now the
private_property of LIFE Magazine. A LIFE executive refused
CBS NEwS permission to show you that film at any price, on the
grcund that it is, quote, "an invaluable asset of Time, :
Inc.
unquote.
And that, even though these broadcasts have
demonstrated that the film may contain vital undiscovered clues
to the assassination.
LIFE's decision means you cannot see the Zapruder film in its 
proper form, as motion picture film.
We believe that the
Zapruder fiim is an invaluable asset, not of Time, Inc.:- but
of the people of the United States.
(ANNOUNCEMENT)
ANNOUNCER: A CBS NEwS INQUIRY: "The Warren Report" continues.
Here again is Walter Cronkite.
CRONKITE:Until now we have heard a great deal about the Warren
Commission from its friends and its foes. But what of the
Warren Commission itself?  Where do its seven members stand
amidst this torrent of controversy over their performance?
Chief Justice Warren, who headed the Commission, has refused to
discuss the Warren Report publicly,, with CBS NEWS, or indeed
with anyone. But_one Commissioner has agreed to participate in
this broadcast. He is John McCloy, internationally known lawyer,
-Presidential adviser, and former High Commissioner for Germany.
Mr. McCloy, however objectively the Commission may have set
about its work, the Report itself - it seems to us - may haveknown lawyer,
-Presidential adviser, and former High Commissioner for Germany.
Mr. McCloy, however objectively the Commission may have set
about its work, the Report itself - it seems to us - may have

Oswald.1
Now, are you satisfied .that as much effort was put into
chailenging that case, as into establishing it? In other words,
did the accused man get a fair trial?
McCLoY:  I'll answer that in just a moment. If I may_just say
one thing, I - which I'd like to say.
In the first place, I
had some question as to the propriety of my appearing here as a
former member of the Commission, to comment on_the evidence of
the Commission - seems to be some question, and I think there
is some question about the advisability of'doing that. But I'm
quite prepared to talk about the procedures and the attitudes
of the Commission. And I'm - the scope of its conclusions, and
so forth. But I will now try to answer your question by
pointing out.that this was an investigation, and not a trial.
We didn't have any plaintiff and defendant. This wasn't what
is known as an adversary_proceding.. We were all called upon
to come down there to - I believe the wording was.- the
directive from the President, i"to satisfy yourself," that is

--- PAGE BREAK ---t
is known as an adversary_proceding.. We were all called upon
to come down there to - I believe the wording was.- the
directive from the President, i"to satisfy yourself," that is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
the Commission, "what were the relevant facts in relation to
this assassination." And that's the base from which we started.
Thereive been a number of suggestions that the Commission, for
example, was only motivated by a desire to put - to make things
quiet，so as to give comfort to the Administration, or give
vicious about this. Well, that wasn't the attitude that we
hadatall.
I know what my attitude, when I first went down, I was convinced
that there was something phony between the Ruby,and the Oswald
affair, that 48 hours after the assassination, here's thisman
shot in the police station. I was pretty skeptical about that.
But as time went on and we heard witnesses and weighed the
witnesses - but just think how silly this charge is.
Here we were seven men, I think five of us were Republicans.
We weren't beholden to'any Administration. .
Besides that,we
we had our own integrity to think of. A lot of people have said
that you can rely upon the distinguished character of the
Commission. You don't need to rely on the distinguished
character of the Commission. Maybe it was distinguished, and
maybe it wasn't. But you can rely on common sense. And you
know that seven men aren't going to get together, of that
character, and concoct a conspiracy, with all of'the members of
the staff'we had, with all of the investigative agencies - it
would have been a conspiracy of a character so mammoth and so
vast that it transcends any' - even some of the distorted
:charges of conspiracy on the part of Oswald.
CRONKITE: What did you do on those visits to Dallas?
McCLoY: Well, we went there and walked over the Dealey Plaza,
almost - it seems to me - foot by foot. We went into the
School Book Depository. We talked to all of the police
officers there - that were there, a number of the witnesses.
Visited the boarding house - the'boarding houses that Oswald
had lived in. Retraced, step by step, his - his movements from
the School Book Depository to the point at which he was
apprehended in the theatre. we chased ourselves up and down
the stairs, and timed ourselves. I sat in the window and held
the very rifle, with a four power scope on it, and sighted
down across it'- seeing. - must have been at the exact spot
that whoever the assassin was sat, with the carton of boxes as
a headrest; snapped the trigger many times; saw the - we had a
. car moving at the: alleged rate - well, I can go on.
But I'm just trying to give you the - the impression of what was
the fact that we did, assiduously, follow this evidence, and
work out as best we could' our own judgments in relation to it.
CRONKITE: Mr. McCloy, the Commission came into being late in
1963, went through to'September '64 - when you were dissolved.vidence, and
work out as best we could' our own judgments in relation to it.
CRONKITE: Mr. McCloy, the Commission came into being late in
1963, went through to'September '64 - when you were dissolved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t as best we could' our own judgments in relation to it.
CRONKITE: Mr. McCloy, the Commission came into being late in
1963, went through to'September '64 - when you were dissolved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
Could you have used more time? There is the charge that it was
your conclusions were rushed, that there was some stringent time
scale imposed.
McCLoY: The conclusions weren't rushed at all. If there's any
charge that can be made - and maybe this is an unjust chargez-
because I wasnit in charge of it - I'm inclined to think that
we perhaps rushed to print a little too soon.
But the
conclusions we arrived at in our own good time.
I think that if there's one thing that I would do over again, 
there, I think we were perhaps a little'over-sensitive to what
we understood was the sensitivities of the Kennedy family
against the production of colored photographs of the body, and
so forth.
regard to that - the pathology in respect to the President's
wounds.
Itwasourownchoicethatwedidn'tsubpoenathese
photographs, which were then in the hands of the Kennedy family.
I say, I'wish - I don't think we'd have subpoenaed them. We
could have gotten - Mr. Justice Warren was talking to the
Kennedy family about that at that time。 I thought that he was
really going to see them, but it turned out that he hadn't.
CRONKITE: It's not surprising that there should be some
skeptics, quite obviously, to any such report. But how do
youaccountforthefact thatthedisbelieversoutnumberthe
believers by such a wide margin?
McCLoY: I think that - if you want me to speculate on it, first
place there's the credulity of people generally. This is pretty
spicy, pretty scandalous. Bear in mind that there have been an
enormous amount of books written now, a large number of books
written, _pamphlets written - with the most shocking and
distorted statements in regard to the evidence;. with all of the
blurbs and all of the propaganda. You know the business that
goes with selling books.
the rather limited distribution of the Report, with the rather
prosaic accounts. _So, that I suppose this tends to build_the
thing up.
There. are other - there are other things that I
suppose you can talk about.
Strange attitudes.
The people
associate their politics with their belief, or their disbelief,
in the.Report.
I've gone to.a number of campuses, for example. I'm astounded
to find that they - the professors, as well as students - in
many of the cases, I don't say the majority, think that it's
illiberal to come'to the conclusion that a Communist inclinede. I'm astounded
to find that they - the professors, as well as students - in
many of the cases, I don't say the majority, think that it's
illiberal to come'to the conclusion that a Communist inclined

--- PAGE BREAK ---find that they - the professors, as well as students - in
many of the cases, I don't say the majority, think that it's
illiberal to come'to the conclusion that a Communist inclined

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
defector could have been the assassin of the President。It's
liberal to feel that it was the result of a right-wing
conspiracy in the hostile atmosphere of Texas. And nothing
that you can say or do seems to be able to dispel their viewpoint.
Maybe thereis a general distrust of government and government
agencies. I don't know. You_can speculate, Mr. Cronkite, as
much as I can about it. I - I - what I do resist, in a way
it irritates me, is any suggestion that the Commission were
motivated other'than by - and I'll leave myself out, there
were competent people in that Commission, people who -. who were:
experienced in investigation, like the Senators and the
Dulles, who was - people who were used to dealing with F.B.I.
reports, appraising
g them,weighing them,taking many of them
for something less than
their face value.
They went at this thing, and they came to this conclusion - and
there was nothing fraudulent about it,there was nothing
sinister about it - either conscious or subconscious, in my
judgment.  And I think that, as I say, that common sense would
teli you that this must be the case. 'We may have erred
somewhere along the line, but so far I haven't seen any
credible evidence which dispels the soundness of the fundamental
conclusions that we came to.
CRONKITE: In a way, we have come to the end of this report on
the Warren Report.'
For some three and a half hours now we have
presented what seemed to us the most significant new evidence
concerning
gthe assassination itself,and the President's
Commission to investigate the assassination.
Yet over these months, as we prepared this report, we began to
realize that there is one more question to be answered. That
question does not really involve the assassination, or the
Warren Commission - except indirectly. It involves the people
of the United States.
Webegan to wonder how it is possiblethat
ever read it.
Why, for instance; when fewer than two million copies of the
Report have been sold, a Gallup Poll indicates that six Americans
. Or why, by a considerable margin, more' people have bought copies
Such indications begin.to suggest that, completely.apart from
the merits of the'Warren Report itself, there may be something
abroad'in the land that wants not to believe the Report's
conclusion, that President Kennedy was the victim of a lone
madman, and
not of a conspiracy.
Our final question then: Could America believe the Warren Report?nd that wants not to believe the Report's
conclusion, that President Kennedy was the victim of a lone
madman, and
not of a conspiracy.
Our final question then: Could America believe the Warren Report?

--- PAGE BREAK ---believe the Report's
conclusion, that President Kennedy was the victim of a lone
madman, and
not of a conspiracy.
Our final question then: Could America believe the Warren Report?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
Dr. Seymour Lipset of Harvard is a distinguished sociologist
whose special field of interest is American behavior. And Dan
Rather asked him about this national reaction of disbelief to
the Warren Report.
LIPSET:S
Sort of thing, you know, we're terribly bothered by:
murders. You know, when you get'the kind of Jack the Ripper
thing, or this feliow in Texas who shot down - if someone's
killed because - for his money,,if someone's kidnapped for money,
if - this is OK.I mean, not that you - we don't want it.
But
at least you can understand what happened. If it - and,.
is
like a murder in the context of a crime for more money by'a?
gang. But if somebody's just shot down in the street by some
fellow who just picked up a gun and shot him, well, if it
happened to him it can happen to you.
If the President is assassinated, not because of a rational
plot, but because of just a nut who has a gun, then any - not
only any President can be assassinated this way - which. he can
be - but anybody else can. It becomes a much less controlled
world.
CRoNKITE:A man who looks into the American spirit from another
viewpoint, but with equally keen interest, is historian Henry
Steeie Commager, whose book "Search for a Usable Past" is
way.
COMMAGER: But I do think that there has come up in recent years,
particularly_since the coming of the Cold War, something that
might be cailed a conspiracy psychology. A feeling that great
events can't be explained by ordinary processes, that if anything
goes wrong - whether it's a great thing, like the so-called loss
of China, or a minor - a particular thing, like a discovery of
espionage somewhere, or the terrible fact'of the assassination
is not to be explained as other historical events,but by some
special standard of explanation, to be applied to'the United
States.And the point is that the ordinary rules for the rest
of the world don't hold for us.
And so with a great number of the things that are ordinarily
explained by the normal processes of history are not to be
explained by this, because they don't apply to the United States.
We are expected aiways to be victorious, and always to triumph,
and so forth and so forth.
And to this came the - added to this came the McCarthy era, with
the miasma of. suspicion, with the ceaseless insistence on
conspiracy,.and dirty work at the crossroads, everywhere. .
Andwe
were'- I think we have been persuaded very largely since the
beginnings of the Cold War to be more receptive to conspiracy
theories. I don't think we'd become paranoid. But we were on
the road to a paranoid explanation of things.ersuaded very largely since the
beginnings of the Cold War to be more receptive to conspiracy
theories. I don't think we'd become paranoid. But we were on
the road to a paranoid explanation of things.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y since the
beginnings of the Cold War to be more receptive to conspiracy
theories. I don't think we'd become paranoid. But we were on
the road to a paranoid explanation of things.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
MORLEY SAFER: Do you think that a second investigation, an
independent investigation, into the assassination of the
President is any more likely to be believed than the Warren.
Commission?
COMMAGER: No.
'I see no reason to suppose that anyone who"
doesn't believe the first will believe a second, or a third,
or a fourth. The conspiracy theory, the conspiracy mentality,
will not accept ordinary evidence, any more than the conspiracy
mentality accepts the ordinary explanation of the assassinations
of Lincoln, and the death of Booth.
It has - there's some:
ordinary, and find refuge in the extraordinary. F
And if another
investigation were to be held, and came up -.came to the sane
conclusion, as I'm inclined to think it would, who knows - I
think it would be found just as unsatisfactory, and the critics
would say, "Well, of _course, this too is part of the
Establishment.
The Establishment appointed this; they want this
kind of an explanation, and we don't believe any of it, because
we know there's dirty work at the crossroads somewhere.
They're
covering things up."
So I see no value, really, in another
investigation.
CRONKITE: In Washington, Eric Sevareid has been watching these
Sauanoua stu nog mou utu o4 uana am pue 6noA uaim sueiaoad 1nog
on the Warren Commission and its work.
SEVAREID: When this reporter returned home after the first
year of World War II in Europe, I made a few speeches to American
groups. Intelligent, middle-ciass, Town Hall kind of audience.
But alnost invariably some man, or group of men, would get me
aside after the speech and say, in effect, "Now tell us the real
low-down."!
This was my first adult encounter with that strain of permanent
skepticism about what they read or hear that runs through so
feelings toward government and public events more than their
feelings toward one another in their daily life. Part of therain of permanent
skepticism about what they read or hear that runs through so
feelings toward government and public events more than their
feelings toward one another in their daily life. Part of the

not to be taken in. Part is the wish to be personally
"inthe
know,"
one up on the other fellow.
But this automatic reaction that there must be conspiracy
somewhere,, the prevalence of this devil theory of politics,
this probably has increased among us, as Professor Commager
suggests, as a result of world war If and the Cold war that
followed.
Roosevelt must have sold- out East Europe at Yalta, so many people
thought; obscure Reds in the State Department,teachers and
writers here and there must have delivered vast China to
Communist hands.
Indeed, one or two otherwise reputable

--- PAGE BREAK ---y people
thought; obscure Reds in the State Department,teachers and
writers here and there must have delivered vast China to
Communist hands.
Indeed, one or two otherwise reputable

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18
bring about the Pearl Harbor attack.
What fed the conspiracy notion about the Kennedy assassination
All that power and majesty wiped out in an instant by one
skinny, weak-chinned, little character. It was like believing
that the Queen Mary had sunk without a trace, because of a log
floating somewhere in the Atlantic, or that AT. & T.'s stock
had falien to zero because a drunk somewhere tore out his
telephone wires.
But this almost unbelievable incongruity has characterized
nearly every one of the assassinations and attempted
assassinations of American Presidents.I
Deranged little men
killed Lincoln, Garfield, McKinley, tried to kill President
Theodore and Franklin Roosevelt。(
Onlythe Puerto Rican attempt
on President Truman represented a real conspiracy.
There are still people who think Adolph Hitler is alive, people
         r 
Jewish plot to control the world. The passage of years, the
does not shake the people who cling to these illusions.
still think some group of men are living somewhere, carrying in
their breasts the most explosive secret conceivable, knowledge
of a plot to kill Mr. Kennedy. These imagined men supposealy
go about their lives under iron self-discipline, never falling
out with each other never giving out a hint of suspicion to
anyone else.
And nearly three years after the Warren inquiry finished its
painful and onerous work, there are not only the serious critics .
who point to the various mistakes of commission or omissiong
mistakes of a consequence one can only guess at, and of a kind
that has probably plagued every lengthy, voluminous official
investigation ever staged; there are also people who think the
Commission itself was a conspiracy to cover up something.
In the first place, it would be utterly impossible in the
American arena of a fierce and free press and politics to conceal
a conspiracy.among_so many individuals who live in the public
eye.
In the second place, the deepest allegiance of men like
Chief Justice warren, or of John McCioy, does not lie with any
President, political'party, or current cause, - it lies with
history, their name and place in history. T
That is all they live
for in their later years." If they knowingly suppressed or
distorted decisive evidence about such an event as a Presidential
murder, their descendants would bear accursed names forever.
The notion that they would do such a thing is idiotic.
This is Eric Sevareid in Washington.evidence about such an event as a Presidential
murder, their descendants would bear accursed names forever.
The notion that they would do such a thing is idiotic.
This is Eric Sevareid in Washington.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19
CRONKITE:  we'll be back in a moment.
(ANNOUNCEMENT)
ANNOUNCER: A CBS NEwS INQUIRY: "The Warren Report" continues.
Here again is Walter Cronkite.
time the Report of the Warren Commission, we summed up our
feelings about it. In the end, we find confronting each other,
we said, the liar, the misfit,'the defector, on the one. hand,
and seven distinguished Americans on the other. And yet,: 
Oswald was never tried for any crime and perhaps, therefore,
there will forever be questions of substance and'detail, raised
by amateur detectives, professional skeptics and serious
students as well.
For the Warren Commission could not give Lee Harvey Oswald his
under law by 12 ordinary citizens. If it had not been for Jackby amateur detectives, professional skeptics and serious
students as well.
For the Warren Commission could not give Lee Harvey Oswald his
under law by 12 ordinary citizens. If it had not been for Jack

12 such citizens would have heard the evidence, would have heard
Oswald, if he had chosen to speak.
That jury would have represented our judgment, our conscience,
and in the end would have spoken for us.
Now,we do not have
that reliance. We must depend on our own judgments and look
into our own consciences.
The warren Commission cannot do that
for us., We are the jury, all of us, in America and throughout
the world.
we found no reason to withdraw what we said then.F
But, now we
have studied the report again,
this time with the benefit of
three years of controversy, of all of these books, of our own
investigations.
We have found that wherever you look at the
Report closely and without preconceptions, you come away
convinced that the story it tells is the best account we
eare
ever likely to have of what happened that day in Dallas.
We have found that most objections to the Report - and certainly
all objections that go to the heart of the Report -.vanish when
they are exposed to. the light of honest inquiry.. It is a
 a  g  o  at  s a  aa
itself.It is true that the answers to some questions·leave us
restless.T
The theory that a single bullet struck down both the
long arm of coincidence about.it for us to be entirely
comfortable. But would we be more' comfortable believing that a
shot was fired by a second assassin who materialized out of thin
air for the purpose, fired a shot, and then vanished again into

--- PAGE BREAK ---But would we be more' comfortable believing that a
shot was fired by a second assassin who materialized out of thin
air for the purpose, fired a shot, and then vanished again into

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
thin air, leaving behind no trace of himself, his rifle, his
bullet, or any other sign of existence.
Measured against the alternatives, the Warren Commission Report "
is the easiest to believe and that is all the Report claims.
But, we have found also that there has been a loss of morale, a
loss of confidence among. the American people toward their own
government and the men who serve it.. And_that is perhaps more
wounding than the assassination itself.
The damage that Lee
Harvey Oswald did the United States of America, the country he
first denounced and then_appeared to re-embrace,_did not end
when the shots were fired from the Texas School'Book Deposgtory.
The most grievous wounds persist and there is little reason to
believe that they will soon be healed.
This is Walter Cronkite. Good night.
ANNoUNCER: This has been the fourth and last of a series, a
CBS NEWS INQUIRY: "The Warren Report."
This broadcast has been produced under the supervision and
control of CBS NEwS.