university of Wisconsin / Stevens point


stevens point, Wisconsin 344 st


October 29, 1979

Dr. Mary S. Metz
Provost Office
Hood College
Rosemont Ave
Frederick, My 21701

Dear Dr. Metz:

In recent weeks in pursuit of my scholarly studies I
have had a black graduate student. Miss WancLa Brownlee, become
deeply interested in the Civil Rights Movement during the last
ninety days under the leadership of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. ,
who was slain in April, 1968. It is important for this young
person who possesses great potential to have ten days or two
weeks of intense contact with subject matter specialists in the
primary documents associated with the closing weeks of Dr. King*s
activities. Dr. Gerald McKnight of your Department of History and
Political Science has studied a great number of these documents
and is currently preparing papers and other works relative to
them? in your community is researcher Harold Weisberg, who is the
most informed person on this subject in the United States and who
possesses vast amounts of primary King documents.

To understand such documents requires close work with
individuals who can impart knowledge of the classification codes
of the several federal agencies as well as show the filing
techniques, bureaucratic devices, and other special aspects of
these evidentiary items. At the same time analysis of these
materials requires expert knowledge of the historical event, the
nuances of meaning objectivity can place upon them, an ability tot
handle controversial contents, and a whole range of similar subjects

Through our funding sources Miss Brownlee will probably
be able to~ spend ten days in Frederick, sometime in late February
or early March, working long hours in Mr. Weisberg* s archives and
consulting with Dr. McKnight on his studies.

Does Hood College have a visiting scholars program that
would accommodate Miss Brownlee who would require a minimum of a
room?


cci McKnight


Sincerely^-, *

David R. Wrone
Professor of History


OvpartRMDf of History • 177 S) 346-2334
