CAR #10 WHERE ARE YOUf

ly: Dil Pienas


This discussion has no hidden agenda. It does not support anybody's pro- conspiracy or
anti-conspiracy theories. I am just a regular guy who wants to find out the truth about tbe
murders of President Kennedy and Officer J.D. Tippit. I have used the best possible research
documents available to me. In most cases I have used the witness's own words, I find it very
undesirable to use an author's interpretation of a witness's interview or authors who reference
each other's work. Also, I have tried to use the logic and common sense that should dictate our day
to day lives and have not made use of any semantics. This study may create more questions than it
answers, however, this is research that I believe should have b^n done.

In most homicide investigations it is a routine procedure to establish the activities of the victim in
the last several hours of his life. Common sense tells us that this should be extremely helpful in
establishing unknown information, locations of incidents, and in some cases possible motives for
the murder. In the case of Officer J.D. Tippit, to my knowledge these routine procedures were
never properly done. Therefore, the information presented in this article has never been assembled
in one place for scholars of the Kennedy Assassination. Given the magnitude surrounding the
Tippit murder, I believe that this timeline should have been done in November of 1963 while
memories of events were fresh in the witnesses' minds, all the witnesses were still alive, and could
have been easily located.

Over tbe years some authors of both books and magazine articles on tbe Kennedy Assassination
have implicated Officer Tippit as somehow being involved in the J.F.K. murder. Some have said
that Tippit actually shot President Kennedy , and others insist that the very compelling image of
"Badgeman" is none other than J.D. Tippit The "Badgeman" image was discovered by researcher
Gary Mack and enhanced from a black and white Polaroid picture taken by Mary Moorman. This
image appears to show a man in a Dallas Police Department uniform holding a rifle and firing at
the President at the time of tbe fatal head shot (for a visual presentation of "Badgeman" check out
"The Killing Of a President" by Robert Groden page 200 for a blown up, colorized version of the
image.)

Others claim .it was Tippit's part of the conspiracy to kill Oswald and silence him, or as in tbe
Roscoe White affair where Roscoe allegedly asked Tippit to take Oswald to Red Bird Field in
South Dallas so that be could make a getaway in a small plane. When Tippit refused, Roscoe had to
shoot him.

My objective is to try and trace Tippit's movements on the last day of his life to see if anything
sinister was going on or if it was just a normal day in the life of a Dallas policeman.

Tippit's shift on November 22, 1963 was 7:00 A.M. to 3:00 P.M. I have not been able to locate any
radio transcripts of tbe Dallas Police Department activities before 10:00 A.M. on this day. There
are several different versions of the Channel 1 Dallas Police Department Radio Transcripts. Most
transcripts have been edited to contain mostly the calls that were pertinent to the President's


motorcade. There are not many calls about routine police business, such as squads going out of
service for lunch, or coffee breaks. The only exception to this is in "The Kennedy Assassination
Tapes" a rebuttal to the Acoustical Evidence Theory by James C. Bowles. This document is
available from the National Archives and also appears in the appendix of "First Day Evidence" by
Gary Savage. Dallas Police Radio Officer Bowles transcribed a very detailed and accurate log of
channel 1 transmissions from 11:42A.M. to 12:37P.M. for 11/22/63. The Dallas Police Department
audio tape that has been widely distributed in the Assassination Community begins at 12:15 P.M.

The first reference I could find to Tippit's activities on that day are the statements made to the FBI
by Mary Ada Dowling, a waitress at the Dobbs House Restaurant, at 1221 North Beckley, (at the
corner of North Beckley and Colorado) in Oak Cliff near Oswald's rooming house and Methodist
Hospital. On December 6,1963, the FBI was investigating possible links between Oswald and Ruby
when Mar}' Ada Dowling gave them the following information. She professed to recognize pictures
of Oswald who had eaten breakfast at the restaurant usually between 7:00 and 7:30 A.M.. She
recalled the person, now recognized as Oswald, was last seen by her in the restaurant at about
10:00 A.M. Wednesday, November 20th, at which time he was "nasty", and used curse words in
connection with his order. She went on to relate that " Office r J.D. Tippit was in the restaurant, as
was his habit at about that time each morning , and shot a glance at Oswald". She said there was

no indication, however, that they knew each other.^^

On 12/5/63 The FBI questioned Sam Rogers, Manager of the Dobb’s House. He related that since
President Kennedy's assassination he recognized Oswald's picture as being that of an individual
who had been a coffee customer in the Dobbs House. On that same day they also questioned
Douglas Leake another employee of the Dobbs House. Leake claimed that he had recopiized
pictures of Oswald as being a person who had been in Dobbs House about 2 times during the days
preceding the assassination. Mrs. Dolores Harrison a Dobbs House employee for 6 years also told
the FBI she recalled Oswald having been in the Dobbs House for breakfast, specific time
unrecalled. She stated she recalls this particular occasion, inasmuch as Oswald had ordered "eggs
over light" and, when served, made a complaint that the eggs were "cooked too hard". Mrs.
Harrison advised she prepared Oswald's eggs and Mary Dowling served them to him. Mrs.
Harrison went on to say that when seeing Oswald at the Dobbs House he "did not talk much and
was always reading magazines or books." She related although she saw Oswald at the Dobbs
House a number of times she did not know his identity until seeing his picture in the newspapers as
the accused assassin of President Kennedy.

Although Mary Dowling could have been mistaken about seeing Oswald at about 10:00 A.M., we
do have corroborated statements that the "Oswald's eggs" story really happened, and statements
that Oswald had eaten in the Dobbs House at different times. Oswald did not have any cooking
facilities at his rooming house, and since the Dobbs House was only 2 blocks away from his
rooming house it is logical that he did indeed eat there on occasion.

The statement that Tippit was in the restaurant , as was his habit about the same time each
morning, is very curious. There is a big difference in mistaking someone that you have seen a few
times (in this case Oswald) as opposed to a person you would see at the same time at the same
location everyday, and perhaps know personally or at least by name.

The Dobbs House was a little over six miles Northwest from the closest point of Tippit's assign^
patrol district, #78 and under normal driving conditions would take 17 minutes to make this trip.
Given the fact that Tippit had worked the Oak Cliff Area for many years and he probably knew


'•/

' many short cuts for his travels around Oak Cliff. Also the fact that he was driving a police car and
was not really subject to traffic laws, the travel times that are stated for normal conditions could
have been reduced by a few minutes, although he still would have to deal with vehicle and
pedestrian traffic to some degree. From this point on this reduced time will be referred to as Tippit
Travel Time.

As we shall see, there are other reports of him being far from his patrol district on a regular basis.
For Tippit to have a coffee break at Dobb's House at 1221 N. BeckJey, It would take a minimum of
15 minutes to get there from his patrol district, about 10-15 minutes for coffee and at least 15
minutes to get back to Tippit's assigned patrol district. A grand total of about 45 minutes. It defies
logic that the Dallas Police Department would authorize a coffee break location that was that far
from Tippit's Patrol District

Unfortunately, neither Mary Dowling nor Dolores Harrison (also a waitress at the Dobbs House)
ever testified for the Warren Commission or the House Select Committee on Assassinations. A
search of the National Archives On-line Data Base, failed to find any documents containing these
names.

To the best of my knowledge no independent researchers have ever interviewed them.

The questioning that was done by the FBI was to investigate the Oswald-Ruby connection, not to
retrace Tippit's movements. From the eyewitness accounts that are available, we can only guess if
Tippit stopped at the Dobbs House restaurant on the morning of November 22, 1963, at his usual
time for coffee, since this day probably started off like any other day.

The ne.\t traceable Tippit sighting is by his best friend and fellow Police Officer, Bill Anglin, from
HSCA document # 180-10108-10451 which is a summary of an interview with Anglin on November
11, 197% where he states "he and J.D. had coffee or tea at "The Old Drive-In" (one source of
part-time employment) about 11:30 to 11:45 A.M. on the Morning of November 22, 1963, J.D.
usually went home for lunch working day tour." K this was the case, logic would dictate that they
met at Austin's Barbecue, located at 2321 West Illinois Avenue. Tippit worked there as a security
guard from 10:00 P.M. to 2:00 A.M. on Friday and Saturday nights, from about late 1960 up until
the time of the assassination.^^ In a 1982 interview Sgt Anglin was asked where exactly they had
coffee that morning, he replied " it was in Deep South Oak Cliff out on our beat." Although there
could have been several Drive-In style Restaurants in that area in 1963 the only Restaurant that
Tippit was known to work at was Austin's. Austin's Barbecue was not in Tippit's regular patrol
district, #78 nor Anglin's district #79.^ I have personally searched microfilms of Dallas City
Directories for 1963 and several years before and after 1963 and could not find any listing for the
"Old Drive-In". At this point I contacted some well informed Dallas area researchers and they had
never heard of the "Old Drive In". Given this information it is possible that they met at Austin's
Barbecue. Whether or not it happened between 11:30 and 11:45 A.M. will be further discussed. If
it turns out that they had coffee in some location on their beats, the timeline remains basically the
same, because the distance from the point where Tippit's and Anglin's district meets to Tippit's
house is about the same.

Tippit's immediate supervisor for about ten years, Sgt. Calvin Bud Owens, gives us some
interesting information in Warren Commission exhibit No. 2985 page 8. He states that "Officer
Tippit had gone home to eat lunch, which was a normal and approved procedure, at about noon
time." However, he does not mention how long Tippit's authorized lunch break was. A review of


the Bowles transcript reveals that most squads that were authorized for a Signal 5 (absence
duty for the purpose of eating or for coffee) stayed out of service anywhere from 26 minu es to 36
minutes. It would be safe to say that the standard time allowed for police officers to have lunch
would be approximately 30 minutes.

Officer Tinpit's widow, Mrs. Marie Tippit, told HSCA interviewer, John Moriarty, that "J.D. had
come home for lunch that day and nothing remarkable happened." But no exact time is
mentioned.(4} o^iy make an educated guess about the actual time. If the time of

A M to 11:45 A.M. for a coffee break is correct we have a timing problem for -npiiit. If he left
Austin's Barbecue at ll:45_and went straight home to 238 Glencairin in South Dallas this is a
distance of approximately 6 miles, and under normal driving conditions would Uke approximately
18 minutes. Using Tippit Travel Time it could have taken him approximately 14 to 15 minutes to
get home for lunch at about 12 noon.

Seems logical, most people have lunch at that time, right? but in this case it is
Tippit radios the Police Dispatcher twice at 11:50 A.M. reporting that he was clear a
disMtcher responds "78 clear ll:51"(Bowles Transcript). Given the time of day the probability
high that these calls were Tippit returaing back to service from lunch.

We have the following timetabl e: ^ ■

I 11:30-11:45 A.M. j coffee at Austin's Barbecue ■

■' 11:45-12:00 Noon ! travel time from Austin's to Tippit's home, 238 Glencairin


I Lunch


• 11:50 A.M.


Tippit reports he is "clear" (most likely after lunch)


The problem with this timetable is that he didn't have time f®*-

interview of his widow that he definitely ate lunch at home on November 22, 1963. Usm t
information it doesn't make sense that he drove 6 miles out of his way to ^ .

immediately turn around and make a seven mile trip back to the location where he calls t
dispatcher from in his patrol district without eating lunch. Also he was ' clear to go back int
service before he got home for lunch?? this just does not make sense.

After much thought about this the only feasible conclusion that can be drawn is that
was mistaken about what time they had coffee. The event happened in 1963 and Sgt. Anglin vvas
interviewed about this in 1977. After 14 years the events of that day could be confused, so,
do respect and without questioning Sgt. Anglin's truthfulness or veracity it most likely could

been an honest mistake.

If they had coffee between 10:45 to 11:00 A.M. at Austin's then the timetable works out much
better.


10:45 -11:00 A.M. Coffee at Austin's Barbecue

1 1 :00 -1 1 : 1 5 A.M. travel time from Austin's to Tippit's home, 238 Glencairin

11:15 -approx. 11:50 A.M. lunch at Tippit's home


Tippit radios he is back in service from lunch, and starts driving !
11:50 A.M. back towards his Patrol District

1:50A.M.-12:17 P.M. travel time from 238 Glencairin back to Tippit's patrol district.


It is important to give the reader some background information about Dallas Police Department
procedures concerning radio calls from squad cars. In 1963 Officers were not equipped with
walkie-talkies, so everytime an Officer would get out of his vehicle he would have to radio the
dispatcher telling them that he would be out of the car and at what location. In ®

background I have found that he had missed radio calls on the following dates: 1/22/58,

8/1/61, 5/15/63 This means that the dispatcher called him on the radio and he did not answer.

These actions were documented in subsequent reports by his superiors. We can be sure that JPP't
was not the only Dallas Police officer to ever miss a radio caU. I do not kuow if this is within the
guidelines of acceptable conduct of a police officer, given the fact that Tippit missed 4 radio calls in
the space of about 5 years and 5 months, or if this performance record was any better or any worse
than other Dallas Police Officers.


At 12:17P.M. Tippit radios the dispatcher and says "be out of the car for a minute, 4100 block of
Bonnie View." This information comes from the Bowles Channel 1 transcript. Close examination
of this document shows that the Police Dispatcher did not transmit an order for Tippit to go to this
location on Bonnie View. Perhaps as- Tippit was patrolling his.district after lunch, he notic^
something suspicious or was stopped by a citizen and asked to investigate whatever was going on at

the 4100 block of Bonnie View Rd.


4100 Bonnie View is 7.5 miles from Tippit's home with a normal travel time of 24 minute, ImM
Travel Time could have been 18-20 minutes this would have given Tippit plen^ of time from
11:50A.M. when he cleared from lunch to travel to the location in his patrol district where he got

out of the car at 12:17P.M..

In Judy Bonner's book "Investigation of a Homicide"on page 71 she states "The Bonnie View call
turned out to be a dry run, an elderly woman who had thought she had seen a man trying to
burglarize a house next door. Tippit poUtely took down her story, made a fruitless search of the
neighborhood, returned to his car to write out a report, then radioed *

do not know how Judy Bonner obtained this information? Tippit was killed ' ‘“’“J ®

search for the report mentioned has proved unsuccessful. Whatever happened Bonnie

View did not last long since Tippit called back the Dispatcher 3 minutes later at 12.20P.M. and

reported "78 clear".

Even though Tippit was not ordered to the 4100 block of Bonnie View RD. by the Police
Lpatchef, the?e is no hard evidence to disprove that this event was genuine, -^ere is also no hard
evidence to prove this event was staged in any way, since the loMtion he
the dispatcher and potential witnesses could have been located if the situation called for iL The


f K y ■ tM* w . I w # . M.. ym.


‘‘*® *’'®^‘‘ of Bonnie View Rd. between 12:17 and

i**2UxaiVl« OD ll/22/o3«

WHAT'S THE BIG DEAL ABOUT THE LUNCH TIME OR THE CALL AT 4100 BONNIE VIEff?

Just this, if Tippit, as some have speculated was involved in the assassination as either a shooter or
a conspirator it is now 12:20 P.M. and he is approximately 10 miles from Dealey Plaza, the site of
the Kennedy Assassination. The original time for President Kennedy's arrival at the Dallas Trade
Mart was 12:30 P.M.^^ which means the President would be in Dealey Plaza at approximately
12:15-12:20 P.M. if the motorcade was running on schedule. I understand that if Tippit was
involved in the assassination he could have monitored the motorcade's progress on Channel 2 of
the Police radio to find out it's exact location. By going for coffee with his best friend and then
home for lunch and then stop to investigate at 4100 Bonnie View he would be cutting it too close if
he needed to get to downtown Dallas to take part in the shooting or to aid the assassins in anyway.

The next time we are able to locate Tippit is from information on the radio logs. At 12:45 P.M., 15
minutes after the assassination, he is asked his location and he responds "I'm about Keist and ’
^nnie View", which is in his patrol district Then, comes the message that has been debated since
the day that it happened. Dispatcher Murray Jackson, (a close personal friend of Tippit's) orders
squad "#87 and #78 move into Central Oak Cliff area.". This order gave Tippit the authorization
to go anywhere he wanted in Oak Cliff. Jackson's reasoning for this is "there was the shooting
involving the President and we immediately dispatched every available unit to the Triple
Underpass, where the shot was reported to have come from. I realized that we were draining the
Oak Cliff area of available Police Officers so if there was an emergency such as a robbery or a
major accident to come up I wouldn't have anybody there that would be in close proximity to
answ er the call. And since J.D. was the outermost Unit, actually I had 2 Units, #87 which was
Officer Nelson and #78 which was Officer Tippit" (in actuality Bill Anglin's District #79 was
farther south and further away from the Texas School Book Depository than Tippit's District

#78).i21 It is also interesting to note that Bill Anglin responded to the 12:42P.M. radio call from the
{wlice dispatcher that said. "Attention all squads in the downtown area code 3 (red lights and
siren) to Elm and Houston (Dealy Plaza) with caution. At 12:52P.M. Anglin radios the dispatcher
that he will "be out at the triple underpass"(Dealy Plaza).

Here is where it gets very interesting, at approximately 12:45 to 1:00 P.M. there are 5 witnesses
that placed Tippit not in Central Oak Cliff but at the Gloco (Good Luck Oil Company) gas station
which was located at 1502 North Zang Boulevard. This is the absolute northernmost part of Oak
Cliff.

A 1966 article in "Ramparts" magazine by researcher, William Turner, states that on a recent
trip to Dallas he" uncovered five witnesses to Tippit's whereabouts in the last minutes of his life.
There is no indication that the Commission or any police agency was even aware of them.
Photographer, A1 Volkland, and his wife, Lou, both of whom knew Tippit, said that 15 or 20
minutes after the assassination they saw him at a gas station and waved to him. They observed
Tippit sitting in his police car at a Gloco gas station in Oak Cliff, watching the cars coming over
the Houston Street Viaduct from downtown Dallas. Three employees of the Gloco station, Tom
Mullins, Emmett Hollingshead, and J.B. "Shorty" Lewis, all of whom knew Tippit confirmed the
Volklands' story. (In 1987 Dallas area researcher Greg Lowery located 2 of the 5 witnesses just
mentioned and they verified the account they had witnessed 24 years earlier, and there was no
indication that any law enforcement agency had ever interviewed these 5 witnesses. This story was


publish^ in the Oak ClilT Tribune June 30, 1988). They said Tippit stayed at the station for about
10 minut«, somewhere between 12:45 and 1:00 P.M., then he went tearing off down Lancaster at
high speed -on a bee-line toward Jack Ruby's apartment and in the direction of where he was
kill^ a few minutes later." I hope this last statement about Ruby’s apartment does not lead the
reader to a sinister conclusion. In all fairness to the witnesses at the Gloco station that made the
^tement I would like to mention again that Tippit was at the northernmost part of Oak Cliff
Tippit could only go south if he was to stay in Oak Cliff. It is true that traveling south on
Lancaster is the general direction of Jack Ruby's apartment but it is also the general direction of
Tippit s patrol district, the Top 10 Record Shop, Tippit's home, Austin's Barbecue and other Oak
Cliff landmarks (see map of Tippit locations).

The article continues on to ask the following legitimate questions "What could Tippit have heard
or seen to cause him to leave his observation post at the Gloco station and roar up the street?
Police radio logs show no instructions to move. We know that cab driver, Whaley, said he drove
Oswald across the Houston Street Viaduct (past the Gloco station at the same time Tippit was
reported there) to a spot near the rooming house (1026 North Beckley). Is it possible that Tippit
spotted Oswald in the cab, recognized him, and for some reason took off to intercept him?"

Let us look at these statements analytically. At 12:45 P.M. the Police Dispatcher asks Tippit his
location, Tippit repli^ "I'm about Keist and Bonnie View"iSi, we have to question the truthfulness
of this statement. Police dispatcher, Murray Jackson, has stated in an interview that " If somebody
IS out of pocket off their district and you ask them their location, they are either not going to
answer or they are going to give you somewhere else anyway." It is much easier to believe that
Tippit was not being truthful about his location than to discount the statements of five witnesses
that ^ew him personally and place him at a location approximately 5 miles away from the
location he reported, at approximately the same time. The estimated travel time from Keist and
Bonnie View to the Gloco station under normal driving conditions, is 18 minutes and 13-14 minutes
for Jippit Travel Time. Given his witnessed location at 12:45 to'l:00 P.M. and the travel time
involved it would seem more logical that Tippit had ventured out of his patrol district at
approximately the time of the assassination for some unknown reason. Regardless of how good an
officer J.D. Tippit was he could not have been in two places at the same time.


At 12:54 P.M. dispatcher, Murray Jackson, calls Tippit for his location and Tippit responds by
saying that he is at "Lancaster and Eighth." It is about 8/10’s of a mile from the Gloco station to
Lancaster and Eighth. Normal travel time is about 4 minutes but since he was "tearing" when he
left the gas station he could have made it in as little as 1-2 minutes. This definitely fits into the time
frame and the direction he was headed as described by the five witnesses.

Some researchers have speculated that Tippit might have stopped off to see Harry Olsen, a DaUas
Police Officer, who had broken his knee cap and by his own admission had taken a side job
guarding an "Estate" in Oak Cliff from 7:00A.M. until 8:00P.M. on the day of the

Assassination.i21 This is in the general area of the Tippit shooting. He could not remember many
details about it, but he said the "estate" was on Eighth Street but he could not remember the exact
location or address. Neither the Warren Commission, nor the House Select Committee asked him
specifically if Tippit stopped off to see him. The following is a portion of the questioning of Harry
Olsen by Warren Commission Lawyer Arlen Specter.

Mr. Specter. Did you have any visitors while you were guarding the estate on that day?


Mr. Olsen. Yes, sir.

Mr. Specter. And who was the visitor or visitors?

Mr. Olsen. Kay

Mr. Specter. What time did she visit you?

Mr. Olsen. Right after the President was shot

Mr. Specter. How did you learn of the assassination of the President?

Mr. Oke„. A worn.. clW me oe the phone who wns . friend of the pemon who had lived there,
Mr. Specter. Do you know who that woman was?

'?he°pr^ld?n\ts*«^^ “ sl.« -id.

Mr. Specter. What time did that telephone call occur?

Mr. Olsen. Right after he was shot I don’t know exactly what time it was.

a'S d' Z ryl'X'n f'' >■

Mr. Olsen. Passers-by. I went outside.

Mr. Specter. \Miom did you see outside?

"re^,^l‘ha“d’\ ° ^ And I said,

wa^Yv^h^e^rl'^V^^ MEAN? The Olsen "estate" story has been looked at in many different
knew aboSt community. It is amazing to me that although the House Select Committee

^en about the linpnng questions concerning Olsen’s activities on the afternoon of the
ssassination they did not ask any specific quesrions to try and clarify the situation when Olsen
1978 deposition to House Select Committee Counsel, Robert Genzman, on August 21,

Olsen testified to the Warren Commission that the "estate" was about four blocks from Kay

325 North Ewing.mi Using this information the

ta^I^ ““ ■ '■«cent trip to Dallas I was

taken to this area by a Texas researcher that has thoroughly studied these circumstances. The two

very strong possible locations for the "estate" are 423 Eighth Street or 431 Eighth Street.il^

Since there is no solid evidence to prove that Olsen did see Tippit or that Tippit drove past Olsen’s
location, and given Olsen’s testimony the most intelligent conclusion at this time is that Tipjil did


not stop off to see Harry Olsen. Even though Olsen admitted that he knew Tippit,*^ the timeline
illustrated here does not give Tippit much time to visit Olsen. I believe Tippit had other Dressing
matters to attend to. ^

We now have Tippit "tearing" South on Lancaster from the Gloco gas station at the corner of
N^h Zang and North Marsalis Ave.. The exact route Tippit took to the next sighting has many
different possibilities. Because of the lack of witnesses at this point in the timeline we will probably
never know Tippit's exact movements.

The next Tippit ^counter is one that has been reported in several different books and magazine
articles but this incident remained unclear to me until I obtained transcripts of the interviews with
the two men who were involved. This sighting took place at The Top Ten Record Shop which is
near the corner of West Jefferson Boulevard and Bishop Ave. about one block West of the Texas
Theater.


Louis Cortinas, was an eighteen year old clerk, in the record shop in 1963. The shop's owner and
his boss was Dub Stark.

In a 1981 interview Cortinas stated the following:

" He was behind the counter at The Top Ten Record Shop, 338 West Jefferson
Boulevard, on November 22, 1963. Police Officer, J.D. Tippit, parked his car on Bishop
Street, apparently heading North, and came into the shop in a hurry and asked
Cortinas if he could use the phone at the counter. He recalls Tippit being in such a
huriy’ that he had to ask people in the narrow aisle to step aside."

"Tippit said nothing over the phone, apparently not getting an answer. He stood there
long enough for It to ring seven or eight times. Tippit hung up the phone and walked
off fast, he was upset or worried about something."

"Tippit sped away in his squad car across Jefferson, down Bishop, to Sunset where he
ran a stop sign and turned right down Sunset."

"Maybe 10, no more than 10 minutes Tippit had left when I heard he had been shot on
the radio."

Cortinas said, "Tippit would come into the record shop occasionally to use the phone while on
duty. He knew Tippit to talk to from other experience, having been ticketed many times for drag
racing near Austin's Barbecue. He also knew Tippit from seeing him at Austin's Barbecue."

Dub Stark also stated that " Tippit parked his patrol car outside, his partner was not with him on
this occasion, he asked permission to use the phone, made a phone call, and left in a hurry and
didn't say anything." Stark went on to say, "he had just enough time to get to the place where he
was shot"

Stark knew Tippit because "Tippit often came in the store to buy records for his children, he also
stopped by while on duty to use the phone several times." Again, we find Tippit far off his patrol
district on a regular basis.


The call must have been of an urgent nature because Tippit’s behavior and the statements of the
“ mtemew with Detective Gus Rose (one of the first police officials to interrogate
M “s •ns*gb‘ a^ut the circumstances that existed for the Dallas Police Department

on 11/22/W. On a day with that much going on Tippit would have been under tremendoSs

something personal that he wanted to take care of he

radio. And he wouldn t check out on the air. I mean he wouldn’t try to get the dispatcher and say I

am gonna be out of the car for something special that is personal. He wouldn’t want to have to ^
answer for it.


i


”0 coivemation, ,o logic

would IcU us there wus uo answer ou the other end. If it had heen a busy signal he would have
ung up the phone immediately but Cortinas estimated it rang about 7 or 8 times. This would be
highly unlikely if he was calling Dallas Police Headquarters. He might have called in if he had

‘*‘‘*"’* broadcast over the radio. It doesn’t make sense for him
call on the telephone to find out what all the commotion was in Downtown Dallas because from
1:00 P.M. until 1:15 P.M. the radio traffic was very slow.^^


Police dispatcher, Murray Jackson, called #78 (Tippit) at 1:03 P.M.il^ and got no answer. One
can guess, using logic, that if Tippit was at Lancaster and Eighth at 12:54 P.M. he could have
wily arrived at the Top Ten Record Shop a distance of 2 miles before 1:00 P.M. and could have
„ “ inside the record shop when the unanswered call was made. The distance from the Top Ten

Record Shop to 404 E. 10th St(the Tippit Murder sight) is 6/10’s of a mile with a travel time of
about 2 minutes.


I would like to take a moment to talk about an event that has perplexed many researchers over the

Oswald returned to his roominghouse at 1026 North Beckley at about
1:WP.M. on 11/22/63 Earlene Roberts who was the housekeeper at the roominghouse noticed that
a Dallas Police car pulled up in front of the rooming house and honked the horn twice and then
drove away. This happened while Oswald was in his room. There has been so much written about
this event that a full length article could be written about it but, I would like to give the reader a
few facts. In Earlene Roberts Warren Commission testimony she states that the Police car had 2
uniformed officers in it, Tippit was alone in Car 10 on 11/22/63. At approximately the time Earlene
Roberts states this event happened we have at least 2 witnesses at the Top 10 Record Shop that
state Tippit was in the shop at that time. Many of the researchers that theorized that Tippit drove
by the roominghouse and honked the horn were unfamiliar with the Top 10 Record Shop
witnesses, or wrote their theories before these interviews were conducted and made available.
Using the best information we have at this time it is highly improbable that Tippit performed the
horn honking event since he was at a different location 1.2 miles away with a travel time of 6
minutes and a Tippit travel time of 3 to 4 minutes.

piere have been many references in print to 2 calls that were made at 1:08 on the Dallas Police
Radio. The original source of this information is the March 23,1964 transcript of the channel 1
radio log,Commision Exhibit 70S page 17 in Vol. 17 page 406 of the Warren Commission Hearings.
The transcript states that #78 (Tippit) called the dispatcher once just before 1:08 and then seconds
later at exactly 1:08, but the dispatcher did not answer. Most researchers that have studied the
many versions of the radio logs agree that Arch Kimbrough’s Critics Copy is an excellent
reference took The 2 radio calls in question at 1:08 do not appear in Arch’s transcripL Upon
discovering this discrepancy I started doing a great deal of work with my audio copy of the Dallas


Police Tapes. I used noise filters to "clean up" the overall sound quality and used a 31 band
graphic equalizer to make the voices on the tape clearer and more pronounced. After much study I
concluded that the transmission was not made by Tippit but instead was made by "388" a unit
from the Criminal Investigation Division.

"388" was having a conversation with the dispatcher at about this time. Transmission fl390A On
page 31 of the Arch Kimbrough's Channel 1 transcript is what I believe was mistaken as "78"
since it is slightly garbled. By comparing the voice characteristics of the calls Tippit made earlier
in the tape to the 1:08 call in question I concluded that the voices did not match. At this point I
contacted a very well respect^ Dallas researcher who has a great deal of experience listening to
these tapes and he is in agreement with me that the 1:08 transmission is "388" and not Tippit Give
the tape a listen , what do you think?

Cortinas said he sped away from the record shop but by the time Tippit gets near the corner of
East 10th and Patton Ave. Tippit Murder witness Helen Markham testiPies Tippit's police car was
"driving real slow now, real slow."^^

William Scoggins a cab driver that also witnessed the Tippit murder while he was parked in his
cab eating lunch near the murder scene describes Tippit's Patrol car as cruising "Not more than
10 or 12 miles a hour". Why would Tippit drive in such an erratic way? First very fast, then very
slow in the last few minutes of his life may never be explained.

In his Warren Commission testimony below Vol3 page 324-325 Scoggins gives some startling
information about Tippit's activities. As we shall see Tippit was observed in the neighborhood that
he was killed quite often.

Mr. SCOGGINS. Well, I first seen the police car cruising east.

Mr. BELIN. About how fast was it cruising?

Mr. SCOGGINS. Not more than 10 or 12 miles a hour, I would say.

Mr. BELIN. It was going east on what street?

Mr. SCOGGINS. On Tenth.

Mr. BELIN. All right Did you see the police car go across right in front of yours?

Mr. SCOGGINS. Yes; he went right down the street He come from the west going east On east
Tenth.

Mr. BELIN. Then what did you see?

Mr. SCOGGINS. I noticed he stopped down there, and I wasn't paying too much attention to the
man, you see, iust used to see him every day, but then I kind of looked down the street saw this,
someone, that looked to me like he was going west now, I couldn't exactly say whether he was
going west or was in the process of turning around, but he was facing west when I saw him.

Mr. BELIN. All right


>ss/ 199/ William M. nrs


Mr. SCOGGINS. And he was-he stopped there.

Mn BELIN. Let me ask you this now. When you first saw this man, had the police car stopped or


Commission Counsel David Belin did not ask any questions regarding
the statement, ju st used to see him everyday , the implications of this testimony are very importa^nL

hoggins gave his testimony on March 26,1964, one week later on April 2,1964 Mrs. Charlie
irginia Davis gave her testimony to the Warren Commission which independently corroborates
&o^ins statements that Tippit was seen often near the spot that he was later murdered at Mrs

PartnnT* ^ ® murder. She lived at 400 East 10th St at the corner of

«n tn She heard the gunfire both she and her sister-in-law, Mrs. Barbara Davis both

Sith down Pa«n ‘T’’ M*“ **’® murderer escaping by walking across their front yard and
^uth down Patton Ave.. The following testimony is from VoL 6 page 458 of the Warren
Commission Hearings.

Mrs. DAVIS. No, sir; we just saw a police car sitting on the side of the road.

Mr. BELIN. WTiere was the police car parked?


Mrs. DAVIS. It was parked ^tween the hedge that m arks the apartm ent house where he lives i
and the house next door.


in


Mr. BELEV. Was it on your side of East 10th or the other side of the street?


Mrs. DA\TS. It was on our side, the same side that we lived on.

Irft?^^^^ headed as you looked to the police car, towards your right or towards your

I

Mrs. DAVIS. Right '


that Officer Tippit was in the neighborhood so much
that Mrs. Davis thought that he lived there and once again he did not ask any questions to clarify
the matter. The Warren Commission knew that Tippit did not live in this area, but because the '
proper questions were not asked we only have a vague outline of Tippifs regular activities in the
neighborhood where he was killed.


One of the mam themes of this work is that Tippit was off his assigned patrol district on a regular
tasis for a variety of reasons. We know by the Davis and Scoggins testimony that he was seen near
tte murder sight on a daily basis. The reasons for his frequent visits there is beyond the scope of
this writing, but it is something I would like to address at a future time. If it is ever positively
proven that Oswald did not kill J.D. Tippit then the real murderer could have easily known where
to find Tippit, since his activities were common knowledge to people in the neighborhood.

Tippit was lolled in Patrol District #91 which is about 4 miles from the closest point of Tippit's
Patrol District #78. The travel time under normal conditions is about 13 minutes. Tippit Travel


Time could have been 9-10 minutes. So here we have Tippit leaving bis Patrol District driving to
East 10th SL, staying for an undetermined time and returning to his Patrol District- If he stayed at
"the apartment house where he lives" for 10 minutes the minimum elapsed time to leave and
return from is Patrol District is 30 minutes. Please remember that Tippit's squad car was parked
at this location so often that Mrs. Davis thought he lived there. How often he made this trip and
how long he would stay is anybody's guess.

Officer J.D. Tippit was murdered a few moments after Helen Markham and William Scoggins saw
him on 11/22/63 and because of circumstances outlined in this writing some of the true events of
this day might never be known.


Copyri^it © 1997 WiTUam M. Drenas


You may contact Bill Drenas at
bd63@mediaon&nat-


199 / wviiiiam M. nrc


UPPIT TIMELiNE 1 1 /22/6^


KEY: AH times except radio calls are approximate.
* Probable Movements
^ Known Movements


• 7:00 A.M.''


Begin Tour of Duty


: 9:40 A.M. •


Start of Travel Time from Tippit's Patrol District to Dobb's House
Restaurant


! I0;00-10;15 AM. •


Coffee at Dobb’s House, 1221 No. Beckley Ave.

Travel Time from Dobb's House back to Tippit's patrol district.


; I0;15-10;30A.M. *


10;45- 11:00 AM. ''


(The exact time is in dispute) Coffee with Patrolman Bill Anglin at
Austin's Barbecue. (Bill Anglin said, "11:30-1 1:45") 1


11:00-11:15 AM.


Travel time from Austin's to 238 Glencaim (Tippit's Home) for
lunch.


11:15- 11:50 A.M.


Lunch at 238 Glencaim.


11:50A.M.- 12:17P.M. ^


Travel time from 238 Glencaim to 4100 Block Bonme View.


12:1 7 P.M, ^


Tippit radios dispatcher "Be out of the car for a minute 4100 Block
Bonnie View'."


12:20 P.M. ''


Tippit radios dispatcher " Clear."


12:30 P.M. ^


Tippit starts moving toward Northern Oak Cliff. 1


12:45 P.M."'


5 witnesses placed him at the GLOCO Service Station, 1 502 North
Zang Boulevard, near the Houston Street Viaduct. He stays there for
about 10 minutes, then tears off down Lancaster at high speed.

Police Dispatcher asks Tippit's location, he responds, "fm about ;

Keist and Bonnie View", (Highly improbable) ^


: 12:54 P.M.*


Dispatcher asks Tippit's location, he responds, "Lancaster and «

Eighth". ;


^ 1:00-1:05 P.M.


Tippit makes hurried phone call at The Top Ten Record Shop, 338 I
West J efferson, near the comer of Bishop Ave. ’ j


j 1:03 P.M. ^


Dispatcher calls Tippit, Tippit does not respond.


i 1:10-1:15 P.M.^


Tippit shot to death near comer of East Tenth Street and Patton j

Avenue. ( The exact time is in dispute. The Warren Commission I

Report states it happened at 1 : 1 5). |


Copyright O 1997 William M. Drenas.


End Notes


1. Warren Commission exhibit 3001, pg. 2

2. Warren Commission exhibit 2985, pg.6

3. Dallas Police Radio Patrol District Map (Putnam exhibit No. 1 )

4. Summary of interview with Marie Tippit, 1977 HSCA document, #180-10120-10047

5. AARC Records

6. Dallas Morning News 1 1/22/63

7. Putnam Exhibit # 1

8. Dallas Police Department Radio transcript (Critics copy by Arch Kimbrough), pg.l6

9. Warren Commission testimony of Harry Olsen, XIV, pg. 624-639

10. Kay Coleman, the future Mrs. Olsen and a stripper at Jack Ruby's Carousel Club

1 1 . Warren Commission Hearings, volume XTV, pg, 64 1

12. Attached Map # 1

13. Warren Commission hearings volume XTV, pg. 628

14. Dallas Police Department Radio Transcripts (Critics copy by Arch Kimbrough), pg. 25-34

15. Ibid. pg. 28

16. Warren Commission Hearings volume HI, pg. 307


wvMfiiMiil ya< 199/ WVIIIiam M.


:£7th


D g & tu

Kay Coleman's apartment 325 >g)rth Ewing


u c I i H M n

iTEInmaKI- I 5 'I : ^ Li-.

Lancaster and EighthTippit^Fep0Fted-p0^fe0n-at-l-2-454^p


[423 and 43 1 Eighth St. Possible Olsen (Estate) Locations


..£10TH


j%

I %


iTippit Muf^r Scene


l-'^N


E11TH


Jack Ruby's ^artment 223 ^uth Ewin^J^

i U


iC 1996DcLonne Street Atlas USA


Possible Olsen Locations (map #1)


LakdC


istrict #78


HO


9^3||


llWiiS


rliii


Tippit Locations 11/22/63
