HarolaWeiaberg
Rt.8,Frederiok,Ma.21701
3/30/74
George Horman
CBS Hewa
Dear George
Laat night's evening news tock me beck 35 yuars, to whan I waa part ot two orrlciel
avestigations or Harlan, to one of the more sbawedul periods of our latory and one of
Axo年u  e4pnb epu enu ptaon aAop SurtTxn #urpazhau Au ur sutn osrnizotoo nxon ony
Were I youger and with lona planned and resenzahad work, Ia do a booic on It.

In
pert I vrite you on the chance you think there oould bo aome TW interpot iun telling an
eqa aaut IArretoTxyo Aruo poprooot a avua Aaopnpt  Buypzooax uT pue Cxoe prn
reoorda of one Lnvoatigation and lnow where thone of the other are availnble.

I alao have othar purpogen.

I wan alvaya too buay to lcoey a jouamal.

There asw new
Mereral aoadexdo interoata in ny wori fox azahiven aa govazxnent in cxinia.

Ir anything
pua punationq aa yo gueuBty  ptooet ttpn tr oaodand 4nr xoy soqou se #are way
experdenga that influenced and anahle some of the worit of xore franediate ccholarly in-
toreat.

(I was s Senate investigator between my navapapar and maganina dnya end before
bwooming part of intelligancn duxing World Var Ii.) And ir it doeg not intoroat you or
auggest those in 2V who aight be interoated, zaaybe it will interaot thone kide of whom
Ihave hoard fron time to time on radio, telltng then what they zetther hear nor see
In Georgotonne
In the t93Os Harian waa almoat an oguivalent or Vietnam.

With e populatlon or about
prnon oun #eou Jo Auoranrpeeeay #sug srox mon Jo TTu yo sty tau xoy aan exopn
One ot the more original plota Bouoeivad by tha coal-operatoreassociatfon wne
getting rid or the octagennzian grgendxar brought sn from Indiann, Fogey Dayer, ao callod
beeeuge ho had loat  Log.

Ali the gun thugs weru doputised.

The epezatars chhet thug was
4xu oq Jo 4to pooxxon orn *cba Trx o4 oots uep sn 8 cueue teg perru Lrtet
county to the west, Bell.

Unthank was alao gdven the dyaanfte noeded.

But he figured why
Halr whnt he had boan givea.Unthank was alao gdven the dyaanfte noeded. But he figured why
Halr whnt he had boan givea. There was then a ohain or foe-epiittere sho figured it the
do it for Sio.oo. Phnt wing of the hotol want atradght up in the aiz whan Pozey was n
bed. And wat setunlly happened ia that the notal bed turned ovar iz the miry couing dom
on top or Pegey: proteoting him. He waa unburt. And xothing happened to anyone olne, dther,
not eren arter we took oonteselons izndez oathe
In faot, one of tha oporatore, Ted Greooh, threatened a Senate witnees in the totlet
on the northeaut cozner af the thfzd floor of the Oid Senate Offloe Building and mas in-
ducted for it. Tha·opezators were expezienced in fixding Jurlee and they fixed that one
in Washingtou, too. I wea a wi tnoas in that trial. The saao method wan tsed a few months
later, when the opartmont or Juntaon folloved ap with criminal charges against somathing
mors than 6O oorporations and individunla. For ail this violenoe and sauxdere, it soome
ous xo amu aus auk 3aa 4ng *Te 4o 2eTeg Aay A *Sn se tonoux 8on goeo ou tas Ppo
firat mlning oorporation in the indictaent. The trial wes about 10o mdlaa north and I think a bit wont ot Baxinn, in rondon,
Laurel Gounty, where the population, when aourt wan not in sanaion, was tgiog accordlng to
the road sign. I was the only one ooonocted with the govezrment who waliced arobnd alone and
unarmad. Emarly oach norming I took a throe-houz walk in the mountaine with an old Lanyer

--- PAGE BREAK ---potaFux puu 0rpaxaod a porrzeo on ng *vyuyazTA 4uen 3o xouraaa zureahert uooa pau on
as we atzolled in the mountains before bzeakfaat.

I made loeal frlends, oamler for a 24-
Atad tetorxro aut us ouoge I puy*eradod sou tun guemnreaoy Turepeg et atoun pro-reaf
was not from the apaxtaent ot Juatics or the FBi, ao I had local aouroos of everything
Iron boosa to infoxmatior.

(It wna a dzy county and I wan alao the orricial party's
runxrunnar whea the bootlegznrs'y
prioos got too bigh.

I ran lt from Jextngton, Ey., or
(,suoxudot auz so xomy pexouz pro uu ty &mueaofrtor
Wbon ny aourcos told me whan and how the Jury was Lixea and nobody fron Waahington
would belleve suoh a thing could happan, I decided it wae timo to return to the job at
4oatens ert snoge psou neux 1 eaaaoog # panarrog puu qtoamrude oq togqn taxy egutieg euy
Iserved aa thedr oxgort on snat thinge as duous tocm ubpenafu.

Somothang aase the
Waahingtan people aidn't expeot followed kadfataly upon ny depmrture, nix mxdera, of
gunthage lcfiling each Sther.

I wns tha oaly one who kney how they cona to pess and I wam
aafely axay only houre berore the rtrat of then.

It and detadla ot the parsanal liven or
uoTr wswg eu4 *uepao, toz ueraoy 4Jer ox ozoyoq *Aupung euo *gtan PrT axrT san 41
Hokahon, who Was standing near It whan we hoard a roine, whtpped the doox ef my hotei
*sndp   o o Ta pdo mor
aoeiatant AG.

in aharge ot the Cridnal Divieione
ne pu tear oao gne an ta bexry Deno suIe out axooe
had a chautfeur who got ao scared ar heing bLwon up shau he turned the mitah on that he
the tiag-deputiou who wexe Looking for local chargau they conld pdn on us.

Welly K.

opkina, an anantent A.Q.

Iatez ired by ohn Lows an ta conaral oounsol whan I wis
anmored Puiak.

With thone two atorien it ia ny intention to give a little ot the oondftiona umder
whioh the federal proseoution worised as muah as Looal oolor.

The conditlons of the mdnera, apesially those evan suapectod ot wanting the unton.--- PAGE BREAK ---

With thone two atorien it ia ny intention to give a little ot the oondftiona umder
whioh the federal proseoution worised as muah as Looal oolor. The conditlons of the mdnera, apesially those evan suapectod ot wanting the unton. Ka so exan y3oexuz pue Arodouou Tagoriso ue aooure aun earrio oraspazouy aeen Aapoz
any mob but by teiopezatora. throngh tho muchinery ot congany townm. The opexators were
alao without aympathy for eaoh ethex it one was suageoted or oottoning to Washington. 1
up azepuoaroo orou  Supzouphaa eu puw Taop Apoqoog soy xakkur pacxu-oro out zequrmar
my room in London. Wlthia dayn Peabody's Harlan aine was bombed and burnaa. *Konou sou tayzoe ur gred atan Lous up Itruuogaleoxo aaanre #ion meoprd onorr *otosu
and oould spend lt at the coapany store only. Phey were never eut ot debt and oonld not
eren move whan they were in debt. Boatdesg the oparutors ovaaed all the shacks. Pearl Banahan, who ran the Harlen-Wallins Coal Co., a ssall mnn whg lookod like a
Central Caatinga job on a Yankee storaicoepar, wan probabiy tho moat erfecient in mkimming
souaqo  xoy xong t *fen potziut  xoy xong 9 *xyoxoeuo Taaz 2 pur og *rroxan uno spu
qouo por oyuond *din taquan swn peupwrdnoo ogn eafordse Aury *osa tteo  Jo spozn t mo
*Lpeen potirax Leopang troee zoy pacroop sex oakordieo
epeaad gape spu zu naHog xat Jo uereanbe zngty og peg y xrwu Laz deoxe
Jails aa I xmenbar uncier the #tepe of either the officen or the compeny storea. the Iawy. 10c格 or it。
Thare was an authantio horo, a lay preachar/miner aotually nsmed Karahall Nundok. Hot that many yore not beroic. Juat living there was hereiem. But thesa untll-then
moguny qooedn twqteqazrtg aty Jo toropztetnd eny emg *4reT Araex ordood xoot-upuyunou
was boaten up end oriypled. ie probably held the rocord for beatngs survivod. Once he wi

--- PAGE BREAK ---+
kieked along a railroad traek and boaten with,gunbutts until ha was though dead.

But
ho stayed and preaohed and organized.

He didn t oven taku hin faudly out or Herlan
tntil his bouse was abot up by a motorcade ofdeputiea.

As I reoell arter all these years,
some of hs kdg weze cilled in bed and he took hia wife'and smrvlvinglciag to Tenneasee
and then returned to continse spraedtng the word.

Herely living ln Harlen and worieing in the sines were acte of personal horodem thene
Tha opezators could operate this tyranny because of thefr polltioal contrel of the
conl axreas.

lt waa onough to oontrol Kentuoky slections.

One of their Lawyero and ona or the lending defense lenyera at the trtal wms solm I.

xuut T eat upus so zmwnoxdertue /oerarrod  ATareotxno sg exaua xoqeet Aou nog morg
it is hia son.

Among tho otheru in the gorernment party who Later becane modestly fanous
yare Eenxy Sohveinhaut, Luter a judge.

His wfdou, Hargazot, is prominent Ia ontgonoxy
Coumnty polition.

J.H Holrernay, a Fordhan Lawyer and lise moat, a davout Catholia, was
the Fai agant in abaxge.He miitobed to Juattce from the FBi beceune of the fina impresaion
lio made on brien, who was ths pcotogo of Homer Cuanngn, then A.

(And Latar a friond ot
sopo oz ooar aTe (*queppeazd aoTA snan st trotx oenon ouarg zeorog a Ana os #an toaTreu
of the lands Division, later Criasinnl.

Ee wea a rine gy and vex heoann good frloeds.

tanght mo what I have forgotten, how to talce his atztonatio pdatol apaxt and put It togother
again bitndfolded, so I could ride shotaum for hin wbon there wnn no agent to do It.

Thoy
Noriced lu pairs.

And thero were timea whan I aroucbed behdnd the door of the car pointing
that piatol to oovar Jim whan he walked uy to the door of a meuntain house.

Bxedting daya
for a 24-year~ola!

suppa ouo ptrn Aaead maupomon azon foul prut azan sogtnd smo yo tmou eren osnog
when I was woricing and not thase a jouxnaligtic eadnence of the day pursued a roluatent
other wousen phoned sme.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bxedting daya
for a 24-year~ola! suppa ouo ptrn Aaead maupomon azon foul prut azan sogtnd smo yo tmou eren osnog
when I was woricing and not thase a jouxnaligtic eadnence of the day pursued a roluatent
other wousen phoned sme. Thmro was no doctor of the few in the aren wbo tas hoaa. The only
PTp sdoTe eue mon g4fr quaae on zzuy poazndmn sun I) ttaa p Gnn atot ae prnoo I &teu
xaaooy snoqu xouto  ope Reg Arrer xrot xar ou4 aoxy tmayzr on4 corsxwd rauo ot
Vnakington coliumnist, george Dixon. Ha was then our "rudloal" and mont tnyrobanly, bed
The vay in wziah tha juzy was Cixed wen adaple and sffeotive even with noguestration. 30 oao uonoxvt cnox od p4 sat 0 xoTzs sau sun 4r #aleastoe dn suarou axosuxodo el
xtero eut oun outoary *gooznos Auso ouo san tan eaett Jo eu *Cmf op Sarprom Baoqs
the Lanyers and agents. Be was n aice suy who waa trinted by the other looal nice gyu. Hy boat Local friamd wam a Lanyer sho rornined a alose friend for yearu aftor he
had to Laave and until his mnrriage soured. e aamo fron ore cf the more fanous familione
ptaoo ordo Aan Auu ppad 4oa ag +oapiouad zatio ou aatg prnoo oat suaan ton *xood auy yo
woric and the materiala. He waa the local force for deoency. Somshow be aoqudred throe
saall wenklles in the area, The London Timos, The Manohanter Gunrdian and one more
Lrstaeo Suspney re qreeu ouz ug sen xezaeqoaayt *touratog uouron qunog ots pensta Arauepour
Once when he was avay defending an umpopular cliont for the Acuu in Lexington hia wife
aaked me to drive erar the Manaheatar with her to try and colloot sone mouey oved them. She feared ir he did lt thoy would ahoot hin. Posaible, teo. But not a wonnn. And ahe was
a gzetty Portugosa voran ho had met in aollege in alifarnia. I remenber that weel vell
becauge when the iondon yaper had to go to preas she noeded mora oopy. One or the stories
I wrote was af the night before'a mecand Lavia-Sobseling fight. (i hoad was *Joe still
ohaupy Max atil Schmelling." On, the groana!)n yaper had to go to preas she noeded mora oopy. One or the stories
I wrote was af the night before'a mecand Lavia-Sobseling fight. (i hoad was *Joe still
ohaupy Max atil Schmelling." On, the groana!)

--- PAGE BREAK ---preas she noeded mora oopy. One or the stories
I wrote was af the night before'a mecand Lavia-Sobseling fight. (i hoad was *Joe still
ohaupy Max atil Schmelling." On, the groana!)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This Iriend was hipped on the anoentor for yhon iohaumad All was named, not Henry.
Casfus Clay was quite a man, an abolitianist editor in alave territyry. "inooin sont hin
as anbassador to Buseda to save hie life after he had won about us many Tights as cne
man oould oxpect to siurvlve.He'd mais a heliuva novie with tbe X-rated the roality.
Ne had to leave Rusaian because ot an arfair with s womnn in tha Czur'e family.
I wander as T remeaber auid I xuat get to work.
Another itam in yeaturday s nams oarrled se beck, but only four yenra. You mny
Bs 1 wguomoop ot4 *gupupuaxag-uerd 2pt 4anorpuprty ouz Jo 4zosupo stt ug *coqaemex
you and others proving he was a yareotiaing liar. They were attaohed to the oomplaint
in the fixat of my Freedou ot Infozmatlon aulta, nona ever xoported. They have the
sane xeoord on Mitohell und even iriclude ay uncontontod and unpuni shed chnrges ot
pu ateut JT pazup uobq earu pnon peueddn aoyn xs tepron oayo I ntxod Toporxro
been any expoaure of thia ofrioinl diabonenty and corruption or whiah I dld have and
4aut trg suomaspmf Arausms paqxodetin oure  4os 1 *yootd Atruey ooueprae opraor prp
firat caso.(Pat Gray and Rucicelshaus Tiguzed in than offiaially and I believe unofrioially
Jaffa. I lcnou Jarre ie part ot the story thnt inaludes your cnetimn quent, for JrK'e
brain.) I have another one rilod nou, also lgmored, in whiah the umreportod reoord
is overloaded with the same and I think cxonsos iato both perjury uad subornatton.
With ay earllor axperieroes I do nthfng to attrnot nttention to those suita, being
able to afford naither the tine no the coat whan thare is no apparont intaraat in
then. I an contont to sorve soriou purposes and to butld a rocard that zay have value
only in hdstory. Ahd neybe none day a federnl judge wlll got uptight over sotebody
othex than mo.
This one has the potentiel. And the meoond one ls before the Suyrene
ourtfor
oert. It will be preoedent under the invantigatoryirllea exenptiou. The goveranent has
just aaiked for ita second extanaioan. Hov the preas could heve ignorad what Danaher
writer ehould bo forever torfended from saking inquiry.Or,prdor restreiat in a
blassing. Hla lant words, in capu, wexe T think unigue in a deodaion, Requisoat in
Well, I hopa I haven'$ bored you.
And thankca for tha tranaoripta I eakad fooe
Barcarely.
P.S. Tha laat tine I was in Harlan was the weak after World War II started. The Ui
and ruined nan, George Pitler.woorge had the gute to stay in iarlan tom. end hs made
the bast Pennaylvania Dutch sauer kraut and ribe I ever tastod, topped off with a
viait,and was ceraain to got to Briatol before gundonm. That was only two years after
the ikillensstarted lilling themaelves and some of their friands might have figured out
howitallatarted.