INTRODUCTION.
The desire of the author of this small treatise is, not so much
to explain in harmony with a plane earth, all the wonderful phe­
nomena in Nature, as to incite a more critical investigation uito
Natural Science.
Individuality of observation is a sure method of
ascertaining the truth, therefore, he desires to help beginners over
the threshold of this particular branch of science.
His object is to
contribute towards helping thoughtful and truth-seeking men to solve
the problem that true science and true religion are not antagonistic;
but that the God of the Bible, the Creator of all things, is har­
monious in all H is works and words.
“ I have made the earth and created man upon it.
I, even my
hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I
commanded . . . . I am God, there is none else.”
Such a Being is worthy of our reverence and worship.
Astronomy took its rise in the East.
Since those days when
the earth was yoimg, many, indeed, have been the various “ world
systems.”
In spite of opposition, the Newtonian-Copemican system
Jias
prevailed.
“ But a reasonable motion of the sun through
space, discovered and established by Sir W. Herschel, and others,
tends to deprive ‘ the system ’ of those pretty pictures in concentric
circles.”
On many sides one hears rumours of a proposed change,
in fact, some scientists have already changed.
Sir Richard Phillips
goes so far as to call Sir I. Newton’s ideas “ execrable superstitions,”
and he also says:
“ W oe to him who for another century shall oppose
them.”
W ell, from the great interest taken in the author’s lectures
upon this subject he feels sure that this book will meet with a good
reception.
It is a large and interesting subject.
The study of it
can do nothing but good.
T he following words from a work on “ Liberty,” by John
Stuart Mill, should secure an impartial reading of the work.
“ If there are any persons who contest a received opinion, or
will do so if law or opinion will let them, let us thank them for it,
open our minds to listen to them, and rejoice that there is someone
to do for us what we otherwise ought, if we have any regard for
either the certainty or vitality of our convictions, to do with much
gieater labour for ourselves.”
F R E D E R IC K H E N R Y CO O K .
35 a, Lymington Avenue,
Noel Park, London, N.
England.
May, igo8.ther the certainty or vitality of our convictions, to do with much
gieater labour for ourselves.”
F R E D E R IC K H E N R Y CO O K .
35 a, Lymington Avenue,
Noel Park, London, N.
England.
May, igo8.

--- PAGE BREAK ---r vitality of our convictions, to do with much
gieater labour for ourselves.”
F R E D E R IC K H E N R Y CO O K .
35 a, Lymington Avenue,
Noel Park, London, N.
England.
May, igo8.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 0
TH E T ER R EST R IA L PLA N E.
NEBULA PHILOSOPHY AND GRAVITY.
Professor H aeckel informs us that “ the world is nothing else
than an eternal ‘ evolution of substance,’ ” and that this “ periodical
process of evolution ” is really caused by “ the inherent primitive
properties of substance— -feeling and inclination ”— which he says,
are “ active causes”— W hat does he mean?
He tells us in plain
and unmistakable language in the edition of the “ Riddle of the
U n iverse” of 1902, page 92, therein he says;—
“ N o philosopher has done more than Immanuel K ant in de­
fining the profound distinction between efficient and final causes,
with relation to the interpretation of the whole Cosmos.
In his well
Icnown earlier work on ‘ The General Natural History and Theory
of the H eaven s’ he made a bold attempt ‘ to treat the constitution
and the mechanical origin of the entire fabric of the universe accord­
ing to the Newtonian laws.’
This ‘ cosmological nebular theorj' ’
was based entirely on the mechanical phenomena of gravitation.
It
was expanded and mathematically established later on by La-Place.
W hen the famous French astronomer was asked by Napoleon I. where
God, the Creator and sustainer of all things, came in in his system,
he clearly and honestly replied; ‘ S i r e , I h a v e m a n a g e d w i t h o u t
THAT h y p o t h e s i s -’
That indicated the atheistic character which this
mechanical cosmogony shares with all other inorganic sciences.
This
is the more noteworthy because the theory of Kant and La-Place is
now almost universally accepted; every attempt to supersede it has
failed.
When atheism is denounced as a grave reproach, as it often
is, it is well to remember that the reproach extends to the whole of
m odem science, in so far as it gives a purely mechanical interpreta­
tion of the inorganic world.”
Haeckel, in common with others of his school of thought,
denies the existence of the Creator, in fact, he goes further, and says
that the notion has gone for ever, and that the “ eternal iron laws of
nature ” have taken the place of G o d ; and Haeckel arrives at this
conclusion though— philosophy.
H e candidly admits that “ ithe
greatest
triumphs
of modem
science— the
cellular
theoiy,
the
dynamic theory of heat, the theory of evolution, and the law of sub­
stance— are p h i l o s o p h i c a c h i e v e m e n t s .”
T he Apostle Paul says:
“ Beware lest any man spoil you through
p h i l o s o p h y .”'
H e
also says :
“ K eep that which is committed to thy trust
.
.
.
.avoiding the oppositions of science falsely so called.”
W here should we look for Tm th?

In the H oly Scriptures that are
“ able to make us wise unto salvation.”
T hey warn us against man’s
“ philosophy,” and man’s “ vain deceit.”
Thus guiding us amid the
conflicting and ever-changing theories of men who know not God
n e b u l a p h ilo s o p h y a n d g r a v i t y .

41
and yet consider themselves w ise!

N ot only do they consider them­
selves wise, but far above a faithful follower of the lowly Nazarene!

H aeckel informs us that, “ Christ Him self had no knowledge wihat-
ever of astronomy— indeed, H e looked out upon heaven and earth.

Nature and man, from the very narrowest geocentric a«d anthropo-
centric point of view-”
Considering the sublime ceaching of C hm t
as to the duty of man to man, and man to Go<J, his comprehensive
view of man’s life here and hereafter, it is but a step from the sub­
lime to the ridiculous to fu r th e r consider such a criticism on the Son
of God, who knew, as Christ did, the will and ways o f God to fit
Him to be the heir of all things.

W e will continue our investigations further as to when, and
how, the world began to evolve itself.

In the beginning there was gas, or a “ nebulous cloud,” accord­
ing to scientists and evolutionists.W e will continue our investigations further as to when, and
how, the world began to evolve itself.

In the beginning there was gas, or a “ nebulous cloud,” accord­
ing to scientists and evolutionists.

This is rather a difficult subject
to deal with, because, as we have already read, there was .scientifi­
cally, no beginning— just an “ eternal evolution of substance.”
Any­
way there was a time when this “ nebulous cloud ” arose— never
mind where it came from, for no scientist has yet even attempted an
explanation on this point, although its existence requires s o m i>
accounting for, considering that it was inorganic matter, and it
possessed the powers of “ feeling and inclination.”
According to
La-Place, “ the particles forming the cloud were verj' hot,” he was
not there to see, but I only mention this because some scientists, like
Herbert Spencer, state that the “ embryo universe ” was cold.

Any­
way, /hot or cold, the particles by universal suffrage, or by some
other method, unknown to scientists, took upon themselves to form
the “ solar sy s te m th e re fo re , it was necessary that this “ diffused
fire mist ” should condense a little, and move its particles a little
closer together, “ according to Newtonian laws.”
As the Newtonian
laws of attraction, or gravitation, formed the basis of this “ world
building nebular theory,” let us consider these laws.

Sir Robert Ball tells us, that “ every body in the universe attracts
every other body.”
He also says that “ the law of gravitation under­
lies the whole of astronomy.”
But when we read in a “ Million of
Pacts,” by Sir Richard Phillips, th a tU n iv e r s a l gravitation
.

.

is an utterly impossible mode of action,” I think it time we consulted
Sir I.

Newton on the matter.

I find, according to a letter he sent to
D r.4 0
TH E T ER R EST R IA L PLA N E.
NEBULA PHILOSOPHY AND GRAVITY.
Professor H aeckel informs us that “ the world is nothing else
than an eternal ‘ evolution of substance,’ ” and that this “ periodical
process of evolution ” is really caused by “ the inherent primitive
properties of substance— -feeling and inclination ”— which he says,
are “ active causes”— W hat does he mean?
He tells us in plain
and unmistakable language in the edition of the “ Riddle of the
U n iverse” of 1902, page 92, therein he says;—
“ N o philosopher has done more than Immanuel K ant in de­
fining the profound distinction between efficient and final causes,
with relation to the interpretation of the whole Cosmos.
In his well
Icnown earlier work on ‘ The General Natural History and Theory
of the H eaven s’ he made a bold attempt ‘ to treat the constitution
and the mechanical origin of the entire fabric of the universe accord­
ing to the Newtonian laws.’
This ‘ cosmological nebular theorj' ’
was based entirely on the mechanical phenomena of gravitation.
It
was expanded and mathematically established later on by La-Place.
W hen the famous French astronomer was asked by Napoleon I. where
God, the Creator and sustainer of all things, came in in his system,
he clearly and honestly replied; ‘ S i r e , I h a v e m a n a g e d w i t h o u t
THAT h y p o t h e s i s -’
That indicated the atheistic character which this
mechanical cosmogony shares with all other inorganic sciences.
This
is the more noteworthy because the theory of Kant and La-Place is
now almost universally accepted; every attempt to supersede it has
failed.
When atheism is denounced as a grave reproach, as it often
is, it is well to remember that the reproach extends to the whole of
m odem science, in so far as it gives a purely mechanical interpreta­
tion of the inorganic world.”
Haeckel, in common with others of his school of thought,
denies the existence of the Creator, in fact, he goes further, and says
that the notion has gone for ever, and that the “ eternal iron laws of
nature ” have taken the place of G o d ; and Haeckel arrives at this
conclusion though— philosophy.
H e candidly admits that “ ithe
greatest
triumphs
of modem
science— the
cellular
theoiy,
the
dynamic theory of heat, the theory of evolution, and the law of sub­
stance— are p h i l o s o p h i c a c h i e v e m e n t s .”
T he Apostle Paul says:
“ Beware lest any man spoil you through
p h i l o s o p h y .”'
H e
also says :
“ K eep that which is committed to thy trust
.
.
.
.

Newton on the matter. I find, according to a letter he sent to
D r. Bentley, February, 1692, that he expressed the opinion, “ that
attraction should be innate and inherent in matter so that one body
can act upon another at a distance— is to me so great an absurdity,
that I believe no man, who has. in philosophical matters, a competent
faculty of thinking can ever fall into it.”
I shall never fall into it,
especially considering Sir I Newton’s words, that;—
“ Gravity must be caused by an agent acting according to certain
laws, but whether this agent be material or immaterial I have left
to the consideration of my readers.”
Professor Bernstein’s considera­
tion is, th a t:—ed by an agent acting according to certain
laws, but whether this agent be material or immaterial I have left
to the consideration of my readers.”
Professor Bernstein’s considera­
tion is, th a t:—

--- PAGE BREAK ---4 2
TH E T ER R EST R IA L PLA N E.

“ T1i€ theory that motions are produced through material attrac­
tion is absurd.”
Perhaps Sir I.

Newton agrees, for he says :—
“ What I call attraction may be performed by impulse, or by
some other means unknown to me.”
W ell, if Sir I.

Newton does not
know we muat not be surprised that, C.

V.

Boys, F .R .S ., etc., says:
“ It is a mysterious power which no man can explain; of its
propagation through space all men are ignorant-”
I quite believe
this, and also the following, written by Professors Singer and Berens:
“ A body on earth falls to the ground, this is observation, body
and earth attTact each other, this is an obvious (?) and necessary
inference and inference only.”
Dear me!

I shnll believe as Professor
W.

B.

Carpenter says :—
“ W e have no certain experience at all
.

.

.

iVie doctrine of
universal gravitation then is a pure assuinptiott.”
T he fact is that “ gravity” is not required, there is not the
slightest evidence in the universe around U5 of the existence of such
a “ miysterious power.”
In Joyce’s “ Scientific Dialogues,” we read :—
“ It seems very surprising that philosophers, who have dis­
covered so many things, have not been able to find out the cause of
gravity.

H ad Sir I.

Newton been asked why a marble, dropped from
the hand, falls to the ground, could he not have assigned a reason?

That great man, probably the greatest man that ever adorned the
world, was as modest as he was great, and he would have told you
he knew not the cause.”
This is valuable evidence, coming from believers in the theorj’
of gravitation.

T h e learned Dr.

Price asks:—
“ Who does not remember a time when he would have wondered
at the question, w h y d o e s w a t e r r u n d o w n h il l ?

W hat ignorant
man is there who is not persuaded that he understands this per­
fectly?

But every i m p r o v e d man knows it to be a question he can­
not answer.W hat ignorant
man is there who is not persuaded that he understands this per­
fectly?

But every i m p r o v e d man knows it to be a question he can­
not answer.

For the descent of water, like that of other heavy
bodies, depends on the attraction of gravitation, the cause of which
is still involved in darkness.”
W eill It is astounding!

Newton invents a theory, which ad­
mittedly has no known foundation in Nature; a pulling, a pushing
power called “ gravitation.”
Nobody understands its working, no
one knows anything about its cause, it has never been seen, tested,
or felt, yet such a person as Pope wrote;—
“ Nature and Nature’s laws lay hid in night;
God said : ‘ Let Newton be,’ and all was light.”
W here is the light?

A question is asked of an “ improved man,”
and he cannot answer!

Why does water run down hill ?

Why does
it not run up hill?

If the earth is a globe it does both!

Fancy!

There are, so scientists say.

21,923,200 cubic miles of land, and
323,722,000 cubic miles of water in the “ globe.”
Whatever keeps
this preponderance of water underneath, and on the top, and on the
sides, and all round the outside of the comparatively small portion
NEBULA p h i l o s o p h y
AIsD GRAVITY.

of “ land ” ?

W ater
d o e s run down hill.

Why does it not run
down the globe hill— and fall off ?

Light is com ing!— “ Gravity
is a theoretical power necessary to the theory that the solar system
made itself into numerous rotating whirling globes, each one that
has been, is, or will be capable, perhaps, of supporting life, as we
understand it, upon its surface.”
Apart from this theory, in all its
ramifications, gravity can find no place in Nature.

Leave paper astronomy, and come out in the light of Nature.

W hy does a balloon ascend ?

Because bulk for bulk it is lighter than
air.

It will rise to a position; at that elevation it will stay because
it will have found its equilibrium.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Because bulk for bulk it is lighter than
air. It will rise to a position; at that elevation it will stay because
it will have found its equilibrium. When it loses its bulk by an
escape of gas, it will collapse and descend to earth again, for the
simple reason that its weight is greater than that of the air it dis­
places. Wood floats in water; a piece of solid iron sinks; why? Because bulk for bulk the wood is lighter than the water it displaces,
whereas bulk for bulk the iron Is heavier than the water. The denser
a body the greater its weight; recognising this truth scientists say—
gravity is another name for weight. They may call it “ gravitation
if they choose to do so; but when an apple falls to the earth, it falls
by its own weight when released from the stalk on which it grew j
not because the apple has been pulled by the earth, or the earth
pulled by the apple. Considering all the contradictions and uncertainties of tlie
“ scientific world,” as to what is, or is not gravity,— its ven- existence
being questioned, the following words, by Professor T. H. Huxley,
are highly significant:—
“ If the law of gravitation ever failed to be true even to the
■smalle.'t extent, for that period the calculations of the astronomer
have no application.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---re highly significant:—
“ If the law of gravitation ever failed to be true even to the
■smalle.'t extent, for that period the calculations of the astronomer
have no application.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 4
TH E T ER R EST R IA L PLA N E.
DISCOVERY OF NEPTUNE.
From the foregoing chapter it is obvious that “ science” can
supply no information when we ask for the origin of matter or
motion.
In fact, when we ask about origins, “ science ” is dumb ! The
“ world building ” scientists wBo Build on atoms— or little some­
things— cannot prove the atomic theory upon which they build; or
even tell us the origin of atoms; or how they came to be difused-
through space, or by what law diffused matter did aggregate.
Cam ille Flammarion, a popular astronomer, says:—
“ The most probable hypothesis, the most scientific theory, is
that which represents the sun as a condensed nebula.
This carries
us back to an unknown epoch, when this nebula occupied the pre­
sent place of the solar system.
.
.
.
Let us imagine, then, an
immense gaseous mass placed in space-
Attraction is a force in­
herent in every atom of matter.
The denser portion of this mass
will insensibly attract toward it the other parts, and, in the slow fall
of the more distant molecules toward this more attractive region,
a general motion is produced, incompletely directed toward this
centre and soon involving the whole mass in the same motion of
rotation^
.
.
It has begun to turn so quicklv as to develop, at
the exterior circumference, a centrifugal force sup>erior to the general
attraction of the mass, as when we whirl a sling; the inevitable con­
sequence of this excess is a rupture of the equilibrium, which detaches
an external ring.
This gaseous ring will continue to rotate in the
same time and with the same velocity; but the nebulous matter will
be henceforth detached, and will continue to undergo progressive
condensation and acceleration of motion.
This same feat will be
reproduced ag often as the velocity of rotation surpasses that by
which the centrifugal force remains inferior to the attraction.”
According to this “ scientific theory^”— this “ most probable
hypothesis,” the “ planets ” were detached from the condensed sun
mass, we are to imagine how.
Lord Salisbury when President of the British Association for the
Advancement of Science, asked the following question, that has not
yet been answered :—
“ If the earth is a detached bit, whirled off the mass of the
sun, how comes it that, in leaving him, we cleaned him out so com­
pletely of his nitrogen and oxygen that not a trace of these gases
remains to be discovered, even by the sensitive vision of the spectro­
scope ? ”
Sir Robert Ball informs us that, “ some of the elements which
are of the greatest importance on the earth would appear to be mis>-e discovered, even by the sensitive vision of the spectro­
scope ? ”
Sir Robert Ball informs us that, “ some of the elements which
are of the greatest importance on the earth would appear to be mis>-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing from the sun.

Sulphur, phosphorus, mercurv', gold, nitrogen
may be mentioned among the elements which have hitherto given no
indication of their being solar constituents.”
But there are many objections to the probabihty of the nebular
theory being true, even supposing the world to be a globe.

It is
well known that the planets revolve around the sun from west to
east; but, totally ignoring the nebular hypothesis, it was stated a
short tune back by Professor Lankester, that “ one of the satellites
of Saturn went round that planet the wrong w ay!— thus calling for
a fundamental revision of our ideas of the origin of the solar system.”
This is not the only instance-
The “ moons ” of Uranus instead of
rotating from west to east rotate from east to west!

while the planes
of their revolution are nearly at right angles to the orbit of their
“ parent,” Uranus!

Sir Robert Ball says that “ we are not in a
p>osition to give any satisfactory explanation of this circumstance.”
I am about to describe now, what Sir Robert Ball calls “ a
discovery so extraordinaiy' that the whole annals of science may be
searched in vain for a parallel.”
I must be as brief as possible and
yet “ develop the account of this striking epoch in the history of
science with the fulness of detail which is commensurate with its
importance.”
It is supposed that the supreme controlling power in the solar
system is the attraction of the sun.

and that every planet in the system
revolves around the sun in an elliptic path.

Newton’s laws of gravi­
tation, of course, underlies all this supposition.

According to this law
every body in the universe attracts every other body.

T he planet
Uranus was observed to have “ perturbations.”
L e Verrier, a great
French astronomer, set himself to investigate the cause of this dis­
turbance!.--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to this law
every body in the universe attracts every other body. T he planet
Uranus was observed to have “ perturbations.”
L e Verrier, a great
French astronomer, set himself to investigate the cause of this dis­
turbance!. The influences of older planets were found to be inade­
quate to account for the perturbations, so L e Verrier commenced a
search, by the aid of mathematical investigation, for an unknovTO
planet. It also appears that another astronomer, Mr. Adams,
had undertaken the same task as Le Verrier, each being ignorant of
the others labour. Now for the “ discover\\”
On the night of the 23rd of September, the sky being clear, a
telescope was pointed in accordance with Le Verrier’s instructions. The field of view showed a multitude of stars. One of these was
really the planet Neptune. The next night the object was again
observed. “ It had moved, and when its motion was measured it
was found to accord precisely with what Le Verrier had foretold. Indeed, as if no circumstance in the confirmation should be wanting,
the diameter of the planet, as measured by the micrometers at Berlin,
proved to be practically coincident with that anticipated by Le
Verrier.”
“ The world speedily rang with the news of this splendid achieve­
ment. Instantly the name of L e Verrier rose to a pinnacfe hardly
surpassed by that of any astronomer of any age or countr}'. The
circumstances of the discover,- were highlv dramatic. We picture
the great astronomer buried in profound meditation for many
months; his eyes are bent, not on the stars, but on his calculations. DISCOVERY OF N EPT U N E. 4 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---iSio telescope is in his hand; the human intellect is the instruinent
he alone uses.

With patient labour, guided by consummate mathe­
matical skill, he manipulates his columns of fi^^ures.

He attempts one
solution after another.

In each he learns something to avoid; by
(each he obtains some light to guide him in his future labours.

At
length he begins to see harmony in those results, when before there
was discord.

Gradually the clouds disperse, and he discerns with a
certainty little short of actual vision, the planet glittering in the
far depths of space.

H e rises from his desk aiad invokes the aid of
a practical astronomer; and lo !

there is the planet in the indicated
spot.

The annals of science present no such spectacle as this.

It
was the most triumphant proof of the law of universal gravitation.'’—
Sir R.

Ball.

The joyful bells of the scientific world, however, soon stopped
ringing.

The above “ splendid achievement,” “ the most triumphant
pnx)f of the law of universal gravitation,” has been weighed in the
balances and found wanting.

Mr.

Babinet, September 15th, 1848, read a paper before the
French Academy of Sciences, as follow s:—
“ The only sittings of the Academy of late in which there was
anything worth recording, and even this was not of a practical
character, were those of the 29th, and the iith .

On the former
day jM.

13abinet made a communication respecting the planet Nep­
tune, which has been generally called M- Le Verrier’s planet, the
discovery of it having, as it was said, been made by him from
theoretical deductions which astonished and delighted the scientific
public.

What M.

Le Verrier had inferred from the action on
other planets of some body which ought to exist was verified— at
least, so it was thought at the time— by actual vision.

Neptune
was actually seen by other astronomers, and the honour of the
theorist obtained additional lustre.

But it appears from a com­
munication of M.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Neptune
was actually seen by other astronomers, and the honour of the
theorist obtained additional lustre. But it appears from a com­
munication of M. Babinet, that this is not the planet of Le Verrier. H e had
placed his planet at a distance from the sun equal to
thirty-six times the limit of the terrestrial orbit. Neptune revolves
at a distance equal to thirty times of these limits, which makes a
difference of nearly
t w o
h u n d r e d
m i l l i o n s
o f
l e a g u e s ! Le
Verrier had assigned to his planet a body equal to thirty-eight
times that of the earth; Neptune has only o n e t h i r d of this volum e! M. Le Verrier had stated the revolution of his planet round the
sun to take place in two hundred and seventeen years; Neptune per­
forms its revolutions in one hundred and sixty-six years 1 Thus, then,
Neptune is not M. L e Verrier’s planet, and all his theory as regards
that planet falls to the ground! M. L e Verrier may find another
planet, but it will not ans-\ver the calculations v.'hich he made for
Neptune. “ In the sitting of the T4th, M. Le Verrier noticed the com­
munication of M. Babinet, and to a great extent admitted hi.s own
errnr. He complained, indeed, that much of what he said was taken
in too absolute a sense, but he evinces much more candour than
might have been expected from a disappointed explorer. M. I-e
^6
TH E T ER R EST R IA L PLA N E.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he said was taken
in too absolute a sense, but he evinces much more candour than
might have been expected from a disappointed explorer. M. I-e
^6
TH E T ER R EST R IA L PLA N E.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Verrier may console himself with the reflection that if he has not
been so successful as he thought he had been, others might have
been equally unsuccessful; and as he has still before him an im­
mense field for the exercise of observation and calculation, we may
hope that he will soon make some discovery which will remove the
vexation of his present disappointment.”— “ Times ” Newspaper, Sept.
i8th, 1848.
“ Cosmos,” by Hum boldt; and “ Earth not a G lobe,”
by “ Parallax.”
It must not be supposed that Neptune was never observed until
the time of the above recorded “ discovery.”
Several instances have
been discovered of Neptune being noted, and marked as a star on
the catalogues of earlier astronomers.
On May 8th and loth, 1795,
Lalande observed the same star.
Even supposing that L e Verrier had fully proved his case, it
would neither have proved the theory of gravitation true, nor the
tremendous distances of the stars and their gigantic sizes as postu­
lated.
The perturbations of Uranus were more likely caused by the
known powers of magnetism and electricity, for we must not lose
sight of the fact that there is every reason to suppose and believe
that the sun is the seat of electrical phenomena.
A s to the distances
and size of the stars we shall have more to say later on, but with
assurance we say now that there is not an astronomer who knows
the distance or size of any one of them.
One is led to believe that
the star distances and magnitudes are calculated according to the
method John Wesley suggested was employed— “ distance proves the
magnitude, and the great magnitude proves the tremendous distance.’’
DISCOVERY OF N EPTU N E.
4 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---cording to the
method John Wesley suggested was employed— “ distance proves the
magnitude, and the great magnitude proves the tremendous distance.’’
DISCOVERY OF N EPTU N E.
4 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

E C L IP S E S .
5 7
ECLIPSES.
It is often asserted that “ the globular theor)' must be true because
astronomers can predict eclipses most accur-uely.”
If the capability
of predicting eclipses is going to determine the truth or other%vise of
any world system, we should get a confused medley of “ true systems!”
for all theories regarding the order of the universe claim the power
to foretell eclipses, one as accurately as the other.
It should be
recognised that practical astronomy— a science of observation, for
the study and development of which the Greenwich Observatory' was
established— is independent of any, and every theor}'.
Eclipses are
not timed by any calculation concerning the rate or distance at which
the earth be supposed to fly round the sun and the moon round the
earth, or by the rate at which the moon and the sun travel over the
earth.
T he calculations necessar)' to locate future eclipses are based
upon the records o f past obsen-ances of these periodically recurring—
phenomena.
Eclipses occur in cycles.
An eclipse of the moon occurs again
after a cycle of, practically, i8 years io } i days.
If all the eclipses
are observed in this period it would be possible to foretell all future
ones; a certain amount of mathematical skill, of course, is necessary.
It was by this rule that ancient astronomers accurately predicted
eclipses.
Thales, who lived 600 3'ears before the birth of Christ, predicted
eclipses.
Ptolemy also foretold eclipses for hundreds of years to
come.
Egyptian, Hindoo, and Chinese astronomers of ancient times
foretold eclipses.
A . M clnnes, in his work on “ Pagan Astronomy,”
says
“ More than 2,000
years ago the Chaldeans presented
to
Alexander the Great, at Babylon, tables of eclipses for 1,993 years;
and the ancient Greeks made use of the cycle of 18 years 11 days,
the interval betvveen two consecutive eclipses of the same dimensions
...............Mere theorising about the sun and moon— the great unerring
clocks of time— has thrown chronology and the calendar into con­
fusion, and hence scientists cannot agree as to the world’s age.”
If the facts already given are not suflScient to convince the reader
that the “ globular theory” has nothing whatever to do with the
accuracy of eclipse occurrences, the following, from “ New Principia,”
by Morrison, F .A .S .L ., R .N ., may effectually convince the student:—
“ Eclipses, occultations, the position of the planets, the motion
of the ‘ fixed stars,’ the whole of practical navigation, the grand
phenomena of the course of the sun, and the return of comets, may
all and every one of them be as accurately, nay, more accurately,
known without the farrago of mystery the
mathematicians
havend
phenomena of the course of the sun, and the return of comets, may
all and every one of them be as accurately, nay, more accurately,
known without the farrago of mystery the
mathematicians
have

--- PAGE BREAK ---58
TH E TE R R E ST R IA L PLA N E.

adopted to throw dust in the eyes of the people, and to claim honours
to which they have no just title .

.

.

.

The public, generally, be­
lieve that the longitudes of the heavenly bodies are calculated on
the principles of Newton’s laws.

Nothing could be more false.”
How are eclipses of the moon caused ?

Our astronomers of the
“ globular theory ” school tell us that a times comes when the earth
lies directly between the moon and the sun; the moon is thus
plunged into “ the shadow ” of the earth, the light from the sun that
the moon is siupposed to reflect is intercepted, and the moon is
eclipsed.

T his is very remarkable, and I doubt its possibility, con­
sidering that even in the, depth of a total eclipse the moon remains
visible, and actually glows with a bright copper coloured h u e; but
there are even greater objections than this against “ the shadow ”
theor)-.

Now, according to the “ globular theory,” a lunar eclipse occurs
when the sun, earth, and moon are in a direct line; but it is on record
that since about the 15th century over 50 eclipses have occurred
while both sun and moon have been visible above the horizon.

T he
accompanying illustration will show how utterly impossible it is to
harmonise this fact with even the globularists’ own theory.

T h e horizon to an observer on the earth would be at right angles
from a perpendicular line where he stood, and above this horizon—
overhead— was the sun and moon visible— the moon eclipsed.

One may read carefully a whole host of “ scientific ” books before
finding the information that there have been several instances of
lunar eclipses being seen with both sun and moon above the horizon
— why this silence?

Writing to the Astronomer Royal on this subject I was informed
that the above phenomenon was caused by “ refraction,” which caused
the :sun and moon toi appear “ above the horizon when wholly below
it.”
A h !

of course!Writing to the Astronomer Royal on this subject I was informed
that the above phenomenon was caused by “ refraction,” which caused
the :sun and moon toi appear “ above the horizon when wholly below
it.”
A h !

of course!

Professor Air}- once said:
“ One of the
most troublesome things an astronomer has to deal with is refraction.”'
But it seems a bit convenient at times I
Is the phenomenon of a
lunar eclipse with both sun and moon visible above the horizon
due to refraction?

L et us consider the position.

E C L IP S E S .

59
First, the globularists admit that the facts observed in Nature
relative to this case do not agree with their globular theory; that is
a proper admission to make.

A theo'iy concerning the operation of
“ refraction,” instead of clearing up the difiiculty, really adds to the
dilemma.

W hat has “ refraction” to do in the matter?

The moon has
visibly risen, and the sun has not yet set, in accordance with accurate
almanac time, and an eclipse of the moon is due, and takes place
through “ refraction.”
It must be “ refraction,” astronomers say so.

We will now deal with “ refraction.”
Refraction only operates when our line of sight, or a ray of light,
passes from one medium into another of different density.

Get a
basin; place it wherei a light causes part of the rim to cast a shadow
into the bow l; place, say, a penholder obliquely in the basin and then
pour in some water, and you will see that refraction will apparently
raise the immersed part of the penholder, while the shadow will go
back and down.

Now apply the experimental knowledge thus gained
to the theory before us.

If refraction did throw up the sun and
moon, then refraction would throw “ the shadow ” further down away
from the moon— and there could not be an eclipse.

And' so it is
impossible for astronomers to prove our earth— terra firma— to be a
heavenly body, whirling and spinning between the two luminaries, the
sun and moon.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If refraction did throw up the sun and
moon, then refraction would throw “ the shadow ” further down away
from the moon— and there could not be an eclipse. And' so it is
impossible for astronomers to prove our earth— terra firma— to be a
heavenly body, whirling and spinning between the two luminaries, the
sun and moon. They sa y : “ The shadow of the earth on the moon proves the
world a globe.”
Oh I
How are we to know that it is the shadow of
the earth? Is there any special way of identifying it? Might it
not be “ the shadow ” of some other moving dark body ? It is sup­
posed that the earth is a globe because the shadow on the moon is
curved; but it is not only a globe that can cast a circular shadow on
a sphere; experiment with an orange, a cube, and a lighted candle,
in a dark room, and whatever “ shadow ” that is cast on the orange
by the cube will be curved— how could it be otherwise? Eclipses of the moon may be caused in several ways. I do not
profess to know how they are produced, for I believe, as it says in
Ecclesiastes, 8th chap., that “ a man cannot find out all the work
that is done under the sun : because though a man labour to seek
it out, yet shall he not find it; yea, further, though a w se man think
to know it, yet shall he not be able to find it.”
W e cannot know
all the works of G od; we know that there are “ dark bodies ” in the
sky; the moon may be eclipsed by the periodical motion of one of
these. Eclipses of the sun and moon, or any celestial phenomena, can­
not prove the earth to be a globe, or even flat
It is most illogicaJ
to search the sky for “ proof” as to the shape of the earth. It is
quite possible to determine the figure of the earth while we are on
it; having done this, all that occurs in the sky must be explained_
if explained at all'— in harmony with the ascertained fact that the earth
is a plane.

--- PAGE BREAK ---6o
T H E T ER R EST R IA L PLA N E.

THE SUN’S DISTANCE.

Sir Richard Proctor, in his work on “ T he Sun,” informs us that
“ the determination of the sun’s distance is not only an important
problem of general astronomy, but it may be regarded a s t h e v e r y
FOUNDATION o r ALL OUR RESEARCH ES.”
So it is the foundation of
all their researches, in fact,
t h e a s s u m e d
d i s t a n c e
o f
t h e
s u n
FROM t h e e a r t h IS THE “ M EASURING ROD,” USED B Y THE ASTRONOM ER
TO DETERM INE ALL OTHER DISTANCES.

W hat is the length of this
measuring rod ?

What kind of “ foundation ” are the researches of
the astronomer built upon ?— let us see.

Sir Robert Ball informs us that “ the dimensions of our luminary
are commensurate with his importance.

Astronomers have succeeded
in the difficult task of ascertaining the exact figures, but they are so
gigantic that the results are hard to realise.”
H e says : “ T h e actual
distance of the sun from the earth is about 92,900,000 miles.”
Fancy
the “ actual distance” being “ about” !

N o doubt it is advisable to
have a saving clause “ about ” in the “ exact science ” of astronomy,
for Professors Airy and Stone gave the distance of the sun from the
earth as 91,400,000 miles.

Evidently t h e y made a slight mistake in a
few millions, because Encke knew the distance to-be 95,000,000 miles
— in winter, and a few millions less in summer.

This iis not an exact
scientific statement, considering that it is summer in one part of the
earth, and that it is w'inter in another part of the earth at the same time.

But
this is a scientific triffe; for after all, what is a matter of
2,000,000 miles in 95,000,000?

When we come to Copernicus we
find him stating that the distance of the sun from the earth to be
“ 3,000,000 ”— what!— your book says,
“ 5,000,000 miles ”— Oh,
yes, it is all right, the 3,000,000 miles was an earlier guess— I beg
pardon— calculation.But
this is a scientific triffe; for after all, what is a matter of
2,000,000 miles in 95,000,000?

When we come to Copernicus we
find him stating that the distance of the sun from the earth to be
“ 3,000,000 ”— what!— your book says,
“ 5,000,000 miles ”— Oh,
yes, it is all right, the 3,000,000 miles was an earlier guess— I beg
pardon— calculation.

The ideas of ancient astronomers as to- the distance of the sun
from the earth were not quite so great as the ideas of modern astro­
nomers, although, no doubt, they considered themselves quite as
accurate as do modem astronomers in their statements of “ actual
distance.”
Pythagoras gave as his
estimate of
the sun’s dis­
tance
from the earth
a matter of “ 44,000 miles.”
However,
he
was
wrong,
right
enough,
for
Tycho
Brahe,
and
others,
knew the distance of tihe sun to l)e
about
13,000,000 miles
above the earth,”
Some time afterward it was shown that even
Tycho Brahe was a few millions of miles out, and his “ observations ”
must have led Kepler millions of miles astray, for in 1670, Cassini
demonstrated, in the usual way of astronomers, that the distance of
the sun from the earth was '' 85,000,000 m iles.”
No doubt He did
his best; but of what avail were his efforts when Sir I.

Newton after­
wards gave the distance as “ 28,000,000 miles,” or “ 54,000,000” ;
no need to be particular, for Sir I.

Newton said, “ either distance
would do very well.”
I am sorn' to say it, but I am afraid Newton
was forgetful or ungrateful, as the basis of his labours were the laws
of K epler; but he totally ignored the distance of the sun from the
earth according to Kepler’s law— " 12,376,880 miles.”
t h e s u n s d i s t a n c e .

61
Mayer gives the sun’s distance as over 104,000,000 miles.Newton said, “ either distance
would do very well.”
I am sorn' to say it, but I am afraid Newton
was forgetful or ungrateful, as the basis of his labours were the laws
of K epler; but he totally ignored the distance of the sun from the
earth according to Kepler’s law— " 12,376,880 miles.”
t h e s u n s d i s t a n c e .

61
Mayer gives the sun’s distance as over 104,000,000 miles.

One
of the la,test globular fheories, "K oreshan Astronomy,” which claims
to interpret all ancient legends, and mythologies, and to furnish the
basis of all reason and science, emphatically states that the distance
of the sun from the earth is about “ 4,000 miles.”
Some say it is 96,000,000 of miles-
I do not give all the auttTo-
rities with their “ actual ” and “ about ” distances; but, according fo
the “ globular theory,” the distance of the sun from the earth may
be a n y t h i n g b e t w e e n “ 4,000 m i l e s ” a n d “ 104,000,000,” this re­
presents the astronomical “ measuring ro d ”— “ the foundation of all
our researches!

”
With the above futile results of attempts to ascertain the distance
of the sun before us, a thoughtful consideration of the following
Scripture may serve a useful purpose.

“ Thus saith Jehovah, which giveth the sun for a light by day,
and the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by nig'hit,
which divideth the sea when the waves thereof roar; the Jehovah of
Hosts is His name :
If these ordinances dejjart from before me,
saith the Lord, then the seed of Israel also shall cease from being
a Nation before me for ever.

Thus saith Jehovah;— “ I f h e a v e n
ABOVE CAN BE MEASURED, AND
THE FOUNDATION
OF THE EARTH
s e a r c h e d OUT BENEATH.

I will also cast off all the seed of Israel
for all that they have done.”
“ T h e heaven for height, and the earth for depth .

.

.

.--- PAGE BREAK ---

. . there
is no searching.”
Astronomers, with their various ideas concerning the sun’s dis­
tance, speak concerning millions of miles as though they were but
inches. In fact, it is as Joyce, in his “ Scientific Dialogues,” says;—
“ We talk of millions, with as much ease as of hundreds or tens,
but it is not, perhaps, possible for the mind to form any adequate
conception of such high numbers. Several
methods have been
adopted to assist the mind in comprehending these vast distances.”
You have some idea of the swiftness with which a cannon ball pro­
ceeds from the mouth of a gun— at the rate of about 8 miles in a
minute. T he numbers of minutes in a year is 525,600, so it would
take a cannon ball travelling at the rate of 8 miles a minute, 22 years
to reach the sun from the earth! The “ exact figures ” concerning the size of the sun are as various
and as unreliable as the distances given-
We are informed that the
sun is “ more than a million of times larger than the earth;” with a
diameter variously estimated by modern astronomers in harmony with
their different ideas as to its distance. According to Russell, the
diam.eter of the sun is 882,000 m iles; but Giberne says it has a
'diameter of 850,000 miles and Sir Robert Ball, of “ exact” Ogure
fam e, has found the diameter to be 866,000 miles. When this gigantic sun is considered one really must wonder
where the supply of fuel is obtained from, to maintain the great lieat
it must have. It is also curious to note (supposing, according to
modem astronomy, that all the heat we get actually comes from
the sun) that the nearer we get to the sun the greater is the coH. On lofty mountains, even under the equator, are to be found never

--- PAGE BREAK ---melting snows; and at sea level the hottest parts of the earth are
not under the equator (which, of course, is supposed to be nearest
the sun), but are places some degrees— about lo — north and south
of the equator.

Our astronomers seem to tiiink that their explana^
ticns concerning the earth and celestial phenomena are almost com­
plete.

They may yet learn that “ there is more in heaven and in earth
than is dreamt of in their philosophy.'’
Job said, in enumerating what he knew to be idolatry and sin
against G o d :—
“ If I beheld the sun when it shined, or the moon walking in
brightness, and my heart had been secretly enticed, or my mouth
had kissed my hand:
This were also an iniquity to be punished
by the Jud'ge: for I should have denied the God that is above.”
It is well-known that sun worship was practised at the time in
which Job lived; and many years after his time we find God’s pro­
phets lamenting the fact that those who by their knowledge ought
to have done better, were worshipping the sun, moon, and all the
host of heaven.

It will no doubt come as a revelation to many to
leam that heliolatry, or sun worship, is still practised, and in this
country.

It is not really to be wondered at, when such men as Sir
Robert Ball say :—
“ For the power to live and move, for the plenty with which we
are surrounded, for the beauty with which Nature is adorned, we
are immediately indebted to one body in the countless host of space,
and that body is the sun.”
H ow different is this from the words of St.

P a u l:—
“ God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that
H e is Lord of heaven and earth .

.

• .

.

giveth to
all life and
breath, and all th in g s..............

H e is not far from everyone of us,
for in Him we live, and move and have our being.”— Acts.

17.

But are we indebted so much to the sun as Sir Robert Ball sup­
poses?

I think not.

A ll the heavenly bodies have their God-given
functions.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I think not. A ll the heavenly bodies have their God-given
functions. In Deuteronomy, 33rd chap., we read that there are
“ precious fruits put forth by the suni, and precious things put forth
by the moon.”
In Job we read :—
“ Canst thou bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades (the seven
stars):
Or loose the bands of Orion? Canst thou lead forth the
Mazzaroth (the signs of the Zodiac) in their season, or canst thou
guide the Bear with her train ? ”
I know that very few believe that
the moon, stars, and “ planets ” have much influence in the affairs
of this earth, but Holy Scripture teaches that they do have their
role to fulfil, as in the 19th Psalm :—
“ The heavens declare the glory of G od; and the firmament
showeth H is handiwork. Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto
night showeth knowledge. There is no speech or language where
their voice is not heard. T h e i r r u l e (or direction) is g o n e o u t
THROUGH ALL THE EARTH, and their words to the ends of the world.”
For the benefit of those who have “ faith ” in the opinion of
scientific men in preference to the Bible. I may mention that Kepler,
one of the “ greatest astronomers,” believed in the influence of the
stars; and sO' did Flamsteed, our first Astronomer Royal. 62
THE TER R EST R IA L PLA N E.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tion that Kepler,
one of the “ greatest astronomers,” believed in the influence of the
stars; and sO' did Flamsteed, our first Astronomer Royal. 62
THE TER R EST R IA L PLA N E.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CUI BO N O .”
63
“ CUI BONO.”
■
“ O f all terrors to the generous soul, that cui bono is the one
to be most zealously avoided.
Whether it be proposed to find the
magnetic point, or seek a north sea passage impossible to be utilised
if discovered; or a race of men of no good to any human institution
extant, and of no good to them selves! or to seek the unicorn in
Madagascar, and when we have found him, not to be able to make
use of him ; or the Great Central Plateau of Australia, where no one
could live for centuries to com e; or the great African lake, for all
the good it would do us English folk, might as well be in the m oon;
or the source of the Nile, the triumphant discovery of which would
neither lower the rents nor take the taxes off anywhere— whatever it
is, the cui bono is always a weak and cowardly (?) argument; essen­
tially shortsighted, too; seeing that, according to the law of the past,
by which we may always safely predicate the futurei so much
falls into the hands of the seeker for which he was not looking,
and
of
which
he
never
even
knew
the
existence.
T he
area of the possible is still very wide, and very insignificant and
minute is the angle we have staked out and marked impossible. What
do we know of the powers that Nature has yet in store; of the secrets
she has yet awaiting discovery, and the wealth concealed ? Quixotism
is a folly when the energy which might have achieved conquests over
misery and wrong, if rightly applied, is wasted in fighting windm ills;
but to forego any great enterprise for fear of ridicule and the dangers
attending it; or to check a grand endeavour by the cui bono of
ignorance, stupidity, and moral scepticism, is worse than a folly—
it is baseness, and cowardliness.”
A well-known infidel has written :—
“ In every Christian country the masses of the people are taught
in childhood that God created the universe in six days and rested
on the seventh.
Yet even,’ student knows this is utterly false, every
man of science regards it as absurd, and the more educated clergy
are beginning to explain it away.”
Though this is not exactly true it is rather near to it.
Now the
truth of Christianitv- is called in question to-day, as in old time, by
the wisdom of this world— “ science.”
I would ask my readers after
having read through this work, before draw ng any hasty conclusion
for or against the arguments herein, to carefully consider the fact
that they have been trained, perhaps from early childhood, to believeread through this work, before draw ng any hasty conclusion
for or against the arguments herein, to carefully consider the fact
that they have been trained, perhaps from early childhood, to believe

--- PAGE BREAK ---

64
THE T ER R EST R IA L PLA N E.
the “ globular theor}’ ” true.
It is a compulsory subject at school,
and tbe plane eartB teaching is never referred to, except perhaps in
derogatory- terms by teachers who could not give a lucid exposition
of our standpoint.
Considering also that such men as our titled
astronomers go out of their way to inform the public that “ it is only
the untutored mind that believes the earth to be flat,” it is not to
be wondered that so many people, consciously or unconsciously, are
prejudiced against any teaching not in harmony with the “ globular
theory”
Infidels and astronomers, who say that no scientific men believe
the Story of Creation, narrated in Genesis, to be accurate, make a
great mistake.
However, the only appeal I make is, that one and
all will judge this little book on its merits, using their natural sense
in its study; also doing as the Scripture commands:—
“ rR O V E ALL THINGS, HOLD FAST THAT WHICH IS GOOD.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---all will judge this little book on its merits, using their natural sense
in its study; also doing as the Scripture commands:—
“ rR O V E ALL THINGS, HOLD FAST THAT WHICH IS GOOD.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

vessel not suit its behaviour to the globular theory?
Is it
because it is only a theory?
W hy do Astronomers violate the
law of Perspective when they make diagrams of ships at sea?
And now, when the tricks
of the so-called Astronom ical
‘ Science ’ are exposed, why should not all our readers believe
the plain truth, that the Earth and sea form one vast out­
stretched and circular p lan e?”
EARTH ’S SUPPOSED SHADOW IN LUNAR ECLIPSE. 77
S E C T IO N
4 .
T H E E A R T H ’S SH A D O W IN A L U N A R E C L IP S E .
The Moon has been a sad trouble to our Modern
Astronomers, as she has sO' often belied their theories;
but, being determined to make use of her somehow,
they assert that the globularity of the world is proved by
the shadow of the Earth passing over her in a round
form during a Lunar Eclipse.
Before entering into this subject, it may be as well
to say a few words respecting Eclipses.
Many people,
when they find that an Eclipse takes place at the time
predicted, are apt to think what a wonderful science
Modem Astronomy must be that can foretell such events
so exactly.
But the truth is that the recurrence of
Eclipses are mere matters
of calculation from
those
which have happened at certain times before, and it is
known by e.xperience that such will take place at certain
times again.
The Chaldeans calculated them thousands
of years ago, and Aristarchus and Ptolemy could predict

--- PAGE BREAK ---and it is
known by e.xperience that such will take place at certain
times again.
The Chaldeans calculated them thousands
of years ago, and Aristarchus and Ptolemy could predict

--- PAGE BREAK ---

y 8
T E R R A F IR M A .
c h a p . i n . , s e c . 4.
them as well as Newton or La Place.
Mrs. Somerville
in her “ Physical Sciences,” p. 46, remarks—
‘‘ No particular theory is required to calculate Eclipses, and
the calculations may be made with equal accuracy, indepcnde.nt
o f every theory."
I remember a good story respecting a man who had
been summoned to give evidence in a certain trial.
He
did not appear but a friend came in his stead.
“ Why,”
asked the Judge, “ does Mr. Blank not appear?”
“ My
Lord,” replied the man, “ I could give your Lordship
a dozen reasons why he could not come.”
“ Let us
have them, then,” said the Judge.
“ In the first place,
my Lord, my friend is dead.”
“ That will do,” said his
Lordship, “ you can keep your eleven other reasons to
yourself.”
So the Earth having been proved by experi­
ment to have no curvature, and is declared by God to
be “ founded upon the seas and established upon the
floods,” that fact ought, as a matter of course, tO' be a
sufficient reason why it is not a wandering Planet, and,
therefore, that it would be as impossible for its shadow to
cause an Eclipse of the Moon, as for that dead man to
give evidence in a Court of Law.
Still, perhaps, it may
be
useful
and
interesting
to
make
a
few
remarks
respecting this alleged proof, as they will show some of
the great mistakes which our Modem Astronomers have
made.
According to the Newtonian theory, it is necessary
in a Lunar Eclipse, for the Sun to be on the opposite
side of the supposed globular Earth, so that the Earth’s
shadow may thus in passing be cast upon the Moon.
But, as Lunar Eclipses have occurred when both the

--- PAGE BREAK ---be on the opposite
side of the supposed globular Earth, so that the Earth’s
shadow may thus in passing be cast upon the Moon.
But, as Lunar Eclipses have occurred when both the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sun and the Moon were above the horizon, it stands
to reason that,
in such circumstances,
it would be
absolutely impossible for the shadow of the Earth to
have been the cause of the Eclipse of the Moon.
During an Eclipse of the Moon its surface has
repeatedly been seen during the whole time it lasted,
thus clearly proving that its Eclipse could not have
been caused by the shadow of the Earth.
I quote the
following illustration of the fact from what took place
at Collumpton, Devonshire, 00 19th March, 1848—
“ The appearances were as usual till twenty minutes past
n in e; at that period, and for the space of the next hour, instead
of an Eclipse, or the shadow (umbra) of the Earth being the
cause of the total obscurity of the Moon, the whole phase of
that body became very quickly and most beautifully illuminated,
and assumed the appearance of the glowing heat of fire from the
furnace rather than tinged with a deep red. . . . The whole Use
of the Moon being as perfect with light as if there had been no
Eclipse whatever. . . . The Moon positively gave good light
from its disc during the total Eclipse.” *
Again, the Earth, with a supposed diameter of 8,000
miles, is said to revolve round the Sun, with the velocity
of about
1,100 miles per minute;
the Moon being
reckoned to have a diameter of 2,200 miles, and to go
round the Earth at the rate of 180 miles per minute,
thus, according to calculation, the Eclipse of the Moon,
by the shadow of the Earth passing it, should not take
four minutes, whereas the usual time occupied by a
Lunar Eclipse is generally about two hours, and it has
been known to have been extended to four.
* " Philosophical Magazine," No. 220, for August, 1848.
E A R TH ’S SU PPOSED SHADOW IN LUNAR ECLIPSE. 79ar Eclipse is generally about two hours, and it has
been known to have been extended to four.
* " Philosophical Magazine," No. 220, for August, 1848.
E A R TH ’S SU PPOSED SHADOW IN LUNAR ECLIPSE. 79

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Parallax sums up the matter as follows, and quotes
several instances to show that the opinion has lately
gained ground among Astronomers of note, that there
are non-luminous bodies in the heavens which may cause
an Eclipse of the Moon—
“ We have seen that during a Lunar Eclipse the Moon’s
self-luminous surface is covered by a semi-transparent ‘ some­
thing ’ ; that this ‘ something ’ is a definite mass, because it
has a distinct and circular outline, as seen during its first and
last contact with the Moon.
As a Solar Eclipse occurs from
the Moon passing before the Sun, so, from the evidence above
collected, it is evident that a Lunar Eclipse arises from a similar
cause.
A body, semi-transparent and w ell defined, passing
before the M oon;
or between the Moon’s surface and the
observer on the surface of the Earth.
“ That m any such bodies exist in the firmament is almost a
matter of certainty, and that one such as that which eclipses,
the Moon exists at no great distance above the Earth’s surface,
is a matter admitted by many of the leading Astronomers of
the day.” *
It is thus clearly evident that there is not the shadow
of a proof that the shadow of the Earth is the cause o f
a Lunar Eclipse, and therefore no argument can be
drawn from this alleged proof that the Earth is a
globular Planet.
I doubt not that many of my Readers know the
famous passage in the .iEneid—
Facilis decensus A verni,
Sed revocan grwius superasque evaderc ad uuras,
Hie labor, hoc opus est.
* “ Zetetic Astronomy," pp. 148, 149.
So
TER R A FIRMA.
c h a p . in., s e c . 4.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cilis decensus A verni,
Sed revocan grwius superasque evaderc ad uuras,
Hie labor, hoc opus est.
* “ Zetetic Astronomy," pp. 148, 149.
So
TER R A FIRMA.
c h a p . in., s e c . 4.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is true that Virgil did not write as an Astronomer,
but as a Poet, yet the thought has occurred to me that
the above lines, with a small parenthetical addition,
might be suitably employed to show the impossibility
of our World careering, round the Sun,
and might,
perhaps, be read with renewed appreciation by some of
our repentant Astronomers, thus—
“ It is easy to descend to the lower regions,
But (for the Earth) to retrace its steps and ascend to the upper
skies.
There is the difficulty— this is the task.”
E A R TH ’S SUPPOSED SHADOW IN LUNAR ECLIPSE. 8r