A 16


Tuesday, October 24, 1978 XI


Miami CourtDelays
Guatemalan Return
To District Police

By Kenneth Bredemeier

WMhlngton £o«t Staff Writer

MIAMI — Stanley R. Wilson, a District of Columbia
homicide detective, took the unusual step here
yesterday of offering to take personal custody of
Jorge A. Zimeri-Safie, the Guatemalan businessman
and gun inventor who some describe as a dangerous
international terrorist.

Zimeri has been caught in a tug-of-war between
the Guatemalan government— which wants him ex-
tradited to stand trial on a murder charge there —
the State Department and the District police de-
partment. The locale of that interagency battle
switched to Miami last week, with no end clearly in
sight

Just as Magistrate Peter R. Palermo appeared
ready to release Zimeri to Wilson’s custody to live
at an unspecified D.C. location under an assumed
name, the judge gave a government prosecutor up
to another week to check part of Wilson’s testi-
mony.

Wilson, a short, studious-looking man with gray-
ing hair, told Palermo that he was not only testify-
ing under a subpoena from Zimeri's lawyers, but 1
also as a representative of the State Department ;

The policeman said that a State Department
official he could not name for “security reasons”
had asked him to “represent them (the State
Department) as to the facts” of the Zimeri case.

Slate Department Position

But Assistant U.S. Attorney Jerome Sanford said
that actually the State Department, on behalf of the
Guatemalan government, was requesting Zimeri’s
return to the Central American country to stand
trial on the charge that he killed a Guatemalan na-
val officer in 1976.

Government officials and Zimeri’s attorneys have
been fighting over his fate for the last week now.
On the one hand, federal prosecutors have tried un-
successfully to get Zimeri to testify to a grand jury
here about “organized crime assassinations.” Mean-
while, Zimeri’s attorneys mave tried to get him
freed on bail pending outcome of the extradition
proceeding.

Zimeri, a 34-year-old textile manufacturer, has
said the 1976 Guatemalan murder charge is trumped
up and designed only to secure his return to his
homeland so that government agents can execute
him for his political opposition to the current mili-
tary regime.

After Wilson refused to name publicly the State
Department official who authorized his testimony,
the already bizarre case took an even stranger twist.
Prosecutor Sanford asked Wilson to write the name
of the State Department official on a piece of paper
and give it to Palermo so that it would remain se-
cret from the public.

Wilson did so and Sanford said he would check
the supposed authorization of the person.

Official’s .\amo Blurted Out

But minutes later, one of Zimeri’s attorneys, Ed-


ward R. Shohat, inadvertently blurted out the name
I of the official, Isabel Johnstone, a former CIA agent
I who now Investigates terro£tsm^^La^
j and South America for the State Department.

; Reached by telephone in Washington, Johnstone
said she "had no idea (Wilson) was going to say
that” she had given him authority to represent the
State Department in his court testimony.

“I think he got carried away,” Johnstone said of
f Wilson’s testimony.

Despite the apparent conflict in Wilson’s testi-
mony, Shohat said after the court hearing that he
still hopes that Zimeri will be released soon to Wil-
son's custody.

The police detective told Palermo that he had in-
terviewed Zimeri for 150 hours since last December
and that the Guatemalan had provided him and (
other U.S. officials with important information |
about various political assassinations in Latin Amer-
ica, including the 1968 slaying of John Gordon Mein,
then the U.S. Ambassador to Guatemala.

Wilson said he first interviewed Zimeri in Miami

( about the bombing death in Washington of Orlando
Letelier, a former Chilean ambassador to the U.S.

All In forma How Proved True

The detective said Zimeri’s information about the
slaying of Mein and other killings had, with inde-
pendent checking, proved to be true. “In no way can
I say he is a danger to society,” Wilson said.

Wilson, whose air fare from Washington to Miami
was paid by the defense, told a reporter before the
hearing that he was testifying for Zimeri because
“if a source helps me out, I’ll help him out.”

The policeman testified that he believes the evi-
dence in the Guatemalan murder case “appears to
be tainted.” He said that two witnesses who at first
implicated Zimeri in the slaying have since re-
tracted their statements. “The case in question was
set up by the (Guatemalan) government to frame
the Zimeri” family.

Wilson has said that he thinks it would be an in-
justice to send Zimeri back to Guatemala. He called
The Washington Post, among others, to alert them
to the case. *

Sanford said he opposed releasing Zimeri on bond
because he had no ties to the Miami community and
no appreciable assets in the IJ.S. But Palermo said
that he felt “under the circumstances the man
should be released on bond.”

But then the judge said he would give Sanford
time to check Wilson’s testimony.


*-**?• .y;


™ "v ' i'. Wv r - -y-y
