Premiere Issue
.95
PREVAILING
$4

WINDS
THE
CIA MASSACRE.
THE UNSOLVED MYSTERY
iititiA14401114-
STRANGE NEW
WEAPONS OF
THE FUTURE
NEXT TARGET
ELL
OSED OR
OSWALD FRAMED?
Y PETER DALE SCOTT
ESTATE POWER AND
DEATH OF JFK
HAEL PARENT!
Plus: The truth about
The.,,Ranzaof NutraSweet TM
The $ch-EFT& of Pat Robertson
Drugs and Covert Operations
Death at Area 51...and more
4104.-N
‘-NwL.Immek,,,--mckzw1.4mktwoa,

--- PAGE BREAK ---Advisory Board
Robert Bernstein, M.S
Walt Brown, Ph.

D.

Mary Ferrell
John Judge
Jim Horowitz
Mary Jane Mazzella
Carl Oglesby, P.h.D.

Michael Parenti, P.h.D.

Jane Rusconi
Peter Dale Scott, Ph.D.

Oliver Stone
Cyril Wecht, M.D., J.D.

Wk.

3.

The Center for the Preservation of Modern History
P.O.

Box 23511, Santa Barbara, California 93121 Tel: (805) 899-3433 Fax: (805) 899-4773 BBS: (805) 899-4737
Dear friends,
Welcome to the premiere issue of Prevailing Winds Magazine.

This periodical is devoted to exposing hidden history, intelligence abuses, political scandals, medical
fraud, corruption, the threat of resurgent fascism, and related issues.

This publication is an outgrowth of
Prevailing Winds Research, which has been operating since 1990.

Some of you are already familiar with
PWR, while others may need an introduction.

Here is where we came from, and hope to accomplish.

In 1989, a dedicated team of students on the campus of Santa Barbara City College began a small
political awareness club.

We invited to the campus a wide range of speakers, who addressed a number of
important topics.

In 1990, the club outgrew its campus setting and became a non-profit organization
dedicated to preserving and disseminating politically and socially important information, We called it
Prevailing Winds Research.

We feel that much of our past may go down the "memory hole" because the
public does not have easy access to significant articles, documents and other materials which are usually
stored only in obscure, and many times secret, archives.

Prevailing Winds Research makes this
fascinating information widely available via mail order catalogue and computer bulletin board system.

We are all aware of a major problem concerning the preservation of historical materials.

One can find,
scattered around the country, treasure troves of important raw data which are inaccessible to the public.

Example: The film JFK renewed the controversy over New Orleans D.A.One can find,
scattered around the country, treasure troves of important raw data which are inaccessible to the public.

Example: The film JFK renewed the controversy over New Orleans D.A.

Jim Garrison's probe of the
Kennedy assassination.

The public was told many conflicting stories about what Garrison did.

The best
way to resolve these conflicts is to examine the documentary record.

Recently, we have procured Jim's
extensive collection and we plan to make those files, and numerous other caches of data, available world
wide via digital communication.

To this end, we have formed a non-profit educational trust called The Center for the Preservation of
Modern History.

Our task won't be easy.

But we can no longer depend on public and university libraries,
crushed by budgetary restraints, to preserve our past.

The Center for the Preservation of Modern History now functions as the non-profit umbrella
organization for Prevailing Winds Research and its various projects.

One such project is the magazine
you hold in your hands.

Prevailing Winds Magazine will feature the kind of hard, investigative reporting
that too much of the media now eschews.

We are also using this publication to make the Prevailing Winds Research Catalogue available to a
wider audience.

If you're a newcomer to PWR, just flip through our catalogue, located towards the back
of this issue, and you'll see some examples of the hidden history we've been bringing to light.

The idea of appending a catalogue to a magazine may seem unconventional.

But we feel that this
combination should help us gain a certain measure of independence from the corporate culture which
permeates so much of our society.

As you probably know, most magazines devote 60%-70% of their
available space to corporate advertising — e.g., ads for liquor, cigarettes and so forth.

Such ads can make
a periodical beholden to the companies that pay for them.--- PAGE BREAK ---

As you probably know, most magazines devote 60%-70% of their
available space to corporate advertising — e.g., ads for liquor, cigarettes and so forth. Such ads can make
a periodical beholden to the companies that pay for them. Do you think we could have published this
issue's expose of NutraSweetTM if we depended on ad revenues from diet soda manufacturers? The only advertising you'll find concerns our reprints, books, audio and videotapes made available by
our non-profit, as well as a few unsolicited ads. We are thus responsible only to our readers. We hope you gain insight and understanding from this magazine. If you have any comments for our
writers and editors, please send them to us. This is a people's publication — your publication. Until next time,
— the Editors and Publisher
Prevailing Winds
Magazine
is a publication of
The Center
for the
Preservation of
Modern History
Board of Trustees
Nancy Broyles
William Davis
John De Loreto, Esq. Bruce Kaner
Ron Robertson
Contributors this issue:
ANDY BOEHM is one of the top investigative journalists in the
DICK RUSSELL is a Boston-based free-lance investigative
country. His coverage of the CIA shootings at Langley is the first journalist. His 1993 book The Man Who Knew Too Much has
work of its kind on the subject. received wide acclaim. ALEX CONSTANTINE is frequently-published author whose
PETER DALE SCOTT, Ph.D., is Professor of English (Rel),
Constantine Report is a regular weekly feature on KAZU radio in University of CAlif. at Berkeley. He has authored or co-authored
Monterey. CA. such classics as The Iran-Contra Connection. Crime and Cover-
MICHAEL PARENTI, Ph.D., is a prolific author and staunch Up, Cocaine Politics, and Deep Politics and the Death ofJFK
critic of the media. His most recent work is Land ofidols. His book
THE WALRUS remains a mystery even to us. We suspect he's
Against Empire will appear in March, 1995. with the Illuminati.

IfJFK
critic of the media. His most recent work is Land ofidols. His book
THE WALRUS remains a mystery even to us. We suspect he's
Against Empire will appear in March, 1995. with the Illuminati.

I

--- PAGE BREAK ---Prevailing
Winds
Magazine
Publisher
The Center for the Preservation of
Modem History
Editing, design and cover art for
this Premiere Issue was done by
Martin Cannon
IN THIS ISSUE:
2 / The Prevailing Winds Briefing
Featuring: The toxic Stealth aircraft and Area 51..

North and Huff ington: The last word...

Carlos the Jackal: Who's his real boss...?

The Schemes of Pat Robertson...

and more.

10 / I Am the Walrus
An opinionated look back at 1994: The Clinton "scandals," Al D'Amato and
the mob, Terry Reed's Compromised, and more.

Associate Editors
Andy Boehm
T.

J.

Marley
Sophia Perdido
Allan Peterson
Marlene Struss
Contributing Editor
Michael Parenti, Ph.D
Special thanks to the following
researchers for their help:
Andy Boehm, Walt Brown,
Marilyn Coleman,
Alex Constantine, Tom Davis,
James DiEugenio, Kalani and
Katiu.ska Hanohano, John Judge,
Al Kunzer, Michael Parenti, Ph.D.,
Dick Russell, Peter Dale Scott, PhD.

15 / Late For Work (cover story)
by Andy Boehm
The untold story of the great CIA massacre and the gunman who got away.

28 / Non-Lethal Weapons
by Dick Russell
A look at what they're cooking up at Los Alamos.

Are you the real target?

31 / State Power and the JFK Assassination
by Michael Parenti
Take a close look at the JFK hit, and you'll see how American politics really
operates.

Parenti explains why both right and left shun the truth.

40 / NutraSweet"', the NutraPoison'TM
by Alex Constantine
So, you think NutraSweetTM is safe?

Well, just take a look at who makes it.

50 / Roswell
by Sophie Perdido
The great "crashed UFO" case may be solved at last.

Extra-special thanks goes out to
Andy !toehm for his eye for detail.

If you have any news clippings
that you think might prove useful for
one of our columns, please send us
copies.

Your contribution will be grate-
fully acknowledged here (unless speci-
fied otherwise).

We welcome your views.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Your contribution will be grate-
fully acknowledged here (unless speci-
fied otherwise). We welcome your views. Please
address all correspondence to: Editors,
Prevailing Winds Magazine, P.0, Box
23511, Santa Barbara, CA 93121. (Please indicate if you do not want
correspondence published.) Letters
sent on MAC or IBM-compatible disks
are accepted
Manuscript and artwork submis-
sions are welcomed. Address to "The
Editor." Please note: We cannot be
responsible for the return of unsolicited
manuscripts. Always send self-ad-
dressed, stamped envelope. Send que-
ries in writing. Submissions on IBM-
compatible disks are encouraged. 52 / Case Closed or Oswald Framed? Peter Dale Scott demolishes the Warren Commission's great defender. 58 / Assassination Politics
Why did Norman Mailer switch sides on the JFK case? And just who are
these strange fellows threatening the life of Bill Clinton? 64 / The Prevailing Winds Catalogue
Your source for important information and educational materials. Reprints: p. 64. Audio tapes: p. 79. Videos: p. 85. Books: p. 89. Prevailing Winds Magazine Premiere Issue (#1). Published by the Center for the
Preservation of Modern History, a non-profit educational trust, P.O. Box 23511, Santa
Barbara. CA 93121. Subscription rates: 320 four issues, 538 eight issues (USA); 325 four
issues, 340 eight issues (Canada and Mexico); 532 four issues, 362 eight issues (other
countries). For information on acceptable forms of payment, please see page 94. All
contents
Copyright 1995. All rights reserved in all countries. Copyright contents may
not be reproduced in any manner without prior written permission of Prevailing Winds
Magazine and the authors. Printed in the United States, POSTMASTER: Please send
address changes to Nvailing Winds, POB 23511, Santa Barbara CA 93121.

--- PAGE BREAK ---THE PREVAILING WINDS BRIEFING
Toxic Stealth:
The Rough Notes
of a Scandal
We admit it.

We're writing this before all the facts are in.

But for the past year or so, we've had glimpses of a story which
raises a highly disturbing possibility: Are deadly toxins released
into the environment during the
manufacture and testing of the Stealth
bomber and other advanced aircraft?

Keep in mind: The reports we have
received so far are anecdotal and
often second-hand.

But a recently-
filed lawsuit tends to confirm our
worst suspicions.

A professional midwife who de-
livers babies in the California high
desert tells us that clients living in
certain desert areas such as Ridge-
crest, the "bedroom community"
serving the super-secret China Lake
Naval Weapons facility —have expe-
rienced an abormally high rate of still-
births, miscarriages, and placenta previas.

This midwife has
compared notes with colleagues who also serve these commu-
nities; they report the same frightening trend.

Could these problems have any relationship to the many
top-secret military projects conducted in the area?

As Popular Science and other journals have noted, high
desert residents have frequently spotted overflights of unusual
aircraft, many quite experimental, all top secret.

These craft
could include the Stealth fighter and bomber, the teardrop-
shaped TR-3A reconnaissance plane (reportedly used secretly
during the war against Iraq), and the Aurora, the supersonic
spy-plane whose very existence is denied by the Air Force, even
though many savvy southern Californians credit it with causing
a recent series of sonic booms.

Eyewitness reports (including
some we have collected personally) describe even stranger craft
— including large, silent hovering vehicles, possibly using a
radically new propulsion system.

Aerial photographs indicate
that certain secluded desert facilities conduct open-air radar
testing of astonishing new aircraft designs.Eyewitness reports (including
some we have collected personally) describe even stranger craft
— including large, silent hovering vehicles, possibly using a
radically new propulsion system.

Aerial photographs indicate
that certain secluded desert facilities conduct open-air radar
testing of astonishing new aircraft designs.

Quite recently, we discussed the reported high incidence of
stillbirths and miscarriages with a "whistleblower" who
worked for a major aircraft corporation.

Our source hinted that
the problem might well be linked to the high-tech anti-radar
material which coats Stealth and successor aircraft.

Similar health concerns surround the controversial Area 51
test site, located at the edge of Groom Lake in the Nevada Test
Site, 90 miles north of Las Vegas.

About six years ago, self-de-
scribed "physicist" Robert Lazar drew attention to this covert
base when he asserted that the Air Force has used it to back-en-
gineer recovered UFOs.

Such hard-to-believe claims may have
dissuaded mainstream reporters from paying serious attention
to "black projects" being tested at the base —the very existence
of which the government refuses to admit, even though Soviet
satellites have photographed the facility.

Enthusiasts make
nightly treks to "Freedom Ridge," where the base — and,
occasionally, some very odd flying
whatzits — can be distantly viewed.

Uncle Sam wants to increase his land
holdings in the area in order to re-
move the public's vantage point on
the "imaginary" base.

And now thirty-nine former em-
ployees of the non-existent base have
come forward to bring suit against the
U.S.

government, claiming that envi-
ronmental hazards at Area 51 have
resulted in numerous illnesses and at
least one possible death.And now thirty-nine former em-
ployees of the non-existent base have
come forward to bring suit against the
U.S.

government, claiming that envi-
ronmental hazards at Area 51 have
resulted in numerous illnesses and at
least one possible death.

According to the New York Times
Magazine (6/26/94), these former •
base workers "are ready to testify
that, thanks to the open-air burning of hazardous and toxic
wastes in exposed 'burn pits' north of the base, they have
sustained long-term damage from dioxins and other hazardous
materials.

The wastes burned — resins, hardening compounds,
and solvents called furrans (used in the anti-radar coating of
Stealth aircraft) —are said to cause dioxin-related health prob-
lems like liver damage, skin diseases, and birth defects." (Italics
added.) One plaintiff, Helen Frost, previously filed a wrongful
death suit (dismissed on a technicality) against Lockheed, alleg-
ing that burning toxins killed her husband, who was working
downwind.

We can't help but wonder if defense workers in the Califor-
nia desert face similar problems.

The toxic side-effects of military R&D remain one of the
great under-reported stories of our time.

According to an AP
story of May 16, 1994, each year the military must find ways to
dispose one-half million tons of hazardous chemical wastes,
radioactive wastes, and solvents
not to mention the lethal
ooze seeping out of old nerve gas weapons.

Experts indicate that
taxpayers may have to shell out some $250 billion to clean up
the mess at over 900 sites controlled by the Departments of
Defense and Energy.

And that's not counting the potential
health costs of these military toxins and environmental compro-
mises.

Is our Defense Department, in its zeal to kill foreigners,
accidentally killing us?

Midwives report that
women living near the
China Lake Naval
Weapons base have an
abnormally high rate of
stillbirths and
miscarriages.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Is our Defense Department, in its zeal to kill foreigners,
accidentally killing us? Midwives report that
women living near the
China Lake Naval
Weapons base have an
abnormally high rate of
stillbirths and
miscarriages. Prevailing Winds Magazine
Premiere issue a
tr*Prisok
• -n
•
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---We Need This Like We
Need Anthrax
Social spending is being decimated, schools go unfunded,
health care remains a privilege for the propertied — yet the
Pentagon keeps marching on.

Clinton will spend around $250
billion this year on the military, compared to $230 billion
(measured in constant dollars) during the Nixon regime.

(And
remember: We were fighting a very expensive war/police action
back then) And now Gingrich and Dole want to increase
defense spending.

So: What kind of bang do we get for all those bucks?

Well,
for starters: The Pentagon wants to spend $150 million on a new
germ warfare lab, located at the Aberdeen Proving Grounds in
Maryland.

This new lab will specialize in the military use of
anthrax and botulism, And bio-war research has resumed at the
venerable Ehigway proving ground in Utah, even though the
Army ceased testing there ten years ago because it could no
longer guarantee the safety of its aging facilities.

Of course, the Brass insists that these studies are purely
defensive.

Back in the early '70s, President Nixon reached a
treaty with the Soviets banning all research into the offensive
use of chemical and biological warfare.

But the distinction is
moot: Many experts assert that "defensive" bio-war studies can
readily convert into offensive usages.

Besides, the heirs to the
Soviet Union are scarcely in a position to hold the United States
to its agreements.

Think about it: If American interest in these
areas is indeed purely defensive, why won't the DOD let a
civilian agency take over the research?

Even When They Lose,
They Win
Thank God for small failures — specifically, the failures of
Senate hopefuls Oliver North and Michael Huffmgton.

Against prediction, the voters didn't favor thrice-convicted
Iran-Contra felon North, who ran for Charles Robb's Senate seat
in Virginia.Even When They Lose,
They Win
Thank God for small failures — specifically, the failures of
Senate hopefuls Oliver North and Michael Huffmgton.

Against prediction, the voters didn't favor thrice-convicted
Iran-Contra felon North, who ran for Charles Robb's Senate seat
in Virginia.

An astonishing amount of money went into this race,
much of it from big oil interests, as well as food magnates
Jimmie Dean and Clifford Heinz, Thomas Coombs of Sherwin
Williams Paint, the Coors family, and Daniel DeVoss, chairman
of Amway.

Religious supporters included Pat Robertson and
Rev.

Sun Myung Moon.

(Odd, isn't it, how Pat and the Moonies
so often back the same horse...?) The man heading this fund-
raising effort was Richard Viguerie, Rush Limbaugh's main
man, well known for his effective direct mail campaigns.

As
Viguerie once noted in a candid moment, "A well-organized
minority can often defeat an unorganized majority."
Incidentally, North's candidacy posed a direct challenge to
the 14th Amendment to the Constitution, which states that no
"sworn officer of the United States" (which North was) who
has "given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof" (which North
did) can be a Senator.

Since few pay much attention to the
Constitution these days, North's opponents had to rally around
Robb, an unattractive Democratic candidate.

Of course, money
raised to combs.

the massively-funded North could have gone
to other races in other states.

This may have been the entirepoint
of the North campaign: He is, after all, an old hand at diverting
funds.

The mere fact that he attracted so many votes says something
disturbing about our electorate.

Celerino "Cele" Castillo, a
former supervisory agent for the Drug Enforcement Agency, has
further substantiated longstanding charges that North protected
a massive cocaine operation during the mid-1980s.

Castillo
informed then-Vice President George Bush about this drug
operation; Bush did nothing.Celerino "Cele" Castillo, a
former supervisory agent for the Drug Enforcement Agency, has
further substantiated longstanding charges that North protected
a massive cocaine operation during the mid-1980s.

Castillo
informed then-Vice President George Bush about this drug
operation; Bush did nothing.

A North spokesman has de-
nounced Castillo's assertions as "a nutty conspiracy theory."
The Guardian (of Oct.

5, '94) offered perhaps the most
amusing insight into North's run for office.

The would-be
Senator tried to turn the "threat" of homosexuality into a major
campaign issue, even though "his entourage has always in-
cluded a remarkably high number of gays." North's chief con-
tra-fund-raising aide was Carl "Spitz" Channel', a homosexual
who — for reasons best known to himself — once gave a
massive donation to an anti-gay organization.

According to The
Guardian, "Other young male associates of North used to write
feverish odes about their hero's clear blue eyes and manly
bearing."
Meanwhile, on the other side of the country, voters have (just
barely) rejected California Senate hopeful Michael (now
"Mike") Huffmgton — who, though not the worst candidate
running in 1994, was very likely the oddest.

As a House member
representing Santa Barbara County, Huff quickly managed to
alienate his constituents, who generally regard him as a fabu-
lously wealthy, do-nothing carpetbagger from Texas.

He's the
chief financial officer of Huffco, an oil and natural gas conglom-
erate started by his father, Roy — a life-long buddy of the
gone-but-not-forgiven George Bush.

Indeed, the Huffmgton family's financial history fits the
pattern set by other Bush associates.

Soon after the CIA estab-
lished a murderous regime in Indonesia in 1965, Roy Huffmgton
established close ties with the dictatorial government in order
to exploit the country's previously untapped natural gas re-
serves.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Indeed, the Huffmgton family's financial history fits the
pattern set by other Bush associates. Soon after the CIA estab-
lished a murderous regime in Indonesia in 1965, Roy Huffmgton
established close ties with the dictatorial government in order
to exploit the country's previously untapped natural gas re-
serves. (Eventually, the Huffmgton family sold shock batons to
their neo-fascist partners in Jakarta) Years later, both Roy and
Michael Huffmgton sat on the board of the now-failed First City
Bancorp of Texas, which made billions of dollars worth of sour
loans. One of these unsecured loans went to — you guessed it
— a Huffco subsidiary in Bakersfield, California, which lost
$100 million. But — as the national press belatedly learned and as Santa
Barbarans have known for some time — to get to the dark, weird
heart of the Huffmgton story you must examine the background
of his attractive wife, Arianna, an aristocratic Greek who mar-
ried Michael about ten years ago. She initially achieved wide-
spread public annoyance a couple of decades ago when she
argued, in a book called The Female Woman, that feminism
devalued motherhood. In 1988, she turned her attentions to the
world of art and whipped up a book "proving" that Picasso had
no talent. Recently, she wrote The Fourth Instinct, a gently
reactionary volume which argues that welfare thwarts the pub-
lic's instinctive urge to practice altruism. In her recent literary outing, Arianna largely acted as the
amanuensis for her guru, or Raspu tin — a now-infamous cult
leader n amecl John-Roger, a, k.a. "The Mystical Traveler." Born
Roger Delano Hinkins, John-Roger has established himself as
Premiere Issue 3
Prevailing Winds Magazine

--- PAGE BREAK ---The
Guns 'n'
Drugs
Reader
tlaCCI0eff ey
govervirnare a/Deka nor.

frertrIckod
narcancs and
WO41,111..

ina is vain ray-
horn Hui Edina or
Prevailing Vilna* Peerratch
ZATAIMITAWA=.117/4747/Val&ITLYal
1
THE GUNS 'N' DRUGS
READER
"The Guns 'n Drugs Reader" is a collection of articles.

inter-
views, speeches, and book chapters which deal with narcotics
trafficking by sectors of the United States government.

The
book focuses particularly on the Christie Institute's La Penca
lawsuit, providing many primary source materials relevant to
that case.

The La Penca case is important because it exposes
how various intelligence agencies have long used illicit narcot-
ics to fund covert op-
erations.

The LaPenca
case also provides
most of the missing
pieces that the Iran-
contra committee re-
fused to go near.

"The Guns 'n Drugs
Reader" also presents a
wide collection of sup-
porting viewpoints,
ranging from "Bo"
Gritz to Professor Al-
fred McCoy (author of
The Politics of Heroin
in Southeast Asia).

Sprinkled throughout
the various longer arti-
cles are numerous rele-
vant press clippings
which add haunting confirmation of what really goes on behind
the "national security" facade.

What emerges from the various documents is the sense that,
more than anything else.

drugs like cocaine and heroin are a
form of taxation, a covert way of raising billions of dollars with-
out any form of congressional or public supervision.

Given this
hidden budget, intelligence agencies are able to conduct their op-
erations without any form of scrutiny.

PWR code #671 $18.95
the grand preceptor of The Church of the Movement of Spiritual
Inner Awareness, or MSIA (pronounced "Messiah").

In recent
months, the press has devoted much ink to John-Roger, whose
vast holdings include a heavily-guarded 140-acre compound
near Santa Barbara.

Although little of this media attention has
been kind, reporters rarely display true insight into his sect.In recent
months, the press has devoted much ink to John-Roger, whose
vast holdings include a heavily-guarded 140-acre compound
near Santa Barbara.

Although little of this media attention has
been kind, reporters rarely display true insight into his sect.

For unknown reasons, the Mystical Traveler has been repeat-
edly invited to lecture employees of McDonnell-Douglas and
the CIA-linked Lockheed Corporation.

His theology includes
healthy borrowings from ECKANKAR and various narcissistic
self-help systems, mixed in with such concepts as the "As-
cended Masters" and the "Priesthood of Melchizedek." Cult-
watchers will recognize the "Ascended Masters" as the Aryan
demi-deities worshipped by the I AM Religious Activity{  a
fascist-linked sect that sprang up in the I930s.

If nothing else,
the John-Roger story should demolish any lingering misappre-
hensions that the New Age movement is entirely, or even
his affairs with very young men.

putative co-authorship, with Peter McWilliams, of several huge-
primarily, progressive in nature.

ago.

Her loyal support helped the sect leader weather 1988
allegations of fiscal and sexual hanky-panky, mostly concerning
Arianna is a minister in MSIA, which she joined 22 years
Also helping to rehabilitate his reputation was John-Roger's
Prevailing Winds Magazine
selling books.

McWilliams fell in with MSIA about ten years
ago.

He now charges, in his book Life 102: What To Do When
Your Guru Sues You, that the cult leader brainwashed him into
believing he would fall ill and die unless he credited, and paid,
John-Roger as "co-author" of his works.McWilliams fell in with MSIA about ten years
ago.

He now charges, in his book Life 102: What To Do When
Your Guru Sues You, that the cult leader brainwashed him into
believing he would fall ill and die unless he credited, and paid,
John-Roger as "co-author" of his works.

After leaving the sect,
McWilliams stopped splitting his earnings, and the messiah of
MSIA is suing for over $400,000 unpaid profits on the books he
"co-wrote." (Incidentally, Life 102 reports that John-Roger has
used expensive machines capable of "beaming invisible mes-
sages" —a notion McWilliams pooh-poohs, though others may
take the possibility more seriously.)
McWilliams' exposé argues, essentially, that John-Roger
controls Arianna, who in turn controls her husband.

As numer-
ous writers have noted, Michael Huffington almost never makes
a decision without consulting his wife.

According to Peter McWilliams and others, John-Roger still
maintains close links to Arianna — though she tries to downplay
the relationship, insisting that she is actually a member in good
standing of the Greek Orthodox Church in Santa Barbara.

A
representative of that church claimed otherwise in a letter to the
Santa Barbara Independent (11/3/94): "Arianna Huffington is
not a member of the Saint Barbara Greek Orthodox Church...

Neither do they attend services, except when it is election time."
The letter further notes that baptism occurs only once in Ortho-
doxy; thus, one abjures that faith when re-baptised into another.

McWilliams' book contains a photograph of Arianna's re-bap-
tism into MSIA.

In all likelihood, we'll be hearing again from the wealthy
and ambitious Huffingtons —and from Jolly John-Roger.

In the
meantime, we note once again the distressing pattern: A deep-
pockets candidate can "win" even if he loses, by forcing the
opposition party to divert funds from other races.

What better
argument for campaign reform do we need?--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the
meantime, we note once again the distressing pattern: A deep-
pockets candidate can "win" even if he loses, by forcing the
opposition party to divert funds from other races. What better
argument for campaign reform do we need? Leading Republican Sees
Gay Conspiracy
Prevailing Winds keeps an open mind regarding alternative
theories of AIDS causation, such as the competing scenarios
proposed by Dr. Alan Cantwell and Dr. Peter Duesberg. We're
not sure what AIDS is. But we know what AIDS isn't. It isn't
an excuse for hard rightists to persecute homosexuals. Alas, evidence suggests that Dr. Stanley Monteith, chairman
of the California Republican Party's Health and Human Serv-
ices Committee, thinks otherwise. (Most of our info on Monteith
comes by way of writer John Roemer, who profiled the doctor
in the Los Angeles Village View, August 12-18, 1994.) At a
recent "Human Life International" conference, held in Irvine,
CA, Monteith "staffed a booth where rabidly anti-Semitic lit-
erature was displayed alongside his own writings." These writ-
ings claim that AIDS is a conspiracy concocted by homosexuals
out to destroy hetero America. (Presumably the gay schemers
who invented AIDS decided to divert suspicion by first inflict-
ing the disease on themselves. Now that 's devious.)
Monteith 'wants mandatory testing, reporting, and possibly
quarantine of the infected.. Enforcement of such laws could
effectively criminalize any sexual behavior Monteith dislikes. He sneers at such notions as needle exchanges and education
Premiere Issue
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---campaigns, even though both tactics have proven effective.

Obviously, Monteith's main concern isn't public health but
homosexuality per se: He "hosted" a video called The Gay
Agenda, a rumor-mongering piece of homophobic agit-prop
heavily promoted by "Reverend" Pat Robertson during the
gays-in-the-military debate.

Roemer closes his exposé by quot-
ing a 1987 letter Monteith wrote to a fellow reactionary: "The
entire subject of AIDS gets into sex education, moral break-
down, humanism, and all of the sinister forces which work
behind the scenes to destroy our society...

In many ways, this
horrible epidemic gives us a chance to rejuvenate the John Birch
Society."
Gee, Doc, couldn't you work in some reference to the
Illuminati?

And remember, folks: This blathering Bircher is the
California GOP's main man on health issues.

Expect to see
much more of this kind of thinking on a national scale.

Spying is Forever
Col.

Sergei G.

Gorlenko of Russia's Federal Counterintelli-
gence Service made front pages worldwide with his charges
(first aired in the Rossisk.aya Gcrzeta of September 3, 1994) that
California's Pepperdinc University has sponsored a defense
conversion program in Russia with a hidden agenda: Espionage.

Pepperdine, generally regarded as a highly conservative
institution, denies the FCI accusation.

But the university's con-
version program received $1.7 million from the Agency for
International Development —which, as the mainstream Ameri-
can press rarely points out, has a long history of providing cover
for CIA operations.

John Gilligan, director of AID during the
Carter administration, once revealed that "...many AID field
offices were infiltrated top to bottom with CIA people...

The
idea was to plant operatives in every kind of activity we had
overseas, government, volunteer, religious, every kind." Plus
Fa change...

Who is Carlos?

The capture of Carlos the Jackal (born Ilich Ramirez
Sanchez) has unusually deep ramifications.Who is Carlos?

The capture of Carlos the Jackal (born Ilich Ramirez
Sanchez) has unusually deep ramifications.

Many who read
newspapers during the 1970s learned to few- Carlos as the
terrorist par excellence.

At one time, the media portrayed him
as the mastermind behind the 1972 Olympics massacre and the
muscle behind West Germany's Baader-Meinhof gang and It-
aly's Red Brigades.

Evidence suggests, however, that the public
has received a distorted view of the Jackal's activities_ The lime
has come to ask the question, who were his true sponsors?

Carlos actually had little or nothing to do with the Olympics
tragedy, in which Black September terrorists murdered 11 Is-
raeli athletes.

His only known connection with that event (ac-
cording to James 0.

Goldborough in the San Diego Union
Tribune of August 22, 1994) is the fact that he worked for a
revolutionary named Wadi Haddad in the early '70s.

Haddad
was a leader of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine,
and helped train the Black September guerillas.

Israel retaliated for the massacre by attacking Black Septem-
ber operatives throughout the world.

One of their targets was a
man named Mohammed Boudia, who worked with the terrorist
group in Paris.

After Mossad killed Boudia, Carlos took over
his position.

This ascension established a pattern: The authori-
ties killed or captured other terrorists, while Carlos always lived
to "fight" another day.

A later Carlos associate, Wilfred Bose, was arrested in Pans
in 1975 after he illegally entered the apartment of still another
fellow-terrorist, Michel Moukarbel.

Mysteriously, Bose was
released shortly thereafter, even though the police found evi-
dence linking him and Carlos to a bazooka attack on a Yugoslav
airliner.

Bose escaped to Germany and helped plan the operation
at Entebbe, where the Israeli rescue team killed him.Mysteriously, Bose was
released shortly thereafter, even though the police found evi-
dence linking him and Carlos to a bazooka attack on a Yugoslav
airliner.

Bose escaped to Germany and helped plan the operation
at Entebbe, where the Israeli rescue team killed him.

Shortly after Bose walked away from French custody, un-
armed Parisian police, acting on a Mossad tip, came to Moukar-
bel's apartment, where they found Carlos.

In the resultant gun-
fire, Carlos killed Moukarbel point-blank, and then shot two
officers while shouting "I am Carlos!"
Victor Ostrovsky's By Way of Deception gives an account
of this episode as confusing as it is detailed.

Mossad veteran
Ostrovsk-y claims that Moukarbel was an informant for the
Israeli spy agency.

(The book also mentions a party of South
Americans in the apartment, but doesn't say what happened to
them.) Ultimately, we have only Mossad's word that Moukarbel
was an Israeli informant — the actual informant may well have
been Carlos himself.

All we know for sure is this: Carlos got
away; his comrade ended up dead.

Toward the end of 1975, Carlos and his gun-toting associates
rudely interrupted an OPEC meeting in Vienna and took dozens
of hostages, including Sheik Yamani of Saudi Arabia.

Carlos
seemed to have no clear political goal.

After pocketing a few
million (perhaps as much as $20 million) in money, he freed the
hostages and walked away.

Some still find it hard to believe that
Carlos could threaten with impunity so powerful a man as
Yamani —who, you will recall, had greatly inconvenienced the
United States throughout much of that decade.

What could possibly explain the Jackal's phenomenal lucky
streak?

Perhaps the answer lies in the books Manhunt and
Libyan Sandstorm, which tell the story of "renegade" CIA
agents Ed Wilson and Frank Terpil, who caused an early-110s
scandal by smuggling weapons and other military aid to Libya.--- PAGE BREAK ---

What could possibly explain the Jackal's phenomenal lucky
streak? Perhaps the answer lies in the books Manhunt and
Libyan Sandstorm, which tell the story of "renegade" CIA
agents Ed Wilson and Frank Terpil, who caused an early-110s
scandal by smuggling weapons and other military aid to Libya. Many analysts of the Wilsonfferpil affair wonder whether the
"renegades" were operating under Langley's instructions all
along. One of the fast to blow the whistle on the pair was former
CIA analyst Kevin Mulcahy, who, back in 1977, told Bob
Woodward of the Washington Post about the Wilson/Terpil
operation. Mulcahy insisted that Terpil —then employed by the
Agency — had trained the infamous Carlos. On October 26, 1980 — just before Mulcahy was to testify
against Wilson — authorities found the witness dead, just
outside his Virgina motel room. Accounts of the death vary;
Virginia medical authorities (foreshadowing the Casol aro case)
ruled that Mulcahy had expired of natural causes. Whatever the
cause, he never had the chance to tell a court about Frank
Terpil's links to Carlos the Jackal. In recent years, Syria sheltered Carlos. But the warming
relations between Damascus and Washington apparently made
Carlos a liability, so Syria transferred him to the Sudanese
government, which eventually turned him over to French
authorities. The politics become quite intriguing at this point
Most news accounts of Carlos' capture noted that Sudan, guilty
of horrifying atrocities against the Nu ba people in the south, has
Prevailing winds Magazine
Premiere issue 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---COCAINE
• •,TheIMINe...%V.11
.1:10U•tnill•r.,.."7,••"19.,e,
POLITICS
DRUGS, ARMIES,
AND THE CIA IN
CENTRAL AMERICA
PETER DALE SCOTT AND
JONATHAN MARSHALL
Cocaine Politics tells the story of how elements of
our own government went to work with narcotic traf-
fickers, and then fought to suppress the truth about
what they had done.

PWR code #816 $16.95
officially joined the Clinton Administration's list of terrorist
nations — in part because Sheik Rahman, of World Trade
Center fame, came to America on a Sudanese passport.

These
news accounts usually left out the fact that Sudan, previously
considered a key player in the region's cold war politics, once
housed a sizable CIA station and functioned as a key regional
ally of the United States.

Sudan is ruled by a fundamentalist clique which draws
inspiration from fanatical Hassan al Turabi, leader of the Mus-
lim Brothers.

As the summer 1994 issue of Covert Action noted,
"An influential if small coterie within the State Department
welcomed the Brothers as...sympathetic to Western business
interests and viscerally hostile to communism." CIA links to the
Brothers, and influence in Sudan, may continue to this day.

The latest twist: Carlos' lawyer in France is none other than
the mysterious Jacques Verges, the alleged leftist who repre-
sented Nazi murderer Klaus Barbie.

According to European
news stories, Verges was identified as a CIA "asset" in newly
released files from the Stasi, the former East German secret
police.

Even in captivity, Carlos the Jackal continues his tradition
of "inadvertent" aid to reactionary causes.

A recent article in
Vanity Fair predicts that Carlos may spice up his upcoming trial
by fingering certain left-of-center French Presidential candi-
dates as "people who were personally implicated in terrorism
during the 1970s."
Once again, the Carlos story dances from the political left to
the right and points beyond.Even in captivity, Carlos the Jackal continues his tradition
of "inadvertent" aid to reactionary causes.

A recent article in
Vanity Fair predicts that Carlos may spice up his upcoming trial
by fingering certain left-of-center French Presidential candi-
dates as "people who were personally implicated in terrorism
during the 1970s."
Once again, the Carlos story dances from the political left to
the right and points beyond.

His former allies — the ones left
alive, at any rate — must now be wondering, was Carlos the
Jackal actually Carlos the Judas?

Sieg Heil, Old Chap
Two rather embarrassing items about Great Britain and the
Nazis:
According to the book Eminent Churchillians, by the con-
troversial historian Andrew Roberts, King George VI (father of
Queen Elizabeth II) personally intervened to prevent Jewish
refugees from fleeing to safety in Palestine, which was then
governed by Britain.

In early 1939, after the Kristallnacht po-
groms, His Majesty had his private secretary write Foreign
Secretary Lord Halifax to approve of the steps then being taken
"to prevent these people from leaving their country of origin."
The King did not favor persecution of Jews — he just didn't
want any more of them under British rule.

In the present day: British Brigadier General Andrew Ridg-
way and two staff officers laid a wreath at a war memorial in
Celle, Germany.

The wreath was labelled "To the Gallant and
the Brave.

From the British Army." Apparently, Ridgway had
no idea that the memorialized German soldiers were fallen SS
officers, nor did he realize that the group organizing the cere-
mony, the OdR Ritterkreuz, counts dozens of living SS officers
among its members.

Leading SS men in the OdR include Colo-
nel Fritz Dirges, who served as one of Adolf Hitler's adjutants,
and SS General Wilhelm Mohnke, who, during the war, mur-
dered more than 40 British prisoners of war at Dunkirk.--- PAGE BREAK ---

From the British Army." Apparently, Ridgway had
no idea that the memorialized German soldiers were fallen SS
officers, nor did he realize that the group organizing the cere-
mony, the OdR Ritterkreuz, counts dozens of living SS officers
among its members. Leading SS men in the OdR include Colo-
nel Fritz Dirges, who served as one of Adolf Hitler's adjutants,
and SS General Wilhelm Mohnke, who, during the war, mur-
dered more than 40 British prisoners of war at Dunkirk. The
aged Mohnke may have attended the same Celle ceremony
graced by the presence of Brigadier General Ridgway. Ridgway now commands British forces in Bosnia. Sieg Heil, Mon Ami
Speaking of embarassing disclosures: Francois Mitterand,
Socialist president of France since 1981 (and now seriously ill),
has recently had his war-time dirty laundry aired. According to
a new book by French investigator Pierre Penn (who had Mit-
terand's cooperation), the Socialist politician did not join the
French Resistance early on, as he has heretofore claimed. Evi-
dence now indicates that he joined the anti-Nazi forces in late
1943, when the handwriting on the wall already predicted
Hitler's defeat. Throughout much of the Nazi occupation, Mit-
terand supported the elderly Nazi puppet Charles Petain and his
fascist Vichy government, responsible for the decimation of
France's Jewish population. Mitterand worked in the Vichy
regime's Commissariat General for Prisoners of War, and con-
tributed articles to the anti-Semitic journal France. Revue de
l'Etat Nouveau. Petain awarded Mitterand the Francisque Gal-
lique, a medal bestowed only on those Petain devotees who had
helped bring about Nazi rule. Mitterand explains that he was young at the time. Prevailing Winds Maga7ine
Premiere Issue
6
----'
'
' '
• - : . ,.i..:L--,-.;-,4,--.-,...?-a. ::'•''
-'_"
: ::' • - - --..Z.• 7!;.,
..qz!.,-1,4-:.¢,,_. . . '7,-7 •

--- PAGE BREAK ---Sieg Heil and
Kyrie eleison
"Embarrassing" scarcely describes Pope John Paul H's
actions this past year.

The Vatican has awarded Kurt Waldheim
— former UN Secretary General, and later President of Austria
(1986-1992) — the honor of a papal knighthood.

In the late
1980s, the world learned that Waldheim had spent the previous
four decades covering up his participation in Nazi war crimes
as a Wehrmacht intelligence officer.

The Vatican topped this outrage by sending secret envoys to
Iran and Libya, the Pope's allies against the United Nations
Conference on Population and Development.

As editorialist Jim
Hoagland puts it: "In the Vatican's viewpoint, the worldwide
struggle over abortion and birth control seems to take immediate
precedence over the political struggles in Egypt, Algeria, Ma-
laysia and other countries where Muslim fundamentalists want
to sweep away secular governments and install theocracies."
Hoagland goes on to quote Iranian Foreign Minister Rafsanjani,
who met with a papal envoy on August 1: "The future war is
between the religious and the materialists.

Collaboration be-
tween religious governments in support of outlawing abortion
is a fine beginning for the conception of collaboration in other
fields."
However, according to the International Iran Dines of Sep-
tember 9, 1994, the Vatican ultimately got little Iranian ,  help
during the Cairo conference.

There's a big difference between
Catholic and Shiite attitudes toward reproduction: "...

the Vati-
can opposes any form of artificial birth control while govern-
ments in the Islamic world have almost uniformly embraced
birth control apart from abortion." It's rather striking, when you
think of it: Compared to the Bishop of Rome, even the funda-
mentalists of Iran seem like the voices of sweet reason — on the
subject of sex, at least.There's a big difference between
Catholic and Shiite attitudes toward reproduction: "...

the Vati-
can opposes any form of artificial birth control while govern-
ments in the Islamic world have almost uniformly embraced
birth control apart from abortion." It's rather striking, when you
think of it: Compared to the Bishop of Rome, even the funda-
mentalists of Iran seem like the voices of sweet reason — on the
subject of sex, at least.

Mercury, Mossad,
Murder, and Nukes
The Guardian of July 26, 1994, describes a gruesome mur-
der mystery with possible intelligence links and nuclear conse-
quences.

The murder took place in Johannesburg, South Africa,
one evening in November, 1991.

A 49-year-old British busi-
nessman named Alan Kidger received a phone call at home from
an unknown person, then told his wife he was stepping out.

He
never returned.

The next morning two young thieves found his
car parked downtown, opened the trunk, and discovered
Kidger's body.

The arms and legs had been surgically severed,
and the torso smeared with black paint.

Kidger's family initially suspected that white extremists,
angered by his mixed marriage, may have committed the mur-
der.

But the case went unsolved until June of this year, when a
South African police chief, Lieutenant Colonel Charles Land-
man, came forward with a startling explanation: Mossad, the
Israeli CIA, killed Kidger.

According to the police chief, ele-
ments of the previous South African intelligence service
blocked his earlier investigation into the affair — the same
elements which may have been involved with the bombing of
Lt.

Col.

Landman's car in 1993.

He believes the installation of
a new South African government frees him to pursue the case
anew.

Why would Mossad agents kill this businessman?

Kidger
worked for Thor Chemicals, a British multinational whose
presence in South Africa is resented by many.Why would Mossad agents kill this businessman?

Kidger
worked for Thor Chemicals, a British multinational whose
presence in South Africa is resented by many.

Environmental-
ists charge that the Thor mercury reprocessing plant in Natal
(the largest such plant in the world) has grossly polluted the
Umgeni river.

But health issues did not trouble Mossad.

Their
concerns were nuclear.

Kidger may have been involved with
smuggling so-called "Red Mercury," a substance potentially
valuable in the manufacture of nuclear weapons, to Middle
Eastern nations with nuclear ambitions.

Or so says Landman.

But many deny the very existence of
Red Mercury.

Reportedly, the substance originated some years
ago, when Soviet scientists discovered a way to use a common
mercury compound as a cheap and efficient substitute for ura-
nium in both fission and fusion bombs.

Most nuclear experts in
Russia, the United States and Britain deny these reports —yet
some knowledgeable analysts insist that Red Mercury does
exist.

Included in the latter group are Frank Barnaby, former
director of the Stockholm Internationl Peace Research Institute,
and Sam Cohen, generally regarded as the father of the neutron
bomb.

If these experts are correct, the Red Mercury problem
could eclipse the plutonium and uranium smuggling scandals
now erupting in Russia and Germany.

Thor Chemicals officials argue that South African environ-
mental extremists killed Alan Kidger.

Nevertheless, Lt.

Col.

Landman is adamently pursuing the Mossad angle, including
possible links to the murder last April of chemical expert Wy-
nand van Wyk.

Expect the Red Mercury story to heat up in the
months and years ahead...

Atoms for Kohl
Speaking of those uranium and plutonium smuggling scan-
dals: The New York Times of August 26 notes an aspect of the
story seldom reported elsewhere.

Officials of the Social Demo-
cratic Party charge that German authorities themselves aided the
smuggling.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Atoms for Kohl
Speaking of those uranium and plutonium smuggling scan-
dals: The New York Times of August 26 notes an aspect of the
story seldom reported elsewhere. Officials of the Social Demo-
cratic Party charge that German authorities themselves aided the
smuggling. The theory, taken seriously by many in Germany,
holds that conservative German President Helmut Kohl, who
won re-election in October, benefited politically from the spec-
tacular series of arrests which dominated German headlines. As
one Social Democratic leader put it, "This smacks of a stunt."
Allegedly, the uranium and plutonium uncovered during the
smuggling busts originated in Russia. But Russian counterintel-
ligence experts doubt that the plutonium came from their coun-
try, claiming that the type of plutonium reportedly found in
Germany is almost never used in Russia. The smuggling cases raise yet another question. What hap-
pens to the recovered plutonium and uranium after the smug-
gling operations come to light? One doubts that German cops
keep the stuff sitting on a shelf in the evidence room. And as
long as Russian officials disclaim the material, they certainly
won't press to get it back. Does Kohl's government harbor a clandestine nuclear weap-
ons program? Germany did try to beat America to the bomb
during the war... Prevailing Winds Magazine
Premiere Issue 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---f7+
s,.

The Party Girl, the KGB,
and the Devil
We hope you remember Christine Keeler, the naughty Eng-
lish lass who, during the swinging '60s, shook up the British
government by bedding both Defense Minister John Profumo
and a KGB operative.

The resultant scandal inspired one of
Esquire's most memorable "dubious achievement" awards, as
well as a rather good film — titled, appropriately, Scandal.

Keeler now tells British tabloids that she did what she did
while spying for the Russians, exactly as some have long
suspected.

Prevailing Winds remains fairly skeptical about this
scenario.

The former party girl is well known to have fallen on
rather sad times financially — and some Western ideologues
still go to great lengths to keep alive their favorite anti-commu-
nist canards (e.g., the KGB-shot-the-Pope myth, the Alger-Hiss-
was-guilty myth, etc).

The Profumo affair has long attracted bizarre interpretations.

Perhaps the most striking assertion came from Hungarian film
actress Eva Bartok, who married into uppercrust British society
—the same circles in which Stephen Ward traveled.

(Recall that
Ward acted as the "mentor" to Keeler and other attractive
women.) Bartok charged that Ward's crew dabbled in Satanism
as well as sadomasochism.

Maury Terry's controversial book
The Ultimate Evil also notes Ward's occultic leanings.

Terry
further implies that a woman named Mary Anne MacLean knew
Ward and had, like Keeler, serviced prominent Brits.

MacLean
later married Robert DeGrimston and co-founded an infamous
cult called The Process.

Is any of this provable at this late date?

Perhaps not.

History
may never know whether Christine Keeler was Old Nick's
bosom buddy, one of the KGB's best-laid plants, or simply a
girl who wanted to have some fun.

The Fire Next Time?

Some observers fear that Elizabeth Clare Prophet's Church
Universal and Triumphant could prompt another Waco-style
disaster.The Fire Next Time?

Some observers fear that Elizabeth Clare Prophet's Church
Universal and Triumphant could prompt another Waco-style
disaster.

A federal investigation has confirmed what Prophet's critics
have long asserted (despite denials from church leaders): Top
followers of the self-styled "Guru Ma" have been stockpiling
weapons in various strongholds around their headquarters in
Livingston, Montana.

Stuart Gibson, an attorney for the U.S.

Justice Department, alleged (in a Rocky Mountain News story
of 7/6/93) that the cult used a complex stock scheme to launder
money from staff salaries for weapons purchases.

Such pur-
chases would have violated the church's tax-exempt status.

None of these revelations, of course, could possibly justify
another grandstanding raid by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco
and Firearms.

A repeat of the inexcusable (and, to a large degree,
still unexplained) Branch Davidian tragedy must be avoided at
all costs.

Even so, let's not paint an idealized portrait of Elizabeth
Clare Prophet, a far-rightist who practically swoons over Oliver
North.

Her cult is, in essence, an updated spin-off of the "1 AM
Religious Activity." This still-active sect, quite popular during
the 1930s, was founded by Guy and Edna Ballard, the students
of a mystic-minded American Nazi named William Dudley
Pelley, one of this nation's most vicious Jew-haters.

Pelley's
teachings ultimately trace back to Helena Petrovna Blavatsky's
intensely racist The Secret Doctrine — a work which also
seminally influenced Dietrich Eckhart, the mentor of Adolf
Hitler.

I AM-derived organizations still thrive, nipping at the edges
of the New Age movement —for example, a few of those rather
silty "angel" books contain transparently hidden I AM propa-
ganda.

Some latter-day Ballardite sects, such as the one headed
by Colorado real estate bigshot George Green, are openly an-
tisemitic.I AM-derived organizations still thrive, nipping at the edges
of the New Age movement —for example, a few of those rather
silty "angel" books contain transparently hidden I AM propa-
ganda.

Some latter-day Ballardite sects, such as the one headed
by Colorado real estate bigshot George Green, are openly an-
tisemitic.

Prophet's group officially eschews racism, although
at least one CUT defector has reported that the inner leadership
still maintains a weltanschauung all too reminiscent of Pelley's.

Jesus Wept
This is the age of miracles.

Two pillars of the far-from-liberal
mainstream press have actually (albeit belatedly) told some of
the truth about a heavily protected right-wing superstar —
televangclist Pat Robertson, leader of the Christian Broadcast-
ing Network.

Newsweek recently gave away one of Robertson's unnerving
little secrets: He uses funds from his non-profit ministry to set
up his for-profit enterprises.

That's right — Social Security
checks sent to the 700 Club go to Robertson's expanding busi-
ness empire (which includes the rights to all Mary Tyler Moore
Show reruns).

Robertson spokesmen claim that Pat borrows
non-profit monies to make his for-profit investments, which
sounds a bit like the sort of rationale Jimmy Hoffa might have
offered.

(Does anyone really think that the IRS would let an
outfit like, oh let's say, Prevailing Winds use non-profit dona-
tions to fund for-profit ventures?

Not bloody likely.)
To top it off, the ABC Ncws program Prime Time Live
uncovered another way Pat Robertson has explored the virtues
of free enterprise_ Seems the good reverend has set up a nice
little pyramid scheme — oops, beg pardon: We meant to say
multi level marketing.

Whichever term you prefer, the basic set up remains the
same.

Rev.

Pat proffers a line of products — in this case,
KaloVita vitamins, manufactured with water "from the Sea of
Galilee"; he also offers a nutritional drink called American
Whey.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rev. Pat proffers a line of products — in this case,
KaloVita vitamins, manufactured with water "from the Sea of
Galilee"; he also offers a nutritional drink called American
Whey. The products are sold via an operation similar to the
classic pyramid franchise operation, as described by John Ken-
neth Galbraith (in Annals of an Abiding Liberal): "A salesman
recruits other salesmen and gets an override — a share in what
they receive as down payments. And then the salesmen so
recruited recruit other salesmen and take a similar cut before
passing the residue back to the individual who recruited them."
In the classic pyramid operation, the operation expands and
monies flow back to the originator —who, if he is smart, knows
precisely when to bail out and hightail it to some congenial
nation without an extradition treaty. Although pyramid multi level marketing schemes arcoften
fueled by revivalistic religiosity and heart-tugging blather about
the free enterprise systeM, eventually the financial bubble
bursts, the naive recruits take a bath, and their enthusiasm turns
to anger. What will Reverend Pat do if (when?) his operation
Prevailing Winds magazine
Premiere Issue
8
•

--- PAGE BREAK ---CIA COMPIICITY IM
Tiff GLOBAL DRUG TRADE
reaches this point?

He will face limited options.

Of course, he'll probably heap
blame on the `liberal media," as Jim Bakker's flacks tried to
do.

And he can always point the finger at some hapless under-
ling.

Indeed, he has used that very tactic already, in order to
explain the failure of an earlier multi-level enterprise, which
sold discount coupons to senior citizens.

Pat Robertson denies all charges of questionable business
practices.

Nevertheless, "multi-level" plans have a sad record
(can you name even one which fulfilled the promise of profit for
all involved?), and most savvy folk steer clear of them.

Key questions remain unanswered.

Why doesn't the good
reverend simply make his vitamins available via mail order, or
on store shelves?

Why does he insist on an absurd marketing
structure, whereby one super-salesman sells other salesmen on
the idea of selling to still other salesmen, who sell to still more
salesmen, until finally America becomes a nation of vitamin
salesmen rabidly selling salesmanship to each other?

Robertson, a Yale graduate and the son of a conservative
Virgina senator, deserves closer scrutiny than he has heretofore
received.

Born into a Virginia "old money" family (related, on
his mother's side, to Winston Churchill and President Benjamin
Harrison), Robertson reportedly considered suicide after failing
the Bar exam.

But he was saved by an act of Grace — J.

Peter
Grace, chairman of W.R.

Grace and Co.

The fabulously wealthy
Grace took a personal interest in the young man, giving him a
job assessing "management techniques" in Peru.

Grace is a leading member of the Knights of Malta, the
shadowy group which represents American Catholicism's reac-
tionary elite.

The Knights, in turn, have longstanding ties to the
world of intelligence.Grace is a leading member of the Knights of Malta, the
shadowy group which represents American Catholicism's reac-
tionary elite.

The Knights, in turn, have longstanding ties to the
world of intelligence.

Leading members have included German
spy chief Reinhard Crehlen and Iran-contra spymaster William
Casey, as well as numerous other CIA luminaries.

J.

Peter Grace
headed the American Institute for Free Labor Development
(AIFLD), which received massive CIA funding throughout the
'60s and '70s.

These CIA/AIFLD monies went toward union
busting and covert operations in Latin America.

So far, no
evidence suggests that Pat Robertson spent his South-of-the-
border sojourn acting on behalf of a Grace political operation.

In later years, however, Robertson did supply aid to the
contras, and to the bloodthirsty junta led by Guatemalan leader
Efrain Rios-Montt.

During the Afghan war, CIA operatives
acted as Robertson's drivers during a CBN visit to the Afghan-
Pakistani border.

As Covert Action Information Bulletin once noted (in its
Spring, 1987 issue), "An international organization like CBN,
active in 65 foreign countries, would be of obvious use to an
intelligence agency like the CIA.

Such organizations can be
used as conduits of funds and can help administer counterinsur-
gency programs." Covert Action further claimed that CBN,
unlike other religious broadcasters, "does not voluntarily issue
annual audited financial statements."
Perhaps the most disturbing tale involving Reverend Pat can
be found in the pages of a British book called The Octopus, as
yet unpublished in this country.

In this work, a former DIA agent
reveals how American intelligence protected selected Lebanese
heroin smuggling operations.

And it seems that one of the poppy
fields in that part of the world may have had disturbing links to
a certain highly-televised fundamentalist...

...but that's the start of a very long tale.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And it seems that one of the poppy
fields in that part of the world may have had disturbing links to
a certain highly-televised fundamentalist... ...but that's the start of a very long tale. Rest assured that
we'll be looking into these matters in greater detail in future
issues. After all, Robertson's Christian Coalition played a large
role in the propaganda blitz which led to the recent Republican
landslide. Which means we can't stand pat. And finally... Boom Town
USA Today reported (on June 2, 1994) that the southern
region of Tucson, Arizona, has been plagued by the sounds of
mysterious explosions. Locals hear bizarre booms twice daily. Trouble is, nobody can figure out the cause of the explosions. Perhaps unlucky Arizonans are ear-witnessing the construction
of one of those fabled underground military bases?El
THE POLITICS OF HEROIN
"CIA Complicity in the Global
Drug Trade"the explosions. Perhaps unlucky Arizonans are ear-witnessing the construction
of one of those fabled underground military bases?El
THE POLITICS OF HEROIN
"CIA Complicity in the Global
Drug Trade"

by Alfred W. McCoy, Ph.D.
To an average Ameri-
can who witnesses the dis-
mal spectacle of the narcot-
ics traffic at the street
level, it must seem incon-
ceivable that the govern-
ment could be implicated
in the international drug
trade. Unfortunately,
American diplomats and
CIA agents have been in-
volved in the narcotics traf-
fic at three levels: (1) coin-
cidental complicity by ally-
ing with groups actively
engaged in the drug traffic;
(2) support of the traffic
by covering up for known
heroin traffickers and condoning their involvement; and (3) ac-
tive engagement in the transport of opium and heroin. It is
ironic, to say the least, that America's heroin plague is of its
own making."
from The Politics of Heroin: CIA Complicity in the Global
Drug Trade
Twenty years of research have led to this revised and updated
edition of Alfred W. McCoy's classic. The Politics of Heroin in
Southeast Asia. In it, he concludes that, with global produc-
tion and consumption of narcotics at record levels and her-
oin use in America on the rise, it is time to confront the fail-
ure of the U.S. government's drug policy and to put an end
to the CIA's complicity in the narcotics trade, which since
World War H has been an integral part of the agency's ef-
forts to maintain US. power abroad. A remarkable expose
of official U.S. hypocrisy in its approaches to one of the
world's greatest social problems, The Politics of Heroin of-
fers an analysis that is destined to influence the public de-
bate on drugs for years to come.
Alfred W. McCoy is professor Southeast Asian history at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison.
PWR code #801
$19.95
Prevailing Winds Magazine
Premiere issue 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---am the walrus
"The time has come," the Walrus said, "to speak of many things..."
A look back at 1994
3y now, you've probably all heard the joke about the
i
newspaper reporter who spots Bill Clinton walking on
water, then writes an article headlined "Clinton Can't
Swim." This story resonates not because anyone hallucinates
Messianic abilities on Bill's part (hardy!), but because we've
all seen that particular reporter's work — and his byline is
Legion.

The media's deviltry never stops.

After the great Republican
midterm massacre of 1994, in which some of this nation's most
obnoxious reactionaries clobbered all
competition, conservative spin doctors
immediately set to work.

They portrayed
the vote as a rejection of liberalism in
general, and Clinton's policies in spe-
cific.

Nonsense.

The voters rejected a Presi-
dent, not a set of policies.

They spat in the
eye of a man, not an ideology.

November 8, 1994, did not mark the
occasion when a slap-happy American
populace shouted "Thank you Ronald
Reagan!" for busting unions and turning
$14-an-hour jobs into $6-an-hour jobs.

The people did not collectively forgive
Reagan and Bush for forcing Mom to
punch a time clock alongside Dad, The
people did not cheer Big Business' not-so-secret plans to keep
wages low by keeping unemployment high.

The people did not
bestow their blessings on Reagan/Bush-era budget deficits,
serviced by bonds which only the wealthy purchase and profit
from.

The people did not shout hosanna for an increasingly toxic
workplace.

The people did not say aye to the gutting of Medicare
and restrictions on abortion.

The people did not suddenly see
the wisdom of increased tax breaks for the decadent, arrogant,
indolent, elitist pseudo-humanoids comprising the American
plutocracy.

No.The people did not suddenly see
the wisdom of increased tax breaks for the decadent, arrogant,
indolent, elitist pseudo-humanoids comprising the American
plutocracy.

No.

When questioned on specific issues, the public still
expresses opinions and preferences well to the left of Newt
Gingrich, and often to the left of Clinton himself
Although the Radio Right — perhaps the most effective
propaganda force in history -has successfully painted Clinton
red, he is essentially a sell-out mushy moderate who could have
found a home in either party.

Thus, predictably, the President
finds himself damned by the marginalized left press because he
isn't a socialist, and damned by everyone else as Lenin reincar-
nate.

The disinformationists have created a false Clinton and
made him a scapegoat for the sins of corporate America.

His task, all along, has been to play the role of the Bad
Democrat.

During his eighteen months of attempted power,
ruling class hirelings on Capitol Hill and in the press blocked
any Administration fancies (such as congressional lobbying
reform) which might have inconvenienced the corporate elite.

Then the Radio Right assigned the hapless president sole re-
sponsibility for every American ill during the past two decades
—rather like blaming all venereal disease on one impdtent man.

An absurd idea, but the American people feast on absurdity.

Rush Limbaugh and his clones have completely highjacked the
airwaves, yet they bleat continually that a Great Liberal Con-
spiracy controls the media.

Nobody no-
tices the contradiction.

On the morning
after the elections I couldn't find a single
liberal, progressive, or even moderate
radio commentator on the air in South-
ern California.

Left-wing broadcasters
are as extinct as left-wing newspapers;
the only exceptions are heard on the
Pacifica Radio Network, which Senate
leader Bob Dole has targeted for deci-
mation.On the morning
after the elections I couldn't find a single
liberal, progressive, or even moderate
radio commentator on the air in South-
ern California.

Left-wing broadcasters
are as extinct as left-wing newspapers;
the only exceptions are heard on the
Pacifica Radio Network, which Senate
leader Bob Dole has targeted for deci-
mation.

Apparently, the Radio Right learned
an important lesson from Josef Goeb-
bels: Always portray your side as the
underdog.

Even after the Nazis con-
quered Europe, Goebbels-approved
propaganda films (like the one re-cre-
ated in Kiss ofthe Spider Woman) pictured the Nazis as fighting
an uphill battle against greater, more insidious and pitiless
forces.

Never underestimate propaganda's power to make peo-
ple believe the surreal.

It was the virus of disinformation, which
sent millions into the showers and the ovens, while simultane-
ously leading Germans into a war that shamed their nation
eternally.

What makes the people around you right now — at
work, at home, in the restaurant, in the mirror immune to this
deadly strain?

Tom Brokaw, speaking more presciently than he knew,
called November 8, 1994, "the night of the long knives." We
will feel the effects of this night long after Bill Clinton has been
reduced to a soundbite from the video archives.

Yet we must
concede that Bill Clinton — or at least the Bogus Bill erected
by the far right — is the man who made this night possible.

Astonishingly, the public has turned against the President
because of his perceived "personal flaws," while scandal-rid-
den reactionaries shamelessly wrap themselves in a banner
marked Virtuous & True.

House majority leader Newt Gingrich
is a womanizer who, after learning his wife had cancer, left her
for a younger girlfriend — yet he now poses as our new Cotton
Gingrich rails against
"big government,"
yet his Georgia
congressional district
remains one of the
greatest recipients of
federal largesse.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Astonishingly, the public has turned against the President
because of his perceived "personal flaws," while scandal-rid-
den reactionaries shamelessly wrap themselves in a banner
marked Virtuous & True. House majority leader Newt Gingrich
is a womanizer who, after learning his wife had cancer, left her
for a younger girlfriend — yet he now poses as our new Cotton
Gingrich rails against
"big government,"
yet his Georgia
congressional district
remains one of the
greatest recipients of
federal largesse. Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page In

--- PAGE BREAK ---Mather, hectoring his enemies for their alleged moral lapses.

Gingrich also rails against "big government," though his Geor-
gia congressional district remains one of the biggest recipients
of federal largesse; amazingly, he once lobbied on behalf of the
ultra-spooky Lockheed corporation to allow a sale of Lockheed
jets to Khaddafy's Libya.

Meanwhile, convicted burglar G.

Gordon Liddy regularly denounces Clintonian "sleaze" to his
wide radio audience.

His younger listeners probably don't know
that Liddy once kept silent while an innocent man took the rap
for a crime he committed (breaking into psychiatrist Lawrence
Fielding's office).

Pyramid schemer Pat Robertson runs daily
propaganda broadsides at the administration, though non-profit
religious broadcasters are forbidden to take a partisan stance.

To describe these years, historians will need a stronger
metaphor than the usual one involving pots and kettles.

Pretty Paula
T
he President's principal "moral lapses" were Whitewa-
ter and his alleged sexual harrassment of an Arkansas
woman named Paula Jones.

These matters are traffic
tickets, yet they have garnered more press attention than did the
weekly 20-car pile-ups of the Bush and Reagan years.

When a
bored public finally cried "Enough!" at Paula-gate, television
pundits offered such observations as the following (actual
quote): "The people just aren't interested in distractions like
Paula Jones on one hand and Iran-Contra on the other." Appar-
ently, the documented tale of Ronald Reagan giving TOW
missiles to the Ayatollah is somehow equivalent to Ms.

Jones'
unlikely account of then-Governor Clinton offering up his Scud.

Does anyone truly believe that Bill Clinton, in the midst of
his 1991 presidential campaign, would suddenly drop his draw-
ers and demand fellatio from a woman he did not know well and
whose loyalties he could not gauge?Jones'
unlikely account of then-Governor Clinton offering up his Scud.

Does anyone truly believe that Bill Clinton, in the midst of
his 1991 presidential campaign, would suddenly drop his draw-
ers and demand fellatio from a woman he did not know well and
whose loyalties he could not gauge?

When forced to comment
on the tale's unlikelihood, political analysts usually muttered
something indecipherable about JFK and the arrogance of
power, as if this could somehow render Paula plausible.

Few recall that Gennifer Flowers, the last woman to level
such accusations, got some $100,000 from Penthouse magazine
for her trouble.

(Flowers, recently quoted as saying "I love
Republicans," is now crying poor.

Maybe Hillary can give her
advice on money management.) Few recall that the fellow who
delivered Flowers to the press was Arkansas fix-it man Larry
Nichols, a close friend to contra leader Adolpho Calera.

Few
recall that Nichols once lined up a parade of women with similar
stories, although the tabloids never printed these talcs because
the ladies wanted payment in the quarter-million dollar range.

And nobody now recalls the forged document — which a
source tried to fob off on me during  the 1992 campaign -
pretending to be Clinton's letter of apology to a lover he once
pushed down the stairs of the governor's mansion.

Whoever
engineered this hoax did a clever, professional job.

Why hasn't
anyone fingered the fabricator?

I don't know who pasted together that phoney missive, but
let's not be in too much of a rush to cross Larry Nichols off the
list of suspects.

Nichols, a longtime Clinton enemy with a truly
majestic ability to carry a grudge, has become a heroic figure to
the Radio Right, the Fundamentalist fearmongers, and the anti-
Semitic gutter press.

He continues to level new charges (publi-
cized by the Falwell-approved video The Clinton Chronicles),
mostly concerning Clinton's putative involvement with drug
smuggling.Nichols, a longtime Clinton enemy with a truly
majestic ability to carry a grudge, has become a heroic figure to
the Radio Right, the Fundamentalist fearmongers, and the anti-
Semitic gutter press.

He continues to level new charges (publi-
cized by the Falwell-approved video The Clinton Chronicles),
mostly concerning Clinton's putative involvement with drug
smuggling.

Nichols wanted to tell us these things earlier, you
see, but had to hold his tongue — because 'nobody would have
believed him.' So what obligates us to believe him now?

Whitewater vs.

Silverado
0
 ne need not hallucinate a halo atop Bill Clinton's head
to be infuriated by the media's handling of the so-called
Whitewater scandal.

The herd of reporters lapping at
Whitewater have implied, without yet offering any evidence,
that Clinton funded his gubernatorial campaigns with money
from an ill-run Arkansas financial institution called Madison
Guaranty.

Similarly, when Jay Stephens, a Clinton enemy, was
appointed to probe one aspect of the Whitewater affair, otiose
private whining from George Stephanopolis became, in the eyes
of many journalists, evidence of an attempt to subvert the
investigation.

Thus, in the early days of the "scandal," Kathleen Kiely -
the Washington correspondent for the Houston Post — ap-
peared on the nationwide C-SPAN network, looking the epit-
ome of yuppified loveliness as she insisted that the press was
treating Clinton no differently than it had Bush.

True, she said,
one could draw an analogy between Madison and the monumen-
tally failed Silverado Savings and Loan, which Neil Bush helped
run into the mud at taxpayer expense.

But, we were told, there
was no evidence that pilfered Silverado funds had benefited any
of George Bush's campaigns, and no evidence of White House
pressure to squelch that story.

Silverado was therefore a less
important matter than Whitewater.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But, we were told, there
was no evidence that pilfered Silverado funds had benefited any
of George Bush's campaigns, and no evidence of White House
pressure to squelch that story. Silverado was therefore a less
important matter than Whitewater. However, those few who followed the S&L debacle in detail
might remember the strange timing of the Silverado failure. Regulators originally planned to shut down the crooked com-
pany by the end of October, 1988, just before the Bush election. Then a mysterious telephone caller "from Washington" de-
manded, and got, a 45-day delay in Silverado's closure. This
delay allowed Silverado to rack up another half-billion-or-so
dollars in losses, but it helped George Bush sidestep an unpleas-
ant "October Surprise" which might have cost him the presi-
dency_ In point of fact, Silverado had been on the ropes through-
out much of the Bush campaign, but reporters at that time
conveniently chose to ignore young Neil's banditry. Just as conveniently, most American journalists have now
forgotten all about a fellow named Larry Mizel, who ran some-
thing called M.D.C. Holdings. M.D.C. received loans worth
hundreds of millions of dollars from Neil Bush's firm, including
$208 million worth of "non-conforming mortgage loans" —
i.e., loans that were improperly secured. (Compare these figures
to those bandied about in the Whitewater affair, which rarely
get into the six-digit league.) "Coincidentally," Mizel was also
one of the Republican Party"s largest contributors. Another huge
donor to the GOP was Bill Walters, "coincidentally" a business
partner of Neil Bush and the single largest recipient of shady
loans from Silverado. Naturally, the American taxpayer had to
cover Silverado's losses when its loans went sour. In effect, tax
money funded the Republicans — the party of Gingrich, the
"party of virtue."
But none of this mattered to Kathy Kiely, Texas' answer to
s. Prevailing Winds Premiere issue Page I I. In effect, tax
money funded the Republicans — the party of Gingrich, the
"party of virtue."
But none of this mattered to Kathy Kiely, Texas' answer to
s. Prevailing Winds Premiere issue Page I I

--- PAGE BREAK ---Brenda Starr, who tossed her dashing red tresses to and fro
before the TV cameras while remaining happily ignorant of all
I've just mentioned, happily ignorant of Ken Good and Stephan
Halper and Fred Malek and all the other GOP fat-cats who
helped loot America's Savings and Loan system, gleefully
clueless about the persuasive evidence that much of this looted
money also funded CIA covert operations.

Why does dear Kathy bug me so much, months after her
appearance?

Because if she really wanted to discover the truth
of such matters, she needed only consult fellow Texan Pete
Brewton, author of that invaluable work, The Mafia, CIA and
George Bush.

Brewton once worked for Kathy's employer, the
Houston Post.

Alas, he was "axed" to leave when he dug a little
too obsessively into the staggeringly wealthy Walter Mischer,
a good friend of, and fund-raiser for, George Bush.

Mischer is
arguably the most powerful figure in Houston, and has (accord-
ing to Brewton) ties to the CIA and organized crime.

Oddly enough, you don't see Pete Brewton on C-SPAN, or
anywhere else on American television.

Awful Al
A
pparently, Clinton's opponents looked back at the
Iran/Contra scandal and decided, probably rightly, that
all those tales of Reaganite covert thuggery simply left
many Americans confused.

Shackley, Secord, Singlaub —who
could follow their insanely complex trail?

The details boggled,
and bored.

But the odor of high-level malevolence damaged
Ronald Reagan's poll numbers, at least temporarily.

So far, Whitewater has been little more than an attempt to
recreate that odor artificially — it's a political scratch-n-sniff
card.

There is no there there; Congress' thudding Whitewater
hearings gave us nothing but fumes.

One of the chief fumers was New York's Republican Sena-
tor Alfonse D'Amato, one of the most corrupt individuals ever
elected to high office, as all readers of Leonard Lurie's new
book, Senator Pothole, know well.There is no there there; Congress' thudding Whitewater
hearings gave us nothing but fumes.

One of the chief fumers was New York's Republican Sena-
tor Alfonse D'Amato, one of the most corrupt individuals ever
elected to high office, as all readers of Leonard Lurie's new
book, Senator Pothole, know well.

In the great long-playing
record of modern American scandals, D'Amato's name pops up
with the regularity of a scratch in the vinyl: He played roles in
the WedTech scandal, the HUD scandal, the ABSCAM scandal,
the Unisys scandal, and of course the S&L scandal.

In 1975,
D'Amato testified to a Federal Grand Jury that he knew nothing
about kickbacks to the Republican party in Nassau County; ten
years later he admitted that this statement was a lie.

In spite of this impressive resume, the Senator from New
York may be best known for his efforts on behalf of gangsters
—for example, back in '85 he asked U.S.

Attorney Guiliani not
to prosecute mafia chieftain Paul Castellano.

Earlier in his
illustrious career, D'Amato made a similar effort to reduce the
sentence of Mario Gigante, a scion of the Genovese crime
family.

Interestingly, D'Amato's ploy on Gigante's behalf came
directly after an interesting conversation between the mobster's
associates and the outlandishly corrupt lawyer Roy Cohn, once
the protege of Joe McCarthy.

Cohn assured the mobster's pals
that $175,000 could buy Mario an early release from prison.

Senator D 'Amato was a friend of Cohn's law partner —but that
friendship, we are assured, is just a coincidence.

Awful Al now leads the charge on Whitewater, pretending
to be the last great champion of decency in politics.

If that's so,
then why is D'Amato still blocking the public release of an
August 1991 Senate Ethics Committee report outlining his
many evils?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Awful Al now leads the charge on Whitewater, pretending
to be the last great champion of decency in politics. If that's so,
then why is D'Amato still blocking the public release of an
August 1991 Senate Ethics Committee report outlining his
many evils? D'Amato originally announced that he would be satisfied if
Attorney General Janet Reno appointed a special prosecutor on
The senator from New York
may be best known for his
efforts on behalf of gangsters
Whitewater. This statement proved to be another D'Amato lie. When Reno tapped moderate Republican Robert B. Fiske for
the job, the Senator demanded, and got, congressional hearings,
which he dominated like the dark god Chernabog presiding over
Night on Bald Mountain. At one point, he cut off Senator
Kerry's attempt to uncover some Bush-era wrongdoings -
specifically, the pressure applied by the Bush administration on
the Resolution Trust Corporation for a Whitewater indictment
just prior to the 1992 election. Now, in a ghastly irony, veteran S&L conster Al D'Amato
will assume chairmanship of the Senate Committee on Banking,
Housing, and Urban Affairs. And his creature, George Pataki,
will succeed Mario Cuomo as New York Governor. Clinton vs. Reagan
hroughout eight dismal years of Ronald Reagan's presi-
dency, most of our media watchdogs refused to ask acreature, George Pataki,
will succeed Mario Cuomo as New York Governor. Clinton vs. Reagan
hroughout eight dismal years of Ronald Reagan's presi-
dency, most of our media watchdogs refused to ask a

simple question: How did Ronnie make his millions? The
question is still pertinent, because it puts the Clinton "scandals"
into perspective.
Reagan, whose acting career had ended in failure, success-
fully ran for the California governorship in 1966. Shortly after
he won the office, Twentieth Century Fox purchased some
Reagan ranch property for $1.9 million — nearly three times
more than it was worth. The Governor returned the favor two
years later when he gave Fox and the other major studios a
massive tax break on their film inventories.
Actually, the deal was a bit more complex: Fox merely acted
as a conduit for the $1.9 million dollars, which originally came
from one Dr. Jules Stein, who had excellent reason to shower
Ronnie with his gratitude. The good doctor, it seems, owned
MCA — a company which had benefited, back in the 1950's,
from a classic piece of Reaganesque double-dealing. At that
time, MCA was a powerful talent agency vying to go into
television production, thus creating a severe conflict of interest:
What kind of representation could an actor expect if his agent
and his employer were one and the same? Reagan, who then
headed the Screen Actor's Guild, winked at the conflict and
waived MCA past the usual regulations. Eventually he winked
and waived his way into a tidy fortune, and ultimately into the
White House.
Compared to a scam on that level, Hillary's cattle trick -
even if given the worst possible interpretation — seems about
as naughty as pitching pennies in school.
Reagan's friends included crooked Teamster officials, mafia
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 12

--- PAGE BREAK ---•-•
luminaries such as Johnny Rosselli, and para-Nazi moneymen
like Patrick Frawley and Walter Knott.

Speaking to an ABC
news executive, Frawley once credited Reagan's 1966 guberna-
torial victory to public angst over "Niggers, the Watts riots, dirty
students, the Cesar Chavez Reds and fair housing." Oddly, the
press never reminded us of that quote back in, say, the 1982-83
period.

C'mon, admit it: if a Clinton financial angel had ever
muttered similarly vile words within earshot of a newsman, we
would now be hearing those words repeated every time we turn
on the radio.

Compromised Reporting
A
merican journalists, who had a soft and cuddly attitude
toward the presidency ten years ago, act quite differ-
ently now.

Of course, the press (which loves to pretend
to analyze itself) has an explanation for this newfound aggres-
siveness: "It's the zeitgeist." Reporters just happen to be in a
roughouse mood right now.

And undoubtedly they will just
happen to be pliant again when a Dole or Quayle or Gramm or
Gingrich or Robertson or Spector becomes president.

And un-
doubtedly we will be told then, as we are told now, to blame
something in the atmosphere rather than the conscious decisions
made by right-wing news lords.

Tellingly, and despite the new zeitgeist of vituperation, the
loudest media voices still choose their targets carefully.

They
still refuse to investigate any financial scandals which might
sully hideously wealthy and reactionary Washington insiders.

Of either party.

For example: At the dawn of the Clinton era, Rush Limbaugh
— who has become the GOP's Goebbels, even though he looks
more like Goering — loudly applauded Clinton's appointment
of Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, the appalling Texas Sena-
tor who strongly supported the Nicaraguan contras.Of either party.

For example: At the dawn of the Clinton era, Rush Limbaugh
— who has become the GOP's Goebbels, even though he looks
more like Goering — loudly applauded Clinton's appointment
of Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, the appalling Texas Sena-
tor who strongly supported the Nicaraguan contras.

(He's gone
now, and good riddance.) This seal of approval may explain why
the Radio Right, in its fury to denounce the Waco debacle,
refused to go after Bentsen — even though he was the cabinet
officer in charge of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Fire-
arms, which initiated the raid against David Koresh's cult
compound.

For that matter, nobody wants to talk about Bent-
sen's long-standing ties to Walter Mischer, for the Mischer trail
leads back to Bush.

And mum's the word on those three Texas
Savings and Loan institutions Bentsen owned: All three, accord-
ing to Pete Brewton, have connections to the CIA and the Mafia.

Most journalists have also steered clear of allegations that
the CIA ran drugs and weapons through the small airstrip at
Mena, Arkansas.

Even Limbaugh won't touch this story, for it
forces us to confront a bi-partisan scandal.

The Mena affair calls
into question not just the ethics of then-Governor Clinton, who
allegedly protected the operation, but also the ethics of Oliver
North, George Bush and the entire contra effort.

The details of
this insanely-complex affair now fill a 600-page volume (with
tiny margins and unreadable type) called Compromised, by John
Cummings and Terry Reed, published by SPI Books.

I can describe this work's allegations at greater length in the
future, if necessary.

Briefly:
Terry Reed functioned as an Army intelligence officer dur-
ing Vietnam, turning to civilian spookery in the late '70s.

In
1982, he met Oliver North, who posed as a CIA agent named
John Cathey.Briefly:
Terry Reed functioned as an Army intelligence officer dur-
ing Vietnam, turning to civilian spookery in the late '70s.

In
1982, he met Oliver North, who posed as a CIA agent named
John Cathey.

North coveted Reed's Piper turbo-prop airplane
for use in the "contra war." Reed was asked to give up the plane,
report it as stolen, then collect the insurance money.

He says he
balked at this offer, although the aircraft did indeed turn up
missing shortly thereafter; his insurance company coughed up
the rather dismal sum of $6000 as recompense.

This odd episode didn't stop Reed from spending the next
few years t, _Ming contra pilots at a CIA-friendly airstrip just
outside the minuscule Arkansan township of Mena, where in
an all-too-familiar scenario —guns went out to the contras and
drugs came back to the United States.

The chief smuggler was
Barry Seal.

a swashbuckling criminal turned DEA & CIA asset.

And did Governor Clinton do anything to shut down Seal's
drug flights into Mena?

To the contrary: Compromised asserts
that the future President and his cronies profited from the
laundering of drug funds through Arkansas financial institu-
tions.

(Reed's charges apparently inspired the latest batch of
`shocking new revelations' from Larry Nichols, who, oddly
enough, couldn't tell reporters anything about Mena during the
presidential campaign.)
In 1986, Reed moved to Guadalajara, Mexico, where his
machine tool business functioned as a cover for a similar guns-
in-drugs-out operation.

This Mexican project had lasted but a
few months when Reed's friend William Cooper died in that
famous CIA airplane downing over Nicaragua, which only
Eugene Hasenfus survived.

At this point Terry Reed got religion.

Claiming to be
shocked, shocked to discover CIA involvement with drugs, he
quit the operation in the summer of 1987.At this point Terry Reed got religion.

Claiming to be
shocked, shocked to discover CIA involvement with drugs, he
quit the operation in the summer of 1987.

Shortly thereafter, an Arkansas private investigator, who just
happened to be a friend of a friend of Bill Clinton, stumbled
across that long-lost Piper turbo prop in a hangar back in
Arkansas.

The FBI went after Reed for insurance fraud.

He
managed to clear his name in court, despite several unnerving
incidents — including the fire-bombing of a car belonging to
his lawyer's daughter, and the alleged sequestering of key
evidence in the Arkansas governor's mansion.

A number of writers became quietly interested in Reed's tale
during the 1991-92 presidential primaries.

Most bowed out
when Clinton locked up the nomination, and when Time ran an
article branding Reed a liar.

Parts of this article, by Time
correspondent Richard Behar, strike me as unfair.

Besides, the
Mena story does nor rest entirely on one ex-spook's credibility.

Anyone who telephones Charles Black, a deputy prosecuting
attorney in Arkansas who investigated Barry Seal, will defi-
nitely come away with the understanding that Clinton refused
to prosecute dope-smuggler Seal.

Nonetheless, I have problems with Terry Reed, whose story
has grown like Topsy over the years.

When we first heard this
narrative in the Summer 1991 issue of Covert Action, Bill
Clinton was a footnote character; now he has become Oliver
North's partner and a principal player in a CIA conspiracy.

Compromised also claims that George Bush's sons had direct
involvement with the Medellin cocaine cartel, and that the CIA
engineered the Hasenfus crash to push Bush into Reagan's chair
prematurely.

Interesting notions, and worth following up.

But
then Reed crosses the boggle threshold when he describes his
impromptu meeting with then-Governor Clinton in the parking
lot of Little Rock's most popular Mexican restaurant.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Interesting notions, and worth following up. But
then Reed crosses the boggle threshold when he describes his
impromptu meeting with then-Governor Clinton in the parking
lot of Little Rock's most popular Mexican restaurant. Clinton
was sitting in a van, nonchalantly smoking reefer —and yes, he
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 13

--- PAGE BREAK ---the parking
lot of Little Rock's most popular Mexican restaurant. Clinton
was sitting in a van, nonchalantly smoking reefer —and yes, he
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

inhaled. Right in front of someone he did not know well and
whose loyalties he could not gauge.
Or so Reed says. And maybe you'll believe him, if you're
the sort who likes to mutter vaguely about JFK and the arrogance
of power. But I have trouble buying that particular yarn. A
former Christie Institute researcher tells me he accepts much of
the original account (e.g., Mena, Seal, and all that), but suspects
that Reed has since festooned his basic narrative with rumors
and speculation. If this assessment is true, it would place Terry
Reed squarely in Riconosciutto territory.
Charles Black, during my conversation with him in late
1991, brought up another important point. A state prosecution
of Seal would have cost Arkansan taxpayers some major-league
money — probably more than the state has ever spent on any
similar trial. We've learned from Whitewater that Clinton's
Arkansas simply wasn't flush with funds. (Why else would his
gubernatorial campaigns scramble so desperately after the kind
of coinage a George Bush would toss out with his pocket litter?)
And Ambitious Bill wanted to establish a reputation for frugal-
ity. So the temptation to "Let George do it," re: Mena, must
have seemed mightily attractive. Don't forget: The federal gov-
ernment mounted its own case against Seal's doings at Mena.
And if that case was compromised (as indeed it was), we should
heap blame on the Bush White House, not the Arkansas Gover-
nor's mansion
Come to think of it: Why doesn't anyone talk about the drug
operations running parallel to Seal's in other states? Exactly
similar enterprises have flourished in Arizona, Kentucky,
Texas, Pete Wilson's California (specifically in Mariposa
County), and elsewhere. We have excellent reason to suspect
that these smuggling rings were (are?) involved with, and pro-
tected by, certain factions within the American military/intelli-
gence empire. Why do our so-called "liberal" news organs
consider drug-related "black ops" worthy of ink only when
exposure can humiliate a Democrat?
Terry Reed's case isn't entirely helped by Compromised, in
which he comes off as a fairly repellent personality, despite John
Cummings' attempt to paint a flattering portrait. In the early
pages, Reed claims he was appalled and disillusioned when his
Vietnam-era duties caused him to target American prisoners for
a bombing raid. Such atrocities prompted him to write a poem
which includes the lines "If you can't call it a wariThen don't
call me." Yet there he was, less than a decade later, infiltrating
Japanese firms for the CIA, participating in vile Central Ameri-
can wars-that-couldn't-be-called-wars, and helping 011ie North
sneak past congressional obstacles to contra aid.
Fi
4 yen if one sets aside Reed's claims, one can't waste
much sympathy on Clinton. In the final analysis, anddespite his laudable actions in Haiti and on some other
fronts, Clinton is what he is — a moderate, in the worst sense
of the word.

He's Stuart Smalley, transported from Saturday
Night Live to the White House, desperately whining for his
blood enemies to join him in a big group hug.

Why doesn't he treat his enemies as enemies?

More specifically: Why has he covered up the crimes of
George Bush and the Republican Party2 Follow that question
to its ultimate end, and you'll likely uncover the darkest truths
about this administration and its failures.

Columnist William Safire reports that Clinton and Bush cut
a deal: The new President would ignore the crimes of his
predecessor if Bush agreed not to snipe at the new administra-
tion.

there's anything to Safire's report (and the matter prob-
ably runs much deeper), Clinton certainly bargained badly.

He
could, and should, have decimated his opponents before they
decimated him.

The President should have selected a team of trustworthy
Justice Department investigators and set them loose on such
issues as [NSLAW, the death of Danny Casotaro, Iraqgate, CIA
connections to the bombing of Pan-Am 103, and BCCI.

Clin-
ton's Justice Department could have investigated Kissinger and
Associates, with its ties to the arms trade in both Iraq and (here
comes the part everyone forgets) the former Yugoslavia.

The
Justice Department should have refused to accept Christopher
Dragoul as the "front man" for the Banco Nacional di Lavoro
scandal.

Justice could have investigated George Bush's illegal
(because unratified by Congress) forgiveness of Egypt's S7
billion debt.

Justice might have unravelled Bush's cover-up of
Noriega's drug dealing, as outlined in the suppressed DeFeo
Report.

The Justice Department might still direct a few worrying
questions toward Republican Senator Orrin Hatch, who tried to
keep that report quiet.Justice might have unravelled Bush's cover-up of
Noriega's drug dealing, as outlined in the suppressed DeFeo
Report.

The Justice Department might still direct a few worrying
questions toward Republican Senator Orrin Hatch, who tried to
keep that report quiet.

The Justice Department might have looked into George
Bush, Jr., who ought to be sitting in a jail cell instead of the
Texas governor's mansion.

Back in 1990, Junior thumbed his
nose at the Securities and Exchange Commission with an unre-
ported (hence unlawful) insider trade involving some $846,560
worth of Harken energy stock.

The Justice Department could
have studied whether Harken's Persian Gulf oil deals unduly
influenced the Middle East policies of George Senior.

The
Justice Department should have examined the younger Bush's
ties to the BCCI crime bank.

The Justice Department should have investigated Prescott
Bush (the former President's brother), who was employed as a
"consultant" by a Japanese firm called West Tsusho, a front for
the Yakima.

Justice might also have peeked at Jeb Bush, known
associate of Cuban drug smuggler Leonel Martinez, convicted
terrorist Orlando Bosch, and Medicare fraud specialist Mike
Recarey.

(This is the same Jeb Bush who nearly became gover-
nor of Florida.) The Justice Department might have considered
an ABSCAM-style sting against Al D'Amato, or...

...but why go on?

There's a lot more; the dreadfully seedy
history of Reagan, Bush, and their political heirs is available for
anyone to read.

If our current President refuses to investigate,
or even mention, these wrongdoings, he should be considered
an accessory to the crimes of his predecessors.

In a way, Lim-
baugh is right: Democrats do coddle crooks.

Forget health care, forget the deficit, forget all else: The next
President must make the exposure and punishment ofcorruption
his primary goal.inhaled. Right in front of someone he did not know well and
whose loyalties he could not gauge.
Or so Reed says. And maybe you'll believe him, if you're
the sort who likes to mutter vaguely about JFK and the arrogance
of power. But I have trouble buying that particular yarn. A
former Christie Institute researcher tells me he accepts much of
the original account (e.g., Mena, Seal, and all that), but suspects
that Reed has since festooned his basic narrative with rumors
and speculation. If this assessment is true, it would place Terry
Reed squarely in Riconosciutto territory.
Charles Black, during my conversation with him in late
1991, brought up another important point. A state prosecution
of Seal would have cost Arkansan taxpayers some major-league
money — probably more than the state has ever spent on any
similar trial. We've learned from Whitewater that Clinton's
Arkansas simply wasn't flush with funds. (Why else would his
gubernatorial campaigns scramble so desperately after the kind
of coinage a George Bush would toss out with his pocket litter?)
And Ambitious Bill wanted to establish a reputation for frugal-
ity. So the temptation to "Let George do it," re: Mena, must
have seemed mightily attractive. Don't forget: The federal gov-
ernment mounted its own case against Seal's doings at Mena.
And if that case was compromised (as indeed it was), we should
heap blame on the Bush White House, not the Arkansas Gover-
nor's mansion
Come to think of it: Why doesn't anyone talk about the drug
operations running parallel to Seal's in other states? Exactly
similar enterprises have flourished in Arizona, Kentucky,
Texas, Pete Wilson's California (specifically in Mariposa
County), and elsewhere. We have excellent reason to suspect
that these smuggling rings were (are?) involved with, and pro-
tected by, certain factions within the American military/intelli-
gence empire. Why do our so-called "liberal" news organs
consider drug-related "black ops" worthy of ink only when
exposure can humiliate a Democrat?
Terry Reed's case isn't entirely helped by Compromised, in
which he comes off as a fairly repellent personality, despite John
Cummings' attempt to paint a flattering portrait. In the early
pages, Reed claims he was appalled and disillusioned when his
Vietnam-era duties caused him to target American prisoners for
a bombing raid. Such atrocities prompted him to write a poem
which includes the lines "If you can't call it a wariThen don't
call me." Yet there he was, less than a decade later, infiltrating
Japanese firms for the CIA, participating in vile Central Ameri-
can wars-that-couldn't-be-called-wars, and helping 011ie North
sneak past congressional obstacles to contra aid.
Fi
4 yen if one sets aside Reed's claims, one can't waste
much sympathy on Clinton. In the final analysis, and

In a way, Lim-
baugh is right: Democrats do coddle crooks. Forget health care, forget the deficit, forget all else: The next
President must make the exposure and punishment ofcorruption
his primary goal. If Bill Clinton's soft-n-sweet personality
prevents him from engaging in such a battle, we should find
someone tougher. And if secrets in his background keep him
from the fight, we must find someone cleaner. Until that battle is won, all others are lost. — the Walrus
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 14e tougher. And if secrets in his background keep him
from the fight, we must find someone cleaner. Until that battle is won, all others are lost. — the Walrus
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---crets in his background keep him
from the fight, we must find someone cleaner. Until that battle is won, all others are lost. — the Walrus
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LATE FOR WORK
The Mysterious Massacre at the CIA
by Andy Boehm
"The important thing to know about an assassination
or an attempted assassination is not who fired the shot
but who paid for the bullet."
—Eric Ambler: A Coffin For Demetrios
By unanimous media consent, the February 26,1993
bombing of Manhattan's World Trade Center was the
worst or biggest or most heinous or deadliest or most
destructive, etc., terrorist act ever on American soil.
Without falling into Chomskyesque disputes over what
is/isn't terrorism, the above hyperbole seems valid, at
least in quantities of dollars and lives—if the word
"peacetime" is added as a qualifier. Otherwise, one
would need to factor in the Nazi (or Mafiosi) sabotage
of the retrofitted luxury liner/troopship Normandie;
Sherman's March; the Burning of Atlanta; and the more
destructive sallies of Quantrill's Raiders. And if quad-
rapeds can be terrorists, then the havoc wreaked by the
malevolent moo-cow owned by one Mrs. O'Leary of
Chicago surely qualifies as the worst act of terrorism
ever committed within and against the U.S. of A.
However, one can measure terror not just on the
scales of Mammon and the Grim Reaper, but also by its
political and social impacts. So return with us now to
those thrilling days of yesteryear, when—one month
before the World Trade Center blast—we fmd what
undoubtedly qualifies as THE most morale-destructive,
audacious and foolhardy act of terroristic, gutsy bravado
ever perpetrated in America against the American power
elite. This act is the still-unpunished shooting of CIA
employees by a lone gunman standing on a crowded
highway (after having stopped his car in the middle of
said highway) hard by the Langley, Virginia, entrance
to the CIA. The shooting occurred in full view of a U.S.
Senator. This was nothing short of a multiple political
assassination — and the case is far from closed.
Oddly, after about a week of front-page coverage,
this outrageous act faded so fast from public view that
most Americans today don't even remember it.
Why did this story so quickly vanish down the Mem-
ory Hole? One answer is that the World Trade Center
fireworks greatly overshadowed the CIA driveway mas-
Prevailing Winds Premiere issue Page 15.
Why did this story so quickly vanish down the Mem-
ory Hole? One answer is that the World Trade Center
fireworks greatly overshadowed the CIA driveway mas-
Prevailing Winds Premiere issue Page 15

--- PAGE BREAK ---sacre.

True — except the Langley story vanished before the
bombing in Manhattan.

Another simple and plausible explanation is that the incident
painfully embarrasses the CIA, which considers itself the
world's premier intelligence agency.

After all, can you imagine
a lone gunman cutting down Israeli agents at the front door to
the Mossad with the impunity of some boyish Nimrod snatching
a Hershey Bar from a blind news dealer on a street corner?

Could
anybody get away with something of this magnitude at the gates
of M15, MI6, the KGB, or even the headquarters of Lichten-
stein's intelligence directorate?

Of course not.

So it's easy to see
why the CIA, painfully victimized at its very front door by one
exorbitantly foolhardy gunman who then easily evades an inter-
national dragnet, would just as soon let the story die in peace.

Yet the CIA's tender feelings, publicly bruised oft times
before, don't sufficiently explain why this remarkable blood-
letting is now as nearly forgotten as the Chicago Cubs' last
pennant.

There appear to be other reasons why the CIA didn't
feed the press enough red meat to keep the story alive.

The real
explanation, I hope to show, for this widespread disregard is that
the whole affair is fishier than Fulton Street.

Prelude:
Stencils on the Street
O
ne day after Christmas 1992, graffitti of a most peculiar
nature began appearing in Vienna, Virginia, an arboreal
Washington, D.C., suburb next door to the Langley
home of the CIA's sprawling 258-acre headquarters.

In large,
neatly stencilled spray-paint lettering on the pavement of major
thoroughfares, these inscriptions appeared:
1.

At all locations: "VIENNA, POLICE, CIA, CRIME"
2.In large,
neatly stencilled spray-paint lettering on the pavement of major
thoroughfares, these inscriptions appeared:
1.

At all locations: "VIENNA, POLICE, CIA, CRIME"
2.

At some locations in Vienna and on sidewalks fronting two
(some newspapers said three) news services in Washington
D.C.: "OFFICER, WICKS, PRICE, KERR, ONE SECTION,
CRIMINAL, INTELLIGENCE, NETWORK, COVER-UP,
FBI HOOVER, BUILDING-MAIL ROOM, DAMAGE CON-
TROL, FBI SECURITY MALE 5'10 XXX 210 SUIT 52,
SENATE, BRIEFING, I1 DAYS, INFORM JAY
STEPHENS"
3.

The words "1" and "KERR" were added later to some of
the instances of inscription #1.

Wicks and Price were officers of the Vienna Police Depart-
ment; Daniel Kerr is its chief.

Jay Stephens was a Bush-ap-
pointed U.S.

Attorney for D.C.

and a strident critic of Bill
Clinton.

In some locales the graffiti letters were four feet high, with
the lines (all words between each comma above) spaced at
48-foot intervals.

Type styles/sizes varied by location, as did the
colors of the industrial-grade paints.

In one instance, according
to the Vienna Times, "each word is repeated twice (sic), once in
white and another time in red.

The red letters were added several
days after the white ones." The words "SENATE, BRIEFING,
11 DAYS" had no clear meaning to the locals; ditto for "210
SUIT 52," which might have been an office (or "suite") num-
ber.

The graffitti were amusing curiosities, but nobody placed
much importance on them.

At least not until ten minutes before
8:00AM on January 25th, 1993, when gunfire erupted on two
northbound lanes of Route #123 (a.k.a Dolley Madison Blvd.),
where cars lined up for a left turn into the CIA.

"Just the Facts, Ma'am"
S
tire thing, Joe.

Just one problem: Every authoritative
spokesman and media outlet puts forth different facts."Just the Facts, Ma'am"
S
tire thing, Joe.

Just one problem: Every authoritative
spokesman and media outlet puts forth different facts.

We know this much for sure: As on any early weekday
morning, Dolley Madison Boulevard was filled with cars, most
driven by civil servants commuting to work in the District or in
Virginia's numerous federal buildings.

Dolley Madison is an
eight-lane highway, four south and four north, divided by a
grassy median strip.

Cars heading north could either proceed to
Washington, D.C., or enter two left-turn lanes leading to the CIA
compound.

One rarely envisions spooks punching timecards
and working in the early morning, but in fact many do.

Thus,
with ten minutes left before the workday began, several cars
waited in the left-turn-only lanes for the green light permitting
them to swing into the CIA parking lots.

In the outer lanes
heading toward Capitol Hill, morning traffic began to thin.

A car suddenly stopped, blocking the inner of the two
through-lanes, as if the vehicle had stalled right at the light.

(A
later, unattributed, assertion placed this car in the outer left-turn
lane.) In fact, the car had not stalled; it was parked right there in
traffic.

The driver exited, stood in front of the car, and then
walked a few feet until he stood between the two left-turn lanes.

He held up a rifle and started firing into the cars lined up waiting
to turn left.

The Washington Post stated (with the imprecision
typical of the way journalists covered this incident) that the
killer "fired at least ten rounds."
Neither dawdling nor hurrying, the killer walked between
the two lanes, firing to the right and left.

Southbound drivers as
well as those exiting the CIA had distant views of the shootings.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Washington Post stated (with the imprecision
typical of the way journalists covered this incident) that the
killer "fired at least ten rounds."
Neither dawdling nor hurrying, the killer walked between
the two lanes, firing to the right and left. Southbound drivers as
well as those exiting the CIA had distant views of the shootings. At roughly the same time gunfire erupted, one car approached
the intersection in the outer northbound lane, which now -
according to most accounts — became the only lane through
which traffic could continue flowing past the CIA turnoff. Mr. Smith Goes to
Washington
T
he driver, and sole occupant, of this car was New Hamp-
shire GOP Senator Bob Smith, a bombastic conservative

Neanderthal well known as an unstinting champion of
the POWs he is convinced remain incarcerated in Vietnam.
Having just dropped off his 13-year-old son at school, Smith
was alone, and without the cellular telephone usually found in
the car. Why that was he didn't volunteer to the news media.
What he did volunteer (to Inside Edition) was the following:
As he neared the intersection, "I heard what I thought at the time
were pebbles hitting my car. It was kind of a POP POP POP! 1
looked to my right to see if, uh, if in fact some kid may have
been there, throwing stones and I — I didn't see anything. So I
looked to my left into the middle of the road ...(and) l saw the
gunman who was standing there at the, at the front of two rows
of, uh, cars who were stopped to turn into the CIA. He looked
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 16
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11111.111111111111111111.11111111111111111111111111111.1.1110111
.
...`,3- ,,F.,,.`,,,.,-,,,o,,—,pped to turn into the CIA. He looked
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 16
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11111.111111111111111111.11111111111111111111111111111.1.1110111
.
...`,3- ,,F.,,.`,,,.,-,,,o,,—,

DIAGRAM OF THE MURDER SCENE
1 and 2: Unidentified, and uninjured, drivers. Their positions prevented other cars from backing up.
3: Volkswagen driven by Frank Darling (killed)
4: Cadillac driven by Calvin Morgan (wounded)
5: Saab driven by Lansing C. Bennett (killed)
6: Car (variously described) driven by the gunman
7: Car driven by Senator Bob Smith. Smith proceded through the intersection and went on to the Capitol.
8: Car driven by Stephen E. Williams (wounded), who completed turn into CIA headquarters.
9. Car driven by Nicholas Starr (wounded), who completed turn into CIA headquarters.
just momentarily at rue; he was, you know, facing me, uh, and
I think frankly just decided to shoot still targets instead of
moving targets... And he turned and walked between these two
lanes of cars and systematically began shooting at point-blank
range into the windows of the automobiles... He had no expres-
sion on his face; he was very methodical, very cool." Smith later
said "Coolly and methodically, with no emotion, no expression
and no words, , he simply walked up to the automobiles and fired
at point-blank range into the windows." (Emphasis added)
Smith continued: "First, I heard what turned out to be shots
that I thought was pebbles, and I realized they were shots; then
I saw him with a gun... He then turned and shot into [unintelli-
gible] deliberately and, uh, you know, very methodically shot
into these cars. It happened so quickly I didn't realize what was
going on; and when I did, my first reaction was to try to get to
a phone... / had to wait till I got to my office because there was
literally no place to stop. It was on the parkway." Then, regard-
ing his eye contact with the killer, Smith said "He, he didn't, he
did not make eye contact with me; he looked at my car. I could
see his eyes..."
The Victims
B
efore examining the unfortunates shot in this surprise
slaughter, let's remember for whom they worked and on
whom we must rely for their identification. They weren't
employed at the Bureau of Engraving or the Tea Tasters' Board.
They worked for the Central Intelligence Agency, which nor-
mally refuses to confirm or deny if any specific person outside
its top executives is or is not in its employ.
A rare occasion when the CIA broke this rule came in 1988,
when the CIA officially denied that the "George Bush of the
CIA" cited in a 1963 letter from J, Edgar Hoover (discovered
by Nation magazine contributor Joe McBride) was the same
George Bush who later occupied the Oval Office. According to
the CIA. the Hoover memo referred to another fellow named
George Bush who worked for the Agency. But this identification
later proved false. Which means that anything the CIA says
IY
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 17eferred to another fellow named
George Bush who worked for the Agency. But this identification
later proved false. Which means that anything the CIA says
IY
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 17

--- PAGE BREAK ---JUDGE FOR YOURSELF
by John Judge
Includes:
"The Black Holy of Guyana: The Truth about
Jonestown"
"The Jonestown Banks"
"Tied Up In Nazis" - An Interview with John Judge
by Corey Dubin
The Fourth Reich" (a speech delivered in San Luis
Obispo, December 1989)
"Unidentified Fascist Observatories - John Judge
on UFOs"
"MOVE & The Militarization of Police"
"Contra gate & The Invisible Government -
Excerpt from a speech.

"Reag.an, Bitburg & The Nazi SS"
"Good Americans" - A Who's Who of American
Fascists
"Poolside with John Judge" - an interview by PWR
John Judge goes into exten-
sive detail regarding the
Kennedy assasin• ations, the mur-
der of Dr.

Martin Luther King.

the Nazi connection to the CIA
and NSA/NSC, Chappaquiddick,
the murder of John Lennon, the
murder of newswoman Jessica
Savitch, the Hinckley-Bush con-
nection, Saddam Hussein.

the
Bush Crime Family, and a host
of other topics which America's
ruling junta prefers you know
nothing about.

PWR code #707 $17.95
"Ulf biralulsorl
AwilaheCileall
Rs time 9•11ftrimirilkliliblara
VillorialCemelurtIFOraimiso
IhelFrowlIfibr011itteride.TIONINIM
*Mist tad
"
priaTillirgun
THE MAE BRUSSELL
READER
by Mae Brussell
Mae Brussell served as the well-
spring for many researchers examin-
ing the Nazi connection to the U.S.

intelligence community and as the
years go on, her work becomes in-
creasingly relevant.

Starting with
her research into the Kennedy assas-
sination, Mae uncovered the cast of
characters in an international fascist
network which was strangling the
American democratic system.

Her
meticulous research and documenta-
tion make it impossible to ignore her
political analysis of contempory
America..

The anthology contains: "The Nazi Connection to the
John F.

Kennedy Assassination" (1983); "Why Was Martha
Mitchell Kidnapped?" (1972); "Why is the Senate Watergate
Committee Functioning as Part of the Coverup?" (1972) and
"Why Was Patty Hearst Kidnapped?' (1974).The anthology contains: "The Nazi Connection to the
John F.

Kennedy Assassination" (1983); "Why Was Martha
Mitchell Kidnapped?" (1972); "Why is the Senate Watergate
Committee Functioning as Part of the Coverup?" (1972) and
"Why Was Patty Hearst Kidnapped?' (1974).

PWR code #205 $14.95
Mae
Brussell
Reader
about its other employees may very well also be a lie.

THE DEAD
I.

Frank Darling, 28, was fatally shot while waiting for the
left-turn signal in his blue Volkswagen, second from the front
of the innermost lane.

Four bullets hit Darling, which suggests
that he received extra-special attention from the assassin, since
only 8 to 10 bullets in all were fired.

Interestingly, Darling's
wife Judy was also in the car but came through the ordeal
unharmed, at least physically.

Some news reports, but not all
(such disparities are typical), say she ran out of the car during
the shooting.

One wonders: Why did the gunman spare her?

He
surely realized that she could help identify him.

Who, you may ask, was Frank Darling?

The Los Angeles
Times reported variously that:
1.

He was a CIA analyst;
2.

He was an Agency officer in the operations directorate;
3.

"Darling worked in covert operations";
4.

He was a communications officer.

Other publications gave other, equally vague, multiple defi-
nitions of Frank Darling's occupation.

Clearly, he was what
some call a covert op.

[I.

Dr.

Lansing Bennett, 66.

Bennett was waiting to turn left
in his Blue SAAB 900S in the lane next to the Darlings.

(A minor
oddity: All reports give the exact model of Bennett's car, but
define Darling's only as a blue VW.) Bennett was both "a
physician employed by the CIA" and "an intelligence analyst."
Apparently Bennett had what sounds like a "rilly neat gig."
He converted photos, intelligence reports and debriefings into
medical evaluations of prominent figures.Bennett was waiting to turn left
in his Blue SAAB 900S in the lane next to the Darlings.

(A minor
oddity: All reports give the exact model of Bennett's car, but
define Darling's only as a blue VW.) Bennett was both "a
physician employed by the CIA" and "an intelligence analyst."
Apparently Bennett had what sounds like a "rilly neat gig."
He converted photos, intelligence reports and debriefings into
medical evaluations of prominent figures.

During the Brezhnev
era, this sort of intepretation appeared in mainstream news
media with considerable frequency, supposedly because old
Leonid was getting senile and/or had suffered a near-drowning.

According to Jim Hougan's under appreciated book, Secret
Agenda, intelligence operatives sometimes go to extreme
lengths to compile these medical and psychological profiles.

A somewhat far-fetched (but not totally beyond the pale)
consideration concerns the possible use of psychic abilities in
this line of work.

It's no secret that many, perhaps all, intelli-
gence agencies everywhere during the 1970s and '80s, got the
"psychic" bug and decided to explore ESP, psychokinesis, and
other paranormal and parapsychological phenomena.

Ignoring
these phenomena might give the enemy an advantage, or so the
argument went.

Some believe that psychic powers can scramble
computers, set off or abort missile launches, and/or affect the
health of world leaders.

Evaluating the validity of such a scenario is too much for
yours truly, but two peculiar points deserve mention:
A.

A pself-pstyled psychic from Ssouth Dakota has related
to this highly dubious author that he (the psychic, not yours
truly) once discussed Bennett with the CIA and "knows" that
the late doctor was an ESP adept.

B.

Someone like Lansing Bennett, well paid to determine the
emotional and physical condition of prominent people not eager
to visit the CIA for a checkup, would certainly profit from ESP
— or might at least pretend to have clairvoyant abilities.--- PAGE BREAK ---

B. Someone like Lansing Bennett, well paid to determine the
emotional and physical condition of prominent people not eager
to visit the CIA for a checkup, would certainly profit from ESP
— or might at least pretend to have clairvoyant abilities. Pretty unlikely, you say? Perhaps — but not totally impos-
sible, given the zany, always-well-funded researches of the CIA
and other spook academies. It's certain that intelligence opera-
tives around the world do not totally dismiss parapsychology. Prevailing Winds Premiere issue Page is

--- PAGE BREAK ---krid if these people accept ESP, where better to place putative
)si adepts than in positions assigned to read the psycho-physical
iealth of prominent foreign leaders?

Suffice it to say that if Dr.

Bennett was a psychic, he surely
:ailed to foretell the problems he'd encounter on his way to his
last day of work.

Furthermore, his younger wife, inga Wells-
Bennett, in a rather odd TV interview on America's Most
Wanted, stated that Dr.

B had considered taking the whole day
off, then changed his mind and drove to work, and to his death.

Not much of a soothsayer.

sayeth 1.

Worth noting: The LA Times of 10/13/93 stated of Darling
and Bennett that "The two had never worked together and were
in separate divisions" at the CIA.

This is a peculiar denial;
nobody to my notice ever suggested connections between the
two victims, save that they lived near each other (as do plenty
of other civil servants) and that their cars adjoined each other
when the gunman opened fire.

So why the denial?

THE WOUNDED
1.

Nicholas Starr.

Widely defined as "an analyst in the
intelligence directorate," Starr was very badly wounded, almost
died, and almost lost an arm.

In the end, however, be pulled
through and kept his arm.

2.

Calvin Morgan, described as "an engineer." Which
means what'?

3.

Stephen E.

Williams, employed by AT&T.

Clearly, he
wasn't there simply to empty nickles and dimes from pay phones
in the CIA cafeteria.

AT&T refuses to elaborate on Williams'
duties.

An AT&T spokesman said, "We're not even confirming
that he was in the area " Williams himself wouldn't talk to the
press.

The Assassin
(Stop me if you've heard
this one before)
I
')espite witnesses on the highway and the fact that Sena-
tor Smith and Judy Becker-Darling should have been
able to describe the gunman, nobody named in the
newsmedia provided a detailed description of the killer other
than that he was a 30-i sh Caucasian man with black hair.An AT&T spokesman said, "We're not even confirming
that he was in the area " Williams himself wouldn't talk to the
press.

The Assassin
(Stop me if you've heard
this one before)
I
')espite witnesses on the highway and the fact that Sena-
tor Smith and Judy Becker-Darling should have been
able to describe the gunman, nobody named in the
newsmedia provided a detailed description of the killer other
than that he was a 30-i sh Caucasian man with black hair.

Neither
could anyone provide a solid description of the car.

Although
later described as brown, it was first APed, said the Washing-
ton Post, "as a white van or a black station wagon with four
people inside." How a white van could be mistaken for a black
wagon and one person confused with four is unfathomable.

Essentially, the authorities hadn't the foggiest notion of who
pulled the trigger, and the 1500-plus tips telephoned in by
February 5th did nothing to clear the fog.

Nevertheless, scarcely
a day after the bloodshed, the mass media were already charac-
terizing the killer as — you guessed it — a lone mu, that
perennial American folk-villain "responsible" for killing all the
politically significant murder victims in American history, at
least since President William McKinley went where the wood-
bine twineth nearly a century ago.

Once upon a time, the
newsmedia needed only the opinions of a quid-chawing South-
ern sheriff to confirm an apparent political assassin as a solo
psycho.

But given three decades of pesky quibbling from those
damned "assassination buffs," the press nowadays requires
confirmation from mental-health professionals before rendering
the inevitable, cookie-cutter verdict of "lone nut."
So even before poor Lansing Bennett was in his grave
(details on Frank Darling's interment, like most details about
his life, are absent), the professional nut-buffs came out in full
swarm telling us all we needed to know about the Dolley
Madison Murderer.Once upon a time, the
newsmedia needed only the opinions of a quid-chawing South-
ern sheriff to confirm an apparent political assassin as a solo
psycho.

But given three decades of pesky quibbling from those
damned "assassination buffs," the press nowadays requires
confirmation from mental-health professionals before rendering
the inevitable, cookie-cutter verdict of "lone nut."
So even before poor Lansing Bennett was in his grave
(details on Frank Darling's interment, like most details about
his life, are absent), the professional nut-buffs came out in full
swarm telling us all we needed to know about the Dolley
Madison Murderer.

For instance, serial killer expert Robert
Ressler studied the tea-leaves and gave the following reading:
"You can see in this guy something like divorce, job loss,
flunking out of school, being dishonorably discharged from the
military, turned down by the CIA for a job, or some perceived
injustice.

This is a tormented person with a lot of problems in
his life.

He might have been moody or depressed, sitting around
feeling as though everybody is out to get him." James Alan Fox,
another serial killer savant, told the Washington Post that "the
killer probably has a long history of frustration." Adding one
assumption to another, Fox maintained that "the more random
the event, the more delusional the killer." (Emphasis added.)
Other academic heavies weighed in with typical nut-buff
boilerplate, like Stanford University's Dr.

Donald Lunde's as-
sertion that "the two most common agencies that become part
of a paranoid delusional system in the United States are the FBI
and CIA." Perhaps this is so, and for logical reasons.

But all the
"learned" speculation above is the sort of delusional confabu-
lation that would earn a D-Minus in any of the above academics'
classes.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Donald Lunde's as-
sertion that "the two most common agencies that become part
of a paranoid delusional system in the United States are the FBI
and CIA." Perhaps this is so, and for logical reasons. But all the
"learned" speculation above is the sort of delusional confabu-
lation that would earn a D-Minus in any of the above academics'
classes. After all, none of these nut-buffs had the slightest idea
as to who shot the five, or why he did so Yet none of them
considered for an instant the possibility that the motive just
might have been (gasp!) political. Analyzing Eyewitness
Testimony
S
enator Smith: It is disrespectful of a public office to insult
a United States Senator, even a reactionary nincompoop
like Bob Smith. But it is also disrespectful of the public
itself to foist on it a tale so tall that only the somnambulistic
undead of the mainstream newsmedia would buy it. Clearly,
either the shock of the event scrambled Smith's brains, or he just
plain lied. Senator Bob could not keep straight which came first —the
"pebbles" that turned out to be gunshots or the brief face-to-face
encounter with the gunman preceding the shots. Smith said he
heard the "pebbles," then looked rightward for the source of the
sound, then looked leftward and saw the killer, who "looked
just momentarily at me." Then the killer "walked up to the
automobiles," and "systematically began shooting."
First question: Either the gunman "began shooting" before
Smith looked right, or he didn't fire till afterward. But if the
latter were the case, how does one explain the earlier sound of
"pebbles?"
Second question: Why did Senator Smith look to his right
(i.e., to the passenger side) for the source of the "pebble" sound? All the gunfire occurred to his left (i.e., the driver's side). Of course, the sound of "pebbles hitting my car" could have
77:
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 19

--- PAGE BREAK ---been the sound of windshield fragments falling on Smith's car,
not the much louder report of gunshots.

But if Smith drove so
close to the shooting that glass shards hit his vehicle, surely he
should have heard an initial burst of rifle fire.

Pebbles or no pebbles, Smith was unequivocal that he "could
see his eyes – when the gunman "looked just momentarily at
me...(but) did not make eye contact with me." In fact, Smith's
observations segued to the telepathic as he stated that the gun-
man had "no emotion" and uttered "no words." So he had a
sufficiently good look to permit description of the killer's inner
emotional state and absence of lip movements.

Yet Smith, like
all the witnesses identified by name, could (or would) not give
a definitive description of the outer, physical characteristics of
the man.

How curious.

The most perplexing aspect of Smith's self-sworn, "trust
me" testimony, which lacked an official interrogation (one was
actually recommended by a local cop), is that he claimed he
fulfilled his citizen's duty to report a capital crime by calling it
in from his Senatorial office 43 minutes after he'd witnessed the
incident.

Having driven the route numerous times, Smith must
have known that well before entering Washington, he could
have used any of several exits, including a huge cloverleaf not
far from the CIA.

After departing the freeway, he undoubtedly
could have found a pay phone to contact the Fairfax fuzz.

Perhaps he didn't stop sooner because he was being pursued
by the gunman.

A glance at the diagram of the shooting site
reveals that the two left-turn lanes were blocked by dead men's
cars, while the gunman's station wagon blocked the next lane.

If so, Senator Smith, and only Senator Smith, could have driven
through the intersection during the shootings.

After the shoot-
ings, other District-bound drivers wisely held back.If so, Senator Smith, and only Senator Smith, could have driven
through the intersection during the shootings.

After the shoot-
ings, other District-bound drivers wisely held back.

The barely
inescapable conclusion: For quite some distance (between the
shooting site and at least the next offramp) only two cars could
have travelled down Highway 123, heading toward the District
of Columbia: Smith's and the killer's.

Wouldn't Smith have looked in his mirror at the car behind
him?

Couldn't he have noted :where the car turned off?

Didn't
he understand that he was being followed by a killer, whose
appearance and automobile he ought to have remembered?

And why did Smith concoct the flagrant canard that the
nearest telephone was in his Capitol office, many miles away?

With the Grim Reaper tailgating him, nobody would've be-
grudged his refusing to stop and call.

But he'd then have had to
answer why he could not identify the only vehicle proceeding
behind him, a vehicle he'd already seen at the crime scene.

In
other words, if Smith had a reasonable explanation for not
reporting the crime, he lacked a reasonable explanation for not
identifying the getaway car.

Smith gambled that the news media wouldn't notice incon-
sistencies and contradictions in his unsworn account.

For a
powerful man dealing with the American press this is never
much of a gamble.

Yet why take it at all????

Other identified witnesses: Various folk quoted in the news-
media chimed in with vague descriptions.

They saw the "prob-
ably Caucasian" killer leave his car, shoot at the waiting left-
turners, then drive off.

Unidentified witnesses: Some Person(s) briefly convinced
the local police of alternatives to what is now gospel truth in the
newsmedia: They saw four, not one, fugitives in a white, not
brown, getaway car.

Crime scene photos: Many newspapers published crime-
scene photos, and on-site TV coverage was abundant.Unidentified witnesses: Some Person(s) briefly convinced
the local police of alternatives to what is now gospel truth in the
newsmedia: They saw four, not one, fugitives in a white, not
brown, getaway car.

Crime scene photos: Many newspapers published crime-
scene photos, and on-site TV coverage was abundant.

Simple
photo analysis reveals several peculiarities in the crime scene.

Published testimony and early-in-the-day videos and photos
show the two dead men still sitting up in their drivers' seats.

Later on (at least 2:00 PM), we see police photographing a dead
body sprawled out on the highway, with gurneys standing by.

The bodies could not have fallen on the pavement, so obviously
they were placed there.

Why?

Plopping one or both on the
pavement for photographic and other purposes could further
muddle the forensic evidence obtainable from the corpses.

Why
was each dead man left to pose grotesquely behind the wheel
for such a long time?

And why was one or both dropped to the
pavement before being taken — presumably — to the coroner?

And what about the LA Times' assertion that "after the
shooting, drivers of two of the first vehicles in line were able to
drive down to the CIA main gate several hundred yards away,
where they notified guards of the attack." Does anybody really
believe that the CIA doesn't monitor its own driveway, and that
guards have to be notified of a multiple shooting there?

The Killer Discovered
O
n January 28, a Pakistani living in Reston, Virginia
(near Langley) called in a missing person report on his
roommate, another Pakistani named Mir Aimal Kansi.

Less than two weeks later, this vanished roommate became the
man now "hunted" worldwide as the one and only indicted
killer at the CIA driveway.

Before proceeding with details, keep this in mind: The
media portraits of alleged killer Kansi are just as vaporous,
contradictory and puzzling as the coverage of every other aspect
of this incident.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Less than two weeks later, this vanished roommate became the
man now "hunted" worldwide as the one and only indicted
killer at the CIA driveway. Before proceeding with details, keep this in mind: The
media portraits of alleged killer Kansi are just as vaporous,
contradictory and puzzling as the coverage of every other aspect
of this incident. At first, reporters didn't name the roommate who called in
the missing person report. Later, the killer's roommate was
identified as Zahed Ahmad Mir, 39. Mir had plans to fly to
Pakistan around February 13th, but he suddenly changed his
ticket to the 9th, the day after the police searched his apart-
ment.Thus, he found himself in the Fairfax County jail under
what the Los Angeles Times called "a rarely used Virginia law
that allows police to detain material witnessess if it is not
possible to ensure their appearance in court." Mir didn't object,
since for reasons not stated (what else is new?) he didn't want
to return to the apartment. At this point, the nomenclature gets tricky. "Mir" is both the
alleged killer's first name, and his roommate's alleged last
name. The police kept Kansi's roommate in jail under a pseu-
donym -- which hardly mattered, since he told police that the
name "Zahed Ahmad Mir" was itself fictitious. The police
won't reveal his real real name, perhaps because they don't
know it. Later, Mir (who is not Mir) was rewarded with six
months in the stammer for lying to immigration officials —and
now, the tipster who broke open a murder case awaits trial on
other immigration offenses. And, just to make matters termi-
nally confusing, Kansi himself habitually used alternative
names, such as "Hansi" and "Kasi." Got that so far...? If you do, let's return to the killings and their immediate
aftermath. Zahed Ahmad Mir (or whatever else you choose to call him)
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 20

--- PAGE BREAK ---THE FRANKLIN COVER-UP
"Child Abuse, Satanism, and
Murder in Nebraska"
by John W.

DeCamp
The shut-down of Omaha, Nebraska's
Franklin Community Federal Credit Un-
ion, raided by federal agencies in No-
vember 1988, sent shock waves all the
way to Washington, D.C.: S40 million
was missing.

The credit union's man-
ager: Republican Party activist Law-
rence E.

''Larry" King, Jr., behind whose
rise to fame and riches stood powerful
figures in Nebraska politics and busi-
ness, and the nation's capital.

In the face of opposition from local
and state law enforcement, from the
FBI, and from the powerful Omaha
World-Herald newspaper, a special Franklin committee of
the Nebraska Legislature launched its own probe.

What
looked like a financial swindle, soon exploded into a hideous
tale of drugs, Iran-contra money-laundering, a nationwide
child abuse ring, and ritual murder.

Nineteen months later, the legislative committee's chief in-
vestigator died--suddenly, and violently, like more than a dozen
other people linked to the Franklin case.

Author John DeCamp knows the Franklin scandal from the
inside.

In 1990, his "DeCamp memo" first publicly named the
alleged high-ranking abusers.

Today, he is attorney for two of
the abuse victims.

Using documentation never before made public, DeCamp
lays bare not only the crimes, but the cover-up -- a textbook
case of how dangerous the corruption of institutions of govern-
ment, and the press, can be.

In its horror and in what it pertains
to the nation, the Franklin cover-up followed the ugly precedent
of the Warren Commission.

PWR code #802 $9.95
+ S.rn,*
/1.411
%SIR Skin 4/.1
telephoned the cops on January 28.

They searched the bachelor
pad February 8, eleven days later.

Mir (not Mir) claims that on
January 31 (nine days before the apartment search), Kansi called
him from nobody-knows-where to tell him that "he [Kansi] had
to leave in a hurry ...They searched the bachelor
pad February 8, eleven days later.

Mir (not Mir) claims that on
January 31 (nine days before the apartment search), Kansi called
him from nobody-knows-where to tell him that "he [Kansi] had
to leave in a hurry ...

that someone would be coming to the
apartment to get his possessions, and that he would not be back."
Truer words were never spoken: Kansi, age 28, has not been
back, and "someone," namely what newsfolk are pleased to call
"authorities," took his possessions.

These included about 600 rounds of ammo, a bulletproof
vest, a couple of handguns, an imitation AK-47 established as
the death weapon at the CIA driveway, and clothing imbedded
with glass shards.

This impressive cache was "hidden" under a
couch, putatively (albeit unbelieveably) unbeknownst to the
Zahed Ahmad Mir.

Also unknown is what might have gone in and out of the
apartment shared by Kansi and Mir (not Mir), particularly
during the 11 days between that first report of Kansi's disapear-
ance and the search under the couch.

After the discovery of the
weapon, Mir Aimal Kansi was christened officially as the killer,
and his photo appeared worldwide — a rare triumph for police
artists, because the indicted gunman looked amazingly like the
reward-poster drawing authorities assembled with the help of
(what else?) an unidentified witness.

Kansi's photo, see cover
art, is such a good likeness of the Poster Boy that a cynic might
imagine the witness personally knew the suspect rather than
merely (or Mirly) getting a quick glance at him.

Confusing?

You bet your Bippyl Yet even more confusion
arrived February 12, when police found a "brown compact
station wagon matching [sic] the description of the killer's car,
parked in Herndon, Virginia," (where Kansi was employed).

In
fact, there wasn't one description of the killer's car, but several.

Recall the original APB for a white van or black station wagon,
not to mention the reported three other passengers.In
fact, there wasn't one description of the killer's car, but several.

Recall the original APB for a white van or black station wagon,
not to mention the reported three other passengers.

The L.A.

Times claimed that "the car's owner had been notified and
interviewed by police...(who) refused to say whether the owner
knew Kansi or was otherwise involved in the case."
According to the New York Times, "A man using the same
last name as the suspect, Mir Aimal Kansi, had flown from
Washington to Pakistan on January 26." (interestingly, Kansi
purchased his plane ticket eight hours after the shootings.) Then
he visited his family in Quetta, a city of 300,000 located only
35 miles from the border Pakistan shares with Afghanistan.

We
are told he partied hearty there for a week.

Then, said the Times,
he left for parts unknown after receiving a tip from an uniden-
tified (of course!) friend in America that a USA-Pakistani
manhunt would soon be on his trail.

Here's the catch: The tip came just before the apartment
search back in Virginia — that is, before he was formally
identified as the sole suspect.

How convenient, and how curious.

At this writing, investigators believe that Kansi resides in
Afghanistan.

CNN reports that Kansi is protected by Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar, the fanatic terrorist and heroin merchant extraordi-
naire.

Hekmatyar, leader of a mujaheddin faction during the
Afghan-Soviet war of the 1980s, was armed to the teeth by -
you guessed it — the CIA!

Small world, ain't it?

Thanks to Great Britain's Sunday Times, we now know a
little more about Kansi, the accused killer.

He has a Master's
Degree in English Literature from Baluchistan University.

His
family is wealthy and belongs to the Pathan (also called Pushtun
or Pashtoon) cultural group, in particular to a tribe called —so
help me God!

— KANSI.

(The name game never stops in this
case.) The Sunday Times also dropped a couple of bombshells
never seen in any American newspaper:
1.--- PAGE BREAK ---

— KANSI. (The name game never stops in this
case.) The Sunday Times also dropped a couple of bombshells
never seen in any American newspaper:
1. Law enforcement authorities "complained that the CIA
has done the bare minimum to cooperate with the investigation,
fueling suspicions that the agency may know more about the
case than it has admitted so far." One experienced cop on the
case was quoted saying "Kansi appears to be CIA-trained
because he planned this so well and so methodically." (Empha-
sis added.) The Washington Post once noted that Pakistani
"security officials suggested that Kansi might have links to the
CIA." Yea, verily: It is indeed a small world. 2. "There is uncertainty on how he (Kansi) entered the
United States." Supposedly he applied for political asylum in
1992 after being in the USA for a year, claiming that he had
entered the country through New York's Kennedy Airport
without being interviewed by immigration officials. In theory
that is impossible; either Kansi came in some other way or he
had high-level help to avoid official screening. He also won a
work permit without being interviewed" by immigration offi-
cials. That's another im .sssibili
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 21

--- PAGE BREAK ---ADDICTED TO WAR: WHY THE
U.S.

CAN'T KICK MILITARISM
An Illustrated Expose
by Joel Andreas
Addicted to War takes on
the most active, powerful and
destructive military in the
world.

Hard-hitting, carefully
documented, and heavily illus-
trated, it reveals why the
United States has been in-
volved in mom wars in recent
years than any other country.

Read Addicted to War to find
out who benefits from these
military adventures, who pays-
and who dies.

PWR recom-
mends this book for every
home.

Comes with resource list
and referances.

PWR code #806 $6.95
THE SPLENDID BLOND BEAST
"Money, Law, and Genocide in the
Twentieth Century"
by Christopher Simpson
The most appalling crime in human affairs is certainly geno-
cide.

But perhaps even more shocking is the fact that those who
organize and even those
who commit mass murder
are rarely punished for
what they have done.

THE
Most, in fact, profit from
their crimes.

The Splend-
ind Blond Beast is the lat-
est investigation into this
seamiest side of the twenti-
eth century.

Christopher Simpson's
new research reveals that
CIA chief Allen Dulles or-
ganized the escape of the
highest-tanking SS killer
to survive World War II,
along with a number of the
officer's senior aides.

Each of these Nazis had
been personally responsible for the deportation of Jews to death
camps and for mass executions of resistance fighters.

Dulles
also used U.S.

government lists to help install former slave-la-
bor specialists in key positions in postwar Germany.

In addition to presenting this revelatory expose of govern-
ment malfeasance, Simpson traces the roots of mass murder as
an instrument of state power, from the Armenian genocide of
World War I through Hitler's Holocaust.

He shows how the ex-
isting structures of international law and commerce have at criti-
cal points actually encouraged mass murder and the escape of
war criminals.In addition to presenting this revelatory expose of govern-
ment malfeasance, Simpson traces the roots of mass murder as
an instrument of state power, from the Armenian genocide of
World War I through Hitler's Holocaust.

He shows how the ex-
isting structures of international law and commerce have at criti-
cal points actually encouraged mass murder and the escape of
war criminals.

Corporate looting and profiteering at the ex-
pense of innocents are often built into genocide, Simpson con-
tends.

and influence which killers are most likely to escape jus-
tice and who is predisposed to help them.

(clothbound)
PWR code #807 $21.95
AlDDICTED
"WAR
SPLENDID
BLOND
BEAST
H•n•y Law 4.d
II•n•ctd•
th•
Tlownttrih Co•tary
Oil
C.I1,1112 1-01..S1.1
Kansi's Employer
T
he man called Mir Aimal Kansi may not have been here
legally, and he may be a killer, but at least he wasn't on
welfare.

In fact, he had a genuine and productive gig with
a highly unusual employer: a courier service that held an exclu-
sive contract to deliver packages from the CIA.

(Allegedly,
Kansi didn't ply that particular delivery route and didn't have
clearance to pick up packages inside Agency headquarters.)
The delivery service is called Excel Courier.

Excel is owned by
Chris Marchetti, son of a celebrated local resident, namely
Victor Marchetti, who gained quite a bit of fame back in the '70s
as a renegade CIA agent, probably the first to go public.

Marchetti the elder mightily pissed off the Company by
airing huge loads of its dirtiest laundry in a book he co-wrote
with John Marks in 1974, The CIA and the Cult of Intelligence.

Or so we were told.

Truly it boggeleth the mind that the CIA
would hire as courier the son of its great public critic and
whistleblower.

I doubt, for example, that the Pentagon would
ever assign nuclear-weapons deployment to the Meeropol
Brothers, who were once named—like their parents, Ethel &
Julius—Rosenberg.Truly it boggeleth the mind that the CIA
would hire as courier the son of its great public critic and
whistleblower.

I doubt, for example, that the Pentagon would
ever assign nuclear-weapons deployment to the Meeropol
Brothers, who were once named—like their parents, Ethel &
Julius—Rosenberg.

Well, what the hell
If Chris Marchetti
came in with the low bid and proffered good, knowledgeable
references (perhaps from Phil Agee or John Stockwell?), then
why shouldn't he get the gig?

After all, This is America, Bunky,
not some revenge-ridden oligarchy where children suffer for
their parents' sins.

Or maybe, just maybe, there's more to the Victor Marchetti
story than we have been told heretofore.

False Starts and
Unanswered Questions
T
he tale of Kansi fleeing to Pakistan and then to the
uncharted wilds of Afghanistan may be a total crock.

It
has never been confirmed that the Kansi who allegedly
fired the rifle outside CIA headquarters was the same man who
used that name on the flight to Pakistan.

Nor is he by any means
the only Pakistani with that name.

What we can be pretty sure of is that two popular tales about
him are false.

One comes to us from Fairfax County prosecutor,
Robert Horan, Jr.

According to Horan, Mir (not Mir) alleged
that Kansi was so incensed over the plight of Moslems in Bosnia
that he planned "to make a big statement" with violence against
the CIA or the White House.

But in fact Kansi has never made
a verbal statement, never explained what grievance prompted
his crime, even after he got away scot-free.

What good is a
violent protest if you leave people guessing about your motiva-
tions?

And as an educated man, he probably knew that the CIA
played no part in the Serbians' loathsome ethnic cleansing of
Bosnia (unless there's an aspect of the Bosnian situation we
don't yet know about).--- PAGE BREAK ---

What good is a
violent protest if you leave people guessing about your motiva-
tions? And as an educated man, he probably knew that the CIA
played no part in the Serbians' loathsome ethnic cleansing of
Bosnia (unless there's an aspect of the Bosnian situation we
don't yet know about). The second popular fable, which often arises when Moslems
are suspected of a violent crime, portrays Kansi as a wannabe
martyr intent on ascending in a blaze of glory to that Big Mosque
In The Sky. But Kansi bought his bullet proof vest one week
before the shootout and probably wore it then. Hardly the action
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---of a would-be martyr.

Ditto for his escape and disappearance.

This whole Kansi business raises far more questions than it
answers and reeks of deception, artless fibbing and intentional
omission of significant information.

Who, pray tell, was that
"unidentifed witness" (shades of "Confidential Witness" who
found Vince Foster's corpse)?

Why was this nameless sentinel
better able than Senator Bob Smith to give the police artist an
accurate description of the supposedly unknown gunman?

Who
was the unidentified owner of the getaway car?

What happened
to the contents of Mir's apartment during the 14 days between
the CIA shooting and the police discovery of Kansi's arsenal?

What has happened to Kansi's roommate, Mir (not Mir)?

As to the last question, an exclusive interview with Mir's
one-time attorney, Peter Greenspun, both provided answers and
raised further mysteries.

According to Greenspun, Mir's reward
"for being a good citizen by reporting Kansi to police" was
unconstitutional detention for six months and then severe prose-
cution for "garden variety" immigration offenses.

Found guilty
and having served time on one such offense, Mir now awaits
trial for another one.

All this, said Greenspun, was to prevent
Mir from returning to Pakistan.

So long as he remains in
America, he'll be available as a material witness if and when the
manhunt captures his highly elusive ex-roommate.

Yet these
harsh tactics to keep Mir around are unneccessary, for, accord-
ing to Greenspun, his client "found out it would be unhealthy
to go back to Pakistan." When I asked what "unhealthy" means,
and where Mir is now, and what Mir's real name is, Greenspun
declined to respond.

Who was Kansi's helpful American friend and how in hell
did he know that the manhunt was about to reach Quetta?

Who
exactly are these people so often called "the authorities" in press
accounts, and why did it take them so long to search the
apartment in Reston, Virginia?Who was Kansi's helpful American friend and how in hell
did he know that the manhunt was about to reach Quetta?

Who
exactly are these people so often called "the authorities" in press
accounts, and why did it take them so long to search the
apartment in Reston, Virginia?

Why did they tell us so little
compared to what other "authorities" revealed about the World
Trade Center bombings and other terroristic acts allegedly
planned by the devotees of Sheik Abdul Rahman?

Is there a
cover-up going on?

If so, what secrets are being hidden?

For the rest of this article and its sequel, the CIA-driveway
killer will be called "Kansi." I don't neccessarily believe Mir
Aimal Karisi is the killer.

But since everyone calls him Kansi,
I'll go along with that convention — if only for journalistic and
reader convenience.

Theories of Causation
W
hile assassinations of the 1960s still provide the most
provocative puzzles, the CIA driveway shootings
may pose the most unanswered questions per crimi-
nal man-hour.

After all, the whole affair took about 75 seconds
from Kansi's arrival at the intersection until he vanished, unpur-
sued, down the parkway and presumably into suburban Vir-
ginia.

But despite a nearly overpowering cloak of mystery, there
are several plausible theories, none mutually exclusive, that
might explain what happened and why.

1.

Internecine CIA Warfare
Perhaps Kansi was a hit-man for a CIA faction that sought
to punish another faction.

Writers investigating the espionage world often hear talk of
infra-Agency schisms.

An alleged cleft in the CIA pits the "A
Team" against the "B Team," both being groups of experts
assigned to evaluate the Soviet military threat.

During the
Nixon-Ford years, the CIA had but one team of experts tasked
to gauge the Soviet military threat.An alleged cleft in the CIA pits the "A
Team" against the "B Team," both being groups of experts
assigned to evaluate the Soviet military threat.

During the
Nixon-Ford years, the CIA had but one team of experts tasked
to gauge the Soviet military threat.

They saw it as not much
threat at all — thus infuriating and frightening the military-in-
dustrial complex, which saw its economic raison d 'etre shrink-
ing just as its Vietnam trough ran dry.

Joining this chorus of
indignation in 1976 were President Ford's almost-successful
nomination opponent, Ronald Reagan, and his commiephobic
hordes.

In this setting, DC1 George Bush appointed another
team of analysts, the "B Team," to make a second appraisal.

Wouldn't you know it: They arrived at the much-desired con-
clusion that the Soviet threat was quire a threat indeed.

Thus the
"A Team" became the moderates; "B" the hardliners.

Another alleged schism within the intelligence community
is the "Bush Team" vs.

the honest CIA patriots.

In this scenario,
the latter faction fulfills its duties in a constitutional manner,
defending essential American interests against genuine threats,
while the Busbies bend intelligence findings to promote certain
parochial, if not anti-social, economic and political agendas.

The 1980 monkey business revolving around US hostages in
Tehran, generally called "The October Surprise," is considered
the Bush Team's greatest success, because it led to the defeat of
a sitting president, Jimmy Carter.

A variation of this scenario is the "Casey Team vs.

the
McKee Team." The latter was a group of veteran CIA agents,
commanded by one Charles McKee, who were trying to locate
and rescue American hostages in Lebanon via traditional meth-
ods of spycraft.

The Casey Team, manned by freelance "con-
tract agents," hired by DCI Bill Casey, was also attempting to
rescue said hostages.the
McKee Team." The latter was a group of veteran CIA agents,
commanded by one Charles McKee, who were trying to locate
and rescue American hostages in Lebanon via traditional meth-
ods of spycraft.

The Casey Team, manned by freelance "con-
tract agents," hired by DCI Bill Casey, was also attempting to
rescue said hostages.

But the Casey Team decided to cut shady
deals with the kidnappers —deals including US assistance to a
heroin smuggling operation run by Arab terrorists.

According
to an investigative agency called Interfor, in 1988 McKee & Co.,
then based in the Middle East, and couldn't get Casey to stop it.

They flew home to blow the whistle on the Casey Team, which
decided to blow up the plane first.

The flight was none other
than Pan Am 103, which exploded over Lockerbie, Scotland,
killing 280 people — including McKee and his CIA team.

Interfor— which admittedly sought exoneration for its client,
Pan Am—is staffed mainly by alumni of Israel's Mossad,
generally recognized as one of the world's most effective intel-
ligence agencies.

(Not that other political theories for the 103
disaster lack validity: Bernt Carlsson, the UN's chief adminis-
trator of Namibia, was aboard the flight, as were several Wall
Street bigwigs — AND Michael Bernstein, the Justice Depart-
ment's top man in charge of rooting out Nazi war criminals.)
The "Casey Team vs.

McKee Team" scenario closely re-
sembles another quite believable conflict: a schism pitting the
"legitimate" CIA administered by Jimmy Carter's DCI, Stans-
field Turner, against the 800+ spooks Turner dismissed on
Halloween, 1977 to save money and cull out the bad apples.

Sadly, as Peter Dale Scott has noted, these cashiered spooks did
not open bookstores or French restaurants.

Instead, they contin-
ued doing in the private sector what they'd done for years as
government employees — and Bill Casey was glad to hire such
freelancers for all sorts of projects distasteful to CIA careerists.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sadly, as Peter Dale Scott has noted, these cashiered spooks did
not open bookstores or French restaurants. Instead, they contin-
ued doing in the private sector what they'd done for years as
government employees — and Bill Casey was glad to hire such
freelancers for all sorts of projects distasteful to CIA careerists. Prevailing Winds Premiere issue Page 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---2.

Destabilizing Clinton
This was quite a popular theory after the World Trade Center
bombing, which destroyed empty Secret Service presidential
limousines.

This was combined with the driveway slayings and
other events into a catch-all collection of misdeeds allegedly
committed by intelligence vets (led by the Bush Team) to
destabilize the Clinton Administration and show "Slick Willie"
who's really boss, or at least frighten him into accepting control
from the Forces of Darkness.

Well...maybe.

But it would seem that the Kansi affair
worked far better to destabilize the CIA than Clinton, who'd
become President just five days earlier.

In any case, he has never
needed much help in destabilizing his own administration.

3.

Targeting Specific Victims:
Nobody outside the Agency seems to know much about
Frank Darling.

Did Kansi focus his murderous intent exclu-
sively on Darling or Lansing Bennett?

The accused assassin
lived in Reston, the same Virginia town his two slain victims
called home.

Kansi could have studied their commuting habits
for months without arousing suspicion.

He expended four bul-
lets on Darling, while every other victim only merited one or
two shots.

Yet Darling's wife, a potentially valuable witness -
and therefore a likely target — was spared, seemingly by
intention.

True, her husband pushed her under the dash, but a
shot through the side window could have easily hit her.

Who
was Frank Darling, and who is his wife?

What was Darling's
area of expertise?

Did his duties ever concern Afghanistan, or
Pakistan?

If we knew more, we might unravel this whole affair.

Some answers appeared in a sad Washington Post story
(9/3/94) titled "For Survivor, The Pain Doesn't Stop," about
Judy Becker-Darling's continuing grief and anger.

Mrs.

Darling
was herself a CIA employee, bearing a typically cryptic job title,
"logistics officer." She had married Frank Darling, five years
her junior, just three months before his assassination.Mrs.

Darling
was herself a CIA employee, bearing a typically cryptic job title,
"logistics officer." She had married Frank Darling, five years
her junior, just three months before his assassination.

Now on
leave with post-traumatic stress, Judy Becker-Darling feels
quite bitter toward the Agency — which was so tasteful as to
send to her "two CIA employees (who) showed up with a
cardboard pie chart that showed the stages of grieving."
Strange, isn't it: An agency well-known for hiring hordes of
shrinks (to conduct mind control experiments and provide psy-
chological profiles) offers such insensitive solace to a trauma-
tized widow, who was nearly slain herself.

According to Mrs.

Becker-Darling, the Agency's attitude
toward the driveway murders is: "They want it to go away.

They
don't want me to speak out." She can't understand why her
husband's partially decapitated body was, like Lansing Ben-
nett's corpse, left sitting for hours at the wheel of his bullet-rid-
den automobile.

Angry and miserable, Judy told the Post that
"If Frank had ever known what I would go through, he never
would have saved me." Somewhere "near Philadelphia," CIA
covert op Frank Darling is interred in a double grave under a
heart-shaped tombstone bearing his name, his life's brief term
(1964-1993), Judy's years (1959-
) and an inscription: "I
will always love you.

My hero." So far, my attempts to commu-
nicate with Judy Becker-Darling have proven unsuccessful.

Strangely enough, another, older man also named Frank
Darling is cited by Noam Chomsky and Edward S.

Herman, in
their 1979 book, The Washington Connection & Third World
Fascism, as a "CIA analyst." His field of expertise was Thai-
land.

Were the two men related?

Does it matter?

4.

Creating a Diversion
Another possible motive for the Langley shooting was to
create a diversion within the CIA compound or at some other
entrance to it.4.

Creating a Diversion
Another possible motive for the Langley shooting was to
create a diversion within the CIA compound or at some other
entrance to it.

No doubt the whole place erupted in mass freak-
out, and if enemies had previously infiltrated the headquarters
(as courier, repairman, etc) they might have gotten the opportu-
nity then to install a bug or play some sort of nasty game with a
computer.

This explanation, transmuted to industrial espionage,
has been put forth for the World Trade Center bombing.

One thing is for sure: If this did happen, we'll never know
about it.

The embarrassment would be too great for the CIA to
'fess up, and the Agency might not even comprehend what
really went down.

5.

Afghani-Pakistani blowback
This is the most significant line of investigation.

The term blowback, popularized though not coined by Chris-
topher Simpson in his excellent 1988 book of the same name,
essentially means the domestic repercussions (often unin-
tended) of covert operations abroad — as when, for example,
an American newspaper picks up a false story planted by the
CIA in an Italian newspaper.

Simpson used "blowback" to refer
to the outcome of American intelligence operations designed to
recruit Third Reich veterans after the war, for these Nazi-
spooks-turned-U.S.-spooks had a dismal influence on U.S.

pos-
ture toward the USSR.

The blowbacks from our crusade against
Cuba include a huge Cuban exile army (within which one U.S.

president's assassination may have been planned) and a nasty
intermingling of government agents with representatives of the
Cosa Nostra.

The blowback from Vietnam features a huge,
fervently anti-communist population of Southeast Asians in
Orange County, California (including a growing body of preda-
tory gangs), not to mention the U.S.

resettlement of the limong,
an anti-communist Laotian tribe whose matrimonial customs
Make David Koresh look prudish.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The blowback from Vietnam features a huge,
fervently anti-communist population of Southeast Asians in
Orange County, California (including a growing body of preda-
tory gangs), not to mention the U.S. resettlement of the limong,
an anti-communist Laotian tribe whose matrimonial customs
Make David Koresh look prudish. The worst recent case of blowback stems from bipartisan
opportunism and Red Menace paranoia inspired by the USSR's
foolish 1979 incursion into Afghanistan. Ever since 1917, each of America's two main political
parties has strained to prove its anti-communist mettle. From
1968-72, Gene McCarthy and George McGovern briefly con-
vinced about half the electorate that mindless anti-communism
leads to mindless blood baths. But by 1976 the Democratic party
had fallen back into the hands of "pragmatists." So when the
Soviets invaded Afghanistan in 1979 to prop up a client regime
(much as the United States has done elsewhere repeatedly),
President Carter directed the CIA to lavish huge arsenals, vast
wealth, exalted status and limitless safe-conduct permits on all
Afghani and northern Pakistani anti-communist zealots. The
ensuing "secret war" accelerated under Reagan, Bush and the
indefatigable William Casey, greatly enriching the many Paki-
stanis who profited from trading arms — and drugs, a la the
Nicaraguan contras — with Afghani "freedom fighters." Also
enjoying lavish CIA underwriting was a sort of Lincoln Brigade
Prevailing winds Premiere Issue Page 24

--- PAGE BREAK ---of multinational Islamic commie-killers, some of whom moved
later to Jersey City to join Sheik Omar Abdul Rahman.

After the Soviets lost Afghanistan — and their status as a
major nation, then their status as a nation period — it became
clear that an abiding hatred of Western secular values was the
ONLY glue holding together the recipients of American mili-
tary largesse near the Afghan-Pakistani border.

Today, the
battles between the various anti-communist groups in and near
To finance their internecine
carnage, the "freedom
fighters" sell huge amounts
of cheap heroin
Afghanistan have become exceptionally bloody, making some
westernized Afghanis — especially women —nostalgic for the
safe, orderly, sensible days of Soviet domination.

To finance their internecine carnage, the "freedom fighters"
sell huge amounts of cheap heroin (as did their ideological
forefathers in Laos).

They also sell classified American military
technology, and their own guerilla services, to any and all high
bidders — even to such international loose cannons as North
Korea, Yemen, Iraq, Iran, Libya, and various fundamentalist
Islamic revolutionary groups.

The situation has become so bad
that United States agents are now outbidding all others to buy
back American missiles from Afghani Islamic fundamentalists.

In essence, your taxes paid for these missiles twice.

CNN reports that veterans of the war with the Soviets,
especially those commanded by mujaheddin leader Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar, now run a sort of Jihad University, which matricu-
lates terrorists, spooks, explosives experts and hit men — an
army of mercenaries and shock troops intent on overthrowing
"Westernized" governments in the Islamic world.

Uncle Sam lavished these warriors with valuable hardware,
created a lucrative business delivering arms, and assisted in
distributing their opiates.

Nevertheless, many anti-communist
fighters on the Afghanistan/Pakistan border now feel mightily
ticked off at America.Uncle Sam lavished these warriors with valuable hardware,
created a lucrative business delivering arms, and assisted in
distributing their opiates.

Nevertheless, many anti-communist
fighters on the Afghanistan/Pakistan border now feel mightily
ticked off at America.

Peace is bad for their business, and some
entrepreneurs were cold-shouldered or hot-leaded by the CIA
and its employees.

Others living on the border were killed by
the notorious Pakistani dictator, General Mohammed Zia ul-
Haq, viewed in some quarters as a CIA puppet.

One of these unfortunates may have been a Pakistani politico
named Malik Gul Hasan KANSI, whom The Sunday Times calls
"a tribal relative of " Mir Aimal Kansi.

Like Kansi the killer,
Kansi the killed lived in Quetta, Pakistan, once the major point
of lucrative CIA gun-drug commerce with Afghani guerillas.

Somebody blew M.G.H.

Kansi away in 1984, and among Paki-
stanis the most popular candidate is the CIA.

Out of this bub-
bling pot of violent resentments, heated by escalation and then
termination of an American-financed war against the USSR, all
sorts of people and political tendencies could have arisen,
leading directly to the murder of two (and attempted murder of
three) employees of the CIA.

And the World Trade Center
bombing.

And political assassinations in Egypt and Algeria.

And, some suspect, the recent bombing in Buenos Aires
Deeper scrutiny of the Afghani-Paki Blowback factor re-
veals a whole lot more, including one explanation of why the
CIA has "let" the press stay silent on the shootings As we look
at Kansi's possible motivations, we see the first light thrown on
an obscure CIA dirty tricks campaign of immeasurable historic
import —a covert operation designed to destroy the entire "Evil
Empire" of the USSR.

This anti-Soviet operation may ulti-
mately lead to equally evil pan-Slavic fascism all over Eastern
Europe.And, some suspect, the recent bombing in Buenos Aires
Deeper scrutiny of the Afghani-Paki Blowback factor re-
veals a whole lot more, including one explanation of why the
CIA has "let" the press stay silent on the shootings As we look
at Kansi's possible motivations, we see the first light thrown on
an obscure CIA dirty tricks campaign of immeasurable historic
import —a covert operation designed to destroy the entire "Evil
Empire" of the USSR.

This anti-Soviet operation may ulti-
mately lead to equally evil pan-Slavic fascism all over Eastern
Europe.

Beyond that possibility is the very real prospect of
frighteningly well-armed Islamic revolts against all three super-
powers.

(Even China has indigenous Muslim separatists).

Afghani-Paki blowback appears to be the most significant
cause of the CIA driveway carnage.

Without precluding other
causative factors, this line of inquiry opens a window on hidden,
ill-conceived CIA actions in that region that may have sent the
entire world hurtling in a direction few would have desired or
anticipated.

Surprisingly, a beautiful blonde from a TV show
called The Price Is Right helped bring to light much of the secret,
but historic (and violent) drama from which Kansi probably
arose.

We'll examine that drama —and the blonde's misadven-
tures with the CIA — in the next issue of Prevailing Winds.

Mind Control?

E
arlier, I applied words like gutsy and audacious to Kansi.

In truth, he went way beyond that.

Not only did he shoot five people on a busy highway
in full view of horrified commuters, but he did so with every
reason to expect a very nasty reaction once he'd lost the element
of surprise.

Kansi needed 40-50 seconds to nail his five victims,
none of whom were bean-counting civil-service lifers.

They
worked for the justly feared U.S.

Central Intelligence Agency,
reportedly the trainer of ruthless killers.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They
worked for the justly feared U.S. Central Intelligence Agency,
reportedly the trainer of ruthless killers. By the time Kansi got
to the last couple drivers, who'd had half-a-minute to prepare a
defense, he might well expected quick-killing gonadotropic
blowfish toxin to come squirting out of a hood ornament. That
didn't happen, but something akin to it could have. So: Our boy Mir Aimal was far more than foolhardy or
fanatical. He was unflappable, devoid of emotion, even robotic
—hardly indicative of a "disgruntled" employee or mad loner,
as the expert nut-buffs characterized him without evidence. These "lone nut" assassins often fit the "Manchurian Can-
didate" profile. Of course, the mainstream media never discuss
such possibilities. Although we now live in an era when "re-
sponsible" journalists give value-neutral exposure to angels. past-life regression, and alien space-nappings, the possibility of
mind control and brainwashing remains ignored —even though
top executives of intelligence agencies worldwide have admit-
ted instituting programs to create hypno-programmed killers. I know what many of you are thinking: Mind control??An-
other mad raving from the conspiracy buffs... Well, don't tell former CIA Directors William Colby and
Stansfield Turner. In the mid 1970s, they publicly admitted the
existence of MK-Ultra and other CIA "experimental" mind-
control programs. This is authentic; it happened; this ain't
retrieved memory or urban legend; IT'S A GODDAMN FACT! Moreover, programmed assassins were undoubtedly not only
experimental goals; they were put into operation. If you think
otherwise, take a gander at this zombie jamboree: Sirhan B. Prevailing Winds Premiere issue Page 25

--- PAGE BREAK ---Part of the foreword
to Crime and Cover-Up.

"...underworld, and la-
bor union interrelation-
ships in the complex
framework of the assas-
sinations in Dallas and
elsewhere.

His study of
the Schweiker-Hart re-
port and the Dallas-Wa-
tergate connection is a
small masterpiece which
renders understandable
a Byzantine picture of
intercials joined forces
with cocaine criminals,
and then engaged in a
largely-successful cover-up to hide the truth."
This book was originally published in 1977.

Open
Archive Press is proud to make this book the first
book we print under our new press title.

PWR code #702 $10.95
CRIME
AND
COVER-UP
The CIA, the Mafia, and
the Dallas-Watergate
Connection
by Peter Dale Scott
with a foreword
by Sylvia Meagher
Sirhan, Jack Ruby, John Hinkley, Sara Jane Moore, Dennis
Sweeney (Congressman Al Lowenstein's killer), Arthur Bremer
and Squeaky Fromme.

Examine closely the histories of these
individuals, and you'll have a hard time denying the possibility
of a real-life "Manchurian Candidate."
Mir Aimal Kansi surely fits the picture of the classic mind
controlee.

As those few historians aware of such matters note,
military mind-control goes way back, perhaps to Napoleonic
times.

Hypno-controlled zombies have generally filled two
roles: assassin and (ta daaah...l) courier.

It might be said that
Kansi "Excelled" in both roles.

We'll never know for sure if Kansi is a Manchurian Candi-
date —but let us briefly indulge in the sort of speculative navel
gazing that "mental health professionals," serial-killer savants,
and other lone nut-buffs regularly do for the press.

If Kansi had
been "brainwashed," he could sincerely believe he had a valid,
personal motive to use American spooks for target practice.

Maybe he had been convinced hypnotically that someone had
slandered his sister in the lunchroom at Langley, or even that
the DCI made a tasteless joke about Moslems.If Kansi had
been "brainwashed," he could sincerely believe he had a valid,
personal motive to use American spooks for target practice.

Maybe he had been convinced hypnotically that someone had
slandered his sister in the lunchroom at Langley, or even that
the DCI made a tasteless joke about Moslems.

He could believe
in his own free will while actually having none,
An essential element for employing hypno-programmed
assassins is a cue (verbal and/or visual) that converts a passive
schlub into a fearless killing machine.

You can't have such a
zomboid cued up to something ubiquitous like Eveready Bunny
commercials or the sound of squealing brakes; s/he then might
assassinate all sorts of innocent bystanders and, worst of all,
waste the taxpayer dollars spent on creating a programmed
killer, So: what if, just what if Kansi's trigger mechanism were
a signal from someone recognizable who never appears in public
by accident?

Say, an important public official —perhaps a U.S.

Senator with porcine, flapping jowls that can't be mistaken for
those of anyone else?

Or perhaps the cue was given by some
other individual who exited the CIA to catch a bus a couple of
minutes before death time, who could then "fortuitiously" give
a definitive description of the assassin to a police artist.

Admittedly, this is all wacko speculation — but no more
irresponsible than the fanciful conclusions offered by Robert
Ressler, author of the self-aggrandizing book Whoever Fights
Monsters.

(Ressler, you will remember, characterized the Lan-
gley killer, sight unseen, as a "tormented person with a lot of
problems.") Ressler's hook, in which he crowns himself king
of the serial killer "profilers," examines the case of John
Joubert, ex-resident of Offutt Airbase and convicted ceremonial
slash-killer of little boys in Nebraska.Admittedly, this is all wacko speculation — but no more
irresponsible than the fanciful conclusions offered by Robert
Ressler, author of the self-aggrandizing book Whoever Fights
Monsters.

(Ressler, you will remember, characterized the Lan-
gley killer, sight unseen, as a "tormented person with a lot of
problems.") Ressler's hook, in which he crowns himself king
of the serial killer "profilers," examines the case of John
Joubert, ex-resident of Offutt Airbase and convicted ceremonial
slash-killer of little boys in Nebraska.

Yet Ressler ignores
profuse evidence that Joubert matriculated in the notorious
"MONARCH" mind-control program, which is the most likely
explanation of why bizarre killings are to Omaha as Country
music is to Nashville.

The much-rumored MONARCH project
at least deserved Ressler's consideration.

(Perhaps he himself
was "brainwashed" to avoid the topic, although in his case a
light rinse would have probably been sufficient.)
American Graffiti
W
hat does it take to supplant Sunday-supplement psy-
choanalyzing of "lone-nuts" with a more realistic
diagnosis of Kansi —a diagnosis that also considers
those who paid for Kansi 's bullets?

Well, the answer's not blowing in the wind.

But perhaps it
was written on the streets of suburban Virginia —as part of what
was described earlier as the most peculiar and coincidental
graffitti written in many a year.

The local fuzz did, indeed, find
a man who seems guilty of this "vandalism," although the
media never revealed how the police happened to arrest him.

(The Washington Post said he was arrested for "a traffic viola-
tion," thus begging more questions than I have the energy to
address.) He is Michael T.

Murray, 29, of Vienna, Virginia, and
he readily admitted to Tom Comi of the Vienna Times (a more
diligent paper than the Post) that he was responsible for the large
graffitti concerning the CIA which appeared in numerous inter-
sections throughout suburban Virginia.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(The Washington Post said he was arrested for "a traffic viola-
tion," thus begging more questions than I have the energy to
address.) He is Michael T. Murray, 29, of Vienna, Virginia, and
he readily admitted to Tom Comi of the Vienna Times (a more
diligent paper than the Post) that he was responsible for the large
graffitti concerning the CIA which appeared in numerous inter-
sections throughout suburban Virginia. According to Murray,
who was arrested with a high-tech Glock 9mm pistol worthy of
a professional assassin, his artistic labors had been neccessitated
by "criminal material directed at me" and a "criminal infra-
structure I have been trying to expose." He wouldn't elaborate,
but he did predict that "when this goes to court, I'm going to
prove I'm right and expose this entire operation."
In a letter to this author, reporter Comi opined that Murray
wasn't playing with a full deck. According to Fairfax County
police Chief Dan Kerr, Murray "thinks everybody is an agent
(of the CIA) ... he even thinks his parents are." Notwithstanding
the undeniable fact that some people's parents truly are CIA
agents, the general thinking around suburban Virginia is that
Murray's a prime candidate for the rubber room. He surely
believes the CIA is persecuting him. Could that belief have been
instilled by a forgotten friend who had a soothing voice, a
penetrating gaze and a shiny gold watch on a long chain...? There's a perfectly good reason why sinister forces might
have decided to suck poor Murray's brain out and replace it with
a floridly paranoid belief system. Perhaps those who paid for
the bullets originally intended to pin the blame for the assassi-
nations on a prefab chump, a sort of MANCHURIAN
PATSY.Who could have fulfilled that role more perfectly than
Michael Murray, with his artistic ravings against the CIA, his
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 26

--- PAGE BREAK ---affection for high-tech concealed weapons, and his stated intent
to "expose this whole operation?"
Enter the BATF
B
efore we take temporary leave of this vale of confusion,
we need to examine one more tale, which is — of course
— buffoonish, bizarre and byzantine to the max.

It, too,
relates to artiste manqué Michael T.

Murray.

Just one day after the driveway shootings, a gunsmith named
David Fischer, who saw a composite drawing, claimed he could
identify the killer.

Fischer could do so because he had recently
sold a small arsenal to Kansi at David Condon, Inc., a gun shop
in Chantilly, Virginia.

Fisher told the Washington Post that he
made the correct identification on January 26th (the day after
the shooting) to an agent of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms (BATF), who refused to take him seriously.

You remember the BATF, don't you?

The agency that
makes the NRA look warm & fuzzy?

Those comical Keystone
Killer Cops who barbequed 86 Branch Davidians in Waco?

My
only encounter with the BATF came when I worked for a
micro-brewery that asked the Agency to approve its slogan
"German Beer Brewed In Wisconsin.

"No way, said the BATF,
which threatened to close the brewery because the slogan could
"fraudulently deceive consumers into thinking the beer was
made in Gemany." That was when I decided BATF personnel
had simply washed up at low tide in the gene pool where the
feds go fishing for recruits.

Nowadays, many Americans feel
that the Bureau has become a repository for oafs with itchy
trigger forgers who cannot be trusted to do much more than kill,
blunder, and righteously lie about anything that makes them
look less than heroic.

Which brings us back to David Fischer, the gun dealer who
identified Kansi —and may even have done so hours before the
accused killer flew off to Pakistan.Nowadays, many Americans feel
that the Bureau has become a repository for oafs with itchy
trigger forgers who cannot be trusted to do much more than kill,
blunder, and righteously lie about anything that makes them
look less than heroic.

Which brings us back to David Fischer, the gun dealer who
identified Kansi —and may even have done so hours before the
accused killer flew off to Pakistan.

Fischer had shown the BATF
agent (never identified by the Bureau) federal and state gun
purchase documents which Kansi had signed with his correct
name.

Yet Fischer says that the underwhelmed agent "blew me
off." Why?

Because, said the Post, Fischer claimed the agent
wanted to find "records that would show that Michael Murray,
a Vienna man accused of painting anti-CIA graffitti on streets
there, had purchased a gun." Fischer's boss witnessed this
encounter and related it to Stephen Bittle, a part-time employee
at the gun shop who is also Sheriff of Falls Church, Virginia.

Bittle considered the incident so important that he had info on
it passed to Mike Little, a Fairfax County police investigator.

Eleven days later, when Kansi became the official killer,
Fischer and associates brought this story of apparent BATF
neglect to the attention of the news media.

The Bureau insisted
that Fischer got it wrong, even though Fischer's boss backed up
his employee's version of events.

Then, in May, 1994, the
General Accounting Office (GAO) reported to Congress that its
investigation "tended to support the statements of the gunsmith
and the store manager." Nevertheless, the unnamed agent vehe-
mently denied that any such incident had occurred.

A spokes-
man for the BATF stood by the agent's denial.

And well he might.

For if the BATF confirmed that it was
searching for someone who resembled Michael Murray, it
would have to explain how the Bureau knew who Murray was
and what he looked like six days before Murray was identified
as the graffiti painter.And well he might.

For if the BATF confirmed that it was
searching for someone who resembled Michael Murray, it
would have to explain how the Bureau knew who Murray was
and what he looked like six days before Murray was identified
as the graffiti painter.

In other words, Fischer claimed that the
Bureau, on January 26, searched for evidence relating to a man
who was not a suspect until February 2.

(Keep in mind that
throughout this period many believed the killer and the graffiti
artist might be one and the same.)
Does it surprise you to learn that neither the newsmedia nor
the GAO nor the BATF nor any Virginia police noticed this
oddity?

It sure doesn't surprise me.

And it probably didn't
surprise Murray, whose arrest gives rise to one further anomaly.

According to one local news report, when Murray got busted
for his "traffic offense" and was coincidentally discovered to
be the graffitti artist, there was already an arrest warrant out for
him.

But Murray claims that the unexplained warrant misiden-
tified him by one inch in height, 26 pounds of weight, and the
color of both his eyes and hair.

At this point, you are probably as exhausted as I from trying
to decipher all these confliciting "reports" and obvious lies.

Let's remember two things: I The CIA is well known for its
ability to coerce news media, prosecutors, local police and
federal fuzz to dissemble, avoid topics and ignore evidence in
the interests of "protecting national security." 2.

As noted
earlier, the British Sunday Times of February 14, 1993, stated
that law enforcement "complained that the CIA has done the
bare minimum to cooperate with the investigation, fueling sus-
picions that the agency may know more about the case than it
has admitted so far." Amen.

Until Next Time...--- PAGE BREAK ---

As noted
earlier, the British Sunday Times of February 14, 1993, stated
that law enforcement "complained that the CIA has done the
bare minimum to cooperate with the investigation, fueling sus-
picions that the agency may know more about the case than it
has admitted so far." Amen. Until Next Time... As previously mentioned, next issue will wrap up 20 or 30
loose ends on this bizarre affair, while focusing on the ominous
ramifications of CIA efforts to "defeat communism." Our sec-
ond chapter, "Was The Price Right?: The Cost of Destroying
the USSR. " will discuss how Bob Barker's beautiful blonde
bombshell pondered Pakistani problems for 18 years, and what
she found out. This line of investigation leads straight back to
the Elusive Butterfly Of Death, Mir Aim al Kansi, and his
possible protector, the CIA-financed Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. Until then, we'd like to hear your thoughts. Drop us a line
and try your hand at the following:
1. Who is Frank Darling? Was he simply a victim of ill
fortune, or was he specifically targeted? 2. Of the "big three" weekly news magazines in the USA,
why did only Time write about the shootout at all immediately
following the tragedy? 3. How do terrorists sashay in and out of our country as if its
"tightly policed" borders were made of chiffon and Swiss
cheese? 4. Did a U.S. Senator accidentally happen upon the driveway
murders at the wrong time, or was there more to his confusing
(and seemingly fabricated) story? 5. Why bother having freedom of the press when the press
won't exercise it?D
END PART ONE
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 27

--- PAGE BREAK ---is confusing
(and seemingly fabricated) story? 5. Why bother having freedom of the press when the press
won't exercise it?D
END PART ONE
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 27

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE STARTLING FILM THAT
COULDN'T BE SUPPRESSED!
A DOCUMENTARY CLASSIC THAT
EXPLODES THE ASSASSINATION
COVER-UP AND RAISES SERIOUS
QUESTIONS ABOUT WHO REALLY
KILLED ROBERT KENNEDY.
by Dick Russell
E
ditor's note: "Non-Lethal Weaponry" has become the
new buzz-term for a wide array of advanced defense
systems using hitherto-unimagined technologies —in-
cluding electronic means of affecting the human mind and
nervous system. Dick Russell. author of The Man Who Knew
Too Much, war the only journalist to cover the important 1993
conference on these weapons of the future. which will one day
be used in our cities. Much of this new technology remains
classified If any of these 'hon-lethal" options sound attractive
to you. keep one thing in mind: Any technology which makes
insurrection impossible also makes tyranny inevitable.
T
he year is 1997. A group of terrorists is holding hostages
inside an American Embassy in Central America, andnd: Any technology which makes
insurrection impossible also makes tyranny inevitable.
T
he year is 1997. A group of terrorists is holding hostages
inside an American Embassy in Central America, and

the President is receiving a Pentagon briefing on various
options.
What about hauling out the isotropic radiator? Fired from a
conventional weapon, an explosive burst superheats a surround-
ing gaseous plasma and inspires a laserbright flash. For the
terrorists, it's as if they just came out of a dark room and stared
directly up at the sun. But the retinal damage is only temporary.
Or how about using infrasound? From banks of speakers
driven by highpowered amplifiers, very low frequency sound
waves are generated that can easily penetrate most buildings and
vehicles. Not only will the terrorists quickly become disori-
ented, before long they'll also be vomiting and defecating
Another option is always VS1 — Visual Stimulus and Illu-
sion. A holographic image is projected into the clouds right
outside the embassy window. When the terrorists look out, one
of their long-lost martyrs simply tells them to let everybody go.
These projected scenarios are not far-fetched in certain
Pentagon and Justice Department circles. Isotropic radiators,
infrasound, and VSI are all part of a new concept of warfare (or
riot/crime control) known as nonlethal defense, or "disabling
technologies." The program titles —High Power Microwaves,
Liquid Metal Embrittlement, Non-Nuclear Electromagnetic
Pulse — are best envisioned in the hands of Luke Skywalker,
Batman, or maybe Captain Crunch. But proponents believe that
these will soon mean incapacitating people and damaging
equipment with less bloodshed, less property destruction, and
less environmental havoc. Research and development is moving
rapidly forward at Los Alamos, Sandia, Edgewood, Picatinny,
and other military laboratories.
Ai.
ner the disaster at the Branch Davidian compound in
Waco, Attorney General Janet Reno wrote to then-De-
ense Secretary Les Aspin on June 3, 1993, about ex-
ploring "dual use applications by both the military and law
enforcement" of such projects as acoustic beam technologies.
Then, following the ill-fated Ranger raid in Somalia last Octo-
ber, Aspin stated publicly for the first time that nonlethal weap-
ons could play a vital role in future peacekeeping operations,
citing crowd control and monitoring of demilitarized zones.
In mid-November, the initial public coming-together of the
Defense and Justice Departments on this matter occurred at a
largely-classified two-day conference inside the Johns Hopkins
University Applied Physics Laboratory (APL). Featured meal-
time speakers were Lieutenant General Richard Trefry, now-re-
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 28conference inside the Johns Hopkins
University Applied Physics Laboratory (APL). Featured meal-
time speakers were Lieutenant General Richard Trefry, now-re-
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 28

--- PAGE BREAK ---tired Military Advisor to President Bush, Dr.

Edward Teller of
H-Bomb fame, and until she cancelled at the last minute and had
her prepared speech read by an aide, Attorney General Reno.

Behind publicly-closed doors, General "Shy" Meyer (retired
Army Chief of Staff) and top brass from all three services
listened to such technical talks as "RF Weapons: A Very
Attractive Non-Lethal Option." RF stands for radio frequency.

The conference was organized and MC'd by Dr.

John B.

Alexander, a 56-year-old retired Colonel who went from com-
manding Special Forces in Vietnam to studying near-death
experiences under Elizabeth Kubler-Ross (gaining a Ph.D.

in
thanatology)_ Back in 1980, in
an article titled "The New
Mental Battlefield: 'Beam Me
Up Spock,'" published in the
MilitaryReview, Alexander de-
scribed how "literally thou-
sands of people have reported
the experience of being dis-
cretely and consciously located
outside of their physical bodies
and yet able to view themselves
from that perspective with a to-
tal awareness of activities in
that area.

This phenomenon is
frequently associated with life-
threatening circumstances such
as accidents, illness or extreme
danger." Such out-of-body
travel, Alexander suggested,
might be a means "to penetrate secured areas to retrieve desired
data"
Since considered the military's resident expert on the Para-
normal, Alexander moved on in 1988 to take charge of non-le-
thal defense research at the Los Alamos National Laboratory.in
thanatology)_ Back in 1980, in
an article titled "The New
Mental Battlefield: 'Beam Me
Up Spock,'" published in the
MilitaryReview, Alexander de-
scribed how "literally thou-
sands of people have reported
the experience of being dis-
cretely and consciously located
outside of their physical bodies
and yet able to view themselves
from that perspective with a to-
tal awareness of activities in
that area.

This phenomenon is
frequently associated with life-
threatening circumstances such
as accidents, illness or extreme
danger." Such out-of-body
travel, Alexander suggested,
might be a means "to penetrate secured areas to retrieve desired
data"
Since considered the military's resident expert on the Para-
normal, Alexander moved on in 1988 to take charge of non-le-
thal defense research at the Los Alamos National Laboratory.

In a speech before the Council on Foreign Relations on October
27, 1993, Alexander noted: "Nothing about this concept should
detract from maintaining a highly mobile and extremely lethal
force." Or, as Steven Aftergood, senior research analyst at the
Federation of American Scientists, says: "I doubt this portends
a fundamental change in the structure of our military system or
future war-fighting."
Still, there seemed to be considerable enthusiasm for non-
lethality among the almost all-male crowd that came to the
November conference, sporting name-tags identifying them as
CIA, DIA, DOE, National Security Council, Secret Service,
Martin Marietta, Lockheed, Grumman, and many more.

As one
conference speaker, Joseph Burger of the Pentagon's office of
Peacekeeping & Peace Enforcement, put it: "Many view non-
lethal weapons as futuristic or quite unrealistic.

But in the new
realities of foreign policy, the U.S.

is dealing in uncharted
waters.But in the new
realities of foreign policy, the U.S.

is dealing in uncharted
waters.

And the ability to destabilize an enemy, by other than
conventional means has the ability to revolutionize conflict
settlement-"
I
am standing in front of a conference exhibit table for the
Army's Edgewood Research Development and Engineer-
ing Center.

On the back wall are displays of the Edgewood
experience with "Anti-material and Anti-personnel Technolo-
gies" since the 1920s, the latter being sensory irritants, smoke
technologies, incapacitants, and novel riot control.

Edgewood
was also the site of drug testing on some 7000 unwitting soldiers
during the 1950s.

An Army videotape is rolling, titled "Human Aspects of
Using Inflatable Devices for Rapid Confinement Area Displace-
ment." It depicts a feasibility study conducted inside a specially-
constructed plexiglass room that's been filled to ceiling height
with beach balls.

Men are seen stumbling around in sphere-
shock, totally without any sense of direction.

Theoretically, the
beach balls would be self-inflating and might be emplaced
inside, say, a prison ceiling ready to be dropped at the touch of
a guard's hand to quell rioters.

Another tape segment pro-
ceeds, depicting the testing on
ferrets of new calmative agents
with antidotes.

"We put you
down, we can bring you out,"
Edgewood's Larry Bickford ex-
plains to me.

Nerve-wracking is
a more apt way to describe the
various wares on the Edgewood
display table.

The "Soft Rag" is
a flying rubber donut, "much
safer than a bullet," designed to
knock you down when fired from
an M16.

Next to it is the new,
improved "Sting Rag" model
which contains CS tear gas.

I ask about the wall picture
labeled "aqueous foams." "Sort
of like a washing machine gone crazy," says Bickford, the
sprayed-in suds effect bringing about lack of traction and dis-
orientation due to obscured vision.Next to it is the new,
improved "Sting Rag" model
which contains CS tear gas.

I ask about the wall picture
labeled "aqueous foams." "Sort
of like a washing machine gone crazy," says Bickford, the
sprayed-in suds effect bringing about lack of traction and dis-
orientation due to obscured vision.

There are also sticky foams
and slippery gels, producing wondrous wound-up-in-spaghetti
and banana-peel type effects.

According to David Boyd, scien-
tific director at the National Institutes of Justice (NIJ), the only
trouble with this sticky foam is "trying to figure out how to clean
it up_ " Without a molecular reversal of some sort, this particular
super-adhesive is currently too tenacious to disentangle its
victim.

These latter ideas, incidentally, originated with the De-
fense Nuclear Agency as a means of securing nuclear sites from
potential terrorists.

At New Mexico's Los Alamos and Sandia labs, Liquid Metal
Embrittlement is being designed to change and severely weaken
the molecular structure of metals or alloys.

Because it is mer-
cury-based, the idea is to protect the operator by having him
apply it with a felt tip marker.

Supercaustics, nicknamed C+, are
being formulated to cause tires and shoe soles to deteriorate, or
damage asphalt roads and roof tops.

Anti-Traction Technology
includes lubricants ready to render railroads, ramps, runways
and stairs ineffective for limited periods.

On the biological side, how about microbes that eat high
explosives?

Or, better yet, microbes engineered to feast upon
the insulation of an enemy's computers or electrical wiring.

As
John Alexander has said, "There is almost nothing that some
microbe won't eat, so the potential applications are extensive."
But are we really moving from "smart" weapons to "nice"
ones?

Take the High Power Microwaves being investigated at
Los Alamos, for example.--- PAGE BREAK ---

As
John Alexander has said, "There is almost nothing that some
microbe won't eat, so the potential applications are extensive."
But are we really moving from "smart" weapons to "nice"
ones? Take the High Power Microwaves being investigated at
Los Alamos, for example. The purpose of HPM's is to disrupt
electronic systems — but should a human being get in between
The head of non-lethal
weapons research at Los
Alamos is John B. Alexander, a
56-year-old retired Colonel
who went from commanding
Special Forces in Vietnam to
studying near-death
experiences under Elizabeth
Kubler-Ross. Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 29

--- PAGE BREAK ---the beam and its source, notes weapons expert Janet Morris,
"you may not be dead, but you might need a kidney transplant."
Laser rifles with power packs are being readied to disable
optical and infrared systems, but they are also being considered
to flash-blind people.

The temporary damage may be as slight
as a centervision blind spot, similar to what happens when you
see a flashbulb go off, or it could be significant.

"Any system
that intentionally blinds would be considered maiming," says
John Alexander, "and I'm confident we would not do that as a
primary function of the weapon."
A
decade ago, the Congressional Clearinghouse of the
Future chaired by then-Senator Albert Gore, Jr.

drafted
a report titled Future Agenda, which
considered the eventual need for controls on
offensive microwave weapons, described as
"'force fields' which have great destructive
power." A section of the November 1982
report added that "the distant future may
bring totally new weapons of broad scale
destruction," including "new electronic de-
vices such as high-energy directed beams,
and mind-control mechanisms.

Whether or
not these weapons could or should be devel-
oped and the means of defense against them
in the event of enemy deployment may be
subject to debate in the coming years."
For example, it has long been known that
certain sound frequencies have definite ef-
fects on the human body, depending upon
their level of intensity.

Infrasound is a pow-
erful, ultra-low-frequency acoustic wave
that can re-create the effects of seasickness;
the French are credited with its original development for riot-
control applications.

According to military consultant Janet
Moths, "There is also some research in the classified realm
about what frequencies affect what organs."
At a higher frequency level, a targetable device can poten-
tially hit someone with the force of a baseball right between the
eyes —or even crumble masonry.Infrasound is a pow-
erful, ultra-low-frequency acoustic wave
that can re-create the effects of seasickness;
the French are credited with its original development for riot-
control applications.

According to military consultant Janet
Moths, "There is also some research in the classified realm
about what frequencies affect what organs."
At a higher frequency level, a targetable device can poten-
tially hit someone with the force of a baseball right between the
eyes —or even crumble masonry.

Sound could be utilized like
a controllable earthquake, to shake people out of buildings or
tunnels.

The Russians are said to be testing a sound-based
system which intensifies the effect of an automobile backfire a
thousandfold.

Last July, an article in the monthly periodical Defense Elec-
tronics described a series of secret meetings held last March in
suburban Northern Virginia between U.S.

intelligence officials
and a group of Russian scientists.

They were talking, the article
maintained, "about the Russians' decade-long research on a
computerized acoustic device allegedly capable of implanting
thoughts in a person's mind without that person being aware of
the source of the thought." The FBI was apparently considering
using the Russian device — dubbed "acoustic psycho-correc-
tion" — on David Koresh, sending in the voice of God (or,
alternatively, of the cult leader's mother) in an effort to get the
Branch Davidians to emerge.

But the Russian scientists alleg-
edly refused "to promise zero risk."
When the NIJ's David Boyd was asked recently whether any
non-lethal weapons were considered for use in Waco, he re-
sponded: "I have to answer that very carefully.

The fairest
answer is, none were suitable." Another source says that the FBI
had discussions about piping thorazine into Koresh's domain,
mixed with dimethy I sulfoxide (DMSO) to absorb the tranquil-
izer rapidly through the skin of the Branch Davidians.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But the Russian scientists alleg-
edly refused "to promise zero risk."
When the NIJ's David Boyd was asked recently whether any
non-lethal weapons were considered for use in Waco, he re-
sponded: "I have to answer that very carefully. The fairest
answer is, none were suitable." Another source says that the FBI
had discussions about piping thorazine into Koresh's domain,
mixed with dimethy I sulfoxide (DMSO) to absorb the tranquil-
izer rapidly through the skin of the Branch Davidians. Considering the ensuing conflagration in WACO that killed
more than 80 people, would mind/behavior control have been
justified in retrospect? Chris and Janet Morris would say yes. The Moths couple, coauthors of about 30 nonfiction and fiction
books (the sci-fi works are generally under pseudonyms), are
also Senior Fellows and Research Directors for the U.S. Global
Strategy Council, a Washington think tank under the auspices
of ex-CIA Deputy Director for Intelligence Ray Cline. Describ-
ing the Russians' "acoustic psycho-correction" device, Janet
concedes that "it's potentially scary stuff. What we'd like to have are some open hear-
ings leading to an international set of con-
ventions constraining inappropriate use of
this and other non-lethal methods." At the
same time, the Morrises are seeking a Na-
tional Security Council-level decision advo-
cating non-lethal weapons for international
and domestic control of violence. T
here is no doubt that the Justice De-
partment is looking for a piece of theonal Security Council-level decision advo-
cating non-lethal weapons for international
and domestic control of violence. T
here is no doubt that the Justice De-
partment is looking for a piece of the

action. As the NIJ's Boyd, himself a
20-year Army veteran, emphasized to the
conventioneers at Johns Hopkins, "Police
today still have the same choices Wyatt Earp
had 100 years ago: talk a prisoner into coop-
erating, beat him into submission, or shoot
him." According to Boyd, recently a work-
ing group was formed to take a deeper look
at non-lethal technologies among the NIJ, FBI, Centers for
Disease Control, National Institutes of Health, National Acad-
emy of Sciences and National Governor's Association, with an
advisory panel including ex-FBI/CIA Director William Web-
ster and Admiral Paul Yost.
None of the labs will say how much they're spending on
non-lethal weapons development. John Alexander argues that
disclosing program details would invite other nations to develop
counter measures.
ironically, one advocate for an end to secrecy is Edward
Teller, now 85, who came to the November conference sporting
black boots, a blue suit, and a wooden cane almost as tall as he
is. The ex-director of Lawrence Livermore Lab's vision of
non-lethality foresees small nuclear bombs with the explosive
power of 100 tons of TNT, which could be strategically placed
across say, North Korea, to wipe out its infrastructure. Civilians
would receive advance warning so they could evacuate the area.
"A plan of this kind could work without a single casualty,"
Teller remarked.
Meantime, the conference seems to have sparked momen-
tum. In March, the Army plans to appoint a senior advisory
group to guide non-lethal weapons development and draft a
master plan detailing future doctrine, training, and materiel
issues. Whether the future might determine if somebody's mi-
crobe can outwit somebody else's microwave — and maybe
offer us mutations of Strangelove or Pavlov — we may find out
sooner than you can say Holy Sticky Foam. El
"... the Congressional
Clearinghouse of the fu-
ture chaired by then
Senator Albert Gore, Jr.
drafted a report titled
Future Agenda, which
considered the eventual
need for controls on of-
fensive microwave
weapons, described as
"force fields" which
have a great destructive
power."
Prevailing winds Premiere Issue Page 30nda, which
considered the eventual
need for controls on of-
fensive microwave
weapons, described as
"force fields" which
have a great destructive
power."
Prevailing winds Premiere Issue Page 30

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed the eventual
need for controls on of-
fensive microwave
weapons, described as
"force fields" which
have a great destructive
power."
Prevailing winds Premiere Issue Page 30

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I.
I
-110'
rI
AVAILABLE
for the first time
THE ASSASSINATION OF
ROBERT F. KENNEDY
Nominated for the 1975 Golden Globe Award - Best Doeumentaly
"The Second Gun"
a Ted Charach film
"THE SECOND GUN" must be viewed by all. PWR highly recommends this
brilliant investigative documentary by Ted Charach. PWR code #783 $29.95
STATE POWER
AND THE OK ASSASSINATION
by Michael Parenti, Ph.D.
(The following is adapted from a lecture Parenti gave in
Berkeley, California on November 26, 1993.)
-F
 or some time I have been impressed—and depressed—by
the extent to which history is a chronicle of immense
atrocities. Whenever surplus wealth accumulates in any
society, whenever people emerge from a subsistence economy,
some portion of the population will do everything it can to
enslave and expropriate the labor of the rest of the people. This
is true whether it is a slave society, as in ancient Egypt, Greece
and Rome; or a feudal society, where people were reduced to
serfs; or a capitalist society, where people arc driven to the edge
of insecurity and sometimes starvation, made to work faster and
harder for less and less, as throughout the capitalist Third World.
One of the things used in these repressive arrangements is
that necessary instrument of control called the state. As Max
Weber (who wasn't a Marxist) put it, the state is that organiza-
tion which has a monopoly on the legitimate uses of force and
violence.
In modern times, some peoples have fought back and devel-
oped some restraining power against the state, some features of
self-protection, or what we call "democratic rights." But even
in the much vaunted "western democracies" there exists a great
deal of arbitrary state power, whose primary function is to
maintain the existing politico-economic structure. Be it demo-
cratic France or democratic England or democratic Germany or
democratic USA or democratic Canada, all these countries have
instruments and agencies that act repressively and largely unac-
countably, that use surveillance, disruption, udicial harassment,
trumped-up charges and arrests, covert action, subversion, tax
harassment, violence, and even assassination—every dirty trick
in the book.
In the middle of these democracies, you have the state within
the state, known as the national security slate, a mostly secret
unit of misgovernment that is capable of the most unspeakable
crimes, crimes that are perpetrated against people all around the
world and against dissidents at home.
Not long ago, I got a letter from a woman who has been a
community organizer in Chicago. And she said, with grief in her
heart, that she remembered the hope and spirit of the 1960s, the
tremendous democratic organization and leadership that was
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 31. And she said, with grief in her
heart, that she remembered the hope and spirit of the 1960s, the
tremendous democratic organization and leadership that was
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 31

--- PAGE BREAK ---developing in the Latino and African-American communities.

She noted that every single one of the community leaders of that
day is either dead, shot by the police, or in Marion Prison on
trumped-up charges.

She went on to describe the demoralization
that took place, the shattering of those organizations, after which
came the drug traffickers, who were aided and abetted by the
federal agents themselves.

What she was describing (though she didn't call it that) was
a state engaged in domestic counterinsurgency, a state more
interested in keeping a population unorganized and demoralized
than in having it organized and effectively fighting for its
democratic rights.

Because if that popu-
lation is effective and powerful, it will
start making demands and start pursuing
its interests.

And it will start cutting in on
the privileged interests of property and
power that those police and undercover
people and those military forces are dedi-
cated to protecting.

For hundreds of years, theorists have
made just that point, except they made it
proudly rather than critically.

Adam
Smith and John Locke both said that "as
the divisions of property become increas-
ingly unequal, it is necessary to have a
state to defend those who have property
from those who do not." In so many
words so did James Madison and Alexander Hamilton.

The only
difference is that when Marx said it, he added that the purpose
of the state was to defend those who accumulate wealth from
those whose labor produces the wealth.

For Marx, it was not just
a matter of the haves versus the have-nots; it was the haves
taking from the have-nots who produced the wealth.

In the last half-century and even before, throughout the
world, dominant economic interests have enlisted the efforts of
assassins and torturers.

As we talk at this moment, the CIA and
other such agencies in this country, and in other countries, have
sponsored violence, torture, death squads, and drugs.In the last half-century and even before, throughout the
world, dominant economic interests have enlisted the efforts of
assassins and torturers.

As we talk at this moment, the CIA and
other such agencies in this country, and in other countries, have
sponsored violence, torture, death squads, and drugs.

They've
done this from Angola to Zaire to Mozambique to El Salvador
to Guatemala to Indonesia to East Timor, and in scores of other
countries.

They have used repressive ploys in Western Europe
and the United States, in Chicago, Detroit, Los Angeles, and
New York.

In many countries the national security repressors have
systematically targeted peasant leaders, intellectuals, journal-
ists, student leaders, clergy, labor union leaders, workers, and
community activists.

Tens of thousands have been murdered
and assassinated to prevent social change, to destroy any kind
of redistributive politics—any kind of government, any kind of
social movement that is not willing to reduce its people to
economic fodder for the Fortune 500.

And with NAFTA and
GATT, the third-worldization of the USA will continue full
speed ahead.

The gangster nature of the state is cloaked by a democratic
facade and by the democratic substance of government.

Some
democratic victories have been won by the people after much
protracted struggle: universal suffrage, civil rights, civil liber-
ties, the right to collective bargaining, the eight hour day, sonic
civil liberties, public education, some human services.

In each
instance, these rights are violated or rolled back or put under
siege.

Still their reality should not be denied.

And most omi-
nously, in the midst of this struggle, the state still exercises an
often covert, unaccountable, and largely elitist and undemo-
cratic repressive power.

C
onsider an issue like drugs.

The problem is not that the
government has failed to do enough about the illicit
traffic and that it is losing "the war against drugs.C
onsider an issue like drugs.

The problem is not that the
government has failed to do enough about the illicit
traffic and that it is losing "the war against drugs.

-
What is really unsettling is that the government, or certainly
elements within the national security state, are active perpetra-
tors and purveyors of narcotics.

Likewise, what is so compelling about
the assassination of President John Ken-
nedy is how nakedly the gangster nature
of the state is revealed.

It is an awakening.

To know the truth about the JFK assassi-
nation is to call into question the entire
state system and the entire social order it
professes to protect.

This is why for thirty years the main-
stream press has suppressed or dismissed
out-of-hand the findings about JFK's
death, ignoring or ridiculing the findings
of independent investigators like Peter
Dale Scott, Harold Weisberg, Carl
Oglesby, Mark Lane, Anthony Summers,
Philip Melanson, Jim Garrison, Cyril
Wecht, Jim Man-s, Gaeton Fonzi, Sylvia Meagher, Michael
Canfield, James DiEugenio, and literally hundreds of others.

These independent investigators are called "assassination
buffs." The term "buff-  is a marginalizing and diminishing
characterization.

A buff is someone who pursues odd hobbies
and quirky little interests.

For the same reason that we would
not refer to "Holocaust buffs" so should we not use "assassi-
nation buffs." These are serious investigators who are unearth-
ing terrible truths about a dreadful crime perpetrated by the
gangster state.

It is no accident that mainstream media pundits, opinion
leaders and political leaders in this country relentlessly attack
or ignore the literature that piece by piece has established an
immense conspiracy to assassinate the President and an even
more extensive conspiracy to cover-up the crime.

It is no acci-
dent that they give fulsome, gushing, ready publicity to the likes
of Gerald Posner and his mendacious apologetic.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is no accident that mainstream media pundits, opinion
leaders and political leaders in this country relentlessly attack
or ignore the literature that piece by piece has established an
immense conspiracy to assassinate the President and an even
more extensive conspiracy to cover-up the crime. It is no acci-
dent that they give fulsome, gushing, ready publicity to the likes
of Gerald Posner and his mendacious apologetic. In his book Case Closed, Posner did a grotesque whitewash. The book is not a sloppy job, not a confused work — rather, it
is a deliberate contrivance that fabricates evidence, uses outright
untruths, to conclude that Lee Harvey Oswald was a disgruntled
leftist who killed Kennedy. Posner's book, eloquently described
to me by Peter Dale Scott as a "pile of crap," received saturation
publicity in every major publication and TV channel. Posner's
credibility depends on the public's being totally ignorant of what
the independent investigators have been uncovering for the last
thirty years. He could get away with his misrepresentations
because he is secure in the knowledge that those he criticizes
will never be afforded the mainstream platform he repeatedly
enjoyed. '
. For the same reason the mainstream critics lavished praise
and maximum exposure on Posner so did they savage Oliver
Stone's movie JFK, a movie that reached millions of viewers
What is so
compelling about the
JFK assassination is
how nakedly it
reveals the gangster
nature of the state. Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 32

--- PAGE BREAK ---with a very accurate account of the specifics of the assassination.

I wrote a book calledMake-Believe Media, a critique of the
politics of entertainment, specifically films and television, so I
think I know something about films.

As far as I know, JFK is
the only movie in film history that was attacked, six months
before it was released, in the Washington Post.

the New York
Times, in Time, Newsweek, and every other major and minor
corporate-owned publication in the USA.

And it continued to
be attacked relentlessly for a year after it was released.

During the week of the thirtieth anniversary of the Kennedy
assassination, the media revved up once more to saturate the
airwaves with programs proclaiming that Oswald was the lone
assassin.

Like the Warren Commission did, the media assumed
a priori that Oswald was the killer.

The only question asked was:
"Did Oswald act alone?" — which was dismissed with a
resounding YES.

Meanwhile, all the serious investigators ask
different questions.

Oswald did not act at all.

He was not one of
the people who shot Kennedy, although he was involved in
another way, as a fall guy, in his own words "just a patsy."
The propagandists of the right and the center know why
they've got to trash this issue and contain it.

Listen, for example,
to what Tom Wicker of the New York Times had to say.

Now,
Tom Wicker has never written a movie review in his life.

But
when JFK came out, this Washington columnist for the New
York Times, suddenly emerged as a movie reviewer.

And instead
of getting the usual movie review length of 800 words, he got
over 2,000 words.

His review covered a whole page, with photos
and all.And instead
of getting the usual movie review length of 800 words, he got
over 2,000 words.

His review covered a whole page, with photos
and all.

In that review, he tells us: "If the wild assertions in
Oliver Stone's movie are taken at face value, Americans will
have to accept the idea that most of the nation's major institu-
tions conspired together and carried out Kennedy's murder."
Wicker goes on: "In an era when mistrust of government and
loss of confidence in institutions"—the press not the least—
"are widespread and virulent, such a suggestion seems a dubi-
ous public service."
So, truth has nothing to do with it.

Wicker is saying more
than he intends.

His function is to keep the system and its
institutions stabilized.

The question is institutional legitimacy.

Wicker understands the heart of the matter.

A full revelation
about the murder would invite serious discredit upon the legiti-
macy of the dominant institutions of state and class, the press
being not the least of those institutions.

The press is a faithful
servant of that system which New York Times writers like
Wicker are paid to defend faithfully.

Playing before mass audi-
ences, the movie IFK did not finger a cabal of malevolent
perpetrators, but in fact pointed the finger at the national security
state itself as the murderer.

If such were the case, then millions
of people would question what kind of a system they were living
in.

Damage control becomes necessary.

The media have been tireless in their efforts to suppress the
truth about the gangster state.

In 1978, the House Select Com-
mittee reported after an investigation that there was more than
one assassin involved in the Kennedy shooting and therefore
there was a conspiracy.

In immediate response, the Washington
Post editorialized: "Could it have been some other malcontent
who Mr.

Oswald met casually?In immediate response, the Washington
Post editorialized: "Could it have been some other malcontent
who Mr.

Oswald met casually?

Could not as much as three or
four societal outcasts with no ties to any one organization have
developed in some spontaneous way a common determination
to express their alienation in the killing of President Kennedy?

It is possible that two persons acting independently attempted
to shoot the President at the very same time.

It is "possible," as is any such imagining, but it is also highly
unlikely.

Instead of a conspiracy theory the Washington Post
offers us "coincidence theory." Those who deny conspiracies
sometimes create the most convoluted fantasies of all.

David Garrow, who wrote a biography of Martin Luther
King, patronizingly says, "A large majority of the American
people do believe in assassination conspiracies.

That allows
events to have large mysterious causes instead of small idiosyn-
cratic ones." I would say the Washington Post proposed the
most mysterious cause of all.

In any case, the question of
whether a conspiracy exists in any particular situation has to be
decided by an investigation of evidence, not by a priori, unsci-
entific, and patronizing presumptions about the public mind.

Investigators who conclude there were conspiracies in the
Kennedy and King murders did not fashion large mysterious
causes, grand imaginings, but came to their conclusions through
painstaking probes of material actualities, particular details,
discrepancies, inexplicable contradictions, obvious lies and
coverups.

The investigators have not been impelled by some
"yearnings." They were impelled by questions of evidence, by
things that just did not seem to make sense, by very immediate
empirical circumstances which became more and more compel-
ling.

E
veryone talks about finding the "smoking gun" behind
this or that mystery.

But there is no such thing.

Nor will
one be found in the still-classified archives.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But there is no such thing. Nor will
one be found in the still-classified archives. A "smoking
gun" is an impossible standard of proof. In any case, historians
work by a process of accretion, putting together piece by piece
until a picture emerges. In the Kennedy murder there is no one
smoking gun but a whole artillery of them, impossibilities
regarding the flight of bullets, the nature of the wounds, the
disappearance and deliberate destruction of evidence, the sud-
den and mysterious deaths of numerous witnesses. The independent investigators have demolished the Warren
Commission. The first effort was Harold Weisberg's book
Whitewash, followed by Mark Lane's Rush to Judgment, written
twenty-five years ago. To demonstrate how evidence of conspiracy has been ig-
nored by the powers that be, let us focus on a small part of the
case that has been pieced together by investigators, who were
looking not for a smoking gun but for particular explanations
about simple truths. Consider the background of Lee Harvey
Oswald. During the week of the thirtieth anniversary of the JFK
assassination, one repeatedly heard on television that Oswald
was a "loner," an incompetent, not very bright, and emotionally
troubled. Gerald Posner, transforming himself into an instant
psychiatric expert, announced that Oswald was "a very dis-
turbed young boy. He had a very disturbed childhood, and he
was a passive-aggressive." A passive-aggressive assassin? Per-
haps that explains why he used a rifle that could not shoot
straight. He also was a "leftist," asserts Posner and others. Alexander
Cockburn joined the right and the center, and in a column in the
San Francisco Examiner said Oswald was a leftist. The truth is
something else. All of Oswald's IQ tests show that he was above average in
intelligence. He was bright and a quick learner. Lee Harvey
Oswald spent most of his adult life not as a lonely drifter but
t. aing else. All of Oswald's IQ tests show that he was above average in
intelligence. He was bright and a quick learner. Lee Harvey
Oswald spent most of his adult life not as a lonely drifter but
t. a

Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 33

--- PAGE BREAK ---JFK
"The CIA, Vietnam, and
the Plot to Assassinate
John F.

Kennedy"
By L.

Fletcher Prouty,
Whose theories inspired the movie JFK
Introduction by Oliver Stone
Millions have been gripped by Oliver Stone's filrn,./FK, and
its premise that the plot to as-
sassinate Kennedy originated
beyond the highest levels of
government.

In the movie.

the advocate of this theory is
a character named "X."
played by Donald Suther-
land, who explains how and
why this plot came about.

As Stone has acknow-
ledged, "X" was not only
faithfully depicted in the
film, but, as the film's Crea-
tive Adviser, provided fully-
documented information and
analysis that helped shape
the script.

This mystery man
was not a fabricated charac-
ter, as critics contend.

His
identity can now be revealed:
"X" is L.Fleicher Prouty, a
former top level "military-CIA" operative and the author of
JFK: The CIA.

Vietnam, and the Plot to Assassinate John F.

Kennedy.

Prouty served during the Kennedy years as the Chief of Spe-
cial Operation for the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

He was directly in
charge of the global system designed to provide military support
of the clandestine activities of the CIA.

Among his revelations in .IFK.

-Kennedy's plan to change the course of the the conflict and
to remove all U.S.

military personnel from Vietnam by the end
of 1965 created enormous concern at the center of the military
industrial complex, and led directly to his assassination.

-Upon receiving the report of the Cuban Study Group from
General Maxwell Taylor after the Bay of Pigs disaster in 1961,
Kennedy vowed to "shatter the CIA into a thousand pieces." He
began by firing long-time CIA Director, Allen W.

Dulles, and
his top aides.

-The Army set up a full-fledged covert operation derisively
named "Operation Camelot" to thwart Kennedy's effort to end
the war in Vietnam.

-President Johnson reversed Kennedy's orders to wind down
in Vietnam immediately following Kennedy's murder.-The Army set up a full-fledged covert operation derisively
named "Operation Camelot" to thwart Kennedy's effort to end
the war in Vietnam.

-President Johnson reversed Kennedy's orders to wind down
in Vietnam immediately following Kennedy's murder.

And in
March 1964 he set the course for massive troop escalation.

-Why Kennedy was ultimately against the war and why he
was really murdered.

Brilliantly researched and written.

JFK is riveting.

It is the
first top-level, insider- witnessed account, by a man whose per-
sonal access privileges dated to 1943, No reader will finish
without feeling that he or she has been made privy to a terrible,
dark secret.

PWR code #822 $24.95
The CIA, Vietnam
Arid The Plot To
of L.

Fletcher Prc..:ly
directly linked to the U.S.

intelligence community.

At the age
of 19 in the U,S.

Marines he had secret security clearance and
was working at Marine Air Control in Atsugi Base in Japan.

Atsugi was a top secret base, where the CIA launched U2 flights
and performed other kinds of covert operations in China.

The
next year at the age of 19 he was assigned to El Toro Air Station
in California with security clearance to work radar.

Certain strange things began to happen.

While at El Toro,
Oswald emerged as a babbling Russophile and a "Communist."
He started playing Russian language records at blast level in his
barracks and addressing his fellow Marines in Russian.

He read
Russian books and hailed Soviet Communism as "the best
system in the world," He even called his fellow Marines "com-
rades." If Oswald was a Soviet or Cuban spy, as some people
now claim, he certainly had a novel way of building a cover.

As Philip Melanson reminds, the U.S.

Marine Corps in 1958
was not exactly known as a bastion of liberal tolerance and
freethinking.

My friend Bernard Livingston wrote a book called
Closet Red.Marine Corps in 1958
was not exactly known as a bastion of liberal tolerance and
freethinking.

My friend Bernard Livingston wrote a book called
Closet Red.

He tells how while he was in the Army, he found
himself working for a unit whose job was to filter out anybody
who had leftist or pinko opinions.

(Nothing was done about
racist or sexist or fascist opinions.) The Army — and I'm sure
the Marines — constantly surveils anybody who might begin to
behave the way Oswald did.

But in this instance, for some strange reason, Oswald's
Marine commanders didn't mind.

He kept his security clear-
ance.

He retained access to a wealth of sensitive radar informa-
tion and classified data from secret facilities.

Other odd things began happening.

In February, 1959, Lee
Harvey Oswald failed the Marine Corps proficiency test in
Russian.

Six months later he was practically fluent in Russian.

In 1974 a document that had been secreted by the Warren
Commission was dislodged, thanks mostly to Harold Weis-
berg's legal efforts.

It revealed that Oswald had attended the
U.S.

Army's language school at Monterey.

Now, Monterey is
not open to anyone who just happens to have a language hobby.

You go only for serious training and you are sent by the
government, for government-related work, in a language picked
by the government, pertaining to a specific assignment.

Oswald
learned Russian at the U.S.

School of Languages at Monterey.

Another odd thing: Oswald was given an early discharge
from the Marines because his mother had injured her foot.

It is
known as a dependency discharge; Your parent needs you.

A
jar had fallen on her toe.

He put in the request, and he got it
within a week.

His fellow Marines were astonished at the
velocity of the release.

This was only one of a number of very
strangely favorable treatments that the U.S.

government began
to give this young Marine.

Oswald then defected to the USSR.

But how?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Oswald then defected to the USSR. But how? To get to
Russia in those days would have 'cost $1,500, notes Melanson. Lee Harvey Oswald's bank account showed a deposit of only
$203. He traveled from London to Helsinki on October 11, a
day when there were no available commercial flights that would
have allowed him to make it in one day. He had to have some
kind of private transportation to get to Helsinki. In Russia, he went to the U S. Embassy, openly renounced
his U.S. citizenship and announced he had lots of military
secrets that he was going to give to the Soviets. The Soviets
didn't bite. They let him stay, but they at no time thought he
could be an agent of any use to them. And as the KGB files show,
Prevailing winds Premiere isaue Page 34

--- PAGE BREAK ---To Order Tapes
Non-profit prices.

Labor is donated.

Audio Tapes $4 U.S.

/ 4.60 CAN
(No.

14: $8 U.S.

/ 9.20 CAN)
Videotapes, $10 U.S.

/ 1200 CAN
To Order Books
The Sword arid the Dollar
($17.00 U.S.

/ 19.40 CAN)
All other books, each
($20.00 U.S.

/ 22.95 CAN)
Postage included in price.

Check or money order payable to:
People's Video, P.O.

Box 99514, Seattle, WA 98199, tel: (206) 789-5371
Donations welcome.

Tapes below are available in both audio and
video unless indicated as audio only.

No.

2 Inventing Reality: The Politics of
News Media.

Updated.

Ideological distor-
tion in the news.

No.

7 The Sword and the Dollar.

Updated.

The history of imperialism and the forced
maldevelopment of the Third World .

No.

10 Democracy and Popular Struggle.

Updated.

The historic interplay of political
and economic democracy.

(audio only)
No.

19 Democratic Government vs.

The
State.

The dangers of executive power and
state conspiracy.

No.21 Racism and the Ideology of Slavery.

How racism develops from tribalism, slavery
and imperialism, and the functiom it serves.

No.

22 The Victimization of Women.

Male
terrorism a nd the political economy of gentler
oppression.

No.

23 Conspiracy and Class Power.

Conspiracy as an instrument of ruling class
control.

(audio only)
No.

24 Cuba in Its Time of Struggle.

(Michael Parenti) and El Salvador After the
War.

A report by Christian Parenti.

(audio
only, both on one tape)
No.

25 JFK Assassination: The Gangster
Nature of the State and Struggles in the
Land of Idols.

(aud io only, both on one tape)
No.

27 The Struggle for History.(aud io only, both on one tape)
No.

27 The Struggle for History.

Manipulating the past to control the present
For a free list of all 27 tapes call
People's Video at: (206) 789-5371
Peoples Video presents
audio and videotapes of
Talks
by
Michael
Parenti
Author of
•Inventing Reality:
The Politics of News Media
(Second Edition)
•Power and the Powerless
•Democracy for the Few
(Sixth Edition)
•The Sword and the Dollar:
Imperialism, Revolution
and the Arms Race
•Make-Believe Media:
The Politics of Entertainment
•Land of Idols:
Political Mythology
in America
•Against Empire
they kept him under constant surveillance,
While in Russia he worked in a factory.

He showed no
particular interest in guns, but he belonged to the factory's gun
club.

He used to join in rabbit shoots but he could never hit the
rabbit.

Someone had to stand behind him and shoot the rabbit
while he was firing; otherwise they would have been there all
day.

His marksmanship became something of a joke.

His shoot-
ing record in the U.S.

Marines proved no better.

Now, if Lee Harvey Oswald was really a defector and not a
U.S.

spy, then U.S.

intelligence could well have taken the view
that his was one of the most damaging defections in history.

In
all defections, especially those connected with government and
military, the intelligence unit does a thorough damage assess-
ment.

But no damage assessment was ever made of Oswald's
defection.

This was noted in the Warren Report and the
House Select Committee investigation.

No one has ever
explained why there was no damage assessment.

After two and a half years, Oswald applies to return to
the United States.

Remember, this is after renouncing his
citizenship and announcing he was going to give away state
secrets.

Instead of being grabbed when he comes back and
arrested for treason, Oswald is accepted with open arms by
U.S.

authorities.

The CIA claimed it had no record of de-
briefing him.authorities.

The CIA claimed it had no record of de-
briefing him.

The spooks claim they never touched him, were
never near him.

Their explanation before the Commission
was that there were so many tourists coming in and out, and
that there was nothing particularly unusual about Oswald
that would have caught their attention.

One might wonder
what is needed to catch the CIA's attention.

After the assassination, the CIA claimed that they had
suspected all along that he was a Soviet spy —which makes
it even more curious that they did not debrief him.

What does the State Department do when Oswald departs
from the Soviet Union?

They pay all his travel and moving
expenses back to the United States and those of his wife.

He
is given back his passport with full rights to travel anywhere
around the world.

Another curious thing: his wife is ex-
empted from usual immigration quotas, no waiting.

Years
before she had belonged to the Soviet Komsomol, the Com-
munist youth organization, which automatically bars her
from entry into the USA.

Yet in violation of U.S.

immigra-
tion laws, she was allowed in.

In Dallas, Lee Harvey Oswald settles under the wing of
one George de Mohrenschildt, a right-wing Russian with
CIA ties.

Yet he embarks on a series of short-lived forays
out into the public eye as a "leftist." He starts a one-person
Fair Play for Cuba organization in New Orleans.

Never
recruits another member and receives no recognition from
the national Fair Play for Cuba office.

In all his time in New
Orleans and Dallas he never once meets a single member of
the Communist Party or any other left organization, although
he writes lots of friendly letters to the Communist Party USA
and to the Socialist Workers Party, two groups which at that
time weren't even talking to each other, supposedly asking
for instructions.

He blazes a trail as a "leftist" agitator: local TV, fist-
fights, inflammatory incidents, leaflets.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In all his time in New
Orleans and Dallas he never once meets a single member of
the Communist Party or any other left organization, although
he writes lots of friendly letters to the Communist Party USA
and to the Socialist Workers Party, two groups which at that
time weren't even talking to each other, supposedly asking
for instructions. He blazes a trail as a "leftist" agitator: local TV, fist-
fights, inflammatory incidents, leaflets. One of the leaflets
shows that his organization was on Camp Street, in the very
same building where Guy Banister had his office. Guy
Banister was an F.B.I. agent who retained close working
relations with Cuban emigre right-wing groups — and with Lee
Harvey Oswald. Most of Oswald's personal relations were with right-wing
anti-Communist Cubans or right-wing crypto-fascists, or CIA
types, or others. Besides George de Mohrenschildt, there was
David Ferric. Robert Morrow, a conservative businessman who
worked for the CIA, served as a pilot on CIA missions along
with David Ferric. It was known that David Feme was CIA. Lee
Harvey Oswald also knew Clay Shaw, who was also CIA — as
later confirmed by former CIA director Richard Helms. Oswald
also knew Jack Ruby, a mobster who was also linked to right-
wingers. So while Oswald was supposedly a leftist, almost all
his personal associations were with right-wing people associ-
ated with the intelligence community. Prevailing winds Premiere issue
Page 35

--- PAGE BREAK ---They would have us believe that Oswald just happened to
get a job at the Texas School Book Depository five weeks
before, when it had not yet been publicized that Kennedy's
limousine was going to pass right in front of the Depository.

He
just fortuitously happened to he up there that day to wreak his
personal vengeance.

We are asked to believe that this man, who could not hit the
side of a barn, chose a Mannlicher-Carcano rifle, whose sights
were not even set — a cheap, poor-performance Italian weapon
that the Italians used to say never killed anyone on purpose.

Supposedly he used this rifle to kill the President of the United
States.

We are asked to believe that Oswald would forgo shoot-
ing President Kennedy when he had a perfect gallery target of
him as he came closer and closer right down Houston Street
directly toward the Depository.

Instead, Oswald supposedly waited until the car had turned
at a hundred-and-ten-degree angle down Elm Street, then fired
through a tree (a tree that was later drastically trimmed) rapidly
getting off three shots in a few seconds, one that missed the limo
by yards and the other two that hit their target with devastating
accuracy, a feat that the best marksmen in the country were not
able to emulate until after much practice and after the sights on
the Marmlicher-Carcano were brought into a laboratory and
reset.

They had all sorts of remarks to make about the awful
performance of this rifle.

We are asked to believe that a bullet would go through John
Kennedy, pose in mid-air for two seconds, change direction, and
wound Governor Connally in several places and then reappear
intact on a stretcher, falling out of Connally's body.

In fact, the
bullet did not reappear on the stretcher as if fallen out of
somebody's body.We are asked to believe that a bullet would go through John
Kennedy, pose in mid-air for two seconds, change direction, and
wound Governor Connally in several places and then reappear
intact on a stretcher, falling out of Connally's body.

In fact, the
bullet did not reappear on the stretcher as if fallen out of
somebody's body.

It was found wedged into the side of the
stretcher, obviously pushed in by hand—or perhaps, being the
magic bullet that it was, it jumped out of Connally's body and
wedged itself in the side of the stretcher.

We are asked to believe that a treasure trove of physical
evidence, the interior of the presidential limousine, was just
accidentally torn out and totally rebuilt immediately afterwards.

We are asked to believe that this was not a deliberate coverup.

We are asked to believe that Kennedy's brain just disap-
peared.

That the X-ray — which now shows a reconstructed
head with no exit wound — was, oddly enough, taken with the
jaw cropped out of the picture.

So the head could be anybody's
and there is no opportunity to do any kind of dental identification
to see if that X-ray is President Kennedy's.

We are asked to
believe Mat the autopsy was botched innocently.

There is Jack Ruby, a gambler and gangster with links to the
Cuban exiles and an acquaintance of Oswald's.

We are asked to
believe that Ruby just took it upon himself to kill Oswald
because he was so moved by patriotic vengeance and the suf-
fering that Oswald had caused the Kennedy family.

In jail after
killing Oswald, Ruby pleaded with the Warren Commission to
be taken to Washington where he could tell the whole story.

He
repeatedly voiced fear for his life and claimed "they are killing
me here.

-
We are asked that when twenty-one witnesses, or persons
who otherwise had information related to the case (privy to some
conversations, or whatever else), met violent deaths, they were
part of a colossal coincidence.He
repeatedly voiced fear for his life and claimed "they are killing
me here.

-
We are asked that when twenty-one witnesses, or persons
who otherwise had information related to the case (privy to some
conversations, or whatever else), met violent deaths, they were
part of a colossal coincidence.

Later on in 197S, the second
round of killings started, during the House Select Committee
investigation; sixteen more died violently.

We are asked to
believe that they just happened to die coincidentally violent
deaths — including George de Mohrenschildt himself, killed by
a gun blast to the head three hours after a House Assassinations
Committee Investigator had tried to contact him.

He was being
set up for an interview.

He was being set up for a lot more than
that.

In de Mohrenschildt's address book the name of George
"Poppy" Bush appears.

De Mohrenschildt was a close friend of
Bush; there was a correspondence between them.

The sheriff's
office in Palm County, Florida found that de Morenschildt's
shooting was "very strange." But it was ruled a suicide.

William Sullivan, the number three man in the F.B.I., was
supposed to appear before the House Committee to talk.

(Ac-
cording to Robert Morrow, Sullivan was on the CIA payroll.)
He was shot right outside his home by a man who claimed to
have mistaken him for a deer.

The killer was charged with a
misdemeanor and released in custody of his father, a state
policeman.

Sam Giancana died from natural causes, when his heart
stopped beating —after a bullet went through it, one day before
he was to testify about mob/CIA connections.

He was shot while
under government protection.

One of the things that emerges
from this whole story is the widespread linkages between the
CIA and mob families and mob figures.

For the gangster state
the mob is very functional.

Mobsters can do the kind of dirty
things that the CIA may sometimes want them to do.For the gangster state
the mob is very functional.

Mobsters can do the kind of dirty
things that the CIA may sometimes want them to do.

S
ome writers on the left, such as Noam Chomsky and
Alexander Cockburn, argue that our interest in the JFK
assassination comes from a "Kennedy revival," as Chom-
sky puts it, a "Camelot yearning" and the "yearning for a lost
Messiah." Cockburn and Chomsky, and others, challenge the
notion that Kennedy was assassinated for intending to withdraw
from Vietnam or for threatening to undo the CIA or end the Cold
War.

These things could not have led to his downfall, they argue,
because they were not true.

Kennedy was a cold warrior, a
counterinsurgent who wanted a military withdrawal from Viet-
nam only with victory.

I have argued similarly in my book Democracy for the Few
that Kennedy should not be romanticized as a progressive in
either his domestic or foreign policy.

Chomsky, Cockburn, and others claim that the change of
administration that came with JFK's assassination had no large-
scale effect on policy, not even on tactics.

In other words, if
Kennedy had lived, he likely would have fabricated a Tonkin
Gulf causes belli; he would have introduced ground troops in a
massive land war, as Lyndon Johnson did; he would have
engaged in the merciless B-52 carpet bombings of Laos, Cam-
bodia, and Vietnam, as Richard Nixon did; he would have risked
destroying his own electoral base, proving himself a mass
murderer as bad as Nixon.

In fact, we cannot be certain what Kennedy would have done
had he lived.

The evidence we do have, in fact, is that John
Kennedy observed Cambodian neutrality and negotiated a
cease-fire and coalition government in Laos, which the CIA
refused to honor.

They preferred to back a right-wing faction
that continued the war.

We also know that the surviving Ken-
nedy, Robert, took a turn in a dove-like direction, emerging as
an anti-war critic.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They preferred to back a right-wing faction
that continued the war. We also know that the surviving Ken-
nedy, Robert, took a turn in a dove-like direction, emerging as
an anti-war critic. Robert Kennedy broke with the Johnson
administration over Vietnam and publicly stated that his
Prevailing winds Premiere finale Page 36
t
--Z7M3
:
awls-weP

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TIE PANAIVIA
DECE'17 PI):]"," h
ACADEMY AWARD' WINNER
siarruird by ElinibolI Mont gollicr:.

Music by St ing.

Jackman Drawn,',
.lorgf• Stntur..

!smut, I Itivt•ra and other!,
brother's administration had committed terrible mistakes.

Chomsky recently wrote a whole book arguing that JFK had
no intention to withdraw from Vietnam without victory.

But
Chomsky says very little about troop escalation other than to
offer Roger Hilsman's speculation that Kennedy might well
have introduced U.S.

ground troops in South Vietnam.

Maybe
so.

maybe not.

In fact, the same Hi lsman noted in a prominently
displayed letter in the New York Times not long ago — and
Chomsky has paid it no attention — that in 1963 Kennedy was
the only person in his administration who opposed the introduc-
tion of U.S.

ground troops.

JFK was the only thing preventing
an escalation of the war.

Maybe Chomsky is right that the interventionists had no
reason to think that JFK would withdraw.

But they were sorely
bothered by his unwillingness to engage in a full-scale ground
war —something Lyndon Johnson did not long after assuming
office.

Certain left analysts can argue Kennedy wasn't a progressive
or liberal, and that the CIA had no reason to kill him, and that
the functionaries of the national security state had no reason to
be dissatisfied with him.

The question is, did they see it that way?

Entrenched power elites are notorious for not seeing the world
the same way that left-wing analysts do.

Some months ago on a San Francisco talk show on KGO, I
heard a listener call in as follows: "I've never said this before.

It's the first time I'm saying it.

But 1 worked for Army intelli-
gence, and in 19631 was in Japan, and the accepted word around
then was that Kennedy would be killed because he was messing
too much with the intelligence community.It's the first time I'm saying it.

But 1 worked for Army intelli-
gence, and in 19631 was in Japan, and the accepted word around
then was that Kennedy would be killed because he was messing
too much with the intelligence community.

And when word
came of his death, all I could hear were delighted comments like
`We got the bastard.'" Roger Craig records the comments of
many Dallas police officers who wanted to see Kennedy done
away with.

In 1963, people in right-wing circles, including elements in
various intelligence organizations, did not believe that Kennedy
could be trusted with the nation's future.

They saw something
different from what Chomsky and Cockburn have seen.

They
fixed on Kennedy's refusal to provide air coverage for the Bay
of Pigs, his refusal to go into Indochina with massive ground
forces, his unwillingness to launch another invasion of Cuba,
his no-invasion guarantee to Khrushchev on Cuba, his Atmos-
pheric Test Ban Treaty with Moscow, his American University
speech calling for reexamination of our Cold War attitudes
toward the Soviet Union, his antitrust suit against General
Works by the Empowerment Project
The Panama Deception
ACADEMY AWARD WINNER '93
THE PANAMA DECEPTION, EXPOSING THE COVER UP!

Narrated by Elizabeth Montgomery, Music by Sting,
Jackson Browne, Jorge Strunz, Ismael Rivera and others.

In 1989 Panama was turned inside out by 26,000 U.S.

government troops searching for one man, Manuel Nori-
ega.

Stealth fighters roarer overhead, media reports
were suppressed, and the civilian body count may have
risen into the thousands.

While the U.S government
was telling one story, an intrepid group of filmakers
were braving roadblocks and bullets to bring America
the truth.

This film documents what realy happened.TIE PANAIVIA
DECE'

While the U.S government
was telling one story, an intrepid group of filmakers
were braving roadblocks and bullets to bring America
the truth. This film documents what realy happened. See mass graves unearthed exposing horrific atroci-
ties, homeless families interned m concentration camps,
plus interviews with noted experts General Maxwell
Thurman, Panamanian President Endara, former CIA
analyst David MacMichael, and others revealing Presi-
dent Bush's secret agenda behind the invasion - to keep
U.S. military bases in Panama after the year 2000 in de-
fiance of the canal treaties, test high-tech weapons and
train soldiers for their next confrontation, Desert Storm. Banned in Panama and labeled "subversive" in the
United States, The Panama Deception will make you an-
gry, it will make you cry, but most important, it will
make you think. PWR code #78.0 $49.95
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 37

--- PAGE BREAK ---xg
Electric, his fight with U.S.

Steel over price increases, his
challenge to the Federal Reserve Board, his warm reception at
labor conventions, his call for racial equality and (usually reluc-
tant) responsiveness to civil rights leaders, and his talk of
moving forward to a "New Frontier."
Erwin Knoll, editor of the Progressive, admits he has no idea
who killed Kennedy, but this does not keep him from asserting
that the Oliver Stone film was "manipulative" and that Stone
provided false answers.

But if he has no idea who killed Ken-
nedy, how could he conclude that the film is false?

The remark-
able thing about Erwin Knoll, Noun Chomsky, and Alexander
Cockburn is they do not know a thing about the critical investi-
gations that have been carried
out.

When it has been repeat-
edly pointed out that the left
critics don't know anything
about the case, they never
deny it.

But this does not pre-
vent them from dismissing the
whole thing in the most gen-
eral and unsubstantiated terms
— Chomsky with benign con-
descension, Cockburn with
vitriol and venom, and Knoll
with a flabby ranting.

When Erwin Knoll allows,
in a show of flexibility, that
the Warren Commission did a
hasty, slipshod job of investi-
gation, he only further reveals
his ignorance.

In fact, the
Commission did a brilliant job of investigation.

It sat for fifty-
one long sessions over a period of several months, much longer
than most major investigations.

It compiled twenty-six volumes
of testimony and evidence.

It had the investigative resources of
the FBI and CIA at its command.

Far from being hasty and
slipshod, it painstakingly crafted theories that moved toward its
foreordained conclusion, that Oswald was the lone assassin.

It
framed an argument and moved unfailingly to fulfill that argu-
ment.

It failed to call witnesses who saw something different
from what it wanted to hear, who not only heard but saw, people
on the grassy knoll shooting behind the fence.It
framed an argument and moved unfailingly to fulfill that argu-
ment.

It failed to call witnesses who saw something different
from what it wanted to hear, who not only heard but saw, people
on the grassy knoll shooting behind the fence.

The commission
failed to call them.

It ignored or reinterpreted what little con-
flicting testimony that did creep into its proceedings.

All this
took deliberate and careful effort.

A hasty, slipshod investiga-
tion would show traces of randomness in its errors.

But the
Commission's distortions consistently move in the same direc-
tion in pursuit of a prefigured hypothesis.

Knoll talks about the gullible U.S.

public and says he "de-
spises" Oliver Stone for playing on that gullibility.

There is not
a small amount of elitist presumption among the ignorant left
critics, who conclude that the public is not as perceptive as they
are because it comes to a different conclusion than they do about
the JFK assassination.

It never occurs to them that the public is
just better informed than they.

In fact, the U.S.

public is anything but gullible.

It has not
swallowed the official explanation the way Cockburn has.

Sev-
enty-eight percent say they believe there was a conspiracy.

Both
Cockburn in the Nation, Chomsky in Z Magazine and again in
an exchange with me in Z, dismiss that fact and use the identical
argument.

They point out that over seventy percent of the people
also believe in miracles.

One might ask, what has that to do with
the question at hand?

That people can have a stupid opinion
about one thing doesn't mean they're stupid about everything.

In fact, Chomsky and Cockburn are themselves evidence of that.

In any case, the comparison is between two different things.

They're comparing the public's gullibility about miracles with
the public's unwillingness to be gullible about the official line
that is being fed and shoved in their faces for thirty years.

The
latter is not gullibility at all.They're comparing the public's gullibility about miracles with
the public's unwillingness to be gullible about the official line
that is being fed and shoved in their faces for thirty years.

The
latter is not gullibility at all.

Alexander Cockburn and Noarn Chomsky have told us that
we must not reduce great developments in history to conspiracy,
for then we lose sight of insti-
tution, class, and the other sys-
temic factors of American
capitalism_ I have spent my life
looking at the institutional
forces and systemic factors in
U.S.

capitalism.

I use a struc-
tural analysis in all my writ-
ings.

But in investigating the
JFK conspiracy, we are not
looking for an "escape from
something unpleasant and dif-
ficult," to quote psychiatrist
Noam Chomsky.

Rather we
are hitting upon the nature of
state power in what is sup-
posed to be a democracy.

As I pointed out in a letter
to both Cockburn and Chom-
sky (who have both ignored the argument) conspiracy is not
something that exists in contradistinction to structural analysis.

It is part of it.

Ruling elites will use conspiracy.

They will use overtly
legitimating procedures.

They will finance elections, publicity
campaigns, publishing houses, wire services, and academic
studies.

They will set up liberalish organizations, alternative
trade unions.

They will use secret surveillance, mobsters, ter-
rorists, assassins and death squads.

They will use every single
conceivable thing there is.

And when they had someone in the
White House who was giving them trouble, when they had an
agenda to save Southeast Asia from Communism, they would
even kill one of their own if he hesitated and proved reluctant.

And that is a tremendously startling revelation to the Ameri-
can public.

The revelations about the JFK case made them
realize what kind of a gangster government and national security
state we really have in this country and what it does around the
world.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And that is a tremendously startling revelation to the Ameri-
can public. The revelations about the JFK case made them
realize what kind of a gangster government and national security
state we really have in this country and what it does around the
world. A structuralist position should not discount the role of human
agency in history. Institutions are not self-generating forces. The "great continuities of corporate and class interest" (Cock-
burn's phrase) do not just happen of their own accord, like
reified, disembodied social forces. Neither empires nor national
security institutions come into existence in a fit of absent-mind-
edness. As I argue in my forthcoming book, Against Empire,
they are both the product of conscious planning and often
forceful and violent effort directed at specific goals and elite
interests. Evidence for this can be found in the very existence of the
Ruling elites will use
conspiracy. They will finance
elections, publicity campaigns,
publishing houses, wire
services, and academic studies. They will use surveillance,
mobsters, terrorists, assassins
and death squads. Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 3a

--- PAGE BREAK ---national security state itself.

It is the essence of the state and the
function of state institutions to act as conscious agents in recre-
ating the conditions of politico-economic hegemony.

That is
what state leaders are dedicated to doing.

To achieve their goals,
they have resorted to every necessary form of mass manipula-
tion, deception, and violence, even against one of their own
whom they have come to see as a liability.

onspiratorial action is not something separate and ex-
clusive of institutional presence.

In fact, there's a con-
stant interplay between the two.

While Cockburn and
other Nation writers call for a structural analysis and institu-
tional analysis, we might ask, where's the institutional analysis
in the Nation?

All you get in that
publication are articles preoccupied
with particular issues, events, per-
sonalities, secret deals, inside in-
trigues — one might say — con-
spiracies, all of vastly lesser magni-
tude than the JFK assassination.

Yet
in thirty years the Nation and the
Progressive have never published a
single word by independent investi-
gators, except as a letter to the editor
on rare occasions.

G.

William Domhoff makes an
argument very much like Cock-
burn's.

In response, Peter Dale Scott
makes an argument very much like
the one I made in my exchange with
Chomsky in ZMagazine and also in the Nation in my exchange
with Cockburn.

I made the point that "conspiracy" and "insti-
tutional analysis" are not mutually exclusive.

Neither Cockburn
nor Chomsky ever responded to that point, either to rebut it or
to accept it or to show how it does or doesn't apply here.

They
just ignore it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Neither Cockburn
nor Chomsky ever responded to that point, either to rebut it or
to accept it or to show how it does or doesn't apply here. They
just ignore it. Domhoff points out: "If conspiracy means that these men"
meaning the ruling elites "are aware of their interests, know•
each other personally, meet together privately and off the record,
and try to hammer out a consensus on how to anticipate and react
to events and issues, then there is some conspiring that goes on
in the Council for Foreign Relations, not to mention the Com-
mittee for Economic Development, the Business Council, the
National Security Council, and the Central Intelligence
Agency."
But Scott notes that Domhoff shares Cockburn's and Chom-
sky's resistance to the idea that an assassination conspiracy
could have a lasting impact on our political arrangements. In his
book Deep Politics, Scott quotes Domhoff: "We all have a
tremendous tendency to want to get caught up in believing that
there's some secret evil cause for all of the obvious ills of the
world. Conspiracy theories encourage a belief that if we get rid
of a few bad people, everything will be well in the world."
Then Peter answers: "I believe that a we understanding of
the Kennedy, assassination will lead not to a few bad people but
to the institutional and power political arrangements which
constitute the way we are systematically governed. The con-
spiracies I see as operative, in other words, are part of our
political structure, not exceptions to it."
T
he left critics are concerned that you might like Kennedy
and not see how bad he really was. They mistake the lowpolitical value of the victim, JFK, whom they hate and
detest, with the high political importance of the issue and the
implications for democracy, the revelation of the gangster na-
ture of the state.

Back in 1894.

Captain Alfred Dreyfus was a conservative
militarist.

Clemenceau once conjectured that if the man's name
had not been Dreyfus, he would have been an anti-Dreyfusard.

Does that mean that the political struggle waged in l'affaire
Dreyfus was a waste of time?

The issue was quickly drawn
between the right and the left, between those who stood with the
army and the anti-Semites, and those who stood with the Re-
public and justice.

The same with Benigno Aquino.

Aquino was a member of the privi-
leged class in the Philippines.

He
promised no great structural
changes.

He was even more conser-
vative than Kennedy.

Does this
mean that the Filipino people should
have dismissed the conspiracy' that
led to his assassination as an event
of no consequence?

Should they
have said, "Ah, just another ruling
class pig; what do we care?" In-
stead, they used it as ammunition
against the hated Marcos regime, as
a revelation of what that government
was really doing.

Archbishop Romero of El Salvador was a member of the
Salvadoran aristocracy.

He could not have made it to the top of
the church hierarchy otherwise.

When he was ordained, the
aristocracy came with presents.

They hugged and kissed him.

And the minute he opened up his mouth and made some critical
remarks about the war and some concerned comments about the
poor, he was assassinated.

If he hadn't been assassinated, I doubt
that Salvadoran history would have been much different.

Does
this mean that solidarity groups in this country and El Salvador
should not have tried to make his murder an issue that revealed
the homicidal gangster nature of the Salvadoran state?Neither Cockburn
nor Chomsky ever responded to that point, either to rebut it or
to accept it or to show how it does or doesn't apply here. They
just ignore it. Domhoff points out: "If conspiracy means that these men"
meaning the ruling elites "are aware of their interests, know•
each other personally, meet together privately and off the record,
and try to hammer out a consensus on how to anticipate and react
to events and issues, then there is some conspiring that goes on
in the Council for Foreign Relations, not to mention the Com-
mittee for Economic Development, the Business Council, the
National Security Council, and the Central Intelligence
Agency."
But Scott notes that Domhoff shares Cockburn's and Chom-
sky's resistance to the idea that an assassination conspiracy
could have a lasting impact on our political arrangements. In his
book Deep Politics, Scott quotes Domhoff: "We all have a
tremendous tendency to want to get caught up in believing that
there's some secret evil cause for all of the obvious ills of the
world. Conspiracy theories encourage a belief that if we get rid
of a few bad people, everything will be well in the world."
Then Peter answers: "I believe that a we understanding of
the Kennedy, assassination will lead not to a few bad people but
to the institutional and power political arrangements which
constitute the way we are systematically governed. The con-
spiracies I see as operative, in other words, are part of our
political structure, not exceptions to it."
T
he left critics are concerned that you might like Kennedy
and not see how bad he really was. They mistake the low

If he hadn't been assassinated, I doubt
that Salvadoran history would have been much different. Does
this mean that solidarity groups in this country and El Salvador
should not have tried to make his murder an issue that revealed
the homicidal gangster nature of the Salvadoran state? Instead of seizing the opportunity, some left writers conde-
scendingly ascribe a host of mass psychology motivations and
emotional needs to those of us who are concerned about the JFK
assassination cover-up. They psychologize about our illusions,
our false dreams, our longings for messiahs and father figures,
our inability to face unpleasant realities the way they can. They
deliver patronizing admonitions about our "conspiracy captiva-
tion" and "Camelot yearnings.-  They urge us not to escape into
fantasy. They are the cognoscenti who guide us and out-left us
on the JFK assassination, a subject about which they don't know
a damn thing and whose significance they will never be able to
grasp. I have a different name for our interests. It is not JFK
worship. It's not "Camelot yearnings," as the left critics would
say. It's not conspiracy titillation, as the mainstream media
would say. Our interest is born of democratic struggle. A desire
to know what is going on. A desire to have rulers who are worthy
of our name and the name of democracy.10
Benigno Aquino was
even more conservative
than Kennedy. Should
the Filipino people have
dismissed the conspiracy
that led to his
assassination? It
1
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 3910
Benigno Aquino was
even more conservative
than Kennedy. Should
the Filipino people have
dismissed the conspiracy
that led to his
assassination? It
1
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 39

--- PAGE BREAK ---NutraSweetTM
The NutraPoison
NutraSweet and the Military-Medical-Industrial Complex
financed by the likes of Sullivan & Cromwell's Allen Dulles
and Edwin Webster of Kidder, Peabody.'
Until the acquisition by Monsanto in 1985, the firm's chair-
man was William L.

Searle, a Harvard graduate, Naval reservist
and — a grim irony in view of aspartame's adverse effects -
an officer in the Army Chemical Corps in the early 1950s, when
the same division tested LSD on groups of human subjects in
concert with the CIA!

The chief of the Chemical Warfare
Division at this time was Dr.

Laurence Laird Layton, whose son
Larry was convicted for the murder of Congressman Leo Ryan
at Jonestown ("Come to the pavilion!

What a legacy!

").

Jones-
town, of course, bore a remarkable likeness to a concentration
camp, and kept a full store of pharmaceutical drugs.

(The
Jonestown pharmacy was stocked with a variety of behavior
control drugs: qualudes, within', morphine, demerol and 11,000
doses of thorazine — a better supply, in fact, than the Guyanese
government's own, not to mention a surfeit of cyanide?)
Dr.

Layton was married to the daughter of Hugo Phillip, a
German banker and stockbroker representing the likes of Sie-
mens & Halske, the makers of cyanide for the Final Solution,
and I.G.

Farben, the manufacturer of a lethal nerve gas put to
the same purpose.

1° Dr.

Layton, a Quaker, developed a form of
purified uranium used to set off the Manhattan Project's first
self-sustaining chain reaction at the University of Chicago in
1942 by his wife's German-born Uncle, Dr.

James Franck.

At
Dugway Proving Ground in Utah, Dr.

Layton concentrated his
efforts, as did I.G.

Farben, on the development of nerve gasses."
Dr.Layton concentrated his
efforts, as did I.G.

Farben, on the development of nerve gasses."
Dr.

Layton later defended his participation in the Army's
chemical warfare section: "You can blow people to bits with
bombs, you can shoot them with shells, you can atomize them
with atomic bombs, but the same people think there's something
terrible about poisoning the air and letting people breathe it.

Anything having to do with gas warfare, chemical warfare, has
this taint of horror on it, even if you only make people vomit."12
Nazis and chemical warfare are recurring themes in the
aspartame story.

Currently, the chief patent holder of the sweet-
ener is the Monsanto Co., based in St.

Louis.

In 1967, Monsanto
entered into a joint venture with 1.G.

Farbenfabriken, the afore-
mentioned financial core of the Hitler regime and the key
supplier of poison gas to the Nazi racial extermination program.

After the Holocaust, the German chemical firm joined with
American counterparts in the development of chemical warfare
agents and founded the "Chemagrow Corporation" in Kansas
City, Missouri, a front that employed German and American
specialists on behalf of the U.S.

Army Chemical corps.'
Dr.

Otto Bayer, I.G.'s research director, had a binding rela-
tionship with Monsanto chemists." In the post-war period, Dr.

Bayer developed and tested chemical warfare agents with Dr.

Gerhard Schrader, the Nazi concocter of Tabun, the preferred
by Alex Constantine
(Reprinted by Permission, LFP, Inc., 1994)
I recognized my two selves; a crusading idealist and a cold,
granitic believer in the law of the jungle.

— Edgar Monsanto Queeny,
Monsanto chairman, 1943-63,
The Spirit of Enterprise, 1934.

T
he FDA is ever mindful to refer to aspartame, widely
known as NutraSweet, as a "food additive" — never a
"drug." A "drug" on the label of a Diet Coke might
discourage the consumer.— Edgar Monsanto Queeny,
Monsanto chairman, 1943-63,
The Spirit of Enterprise, 1934.

T
he FDA is ever mindful to refer to aspartame, widely
known as NutraSweet, as a "food additive" — never a
"drug." A "drug" on the label of a Diet Coke might
discourage the consumer.

And because aspartame is classified
a food additive, adverse reactions are not reported to a federal
agency, nor is continued safety monitoring required by law.'
NutraSweet is a non-nutritive sweetener.

The brand name is a
misnomer.

Try Non-NutraSweet.

Food additives seldom cause brain lesions, headaches, mood
alterations, skin polyps, blindness, brain tumors, insomnia and
depression, or erode intelligence and short-term memory.

Aspartame, according to some of the most capable scientists in
the country, does.

In 1991 the National Institutes of Health, a
branch of the Department of Health and Human Services, pub-
lished a bibliography, Adverse Effects of Aspartame, listing no
less than 167 reasons to avoid it.'
Aspartame is an rDNA derivative, a combination of two
amino acids (long supplied by a pair of Maryland biotechnology
firms: Genex Corp.

of Rockville and Purification Engineering
in Baltimore.?

The Pentagon once listed it in an inventory of
prospective biochemical warfare weapons submitted to Con-
gress.' But instead of poisoning enemy populations, the "food
additive" is currently marketed as a sweetening agent in some
1200 food products.

In light of the chemo-warfare implications, the pasts of G.D.

Searle and aspartame are ominous.

Established in 1888 on the
north side of Chicago, G.D.

Searle has long been a fixture of the
medical establishment.

The company manufactures everything
from prescription drugs to nuclear imaging optical equipment.'
Directors of G.D.

Searle include such geopolitical heavy-hit-
ters as Andre M.

de Staercke, Reagan's ambassador to Belgium,
and Reuben Richards, an executive vice president at Citibank.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Searle include such geopolitical heavy-hit-
ters as Andre M. de Staercke, Reagan's ambassador to Belgium,
and Reuben Richards, an executive vice president at Citibank. Also Arthur Wood, the retired CEO of Sears, Roebuck & Co.,
disgorged by the clan of General Robert E. Wood, wartime
chairman of the America First Committee s  America Firsters,
organized by native Nazis cloaked as isolationists, were quietly
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 40
,:e.V5-57f-
.:117,_1-f'^''' •

--- PAGE BREAK ---nerve gas of the SS.

Schrader was also an organophosphate
pioneer, and tested the poison on populated areas of West
Germany under the guise of killing insects.15 Schrader's experi-
ments reek suspiciously of the ongoing aerial application of
malathion — developed by Dr.

Schrader, a recruit of the U.S.

Chemical Warfare Service when Germany surrendered — in
present-day Southern Califomia.16
Another bridge to I.G.

Farben was Monsanto's acquisition
of American Viscose, long owned by the
England's Courtauld family.

As early as
1928, the U.S.

Commerce Department is-
sued a report critical of the Courtauld's
ties to 1.G.

Farben and the Nazi party."
Incredibly, George Courtauld was handed
an appointment as director of personnel
for England's Special Operations Execu-
tive, the wartime intelligence service, in
1940,18 A year later, with the exhaustion
of British military financial reserves,
American Viscose, worth $120 million,
was put on the block in New York.

The
desperate British treasury received less than half that amount
from the sale, brokered by Siegmund Warburg, among others.

t9
Monsanto acquired the company in 1949.2°
The Nazi connection to Monsanto crops up again on the
board of directors with John Reed, a former crony of "Putzi"
Hanfstangl, a Harvard-bred emigre to Germany who talked
Hitler out of committing suicide in 1924 and contributed to the
financing of Mein Kamp121 Reed is also chairman of Citibank
and long a confederate of the CIA.

According to a lawsuit filed
by San Francisco attorney Melvin Belli, Reed was an instigator,
with Ronald Reagan, James Baker and Margaret Thatcher, of
the "Purple Ink Document," a plan to finance CIA covert
operations with wartime Japanese gold stolen from a buried
Philippine hoard.22
Other covert military connections to Monsanto include Dr.

Charles Allen Thomas, chairman of the Monsanto Board, 196-
65.

Dr.Charles Allen Thomas, chairman of the Monsanto Board, 196-
65.

Dr.

Thomas directed a group of scientists during WW II in
the refinement of plutonium for use in the atomic bomb.

In the
postwar period Monsanto operated Tennessee's Oak Ridge
National Laboratories for the Manhattan Project.' (Manhattan
gestated with the Oak Ridge Institute for Nuclear Studies, where
lethal doses of radiation were tested on 200 unwary cancer
patients, turning them into "nuclear calibration devices" gratis
the AEC and NASA, until 1974.24) Nazi scientists and a 7,000
ton stockpile of uranium were delivered to the Project by its
security and counter-intelligence director, Col.

Boris Pash, a G2
designate to the CIA's Bloodstone program — and the eminence
guise of PB/7, a clandestine Nazi unit that, according to State
Department records, conducted a regimen of political assassi-
nations and kidnappings in Europe and the Eastern bloc."
Monsanto Director William Ruckelshaus was an acting di-
rector of the FBI under Richard Nixon, a period in the Bureau's
history marred by COINTELPRO outrages, including assassi-
nations.

Nixon subsequently appointed Ruckelshaus to the po-
sition of EPA director, a nagging irony given his ties to industry
(Browning Ferris and Cummins Engine Co.).

CIA counterintel-
ligentsia on the Monsanto board include Stansfield Turner, a
former Director of Central Intelligence, and Earle H.

Harbison,
an Agency information specialist for nineteen years.

Harbison is also a director of Merrill Lynch, and thus raises
the spectre of CIA drug dealing.

In 1984 President Ronald
Reagan's Commission on Organized Crime concluded that
Merrill Lynch employed couriers "observed transferring enor-
mous amounts of cash through investment houses and banks in
New York City to Italy and Switzerland.Harbison is also a director of Merrill Lynch, and thus raises
the spectre of CIA drug dealing.

In 1984 President Ronald
Reagan's Commission on Organized Crime concluded that
Merrill Lynch employed couriers "observed transferring enor-
mous amounts of cash through investment houses and banks in
New York City to Italy and Switzerland.

Tens of millions of
dollars in heroin sales in this country were transferred over-
seas." Merrill Lynch invested the drug proceeds in the New
York bullion market before making the offshore transfers.26
As might be expected in view of Monsanto's Nazi, chemical
warfare and CIA ties, NutraSweet is a can of worms unprece-
dented in the American food industry.

The history of the product
is laden with flawed and fabricated research findings and, when
necessary to further the product along, bla-
tant lies — the basis of FDA approval and
the incredulity of independent medical re-
searchers.

Senator Metzenbaum described the
FDA as "the handmaiden" of the drug
industry in 1985, but she comports under
all regimes.

In the Clinton administration,
for example, Mike Taylor was graced with
the position of deputy director of the FDA.

Taylor is a cousin of Tipper Gore, Vice
President Albert Gore's wife, and once an
outside counsel to Monsanto.

(Gore voted
with Senate conservatives in 1985 against aspartame labelling.)
Under the tutelage of the Clinton administration, one Chi-
cago reporter quipped, the FDA strictly enforces one "unwrit-
ten" violation of law — failure to bribe.

Granitic Believers
G
D.

Searle, the pharmaceutical firm that introduced
NutraSweet, worked symbiotically with federal and
congressional officials, bribed investigators when vio-
lations of law were exposed, anything to move aspartame to
market.

As far back as 1969, an internal Searle –strateu memo"
concluded the company must obtain FDA approval to outpace
firms competing for the artificial sweetener market.Searle, the pharmaceutical firm that introduced
NutraSweet, worked symbiotically with federal and
congressional officials, bribed investigators when vio-
lations of law were exposed, anything to move aspartame to
market.

As far back as 1969, an internal Searle –strateu memo"
concluded the company must obtain FDA approval to outpace
firms competing for the artificial sweetener market.

Another
memo in December 1970 urged that FDA officials were to be
"brought into a subconscious spirit of participation" with
Searle.' To that end, with enormous profits at stake, the phar-
maceutical house set out on a long struggle to transform the
Pentagon's biochemical warfare agent into "the taste Mother
Nature intended.

The official story is that aspartame was discovered in 1966
by a scientist developing an ulcer drug (not a "food additive").

Supposedly he discovered, upon carelessly licking his fingers,
that they tasted sweet.

Thus was the chemicals industry blessed
with a successor to saccharine, the coal-tar derivative that foun-
dered eight years later under the pressure of cancer concerns.

Aspartame found early opposition in consumer attorney
James Turner, author of The Chemical Feast and a former
Nader's Raider.

At his own expense, Turner fought approval for
ten years, basing his argument on aspartame's potential side
effects, particularly on children.

His concern was shared by Dr.

John Olney, Professor of neuropathology and psychiatry at
Washington School of Medicine in St.

Louis.

Dr.

Olney found
that aspartame, combined with MSG seasoning, increased the
odds of brain damage in children.28
Other studies have found that children are especially vulner-
able to its toxic effects, a measure of the relation between
consumption and body weight.

The FDA determined in 1981,
when the sweetener was approved, that the maximum projected
intake of Aspartame is 50 milligrams a day per kilogram of body
weight.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Olney found
that aspartame, combined with MSG seasoning, increased the
odds of brain damage in children.28
Other studies have found that children are especially vulner-
able to its toxic effects, a measure of the relation between
consumption and body weight. The FDA determined in 1981,
when the sweetener was approved, that the maximum projected
intake of Aspartame is 50 milligrams a day per kilogram of body
weight. A child of 66 pounds would consume about 23 milli-
grams by imbibing four cans of Diet Coke. The child might also
The FDA strictly
enforces one
"unwritten"
violation of law -
failure to bribe
• 4
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 41

--- PAGE BREAK ---conceivably down an aspartame-flavored snack or two, nearing
the FDA's projected maximum daily intake.29 Dr.

William
Partridge, a professor of neuroendocrine regulation at MIT, told
Common Cause in August 1984 that it wouldn't be surprising if
a child — "confronted with aspartame contained in iced tea,
chocolate milk, milk shakes, chocolate pudding pie, Jello, ice
cream and numerous other products" — consumed 50 milli-
grams per kilogram in a day.

Internally, aspartame breaks down into its constituent amino
acids and methanol, which degrades into formaldahyde.

The
FDA announced in 1984 that "no evidence" has been found to
establish that the methanol byproduct reaches toxic levels,
claiming that "many fruit juices contain higher levels of the
natural compound." 3° But the Medical World News had already
reported in 1978 that the methanol content of aspartame is 1,000
times greater than most foods under FDA contro1.3'
NutraSweet, the "good stuff" of sentimental adverts, is a
truly insidious product.

According to independent trials, aspar-
tame intake is shown by animal studies to alter brain chemicals
affecting behavior.

Aspartame's effects on the brain led Richard
Wurtman, an MIT neuroscientist, to the discovery, as recorded
in The New England Journal ofMedicine (No.

309, 1983), that
the sweetener defeats its purpose as a diet aid, since high doses
may instill a craving for calorie-laden carbohydrates.

One of his
pilot studies found that the NutraSweet-carbohydrate combina-
tion increases the "sweetener's effect on brain composition."
Searle officials denigrated Wurtman's findings, but the Ameri-
can Cancer Society has since confirmed the irony — after
tracking 80,000 women for six years — that "among women
who gained weight, artificial sweetener users gained more than
those who didn't use the products," as reported in Medical
Self-Care (387).

(Since his battle with G.D.One of his
pilot studies found that the NutraSweet-carbohydrate combina-
tion increases the "sweetener's effect on brain composition."
Searle officials denigrated Wurtman's findings, but the Ameri-
can Cancer Society has since confirmed the irony — after
tracking 80,000 women for six years — that "among women
who gained weight, artificial sweetener users gained more than
those who didn't use the products," as reported in Medical
Self-Care (387).

(Since his battle with G.D.

Searle, Wurtman
founded Interneuron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., the producer of a
sports drink that enhances athletic performance, and a weight-
loss drug marketed in over 40 countries.

Wurtman's share of the
company, established in 1989, was worth $10 million by
1992.32)
Even more daunting are the findings of Dr.

Paul Spiers, a
neuropsychologist at Boston's Beth Israel Hospital, that aspar-
tame use can depress intelligence.

For this reason, he selected
experimental subjects with a history of consuming it but un-
aware that they might be suffering ill effects.

The subjects were
given NutraSweet in capsules of the FDA's allowable limit.

Spiers was alarmed to discover that they developed "cognitive
deficits." One of the tests required recall of square patterns and
alphabetical sequences, becoming increasingly more difficult.

The test is challenging, but most people improve as they learn
how it is done.

The aspartame users, however, did not improve.

"Some frankly showed a reverse pattern," said Spiers."33
Aspartame has been shown to erode short-term memory.

At
the May, 1985 hearings on NutraSweet, Louisiana Senator
Russell Long related a bizarre anecdote:
SENATOR LONG: I have received a letter recently from
a person who is well known to me and whose word is
impeccable, as far as I am concerned.

This person told me that she had been dieting and she
had been using diet drinks with aspartame in it.

She said she found her memory was going.This person told me that she had been dieting and she
had been using diet drinks with aspartame in it.

She said she found her memory was going.

She seemed
to be completely losing her memory.

When she would meet
people whom she knew intimately, she could not recall what
their name was, or even who they were.

She could not recall a good bit of that which was going
on about her to the extent that she was afraid she was losing
Tied Up In Nazis
A Naz-talgic Peek at post World War II America
Many of you have requested that we pull together some of
our many reprints into anthologies to make it easier to under-
stand how the United States has defiled herself
through collusion with covertly Nazi playmates.

Thanks to the Nazis, we now have the CIA and
NSA and an obsession with "national security"
that even Goebbels would be proud of.

Tied Up
In Nazis is our attempt to provide a preliminary,
text on the gravity of the Nazi menace and how
thoroughly we've been betrayed and manipu-
lated by sectors of our government.

"How Allen Dulles & The SS Preserved Each
Other" by Peter Dale Scott
"The Secret Treaty of Fort Hunt" by Carl Oglesby
"Three Doctors from Berlin" by Tom Bowers
"Tied Up In Nazis" interview with John Judge by Corey Dubin
"Nomenclature of an Assassination Cabal" by William Torbitt
"The Prostitution of Psychiatry" by Dr.

Nathaniel Lehrman
"Old Nazis and the New Right" by Russ Bellant
"Colonis Dignidad" by John Dinges
"The Shape of the Beast" a speech by John Stockwell
"Current Events, Past History " a Speech by Daniel Sheehan
"The Seizing of the American Broadcasting Company"
by Andy Boehm
"The CIA and Financial Institutions" by Rebecca Simms
PWR code #977 $17.95
her mind...

In due course, someone suggested that it might
be this NutraSweet, so she stopped using it and her memory
came back and her mind was restored.Nathaniel Lehrman
"Old Nazis and the New Right" by Russ Bellant
"Colonis Dignidad" by John Dinges
"The Shape of the Beast" a speech by John Stockwell
"Current Events, Past History " a Speech by Daniel Sheehan
"The Seizing of the American Broadcasting Company"
by Andy Boehm
"The CIA and Financial Institutions" by Rebecca Simms
PWR code #977 $17.95
her mind...

In due course, someone suggested that it might
be this NutraSweet, so she stopped using it and her memory
came back and her mind was restored.

Senator Howard Metz,enbaum replied that he had received
"a number of letters from doctors reporting similar develop-
ments.

..

There have been hundreds of incidents of people who
have suffered loss of memory, headaches, dizziness, and other
neurological symptoms which they feel are related to aspar-
tame."' Senator Orrin Hatch, a hidebound archconservative
and NutraSweet advocate, downplayed criticism of the sugar
substitute.

"Some people have lost their memory after drinking
a variety of things,-  he argued.

"The bottom line is this: The
studies supporting aspartame's approval have been examined
and reexamined.

More than enough sound, valid studies exist to
demonstrate aspartame's safety."
Hatch of Utah, reports the Wall Street Journal, has "given
his strong support of the pharmaceutical industries.-35 So have
the "Hatchlings." David Kessler, FDA Commissioner under
presidents Bush and Clinton, was once an aide to Orrin Hatch.

Hatch's former campaign manager and aide, C.

McClain Had-
dow, was sentenced to prison for conflict-of-interest charges
arising from his work as a Reagan administration health official.

And Thomas Parry, Hatch's former chief of staff, has carved a
sumptuous life for himself as a Republican fund-raiser and
lobbyist with clients in the pharmaceutical industry'.--- PAGE BREAK ---

McClain Had-
dow, was sentenced to prison for conflict-of-interest charges
arising from his work as a Reagan administration health official. And Thomas Parry, Hatch's former chief of staff, has carved a
sumptuous life for himself as a Republican fund-raiser and
lobbyist with clients in the pharmaceutical industry'. All told,
Parry represents 30 clients, including Eli Lilly, Warner-Lam-
bert, and Johnson & Johnson, not to mention ranking defense
firms and the Bahamas government. Parry's pharmaceutical
clients have enriched Senator Hatch's campaign coffers, and in
turn Hatch lavishes his attentions on them. By the time Orrin Hatch was stumping for NutraSweet in the
Prevailing winds Premiere Isere Page 42

--- PAGE BREAK ---U.S.

Senate, the Center for Disease Control in Atlanta had
received 600 letters complaining of NutraSweet's adverse ef-
fects.

The National Soft Drink Association (NSDA) had them
too: "There have been hundreds of reports from around the
country suggesting a possible relationship between their con-
sumption of NutraSweet and subsequent symptoms including
headaches, aberrational behavior, slurred speech, etc." FDA
Commissioner Arthur Hull Hayes, appointed by Ronald Reagan
in April, 1981 (moving the New York Times to observe that
"some industry officials consider Dr.

Hayes more sympathetic
to their viewpoints than past holders of the office"), considered
such complaints "anecdotal."
Of course, like scores of other conservatives roaming the
executive branch in the 1980s, the ethics of Arthur Hull Hayes
were entirely malleable —not only did
he approve a product based on studies
that were "scientifically lacking in de-
sign and execution," according to a re-
port issued by Science Time in Febru-
ary 1985, but upon leaving the FDA he
took the post of senior medical consult-
ant for Burson-Marsteller, the public
relations firm retained by G.D.

Searle.'
Burson-Marsteller, a huge public
relations conglomerate, swelled in the
1980s by leveraging smaller competi-
tors — including Black, Manafort,
Stone & Kelley, a lobbying firm best
known for influence peddling along the Beltway — presently
outsizing even the Hill & Knowlton empire.

Typical in the
aspartame story are Burson-Marsteller's links to the intelligence
community and righting operatives of the GOP.

Thomas
Devereaux Bell, Jr., an executive officer of the firm, is the
former chairman of the Center for Naval Analysis in Alexandria,
Virginia.

Bell was also the executive director of Ronald Rea-
gan's Inaugural Ball Committee (in which capacity he ushered
in the likes of Licio Gelli, head of P2, the notorious Italian secret
society).Thomas
Devereaux Bell, Jr., an executive officer of the firm, is the
former chairman of the Center for Naval Analysis in Alexandria,
Virginia.

Bell was also the executive director of Ronald Rea-
gan's Inaugural Ball Committee (in which capacity he ushered
in the likes of Licio Gelli, head of P2, the notorious Italian secret
society).

Bell's career in Washington began in 1971 as a deputy
director of Richard Nixon's Committee to ReElect the Presi-
dent.

He went on to serve as an administrative aide to Senator
William Brock and the Reagan transition team.38
At the FDA, Hayes used aspartame as a political statement
that the Reagan administration was embarking on a grand voy-
age of conservative "regulatory reform," sluicing through trea-
sonous liberal constraints on "free enterprise." Despite what
one FDA scientist described as 'very serious' questions con-
cerning pivotal brain tumor tests, Hayes eagerly approved aspar-
tame for use in dry foods in July 1981.39 Three FDA scientists
advised against the approval of aspartame, citing G.D.

Searle's
own brain tumor tests, because there was no proof that "aspar-
tame is safe for use as a food additive under its intended
conditions of use.""
Hayes has since declined to answer any questions about his
decision, which ignored the recommendations of the FDA's
own board of inquiry.

He relied instead on a study conducted
by Japan's Ajinomoto, Inc.

— a licensee of G.D.

Searle.

Hayes
acknowledged in his 1981 decision that he had Only consulted
a preliminary report of the Japanese evaluation, and only
skimmed it.

More serious, Hayes violated federal law by basing
approval on the test, as it had not been reviewed by the FDA
board.' I
Who is Arthur Hull Hayes?

He was no disinterested bureau-
crat.

True to the biochemical theme of the aspartame story, Dr.

Hayes served in the Army Medical Carps in the 1960s.True to the biochemical theme of the aspartame story, Dr.

Hayes served in the Army Medical Carps in the 1960s.

Accord-
ing to the Washington Post, Hayes was assigned to Edgewood
Arsenal at Fort Detrick, Maryland, the Army's chemical warfare
base of operations, "one of a number of doctors who conducted
drug tests for the Army on volunteers ...

to determine the effect
of a mind-disorienting drug called CAR 301,060." According
to a declassified 1976 report prepared by the Army Inspector
General, Hayes had planned a research study to develop the
mind-altering CAR 301,060 as a crowd control agent In 1972,
Hayes left Edgewood Arsenal, and a new plan for the experi-
ments was drawn up by Edgewood physicians.

The 1976 report
notes that similar tests had been conducted before Hayes took
charge.42
Also at the center of the effort to land FDA approval of
NutraSweet stood Donald Rumsfeld — "Rummy" to his friends
— chairman of G.D.

Searle upon leaving the Ford administra-
tion in 1977.

Rumsfeld, the product of a
wealthy Chicago suburb, was a Prince-
ton graduate and a Navy pilot during the
Korean conflict.

He entered politics as a
Congressional House aide attending
night classes at Georgetown University
Law School, which is closely aligned
with the CIA.'
Rumsfeld campaigned ambitiously
for Richard Nixon, who drafted him to
direct the Office of Equal Opportunity
on May 26, 1969.

He quickly established
an office to spy on his employees in a
holy crusade to flush out "revolutionar-
ies" said to be granting federal funds to politically subversive
organizations — a throwback to M cCarthv's tantrums."
Rumsfeld also figured in Nixon's notorious Power Control
Group, spearheaded by Charles Colson and John Ehrlichman.45
Gerald Ford named Rumsfeld executive chief of staff upon the
resignation of Al Haig.He entered politics as a
Congressional House aide attending
night classes at Georgetown University
Law School, which is closely aligned
with the CIA.'
Rumsfeld campaigned ambitiously
for Richard Nixon, who drafted him to
direct the Office of Equal Opportunity
on May 26, 1969.

He quickly established
an office to spy on his employees in a
holy crusade to flush out "revolutionar-
ies" said to be granting federal funds to politically subversive
organizations — a throwback to M cCarthv's tantrums."
Rumsfeld also figured in Nixon's notorious Power Control
Group, spearheaded by Charles Colson and John Ehrlichman.45
Gerald Ford named Rumsfeld executive chief of staff upon the
resignation of Al Haig.

In 1986 he was named chairman of the
Institute for Contemporary Studies, a neoconservative "think
tank" (read: propaganda mill) established in 1972 by Edwin
Meese and Caspar Weinberger.

ICS has sponsored such opin-
ion-shaping projects as a study of expansions in "entitlement
programs" and their erosive effects on the economy, and a book
on the uses of coercion by Communist regimes.46 kumsfeld, at
43, became the country's youngest secretary of defense.

For
many years he has been a vocal proponent of chemical weap-
ons.°
 He is chairman of the Rand Corp." In 1988, he dropped
a presidential bid, and was named a v.p.

of Westmark Systems,
led by past NSA Director Bobby Ray Inman.

Rumsfeld was one
of Westin ark's founding directors, sharing the board with
Joseph Amato, a former vice president at TRW (and a colleague
of Inman's at the National Security Agency), and Dale Frey,
chairman of the General Electric Investment Corp.'
Rumsfeld, a veteran political operative, was an adept at the
vulgar art of public relations.

He was recruited by G.D.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rumsfeld was one
of Westin ark's founding directors, sharing the board with
Joseph Amato, a former vice president at TRW (and a colleague
of Inman's at the National Security Agency), and Dale Frey,
chairman of the General Electric Investment Corp.'
Rumsfeld, a veteran political operative, was an adept at the
vulgar art of public relations. He was recruited by G.D. Searle
because he had "a Boy Scout image," according to one com-
pany of
A house politcian was precisely what Searle
needed to compensate for the damage done by independent
researchers concerned about the toxic effects of aspartame. In
March 1976, an FDA task force brought into question all of the
company's testing procedures between 1967 and 1975. The task
force described "serious deficiencies in Searle's operations and
practices which undermine the basis for reliance on Searle's
integrity." The final report of the FDA task force noted faulty
and fraudulent product testing, knowingly misrepresented find-
. ings, and instances of "irrelevant or unproductive animal re-
search where experiments have been poorly conceived, care-
lessly executed or inaccurately analyzed." 5 I
Richard Merrill, the FDA's chief counsel, petitioned Samuel
FDA Commissioner
Arthur Hull Hayes
ignored the
recommendations of
the FDA's own board
of inquiry. Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 43

--- PAGE BREAK ---MASS MURDERERS IN
WHITE COATS
"Psychiatric Genocide in Nazi Germany
and the United States"
By Lenny Lapon
Documents the mass murder of
"mental patients" by psychiatry in
Nazi Germany and in the United
States -- a fact referred to by the
author as psychiatric genocide.

In
fact.

Lenny Lapon shows how the kill-
°
ing of thousands of psychiatric in-
mates and other "useless eaters" in
Hitler's Third Reich set the stage in a
practical and ideological way for the
later extermination of siz million Jews
and other victims of Nazi persecution.

Other Holocaust researchers rarely ac-
knowledge the incredible importance
of this fact.

Shows the common ideological
roots of the killings in Nazi Germany and harmful, and often fa-
tal, psychiatric "treatments/tortures" in the United States–roots
in eugenics and other political practices and ideas that continue
on a massive scale today.

Gives an ex-inmate's "mental patient's" perspective of the op-
pressiveness of psychiatry, its violence, its dangers, and its use
as a major form of social control.

Presents lengthy excerpts from conversations Lapon had with
eleven psychiatrists who are members of the American Psychiat-
ric Association (APA) and who are also connected in various
ways to Nazi Germany.

Details a history of the organized resistance to psychiatric op-
pression by its victims – a history of the psychiatric inmates lib-
eration movement.

This includes many important events and
documents of this movement in which Lapon has been an activ-
ist for eight years.

PWR code #712 $9.95
MASS MURDERERS
IN
WHITE COATS
a4
01,1,h 1,111
K.

Skinner, U.S.PWR code #712 $9.95
MASS MURDERERS
IN
WHITE COATS
a4
01,1,h 1,111
K.

Skinner, U.S.

attorney for the northern district of Illinois, for
a grand jury investigation of Searle's "willful and knowing
failure" to submit required test reports, and for "concealing
material facts and making false statements" in reports on aspar-
tame submitted to the agency.52 Yet industry analysts, inter-
viewed by the Wall Street Journal six months after Rumsfeld's
appointment as chairman, noted a rapid turnabout in Searle's
fortunes as a result of his direction."
Searle denies that Chairman Rum sfeld ever had any contact
with the FDA, or the Carter and Reagan administrations, to
lobby for aspartame." But the Wall Street Journal article re-
ported in 1977 that Rumsfeld "keenly understands the impor-
tance of a public image.

So he has been mending fences with
the FDA by personally asking top agency officials what Searle
should do to straighten out its reputation." Westley M.

Dixon,
Searle's vice chairman, told the Journal that without Rumsfeld
"we wouldn't have gotten approval for Norpace," a drug inves-
tigated by the FDA in 1975."
The grand jury investigation of Searle disintegrated in Janu-
ary, 1977 when the FDA formally requested that Samuel Skin-
ner, U.S.

attorney and a protege of Illinois Governor James
Thompson, investigate the firm for falsifying and withholding
aspartame test data.

A month later, Skinner met with attorneys
from Searle's Chicago law firm, Sidley & Austin.

Jimmy Carter
ascended to the presidency a few weeks later.

He announced that
Skinner would not be asked to remain in office, but the outgoing
Republican wasn't found wanting for employment.

He in-
formed reporters that he had already begun "preliminary dis-
cussions" with Sidley & Autin.56
G.D.

Searle and Sidley & Austin are Siamese Twins.

Edwin
Austin, a senior partner in the law 111111, was appointed to the
Illinois Supreme Court in 1969.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Searle and Sidley & Austin are Siamese Twins. Edwin
Austin, a senior partner in the law 111111, was appointed to the
Illinois Supreme Court in 1969. The Searle family drew upon
his services extensively, and he taught Sunday school in Wil-
mette, a Chicago suburb, as did Dr. Claude Howard Searle,
whose father cofounded the pharmaceutical house. The firm is grafted to the beating heart of the Republican
party. Morris Leibman of Sidley & Austin was for many years
chairman of the American Bar Association's "Standing Com-
mittee on Law and National Security," a position that won him
Reagan's Medal of Freedom in 1981.57
John E. Robson, head of Sidley & Austin's Washington
office, was appointed executive vice-president of Searle & Co. in 1977, the same year Skinner was named a partner in the law
firm. Robson, too, was active in Republican politics. He was the
first General Counsel of the Department of Transportation, and
at the behest of Gerald Ford in 1975, chairman of the Civil
Aeronautics Board." He moved on to Searle, and stayed with
the company until it was bought outright by Monsanto in 1985. Howard Trienens, a law clerk to the late chief Justice Vinson in
the early 1950s, was a G.D. Searle director and worked for
Sidley & Austin since 1949.59 Archconservative California
Governor George Deukmejian joined Sidley & Austin's Los
Angeles branch upon leaving office in 1991, and is reportedly
making a "very comfortable" living. He has a keen "sense" for
bringing in corporate clients, a partner in the firm told the Los
Angeles Times, many of them past contributors to his campaign
fund. Deukmejian's business connections have given him a
reputation as a Sidley & Austin "rainmaker," but the L.A. City
Council has questioned his ethics in promoting a contract with
Sumitomo Corp. on a metropolitan railway project.°ons have given him a
reputation as a Sidley & Austin "rainmaker," but the L.A. City
Council has questioned his ethics in promoting a contract with
Sumitomo Corp. on a metropolitan railway project.°

Searle aside, Sidley & Austin has served some of the most
notorious special interests in the country. The firm lobbied
overtime, for instance, on behalf of Charles Keating's Lincoln
Savings & Loan, and provided counsel on tax issues and dealing
with federal authorities. The firm assisted Keating when Lincoln
was foundering, and curried political favor to keep the S&L
operating despite massive debts. As a result, the firm was forced
to settle with Lincoln depositors in 1991, agreeing to cover an
excess of $40 million in claims.6I Sidley & Austin also repre-
sented the AMA when a group of drugstore chains sued seven
drug makers —including Searle —for price fixing and antitrust
violations. The lawsuit, filed in October 1993, amounts to
billions of dollars in compensation."
Skinner recused himself from the Searle prosecution four
months before leaving office — asking, in a memo to subordi-
nates, that the matter be kept "confidential to avoid any undue
embarrassment" — a stall that nearly allowed the statute of
limitations to expire. William Conlon, a senior U.S. attorney,
inherited the case. He eased off, citing case load pressures, and
gave a deaf ear to complaints of delays from the Justice Depart-
ment, which urged that a grand jury be convened to prosecute
Searle for falsifying NutraSweet test data. In January, 1979,
Conlon too joined Sidley & Austin.'
The 33-page letter from Merrill to Skinner charged Searle
with criminal fraud in its animal test results. In 1984 Common
Cause asked Dan Reidy of the U.S. attorney's office how the
investigation had stalled. Reidy replied that because it was a
Prevailing winds Premiere Issue Page 44

--- PAGE BREAK ---grand jury investigation, he was "bound by law to secrecy." A
Searle spokesman exploited the demise of the grand jury to
claim that there was "no validity to the charges," that the
company had been "exonerated." Philip Brodsky, an investiga-
tor for the FDA, expressed surprise that Searle hadn't been
indicted.

"I thought surely, they would prosecute them," he
said.64
Eleven years later Senator Metzenbaum issued a press re-
lease charging Skinner with stalling the criminal investigation
as he prepared to decamp from office.

Metzenbaum and his staff demanded
an FBI investigation of Skinner's mis-
handling of the case.

In December,
1988, the conflict-of-interest bomb-
shell blew up in the face of newly-
elected George Bush, who was about
to appoint Skinner to theosition of
Transportation Secretary.

Like most of the Machiavellians in
the NutraSweet story, Samuel Knox
Skinner kept company with hardright
Republicans.

He entered politics as a
campaign volunteer for Barry Gold-
water.

In 1975, he was appointed to Federal Prosecutor in
Chicago by President Ford.

Sidle).

& Austin promoted him to
senior partner after only one year with the firm.

Skinner was the
director of George Bush's presidential campaign in Illinois.

On
occasion he was berated for his involvement with the state's
Republican apparatus: In 1987, for instance, the Chicago Sun-
Times linked him with a clutch of lawyers close to Governor
Thompson, who were awarded lucrative assignments handling
the affairs of financially crippled insurance companies.

Skinner
was a leading light of the Illinois Fraud Prevention Commission
— he targeted welfare cheats (as opposed to white-collar crimi-
nals in the drug industry) — and President Reagan's Commis-
sion on Organized Crime.On
occasion he was berated for his involvement with the state's
Republican apparatus: In 1987, for instance, the Chicago Sun-
Times linked him with a clutch of lawyers close to Governor
Thompson, who were awarded lucrative assignments handling
the affairs of financially crippled insurance companies.

Skinner
was a leading light of the Illinois Fraud Prevention Commission
— he targeted welfare cheats (as opposed to white-collar crimi-
nals in the drug industry) — and President Reagan's Commis-
sion on Organized Crime.

In December 1991, he left Transpor-
tation to take the position of President Bush's Chief of Staff.°
"A Shocking Story"
H
ad Skinner pressed on with the investigation, aspar-
tame's manufacturer would have been forced to explain
a long history of fabricated laboratory tests and slippery
dealings with federal regulators, not to mention the public.

Dr.

Alexander Schmidt, a former FDA commissioner, said
of the original Aspartame Task Force investigation: "What was
discovered was reprehensible.

.

.incredibly sloppy science." A
1980 public board of inquiry opined that the company's testing
procedures were "bizarre.""
Searle's decision to market aspartame culminated with the
falsification of test results to obtain FDA approval.

In November
1969, officials of the firm hired Dr.

Harry Waisman, a re-
searcher for the University of Wisconsin, to test for brain
damage in rhesus monkeys.

Seven monkeys were fed aspartame
for periods up to one year.

In the end, though, the evaluation
flopped because the technicians failed to perform the intelli-
gence tests and autopsies required to determine brain damage.

When questioned about the false data by the FDA, Searle
officials claimed to have had no direct control over the study.

But the protocol for the study was written by a Searle pathologist
after it had begun.

And, according to Dr.

Gross, "Frequent
high-level communications took place between Searle execu-
tives and Dr.And, according to Dr.

Gross, "Frequent
high-level communications took place between Searle execu-
tives and Dr.

Waisman prior to and during the study.""
To make matters worse, Dr.

Waisman died in March, 1971,
in mid-study.

Searle submitted the toxicity test to the FDA on October 12,
1972.

It bore Dr.

Waisman's name as coauthor.

Richard Merrill
noted: "Dr.

Waisman was the expert in the field and his name
would carry great weight," but complained to Skinner that
Searle took "great literary license" in drafting the report,
"which covers up the admitted inadequacy of the design, control
and documentation of this study."'
Searle submitted some 150 test reports, yet Dr.

Martha
Freeman of the FDA Bureau of Drugs
noted in a 1973 memo, "the informa-
tion provided is inadequate to permit
an evaluation of the potential toxicity
of aspartame."71 The FDA task force
set up by Dr.

Schmidt in 1975 re-
viewed 25 studies on seven products
manufactured by G.D.

Searle, a total
of 500 pages and 15,000 exhibits.72
Searle was held to be the author of
"reports that the FDA believes con-
tain false information" and "con-
cealed facts resulting from having
drafted Dr.

Waisman's 'pilot' mon-
key study so that it would appear to be a valid, thorough
scientific study," and not a forgery.

In 1975 Searle submitted a battery of cancer test results
entitled "The Willigan Report," which contained a statistical
table that excluded four malignant mammary tumors detected
by Dr.

Willigan and incorporated in his data.

The malignancies
were made to appear benign.

Searle dismissed the misrepresen-
tation as a computer "programming error" undetected by super-
vising statisticians.

Dr.

Gross interviewed all concerned with
the tests.Dr.

Gross interviewed all concerned with
the tests.

He concluded in a statement to Metzenbaum's com-
mittee in August, 1985, that "to accept the Searle explanation
is to believe that the unfavorable mammary malignancy data
were innocently omitted from the summary table four separate
times by duce different individuals."74
The Waisman and Willigan Reports were prepared by Searle
Labs, as were 88% of the safety evaluations conducted by
1981.75 They are typical of the shoddy documentation upon
which FDA Commissioner Haves based his decision that aspar-
tame does not constitute a public health risk.

Although two
members of the 1975 task force considered the tests to be
criminal frauds, Hayes and Searle declared the results valid.

In
an appeal to Hayes' decision, James Turner said; "The entire
argument that since the studies are no longer considered fraudu-
lent by FDA they are therefore scientifically valid is an example
of a rhetorical shell game that, if successful, can only bring
discredit and ridicule on the FDA.""
Dr.

Gross, the chief scientist on the FDA task force, told the
CBS Nightly News staff in January, 1984, that Searle made
"deliberate decisions" to cloak the toxic effects of aspartame.

"They took great pains to camouflage these shortcomings of the
study," Gross said, "as 1 say, filter and just present to the FDA
what they wished the FDA to know.

And they did other terrible
things.

For instance, animals would develop tumors while they
were under study — well, G.D.

Searle would remove these
rumors from the animals," surgically masking the cancerous
effects of aspartame.??

Yet one 1986 New England Journal of
Medicine article claimed that noncompulsive aspartame intake
has "no sinister effects."
Dr.

Woodrow Monte told CBS, "Every time a truly impartial
team of scientists have looked at NutraSweet, it has been turned
down." Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Yet one 1986 New England Journal of
Medicine article claimed that noncompulsive aspartame intake
has "no sinister effects."
Dr. Woodrow Monte told CBS, "Every time a truly impartial
team of scientists have looked at NutraSweet, it has been turned
down." Dr. Monte, director of the nutrition laboratory at Ari-
zona State University, held that these studies "show extreme
Dr. Gross, chief scientist
on the FDA task force,
told CBS that Searle made
"deliberate decisions" to
cloak the toxic effects of
aspartame. Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 45

--- PAGE BREAK ---dangers over the long term.

"78
Dr.

Monte was rewarded for his comments by a fusillade
from the press.

On February 23, Dan Dorfman, a business news
reporter for WCBS in New York, broke a story that several CBS
employees had invested in options on NutraSweet that pay off
if the stock price drops.79 Dr.

Monte and his attorney had
purchased the options as well.

It emerged that the CBS staffers
had purchased the options on the advice of stock market news-
letters printed prior to the nightly news report.

The investments
were not illegal, nor did they reap a profit.

Searle's stock was
not affected by the publicity, and the investors took a loss.

Nevertheless, the Wall Street Journal ran a front-page story
condemning the "inside trading." Reed Irvine's Accuracy in
Media picked up the cudgel against Dr.

Monte and the CBS
employees as if they'd committed a shocking Wall Street swin-
dle." Accuracy in Media, formed in 1969, is an intelligence
operation abetted by the CIA.

The rabidly right-wing organiza-
tion was co-founded by Bernard Yoh, a counter-insurgency
adviser under the notorious Edward Landsdale in Vietnam, and
a fount of CIA funds to military intelligence units in the Delta
region.

Board member Elbridge Durbrow was once a foreign
service "diplomat," and advised commanders of Maxwell Air
Force Base in Alabama.

Another MM board member, Frank
Trager, has conducted research for the Pentagon and CIA, and
churns out pamphlets on international business and intelligence
operations.

Major financial contributors to AIM include Rich-
ard Nixon, "Bebe" Rebozo, Edward Scripps, the wretched Dr.

Edward Teller and former Treasury Secretary William E.

Si-
Accuracy in Media is a strident advocate of the chemical
industry, which provides it with generous funding.

The media
"watchdog" has long waged a campaign on behalf of dioxin,
denouncing the "Agent Orange scare" as the creation of deliri-
ous, anti-business liberals.Si-
Accuracy in Media is a strident advocate of the chemical
industry, which provides it with generous funding.

The media
"watchdog" has long waged a campaign on behalf of dioxin,
denouncing the "Agent Orange scare" as the creation of deliri-
ous, anti-business liberals.

Among the leading manufacturers of
Agent Orange for the Vietnam war effort was Monsanto, pre-
paring — at the very moment AIM took aim at detractors of
NutraSweetThi — to buy G.D.

Searle.

The Good Stuff
D
r.

Monte cautioned in 1987 that he didn't want to sound
like a "conspiracy theory" hound, but the aspartame
chronology clarifies its commercial emergence.

The
FDA Board of Inquiry' advised against the sweetener on Sep-
tember 30, 1980.

On January 21, 1981 —the day after Reagan's
inauguration —Searle submitted "ten new studies." Dr.

Monte
was skeptical.

"It is impossible that they could have conducted
those studies in four months," he said.

"Obviously they'd
previously done those studies but hadn't officially submitted
them, although much of the information in those studies was
informally presented to the board of inquiry." With the "new
tests" in hand, Hayes acted as though critical, overriding evi-
dence had proven the safety of aspartame.'
James Turner, representing the Community Nutrition Insti-
tute in Washington, D.C., said that Arthur Hull Hayes, to arrive
at his decision that aspartame is safe, firewalked a path "through
a mass of scientific mismanagement, improper procedures,
wrong conclusions and general scientific inexactness." Two
FDA officials declared in 1985 that Hayes was determined to
clear all obstacles to NutraSweet approval.

One FDA bureaucrat
reported that "people at the top" were closed to questions
concerning the quality of the tests submitted by Searle."
In July, 1984 a broad investigation of NutraSweet's adverse
effects was conducted by the FDA and the Centers for Disease
Control."Obviously they'd
previously done those studies but hadn't officially submitted
them, although much of the information in those studies was
informally presented to the board of inquiry." With the "new
tests" in hand, Hayes acted as though critical, overriding evi-
dence had proven the safety of aspartame.'
James Turner, representing the Community Nutrition Insti-
tute in Washington, D.C., said that Arthur Hull Hayes, to arrive
at his decision that aspartame is safe, firewalked a path "through
a mass of scientific mismanagement, improper procedures,
wrong conclusions and general scientific inexactness." Two
FDA officials declared in 1985 that Hayes was determined to
clear all obstacles to NutraSweet approval.

One FDA bureaucrat
reported that "people at the top" were closed to questions
concerning the quality of the tests submitted by Searle."
In July, 1984 a broad investigation of NutraSweet's adverse
effects was conducted by the FDA and the Centers for Disease
Control.

Federal health officials said at the outset that they
believed no harm would emerge from the data to indict aspar-
tame.

Robert McQuate, Ph.D., science director of the National
Soft Drink Association, predicted with mystical confidence that
the study would -provide further evidence that aspartame is a
safe ingredient."84
Dr.

McQuate didn't fret the goring of his biochemical ox.

In
November the CDC announced that no "serious, widespread"
side effects had been found." It was "unlikely," said CDC
officials, that "complainers" could establish a link between
NutraSweet and their maladies —the same bromide once tossed
to victims of radiation experiments.McQuate didn't fret the goring of his biochemical ox.

In
November the CDC announced that no "serious, widespread"
side effects had been found." It was "unlikely," said CDC
officials, that "complainers" could establish a link between
NutraSweet and their maladies —the same bromide once tossed
to victims of radiation experiments.

The reported side-effects of
aspartame fell into two distinct categories: central nervous
system (65%) and gastrointestinal disorders (24%)." Yet the
CDC claimed erroneously that no consistent reaction pattern
had been found" Robert Shapiro, then president of NutraSweet,
used the occasion to enthuse that the survey "clearly established
the safety" of the sugar substitute." Nevertheless, the CDC
recommended a new set of studies because aspartame users
continued to complain of ill effects.

Based on the ersatz assurances of the CDC report, PepsiCo
announced that it would drop saccharine and begin sweetening
its diet drinks entirely with aspartame.

The decision would have
been approved by Wayne Calloway, then CEO of PepsiCo and
director of the multinationals Citicorp, General Electric and a
Exxon.

In 1983 soda bottlers, organized around Pepsi, had
petitioned the FDA for a delay in approval of NutraSweet for
sofl drinks until further evaluation verified its safety — inter-
preted by market analysts as a ploy to drive down the price of
the sweetener.

They soon abandoned the effort to block approval
(and all health concerns they might have had).

"We believe
saccharine is safe," Pepsi USA President Roger Enrico lied, but
"we wanted the taste improvement." PepsiCo, already drawing
on a tenth of Searle's 7.5 million pound annual production of
aspartame, signed an agreement with G.D.

Searle to boost
purchases 500 percent." (L ike other corporate pushers of aspar-
tame, Pepsi has long maintained ties to the intelligence commu-
nity."We believe
saccharine is safe," Pepsi USA President Roger Enrico lied, but
"we wanted the taste improvement." PepsiCo, already drawing
on a tenth of Searle's 7.5 million pound annual production of
aspartame, signed an agreement with G.D.

Searle to boost
purchases 500 percent." (L ike other corporate pushers of aspar-
tame, Pepsi has long maintained ties to the intelligence commu-
nity.

One product of the relationship was a Pepsi plant in
Vientiane, Laos with a laboratory outfitted for heroin produc-
tion.

Alfred McCoy, in The Politics of Heroin in Southeast Asia,
documents the efforts of Richard Nixon to promote the plant's
construction in 1965, and the CIA's continuing subsidization of
the plant.

McCoy complained to Pepsi officials that the facilities
were but a cover for the importation and refinement of mor-
phine, but it continued to operate unhindered.)
Yet another report was filed by Reagan's General Account-
ing Office in July 1987, this one on the FDA's handling of
aspartame.

The GAO concluded that the agency had followed
proper procedures and conducted valid studies.

But the report
noted that the FDA had followed guidelines forfood —not drug
— testing, despite the recommendation of the agency's own
biologists favoring drug tests, which are considerably more
stringent.

This recommendation was overruled by FDA offi-
cials.

Another blemish in the study was bared by Dr.

Louis Elsas,
director of medical genetics at Emory University in Atlanta.

"They never asked the right questions about what it does to brain
function in humans," he told the Washington Post.

Half of the
scientists polled expressed reservations about the safety of
NutraSweet.

One-fifth reported "major concerns." Monsanto
quibbled in a press release that these critics had themselves
never conducted aspartame research.

A score of independent
scientists have.

They found side effects.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A score of independent
scientists have. They found side effects. Senator Metzenbaum berated Searle's flawed and fabricated
Prevailing Winds Premiere issue Page 46

--- PAGE BREAK ---THE MAN WHO
KNEW TOO MUCH
by Dick Russell
In September 1963, CIA contract agent Richard Case Nagell
walked into an El Paso bank,
fired two shots into a wall, and
intentionally got himself ar-
rested.

"Why weren't the real
issues brought out in this
court?" he shoUted after his
conviction for attempted bank
robbery.

"They will be some-
time!"
That "sometime" is now.

The Man Who Knew Too
MuCh may be the most im-
portant book written on the
assassination of President
John F.

Kennedy.

Here
journalist Dick Russell tells
the story he has spent the
past seventeen years investi-
gating.

It is the story of a
man who had knowledge of a conspiracy to kill Kennedy-
and sought to warn the governments of three nations in ad-
vance.

It is the story of a man, Richard Case Nagell, who
was assigned by the Soviets to prevent the assassination of
Kennedy by killing Lee Harvey Oswald.

What had begun as
a separate intelligence operation utilizing Oswald ended
with Oswald and Nagell enmeshed in a plot against Kennedy-
a plot Nagell himself tried desperately to stop.

Richard Case Nagell-a former CIA operative, KGB opera-
tive, and a comrade-stn-arms of Oswald-is still alive He knows
more about the espionage web surrounding Oswald and the
events leading up to the assassination than anyone else except
the perpetrators.

Dick Russell exposes these startling facts:
-The FBI's and CIA's failure to act on information before the
assassination about Oswald and two co-conspirators.

-Three earlier plots to assassinate JFK.

-Oswald's ties to both US and Soviet intelligence agencies.

-The links to a Soviet spy network inside the CIA.

-The role of a cabal of right-wing extremists connected to Cu-
ban exiles, the Pentagon.

Texas oilmen, and organized crime.

-A military unit known as Field Operations Intelligence,
whose existence has never been publicly revealed.

-The Far East intelligence connection.

-Oswald's two mysterious trips to Mexico City.--- PAGE BREAK ---

-The Far East intelligence connection. -Oswald's two mysterious trips to Mexico City. -The CIA/Pentagon's development and use of "mind control."
Dick Russell illuminates the intrigue surrounding Oswald and
the intelligence brotherhood by coordinating Nagell's story with
dozens of other interviews and a painstaking review of the pub-
lic record. The Man Who Knew Too Much shatters a hail of
mirrors, reflecting the lies told consistently throughout the
years and exposing the interconnected individuals and or-
ganizations responsible for the century's greatest political
tragedy. "A fascinating probability...another turn to the light in the un-
folding labyrinth of clues to the murder at the heart of the
American century." --Oliver Stone
"Assassination buffs will be fascinated by Dick Russell's
book on Oswald and Nagell for it contains a great deal of new
material that can open a host of hitherto unperceived leads."
-Norman Mailer
PWR code #813 $19.95
FRED TO KILL OSIAill
AND WIRT M-
ASSA 'ATION LW
tests at the August 1, 1985 Senate hearings. "The FDA," he
said, "is content to have the manufacturer of aspartame, G.D. Searle, conduct these studies. How absurd."
He also faulted the AMA:
The Journal of the American Medical Association re-
cently published a report on aspartame which, with some
significant disclaimers, stated it was safe for most people. I
wish that this report could ease my concerns. It does not It
merely restates the FDA position which relies solely on the
tests conducted by C.D. Searle. As I have indicated these
tests are under a cloud. In addition, the concerns raised
recently by the scientists ... were not even included in the
report.In defense of the tests, executives of G.D.

Searle argued that
the sweetener has been approved by foreign regulatory agencies
and the World Health Organization.

But H.J.

Roberts, an inter-
nal medicine specialist in West Palm Beach, Florida, reviewed
the foreign studies and found that "the vast majority of these
agencies accepted company-sponsored research without ever
having done independent confirmatory studies."91
Deficiencies in testing were aggravated by a lack of labora-
tory training at Searle.

One of the pivotal safety studies involved
fetal damage, but the FDA task force found that the medical
researcher in charge was "inexperienced in conducting studies
of this nature and yet given full responsibility." They were
appalled to discover that his sole credential was a field study of
the cottontail rabbit for the Illinois Wildlife Service, yet at Searle
he'd been assigned to laboratory training and supervision.

When
asked about his curriculum vitae in fetal research, he replied that
he'd once attended a seminar on the subject, and the company
had provided him with a stack of reference works.92 (Yet J.D.

Searle, in its 1981 Annual Report, billed itself as "a research-
based pharmaceutical company.")
Corporate control of NutraSweet testing continues at Mon-
santo, torturing the ethics of academic medicine.

In August 1987
the University of lllinois, a recipient of Monsanto's largess,
issued a study exonerating aspartame of causing seizures in
laboratory animals.

Dave Hattan, a safety regulator for the FDA,
responded that the study only confirmed the need for testing on
humans.

At independent labs, he insisted, aspartame provoked
seizures."
Industrial support tends to contaminate test data.

Dr.

Elsas,
in a 1988 letter to the New England Journal of Medicine,
advocates unbiased review of clinical research.-The Far East intelligence connection. -Oswald's two mysterious trips to Mexico City. -The CIA/Pentagon's development and use of "mind control."
Dick Russell illuminates the intrigue surrounding Oswald and
the intelligence brotherhood by coordinating Nagell's story with
dozens of other interviews and a painstaking review of the pub-
lic record. The Man Who Knew Too Much shatters a hail of
mirrors, reflecting the lies told consistently throughout the
years and exposing the interconnected individuals and or-
ganizations responsible for the century's greatest political
tragedy. "A fascinating probability...another turn to the light in the un-
folding labyrinth of clues to the murder at the heart of the
American century." --Oliver Stone
"Assassination buffs will be fascinated by Dick Russell's
book on Oswald and Nagell for it contains a great deal of new
material that can open a host of hitherto unperceived leads."
-Norman Mailer
PWR code #813 $19.95
FRED TO KILL OSIAill
AND WIRT M-
ASSA 'ATION LW
tests at the August 1, 1985 Senate hearings. "The FDA," he
said, "is content to have the manufacturer of aspartame, G.D. Searle, conduct these studies. How absurd."
He also faulted the AMA:
The Journal of the American Medical Association re-
cently published a report on aspartame which, with some
significant disclaimers, stated it was safe for most people. I
wish that this report could ease my concerns. It does not It
merely restates the FDA position which relies solely on the
tests conducted by C.D. Searle. As I have indicated these
tests are under a cloud. In addition, the concerns raised
recently by the scientists ... were not even included in the
report.

Dr. Elsas,
in a 1988 letter to the New England Journal of Medicine,
advocates unbiased review of clinical research. "The Nu-
traSweet Co.," he said, "may have had an interest in protocols
that would find that their product had no untoward of ects."94
Monsanto reportedly granted one NutraSweet researcher a $1.3
million honorarium.' The same hired gun willing to manipulate
lab results will have no qualms publicly defending a tainted
pharmaceutical, like the diabetic specialist who objected that a
Senate hearing on aspartame, which called him as a witness,
might arouse groundless public anxiety.96
Victims and health activists have attempted in the courts to
put a stop to the marketing of NutraSweet, to no avail. In 1985
a coalition of consumer groups were handed a ruling by the
federal Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
that the FDA had followed proper procedures in approving
aspartame for soft drinks. A year later the Washington Post
reported that the Supreme Court again refused to consider the
case "despite critics' arguments that the product, sold under the
brand name NutraSweet, may cause brain damage."'"
Likewise, the medical establishment has thrown up an im-
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 47ritics' arguments that the product, sold under the
brand name NutraSweet, may cause brain damage."'"
Likewise, the medical establishment has thrown up an im-
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 47

--- PAGE BREAK ---penetrable wall to aspartame critics.

Dr.

Roberts, author of a
brief study, "Aspartame-Associated Confusion and Memory
Loss: A Possible Human Model for Early Alzheimer's Dis-
ease," found it impossible to publish the article in a peer review
medical journal.

This was peculiar, he thought, "considering the
increasing magnitude of Alzheimer's disease, and the relevance
of my observations to newer biochemical findings and avenues
of research." He can "personally vouch for the enormous diffi-
culty in getting published articles concerning reactions to aspar-
tame products," a trend in censorship with "ominous over-
tones." The options, Dr.

Roberts says, are "generally limited to
`burying' the findings in a small-circulation journal (such as the
bulletin of a county medical society), reporting the results as a
letter to the editor, or (unfortunately, most often) discarding the
project."'"
Silence surrounds the most odious conspiracies.(?

Footnotes
I.

"Sweet Talk," Science and the Citizen column, Scientific
American, July, 1987, p.

15.

2.

"Adverse Effects of Aspartame — January '86 through
December '90," Current Bibliography series, National Library
of Medicine pamphlet, National Institutes of Health, U.S.

De-
partment of Health and Human Services, 1991.

3.

"Pepsi Switches Sweeteners —Aspartame Winning Diet
Cola Market," Washington Post, November 2, 1984, p.

A-1.

4.

Mae Brussell, World Watchers #842, KAZU-FM, Mon-
terey, CA., January 25, 1988.

5.

Moody's Inthistrial Manual, 1975, p.

2606.

6.

G.D.

Searle's 198 1 Annual Report.

Also, Arnold Foster
and Benjamin R.

Epstein, Cross-Currents, Doubleday & Co.

(New York: 1956), p.

153.

7.

Nancy Lisagor and Frank Lipsius, A Law Unto Itself The
Untold Story of the Law Firm of Sullivan & Cromwell, William
Morrow (New York: 1988), pp.

13738, 163.

8.

John Marks, The Search for "The Manchurian Candi-
date": The CIA and Mind Control, Times Books (New York.

1979), pp.

58, 67 & 212.1979), pp.

58, 67 & 212.

Marks writes that incapacitating "large
numbers of people fell to the Army Chemical Corps, which also
tested LSD and even stronger hallucinogens.

The CIA concen-
trated on individuals."
9.

John Peer Nugent, White Night: The Untold Story of What
Happened Before — and Beyond —Jonestown, Rawson, Wade
(New York: 1979), pp.

143, 177.

10.

Michael Meiers, Was Jonestown a CIA Medical Experi-
ment?

A Review of the Evidence, Mellen House (Lampeter, UK:
1988) p.

42.

11.

Ibid., p.

43.

12.

Ibid., pp.

42-43.

For a sanitized account of Dr.

Layton's
career, see Min S.

Yee amd Thomas N.

Layton, In My Father 's
House: The Story of the Layton Family and the Reverend Jim
Jones, Holt, Rinehart and Winston (New York, 1981).

13.

National Council of the National Front of Democratic
Germany and the Committee of Anti-Fascist Resistance Fight-
ers of the German Democratic Republic, The Brown Book: War
and Nazi Criminals in West Germany, Verlag Zeit urn Bild,
1965, pp 33-34.

14.

Dan J.

Forrestal, Faith, Hope & $5,000: The Story of
Monsanto, Simon and Schuster (New York: 1977), p.

159.

15.

Brown Book, p.

34.

16.

Tom Bower, The Paperclip Conspiracy: The Hunt For
the Nazi Scientists, Little, Brown & Co.

(Boston 1987), pp.

93,
95.

17.

Howard W.

Ambruster, Treason's Peace: German Dyes
and American Dupes, Beeehhurst Press (New York: 1947), p.

144.

18.

Nigel West, MI6: British Secret Intelligence Service
Operations, 1909-1945, Random House (New York: 1983), p.

92.

19.

Jaques Attali„4 Man of Influence: The Extraordinary
Career ofS.G.

Warburg, Adler & Adler (Bethesda, Maryland:
1987), p.

167.

20.

Forrestal, p.

121ff.

21.

Anthony Cave Brown, The Last Hero, Wild Bill Dono-
van, Vintage (New York: 1982), pp.

210211.

Also: Ernst
Hanfstangl, Unheard Witness, J.R.

Lippincott (New York:
1957)
22.

"Search for the Tiger's Treasure," Las Vegas Sun,
December 26, 1993, p.

1.

23.

Moody's Industrial Manual, 1968, p.

4080.

24.4080.

24.

"Radiation and the Guinea Pigs," Guardian, March 3,
1994, p.

3.

Also see, "Nuclear Scientients Irradiated People in
Secret Research," New York Times, December 17, 1993, p.

Al.

25.

Christopher Simpson, Blowback: America's Recruit-
ment of Ncais and Its Effects On the Cold War, Wiedenfeld &
Nicholson (New York: 1988), pp.

26, 152-53.

Col.

Pash, a
former high school gym teacher, was an officer of the Office of
Policy coordination under Frank Wisner.

His unit, writes Simp-
son, "known as PB/7, was given a written charter that read in
part that `PB/7 will be responsible for assassinations, kidnap-
ping, and such other functions as from time to time may be given
it...by higher authority.

— Pash was a member of the Russian
Orthodox Church, a veteran of the Russian Civil War, Mon-
santo's Clinton Engineering Works in Oak Ridge became the
Manhattan Project's headquarters in 1943, and was "manned
almost entirely by experienced officers and agents of the CIC."
See Ian Sayer and Douglas Botting, America's Secret Army: The
Untold Story of the Counterintelligence Corps, Franklin Watts
(New York: 1989), pp.

71ff., 346.

26.

Robin Thomas Naylor, Hot Money and the Politics of
Debt, Simon & Schuster (New York; 1987), p.

289.

27.

"Statement from Adrian Gross, Former FDA Investiga-
tor and Scientist," Congressional Record, August 1, 1985, p.

S10835.

28.

Florence Graves, "How Safe is Your Diet Soft Drink?"
Common Cause, July/August, 1984.

29.

Ibid.

30.

"FDA Finding on Aspartame," New York Times, Jan-
uary 14, 1984, p.

28.

31.

Article in Medical World News, 1978, cited in I.N.

Love,
"NutraSweet Isn't that Sweet," Gentle Strength Times, October
1987, p.

3.

32.

"Dick Wurtman's Ideas Aren't So Crazy After All,"
Business Week, December 14, 1992, p.

60.

33.

"A Sour View of Aspartame,"San Francisco Chronicle,
August 25, 1987.

34.

"Amendment No, 60" (debate), Congressional Record,
May 7, 1985, p.

S5516.

35.

"Lobbyist's Cozy Ties with Ex-Boss Sen.--- PAGE BREAK ---

35. "Lobbyist's Cozy Ties with Ex-Boss Sen. Hatch Include
Client Referrals, Political Fund-Raising," Wall Street Journal,
February 18, 1993. Eli Lilly contributed $17,500 to Hatch's
campaign chest between 1985 and 1988. Sen. Hatch filed a
friend-of-the-court brief on behalf of Eli Lilly in a 1989 patent
case. Other pharmaceutical houses enjoy his political favors. Lobbyist Thomas Parry remains a key adviser to Sen. Hatch:
"Nobody gets better care than his former chief of staff," reports
the Journal. 36. Ibid. Prevailing Winds Premiere issue Page 48

--- PAGE BREAK ---37, Jane E.

Brody, "Sweetener Worries Some Scientists,"
Science Times, February 5, 198S.

38.

Who's Who in Industry and Finance, 97th ed., MacMil-
lan (Wilmette, IL.) p.

583.

39."Food and Drug Administration Food Additive Approval
Process Followed for Aspartame," GAO Report B223552, June
18, 1987.

40.

"GAO Investigating NutraSweet Approval," UPI, re-
printed in Congressional Record, August 1, 1985, p.

S10823.

41.

Graves.

42.

"Head of FDA Tested Drugs on Volunteers," Wash-
ington Post, June 26, 1983, p.

A4.

43.

Austin H.

Kiplinger, Washington Now, Harper & Row
(New York: 1975), pp.

36-37.

44.

Daniel Guttman and Barry Wiliner, The Shadow Gov-
ernment: The Government 's Multimillion Dollar Giveaway of
its Decision-Making Powers to Private Management Consult-
ants, "Experts," and Think Tanks, Pantheon, (New York:
1976), pp.

63-90.

45.

Bruce Oudes, ed., From: The President — Richard
Nixon 's Secret Files, Harper & Row (New York: 1989), p.

173.

46.

James A.

Smith, The Idea Brokers: Think Tanks and the
Rise of the New Policy Elite, Free Press (New York: 1991), p.

282.

47.

Sterling Seagrave, Yellow Rain: A Journey Through the
Terror of Chemical Warfare.

M.

Evans and Co.

(New York:
1981), pp.

258: "After a meeting with President Nixon, Repre-
sentative Gerald Ford attacks politicians who criticize the Pen-
tagon CBW efforts, saying the critics seem to favor 'unilateral
disarmament.'"
48.

Christopher Palmeri, "Act Three," Forbes, October 26,
1992, p.

88.

49.

"Westmark Systems Expands Board, Hires 3 New Vice
Presidents," Wall Street Journal, February 11, 1988, p.

33.

50.

Graves.

52.

"Hon.

Samuel K.

Skinner," Congressional Record,
Congressional Printing Office, Washington, D.C., August 1,
1985, pp.

510827, 510835.

53.

Graves.

54.

Congressional Record, August I, 1985, p.

510823.

55.

Graves,
56.

"Critics Cause Bush Cabinet Search to Stumble," Los
Angeles Times, December 22, 1988.

57.

Herman Rogan, Traditions and Challenges: The Story
of Sid.ley & Austin, R.R.57.

Herman Rogan, Traditions and Challenges: The Story
of Sid.ley & Austin, R.R.

Donelly & Sons (Chicago: 1983), p.

266.

58.

Who's Who in America, 48th ed., 1994.

59.

Ibid.

60.

"Deukmejian Thrives in Private Life, Law Work," Los
Angeles Times, January 3, 1992, p.

Al.

61.

"Chicago Law Firm Agrees to Pay Up to $34 Million in
Lincoln S&L Case," Los Angeles Times, May 21, 1991, p.

D5;
and "Sidley & Austin, RTC Said to Reach Pact," Wall Street
Journal, October 31, 1991, p.

B4.

The basis of the suit was a
memo written on May 10, 1988 by Margery Waxman, a partner
in Sidlev & Austin's Washington office, to Charles Keating.

In
it, she said "pressure" had been applied to M.

Danny Wall, then
chairman of the Home Loan Bank Board, "to work toward
meeting your demands and he has so instructed his staff."
62.

"Suit Accuses 7 Drug Makers of Price-Fixing," Los
Angeles Times, October 15, 1993, p.

Dl.

Other pharmaceutical
houses accused of conspiring to fix prescription drug prices
included Smith-Kline-Beecham, Ciba-Geigy Corp., American
Home Products, Schering-Plough and Glaxo.

63.

Ida Honorof, "FDA Coverup of Hazards of Nutra-
Sweet,"Report to Consumers, Vol.

XVIII, No.

401, December,
1987.

Also, "Two Ex-U S.

Prosecutors' Roles in Case Against
Searle are Questioned in Probe," Wall Street Journal, February
7,1g 86, p.

4.

Ironically, William Conlon won an appointment
to the Illinois State Board of Ethics in 1982 (Kogan, p.

359).

64.

Graves
65.

Los Angeles Times, December 22, 1988.

66.

"Sam Skinner: A Pragmatist in a Storm," Wall Street
Journal, December 6, 1991.

67.

"Samuel Knox Skinner," New York Times, December
23, 1988.

68.

Graves.

69.

"Statement from Adrian Gross, Former FDA Investiga-
tor and Scientist," Congressional Record, August 1, 1985, p.

S10835.

70.

Congressional Record, August 1, 1985, p.

510831, and
"Statements from Adrian Gross," p.

S10838.

71.

"FDA Handling of Research on NutraSweet is De-
fended," New York Times, July 18, 1987, p.

50.

72.

H.J.--- PAGE BREAK ---

72. H.J. Roberts, M.D., Aspartame (NutraSweet).' Is it Safe?,
Charles Press (Philadelphia: 1990), p. 10. 73. Congressional Record, August 1, 1985, p. S108-28,
74. Ibid., p. S108-34. 76. Graves. 77. "Sweet Suspicions," three-part CBS Nightly News se-
ries. January 1984. Transcript reprinted in the Congressional
Record, August 1, 1985, p. S108-26. 78. Ibid. 79. Raymond Bonner, "Searle Stock Query Held
`Smokescreen,'" New York Times, February 29, 1984, p. D5. 80. William Safire, "Sweet and Sour," New York Times,
June 1, 1984, p. A31. 81. Louis Wolf, "Accuracy in Media Rewrites the News and
History," Covert Action Information Bulletin, Number 21
(Spring 1984), pp. 24-37. 82. I.N. Love, "NutraSweet Isn't that 'Sweet,— in Gentle
Strength Times, October 1987, p. 3. 83. Graves. 84. "Complaints on Aspartame Lead to Nationwide Inves-
tigation," Los Angeles Times, July 5, 1984, p. HI. 85. "Federal Agency Sees Little Risk in Sweetener," New
York Times, November 2, 1984, p. A22,
86. Los Angeles Times, July 5, 1984. 87. New York Times, November 2, 1984. 88. "U.S. Study of Aspartame Finds no Serious Effects,"
Washington Post, November 2, 1984, p. A18. 89. "Pepsi Switches Sweeteners," Washington Post, No-
vember 2, 1984, p. Al. 90. "Most Scientists in Poll Doubt NutraSweet's Safety,"
Washington Post, August 17, 1987, p. A23. 91. Roberts, p. 238. 92. Congressional Report, May 7, 1987, p. S5500. 93. "New Findings Back Use of Sweetner," New Yo
Times, August 1987, p. 30. Post, April 23, 1986, p. C7. oberts, p. 246-47.M
94. "Researchers Differ Over Long Range Effects of Swee
crier," Los Angeles Times, November 3, 1988, p. H]. 95. Roberts, p. 244. oberts, p. 248. High Court Rejects Sweetener Review," Washington
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 49
98. 96,
97. "
-L-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ROSWELL
THE GREAT "UFO" CASE: SOLVED AT LAST?

U
FO aficionados are a testy lot, which is why one hesitates
to write about the Roswell affair —a maddeningly complex
farrago of "spies," lies, and watch-the-skies.

New Mexico
Congressman Steve Schiff is looking into the story, which recently
inspired a rather nifty made-for-cable film starring Kyle MaLaugh-
lin.

Saucer fans fixate upon each detail of the Roswell account like
mystics contemplating the stations of the cross, and God help the
writer who hints at an explanation divergent from the UC (ufologi-
cally correct) interpretation.

Yet we must now report that persuasive evidence indicates
something other than an alien craft crash-landed near Roswell,
New Mexico, on July 2, 1947.

During a thunderstorm on that date, an unidentified sky-borne
object exploded.

The wreckage crashed into W.

W.

"Mac" Brazel's
sheep ranch, situated about 10 miles northwest
of Roswell and 30 miles southeast of Corona.

The next morning, Brazel and his sons searched
for debris.

They found shards of an extremely
sturdy light-weight metal, and a foil-like sub-
stance that was surprisingly resistant to tearing
or wrinkling.

The ranch had no telephone, so
Braze!

didn't report his find until he made a trip
to the city some two days later.

He briefed Major
Jesse Marcel, an intelligence officer at the local
Army Air Base (home, incidentally, of the 509th
Bomb group, specially trained to deliver atomic
payloads).

Marcel consulted with higher authority and received
orders to investigate the crash site.

At the ranch, Marcel found the inexplicable foil, and scooped
up bits of a flexible material similar to balsa wood, imprinted with
pink and purple "hieroglyphics." The Major had a crew of men
scour the area for the debris, then convinced Brazel that silence on
this matter would be the better part of patriotism.Marcel consulted with higher authority and received
orders to investigate the crash site.

At the ranch, Marcel found the inexplicable foil, and scooped
up bits of a flexible material similar to balsa wood, imprinted with
pink and purple "hieroglyphics." The Major had a crew of men
scour the area for the debris, then convinced Brazel that silence on
this matter would be the better part of patriotism.

Apparently, the
military later used fairly heavy-handed tactics to convince the
unfortunate rancher not to discuss the matter.

Soldiers loaded the
wreckage aboard a B-29, which flew to Fort Worth, Texas.

On July 8, the public information officer at Roswell base,
Walter Haut, issued a press release stating that the 509th had
recovered a flying saucer "through the cooperation of one of the
local ranchers."Mistake.

Haut's superiors immediately squelched
the report.

(Haut's military career didn't last much longer.) To
assuage public anxiety, the military needed to come up with a clever
diversion — and fast.

Thus, at Fort Worth, Brigadier General Roger
mey announced that the wreckage was simply a weather balloon
_
aught down by the thunderstorm.

He even allowed newsmen to
lotograph the recovered balloon pieces (at least that's what they
ere told the stuff was), which were then sent on to Ohio's Wright
tld for analysis.

One wonders why a mere weather balloon would
ceive such treatment.

Ramey's story held until the late 1970s, when author William
Moore (and others) decided to look into the matter.

Marcel, when
interviewed, admitted that the "weather balloon" tale was phoney.

Moore co-wrote a book called The Roswell Incident with Charles
Berlitz, whose well-known name helped garner a sizable advance
The book mixes solid facts and silly rumors —a sad situation which
Moore blames on his former partner.

Still, the basic Roswell story
got out, and other researchers became interested.Moore co-wrote a book called The Roswell Incident with Charles
Berlitz, whose well-known name helped garner a sizable advance
The book mixes solid facts and silly rumors —a sad situation which
Moore blames on his former partner.

Still, the basic Roswell story
got out, and other researchers became interested.

Moore now claims that the material photographed in Ramey's
office back in 1947 was the actual debris from Brazel's ranch.

Most
ufologists prefer to believe that newsmen snapped shots of an
unrelated downed weather balloon, which Ramey sneakily substi-
tuted for the real thing.

Moore backs his version of events with
interview statements from Marcel and then-Colonel Thomas J.

DuBose, who both appear in the controversial photos.

If their
assertions are true — if those images do depict the real "alien"
wreckage — then the Roswell case suffers a punishing blow.

To
most people, the silvery' substance in the phot-
graphs simply doesn't look like shearings from
a saucer.

The stuff-that-can't-be-wrinkled-or-
to rn appears very wrinkled and very torn.

Many following the case decided to discard
Moore's interviews with Ramey and DuBose,
mostly because Moore has, over the years.

proven somewhat confounding.

He claims his
research into Roswell attracted the attention of
a group inside the American intelligence com-
munity — and in truth, he does appear to have
communicated with a number of spooky fel-
lows, including Colonel John Alexander of Los Alamos National
Laboratories.

(See Dick Russell's "Non-lethal Weapons," in this
issue.) Moore's associate Jamie Shandera received top secret presi-
dential briefing papers allegedly confirming Me extraterrestrial
origin of the Roswell crash.

But these documents are as widely
questioned as Anna Nicole Smith's assurances that she never had
cosmetic surgery.

So, just what, exactly, nose-dived onto Mac Brazel's ranch that
day in 1947?--- PAGE BREAK ---

But these documents are as widely
questioned as Anna Nicole Smith's assurances that she never had
cosmetic surgery. So, just what, exactly, nose-dived onto Mac Brazel's ranch that
day in 1947? Astronomer Jacques Vallee once offered the interest-
ing suggestion that the debris may have come from a special
floating drone, designed to measure radioactivity. (These were,
after all, the days of open-air A-bomb tests.) Vallee believes the
technology of the time could have produced Roswell-type metallic
foil, "Aluminized Saran," he writes, "...was paper-thin, was not
dented by a hammer blow, and was restored to a smooth finish after
crushing."
Vallee came close, but lawyer Peter Gersten got the cigar. Gersten, now joined by a handful of other saucer researchers -
including a controversial fellow named Karl Pflock — has explored
the possibility that the crashed object was constructed fora top-se-
cret balloon project called "Mogul." (The Army has recently
issued a report backing up this scenario.) Project Mogul studied the
phenomenon of atmospheric sound channels, once a highly classi-
fied subject At a certain level in the upper atmosphere, soundwaves
travel extremely far. The scientists involved with Project Mogul
hoped to use stationary balloons to "overhear" possible nuclear
Was
"crashe
really
Pro
MO
the
d UFO"
part of
ject
GUL? Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 50
a412,

--- PAGE BREAK ---PROJECT MK-ULTRA
"The CIA's Program of
Research in Behavioral
Modification"
JOINT HEARINGS before the Select
Committee on Intelligence and the Subcom-
mittee on Health and Scientific Research of
the Committee on Human Resources,
United States Senate 95th Congress.

First
Session.

PWR code #220 $9.95
111I11- UM.

IS..Noi•
Naar •••I••••••I•••I
explosions emanating from the Soviet Union.

Confirmation for the Mogul theory comes from Professor Char-
les B.

Moore (that last name again!

As if this tale weren't complex
enough...) of the Langmuir Laboratory for Atmospheric Research
in Socorro, New Mexico.

Professor Moore, now in his 80s, headed
Project Mogul.

Jim Moseley, who puts out a sarcastic, iconoclastic
newsletter called Saucer Smear, has printed the following excerpt
from a letter written by the good Professor
"Turning now to the debris recovered by W.

W.

Brazel in 1947,
I have long held that this material probably was from one of our
balloons.

1 tried to convince William Moore on this point when he
visited me, but I failed..." According to the professor, the debris
resulted from a balloon launch designed to test a Rawin radar target.

"Rawin targets simply were not used by the regular weather
services in peacetime.

Therefore, the people who had previously
found radiosondes and weather balloon debris would not have
recognized the ML-306/AP targets because they would not have
seen them before." These strangely-shaped radar targets were
constructed of an unusual material which one balloon expert de-
scribes as a combination of aluminum foil and wax paper.

(This is
probably the "aluminized saran" Vallee speaks of.) The reinforc-
ing tape had flowers, circles and other figures printed on it, poss-
sibly accounting for the "hieroglyphics" mentioned by rancher
Braze!.Therefore, the people who had previously
found radiosondes and weather balloon debris would not have
recognized the ML-306/AP targets because they would not have
seen them before." These strangely-shaped radar targets were
constructed of an unusual material which one balloon expert de-
scribes as a combination of aluminum foil and wax paper.

(This is
probably the "aluminized saran" Vallee speaks of.) The reinforc-
ing tape had flowers, circles and other figures printed on it, poss-
sibly accounting for the "hieroglyphics" mentioned by rancher
Braze!.

Although the actual Mogul balloons were made of the then-new
material polethylene, the scientists decided to use standard meteor-
logical balloons to conduct a test of the radar target.

Thus, in June
of 1947, an ML-306/AP device was attached to a cluster of neo-
prene balloons and launched from Alamogordo Army Air Force
Base.

As the balloons ascended, the rubber-like neoprene expanded
and burst — hence the "explosion" reported by Braze'.

The balloon
cluster descended; the remaining balloons had just enough "lift"
to drag the ML-306/AP along the desert floor.

Naturally, the radar
target was shredded.

And Mac Brazel, it seems, found the shreddings.

Since Project
Mogul was then highly classified (and remained so for decades),
the military had to silence Brazel and put a cover story in place.

The jury stillhasn't reached afinal verdict; a number of reason-
able people (including the unfortunate Haut) still don't buy the
Mogul theory.

Of course, that theory would immediately fall to
shreds if someone could prove the nagging reports that searchers
in 1947 found actual alien bodies.

Indeed, a conster named Gerry
Anderson came forward in 1990, claiming to have seen such
bodies.

His story was later proved a hoax.

More intriguing is the tale of one Grady L.

"Barney"
Barnett, a soil conservation engineer who stepped forward
after researchers had already tracked down Jesse Marcel and
other key witnesses.More intriguing is the tale of one Grady L.

"Barney"
Barnett, a soil conservation engineer who stepped forward
after researchers had already tracked down Jesse Marcel and
other key witnesses.

Barnett reported that he had found a
crashed disc, complete with alien bodies, on July 3, 1947.

The
crash occurred on the Plains of Saint Augustine (near Mag-
delena), more than 100 miles from Brazel's spread.

Weirdly,
a team of university archeologists just happened to show up
in this spot at that moment; they too saw the wreckige.

Soon
thereafter, a red-haired military man appeared.

He swore
Barnett and his compatriots to secrecy; Army personnel from
Roswell then scooped up the bodies and the disc.

At least, that's what Barnett claimed.

But his tale raises a
number of questions: Who were these "archeologists," and
why haven't they confirmed Barnett's story?

What kind of
crash could scatter extraterrestrial artifacts over an area 100
miles wide?

Why does a diary kept by Barnett's wife note that her
husband spent July 3, 1947 in the office?

How can we reconcile
Barnett's assertions with those of archeologist Herbert Dick, who
was out working in the Plains of St.

Augustine that day and never
saw any sign of a crashed saucer or other archeologists?

Most
importantly: If the military had recovered aliens on July 3, why
didn't Jesse Marcel lotow anything about the Barnett crash or
recovered alien bodies?

The extraterrestrial cadaver story doesn't end there.

Roswell
mortician Glenn Dennis has told reporters that, 43 years earlier,
Army personnel delivered alien bodies to the Roswell Army Air
Field, But Dennis didn't see the bodies himself; he says he heard
about them from a nurse who worked at the base.

Others allegedly
saw aliens first-hand: Captain Oliver "Pappy" Henderson of
Roswell's First Air Transport Unit spotted the corpses in situ, while
Sergeant Melvin E.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Roswell
mortician Glenn Dennis has told reporters that, 43 years earlier,
Army personnel delivered alien bodies to the Roswell Army Air
Field, But Dennis didn't see the bodies himself; he says he heard
about them from a nurse who worked at the base. Others allegedly
saw aliens first-hand: Captain Oliver "Pappy" Henderson of
Roswell's First Air Transport Unit spotted the corpses in situ, while
Sergeant Melvin E. Brown, stationed at the base, guarded a truck
carrying recovered items from the Barnett crash site. Reportedly,
Brown pulled back a tarpaulin and caught a glimpse of the alien
cadavers. Astonishing assertions. Alas, the Brown and Henderson ac-
counts have a co-dependent relationship with the unconvincing
Barnett narrative — and the Gerry Anderson fiasco makes one
skittish of all such claims. The question remains: How could alien
corpses make their way to Roswell base without anyone informing
Major Jesse Marcel, Roswell's chief intelligence officer? Ultimately, we have no iron-clad proof of alien bodies and no
truly solid evidence of a July 3 crash on the Plains of Saint
Augustine. We do have good reason to believe something fell on
Mac Brazel's ranch — and we now have a pretty good idea of what
that "something" probably was. UFO skeptics shouldn't gloat,
though: The Mogul theory gives both debunker and believer an egg
facial. Some participants on both sides of the debate reached
conclusions before all the facts were in — for example, arch-skeptic
Philip Klass insisted on the "weather balloon" cover story well
after Marcel had discredited it
In a sense, the believers were right: Something strange did
plummet to earth near Roswell. The government really did cover
up the twat about the crashed object. But it probably wasn't a flying saucer. Of course, we're willing to revamp that opinion if someone can
prove that Professor Moore has it all wrong. Anyone willing to give
that a go...? — S.P. Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 51aucer. Of course, we're willing to revamp that opinion if someone can
prove that Professor Moore has it all wrong. Anyone willing to give
that a go...? — S.P. Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 51

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CASE CLOSED OR OSWALD FRAMED?
Case Closed:
Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of JFK
by Gerald Posner (New York: Random House).
A Book Review
by Peter Dale Scott, Ph. D.
T
his is a special book about a special case:The two,
indeed, are part of a single phenomenon. From theoutset, the Kennedy assassination has attracted — along
with cranks, ideologues, paranoid obsessives, charlatans, and a
clairvoyant — two special kinds of student: the lawyers and the
scholars.

From the outset there have
been reasons (persuasive reasons) of
state to close the case; and from the
outset there have been glaring problems
With the evidence which have kept it
open.

Over the years there has been no
shortage of people (not just lawyers)
meeting the persuasive needs of state,
nor of people (including some lawyers)
following the lure of truth.

If anything has become more clear
about the case since the Warren Report,
it is that officials of many government
agencies have lied, sometimes repeat-
edly, to maintain the Warren Commis-
sion's conclusions.

Congressional Comm 'ttees have established
that FBI agents lied about Oswald's visit to the Dallas FBI office
before the assassination and that CIA officials gave false state-
ments (even within the Agency) about CIA surveillance of
Oswald at the Cuban and Soviet Embassies in Mexico City.'
These official lies have created a touchstone against which new
books about the assassination can be tested.

Are lies transmitted
uncritically, in lawyerly fashion, as evidence?

Or are they
'exposed by scholarly investigation?

As we shall see, Posner's
performance is a mixed one (he deals with the FBI falsehoods,
but not the CIA ones).

On balance, unfortunately, it is a lawyerly
performance.

Care Closed may seem to uninformed readers to be the most
persuasive of the succession of books that have urged readers
to accept the lone-assassin finding of the Warren Report.

But to
those who know the case it is also evidence of ongoing cover-up.

For Posner often transmits without evaluation official state-
ments that are now known to be false, or chooses discredited but
compliant witnesses who have already disowned earlier helpful
stones that have been disproves.But to
those who know the case it is also evidence of ongoing cover-up.

For Posner often transmits without evaluation official state-
ments that are now known to be false, or chooses discredited but
compliant witnesses who have already disowned earlier helpful
stones that have been disproves.

He even revives a wild allega-
tion which the Warren Commission rejected, and reverses tes-
timony to suggest its opposite.

These are serious charges.

There are in fact books on both
sides of the Kennedy assassination controversy about which
similar accusations could be made, and normally one might
conclude that such books did not merit a serious rebuttal.

But
Case Closed is a special book, in which Posner more than once
acknowledges help from "confidential intelligence sources."
It has since been granted major publicity in the media, from U.S.

News and World Report to the Today show and 20/20.

There are many places where one can agree with Posner's
rebuttal of particular critics on particular points.

One must grant
also that on a topic of this range and complexity no one's book
will be flawless.

But in Case Closed some of the weakest sections of the
Warren Commission argument have been strengthened by sus-
pect methodologies and even falsehoods so systematic they call
into question the good faith of his entire
project.

On the now-hoary question of
whether Oswald's protector in Dallas,
George de Mohrenschildt, had a CIA
relationship, Posner reverts to the War-
ren Commission method of letting the
CIA answer the question: "CIA offi-
cials have provided sworn testimony
that there was no de Mohrenschildt-
U.S.

intelligence relationship."3 That
will not work in 1993.

In 1978 the
House Select Committee on Assassina-
tions revealed that, when leaving Dallas
in May 1963 for Haiti, de Mohren-
schildt traveled to Washington and took part in a Pentagon-CIA
meeting with de Mohrenschildt's business ally, a Haitian banker
named Clemard Joseph Charles.CASE CLOSED OR OSWALD FRAMED?
Case Closed:
Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of JFK
by Gerald Posner (New York: Random House).
A Book Review
by Peter Dale Scott, Ph. D.
T
his is a special book about a special case:The two,
indeed, are part of a single phenomenon. From the

intelligence relationship."3 That
will not work in 1993. In 1978 the
House Select Committee on Assassina-
tions revealed that, when leaving Dallas
in May 1963 for Haiti, de Mohren-
schildt traveled to Washington and took part in a Pentagon-CIA
meeting with de Mohrenschildt's business ally, a Haitian banker
named Clemard Joseph Charles. A former CIA contract agent
has since suggested that one of de Mohrenschildt's purposes in
moving to Haiti was to oversee a CIA-approved plot to over-
throw Haitian dictator Francois "Papa Doc" Duvalier. 4
There is no excuse for Posner's repeating, uncritically and
without footnotes, another old CIA claim, that at the time of the
assassination, "Oswald's CIA file did not contain any photos"
of Oswald.5 This false claim is an important one, since the CIA
has used it to justify the false description of Oswald which it
sent to other agencies on October 10, 1963, six weeks before the
assassination. But as Anthony Summers pointed out thirteen
years age, the CIA preassassination file on Oswald contained
four newspaper clippings of his defection to the Soviet Union
in 1959, and two of these contained photographs of him.6 One
could argue that the original error arose from an innocent
oversight; although this is unlikely, since it is part of a larger
pattern of CIA misrepresentations concerning the photos.? One
"But in Case Closed some
of the weakest sections of the
Warren Commission argu-
ment have been strenghtened
by suspect methodologies
and even falsehoods, so sys-
tematic they call into ques-
tion the good faith of his en-
tire project"
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 52

--- PAGE BREAK ---cannot offer such an innocent defense for Posner's repetition of
the falsehood.

His discussion of the photo issue is a finning
argument with Summers; and indeed in this section he repeat-
edly disputes Summers' allegations.

In short, this book is not "a model of historical research,"
as the historian Stephen Ambrose has claimed.

It is a lawyer's
brief.

Reversing the Verdict on Jack
Ruby and Organized Crime
O
ne would have thought that one issue now resolved
beyond question is that Jack Ruby indeed had, as the
House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded,
a "significant number of associations" with organized crime
leaders both nationally and in Dallas (AR 149).

Eight pages on
this topic in the House Committee Report were supplemented
by a staff volume of over a thousand pages.

Once this important
point is conceded, it is hard not to agree that the Warren
Commission's portrait of Ruby as a loner, based on misleading
reports and suppression of evidence by the FBI, was a false one.

To avoid this problem, Posner has produced a witness who
revives the Warren Report's portrait of Ruby as "a real low level
loser," adding that only "conspiracy theorists" would "believe
that Ruby was part of the mob." The witness is Tony Zoppi,
whom Posner describes as a former "prominent entertainment
reporter for the Dallas Morning News."9 He does not mention
that Zoppi had been the source of an innocent explanation for
Jack Ruby's 1959 visits to the Havana casinos, an explanation
so swiftly demolished by the Committee that Zoppi himself
retracted it.

Thanks to this episode we now know that Zoppi, as
well as Ruby, was close to a casino employee of Meyer Lansky's
called Lewis McWillie and was himself working for a mob
casino in Las Vegas, the Riviera., by the time the Committee
interviewed him in 1978.1°
Why would Posner choose a discredited casino employee to
claim that Ruby was not connected to the mob?To avoid this problem, Posner has produced a witness who
revives the Warren Report's portrait of Ruby as "a real low level
loser," adding that only "conspiracy theorists" would "believe
that Ruby was part of the mob." The witness is Tony Zoppi,
whom Posner describes as a former "prominent entertainment
reporter for the Dallas Morning News."9 He does not mention
that Zoppi had been the source of an innocent explanation for
Jack Ruby's 1959 visits to the Havana casinos, an explanation
so swiftly demolished by the Committee that Zoppi himself
retracted it.

Thanks to this episode we now know that Zoppi, as
well as Ruby, was close to a casino employee of Meyer Lansky's
called Lewis McWillie and was himself working for a mob
casino in Las Vegas, the Riviera., by the time the Committee
interviewed him in 1978.1°
Why would Posner choose a discredited casino employee to
claim that Ruby was not connected to the mob?

The answer,
surely is, that he is a lawyer out, like the Warren Commission,
to "close" a case.

Posner opposes the thousand pages of House
Committee documentation, not with new rebuttal documenta-
tion, but by extended oral interviews with just four witnesses,
each of them dubious.

One is Jack Ruby's brother Earl, inves-
tigated by the House Committee because of allegations that his
business and personal incomes increased after Oswald's murder
(AR 159).

Another is former FBI agent William Roemer, from
the Chicago FBI office that covered up Ruby's organized crime
links in the first place.One is Jack Ruby's brother Earl, inves-
tigated by the House Committee because of allegations that his
business and personal incomes increased after Oswald's murder
(AR 159).

Another is former FBI agent William Roemer, from
the Chicago FBI office that covered up Ruby's organized crime
links in the first place.

(The House Committee concluded that
the FBI "was seriously delinquent in investigating the Ruby-un-
derworld connections;" AR 243.)
The fourth is Dallas Deputy District Attorney Bill Alexan-
der, who in November 1963 allegedly "prepared to charge
Oswald with murdering the President as part of an international
Communist conspiracy."11 Posner transmits Alexander's ad-
mission to him (in the second of four interviews) that he has
been an important liar about the case.12 And yet Posner inter-
viewed Alexander over "several days" (503), and cites him, as
a "significant source," on at least sixteen different occasions.

Crucial to closing the case is rebuttal of the House Commit-
tee's finding that Ruby may have had "assistance" from Dallas
policemen in entering the Dallas Police Basement (AR 157).

It
learned that doors to another stairway had apparently been left
unlocked, and the men guarding these doors reassigned else-
where shortly before the murder.

It learned also that "the Dallas
Police Department withheld relevant information from the War-
ren Commission," particularly that at the time the sergeant
responsible for the reassignments, Patrick Dean (an acquain-
tance of Dallas mob boss Joe Civello), had been given, and
failed, a polygraph test (AR 158).

Posner ignores these disturbing indications of conspiracy.

He writes (p.

393) that "it wasnever clear whether the door near
the public elevators was properly locked," but offers no reason
to counter the admission by Sergeant Dean, the officer in charge,
that the door was not locked.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He writes (p. 393) that "it wasnever clear whether the door near
the public elevators was properly locked," but offers no reason
to counter the admission by Sergeant Dean, the officer in charge,
that the door was not locked. Like the Warren Commission, he
concludes that Ruby entered by a different route, a vehicle ramp,
even though no witnesses saw Ruby enter that way and eight
witnesses (Posner mentions only two) said that he did not.13 His
only evidence for the ramp route is the Warren Commission's:
Ruby's own sayso, as testified to later (but not at the time) by
four Dallas policemen, one of them Dean. 14
Here again Posner downplays an important Committee find-
ing, by turning again to questionable witnesses and totally
ignoring the evidence of official coverup, in this case by the
Dallas Police. Repeating Stories
Which Even the Warren
Commission Rejected
T
his lawyerly habit.of preferring convenient but discred-
ited witnesses is widespread throughout the book. Withby the
Dallas Police. Repeating Stories
Which Even the Warren
Commission Rejected
T
his lawyerly habit.of preferring convenient but discred-
ited witnesses is widespread throughout the book. With

respect to Oswald's prior use of weapons (another highly
disputable area), he accepts, as did the Warren Commission, the
testimony of Marina Oswald. In so doing he does nothing to
rebut the finding of Warren Commission Counsel Norman
Redlich in February 1964 that Marina "has repeatedly lied to
the Secret Service, the FBI, and this Commission on matters
which are of vital concern."
Given this unrebutted memo, it is hard to excuse the Warren
Commission for relying on Marina's testimony that the
Mannlicher Careen') "was the 'fateful rifle of Lee Oswald.'"15
But Posner resuscitates a story from Marina which even the
Warren Commission, knowing the story's history, discounted
as having "no probative value,"16
Marina said, "Then he got dressed and put on a good suit.
I saw that he took a pistol. I asked him where he was going,
and why he was getting dressed. He answered, 'Nixon is
coming..." She did not know who Nixon was but was
determined that Lee should not leave the house with the
pistol. She asked him to join her in the bathroom, and when
he entered, she jumped out and slammed the door shut.
Bracing her feet against the nearby wall, she struggled as
hard as she could to keep the door closed against his efforts
to push out. "I remember that I held him," she said. "We
actually struggled for several minutes, and then he quieted
down..." At first he was furious, but as he calmed, Oswald
agreed to strip to his underwear, and stayed home reading
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 63

--- PAGE BREAK ---the remainder of the day."
We can only repeat here a few of the problems with this
story, which at the time engendered a number of supporting
statements to the FBI that were later hastily recanted:
According to one version of this latest story from Marina,
Oswald had "intended to shoot Nixon" in Dallas; and she
"had locked Lee Harvey Oswald in the bathroom the
entire day....to prevent him from doing so"...

Faced with
the fact that the Oswald bathroom — like all others -
locked from the inside, Marina then told the FBI ...

that in
April 1963 "she forcibly held the bathroom door shut by
holding on to the knob and bracing her feet against the
wall"....

Finally she would tell the Warren Commission ...

that she and her much stronger husband "struggled for
several minutes" inside the bathroom...

Faced with other,
irreducible difficulties in this Nixon story, the Warren
Commission discreetly concluded it was of "no probative
value.

Note here that Posner has glossed over the inconsistencies
in two incompatible stories by attempting to present them as
one.

In fact if Marina was outside holding on to the knob, she
could not have simultaneously been inside struggling with her
husband.

Twisting Testimony to Imply (or
Even State) Its Opposite
B
ut Posner's worst abuse of testimony occurs with respect
to Oswald's location before the fatal shots.

Posner inher-
its the Warren Commission's problem that a number of
credible witnesses placed Oswald on the first or second floor of
the School Book Depository, both shortly before and shortly
after the fatal shots were fired from the sixth floor at 12:30 PM.

The FBI Summary Report of December, 1963 suggested that
Oswald had been observed on the fifth floor between 11:30 and
12:00, but the Warren Commission added that he had been seen
by Charles Givens, of whom more below) on the sixth floor.Posner inher-
its the Warren Commission's problem that a number of
credible witnesses placed Oswald on the first or second floor of
the School Book Depository, both shortly before and shortly
after the fatal shots were fired from the sixth floor at 12:30 PM.

The FBI Summary Report of December, 1963 suggested that
Oswald had been observed on the fifth floor between 11:30 and
12:00, but the Warren Commission added that he had been seen
by Charles Givens, of whom more below) on the sixth floor.

Posner, like earlier advocates of the lone assassin theory, reports
another such alleged sighting as fact: "At 11:40 one of the
workers, Bonnie Ray Williams, spotted Oswald on the east side
of that floor, near the windows overlooking Dealey Plaza."19
The problem with this convenient story is that Williams, as
if to satisfy his exigent examiners, had apparently changed his
story not once but twice.

An earlier FBI interview on November
23 had reported Williams as saying that he had seen Oswald on
the fifth floor about 11:30 AM; and that Williams had returned
to the sixth floor about noon and had seen no one.20 One day
earlier, only a few hours after the assassination, Williams had
signed and sworn to a Dallas Police affidavit, stating categori-
cally that "I didn't see Oswald any more, that I remember, after
I saw him at 8 AM."2I
The Warren Commission was quite aware of this problem.

It quizzed Williams about his conflicting earlier statements to
the FBI (though not to the Dallas police) and then discreetly
declined to use his belated story about the sixth floor.

And yet
it relied heavily on Williams' account (in another story he had
failed to report earlier) of hearing the shots fired from one floor
above him while watching the motorcade with two coworkers
on the fifth floor.

Commission Counsel Belin elicited vivid
testimony from Williams on this point: "It sounded like it was
right in the building ...

it even shook the building, the side we
were on.Commission Counsel Belin elicited vivid
testimony from Williams on this point: "It sounded like it was
right in the building ...

it even shook the building, the side we
were on.

Cement fell on my head." 22
Williams' earlier amnesia about what he heard is compen-
sated for by elaborate corroboration from his two alleged com-
panions, "Junior" Jarman and Harold Norman.

Indeed the
corroboration is so precise that one's suspicions are raised,
especially since none of the three had reported their important
earwitness accounts to the Dallas police.-3 We even find these
suspicions voiced by Stephen White, in one of the many earlier
books which, like Posner's, has tried to persuade the American
public that the Warren Commission was right:
Any student of the Report...must become uneasy at the
testimony of the three men who stationed themselves at a
fifth floor window in the Depository to watch the motor-
cade go by.

Their stories dovetail admirably: They each
heard three shots; they believed they were fired above
them; one of them heard three shells hit the floor above
them.

It may well be so, but uneasiness is engendered
when one learns that the Warren Commission stimulated
their memories by a reenactment that duplicated in detail
the account to which the investigators themselves were by
then committed, and in so doing may have made concrete
a recollection that had earlier been vague and indistinct.24
The Warren Commission needed an eyewitness to Oswald
on the sixth floor in order to rebut three eyewitness stories that
Oswald had spent this period on the first or second floor of the
building.

Posner has no better rebuttal for one of these three
downstairs witnesses (Eddie Piper) than to say that "Piper ...

is
clearly mistaken as five witnesses had placed Oswald on an
upper floor, left behind by the elevators by that time.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Posner has no better rebuttal for one of these three
downstairs witnesses (Eddie Piper) than to say that "Piper ... is
clearly mistaken as five witnesses had placed Oswald on an
upper floor, left behind by the elevators by that time. "25 The big
problem here is that the witness score of five (for upstairs)
versus three (for downstairs) had originally been one, or later
two, (for upstairs) versus four (for downstairs). The problematic
nature of this evidence had been noted in an early Warren
Commission internal memo of February 25, 196426 All five who
had declared for upstairs by March had changed their stories to
do so. None had done so more suspiciously than the one witness,
Charles Givens, whom Posner chooses (without any hint of this
problem) as his main source. There are three possible responses to the confusion and
conflict in witness testimony about Oswald's location. There is
the judicious or common-sense response (which was that of the
House Committee): to conclude that the "inconsistencies in the
statements
created problems that defied resolution 15 [now
301 years after the events in Dallas."-7
There is the scholarly response: to gather more evidence,
whether as to what happened inside the Depository, or about the
alterations in the witnesses' stories, or about the forces which
led to these alterations. Sylvia Meagher in 1971 looked more
closely at "The Curious Testimony of Mr. Givens," which
changed at least four times in five months and ended up with his
switch from being a downstairs to an upstairs witness. Accord-
ing to an FBI memo of November 22, Givens had told the FBI
that at 11:50 AM he had seen Oswald reading a paper in the
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 54

--- PAGE BREAK ---PETER DALE SCOTT
DEEP POLITICS
AND THE
DEATH OF JFK
in this met iculously documented, eye-open-
ing investigation.

Peter Dale Scott uncovers
the political secrets surrounding Kennedy's
assassination.

Offering a wholly new per-
spective—that JFK's death was not an iso-
lated case.

but rather a symptom of deeper
processes—Scott examines the deep poli-
tics of early 60s American international and
domestic policies.

525.00 aentativel
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS
DEEP POLITICS AND
THE DEATH OF JFK
by Peter Dale Scott
In this meticulously documented, eye-opening in-
vestigation, Peter Dale Scott uncovers the political se-
crets surrounding Kennedy's assassination.

Offering
a wholly new perspective-that JFK's death was not
an isolated case, but rather a symptom of deeper proc-
esses.

Scott examines the deep politics of early 60's
American international and domestic policies.

PWR code #815
$24.50
WHO KILLED JFK
BY CARL OGLESBY
In this clear, readable book, prominent
assassination researcher Carl Oglesby
proves that JFIC must have been killed by
a conspiracy, not by a lone gunman.

Even
scarier, he knows that the U.S.

govern-
ment has been, and still is covering up that
conspiracy.

In the last chapter.

he dis-
cusses who might actually have pulled the
trigger.

PWR code #711 $5.95
"domino room" on the first floor In his Warren Commission
testimony of April 8, 1964, Givens told counsel Belin that he
had never made the earlier statement and claimed (for the first
time in the official record) that he had seen Oswald on the sixth
floor just before noon.

Meagher also reprinted an intervening statement on Febru-
ary 13, 1964 to the FBI by Dallas Police Lt.PWR code #711 $5.95
"domino room" on the first floor In his Warren Commission
testimony of April 8, 1964, Givens told counsel Belin that he
had never made the earlier statement and claimed (for the first
time in the official record) that he had seen Oswald on the sixth
floor just before noon.

Meagher also reprinted an intervening statement on Febru-
ary 13, 1964 to the FBI by Dallas Police Lt.

Jack Revill (a
narcotics detective), "that Givens had previously been handled
by the Special Services Bureau on a marijuana charge and he
believes that Givens would change his story for money." And
she denounced as "patently false" Revill's testimony to the
Warren Commission (on May 13, 1964) that Givens had told
him on November 22 he had seen Oswald on the sixth floor, on
the grounds that Givens had never said this until April, 1964.29
Finally there is the lawyerly approach: to tell less, not more,
to suppress the difficulties with the testimony that is preferred,
and to invent nonexistent problems with the testimony of wit-
nesses one wishes to discredit.

This is the approach of Posner
in Case Closed.

Instead of admitting, and discussing, the prob-
lems with the sixth floor witnesses who recanted their own
testimony, Posner completely ignores these problems and cre-
ates the false impression that it is a key first floor witness who
has contradicted herself.

Posner is especially concerned to impeach the testimony of
Carolyn Arnold, which corroborated Oswald's own account of
having lunch on the first floor, in opposition to the Warren
Commission account of Oswald waiting on the sixth floor In
Posner's words:
Carolyn Arnold, a secretary to the Depository's vice-
president, told Anthony Summers in 1978 that at 12:15
she entered the second floor lunch room and saw Oswald
sitting in one of the booths.

"He was alone as usual and
appeared to be having lunch," Arnold said.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Posner is especially concerned to impeach the testimony of
Carolyn Arnold, which corroborated Oswald's own account of
having lunch on the first floor, in opposition to the Warren
Commission account of Oswald waiting on the sixth floor In
Posner's words:
Carolyn Arnold, a secretary to the Depository's vice-
president, told Anthony Summers in 1978 that at 12:15
she entered the second floor lunch room and saw Oswald
sitting in one of the booths. "He was alone as usual and
appeared to be having lunch," Arnold said. Her interview
with Summers was the first time she ever publicly told the
story about seeing Oswald in the lunch room, But Arnold
had given two different FBI statements shortly after the
assassination. In one, she said she "could not be sure" but
might have caught a fleeting glimpse of Oswald in the first
floor hallway, and in the second statement said she did not
see him at all. Arnold told Summers the FBI misquoted
her, though she had signed her statement as correct. Four
other women worked with Arnold and watched the motor-
cade with her that day. They support her original state-
ments and not the story she told fifteen years later. Virgie
Rachley and Betty Dragoo accompanied her when she left
the second floor at 12:13. They did not see Oswald in the
lunch room. After this apparent demolition of Arnold, Posner dismisses
the other two witnesses in a footnote:
William Shelley and Eddie Piper also thought they saw
Oswald on the first floor shortly before noon. But Shelley
later admitted he saw him at 11:45 A M., before others
noticed him on the sixth floor. Piper thought he saw
Oswald at noon filling orders on the first floor, but he is
clearly mistaken as five witnesses had placed Oswald on
an upper floor, left behind by the elevators at that time.3°
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 55

--- PAGE BREAK ---(These five witnesses had come up with the elevator story
long after the assassination; and one of them, charles Givens,
had originally placed Oswald on the first floor).

But the apparent problem with Arnold's testimony is an
artifact of Posner's own lawyerly imagination:
1) Arnold never told the FBI "she did not see [Oswald] at
all." She said that she "did not see Lee Harvey Oswald at the
time President Kennedy was shot.

'` This was in response to a
narrow question asked of all Book Depository witnesses by the
FBI, in accordance with a request from the Warren Commission.

Similar if not identical answers were given by Roy Truly, who
according to Posner saw Oswald two minutes (some say 90
seconds) after the assassination, and by five of Posner's alleged
upper floor witnesses.'
2) It is highly misleading to say that "Arnold told Summers
the FBI misquoted her, though she had signed her statement as
correct." Here Posner conflates two different FBI statements,
one of November 26 about seeing Oswald on the first floor
(where she later claimed to have been misquoted) and one of
March 28 about not seeing Oswald at the time of the assassina-
tion (which she had signed as correct).

3) Thus there is no evidence that Arnold ever contradicted
herself.

One might normally suspect witnesses who denied
making statements attributed to them by the FBI.

But Posner has
no grounds for doing so in this case.

As he is quite aware, three
of his upper floor witnesses (Givens, Williams, and Norman,
whose final stories he reports as gospel) had denied under oath
making earlier statements attributed to them by the FBI and/or
Secret Service.34 Arnold's different memory after fourteen
years is hardly comparable to the dramatic differences in re-
ported stories from Givens after a few weeks, or even hours.But Posner has
no grounds for doing so in this case.

As he is quite aware, three
of his upper floor witnesses (Givens, Williams, and Norman,
whose final stories he reports as gospel) had denied under oath
making earlier statements attributed to them by the FBI and/or
Secret Service.34 Arnold's different memory after fourteen
years is hardly comparable to the dramatic differences in re-
ported stories from Givens after a few weeks, or even hours.

I call Posner's treatment lawyerly, because he is trying both
to make some very problematic sixth floor witnesses seem
clearer than they were and to make a first floor witness seem
more problematic than she really was.

But at times his abuse of
evidence goes beyond legal propriety,
On the same page, for example, he tries to rebut Oswald's
own statement that he took his lunch in the first floor domino
room by a seemingly persuasive barrage of conflicting testi-
mony: "Danny Arce, Jack Dougherty, and Charles Givens [all
three of them upper floor witnesses who had changed their
stories] also ate in the first floor room up to 12:15 and said there
was no sign of him.

“3 5 The footnoted citation for this statement
from Givens is to the Warren Commission Hearings, Volume
Six, p.

352.

But on that page we find the exact opposite testi-
mony:
MR_ BELIN: On November 22 did you eat inside the
building?

MR.

GIVENS: No Sir.

After this discovery, one.

can raise questions about the other
alleged witnesses as wel1.3°
Not every page of Posner's book is as full of distortions as
this one.

Even here I have focused on the worst handling of
evidence; there are indeed other credible witnesses who create
problems for those who believe that Oswald in fact spent this
time on the first floor.

But I have no trouble admitting that the evidence is confused,
and the Depository witness testimony problematic.Even here I have focused on the worst handling of
evidence; there are indeed other credible witnesses who create
problems for those who believe that Oswald in fact spent this
time on the first floor.

But I have no trouble admitting that the evidence is confused,
and the Depository witness testimony problematic.

It is Posner,
in his desire to find the case closed, who must introduce a false
simplicity that in fact is not to be found.

There will be those who
argue that Mr.

Posner is after all a lawyer, and we should expect
no better of him.

But my complaint is about the national media pundits who
(like Tom Wicker) have hailed this book as "thoroughly docu-
mented" and "always conclusive." My complaint even more is
with the prominent academics who (like Professor Stephen
Ambrose) have hailed it as "a model of historical research." The
case will certainly never be closed as long as the media tout such
misrepresentations as the proper answer to the critics.

CI
Footnotes:
I.

U.S.

Cong., Senate, Intelligence Committee, Performance
of Intelligence Agencies, Appendix B; House, Judiciary Commit-
tee, FBI Oversight Hearings, October 21 and December 11, 1975;
Posner, 215-17 (Oswald and FBI in Dallas); House, Select Com-
mittee on Assassinations, "Lee Harvey Oswald, the CIA and
Mexico City," Classified Staff Study (cited henceforth as Lopez
Report, declassified 1993), 123, 164, 183-84, etc.

(Oswald in
Mexico City).

2.

Posner, pp.

511, 514, etc.

3.

Posner, 86.

4.

12 AH 5557; Summers, 248; Dick Russell, The Man Who
Knew Too Much (New York: Carroll and Graf, 1992), 318-19;
Warren Hinkle and William Turner, The Fish Is Red (New York:
Harper and Row, 1981), 210 (contract agent); Peter Dale Scott,
Deep Politics and the Death of JFK (Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press, 1993), 78.

There is also the problem
of the alleged KGB defector, Yuri Nosenko, who came to America
in 1964 with the claim that the KGB had nothing to do with Oswald.12 AH 5557; Summers, 248; Dick Russell, The Man Who
Knew Too Much (New York: Carroll and Graf, 1992), 318-19;
Warren Hinkle and William Turner, The Fish Is Red (New York:
Harper and Row, 1981), 210 (contract agent); Peter Dale Scott,
Deep Politics and the Death of JFK (Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press, 1993), 78.

There is also the problem
of the alleged KGB defector, Yuri Nosenko, who came to America
in 1964 with the claim that the KGB had nothing to do with Oswald.

There are issues here that will probably never be resolved, but
Posner, in order to close the case, makes light of them.

He spends
most of his time confirming what he calls "Nosenko's bona tides"
(p.

41), and his arguments are quite persuasive.

But even if Nosenko
were a bona fide defector, it does not follow that all that he says
about Oswald is true.

On the contrary, the House Committee
reported "significant inconsistencies" in statements Noscnko had
given the FBI, the CIA, and the Committee (AR 102).

Posner makes
the valid rebuttal point (p.

45) that a 1967 CIA review found
"massive errors in the translations of the interviews conducted
before and during Nosenko's imprisonment," but he does not
reveal to his readers that this finding related to CIA interviews only,
leaving unexplained the reported major discrepancies between
Nosenko's statements to the Committee and to the FBI.

Thus there
is still little justification for Posner's having relied so heavily on
Nosenko as a principal source.

5.

Posner, 186; emphasis in original.

This false claim was
originally made within the Agency by an anonymous official to
CIA General Counsel Lawrence Houston.

See Anthony Sum-
mers, Conspiracy, (New York: McGrawHill, 1980), 381.

6.

Summers, 381; Warren Commission Document 692; CIA
Document 590252.

7.

Lopez Report, 1374 I.--- PAGE BREAK ---

7. Lopez Report, 1374 I. The Lopez Report called explanations
offered by CIA employees on the matter of the false Oswald
description "hard to accept" (139) and "implausible" (140). 8. Posner, 191 (footnotes 99 and 100), 193 (footnote 105). These cite pages in Summers immediately before and after the
account of the photos in Oswald's file. Prevailing winds Premiere Issue Page 56

--- PAGE BREAK ---•
9.

Posner, 355, 361.

10.

Scott, 198-99; 5 AH 170ss; 9 AH 164-69.

The stake of
Meyer Lansky, Moe Dalitz, and the Chicago mob in the Riviera
is confirmed by one of Posner's other Ruby witnesses, William
Roemer, War ofThe Godfathers (New York: Donald I.

Fine, 1990),
82,167.

11.

William Manchester, The Death of a President (New York:
Harper and Row, 1967), 326; Scott, Deep Politics, 270.

By the time
Posner interviewed him, Alexander had become a fervid anticon-
spimtorialist (Posner, 361-62, 466-67).

But Posner is usually scath-
ing about witnesses who have changed their positions (e.g.

139,
227).

12.

"Shortly after the Inquirer incident, Alexander and two
local reporters concocted a story that Oswald had been FBI
informer S-179 and had been paid $200 a month.

Lonnie Hud-
kins, one of the reporters, printed the story.

attributing it to an
unidentified source.

The fallout was so great that the Warren
Commission held a January 22, 1964, executive session to
discuss the issue.

never much liked the federals,' Alexander
says.

figured it was as good a way as any to keep them out of
my way by having to run down that phony story.'" One of those
who printed the "phony story" was Joe Gouiden (Philadelphia
Inquirer, December 8, 1963).

13.

Posner, 395; G.

Robert Blakey and Richard N.

Billings,
The Plot to Kill the President (New York: Times Books, 321-22.

14.

Posner, 395-96.

Posner says "three" Dallas policemen,
instead of four.

Is he mindful of the problem with Dean's
testimony which he does not share with his readers?

Accepting
Jack Ruby's version as if it were authoritative, Posner also
claims (396n) that the House Committee "ignored the fact that
Secret Service agent Forrest Sorrels also said he heard Ruby tell
[the Dallas police] ...

that he had come down the ramp (Dallas
Morning News, March 25, 1979)." He thus rebukes the Committee
members for ignoring a "fact" that emerged after their report was
published.Accepting
Jack Ruby's version as if it were authoritative, Posner also
claims (396n) that the House Committee "ignored the fact that
Secret Service agent Forrest Sorrels also said he heard Ruby tell
[the Dallas police] ...

that he had come down the ramp (Dallas
Morning News, March 25, 1979)." He thus rebukes the Committee
members for ignoring a "fact" that emerged after their report was
published.

In 1964 Sorrels testified under oath that he did not recall
hearing Ruby comment on how he got into the basement area (13
WH 68),
15.

WR 128, citing 1 WH 119, 14.

16.

Warren Report.

p.

189.

17.

Posner, Case Closed, 120.

18.

Scott, Deep Politics, 271, 289; cf discussion at 28991 22
WH 596, 786; 5 WH 389-90.

19.

Posner, 225, cf.

22 WH 681 (FBI interview of March 19,
1964); 3 WI-1 165.

20.

WCD 5.330, emphasis added; cf.

3 WH 169.

21.

24 WH 229.

22, 3 WH 175; quoted in Posner, 242.

Cf 3 WH 179: "1
heard three shots.

But at first I told the FBI I only heard two
they took me down — because I was so excited, and I couldn't
remember too well.

But later on, as everything began to die
down, I got my memory even a little better than on the 22d, I
remembered three shots."
23.

Like Williams, Norm an —when testifying to the Warren
Commission — recanted details of an earlier statement he had
made under oath (3 WH 194; cf.

17 WH 208).

24.

Stephen White, Should We Now Believe the Warren Re-
port?

(New York: Macmillan, 1968), 57-58.

25.

Posner, 227.

For just some of the many problems of the
alleged Oswald-by-the-elevator encounter (later doubled to be-
come two Oswald-by-the-elevator encounters), see Gorden
Miller, The Third Decade (September 1993), 33-35.

Miller does
not mention that Bonnie Ray Williams (3 Ali 168) attributed to the
first encounter an exchange of words between Givens and Oswald
which Givens (6 AH 351) attributed to the second encounter (when
Williarng was not present).For just some of the many problems of the
alleged Oswald-by-the-elevator encounter (later doubled to be-
come two Oswald-by-the-elevator encounters), see Gorden
Miller, The Third Decade (September 1993), 33-35.

Miller does
not mention that Bonnie Ray Williams (3 Ali 168) attributed to the
first encounter an exchange of words between Givens and Oswald
which Givens (6 AH 351) attributed to the second encounter (when
Williarng was not present).

Posner, undaunted, reports both eleva-
tor-encounter stories, along with the Givens version of the ex-
change of words, as if they were incontestable facts.

Posner also
names Jack Dougherty as a witness to an 11:45 AM elevator-en-
counter, citing (without page reference) an "affidavit of Jack E.

Dougherty.

November 22, 1963" (Posner, 540, footnote 12).

When
Posner omits page references, one's suspicions are rightly amused.

The affidavit (24 WH 206) says nothing about an elevator encoun-
ter at all.

There is also no elevator in the testimony (6 WH 377-78),
where Dougherty stated, "It was about 11 o'clock; that was the last
time I saw him?

26.

Summarized in Sylvia Meagher, "The Curious Testi-
mony of Mr.

Givens," Texas Observer, August 13, 1971; re-
printed in Peter Dale Scott, Paul L.

Hoch, and Russell Stetler, The
Assassinations: Dallas and Beyond (New York: Vintage, 1976),
246-47.

27.

AR 50.

28.

6 WH 345-56; WR 143; cf.

WCD 5.329 (FBI interview
of 11/22/63); all summarized in Meagher, 245-47.

29.

WCD 5.330 (FBI memo of 11/22/63); 6 W14345-56, WR
143 (Givens testimony); WCD 735.296-97 (Revill to FBI), 5
WH 35-36 (Revill to Commission); Meagher, in Scott, Hoch,
and Stetler, 245-48.

30.

Posner, 227; emphasis added.

31.

Posner does not supply a footnote for his statement that
Shelley saw Oswald "at 11:45 A.M." What Shelley told the
Commission, unambiguously, is that he saw Oswald on the first
floor at "about ten to twelve."(6 WH 328).--- PAGE BREAK ---

31. Posner does not supply a footnote for his statement that
Shelley saw Oswald "at 11:45 A.M." What Shelley told the
Commission, unambiguously, is that he saw Oswald on the first
floor at "about ten to twelve."(6 WH 328). The difference of
five minutes, trivial in practice, is devastating to Posner's logic;
for 11:50 is the Commission's time for the first encounter at the
elevator on the fifth floor. In other words, Shelley's testimony
cannot be written off as compatible with the highly dubious
elevator story. 32.22 WH 635; FBI interview of March 18, 1964, emphasis
added. 33.22 WH 634 (Arce), 22 WH 645 (Dougherty), 22 WH 649
(Givens), 22 WH 655 (Jarman), 22 WH 666 (Norman); cf. Howard Roffmam, Presumed Guilty (Rutherford, NJ: Fairleigh
Dickinson University Press, 1975), 185. 34. 6 WH 354 (Givens); 3 WH 168, 171-72, 173, 180
(Williams); 3 WH 194 (Norman). 35. Posner, 227. 36. Givens' testimony is consistent with his original affidavit
to the Dallas Police on November 22 that at twelve noon he took
his lunch break and left the building. A very similar statement
("At lunch time at 12:00 noon I went down on the street") had
been signed and sworn to by Danny Arce (24 WH 199). Arce's
different statement to the Warren Commission, that he ate lunch
in the "domino room" (6 WH 365), is thus open to question. This leaves only Jack Dougherty, a witness the Warren Report
very understandably calls "confused" (WR 153) and who tes-
tified twice to Warren Commission Counsel Ball that the shots
were fired "before I ate my lunch" (6 WH 379). 0
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 57

--- PAGE BREAK ---Assassination Politics
Gerald Posner and the
False Quotation Syndrome
Since this issue of Prevailing Winds contains Peter Dale
Scott's masterful skewering of Gerald Posner's Case Closed,
you may think we've dumped sufficient opprobrium on poor
Gerry's noggin.

Naah.

We haven't even started.

After all, we
can't let future historians accept the JFK case as closed when
new evidence indicates that media-hero Posner is a bit, shall we
say, ethically challenged.

Of course, savvy folk knew Gerry had a wayward way with
facts from his book's first sentence, which claims that more than
2000 books have been written about the Kennedy assassination.

The actual figure is somewhere under
400.

Posner probably got the "2000"
figure from the struggling Assassina-
tion Research Center in Washington,
D.C., which does (or did) house
roughly that number of books on its
unsteady shelves.

But those holdings
include many titles not directly about
the assassination.

Posner goes on to claim that this
avalanche of assassinology, foisted on
the public by avaricious writers, has
presented only the pro-conspiracy side
of the Kennedy question.

Let's first
clear up this business of alleged ava-
rice: JFK books normally sell well only
when a movie or some other newsworthy event pushes the case
into the spotlight.

At other times, books in the genre do not sell
particularly well (trust me on this), with the exception of works
by a few lucky authors —Litton, Lane, maybe one or two others.

Most assassination researchers don't quit their day job., they do
what they do because they believe in the work.

And a book
which sells, say, 5000 or 10,000 or even 20,000 copies can
scarcely compete with the millions reached by Dan Rather,
NBC, Time, Life, and Newsweek.

All of these media outlets have
steadfastly defended the "lone nut scenario" over the decades.And a book
which sells, say, 5000 or 10,000 or even 20,000 copies can
scarcely compete with the millions reached by Dan Rather,
NBC, Time, Life, and Newsweek.

All of these media outlets have
steadfastly defended the "lone nut scenario" over the decades.

If Posner asserts that the public hasn't had a chance to hear the
Warren Commission's side of the story, he is (as Dave Letter-
man might say) just plain goofy.

He may be worse than that.

Researchers Harold Weisberg
and Walt Brown, as well as medical expert Dr.

Gary Aguilar,
have been double-checking Posner's claimed interview sub-
jects.

Apparently, the Warren Commission's foremost apologist
seriously misrepresented those he supposedly interviewed.

For example: Posner testified to the Conyers Committee on
November 17, 1993, that he interviewed JFK's autopsists, Drs.

James Flumes and J.

Thornton Boswell.

Both allegedly told
Posner the skull wound was high.

On March 30, 1994, Aguilar
called Humes and Boswell to get their side of the story.

Dr.

Humes confirmed that he had spoken to Posner, but denied
changing his mind about the skull wound, which he has always
said was low.

But here's the kicker: Not only does Dr.

Boswell
continue to say that the wound was low, he insisted to Aguilar
— twice, and without any equivocation — that he had never
spoken to Posner at all!

If that 's true, then Posner is guilty of lying before a congres-
sional committee.

In other words, his sense of ethics has gone
North.

But it gets worse:
Case Closed also draws on an al-
leged Posner interview of James
Tague, the third man hit in Dealey
Plaza that day.

For thirty years, Tague
has asserted that the first shot did not
hit him — and his insistence on this
point has, for various reasons, always
caused grave problems for the Warren
Commission and its avatars.

Posner
solved these problems by quoting from
his alleged recent interviews with
Tague, which, we are led to believe,
were conducted on two successive
days.--- PAGE BREAK ---

For thirty years, Tague
has asserted that the first shot did not
hit him — and his insistence on this
point has, for various reasons, always
caused grave problems for the Warren
Commission and its avatars. Posner
solved these problems by quoting from
his alleged recent interviews with
Tague, which, we are led to believe,
were conducted on two successive
days. (Never mind that Posner else-
where expresses contempt for wit-
nesses who change their original testi-
mony.) According to Case Closed, the "Third Man" now agrees
that a fragment of the first shot could have hit him. This revised
standard version of Tague's testimony greatly aids the book's
reconstruction of the crime. Dr. Aguilar and Harold Weisberg separately contacted
Tague to ask why he told Posner a story differing from the one
he has recited for years. The answer was clear and shocking:
James Tague never spoke to Gerald Posner at all! And Tague
stands by his oft-repeated story that the first shot most assuredly
did not hit him. Other instances of "false quotation syndrome" are only now
coming to light. For example, there's the case of Harold Nor-
man, a Dealey Plaza witness located under the alleged sniper's
window. Norman did speak to Posner. But this witness told
another writer, Walt Brown, that the information ascribed to him
in Case Closed does not resemble what he actually said — "not
by a long shot."
Apparently, the
Warren Commission's
chief apologist has
seriously
misrepresented those
he putatively
interviewed. Prevailing winds Premiere Issue Page 58
•
WA**  ..g1 , •

--- PAGE BREAK ---Inside the John F.

Kennedy
Assassination
by D.H.

Christian
Based on William Torbitt's Nomenclature of an Assassina-
tion Cabal.

1) The Files of the Orleans Par-
ish District Attorney's Office.

2) The Warren Commission
Hearings.

3) Evidence of the House Se-
lect Committee on Assassinations.

4) The dc-classified files of
the FBI.

5) Eyewitness interviews and
personal sources.

Special to Prevailing Winds
Research from Dan H.

Christian
Based on Ihis documentary by
D.H.

Christian, a made-for-
television special was created.

It aired April 15,1992, going
out to over 150 markets na-
tionwide and hosted by James
Earl Jones.

Featuring Craton Fonzi, Pe-
ter Dale Scott, Ralph Shoen-
man, John Judge.

Dan Sheehan, Col.

L.

Fletcher Prouty.

Victor
Macbeth and others.

PWR #878 $15.95
Posner even seems to have misquoted his own editor, Robert
Loomis of Random House.

The author of Case Closed has
frequently recounted the story of his book's genesis, which was
on this wise: In 1992, Random House hired him to write a book
that would establish a conspiracy once and for all; Posner started
investigating, found no evidence of a plot to kill JFK, and
reported these findings to his publisher, who told him to go with
what he found.

'Tis a pretty tale, and utter bullshit.

Well before
Case Closed, researcher Walt Brown sent a JFK assassination
manuscript to Random House, and got a vehement rejection
notice — signed by editor Loomis — stating in no uncertain
terms that Random House would never publish any book critical
of the Warren Commission's basic findings.

If Loomis wants to maintain such an attitude, that's his
privilege, of course But how can Gerald Posner claim that
Loomis originally tasked him to produce a work open to the idea
of conspiracy?

During the 1993-94 year's media orgasms over Case Closed,
the public frequently heard glowing remarks about Posner's
background.

For example, we heard that he was a Wall Street
lawyer, which was comforting.During the 1993-94 year's media orgasms over Case Closed,
the public frequently heard glowing remarks about Posner's
background.

For example, we heard that he was a Wall Street
lawyer, which was comforting.

All America instinctively trusts
Wall Street lawyers.

We also heard that he had acted as the
attorney for an organization called CANDLES; which repre-
sents victims of Dr.

Josef Mengele's horrifying experiments at
Auschwitz CANDLES is run by a feisty and courageous
woman named Eva Kor, an Auschwitz survivor now living in
Terre Haute, Indiana.

When I called her last February, she
insisted that Gerald Posner never was a lawyer for her organi-
zation.

She considers him untrustworthy and expresses con-
tempt for anyone who conjures up a false association with her
group in order to bask in unearned moral authority.

Posner, in
her view, is "a real son of a...gun." (She's too ladylike to swear,
but she's cute when she's tempted.)
As for Posner's much-vaunted computer analysis, which
"proved" that the bullets came from the back Despite the
impression you might have gleaned from Case Closed and its
media cheerleaders, that analysis was not done at Posner's
behest.

A computer firm called Failure Analysis did the work
for a 1992 mock trial of Lee Harvey Oswald, staged by the
American Bar Association_ In fact, Failure Analysis did two
computer analyses — one for the prosecution and one for the
defense.2 The president of Failure Analysis, Robert McCarthy,
found the defense position more convincing.

Dr.

Gary Aguilar had a few enlightening words on I 'affaire
Posner in a letter he sent to the Federal Bar News and Journal
(March/April 1994).

A few excerpts:
"Posner dismissed Rose Cheramie's remarkable clairvoy-
ance that President Kennedy was to be killed in Dallas [memo-
rably dramatized in the Stone film] by claiming that the witness
to Cheramie's statements, Dr.

Victor Weiss, reported that
Cheramie only mentioned this after Oswald's death.A few excerpts:
"Posner dismissed Rose Cheramie's remarkable clairvoy-
ance that President Kennedy was to be killed in Dallas [memo-
rably dramatized in the Stone film] by claiming that the witness
to Cheramie's statements, Dr.

Victor Weiss, reported that
Cheramie only mentioned this after Oswald's death.

This is
flatly untrue, which Posner must know from the work of the
1978 House Select Committee on Assassinations (HSCA)
which reported that, according to Dr.

Weiss, `Dr.

Bowers
alllegedly told Weiss that the patient, Rose Cheramie, had stated
before the assassination that President Kennedy was going to
be killed.' Moreover, Posner certainly neglected to mention
another unassailable, HSCA-cited witness, Louisiana state po-
lice lieutenant Francis Fruge.

He reported Cheramie made the
prediction directly to him Iwo days before Kennedy's murder.

"Posner cited the testimony of Renatus Hartogs, the psychia-
trist who examined Oswald as a teenage truant, arguing that
Hartogs' findings suggested a violent potential.

The Warren
Commission dismissed Hartogs' testimony when an examina-
tion of his original report revealed the opposite conclusion ..."
Aguilar concludes: "While one is naturally loath to question
the good faith of any author, especially one nominated for a
Pulitzer Prize.

Posner seems to be begging even Warren Com-
mission loyalists to question his
Normie and Larry
(An Outing)
Posner's volume was only the first blow in a projected
one-two-three attempt to knock out the conspiracists.

Expect
two more volleys in the near future.

The next big Oswald-did-it
book will come from Norman Mailer, by way of —you guessed
it —Random House.

And you thought Case Closed got big-time
publicity...

Mailer, previously considered a friend to the assassination
research community, has visited Russia to put together Oswald
In Minsk.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And you thought Case Closed got big-time
publicity... Mailer, previously considered a friend to the assassination
research community, has visited Russia to put together Oswald
In Minsk. A depressed gathering of researchers got an awful
earful of this work when Mailer gave the opening address at the
1993 Assassination Symposium on Kennedy (ASK) in Dallas. During this speech, Mailer thus assessed Oliver Stone: "He is a
brute, but he has the honesty of a brute."
Yeah, well, that works both ways: Norman Mailer is a
sophisticate, and he has the, er, honesty of a sophisticate. Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 59

--- PAGE BREAK ---He gave ample evidence of his sophisticated approach to
matters of honesty during that evening's reading from his up-
coming volume.

The audience was particularly awed by
Mailer's attempt to explain away one of the major mysteries of
Oswald's 1959 trip to the Soviet Union: Now did Ozzie pay for
it?

Plane fare alone cost at least $1500, yet Oswald's bank
account contained a paltry $203.

Mailer hilariously suggested — without offering proof, or
even an argument — that Oswald earned the funds working the
streets as a homosexual prostitute.

Presumably he kept the
money in his mattress rather than his bank account (but why?)
without his barracks-mates ever noticing.

Of course, there's
absolutely no evidence Oswald ever did anything of this nature.

El Toro Marine Base certainly offered few opportunities for a
would-be street hustler, there being no public streets nearby.

For Oswald to earn so much so rapidly (at that era's rates), his
head must have been bobbing up and down faster than one of
those "drinking bird" bar toys.

If the rest of Mailer's book can achieve this level of surreal
silliness, he should read it aloud on Comedy Central in between
the Monty Python reruns.

Mailer's close partner in this Minsk mess is Lawrence
Schiller, who has skulked around the famed writer for more than
two decades.

In Peter Manse's 1985 biography of Norman
Mailer, Schiller's own words damn him as the sort of Self-ob-
sessive wheeler-dealer anyone even glancingly familiar with
Hollywood has met and hated.

Although he almost never actu-
ally writes anything, Schiller somehow regularly gets involved
with high-profile book projects, such as Mailer's 1973 coffee-
table book on Marilyn Monroe.

Schiller was the business agent of Jack Ruby.

He first had a
go at the Warren Commission critics back in 1967, when, as the
"photographic expert" hired by CBS, he "authenticated" the
negative of the famous backyard photograph showing Lee
Harvey Oswald and the rifle.Schiller was the business agent of Jack Ruby.

He first had a
go at the Warren Commission critics back in 1967, when, as the
"photographic expert" hired by CBS, he "authenticated" the
negative of the famous backyard photograph showing Lee
Harvey Oswald and the rifle.

Oddly, the Warren Commission
said they could find no negative.

Jack White's video presenta-
tion on this matter has utterly convinced me that the image is a
forgery — and I speak as a professional illustrator who has used
an airbrush to alter many a photo.

At this same time, Richard Warren Lewis and Lawrence
Schiller, posing as objective journalists, visited the assassina-
tion critics; their true intention was to write an attack book called
The Scavengers and Critics of the Warren Commission.

Mark
Lane, in his A Citizen's Dissent, paints an amusing picture of
Schiller as a man obsessed with money and Lane's allegedly
"mod" outfit (actually a conservative suit).

In a magazine
article, Schiller and Lewis smeared Lane by noting his convic-
tion for "breaching the peace in Jackson, Mississippi." The
S&L team never mentioned that the arrest occurred because
Lane and the leader of the NAACP deliberately stood together
in the segregated Jackson airport.

Did Schiller ever have the guts
to challenge segregation laws?

In their 1967 book, S&L got numerous spellings, dates and
facts wrong — for example, they grossly overestimated the
speed of the "magic bullet." Worse, they damned the critics as
monetarily motivated — which, coming from Schiller, was a
major hoot.

(Remember: Jack Ruby's business agent.) The
aforementioned book by Manso portrayed Schiller — at least
in my reading —as a man so in lust with money he would ravish
a quarter if he could find an orifice.

by Howard Zinn
From the opening pages.

an account of
"The European invasion of the Indian set-
tlements in the Americas," there is a rever-
sal of perspective, a reshuffling of heroes
and villains.by Howard Zinn
From the opening pages.

an account of
"The European invasion of the Indian set-
tlements in the Americas," there is a rever-
sal of perspective, a reshuffling of heroes
and villains.

The book bears the same rela-
tion to traditional text as a photographic
negative does to a print: the areas of dark-
ness and light have been reversed..

The
open-minded will profit from professor
Zion's account, and historians may well view it as a step toward
a coherent new version of American history." -Eric Foner, New
York Times book Review.

PWR code #727 $12.95
Yet only now are we getting the full story of Schiller's
actions during that period.

Newly released FBI documents in
the possession of writer-investigator James DiEugenio prove -
beyond all doubt —that Lawrence Schiller was an FBI inform-
ant.

(We don't know if he was a paid informant, though it's hard
to imagine him working for free.) To put it bluntly: Lawrence
Schiller, Norman Mailer's research partner, has a history as a
spy.

Perhaps Mailer and Schiller will try to cobble together a
rationalization for this spying; there's always a rationalization.

But I doubt that they will convince any activist of that era who
recalls the damage wrought by FBI harassment and infiltration.

When you think of that damage, that backstabbing, that double-
dealing, that covert tattling, think of Schiller.

And think of
Mailer, whose involvement with the left during the 1970s de-
serves a major reassessment.

Did FBI-guy Schiller ger useful
info from Norman Mailer?

It gets worse.

While spying for the FBI on the Garrison case,
Schiller contacted homosexual acquaintances of the defendant,
Clay Shaw.

These sources (two in San Francisco, three in New
Orleans) all confirmed that Shaw used pseudonyms, including
the name Clay Bertrand.

Schiller and the FBI knew that Garrison
was correct concerning a key disputed point in his case.

Yet they
never made their knowledge public.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Schiller and the FBI knew that Garrison
was correct concerning a key disputed point in his case. Yet they
never made their knowledge public. Perhaps the most interesting comment on Schiller's honesty
came, oddly enough, from Mailer himself, who once told a
columnist (New York Daily News, April 5, 1984): "When it
comes to lying, Larry Schiller makes Baron von Munchausen
look like George Washington."
So why has Mailer made this man his partner? I don't know. But I feel that financial worries may be one
key to the mysteries of Mailer, whose legendary tax problems
bring Willie Nelson to mind. For many years, Mailer dodged
(and for all l know may still be dodging) the IRS. In Manso's
biography, we find the following quotes from Mailer's sixth
wife: "All the while Norman was writing The Erecutioner's
Song he was in serious financial trouble, and we were borrowing
money every month." "After going through all the records and
the bills, I realized what idiocies had been committed by his
financial people." "The nut was $1000 a day, a staggering
figure." "So it's a given — owing number of dollars a year -
and he's got to work like crazy to pay for it." In the late '70s,
the debt to his publisher alone was $300,000. Mailer even
resorted to borrowing a further $90,000 from his own mother. Has this scramble after bucks ever affected the accuracy of
Mailer's reportage? To answer that question, one need only turn
A
PEOPLE'S
HISTORY
OF THE
UNITED
STATES
Prevailing winds Premiere Issue Page t30
Jt$ 7?.

--- PAGE BREAK ---to the last chapter of Donald Spoto's excellent 1993 biography
of Marilyn Monroe, in which Spots recounts the controversy
over Mailer's over-hyped Marilyn book of two decades pre-
vious.

In that fluffy 1973 work, Mailer dropped none-too-subtle
hints that Robert F.

Kennedy was involved with the death of the
actress.

Did Mailer really believe this?

Apparently not: He told
• 60 Minutes that he felt Marilyn had died accidentally.

Then why
did Mailer smear RFK?

"I needed money very badly," he told
his TV interviewer.

In 1983, Mailer came into big money when he left Little
Brown, his longtime publisher, for Random House, which
signed a $4,000,000 four-book deal with the author.

Ancient
Evenings, Tough Guys Don't Dance, and Harlot's Ghost fol-
lowed.

When he completes Oswald in Minsk, his publisher will
have finally gotten what they paid for.

In a way, Mailer's most recent fiction work bears a deli-
ciously appropriate title.

As a literary figure, he has become a
ghost of his former self And as a historian, he has become quite
the...

...nope.

Better not finish that thought.

But I wanted to
register the temptation
"They Call Me Gus!"
(Another Outing)
The third big Oswald-did-it book will come from a fellow
named Gus Russo (pronounced ruse-oh) who is worth a few
words, none of them kind.

Forgive the upright pronouns in the
following section, but this one's personal.

More than eighteen months ago, I got an out-of-the-blue call
from Russo, then known as an assassination buff who had
helped edit the published screenplay of Oliver Stone's JFK.

"If
Stone trusts him, he's gotta be cool," I reasoned, and so I spoke
as freely to Russo as one would to a best friend.

He explained that he was heavily involved with a PBS
Frontline special on Lee Harvey Oswald.

This special, he main-
tained, would prove the case for conspiracy.

Specifically: Fron-
tline would air declassified documents establishing that Oswald
worked for the Office of Naval Intelligence.This special, he main-
tained, would prove the case for conspiracy.

Specifically: Fron-
tline would air declassified documents establishing that Oswald
worked for the Office of Naval Intelligence.

Russo repeatedly
assured me that the show would demonstrate Oswald's spook-
ery beyond any doubt.

.

Pretty impressive.

Naturally, I wanted to assist this Frontline
investigation in any way possible.

Russo said he wanted to know anything and everything
about the people visiting Guy Banister's office before the assas-
sination.

(Anyone who has seen the Stone film knows who
Banister is.) I told him that acquaintances of mine were close to
tracking down an elusive, little-known witness who had per-
formed key duties in the Banister operation.3
Cut to November, 1993: Gus Russo's Frontline special airs,
and I discover that his telephone call was about as misleading
as those famous signs reading Arbeit Macht Frei.

Nearly the
entire documentary is an ode to the glories of Posner.

The show
also features Patricia Johnson MacMillan, author of the uncon-
vincing Marina and Lee; Newly released CIA documents iden-
tify her as a witting Agency asset, a fact never mentioned by
PBS.

Frontline pooh-poohs the very idea of conspiracy.

No
mention of "documents" proving Oswald's work for ONI.

By this point, I couldn't help suspecting that Gus Russo was
as spooky as Caspar, and a lot of other people felt likewise.

These suspicions deepened when files from the House Select
Committee on Assassinations started to come out.

Turns out that
Banister witness 1 had discussed with Russo knew a lot of
interesting stuff and had spilled many a bean to the HSCA
investigators after they granted him immunity.

Alas, Russo
(with PBS funding, a luxury envied by other researchers)
tracked this witness down in 1993 and got him to deny what he
had said some fifteen years earlier.Turns out that
Banister witness 1 had discussed with Russo knew a lot of
interesting stuff and had spilled many a bean to the HSCA
investigators after they granted him immunity.

Alas, Russo
(with PBS funding, a luxury envied by other researchers)
tracked this witness down in 1993 and got him to deny what he
had said some fifteen years earlier.

This denial raises questions of its own: If the witness told a
bogus tale in the 1970s, why did he demand immunity at that
time?

But the damage was done.

Russo found out — from me,
dammit!

— that other researchers were pursuing an overlooked
lead, a lead more significant than anyone realized, and he got to
the witness in question first.

File this one under M for Mouth, as in me-and-my-big.

Now Gus Russo has reportedly received an advance of one
quarter of a million dollars to write a book about the assassina-
tion.

Unbelievable!

Can you name any other first-time author
(not counting celebrities) who has ever received that kind of
money?4 Especially for yet another book on JFK?

Titles on this
subject may have sold well immediately after the Stone film, but
they're not hot-sellers these days — many stores don't even
stock the newer works.

Russo has told differing stories about this forthcoming book
to various JFK researchers (Peter Cross, John Newman, Gary
Aguilar, etc.), but a general image of the quarter-million-dollar
volume has come into view.

The Russo bottom line: Oswald did
it, the Warren Commission said so, and that settles it.

The Russo
kicker: Oswald did it on behalf of Fidel Castro, and those darned
Kennedys hushed up the true facts of the assassination to protect
the deceased President's image.

It seems that John the Blood-
thirsty desperately wanted to see Fidel's bearded head dancing
on a spear, and he forced those nice boys at CIA to concoct
assassination schemes against the Cuban leader, even though
they didn't really want to.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Russo
kicker: Oswald did it on behalf of Fidel Castro, and those darned
Kennedys hushed up the true facts of the assassination to protect
the deceased President's image. It seems that John the Blood-
thirsty desperately wanted to see Fidel's bearded head dancing
on a spear, and he forced those nice boys at CIA to concoct
assassination schemes against the Cuban leader, even though
they didn't really want to. •
This last bit of balderdash will probably go over well with
leftists of a certain stripe, the kind for whom all weapons are fair
in their ongoing war against Main Enemy JFK. (I'm sure Noam
Chomsky will love Russo's "revelations" — of course, Chom-
sky once blamed the murder of Patrice lannumba on JFK, even
though Lumumba died before Kennedy took the oath of office.)
But the whole idea is disproven by a newly released 1967 report,
written by the Inspector General of the CIA, giving the full
history of the Castro assassination plots. Those plots began in
1959, and the Agency desperately tried to keep them secret from
the President. JFK had, in fact, been seeking a detente with the
Cubans directly before the assassination, sending peace-feeler
messages through ambassador William Attwood to Cuba's U.N. ambassador Carlos Lechuga_
Where, you might ask, is Gus Russo getting his "informa-
tion?" Good question. Here, as Paul Harvey would say, is the
rest of the story:
By Russo's own admission, he's been cozying up to none
otherthan William Colby and Theodore Shackley. (He originally
told a JFK researcher that these meetings also included Richard
Helms, but he later retracted that story.) Anyone who has read
anything about the CIA knows these individuals and their hor-
rifying history. But Russo is proud to have struck up an acquain-
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 61

--- PAGE BREAK ---lance with these gentlemen.

He's been quoted as crowing
proudly, "They call me Gus!"
I can think of other names.

- M.0
Notes:
I.

By contrast, the begettor of a book like, oh, say, Recycled
Doonesbury can hardly claim that he isn't in it for the money.

2.

Posner finally got around to mentioning this business in
the paperback edition of Case Closed.

(Compare the first footnote
for chapter 14 in both the hardcover and softcover editions.) He
tries to save face by claiming that the Failure Analysis defense team
presented a weak case.

Indeed it did.

By the company's own
admission, the computer team working defense did not set out to
prove a conspiracy, but merely to raise doubts about Oswald's guilt
in the jurors' minds.

The fact that the defense made only a limited
effort hardly bolsters Posner's argument; quite the opposite.

Failure Analysis participated in the ABA mock trial in order
to demonstrate to lawyers the effectiveness of using computer
graphics in presenting a legal case.

The company used computer
graphics to illustrate the defense and prosecution positions, not to
recreate fully the assassination.

The correspondence between the
company and Harold Weisberg, reprinted in his book Case Open,
makes this point quite clear.

No computer can truly recreate the
JFK assassination; a genuine recreation would involve firing weap-
ons in Dealey Plaza
Weisberg makes another good point: To illustrate the case
for the prosecution, the Failure Analysis team relied on infor-
mation gleaned from second hand sources.

(Garbage in, garbage
out.) Had they gone to first hand sources — the varying testi-
monies of the Parkland and Bethesda doctors, the interviews
with the Dallas nurses, the questioned X-rays, and so forth -
they would have come up against all the same controversies and
inconsistencies that medical specialists like Dr.

Gary Aguilar
and Dr.

David Mantick are now trying to resolve.Gary Aguilar
and Dr.

David Mantick are now trying to resolve.

Incidentally, during the initial flush of Posner hype, Tom
Brokaw and other media heavies pretended that Case Closed
represented the rust application of computer technology to the JFK
case.

In fact, the Warren Comission critics have used computers for
decades — for example, some early pm-conspiracy photographic
analyses first appeared in the technical journal Computers and
Automation.

3.1 give only sketchy details of this business in order not to
step on the toes of another writer, who wants to pursue this topic.

4.

By comparison: Anne Rice stunned many when she
received the queenly sum of $12,000 for her first novel, Inter-
view With the Vampire.

Russo has beaten her badly.

And I'm sure
it's the kind of beating she disapproves of.171
Yes, Virgina, There Is a
Lone Nut
Pretend that you live in the most secure residence in North
America: bodyguards everywhere, anti-aircraft guns on the
roof, impenetrable wrought-iron fences.

Then imagine that you
visit a part of the world thronged with suicidal mass-killers of
opposing religious faiths who ALL hate your guts.

And yet you
return home without receiving even a paper cut.

Then pretend, if you can, that before you left, a man whose
name nobody now remembers dive-bombed his airplane into
your yard a few feet from your bedroom.

And then imagine that
"Security" and the newsmedia explain the incident by saying
the dead pilot was "despondent." And then, after you've re-
turned unscathed from Suicide-Killer-City, some unimpeded
bozo peppers your family's house with 30 bullets from a public
sidewalk and nobody, not a soul, has the slightest idea why.

And then imagine that, at this very same time, you're being
viciously assailed as a leader of vile far-left political forces you
actually never had anything to do with.And then imagine that
"Security" and the newsmedia explain the incident by saying
the dead pilot was "despondent." And then, after you've re-
turned unscathed from Suicide-Killer-City, some unimpeded
bozo peppers your family's house with 30 bullets from a public
sidewalk and nobody, not a soul, has the slightest idea why.

And then imagine that, at this very same time, you're being
viciously assailed as a leader of vile far-left political forces you
actually never had anything to do with.

Would you think that
something, er, fishy, was going on, that there might be some sort
of organized operation to drive you nuts, if not drive you into
an early grave?

Of course you would not!

Because if you did, you'd obvi-
ously be one of those wacko conspiracy buffs!

And you're
certainly not one of those pathetic fools, even though your
Vice-President once publicly alleged that a—gasp!—conspir-
acy assassinated one of your predecessors back in 1963.

Obvi-
ously the airplane "crash," the mute gunman, and the hate
campaign are all just weird coincidences that are part of life.

You know, just like that recent false alarm in the White House
which enabled platoons of armoured "firefighters" to enteryour
home without previous security clearance.

No siree, no time's
available to fret over such trifles.

And good thing that's so.

Otherwise you might start fretting
about other trifles like:
1.

Frank Eugene Corder, the "despondent" kamikaze pilot
vanished from sight three weeks before his already forgotten
landing beneath your bedroom window.

2.

Sidewalk sharpshooter Francisco Martin Duran vanished
from sight a month before he "shot" to national prominence.

He spent his unchronicled army career in a military prison.

3.

Periods of pre-assassination, unaccounted-for "missing
time" figure prominently in the life reconstructions of many of
America's most notorious "lone nuts," like Lee, Sirhan, Artie,
Sara Jane, John, James Earl, Squeaky, et al.

4.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Periods of pre-assassination, unaccounted-for "missing
time" figure prominently in the life reconstructions of many of
America's most notorious "lone nuts," like Lee, Sirhan, Artie,
Sara Jane, John, James Earl, Squeaky, et al. 4. Corder evidently started going 'round the bend when his
dear old dad bought the farm. Seems Dad worked for years at
Maryland's Edgewood Arsenal, site of some of this nation's
most appalling, illegal and (once) covert mind-control and bio-
logical warfare programs. When John Corder was asked how
his brother gained access to the Cessna he stole and piloted into
the White House lawn, he professed puzzlement but added that
"Dad had a whole lot of keys for airplanes he worked on."
6. Briefly, the Durans' neighbors told newsmedia that Duran
belonged to a shadowy, proto-fascist "militia." Then they
stopped being quoted or stopped talking. But you are the President, and you're not going to succumb
to such silly, paranoid speculation. Yes, Virginia — uh, Bill — there is (as you well know) a
Lone Nut, or two, or ten. And just because they congregated
around you during a six-week period which also marked your
party's national Armageddon, why, that's no reason to believe
anything else other than that it was all some sort of great, big
coincidence! Right, Bubba? In most dations, the concept that violent, secretive, sinister
groups occasionally travel• unlawful avenues to power is itself a
cliché that nobody bothers to deny. But not here, no sirree! We
are AMERICANS!! And as our den mothers, omniscient high
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 62

--- PAGE BREAK ---school teachers, "liberal" media pundits and college professors
taught us, we have a "special" political system that absorbs and
addresses all needs and discontents.

In America, there's no need
to resort to violence and covert crimes, because a simple two-
party system takes care of everything —content, discontent and
ambivalence.

If on occasion there is a crime committed that
appears to be political in nature why, it's actually the product
of a despondent loser, or dysfunctional nut, or the workings of
sheer coincidence confabulated by some paranoid troublemaker
into something sinister.

Sure it might really be there in Europe
or Latin America, but not here.

Americans don't play that kind
of game.

There's no here, here.

T
here comes a time in the life of every person and every
collective of persons when childhood fantasies must be
discarded and adult realism striven for.

Otherwise, if the
individual or collective continues believing in Santa Claus, or
The Tooth Fairy, or "Coincidence," then growth ends and the
functional equivalent of Death takes over.

Long years have passed since the United States of America
— the world's mightiest power, the richest producing nation,
the Arsenal of Democracy — fell "into de-
nial" Yes, it's a lame phrase, bandied about
indiscriminately by "recoverees" filled with
the 12-step Full Gospel of Human Potential.

And yet, like many obnoxious platitudes and
cliches, there is a sticky element of unpleas-
ant truth to it.

It is long past the time that America's
collective "Inner Child" should have grown
up and moved out of denial.

We've been on
a binge of such denial ever since the bloom
went off the imperialistic rose back in Feb-
ruary (Tet), 1968.

Conspirators, criminals and cynical swindlers
have succeeded in bilking millions of us because our leaders,
our newsmedia and just plain us have been unable and unwilling
to admit that conspiratorial evil is practiced here almost every
day of every year.We've been on
a binge of such denial ever since the bloom
went off the imperialistic rose back in Feb-
ruary (Tet), 1968.

Conspirators, criminals and cynical swindlers
have succeeded in bilking millions of us because our leaders,
our newsmedia and just plain us have been unable and unwilling
to admit that conspiratorial evil is practiced here almost every
day of every year.

Superficially, it would appear that Nasty Old Mister Truth
Decay is on his way out because the Justice Department recently
indicted Francisco Martin Duran for attempting to assassinate
President Clinton.

Will the media actually talk about the politi-
cal, as opposed to merely psychological, motivations forhis act?

Has realism come into play in Washington?

Hardly.

As the not-entirely comatose Washington Post has
noted, due to maddeningly labyrinthine federal regulations, the
FBI gets jurisdiction over the (easy-to-win) Duran case if Presi-
dential assassination comes into play.

If not, then jurisdiction
rests with the only government employees who've grossly,
simultaneously offended right-wing gun nuts and left-wing civil
libertarians, the dreadful BATF (Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco &
Firearms).

Say what you will about the FBI, but it's certainly
understandable that the U.S.

Attorneys handling the Duran case
prefer an FBI investigation to one by the super sleuths of the
BATF.

That, and most likely only that, is why Duran has been
indicted for attempted Presidential assassination.

The prospects are bleak for thwarting the Forces Of Dark-
ness via a Presidential assassination trial of the pathetic Duran.That, and most likely only that, is why Duran has been
indicted for attempted Presidential assassination.

The prospects are bleak for thwarting the Forces Of Dark-
ness via a Presidential assassination trial of the pathetic Duran.

Six years ago, during my lengthy re-investigation of Bobby
Kennedy's assassination (a reprint of which is available in the
Prevailing Winds catalogue), I was granted an open-ended, "as
much time as you want" interview with a fellow in the Los
Angeles District Attorney's office who was point man on the
RFK case, plus the LADA's man in charge of the physical
evidence in the case.

Time after time, I would ask the men about
tantalizing bits of evidence suggesting Sirhan was not alone or
did not even shoot RFK.

Each time the DAs would reply that
although such evidence existed, "We couldn't find anything of
that nature that we could take to a jury and obtain a conviction."
Remember, these are the same people who could not "obtain a
conviction" on the Menendez Brothers.

The point of a local or state or federal justice system is
always to "obtain justice," but it's always justice in the context
of individuals.

Law & order hardliners want to maximize con-
victions; civil libertarians want to protect the rights of individual
defendants.

But our justice system has no place for delivering
justice for society.

In the case of Bobby Kennedy and every other
leader whose successful or unsucessful assassin survived, jus-
tice for our society was never obtained because that justice is
equal to truth, which is rarely a popular item in politically-
charged litigation for either prosecutor or defendant.

Given the
choice, most Americans would release to
the streets a Sirhan or Bremer or Duran if in
return American society could learn the
truth about the political assassinations these
men were nailed for.In the case of Bobby Kennedy and every other
leader whose successful or unsucessful assassin survived, jus-
tice for our society was never obtained because that justice is
equal to truth, which is rarely a popular item in politically-
charged litigation for either prosecutor or defendant.

Given the
choice, most Americans would release to
the streets a Sirhan or Bremer or Duran if in
return American society could learn the
truth about the political assassinations these
men were nailed for.

But nothing remotely
like that ever has or ever will emerge from
a criminal justice system totally oriented to
convicting or absolving individual suspects.

No doubt Francisco Martin Duran will
be convicted of attempting to assassinate a
President.

And the stoney silence he, or his
hypnotists, have decided to maintain will
undoubtedly prevail until he dies sometime around November
22, 2063.

He sure as hell will never try to assassinate another
important person whose physical existence may mean justice
for certain oppressed sectors of society.

But: Was there anything
more to this act by a Lone Nut?

If so, don't expect the "justice
system" to fmd it, because the "justice system" giveth not a
shit.

And it also doesn't care that the pilot who nearly crashed his
airplane into the White House (true, the Clintons slept that night
in Blair House, but so what?) might have been an assassin sent
on a nearly-successful mission by someone who was not de-
spondent.

That pilot is now dead, and you can't indict and
convict a corpse.

So why bother investigating whether he was
despondent, DIAspondent or dissociated.

I have a slightly different view of justice.--- PAGE BREAK ---

So why bother investigating whether he was
despondent, DIAspondent or dissociated. I have a slightly different view of justice. I think Francisco
Martin Duran should be set free after a trial in which he responds
to just one statement from the prosecutor "Martin, why don't
you pass the time by playing a little solitaire?" Once he flips
over the Queen of Diamonds, a few follow-up queries from
defense attorneys knowledgeable about Manchurian-style elec-
tions would surely deliver the greatest of all forms of justice:
TRUTH. Until that happens, the It-Can't-Happen-Here crowd
will reign supreme, and the rest of us will continue being modern
history's biggest patsies. Yes, Virginia, it has happened here. And it can happen again,
and again, and again. — A. B. "In the case of Bobby
Kennedy... whose successful
assassin survived, justice for
our society was never ob-
tained because that justice is
equal to truth, which is rarely
a popular item in politically-
charged litigation for either
prosecutor or defendant."
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue. Page 63

--- PAGE BREAK ---Prevailing Winds Research Catalogue
Prevailing Winds Research is a project of the Center for the Preservation of Modern History.

PWR is
dedicated to collecting, preserving and disseminating information essential for a full understanding of world
events.

Our primary mission is to explore and expose the scandals, corruption, and abuses of power which
threaten democracy.

We distribute books, documents, transcripts, magazine articles, video and audio tapes in
order to educate the public about intelligence abuses, media manipulation, political assassinations, medical
abuses & more.

Our catalogue provides the public with a range of alternative views, featuring the work of
prominent authors, historians and researchers, addressing topics usually suppressed by the mainstream media.

HIDDEN HISTORY
002 "How Allen Dulles and the
SS Preserved Each Other"
by Peter Dale Scott
An incisive survey of the deals cut be-
tween the Nazis and American intelli-
gence following World War II.

Scott
delves into Mengele's "Kameraden" and
the U.S.

protection of Klaus Barbie (in-
cluding the Justice Department cover-up
of U.S.

complicity in Barbie' s escape).

He
also explores "Operation Bernhard," the
Nazis' elaborate counterfeiting and
money-laundering network.

$1.25
003 "The Secret Treaty of Fort
Hunt"
by Carl Oglesby
Read this piece in conjunction with
Scott's (above) and you'll know how we
got into the mess we're in today.

Oglesby
tells the story of ODESSA and Reinhard
Gehlen's spy organization, which formed
the basis of our modem CIA.

As Oglesby
points out, only the German army surren-
dered at the close of WWII.

"It was not
the surrender of the hard SS core of the
Nazi Party.

The SS sought other means of
continuing the war, while the right wing
of the United States' military estab-
lishment, gripped by fears and secret pas-
sions of its own, aided the post-war fas-
cists."It was not
the surrender of the hard SS core of the
Nazi Party.

The SS sought other means of
continuing the war, while the right wing
of the United States' military estab-
lishment, gripped by fears and secret pas-
sions of its own, aided the post-war fas-
cists.

The history that we have lived
through since then stands witness to the
consequences." $1.45
491 "The Origins of Genocide"
an interview with Christopher
Simpson
The brilliant historian and investiga-
tive reporter Christopher Simpson (author
of Blowback and The Splendid Blond
Beast) discusses fascism, the holocaust,
the genocide of the Armenians and the
politics of state-sponsored mass murder.

As Simpson documents, nations continue
to practice genocide because the perpetra-
tors almost always get away with it.

A
terrific interview from The Lighthouse
Report (heard on radio station KAZU in
Monterey, CA).

S1-00
025 "Good Americans"
by John Judge
A well-annotated "Who's W ho" de-
tailing fascist infiltration of the American
political establishment.

This is the crew
helping America goose step into the
Twenty-first Century.

$2.45
024 "Reagan, Bitburg & The
Nazi SS"
by John Judge
If, back in '83, you thought there was
more to Reagan's inexplicable insistence
on honoring dead SS soldiers at Bitburg
Cemetery, you were right!

John Judge
probes Reagan's plethoric ties to overtly
fascist organizations and individuals.

S1.00
013 "The Doctors from Berlin"
by Tom Bowers
Many know about the Nazi rocket sci-
entists who went to work for NASA after
the war, but that's only a small part of the
story.

American intelligence also im-
ported hundreds of Nazi medical doctors.

This chapter from Tom Bowers' book
"The Paperclip Conspiracy" lays bare the
numerous ruses used to get Nazis here
without public or congressional scrutiny.

7511
438 "Which World Leaders
Helped Nazi Criminals?"
by Vicky Quade
John Loftus uncovered the scandal of
the century!--- PAGE BREAK ---

This chapter from Tom Bowers' book
"The Paperclip Conspiracy" lays bare the
numerous ruses used to get Nazis here
without public or congressional scrutiny. 7511
438 "Which World Leaders
Helped Nazi Criminals?"
by Vicky Quade
John Loftus uncovered the scandal of
the century! After joining the Justice De-
partment's Office of Special investiga-
tions to ferret out Nazis in America, he
honed in on one nagging question: How
did so many Nazi criminals escape prose-
cution? ("Mein Fuehrer, I can walk...out
of prison!") 90g
008 "Old Nazis & The New
Right"
by Russ Bellant
Learn how unrepentant fascists helped
the New Right subvert the GOP. Bellant
focuses on the Republican Heritage
Groups Council, a Nazi nest which Bush
and Reagan courted in their pursuit of
power. Exposure forced the dismissal of
certain Nazis from Bush's campaign com-
mittee, but as Bellant points out, "Several
of the persons who had been reported as
resigning told journalists they had never
been asked to resign and considered them-
selves still active with the Bush cam-
paign." 70¢
Article reprints and other documents
PWR distributes hard-to-find documents and reprints which help explain both our
history and current world events. Many of the magazine articles, transcripts and
documents here are otherwise available only in the largest research libraries. The
majority of the reprints have been newly typeset for greater readability. Nearly all
articles and documents come three-hole punched and stapled for easy preservation. We are always adding new items to our catalogue — if you come across a piece you
think we should include, please send us a copy. Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 64
' ..10,rfe
Ay4.

--- PAGE BREAK ---030 "Vigilante Repression"
by Ken Lawrence
A frightening investigation of U.S.

fas-
cism.

Ever since the end of the Civil War,
vigilante terrorism has been white-su-
premacist and conspiratorial.

Formed in
1866, the KICK was led by Nathan Bed-
ford Forrest, who continued as a guerrilla
the war he had fought as a Confederate
general.

Today, racist skinheads and other
Nazis maintain the tradition, and their
power is increasing.

750
ASSASSINATION POLITICS
464 "An Introduction to the
Assassination Business"
by Col.

L Fletcher Prouty
Assassination is big business.

It is the
business of the CIA and any other power
that can pay for the job and control the
getaway.

Get the inside scoop on Amer-
ica's greatest hits.

$L25
402 "Playboy's History of
Assassination in America"
The classic seven-part series from
Playboy's reseatch staff.

Part 1: Death
to Tyrants!

(The Lincoln Assassination);
Part 2: After Lincoln, The Deluge (Gar-
field, McKinley, etc.) Part 3: End of the
Kingfish (Huey Long); Part 4: The End
of Camelot (guess who); Part 5: Cries of
Conspiracy; Part 6: Death Crosses the
Color Line (King); Part 7: No End to
the Madness (Got that right!) $12.95
028 "The Assassins"
by Jahn Judge
Notes for a radio interview on political
assassination_ This concise outline de-
scribes the operation, purpose, funding,
recruitment and political reality of Amer-
ica's hidden death squads for domestic
operations, as well as the organizations
and individuals involved, including the
"charitable" institution called World Vi-
sion 500
417 "How All the News About
Political Assassinations In The
United States Has Not Been Fit
to Print in The New York
'Imes"
by Jerry Policoff
This piece provides a timeless analysis
of the underhanded way our newspaper of
record has consistently "covered" the po-
litical assassinations of the '60s.Part 1: Death
to Tyrants!

(The Lincoln Assassination);
Part 2: After Lincoln, The Deluge (Gar-
field, McKinley, etc.) Part 3: End of the
Kingfish (Huey Long); Part 4: The End
of Camelot (guess who); Part 5: Cries of
Conspiracy; Part 6: Death Crosses the
Color Line (King); Part 7: No End to
the Madness (Got that right!) $12.95
028 "The Assassins"
by Jahn Judge
Notes for a radio interview on political
assassination_ This concise outline de-
scribes the operation, purpose, funding,
recruitment and political reality of Amer-
ica's hidden death squads for domestic
operations, as well as the organizations
and individuals involved, including the
"charitable" institution called World Vi-
sion 500
417 "How All the News About
Political Assassinations In The
United States Has Not Been Fit
to Print in The New York
'Imes"
by Jerry Policoff
This piece provides a timeless analysis
of the underhanded way our newspaper of
record has consistently "covered" the po-
litical assassinations of the '60s.

Meticu-
lously researched and highly recom-
mended, $2.95
085 "Farewell America"
by William Turner
Did you know that French espionage
agents once wrote a highly-revealing
book about the Kennedy assassination?

This exceptional article by former FBI
agent William Turner describes how De-
Gaulk's spooks conducted a secret in-
quiry into the JFK conspiracy, then pub-
lished the results (pseudonymously) in a
mysterious work called Farewell Amer-
ica.

$1.75
771 "JFK Murder Solved:
Killing Coordinated by CIA"
L.A.

Free Press Special Edition
In 1978 the L.A.

Free Press published
this comprehensive look at the murder of
President John F.

Kennedy, filled with
gems of esoteric information regarding
the assassination and its conspirators.Free Press published
this comprehensive look at the murder of
President John F.

Kennedy, filled with
gems of esoteric information regarding
the assassination and its conspirators.

In-
troduced by Dick Gregory and edited by
Mark Lane, the many topics covered in-
clude: "Secret Documents provide New
Evidence—CIA Conspired to Kill Presi-
dent Kennedy," "Connally Cronies Ar-
range Death Route," "Never Before Pub-
lished Document Proves: FBI Had Five
Day Warning," "The Magic Bullet,"
"The Physical Evidence," "Did the Bul-
let Enter from the Front or Back?" "The
FBI Hid Missing Bullet," '•Who Killed
Officer Tippit?" "The Enchanted Rifle,"
"Gerald Ford Spied on the Commission
for the FBI," "CIA Conceals Plot Against
Garrison," "LBJ and Warren Commis-
sion Coverup," "Doctored Photos In-
criminate Oswald," "Where was Dr.

King's Killer on November 22, 1963?"
"The FBI and Lee Harvey Oswald,"
"Was Oswald a Spy?," "Robert Kennedy
Implicated Jack Ruby," "Grassfire—The
movement caught and spread like grass-
fire," "Moorman Photo Reveals Man on
Grassy Knoll," "FBI Suspect Visits Ma-
rina Oswald," "Was Oswald Watching?"
"A Life Cover Story," "Life Convicts
Oswald, —"Major Media Coverup," "The
Fatal Shot," and more.

58.95
393 "When They Kill A
President"
by Roger Craig
A vitally important unpublished manu-
script written by the late Roger Craig, a
Dallas Deputy Sheriff who witnessed the
assassination of JFK and saw Oswald
driven away in a Rambler by an unknown
accomplice.

If Craig had testified before
a grand jury about what he saw and heard,
he would have singlehandedly destroyed
the entire Warren Commission fairy tale.

After he spoke out, Craig was the target
of several murder attempts (not to men-
tion incessant character assassination).If Craig had testified before
a grand jury about what he saw and heard,
he would have singlehandedly destroyed
the entire Warren Commission fairy tale.

After he spoke out, Craig was the target
of several murder attempts (not to men-
tion incessant character assassination).

$7.95
418 "Possible Discovery of an
Automobile Used In the JFK
Assassination"
by Richard Bartholomew
Until his premature death, policeman
Roger Craig remained convinced that he
saw Lee Harvey Oswald entering a Ram-
bler station wagon directly after the assas-
sination.

Recently, that car was found!

Richard Bartholomew traces its owner-
ship with the DMV, and you won't believe
where the trail leads him.

A fascinating,
well-researched, jaw-dropping, book-
length document; very highly recom-
mended.

$12.95
396 "The Assassination
Business: An Investigation of
the Investigators"
by E.

Peter Model
Many have criticized the Warren Re-
port.

Alas, the major critics tend to distrust
and dislike each other, and you can't fully
understand the assassination literature un-
til you learn who hates whom in the re-
search community.

This article gives you
the scorecard.

(Pop quiz: How should you
seat Robert Groden, David Lifton, Harri-
son Livingston, Mark Lane and Harold
Weisberg at a dinner party?

Answer.

At
separate tables, And even then, don't give
'em steak knives.) 900
413 "The Assassination and
the Cover-up: What Really
Happened?'
An Interview with Peter Dale Scott
A startling article that challenges the
reader to take a look at the "deep politics"
behind the Kennedy assassination and the
cover-up that follows.

The brilliant re-
searcher Peter Dale Scott forces us to see
how the power elite hides the way politics
actually works.

It's time to break through
the wall of denial.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The brilliant re-
searcher Peter Dale Scott forces us to see
how the power elite hides the way politics
actually works. It's time to break through
the wall of denial. 900
403 "The Role of Richard
Nixon and George Bush in the
Assassination of President
Kennedy"
by Paul Kangas
"How Nixon Actually Got into
Power"
by Mae Brussell
Two articles from The Realist (1972
&l 991) Paul Kangas, who admits to have
worked for Naval Intelligence, sketches in
the whereabouts of Richard Nixon and
George Bush on the day and the days
following the JFK. assassination_ And
Mae Brussel's brilliant work descibes in
detail the roots of Richard Nixon's politi-
cal rise. $1.75
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 65

--- PAGE BREAK ---404 "Playboy Interview with
Jim Garrison"
On February 17, 1967, the New Or-
leans' States-hem broke a story that
would electrify the world: New Orleans
District Attorney Jim Garrison's office
was investigating the assassination of
President Kennedy.

This very long Octo-
ber, 1967 interview catches the DA at the
height of his inquiry.

The analysis is time-
less, and we can see now how far-sighted
Garrison really was.

52.45
383 "The Ricky White
Materials"
In 1990.

a young man named Ricky
Don White claimed in a press conference
that his father, Roscoe Anthony White,
was one of the JFK shooters.

After a Larry
King appearance, Ricky White disap-
peared, leaving behind him a controversy
which split the research community.

This
summary of the press conference docu-
ments can help you decide whether he told
the truth.

600
082 "Nomenclature of an
Assassination Cabal" ("The
Torbitt Document")
"William Torbitt"
William Torbitt, the pseudonym of a
prominent conservative Southwestern
lawyer, sifted through the Warren Com-
rnissionvolumes and Jim Garrison's files,
then pursued his own leads to track down
JFK's murderers.

FBI, CIA, DISC, Nazis.

Big Oil: Torbitt names the conspirators,
explains how they interlinked, and pro-
vides a comprehensive study of the plot.

Yes, he names the gunmen.

Many serious
researchers recognize this work as central
to an understanding of what went down in
Dallas.

$9.95
083 "The Torbitt Document:
Researcher's Edition"
In addition to the edition above, we also
publish a Researcher's Edition of Torbitt.

This edition is set in larger type and con-
tains a detailed index of all the names in
the document to facilitate tracing the
many threads Torbitt weaves together.

Strongly recommended!

S 11.95
408 "The Last Words of Lee
Harvey Oswald"
Compiled by Mae Brussel!Strongly recommended!

S 11.95
408 "The Last Words of Lee
Harvey Oswald"
Compiled by Mae Brussel!

Determined to learn Oswald's last
words, his only testimony, The People's
Almanac assigned one of the leading
authorities on the JFK assassination, Mae
Brussel!, to compile every known remark
made by Oswald between his arrest and
death.

"After 14 years of research on the
JFK assassination." Mae Brussell con-
cludes, "I am of the opinion that Lee
Harvey Oswald was telling the truthabout
his role in the assassination during these
interrogations." $1.45
084 "Four Articles about the
Assassination of President
John F.

Kennedy"
edited & compiled by PWR
This compendium features articles by
Jim Garrison ("The Murder Talents of the
CIA"), Fletcher Prouty ("Visions of a
Kennedy Dynasty"), Penn Jones ("Dis-
appearing Witnesses") and Timothy
Leary ("The Murder of Mary Pinchot
Meyer").

According to the last-men-
tioned piece, JFK may have dropped acid
with the wife of a CIA agent!

Well worth
reading.

$3.95
420 "'No President Can Be
Permitted to Change the
Course of the Ship of State':
The Far-Reaching Policies
Attempted During the
Kennedy Presidency"
by Dave Ratcliffe
In this lengthy monograph, Dave Rat-
cliffe illustrates the difficulties facing any
president who challenges the powers-
that-be, as when the shadow government
defeated JFK's stated intention to wrest
power from the CIA.

Nowadays, certain
loudmouth "leftists" like to argue that
IFK.

was just another power-monger fa-
voring big-business-as-usual.

It's time
you read the other side of the story 54.95
086 "On the Trail of the
Assassins with Oliver Stone
and Jim Garrison"
by Steven Hager
An excellent summary of the JFK hit,
the Garrison investigation, and the media
disinformation campaign against Oliver
Stone's film.was just another power-monger fa-
voring big-business-as-usual.

It's time
you read the other side of the story 54.95
086 "On the Trail of the
Assassins with Oliver Stone
and Jim Garrison"
by Steven Hager
An excellent summary of the JFK hit,
the Garrison investigation, and the media
disinformation campaign against Oliver
Stone's film.

Judge Jim Garrison called it
"the best article written about the assassi-
nation" Learn about George Bush's con-
nections with the Bay of Pigs and the
Kennedy conspiracy.

950
411 "Disappearing
Witnesses"
by Penn Jones , Jr.

This article lists many of the mysteri-
ous deaths which followed the JFK assas-
sination.

Penn Jones was in Dealey Plaza
that tragic day.

Of all the newsmen who
covered this historic event, he was the first
with the most—and he remains the best
$1.25
087 "The Death of
Democracy"
by Wendy Govier
A brief, well-researched bio of news-
man, author, and researcher Penn Jones,
most noted for his four-volume work on
the JFK assassination, Forgive My Grief
.50t
385 "The Murder of Martin
Luther King, Jr."
by John_ Edginton and John Sergeant
John Edginton, a British independent
film maker, was intrigued when Rev.

Ralph Abernathy told hint that the gov-
ernment had murdered King.

Edgingion
began his own inquiry, and gathered mas-
sive evidence disputing the official ver-
dict—evidence presented in the BBC
documentary "Who Killed Martin Luther
King?" This article derives from that in-
vestigation.

950
395 "Who Killed Bobby?"
by Allard Lowenstein
Robert F.

Kennedy, presidential candi-
date and junior Senator from New York,
was gunned down in the Ambassador Ho-
tel in Los Angeles, California, on June 5,
1968.

The case against accused shooter
Sirhan B.

Sirhan appeared airtight.

It was
not.

Congressman Lowenstein asked the
right questions—only to end up the victim
of a still-mysterious assassination him-
self.

51.45
394 "Why Sirhan Could Not
Have Killed Robert F.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Congressman Lowenstein asked the
right questions—only to end up the victim
of a still-mysterious assassination him-
self. 51.45
394 "Why Sirhan Could Not
Have Killed Robert F. Kennedy"
by Theodore Charach
Charach's courageous, seminal eight-
year investigation of the RFK hit uncov-
ered perjured testimony, legislative inept-
ness, evidence tampering, and massive
corruption. The conclusion: Sirhan
Bishara Sirhan, the indicted assassin, did
not fire alone. An absolutely essential
work. $4.95
406 "Who Shot Robert
Kennedy?"
Betsy Langmann and Alexander
Cockburn
This 1975 Harpers piece carefully ana-
lyzes the case fora second gun, reflecting
the research of RFK expert Langmann. Note: Cockburn has since joined the lone-
nut brigade, and now pretends (against the
evidence of his own ink) that he never
favored the "conspiracy buff– position. This reprint proves otherwise. Y'know,
sometimes we think there's something de-
cidely odd about or Alex... 90e
416 "Inside Sirhan"
Playboy Interview April1978
RFK 's accused assassin has never
opened up to the press—but he did form
an intimate bond of trust with a cellmate,
who here reveals the hidden side of Sirhan
Sirhan. $1.45
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 66
1.7-7ar",
derr,.3
. ."4g.*

--- PAGE BREAK ---078 "The Lingering Mystery of
UK"
by Andy Boehm
Did a conspiracy kill RFK?

Journalist
Andy Boehm looks at the latest evidence
and concludes that the FBI and CIA-
linked police investigators badgered wit-
nesses and falsified evidence.

The story of
assassination witness Sandra Serrano will
shock you.

A very well-written overview
of the case, newcomers should start here.

$2.25
833 "Interview With Sarah
Jane Moore"
Researchers into the political murders
of the 1960s tend to forget about the as-
sassinations, and attempted assassina-
tions, of the 1970s.

President Ford twice
became the target of gun-toting ladies:
The first was Manson disciple "Squeaky"
Fromme, while the second was Sarah Jane
Moore.

Previously, she gave only one ma-
jor interview, to Playboy back in 1974.

But now a noted researcher has obtained
a much fuller account.

For the first time,
the would-be assassin spills the beans on
her connections to the CIA, mind control
operations, and her work as an infiltrator
for the FBI.

A book-length compilation of
historically-important raw data.

$17.95
405 "Playboy Interview with
James Hoffa"
James Hoffa was the president of the
International Brotherhood of Teamsters,
the largest and wealthiest labor union in
the world.

And RFK was Hoffa's greatest
enemy.

Did he have a role in the Kennedy
murders?

51.75
475 "Who Killed Jimi
Hendrix?"
by John Swenson
Where did Hendrix 's massive fortune
go?

Who was behind his kidnapping?

How and why did he die?

Did the FBI and
others keep active records on Hendrix?

If
these seem like intriguing questions, than
this fine piece of detective work is for you.

950
379 "The Marcos Network and
Murder"
by Dan Junas
Was Ferdinand Marcos permitted to
murder American citizens on these shores
with absolute impunity?!

Junas examines
the murders of two union officials, and the
rich trail of evidence leads from the back
alleys of Seattle to the doors of Malaca-
nang palace.950
379 "The Marcos Network and
Murder"
by Dan Junas
Was Ferdinand Marcos permitted to
murder American citizens on these shores
with absolute impunity?!

Junas examines
the murders of two union officials, and the
rich trail of evidence leads from the back
alleys of Seattle to the doors of Malaca-
nang palace.

It seems that wherever you
find a fascist despot, you also find a U.S.

intelligence "asset" 800
079 "Reagangate: White
House Connections to the Vicki
Morgan Killing"
by Larry Flynt
Remember Vicki Morgan, the naughty
young lady who participated in magnate
Alfred Bloomingdale's S&M orgies?

Re-
member Bloomingdale's pal, Ronald
Reagan?

Remember how Vicki was mur-
dered right after she told the press she had
videotapes of top Reagan officials frolick-
ing in sexual abandon?

Remember how
Larry Flynt suddenly got the tapes?

Well,
here's Larry's story!

A mind-boggling
look at fascist kink and squalor.

(Did you
know Kissinger used the tapes to black-
mail Reagan?) 500
080 "Who Killed Vicki
Morgan?"
by William Turner
If you find Larry Flynt's article (above)
intriguing, you'll love this investigative
piece by former FBI agent Bill Turner.

Turner and his colleagues (Donald Freed
and Lake Headley) dissect the evidence in
the Vicki Morgan murder and suggest
probable motives.

$1.95
380 "The Murder of Benigno
Aquino"
by Ira Sohn
On August 21, 1983 Filipino politician
Benigno Aquino, Jr.

was murdered at the
Manila airport Ira Sohn's perceptive arti-
cle from The Rebel explains the interna-
tional banking considerations behind
Aquino's murder and describes the prob-
able reason for the assassination.

It seems
Aquino posed a threat to certain interna-
tional money cartels 950
398 "John Lennon: The
Radical Years"
by Bill Weinberg
When the former Beatle turned politi-
cal activist, federal snoops invaded John
Lennon's life with high-pressure surveil-
lance and harassment.

Deportation pro-
ceedings forced Lennon out of radical
politics.It seems
Aquino posed a threat to certain interna-
tional money cartels 950
398 "John Lennon: The
Radical Years"
by Bill Weinberg
When the former Beatle turned politi-
cal activist, federal snoops invaded John
Lennon's life with high-pressure surveil-
lance and harassment.

Deportation pro-
ceedings forced Lennon out of radical
politics.

Twenty years later, the FBI still
won't release the complete Lennon files.

Nor are all the facts in on Lennon assassin
Mark David Chapman's possible links to
U.S.

intelligence.

900
SPIES AND SECRET
OPERATORS
489 "The Cutolo Affidavit"
with an introduction by Paul Neri of
the NSA
Nearly indescribable, and absolutely
essential.

Colonel Edward P.

Cutolo of
the Green Berets witnessed a lot of covert
shenanigans before his premature demise
— including Operation Watch Tower, Ed
Wilson's underhanded dealings, drug-
running, money-laundering, and more.

The WilsonlTerpil scandal has come back
into view, in light of the team's connec-
tions with Carlos the Jackal.

Was Wilson
a renegade spook — or a Company man
from start to finish?

Anyone investigating
these and other dark doings should study
this complex and compelling affidavit.

Neri obtained this affidavit before Cutolo
died: just before Neri's own death in
1990, he distributed the statement to the
press — who, of course, did nothing to
investigate these charges.

$2.95
409 "The American James
Bond: A True Story"
by David C.

Martin
Top spy William Harvey uncovered
Kim Philby, tapped the Berlin tunnel, and
conspired against Castro, but his own
government gave him the fiercest fight.

S1.45
410 "The Smartest Spy"
by Robert Sam Anson
Bobby Ray Inman (who has held top
posts in various spy agencies) was known
around Washington as the shadowy gen-
ius of the CIA—a spook so shrewd no one
ever knew what he was thinking, just as
nobody really knows why he bolted from
a post as Clinton's Defense Secretary.

Learn what makes him tick.--- PAGE BREAK ---

S1.45
410 "The Smartest Spy"
by Robert Sam Anson
Bobby Ray Inman (who has held top
posts in various spy agencies) was known
around Washington as the shadowy gen-
ius of the CIA—a spook so shrewd no one
ever knew what he was thinking, just as
nobody really knows why he bolted from
a post as Clinton's Defense Secretary. Learn what makes him tick. 900
397 "Playboy Interview with
William Colby"
Princetonian, soldier, lawyer, spy—
William Colby served as an OSS com-
mando during WWII, then joined the CIA
and helped keep the left from power in
Italy. Later, he set up the staggeringly
bloody Phoenix program in Vietnam. Yet
when he eventually headed the Agency,
his fellow spooks damned him as a lib-
eral! Here's a fascinating look at a para-
doxical figure, whose name still comes up
in highly controversial contexts (as all
readers of The Franklin Cover-up know). S1.95
036 "William Colby"
John Martin
Colby served as the CIA's chief of the
Far East division from 1962 to 1968, and
ran CIA operations in Vietnam from 1968
to 1971, before being named CIA Director
in 1973. This interview gives unique in-
sight into the thinking of a CIA "liberal"
whose policies sometimes resembled
those of the Nazis he once fought. 750
r
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 67

--- PAGE BREAK ---Excuse me, coul
spare a little
Social Change ,
033 "The New FBI"
by Ross Gelbspan
During the recent Republican admini-
strations, America returned to the days of
J.

Edgar Hoover.

the Red Squads and CO-
INTELPRO.

The FBI wire-tapped,
opened mail, and actively violated the
civil liberties of hundreds of groups and
thousands of individuals.

Study history;
the past is future.

NO
461 "Inside The Shadow CIA"
by John Connolly
This is the tale of a big private company
with a board of former CIA, FBI and
Pentagon officials, in charge of protecting
nuclear-weapons facilities, the Alaskan
oil pipleline, and more than a dozen
American Embassies abroad.

A company
with 30,000 men under arms and ties to
radical right-wing groups.

A company
which secretly helped arm Iraq and fueled
unrest in Venezuela.

Yes, we're talking
about Wackenhut, a name well-known to
all those attempting to unravel the story
journalist Danny Casolaro tried, and died,
to get.

A must for anyone interested in the
Inslaw scandal.

90c
005 "State Defense Forces"
by Ed Connolly
Though little-known, State defense
fortes pose a terrifying threat to liberty in
the United States.

Not only have they
played a major role in illegal gun running,
they stand poised to round up all Ameri-
can dissidents (e.g., you and me) should
the right "emergency" come along 50c
031 "The CIA on Campus"
by Robert Witanek
CIA operatives with academic cover
work extensively on campuses around the
world.

They write books, articles, and re-
ports for U.S.

consumption with secret
CIA sponsorship.

And they regularly re-
cruit foreign and U.S.

students and fac-
ulty.

75r
830 "The Secret Team and the
Games They Play"
by L.students and fac-
ulty.

75r
830 "The Secret Team and the
Games They Play"
by L.

Fletcher Prouty
The Team consists of' security-cleared
individuals in and out of government,
they form temporary action committees
responding to specific troubles anywhere
in the world, sometimes in ways that du-
plicate the activities of regular American
missions, and sometimes in ways that un-
dermine those activities.

In May of 1970,
Fletcher Prouty was already exposing the
non-lawful acts of the secret team.

$1.75
458 "Why The CIA Will Win;
Why the kest of us Will Lose"
Andrew St.

George
In the 70's, Senator Church tried to
clean house at the CIA.

He failed.

His
Committee became lost in polite collo-
quies with bureaucratic witnesses—am-
bassadOrs, Generals, senior administra-
tion officials—and rarely forced testi-
mony on CIA genocide around the world.

(But Church got some of truth, which is
why a covertly-funded Republican oppo-
nent eventually unseated him.) If you still
have illusions that Congress can clean up
America's festering corruption, this arti-
cle is your ticket to reality.

900
459 "Vernon Walters:
Crypto-Diplomat and
Terrorist"
by Ellen Ray and William Schaap
Vernon Walters, a longtime covert op-
erator.

belonged to the "Murder Board,"
Reagan's core Central American policy
group.

In February, 1985, Walters was
nominated as United Nations Ambassa-
dor.

As journalist Claudia Wright noted:
"Walters' candidacy for the U.N.

post
carries an unusual cachet: Directly or in-
directly, he has been involved in over-
throwing more governments than any
other official still serving in the U.S.

gov-
ernment." A shattering expose of thugs
in high places.

750
460 "Victor Marchetti"
A Penthouse Interview
For too-many decades, the CIA has
waged secret wars, trained and financed
torturers, fixed -free" elections, bribed
foreign leaders, undermined and over-
thrown governments, and assassinated
those who didn't dance to the Agency's
tune.gov-
ernment." A shattering expose of thugs
in high places.

750
460 "Victor Marchetti"
A Penthouse Interview
For too-many decades, the CIA has
waged secret wars, trained and financed
torturers, fixed -free" elections, bribed
foreign leaders, undermined and over-
thrown governments, and assassinated
those who didn't dance to the Agency's
tune.

The American people rarely knows
what the Agency does in their name.

Now,
Victor Marchetti, a former high-ranking
CIA official, comes clean.

(Although
there's still some question as to just how
clean.) $1.45
462 "Twilight of The Spooks"
by Victor Marchetti
Everyone interested in the CIA knows
(or should know) about the furious be-
hind-the scenes struggles between covert
ops schemer Richard Helms, lunatic spy-
hunter James Jesus Angleton, and alleged
"liberal" CIA chieftain William Colby.

Marchetti offers his own insider's view of
this internecine Agency feud—which, in-
cidentally, resulted in the publication of
Edward J.

Epstein's Legend, an Angleton-
inspired disinformation masterwork ob-
fuscating the JFK assassination.

700
422 "The Biggest
Eavesdropper of Them All:
The NSA"
The NSA is unquestionably the bul-
wark organization of the Fourth Reich.

Because Nazis are always paranoid (and
for good reason), the NSA has constructed
a highly elaborate "eavesdropping" tech-
nology to keep an eye on you and me.

This
article focuses on the NBA's telephone-
monitoring technology and its ultra-so-
phisticated computer systems 51.00
465 "Phillip Agee on the Run"
by Steve Weissman
The governments of Britain, France,
West Gemiany, the Netherlands, and Nor-
way closed their borders to Phillip Agee,
the CIA's most troublesome quitter and
critic.

Why?

Did the former CIA man go
to work for new masters in Moscow and
Havana, as the five European govern-
ments have hinted but not said straight
out?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Why? Did the former CIA man go
to work for new masters in Moscow and
Havana, as the five European govern-
ments have hinted but not said straight
out? Or was Agee the victim of an inter-
national frame-up, hatched by the CIA
and put into effect by the agency's Euro-
pean allies? 700
469 "The Boardroom of the
New Order: The CIA and the
Bilderbergers"
by Alex Constantine
As one editorial has put it, "If the Bil-
derberg group is not a conspiracy of some
sort, it is conducted in such a way as to
give a remarkably good imitation." Fas-
cist sympathizer Prince Bernhard of the
Netherlands and compulsive political
scheme Dr. Joseph Retinger founded the
Bilderberg Round Table. After the first
Bilderberg meeting, Retinger and Prince
Bernhard travelled to Washington to meet
with Allen Dulles and Walter Bedell
Smith, then the director of Central Intelli-
gence. What happened afterwards is his-
tory albeit secret history. 51.00
436 "List of U.S. Attendants at
the 1991 Bilderberg meeting
held in Baden-Baden,
Germany"
The list includes Bill Clinton, Vernon
Jordan, Henry Kissinger and a host of
others. Yeah, we know that the right-wing
fringies publish a lot of bilge about the
Bilderbergers. But we still find this list
haunting. Remember: Clinton made the
party one year before he took the White
House. 50c
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 68
Fa d w ri b.

--- PAGE BREAK ---437 "The List"
Past and present members of both the
"Council on Foreign Relations" and
"The Trilateral Commission" who are ac-
tive in the media, the military, Big Oil,
high finance, NSC, CIA, and more.

50e
423 "The History of Operation
CHAOS"
by Verne Lyon
Some naive folks still believe that the
CIA doesn't operate domestically!

(The
same people tend to believe in the Easter
Bunny, Santa Claus, and Michael Jack-
son's marriage.) Let's get real: "For over
15 years, the CIA conducted a massive
illegal domestic covert operation called
CHAOS.

It was one of the largest and
most pervasive domestic surveillance
programs in the history of this country.

Throughout the duration of CHAOS, the
CIA spied on thousands of U.S.

citizens."
And the game hasn't changed.

900
430 "Portland Police Scramble
to Cover Up Key Role in
ADL/FBI Domestic Spy
Operation."
by Andrew Seltser
The ADL spy operation used "former"
CIA personnel to target American dissi-
dent groups on both the right and the left.

This article highlights the very real possi-
bility that the ADL merely functioned as
a "cut-out" for a counter-intelligence op-
eration conducted by local cops, ulti-
mately controlled by an "ultra-right fac-
tion or clique within the FBI." Uncle Sam
is still watching you!

75e
MEDIA MANIPULATION
067 "Accuracy in Media, Inc."
by John Motavalli & Patrice
Greanville
One of the most malign organizations
working against the first amendment is
Reed Irvine's "Accuracy in Media." This
extremist group has exerted incredible
pressure on the American media to sani-
tize what we get to see, read and hear.

Learn about AIM's strategies, leaders and
future plans.

750
068 "The Seizing of the
American Broadcasting
Company"
by Andy Boehm
In rase you're wondering why news-
folk don't go near certain stories, Boehm
exposes how ABC was taken over by Cap
Cities, a corporation tied to deceased CIA
honcho William Casey.Learn about AIM's strategies, leaders and
future plans.

750
068 "The Seizing of the
American Broadcasting
Company"
by Andy Boehm
In rase you're wondering why news-
folk don't go near certain stories, Boehm
exposes how ABC was taken over by Cap
Cities, a corporation tied to deceased CIA
honcho William Casey.

Federal maneu-
vering brought down the price of ABC
stock, allowing Cap Cities to take over at
a bargain-basement price.

95e
070 "All the Congressmen's
Men: How Capitol Hill
Controls the Press"
by Walter Karp
Walter Karp outlines how Congress
and the press keep major stories from the
American people.

"For eight years the
Democratic opposition had shielded from
the public a feckless, lawless president
[Reagan] with an appalling appetite for
private power.

That was the story of the
Reagan years, and Washington's journal-
ists apparently knew it.

Yet they never
turned the collusive politics of the Demo-
cratic party into news.

Slavishly in thrall
to the powerful, incapable of enlightening
the ruled without the consent of the rulers,
the working press.

the "star" reporters,
the pundits, the sages, the columnists
passed on to us, instead, the Democrats'
mendacious drivel about the President's
Teflon shield.

-  .75e
069 "The Media Silence"
a speech by Ben Bagdikian
If you're wondering why you haven't
seen much in the press about the various
issues covered in this catalog, Pulitzer
Prize winner Ben Bagdikian's incisive
speech will explain why.

He outlines the
various corporate interests involved and
provides an insider's view of what's
wrong with modern American journal-
ism.

SLOO
075 "Propaganda and the
Media"
by Robin Anderson
How CIA propaganda assets turn
thugs into "freedom fighters." 750
076 "Disinformationgate"
by Fred Landis
Scandals, media manipulation, covert
operations and psychological propaganda
operations ("psyops") perpetrated on the
American people.He outlines the
various corporate interests involved and
provides an insider's view of what's
wrong with modern American journal-
ism.

SLOO
075 "Propaganda and the
Media"
by Robin Anderson
How CIA propaganda assets turn
thugs into "freedom fighters." 750
076 "Disinformationgate"
by Fred Landis
Scandals, media manipulation, covert
operations and psychological propaganda
operations ("psyops") perpetrated on the
American people.

800
473 "The Manipulated Media"
Noam Chomsky and Jeff Cohen
Chomsky and Cohen examine numer-
ous cases of news suppression, demon-
strating how the media regularly indulge
in outright lying, distortion and bizarre
reinterpretations of reality.

In this topsy-
turvy press environment, public figures
with shady histories can reinvent them-
selves almost overnight.

53.95
077 "The Media and
Government Deception"
by David Pearson
In 1532, Niccolo Machiavelli wrote
that a prince should know how to be a
great hypocrite and dissembler.

"For men
are so simple," he said, "and yield so
much to immediate necessity.

that the de-
ceiver will never lack dupes." Machiav-
elli's disciples still run the show today, as
this article clearly demonstrates.

60e
072 "How the News Media Let
Us Down in Panama"
by Mark Hertsgaard
Hertsgaard dissects the cheerleader
role that the press played in the 1989
invasion of Panama "Little attention was
paid, for example.

to the discomfiting fact
that the invasion was a criminal act.

When
the United Nations voted on December
29th to condemn the intervention as 'a
flagrant violation of international law,'
NBC's Nightly News didn't even bother
to report the story, while CBS lavished a
full ten seconds on it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

to the discomfiting fact
that the invasion was a criminal act. When
the United Nations voted on December
29th to condemn the intervention as 'a
flagrant violation of international law,'
NBC's Nightly News didn't even bother
to report the story, while CBS lavished a
full ten seconds on it. Similarly, while
Americans were constantly told that Nori-
ega was a drug-trafficking thug, they were
rarely reminded that he had been kept on
the CIA payroll by both George Bush and
Ronald Reagan." 70e
074 "Disinformation as News
Fit to Print"
by Edward S Herman
The brilliant radical writer who ex-
posed the "KGB-shot-the-Pope" hoax
demonstrates how disinformation thrives
in the U.S. because owners of the large
media outlets are biased in favor of gov-
ernment and corporate power. 75e
473 "The Spies Who Came in
from the Newsroom"
by Joe Trento and Dave Roman
Why is the CoplevPress unique? Name
another news organization that had 23
intelligence agents masquerading as "re-
porters" on its payroll! How an American
newspaper chain and its overseas news
service acted as an intelligence arm 950
382 "CIA Relations with
Media: Official and Otherwise"
This collection of articles provides in-
sight into the widespread influence over
American media exercised by various in-
telligence agencies, particularly the CIA. This package includes four articles: "CIA
Relations with Media—Official & Other-
wise;" "CIA Covert Propaganda Capa-
bility," by Sean Gervasi; "The Grocer•
Store Papers," and "The New York Times
on the the 1984 Salvadoran and Nicara-
guan Elections" by Edward S. Herman. 52.45
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 69

--- PAGE BREAK ---SCANDALS
386 "Hidden Hoover"
by Anthony Summers
From the 1930s through the 1960s, FBI
Director J.

Edgar Hoover refused to admit
the Mafia's very existence.

Did mobsters
Frank Costello and Meyer Lansky black-
mail the most powerful crime-lighter in
the country?

Anthony Summers investi-
gates allegations of homosexuality, com-
promising photos, and drug orgies.

950
029 "The White House War
Against Martin Luther King"
by Jeff Cohen
This excellent summary chronicles the
FBI's racist war against Martin Luther
King, showing that orders to shadow and
discredit King came originally from the
Kennedy White House and were then ex-
panded by LBI.

The article also discusses
lames Earl Ray and the many aspects of
the King murder that the FBI failed to
investigate.

.700
492 "The Truth About
Chappaquiddick: How Sen.

Edward Kennedy Was
Framed"
by Joachim Joesten
This classic, highly-detailed analysis
by the late, great reporter Joe Joesten
forms the basis for all revisionist thinking
on the death of Kennedy aide Mary Joe
Kopechne.

For years, only a raw manu-
script has circulated, samizdat-style—but
now we've put together a beautifully-
typeset version.

If you think you've heard
everything about this case, wait until you
see Joesten's evidence (never persua-
sively countered) that Teddy was targeted
by a coven operation, directed by power-
ful individuals who did not want another
Kennedy presidency.

S8.95
092 "The
Nixon-Hughes-Lansky
Connection"
by Howard Kohn
In 1976, Rolling Stone Magazine ran a
lengthy expose of Nixon's connections
with the CIA, the Howard Hughes Organ-
ization, and Meyer Lansky's syndicate.

This key article exposes Nixon's involve-
ment with Cuban gambling casinos and
the $100,000 bribe he received from
Howard Hughes.

Forget the recent Nixon
hagiographies; here's the real story of the
President who was the =ha's best friend.

$2.45
480 "Watergate and the World
of the CIA"
by L.Forget the recent Nixon
hagiographies; here's the real story of the
President who was the =ha's best friend.

$2.45
480 "Watergate and the World
of the CIA"
by L.

Fletcher Prouty
Were the burglars at the Watergate Ho-
tel really "former" CIA men?

Or were
they still subject to the Agency's orders?

This great inside look at Watergate comes
from a man who was in constant contact
with top officers of the intelligence estab-
lishment.

Col.

Prouty is one of the few
people with inside knowledge of the CIA
who was not required to take a lifetime
oath of silence.

950
431 "Nixon's Last Cover-Up"
by Seymour M.

Hersh
The National Archives holds four thou-
sand hours of White house tapes.

Youstill
can't hear them.

900
470 "High Times Interview
with Frank Sturgis"
The Watergate bust in 1972 put an end
to Frank Sturgis long career of clandestine
operations.

After pleading guilty—and
spending 14 months in jail —Sturgis kept
mum about his clandestine background,
even after other Watergaters published
their soul searchings.

In 1975-76 how-
ever, Sturgis testified in executive session
before congressional committees investi-
gating covert operations.

The stories Stur-
gis tells here about his work for the CIA,
for the White House "plumbers," and for
pro-and anti-Cubans.

are the most exten-
sive public account since that still-secret
sworn testimony.

750
001 "Why Was Patty Hearst
Kidnapped?"
by Mae Brussel'
If you've never read one of Mae
Brussell's breathtaking analyses of politi-
cal history, we suggest you start with this
classic, book-length study, which lays out
the true story of America's most infamous
kidnapping.

Members of the so-called
"Symbionesc Liberation Army" were ac-
tually FBI and police undercover opera-
tives, out to manipulate public fear and
pave the way for today's "national secu-
rity" police state.

Mae explains how to
recognise federal agents provocateurs.Members of the so-called
"Symbionesc Liberation Army" were ac-
tually FBI and police undercover opera-
tives, out to manipulate public fear and
pave the way for today's "national secu-
rity" police state.

Mae explains how to
recognise federal agents provocateurs.

$4.95
009 "The Real Enemies of
Karen Silkwood"
by Anthony Kamer),
The Silkwood murder and the resulting
motion picture starring Meryl Streep fo-
cused American attention on the power of
the nuclear industry.

If you don't know
the details of the murder and cover-up,
this article will bring you up to speed; it
paints a grim picture of the forces operat-
ing behind the illusion of corporate legiti-
macy and "national security." .750
425 "The Secret Papers Of
Howard Hughes"
by Michael Drosnin
On June 5, 1974, burglars staged a dar-
ing break-in at 7000 Romaine Street in
Hollywood —the nerve center of Howard
Hughes' vast empire.

The ...neves got the
most secret papers of the world's most
secretive man.

Who was behind the rob-
bery?

The CIA, the Mafia, the White
House and the Hughes organization itself
were all suspect, but despite a top-secret
FBI investigation and a $1,000,000 CIA
buy-back bid, the case was never solved.

Years later, reporter Drosnin began his
own investigation, which eventually led
him to the stolen secrets.

$1.25
387 "Del tagate"
by Ellen Ray and William Schaap
One of the main reasons Jimmy Carter
lost his 1980 bid for re-election was the
Desert One hostage "rescue" fiasco.

Was
the effort sabotaged?

Learn about Oliver
North's involvement in this covert esca-
pade.

500
017 "An Election Held
Hostage"
by Abbie Hoffman & Jonathan Silver
Hoffman & Silver examine all the evi-
dence which points to the inescapable
conclusion that a deal was cut with Iran
prior to the 1980 election to hold the hos-
tages until after Reagan was safely in of-
fice.

Some researchers believe that Hoff-
man used former President Jimmy Carter
as a source.--- PAGE BREAK ---

500
017 "An Election Held
Hostage"
by Abbie Hoffman & Jonathan Silver
Hoffman & Silver examine all the evi-
dence which points to the inescapable
conclusion that a deal was cut with Iran
prior to the 1980 election to hold the hos-
tages until after Reagan was safely in of-
fice. Some researchers believe that Hoff-
man used former President Jimmy Carter
as a source. Hoffman died (some think
mysteriously) not long after he wrote this
piece. $1.95
032 "A Question of Treason"
by Donald Freed
This ground-breaking work by Donald
Freed was first published in 1983. Classic
early material on the October Surprise and
Operation Eagle Claw. 900
018 "A Majority of One:
October Surprise"
a speech by Barbara Honegger
A very personal and insightful speech
about restoring decency and ethical gov-
ernment to America, Honegger gives fur-
ther details about the October Surprise,
outlines CIA involvement in the S&L
scam, and proposes two constitutional
amendments so that this malignancy can
never recur. $1.75
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 70

--- PAGE BREAK ---020 "The October Surprise
Time Line"
by Barbara Honegger
Starting in 1963, Barbara Honegger
traces the events that led to the October
Surprise.

But she doesn't stop there.

She
shows how the criminal activities contin-
ued and evolved into all the other scandals
and crises which plague us to this day.

(Incidentally: Anyone who thinks Con-
gress settled the October Surprise contro-
versy should read Robert Parry's Trick or
Treason —turns out Barbara was right all
along!) 51.95
474 "The Brenneke Matter"
by Cameron Barr
Richard Brenneke, a quiet man who
lives in a suburb of Portland, Oregon,
claims to be a former CIA contractor who
has laundered money, dealt arms, and
flown secret cargo flights during the last
two decades.

The CIA denies any associa-
tion with him, and high-level officials
have dismissed his allegations concerning
the October Surprise and other scandals.

During the Bush administration, a well-
respected federal prosecutor spent nine
days in court trying to prove Brenneke
guilty of lying — and failed.

Cameron
Barr, writing originally for American
Lawyer, looks at the case.

50t
021 "The Testimony of Donald
Gregg at the Trial of Richard
Brenneke"
In this transcript excerpted from the
trial of Richard Brenneke (a key October
Surprise witness), Bush aide Donald
Gregg sweats it out and divulges some
extraordinary history $2.30
081 "The Last Flight of 007"
by L.

Fletcher Prouty
Many theories have been advanced
about the shoot-down of KAL Flight 007
while en route from New York to Seoul,
Korea in 1983.

L.

Fletcher Prouty care-
fully examines the government's evi-
dence and draws a conclusion quite differ-
ent from the official explanation!

$1.25
050 "La Penca, John Hull,
Drugs & Central America"
a speech by Tony Avirgan
Award-winning journalist Tony Avir-
gan was injured at the La Penca bombing.Fletcher Prouty care-
fully examines the government's evi-
dence and draws a conclusion quite differ-
ent from the official explanation!

$1.25
050 "La Penca, John Hull,
Drugs & Central America"
a speech by Tony Avirgan
Award-winning journalist Tony Avir-
gan was injured at the La Penca bombing.

In this entertaining talk given at the Santa
Barbara Free Methodist Church on May
1, 1990, Avirgan briefly discusses the
events at La Penca.

It's interesting to com-
pare what he was saying then with his
stance now.

$2.00
051 "Two from the Tico Times"
Two articles by reporter Cyrus Reed
(from Costa Rica's Tico Times) which
discuss the indictment of CIA asset John
Hull on charges of murder and drug traf-
ficking.

A comprehensive look at the
Costa Rican investigation of Hull's in-
volvement in cocaine smuggling.

300
012 "The Iran-Contra
Committees: Did They Protect
Reagan?"
by Seymour Hersh
Don't let Rush Limbaugh re-write our
history!

Get the real story of the Rea-
gan/Bush assault upon our Constitution_
Hersh outlines the Iran-Contra Commit-
tee's failures.

The committee uncovered
numerous avenues of inquiry which they
elected not to mention publicly.

Hersh
also discusses the aborted testimony of
James Radzirnski, which might have led
to Reagan's impeachment.

504
022 "The Other Iran-Contra
Cases"
by David MacMichael
You think Iran-Contra was investi-
gated thoroughly?

Hey —they never even
started.

MacMichael investigates several
lesser-known but critical aspects of this
still-misunderstood scandal.

60e
019 "Operation Surgical
Strike"
by Barbara Honegger
If you remember the Iran-contra scan-
dal (and don't let it go down the memory
hole!) you'll recall that July 13th, 1985 is
a very important date.

That's when "the
President" allegedly signed the finding
authorizing the shipment of arms to Iran.60e
019 "Operation Surgical
Strike"
by Barbara Honegger
If you remember the Iran-contra scan-
dal (and don't let it go down the memory
hole!) you'll recall that July 13th, 1985 is
a very important date.

That's when "the
President" allegedly signed the finding
authorizing the shipment of arms to Iran.

What most people overlook is that on July
13, 1985, Ronald Reagan was under the
knife for colon cancer surgery and George
Bush was officially "President-for-a-
day ." Barbara Honegger's extensively
footnoted article suggests that Reagan
wasn't lying when he said he couldn't
recall signing the finding.

$2.00
071 "Two Stories the
American Press Ignored
Completely"
by John Picton
The world doesn't yet know the true
story of the crash of Flight 103 over Lock-
erbee, Scotland.

And we don't yet know
the truth about the crash at Gander, New-
foundland, which killed 248 U.S.

service-
men.

These two articles from the Toronto
Star discuss the Gander and Lockerbee
crashes in depth and suggest the real rea-
sons for these disasters.

(Both "crashes"
had links to covert operations.) Once you
read these, you'll understand why the
muzzled American press won't give these
stories any play.

75t
384 "The Bombing of
Pan Am 103"
by Jef Jones
"Is the story of Pan Am 103 that some
U.S.

Government_ U.N.

Officials.

and for-
eign leaders were spared because they had
acces to information indicating that the
flight was threatened, while the traveling
public was kept in the dark?

Is it the case
that in their rush to make flight schedules
and cut costs.

Pan Am allowed bags that
had not been properly searched to be
loaded on its plane?

Is it the case that a
rogue CIA operation trying to free U.S.

hostages by protecting a heroin smug-
gling ring failed to prevent the bomb from
going on board'?" Just what is the CIA
hiding?

750
471 "Press Release from
Congress, Re: Pan Am Flight
103'
James A.

Traficant, Jr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

750
471 "Press Release from
Congress, Re: Pan Am Flight
103'
James A. Traficant, Jr. (D-Ohio)
One of Congress' bolder voices re-
leases a key section of the Interior report,
which blames the CIA for the Pan Am 103
bombing. Learn about the participation of
Manzur Al-Kassar, Oliver North's arms
trading partner. Did vou know that
doomed airliner carried a team of disaf-
fected American intelligence officials
who were going to spill the beans about a
"protected" Middle East drug operation? 950
093 "The Wholesaling of
America"
by Pete Hamill
One of the great, hidden scandals of the
Reagan-Bush era was the way they sold
off America in bits and pieces. "If you
buy the latest Springsteen hit, you are
buying it from a Japanese company, CBS-
Sony. If you shop at Bloomingdales, you
are giving your trade to a Canadian com-
pany. If you eat Ball Park franks or dine
at Burger King or wear Endicott Johnson
shoes or buy gas from Standard Oil or get
a Jacuzzi for your home or buy a set of
Farberw are pots and pans, you have
brought your custom to a British firm
Your new RCA records and your Dou-
bleday books come from the German firm
of B enels mann. Shopping for groceries at
the A&P? The chain is owned by Ger-
mans. Mack Truck is owned by the
French. And Firestone has been bought by
Bridgestone, which is Japanese." 700
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 71

--- PAGE BREAK ---089 "1000 Points of Blight"
by Russ Baker
George Bush's favorite charity, Amen-
Cares, turns out to be less than saintly.

Russ Baker links this charity to an assort-
ment of right-wing loonies—from the
Knights of Malta to child-molester Father
Bruce Ritter!

"As an officially sanctioned
Point of Light.

ArneriCares typifies the
glitzy self-serving response of the very
establishment responsible for many of the
problems that plague the Third World:
debt, hunger, militarization, and dictator-
ships.

Meanwhile, dozens of other aid
groups work quietly to transform the lives
of the world's impoverished without mak-
ing the nightly news." $1.75
399 "Dead Right"
by John Connolly
Investigative Reporter Danny Casolaro
couldn't let go of a big, dark, twisted story
involving the CIA, the mob, arms smug-
gling, Indian reservations, the stolen IN-
SLAW software and financial intrigue.

When the authorities found him dead in a
motel room, his arms deeply slashed thir-
teen times and his fingernails partially
removed, certain "assets" in the press
tried to tell us he had committed suicide.

This article will tell you some of what
Danny Casolaro died to discover.

950
440 "PROMIS: The Men Who
Sold The World...

and The
Man Who Told The Story"
by Glenn Krawczyk
Profits of War is the book the CIA and
the Israelis tried to stop, written by the
man they said didn't exist: Ari Ben-
Manashe, the Mossad's golden boy.

After
spending a year in a U.S.

jail on trumped-
up charges, Ben-Manashe decided to spill
the beans—on Inslaw, the stolen Pnamis
software, Robert Maxwell, and a host of
coven ops.

800
THE BUSH CRIME FAMILY
023 "George Bush: Spymaster
General"
by Frank Snepp & Jonathan King
Bush was a major player in an interna-
tional extortion scheme which used for-
eign aid to bribe and coerce support for
their American proxy armies.jail on trumped-
up charges, Ben-Manashe decided to spill
the beans—on Inslaw, the stolen Pnamis
software, Robert Maxwell, and a host of
coven ops.

800
THE BUSH CRIME FAMILY
023 "George Bush: Spymaster
General"
by Frank Snepp & Jonathan King
Bush was a major player in an interna-
tional extortion scheme which used for-
eign aid to bribe and coerce support for
their American proxy armies.

Despite
Bush's claim that he knew nothing of the
contra supply effort, new evidence proves
he signed off on early deliveries, helped
organize a supply bridge to Honduran
contra bases, and sent members of his
staff into the field, And recent documen-
tation confirms the central role played by
the Israelis.

$1.25
415 "George Bush, CIA
Operative: The Man Who
Wasn't There"
by Joseph McBride
This now-classie article argues that
George Bush had a long, hidden history
with the CIA.

A November 29, 1963
memo from FBI Director Hoover to the
State Department —subject-headed "As-
sassination of President JohnF.

Kennedy.

November 22, 1963" — reveals the Bu-
reau contacted "Mr.

George Bush of the
Central Intelligence Agency" regarding
the reaction of Miami's Cuban exiles.

An
intelligence source confirms that Bush
started working for the agency in 1960 or
1961, using his oil business as cover for
covert activities.

$1.20
468 "George Bush and the
CIA: In the Company of
Friends"
Anthony L.

Kimery
"The name's Bush — George Bush."
Strong evidence suggests that George
Bush has put in 45 years of loyal service
to the CIA, and has profited from shady
oil deals and coven operations.

51.25
421 "The Bush Family:
Deals and Steals That Would
Make the Mafia Blush"
by Richard D.

Osborn
Many presidents have an image prob-
lem regarding the behavior of thier sib-
lings and children and other family mem-
bers.

President Bush and his family, how-
ever, seem to be in a class by themselves.

950
435 "Oil in the Family:
George W.

Bush, Jr.950
435 "Oil in the Family:
George W.

Bush, Jr.

and His
Slippery Friends"
Harken Energy signed an agreement
with Bahrain, giving Harken the exclusive
exploration, development, production,
transportation, and marketing rights to
most of Bahrain's massive offshore oil
and gas reserves.

Oil industry analysts
marveled at how this little-known com-
pany, with no previous international drill-
ing expertise, landed such a valuable con-
cession.

Ah...but it seems that George
Bush jr., eldest son of you-know-who, sits
on Harken's board of Directors and owns
a ton of company stock.

Which may ex-
plain Harken's links to institutions in-
volved with drug smuggling, currency
manipulation, and covert ops.

At this writ-
ing, young George is running for Gover-
nor of Texas!

51.45
090 "Resolution of
Impeachment for George
Bush"
by Rep.

Henry Gonzalez (D-Tex.)
We think Congressman Henry Gon-
zalez has more guts than just about anyone
else in Washington.

During the Gulf War,
he brought five charges against Bush.

Why didn't anyone listen?

500
467 "The Family that Preys
Together"
by Jack Colhoun
Bush family members have done deals
with shady partners from the netherworld
of covert operations and organized crime.

The Bush men looted and pillaged from
D.C.

to Dallas, from Bahrain to China.

And they're still getting away with it.

51.20
466 "Company Man"
by Scott Armstrong and Jeff Nason
George Bush has been on the scene of
the biggest political scandals of the last
two decades.

How did he always get out
alive?

Bush served as a congressman,
U.N.

ambassador, envoy to China, and
CIA.

As Vice-President, he headed NSC
groups on crisis management, drugs, and
terrorism.

Despite this busy resume,
Bush's footprints were shallow when they
were visible at all.

How did he do it?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Despite this busy resume,
Bush's footprints were shallow when they
were visible at all. How did he do it? $1.20
439 "The Bush/Crime
Anthology"
Includes: "Cocaine and the White
House Connection," by Murray Waas:
"George Bush and the Contras" by Frank
Snepp and Jonathan King; "The Iran Con-
nection" by Frank Snepp and Jonathan
King; "The Covert George Bush" by Jay
Levin; "Bush and Noriega" by Frank
Snepp and Jonathan King; "Bush's En-
tourage: The Sleaze Factor" by Jonathan
Kelly and Murray Was; and "The Dirty
Secrets of George Bush" by Howard
Kohn and Vicki Monks. 54.95
059 "Where Was George? Bush & the Secret Noriega
Report"
by Joe Conason & John Kelly
This article from The Village Voice
describes the DeFeo report, released in
1975, which pointed out Manuel Non-
ega's involvement in narcotics smuggling
from Panama to the United States. There's
no way George Bush couldn't have
known about this report, yet he still kept
Noriega on the payroll. 95e
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 72
• -••:,-•
•=3

--- PAGE BREAK ---CULTS AND RELIGION
040 "The Sovereign Military
Order of Malta"
by Francoise Hervet
A scholarly overview of the Knights of
Malta and their shadowy role in interna-
tional intelligence operations.

Hervet dis-
cusses the Order's history, the American
Association of SMOM.

the American-
Italian Connection, the fascist P-2 Lodge,
AmcriCares, and the group's covert po-
litical goals.

It's Church and State, work-
ing hand-in-hand to propagate fascism.

$1.75
042 "Their Will Be Done"
by Martin Lee
Lee studies the relationship between
the CIA and the Vatican, paying particular
attention to the Knights of Malta.

He
charges that the CIA: (1) passed money
to numerous priests and bishops, some of
whom became witting CIA agents; (2)
employed undercover operatives to lobby
members of the Curia and spy on liberal
churchmen, and (3) collaborated with
right-wing Catholic groups to counter
progressive clerics in America.

954
007 "Fundamentalism and the
New Right"
by Joan Bother
Joan Bokaer is with the Center for Re-
ligion, Ethics and Social Policy at Cornell
University.

Here, she exposes how fun-
damentalist cults have affected America's
foreign and domestic policy.

Today, with
the religious right vying for ever-greater
power, you must understand this impor-
tant piece of social history.

S2.25
026 "Black Hole of Guyana"
by John Judge
What the media told you about Jones-
town was a massive lie.

John Judge's clas-
sic, painstakingly researched monograph
(footnotes galore!) reveals what really
went down: Cult leader Jim Jones and his
key aides all had links to the military and
the intelligence community.

Jonestown
was a CIA-run mind control experiment
on human subjects.

American blacks were
the targets (most of the whites at Jones-
town lived comfortably).

The denizens of
Jonestown did not commit suicide; they
were murdered by the Green Berets and
British Black Watch troops.

And no-one
has yet tracked down the missing Jones-
town money.The denizens of
Jonestown did not commit suicide; they
were murdered by the Green Berets and
British Black Watch troops.

And no-one
has yet tracked down the missing Jones-
town money.

You can't understand what
happened in Waco until you know what
happened in Guyana.

$2.95
044 "Colonia Dignidad"
by John Dinges
Recently, PWR contacted a source in
Chile and discovered that, despite the po-
litical changes in that country, the infa-
mous Colonia Dignidad continues much
as before.

It's the world's most dangerous
cult, the model for Jonestown and other
mind control sects.

Led by Paul Schae-
fer—a fugitive from child molestation
charges in Germany—this fascist en-
campment has long been accused of hu-
man rights violations, torture and murder
A must-read monograph for anyone inter-
ested in Nazis, brainwashing, child abuse,
strange religions and strange politics.

$1.50
434 "Waco, Koresh and Mind
Control"
by Lanny Sinkin
CIA mind control experimentation is
well documented.

We know the Agency
looked at the way cults affect belief and
behavior.

Were the Branch Davidians un-
der study?

Lanny Sinkin postulates a
mind control experiment gone horribly
awry--and his reconstruction of events
seems to answer a number of unresolved
questions.

Sinkin also looks at the role
played by Mark Richards—the man who,
according to Danny Sheehan, runs inter-
ference for the CIA at the Justice Depart-
ment.

954
378 "Moon's Law: God is
Phasing Out Democracy"
by Fred Clarkson
"The Moon organization is an omi-
nous, anti-democratic element in Ameri-
can and world politics.

Its history is syn-
onymous with post-World War II fas-
cism.

In coalition with right-wing, secular
and religious groups, the Moon organiza-
tion is attempting to create a broad-based,
mainstream fascist movement in the U.S.Its history is syn-
onymous with post-World War II fas-
cism.

In coalition with right-wing, secular
and religious groups, the Moon organiza-
tion is attempting to create a broad-based,
mainstream fascist movement in the U.S.

despite the mendacity of the Moon or-
ganizations, when it comes to their fascist
politics, they mean what they say." Inter-
estingly, Moon is also the moncyman be-
hind the Washington Times, favorite
newspaper of D.C.'s worst demogogues.

954
MIND CONTROL AND
HIGH STRANGENESS
412 "Quest for the
Manchurian Candidate"
by Allan W Sheflin d Edward M
Opton, Jr.

For years, CIA scientists have at-
tempted to create programmmed agents
through the use of "mind control" tech-
niques.

The project was called MK-UL-
TRA Did it succeed?

754
485 "Non-Lethal Defense"
by Dick Russell
A PWR exclusive!

The author of the
brilliant The Man Who Knew Too Much
was the only reporter to cover a high-level
meeting on "non-lethal weaponry,"
hosted by the mysterious Col.

John Alex-
ander, a man involved in parapsychology,
UFOs, and Washington power games.

Uncle Sam's been making some very bi-
zarre toys, including weapons which af-
fect the mind and nervous system.

And
you 're the target.

is "non-lethal weap-
onry" the new way to pronounce "MK-
ULTRA"?

(Remember.

Any technology
which makes insurrection impossible also
makes tyrrany inevitable!) 954
429 "Microwave Harrassment
and Mind Control
Experimentation"
by Julianne McKinney
McKinney, director of the Association
of National Security Alumni's Electronic
Surveillance Project, compiled this pre-
liminary investigative finding based on a
rapidly growing number of complaints
from "average citizens" who appear to be
the targets of U.S.

Government-spon-
sored harassment and mind-control ex-
perimentation, involving the abuse of di-
rected-energy weapons technologies.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Any technology
which makes insurrection impossible also
makes tyrrany inevitable!) 954
429 "Microwave Harrassment
and Mind Control
Experimentation"
by Julianne McKinney
McKinney, director of the Association
of National Security Alumni's Electronic
Surveillance Project, compiled this pre-
liminary investigative finding based on a
rapidly growing number of complaints
from "average citizens" who appear to be
the targets of U.S. Government-spon-
sored harassment and mind-control ex-
perimentation, involving the abuse of di-
rected-energy weapons technologies. A
distinctive pattern has emerged in these
cases, which suggests that those running
the experiments have received centralized
training. Mind control is alive and wetl-
and anyone is a potential target. $6.95
432 "Mind Control and the
New World Order"
by Glenn Krawczvk
An article from Australia which ex-
plores the many frightening aspects of
Mind Control. A mind is a terrible thing
to commandeer... 700
427 "Sting/Counter-Sting:
Unmasking the Disinformers"
by Ralph Steiner
Whatever you believe about UFOs—
whether you are a skeptic, a believer. researcher or an "experiencer"— this ar
tide will raise questions. Private hoaxes
and government sanctioned "disinforma. tion" dog the heels of UFO investigators,
and it is becoming appparent that some
cases are not what they seem. This is an
account of one researcher's odyssey into
the bizzare world of orchestrated decep-
tion and elaborate counter-intelligence
operations—operations that employ high
theater, sophisticated psychological war-
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 73

--- PAGE BREAK ---fare practices, and (quite possibly) mind
control.

52.95
428 "Intelligence Links to a
Famous UFO Case?"
by George Hansen, Joseph Stefula
and Richard Butler
We know that a lot of you "covert
politics" followers are also closet UFO
buffs.

Well, we strongly suggest you read
this report, which illustrates the curious
methodology of certain leading ET re-
searchers.

"Alien abduction" specialist
Budd Hopkins has publicized the case of
one Linda NapoInas), who claims that
she floated out the window of her New
York City apartment one night, and as-
cended into an spacecraft.

We're told that
three people in a nearby car—including
Javier Perez de Cuellar, Secretary General
of the U.N.!—witnessed this event.

Linda
also speaks of subsequent kidnappings by
CIA agents.

The authors of this controver-
sial monograph interviewed the claimed
abductee, found problems in the story,
and identified a science fiction novel that
may have inspired the affair.

53.25
474 "How the U.

S.

Navy
Brain-Trains Political
Assassins"
from the Landon Times
Does the U.S.

Government conduct po-
litical assassinations?

You bet.

According
to this piece, the U.S.

Navy seeks out
convicted murderers and programs them
to conduct political hits.

50t
WAR AND TERRORISM
373 "Soldier of Fortune's
Robert K.

Brown"
by Ward Churchill
Churchill exposes Brown's fascist
leanings, and describes his important role
in recruiting right-wing wackos to serve
as mercenaries.

Brown isn't someone to
laugh at—he represents the brutality and
arrogance pervading the underside of U.S.

politics.

950
374 "U.S.

Supports Khmer
Rouge"
by Jack Calhoun
"Although most people believe that the
I.S.

ended its intervention in Southeast
ksia in 1975, it is evident from the infor-
mation provided here that the U.S.

contin-
ues to support repressive and non-demo-
cratic forces in the jungles of Cambodia.

Nhen asked about U.S.

policy in Cambo-
dia during an April 26, 1990, ABC News
special.

Rep.policy in Cambo-
dia during an April 26, 1990, ABC News
special.

Rep.

Chester Atkins (D-Mass.)
characterized it as a 'policy of hatred.'
The U.S.

is directly responsible for mil-
lions of deaths in Southeast Asia in the
past 30 years.

Now, the U.S.

government
provides support to a movement con-
demned by the international community
as genocidal.

How long must this policy
of hatred continue?" 75e
376 "U.S.

Intelligence &
International Terrorism"
by John Cummings
Right-wingers love to cry "interna-
tional terrorism!

"as an excuse to revoke
civil liberties.

This article proves that be-
hind much of the world's terrorism stands
none other than the CIA itself.

750
377 "Israeli Arms in Central
America"
by Clarence Lusane
First, let's get one thing straight PWR
is not right-wing, we don't support any
anti-Semitic conspiracy theories, and we
don 't blame Mossad for all the world's
probtems.(Got that, Chip?) But let's face
facts: Israel provided weapons to the con-
tras after Congress prohibited military
aid.

The Israelis supplied the Guatemalan
military in their brutal war on their own
people.

And when the Colombian govern-
ment raided the palaces of the Medellin
cartel, they found Israeli agents actively
training the troops working for the
druglords.

An eye-opening investigation
from Covert Action.

SOO
043 "Israeli Aggression in the
Middle East"
by Ward Churchill & Russell Means
The Middle East crisis won't truly end
until we understand the area's history.

"The `special relationship' existing for
more than three decades between the
United States and Israel has led to the
creation of a mythology in this country
concerning the nature of Israel's 'unique
moral character' and the 'purity' of its
military conduct.

The U.S.

government
and its media cohorts have literally in-
verted the truth.." $1.00
372 "A Violation of
International Law: The U.S.The U.S.

government
and its media cohorts have literally in-
verted the truth.." $1.00
372 "A Violation of
International Law: The U.S.

Invades Panama"
by Howard Friel
At the height of his Persian Gulf decep-
tion, Bush bad the audacity to claim that
Saddam Hussein had violated interna-
tional law!

Using Panama as a case study,
Friel demonstrates that the U.S.

itself has
precious little concerm for the tenets of
international law: "Given the illegality of
the U.S.

invasion of Panama, the Chief
Executive who ordered and approved the
invasion, George Bush, is at least as much
an international criminal as Manuel Nori-
ega.

50e
391 "Transcript of the Speech
of General Manuel Noriega at
his Sentencing"
On July 10, 1992, more than two-and-
a-half years after the U.S.

invasion of
Panama, General Manuel Antonio Non-
ega was sentenced to 40 years in prison—
the first time in modem history a sover-
eign nation was invaded under the pretext
of arresting the head of state to face crimi-
nal charges.

Oddly, the trial received little
attention in the media—perhaps because
Noriega was an insider willing to talk
about things Uncle Sam doesn't want you
to know.

soe
041 "Iraq and Kuwait: A
History Supressed"
by Ralph Schoenman
A background briefing on the Gulf.

This booklet is a scathing indictment of
U.S.

foreign policy, analysing how Sad-
dam Hussein was transformed from an
ally to the "new Hitler" by Washington
propagandists desperate for a war to le-
gitimize their military expenditures in the
post-Cold War era.

57.50
034 "The Persian Gulf War,
Covert Operations and the
New World Order"
by Daniel Sheehan
Ever wonder what really happened in
the Gulf?

Sheehan lays out the clear, sub-
stantiated facts regarding certain key
events surrounding the Gulf War.

52,45
037 "Transcript of the Meeting
Between Saddam Hussein and
U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sheehan lays out the clear, sub-
stantiated facts regarding certain key
events surrounding the Gulf War. 52,45
037 "Transcript of the Meeting
Between Saddam Hussein and
U.S. Ambassador April
Glaspie"
You've no doubt heard about the
strange meeting which took place be-
tween Saddam Hussein and April Glaspie
on July 29, 1990, shortly before Iraq in-
vaded Kuwait. This is the official tran-
script, including not only Glaspie's con-
versation with Hussein but also her re-
sponses to reporters. .45e
063 "Producing the Proper
Crisis"
A speech by Philip Agee
Those of you who suspected there may
have been more going on in the recent
Persian Gulf war than met the eye will
find former CIA agent Philip Agee's bril-
liant analysis deeply disturbing. Compar-
ing the situation in the Gulf to the Korean
War, Agee paints a vivid picture of how
Washington manipulates public opinion
by demonization techniques and the use
of Hitler's "Big Lie" principle. 900
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 74

--- PAGE BREAK ---038 "What We Gave Saddam
for Christmas"
by Murray Waas
Although the Gulf War ended swiftly.

Waas shows that the outcome could have
been far more gruesome had plans gone
awry Read how Join Mitchell, Richard
Nixon, Henry Kissinger, Sarkis Sogha-
nalian and all the other shady operators
pumped up the dictator Hussein with arms
deals that made war inevitable.

$1.50
034 "Why Are We in the
Persian Gulf?"
Pam Burton interviews John Judge
Prior to the Gulf War, John Judge was
interviewed on the hidden history of
Bush's manipulations in Kuwait Tracing
the secret history of the oil cartels, John
lays out what they're really up to and why
they manipulated Saddam Hussein into
invading Kuwait $2.00
419 "Bush and Saddam's Illicit
Affair: How the U.

S.

Armed
Iraq"
by Robert' Hennelly
Saddam Hussein ("the new Hitler")
was, throughout the 1980s, an important
U.S.

trading partner—receiving loans,
arms, food, military intelligence, and even
moral support, right up to the Kuwait in-
vasion.

Here's how Bush covered up his
alliance with Saddam.

$2.50
045 "U.S.

Oil Plot Fueled
Saddam"
by Helga Graham
This short article from The London Ob-
server details a side to the Persian Gulf
War ignored by the American press.

The
U.S.

did everything it could to push Sad-
dam into Kuwait, and held a secret meet-
ing in New York urging Iraq to engineer
a big oil price rise.

"James Baker was
attempting to have a State Department
Human rights repon critical of Saddam's
regime (albeit moderately) suppressed.

Huge credits to Iraq were continued de-
spite congressional sanctions waived by
the president." 400
COVERT OPERATIONS
AND DRUG CARTELS
390 "What War On Drugs?:
The CIA Connection"
by Alfred W."James Baker was
attempting to have a State Department
Human rights repon critical of Saddam's
regime (albeit moderately) suppressed.

Huge credits to Iraq were continued de-
spite congressional sanctions waived by
the president." 400
COVERT OPERATIONS
AND DRUG CARTELS
390 "What War On Drugs?:
The CIA Connection"
by Alfred W.

McCoy, Ph.D
The author of The Politics of Heroin
shows how American diplomats and CIA
agents have been involved in the narcotics
traffic at three levels: coincidental com-
plicity through coven alliances with pro-
American groups engaged in the drug
traffic, active support of the traffic by
protecting drug lord allies, and even out-
right engagement in the transport of
opium and heroin_ 800
054 "The CIA & The Politics
of Narcotics"
Alfred McCoy
A recent interview with Professor Al-
fred McCoy, author of The Politics of
Heroin in Southeast Asia and Drug Trap
fic: Narcotics and Organized Crime in
Australia.

McCoy traces the history of
America's involvement with narcotics
from the 1870's to the present, with spe-
cial emphasis on the CIA's role in the
Southeast Asian heroin trade and contra
cocaine trafficking.

S1.95
052 "Right Under Your Nose"
by Jim Crogan
When it became clear to thoughtful
Americans that the Iran-contra committee
was part of the cover-up, some hoped that
Senator John Kerry's Subcommittee on
Narcotics and Terrorism would expose
the CIA-N SC-Narcotics link.

Although
the Subcommittee seditiously watered
down its findings, the hearings supported
the allegations in the Christie lawsuit.

300
053 "The Real History of Air
America"
Various authors and former Air Amer-
ica pilots show the wide extent to which
that CIA proprietary airline was involved
in drug smuggling during the Vietnam
War.

400
058 "Dossier on Richard
Armitage"
A briefing on the career of Republican
bigwig Richard Armitage, tracing his pro-
gress from heroin trafficking in Vietnam
to cocaine deals with the contras.300
053 "The Real History of Air
America"
Various authors and former Air Amer-
ica pilots show the wide extent to which
that CIA proprietary airline was involved
in drug smuggling during the Vietnam
War.

400
058 "Dossier on Richard
Armitage"
A briefing on the career of Republican
bigwig Richard Armitage, tracing his pro-
gress from heroin trafficking in Vietnam
to cocaine deals with the contras.

his rela-
tionship to criminal elements in the
American Vietnamese population, and his
family links to various oil and insurance
corporations.

Well documented.

$3.50
046 "Cocaine & The White
House Connection"
by Murray Waas
Certain elements of the U.S.

govern-
ment play a crucial role in narcotics traf-
ficking.

This article provides background
on.

the key players, from 011ie North to
No riega to the Columbian cocaine cartels.

$1.45
389 "Cocaine & The White
House; Part 2"
by Murra-y Waas .

Columbian drug cartels are bigger than
Exxon or IBM, and your government
helped them get that way.

$1.45
073 "The Panama Connection:
U.S.

Addiction to National
Security"
by Robert Matthews
An excellent summary of the deeds and
misdeeds that led us to invade Panama.

As Senator John Keay remarked: "It
seems as though stopping drug trafficking
in the U.S.

has been a secondary U.S
foreign policy objective, sacrificed re-
peatedly for other political and institu-
tional goals, such as changing the govern-
ment of Nicaragua, supporting the gov-
ernment of Panama, using drug-running
organizations as intelligence assets, and
protection of military and intelligence
sources from possible compromise
through involvement in drug-traffick-
ing." 800
091 "The Vietnamese Mafia"
by Corky Johnson & Donald
Goldberg
Ever wonder why so many Vietnamese
came to America, and why some have
done so well here?

Did it ever occur to you
that many of them derived huge fortunes
from narcotics?--- PAGE BREAK ---

has been a secondary U.S
foreign policy objective, sacrificed re-
peatedly for other political and institu-
tional goals, such as changing the govern-
ment of Nicaragua, supporting the gov-
ernment of Panama, using drug-running
organizations as intelligence assets, and
protection of military and intelligence
sources from possible compromise
through involvement in drug-traffick-
ing." 800
091 "The Vietnamese Mafia"
by Corky Johnson & Donald
Goldberg
Ever wonder why so many Vietnamese
came to America, and why some have
done so well here? Did it ever occur to you
that many of them derived huge fortunes
from narcotics? This article chronicles the
growth of the "Vietnamese Mafia" under
the guidance of none other than General
Nguyen Cao Ky, former Vice President of
South Vietnam. They make the Italian
Mafia look like the Little Rascals 750
055 "State Organized Crime"
by William J. Chambliss
Criminologist William J. Chambliss
presented this paper at the American So-
ciety of Criminology. He provides a per-
suasive overview of U.S. government in-
volvement in narcotics peddling, compar-
ing characters like North, Singlaub, Se-
cord, and Hull to pirates of yore. Just as
European rulers from the 16th to the 19th
centuries licensed pirates to attack rival
states (taking a cut in the process), the
U.S. has made similar deals to obtain fi-
nancing for covert operations. 51.50
FINANCIAL SCANDALS
414 "The CIA, The Mob &
The S&L's"
David Armstrong interviews Pete
Brewton
The journalist who uncovered the CIA-
Mob-S&L connection discusses his find-
ings with a reporter for the Texas Ob-
server. Enlightening! $1.00
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 75

--- PAGE BREAK ---392 "The Real S&L Scandal:
flow Bush's Pals Broke The
Banks"
by Jonathan Kwitny
Who benefited from the S&L ripoff?

George Bush.

his sons, his Houston pals,
his campaign manager.

his comptroller of
the currency, and his landlord, not to men-
tion the Republican Party, the Mafia, and
the CIA.

Drawing from research done by
Pete Brewton, Kwitny shows how George
not only looked the other way, but ac-
tively intervened to keep failing S&L's
open.

Makes the current Whitewater
"scandal" seem about as naughty as an
overloud belch.

$1.75
062"The CIA & Financial
Institutions"
by Rebecca Sims
Although the Big Media barons don't
like to talk about it, the CIA was a huge
part of the S&L debacle.

Learn how and
why the Agency helped pull off the
world's greatest bank robbery.

950
061 "The Banks & The CIA:
Cash & Carry"
by Steve Pizzo
The authors of Inside Job probe three
specific incidents which point to CIA in-
volvement in the S&L fiasco: (1) The
owner of a freight airline that shipped
guns to the Middle East and Central
America kept this Agency operation
afloat with loans (never repaid) from a
bank at which he was a director.

(2) A
Baltimore banker found himself servicing
a CIA front company and arranging over
$20 million in arms deals before being
hung out to dry.

(3) Acting as a middle-
man for arms shipments to Afghanistan,
Iran, Iraq, and Central America, a CIA
contract pilot helped bilk a Denver bank
out of more than $2 million.

Why didn't
Congress look into this stuff?

$1.00
064 "The Brewton Articles"
by Pete Brewton
These history-making articles from
The Houston Post are the result of a year-
long investigation by reporter Pete Brew-
ton of CIA links to the S&L scandal.

The
mainstream press ignored this story, as
usual.

Brewton connects the pieces in the
S&L puzzle, including Neil Bush's Sil-
verado buddies.The
mainstream press ignored this story, as
usual.

Brewton connects the pieces in the
S&L puzzle, including Neil Bush's Sil-
verado buddies.

$2.50
065 "Did the CIA Raid the
S&L's?"
by Joel Bleifuss
Investigative reporter Joel Bleifuss ex-
amines the involvement of key CIA peo-
ple in the collapse of several S&L's and
summarizes Pete Brewton's investiga-
tions, 500
066 "Ripoff Savings & Loan of
Colorado"
by Bryan Abas
This fine article focuses primarily on
Richard Rossmiller and his involvement
in several S&L failures.

Abas also ex-
poses Neil Bush, scion of the Bush Crime
Family, and his suspicious involvement in
the failure of the Silverado S&L.

Great
info you can't get anywhere else.

$1.00
AIDS AND MEDICAL FRAUD
441 "AIDS Linked to
Smallpox Vaccine"
by Robert S.

Mendelsohn, M.D.

Have you read or heard anything in the
major media linking the AIDS epidemic
with vaccinations?

Probably not Yet data
from the World Health Organization indi-
cates that AIDS hit Central Africa most
heavily in those areas targeted by small-
pox immunization programs.

A not-to-be-
missed article.

Also included: "AIDS
and Hepatitis B.

Vaccine" which pro-
vides an alternative view (from the Jour-
nal of theAmerican Medical Association)
on that vaccine's safety.

$1.00
094 "The 1970 AIDS Funding
Bill?"
Could this be the AIDS smoking gun?

During the Department of Defense Ap-
propriations Hearings for 1970, a Pen-
tagon scientist requested $10 million to
fund creation of a "synthetic biological
agent" that would "be refractory to the
immunological and therapeutic processes
upon which we depend to maintain our
relative freedom from infectious dis-
ease." The Pentagon got its money, and
soon the world got AIDS.

500
095 "The AIDS Pandemic"
Three great articles from CovertAction;
"Is AIDS Non-Infectious?

The Possibil-
ity and its Chemical Biological Implica-
tions" by N.S.500
095 "The AIDS Pandemic"
Three great articles from CovertAction;
"Is AIDS Non-Infectious?

The Possibil-
ity and its Chemical Biological Implica-
tions" by N.S.

Lehrman, M.D., "Origin
and Spread of AIDS: Is the West Respon-
sible?" and "Chemical-Biological War-
fare, Medical Experiments, and Popula-
tion Control" by Robert Lederer.

These
classic articles remain very relevant to the
AIDS issue and discuss topics never
touched by mainstream media.

54.75
443 "A Special Collection of
AIDS Articles"
By Nathaniel S.

Lehrman, MD.,
This collection includes the following
articles: "Gallileo Affair Whitewash,"
The Churchman, Dec.

1982; Letter, "Dr.

Lehrman replies," March 1983; "U.S.

Science Muzzles AIDS Questions," Lies
of Our Times, June 1992; "Separating
Pesticides and AIDS: The Belle Glade,
Florida, Epidemic," Lies of Our Times,
July-August, 1991; "AIDS Controversy
and the Media," Lies of Our Times, July-
August, 1991; "What Really Causes
AIDS?

Scientific Dreyfusards Challenge
the HIV Hypothesis," The Human Quest,
May-June 1990; "Is AIDS Non-Infec-
tious?

The Possibility and its CB W Impli-
cations," Covert Action Information Bul-
letin, #28, Summer 1987; Psychiatric
Times, letter, "L.A.

Riots," September,
1992; and a piece on AZT written for
Newsday.

$3.95
096 "AIDS: The Manmade
Virus"
Speech by Robert Strecker, M.D.

Dr.

Strecker outlines his theory of how
the AIDS virus was created and spread,
probably intentionally, through infected
vaccines to selected populations.

Strecker
challenges many of the assumptions about
AIDS.

The transcript also includes the
Q&A portion of the program.

$2.00
097 "AIDS References"
from the Strecker Group
Those of you who have read Dr.

Strecker's analysis of what AIDS is and
how it started will find this bibliography
of great value.

500
098 "WHO Killed Africa"
by Wm.

C.

Douglass, M.D.--- PAGE BREAK ---

C. Douglass, M.D. This chilling article by William Camp-
bell Douglass, M.D., traces the World
Health Organization's "vaccination"
program in Africa, which coincided with
the advent of AIDS on that continent. Dr. Douglass believes AIDS was introduced
into the U.S. via the hepatitis-B vaccine,
pointing out that "The Centers for Dis-
ease Control reported in 1981 that 4% of
those receiving the hepatitis-vaccine were
AIDS-infected. In 1984 they admitted to
60%. Now they refuse to give out figures
at all because they don't want to admit that
100% of hepatitis vaccine receivers are
infected with AIDS." 500
099 "The Strecker
Memorandum" and "AIDS:
The Man-Made Virus"
Dr. Robert Strecker
These are reprints of Dr. Strecker's
brochure describing his videotape, plus an
interview with Dr. Strecker on the "Tom
Valentine Radio Show." In these few
pages, Dr. Strecker outlines why he feels
that: (a) AIDS is a man-made disease; (b)
AIDS is not a homosexual disease; (c)
AIDS is not a venereal disease; (d) AIDS
can be carried by mosquitos; (e) Condoms
will nor prevent AIDS; and (f) there are
at least 6 dif erent AIDS viruses loose in
the world. 700
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 76

--- PAGE BREAK ---am ler
violence
St non•
violence
tnaAs WV -
continue
postponing
• solution
to the
American •
black awes
problem, •
jest to
Redd or'
violence.

s
444 "Germ Genocide: The
Ultimate Ethnic Weapon"
by Lowell Pante
Every ethnic group has inherited sus-
ceptibilities to specific ailments.

In their
infernal race for "better" weapons, mili-
tary scientists have developed the ulti-
mate honor: bio-weapons that target spe-
cific races.

Po nte reveals just how far
these developments have gone and what's
in store for humankind.

51.25
445 "NutraSweetTM Alert:
The SweetPoison"
A hand-out briefly outlining the dan-
gers and side effects of aspartame, a.k.a.

NutraSweet 314'
488 "NutraSweeJM, the
NutraPoison"
by Alex Constantine
A lavishly-footnoted expose of the
most dangerous hoax ever foisted on
American consumers Is NutraSweet (de-
veloped at Fort Detrick, America's bio-
warfare wonderland) really safe?

Numer-
ous scientific studies suggest otherwise.

Yet powerful political forces rushed
aspartame onto the market, while cover-
ing up its disturbing side effects.

Note: A
heavily-edited version of this article ran
in a men's magazine.

PWR is the only
source for the full story, which outlines
the far-right agendas of NutraSweet's ma-
jor promoters (e.g., Orrin Hatch).

$2.25
016 "The Prostitution of
Psychiatry: 1930s
Germany-1980s America"
by N.S.

Lehrman, A.D.

Psychiatrists were the first mass mur-
derers in Nazi Germany.

Dr.

Lehrman's
address (to the First International Con-
gress of Psychiatry, Law and Ethics) re-
veals disturbing parallels between Ameri-
can psychiatry in the 1980s and psychia-
try in the Third Reich.

The article looks at
John Hinckley, Mark David Chapman,
and several other assassins.

$1.25
004 "Did a Nazi Spray You
Today ?"
by Leonard Cole
This chapter from Leonard Cole's
book Clouds of Secrecy tells the story of
the Nevin family's lawsuit against the
government.The article looks at
John Hinckley, Mark David Chapman,
and several other assassins.

$1.25
004 "Did a Nazi Spray You
Today ?"
by Leonard Cole
This chapter from Leonard Cole's
book Clouds of Secrecy tells the story of
the Nevin family's lawsuit against the
government.

Edward Nevin died as a re-
sult of an Army experiment with Serraria
marcescens virus, sprayed over San Fran-
cisco in 1950, Needless to say, the Army
was found innocent, but Cole's descrip-
tion of the trial raises many questions
about what "justice" has become in to-
day's America.

In view of the mysterious
"AIDS" plague, this excerpt raises fasci-
nating questions..700
006 "Malathion's Deadly
Legacy"
by Dave Armstrong
Did you know that Malathion, the pes-
ticide being sprayed over large portions of
the United States, was originally a Nazi
nerve gas?

"Malathion has its roots in the
research laboratories of Germany's 1,G
Farbenindustrie.

1.G., once described as
'an almighty industrial colossus.' is best
remembered for its development of Zyk-
Ion 13, the hydrogen cyanide gas used by
the Nazis to exterminate Jews and other
`undesirables' at the Auschwitz death
camp." 800
446 "Radiation Cannot Be
Contained"
Dr.

John Gofman
An interview with Dr.

Gofman, Profes-
sor Emeritus at the University of Califor-
nia, Berkeley.

He co-discoved Uranium-
232, Plutonium-232, Uranium-233, and
Plutonium-233, and of the fast neutron
fissionability of Uranium-233.

Starting in
1969 he challenged the AEC claims of a
"safe threshold" of radiation.

Gofman
outlines how he came to understand the
true dangers of man-made radioactive
matter and how the government and the
nuclear industry cover up the hazards.

$4.95
449 "Nuclear Cover-Up: 49+
Years Old, Going Strong &
Killing Us An"
Excerpts from a speech by Norman
Solomon
Ina 1992 speech, author and journalist
Norman Solomon addressed the critical
issues of nuclear power.Gofman
outlines how he came to understand the
true dangers of man-made radioactive
matter and how the government and the
nuclear industry cover up the hazards.

$4.95
449 "Nuclear Cover-Up: 49+
Years Old, Going Strong &
Killing Us An"
Excerpts from a speech by Norman
Solomon
Ina 1992 speech, author and journalist
Norman Solomon addressed the critical
issues of nuclear power.

The nuclear in-
dustry promotes official mythologies
about the "peaceful atom," and the
"safety" of low-level radioactive mate-
rial.

Solomon reveals the truth about fall-
out, waste, biosphere contamination, the
inherent dangers of nuclear power plants,
and "temporary" radioactive waste sites.

Clinton's not doing anything about this
problem; it's up to us.

$1.25
450 "Interview with Dr.

Ernest
3.

Sternglass, Author of Secret
Fallout'
by David T.

Ratel, Jan 1993
This interview touches on the health
effects of low-level radiation generated
by nuclear bomb testing, as well as the
effects of routine radiation releases by
nuclear reactors.

(These facts were known
to the U.S.

government since the late
1950s — not that they ever told us!) Er-
nest J.

Stemglass is Emeritus Professor of
Radiological Physics in the department of
Radiology, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, where he directed the
Radiological Physics and Engineering
Laboratory.

He is the author of Secret
Fallout: Low-Level Radiation from Hi-
roshima to Three Mile Island.

$2.45
455 "Dr.

Rosalie Bertell,
Mathematician and Medical
Researcher"
A key interview from the 1982 book
Nuclear Witnesses: Insiders Speak Out.

Dr.

Rosalie Bertell, details her personal
experiences within the nuclear estab-
lishment.

A wealth of info about the con-
tamination of Mother Earth.

We give this
one a glowing review (so to speak).

52.95
456 "16 Million Radiation
Deaths and Counting"
Dr.

Rosalie Bertell
Adapted from a talk given by Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

52.95
456 "16 Million Radiation
Deaths and Counting"
Dr. Rosalie Bertell
Adapted from a talk given by Dr. Rosalie Bertell, President of the Interna-
tional Institute of Concern for Public
Health in Toronto, Canada. The issue of
radioactive pollution — from nuclear test-
ing fallout, from routine reactor emis-
sions, from billions of tons of uranium
tailings left exposed at sites around the
globe, and from massive amounts of ra-
dioactive waste generated every year —is
hardly the "passe" story the industry's PR
hacks would have us believe. This is the
number one problem our children, grand-
children, etc, will have to deal with for at
least the next 250,000 years. The damage
to the integrity of the gene pool is still
being assessed. $2.25
457 "Secrecy is the One Way
an Open Society Can Be
Controlled"
Dr. Ernest Sternglass
Another important selection from the
rare book Nuclear Witnesses: Insiders
Speak Out. This is an interview with Dr. Ernest J. Stemglass, at the time the direc-
tor of the Department of Radiological
Physics at the University of Pittsburgh
Medical School, detailing his personal ex-
perience and knowledge regarding the nu-
clear establishment. Dr. Stemglass is a
staunch advocate of the public's right to
know about the true costs and conse-
quences of exposure to low-level radia-
tion on the human body — especially on
the unborn the young, and the elderly. $2.95
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 77

--- PAGE BREAK ---THE HEMP CONSPIRACY
478 "Medical Marijuana: The
Healing Herb"
by R.C.

Randall
There is an ancient medicine of poten-
tial benefit to hundreds of millions of
people which can be produced anywhere,
for almost nothing.

Yet, everywhere it is
illegal.

The medicine is marijuana, and
modern scientific studies confirm its me-
dicinal properties.

This article explores
marijuana's many therapeutic uses.

(Does
it make any sense to you that a dying
cancer victim can get hard drugs but not
pot'?) 700
484 "Hemp In England"
by the editors of Face Magazine in
England
Hemp was once grown throughout
Britain.

and used to make oil, rope, cloth,
medicine and food.

Now many farmers
want to reinstate it.

As the Manchester-
based drug agency Lifeline says, "The
lethal dose of cannabis is a two-kilo block
dropped on your head from the 25th floor
of a high-rise building." 51.85
476 "Hemp In Hawaii: Power
For the People"
by Judy Osborn
Oil shortages, high prices, and reces-
sion have pushed Hawaii into economic
crisis.

And with the world's highest plant
and animal extinction rate, the state also
faces an environmental crisis.

Hawaiian-
grown hemp could help solve both emer-
gencies.

(It could certainly cheer up out-
of-work Hawaiians.) 750
477 "Can Hemp Save the
Planet?"
by David Walker, Ph.D.

Hemp has been a crop of enormous
economic and social value for most re-
corded history.

Jack Herer's book The
Emperor Wears No Clothes advocates the
expanded cultivation of hemp for envi-
ronmental, economic, and social pur-
poses.

This manuscript reviews the scien-
tific literature backing Herer's argument.

500
479 "Hemp, the Plant That
Can Save Mother Earth: "
A Hugh Downs ABC News radio
commentary (Transcribed by Dave
Ratcliffe)
Downs gets down!

Listen to Uncle
Hugh: Hemp is the world's prime renew-
able natural resource.

Its uses are as varied
as you could possibly imagine or hope for.Listen to Uncle
Hugh: Hemp is the world's prime renew-
able natural resource.

Its uses are as varied
as you could possibly imagine or hope for.

This plant can solve many of the critical
imbalances in our industrial culture.

$2.95
057 "The Politics of Hemp"
from "The Emperor Wears No
Clothes"
Did you know it was once illegal in the
United States not to grow hemp?

Did you
know that the first flag of the United
States was made of hemp cloth and the
Constitution was printed on hemp paper?

Did you know that George Washington
not only grew hemp but also smoked it?

So: Why is marijuana now illegal?

The
story will shock and infuriate you.

$1.00
791"The Many Uses of Hemp"
by the Business Alliance for
Commerce in Hemp
Curious about the constructive uses of
hemp?

PWR feels this 20-page reprint is
one of the most comprehensive discus-
sions of the incredible possibilities in the
fields of commerce, medicine, textiles,
the environment, and food.

Read about:
Hemp for Ecology, Hemp & The Econ-
omy, Hemp for Health, Hemp for Fuel—
and more.

Even if you don't inhale, it's a
very valuable plant.

$1.85
MISCELLANEOUS
424 "The Mind of Mae
Brussel!'"
by Paul Krassner
From Sirhan to Satanism, from Chap-
paquiddick to Chowchilla, from
malathion to Manson, Mae covered it all,
tirelessly investigating the hidden links
between seemingly-unconnected events.

Radical comic Paul Krassner (who pub-
lished some of Mae's best work in The
Realist) paints a humorous and insightful
portrait of the woman who, for nearly two
decades, gave her weekly radio listeners
the news behind the news.

80e
088 "The Flynt Papers:
November, 1983"
by Don Ray
Remember when Larry Flynt was all
over the front pages as a result of his
explosive appearance before the Supreme
Court, his "run" for the presidency, and
his claim that he had copies of the Vicki
Morgan tapes?Radical comic Paul Krassner (who pub-
lished some of Mae's best work in The
Realist) paints a humorous and insightful
portrait of the woman who, for nearly two
decades, gave her weekly radio listeners
the news behind the news.

80e
088 "The Flynt Papers:
November, 1983"
by Don Ray
Remember when Larry Flynt was all
over the front pages as a result of his
explosive appearance before the Supreme
Court, his "run" for the presidency, and
his claim that he had copies of the Vicki
Morgan tapes?

This extensive profile of
Flynt describes what was going on behind
the scenes and provides a fascinating
glimpse of a complex and fascinating
man.

Though some damn Flynt as merely
a pornographer, he's long been an outspo-
ken and ferocious fighter for First
Amendment freedoms.

$1.75
047 "An Evening with Daniel
Sheehan"
speech at Paramount Pictures,
March 22, 1990
Dan Sheehan describes the Christie In-
stitute's La Penca lawsuit to the execu-
tives and staff at Paramount Pictures.

Al-
though the suit failed (the bad guys won)
we still need to understand this history—a
history of cruelty and criminality known
as the Reagan/Bush era.

$1.95
048 "Current Events and Past
History"
a speech by Daniel Sheehan
Sheehan details the United States' in-
volvement in narcotics trafficking, the se-
cret arrival of Nazi spymaster Reinhard
Gehlen in America after World War 11,
CIA collusion with the Mafia, and the
rampant lawlessness.

$1.95
049 "Who, What, Why, When,
Where?"
a speech by Daniel Sheehan
Many don't understand why the Chris-
tie case was so important, and why it
failed.

In this speech, Sheehan describes
how George Bush squirmed when Chris-
tie subpoenaed documents from his of-
fice, why Oliver North got away with it,
and who J.

Danforth Quayle really is.

Sheehan gives the straight skinny on
Judge King, the Lansky -associated Nixon
appointee who threw out the case against
America's venal covert operatives.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Danforth Quayle really is. Sheehan gives the straight skinny on
Judge King, the Lansky -associated Nixon
appointee who threw out the case against
America's venal covert operatives. $1.95
027 "Poolside With John
Judge"
A PWR Interview with John Judge
John Judge answers all kinds of pro-
vocative questions about Bush, the Iraq
invasion, numerous assassinations (in-
cluding John Lennon's), & more. $2.50
666 "The Monarch Project"
by Andy boehm
For years, troubling rumors have pro-
liferated about a mysterious U.S. govern-
ment mind-control program designed to
convert multiple-pc rsonality-disorde red
children into to spooks, spies and killers. While investigating (for a British TV
documentary) assorted atrocities in east-
ern Nebraska (see #802t, The Franklin
Cover-up), investigator Andy Boehm un-
covered considerable evidence attesting
to the existence of this Manchurian-Can-
didate Academy (although it's not neces-
sarily named "Monarch") at Offut Air
Base near Omaha, home of the SAC. In-
cluded are investigative notes and a
lengthy interview from a Monarch
"Graduate" whose memories of a fright-
eningly bizarre education are neither re-
pressed, recovered nor false. $14.95
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 78
•

--- PAGE BREAK ---Audio Programs from Prevailing Winds
DR.

HELEN CALD1C017
Dr.

Calchcott, a world renowned peace
activist, who has won The Gandhi Peace
Award, University Women's Peace
Award, and numerous other awards.

Dr.

Caldicott founded International Physi-
cians for Saving the Environment,
Women's Action for Nuclear Disarma-
ment, and Physicians for Social Respon-
sibility.

103 "A Compassionate
Society"
Dr.

Helen Caldicott spoke to a packed
audience at the Santa Monica Civic Cen-
ter on Nov.4, 1991.

A very important talk
from the heart of Helen Caldicott.

$7.95
PHILIP AGEE
I00 "Producing the Proper
Crisis"
Philip Agee was one of the first CIA
staff officers to go public and protest the
Agency's illicit activities.

He's been
smeared in the press and forced on the run.

In his speech, delivered at UC Santa Bar-
bara on April 24, 1991, Phil guides you
from early CIA activities in foreign lands
to events leading up to the Persian Gulf
war.

An excellent, eye-opening speech!!!

(Note: Our reprint section lists a transcript
of an earlier version of this speech, but
here Agee greatly elaborates and up-
dates.) 2-90 min tapes.

$11.95
MAE BRUSSELL
Prevailing Winds Research proudly of-
fers six selected tapes from Mae
Brussell's World Watchers International
broadcasts, which focused on assassina-
tions, conspiracies, and the world wide
threat posed by resurgent fascism The
late, great Mae Brussell produced 800+
broadcasts over 16 years—and if you're
interested in the kind of material featured
in this catalogue, you'll find any one of
those broadcasts fascinating.

(Believe us:
None of her stuff is outdated.) PWR has
chosen six tapes which we feel represent
the best of Mae's work.

You can receive
all six in a special "Mae Brussell Collec-
tion." Or you can order each separately
for $6.95 each.(Believe us:
None of her stuff is outdated.) PWR has
chosen six tapes which we feel represent
the best of Mae's work.

You can receive
all six in a special "Mae Brussell Collec-
tion." Or you can order each separately
for $6.95 each.

102 The Mae Brussell
Collection
All six World Watchers broadcasts
(#793, 794, 795, 804, 805, 806) are avail-
able as a set for $19.95
If you want to sample each tape indi-
vidually, order them by their PWR code
numbers: PWR code # 571 = tape 793,
PWR code #572 = tape 794, PWR code
#573 =tape 795, PWR code # 574 = tape
804, PWR code #575 = tape 805, PWR
code 4576 = tape 806.

A word of explanation Mae numbered her
broadcasts in consecutive order.

She began
each show by saying something like "This is
Mae Brussel), and this is broadcast number
793." In this catalogue, we have assigned each
tape a PWR code number—and these do not
correspond to the original broadcast number
Sorry.

We don't mean to confuse anyone—we
just have our own filing system, that's all.

TONY AVIRGAN
101 "La Penca, John Hull,
Drugs & Central America"
At the Santa Barbara Free Methodist
Church on May 1, 1990, award-winning
photojournalist Tony Avirgan eloquently
spoke about his experience at La Penca
and discussed CIA activities in Central
America.

A unique listening experience.

Avirgan is introduced by Father Bill
Davis.

2-60 min.

tapes.

S9.95
NOAM CHOMSKY
"Judged in terms of the power, range,
novelty and influence of his thought,
Noam Chomsky is arguably the most im-
portant intellectual alive"—New York
Times Book Review.

Like many another
great thinker, Chomsky has the uncanny
ability to make difficult concepts appear
obvious.

His insights force his listeners to
question their ideological foundations,
while imparting a sense of empowerment.

(Yeah, we know he's said some stuff
about the JFK assassination we don't
agree with.His insights force his listeners to
question their ideological foundations,
while imparting a sense of empowerment.

(Yeah, we know he's said some stuff
about the JFK assassination we don't
agree with.

But we like nearly everything
else he says.)
104 "Slaughter in The Gulf"
Noam Chomsky discusses the Gulf
War in Berkeley, Ca.( 1991) $6.95
105 "The Media's Role In the
New World Order"
Noam Chomsky, introduced by Jeff
Cohen, spoke at a F.A.I.R.

event in Culver
City, Ca.

2 tapes
$11.95
110 "The Media's Role In The
New World Dis-Order" (1993)
The sequel speech.

Noam Chomsky,
with an introduction by Jeff Cohen, spoke
at a F.A.I.R.

sponsored event on Sunset
Blvd.

What an eye-opening presenta-
tion!

2 tapes.

$11.95
JEFF COHEN AND
NORMAN SOLOMON
749 "An Evening of Comedy &
Politics"
Jeff Cohen, Norman Solomon and
Paul Krassner
A great evening of insightful political
analysis and humor.

Jeff Cohen and Nor-
man Solomon discuss their book "Adven-
tures in Medialand: Behind the News, Be-
yond the Pundits," and Krassner talks
about his outrageous "Confessions of a
Raving, Unconfined Nut: Misadventures
in the Counterculture." 2 tapes.

SI1.95
DANIEL ELLSBERG
106 "Beyond The Pentagon
Papers"
In January of 1991, Daniel El lsberg, of
Pentagon Papers fame, visited the campus
of UCSB in Santa Barbara, Ca.

and gave
a superb analysis of the Bush Administra-
tion and a behind-the-scenes look at what
has been going on in our name worldwide.

2 tapes $11.95
JON RAPPAPORT
210 "AIDS, FDA, and Health
Fraud"
John Rappoport Series (5 tapes)
This is the landmark series of KPFK
appearances by Jon Rappoport on Roy
Tucicman's show, Sonrethiprg's Happen-
ing, in 1992.

Rappoport.

the author of
AIDS INC., here delves into the FDA and
the federal government's war against al-
ternative health.

Rappoport takes apart the
myth of Medical Authority and breaks the
last real taboo, the Medical and Scientific
Priesthood.--- PAGE BREAK ---

the author of
AIDS INC., here delves into the FDA and
the federal government's war against al-
ternative health. Rappoport takes apart the
myth of Medical Authority and breaks the
last real taboo, the Medical and Scientific
Priesthood. These five 90 minute tapes
serve as the foundation for Rappoport's
later programs on the pharmaceutical in-
dustry and toxic drugs. These programs
define what Health Freedom really means
and why it is absolutely necessary to our
survival as free people with civil rights. A
must for anyone who wants to know what
repressive government agencies and cor-
porations are up to. $27.95
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 79

--- PAGE BREAK ---THE LIGHTHOUSE REPORT
Originally broadcast over KAZU in
Monterey.

C.A.

With Will Robinson &
Marilyn Col man
730 Special Report: "The 2nd
Gun: Who Killed RFK?"
On the 25th anniversary of the assassi-
nation of Robert Kennedy, the Lighthouse
report put together a special documentary
look at the conspiracy involved in the
murder and subsequent coverup.

In a way,
this program is the defense Sirhan Sirhan
never got in court.

Was he another Lee
Oswald?

Was he a —Manchurian Candi-
date?" This program incorporates the
work of journalist and eyewitness Theo-
dore Chapach, the noted radio broadcaster
Mae Brussel, and the late Dr.

Edward
Simpson-Kallas.

$7.50
731 "Cocaine Politics"
Interview with Peter Dale Scott
In this interview, Professor Scott enters
the dangerous world of cocaine traffick-
ing and tells the sordid story of how ele-
ments of our own government worked
with narcotics traffickers, and then fought
to suppress the truth.

$7.50
732 "Who Killed John
Lennon?"
A interview with Fenton Bresler,
author of Who Killed John Lennon.

Author/lawyer Fenton Bresler spent eight
years researching police reports, court tes-
timony and the psychological makeup of
Mark David Chapman and found things
didn't add up.

Mr.

Bresler, along with
Will & Marilyn explore the possibility
that Chapman may have been a mind-con-
trolled assassin.

$7.50
733 "AIDS & the HIV Myth"
A interview with Celia Farber.

investi-
gative reporter & Senior Writer for Spin
Magazine.

Farber has spent years in chas-
ing the truth of the cause and cures of
AIDS.

She not only answers many of the
questions but also brings up new ques-
tions, such as: Why is AIDS in Africa
defined differently than in the U.S.?

A
must-listen for anyone interested in the
alternative theories surrounding this
deadly disease S7.50
JIM GARRISON
777 "The Rise of The Fourth
Reich"
From the year 1967, this speech by
Garrison has endured the test of time.She not only answers many of the
questions but also brings up new ques-
tions, such as: Why is AIDS in Africa
defined differently than in the U.S.?

A
must-listen for anyone interested in the
alternative theories surrounding this
deadly disease S7.50
JIM GARRISON
777 "The Rise of The Fourth
Reich"
From the year 1967, this speech by
Garrison has endured the test of time.

Garrison lays bare the Kennedy Assassi-
nation with incredible insight, accuracy,
and wit.

Fascinating listening!

58,95
BARBARA HONEGGER
The author of October Surprise, Bar-
bara Honegger reveals many of the crimes
of the Reagan-Bush junta that presided
over America.

From secret arms deals
with the Iranians through the S&L scandal
and the Persian Gulf war, Barbara exposes
the secret history that today's Republican
apologists very much hope to keep secret.

877 "The October Surprise
Whitewash"
by Barbara Honegger
Barbara returned from Washington
days after the "Joint Report of the Task
Force to Investigate Certain Allegations
Concerning the Holding of American
Hostages By Iran In 1980" (October Sur-
prise Task Force) was released: She gave
a press conference to explain what hap-
pened behind the scenes and exposes the
Task Force's deceptions_ What a tape!

We
have offered to refund anybody disap-
pointed with this tape (and so far, no-
one's asked for a refund).

You will not
find anybody who can lend more insight
to the matter of the "October Surprise"
than Barb Honegger.

57.95
111 "October Surprise Update"
Barbara Honegger gives a great outline
of the "October Surprise" scenario along
with all the latest.

Barbara has worked the
hardest in getting the "October Surprise"
story to the masses.

On November 4,
1991, Barbara spoke to a University of
California, Santa Cruz, full house.

4 stars.On November 4,
1991, Barbara spoke to a University of
California, Santa Cruz, full house.

4 stars.

2 tapes 511.95
112 "A Majority of One"
On July 24, 1990, Barbara gave a com-
prehensive analysis linking the trea-
sonous dealings in 1980 with illegal cov-
ert operations and banking scandals.

Bar-
bara spent nearly three years working in
the White House and delivers an amazing
account of the sinister secret agendas at
work to undermine our democratic struc-
tures.

1-90 min.

tape.

56.95
113 "The October Surprise"
On November 3, 1990, Barbara
Honegger graced the University of Cali-
fornia Santa Barbara's Campbell Hall.

Barbara attended UCSB for her freshman
year, 25 years ago, which gave this won-
derful talk a certain magic.

For over two
and a half hoots she lays out a White
House insider's view of the crooked deals
and deceptive practices of the Reagan-
Bush administration.

If you think we have
been Bush-whacked all these years, how
do you think the families of the 250,000-
plus dead in Iraq feel?

511.95
JOHN JUDGE
Researcher John Judge is the most radi-
cal speaker on the lecture circuit, and the
most audacious critic of the American
government you'll ever hear.

He's draw-
ing a rapidly-widening audience for his
investigations of the Kennedy assassina-
tions, the Bush Crime Family, mind con-
trol, CIA narcotics trafficking, the horri-
fying neo-Nazi revival, and various other
sinister forces at work in America.

His
research provides a thorough dissection of
the hidden agendas and underlying his-
tory of post-WW2 America Prepare to
have your complacency shattered: No
other speaker will leave you shaking quite
the way John Judge does.

194-198 "The Deaths of
Democracy"
For the last 22 years, John Judge has
researched current political assassinations
and other covert operations.

Beginning
with the murder of John F.--- PAGE BREAK ---

194-198 "The Deaths of
Democracy"
For the last 22 years, John Judge has
researched current political assassinations
and other covert operations. Beginning
with the murder of John F. Kennedy in
1963, which he identifies as a military
coup d'etat, Judge focuses on the hidden
historical developments of the National
Security state. John gave somewhat dif-
fering presentations at each night's event
during his California tour in 1992. Each
night presents new topics and new infor-
mation. Each lecture is approximately
three hours long. » 194 USCB, Santa Barbara, 2-25-92
$1L95
» 195 Wilshire United Methodist
Church, 2-90 Si L95
,) 196 Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo, 2-27-
92 511.95
» 197 Louden Nelson Center, Santa
Cruz, 2-28-92 $1L95
», 198 The Women's Building, San Fran-
cisco, 3-91
511.95
882 "Cults, Lies & Videotape:
From Jonestown to Waco"
with John Judge in Hawaii 7-8-93
A wild evening in which the following
topics are discussed: Cults, mind control,
UFO's, fear, paranoia, assassinations,
drugs, Jonestown, Waco, Rajneesh, secret
societies and more. A sensible-and-sane
approach to weird-land. PWR highly rec-
ommends this explanation of how the in-
telligence community and cults interact. Four hours, 3 tapes. $16.95
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 80

--- PAGE BREAK ---135 "Who Killed JFK and
Why?"
Featuring John Judge and Ralph
Schoenman
Ralph teamed up with John to give two
separate one hour summaries followed by
one hour of questions and answers.

As
executive director of the Bertrand Russell
Peace Foundation, Ralph Schoenman
founded the Who Killed Kennedy Com-
mittee in 1963.

The Committee found that
Clay L.

Shaw was a director of the CIA
proprietary organization in Europe
through which a series of assassinations
and coups d'etat were prepared.

Schoen-
man provided evidence on Clay Shaw to
New Orleans D A.

Jim Garrison in the
1960's.

2 tapes $12.95
114 "Blacks, Drugs, & the
CIA"
A priceless analysis of how covert drug
operations have victimized the African-
American community.

This talk exposes
the real political and social agenda behind
the drug traffic and the repressive police
state "justified" by drug use.

$6.95
115 "Jonestown — The Untold
Story"
A timeless speech on some under-re-
ported details of the "Jonestown Massa-
cre." Based on years of careful research,
Judge documents the mass murder (not
suicide) that took place, the mind control
experiments, and the incredible connec-
tions to military intelligence.

$6.95
116 "Who Really Runs
America?"
This three-tape lecture was delivered to
a sold-out house at the University of
Toronto.

Covering the hidden history of
the Cold War, U.S.

intelligence agencies
and international fascism, Judge names
the key players in control of our society,
and how they hope to conquer the last
frontier, "the space between our ears."
3-tape series.

$15.95
117 "Evidence in the JFK
Assassination"
Judge and Wendy Govier gave this six-
hour analysis of the events surrounding
the coup-d'etat of November 22nd, 1963.

Slides, videotapes, analyses and Q & A
clearly revealed the hard evidence of con-
spiracy and cover-up in the murder of the
President.$15.95
117 "Evidence in the JFK
Assassination"
Judge and Wendy Govier gave this six-
hour analysis of the events surrounding
the coup-d'etat of November 22nd, 1963.

Slides, videotapes, analyses and Q & A
clearly revealed the hard evidence of con-
spiracy and cover-up in the murder of the
President.

Judge then names the groups
and individuals responsible for that and
many other murders in a "Whodunnit"
that will surprise and alarm you.

Special
4 tape series.

A mind-bender.

S19.95
118 "UFOs: Unrecognized
Fascist Observatories"
Judge lays out evidence that "flying
saucers" are part of the secret Nazi arsenal
captured by American forces and con-
cealed from the public.

He discusses hid-
den technology and manipulation of pub-
lic opinion.

I- 90 minute tape.

$6.95
119 "Who Killed The
Dreamer?"
Judge spoke at Mt.

Tabor Baptist
Church, Los Angeles, naming and expos-
ing the real murderers of Martin Luther
King.

A step-by-step analysis of the bal-
listic and eyewitness evidence leads to the
real killers.

Then Judge goes further, re-
vealing a pattern of witness deaths similar
to the Kennedy murder, and mysterious
links to the Jonestown massacre.

$11.95
120 "Farewell America"
UCSB's Isla Vista Theater welcomed
John Judge for an evening of insight on
Friday December 1, 1989.

In this discus-
sion John featured topics such as AIDS as
Chemical Biological Warfare, the Bush-
Hinkley connection to the 1981 attempt
on Ronald Reagan's life, the murders of
John Lennon, RFK, JFK 511.95
121 "The Fourth Reich"
John gave the speech of his life to a
packed house in San Luis Obispo, Califor-
nia.

Many J.F.K.

researchers were pre-
sent, making for a most complete discus-
sion of the assassination.

Also featured:
the sordid truth behind Jonestown and the
suspicious deaths of certain popular fig-
ures in music, media and progressive poli-
tics.

2-90 min.

tapes.

511.95
122 "The History of U.S.

Government Drug
Involvement"
John lays out the history of U.S.511.95
122 "The History of U.S.

Government Drug
Involvement"
John lays out the history of U.S.

gov-
ernment involvement in narcotics trans-
port, distribution and use from 1945 t'ill
today.

A compelling expose of the bidden
history of post-WW2 America 2-90 min.

tapes.

$11.95
123 "Judge For Yourself"
This intense, provocative discourse
touches on everything— a great overview
of our hidden history.

Every one of John's
speeches is unique and rich in value.

2-90
min tapes.

$11.95
124 "Why Are We In the
Persian Gulf?"
John exposes the real hidden agenda of
Mr.

Bush's war; covert/overt power
plays, billions made by oil companies,
defense spending (some peace dividend!),
the history of OPEC, the S&L drain, CIA
activity and more.

1-60 min tape.

$7.95
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 81
125 "Poolside with John
Judge"
Judge lays out the truth about Bush's
family history, the phony war on drugs,
the national security state, coven manipu-
lation of racial tensions, the Manson mur-
ders, and even the death of Bob Marley.

(Incidentally: Although certain Marley
'experts' try to pooh-pooh the story, Neil
Bush really did visit him shortly before
his death) 1-90 min tape.

$6.95
126 "Poolside
Solutions and
Alternatives"
Nearly a year after Prevailing Winds
conducted the first poolside interview
with John, we met again to concentrate on
solutions and alternatives.

So often the
question comes up: "What can we do?"
A fair question: It is easy to point out
corruption without addressing how to im-
prove matters.

In this new interview, John
offers some ideas and some hope.

It's nice
to know there's something positive you
can do...

$6.95
127 "John Judge In L.A."
Interview by Joe Crummy
John shocked the L.A.

radio audience
with details on the Hinkley-Bush connec-
tion and the events surrounding the at-
tempted assassination of Ronald Reagan
in 1981.--- PAGE BREAK ---

$6.95
127 "John Judge In L.A."
Interview by Joe Crummy
John shocked the L.A. radio audience
with details on the Hinkley-Bush connec-
tion and the events surrounding the at-
tempted assassination of Ronald Reagan
in 1981. $6.95
128 "Prisoners' Justice Day"
During one of John's visits to Toronto,
he met with Rick Lines to discuss the
prison situation as well as parallel psychi-
atric abuses worldwide. $6.95
129 "The History of Fascism in
America: 1917 to 1987"
John gives names, places, dates leading
you through some incredible hidden his-
tory regarding American fascism's deep
roots. While most of the names will come
as no surprise, a few of the folks he ex-
poses may shock you. Fascinating and
filled with vivid historical detail. 1-90 min
tape. S6.95
130 "John Judge Sampler"
Whether you're familiar with John's
work or not, this tape makes for a zesty
sampling of his research Unless we miss
our guess, you'll fund him to be a bracing
jolt to your knowledge banks. This tape
focuses primarily on Jim Jones and Jones-
town, summarizing John's ground-break-
ing research study "The Black Hole of
Guyana" He goes on to describe other
cult operations. 1-90 min tape. $6.95
Question
Authority
b,`

--- PAGE BREAK ---RFK
"Y": The R.F.K.

Assassination
Album
Produced in 1969, this tape contains all
the original recordings of the assassina-
tion, and the drama that follows.

You will
hear the actual assassination, witnesses
recreating the scene, the arrest, the inves-
tigation.

evidence, security, questions of
conspiracy.

Sirhan and the trial.

Some of
the people you will hear from are: RFK,
Jeff Brent, Karl Uecker, Ramsey Clark,
Dr.

Thomas Noguchi and many others.

A
very moving experience, replete with dra-
matic first-day evidence.

$7.95
JOHN NEWMAN, Ph.D.

715 "JFK and Vietnam"
John Newman has published exten-
sively on Soviet.

Chinese, and Asian Af-
fairs.

He has three degrees in East Asian
history, including a doctorate from
George Washington University.

Both his
doctoral dissertation and his book are
based upon fifteen years of painstaking
research into the Vietnam war during the
Kennedy Administration.

Newman lays
out his research and documents, which
show a clear withdrawal from Vietnam
and other insights into where the hit in
Dallas may have spawned.

2-tapes.

S11.95
MICHAEL PARENTI
131 "Global Militarism & the
Bush Hypocrisy"
Author of many books, Professor Par-
enti is highly respected in the educational
community.

His lecture demonstrates the
massive deception perpetrated upon the
American populace.

Once again Michael
is in excellent form.

4 STARS!

1-90 min
tape.

$6.95
132 "Human Nature in
Politics"
The Christie Institute hosted Michael
Parenti for his talk, "Human Nature in
Politics," which deals with political di-
mensions of human nature, as well as a
critique of conservative concepts.

1-tape.

S6.95
717 "Make-believe Media: The
Politics of Entertainment"
Parenti explains bias in the media and
presents a history of the manipulation and
propaganda found in so-called "escapist"
entertainment.

2-tapes.

$11.95
421%.41.

COL.

L.

FLETCHER PROUTY
133 "The Mind of L.

Fletcher
Prouty"
John Judge interviews Col.

L.Fletcher
Prouty"
John Judge interviews Col.

L.

Ftetcher
Prouty, who was liason officer between
the Secretary of Defence and the CIA
Director at the time of the JFK murder.

Prouty helped to script the Donald Suth-
erland "Mr.

X" portion of the Oliver
Stone movie, JFK.

He's a real font of
inside information on the secret history of
the post-War era.2 tapes.

511.95
880 "Mr.

X on the Stony Knoll"
with Col.

L Fletcher Prouty and
John Judge
Believe it or not, we brought Prouty
("Mr.

X" in the film JFK, played by
Donald Sutherland) to the same spot in
Washington where Oliver Stone shot the
scene with Kevin Costner.

For over two
hours, Fletcher and John discussed the
CIA, covert operations, assassinations,
the Reagan shooting, KAL flight 007, and
much much more.

Very important infor-
mation!

2 tapes.

$12.95
RALPH SCHOENMAN
134 "The Hidden History of
Iraq & Kuwait"
Schoenman provides the a compre-
hensive and scathing indictment of U.S.

foreign policy and helps us to understand
how Saddam Hussein was transformed
from a friend and ally to the "new Hitler"
by Washington propagandists desperate
for a conflict to legitimize their post-Cold
War military expenditures.

No-one else
comes close to Schoenman's analysis of
the Middle East.

1-90 min.

tape.

$6.95
747 "Beyond Dallas: The Real
Politics of the Kennedy
Execution"
Ralph Schoenman at UCLA in Febru-
ary, 1992.

One of Ralph's Finest speeches.

Schoenman lays bare the true underlying
political framework in which the hit took
place.

Full of brilliant insights, these
tapes are a must for JFK researchers.

2
tapes.

S11.95
748 "The Politics of the Gulf
War"
with Ralph Schoenman and John Judge
The last time John was in California he
sat down with Ralph and they discussed
many issues surrounding the U.S.

spon-
sored "slaughter in the Gulf." Both were
able to share their own valuable insights.

Very important information.

$6.95
PETER DALE SCOTT, Ph.

D.--- PAGE BREAK ---

$6.95
PETER DALE SCOTT, Ph. D. Professor of English at Berkeley, Peter
Dale Scott, author of Cocaine Politics:
Drugs, .4rmies, and the CL4 in Central
America, has always bc,m highly regarded
for his research into politcal wrongdoing. lie renders understandable the Byzantine
connections and internecine rivalries be-
tween the mob, government agencies, and
the intelligence apparatus. His analysis of
the power factions behind the JFK assas-
sination remains unrivalled. 136 "Drug Smuggling & the
CIA"
Scott clearly demonstrates that when-
ever the CIA goes into a country, drugs
start flowing out. If you want to under-
stand what really happened (and hapens)
in Central America, here's where you
should begin. 2 tapes. $11.95
DANIEL SHEEHAN
As chief counsel for the Christie Insti-
tute, Daniel Sheehan has built a formida-
ble reputation as one of America's leading
liberal crusaders. Many of these tapes deal
with various aspects of the La Penca law-
suit—which, alas, the bad guys won (but
the fight still brought a lot of the truth out). A great speaker. 451 "JFK, The October
Surprise and the Christie
Institute Today"
On March 25, 1992, Sara Nelson and
Danny Sheehan gave an extremely warm
talk to a gathering at Esalen in Big Sur. Ca. Topics included the October Surprise,
JFK, and even Watergate. 2
tapes. $11.95
452 "The Philosophy of the
Christie Institute"
At the Fs:lien Institute in Big Sur, Ca. 3-91. 1 tape. $6.95
453 "Natural Law Democracy
and the Cosmos"
At the Esalen Institute in Big Sur, Ca. 3-91 2 tapes $12.00
137 "Some Bad News and
Some Good News"
On Oct. 13, 1991 at the Red Lion Inn
in Santa Barbara, Danny delivered an in-
credible talk to a standing- room-only
crowd. 2 tapes 511.95
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 82

--- PAGE BREAK ---138 "The Persian Gulf War,
Covert Operations and the
New World Order"
Having trouble understanding what
happened in the Gulf?

We think you'll
find that Daniel Sheehan has the answers.

On March 21, 1991, he broke Santa Bar-
bara fire codes at his standing-room-only
Victoria Street Theater appearance, in
which he lays out the clear, substantiated
facts regarding events occurring prior to
and during the Persian Gulf conflict.

2-60
min tapes.

$11.95
139 "The Politics of Drugs in
America"
Danny's speech gives a concise over-
view of the real problems facing our na-
tion, focusing in particular on the phony
"War on Drugs" and the real purpose of
this exercise.

4 STARS.

1-90 min.

tape.

57.95
140 "Noriega & Bush — The
Real Dope'
Daniel Sheehan spoke at the Cross-
roads School in Santa Monica Since the
invasion of Panama was fresh, Danny
spent considerable time going over the
Bush-Noriega link, which is so important
to understanding the ramifications of the
U.S.

presence in Central and Latin Amer-
ica and the U.S.-backed drug flow.

1-90
min_ tape.

$7.95
141 "Current Events/Past
History"
Santa Barbara City College Political
Awareness Club featured Daniel Sheehan
at the Garvin Theater.

Danny covers so
much ground at every speech, that it's
hard to say which talk is of greater value.

Sheehan explains how the NSC/CIA was
formed and the Nazi connection to those
ill-conceived organizations.

The question
and answer session opens up a lot of im-
portant issues, ranging from racism in
America to JFK.

511.95
142 "An Evening With Daniel
Sheehan"
Paramount Pictures invited Daniel
Sheehan to present the La Penca lawsuit
and an update of the suit to a large group
of executives and staff.

Danny also pro-
vided an interpretation of the hypocrisy so
prevalent in our government.511.95
142 "An Evening With Daniel
Sheehan"
Paramount Pictures invited Daniel
Sheehan to present the La Penca lawsuit
and an update of the suit to a large group
of executives and staff.

Danny also pro-
vided an interpretation of the hypocrisy so
prevalent in our government.

This speech
is perfect for an overview of The Christie
Institute and what they stand for, and the
deeper meanings behind the La Penca
bombing case they pursued so diligently
those many years.

1-90 min.

tape.

$6.95
TfPCtIOPffiCf
DR.

ROBERT STRECKER
145 "AIDS: The Man-Made
Virus"
Dr.

Robert Strecker, MD speaks on his
research into the genesis of AIDS.

Strecker provides a perspective that's
chilling and knowledgeable.

He believes
that government AIDS researchers are ly-
ing to you about nearly everything.

A
transcript of this speech is also available
in the reprint section_ 2 tapes.

S11.95
146 "AIDS, Health Care, and
the American Fallacy"
Dr.

Strecker gave an eloquent and con-
cise one-hour summation of all his AIDS
research and what's to come ahead.

An
amazing lecture, filled with sources and
references.

1 tape.

$7.95
OTHER AMERICAS RADIO
149 "The Media As
Propaganda"
World-renowned linguist Noam
Chomsky levels his guns at the commer-
cial media.

Chomsky, widely regarded as
America's foremost intellectual dissident,
explains why previous administrations
were forced to use clandestine military
operations and how the American public
can affect U.S.

foreign policy.

A startling
presentation.

60-min.

$8.00
150 Crosswired: U.S.

Media
and Central America
Mercedez Lynn D'Uriarte, media re-
searcher and veteran of the Los Angeles
Times, provides an inside view of corn-
mercial media and its coverage of the
Third World.

It doesn't matter where it
happened, or whom it happened to— until
Washington pays attention to it, you don't
hear about it.

Two 30-min.

parts.Two 30-min.

parts.

$8.00
151 "Objectivity or
Complacency" and "Quietly
Eating Radioactivity"
(Two programs on one tape) In "Ob-
jectivity or Complacency," Saul Landau,
journalist and Emmy award-winning
filmmaker, explores the concept of Na-
tional Security and how it affects media
coverage.

Humorous, yet compelling.

In
"Quietly Eating Radioactivity," radiation
expert Dr.

Rosalie Benell explores the
hidden dangers of low-level radiation in
our environment, in the food chain, and
the effect of radiation on future genera-
tions.

She exposes a failed U.S.

nuclear
test that paralleled Chernobyl, thus raising
questions as to the • actual cause of in-
creased U.S.

radiation levels at that time.

This program, made in 1986, instigated a
Ted Koppel special.

(60 min.)
$8.00
152 "Lines of Deceit: Cocaine
and the White House"
Why did cocaine smuggling increase
1000% after George Bush became Drug
Czar?

This program delves into the murky
world of drugs and covert action, and
explores the ways in which drug smug-
gling has been used for decades to finance
numerous U.S.

secret operations.

60-
min.: S8.95
153 A Nation Betrayed: Heroin
and the White House
General Khun Sa, warlord of the
opium-rich Golden Triangle, was be-
lieved to have been holding 10 American
POWs since the Vietnam war.

The White
House sent in Lt.

Col.

James "Bo" Gritz,
the most decorated Special Forces com-
mander of the Vietnam War, in search of
these POWs.

His quest led him to the
mountain stronghold of Khun Sa, where
Gritz uncovered a trail of drug smugglers
and secret military operations that led
straight to Washington.

30-min Side B
contains an audio sampler featuring 2 to
3-minute audio samples of most of the
programs in Other Americas Radio's
catalog.--- PAGE BREAK ---

His quest led him to the
mountain stronghold of Khun Sa, where
Gritz uncovered a trail of drug smugglers
and secret military operations that led
straight to Washington. 30-min Side B
contains an audio sampler featuring 2 to
3-minute audio samples of most of the
programs in Other Americas Radio's
catalog. $8.00
154 "October Surprise"
This documentary examines the star-
tling allegations that a treasonous plan
was carried out in 1980 by members of the
Reagan/Bush presidential campaign to
delay the release of the 52 hostages in
Iran, thus assuring victory for Reagan. Barbara Honegger (former Reagan policy
analyst), Mansur Rafizadeh (ex-chief of
the U.S. SAVAK Iran's secret police),
Abol-Hassan Bani-Sadr (former Presi-
dent of Iran) and others charge that a
promise of weapons for Iran was made by
George Bush et al. in exchange for not
releasing the hostages until Ronald Rea-
gan was elected and inaugurated. Side B
contains an audio sampler of other avail-
able audio tapes. 58.00
556 "Contragate: The Men
Behind the Guns"
The first complete account of the La
Penca press conference bombing and sub-
sequent uncovering of a shadow CIA net-
work dealing in drugs, assassinations and
terrorism. Journalists Tony Avirgan and
Martha Honey, along with the Christic
Institute, conducted investigations that
have revealed links between this network,
the Iran-contra arms deal and the White
House. 60-min. 58.00
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 83

--- PAGE BREAK ---te, conducted investigations that
have revealed links between this network,
the Iran-contra arms deal and the White
House. 60-min. 58.00
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 83

--- PAGE BREAK ---

reach for your
e, you should
Hess for Reagan.
557 "Crying Uncle:
Nicaragua's Elections Under
Fire"
With Chamorro's upset victory in the
1990 Nicaraguan election, the Bush ad-
ministration succeeded in buying the elec-
tion, but did they succeed in buying the
candidate? This program focuses on
UNO: the new Nicaraguan administra-
tion, who they really are and how they
plan to deal with the Sandinistas. 30-min.
58.00
156 "Guatemala: A Curtain of
Silence"
This 2-part program reviews the his-
tory of Guatemala from the Spanish con-
quest to the domination of the country by
the United Fruit Company, moving into
the 1954 CIA coup and culminating with
the present attempts at civilian democracy
and indigenous activism. Part I examines
the history of U.S. influence in Guate-
mala, including then-CIA Officer Philip
Roettinger's account of his efforts in cre-
ating the coup. Part II explores the human
rights situation in Guatemala. focusing on
the Indian communities and the chal-
lenges to their survival. Heartfelt and elo-
quent Two 30-min. parts on one 60-min.
tape.
$8.00
157 "Waging Unconditional
Peace"
Vietnam veteran Brian Wilson lost
both legs while waging peace at the Con-
cord Naval Weapons Station, blocking a
train loaded with weapons bound for Cen-
tral America. Wilson conveys his own
experience of a U.S. foreign policy that
kills and maims civilians in the name of
national security. Joining Wilson is John
Ryan, the FBI special agent assigned to
investigate Wilson. Ryan's refusal to
classify the Veterans for Life participants
as terrorists cost him his career and a
5300.000 retirement pension. 60-min.:
$8.00
Help Support Our Workned to
investigate Wilson. Ryan's refusal to
classify the Veterans for Life participants
as terrorists cost him his career and a
5300.000 retirement pension. 60-min.:
$8.00
Help Support Our Work

Subscribe to: Prevailing Winds Magazine
Four Issues/$20 Eight Issues/$38
Send To: Prevailing Winds Magazine. P.O. Box 2351 1, Santa Barbara, CA 93121
or call (805) 899-3433
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 84

--- PAGE BREAK ---Video Presentations from Prevailing Winds
A number of the video presenta-
tions available from Prevailing
Winds are also available on audio
tape.

For further descriptions of
these programs, you may want to
check the audio tape section.

PHILIP AGEE
100 "Producing the Proper
Crisis"
Philip Agee was one of the first CIA
staff officers to go public and protest the
Agency's illicit activities.

In his speech,
delivered at UC Santa Barbara on April
24, 1991, Phil guides you from early CIA
activities in foreign lands to events lead-
ing up to the Persian Gulf war.

An excel-
lent, eye-opening speech!

$16.95
TONY AVIRGAN
101 "La Penca, John Hull,
Drugs & Central America"
At the Santa Barbara Free Methodist
Church on May 1, 1990, award-winning
photojournalist Tony Avirgan eloquently
spoke about his experience at La Penca
and CIA activities in Central America.

A
unique listening expeience.

Avirgan is in-
troduced by Father Bill Davis.

$16.95
NOAM CHOMSKY
Author of mans' books, Chomsky has
the uncanny ability, as do many great
thinkers, to make the unknown ultimately
appear obvious.

Chomsky's direct por-
trayal of world events forces his listeners
to question their ideological milieu.

His
insights, though forbidding in their inten-
sity, impart a sense of empowerment.

737 "The Media's Role in The
New World Order"
Noam Chomsky (with Jeff Cohen)
spoke at a F.

A.I.R.

event in Culver City,
Ca, on November 11,1991.

Highly rec-
ommended viewing.

$17.95
199 "The Media's Role in The
New World Dis-Order" (1993)
Noam Chomsky.

an introduced by Jeff
Cohen, spoke at an event sponsored by
F.A.I.R (Fairness and Accuracy In Re-
porting) An eye opening video!

517,95
COHEN, SOLOMAN Et
KRASSNER
881 "An Evening of Comedy &
Politics"
A great evening of insightful political
analysis and humor.an introduced by Jeff
Cohen, spoke at an event sponsored by
F.A.I.R (Fairness and Accuracy In Re-
porting) An eye opening video!

517,95
COHEN, SOLOMAN Et
KRASSNER
881 "An Evening of Comedy &
Politics"
A great evening of insightful political
analysis and humor.

Jeff Cohen & Nor-
man Soloman wrote 'Adventures in Me-
dialand: Behind the News, Beyond the
Pundits," Krassner had just finished his
"Confessions of a Raving, Unconfined
Nut: Misadventures in the Countercul-
ture."
S17.95
FATHER BILL DAVIS
161 "Third-Party Politics in
America"
Father Bill Davis, one of the co-foun-
ders of The Christie Institute, came to
speak at The Green Dragon in Santa Bar-
bara.

Bill gave a great summary of the
state of our dis-union and the potential and
urgent need for a third party.

516.95
BARBARA HONEGGER
164 "A Majority of One"
Barbara gives a comprehensive analy-
sis, linking pre -election treason with ille-
gal covert operations and the Saving and
Loans scandal.

Barbara spent nearly three
years working in the White House, and
delivers an amazing account of sinister
secret agendas to undermine our demo-
cratic structures.

$16.95
165 "The October Surprise"
For over two and a half hours Barbara
lays out a White House insider's view of
the crooked deals and deceptive practices
of the Reagan-Bush administration Step
by step, Barbara outlines the "October
Surprise" and its ramifications.

S16.95
JACK HERER
166 "Sooner or Later, There's
a Time for Hemp."
Jack Herer spoke to the community of
Isla Vista, CA.

His message: There is only
one known renewable natural resource
able to provide goods.

And essentials such
as paper and textiles meet all the world's
transportation, home and industrial en-
ergy needs; and clean the atmosphere.

Yep: It's hemp!

517.95
167 "Hemp For Victory"
The original 1942 United States De-
partment of Agnculture pro-marijuana
film, titled "Hemp For Victory".--- PAGE BREAK ---

Yep: It's hemp! 517.95
167 "Hemp For Victory"
The original 1942 United States De-
partment of Agnculture pro-marijuana
film, titled "Hemp For Victory". It con-
tains a chronology of the many uses of
hemp from Roman times to the present. Along with "Hemp For Victory", you'll
see Jack Hcrer, author of 'The Emperor
Wears No Clothes", in Isla Vista. CA.,
presenting one of his power-packed
speeches in defense of hemp. The video
tape will come with plenty of reading
material as well. (For an excellent book on
the subject, pick up "The Emperor Wears
No Clothes ')
$19.95
JOHN JUDGE
"The Deaths of Democracy"
Back in the '20s, hundreds of decent
Germans were killed by coven fascist
cells; the authorities covered up the
crimes, and those who cried "conspiracy"
were widely derided. Is history repeating
itself? John says yes, and he presents a
powerful argument. For the last 22 years,
John Judge has researched political assas-
sinations and other coven operations, be-
ginning with the murder of John F. Ken-
nedy in 1963, which he identifies as a
military coup d'etat. Judge's parents
worked in the Pentagon and as a child he
frequented the Pentagon library. John
spoke on America's plague of mysterious
deaths during his 1992 California tour. Knowing that a high-quality video was
being produced for each night's event,
John gave a somewhat different presenta-
tions at each lecture. Each talk is around
three hours long. 169 Deaths 'of Democracy
USCB, Santa Barbara, 2-25-92
$16.95
170 Deaths of Democracy
Wilshire United Methodist Church, 2-
90 516.95
171 Deaths of Democracy
Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo, 2-27-92
$16.95
172 Deaths of Democracy
Louden Nelson Center, Santa Cruz, 2-
28-92 S16.95
173 Deaths of Democracy
The Womens Building, San Francisco,
3-91 $16.95
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 85

--- PAGE BREAK ---882 "Cults, Lies & Videotape:
From Jonestown to Waco"
John Judge in Maur, Hawaii, 7-8-93
A wild evening in which the following
topics are discussed: Cults, mind control,
UFOs, fear, paranoia, assassinations,
drugs, Jonestown.

Waco, Scientology,
Rajneesh, secret societies and more.

A
sensible-and-sane approach to weird-
land.

PWR highly recommends this ex-
planation of how the intelligence commu-
nity and cults interact.

This four hour eve-
ning in Maui will come on two cassettes.

to provide you with strong quality for-
making copies.

$24.95
135 "Who Killed JFK and
Why?"
Featuring John Judge and Ralph
Schoenman
Schoenntan teamed up with John to
give two separate one-hour summaries
followed by one hour of questions and
answers.As executive director of the Ber-
trand Russell Peace Foundation, Schoen-
man founded the Who Killed Kennedy
Committee in 1963.

The Committee
found that Clay L.

Shaw was director of
the CIA proprietary organization in
Europe through which a series of assassi-
nations and coups d'etat were prepared.

Schoerunan provided evidence on Clay
Shaw to New Orleans D.A.

Jim Garrison
in the 1960's.

517,00
533 "Who Really Runs
America?"
For nearly three and a half hours, John
Judge delivered an immaculate indict-
ment of America's hidden elite to a sold-
out house at the University of Toronto, on
August 9, 1991.

Covering the hidden his-
tory of the Cold War, U.S.

intelligence
agencies and international fascism, Judge
names the key players in control of our
society, and how they hope to gain the last
frontier, "the space between our ears."
Special 3 1/2 hour video.

519.95
534 "The JFK Assassination"
At the University of Toronto, John
Judge and Wendy Govier gave an incred-
ible six-hour analysis of the events sur-
rounding the coup-d'etat of November 22,
1963.

Slides, video, and analysis clearly
reveal the conspiracy and cover-up in the
murder of President Kennedy.519.95
534 "The JFK Assassination"
At the University of Toronto, John
Judge and Wendy Govier gave an incred-
ible six-hour analysis of the events sur-
rounding the coup-d'etat of November 22,
1963.

Slides, video, and analysis clearly
reveal the conspiracy and cover-up in the
murder of President Kennedy.

Judge
names the groups and individuals respon-
sible for the events in Dallas and leads you
through the global implications.

A mind-
bender!

Special six-hour video.

$19.95
176 "John Judge in Thunder Bay,
Canada"
In 1991, John was invited to Thunder
Bay to give an insightful and humorous
talk on assassinations, fascism, history
and then-current events, including the
Clarence Thomas confirmation.

516.95
177 "The Fourth Reich &
Kennedy's Killers"
Includes slides of the Oswald doubles.

S16.95
175 "The History of U.S.

Government Drug Involvement"
Judge lays out the history of U.S.

gov-
ernment involvement in narcotics trans-
port, distribution and use from 1945 until
now.

A compelling expose of the hidden
history of post WWII America which
demonstrates that the "War on Drugs" is
really a repressive police-state response
that blames the victims.

516.95
RFK
876 "The RFK Assassination
Special Presentation"
Compiled by Ted Charach and PWR
This tape contains speeches and inter-
views with Robert Kennedy.

The last hour
contains highlights of the strongest evi-
dence available from the RFK assassina-
tion.

This tape was shown during RFK
assassination lectures around North
America, by Ted Charach of "The Second
Gun" fame.

516.95
DR.

JOHN NEWMAN
178 "JFK and Vietnam"
Dr.

John Newman has published exten-
sively in Soviet, Chinese, and Asian Af-
fairs.

He has three degrees in East Asian
History, including a doctorate from
George Washington University.John Newman has published exten-
sively in Soviet, Chinese, and Asian Af-
fairs.

He has three degrees in East Asian
History, including a doctorate from
George Washington University.

Both his
doctoral dissertation and his book are
based upon fifteen years of painstaking
research into the Vietnam War during the
Kennedy Administration Newman lays
out his research and documents, which
show that JFK clearly intended a with-
drawal from Vietnam.

You've heard the
lies told by certain ax-grinding "leftists,"
now get the documented truth.

$16.95
OCTOBER SURPRISE
179 "Highlights of October
Surprise Colloquy"
A special program condensed from a
three-hour colloquy sponsored by the
Fund for New Priorities.

Just how fair
and free are our elections?

If covert opera-
tors managed to unseat Jimmy Carter,
what are they up to nowadays'?

$16.95
MICHAEL PARENT!

180 "Global Militarism"
Author of many books, Parenti is
highly respected in the educational com-
munity and his texts are well-known to
political science students.

His lecture
demonstrates the government's massive
deceptions perpetrated upon the Ameri-
can people.

As always, Michael Parenti is
in excellent form.

$16.95
718 "Make Believe Media: The
Politics of Entertainment"
You've probably heard conservative
spokesmen like Michael Medved whine
about Hollywood's "left-wing" bias.

The
truth, of course, is the exact opposite -
and it's time you got the other side of the
story.

Michael Parenti presents a history
of media manipulation, and shows how
right-wing propaganda warps the product
of our entertainment industry $16.95
FLETCHER PROUTY
400 "The Mind of L.

Fletcher
Prouty"
Researcher John Judge interviews
Col.

L.

Fletcher Prouty.

Col.

Prouty, who was liason officer
between the Secretary of Defence and the
CIA Director at the time of the JFK mur-
der, scripted the Mr.

X portion of the
Oliver Stone movie.

One of the best tapes
PWR has to offer.

$19.95
874 "Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One of the best tapes
PWR has to offer. $19.95
874 "Mr. "X" on the Stony
Knoll"
Col. Fletcher Prouty & John Judge
Believe it or not, we brought Fletcher,
(-X" in the film "JFK", played by Don-
ald Sutherland) to the same spot in Wash-
ington where Oliver Stone shot the scene
with Kevin Costner. For over two hours,
Fletcher and John discussed: the CIA. covert operations, assassinations, the
Reagan shooting, Flight 007 and much
much more. You won't believe your eyes! Very important information. $19.95
RALPH SCHOENMAN
181 "The Hidden History of
Iraq & Kuwait"
To truly understand the Persian Gulf
War, a review of the history is a must. In
his speech, delivered at Santa Barbara
City College in Match 1991, Schoenman
provides the listener with a comprehen-
sive and scathing indictment of U.S. for-
eign policy and helps one to understand
how Saddam Hussein was transformed
from a friend and ally to the "New Hitler"
by Washington propagandists. No one
outdoes Schoenman's analysis of the
Middle East. $16.95
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 86

--- PAGE BREAK ---•
174 "Who Killed JFK and
Why?"
Featuring John Judge and Ralph
Schoenman
Ralph teamed up with John to give two
separate one hour summaries followed by
an hour of questions and answers.

As ex-
ecutive director of the Bertrand Russell
Peace Foundation, Ralph Schoenman
founded the Who Killed Kennedy Com-
mittee in 1963.

The Committee found
Clay L.

Shaw as director of the CIA pro-
prietary organization in Europe and the
U.S., through which a series of assassina-
tions and coups d'etat were prepared.

Schoenman provided evidence on Clay
Shaw to New Orleans D.A.

Jim Garrison
in the 1960's.

$16.95
407 "Beyond Dallas: The Real
Politics of the Kennedy
Execution"
Ralph Shoennian at UCLA in Febru-
ary, 1992.

Many people feel this is one of
his finest speeches on the JFK assassina-
tion.

During nearly three hours of deliv-
ery, Ralph bares the true underlying po-
litical framework in which the Dallas hit
took place.

Full of brilliant insight, this
tape is a must for Kennedy researchers
and first-timers alike.

S19.95
PETER DALE SCOTT, Ph.D.

Currently a professor of English at
Berkeley, Peter Dale Scott, author of Co-
caine Politics: Drugs, Armies, and the
CIA in Central America, has always been
highly regarded for his research into polit-
cal wrongdoing.

He renders under-
standable the Byzantine connections and
internecine rivalries between the mob,
government agencies, and the intelligence
apparatus.

His analysis of the power fac-
tions behind the JFK assassination re-
mains unrivalled.

136 "Drug Smuggling and the
CIA"
Peter Dale Scott clearly demonstrates
that whenever the CIA goes into a coun-
try, drugs start flowing out.

516.95
DANIEL SHEEHAN
As chief counsel for the Christie Insti-
tute, Daniel Sheehan has built a formida-
ble reputation as one of America's leading
liberal crusaders.

Many of these tapes deal
with various aspects of the La Penca law-
suit — which.

alas, the bad guys won.Many of these tapes deal
with various aspects of the La Penca law-
suit — which.

alas, the bad guys won.

In
addition to the videotapes of Sheehan,
transcripts of many of his speeches appear
in "The Guns 'n' Drugs Reader."
185 "Some Bad News and
Some Good News"
On Oct.

13.

1991 Danny delivered an
incredible talk to a standing-room-only
crowd.

$16.95
186 "The Persian Gulf War,
Covert Operations & the New
World Order"
Having trouble understanding what
happened in the Gulf?

We think you'll
find that Daniel Sheehan has the answers.

On March 21, 1991, he broke the fire
codes at his standing-room-only Victoria
Street Theater appearance, in which he
lays out the clear, substantiated facts re-
garding events occurring prior to and dur-
ing the Persian Gulf conflict.

$16.95
187 "Current Events/Past
History"
Danny covers so much ground at every
speech, that it's hard to say which talk is
of greater value.

Sheehan explains how
the NSCICIA was formed and the Nazi
connection to those ill-conceived organi-
zations.

The question and answer session
opens up a lot of important issues, ranging
from racism in America to the JFK assas-
sination_ 4 STARS.

$16.95
188 "Crack, Covert
Operations & The
Constitution"
The Christie Institute has done an in-
credible job educating the citizenry on the
issue of government involvement in the
drug business.

With an introduction by
Sara Nelson, the Executive Director of the
Christie Institute.

Produced by the Chris-
tic Institute.

$19.95
ROBERT STRECKER, M.D.

192 "AIDS: The Man-Made
Virus"
On May 25, 1990, Dr.

Robert Strecker.,
M.D, came to the Santa Barbara City Col-
lege and spoke on his research into the
genesis of AIDS.

Dr.

Strecker provides a
chilling perspective; according to him,
government AIDS researchers are lying to
you about nearly everything.

(A transcript
of this speech is also available — see
reprint section.) 516.95
757 "AIDS, Health Care, and the
American Fallacy"
In July of 1990, Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Strecker provides a
chilling perspective; according to him,
government AIDS researchers are lying to
you about nearly everything. (A transcript
of this speech is also available — see
reprint section.) 516.95
757 "AIDS, Health Care, and the
American Fallacy"
In July of 1990, Dr. Strecker gave an
excellent concise one-hour summation of
all his AIDS research and what's to come
ahead. Filled with sources and references,
this lecture is incredible! $16.95
784 "The Strecker
Memorandum"
When Dr. Strecker realized that the
media would never carry his findings
about the genesis of AIDS, he and his staff
produced "The Strecker Memorandum"
in order to get this information to the
public. He asserts that AIDS is man-
made; AIDS is not a homosexual disease;
AIDS is not a venereal disease; and con-
doms will not prevent AIDS. $29.95
SABINA VIRGO AND BLASE
BONPANE
193 "The Peace & Justice
Struggle: Carry It On"
Sabina Virgo and Blase Bonpane came
to Montecito. Ca., on Sunday, January 26,
1992. Sabina Virgo is on the National
Board of Directors for the Rainbow Coa-
lition, International Affairs Committee as
well as other important organizations. Blase and Theresa Bonpane founded the
Office Of the Americas (00A). To con-
tact them, see our reference page. 516.95
"Gee, Ben, how come we
never thought of selling
narcotics to the American
people and weapons to
America's enemies?"
Because in our day,
George, they used to hang
men for treason, not elect
them president! Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 87

--- PAGE BREAK ---"JOURNEY INTO
MADNESS"
"The True Story of Secret CIA Mind Con-
trol and Medical jouRNEy
Gordon Thomas is author of 	IWO
copies in thirty-six countries.

more told twenty books, which
have sold more than 35 million
"There is no escaping the ghast-
liness of the message and the
power of this indictment leveled
against all who collude, connive,
and collaborate in the greatest
misuse of medical power since
the Nazi factories 50 years ago".

-
Sunday Times
PWR code #230 $14.95
Abuse"
by Gordon Thomas
THE 'TRUE STORY
OF SECRET CIA MIND
CONTROL AND
MEDICAL ABUSE
Assassination Politics: Conferences
THE SECOND MIDWEST
SYMPOSIUM ON
ASSASSINATION POLITICS
Videotapes front a National
Conference on the Political
Violence of the 60s and the murders
of JFK, RFK, MLK and Malcolm X
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
Gary Aguilar, MD Daniel Alcorn, J.D.

Robert
R.

Artwohl, M.D., James A.

DiEugenio, Roger
Feinman, J.D.

Gaeton J.

Fonzi, Jack Gordon,
Ed.D.

Judge Burt W.

Griffin, Paul L.

Hoch,
PhD., John Judge, Robert Blair Kaiser, John
Lattimer, MD.

Sc.D., James H.

Lesar, J.D.,
David S Lifton, Edwin J.

Lopez, J.D., George
D.

Lundberg, MD., David Mantick, M.D.

Ph.D., Philip H.

Melanson.

PhD., Marc Mi-
cozzi, M.D.

PhD., Wallace Milam, Robert
Morrow, John M.

Newman, Ph.D , Carl
Oglesby, Michael Parenti, Ph.D., Jerry Poli-
coff, Jerry Rose, Ph.D., Jane Rusconi, Dick
Russell, Gus Russo, David E.

Scheim, PhD.,
Peter Dale Scott, PhD., Wayne S.

Smith,
Ph.D,, Dee D.

Smith Simmons, Eugene Stur-
ges, J.D.

Anthony Summers, Robert Tanen-
baum, J.D., Josiah Thompson, Ph.D., William
Turner, Cyril H.

Wecht, MD J.D., Michael H.

West, D.D.S., Leslie Wizelman, J.D., Mark
Zaid, 1.

D.

860 Program 1.

Keynote speech
and Press Conference
Speech by Carl Oglesby.

With Gordon,
Summers, Lesar, Judge, Simmons,
Tanenbaum, Fonzi, Turner, Newman.

Single Tape — S19.95
861 Program 2.

Researcher's
Workshop: Panel 1
Exploring the Hidden Record.

Lesar,
Hoch, Russell, Rose, and Zaid.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Researcher's
Workshop: Panel 1
Exploring the Hidden Record. Lesar,
Hoch, Russell, Rose, and Zaid. Single
Tape —$19.95. 862 Program 3. Researcher's
Workshop: Panel 2
Exploring the Hidden Record. Judge,
Newman, Scott, Russo, DiEugenio. Sin-
gle Tape —S19.95. 863 Program 4. Reopening the
Investigation: Issues and
Strategies
Zaid/ Judge, Oglesby, Lesar, Sturgis,
DiEugenio, Russell. Two tapes -
S29.95. 864 Program 5. Circumstantial
vs. Admissible Evidence of
Conspiracy
Lifton, Alcorn, Lesar, Russo, Rusconi,
Scheirn, Thompson. Two tapes -
S29.95
865 Program 6: US
Intelligence: Assessing Its
Role—Panel 1
Fonzi. Smith. Morrow, Melanson,
Turner, Two Tapes —$29.95. 866 Program 7. US
Intelligence: Assessing Its
Role—Panel 2
Hoch, Scott, Summers. Russell. New-
man. Two Tapes $29.95. 867 Program 8. Media Politics:
What We Can Do and What
We Can Expect
Policoff, Summers, Kaiser, Feinman,
Zaid, DiEugenio, Smith, Thompson. Two Tapes —$29.95. 868 Program 9. The Robert F. Kennedy Case
Wecht, Kaiser, Melanson, Morrow,
Scheim, Turner. Single Tape — S19.95. 869 Program 10. The JFK
Case: Two Views of the
Medical Evidence
Lundberg, Lattimer, West,Micozzi. Artwohl - Milam, Lifton, Mantick,
Aguilar, Feinman, Wecht.Two Tapes -
$29.95. 870 Program 11. Our Public
Inquests: A Look Back and
Ahead
Fonzi, Wizelman, Lopez, Melanson,
Griffin, Tanenbaum. Two Tapes -
$29.95. 871 Program 12. Dinner
Speeches
Simmons, Thompson, Parenti, Tanen-
baum. Single Tape — $19.95. 872 Program 13. The Life and
Death of Martin Luther King
Judge, Simmons, Melanson. Single
Tape —$19.95
873 Full Set Option. Order all 20 tapes for a reduced price
of $249.95 ($329 value). Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 88

--- PAGE BREAK ---CAN BE A SBA
ARPOINIFD
CLARE/AN
Of
Books Distributed by Prevailing Winds
808 Blowback: The First Full
Accounting of America's
1
Recruitment of Nazis, and its
Disastrous Effect On Our
Domestic and Foreign Policy
By Christopher Simpson
Blowback is the fullest and most
authoritative account ever written of
America's collaboration with Nazis after
World War II.

Drawing on extensive first-
hand research and a wealth of documents
previously classified or never before
made public, Christopher Simpson shows
how the collaboration between high-rank-
ing American officials and ex-Nazis had
a profound effect on American society
and the Cold War.

(The publisher tells us
that this essential work is out of print in
both paper and clothbound; our hard-
bound editions are the last ones available.)
SI 5.95
559 The Debt Virus
by Jacques S.

Jailaran, M.D.

Debt Virus questions the traditional
role of money in our economy.

The debt
virus is no respecter of governments, in-
stitutions, or individuals as it takes its toll
on savings, investments, employment, in-
come, growth, and stability.

(clothbound)
$19.95
711 Who Killed JFK?

by Carl Oglesby
In this clear, readable book, prominent
assassination researcher Carl Oglesby
gives newcomers to the case the best brief
introduction they could hope for.

$5.95
801 The Politics of Heroin:
CIA Complicity in the Global
Drug Trade
by Alfred W.

McCoy, PhD.

Twenty years of research have led to
this revised and updated edition of Alfred
W.

McCoy's classic, The Politics of Her-
oin in Southeast Asia.

He concludes that,
with global production and consumption
of narcotics at record levels and heroin use
in America on the rise, it is time to con-
front the failure of the U.S.

government's
drug policy and to put an end to the CIA's
complicity in the narcotics trade.

519.95
802 The Franklin Cover-Up:
Child Abuse, Satanism, and
Murder in Nebraska
by John W.government's
drug policy and to put an end to the CIA's
complicity in the narcotics trade.

519.95
802 The Franklin Cover-Up:
Child Abuse, Satanism, and
Murder in Nebraska
by John W.

DeCamp
When federal agencies shut down the
Franklin Community Federal Credit Un-
ion in Omaha Nebraska, they sent shock
waves all the way to Washington, D.C.

What looked like a financial swindle soon
exploded into a hideous tale of drugs.

Iran-contra money -laundenng, a child
abuse ring, and ritual murder.

An utterly
convincing, extremely well-documented
investigation — if you don't believe such
things are really going on, you haven't
read this book yet.

$9.95
804 George Bush: The
Unauthorized Biography
by Webster Griffin Tarpley and
Anton Chaiikin
Using exhaustive official documenta-
tion, Webster Tarpley and Anton Chaitkin
have broken through the astonishing wall
of silence around George Bush.

Here are
the details on: How the Bush family pro-
moted the Nazi war machine; Jupiter Is-
land; Skull and Bones; the 'war hero'
story; Zapata oil; the Watergate burglars;
Iran-Contra; Third World genocide; and
Bush's Leveraged Buyout Mob.

Very
strong research Since the authors are con-
nected to (egads!) the LaRouche group,
you have to read between the lines now
and then, and recognize the ideology for
what it is.

But the plentiful footnotes do
check out, and that's what counts.

$19.95
(Okay, let's get one thing straight: PWR is
not involved with LaRoache — honest, Chip,
we really aren't.

If someone on the politically-
correct left would write a book on this subject,
we'd love to distribute it.

But the left dropped
the ball, and you can't blame Tarpley and
Chaitkin for picking ii up, now can you?)
803 The Crimes of a President:
New Revelations on Conspiracy
& Cover-Up in the Bush &
Reagan Administrations
by Joel Bainerman
The most damning book yet on Presi-
dent Bush's shocking role in several ma-
jor government scandals.If someone on the politically-
correct left would write a book on this subject,
we'd love to distribute it.

But the left dropped
the ball, and you can't blame Tarpley and
Chaitkin for picking ii up, now can you?)
803 The Crimes of a President:
New Revelations on Conspiracy
& Cover-Up in the Bush &
Reagan Administrations
by Joel Bainerman
The most damning book yet on Presi-
dent Bush's shocking role in several ma-
jor government scandals.

Unsanitized
truth on such unsavory actities as: The
CIA's involvement in the bombing of the
Pan Am 103; the arming of Saddam
Hussein to orchestrate the Gulf War, the
whole truth about Oliver North, and why
Bush needed him; the real reasons behind
the Justice Department's attempted
cover-up of the S&L and BCC I scandals.

$6.95
714 The Col.

L.

Fletcher Prouty
Collection
Col_ L.

Fletcher Prouty, liason officer
between the Secretary of Defense and the
CIA, gives an honest accounting of the
hidden history he helped to make, This
compilation of ten articles is highly rec-
ommended for anyone who wants to un-
derstand the workings of behind-the-
scenes powers.

$8.95
805 Unholy Trinity: The
Vatican, the Nazis, and Soviet
Intelligence
by Marks Arons & John Loftus
Unholy Trinity documents the frighten-
ing history of the Vatican's involvement
with Nazi war criminals, and reveals for
the first time the secret connection that
fatally comprumised Vatican-Amencan
intelligence networks behind the Iron
Curtain.

This disturbing book reveals the
disastrous effects of the Vatican-Nazi
connection.

(clothbound) $22.95
806 Addicted to War:
Why the US Can't Kick
Militarism—An Illustrated
Expose
by Joel Andreas
Addicted to War takes on the most ac-
tive, powerful and destructive military in
the world.

Hard-hitting, carefully docu-
mented, and heavily illustrated, it reveals
why the United States has been involved
in more wars in recent years than any
other country.

PWR recommends this
book for every home.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hard-hitting, carefully docu-
mented, and heavily illustrated, it reveals
why the United States has been involved
in more wars in recent years than any
other country. PWR recommends this
book for every home. Comes with re-
source list and references. 56.95
807 The Splendid Blond Beast:
Money, Law, and Genocide in
the Twentieth Century
by Christopher Simpion
The most appalling crime in human
affairs is certainly genocide. Yet those
who organize/commit mass murder are
rarely punished for what they do. Simpson
traces the roots of genocide as an instru-
ment of state power, from the Armenian
massacres of World War I through
Hitler's Holocaust. He shows how the
existing structures of international law
and com-
merce have at
critical points
actually en-
couraged
mass murder
and the es-
cape of war
criminals. (clothbound)
$21.95
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 89

--- PAGE BREAK ---809 First Hand Knowledge:
How I Participated In The
CIA-Mafia Murder of President
Kennedy
by Robert D.

Morrow
Now, for the first time, a former CIA
agent reveals all the details of the extraor-
dinary plan to murder the President of the
United States.

Agent Morrow claims that
he participated in the assassination plot on
direct orders from the head of CIA Covert
Operations.

$17.95
727 A People's History of the
United States
by Howard Zinn
"From the opening pages, an account
of 'The European invasion of the Indian
settlements in the Americas,' there is a
reversal of perspective, a reshuffling of
heroes and villains.

The book bears the
same relation to a traditional text as a
photographic negative does to a print: the
areas of darkness and light have been re-
versed.

The open-minded will profit from
Professor Zinn's account, and historians
may well view it as a step toward a coher-
ent new version of American history." -
Eric Foster, New York Times Book Review.

• $12.95
810 Inside the Shadow
Goverment
by The Christie Institute
"This is the definitive, well-footnoted
summation of the Christie case, which
first brought the Contragate scandal to the
attention of the American people, which
documents major wrong-doings carefully
avoided by the [ran-contra select commit-
tees, and which now may offer us the best
chance of bringing these wrong-doers to
justice." — Peter Dale Scott $14.95
811 The Secret Team: The CL4
and Its Allies in Control of The
United States and the World
by Col.

L Fletcher Prouty (Ret.)
Essential reading for anyone interested
in the Central Intelligence Agency.

The
Secret Team pulls no punches, and ex-
poses the CIA for what it is and what it
really does.

$19,95
(The Secret Team, originally published by
a large and reputable firm, eventually became
quite difficult to find — until a small and
disreputable firm, of whom we are not fond,
reprinted it.The
Secret Team pulls no punches, and ex-
poses the CIA for what it is and what it
really does.

$19,95
(The Secret Team, originally published by
a large and reputable firm, eventually became
quite difficult to find — until a small and
disreputable firm, of whom we are not fond,
reprinted it.

Prouty 's work is just too darned
important to languish unread, which is why we
hope to publish this classic ourselves one day.)
812 The Martin Luther King
Assassination: New Revelations
on the Conspiracy and Cover-Up
by Dr.

Philip H.

Melanson
Philip H.

Melanson, Ph.D., is one of the
nation's leading experts on the history of
American political violence.

The Martin
Luther King Assassination exposes an ad-
mitted contract killer with CIA ties who
confessed to involvement in an unauthor-
ized CIA and U.S.

Government conspir-
acy to kill Dr.

King.

"A painstakingly
documented indictment." $14.95
813 The Man Who Knew Too
Much
by Dick Russell
The Man Who Knew Too Much may be
the most important book written on the
assassination of President John F.

Ken-
nedy.

Journalist Dick Russell tells the
story he has spent the past seventeen years
investigating—a story of spies, ounter-
spies, fascists, brainwashing, and more.

A
huge book, and hugely rewarding.

$27.95
814 Destiny Betrayed: JFK,
Cuba, and the Garrison Case
by James DiEugenio
You've read and heard all the lies about
the Garrison inquiry.

Now read the truth.

The author not only studied all the exist-
ing research, but also traveled the U.S.

interviewing many of the survivors of this
drama, exploring the background of Clay
Shaw as no one ere has ever done, uncov-
ering documents never before published
or described in full.

Nearly a thousand
footnotes.interviewing many of the survivors of this
drama, exploring the background of Clay
Shaw as no one ere has ever done, uncov-
ering documents never before published
or described in full.

Nearly a thousand
footnotes.

S19.95
815 Deep Politics and the Death
of JFK
by Peter Dale Scott
In this meticulously documented, eye-
opening investigation, Peter Dale Scott
uncovers the political secrets surrounding
Kennedy's assassination_ Scott offers a
new perspective: JFK's death was not an
isolated case, but rather a symptom of
deeper processes.

$24.95
816 Cocaine Politics: Drugs,
Armies, and the CIA in Central
America
Peter Dale Scott and Jonathan
Marshall
Cocaine Polities tells the story of how
elements of our own government went to
work with narcotic traffickers, and then
fought to suppress the truth about what
they had done.

Simply brilliant.

516.95
702 Crime and Cover-up: The
CIA, the Mafia, and the
Dallas-Watergate Connection
by Peter Dale Scott, Ph.D.

From Sylvia Meaghar's foreword to
Crime and Cover-Up: "(Scott's] study of
the Schweiker-Hart report and the Dallas-
Watergate connection is a small master-
piece which renders understandable a
Byzantine picture of intercials.

joined
forces with cocaine criminals, and then
engaged in a largely-successful cover-up
to hide the truth." This book was origi-
nally published in 1977.

Open Archive
Press is proud to make this book the first
book we printed.

$9.95
277 Alternative Perspectives on
American Democracy
One-stop shopping for anyone who
wants to know how and why America
went wrong:.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Open Archive
Press is proud to make this book the first
book we printed. $9.95
277 Alternative Perspectives on
American Democracy
One-stop shopping for anyone who
wants to know how and why America
went wrong:. This compendium includes:
"An Evening With Daniel Sheehan;" "La
Penca, John Hull, Drugs & Central Amer-
ica" (Tony Avirgan); "The CIA &The
Politics of Narcotics" (Alfred McCoy);
"The Politics of Hemp" "Fundamental-
ism & The New Right" (Joan Bokaer)
"Perspectives on the Arms Race" (Joan
Bokaer); "An Election Held Hostage"
(Abbie Hoffman & Jonathan Silvers); "A
Majority of One" (Ben Bagdikian);
"Why is the Senate Watergate Committee
Functioning as Part of the Cover-Up?"
(Mae Brussell); "Hidden American His-
tory" (John Judge); "Pack Pluralism"
(Michael Parenti) $18.95
818 The Mafia, CIA and George
Bush
by Peter Brewton
The single most important book on
Bush-era politics, covert operations, and
financial skullduggery. Award-winning
journalist Pete Brewton uncovers the hid-
den facts behind the most expensive scan-
dal of modem times 522.95
671 The Guns 'n' Drugs Reader
Compiled by Prevailing Winds
Research
"The Guns 'n Drugs Reader" is a col-
lection of articles, interviews, speeches,
and book chapters which deal with narcot-
ics trafficking. by sectors of the United
States government. Sprinkled throughout
the various longer articles are numerous
relevant press clippings which add haunt-
ing confirmation of what really goes on
behind the "national security" facade. What emerges from the various docu-
ments is the sense that dings like cocaine
and heroin are a form of taxation, a covert
way of raising billions of dollars without
any form of congressional or public su-
pervision. S18.95
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 90

--- PAGE BREAK ---oin are a form of taxation, a covert
way of raising billions of dollars without
any form of congressional or public su-
pervision. S18.95
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 90

--- PAGE BREAK ---

817 Profits of War: Inside the
Secret U.S
Arms
Network
by Ari Ben-Menashe
Ari Ben-Menashe was privy to the ne-
gotiations between the Republicans and
the hanians to hold the American hos-
tages until after the 1980 election, and he
was there when Bush met a high Iranian
official in Paris in October 1980. He also
worked directly with Robert Gates -
eventual director of the CIA —to arrange
the transfer of $52 million in cash to Iran
in early 1981. In 1986, in Israel, he briefed
George Bush. Ben-Menashe also was in-
volved in Israel's attempt to halt the
U.S.'s arming of Iraq. $24.95
878 Inside the John F. Kennedy
Assassination
by D.H. Christian
Christian put together these materials
(drawing largely from Torbitt) while re-
serching a made-for-television special,
which featured Gaeton Fonzi, Peter Dale
Scott, Ralph Schoenman, John Judge,
Dan Sheehan, Col. L. Fletcher Prouty,
Victor Marchetti and others. $15.95
083 The Torbitt Document:
Nomenclature of an
Assassination Cabal
by William Torbitt
Indexed Researcher's Edition. Wil-
liam Torbitt, the pseudonym of a promi-
nent conservative Southwestern lawyer,
sifted through the Warren Commission
Report, the testimony in Jim Garrison's
prosecution, and pursued his own leads to
track down President Kennedy's murder-
ers. The document names the conspira-
tors, explains how they inter-linked with
one another, and provides a comprehen-
sive study of the 1963 assassination.59.95
879 The JFK Reader
Includes: "The Torbitt Document" (in-
dexedi); four articles from Jim Garrison,
L.

Fletcher Prouty, Penn Jones and Timo-
thy Leary; the famous Special Edition of
the IA Free Press (loaded with tons of
goodies); "The Role of Richard Nixon &
George Bush in the Assassination of
President Kennedy" by Paul Kangas;
"How Nixon Actually Got Into Power"
by Mae Brussel; "The Ricky White Ma-
terials;" "The Lingering Mystery of
RFK" by Andy Boehm; and "The Nazi
Connection to the John F.

Kennedy As-
sassination" by Mae BrusselL $19.95
231 The Hidden History of
Zionism
by Ralph Schoenman
An in-depth examination of the strug-
gles of the Palestinian people, this book's
meticulous documentation reveals the in-
teractions of key Zionist leaders with the
same Nazi monsters who had decimated
the Jews of Europe.

Ralph Schoenman
served as Executive Director of the Ber-
trand Russell Peace Foundation in which
capacity he conducted negotiations with
numerous heads of slate.

He helped se-
cure the release of political prisoners in
many countries and initiated the Interna-
tional Tribunal on U.S.

War Crimes in
Indo-China, of which he was Secretary
General.

$8.95
977 Tied Up In Nazis:
A Naz-talgic Peek at post-World
War II America
Many of you have requested that we
pull together some of our many reprints
into anthologies to make it easier to un-
derstand how the United States has de-
filed herself through collusion with cov-
ertly Nazi playmates.

This reader includes
"How Allen Dulles & The SS Preserved
Each Other" by Peter Dale Scott; "The
Secret Treaty of Fort Hunt" by Carl
Oglesby; "The Doctors from Berlin" by-
Tom Bowers; "Tied Up In Nazis" by
John Judge; and much more.

$19.95
205 The Mae Brussel!

Reader
by Mae Bntssell
Starting with her research into the Ken-
nedy assassination, Mae uncovered the
cast of characters in an international fas-
cist network which was strangling the
American democratic system.$19.95
205 The Mae Brussel!

Reader
by Mae Bntssell
Starting with her research into the Ken-
nedy assassination, Mae uncovered the
cast of characters in an international fas-
cist network which was strangling the
American democratic system.

Her me-
ticulous research and documentation
make it impossible to ignore her political
analysis of contemporary America..

The
anthology contains: "The Nazi Connec-
tion to the John F.

Kennedy Assassina-
tion" (1983); "Why Was Martha Mitchell
Kidnapped?" (1972); "Why is the Senate
Watergate Committee Functioning as Pan
of the Coverup?" (1972) and "Why Was
Patty Hearst Kidnapped?' (1974),
$14.95
707 Judge For Yourself
by John Judge
This mind-bending reader includes
"The Black Hole of Guyana: The Truth
about Jonestown;" "Tied Up In Nazis;"
"The Fourth Reich;" "Unidentified Fas-
cist Observatories;" "MOVE & The
Militarization of Police;" "Contragate &
The Invisible Government;" "Reagan,
Bitburg & The Nazi SS;" and more.

$17.95
454 The Secret Life of Ronald
Reagan
by Donald Freed and Larry Flynt,
The secret life of Ronald Reagan is in
a real sense the secret life of America.

A
shared nightmare.

The thrust and thesis of
the book is: America is losing its demo-
cratic system and tradition, becoming an
"Authoritarian" culture (to use Reagan's
euphemistic word for fascism).

$14.95
313 The Trial of Richard
Brenneke
You are the jury!

When Richard Bren-
necke testified under oath that he'd helped
fly George Bush to Paris in October,1989
to cut a treasonous deal with the Iranians,
the government pressed charges of per-
jury against him.

After hearing all the
government's evidence, the jury found
Brenneke innocent.

Now you can read all
the testimony presented at this facinating
and important trial.

We've included
plenty of additional materials.

$17.95
401 The Kerry Hearings
Hearings before the Subcommittee on
Terrorism, Narcotics and International
Communications.817 Profits of War: Inside the
Secret U.S
Arms
Network
by Ari Ben-Menashe
Ari Ben-Menashe was privy to the ne-
gotiations between the Republicans and
the hanians to hold the American hos-
tages until after the 1980 election, and he
was there when Bush met a high Iranian
official in Paris in October 1980. He also
worked directly with Robert Gates -
eventual director of the CIA —to arrange
the transfer of $52 million in cash to Iran
in early 1981. In 1986, in Israel, he briefed
George Bush. Ben-Menashe also was in-
volved in Israel's attempt to halt the
U.S.'s arming of Iraq. $24.95
878 Inside the John F. Kennedy
Assassination
by D.H. Christian
Christian put together these materials
(drawing largely from Torbitt) while re-
serching a made-for-television special,
which featured Gaeton Fonzi, Peter Dale
Scott, Ralph Schoenman, John Judge,
Dan Sheehan, Col. L. Fletcher Prouty,
Victor Marchetti and others. $15.95
083 The Torbitt Document:
Nomenclature of an
Assassination Cabal
by William Torbitt
Indexed Researcher's Edition. Wil-
liam Torbitt, the pseudonym of a promi-
nent conservative Southwestern lawyer,
sifted through the Warren Commission
Report, the testimony in Jim Garrison's
prosecution, and pursued his own leads to
track down President Kennedy's murder-
ers. The document names the conspira-
tors, explains how they inter-linked with
one another, and provides a comprehen-
sive study of the 1963 assassination.

We've included
plenty of additional materials. $17.95
401 The Kerry Hearings
Hearings before the Subcommittee on
Terrorism, Narcotics and International
Communications. These volumes contain
the full witness testimony offered before
Senator Kerry's subcommittee. You will
read testimony from people who were
taken out of jail by the CIA to fly cocaine
and weapons for them. You will not be-
lieve your eyes! $19.95
821 Dangerous Liaison: The
Inside Story of the US-Israeli
Covert Relationship
by Andrew and Leslie Cockburn
The first book to focus on the secret
relationships between Israeli and Ameri-
can intelligence, Dangerous Liaison ex-
plores the shadowy world where arms
dealers and spyrnasters determine the pol-
icy of governments and the course of
world history. The Cockburns describe
for the first time the wide-ranging and
ambitious "Operation KK Mountain," by
which Israelis gathered intelligence for
the CIA in Third World countries. Pro-
vocative and important_ (Clothbound)
$14.95
824 Who Killed John Lennon? by Fenton Bresler
is there more to the killing of rock
superstar John Lennon than we've been
led to believe? Bresler, a respected British
barrister, uncovers strange and startling
evidence that Mark David Chapman did
not act alone. "A fascinating look into a
celebrated case . Aspects of the Lennon
homicide have troubled knowledgeable
investigators  for years." — Maury Terry,
author of The Ultimate Evil. 517.95 . lTj
Prevailing If
Premiere Issue Page 91ebrated case . Aspects of the Lennon
homicide have troubled knowledgeable
investigators  for years." — Maury Terry,
author of The Ultimate Evil. 517.95 . lTj
Prevailing If
Premiere Issue Page 91

--- PAGE BREAK ---R
11,.

•
I rt case of Via
St3ndard ' gfa SS brIChtill t
W'i tewash 	7,1 X "STANDARD
827 Pot Art: Marijuana
Reading Matter
by Stone Mountain Press
"...For those too young to remember
how America got driven mad by dope
fiend paranoia, for those old folks who
lived through it, a horrifying deja vue of
the nightmare now 1970 closing in which
armed police against children every-
where.

Invaluable/grass scholarship, if
grass survives!

Rave X Ray historic illus-
trated Bibliography on Think-Police!

"—
Allen Ginsberg.

Includes: "Marijuana"
(Scientific American, Dec.

1969).

"Army
Studies on Marihuana," "Marijuana -
Assassin of Youth" by H.F.

Anslinger in
Reader's Digest, "The Politics of Pot" by
James Sterba, "The Great Marijuana
Hoax: The First Manifesto to end the
Bringdown" by Allen Ginsberg, etc.

$18.95
822: JFK: The CIA, Vietnam,
and the Plot to Assassinate
John F Kennedy"
By L.

Fletcher Prouty (introduction
by Oliver Stone)
Oliver Stone's film, JFK features a
character named "X," (Donald Suther-
land), who explains the assassination plot.

"X" was L.

Fletcher Prouty, a former top
level "military-CIA" operative who
served during the Kennedy years as the
Chief of Special Operation for the Joint
Chiefs of Staff.

In this riveting book,
Prouty reveals Kennedy's plan to "shatter
the CIA into a thousand pieces," and re-
move all U.S.

military personnel from
Vietnam; the Army set up a covert opera-
tion named "Operation Camelot" to
thwart Kennedy's effort to end the war in
Vietnam.

No reader will finish without
feeling that he or she has been made privy
to a terrible, dark secret.

524.95
823 The Second Gun: The Plot
To Kill Robert F Kennedy
Complete Transcript of the Film "The
Second Gun" by Theodore Charach and
Gerard Alcan nominated for the 1975
Golden Globe Award for best feature
length documentary.No reader will finish without
feeling that he or she has been made privy
to a terrible, dark secret.

524.95
823 The Second Gun: The Plot
To Kill Robert F Kennedy
Complete Transcript of the Film "The
Second Gun" by Theodore Charach and
Gerard Alcan nominated for the 1975
Golden Globe Award for best feature
length documentary.

$12.95
712 Mass Murderers in White
Coats: Psychiatric Genocide in
Nazi Germany and the United
States
By Lenny Lapon
Documents the mass murder of "men-
tal patients" by psychiatry in Nazi Ger-
many and in the United States —psychi-
atric genocide.

Lapon shows how the kill-
ing of thousands of psychiatric inmates
and other "useless eaters" in Hitler's
Third Reich set the stage in a practical and
ideological way for the later extermina-
tion of six million Jews and other victims
of Nazi persecution.

Presents lengthy ex-
cerpts fmm conversations Lapon had with
eleven psychiatrists who are members of
the American Psychiatric Association
(APA) and who are also connected in
various ways to Nazi Germany.

S9.9$
825 Killing Our Own
Harvey Wasserman & Norman
Solomon with Robert Alverez &
Eleanor Walters (Introduction by
Dr.

Benjamin Spock)
This is the frightening story of the dam-
age that has already been done to our own
people — to children even more than to
adults — by unlocking the power of the
atom.

Top scientists, including Drs.

John
Gofinan, Alice Stewart, Karl Z.

Morgan,
Rosalie Bedell, and Irwin Bross, have
been censored, harassed, tired, or de-
prived of their grants for standing by their
studies, which showed the harm down to
humans and animals.

$22.95
826 Secret Fallout: Low-Level
Radiation from Hiroshima to
Three-Mile Island"
by Ernest Sternglass, intro by
George Wald
Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Morgan,
Rosalie Bedell, and Irwin Bross, have
been censored, harassed, tired, or de-
prived of their grants for standing by their
studies, which showed the harm down to
humans and animals. $22.95
826 Secret Fallout: Low-Level
Radiation from Hiroshima to
Three-Mile Island"
by Ernest Sternglass, intro by
George Wald
Dr. Ernest Stemglass is Professor of
Radiology, specializing in radiological
physics, at the University of Pittsburgh
Medical School; he has testified on low-
level radiation before the Joint Committee
on Atomic Energy and many other groups
both here and abroad. $19.95
Prevailing Winds Premiere Issue Page 92
r

--- PAGE BREAK ---BACK ISSUES OF LOBSTER
Lobster, published by Robin Ramsey,
is the closest British equivalent to Coven
Action Quarterly.

Each issue is full of
well-written, witty, scholarly, spritely and
thought-provoking articles on spies, lies,
assassinations, and parapolitics.

if you'd
like to see a European perspective on such
matters, we strongly urge you to give Lob-
ster a try.

(Remember.

British magazines
aren't restricted by American laws against
"naming names" of spooks.) Lobster is
very hard to find in the US; Prevailing
Winds offers photocopied back issues of
Lobster for $5.95.

900 LOBSTER 17
Disinformation and the new "terrorist
threat," naming names: The London CIA
station, anti-Labour forgeries, the death of
Zia, the Pinay Circle, and more.

901 LOBSTER 18
Spooks and the European right, covert
propaganda, inside BOSS (South Africa's
spies), the SAS, and more.

902 LOBSTER 19
CIA and British unions, shooting the
Pope, Disinformation, ELF and mind con-
trol, The Wallace affair, conspiracy theo-
ries.

903 LOBSTER 20
Peter Dale Scott on US involvement in
the Indonesian slaughter, JFK: a look at
Clay Shaw's address book, the economics
of appeasement, and more.

904 LOBSTER 21
The Moonies, WACL, the Korean
CIA, Western Goals, and more.

905 LOBSTER 22
The fall of Willi Brandt, spotting Brit-
ish spooks, MI5 and pre-war British fas-
cists, appeasement, and more.

906 LOBSTER 23
Mind control, U.S.

Army drug experi-
ments, JFK, the CIA and the Warren
Commission critics, British fascism
1974-83, and more.

907 LOBSTER 24
British fascism through '92, Jim Garri-
son reconsidered, mind control update,
parapolitics and the paranormal, Daniel
Brandt's incorrect political memoir, and
more.

908 ALL 8 ISSUES OF
LOBSTER 529.95
Prevailing Winds Research recommends the following:
CIABASE
P.O.

Box 5022, Herndon, VA 22070.

Tel.

(703) 437-8487.

A
computer database on the CIA.

COVERT ACTION QUARTERLY
1500 Massachusetts Ave.

NW #732, Washington, DC 2005.COVERT ACTION QUARTERLY
1500 Massachusetts Ave.

NW #732, Washington, DC 2005.

Tel: (202) 331-9736.

Still the best periodical exposing the Ameri-
can intelligence empire.

Every issue is a must-read.

EMPOWERMENT PROJECT
3403 Highway #54 West, Chapel Hill, NC 27516 (919) 967-
1963.

EP are the producers of the Acadamy Award winning
documentary Panama Deception, as well as the film Cover-Up
FAIR/EXTRA!

130 W.

25th, New York, NY 10011, Tel.

(212) 633-6700.

Extra!

is a terrific magazine exposing media bias; published by
Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting.

LIES OF OUR TIMES
(Institute for Media Analysis)
145 W.

4th St., New York, NY 10012-1052.

LOOT is a great
publication devoted to exposing media misinformation, especially
on the part of the New York Times.

LOBSTER
214 Westboume Ave., Hull, HU53JB, UK.

Tel: 0482-447558.

Wonderful British publication on parapolitics.

MIDNIGHT SPECIAL BOOKSTORE
1350 3rd Si Promenade, Santa Monica, CA, Tel.

(310) 393-
1953.

They stock PWR material and have an excellent book and
magazine selection.

NACLA
(North American Congress on Latin America)
475 Riverside Dr.

Suite 454, New York, NY 10115.

Tel: (212)
870-3146
PAGES BOOKSTORE
256 Queen St, W.

Toronto, Ont., Canada.

Tel: (416) 548-1447.

They stock PWR material and have an excellent book and maga-
zine selection.

PEACENET COMPUTER NETWORK
18 DeBloom Si, San Francisco, CA 94107.

Tel.

(415) 564-
1794.

PEOPLE'S VIDEO
P.O.

Box 99514, Seattle, WA 98199.

Tel.

(206) 789-5371.

A
group devoted to distributing the excellent works of Dr.

Michael
Parenti.

Cal] or write for a free catalog.

SOUTH END PRESS
116 S.

Botoiph St., Boston, MA 02115
SPEAK OUT!

3004 16th Si, Suite 303, San Francisco, CA 94103.

Tel: (415)
864-4561.

A political speakers' bureau; call or write for catalog.

THE ORGANIZER
4017 24th Si, #19, San Francisco, CA 94114.

A labor oriented
newspaper where the writings of Ralph Schoenman can be found.

To contact Ralph directly, call: (805) 962-4011
THE REALIST
P.O.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A labor oriented
newspaper where the writings of Ralph Schoenman can be found. To contact Ralph directly, call: (805) 962-4011
THE REALIST
P.O. Box 1230, Venice, CA 90291. Edited by renowned radical
Paul Krassner. ($12 for eight issues; 523 for 16 issues.)
TOM DAVIS BOOKS
P.O. Box 1107, Aptos CA. 95001-1107. The best mail-order
source for hard-to-find books on assassinations, conspiracies,
politics, cults, mind control, etc. Send two stamps for catalog. UNCLASSIFIED
2001 "5" St. NW, Suite 740, Washington, DC 20009. Great
anti-spook journal; info you can't get anywhere else.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ORDER FORM
Name

Address

City

State/Prv.

Zip/P. Code.

If
are using a credit card, please fill out the following
Mastercard or
Visa II

Expiration date:

Send to:re else.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ORDER FORM
Name

Address

City

State/Prv.

Zip/P. Code.

If
are using a credit card, please fill out the following
Mastercard or
Visa II

Expiration date:

Send to:

Prevailing Winds Research
P.O. Box 23511
Santa Barbara, CA 93121
QUANTITY CODE #
PRICE
QUANTITY CODE #
PRICE
FOREIGN ORDERS:
For quick processing,
please send a U.S.
money order, or use
Visa or Mastercard.
Total from column 1:
Total from column 2:
Subtotal columns 1 & 2:
Sales tax (CA only):
Postage and handling:
TOTAL:
$3.75
Yes, I'd like to help Prevailing Winds.
Here's my donation:
Donors will receive
tax-deductible receipts.
Thanks for your support!
PREVAILING WINDS RESEARCH
P.O. Box 23511 Santa Barbara, CA 93121
TELEPHONE (805) 899-3433 FAX (24 Hours) (805) 899-4773 BBS (805) 899-4737
HOW TO PLACE AN ORDER (IMPORTANT!):
• We accept cash, check, money order, Visa or Mastercard. Use the order form below or the order form on
the next page. If you wish, photocopy the order form, or simply write your own list of what you would like.
(Hey, we're easy.) Please order each item by its three-digit code-number and list the desired quantity
• Order by FAX for quick Visa and Mastercard processing. Our 24-hour Fax line is (805) 899-4773.
• Prevailing Winds Research computer Bulletin Board System: People with access to computers can dial
our new BBS. Tell your friends and family. You can download our catalogue, sample the wares, and trade
info and opinions with others. Call the PWR BBS at (805) 899-4737.
• Foreign orders outside of Canada and Mexico: Please add 20% of your total to the shipping cost for fast
overseas service. Canadian customers can pay with personal checks in Canadian funds; just add 35% extra
in Canadian funds to your total. All Canadian checks will be held five days until they clear. For quicker
processing, use U.S. funds, money orders, Visa or Mastercard. For Canadian orders please add $2.00 to
shipping in order to cover the high postal rates.
• PREVAILING WINDS MAGAZINE: (Four issues/520 use code #999) (Eight issues/S38 use code #998)or Mastercard. For Canadian orders please add $2.00 to
shipping in order to cover the high postal rates.
• PREVAILING WINDS MAGAZINE: (Four issues/520 use code #999) (Eight issues/S38 use code #998)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

king 11:1S w 66r(
P.O. Box 23511
Santa Barbara, CA 93121
Mail order form to 0
Order Form
Name

Address

City

State/Pry.
Zip/P. code
Quantity
code #
Price
Quantity
code #
Price
Quantity
code #
Price
Total from column 1
Total from column 2
T otal from column 3
Visa or
Exp.date
FOREIGN
a U.S. money
Mastercard #
Sub
Sales Tax
Total
(CA
(1,2 & 3)
only )
P&H
Total
send
53.75
ORDERS: Please
order for quick processing,
Donations will receive
tax-deductible receipts.
Thanks for your support!

--- PAGE BREAK ---CovertAction Back Issues
K
No.

1 (July 1978) Agee on CIA: Cuban exile Mal; consumer research in Jamaica •
K
No.2 (Oct 1978) How CIA recruits diplomats; researching undercover officers;
double agent in CIA.'
O
No.

3 (Jan.

1979) CIA snacks CAIB: secret Army manual; spying on hos!

countnes."
O
No.4 (Apr.-May 1979}U.S.spics in Italian serilces; Main Spain; CIA recruiting
for Afnca; subversive academics, Angola.•
K
No,5(Aug-1979)U.S.iniciligence inS.E.

As ia; CIA tn Denmark,Swed en.

Gm nail a.

•
O
No.

6 (Oct 1979) U.S.

in Canbbean; Cuban exile terrorists; CIA plans for Nica-
ragua;CIA's secret "Perspectives for Intelligence." •
ID No, 7 Pee.

1979-Jan.

1980) Media destabilization in Jamaica; Robert Moss;
CIApropaganda budget: media operations; UNITA; Iran.'
El No.

8 (Mar.-Apr.

1980) Attacks on Agee; U.S.

intelligence legislation; CAIB
statement to Congress; Zimbabwe; Northern Ireland.

O
No, 9 (June 1980) NSA in Norway; Glornar Explorer, mind control; notes on NSA
O
No, 10 (Aug,-Sept.

1980) Can hbean; itestabiliaanion in Jamaica; Guyana; Gre-
nada bombing; "The Spike"; deep cover manual.

•
K No.

11 (Dec.

1980) Rightwing terrorism; South Korea; KC:A; Ponugal; Guyana;
Caribbean; ARO; NSA interview.

K
No.12 (Apr.1981) U.S.

in El Salvador& Guatemala; New Right: William Casey;
CIA In Mozambique: mail surveillance.'
D
No.13 (July-Aug.

1981) 5.

Africa dccurnenrs; Namibia; mercenaries; the Klan: Globe
Aem; Angola; Mozambique; BOSS; Cent.

America; Max Hugel; mail surveillance.

K
No.

14-15 (Oct 1981) Index to nos.

1-12; review of intelligence legislatiun;
CAIB plans; extended Naming Names.

0 No.

16 (Mar.

1982) Green Bart torture in El Salvador, Argentine death squads: CIA
media operations: Seychelles; Angola., Mozambique; the Klan; Nugan Hand.'
CI No.

17 (Summer 1982) CBW history; Cuban dengue epidemic; Scott Barnes
and "yellow rain" lies; mystery death in Bangkok.'
O
No.1982) Green Bart torture in El Salvador, Argentine death squads: CIA
media operations: Seychelles; Angola., Mozambique; the Klan; Nugan Hand.'
CI No.

17 (Summer 1982) CBW history; Cuban dengue epidemic; Scott Barnes
and "yellow rain" lies; mystery death in Bangkok.'
O
No.

18 (Winter 1983) CIA & religion; "secret" war in Nicaragua; Opus Dci;
Mokitos; evangelicals-Guatemala; Summer Inst.

of Linguistics; World Medical
Relief; CIA & nass; torture; S.

Africa; Vietnam defoliation.'
K
No.19 (Spring-Summer 1983) CIA & media; history of disinformation; "plot"
agilinSS Pope; Grenada airport; Georgie Anne Geyer.

O
No.

20 (Winter 1984) Invasion of Grenada; war in Nicaragua; Ft.

H uachutz; Israel
and South Korea connections in Central America; KAL flight 007.

O
No.

21 (Spring 1984) New York Trines and the Salvadoran election; Time and
Newsweek distortions; Accuracy in Media; Nicaragua.

CD No.

22 (Fall 1984) Mercenaries & terrorism; Soldier of Fortune; "privatizing"
the war Nicaragua; U.S -South African terror; Italian fascists.

D No.

23 (Spring 1985) "Plot" to kill Popel"Bulgarian Connection"; CIA ties to
Turkishand Italian net) fascists.

O
No.

24 (Summer 1985) State reprotaion.

infiltrators.

provocateurs; sanauary
movement; American Indian Movement; Leonard Peltier; NANSCO strike: Arnaud
de Borehgmae, Moon.

and Moss; Tetra Tech.

O
No.

25 (Winter 1986) U.S..

Na.,ns.

and Vatican; Knights of Malta; Greek civil
wariElene WACL and Nicaragua: manure.

O
No.

26 (Summer 1986) U.S.

state terrorism; Vernon Walters; Libya bombing;
contra agents; Israel & S.

Africa; Duane; media in Costa Rica: democracy in Nica-
ragua; Index to nos.

13-25.'
0 No.

27 (Spring 1987): Special:—Religious Right: New York Tones & Pope Plot;
Carlucci; Soul hern Air Transport; Michael Lc-clear'
0 No.28 ummor 1987)Spocial—ClAamidrup.S,EAsto,AfghanistanantralAmer-
ica.Nuean Hand: sorts cos in Canada; Delta Force.

AIDS Oleo= and CB W.•
O
No.27 (Spring 1987): Special:—Religious Right: New York Tones & Pope Plot;
Carlucci; Soul hern Air Transport; Michael Lc-clear'
0 No.28 ummor 1987)Spocial—ClAamidrup.S,EAsto,AfghanistanantralAmer-
ica.Nuean Hand: sorts cos in Canada; Delta Force.

AIDS Oleo= and CB W.•
O
No.

29 (Winter 1988) Panic Spactal: Plulippiri z Fiji, N.

Zealand, Belau.

Vanuatu;
atom testing; araliatNicaragua; Reader's Digest: CIA,Culw.

Tibet: Ague on Ski; AIDS.*
0 No.

30 (Summer 1988) Special—Middle East; Innlada; Israeli ems sales; Israel
in Africa; disinformation and Libya; CIA's William Buckley; the Afghan arms
pipeline and contra lobby.

o No.

31 (Winter 1989) Special—Domestic surveillance: The FBI; CIA on cam-
pus;Office of Public Diplomacy; Lexington Prison; Puerto Rico.

K No.

32 (Summer 1989) Tenth Year Anniversary Issue: Best of CAIB Naming
Names, CIA at home, abroad, and in the media.

Ten-year perspective by Philip Agee.

O
No.

33 (Winter 1990) Bush Issue: CIA agents for Bush; Terrorism Task Force;
El Salvador and Nicaragua intervention; Republicans and Nazis.

0 No.

34 (Summer 1990) FBI/CIA Role in Assassination of Martin Luther King
Ir.; Nicaraguan elections; South Airman death squads; U.S.

and Pal Pot; Noriega
and the CIA; Council for National Policy.

0 No.

35 (Fall 1990) Special—Eastern Europe; Analysts-Persian Gulf & Cuba;
massacres in Indonesia; CIA and Banks; Iran-contra.

O
No.

36 (Spring 1991) Special—Racism & Nat.

Security.

FBI v.

Arab-Ants.

&
Black Officials; Destabilizing Africa; Chad.

Uganda, S.

Africa; Angola, Mozam-
bique, Zaire; Haiti; Panama; Gulf War; cratirretaao "an."
O No.

37 (Summer 1991)Special--Gulf War: Media; U.N.; Libya; Iran; Domestic
costs; N.

Korea Next?; Illegal Arms deals.

0 No.

38 (Fall 1991) Special—DoD, CIA recruitment of U.S.

& iniernational stu-
dents; Aril Durrani 's Iran-Contracase; Moon & Academia; Targetingenvironmen-
taluts; C1ABASE database review.

K
No.& iniernational stu-
dents; Aril Durrani 's Iran-Contracase; Moon & Academia; Targetingenvironmen-
taluts; C1ABASE database review.

K
No.

39 (Winter 1991-92) Special—The "Good" Agencies; NED; Peace Corps;
USAIDS, Aron.

Nail.

Cancer Inst.

& Bia.

War; Population Control; Casularo; FBI &
Supreme Court; Robert Games; USSR destabilization: BCCI.

O
No.

40 (Spring 1992) Indigenous Peoples; N.

America: toxic dumps, Leonard
Peltier interview; Guatemala: U.S.

policy & indigenous; Rigoberta Menchii; Pol Pot
Returns; E.

Timor Massacre; U.S.

in Pacific; GATT; David Duke.

CD No.

41 (Summer 1992) Special--Next Enemies; LA Uprising; Geo.

Bush and
CIA; Bush Family; Eqbal Ahmail; UN: U S.

Tool; Nuclear Proliferation; Environ-
mentalist Attacked; U.S.

Economic Decline; Dissent as Subversion.

O
No.

42 (Fall 1992) Agoe on Covert Ops; Peru: fluoride; VP Bushand CIA; Nica-
ragua; SOiLIC; Miluortzing the Drug War; ClATargets Gonzalez; Bush Inaugural
Leak; Rev.

Moon Buys University.

O
No.

43 (Winter 1992-93) Chemical and biological war Zimbabwe, So.

Africa, and
anthrax; Gulf War Syndrome; Agent Orange, Scientific racism; Yellow Rain &
Suns Journal; Plus: Yugoslavia destabilization; U.S.

Religious Right; Somalia.

K
No.44 (Spring 1993) Special—Public relations.

buying influence, Hill & Knowlton,
Burson-N4arsieller.

Clinton Cabinet; Sornalia:"hurnariaanan" intervention; Rio Summit
Greenwash; BC:CI-CIA; Clinton & Nal_ Sec.

Act; Ants-Gay plans.

K
No.45 (Summer 1993) So.

Africa Right 's Links; German Neo-Nazis; HIV Hai-
tians; Interview: Fred Weir in Russia; Police Target Black Youth; ADL Spying;
Pelican Bay Prison;Ireland's Youth; Angola Profiteers.

O
No.

46 (Fall 1993) Economic intelligence; Israel & Iran; NSA; School of Americas;
Ex-adviser reveals cover-up; Pnvate prisons; Delta justice; Savannah River.

O
No.

47 (Winter 1993-94) 1511 Anniversary.

FBI v.--- PAGE BREAK ---

47 (Winter 1993-94) 1511 Anniversary. FBI v. Ban; Russian October Coup;
Rocky Flaedury,rtarraTrilaterahsts;Zinnon FBI; Dellinger on '90s; Cold WarQuiz
Ginsberg on CIA; Mumia Abu-Jamal: World Bank/IMF; UN/CIA Proprietary. K
No.48 (S pri ng 1994) Chiapas Upnsing:U.S.SellsOut Haile IrareContraReron; LA.-8;
U.S. mercenaries in Aziabaijan, Council fur Natl. Policy; Guatenialaa Drug Generals. K
No.49 (Summer 1994) MonIcsinos, Fujimun, and Peru; TurabiiSudan; Giulio; U.S. mom hats on humane; Armenia and Azerbaijan: S. Africa's Left: Salvador's elections. CI NO. 50 (Fall 1994) Operation Condor Clinton's Crime Bill; Canto 's Liberty Lobby;
Monfort's Meatpackers; Low Wen-say Democracy, NRO & Intelligence Budget. • AVAILABLE IN PHOTOCOPY ONLY
Back Issues: Check above, or list below. U.S.: $8 per copy. Airmail: Can./Mex. add $2; others add $4. K $250 Complete Set: plus $20 postage, U.S., Can. / $10 other
lEl$65 nor ten :ssues
El $35 for five issues
SPECIAL OFFERS:
K
CovertAction MUG $7 plus S2 shipping, handling
O
$10 + $2 shipping, audio tapes of Noam Chomsky
talk at CAQ's 15th Anniversary Bash
Books:
O $25 Dirty Work: CIA in W. Europe, Philip Agee, Louis Wolf
O S25 Dirty Work H: The CIA in Africa. Ellen Ray, at al. O $l 0 Lyndon LaRouche/New Fascism. Dennis King
K
$10 On the Run. Philip Agee
Subscriptions (4 issues / year):
U.S. 111 $22 one year 0 $38 two years
Can./Max
O $27 one year 0 $48 two years
Lat. Am.IEur
O $33 one year 0 $59 two years
Other areas
O $35 one year 0 $63 two years
O 55 / year additional charge for institutions
K 85 discount for prisoners
0 $2 discount for gift to libraries
Give a gift subscription at S
to:
NAME
ADDRESS
NAME
ADDRESS
I am mailing $US
to: CAQ, 1500 Massachusetts Ave., N.W., #732, Washington, DC 20005, USA

--- PAGE BREAK ---

NAME

ADDRESS
ZIP
If using Visa or Mastercard, please fill out:
Card #:
Expiration date:
I would like to give a gift subscription at $
to:
NAME, Washington, DC 20005, USA

--- PAGE BREAK ---

NAME

ADDRESS
ZIP
If using Visa or Mastercard, please fill out:
Card #:
Expiration date:
I would like to give a gift subscription at $
to:
NAME

ADDRESS
ZIP:
The Coalition on Political Assassinations
Videotapes available from the "Three Decades of Doubt" conference held in Washington,
D.C., Oct. 7-11, 1994. Tapes cost $20 a piece, $35 for a two-tape set and $250 for full set (15 tapes).
Program 1:
Welcome and Keynote
Dr. Cyril Wecht, Janet Rainwater,
Dan Alcorn, John Newman
Program and Logistics
Dr. Gary Aguilar, John Judge
Program 2:
Historical Overview
Thersa Seay, Fletcher Prouty,
Michael Morrissey, Donald Gibson,
William Wolfram, Carrie Foster
Program 3:
Previous Investigations
Walt Brown, Jim DiEugenio,
Jerry Rose, William Turner
Program 4 (two tapes):
Medical, Forensic & Autopsy
Evidence
Donald Purdy, Kathleen Cunningham.
Dr. Randy Robertson, Wallace Milam,
Dr. Gary Aguilar
Ballistics
G.M. Evica, Milicent Cranor, Dr. Wecht
Program 5:
Photographic Evidence
Robert Groden, Hal Verb,
Martin Shackleford
Program 6:
Was There a Second Oswald?
A special presentation by Jim Marrs
and John Armstrong
Program 7 (two tapes):
Media and Fairness
& COPA Press Conference
Jerry Policoff, Wayne Smith,
Brad Kizzia, Stewart Galanor,
Martin Shackleford, Michael Parenti,
Mark Lane, Daniel Alcorn, John
Newman
Program 8:
Skull Wounds, Forensic
Evidence
Special presentation by Dr. David
Mantik
Program 9:
Assassinations of Robert F.
Kennedy and Martin Luther
King, Jr.
William Turner, Philip Melanson,
Wallace Milam, James Lesar
Program 10:
Full Disclosure
James Lesar, Paul Hoch
What's New In the Files?
Alcorn, Carol Hewett, Jim DiEugenio
Program 11:
Lee Harvey Oswald
John Newman, Peter Dale Scott
Review Board and Records
John Newman
Call to Action
Judge, Wecht, DiEugenio
Program 12 (two tapes):
Assassination Record
Review Board
Special presentation John R.
Tunheim, Chairman
Public Hearings -
Assassination Records
Review Board, National
Archives
J. Lesar, Newman, Scott,
Judge, others,Assassination Record
Review Board
Special presentation John R.
Tunheim, Chairman
Public Hearings -
Assassination Records
Review Board, National
Archives
J. Lesar, Newman, Scott,
Judge, others,

Order from: The Coalition on Political Assassinations
P.O. Box 772, Ben Franklin Station, Washington DC 20044-0772.
Tel: (202) 785-5299 FAX: (202) 293-3218
Prevailing Winds Magazine
Subscription rates:
US: 0 820 — four issues 0 $38 — eight issues
Cam/Mex.: 0 825 —four issues
K $48 — eight issues
Other:  K 832
four issues
K 862 eight issues
l am enclosing $ 	in U.S. funds (cash, check,
money order, Visa or Mastercard) and mailing it to:
Prevailing Winds Magazine
P.O. Box 23511
Santa Barbara, CA 93121
(Note: Ifyou would like to order by FAX, or use Canadian
.finds, please see the ordering information on page 94.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

#1110101110‘
A N f MEN
411 01
4CCO4PLIS1110,111°110P‘

OIS °11,0
ill fa
ll il
l Or

•
1911E MAN Ali
00,0,-
Hir I S IDEA r1  irk
—Slew, Rea,
1information on page 94.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

#1110101110‘
A N f MEN
411 01
4CCO4PLIS1110,111°110P‘

OIS °11,0
ill fa
ll il
l Or

•
1911E MAN Ali
00,0,-
Hir I S IDEA r1  irk
—Slew, Rea,
1

THE PHILADELPHIA!!
INQUIRER
NOANt CHOMSKY
AND TI-1[ M[DIA
A FILM BY MARK ACHBAR & PETER WINTONICK
4 5>
86978
74470
MANUFACTURING
CONSENT
Noam Chomsky and the Media
Manufacturing Consent explores the political life
and times of the controversial author and radical phi-
losopher, Noam Chomsky. An outspoken critic of the
press and one of America's leading dissidents, he has
unrelentingly dissected how our much-acclaimed
democratic freedoms often mask an irresponsible use
of power. Shocking examples of media deception per-
meate Chomsky's critique of the forces at work be-
hind the daily news. He encourages his listeners to
extricate themselves from this "web of deceit" by
undertaking a course of "intellectual self-defense."
Few have created a body of work more provocative
than that produced by Noam Chomsky, whose bibli-
ography contains over 700 entries. Whether you agree
with him or not, he directly and tirelessly addresses
some of the most important moral, ethical, political
and social issues of our time, and raises questions that
are essential for anyone living in our complex era.
Directed by Mark Achbar and Peter Wintanick.
A Necessary Illusions/National Film
Board of Canada Co-production
Two tape set — $59.95
Prevailing Winds code #883
(For ordering information, please see page 94.)
THE CENTER FOR THE PRESERVATION
OF MODERN HISTORY
Prevailing Winds Magazine
P.O. Box 23511
Santa Barbara, CA 93121
ADDRESS CORRECTION REQUESTED
PLEASE HELP US OUT
if you are moving, please send us
a change-of-address notice well
in advance. Give both the old and
new address, Including zip
codes. Don't miss an issue.
Non-profit Organization
U.S. Postage
PAID
Santa Barbara, CA
Permit #951