Dear David, you 8/6/yi

I just adiLr*ssed an envelop to in to respond to yournoto and thank you for the
cassette we'll probably Iook at when there is another fan here to enjoy it when I reraen-
bered that all I will no* be able to do is get started* We are now, on -dl's better days,
the Cane family* We both use them, only more often recently she'd had to use the wheel-
chair (how and why I sot it may amuse you sometime) or a walker. But what I do not want to
foget is to give you a little explanation for a copy of a letter I'll enclose, the one I'd
just finished writing. Scianbra war, the junior member of Garrison's staff and the one who
was with him more than any other. The judge I refer to sat on the Shaw case.

Now I have to go and elevate my left foot a foot above the heart and do the exorcises
the physical therapist ha*a given me for a sprained foot and really swollen ankle. Not to
be borod too much I'll do it to the Christian Science News on W13JC, one of the two best
radio newscasts. ...Kesumed 8/7 • We could also be called the Payne family!

The MDW file was not in the basement but if Kick put it there it'll turn up. Thanks.

If you sj)eak to him, ask him if he placed it where MDW would be and if not, where. Thanks.
And we are glad he is spnding more time with his new girl friend. May last longer that way.

There are several parts of Crouch's letter to Rick that I do not believe. One is that
the Secret service burned " a safe full" of autopsy pictures. I am sure they never had that
many and that if they burned any, there would be little or no knowledge ol it by anyone, J°

I do not believe that Bouck told Fox to make prints of this film for each of them.

I also do not believe that enlargements were made if this means larger than the ori-
ginal enlargements of the pictures.

Perhaps Gooden did get to make some copies for h im s elf of the autopsy film when HSCA
had it bi/t I heard that when he had then he was always matched, apparently jo prevent tha$.

Crouch says that in June 1981 Foe let him co y the pictures but with an agreement
that they not be used until after he died. Yet Crouch also says that the next nonth he
tried to cell them to the National Enquirer. I can't believe that the inquirer would not
have bought them. Fox claims that when there '££’ motel room was entered, based on the drapes
being in a different position. He identifies the Enquirer n , fl"l±ai3on" as one J im hatinger.
I’ve known many people there, never heard his name, and am confident that he was not one
on the staff specializing in JFK assassination information. Those who did usually checked
such things out with me then.

Having agreed in June not to make any use of *:he pictures while Fox is alive Crouch
says he sent Lifton a set of copies that august. Assuming this is true it 3ays his word
is worthless.

Interesting he makes no reference to Fox's having a copy of the Hitler will with
those pictures. I wrote the reporter who did the Wilmington story on Crouch and asked him
about this and as I recall other tilings and got no reply. He add Crouch was working with


2


Oliver °tone. He also said tJiat Crouch had three documents, making no reference to tiny
other records* those three were published in Tile Pentagon Papers. The picture appears to
(Note from page 1 : Pox does not account for making that "sfe full" of pictures he says
the Secret Service burned and he was its photographer* Sorry, phone call and I thought
^'d finished the sentence started above.)


have been taken in a shop. If Crouch had eKfen a decent librury on the assassination that
would liave been a better place to have as or in background for him as an "expert."

You do not believe him and I don^t either. Question is why does he lie? He should
have a purpose for lying and with Pox dead v/ho is to contradict him?

The reference to the Hitler will is why I asked you if you could get a rundown on
Pox. That Pox had copies of those pictures in itself is unusual but that ./hen he could
have gotten into real trouble for it that he let someone else have a sot is not easy to
believe. Hot with his years on the Secret Service.

Crouch seems not to claim any special relationship with Pox, so wliy would Pox let

i

h$m of all people liave copies? Crouch was not any kind of expert and seems then not to
have any substantial subject interest. Then or since. Only nutty theories.

Best to Prances and the boys.

Whether or not -uil is uajpx to going with me I have a 1 p.m. appointment at ^pkins
thi3 coming Wednesday. Her sister will drive me there. We'll probably get there in tine to
have lunch in the cafeteria if you'd like to meet us for lunch. I can't be sure of the
schedule but I would want Belle to be able to park tho car and meet me in the cafeteria a
little before 12, antici;.»ating there' d then be more of u crowd.

We hope you all do get here soon,
