DUBLIN HIGH SCHOOL 
6780 Coffman Road 
Dublin, Ohio 43017 
(614) 764-5900 
April 5, 1992 
Harold Weisberg 
7627 Old Receiver Road 
Frederick, Maryland 21702 
Dear Mr. Weisberg: 
I want to thank you and your gracious wife for your time and 
hospitality last Sunday when you allowed rae and my sons to 
viasit and learn from you. In particular you willingness to 
share your experiences, knowledge and wisdom were helpful to 
me, and your kindness and understanding toward my boys are 
appreciated. 
I was able to visit briefly with Jim Lesar at the AARC office 
later that week. I did not have time to pursue ray wish to see 
Oswald’s alleged murder weapon or CE 399, but I will work on 
Sue McDonough and the rules to be able to view them in time. 
I have contacted Michael Hurwitz of Reynoldsburg, Ohio 
(southeast suburb of Columbus) and have requested a copy 
of his taped itnerviews with various personages in Dallas, 
including Oswald’s landlady at the time of the assassination. 
Jim Lesar has agreed to have the tapes transcribed for your use 
and I will donate a copy of the tape to the AARC. I am also 
working on getting Mr. Hurwitz to write a signed statement 
, regarding his ownership of two Manlicher-Carcano rifles that 
are very close in serial number to Oswald’s alleged weapon and 
how Hurwitze obtained them (from Dallas’ Deputy Police Chief). 
Mr. Hurwitz, is, you might recall, the former Defense Department 
employee who had archives clearance in the early 1970’s while 
investigating the My Lai massacre' allegations for the military. 
He deals in collectables and has first option on various assass- 
ination memorabilia. He will be speaking in May, hopefully, to 
several classes of our students at Dublin High School. 
When I returned home, I noticed that Human Events newspaper, a 
conservative weekly out of Washington, printed my letter to 
the editor, asking that this issue not be classified a ’’conserva- 
tive vs. liberal” knee-jerk issue, but rather an issue of finding 
the truth, where possible, wherever the facts might lead. 
We are looking for a place in the yard for the ’’Maryland quartz” 
ray youngest boy found in your yardi, and are combing the pine cones 
for seeds to plant. I know tht tKey nor I will forget our visit. 
I hope that you are feeling better, and that I may visit again 
some time. Please pass my thanks on to your wife. Thanks again. 
Sincerely 
David Keck 
868 Chelsea Lane