PROPAGANDA
BATT LIU FRONT

Issued by: FRIENDS OF DEMOCRACY, INC. National Headquarters:

Eastern Regional Office: Fidelity Building

137 East 57th Street, New York 22, N. Y. Kansas City, Missouri

December I, 1943 Vol. I, No. XI 1


“Anti ” Propagandists Carry On


When Gerald L. K. Smith, the Detroit rabble-
rouser and head or the America First Party, sug-
gested this month that Senator Robert Rice Rev-
nolds run for President of the United' ^States on the
AmePfca First ticket in 1944, the Senator said he
was "flattered and honored.” This
That Man on means that the “nationalists” at
Horseback long last may have found what
they are looking for — a Leader
who really will "lead,” a Man on a White Horse
around whom the variegated crack-pots, fascists,
nationalists, anti-Semites and Anglophobes can
flock.

The search for That Man on Horseback has been
going on in this country for some years, but for
various reasons the chosen Leaders just didn’t get
around to leading. For a time it looked as if Major
General George Van Horn Moseley, U.S.A. retired,
might be The One to lead America into the prom-
ised land of the Fuehrers, Aryans, etc. The native
fascists liked him just fine, and he liked them. But
the small-time leaders couldn’t get along with each
other. They squabbled, and the whole movement
fell apart before the Major General could reach the
White House. Then Charles A. Lindbergh looked
promising. Although all the fascists were for him
100 per cent, he couldn’t get around to committing
himself one way or the other on how well he liked
them. Indications were that he was beginning to


think them rather nice, but Pearl Harbor arrived at
this crucial moment.

Almost two years have passed and the movement
again is in full swing. The word "nationalist” has
been substituted for the word "fascist,” but most
of the faces are the same — including those of Sena-
tor Reynolds and the Rev. Gerald Smith.

The Senator’s record makes him particularly well
fitted for his new role. Reynolds edited the "Amer-
ican Vindicator” before Pearl Harbor, (his paper
now is called "The National Record”) and copies
of that newspaper were peddled at meetings of the
German-American Bund and the Christian Front.
He thought we shouldn’t go to war against Ger-
many to save "minorities.” He argued that there
was virtue in Nazism and fascism, for, after all,
Hitler and Mussolini had solved their unemploy-
ment problems, hadn’t they? Before the Japanese
bombed us he sounded exactly like Tojo’s Ministry
of Propaganda and Public Enlightenment. He in-
sisted that the United States had declared war on
poor little innocent Japan by extending a loan to
China.

Reynold’s association with persons now under in-
dictment for sedition are numerous, tie inserted in
the Congressional Record a speech by Gerald Win-
rod; Winrod is under indictment for sedition.'Tn


1939 he was one of the authors of a resolution to
appoint William Gri ffin as a special roving ambassa-
dor to visit v arious~Etiropean countries; Griffin is
under indictment for sedition. He was implicated
in the Prescott Dennett - George Hill - George Syl-
vester Viereck franking scandal; Dennett and Vier-
eck are under indictment for sedition, and Hill was
sent to jail for perjury. He inserted in the Congres-
sional Record an anti-Semitic, anti-alien article
from Domenico Trombetta’s "II Grido della Stirpe,”
Trombetta has been denaturalized and indicted as
an unregistered foreign agent. Elizabeth Dilling says
that Reynolds praised her "wonderful patriotism” ;
Mrs. Dilling is under indictment for sedition.

If it ever occurred to Reynolds that he might
have been wrong or that his associates might be un-
savory, he hasn’t made any public statements to
that effect. Instead, he congratulated himself on his
own good judgment by saying that he’s "1,000 times
more isolationist” now than he was before Pearl
Harbor.

There can be little doubt that Reynolds means
what he says when he says that he’s "flattered and
honored” at Smith’s suggestion. The Senator has
announced that he does not intend to seek re-elec-
tion in North Carolina when his term expires next
year, yet he plans to "continue in public life” to
champion "the best interests of my State and my
country.” In other words, Reynolds will be free to
lead a third party movement. The ''nationalists”
who make up the movement like the Senator, and
the Senator likes them. Everything is all set.


Robert Rice Reynolds is not sitting idly by while
the Rev. Gerald L. K. Smith grooms him for Leader-
ship. The Senator is making friends on his own here
and there; when The Day arrives he can reap the
support he currently is cultivating.

Reynold’s latest gesture of friendship
Sidelight was extended to Gerald Winrod, famil-
iarly kn own as the "Jayhawk Nazi,”
who heads the list of 3 3 persons now under indict-
ment for sedition. Now just because the Rev. Win-
rod is in bad repute his following is not to be under-
estimated. He is a Fundamentalist minister who


tours the country during the summer holding re-
vival meetings; he still speaks over the radio with
regularity; he once polled more than 50,000 votes
when he sought the Republican nomination for the
United States Senate — and 50,000 is a sizable num-
ber of votes in Kansas.

It all started late in September when Winrod ar-
rived in St. Petersburg, Florida, to hold a series of
meetings. Nelson Poynter, editor of the St. Peters-
burg "Times,” ran a front-page editorial attacking
Winrod for following the Nazi line and for his
connections with World Service, a German propa-
ganda agency. Winrod bought space in the "Inde-
pendent,” a rival newspaper, to answer Poynter’s
attack. (Incidentally, Friends of Democracy has in
its files documents proving that Poynter was right.)
One of Winrod’s friends sent a copy of that par-
ticular issue of the "Independent” to Senator Rob-
ert Rice Reynolds.

Reynolds, who had had. dealings with Winrod
before, apparently felt sympathetic. He sat down
and wrote the Reverend a letter: "I read every word
of your reply with deep interest. These character
assassins are still at large but the day of reckoning
will arrive. . .

* * *

T oan McBride, a former waitress at the Deutsches
Haus, headquarters of the German- American Bund
in Los Angeles, recently was released on $2,000 bail
from the California Institution for
Out on Bail Women at Tehachepi.

Mrs. McBride, along with eight
others, was convicted more than a year ago for fail-
ure to register with the California Secretary of State
as a member of the governing body of a subversive
organization. She was sentenced to five years in
prison.

As the last issue of the battlefront reported,
Genevieve Kerrigan and Leone_ -Menier. who were
c onvicteaaTS^with Mrs. McBride, also have been
released. All three obtained their freedom through
the intercession of C. Leo n de A ryan , editor of the
"Broom” in San Diego, California. De Aryan, who
is under Federal indictment for sedition himself,
claims that the California law under which the
three were sentenced is un-Constitutional.


Mrs. McBride was born in East Prussia, Germany,
and came to the United States, she says, when she
was "very young.” Active with various “national-
ist” groups on the West Coast, she proclaimed that
Hitler was a “very great man.” She consistently
wore a swastika bracelet.

Besides her connections witli the German- Amer-
i can Bund, Mrs. McBride was active in the FfigHdT "
o f Pro gress, the National -Copperheads andTthe
America'Fitst Committee.

It was the Friends of Progress a n d the National
Copperheads, run by Robert Noble and Ellis O.
Jones respectively, that staged the mock impeach-
ment proceedings against President Roosevelt. The
impeachment trial lasted well after Pearl Harbor.
And it was Robert Noble who, during the battle for
Bataan, yelled, “To hell with MacArthur!”

With Noble and Jones, Mrs. McBride used to
picket the offices of a Los Angeles dentist because
he advertised in an “interventionist” newspaper.
When she testified before the California State Legis-
lative Committee Investigating Un-American Ac-
tivities, she wore the official National Copperhead
pin*

An enthusiastic supporter of the America First
Committee, Mrs. McBride acted as usher at the
America First rally addressed by Senator Burton K.
Wheeler. Among her other duties wasTtolTTOif
saleRei&g. hecklers.


The social prestige of Elizabeth Dilling appar-
ently hasn’t been impaired by her indictment for
sedition. She still is invited out to dinner to hear
speeches by Goy ^Green o f Illinois, Se nat or C. W ay-
land B rooks , and Col. Rob ert McCormick, publisher
oT the "Chicago T ribune^S^e must fmcfthe Colonel’s
speeches especially refreshing. He defends the 33
persons (including herself) who are under indict-
ment for conspiring to undermine the morale of
the armed forces; he includes in his talks little squibs
like this: "Leadership for the protection of our form
of government must come from the west because
in the east it is confused by that most extraordinary
alliance of international capital and international
communism. . . .”


Speaking of Mrs. Dilling — during the last few
weeks she has been writing articles for nearly every
issue of C. Leon de Aryan’s “(The Broom.” She has
been telling de Aryan’s readers what a "menace” the
Jews are, keeping them informed about the fine
points of the " Bible of , the.. Anti-Chr ist” which is
being sponsored by Boalte^Carter, and insisting that
there is a conspiracy afoot to rewrite the King
James version of the Bible. This is the first time
Mrs. Dilling has written for Mr. de Aryan with any
regularity — she’s branching out.


And speaking of Mr. de Aryan — shortly after the
33 persons (including de Aryan) were indicted for
sedition, "The Broom” was reduced from a full-
sized four -page newspaper to a four-page tabloid.
The contents became almost innocuous — it was full
of stories on the blessings of vegetarianism and re-
prints from liberal isolationist and pacifist news-
papers. But de Aryan now is getting back into the
swing of things. Recently he enlarged "The Broom”
so that it is a full-sized paper again. And de Aryan
is beginning to sound like himself. Again he’s saying
that “fair dealing ... is alien to Jews,” that Mr.
Roosevelt “is not God,” that "patriotism, contrary
to divine law, is an absurdity,” etc., etc.


The papers a short time back announced that
Senato rs Burtoru J£?«Whee1eF-and Gera ld P. Nye
have been meeting with “the bush league friend of"


PROPAGANDA IS A WEAPON

Propaganda is a weapon as much as submarines,
tanks and bombers. Friends of Democracy has
been carrying on a militant campaign against anti-
democratic propaganda for a number of years.
The impact of the Axis propaganda is now tre-
mendous. Therefore, it is necessary for Friends of
Democracy to 'carry on more vigorously than
heretofore. Our organization invites the coopera-
tion and support of all who are concerned about
the preservation of democratic civilization.


“THE MAILED FIST”


fascism, Joseph P. Kamp, and one Michael Ahearn,”
Because Kamp has received widT^uWfcfEy^From
time to time, his background was pretty well cov-
ered, but no one seemed to know anything about
Ahearn.


fc

As a matter of fact, Ahearn 's record is worse than
Kamp’s. Back in the early 1930's he organized the
original AmerinaJEj^t^Xnc. , with James True — the
man who invented and patented" BHT^JSffSiBer.”
Ahearn used to lecture weekly before the leaders
of the American National Labor Party, an offshoot
of the German -American Bund. He was closely as-
sociated with George Deatherage, the acknowledged
fascist who is~now^un3eTTTidTrtTnent for sedition.
He was active at the anti-Semitic Conference at
Asheville, North Carolina. More recently he worked
as "Research Director” for Cathrine Curtis, whose
organization, the "Women Investors In America, was
named in the sedition indictment as a vehicle
through which the alleged conspirators worked
against the morale of our armed forces.


Carl Mote, the Indiana utilities president and edi-
tor of "America Preferred,” is continuing to lay the
groundwork for his campaign for a place in the
United States Senate. With Tom L inder, he re-
cently addressed the annual meeting of theJRirmer's
QuiWra-group which apparently spends moneTtfcse
on "Nationalism” than on agriculture.


FRIENDS OF DEMOCRACY, INC.

13 7 Ea?t 57th Street
New York 22, N. Y.

Enclosed please find my contribution (which also entitles me

to membership in your organization) for

Use it to keep THE PROPAGANDA RATTLEFRONT com-
ing, and also to carry on the work of Friends of Democracy.

Name

Street

City Zone . Staie^

Contributions to Friends of Democracy are deductible from income tax

A NONSECT ARIAN> NONPARTISAN, NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION
SUPPORTED BY VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS
VOL I— No. XI


"We may expect much propaganda before and
after the conflict is ended to trick the American
people into debate over the extent of Germany's
guilt. Already, you hear attempts to differentiate
between ‘the Nazis’ and Germany.” — From the
preface of S. L. G. Knox's illu min ating pamphlet,
"The Mailed Fist 1864-1939; The Background of
Hitlerism,” published by Friends of Democracy, Inc.

Propaganda to whitewash the German nation
serves a double purpose: (1) Preserve German mili-
tary and economic power for World War III; (2)
Commit soft-hearted British and Americans to a
dangerous rift with our Russian allies when the Rus-
sians insist realistically that the Germans pay the
full penalty of German war guilt.

The Knox pamphlet is a specific antidote for the
poison of such propaganda. German Nazism is ex-
posed with documented evidence as merely the latest
expression of a systematic pattern of German ag-
grandizement, by aggression, which has been fol-
lowed with calculatedly evil purpose for over
seventy-five years.

"The Mailed Fist” is admittedly the case of the
prosecution; yet it is made so airtight, with both
direct and circumstantial evidence, that those who
are armed with the facts it presents will be fairly
impervious to the subtlest propaganda. Mr. Knox
shows that eleven times in the seventy-five years be-
fore the outbreak of war in 1914, the German Em-
pire and its predecessor Prussia followed out the
pattern which finally should have become clear to
all in 193 8. In only one of the eleven moves did the
Germans fail to accomplish their purpose — German
aggrandizement. That was in the war of 1914-1918.

"It is therefore important,” says the author, "that
those who want to consider fairly and intelligently
the appalling situation with which the world is con-
fronted, should know the story of Germany’s atti-
tude in European affairs. . . . Only thus can they
decide whether the repudiation of 'war guilt,’ which
Hitler emphasized in winning his way to power, and
in organizing Germany for new wars, is, or is not
justified.” >
