APPEYDIX TO HR. CARLOS BRINGUIER'S LETTER O MARCH 29,
1967
Enclooed herein are events as well as facts thct have
occured during the past several months regarding the District
Attorney Jin Garrison's inbeetigationpf thesscsslhtunof
the late President John F. Kennedyi:
I first learned about Hr.Garrison'e investigetion in late
Dccenber of 1956 when I met Mr. Co.rlos Bringuier and a local
newsman frou Chnnel 12 T.V..%r. Sa De Pino.
Xr.Erinzuier
told Xr. De Pino thnt thcre was an inveatication beiny, con-
ducted by Xr.Garrieon in regard to the asseosination of the
late President.Yr.De Fino then went on to say that he had
furnishel inforuation to Mr. Garrison In regard to Kr.Ferrie
andother3.
At this point I toai Xr.De Pino that I hai known Mr.
Ferrie for sono tine in the year lc6l. He became vor. inter.
oated in what I hsd just sail anl w9 started talxinr about Hr.
Ferrie.vhat I did not disclose to Mr.De Pino bhat night was
confidenticl infornation about Mr.Ferrie that oould havo
possibly linked Kr.Ferrie and Ostead in a plot.
Beczuse of the foresoine, I thoucht I couli be of some
help in the investication ani'I askod Yr.De Fino to contact
Kr.Gerrison and cdvise the latter that ir I uould be of any
belp Iwould be willingto cooyerate.
Of course, Hr. Willis, at this time,I thou-ht that Kr.
Garriso"'e investsgation relative to the ass2ssinntion of
the lote.Ere-ident found that the assassination was the wor
or hhe Connunists and posaibly,Hr: Garrison had found real
eviience.
Deya passcd ani I hed not herd a word from the Distriot
Attorney's orfice, but finally,on the'week of January 8-15 of
1s67.%r.Frank Kiein tacephonoj my hone ani spoke to ny wife.
Since I was et work,Mr, Klein left a messarc with my wife
stating thet ho youid call bnc' ani speak with re letor. At
or January, Mr. Klein telephoned ay office whero I work ind rc-
quested if it was rossible for re'to so to the Distriot Attornog's
offico that sote day at 2r.li.. My ropiy waa,"Yos"
Hy conversntion with lr. Kiein was neinly centered around
the trainins cenp ncross Lake Ponchartrains Hr. Bargio Arenchai
Snith; Vr. David Milliaa Ferrie;. Lee Harvey Osvald; Crusade to
Free Cuba; and Gay Banniater.
51M
ENCLOSURE,was neinly centered around
the trainins cenp ncross Lake Ponchartrains Hr. Bargio Arenchai
Snith; Vr. David Milliaa Ferrie;. Lee Harvey Osvald; Crusade to
Free Cuba; and Gay Banniater.
51M
ENCLOSURE,

--- PAGE BREAK ---around
the trainins cenp ncross Lake Ponchartrains Hr. Bargio Arenchai
Snith; Vr. David Milliaa Ferrie;. Lee Harvey Osvald; Crusade to
Free Cuba; and Gay Banniater.
51M
ENCLOSURE,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3
Nr.Kloin told uc that Lee H. Oovald had reportedly.beon
Seen at the training camp. He asked me if I had knoyn of ouch
a canp. I told lir. Kloin that first of all it was aimost in
posoible that Osuald could have been at this camp becauso the
canp in question was en anti-Castrd one.
Then I went on Bxplaining to hia what I hed known about
this mattor.I told hia that tho way I foung out about the camp
was approxinatcly 1 week bofor it dicsolved. Two Cubans had
boen et kir. Bringuior'e store and hai just left this particuler
canp becauae they rere disgueted with it. Kr.Bringuier called
me about this matter that day and I tried to help theso tyo
bus to Mieni. I also gave each or then ten (io) dollars for
exjensrs and meals. I also stated to Hr. Mlein thet I had tho
names or threo Cubans who wsre at the canp; two of thom were
military lenders and the other one was a spy who wes descovered
at the cenp. I also told him what Kr. Richard Drvie hai told
me about tho cenp just a fey days before the canp kcs abandoned.
To my surprise lir. Kloin ashel ce is I had ever been at the
carp and ny reply was tho truth,"No"
he started talking about Hrr Arcacha and his wherebbouts.
I told him that I did not know exactly whan lir. Arcacha had
left.the' city.but it was prssum2bly around the miaile of 1962.
Then he nskei me if I hni scen Arcccha in the cigy in 1963.
Ky ansver wns,"ko"
.Then Iwent on cxplaining to r.Klein
that due to the conditions in which lr.Arcacha had loft the
city it was elnost iepossible that he could have como bac2.
Mr. Klein aBtonished ce when he told ms he had witnesses that
gad positively identifiei Mr. Sorgio Arcacha Saith here in Hewv
Orleans in the yeir or 1963. Furthormore, thnt Arcache was
"really fivinc here 1n Hiev Orleansin 1963.
A few ninutrs later vo talkre nbout Mr.Forrie.At bhat
monont I told xr.Klein that Ihai confidsntiel infornation in
regard to iir.Fcrrie bcing a Comnunist. Xr. Mlein was not in-
torested at ell in regard to this infornation.
°eciscussed
:Kr. Ferrie for somo time and then the conversation chahced to
Hr. Gay Bannister.I told hin that I hed been in Mr. Bannister'g
orrice sovernl tines during the lsto part of lc6l with lir.
Arcache and Mr.Ferrie.
Tien hghskei ce if I had evor seen
I also oxplained to hin thnt who ever wns tolling then things
like th-t shouli be investisated becruse Oswali, according to
the tarron Conajssion and the FBI, waa in Russia at thnt time.
I then explained to him tho mecting that I had with Oswald on
August 16,1963 when I tried to 1nfiitrate 0swald's orzanisation,
The Fair Play for Cuba Conmittee. I refored him to staterents
made by Mr. Bringuier Sn the Warren Comnission Report, and I
also told him thnt I had requosted the FBI and the Socret Servioy
not to disclose my nane to the public, but to be kept on officia?
covernnont staterenta becnuse m: fathor was in jail in Cuba at
the tine and could very well be shot.ed the FBI and the Socret Servioy
not to disclose my nane to the public, but to be kept on officia?
covernnont staterenta becnuse m: fathor was in jail in Cuba at
the tine and could very well be shot.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ocret Servioy
not to disclose my nane to the public, but to be kept on officia?
covernnont staterenta becnuse m: fathor was in jail in Cuba at
the tine and could very well be shot.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then I told Mr. Klein that in thc loter part or 196l:and
the boginning of 1962 a Crusnde to Free Cuba was founded here
in New Orleans for the purpose of collccbing noney to libcrate
our country..I explained to him that the connittee was com-
posed of anti- Connunist Ansricans who wore responeible and
known citizens of this convunity.Imnediately Mr.Klein told
me
"Conservatives"
I replied very quickly'that I don't
Minutes later ho noked re is I had evor hoard of bho neme
pf Ciay Bertrand,Santana, of Torres.I told hin that. I had
neyor hoard of the nanes of Santana and Torres, but I thought
I had heanl of the nane Bertrand befors. fey the w2y, Mr. Wiilis,
the nene of Mir.Bertrand was montioned to re by the FBI just
days after tho assaasinntion or President Kennedyy but at thet
moment I could not remenb-r where I had heard it.). Then twe
detectives brought fonr pictures into the roor。
One vasa
picture of Osvaid diatributing Conmunist pronaganda in front of
the International Trade Mart. Itsold them thct I aid not know
any onc of the persons in it except Oowald and furthermors,I
for the purpose of idontifying any or those pepple.The other
three·pictures yero abcording to Kr. Klein or Ferrie, which I
recotnized iagoiiately, and two convicted crininzls,'Santana
and Torres.I do not know any of thosc two criminais.
At the eni of tho meeting that day I tola hin thet I
wouli get for him all I had about the Crusede to Free Cuba,
the nancs of the peorle nt the canp that Mr. Richard Davis had
.told ne and other matters pertaining to Nr. Aroacha, Mr. Davis,y
agd bring also to thon lctters,vboplea bfiwhioh I had, which.I
hai written to the Prosident.of the.United States,Lyndon B.
Johnson,in l954,in regard to tha Warren Comnission Report
and ay acgualntance vith 0syald on August 16,1963.
As soon as I lert tho District Attomey's office I hai my
doubts about tho investication and I deoided to _gather all .the
ihformntion that I had available in order that Ioould alarify
for the Didtrict Attornoy's ofrice a lot of false infornation
given to then by othors.
On Fridas morninr. January 20, 1967, I deciied that the
ordor to bring all the information I hai.I lert my office at
5 P.r.and about nt 6oy'clock & man knocked on the door of ny
at the Distrlct Attorney's orrico on Saturday, January 2i,1967
at l2 0'cloc noon..
(Fhotostatic.Copy attachoi) I did not put
much inportance lo 6t and I went to the orrice with all the
Inforuztion thct I had previously collected.rico on Saturday, January 2i,1967
at l2 0'cloc noon..
(Fhotostatic.Copy attachoi) I did not put
much inportance lo 6t and I went to the orrice with all the
Inforuztion thct I had previously collected.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nuary 2i,1967
at l2 0'cloc noon..
(Fhotostatic.Copy attachoi) I did not put
much inportance lo 6t and I went to the orrice with all the
Inforuztion thct I had previously collected.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Upon my arrival th?ro I wna rsooivod by Hir. Louis Ivon
Who brourht no into a gnall roop. Ho told m. that r.Carrigon
kouli occnoveryohortly.
Pusuiy Fiy foyy cood Ittue guy. ui.
a rirlo with a tolracopic oirht on top of a table yory near to
ao, in feot, lf I ha. wantnd, I could havo touchca itwithout
getting cut or cy chnir.. On another table torg placed picturos
or oriainalo. To uy loft wno c picture or tho Man or Louisiana
hanginz on lho Hall. I aat vaitins with the albun I brouzht
.and tho othor inrormction J had aloo.I hao left nlons ln tho
rooa anl tho tsnc vas paasine. I triod to anusc aysrlr by otudy-
ins the cap on the wnll fron ay chair.About hnlf an hour lntor
HrIvon czne jnto the roon ond atayod for about tnenty minutos.
Ho thcn retoved tho rifle from the tnble yhore it wns end coyed
It to tho table unlon tho oap or Louiaiana.
Bcforo holafttho
rooa he ccvo ce approxiaately ten picturos of crininals +elook
ot.Hc rronisod thnt xr.Garriaon vould eee me in ten minuce3.
Atout hnir an hour lator Iyas gotting cuito mai about the khole
thing becauso I couli ore through tho bottom or the coor leasing
to a hall vay thnt thoro Cas elvayo pcoplo pnssing by in tha
darsction o:Hr.Garrison's o"ficn。
Thon Ihcnra noise in
tho roor ncxt to aine and I notioed a mirror on a coor.
Althou-h at the tind i did not think anythin. of it I thou-ht
thc beat thinr I could o wao take e nap..
Finaliy around
3;307.!..
almost afeer four houro o: sitting in tho roon,Hr.
Ivon chno nn! tols ae thnt Xr.Garrioon was roesy to see no.
hanio and ravo me g thorou~h cheok.l wns so 1rious et this
tine thzt I tolc hin thnt vas tho vey to treat peorle who yaoe
yoaantooring infomation. He aalod mo why I was enzry end I
Imnodintoly'replied to hin,"
1 cono to thio orrionto try to
help gou. poople cnl you troat no liso I vas a criminel or in.
aprigon yn Cuba.Ho shon told mn thnt h dien't kant to rako
any coamonts and that ur. Garrison hinselr vill aoko the cornonts
about that.
I Inmoilntoly asici Xr. Cnurloon Hhy I had been_aubreneed
When I hni told Hr.Moin ani olao :r.De Fino that J koula
cooporate in his inveatication if lhoy ncedoi mo.He did not
repiy to my qvection and etnrtod asking me guostiona.I
Innodietelj oranoi tha albun thet I had about tho Cmsade to
Frcc Cubn and I ot ted exrlainin to bia hon I was able to
elininite Tron thia oonmittoc bofore it atatel Kr. Ferrlo.I
told xr.Saurison my feolinrs obout Forrio bocavao I novcr cid
trust or lixo bia vhen ho vas vlth xr. Arcachc.
Thon tho convoroatisnrohinrod to tho carp aorass Lake
Pontohartrnin. Ho aoked mo vhat I knoy about the canp. I ex-
Dlainod to hia the oano thing chat I hal prcviousiy told Mr..
Klein cxccrt that I hni brought with co tho naaos or the threo
poreons which I hai proninos to obtain for Mr.Klein a fow days
berorc.ex-
Dlainod to hia the oano thing chat I hal prcviousiy told Mr..
Klein cxccrt that I hni brought with co tho naaos or the threo
poreons which I hai proninos to obtain for Mr.Klein a fow days
berorc.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the oano thing chat I hal prcviousiy told Mr..
Klein cxccrt that I hni brought with co tho naaos or the threo
poreons which I hai proninos to obtain for Mr.Klein a fow days
berorc.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In faot,I had vith no a nevspapar pioture of tho spy who wao
at the.camr becausc-t'is. porson brouzht vaado publicity in Xiani.
When tho military rerconnel cbonionel the camp they brought the
opy, Fernanio/rorninsea, Barccnns, with thon.
！
Mr. C:rrison vns quito,oo then I Eave hin ny lottora to
the Frec::ent or tho Unitoi Stntcs aatod 0ctobor 6,io64 end
Ootobor ?. ls64. oopieg or which are attaohed to this lotter.
He lookai at thea and then fave then to Hr. Ivon who wae gitting
with un all that timo.
In the neantime Mr.Gorrison wao looline
through thc clbun or Cruaalo to Freo Cuba. He yas loo'ing with
intereat at tho names or thoso on thia cormittoo. Ho ankod mc
Ir I kney Gay Ranninter nnd I told hin that I aia. le thsn
aakod mo ie I cmow that Oovnld uaed to yioit Gay Bannistor'g
orrico. I ropliod,":o".
Thon very calply ho toli ao that cup-.
pose ho tolJ 5c thrt Oawali wns not a Conmuniat.but andanti-
Comnuniot.rhnt than? I iaaodiatcly told him that soncbody wns
nuts orwa3 lying bocau3e whon 1zot 0owald on Aurust 16,1963
I yao oonvinoed he wis a Conmuniat: Bogideo,Oawnld couid not
Oavald iniicatod thnt he Was n Conmuniat,I rolerroa him to thc
Harrcn Soaniosion Forort.  This ctartsd a very hoatcd debate
batwecn.Hr. Garricon ani I. At this rozrnt hc eoouod mc or
being with Oavale, Forris and Aroncha at Xanouso'a Restaurant
at Cann ani Lafayette Stracts. I told hia that it wne a bis lia
and it couid not have beon roasible. Then ho rcplicd lhnt thoro
were aoae witnenses xho rrcognizoi mo toiay aa being in thzt
reotaurant.
Itole hin that Ihad been in that roataurant many
tinos in lo6l brtwcen Ootobar and Dooombor,but th2t 1 had nevor
barn insiir that reatcunant aftor lhnt tinc.I also tola his
not in licv Orlcang.Thoh he'toll go.takring tho Open Lettor
to che Frsoiirnt mentionoe above.
uhen I oa finiahed with
sinco
ho waa oo nasty about it,Isnvo him tho following reply.
aoyLu
Hr. Garriaon,whnt I think I'n coin to do whon you riniah youn
'es yesn gou Lu uvelo oi ce uctatsrisoaus
Ialcorcc21l a3=
Ing hia about what ho ycs goin to do wlth tho Karren Teport
and hio reply wns ttc aone ns before.I thought thzt this Kas
a big joke and chnt soneboiy kna lying to hia, so I startod to
laush.
Thon ho gtortoi tilkin nbout tho oanp. A fey minutes
Iatcr he aoounol go of bsing at lie caap. too. Itola asg that
puu cuTt Udh csuTis oscuT tTO svig LIy cg oAcxd c CuTog stA 1
thnt I wouid be ablc to prove It. He thoh kinl or tarontoned
co whoh he said thnt I'd bcttor toil hin thd truta aou booauoo
Lang Fuedg oug oucjog ou suguq fuu ou csnoot og Cujod sua oy
I told hia Lhat I wes telling hin ihe truth eni that soceboiy
else vas lying to him. Thon wo vont into othor alfferont sub
Jeoto and I tried to convince Mr.Garrinon that he hal cverything
Wrong ani thrt I could be or much 6ervice to hin.truth eni that soceboiy
else vas lying to him. Thon wo vont into othor alfferont sub
Jeoto and I tried to convince Mr.Garrinon that he hal cverything
Wrong ani thrt I could be or much 6ervice to hin.

--- PAGE BREAK ---boiy
else vas lying to him. Thon wo vont into othor alfferont sub
Jeoto and I tried to convince Mr.Garrinon that he hal cverything
Wrong ani thrt I could be or much 6ervice to hin.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Br. Garriaon toll ce thnt bofore I.oould heln his I woula
have to tale a lio dotector teot.I tordchiinthat I xould tako
a lio detoctor tcst or truth corn anytimo that he wentod
booauoo I would ahow hin whnt I xeB telling hin rns the tmuth.
Ho thon rokod ro ir Iwouletolo aliedctoctortostat that
moront.  I told Hr.Cprrison that it was O.z. with ma. Mr. Ivon
thon lart tho roon and brourht Xr.Carrison cnd me e cup of coifoo.
Ho tolc mo thnt thog oouzd notcivo mo a lio cotootortest that
day, but that thoy soula call ne anrly Sunday morning, that is,
the noxt doy,end thon they vouli bo able to porform ths teatian
the artermoon.
1 lort ir. Carrison'e offico that day and Mir. Ivon acconpnniod
me to ny cer.Acain ho kind o: threntsnod no by tejliny mo thnt
I Hcttor bc tollinr then tho truth bocause tho lie aocector woula
proveothe:m:icc.
Irot rad nnd I asked hin if ha thoucht I was
Bone kind of a nut to rvcn vrito lottors to thc Irooiaent of tho
Unitod Statos and diotribute then at the Jung liotel in the preosnce
of Xr. Sohnaon vhon he was hore and lio ebout it. Hc cie not eey
e wora at all after that.I vaitci ail day that Bunday but I did
not roocivo a phono call fron thcn.
On xoniny. Sanunry 23,ic67 nt about 7:43 P...
xhile Iwas at
a rclative's houeo aoreonc calicd ay house. liy wire ansuorcd oni
the nnn toia cy wifo that he wns coins to kiii nc bccausc I had
beeh coing to tio District xltorncy's orrice several tines.
and ono aorc wao rot coins to aaka any difleicnee. This frightonod
Dy xlro torribly end sho called ce irnodiatoly.
Ao soon as'I
Whon tho yolico arrived I told thou vhy I had born throatoned-
(Poonune
eho oail thnt I had beon visitirg'the Distriet kttorney'g
orfioc). anl thoy imnoaiatoly contncted the Diotrict Attorneg.
Ilinl bcon onc bororn threatoncl,yearo bofors,by 3 min oallod
Jask kartin, co I told tho polico about lt.
Thenoxtday，on
Tuesla, Jon. 2h, 1ssT, I vna nolod by tho Diotriot Attorney to
brins ty wito veth mn in orior thnt sho mlsht be cble to lioten
to sonotarcs of voices。
Mhon thet pl-yoatho tape sith Martin's
yoice,py vi.o Iraodiately rocosnisod it.A fow minutns ltor
yery politely and tola us'that he 'nov it yns Jacltartin oocnuso
informction hnd loakod out ot hio ofrico to :inrtkd about ny vioita
thcro.He then apologieoi for cvorything end toid ns chat ho.
"Boliovod cverythins L had told hia Baturday and thnt it was not
jlothononton
to rolate to no confidontial infornation, vhioh I,with confidanco.
Hr. yiilia, nn paoning on to yu. At thnt tins vs. Garrison had
aakei me not to relnto it tyanyono.y and thnt it was not
jlothononton
to rolate to no confidontial infornation, vhioh I,with confidanco.
Hr. yiilia, nn paoning on to yu. At thnt tins vs. Garrison had
aakei me not to relnto it tyanyono.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t
jlothononton
to rolate to no confidontial infornation, vhioh I,with confidanco.
Hr. yiilia, nn paoning on to yu. At thnt tins vs. Garrison had
aakei me not to relnto it tyanyono.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

His theoio Wns cs follove-
IARTT CORIMUiNIST
WHO OHIS A COFFSE INDUSTRY HRE.O3ALD WA3 REALLY KOT A
COAIUNIST,EUT AH AHTI-COHIUNIST. HI3 ACTIONS ON CAIAL STREET
ARD HIS COMUNIST AOTIVITIE3 WERT RALLY A FRONT FOR OSWALD
IN ORDER THAT OSWALD COULD GET IHTO CUBAASACOUNISTAND
KILL FIDEL CA3TROOSSALD VAS BEING DAOKED BY A GROUF OF.
ANTI-CORUHST AIERICAIS HHIO ACCORDING TO MR. GARRISON WERE
CETTO HOIIVZIHVDNO RY CL CEUKOTES CHA SEAIVAFTSNOO
"THEGUARDIA: OF THE CARIBBEAN
Ho thon wont on to explain that aftcr tho plan to kill
Castro failed, they dccidod to kiil Prosidcnt Konncdy. Hc also
Osvali the dey ho uas dictributing tho Coimunist yrogacanda
was a Cuban by the namo or'Hanuol GarcGonzales.He then
told me tiint bhao Cuban bas dofnateIy implicnted bccauae there
are pioturoa of this aan and othor Cubans bohind 2 "billboard"
olose to whoro the late Frcsidsnt vas shot.o also told the
Banos or tao othor anti-Conaunist Anericans,that I kney, that
ho said were definately inplicated. I was not conpletoly shocked
by those revelations, on the contrary, I felt pity for lr..
 s  a y as    I o
I starfod vory calaly to toll hin that sonoboiy was lying to him
or tho Comguniut wero behind the story.I csked hin to nake a
thorough invostigation in recard to overyone connected vith this
fantaatic story. At this meoting lr. Garrison triod to dic-
courage ne into taking any logal action asainst Jack Hargin.
At this aenonooting
I once acain asked %r.Garrison if he
vas not, neceeoary. Hy wife and I then loft.
→
'I did not hear anything at all about whether they had
arrestod Jack Xartin or not, but I wented thea to bring him
in to ssio sure that he vas thc one who callod cy hone.
By a coincidence I went by the District Attormney's offico
on Saturday, Jan. 23, 1c67 to bring the ohocks which'I hed
made on .uguot l,ls63 for the to Cubans who yore at the camp
and whioh i had sreviously steted at tho b:ginning of this
lettcr in ay conversation with xr. Klein and also to aok hir.
Garrison to sive nc a lie jetoctor tost ir he wantcd./ Insida
the littlo roon where I had beon on the previous Saturday
they were qucstioning Yr. Jack S. Hartin.I waitodufor about
five minutes and thon lir. Ivon coue outside and told mo that
Martin hai confossed thiat he yas the one who threatonod to xiil
me on Janwary 23,1967.
I asked Yr. Ivon if it was possible that Icovid tald to
Xr. Jack Martin to Tind out why he vanted to xill mo. Ivon
hcsiteted but then told ne it waa O.K. Iwelked into the roon
that he was drunk and did not knoy what.he Haa saying.I thenthat Icovid tald to
Xr. Jack Martin to Tind out why he vanted to xill mo. Ivon
hcsiteted but then told ne it waa O.K. Iwelked into the roon
that he was drunk and did not knoy what.he Haa saying.I then

--- PAGE BREAK ---Xr. Jack Martin to Tind out why he vanted to xill mo. Ivon
hcsiteted but then told ne it waa O.K. Iwelked into the roon
that he was drunk and did not knoy what.he Haa saying.I then

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in full agreement with Mr. Ivon and lir. Martin himself. Mg
reason for doins so vas to find out if he was the one who had
beentelling ir. Garrinon all those false stories; bcczuee et
one tino, in lg6l, ho workod for Xr. Gay Eannister and he uaed
to go quito ofton to Menouso's Restaurant where Mr. Carrison
ha3 told ne jroviously pooplg hgdsocn me with Oswald,Ferrie,
and Arcacha.
L··
.Ao I started quostiohing Hr.Mertin,I found out cor
certain that he was the one. As I was completaly destroying
all or liartin'o statenents thnt he had civen to the Dictrict
attorney'o _prfice some tone in Hovembor, the written testinony
Which Hr. Ivon was holding in his hand.' 3uddonly Ivon stopped
just prior to the aosassination. I aslicd him what year it was
and he said tyat the Fresidont was killed in lo62.Imnodietely
after that ir.Ivon aaled Martin to tako a'lie detector tcst.
Yartin tola him that he would take one on another day. Xr.
Ivon then a3kcd ae to leave the roon and Iobeyed。
I vaited
his mini about rhat be.had told us I'm going to break his
head open". Then Hr. Ivon told me that he wcs coinz to tale
thats.θ.b.hone。
I was shockod to see that Me. Ivon Hos not
evon Eoinz to put Jac': Hartin in jail,bit, on the contrary
he vas coin_ to give hin a rido hone.I did not day e yord and
Ileft the 5ffico.Later on several occasions,I reguested that
Kr. Ivon arranso for an arpointaent with lir. Garrison about
Jack Hartin.Up to this date I have not boen able to spcak to
Hr.Garriaenn about thia mntter at all!
Whathns alvays puzrled me is that'T'have been sevorel
tines aftomwards at their orfice and I have recsived aeveral
calls from theu requestins my holp to identify different
puople, but nevor have I secn nor has Mr. Garrison returned
my callo in recard to Jac' Martin.
Althouch Iwould like to go into detail ebout other
incidents that have occured during several other vlsits to the
do soaat thio tire.But.I wstia like to point out to yoy that
many Irregularities have occurred in my prescnce, ana I believe.
that they are not in acsordance yith the Constitution of the
United Stcted.
I rinally would like to point out thnt tho roason why I'n
disolosing confidcntil information told to ne by Kr. Garrison
to your committoe is that he miy havo given thc sane information
to tho irresronsible and loft-wing author of the book;Mush to
Judgonent". hR. MAaK LANE.
sincerelyyours,
.e.r.
Carlos QuirogaGarrison
to your committoe is that he miy havo given thc sane information
to tho irresronsible and loft-wing author of the book;Mush to
Judgonent". hR. MAaK LANE.
sincerelyyours,
.e.r.
Carlos Quiroga

--- PAGE BREAK ---mmittoe is that he miy havo given thc sane information
to tho irresronsible and loft-wing author of the book;Mush to
Judgonent". hR. MAaK LANE.
sincerelyyours,
.e.r.
Carlos Quiroga

--- PAGE BREAK ---

../.
I am hereby regl.sting thnt the questions s .ted horein
be askod to me during the course of the lie-detector test,in
regard to the preaent investization of the essassination of the
lato Frcsiient John F. Kennesy being conducted by you, Hir. Jim
Garrison, and your menbers of the Distriot Attorney'e office.
As I stnted to your office investigator, Mr. Louis Ivon,
In a telephonn conversation laat night,Apri1'14,1967,I'm
willing to take a lio-dotector test at this tire providcd the
following questions are asked to me.
Question No. 1.
Have. I ever met Lee Harvey Oswald and talked to him at
any other time in my 1ife besides that of August 16,1963,when
I visited his house on Magrzine St., Ney Orleans, when I tried
to infiltrate his Comnunist orsanization, "Fair Hlay for Cuba
Cormittee" ane of which visit I imnediately,reported to Lieuten-
ant liartello of the New Orleans Folice Department and of which
visit I cave full details to the FBI and the Secret Service days
after the assassinntion of the late Prssident Kennedy?
Answer to question 2lo l.-- No.
，
Cuestion No 2.
In talking to lr. Lee Harvey 0svald on Avguet 16, 1963,
what icpression did I receive ebout him.
Answer to question No.2.
Mr. Lee Harvey Oawald v2s intellicent end a very well in-
structed Comnunist.
Question Ro. 3.
-Havo I ever met Lee Harvey Oovald in the conpany or David
Ferrie and Sergio Arcaoha Smith at.Kancugo's Resteurant on
Canp'anj Lafayette Streots.
Ansner to fuestion Ko. 3.-- Ko.
question Yo. 4.
Ian't it true thnt on January 2l, 1967,you, %r.Garrieon,
told ne that.soveral witnesscs had testified that they had seen
me with Lee Hiarvcy Oswald, Devid Ferrie and Serzio Arcacha 3mith
at Mancuso'g Restrurant on Canp and Lafayette Stroets.
Anever to qucstion lio. 4.-- Yes.
Cuastion No.5.
Based upon this testinony by these witneesas stated in
quostion No. 4 in recard to me being yith Leg fiarvey Osvald,
do I bolicve that these vitnes3es be prosccuted by lew for
giving false tectiuony?
Ansver to question Mo.5.
Because thcse witnesnes are lying. I believe .that they
all must be prosecuted by law.
5114
(.)
ENCLOSURE
1at these vitnes3es be prosccuted by lew for
giving false tectiuony?
Ansver to question Mo.5.
Because thcse witnesnes are lying. I believe .that they
all must be prosecuted by law.
5114
(.)
ENCLOSURE
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---e prosccuted by lew for
giving false tectiuony?
Ansver to question Mo.5.
Because thcse witnesnes are lying. I believe .that they
all must be prosecuted by law.
5114
(.)
ENCLOSURE
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cuestion No. 6.
Have I evor be .'at tho cnti-Castro traini _camp of the
Christian Deaocratic Movonent hich was located across Lake
Fontchartrain fron Nev Orleane in the ycar of 1963?
Answer to question lo.6.
No. I have never been at that trainine camp.
Question Ko.7.
Isn't it tmue that you, Mr. Garrison, told me on January
21, ls67. that you had witnesses that wouid testiry that they
had scen mo at thnt training camp?
Answer to question lio.7.--- Yes.
Cuestion Ho.8.
Based upon the testimony of these witnrsses, what should
the District Attorney's officc do about these vitnosses.
Answer to question Ho 8.
Because theso vitresses have lied, they must all be
prosecuted by law.
question No. 9.
Have I over beon threatened to be killed by en individual,
C
who apnea.rs to me to be one of your vitnesses, becaues I had
tcore to your office on several occasions?
Answer to qucstion ko. 9.
 . Yes, my 1ife has by an individual on January 23, 1967, who
i. in a telophone converaation with my wife tola her that he was
going to kill me if I continued going to the District Attorney's
orfice to give them information.
Arter ny wife recognized tho voice of Jack Miartin on a
tape recorded conversation in your office on January 24,1967.
Lyou r.Garrison, told ne that you also thoucht it was Jack
Kartin because informatlon about my visits to your office had
-Feaked ,out to him.
OnJanuary 28,1957,Mr. Jack.artin coniessed in front
or
Kr.Louie Ivon and myseif that he had called my house and
threatened to kill me.
Question No. 10.
Have I ever bcen present at any time,at any place whcre
there .has becn a discusoion about a plot to assassinate the
late Prcsident John F. Kennedy?
Answor to Quention No. 10.
No. I have nover been presont nor did I ever overhear
any conversation in rcard to a plot to kill the late President
John F. Kennedy.
I am also requesting, that a copy of all your questions _and the
ansvors by to be given to me for my record purroses before I lerve
this orrico this date, Arril 15,1967.in the company of my wife
Hrs. Maria S. Quiroga. I also request that the lie-detoctor test
be given in the presence of ny wife.
Sincerely yours,
Carlos Quirocs
Mrs.Haria 3. quiroce
Kr.·Jin Garrison
Witness_
Witness