DearDavid,
8/29/93
abort
Ajthough whaf I wrota you yesterday that nevest of Livingstone's insanities, did
not stay in my mind It returned soon after I was abed。 I kept getting up yith it on my
uptryinyh_oleek
Mkind and the less than five hours I was abed before staying therekas clearly a futility
t
was not the good sleep that at my age and with my health problems I need。I tried to
八
return to thie work that interests me and it was inpossible。 I could not get put of my
mind what I believe will be inevitable once his Killing tho Truth is published。 Nor
could I stop wondering vhat the situation vould be if the Baltimore City Police Depart-
ame
ment had done what it should have done,not for its own reasons done nothing, which 面
thijk can be regarded as negligence if not misprisgn, as I, a non-lawyer, understand
that。If I am right I believe that will be, is,really, misprison of a felony。I think
there is no doubt that Harry is guilty,repeatedly,including in what I did not send
youforit but now enclose，of a felony at thleast ofArticle 27 of the Annotated Mary-
(quoting from page 11)as "a.ccesspries after the fact" of the JFK assassination。 He says
more your people can interpret for themeelves about thisqt.
In my viev,and I intend to share it withy others without now going farthur but with
going farthur before too long in mind, the situation I face and will face, a situation
fraught with a number of dangers for meCxists only befause of the hegligenfe or mis-
it!
prison of the Baltimore police。Its failures nbt only enabled this mental problen to
continue but it enquraged him to do more and worse and inflated his already infglted
insanity that he serves the nation with his incredible and paranoid concpepts, including
of himself as representing the law and the police, about vhich he was quite specific,im
what hepg regardsas apatriotic act of vepgeance against those directly and indirectly
responsible for the JFK assassination。 In this sick thiny he actually says ve got paid
for that -which is entirely unreal but which he vithoutquestion believes。
In my view also the failure of yhe police to do anything has encouraged his publisher,
a publisher who for the May 3 issue of Publishers Beekly Said of us that we are guilty
of "furthering the conspiracy," accessories, Aside from wondering whether or not under
ke/
misgivings he should and would have had, absent his greed, i the police had done what
itshouldhavedone
vith him to work with him "in this investggation," top of page 11。Aside from the viola-
tion this clearly represents,does it involve the police more directly in the evil he is
up to,the danger to others from it,and does it involve those jolicemen in criminal acts
ofwhich he is guiltybutthanks to thepolice remainsimmune?
Separate from which is the clear criminal act of Richard Waybright，possible acts,
that began whon he stole fromme。What he stole Iregard as having considerable valuetthanks to thepolice remainsimmune?
Separate from which is the clear criminal act of Richard Waybright，possible acts,
that began whon he stole fromme。What he stole Iregard as having considerable value

--- PAGE BREAK ---remainsimmune?
Separate from which is the clear criminal act of Richard Waybright，possible acts,
that began whon he stole fromme。What he stole Iregard as having considerable value

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
and not possible for me now to replace。It has taken' me much time to do the best I can
from recollection because I regard that as impirtant for our history。
So, what will be my pogsition when that book appears. Vithout confirmation I was
newest sensation of the exploiters and commercializers,Case Closed。
This is hearsay bit his many letters indicate it is probably true,perhaps under-
Another one vho read it, allowed to or asked to, as I understand it, by the publisher,
found it incrediblethatthethings said aboutme couldbepublished。
It is possible that.these non-experts vere used by the publisher for a phony
With people my age the publisher also knows there is little possibility of a suit。
Fewpeople canafford that and by thetime a suit could come totrialwhocould expect
tobearoundtopushit?
Before going further I vant also to raise the question, did the police consult with
the postal inspectors on vhetherLivingstone isin violation of provisions of Title.18
negligence at the least,negligence that contributed to making the present situation
possible?
That same issue ofublishers Weekly quotes Bublisher Kent Carroll aS saying the
first printing in hardback will be more than 50,Oo0 copies。 That requgires an extraordin-
ary promotional and advertising campaign and that in and of itself is even more damaging。
With all such attention, what am I to say when asked by the media about those charges?
Nothing，and thus appear to validate them?
Orshow,vhich is child'splay;that they arefalseand the product of a sick and
dangerous mind,which is the truth?
Exposing Livingstone is the only possible course。If I do not do that,I contribute
to the ruin of my own reputation and all that means in terms of my work and its acceptance
in ourhistory。
6.0napen
What can that then meanwhen that paranoidal megalomaniac can not respond in any
Wayand he faces the ruin ofwhat he hasjust done?Does anyone whokmowshimand ofhis
many threats, some of which are recorded on phone naswering devices,think he will do noth-
ing? I do not, especially because it will mean his ruino
Here I am out in thc country，living close toinvisibly in a woods,prohibited from
is now too much for me and,extraordinarily vulnerable in an unusual way, what am I to
S if that self-conceived agent of the police and law comes hefe to avenge, as in his
he
sick mind as well as his wordsregards as apatriotic mission?dinarily vulnerable in an unusual way, what am I to
S if that self-conceived agent of the police and law comes hefe to avenge, as in his
he
sick mind as well as his wordsregards as apatriotic mission?

--- PAGE BREAK ---in an unusual way, what am I to
S if that self-conceived agent of the police and law comes hefe to avenge, as in his
he
sick mind as well as his wordsregards as apatriotic mission?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4
YouaswellasyourdepartmentlknowthatifIhadwantedtoembarrassitatall
I could have。Fir example, when a Blftimore Sun reporter vas hore, if I had just shown
him the file you have seen part of。Most of, probably。I have been entirely silent in
public andvirtually entirely so in private。ButI cannot long continue to do that with
any degree of safety.I think this is nowpretty obvious。
，By the way,I intend this for you to ghve to the right person, wwthout your personal
involvement,Qothatthebad situation can still bemanaged ina way that will do leasf
damage to the department。I recognize that it can have jts own problems and that its
d
long period of doing nothing can be for reasons it consiered important,toit.I think
Lrmgny
that perhaps all inferests are served by this remaining a nonpublic matter/as long
as that does not endanger me and 。 Lil.
I.cannot and,do not pretend that what thought I gave this during the time I was not
iQntiely depincloteo,
fitfully asleepe (It is now only 4 aom.) I algs have not consulted any lavyer. I have to
face the possibility that thisvill all come to a head vithin qmonth。If it doesfnot,
there is the certainty that it will well before 11/22 because the book will be out before
But my present thinlking prior to discussing this with Iil when she is up is that w
Kmnweeape
vhilethere is nothingI can dotoprotectmyself Imust sharekhowldegof this situation
vith others who are credible people,friends I can trust not to leak but who I think will
notbesilentifsomethingdoeshappene
If bil agrees then I'll do that promptly.
local lawyer although as of nov I am not inclined to have any Maryland involvement。 I just
vant generalalvice as of nov。
Asof nowIaminclinedtothinkthatifnothing happens within acouple ofweeks,
before I have any reason to believe that the book will be out for review or on sale, and
     0  t  9   t a o a
possible from makfet considerations, I will inforn the press.
I am aware that that can cause more of @ stink than if this is taken care of
properly and promptly vithout my causing it。I think my clear record is that I have been
careful and cautiqus as well as patient to avdid undue probimgs for the police。 But it
一
2
andnotI causedthepresent situationandwhenI consider the potentialtomeIfeelthat
it just is not Bafe for me to riscontinuing with total public silencee
In the simplest terms, as best a nonlawyer can have avalid opinion in it, I believe
thatide from what for its own,reasons and under its own regulations the police should
andha!
have done and didnt do,ithaskmowledge of a potcntialviolation of Maryland law in
- 1g uq s    u o 4u J 69 oe 4T
gent in doing nothing about it and is perhaps guilty of misprJison of a felony or felon-
iess'It is responfible for the present situation that is so dangerous to me。in
- 1g uq s    u o 4u J 69 oe 4T
gent in doing nothing about it and is perhaps guilty of misprJison of a felony or felon-
iess'It is responfible for the present situation that is so dangerous to me。

--- PAGE BREAK ---4u J 69 oe 4T
gent in doing nothing about it and is perhaps guilty of misprJison of a felony or felon-
iess'It is responfible for the present situation that is so dangerous to me。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

If he only pusheamethat cannow kill me!
If youhad been heretou would haveseen that most of this year my arms have been
covered by surgical conpresses,at one time all or major parts of those three inches by
three inches. They have been on my arms constantly for mechanical protection of scabsgto
oud
preyent bleeding again from the merest contact。 One of those places, on the inside of my
right foreamm, with that patch off for about a week, is a rather ugly and red pagth
about to-inches by more than an inch and a half。In my sleep rubbing that foreapm over
vrc
my nose peeled the skin back thayuch! This may sound extreme but it is the actuality
as the congsequence of living for about 18 years or a rather high level of anticoagulent。
All of the skin is visibly ffected, more than from age。 Another patch, oh my left fore-
ona
arm,also just removed,Was aslarge  gpot that peeled back vhen from unsteadiness as
I Fas leaving my small office that arm grazed against the round doorknob! Both elbows
Thereae
Gre still so covered, there are two ofher such patches, one on each arm, and Fbouldthe
fdund^one-inch bandaids on smaller patchea。Even the edge of a hardback book has peeled
the foriqyfarm skin back for several years nowe full,
.Suppose hd merely pushes me and I puwh him back, That alone can be too much for my
M
any excitement any more。Without exceptional excitement on a number of occasions in the
   a a    u      s
month a couple of times and had me on a Holter monitor several other times,ce@
onceforacontinuous72hours。
Wihtout saying more, which I can, I give an idea of what I face, what anyone knowing
Harry and his condition kmows is at the very least possible。
There is a vety/fikelihood thatuhat he has no vay of knowing can cause it he can
kill me。
At theveryleast;there willinthat orin anything elsebearealresponsibility
for it by tha Baltimore police?
董e i had done what it kmew it should have done more than a half year ago and at
all times/since then this situation would not exist. I mean all parts/bs it, even the
willingnessofthegreedypublisher whomadeapoton hisearlier trashtoconsider
Mal
publishing such evil and insane stuff。They kmow he is sick in the head,but theymean
m
eren
opter
bpsidbs
tract and in what I enclose he has at least one more,hot the one he will print in Balti-
more。But for all it kmew,it did nothing at all,and it kmew he was doing what it was
bound todo something aboutin hisuses of members ofthedepartmentand in his repres-
entations that he represented it。 It did nothing when Union Wemorial gave it a copy of
theletterhevroteonpolicestationery.d todo something aboutin hisuses of members ofthedepartmentand in his repres-
entations that he represented it。 It did nothing when Union Wemorial gave it a copy of
theletterhevroteonpolicestationery.

--- PAGE BREAK ---utin hisuses of members ofthedepartmentand in his repres-
entations that he represented it。 It did nothing when Union Wemorial gave it a copy of
theletterhevroteonpolicestationery.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I believe there is further hegligence.When Detective Adams phoned me about seven
months ago he kmew that the conputer had been misused(federal offense?）and who had
misused it and I believe for whom.He asked me about that。My recollection then was not
clear enough for me to tell him unequivocally that Rick had done that to my kmowledge。I
did think so but I vas not positive of it。When I told Lil she recalled clearly that
Richard had not only said so but had offered to do that for us. But Adams never called
us back。He did not respond to my offer to let him see and copy all I have。He did not
indicate any intercst in any of that at all。He did not even tell me how to mail anything
to him that I might think could be of interest,anything that I had or would get。Neither
directly nor indirectly have I heard a word from him since then。It is obvious that I have
uhen toptotectmyselfI mayhaveto。
The danger to me from Harry is qyite real and it exists only because the police
did nothing when,it should haye, months ago,before he even turned his manuscript ine
If hy any good fortune I am not harmed by this appearance of this book, I urge
t.
a careful reading of the third paragragh from the bottom of page 11 of the enclosure. It
pretty much says that what the publisher would notaccept for this book he says "is already
a book。"(He also there refers to what he expects of the State。He ways it has concurrent
juridsdiction in the assaassination!)In looking for another reference to this I see the
clear threat at the top oa page 19。Tovard the bpttom of that page he refers to publish-
ing what thc, commercial publisher would not permit in the comdng book as a"spin-off"。
thati
He ag Say/there/it will be"published by my owun company." He calls that Conservatory Presse
It isaBaltimore operation,Box 7149，21218。
Then he talks also about a fifth book of this sick and dangerous stuff.There is to
done nothing and continues to do nothing:
Obviouslg I do not know what if anytying it did or learned but I have reason to
bepieve that its own records reflect a prediepotion to violence if not his mental history.
Rik,
when in his second book he mamed a Baltimore βoliceman as his "chief investigator." It
has been silent kmoving all the utterly irrational things he has put on paper。Even the
utter irrationality of writing as he did on its own letterhead。In my view it is respon-
sihile for the existence of the situation I now face。
AndI ampowerlesstodoanything otherthan todrawthepublicattentiontoit that
I may be forced to do。And certainly do not vant toe
If I now @nted to I vould not be this informal, this private zbout jtiuh would write
W
LdniCmid
Afon
the mayor or the chief and vould have a letter I could make public if nothing happened. It
Sincerely,