nillions persecuted and miserable [Jewish’] wretches”.
1~6,000,000... suffering arguments in favor of Zionism.”
“Russia is now.. grinding out the lives of 6,000,000 Jews” *
“ anore than 6,000,000... Jews whose lives are at stake”
“Nearly six million Jews are ruined”
“~SiX tnillion Jews.. are dying of starvation”


“Jewish war sufferers... six millions face... disease and death’
“Over six Tnillions of Jews... systematically degraded”
‘SIX MILLION JEWS FACE STARVATION”


million Jews... are struggling between life and death’ :
‘War Would be the annihilation of the six million Jews” “™
“Six million Jews in Europe are doomed to destruction”


THE SURPRISING ORIGIN
OF THE SIX-MILLION FIGURE


THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


THE SURPRISING ORIGIN OF THE SIX-MILLION FIGURE


The First
Holocaust


The Surprising Origin
of the Six-Million Figure


Don Heddesheimer


salt vii
Kiel Isher


Castle Hill Publishers
P.O. Box 243, Uckfield, TN22 9AW, UK
5th edition, July 2018


HOLOCAUST HANDBOOKS, Volume 6:

Don Heddesheimer:

The First Holocaust: The Surprising Origin of the Six-Million Figure
Uckfield, East Sussex: CASTLE HILL PUBLISHERS

PO Box 243, Uckfield, TN22 9AW, UK

5th edition, with an expanded Introduction, July 2018

The first two editions bore the subtitle Jewish Fund Raising Campaigns
with Holocaust Claims During and After World War One.


ISBN10: 1-59148-204-6 (print edition)
ISBN13: 978-1-59148-204-8 (print edition)
ISSN: 1529-7748


Published by Castle Hill Publishers
Manufactured in the United States of America and in the UK


© 2003, 2004, 2015, 2017, 2018 by Don Heddesheimer for the main
text and by Germar Rudolf for the Preface/Introduction


Distribution worldwide:
Castle Hill Publishers

PO Box 243

Uckfield, TN22 9AW, UK


Set in Times New Roman
www.HolocaustHandbooks.com


Cover Illustrations: Featuring some of the main players in the drama:
front (left to right): Lenin, Czar Nicholas II, Stalin; spine: German em-
peror Wilhelm II; back: Hitler (right), Polish President Josef Pilsudski
(behind bar code), and small around the bar code (counter-clockwise
from top right): Stephen Wise, and finally Paul, Felix and Max War-
burg.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 5


Table of Contents


Page
VintrOMU COM 5. scsi celiccssscss avbectececeeassendhcoddscisssassveechescceestsnectdesecseasesasovsecdes 7
Since When Do We Know about This? .........ccccccccsscceceesseeeeeesteeeeees 7
Six Million before Hitler ............ccc cc cccccsessssecececeeeesesssceeeeeeseeensaaees 16
The Six-Million Figure in the Media ....... eee ceeceeeceseeeeeeeeeeeenee 30
SUMMA Yc aiandi ania a eae 34
Chapter 1: Activities Prior to World War One ...........ccsccsssscssssccsseee 37
Chapter 2: World War One Activities............scssssccssssccssssesssscsssscesseee 51
Chapter 3: Postwar Campaigns ...........scccssccsssssssssscsssscssssssssesssssecssces 67
Chapter 4: The 1926 CampaignS...............sccssssssssssssssscssscssssscesseesseeees 77
Chapter 5: Following The Money ...........ccsscsssssssssscssssccssssssssscsssesesseee 85
Chapter 6: The Trail Continues .............cccccsssscsssscssssccsssssssscssssscees 101
Epilogue to the 2018 edition. .............cccscccssscssssscssssscssscsssssssessssscees 113
List of Pre-Nuremberg References to “Six Million Jews,”
Starting B50 bis tecectedesecustetateb lst soet slecsvevsaceteees tosatestadesea phateoeets 115
APPOMIX, seecciccscsenscccevssssccesnnssecencstsecevansscsetessvasevectessencsovesssonesdseteceeteos 135
BeRESOUTCES:. v7 ..cee.e8cter, Hos ekceti sees ttis hae sete Sos enka Reh ane eee 135
2. Selected Book and Newspaper Excerpts ..........csseesceseceseceseeees 135
Ss DOCUMENIS 2:6: 522 Hstscersebesterseatatarias tives thstadatssbtacet ea daeabiedaina sibaeaths 163
Biblio praphay sciscsescccccse siicescentiecs cestisconssonsscescecsocsctosdsesasetenseosseesacvacseus 183


INGEX:OF Nate sesssesecssscsesslescceesecacseseesasesecessvasssscsasescscavassousbeeoseeasessso 187


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 7


Introduction
By Germar Rudolf


Since When Do We Know about This?


As we all know, roughly six million Jews were killed by National So-
cialist Germany during World War IJ, or so we are told. This genocide is
today widely referred to as the Holocaust or the Shoah. But how do we
know that six million Jews lost their lives? And for how long have we
known it?

Whereas it seems that the first question might be answered by de-
mographic research on the Jewish losses during World War Two, the
second question has to be directed to historians.

Regarding the issue of demographic research, it turns out on looking
closer into the matter, that, for a long time after the Second World War,
expert historians on this topic have stated that we actually don’t know at
all how many Jews had died in the Holocaust. For instance, when asked
during a trial in Germany in 1979, German mainstream historian Dr.
Martin Broszat, who at that time was one of the worldwide leading his-
torians in Third Reich studies, stated that the six-million figure was
more of a symbolic figure rather than one that has been substantiated
with solid demographic research.' It was not until 1991 that a major
monograph, published in Germany by a mainstream publishing house
and authored by a group of renowned authors, addressed this elusive is-
sue with the thoroughness the topic requires.”

As a matter of fact, this book was the reaction to a 1983 “revisionist”
study that had challenged the accuracy of the six-million figure.? In
their attempt to refute that evil revisionist study, Wolfgang Benz and his
colleagues got lucky, because their research confirmed what had always
been “known.” He wraps it up on page 17 of this book, where he states:


“The bottom line indicates a minimum of 5.29 and a maximum of just
over 6 million [Jewish victims of the Holocaust].”


' Frankfurt Jury Court, May 3, 1979, Ref. Js 12 828/78 919 Ls.

2 W. Benz (ed.), Dimension des Volkermords, Munich: Oldenbourg, 1991, p. 17.

3 Walter N Sanning, The Dissolution of Eastern European Jewry, Institute for Histori-
cal Review, Torrance, Cal., 1983 (2nd ed.: Uckfield: Castle Hill Publishers 2015).


8 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Hence, even though the six-million figure had been regarded as a mere
“symbolic figure” by historians in this field, it had reached an almost
sacrosanct status already long before the appearance of Benz’s book. It
should not surprise, therefore, that the massive social and legal persecu-
tion encountered by everyone in Germany who doubts, denies, or re-
futes the six-million figure has resulted in an invisible guideline for this
study

In an attempt to quell any skepticism about their “lucky” find, Benz
asserts with a straight face three pages later (p. 20):


“Of course the purpose of this project also was not to prove any pre-set

figure (‘six million’).”

But considering that the Holy Holocaust is without any doubt the big-
gest taboo of our times, is this really a matter of course? In fact, such an
uncalled-for disclaimer makes skeptical minds all the more suspicious.

In a separate study, I therefore took the trouble to juxtapose the sta-
tistical data on Jewish population losses during World War II as com-
piled by Benz and his colleagues with those gathered by Walter Sanning
in his iconoclastic revisionist study. The result indicates that and his col-
leagues have massively cheated in order to reach their expected value.

The worst blooper by Benz and his colleagues consists of simply
calculating Jewish population losses by forming the difference between
the respective last prewar population census and the first postwar popu-
lation census of the countries they investigated. They recklessly ne-
glected or even utterly ignored that massive shifts of populations and
changes of national borders happened before, during and after the war.
The millions of additional Jews living after the war mostly in the U.S.
and in Palestine or later Israel were tallied as Holocaust victims by
Benz. Benz’s work has so many logical, methodological, and systematic
flaws that its results have to be rejected.*

But if it is true that we do not have a reliable demographic study that
shows without a doubt that six million Jews lost their lives during
World War Two, then why are we confronted with this six-million fig-
ure? Where does this figure originate? And when was this figure first
propounded?

It is usually assumed that the Nuremberg Military Tribunal during
1945 and 1946 was the origin of the claim that six million fell victim to
the Holocaust. And in fact, during that trial two witnesses made claims
to that effect:


4 “Holocaust Victims: A Statistical Analysis. W. Benz and W. N. Sanning — A
Comparison,” in Germar Rudolf (ed.), Dissecting the Holocaust, 2"! ed., Chicago:
Theses & Dissertations Press, 2003, pp. 181-213.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 9


First, we have Wilhelm Hottl, who was a German secret-service
agent whose written affidavit was submitted to the court.* The affidavit
says in its decisive passage:

“(Eichmann told me that] Jn the various extermination camps some four

million Jews have been killed, while two more million perished in other


”


ways.
In his 1997 autobiography, Hottl confirmed to have heard those num-
bers from Eichmann.°

The second Nuremberg witness was Dieter Wisliceny. During the
war, he was a German official working with Adolf Eichmann at the task
of deporting Jews. He testified in person during the Nuremberg Trial.
During his testimony, he stated, among other things:’


“He [Adolf Eichmann] said he would leap laughing into the grave be-
cause the feeling that he had 5 million people on his conscience would
be for him a source of extraordinary satisfaction.”


Note that Wisliceny falls one million short of the required six million.

Since Eichmann was not in custody after the war, it has been specu-
lated that he was used as a convenient scapegoat during the Nuremberg
trial. But Eichmann ended up facing his own trial some 15 years later,
after he had been kidnapped by Mossad agents from his Argentine ref-
uge in 1961.

Interestingly, when he was asked during that trial whether the Jews
he had deported knew what was awaiting them, he made some rather
astonishing remarks. That trial was actually taped, and that footage is
online on YouTube and elsewhere.* Here is my translation of what
Eichmann said in this regard:

“The people out there did not know that for a long time. I myself didn t
know it either whether these transports... for instance, if they went into
the General Government [occupied Poland], then I knew that nothing
happened [to them] as long as Globocnik was not working [there]. If
they went to Auschwitz, it is clear that the majority was deployed for la-
bor there. I was kept in the dark as well as to how many or who would
be killed. But I did not worry about that either, because that was not my
area of responsibilities. It cannot be denied, though, that I knew about
the things due to the service trips I was ordered to make to the East.”


When we look deeper into the matter, however, a slightly different im-
age appears. When doing research for his book Nuremberg: The Last


Document 2738-PS, IMT Vol. 31, pp. 85f.

Wilhelm Hottl, Einsatz fiir das Reich, Koblenz: S. Bublies, 1997, pp. 412f.
IMT Vol. 4, p. 371.

96th Session of the Eichmann Trial, July 13, 1961;
www.youtube.com/watch?v=8 Y1lq49Dumes; starting at 2 min. 35 sec.


on nn


10 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


The First Holocaust


Volume 6 of the Series


THE SURPRISING ORIGIN
OF THE SIX-MILLION FIGURE


Published by me ke Nola mem ial—3


The present book has been turned into a video documentary featuring
many of the newspaper clippings and book excerpts mentioned here,
and additional material not included in this book.

You can watch the documentary on YouTube at
youtu.be/yBnMtkbWPCs (or search for this book’s title).

You can also download the documentary in low resolution to watch on
your hand-held device, or in high resolution to watch on your computer
or in order to burn it to DVD and watch it on TV.

Simply go to www.HolocaustHandbooks.com, and pick this title from
the movie drop-down list.


Battle, controversial British historian David Irving rummaged through
many archives and personal records of people involved in those trials.
He found out that in June 1945, before that trial began, the man who
was organizing it, U.S. Chief Prosecutor Robert Jackson, met three
lawyers representing major influential Jewish organizations. Jackson
wanted to get their input for the upcoming trial.

Regarding Jewish population losses, Jackson asked them straight-
forwardly:?


“How great were those [Jewish] losses?”
One of those lawyers, Dr. Robinson, responded reflexively:


,


“Six million.’
But because the chaos reigning in Europe at that time rendered any de-
mographic studies impossible, one has to wonder how he could have
known or even thought this.


9 David Irving, Nuremberg. The Last Battle, London: Focal Point, 1996, pp. 61f.; p. 99
in the current online version at
http://www.fpp.co.uk/books/Nuremberg/NUREMBERG pdf


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 11


The mystery of the origin of the six-million figure deepens as we go
back in time. Already in December of 1944, when the Allied armies
were about to enter Germany, the Soviet propagandist Ilya Ehrenburg
wrote in the Soviets’ English-language newspaper Soviet War News on
December 22, 1944 (pp. 4f.):


“In regions they seized, the Germans killed all the Jews, from the old
folk to infants in arms. Ask any German prisoner why his fellow coun-
trymen annihilated six million innocent people, and he will reply quite
simply: ‘Why, they were Jews.’”

That’s not the only time this symbolic figure appeared in that propagan-
da newspaper published for Anglophone readers. It was repeated in the
issues of January 4 and March 15, 1945. We read there:


“The world now knows that Germany has killed six million Jews.’


d


Those articles were re-discovered by the German historian Dr. Joachim
Hoffmann, who has reproduced them in the appendix to his 2001 book
Stalin’s War of Extermination.'° Here the same question comes to mind:
How could Ehrenburg know that six million had been killed before even
a single Allied soldier had set foot onto German soil?

In fact, Ehrenburg “knew” about those six million already much ear-
lier. Anglophone newspapers were announcing in November 1944 that
Ehrenburg was about to publish a book on claimed German atrocities.
In a press release by the United Press as published in the Youngstown
Vindicator on November 27, 1944, we read under the headline “Prints
Volume On Atrocities Against Jews”:


“the German massacre of approximately six million European Jews.”’


The article referred to a book written by Ehrenburg — wrongly spelled
“Ehrenborg” there — which was said to be released soon. If considering
that writing a book takes months, that six-million figure must have been
around already well before November 1944. This book actually didn’t
get published in the Soviet Union at that time, probably because Stalin
didn’t want to emphasize the Jews’ role as victims of the Germans. It
appeared only many years after the war. An English edition has been
available for quite a while under the title The Complete Black Book of
Russian Jewry."


'0 Joachim Hoffmann, Stalin’s War of Extermination, Capshaw, Ala.: Theses & Disser-
tations Press, 2001, pp. 189, 402f.

'! Tlya Ehrenburg, Vassily S. Grossman, The Black Book: The Ruthless Murder of Jews
by German-Fascist Invaders throughout the Temporarily-Occupied Regions of the
Soviet Union and in the Death Camps of Poland during the War of 1941-1945,
Schocken Books, New York 1981; idem, The Complete Black Book of Russian Jew-
ry, New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers, 2001


12 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


That the six million figure is indeed older than November 1944 can
be gleaned from the next writer, Rabbi Chaim Weissmandl, who became
known for his efforts to save the Jews of Slovakia from what he as-
sumed would be certain extermination. Wikipedia writes about him:'”

“Largely by bribing diplomats, Weissmandl was able to smuggle letters

or telegrams to people he hoped would help save the Jews of Europe,

alerting them to the progressive Nazi destruction of European Jewry. It
is known that he managed to send letters to Winston Churchill and


Franklin D. Roosevelt, and he entrusted a diplomat to deliver a letter to
the Vatican for Pope Pius XII.”


One of the most famous letters he wrote is widely quoted. It stems from
May 16, 1944, and was allegedly written while Weissmandl was hiding
in a cave in Poland. As quoted by the Jewish Virtual Library website,
Weissmandl wrote the following:'*
“why are you, fellow Jews and government ministers in all the free
countries, being silent about this slaughter, in which some six million
Jews have been murdered thus far, and in which tens of thousands are
now being murdered every day?”


Again, we should ask: how could this cave dweller have known this?

Weissmandl is such a big figure in the struggle to save Jews during
the war that there exists even a dedicated book on him.'* One of the first
mainstream authors referring to Weissmandl was the orthodox Holo-
caust Historian Dr. Lucy Dawidowicz in her 1975 book The War
against the Jews.'°

Not even May 1944 is the end of our six-million journey through
time. Let’s leap back a year: May 15, 1943. The first item of interest is
an article in the Australian newspaper The Advertiser dated May 15,
1943 with the headline “Appeal on Behalf of the Jews.” It mentions
“the possibility of the complete wiping out of six million Jews.” So, this
article does not claim that six million have already been murdered, but
that there is a chance that it will be done “by the barbarian Hun.”

The next entry in the same vein is from the Canadian Jewish Review
from just a day earlier (May 14, 1943), written by a certain Rabbi Dr.
Harry J. Stein. Under the headline “Commentaries,” we read, among
other things:


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chaim_Michael_Dov_Weissmandl
http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/Holocaust/hungary | .html
'4 Abraham Fuchs, The Unheeded Cry: The Gripping Story of Rabbi Chaim Michael
Dov Weissmandl, the Valiant Holocaust Leader Who Battled Both Allied Indifference
and Nazi Hatred, Mesorah Publ., New York 1984.
15 Lucy S. Dawidowicz, The War against the Jews, 1933-1945, New York: Holt, Rine-
hart & Winston, 1975.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 13


“Two millions of Jews have already been done to death. Six millions in
mid-Europe are sentenced to die.”


So here as well, they predict that, by the time the Nazis are done, six
million might be the total death toll.

My third quote is from the Cumberland Evening Times from Cum-
berland, Maryland. It is from March 20, 1943, and tells the reader under
the headline “Gives Background Picture of Nazis from Experience”
what the Nazis were in the process of doing:

“The Nazis set out in the beginning to destroy whole peoples. They ex-

pected to obliterate from the earth not less than 6,000,000 Jews as a

beginning.”

My next quote is from page 12 of the New York Times of March 10,
1943, where we read under the headline “40,000 Here View Memorial
to Jews” in a similar fashion that “2,000,000 Jews” have already been
“killed in Europe,” and that “the four million left to kill are being killed,
according to plan.”

One month earlier still, America’s magazine with the largest number
of readers, Reader’ Digest, has a very interesting article headlined
“Remember Us”'® written by Jewish scriptwriter and Zionist propagan-
dist Ben Hecht." It is a condensed rehash of the first chapter of a paper
headlined “The Extermination of the Jews” which had appeared the
same month on pages 194 to 198 in the magazine The American Mercu-
ry.'® On page 195, we read (p. 108 in the Reader 5 Digest version):

“Of these six million Jews [of Europe], almost a third have already

been massacred by Germans, Rumanians and Hungarians and the most

conservative of the scorekeepers estimate that before the war ends at
least another third will have been done to death.”


Going back yet another year, let’s turn to America’s most prestigious
newspaper, the New York Times. On December 13 of that year, in an ar-
ticle headlined “Tardy War Report Held Aid to Faith” printed on page
21, this paper reported statements made by several rabbis throughout
New York. Right in the middle of that article is the section of interest. It
says there:


“Authenticated reports point to two million Jews who have already been
slain by all manner of satanic barbarism, and plans for the total exter-


'6 Ben Hecht, “Who Will Speak for the Jews? Remember Us,” Reader s Digest, Febru-
ary 1943, p. 107f; see also the elaborations on this by Dean Irebodd in Part 9 of his
44-hour documentary One Third of the Holocaust (Ein Drittel des Holocaust);
http://codoh.com/library/document/534; or
http://holocausthandbooks.com/index.php?page_id=1001

See his entry in the Internet movie database IMDB:
www.imdb.com/name/nm0372942.

'8 www.unz.org/Pub/AmMercury-1943feb-00194? View=PDF


14 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


mination of all Jews upon whom the Nazis can lay their hands. The
slaughter of a third of the Jewish population in Hitler s domain and the
threatened slaughter of all is a holocaust without parallel.”


Note the word “holocaust” here. A week later, the New York Times re-
ported on page 23:
“What is happening to the 5,000,000 Jews of German-held Europe, all
of whom face extermination [...].
Early in December 1942 the State Department in Washington gave some
figures showing that the number of Jewish victims deported and per-
ished since 1939 in Axis-controlled Europe now reached the appalling
figure of 2,000,000 and that 5,000,000 were in danger of extermina-
tion.”


During the war years, the New York Times published a number of rather
revealing articles on this and closely related issues, which were first an-
alyzed by Dr. Arthur Butz in his 1976 book The Hoax of the Twentieth
Century, where this issue is explored in more detail.'? Butz concludes in
his book:”°


“Another point that should be made here [...] is that the six million fig-
ure had its origin apparently in the propaganda of 1942-1943.”


Butz also shows that the origins of these articles were Jewish-Zionist
pressure groups like the World Jewish Congress and the American Jew-
ish Congress. Initially, their claims were not taken seriously in Wash-
ington, until Henry Morgenthau of the Treasury Department managed to
overthrow the influence of the State Department on U.S. foreign rela-
tions.”!

But even Butz’s farsighted approach was still a little short, for we
can keep going back in time for quite a while without running out of
sources referring to six million suffering and dying Jews.

One particularly pertinent article among those of interest was pub-
lished in the Palm Beach Post on June 25, 1940, the day France surren-
dered to the German Wehrmacht. It is headlined “Doom of European
Jews is seen if Hitler wins,” which is meant to stir up the world against
Hitler in order to prevent peace being concluded on reasonable terms,
which Germany was offering at that point.

The chairman of the World Jewish Congress Nahum Goldmann is
quoted as having said that “six million Jews in Europe are doomed to
destruction” in case the world makes peace with Hitler. How could
Goldmann know that? And why would that be so in the first place, as it


'9 Brighton: Historical Review Press, 1976. In the current 4th edition of 2015, see his
chapter “The First ‘Extermination’ Claims and New York” on pp. 99-126.

20 bid. (2015), p. 115.

21 See Butz’s chapter “The First ‘Extermination’ Claims and Washington,” starting on
p. 89 of the 2015 edition, ibid.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 15


was the continuation of the war rather than its early termination that
triggered the Holocaust?

The next item was published by The New York Times on p. 27 of its
January 15, 1939 issue, hence almost nine months before the outbreak
of the war. Under the headline “Masaryk to Work for the Zionist
Cause,” we find toward the end of this lengthy article an interesting
passage where a rabbi is quoted. He has his own agenda, and that is try-
ing to encourage Jewish emigration from Europe. In that context, he
said that it would be “impossible to evacuate six million Jews.” Again,
the mystical figure. A little later, a certain Dr. Chaim Weizmann is men-
tioned as supporting this emigration effort, which brings me to the next
stop of our journey back in time.

We are now in 1936. At that time, the so-called Peel Commission,
formed by the British government, was investigating the causes of Arab
unrest in Palestine, which at that time was under British control. In that
context, Jewish leaders were also heard, some of whom advocated the
formation of a Jewish autonomous area in Palestine, or even an inde-
pendent state.

The 1937 Peel Commission Report concluded as follows:””

“Partition [of Palestine] offers a possibility of finding a way through

[the difficulties], a possibility of obtaining a final solution of the [Jew-

ish] problem which does justice to the rights and aspirations of both the

Arabs and the Jews and discharges the obligations undertaken towards

them twenty years ago to the fullest extent that is practicable in the cir-

cumstances of the present time.”


As we know now, nothing came of it back then, but note the use of the
term “final solution to the [Jewish] question,” a term later also used by
Germany’s government.

What is of interest today is the testimony of one witness who testi-
fied in 1936 during the commission’s hearing: Dr. Chaim Weizmann.
An article published in the London Times on November 26, 1936 with
the headline “The Jewish Case” reports on Weizmann’s testimony. We
read there that Weizmann spoke of


“six million unwanted unfortunates [in Eastern Europe] who were con-
demned to be penned up in places where they could not live. Even those
in Western Europe were now threatened. Second was the world problem
created by the presence of these six million people without a future
whose condition was a threat to Europe. A certificate permitting emi-
gration to Palestine was regarded as a certificate of freedom.”


2 http://david-collier.com/?page_id=603


16 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


So here the future first president of the State of Israel lets the cat out of
the bag: Jewish leaders were advocating a Zionist agenda, and six mil-
lion suffering Jews were a powerful argument for this.

Let’s look into two media reports during the very first years of Hit-
ler’s reign. The first is from the “newspaper of record,” the New York
Times of September 8, 1935. In an article on page 26 with the headline
“Congress Defends Polish Jews” dealing primarily with Jews in Poland,
we read that

“{...] the first world conference of the Federation of Polish Jews [was]

being attended by sixty delegates from eighteen countries representing


6,000,000 Jews.”


It doesn’t say anything about the Jews suffering, however, but the next
entry compensates for that. It is also from The New York Times, from its
March 29, 1933 issue. On page 9, we read under the headline “Alder-
men Vote Hitler Protest”:


The Joint Distribution Committee “is now active in relief and recon-
struction work in Eastern Europe where 6,000,000 Jews are involved.
The work there is done through the office in Berlin.”


This brings up the main topic of Don Heddesheimer’s present study, be-
cause the Joint Distribution Committee mentioned here was involved in
Jewish relief activities for many years before Hitler came to power.


Six Million before Hitler


Heddesheimer has collected a vast amount of material indicating that
the propaganda unleashed by Zionist organizations during World War
Two was preceded by like propaganda in great abundance. As a matter
of fact, the World-War-II iteration is a mere repetition — or should we
say continuation? — of propaganda, which intensified during World War
One (!) and reached its first culmination in the 1920s. Already by then,
the figures of “five or six million Jews threatened by death” were wide-
ly publicized and were used as a means to an end: namely the uncritical
support of Jewish and Zionist political goals.”*

Before I let you loose on Heddesheimer’s book, allow me to reset
our six-million time machine we just used to travel backward in time.
Let me lead you all the way back in time to when the six-million figure


°3 Don Heddesheimer has published an earlier, shorter article on this topic: “Holocaust
Number One — Fundraising and Propaganda,” The Barnes Review, 3(2) (1997), pp.
19-24.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 17


was apparently mentioned for the very first time, and then bring you
forward to the point where we can hand over the mic to Don, so to say.

As far as I was able to determine, the magic number was mentioned
for the first time in the year 1850 in a book published by a Christian So-
ciety trying to make Jews convert to Christianity.** On page 216 of this
book, we find some statistical numbers on religious affiliations of man-
kind during that era, claiming that among the billion people then living
on the planet, six million were Jews.

The next occurrence known to me stems from the year 1866 in yet
another Christian publication which repeats the number from 1850.”°

Probably for lack of any reliable demographic data, that number
keeps popping up elsewhere, for instance in The New York Times of
September 12, 1869, where we read under the headline “Sunday Notes,”
with reference to a new Jewish weekly, that “there are now living about
6,000,000 Israelites, nearly one half of whom live in Europe.””°

This number is repeated again in the same newspaper on October 31
of the same year under the headline “Religious Intelligence.””’

Twenty years later, in an article in The New York Times of February
10, 1889, which asked the question “How many Jews are there?,” that
number still hadn’t changed.”* This makes me suspect that nobody was
actually counting the Jews; they were just copying that figure from
whoever wrote it first, since it was a round, sexy number.

Before rushing ahead, we need to briefly discuss what was going on
in Czarist Russia at that time.

On March 13, 1881, the Russian Czar Alexander II was assassinated
by political radicals. Since many political radicals in Russia were Jew-
ish, pogroms against Jews flared up in Russia lasting for more than a


4 British Society for the Propagation of the Gospel among the Jews (ed.), The Jewish


Herald and Record of Christian Effort for the Spiritual Good of God's Ancient Peo-
ple, Vol. V, London: Aylott & Jones, August 1850;
https://books.google.com/books?id=ly8EAAAAQAAJ (reprinted in the Christian
Spectator of 1850, p. 496).
°5 Brigham Young, The Latter-Day Saints’ Millennial Star, Vol. 28, Liverpool/London
1866, p. 677; https://books.google.com/books?id=3m4tAAAAYAAJ.
http://query.nytimes.com/mem/archive-
free/pdf?res=9903E0D9 123BE63BBC4A52DFBF668382679FDE
http://query.nytimes.com/mem/archive-
free/pdf?res=9903E2D9 1F38E63BBC4950DFB6678382679FDE
“How Many Jews Are There?”; http://query.nytimes.com/mem/archive-
free/pdf?res=9D04E1D7153AE033A25753C1A9649C94689FD7CF
To avoid inflating the footnotes, search The New York Times for the articles quoted at
http://spiderbites.nytimes.com/ as well as
http://query.nytimes.com/search/sitesearch/#/*/.


26


27


28


18 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


year. Although the Czar’s government didn’t seem to have contributed
to them, they were accused of not doing enough to put a stop to them.”

The New York Times reported on those pogroms, for instance in a
long article on January 28, 1882 with the headline “Russian Jewish
Horrors. A Nine-Months Record of Rapine, Murder, and Outrage,”
which summarized the events of the prior nine months.

On April 22, 1882, in an article headlined “Russia and the Jews,” the
same newspaper even used a buzzword in connection with the Russian
pogroms: “annihilation.”

The next czar, Alexander III, was massively opposed to political re-
forms and wanted to turn the clock back, while the world around him
expected Russia to become more liberal. In particular, he had a bone to
pick with the Jews, as they were the ones pushing most ardently for lib-
eralization.

Hence, in May 1882, Czar Alexander III tightened residential and
professional limits for the Jews in Russia. Several towns and provinces
subsequently expelled their Jews, erroneously thinking that the czar had
issued a ukase expelling them from Russia altogether. As a result, Jews
started emigrating from Russia by the thousands.

The New York Times was reporting on this ongoing persecution of
the Jews in Russia, peaking in 1891 with numerous articles. The first
one appeared on January 26 under the headline “Russia’s Christianity,”
where it said: “Russia’s population of five million to six million Jews”
and elsewhere “about six million persecuted and miserable wretches.”

The New York Times’s reporting on Jews in Russia culminated in a
series of 15 articles by a certain Herold Frederic stretching from early
September to late December 1891;*° almost all of them were printed on
the front page. The first was titled, “Russia’s War on the Jews”, while
all the other subsequent 14 articles were titled “An Indictment of Rus-
sia.”

The second sequel of this series of September 12 gave as the total
number of Jews living in Russia again an estimate of 6,000,000:


“a total of six million is most nearly correct.”


This number was repeated in a New York Times article headlined "Rus-
sia and Religious Liberty" on March 15, 1896.

During the reign of Czar Alexander III, Russia wanted to get rid of
its Jews, but no country would accept them. With no place to go, Jewish


29 For details see John D. Klier, Russians, Jews, and the Pogroms of 1881-1882, Cam-
bridge University Press, 2011.

3° Unless stated otherwise, all on p. 1 of the New York Times of 1891: “Russia’s War on
the Jews’, Sept. 6; all “An Indictment of Russia”: Sept. 12 & 28; Oct. 5, 12,19 &
26; Nov. 2 (p. 5), 9, 16, 23, 30; Dec. 7, 14 & 21.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 19


lobby groups were looking for a way out. That was a situation which
would repeat itself some 50 years later in Germany, by the way.

In 1897, the German Jew Theodor Herzl published his now-famous
book Der Judenstaat (The Jewish State), which gave the Zionist move-
ment a tremendous boost. Jewish media and organizations increasingly
lobbied for the emigration of Jews to Palestine and for the resurrection
of Israel. For example, as The New York Times reported on June 11,
1900 during a “Zionists’ Mass Meeting”, in New York, Rabbi Stephen
Wise said:


“There are 6,000,000 living, bleeding, suffering arguments in favor of

Zionism”
Although Russia started implementing serious liberal reforms with the
succession of Czar Nicholas II to the throne in 1894, Russia wasn’t
coming to rest. On April 19-21, 1903, an anti-Jewish pogrom occurred
in the Russian town of Kishinev. On May 16, The New York Times re-
ported on the event under the headline “More Details of the Kishineff
Massacre.” Toward the end of this long article we read:

“We charge the Russian Government with responsibility for the Ki-

shineff massacre. We say it is steeped to the eye in the guilt of this holo-

caust”


There it is: a holocaust! But that’s not all. Further below in that article
we read:


“So long as a ‘civilized’ Government brands five million people as a
perilous pest which must be slowly annihilated, so long its baser sub-
jects will think themselves justified in accelerating the process of exter-
mination with knives, axes, and hatches.”


So, annihilation, extermination and a holocaust. It’s all there. The arti-
cle’s only deficit is that it missed the magical figure by a million.

In the same vein, The New York Times wrote on May 20 of that same
year under the headline “How This Country Should Regard Russia,”
and again with reference to the Kishineff massacre:


“This barbaric Holocaust...”


The spell was cast. A fashionable word had been minted at the dawn of
the 20th Century: The Holocaust.

On November 10, 1905, The New York Times used the buzzword
again in an article headlined “Begs President to Act.” The background
of this was the failed attempt to overthrow the czar. During that aborted
revolution, political radicals, mostly socialists and communists, failed to
do what they would succeed in doing 12 years later. As before, this at-
tempted revolution was again fueled by a disproportionate number of
Jewish radicals and with a lot of Jewish support even from abroad. The


20 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


New York Times, for instance, reported on this attempted putsch rather
favorably.

But when things went badly for the revolutionaries, retaliatory ex-
cesses against Jews were again on the rise, resulting in renewed accusa-
tion of a “holocaust” by the New York Times.

Three days later, on Nov. 13, we read in The New York Times on
page | under the headline “Carnegie Gives $10,000 for Russian Relief”
that “Jews” were being “exterminated,” and on page 4 of that issue,
where in an article headlined “Russian Church Denounced,” the Rus-
sian Orthodox Church is denounced for its alleged responsibility in
those pogroms, the Times uses the word “holocaust” again with refer-
ence to the Kishineff massacre. It is even claimed that the Russian
Church had “repeatedly declared that the Jew must be either converted
or exterminated.”

I won’t check here whether this accusation and similar ones are true.
We are only interested here in the history of the magical number, and
while we’re at it, if we stumble over similar buzzwords, Ill present
them here, too.

AS we approach the First World War, things are heating up, and Jew-
ish lobby groups are pushing for a Jewish homeland. In an article of the
New York Times from October 20, 1904 with the headline “Zangwill
Here to Aid Jewish Colony Scheme,” Jewish lobbyists are reportedly
pipe-dreaming about Britain handing over to the Jews some colony in
Africa. “England’s Offer of Land in South Africa,” says the subtitle, but
further below in that article we read that the promised land has shifted
to East Africa:


“Mr. Zangwill’s mission is to arouse interest in the proposed scheme to
colonize the Jews on a land that the British Government has offered to
set aside for them in British East Africa.”


But what we’re after can be found further below, the reason for Jews
trying to find some homeland: the suppressed “six million Jews in Rus-
sia.”

I mentioned before that the New York Times was supportive of the
aborted Russian revolution of 1905. An article from January 29, 1905
with the headline “End of Zionism, Maybe” proves the point. It was
written in the wake of civil unrest which eventually led to that failed
putsch. A “Jewish preacher” is quoted saying that “a free and a happy
Russia, with its six million Jews, would possibly mean the end of Zion-
ism.” In other words, if a revolution would liberate Russia, Jews would
get lucky and wouldn’t have to leave Russia.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 21


After the failed 1905 Revolution in Russia, the New York Times pub-
lished more reports on six million suffering Jews; here are some exam-
ples:

Reporting on the resignation of a top official of the Russian Ortho-
dox Church, we read on November 1, 1905 under the headline “Pobie-
donostzeff Resigns”:

“From 1890 to 1902 he caused six million Jews to be expelled from

Russia.”


Now, if that were so, there wouldn’t have been any Jews left in Russia
afterwards, but be that as it may, right now we’re only interested in
tracking that symbolic figure.
On March 25, 1906, we read in the newspaper of record in an article
headlined “Dr. Paul Nathan’s View of Russian Massacre”:
“Startling reports of the condition and future of Russias six million
Jews [indicate that...] the Russian Government's studied policy for the
‘solution’ of the Jewish question is systematic and murderous extermi-
nation.”


Does that rhetoric sound familiar?

Almost five years later, in an article from March 13, 1910 headlined
“Many Jews Flee from Russia,” we read in the same newspaper again
this magical number of Jews suffering in Russia. And again, on April
11, 1910 with the headline “Russian Jews Sad Plight,” it states that
these “six million souls” are subject to “the systematic, relentless, quiet
grinding down,” whatever that means.

In an article headlined “Churches in Plea to Czar for Justice” pub-
lished on October 31, 1911, the New York Times reports in the middle
column of that article on a resolution passed, where we read:


“The six million Jews of Russia are singled out for systematic oppres-
sion and for persecution by due process of law.”


My last pre-World-War-I example from the New York Times is from De-
cember 10, 1911. This is a huge full-page article by Herman Bernstein
carrying the headline “Condition of Jews in Russia Worst in History.”*!
It is dedicated to the oppressed Jews in Russia. The rightmost column
has the buzzwords we are looking for at the very bottom:


“The Russian Government, [...] has numerous other methods by which
it intensifies the oppression of the Jews, and by which it is making the
6,000,000 Jews a people economically exhausted-a people without any
rights at all.”


3! Herman Bernstein, “Condition of Jews in Russia Worst in Its History”, Magazine,
Part 6, p. SM8


22 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


The New York Times sure wasn’t the only media outlet propagating that
six million Jews were being persecuted and exterminated by Russia, but
it was the most prominent and prestigious source to do so. In a similar
vein, one of the most prestigious publication of American Jewry, the
American Jewish Year Book, wrote on page 308 of its edition covering
the years 1911-1912:


“The position of our [Jewish] co-religionists in Russia grows increas-
ingly deplorable [...].”
and further down:


“Russia has since 1890 adopted a deliberate plan to expel or extermi-

nate six millions of its people [...].”

Earlier in this introduction, I quoted several New York Times articles of
the years 1942 and 1943, because after having read this book, I would
like the reader to come back to these pages and read those articles
again. He will then be struck by the similarity of the theme. But he will
also notice a difference:

During World War Two, Zionist pressure groups found a very con-
venient propaganda target in National Socialist Germany, whose ex-
tremely anti-Jewish politics invited all sorts of credible accusations.

Before, during, and immediately after World War One, however, the
situation was more complex. As I have shown here and as Heddesheim-
er will explain in more detail, the major target for polemic attacks in the
years before World War One was czarist Russia due to its policies to-
ward Jews, which many Zionists portrayed as anti-Jewish.

After czarist Russia’s defeat was apparent in 1916/1917, Zionist
propaganda switched its target over to Germany (see pp. 58f. of this
book), whose ally, the Ottoman Empire (Turkey), needed to be defeated
to ‘liberate’ Palestine for Zionist plans (and of course in order to secure
billions of dollars lent to the British and French). Such propaganda ac-
cusations against Germany, however, ceased at war’s end, because
Germany, in those years, was quite willing and capable of opposing
such untrue propaganda.

After the end of World War One, when Zionist schemes about Pales-
tine were temporarily frustrated, but new hopes had arisen with the So-
viet experiment in Russia, no particular country was initially singled
out, even though there was a perfect target: Poland.

Between World War One and World War Two, Poland was a military
dictatorship that implemented a policy of ‘ethnic pressure,’ i.e., all non-
Polish minorities were subjected to discriminations and various degrees
of persecution with the intention to ‘convince’ them to emigrate (quite


32 American Jewish Year Book, Vol. 13 (1911-1912), American Jewish Committee,
New York 1912; www.ajcarchives.org/main.php?GroupingId=10044


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 23


similar to what Israel does today in Palestine against non-Jews). The
Jews in Poland were not exempt from this treatment. As a matter of fact,
Polish official as well as unofficial anti-Judaism was so massive that
many Polish Jews preferred living in Germany even during the Third
Reich until late 1938 rather than staying in their native country.

Hence, there was as much justification to massively attack Poland
for its rabid anti-Jewish attitude as there were reasons to attack Germa-
ny after Adolf Hitler rose to power there and step by step implemented a
policy increasingly comparable to that already in effect in Poland.

Although it can be shown that the New York Times accused Poland of
anti-Jewish persecution in many articles — whereas this newspaper was
basically silent about similar persecution suffered by Germans, Lithua-
nians, Ruthenians, Ukrainians, and Slovaks residing in Poland —
Heddesheimer does not focus on this aspect, because his book is not
about the suffering and persecution of Jews in eastern Europe, but about
propaganda and fundraising in New York. I therefore want to draw the
reader’s attention to a few examples of articles in the New York Times
addressing anti-Jewish persecution in Poland.

Already by 1919, a report about alleged anti-Jewish pogroms in Po-
land appeared in the New York Times, but with a very ironic connota-
tion, since the veracity of these reports was doubted:*


“Tt has been pointed out that some of these reports may have originated
with German propagandists or may have been exaggerated by them
with the obvious purpose of discrediting Poland with the Allies, in the
hope that Germany might be the gainer thereby. Germany might have
assisted in spreading these stories, may have invented them, although it
would be a cruel deception to wring the hearts of great multitudes of
people in order to gain such an end [...|”


False claims of Jewish suffering would be cruel indeed, and it sure is
nice to read it from the horse’s mouth. It is troubling, however, when
such claims are falsely attributed as in this case where the New York
Times apparently could not suppress its prejudice to potentially see the
‘evil German’ behind everything.

In some articles during the 1920s addressing the sufferings of Polish
Jewry, these hardships were interestingly depicted as a result of general
economic hardship in Poland after World War One rather than as a re-
sult of any specific anti-Jewish policies.** Others, in particular during
the 1930s when Polish policies became more repressive, reported anti-
Jewish persecutions, which triggered the public protest of Dr. Joseph


33 “Pogroms in Poland,” New York Times, May 23, 1919, p. 12.
4 E.g., “Jews of Poland again Face Period of Want”, New York Times Sunday Maga-
zine, May 28, 1926, p. 8.


24 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Tenenbaum, the chairman of the American Jewish Congress.*° This was,
however, also accompanied with some dramatically exaggerated claims
about the suffering of the Jews:*°


“The Jewish people all over the world face a war of extinction, Dr.
Tenenbaum declared in an address [...].”’


This was roughly one year before Hitler was elected chancellor of Ger-
many!

Even though Poland’s anti-minority policies in general and anti-
Jewish policies in particular, which started right at this country’s estab-
lishment in 1918/19, made it a perfect target for criticism, this aspect of
Polish history is today almost forgotten.

As we know today, the largest suffering of mankind between the two
world wars was happening in the Soviet Union, so one would expect
that the Zionist organizations would name the Red Terror as one main
reason for the claimed sufferings of Jews. But this didn’t happen until
later. The reason for that can be deduced from a few examples, shed-
ding a bright light onto how the New York Times viewed the situation of
Jews in the Soviet Union.

If we want to understand what was going on at that time, we need a
brief summary of those events. Since the communist putsch in late
1918, a brutal civil war was raging in Russia. The communist “Reds”
were opposed by the counter-revolutionary “Whites,” who were mostly
forces loyal to the monarchy.

Ethnic Jews, most of whom had been the most ardent enemies of the
czarist system for decades for understandable reasons, dominated the
leading ranks of the “Reds.” Consequently, anti-Jewish feelings among
the “Whites” and their supporters grew immensely.

The result of this was more anti-Jewish pogroms, but this time the
Jews were able to fight back. For example, in an article of September 8,
1919, the New York Times reported on page 6 under the headline
“Ukrainian Jews Aim to Stop Pogroms” about massacres against Jews
committed by anti-Semitic gangs and by the counter-revolutionary
units. According to that article, 127,000 Jews had already been killed in
pogroms, and all six million Jews were threatened to be next. Toward
the end, the article states:


“This fact that the population of six million souls in Ukrainia and in
Poland have received notice through action and by word that they are
going to be completely exterminated.”


35 “Tenenbaum Quits Polish Group Here. Charges Anti-Semitic Policy Abroad in Re-


signing as Head of Good-Will Committee,” New York Times, Nov. 20, 1931, p. 26.
36 “Racial Bias Viewed as Threat to Peace,” New York Times, Feb. 22, 1932, p. 20.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 25


On Dec 20, 1922, the New York Times reported with pride in an article
titled “South Russian Jews Raise Strong Army” how Jews had formed
their own militia of 500,000 soldiers in the young Soviet Union to fight
against anti-Jewish gangs and counter-revolutionary insurgents in order
to protect “the lives and interests of five million of their race living in
Russia.” At that time, when the Soviets had won the civil war, such a
militia army was possible only with the Soviet government’s support or
at least tacit condoning.

There is another, 22-minute-long video on YouTube titled Six Mil-
lion Jews 1915-1938 at the address given here which I can highly rec-
ommend.*’ It shows a number of original newspapers of that time peri-
od and briefly highlights similar buzzwords as we are tracking here.

The disturbing question that this raises is: were Jewish groups in the
U.S. supporting the Communist Revolution? Fact is that by 1921, Jew-
ish pressure groups in the U.S. feared a collapse of communist Russia,
as they expected this to lead to a gargantuan pogrom against the Jews in
Russia.

A New York Times article of July 20, 1921 on page 2 titled “Begs
America Save 6,000,000 in Russia” gets that point across already in the
subtitle, which states that massacres are threatened, should the power of
the Soviet regime wane. We read there:

“Russias six million Jews are facing extermination by massacre. As the

famine is spreading, the counter-revolutionary movement is gaining and

the Soviets control is waning.”


The fundraising campaigns by Jewish lobby groups in the U.S. were
therefore focused not only on helping destitute Jews, but also on pres-
suring the U.S. government to intervene. One might also wonder where
the Jews in Russia got the means to organize and arm an army of
500,000 soldiers...

Interestingly, this article was copied from the Chicago Daily Trib-
une, which, however, printed this article on the same date with a mis-
leading headline “Jews in Russia Flee in Terror from Red Rebels,”** try-
ing to imply that the Jews were fleeing from the communists, although
the article states clearly that they only feared a defeat of the Reds during
that revolutionary war.

In other words: Considering the terror inflicted upon the civil popu-
lation of the early Soviet Union in general and the Ukraine in particular
by armed and unarmed units of the Soviet authorities, it must be as-
sumed that this Jewish militia army was one important factor causing


37 https://youtu.be/Dda-OQ_XUhk.
38 “Jews in Russia Flee in Terror from red Rebels”, Chicago Tribune, July 20, 1921, p.
3; http://archives.chicagotribune.com/1921/07/20/page/3/.


26 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


terror rather than defending against it. And the New York Times depicted
this essential part of the Red Terror as heroic, justified Jewish self-
defense. This attitude can be understood if one keeps in mind that many
Zionist Jews looked upon the new Soviet Union as a Jewish dominated
and controlled experiment of a Jewish-led country free of anti-
Judaism.*?

Another aspect of the story is to trace the money raised by those
fund-raising campaigns. In Chapter Five, Heddesheimer addresses this
question. The literature quoted by him shows that Jewish organizations
were indeed using some of the money to assist the Jewish populace in
Poland. But on the ugly side, as Heddesheimer hints at in his fifth chap-
ter, it also served as a fund-raising drive to support various aspects of
the Jewish-dominated communist revolution in Russia, or in other
words: to wittingly or unwittingly finance the Jewish-Soviet holocaust
against Christians in Russia, the Ukraine, and all the other states within
the Soviet Union.

In contrast to that, the second large-scale Zionist fund- and support-
raising campaign during World War Two was pointed at the creation of
Israel, and this propaganda has never ceased in the decades since. First
of all because Israel has a continuous need for massive support, whereas
the Soviet Union did not get any more such support after it became ba-
sically de-Judaized under Stalin, and secondly because Germany col-
lapsed totally after the war and has never been allowed to defend itself
against Zionist propaganda claims; quite to the contrary: it is punishable
by law in Germany and many other European countries to challenge
those claims.

In his last chapter, Heddesheimer briefly investigates whether or not
the claims of extraordinary Jewish sufferings made by Zionist pressure
groups during the late 1910s and the 1920s were based on facts. Did
Jews in Central and Eastern Europe suffer more than the average popu-
lace in those countries, which had collapsed after World War One? Was
there indeed a holocaust looming or going on in the years between 1915
and 1927? Using contemporary Jewish population statistics, Heddes-
heimer briefly points out that the worldwide Jewish population was
growing much faster during and shortly after World War One than the


39 There some interesting German literature on this, none of which was ever published
in an English translation: Sonja Margolina, Das Ende der Liigen, Berlin: Siedler,
1992; Johannes Rogalla von Bieberstein, Jiidischer Bolschewismus: Mythos und Re-
alitdt, Dresden: Edition Antaios, 2002; Alexander Solschenizyn, Zweihundert Jahre
zusammen. Die russisch-jiidische Geschichte 1795-1916, Munich: Herbig, 2003;
Nikita Petrov, “Veraénderungstendenzen im Kaderbestand der Organe der sowjeti-
schen Staatssicherheit in der Stalin-Zeit”, Forum fiir osteuropdische Ideen- und Zeit-
geschichte, 5(2) (2001).


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST PAL


other religious and/or ethnic groups who lived in the same countries.
That should suffice to answer the above questions.

One might also easily conclude that if those first holocaust claims
were true, it would dominate our history books as the First Holocaust.
But since it cannot be found there, we can rightly assume that this prop-
aganda was untrue.

To close this section, I would like to briefly mention the causes of al-
leged Jewish suffering in both holocaust propaganda claims. Whereas
simple poverty is mainly claimed to have been the reason for the (in-
vented) First Holocaust, mass murder by gas chambers and executions
are supposed to have been the means during the Second, the ‘real,’ Hol-
ocaust.

Even though gas-chamber claims were not part of the propaganda
pattern of the 1910s and 1920s, there is one known exception, which
was published by the London Daily Telegraph on March 22, 1916, p. 7:


“ATROCITIES IN SERBIA
700,000 VICTIMS
FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT
ROME, Monday (6:45 p. m.).

The Governments of the Allies have secured evidence and documents,

which will shortly be published, proving that Austria and Bulgaria have

been guilty of horrible crimes in Serbia, where the massacres committed
were worse than those perpetrated by Turkey in Armenia.

[...] Women, children, and old men were shut up in the churches by the

Austrians and either stabbed with the bayonet or suffocated by means of

asphyxiating gas. In one church in Belgrade 3,000 women, children,

and old men were thus suffocated. [...|”’
Of course, today no historian claims that the Austrians or any of their
allies ever committed mass murder with poison gas in Serbia during
World War One. This was nothing but black propaganda issued by the
British government and eagerly disseminated by the British media.

But juxtapose this with an article that appeared in the same London
Daily Telegraph on June 25, 1942, p. 5, that is, five days before the
Jewish-owned and -controlled New York Times reported on the alleged
mass murder of Jews in German-controlled Europe for the first time:


“GERMANS MURDER 700,000
JEWS IN POLAND
TRAVELLING GAS CHAMBERS
DAILY TELEGRAPH REPORTER
More than 700,000 Polish Jews have been slaughtered by the Germans
in the greatest massacre in world history. [...]”


28 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Now, this time this news report was the whole and unembellished, in-
dubitable truth! And you better believe it, because doubting this can get
you prison terms of up to 10 years in Austria, 5 years in Germany, Rus-
sia and Israel, three years in Italy, Switzerland, Poland and Hungary,
and lower prison terms in many more countries...*° This is actually the
only claimed event in the history of mankind that has ever been protect-
ed from critical investigation by penal law! But that ss not the subject of
this book.

Fact is that with Germany’s collapse in 1945, the nightmarish gas
chambers used to kill most of the six million Jews who fell victim to the
Holocaust, that is to say, the Nazi’s solution to the Jewish question by
means of murderous extermination — note that any resemblance of the
terms used here with those used during past events is purely coinci-
dental — these gas chambers were a matter of the past, gone for good.
Done!

If you believe that, you are wrong again! Let me bring up only two
examples from a war that took place almost 50 years after the second
holocaust propaganda started, in 1991. It is about America’s first war
against Iraq to drive Iraqi forces out of Kuwait. The New York-based
Jewish Press, then calling itself “The largest independent Anglo-Jewish
weekly newspaper,” wrote on its front page on February 21, 1991:


“IRAQIS HAVE GAS CHAMBERS FOR ALL JEWS”


Or take the front-cover announcement of volume 12, number 1 (spring
1991), of Response, a periodical published by the Jewish Simon Wie-
senthal Center in Los Angeles and distributed in 381,065 copies:


“GERMANS PRODUCE ZYKLON B IN IRAQ
(Iraq’s German-made gas chamber)”


If you do not believe it, turn to the Appendix, pp. 180f., for reproduc-
tions of the documents mentioned above.

I hope that you get the idea of this book: 1900, 1916, 1926, 1936,
1942, 1991...

In 1991, it was all invented, for sure, as were the later claims prior to
America’s second war against Iraq in 2003 that Iraq possessed or was
about to possess weapons of mass destruction — Zyklon B not being
mentioned here, though. But as Israel’s renowned newspaper Ha ‘aretz
proudly proclaimed:*!


40 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laws_against_Holocaust_denial

41 Ari Shavit, “White man’s burden,” Ha’aretz, April 7, 2003;
www.haaretz.com/1.4764706; see also Stephen J. Sniegoski, “War on Iraq: Con-
ceived in Israel,” The Revisionist, 1(3) (2003), pp. 285-298


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 29


“The war in Iraq was conceived by 25 neoconservative intellectuals,
most of them Jewish, who are pushing President Bush to change the
course of history.”


Because, as we all know, the Jews in Israel deserve preventive protec-
tion from annihilation by weapons of mass destruction — Zyklon B or
not, invented or not...

So maybe not quite all claims referring to events between 1941 and
1945 are completely true? Maybe there is a chance after all that things
were twisted, distorted, exaggerated, invented? Maybe...

If the reader has by now opened his mind to that possibility, I can
only invite him to read about the arguments of those who do indeed
claim that many things about the ‘Holocaust’ were twisted, distorted,
exaggerated, and invented. If Heddesheimer’s book is an eye-opener to
you, which I think it will be, then I can only invite you to read even
more-tantalizing revelations, about which you can learn in the back of
this book.

I think that Don Heddesheimer’s book is a very important contribu-
tion to our understanding of the origins of modern-day Jewish Holo-
caust claims. These claims are neither primarily Anglo-Saxon nor Sovi-
et-Communist in origin. The victorious nations of World War Two sure-
ly seized upon the opportunity to take advantage of such propaganda
and to increase its scope and impact. But the original propaganda claims
are Jewish-Zionist in nature and part of a propaganda pattern that start-
ed at the very dawn of the 20" century. And they have increased in in-
tensity ever since due to their political success and the lack of re-
sistance.

This book ought to remind us also of the simple fact that the truth is
always the first casualty of every war. It is surprising that so many peo-
ple overlook this, when it comes to the most destructive war ever
fought, during and even more so after which the truth was raped and
murdered more often than ever before or after in the history of man-
kind: World War Two. Isn’t it therefore likely that we were and are be-
ing told many more lies about this particular war than about all those
other wars, where we all know that our government lied: World War
One, Korea, Vietnam, and the wars against Iraq?

Let me close this introduction by quoting without further comment


from Jonathan Goldberg’s Jewish Power:


“Nothing illustrated the Jews’ new status more clearly than the Senate
response to the Romanian pogroms in 1870. The first news reports to
reach the United States indicated that ‘thousands’ had been killed in ri-
ots in late May. Protest rallies were held in Indianapolis, Louisville,


42 Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley 1996, pp. 98f.


30 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


and a half-dozen other cities. After some furious lobbying by Simon
Wolf, the matter was brought to the Senate floor by Senator Oliver Mor-
ton of Indiana.

Morton read a statement from the Indianapolis Jewish rally and asked
for action by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. The committee
chairman, Massachusetts GOP leader Charles Sumner, delicately told
the chamber he was ‘disposed to believe that there is at least some
gross exaggeration in the report’ of mass murder. In reply, Senator
Morton assured his colleagues that his statement had come from ‘gen-
tlemen of the highest respectability and position, and they represent a
very large and numerous class of people in Indianapolis and in Indi-
ana.’ That was enough it seems; the Senate ordered the Foreign Rela-
tions Committee to take up the matter with the State Department.
(Sumner turned out to be correct. The riots’ death toll had been zero.)”


The Six-Million Figure in the Media


In the last part of my introduction, I will approach our topic in a broad-
er, more general way. For this purpose, I have tapped into three data-
bases which can be accessed online. First we have the Library of Con-
gress Search Engine of Historic American Newspapers, which features
digitized U.S. newspapers from 1836 to 1922.*7 I have searched it for
the terms “six million Jews,” both written out and as a number. In the
first case, I have found 71 results and in the second 198

Curious as I was, I also searched the database for seven, five, four,
three, two and one million. The results are given in parentheses:

— 71 results with “six million Jews”
(7: 49; 5: 87; 4: 58; 3: 123; 2: 103; 1: 100)
— 198 results with “6,000,000 Jews”

(7: 149; 5: 273; 4: 198; 3: 260; 2: 205; 1: 425)
So there is no particular preponderance for six million. However, when
looking up the actual newspaper articles, it turns out that only the en-
tries of seven, six and five million are predominantly about claims of
suffering Jews or Jews in danger of being exterminated, with a focus on
five and six million. Lower figures are usually about some mundane is-
sue, like how many Jews live in New York or in the U.S. or some other
country, for instance.

I have done the same kind of search on the New York Times database
at the address given, and for editions spanning from 1851 to 1939.4


43 http://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/
44 http://query.nytimes.com/search/sitesearch/#/*/


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 31


This results in only four entries for “six million Jews” with the number
written out, and sixteen entries with the actual number. Results for other
round million figures are again listed in parentheses, where the same
observation applies as mentioned before-.:
— 4 results with “six million Jews”
(7: 2; 5: 7; 4: 3: 9; 2: 2; 1: 4)
— 16 results with “6,000,000 Jews”
(7: 7; 5: 26; 4: 12; 3: 45; 2: 27; 1: 37)
I’ve also searched the database of the Chicago Tribune,* but the results
there are rather meagre. After all, The New York Times was owned and
run by Jews, whereas the Chicago Tribune was not. This may account
for the difference, although the Chicago Daily Tribune, as it was called
back then, was not immune to the six-million propaganda either, as an
article on page 19 of the Chicago Daily Tribune of October 22, 1919
shows, where we read under the headline “‘Wistful Faces Turn to You
from Far East,’ Is Jewish Plea Here”:


“More than six million Jews are suffering as a people never suffered be-
fore.”


Now, if you think I have presented a lot of material published prior to
the end of the Second World War which refers to six million suffering
and dying Jews, think again, because there is more.

The most comprehensive list of articles, books and speech excerpts
spanning from the years 1900 to the end of World War Two which I
have seen so far had some 278 entries in 2016.“ It used to be freely ac-
cessible at the web address given, but now you need to register with the
owner. But I have copied the list, which is reproduced in the appendix
of my epilogue to this book.

However, if you are trying to convince a skeptic, this list might not
do the trick, because anyone can make up such a list. In that case you
would have to present not just the source information, but reproductions
of the actual newspaper articles. Fortunately, that has been done by a
very diligent researcher as well. It has been published as an eBook with
the title Six Million Open Gates. It can be downloaded free of charge at
the address given.*’ This book contains reproductions of 240 media
items between 1900 and late 1945. The author of this book has gone to
great lengths and huge expense to put this work together. Hence, in case
you need to see the actual article to believe it, just grab an electronic
copy of that book. And make no mistake: this list is still not complete!


45 http://archives.chicagotribune.com/

46 http://winstonsmithministryoftruth.blogspot.com/2012/02/145-references-to-
6000000-jews-prior-to.html or http://goo.gl/h8auqj

47 https://ia800308.us.archive.org/28/items/sixsixsix/book.pdf or https://goo.gl/zJDjsi


32 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


0.0000030%

0.0000020%

0,0000010%

pauaet 1880 1900 1920 1940

TOOUOTTON

0.0000100%

0,0000090%

0,0000070%

o.0000060%

0,0000050%

0,0000040%

0,0000030%

0,0000020%

0,0000010%

00000005 aee0 1360 1580 2000
Chart 1: Frequency of the phrase “six million Jews” in the Google

Books project.


Last but not least we will take a more scientific, statistical approach
to the matter at hand. The world’s largest internet search engine Google
has posted millions of books online. This database can be used to find
out how often a certain term occurs in books associated with a certain
date, usually the date of publication.*®

The first chart shows the results for the term “six million Jews.” I
have also done the same search for the same term in the second-most-
common media language, which is German. The results for “6 Millio-
nen Juden” are shown in the second chart.

The tendency in both languages is similar, but the peaks are more
pronounced in the German, maybe because there is less data. Anyway,
we see a first rise of that figure with ongoing pogroms in Russia under
Czar Alexander II, then a steep rise starting just prior to the First World
War, with a peak during the fundraising campaign of the early 1920s,


48 https://books.google.com/ngrams/


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 33


0.00000350%
0.00000300%
0.00000250%
0.00000200%
0.00000150%
0.00000100%


6 Millionen Juden


0.00000050%
0.00000000%


1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940


0.00000650%
0.00000600%
0.00000550%
0.00000500%
0.00000450%
0.00000400%
0.00000350%
0.00000300%
0.00000250%
0.00000200%
0.00000150%
0.00000100%


6 Millionen Juden


0.00000050%
0.00000000%


1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000


Chart 2: Frequency of the phrase “6 Millionen Juden” in the Google
Books project.


and another, less pronounced one during the campaign’s second phase
in the mid and late 1920s.

Next we have a slight rise during the early years of Nazi Germany, a
further slow rise during the first years of the Second World War, with an
extreme rise after the outbreak of the German-Soviet war in mid-1941.

The curve hits a maximum in the mid and late 1940s around the Nu-
remberg Tribunals and its legal and media aftermaths. Then we have
another sharp peak around the 1961 Eichmann trial in Jerusalem, with a
slight decrease in the Anglophone world, but a more pronounced one in
the German media sphere, probably because the Germans weren’t quite
in tune with the new zeitgeist yet.

The last rise of the curve indicates that “six million” has turned into
a household term, but the later decrease is probably merely due to new-


34 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


er books being underrepresented in Google’s database due to copyright
protection issues.


Summary


The term “six million Jews” is found in Anglophone media reports ever
since the world’s Jewish population had reached roughly six million in
the mid-eighteen-hundreds.

The anti-Jewish pogroms and legal measures in Russia after the as-
sassination of Czar Alexander II in 1881 made “six million Jews” a
buzzword. Terms like “extermination” and “holocaust” made their first
appearance in this context at the dawn of the 20th century.

During the abortive Communist revolution of 1905, these words
were even used together with an alleged “solution of the Jewish ques-
tion” as a policy of “murderous extermination.”

The First World War with its subsequent Russian/Communist Revo-
lution, which was very popular among many Jews both in Russia and
abroad, resulted in further hardship for the Jews in Russia. This in turn
led to a steep increase in the use of these buzzwords.

Fundraising campaigns in the U.S. for Jews in Eastern Europe kept
those terms in the media during the early and mid-1920s.

The rise of National Socialism in Germany steadily reinvigorated the
use of these terms from the very beginning of the Third Reich.

We conclude, therefore, that we have heard since the eighteen-
eighties that “six million Jews” have been threatened more or less con-
tinuously with extermination in a holocaust.

So what? You may ask. What is that supposed to prove, if anything?
Well, here are some tough questions:

— In 1882, was there a “struggle for the annihilation of the Jews’’?

— In 1903, did the Russian government decide that Jews “must be an-
nihilated,” so that they underwent a “process of extermination” in
“this barbaric holocaust”?

— In 1905, was there a “holocaust” in which “Jews must be ... exter-
minated?”

— In 1906, was “the Russian Government’s policy” to solve “the Jew-
ish question” by way of “murderous extermination’’?

—In 1911, had “Russia ... adopted” a “plan to ... exterminate six mil-
lion” Jews?

—In 1915, was there a “Russian campaign of extermination” against
the Jews?


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 35


—In 1919, were “six million” Jews “dying... in this threatened holo-
caust?” Were “6,000,000 [Jewish] souls... going to be completely
exterminated”?

— In 1920, was it necessary “to save six million [Jews] from extermi-
nation”?

—In 1921, were “Russia’s 6,000,000 Jews... facing extermination by
massacre”?

— In 1926, was the “whole [Jewish] people... dying”?

To ask these questions in such a condensed form means to answer them,
because what we are dealing with here was exaggeration and hyperbole.

Fact is that prior to the Communist Revolution, holocaust and ex-
termination claims were exaggerations used to lobby for

— facilitation of Jewish immigration to the U.S. and to other countries,

— creation of a Jewish national homeland,

— and “regime change” in Russia.

Once that “regime change” had been accomplished in Russia at the end
of World War One, holocaust and extermination claims didn’t cease but
rather continued. This time these exaggerations were used

— to raise funds meant to assist Jewish communities in Eastern Europe,

— to defeat the czarist counter-revolution and thus,

— to effectively stabilize the fledgling Communist regime in Russia.
The advent of the Third Reich led to the repetition of some of these pat-
terns: holocaust and extermination claims were exaggerated at least un-
til the outbreak of the German-Soviet war, which was by its very nature
a counter-revolutionary war. These exaggerations were again used to
lobby for

— facilitation of Jewish immigration to the U.S. and to other countries,

— creation of a Jewish national homeland in Palestine,

— and finally “regime change” in Germany.

We all know the outcome of that struggle.


At the end of this introduction, let me pose that initial question again:
Since when do we know that Six Million Jews died in the Holocaust?
To answer this question, we need to know two things:

1. Which Six Million are we talking about?

2. Which Holocaust?


Turn the page for the latest but probably not last six-million propaganda
news...


36 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


THE TIMES OF ISRAEL Netanyahu tells Putin: Iran wants to carry out another Holocaust


Netanyahu tells Putin: Iran
wants to carry out another
Holocaust


In Moscow to meet Russian leader, prime minister says regional crisis
must be solved ‘in a prudent and responsible manner’


By STUART WINER v @ ry) oO 1 850
9 May 2018, 6:20pm | M2 shares


neets with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu at the Kremlin in Moscow


Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu told Russian President Vladimir Putin
on Wednesday that Iran is seeking to commit another Holocaust by
exterminating six million more Jews amid spiraling tensions between
Jerusalem and Tehran.


Ahead of talks Wednesday in Moscow, Netanyahu urged that the Middle
Eastern regional crisis be resolved in “a responsible manner.”


Stuart Winer, “Netanyahu tells Putin: Iran wants to carry out another
Holocaust”, The Times of Israel, May 9, 2018


www.timesofisrael.com/netanyahu-tells-putin-iran-wants-to-carry-out-
another-holocaust/


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 37


Chapter 1:
Activities Prior to World War One


The golden age of newspapers has come and gone. Before the influence
of computers, before television, before radio, political leaders would lit-
erally act based on what was written in the newspapers. Their stories
and their editorial viewpoints were taken much more seriously than they
are today. If it was a less cynical, more innocent time, it was also a time
of more influential newspapers. Just one example, some historians
blame the Hearst Newspapers for starting the Spanish American War in
1898. Newspapers, while still important today, were the premier opin-
ion molders in the latter part of the nineteenth through the first half of
the twentieth century.

Three New York Times editorials published in 1880 about Germans
and Jews were quite forward looking and are a good place to start: An
editorial from February 1880 said:”


“The war, which has for some time raged in Germany between the na-
tives and the Jews, seems rather to increase than diminish in intensity. It
is something more than a popular prejudice, it is a national passion and
the ablest, most dignified, and most learned men have ranged them-
selves on either side. To us here it seems very strange that such a con-
test of races can be going on in a land of so much intelligence and intel-
lectual pretension, and in the year 1880, too. The crime of the Jews ap-
pears to be comprehended chiefly in their financial prosperity. No sin is
as great as success in the eyes of the non-successful. The charge is
made that of the 600,000 Israelites in the empire, hardly any engage in
agricultural or mercantile pursuits; but that they control trade, rule the
money markets, and are eating up the country with their avarice and
usury. They are not materially different from the rest of the human fami-
ly. [...] Jf the Jews in Germany were poor, they would not be attacked.
But they are, many of them, very rich, and that is their offense.”


Two more articles from 1880 written along this same theme are reprint-
ed below:*”


49 New York Times, Editorial, February 27, 1880.
50 Tbid., December 9, 1880.


38


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


“THE [New York] TIMES has referred more than once to the injustice
and impolicy of the prejudice, amounting to little less than persecution,
in Germany against the Jews. There are not many more than 500,000
Jews in the whole empire, but they abound in Prussia, and have excited
the animosity of the mass of the inhabitants, not only by their wealth,
but by their intellectual power and moral influence, as well as by the
prominent positions many of them occupy. The common people who are,
as a rule, always unsuccessful, and therefore disappointed and discon-
tented, complain that the Jews escape military duty and most of the
penalties of citizenship, and yet enjoy, beyond all proportion, its emol-
uments and compensation. They probably do not get anything they have
not earned, and the outcry against them is part of the ineradicable prej-
udice which the non-prosperous have always felt, and will always feel,
against the prosperous. In no country of Europe have the Jews been so
active and conspicuous in promoting the cause of humanity and the
progress of civilization as they have in Germany. The greater part of the
Professors of the universities there have been, and still are, Jews, it is
said; many of the oldest authors, journalists, composers, artists, philos-
ophers, scholars, savants have been, and continue to be, either that gift-
ed, much-persecuted race or its descendants. NEANDER was of Jewish
extraction: so was GANS: and the same may be said of BERNARY,
WEIL, BENFEY, STAHL, DERNBERG, VALENTIN, LAZARUS, HERZ,
and a score of others. The Jews themselves are very naturally indignant
at the war making on them, and say, with reason, that they have done as
much as any Christians for the intellectual, moral, and financial devel-
opment of Germany, and that the persecution to which they are exposed
is a shameful contradiction of the avowedly tolerant and liberal spirit of
the latter half of the nineteenth century. As representatives of literature,
music, and the theater they point with pride to HEINRICH HEINE,
BOERNE, ENSE, BERTHOLD AUERBACH, HENRIK HERTZ, JULES
JANIN, MENDELSSOHN, HALEVY, MEYER-BEER, MOSCHELES,
JOACHIM, ERNST, RUBINSTEIN, GRISI, GIUGLINI, CZILLAC,
RACHEL, ROTT, DESSOIR. If the German Jews had merely amassed
money and become the great capitalists and bankers that they are, the
present crusade against them would be less strange than it is when it is
remembered how eminent they have become in all of the departments of
thought and learning. LEOPOLD ZUNZ spoke truth when he said: ‘If
there is a gradation in sufferings, Israel has reached the highest acme.
If the long duration of sufferings, and the patience with which they are
bourne, ennobles, the Jews defy the high-born of all countries. If a lit-
erature is called rich which contains a few classical dramas, what place
does a tragedy deserve that lasts 1,500 years, and that is composed and
enacted by the heroes themselves.”’


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 39


And ten days earlier:*!


“The persecution or the Jews in Prussia, led by the County Chaplain,
STOCKER, and Prof. TREITSCHKE, presents this novel phase, that the
JEWS are by no means inclined toward the Christian doctrine of offer-
ing the other cheek to be slapped after the first side has received the
blow. If the London Times’ correspondent is to be credited, a Jewish
volunteer lately shot his Lieutenant for some insult, a Jewish traveler in
a public conveyance caned a Professor of a gymnasium, a Jewish stu-
dent in Gottingen killed a Christian fellow student in a duel, and a Jew-
ish merchant in open Change boxed a Christian trader’ ears. The
[London] Times distinctly states that all these unfortunate incidents
were ‘preceded by some violent act by the Christian antagonist.’ This
only shows that there is much more fight in the German Jew than was
expected, and we suppose that his coreligionists on this side of the wa-
ter are rather pleased that he should show his combativeness. As to pos-
sessing personal courage, it is very stupid to suppose from his anteced-
ents that the Jews are not as brave as any other race. During our own
civil strife there were a great many Jews in arms on both sides, and
more than once their gallantry was commented upon. In some recent
Indian skirmishes the services of a Jew, who was a volunteer, were es-
pecially extolled by his commanding officer for coolness and gallantry.
There have been occasionally, in our regular service, Jews who were
fire-eaters of the most eccentric character. Capt. LEVY, of the United
States Navy, was of this kind , and was so keen to bring a fellow-mortal
on the field of honor that he never was so supremely happy as when he
had an affair with pistols at 10 paces. In the English Navy some very
brave and cool work has been done by Jewish officers. Of course, going
down to brute pluck and the lowest animal instincts, the annals of the
prize ring show a great many able Jewish pugilists, who, 40 years ago,
for punching anybody’ head, or taking any amount of punishment
themselves, were quite the compeers of the most illustrious Christian
boxers of Corinthian times. It is quite a mistake, then, to imagine that
the Jew will not fight. He may not resort with his fist or a stick, except
under positive aggression, but if he thinks he is right he is quite as hot
blooded as an individual of another race. If, then, in Prussia the Jew
has been made a soldier, and has withstood charges of French cavalry,
or crossed bayonets with Zouaves, he has acquired some confidence in
his own physical strength, and, above all, has been taught some little
punctiliousness in regard to his own honor. To descend to fisticuffs will
not, of course, settle the question, but an occasional set-to in good Eng-
lish style, and a show of personal pluckiness on the part of the Jews in
Germany, can do them no harm.”


5! Ibid., November 29, 1880, p. 4.


40 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Probably the most surprising invariable in all of the nineteenth century
articles I found was that they were written from the same point of view
that is printed in the newspapers of today. Here’s another article from
the 1880s interviewing a representative of the American Hebrew, giving
another glimpse into the situation of Jews in Imperial Germany:*”


”’The Jews are foremost among the best citizens of Germany. They are
not only making great strides in the intellectual pursuits, but more and
more they are advancing from what may be called the lower grades of
industry and trade to the higher and more respectable. In the legal pro-
fession they are entering in vast numbers; in fact, they are more than
proportionately represented at the Bar. They take high rank among their
legal colleagues for ability and integrity. They meet no obstacles in as-
piring to the highest positions which the profession offers, except it be
that the Government uses caution so as not to place too many Jewish
Judges in any particular district in order to obviate the prejudice and ill
feeling which jealousy would thus excite. So, too, their influence is be-
ing felt in the medical profession, and in the field of science their posi-
tion is prominent. At the universities they figure prominently and in
great numbers in the professorial chairs. At the Universities there is a
great deal of feeling against the Jews. While no doubt there are many
Jews employed on the German press occupying prominent positions in
the editorial staffs of leading journals, yet their numbers and influence
have been much overrated. They certainly do not control the press to as
large an extent as in Austria.”


In 1887, The New York Times reported that London Jews earned an av-
erage of at least 82 pounds per person while the Gentile average was 35
pounds, i.e., that the Jews were 2% times richer than the native popula-
tion. It also estimated that Jewish men in London were twenty times as
likely to earn more than 10,000 pounds a year, were seventeen times as
likely to earn more than a thousand pounds a year, and were more than
six times as likely to earn more than 500 pounds a year than the general
population in the United Kingdom.™

There were then remarkable extremes of both poverty and wealth
among the Jews of London. The Jews took care of their own poor, and
there were no Jewish persons dependent on taxes or non-Jewish charity
for support. But every third Jew in London was actually in receipt of
poor relief, every second Jew belonged to a pauper class, and every
second Jewish funeral was a pauper’s funeral according to the report of
the Jewish Board of Guardians of 1886.~*


52 “Herr Lasker on German Jews”, New York Times, August 26, 1883.
53 “Jews and Gentiles in London’, New York Times, June 20, 1887.
4 “Jewish Poverty and Wealth”, New York Times, May 30, 1887.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 41


Charity has a long tradition in Jewish society. Many believe that the
great Old Testament prophets made clear the direct connection between
economic oppression and want. To their minds, destitution was funda-
mentally a consequence of social and economic exploitation. The
sources of want they traced to undue advantage taken by the strong over
the weak. Public relief grew up around the synagogues. In ancient times
there was a room in the Temple itself where the pious, unobserved, left
donations for the respectable poor. Even in ancient times synagogues
were also used as places of shelter and sustenance for wayfarers.* Per-
haps stated more politically, Theodor Herzl, the father of Zionism,
said:°°


“In old fashioned times Jewish charity in various localities was institut-
ed largely to relieve the needs of those traveling from other localities
who had been rendered paupers by persecution, and the motive-spring
was, to a considerable extent, the uncertainty as to how soon the charity
care giver of today might become the beggar of tomorrow.”


There was a kinship of misfortune; if not actual, then prospective. Ger-
man Jews maintained thousands of their own welfare agencies even af-
ter the enactment of social legislation in the 1880s.*’


55 Ephraim Frisch, An Historical Survey of Jewish Philanthropy, New York: Macmillan
and Company, 1924. Beginning on page 62 this book lists “The Eight Degrees of
Charity” from Maimonides, “Portions of the Poor,” Chapter 10, Paragraph 7-14
from highest to lowest:

1. The highest degree of charity was one who takes hold of an Israelite who has
become impoverished and gives him a gift or a loan or goes into partnership
with him or finds work for him so that he does not need to ask for help.

2. The second highest class of charitable giving was giving charity to the poor
without the poor knowing from whom he takes, such as giving to a public chari-
ty fund run by a trustworthy, wise person who knows how to manage it proper-
ly.

3. Continuing in descending order from most worthy to least worthy. Giving char-
ity to the poor where you know the recipient but he does not know you such as
distinguished wise men who go secretly and leave money at the doors of the
poor.

4. Giving where the poor man knows who the giver is but the giver does not know
who got his money.

5. Giving without being asked.

6. Giving after being asked.

7. Giving less than is proper but in a pleasant manner.

8. The least worthy charitable gift is one who gives reluctantly.

Reading through this list one can’t help but surmise how such a belief system could
be useful to fundraisers who were leaders in the Jewish community.

56 Theodor Herzl, The Tragedy of Jewish Immigration, New York: Zionist Organization
of America, 1920, p. 9.

57 Ron Chernow, The Warburgs — The Twentieth Century Odyssey of a Remarkable
Jewish Family, New York: Random House, 1993, p. 43.


42 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


The Alliance Israelite Universelle was formed in Paris, France. The
Anglo-Jewish Association of London was established in 1871 and oper-
ated in collaboration with the Board of Deputies of British Jews and
worked mostly in what is now called the Middle East. The /sraelitische
Allianz zu Wien, headquartered in Vienna, operated largely in the Aus-
trian province of Galicia, which is today a part of Ukraine. The
Hilfsverein der deutschen Juden in Berlin was founded in 1901 and was
mostly concerned with the problems of migrants in transit through
Germany. In 1891, Baron de Hirsch created the Jewish Colonization As-
sociation, which eventually received 40 million dollars of his money to
help Jews in eastern Europe and encourage them to leave eastern Eu-
rope for America.** In the nineteenth century, European philanthropic
organizations, such as the Baron de Hirsch Fund and the Alliance Isra-
elite, provided aid for Jewish immigrants in the United States. New
York City was described as having more poor Jews than any city in Eu-
rope.

Most of the early Jewish immigrants to America were of German
heritage. While many distinguished themselves as businessmen and
traders, there were also some political leaders. The first Jewish Gover-
nor was probably Michael Hahn of Louisiana who was elected in Feb-
ruary of 1864 and resigned in 1865 to become a United States Senator.
Edward S. Solomon was appointed by President Grant as Governor of
Washington territory (1870-1874). Other early Jewish governors include
Franklin J. Moses of South Carolina, serving in the reconstruction era
from 1873-1875, Alexander Moses of Idaho (1915-1919), and Simon
Bamberger of Utah (1917-1921). In 1930, Julius Meier was elected
Governor of Oregon and Arthur Seligman was elected Governor of New
Mexico.

One of the many commercial success stories concerned the founding
of the banking house of Kuhn & Loeb. Abraham Kuhn and Solomon
Loeb were brothers in law, German Jewish haberdashers who had made
a fortune selling uniforms and blankets to the North during the Ameri-
can Civil War and then moved to New York starting the Kuhn & Loeb
banking house in 1867.” Soon Kuhn & Loeb was actually run by Jacob
Schiff, a Frankfurt, Germany, native who had married into the family,
marrying Solomon Loeb’s daughter Theresa. Schiff’s ancestor’s had
been linked to the Rothschilds,” and Schiff had previously worked at
banking houses in Frankfurt, New York, and at the Warburg bank in


38 Oscar Handlin, A Continuing Task. The American Joint Jewish Distribution Commit-
tee 1914-1964, New York: Random House, 1964.

°° R. Chernow, op. cit. (note 57), p. 48.

60 Tbid., p. 46.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 43


Hamburg"! before accepting an offer from Solomon Loeb to return to
the United States and become a partner at Kuhn & Loeb in New York.
Schiff concentrated on what was then the most lucrative part of Wall
Street: railroad financing.

At the age of 19, Schiff’s daughter married Felix Warburg from the
Hamburg, Germany, banking family where Schiff had previously
worked. Paul Warburg, one of Felix’s older brothers, married Solomon
Loeb’s youngest daughter from his second marriage, twenty years after
Loeb’s daughter from his first marriage had married Schiff. Therefore
Paul Warburg, in addition to being Felix Warburg’s brother, became
through the two marriages his brother’s uncle. And Jacob Schiff was not
only Felix Warburg’s father-in-law, he was Paul Warburg’s brother-in-
law because Paul’s wife was Jacob Schiff’s half-sister.”

Both Paul and Felix Warburg were at various times partners in both
the Kuhn & Loeb banking house in New York and in the M.M. Warburg
banking house of Hamburg, Germany, that was run by an older brother
Max Warburg. Paul Warburg worked actively at both banks, spending
about six months each year in Hamburg and the rest of the year in New
York before settling down in New York and finally becoming a U.S. cit-
izen in 1911. To the consternation of many, Paul Warburg, who had
never voted in an American presidential election, was appointed to the
Federal Reserve Board by President Woodrow Wilson in 1914.

By 1903, Jacob Schiff was an important community leader, and there
was said to have been a pogrom in Russia that had the semi-official
sanction of the Czar’s government. This caused many public rallies to
be held in cities throughout the United States. Thousands of people
signed a petition of protest, which President Theodore Roosevelt sent to
the Russian government. American Jews also raised $100,000 for the
relief of the victims. This started a flow of charity money from America
back to Europe. There was general civil strife in Russia in the fall of
1905 including reports of crackdowns that were a direct result of the tri-
als of the Russo-Japanese War and the identification of specific Russian
Jews with radical and reformist political elements. U.S. rallies were
again held in protest, and this time American Jews raised 1.2 million
dollars from thousands of contributors. Jacob Schiff, as the head of the
New York Jewish community that was furious at the Russian Czar, una-
shamedly and publicly used his financial power against the Czar. Schiff
sought to punish Russia by closing off the American money market to
the Russian government. Were the Jews in Russia better or worse off
than the average Russian living in that poor country? Under the Czar,


6! Naomi W. Cohen, Jacob H. Schiff, A Study in American Jewish Leadership Hanover,
NH: Brandeis University Press, University Press of New England, 1999.
6 R. Chernow, op. cit. (note 57), pp. 46 to 56.


44 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Jews were restricted to 10% of the places in the government run prima-
ry and secondary schools, but they were about 2% of the population.
Another statistic, derived from the Russian census of 1897, states that
21.1% of the general Russian population was literate, while official
United States government statistics of that period reported a literacy
rate of 74% for Russian-Jewish immigrants.

Schiff lobbied then President Teddy Roosevelt to conduct a Rough
Rider assault, patterned after the 1898 American invasion of Cuba,
against Russia.© Schiff financed Japan in its successful 1904-1905 war
against Russia® and even paid for the distribution of anti-czarist propa-
ganda to Russian prisoners. Some of the later loans from Schiff’s Kuhn
& Loeb to Japan were in part subscribed through the Warburg’s Ham-
burg bank.™

It was with the intent of weakening the Czar that Schiff underwrote
the multi-million dollar loan to the Japanese government during the
Russo-Japanese War and paid for the distribution of revolutionary lit-
erature to Russian prisoners of war held by the Japanese. Many years
later, in April 1917, George Kennan, author of Siberia and the Exile
System and a leader of the Friends of Russian Freedom, remembered
and praised Schiff’s effort:


“Tt was fruitful in good results, because it was the support of the army
that enabled the Duma to overthrow the Government of the Czarand
you helped to enlighten the army.”


President Theodore Roosevelt felt that he could not change the condi-
tions in Russia and did not want to embarrass himself and the U.S. gov-
ernment in useless attempts at intervention. The Jewish leadership was
not happy with the American government’s lack of response. Schiff
wanted the U.S. to send gunboats or ordinary steamers to Russia to pick
up the refugees. President Roosevelt became “piqued at the constant
pressure the Jews brought to bear on him and the State Department.”
The American Jewish Committee was founded in 1906 in the middle
of all of this. Schiff told the organizing meeting that he and his friends
needed a committee that would be powerful but discreet because he was
fearful of substantiating the assumption prevalent in the 1890s that Jews
were controlling invisible financial empires and secretly directing gov-
ernments of many nations. The American Jewish Committee’s lobbying
techniques included “lavish expenditures of money, public speaking
campaigns, extensive distribution of propaganda, and courting politi-
cians by playing off Republicans against Democrats.” Central to the
6 Ibid. p. 100
64 Judith S. Goldstein, The Politics of Ethnic Pressure, New York and London: Garland


Publishing, 1990.
65 George Kennan, Siberia and the exile system, New York: Russell & Russell, 1970.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 45


strategy of behind the scenes pressure and backstairs diplomacy that is
their trademark is the political and social contacts its leaders enjoy with
high-level officials and foreign dignitaries.’ Adolf Ochs, then publisher
of the New York Times, was a member of the American Jewish Commit-
tee.©’ In her book, author Judith Goldstein describes the early American
Jewish Committee as an oligarchy, stable, cohesive, and extremely
well-funded. In 1917, ten of the fifteen men on the executive committee
were original members from 1906, while the general membership had
increased from 57 to 105 throughout the country.

The American Jewish Committee’s Constitution, adopted in 1906,
declared:


“The purpose of this Committee is to prevent infringement of the civil
and religious rights of the Jews, and to alleviate the consequences of
persecution. In the event of a threatened or actual denial or invasion of
such rights, or when conditions calling for relief from such calamities
affecting Jews exist anywhere, correspondence may be entered into with
those familiar with the situation, and if the persons on the spot feel
themselves able to cope with the situation, no action need be taken; if,
on the other hand, they request aid, steps shall be taken to furnish it.”


Their first high profile venture into the public arena was a fight for the
abrogation of the Russo-American Treaty of 1832. Abrogation means to
cancel, repeal or annul by authority. The American Jewish Committee
promoted the abrogation of the treaty of 1832 as a way of forcing Rus-
sia to allow free migration of Jews within Russia and to America. The
history of the American Jewish Committee’s first legislative fight is 1m-
portant background information because it shows the awesome power
of these advocacy groups even at the beginning of the twentieth century
and that the methods that they are still using today to influence public
opinion have been around for a long time. The Politics of Ethnic Pres-
sure by Judith S. Goldstein is an excellent, assiduously researched book
covering this period in detail, and this writer relies on her conclusions
regarding Schiff’s conduct in the conflict with the U.S. Government’s
handling of perceived persecutions of his co-religionists in Russia.
Schiff was a rich German born Jew who was the head of a New York
Jewish community whose ranks included a lot of less financially well-
off Jews of Polish/Russian heritage.

These eastern European Jews were specifically objecting to an inter-
nal passport system then existing in czarist Russia. The purpose of the
internal passport system was to maintain internal security and keep
Moscow and Leningrad from becoming overcrowded, but some were


6° Gregg Ivers, To Build A Wall. The American Jews and the Separation of Church and
State, Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1995, p. 36.
67 Tbid., p. 41.


46 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


exempted from the restriction. It certainly wasn’t as onerous as the cur-
rent Israeli system of passport restrictions on the Palestinians. The free-
dom of movement of many nationality groups existing within the czarist
empire was restricted. Jews within Russia not exempt from the regula-
tions were allowed to live and travel within an area that was about half
the size of western Europe and went from the Baltic to the Black Sea.
They called this area the ‘Pale’, and it was officially abolished in 1915,
though it lives on in myth and lore up to the present day. Within the
Pale were major cities such as Odessa, Kiev, and Minsk. In a time peri-
od when many Christians in Europe were virtually restricted to living in
a tiny village or on a single farm, it seemed like relative freedom, but
this regulating of the right to travel was the basis of a determined cam-
paign on both sides of the Atlantic. The situation of Jews living in czar-
ist Russia had been consistently deteriorating since the murder of Alex-
ander II in 1881, which was at least in part organized by a pregnant
Jewish woman, Gesia Gelfman. The new Czar, in reaction, authorized
the formation of a quasi-secret nationalist organizations whose mission
was to root out terrorists and protect Russian patriotism.™

Many Americans felt that it was unreasonably selfish for an ethnic
group to demand that the United States compromise its foreign policy
toward another country based on privileges that other country granted to
that same ethnic group. These Americans failed to see how it was in
America’s national interest. President William Howard Taft was not
willing to shape America’s Russian policy around the needs of Russian
Jewry and the desires of an ethnic minority at home. Taft had been
handpicked for the presidency by Teddy Roosevelt. A principled and
cerebral man who later served as Chief Justice of the United States Su-
preme Court Taft was not as popular as Teddy Roosevelt had been. Dur-
ing this period of political turmoil, the American Jewish Committee
cleverly and boldly employed its network of national contacts and sup-
ported politicians such as Woodrow Wilson who were hungry for votes
in the 1912 election.”

Louis Marshall was the president and chief strategist of the Ameri-
can Jewish Committee. A contemporary and ally of the Schiffs and War-
burgs,”” he directed the American Jewish Committee in a skillful, un-
compromising campaign to spread what was called the ‘abrogation
message’ to politicians at the state and national levels. The committee
worked openly and unabashedly to make Congress and the public be-
lieve that the passport issue involved national rights and power, in


68 Norman E. Saul, Concord and Conflict. The United States and Russia, 1867-1914,
Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 1996, pp. 241-243.

6 J.S. Goldstein, op. cit. (note 64), p. 162.

70 R. Chernow, op. cit. (note 57), p. 164, 252.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 47


which the Jews just happened to be the catalyst. A series of anti-Rus-
sian, pro-abrogation articles for newspapers and magazines throughout
the country was prepared. They accused the Associated Press of biased,
unreliable, and anti-Semitic reporting. They also sent 35,000 copies of
Marshall’s January speech to the “creators and leaders of public opin-
ion in every part of the country”, to all newspapers with a circulation of
over 2200, and to newspapers in home towns of federal judges, Demo-
cratic and Republican National Committeemen, district attorneys, and
Congressmen. The American Jewish Committee wrote 50,000 ministers
throughout the country suggesting that they make this internal passport
dispute within Russia the subject of their sermons. Jewish organizations
and individuals prevailed upon fraternal organizations, unions and state
legislatures to pass abrogation resolutions. State legislatures in Georgia,
Montana, Ilinois, Florida, Nevada, and New York all passed similar
resolutions.
Finally, in New York City in 1911, the American Jewish Committee


“[...] staged an enormous abrogation rally in New York City which fea-
tured the appearance of two presidential hopefuls, Woodrow Wilson and
Champ Clark, William Randolph Hearst, a former ambassador to Rus-
sia, and several Congressmen.”’


It was a lot of pressure on then President Taft who felt it would severely
restrain Russian American relations and jeopardize America’s immigra-
tion policy. Secretary of State Knox told President Taft that ending
normal relations with Russia because she excluded American Jews for
the sake of her domestic policy would “stultify our traditional policy in
the matter of immigration.” Despite President Taft’s opposition to abro-
gation, the American Jewish Committee pressured the U.S House of
Representatives to pass a (not legally binding) resolution on this by a
vote of 301 to 1. Schiff bragged that the abrogation victory was “the
greatest victory for the Jews since Napoleon granted them civil
rights.””

There are other examples of lobbying to influence U.S. foreign poli-
cy on behalf of their co-religionists before World War One. In 1906,
Secretary of State Elihu Root instructed America’s representative at the
Algeciras conference, where the European powers were deciding the
economic and political fate of Morocco, to express an interest in the
Jews of Morocco. Root’s instructions contained a letter from Schiff de-
scribing Moroccan-Jewish conditions. In 1912, at the end of the Balkan
war in which Bulgaria, Serbia, and Greece had defeated Turkey, the
American Jewish Committee prevailed upon incoming President Wilson
to intervene diplomatically in the London peace negotiations on behalf


71 J.S. Goldstein, op. cit. (note 64), pp. 165-178.


48 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


of the Balkan Jews, who before the Balkan war had lived under the rule
of the Ottoman Turks and had enjoyed political and civil rights.”’ But it
was a Georgia State conviction of a child murderer based on circum-
stantial evidence, that is, evidence based on circumstances which form
reasonable grounds for determining facts relevant to a case, that roused
the New York Jewish community to action and provided the impetus for
the establishment of the largest Jewish civil rights organization in the
United States.

B’nai B’rith, founded in 1843, is the largest and oldest Jewish frater-
nal lodge in the United States. Its name means children of the covenant
in Hebrew. In 1913, B’nai B’rith started the Anti-Defamation League in
response to the President of the Atlanta B’nai B’rith, Leo M. Frank, be-
ing convicted of murdering Mary Phagan, a thirteen-year-old employee
in a pencil factory where he was superintendent. A particularly grue-
some crime, the victim had been dragged across the coal cindered
basement floor, face down, causing punctures and holes in her face. The
funeral director reported that when he picked up the little girl’s body the
cord she had been strangled with was still around her neck.”

The defendant was indicted by an all-white Grand Jury that included
three Jewish members. At the trial, the prosecution’s case relied on the
testimony of a black janitor, who the jurors believed. Frank was found
guilty and sentenced to death. The Georgia Supreme Court affirmed the
trial court decision finding in pertinent part:”


“The evidence tended to show a practice, plan, system, or scheme on
the part of the accused to have lascivious or adulterous association with
certain of his employees and other women at his office or place of busi-
ness, in which the homicide occurred. Some of these acts were shown
specifically to have occurred not long before the homicide. [...] It tend-
ed to show a motive on the part of the accused, inducing him to seek to
have criminal intimacy with the girl who was killed, and upon her re-
sistance, to commit murder to conceal the crime. There was not only ev-
idence of the practice of the accused with other women, but during the
trial there was also introduced evidence tending to show that in pursu-
ance of his general practice he made advances toward the deceased.”


Louis Marshall, the head of the American Jewish Committee, at first
took the tactic of bringing influence to bear on the Southern press to
free the defendant. When this didn’t work, he convinced Adolf Ochs,
the publisher of the New York Times and a member of the American
Jewish Committee, to use his newspaper to publicize the ‘injustices’


7 Mary Phagan, The Murder of Little Mary Phagan, Far Hills, NJ: New Horizon Press,
1987.

3 Frank v. State, Supreme Court of Georgia, Feb. 17, 1914, 80 Southeastern Reporter
1, pp. 1016-1044.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 49


surrounding this trial, but also insisted that Ochs not mention that the
defendant was Jewish or suggest that anti-Semitism had influenced his
prosecution.”

The defendant was represented by the high-powered Atlanta law
firm of Rosser & Brandon, which merged with Slaton & Phillips in
1913, the same year as the trial. John Slaton from that same law firm
became governor of Georgia and commuted the death sentence to life
imprisonment on June 21, 1915. While commutation is certainly within
a Governor’s discretion and makes ethical sense in a case where the de-
fendant had no prior convictions, the commutation made no sense polit-
ically. The Jewish groups weren’t happy about it because they claimed
Frank was innocent and wanted a new trial that would clear the defend-
ant. Mary Phagan’s family and much of the general public thought the
commutation looked like a back room deal between the Governor and
his old law firm, which represented the defendant.

Then an equally heinous murder occurred when the defendant was
abducted from his prison cell and lynched. The justice system complete-
ly broke down and no one was ever arrested, prosecuted, or otherwise
held accountable for this second murder. And there was no shortage of
braggarts claiming responsibility for the lynching. What secretive, or-
ganized movements were involved in this gangsterism?

If B’nai B’rith really thought their defendant was innocent, wouldn’t
they have applied pressure to assure that his butchers were brought be-
fore the bar of justice? But if some people felt he was actually guilty,
the lynching solved a lot of problems. A guilty man spending the rest of
his life in prison might decide to confess somewhere along the line in
hope of getting released. The Pollard spy case comes to mind in that re-
gard. We know who killed Mary Phagan. The real question is why
didn’t anybody care who lynched the President of Atlanta B’nai B’rith?
Not just who participated in the lynching, but also who was involved in
the cover up? Who were the accessories before the fact to this murder-
ous obstruction of justice? Many decades later, after most of the wit-
nesses were dead, he received a posthumous pardon that did nothing to
bring his killers to justice. Of course, a pardon is usually based on pollit-
ical influence and has nothing to do with guilt or innocence.

Demanding the abrogation of the Russian American treaty of 1832,
publicly financing the Japanese in the Russo-Japanese war and taking
up the cause of the convicted murderer of little Mary Phagan are repre-
sentative examples of causes that galvanized organized Jewish advoca-
cy groups in the United States before World War One. As we have seen,
the extent of the influence and access to power of these groups within


74 G. Ivers, op. cit. (note 66), p. 41.


50 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


American politics by the time of the outbreak of the First World War
was very great. Much greater than is generally realized today.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 51


Chapter 2:
World War One Activities


Regarding the growing importance of the American Jewish Committee,

a 1931 summary report by its secretary Joseph C. Hyman stated:”°
“Small in its beginnings and regarded as merely a temporary committee
for emergency aid, the organization has evolved into the greatest relief
agency in Jewish history. In its primary results, it meant the physical
saving of millions of Eastern European Jews.”


Another American Jewish Committee’s explanation was more re-
strained:”°


“As soon as the World War [One] started and it was obvious that a
large part of the War would be fought in the zone in which six or seven
million Jews lived, particularly Poland, Russia and Galicia, many wor-
thy people started organizations to collect funds for the sufferers in the
War zones.”


The story of the holocaust of up to six million European Jews didn’t
originate with World War Two. In fact, a very similar scenario was
played out in somewhat less flamboyant terms during World War One
and its aftermath. After World War One it was reported as news that five
million, over five million, even six million Jews in Europe were sick or
dying in a holocaust from starvation, horrible epidemics, and a malig-
nant persecution. The following focuses especially on the World War
One fundraising drives. These selected campaigns by major Jewish ad-
vocacy groups may offer historical significance both on their own and
in terms of the post-World-War-Two Holocaust industry.

Holocaust is a World War One word. Holocaust was used during and
after World War One to describe what was going on in Europe and what
allegedly happened to the Jews of Europe during and after that war.
While the stories that are today referred to as “the Holocaust” weren’t
called a holocaust during or even for decades after World War Two, the


™ The Activities of the Joint Distribution Committee (J.D.C.), A Summary Report,
Submitted to the Council of the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee by
Joseph C. Hyman, Secretary, March 22, 1931.

7 Felix M. Warburg, A Biographical Sketch, New York: The American Jewish Com-
mittee, 1938, p. 14.


52 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


word holocaust was used while World War One was happening and
thereafter. It was called a holocaust, it was called the greatest tragedy
the world has ever known and it was called the greatest need the world
has ever known.

Until 1917, the leader of the Jewish community in New York, Jacob
Schiff, repeatedly called for an end to “this holocaust.””’ In 1919, the
American Hebrew magazine used the word holocaust in describing the
plight of European Jewry in an article written under the byline of a for-
mer Governor of New York State.’”* Yehuda Bauer wrote in My Broth-
er's Keeper, an authorized history of the Joint Distribution Committee
of Jewish War Sufferers, that”’


“the destruction of European Jewry during World War Two has oblite-
rated the memory of the first holocaust of the 20th century in the wake
of the First World War.”


A “holocaust of humanity” is the way World War One was described in
The Great Betrayal, a book co-authored by Rabbi Stephen S. Wise and
published in 1930. The premise of The Great Betrayal was that the Brit-
ish had reneged on promises they made concerning Palestine to the Jew-
ish leadership during World War One. This book included a chapter on
Winston Churchill’s opinion that:*°


“The Zionist movement throughout the world was actively pro-Ally, and
in a special sense pro-British. Nowhere was this movement more no-
ticeable than in the United States and upon the active share of the Unit-
ed States in the bloody struggle which was impending rested a large
proportion of our hopes. The able leaders of the Zionist movement and
their wide-spread branches exercised an appreciable influence upon
American opinion and that influence — like the Jewish influence gener-
ally — was steadily cast in our favor. Jews (Zionist and non-Zionist
alike) sympathized with the Allies and worked for the success of Great
Britain and the close co-operation with Great Britain of the United
States.

The Balfour Declaration must, therefore, not be regarded as a promise
given from sentimental motives; it was a practical measure taken in the
interests of a common cause at a moment when that cause could afford
to neglect no factor of material or moral assistance.”


77 N. Cohen, op. cit. (note 61), p. 191.

78 Martin H. Glynn, “The Crucifixion of Jews Must Stop!,” The American Hebrew, Oct.

31, 1919, pp. 582f. See Appendix, p. 179.

Yehuda Bauer, My Brother's Keeper. A History of the American Joint Distribution

Committee 1929-1939, Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America,

1974.

89 Jacob de Haas, Stephen S. Wise, The Great Betrayal, New York: Brentano’s Publish-
ers, 1930, p. 287.


79


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 53


The Price of Liberty is an authorized history of the American Jewish
Committee that was published in 1948, after World War Two was over.
It contains a chapter about World War One entitled “The Holocaust of
War.” This chapter mentions some of these World War One and postwar
fundraising efforts and includes the following quote:*'


“As the armies rolled back and forth in desperate conflict over the bor-
ders of Poland, Galicia, and East Prussia, terror, desolation and death
descended on the civilian population in general, but most of all upon
the seven million Jews. The Christian Poles, Ruthenians and Germans
suffered the inevitable hardships that attend all warfare; but the Jews,
already proscribed by the Russians and Poles, met with a concentrated
orgy of hatred, blood lust and vindictive opportunity that threatened to
wipe them out in one vast holocaust.”


Less than a month after the initial declarations of war in Europe, plans
were begun to organize an effort to help Jews living in the war affected
areas. On October 4, 1914, the Central Committee for the Relief of Jews
Suffering Through the War was formed with Morris Engelman elected
financial secretary and a day of prayer was proclaimed by President
Woodrow Wilson. On October 14, 1914, Louis Marshall, the president
of the American Jewish Committee, called a meeting which resulted in
the formation of the American Jewish Relief Committee with Louis
Marshall as chairman and Felix Warburg as treasurer. On November 27,
1914, the American Jewish Relief Committee and the Central Relief
Committee organized the Joint Distribution Committee, electing Felix
M. Warburg chairman.*

The American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee for Jewish War
Sufferers, affectionately referred to by its supporters as the ‘Joint’, was
also started in 1914 by the leaders of the American Jewish Committee
in response to:

“alarming news that reached the U.S. regarding the fate of eighty five

thousand Jews of Palestine.”


There were then many Jews living in Palestine being subsidized by Brit-
ish Jews whose subsidies were interrupted by the war between Great
Britain and Turkey, which then controlled Palestine.

Felix Marshall, the longtime president of the American Jewish
Committee, became its first president. Jacob Schiff made son-in-law Fe-
lix Warburg the first ‘Joint’ treasurer. On New Year’s Day of 1915, Fe-
lix Warburg, the Chairman of the Joint Distribution Committee, orga-


81 Nathan Schachner, The Price of Liberty. A History of The American Jewish Commit-
tee, New York: The American Jewish Committee, 1948, p. 60, 287.

82 Morris Engelman, Fifteen Years of Effort on Behalf of World Jewry, New York: Fer-
ence Press, 1929.


54 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


nized a remittance or credit bureau supervised by his secretary, Harriet
Lowenstein. In March of that year, the Central Relief Committee made
arrangements with Henry Morgenthau, Woodrow Wilson’s ambassador
to Turkey, to transmit funds to institutions in Palestine. In time, aid to
Palestine, Greece, Egypt, and Syria was channeled through the U.S.
Ambassador to Turkey.

In 1915, at a rally in New York, Louis Marshall, on behalf of the
American Jewish Relief Committee, along with Jacob Schiff and Con-
gressman Meyer London, denounced the apathy toward the suffering of
co-religionists declaring that millions were in dire distress and pleading
with the rich to give. Marshall said there were about 13 million Jews in
the world, and that over 6 million of them are in eastern Europe where
the war is being fought. Marshall also read a letter from Schiff that
“private reports” had been received showing conditions in Russia, Pal-
estine, Poland, and Galicia, “the frightful nature of which could not be
pictured.” Mr. London said this was the worst period in Jewish history
and that millions of Jewish peoples depended on the generosity of more
fortunate Jews of the United States.*?

In May of 1915, certificates bearing the facsimile signatures of the
officers of both committees ranging in value from one dollar to five dol-
lars were introduced. In September, the Esras Torah fund was founded
to aid the unfortunate Rabbis and Zadikim in Europe and Palestine. In
October, Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society (Hias) obtained permission
from Germany and other countries in Central Europe and received the
consent of the United States Government to make arrangements so that
communications between residents in the United States and their kin in
eastern Europe could be reestablished with all letters passing through
Hias, which acted as an International Post Office.

On December 21, 1915, $700,000 was raised by the American Jew-
ish Relief Committee at a meeting held at Carnegie Hall in New York
City. On December 28, the Business Men’s League was organized with
Jacob Wertheim as chairman to assure the cooperation of business peo-
ple throughout the United States.

On January 6, the United States Senate unanimously passed a resolu-
tion introduced by Senator Martine of New Jersey setting aside a special
Jewish relief day. On January 12, a Resolution was signed by President
Wilson setting aside January 27, 1916 as Jewish Sufferers Relief Day,
“at the urging of friends of the Jewish people in the United States Sen-
ate.”** It was observed throughout the country resulting in collections
exceeding two million dollars. On February 17, representatives of the


83 “Tews Indifference to War Aid Rebuked”, New York Times, Jan. 14, 1915, p. 3. The
complete text is reproduced in the Appendix, p. 136.
84 'Y. Bauer, op. cit. (note 79), p. 8.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 55


Central Committee for the Relief of Jews Suffering Through the War and
the Women’ Proclamation Committee visited the White House and
were received by President Wilson, who accepted a plaque commemo-
rating Jewish Relief Day.**

A drive to collect ten million dollars in 1916 was kicked off with a
pledge of the cooperation of newspapermen. As Engelman notes in his
chronological summary of the first fifteen years of the Joint Distribution
Committee published in 1929:


“The generosity of the public was greatly stimulated by the whole-
hearted helpfulness of the entire American and Jewish press.”’


Throughout all of the early holocaust fundraising drives, there was a to-
tal lack of criticism or media scrutiny, the press being reduced to a sort
of cheering section, not unlike today’s cringing fondness over the ac-
tions of Israel and the post-World-War-Two Holocaust industry by the
fourth estate.

A May 22, 1916, New York Times article reported that there were
700,000 Jews in need on the east war front:°°


“of the normal total of about 2,450,000 Jews in Poland, Lithuania, and
Courland, 1,770,000 remain, and of that number about 700,000 are in
urgent and continuous want. About 455,000 of these are in Poland, and
50,000 of these number are persons who are without homes and in par-
ticularly distressful circumstances.”


Another 1916 project was a book entitled The Jews in the Eastern War
Zone. Published by the American Jewish Committee, 25,000 copies of
this book were sent to the leaders of American thought and the molders
of public opinion including President Wilson, members of the Presiden-
tial Cabinet and Congress, the press and the magazines, influential men
and women everywhere.*’ The book said that Russia has virtually con-
verted an area into a penal settlement, where six million human beings
guilty only of adherence to the Jewish faith are compelled to live out
their lives in squalor and misery, in constant terror of massacre, subject
to the caprice of police officials and a corrupt administration — in short,
without legal rights or social status:**

“a kind of prison with six million inmates, guarded by an army of cor-

rupt and brutal jailers.”


85 M. Engelman, op. cit. (note 82), p. 9.


86 “700,000 Jews in Need on the East War Front”, New York Times, May 22, 1916, p.
11. The complete article is reproduced in the Appendix, p. 138.

87 Nathan Schachner, op. cit., (note 81), p. 63.

88 The American Jewish Committee, The Jews in the Eastern War Zones, New York:
The American Jewish Committee, 1916, p. 19f.


56 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


The Jews in the Eastern War Zone is an important book from this period
because the language in the book is reused extensively by other sources,
such as the New York Times. It is important today because it shows what
the American Jewish establishment was telling people before the United
States entered World War One, as a reading of the introduction and the
introduction to the section on Russia shows.” This book’s concept in-
cluded the theme that the Jews in eastern Europe were experiencing a
unique suffering, that this suffering was to an extent suffered by no oth-
ers, that they were denied elementary rights denied to no other people,
and were the victims of government sponsored persecutions. It even
contains the buzz words “six million” and “extermination.”

The book also describes why the American Jewish establishment
thought that the recent abolition of the Pale was temporary, granted
grudgingly by Russia’s leadership with galling limitations, and issued in
the hope of facilitating a foreign loan.”

In July of 1916, Felix and Paul Warburg’s younger brother Fritz
Warburg, who during World War One was the Chairman of the Ham-
burg Metal Exchange, was involved in discreet unofficial peace talks
with Alexander Protopopov, the Vice President of the Russian Duma, in
Stockholm, Sweden. Fritz discussed a separate peace between Germany
and Russia with Russia receiving parts of German occupied Polish are-
as.’' There were several unsuccessful peace attempts between Germany
and Russia in 1916.

In October of 1916, Felix Warburg, who had simultaneously held
both the office of Chairman of the Joint Jewish Distribution Committee
and Treasurer, resigned as Treasurer and was replaced by Herbert Leh-
man. Mr. Lehman is more famous as the Democratic governor of New
York from 1933 to 1942. Franklin Roosevelt preceded him in that office
from 1929 to 1933. Although Lehman served as treasurer for less than a
year, he retained close connections with the ‘Joint’ and headed up the
United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA),
which was established in 1943 and existed until it was supplanted by
the International Refugee Organization in 1947.

The outbreak of World War One was a difficult time for Americans
who had been born in Germany. Most didn’t want the United States to
get sucked into this European war, which they thought would not bene-
fit their adopted country as well as for reasons of sentiment. At the be-
ginning of the war, Jacob Schiff rationalized that Germany was going to


win and that a German victory that would also end Czarism appeared by
8° For a longer excerpt from this book, see Appendix, p. 139.
% [bid., p.21.

°! R. Chernow, op. cit. (note 57), pp. 178f.

°? Oscar Handlin, op. cit. (note 58), p. 93.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 57


far the more desirable end. Schiff’s in-laws at the Warburg firm in
Hamburg were actively supporting the German war effort.’’ Although
the Russian invasion of Germany was halted by the German army shift-
ing troops from the western front, this produced a stalemate in the west.
As hopes for a quick victory evaporated and the war dragged on, the
anxieties of German-Americans only increased.

German-Americans in general had their loyalty as Americans ques-
tioned during the World War One period by the pro-British U.S. estab-
lishment. Schiff was accused of being pro-German during the first two
years of World War One because he didn’t want America to fight in a
war allied with the Czar. Once the Czar fell in early 1917, Schiff finan-
cially supported the Mensheviks and supported U.S. intervention. A
month after the March 1917 revolution deposing the Czar in Russia, the
United States declared war on Germany and entered World War One.

While America was still neutral,”? the ‘Joint’ channeled 19 million
marks to aid Polish Jews through the M.M. Warburg private bank in
Hamburg Germany.** According to Reports Received by the Joint,” a
1916 publication of The Joint Distribution Committee, they were send-
ing money to the Jewish Colonization Committee in Petrograd, Russia,
which worked through local committees in 142 centers in Russia from
Alitir, Baku, Bessarabia, Irkutsk, and Odessa to Yaraslavl.*° It was the
general policy of the ‘Joint’ to work within existing Jewish organiza-
tional structures already in place in Europe.

After America entered the war, the ‘Joint’ transferred money into
German-occupied territory through neutral Holland. A committee was
set up that transferred close to two million dollars from the United
States to Dutch diplomatic representatives, who distributed it according
to guidelines received from New York by way of Holland. In May of
1917, Oscar Strauss, Henry Morgenthau Sr., Louis Marshall, Fulton R.
Brylawski, and Albert Lucas, secretary of the Joint Distribution Com-
mittee, interviewed the Secretary of State, and arrangements were com-
pleted for sending relief funds to the German occupied territories in Po-
land and Lithuania through the intermediary of a committee of Dutch
Jews, instead of the German Hilfskomitee.”’

By the time America entered World War One, anti-German hate
propaganda in the United States had escalated to a point that was much


°3_R. Chernow, op. cit. (note 57), Chapter 13: “Iron Cross,” pp. 171-179.

4 Ibid., p. 173.

Reports Received by the Joint Distribution Committee of Funds for Jewish War Suf-
ferers, Felix M. Warburg, Chairman; Albert Lucas Secretary. New York Public Li-
brary 746677 Astor, Lenox and Tylden foundations, 1916.

© Ibid., p.9.

Engelman, op. cit. (note 82), p. 16.


58 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


worse than any time even during World War Two. In many places the
playing of music by Beethoven and other German composers was out-
lawed, as was the teaching of German in public schools. It is now con-
veniently forgotten how Kaiser Wilhelm was vilified and caricatured.
Falsehood In Wartime, a book written by a Member of British Parlia-
ment, chronicles some of the vitriolic stories published about aspects of
German culture. He notes that films were produced by those who were
trying to get America into the war and that one showed a foreign army
burning villages, carrying off women, and a hideous German looking
villain was depicted plotting and scheming, with a close-up of him, roll-
ing his eyes with Mephistophelian cunning in the gallery of Congress.
Luther’s A Mighty Fortress is our God was mistranslated as “Hinden-
burg is our God”, and Wagner was unfavorably compared to Sousa.”®

Rudyard Kipling saw Germans as germs, saying that “Pestis Teuton-
icus” menaces civilization everywhere in a New York Times article,
which is reprinted below:”


“One thing that we must get into our thick heads is that wherever the
German — man or woman — gets a suitable culture to thrive in he or she
means death and loss to civilized people, precisely as germs of any dis-
ease suffered to multiply mean death or loss to mankind, There is no
question of hate, or anger or excitement in the matter, any more than
there is in flushing out sinks or putting oil on water to prevent mosqui-
toes hatching eggs. As far as we are concerned the German is typhoid
or plague — Pestis Teutonicus, if you like. But until we realize this ele-
mentary fact in peace we shall always be liable to outbreaks of anti-
civilization. Make this clear by all means in your power. [...| We must
put the work through for the sake of all mankind and the saving of our
souls. I see that Australia has begun to restrict German trade. That is
right. Where a bale or box of German goods comes into a civilized
country there is always the chance of exposing mankind to danger
sooner or later. This has been proved, before all mankind in every quar-
ter of the world. [...] If I were a German, I would really be grieved at
the blindness of all the rest of the world, and judging from their papers,
they are grieving in multitudes. But I fancy it is a long way yet for them
and for us. They have got to go on winning victories for about another
year if their men and their money run into it. They will probably finish
up with a splendid victory, and then those ‘fool allies’ will reform their
line and pick up the pieces and get ready to be beaten again — very like-
ly not far from where the lines are now. Then the show will shut up with
Germany victorious to the last and the Allies methodically carving her
up into nice harmless pieces. Maybe I am wrong, but that is the way I


°8 Arthur Ponsonby, M.P., Falsehood In Wartime-Propaganda: Lies of the First World
War, New York: E.P. Dutton, 1929.
99 “Sees Germans as Germs,“ New York Times, May 14, 1916.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 59


see it. Germany winning all the victories and the Allies winning the
war.”


After America entered the war, “actual war films” (sic) were produced
in Hollywood and released, and the Committee on Public Information
employed an immense army of speakers and pamphleteers. Lies were
successfully circulated including poisoned sugar-candy dropped by
German airplanes for children to eat and German soldiers giving poi-
soned candy and hand grenades to children. A particularly gruesome lie
about German soldiers crucifying a young girl was the basis of a war
propaganda drama, “Duty to Civilization”, which had the blessing of
President Wilson.!°°

It was during this period that the Provisional Zionist Committee
whose chairman was Stephen S. Wise in a news story entitled “Ger-
mans let Jews Die, Women and Children in Warsaw Starving to Death”
vouched that “Jewish mothers, mothers of mercy, feel happy to see their
nursing babies die, at least they are through with their suffering.””'

This report ignores the facts that aid had been sent to Warsaw
through Hamburg while America was still neutral and that just a month
before, in May of 1917, ‘Joint’ officials made arrangements through
both the U.S. Secretary of State and German officials to send relief
funds to the German occupied areas of Poland and Lithuania by way of
a committee of Dutch Jews as noted previously in this chapter. The
Netherlands managed to remain neutral throughout that war and provid-
ed asylum for Kaiser Wilhelm the Second from the time of his abdica-
tion until his death in 1941.

The Balfour declaration is dated November 2, 1917, although the
language in the declaration had been worked on for years before that.
For example the words “national home” were used instead of nation to
dispel fears that the Arab Moslems and Christians already living there
would be expelled. Lord Balfour of the British foreign office signed and
sent a letter to Lord Rothschild which said:

“IT have much pleasure in conveying to you on behalf of His Majesty’

Government the following declaration of sympathy with Jewish Zionist

aspirations, which has been submitted to and approved by the cabinet:

‘His Majesty's Government view with favor the establishment in Pales-

tine of a national home for the Jewish people, and will use their best

endeavors to facilitate the achievement of this object, it being clearly
understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and
religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine or the


100 A. Ponsonby, op. cit. (note 98), pp. 183-185.

101 “Germans Let Jews Die. Women and Children in Warsaw Starving to Death” New
York Times, August 10, 1917. The complete text is reproduced in the Appendix, p.
139.


60 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


rights and status enjoyed by Jews in any other country.’ I should be
grateful to you if you would bring this declaration to the knowledge of
the Zionist Federation.”


A month after the date of the Balfour Declaration in December of 1917,
the British army entered Jerusalem.

In 1918, Louis Marshall was spearheading a drive to raise twenty
million dollars for what they said was the millions of starving Jews in
the war zones.'°? While labeled non-sectarian, Felix Warburg, the
Chairman of the 1918 campaign explained that:!°

“this campaign is entirely for the Jewish civilian populations in Europe,

Palestine and Asia Minor.”


Also in 1918, the American Jewish Congress was founded with the
original goals of “providing humanitarian relief for European Jews who
had suffered from the carnage of the war and restoring the State Of Is-
rael to Palestine.”©° The American Jewish Congress saw itself as the
voice of the eastern European Jews rather than the American Jewish
Committee, whose members were mostly German Jews.

Rabbi Stephen S. Wise was the major leadership figure of the Amer-
ican Jewish Congress during its formative period.'* Born in Hungary,
the son of a Rabbi and a porcelain heiress and the grandson of Joseph
Hirsch Weisz, a Grand Rabbi of Hungary, he was brought to New York
by his parents as a small child in 1875, when his father became rabbi of
a Brooklyn, New York, congregation. The younger Wise was instructed
in Talmudic law by his father and the Rev. Dr. Gustav Gotheil. He at-
tended the College of the City of New York, and was reported to have
completed his studies abroad. After returning to the United States, at the
age of 20, he was elected rabbi of the Congregation B’nai Jeshurun in
New York where he remained for over five years. Shortly after June of
1900, he went to Portland, Oregon, to head up a congregation and then
returned to New York, founding the Free Synagogue in 1906. Early on,
Dr. Wise was known for his progressive ideas on general topics and also
as an exponent of Zionism, a movement then contemplating the reestab-
lishment of the Jewish nation.'°°


102 “No Sectarianism In Jewish Drive”, New York Times, September 15, 1918.

103 Pamphlet with the title “A Message from Felix M. Warburg, Chairman, Jewish War
Relief 1918 Campaign, New York City, Conducted by the American Jewish Relief
Committee — Louis Marshall, Chairman; Central Relief Committee — Leon Kamaiky,
Chairman; People’s Relief Committee — Alexander Kahn, Chairman,” Sept. 29,
1919.

104 G Ivers, op. cit. (note 66), p. 51.

105 “Dr, Wise To Go To Portland”, New York Times, August 3, 1898 p. 1.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 61


As early as 1900, Wise is recorded telling a Zionist gathering that
“there are 6,000,000 living, bleeding, suffering arguments in favor of
Zionism” as reported in a New York Times article.'°°

By 1906, Dr. Wise had founded the Free Synagogue, an independent
reform synagogue on West 81st Street in New York City. His sermons
sometimes were reported in the New York Times. In 1908, the New
Year’s service was so crowded that the overflow crowd was addressed
by Eugene Lehman of Yale University, the President of the adjoining re-
ligious school.'°’ His tone was often frankly populist. In one sermon
Wise accused the Standard Oil Company of treason and of a bankruptcy
in morals.'"* He preached from Carnegie Hall that certain criticism
should be ignored but that there was a duty, “to meet every attack on
honor, righteousness, and justice, to make ourselves kings among men,
and knightly administrators of justice to humanity at large.”'® In an-
other sermon he went after thirteen New York State Judges for attending
a banquet in honor of a former Tammany (political machine) leader. He
preached against the intermarriage of Jews and Christians.'' He spoke
at a Seventh Avenue Methodist Church under the auspices of the Peace
Society, of which Andrew Carnegie was President, attacking “yellow
journalism as would jingoize our land into war.” An excellent topic
even for today! Wise also once came out in favor of a bill that was
pending in the New York Legislature that would tax and assess “for
profit” cemeteries for public improvements."'!

One story he used to tell was that in 1914 the Mayor of New York
City called him on the phone and asked:


“Dr. Wise, this is John Mitchell. Where the hell is Armenia? [...] Some
representatives of Armenia are coming to this office in a few minutes
and I dont know where Armenia is or what those fellows want.”


Wise said he suggested that Mitchell put a good stenographer on the
phone and dictated a short statement of welcome and congratulations to
the gentlemen from Armenia.!!*

In November of 1918, Wise was named chairman of a delegation to
go to London, England, on behalf of the Zionist Organization of Ameri-
ca.''? In January of 1919, after conferring with Lord Balfour, the British


96 “Rabbi Wise ’s Address”, New York Times, June 11, 1900, p. 7. For the entire article,
see Appendix, p. 135.

°7 “Throng at Free Synagogue”, New York Times, Sept. 27, 1908, p. 7.

8 Holds Oil Trust Guilty of Treason”, New York Times, Oct. 12, 1908.

«Dr Wise On Attacks”, New York Times, March 12, 1912.

0 “Dr. Wise Against Intermarriage”, New York Times, Oct. 4, 1909.

'l “Would Tax Cemeteries”, New York Times, March 9, 1913.

'2 Stephen S. Wise, Challenging Years. The autobiography of Stephen Wise, New York:
Putnam’s Sons, 1949, p. 15.

13 “Send Zionist Mission”, New York Times, Nov. 29, 1918.


62 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Foreign Secretary, Wise was in Paris, France, where he conferred with
Colonel House and received the Legion of Honor decoration in appreci-
ation of his eminent services to the French cause. When asked if there
was any likelihood of boundary difficulties in the Near East, Dr. Wise
said:
“Not if France and Great Britain act as they may be expected to act in
the spirit of friends and allies — and have regard not for obsolete con-
ventions and questionable facts, but for that spirit throughout the per-
manent conference.”


After returning to the United States, Dr. Wise met with President Wilson
in 1919 who approved of a Jewish Commonwealth in Palestine under
British rule. Wise was quoted on page one of the New York Times on
March 13, 1919, saying:''4


“The rebuilding of Zion will be the reparation of all Christendom for
the wrongs done to the Jews.”


The occasion was a meeting of Zionist leaders headed by Wise and
President Wilson at the White House, where guarantees for human
rights to Jews throughout the world including eastern Europe and Pales-
tine were discussed. Afterwards, Wise and other leaders spoke to a large
Washington, D.C., audience about his recent experiences in Paris and its
bearing on the Paris Peace conference. He predicted that Britain,
through the League of Nations, would accept a mandate over Palestine
and that the Jews would return to their rightful place in the world.

These articles show that by 1919 the Jewish lobby was international,
focused, and powerful. They were in friendly contact with the heads of
the victorious allied governments and a strong voice at the Paris Peace
Conference. Wise was a major player as the head of the Zionist Organi-
zation of America and later the driving force behind the American Jew-
ish Congress. Wise was meeting with world leaders, passing on their
agendas, and representing the Jewish leadership on the issue of Pales-
tine. Chaim Weizmann, Chairman of the British Zionist Committee who
had been that organization’s central Paris Peace Conference figure, in-
dicated that the allies and especially the British were sympathetic to the
Zionist cause. Displaying confidence and assurance that the mandate of
Palestine through the League of Nations would naturally evolve into a
Jewish commonwealth, Weizmann said:

“The League of Nation has made it possible to give expression to the

centuries old desire of the Jewish race.”


'l4 «President Gives Hope to Zionists”, New York Times, March 3, 1919, p. 1. For the
complete article, see Appendix, p. 146.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 63


Weizmann is credited with making the famous prediction in the early
nineteen twenties that Palestine would become “as Jewish as England is
English.”"''*

An early American Jewish Congress news story and fund drive arti-
cle from May 20, 1920, included this message:


“The fund for Jewish war sufferers in Central and Eastern Europe
where six millions face horrifying conditions of famine, disease and


death.”
In the second paragraph Dr. Wise says:


“Tf American Jews now fail to help those who suffer through no fault of
their own, the blame will rest on their own heads should they miserably
perish. Surely no self-respecting American Jew will wish, or even will
suffer, the extinction of large numbers of Jewish people to come to


”


pass.


The article lists many large contributors, including a ten thousand dollar
contribution from Adolf Ochs, who was then the owner of the New York
Times.'"°

We are concentrating on Stephen S. Wise because of his role in
breaking the World War Two extermination stories to the American
mainstream media through the New York Times. A New York Times arti-
cle of November 25, 1942, written under the byline of James MacDon-
ald, has been mounted and displayed in the United States Memorial
Holocaust Museum in Washington, D.C. It is titled:


“Himmler Program Kills Polish Jews. [...| Officials of Poland Publish
Data — Dr. Wise Gets Check Here by State Department.”


The first part of the article was based on a report issued on November
24 by the Polish government in exile in London, England, although de-
tails of the report had allegedly been previously printed in unnamed
Palestine newspapers. It stated that in June of 1942 Himmler had visited
Warsaw and ordered that half the Jews in Poland be killed by the end of
the year and that this was being done throughout Poland and especially
at Treblinka, Belzec, and Sobibor. There is no mention of Auschwitz.!!”
Stephen S. Wise, who was still the president of the American Jewish
Congress as well as chairman of the World Jewish Congress, is the
source of the second half of the article “Wise Gets Confirmations-
Checks With State Department on Nazis’ Extermination Campaign.”
115 §_S. Wise, op. cit. (note 112), p. 109.
116 «Jewish War aid Gets $100,000 Gift”, New York Times May 7, 1920, p. 11, see Ap-
pendix, p. 168.
7 According to Arthur Butz, The Hoax of the Twentieth Century, op. cit. (note 19), p.
99, Auschwitz entered the Allied war propaganda with the publication of a booklet


by the War Refugee Board in November, 1944. Therefore, it makes sense that
Auschwitz isn’t mentioned in this 1942 story.


64 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Wise said that he had learned through unnamed sources confirmed by
the State Department “that about half the estimated 4,000,000 Jews in
Nazi-occupied Europe had been slain in an extermination campaign”
and that “the plan was drafted by Herman Backe, Secretary of State for
Economics, and was put into effect by Hitler by late summer.” Wise
presented a detailed memorandum on atrocities committed in areas oc-
cupied by German, Rumanian, Hungarian, and Slovak troops and sum-
marized the statistical effect of the campaign on the Jews living in each
country. One example:


“The total number of Jews in Poland, after the deduction of some
500,000 refugees in Russia, should have approximated 2,800,000.”


I don’t want to say that Wise’s numbers in the article were wrong be-
cause one would think that, if anyone knew the Jewish population in
German occupied Europe in 1942, it would be the chairman of the
World Jewish Congress. If anything, he would inflate the numbers,
which may have been the case here. For example, however many Jews
purportedly were in Poland, since there was no modern Poland before
1918, they were previously also counted as citizens of other countries,
chiefly Russia. In 1939, when Stalin invaded eastern Poland, it was on
the pretext of protecting the minorities within what had for two decades
been Poland. The Soviet Union considered the Jews under their control
to be Soviet citizens as they had been Russian citizens before 1918. Al-
so many so called Polish Jews moved to Hungary, a country that Wise
left out of his statistical analysis. This historic article contains several
inconsistencies and is historically significant for its timeliness, not for
its accuracy.

There are many other articles. One such example is an article on
page one of the New York Times of July 22, 1942, printing the text of
messages from President Franklin Roosevelt and Prime Minister
Churchill to Dr. Wise containing vague statements of atrocities.''* There
are other such examples. The points are that Wise was a major force be-
hind breaking the World War Two holocaust story to the mainstream
press through the New York Times, that he then had a history of an ac-
tive ongoing relationship with the Times that went back over forty
years, and that he also had a long history of making extermination
claims all the way back to World War One. This makes Wise’s activities
during the First World War era holocaust fundraising drives all the more
significant.


‘8 Thid., pp. 107f.; Butz discusses a large series of quotes from the New York Times,
ibid., pp. 99-123.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 65


A few other examples. In a sermon at Carnegie Hall Wise declared
that Jews cannot believe in “the Christ of dogma” in order “to be saved
or to be safe.” Regarding Jesus Christ, Dr. Wise said in 1938:'!°


“We’ve never rejected him. He died as millions of Jews are dying to-
day.”
There are several articles about Wise’s views on Jesus. One urged Jews
to agree as to the historic reality of Jesus and the nature of his activi-
ty.’?° In another, Dr. Wise wanted an end of missionizing by Christians
to Jews and that Christian textbooks not teach that the Jews tried to kill
Jesus:


“The Christian teacher ought to read backward, trying to make clear to
the Christian child that all this happened long ago, that we do not know
where the responsibility rests. Some Jews went with Him, some turned
against Him. But his mother was a Jewish woman.”’


Wise wrote in his autobiography Challenging Years:'*!


“T have felt it to be my sacred duty, when addressing Christian groups
and committees, to remind them that even if it could be proven, as of
course it cannot be [according to Wise], that Jews and only Jews were
responsible for the crucifixion, those who called themselves his follow-
ers dare not overlook or ignore Jesus’ last appeal on behalf of his per-
secutors.”


Wise thought that Christians, in stressing the resurrection, neglected the
life and teachings of Jesus the Jew, and that Jews have not repudiated
Jesus the Jew. Wise considered it undebatable that, “Jesus was a Jew,
not a Christian.” Of course, if we follow that logic to its ultimate ab-
surdity, then it should be stressed that Buddha was born a Hindu, that
Luther was born a Catholic, and that John Wesley was born an Anglican
and was even buried in his Anglican robes. George Washington was
born an Englishman, and the English never rejected Washington the
Englishman. El Libertador Simon Bolivar was born a Spaniard, and so
on.
Wise, again from his autobiography published in 1949, says:!**


“Tt is credibly, even verifiably reported that in all negotiations in the
last year of the war through neutral powers on the part of the repre-
sentatives of the Nazi regime in 1944, the first demand of Hitler had ref-


"19 Totalitarianism is Scored — Dr. Wise Declares Jews Cannot Believe in ‘Christ of
Dogma”, New York Times April 18, 1938, p. 15.

120 “Jesus As A Reality — Rabbi Wise Thinks Jews Should Agree as to His Activities”,
New York Times, April 25, 1925; “Jesus Lived, Dr. Wise Tells Jews”, ibid., December
21, 1925.

1218'S. Wise, op. cit. (note 112), p. 282.

122 Ibid., p. 235f.


66 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


erence not to territory or to reparations but to the handing over to him
of the Jews of such countries as England and the United States.”


You can’t help but wonder how much of what he said he actually be-
lieved but it’s possible he believed everything he said.

Recapitulating this chapter, at the beginning of World War One the
leadership of the American Jewish Committee established The Ameri-
can Jewish Joint Distribution Committee for Jewish War Sufferers, os-
tensibly to help Jews living in Palestine. It channeled aid to Jews living
in eastern Europe through Jewish welfare agencies in Germany until
America entered the war, after which, with the permission of the Ger-
man and American governments, aid continued to be sent through the
neutral Netherlands. The suffering of Jewish civilians living in eastern
Europe was described literally as a holocaust, a unique suffering, and
regular fundraising campaigns to aid these people were conducted
throughout the war. January 27, 1916, was set aside as Jewish Sufferers
relief day by President Wilson, and also in 1916, an influential book
was published by the American Jewish Committee entitled The Jews in
the Eastern War Zones, that reported Jews were being denied rights de-
nied to no other people, and used the words six million and extermina-
tion in describing their persecutions under the Czar. Anti-German hate
propaganda, directed against both Jews and non-Jews in the United
States reached a fever pitch. The Balfour Declaration was declared a
month before the British army entered Jerusalem. The American Jewish
Congress was launched and both the American Jewish Committee and
The American Jewish Congress sent delegates to the Paris Peace Con-
ference that placed Palestine under a British mandate.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 67


Chapter 3:
Postwar Campaigns


“(The Jews] were the worst sufferers in the war. [...] ‘The successive
blows of contending armies have all but broken the back of European
Jewry,’ he said, ‘and have reduced to tragically unbelievable poverty,
starvation and disease about 6,000,000 souls, or half the Jewish popu-
lation of the earth.”


—From a statement by Felix Warburg, Chairman of the Joint Distribu-
tion Committee, November 1919.!77


“In Europe there are today more than 5,000,000 Jews who are starving
or on the verge of starvation, and many are in the grip of a virulent ty-
phus epidemic. ’’'**


Speaking from Paris on October 26, 1919, Felix Warburg spoke about
plans to switch from emergency or general relief to reconstructive relief
in the activities of the Joint Distribution Committee. Warburg said:'”


“The 30 million dollars given since the war by America for the relief of
Jewish victims of the war programs has been well spent and served the
purpose of keeping body and soul together for millions of unfortunates
who otherwise would have perished.

Warburg explained, ‘The great need of urgent relief-food, clothing, and
shelter, still exists but as Europe settles down the need for money for
that purpose will pass. It is passing even now. We are hoping to get 20
million dollars in an American drive and use perhaps half of this for
work of immediate relief.

‘The other half will be used as capital for a bank. What the Jews and
everybody else in Europe need is raw materials to get back to work.
[...] We negotiated with local bankers throughout the stricken section,
saying: ‘We will give you a certain amount of money if you will advance
an equal amount as a loan to reestablish the people in their accustomed
trades.’


123 “Tells Sad Plight of Jews,” New York Times, November 12, 1919, p. 7. See transcript
on p. 153 and a reproduction on p. 170 in the Appendix.

!24 Editorial, New York Times, April 21, 1920, p. 8.

'25 Rditorial, New York Times, October 27, 1919, p. 3.


68 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


‘We want to encourage the Jews in trade and farming so far as possible,
and discourage mere merchandising. We feel that in this way we can do
much to eliminate race prejudice. This plan of lending money at small
interest may go a long way toward this.

‘T see no reason to believe that profit cannot be shown on the great
mass of loans we intend to make. Naturally we are interested primarily
in the Jews, but so far as practicable we hope to do business — that is
what this is, with non-Jews as well.”


Back in New York from his trip to Paris, Felix told the New York Times
in an article that the Jews were the worst sufferers in the war, “and have
reduced to tragically unbelievable poverty, starvation and disease about
6,000,000 souls, or half the Jewish population of the earth.”!*> At the
same time, one of Felix’s older brothers, Max Warburg, was represent-
ing Germany on their Finance Committee at the Versailles Peace con-
ference. Max ran the Warburg bank in Hamburg and played a role at
every major reparations conference for 14 years giving him wide yet
unofficial influence. During the Weimar Republic, Max Warburg was on
the Central Committee of the Reichsbank and on the board of 27 Ger-
man businesses including I.G. Farben.

American Red Cross and American Jewish Committee representa-
tives were working in a remote region of Poland according to another
1919 report article: '*°


“The war has left 5,000,000 destitute and stricken Jews in Eastern Eu-
rope. [...] Their number is being reduced every day by a series of the
most terrible epidemics that ever swept any section of the world.”


He attributed this to an accident of geography, causing Jews to suffer
“more from the war than any other element of the population.”

Felix Warburg had a secretary, Harriet Lowenstein, who was active
in the Joint Distribution committee. She went to Europe on their behalf
and made large purchases from the U.S. Army. When the servicemen
asked what she was going to do with the 100,000 plus candles that she
bought, she told them that the candles were to keep the rats away from
the dead in the horrible cellars where so many of the destitute Jews live
in Poland. This was perfectly true, too, according to Lowenstein.'”’

This article was apparently written months after the fact, probably in
New York, after Miss Lowenstein had returned home from Europe.
Speculating on how this story came to be, it is possible it was written to
explain rumors among the American soldiers that there was a Jewish
woman with a lot of powerful friends who was pushing everybody


126 “Five Million Face Famine in Poland”, New York Times, December 3, 1919, p. 24.
For the complete article, see Appendix, p. 156.

127 «Sends $2,000,000 in one Bargain Hunt,” New York Times, October 26, 1919, sec-
tion 2, page 1. For the complete article, see Appendix, p. 151.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 69


around France and almost stealing army supplies and equipment. It’s al-
so possible that the story was just a human-interest story, perhaps writ-
ten to show contributors to the ‘Joint’ that they were getting their mon-
ey’s worth, but that alone wouldn’t explain the smart mouth routine
about the candles to the American servicemen. Of course only a very
small percentage of the world’s many needy people then were Jewish,
as is true today, although the State of Israel receives the lion’s share of
the total of U.S. foreign aid. Some things don’t change.

Here is another remarkable ‘news’ story from 1919. Former U.S.
Ambassador to Turkey, Henry Morgenthau Sr., the father of Henry
Morgenthau Jr., back from an official mission to Poland, reported that
five to ten million people in Europe and the Middle East faced hunger
death in the coming winter. That there was massive hunger in Europe at
that time was certainly true. But his real point was not just to talk about
the ‘starving millions.’'”*®

This article’s centerpiece is the theme we have seen stressed so
many times since, in so many places and in so many ways. Morgenthau
uses a Jewish massacre as a universal symbol for all suffering for all
people who experience injustice. Morgenthau called the Jewish massa-
cre at Pinsk “a complete expression of the misery and injustice which is
prevalent over such a large part of the world today [...|” Later he calls
the massacre, “the anguish cry of a terribly persecuted race; to my mind
it expressed the misery of centuries and the misery not only of the Jews,
but the numerous other people that for ages have looked for justice and
have not found it.” An earlier example of trying to appropriate the
Christian message that we see over and over echoed in today’s popular
culture.

Sholem Asch, a well-known Yiddish writer, served on the Joint Dis-
tribution Committee during World War One. When the ‘Joint’ entered
Lithuania in 1919, he went there on its behalf.!”? Asch later served on
the pro-Soviet American Committee of Jewish Writers and Scientists. '*°
Three years before World War Two began, Asch wrote concerning
Polish Jews:'?!


“people made the impression as if they were buried alive. Every second
person was undernourished, skeletons of skin and bones, crippled, can-
didates for the grave.”
“In the Valley of Death” was a fictional article published by the New
York Times magazine in 1943 written by Asch in which he wrote of


128 “Says Ten Millions Face Hunger Death,” New York Times, Dec. 3, 1919, p. 19. For
the complete article, see Appendix, p. 153.

'29'Y. Bauer, op. cit. (note 79), p. 11.

130 Arkady Vaksberg, Stalin Against the Jews, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1994, p. 118.

31-Y_ Bauer, op. cit. (note 79), page 189.


70 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


“gas chambers and blood poisoning stations which are established in
the outlying countryside, where steam shovels prepare community
graves for the victims. ”'*?


At the end of World War One, there certainly were people starving in
Europe. There were millions of Germans, Poles, and Russians starving.
Also more people died in a worldwide influenza epidemic in 1918-1919
than died in World War One. On Christmas Day of 1919, the American
Relief Committee for German Children, which included Jacob Schiff
and Paul Warburg, was soliciting funds for hungry German children
through the Society of Friends.

In 1920, there was a non-sectarian appeal for funds with the slogan,
“This time the burden is too gigantic to be borne by Jews alone”, by the
Greater New York Appeal for Jewish War Sufferers. This fund drive in-
cluded many prominent Protestant and Catholic clergy with special
model sermons prepared for delivery in all denominations on Church
Sunday. The New York City Board of Education cooperated so that
children in the public schools could hear the story of the suffering of the
children in other lands. Once again the appeal concentrated on Poland,
and 10,000 active volunteers were helping in the New York campaign.
Dr. Boris B. Bogen, sent to Warsaw by the Joint Distribution Commit-
tee, provided this message:'*?

“Hunger, cold rags, desolation, disease, death — Six million human be-
ings, without food, shelter, clothing or medical treatment. At no time
during the war, in any land, not either in Belgium or Northern France,
was there a situation more critical, a need more great, a demand for
sacrifice more insistent than now comes from Eastern and Central Eu-
rope. Both the present and future existence of an entire people are at
stake.”


This 1920 fundraising campaign was aided and legitimized by at least
two New York Times editorials. One entitled “A Work Of Mercy” made
the point that the Jews who fought bravely for the allied cause had no
fatherland and were still suffering even though the war had ended. It
stated: '*4

“In Europe there are today more than 5,000,000 Jews who are starving


or on the verge of starvation, and many are in the grip of a virulent ty-
phus epidemic. An appeal has been issued throughout the world.”


'32 Sholem Asch, “Jn the Valley of Death,” New York Times, February 7, 1943 p. 16.

133 “Jews Ask Public to Aid War Victims”, New York Times, May 2, 1920, p. 1. For the
entire article, see Appendix, p. 158.

134 New York Times, April 21, 1920, p. 8. For the entire article, see Appendix, p. 158, re-
produced on p. 168.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 71


Another Times editorial captioned “The Jewish War Sufferers”’ report-
ed:'*


“In Russia and the neighboring countries the Jews have been subject to

a particularly malignant persecution which has not ended with the war.

Without any national organization of their own, they have no central

organization to appeal to. Living in segregated and generally impover-

ished communities, their misery is cumulative to an extent unknown
among other sufferers. It is estimated that more than five millions are
actually starving or on the verge of starvation, and a virulent typhus ep-
idemic is raging among them and is already spreading among neighbor-
ing populations.”
Although obviously not true, or at the very least grossly exaggerated,
these stories, which have been completely forgotten today, were taken
quite seriously at the time they were made. Please remember that the
press had a lot more credibility in 1920 than it has today.

On September 10, 1920, President Woodrow Wilson expressed sym-
pathy for the suffering Jews of eastern Europe in a letter to Stephen S.
Wise, then Executive Chairman of the Committee on Jewish Status in
eastern Europe. President Wilson declared:'*°


“T am deeply moved by the reports which you send me of the trials and
sufferings endured by your fellow Jews throughout Eastern Europe. No
American, whatever his racial origin or religious creed can fail to feel
the deepest sympathy with the Jews of Eastern Europe who continue to
bear not only the burden of the war, but also the sufferings incident to
unenlightened and unjust treatment at the hands of governments and
peoples. [...]| 1 am of the hope that those nations with which our own
land holds political commerce may do everything in their power to end
not only the legal disabilities of their Jewish populations as provided
for in the minority clauses of the Peace Treaty, but all the injustices and
wrongs which are laid upon them.”


The peace treaty that President Wilson was referring to was of course
the Versailles Treaty and the Peace Conference at Paris that ended
World War One.

By this time the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee was
being called the “undisputed colossus of overseas aid.”'*’ The group’s
executive committee met at Felix’s office at Kuhn & Loeb or in the
Rembrandt Room of his mansion, named for the Rembrandt paintings
on display.


135 “The Jewish War Sufferers,” New York Times, May 3, 1920, p. 12. For the entire arti-
cle, see Appendix, p. 161, reproduced on p. 169.

136 «President Urges Justice for Jews,” New York Times, September 12, 1920.

137 R. Chernow, op. cit. (note 57), p. 246.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


There were free loan societies and other financial institutions being


funded through charitable contributions in place by 1921. Instead of
having to pay back depositors plus interest, they didn’t have to pay any-
body back when the money was donated. One might think that they
wouldn’t charge interest. But as their own records show, the ‘Joint’ did
charge substantial interest, as proven by this interchange at the Chicago
Conference of the American Jewish Relief Committee held in 1921:'°8


“Mr. Adolf Kraus: ‘I would like to ask the speaker a question. I under-
stood you to say that these banks that will loan out the money will
charge no more in the way of interest initially than if we had adminis-
tered the cost of carrying on these banks. Did I understand you correct-
ly.’

Colonel Lehman: ‘Yes’.

Mr. Kraus: ‘Tf the initial cost will be ten percent, will these people be
charged ten percent?’

Col. Lehman: ‘IT have said that we will not allow them to charge an
amount more than will be necessary.’

Mr. Kraus: ‘You are not answering my question.’

Col. Lehman: ‘Yes, I will answer it. I should have said that we will not
allow them to charge more. I did not mean to give the impression that
we will not allow them to charge as much as may be necessary to carry
on with the administrative charges. In other words, I believe about ten
percent will be necessary to carry on with the administrative charges.’
Mr. Kraus: ‘T protest against charging these people ten percent inter-
est.’

Col. Lehman: ‘I want to emphasize the fact that the reconstruction
committee, the Joint Distribution Committee, will under no circum-
stances charge ten percent or any substantial proportion of that. The re-
construction committee in Rumania is charging to the federation of co-
operatives making these loans two and one half percent. You cant ex-
pect these people to whom we are giving the money to assume all of the
costs of administration. They are willing to take some risk of loss on the
administration, but where the cost is, say six percent to eight percent for
administration, it would be hard to expect them to carry that them-
selves. Now, in Poland I should say that the cost of administration
would be that, while the Joint Distribution Committee is only going to
receive three or four percent.’

Mr. Kraus: ‘What is the difference to the man who pays the interest
whether the bank in Rumania receives the interest, or in Poland, or the
Joint Distribution Committee? My opinion is that if any interest is
charged it should be limited, so it should not cost the person who pays it


'38 Proceedings of Chicago Conference of the American Jewish Relief Committee held


on September 24-25, 1921.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 73


more than five percent. If we are going to do charity at the rate of ten
percent interest and over, let us stop. It is no charity at all.’

Col. Lehman: ‘IT dont think that you can change the economic laws with
the use of a million dollars. You can change them to a certain extent. I
think that Dr. Bogen will bear me out when I say that the interest rate in
Poland is much higher than that.’

Dr. Bogen: ‘In Poland the moneys that will be received from America
will be used in reconstruction work, and to help the Polish Jew so that
he will be able to help himself. The usual rate of interest in Poland is 1
percent a week, or 52 percent a year. The Jews in Poland do not want to
borrow money without interest. When I told them that we were going to
give them relief they told me they wanted to send you an appreciation
for all that was done in the matter of relief.’

The Chairman: ‘Subject to the approval of the conference the chair
would suggest that such questions as may arise in the minds of the
members of this conference be jotted down and the chair proposes to set
aside all the time that we need for answering questions.”’


The excuse was later given that the interest rates are high in Poland due
to the exchange drop (inflation) in Poland, but since the money was do-
nated in dollars that kept their value, the Polish currency fluctuations
shouldn’t have made any difference.

Later a Dr. Rosenblatt of the conference discussed pogroms and
children.'*’ Dr. Rosenblatt said:


“Pogroms are going on daily. They spring up sporadically, unsystemati-
cally, in one place one week and the next week in another place, and
there is no power on Gods earth which can cope with the situation of
the pogroms. I do not want you to misunderstand me. The Russian Gov-
ernment is trying its utmost to cope with the situation but it is power-
less, because these pogroms, this pogrom movement, these criminal
ways of killing the Jews, are a movement against the Soviet government.
It is synonymous with them to make a pogrom and to fight the Soviet
government and therefore the one insoluble problem today is how to
cope with the pogrom situation’. [...]

I witnessed scenes of children playing. What is the play, what is the
game of the children? They are playing in pogroms, a group of 25 chil-
dren on one side and a group of 25 children on the other side. One
group is the pogrom maker and the other group consists of Jews who
must save themselves, and the psychology of those children, the frame of
mind of these children is the most horrible thing to think of.”


A Mr. Billikopf, who had been a commissioner of the Joint Distribution


Committee for three months in Galicia, Lithuania, and Poland, gave the
hard sell:!*°


139 Ibid., p. 40f.


74 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


“T advocate a new and immediate drive as the first and the imperative
task that is before us. I know that the words ‘drive’ and ‘campaign’ have
become odious — that they cause our flesh to shrivel when we think of
them, but whether they are odious or not, there are 60,000 Jewish or-
phans who, without us, will die!”


Dr. Nathan Krass spoke about some of the negative rumors that must
have been floating about at the time of the conference. Dr. Krass testi-
fied:'*!


“T have crossed the ocean a number of times in the interest of the Joint
Distribution Committee. I have traveled all through America, and there-
fore geographically I have trained myself to see both sides of the prob-
lem. I see it from Europe; I see it from America. I see it through your
eyes; I saw it through the eyes of our brethren over yonder. I am glad
that I was in Europe this year, because so many of our rich Jews of
America were tourists this year. I met them in Carlsbad, I met them in
Marienbad; they were everywhere, and everywhere they grumbled be-
cause they saw in so many of those summer resorts the Jews of Europe
living in the hotels and enjoying themselves and they came to the rapid
conclusion that because these few Jews, the thousand they saw in
Carlsbad, and the 800 they saw in Marienbad and the 500 in Wiesba-
den, who through the decline in the exchange value could translate their
lei and their lire into large amounts of money in Czechoslovakia and in
Germany — these American Jewish tourists have come to the conclusion
that all the Jews in Europe are rich and have grown prosperous and
therefore we need no longer help them, but we should let them help, let
them take the burden from our shoulders.”


He further stated that while he was in Europe he also saw orphan asy-
lums, misery, and hardworking ‘Joint’ agents.

Felix Warburg and Henry Morgenthau also spoke at this conference
along with others.

The fund drives continued on a more or less annual basis. In 1922, a
Rabbi Joseph H. Hertz, Chief Rabbi of the British Empire, condemned
the silence of pogroms that he said were being carried out in Ukraine.
He declared:'”


“[...] 1,000,000 human beings had been butchered and that for three
years 3,000,000 persons in the Ukraine had been made ‘to pass through
the horrors of hell.’ [...] He said that although the pogroms in the
Ukraine had ended there were something like 600,000 homeless chil-
dren, 150,000 orphans and 35,000 double orphans in the Ukraine who


40 Ibid., p. 55.

141 Ibid., p. 61.

'2 “British Chief Rabbi Condemns Silence on Pogroms Carried Out in Ukraine”, New
York Times, January 9, 1922, p. 19. For the entire article, see Appendix, p. 162.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 715


would die from cold, hunger or disease unless Jewish hearts remained
human and came to the rescue.”


A brief 1922 news article “Jews Take Over Relief’ reported that the
Jewish Joint Distribution Committee was taking over the work of the
American Relief Administration in overcoming famine in seven gov-
ernments of the Ukraine.'**

In 1923, the Jewish Relief Committee of the Joint Distribution
Committee was reporting 1,165,290 stray children wandering in the
Ukraine. They made the further astounding claim that the 1,165,290
stray children were wandering in the Ukraine because 3 million dollars
in pledges had not been paid. The New York Times reported that the
Committee stated:'“4


“There is still time to round up these 1,165,290 homeless children and
reclaim them from the fate of savages. There is time to snatch them back
from the first onslaughts of Winter in Russia, even now creeping over
the hills, but it will require every dollar of the cash pledged to the pro-
gram of relief and now withheld. Unless the money can be had at once it
will be too late.”


Some people will, by inclination, believe that wherever there’s smoke
there must be fire. Even when the smoke is coming from dry ice. These
people will think there must be some truth to stories told often enough
and well enough, whether or not the stories pass the smell test. By incli-
nation, I may tend toward the opposite extreme. Show me where some-
body’s obviously lying and I will probably remember that incident even
when he is trying to tell the truth. A lot of the money raised by these
drives was used to help many people, and it is possible to argue that if
the promoters hadn’t dramatized the situation, less money would have
been raised which would have meant that fewer people would have
been helped. But on the other hand, the more dubious stories compro-
mised the integrity of these endless appeals for charitable contributions.
The next chapter covers the 1926 drive, where stories of 5,000,000
starving European Jews were spread to finance banks in Poland and
kibbutz like agricultural colonies in the Soviet Union. It was perhaps
the high water mark of fundraising prevarication, at least for the 1920s.


143 « Jews Take Over Relief. Will Carry on Work of American Body in Ukraine,” New
York Times, July 2, 1922.

144 <7 165,290 In Ukraine Verge On Savagery — Jewish Relief Committee Here Appeals
for $3,000,000 to Aid Homeless Children”, New York Times, September 3, 1923.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 77


Chapter 4:
The 1926 Campaigns


“There are millions of Eastern European Jews in Poland and an equal
number in other countries who are passing away and all of them will
disappear unless we rise to the emergency, forget everything else, and
come to the rescue. “


—Louis Marshall, President, American Jewish Committee. !*


“There are 5,000,000 Jews in Central and Eastern Europe facing star-
vation [...]. Five million Jews are in desperate distress today-2,225,000
in Russia, 2,225,000 in Poland, and 500,000 in Bessarabia, Lithuania,
and the nearby countries. “


—The American Christian Fund, December 6, 1926.'*°


After World War One, the public generously contributed to European
relief efforts. But by 1926, the ‘Joint’ found itself:!*’


“Faced with a Jewish American community that was becoming increas-
ingly indifferent to disaster appeals.”’


The records of the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee show
a drop off in contributions from 1920 to 1925 followed by a large in-
crease in 1926. 1926 was also the year in which the most outrageous
Jewish suffering news stories of the 1920s were concocted, the stories
of the five million starving eastern European Jews.

On April 26, 1926, a page one New York Times news story an-
nounced the opening of this fundraising drive at three simultaneous
dinners in New York City the preceding night attended by 2200 people.
It was announced that the largest gift was $400,000 from Felix War-
burg. Speakers drew graphic word pictures for the guests at the dinner
tables and also for the larger radio audiences


'45 “Gifts of $3,700,000 Open Jewish Drive”, New York Times, April 26, 1926, p. 1.

'46 “Cathedral Is Scene of Rally of Faiths for Jewish Relief’, New York Times, Decem-
ber 6, 1926, pp. 1, 18; first part reproduced on p. 170.

'47-Y Bauer, op. cit. (note 79), p. 18.

148 “Gifts...”, op. cit. (note 145), p. 1.


78


DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


“of the pathetic conditions in which millions of Jews are living in Po-
land, Bessarabia, Russia and Rumania, as a result of post-war industri-
al and economic depression, added to the distress left by the war itself.
[...] The speakers appealed to America to salvage one half of the Jews
of the World. They said that all the suffering and persecution to which
Jews had been subjected to in the past all over the world were nothing
[compared] to the misery of the Jews in Eastern Europe today [...and
that] thousands have died from starvation and the diseases that follow
famine like typhus and tuberculosis, and hundreds have committed sui-
cide because they felt their lot hopeless.

Unless America goes to the rescue, it was declared, 1,000,000 Jews in
Poland and 1,000,000 more in other countries affected will be wiped
out by famine and pestilence and will simply disappear off the face of
the earth.”


Louis Marshall, the head of the American Jewish Committee, said:'”°


“At this very moment there are literally millions of men, women, and
children who have always led blameless lives, who are industrious,
thrifty, conscientious, abstemious (eating and drinking sparingly), and
provident, who, without fault of their own, are moving on the very brink
of destruction and annihilation, before whom gaunt famine stalks, who
are threatened and pursued by bigotry and intolerance, and who are
denied the opportunity of gaining a livelihood by abhorrent legislation
and by malignant hostility. The scene of the Jewish tragedy is laid in
Poland and its several divisions, including Galicia; in Lithuania, Lat-
via, Estonia, Rumania and Russia. The victims are the Jews of these
countries, numbering more than 7,000,000 souls. They are emaciated,
ragged, debilitated by physical deterioration resulting from hunger and
disease and mental solicitude. Their eyes are downcast. There is scarce-
ly a gleam of hope left in their hearts. They are on the verge of despair,
and many of them have given way to it, so that on every side one be-
holds the suicide of desperation. [...] All this has come after the war is
over, after they have passed through famines, after they have been refu-
gees, after they have lost frequently the head of the household as a re-
sult of the war, after in some of these countries there have been pog-
roms, and people have been murdered in cold blood, after all that they
possessed is gone, their wealth taken from them, and these things have
not been enough, but those that I have just described are continuing, are
occurring at this hour, at this moment, while I am speaking, there are
millions of Eastern European Jews in Poland and an equal number in
other countries who are passing away and all of them will disappear
unless we rise to the emergency, forget everything else, and come to the


”


rescue.


149 Thid., p. 10.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 719


David A. Brown from Detroit, Michigan, the national chairman of this
1926 drive, said that:'*°


“900,000 Jews in Poland alone were on the verge of starvation and that
this was nearly one third of the entire Jewish population of Poland.
There have been more suicides among the Jews in Poland alone than
had ever occurred there in five centuries. [...] However, there has been
a rift in the clouds of Russia due to the fact that the Russian Govern-
ment recognizes that the very foundation of their economical existence
depends on agriculture. It has hundreds of millions of fertile acres. Rus-
sia has put an end to the private ownership of land, but it recognizes the
right of anybody who desires to work upon the land to engage in agri-
cultural pursuits and has made no discrimination between the Jew and
the non-Jew in that regard.”’


Brown’s message, which was read at the meetings, began:


“Never in the history of the Jewish people, dating back for centuries,
was there a situation like this, and never before in the history of the
Jewish people was there an emergency as great as this.”


The New York Times quoted Mr. Brown as stating the “standard of life
of the Russian Jew is lower than that of the people of India, China, Ja-
pan and Korea” in an editorial in support of the drive.'°° This editorial
called the drive:


“the latest chapter in the story of American succor for Europes stricken

populations, which began with Herbert Hoovers work in Belgium and
has taken the form of vast sums expended on war relief, famine relief
and reconstruction. ”


The 1926 drive of the American relief fund for the Jews of eastern Eu-
rope used a correspondent named Irma May who sent radiograms from
Warsaw to New York. One of these radio programs said:'*!


“In Lodz [...] Records show threatening increase of hysteria, insanity
and suicide within last months. Schools report tuberculosis to 65 per-
cent. Sixty percent of children survive on tea and bread distributed by
schools which face closing. Outbreaks of typhoid and other hunger epi-
demics anticipated and no means available for preventing. Approxi-
mately 230,000 Jews doomed unless immediate relief available.’”’


Another of Ms. May’s radio messages described conditions in Rovno,
Poland “selling last piece of furniture to escape prison for not paying
taxes.”'°* About 500,000 persons attended rallies in New York City in


150 “Arrives With Plea For Starving Jews — Miss May Relief Worker, Says 1,000,000 in
Poland Alone Need Speedy Help”, New York Times, April 8, 1926.

'51 According to the article quoted before, Miss May made a study of conditions in
those countries on instructions from David A. Brown, National chairman of the
United Jewish Campaign.

152 “Jews of Poland Again Face Period of Want”, New York Times Sunday Magazine,


80 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


support of this 1926 drive and speakers “‘spread the message of the suf-
fering of millions of Jews abroad.”'™ The Joint Distribution Committee
cabled that!>?


“unless substantial help came quickly — the Jewish orphans asylum will
be compelled to close. [...] Thousands of children will be turned out in-
to the streets to roam about aimlessly, hopelessly, blindly.”


On November 26 in Washington, D.C., a movement to enlist 50,000
Christian clergy in an organization to save 5,000,000 starving Jews in
eastern and Central Europe was backed by what was called, oddly, the
Near East relief movement. They claimed that one third of the Jewish
population is in distress and:'**


“in some parts of Europe the death rate among Jewish babies is almost
100 percent. [...]

Thousands of Jews are dying of want right now. Hundreds of thousands
are confronted by that most painful death-hunger. Unless help is given,
5,000,000 Jews will starve. This does not mean that they will die imme-
diately, but that they will linger, with lack of sufficient food, and some
will die next week, some next month and each succeeding month, unless
relief comes, one way or another.”


On December 6, 1926, there was another page one New York Times arti-
cle about a rally for the five million starving Jews of eastern Europe.
The headline read: “Cathedral is Scene of Rally of Faiths for Jewish Re-
lief.” 1,500 people attended the mass meeting and heard World War One
Commander in Chief of the US forces General John J. Pershing urge
generous contributions as well as Protestant and Catholic leaders and
Louis Marshall, the head of the American Jewish Committee. New York
Governor and later Presidential Candidate Alfred Smith and Supreme
Court Justice Arthur S. Tompkins sent telegrams of support. One of the
themes stressed by several of the speakers was that by financially help-
ing the starving Jews of Europe they will be fighting race prejudice,
hate and bigotry throughout the world.
General Pershing said:


“Tt is a difficult thing for us in our prosperous country to imagine just
what suffering those poor people overseas are going through. This is an
occasion for all Americans, whether Christians or what not, to show
our Jewish friends that we have charitable instincts and that there is no
such thing as race prejudice in this great country. To my mind this is
one of the great lessons we can teach the people of Europe by contrib-
uting to this fund.”


May 28, 1926, p. 8.

'53 Editorial, New York Times, May 3, 1926 p. 6.

154 «Will Aid Starving Jews—Protestant and Catholic Clergy to Back Near East Relief
Movement’, New York Times, Nov. 27, 1926.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 81


Bishop Manning who presided is quoted as follows:


“The lives of 5,000,000 Jewish men and women and children are at
stake. Our Jewish fellow Americans are sending their help nobly to
their stricken brethren. But the American Jews cannot do it all. The
need is too great for them to meet it. And we cannot allow them to do it
all. The Christians of America must have a share in this great work of
mercy. The call that comes from those suffering mothers and starving
babies is the call of our common humanity.”


Louis Marshall, the wily head of the American Jewish Committee, stat-
ed:


“We rejoice that the Christian Community has decided to help us com-
plete our fund. The telegram we received announcing this decision came
to us like manna in the wilderness, like the dew of heaven on the
parched soil, after the Jews in America for twelve years had striven
alone to keep alive their brethren in Poland, Rumania, Bessarabia and
Russia, where pestilence, war, famine, and massacre have been their
daily experience.”


New York Governor Alfred Smith, who two years later would be the
presidential candidate of the Democratic Party, sent a generous contri-
bution and the following telegram, which was read to the audience:


“Contribution to the American Christian Fund and to the fund of the
United Jewish Campaign for relief of suffering Jews in Eastern Europe
represents the true Christian and American spirit. Suffering unites us in
common brotherhood. Such deeds further good will, better understand-
ing and tolerance. May your meeting have substantial results.”


It was also reported that the American Christian Fund had sent a letter
to 150,000 Christian leaders around the country apprising them that
there are 5,000,000 Jews in Central and Eastern Europe facing starva-
tion.


“We must realize that American Jews cannot save all of them. Unless
Christians help, many will perish. American Christians have never real-
ized nor understood the sufferings of the Jews of Central and Eastern
Europe. Five million Jews are in desperate distress today-2,225,000 in
Russia, 2,225,000 in Poland, and 500,000 in Bessarabia, Lithuania,
and the nearby countries. Men, women, and little children are suffering
and in misery — they are hungry all the time.

Since 1914 ‘the Four Horsemen’ have ridden grimly over half the Jew-
ish population of the world-war pestilence, famine and always death.”


A New York Times editorial supporting this drive reported that 62 mil-
lion dollars had been raised and that they were now engaged in raising
25 million more.'*°


155 “Cathedral Is Scene”, New York Times, December 6, 1926, p. 1.


82 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Isn’t it revealing that in 1926 there are news stories on page one of
the New York Times that five million Jews are starving, unlike during
World War Two, where press coverage was nonexistent or relegated to
the back pages and the religion section until it was practically over? In
1926, we have fifteen hundred people coming out in a snowstorm for
the five million starving Jews, fund drives all over the country, support
from notables including the Governor of New York, 500,000 people at-
tending rallies in New York City in support of this 1926 drive.'*° One
can’t help but wonder about the I.M.T. prosecutors and staff that grew
up in the New York area or elsewhere and had been exposed to these
earlier campaigns. Are we really supposed to believe that an extermina-
tion of the Jews in Central and eastern Europe was avoided in the 1920s
because of mass fundraising campaigns and an outpouring of public
sympathy and support and that twenty years later these same people in
eastern and Central Europe were killed because no one knew about their
plight or no one cared? Certainly they couldn’t have argued that nobody
knew about the holocaust in 1926 because it was on the front page of
the New York Times at least twice.

Did the 1926 holocaust stories evolve out of previous Jewish fund-
raising drives and commitments? Was this just part of a charity tradi-
tion? Were these emotional appeals playing on people’s fears or perhaps
spirituality contrived in order to raise lots of money? We do know these
charity drives were run by international bankers who had also financed
wars, revolutions, and railroads. What they said they actually did with
this money is the subject of the next chapter.

A few other news stories about millions of suffering Jews. In 1937,
Samuel Untermeyer called a conference at New York’s Waldorf-Astoria
Hotel to report that at least 2,000,000 of the slightly more than
3,000,000 Jews in Poland were virtually starving:'*’

“An entire nation of more than three million souls is threatened with

annihilation. ”

In 1938, “a depressing picture of 6,000,000 Jews in Central Europe de-
prived of protection or economic opportunities, slowly dying of starva-
tion, all hope gone” was presented by Jacob Tarshis, known by his radio
audience as the Lamplighter, representing the American Joint Distribu-
tion Committee:'*


!56 New York Times, May 3, 1926, p. 6.

'57 “Untermeyer Asks Aid For Jews In Poland — He Reports at an Emergency Meeting
That 2,000,000 Are Virtually Starving to Death”, New York Times, December 6,
1937.

158 “Jewish Teachers Chided By Isaacs”, New York Times, February 23, 1938.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 83


“The Jewish tragedy started when Hitler came to power in 1933,’ Mr.
Tarshis declared. ‘Now anti-Semitism has spread to thirteen European
nations, and threatened the very existence of millions of Jews.”


In 1940, Dr. Nahum Goldmann, chairman of the administrative commit-
tee of the World Jewish Congress, said in an interview at the Hotel As-
tor that:!°


“Six million Jews in Europe are doomed to destruction, if the victory of
Nazis should be final. [...] The chances for mass emigration and reset-
tlement of European Jewry seems to be remote, and European Jews face
the danger of physical annihilation. Even the 4,000,000 Jews under So-
viet rule, although free from racial discrimination, are not safe in the
event of a final Nazi victory.”


There is a pattern of emotional appeals playing on people’s fears in or-
der to raise lots of money. And they needed a believable crisis to con-
vince the donors to contribute these large sums of money. Were the
leaders making these appeals calculating and unscrupulous enough to
invent facts? Over time and with enough practice, could miracles be
manufactured that would appear credible to institutional sources? Re-
peated and expanded upon day after day over and over for generations
in these institutional sources, could the credibility of these invented
facts become unassailable? I believe that these early holocaust fundrais-
ing drives provide an important clue toward unraveling the revisionist
puzzle.


59 “Nazi Publicity Here Held Smoke Screen”, New York Times, June 25, 1940, p. 4.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 85


Chapter 5:
Following The Money


This chapter sketches the very puzzling story of where the money raised
in these fundraising drives went in Russia at least according to the pub-
lished sources. We will also cover a few important points of historical
background and touch on the political situation in the Soviet Union in
the early twentieth century, a period that is largely forgotten or misun-
derstood today.

The American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee’s own yearly
expenditures chart shows the amounts of money the ‘Joint’ says they
spent from 1914 through 1934 on relief. They had two classifications of
aid: emergency or general relief which included soup kitchens, clothing,
emergency medical care and rehabilitative or reconstructive relief which
consisted largely of setting up and operating trade schools, banks, and
farms. At the end of World War One, people were generous with their
contributions, but in the early 1920s collections dropped off year by
year. In 1926, as featured in the last chapter, the promoters really got
creative and were successful in boosting collections. The aid raised dur-
ing the war and in the immediate postwar period was channeled into
emergency relief, which they also called general relief. Later, most of
the money was spent on reconstruction, or rehabilitative relief. By 1926,
they were spending 81% of the money on reconstruction, and in 1927,
86% according to their own figures.

Less than 20 percent of the funds sent to Poland actually went into
emergency relief in 1927 according to chairman David A. Brown. The
remainder was devoted to “constructive undertakings” such as estab-
lishing cooperative banks in Poland, financing tradesmen and artisans,
and promoting Jewish agricultural settlements.'© Also in 1927, a Max
Steuer who had gone to Europe to investigate the relief programs
charged that 40% of the money raised “disappeared in the manipula-
tions by the bankers on the subject of exchange.”

Mr. Steuer quoted a Dr. Greenebaum, a member of the Polish Par-
liament, who said that until recently, “after the money had been trans-
mitted, the exchanges were so manipulated on the other side that at


160 Editorial, New York Times, September 12, 1927.


86 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


least 40 percent of the money was consumed before a single dollar was
distributed to any person for whom it was intended.” Steuer made other
charges but also made it clear that he was referring to Polish bankers
and not American bankers. '*!

As one would expect, Steuer received a scathing in the press for
questioning the actions of the ‘Joint’. On Monday, September 12, 1927,
The New York Times editorialized:!©


“Mr. David A. Brown cited figures which would indicate that in Poland
less than 20 percent of the funds went into emergency relief. The re-
mainder was devoted to ‘constructive’ undertakings. Mr. Henry Mos-
kowitz in a recent public statement expresses the opinion that a study of
the Joint Distribution Committees accounts would show that in Poland
the bulk of the relief money went into the establishment of cooperative
banks and other agencies for the purpose of financing small tradesmen
and artisans. Incidentally, this may suggest what Mr. Steuer had dimly
in mind — very dimly — when he made his startling charges, and particu-
larly his reference to manipulation of the exchanges. If American dol-
lars were converted into Polish zloty for the creation of bank capital, it
is conceivable that some losses may have been incurred through the
fluctuations of the Polish exchange.”


The Jewish Daily News was more blunt. They editorialized that Mr.
Steuer had simply removed himself from the role of a Jewish communal
leader.'®

The actions of the Committee were defended by both Louis Marshall
and Felix Warburg. Warburg deplored the wide publicity and insisted
that Steuer had placed an exaggerated value on hearsay testimony and
was trying his case in the newspapers. Warburg further stated that no
good purpose had been served by Steuer’s statement and that the prob-
lem had been corrected.

Speaking at the Constructive Relief Conference in October of 1927,
Felix Warburg responded that the policy of the Joint Distribution Com-
mittee has been based on a deep seated respect for the Jewry of the old
world and that the European Jews, long before the war, had developed
many conspicuous national and international philanthropic associations.
He said that the leadership of European Jewry had never been ques-
tioned and that it was the general policy of the ‘Joint’ to work within
existing Jewish organizational structures in Europe.'®* Warburg wasn’t
recorded as saying anything about the starvation statistics that had been


161 “Steuer Puts Blame on Polish Bankers”, New York Times, September 7, 1927.

162 Editorial, New York Times, September 12, 1927.

163 “Warburg Assails Steuer s Charges”, New York Times, September 9, 1927.

'64 Report on the Activities of the Joint Distribution Committee, Constructive Relief
Conference, Chicago, IL, October 22-23, 1927, p. 4.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 87


claimed during the fundraising campaigns of the year before. But he did
offer the opinion that 1919 and 1920 were the blackest years in modern
Jewish history. During those two years, according to Warburg:


“Widespread massacres and pogroms resulted in the murder of several
hundred thousand Jews. On the other hand, it witnessed a phenomenal
revival of Jewish activity, accompanied by intense social strife, and by a
renaissance of cultural and economic theories incident to the universal
movements for national self-determination and the recognition of racial
minority rights.”
Warburg also claimed that there had been Ukrainian pogroms in the
course of which nearly 200,000 Jewish men, women and children per-
ished by fire and sword, constituting one of the blackest pages of histo-
ry.!6

The public quickly forgot about Steuer’s little criticism. In 1932, Fe-
lix Warburg was selected as second only to Supreme Court Justice Lou-
is Brandeis in an honor roll of the ten leading Jews in the United States.
Others in that top ten included United States Supreme Court Justice
Benjamin Cardozo and Harvard law professor Felix Frankfurter as well
as New York Times publisher Adolf Ochs and Rabbi Stephen Wise.'©

What kind of a person was Felix Warburg? He was described as fun
loving, a person who knew how to relate to many different types of
people. While highly respected and genuinely liked as a leader within
the New York establishment, he was not an intellectual, a doer, not a
thinker. Married to an heiress while maintaining numerous girlfriends
openly, he was the kind of person who is incapable of embarrassment,
possessed of a cast iron gut, and publicly credible whether or not he was
being particularly truthful. The rap on Felix was that he was the family
flyweight and not bright enough for the Hamburg bank.'®

In reading this next section, it’s only fair to first point out the obvi-
ous, that to most of the general public, Felix Warburg was an extremely
wealthy Republican banker. We will assume that he didn’t at first want
to have anything to do with Soviet Russia. To me, saying that Jews were
attracted to communism is about as fair as saying that Germans were at-
tracted to National Socialism. But it is a fact that the private charity he
headed funded agricultural colonies in the Soviet Union, claiming that
millions of Jews were starving in Europe, year after year.

Jewish agricultural colonies in Russia had been tried before under
czarist rule. Before the Communist revolution, there were Chibbat Zion
branches in operation all over Russia. This socialist agricultural move-
ment was financially supported by Baron Edmund de Rothschild who
165 Thid., pp. 9-11,


166 New York Times, December 31, 1932.
'67 R. Chernow, op. cit. (note 57), p. 289.


88 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


called them “my colonies” and put in agents to supervise them. This
didn’t mean that Baron Rothschild approved of the Czar any more than
Warburg was attracted to communism. It’s possible that both Rothschild
and Warburg thought that they could have a positive and moderating ef-
fect on these respective regimes by being involved in a business rela-
tionship with them. Or they could have become involved for other rea-
sons, such as to facilitate emigration from Russia, or to set up tempo-
rary settlements of people who could later be moved to Palestine.

Of course there’s the obvious humanitarian reasons. With the benefit
of hindsight, any attraction to Marxist ideology seems odd and incredi-
ble. But we must briefly mention a few of the writers and thinkers
whose works were influential during that period and whose ideas could
have motivated leaders and opinion makers from Rothschild and War-
burg on down to the lowliest commissar and GULag enforcer. They are
largely forgotten now perhaps for the good reason that their ideas have
not stood the test of time.

A Hebrew novelist extolled readers to cease to be Jews in a theoreti-
cal religious sense and to become Jews in their own right as a living and
developing nationality. Nachman Syrkin predicted that the Jews would
redeem the world which crucified them and that their role in human his-
tory was a uniquely chosen role, which in the future through the agency
of Zionism would usher in the socialist millennium.'® Syrkin said in
1918 that the Jewish people is socialist not by necessity but because the
revolution was declared on Mt. Sinai.'® A chief rabbi of Palestine,
Abraham Kook, wrote that a consistent application of all the laws of the
Torah in social and economic matters would not tolerate the capitalist
system. Moses Mendelssohn, who was the founder of Jewish rational-
ism, argued:'”°

“The progress of modern civilization has come to be regarded as a sort

of ‘Messiah’ for the final solution of the Jewish problem.”’

Dov Ber Borochov was a leading exponent of Marxist Zionism. He
wrote The National Question and the Class Struggle in 1905, which was
widely read by Jews living in Russia at the time. Writing in the scien-
tific, jargon ridden, lumberingly constructed style of Marxist analysis'”!
Borochov argued that just as the class struggle is waged for the material
means of production, there is also a national struggle waged for “spir-


'68 David J Goldberg, To the Promised Land — A History of Zionist Thought, Lon-
don/New York: Penguin Books, 1996, p. 117.

169 Enzo Traverso, The Marxists and the Jewish Question, New Jersey: Humanities
Press, 1994, p. 51.

70 Nahum Sokolow, History of Zionism 1600-1918, vol. 1, London/New York: Long-
mans, Green and Co., 1919, p. xvii.

‘1 T), Goldberg, op. cit. (note 168), p. 126.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 89


itual” (language, customs, mores) and territorial conditions of produc-
tion. Borochov theorized that the normally antagonistic classes within a
conquered or oppressed nationality unite in identifying with the op-
pressed proletariat. According to Borochov, even upper classes of an
oppressed nationality think and act like oppressed proletariat because of
the history of the whole nationality having been oppressed. By this
twisting of Marxist gibberish, Jewish nationalism was transformed into
a progressive movement of national liberation by interpolating the class
struggle into Zionism.

The New Standard Jewish Encyclopedia explained Borochov’s theo-
ry this way:!”

“Borochov 8 chief ideological contribution was his Marxist analysis of

the economic structure and social situation of the Jewish people, point-

ing to the physical inevitability of territorial concentration in Palestine

as a means of occupational redistribution and normalization.”


Sokolow’s History of Zionism first published in 1919, chronicles that
during the Communist revolution of 1917 at Odessa, a port on the black
sea, entire battalions of Zionist soldiers bore through the town behind
blue and white banners proclaiming: “Liberty in Russia, land and liber-
ty in Palestine.” A hundred and fifty thousand men followed these ban-
ners to which the military Governor of Odessa insisted on showing
honor publicly.'” In the course of the Russian civil war between the
reds and the whites, the Jewish population rallied massively to the Red
Army, and its intelligentsia was recruited into the Soviet state appa-
ratus.'”* Leon Trotsky, as the head of the Red Army in 1919, accepted
the proposition from Paole Zion that Jewish “national battalions” be
constituted to organize the defense of the Jewish population and win it
over to the new Bolshevik regime.'” In 1922, it was reported that a
strong Jewish army organized for self-protection was well equipped
with rifles, ammunition, and machine guns and numbered 500,000
strong. In a town called Spalla, the Jewish Volunteer Army, well-armed,
engaged in guerrilla warfare with a band of several hundred bandits,
which ended with the Jews entering the town. Order was established
immediately and several thousand former residents who escaped a se-
ries of massacres two or three years before began streaming in from all
parts of Russia and Rumania. The Jewish army was founded by young


'2 The New Standard Jewish Encyclopedia, seventh edition, 1992.

73 N. Sokolow, op. cit. (note 170), vol. 2, p. 38.

4 B. Traverso, op. cit. (note 169), p. 7.

5 Quoted by Joseph Nedava, Trotsky and the Jews, Philadelphia: Jewish Publication
Society of America, 1972, p. 114.


90 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Zionist groups and therefore had religious as well as racial signifi-
cance.'”°

Beginning in 1924, Jewish colonies totaling 1.5 million acres were
established in the Crimea, the Zaporozje, Cherson, and Odessa districts,
in Caucasia and in White Russia. Also in 1924, at a luncheon at Kuhn &
Loeb in New York, a program was worked out to involve the Joint Dis-
tribution Committee in some of these projects. The Joint Distribution
Committee began financing Soviet Jewish agricultural settlements in
Ukraine and the Crimea with a mixture of donated money, loaned mon-
ey, and Soviet funding. These settlements became a bizarre hybrid of
Park Avenue charity and Marxist agriculture. Some of the Jewish set-
tlements founded by Agro-Joint were Zionist colonies settled by people
who saw the Crimea as a stepping-stone on the road to Palestine. Thir-
teen of the colonies had Hebrew names. According to statistics pub-
lished in Yehuda Bauer’s book, My Brother's Keeper, which was fi-
nanced with a generous grant from the Joint Distribution Committee,
there were 112 Agro-Joint colonies in the Crimea in 1928.'’’ The Soviet
government contributed 500,000 rubles for the Agro-Joint settlements
each year and placed this budget at the disposal of Agro-Joint.'*

The new Soviet government considered the Jews to be a formerly
oppressed nationality entitled to their own territorial regions. In accord-
ance with the Soviet scheme of national autonomy, these regions were
governed as autonomous Jewish districts. Schools, Colleges, law courts,
police forces and the entire machinery of government were conducted
in Yiddish. There were also traveling theaters, publications, movies, ra-
dio and lectures. Jewish workers were recruited for new factories all
over Russia. In Asia near the Manchurian border, the New Jersey sized
territory of Biro-Bidjon was, in time, also declared a territory exclusive-
ly for Jewish settlers. It was prestigious being Jewish in the Soviet Un-
ion during the 1920s and the first half of the thirties and perhaps long
after that. It was a time of state protection for Russian Jews. They were
assumed to be faithful allies of Soviet Power and therefore to be trusted
in promoting policy. The Soviet government gave the Jewish theater a
first class building in the middle of Moscow and large state subsidies
for its work, and its creative figures received generous titles and medals
which guaranteed them privileges and material comforts within the So-
viet system.'””


176 «South Russian Jews Raise Strong Army — Organized for Self-Protection, It is Said to
Number Now 500,000 Soldiers”, New York Times, December 20, 1922.

'77-Y_ Bauer, op. cit. (note 79), p. 60.

8 Ibid., p. 65.

'79 B. Traverso, op. cit. (note 169), p. 155; Arkady Vaksberg, op. cit. (note 130), pp. 52-
63.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 91


In the spring of 1927, Felix Warburg went to the Soviet Union, trav-
eling from Vladivostok to Moscow, claiming to have toured forty of the
Agro-Joint colonies in the Crimea and Ukraine. Warburg’s party trav-
eled by private railroad car and toured more remote regions in two
chauffeured limousines. Felix laid a cornerstone for a Felix Warburg
high school and visited a settlement named Felix Warburg No. 4 and
5.'®° Upon his return he told a fundraising rally in Chicago:'*!


“T wish you had been with us on our trip through Russia. Good friends
had warned us not to make the trip, that it was dangerous, that we were
going to a country where everything would be supervised and we would
get predigested food in regard to the things we wanted to see. Nothing
of the kind has happened. In no country we visited were we as free from
formalities and granted such absolute freedom as in Russia. [...| The
work in Russia has been a great success, not only from the sentimental
standpoint but also from the financial standpoint. It is difficult to realize
that untrained Jewish people from the cities should have been brought
to these farms and in the third year should begin seriously to pay back
the loans, heavy loans, but that is the truth. Everything given to them is
noted down by them in a book. Whenever they look at the book they
know what they owe to the mutual credit society, and they know what
they owe to the Kassas and they know what they owe to the Jews of
America.”


Julius Rosenwald, the owner of Sears, was a heavy donor to the Ameri-
can Jewish Joint Agricultural Corporation and a settlement was also
named after him.

To the Communists it was blood and not religion that determined
Jewishness. Anti-Semitism in the Soviet Union was prosecuted as a
crime against the Jewish nationality. It was a crime against racism.
Communists supported what they called “spiritual” aspects of the peo-
ple. These spiritual aspects were myths, folkways, customs and so forth
and should not be confused with religion, which the communists op-
posed. While religious Christianity, Islam, and Judaism were persecuted
as religions within the communist system, the Jewish people were fa-
vored as an historically oppressed nationality like the Georgians or the
Armenians.

In 1928, the Central Committee of the Communist party in Moscow
appointed a special committee to combat anti-Semitism. The special
committee’s program provided for a systematic campaign by trained


180 R. Chernow, op. cit. (note 57), pp. 289-304.

181 “A frer Three Years, The Progress of the Jewish Farm Colonies in Russia”, Reports of
Dr. Joseph A. Rosen, Felix M. Warburg, and James H. Becker, Delivered at the Con-
structive Relief Conference of the Joint Distribution Committee and the United Jew-
ish Campaign, Chicago, October 22-23, 1927.


92 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


personnel beginning within the Communist Party and also within
schools including colleges. The campaign against anti-Semitism was in-
troduced into the schoolbooks, motion pictures, the press, and literature.
Public debates on anti-Semitism were held and excursions to the Jewish
colonies arranged. A campaign against anti-Semitism was also conduct-
ed in the Red Army and in the trade unions. It became a crime against
the state. The highest disciplinary penalties were provided in the pro-
gram recommended by the committee for those found guilty of anti-
Semitic practices and particularly for those opposing the Jewish coloni-
zation work.'*

The head of the Moscow State Theater and seven other officials of
the State Theater were dismissed for their anti-Semitic practices.’ A
Moscow dispatch to The Jewish Telegraph Agency reported that four
“Pogromists” were sentenced to death and nine to prison terms of from
one to ten years.'** During a conference on combating anti-Semitism
held in the All-Russian Communist Club, a Moscow District Court
Judge stated that disciplinary punishment had been inflicted upon sev-
enty persons in Moscow during the first ten months of 1928 for anti-
Semitic propaganda.'*

The battle against anti-Semitism became an election campaign issue
in White Russia.'*°


“Communists, fight ignorance, alcoholism and anti-Semitism read a
poster placarded in the streets.”


In a separate report, two ringleaders found guilty of attacking the Jew-
ish Colony No. 3 were sentenced to death. Two other members of the
band were sentenced to imprisonment followed by deportation. The
Chief of Police and his assistant received eighteen-months jail sentences
and the chairman of the regional Soviet was sentenced to one year in
prison.!%7

The Communist press was reporting that the principal cause of anti-
Semitism in industrial centers was the influence of the “Kulaks”
(wealthier peasants) upon former peasants now working in factories. A
reporter from The Jewish Telegraphic Agency investigated and reported
in a dispatch from Minsk:'**


82 “Communist Body Acts”, New York Times, May 20, 1928.

83 “Russian Communists War on Anti-Semitism”, New York Times, May 13, 1928.

84 “Death Decreed for Pogromists”, New York Times, July 8, 1928.

85 “Moscow Anti-Semites Disciplined’, New York Times, October 14, 1928.

86 “War on Anti-Semitism Feature in Soviet Election Campaign”, New York Times, Jan-
uary 6, 1929.

87 “Two to Die for Pogrom’”, New York Times, September 3, 1929.

88 “Holds Kulaks Responsible — Investigators Blame Wealthier Peasants for Russian
Anti-Semitism”, New York Times, December 30, 1928.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 93


“Jewish and non-Jewish workers interviewed by the correspondent
agreed in blaming the Kulaks for using their influence over the new fac-
tory hands for the purpose of promoting anti-Semitic disturbances and
thus making trouble for the Soviet government. The Kulaks are especial-
ly incensed at the government’ insistence upon its plan for the eventual
socialization of agriculture.”


In one show trial eight workers including three Communist party mem-
bers were charged with tormenting a Jewish working girl. In order to
achieve the maximum publicity, it was staged in the largest available
hall and advertised throughout Russia. The President of the White Rus-
sian Supreme Court presided over a bench of judges, and the chief pros-
ecutor of the White Russian Republic personally conducted the case for
the state. The President of the White Russian Academy of Sciences and
the dean of the Minsk faculty of Law also appeared as “prosecutors on
behalf of public opinion.” Intending to serve as a warning to other of-
fenders, the sentences at Soviet show trials tended to be draconian. Ac-
cording to the indictment, a Jewish girl was first habitually mocked and
later roughly handled. She was told she would be put in an oven and
then water was thrown over her. Then she tripped and fell on her face
and finally was brutally kicked on the ankle with a wooden clog. Such
rowdyism was all too frequent with White Russian workers during that
period. Almost an exactly similar case occurred almost simultaneously
in a nearby town at another factory with a non-Jewish girl as the victim,
but no action was taken. '®?

Why did the Bolshevist party decide to hold a full-dress political an-
ti-Semite ‘show trial’ at the White Russian capital Minsk? A major rea-
son given in a New York Times report covering this trial was that the So-
viet elections were about to begin and the Communists hoped to use
these elections to smash the power of the Kulaks once and for all. In
White Russia much land had recently been taken from the Kulaks and a
small part of it was utilized to form new Jewish land colonies. As a re-
sult there had been a certain amount of terrorization of the new Jewish
colonists. The Communists then hit back with this slogan:'*?


“All anti-Semitism comes from the Kulaks.”’


It was also decided to thrash out this case with the utmost publicity be-
cause such acts were prevalent in the area and an increase could have
become politically dangerous in an atmosphere of discontent generated
by a bad harvest, crushing taxation on the villages and a shortage of
goods in the towns. Even the official “Jewish section” of the Com-
munist party directorate in Moscow often soft-pedaled anti-Semitism in
order not to supply enemies of the Soviet regime and the anti-Socialist


189 “Anti-Semite Show Trial Opens at Minsk,” New York Times, January 20, 1929.


94 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Jewish press abroad with opportunities for “fantastic pogrom propa-
ganda.’!*°

The eight defendants were accused of “counter revolution” although
the alleged facts hardly seemed to justify such a terrible charge. The
Soviet Chief Prosecutor (Krylenko) at this trial wanted the death penal-
ty by shooting for Class One offenders found guilty of counterrevolu-
tionary activities and prison for an indefinite term for Class 2 offenders.
He stated:!*


“Under no circumstances will these criminals belonging in Class 2 be
allowed to return home. After their release from prison they will be ex-
iled for life to remote places out of harm’ way.”


The central issue at the trial was whether the defendants were guilty of
an act of a counter-revolutionary nature (Class One). The judge sought
to establish the connection of the defendants’ acts with the influence of
the Kulaks, wealthy peasants, and Nepmen. Nepmen were new econom-
ic policy men — small businessmen who had been allowed to operate
under Lenin after the famine of 1921-1922, but were later taxed out of
existence. The four major defendants were found guilty of anti-
Semitism and rough treatment of their fellow worker and received pris-
on terms.'””

In a separate show trial four months later, 24 other Russian workers
charged with anti-Semitism received prison sentences. The trial attract-
ed wide attention, and hundreds of people crowded the court to hear the
decision, which was issued at 5 o’clock in the morning. At the same
time during a meeting held in Moscow, Anatole Lunatcharsky, Commis-
sioner of Education, said he could understand those who opposed the
Soviet Government but could not see how followers of communism
could maintain the claim that “Jews govern us.”'!

The Soviet war on anti-Semitism coincided with the period after
Lenin’s death in 1924 when Joseph Stalin was jockeying for power. He
was a man who spent a lifetime portraying himself as an internationalist
and as a determined foe of anti-Semitism. Stalin’s bitterest enemy, Leon
Trotsky, called Stalin a clerk, an embezzler of ideas, timid and unintel-
ligent, but never said anywhere that Stalin was motivated by anti-
Semitism.

Stalin, an early editor of Pravda, had first came to public attention
with the publication of his article “Marxism and the National Ques-
tion” in the Communist theoretical journal Enlightenment one year be-
fore the start of World War One in 1913. This article dealt with what


190 «“Anti-Semites Sentenced. Several Russians Get Prison Terms for Treating Girl
Roughly”, New York Times, January 22, 1929.
191 “Soviet Still Wars on Anti-Semitism“, New York Times, May 19, 1929.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 95


Marxists should do after the revolution with all of the non-Russian na-
tionalities that had been conquered and forcibly made a part of Russia
by the Czars. Stalin argued for the creation of locally autonomous re-
gions (colonies, reservations) for the historically oppressed nationality
groups where their language, folkways and traditions would be respect-
ed. In this politically charged article, Stalin wrote at length on the Jew-
ish nationality, describing them as not a nation but something mystical,
intangible and otherworldly. This article established Stalin as the Bol-
shevik authority on the national (actually the nationalities) question.
Lenin appointed Stalin the Commissar of Nationalities Issues in the first
Bolshevist government. In April of 1922, at Lenin’s insistence, Stalin
was elected to the newly created post of general secretary of the Com-
munist party. '°

Less than a year after becoming the undisputed dictator of the Soviet
Union with his public statements viewed as national policy, Stalin made
his most famous statement about anti-Semitism. Stalin characterized it


as “the most dangerous survival of cannibalism’ :'*


“National and racial chauvinism is a remnant of man hating customs
characteristic of the era of cannibalism. Anti-Semitism is an extreme
expression of racial chauvinism and as such is the most dangerous sur-
vival of cannibalism. It is useful to the exploiter for it serves as a light-
ning rod enabling capitalism to evade the blows of the toilers.

‘It is a danger to the working people for it is a false path leading them
into the jungles and away from the right road. Communists cannot but
be irreconcilable enemies of anti-Semitism. In the Soviet Union it is rig-
idly prosecuted and militant anti-Semites are punishable by death under
the law.”


Stalin’s “cannibalism” and “lightning rod” analogies were standard
communist orthodoxy. Karl Kautsky, a principal theorist of the second
Marxist International, wrote in 1903 that the czarist regime used the
Jews “as a lightning conductor during the storms that gather over the
autocracy.” Lenin always condemned anti-Semitism in the clearest and
most intransigent fashion. In 1918, he signed a decree calling it a “mor-
tal danger for the entire revolution and as a menace to the workers and
the peasants.” Engels saw the struggle against anti-Semitism as a priori-
ty task of the international workers’ movement writing in Arbeiter-
zeitung, the daily newspaper of the Austrian Socialists, that “we owe
much to the Jews [...] Marx was of pure Jewish blood, Lassalle was


192 Albert Resis (ed.), Molotov Remembers, Conversations with Felix Chuev, Chicago:
Ivan R. Dee Inc., 1993, p. 87.

“Stalin Hits Anti-Semitism — Says It is ‘Most Dangerous Survival of Cannibalism”,
New York Times, January 15, 1931. This statement was made in Moscow on the pre-
vious day to the Jewish Telegraphic Agency.


193


96 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Jewish, very many of our best comrades are Jewish.”'** And Karl Marx
said:

“The stiffest form of opposition between Jew and Christian is religious.

How is this to be resolved? By abolishing religion.”

Marx also said that man emancipates himself from religion politically
by relegating it from public to private law.'”°

Typically, Stalin’s supporters were dedicated, not particularly intel-
lectual party officials who had never been outside the Soviet Union. His
group brought a rigid, totalitarian, small mindedness to Marxist social
theory. When the theories proved to be unworkable, they became even
more dogmatic, brutal, and even murderous in their insistence on carry-
ing them out. Lazar Kaganovich was probably the biggest and certainly
the most durable butcher during the Stalinist era. Sometimes using the
alias Kosherovitz,'°° he was the Soviet official most responsible for the
Ukrainian famine of 1932-1933. Some have even argued that Kaga-
novich was the real master at the Kremlin and Stalin a mere puppet.'””

The only English language biography about this killer of over twenty
million people was written by Stuart Kahan, an American writer whose
aunt Rosa was Stalin’s third wife and who is therefore also the nephew
of Lazar Kaganovich, but more about that later. Kahan worked as a
journalist for the New York Times. In the 1980s, he visited and inter-
viewed Kaganovich who was retired and living in a Moscow apartment.
A courageous book based on interviews with family members commin-
gled with family history and lore, it is a fascinating and highly readable
biography. But it spares the family and treats even Lazar Kaganovich in
a relatively friendly manner, to the extent that it is ethically possible.
While the only available biography about this biggest mass killer of the
twentieth century is largely positive, it’s amazing that this book exists at
all.

Kahan wrote that during the first year of the ‘Great Terror’ Kaga-
novich supervised the killing of nearly half a million people as mass
purges swept across the country like a deranged prehistoric animal.'”*
While he was in power, eight towns’ names were changed to Kaga-
novich in addition to the Moscow subway initially being named after


°4 E. Traverso, op. cit. (note 169), p. 26.

°5 Morris Stockhammer (ed.), Karl Marx Dictionary, New York: Philosophical Library,
1965, p. 121, 214. Both quotes are taken from Marx’s Papers on the Jewish Ques-
tion.

% Strobe Talbott (ed.), Khrushchev Remembers — The Last Testament, Boston: Little,
Brown, and Co., 1974, p. 150.

°7 Walter Laqueur, Stalin — The Glasnost Revelations, New York: Scribner’s, 1990, p.
251.

°8 Stuart Kahan, The Wolf of the Kremlin, New York: William Morrow and Company,
Inc., 1987, p. 174.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 97


him. He was assigned to the Cheka (later called the OGPU, then the
NKVD, and still later the KGB), an investigative agency that became a
political police force of organized terror. Stalin assigned Kaganovich
the task of keeping his second wife under surveillance and reporting
back on her activities. After she committed suicide, Kaganovich intro-
duced Stalin to his younger sister Rosa who was a medical doctor at a
clinic in Moscow and within a year Rosa Kaganovich became Stalin’s
third and last wife.

His perennial sidekick during that period was a young Nikita
Khrushchev who as a Shabes Goy in the Ukraine lit the Sabbath lights
and started the stoves for the Jewish high politicos on Saturdays.'”
Khrushchev wrote in his biography that as a Russian peasant he first
met Kaganovich in 1917 and owed his early career to Kaganovich. Ka-
ganovich was Khrushchev’s boss from 1928 to about 1938 and again
from 1946 to 1948.7

Kahan wrote that Kaganovich took great pleasure in having 16 major
Cossack villages removed to Siberia because he blamed the Cossacks
for persecuting Jews under the Czars.”’' He participated in demolishing
the church of Christ the Savior in Moscow for a new palace of Soviets.
The holy week monastery was turned into a theater for use by party
members:?”


“People were afraid to laugh. It was as if a huge blanket had been
dropped over their mouths.”


Kahan wrote of an interesting and possible account of Stalin’s death.
According to Kahan, after Stalin’s first stroke Rosa (Dr. Rosa Kaga-
novich Stalin, Stalin’s wife) prescribed for him pills called dicoumarol,
an anticoagulant also used in rat poison. Large amounts are lethal, but
taken in small amounts, dicoumarol retards blood clotting making an-
other stroke less likely. After his first stroke, Stalin took dicoumarol
twice a day. Later Rosa secretly quadrupled the dosage, which eventual-
ly poisoned him. The problem with the story is that Kahan implicates
Molotov, Bulganin, and others in the inner circle as plotters in Stalin’s
demise. It is not very likely that Stalin would have no friends in his own
inner circle but this theory protects Rosa and Lazar Kaganovich from
total responsibility.°°? Maybe Stalin really was killed by a Jewish doc-
tor, namely his wife. An autopsy might tell us for sure.

Hard to believe stories about killer doctors have been around for a
long time in the Soviet Union. An earlier ‘doctors plot’ was one of the


199 Ibid., p. 158.

200 Strobe Talbott (ed.), op. cit. (note 196), p. 544f.
201 S. Kahan, op. cit. (note 198), pp. 158-165.

202 Thid., p. 178.

203 [hid., pp. 257-265.


98 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


excuses for the Soviet Great Terror of the 1930s. Briefly, this earlier tale
and its resultant consequences went like this: In 1934, Bukharin, Yago-
da, and other rightists in contact with Trotsky were plotting to assassi-
nate Stalin, Voroshilov, Kirov, Menzhinsky, Molotov, Kuibyshev, Kaga-
novich, Gorky, and Zhdanov, just about the entire Soviet leadership.
They plotted to accomplish this through physicians slowly ruining the
health of these leaders. As directed by the plotters, the physicians delib-
erately gave bad advice and mistreatment for illnesses especially to the
cardiovascular system. Injections and stimulants were administered in a
way calculated to surreptitiously kill the patient. In that way, Menzhin-
sky was murdered and his position in the leadership was assumed by
Yagoda.

When Gorky, the internationally famous literary figure, contracted a
serious case of influenza and died, it was soon rumored that his doctor
deliberately aggravated his condition, murdering Gorky. Soon they were
saying that Trotsky had ordered that “Gorky must be physically exter-
minated at all costs” due to Gorky’s prestige and because he was very
devoted personally to Stalin. These and similar fictional ‘crimes’ were
prosecuted at three trials held at the height of the Great Terror before
the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the USSR in August
1936, January 1937, and in March 1938.2% At the 1936 trial, Zinoviev
and Kamenev were brought from prison where they were serving out
terms on previous convictions. The prosecutors established that an inti-
mate relationship had developed between Leon Trotsky on the one hand
and Alfred Rosenberg and Rudolf Hess of National Socialist Germany
on the other hand. At the conclusion of the third trial in 1938, the mur-
dering doctors and other plotters were convicted and shot by a firing
squad.

During the great terror, from 1936 to 1938, Stalin approved a plan to
summarily shoot tens of thousands of people establishing target figures
for shootings by province. There was socialist competition between
NKVD departments to find the most spies. N.I. Ezhov, Stalin’s secret
police chief at the height of the Great Terror, cynically and knowingly
forced confessions from innocent people. Stalin personally signed death
sentences including a record 3,167 in one day. Eventually Ezhov was
arrested, convicted, and shot for the crime of “leftist overreaction” and
was replaced by Beria.”°° The old line Bolsheviks were arrested and
shot in a move that may have actually been popular with some of the
lower classes because there was so much bitterness accumulated against


204 Albert E. Kahn, Michael Sayers, The Great Conspiracy — The Secret War Against
Soviet Russia, Boston: Little, Brown, and Co., 1946, p. 262 et al.

205 John Arch Getty, Roberta T. Manning, (eds.), Stalinist Terror. New Perspectives,
Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993. pp. 14, 34, 42.


DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 99
the misery that the revolution had caused to the Russian people.*”°

Closing this chapter with a note concerning the Soviet ‘doctors plot’
of the 1950s, according to author Kahan, six of the fifteen doctors who
were charged were Jewish, but the official news of the arrest only re-
ported nine of the fifteen names, including all of the six Jewish names.
It therefore looked to the world like most of those arrested were Jewish,
which is typical of the misconceptions that are repeated to this day. For
example, online Encarta Encyclopedia reports:


“In 1953 fifteen doctors, most of them Jewish, were arrested and
charged with murdering important Soviet officials on orders from the
Joint Distribution Committee, a Zionist organization.”


Go figure.


206 Walter Laqueur, op. cit. (note 197), p. 273f.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 101


Chapter 6:
The Trail Continues


Glowing reports of activities in the Soviet-Joint agricultural colonies
continued into the early thirties. In 1931, The New York Times report-
ed:7°7


“The economic transformation of Jewish life in Soviet Russia is not far
short of a marvel. Discarding all estimates about the future, one cannot
overlook the remarkable fact brought out at the session of the Council
of Nationalities held in Moscow in the middle of January that at the be-
ginning of this year 46.7 percent of the Jewish population in Soviet Rus-
sia were wage earners, a percentage which no other nationality in Sovi-
et Russia has yet reached; also that 43% of this new Jewish proletariat
were connected with heavy industry; that the former preponderance of
Jews in the needle and the leather trades has changed to a preponder-
ance in the metallurgical industries; that the number of Jews working in
the Soviet metal industries now exceeds the number in all other trades.
[...] The number of Jewish men without rights because they engage in
trading has been reduced to such a minimum that it no longer counts.
[...] a nation of, literally, shopkeepers and traders is in front of our eyes
being transformed into a people of land and industrial workers.”


Yehuda Bauer reports in My Brother's Keeper that a ‘Joint’ leader had
discussed the contemporaneous ruthless extermination of the Kulaks
with colleagues and Jewish leaders in Russia but notes that there were
few Kulaks among the colonists and it would therefore affect them very
little.*°* Agro-Joint reacted to the Soviet forced collectivization drive by
intervening with local Soviet government and Communist party offi-
cials to modify legal restrictions so that the Agro-Joint colonies came
out of the collectivization drive relatively well.”

Jewish Workers and Farmers in the Crimea and Ukraine is a book
about the activities of the Soviet Agro-Joint colonies that was written by
a long-time American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee activist and
Agro-Joint Assistant Treasurer, Evelyn Morrissey. It chronicles a


207 William Zukerman, “Status of the Jews in Russia as transformed by the Revolution,”
The New York Times, May 31, 1931.

208 'Y. Bauer, op. cit. (note 79), p. 70.

209 Ibid, p. 74E.


102 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


month-long visit to the Soviet Union and tour of these agricultural col-
onies in 1935. The Agro-Joint project inside the Soviet Union made fel-
low travelers (persons who espouse the cause of the Communist Party
without being a member) out of some ‘Joint’ officials. Treated like roy-
alty, Morrissey’s party did not have to wait in line to see the embalmed
body of Lenin. She spent her first night at the State Opera Theater, then
made the rounds of Moscow’s museums and the just opened opulent
Lazar Kaganovich Moscow subway system. She was told that Red
Square was not named after the Communists, but was so named because
of the public executions that took place there during ancient times. “Was
it Ivan the Terrible whose blood-spilling gave it its name?” Motrissey
wondered. She saw churches that were still open and churches that were
now museums or clubs for workers. She saw the house where Stalin
was living. She toured Leningrad, Odessa, and Kiev.

Then Morrissey’s party went off to visit the Agro-Joint colonies. In
one Kolkhoz they were told that 1934 was a good crop year for them,
but that 1935 would be even better.7!° (Remember, over 7 million
Ukrainians had died in an artificial famine during 1933-1934.7'') She
reported seeing prisoners working in the fields in the Crimean steppes
living under fairly good conditions. She wrote that “undesirables, coun-
ter-revolutionaries, and class enemies in Russia” are denied internal
passports, which means that as escaped convicts they could not secure
employment. These passports had to be renewed every three to five
years, she explained, and only workers and those who accept the Soviet
system receive passports. The book goes on:?!*


“This, it is explained, provides a careful check on the Soviet citizen. We
have read much of forced and prison labor conditions and its horrors,
but here in these golden fields of sunflowers we cannot visualize what it


”


means.


Morrissey also reported that the “Soviet Government has not merely ac-
tively cooperated in the work, but has taken the lead officially, recog-
nizing the solution of the Jewish question as a State problem.” She not-
ed the Government’s ongoing campaign against anti-Semitism, that
spreading anti-Semitic propaganda was a criminal offense, punishable
by internal exile and imprisonment:


210 Evelyn Morrissey, Jewish Workers and Farmers in the Crimea and Ukraine, Private-
ly Printed, New York: Self-published, 1937, p. 38.

211 Robert Conquest, Harvest of Sorrow. Soviet collectivization and the terror-famine,
London: Hutchinson, 1986; Robert Conquest et al., The Man-made famine in
Ukraine, Washington: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research,
1984.

212 E. Morrissey, op. cit. (note 210), p. 41.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 103


“Jews as a nationality, she said, enjoy actual and absolute equality in
civil, political, and other rights with the rest of the population. In the
Agro-Joint colonies Jews enjoy cultural autonomy; Yiddish is spoken in
the schools and courts, thus transmitting Jewish national tradition to
the younger generation through Jewish communal life, the study of Jew-
ish literature, etc.”


A ‘Joint’ publication written by Joseph Hyman and published in 1939°!?
reported that Agro-Joint projects included farm settlements, industriali-


zation, and other activities for both rural and urban Jews:7!*


“At certain stages of development in all the Agro-Joint projects, the
work was taken in hand by local government agencies, fitted into the
general structure of economic and social life of the country, and contin-
ued on a larger scale at the expense of the Government.”


This publication claimed that the land settlement work settled 250,000
people in the Ukraine and Crimea and that “by 1937 the collectives had
become strong enough to take new members into the colonies without
outside help, and to provide large funds for general improvements, elec-
trification of villages, irrigation, water supply and other projects.” Agro-
Joint operated three hundred loan societies which were absorbed by the
Government Bank in 1937 “which enabled them to continue working on
a scale larger than any social welfare organization would have been able
to provide.”

This same 1939 ‘Joint’ publication also mentioned operating other
successful trade and farm schools, sometimes in cooperation with other
Jewish organizations such as ORT?" and the Soviet Government. It re-
ported organizing 63 medical societies that successfully fought “tuber-
culosis, trachoma, favus and other diseases ravaging the impoverished
Jewish population.” This showed a capability of moving large groups of
people around deep within the Soviet Union during the 1920s and
1930s. It reported that Agro-Joint wound up its activities in 1937-1938
“when it was found that Russian Jews no longer required the assistance
of outside organizations.”?'°

According to The JDC Story, which was published in 1953 by the
American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee, there were 215 Agro-


213 Joseph C. Hyman, Twenty Five Years of American Aid To Jews Overseas. A Record of
the Joint Distribution Committee, New York, 1939.

214 Tbid., p. 31.

215 Organization for the Distribution of Artisanal and Agricultural Skills among the Jews
in Russia (ORT), a Jewish advocacy group founded in 1880 in czarist Russia. The
administrative offices are located in London, England.

216 J.C. Hyman, op. cit. (note 213), pp. 27-33.


104 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Joint colonies containing 100,000 persons operating in the Crimea and
Ukraine by 1936:7!’


“In less than a decade and a half, the work of Agro-Joint helped to
transform a large section of Russian Jewry from a downtrodden, almost
helpless ghetto population into self-reliant and productive workers of
the field and factory. [...] Without the full cooperation of the Russian
Government, these tasks could not have been accomplished, according
to this 1953 ‘Joint’ source. But finally in 1938, JDC was asked to wind
up its activities in Russia, since according to the authorities, the gov-
ernment was now in a position to provide for its citizens without calling
upon outside aid.”


In My Brother ’s Keeper, Yehuda Bauer called the results of this coloni-
zation effort “unclear” and said that the full story of what happened to
Agro-Joint can’t be told until the Agro-Joint files in Russia are found
and opened to scholarly inspection.*"*

But the Soviet agricultural colonies were always overshadowed by
the colonies in Palestine. After all, the ‘Joint’ had been founded in 1914
to help colonists in Palestine. Many fundraisers, especially in Wise’s
American Jewish Congress, felt that the Soviet colonies were at best a
distraction to the Zionist goal. Palestine was the most consistent cause
in the Joint Distribution Committee’s fundraising campaigns from 1914
through the 1920s and 1930s, as it is today — for Israel.

As previously mentioned, what was then called Palestine was a part
of the Turkish Ottoman Empire at the time that hostilities first broke out
in 1914 between the German Empire, Austria-Hungary, and the Otto-
man Turks on one hand and Great Britain, France, and czarist Russia on
the other hand. The United States entered the war in 1917. Also in 1917,
there was the Balfour Declaration and Great Britain conquered Palestine
including Jerusalem. After the cessation of hostilities, Great Britain was
awarded the mandate of Palestine at the Paris Peace conference.

Rabbi Wise reminisced about a meeting he had with Lord Balfour in


December of 1918. Wise wrote:7!”


“We [Wise and Balfour] met again at the dinner tendered by Lord Roth-
schild to King Feisel and the world-famed Colonel T. E. Lawrence.
Feisel looked every inch an Eastern potentate and spoke in Arabic.
Lawrence translated the speech in simple, musical English, a simple
enough task, seeing that he had probably written the Arabic version for
his majesty.”


217 Moses A. Leavitt, The JDC Story. Highlights of JDC Activities 1914-1952, New
York: American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee, Inc., 1953, p. 10.

218 -Y Bauer, op. cit. (note 79), pp. 103f. Bauer notes in the preface that he received a
generous grant from the Joint Distribution Committee in writing the book.

219 §.S. Wise, op. cit. (note 112), pp. 195f.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 105


Soon after Britain obtained this League of Nations Mandate over Pales-
tine, Winston Churchill became Colonial Secretary in British Prime
Minister Lloyd George’s cabinet. He seemed to believe that the Jews
coming to Palestine would be advantageous for the Arabs dwelling in
Palestine. As mentioned in a previous chapter, Churchill told a Moslem
delegation in Jerusalem that Palestine would be “a” not “the” national
home of the Jews. Speaking in the British House of Commons on July


4, 1922, Churchill asked rhetorically:*”°


“Are we to keep our pledge to the Zionists made in 1917? [...| Pledges
and promises were made during the war, and they were made, not only
on the merits, though I think the merits were considerable. They were
made because it was considered they would be of value to us in our
struggle to win the war. It was considered that the support which the
Jews could give us all over the world, and particularly in the United
States, and also in Russia, would be a definite palpable advantage.”


The Churchill White Paper of June 1922, while he was Secretary of
State for the Colonies, concluded that the apprehensions, “so far as the
Arabs are concerned, are partly based upon exaggerated interpreta-
tions of the meaning of the [Balfour] Declaration favoring the estab-
lishment of a Jewish National Home in Palestine. [...] Unauthorized
statements have been made to the effect that the purpose in view is to
create a wholly Jewish Palestine. Phrases have been used such as that
Palestine is to become as Jewish as England is English.”**' Perhaps
Churchill thought that the Jews coming to Palestine would become
good Palestinians, as they had become good Englishmen, good Ger-
mans, and good Frenchmen.

Many of the leaders of that period did not see Palestine developing
into a Jewish state. Max Warburg viewed Palestine as a possible sanctu-
ary to restore the spirit, a cultural gift to mankind.”” Along those lines,
Felix Warburg largely financed the creation of an Institute of Jewish
Studies at the Hebrew University. Lord Balfour presided over the
founding ceremonies at the opening of Hebrew University on April 1,
1925. Chaim Weizmann became the first President and Albert Einstein
chairman of the Academic Council.” In 1925, Felix Warburg joined
with Louis Marshall in setting up the Palestine Economic Corporation,
with Felix as honorary chairman, to channel investment money into
commercial and agricultural projects in Palestine. Felix’s fantasies
about a classless society, purged of human frailty, with farmers and arti-


220 Robert John, Behind the Balfour Declaration, Costa Mesa, CA: Institute for Histori-
cal Review, 1988, p. 85.

221 J. de Haas, S.S. Wise, op. cit. (note 80), pp. 173-176.

222 R. Chernow, op. cit. (note 57), p. 297.

223 Ibid., p. 252.


106 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


sans settling there, was suggestive of the Jewish Agro-Joint colonies in
Russia.’™ This idea did not originate with Warburg, of course, much of
the same idea is seen in Theodor Herzl’s writings, especially his novel
Old New Land.”°

The indigenous Palestinians were not happy about these changes,
although the British and the Zionists tried to convince world opinion
that they were. On August 23, 1929, there was an Arab uprising against
the Jewish population in Palestine. Five days after this Arab uprising, a
mass meeting was held at Madison Square Garden, New York City, rais-
ing two and a half million dollars and creating an emergency relief fund
for Jewish victims of the Arab uprising, which began to be distributed
in September 1929. Propaganda efforts were made to show how Jewish
immigration to Palestine brought prosperity to the Arabs residing there.
A survey was completed that showed that Jewish enterprises had both
quadrupled the value of Arab property and increased the purchasing
power of the Arabs. According to this survey, classes affected adversely
by the Jews included Arab employers who exploited their fellow natives
through cheap labor and land owners who exploited their lessees.””° The
survey echoed the opinions of the Palestinian character Reschid Bey out
of Herzl’s best known novel, Old New Land, who had exclaimed that
everyone has gained from Jewish expansion, the landowners from high-
er land prices, the peasants from regular employment and welfare bene-
fits.

Herzl’s popular utopian fantasy novel Old New Land was written in
1899 and set in the future (1923). In this novel, a Christian says:7”’


“You re queer fellows, you Moslems. Dont you regard these Jews as in-
truders?”’

“You speak strangely, Christian,” responded the fictional Moslem char-
acter named Reschid. “Would you think of someone as a robber, who
does not take anything from you, but brings you something instead? The
Jews have enriched us. Why should we be angry with them? They dwell
among us as brothers, why should we not love them? [...| You must ex-
cuse my saying so, but we did not learn tolerance in the Occident. We
Moslems have always had better relations with the Jews than you Chris-
tians.”


224 Thid., pp. 252 and 448.

225 Theodor Herzl, Old New Land, Princeton, NJ: M. Wiener, 1997; first published in
German as Altneuland circa 1900.

226 “Survey Reveals that Jewish Immigration to Palestine Brings Prosperity to Arabs,”
The New York Times, June 15, 1930.

2271 Theodor Herzl, Old New Land, op. cit. (note 225), p. 124f.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 107


This could have been wishful thinking for some, but to many others the
concerns of the Arabs that were already living in Palestine were simply
a matter of indifference.

The ‘Joint’ organized the Palestine Economic Corporation in 1926,
which through various subsidiaries, such as the Central Bank of Coop-
erative Institutions and the Loan Bank, Ltd., and the Palestine Mortgage
and Credit Bank, offered credit to farmers, artisans, small merchants,
and manufacturers. The Palestine Water Company and the Bayside
Land Corporation were established, and they also had investments in
Palestine Potash, Ltd., Palestine Hotels, Palestine Foundries, and Metal
Works, Agricultural Mortgage Company, and the Palestine Electric
Corporation.”

Steven S. Wise said this about Zionism and the problems in Palestine
in 1931:


“Only two kinds of beings believe that Zionism aims at power and the
use of violence. First, those unworthy Arab leaders who are incapable
of believing that faith in the weapons of love and peace can be real, and
the equally unworthy Jewish leaders who believe only the worst about
their own people who, with all facts of and passion for an outmoded
nineteenth century philosophy insist that the recrudescence of Jewish
life in Palestine means force, violence and war. As if there were to be
the abrogation of every Jewish ideal of the centuries by Jews who stand
out even among their own as idealists!”


There was a general feeling after the end of World War One that some-
thing big was about to happen. Many of the hopes and perhaps wishful
thinking of that period are neatly summarized in an article from the New
York Times of August 28, 1922, which also refers to the return of Jerusa-
lem, predicting that it will be the world peace capital:


“SAYS JEWS OF WORLD WILL BACK LEAGUE

Dr. Sokolow Tells Zionist Congress Jerusalem Will Be International
Peace Capital.

ARAB ENTENTE PREDICTED

Dr. Weizmann Convinced Palestine Cannot Be Rebuilt Without Cooper-
ation of Arab People.

CALSBAD, Aug. 27 (Jewish Telegraphic Agency) — ‘The League of Na-
tions is a Jewish idea and Jerusalem some day will become the capital
of the world’s peace,’ declared Dr. Nahum Sokolow, Chairman of the
Zionist Executive Committee, at a special meeting of the Zionist Confer-
ence today.


228 J.C. Hyman, op. cit. (note 213), pp. 39.
229 “Rabbis Urge Faith As Key To Crisis,” The New York Times, September 21, 1931, p.
36.


108 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


‘The League has recognized our rights to our ancient home,’ Dr.
Sokolow continued. ‘We Jews throughout the world will make the
Leagues struggle our own and will not rest until there is ultimate victo-
ry.’[...]
It was decided at the meeting to send messages of congratulation to
Max Nordau, one of Herzl’ first followers, the Earl of Balfour and Bar-
on Edmond de Rothschild, the last named being the founder of the first
Jewish colony in Palestine.
[...] George Halpern, Treasurer of the Zionist World Organization, con-
tended that the Zionists should concentrate on colonization and immi-
gration rather than on cultural activities. [...]”


Dr. Sokolow was the author of History of Zionism, published in 1919,
and very influential in defining both the scope and the naiveté of the
movement at the time. Theodor Herzl was the founder of the Zionist
movement and was remarkable as a religious leader who was personally
not religious. Max Nordau was considered by many to be Herzl’s spir-
itual heir, and Chaim Weizmann was the charismatic former English
chemistry professor who actually led the Zionist movement at the time.
Felix Warburg’s niece, Lola Hahn Warburg, was Weizmann’s lover.

In the 1920s, Theodor Herzl’s spiritual heir Max Nordau was claim-
ing that Jews were being slaughtered on the Polish-Russian border and
that 600,000 pogrom-afflicted Jews should immediately be transferred
to Palestine along with their assets. Nordau reportedly predicted that a
third of these Jews would starve to death, a third would emigrate, and
that the remaining third would quickly and finally achieve the Jewish
State.**°

According to Nahum Sokolow’s History of Zionism, a seminal and
encyclopedic study first published in 1919, the anti-Zionist Mendels-
sohnian school argued:**!


“The progress of modern civilization had come to be regarded as a sort
of ‘Messiah’ for the Final Solution of the Jewish problem.”


This history relates how the public sympathy engendered by fifteenth
century massacres of Jews in Poland and Inquisition stories of Jews be-
ing burned alive in Spain led to the readmission of the Jews into Eng-
land.**? Sokolow writes this about World War One:?7?


“Now among all the battlefields and graveyards of the war, there is not
one to be compared with the battlefield of the Jewish ‘Ghetto’ in East-
ern Europe. Millions of Jews have waded through seas of blood and
tears. Towns and villages have been dyed with their blood. The Jews


230 Edwin Black, The Transfer Agreement, Washington, D.C.: Dialog Press, 1999, p. 77.
31 N. Sokolow, op. cit. (note 170), vol. 1, p. xvii.

232 Thid., vol. 1, p. 32.

233 Ibid., vol. 1, p. Xxii.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 109


have sacrificed their trade, their fortunes and themselves. The flower of
their manhood has been lost or mutilated. The sources of life have been
cut off, every link of the chain of existence has been broken.”


Similarly, concerning Theodor Herzl, the non-religious founder of the


Zionist movement., Sokolow wrote:?**


“Herzl had written his first pamphlet under the influence of the Dreyfus
affair. That cry of 20 years ago thunders in unison with the cries of
mothers, wives, orphans, from underneath the pyres and ruins which in
their brutal reality leave the worst imaginings of a Jeremiah far behind.
The dead arise from their graves, covered with blood, trampled in the
dust, with the fiery name of God, the shaddae on their pale foreheads,
and they demand to be heard.”


As we can see, the imagery of a massive garish imitation of the cruci-
fixion has been present in the literature for a long time.

Another book also published in 1919, The Jew Pays. A narrative of
the Consequences of the War to the Jews of Eastern Europe, and of the
Manner in which Americans have Attempted to Meet Them, provides a
spiritual explanation for these charity drives:**°


“The very speech of ancient Israel in all its eloquent and touching
modulations had been somehow prophetically fashioned for this su-
preme hour. The trained organizer, equipped with a knowledge of the
Jewish soul, could turn to the sacred books and find therein texts with-
out number for his purpose. One quarter of the content of the Bible is a
record of Jewish struggle and sorrow, and fairly teems with gems in the
literature of exhortation and appeals to compassion. Half the Jewish
fasts and feasts are redolent of exile and oppression and the threat of
national extermination. ”


Population statistics published during this period do not support the
claims that there was a holocaust of Jewish people during World War
One. Quite the contrary, from 1900 to 1920, according to standard ref-
erence books, the world’s Jewish population more than doubled. One
reference book, the World Almanac of 1900, gave a Jewish population
of 7,186,000 including 3.4 million in Russia and 1.7 million in the Aus-


234 Ibid. vol. 2, p. 13.

235 Marcus Eli Ravage, The Jew Pays. A narrative of the consequences of the war to the
Jews of eastern Europe, and of the manner in which Americans have attempted to
meet them, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1919. The rest of the quote is: “The Passo-
ver service begins with an invitation to the hungry and the stricken to come and par-
take of the bread and prosperity of their more fortunate brethren. The New Year and
the Day of Atonement are essentially days of repentance, and in the Jewish tradition,
repentance ever begins with love and charity towards ones neighbor. The Feast of
Purim celebrates the memory of a man and a woman who were instrumental in res-
cuing the people of Israel from annihilation; and the ninth of Ab is a fast of mourn-
ing over the destruction of the national life.”


110 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


trian Empire. The World Almanac of 1920 put the Jewish population at
about 15 million including 10.9 million in Europe and 3.5 million in
North and Central America.

During this same 20-year period, from 1900 to 1920, the total world
population increased twenty five percent from roughly 1.2 billion in
1900 to roughly 1.6 billion in 1920. The world’s Christian population
increased from 477 million in 1900 to 576 million, and the world’s
Moslem population increased from 176 million in 1900 to 227 million
in 1920.7°

Why do statistics show the population of the world and of the rest of
the world’s religions increasing by twenty to twenty five percent from
1900 to 1920 and the world’s Jewish population increasing by over
100% in those same twenty years? This same period where, according
to the promoters of the First World War era holocaust fundraising
drives, there was massive starvation, pogroms, and persecution. It is in-
congruous, to say the least. The total world population increased by
twenty five percent from 1900 to 1920. If the Jewish population of the
world really only increased by twenty to twenty five percent from 1900
to 1920, that would explain the missing five and a half million at the
end of World War Two. Of course it’s not that simple. The main point
here is that during the first part of the twentieth century, the world’s
Jewish population was increasing much more rapidly than the surround-
ing populations. This is according to the standard reference books pub-
lished during that time period.

Additionally, according to Arno Mayer, there was a remarkable
growth in England during that period:**’


“In the mid-1880s England had only 65,000 Jews, of whom 46,000
lived in London. Three quarters of them were engaged in trade, com-
merce, and the professions, and most of them were well established and
relatively well off. But then during the next 30 years, up until 1914, the
Jewish population increased nearly fivefold, to reach 300,000.”


It is also generally accepted that about one third of all eastern European
Jews left their countries of origin for the United States between 1881
and 1914.”°8 The United States census of 1890 reported a population of
130,000 Jews, yet by 1920, the Jewish population of North and Central
America was about 3,530,000.7°° These American figures appear to be


236 The World Almanac and Encyclopedia 1900, New York: The Press Publishing Co.,
1900; The World Almanac and Encyclopedia 1920, New York: The Press Publishing
Co., 1919.

237 Arno J. Mayer, Why Did The Heavens Not Darken?, New York: Pantheon Books,
1988, p. 50.

238 For example see G. Ivers, op. cit. (note 66), p. 35.

239 The World Almanac and Encyclopedia 1920, op. cit. (note 236), puts the Jewish pop-


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 111


in the ballpark of reality. There were no restrictions on immigration to
the United States during much of that period, and up to three million
Jews came from countries in eastern Europe, where there was war and
political instability. What’s hard to believe is the claim that the popula-
tions of the eastern European Jewish communities that had sent so
many of their young men off to war and so many of their families to
America and Great Britain, also increased in population from 1900 to
1920. In comparing the figures, remember there was no modern Poland,
no Czechoslovakia, and no Yugoslavia before 1918.

Working backward, in 1885 the bulletin of the Geographical Society
of Marseilles calculated the total number of Jews in the world at
6,877,602 including 300,000 in America and 5,407,603 in Europe. Of
the 1885 European statistics, the most interesting is Russia which is
listed at 2,552,145. (another 70,000 were listed as living in Asiatic Rus-
sia and 14,000 in Turkestan and Afghanistan.) France is listed with
70,000.

Of course there was no Poland in 1885, because it was split between
the Austrian Empire (1,648,708), the German Empire (561,512) and
Russia (2,552,145).

Conklin’s Handy Manual of Useful Information and World’ Atlas,
published in 1888, put the world’s Jewish population then at 7 mil-
lion.

At least 6,000,000 was the estimate accepted at the Jewish Young
Men’s Club in Glasgow, England, in 1889. They went on to say:7”

“Tt is distressing to hear that, with the exception of half a million, they

are allin a state of political bondage.”


Let’s recapitulate all of this and see how it fits into the big picture. After
World War One, up to six million European Jews are saved from exter-
mination because of the intervention of people of all faiths. This is just
twenty years before these same people are all but exterminated in a se-
cret campaign without written orders and no budget because no one
cared. In 1920 and 1926, we have rallies and campaigns all over the
United States in drives for up to six million starving European Jews,
who are called the worst sufferers in what is now called World War One
and its aftermath. They had organizations with offices and agents all
over Europe receiving money raised in the United States and elsewhere
by organizations that have continually existed since World War One,
and exist even today.


ulation of North and Central America at 3,530,000.

240 «Statistics of the Jews,” The New York Times, October 17, 1885.

°41 Conklin ’s Universal Handbook for Ready Reference, Chicago: Laird & Lee, 1888, p.
219.

242 The New York Times, February 10, 1889.


112 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


All of these fundraising groups have operated continuously up to the
present day and are still operating. They have raised money continuous-
ly since the end of World War One. The Joint Distribution Committee
for the relief of Jewish war sufferers is still thriving. As this is being
written, they have a very active, tame, dignified, web site. Also as of
this writing, the ‘Joint’ is funded primarily through the national United
Jewish Communities (UJC), which is supported by campaigns conduct-
ed by Jewish federated and non-federated communities throughout the
U.S. Not much has changed there. There is alleged to be a big ware-
house full of old Joint Distribution Committee records in Brooklyn,
New York.

The Warburg family has a museum in Great Britain that was the pet
project of Aby Warburg, the oldest brother of Felix and Max Warburg.
At the time of this writing, they have a much-enlarged site on the World
Wide Web. They have a history web site with the name “The Institute
for Historical Research.” Just go to a good search engine like Google
and type in ILH.R. Then look for a British address.

The World Jewish Congress was formed by the American Jewish
Congress in 1936, “uniting Jewish communities around the world,” ac-
cording to their web site. The American Jewish Congress is today head-
quartered at the Stephen Wise Congress House at East 84th Street in
New York City. Their national staff is headed by an executive director.
They maintain 15 regional offices in the United States, a permanent rep-
resentative in Washington, D.C., and an Israeli office in Jerusalem.
President Clinton spoke at a World Jewish Congress dinner in New
York on September 11, 2000, in honor of World Jewish Congress Presi-
dent Edgar M. Bronfman. Bronfman was the chairman of Seagram’s,
which was recently swallowed up by Vivendi Universal, a French enter-
tainment and water conglomerate. Bronfman became a media mogul
and as of this writing is a Vivendi vice chairman.

The American organizations promoting the charity drives after
World War One were also going full blast before and during World War
Two. That is another story that needs to be explored from a revisionist
perspective sometime in the future.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 113


Epilogue to the 2018 edition


By Germar Rudolf


This book, first published in 2003 and then issued in a slightly revised
second edition in 2005, caused quite a stir both in the revisionist com-
munity as well as among the Holocaust orthodoxy.

Revisionists have since tried to expand Heddesheimer’s approach to
cover other U.S. and foreign sources.” If systematically scouring me-
dia databases and document archives as described in the introduction to
this book, many more sources echoing the same magical six-million
number could doubtlessly be found.

To preserve that list in printed form, I print an updated version of it
at the end of this epilogue. (I did not include names mentioned in it in
the Index of Names at the end of this book.)

Another fruit of Heddesheimer’s pioneering work is video presen-
tations which enlighten the inquirer about the astonishing origin of the
six-million figure. Searching YouTube with the keywords “First
Holocaust” or “Six Million Jews” brings up some of them, for instance
(as of March 8, 2018):

— “Remember the First Holocaust of the Jews — World War 1”

youtu.be/BM-NpkkGvko (1 min)

— “How do we know that six million Jews died in the Holocaust?”

youtu.be/jQveQJ2OTOO (11 min.)

— “Six Million Jews 1915-1938 HD”

youtu.be/Dda-0Q_XUhk (22 min.)
Most notable among them is the 70-minute documentary I myself pro-
duced based on the present book, but after reading this book, you won’t
find much there that will be new to you. It may be useful, however, in
order to introduce people to this topic who otherwise are disinclined to
spend the time and effort needed to read an entire book (I also list the
German edition of it, just in case...):


243 http://winstonsmithministryoftruth.blogspot.com/2012/02/145-references-to-
6000000-jews-prior-to. html.


114 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


— “The First Holocaust: The Surprising Origin of the Six-Million
Figure” youtu.be/yBnMtkbWPCs (1 hr. 10 min.)

— “Der Erste Holocaust: Der verbliiffende Ursprung der Sechs-
Millionen-Zahl” youtu.be/-qhF_bcHeXc (1 hr. 5 min.)


There have also been a few critical remarks about Heddesheimer’s
book. They point out that there is nothing wrong with an ethnic or reli-
gious group trying to help their brethren in distress, as Jewish organiza-
tions in the U.S. did with regard to Jews suffering in Europe either un-
der the czarist regime or during and after World War I. That point may
be granted, but that is, of course, not the point Heddesheimer is making.

Apart from the foregoing, the Soviet Union was born of a predomi-
nantly Jewish revolution, and secular Jews (if there is such a thing)
dominated the Soviet Union in the early years to an astonishing degree.
Anti-Semitism was even made a crime in the Soviet Union right after its
creation, and we should also not forget that the Jewish six-pointed star
was the state symbol used by the early Soviet Union, not the five-
pointed star, which was adopted only later. Hence, U.S. Jewish groups
collecting money for Jewish relief causes in the Soviet Union can hard-
ly claim that the money was spent to avert Jewish suffering. Support
given thereto was naive at best, and in fact helped entrench the Soviet
terror regime during the first decade after World War I.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 115


List of Pre-Nuremberg References to “Six Million
Jews,” Starting in 1850


1.


10.


11.


12.


13.


14.


15.


16.


1850 — British Society for the Propagation of the Gospel among the Jews (ed.), The
Jewish Herald and Record of Christian Effort for the Spiritual Good of God's An-
cient People, Vol. V, Aylott & Jones, London, August 1850, page 216: “there are
now living about 6,000,000 Israelites” in the world (reprinted in the Christian
Spectator 1850, page 496).

1866 — Brigham Young, The Latter-Day Saints’ Millennial Star, Vol. 28, London
1866, p. 677: “there are but about 6,000,000 Jews in the world”

1869 — The New York Times, 12 September 1869, page 8: “there are now living
about 6,000,000 Israelites, nearly one half of whom live in Europe.” Repeated on
31 October 1869.

1889 — The New York Times, 10 February 1889: “How Many Jews Are There? [...]
the lowest [estimate] that could be entertained, stated the number of the ubiquitous
race at 6,000,000.”

1891 — The New York Times, 26 January 1891: “Russia’s population of five million
to six million Jews [...] about six million persecuted and miserable wretches.”

1891 — Herold Frederic, “An Indictment of Russia,” The New York Times, 12 Sep-
tember 1891: “as to the entire number of Jews in Russia [...] a total of 6,000,000 is
most nearly correct.”

1896 — “Russia and Religious Liberty,” The New York Times, 15 March 1891: “the
[Russian] Jews are 5,000,000 or 6,000,000.”

1900 — Stephen S. Wise, New York Times, 11 June 1900: “There are 6,000,000 liv-
ing, bleeding, suffering arguments in favor of Zionism.”

1902 — Encyclopaedia Britannica, 10th Edition, Vol. 25, 1902, page 482: “While
there are in Russia and Rumania six millions of Jews who are being systematically
degraded...”

1902 — Samuel W. Goldstein, New York Times, 27 November 1902: “PLEA FOR
ZIONISM... In answer I would say: Does Dr. Silverman represent the 6,000,000
Jews in Russia, 300,000 in Roumania and the 1,000,000 in Galicia?”

1903 — New York Times, 16 May 1903, “More Details of the Kishineff Massacre”:
“We charge the Russian Government with responsibility for the Kishineff massa-
cre. We say it is steeped to the eye in the guilt of this holocaust [...] So long as a
‘civilized’ Government brands five million people as a perilous pest which must be
slowly annihilated, so long its baser sub-jects will think themselves justified in ac-
celerating the process of extermination with knives, axes, and hatches.”

1903 — The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 18 September 1903, page 6: “... six mil-
lion downtrodden brethren.”

1904 — The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 19 February 1904, page 2: “... where
five or six million people existed under persecution.”

1904 — The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 7 October 1904, page 1: “... the final
and definite deliverance of the six millions of Russian, Roumanian and Galician
Jews... transporting five or six million people over the sea.”

1904 — Israel Zangwill, New York Times, 20 October 1904: “The problem does not
relate to the American Jews, but to the 6,000,000 in Russia. The Russian Govern-
ment has consented to allow the Jews to leave,”

1905 — New York Times, 29 January 1905: “[Rev Dr Harris] declared that a free and
a happy Russia, with its 6,000,000 Jews, would possibly mean the end of Zionism,


116


17.


18.


19.


20.


21.


22.


23.


24.


29:


26.


27.


28.


29.


30.


31.


32.


33.


34.


33)


DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


since the abolition of the autocracy would practically eliminate the causes that
brought Zionism into existence.”

1905 — New York Times, 1 November 1905: “From 1890 to 1902 [Chief Procurator
of the Holy Synod Pobiedonostzeff] caused 6,000,000 Jewish families to be ex-
pelled from Russia...”

1906 — New York Times, 25 March 1906: “Startling reports the condition and future
of Russia’s 6,000,000 Jews were made on March 12 in Berlin to the annual meet-
ing of the Central Jewish Relief League of Germany by Dr. Paul Nathan... He left
St. Petersburg with the firm conviction that the Russian Government’s studied pol-
icy for the ‘solution’ of the Jewish question is systematic and murderous extermi-
nation.”

1907 — The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 18 October 1907, page 13: “... for six
million people cannot emigrate.”

1908 — Deseret Evening News, 17 March 1908: “... poverty, starvation and disease
are the afflictions which now beset the six million Jews in that country and Rou-
mania.”

1908 — The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 7 August 1908: “... when six million
Russian Jews are crying...”

1910 — The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 4 February 1910: “SIX MILLION
BABIES SAVED BY STRAUS.”

1910 — “Many Jews Flee from Russia,” The New York Times, 13 March 1910: Rus-
sia’s “Jewish population of roundly 6,000,000”

1910 — “Russian Jews in Sad Plight,” The New York Times, 11 April 1910: “the sys-
tematic, relentless, quiet grinding down of a people of more than 6,000,000 souls,”
1911 — Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th Edition, Vol. 2, 1911, page 145: “While
there remain in Russia and Rumania over six millions of Jews who are being sys-
tematically degraded...”

1911 — Max Nordau speaking at the 1911 Zionist Congress. Ben Hecht, Perfidy,
NY: Julian Messner, 1961, page 254: “But the same righteous Governments, who
are so nobly, industriously active to establish the eternal peace, are preparing, by
their own confession, complete annihilation for six million people,”

1911 — Fort Wayne Journal Gazette (Ind.), 4 June 1911, page 15: “PRINCE,
PRIEST AND PEASANT WAGE WAR AGAINST SIX MILLION JEWS”

1911 — The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 18 August 1911, page 14: “Very soon a
fervid Russian patriotism will reign in every Ghetto, and the melting-up of the race
begin. But this absorption of the five or six million Jews...”

1911 — Max Nordau, The Jewish Chronicle (London), 18 August 1911, page 14:
“.. the downfall of six million creatures... for no war has ever yet destroyed six
million human lives.”

1911 — The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 25 August 1911: “... six million Jews
are still groaning under the most terrible yoke.”

1911 — Max Nordau, The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 1 September 1911, page 3:
“... the downfall of six million creatures... for no war has ever yet destroyed six
million human lives.”

1911 — Max Nordau, The Reform Advocate (Chicago), 9 September 1911: “... the
downfall of six million creatures... for no war has ever yet destroyed six million
human lives.”

1911 — New York Times, 31 October 1911: “The 6,000,000 Jews of Russia are sin-
gled out for systematic oppression and for persecution due to process of law.”

1911 — “Condition of the Jews in Russia Worst in History,” New York Times, 10
December 1911: “The Russian Government [...] is making the 6,000,000 Jews a
people economically exhausted—a people without any rights at all.”

1912 — American Jewish Year Book 5672 (23 Sep 1911 — 11 Sep 1912), page 308:
“Russia has since 1890 adopted a deliberate plan to expel or exterminate six mil-


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 117


36.


37.


38.


39.


40.


41.


42.


43.


44.


45.


46.


47.


48.


49.


50.


lions of its people for no other reason than that they refuse to become members of
the Greek Church, but prefer to remain Jews.”

1912 — The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 5 January 1912: “... more than six mil-
lion Jews reside in small towns and villages there is no Sabbath question.”

1912 — Rabbi Stephen S. Wise, New York Tribune, 11 September 1912, page 9:
“Russia is now asphyxiating the Jews. It does not dare to offend the nations by
blood spilling, so it is slowly, but surely grinding out the lives of 6,000,000 Jews.”
1913 — Fort Wayne Journal Gazette (Ind.), 18 October 1913, page 4: “There are six
million Jews in Russia and the government is anxious to annihilate them by meth-
ods that provoke protests from the civilized world.”

1914 — The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 10 July 1914, page 9: “... where six mil-
lion Jews are suffering...”

1914 — New York Times, 2 December 1914, page 12: “APPEAL FOR AID FOR
JEWS. ... the plight of more than 6,000,000 Jews... upon the Jewish people, more
than nine millions of whom live in the countries at war and over six million of
these in the actual war zone in Poland, Galicia and the whole of the Russian fron-
tier.”

1915 — New York Times, 14 January 1915, page 3: “In the world today there are
about 13,000,000 Jews, of whom more than 6,000,000 are in the heart of the war
zone; Jews whose lives are at stake and who today are subjected to every manner
of suffering and sorrow...”

1915 — The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 19 March 1915: “How the casting of six
million people into the deepest abyss of servitude and outlawry is to relieve tension
we cannot understand.”

1915 — The Sun (N.Y.), 6 June 1915, section 5, page 1: “Six million Jews, one-half
of the Jewish people throughout the world, are being persecuted, hounded, humili-
ated, tortured, starved. ... six million Jews in Russia... are being tortured so merci-
lessly.”

1915 — The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 25 June 1915: “The annihilation of the
six million Jews now congregated in the Russian domains goes on in a well-
defined and systematic manner.”

1915 — Jacob de Hass, The Boston Sunday Globe, 26 September 1915, page 46:
“Indeed the only point that all warring elements are agreed upon is that at the end
of the holocaust the Jews and Palestine will be more closely related than at pre-
sent.”

1915 — New York Tribune, 14 October 1915: “What the Turks are doing to Armeni-
ans is child’s play compared to what Russia is doing to six million Jews, her own
subjects.”

1915 — The Mercury, 4 December 1915: “... six millions of Russian and Polish
Jews are to-day the most pitiable victims of that race hatred and that race fanati-
cism which have been the creed of Germany...”

1916 — The Jews in the Eastern War Zone, The American Jewish Committee (ed.),
1916, pages 19f., 29, 47, 60, 66: “... where six million human beings guilty only
of adherence to the Jewish faith are compelled to live out their lives in squalor and
misery, in constant terror of massacre... estimated at six million or more... of
these six million people... a kind of prison with six million inmates... The persons
most affected, the six million Jews of Russia... The Jews are loyal and brave, and
it is most inadvisable to pursue a policy which might convert six million subjects
into enemies.... the six million Jews of Russia still continued... nearly three of the
six million...”

1916 — Sausalito News (CA), 22 January 1916, page 1: “... six million starving
Polish Jews in the war stricken countries of Europe”

1916 — Oakland Tribune (Cal.), 26+27 January 1916, page 1 (FRONT PAGE
ADVERT 2 DAYS RUNNING): “The President of the United States—6,000,000


118


51.


52:


53.


54.


33.


56.


57.


58.


59.
60.


61.


62.


63.


64.


65.


66.


67.


68.


DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Starving, Homeless, People—Why should the President, by proclamation to the
people of the nation, fix upon January 27th as the day for contributing towards the
relief of over six million Jews located in the Far Eastern War Zone?”

1916 — The Tacoma Times, 28 February 1916: “... there were 6,000,000 Jews in
Europe absolutely without food or resources.”

1916 — New York Times, 28 February 1916: “Nearly six million Jews are ruined in
the greatest moral and material misery; millions of them are refugees, dependent
upon the good will of their brethren.”

Kalamazoo Gazette (Kalamazoo, MI), Wednesday, 1 March 1916, page 1: “WAR
MAY MOVE 6,000,000 JEWS ... Nearly six million Jews are ruined.”

1916 — The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 3 March 1916, page 6: “Position of the
Jews in Russia. The Jews in Russia, numbering about six million, are denied full
political and civil rights and are economically oppressed.”

1916 — New York Herald, 5 March 1916, Section III, page 10: “Six million Jews,
old men, women and little children, are suffering from the greatest calamity that
has befallen Israel since the Egyptian bondage.”

1916 — North Devon Journal, 9 March 1916, page 7: “In Poland, in Southern and
Western Russia, six million Jews resided when the War broke out. They lived there
in the Pale of Settlement, in poverty, and were terribly overcrowded.”

1916 — Fort Wayne Journal Gazette (Ind.), 12 March 1916, page 34: “... six mil-
lion Jews reported starving in the warring countries.”

1916 — El Paso Herald, 22 April 1916, page 5: “Six Million Jews Are Deprived Of
Papers By Russian Censorship. ... Six million Jews have been robbed of their
newspapers.”

1916 — The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 4 August 1916: “... six million Jews ...”
1917 — Corsicana Daily Sun, 16 February 1917, page 2: “Six million Jews are liv-
ing in lands where they are oppressed, exploited, crushed and robbed of every inal-
ienable human right.”

1918 — Fort Wayne News and Sentinel (Ind.), 22 June 1918, page 1: “In the war
zone of Europe there are six million Jews who have been the war’s worst sufferers,
1918 — The Columbus Jewish Chronicle, 28 June 1918, page 1: “Claims Palestine
Has Room For Six Million... It is quite possible for Palestine to find room for five
to six millions... 800,000 hectares will suffice to produce the food of six millions
of people, ...”

1918 — The Bakersfield Californian, 30 July 1918, page 4: “... the six million
starving Jews in Poland, Galicia and other stricken Eastern provinces...”

1918 — The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 5 September 1918: “... Russia, where
the bulk of the Jewish people to the number of well over six million still dwell, is a
land of blood and midnight darkness.”

1918 — The Columbus Jewish Chronicle, 13 September 1918, page 1: “The report
describes the havoc the war has caused among the six million Jews of Russia.
Driven by the invading armies, the Jews have been compelled to flee from their
homes;”

1918 — New York Times, 18 October 1918, page 12: “Six million Souls Will Need
Help to Resume Normal Life When War Is Ended. ... Committee of American
Jews Lays Plans for the Greatest Humanitarian Task in History. ... 6,000,000 Jews
Need Help.”

1919 — The Bourbon News, | April 1919, page 4: “... six million Jews in Poland,
Lithuania, Galicia, Palestine, Turkey and Siberia who are dying of starvation, ...”
1919 — The Corsicana Daily Sun, 3 April 1919, page 5: “SIX MILLION ARE
STARVING ... It is estimated that there are six million Jewish women, children
and aged men actually starving to death.”


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 119


69.


70.


71.


72.


73.


74.


75.


76.


77.


78.


79.


80.


81.


82.


83.


84.


1919 — The Galveston Daily News, 4 April 1919, page 3: “Six million Jews in Po-
land, Lithuania, Galicia, Palestine, Turkey and Siberia are dying of starvation. ...
These six million despairing souls are totally dependent on American generosity
for the bare necessities of life.”

1919 — The Watchman and Southron, 5 April 1919: “Six million Jews in Poland,
Lithuania, Galicia, Palestine, Turkey and Siberia are dying of starvation. ... These
six million despairing souls are totally dependent on American generosity for the
bare necessities of life.”

1919 — The Galveston Daily News, 5 April 1919, page 5: “Six million Jews are dy-
ing of starvation.”

1919 — The Galveston Daily News, 6 April 1919, page 8: “The American Jewish
Relief Committee is endeavoring to save from starvation six million Jews who are
the helpless victims of the German terror.”

1919 — El Paso Herald, 7 April 1919: “... to save from starvation six million Jews
who are the helpless victims of the German Terror.”

1919 — San Antonio Express, 8 April 1919, page 15: “The American Jewish Relief
Committee is endeavoring to save from starvation six million Jews who are the
helpless victims of the German terror.”

1919 — The Corsicana Daily Sun, 9 April 1919, page 8: “THE AMERICAN
JEWISH RELIEF COMMITTEE IS ENDEAVOURING TO SAVE FROM
STARVATION SIX MILLION JEWS WHO ARE THE HELPLESS VICTIMS OF
THE GERMAN TERROR”

1919 — San Antonio Express, 9 April 1919, page 12: “At no other time in the histo-
ry of the Jewish people has the need been so great as now. Six million of our
brothers and sisters are dying of starvation. The entire race is threatened with ex-
tinction.”

1919 — Daily Kentucky New Era, Wednesday, 9 April 1919, pages 4f.: “The Amer-
ican Jewish Relief Committee is endeavouring to save from starvation six million
Jews who are the helpless victims of the German Terror.”

1919 — The Wellington Leader (Tex.), 11 April 1919, page 1: “We wish to call the
attention of our people to the great drive that is on to raise funds for the relief of
the six million Jews who are starving in the war ridden districts of the east.”

1919 — The Corsicana, Semi-Weekly Light, 11 April 1919, page 5: “THE
AMERICAN JEWISH RELIEF COMMITTEE IS ENDEAVOURING TO SAVE
FROM STARVATION SIX MILLION JEWS WHO ARE THE HELPLESS
VICTIMS OF THE GERMAN TERROR”

1919 — The Daily Courier (Pa.), 4 August 1919, section 2, page 1: “APPEALS TO
AMERICA TO ACT QUICKLY IF LIVES OF SOME SIX MILLION JEWS ARE
TO BE SAVED... The lives of some six million people are at stake.”

1919 — The Fulton Patriot, 3 September 1919, page 4: “WORLD JEWRY AT
GREATEST CRISIS Leaders in America Striving to Save Race in Europe From
Destruction. ... All told, many million Christians and more than 6,000,000 Jews in
countries other than the United States are being directly aided by American Jewish
relief funds.”

1919 — New York Times, 8 September 1919, page 6: “127,000 Jews Have Been
Killed and 6,000,000 Are in Peril. ... 6,000,000 souls in Ukrainia and in Poland
have received notice through action and by word that they are going to be com-
pletely exterminated — this fact stands before the whole world as the paramount is-
sue of the present day.”

1919 — The Fort Wayne News and Sentinel, 17 September 1919, section 2, page 1:
“’.. six million Jews are dying of starvation and where vast numbers of them—
innocent victims of the ravages of war—wander homeless, and in rags.”

1919 — Trenton Evening Times (Trenton, N.J.), 28 September 1919, page 4: “Six
Million Jews Reported Destitute in Eastern Europe.”


120


85.


86.


87.


88.


89.


90.


91.


92.


93.


94.


95.


DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


1919 — Rushville Daily Republican, 29 September 1919, page 4: “The thought that
as I walk the streets of this prosperous and happy town there are 6,000,000 people
in other lands without food, shelter or raiment is disturbing. ... When I read, as I
have read all my life, of the persecution and slaughter of the Jews I am not proud
of my own race or my religion. ... Six million people perishing!”

1919 — Tipton Tribune, 29 September 1919, page 2: “The thought that as I walk the
streets of this prosperous and happy town there are 6,000,000 people in other lands
without food, shelter or raiment is disturbing. ... When I read, as I have read all
my life, of the persecution and slaughter of the Jews I am not proud of my own
race or my religion. ... Six million people perishing!”

1919 — Fort Wayne Journal Gazette, 1 October 1919, page 4: “The thought that as
I walk the streets of this prosperous and happy town there are 6,000,000 people in
other lands without food, shelter or raiment is disturbing. ... When I read, as I have
read all my life, of the persecution and slaughter of the Jews I am not proud of my
own race or my religion. ... Six million people perishing!”

1919 — The Washington Democrat, 2 October 1919, page 1: “The thought that as I
walk the streets of this prosperous and happy town there are 6,000,000 people in
other lands without food, shelter or raiment is disturbing. ... When I read, as I have
read all my life, of the persecution and slaughter of the Jews I am not proud of my
own race or my religion. ... Six million people perishing!”

1919 — The Colorado Springs Gazette, 2 October 1919: “SIX MILLION JEWS
FORM DAILY IN A BREAD LINE ... Six million Jews, men, women and chil-
dren, a number as great as the population of the state of Illinois including Chicago,
form the bread line in Europe every day.”

1919 — Janesville Daily Gazette (Wis.), 4 October 1919, page 4: “... the Feast Day
of Rosh Hashonah. It was not a feast day for some six million starving Jews of Eu-
rope because every day for the past four years has been a fast day for them. ... the
five year fast that has been the lot of the 6,000,000 Jews in Europe.”

1919 — Sheboygan Press (Wis.), 4 October 1919, page 2: “... the Feast Day of
Rosh Hashonah. It was not a feast day for some six million starving Jews of Eu-
rope because every day for the past four years has been a fast day for them. ... the
five year fast that has been the lot of the 6,000,000 Jews in Europe.”

1919 — The Pittsburgh Gazette Times — 5 October 1919, section 6, page 16: “Still
they live—these 6,000,000 helpless, starving, homeless people ... JEWISH WAR
RELIEF COMMITTEE”

1919 — The Fort Wayne Journal-Gazette (Ind.), 6 October 1919, page 3: “With six
million of their population in absolute want, they are unable alone to render suffi-
cient aid... There are to-day to be found in the ten provinces of Russia, Poland and
the fifteen provinces called the ‘Pale of Settlement’ six millions of these peaceful
and law abiding people... We do not see with our eyes the evidences of want and
degradation into which six million Jews have been thrown suddenly through no
fault of their own.”

1919 — Indiana Weekly Messenger, 9 October 1919, page 1 & 4: “Life for six mil-
lions in the shadow of death! ... Six millions mean what? ... Six million souls, old
men, old women, and little children in Poland, Lithuania, Russia, Palestine, Gali-
cia, Turkey, Syria, Roumania, Greece, and Bulgaria are in imminent danger of
starving to death this winter. ... The responsibility of maintaining life in these six
million sufferers rests upon every man and woman in the United States... Helping
the Jews in their extremity is not helping the Bolsheviks,” the speaker emphatically
declared.”

1919 — Schenectady Gazette, 16 October 1919, page 15: “Today 6,000,000 Jews
Are Facing the Darkest Days Ever Known in the Long History of the Race.”


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 121


96.


97.


98.


99.


100.


101.


102.


103.


104.


105.


1919 — Titusville Herald, 18 October 1919, page 4: “... Jewish Relief Fund... Con-
tribute Today, the Last Day and Help Save From Death Six Millions of Starving
People.”

1919 — San Francisco Chronicle, 19 October 1919, page 18: “6,000,000 JEWS IN
BREAD LINE, STRAUS WRITES. More Than Third of Entire Race in World Re-
duced to Despair in Europe. ... Six million Jews, out of the 16,000,000 in the
world...”

1919 — Cape Vincent Eagle, 23 October 1919: “... there are six million people in
other lands without food, shelter or raiment is disturbing. ... When read, as I have
read all my life, of the persecution and slaughter of the Jews I am not proud of my
own race or of my religion.”

1919 — Martin H. Glynn, “The Crucifixion of Jews Must Stop!” The American He-
brew, 31 October 1919, page 582: “From across the sea six million men and wom-
en call to us for help ... Within them reside the illimitable possibilities for the ad-
vancement of the human race as naturally would reside in six million human be-
ings. ... In this catastrophe, when six million human beings are being whirled to-
ward the grave by a cruel and relentless fate, only the most idealistic promptings of
human nature should sway the heart and move the hand. Six million men and
women are dying from lack of the necessaries of life [...] bigoted lust for Jewish
blood. In this threatened holocaust of human life in the name of the humanity of
Moses to six million famished men and women. Six million men and women are
dying ... six million Jewish men and women are starring across the seas ...”

1919 — The Evening Tribune Providence, 31 October 1919, page 11: “In the midst
of our campaign for the relief of the six million Jews of Eastern Europe...”

1919 — The Record (Johnson City, N.Y.), 1 November 1919, page 8: “There are
6,000,000 Jews in eastern Europe whom the war has left dependent upon America
for aid.”

1919 — Beatrice Daily Sun (Neb.), 8 November 1919, page 2: “The territory which
Mr. Hoover visited is but a part of that in which 6,000,000 Jews, suffers of war and
war’s equally horrible after-math, stand helpless today, ... The Need: SIX
MILLION STARVING SOULS. Six million Jews in Poland, Lithuania, Galicia,
Palestine, Turkey and Siberia are dying of starvation. ... These six million despair-
ing souls are totally dependent on American generosity for the bare necessities of
life. The Object: $35,000,000 for 6,000,000 LIVES”

1919 — Lebanon Daily News (Pa.), 11 November 1919, page 2: “DISEASE AND
STARVATION IN POLAND Lieut. Wright Tells of Half Starved People Clad in
Rags BREAD OUT OF LEAVES Says 6,000,000 Face Death This Winter Unless
Given Immediate Relief... 6,000,000 Face Death... Six million Jews in eastern
Europe face death during the coming winter, ...”

1919 — Felix M. Warburg, New York Times, 12 November 1919: “The Jews were
the worst sufferers in the war. The successive blows of contending armies have all
but broken the back of European Jewry and have reduced to tragically unbelieva-
ble poverty, starvation and disease about 6,000,000 souls, or half the Jewish popu-
lation of the earth.”

1919 — Gouverneur Free Press, 12 November 1919: “Six Million Men and Women
Are Dying... Won’t You Help Them? ... From across the sea six million men and
women call to us for help... in six million human beings... In this catastrophe,
when six million human beings are being whirled toward the grave by a cruel and
relentless fate... Six million men and women are dying... Six million men and
women are dying... Because of this war for Democracy six million Jewish men
and women are starving across the seas... Six million men and women of the race
that helped do the greatest of the world’s work are falling into the grave! ... six
million famished men and women now turn mute eyes of appeal...”


122


106.


107.


108.


109.


110.


111.


112.


113.


114.


115.


116.


117.


118.


119.


120.


121.


122.


123.


124.


125.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


1919 — Chester Times (Pa.), 28 November 1919, page 15: “There are 6,000,000
Jews in Eastern Europe whom the war has left dependent upon us for aid.”

1919 — Ironwood News Record (Mich.), 6 December 1919, page 9: “For First Time
in History of Race, Jews Are Asking Others For Help. ... They are doing it because
six million Jews in eastern and central Europe are actually in need of food at this
moment. ... The problem of 6,000,000 starving men, women and little children
ought to be the problem of all humanity.”

1919 — Lima News (Ohio), 24 December 1919, page 3: “Today Six Million Jews
Are Facing the Darkest Days Ever Known In the History of the Race.”

1919 — The Toledo News-Bee, 27 December 1919: “Six Million Human Beings Are
Suffering the Tortures of Disease, Hunger and Death... American Jewish Relief
Committee”

1920 — Van Wert Daily Bulletin (Ohio), 5 January 1920, page 3: “... Jewish relief
work in Europe and Asia. There are six million Jews in the two continents who be-
cause of the war have been made destitute.”

1920 — Manti Messenger (Utah), 19 March 1920: “Just now some six million of
Jews, eight hundred thousand of them just children, are in imminent danger of
starvation in eastern Europe.”

1920 — Tulsa Daily World, 11 April 1920, section B, page 14: “Today 6,000,000
Jews Are Facing the Darkest Days Ever Known in the Long History of the Race”
1920 — Utica Herald-Dispatch, 20 April 1920, page 9: “Today 6,000,000 Jews Are
Facing the Darkest Days Ever Known in the Long History of the Race.”

1920 — New York Times, 1 May 1920, page 8: “Just Another Drive, but the Lives of
6,000,000 Human Beings Wait Upon the Answer.”

1920 — New York Times, 2 May 1920, page 1: “... six million human beings, with-
out food, shelter, clothing or medical treatment.”

1920 — New York Times, 3 May 1920, page 11: “Your help is needed to save the
lives of six million people in Eastern and Central Europe.”

1920 — New York Times, 5 May 1920, page 9: “... to save six million men and
women in Eastern Europe from extermination by hunger and disease.”

1920 — New York Times, 5 May 1920, page 19: “Six million starving, fever-stricken
sufferers in war-torn Europe appeal to us.”

1920 — New York Times, 7 May 1920: “... Jewish war sufferers in Central and
Eastern Europe where six millions face horrifying conditions of famine, disease
and death.”

1920 — A poster tied to a lamppost in a photograph in the 1 June 1920 edition (Vol.
1, No. 3) of Jewish Relief News: “JEWISH WAR RELIEF CAMPAIGN (—) MAY
2 TO 9 (—) SIX MILLION STARVING SOULS”

1920 — Montgomery Advertiser (Montgomery, AL), 29 June 1920, page 5: “Must
They Pay the Price? Victims of the War—In the Path of Five Armies [...] Six Mil-
lion Jews have been pillaged, plundered, mal-treated, driven about the country like
cattle.”

1920 — Ogden Standard Examiner, 8 August 1920, page 9: “PUSH DRIVE FOR
JEWISH RELIEF ... Mr. Bond declared today that there are six million jews [sic]
in eastern and central Europe whom the war has left dependent upon America.”
1920 — The Ogden Standard-Examiner, 20 August 1920: “... there are six million
Jews in eastern and central Europe whom the war has left dependent upon Ameri-
ca.”

1920 — New York Tribune, 29 August 1920: “Six million Jews were made homeless
by five years of foreign and domestic wars.”

1920 — Brooklyn Daily Eagle, 29 August 1920: “Six million Jews had been made
homeless, starving, naked and plague ridden by five years of foreign and domestic
wars that swept Poland.”


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 123


126.


127.


128.


129.


130.


131.


132.


133.


134.


135.


136.


137.


138.


139.


140.


141.


142.


1921 — New York Times, 20 July 1921, page 2: “BEGS AMERICA SAVE
6,000,000 IN RUSSIA. Russia’s 6,000,000 Jews are facing extermination by mas-
sacre.”

The New York Call, 2 January 2, 1922, page 2: “JEWS MEET HERE JAN. 15 TO
PLAN CAMPAIGN FOR $6,000,000 FOR RELIEF”

1922 — Lowell Sun (Mass.), 22 March 1922, page 14: “The Jews in the immediate
district for which the aid of the war sufferers’ campaign is to be given numbered
over six million. ... Over 300,000 orphans, over 150,000 desecrated women, over
six million wandering Jews walking, crawling in their misery, feeding on the bark
of trees and on herbs that grow by the wayside.”

1925 — Lawrence Journal-World (Kansas), 29 June 1925, page 5: “Jewish National
Fund Invests Almost $6,000,000 in Palestine”

1926 — Encyclopaedia Britannica, 13th Edition, Vol. 1, 1926, page 145: “While
there remain in Russia and Rumania over six millions of Jews who are being sys-
tematically degraded...”

1926 — Canadian Jewish Review, 9 April 1926, page 4: “... the extreme need of
6,000,000 Jews in Russia and Poland, ...”

1926 — New York Times, 21 April 1926: “In Heaven’s Name, Arouse the Jews of
America! New York’s Quota: $6,000,000 United Jewish Campaign of New York”
1930 — The Daily Times (Pa.), 15 March 1930, page 5: “Will Raise $6,000,000 for
Upbuilding Palestine and to Rehabilitate Jews of Eastern Europe”

1931 — The Montreal Gazette, 28 December 1931, page 25: “SLX MILLION JEWS
FACE STARVATION. ... FEARS CRISIS AT HAND. ... six million Jews in East-
ern Europe face starvation, and even worse, during the coming winter.”

1932 — Symphony of Six Million, movie, 29 April 1932; directed by Gregory La
Cava, written by Fannie Hurst (story), J. Walter Ruben, Bernard Schubert (screen-
play), starring Ricardo Cortez.

1933 — New York Times, 29 March 1933: The Joint Distribution Committee “is now
active in relief and reconstructive work in Eastern Europe where 6,000,000 Jews
are involved.”

1933 — New York Times, 1 June 1933, page 6: “Dr. Margoshes said he had received
a letter from the poet at Zurich a few days ago, stating that she had ‘run away from
the holocaust...”

1933 — The Jewish Western Bulletin, 21 September 1933: “At this period of human
persecution and of human destruction, when life, especially Jewish life has ceased
to be of any value in the cruel land of bloody Germany, when the lives of hundreds
of thousands are tortured and hang in the balance — during this holocaust...”

1935 — New York Times, 8 September 1935, page 26: “The preliminary session of
the first world conference of the Federation of Polish Jews being attended by sixty
delegates from eighteen countries representing 6,000,000 Jews...”

1936 — Kabbalist & Zionist Jacob de Hass, B’nai B’rith Magazine The National
Jewish Monthly, Volume 50, Number 6, March 1936.: “Six million Jews are affect-
ed by this omnipresent fear (‘of another world war’)”

1936 — Chaim Weizmann, Reden und Aufsétze 1901-1936, Jiid. Bucherverlag Er-
win Léwe, Berlin 1937, page 272-4: “It is no exaggeration to say that six million
Jews are sentenced to be imprisoned in this part of the world, where they are un-
wanted, and for whom the countries are divided into those, where they are unwant-
ed, and those, where they are not admitted. ... It is ultimately the fate of six million
people!”

1936 — New York Times, 31 May 1936, page 14: “AMERICANS APPEAL FOR
JEWISH REFUGE.” The petition, in expressing the opinion of enlightened Chris-
tian leadership in the United States, favoring a larger Jewish immigration into Pal-
estine, stressed the intolerable sufferings of the millions of Jews in “the European
holocaust. ... to save these unfortunate millions from total annihilation...”


124


143.


144.


145.


146.


147.


148.


149.


150.


151.


152.


153.


154.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


1936 — The Jewish Western Bulletin, 2 June 1936, page 3: “Great Britain has it
within her power to throw open the gates of Palestine and let in the victimized and
persecuted Jews escaping from the European holocaust.”

1936 — The Montreal Gazette, 8 August 1936, page 5: “Delegates of 32 Nations
Represent six million Hebrews.”

1936 — Chaim Weizmann, speech before the Peel Commission on Palestine, King
David Hotel in Jerusalem, November 25, 1936: “If one goes further afield (in Eu-
rope), and takes the Jewries of Rumania, Latvia, Lithuania, Austria, ones see prac-
tically the same picture, and it is no exaggeration on my part to say that today six
million — I am not speaking of the Jews in Persia and Morocco and such places,
who are very inarticulate, one hears very little of them — in that part of the world
are doomed to be pent up in places where they are not wanted, ... These six mil-
lion people to whom I have referred are condemned to live from hand to mouth. ...
it affects the fate of six million people.”

1936 — Chaim Weizmann, The (London) Times, 26 November 1936: “While in
Western Europe many individual Jews had happy homes, in Eastern Europe there
were 6,000,000 unwanted unfortunates who were condemned to be penned up in
places where they could not live. ... the presence of these 6,000,000 people with-
out a future whose condition was a threat to Europe.”

1936 — Chaim Weizmann, The Jewish Western Bulletin, 11 December 1936, page
3: “... where six million Jews are in a position which is neither life nor death.”
1936 — New York Post, 11 December 1936, page 19: “JEWISH RELIEF BOARD
TO HEAR LEHMAN SUDAY Gathering to consider the crisis confronting
6,000,000 Jews in Central and Eastern Europe, ...”

1937 — Fitchburg Sentinel, 17 February 1937, page 1 & 11: “Stating that
“6,000,000 Jews in central Europe have neither life nor death because of extreme
persecution,” Mrs Emanuel Halpern of New York city, member of the national
board of Hadassah urged... Today there are 6,000,000 million (sic) Jews in central
Europe who have neither life nor death.”

1937 — The Jewish Criterion, 3 September 1937: “the position of the six million
Jews of Central and Eastern Europe with whose existence the J.D.C.” was “so vi-
tally concerned.”

1937 — Albany Evening News (NY), 27 May 1937, page 6.: “The plight of six mil-
lion Jews in Europe is an outstanding indictment against the ruthlessness of dicta-
torships that have seen fit to utilize uncivilized and thoroughly un-Christian meth-
ods in the persecution of minorities, in order to gain their personal and selfish at-
tainments. It is our duty to try to alleviate the perilous conditions of the youth in
Germany and Poland, and it is the duty of every Jew to assist in raising the quota
that is allotted to use [recte: us].”

1937 — Chaim Weizmann speech (4 August 37) at the World Zionist Conference,
Switzerland, The Manchester Guardian (UK), 9 August 1937, page 13: “I told the
Royal Commission [on Palestine, Nov 25, 1936] that the hopes of 6,000,000 Jews
are centred on emigration. Then I was asked: ‘But can you bring 6,000,000 to Pal-
estine?’ I replied: ‘No. I am acquainted with the laws of physics and chemistry and
I know the force of material factors. In our generation I divide the figure by three,
and you can see in that the depth of the Jewish tragedy—two millions of youth,
with their lives before them, who have lost the most elementary of rights, the right
to work.’ The old ones will pass, they will bear their fate or they will not. They are
dust, economic and moral dust in a cruel world.”

1937 — The Jewish Western Bulletin, 31 December 1937: “The number six million
is often used to describe the Jewish population of Central and Eastern Europe.”
1938 — New York Times, 9 January 1938, page 12: “PERSECUTED JEWS SEEN
ON INCREASE. 6,000,000 VICTIMS NOTED. ... Five to six million in all are
today the victims of governmental anti-Semitism...”


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 125


155.


156.


157.


158.


159.


160.


161.


162.


163.


164.


165.


166.


167.


168.


169.


1938 — New York Times, 23 February 1938, page 23: “A depressing picture of
6,000,000 Jews in Central Europe deprived of protection or economic opportuni-
ties, slowly dying of starvation, all hope gone... Now anti-Semitism has spread to
thirteen European nations, and threatens the very existence of millions of Jews.”
1938 — Sunday Times-Advertiser (Trenton, N.J.), 20 March 1938: “The simple fact
is that the fate of six million Jews in Poland, Roumania, Germany and Austria
hangs in the balance.”

1938 — The Jewish Criterion (Pittsburgh), 1 April 1938, page 15: “I shall not
comment upon the first except to remind you that six million Jews in Europe are
struggling between life and death.”

1938 — The Guardian, 4 April 1938, page 11: “Six million Jews at this moment are
trapped like rats...”

1938 — New York Times, 2 May 1938: “The rising tide of anti-Semitism in Europe
today, which has deprived more than 6,000,000 Jews and non-Aryans of a birth-
right...”

1938 — Jacob Lestshinsky, “The Jews of Central Europe,” in Jewish Frontier, Vol.
5, No. 6, June 1938, page 13: “EVERY NATION is morally compelled to face the
bitter truth. This article is written not with the intent of bewailing our plight but in
order to arrive at a factual calculation of the status of six million Jews in Central
and Eastern Europe and of the prospects that exist in the lands of immigration.”
1938 — Port Arthur News, 9 June 1938, page 1: “It is estimated that nearly six mil-
lion Jews have been driven from their homes by ruthless oppressors and stripped
not only of their property but their right to work for a living.”

1938 — Rochester Democrat and Chronicle, 16 June 1938, page 18: “Judge Lewis
urged American members of the race to swing moral and financial powers into the
channels of evacuating some 6,000,000 Jews to Palestine.”

1938 — Turtle Mountain Star, Rolla, North Dakota, 6 October 1938: “Five or six
million Jews, uprooted by dictatorship and tossed about by economic storms, may
have to depend upon the development of the Holy Land, under British mandate, as
a solution to their difficulties. But they face the hostility of the Arabs living there,
whose economic and religious interests conflict with theirs. ... protects the settlers
from the raiding Arabs. ... The Arabs Are Coming! ... The dreaded Mohammedan
raiders have been sighted by a neighbor settler...”

1938 — The Times, 22 November 1938: “Mass emigration of Jews to Palestine for
two years and the formation of a Jewish national assembly was advocated by Sir
John Haslam, M.P., in a message which he sent to a public meeting at the King-
sway Hall last night held by the New Zionist Organization. The message stated that
the problem now involved some 6,000,000 Jews.”

1939 — New York Times, 15 January 1939, page 27: “Rabbi Silver wanted assis-
tance to Jewish emigration safeguarded so that European governments would real-
ize that ‘it is impossible to evacuate 6,000,000 Jews.’”

1939 — The Binghampton Press, 18 January 1939, page 8: “IRISH PLEA — Depu-
ty Robert Briscoe, only Jewish member of the Irish Parliament, arrives in New
York city to begin a campaign to enlist Americans in a plan for resettling approxi-
mately 6,000,000 Jews in Palestine.”

1939 — The Canadian Jewish Chronicle, 27 January 1939: “Only six million Jews
remain at the moment safe. But they will have to carry the burden.”

1939 — The Daily Sentinel (Rome, N.Y.), 31 January 1939, page 11: “Does Mr. X
really believe that if Hitler gains control of Spain with the help of Franco, that life
in Spain will be any different than it is today in Germany, Austria and Czechoslo-
vakia where 6,000,000 Jews have been murdered, ...”

1939 — Chaim Weizmann, The Palestine Post, 14 February 1939: “The fate of six
million people was in balance...”


126


170.


171.


172.


173.


174.


175.


176.


177.


178.


179.


180.


181.


182.


183.


184.


185.


186.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


1939 — The Jewish Criterion, 17 February 1939, page 20: “The fate of six million
people is in the balance. ... They supported their stand with a declaration that Jews
never needed unrestricted immigration to Palestine as much as at present, with
6,000,000 Jewish refugees seeking a haven.”

1939 — The Evening Independent, 22 February 1939, page 1: “6,000,000 Helpless.
... there are six million Jews in Europe today fighting desperately against intoler-
ance and despair. For them the support of the united appeal is crucial.”

1939 — The Jewish Western Bulletin, 3 March 1939: “SIX MILLION JEWS
OVERSEAS FACING PERSECUTION, DISCRIMINATION AND ECONOMIC
RUIN ...”

1939 —The Advocate: America’s Jewish Journal. Vols. 95-98, 17 March 1939, page
47: “Tf the six million Jews that constitute the European scene were removed from
the lands where they now dwell the forces of brutality and ruthlessness would still
continue to operate.”

1939 — The Jewish Criterion, 7 April 1939, page 4: “Not in Hitler’s Hands, In
Yours... The Fate Of Six Million European Jews”

1939 — The Jewish Criterion, 7 April 1939, page 33: “... six million Jewish people
who are in dire need today.”

1939 — The Jewish Criterion, 14 April 1939, page 4: “Recent events in Central Eu-
rope have brought to 6,000,000 the total number of Jews in Central and Eastern
European countries affected by anti-Semitic activities.”

1939 — The Jewish Criterion, 14 April 1939, page 6: “... whether our 6,000,000
fellow countrymen will live or die... More than a million refugees, starving, tor-
tured, fear-dazed, have been dragged from their homes, separated from their fami-
lies, expelled from their countries. Five million more, await with horror the mo-
ment this misery will strike them...”

1939 — Chester Times (Pa.), 20 April 1939, page 6: “Six million Jews are the step-
children of fate in Europe today.”

1939 — The Jewish Criterion, 21 April 1939, page 15: “... the distress and suffer-
ing of 6,000,000 Jews in Europe. ... HAVE YOU DONE YOUR DUTY? THE
UNITED JEWISH FUND NEEDS YOUR HELP FOR THE HELPLESS
6,000,000 IN EUROPE

1939 — The Jewish Criterion, 28 April 1939, page 3: “... 6,000,000 fellow Jews
who are in distress today.”

1939 — The Niagara Falls Gazette, 1 May 1939, page 15: “ITHACA RABBI
SAYS FREE JEWS MUST AID HARASSED BRETHREN Six Million Jews Are
Refugees, Members of B’nai B’rith Lodges Told. Three-eights of the world’s Jew-
ish population of 16,000,000 persons, or approximately 6,000,000 persons, are po-
tential refugees. ... Rabbi Fischoff declared that the 6,000,000 Jews or Christians
of Jewish extraction are in real of imminent danger due to the spread of totalitari-
anism in the world.”

1939 — The Jewish Criterion, 5 May 1939, page 9: “PLIGHT OF 6,000,000 ... The
6,000,000 European Jews ...”

1939 — The Jewish Criterion, 12 May 1939, page 7: “The year of 1939 is the year
of the most critical struggle of 6,000,000 European Jews.”

1939 — Western Morning News (Devon, UK), 8 June 1939, page 6: “PLIGHT OF
THE UNWANTED ... A little more than a month ago Lord Winterton, chairman of
the Evian Committee, declared that the potential problem concerned five or six
million Jews.”

1939 — Ohio Jewish Chronicle, 30 June 1939, page 1: “The crisis which Jews of
Europe are facing today envelops far more than six million souls.”

1939 — Contemporary Jewish Record, Vol. 2, No. 5, September-October 1939,
page 3 (Published by the American Jewish Committee): “... the coming war would
be the annihilation of the six million Jews in East and Central Europe.”


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 127


187.


188.


189.


190.


191.


192.


193.


194.


195.


196.


197.


198.


199.


200.


201.


202.


203.


204.


1939 — The Sentinel (Chicago, IL), 12 October 1939.: “... the coming war would
be the annihilation of the six million Jews in East and Central Europe.”

1939 — The Jewish Criterion, 13 October 1939, page 2: “... the coming war would
be the annihilation of the six million Jews in East and Central Europe.”

1939 — Samuel Broncheck, Syracuse Herald-Journal, 30 October 1939, page 15:
“.. in Poland alone there are 6,000,000 Jews who are now subject to Hitler’s per-
secution or Stalin’s ‘communizing.’”

1939 — The Southern Israelite, 28 November 1939: “... the coming war would be
the annihilation of the six million Jews in East and Central Europe.”

1940 — Mason City Globe Gazette (Iowa), 20 January 1940, page 16: “Mr. Tannen-
baum stressed that Palestine offered the only solution to the six million Jews who
are homeless, starving and sick in central and eastern Europe today.”

1940 — The Southern Israelite, 3 May 1940: “Almost six million Jews find them-
selves on the brink of starvation and extermination. Their only hope is the help
which the Jews of America can extend to them. The success of the United Jewish
Appeal will determine their fate.”

1940 — Robert W. Schiff, Ohio Jewish Chronicle, 17 May 1940, page 1: “Over six
million Jews in Central and Eastern Europe are faced with great danger of annihi-
lation as the result of the sweep of war and oppression.”

1940 — New York Times, 25 June 1940, page 4: “Six million Jews in Europe are
doomed to destruction, if the victory of Nazis should be final. ... The chances for
mass emigration and resettlement of European Jewry seem to be remote, and Eu-
ropean Jews face the danger of physical annihilation. Even the 4,000,000 Jews un-
der Soviet rule, although free from racial discrimination, are not safe in the event
of a final Nazi victory.”

1940 — Joplin News Herald (Missouri), 25 June 1940, page 3: “Six million Jews in
Europe are doomed to destruction.”

1940 — The Palm Beach Post, 25 June 1940: “Dr. Nahum Goldmann [...] said to-
day that if the Nazis should achieve final victory ‘6,000,000 Jews in Europe are
doomed to destruction.”

1940 — Ohio Jewish Chronicle, 28 June 1940, page 1: “The lives of six million
Jews have been uprooted by the psychopathic, political ambitions of totalitarian
leaders.”

1940 — The Palestine Post, 1 July 1940, page 6: “Nor must we despair that six mil-
lion Jews will forever lose trace of their historic heritage.”

1940 — The Jewish Criterion, 15 November 1940: “J.N.F. to Raise $6,000,000 for
Palestine During Coming Year. ... the Jewish National Fund of America voted to
raise $6,000,000 for the holy land’s war needs during the coming year.”

1941 — Salt Lake Tribune, 5 February 1941, page 2: “Nazis Prepare Blueprint Of
All World Enslaved ... Later, the survivors will all be sent to whatever ‘reserva-
tion’ the Nazis finally decide to set up—all six million of Europe’s Jews.”

1941 — New York Times, 2 October 1941: “... as to avoid the likelihood of another
holocaust.”

1941 — The Jewish Criterion, 28 November 1941: “6,000,000 Jews in Europe
Look to America for Aid, Says Warburg. Fully six million Jews in Europe ...”

1942 — The Jewish Spectator, Volume 7, 1942, page 53: “Now, too, the unspeaka-
ble tragedy of almost six million Jews under nazi domination is not considered suf-
ficiently important to be discussed.”

1942 — The Palestine Post, 1 November 1942: “The Chief Rabbi, who spoke on
behalf of Empire Jewry and Jews of the United Nations, as well as of all six mil-
lion Jews in Europe, said that the deliberate extinction of the whole house of Israel
was being carried out by Hitler’s sadists and quislings on a scale beyond compare
even in the annals of Israel.”


128


205.


206.


207.


208.


209.


210.


211.


212.


213.


214.


215.


216.


DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


1942 — New York Times, 13 December 1942, page 21: “Rabbi Israel Goldstein in
Temple B’nai Jeshurun, Eighty-eighth Street, near Broadway, declared: “Authenti-
cated reports point to 2,000,000 Jews who have already been slain by all manner of
satanic barbarism, and plans for the total extermination of all Jews upon whom the
Nazis can lay their hands. The slaughter of a third of the Jewish population in Hit-
ler’s domain and the threatened slaughter of all is a holocaust without parallel.”
1942 — The Courier-Mail (Brisbane), 19 December 1942: “GERMAN HORROR
CRIMES; ALLIES PROMISE JUSTICE. Statements issued simultaneously in
London, Washington and Moscow, told of German barbarity and of proof of the
Nazi determination to exterminate Jews. ... Hitler’s decision to exterminate the
Jews... It is estimated that there are between five and six million Jews in Occupied
Europe... Nazi Slaughter House. ... Hitler’s oft-repeated intention to exterminate
the Jewish people in Europe.”

1942 — Barrier Miner (Australia), 23 December 1942: “Mr. Silverman suggested
that Australia and Canada could each absorb 6,000,000 Jews. ... MOST ARE
DOOMED... The Jewish Congress declares that 2,000,000 Jews have been exter-
minated so far.”

1942 — The Massacre of a People: What the Democracies Can Do, 1943. The fol-
lowing article is an excerpt from “Let My People Go,” a pamphlet written on
Christmas Day 1942 in London: “Of the six million Jews or so who were living at
the outbreak of the war in what is at present Nazi-occupied Europe, a high propor-
tion—between one and two million—have been deliberately murdered by the Na-
zis and their satellites. ... Unless something effective is done, within a very few
months these six million Jews will all be dead, ...”

1943 — American Zionist Emergency Council (as of 1970: American Zionist
Movement) , Palestine, Volumes 1-5 (1943): “Jewish civilian casualties will be
close to six million...”

1943 — Debates: House of Commons, official report, volume 5, Canada, 1943: “I
should like to read a bit from a pamphlet entitled “Let My People Go,” written by
Victor Gollancz: Of the 6,000,000 Jews or so who were living at the outbreak of
the war in what is at present nazi-occupied Europe, a high proportion -say between
one and two million- have been deliberately murdered by the nazis and their satel-
lites. ... within a very few months these six million Jews will all be dead...”

1943 — The Canberra Times, 25 January 1943: “... Jews are being subjected as part
of Hitler’s plan to exterminate six million Jews in occupied Europe.”

1943 — The (London) Times, 25 January 1943: “They note further that the extermi-
nation already carried out is part of the carrying into effect of Hitler’s oft-repeated
intention to exterminate the Jewish people in Europe, which means in effect the
extermination of some 6,000,000 persons in the territories over which Hitler’s rule
has been extended.”

1943 — Lowell Sun (Mass.), 26 January 1943, page 9: “Of these six million Jews,
almost a third have already been massacred by Germans, Rumanians and Hungari-
ans and the most conservative of scorekeepers estimate that before the war ends at
least another third will have been done to death.”

1943 — The Guardian, 27 January 1943, page 4: “A PROPOSAL TO SAVE THE
JEWS... Some six million lives remained in imminent peril.”

1943 — The Canadian Jewish Review, 29 January 1943, page 1: “... Hitler really
intended to exterminate 6,000,000 more human beings.”

1943 — The Zionist Review, 29 January 1943, page 3: “A statement calling on the
Government to declare its readiness to co-operate in finding an immediate refuge
for all Jewish refugees from death at the hands of the Nazis has been issued by the
Archbishops of Canterbury (Dr. Temple), York (Dr. Garbett), and Wales (Dr.
Green). ... They note, further, that the extermination already carried out is part of
the carrying into effect of Hitler’s oft-repeated intention to exterminate the Jewish


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 129


217.


218.


219.


220.


221.


222.


223.


224.


225.


226.


227.


228.


229.


230.


people in Europe, which means in effect the extermination of some 6,000,000 per-
sons in the territories over which Hitler’s rule has been extended.”

1943 — Hull Daily Mail, 30 January 1943, page 3: “Mr Gollancz states that of the
six million Jews living at the outbreak of war in the present Nazi-dominated areas,
between one and two million have been deliberately murdered.”

1943 — Contemporary Jewish Record, Volume 6, No. 1, February 1943 (Published
by the American Jewish Committee): “Suddenly, during the summer of 1942,
world public opinion was shocked out of its lethargy by the realization that the Na-
zis had decreed the complete extinction of six million Jews and that a third of the
victims had already perished.”

1943 — Ben Hecht, Reader s Digest, February 1943, page 108: “Of these 6,000,000
Jews almost a third have already been massacred by Germans, Rumanians and
Hungarians, and the most conservative of the scorekeepers estimate that before the
war ends at least another third will have been done to death.”

1943 — Western Morning News (Devon, UK), 5 February 1943, page 2: “There are
some who hold that Hitler’s set purpose is the extermination of the Jews in Occu-
pied Europe, numbering about six millions. ... We can neither accommodate six
million Jews here nor dictate the attitude of other Governments.”

1943 — New York Times, 2 March 1943: “... appalling is the fact that those who
proclaim the Four Freedoms have so far done very little to secure even the freedom
to live for 6,000,000 of their Jewish fellow men by readiness to rescue those who
might still escape Nazi torture and butchery.”

1943 — The Canadian Jewish Review, 14 March 1943, page 8: “Two millions of
Jews have already been done to death. Six millions in mid-Europe are sentenced to
die.”

1943 — Wallace R. Deuel, Cumberland Evening Times, 23 March 1943, page 1:
“The Nazis set out in the beginning to destroy whole peoples. They expected to
obliterate from the earth not less than 6,000,000 Jews as a beginning.”

1943 — The Advertiser (Adelaide, Australia), 15 May 1943: “... the possibility of
the complete wiping out of six million Jews if something is not immediately done
to secure a harbour of refuge.”

1943 — 21 July 1943, Ben Hecht’s show We Shall Not Die staged at the Hollywood
Bowl, California: “The Germans murdered 2,000,000 Jewish civilians without
trouble; the Germans are murdering the surviving 4,000,000 Jewish civilians of
Europe without trouble.”

1943 — The Yorkshire Post and Leeds Mercury, 7 December 1943, page 1.: “Hitler
had pronounced a sentence of death on the 6,000,000 Jews of Europe. The Nazis
had already murdered two millions by machine-gun and lethal chamber, by torture
and hunger, and were now busy exterminating the third million.”

1943 — The Canadian Jewish Review, 13 August 1943, page 8: “Two million Jews
out of Europe’s six million have already been slaughtered by the Nazis; most of the
remainder seem doomed, ...”

1943 — Toledo Blade, 27 August 1943: “3,000,000 Jews Left In Europe —
5,300,000 Reported To Have Perished. Europe’s Jewish population has been re-
duced from 8,300,000 to 3,000,000 during the 10 years the Nazis have been in
power, says the Institute of Jewish Affairs.”

1944 — The Palestine Post, 23 January 1944: “Only a handful of Polish Jews sur-
vived the extermination. They were now either with the partisans in the forests or
living as Crypto-Jews. The death toll was six million, they declared.”

1944 — The Polish Jewish Observer (Section of The City and East London Observ-
er), 4 February 1944, p. 1.: “6,000,000 JEWS SLAIN? THAT the [sic] appalling
total of 6,000,000 Jews have been slaughtered in Poland was testified to by the two
members of the Polish underground movement who have just arrived in Palestine.


130


231.


232.


233.


234.


235.


236.


237.


238.


239.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


[...] The figure of 6,000,000 slain, it was said, included Jews deported to Poland
from various European countries.”

1944 — The Montreal Gazette, 18 March 1944, page 11: “There must be insurance
that the Germans, unrepentant as they were after the last war, do not prepare an-
other holocaust.”

1944 — Rabbi Chaim Weissmandl, in a letter dated May 15, 1944, addressed to the
Zionist leadership in Palestine: “And you — our brothers in Palestine, in all the
countries of freedom, and you, ministers of all the kingdom — how do you keep si-
lent in the face of this great murder? Silent while thousand on thousands, reaching
now to six million Jews, were murdered.”

1944 — Rabbi Chaim Weissmandl, 31 May 1944: “... heads of government and ra-
dio must announce what was done to our people in the slaughter house of Belzec,
Malkinia (Treblinka), Sobibor, and Auschwitz. Till now six times a million Jews
from Europe and Russia have been destroyed.”

1944 — Moshe Sharett, future Israeli PM, 15 June 1944. Quoted in a telegram
(same day) from the British High Commissioner of Palestine to the Colonial Secre-
tary in London (TNA Kew, T 161/1167): “Shertok derived the impression that en-
emy motives were mixed, and might be all or any of the following: (a) the purely
realistic object of getting various commodities from us through the only medium
of exchange available; (b) hope that by obtaining some credit in our eyes for not
slaughtering 2,000,000 Jews they would get away with the fact that they had
slaughtered 6,000,000 Jews already;”

1944 — United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers of America Convention
Proceedings, 25-29 September 1944: “WHEREAS: History records no parallel to
the bestial cruelties inflicted on the Jewish people of Europe by the Nazis and their
satellites, whose coldly calculated program of extermination of all European Jews
very nearly succeeded, almost six million Jews having been murdered in cold
blood ...”

1944 — Youngstown Vindicator (Ohio), 27 November 1944: “A five-volume ‘black
book’ containing a documentary record of the German massacre of approximately
6,000,000 European Jews is being prepared by the state publishing house.”

1944 — The Pittsburgh Press, 28 November 1944, page 5: “Six Million Jews Listed
Slaughtered. A five-volume ‘black book’ containing a documentary record of the
German massacre of approximately six million European Jews was being prepared
today by the State publishing house. ... The work was under the general editorship
of Ilya Ehrenburg and the editorial board included Poet-Playwright Konstantin Si-
monov, Writer Vsevold [Vsevolod] Ivanov and Poetess Vera Imber.”

1944 — The Leader, 28 November 1944: “Russian ‘Black Book’ lists German
crimes. The first volume of a five-volume Russian ‘black book’ recording the doc-
umentary form of the German massacre of approximately 6,000,000 European
Jews has been completed by the Soviet state publishing house ... The five-volume
work is under the general editorship of Ilya Ehrenburg, noted Soviet writer and
war correspondent, with an editorial board that includes poet-playwright Kanstan-
tin [Konstantin] Simonov, writer Vsevold [Vsevolod] Ivanov and poetess Vera Im-
ber. Editors of the work -which will be published in both Russian and English in
press runs of hundreds of thousands of copies- estimate from data now available
that the Germans killed between 5,000,000 and 6,000,000 Jews in Russia, Poland
and western Europe. They believe an additional 500,000 now are being murdered
in Hungary.”

1944 — The Palestine Post, 28 November 1944: “SIX MILLIONS MURDERED.
The Soviet State Publishing House is preparing the publication of another “Black
Book,” a documentary record of the German massacre of approximately six mil-
lion European Jews. ... According to the Soviet editors, the Germans killed be-


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 131


240.


241.


242.


243.


244.


245.


246.


247.


248.


249.


250.


251.


252.


tween five and six million Russian, Polish and Western European Jews, and an ad-
ditional half million are being murdered in Hungary now.”

1944 — The Jewish Criterion, 1 December 1944: “... 5,500,000 Jews have been
killed in Germany and German-occupied territories since the outbreak of the war.
... Yes, the Germans murdered close to six million Jews...”

1944 — President of the Chester Zionist Organization, Rabbi Naphtali Frishberg,
Chester Times (Pa.), 2 December 1944, page 6: “With six million dead abroad,
how can the Council on Judaism ...”

1944 — Springfield Republican (Springfield, Mass.), 4 December 1944, page 2:
“6,000,000 JEWS DEAD, RESULT OF THE WAR ... The war losses of world
Jewish [sic], including those killed in action, now total more than 6,000,000, Dr
Nahum Goldman told members of the executive committee of the New England
division of the American Jewish congress today.”

1944 — Nahum Goldmann, Jewish Western Bulletin, 8 December 1944: “... apart
from Jewish losses in combat service, 5,500,000 Jews have been killed in Germany
and German-occupied tesritories [territories] since the outbreak of the awr [war].
These figures exceed the number anticipated even by the most pessimistic. ... Yes,
the Germans murdered close to six million Jews...”

1944 — Ilya Ehrenburg, Soviet War News, 22 December 1944: “In the regions they
seized, Germans killed all Jews, from the old folks to infants in arms. Ask any
German prisoners why his fellow countrymen annihilated six million innocent
people...”

1945 — Ilya Ehrenburg, Soviet War News, 4 January 1945: “In regions they seized
the Germans killed all the Jews from the old folk to infants in arms. Ask any Ger-
man prisoner why his fellow countrymen annihilated six million innocent people
and he will reply quite simply: ‘Why, they were Jews.’”

1945 — New York Times, 8 January 1945: “6,000,000 JEWS DEAD. The Jewish
population in Europe has been reduced from 9,500,000 in 1939 to 3,500,000. Of
the 6,000,000 European Jews who have died, 5,000,000 had lived in the countries
under Hitler’s occupation.”

1945 — New York Times, 11 February 1945, page 10: “1,200,000 Jews survived of
the 6,000,000 who had been under German rule during the war, and that most of
them were eager to come to Palestine.”

1945 — New York Times, 17 February 1945: “Dr. Joseph Schwartz, European direc-
tor of the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee, estimated today that
500,000 of Europe’s 6,000,000 Jews had escaped destruction by emigration and
that only 1,000,000 to 1,500,000 of Europe’s 6,000,000 Jews were now left on the
Continent.”

1945 — Ilya Ehrenburg, Pravda, 1 March 1945: “The world now knows that the
Germans killed six million Jews. They killed all Jews — from infants at the breast
to the aged.”

1945 — Ilya Ehrenburg, Soviet War News, 15 March 1945: “The world now knows
that Germany has killed six million Jews.”

1945 — Joseph Thon, president of the National Organization of Polish Jews in
America, 22 March 1945: “I accuse the whole German people that in the years
1939 to 1945 they slaughtered upward of 15,000,000 men, among which there
were 6,000,000Jews. ... The German people murdered, in cold blood, in excess of
6,000,000 European Jews, among them over 3,000,000 Polish Jews.”

1945 — Ilya Ehrenburg, The Advertiser (Adelaide), 27 March 1945: “... the Ger-
mans tortured the last handful of Jews. The Germans killed six million Jews -all
the Jews of Poland, Hungary, the Ukraine, Lithuania, Byelo-Russia, West Europe
and of course Germany.”


132


253.


254.


255.


256.


257.


258.


259.


260.


261.


262.


263.


264.


265.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


1945 — Army News (Darwin, Australia), 11 April 1945: “NAZIS HAVE
MURDERED SIX MILLION JEWS. Of a population of 16 million Jews in the
world before the war, more than six million had been murdered by the Nazis.”

1945 — New York Post, 21 April 1945, page 9: “The Nazi leaders felt they had
nothing to fear. ‘They murdered six million Jews, but nothing was done. In the
words of the Czech delegate to the London War Crimes Commission,’”

1945 — Stephen S. Wise, May 1945; Norman Finkelstein, Friends Indeed: The
Special Relationship of Israel and the United States, Millbrook Press, Brookfield
1998, page 33: “The Christian world, and I include England, of course, in the
Christian world, suffered six million of the people of Jesus of Nazareth to die in a
most horrible manner. The Christian world owes the Jews some reparation.”

1945 — New York Times, 2 May 1945: “... estimated that only 1,000,000 of
6,000,000 Jews in Europe in 1939 were still alive.”

1945 — The Pittsburgh Press, 13 May 1945: “Nazis Destroy six million Jews. ...
Of the eight million Jews living in Germany and German occupied countries be-
fore the war, 6,200,000 have died from either execution, cruel treatment or starva-
tion, according to latest figures compiled by Jewish welfare organisations here.”
1945 — New York Times, May 20 1945, page 7: “... seemingly endless streams of
former ‘slaves’ from all parts of Europe and by the huge cantonments of liberated
victims of Nazism. More than six million of them have been liberated ...”

1945 — Dr. Jacob Robinson (lawyer), 11(12) June 1945; David Irving, Nuremberg:
The Last Battle, Focal Point, London 1996, pages 61f.: “How great were these
losses, inquired [Robert H.] Jackson, seeking a figure to use at the coming trial.
“Six million,’ responded Dr. Robinson, and indicated that the figure included Jews
in all Nazi-occupied lands ‘from the Channel to Stalingrad’ ... Jackson noted that
day: ‘I was particularly interested in knowing the source and reliability of his esti-
mate as I know no authentic data on it.’”

1945 — Chaim Weizmann, president of the (World) Zionist Organization, speech in
London at the World Zionist Congress on August Ist, 1945. “An Answer to Mr.
Bevin by Chaim Weizmann” Jewish Spectator, Vol. X, No. 5, September 1945:
“The Jewish people, with its six million victims in Europe,”

1945 — David ben Gurion, speech in London at the World Zionist Congress on 2
August 1945. Footage viewable at criticalpast.com: “The six million slaughtered
Jews.”

1945 — The Canadian Jewish Chronicle, 3 August 1945, page 7: “This commission
is gathering all materials, documents, and photographs illustrating the martyrology
of Polish Jews and of the Jews of all Europe. This proves that the Germans mur-
dered six million European Jews in Poland.”

1945 — Alexander L. Easterman, Political Secretary of the World Jewish Congress,
letter to the head of the British war crimes trials Brigadier General Henry Shapcott,
8th August, 1945, in UK NA, WO 309/424, page 102B.: “As I inform you, the
World Jewish Congress has been in relations with the United Nations War Crimes
Commission and with various Governments on the question of the Jewish aspect of
war crimes. In formal memoranda and in many discussions with these authorities,
the Congress has expressed their views upon the specific character of the crimes
committed against the Jews in Europe by the Nazi Government of Germany and
their satellites, crimes which have culminated in the extermination, as a result of a
calculated and planned conspiracy against the Jewish people, of some six million
Jewish men, women and children.”

1945 — The Canadian Jewish Review, 10 August 1945, page 1: “while the Jews,
who had lost 6,000,000 victims to Nazism in Europe,”

1945 — The Times (London), 14 August 1945: “... some 6,000,000 men, women,
and children — were put to death by the Nazis and their satellites.”


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 133


266.


267.


268.


269.


270.


271.


272.


273.


274.


275.


276.


277.


278.


279.


280.


281.


1945 — The Evening Post (New Zealand), 21 August 1945, page 5: “Two-fifths of
all Jewry-nearly 6,000,000 men, women and children-were butchered.”

1945 — The Guardian, 5 September 1945, page 8: “Altogether, it is estimated that
six million Jews have been killed.”

1945 — The Canberra Times, 6 September 1945: “SIX MILLION JEWS KILLED
BY GERMANS. Throughout the war the Germans killed 6,000,000 Jews, the
number left in Europe being approximately 1,600,000 ... most surviving Jews de-
sired to emigrate to Palestine. The agency plans to send six groups of six men each
to help Jews in German camps. ... It is planned to erect a monument on the summit
of Mount Scopus to commemorate the Jews who died. It will bear the names of all
the 6,000,000, including soldiers, partisans and ghetto fighters. All the Jewish cul-
tural documents and religious objects left in Central and Eastern Europe are to be
collected in Palestine.”

1945 — The Evening Post (New Zealand), 6 September 1945, page 7: “The Ger-
mans killed 6,000,000 Jews during the war, said Mr. Eliahu Dobkin, head of the
Jewish Agency’s immigration department, on his return to Jerusalem from Central
Europe.”

1945 — Jewish Western Bulletin, 7 September 1945, page 43: “Almost 6,000,000
Jews were wiped out during these years,”

1945 — Jewish Western Bulletin, 7 September 1945, page 47: “Throughout the
world there is a growing indignation over the barbarism and the unspeakable cruel-
ty of the mass murders of six million Jews by the Nazis,”

1945 — New York Times, 17 September 1945: “Six million Jews have died as mar-
tyrs and their blood cries up from the ground.”

1945 — Dr. Joseph Tenenbaum President of the American Federation of Polish
Jews, The Jewish Criterion, 21 September 1945, page 7: “Due to German atrocities
and Allied neglect six million Jews have been slaughtered.”

1945 — American Zionist Emergency Council, New York Post, 27 September 1945:
“Tt was our very unhappy conviction all along that the responsibility for the extinc-
tion of six million Jews in Europe was not Hitler’s alone. The Entire Christian
world shares that responsibility.”

1945 — The Canadian Jewish Review, 28 September 1945, page 8: “We mourn six
million dead adults, the aged, the young and the little Jewish children. We remem-
ber them.”

1945 — 30 September 1945. At a Zionist rally at Madison Square Gardens NYC, a
huge banner approximately 50ft long and 2.5ft high, hung above the stage on
which the speakers addressed the audience. The banner said: “AREN’T 6,000,000
JEWISH DEATHS ENOUGH?”

1945 — New York Post, 1 October 1945, page 15: “While ‘we waited patiently for
the fulfillment of Great Britain’s pledges to the Jewish people,’ they said, ‘six mil-
lion Jews were killed in Europe. ...” ... Aren’t 6,000,000 Jewish Dead Enough?”
1945 — The Evening Post, 2 October 1945, page 7: “The 6,000,000 Jews who had
been killed ...”

1945 — The Manhattan Zionist Club, New York Post, 3 October 1945, page 21:
“For years we waited patiently for the fulfilment of Great Britain’s pledges to the
Jewish people, We waited in vain. In the meantime, six million Jews were killed in
Europe,”

1945 — The Canadian Jewish Chronicle, 5 October 1945, page 6: “You now pro-
pose to continue to keep these doors shut against our survivors, after six million of
our people perished, for whose death your country [Britain] is not without blame.”
1945 — The Chester Times, 10 October 1945: “It was our very unhappy conviction
all along that the responsibility for extinction of six million Jews in Europe was
not Hitler’s alone. The entire Christian world shares that responsibility.”


134


282.


283.


284.


285.


286.


287.


288.


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


1945 — The Observer, 14 October 1945, page 5: “At the entrance to its office, a
large poster asks the searching question: Six million Jews have been murdered—
world, where is thy conscience?”

1945 — The Canadian Jewish Review, 26 October 1945, page 12: “They look about
and behold the tragic suffering of Israel during the past decade in which six million
Jews perished and they see to see Israel as a defeated nation.”

1945 — The Observer, 2 November 1945, page 10: “The horror of the Middle Ages
with all forms of torture was brought down upon European Israel with the result
that six millions of Jews perished.”

1945 — Lebanon Daily News (Pa.), 9 November 1945, page 11: “Six million Jews
have perished—victims of the Nazis”

1945 — Peter Gay, The Gateway (Uni. of Alberta), 9 November 1945, page 2: “...
six million Jews have been murdered and the few remaining ones are denied a ha-
ven...”

1945 — Chaim Weizmann, president of the WZO, speech on 19 November 1945, at
the convention of the Zionist Organization of America in Atlantic City. “Weiz-
mann’s Rebuke to Bevin,” The Jewish Chronicle, November 30, 1945, p. 1.: “after
the slaughter of six million Jews, the remnant of a million and a half implore the
shelter of the Jewish homeland? What a sorry epitaph the new declaration of policy
seeks to write over the graves of six million of our dead. The soil of Europe is sat-
urated with their innocent blood.”

1945 — The Indian Express (Madras) — 19 Nov 1945, page 4: “The world will have
no peace as long as Jews have no opportunity to determine their destiny in their
own land. We know from bloody experience that mass murder of six million Jews
was made possible only because of their homelessness and statelessness.”


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 135


Appendix


1. Resources


The New York Times offers free access to its archives covering the years
from 1851 to 1922, and then again from 1987 through the present (plus
1964, for some reason), and paid access for the remaining years. See at


http://spiderbites.nytimes.com/
The Chicago Tribune offers free access to its archives at:


http://archives.chicagotribune.com/

The Library of Congress Search Engine of Historic American News-
papers features digitized U.S. newspapers from 1789 to 1963 (as of
March 2018): http://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/

In addition to these, there are also subscription-based archival re-
sources, like for instance the www.newspapers.com.


2. Selected Book and Newspaper Excerpts


Ehe New York Cimes


June 11, 1900, p. 7


“Rabbi Wise ’s Address


Rabbi Wise said, in part:

‘The day will never come when I will care less for Zion, when there will be
anyone who will strive more for the glorious ideals of Zionism.

‘Two great conventions of Jews are being held tonight. In Chicago, there is
a conference of charities called together by men who minister to the wants
of the poor. They have assembled to see that too much charity is not given
to the unworthy. Their purpose is right. But ours is the greater charity. We
have assembled not to see that the Jew does not get too much, but that eve-
ry Jew shall get the right to live.


136 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


‘There are 6,000,000 living, bleeding, suffering arguments in favor of Zion-
ism. They come not to beg, but ask for that which is higher than all materi-
al things. They seek to have satisfied the unquenchable thirst after the ide-
al. They ask to become once again the messengers of right, justice, and
humanity.

‘Your Christian friends will honor you if you have enough self-respect to
care for your own people. Say that you are not a Jew and you will be hated
as a Jew, nevertheless. But say that you are an American Jew, and strive for
the best principles of the race, you will be respected and the Zionist name
honored.

‘Of Israel and Zion one thing is true. They can conquer. God is our leader,
and with the General of the heavenly hosts to lead who will say that we go
not to victory?

‘In the old Greek games, the man who won the race was not he who went
fastest, but the one who bore a lighted torch to the end of the course.

‘We Zionists have entered a race, the torch of liberty, charity, and justice in
our hands.

‘The race will be won, not because we are fastest but because that lamp is
a light unto the world. It will never be extinguished.

‘Come, brothers, the lamp is in your hands, run the race and may God give
you the victory forever.”


Ehe New York Cimes


January 14, 1915, p. 3:


“JEWS INDIFFERENCE TO WAR AID REBUKED
Louis Marshall Denounces Apathy Toward Suffering of Co-Religionists.


MILLIONS IN DIRE DISTRESS


Jacob H. Schiff, Meyer London, and Dr. Enelow Plead with the Rich to
Give.

Louis Marshall, speaking at a meeting in Temple Emanu-El last night, de-
plored what he termed the failure of the Jews of America, particularly of
New York, to realize the terrible calamity that has overtaken the millions of
Jews whose homes are in the eastern theater of the European war.

The meeting was held in the interest of the American Jewish Relief Commit-
tee, of which committee Mr. Marshall was President. Besides Mr. Marshall
Congressman-elect Meyer London, and the Rev. Dr. H.G. Enelow of the
Temple Emanu-El, spoke. Like Mr. Marshall, each deplored the fact that the
Jews of America have not given the assistance they should to their suffering


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 137


co-religionists. Further emphasis on the same subject was contained in a
letter from Jacob H. Schiff, read by Mr. Marshall.

‘Tt is discouraging to those who have devoted so much time and energy to
this work that there is so small a response from Jews in New York, a city
which is so great a Jewish center. It seems to me that the people are so
dazed by the European cataclysm that they are unable to realize that it is
their duty to aid of those who are suffering through the calamity.

‘In the world today there are about 13,000,000 Jews, of whom more than
6,000,000 are in the heart of the war zone; Jews whose lives are at stake
and who today are subjected to every manner of suffering and sorrow, and
the great American Jewish community is not doing its duty toward these
sufferers. In the United Stated there are between 2,000,000 and 3,000,000
Jews, nearly all able to do something and yet, after months of work, we
have not raised more than $300,000. In New York there are more than a
million Jews, some of them persons of great affluence, but many of them
seem to think if they have given a few hundred dollars they have done their
duty.

‘We hear of pogroms in Russia, in Poland, in Galicia, and we sit indiffer-
ent. In Palestine, starvation stalks through the land. Shall we selfishly en-
joy ourselves and say we would like to, but cannot help because of hard
times, and think that we are doing our duty? No. The time has come for
every man and woman and child to do his duty, and we must fulfill that duty
quickly or it may be too late in hundreds of thousands of cases’

At this point Mr. Marshall read Mr. Schiff's letter. Mr. Schiff said his own
interest in the work was intense, and that it should appeal to every Jew.
Private reports he has received, Mr. Schiff said, showed conditions in Rus-
sia, Palestine, Poland, and Galicia, the frightful nature of which could not
be pictured.

He said that the Emanu-El congregation is the largest and wealthiest in the
United States and hoped that its members would give in proportion to their
means. He further suggested a committee to canvass the congregation for a
Temple Emanu-El fund and said he would contribute. Mr. Marshall put the
suggestion in the form of a motion which was unanimously carried. Mr.
Marshall will name the committee soon.

Mr. London said this was the ‘worst period in Jewish history,’ and that the
having of millions of Jewish peoples depended on the generosity of more
fortunate Jews of the United States. Dr. Enelow emphasized what Mr. Mar-
shall had said and added that never before were the Jews of this country
confronted with so great a duty.”


138 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Ehe New York Cimes


May 22, 1916, p. 11


“700,000 Jews in need on the east war front


German Hebrew Relief Association, Striving to succor them, requires more
food.

An associated press correspondence from Berlin said, ‘of the normal total
of about 2,450,000 Jews in Poland, Lithuania, and Courland, 1,770,000
remain, and of that number about 700,000 are in urgent and continuous
want. About 455,000 of these are in Poland, and 50,000 of these numbers
are persons who are without homes and in particularly distressful circum-
stances. The number of the needy is increasing from month to month. Op-
portunities to earn money are few, and thousands who are still living on
their savings will, sooner or later, find these exhausted and become de-
pendent on charity.

These estimates appear in the annual report of the German Hebrew Relief
Association, which has taken upon itself the work of aiding co-religionists
in the occupied districts of the battle line in Russia and Galicia. The sum of
500,000 marks monthly is required to alleviate the distress of the most ne-
cessitious of the 700,000 sufferers, and even that sum which is all that the
relief association can devote to the work for the next few months, can do
little more than keep them from starvation.

‘With this sum 225 cities and villages in the occupied districts are being as-
sisted. The Grand Lodge of B’nai B’rith in Germany has had a large share
in the relief work, and more than a half million marks has thus far been re-
ceived from America. Up to date nearly 2,250,000 marks has been paid out
of the Hebrew Relief Association for Poland and Lithuania. Funds availa-
ble have not been sufficient to afford relief to some 10,000 Jews in Cour-
land, where the distress is not so great as in the other districts.

‘Those activities have formed but a part of the work of the Relief Associa-
tion. Quite as important and even more arduous has been its work as an in-
termediary between the residents of the occupied districts and the outside
world. In this department no denominational distinctions were made, Jews
and Catholics alike being aided. Chief advantage was taken of this work by
relatives and friends in America of the Polish sufferers. About 8,000,000
marks has thus far been received from America for direct transmission, and
the relief association handles as many as 100,000 letters monthly to and
from America.

‘A slight elevation of conditions may come from the recently secured per-
mission of emigration from the occupied districts. Many families have al-
ready availed themselves of the permission, most of them going with tickets
sent from America. ”


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 139


Ehe New ork Cimes


August 10, 1917


“Germans Let Jews Die. Women and Children
in Warsaw Starving to Death


“Through the Intelligence Department of the Mayor’s Committee on Na-
tional Defense, the Provisional Zionist Committee last night made public a
letter describing conditions among Jews in Warsaw under German rule.
The name of the writer of this letter is not divulged for obvious reasons.
The veracity and authenticity of the letter is vouched for by the Zionist
Committee, of which Dr. Stephen S. Wise is chairman and Supreme Court
Justice Louis D. Brandeis, honorary chairman. The letter says in part:
‘Death from starvation is a real fact. It is witnessed here all over, in every
street, in every step, in every house. Jewish mothers, mothers of mercy, feel
happy to see their nursing babies die; at least they are through with their
suffering.

‘Our wealthiest people cut off their daughters’ hair and sell it to be able to
buy the indispensable things like bread for their dying children. Four and
five year old children have become so weak they must be carried on their
arms like babies. Fathers, should they return from the battlefield will meet
of their five and six children they kissed good-by when they left for the war
two or probably one or more. How long yet will this suffering last. From
where will our help come. A commission has been sent to Switzerland to
maintain our soup kitchens, but I doubt the success of their mission. Help
us, help us. Awaken America. This is our only hope. Should America not aid
us all will be lost.”


The Jews in the Eastern War Zones


Published by the American Jewish Committee, 1916, pp. 7 to 21


“Introduction


Of all the people that have suffered deeply from the present war, none have
borne a greater burden than the Jews — in physical and economic loss, in
moral and spiritual torment.


140 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Jews are today fighting each other in all the armies of Europe. Russia
alone has 350,000 Jewish soldiers; Austria has over 50,000; altogether
there are one-half million Jews in the ranks of the fighting armies.

The Jews are bearing the brunt of the war’s burdens, not only on the field
of battle, where they suffer with the rest of the world, but also in their
homes, where they have been singled out, by their peculiar geographic, po-
litical and economic position, for disaster surpassing that of all others.
When the war broke out, one-half of the Jewish population of the world
was trapped in a corner of Eastern Europe that is absolutely shut off from
all neutral lands and from the sea. Russian Poland, where over two million
Jews lived, is in a salient. South of it is Galicia, the frontier province of
Austria. Here lived another million Jews. Behind Russian Poland are the
fifteen Russian provinces, which together with Poland, constitute the Pale
of Jewish Settlement. Here lived another four million Jews.

Thus seven million Jews — a population exceeding that of Belgium by one
million-have borne the brunt of the war. Behind them was Holy Russia,
closed to them by the May laws of 1881. In front were hostile Germany and
Austria. To the south was unfriendly Rumania. They were overwhelmed
where they stood; and over their bodies crossed and recrossed the German
armies from the west, the Russian armies from the east and the Austrian
armies from the south. True, all the peoples of this area suffered ravage and
pillage by the war, but their sufferings were in no degree comparable to
those of the Jews. The contending armies found it politic, in a measure, to
court the good will of the Poles, Ruthenians and other races in this area.
These sustained only the necessary and unavoidable hardships of war. But
the Jews were friendless, their religion proscribed. In this medieval region
all the religious fanaticism of the Russians, the chauvinism of the Poles,
combined with the blood lusts liberated in all men by the war — all those
fierce hatreds were sluiced into one torrent of passion which overwhelmed
the Jews.

Hundreds of thousands were forced from their homes on a day’; notice, the
more fortunate being packed and shipped as freight — the old, the sick and
insane, men, women and children, shuttled from one province to another,
side-tracked for days without food or help of any kind — the less fortunate
driven into the woods and swamps to die of starvation. Jewish towns were
sacked and burned wantonly. Hundreds of Jews were carried off as hostag-
es into Germany, Austria and Russia. Orgies of lust and torture took place
in public in the light of day. There are scores of villages where not a single
woman was left inviolate. Women, old and young, were stripped and knot-
ted in the public squares. Jews were burned alive in synagogues where they
had fled for shelter. Thousands were executed on the flimsiest pretext or
from sheer purposeless cruelty.

These Jews, unlike the Belgians, have no England to flee to. The sympathy
of the outside world is shut off from them. They have not the consolation of
knowing that they are fighting for their own hearths, or even for military


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 141


glory or in the hope of a possible reward of indemnity. The only thought
they cherish is that after the struggle shall be over they may at last achieve
those elementary rights denied to no other people, the right to live and
move about freely in the land of their birth or adoption, to educate their
children, to earn a livelihood, to worship God according to the dictates of
their conscience.


Russia


Nearly half of the Jewish population of the world lives in Russia, in the
immediate area of active hostilities, congested in cities, which are the first
point of attack. The dreadful position of the Jews of Russia in normal times
is well known. Forbidden to live outside of the enlarged Ghetto, known as
the Pale of Settlement; burdened with special taxes; denied even the scant
educational privileges enjoyed by the rest of the population; harried by a
corrupt police, a hostile government and an unfriendly populace — in brief,
economically degraded and politically outlawed — their condition repre-
sented the extreme of misery. It was the openly expressed policy of the reac-
tionaries who ruled Russia to solve the Jewish question by ridding the
country of the Jews. ‘One-third will accept the Greek Church; one-third
will emigrate to America; and one-third will die of starvation in Russia’ —
so ran the cynical saying. Some did abjure their faith, tens of thousands did
starve in Russia and hundreds of thousands did emigrate to America.


Loyalty of Russian Jews


Then came the war. The Jews saw therein an opportunity to show the Chris-
tian population that in spite of all the persecutions of the past they were
ready to begin life anew in a united and regenerated Russia. Thousands of
Jewish young men who had been forced to leave Russia to secure the edu-
cation which their own country denied them returned voluntarily to colors
even though they knew that all hope of preferment and promotion was
closed to them. On the field of battle the Jewish soldiers displayed courage
and intelligence which won the respect of their fighting comrades and
gained for them the much desired cross of St. George, granted for distin-
guished valor in the face of the enemy; while those who remained at home
opened and equipped hospitals for wounded soldiers without distinction of
race or creed, contributed generously to all public funds, and, in brief,
gave themselves and their possessions unsparingly to the Russian cause.

It appeared at first as though the long desired union with the Russian peo-
ple was about to be realized. But it soon developed that the chains which
bound the Jews of Russia to their past could not be broken. Forces which
they could not possibly control doomed them to the greatest tragedy in their
history. The Pale in which they lived was Polish in origin and population.


142 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Poles and Jews were fellow victims of the Russian oppressor; but instead of
being united by the common bond of suffering, they were separated by reli-
gious and racial differences and above all by dissension deliberately fos-
tered among them by the Russian rulers until it developed into uncontrolla-
ble hate.


Russian Atrocities


Immediately before the war the struggle had assumed its bitterest form —
that of unrelenting boycott waged against the Jews. When the war broke
out the political status of the Poles changed overnight. Both the Russian
and the German armies found it politic to cultivate the good will of the
Polish population. Many Poles seized the opportunity to gratify personal
animosity, religious bigotry or chauvinistic mania by denouncing the Jews,
now to the one invader and now to the other, as spies and traitors. In Ger-
many the animus of the attacks was to some extent uncovered and the lies
refuted. But in Russia they found fertile soil. The Russian military machine
had met with defeat at the hands of the Germans. To exonerate themselves
in the eyes of their own people the military camarilla eagerly seized the
pretext so readily furnished them by the Poles and unloaded the burden of
their ill-fortune upon the helpless shoulders of the Jew. Men, women, even
children were executed without the shadow of evidence or the formality of a
trial. Circumstantial stories of Jewish treachery, invented by the Poles,
were accepted as the truth and circulated freely through the Russian press
and on the local government bulletin boards; but when official investiga-
tion proved those stories false in every particular, the publication of the
refutation was discouraged by the censorship. The authorities gave the
troops a free hand to loot and ravage, even encouraging them by the publi-
cation of orders which officially denounced all Jews as spies and traitors.
The result was a series of outrages unprecedented even in Russia. A million
Jews were driven from their homes in a state of absolute destitution.


Protest of Liberal Russia


All of the liberal elements of Russia protested against this campaign of ex-
termination, but were powerless in the face of the military Government.
Hundreds of municipal bodies, trades and professional organizations, writ-
ers, publicists and priests, petitioned the civil government to admit the
Jews to human equality or at least suspend its policy of persecution. These
memorials, together with the speeches delivered in the Duma, constitute a
body of evidence from non-Jewish sources, which must condemn the Rus-
sian Government in the eyes of the world.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 143


Galicia


During the ten months of the Russian occupation of Galicia, the Jews of
that section suffered even more severely than did the Jews who dwelt in the
Russian Pale. For here the Jews were the subjects of the enemy and no pre-
text was needed for their maltreatment. The Ruthenians and Poles who oc-
cupied the land were friendly to Russia, which promised them independ-
ence and power. But Russia could expect nothing from the Jews of Galicia,
for they were already in the possessions of rights and liberties not enjoyed
by the Jews of Russia, and the weight of the Russian invasion fell upon
them mercilessly. Here thousands of Russian Jewish soldiers were forced to
give up their lives in an attempt to impose on free Jews of Galicia the servi-
tude from which they themselves so ardently longed to escape in Russia.
They were forced to witness the desecration by their Russian companions-
in-arms of synagogues, the outrage of Jewish women and the massacre of
innocent and helpless civilians of their own faith.


Rumania


Though Rumania is not yet a belligerent, some of the Jews of that country
have been vitally affected by the war. In July of 1915, the Ministry of the In-
terior issued a general order expelling the Jews of the towns near the Aus-
tro-Hungarian frontier into the interior. Though this order was later al-
leged to have been designed to prevent the operation of Jewish grain
speculators from Bukowina, many Jews who had resided in the border
towns for generations were summarily expelled.

This action of the Government was bitterly criticized by the liberal press
and a memorial addressed to the King by the League of Native-born Jews,
and the order was finally revoked.

Whether the present Balkan situation may or may not result in the entrance
of Rumania among the belligerent nations there is no doubt that upon the
termination of hostilities the question of Rumania’s treatment of the Jews
should be reopened.


Palestine


At the outbreak of the war Palestine contained, according to reliable esti-
mates, about 100,000 Jews, some of whom were economically independent
agriculturists, but the great majority of whom were aged pilgrims depend-
ent upon their relatives and the good-will offerings of their pious co-
religionists in Europe. The war cut them off completely from both the mar-
kets of Europe and from their relatives and friends; nearly the entire Jewish
population was thus left destitute. Their position was further aggravated by
the severity with which Turkey, upon her entrance into the war as an ally of
the Central Powers, treated the nationals of hostile countries. About 8,000


144 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Jews who declined to become Turkish subjects were either expelled or de-
parted voluntarily.


Jews in Other Belligerent Countries


In all the countries where the Jews have heretofore enjoyed freedom there
has been no special Jewish problem during this war. The Jews have identi-
fied themselves completely with the lands of their birth or adoption, and
have shared the trials and glories of the peoples among whom their lot was
cast.

In England, the Jewish population, according to estimates prepared by
Lord Rothschild, furnished more than its share of recruits to the British ar-
my, its quota of 17,000 comprising about eight and a half percent of the to-
tal Jewish population as compared with six percent furnished by the non-
Jewish population. The Lord Chief Justice, Baron Reading, a Jew, mobi-
lized the financial resources of the country and was called upon to head the
Anglo-French commission which negotiated the $500,000,000 credit se-
cured in the United States. Lord Rothschild is treasurer of the Red Cross
organization. Hon. Herbert Samuels is a member of the Coalition cabinet.
A Jewish battalion organized by Palestinian fugitives rendered exceptional
service to the allies in the Gallipoli Peninsula. Many rewards, including the
bestowal of Victoria Crosses and promotions, are listed in the Anglo-Jewish
press every week.

In Germany the Jews, although without complete social privileges, have
borne their full share of the burdens of war. To Herr Ballin, the head of the
mercantile marine, was given the task of organizing the national food sup-
ply, and other Jews have been prominently identified with every department
of the industrial mobilization of the country. In France and Italy, Austria-
Hungary and Turkey, Jews are to be found in the ministerial cabinets, in
command of troops in the field, and prominent in charge of the medical
service of the armies.

Thus the present war has again demonstrated the great truth that, in times
of struggle as in times of peace, the Jews constitute a most valuable asset
to those nations that accept them as an integral part of their population
and permit them to develop freely, but wherever an autocratic government
demoralizes its people by confronting them with the spectacle of an unpro-
tected minority denied all human rights, the government itself feels the re-
action and the moral tone of the nation is thereby impaired.°™!


244 A note on sources of information that has not been copied claims, incredibly, that the
Russian government hasn’t denied anything claimed in this report.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 145


Russia


Russia acquired the great bulk of her Jewish population through the parti-
tions of Poland, from 1773 to 1795. Strongly medieval in outlook and or-
ganization as Russia was at that time, she treated the Jews with the excep-
tional harshness which the medieval principle and policy sanctioned and
required. By confining them to those provinces where they happened to live
at the time of the partitions, she created a Ghetto greater than any known
to the Middle Ages; and by imposing restrictions upon the right to live and
travel even within this Ghetto, she has virtually converted it onto a penal
settlement, where six million human beings guilty only of adherence to the
Jewish faith are compelled to live out their lives in squalor and misery, in
constant terror of massacre, subject to the caprice of police officials and a
corrupt administration-in short, without legal right or social status.

Only twice within the last century have efforts been made to improve the
conditions of the Jews in Russia; and each interval of relief was followed
by a period of greater and more cruel repression. The first was during the
reign of Alexander the Second; but his assassination in 1881 resulted in the
complete domination of Russia by the elements of reaction, which immedi-
ately renewed the persecution policy. The ‘May laws’ of Ignatieff (1882)
which enmesh the Jews to this day, were the immediate product of this re-
gime. The second period, a concomitant of the abortive revolution of 1904-
5, was followed by a ‘pogrom policy’ of unprecedented severity which last-
ed until the outbreak of the present war.


The Pale of Settlement


At the beginning of the war the number of Jews in the Russian Empire was
estimated at six million or more, comprising fully half of the total Jewish
population of the world. Ninety-five percent of these six million people
were confined by law to a limited area of Russia, known as the Pale of Set-
tlement, consisting of the fifteen Governments of Western and Southwestern
Russia, and the ten Governments of Poland, much of which territory is now
under German occupation. In reality, however, residence within the Pale
was further restricted to such an extent that territorially the Jews were
permitted to live in only one two-thousandth part of the Russian Empire.
No Jew was permitted to step outside this Pale unless he belonged to one of
a few privileged classes. Some half-privileged Jews might, with effort, ob-
tain special passports for a limited period of residence beyond the Pale;
but the great majority could not even secure this privilege for any period
whatsoever. A tremendous mass of special restrictive legislation converted
the Pale into a kind of prison with six million inmates, guarded by an army
of corrupt and brutal jailers.


146 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


The Recent Abolition of the Pale


In August 1915, the Council of Ministers issued a decree permitting the
Jews of the area affected by the war to move into the interior of Russia.
This act has been supposed in some quarters to constitute the virtual aboli-
tion of the Pale, this interpretation being chiefly attributable to the exten-
sive publicity given the measure by the Russian government; but the evi-
dence, official and otherwise, clearly indicates that far from being a gener-
ous act of a liberal Government toward an oppressed people, it is in reality
only a temporary expedient, dictated mainly by military necessity and part-
ly by the need of a foreign loan; it is evident that it was granted grudgingly,
with galling limitations which served to emphasize the servile state of the
Jews; that it is in practice ignored or evaded at the convenience of the local
authorities; and that it has been utilized, if not designed, to mislead the
public opinion of the world. “


Ehe New York Cimes


March 3, 1919, p. 1


“PRESIDENT GIVES HOPE TO ZIONISTS


Tells Delegation He Approves Plan for a Jewish Commonwealth in Pales-
tine.

DR. WISE DEFENDS ENGLAND - Says at Mass Meeting- League of Na-
tions Means Justice to World’s Weakest Peoples

Special to the New York Times. — Washington, March 2, 1919.

Approval of the plans of Zionist leaders for the creation of a national Jew-
ish Commonwealth in Palestine was given tonight by President Wilson to a
delegation of representative American Jewish Leaders who spent an hour
at the White House in conference with the President over the international
status of Jews around the world. The delegation was headed by Rabbi Ste-
phen Samuel Wise of New York, and also included Judge Julian W. Mack of
Chicago, Louis Marshall of New York, and Bernard J. Richards of New
York, members of the delegation to the Paris Peace Conference recently
named by the American Jewish Congress.

Here is the word of promise that was given to the delegation by the Presi-
dent:

‘As for your representations touching Palestine, I have before this ex-
pressed my personal approval of the declaration of the British Government
regarding the aspirations and historic claims of the Jewish people in re-
gards to Palestine. I am, moreover, persuaded that the allied nations, with


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 147


the fullest concurrence of our own Government and people, are agreed that
in Palestine shall be laid the foundation of a Jewish Commonwealth, ’

The delegation presented to the President a memorial setting forth the pre-
sent status of the Jews in eastern Europe and the effect upon them of the
creation of new and enlarged states — Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Yugo-
slavia. The delegation also presented the resolution adopted by the Ameri-
can Jewish Congress held in Philadelphia last December which set forth
the guarantees considered necessary for securing fundamental human
rights to Jews throughout the world.

After the conference the delegates stated that they had always found the
President, ‘as always, sympathetic with the incontestable principle of the
right of the Jewish people everywhere to equality of status.’


Meeting Cheers Wilson's Words


On leaving the White House Rabbi Wise and Justice Mack went to a mass
meeting in the auditorium of the Central High School, the largest meeting
place in Washington [D.C.]. Three thousand persons had crowded into it,
but large numbers were unable to gain admittance.

Rabbi Wise spoke of the aspirations and hopes of American Jews and of
Jewry around the world, told of his recent visit to Paris, in its bearing on
the Peace Conference, and discussed the League of Nations, predicting that
it would be part of the final Peace Treaty. After making the announcement
of the President’s attitude toward the Zionist movement and quoting amid
the greatest enthusiasm what was said, Rabbi Wise exclaimed:

‘T believe that England should be the mandatory for the League of Nations
for the Jewish National Commonwealth to be established in Palestine and
I, here and now, make the prophecy that Great Britain will accept the man-
date over Palestine. He wrongs, slanders, and libels Great Britain who as-
serts that England in her attitude towards Palestine wants to spread out her
dominions. I know whereof I speak, when I assert, following my recent visit
to Paris and London, that England will never accept a mandate over Pales-
tine except in response to a mandate from the League of Nations, and when
England does accept such a mandate it will mean that the Jewish people of
the world have again come to their rightful place in the world.

The formation of the League of Nations means two things. It means justice
from the greatest of the nations and justice to the weakest of the peoples of
the earth. I am almost terrified by some of the formidable arguments
against the League of Nations I have heard in the last few days. We have
been told that if we want peace all we have to do is to come back from Eu-
rope and let Europe fight it out without any League of Nations being formed.
We tried that once. We tried that from August, 1914, until we entered the
war in April, 1917, when we had to make up our minds that when the liber-
ty of the world was invaded the liberty of America was also threatened. We
would go to war tomorrow under the same circumstances, only if we had


148 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


the same circumstances tomorrow in the light of recent history, we would
go to war a little earlier.

The real question now is whether we will form a League of Nations, wheth-
er we will stay where we are and help keep the peace of the world, or come
back here and have to go back and make war again. Instead of going there
again to make war let us stay there and make peace. I prophesy here and
now that the Peace Conference will not adjourn without making provision
for a League of Nations. A am not undertaking to say whether we should
undertake a mandate under the League of Nations. But I am not willing to
say, as an American, that we should accept all of the advantages flowing
out of a League of Nations and not be willing to assume our responsibilities
under such a league.


America and Armenia


‘T firmly believe that if the League should turn to America and point to Ar-
menia, wounded, broken, and helpless, and ask us to take Armenia and
bind up her wounds until such a day as she was able to stand alone, Ameri-
ca would accept such a mandate.’

Rabbi Wise said the Jews of the world would have to thank America and
the Allies for the recreation of the Jewish commonwealth in Palestine. It
was not his idea that all the Jews could or would go to Palestine. Palestine,
he said, could not begin to find room for the Jewry of the world.

‘Perhaps, ‘ he said, ‘little more than a fourth of the Jews of the world will
be able to go there. When the national home is established for the Jews in
Palestine it will be a home for the homeless, wronged and disinherited
Jews and a radiating center of light and inspiration to all the Jews of the
world. The rebuilding of Zion will be the reparation of all Christendom
for the wrongs done to the Jews. [Emphasis added]

Dr. Wise resented the imputation in connection with the ongoing investiga-
tion that Russian Bolsheviks and Russian Jews were synonymous.
Bolshevism, he said, was not a Jewish phenomenon. Admitting that a consid-
erable number of Jews held office under the Bolsheviks, it must be remem-
bered that these Jews who had returned to Russia included many of the ‘all
but crucified exiles.‘ He asserted, on authority of Kerensky, that 80 to 95 per-
cent of the millions of Jews are against Bolshevism, as they ought to be.

‘T consider it a grave wrong against a whole people to speak of Bolshevism
and the Russian Jew as if these were interchangeable terms,’ continued Dr.
Wise. ‘Even though a handful of Bolshevist leaders may be perfidious out-
casts, the great leaders among the Russian Jews are against Bolshevism.
Are all Jews to be damned because a few Jews are damnable? I had not
thought that was the real Christian or American way. Russian Jewry and
half of the world Jewry are broken for a time. The responsibility rests with
the American Jewry.’


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 149


The four members of the delegation headed by Rabbi Wise, who will leave
for Paris soon, arrived in Washington this morning and spent most of the
day in conference with Louis D. Brandeis, Associate Justice of the United
States Supreme Court, who has been very actively supporting the Zionist
movement.”


“Washington, March 2, 1919 (Associated Press.)

In his speech at Washington High School tonight, Dr. Wise, referring to an
unpublished document placed in the records of the Senate Committee,
which he said purported to be a list of Jews in India, Russia and elsewhere
who were used as agents by the German Government to stir up social un-
rest in those countries, declared the information in the document was erro-
neous. He described its author as ‘either a madman or a foul and loath-
some knave.’”


“ACTION OF CONFERENCE SATISFIES ZIONISTS


Dr. Weissman [sic] Says Palestine Will See First Fruits of League of Na-
tions.

By Walter Duranty.

Special Cable to THE NEW YORK TIMES.

Paris, February 28. — ‘We are very well satisfied with the reception given
by the Peace Conference to the Zionists’ claims,’ said Dr. [Chaim] Weiss-
man [sic], Chairman of the British Zionist Committee, who has been the
central figure of the organization in Paris. ‘The principal Allied statesmen
have shown sympathy with Zionist aims, and yesterdays hearing set the
seal of the formal approval of the Conference as a body.

We have obtained full recognition of the historic title of the Jewish people
to Palestine and of the Jews’ right to reconstitute their national home there.
By national home I mean the creation of such conditions as will enable
large numbers of Jews to travel to Palestine, to settle there on a self sup-
porting basis, to found their own schools, universities and other institutions
— in short, to establish an administration that will carry out our program
and ultimately make Palestine as Jewish as America is American.

For the present that is the limit of the Zionist aims. We want it understood
that the immediate formation of a Jewish State or Commonwealth is not
contemplated. Today, and doubtless for some years to come, Jewish settlers
in Palestine will actually be in a considerable minority as compared with
the non-Jewish inhabitants of the country. There can be no question of that
minority imposing its will upon the majority. Our position will be the first
great experiment of the League of Nations mandatory system by which
people not yet ready for independent self-government will gradually rise
thereto under the tutelage of the great powers.

We have asked that the British should be appointed. For centuries the Jews
have been scattered among the nations of the world, and we know which


150 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


are our friends. First among them are the English-speaking peoples, edu-
cated on the Bible, just as the Jews have been. We chose Great Britain part-
ly owing to the doubt as to whether the United States would be willing to
accept obligations in the Near East, partly because of geographical con-
siderations and because of Great Britain s great and varied experience with
all kinds of races and constitutions. Under her direction the whole of Pal-
estine from the Lebanon Province to the Egyptian frontier and from the sea
to the Hedjaz Railway will be open to Jewish settlements, which will auto-
matically develop into an autonomous Jewish commonwealth.

Thus the League of Nations has made it possible to give expression to the
centuries old desire of the Jewish race. Jews everywhere are ardent sup-
porters of the League, and owe a deep debt of gratitude to President Wilson
for his advocacy of the principles by which our return to our ancestral
home will be brought about.

We have asked that Great Britain shall place Palestine under a suitable po-
litical administration and economic conditions, shall promote Jewish im-
migration and settlements on the land, and shall seek the cooperation of a
Jewish council representing the Jews of Palestine. Concessions for the ben-
efit of Palestine will be granted by Great Britain to this council with a pro-
viso that the latter not be prohibited from using them for private profit.
Finally, we have agreed to accept the original stipulation of the British
Government as follows:

It is clearly understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the
civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine,
or the rights and political status of Jews living in other countries.

You see our aims for the present are modest and cautious. Later, an Inde-
pendent Government of Palestine will be a natural outgrowth of the new
circumstances and conditions.”


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 151


Ehe New York Cimes


October 26, 1919, Section 2, page 1


“SPENDS $2,000,000 IN ONE BARGAIN HUNT


Miss Lowenstein Tells of Buying for 4,000,000 Starving Jews of Eastern
Europe.


ARMY FILLS HER ORDERS


Purchases Range from Hardtack to Hobnailed Boots-Soap the First Big
Need Supplied.

A three week shopping tour, in which she spent $2.000,000 for a ‘family’ of
4,000,000 people, is the record of Harriet B. Lowenstein, a representative
of the Joint Distribution Committee of American Funds for Jewish War Suf-
ferers, who returned recently from Eastern Europe. In a statement issued
yesterday by the committee it was said that Miss Lowenstein’s purchases
virtually saved the lives of the Jews of Eastern Europe who were dying of
Starvation.

Miss Lowenstein snapped up every bargain offered by the Liquidation Bu-
reau of the United States Army, from hardtack to hobnailed boots and from
soap to motor trucks! On her arrival in Paris she met Lewis Strauss, secre-
tary to Herbert Hoover, and learned of the terrible conditions in the Euro-
pean countries, and from Poland she received word to spend $2,000,000 on
behalf of 4,000,000 destitute Jews.

‘T didn t know what to get,’ said Miss Lowenstein, ‘and I didn't know where
to get it. All I knew was that it must be done. Luckily, when I got to Paris
Louis Marshall, Chairman of the Jewish delegation to the Peace Confer-
ence, and Dr. Cyrus Adler were still there. They took me to see Judge Par-
ker of Texas, who was in the Liquidation Bureau of the United States Army.
‘Has the army anything to sell?’ we asked him.

Why, yes, it has quite a few things, here and there, he said.

‘Could we see them?’ we asked. ‘We have to get several train loads off to
Poland right away.’

It turned out that the things werent in Paris. To get her bargains, Miss
Lowenstein had to attend a series of Monday morning sales, so to speak,
all through France. The salvage department of the United States Army were
her wholesale stores. Her shopping tour might take her to Bordeaux for ol-
ive oil, and to Tours for blankets, and to Toule for medicine, but what ease
can a bargain finder expect?

‘The first thing I did,’ she said, ‘was to borrow an army car, and run down
to Gievres, which I was told was one center for their Liquidation Board. In
the three days and three nights that I stayed there, I bought enough stuff to


152 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


fill thirty-nine freight cars, which were leant to me through the courtesy of
the army, and of the Liquidation Board.

‘The first thing I bought was a lot of soap. Nobody had told me to do that,
but we had reports about the filth and disease in Poland, and it seemed to
me that soap was a luxury we couldn t get along without. The men said that
they thought I must be going to scrub all Poland up, when they saw my
freight car full of soap.

‘There were thousands of cases of typhus in Poland among the destitute
Jews, and I wanted to send beds, but I knew that was impossible, as we
could get only the space on the ships as Mr. Hoover could spare us. So I
figured that the best thing to do would be to send three carloads of army
blankets. 80,000 bed sheets, and 150,000 pillowcases. I managed to get
1,000 cots and 1,000 mattresses in, without being stopped.

Miss Lowenstein did not find all of these things conveniently laid out for
her at Gievres, by any means. She had scoured France of them, by this
time. Then, when her things were packed into the boat, she heard that med-
icines were to be procured at Toule, and rushed off to buy them.

‘Medicines were one thing of which I knew practically nothing at all,’ she
said. ‘So I just bought the things that I thought women of common sense
could use, without doctors and without nurses — quinine, cathartics, ty-
phoid disinfectants, anesthetics, (I had heard that operations were con-
stantly being performed without anything of the kind in Poland,) and sim-
ple things of the kind. I also got twenty surgical cases, the kind they used in
the field of battle, and a large quantity of ninety five percent pure alcohol
at 72 cents a gallon — another bargain, as anyone who has bought it here
must know. Then, because I knew the children were suffering from malnu-
trition, and that the Jewish youngsters couldnt eat most fats, because of
their religion, I got all the pure olive oil the Army had, at $1.75 a gallon.
All this while, the entire Army was helping Miss Lowenstein with her bar-
gains, just as if they had been real salesmen and she a real buyer with a big
order to place. Through their help, Miss Lowenstein was able to get hold of
400,000 pounds of hardtack, for the hungriest region in the world, the
desolate territory east of the Bug River, where thousands of Jewish children
were dying of starvation. Relief workers say that this despised food of the
doughboys saved the lives of a host of youngsters there, Along with this
hardtack, Miss Lowenstein sent about a carload of condensed milk.

‘T knew that the Jewish people in these lands had hardly a ray of hope left
to them,’ she explained. ‘I knew that fathers were watching their children
starve, and that mothers were having to leave their babies dead along the
roads they trod as returning refugees. And I knew that it must seem to the
stricken Jewish people of Poland that they had not even the consolation of
religion left, when they could not get the candles that their creed requires
them to keep burning on the Sabbath day while they say their blessing. So I
got as many candles and matches as I possibly could — at least 100,000 of
the candles. ‘What are you going to do with so many?’ the army men asked,


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 153


and because I didnt want to give them a sentimental woman-reason, I told
them that the candles were to keep the rats away from the dead in the hor-
rible cellars where so many of the destitute Jews live in Poland. This was
perfectly true, too, but my chief reason was the other one.

Miss Lowenstein followed her bargains to Eastern Europe, where she had
the satisfaction of seeing how much good they were doing, and the unhap-
piness of knowing that millions of dollars worth of supplies were still need-
ed, if the Jewish race was to be saved.

Without doubt, hundreds of thousands of Jews in eastern Europe will die
this winter, unless the United States comes to their aid,’ said Miss Low-
enstein. ‘More important even than food or medicine is the fact that the
American Relief Administration, the Red Cross, and the American Jewish
relief agencies have given these little people a little ray of hope, after the
blackness of five years of war and starvation. If that hope fails them now,
they will die.”


Ehe New ork Cimes


November 12, 1919, p. 7


“FELIX M. WARBURG TELLS
SAD PLIGHT OF JEWS.


Felix M. Warburg Says They Were the Worst Sufferers in War.


Felix M. Warburg, Chairman of the Joint Distribution Committee of Ameri-
can Funds for Jewish War Sufferers, who returned several days ago from a
trip to Europe for that organization, made public yesterday some of his
findings.

‘The successive blows of contending armies have all but broken the back of
European Jewry,’ he said, ‘and have reduced to tragically unbelievable
poverty, starvation and disease about 6,000,000 souls, or half the Jewish
population of the earth.

‘The Jewish people throughout Eastern Europe, by sheer accident of geog-
raphy, have suffered more from the war than any other element of the popu-
lation. The potential vitality and the capacity for self-help that remains to
those people after the last five years is amazing to me.’

The people are deeply moved by the help given them by America, Mr. War-
burg said, but it would be fatal to lessen the emergency aid now while mil-
lions are in tragic need. The $30,000,000 spent by this committee, he said,
has fed and clothed more than a million children and it has renewed the
hope of five million parents and elders.


154 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


‘For more than four years,’ he said, ‘The war on the Eastern front was
fought largely in the congested centers of Jewish population. A straight
north and south line from Riga, on the Baltic, to Salonica, on the Aegean
Sea, will touch every important battle area of the Eastern war zone and
every center of Jewish population. After the cataclysm of the last few years
it is too much to expect this Jewry to become self-sustaining in a short
twelve-month.’

Mr. Warburg is concerned over the program soon to be started for the dis-
continuance of emergency relief. This plan, he said, calls for the formation
of a $10,000,000 reconstruction corporation.

‘This organization,’ he said, ‘would afford facilities for constructive aid to
Jews abroad in the way of loans and credit at nominal interest rates. The
value of this sort of assistance as a substitute for pure charity is apparent.’

Other relief projects recommended by Mr. Warburg include the establish-
ment of an express company to forward money and packages from Jews in
this country to relatives and friends abroad; the distribution of $120,000
worth of fuel in sections of Poland where destitution is greatest; the pur-
chase of $300,000 worth of cloth in the bolt whereby unemployed workmen
of Poland may get raw material, and a plan to reunite those Jewish fami-
lies that have relatives in the United States and those who have become
separated abroad.”


Ehe New ork Cimes


December 3, 1919, p. 19


“SAYS TEN MILLIONS FACE HUNGER DEATH
Morgenthau Urges America to Try to Save Dying Nations of the Old World


Describes Scenes He Saw


Ex-Ambassador Convinced Nothing Except Miracle Can Prevent Great
Horror Winter Holds in Store

Washington, Dec.2 — In an address here tonight, Henry Morgenthau, for-
mer American Ambassador to Turkey, said that ‘nothing on earth except a
miracle can prevent the death by freezing and starvation of from 5,000,000
to 10,000,000 people in Europe and the Middle East this Winter.’

Many prominent officials were in the audience that heard Mr. Morgenthau,
who recently had returned to this country from an official mission to Po-
land.

T wished that I could adequately describe a scene which I witnessed in
Pinsk last August,’ said Mr. Morgenthau. ‘Tt has haunted me ever since and


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 155


has served as a complete expression of the misery and injustice which is
prevalent over such a large part of the world today. A few months before
my arrival a particularly atrocious Jewish massacre had taken place.

‘A Polish officer with troops had entered an assembly hall where the lead-
ing Jewish residents had gathered, arrested them, and marched them hur-
riedly to the public square. He took thirty-five men, and in the dim light of
an automobile lamp, placed them against a Cathedral and shot them in
cold blood. A somewhat hazy charge had been made that these men were
Bolsheviks, but no trial was given them and indeed, the charge was subse-
quently shown to be untrue.

‘Returning to the scene of the execution the next morning the troops found
that three of the victims were still breathing: these they dispatched with
bullets and all thirty-five corpses were thrown into a pit in an old Jewish
cemetery, without an opportunity for decent burial or religious exercises
and with nothing to mark the graves.

‘A proceeding to make one shudder, it is true, yet not a particularly horri-
ble event compared with the crimes that have been perpetrated in Central
Europe, in the Balkans, and in Asia Minor in the last five years. The lives of
only thirty five Jews were sacrificed, but in a few months nearly a million
Armenians were destroyed under conditions that were far more hideous. It
was the scene which I witnessed in my visit that I wish particularly to bring
to your minds.

‘Up to the time not a single Jew had been permitted to visit that cemetery.
But I was allowed to inspect the scene of this martyrdom; and, when I en-
tered, a great crowd of Jews who had followed me also went in. As soon as
they reached the burial place of their relatives they threw themselves as a
mass upon the ground, and set up a wailing that still rings through my ears.
It was the anguish cry of a terribly persecuted race; to my mind it ex-
pressed the misery of centuries and the misery not only of the Jews, but the
numerous other people that for ages have looked for justice and have not
found it.

That same evening I attended divine services at the synagogue. Inside this
building a crowd of more than 5000 had gathered to express their grief for
the loss of their leaders. This large mass of men, women and children
screamed until it seemed that the heavens would burst. I had read of such
public expressions of agony in the Old Testament, but this is the first time I
completely realized what the collective grief of a persecuted community
was like. To me it has remained a pitiful memory and symbol of the cry for
help that is going forth from a great part of Europe.’

In conclusion, Mr. Morgenthau said: ‘You can travel for days in Eastern
Europe and see no faces that are not truly emaciated, and gaze into eyes
that are not dull and almost expressionless from lack of food.

‘At this moment the greatest problem facing the American people is this:
Are we going to stand aside while Europe flounders in agony into dissolu-
tion, or are we to rise to our opportunity and our duty and rescue these suf-


156 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


fering peoples? Emerson said that ‘America represented Gods last attempt
to save mankind.’ It certainly looks as though the time when we were to
make good this prophecy had arrived.

‘There is something in this opportunity that appeals to the historic imagi-
nation. The woes of Armenia are directly connected with the development
of the United States. It was the Turkish conquest of Asia Minor and Con-
stantinople which shut off the centuries-old trade route to the East and thus
led to that search for that eastward route which culminated in the discovery
of America. It would be nothing more than historic justice if this new coun-
try should be the means saving from destruction not only what is left of the
Armenians but saving also the other despairing peoples of Eastern and
Central Europe. All the people are really brothers.

‘The great impulse must come from this side of the Atlantic. I have already
said that Europe is today facing a dissolution not unlike that which over-
whelmed her when the Roman Empire fell. But the world situation today
presents one great contrast to that of nearly two thousand years ago. The
Roman Empire fell through its own vices and miseries, it fell because there
was no outside force that would come to the rescue.”


Ehe New ork Eimes


December 3, 1919, p. 24


“Five Million Face Famine in Poland


American Jewish Relief and Red Cross Societies Fighting Disease and
Hunger.

Many Children Stunted — A New Malady Spreading Blindness Among War
Refugees — Typhus Toll Is Heavy.

Five million people east of the River Bug in the new Poland are at the point
of starvation, according to a statement made public yesterday by the Amer-
ican Jewish Relief Committee as a result of investigation by the American
Red Cross and the American Jewish Relief Agents. The vast region, from
which there has been practically no news in five years, has just been pene-
trated by the American Red Cross and the American Jewish Relief Commit-
tee s representatives.

‘The war has left 5,000,000 destitute and stricken Jews in Eastern Europe,’
the statement says, ‘a number as great as the entire population of New York
City, utterly helpless, in many cases sick, in every case hungry and depend-
ent.

‘East of the River Bug these people are living in devastated houses, in stalls
of old stables, on roofless platforms built for refugee families, one family to


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 157


a platform, in old freight cars, in holes in the ground, or under the open
sky. They are weak from many months of semi-starvation, for they have
gone for five years without one square meal. They are still terror-stricken
from the war. Their number is being reduced every day by a series of the
most terrible epidemics that ever swept any section of the world.

‘Typhus, cholera and smallpox are all raging in the territory east of the
River Bug. No estimate of the actual number of those smitten with typhus in
Poland has yet been compiled, but it probably is greater than in Siberia,
where the American Red Cross found 100,000 cases. Dirt and malnutrition
are the two great causes of the epidemic of disease.

‘All through Poland may be found children of eight or ten years old no
larger than youngsters half their age ordinarily are. Two out of three in-
fants do not survive their first year of life. The average child in the territory
east of the Bug River has never tasted milk, even mother’s milk. American
Red Cross investigators say that an abnormal number of children are born
blind, because of the matnutrition of their mothers. American Jewish relief
investigators discovered a new eye disease that had attacked thousands of
children, beginning with constant blinking and ending in total blindness,
resulting when long-continued starvation had affected the muscles of the
eyes.

In the battle against disease that is going on in the territory east of the Bug
River the American Red Cross is fighting the former with medicines and
doctors and attempts toward cleanliness, while the American Jewish relief
workers have entered the lists against hunger, with soup kitchens and milk
stations, and Children’s Relief Bureaus, established here and there, all
through the vast stretch of territory.

Tf all of the people in the territory east of the Bug River could be fed
properly at once, disease would soon disappear, doctors in this afflicted re-
gion say. If they could replace the rags which they have worn since the be-
ginning of the war with fresh clothing, the epidemics would cease to
spread. If their living places could be made habitable and clean, it would
no longer be as it is today the most desolate expanse of land in the world. It
is toward this end that the two great organizations, one of Gentiles and the
other of Jews, are working hand in hand, differences of creed forgotten, in
the great practical need that they face.”


158 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Ehe New York Cimes


April 21, 1920, Editorial, p. 8


“A WORK OF MERCY.


Hitherto the Jews have financed their own philanthropies and with a liber-
ality and skill that has been universally recognized. In behalf of those of
their religion who are still suffering in the war-ridden districts of Europe
they are now for the first time seeking outside aid.

With the fate of Belgium and Serbia it was easy to sympathize. A nation’s
territory was invaded and its citizens were making a united stand. The Jews
have no fatherland, no means of uniting in the common defense. Yet from
the outset, wherever the call came, they fought, and fought bravely, for the
allied cause. Meantime, in widely scattered lands the folk at home suffered
as perhaps those of no other people, and their suffering has in many locali-
ties outlasted the war.

In Europe there are today more than 5,000,000 Jews who are starving or
on the verge of starvation, and many are in the grip of a virulent typhus ep-
idemic. An appeal has been issued throughout the world. The quota of New
York City is $7,500,000. The drive will occupy the week of May 2-9, and
will be based wholly upon the principle of sympathy and a common human-


ity.”


Ehe New ork Eimes


May 2, 1920, Section 2, page 1


“JEWS ASK PUBLIC TO AID WAR VICTIMS


Non-Sectarian Appeal for $7,500,000 Starts Today with Sermons in All
Churches.


POLAND’S WOE APPALLING


Campaign to be Pressed by 10,000 Active Workers, in the Five Boroughs.

A famished child upon the auction block, a mother in the foreground plead-
ing for aid, death with outstretched arms lurking near and the legend,
‘Shall Death Be the Highest Bidder?’

Such is the pictorial representation of the needs of stricken peoples in the
war devastated zones of Central and Eastern Europe which will confront
New Yorkers everywhere today. Back of that representation stands an or-


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 159


ganization designed to take advantage of every channel to press home to
the people of this city the need for contributing toward the $7,500,000 to be
raised here this week by the Greater New York Appeal for Jewish War Suf-
ferers.

This fund is but a tithe of that which must be subscribed in the entire coun-
try if disaster to whole peoples is to be averted. The world nature of the ca-
lamity which has overtaken men, women and children, deprived not only of
life's bare necessities but of all means of rehabilitating themselves without
aid from the outside, has led leading Jews of New York and the nation to
turn to the public, irrespective of creed, for help. Heretofore the Jews them-
selves have contributed many, many millions which have been expended by
the Joint Distribution Committee through relief agencies of all countries
and without regard to the religious beliefs of those in need. This time the
burden is too gigantic to be borne by Jews alone.


Millions Racked by War.


A pen picture of actual conditions, typical of those in several countries, has
been sent to the Campaign Committee by Dr. Boris B. Bogen of this city,
now in Warsaw as head of the First Relief Unit, sent abroad by the Joint
Distribution Committee. Dr. Bogen writes:

‘Hunger, cold rags, desolation, disease, death — Six million human beings,
without food, shelter, clothing or medical treatment in what now are but the
wastes of once fair lands, lands ravaged by long years of war or blighted
by its consequences!

‘That, in a few words, is the actual situation in all those countries that con-
stituted what was known during the great conflict as the Eastern theater of
war.

‘Words cannot adequately convey nor can any picture be drawn which can
bring home to comfortable, affluent, happy New Yorkers, surrounded by
their families and friends, riding in their automobiles, enjoying every luxu-
ry, the utter, abject, hopeless misery confronting the population of these
lands, a population about equal to that of New York City itself.

Tf you would try to visualize, to realize the situation, place yourself at the
corner of Fifth Avenue and Forty-second Street.

‘The once teeming avenue is all but deserted. Gone are the gay equipages,
their bejeweled occupants and liveried attendants. No longer are the side-
walks filled with a surging crowd of gaily dressed men and women. The
street is all but still. Laughter and lively chatter are heard no more.

‘Instead, old men lean for support against the buildings. Mothers, with dy-
ing babes tugging vainly at their breasts, sit along the curb. The flower of
what was once young manhood and womanhood of the city is not in the
picture, for they, by thousands and tens of thousands, lie stricken in the
overcrowded hospitals, laid low by the breath of a pestilence.


160 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Too Weak to Cry For Bread.


‘Little children, with wasted frames and swollen bodies, cling to their
mothers’ rags, too weak even to cry for bread that is not to be had.

‘A bitter wind sweeps the avenue from the north. A man — his tatters cannot
be called clothes — his face blue and pinched, looks at you with unseeing
eyes. You do not at first recognize him. It then dawns upon you that you
have seen that face before. It is the face of a friend, a man who but a few
short months before was well-to-do, a banker, as prosperous, well fed and
well dressed as you are now. He reaches out his arms toward you and falls
at your feet. You stoop down to lift him up. He is dead! Hunger did it.

‘The scene is not exaggerated, not overdrawn. It has its exact counterpart
in hundreds of cities, towns and villages throughout Central and Eastern
Europe at this very moment. The call comes from one human being to an-
other, from those who have less than nothing to those who have much. It is
the call of humanity.

‘At no time during the war, in any land, not either in Belgium or Northern
France, was there a situation more critical, a need more great, a demand
for sacrifice and help more insistent than now comes from Eastern and
Central Europe. Both the present and future existence of an entire people
are at stake.’

The campaign is receiving the active cooperation and support of Archbish-
op Patrick J. Hayes of the Roman Catholic Diocese, Bishop Luther B.
Burch of the Episcopal Diocese, Bishop Luther B. Wilson, President of the
Board of Foreign Missions of the Methodist Episcopal Church; Miss
Evangeline Booth, Commander of the Salvation Army.

Members of the Executive Committee include Cleveland H. Dodge, Treas-
urer of the Committee for the Relief in the Near East; President Nicholas
Murray Butler of Columbia University, George Gordon Battle, Otto T.
Bannard, John G. Ager, the Rev. Dr. David J. Burrell, Robert Grier Cooke,
Paul G. Cravath, Francis D. Gallatin, Charles H. Sabin, President of the
Guaranty Trust company; former Attorney General George W. Wickersham,
Judge Joseph F- Mulqueen, Judge William H. Widhams and Alfred E. Mar-
ling.

The appeal is to be brought home forcibly to the people of New York in
many ways. Today is Church Sunday, and there will be special sermons in
the churches of all denominations. The Rev. Dr. S. Parkes Cadman has pre-
pared a model sermon for Protestant churches. Vicar General Joseph F.-
Mooney has written a message to the Roman Catholic churches, and Dr.
Nathan Stern, rabbi of the West End Synagogue, prepared an appeal to be
read to the Jewish congregations.

Children in the public schools, through the cooperation of the Board of Ed-
ucation, are to hear the story of the sufferings of the children in other
lands. In theaters, moving-picture houses, clubs, hotels and restaurants, in


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 161


short wherever people are gathered together, the conditions they are asked
to alleviate will be made clear to them.

It is estimated that not fewer than 10,000 active workers have been enlisted
in the cause in the five boroughs. The organization for the campaign has
been divided into three parts: The organization of the trades and industries,
so that not a single business or profession in the city has been overlooked;
the women’s division, embracing 3,000 women workers under the leader-
ship of Mrs. I. Unterberg, Mrs. Samuel C. Lampert and Mrs. S.S. Prince,
which has divided the city into districts: the women organized the schools
and churches and will make a direct appeal to the homes and to the neigh-
borhood storekeepers: the third organization is that of the boroughs, each
borough, Manhattan, the Bronx, Brooklyn, Queens, and Richmond, having
a borough organization.”


Ehe New ork Eimes


May 3, 1920, Editorial, p. 12
“THE JEWISH WAR SUFFERERS.


The non-sectarian character of the drive on behalf of the Jewish war suf-
ferers was emphasized in the appeal which marked its formal beginning
yesterday. An accompanying letter was signed by Evangeline Booth of the
Salvation Army, Bishop Burch, Archbishop Hayes and many other repre-
sentatives of Christian churches. A statement of the nature of the crisis was
prepared by the Rev. Dr. S. Parker Cadman and sent to every Protestant
minister in the city to serve as the basis for an announcement from the pul-
pit. A similar statement for the Catholic churches was sent out by Mgr. Jo-
seph F. Mooney.

Hitherto the Jews have financed their own charities, and with a liberality
and skill that has been universally recognized. The present need transcends
the means of any single sect and centers in a catastrophe which threatens
the entire world. In Russia and the neighboring countries the Jews have
been subjected to a particularly malignant persecution which has not end-
ed with the war. Without any national organization of their own, they have
no central organization to appeal to. Living in segregated and generally
impoverished communities, their misery is cumulative to an extent unknown
among other sufferers. It is estimated that more than five millions are actu-
ally starving or on the verge of starvation, and a virulent typhus epidemic
is raging among them and is already spreading among the neighboring
populations. Both in intensity and the extent of present suffering and in the
menace it holds out for all Europe, the situation is one which directly con-
cerns the public of all races and creeds.


162 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


The quota of New York City is $7,500,000. On the American Joint Distribu-
tion Committee are Professor Harry Fisher of Chicago, Professor Israel
Friedlander, Max Pine and Maurice Kass. In their work of distributing
food and medical aid through the ghettos of Central Europe they are
obliged to proceed without the protection of the Government of the United
States which has no diplomatic relations with Soviet Russia. Ample precau-
tions will be taken, however, to make sure that the supplies will be used for
the purpose in hand. It is a work of mercy that makes a peculiar appeal to
both the hearts and the interests of a common humanity.”


Ehe New ork Cimes


January 9, 1922, p. 19


“BRITISH CHIEF RABBI CONDEMNS SILENCE ON
POGROMS CARRIED OUT IN UKRAINE


London, Jan 8 (Associated Press).


—At the second annual conference of the Federation of Ukrainian Jews the
Very Rev. Joseph H. Hertz, Chief Rabbi of the British Empire, called atten-
tion to the ‘astonishing fact in the moral history of contemporary humanity
that one of the blackest pages in the annals of man has just closed, and yet
the world knows next to nothing of the unspeakable horrors and infinite
crimes perpetrated against the Jewish people.’

Dr. Hertz declared that 1,000,000 human beings had been butchered and
that for three years 3,000,000 persons in the Ukraine had been made ‘to
pass through the horrors of hell’ and that hardly a word of these facts had
appeared in the newspapers.

The voice of the Jewish community, Dr. Hertz continued, had not been
raised as it should have been, and it was humiliating to find the apathy and
callousness with which certain sections of Jewry had faced this disaster. He
described in detail some of the crimes that had been committed.

He said that although the pogroms in the Ukraine had ended there were
something like 600,000 homeless children, 150,000 orphans and 35,000
double orphans in the Ukraine who would die from cold, hunger, or disease
unless Jewish hearts remained human and came to the rescue.”


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 163


3. Documents


Shall Death
be the
Highest Bidder?


(Draweng by Boardman Rebensos)


Your help is needed to save the lives of six
million people in Eastern and Central Europe.

They are destitute of food, clothing, shelter,
medicine—of everything on which life depends.

You have the power to give them life.

Their fate is in your hands.

What will you give?


Send your contribution to Paul Baerwald, Treas.


GREATER NEW YORK NON-SECTARIAN FUND


Otto A. Rosalsky, Chairman


To be administered by the
‘JOINT DISTRIBUTION COMMITTEE
Felix M. Warburg, Chairman


Contributions te thie Fund in amounts of 51,000 and more will be echnosledged
tn these columns beginning on Wednesday, May 5th


New York Times, May 3, 1920, p. 11


164


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


THE APPEAL—


To Save Six million Men and
Women in Eastern Europe from
Extermination by Hunger and
Disease.


THE F ACTS—


“Tt is proper, for me in my official capacity to cer-
tify to the men and women of New York that the 3 ap-
palling conditions which have been related to them
and of which they have formed very varying realiza-
tions are truce beyond the power of words to convey
adequately.” P

BAINBRIDGE COLBY, Sceretiry of State.


THE RESPONSE—


THUS FAR
TWO HAVE GIVEN $100,000—iacob UU. Schiff: and Felix M. Warbur
ONE HAS GIVEN $60,000—‘rhe Lamport Company.
ONE HAS GIVEN $50,000—Harry B. Rosen.
ONE HAS GIVEN $30,000—Mr. and Mrs, Nathan Hotheimer,


THREE E 00—Mr. ant Mrs, Schatzkin and Son, Jeffersun
RABE GIVEN SIO Seligman and Mrs. Felix M. Warburg.
SEVEN HAVE GIVEN $20,000—Co!. Michaol K. Friedsam, Louis Marshall,
wel and Harry Sachs, Reuben Sadowsky,
1b Sperber, Weinstein Bros. Ine., snd
by Wertheim.


ONE HAS GIVEN $15,000—Mr: and Mrs. Nathan JJ. Miller.


NINETEE!: HAVE GIVEN $10,000—Max Aronson, Blauner Brothers, I. Gilman,
Col. sind Mrs. HL. A. Guinzburg, Mr. and Mrs.

M. Hyman, Kreeger Brothers, S. Liebo-

Son, Arthur Lehman, Herbert Leh-
raul Mrs.


he Vaubell


Mr. 3
Rothstein, H. 1. Ru
Mr. and Mrs, Henry


oe M. Wi vassare J. Frickwer eC Con Schwartz
& Jaf


(This is the first list, Adstitional lists seul appear from day te day.)


THE OBLIGATION—


It is the duty ‘of every person in New York
to give the.utmost he can spare to relieve
the greatest need the world has ever known.


Send Your Gheck To
Paul Baerwald, Treasurer
389 Fifth Ave.
GREATER NEW YORK NON-SECTARIAN FUND-
OTTO A. ROSALSKY, Chairman,


‘To Be Administered By


THE JOINT DISTRIBUTION COMMITTEE


FELIX M. WARBURG, Chairman.


This advertisement is paid for by M. Lowenstein & Sons


40. West 23rd Street


New York Times, May 5, 1920, p. 9


165


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


gd 0z61 ‘1 Aew


‘SOUL 4JOA MON


| whustig 000‘000'9 jo sar]


ae \ EBS UR ET AEA
Rott ack JSRULS CUVNOTT ev-6z ‘ANVAWOD


m : aHLou xanfi ‘x STYSOU "Y OLLO-


‘.
os ‘suo noay 2a¥s, NVMuaNONZ ads ‘Hi ft “ASLAM ‘TaV9 ‘NGFNO TAK ‘A Hdaso


3 ‘SHUSGNVS NOAT 1 Snoave Nagaad “NIGYS H S, save worLva “AGH LY 'NVWLYY


‘QUTENSRIO" "IGNWYS ‘'NIGLSHLOU “A “V ‘VIGANASOU “"H ,  ‘SITHIID HEARTH “waSSV MOTO


ly also see eeel


MH XOWdd Odd ‘NILVTIV9 ‘a ‘SIONVaa jnYsaania “a a ‘TENO1OO
(A9YOWK AUNSH “HOTOC _HONSY4 BALSAHO ‘ISINVG “IGMNVUS “HX SPT (MGad (3 4aL

“a dauatv n “IVA “XO4 WVITUM “TdHOSIA AYUVH “LHOL “a ‘SONTS
SNEMOT a -4 ‘NOG fz WKVUEV 'SCHVMGG “H AVI wes 4M aSuoRS ‘Syunda
Mal HNH. ‘Li ‘da Ivd ‘SIvuo “1 SaTYVHO eFH00 fi Ou “AOE

SNHLaY “TaGIHy Tan: - NOD NILUVNN “HS'100 'S GUI ‘NId¥HO. LOIN aH Tae

a TANIKVS "NHYX USGNV “and ‘f GIAVG “Ud “AY “AA TSSaua “W CIAV “SELLY NOdHOD
OH NVHLVYN ‘SGAVH ‘ft @Sx0dS “HS LLNE -AVENNW SVIOHOIN HoWda ‘3 SATUVHO

H aA LSnd" PaNVo Se GUY NG \ dOHSIG “HLOO@ ANITHONVAG. ‘GYVNNYG ‘L! OLLO “GTv
NIA ‘I 'SNVSD ($$ Fava iH “WaVd ‘TNVd ‘NOSKVAV. — “avov 'D bia dv Oo ft


‘ : :99}}1MIMIOH anezeng | | |


d ‘AELLINWOO- NO


FHL Ad GIN.


-GNONA MYOA


weunreyd ‘Ax!
: MYOA AVIN ‘ANNAAV HLALA “68


91 AVON 3P2T! ano
puas jpn yng ‘uossad ut ( aAt3-01 payse aq 07 Hem JOU [LM Nod adoy aAy


iP PPta weysip] oY}. og Weed [[eyYS,,
Jo ‘aT, B® anes Ol JATIN NOA TEA
Ue ‘NV900 DOLL
‘NWILV AHL SSOUDV AVA SLI GNNO4 XIGLYNII SVH adOuna
NI VZNANTANI JO OINACIdaA HOVA SV ATANNSSV LsAl SAYOHS
HNO HOVAY THA ALINVTVO SQOUFGNNHL SIHLAO NOILVEAGaa


“ATL AWOS?euUg ut pape you are “Burareys sSuraq Grammy jo sSpuesnoqy ‘jo F


“sperpanq jo saouanbastoa aptqesour UE A3q10 ou pue qa. Ay snydy iH
a ‘spuey, uopphy- Ie Age Y) Ul GON sey


pue aseosl(] sourme,y Wolf Si LAPIN out jo yyeyaq UL YooM 1X9 Mok Mea ANT


ME OBER 24 OF TY ada NVIMVIIGS-NON 9 40} vost of 5 SL


_ JaMsuy ay} UO


FY


oar


SININGY 4a OL


IN wALVAND


SOU “VY OLLO . 8
‘AUNSVARL ‘CIVMUAVE ThVd. 3
Pee 10}
yooy Seut sop IPI OF PHOM oy TE Ut FV Id ANO mq sr ors],
“paavs $q 07 are
spury asoqryso aod an jo SAAT, 2t YIYM UL KYA ANO 3g st aoyy,
; ‘adorng eruay pue thrayseq
wWosy sn 03 saut0a MoU uey) jaysisur ozout dyoy pue soryrioes 104 simp 42
~— aXOM pool R—[LONUO VOU WOMENS B oJoyI se aouKAY usayy~o
10 shoe ur vase ou ‘purer Aue ur “wed ayy SuLMp eur ou Ty.
:: / “TAAON Ad-OL GASVAD OSTV a \VH
HLVA UNV ASVASIC ‘SSANSSATANWOH *SSANCANVN ANY “AYOLS


oe nV SI Wa NOH “UdTP[Io PUB TaUIOM ‘usu 99'000'9 OF Ig
"yioX Mayt-ur 1078 po ue are susreduey 4


aR. pare fasmom “WOU JO SOATT OY} GABS 0} ‘fAxastut UBUIAT aelrayye :
o1 M0}; ay eal wen{—adredureo aptpoue jsul—eaup “‘Sorpoue asng


ne M ssulog
[ , PAU aouy sng,


>
s


a


166 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


TO THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY.
sania NEW YORK NON-SECTARIAN. FUN


To be administered by the
Joint Distribution Committee


‘ar relief of ioe from Famine, Disease, Destitutic
IN THE WAR RIDDEN. COUNTRIES


FELIX M. WARBURG; Chairman ,


TEXTI*E DIVISION HEADQUARTERS ~
274-276 Church Street, New York’ City.
Phone 4218 Franklin. ios
Six Million starving, fever-stricken sufferers in war-torn Europe appeal to. use for he

, They are destitute of food, shelter, clothing, medicine—of everything on nt life'c
ends,
Their fate is in your handst
You have the power to give them life!


HOW MUCH WILL YOU GIVE? }
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. Te :
CHARLES L. BERNHEIMER, LEON LOWENSTEIN, Chairman, . SIDNEY H. SCHEUER,
‘ Bear Mills Mfg. Co. M. Lowenstein & Sons, Inc. ies Lowinson & Co.
JAMES McKENZIE, . SCHWARZ
Ee Cocvorstioe: Levi-Strauss & Co. . Max Schwarz, ‘Inc.
San Francisco, Cal. GEORGE SEIDMAN,
‘ E..S, CRULTENDEN, JEAN MYRICK, ; M. Heineman & Co.
M.C. D. Borden & Sons. «+ Myrigigs Be BERN. SEMEL
WILLIAM H. EVANS, JACQ CG. NORDEMAN, T. W. UM,
Leslie, Evans & Co. C. H. Po Apes Inc. Minot, Hooper & Co.
L rarate R. E. REE’ MEYER STERN,
EORGE Hunter Mf; 9 em, Co. : Jacob S. eimer.
Deering, Milliken & Co. CLINTON REMINGTON, JOSEPH L. STEINAN, ~
LINCOLN GRANT, a? V. Remington, J. L. Steinan, Inc.
Wellington, oes & Co. Fall River, Mass. AARRY STRAUSS.
SAM C. LAMPORT, : A. E.. ROTHSTEIN, : MAX WILNER,
Lamport Mfrs. ie Co. A. E. Rothstein, Inc. Henry Glass & Co.
a DETACH HERE- - — — — —---~ lelietetiali eiettedatetl


1 consideration of relief to be given to the WORLD WAR SUFFERERS, to be administered by the JOI
ISTRIBUTION COMMITTEE, I hereby pledge the sum of Dollars ($ °


ayable: Optional mat amount at once or 50% July 1, 1920, and 50% on or before January 5, 1921...
'o not write in this ved bs


T pate c. 8 amounT 3


Checks Received with Pledge-$...-.cs:.csscecces secesvedyrens aa


Cash Received with Pledge $..2..--.--.-6ecseeeeeeees piidea ante |
make checks Payable to PAUL BAERWALD, Treasurer. H


! GREATER NEW YQRK: NON. K NON-SECTARIAN FUND |
eget ie ae 24 Chureh Street, ; New York City J


HD
i


New York Times, May 5, 1920, p. 19


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 167


“In Heaven’s Name,
Arouse the Jews of America!”.


This is the cry that comes from the
Jews of Europe-to the Jews of America


“Make them understand that we are dying! Make

them understand that a whole people is dying!

Dying for lack of food!

Dying for —_ a La help!

Dying for lack of shelter! j
-“Make them understand that hundreds upon hun-
dreds are killing themselves because their sufferin,
and the suffering of their loved ones has made
unbearable.


“Make them understand that millions of Jews are

trapped in and there is no hope except the
aoe of America help.
“We pep ayia passes") pe rad den of America that
never in the histo: ple, dating back
forcenturies, was ease this, and never
before in the history of the Jewish people was there
a:b aa ee as great as this. =

again the Jews of (Aigerics have seved us’
frat oor And mows from the depths of our
despair, we plead with you again to help us quickly.
or we-perish.”
Extract from a letter received from one of the lead-


deg ome Eaepe  Daid A Brown, Natal


lews of New York, you have the o; rtunity and privilege of saving these, your
=. \ioyoobsctifting sanaverbeloredaring tbe Campaign about tobe conducted.
Every, axe wecethcy Gh the ante OR want Wi corey Tie Colt sae of OR APNE Fe


sponsibility.
Every Jew will want to give answer.to the gy that comes from Europe.


“In Heaven’s Name, Axg e the Jews of America!”
ork’s Quota


iO, OOO, OOO


United Jewish ne of New York . S
April 25th to May 9th Headquarters: Biltmore Hotel /~
FELIX M. WARBURG WILLIAM FOX DAVID A. BROWN PAUL BAERWALD
Hon. Chairman (Chairman ' Natl. Chairman ‘Treasurer


LOUIS MARSHALL JONAH ). GOLDSTEIN {DAVID M. BRESSLER H. A. GUINZBURG
Hon. Chairman Vice-Chairman Vice-Chairman Asso, Treasarer


HERBERT H. LEHMAN OTTO A. ROSALSKY


New York Times, April 21, 1926


168


“GEIS sno


Nathan Straus Tells Sympathy
for Coreligioni sts in.
“Europe


: |
DAY'S TOTAL Is $416,000


LaGuardia Promises | Workers Al-
dermanic Committee to |
Help Drive.


‘The fund for Jewish war sufferers in
| Central and Eastern Europe, where six
} millions face horrifying conditibna of
| famine, discuse and death, was enriched
| yesterday by a contribution of $100,000.


| Wise announced the gift at yesterday
|| afternoon's gathering in the Hotel Bilt-
| more of: workers seeking to raise New
York's. $7,500,000 quota of the $35,000,-
000 sought throughout the nation, The;
announcement brought the men and
| women there cheering to their feet.

“Jf American Jews now fall to help:
those. who suffer through no fuult of
thelr own, Mr. Straus has said to me,”
| Dr, Wise told the meeting, "the blame)
will rest upon thelr own ‘heads should |
they miserably perish. Surely no self: |


even will suffer, the extinction of large
numbers of Jewlsh people to come to
pass.”

Mr. Straus, responding to the applause,
sald that he had been unable to sleep
at+night because of the sufferings of
his coreligionists In Europe and that
despite his contributions to ald them he
felt that he had not done his duty.

Other large contributions announced
yesterday, the total for the day being
$410,000, were


respecting American Jew will wish, or)


| from Nathan Straus, Rabbi Stéphen S. |


|


|


DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


from ili-judged propdials of interfer-
ence, mind their own ‘usiness and
let the Irish in Ireland mind theirs
and settle it, if they can settle it, to
their hearts’ desire.
See


A WORK OF MERCY.

. Hitherto the Jews have financed
their own philanthropies, and with a
liberality and skill which has been uni-
versally recognized. In behal? of
those of their religion who are still
suffering in the war-ridden districts of
Europe they are now for the first time
seeking outside aid.

_ With the fate of Belgium and Cer-
bia it was easy to sympathize. A wa-
tion's territory was invaded and its
citizens were making a ufited stand.
The Jews have no fatherland, no
means of unjting in the common do)
fense. Yet from the outset, wherever
the call came, they fought, and fought
bravely, for the allied cause. Mean-
time, in widely scattered lands the
folk at home suffered as perhaps those
of no other people, and their suffering
has in many localities long outlasted
the war. :

In Europe there are today more than
5,000,000 Jews who arp starving or on
the verge of starvation, and many are
in the grip of a virulent typhus épi-
demic. An appeal has been issued
throughout the, world. The quota of
New York City is $7,600,000. The
drive will occupy the week ‘of May 2-9,
and will be based wholly upon tho
principle of sympathy and a common


humanity. -


“MES; WEDNESDAY,


APRIL


nomination, Mr. Hoover. He ts also
expected to carry Indiana and Illinois,
or at least to haye a large vote from ‘


those States.
stanch suppo
tion, but his o
excelleft record
ahead of some
are doing the e thing.

Since Cox is réd of Ohio's vote,
additional emphasis is given to the fuct
that the new Industrial voters are not
of the radical type, for Cox as Goy-
ernor showed no favor to riot or any
sort of extreme. radicalism. Noticea-
ble again, forthe same reason, ts the
warm reception given to’ General
Woop by the workingmen’s audiences
to whom he has spoken, for in that re-
spect he stands where Governor Cox
does. There Is this difference, that
in the Republican Party Genera:
Woop stands for opposition to the
State machine, which is backing Sen-
ator Hanoina, and ariti-machine senti-
ment may have much to do with his
reception. In other words, he may
be reaping just the same kind of sup-
port which outsidg of Detroit went to
Senator Jounson in Michigan. JoHN-
s0N’s8 support in Detroit was radical,
but up-State the anti-machine “ote


cut’a considerable figure.
7 a


Topics OF THE TIMES.


> In Geclaring anacpageat

Rejected ble—bhy which was. meant

|All the - unworthy of considera-

Pro tion—every one of- the
Be posals sixty-seven proposals for
a-war memorial that came from the pub-


fe is running as a
of the Administra-
personality and his
Governor put him jj

ther candidates who


May 7, 1920, p. 11


New York Times


April 21, 1920, p. 8


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


169


ke: mm “EID Bevesth AV., near 120th St.
914 Third Avenue


THE JEWISH WAR ae FERERS.


The non-sectarian chafacter of the
drive in behalf of the} Jewish war


ning yesterday. An
ee letter was signed by| EvaNowine
| Boors of the Salvation Army, Bishop


See AU arate Gaflebery Bane re, sv iete| BURCH, Archbishop Harés and many
- | gupsoRIPTiON RATES. other representatives f Christian
churches. A statement of the ngture


‘ of the crisis was prepared by the Rev.

Hess S. Parkes CaDMan! and -sent to

every Protestant minister in the city

ase ‘| to serve as a basis for an announce-

oink ae ment from the pulpit. A similar state-

! sais a me ment for the Catholic churches was
for daily or daily and| Sent out by Mgr. Joserx F. Mooney.

Hitherto the Jews have financed.

' thelr own charities, and with a liberal-

- ity and skill that have been univer-

é: , sally recognized. The resent need

transcends the means of any single

sect and centres in a catastrophe

Ai which threatens the entire world. In

! Russia and the neighboring countries


where, Sunday, Five
Pe eee and Al
greece


b
DAL


” ss a slawwhere:
. Menthe. Month.
00 $1.


1
Bunday editions.
Ponsion Rares.
DAILY & BUNDAY...


an ad
‘Ex MID-WEEK
dys), 1 year, $5, ©


HB NEw YORK “cee een ENT
THIATORY, Miustreied Monthly Magasine, | the Jews have been subject to a par-
yest, $4 erage eh ears: $50. ticularly malignant persecution which

HE NEW SORE TIMes INDEX. Quar-
ot Bal COR Tees ib mer yeas a6, | Das not ended with the war. Without


THE NEW YORK TIMES WAR VOLUMES


9 any national organization of their


own, they have no central organization
! to appeal to. Living in segregated and
generally impoverished communities,
_ their misery is cumulative to an ex-
tent unknown among other sufferers.
lt Is estimated that more than five
millions are actually starving or on|
the verge of starvation, and a Virulent | *
typhus epidemic is raging among them
and is already spreading among the |
neighboring populations. Both in the;
Inteasity and the = of present
suffering and in the menace it holds
out for all Europe, thq. situation is
one which directly cone: the public-
spirited of all races and| cre
aa quota of New York| City fy
$7,500,000. On’ the. Ameri
DistHbution Committee
Harky FisHsa of Chic
IsRABL FRIBDLANDER,
Maurice Kass, “In the
— ting food and medi: through’
he ighettos of Central ipe they!

© bbitzed to proceed without! the pro-'


70; three-quarter leather,
12d—-encyclopedic history


The Associated Preas \s exciusively
to the use for republication of all
atchos credited to It or not otherw
ted-in thie paper, and also the loca!
spontaneous origin published herein.

All rights of republication of all. other
matter herein are also reserved.


eS eeee—===
MR. PENROSE NOMINATES.

Senator Penrose, it is good to see,
has more than recovered his health.
He was never in better form or epirits,
He bubbles with grave humor. He
vests his words with artless \candor.
His earlier favorite, Senator HaRpINo,
has disappointed expectations perhaps’
| Mever too serious. Senator JOHNSON,
deliciously described by Mr. Quar’s
cleverest pupil as ‘* from some points;
of view a radical,’' has shown alto-
gether too much capability of turning!
An encouraged. side-show Into an un-
Permitted main tent. It was time to!
make another feint or diversion, to
light some more false fires. ned

fo, on the day the Knox peace poh ire


Joint |
fessor |
so, Professor
x Bing and-
work of dis-


lution Is’ reparted favpraBly from the| tect! of the Government| of the |
Senate Forelgn Aftgirs Committee,|| United. States, which - diplo- |
Mr. Penrose peaks! }'' The primaries| Matle relations with §| viet Russia,


«


Ample Precaytions will bi
eve:


jo not seem to have developed an
: ramount j candida es. If we. ar
|" daked to take up a candidate of th
type of the|Goyernor of Tiliniols, wa


Neve a reht timed Ately to turn tn


a work! ot. mercy.”


Peculiar: appeal to. both the hearts and


up the house of the Attorney General
j himself |in Washington .and, Ju
Norr’s house |in this city was actu-


be treated apart from the world situ-
ation. In an economic se we are
married to “‘ abroad "’ for better ‘or
worse, without hope of divorce. It 1s
a pity that the Federal Reserve lacks
the learning and experience of Mr,
Wanrsuno, and the temptation to sug-
gest his return is great. .And yet
there is an embarrassment in conald-
ering intrusting our home finance to
any one of forelgn extraction. In pro-
portion as he was a mao of Mr.
Warsvuro’s fine qualities there would
be a danger that the fear of being
thought prejudiced by transatlantic
affiliations might influence his e-
cisions rather against them, through
excess of precaution against prejudice
In their favor. The British AmBas-
sador protected himself against this
suspicion by excepting his own coun-
try from his remarks. ,Jf Mr.
Warsura is of the same opinion, the
agreement is no proof that foreign
sympathies prejudice ther both, but
that in truth world economics are in-
divisible parts of a single whole.
—


A DUTY PERFORMED. al?

There can never be a more placta
and safer ‘' May Day "': no attempt
on the life of any prosecutor, or Judge,
or legislator, or capitalist, not even a
gesture of violence by emissary or
agent of a foreign or American radis
cal orgunization, ‘but It may well be
that nothing happened because the
police power had been forewarned and
was ready to the last man. Did At-
torney General Patmex and the Secret
| Service take the threats and exhorta-
tions and propaganda of the interna-
tlonalists too seriously and raise an
unnecessary alarm? The sufficient an-
swer is that last June, when’ attempts
were made:by the “ Reds’ to blow| —


ally shattered ‘by a bomb—there were
explosions designed to kill officials in
other cities—the Secret Service was
;not on the alert, had | discovered
nothing,
; break, athe police were not. pre: i
pared tq protect elthe® life or prop-|

he| miscreants, fanatics and|P!
crackbi ns} who. do such things can~
n too. sav rer Against


tha aan h Lathe aov ta “aldutiy: ‘a tes


New York Times, May 3, 1920, Editorial, p. 12


170 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


TELLS SAD PLIGHT OF JEWS.


EE
Fellx M. Warburg Says They Were
‘the Worst Sufferers In War.


Felix M. Warburg, Chairman of the|r
Joint Distribution Committee of Amer-
fcan Funds for Jewish War Suffercrs,
who returned severdl days ago from u
trip to Europe for that organization,
made public yesterday somgof his find-
ings.

“The successive blows contending
armies have all but brok the back of
European Jewry,"' he suid, ‘‘ and have
reduced to tragically unbellevable pov-
efty, starvation and diseage about 6,(X), -


000 souls, or half the Jewish population
of the earth. :

“The Jewish people throughout East-
ern Europe, ne 3 sheer accident of geogra- }.

y, have suffered more from oe war],

nm any other element of the popula-

tion. The potential vitality and the ca-
pacity for self-help that remains to these
tng to after the last five years is amaz-


e


POR JEWISH RELIEF}


Service at St. John’s, First. of
Its Kind, Brings Pleas of
_ “Good-Will; No Bigotry.” -


to me.’

e ople are deeply moved by the
help given them by America, Mr. War-
burg said, but it would be fatal to lessen
the emergency aid now while millions
are in tragic need. The ing se gM spent
ed his committee, he sald, has fed and

othed more than a millon children
and has renewed the hope of five million
Parents and elders.

** For more than four yvears,'’ he sald,
‘“‘the war on the Eastern front was
seugnt largely in the congested centres
of Jewish Pulation. A straight north
and south line from Riga, on the Baltic
to Salonika, on the Aegean Sea, will
touch every important battle area of the
Bastern war zone and every centre of
sywion po tion. After the cataclysm

the 1
ex


1,500 ATTEND IN-THE STORM


Hear Gen. Pershing Urge That:
| There Should Be “No Race
‘Prejudice in This Country.”


| GOV. SMITH SENDS MESSAGE


ast few years it is too much to
—— this Jewry to become self-sus-
ng in a short twelve-month.”’

Mr. Warburg is concerned over the
brogram soon to be started for the dis-
continuance of emergency relief. This
Dian, he sald, calls for the formation of
a $10,000,000 reconstruction corporation.

“ This he crag po he said, *' would

ord facilities for constructive aid to
ews abroad in the way of loans and


Advocates “Better 4 Understanding
~and Tolerance”-—Collection Taken,
ut Total Not Announced,


Credit at pominal, interest rates, The olic-Jewish mass mee! in the Prot-
value o 8 80 of aasis ce as a ve ; ‘ if , 4
substitute for pure charity is parent.’ estant Episcopal:. edral of St.


ther relief Ade ects recommended by
Mr. Warburg include the establishment
of an express company to forward
money and packages from Jews in t
country to relatives and friends abroad:
} the distribution of $120,000 worth of fuel
sections of Poland where eaettitution


y test; the pure 000

of cloth tn the t whereby un-

yed workmen of Poland may get

~~ and a plan to reunite

ewish families that have rela-

the United States and those. who
separated abroad.


John- the Divine; for’ the. benefit of
millions of destitiite Jews in‘ Eastern
Burope, General John J. Pershing as-
serted last ‘night \that what’ America
needs is “a, \splrit of good: will”
urged. generous contributio) »
Jewish relief fund to show e,
etl that thara was “nhimirh thing on raed!
ive &


New York Times
November 12, 1919, p. 7. December 6, 1926, p. 1.


_ that is herole and generous in. your heart. \


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


From The Literary Digest for feel 4,1926


N.


ROM THE WRECKAGE OF AN OLD STABLE three little children
tare out at the investigator. Their small bodies are -partly covered
with rags, their bare feet are in the mud. The eldest, eight years, calls
aloud, and from inside the ruin comes a woman, also pattially clad in rags.


She is young, but looks old. Her face is haj gard with pain and despair. .


It is mother, Father will soon return from his vain gearch for work and
food—it is always so—and will lie for a while on the mud floor of the stable,,
while mother and the three little ones will huddle’togetheron the “bed,” a
heap of straw and parts of grain sacks. There is nothing else in this “home”
but a crude little stove with two or three black pots, all empty. Starvation
has been waiting; it will not much longer wait.

FIVE MILLIONS ARE LIKE THIS! Five million men, women, and
children in Russia, Poland, Bessarabia, Lithuania and near-by countries
are facing the long winter that is already upon them, destitute, starving,
with no adequate relief in sight. “

Almost the population of Greater New York, you will say. Yes; but
this mighty tale of destitution is not told of New York, it is not told of -
America. Here there may be poverty, suffering—but not of the kind that
ends in starvation, death.


In these days of world-changes of vast figures, we have learned to
think in millions, But five million starving ‘people — no, that is unthink-
able. Try to imagine it, if.you can! The heart breaks before the first flash
of the real picture reaches us. Not the author of*the “Christmas’ Carol,”
not the poet who wrote of the divine quality of mercy, could weave upon
the loom of their genius such profound epics of human/misery as those
that reach us in this oncoming season of Christmas from the stricken Jews
of Russia and Poland. Fact, stark unmitigated fact, is sometimes harder to
measure, of more dramatic import, than the sublimest work of the imagi-
nation, So it is in these stories of starvation. One bows before the length-
ening chfonic! 5

* For twelve years it has gone on, until half the Jews of the world,
smitten by the pestilence and famine that have been their portion ever sincé


« that memorable doomsday of war in 1914, have reached the very limits of


human suffering. Echoes of it come to us in the reports from those who
are trying to assuage this agony of a mighty race from whose heart, be
it remembered, shone forth the Sun of Christianity.


Can any man or woman in this land of abundance read of such distress.
and then eat without choking, unless he or she has shared to the utmost of
ability? Can any father or mother gather a happy, laughing family to-
gether around the home: table and forget these freezing, starving multi-
tudes stumbling through the storm-swept countrysides of Europe in search
for food or huddling among the rags and straw of a rotting stable?


In God’s name, pity the little children, innocent of any wrong, helpless
before the great mystery of starvation and death! They are as miuch en-
titled to daily food and tender care as the children.of our own’ homes, But
they are always hungry, and ragged, and sorrowful, and afraid. :

And pity the mothers, who with hopeless agony tearing at their hearts
must see their little ones look at them with the gaunt eyes of starvation,
and hear their pitiful appeais for food, with nothing to give them, no
soothing comfort in the pain and terror of the long days and nights.


Quick compassion is needed; delay means death for scores of thousands
who might be saved. Something heroic in giving Ix needed, something
impelled by the spirit of a love that knows no barrier of race or creed, but
is stirred by human suffering and is glad to give life and joy in place of
death and bitterness. «


' Here, in this smiling land of comfort, where your home is safe, and
yout loved ones dwell in the midst of plenty, the moans of anguish from
helpless women and children come to.you across the sa and: call to all


. Sect


“Draw Out Thy So ;


171


s
Pao '


ne 4 i y * ; . ‘
to the Hungry”
.-“Whoso hath this world’s good and seeth his brother’have need, and
shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him"—ah, but this does not
mean you. Your heart is warm with compassion and your hand will be
open wide with help now for.these millions of hungry and afflicted people


of Easter Europe, whose homes are gone, whose livelihodd has been taken
away, and avhose paths of life are filled with terror. ,


_ And as you hear their cry and respond with generous gifts, the an-
clent blessings in the words of Isaiah, are renewed for you:


“If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted
soul; then shall the Lord guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in
‘drought, ‘and make fat thy bones; and thou shalt be like a watered gar-
‘den, ‘and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not.”


How splendidly you have given to satisfy the hungry in other years!


_ And now your hearts must respond again, What are a few paltry miles


of distance! They can not separate you from that famine-stricken land.
They can not shut out from your vision those hunger-pinched faces and


" outstretched hands.. If you withhold your gifts now, thousands of these


people will surely die. Out of the bounty God has given you let a gen-
erous portion be blest.both to you and to these needy ones by giving it
quickly with a glad heart.


So far, the Jews of America have been strongent to help. In the twelve
years that have passed they have collected and sent to these sufferers in
Europe through their Distribution Committees something over sixty-two
‘millions of dollars. A great sum—but {t Is only a small part of what is


-needed. Distributed among those five million destitute Jews during the


last twelve years, it means an average of about one dollar a year for each
person, More is needed. Christian America must realize its debt to these
victims of war, persecution and political injustice, and do its utmost to
help. . -s


None know this better than THE LITERARY DIGEST. During the
last twelve years this magazine has appealed repeatedly for help in behalf
of those left destitute by the war. Always the Yresponse has been quick,
generous from’the Jews of America. It was so when, in the carly days of
the war, THE LITERARY DIGEST called upon Americans to save the
Belgians from starvation, and hundreds of thousands of dollars’ poured in


“from subscribers, and again when it called for relief for the starving and


terrified Armenians. with similar results. Again it was so when THE

LITERARY DIGEST, in October, 1920, appealed in behalf of three and

a half million children who were starving in Europe, and as a result the

Child-Feeding Fund of $33,000,000 was raised. From no one came 8 more

generous response than from the Jéws, notwithstanding the immense

burden of charitable relief they were even then carrying in behalf of the

destitute of their own race. So it is that in this poignant crisis, into

which the Jew of Russia and Poland and adjacent countries has been

forced through no fault of his own, the urge to help reaches us as a splén-
‘did opportunity not only to follow the warmest instingts of our common

humanity, but to pay as well a debt of gratitude to a great race that has”
played so splendid a part in all the finest activities of our civilizatign.


THE LITERARY DIGEST never appeals to its readers to respond to
any call unless it has already realized its own duty to ive, and therefore,


. before you read this page, our xubscription for'$5,000 has been delivered


to the Committee for relief of these destitute Jews.in Eastern Europe. In
the past we have proved the generosity of our readers—and to-day, ap-
pealing again to them in a cause that & urgent and dire in its need, we
believe the response will be as-glad, spontaneous anid practical as ever. Of-
ficial Committees ‘are working in their respective areas throughout the
country, You,can easily locate them., Contribute 'through them, and do
not delay: " mat pire gh to -


The New York Times, December 4, 1926


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


172


THE AMERICAN JEWISH JOINT DISTRIBUTION COMMITTEE
MILLIONS TREND OF EXPENDITURES, 1914-1934


OF DOLLARS


Sipe arma —  g¥larys


LEGEND


SNe,
|
|
|


’ ?
+


YEAR STRUCTION


es RATIOS


RECON- GENERAL


RELIEF

100%
97%
77%
52%
30%
27%
14%
19%
14%
14%
19%
17%
12%
25%
20%
30%


|
7
|
|
|


1) “gm GENERAL AND coe SON
EMERGENCY RELIEF : :
10 - @@ RECONSTRUCTIVE ee fe : | 1914-19 et
ACTIVITY ONL He 1920 %
INCLUDING ; ; 1921 23%
Q— ECONOMIC RECONSTRUCTION Pi dal) 1 oie Se Bis te22 48%
CHILD CARE AND TRAINING 1923 70%
MEDICAL-SANITARY WORK 1924 73%
CULTURAL-RELIGIOUS AID 1925 86%
8- REPATRIATION AND 7 ie ome =e = —= 1926 Ble
REFUGEE WORK 1927 86%
1928 86%
Ara ret je ED la ee eal a eC OER Lice Te 1929 81%
1930 83%
1931 88%
Sh = Sgerpeces = aa aay tose 75%
1933 80%
1934 70%
Lo a | CSO SRRISRES Deeb Seis ae tees iy eee at |
4 a Sebi 2 :
3 : : fei :
5 ae BR e : : i fe Zia
‘ | | Ik I J |
me al


‘26 ‘27 '28 '29°30 ‘31 °32 ‘33 ‘34


Resume of Activities of the Joint Distribution Committee for Lessing J. Rosenwald from Felix M.
Warburg, November 21, 1935


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 173


N THE RAISING OF FUNDS >
; WS SUFFERING THROUGs Fo ts
% = ae = i tHE y


Morris Engelman, Fifteen Years of Effort on Behalf of World Jewry,
New York: Ference Press, 1929, p. 7


174 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


AMERICA |


ORGANIZED
OCTOBER 47" 1914


Chis is tu Certify that. +
nas contaiaureo FIVE DOLLARS rowanos THe

U.S. Jewish Relief Day Special Find,

Hatiuary 27, 1916


° - °


Ardlocthidon,


Morris Engelman, Fifteen Years of Effort on Behalf of World Jewry,
New York: Ference Press, 1929, p. 9


DON HEDDESHEIMER : THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


= 3 OR tl Mis aa ae ‘
FOR REWER OR


4a centridated toLhe fund tele.administered
ty the Goint Distritulion Commiltce.


NewYork, . lay yee S920


Ae


ASSOCIATE WONORAGY CmalSman A SE OE TREASURER )
ai ns commas names Orme ONS AP a L
ae 4
Z :
AN from. ennarnn - TEST CorwurTes ,:


ACA) ORORADY CmRREE


aR Li - a x, vas Cmarae- COPPDNTITE OF STRATE | mame
rs AA - (on
ASSOCOATE HONORARY Thaenan E | Al == Werhus ht Bl


Morris Engelman, Fifteen Years of Effort on Behalf of World Jewry,
New York: Ference Press, 1929, p. 23


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


176


1927—Chief Rabbi Chayem Josep!
President Masaryk o


Morris Engelman, Fifteen Years of Effort on Behalf of World Jewry,
New York: Ference Press, 1929, p. 35


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 177


Photo taken at opening of $10,000,000 drive in 1916, when pledge of co-operation of
newspaper men was given. Generosity of the public was greatly stimulated
by the whole-hearted helpfulness of the entire American and Jewish press.
Arthur L. Malkenson, by publishing contributions daily in the Jewish
Morning Journal, and the late Chayem Malitz, the most able Jewish writer
of his time, greatly facilitated the work of the committee.


Morris Engelman, Fifteen Years of Effort on Behalf of World Jewry,
New York: Ference Press, 1929, p. 10


178 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


‘ouseTeg ‘weresniof


Ul aUapIsal s,BinqieM JW XYPq IA JO Uspses oy} ur usyxe} ydeiZoj0yq gz [dy


Morris Engelman, Fifteen Years of Effort on Behalf of World Jewry,
New York: Ference Press, 1929, p. 39
From right to left: Felix Warburg of Kuhn & Loeb, New York, and
Chairman of the Joint Distribution Committee; Max Warburg of
the Warburg bank in Hamburg; Dr. Cyrus Adler member of the Execu-
tive Committee of the Joint Distribution Committee; Rev. H. Pereira
Mendes; Morris Engelman, Member of the Executive Committee of the
JDC.


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


179


THE AMERICAN HEBREW


October 81, 1910


The Crucifixion of Jews Must Stop!


By MARTIN H. GLYNN


From across the ses siz million men
and women cal] to vs for help, and eight
hundred thousand Ittle children ery for
bread.

These children, these men and women
are our fellow-membera of the human
family, with the same claim on life as
we, the same susceptibility to the winter’s
cold, the same propensity to death before
the fangs of hunger. Within them reside
the ilfmitable possibilities for the ad-
‘vancement of the buman race as naturally
would reside in six million human beings.
We may not de their keepera but we
ought to be their helpers.

In the face of deatb, in the throes of
starvation there is no place for mental
distinctions of creed, no place for physical
differentiations of race. In this catas-
trophe, when six million Buman beings
are being whirled toward the grave by a
cruel and relentless fate, only the most
idealistic promptings of human nature
should away the heart and move the
hand.

Six million men and women ere dying
from leck of the necessaries of Life; eizht
hundred thouaand children ery for bread.
And this fate js upon them through no
fault of thelr own, through no transgres-
Sion of {he taws of God or man; but
through the awful tyranny of war and o
bigoted lust for Jewish btood,

In Usts threatened holocaust of bumen
life, forgotten are the niceties of pbiloso-
vhical disUoction, forgotten are the dif-
ferences of historical interpretation; and
the determination to help the helpless, to
abelter the homeless, to clothe the naked
and to feed tho hungry becomes a religion
at whose altar men of every race can
worabip and women of every creed can
Kneel. In this calamity the temporall-

tles of man's fashionings fall away before
the eternal verities of life, and we awaken
to the fact that from the hands of one
God wo all come and before the tribunal
of one God we ail must stand on tho day
of Snal reckoning. And when that reck-
oning comes mere profession of Ups will
not weigh a pennywelgh!; but deeds, mere
intangible deeds, deeds that dry the tear
of sorrow and aliay the pain of enguish,
deeds that with the spirit of the Good
Samaritan pour oll and wine in wounds
sud find sustenance and shelter for the
suffering and the atricken, will outwoigh
all the stars in the heavens, sli the waters
in tho seas, al! the rocke and metals in alj
the celeatian globes that revolve in the
firmament around us

Race jg a matter of accident; croed,
partly a matter of inberilance, partly a
matter of environment, partly one’s meth-
Od of rattocination; but our pbyaloat
wanta and corporeal needs are implanted


(Former Governor of the State of N. ¥.)


in all of us by the hand of God, and the
man or Woroan who ¢an, and will not,
hear the cry of the starving; who can,
and will not, take heed of the wail of the
dying: who :an, and will not, stretch
forth a helping hand to those who sink
deneath the wares of adversity Js an es
sassin of nature's nest Insttnets, a traitor
to the cause of the hunian faotly and an
abjurer of the naturel law written upon
the tablets of every human heart by the
finger of God bimmnelt.

And so jn the apirtt that turned the
poor widow's vollve offering of copper In-
to aitver, and the allver into golé when
placed upon God's altar, the people of this
country are called upon to sanctify their
money by giving $25,000,000 in the name
of the humanity of Moses to six mijlion
fnmished men and women.

Six mijlion men and women are dying
—eigbt hondred thousand little children
are crying for bread.

And wby?

Because of a war to Iny Autoeracy ia
the dust and give Democracy the aceptre
of the Just,

And ip that war for democracy 200,000
Jewtsh lads from the United Blates
fongat beneath the Mare and Giripes. Im


the 77th Division alone there wers 14,000
of them, and in Argonne Forest this divi-
sion captured S4 German guns, This
shows that at Argonne the Jewish boys
from the United States fought for democ-
racy as Joshua fought against the Amale-
kites on the plains of Abrabam. In an
address on the socalled “Lost Battalion,”
led by Colonel Whittlesey of Pittafield,
Major-General Alexander shows the figbt-
ing stuff these Jewish dDoys were made of.
In some way or another Whittlosey’s
commsnd was surrounded. They were
short of rations. They tried to get word
back to the rear telling of their plight.
They tried aud they tried, but their men
never got through. Paralyats and stupe-
faction and despair were in the air, And
when the bour was darkeat and all sesmed
lost, a soldier Ind stepped forward, and
said to Col, Whitteney: “I will try to
get through.” He tried, he was wounded,
he bad to creep and crawl, but be got
through. Today he wears the Distin-
guished Service Cross and his name is
ABRAHAM KROTOSHINSKY.
Because of this war for Democracy six
million Jewish men and women are stary-
Ing acrosa the eens; sight hundred thee
mand Jewish babies are erring fer bred,


“From across the sea, six million men and women call to us for help [...] six
million human beings. [...] Six million men and women are dying [...] in the
threatened holocaust of human life [...] six million famished men and wom-
en. Six million men and women are dying [...]”
The American Hebrew, Oct. 31, 1919, pp. 582r.
Martin H. Glynn was temporarily governor of the State of New York
between Oct. 17, 1913, and Dec. 31, 1914


180 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Pope, According to rehabie information, the
vietims of the Anstrians and Bulgarians ex-
coaded 700.000 Whole districts, with towns
and villages, have heen depopulated by mas-
ractes. Women. children, and ol en were
shut up in the churches by the Austriana, and
other stabhed with the bayonet or éuffocated
hy menna of asphvsiating gas. Tn one charch
in Belgrade 3,000 women, children, and old


ATROCITIES IN SERBIA.


700.0%) VICTIMS,


a FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT.


ROME, Monday (6 48 p.m.).
The Govrernmenta of the Allies have secured


evidence and docuinents, which will shortly be


published, proving that Anetria and Bulgaria ,


have been guilty of horrible crimen in Rerbia,
where the massacres committed were .woree
than there perpetrated by Turkey in Armenia
The Italian Government has to-day published
the testimony af two Italian prisoners who
escaped from Austria through Serbia, and took
rafuge in Roumania. What these two prisonerr
saw and learned, however, was nothing com.
pared with the evidence xupplied by the Ser.


men were thus suffocated

Serhian refugees, not on oath, have stated
that they were preecnt at @ distribution of
bombs and machines for producing aaphysziat-
ing gas to the Bulgarians hy the Germane and
Austrians, who instructed the farmer how to
utiliae these inatrumenta to exterminate the
Serbian population The Bulgarians uaed this
method at Nish, Pirot, Prisrend. and Negotin,
the inhabitants of which places died of euffora.
tion. Similar means were employed by the


ians themav!ves, and communicated by M
Vasiteh to the Italian Government and to the


“According to reliable information, the victims of the Austrians and Bul-
garians exceeded 700,000. [...J Women, children, and old men were
shut up in the churches by the Austrians, and either stabbed with bayo-
net or suffocated by means of asphyxiating gas.”

The Daily Telegraph, March 22, 191


GERMANS MURDER 700,000
JEWS IN POLAND ae
fof WAR NEWS!


TRAVELLING GAS CHAMBERS |
IRAQIS HAVE


“e DAILY TELEGRAPH REPORTER
More than 700,000 Polish Jews have been
GAS CHAMBERS
-FOR ALL JEWS


slaughtered by the Germans in the greatest
‘See Story on Page 4


\ Austrians in aeveral parts of Montenegm.


massacre in the world’s history. In addition, 2
system of starvation is being carried out in which
the number of deaths, on the admission of the
Germans themselves, bids fair to be almost as
large.

The most gruesome details of mass killing, even to
the use of poison gas, are revealed in a report sent secretly
to Mr.S. Zygielboim, Jewish representative on the Polish
National Council in London, by an active group in Poland
It is strongly felt that action should be tuken to prevent
[Hitler from carrviny out his threat tbat five munutes


The Daily Telegraph, June 25, 1943, p. 5


FIRAQ NEARING TOTAL DISASTER


The Jewish Press,
February 21, 1991


DON HEDDESHEIMER : THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 181


RESPONSE _


‘THE! WIESENTHAL CENTE R: WORLD, REPORT” ae


ty


) Vee LAS


7) \
age VON 8 pss \, RPO DU 2
i IRA ac one G ae”


“Germans produce Zyklon B in Iraq [...]
(Iraq’s German-made gas chamber)”
Response, Vol. 12, No. 1, Spring 1991


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 183


Bibliography


The many newspaper articles quoted are not included.


— American Jewish Committee, The Jews in the Eastern War Zones, New York: The
American Jewish Committee, 1916

— American Jewish Relief Committee, Proceedings of Chicago Conference of the
American Jewish Relief Committee held on September 24-25, 1921

- American Jewish Year Book, Vol. 13 (1911-1912), New York: American Jewish
Committee, 1912

— Bauer, Yehuda, My Brother's Keeper. A History of the American Joint Distribution
Committee 1929-1939, Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America,
1974.

- Benz, Wolfgang (ed.), Dimension des Vélkermords, Munich: Oldenbourg, 1991

- Berendsohn, Walter A., to Thomas Mann, Sieben Manifeste zur jiidischen Frage,
Darmstadt: Jos. Melzer Verlag, 1966

- Bieberstein, Johannes Rogalla von, Jiidischer Bolschewismus: Mythos und Realitdt,
Dresden: Edition Antaios, 2002

- Black, Edwin, The Transfer Agreement, Washington, D.C.: Dialog Press, 1999

- British Society for the Propagation of the Gospel among the Jews (ed.), The Jewish
Herald and Record of Christian Effort for the Spiritual Good of God's Ancient Peo-
ple, Vol. V, London: Aylott & Jones, August 1850

— Butz, Arthur R., The Hoax of the Twentieth Century, Brighton: Historical Review
Press, 1976; 4th ed., Uckfield: Castle Hill Publishers, 2015

— Chernow, Ron, The Warburgs — The Twentieth Century Odyssey of a Remarkable
Jewish Family, New York: Random House, 1993

— Cohen, Naomi W., Jacob H. Schiff, A Study in American Jewish Leadership Hanover,
NH: Brandeis University Press, University Press of New England, 1999

-— Conklin’s Universal Handbook for Ready Reference, Chicago: Laird & Lee, 1888

— Conquest, Robert, Harvest of Sorrow. Soviet collectivization and the terror-famine,
London: Hutchinson, 1986

— Conquest, Robert et al., The Man-made famine in Ukraine, Washington: American
Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, 1984

- Dawidowicz, Lucy S., The War against the Jews, 1933-1945, New York: Holt, Rine-
hart & Winston, 1975

— Ehrenburg, Ilya, Vassily S. Grossman, The Black Book: The Ruthless Murder of Jews
by German-Fascist Invaders through-out the Temporarily-Occupied Regions of the
Soviet Union and in the Death Camps of Poland during the War of 1941-1945, New
York: Schocken Books, 1981

— Ehrenburg, Ilya, Vassily S. Grossman, The Complete Black Book of Russian Jewry,
New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers, 2001

— Engelman, Morris, Fifteen Years of Effort on Behalf of World Jewry, New York: Fer-
ence Press, 1929


184 DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


— Frisch, Ephraim, An Historical Survey of Jewish Philanthropy, New York: Macmillan
and Company, 1924

— Fuchs, Abraham, The Unheeded Cry: The Gripping Story of Rabbi Chaim Michael
Dov Weissmandl, New York: Mesorah Publ., 2007

- Getty, John Arch, Roberta T. Manning, (eds.), Stalinist Terror. New Perspectives,
Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993

— Goldberg, David J., To the Promised Land — A History of Zionist Thought, Lon-
don/New York: Penguin Books, 1996

— Goldberg, Jonathan Jeremy, Jewish Power, Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley
1996

- Goldstein, Judith S., The Politics of Ethnic Pressure, New York and London: Garland
Publishing, 1990

- Haas, Jacob de, Stephen S. Wise, The Great Betrayal, New York: Brentano’s Publish-
ers, 1930

- Handlin, Oscar, A Continuing Task. The American Joint Jewish Distribution Commit-
tee 1914-1964, New York: Random House, 1964

— Hecht, Ben, “Who Will Speak for the Jews? Remember Us,” Reader s Digest, Febru-
ary 1943

— Heddesheimer, Don, “Holocaust Number One — Fundraising and Propaganda,” The
Barnes Review, 3(2) (1997), pp. 19-24

— Herzl, Theodor, Old New Land, Princeton, NJ: M. Wiener, 1997

— Herzl, Theodor, The Tragedy of Jewish Immigration, New York: Zionist Organization
of America, 1920

— Hoffmann, Joachim, Stalins Vernichtungskrieg 1941-1945, Munich: Verlag fiir Wehr-
wissenschaften, 1995; 5th ed.

- Hoffmann, Joachim, Stalin’s War of Extermination 1941.1945, Capshaw, AL: Theses
& Dissertations Press, 2001/reprint: Uckfield: Castle Hill Publishers, 2015

- Hottl, Wilhelm, Einsatz fiir das Reich, Koblenz: S. Bublies, 1997

— Hyman, Joseph C., The Activities of the Joint Distribution Committee (J.D.C.), A
Summary Report, Submitted to the Council of the American Jewish Joint Distribution
Committee by Joseph C. Hyman, Secretary, March 22, 1931

— Hyman, Joseph C., Twenty Five Years of American Aid To Jews Overseas. A Record of
the Joint Distribution Committee, New York, 1939

- Irving, David, Nuremberg. The Last Battle, London: Focal Point, 1996

— Ivers, Gregg, To Build A Wall. The American Jews and the Separation of Church and
State, Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1995

- John, Robert, Behind the Balfour Declaration, Costa Mesa, CA: Institute for Histori-
cal Review, 1988

— Joint Distribution Committee, Report on the Activities of the Joint Distribution Com-
mittee, Constructive Relief Conference, Chicago, IL, October 22-23, 1927

— Kahan, Stuart, The Wolf of the Kremlin, New York: William Morrow and Company,
Inc., 1987

— Kahn, Albert E., Michael Sayers, The Great Conspiracy — The Secret War Against So-
viet Russia, Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1946

- Kennan, George, Siberia and the exile system, New York: Russell & Russell, 1970

- Klier, John D., Russians, Jews, and the Pogroms of 1881-1882, Cambridge University
Press, 2011

— Laqueur, Walter, Stalin — The Glasnost Revelations, New York: Scribner’s, 1990

— Leavitt, Moses A., The JDC Story. Highlights of JDC Activities 1914-1952, New
York: American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee, Inc., 1953

- Margolina, Sonja, Das Ende der Liigen, Berlin: Siedler, 1992


DON HEDDESHEIMER - THE FIRST HOLOCAUST 185


- Mayer, Amo J., Why Did The Heavens Not Darken?, New York: Pantheon Books,
1988

- Morrissey, Evelyn, Jewish Workers and Farmers in the Crimea and Ukraine, Private-
ly Printed, New York: Self-published, 1937

— Nedava, Joseph, Trotsky and the Jews, Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of
America, 1972

— The New Standard Jewish Encyclopedia, 7th ed., 1992

— Petrov, Nikita, “Veranderungstendenzen im Kaderbestand der Organe der sowjeti-
schen Staatssicherheit in der Stalin-Zeit”, Forum fiir osteuropdische Ideen- und Zeit-
geschichte, 5(2) (2001)

— Phagan, Mary, The Murder of Little Mary Phagan, Far Hills, NJ: New Horizon Press,
1987

— Ponsonby, Arthur, Falsehood In Wartime-Propaganda: Lies of the First World War,
New York: E.P. Dutton, 1929

— Ravage, Marcus Eli, The Jew Pays. A narrative of the consequences of the war to the
Jews of eastern Europe, and of the manner in which Americans have attempted to
meet them, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1919

- Resis, Albert (ed.), Molotov Remembers, Conversations with Felix Chuev, Chicago:
Ivan R. Dee Inc., 1993

— Rosen, Joseph A., Felix M. Warburg, James H. Becker, “After Three Years, The Pro-
gress of the Jewish Farm Colonies in Russia’, Reports of Dr. Joseph A. Rosen, Felix
M. Warburg, and James H. Becker, Delivered at the Constructive Relief Conference
of the Joint Distribution Committee and the United Jewish Campaign, Chicago, Oc-
tober 22-23, 1927

- Rudolf, Germar (ed.), Dissecting the Holocaust, 2nd ed., Chicago, IL: Theses & Dis-
sertations Press, 2003

— Sanning, Walter N., The Dissolution of the Eastern European Jewry, Newport Beach,
CA: Institute for Historical Review, 1983 (2nd ed., Castle Hill Publishers, Uckfield
2015)

- Saul, Norman E., Concord and Conflict. The United States and Russia, 1867-1914,
Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 1996

— Schachner, Nathan, The Price of Liberty. A History of The American Jewish Commit-
tee, New York: The American Jewish Committee, 1948

— Sniegoski, Stephen J., “War on Iraq: Conceived in Israel,” The Revisionist, 1(3)
(2003), pp. 285-298

— Alexander Solschenizyn, Zweihundert Jahre zusammen. Die russisch-jiidische Ge-
schichte 1795-1916, Munich: Herbig, 2003

- Sokolow, Nahum, History of Zionism 1600-1918, 2 vols., London/New York: Long-
mans, Green and Co., 1919

- Stockhammer, Morris (ed.), Karl Marx Dictionary, New York: Philosophical Library,
1965

— Talbott, Strobe (ed.), Khrushchev Remembers — The Last Testament, Boston: Little
Brown and Company, 1974

- Traverso, Enzo, The Marxists and the Jewish Question, New Jersey: Humanities
Press, 1994

— Vaksberg, Arkady, Stalin Against the Jews, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1994

— Warburg, Felix M., A Biographical Sketch, New York: The American Jewish Com-
mittee, 1938

— Warburg, Felix M., A Message from Felix M. Warburg, Chairman, Jewish War Relief
1918 Campaign, New York City, Conducted by the American Jewish Relief Committee


186 DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


— Louis Marshall, Chairman; Central Relief Committee — Leon Kamaiky, Chairman;
People’s Relief Committee — Alexander Kahn, Chairman; pamphlet, Sept. 29, 1919

— Warburg, Felix M., Resume of Activities of the Joint Distribution Committee for Les-
sing J. Rosenwald, November 21, 1935

— Warburg, Felix M., Albert Lucas, Reports Received by the Joint Distribution Commit-
tee of Funds for Jewish War Sufferers, Felix M. Warburg, Chairman; Albert Lucas
Secretary. New York Public Library 746677 Astor, Lenox and Tylden foundations,
1916

— Wise, Stephen S., Challenging Years. The autobiography of Stephen Wise, New York:
Putnam’s Sons, 1949

— World Almanac and Encyclopedia 1900, New York: The Press Publishing Co., 1900

— World Almanac and Encyclopedia 1920, New York: The Press Publishing Co., 1919

- Young, Brigham, The Latter-Day Saints’ Millennial Star, Vol. 28, London 1866


DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Index of Names


Individuals only. Entries in footnotes as italics.


7. oa
Adler, Cyrus: 151, 178
Ager, John G: 160
Asch, Sholem: 69, 70
Auerbach, Berthold: 38


—_ B—

Backe, Herman: 64

Balfour, Arthur James:
52, 59-61, 66, 104,
105, 108

Ballin: 144

Bamberger, Simon: 42

Bannard, Otto T.: 160

Battle, George Gordon:
160

Bauer, Yehuda: 52, 54,
69, 77, 90, 101, 104

Becker, James H.: 9/

ben Gurion, David: 132

Benfey: 38

Benz, Wolfgang: 7, 8

Beria, Lavrentiy: 98

Bernary: 38

Bernstein, Herman: 21

Bevin: 132, 134

Bey, Reschid: 106

Billikopf: 73

Black, Edwin: 108

Boerne: 38

Bogen, Boris B.: 70, 73,
159

Bolivar, Simon: 65

Booth, Evangeline: 160,
161

Borochov, Dov Ber: 88,
89

Brandeis, Louis D.: 87,
139, 149

Briscoe, Robert: 125


Bronfman, Edgar M.: 112

Broszat, Martin: 7

Brown, David A.: 79, 85,
86

Brylawski, Fulton R.: 57

Buddha: 65

Bukharin, Nikolai: 98

Bulganin: 97

Burch, LutherB.: 160, 161

Burrell, David J.: 160

Butler, Nicholas Murray:
160

Butz, Arthur R.: 14, 63,
64


a C a
Cadman, S. Parker: 160,
161
Cardozo, Benjamin: 87
Carnegie, Andrew: 61
Chernow, Ron: 4/-43, 46,
56, 57, 71, 87, 91, 105
Churchill, Winston S.: 12,
52, 64, 105
Clark, Champ: 47
Clinton, William J.B.: 112
Cohen, Naomi W.: 43, 52
Conquest, Robert: /02
Cooke, Robert Grier: 160
Cortez, Ricardo: 123
Cravath, Paul G.: 160
Czar: 57, 66, 88, 95, 97
Czillac: 38


=p

Dawidowicz, Lucy S.: 12
de Hass, Jacob: 117
Dernberg: 38

Dessoir: 38

Deuel, Wallace R.: 129


Dodge, Cleveland H.: 160
Dreyfus, Alfred: 109
Duranty, Walter: 149


—F —

Easterman, Alexander L.:
132

Ehrenburg, Ilya: 11, 130,
131

Eichmann, Adolf: 9

Einstein, Albert: 105

Enelow, H.G.: 136, 137

Engelman, Morris: 53, 55,
57, 173-178

Engels, Friedrich: 95

Ense: 38

Ernst: 38

Ezhov, N.I.: 98


—)
Feisel, King: 104
Finkelstein, Norman H.:
132
Fischoff, Rabbi: 126
Fisher, Harry: 162
Franco, Francisco: 125
Frank, Leo M.: 48, 49
Frankfurter, Felix: 87
Frederic, Herold: 18, 115
Friedlander, Israel: 162
Frisch, Ephraim: 4/
Frishberg, Naphtali: 131
Fuchs, Abraham: /2


= —
Gallatin, Francis D.: 160
Gans: 38

Garbett, Dr.: 128

Gay, Peter: 134
Gelfman, Gesia: 46


188


George, Lloyd: 105

Getty, John Arch: 98

Giuglini: 38

Globocnik, Odilo: 9

Glynn, Martin H.: 52,
121, 179

Goldberg, David J: &8

Goldberg, Jonathan: 29

Goldmann, Nahum: 14,
15, 83, 127, 131

Goldstein, Israel: 128

Goldstein, Judith: 44, 45,
46, 47

Goldstein, Samuel W.:
115

Gollancz, Victor: 128,
129

Gorky: 98

Gotheil, Gustav: 60

Green, Dr.: 129

Greenebaum: 85

Grisi: 38

Grossman, Vassily S.: 1/


=

Haas, Jacob de: 52, 105

Hahn Warburg, Lola: 108

Hahn, Michael: 42

Halevy: 38

Halpern, Emanuel: 124

Halpern, George: 108

Handlin, Oscar: 42, 56

Harris, M.H.: 115

Haslam, John: 125

Hayes, Patrick J.: 160,
161

Hearst, William
Randolph: 37, 47

Hecht, Ben: 13, 116, 129

Heddesheimer, Don: 16,
22, 23, 26, 29, 113,
114

Heine, Heinrich: 38

Hertz, Henrik: 38

Hertz, Joseph H.: 74, 162

Herz: 38

Herzl, Theodor: 19, 41,
106, 108, 109

Hess, Rudolf: 98

Himmler, Heinrich: 63

Hirsch, Baron de: 42


DON HEDDESHEIMER « THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Hitler, Adolf: 14-16, 23,
24, 64, 65, 83, 125-
129, 131, 133

Hoffmann, Joachim: 11


Hohenzollern, Wilhelm II.


von: 58, 59

Hoover, Herbert: 79, 151,
152

Hottl, Wilhelm: 9

House, Edward Mandell:
62

Hurst, Fannie: 123

Hyman, Joseph: 51, 103,
107


—

Ignatieff: 145

Imber, Vera: 130

Irebodd, Dean: /3

Irving, David: 10, 132

Ivan the Terrible: 102

Ivanov, Vsevolod: 130

Ivers, Gregg: 45, 49, 60,
110


—_jJ—

Jackson, Robert H.: 10,
132

Janin, Jules: 38

Jeremiah: 109

Jesus: 65

Joachim: 38

John, Robert: /05


—K—

Kaganovich Stalin, Rosa:
96, 97

Kaganovich, Lazar: 96-
98, 102

Kahan, Stuart: 96, 97, 99

Kahn, Albert E.: 98

Kahn, Alexander: 60

Kamaiky, Leon: 60

Kamenev: 98

Kass, Maurice: 162

Kautsky, Karl: 95

Kennan, George: 44

Kerensky: 148

Khrushchev, Nikita: 96,
97

Kipling, Rudyard: 58


Kirov: 98
Klier, John D.: /8
Knox, Secretary of State:
47
Kook, Abraham: 88
Kosherovitz: see
Kaganovich, Lazar
Krass, Nathan: 74
Kraus, Adolf: 72
Krylenko, Soviet Chief
Prosecutor: 94
Kuhn, Abraham: 42-44,
71, 90, 178
Kuibyshev: 98


—

La Cava, Gregory: 123

Lampert, Samuel C.: 161

Lasker: 40

Lassalle, Friedrich: 95

Lawrence, Thomas E.:
104

Lazarus: 38

Leavitt, Moses A.: 104

Lehman, Eugene: 61

Lehman, Herbert: 56, 72,
73

Lenin, Vladimir I.: 94, 95,
102

Lestshinsky, Jacob: 125

Levy: 39

Loeb, Solomon: 42-44,
71, 90, 178

Loeb, Theresa: 42

London, Meyer: 54, 136,
137

Lowenstein, Harriet: 54,
68, 151-153

Lucas, Albert: 57

Lunatcharsky, Anatole: 94

Luther, Martin: 58, 65


—_M—

MacDonald, James: 63
Mack, Julian W.: 146, 147
Maimonides: 4/
Manning, Bishop: 81
Manning, Roberta T.: 98
Margolina, Sonja: 26
Marling, Alfred E.: 160
Marshall, Felix: 53


Marshall, Louis: 46-48,
53, 54, 57, 60, 77, 78,
80, 81, 86, 105, 136,
137, 146, 151

Martine, Senator: 54

Marx, Karl: 95, 96

Masaryk, Tomas G.: 15

May, Irma: 79

Mayer, Arno: 110

Meier, Julius: 42

Mendelssohn, Moses: 88,

108

Mendelssohn-Bartholdy:

38

Mendes, H. Pereira: 178

Menzhinsky: 98

Meyer-Beer: 38

Mitchell, John: 61

Molotov, Vyacheslav: 95,

97, 98

Mooney, Joseph F.: 160,

161

Morgenthau, Henry, Jr.:

14, 69

Morgenthau, Henry, Sr.:

54, 57, 69, 74, 154,

155

Morrissey, Evelyn: 102

Morton, Oliver: 30

Moscheles: 38

Moses, Alexander: 42

Moses, Franklin J.: 42

Moskowitz, Henry: 86

Mulqueen, Joseph F: 160


—_N—

Napoleon: 47

Nathan, Paul: 21, 116
Neander, Johann August
Wilhelm: 38

Nedava, Joseph: 89
Nordau, Max: 108, 116


a 6
Ochs, Adolf: 45, 48, 49,
63, 87


== (Pp

Parker, Judge: 151
Pershing, John J.: 80
Petrov, Nikita: 26


DON HEDDESHEIMER * THE FIRST HOLOCAUST


Phagan, Mary: 48, 49
Pine, Max: 162
Pobedonostsev,
Konstantine P.: 116
Pollard, Jonathan: 49
Ponsonby, Arthur: 58, 59
Pope Pius XII: 12
Prince, S.S.: 161
Protopopov, Alexander:


56


=

Rachel: 38

Ravage, Marcus Eli: 109

Reading, Baron: 144

Resis, Albert: 95

Richards, Bernard J.: 146

Robinson, Jacob: 10, 132

Romanov, Alexander II.,
Czar: 34, 46, 145

Romanov, Alexander IIL.,
Czar: 17, 18, 32, 46

Romanov, Nicholas II.,
Czar: 19, 21, 43, 44, 57

Roosevelt, Franklin D.:
12, 56, 64

Roosevelt, Theodore: 43,
44, 46

Root, Elihu: 47

Rosen, Joseph A.: 9/

Rosenberg, Alfred: 98

Rosenblatt: 73

Rosenwald, Julius: 91,
172

Rothschild, Baron
Edmund de: 59, 87, 88,
104, 108, 144

Rothschild, family: 42

Rott: 38

Ruben, J. Walter: 123

Rubinstein: 38

Rudolf, Germar: 7, 8, 113


= S ==

Sabin, Charles H.: 160
Samuels, Herbert: 144
Sanning, Walter N.: 7, 8
Saul, Norman E.: 46
Sayers, Michael: 98
Schachner, Nathan: 53, 55
Schiff, family: 46


Schiff, Jacob: 42-45, 47,
52-54, 56, 57, 70, 136,
137

Schiff, Robert W.: 127

Schubert, Bernard: 123

Schwartz, Joseph: 131

Seligman, Arthur: 42

Shapcott, Henry: 132

Sharett, Moshe: 130

Shavit, Ari: 28

Shertok, Moshe: 130

Silverman, Dr.: 115, 128

Simonov, Konstantin: 130

Slaton, John: 49

Smith, Alfred: 80, 81

Sniegoski, Stephen J.: 28

Sokolow, Nahum: 88, 89,
107-109

Solomon, Edward S.: 42

Solschenizyn, Alexander:
26

Sousa, John Philip: 58

Stahl: 38

Stalin, Josef: 26

Stalin, Joseph: 11, 26, 64,
69, 94-98, 102

Stein, Harry J.: 13

Stern, Nathan: 160

Steuer, Max: 85-87

Stécker: 39

Stockhammer, Morris: 96

Strauss, Lewis: 151

Strauss, Oscar: 57

Sumner, Charles: 30

Syrkin, Nachman: 88


—_ TT

Taft, William Howard: 46,
47

Talbott, Strobe: 96, 97

Tannenbaum: 127

Tarshis, Jacob: 82, 83

Temple, Dr.: 128

Tenenbaum, Joseph: 24,
133

Tompkins, Arthur S.: 80

Traverso, Enzo: 88-90, 96

Treitschke, Heinrich von:
39

Trotsky, Leon: 89, 94, 98


Free Samples


HOLOCAUST


HANDBOOKS


his ambitious, growing series addresses various aspects of the “Holocaust” of the

WWllera. Most of them are based on decades of research from archives all over the

world. They are heavily referenced. In contrast to most other works on this issue,
the tomes of this series approach its topic with profound academic scrutiny and a critical
attitude. Any Holocaust researcher ignoring this series will remain oblivious to some of
the most important research in the field. These books are designed to both convince the
common reader as well as academics. The following books have appeared so far, or are
about to be released. Compare hardcopy and eBook prices at www.findbookprices.com,


SECTION ONE:
General Overviews of the Holocaust


The First Holocaust. The Surprising Origin of
the Six-Million Figure. By Don Heddesheimer. |
This compact but substantive study documents
propaganda spread prior to,
during and after the FIRST
World War that claimed East
European Jewry was on the
brink of annihilation. The
magic number of suffering
and dying Jews was 6 million
back then as well. The book
details how these Jewish fund-
raising operations in America
raised vast sums in the name
of feeding suffering Polish and

Russian Jews but actually fun-
neled much of the money to Zionist and Com-
munist groups. 5th ed., 200 pages, b&w illustra-
tions, bibliography, index. (#6)


Lectures on the Holocaust. Controversial Issues
Cross Examined. By Germar Rudolf. This book
first explains why “the Holocaust” is an impor-
tant topic, and that it is well to keep an open
mind about it. It then tells how many main-
stream scholars expressed
doubts and subsequently fell
from grace. Next, the physi-
cal traces and documents
about the various claimed
crime scenes and murder
weapons are discussed. Af-
ter that, the reliability of
witness testimony is exam-
ined. Finally, the author
lobbies for a free exchange
of ideas about this topic. This book gives the
most-comprehensive and up-to-date overview
of the critical research into the Holocaust. With
its dialog style, it is pleasant to read, and it can
even be used as an encyclopedic compendium.
3rd ed., 596 pages, b&w illustrations, bibliogra-
phy, index.(#15)


Breaking the Spell. The Holocaust, Myth &
Reality. By Nicholas Kollerstrom. In 1941,
British Intelligence analysts cracked the Ger-
man “Enigma” code. Hence, in 1942 and 1948,
encrypted radio communications between Ger-
man concentration camps and the Berlin head-
quarters were decrypted. The intercepted data


Pictured above are all of the scientific studies that comprise the
series Holocaust Handbooks published thus far or are about to
be released. More volumes and new editions are constantly in
the works. Check www.HolocaustHandbooks.com for updates.


refutes the orthodox “Holocaust” narrative. It
reveals that the Germans were desperate to re-
duce the death rate in their labor camps, which
was caused by catastrophic i
typhus epidemics. Dr. Koller-
strom, a science historian,
has taken these intercepts
and a wide array of mostly
unchallenged corroborating
evidence to show that “wit-
ness statements” support-
ing the human gas chamber
narrative clearly clash with
the available scientific data.
Kollerstrom concludes that
the history of the Nazi “Holocaust” has been
written by the victors with ulterior motives. It is
distorted, exaggerated and largely wrong. With
a foreword by Prof. Dr. James Fetzer. 5th ed.,
282 pages, b&w ill., bibl., index. #31)


Debating the Holocaust. A New Look at Both
Sides. By Thomas Dalton. Mainstream histo-
rians insist that there cannot be, may not be
a debate about the Holocaust. But ignoring it
does not make this controversy go away. Tradi-
tional scholars admit that there was neither a
budget, a plan, nor an order for the Holocaust;
that the key camps have all but vanished, and
so have any human remains; that material and
unequivocal documentary evi-
dence is absent; and that there
are serious problems with
survivor testimonies. Dalton
juxtaposes the traditional
Holocaust narrative with re-
visionist challenges and then §
analyzes the mainstream’s
responses to them. He reveals
the weaknesses of both sides,
while declaring revisionism


ISSN 1529-7748 : All books are 6’x9” paperbacks unless otherwise stated. Discounts are available for the whole set.


Worlt War Two Photes of ADoped
Mass-Marter Sites Anatyred


the winner of the current state of the
debate. 2nd ed., 332 pages, b&w illus-
trations, bibliography, index. (#32)


The Hoax of the Twentieth Century.


updates; 224 pages, b&w illustrations,
bibliography (#29).


Air Photo Evidence: World War Two
Photos of Alleged Mass Murder Sites


The Case against the Presumed Ex-


Analyzed. By Germar Rudolf (editor).


termination of European Jewry. By
Arthur R. Butz. The first writer to
analyze the entire Holocaust complex
in a precise scientific manner. This
book exhibits the overwhelming force
of arguments accumulated by the mid-
1970s. Butz’s two main arguments
are: 1. All major entities hostile to
Germany must have known what was
happening to the Jews under German
authority. They acted during the war
as if no mass slaughter was occurring.
2. All the evidence adduced to proof
any mass slaughter has a dual inter-
pretation, while only the innocuous
one can be proven to be correct. This
book continues to be a major histori-
cal reference work, frequently cited by
prominent personalities. This edition
has numerous supplements with new
information gathered over the last 35
years. 4th ed., 524 pages, b&w illus-
trations, bibliography, index. (#7)


Dissecting the Holocaust. The Grow-
ing Critique of ‘Truth’ and ‘Memory.’
Edited by Germar Rudolf. Dissecting
the Holocaust applies state-of-the-art
scientific technique and classic meth-
ods of detection to investigate the al-
leged murder of millions of Jews by
Germans during World War II. In 22
contributions—each of some 30 pag-
es—the 17 authors dissect generally
accepted paradigms of the “Holocaust.”
It reads as exciting as a crime novel: so
many lies, forgeries and deceptions by
politicians, historians and scientists
are proven. This is the intellectual ad-
venture of the 21st century. Be part of
it! 3rd ed., ca. 630 pages, b&w illustra-
tions, bibliography, index. (#1)


The Dissolution of Eastern European
Jewry. By Walter N. Sanning. Six Mil-
lion Jews died in the Holocaust. San-
ning did not take that number at face
value, but thoroughly explored Euro-
pean population developments and
shifts mainly caused by emigration as
well as deportations and evacuations
conducted by both Nazis and the So-
viets, among other things. The book
is based mainly on Jewish, Zionist
and mainstream sources. It concludes
that a sizeable share of the Jews found
missing during local censuses after
the Second World War, which were
so far counted as “Holocaust victims,”
had either emigrated (mainly to Israel
or the U.S.) or had been deported by
Stalin to Siberian labor camps. 2nd
ed., foreword by A.R. Butz, epilogue by
Germar Rudolf containing important


During World War Two both German
and Allied reconnaissance aircraft
took countless air photos of places of
tactical and strategic interest in Eu-
rope. These photos are prime evidence
for the investigation of the Holocaust.
Air photos of locations like Auschwitz,
Majdanek, Treblinka, Babi Yar etc.
permit an insight into what did or did
not happen there. The author has un-
earthed many pertinent photos and
has thoroughly analyzed them. This
book is full of air photo reproductions
and schematic drawings explaining
them. According to the author, these
images refute many of the atrocity
claims made by witnesses in connec-
tion with events in the German sphere
of influence. 5th edition; with a contri-
bution by Carlo Mattogno. 168 pages,
8.5”x11”, b&w illustrations, biblio-
graphy, index (#27).

The Leuchter Reports: Critical Edi-
tion. By Fred Leuchter, Robert Fauris-
son and Germar Rudolf. Between 1988
and 1991, U.S. expert on execution
technologies Fred Leuchter wrote four
detailed reports addressing whether
the Third Reich operated homicidal
gas chambers. The first report on
Auschwitz and Majdanek became
world famous. Based on chemical
analyses and various technical argu-
ments, Leuchter concluded that the
locations investigated “could not have
then been, or now be, utilized or seri-
ously considered to function as execu-
tion gas chambers.” The second report
deals with gas-chamber claims for
the camps Dachau, Mauthausen and
Hartheim, while the third reviews de-
sign criteria and operation procedures
of execution gas chambers in the U.S.
The fourth report reviews Pressac’s
1989 tome Auschwitz. 4th ed., 252
pages, b&w illustrations. (#16)


The Giant with Feet of Clay: Raul Hil-
berg and His Standard Work on the
“Holocaust.” By Jiirgen Graf. Raul Hil-
berg’s major work The Destruction of
European Jewry is an orthodox stan-
dard work on the Holocaust. But what
evidence does Hilberg provide to back
his thesis that there was a German
plan to exterminate Jews, carried out
mainly in gas chambers? Jtirgen Graf
applies the methods of critical analy-
sis to Hilberg’s evidence and examines
the results in light of modern histori-
ography. The results of Graf's critical
analysis are devastating for Hilberg.


2nd, corrected edition, 139 pages, b&w
illustrations, bibliography, index. (#8)


camp. 2nd ed., 372 pages, b&w illus-
trations, bibliography, index. (#8)


Jewish Emigration from the Third
Reich. By Ingrid Weckert. Current
historical writings about the Third
Reich claim state it was difficult for
Jews to flee from Nazi persecution.
The truth is that Jewish emigration
was welcomed by the German authori-
ties. Emigration was not some kind of
wild flight, but rather a lawfully de-
termined and regulated matter. Weck-
ert’s booklet elucidates the emigration
process in law and policy. She shows
that German and Jewish authorities
worked closely together. Jews inter-
ested in emigrating received detailed
advice and offers of help from both
sides. 2nd ed., 130 pages, index. (#12)


Inside the Gas Chambers: The Exter-
mination of Mainstream Holocaust
Historiography. By Carlo Mattogno.
Neither increased media propaganda
or political pressure nor judicial perse-
cution can stifle revisionism. Hence, in
early 2011, the Holocaust Orthodoxy
published a 400 pp. book (in German)
claiming to refute “revisionist propa-
ganda,” trying again to prove “once
and for all” that there were homicidal
gas chambers at the camps of Dachau,
Natzweiler, Sachsenhausen, Mau-
thausen, Ravensbriick, Neuengamme,
Stutthof... you name them. Mattogno
shows with his detailed analysis of
this work of propaganda that main-
stream Holocaust hagiography is beat-
ing around the bush rather than ad-
dressing revisionist research results.
He exposes their myths, distortions
and lies. 2nd ed., 280 pages, b&w il-
lustrations, bibliography, index. (#25)


SECTION TWO:
Specific non-Auschwitz Studies


Treblinka: Extermination Camp or
Transit Camp? By Carlo Mattogno and
Jiirgen Graf. It is alleged that at Treb-
linka in East Poland between 700,000
and 3,000,000 persons were murdered
in 1942 and 1943. The weapons used
were said to have been stationary and/
or mobile gas chambers, fast-acting or
slow-acting poison gas, unslaked lime,
superheated steam, electricity, diesel
exhaust fumes etc. Holocaust histori-
ans alleged that bodies were piled as
high as multi-storied buildings and
burned without a trace, using little
or no fuel at all. Graf and Mattogno
have now analyzed the origins, logic
and technical feasibility of the official
version of Treblinka. On the basis of
numerous documents they reveal Tre-
blinka’s true identity as a mere transit


Belzec_in Propaganda, Testimonies,
Archeological Research and History.
By Carlo Mattogno. Witnesses re-
port that between 600,000 and 3 mil-
lion Jews were murdered in the Bel-
zec camp, located in Poland. Various
murder weapons are claimed to have
been used: diesel gas; unslaked lime
in trains; high voltage; vacuum cham-
bers; etc. The corpses were incinerated
on huge pyres without leaving a trace.
For those who know the stories about
Treblinka this sounds familiar. Thus
the author has restricted this study to
the aspects which are new compared
to Treblinka. In contrast to Treblin-
ka, forensic drillings and excavations
were performed at Belzec, the results
of which are critically reviewed. 142
pages, b&w illustrations, bibliography,
index. (#9)


Sobibor: Holocaust Propaganda and
Reality. By Jiirgen Graf, Thomas Kues
and Carlo Mattogno. Between 25,000
and 2 million Jews are said to have
been killed in gas chambers in the
Sobibér camp in Poland. The corpses
were allegedly buried in mass graves
and later incinerated on pyres. This
book investigates these claims and
shows that they are based on the se-
lective use of contradictory eyewitness
testimony. Archeological surveys of
the camp in 2000-2001 are analyzed,
with fatal results for the extermina-
tion camp hypothesis. The book also
documents the general National So-
cialist policy toward Jews, which
never included a genocidal “final so-
lution.” 442 pages, b&w illustrations,
bibliography, index. (#19)


The “Extermination Camps” of “Ak-
tion Reinhardt”. By Jiirgen Graf,
Thomas Kues and Carlo Mattogno. In
late 2011, several members of the ex-
terminationist Holocaust Controver-
sies blog posted a study online which
claims to refute three of our authors’
monographs on the camps Belzec,
Sobibor and Treblinka (see previ-
ous three entries). This tome is their
point-by-point response, which makes
“mincemeat” out of the bloggers’ at-
tempt at refutation. Caution:


The two volumes of this work are
an intellectual overkill for most
people. They are recommended
only for collectors, connoisseurs
and professionals. These two
books require familiarity with
the above-mentioned books, of
which they are a comprehensive
update and expansion. 2nd ed.,
two volumes, total of 1396 pages,
illustrations, bibliography. (#28)


Chelmno: A Camp in History & Propa-
ganda. By Carlo Mattogno. At Chelm-
no, huge masses of Jewish prisoners
are said to have been gassed in “gas
vans” or shot (claims vary from 10,000
to 1.3 million victims). This study cov-
ers the subject from every angle, un-
dermining the orthodox claims about
the camp with an overwhelmingly ef-
fective body of evidence. Eyewitness
statements, gas wagons as extermina-
tion weapons, forensics reports and
excavations, German documents—all
come under Mattogno’s scrutiny. Here
are the uncensored facts about Chelm-
no, not the propaganda. 2nd ed., 188
pages, indexed, illustrated, bibliogra-
phy. (#23)


The Gas Vans: A Critical Investiga-
tion. By Santiago Alvarez and Pierre
Marais. It is alleged that the Nazis
used mobile gas chambers to extermi-
nate 700,000 people. Up until 2011, no
thorough monograph had appeared on
the topic. Santiago Alvarez has rem-
edied the situation. Are witness state-
ments reliable? Are documents genu-
ine? Where are the murder weapons?
Could they have operated as claimed?
Where are the corpses? In order to get
to the truth of the matter, Alvarez has
scrutinized all known wartime docu-
ments and photos about this topic; he
has analyzed a huge amount of wit-
ness statements as published in the
literature and as presented in more
than 30 trials held over the decades
in Germany, Poland and Israel; and
he has examined the claims made in
the pertinent mainstream literature.
The result of his research is mind-bog-
gling. Note: This book and Mattogno’s
book on Chelmno were edited in par-
allel to make sure they are consistent
and not repetitive. 398 pages, b&w il-
lustrations, bibliography, index. (#26)


The Einsatzgruppen in the Occupied
Eastern Territories: Genesis, Mis-
sions and Actions. By C. Mattogno.
Before invading the Soviet Union,
the German authorities set up special
units meant to secure the area behind
the German front. Orthodox histo-
rians claim that these unites called
Einsatzgruppen primarily engaged
in rounding up and mass-murdering
Jews. This study sheds a critical light
into this topic by reviewing all the
pertinent sources as well as mate-
rial traces. It reveals on the one hand
that original war-time documents do
not fully support the orthodox geno-
cidal narrative, and on the other that
most post-“liberation” sources such as
testimonies and forensic reports are
steeped in Soviet atrocity propaganda
and are thus utterly unreliable. In ad-


dition, material traces of the claimed
massacres are rare due to an attitude
of collusion by governments and Jew-
ish lobby groups. 830 pp., b&w illu-
strations, bibliography, index. (#39)


Concentration Camp Majdanek. A
Historical and Technical Study. By
Carlo Mattogno and Jiirgen Graf. At
war's end, the Soviets claimed that up
to two million Jews were murdered
at the Majdanek Camp in seven gas
chambers. Over the decades, how-
ever, the Majdanek Museum reduced
the death toll three times to currently
78,000, and admitted that there were
“only” two gas chambers. By exhaus-
tively researching primary sources,
the authors expertly dissect and repu-
diate the myth of homicidal gas cham-
bers at that camp. They also criti-
cally investigated the legend of mass
executions of Jews in tank trenches
and prove them groundless. Again
they have produced a standard work
of methodical investigation which au-
thentic historiography cannot ignore.
3rd ed., 358 pages, b&w illustrations,
bibliography, index. (#5)


Concentration Camp Stutthof and Its
Function in National Socialist Jewish
Policy. By Carlo Mattogno and Jiirgen
Graf. Orthodox historians claim that
the Stutthof Camp served as a “make-
shift” extermination camp in 1944.
Based mainly on archival resources,
this study thoroughly debunks this
view and shows that Stutthof was in
fact a center for the organization of
German forced labor toward the end of
World War II. 4th ed., 170 pages, b&w
illustrations, bibliography, index. (#4)


SECTION THREE:
Auschwitz Studies


The Making of the Auschwitz Myth:
Auschwitz in British Intercepts, Pol-
ish Underground Reports and Post-
war Testimonies (1941-1947). By
Carlo Mattogno. Using messages sent
by the Polish underground to Lon-
don, SS radio messages send to and
from Auschwitz that were intercepted
and decrypted by the British, and a
plethora of witness statements made
during the war and in the immediate
postwar period, the author shows how
exactly the myth of mass murder in
Auschwitz gas chambers was created,
and how it was turned subsequently
into “history” by intellectually corrupt
scholars who cherry-picked claims
that fit into their agenda and ignored
or actively covered up literally thou-
sands of lies of “witnesses” to make
their narrative look credible. Ca. 300


‘Sauvage acmnaer Puimat manacs


Amesronscat ane Premmmcas S789


seeisy yes roots reaceet


i


TE Fvt even rHtm,


AUSCHWITZ:
Tochmigue and Operation
of the Gas Chamisers


aug. eBay
a aS ae


An trtrinlin thom and Lylate
(ome Lae Pm Migr pe


ig


fa 1\Canlt baad reese
oF Pu has Fa a cadens


Ep
A


pp., b&w illustrations, bibliography,
index. (Scheduled for mid-2020; #41)


The Real Case of Auschwitz: Robert
van Pelt’s Evidence from the Irving
Trial Critically Reviewed. By Carlo
Mattogno. Prof. Robert van Pelt is
considered one of the best mainstream
experts on Auschwitz. He became fa-
mous when appearing as an expert
during the London libel trial of Da-
vid Irving against Deborah Lipstadt.
From it resulted a book titled The
Case for Auschwitz, in which van Pelt
laid out his case for the existence of
homicidal gas chambers at that camp.
This book is a scholarly response to
Prof. van Pelt—and Jean-Claude
Pressac, upon whose books van Pelt’s
study is largely based. Mattogno lists
all the evidence van Pelt adduces, and
shows one by one that van Pelt mis-
represented and misinterpreted each
single one of them. This is a book of
prime political and scholarly impor-
tance to those looking for the truth
about Auschwitz. 3rd ed., 692 pages,
b&w illustrations, glossary, bibliogra-
phy, index. (#22)


Auschwitz: Plain Facts: A Response
to Jean-Claude Pressac. Kdited by
Germar Rudolf, with contributions
by Serge Thion, Robert Faurisson
and Carlo Mattogno. French phar-
macist Jean-Claude Pressac tried to
refute revisionist findings with the
“technical” method. For this he was
praised by the mainstream, and they
proclaimed victory over the “revision-
ists.” In his book, Pressac’s works and
claims are shown to be unscientific
in nature, as he never substantiate
what he claims, and historically false,
because he systematically misrepre-
sents, misinterprets and misunder-
stands German wartime documents.
2nd ed., 226 pages, b&w illustrations,
glossary bibliography, index. (#14)


Auschwitz: Technique and Operation
of the Gas Chambers: An Introduc-
tion and Update. By Germar Rudolf.
Pressac’s 1989 oversize book of the
same title was a trail blazer. Its many
document reproductions are still valu-
able, but after decades of additional
research, Pressac’s annotations are
outdated. This book summarizes the
most pertinent research results on
Auschwitz gained during the past 30
years. With many references to Pres-
sac’s epic tome, it serves as an update
and correction to it, whether you own
an original hard copy of it, read it
online, borrow it from a library, pur-
chase a reprint, or are just interested
in such a summary in general. 144
pages, b&w illustrations, bibliogra-
phy. (#42)


The Chemistry of Auschwitz: The
Technology and Toxicology of Zyklon
B and the Gas Chambers — A Crime
Scene Investigation. By Germar Ru-
dolf. This study documents forensic
research on Auschwitz, where mate-
rial traces and their interpretation
reign supreme. Most of the claimed
crime scenes — the claimed homicidal
gas chambers ~ are still accessible to
forensic examination to some degree.
This book addresses questions such
as: What did these gas chambers look
like? How did they operate? In addi-
tion, the infamous Zyklon B can also
be examined. What exactly was it?
How does it kill? Does it leave traces
in masonry that can be found still
today? The author also discusses in
depth similar forensic research con-
cuted by other authors. 3rd ed., 442
pages, more than 120 color and almost
100 b&w illustrations, bibliography,
index. (#2)


Auschwitz Lies: Legends, Lies and
Prejudices on the Holocaust. By C.
Mattogno and G. Rudolf. The falla-
cious research and alleged “refuta-
tion” of Revisionist scholars by French
biochemist G. Wellers (attacking
Leuchter’s famous report), Polish
chemist Dr. J. Markiewicz and U.S.
chemist Dr. Richard Green (taking on
Rudolf’s chemical research), Dr. John
Zimmerman (tackling Mattogno on
cremation issues), Michael Shermer
and Alex Grobman (trying to prove it
all), as well as researchers Keren, Mc-
Carthy and Mazal (how turned cracks
into architectural features), are ex-
posed for what they are: blatant and
easily exposed political lies created to
ostracize dissident historians. 3rd ed.,
398 pages, b&w illustrations, index.
(#18)


Auschwitz: The Central Construction
Office. By C. Mattogno. Based upon
mostly unpublished German wartime
documents, this study describes the
history, organization, tasks and pro-
cedures of the one office which was
responsible for the planning and con-
struction of the Auschwitz camp com-
plex, including the crematories which
are said to have contained the “gas
chambers.” 2nd ed., 188 pages, b&w
illustrations, glossary, index. (#13)


Garrison and Headquarters Orders of
the Auschwitz Camp. By C. Mattogno.
A large number of all the orders ever
issued by the various commanders of
the infamous Auschwitz camp have
been preserved. They reveal the true
nature of the camp with all its daily
events. There is not a trace in these
orders pointing at anything sinister
going on in this camp. Quite to the


contrary, many orders are in clear
and insurmountable contradiction
to claims that prisoners were mass
murdered. This is a selection of the
most pertinent of these orders to-
gether with comments putting them
into their proper historical context.
(Scheduled for late 2020; #34)


Special Treatment in Auschwitz:
Origin and Meaning of a Term. By C.
Mattogno. When appearing in Ger-
man wartime documents, terms like
“special treatment,” “special action,”
and others have been interpreted as
code words for mass murder. But that
is not always true. This study focuses
on documents about Auschwitz, show-
ing that, while “special” had many
different meanings, not a single one
meant “execution.” Hence the prac-
tice of deciphering an alleged “code
language” by assigning homicidal
meaning to harmless documents — a
key component of mainstream histori-
ography — is untenable. 2nd ed., 166
pages, b&w illustrations, bibliogra-
phy, index. (#10)


Healthcare at Auschwitz. By C. Mat-
togno. In extension of the above study
on Special Treatment in Auschwitz,
this study proves the extent to which
the German authorities at Auschwitz
tried to provide health care for the
inmates. Part 1 of this book analyzes
the inmates’ living conditions and the
various sanitary and medical mea-
sures implemented. Part 2 explores
what happened to registered inmates
who were “selected” or subject to “spe-
cial treatment” while disabled or sick.
This study shows that a lot was tried
to cure these inmates, especially un-
der the aegis of Garrison Physician
Dr. Wirths. Part 3 is dedicated to Dr.
this very Wirths. His reality refutes
the current stereotype of SS officers.
398 pages, b&w illustrations, biblio-
graphy, index. (#33)


Debunking the Bunkers of Auschwitz:
Black Propaganda vs. History. By
Carlo Mattogno. The bunkers at Aus-
chwitz, two former farmhouses just
outside the camp’s perimeter, are
claimed to have been the first homi-
cidal gas chambers at Auschwitz spe-
cifically equipped for this purpose.
With the help of original German
wartime files as well as revealing air
photos taken by Allied reconnaissance
aircraft in 1944, this study shows
that these homicidal “bunkers” never
existed, how the rumors about them
evolved as black propaganda created
by resistance groups in the camp, and
how this propaganda was transformed
into a false reality. 2nd ed., 292 pages,
b&w ill., bibliography, index. (#11)


Auschwitz: The First Gassing. Ru-
mor and Reality. By C. Mattogno. The
first gassing in Auschwitz is claimed
to have occurred on Sept. 3, 1941, in
a basement room. The accounts re-
porting it are the archetypes for all
later gassing accounts. This study
analyzes all available sources about
this alleged event. It shows that these
sources contradict each other in loca-
tion, date, victims etc, rendering it im-
possible to extract a consistent story.
Original wartime documents inflict
a final blow to this legend and prove
without a shadow of a doubt that this
legendary event never happened. 3rd
ed., 190 pages, b&w illustrations, bib-
lography, index. (#20)


Auschwitz: Crematorium I and the
Alleged Homicidal Gassings. By C.
Mattogno. The morgue of Cremato-
rium I in Auschwitz is said to be the
first homicidal gas chamber there.
This study investigates all statements
by witnesses and analyzes hundreds
of wartime documents to accurately
write a history of that building. Where
witnesses speak of gassings, they are
either very vague or, if specific, con-
tradict one another and are refuted
by documented and material facts.
The author also exposes the fraudu-
lent attempts of mainstream histo-
rians to convert the witnesses’ black
propaganda into “truth” by means of
selective quotes, omissions, and dis-
tortions. Mattogno proves that this
building’s morgue was never a homi-
cidal gas chamber, nor could it have
worked as such. 2nd ed., 152 pages,
b&w illustrations, bibliography, in-
dex. (#21)


Auschwitz: Open Air Incinerations.
By C. Mattogno. In spring and sum-
mer of 1944, 400,000 Hungarian Jews
were deported to Auschwitz and alleg-
edly murdered there in gas chambers.
The Auschwitz crematoria are said
to have been unable to cope with so
many corpses. Therefore, every single
day thousands of corpses are claimed
to have been incinerated on huge
pyres lit in deep trenches. The sky
over Auschwitz was covered in thick
smoke. This is what some witnesses
want us to believe. This book examines
the many testimonies regarding these
incinerations and establishes whether
these claims were even possible. Using
air photos, physical evidence and war-
time documents, the author shows that
these claims are fiction. A new Appen-
dix contains 3 papers on groundwater
levels and cattle mass burnings. 2nd
ed., 202 pages, b&w illustrations, bibli-
ography, index. (#17)


cane maTTOCH®


Free Samples


The Cremation Furnaces_of Ausch-
witz. By Carlo Mattogno & Franco
Deana. An exhaustive study of the
history and technology of cremation
in general and of the cremation fur-
naces of Auschwitz in particular. On
a vast base of technical literature,
extant wartime documents and mate-
rial traces, the authors can establish
the true nature and capacity of the
Auschwitz cremation furnaces. They
show that these devices were inferior
make-shift versions of what was usu-
ally produced, and that their capacity
to cremate corpses was lower than
normal, too. 3 vols., 1198 pages, b&w
and color illustrations (vols 2 & 3),
bibliography, index, glossary. (#24)


Curated Lies: The Auschwitz Muse-
um’s Misrepresentations, Distortions
and Deceptions. By Carlo Mattogno.
Revisionist research results have put
the Polish Auschwitz Museum under
pressure to answer this challenge.
They’ve answered. This book analyz-
es their answer and reveals the ap-
pallingly mendacious attitude of the
Auschwitz Museum authorities when
presenting documents from their ar-
chives. 248 pages, b&w illustrations,
bibliography, index. (#88)


Deliveries of Coke, Wood and Zyklon
B_to Auschwitz: Neither Proof Nor
Trace for the Holocaust. By Carlo
Mattogno. Researchers from the Aus-
chwitz Museum tried to prove the re-
ality of mass extermination by point-
ing to documents about deliveries of
wood and coke as well as Zyklon B to
the Auschwitz Camp.
If put into the actual
historical and techni- }
cal context, however,
these documents
prove the exact op-
posite of what these
orthodox researchers
claim. Ca. 250 pages,
b&w illust., bibl., in-
dex. (Scheduled for
2021; #40)


SECTION FOUR:
Witness Critique


Holocaust High Priest: Elie Wiesel,
Night, the Memory Cult, and the
Rise of Revisionism. By Warren B.
Routledge. The first unauthorized
biography of Wiesel exposes both his
personal deceits and the whole myth
of “the six million.” It shows how Zi-


1| An Auschwitz Doctor's Eyewitness Ac-


onist control has allowed Wiesel and
his fellow extremists to force leaders §
of many nations, the U.N. and even
popes to genuflect before Wiesel as
symbolic acts of subordination to
World Jewry, while at the same time
forcing school children to submit to
Holocaust brainwashing. 468 pages,
b&w illust., bibliography, index. (#30)


Auschwitz: Eyewitness Reports and
Perpetrator Confessions. By Jiir-
gen Graf. The traditional narrative
of what transpired at the infamous
Auschwitz Camp during WWII rests
almost exclusively on witness testi-
mony. This study critically scrutinizes
the 30 most important of them by
checking them for internal coherence,
and by comparing them with one an-
other as well as with other evidence
such as wartime documents, air pho-
tos, forensic research results, and ma-
terial traces. The result is devastat-
ing for the traditional narrative. 372
pages, b&w illust., bibl., index. #36)


Commandant of Auschwitz: Rudolf
Héss, His Torture and His Forced
Confessions. By Carlo Mattogno &
Rudolf Héss. From 1940 to 19438, Ru-
dolf Héss was the commandant of the
infamous Auschwitz Camp. After the
war, he was captured by the British.
In the following 13 months until his
execution, he made 85 depositions of
various kinds in which he confessed
his involvement in the “Holocaust.”
This study first reveals how the Brit-
ish tortured him to extract various
“confessions.” Next, all of Héss’s de-
positions are analyzed by checking his
claims for internal consistency and
comparing them with established his-
torical facts. The results are eye-open-
ing... 402 pages, b&w illustrations,
bibliography, index. (#35)


EL WEST ance.
THE MEMORY COLT AND THE RISE
OF RivisioNtsae


cane maTTocee seme ates


count: The Tall Tales of Dr. Mengele’s
Assistant Analyzed. By Miklos Nyiszli
& Carlo Mattogno. Nyiszli, a Hungar-
ian physician, ended up at Auschwitz
in 1944 as Dr. Mengele’s assistant. Af-
ter the war he wrote a book and sey-
eral other writings describing what he
claimed to have experienced. To this
day some traditional historians take
his accounts seriously, while others
reject them as grotesque lies and ex-
aggerations. This study presents and
analyzes Nyiszli’s writings and skill-
fully separates truth from fabulous
fabrication. 484 pages, b&w illustra-
tions, bibliography, index. (#37)


(O8 eOKLees veg CARLO MATTORNO


AUSCHWITZ


FOR CURRENT PRICES AND AVAILABILITY SEE BOOK FINDER SITES SUCH AS
BOOKFINDER.COM, ADDALL.COM, BOOKFINDER4U.COM OR FINDBOOKPRICES.COM;
LEARN MORE AT WWW.HOLOCAUSTHANDBOOKS.COM

PUBLISHED BY CASTLE HILL PUBLISHERS, PO Box 243, UCKFIELD, TN22 9AW, UK


BOOKS BY AND FROM CASTLE HILL PUBLISHERS


Below please find some of the books published or distributed by Castle Hill Publishers in the United
Kingdom. For our current and complete range of products visit our web store at shop.codoh.com.


Thomas Dalton, The Holocaust: An Introduction

The Holocaust was perhaps the greatest crime of the 20th century. Six million Jews, je
we are told, died by gassing, shooting, and deprivation. But: Where did the six million fe
figure come from? How, exactly, did the gas chambers work? Why do we have so little §
physical evidence from major death camps? Why haven't we found even a fraction of the |
six million bodies, or their ashes? Why has there been so much media suppression and §
governmental censorship on this topic? In a sense, the Holocaust is the greatest murder §
mystery in history. It is a topic of greatest importance for the present day. Let’s explore
the evidence, and see where it leads. 128 pp. pb, 5”x8”, ill., bibl., index m


Carlo Mattogno, Auschwitz: A Three-Quarter Century of


Propaganda: Origins, Development and Decline of the “Gas Chamber” pees Lie
During the war, wild rumors were circulating about Auschwitz: that the Germans were
testing new war gases; that inmates were murdered in electrocution chambers, with
gas showers or pneumatic hammer systems; that living people were sent on conveyor why

belts directly into cremation furnaces; that oils, grease and soap were made of the mass- ts —
murder victims. Nothing of it was true. When the Soviets captured Auschwitz in early ‘free-yuartay boulury
1945, they reported that 4 million inmates were killed on electrocution conveyor belts ol Propayanie
discharging their load directly into furnaces. That wasn't true either. After the war, “wit- |. \ et |
nesses” and “experts” repeated these things and added more fantasies: mass murder with | ~ }
gas bombs, gas chambers made of canvas; carts driving living people into furnaces; that |
the crematoria of Auschwitz could have cremated 400 million victims... Again, none of
it was true. This book gives an overview of the many rumors, myths and lies about Aus-
chwitz which mainstream historians today reject as untrue. It then explains by which —
ridiculous methods some claims about Auschwitz were accepted as true and turned into “history,” although


they are just as untrue. 125 pp. pb, 5”x8” ill., bibl., index, b&w ill.
Wilhelm Staglich, Auschwitz: A Judge Looks at the Evidence


Auschwitz is the epicenter of the Holocaust, where more people are said to have been
murdered than anywhere else. At this detention camp the industrialized Nazi mass
murder is said to have reached its demonic pinnacle. This narrative is based on a wide
range of evidence, the most important of which was presented during two trials: the
International Military Tribunal of 1945/46, and the German Auschwitz Trial of 1963-
1965 in Frankfurt. — SR &,..
The late Wilhelm Staglich, until the mid-1970s a German judge, has so far been the only mS Be
legal expert to critically analyze this evidence. His research reveals the incredibly scan-
dalous way in which the Allied victors and later the German judicial authorities bent
and broke the law in order to come to politically foregone conclusions. Staglich also
exposes the shockingly superficial way in which historians are dealing with the many ®
incongruities and discrepancies of the historical record.

3rd edition 2015, 422 pp. pb, 6“x9, b&w ill.


Gerard Menuhin: Tell the Truth & Shame the Devil


A prominent Jew from a famous family says the “Holocaust” is a wartime propaganda
myth which has turned into an extortion racket. Far from bearing the sole guilt for start- fj
ing WWII as alleged at Nuremberg (for which many of the surviving German leaders
were hanged) Germany is mostly innocent in this respect and made numerous attempts TELL THE
to avoid and later to end the confrontation. During the 1930s Germany was confronted TRUTH AND
by a powerful Jewish-dominated world plutocracy out to destroy it... Yes, a prominent
Jew says all this. Accept it or reject it, but be sure to read it and judge for yourself!
The author is the son of the great American-born violinist Yehudi Menuhin, who,
though from a long line of rabbinical ancestors, fiercely criticized the foreign policy of
the state of Israel and its repression of the Palestinians in the Holy Land.
4th edition 2017, 432 pp. pb, 6”x9”, b&w ill.
For prices and availability see www.shop.codoh.com or write to: CHP, PO Box 243, Uckfield, TN22 9AW, UK


A JUDGE LOOKS AT THE EVIDENCE


Robert H. Countess, Christian Lindtner, Germar Rudolf (eds.), ee
Exactitude: Festschrift for Prof. Dr. Robert Faurisson EXACTITUDE


On January 25, 1929, a man was born who probably deserves the title of the most cou-
rageous intellectual of the 20th century and the beginning of the 21st century: Robert
Faurisson. With bravery and steadfastness, he challenged the dark forces of historical
and political fraud with his unrelenting exposure of their lies and hoaxes surrounding
the orthodox Holocaust narrative. This book describes and celebrates the man, who \
passed away on October 21, 2018, and his work dedicated to accuracy and marked by ROBERT FAURISSON
insubmission. ct es ns


146 pp. pb, 6”x9”, b&w ill.


Cyrus Cox, Auschwitz - Forensically Examined
It is amazing what modern forensic crime-scene investigations can find out. This is also Cyrus Cox
true for the Holocaust. There are many big tomes about this, such as Rudolf’s 400+ page
book on the Chemistry of Auschwitz, or Mattogno’s 1200-page work on the crematoria of
Auschwitz. But who reads those doorstops? Here is a booklet that condenses the most- |  FORENSICALLY
important findings of Auschwitz forensics into a nutshell, quick and easy to read. In the sees

first section, the forensic investigations conducted so far are reviewed. In the second
section, the most-important results of these studies are summarized, making them ac-
cessible to everyone. The main arguments focus on two topics. The first centers around
the poison allegedly used at Auschwitz for mass murder: Zyklon B. Did it leave any
traces in masonry where it was used? Can it be detected to this day? The second topic
deals with mass cremations. Did the crematoria of Auschwitz have the claimed huge
capacity claimed for them? Do air photos taken during the war confirm witness statements on huge smoking
pyres? Find the answers to these questions in this booklet, together with many references to source material
and further reading. The third section reports on how the establishment has reacted to these research results.

124 pp. pb., 5“x8% b&w ill. bibl., index


AUSCHWITZ


Steffen Werner, The Second Babylonian Captivity: The Fate of the Jews in Eastern
Europe since 1941
“But if they were not murdered, where did the six million deported Jews end up?” This is
a standard objection to the revisionist thesis that the Jews were not killed in extermina- [>
tion camps. It demands a well-founded response. While researching an entirely different
topic, Steffen Werner accidentally stumbled upon the most-peculiar demographic data
of Byelorussia. Years of research subsequently revealed more and more evidence which |
eventually allowed him to substantiate a breathtaking and sensational proposition: The |)
Third Reich did indeed deport many of the Jews of Europe to Eastern Europe in order [ex
to settle them there “in the swamp.” This book, first published in German in 1990, was % = See
the first well-founded work showing what really happened to the Jews deported to the |~
East by the National Socialists, how they have fared since, and who, what and where they |:
are “now” (1990). It provides context and purpose for hitherto-obscure and seemingly
arbitrary historical events and quite obviates all need for paranormal events such as genocide, gas chambers,
and all their attendant horrifics. With a preface by Germar Rudolf with references to more-recent research
results in this field of study confirming Werner's thesis.

190 pp. pb, 6”x9”, b&w ill., bibl., index


Germar Rudolf, Holocaust Skepticism: 20 Questions and Answers about Holocaust
Revisionism
This 15-page brochure introduces the novice to the concept of Holocaust revisionism,
and answers 20 tough questions, among them: What does Holocaust revisionism claim?
Why should I take Holocaust revisionism more seriously than the claim that the earth
is flat? How about the testimonies by survivors and confessions by perpetrators? What
about the pictures of corpse piles in the camps? Why does it matter how many Jews were
killed by the Nazis, since even 1,000 would have been too many? ... Glossy full-color
brochure. PDF file free of charge available at www.HolocaustHandbooks.com, Option
“Promotion”. This item is not copyright-protected. Hence, you can do with it whatever by
you want: download, post, email, print, multiply, hand out, sell...
15 pp., stapled, 8.5“x11, full-color throughout
For prices and availability see www.shop.codoh.com or write to: CHP, PO Box 243, Uckfield, TN22 9AW, UK


Holocaust


Skepticism


20 Queeciene aot Anewery
ee atte Ratna


Germar Rudolf, Bungled: “Denying the Holocaust” How Deborah Lipstadt Botched
Her Attempt to Demonstrate the Growing Assault on Truth and Memory a <
With her book Denying the Holocaust, Deborah Lipstadt tried to show the flawed [isestelutestenmen
methods and extremist motives of “Holocaust deniers.” This book demonstrates that GAYS hat cme itt
Dr. Lipstadt clearly has neither understood the principles of science and scholarship, HOLOCAUST”
nor has she any clue about the historical topics she is writing about. She misquotes,


mistranslates, misrepresents, misinterprets, and makes a plethora of wild claims with- WOPOWIEYS: Lipatat
out backing them up with anything. Rather than dealing thoroughly with factual argu- [eerie


Growing Assault


ments, Lipstadt’s book is full of ad hominem attacks on her opponents. It is an exercise
in anti-intellectual pseudo-scientific arguments, an exhibition of ideological radicalism
that rejects anything which contradicts its preset conclusions. F for FAIL

2nd ed., 224 pp. pb, 5“x8°% bibl., index, b&w ill.


Carolus Magnus, Bungled: “Denying History”. How Michael Shermer and Alex
Grobman Botched Their Attempt to Refute Those Who Say the Holocaust Never Happened
Skeptic Magazine editor Michael Shermer and Alex Grobman from the Simon Wiesen-
thal Center wrote a book in 2000 which they claim is “a thorough and thoughtful answer
to all the claims of the Holocaust deniers.” In 2009, a new “updated” edition appeared
with the same ambitious goal. In the meantime, revisionists had published some 10,000
pages of archival and forensic research results. Would their updated edition indeed an-
swer all the revisionist claims? In fact, Shermer and Grobman completely ignored the
vast amount of recent scholarly studies and piled up a heap of falsifications, contortions,
omissions, and fallacious interpretations of the evidence. Finally, what the authors claim
to have demolished is not revisionism but a ridiculous parody of it. They ignored the
known unreliability of their cherry-picked selection of evidence, utilizing unverified ‘Sacedipan ere Ghar
and incestuous sources, and obscuring the massive body of research and all the evidence
that dooms their project to failure. F for FAIL

162 pp. pb, 5“x8*% bibl., index, b&w ill.


Carolus Magnus, Bungled: “Debunking Holocaust Denial Theories”. How James
and Lance Morcan Botched Their Attempt to Affirm the Historicity of the Nazi Genocide
The novelists and movie-makers James and Lance Morcan have produced a book “to
end [Holocaust] denial once and for all” To do this, “no stone was left unturned” to BUNGLED:
verify historical assertions by presenting “a wide array of sources” meant “to shut down “‘DEBUNKING
the debate deniers wish to create. One by one, the various arguments Holocaust deniers
use to try to discredit wartime records are carefully scrutinized and then systemati-
cally disproven.’ It’s a lie. First, the Morcans completely ignored the vast amount of re- |———
cent scholarly studies published by revisionists; they didn’t even identify them. Instead, |"
they engaged in shadowboxing, creating some imaginary, bogus “revisionist” scarecrow 1 Be
which they then tore to pieces. In addition, their knowledge even of their own side's [se Shear
source material was dismal, and the way they backed up their misleading or false claims [Mm eae me
re ; CAROLUS
was pitifully inadequate. F for FAIL. MAGNUS
144 pp. pb, 5“x8*%, bibl., index, b&w ill.


Joachim Hoffmann, Stalin’s War of Extermination 1941-1945

A German government historian documents Stalin’s murderous war against the Ger-
man army and the German people. Based on the author's lifelong study of German and
Russian military records, this book reveals the Red Army’s grisly record of atrocities
against soldiers and civilians, as ordered by Stalin. Since the 1920s, Stalin planned to
invade Western Europe to initiate the “World Revolution.” He prepared an attack which |; rilination
was unparalleled in history. The Germans noticed Stalin’s aggressive intentions, but they [>= a
underestimated the strength of the Red Army. What unfolded was the most-cruel war
in history. This book shows how Stalin and his Bolshevik henchman used unimaginable
violence and atrocities to break any resistance in the Red Army and to force their un-
willing soldiers to fight against the Germans. The book explains how Soviet propagan-
dists incited their soldiers to unlimited hatred against everything German, and he gives
the reader a short but extremely unpleasant glimpse into what happened when these Soviet soldiers finally
reached German soil in 1945: A gigantic wave of looting, arson, rape, torture, and mass murder...

428 pp. pb, 6“x9% bibl., index, b&w ill.
For prices and availability see www.shop.codoh.com or write to: CHP, PO Box 243, Uckfield, TN22 9AW, UK


CAROLUS MAGNUS


BUNGLED:


me


2.9,0,0.0
Wine
a.


Udo Walendy, Who Started World War I: Truth for a War-Torn World
For seven decades, mainstream historians have insisted that Germany was the main,
if not the sole culprit for unleashing World War II in Europe. In the present book this
myth is refuted. There is available to the public today a great number of documents on
the foreign policies of the Great Powers before September 1939 as well as a wealth of
literature in the form of memoirs of the persons directly involved in the decisions that
led to the outbreak of World War II. Together, they made possible Walendy’s present
mosaic-like reconstruction of the events before the outbreak of the war in 1939. This
book has been published only after an intensive study of sources, taking the greatest
care to minimize speculation and inference. The present edition has been translated }
completely anew from the German original and has been slightly revised.
500 pp. pb, 6”x9”, index, bibl., b&w ill.


Germar Rudolf: Resistance is Obligatory!

In 2005 Rudolf, a peaceful dissident and publisher of revisionist literature, was kid-
napped by the U.S. government and deported to Germany. There the local lackey regime comes
staged a show trial against him for his historical writings. Rudolf was not permitted to
defend his historical opinions, as the German penal law prohibits this. Yet he defended
himself anyway: 7 days long Rudolf held a speech in the court room, during which he
proved systematically that only the revisionists are scholarly in their attitude, whereas
the Holocaust orthodoxy is merely pseudo-scientific. He then explained in detail why it
is everyone's obligation to resist, without violence, a government which throws peaceful
dissident into dungeons. When Rudolf tried to publish his public defence speech as a
book from his prison cell, the public prosecutor initiated a new criminal investigation
against him. After his probation time ended in 2011, he dared publish this speech any-
way...


2nd ed. 2016, 378 pp. pb, 6“x9% b&w ill.


Germar Rudolf, Hunting Germar Rudolf: Essays on a Modern-Day Witch Hunt
German-born revisionist activist, author and publisher Germar Rudolf describes which events made him con-
vert from a Holocaust believer to a Holocaust skeptic, quickly rising to a leading person-
ality within the revisionist movement. This in turn unleashed a tsunami of persecution
against him: loss of his job, denied PhD exam, destruction of his family, driven into
exile, slandered by the mass media, literally hunted, caught, put on a show trial where
filing motions to introduce evidence is illegal under the threat of further proseuction,
and finally locked up in prison for years for nothing else than his peaceful yet controver-
sial scholarly writings. In several essays, Rudolf takes the reader on a journey through
an absurd world of government and societal persecution which most of us could never
even fathom actually exists...
304 pp. pb, 6“x9‘% bibl., index, b&w ill.


Germar Rudolf, The Day Amazon Murdered History
Amazon is the world’s biggest book retailer. They dominate the U.S. and several foreign
markets. Pursuant to the 1998 declaration of Amazon's founder Jeff Bezos to offer “the
good, the bad and the ugly,’ customers once could buy every book that was in print and
was legal to sell. However, in early 2017, a series of anonymous bomb threats against
Jewish community centers occurred in the U.S., fueling a campaign by Jewish groups
to coax Amazon into banning revisionist writings, false portraing them as anti-Semitic.
On March 6, 2017, Amazon caved in and banned more than 100 books with dissenting
viewpoints on the Holocaust. In April 2017, an Israeli Jew was arrested for having placed
the fake bomb threats, a paid “service” he had offered for years. But that did not change
Amazon's mind. Its stores remain closed for history books Jewish lobby groups disap-
prove of. This book accompanies the documentary of the same title. Both reveal how revisionist publications
had become so powerfully convincing that the powers that be resorted to what looks like a dirty false-flag
operation in order to get these books banned from Amazon...

128 pp. pb, 5”x8”, bibl., b&w ill.
WWW.ADDALL.COM, WWW.BOOKFINDER4U.COM OR WWW.FINDBOOKPRICES.COM; LEARN MORE AT
SHOP.CODOH.COM. PUBLISHED BY CASTLE HILL PUBLISHERS, PO Box 243, UcKFIELD, TN22 9AW, UK


Thomas Dalton, Hitler on the Jews

That Adolf Hitler spoke out against the Jews is beyond obvious. But of the thousands of
books and articles written on Hitler, virtually none quotes Hitler's exact words on the
Jews. The reason for this is clear: Those in positions of influence have incentives to pre-
sent a simplistic picture of Hitler as a blood-thirsty tyrant. However, Hitler’s take on the
Jews is far more complex and sophisticated. In this book, for the first time, you can make
up your own mind by reading nearly every idea that Hitler put forth about the Jews, in
considerable detail and in full context. This is the first book ever to compile his remarks
on the Jews. As you will discover, Hitler’s analysis of the Jews, though hostile, is erudite,
detailed, and - surprise, surprise — largely aligns with events of recent decades. There are
many lessons here for the modern-day world to learn.

200 pp. pb, 6”x9”, index, bibl.


Thomas Dalton, Goebbels on the Jews

From the age of 26 until his death in 1945, Joseph Goebbels kept a near-daily diary.
From it, we get a detailed look at the attitudes of one of the highest-ranking men in Nazi
Germany. Goebbels shared Hitler’s dislike of the Jews, and likewise wanted them totally
removed from the Reich territory. Ultimately, Goebbels and others sought to remove
the Jews completely from the Eurasian land mass—perhaps to the island of Madagascar.
This would be the “final solution” to the Jewish Question. Nowhere in the diary does
Goebbels discuss any Hitler order to kill the Jews, nor is there any reference to exter-
mination camps, gas chambers, or any methods of systematic mass-murder. Goebbels
acknowledges that Jews did indeed die by the thousands; but the range and scope of
killings evidently fall far short of the claimed figure of 6 million. This book contains,
for the first time, every significant diary entry relating to the Jews or Jewish policy. Also
included are partial or full citations of 10 major essays by Goebbels on the Jews.

274 pp. pb, 6”x9”, index, bibl.


Thomas Dalton, The Jewish Hand in the World Wars

For many centuries, Jews have had a negative reputation in many countries. The reasons
given are plentiful, but less well known is their involvement in war. When we examine
the causal factors for war, and look at its primary beneficiaries, we repeatedly find a
Jewish presence. Throughout history, Jews have played an exceptionally active role in
promoting and inciting war. With their long-notorious influence in government, we
find recurrent instances of Jews promoting hardline stances, being uncompromising,
and actively inciting people to hatred. Jewish misanthropy, rooted in Old Testament
mandates, and combined with a ruthless materialism, has led them, time and again,
to instigate warfare if it served their larger interests. This fact explains much about the
present-day world. In this book, Thomas Dalton examines in detail the Jewish hand in
the two world wars. Along the way, he dissects Jewish motives and Jewish strategies for
maximizing gain amidst warfare, reaching back centuries.

197 pp. pb, 6”x9”, index, bibl.


Barbara Kulaszka (ed.), The Second Ziindel Trial: Excerpts from the Transcript
In 1988. German-Canadian Ernst Ziindel was for on trial a second time for al- | ~
legedly spreading “false news” about the Holocaust. Ziindel staged a magnificent
defense in an attempt to prove that revisionist concepts of “the Holocaust” are
essentially correct. Although many of the key players have since passed away,
including Ziindel, this historic trial keeps having an impact. It inspired major
research efforts as expounded in the series Holocaust Handbooks. In contrast to
the First Ziindel Trial of 1985, the second trial had a much greater impact in- |»
ternationally, mainly due to the Leuchter Report, the first independent forensic |,
research performed on Auschwitz, which was endorsed on the witness stand by
British bestselling historian David Irving. The present book features the essential
contents of this landmark trial with all the gripping, at-times-dramatic details. |
When Amazon.com decided to ban this 1992 book on a landmark trial about the &
“Holocaust’, we decided to put it back in print, lest censorship prevail...
498 pp. pb, 8.5“x11, bibl., index, b&w ill.
For prices and availability see www.shop.codoh.com or write to: CHP, PO Box 243, Uckfield, TN22 9AW, UK
