BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL RESEARCH, 1975
JOINT HEARINGS
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON
LABOR AND PUBLIC WELFARE
AND TIHE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
UNITED STATES SENATE
NINETY-FOURTII CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
ON
IIUMAN-1SPF EXIERIMENTATION PROGRAMS OF THE D10PART-
MENT OF DEFENSE AND CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
AND
S. 2515
TO AMEND THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT TO ESTABLISH
TIlE PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION FOR THE PROTECTION OF
HUMAN 
SUBJECTS 
INVOLVED 
IN 
BIOMEDICAL 
AND 
BE-
HAVIORAL RESEARCH, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
SEPTEMBER 10, 12; AND NOVEMBER 7, 1975
Printed for the use of the Committee on Labor and Public Welfare
and the Committee on the Judiciary
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
7-0260 
WASHINGTON : 1976
15s4a.I,#r 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---R 7, 1975
Printed for the use of the Committee on Labor and Public Welfare
and the Committee on the Judiciary
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
7-0260 
WASHINGTON : 1976
15s4a.I,#r 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

COMMITTEE ON LABOR AND PUBLIC WELFARE
HARRISON A. WILLIAMS. JIL, New Jersey, OQokvm.n
JENNINGS RANDOLPH, West Virginia
CLAIBORNE PELL, Rbode Island
EDWARD M. KENNEDY. Massachusetts
GAYLORD NELSON, Wisconsin
WALTER F. MONDALE, Minnesota
THOMAS F. EAGLETON, Missouri
ALAN CRANSTON, California
WILLIAM D. HATHAWAY, Maine
JOHN A. DURKIN, New Hampshire
JACOB K. JAVITS, New York
RICHARD 8. SCHWEIKUR, Pennsylvania
ROBERT TAFT, JL, Ohio
J. GLENN BALL, Ja., Maryland
ROBERT T. STAFFORD, Vermont
PAUL LAXALT. Nevada
DONALD ELSS0uso. Genra CounSer
MARJOaza M. WHITTAnSa, Chief Clerk
JAY B. CmLma, M4sorlty Cousel
SURCOMMIT 
oN HEALTH
EDWARD M. KENNEDY. Massachusetts, Chairmon
HARRISON A. WILLIAMS, Ja., New Jersey
GAYLORD NELSON, Wisconsin
THOMAS F. EAGLETON, Missouri
ALAN CRANSTON, California
CLAIBORNE PELL, Rhode Island
WALTER F. MONDALE, Minnesota
WILLIAM D. HATHAWAY, Maine
JOHN A. DURKIN, New Hampshire
RICHARD S. SCHWEIKER, Pennsylvania
JACOB K. JAVITS, New York
J. GLENN BEALL, Js., Maryland
ROBERT TAFT, Js., Ohio
ROBERT T. STAFFORD, Vermont
PAUL LAXALT, Nevada
LZROT G. GOLDMAN, Professional sta# Member
JAY B. C Tmma, Minorfty Counsel
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
JAMES 0. EASTLAND, Mississippi. Oha rmoan
JOHN L. McCLELLAN, Arkansas
PHILIP A. HART, Michigan
EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Massachusetts
BIRCH BAYH. Indiana
QUENTIN N. BURDICK, North Dakota
ROBERT C. BYRD, West Virginia
JOHN V. TUNNEY, California
JAMES ABOUREZK, South Dakota
ROMAN L. HRUSKA, Nebraska
HIRAM I YONG. Hawaii
HUGH SCOTT, Pennsylvania
STROM THURMOND, South Carolina
CHARLES McC. MATHIAS, JR., Maryland
WILLIAM L, SCOTT, Virginia
SUBCOMMITrE 
ON ADMIxIsTRATIVE PACTICE AND PBOCEDUIE
EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Massachusetts, Chairman
PHILIP A. HART, Michigan
BIRCH BAYH, Indiana
QUENTIN N. BURDICK, North Dakota
JOHN V. TUNNEY, California
STROM THURMOND, South Carolina
CHARLES McC. MATHIAS, Js., Maryland
HUGH SCOTT, Pennsylvania
THOMAS M. SUSMAN, Chief (7ousel
WALTZa J. SHEnIDAN, Chief Investfgator
JAMS F. MIcHIm. Iv e tfoW'
WILLIAM A. COATas, MitoritV CouR8el
(II)CHARLES McC. MATHIAS, Js., Maryland
HUGH SCOTT, Pennsylvania
THOMAS M. SUSMAN, Chief (7ousel
WALTZa J. SHEnIDAN, Chief Investfgator
JAMS F. MIcHIm. Iv e tfoW'
WILLIAM A. COATas, MitoritV CouR8el
(II)

--- PAGE BREAK ---CONTENTS
Text of: 
Page
S.

2515 
238
CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF WITNESSES
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 1975
Schmidt, Alexander M., M.D., Commissioner, Food and Drug Administra-
tion, accompanied by Richard A.

Merrill.

Assistant General Counsel,
Food and Drug Division, DHEW; Dr.

John Jennings, Associate Com-
missioner for medical affairs; and Dr.

Francis D.

Keisey -------------
4
Jordan, Lt.

Col.

William R., U.S.

Army (Ret.), accompanied by Mrs.

Elizabeth Barrett, Mrs.

Mary Ray, Mr.

and Mrs.

William F.

Chaffin,
Mr.

Vincent Rewet, Mrs.

Alice Olson, and Lisa, Eric.

and Nils Olson,
a panel 
------------------------------------------------------
64
Ablard, Charles D., Esq., general counsel, Department of the Army;
accompanied by Lt.

Gen.

R.

R.

Taylor, surgeon general and Brig.

Gen.

Kenneth R.

Dirks, assistant surgeon general for research and
development, a panel 
------------------------------------------
145
FRIDAY, SEPTmBEa 12, 1975
Sim, Dr.

Van M., chief, medical research division, Biomedical Labora-
tories, Edgewood Arsenal, Md -----------------------------------
207
FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 1975
Isbell, Dr.

Harris, researcher in drug area, Eastland, Tex.; James H.

Childs, Washington, D.C.; and Edward M.

Flowers, Seabrook.

Md.,
a panel 
------------------------------------------------------
248
Sidell, Dr.

Frederick, chief, Medical Volunteer Office, Edgewood Arsenal,
Md., and Dr.

Edward M.

Gunn, Hilton Head, S.C., a panel ------------
256
Duckett, Carl E., Deputy Director; Dr.

Sayre Stevens, Associate Deputy
Director, Science and Technology; George L.

Cary, legislative counsel,
and Robert Chin, associate legislative counsel, a panel from the Central
Intelligence Agency 
-------------------------------------------
264
Dirks, Brig.

Gen.

Kenneth R., M.D..

U.S.

Army, Assistant Surgeon Gen-
eral for Research and Development; Lt.

Col.

William G.

Wisecup, U.S.

Air Force, Program Manager, Directorate of Life Sciences, Office of
Scientific Research; Capt.

C.

E.

Brodine, U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

E. Brodine, U.S. Navy, Commanding
Officer, Naval Medical Research and Development Command; and MaJ. Leo F. Jaroszewski, Executive Officer, Directorate of Professional Serv-
ices, Air Force Surgeon General's Office, Washington, D.C., a panel--- 
306
STATEMENTS
Ablard, Charles D., Esq., general counsel, Department of the Army;
accompanied by Lt. Gen. R. R. Taylor, surgeon general and Brig. Gen. Kenneth R. Dirks, assistant surgeon general for research and develop-
ment, a panel 
------------------------------------------------
145
Prepared statement -----------------------------------------
146
Central Intelligence Agency, prepared statement ----------------------
284
Chaffin, Dorothy, wife of William F. Chaffin, Tucson, Ariz., prepared
statement 
----------------------------------------------------
18
Chaffin. William F.. retired member, U.S. Air Force, Tucson, Ariz., pre-
pared statement 
..--------------------------------------------- 
128
Department of the Army, Charles D. Ablard, general counsel, prepared
statement 
----------------------------------------------------
146
(m)

--- PAGE BREAK ---IV
Dirks, Brig.

Gen.

Kenneth R., M.D., U.S.

Army, Assistant Surgeon Gen-
eral for Research and Development; Lt.

Col.

William G.

Wisecup, U.S.

Air Force, Program Manager, Directorate of Life Sciences, Office of
Scientific Research; Capt.

C.

E.

Brodine, U.S.

Navy, Commanding
Officer, Naval Medical Research and Development Command; and MaJ.

Leo F.

Jaroszewskl, Executive Officer, Directorate of Professional Serv- 
Page
lives, Air Force Surgeon General's Office, Washington, D.C., a panel-....

306
Prepared statement 
----------------------------------------- 
314
Duckett, Carl E., Deputy Director; Dr.

Sayre Stevens, Associate Deputy
Director, Science and Technology; George L.

Cary, legislative counsel,
and Robert Chin, associate legislative counsel, a panel from the Central
Intelligence Agency 
-------------------------------------------
264
Prepared statement 
----------------------------------------- 
284
Isbell, Dr.

Harris, researcher in drug area, Eastland, Tex.; James H.

Childs, Washington, D.C.; and Edward M.

Flowers, Seabrook, Md.,
a panel 
-----------------------------------------------------
248
Jordan, Lt.

Col.

William R., U.S.

Army (Ret.), accompanied by Mrs.

Elizabeth Barrett, Mrs.

Mary Ray, Mr.

and Mrs.

William F.

Chaffin,
Mr.

Vincent Rewet, Mrs.

Alice Olson, and Lisa, Eric, and Nils Olson,
a panel 
------------------------------------------------------ 
64
Schmidt, Alexander M., M.D., Commissioner, Food and Drug Administra-
tion, accompanied by Richard A.

Merrill, Assistant General Counsel,
Food and Drug Division, DHEW; Dr.

John Jennings, Associate Com-
missioner for medical affairs; and )r.

Francis D.

Kelsey --------------
4
Sidell, Dr.

Frederick, chief, Medical Volunteer Office, Edgewood Arsenal,
Md., and Dr.

Edward M.

Gunn, Hilton Head, S.C., a panel ------------ 
256
Sim, Dr.

Van M., chief, medical research division, Biomedical Labora-
tories, Edgewood Arsenal, Md -----------------------------------
207
Taylor, Lt.

Gen.Van M., chief, medical research division, Biomedical Labora-
tories, Edgewood Arsenal, Md -----------------------------------
207
Taylor, Lt.

Gen.

Richard R., M.D., the surgeon general, Department of
the Army, prepared statement ----------------------------------- 
184
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Articles, publications, etc.:
Additional questions by Senator Thurmond to General Taylor with
responses 
------------------------------------------------
181
Disposition forms supplied for the record by Dr.

Van M.

Sim, chief,
Medical Research Division, Biomedical Laboratories, Edgewood
Arsenal, Md 
--------------------------------------------- 
220
Fact Sheet on LSD studies at Edgewood Arsenal ----------------- 
228
Investigational Use of Drugs by theh Biomedical Laboratories, memo-
randmn from the Department of the Army to the Asistant Surgeon
General for Research and Development, March 10, 1975 (with en-
closures) 
-------------------------------------------------
27
Investigational Use of Drugs by the Department of Defense, from
the Federal Register, Vol.

39, No.

231, Nov.

29, 1974 -------------- 
15
Membership of the Army Volunteer Program Study Group ----------
318
Miscellaneous material supplied for the record by Lt.

Col.

William R.

Jordan, U.S.

Army (Ret.) -----------------------------------
73
Research contracts from Edgewood Arsenal involving drug testing
volunteers, 1965-75 
---------------------------------------- 
169
Volunteer's Participation Agreement, U.S.

Army Chemical Warfare
Laboratories, U.S.

Army Chemical Center, Md ------------------
65
Communications to:
Drug Control Division, Office of Scientific Support, Bureau of Nar-
cotics and Dangerous Drugs, U.S.

Department of Justice, from
William R.

Jordan, Alexandria, Va., August 18, 1972 ------------ 
68
Jordan, Lt.

Col.

William R., U.S.

Army (Ret.), Alexandria, Va.,
from Ernest A.

Carabillo, Jr., chief, Drug Control Division, U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Army (Ret.), Alexandria, Va.,
from Ernest A. Carabillo, Jr., chief, Drug Control Division, U.S. Department of Justice, August 22, 1972 (with enclosure) ----------
69
Kennedy, Hon. Edward M., Chairman, Subcommittee on Health, from
Robert Chin, associate legislative counsel, Central Intelligence
Agency, March 1, 1976 (with enclosures) ----------------------
295

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V
McClure, Carl D., Rockville, Md., from Richard A. Merrill, Chief
Counsel, Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare, Office of the General Counsel, August 21, 
Page
1975 
----------------------------------------------------- 
53
APPEINDIXF)S
Appendix I.-DOD and Service Directives and Guidance --------------- 
329
Appendix II.-I)escription of DOI) and Service Review Mechanisms Sub-
mitted to National Commission for Protection of Hu-
man Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research_ 
537
Appendix III.-Summary of Current Research Involving Human Sub-
jects in DOD ----------------------------------- 
571
Appendix IV.-Research Plans Submitted to Army Investigational Drug
Research Board by Biomedical Laboratory, Edgewood
Arsenal, Md 
5---------------
Appendix V.-Central 
Intelligence 
Agency 
Directives and Pertinent
Reports -----------------------------------------
877

--- PAGE BREAK ---medical Laboratory, Edgewood
Arsenal, Md 
5---------------
Appendix V.-Central 
Intelligence 
Agency 
Directives and Pertinent
Reports -----------------------------------------
877

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL RESEARCH, 1975
Human-Use Experimentation Programs of the Department
of Defense and Central Intelligence Agency
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 1975
U.S. SENATE,
SuwcOMmrrr 
ON HEALTH OF THE
COMMITrEE ON LABOR AND PUBLIC WELFARE,
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICE AND
PROCEDURE OF THE
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,
Wuasington, D.C.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room 4232.
Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Edward M. Kennedy (chairman
of the subcommittees), presiding.
Present: Senators Kennedy, Javits, Hathaway, Thurmond, Staf-
ford, Schweiker, and Mathias.
Senator KENNEDY. The subcommittees will come to order.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR KENNEDY
This joint hearing of the Senate Health Subcommittee and the Sen-
ate Subcommittee on Administrative Practice and Procedure will
focus on the human experimentation programs of the Department of
Defense. Questions will be raised about similar programs in the Cen-
tral Intelligence Agency.
Several years ago the Nation was shocked by the revelation of
abuses in the human experimentation programs ot the Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare. In Tuskegee, Ala., poor illiterate
black men were enrolled without their knowledge or consent in a syph-
ilis experiment that denied them treatment for this dread disease for
over 20 years. Not until the experiment was revealed by the press was
the experiment stopped.
In Montgomery, Ala., two mentally retarded, teenaged, poor black
girls were sterilized without their knowledge or their parents consent.
In the State of Tennessee thousands of women were injected with
an experimental birth control agent, Deproprovera, without informed
consent. The list of flagrant abuses was long. As a result the Congress
enacted the National Research Act of 1974, which established the Na-
tional Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Bio-
medical and Behavorial Research. As a result, for the first time the
rights of the subjects of research are given the scrutiny and protec-
tion that they deserve.
(1)tection of Human Subjects of Bio-
medical and Behavorial Research. As a result, for the first time the
rights of the subjects of research are given the scrutiny and protec-
tion that they deserve.
(1)

--- PAGE BREAK ---2
This Nation has long had a biomedical research program which-is
second to none.

The Commission will give us a system for the protec-
tion of subjects of research which is second to none.

The jurisdiction of the National Commission was limited to the
programs operated by the Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare.

That is where the known abuses were.

The Commission was
required to recommend to the Congress whether its jurisdiction should
be broadened to cover all Government agencies involved in human
research.

I believe the Congress no longer need wait for that recom-
mendation.

I believe the startling revelations of research abuses in the
Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency make
the strongest possible recommendation for the expansion of the juris-
diction of the National Commission.

The military of this Nation has a special and a very sacred trust.

By and large the Armed Forces of the United States have proven
themselves worthy of that trust.

The human experimentation abuses
which have been brought to light to date, and those which will be
brought to light today are profound violations of that trust.

This hearing will seek to determine the nature and extent of the
abuses.

It will examine the safeguards that are built into human re-
search projects.

It will look at where and why these procedures broke
down.

It will look at what steps have been taken to eliminate the possi-
bility of recurrence.

The need for the Army to carry out top secret research is not in
question here.

What is in question is whether or not the rights of the
subjects of that research have been fully protected.

In this country
ends do not, and never will, justify means.

Any research which is
conducted must adhere to the highest ethical standards.

That was
certainly not the case with the hallucenogenic drug tests conducted
by the Army.

The question is whether these standards have been
adhered to in the more recent past, and whether they are being
adhered to today.--- PAGE BREAK ---

That was
certainly not the case with the hallucenogenic drug tests conducted
by the Army. The question is whether these standards have been
adhered to in the more recent past, and whether they are being
adhered to today. I intend to introduce legislation that will expand the jurisdiction
of the National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects
of Biomedical and Behavorial Research to include all Government
human research programs. I will also seek to make the Commission
a permanent entity. I think it has proven its value to this Nation in
its first year of work. Thesi subcommittees have spent years studying the biomedical re-
search programs of this country. I for one am deeply impressed by
the dedication and skill of our scientists. By and large the top re-
searchers of this Nation welcomed the establishment of the National
Commission. They recognized the importance of its mandate. They
pledged to work with it and they have done just that. I would hope
the Department of Defense and all other agencies doing human re-
search would welcome and support an expansion of this Commission's
jurisdiction. Its goal is not to obstruct research but to strengthen it. The men and women who serve this country in the Armed Forces
make special sacrifices for all of us. We must be sure that when they
volunteer for human research programs, every effort is made to pro-
tect their rights and insure their safety. The human Experimentation
Commission can best help us to achieve that objective.

--- PAGE BREAK ---3
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR JAVTT8
Senator JAVITS.

Mr.

Chairman, if I may, I am very pleased to hear
the Chairman's statement.

It may be remembered that some years ago
I became interested in this field and requested a Library of Congress
report, which I had inserted in the congressionall Record in 1972,
showing the dangers and jeopardy most unfairly and unwisely im-
posed upon innocent human subjects of medical research.

Thereafter I
joined with Senator Kennedy in respect to legislation creating the
National Commission, now lawv, which relates to HEW research funded
activities.

W 
have, as the Senator has properly pointed out, received very
shocking re ports respecting the I)epartiment of defensee and the alleged
failure of the Food and Drug Administration to provide meaningful
monitoring of such drug testing.

I am especially concerned about the 1974 agreement renewing and
broadening the scope of the agreement between the Food and Drug
Administration and the departmentt of Iefense.

So I hope to join witi
Senator Kennedy in providing the necessary statutory protection for
the rights of individuals who participate in scientific research, not-
withstanding the labor of national security, which, it seems to me, does
not mean we have to destroy human beings.

I am too nuch of a lawyer to assume that we have heard it all, and I
will i 
deeply interested and will pay the strictest attention to the
evidence which the Government produce s; but I hope that nothing will
be withheld from us, and that the cover of national security will not
be used to withhold it.

Personally I am quite prepared, if there is any claim of national
security, to ask the Chair for executive sessions so that we may explore
the legitimacy of such claims as a reason for nondisclosure.

However, I believe the e.sential proposition is irrefutable.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Personally I am quite prepared, if there is any claim of national
security, to ask the Chair for executive sessions so that we may explore
the legitimacy of such claims as a reason for nondisclosure. However, I believe the e.sential proposition is irrefutable. We can-
not permit the cover of national security to torture human beings with-
out effective Government measures to protect them against even their
own improvidence or ignorance, and that is after all the function of
Government. Senator KENNEDY. Senator Hathaway. Senator HATHAWAY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As Chairman of tile Subcommittee on Alcoholism anti Narcotics, I
am particularly interested in the subcommittees hearing today, and I
want to extend to you my appreciation for your calling these hear-
ings, and I look forward to hearing the testimony of the witnesses. Senator KE.NNEDY. Senator Thurmond. Senator TIIRMOND. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. We are here today to inquire into the drug testing practices of the
Department of Defense and the Central Intel'ligence Agency. As a
member of the Senate Armed Services Committee is well as the Senate
Judiciary Committee, I am especially interested in this area. There
appears to be evidence that sufficient safeguards for human research
subjects have not been utilized in the past. We are concerned with this
aspect but more importantly, this committee is concerned with what
safeguards are being implemented now and will be implemented in
the future. Human life is precious. However, at the press, nt time, it is necessary to ultimately use human
beings in various forri ; of drug research. It is therefore essential that

--- PAGE BREAK ---4
those volunteering for drug experimentation do so with the knowledge
that they have been given all the information necessary concerning the
experiments and that everything possible will be done to safeguard
their welfare, both during and after the research.

Senator KzNNEDY.

Thank you very much, Senator Thurmond.

We welcome this morning our first witness, the Commissioner of
the Food and Drug Administration, Commissioner Schmidt, who is
here frequently before our committee.

We always welcome his testimony, and I think all of us are indeed
grateful for his presence here this morning and for the comments he
will make.

We want to welcome you, Commissioner.

As I pointed out at the
start of the hearings, it appeared that we were seeing each other on
almost a monthly basis for a long period of time, and we are glad to
have you back on a different subject matter, but I am sure-you will be
helpful to us in this subject matter as you have been in the others.

We welcome you and your associates.

STATEMENT OF ALEXANDER M.

SCHMIDT, M.D., COMMISSIONER,
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, ACCOMPANIED BY: RICH-
ARD A.

MERRILL, ASSISTANT GENERAL COUNSEL, FOOD AND
DRUG DIVISION, DHEW; DR.

JOHN JENNING, ASSOCIATE COM-
MISSIONER FOR MEDICAL AFFAIRS; AND DR.

FRANCIS D.

KELSEY
Dr.

SCHMIDT.

Thank you very much, Mr.

Chairman.

I would like to introduce my colleagues this morning.

On my im-
mediate left is Mr.

Richard Merrill, General Counsel for the Food and
Drug Administration.

On my right is Dr.

John Jennings, Associate
Commissioner for Medical Affairs.

On his right is Dr.

Francis Kelsey
who has been before you, as you know, and can respond to any ques-
tions you might have about clinical investigation monitoring.

Mr.

Chairman and members of the subcommittees, I am pleased to be
here again before your subcommittees.

My purpose is to shed some
light on the relationship between the Food and Drug Administration
and the Department of Defense concerning clinical testing of drugs.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chairman and members of the subcommittees, I am pleased to be
here again before your subcommittees. My purpose is to shed some
light on the relationship between the Food and Drug Administration
and the Department of Defense concerning clinical testing of drugs. This relationship is embodied in the memorandum of understanding
between the Food and Drug Administration and the Department of
Defense which was originally signed by the two agencies in 1964 and
revised in 1974. I will attempt. to outline the events that led to the original memo-
randum of understanding and describe the essence of the original and
the revised memorandum of understanding. I would like, Senator Javits, to emphasize at the beginning that we
construe the revision of the memorandum of understanding to be a
narrowing of it, and not a broadening of it. Senator KF.N NEDY. On that point. Commissioner, of course there is
some considerable dispute, really, as to whether you even have the au-
thority legally to make such an understanding. I think we will get into that sometime later, but, as I understand,
even within your department there is a question about the authority
and the legality of the initial memorandum, let alone the secondary
follow-on memorandum which you describe as being narrower than
the first one.

--- PAGE BREAK ---5
As I understand the question of the legality, that is perhaps not in
your mind but within the department and certainly within GAO it is
very much an open issue.

Dr.

ScIIMItr.

I understand the GAO question is whether we have
the authority to monitor DOD research.

Other questions have been
raised which we can discuss.

The 1962 drug amendments to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cos-
metic Act confirmed and strengthened the Food and Drug Administra-
tion's authority to exercise control over distribution of investigational
drugs.

In January 1963, FDA issued regulations governing the distri-
bution and use of new drugs for investigational use.

These regulations transformed a system that was entirely unregu-
lated, except by the sponsors and investigators themselves, into one in
which clear and strict investigator responsibilities were imposed.

You
will recall that during my appearance of July 10, 1975, I provided the
subcommittees with detailed background of the history and regula-
tion of clinical investigations in the United States.

Since that testi-
mony is in the record of that hearing, I will not repeat it today.

On March 28, 1963, soon after issuance of FDA's notice of claimed
investigational exemption for a new drug regulation, (IND) Brig.

Gen.

Robert E.

Blount, commanding general at the U.S.

Army Medi-
.al Research and Development Command, instituted discussions with
former FDA Commissioner Larrick and staff concerning the require-
ments for clinical investigators working under the auspices of military
authority.

At that time the Department of Defense was developing
their own regulations applicable to all use of investigational drugs
under their auspices.

DOD's draft regulations imposed much the same
kind of controls provided for in FDA's IND regulations.

At the March 1963 meeting, the question of handling reports of
classified investigations arose.--- PAGE BREAK ---

DOD's draft regulations imposed much the same
kind of controls provided for in FDA's IND regulations. At the March 1963 meeting, the question of handling reports of
classified investigations arose. Department of Defense representatives
were advised by FDA staff that it would be possible to develop ar-
rangements under which DOD, in the conduct of clinical trials classi-
fied for reasons of national security, would take full responsibility for
the safety of the subjects, including the adequacy of preliminary
investigations. Senator KxENNEDY. Just on that point, was it your understanding
that the stemm that was going to be set up by DOD would have been
reviewed by FDA, as far as its propriety and whether it complied
with the memorandum of understanding? Dr. S('MiWr. Yes. In brief, what happened was that the DOD
asked FI)A if their regulations would satisfy the safety requirements
of the law. They rnibmitted draft regulations to us and we reviewed them. Parts
of them were questioned by FDA staff, and there were a number of
meetings in both agencies. At the conclusion of these meetings, it was
determined by FDA that the DOD regulations were 
satisfactory and
even exceed the FI)A requirements. It was obviously FDA's judgment, at that time, that the procedures
that DOD provided to us and said they would follow, satisfied the
requirements of the law and satisfied uis. This was the rationale of
why the agreement--or memorandum of understanding-between the
two agencies existed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---6
We felt content that DOD procedures would suffice.

Iii such instances, it would not he necessary for DOD to file claims
for investigational new drug exemptions with FDA.

The two
agencies agreed that it.

would be desirable for FDA employees hold-
ing proper security clearance to have acces to the records covering
such studies so they could obtain that information which might be
of benefit with respect to the use of the same or similar drugs in
civilian populations.

[he (ommissioner at that time, who was George 1P.

Larrick, stated
in a May 21, 1963, memorandum to then Secretary Celebrezze:
We need the reports of all investigation' conducted In the United States so
that we may establish a central index of adverse reactions and thus be pre-
pared to cause discontinuance of proposed new tests which would merely repeat
studies that have already shown an investigational drug to be dangerous to
health.

Growing out of these early discussions with DOD, a memorandum
of understanding was adopted between the Department of Health,
Education.

and Welfare and the Department of Defense concerning
the investigational use of drugs by the Department of Defense.

This
nmemorandum, which became effective on April 8, 1964, provided
that:
(1) FDA would not require an IND submission where an investiga-
tion classified for reasons of national security was to be conductedby
1)O).

I)01's review and controls, as laid out in their regulations, were.

accepted as adequate for protecting human subjects.

These.

controls
required advance approval by a DOI) Review Board and the Surgeon
General of the )aticular defense establishment.

However, DOD
would report.

to FDA unclassified findings associated with classified
investigations.

Additionally, DOD would discuss its classified investi-
gations of drugs on a freqquent basis with FDA personnel who have
proper clea rance.--- PAGE BREAK ---

to FDA unclassified findings associated with classified
investigations. Additionally, DOD would discuss its classified investi-
gations of drugs on a freqquent basis with FDA personnel who have
proper clea rance. (2) Where an unclassified investigation was conducted in DOD
facilities or under a 1)O1) contract, the IND submission could consist
of the supporting data sul)mitted to the appropriate DOD review
Board, the Review Board's evaluation and approval, and the appro-
l)riate Surgeon General's approval. It was felt that the combination of these documents would provide
the information that was in the IND exemption. (3) Where DOD facilities were used to test a drug sponsored by
the pharmaceutical industry, FDA's regular IND requirements had
to be complied with fully. Senator KEN.DY. Just before going on further, may I ask you
about this final sentence on point 1, about DOD would report to
FDA unclassified findings associated with classified investigations. Additionally, DOD would discuss its classified investigations of drugs
on a frequent basis with FDA personnel who have proper clearance. Can you tell us how often you have met. Dr. Sciimryr. As far as we know, during the period between the
time the 1964 memorandum of understanding became effective and
now, there have been four meetings between DOD staff and FDA saff. Of these four meetings, I know very little about one. We have
very little written about that meeting. We have memoranda about

--- PAGE BREAK ---7
two meetings.

These memoranda clearly show that at these two
meetings there was an exchange of information and reviews of classi-
fied types of investigations by DOT) personnel for FDA personnel.

The fourth meeting was fairly casual, and I am not sure that there
was a systematic review o.f information as ini the other two meetings.

I do not know how useful any of these reviews were in doing other
than providing a kind of an overview for FI)A about what kinds
of classified research were being done.

I fitid it hard to believe that the meetings were directly relevant
to tile principal subject.

of the hearing this morning.

Senator KENNEDY.

Effectively, as f gather from what you said,
there.

were two substantive meetings--at least in which substantive
material was discussed over a period of 11 years--
Dr.

SciIMurr.

That is correct.

It.

is clear that there were very few
times.

As I have said someplace in my testimony, it was really rather
minimal, and certainly (lid not represent oversight by the Food and
Dng Administration of the.

conduct of I)OD research.

Senator KENNDF.Y.

How often should the meetings have taken
place?

How long, if you had your druthers, would be a meaningful kind
of interaction with this kind of program?

Dr.

ScMIwmT.

This really gets into our review of the'memorandum
and what we thought at t be time of reviewing it.

Senator KEN.-NEDY.

If you thought FDA was really doing an effec-
tive job of oversight, and DOD was interacting with it, how often
would you need to meet.

and how extensive would these reviews be?

I)r.

Sciir.%iDT.

It is my view that we should have, at least, an
annual formal review of classified research being done by DOD.

Furthermore, it was our view that only classified research should be
exempt from the investigation of new drugs (IND) provisions of the
law and/or regulations.

This is what I meant when I said the current
memorandum narrowed in effect the first.

memo of understanding.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is what I meant when I said the current
memorandum narrowed in effect the first. memo of understanding. I would immediately raise the question though, as to what the pur-
pose of the annual review of classified research is. I think that it is one
thing to sit in it room and listen to a presentation-by the Department
of Defense about the kinds of classified research that is going on with-
in that Department. and quite another thing for the Food and Drug
Administration to exercise some type of monitoring and control func-
tion of that research. There is a very serious question in my mind as to whether or not the
Food and Drug Administration should be in the business of exercising
any control over such things as weapons research (lone by the Depart-
ment of Defense. Senator KE, NNEDY. In your renewal in 1974, it is indicated in your
memorandum of understanding in a paragraph-and I will include it
in the record--experience in operating under this memorandum of
understanding from 1964 to 1974 indicates that DOI) adheres to the
standards of FDA, human subjects having been adequately protected
in DOD sponsored studied, and DOD has been able to carry out its
responsibilities. [The memorandum referred to follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---8
[From the Federal Register, Vol.

39, No.

231- 
Nov.

29, 19741
INVESTIGATIONAL USE OF DRUGS BY THE DEPARTMENT or DEFENSg
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN THE FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION
AND THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFNSE
Pursuant to the notice published in the Federal Register of October 3, 1974
(30 FR 35697) that future agreements or memoranda of understanding between
the Food and Drug Administration and others would be published in the Federal
Register, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs issues the following notice"
A Memorandum of Understanding was approved and accepted by the Food
and Drug Administration and the Department of Defense on August 19, 1974
and October 24, 1974, resptectively, replacing one that was signed in 1964.

This
memorandum, which establishes procedures to be followed by the Department
of Defense and the Food and Drug Administration regarding the investigational
use of drugs by the Department of Defense, reads as follows:
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN T1E FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION AND
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE CONCERNING INVESTIGATIONAL USE OF DRUGS BY THE
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
The Department of Defense (hereinafter called DOD) and the Food and Drug
Administration of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (herein-
after called FDA) hereby jointly agreeo-tole4erms and conditions as described
herein.

Purpose
To establish the procedures to be followed by the Department of Defense and
the Food and Drug Administration regarding the investigational use of drugs by
the Department of Defense.

This Memorandum of Understanding, when signed
by representatives of the agencies, replaces the current Memorandum of Under-
standing signed in 1964.

Background
Section 505(a) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as amended by
section 104 of Pub.

L.

87-781.

76 Stat.

784; 21 U.S.C.

355(a) (1970) established
procedures for the approval required before a new drug can be introduced into
interstate commerce.784; 21 U.S.C.

355(a) (1970) established
procedures for the approval required before a new drug can be introduced into
interstate commerce.

Section 505(i) of the act (21 U.S.C.

355(i)) establishes
exemptions from the approval procedures for drugs which will be used only for
manufacture of other drugs or for investigational purposes.

That section pro-
vides the authority for the regulations to give effect to the general guidance of
the statute, promulgated in 21 CFR 312.1 (formerly 130.3) by Secretary of
Health, Education, and Welfare.

These regulations establish the procedure and
prescribe the necessary forms to be filed in order to exempt drugs to be used only
for investigational purposes from the approval procedures of the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act.

A Memorandum of Understanding was executed by the Departments of Defense
and Health, Education, and Welfare in 1964 to state the procedures that will be
followed to ensure that the requirements of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act and the investigational drug regulations issued under that act are fully met
without jeopardizing or impeding the requirements of national security or the re-
quirements of Federal laws and regulations relating to such use of drugs.

The Surgeon General of each Military Department has established within his
office a formal "Review Board" which carefully considers each research proposal
from its own agency or from outside contractors or grantees which involve the
use of human subjects in the clinical investigation of new drugs.

Each "Review
Board" is staffed with highly qualified professionals capable of performing com-
petent review of such research proposals to ensure adequate protection of human
subjects.

The DOD assumes full responsibility for the protection of all human
subjects involved In research under its sponsorship whether this involves in-
vestigational drugs or other hazards.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Each "Review
Board" is staffed with highly qualified professionals capable of performing com-
petent review of such research proposals to ensure adequate protection of human
subjects. The DOD assumes full responsibility for the protection of all human
subjects involved In research under its sponsorship whether this involves in-
vestigational drugs or other hazards. Before a clinical test may be performed
with an investigational drug, the plan of the test and other pertinent details must
be submitted to the appropriate "Review Board," the Board must indicate its
approval, and the approval must be confirmed by the appropriate Surgeon Gen-
eral. Experience in operating under this Memorandum of Understanding from 1964
to 1974 indicates that the DOD adheres to the standards of the FDA; that human
subjects have been adequately protected in the DOD-sponsored studies; that the

--- PAGE BREAK ---9
DOI) has been able to effectively carry out its responsibilities for national se-
curity without compromise of the intent of the above-cited statutes and regula-
tions; and that certain exemptions provided the DOD from meeting the ordinary
requirements of the investigational new drug regulations are no longer neces-
sary.

Accordingly, the DOI) and the FDA agree to the following new procedures
to meet the requirements of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act concerning
investigational use of drugs:
I.

SUBSTANCE OF AGREEMENT
The Food and Drug Administration and the Department of Defense agree that:
1.

Clinical investigations that are classified for reasons of national security
will not require the filing of a formal "Claim for Exemption" to the FDA.

The
D)I) shall be solely responsible for determining the security classification of such
research projects.

Approval by the-appropriate "Review Board" and Surgeon
General of a test classified for reasons of national security will automatically
exempt the drug being employed from the application of the new drug section of
the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act during such investigational study.

The DOD
will report tW the FDA unclassified findings associated with such studies which
the FI)A should be aware of in order to make a sound evaluation of non-classified
studies proposed on the same or similar drugs.

Additionally, the DOI) will dis-
cuss its classified Investigations of drugs on a frequent basis with personnel from
the FI)A wbo have proper security clearance.

2.Additionally, the DOI) will dis-
cuss its classified Investigations of drugs on a frequent basis with personnel from
the FI)A wbo have proper security clearance.

2.

When the unique requirements of the military dictate the extensive use in
military personnel of drugs which, though not yet approved, have been tested
under the investigational new drug regulations sufficiently to establish with rea-
sonable certainty their safety and efficacy, special ad hoc review and approval for
such use will be effected expeditiously through joint action by representatives of
the Department of Defense and the F.od and Drug Administration to ensure
timely response to the military need.

The 1)O1) will report to the FDA findings
associated with such use which the FI)A should be aware of in order to make a
ounl evaluation of other studies proposed on the same or similar drug.

3.

In all other cases involving the clinical testing of investigational drugs under
programs sponsored by the DOI) and conducted either by the 1)OD within its
own research facilities, or for the )O1) by a contractor or grantee, the ordinary
provisions of 21 CFR 312.1 (formerly 130.3) of the Code of Federal Regulations
g:verning the investigational use of new drugs in human beings shall be followed.

I.

NAME AND ADDRESS OP PARTICIPATING AGENCIES
A.

)epartment of Defense, Washington, DC 20314
B.

Food and Drug Administration, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockvllle, MD 20852
1II.

LIAISON OF'ICEM
A.

Col.

Edward J.

Huycke, Director, Professional services, Office of the Assistant
Secretary of Defense (Health and Environment) Washington, DC 20301.

B.

John Jennings, M.D., Associate Commissioner for Medical Affairs.

HPtFM-1,
Food and Drug Administration, 5600 Fishers LAne, Rockville.

Ml) 20852.

IV.

PERIOD OF AGREEMENT
This agreement, when accepted by both parties, covers an indefinite period of
time and Is subject to modification by mutual consent by both parties.

V.--- PAGE BREAK ---

PERIOD OF AGREEMENT
This agreement, when accepted by both parties, covers an indefinite period of
time and Is subject to modification by mutual consent by both parties. V. AUTHORITY
This agreement is entered into under the authority of the Economy Act, ap-
proved June 30, 1932, as amended, 31 U.N.C. 086. Approved and accepted for the Department of Defense. V. McKzNzi,
Acting Assistant Seorctary, Health and Environment. Date: October 24, 1974. Approved and accepted for the Food and Drug Administration. A. M. ScIIMwT,
Commisoner, Food and Drug AdiMnistration. Date: August 19, 1974.

--- PAGE BREAK ---10
Effective date
This Memorandum of Understanding became effective on October 24, 1974.

Dated: November 21, 1974.

SAU D.

FNE,
A8aociate Commlnioner for Compliat: c.

(FR Doe.

74-27872 Filed 11-27-74: 8:45 am)
Senator KINwY.

I suppose the question of how you know that
basis in light of the fact that you have only had a coup le of meetings.

1)r.

ScMitur.

First, that was based on the few letters and memo-
randa from the Department of Defense, which we accepted.

Second,
tho., INM)'s that were submitted by the I)epartment of Defense, dur-
ing this period, met our requirements for INI)'s.

Our assumption that
the agreement was satisfactory was based principally on these two
things:
(1) The fact that the IND's that we did have were good, and
(2) That the form of communication that we received was reassur-
ing to us.

and we accepted them at face value.

Senator KEfNEiy.

It was not on the basis of these meetings that
were being developed?

I)r.

S Mimnyr.

I)r.

Ley made his visit in 1967 and found that visit
reassuring.

I lis memoranda and the other memoranda of that type in-
dicated that they found no problems.

Senator KE.NNEDY.

As you look back on it, how do you react to the
kinds of protection that were being granted?

l)r.

SciMimwr.

I think it.

is very clear that the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration cannot monitor or control the performance of classified
human research by the Department of Defense.

Senator KF.'.DY.

In terms of the kinds of assiaance that you gave
to the public, then signing another memorandum of understanding,
it would appear from the language that you are giving to the public,
the assurance that there are adequate protections of human subjects.

That was part of the basis for your continuation of the new memoran-
dum of understanding.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In terms of the kinds of assiaance that you gave
to the public, then signing another memorandum of understanding,
it would appear from the language that you are giving to the public,
the assurance that there are adequate protections of human subjects. That was part of the basis for your continuation of the new memoran-
dum of understanding. Granted, hindsight, I think quite frankly that the kinds of mate-
rials that we have seen to (late make it difficult for me to believe that
there could be those kinds of assurances-granted now in hindsight-
but what would you sav about the kinds of protection that would be
given to human subjects? Dr. ScuMnvr. In hindsight I will repeat that the Department of
Defense regulations were satisfactory to us. If it is clear that the
lDepartment of Defense in some instances did not follow those regula-
tions, their own regulations, then this identifies a problem. The question which then obviously arises is whether or not the
Food and Drug Administration should have played some part in
seeing to it that the Department of Defense regulations were followed
by the Department of Defense. This raises the question of whether
te Fl)A has an oversight function over classified research. Senator KEENNEY. And what do you say about that? Dr. SciMnrr. This morning I still have real problems with the idea
of the Food and Drug Administration being responsible for the
accountability of the Department of Defense in following their own
regulations. Senator KExNNEy. Do you think then that you have a right to sign
away what hs been given to you as statutory authority ? You cannot

--- PAGE BREAK ---11
really have it both ways.

You cannot sign away statutory authority
to the Department of Defense, and get up guidelines and ask for as-
surances that there are going to be certain protections and then write
in your memorandum that you are satisfied because these protections
with human subjects are going to be there, and then come to us and
say, well, I do not know whether we should be in the position of over-
seeing the Department of Defense.

If you are not going to be in the position of overseeing the Depart-
ment of Defense on the issue of the protection of human subjects--
and that is what we are really talking about here-
L)r.

SChMIDT.

That is correct.

Senator KFNNEF.DY [continuing].

Then do you think that you are
justified in writing off your authority, your statutory authority, to
the Department of DefenseI
Dr.

ScitMiryr.

We do not feel that we wrote off the authority.

We
were satisfied that the Department of Defense had regulations that
met the requirements of the law.

What we did, in effect, was defer to the Department of Defense
in the area of classified research.

We assumed that the Department of
Defense, their Surgeon General, their review board, would see to the
protection of the subjects.

Giving the authority to the Surgeon General and having the review
board of the Department of Defense oversee this seems perfectly rea-
sonable to me.

I think that is a reasonable assurance.

If it turns out that that is an unreasonable assurance, in light of
recent findings- we will certainly rethink that.

If you sit and think
through, step by step, what an oversight function by the FDA would
mean, particularly when we found something that might be disturbing,
you will find that we would be in a position of stopping classified re-
search that, might entail national security matters.

I am not saying that it is improper for the FDA to be involved in
these matters, but I am disturbed by it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If you sit and think
through, step by step, what an oversight function by the FDA would
mean, particularly when we found something that might be disturbing,
you will find that we would be in a position of stopping classified re-
search that, might entail national security matters. I am not saying that it is improper for the FDA to be involved in
these matters, but I am disturbed by it. We have not had time for dis-
cussions with you and with other people to know right now whether
or not this is the wise thing. I am disturbed at the idea of putting the Food and Drug Adminis-
tration in the middle of the kinds of research that have to do with na-
tional security, the evolution of weapons systems and this sort of thing. The accountability of the. Defense Department is really the question
to me, and if we are to see to it, fine, but I am not sure that is the only
senator KENNEDY. It is my Understanding, Mr. Commissioner, that
the Congress by statute gave the Food and Drug Administration the
responsibility for the protection of human subjects in the area of drug
experimentation. It is further my understanding that at some time, according to these
memoranda, that you made the agreement with the DOD, and you say
to your own satisfaction, that there was going to be a sufficient kind of
oversight in the protection of human subjects, that they were going to
develop protocol, or that they had, but your initial memorandum was
that they are going to, and then you were satisfied that they had. Dr. ScnMrr. Yes, sir. Their regulations were satisfactory. Senator KENNEDy. As your legal counsel points out on that one issue
about whether you had the authority to do it, in a July 28 memoran-
dum, he points out-and we will put it all in the record-I wonder
70-026 0 - 76 - 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---12
whether we should reconsider the propriety of this exemption-refer-
ring to the exemption of the Memorandum of Understanding of the
The General Accounting Office has been looking into this exemption,
and has concluded that itis not legal under the terms of the Food and
Drug and Cosmetics Act, and that the primary reason why we granted
the exemption, so that this agency should not handle classified security
matters, that this premise would not hold on close scrutiny.

Further down in the memorandum he states: "Thus we are abdicat-
ing our statutory responsibility in this area out of the desire to be
courteous to the department of Defense."
I am just wondering when your own legal counsel and when GAO
wonder about the legality of the transfer-and certainly I do not know
how one agency of government can in a memorandum of understanding
reassign statutory authority that is granted by the law-but I think it
is a serious legal question in terms of your own legal staff.

Second, you give in your statement assurance to the public that hu-
man subjects have been adequately protected in the DOD sponsored
studies and you do not know that of your own information.

You take
that on trust or confidence that the DOD is enforcing their protocol.

I just wonder what we have here.

in terms of the protection of human
subjects in this.

Dr.

SUmUT.

In regard to your IA point, you are entirely correct.

For our own assurance about protection of human subjects,-
Senator KENNEwY.

You could not really give it, could you, Mr.

Commissioner.

Dr.

Scmwvr.

No, sir.

Senator KzNNEDY.

That part of the memorandum that would ap-
pear before the public, saying there are adequate protections, really is
not justified on the information that you have within your own agency,
is that correctI
-
Dr.

SoHmwr.

For classified research, we know essentially nothing
about how it was conducted.

Senator KzNEY.--- PAGE BREAK ---

For classified research, we know essentially nothing
about how it was conducted. Senator KzNEY. On the question of the protection you are not
asking here about whether you knew or did not know about the par-
ticular kinds of drug experiments, but on the question of the protec-
tion of human rights? Dr. Sommm. That is correct. Senator KzEzvwY. And you cannot really give that part of your
memorandum that was published, that said the human subjects have
been adequately protected in DOD sponsored studies--that is not cor-
rect, as I understand, based upon your information I
Dr. SCHMrr. From my own frst hand information, we cannot
make that statement. You are absolutely correct. In regard to the legal question, sir, there are two legal issues being
fused when you lump together what GAO has said and what one of
our legal staff has said. The memorandum you are reading from was a kind of questioning
paper prepared by a member of the General Counsel staff, and I will
ask Mr. Merrill to speak to the issues you raised about the legality. Mr. Mmum. Mr. Chairman, that memorandum was sent to me by
a member of my staff and with the advantage of the hindsight of the
last 8 months, says in substance: "We do have a problem ere. The
assumption that we made originally, that proper procedures were

--- PAGE BREAK ---taff and with the advantage of the hindsight of the
last 8 months, says in substance: "We do have a problem ere. The
assumption that we made originally, that proper procedures were

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
being observed may no longer be valid. And if it is no longer valid,
we do have a legal question about the validity of the agreement."
I would agree with that analysis but I do not want the record to
show that I advised the Commissioner that the agreement itself was
invalid.
Senator JAvrrs. Mr. Chairman, may I have just one question?
Senator KzNm-wiy. Surely.
Senator JAvrrs. Mr. Commissioner, first, you are aware, in the first
place, that you function under the Secretary of Health, Education,
and WelfareI
Dr. ScHmID. Yes, sir, that is correct.
Senator JAvrrs. Are you aware of the fact that when two Cabinet
officials have a difference, it is the tradition of our Government that
that difference is referred to the President, and that we have made
provisions in law before, and we can again, mandating that?
Did you ever take this question up with your superior, the Sere-
tary, and say, "I am having a problem with the Secretary of Defense,
and this is now in your province, and the President ought to settle
it"?.
Dr. Scmirmr. No, sir, because, until very recently, I did not realize
that there was a problem that the 1974 Memorandum of Understand-
ing would not solve.
Senator JAvrTe. One other question.
Your Memorandum of Understanding of 1964 said, and I quote from
the bottom of page 3 of your own 
tMement, and from the revised
memorandum of 1974 itself:
Additionally, DOD would discuss its classified investigations of drugs on a
frequent basis with FDA personnel who had proper clearance.
Do you call three meetings, at the most. in 11 years a frequent
basis?
Dr. ScHMirTr. No, sir: I certainly do not.
In my testimony. I called it minimal.
Senator JAVITS. In that case, do you then agree there was something
leIs than appropriate supervision, oversight cooperation-call it any-
thing-respecting your duties when it applied to the DOD?
Dr. Sciivirr. Absolutely.
There was minimal contact, however, I understand why it was
minimal.
Senator JAvrrs. What is your understanding?
I do not quite get that.
Dr. SCHMIDr. Clearly, if I tried to put myself in the place of the
individuals who were involved; Dr. Ley went out to Fort Detrick
and received a briefing, came back home and wrote it up, and it went
in the safe.
TIf I were invited to go out and do that, I would look at the amount
of time I have on the one hand and the number of things I have to
do on the other. I might put that briefing off because we would not, as
a result of a briefing, do anything more than we were prenared to.
The question that is now before us is--what is the oversight function
of the FDA of DOD in classified research?
Senator JAvrrs. Is it not a fact that notwithstanding these under-
standings-This recognition-that you have gone exactly the same
route in 1974 and given up your authority ?
Dr. Scnrwr. Again I quarrel with the phrase "given up the au-at notwithstanding these under-
standings-This recognition-that you have gone exactly the same
route in 1974 and given up your authority ?
Dr. Scnrwr. Again I quarrel with the phrase "given up the au-

--- PAGE BREAK ---14
thority." What we did was to narrow the agreement in the area of
nonclassified research, but we retained that provision for classified
research.

Senator JAvrrs.

It seems to me you haTdly narrowed the agreonent
when your 1974 agreement not only applies to classified research but,
to quote you," meet requirements of the military."
it seems to me you broadened it.

Dr.

ScHMnrr.

No, sir, that is not correct.

Senator JAvrrs.

But what does paragraph 2 mean when you say
unique requirements of the military dictate the extensive use by mili-
tary personnel of drugs which have not yet been approved, which have
not yet been tested under the investigational new drug regulations
sufficiently to establish a reasonable certainty of their safety and
efficacy and so on ?

Dr.

ScHmirr.

That means that in the covered research, there is no
exemption for that research whatsoever.

It means that in those in-
stances wherein there are special needs of the military-which indeed
there are--we would recognize that and facilitate or do whatever is
necessary to meet the.

needs of the Department of Defense.

Senator JAvrrs.

Mr.

Commissioner, it seems to me that you have
overwhelmed-not you, but your organization-you have over-
whelmed, but let us'hope not been intimidated by the DOD in 1964,
and it still continued in 1974, and we have to do something about it.

Dr.

Scii3iiTyr.

No.

Knowing what one knows now, it is very easy to make very broad
general statements, and you may be entirely right.

I rather imagine that back in 1964, sensing the times, I might very
well have agreed with the memorandum as it was then structured.

Clearly I feel now that the memorandum that was then structured
was not appropriate, and we revised it, except in the.

area of classified
research.

I freely state-and have now stated several times--my con-
cern about putting the Food and Drug Administration in the middle
of the kinds of research that I suspect was being done.

Senator JAVITS.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I freely state-and have now stated several times--my con-
cern about putting the Food and Drug Administration in the middle
of the kinds of research that I suspect was being done. Senator JAVITS. You are not quite in the middle, as I have just
lointed out. in this and many other situations. Where there is a difference between two Cabinet officials, each is
bound by law to submit this to the President. It is traditional practice,
and it should and can be done here, and I do not think that excuses
would he needed from foregoing legal responsibilities. Senator KF, NFDy. Just on this point, Mr. Commissioner, as I under-
stood, in the memorandum of understanding which was signed in
1964-and we will include that in the record-it says the Surgeon Gen-
eral of each military department has established within his department
a form of review board which carefully considers each research proto-
col from its own agency or from outside contractors which may involve
the use of human subjects in a clinical investigation of new drugs. In the regulations by the Army-and I would include that in the
record-signed off in August 1972, it talks abouLcompliance with the
memorandum of March 1962, the separate memorandum of understand-
ing, that the Director of the Biomedical Laboratory would submit
through the U.S. Army Materiel Command all research protocols
within proposals for studies utilizing volunteers as subjects for in-
vestigation of representative compounds of new classes of chemicals not
previously approved. [The memorandum referred to follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---studies utilizing volunteers as subjects for in-
vestigation of representative compounds of new classes of chemicals not
previously approved. [The memorandum referred to follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

* 
L fi, 
15. 
-.. 
-
1o+ 
..+, 
.
,, . .
.
. ,. ,,+
Deiman ent of I)efene IistrUI f.-
.tinter 
lavestgattional Use of Drugs bythe department of Dows-sq
(4 Drac xr, er1utlona publ1shod by %bpartmont o±' zalth1 .Eduoaittoar
M' 6:12fare (21 CI 130.3)
. :..atnactoa cpe+±os the manner In which the roflatcus cito'd n
"."'S,.:.3. (,.I vll LO applied to thq invot-gaticnal use of dri's by te
UX. 
$.PPLIWA:L;??Y-,
T.-; pi': oons o-t t.: 
:nstr'ion apply to all DoD Components and tlwlr
" ntr~: : 
". grwituu er.mged in the investigatiorbal use of drugs.
" ", :.C:,<::::." L! 7:7.
A 
tz~Dof-.-. 
4awrm.a f.&1'l rocptvrnib.1l1ty for the pro-
I, w.".,a:..- invzed in 
uarih 
-eL, 
.to sponaorshl-p whether
th.:j "-iVQ 
e 
lv-otigational dr'4sa or ontbc 
hazards.
.). 
Mauh :llta 
:" Dpartrant. will eatablish wlthi:. U-j office ox' Its.
Sir 
A 
eer~lettl 
a :'onsal Riwiov Board of px'n 
jO 
praormoZ to
-' 
5,-r2- re.>.:rl: proposal fr 
within I.at :'litary :Depart4oht,
or :'r.)m Its -,...tra.:t-r. or Grmtuaed which tvi, .nvolvo the use of "
z 43j- ,its 
in t1- .:iir.ical InvetIgc.'t.a. *z' zrw d-as. Before 1,
.:' 
teat 
2th a. :nv 
g io 
r.al 
d-ag '.::" b pe'r'orflmd Arer the
:;p,.. ,£.Of 
a :M1ta.Y Dpartr 
t -
1. 
th.- plan of t,.t. t,:t and .rbter portinen 
-
Ut~is =ut be iubr.dtted
to .h..- appriopri at 
Review Board,
2. 
Sr.,: 
Foa 'I :.t 
i:lcate its approval, anC
.3. tho apprx:l :n-t bm cmnfli.-A- by the reo.'ctivu 8argoor. Gonez'a.
, CI+ 
:'-'i ':tr.; :'L~ItLZ..; 
. :.clnozl:' 
for inaso0:; ot' nntlcOl
. il,: r+z t r'i 
th i~. 
.
t" itng o. :t !% oal 
"Clanm 1'o1 Z. ,ptio"lOw
. paa't:. 
r 
;:' HoxCls-, Etd'ation, and Wcl'ar. 
Appr:al 4 the
Oy 
:.ppr,.l'lht Pi 
oview Board amd;'u.: 3Znoral '41.1 tutao-,
,tvre.lly 
x' .t the d.ag being employed from the applloatign of V* -,z
1J .
.- ... 
.
.
-..Cls-, Etd'ation, and Wcl'ar. 
Appr:al 4 the
Oy 
:.ppr,.l'lht Pi 
oview Board amd;'u.: 3Znoral '41.1 tutao-,
,tvre.lly 
x' .t the d.ag being employed from the applloatign of V* -,z
1J .
.- ... 
.
.
-..

--- PAGE BREAK ---

new drug section bf the Food, Dru, and Couseic Act d~ii thi
" " 
ves ational ntufty.. The Military Departments 
4- 
Vil 
t o-4 
t, 
'
Food 4nd Dr.a MAb.. ' ration (copio. to 06B) umncoaiv) ,tindinae is.;
soci&tuvd rdi-h cuc). 
1.udiac which FDA should be awaro 'o :±if Ordep, t. 
"
ae a sound evaluation of Oon-Iolrssited' Studies propoqd on the sei-
or -si4ar dru. 
Addtiowaaly, the Military Dopartr.nte, Vii di4is.uit.
... 
their claositied Lve3tigSatofs of drugs periodicSly s'th FDA per-M
who have proper sucurity elebrance.
B. In the case of anon-classified security research programs sponsOred
by the Deyartment" of Defense and conducted within its research
facilities or for tn Del tent upon contract, copies ot the
request for apprcval subm'tted to the appropriate Review Board#
the Review Board' ' evaluation and approvaL. ain 
notice ot approval 
"
by the appropAiate Sureoen General will be filed with the FU as
the clim r'oe oxe:aption for the Investigationa 
drug.
C. When th. N .atent of De'enhe performs clinical tests upcr. new
drug. bei.3 .y.naored by the pharnaceutical Industry# the ordinary
claim for exemption (Form 151 . of the Investigational Drug RegA
latiens) will be filed with thie 
FDA.
V. EFlCTIVE. DAMB 
AN!) IMPF o 
NATION
This Instr.otion is effect ve irediately. 
Two copies Cf implemnting
instructions chaLl be fo:.ardei to the Director of Defense Research
and Engineering witazn aLxty dayn.
HAROLD BlowN
Dir;.tor of Defense Research and Engi -eing
Inclosure .1
Memorandum of Unders 
nding

--- PAGE BREAK ---e fo:.ardei to the Director of Defense Research
and Engineering witazn aLxty dayn.
HAROLD BlowN
Dir;.tor of Defense Research and Engi -eing
Inclosure .1
Memorandum of Unders 
nding

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
",.K !.29 (Ince 
.)
.. : 12, "'
!.1Mo~fl"CU 
OF MMST1~AJDr.4
BETWErN Tia DZPA .E.r 
OF FPALT. 
EYJCATIOU, 
AND W lARE, /-:D THE
DEAX,.OF DEFMN!E CONCERNING INVESTIGATIONAL USE OF DRUGS
BY T" 
DEPA 
M.T OF DEFENSE
Section 505(a) of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, as amended
by Section 1O of P. L. 37-781, 76 Stat. 784, 21 U.S.C. -3c. 355, (1962
Supp.) established new procedures for the approval required before the
new drug can be introduced into interstate commerce. 
Section 355(i) of
Title 21, United Ctatts Code (1962 Supp.) establishes exenpttons from
the new ap proval procedures for drugs which will be used orny f-- manu-
facture of cther d_--.+s or for investigational purpcscz. 
That section
establishes t.e general busis for exemption and provf. ez t.'at the Secretary
of Health, Educati&:., and Welfare shall promulgate rt la tions to give
effect to the general guidance of the statute.
On January t, IJ)3 the Secretary published the reg: t.tl: nz in 25 Federal
Register 17 
(19635; the relations will eventual 
: 
p-. ear in Title 21,
Part 130, Secticn 130.3 of the Code of Federal Regu/:ticnL. 
These regu-
lations estabiv. t.e procedure and prescribe the r:e E ssary former to be
filed in order to exempt drugs to be used only for i .es tigational par-
poses fro.: the approval procedures of the Food, Drg .nd Cosmetic Act.
Purpose
The purpose L;' t.iz Memorandum of Understanding is t: st ite thie procedures
that will be followed by the Departments of Defense o -! health, Education,
and Welfare to insure that the requirements of the Ff lar ~l Fooci, 
'-ug, and
Cosmetic Act and the investigational drug regalationt isx;-ed under that Act
are fully met without jeopardizing or impeding the re iai-ements of national
security or the requLriments of Federal laws and reguLit'ons relating to such
use of drucuj.
The 
.s 
-- 
'. 
...
iit'iry L'partmnct hao -
i: 
:-u
itn 
his 
,'Af'Ln 
..U:. 
"!t-vlcw Bour," which caredLIk considers each
research praxysal from itz own agency or from outside 
contractors wlich
may involve ,the use of huran subjects in the clinical tn' estigation of new
drues. 
Each "hevlew Fc-arl" i 
staffed with proressio.-Ll people capable of
performing conf.t:.. 
:r;, 
a 
o 
='ch research proposals t( in'ure adequate
protection of hir.az. subjects. 
The Deiartment of Defen.;e assumes full re-
sponsibility for the protection of humans involved in ,e eear-h under its
sponsorship whether this involves investigational drug:: 
r other bhzares.jects. 
The Deiartment of Defen.;e assumes full re-
sponsibility for the protection of humans involved in ,e eear-h under its
sponsorship whether this involves investigational drug:: 
r other bhzares.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt of Defen.;e assumes full re-
sponsibility for the protection of humans involved in ,e eear-h under its
sponsorship whether this involves investigational drug:: 
r other bhzares.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18
Before a 
n 
-:.y 
O 
performed with an investit.* 
ral 
dr,;,
the plan of 
t 
,. 
- rtinent details muzt be 
ub 
t, 
to
the apprupriu-.. " 
>.,"," 
the Board must indicate itz ay rovalI
and the azPr.1 
:... 
b 
ir 
, by the appropriate Srgeon General.
Under these 
tfer-.. 
, 
t:, 
the apartments of Defense, and !Yeulth, Education,
andl Welfare a:',g 
-
Ct 
t*.h 
flowing procedure meets the r 
'.AireeUntc of the
Food, Druoi, 
u, 
JG-:t;.c Act:
1. 
Clinical iv 
tigatioes thit are classified for reL-onz of national
security wil I 
the filing of a formal "Claim fo- Zxeption" to
the Department of "eu2_t', 
Educationo and Welfare. 
Apprcva. of the test by
the appropriate. 
hvi w ::ourd and 
argeon Genaral will aut~o.atically exempt
the druZ bein- -
.cye1 
frc- th: application of the new ir i"- section of the
Food, Drug, ar,1 
L:t/ Act Jurlr. the investigational 
-
.
he L-epart-
mert of Defen: e w*Il r' ort to .tA findings associated 4,Ith zuch ctudicc
which FDA s o; 
be aware of in order to make a sound ezil-k.ation of Lon-
classified 
tulz 
pr :.,&s 
on the same or similar drl.::. 
Aditio-aiy,
the Depart.ent 
-- ±- 
;I 
discus- its 
classified .are.tigationz of
drugs ,eriodcaL, 
: 
rzonne 
who have proper 
:ui:y clearance.
2. 
In the c4. 
c;" nn-cla-zzified security resea:'1 
roA, rans sponsore-
by the Departent 
a:n'vne 
a~i conducted within it 
,. 
-earch facili!iAez
or for the 
., 
"n 
contract, copies of the rc 
,..t for approval
submitted tc th 
-
'.:at 
JX: Review Board, the R 
It .z oard's evU-uaticn
and approval, -an: n i 
cf a-proval by the appropria .
u: ,on General A1l
be filed with 
-..
:J 
th .
cai 
for exemption for 
ir, vk:tiiaticnal drug.
3. 
When t!e 
-. 
rt- :.t of Defense performs clinic
drugs being, : 
:..:',-Q by t';. 
ji".r aceutical industry.,
for exemption (:-"o= 
!:171 :f the Investigational Drug r
filed with the 
A 
Lr=; A-cnistration.
TeP 
Yhte 
1e8et 
of
FE.B 18 1364
*: te ;tz upon ntw
.E'2laAonz) vilI be
., jW1 
j A 4
(date)I
(date),
for exemption (:-"o= 
!:171 :f the Investigational Drug r
filed with the 
A 
Lr=; A-cnistration.
TeP 
Yhte 
1e8et 
of
FE.B 18 1364
*: te ;tz upon ntw
.E'2laAonz) vilI be
., jW1 
j A 4
(date)I
(date)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19
0.1 
OFI'NL US'"S VY
A 
KENDMNT NO. 
I TO
MHORANDUH OF AGREEtINFT
ON RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE
CONDUCT OF RESEARCH 
AND DEVEIOPNT FOR
DEFENSE AGAINST ClIEMICAL AGENTS
BETWEEN Thi
C0.XANDING GENERAL, 
US ARMY MATERIEL COMMAND
AND
TIM SURGEON GENERAL, DFPARTrNT OF ARMY
AUGUST 1972
Paragraph 5b of the December 1971 Agreement is to be replaced with the following:
b. 
The Cormmandina. General, 
US Army Materiel Cornand, will establish and
mait.iin liaison vith the staff of The Surgeon General throui;h the Special
Assistant for Chemical and Biological Affairs, US Army Materiel Command.
When requested, this ofiicer iUill provide advice and coordination to The
Surgeon General in the fields of chemical operations and activities.
FOR THE SURGEON GENERAL:
IC 
'AR70 R. 
TAYLOR. 
M4.o
Major General, 
6C
Special Assistant for
Research and Development
FOR THE CON.UAN'DING GENERAL
ARMY 1ATERISL COM.VAND:
ClIARLE.t-"1. 
1110kiEA,;/OR.
Major -General, LiA
Chief of Staff
Date

--- PAGE BREAK ---neral, 
6C
Special Assistant for
Research and Development
FOR THE CON.UAN'DING GENERAL
ARMY 1ATERISL COM.VAND:
ClIARLE.t-"1. 
1110kiEA,;/OR.
Major -General, LiA
Chief of Staff
Date

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
WOR,.OFFICIA+L UZEE ON LY
HE.:ORANDU.4 OF ACREE.ENT
ON RESPO:SIBILlTJES FOR THE
COb'DUCT OF R SLkRCH AND DEVELLOP..T FOR
DEFENSE AGAINST CHEMICAL AGENI'S
BE 
LN THE
COM. 'ADhIXG GENERAL, 
US ARMY MATERIEL CO.11AND
AhD
THE SURGEON GENERAL, 
DEPARTMENT OF ARMY
N OVEMBER 1971
1. References.
a. 
DOD Instruction '5160.5, 7 February 1964.
b. AR 705-5, 9.Apr1l 1968.
c. AR 70-55, 18 May 1970.
2. General. a. Under the provisions of reference lb, the Cort anding
Generai,- 
Arr. Materiel Co:Land Is charred with the price responsi-
bility for chemical weapons and defense and The Surgeon General with
the attendant rcspons.dility for the medical aspects of- chcr-ical weapons
and defense.
b. 
This Agrceent between the Cor.-nding General, %.S Ary Materiel
Command and The Surgeon General clarifies and dcline4.e i specific roles
of each in the cotiduct of research and development on ti-e deicnsive
aspects of chericis. agents. 
This Agreement does not .-:ly modification
of the Department cf the krry assigned responsibililtis of tiie Coubuanding
General, US Ar:': .Materiel Co, iand In research and de-.l.-.Pent matters.
The term "responsibility" as used herein refers to th. agreed roles of
the subject parties in the prosecution of research ::n. development on
the defensive aspec:s of chemical agents. 
Also, this Agree=ent does not
prohibit direct communication on technical matters between the Office of
The Surgeon General and the Biomedical Laboratory; Edgowood Arsenal.
c., 
Program guidance and review on radical research for" defensive
aspects of chemical operations will be carried out Jointly by The Surgeon
General and the Coz.an-ing Geteral, 
US Ar-y ;!ateric 
Co .and. 
This
guidance and funding will be imple.,:eted throu.i, VS Arr-," %Nateriel Cor.and
channels. 
A:nn'al prc-ra.: -Iannirig and evaluation of technical progress
of the progrx. will be made Jointly by 7he Sut.e'on General and the
Corrianding GC. -n a, 
US Arz" 
.terlcl 
Cof.iand.or.and
channels. 
A:nn'al prc-ra.: -Iannirig and evaluation of technical progress
of the progrx. will be made Jointly by 7he Sut.e'on General and the
Corrianding GC. -n a, 
US Arz" 
.terlcl 
Cof.iand.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nn'al prc-ra.: -Iannirig and evaluation of technical progress
of the progrx. will be made Jointly by 7he Sut.e'on General and the
Corrianding GC. -n a, 
US Arz" 
.terlcl 
Cof.iand.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21
d, 
The Special Assistant to The Surfcon Gencral for Research and
Development, who is also the Comanding Gcnerbl, 
US Ar. 
Medical. Research
and De;elop~ent Ccz_-.nd, will be the point of-contact for The Surgeon
General for all "tters concerning the Biomedical Laboratory, Edgewood
Arsenal.
3. 
Ar=-v .Medical D&:art.ent Personnel. 
a. Uder the provisions of
reference Ic, 
ie Surgeon , r.-raI. Will assign to senior 
medical Corps
officers, as r.utu3lly agreed upon between T.e Srgeon General and the
Cotanding General, 
US Army lateriei Co:-..ad, to serve as Director and
Deputy Director of the ibioxedical Laborat.ory at Edge--'ood Arsenal. 
The
normal tcur of diay of each officer will be four years, the first two
as Depuzty Direcrar and the last two as Director. 
The senior Medical
Corps officer, in addition to direct .ng the research programs of the
lbiocedical Laboratory, will serve on the staff of the Technical Director
of Edg.'ood Arstrl as the Associate Technicat Director for Medical. 
In
the ab.scnce of tl,e directorr of the Bio-.dical Laboratory, the Deputy
Director will ass-e the above responsibilities.
b. 
As Consultant to The Surgeon General on Medical Defense Against
Chemical Weapons, 
the Director of the Biomedical Laboratory will keep
1he Surlg:ott General informed of the current states of the program on
medical c fense against chemical agents. 
He will in turn receive pro-
fesslr;.. 
z.xdicil advice and £Luida-ce dirt.ctly fror. The Sureenn General.
c. The efficiency report of the Director of the Biomedical Laboratory
will be prepared by the Teciinical Director, Edg -cood Arsenal. 
the CorrAnd-
Ing Ofilcer of Edge'wood Arsenal will attach a letter of corrent to the
report. 
71:e report will be indorsed by the Spicial Asssistant to The
Surgeon General for Research and Development atid revi_, d by The Surgeon
General. 
The De?ury Director will be rated by the Dire,.tor, indorsed
by the Co"..atidlitg Officor of ldgewc.'d Arienal, and revised b-. the
Special Assistant to The Surgeon General for Rtsearch a'd Development.
d. 
The Surgeon General will assign to the Biomedical Laboratory
such other Atrn 
Iedical Departr:ent personnel as are required and authorized
on the Table of Distribution and mutually agreed upon between The Surgeon
qener.al and Co:.-d:iding General, 
US Ar::. Materiel Co:.-2nd. 
Ite Special
Ass i can t to The Surgeon General for Leearchs ail levelopne;it will rnonltor
Arr. Y.-dical Dc;.:rtU.eat perqo;nel pousiLions and a,.sist The Surgeon General
in tl:. selection of personnel to fill 
tlen.
V-. 
te 
of Vol t.: ter. 
A5 St'" ect. of !:.c-c.arrh. 
a. 
Tie Director of the
Bio..cL'Xical La'.oratory, by direction of tie Secretary of the Arty, has
full proiessio;,,i, 
... 
, ci-&-vil, 
b.:; 
.. ii 
y :ll 
.
for
planning a.nd control of experir-ents involving v0±nllieers ucilized in
res :,rcl; perfor.-.ed at or under control of Edgcenol-d Arseaal.ll proiessio;,,i, 
... 
, ci-&-vil, 
b.:; 
.. ii 
y :ll 
.
for
planning a.nd control of experir-ents involving v0±nllieers ucilized in
res :,rcl; perfor.-.ed at or under control of Edgcenol-d Arseaal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---.. 
, ci-&-vil, 
b.:; 
.. ii 
y :ll 
.
for
planning a.nd control of experir-ents involving v0±nllieers ucilized in
res :,rcl; perfor.-.ed at or under control of Edgcenol-d Arseaal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
' 
C0 
1 
cF:r., Uzr OAl',
b. 
In compliance with AR 70-25, 26 Marc. 1962, and/or AR 40-7,
30 Septc:;.ber 1969, the Director of the tionciical Laboratory 
-ill
submit thru US Ary :ateriel Co.-and all research protocols (written
.proposals for stmadIes) utilizing volunteers as subjects for investiga-
tior. of representative co.pounds of new classes of chemicals, not
previously approved, to The Surgeon General for review and forwarding
to the Secretary of the Army for approval prior to initiation of research
studies. 
&o research with cle.-ical agents usin- volunteers will be under-
taken without the written consent of the Scctetary of the Arty.
c. 
A-l research task plans utilizing volunteers must be unanimously
approved by the s.,vood Arsenal .cdical.'Rev .nw goard, consisting of the
physician respuosible for the research plan, the chiefs of the Medical
Research Divisicn and the Clinical Research Branch, 
and the Director and 
,.
Deputy Director of the Bio=edical Laboratory.
d; 
Upon approval by the Edze,:ood Arsenal Medical Review Board,
copio 
vi all re.caich task plar.s 
ii:-r. 
. ,:lunteers will be sibitted
to The Surgeon General for information vnd inclusion in reference files.
5. 
Liaison. 
a. 
The interdependence of all phases of chemical warfare
resi3-l 
lecessitates the full collaboration and t.rinely exchange of
information between the Co.;anding General, VS Arvr.- Materiel C'r.r..and
and The .'rgcan Gencral. 
Effective coordination will be ;-ainrained and
aly neeke:! adjustrents to the program,, rrioriticz, 
-Id facilities will
be made when required.
b. 
The Surgeon General and the Commanding General, US Arty Materiel
Command will coordinate the assignr.ent of a Cerical Corps officer of
appropriate grade, training, and experience tc the staff of the Cor-aanding
General, 
US Army Medical Research and Dcvzluprent Command. 
This officer
will 
provide advice and coordination to Tihe Strgeon General in the fields
of chemical operations and activities. 
lie will (stablish and r-aintain
liaiso, with Ole Weapons Div s 
Io, Pescarch, Devehp.ent and Engineeritig
Directorate, lleiadquarters, 
US Army Hateriel Co.-mand, 
aad its subordinate
coiuanes. 
.
e. 
The Surgeon General %:i]l establi!.h and naiiitain liaison with the
&taff of the Co-.-ndiug Geaciaxi , US Ar;:/; :IaLeri.1 Cor.-and throuLh tile
Chief, 'C.n.iC.l 
and iiologica] 
iq;ent Defet-se Eranch, Preventivc ".edicite
ke:t-a ,- 
tivi 
io 
, ;:e 
ica !" 
c-ctorate, US Arr-:"::.ia 
Researc', 
ind
De\'lo:,rtnt Co.-:.ind. 
The Cieif, Cher.ical and iNiolt"-ical Afqent defense
];ranc.tt 
;. 
,. 
' 
, 
o~', 
US Ari.;." 
-.
': 
¢; 
' 
-r: 
h :n,.d 
) ,: 
_ 
-:.
Cotrajand, will also serve -
Special Project Officer for :cdie;l Diefcne
Agnitr-*t Clnical and Bioloical hea'.ons within the Directorate of Health
anid Li vi 
LU,L. 
,t, 
9 0. 
L 
I C. 
;3c 
c 
n 
. c-
3rajand, will also serve -
Special Project Officer for :cdie;l Diefcne
Agnitr-*t Clnical and Bioloical hea'.ons within the Directorate of Health
anid Li vi 
LU,L. 
,t, 
9 0. 
L 
I C. 
;3c 
c 
n 
. c-
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---rve -
Special Project Officer for :cdie;l Diefcne
Agnitr-*t Clnical and Bioloical hea'.ons within the Directorate of Health
anid Li vi 
LU,L. 
,t, 
9 0. 
L 
I C. 
;3c 
c 
n 
. c-
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23
d. 
%here appropriate, the Army Medical Departr.ent viIl seek partici-
pation of the rsedical services of the Navy, Air Force, and US Public
Health Service in providing qualified'techaica 
and professional personnel
for either. duty or training assignr.ents to the Biowedical Laboratory,
Edgewood Arsenal.
6. 
Publications. a. 
Any articles origtnatilt 
in the Bionedical Labora-
tory will be cleared in accordance with chamtpc, dated 7 April 1971, 
to
Section II, 
paragraph Sc(3), Ait360-.5, or other applicable regulations
published subsequently.
b. Edgewood Arsenal reports containing rLcocm.enlations concerning
medical defense against che-icnl agents vill be sub:.ittcd to 7he Surgeon
General for cor-. nts or concurrence before publication or tran.:rittal
to higher headquarters.
7. 
Joint 's\ 
.cc-T.G 
A..usorv Co--ittee On medical l /€-'ects Of Defe,-e
Ai*nst Cih.:-ica 
;!-ent-.. 
a. 
iinc purpose oi tite Whoy, Coz.ittee, estab-
lished in 
accordance with AR 15-1, 
14 January 1966, will be:
(1) 
To serve in an advisory capacity to the Coz-;-.anding Gen,,ral, US
Army Materiel Co.=.and and The Surgcon General (throu-h tne Special Assistant
to The Surf.con 
general for Rcsearehi and I)evcloprent) on ratters relating
to the r:eical aspects of defei-e aj;aiist cih,-.ical 
,r':Is.
(2) 
To reviewt and evaluate the in-servicc and contract research and
developtr~nt programs conducted utiaer thi., Agreer.ent.
(3) 
To evaluate the procedures for use of iolurteers as subjccts of
research to insure ~txirur., safety and ro!t efficient procedures in hu .an
experir enta Liolt.
b. 
The Corzzittee will con.ist of six civilian r,'::l.-rs who ate recog-
nized authorities in appropriate technical fields. 
Three rerAber!. will be
appointed by the Cor.-.andin, (;oneral, 
US Ar;.v *!ateriel Cor-.nard ;-rd three
by The Surgeon General. 
The Con::anding Ceneral, 
US Ary lateriel Cozind
and The Surcgeon Cener.iJ will each desir:nate one liais.on reprcstc.tat ive
tq the C :.-ittee, ".ho ":ill 
serve as coordiiti.tor. 
t,;,resert.ativ..- 
f the
Navy, Air Yorce, ,i.tl US I'ubl'c. health Servic,. will 1,- invIted to attend
n;evt iI.:; 
oi the C.i,.: itLee as o servers.
t 
1. "he Co'.-xi tLCt, Will r.. -:at 
lea;.t on:.e a ycl 
.L 
Ld ,.sro:,d Ar-nal
for a c itic.;l r 
o\'i¢.: 
af Lh. :icical voPit,-:.r 
.
-.
:.d osce : yv 'r
ill I'iti)ton, 
VC, 
a1Leraati., at the Office of "iie Surlgeon Geii,-rl and
at headquarters, CS 
.rz"I xaLexrie. 
CorM-.,ui.r a c itic.;l r 
o\'i¢.: 
af Lh. :icical voPit,-:.r 
.
-.
:.d osce : yv 'r
ill I'iti)ton, 
VC, 
a1Leraati., at the Office of "iie Surlgeon Geii,-rl and
at headquarters, CS 
.rz"I xaLexrie. 
CorM-.,ui.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24
*Jc; 
,,ii ,, 
.
d. 
The tenure of rrcbers of the Corittee, other than the liaison
representatives, will be three years. 
Iwo members (one appointed by
the Co=_anding Gereral, 
US Arry Materiel Comand and one Appointed by
The Surgeon CcIItral) will be dropped annually and will not be eligible
for reappoinLre.t for one year.
e. All repotts a nd rccon.iendatfo,% arising out of Cor.mittee action
will ue submitted to the Corandit:g Gcraeral, 
US Ar.i Hateriel Comand
and Tae Surgeon General.
S. 
Eeview i.md 'X vision. 
This Agrec.ont %iIll be reviewed annually, or
upon r 
o 
i,, 
.: 
,.,ter 
party, and 
'il) 
be revised by joint action as
often as r.ecesa ry.
IL 
H. JL:.:,IdG$, Jr., X.D.
Lieutenant General
te SLrgeon General
Dcpar--tznt of the Army
Date
General, VSA
Corrxanding General
US Army Materiel Cormand
Date

--- PAGE BREAK ---often as r.ecesa ry.
IL 
H. JL:.:,IdG$, Jr., X.D.
Lieutenant General
te SLrgeon General
Dcpar--tznt of the Army
Date
General, VSA
Corrxanding General
US Army Materiel Cormand
Date

--- PAGE BREAK ---

25
Senator KENNY. That is an internal memorandum that says that
the regulations by the Army say they are to be subjects for investiga-
tion, not what the earlier agreement provided with FDA which says
research for each of the proposals.
I wonder if you could comment on that. That certainly does not
appear to be what the understanding was between the Army and the
FDA.
I)o you think there is adequate supervision when you just get
representatives?
I)r. SCiTMnyr. I would rot know. We are not familiar with that
memorandum.
Senator KENNY. The point is whether you are familiar or not
familiar with it, you can examine it and comment in addition to your
testimony, but is it your understanding if they agree to submit each
protocol, and then you saw regulations that said you will have rep-
resentative compounds, is that the same as each, as far as your under-
standing?
Dr. Scminmr. No, that is not, and it would depend in part on whether
these were studies to be done under IND if they would be classified.
I really am at a loss to respond to that.
Senator KENNF.Dy. The onlv point that I am asking you to respond
to is whether there can be adequate supervision or monitoring if you
get a representative sample rather than the examination of each
protocol.
I would think that. you would be able to respond to that.
.Dr.-SCHMIMD, 
We generally examine every protocol. I think it would
be important to look at every protocol.
Senator KENNEDY. That is the only way, is it not, to get. a respon-
sible review, to examine each protocol rather than a representative
protocol ?
Dr. Scmimir. Yes.
Senator KENNEDY. Would you have made an agreement with the
Army if they said, "We are going to give you a sample protocol"?
Would that have been satisfactory to you ?
Dr. SCmimir. Not for the nonclassified research, no, sir.
Senator KENNEDY. We will hear from Major Johnston later on.
But, in a memorandum of his in October 1974, he points out the
proposed memorandum has been received as requested, and the arrange-
ments for protection of the rights of human subjects are inadequate
according to the current Government and National Standards, al-
though some deviation from usual practice might be justified by
the need to practice security, but that certain basic standards must be
involved and each case should be reviewed by an Army Investigational
Drug Review Board and bv the Human Use Committee when it is
established, and no approval should be granted to allow investigation
to experiment with entire classes of compounds.
That, I would think, as Dr. Johnston points out, would have been
required by FDA.
Dr. SCHMUYr. I would agree with the meaning and intent of that
la-st memorandum.
We have a number of questions about details of our own interac-
tion, and sometime ago we scheduled meetings with the Department ofI would agree with the meaning and intent of that
la-st memorandum.
We have a number of questions about details of our own interac-
tion, and sometime ago we scheduled meetings with the Department of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26
Ddfaao review in detail such matters as you are now touching on.
I think in the past they have been inadequately described.
Senator KENNwY. Just finally, there is a characterization of this
relationship between the FDA and the Army pointed out by Major
Johnston in another memorandum, which we will make a part of the
record of March 10, 1975.
Careful attention should be given to examine the full details of the
10-year period of breach of the Army's agreement with FDA. Be-
cause of the I)OD-FRA agrement, which is the subject of a current
GAO investi gion; (2) Human subjects were involved and it is pos-
sible that follow-up studies may be indicated for some of them; and
(3) the secretiveness and closed-shop atmosphere of the biomedical
laboratory, which is mainly responsible for a decade of broken trust
with theFl)A, still exists.
[The material referred to follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ss and closed-shop atmosphere of the biomedical
laboratory, which is mainly responsible for a decade of broken trust
with theFl)A, still exists.
[The material referred to follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

27
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
OFFIQIK OF THE SURGEON GENERAL
WASHINGTON. 0 Q AU14
SGRD-HA 
March 10, 1975
MEMORANDUIM FOR: 
ASSISTANT SURGEON GENERAL FOR RESEARCH AID DEVEWfIIENT
SUBJECT: 
Investigational Use of Drugs by the'Biomedical Laboratories
1. 
The purpose of this memorandum is to formally call attention to certain
problems involving the use of investigational drugs at the Biomedical
Laboratories, Edgewood Arsenal, and to suggest some guidelines for corrective
action.
2. The Department of Defense and The food and Drug Administration signed
a Memorandum of Understanding Concerning Investigational Use of Drugs by
the Department of Defense in 1964. 
The purpose of this agreement was to
prevent undue delays in the conduct of vital defense research which were
thought to be possible if the FDA processed DOD proposals under the newly
passed investigational drug regulations. The condition under which the FDA
entered into this agreement was that no clinical investigation would be
undertaken unless the research protocol had received prior approval from a
professionally qualified "Review Board" within the services and by The
Surgeon General of the service. Furthermore, it was agreed that all un-
classified investigation would be reported to the FDA. The work at the
Biomedical Laboratories was clearly in -the minds of those who requested this
FDA-DOD agreement since few other facilities were engaged in human experi-
mentation so clearly related to national defense.
3. A new DOD-FDA Memorandum of Understanding was signed in October of 1974
and subsequently published in the Federal Register. 
(TAB A) 
The "Background"
section preceding that agreement cites the experience in operating under the
previous Memorandum from 1964 to 1974 and states (in part) that "the DOD has
been able to effectively carry out it's 
responsibilities for national security
without compromise of the intent of the above-cited statutes and regulations."
The record shows, however, that with respect to work done at the Biomedical
Laboratories, this statement is inaccurate. 
The "intent" of the regulations
referred to was that all clinical investigations of new drugs in humans should
be subjected to an independent professional review. Yet, there is no evidence
that the Biomedical Laboratories consistently submitted its research protocols
to the Army Investigational Drug Review Board (AIDIB) for approval or that
(until this year) The Surgeon General took action to inform the laboratory of
its legal responsibility to do so. 
Attached to this memorandum at TAB B is
a list of projects performed at the Biomedical Laboratories. 
No documentation
70-026 0 - 76 - 3to inform the laboratory of
its legal responsibility to do so. 
Attached to this memorandum at TAB B is
a list of projects performed at the Biomedical Laboratories. 
No documentation
70-026 0 - 76 - 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28
SUBJECT: 
Investigational Use of Drugs by the Biomedical Laboratories
of approval can be found for these in AIDRB records.
4. 
Careful attention should be given to examining the full details of this
10 year period of breech of the Army's agreement with FDA because: 
1) The
DOD-FDA agreement is the subject of a current General Accounting Office
investigation; 2) human subjects were involved, and it is possible that
followup studies may be indicated for some of them; and 3) the secretiveness
and "closed shop" atmosphere at Biomedical Laboratories, which were mainly
responsible for a decade of broken trust with the FDA, still exist.
5. The situation at the Biomedical Laboratories presents a threat of public
embarrassment for the DOD and the Army. Implementation of the following
recomendations will demonstrate a clear intention to examine the record,
correct previous problems and assure that human experimentation at Biomedical
Laboratories will be exposed to continued constructive review.
6. Recommend:
1) 
A proposed letter for The Surgeon General's signature outlining
reporting and approval requirements to Biomedical Laboratories has been
prepared and is at TAB C.
2) A full investigation of work performed at Biomed Labs over the past
decade should be undertaken by appropriate TSG professional personnel to
ascertain if any corrective action is needed with respect to previous
volunteers.
3) 
The human experimentation at Biomedical Laboratories should be more
closely monitored by The Surgeon General. 
This might best be done by a
monitor who is physically present at the laboratory much of the time.
CONCURRENCES:
MICRAEL V. O 
N, 
M.D.
CPT, MC 
-
Chief, Human Use Review Office

--- PAGE BREAK ---IuIV5rTIGATIO'NAL USE OF D31UGS BY
1H 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFEN$E
Mesmano dum of Underitai6ing Between
the Fod aid Urur Ad nitstratmoi" and
te Department of Wifense .

Pur-utnt to the notice published in tile
rllsrut.

fLt-ea 
of October 3.

104 t39
Ilt 3j:'11 that future affcemelia or
Isn..

ttala of ulitirst-ndillnl 
bettecn
tip,- I tnd .tnd Dru7 Admlnitratiol and
-
up.I td be ii 
iliAnii-d i tle PFOfIAL
R- q: " t the Co:m 
snioler of Flood sood
.A + 
n,"'tun 
of Uncierciatudinz was
wi.m~~ltt ito41 iielted by the food and
1'; 
cflmlil 
.

lil 
and thle D pest.

Itr -it tci DI feet , oit Au.-t 12.

1074 and
(lt+:+r'_-4.

19 4.

resalctoo,+.

replacing
alt 
#!&It aa5 s &Incd in IP64.

This Inlcln-
or ",..urn.

sih.chi estlblilic' 
proccduirc
to oc followed by the ipartm Int of De-
lo- -
nd he Food and 1 uir Admints-
trat.un s.er.r-'tui 
the Invcstlgatiosa-11 ile
cI usur.

by lie IJtperait 
nt of De1.smc.

re-d'v as follows:
Sir'toetl 
Its, 
or 11"oessatrlsuto attiott
vte l< 
Ato D I v AvittlolaraTldt are
auot Dooraritot 
or Dertist CUouedtiniie
as $%ioanowit.

Ust or Damon ae, vils
1.0- 1 4StIN49 l or Des ab
Th 
Departlant of Defe-ae IlsertiraIft
called D019) anS t.e Food aid Dou Admin-
i'.

'sion ti the Delirtnbrut of ilekath.

Fdit.

eaf',.t, an I Utelfare Ihtwrein..tter called Ft)i)
l.er.

1" jointly eet 
be the terms aod con-
di %a.

-as describedl hereinl
r.

-#, e To Islt lih the pr,;cedures to be
louha .l, by tl 
f1epartnent of Defense" And
toe t-id And Dru-t A lmilrt- + 
.iWva rg-rdl..g
t1% la-;gatI .al ust N' drrye by tie i.

-
t..

-rrnt of tlefe; te.

This 3i4e~icranditru of
tilet of ite ae iV.

I" 
replace& the current
n,&.a.idus of Uodersla&-oAing signed Io
8e- I yirad Scion 50Sf () 
of the Federld
Ill*<l Liruc.

and CoseitIC Act.

m ancendcAd
by w-CIVM 101 of ib.

L r7-741.

16 Stat 754;
31 U-c.

ISe1a) 
(19141) 
.tahIlIhtl 
prOts-
d'sr.-l fr the approval required before a tiew
tri' can be lOticotuce 
Idinto interstate noste-
L 
i.

$t 
lio, 
S0$(i) of the act f 1 USC.ISe1a) 
(19141) 
.tahIlIhtl 
prOts-
d'sr.-l fr the approval required before a tiew
tri' can be lOticotuce 
Idinto interstate noste-
L 
i.

$t 
lio, 
S0$(i) of the act f 1 USC.

8 s4S011 
) estsbtas eempuon from the W
29
NOTICES
fitule& procrdurtS for t01%' 
Ihith AIi be
ned 
cOLIty for ranfl.-c * ro of Otler dros 
t I
,or ln•t4eiigtiullal plom'.

-
Ihat s 
Oritl
provldls t e aittl rl) ;i 
ltChe i'uLltU.tol to
gio ellend to the rci(1161 riidubiit( o Love
str.tut4.

pron ul..%!cd I:s 21 (tIt 31J I IIr-
mcrly 130 31 by Secret iry of Health.

FAuca.

tion.

atd wYejtrc.

llcwa ferrilstlons r&%%.

blob tlte pucedtre, arid prectibe the nec'-
sIty forms 90 be flrd Il orter tb eaemp,
Oru,:l to be 'ied only for Investigaional
p~.upoie; from thme apptovs pruvedures of the
FcecrmI Food.

Drugc.

arid ( o.ttie~te Act
A 31en.0it 
k I.,n of 
Ulrdertia 
ldoig 
.a
&., 
.e4i bw thie Depoi-r .9'1 of Deftt, 
aud
Ita'l.h.

E dcalbon.

5.1d i 
ieh l 
in I194 to
ii-te the procedure' 
that sll be follosed
It 1ns 
c 
ire that Ite reqvir 
tnietIs of the Tfet.

ttl koad Drug.

anid 
o'inct c 4et and the
Ifi'titi.

ioniii druc grrtlttools Itllled under
that act are full9r 
le% 
mtautotit "opardlzlm.$
r unpieding the reflutrewnts of tiatlo l.*1
secrty at the requisrn nts of Federal loss
sti recmtlorln rellrig to sIch ue of drulls
"a 
ureon Oeimeral of •% h Mtlltary
Department has elt-blihed ollthias his odice
a lornall "Relotw Ioard" which Carefully
cora idcra eatch rteirJh lcropoel from Its
own 
Wrincy or from outsi de contractors or
granttee which Intdrlo t11 to 
of human
&ue.Kta In the cIIckal Ineittsti 
flci ne 
1w
drugs rach -RoIevi 
S'ard 
Is staged with
hlchly qualSed prof etslonal 
capable of
pe+rfaiolug competent review Of Such re-
sea, lh presioal to ensure raulte prottrc-
ton of human sub 
le.

The DOD asMatiee
full rcspomibshillty for the protection of all
human iub4lcts Inolveed In research under
it& "oiiet.ioniii druc grrtlttools Itllled under
that act are full9r 
le% 
mtautotit "opardlzlm.$
r unpieding the reflutrewnts of tiatlo l.*1
secrty at the requisrn nts of Federal loss
sti recmtlorln rellrig to sIch ue of drulls
"a 
ureon Oeimeral of •% h Mtlltary
Department has elt-blihed ollthias his odice
a lornall "Relotw Ioard" which Carefully
cora idcra eatch rteirJh lcropoel from Its
own 
Wrincy or from outsi de contractors or
granttee which Intdrlo t11 to 
of human
&ue.Kta In the cIIckal Ineittsti 
flci ne 
1w
drugs rach -RoIevi 
S'ard 
Is staged with
hlchly qualSed prof etslonal 
capable of
pe+rfaiolug competent review Of Such re-
sea, lh presioal to ensure raulte prottrc-
ton of human sub 
le.

The DOD asMatiee
full rcspomibshillty for the protection of all
human iub4lcts Inolveed In research under
it& "oiiet.

hprlI whether this ivohl 
hW-
oeetgatlionat drtgs O other haraida Ilefora
- clinical tes 
niay be petfornd with an
InttcaIC€tl*nal drulg.

the plan of the leat
sld uth-e pertiotert details leftit be sub-
mioled to the ap-uWrlolatoe -Rfeiw board.-
ii 
9.-ud Ant- 
ln~le-v' 
-- poL -.

1 
.

-"4
'me .pprova must be confirm by the ap-
pit-pr;,te l3urceon Gencral
E,,ptr-ec 
In iperalmI.

order this Item-
mareollum of UvdcattaLm- fron 
fIt4; to
1974 Iilcates tlt 
the 1ial) wilerrs to ft
Itsid.vod.

of the 1tM thiol httnist sauluio
lift% been aodle"uitely protected in the DOD-
epeuited Wi 
ttea: that the D)D has brln
ae to 
te.cti, 
carry 0.11 i98 respolnlbtl-
twa for national security without canpro-
nit, of the Istalilt of the abo+ic-cited statutel
aid eraitlltion$.

ald tha Cetllain etauiptlitti
proatd 
the DOD rome mneeing the ordinary
relimtaemrni 
Of the lnrestigational new druig
r*_:.jatlu.a are no Icrner 
r necessary.

Accord-
Intlr.

the DOD and the TOA agree to the
fwlotolne new pr ,edures to meet the re.

quorementa of the IFedell ft*d Drug.the DOD and the TOA agree to the
fwlotolne new pr ,edures to meet the re.

quorementa of the IFedell ft*d Drug.

and
C4Mtle C Act eoo enlrig lIne'SttAltIonal 
ms
of drugs:
I sateance or acarsieW
iu1 f"lu.inel ffrin tite FDA 
1r0 have
ir f er %tc:rits ch sIule
I When the simiilie 
r 
1 
elu.riuilt of Coe
iits&PAr din'lte the stine at 
4e 
III lII9ll
II'AIsm..I I.

dr-i 
t 
fiotiI 
lll 
igh Pot )O
apstreed.

hase teen tted utoder t.e inst-
tiroAlsollil lois dill,!

rf.uvAtIuti sul"Clently 90
eatlblih 
icll 
rtal4-oej' 
-he certainly their
aitetv amod tfadac), 4leciat ad Nor #*view atnd
approval for buih vte sill be eflled eqpell-
tiouilr thiulh joint, ertlon bs reprtiests-
tlers of II* Drerlllwnlt of DeltImse and ine
rood aM: DruC Alln-;ttrmtien to onsalet
tiiniIY rVe 
, 
lmuui 
0 
to Ihe 111111Ui- Id.

The
DO 
aill report to the lill 
lI.m.41la.,--
elated sith such ti e %hieh inc IDA -hc
be aaare C4 in order to fillke a -'nimid esaiwj-
atioin of otier studft pgiopne on the ime
Or uImsiar drug
3 
10 all other elst arslaolng love clinical
teAung of 
aostiinal 
urugs united plo-
#rains sponsored by the DOD and co-duel
either by the DOID sithi t 9l8 osn re esch
Ifcilitles.

or foe tile DOD by a contcactor or
grant".

the ordinary prow-tlets of 2t CrFt
3121 formerly 130 31 of the Code c-f Fedalr
RIelattions governing the ilvoetgational
ta of new drugs in hunes being ahalh be
followed.

n.

INAMS A" 
4002 
a 
41 Or ?a 
CNlcfATM11
A.

Department of Defense
W*.hilgson.

DO 30314
II rool and Dillg AdmiltstratlmO
OO FIshers "no
Rockville, MD 3032
in 
IAlsolf *orvt-a
A.

Cot.

Edward J IIf,ycke
Director.

Profrational Services
Office of the Asuislant Sccretary oI De.

fense Illealth and Etirovnmeat)
Wahls igton.

DC 20201
T," 
PtOn" 
fIC3-1 
)-'k
a.

John Jennings.

MD.

A&%OCaito 
CoAnmisbioner for Mledilal At.

fairs.

19Cm-i
Food and Drugs Administ ration
foO Ci*hera lane
Rockvitle.

vIiD 2C452
Tetlphoute: (3011 443-4194
IV.

1,10 or A0,8923069"
Thisareesaeal, when aier-A$od by both
parties.--- PAGE BREAK ---

vIiD 2C452
Tetlphoute: (3011 443-4194
IV. 1,10 or A0,8923069"
Thisareesaeal, when aier-A$od by both
parties. oovers an Indetnlto period of Um
and Is subject to mwlliimitlo 
by mutual
consent by both parties. 0. LUTNHOIITYr
This igreemess: It entered Into under the
outhority of the Economy Act. approveiJ
June 30. 1532. aa amended. 31 U'SC. O-. Approved and acceptd for the Depatment
of Defense. "ihe Fond and Drulg Admlnlstratlon aid 
Acl
the Do jr~iaro nt of I lello 
afroe that:
I. C.in1ca lClin" tl)'ttlul that are clatll-
ie3 lot rea•o s of tusia le11trurity will not 
Dat4 to. 24/74
requile the 5ilivm: of a formal "CIlUm for
rFea.p1lon- to Ibe 
te 
A. Ithe DOD IsiaI be 
Appr4owl 
nl
sc4#ly re1ivorublo 
for 
wldeerim.ning 
si 
Drug AfistLra
ser- :ny classIftratIon of sucll research prol. tot# Approval lb teriaiate 
Review
h-ard 
aim 
Oulson 
;Zira 
of a teot
caa fl.ed fw reit4,ie 
f nit1onal i iriy 
Dale V91/74
s-di autoniatcat.l 
etempt time drug being
crnlo,.eI from II e applici tion of the reo 
frelilo dat
dru e 
It!lon of the Vuod. Dre. a"d Corenmtti¢ UnCrStandilig
Act duling such ln esticallonaxl itudy The 
kober 24. 1974. DOD Sll reroe to the PDA uncl.tsil 
find-
Inho siwia ted wlih riutih studies whIch Live 
Dated: NoV
MDA l ou1lil be as-ar of I 'mier to make a
ouind evaluatlon of nont cIsal*f4d st udile
proplwed cin the sans or slmllar drugs Addl- 
Associu
tiemali. the DWO will dilscue Its ¢lassied
lIveltI"atofs, of drugs onl a frequent baste 
IFR1 Doc.74-21f
V. idkcrishoe. fine A.tlotalit SPcltrrr. IeelflA e.G 
alafrosme uc. accepted for lhe Food an4
A Il. Scoitor. Cornmnissioer. end firung Adeimaeirllioi
e. This Memnoruindum of
became elfcute on Oc-
tober 21. 1074. SAM D. 7nW. at CommUlsioner /or
ComplncI- e. 12 Fled 11.57-74.44 
&=I
FlOllAt IStGI|tI. VOL 39, NO. 231--IOAY. NOVE0IMII I9. 1974

--- PAGE BREAK ---noruindum of
became elfcute on Oc-
tober 21. 1074. SAM D. 7nW. at CommUlsioner /or
ComplncI- e. 12 Fled 11.57-74.44 
&=I
FlOllAt IStGI|tI. VOL 39, NO. 231--IOAY. NOVE0IMII I9. 1974

--- PAGE BREAK ---

30
Feenrci 1 
g's A 
.d 
Pr I or to 
ov-. : ber 1971
fl!-rrarch llzn Ap.'ro-l3
10, a02 
6 rcb (.7 
Ify.-:.:i r.--torz )"1.itions 
oZ 1'ejpons SystcM2
10,003 
6 l'cb 67 
It.u-i I .:.tnrs I.,,,1.tons of Defensive Equipm.enc
10,20.; 
15 !.ar 69 
Tbce E;fc'of 
Lh 
ProrC.I,;ivC 
ensemble on Viatlarc(
Pcrfnk.iknce
12,101 
30 Jan 67 
EffLrt of Envi:c-n -n'. on l'cntration of Th,:ic
Atc-atr. .nJ Iri itaruit Ch-Lmicals throu-.h Ski,.n
12,107 
2* 
Y 
V.b 67 
A;'pl',,tl 
rnd Fru-ii-.. 
tai Ihy.-iology of Dcfense
12, 05 
5 'Aay 
(.6 
Th 
( 
iucste'r.I:.I 
;:i 
o I'hysostidrna in I
Acdentu:i 
15 
u.1 (, j 
Aif
12,219 
29 S,.p 69 
qu-nicative lv-t;I-.tion of P.,'acolew cally
1zu4'd Sensory 
'Ltd 
Cc.:nittvc befccts in Ilan
Ade-nlt, n 
17 V:v 69
12,2a5 
25 !: r'-. ;0 
Eva lu t-in o 
,.,.,, 
" ....
: 
."- 
-''
-:'.1.,:d 
ly 
L, 
to irr i... 
AZclnt-
12,7'61 
30 Jul 71 
t.l1. 
!-t;I.i>. 
of , 
i,- 
in Do;.f nn(' lian
13,40/ 
19 A': 67 
Def.n-e of SILA, 
.aWr.L CS
14 ,02 
9 Feb £6 
:..::or 
Dtt-.'nt 
Pro-r:,i 
4 rIT
14,10& 
17 lh=r 67 
Oif:ci,-it S.: 
i 
. .c.; 
an$ Pefcn..ive Asp
of A:":t'Ls :I 
.: .
L ::i 
, Syctc
14, 
08 
17 lic 70 
I:lc..,wrer:nt of Volatile )filuents ftca ,:-'n
f. 
nar rm,'a 
, 
-j..,_.

--- PAGE BREAK ---67 
Oif:ci,-it S.: 
i 
. .c.; 
an$ Pefcn..ive Asp
of A:":t'Ls :I 
.: .
L ::i 
, Syctc
14, 
08 
17 lic 70 
I:lc..,wrer:nt of Volatile )filuents ftca ,:-'n
f. 
nar rm,'a 
, 
-j..,_.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

31
Rc.so.-irch_' PI-.,-z A.pre .. 
A fter Ntoven.eer 1971
Approval"
Date
15 H.ir 72
IV Au- 
*
30 Jon 67
7 liar 72
30 Jvn 67
ri.-ced
3 Lay 72
lit I If
Effc-t or Inyl tIjtritc 
in Han
l',rcUL-,..,,,3 Absorption of Agente
A ,tudv n! lw-.An Ve.-nn3tg to Antlchiolincrri. &
Thor-: 
... Ic Compou,.d 
Under Severe Climatic
Cond r ,,.t -
"
Studie' 0:.in-: Oxtmes !. Prophylaxis tAeainst
Anticnol -i.stcr.-.so 
Agcnts
rze.enrc;a N .:n1
|:iL-,s r
12,0-l2
12, 3%g
Adc sdum
12.2-,)
•,,f. - ,,
A.t -'.*;
, 
;'i 
71 
rA 383.: Th . Fffcct. of Repeated Oral Doses in Man
14 Oct 7. 
I)'tCeTdnntl-i of a P: 'ch Test TWchliaque for
1 Nov 72 
'v. 
t;o 
f 
of AllerA.c and 1ilotocontact Der. .;Lttiu
to CI
25 Jan 72 
r,n-Inv. -ve Teceh iqt ec for ?Xonttorin- Cardiov.1rcul:
l'unictic.: -
rt.",LS of C. rdl: Perfor-,incc a:ad
Flood I r,';uvc in l!,-rn Under Dru- and Strc3
Condit .*or.'3
(:hc3c.~ 
I 
'.;.;.: 
I.y".:o~iv 
, 
lot. ic Cortolatiolls
'itli h v 
ncc Dara in i:3fl
29 
cb ' 2 
C(."': 292,196 - rLfc cts in :.n Alfter a Single
Oral 
...
9 Feb 72 
!cvelo:- -:'t of an in 
vivo test fnr glycolate
,:ro: ,'," i:1 : 
I 
by 
Mlibition of Topical
Pilot 
1,_ ::.iosis
15 iVi. 72 
1h:esti 
'e of thr Central Actior. of rA 3334 Hnd
U;(.t'td 
(her l: 
y-!otropic Aentrs by Use of l'ul,.l¢:try
1 Isov 7;P 
A DV,-, Cca:.-ion 
a Iapidly Actin Incarrcitant
18 Oct 7 
Ii:"el,: "t 
of a f, pid ProcedJ!r" for Detect!r,
Vl:ct o: ,.,!"'bi 
'r': 
A.n~-...-.i in( 
, ilallUCt11oFe0
,nid Cu. 
.,n Lon.trost 1 L. Drugs i 1,i re
23 }far /1 
::'ac 
;' 
.f Vi-.',tl Parx.ctcrr. in Volunteers
12,247
12,21
13, 3?9
-.., tl:,.r 1,3A 1:61 AfffINJ.

--- PAGE BREAK ---i in( 
, ilallUCt11oFe0
,nid Cu. 
.,n Lon.trost 1 L. Drugs i 1,i re
23 }far /1 
::'ac 
;' 
.f Vi-.',tl Parx.ctcrr. in Volunteers
12,247
12,21
13, 3?9
-.., tl:,.r 1,3A 1:61 AfffINJ.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

32
oTmo LTR )II.D 
D-rAFT
SGR.D-HR
SUBJ ECT: 
Investigational Use of Drugs by The Department of Defense
ThRU: 
Commander
US Army Materiel Commiand
AlTN: ACRD-WB
5001 Eisenhower Avenue
Alexandria, 
VA 
22333"
Cotmander
US Army Armament Command
Rock Island, Illinois 
61201
TO: 
Cotmiander
Edgewood Arsenal
Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland 21010
1. 
Reference is made to:
a. 
Army Regulation 40-7, dated 30 September 1969, subject: 
Use of
Investigational Drugs in Humans.
b. 
Memorandum of Understanding Between the Food and Drug Administration and
the Department of Defense Concerning Investigational Use of Drugs by the
Department of Defense, dated 21 November 1914. 
(Inclosure)
2. 
The purpose of this letter is to draw attention to federal regulations relevant-
to the use of investigational drugs in humans at the Biomedical Laborato 
44"
Edgewood Arsenal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---2. 
The purpose of this letter is to draw attention to federal regulations relevant-
to the use of investigational drugs in humans at the Biomedical Laborato 
44"
Edgewood Arsenal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

33
SGRD-1iR
SUBJECT: 
Investigational Use of Drugs by The Department of Defense
3. Reference lb, paragraph 3, outlines DOD responsibility fir reporting all
unclassified clinical testing of investigational drugs to the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) under the ordinary provisions of Title 21, Code of
Federal Regulations 312. 
Therefore the Biomedical Laborator)PP& and other
DOD laboratories are not exempted in any way from FDA regulations when clinical
studies are unclassified.
4. Under the provisions of reference lb, paragraph 1, clinical investigations
that are classified for reasons of national security will not require filing 
\-
of a formal "Claim for Exemption" to the FDA. However, all such investigation
must receive prior approval from the Army Investigational Drug Review Board
(AIDRB) 
and The Surgeon General and must be discussed with personnel from the 
*' 
-
FDA who have appropriate security clearances.
S. Each and every individual protocol, regardless of security classification,
which involves the use of an investigational drug (chemical compound) in a human
at the Biomedical Laboratory* must be approved in writing by the Army Investi-
gational Drug Review Board and The Surgeon General before the test is performed.
The provisions of AR 40-7 (reference la) must be followed exactly. 
It should
be clear that a blanket approval cannot be granted to investigate an entire
class of compounds. Investigation of each compoutid must be approved separately.
Changes in approved protocols must also be formally approve ,and annual reports
must be submitted promptly to the AIDRE.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---estigation of each compoutid must be approved separately.
Changes in approved protocols must also be formally approve ,and annual reports
must be submitted promptly to the AIDRE.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

34
SGRDIiR 
0"
SUBJE': 
Investigational Use of Drugs by the Department of Defense
6. The AIDRB is the authorized interface between the Army and the FDA. 
All
correspondence with the FDA from Army facilities must be directed through the
A*DRB 
unless direct communication with the FDA is authorized by AIDRB.
Amy questions about reporting requirements should be directed to
RQDA (SGRD-HR)M WASH DC 20314.
RICHAD R. 
TAYLOR, M.D,
Lieutenant General
The Surgeon General
CF: 
AMCSA-BC
AHN
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

35
I; 
atSo,
ROUTING AND TRANSMITTAL SLIP
TO 
,..e11s 
c,mcus.Att
0~. 
DATE 
coou"om#
-- tlALI 
iOtt 
AVID
mius
DAtt 
PER coft
SkITS1ALS 
Sig WE
DATE 
SSOAV&U
REMARKS
t5t140
LM 
UAW.~tm.rsiG' 
)A
pvol,,a, + 1, reaw- Cu 
4 
" 
.LwS:
A&, Ml f0fn,dlc 
0: .00j 
IV 
J 
1
#r6. 
P16". 
U14141 
11W , 
i 
t
(A 
~iS 1A"'j, 
L'SJ 
jdholv 
lo 
4AIS 004
a l>'4" r,c; 
... 
.
.. 
.
w v vt(o g*rJ
gift1 
-Dol) mou)"
Do NOT use this Iotm as a RECORD of approvaak. roncurrences.
disapproals. ckauances. and simiar actiorsi
FROMOWE
Chief, Human V.-o Rc, 
-', ' C ;;;ce
.......
0
OPTIONAL FORM 41
AUGUST I?
GSA FPMR (41CFR) 
1-11.2"
Gpo 11F3OF-s?.s-3 1
MI),110

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36
d 
Q;
-qs 
df, 4. T- 
4
sie,,]owj 
wg4
alptove aut f"i 4 "s4  
.t.I
1 
M~ L~
J~ti~Qi4e~ cCMIl7 l t)Ot k# 
7,Aoni~ 4
.-
doe 
ms, 46,, 
, 
, 
,,
AOF &WI do"Off"
IT~s 
6 
6 
f~
A koi ^4Jgs 
a 
A;
017

--- PAGE BREAK ---. T- 
4
sie,,]owj 
wg4
alptove aut f"i 4 "s4  
.t.I
1 
M~ L~
J~ti~Qi4e~ cCMIl7 l t)Ot k# 
7,Aoni~ 4
.-
doe 
ms, 46,, 
, 
, 
,,
AOF &WI do"Off"
IT~s 
6 
6 
f~
A koi ^4Jgs 
a 
A;
017

--- PAGE BREAK ---

37
le.aorandum of Agrccment On Conduct of RM)
S(,D-InR 
For Defrn.;e Against Chemical Ag;ents.
TO 
, .edical 
oxicology 
FOM C, Iuman Use Review 
CATC 10 Oct 1974
Branch, U*A':DC 
Off ice
1. 
The propascd :eorandum hs been reviewed as requested. 
The arrangements
for protection of the rights of luiran subjects are inadequate according to
curr(o, 
Govero'sr.ent and nat'otal -.Landards. Althouh some deviation fro-.
usual pracLive wight lee justified by the need to protect security, certain
basic standards must be tollowed.
2. 
.Fach and every protocol ii%%olving each separate compound must be reviev'ed 1.
the Ar. "y Investig;.tiunal Drug Revie 
Huard and ; by the Hu.,an Use Coe .vitre
when it is established. 
No appecoval should he granted to allow invcstigato
to expci-cr%.t with entire classes of compounds.
3. 
The wording o paragraph 4b 
might be altered iW the following way so that
the Surgeon General i-as the option of reviewing protocols involving use of
Iluo.,;.n Volunteers 
in an acceptable fashion as the review machinery is chang
over tle next few months.
- 4 
b. In compliance with AR 70-25, 15 Septe.mber !974, and/or AR 40-7
30 Septc-iber 1969, tle Director of the biomedical laboratory will. submit
Z!r 
1 
fo 
***dic-)u'1!."-
as subjects for 1'tt.on to Th. 
ShrIcc'n GCneral for review ini 
cc-,'
0%th current ,overn-ent policy on hurnan expericentation. 
1he Suceor (en
will forward the research protocol with l1is reco:-..eitdattons to the 
.
of the Ar:-:- 
for approval. 
Research with chemical agents using volunteer
will not be initiated prior to obtaining written consent frco the Secreta
of the Army."
This version elininaLes the reference to "representative cm.ipounds of
new classes of chemicals, not previously approved" which suggests that
approval is given fcr all the work with an entire "class" of compounds.
The use of "class" in this context i 
vague so that a broad range of comp
night be included. It 
is not the "class" which is approved but the spccif
protocols for testingi 
the co'pou'ds in humans. 
In fact. each slgni(icat
change in a protocol s.vutld be submitted for.approval. The paragraph as
charged is probably clear enough, but perhaps this should be spelled out
precisely in the llc.rorandum since it 
nay be a change frOM past arranl.en'enC
4. 
1 am not sure whether a local llu-aan Use Coc.DitteeAujith Non-DA personnel is
appropriate. 
I veuld be satisfied to see these proposals reviewed by the Ill
at TSG level.
Concurtence: 
VJ!ae 
i 
"ns'tc.dID.
.~ 
~ 
~ 
k 
/ 
nie
i 
./ 
Captain, MC
L1~veQ 
bcc A 
04 ...... 
C, 1-an Use Review Office
D A '06' 
$ EzIIST4 
rrLLSou..caL.nto
23eviewed by the Ill
at TSG level.
Concurtence: 
VJ!ae 
i 
"ns'tc.dID.
.~ 
~ 
~ 
k 
/ 
nie
i 
./ 
Captain, MC
L1~veQ 
bcc A 
04 ...... 
C, 1-an Use Review Office
D A '06' 
$ EzIIST4 
rrLLSou..caL.nto
23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

g8
F:O U TI--N G S L IP 
..... 
.. " v 
" 
" 
"V
i:q ":.: 
• 
r..P, 
/t, 
,r. 
$. t" • .':IIL.4. 'Cr 
'S.
TO 
II-- I 
LA I E
& C- 
- -A 
-DER .
.:- 
"
" DEPUTY CWJA--"TR
1T
SERGEANT HA-JOR
RESEARCHl PI.ANNI:,'G OFF
J UKA 
USE REVIEW' OFF
I, MEDICAL RSCH
DIR, SURGICAL RSC 
.
3 
DIR, -ENVIR QUAL- RSCHI 
:~ 
Iji
ADIIIN SVCS DIVISION
OPERATIONS DIVISION
LOGISTICS DIVISION
COMPTROLLER
JUDGE-ADVOCATE--
Pv1h// 
"-4 / 
1
_ADJUTANT
ADMINISTRATIVE SUPV
ifle Wife. )?"o
CHLCK ACTION tl"2F:%_
iLA 
"l, 
,fI 
c
M- 
, 
1 1 " " T
H,,.i,, 
urnan U, 
R:,- 
O 
'%
,SA 
RDC.
-- DA , 
' 2.22--
I
/,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

39
ROUTING AND TRANSMITTAL SLIP
T O 
I 
--
0 
-,
(* 
' 
'DAT 
• 
E 
C-O:,. 
ro
/ 
oAvT 
pts co,,0
v[osaviou
Dalt 
$IGOIATuIa
REMARKS
TM~~p4/- 
-7Z0T51VT' 
Q3,i 
7-o
As. -
au- 
:5>/ C 
/J i' 6~- 
1 
-r 
,, 
4 
,", 
v",L
"o 0 C / a, 
S -
4-%/W 
4 
14 0 L P 
e-70, 
,U- IS
P4OW 
-rA.c- p 45. 
--,ar 
5; 
z,,,. 
<,-. c -,-o
AS 
AlC65too .v ,'~e 
/jzw 
VlPrt 
,e
2 .
5 
,,d-t'o 
A3: ,, 
~,,,,r ,v, 
*., 
C 
f v"C'-. 
Yu .
2 
/J-1 
C4-,
DoNO-ue tho$ form as 
RECORD of approvals. concurrences,
ds ,e)provals. clearances. and similar actons
FROM 
-
.Ou
t 
, 
" 
! 
a .
(;'p.Ot"
OPTIONAL FORM 41
AUGUST 1067
nl~t 
RU I 
w a*jMi 
160 
% 
11s.i
O 
1013 Of -5,t436
641-191

--- PAGE BREAK ---

40
A. 
, 
4 5 , .'% 0C. C.
S{ 
/ " 
,Vc'r 
C .,".. 
"'-
(' 
-
C. .
-
-Sr , -- 
i C
"-r" 
("JA/
A 
..)2i14.'-r
A-i--b 
,(~
~
*("f?7'- 5,-- 
/7
&e. 
, 
-tr.
-- ' S ,, - " .. , 
,
K... 
I
4,. "f -"
/?,I
a (:.- 
54c :14.
.,A,-/ 
L

--- PAGE BREAK ---,".. 
"'-
(' 
-
C. .
-
-Sr , -- 
i C
"-r" 
("JA/
A 
..)2i14.'-r
A-i--b 
,(~
~
*("f?7'- 5,-- 
/7
&e. 
, 
-tr.
-- ' S ,, - " .. , 
,
K... 
I
4,. "f -"
/?,I
a (:.- 
54c :14.
.,A,-/ 
L

--- PAGE BREAK ---

41
ROUTING AND TRANSMITTAL SLIP
T O 
0 0 1 ,J 
s 
e u t .
REMARKS
-- 
!
ZI c-y 
%7 
1- 7 
-Z
3 
-4 
67v 
&Z' 
-0 
AJZ,, 1/-CAF
Do NOT use this form as a RECORD of appvovals concwrfencms
disapprovals. clearances &Wd 
saoniar actosm. 
.
FROM
V I. 1975S
O+,. 
.
, 
..
L)Z~ ~a~y 
l 
cr 
UliiLi
OPTIONAL FORM 41
AUGUST IMF
oe "A go-owa~e" fm 14 
A
CPO %VV3TOf 
-$M
MtI-1t

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-'R-,va 
-4Ajo CO
-I~ 
~. 
.u..%
g'* 
'-)fj
42
o
-to /P v 
or-'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

43
ROUTING AND TRANSMITTAL SLIP
To 
%oV, S 
f o %k l
.osvig 
at%,o( 
aio
44 IV&*
OAlfi 
9of (O
visat i"
pall 
S641oiatl
REMARKS
JAR 
we 
"ha 
&%4 
h'wom4%w 
&to
I)
a)
iA4II
JN~ .
rv 
-4 414id 
~
£ 
Ao 
11
1990L4
w. 
-
Do NOT use this lonm as a RECORD of approvals. c 
!
1111't' 
disapprovats. clearances. and siilr 
'1n
,ICK. 
V. JOHNSTON, MD.
PT, lWC
.lhief, Human Use Rsviaw Office
OPTIONAL FORM 41 
po 1020o 
3 
sis3 6 
4111
AUGUST I"?
G(A FPM 
4litc) 
10-11.24
I
70-026 0 - 76 - 4
-t-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

44
7n 
414'ck
YC4 Xay
/S 44) 
e'rd' 
4/a. 10n4
o., 7. 
- 1 
-a.zz
,~
0,? A -"ASt
4M4) ove, #
s~S ~
t1(fa~T~7 4 ~fcJ~
-7sf
c4AUZO
4df4 4
*4ez
9, . -F-9.
4,*
4/;e
/4]:
ftq hok::. awal
4WOC16- 4W
!o ,N"W
,; 
A-C 
.d 
,-
"jo, 
^7*
1 14
4(emwx

--- PAGE BREAK ----a.zz
,~
0,? A -"ASt
4M4) ove, #
s~S ~
t1(fa~T~7 4 ~fcJ~
-7sf
c4AUZO
4df4 4
*4ez
9, . -F-9.
4,*
4/;e
/4]:
ftq hok::. awal
4WOC16- 4W
!o ,N"W
,; 
A-C 
.d 
,-
"jo, 
^7*
1 14
4(emwx

--- PAGE BREAK ---

45
'clOm
ROUTING AND TRANSMITTAL SLIP
I 
ttlttt& 
I 
t
TO 
11"4,
[4111. 
I 
€O
Coot 
4 
f%& 
K
oat 
g ,.7.
ll 
60416s 
st lotl
REMARKS f&,:
s~ww 
tE Ow 
tf~nvoNa 
1
'/
Ee~wA4 
Arw/ fi 
(SJAl4
k 6 
4. 
tt 
1 
oe 
I 
as
S4 it~a 
oo41 c 
.Qs 
fi P 
4o ffA10 
~a~ 
4
004%
9srf1
J'&js. (#; 
psXjbFI* 
VACSJ 
or(*$)
V1 vi .le
AJ £s 
,fCT3VP/
Do NOT u" this 1orm as a RECORD of approvals. tonCi 
MIs
dsappMvas. CarawMe. o 
*Ar 
a-os
FROM MICHAEL V. JOHNSTON, M.D. ."
CPT, MC
Chief, Human Use Review Office
OPTIONAL FORM 41
AUOUST IN?
" GSA FPo 
c41VImR 
lWlsinJ
OPO 
ttP 30-SMN33
614I-11)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

48
. W ,,, C6E 
, 
.
f4t 
Jcder o/a/ 
4 ,
AV,.,,, 
At..... 
Oc,,40e- 40;v. /w4 4/,Weq. 
-
0/
44 40,. 
/it
/7(~*/ 
,f 
A4 
Ai 
EitAedo4
L 
frt 
QM~s 
X 
d
tAW/WC4ZFZ-lfAC 
tq~r7
fs~ 
2=ef 
~ 
~~ec~4da

--- PAGE BREAK ---

47
I" 
...... 
... 
... .
-
-, . .. 
.
ROUTING AND TRANSMITTAL SLIP
TO 
*
lsoat% 
$~O~tt o
pal 
P 0 .
REMARKS 
I
tv, o4owAsi 
Clio
.6 
4
o 
C"IL *gas
cecil ogs
Affsftw%'d4
1 t FDA Joo.j totlSo. 
U'rPAw
t 
r sorges. 
O,,,.
a 
earances andurmar acons 
s 
h 
.
FROM MICHAEL V. JOHNSTON, M.D.
CPT, MC
Chief, Human Use Review Office
OPTIONAL FORM 41
AUGUST I"7
*$A FPMR |41CFPR 10-T 1.M0
opo 
* 
1930-sts-
r
141-101

--- PAGE BREAK ---ces andurmar acons 
s 
h 
.
FROM MICHAEL V. JOHNSTON, M.D.
CPT, MC
Chief, Human Use Review Office
OPTIONAL FORM 41
AUGUST I"7
*$A FPMR |41CFPR 10-T 1.M0
opo 
* 
1930-sts-
r
141-101

--- PAGE BREAK ---

48
RI)UTI,iG ArND TRANsMIrrAL SI.IP
/zrL* I
. 1
bale
,=. ,,5 &; -
I 
5O I l
* tI I')4i
(m iULA 
45
COOS 
,o?0S
PILL 
I
0 ,olk"4 1100
w 
INITIALS 
'011 
LAND
,, 
.... 
... 
...
lt lalli 
.
D te 
rea 
o 
C ON
_______I 
___l__JtOO
REMARKS
I ,
AA,d 
Le- 
64
V
S7S4C 
t4 c>
Do NOT use this fofm as a RECORD of ap, ovals. concurencerfo
disapovals, clearances, and similar actions
F R O M .
.. .
.
.
.
.. . .. . .
.. 
. .. 
.
.
9,
GERALD L WANNARKA 
- -)I-
CPT, MSC 
'a -
,
Chief AIDRB Office.." 
, 
/
OPTIONAL FORM 41
AUW.USI 196?
GSA #PMO 141CFl| 100-11 205
two 19600-mn-819 
MMI101
I 0
a 
"
A-V71 
..;4
& te

--- PAGE BREAK ---

49
07-411'1' 
-$
A 
4 
-
e4 
~

--- PAGE BREAK ---

E6t
%/ 
C. vs u 
P* 
S.d.~
,,w 
SIw 
A
o4 W~4AA 
AjL4d4L 
o.to
4UA4L 
46 4Ad4__ 
h
4~/ 
-r
4 
eE& 
)4duv 
-4
Ak4A*AALc 
,YnwAk 
4S5
~v d~-~4.4t~ A fr# 
v,
17
teo
D

--- PAGE BREAK ---PAGE BREAK ---

E6t
%/ 
C. vs u 
P* 
S.d.~
,,w 
SIw 
A
o4 W~4AA 
AjL4d4L 
o.to
4UA4L 
46 4Ad4__ 
h
4~/ 
-r
4 
eE& 
)4duv 
-4
Ak4A*AALc 
,YnwAk 
4S5
~v d~-~4.4t~ A fr# 
v,
17
teo
D

--- PAGE BREAK ---

51
|.. 
A|C - 313 
W41IU SIAl|| AIOOK (44GV (OAMMIwON
10 Coe 30 
APPLICATION FOR BYPRODUCT MATERIAL LICENSE 
ow"ve. $,,,
....
U.IONS 
C4 0 . Items. foeg 
b 14 I t* .. 
,,ss ,e. , 
go woe 
f-, 
.
. ....
, 
..... .. 
... 
t 
0W 
,a
,...~, 
*FpS 
4 
04 
A% *.4 Ciomms,... Wk 0..e.. to fl.-* I 9.0tefs I$ met b# 
bpe.e. 
04 .441.4440 p*'.ded re.tu.... we offet g.
iA.-o q 
. se 
I sIlttl 
ikoti 
oot e 90t4iossoo 
hem 51 mil be co-...I00 
s oN *W 
toff.i 
Mds 
W- 
.
two o 
.. to U I 
&I 
Itwoy Corn
wso.wi 
Westsa, .^. 0 C. 13 
. Aiossogs 14400"4 6reac. 
O 
.ie of Mo..ols t,.c-ecfr 
Up." opp.4el44 0.u 
si 
pA.W 
. 00 q. 
*op~lo W
sotesco Oa AIC Sypssvwo 4olet.&I LWoe, 
Ago AIC SpoodwtW Mo.40 (low 
so -sowed 4 0 wcwfdoe 
l 
h eg o414.I .eoosoto ;9-' 
1 
i
l.ao 10. Cod. of le 
.
Itiol4 
o Pool 30. ea 
It 
tto01oe ,o "% cso l. e d 
10. Code of #*#*I 
legIe lo!,o4. 
Oi 20
I to .MOW 
£0o Sittig £00264 Of £UftwCaftt 
qi...Icbw. 
A., 
&swof 
(01 $0111 A00OfI1a At WOW. is *VO05I MA110*1 WVc It WS10 0
so-ooss.9 
Gft. 
10 
f 
Coueg 
dAiol Ga... 
.
I' 
l t ule 10 
IIL
Biomedcil Laboratory 
Building E 3100
Edgevood Arsenal
Aberdeen Proving Ground
US Army
Maryland 21010 
-
e
I 01 
Ta.. 
, 
O $4 lvft*OC 
ma il@'" 
,I 
P 
tW i 
scJI 
so1 
,u 
se.1, 
ofmlW,,,*,, 
,
Medical Research Division 
I
Biomedical Laboratory 
"one
.
G4e 
IIVB 
IeItI 
.
.
Ioe 
Pwo- 
0 
*M *1 
e. 
ilo'e 
1 .60 
a, 
' 
10016(4 
4411 
.'e.s ... 
* 
p.01. £4 
wwu
Users will be appointed by the radboosotopelnted 
by he
commitees!111 
offer ill be appointed by the
'€oinictee. 
t radioisotope committee.
o .4 
me" .
. * 
* 
o0*0 4 
| I KA to4.l" £44ilI 
bUIY Co 
P 
s4I0 of AN 
4M 
4 
4 
lto, 
04 moo""CVs4s -0 mtaso CoCe 4 
N 
.o 
1 lbme"
II
SEE APPENDIX I
Is OSCIIli PU'P1I0 
got W141C *4S00IJCI 
P 
i8ftAl 
iG H V O 
41810 
U h 
e. ., -We..8 .1 
.04.'9-s 
eo 
I 
.fe 
W" 
A 
£1o 
a I ! 
1 
.
OOI 
be 
d
.l'. 
#"o 
-f.. 
is kboo... -~0 
4. 
me s. 
of. 
a.6. "los 
~. 
mr-f 04 -so@e d sso, 
-. 0 
.- AW. she. ow~g t.ooo 0.41W 00-40 so ssisels As sae ss
be,~o* 
ow .,*5t 
For Human Use see AEC 313a.
uS jimy Medical R & 0 Commnnd
L., No..d.S- .......... 
........
MAY 0 11974
,,.
S@e d sso, 
-. 0 
.- AW. she. ow~g t.ooo 0.41W 00-40 so ssisels As sae ss
be,~o* 
ow .,*5t 
For Human Use see AEC 313a.
uS jimy Medical R & 0 Commnnd
L., No..d.S- .......... 
........
MAY 0 11974
,,.
S

--- PAGE BREAK ---52
Senator KENxEDY.

At least this was the Major's use of those words
describing the way he would characterize the relationship between
the Army and the FDA in implementing these memorandums of
understanding.

I do not know whether you would care to make a comment.

Mr.

MmuuvaL.

Mr.

Chairman, we would like an opportunity to look
at those memorandums
Senator K.NNFDY.

Very well.

If you would like to continue, Commissioner.

I have covered most of
the material here, I believe.

Dr.

SCHM[Dr.

I would like to make a couple of points.

I was about to describe the revised memorandum.

I think we have
covered that, but again, I would point out that the narrowing of the
memorandum by having everything except the classified research
covered by the IND-
[Witness conferring with associates.]
Senator KENNEDY.

We can put the rest of your statement in the
record.

Dr.

Scinxwr.

I ask that the rest of the statement be included in the
record, but I want to go back to one point that I think had been
confusing.

One of the questions that the GAO raised is whether or not we have
the authority to regulate the Department of Defense research, whether
or not under the law the DOD is a "person," and whether the defini-
tion of "person" in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act would
include an agency such as the Department of Defense.

We have obviously felt that the memorandum agreement was legal,
and that the legal requirements of the law were being met by the
memorandum and by the Department of Defense regulations.

The legal question that might have to be resolved is whether or not
we have the authority to regulate the Department of Defense.

Initially,
at least the Department of Defense questioned that, but that issue
essentially became moot by the memorandum and has not been in-
quired into in recent times.

Senator KENNEDY.

Of course your chief counsel believes you did.

Dr.

SentMWr.

Yes, sir.

Mr.

MERRIL.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mr. MERRIL. Senator, I do believe we have authority to invoke a
number of sanctions against testing done by other Government agen-
cies. But that authority is limited by the requirement that interstate
commerce be involved, and it has never been tested in court. We recog-
nize that. Senator KENNE Y. When did that issue come out? Was that Au-
gust 21,1975, about 3 weeks ago? Mr. MERRILL. ret me explain it, if I may. Senator KzNzDY. Certainly. Mr. MERRILL. Mr. McClure of GAO came to me and said:
We have been doing an investigation of DOD drug testing. Our general counsel-
questions whether FDA has any statutory authority over drug testing by other
Government agencies because they are not "persons" within the meaning of the
statute
He asked me to respond to that. I drafted a letter, which we have
submitted for the record, and a copy was given to subcommittee staff,
in which it outlined the things we can do about drug testing by other
agencies, but the issue of our authority remains. It is an issue that GAO put forward. We did not. Senator KENzNDY. We will include the rest of your testimony. [The material referred to follows :]

--- PAGE BREAK ---e issue of our authority remains. It is an issue that GAO put forward. We did not. Senator KENzNDY. We will include the rest of your testimony. [The material referred to follows :]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

al 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH. EDUCATION. AND WELFARE
4. 
' 
rFICE OP THE SECRETARY
.#AVDLE. 
mo.m
August 21, 1975 
0 
O Im
UI ENAL COUNSEL
Mr. Carl D. McClure
Park Building, Room 120
12420 ParkLwAn Drive
Rockville, Maryland 
20852
Dear Me. VaClure-
At our meting on Friday, August 8, you asked me to supply a
statement of the Food and Drug Administraticn's current
statutory authority to regulate clinical testing of drugs
conducted by other Federal agencies. 
Because of other om-
mitments, I have not been able to prepare a detailed legal
analysis of FDA's current authority, but in this letter I
shall attai'pt to provide a capsule statarernt of our con-
clusions. 
If further doc=%entation of any point should be
necessary, I shall be happy to supply it. 
-
A word of introduction may be in order. 
For any regulatory
agency there often is a disparity between legal authority
and available resources. 
FD is constantly ccnfrcnted with
the necessity of choosing among various statutorily authorized
activities to which to devote its primary attention. 
This
choice is further complicated when an activity involves a
sister Federal agency that may share responsibility for com-
pliance with legal requirements.
I.
FDM's general authority to regulate clinical drug testui 
is
limited to "new drugs" for which an application has not been
approved under section 505(d) of the Federal Food, Drug, and
(bmsetic Act (Act). 
It would not be pertinent here to explore
the scope of the definition of "new drug" because the sa..e
criteria would apply to drugs tested by other Federal agencies
as to drugs investigated under the auspices of a private manu-
facturer or university hospital.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ug" because the sa..e
criteria would apply to drugs tested by other Federal agencies
as to drugs investigated under the auspices of a private manu-
facturer or university hospital.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

54
mr. Carl D. maClure
-- gust 21, 1975
PageTw
3-my jyzent, FDA currently has adequate statutory authority
to 
ilateffiuch of the testing COMPU E 
otr I
of section 201(e) of the Act, 21 U.S.C. 
-e. 
the
drugs used in such tests are, or would be, supplied by private
manufacturers. 
section 505(a) of the Act, 21 U.S.C. 355(a),
provides:
No P== shall introduce or deliver
foiintroduction into interstate
omvroe any new drug, unless an
approval of an application ... is
effective with respect to such drug."
Since private manufacturers of pharmaceuticals and chemicals are
"persons" within the meaning of section 201 (e), the full range of
actions provided by the Act (seizure, injunction, criminal
prosecution) wuld be available against a manufacturer who shipped
a drug in interstate ocm erce for purposes of clinical testing con-
ducted in violation of FDA requirements. 
Om piance with these
requireents, which are set out in 21 CFR Part 312, is a condition
of lawful shipment of an unapproved new drug for investigational
use under section 505(i) of tie Act.
In short, where interstate shipment is involved and the source of
the drugs is a private manufacturer, FA has the same legal author-
ity to insist upon ocirpliance with its clinical testing requireents
as it would if te recipient were a private investigator. 
This
authority would not be available if there were no interstate ship-
menrt involved, but this is the limitation under which FDA operates
no matter who ships or receives a product.
In so 
circ mstances there might also be a question whether a
product was a new drug intended for investigational use. 
This
would not be a problem in the case of a drug that had not been
approved for any condition, but it could present a difficult
enforcement problem if the product had been approved for one or
nore indications. 
FDA might then have difficulty showing that
the manufacturer intended the product to be used for an experimental
use, or at leirst realized that the recipient agercy so intended.
Again, however, this is a problem of proof which the FDA confronts
in regulating clinical investigations of now uses of approved drugs
regardless of who conducts them.
PDA can also invoke another sanction in addition to the court
remedies previously mentioned. 
Wen an investigator has con-investigations of now uses of approved drugs
regardless of who conducts them.
PDA can also invoke another sanction in addition to the court
remedies previously mentioned. 
Wen an investigator has con-

--- PAGE BREAK ---w uses of approved drugs
regardless of who conducts them.
PDA can also invoke another sanction in addition to the court
remedies previously mentioned. 
Wen an investigator has con-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

55
r. Carl D. ft*lure
August 21, 1975
page Three
sistently ignored or violated regulatory requirements for
conducting clinical trials, such as by failure to obtain
infonmed consent or to maintain required records, FDA may
suspend his eligibility to receive experimental drugs by
administrative action. once this is done, a anufacturer
way no longer lawfully ship drugs to the investigator, and
continuation of shipment in such circumstances would expose
the manufacturer to the custary judicial sanctions.
II.
he scope of FDA statutory authority to regulate testing by
other Federal agencies is less clear in situations where an
agency is its own source of the material tested. 
Some Federal
agencies are capable of developing and synthesizing a no drug
without any reliance on private manufacturers. 
Apart from
possible efforts to restrict interstate shipment of the drug's
ingredients (on the theory that such ingredients are new drug
substances and, as such, are themselves regulable as new drugs),
enforcement in such circumstances would have to focus directly
on the responsible agency involved or its employees.
A. Wlo .section S05(a) of the 
.Act in term applies only
to "persons," FDA's authority to seize unlawful products under
section 304 of the Act is not so limited. 
If the requisite
showing of interstate shiument could be made, an unapproved
"nW 
drug," no matter who shipped or received it, would be
subject to seizure and oondemnaticn under section 304. -A
product shipped for use in clinical investigations that failed
to comply with FDA's testing requiczzits, such as the submission
of an investigational new drug application, is illegal and thug
subject to seizure under this provision.
I am familiar with cases suggesting that a suit against property
in which the Government has an interest will be considered a suit
against the Government and, in the absence of consent, barred by
sovereign immunity. 
But we are not awre of any case involving
products that are themselves illegal, such as an adulterated or
misbranded drug. 
In such circumstances the justifications for
sovereign b=zdty, already in disrepute, wuld probably be found
inapplicable and the FDA's suit would be upheld.
B. If FD were to attempt to enjoin shipment by a sister
agency or to halt testing conducted in violation of its require 
ts,te, wuld probably be found
inapplicable and the FDA's suit would be upheld.
B. If FD were to attempt to enjoin shipment by a sister
agency or to halt testing conducted in violation of its require 
ts,

--- PAGE BREAK ---found
inapplicable and the FDA's suit would be upheld.
B. If FD were to attempt to enjoin shipment by a sister
agency or to halt testing conducted in violation of its require 
ts,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

56
Wb. Carl D. McClure
ALujust 21, 1975
Page Four
a more difficult question would be raised. 
Such a suit against
the agency would clearly be barred under sovereign immnity.
The question would remain, however, whether a suit for injunction
would lie against the individual agercy officials responsible
for the shipment of the drug or the conduct of the testing. 
The
cases hold that such a suit would likewise be barred by sovereign
inminity unless the official(s) could be sham to be acting either
outside the scope of their aut)rity or unconstitutionally. 
See
Larson v. Domestic & Foreign Oai-rce orp,, 337 U.S. 682 (1949).
there are no cases applying this principle in the context about
which we are concerned, but a good argument could be made that
a Federal official who violates applicable legal requirements for
conducting clinical testing of nwa drugs is acting outside his
authority. Similarly, if another Federal agency wre to adopt
FDA standards for conducting clinical studies, an investigator's
failure to abide by these rules would be action in excess of
authority. Furthermirre, recent judicial recognition of a con-
sttt 
W right of privacy" might provide support for an
argument that he would be acting unconstitutionally if he ignored
legal requirement designed to protect the investigti 
l subjects,
suh as the requirement of. informed consent.
C. 
A similar analysis would apply to the question of the
availability of criminal prosecution in such circumstances.
Obviously, the agency involved could not be prosecuted. 
Whether
the responsible agency officials could be individually prosecuted
for violating FDA's testing requiremets would turn on whether
they could claim official ir.mxnty for their actions. 
Again,
N- 
cases on point are lacking, and the availability of this remedy
is concedely probleatical.
InI.
I have thUs far iqnored two significant practical obstacles to
FDA's invocation of judicial sanctions, 
aly 
in situations
%bere no private 
c 
of drugs is involved. 
cannot
ier"Mt oj Justice to bring suit 
its 
&ees 
We 
ty
routinely deal with classified materials or" cAoets.on of judicial sanctions, 
aly 
in situations
%bere no private 
c 
of drugs is involved. 
cannot
ier"Mt oj Justice to bring suit 
its 
&ees 
We 
ty
routinely deal with classified materials or" cAoets.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

W.. 
arl D. Mclure
August 21, 1975
Page Five
IV.
It bears remphasis that this letter focuses exclusively on
the juri dictional issue that you raised. 
We believe that
FDA has legal authority, under its current statutory authority,
effectively to regulate much of the testing conducted by other
Federal agencies, but we acknowledge that this authority has
not been exxmi 
or upheld by any ouwt.
"ms foregoing legal analysis should not be understood as
reflecting a formal decision by FM to beocme more deeply
involved in the medical research activities of sister agencies.
Nor would FD object to legislative clarification of the sope
of its responsibility for' the developmt, testing, and dis-
tribution of drugs by other Federal ag=ie.
Chief Counsel
Food and Mug A:dizstration

--- PAGE BREAK ---egislative clarification of the sope
of its responsibility for' the developmt, testing, and dis-
tribution of drugs by other Federal ag=ie.
Chief Counsel
Food and Mug A:dizstration

--- PAGE BREAK ---

58
Senator KENDY. Senator Thurmond.
Senator Tnmu 
ONv. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Commissioner Schmidt, under the 1974 Memorandum of Unde-
standing which the FDA had with the DOD, the FDA did have the
right to review classified DOD drug experiments. did it not?
Dr. SoHxmr. To review, yes, sir. It was agreed that we would be
informed of the work and in fact, should be briefed periodically by
the Department of Defense about that research.
Mr. MzEmnA. Senator Thurmond, it is important to understand that
it was the Department of Defense that determined what experiments
were shared and what reviewing we did. We were not given th. oppor-
tunity, of course, to say, "We would like to see that particular test."
Senator TiunmoN. Commissioner Schmidt, approximately how
manof these classified DOD experiments that were reviewed by the
Dr. ScnmYr. On at least two occasions in what I would probably
characterize as a fairly superficial way, a number-of types of experi-
ments--probably ranging from one to two dozen-were reviewed by
FDA personnel at a Department of Defense briefing.
Again, I would guess that it was a general description of the kind of
work. I am reasonably sure that an in-depth examination would reveal
inadequacies of protection of the subjects involved. That depth of
review has probably never been done under a Memorandum of Under-
standing.
Senator T=RixMoN. I had another question, but I think you have
covered it in your answer there.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Senator KENNEDY. 
Senator Hathaway.
Senator HATHAWAY. Would other Government agencies carry on
experiments under your surveillance?
Dr. ScuxMnT. Yes.
Senator HATHAWAY. What kind of agencies ?
Dr. ScHxnur. The Veterans Administration is one.
Senator HATHAWAY. In -that case, what was the administration?
Did you monitor their experimentation I
Dr.-ScHmTr. 
In general, the experimentation that is done under
a Claimed Exemption for an Investigational New Drug (IND) is
monitored. In those instances, it would be the Veterans Administra-
tion and those agencies that submit a request for an IND exemption.,_
We monitor that kind of research.
Dr. Mmu. Senator Hathaway, let me amplify that. The legal
question of whether we can require that submission is the same for
the Veterans Administration as It is for the Department of Defense.
Submission has become a matter of routine, and therefore the question
of whether or not we can legally insist upon it has never, as I said
before, been resolved.
Senator HATHAWAY. Would you explain.
Dr. ScHMWnF. Mr. McClure came to me and said, our general counsel
is having this legal difficulty, would you at least give us your views
on it.
Senator HATHAWAY. You mean just recently ?
Dr. ScnwmnT. Yes; sometime during the middle of last summer.
Senator HATHAWAY. It seems to me there would have been a ques-t least give us your views
on it.
Senator HATHAWAY. You mean just recently ?
Dr. ScnwmnT. Yes; sometime during the middle of last summer.
Senator HATHAWAY. It seems to me there would have been a ques-

--- PAGE BREAK ---views
on it.
Senator HATHAWAY. You mean just recently ?
Dr. ScnwmnT. Yes; sometime during the middle of last summer.
Senator HATHAWAY. It seems to me there would have been a ques-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

59
tion, initially, when the law was first passed, because it seems agencies
charged with the responsibility of supervision should not in any way
delegate that responsibility to an agency that was supposed to super-
vise, and that seems to be the situation here, especially with respect to
the Department of Defense.
Dr. SciMiIur. In general, I think your assumption is correct, Sen-
ator, and the question has only come up in regards to the Department
of Defense.
The Department of )efense, as far as I know, is the only one that
-raised the issue in the first place, and that gave rise to the 1964
memorandum.
Senator HATHAWAY. In the classified experimentation for the De-
partment of Defense, you did monitor that in one case?
Dr. Sci.Miyr. The unclassified research was known to the Food and
Drug Administration, but the full IND was not submitted. That is
one of the reasons we revised the memorandum, so that now it requires
that all nonclassified drug research be handled routinely through the
IND process.
Right now, under the Memorandum of Understanding the only
thing at issue is the classified research.
Senator HATHAWAY. So the unclassified you feel you have pretty
good control overI
Dr. ScitMiDrT. Yes, sir.
Senator HATHAWAY. The reason it was classified as such was so that
it would not. require close surveillance on the classified. Certainly your
people could be cleared for classified research.
Dr. Sc4iMuyF. The best answer I can give you is that I am reluctant
to have the Food and Drug Administration people exercising control
over the research being done by the Department of Defense in matters
such as the development of weapons and weapons systems that in-
volves human research.
Senator HATAWAY. Drug experimentation?
Dr. S(nHMnYr. We are not just talking about drug experimentation.
We are talking about experimentation with substances used in bio-
logical and chemical warfare.
Later, you will probably be discussing hallucinogenic drugs, some
of which have no medical uses. Their use is solely for military pur-
poses. I am not sure that the Food and Drug Administration should
in the business of controlling classified research being done by the
chemical branch of the Department of Defense.
Senator HATHAWAY. You mean because of the law? You do not
think the law is clear?
Dr. SCHMiur. The question basically is how the accountability of
the Department of Defense is achieved, and the question I am posing
is: Is the Food and Drug Administration going to take that route, for
classified research ? At present, I am not sure that is a proper function
for the Food and Drug Administration.
Senator HATIAWAY. You mean regardless of the nature of the drugs
that are being used, so long as it is classified ?
Dr. SciiMTr. That is correct.
Senator KzNNEY. But of course that is not what we are really talk-
ing about, but we are talking about the protection of human subjects.
70-026 0 - 76 - 5is classified ?
Dr. SciiMTr. That is correct.
Senator KzNNEY. But of course that is not what we are really talk-
ing about, but we are talking about the protection of human subjects.
70-026 0 - 76 - 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---SciiMTr. That is correct.
Senator KzNNEY. But of course that is not what we are really talk-
ing about, but we are talking about the protection of human subjects.
70-026 0 - 76 - 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

60
We are not talking about whether is X, Y, or Z drugs are involved,
and whether you ought to review. We are talking about insuring that
there is going to be adequate protection to the subjects of the tests.
I do not see how you can sy this is not a continuing responsibility
of the FDA. Quite frankly, I do not think you have the authority to
sign away this responsibility. I know we have been over this ground,
and that you are sensitive to this.
Dr. ScHMIDr. The answer to your question is not to be general but
to be very specific in where that would end. Suppose we would go in
and find something improper. This poses a question. Where is the au-
thority to do anythingY What is it that we do?
If we went into the classification business, we would then conceiv-
ably get into the business of stopping research. The DOD might very
well say it is essential to the national security.
Senator KEN NEDY. Do you not think you should stop it, Commis-
sioner, if there is going to be a violation of the rights of these people,
if they are not going to be adequately informed and give their con-
sent to being test subjects? Do you think there are any circumstances
where the DOD ought to be given Carte Blanche under the guise of
national security? That cannot be what you mean, can it?
Dr. ScHMIur. You are posing questions now that we are posing to
ourselves
Senator KENNDY. But what is your answer? I hope you did not
have much trouble coming up with an answer to that.
Dr. SCHMIrr. I think that we could perform that monitoring and
enforcement task given the personnel.
Senator KENNEDY. It is my understanding that the Congress has al-
ready mandated that you do so, and if there is any question about that,
we ought to find out what the problem is from a statutory point of
view.
I hope your counsel will work with our staff to insure that this mat-
ter is resolved. If there is any question in your own mind, we want
to make sure that you can perform this vital function.
Dr. SCHMIDr. Again, to reduce it to its simplest terms, the Depart-
ment of Defense said, "We will insure the safety," and we said, "Fine;
you do it."
Senator HATHAWAY. But then you were delegating your authority
that you were supposed to control.
Dr. ScHMwyr. In a sense that is correct.
I used the word "deferred."
We deferred it to the Department of Defense, to the Surgeon Gen-
eral, to the Review Boards, and I do not think that is improper.
If I cannot defer to the Surgeon General, you know, then clearlyJ
cannot defer to anyone.
Senator HATHAWAY. Do you understand if you do that you still
have the responsibility for anything that niay be wrong because you
tire the one charged by the Food and-irug Administration.
Dr. ScminTr. I have learned that since becoming Commissioner.
Senator HATHAWAY. If you do delegate it, you still have the
responsibility.
Mr. SCHMIDT. That I would accept, providing I have the legal
authority.
Senator KENNEDY. Senator Stafford.
Senator STAFFORD. No questions.AY. If you do delegate it, you still have the
responsibility.
Mr. SCHMIDT. That I would accept, providing I have the legal
authority.
Senator KENNEDY. Senator Stafford.
Senator STAFFORD. No questions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---te it, you still have the
responsibility.
Mr. SCHMIDT. That I would accept, providing I have the legal
authority.
Senator KENNEDY. Senator Stafford.
Senator STAFFORD. No questions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Senator KENNEIY. I want to thank you very iuch, Commissioner.
We want to point out that many of these things occurred not
under your administration, and we understand this, and we under-
stand that. you were not there at the time when there should have
been oversight, and this is not a reflection on you personally.
Quite clearly we saw the need for this kind of extension for the
authority under HEW. I think it is completely justified in DOD and
('IA, as well. as I mentioned in my openng statement.
I think we have complete jusification for it as a result of these
hearings.
1)r. Scii-lmyr. We tire very anxious to have this clarified.
Senator 
ME)v. 
I)o you have any reason not to believe that the
omissionin will be helpful in establishing guidelines as well for
1)01) or even CIA I
Dr. ScJiMIiyr. I would welcome the involvement of the Commission.
I think it is entirely appropriate.
Senator KE, NnFjY. I think that. would be very, very helpful.
Senator MATHIIAS. I have just one question. Mr. Chairman.
I)o you hav-e any nlenorandum of understanding with CIA in this
area?
lh'. Scuipf ivr. To my knowledge, we do not. If we have, I probably
would be out of town.
I Laughter.]
As nearly as I can determine. and I have asked and researched, we
have not.
Senator MATHIAs. If you do not know, is there anybody else who
,does or should know?
1)r. SCJiMir. We could ask them, but I really do not know.
Senator KEN NEIY. l)o you know what they are doing?
I)r. Sci.imtvr. No. sir.
You see. one of the questions is where does the material come from
that is being used.
Clearly if a pharmaceutical house manufactures something, then
our law is clear. But if somebody is sitting in a chemical laboratory
in his back bedroom, or if it is not a commercial source, it is not in
interstate commerce. and if it is classified research, our chances of
knowing much about it are nil.
Senator KENNEDY. In terms of any governmental agency sponsoring
any research, whether it be the CIA or any other agency, should you
not know about it?
)r. Scitmityr. I think that is one of the questions that is being put
before all of us right. now. Until recently, we thought things were all
right, and now we are finding out that things are not all right. We
thought that otur agreement was appropriate, and we are now looking
at the appropriateness of that agreement.
Senator MATIAS. But who is it, in fact, in Government who has
more expertise than you to make these kinds of value judgments?
Why should you defer to other people's judgment?
I)r. ScIiMUYr. The possible answer to that has to do with the national
secetrity and the route of accountability for the sorts of things that
apparently the human condition demands.
,Senator MATIIAS. So you make the ubiquitous comment that I have
heard many other places but I did not think I would hear here from
you.he sorts of things that
apparently the human condition demands.
,Senator MATIIAS. So you make the ubiquitous comment that I have
heard many other places but I did not think I would hear here from
you.

--- PAGE BREAK ---62
Dr.

ScHMiiYr.

I never thought we would be concerned with it either,
but, clearly, we are.

We may end up with some subdivision of Dr.

Kel-
sey's operation in having people cleared for everything, people who
can go everyplace, and who will monitor the safety of human subjects
involved in this kind of research.

There should be monitoring.

There should be compliance with rules.

The question is who does that.

If the answer is the Food and Drug Administration, and that is
clear, and everybody agrees, including the Department of Defense,
then we will do it.

I'hope we will do it very well; I think we can.

Senator KF.XXF.DY.

I do not think we can'let a hearing go by without
recognizing I)r.

Kelsey's extraordinary contributions to the health of
the Nation.

I think the FDA is exceedingly fortunate to have.

your continued
services.

It, is an inspiration for all of the people.

We did not call on you this morning, but we are always glad to have
you here.

We want to welcome the next panel of witnesses.

We want.

you'to be as relaxed as possible.

As soon as we get all of you chaired, we will begin with the panel.

I want at the outset to welcome members of the panel.

We appreciate very much your coming here to share with us your
tragic experiences, so that we might fully appreciate the importance of
and need for adequate controls and safeguards in human-use experi-
mentation.

In the past this subcommittee has heard from witnesses that had
been involved in the syphilitic studies that were sponsored by HEW
and were carried on for a period of 20 years without HEW ever noti-
fying these victims that they were involved in a study.--- PAGE BREAK ---

We appreciate very much your coming here to share with us your
tragic experiences, so that we might fully appreciate the importance of
and need for adequate controls and safeguards in human-use experi-
mentation. In the past this subcommittee has heard from witnesses that had
been involved in the syphilitic studies that were sponsored by HEW
and were carried on for a period of 20 years without HEW ever noti-
fying these victims that they were involved in a study. They came up here and pointed out this issue we are very much con-
cerned with, that is, the question of consent-that anytime there is
going to be any action that is going to be taken by any Government
Urgency, wherein people a-re going to be impacted or affected, they are
going to be notified and fully aware of what the implications are and
what the repercussions are. We did that. with the syphilitic study. Then we had girls up here,
one of them retarded, whose parents really had very little awareness. I do not think myself, personally, that they had any understanding
as to what was involved at the time these two girls were sterilized. We were getting at the issues of what both these girls understood
or what their parents understood was going to take place, and now
we are again interested in what the individuals understood about the
action that was being taken by the governmental agency. We have had testimony of those who were mentally retarded, in
State institutions in Tennessee, that were taking deproprovera as a
wvay of insuring contraception. This has all kinds of implications they
did not understand. With the help of these witnesses we passed legislation creating the
National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects. The
Commission is working to provide a wide variety of counseling to Con-
gTess and to the administration on these extremely important issues
involving human-use experimentation, but certainly the most impor-

--- PAGE BREAK ---63
tant issue of all is informed consent, insuring adequate notice and
awareness to people who are exposed to possible adverse effects by any
governmental agency, and this is our goal.

But in the passage of the legislation, as I mentioned in my opening
statement, we did not include the DOD or the CIA for lack of infor-
mation on the extent of their involvement in human-use experimen-
tation.

Our legislative purpose now is to expand the Commission's respon-
sibilities to include CIA and DOD so that test subjects in their
experimentation programs also will receive adequate protection.

I think it is terribly important in terms of legislation that we under-
stand the human dimension, and that is why you are here.

There are times in the drafting of legislation when we tend to lose
sight of the human dimension, and we become entangled in jurisdic-
tional disputes, the defining of words, and other technicalities, as you
saw in an earlier exchange here today.

And that is why we invited
you here today, so that we may keep in perspective how these issues
affect people and their families.

The testimony we will hear from you of the extraordinarily adverse
tragic manner in which you have been affected, will enable us in terms
of our ability, a sense of priority to this, in order to insure that it has
this kind of dimension.

We have asked you, as we have asked the others over this period, that
this committee has been interested in this issue of human experimenta-
tion to come forward and share briefly your experiences with us.

This is at least why you are here and what this committee has been
attempting to do on this particular issue.

Senator Mathias.

Senator MATITAs.

Thank you, Mr.

Chairman.

I want to join with the chairman in welcoming the whole panel
here.

As a native and resident of Frederick where Fort Detrick is located,
it has been my privilege over the years to know various members of
the county, and I say we welcome all of you, particularly Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I want to join with the chairman in welcoming the whole panel
here. As a native and resident of Frederick where Fort Detrick is located,
it has been my privilege over the years to know various members of
the county, and I say we welcome all of you, particularly Mr. Rewet,
who I have known for a long time, Mrs. Ray, and of course, members
of the Olson family. -J
Without going to any length-Iecause we are here to hear them,
and not they to hear us--I would just like to add one more dimension
to what the chairman has said with respect to the Olson family. I hope that we will not only get the benefit of their direct testimony
on their very tragic experience with respect to their knowledge of
what has happened, but a larger lesson will be learned, that Govern-
ment has to deal fairly and honestly and gracefully, above all, with
our own citizens. I feel that the Olson family has been misled for a long period of
time. They have lived under a cloud. Our own Government should not do this to our own people, and
there is the highest duty of truth imposed by the U.S. Government in
respect to the U.S. citizens, and let us hope that out of this very tragic
circumstance, out of the years that they have lived in doubt, we can
have a new sense of what the obligation of Government is to its own
people.-
I appreciate very much your being here.

--- PAGE BREAK ---mstance, out of the years that they have lived in doubt, we can
have a new sense of what the obligation of Government is to its own
people.-
I appreciate very much your being here.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

64
STATEMENT OF LT. COL. WILLIAM R. JORDAN, U.S. ARMY (RET.),
ACCOMPANIED BY MRS. ELIZABETH BARRETT, MRS. MARY RAY,
MR. ANR MRS. WILLIAM F. CHAFFIN, MR. VINCENT REWET, MRS.
ALICE OLSON, AND LISA, ERIC, AND NILS OLSON, A PANEL
Senator Kzxomy. Colonel Jordan, I understand you volunteered
to participate in the LSD drug testing program at Fort Benning, Ga.,
in 1960; is that correctI
Mr. JoRDAN. Yes.
Senator lxNmwrr. Could you tell us why you volunteered?
Mr. JORDAN. Sir, may I make one thing clear before I speak?
I am testifying under subpena. I am not a hostile witness, but I am a
reluctant witness.
I am a very loyal Army man, and I am still a firm believer in the
U.S. Army.
Senator KrNNEmDy. I think that is fair enough.
I think that is a point that I should have mentioned before. It is
not unusual for the subcommittee to subpena witnesses in cases such
as yours.
This subcommittee has followed this procedure for people who have
appeared here from the Food and Drug Administration and other
agencies.
I think it is important for their own protection.
Colonel JoRDAN. Some representatives came from the Chemical
Corps. and we were asked for some 50 volunteers to go through a test
and of the 50 who signed up. they selected some 34. and 34 of these.
individuals went through a test of LSD-25.
Senator KF.NNF.Y. Did you sign any consent form prior to the test?
Colonel JORDAN. I signed a consent form.
I was aware that. it was LSD.
Senator KENNEDY. Did they tell you it was LSD?
Colonel JOR)AN. Yes. sir, they did.
Senator KENNEDY. Did they tell you about all the side effects?
Colonel JORDAN. Sir, they told us that we would experience some
transitory effects, bizarre effects. lasting from 
-t4o-44 hours but we
were informed that at the end of the 12- or 14-hour period we would
be back to normal and back to duty.
There was no indication of anything after that.
Senator K..-NEDY. I have a consent form which you signed. I will
include it in the record.
fThe consent form referred to follows:]mal and back to duty.
There was no indication of anything after that.
Senator K..-NEDY. I have a consent form which you signed. I will
include it in the record.
fThe consent form referred to follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---.
There was no indication of anything after that.
Senator K..-NEDY. I have a consent form which you signed. I will
include it in the record.
fThe consent form referred to follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

65
VOLUN Fi'rFR' S PARTICIPATION AGREFl'CAT7
U. S. ARIY CliiK!ICAL WAJ*FAdC: IABORj.:(R1E,
U. S. 
AI.MY C'IrI..CAL CE4i;:-R, MYJ.YA:m)
N 
A,% 
A, 
UJ .
Age 
?A 
Race C, -t 
Gral 
"* 
Serial No. 
c's%_5'-"
Organizatlo) 
%A 
Ci C,
N~ame of :e'tre:.t Relative 
G 
K 
,) 
o( 
' 
' .
,
Address of 
Hlarc:;t 
Ieiatve 
? 
% 
7) 
' 
-.
Telephon.- 
' r-'her of Ih-arest Relative
I, __ 
\\ 
.
,, 
.. J. 
)'-A 
, certify that I have received, read ard
understarJ a d cux.-ent er.titlcd, "Medical Re:carch Volunteer Pro6ram," copy
of which i! ani.exed lh(reto, anJ that the ger.oral nature of the experiments I
have VO1Ur:,,crL:1 
t 
,rtciate 
in have been exi,lainel fru-n the stanli,Ant
of poz 
hfll, 
hazurjd 
to 1::j, health. 
It 
i- 
my ur.Jerta:i.g 
that the cx,.eriments
are so de:;iA( , 
ha::c. 
u1 the renjlt. ; (f 
aruidma 
and prevL~uz h:prrvv :xi cr1-
mentation, thut the a::ticiiatc/ re-.ults will .JStify the pLrf,--r.ia7!c of" the
experIme:it. 
I uf:dcr:,t'..1 !krt.cr th-tt experir:.e:ts will Ie so cciiucted
as to avoid all u:r:c&':.:ry ;hyical and menti2. nufferii.,; ard injury, and
that I wil] be at liberty to rt.:czt tt 
the cx;'trt:rientu be terminu:ed at
arsy time -f lzi my OJ 
:,iur, 
h have reached the j physical -r mental stats where
coxntr.uat'n Qf the 
:-i::.c::t:; becu::... u:nde.;rable.
I recolie 
t-.at iu jjee .iruit 
of certain ex-cri.rnts transitory dis-
coIture may occur arii we such r-ac-'TZ 
s ",-e: ez e2.-tily 
Tikely- 
t9 's
I will be z : 
ei. 
I rec,,nize, als3, that under theze eircujnst:;ces, 
I
must rely Uo:, t.e skill and w";zd:,: of the phy-Iclan culjervicing t..e experi-
ment to institute whate-.c.- medical or surgical 
.ea:zurez are indicated to
protect r.e.
I cert'fy that there haz bLen no coercion, element t of fraud or deceit,
undue moral cuazi.rn or t1,r ad'v'erse pressuree brc-u'ht tc bear in 
y vuI-
teering ., r tlsi: dity. 
1 Lave i'fle so of amy Cw:i fr-.- Will, cr'-letcy w":±re
of all ha.'i.rd., 
rc,:'iL a:.J rccdr~ition irxulvcl.
DATE: 
T 7) 
-- 
WIT.i'SS: 
" 
.
,
SIGNhED: / 
'" 
-
-
WIT:.._ 
__.
.
.
.
,1.. .
.-_ ". . , 
: .
. ." ,
A Cml C Form 6-9
22 lMay 57'-letcy w":±re
of all ha.'i.rd., 
rc,:'iL a:.J rccdr~ition irxulvcl.
DATE: 
T 7) 
-- 
WIT.i'SS: 
" 
.
,
SIGNhED: / 
'" 
-
-
WIT:.._ 
__.
.
.
.
,1.. .
.-_ ". . , 
: .
. ." ,
A Cml C Form 6-9
22 lMay 57

--- PAGE BREAK ---l ha.'i.rd., 
rc,:'iL a:.J rccdr~ition irxulvcl.
DATE: 
T 7) 
-- 
WIT.i'SS: 
" 
.
,
SIGNhED: / 
'" 
-
-
WIT:.._ 
__.
.
.
.
,1.. .
.-_ ". . , 
: .
. ." ,
A Cml C Form 6-9
22 lMay 57

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66
Senator KENEDY. In the second paragraph it says that you recog-
nize that in puftuing certain experiments transitory discomfiture may
occur.
So your understanding is that it was to be transitory discomfort;
is that right?
Colonel JORDAN. That is right, sir.
I was of the understanding, and all of us were at the time, that it
would be transitory, and after a period of about 14 hours we would
be back into shape and would be released for duty.
Senator KzNoqwy. Now, if you would, describe the test.
Colonel JORDAN. I believe the test started sometime around 7-o'clock
in the morning, something like that.
We were given about 150 micrograms of LSD-25 in distilled water
and were told again, sir, at the time that it was LSI).
Within a period of about 20 minutes the effects began to take place,
principally, initially, nausea, vertigo, and then facial disorientation
and complete disintegration of everything around us.
Again, from the standpoint of the 34 individuals who were involved,
every individual had his own particular reaction.
Individuals became loquacious or argumentative. One individual
crawled under a building and had to be retrieved.
Senator KNNwY. One individual did what?
Colonel JORDAN. One individual crawled under a building and had,
to be retrieved.
But all o.f us had different reactions.
There is no single uniformity.
Senator KENNEDY. Would you have been able to stop in the middle
of the test?
Colonel JORDAN. No, sir.
Well, I am sure that had I gotten out of hand, they would have
s Wped it, yes, sir.
nator KENNEDY. Would you have been able to stop yourself?
('olonel JORDAN. No, sir. No way.
Senator KENNEDY. Why not?
Colonel JORDAN. The effect of LSD-25 at that particular moment
during that particular 12- to 14-hour period was somewhat like being
on a roller coaster.
We had periods of lucidity and almost total awareness that we
were being experimented on, but yet following that there were enor-
mous gaps, complete periods of blanks, where we did not know what
was going on, and we were only told after the fact what we had done.
I spent 45 minutes trying to draw a picture of a bear with a crayon
and ridiculous things that we had no-remembrance of, but whether
I could have stopped it of my own volition, no, no way.
Senator KENNEDY. After the tests were completed, what happened
to you?
Colonel JORDAN. We were checked over by a medical officer who was
there at Fort Benning.
We were kept overnight in a building, and the next morning we were
released to duty.
Senator KENNDY. Then what happened ?
Colonel JORDAN. That was it. That was all of the test.there at Fort Benning.
We were kept overnight in a building, and the next morning we were
released to duty.
Senator KENNDY. Then what happened ?
Colonel JORDAN. That was it. That was all of the test.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng.
We were kept overnight in a building, and the next morning we were
released to duty.
Senator KENNDY. Then what happened ?
Colonel JORDAN. That was it. That was all of the test.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

67
Senator KENNEDY. Did you have any medical or side effects some-
time after that?
Colonel JORDAN. Afterward, I had periods of transitory confusion,
vertigo, things which appeared to me as at least somewhat akin to
what I had gone through, but at the moment I attributed them to just
having a bad night or a bad day, and thought really nothing of it until
December of 1961, when I had an epileptic seizure.
Since then I have had epileptic seizures frequently.
Senator KENNEDY. How long after you took the drug did you have
the epileptic seizure?
Colonel JORDAN. The first seizure was December 14, 1961, and the
test itself took place in January of 1960, January 9, I believe, so it was
some period of time but during that, period of time there were these
momentary effects of what is now termed as flashbacks.
Whether that is a proper medical term I do not know, but again it
was not until the epileptic seizure that I began to think that something
was wrong--obviously.
Senator KENNEDY. So what did you do?
Colonel JORDAN. At that time, sir, I again did not know what had
caused the seizure, nor did the Army, and I must say again, sir, in
protection of the Army, they did a fantastic job of following up on
me after I had the seizures, and sent me to Valley Forge Hospital and
Walter Reed Hospital and gave me absolutely firt class medical atten-
tion to see what was causing the seizures, but to this day no one has
been able to conclude what the cause is.
Senator STAFFORD. Colonel, had you ever had these seizures before
the one you described?
Colonel JORDAN. Sir, I did not even know what epilepsy was. No, sir,
I had not.
Senator KENNEDY. Have you at this date been able to tie any rela-
tionship between the seizure and the tests?
Colonel JORDAN. Sir, starting in about 1968 to 1969, when we began
having some drug problems in the Army, I became involved in drug
enforcement and also in drug education, and I was trying at that time
to provide as much information to the men under my command as I
humanly could, and I began compiling information on heroin, am-
phetamines, barbiturates, the entire flotilla of drug usage, and trying
again to provide this information to the men.
At that time I began finding that there was information linking the
use of LSD with birth defects and also with epilepsy and also with
prolonged psychotic states which required institutionalization to the
affected individuals.
Senator KENNEDY. At some time in August of 1972 did you receive
a letter from Mr. Carbilla? I
Colonel JORDAN. Yes, I did, sir.
Senator KENNEDY. We will include it in the record., but. tell us in
your own words what the letter said.
[The material referred to follows:]etter from Mr. Carbilla? I
Colonel JORDAN. Yes, I did, sir.
Senator KENNEDY. We will include it in the record., but. tell us in
your own words what the letter said.
[The material referred to follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

G3oj - r.1 4o64
.:Dres Optrol Divialon
O4'tioo G??owlioerpr
iiuro~tu 
t 
roto 
mt 
~:n~ye itt!n
*Vaoltindon DO 2(/"37
st Ion tu
$ b~ia 
Ota~zo crdier -y;our 
-.nSy !ineblialott: 
snd I hopo 701oknt~it4
topbls 
, 
h 
485 
. ..
In Ca m'y @ y' 
vii 
brzo.!'rcan ooarli 
YZD, 
yEom iunt'O1iitot4 
h;:t u64,.iE7$
ktoctunlor. 
-i 
a1id ae~n L.D In 4 ii tro 
nbtro~~lo.r~
,, .. 
.
i 
t. 
.
I 
.
1 
y 1'. 
o 
r,
t- 
& 
, 
o.: t ti 
inornr 1 
,m
3: 
.a 
, 
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

69
t N 
UNITED STATES DEPARTM ENT OF J1S'Fi( :E
BUREAU OF NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
WASHINGTON, 
D.C. 
20537
AUG 2 
1972
1r. Wi iliam R. Jort'an
6304 B~etyl 1 Ioad
Alexatidria, Virgtnia 22312
Dear M.r. 
Jordan:
To dae, thec,, have been various studies which associate
L.SD1 with epileptic disorders. 
Il sotae cases, the 
.SD
iy.iay- 
precipiLated a dormant case of epilepsy.
r.nclosed ir a copy of an abstract which seems most
pertinent to your questi6n. 
Although an exhaustive search
of thLe litv.raLur, was IoL 
performed, 
this will give you
some prelirninacy inforiatiun.
Sincerely yours,
tiXnest A. Carahill 
Jr.
Chief
icr.?; Control Division-
Enc losure

--- PAGE BREAK ---earch
of thLe litv.raLur, was IoL 
performed, 
this will give you
some prelirninacy inforiatiun.
Sincerely yours,
tiXnest A. Carahill 
Jr.
Chief
icr.?; Control Division-
Enc losure

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7432 
N3
AUTHORS: 
UNCERLEIDER, 
J. 
TUOYAS; FISHER, 
P KE D.
TITLE: 
TIIE PPOB.2..S OF LSD-25 AND E.OTIO AL DISORDER.
SOURCE: 
CALIFORNIA ?FDICINE.
SOURCEID: 
]O6(j):49-55, 1967.
TIE PROBLEMS CONNECIFD WITH ,BU'SE 
OF LSD (LYSERGIC ACID
DIETIUYLAMIDE) 
HIAVEt 
IVSTIROOMIED ACROFS TEE U.S. I,% TUE PAST 2 YEARS.
LSD POTREPKA 8/2]/72 BNDD/NCDAI;
'!ORE 
RECEINTLY, 
TIIlS APUSE HAS BECUN TO SPFI'AD TO FIW.LAND, 
HOLL;AND,
AND FRANCE. 
TPE PUYSIOLOCIC FFFrCTS OF I.SD ARE ANIMALAL, 
ALTHOUGH
PFCENTLY GRAND ,MAL SEIZURES WERE OBSERVED IN A PREVIOUSLY
NON-EPILEPTiC PERSON FOLLOWING, USE OF LSD. 
LABORATORY TECHNIO!ES AT
PRESENT APE NOT SE:.SII'IVE 
EINOUGIP TO DETERMINE 1t1E LSD CONCENTRATION
IN BODY FLUIDS. 
THE DRUG IS ,NOT Pl'YSIOLOCrtAI.LY ADDICTING; 1OT.VFP,
IT IS PSYCVICALLY ADDICTING, 
AND TOLERANCE TO LSD DEVFLOPS RAPIDLY.
THE PSYCI;OLOCIC EFFECTS INCLUDE INTENSIFIED SENSATIONS AND DISTOFTFD
PEPCrPTI('CNS. 
DELUSIONS APE NOT INFTQUFNT. 
TPUE HALLUCINATIONS 
APE
NOT QUITE AS CO.ON., 
BUT PLAY A CENTFrAL ROLE IN THE SuBJFcTIVF
EFFECTS OF TUE DRUG. 
TEE THRFE MAIN APE.AS OF .ESFARCH 
INTO LSD
INVOLVE CONTIOLLI-D ADMINISTRATION OF KNO-'gN AMOUNT OF LSD
EXPERIMENTALLY, 
RESEARCH INTO ITS THERAPEUTIC EFFECTIVENESS, 
AND
OBSERVATION OF ITS SIDE EFFECTS. 
TUEESIDE EFFECTS AFr DIVIrED INTO
CATEGORIES OF ACUTE SIDE EFFECTS AND CI4RONIC SIDE EFFtCTS. BECAUSE
TillS POTENT AND DANGEROUS DRUG RAINS A MYSTERY 
,IIILF 
THE LEGIONS OF
UNINFORMED CONTINUE TO EXPERIMENT FRIVOLOUSLY WITF ITS USE, IT
BECOMES ItIPERATIVE THAT MORE CONTROLLED SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATION BE
CARRIED OUT TO ILLUMINATE THE UNCERTAIN,TIES. 
(21 REFERENCES)

--- PAGE BREAK ---TINUE TO EXPERIMENT FRIVOLOUSLY WITF ITS USE, IT
BECOMES ItIPERATIVE THAT MORE CONTROLLED SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATION BE
CARRIED OUT TO ILLUMINATE THE UNCERTAIN,TIES. 
(21 REFERENCES)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

71
K
Colonel JORDAN. If I recall correctly, at that time I was doing such a
tremendous amount of correspondence with all of the individuals
involved in drug enforcement and drug education, and if I recall cor-
rectly hw said there were some references-I believe they provided
reference of an association between LSD-25 and epilepsy or seizure
disorders, and also birth defects.
Senator KIzmrm. 
Studies that show LSD related to epilepsy
disorders?
Colonel JoRDAr. Yes sir.
Senator KErNNDY. Ire you receiving medical followup from the
ArmyI
Colonel JoRDAN. By the Veterans' Administration.
I am out of the Army now.
Senator KENNEDY. Do you know whether the Army is following up
on the others?
Colonel JoRDAN. Sir, I am sure that they are.
I have been assured by some of the individuals and also by the
Army that followup is being completed on those individuals.
Senator KENNzDy. How about in the early days?
Colonel JORDAN. No.
There was no followup at all.
Senator KENNEDY. When did the followup start, according to your
own information?
Colonel JORDAN. In my own instance, it started in November of
1974, sir.
Senator KENNEDY. When did the test take place?
Colonel JORDAN. The test was in December of 1960.
Senator KENNE)Y. So, it has been that long a time?
Colonel JORDAN. 
Fourteen years, yes.
Senator KENNEDY. We will go on to Mrs. Ray.
I hope the members will ask any question they wish.
Senator MATMAS. I have just one question of the Colonel, if I may.
Did the group that was tested at the time you were tested consist
entirely of servicemen, or were there conscientious objectors who were
taking these tests?
Colonel JoRDAN. No, there were no conscientious objectors.
We were all members of the advanced infantry class at Fort
Benning.
I believe all were first lieutenants, perhaps a captain or two. I am
not sure.
Senator KENNTDT. Just a final point.
The record is clear on the point that you knew what you were get-
ting into and obviously the record will stand on that. and then what
happened to you afterward, but the other question, I suppose, is the
kind of followup vou received.
Tf T understand correctly-you began receiving medical followup
after you contacted Senator Chiles.
Colonel TORDAN. Yes. sir: and T did that with the utmost rpegrt.
Senator KrwNNE.DY. You had attempted -to work it out through
channels?
Colonel JORDAN. Yes.ollowup
after you contacted Senator Chiles.
Colonel TORDAN. Yes. sir: and T did that with the utmost rpegrt.
Senator KrwNNE.DY. You had attempted -to work it out through
channels?
Colonel JORDAN. Yes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

72
I took it all the way to the Chief of Staff of the Army, and I ran
out of generals, and so I had to come to Congress.
Senator KENNEDY. What kind of reaction were you getting as you
moved up the chain of command I
Colonel JORDAN. I started the request for a followup-I requested
that the Army start the followup in I believe October of 1972, and
requested that they followup on the .4 individuals.
By the end of the next year, after an enormous amount of corre-
spondence, the Army indicated that it would not do so.
I wrote the Chief of Staff of the Army, and told him it was with
the utmost regret that I was going to take the matter to Congress, so
I did.
Senator Chiles, God bless him, got it started.
Senator KENNF.DY. We will include these documents in the record,
as I understand they are. the exchanges of correspondence that you
had with the Army over this period.
Colonel JORDAN. This is my file.
[Indicating.]
Senator KENNFA)Y. Yours is bigger.
I think it is most regrettable.
[The material referred to follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ith the Army over this period.
Colonel JORDAN. This is my file.
[Indicating.]
Senator KENNFA)Y. Yours is bigger.
I think it is most regrettable.
[The material referred to follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

73
fILE I1O.1
I0 J 
S-O 
Co 
;.Ix! and Jst3.f L.:rt
10 
f.. 
.. 
.
CfOW ... .
... 
..
j .l t 
I .
: J 
, t
Jord, U&
Cc.'c.d t btcstf '1ept
Officer's Call
CATE 2 Au 
60 
COMMENT 
NO. I
VaJ harveJ515l/rha
1. 
Pefrencc yo' 
,articlpt'on Jn the I'sycho-che-ical Fvaluatiol Test
on & Jet (4O. 
"Lie Cor.ati eti 3aff Dqpt Vfficcr's Cell for the month of
Lug 60 %ill bc ipr -cn.t0' by Vv Cl.e ic'i Lo, nlitec. 
The cutject matter wiJl
inctloe various L.ipcct6 of th ia.u;.ti n tf;t, those who took part, and a
co€,porativc analysis of th. ('ii'ects 
cf the drr .
In this connection, it Is
considercd advlw+ble to have I rc iei% a nwber of offices thvt took part in
the test. 
It is contcrplated t0.it ,rous 
questions will ke asked relative
to the effects of the dru& ani! yor prscial reaction. 
In qustiois of this
typ, a!+,, c!",-t4c ansirers can o~ly c.cA,. fr¢ft the individuals that were wider
tte infli z .cr. 
of the drog. 
No for:.al notes are required or suaary of re-
actions nect:,lse-r7, es the qucsiwoios uill not te of a technical nature.
(Qcstionu vi-t rerhaps he directed to ird your ability to ca,+ and a unit or
furo.ticn .a a r,.n:rt-er of a staff, unler ,}e Influence of the drut.
2. 
To insure that. ths 
hl 
j; 
I'i a success, It wotad be appreciated
if )ou i.ould attend and iortst uz in the prstrntation.
3. 
The class 
s schcdal',d for the ;ericd 1030-1130 hours,-27 Ag (0.
Tentatiie location - Pratt lal, 
Bldg 35. 
Please advice if you can attend.
'I( jlr cDiO .. 
-.
Actn. 
o, ch,; c 
_'(_-
I
D 
Ia LIC 49 U "4

--- PAGE BREAK ---or the ;ericd 1030-1130 hours,-27 Ag (0.
Tentatiie location - Pratt lal, 
Bldg 35. 
Please advice if you can attend.
'I( jlr cDiO .. 
-.
Actn. 
o, ch,; c 
_'(_-
I
D 
Ia LIC 49 U "4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

74
6304 Dey 
Road
Alexandria V& 22312
26 Awnust 1972
Director
Division of warootio Addiotion and DruR Abuse
National Institute of Yontal ReIth
5600 Fishor Lane
RooL- lle, 
"land
Doar Sir
I a m very muoh Interstod in securing as muoh Information a
possible on the relationship between LSD-25 and epileptio
disorders, and I would approoiatoe any seletanoo your division
may bo ablo to provide*
In Tho Probleos of LSD-25 ind Emotion-.1 Disowdor, a 1967 publioation,
the authors stato that grand 
ma 
eisUzs 
SO 
n oboorved in
prov'ously non-opiloptio persons following tb,-w 
of LSD, 
I
undernt.nd thor. h,.ve boon several more reoent studios slnoe 1967
that Intioate that th. uce of LSD any also preoipitate dormant
o sos of opilnpoy, but I havo been unabla to seoure infor nation
on theso ttu too.
I would sinoeroly a-.preoiate any infom ttion you on provide.
Thank you for your time imd troublo.
Sinoewely,
/illia 
R Jordan

--- PAGE BREAK ---been unabla to seoure infor nation
on theso ttu too.
I would sinoeroly a-.preoiate any infom ttion you on provide.
Thank you for your time imd troublo.
Sinoewely,
/illia 
R Jordan

--- PAGE BREAK ---

75
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH. EDUCATION. AND WELFARE
,I 
C 
.PUBLIC 
HEALTH SERVICE
HEALTH SERVICES AND MENTAL HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
NATIOAL INsTITUTrr o -rNIAL HEALTH
90FISH4ERS LANE
ROKVILLE. MARYLANO MW
Oetobor is, 
eI? 
= TEL: a-m
Kr. WIIU.. It, Jodat
6304 Beryl load
Aleaendr ia, 
.
22312
Der Mr. Jordent
Your letter of August 26 tequesting information about the possible
relatiouship of LSD-25 to epileptic disorders has been referred to me
for reply.
t m not ever. of any resent ciltiucal studies that have been aimed at
investilating the specific questim of whether or not LSD-25 can "pre-
cipitate dormant eases of epilpepy" 
There have been isolated case
reports from time to time of eisures following the use of LSD-25 in
individuals 
who ver not known to have a prior history of epilepsy.
The following references my give you more up-to-date information in
this areas
1. 
Kelleson, N., Acute Adverse LSD Reactions,6 British Journal of
Pschitry, 118:229-30, February, 1971.
2. 
Schwers, C. The Complications of LSD: 
A Review of the Litera-
ture, Journal. of Nerous 
nd -bental 
itsesje 
14t174-86, February, 1968.
Also, you eight be able to obtain further infoatton in this are" by
writing to the National Clearinghouse for Drug Abuse Information, (1COAI)
5600 Fishers Lane, As 8C-09, loekville, Maryld 0632.
t hope this information will be useful. 
tf t M b of further help,
please let me heaw.
SiLtetei 
per,..
Alan I. 
MDe
medical Consultant.
Clinical Drug Studies Section
enter for Studies of Narcotic
end Drug Abuse
70-026 0 - 76 - 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---of further help,
please let me heaw.
SiLtetei 
per,..
Alan I. 
MDe
medical Consultant.
Clinical Drug Studies Section
enter for Studies of Narcotic
end Drug Abuse
70-026 0 - 76 - 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

76
6304 Borl Road
Aloxaniria Va 22312
26 Au-ust 1572
Uni, 
l t~tc :.~yIn'.-ntr,, School
Fort 
tOnnin;, rs'or'ia
Do-r 3irt
On 6 JAv, 
arY 1 ;$0 I partioip:ted in a poyehoohtio,2l ovaluation
tcut at the In." 
t- 
Soh:ol. 
The toot ras conuotod undar uui--rviolon
of tho Ch~oic:l Co:hitoo. Co6-nn1 
nd Staif? Dop:irtn.nt. U'IS.
,t~aoh 'l ic c~ co:;? o 
a disp3ooition formi ror th3 Cha:ic.,1 Co nittoc
.c 
I '/id-, 
h'.n tho:n tht 
t.-: oub.it lc- urod 
n th? toot is
•c-. *.:tro..-ely ?i. ,:-r.' &" pz.yo'oc:!c.ic~1 
:hioh h .o pr~o. 
. v.:ricty
o" a~,u.- 
r 
, 
!opl 
i,,anz..tn 
.:r,-.nornt 
..iv~r--e o"''Ccts
in .. :n bn. 
"incc I-)5-65 
i;rIntific invsoti ;atior. hc O:o:n
th t t:n f !ut-t..noo can produce pzchotio broahn 
nd a v-.rioty of
nouron.ayhi:trlo dinuoro, 
an' that there is a po sib,'1ity th-t
,,' 
of th. 
o'b.:t,-nwo o.n'rozult in chro:-ozo.:al 
'.-zge. 
Since 150C
tivr-j hz lbcj, inor :-in- ovilanco 
tht 
1h- 
V
opi-ptio di 
in 
lreioucly ron- -pilcjtic in.iviu..h.
To d- to. ho--.vr.r, thcre h -. nevor boon any atto.ipt by th Infantry
School to cont-%ot thoco individu:,l 
who toot ptrt in the toot to
:,:rn thc: of tha ha--r'ds t-j :hioh 
A 
r 
#.po"-d 
or V 'Ioto:Ar.e
if t i 
u:o o- tho ct:bzt:nco 
.y haw rexu.ltod in qhys!::l, 
c.:.tioral,
3, 
ro:,ychi;trie'oblc-.s. 
Ao a Ro1-ul.r Ar7y ofiocr uith nori1
2G ye.-rz of cor,,.c, I 
t. unaible to un.¢c-atnd w4 there hlvs boon no
Aoic-I 
7ollo;:-u-, 
snA 
I 
!n-i it i-porsibla to justify th" ,ct;o::s of
th.) Ar-,y first in conluotin,; the opor:x4nta ;ith a subs'inca of
r 
.
cox,,u 
co, socond in failing to : .rn p 
~rtlcip;bnto that tho
3,b:TO 
:1i ".L cz.uce per; :nest d2:.:'o, thiri in 
ilin- to follo--
in not :'0topt-: 
t) dot:r-ino if tho tect h:I r zul~td in
:1. a-o to tor p 
%ci4 
~tO 
01 their o.'Cf.r'n:.
I rc-" zcti-'ly rcu,.i 
t!-nt this ; tt.:r bu 
^---.-,_ into, : :d I should
¢!ry 
ch '-nreei-to - roily to thisA 1ttcr.
S:ncoro r,
L"TC VZA R3J35-:7.:1. a-o to tor p 
%ci4 
~tO 
01 their o.'Cf.r'n:.
I rc-" zcti-'ly rcu,.i 
t!-nt this ; tt.:r bu 
^---.-,_ into, : :d I should
¢!ry 
ch '-nreei-to - roily to thisA 1ttcr.
S:ncoro r,
L"TC VZA R3J35-:7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

77
AS 
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
UNITED STATES 
ARMY INFANTRY SCHOOL
FORT BENNING. GEORGIA 31905
oN gtPv 
m~eet 
To
ATSIN-B
Lieutenant Colonel William R. Jordan
,304 Beryl Road
Alexandria, Virginia 
2231Z
Dear Colone-l Jordan:
The Infantry School is aware that the psychochemical experiment you
(lescrib(Id in your letter of 26 August 1972 was conducted at lfort Benning:
however, there are no r,.(ords of the test results or followup actions
available at this headquarters. 
Our research indicates that neither
the Infantry School nor any other agency at Fort Beining was respon-
sible for the condlict and supervision of the experiment, to include follow-
up medical monitoring of the participants.
Our investigation of the subject test led tis to Edgewood Arsenal Mary-
land. 
Dr Van M. Sims, Chief Medical Research l)ivision, Biological
Medical Laboratory, Edgewood Arsenal, informed this headquarters
that the entire experiment was conducted at IJSAIS underr the sole con-
trol of Edgewood Arsenal personnel. 
Therefore, I have forwarded
your letter to the Commanding General of that installation in order
that be may provide detailed, authoritative answers to your questions
and comments.
Sincerely,
ORWIN C. TAiLBOT'r
MaJor General, USA
Colii.n) 
nda nt

--- PAGE BREAK ---of that installation in order
that be may provide detailed, authoritative answers to your questions
and comments.
Sincerely,
ORWIN C. TAiLBOT'r
MaJor General, USA
Colii.n) 
nda nt

--- PAGE BREAK ---

78
63C4 
oryl Road
Aloaxndria Va 22312
16 opte-bor 197.
CoOnanin Genewal
United 3tetee Arm 
Infantry Sohool
Port Bonain'o, 
Georn-ia 31"05
Dear gonoral 7albotts
TbaM 
you "or your lottery or 11 Sopt%,.,bqr, rospond;nr. to -my question
on the peyohooh-loal experimn-t. 
f ,, 
i .to "our timn .l 
trxoUblo,
and I sh-,l awit the rcpl.v fr= +1-~,v+od Arsor.l.
As to whioh a. no 
wa w"eepooiblo fOr the oonduot wnd eup-'rvsvon or
the test, I oar. onl.y 
ateto th.t the Irf ;ttry 3ohool provided the
Caoilitlove the building, and the toat prtio. r'rte. 
The Cho .o-I
C'v'nittos of the Infantry .hool 
ooliolted tho p'rtic,'p._nts, a.rr.-' d
for their payobiatwio %nd 
tiol 
ez--imitione, %zizatod in brieirg
them pror to the test, arran .d "'-r sGo o' thG rod-eio:l -mez rnel
who Vm present, 
i, 
'm-ed 
,Cot stuco..t cortro c-r)-n.nel to !t-.y .6th
test parti.ip'nts th-ni . the test, took 
t~t*:str, 
tror p'rto!pc.ts
the d!y follovin.- the exprimmnt. 
%r,. 
o: n~k:.oto.; .n 0 Tiioerlo @&11 ,n
27 Augmt l'6C to disouns ti. reaoticns (inolocure -rttob4d). Pin.dly,
the Cwx.r4ln? Genorl o" thi !nr.try fooh-ol v:na xw ra o!' th.) oxf:3rlrjkt
•',nd on-o to the test ara 
to obser, partloikirts ;bil,. theoy uere under
infrluaoo, of the psydhoohenioal.
Thank you for your letter. 
I earni.stly hopo the ln, -ntry 3ohool never
an 
ocnduots tents of th.t natu-o. 
In T. owr, oamo, I levelopod xrand
=al epilepsy in 1961. 
1 blluve tho dieordw is a possible outJ;rojth
6f 4he *xperit&st (inoloauro f. oc 3 
D .ittt.hchd). 
,Wd vhilo we produood
three healthy children xr'or to the oxpor.1mont, sine tb"-t time zy wife
has been unable to have live issue. "und 
-as hal only 
LliO?.-i 
.e. 
l 
the
post-exporim-'nt dovolopo-nts for otber partloip:rts aro siilar, 
than the
entire 
ituatton sh-uld be tbn'ou.-hly ex-t-ind.
Jinoowely,
- Vil1-.I, '~Jordan
L r/4T~3 
403-32-P701LliO?.-i 
.e. 
l 
the
post-exporim-'nt dovolopo-nts for otber partloip:rts aro siilar, 
than the
entire 
ituatton sh-uld be tbn'ou.-hly ex-t-ind.
Jinoowely,
- Vil1-.I, '~Jordan
L r/4T~3 
403-32-P701

--- PAGE BREAK ---

79
6304 Beryl Road
Alexandria Va 22312
28 August 3972
Epilepsy Foundation of America
733 15th Street W
Vashington, DO
Oentlement
X am very interested to seoure information on the relationship between
the use of 
SD and epileptic disorders. 
Information from the Bureau
of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs indicates that various studios
associate IS!D and epilepsy and that in some instances, the use of
ISD may precipitate a dormant case of epilepsy.
Any and all information on this relationship would be most sincerely
appareciatod. I have had a seizure disorder fof the past 11 years,
includin-P grand mal, focal# and psychonotor seizures.
Thank you for your time and trouble.
Sincerely,
Williams .Jordan

--- PAGE BREAK ---ciatod. I have had a seizure disorder fof the past 11 years,
includin-P grand mal, focal# and psychonotor seizures.
Thank you for your time and trouble.
Sincerely,
Williams .Jordan

--- PAGE BREAK ---

an
EEpilepsy
FOUNDATION OF AMERICA
sute 40 
.
182 L Street. N.W. .
Wasington. 0. C. 20036 * 
(202) 293-290
September 8, 1972
Mr. William R. Jordan
6304 Beryl Road
Alexandria, Virginia 
22312
Deir Mr. Jordan:
Thank you for your letter to the Epilepsy Foundation of America.
The National Institute of Neurological Disease and Stroke indicates
that there is very little written information on the subject, with
the exception of the following:
"The Problems of LSD 25 and Emotional Disorder",
Ungerleider and Fisher, California Medical Journal
(Vol. 106, pp. 49-55, 1967).
However, Dr. Teresa Harwood, a consultant to the Drug Information
Center of the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, amplifies
somewhat this article by noting that although contacts throughout
the country have revealed an occasional relationship between LSD
and epilepsy, no determination has been made as to whether LSD is
the idiopathic tool for triggering a dormant "case" of epilepsy.
It seems that the laboratory techniques have not been sensitive
enough, to examine conclusively the relationship in a clinically
controlled situation between epilepsy and LSD.
You have posed an interesting question and we have a few other
avenues to check out. But I wanted to give you something to go on,
until other sources check out.
I hope that this will be helpful to you.
Very sincerely yours,
Hugh S.iage
HSG/dcd

--- PAGE BREAK ---avenues to check out. But I wanted to give you something to go on,
until other sources check out.
I hope that this will be helpful to you.
Very sincerely yours,
Hugh S.iage
HSG/dcd

--- PAGE BREAK ---

81
630 Pery1 r.-d
Alexmnirio, Va 22312
30 A-:unt 1972
Coin, 
O)fficer
Ulgaovod Arsenal
Abrleen :lrvin:- Grou-
Aberdeen, 
' arylnd 21010
Dear Sir:
Cn 8 J.tVJary 1)6'0 I participatctd in a pryc:kochor.tc~l evaluation test
at th-i Tnz% ntry Sch.-)olp Fort !1p-ntr:,. 
Thi turpt u.,33 ccr fluctcd uador
suq-ervtnocn of t-ws C1,sirct, Co--ttee, JAI,, trJ under sponcoroip
of your ranr,;:. 
Attacl1.cd to a copy of a dalposition forn fro.i the
C.-tczil g.-zittxcpI~T3 concorniti; tho t~.,
,dicaL evidcr.co hs shoi.n thot thtV substance wed In thed test is
hi,.h-ria; civi that it ho pr.hOcc- a wrioty of vricou, 
n-.
cr4d c::ztiro 
nent rdvormo ctt'ccts t i 
nxiiL~ 
Lt-iwv:. 
3in-.o iI-
IWJeot1 :LtUcn 1-1-3 boi-n that tho sbs5tzmca 
c.n prolucoC photic 
breaks
aed a vrik.ty of r.e,-rc:%chiotric divordcr,, 
v:1 t)h 
thoro is a.
po sibtLity that ---o o. to 
authtcCta 
:nay ror;ult in chro.-vrzo-81 da-mzo,
Stho 1)63-70 t:emi 1%.4 ben imtreain., evidence tt 
th sibstnco.
can rml co opiliptic diordema in rrevit~,m' ¥ non-cPileptic persona.
To 1.te, hct.-,ver, thero hs nover been any attoq)t that I an awro of
by thoue -.'o 
atonr 
and corelluctcd t o test to contact ,articir.nts
and v'r* o,7 hazar, 
thry vore possibly ox-oscd top or to detr.4nu if
uro o. th 8$,ottrreo my have roovalted in p:.-zicdl, 
ctonail of
n.uro-syclatri 
a-'ter,-ath. 
As a io;,z"Arry of&1icer -vith r.L'rly
20 yeors or vervlve 
I *.- uTn2bl to uwnorstzrnd v:hy tk..uro kha bown no
lo1ica) 
ollo'.-u of tis 
siti,tio,n. 
I tir4 it £ .poziblo to 3'altJly
t 
,. tion.fl- 
ole t::c ir.-,' first, in cc HJctir.- t' .o e*.ox-trcnto Uith a
ab.0vinto of su%, ukno-s coi: .jrncoj z.,ccmis in I 'i,.- to fully
th ird, .n ra'_llin, to c.llov throw'h to v,.' 
p~r1t tC)fluts aftr 
t.*e
fIzarcl -,-ro q-i., %C.l kpo-.n; a! 3 fourth, in nolt attc-ptn, to dotcr-tlm
if tho, tcnts hai! mcultcd in d2,:. O to tho partcICI-,3nts or their ofta'.,rt 
. •
I )vscct'fly r-,.at 
that this r-* cr be look,.,4 into, and I v:ould
very 
a.;b 
o veclate a re:)1r to t.is letter.
Sinerelyp
:lUc 
3 22 
Jordn 
1
LTC :.X;A ho3.32..2: 01,3nts or their ofta'.,rt 
. •
I )vscct'fly r-,.at 
that this r-* cr be look,.,4 into, and I v:ould
very 
a.;b 
o veclate a re:)1r to t.is letter.
Sinerelyp
:lUc 
3 22 
Jordn 
1
LTC :.X;A ho3.32..2: 01

--- PAGE BREAK ---

82
63)4 3.?71 ROM
Aasx 
.ar" Va 22312
3) BUptesber 1972
-
O- 
1 n Offia
tdgewoo4 Arsena
Abooen Proving Oound
Abor4oen, rarylaM 21010
Dear S ip
On-3N Aunpst 1972t am sonth ago, I sent You a lottoP oosming
a psyohoohenloal oviluation test* A oopy of that lottor is attaohe4.
A similar lvttot va sent to tho Irnfatry ohool- end the ooman1nr
oneral forwaded that lattwr also to you an 11 Sept~msbe 1972.
*;lnoo it hna nov boon a sairth eineo I wrote initially, X should ief7
m=oh approoite a wply, 
?hank you for rour tine and trouble.
..inorely,
LT'C IJU 403-32--2"01
Certified Mnil Alexnndria Va 30 Sep 72 number 665868

--- PAGE BREAK ---I wrote initially, X should ief7
m=oh approoite a wply, 
?hank you for rour tine and trouble.
..inorely,
LT'C IJU 403-32--2"01
Certified Mnil Alexnndria Va 30 Sep 72 number 665868

--- PAGE BREAK ---

83
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
HEADQUARTERS. 
EDGEWOOD ARSENAL
EDGEWOOD ARSENAL. MARYLAND 
ZI0O0-
SMUEA-BL 
2 October 1972
LTC William R. Jordan
6304 Beryl Road
Alexandria, VA 22312
Dear Colonel Jordan:
I certainly can appreciate the concerns you raise in your letter of 30 August
and am more than happy to discuss them with you. I understand you have had
some personal discussions with Dr. Van Sim, our senior civilian research
physician, about these matters in the past. I must assume you were not satisfied
by these discussions.
As I see it, the primary source of your concern is a misunderstanding of the
basic nature of medical evidence. This misunderstanding is extremely common
so you are certainly not alone in this. But you must understand that many
observations of a medical nature which have very little validity are reported
both in the medical literature and the open press. These represent suspicious
or unconfirmed possibilities. They serve to alert the scientific community
of possibilities which should be investigated more thoroughly. The vast majority
of such preliminary observations are not subsequently confirmed by further study.
If they are confirmed, the early reporting in the open press has probably served
some useful purpose, but otherwise has created needless anxiety. It might be
argued that even erroneous information about an abusable drug may be of benefit
if it serves the purpose of discouraging its use and abuse. On the other hand, the
point can and has been raised about a "credibility gap" resulting in common dis-
belief of even more accurate information.
Medical evidence is rarely (if ever) 100% conclusive - what we are dealing with
are probabilities. It is only by performing carefully controlled studies that
any estimate of probabilities can be made. The type of "medical evidence" you) 100% conclusive - what we are dealing with
are probabilities. It is only by performing carefully controlled studies that
any estimate of probabilities can be made. The type of "medical evidence" you

--- PAGE BREAK ---what we are dealing with
are probabilities. It is only by performing carefully controlled studies that
any estimate of probabilities can be made. The type of "medical evidence" you

--- PAGE BREAK ---

84
SMUEA-BL 
2 October 1972
LTC William R. Jordan
cite has not been based (by and large) on well controlled studies nor is it
applicable to your personal experience. 
On the other hand, the studies which
have been performed here were well controlled and are applicable to your
' 
experience.
Our data do not disprove that single or multiple massive doses of the compound
cannot produce the consequences suspected and reported that you refer to,
because we have not administered massive or repeated doses. But wt- have
done follow-up studies on.subjects who received single, small doses of up to
.25 mgm and have uncovered no evidence of untoward effects including
psychiatric problems and chromosome breaks. Attributing any development
to an effect of the drug has to be based on some pattern of problems or in-
dication of some significant differences between the two groups. 
Neither has
been the case.
Prior to your receiving this compound, it was studied for a number of years in
animals and for a couple of years in other human subjects. The first human
subjects were medical investigators. The potential for inducing epileptic dis-
orders was specifically investigated in a group of volunteers with predrug
tran-ifigs suggesting such an effect could be easily demonstrated if it existed.
None showed any persistent change in their electroencephalogram nor sub-
sequently developed any form of epilepsy at any time.
We have, in summary, uncovered no evidence that any of the human tests
performed with this substance entailed any risk that was not fully justified by
the requirements of the Army at that time. As I'm sure you are aware, this
compound is still potentially a threat - at least a covert one.
Alt hsufficien4ollow-up 
tudiea t1 eeL aArmfy'Jnees
and to assure ourselves that your concerns are unfounded, I would agree that a
complete follow-up study on all Army subjects who received this compound,
regardless of their availability, might be of general scientific and medical
value even if, as I would expect, the results were completely negative. Since
such a study is beyond our mission requirements and capability with current
funding, it will be suggested to the Office of the Surgeon General of the Army.
2he results were completely negative. Since
such a study is beyond our mission requirements and capability with current
funding, it will be suggested to the Office of the Surgeon General of the Army.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

85
SMUEA-BL 
2 October 1972
LTC William R. Jordan
I appreciate your taking the time to write to me about these matters and
sincerely hope my reply has been of help to you.
Sincerely yours,
J 
K.S TO0NE,
fofonel, OmIC
~fmmanding
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---I appreciate your taking the time to write to me about these matters and
sincerely hope my reply has been of help to you.
Sincerely yours,
J 
K.S TO0NE,
fofonel, OmIC
~fmmanding
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

86
6304 Beryl Road
Alexandria Va 22312
6 October 1972
Q1.Qnel JQn K. Stoner, Jr.
qomandtng Offieer. Edgewood Arsenal
;.&gewQod Arsenal, Maryland 21010
tqa 
( QQne1 StQnert
'k~yQ. 
f Qq yr 
your responsee to my letter Of 30 August 1972 and my
iXaoeq 
q.ter Qft V Septevber 1972. 
I sincerely appreciate your
4k.jog tje. tmo and tovble to respond.
In your losing remarks, you stated that'you hoped your reply had
been of help to me. 
It has been of help, sir. 
It has helped me
understand that there is a clear and apparent conflict between my
own moral aid ethical values and those of the Army as reflected in
your letter, for it is my deep conviction that'the basic moral
Issue has been and continues to be sidestepped, and it is my
qQntent.ion. that. the Army has demonstrated a bowildering disregard
fq. thoe part1qipanto ana their families. 
I hope you understand
4b.ptk my remarks are. not intended in any fashion to be insubordinate
Q3 &fterspetful.. 
- tZam st'll too much of a -soldier for that.
t der separate opver, I am sending you correspondence from the
&reau of Narootios-and Dangerous Drugs, the Epilepsy Foundation of
Auerkoa.. and the National Clearinghouse for Drug Abuse Information,
a wel as extraots of 6.9 scientific and technical publications which
deal with the compound as it relates to epilepsy and birth defects,
as well as two biblioTraphies. I am sure your personnel already
have trhis data. but I feel obliged to forward: them anyway.
'X am al so morally obliged" to inform you that I am sending to the
surgeonn General'of the Army a comprehensive packet concerning the
eperipentationg,. and am requesting that he examine the situation.
Thfmk- you fo" your reply..
William 
Jordan
UrC 
403-32-2701

--- PAGE BREAK ---al'of the Army a comprehensive packet concerning the
eperipentationg,. and am requesting that he examine the situation.
Thfmk- you fo" your reply..
William 
Jordan
UrC 
403-32-2701

--- PAGE BREAK ---

87
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, Maryland 20852 
Telehone: (301) 4434443
September 13, 1972
Hr. William R. Jordan
6304 Beryl Road
Alexandria, Virginia 22312
Dear Hr. Jordan:
Thank you for your recent inquiry. 
Enclosed is general information
on LSD which you requested, as vell as bibliographies to direct
you to more comprehensive and detailed information.
In regard to your specific questions) I have enclosed two computer
searches of the Resources and Materials File. 
These printouts
provide abstracts of documents concerning LSD and birth defects
or epilepsy. 
The Clesrinshouse does not supply reprints of the
works listed; however, they should be available for your local
public library or medical library.
I hope this information will be helpful to you. 
If the Clearinghouse
can be of further assistance, please let us know.
Sincerely,
Barbara Robertson
Information Assistant
National Clearinghouse for
Drug Abuse Information
National Institute of Mental Health
Enclosures

--- PAGE BREAK ---assistance, please let us know.
Sincerely,
Barbara Robertson
Information Assistant
National Clearinghouse for
Drug Abuse Information
National Institute of Mental Health
Enclosures

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
6304 Beryl Road
Alexandria Va 22312
7 October 1972
Executive Officer
Office of tt:e Sureon General
Department of the Arry.
" 
Forrostril- Ruilding
lDtb & Independence Ave S.A..
Washington. D.".. 20314
Door Colonel Adamu::
I-am advised that this is the proper channel through which I should
request that an examination be made of the Army's experinentation
with pnychocbeTioals. 
I am thereore providing you with all the
information I currently have on the experiment, tht. hazards of the
substance used, and correspondence with various agencies.
I cannot say whether the experiment has had a direct bearing- on my
problems opinion soes divided, as may be seen from the inelouros.
However, be tbt 
as it aay, there remain a number of disturbing
questions which involve basic.moral end ethical issues concernin 0_
tbe tent. the infor-",tion provided to participants prior to the
experiment, 
and the lack of i'ollowup after the test.
The obvious question is why I have waited until now to surface this,
The answer is simply that I have not waited: since 1961 1 have informed
every neurolo-ist who has treated me for epilepsy of my participation
io the teat because I huve felt, particularly with the psychomotor
seizures, that there mirqht be u relationship. For 11 years I tried,
but.soziebow never. rot the point -across, and there is alwaysa basic
rvl~ct',nce to tqke problems direct to the top. Additionally, it was
not.uotilI-began doing cy ovn research into the subject that I found
there was considerable scientific and technical d-tta available on
hazards and consequences, and I had not know how extensive the liter.a-ture
woe-uatil then..
I-Must meke this clear &lso.. This is an Army situation, and I believe it
should be in Army cb-nnels. That is why I provide it to you. Thank
you fqr your time end trouble.
SAinc rely,
LTCSA 403-32-2701
30 Incl as listed on follo:ring pagean Army situation, and I believe it
should be in Army cb-nnels. That is why I provide it to you. Thank
you fqr your time end trouble.
SAinc rely,
LTCSA 403-32-2701
30 Incl as listed on follo:ring page

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd I believe it
should be in Army cb-nnels. That is why I provide it to you. Thank
you fqr your time end trouble.
SAinc rely,
LTCSA 403-32-2701
30 Incl as listed on follo:ring page

--- PAGE BREAK ---

89
30 Inclosures
1. Resume, 
30 September 1972.
2. Volunteer Statement; 8 Docenber 1959.
3. Medical Examination, psychochemical test, 16 December 1959.
4. Doctor's Progress Notes, indicating amount ingested and following
day condition, 8 and 9 January 1960.
5. Resume of Effects, as requested by and provided to Chemical
Committee, USA Infantry School, 10 January 1960.
6. Disposition Form from Chemical Committee, 2 August 1960.
7. Letter to Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, 18'August 1972.
8. Response from Bureau'of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, noting possible
relationship with epilepsy. 22 August 1972.
9. Letter to Epilepsy Foundation of America, 28"August 1972.
10. Response from Epilepsy Foundation of America, noting possible
relationship, 8 September 1972.
11. Letter to National Institutes of Health, 25 August 1972.
12. Letter from National Institutes of Health, questioning relation-
ship with epilepsy, 8 September 1972.
13. Letter to Nfation.al institutes of Health, 18 September 19'/2.'
14. Letter to National Clearinihouso for Drug Abuse Information, 24
August 1972.
15. Response from National Clearinghouse, with 14 references on epilepsy
and 55 on birth defects, 13 September 1972.
16. Letter to Commanding General, USA Infantry School; 26 August 1972.
17. Response from Comanding General, Infantry School, 11 September 1972.
18. Letter to Commandin& General, Infantry School, 16 September 1972.
19. Letter to Dr Louria, NY'State Council DrugAddiction, 30 August 1972.
20. Response from Dr Louria, 12 September 1972.
21. Letter to Comminding Officer, Edgowood Arsenal, 30 August 1972.
22. Tracer letter to Commanding Officer. Edgewood. 30 September 1912.
23. Response from Co.;tm-nding Officer. Edgewood. 2 October 1912.
24. Letter to Commanding Officer. Edgewood Arsenal, 6 October 1972.
25. Letter to Hon Edwird H! 
Kennedy, 
US Senate. 14"September 1972.
26. Response from Hon Edward H K nnedy; US Senate, 29 Septem.ber 1972,
with inclosure from Congressional Record, 1 August 1972.
27. Medical Board Proceedings. 11 September 1972.
28. Physical Evaluation Board Proceedings, 26 September 1972.
29. Bibliographv on hallucinogens.
30. Bibliography on hallucinogens and psychotomimetics.. Medical Board Proceedings. 11 September 1972.
28. Physical Evaluation Board Proceedings, 26 September 1972.
29. Bibliographv on hallucinogens.
30. Bibliography on hallucinogens and psychotomimetics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

90
6304 Zerl -oad
Alexandria, Vireinia 22312
24 Ootober 1972
zxeoutive Offioer
Offioe of the Surgeon Genera
Department of the Amy
Forrestal Building
10th & Independenos Ave S.W.
Washinqton, D.C. 20314
Dear Colonel Adams
Referenoe my'letter of 7 Otober 1972 with 30 inoloeuxes, whioh was
handoarried to your offlos on 11 Ootober 1972.
Inolosed ae tvo additional letters whioh vere received subsequent
to the deliver. of the referenoed letter. First is a letter from
Dr Ur~orleider, Assooiate Professor, Department of Psyohiatryo
University of California at Los Anaeles, dated 9 Octobor 1972.
Second is a letter from Dr Ramsey, M.edioal Consultant, Clinioal Drug
Studies Seotion, Center for Studies of Narootio and Drug Abuse,
N:Ltional Institute of Pontal Health, dated 18 Ootober 1572.
If I reooive additional responses# I will send copies to you.
Thank you for your time and trouble.
sincerely,
William I Jordan
I/C USA 403-32-2701
2 inolosuress as

--- PAGE BREAK ---18 Ootober 1572.
If I reooive additional responses# I will send copies to you.
Thank you for your time and trouble.
sincerely,
William I Jordan
I/C USA 403-32-2701
2 inolosuress as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

91
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
OFFICE OF THE SURGEON GENERAL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20314
13 NOV 1972
SGRD-5D
Lieutenant Colonel William R. Jordon
6304 Beryl Road,
Alexandria, Virginia 
22312
Dear Colonel Jordon:
This is to acknowledge receipt of your letter to the Executive Officer,
Office of The Surgeon General, dated 7 October 1972, which was passed to
my office for action.
We are deeply concerned with the questions you have raised. 
Presently,
we are gathering related information and opinions within the Army and
from other Federal agencies as well in order to answer your inquiry.
These inquiries and our evaluation will be time-consuming; we propose
to keep you informed as the review progresses.
Ultimately, we will provide a reply which will address your specific
questions. 
We appreciate both the basis for your concern and the
effort that you have expended in careful documentation of the problems.
You may be assured of our reciprocation.
Sincerely,
CHARD R. TAYLOR,, M.D.-
Major General, MC
Special Assistant for
Research and Development
70-026 0 - 76 - 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

92
6304 BOel Road
Alexandria Vs 223;2
14 November 1972
Major General Riohar4 R. Taylor
Speotal Assistant for Researob and Developmont
Offioo of the Surgeon Ooneral
Department of thn Army
Washincton, DC 20314
Dear Goneral Taylors
Thank you for your letter of 13 love:-.bet 1972.
You have restored my faith in the ArZ. 
I appreolate your response
more than you will over know. 
Thank you. 
I am now fully oonfident
that the matter will bo looked into, and I am oontent to leave the
inquiry in your hands.
Sinorely
im 
Rc J Jordan
/WilISa

--- PAGE BREAK ---you will over know. 
Thank you. 
I am now fully oonfident
that the matter will bo looked into, and I am oontent to leave the
inquiry in your hands.
Sinorely
im 
Rc J Jordan
/WilISa

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.93
1480 Lanley Ave Apt 29A
Penssoola, Fl 32504
13 JamuLay 1973
Iaj1or Genemil Riohard R. Taylor
Speoal Assistant for Researoh and Development
Offlo. of the Surgeon General
Depawnmnt of the Ars,
Washington DO 20314
Dear Geneal Tqlor*
This letter h 
two basio purposese firat, to advise you of q
ohame of address, as noted abovel and seond, to inquire as to
whether your offios has gathered information for a reply to IVy
letter of 7 October 1972. 
In your letter of 13 November 1972,
you indicated your offioe would provide a reply wihioh would adzess
my speoitic questions.
Thank you.
LC4ftt e 
d)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Vy
letter of 7 October 1972. 
In your letter of 13 November 1972,
you indicated your offioe would provide a reply wihioh would adzess
my speoitic questions.
Thank you.
LC4ftt e 
d)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

94
SGRD-EW 
26 
, 73
LTC William R. Jordan
US Armya 
Rtired
1480 Langley Aveue
Apartment 29A
Pensacola. Florida 32504
Der LTC Jordan:
Thank you for your letter of 13 January 1973. As I wrote you earlier,
I intend to keep you informed of the progress of our study of the asso-
clation between chronic medical problems and the experimental adminis-
tration of LSD.
At this time 
addition to initiatine a ravimv-orArmy .LOnsa4_pro-
.&saJnvolving LSD use in humans, we have conducted an extensive liter-
ature search and have solicited expert opinion from a variety of sources
including the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research and the National
Institute of Mental Health.
Although it is too early to offer any conclusions from this research,
I believe that I can allay one major concern of yours-the Army's use
of human volunteers for research. Our present policy, as proumlgated
in AR 70-25, 26 May 1962, includes a requirement for full disclosure
to the subject of all possible risks and free exercise of choice by the
subject uwcouplicatad by biased inducement. I can assure you that those
of us entrusted with applying this policy do not find it restrictive,
but rather an affirmation of a fundamental principle of human relation-
shlp.$
I expect to have more information foroyou sood. 
Please accept my beat
wishes for you and your family in the coming year.
Sincerely,
RICHARD I. TAYLOR, M.D.
Major General, MC
Special Assistant for
Research and Development

--- PAGE BREAK ---sood. 
Please accept my beat
wishes for you and your family in the coming year.
Sincerely,
RICHARD I. TAYLOR, M.D.
Major General, MC
Special Assistant for
Research and Development

--- PAGE BREAK ---

95
140 L 
ley Ave Apt 29A
Pensaoola, florida 12504
23 Narob 1973
Major general 1i*bda 
I T qlor
Speolal Assistant for osearoh "a 
Developmont
Offio of the Surgeon general
Departnentof the ,zW
W)sbioitan, W 20314
JW dear Genoralt
Non than f 
. Motbs at. 
n"- 
itobor 19,2. I bad han..orriod to
-th Surgeon General s Offioe a letter v th 30 inelosures9 requestin"-
the AW 1nk lato prowdaas whioh involved the us* of WJD in exporlments
with humin beinq*o 
On 24 Qotober 172. I provided tvo additional
Inolosures to the Sur-won 'Snor.dts vffloe, the inolosures resulting
from oonttnued investigation on my purt oonoernin, this suauo subject.
On 13 .oveibor 1972. you !. do te in your letter that your offo. ".am
oheockini, into the s'tu-:t*on 'ni wuldkeep ze 
normed. 
Two months
later, since I had not heard aqtlin,., I wrote a-', 
an n, in y:ur letter
of 26 January 1973, you ;.,in at ted you were oont!nulng to "revlow...
Azy sponsored programs inw:v!wn; W-i u e in hwaans" -nd that you wculd
koep me 'nWormed. 
Two addttional months bove now p.soed, and I hAvo
received no further nW'or-i.tion fror your offlos.
I az oblired to infore you thet on 11 April 1973, six months from the
date of my initial request, if I hve no firm indioatiori that the .rvy
Is takin. positive motion on my request. I intend to seek Con~reoionl
ass!stanoe in this matt.or. 
I believe six ont]s is addquate time.
IIll iv 
Jordan

--- PAGE BREAK ---m indioatiori that the .rvy
Is takin. positive motion on my request. I intend to seek Con~reoionl
ass!stanoe in this matt.or. 
I believe six ont]s is addquate time.
IIll iv 
Jordan

--- PAGE BREAK ---

96
SGRD55 
I AP~
LTC William R. Jordan
US Ary, Rt hired
Apartment 29A
1480 Langley Avenue
Pensacola, Florida 
32504
Dear Colonel Jordant
I assumed Command of the US Army Medical Research and Develop-
ment Command and also was appointed Assistant Surgeon General
for aRar-ch and Development 1 March 1973, so your letter of
23 March 1973 to Major General Richard R. Taylor has been passed
to me for reply. 
I have reviewed the previous correspondence
between you and this officer and I can certainly understand your
desire for a timly response to your inquiries. 
With the assis-
tance of my staff, I have also reviewed the available literature
regarding LSD that has been accumulated thus far.
Lot as now attempt to address the questions you raised in para-
graph 12 of your resume of 7 October 1972:
1. 
Why were the ILSD] experiments conducted in the first
place?
There was a legitimate concern in the early 1960's that
hallucinogenic drugs, such an LSD# might be employed by our
anea 
against our troops (I might add that the possibility
has not been discounted even now). 
At that time, immediate
drug effects were studied and demonstrated in the national
interest.
2. 
Why were volunteers not fully and completely informed
of all possible long-term effects?
Even though the imodiate psychotropic effects of LSD have
been known since 1943, the drug was largely treated as a bio-
chemical and medical curiosity. 
In the late 1950's, perhaps

--- PAGE BREAK ---Even though the imodiate psychotropic effects of LSD have
been known since 1943, the drug was largely treated as a bio-
chemical and medical curiosity. 
In the late 1950's, perhaps

--- PAGE BREAK ---

97
6 APR WJ
SGRD-LB
LTC William R. Jordan
by coincidence, the drug was almost simultaneously recognized
by the Aru 
an a military threat and by certain segments of
our US population as a mans for self-fulfillment. 
At tuat
tim, virtually nothing was known of the long-term effects of
the drug, there having ben no systematic human experience with
the drug that could be observed over a long period of time.
Unfortunately, fifteen years later finds us little better off.
Although widespread use of the drug has led to an increasing
number of published observations in the medical and lay press,
few, it any, of these observations of supposed long-term effects
have withstood scientific scrutiny. 
Let me emphasize that I
have not said there ara no long-term effects, but rather that
demonstration of them has proven to be extremely difficult. As
an instance, one cannot assuredly say that your epileptic con-
ditLon is not the result of taking J.SD. 
On the other hand, we
find no comparable experience in the many reports of studies of
LSD users.
3. 
Why has the Army failed to individually and thoroughly
inform and follow-up test participants and their families? 
.
With the evidence at hand, I am not sure the Army would be
justified in creating anxiety among the participants and their
families. 
In order to obtain an expert opinion from a body not
directly responsible for the tests conducted, I have directed
that this issue be presented to the National Research Council,
and I will accept their recommendations as to whether a follow-
up of the participants is warranted.
4. 
Will the Army use its own members or any other human
subjects for experiiats of this nature in the future?
No. While the national interest and the welfare of man-
king in general dictate that humans must continue to be the
ultimate subjects of research designed to benefit humans,
measures incorporated into AR 70-25 regarding the use of human
volunteers would insure adequate medical safeguards and informed
consent after thorough toxicity studies in animals before stud-
Les in human subjects would be approved.
I trust you will find that these comments meet the questions
you have raised. 
Like my predecessor, I am determined that
2city studies in animals before stud-
Les in human subjects would be approved.
I trust you will find that these comments meet the questions
you have raised. 
Like my predecessor, I am determined that
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

98
5APR U?3
SORD-9B
LTC William R. Jordan
medical research in the Army will not merely conform to the
ethics of the medical profession, but vwil be a leader in
embracing change here ovn nore strLnqent ethics at* required.
I an equally determined that inquiries such as yours will be
not with a full and adequate response. 
Please feel free to
call a mo if I have not done so in your case.
Sinoerelyp
SIGNED
3Rotbrt B steinn, M.D., B
RORT SEISTEMe M.D.
Brigadier General, MC
Assistant Surgeon General for
Research and Developownt
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

99
EGRD-ID
2 6 JU; 1373
,LTC V I 11in P.. Jor'..ra
IUS; /trf;i Pa t Jre d
/I. j.Trr:t,"t 29,A
Il, nz-cala, Flor~ea 
32h04")t
,-ar L3C Jordan:
In Annv:cr to your lzattrr of 22 1*,y 1973, I vAIch to inform yoru tt.t 
the
I'atioiud Renc.'. .ch Concil I.as yet to t-ric a 
.
r.,,arcInr
follow-up of in~iv,1c:-1 
'-L: 
received LSD whilo on ncLivo duty In Lbe
Amoy.
Contact vith couucil rqjrc.cntcavas on 30 I1:y 1973, ine.,cItes ts, i.t-
ter is undcr .ctLve coisidLtlztion cind 
a dccision 0J11 prOlAb1y b- rcmichod
in a ft-w wecc'c.
We vdll info:;.i you Vaen th-Ar recor':-enecWtion is evail.ble.
Sincerely,
R. F. P..
Colman! I UC
Actin-, ,/IsvILntnt Sur-con Cer.2rid
for r.vec 
r.nd i.. ot

--- PAGE BREAK ---chod
in a ft-w wecc'c.
We vdll info:;.i you Vaen th-Ar recor':-enecWtion is evail.ble.
Sincerely,
R. F. P..
Colman! I UC
Actin-, ,/IsvILntnt Sur-con Cer.2rid
for r.vec 
r.nd i.. ot

--- PAGE BREAK ---

100
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
OWIC Of THW SuRON G5oRL
WASINGTO. 
DC M1e
8GR 9D. 
I JU. 873
LTC William R. Jordan
US Army Retirbd
Apt OB, Yacht Haven
554 Golden Gate Point
Sarasota, Florida 
33577
Dear Colonel Jordan:
By this time, you may have received General Robert Bernstein's reply to
your letter of 22 ay 1973. 
If not, the letter was no doubt delayed by
having been sent to your previous address. 
A copy is enclosed for your
convenience.
A group of consultants to the national Research Council met on 27 June 1973,
to hear the issues and facts related to the Amy's use of chemical halluci-
nogens. 
The special committee met in closed session after the open meeting
and we have not yet learned the results of their deliberations.
I will see that you are promptly informed when their conclusions are made
available to us.
Sincerely,
I Incl 
RICHARD F. BARQUIST, H.D.
As stated 
Colonel, HC
Acting Assistant Surgeon General
for Research and Development

--- PAGE BREAK ---

101
Apt 1T tahiti Sam:s 
464 Golden 
ate Point
sawasots. Florida 33577
9 July 1973
Colonel Riohard P. Rarquist
Aoting-Assistant Suripos General for Resoaroh and Dovelopment
Offios of the Surgeon Oeneral
Wa'shington DC 20314
Dear Colonel Barquist,
Thank you for your letter of 2 July 1973 informing o of the 27 Juno
meeting of the National Research Counoil regarding the use of obeiol
halluoinone by the army.
I an pleased that the Issue has been presented to the Couoil, although
I still cannot understand the reason for the delay, particularly when
as iong as three months ago (5 April 1973) Goneral Bernstein stated
that he had directed the notion be takes.
I an looking forward to learning of the results of that meeting,
?hank you for the time and trouble.
c Oetr
by fortified mail

--- PAGE BREAK ---stein stated
that he had directed the notion be takes.
I an looking forward to learning of the results of that meeting,
?hank you for the time and trouble.
c Oetr
by fortified mail

--- PAGE BREAK ---

102
4222 a"st'Jobsoon Aveuoe
PeasOola, florida 32704
7 October 173
Chif .f staff
United States AM
no ?eatas"
lsshkin4oom, Do
If 4a Gemeral$
kStOm 
am Year ago I had Mhan 
aid 
to the Offltoe of the Surgeon
General a letter with 30 luolosures, and I requested that as
examisatiom be mide of the Ar' s oeprimentation with peyohoooloal
agets. 
I was particularly concerned ovor the lack of any follow-up
t7 the Army on those who participated in the epetente., I provided
the Office of the Suripon General with as uch soiestiflot technicall
aM medical data s I had been able to secure, much of whdh showed
a direct rolatioaskip between the use of psyohookoeloals 
ad a variety
of adverse and In moe istanobs peromat offects, even after only
oee -eperimentation with the psliokoohemloal a&got
During the past year I have continued to attempt to secure an adequate
response fim the Office of the Surgeon General, and I have continued
to urgo that follow-upt 
studies be vado on the participants, not only
in the furtherano of medical kaowledqo, but also in the ame of
hunanity. 
At this Junoture. it is mr belief that the AM does not
Intend to follow tbrvou 
ams 'thts rquost sad that in fact the issue
io beia buried in the bope that all may forget about it. 
I an led
to that belief t7 a number of factors, including the fact that some
365 days have elapsed without sifnifioant progress.
I had hoped and planned to leave this matt:: in the hands of the
Armys my 21 yeas of active duty have proven to n that the Army 
as
and will deal effectively with any situation or problem. However,
at this point I can only believe that the AM does not plan to handle
this problem. 
As a result, should I not receive indioatics br the
end of November that the Anr 
is taking steps to follow up oa the.
participants In the peyohoobo 
oal experiment, I mut r quest
Congressional assistance at that point.
Thank you for your tim sad trouble.
yous truly,
Willisn . Jordan
IC USA (Retired)
403-32--2701Lhe.
participants In the peyohoobo 
oal experiment, I mut r quest
Congressional assistance at that point.
Thank you for your tim sad trouble.
yous truly,
Willisn . Jordan
IC USA (Retired)
403-32--2701L

--- PAGE BREAK ---

103
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
Owsc. oe TM CHI"w OF STAFF
b. 
WAWINTON4 D.C., 21S1
15 November 1973
Doear Colonel Jordan:
I have reviewed your 7 October 1973.request that the Army conduct a
follow-up study of the participants In Army-sponsored "psychochemical
experiments." 
The personal experiences which have stimulated your
concern for the well-being of participants In Army research activities
are deeply appreciated and add weight to the Army's-similar concerns.
General Taylor, in his 15 October 1973 letter, explained to you the
evaluation we have received from the National Academy of Sciences.
In this case, based on the expert advice from the National Academy of
Sciences, the Army has accepted the finding of the Academy that a
study of this particular population Is not likely to produce useful
Information ar-d would not warrant the significant expenditure of
resources that would be required.
You may be assured that I understand the depth of your Interest In
this matter and your determination to do all that Is hunaniy possible
to satisfy your sincere concern.
Respectful ly,
FREDC WEY~t~
General, Un~~ 
States Army
Vice Chief o Staff
Lieutenant Colonel WI I I lam R. Jordan, USA-Rot
4222 East Johnson Avenue
Pensacola, Florida 32504

--- PAGE BREAK ---oncern.
Respectful ly,
FREDC WEY~t~
General, Un~~ 
States Army
Vice Chief o Staff
Lieutenant Colonel WI I I lam R. Jordan, USA-Rot
4222 East Johnson Avenue
Pensacola, Florida 32504

--- PAGE BREAK ---

104
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
.-oic OF T ,K SUROCON GCNNCAL
WASeNt 
ON. D.C. T031
amY 
70
SGRD-ZB 
5 
15MAY 03
M~AY 1 61973
Philip Handler, Ph.D.
President
National Academy of Sciences
2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20418
Dear Dr. Handler:
The Army Medical Department would like to request the advice
and assistance of the National Academy of Sciences/National
Research Council (NAS/NRC) with the problem described in the
following paragraphs.
From 1958 through the early sixties, elements of th4 US Army
evaluated the potential military threat of the chemicalK
hallucinogens, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) in particular.
In the course of this evaluation, some 1500 volunteers were
given LSD in measured pharmacologic doses. 
Reports indicate
that only the predictable acute effects were experienced.
There is nov concern with the possible long-term effects that
LSD administration may have had upon these volunteers. One
of them is known to have developed a convulsive disorder
(grand mal and psychomotor epilepsy) within two years of
-
receiving LSD under Army supervision. 
The staff of the US
Army Medical Research and Development Command (USAMRDC) have
* reviewed t)ie-ayailable literature on follow-up of LSD, and
S" 
find" th-iew 
- istUdies have been done-which will 'stand scru-
tiney, "either because dose was unknown, follow-up was in-
complete, or controls inadequate.
If NRC is willing to consider this matter, answers to the
following questions are requested:

--- PAGE BREAK ---, "either because dose was unknown, follow-up was in-
complete, or controls inadequate.
If NRC is willing to consider this matter, answers to the
following questions are requested:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

105
SGRD-ZB 
1 5 &!AY W3
Philip Handler, Ph.D.
First, on the basis of available information, should the Army
Medical Department sponsor a follow-up study of the volunteers
who were given LSD. 
This question should consider state of
current knowledge, feasibility, probable validity of findings,
design of controls and any possible off-setting undesirable
effects of conducting such a study, such as creating anxiety
in the target population..
If such a study is recommended, it would have much greater
.credibility if done by an agency other than the US Army,
considering that the Army could be considered to have a
biased interest in the results. 
Therefore, the second
question is whether the NAS/NRC would be willing to design
and conduct such a study, possibly through the Follow-up
Agency of the Division of Medical Sciences. 
In answering
this second question, it would be useful to have an estimate
of the cost of conducting- such a follow-up study as well as
the- time required for its completion. 
The general question
to be answered in such a study should be: 
Have detrimental
effects to health occurred in the subjects who were given
LSD,: whjch are reasonably attributable to the LSD exposure?
This matter has already been discussed informally between
Dr. Beebe of the Follow-up Agency and COL L. B. Altstatt,
MC, Director Environmental Quality Research, 
HQ, USAMRDC,
phone 693-8060. 
COL Altstatt is a point of contact for
further information or details which you may require.
Thank you for your time and attention to this matter.*
.
"" 
Sincerely,"
RigaiBERNSTEIN, 
M.D.
Brigadier General, MC"
Assistant Surgeon General
for Research and Development
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---uire.
Thank you for your time and attention to this matter.*
.
"" 
Sincerely,"
RigaiBERNSTEIN, 
M.D.
Brigadier General, MC"
Assistant Surgeon General
for Research and Development
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
@vFCg Op flg paCq~ls*gu
w00afsts.o... 
0 c ao
ay 25, 1973
Brigadier General Robert Bernstein, MC, USA
Assistant Surgeon General for Research
and Development
Office of the Surgeon General
Department of the Army
Washington, D. C. 
20314
Dear General Bernstein:
This is in reply to your letter of Hay 15, 1973. The
matter discussed in this letter has been referred to the
National Research Council Division of Medical Sciences.
The response of this Division will be communicated to you
in the near future.
Sincerely yours,
Philip Handler
President

--- PAGE BREAK ---

107
PARTICIPANTS
METING ON ClIEICAL HALLUCINOCCNS
June 27, 1973
Da-parttnent of the Army
Colonel Richard F. Barquist, Acting Cosmnander
U. S. Army Mcoical Research and Development Comand
Office of the Surgeon General
Colonel Leslie B. Allstatt, Director
EnvironmenLal Quality Research
U. S. Army Mcdical Research and Development Consmand
Colonel Frank Leitnaker, Deputy Director
Biomtedical Laboratory
Edgewood Arsenal
Colonel Vas M. Sim, Chief
Medical Research Division
Edgewood Arsenal
NR Division of Medical Sciences
Task Force on Chcr, lcal Hallucinogens
Dr. Ieo E. Hlollibter, Chairr.an
Vctcrans Adm.inistration Hospital, Palo Alto
Dr. Samuel Gershon
Department of Pbychiatry
New York University School of Iledicine
Dr. 14alcolm B. Bowers
DeparLment of Psychiatry
Yale University School of Medicine
Division of Medical Sciences
Dr. Leonard Lastcr, Executive D4.rcctor
Dr. henry T. Cinon, -ectutive Secretary
Dr. Lloyd F. Miller, Professional Associate
Dr. Ralph G. Smith, Professional Associate
Mr. Seymour Jablon, Associate Director, Medical Follow-up Agency
Dr. Samuel Abramson, Professional Associate-
70-026 0 - I - 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Associate
Dr. Ralph G. Smith, Professional Associate
Mr. Seymour Jablon, Associate Director, Medical Follow-up Agency
Dr. Samuel Abramson, Professional Associate-
70-026 0 - I - 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

108
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
8-0. COUS: IVWV4o AWtNV¢
..-
%*Ofo..o c ,o0- 
August 24, 1973
Brigadier General Robert Bernstein, MC, 
USA
Assistant Surgeon General for Research
and Development
Office of the Surgeon General
Department of the Army
Washington, D. C. 
20314
Dear General Bernstein:
This is in response to your letter of May 15, 
1973 concerning
the merits of a retrospective study of volunteers who had received
LSD some ten years ago in the course of Army studies. Specifically,
you requested advice from the National Research Council on whether, on
the basis of available information, the Army Medical Department should
sponsor a follow-up study of these volunteers to determine if detrimental
effects on their health occurred that are reasonably attributable to
the ISD exposure.
Your question was referred to our Division of Medical Sciences
which assembled a group of consultants to consider it. 
This group,
after being fully briefed on the pertinent circumstances, arrived at
conclusions which may be suaimarized as follows.
Accumulated experience in the conduct of retrospective studies
suggests that from the original group of volunteers no more than 200
subjects could be expected to be accessible for examination.
Our consultants agreed upon the possibility of acquiring data on
the health status of such a sample, hopefully divided into comparable
experimental and control groups. 
It was estimated that the screening
procedure required for adequate examination of a sample of this size
would extend over a period of two years and cost at least $400,000.
However. this undertaking would not of itself establish the role of LSD
in the etioiogy of any medical conditions encountered.
To establish LSD even tentatively as an etiologic agent would
require that one or more medical conditions of unknown etiology be found
with such a frequency in the LSD-treated group, as contrasted with the
control group, as to clearly link it to the ingestion of LSD. Currentone or more medical conditions of unknown etiology be found
with such a frequency in the LSD-treated group, as contrasted with the
control group, as to clearly link it to the ingestion of LSD. Current

--- PAGE BREAK ---

109 
-
Brigadier General Robert Bernstein, MC, USA
Page 2
paucity of scientific evidence in the available literature suggests
that if long-term effects of [SD do occur after exposure to the dosages
used in the Army tests, and this has yet to be established, they must
occur at a very low frequency rate. Consequently, it is unlikely that
statistically significant incidence rates could be found in the small
and probably biased sample anticipated to remain available from the
original group of subjects.
It is clear that scientific studies aimed at establishing the
presence or absence of low-frequency effects related to a given agent,
especially in terms of an etiological role, should not be undertaken
with inadequate sample size lest, in missing some effects, the results
mislead the undiscriminating public. Such limited scientific worth of
the proposed follow-up study does not warrant the rather considerable
investment of money, time and effort that would be required. It is,
therefore, the conclusion of our consultant group that neither the
subjects concerned, the scientific coumnunity, nor the public would profit
by a retrospective study of the group of volunteers to which your letter
referred.
Sincerely yours,
Philip Handler
President

--- PAGE BREAK ---the scientific coumnunity, nor the public would profit
by a retrospective study of the group of volunteers to which your letter
referred.
Sincerely yours,
Philip Handler
President

--- PAGE BREAK ---

N
110
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
OFFICE OF THE SURGEON GENERAL
WASHINQTON. 0. 
10)14
SGRD-}1
10 SEP W4
K4:QORANDU1 
FOR: 
VICE CHIEF OF STAFF, 
US ARIU
SUBJECT: Reply to Letter from Senator Chiles
1. Reference is made to letter from Senator Lrdton Chiles, dated
9 Septei ber 1974, regarding the Army's follow-up examinations of persons
involved in Arary-sponsored "psychocheaical e:znerients" in January 1960
(Tab A).
2. 
The proposed reply to Senator Chile* to at Tab B.
3. 
Coordination has been obtained from the Office of the Chief of
Legislative Liaison.
2 Inci 
R HARD R. TA7LOR,
as 
Li 
tenant Gen~eral
The Surgeon General
APPROVED. 
,A
S 5 SEP -j74
-LT,. 
CJ
osfsj.-t io 
L"
of J s /Ja:7 
:-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LAW 
N 
0.4 C IALL..,
*WCI&L COMVYt t 04 &so 
£I
MOOAVICl4, SiT410+ 0 Cowl*;"$
September 9, 
1974 
-
General Fred C. Wayand
Acting Chief of Staff
Department of the Army
-Washington, 
D.C. 20310
Dear Goneral h'ayands
On l4r-,;h 4, 
1974, you advised v'u.t the Army planned
to ex:.:aine as 
rapidly au nossiblO those persons
invol-d in tl:c ;.r..-spon.ored "+.-ychochc:'ical
experii.cnts" conducted during jar.uary, 1960.
Since receipt of your letter,. co:..y attached for
your infurration, I have again Lkzn contacted by
Lieutenant Colonal 'illiai. R. Jordan who indicates
that thus far, he has not heard from the Department
roiarldi:ng his '-e:-:,iiainsmt 
ion. 
Accordinelv. I would
progress made in the coditc~t of vhc examinations.
Most si nce 
!.1
LAVTON CHlILLS
-LC/lx
enclosure

--- PAGE BREAK ---from the Department
roiarldi:ng his '-e:-:,iiainsmt 
ion. 
Accordinelv. I would
progress made in the coditc~t of vhc examinations.
Most si nce 
!.1
LAVTON CHlILLS
-LC/lx
enclosure

--- PAGE BREAK ---

112
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARW 
•
~i 
OVI 
OF THC CHIEF 
O[P 
OFWT
" ""WASHblJIrWON, DA 
803WeT.
4 March 1974
Dear Senator Chiles:
I have received your 22 January 1974 request that the Department of the
Army reconsider its position regarding & follow-up study of participants
in Army-sponsored "psycbochemicel experiments.'
This matter was reviewed by our own medical experts and independently by
the National Academy of Sciences, who concluded, as did our medical
experts, that such a study is unlikely to produce usefuL information@
regarding adverse delayed effects of LSD.
Despite the probable lack of scientific validity of the Information likely
to be obtained, the reassurance value of a medical follow-up at this time
for those subjects who participated with Lieutenant Colonel William R.
Jordan, U.S. Army, RSatired, is an overriding coosideration. 
Therefore,
the Army Medical Department plans to proceed with examination of these
persons as rapidly as they can be located.
S
I have inclosed copies of three letters for your information. 
The first
two are from Brigadier General Robert Bernstein, former commander of the
U.S. Army Medical Research and Development Conaed, and Lieutenant General
Richard R. Taylor, The Surgeon General, Departmeat of the Army, respectively.
The third letter is from Dr. Philip Handler, president of the National
Academy of Sciences, responding to the Army's request for guidance in meet-
ing the request made by Colonel Jordan. 
These three letters reflect the
painstaking care, professional participation, acd concern that have marked
the Army$s attention to this matter.
You may be assured of our continued interest in protectLng the health of
Army personnel.
Sincerely,
3 incl 
RE
as 
General, U 
ed States Army
Vice Chief at Staff
Honorable Lawton Chiles
United States Senator
Federal Building
Lakeland, Florida 33801protectLng the health of
Army personnel.
Sincerely,
3 incl 
RE
as 
General, U 
ed States Army
Vice Chief at Staff
Honorable Lawton Chiles
United States Senator
Federal Building
Lakeland, Florida 33801

--- PAGE BREAK ---

113
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
WASHINGTON, OC. 2031
25 September 1974
Doer Senator Chiles:
This is in reply to your inquiry of 9 September 1974 on behalf of
Lieutenant Colonel William R. Jordan (USA, Retired) regarding the
progress made in the conduct of follow-up examinations of persons who
were volunteers in the Army-sponsored "psychochemical demonstration"
during January 1960.
The following steps have been accomplished:
The records have been searched, and a list of current addresses for
the men who participated has been compiled. Between 13 and 17
September 1974, letters were mailed to al-I of the mer. asking them to
confirm that they were participants in the demonstration and to indi-
cate whether they would volunteer to have a follow-uF examination
performed. 
Lieutenant Colonel Jordan should be receiving his letter
in the near future.
Arrangements have been completed to copduct all the examinations at
Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington, D.C., beginning in
October 1974. 
Plans are for two individuals to be scheduled for
admission each week to allow an unhurried and thorough health appraisal.
The evaluation of each individual will require from 3 to S days at the
hospital.
It is anticipated that the examination will be completed not later
than I March 1975. The individuals will be issued Invitational Travel
Orders which will provide for their transportation at government ex-
pense in the case of retired officers and in Temporary Duty status
for officers on active duty. A member of The Surgeon'General's staff
will contact Lieutenant Colonel Jordan and arrange for his follow-up
examination at a mutually convenient time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---for officers on active duty. A member of The Surgeon'General's staff
will contact Lieutenant Colonel Jordan and arrange for his follow-up
examination at a mutually convenient time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

114
I trust that this information will be of assistance.
Sincerely,
40' FRED C. WEAN
General, 
9ed States Army,
ice Ohie of Staff
Honorable Lawton Oiles
United States Senator
Federal Building
*Lakeland, Florida 33801
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

115
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
01WIC o9 WWO SURGEON GENAL
)WAw 
roN.o c 
m. 20310
SGRtD-HR 
3 MAY87
HEMORAICKM FOR: 
CHIEF OF STAFF, US AMY
SUwCTt 
Follow-up of Persons in Psychochemical Experiments--
INFORMATION MEMORANDUM
1. Reference is made to the letter from Senator Lawton Chiles, dated
9 September 1974, regarding the Army's follow-up examinations of persons
involved in Army-sponsored "psychochemical experiments" in January 1960
(Tab B).
2. 
The proposed follow-up letter to Senator Chiles is at Tab A.
3. Previous correspondence relating to this matter is attached at Tab C.
4. Coordination: This action has been coordinated with Office of the
Chief of Legislative Liaison.
3 Incl 
&ICHD R. TAYLOR, 
D.
as 
Lieutenant General
The Surgeon General
2 8 MAY 1975
. OCSA
L .
I, 
rJESTT
LTC, G
, t to C;rrc'-r
CPT Johnston/38065/me
• o * 
(*)

--- PAGE BREAK ---islative Liaison.
3 Incl 
&ICHD R. TAYLOR, 
D.
as 
Lieutenant General
The Surgeon General
2 8 MAY 1975
. OCSA
L .
I, 
rJESTT
LTC, G
, t to C;rrc'-r
CPT Johnston/38065/me
• o * 
(*)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

116
8 
Y 
5
Dear Senator C0lis:
In September 1974 1 vroto to you to describe the Amy's plnsw for cosluct-
IoC radical folow-un oxatn~ations of the officers Vao particlpateJ. alons
vith Lieutenant (olouel J111At 
i. Jordan (WA, Ratird). In an Amy-
sponsored 'psychochemicol demonstratlon" In 1960. 
1 would lik to bring
you up to date ou the progress of those ewxaationn.
Thirty-Lour officers participated in the orltual exercise. 
One of them
subsequently died in Southeast Asia from battle rounds. 
?Venty-stx nmber
of the ra-ai i 
cu 
group of 33 %turn contacted and Invited to coma to Uniter
Lced Ars-r 
doical CeuteL for co"lato evaluation. 
dinatean tma, incl itn?.
Lteutena t Colonel Jordan, have now bean exaAned. 
Anottwr nan io achauulad
for ad-ALssion in thbe next few weeks. 
£¥ Lon Cecliuod tit* Jvitation to
be eainad. and arra 
io.-nts are beins =ase to ascertain thotr lhoaltu
status using a questionnaire. 
Attempts are still beiS rae to locate seven
rambers of the group woo have been separated iron the service.
I anticipate that a final asoessment of the results of these examinations
will be o-2ploted in October 1)75.
I trust that this infor-ation vwil 
be of essistanme.
Sincerely,
General. United 3tates Aru
Chief of Staff
Honorable Lawton Chiles
United States Senator
Federal Butldine
LakelavA, Florida .33S0OL
RETURN TO TSG SHOWING ACTION TAKEN

--- PAGE BREAK ---me.
Sincerely,
General. United 3tates Aru
Chief of Staff
Honorable Lawton Chiles
United States Senator
Federal Butldine
LakelavA, Florida .33S0OL
RETURN TO TSG SHOWING ACTION TAKEN

--- PAGE BREAK ---

117
L.A' TON C,,NSLESg 
m~wms0g.
UIAPObA 
amP,atAvmlw
'UiC'Uab -States 'Zonaff 
ar"o
00"(M@AC $TWO" 
Cowmmfl
September 9# 1974
General Fred C. Wayand
Acting Chief of Staff
Department of the Army
Washington, D.C. 20310
Dear General Wayands
On March 4, 1974, you advised that the Army planned
to examine as rapidly as possible those persons
involved in the Army-sponsored "psychochemical
experiments" conducted during January, 1960.
Since receipt of your letter, copy attached for
your information, I have again been contacted by
Lieutenant Colonel William R. Jordan who indicates
that thus far, he has not heard from the Department
regarding his re-examination. Accordingly, I would
be most appreciative if you would advise me of the
progress made in the conduct of the\examinations.
LAWTON CHILES
LC/lx
enclosure

--- PAGE BREAK ---egarding his re-examination. Accordingly, I would
be most appreciative if you would advise me of the
progress made in the conduct of the\examinations.
LAWTON CHILES
LC/lx
enclosure

--- PAGE BREAK ---

118
SGRD- 
5 JUL 1975
4ORMDUK FOR: 
The Surgeon Geeral
SUBJECT: 
Followup Study of Army Officers Who Participated in PsycbocbomLcal
Experiments t 1960-IiFORHATION )MWDOWD
1. 
In 1960, a group of Army officers who vere students In advanced classes
at the Infantry School, Fort Beaning, Ceorgia, volunteered to participate
In a demonstration of the effects of d-lysergLc acid diethylsaids (LSD).
The test was directed by personnel from the Experimental Medicine and
Neurophrmcology Branch at Edgevood Ardenal and was performed to dem-
strata the disruptive influence this "psychochemical" might have on combat
troops If it vere used against them by an enemy.
2. 
After the volunteers had uudergone psychological testing and pbyeic4
exainations, they were given a single oral dose of LSD. 
The dosage was
adjusted according to each subject's weiRht so that he received 100, 150
or 200 aLcrogrus of the drug. 
The subjects were asked to perform various
mental tasks after taking the drug, and their behavior was observed closely.
Aside from expected temporary behavioral, changes, there were no severe or
untoward reactions. 
The effects of the drug ware no longer apparent when
the officers were examined 24 hours after they ingested the drug.
3. 
In 1972, a retired officer who was part of this group, LTC William R.
Jordan, wrote to The Surgeon General to point out that there Vere possible
late and lons term effects of LSD. 
He was particularly concerned about
information in the lay and medical literature indicating that the use of
LSD wight cause chromosocal damage, birth defects, psychoses, brain damage,
and epilepsy. 
The officer had his first grand real convulsion one year
after participating in the LSD study and he subsequently suffered from
psychomotor and focal seizures which ware difficult to control. 
He was
convinced that there was a causative relationship between his taking LSD
in the study and his seizure disorder. 
In addition, he felt that the LSD
Ingestion was responsible for his wife's infertility and the production of
a spontaneous abortion in 1966. 
The officer urged The Surgeon General to
follow up on volunteers who were given LSD because of the possibility that
some others might have ben adversely affected.n of
a spontaneous abortion in 1966. 
The officer urged The Surgeon General to
follow up on volunteers who were given LSD because of the possibility that
some others might have ben adversely affected.

--- PAGE BREAK ---bortion in 1966. 
The officer urged The Surgeon General to
follow up on volunteers who were given LSD because of the possibility that
some others might have ben adversely affected.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

119
15 JUL 1975
SGR-U
SUBJECT: 
Followup Study of Army Officers Who Participated In ?sychochemica2
Experiments In 1960--IIO 
WATION MMRAD 
DU
4. 
The staff of the US Army Medical Research and Development Command spent
considerable time and effort in researching the claims of long term delter-
ous effects of LSD. 
It yeas concluded that none of the Ill effects cited
had any firm support in the medical literature. 
The matter was referred
to the National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences for
an independent opinion. 
The report of this Council. in part, concluded
that: "Current paucity of scientific evidence In the available literature
suggests that if long-term effects of LSD do occur after exposure to the
doses used Ln the Army tests, snd this baa yet to be established, they
aust occur at a very low frequency rate." 
The full reply of the Council is
at TAB A.
5. 
After LTC Jordan indicated that he was dissatisfied with the Army's
decision not to perform a followup study, he was notified in March 1974
that examinations of the Fort Banning Zroqp would be performed. 
Corre-
spondence with Senator Laeton Chils on the progress of these examinations
is at TAB B.
6. 
Lae following table sunmarizes the progress of the examinations on the
34 man in LTC Jordan's group who Ingested LSD:
a. 
Completed Examinations at Walter Reed Army Medical Center .... 
19
b. 
Declined Invitation to be Exanoed ,................... 
..... 
7
c. 
Letters not Anawered/Addresses Still Being Sought .......... 
., 
7
d. 
Deceased; Killed in Action, Republic of Viet 4an .............
Total 34
7. 
Tho results of the completed examinations are being collated by
Colonel Archer Huott. MC, Chief, Neurology Service, Walter Reed Army Medical
Center. 
A preliminary report on two patients with abnormal findings is at
TAB C. A health survey questionnaire to be sent to men vho declined exami-
nation Is being vritteo 
in consultation with Colonel lluott. 
A final report
should be completed in October 1975.
8. 
LTC Jordan's group represents a small portion of the total number of
subjects who took LSD as part of Army research projects. 
It has bean
2t. 
A final report
should be completed in October 1975.
8. 
LTC Jordan's group represents a small portion of the total number of
subjects who took LSD as part of Army research projects. 
It has bean
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

120
1C5 JD-l
SUIJCTt 
toUonp Study of Army Of f Icer# Who Participated In PeYchochiCA]L
Experlant. In 1960-.-ORHATION WIOWIDU
ostistod that about 1,50 subjects nay have participated at the Army
Chemical Center at Edgeuood Arsenals at other installations such as Fort
Sunning or In contract proracs. 
A awrandun on this subject frot 
the
material gathered as part of the Jordan case investigation is at TAB D.
SIGNED
KennOth R. Dirks. M.D.* 00
KOMHMTH R. DIU.S, M.D.
brigadier Generale HC
Assistant Suracon General
for research and Development
4 Incl
as
MFR: 
Hem sumarizes progress to date on follovup study of Army
Officers who participated in psychochemical experiments in
1960 at Fort Beoning, GA.
CONCURRENCES: See Concurrence Stamp./
ACTION OFFICER: 
MM MICHAEL V. JOHNSTa4
I.
DCO 
""
AIDE
,DXc 
'"R
fN I
RP(
IX T
INFO t2iS DIV
A J
JA
AI'DS
HAJ Johns ton/ 38065
Typed by H. arnes
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---RRENCES: See Concurrence Stamp./
ACTION OFFICER: 
MM MICHAEL V. JOHNSTa4
I.
DCO 
""
AIDE
,DXc 
'"R
fN I
RP(
IX T
INFO t2iS DIV
A J
JA
AI'DS
HAJ Johns ton/ 38065
Typed by H. arnes
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

121
Colonel JORDAN. Again, sir, I am not trying to censure the Army by
any stretch of the imagination.
People disagree. The Army had its position; I had my position.
Senator KzNNz[Y. I think you have been very fair, quite frankly,
to the Arm;.
Colonel oDAN. The Army treated me well, air.
Senator MATiyAs. Doyou know if the others have had side effects ?
Colonel JORDAN. Sir, Ido not know of my own knowledge.
I have heard rumors they have had psychotic episodes after injec-
tion of the drug, but I have no personal knowledge.
Senator KitNNZDY. Mrs. Ray.
I understand, Mrs. Ray, you were employed as a research assistant
at the Tniversity of Minnesota Psychiatric Hospital.
Mrs. RAY. No, Senator.
I started at the University in 1962, and I was employed as a research
assistant from 1964 to 1966 and also as a psychometrist and teaching
assistant.
Senator KENNEDY. What did you do there? What was your func-
tion?
Mrs. RAY. I worked on various staff projects and I, for the most
part, tested patients psychologically. I did intelligence tests and a lot
of MAPI's.
Senator KENNEDY. Did you witness any LSD experiments?
Mrs. RAY. Yes.
I was directly involved in Dr. Marazzi's study.
Senator K.NNEDY. Who is Dr. Marazzi ?
Mrs. RAY. He was a psychopharmacologist who had an Air Force
grant, and he was doing LSD studies for us.
He was not in the department of clinical psychology as I was. He
was two or three buildings away, but I took care of his psychological
testing of LSD patients that he had.
Senator KENNEDY. As I understand it, this was an Air Force grant.
Is that your understanding?
Mrs. RAY. Yes; it was.
Senator KENyY. Tell us just a little bit about the conditions
under which these LSD experiments took place. Were doctors present
during the time of testing
Mrs. RAY. It is hard for me to my exactly what happened, but I can
tell you firsthand, since I was also a subject in the LSD study. There
were no medically qualified people there.
A student gave me the injection. There was no followup.
Senator KENNEDY. How do you know it was a student?
Mrs. RAY. I knew him.
I assumed he had z B.A. I am not sure.
Senator KENNEDY. That would make you feel a lot better, wouldn't
it?
[Laughter.]
Can yo tell us a little bit about what the effects were?
We heard from Colonel Jordan of the effects of his particular
testing
Could you describe those you experienced ?
Mr. RAY. The test in me'or the subject.
Senator KzNNEDY. Both.t what the effects were?
We heard from Colonel Jordan of the effects of his particular
testing
Could you describe those you experienced ?
Mr. RAY. The test in me'or the subject.
Senator KzNNEDY. Both.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ere?
We heard from Colonel Jordan of the effects of his particular
testing
Could you describe those you experienced ?
Mr. RAY. The test in me'or the subject.
Senator KzNNEDY. Both.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

122
Mrs. RAY. I do not know how subjectively they felt.
I know how I thought and acted. But with me, I considered it the
most important event of my life.
I went through a state of absolute terror, panic.,
I have a very hard time verbalizing because unless a person has been
through this, it is very hard to explain it.
I started out after the injection with nausea and shaking and feeling
cold and wanting to run away, but not knowing from what.
As I got worse and worse, I realized something was very wrong. I
felt they may have given me too much or maybe they accidentally went
into a vein, and I told the student that I wanted to go to the emergency
room.
I was absolutely desperate, and he said he was sorry, but he could
not take me there without some sort of authority.
This was on a Saturday, and there just was nobody in the building.
There was no one but the two of us who I knew of.
So he got on the telephone and tried dialing Marazzi who never
seemed to be around. He was never around when I was around.
lie dialed all kinds of people and could not get through, so I tried
to go out through the window.
le was holding onto me. He hollered, and another student walked
through, and the two of them took me to the emergency room.
At this time it was about the worst. I was in a state of becoming the
universe. I became objects. I was no longer a person. I was in a state of
absolute terror.
The closest thing I can remember being like that was as a child, when
I was given ether, the feeling before losing consciousness, and this time
I could bring myself back enough to realize that I was a person out
of this billowing black seething weirdness, this horror.
I looked down and I saw my arms which were two white rivers with
black threads and they were my veins. I realized that, and I felt that
if I tried really hard, somehow I could sever the veins, and I realized
even though I was not really a person that I could end all this night-
mare, this hell, by cutting my veins.
Then I concentrated on this problem for what seemed like centuries,
because time did not exist. It was a strange time disorder. I tried des-
perately to try to kill myself, and at this point there is no question in
my mind that if I had had some sort of sharp instrument, and if I were
alone, I would have killed myself.
And no one seemed to know how to handle the situation.
No one seemed to know what to do. It seemed like kids playing
scientists.
Senator Kzsmmy. There was no adequate medical supervision
during this period of time ?
Mrs. RAT. When I saw patients going in I never saw Dr. Marazzi
around. There were just students.
Senator KENNZDY. Were you permitted to go to the emergency room
when you wanted to?
Mrs. RAY. No, the student told me he just could not take me there;
he had to get some authorization first.
Senator KzNwwy. And you contemplated suicide ?
Mrs. RAI. 
It was not just contemplating; I was desperately trying
to find out how I could commit suicide.there;
he had to get some authorization first.
Senator KzNwwy. And you contemplated suicide ?
Mrs. RAI. 
It was not just contemplating; I was desperately trying
to find out how I could commit suicide.

--- PAGE BREAK ---some authorization first.
Senator KzNwwy. And you contemplated suicide ?
Mrs. RAI. 
It was not just contemplating; I was desperately trying
to find out how I could commit suicide.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

123
Senator MATRIAR. Is that why you tried to get out the window, or
were you just trying to escape ?
Mrs. RAY. At that point I did not consider suicide.
I was just trying to get away. I wanted to run awa.
Senator MhUmms. It was just getting out of there that was im-
portant.
Mrs. RAy. Yes.
I did not care that I was on the third floor. I just had to be away. I
was like an animal in a cage. I did not want to be trapped. I was held
against my will, even though I guess I should not have been.
Senator KENNEDy. Were there others in the tests ?
Mrs. RAY. Yes
Senator KENNEDY. While you were there or during the time that
you were being tested did you view any tests that were being done on
minors?
Mrs. RAY. Yes.
I specifically remember a couple of them that were quite horrible.
Senator KENmY. How old were these test subjects?
Mrs. RAY. I remember one girl of 17, although I saw her written
up as 18, and I remember another girl 19, and the 18-year-old deft-
nitely did not want to be part of the experiment.
Senator KzNmwy. How do you know she did not ?
Mrs. RAY. I saw her as they were taking her in, and she said she
won't go, she won't go, and they said, "Yes, you will," and she said,
"Don't take me back to that hell"; which makes me think she had had
a previous experiment.
Senator KZNNEDY. What was she doing in there ?
You were all not forced or required to do this, were you ?
Mrs. RAy. She was a patient, and she was forced.
They told her she had no choice..
I remember this little episode very well.
There was an aide on her arm restraining her, and an orderly on
another, and she kept saying she did not want to go in, and they
said-I do not know which it was who said that, but they "id, "You
have to go; you have no choice."
Senator KENNEDY. What did the doctor tell her?
Mrs. RaY. There was no doctor there.
But I went back then about I or 2 hours later, and at this point
she was totally disintegrated. She was absolutely psychotic. Before
this she was a very normal appearing person; she would gossip and
joke. I even remember a joke she told me. She was attractive and
talkative. But afterward she was just a mess. She was taken back to
the ward, and she was for like 4 days mute, and you could not get
through to her in any way.
I tried to tet her, and I went into her room and she was just
staring straight ahead.
I went like this [waving hands], and it was nothing; she did not
seem to see me.
I took her to the testing room where there was four others, and
she walked right through a chair as though it was not there. Any posi-
tion that I put her body in, she would stay in.
I would go like this, and she would stay like that.
[Indicating.]
10-036 0 - 76 - Ie walked right through a chair as though it was not there. Any posi-
tion that I put her body in, she would stay in.
I would go like this, and she would stay like that.
[Indicating.]
10-036 0 - 76 - I

--- PAGE BREAK ---gh a chair as though it was not there. Any posi-
tion that I put her body in, she would stay in.
I would go like this, and she would stay like that.
[Indicating.]
10-036 0 - 76 - I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

124
It was just as if she were a doll.
I tried to explain the test to her over and-over and over. She could
not read.
I showed her. I tried to make it very simple, and I said, "Read the
card. If it is true, put it here [indicating]. Read the card. If it is false,
lit it there [indicating]."
She could not understand.
Finally, she started going like this [indicating], sort of mimick-
ing but actually nothing. She just could not understand.
I am sorry. She did not fall over the chair when she went in; she
fell over it iwhen she went out.
Senator Kz,.iEnqY. What has happened to you in succeeding years
since the test took place I
Have you had any side effects since the test took place?
Mrs. RAY. Yes.
Senator K.iNwry. What have they been?
Mrs. RAY. Before this I was quite a relaxed person despite a rather
traumatic life, and right after that, starting the date I got the LSD,
I have been overwhelmed, flooded with anxiety almost 24 hours a day.
It has never changed, and this is over 9 years ago.
That is the most important problem I have had, flashbacks to more
or less a degree, a feeling of going back to that terrible world.
I have had nightmares, I have developed an intolerance to any sort
of stimulants. One cup of coffee after noon will keep me awake all
night, and things like that.
But at the time it influenced mi quite a bit because I had to quit
school. I was hospitalized when I had the LSD experience, but that
was not the end of it.
I had to go through 61/2 months of psychiatric therapy. I was re-
ferred to a psychiatrist the next week, and that was very expensive
for a student.
To add insult to injury, I received a hospital bill after I was ad-
mitted for the treatment for me under the LSD, which I sent to
Dr. Marazzi.
After that point. I -have never seen or heard of him again.
Senator KXN.EDY. Do you want to try to get some kind of addi-
tional followup help or asstance?
Mrs. RAY. Not from them.
Senator KENNEDY. You did not care if you ever saw them again?
Mrs. RAY. I cared. I did not want to ever see him again.
__8nator MATHIA. Mr. Chairman, during Mrs. Ray s very eloquent
and moving description of her experience I noticed Colonel Jordan
nodding.
Colonel Jordan, you seem to agree with her description of the kind
of experience; is that correct?
Colonel JORDAN. Right down the line, yes, sir.
It is a complete personality disintegration, and in some instances a
person becomes almost like a schizophrenic paranoid, without any abil-
ity to control his own actions, his emotions, his thoughts.
I was just reminded there that they gave us an English test, for ex-
ample, during this experiment and it was impossible.
I was a graduate with honors in journalism and a minor in English,
and they gave us an English test which I assume is about second gradet, for ex-
ample, during this experiment and it was impossible.
I was a graduate with honors in journalism and a minor in English,
and they gave us an English test which I assume is about second grade

--- PAGE BREAK ---ring this experiment and it was impossible.
I was a graduate with honors in journalism and a minor in English,
and they gave us an English test which I assume is about second grade

--- PAGE BREAK ---

125
level, and I could not even determine what true and false meant. It
was so completely beyond me. I could read the words, but I could not
somehow connect then.
Her description was absolutely graphic and correct.
Senator KENNEDY. Thank you very uiuch.
Senator STAFrom. Mr. Chairman, could I ask Mrs. Ray', would you
give us again the namie of the doctor who apparently had Air Force
rank and supervised or had charge of these tests?
Mrs. RAY. Dr. Marazzi, and his initials are A. S.
His first name is very hard to pronounce.
Senator STAFFORD. DO you know, Mrs. Ray, if he is in the room
today?
Mrs. RAY. I have not looked. I do not know.
Senator STAFORD. Do you know where he resides at the present
time?
Mrs. RAY. I heard that he is near Detroit. I read this in the paper.
Senator STAFMRD. Do you know if he is practicing medicine at the
present time ?
Mrs. RAY. I hope not. I do not know.
Senator KzNNEDY. We ought to give Dr. Marazzi a copy of the testi-
mony and permit him to make comments.
Mr. Chaffin, you were in the Air Force.
During what period of time?
Mr. CHAFFIN. My total career spanned from June of 1949 until De-
cember of 1969.
Senator KENN.EDY. Did you participate in drug tests?
Mr. CHArnIN. Yes. sir, Idid.
Senator KEN.N.EDY. Will you tell us why you volunteered?
fr. CTIAFriN. Basically, loyalty to the AirForce, figuring this would
be a way to assist the military in some of its programs.
Senator KN..N- EDY. What did you expect to find.
Mr. CiiAFFi.. I was completely unaware of what I would find.
I had been a basic training instructor, and I was instructing in
chemical biological warfare. I knew, you might say, a layman's in-
formation of this particular program, and alt hough I was in the Air
Force, this was under the auispices or control of the Army, and I as-
sumed it would be basically the same thing.
Two of the tests were conducted on a new style gas mask that I
understand was being developed, and the other one was on the use of
DDT to control body parasites, et cetera.
Senator KzNNwY. What were you told you were participating in at
the time you came to take the test ?
Mr. CHAFN. Actually, to my knowledge, nothing, except we would
be administered some type of drugs, which was specifically odorless,
tasteless, colorless, administered in distilled water, and they would
take certain tests during the period of time.
Senator KENNwY What do you remember about the test itself?
Mr. CH" 
N. Very little.
While being administered it, we were requested to determine lapse
of time, using a watch. After being administered the beaker or con-
tainer of distilled water, evidently with the drug in it, we began-I
recall going in, and again we were asked to determine a specific period
of time: 1 minute, 2 minutes; I forget the exact number of times.of distilled water, evidently with the drug in it, we began-I
recall going in, and again we were asked to determine a specific period
of time: 1 minute, 2 minutes; I forget the exact number of times.

--- PAGE BREAK ---evidently with the drug in it, we began-I
recall going in, and again we were asked to determine a specific period
of time: 1 minute, 2 minutes; I forget the exact number of times.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

126
Senator KzNmmY. You were administered LSD, were you not?
Mr. CuRA 
N. Yes, sir; orally.
Senator KENNEDY. As I understand from what you are saying here
from your own knowledge, that the purpose in adinistering this was
to test the time lapses that those who were taking this drug
experienced ?
Mr. CHAIn. Based on the information requested from the indi-
viduals taking the tests, this is my summation, yes.
Senator KENNEDY. When did you find out it was LSD I
Mr. CHAFFIN. I found out unfortunately at the time the story was
published concerning the testing of LSD by Army at Edgewood Ar-
senal, and definitely found out after I attempted to contact several
people and did contact an individual in the Pentagon, and I received
a verifying letter from the Army that I had been administered LSD.
I believe that was around the 5th of August, this year.
Senator KENNEDy. How long after the test I
Mr. CHAFFIN. The test was conducted in July, I believe, of 1958.
Senator KZNNzDY. And you found out in the last several months?
Mr. CHAIN. Yes, sir.
Senator KENNEDY. Do you remember signing any consent form
prior to the test ?
Mr. ChAiN. No, sir I do not recall any consent form at all.
Senator KENNZDY. 
ow would you characterize the medical fol-
lowup after the test ?
Mr. CHAFIN. To my knowledge, there has been no medical followup
at all.
I was never informed there was and I never received any unusual
medical or psychological examinations. The only ones I received were
strictly for purposes of reenlistment, and then finally, my retirement
ph sical.
Senator KENNDrY. Would you tell us, Mrs. Chaffin, what effects you
noticed in Mr. Chaffin after the test.
Mrs. CHArTFJ. 
Basically, it was a personality change.
He became more withdrawn and depressed.
Before he w4s very outgoing, very friendly; but now hours would
go by without talking, and this has been since that time.
Senator KENNEDY. He has been generally more depressed ?
Mrs CHAFFIN. I would say so, yes.
Senator KNNEDy. It is your assessment that you tie this depression
to the time he took the test: is that correct ?
Mrs. CHAFn. 
Yes.
We had been married approximately 7 years when this happened,
and it seemed in the latter part of our marriage he has been undergo-
ing more of these side effects.
Senator KENNEDY. How do you feel, Mr. Chaffin, about how you
were treated by the Army in this case?
Mr. CHAFzI. 
It is a very difficult question to answer.
I enjoyed my military career. Of course, again using hindsight, I
feel that in this particular instance the treatment was unfair in the
wense that I was not aware of the potential physical and psychological
aspects of this particular job, and therefore, I had nothing to base
my decision on to volunteer. I mean, I had no knowledge of what could
possibly transpire as a result of this.cal and psychological
aspects of this particular job, and therefore, I had nothing to base
my decision on to volunteer. I mean, I had no knowledge of what could
possibly transpire as a result of this.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

127
Senator KENNEDY. Mrs. Chaffin, do you have a gun in your house?
Do you have a weapon I
Mrs. CHJAFFIN. Yes, air, we do.
Mr. CHAFFIN. Yes, sir, we do.
Senator KENNEDY. Could you tell us, Mrs. Chaffin; I understand
you had a rather frightening experience one time.
Mrs. CHAFFIN. Yes, sir.
He did take the gun and start out with it and I asked him where he
was going. It was about 10 o'clock, after dark.
I knew-he had no reason to carry a gun.
He said, "I don't know. I will be back."
He had been rather moody all day) and I just asked hin why he was
taking the gun. He said he was going to shoot himself, and that is
when I toldhim that if he left the house with the gun, I would call the
police and have them trace him down.
But he seemed to have no memory of it at all.
Senator KENNY. Mr. Chaffin, as I understand, you have no
memory of this incident, is that right?
Mr. CHAFFIN. Yes, sir, that is right. I have no memory of this
specific instance at all.
Senator KzNNEDY. Or any incidents involving this?
Mr. CHAFFIN. I have had other instances of extreme depression, ac-
tually blank memories up to a certain point; as I say, extreme depres-
sion, virtually indescribable, as far as contemplating taking my own
life.
- Senator KENNEDY. Did you ever have those prior to the time you
took this drug?
Mr. CHAFFIN. No, sir. I can honestly say I had no experiences such
as this.
Senator KiNNwy. Thank you, Mr. Chaffin.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Chaffin follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---took this drug?
Mr. CHAFFIN. No, sir. I can honestly say I had no experiences such
as this.
Senator KiNNwy. Thank you, Mr. Chaffin.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Chaffin follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

128
STATEMENT OF WILLIAM F. CHAFFIN
aBefore a Joint Session of the Senate Subcommitte on Health
and
the Senate Subcommittee on Administrative Practice and Procedure"
September 10, 1975
My name is WILLIAM F. CHAFFIN. I am a retired member of
of the United States Air Force and the owner and operator of a 
jewelry
store in Tucson, Arizona. I am appearing before the Subcomittees
today, with my wife, at the request of Senator Kennedy's Staff, to
answer certain questions and hopefully to cast some light on the events
surrounding my participation in a human experimentation Program while
in the United States Air Force at Edgewood, Maryland in July of 1958.
In June of 1958, I was a Sergeant in the United States
Air Force at Dover Air Force Base, Delaware. Pursuant to my duties
there, I became apprised of the need for volunteeers for chemical
and biological testing at the Edgewood. Maryland base. In an attempt
to be useful to the United States Air Force and my country, I volun-
teered for temporary duty to engage in such testing. I was not informed
at any time prior to the testimony of the nature of the tests of my
duties. (A copy of the orders sending me to the testing facility at
Odgewood, Maryland is attached hereto and incorporated as a part of
the offical record of these hearings.)
Upon my arrival at the Edgewood facility, I was placed in
a barracks with approximately thirty other volunteers. 
Daily, some
of the volunteers were taken to various points on the base, and it
is my understanding they conducted experiments involving the use of
gas masks and perhaps DDT. 
For approximately two weeks, I was simply
ordered to report to a certain station each morning and then was
released for the remainder of the day to pursue my own interests. I
must say that the dates are not exact, and I cannot say with any
great amount of surety whether I was there for a week, two weeks,s
released for the remainder of the day to pursue my own interests. I
must say that the dates are not exact, and I cannot say with any
great amount of surety whether I was there for a week, two weeks,

--- PAGE BREAK ---emainder of the day to pursue my own interests. I
must say that the dates are not exact, and I cannot say with any
great amount of surety whether I was there for a week, two weeks,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

129
three weeks before I was actually involved in the testing of LSD.
In any event, at some point around the middle of the month of July,
myself and four or five other individuals were taken to a hospital
on the base. We were at that time taken into a room and a psychologist
or psychiatrist-I cannot remember which-who I believe was associated
with the University of klaryland, informed us that we would be admin-
istered a drug or a substance in distilled water. We were further
informed that this drug or substance would be odorless, tasteless,
and colorless. We were asked to perform certain tests prior to the
ingestion of the substance. 
!ly best recollection of these tests is
that we were simply asked to estimate certain amounts of elapsed time
by any means other than a watch or clock. 
We were then taken back to
our various wards and a short time thereafter, I was given a beaker
of colorless, odorless and tasteless substance by an orderly or an
attendant.
I have no recollection whatsoever that I was informed of
the nature of qualitites of the substance. Certainly, no reference
was made to any possibility of detrimental, psychological or physical
effects on myself, or my future family, by the taking of the substance.
I cannot estimate adequately the length of time that elapsed
after I took the drug until I first began to notice the effects; hut
my best recollection is that it was in the nature of one-half hour.
-At that time,I remember being taken back to the psychiatrist or psy-
chologist and again asked to estimate various lengths of time by any
means except observing a clock or watch. 
It is extremely difficult
for me to describe adequately what occurred in the next hours of that
day. I have to this day distinct recollections of vivid and colorful
events that made no sense whatnoever to me. I have distinct recoll-
ections of either myself hallucinating or other individuals hallucinating
and imagining that they were seeing certain objects and things. I do
not recall if they were in fact hallucinating or if I were simply
imagining they were. I was obsessed with a feeling that I can only
describe as utter and total depression. 
I do not think these wordsnot recall if they were in fact hallucinating or if I were simply
imagining they were. I was obsessed with a feeling that I can only
describe as utter and total depression. 
I do not think these words

--- PAGE BREAK ---ere in fact hallucinating or if I were simply
imagining they were. I was obsessed with a feeling that I can only
describe as utter and total depression. 
I do not think these words

--- PAGE BREAK ---

130
adequately convey the waning of that which I experienced, but I
simply do not have the words to set .forth the occurrences of that
day. Later, I was released from the hospital. 
I cannot recall if
this was after a period of twelve hours, twenty-four hours or thirty-
six hours or more. It is simply impossible to adequately determine
what lengths of time elapsed.
I returned to my home at Dover, Delaware Air Forte Base
shortly thereafter, and my life returned to a state of some normality.
I found it extremely difficult to talk to my wife or to any other
individual about what had occurred to me at Edgewood. Additionally,
although I was given no debriefing and was not told of the substance
or quality of the tests that I underwent as a member of the United
States Air Force, I did feel that this was a matter that should not
be discussed openly.
Since that time, I have experienced what I believe to be
LSD flashbacks on at least three separate occasions. The feelings
that encompassed me on those three different occasions were again
what I can only describe as a total depression accompanied by nearly
uncontrollable desire to take my life. I do not wish to talk about
these occurrences in detail at this time, but will do so if 
it will
be helpful to the committee's investigation.
After I returned to Dover Air Force Base, my wife became
pregnant and about November of 1958, she suffered a miscarriage of what
the doctor informed us was in all likelihood a deformed or malformed
fetui. I do not know at this time if this attributable to the LSD
which I was administered at Edgewood, Maryland or not. We do not at
this time know if various other problems which have arisen in one of
my children is directly attributable to LSD or not. Conversely, we
do not at this time know that there is no relation. After the ingestion
of the substance in July of 1958, my personality and behavior began
to change. After seven years of marriage, I was certainly not an
individual that tended to depression. However, after the ingestion
of LSD, I have undergone as I mentioned earlier, several occasions of
the same total and extreme depression that occurred when I was givenidual that tended to depression. However, after the ingestion
of LSD, I have undergone as I mentioned earlier, several occasions of
the same total and extreme depression that occurred when I was given

--- PAGE BREAK ---depression. However, after the ingestion
of LSD, I have undergone as I mentioned earlier, several occasions of
the same total and extreme depression that occurred when I was given

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"N
131
the LSD initially. 
Additionally, my wife has related to me one incident
that occurred and which I have no recollection of whatsoever. 
This
incident involved my actually taking a gun and attempting to leave
our home for the purpose of taking my own life.
I would like to state for the record that I believe that
the United States Air Force was always extremely fair to me in my
military career. I enjoyed my military career and consider myself to
be a loyal member of the United States Air Force retired. 
I must also
state that the trauma that I have undergone as a result of beiiq surr-
eptitiously administered this drug is something I consider to be totally
out of keeping with my concept of the service. I can only hooe that
the Committee will take every means available to make sure that the
other individuals who were administered LSD receive notification and
help.
I should relate to the Committee that upon reading of the
tragic story of the Olaen family, it 
became apparent to me that I
had probably received LSD in July of 1958. 
I was, therefore, not
totally shocked when I received notification from the office of the
Surgeon General that I had taken LSD. 
I think I had already realized
as much and had cemented to my wife that, 
finally, I knew what
it was I received at Edgewood, Maryland. 
I should also say to the
Committee that it 
is an extremely difficult matter to be here and to
be talking about these personal matters. I do believe, however, that
there may be some help forthcoming for myself and others if individuals
will take it 
upon themselves to come forward and to speak candidly
about the experiences we have undergone as a result of this drug.
I am deeply and personally opposed to any and all illegal drugs. 
1
am not opposed to testing; but, I do believe that before individuals
in a volunteer status are administered dangerous drugs such as LSD,
they should be given the option of knowing the possibility of lasting
harm.ed to testing; but, I do believe that before individuals
in a volunteer status are administered dangerous drugs such as LSD,
they should be given the option of knowing the possibility of lasting
harm.

--- PAGE BREAK ---I do believe that before individuals
in a volunteer status are administered dangerous drugs such as LSD,
they should be given the option of knowing the possibility of lasting
harm.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

\N
132
Senator -Schweiker.
Senator &nwzmc 
Mrs. Chaffin, at the time your husband was
administered LSD, were you aware that he ws under any drug at all f
Mrs. CnArn1. All I knew-I was a service wife; I didn't question
aything.
H6 said he was going to Maryland, to TDY, and that was it.
Senator Scuwm 
.
You did not think it was a drug program of
anykidnd involved?
m CHirI. I did not know what it was, sir.
Senator ScHwziKz How long would you say it took from the first
time he took LSD until you noticed a change in his personality?
Was it almost simultaneous ?
Mrs Cum. No, sir. It was a gradual thing.
Senator Sciawu.uMa. Would you say this continued for a long period
of time
Mrs. CamN. Itis really still continuing.
Senator ScuwmuzRu. As far as you are concerned, has there been
some kind of premanent effect?
Mrs. CHAMUIN. I feel so, yes.
Senator ScHwwczi 
There is no question in your mind about that; is
there?
Mrs CHAWIN. No, sir.
Senator 
i 
CHWrE. When did the gun incident occur ?
Mrs. CHAiN. It happened approximately 2 years ago.
Senator SCHWrsKaR When did he take LSD?
Mrs. CHunr. In 1958.
senatorr Scuwmxu. The gun incident happened 2 years ago?
Mrs. OCHAni. 
Yea
Senator SCHW~aKER. 
Looking back on it, do you see a Government
responsibility in this matter? What advice can you give our commit-
tee about preventing this kind of thing, what should we be doing in
the future to prevent families like yours from experiencing these
tragic consequences?
Mr 
CIAMN. I feel the subject should be well informed and his
immediate family, his wife if he has one, or parents if not.
And he should know what he is taking. and he should be advised
of the consequences.
Then, if he still wants to volunteer-I am not against testing as
such; that is the way we make progress.
Senator ScuwEiKEr Do you feel the Government should have told
your husband what he received and followed up afterwards?
Mrm Citrx. Yes, sir.
Senator ScnWrixz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Chaffin follows :]Government should have told
your husband what he received and followed up afterwards?
Mrm Citrx. Yes, sir.
Senator ScnWrixz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Chaffin follows :]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ve told
your husband what he received and followed up afterwards?
Mrm Citrx. Yes, sir.
Senator ScnWrixz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Chaffin follows :]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

133
STATEMENT OF MRS. DOROTHY CHAFFIN
"Before a Joint Session of the Senate Subcommittee on Health
and
the Senate Subcommittee on Ad.ainistrative Practice and Procedure"
September 10, 1975
I am DOROTHY CHAFFIN, the wife of WILLIAM F. CHAFFIN,
of 4449 Jay Street, in Tucson, Arizona. We have four children. I
recall that my husband was ordered to the Edgewood Maryland Testing
Facility in July, 1958; at that time, we were stationed at Dover
Air Force Base in Delaware. I did not question, to any great degree,
my husband's going to Edgewood in Maryland for testing. Hy husband
had been a basic training instructor in biological and chemical warfare
earlier in his career, and we both believed that he would be doing
tests which were similar to those in which he had participated in in
Texas.
When my husband returned in the latter part of July from
Edgewood, Maryland, I spoke to him about what had occurred. In retro-
spect, it is easy to see why he was so hesitant to speak with me about
this matter, although at that time, I simply considered it a matter
of Air Force security which did not involve me and into which I should
not inquire.
However, upon my husband's return, I began almost immed-
iately to notice basic changes in his personality. These incidents
ranged from slight depression over what seemed to me minor matters
to total and deep depression for no apparent or explainable reason.
He became more and more withdrawn and non-responsiv-. 
I think now I
should have realized that this occurred simultaneously with what we
now know to be the administering of LSD. 
But, I must say that I did
not place those two events together in my mind until very recently.
it is difficult to describe the change in my husband's personality,
although he had become more withdrawn and was subject to short states
of total depression.together in my mind until very recently.
it is difficult to describe the change in my husband's personality,
although he had become more withdrawn and was subject to short states
of total depression.

--- PAGE BREAK ---until very recently.
it is difficult to describe the change in my husband's personality,
although he had become more withdrawn and was subject to short states
of total depression.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

134
On one extremely traumatic occasion at our home in Tucson,
Arizona, my husband arose from the bed rather late in the evening
and took a gun from our home. I was amazed and asked what he was
doing, and he simply replied to me that he was going out for a drive,
and then stated that-he was going to kill himself. I was shocked
and began to try to reason with him to understand what was occurring,
and he could not explain to me. After considerable difficulties, I
did convince him to put the gun up, which he did, and he returned to
bed. The next day, he was unable to recall anything that had occurred.
I know of at least two other occasions when my husband had contemplated
taking his own life and has suffered from acute and total depression.
He cannot explain to me adequately how he feels during these times,
but it is evidently a terrible experience for him; certainly it is for
our family.
As my husband has stated to you, we feel as if our family
may have suffered directly from this incident in other ways also. I
suffered a miscarriage in late 1958 and was informed by the doctor
that the fetus was probably malformed or deformed. Additionally, one
of my children suffers from cystic fibrosis, a genetically inherant
_disease, and we are not sure at this time if there is a correlation
between his cystic fibrosis and several other organic problems he
suffers and my husband having taken LSD. 
We are informed that LSD can
and in some cases does effect one's children.
Since we have learned for sure that my husband was admin-
istered LSD, our situation has been very difficult. We are a rather
normal and private family, and it is difficult to talk openly about
our problems. We are also convinced that this testimony is necessary.
However, the whole ordeal has created great anxiety in my husband
and our family. Nonetheless, we are hopeful that his statement will
aid the Committee in its investigation and will inform other individuals
who may have suffered from this drug as have my husband and our family.ly. Nonetheless, we are hopeful that his statement will
aid the Committee in its investigation and will inform other individuals
who may have suffered from this drug as have my husband and our family.

--- PAGE BREAK ---are hopeful that his statement will
aid the Committee in its investigation and will inform other individuals
who may have suffered from this drug as have my husband and our family.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

135
Senator KZNNEDY. Our next witness is Mrs. Elizabeth Barrett.
Mrs. Barrett., I believe your father was involved in an LSD
experiment.
Mrs. BAuuur. It is interesting the Army has not really decided
what it is yet.
Newsday, which is a Long Island newspaper, got a name from the
Army. That was shortly before we came down to visit the Army.
Wen we came down, we got a name entirely different and upon
disclosing this to the reporter .from Newsday, the reporter called the
Army and said, "How come you gave us two different drugs?"
The net result of that conversation is they.came back to this man
and said it many still be a third drug.
They gave hm, the name of another drug and said he was going to
Edgewood Arsenal to check it.
Heard LSD as a child, and that is, so far as that, the only other
information we have.
Senator KzNNEDY. I think the Army told us this morning it was
mescaline.
Mrs. BARRrF. But that is not very much. The mescaline derivative
does not really mean anything.
Senator KENNEDY. Could you tell us just a little bit about the experi-
ment that he was involved in.
Mrs. BARRTr. Senator Kennedy, I have a two-page prepared
statement.
If I may, I would like to give it to you, and then you can ask me
anything you like.
On January 8, 1953, my father, Harold Blauer died. At the time,
his family was told that he died after receiving an overdose of a drug
being given to him for diagnostic and/or therapeutic purposes. Now.
the Department of the Army has informed me that my father was
a victim of a drug test program administered by the New York
Psychiatric Institute under an Army contract. The Army has sup-
plied me with some of the file describing these experiments. The
description of my father's participation in this program is something
I still find difficult to believe, much less understand.
Not only is there no record of permission .from my father to ad-
minister experimental drugs, but they were apparently forced upon
him. I quote from the record-first day-first injection-first com-
-mfint.ery apprehensive, considerable persuasion required."
Anyone who has been around mental institutions can tell you that
means that my father was tied or held down. And prior to the third
injection, my father pleaded "Why (do) you do this. I have plans
to go home tomorrow." -
It's an outrage that this type of experiment has been permitted.
There must be no more secret contracts to conduct experiments on
innocent people.
I cannot begin to express the dismay, fear, anger, pain *** that
I feel. But I would like to make the strongest plea I can that all those
within range of my voice start to work with the philisophy that the
best way to prevent this kind of horror-whether the misuse of exper-
imental or even everyday drugs-is to encourage people to believe that
they are responsible for their own bodies.
?n order for people to be capable of making intelligent decisionsthe misuse of exper-
imental or even everyday drugs-is to encourage people to believe that
they are responsible for their own bodies.
?n order for people to be capable of making intelligent decisions

--- PAGE BREAK ---136
about their health care, they have to have adequate information avail-,--
able.

One step that could be taken immediately would be to encourage
the use of three easily understandable, obtainable and inexpensive
books.

They are simply: a medical dictionary, a Merck Manual and a
Ph sicians Desk Reference (PDR).

Itis as easy to use a medical dictionary as an English dictionary.

A
ferck Manual is a grownup's Dr.

Spock.

With the help of a medical
dictionary, it is not difficult to understand.

The PDR is a o pendium
of "package inserts" for most of the ethical drugs sold today.

A "pack-
age insert" is also, by law, included in every drug package shipped by
its manufacturer.

the package insert describes the drug, what it is
made of, what sizes and forms it comes in, what it looks like, what it
is to be used for, how it is to be used, when it is not to be used and what
the possible side effects are.

For example, I know you, Senator Kennedy, have been concerned
about the misuse of antibiotics.

A patient looking for an antibiotic in
the PDR and/or his ailment in the-Merck Manual, will find that he
should have a culture and sensitivity test before an antibiotic is pre-
scribed.

He will also learn that antibiotics do not kill viruses.

If any
of the correct procedures are not being followed, he will be able to
ask effective questions and help to prevent the development of prob-
lems.

I firmly believe that mass utilization of these books and tie im-
proved patient-doctor communication and responsibility they would
foster would begin to obviate some of the medical problems this coun-
try is having today.

If cigarettes must be labeled as dangerous to your health and if
the ingredients in all package goods on supermarket shelves must be
listed, how could it be that a patient can receive medical care, includ-
ing drugs, without the vaguest idea of why or what lie is getting or can
be a guinea pig in a secret experiment.

I would welcome the opportunity to discuss this in depth.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If cigarettes must be labeled as dangerous to your health and if
the ingredients in all package goods on supermarket shelves must be
listed, how could it be that a patient can receive medical care, includ-
ing drugs, without the vaguest idea of why or what lie is getting or can
be a guinea pig in a secret experiment. I would welcome the opportunity to discuss this in depth. Senator KF..xxF.DY. As I understand, the drug was administered to
him, this drug mescaline, or derivative, was administered on a few
different occasions. Mrs. BARR"r. Five different occasions; three different drugs. Senator KiNmEY. Three different drugs; and it was the final in-
jection, I understand, which was the one that killed him; is that cor-
rect V
Mrs. BARrTFr. Yes. It would have to be the final injection that killed
him. However, that final injection was also the substance they gave
him the first time. They gave him three drugs, two of them twice, and one of them once,
alternating at all times, never giving the same drug twice. The first time they gave him the drug, they gave him 28.4 miili-
grams. The last time they gave him the drug, the time that killed him,
they gave him 450 milligranms-28 to 450; that is not even done in
animals in laboratories; they are too valuable. Senator KzNwrY. Do you know whether your father consented to
the drug experiments? Mrs. BARRErr. I have no information that he did. We were not aware at home that he was involved in anything like
this.

--- PAGE BREAK ---u know whether your father consented to
the drug experiments? Mrs. BARRErr. I have no information that he did. We were not aware at home that he was involved in anything like
this.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

137
He was aware, as I was aware, that he was to come home the next
day after this injection.
Senator KENNEDY. How old were you then ?
Mrs. BARW1-. Thirteen.
My mother and father were divorced and I had lived with my father
for the last 2 or 3 years alone, so I had been close to him.
He did come out of the hospital at Christmas, just after this quote I
gave you--"Why do you give this to me? I am going home tomorrow."
He came out and spent, I think, 3 days with me in kind of a resort
hotel on Long Island for Christmas.
It was my understanding then that he was going back in for another
week or so and then come out on the 5th of January.
lie rented a place for us to live, and things were going to be all
right.
Senator KF.NNEDY. As I understand, later there was a case which
involved the death of your father.
The Justice I)epartment was brought. into it, I suppose, to advise
the I)epartment on the way to proceed, and I will make that a part of
the 'record.
Mrs. Bmamrr. Is that the memo about my mother's suit against the
State
Senator KEiNweve. That is correct.
Mrs. BA mr. My mother settled for $18,000 as a consequence of
that?
Senator KzNmoY. Yes.
Mrs. Bummrr. May we have a copy of that?
Senator KzENNlY. Yes, you certainly may.
We will put it in the record.
You may have a copy.
Mrs. BAmtwf. I have correspondence of my mother to her grand-
father who was a lawyer and was helping in the case and the various
lawyers, and the pain my mother went through.
They tried to say to her, things like "We will tell nasty things about
you. They will get out in public if you continue to pursue this case."
Senator KENNEDY. I will include this memorandum from Dr. Dill
after we have reviewed it just in teoms of personal privilege.
[The material referred to may be found in the files of the sub-
committee.]
Senator ScrwwxzR. I think you have given us a strong indictment,
and I want to assure you of my own personal commitment to follow
up and support Senator Kennedy and Senator Javits in their bill in
this area.
Having served on the CIA Intelligence Committee, I believe one of
the tragedies as I see these programs, is that the responsibility is very
difficult to pin down.
It seems to me that one of the areas that we should include in the
legislation is to mandate the Commission to keep a register on pro-
tecting human behavior, and to make official not only who initiates the
tests, but everybody who approves a test or program. All names should
be on the register with this Commission, because time and time agaim
on the Intelligence Committee we run into memos that are unsigned.
Everybody says there was a memo but nobody ever signed it.
We have been playing those games for several months, and it getsime agaim
on the Intelligence Committee we run into memos that are unsigned.
Everybody says there was a memo but nobody ever signed it.
We have been playing those games for several months, and it gets

--- PAGE BREAK ---elligence Committee we run into memos that are unsigned.
Everybody says there was a memo but nobody ever signed it.
We have been playing those games for several months, and it gets

--- PAGE BREAK ---

138
back to the old intelligence technique where there was a memo but it
never really went anywhere, it never really authorized anybody to do
Scond is the compartmnentalization of information so that only a
few people know about it, and then, of course, when somebody does
find out, there is the type of harassment you just described used to
If we do not take special pains to have the forms signed on the
dotted line, making known the chain of command, whether it be the
military structure or the CIA, we will never solve-the problem.
So I think it is not only important to tell you that we are com-
mitted to changing it but we are committed to setting up a system
that is going to work instead of everybody being permitted to pass
the buck.
Mrs. BARRIrr. I do appreciate that, Senator Schweiker.
However, I would like all of you to make the American public un-
derstand that no matter how many laws you pass, this cannot be the
ultimate safeguard. The ultimate safeguard has to lie with that per-
Son's consent.
Now, there is some question as to whether that is possible, but there
is not a question that I am going into my doctor's office and he is giv-
ing me a drug.
We cannot protect them too much.
I think we have protected them to the point where people say,
"Well, the Government would not allow this if it were not all right,"
so they go ahead and do what the expert says.
Am I clear?
Senator SCHWFIKR. Yes, I understand what you are saying, and I
certainly will keep it in mind whtn we act in this area because it is
obvious the system has completely broken down. There is going to
have to be a super effort to write a mechanism that will work, since
there are now all kinds of ways of getting around the fact.
Senator KF.NNEDY. Thank you, Mrs. Barrett.
Senator MATHIAS. Just one question.
You said that your mother was coerced into settling because they
threatened to disclose some personal information.
Who was thatI
Mrs. BARRrrT. I have not that specific information.
I have a letter from my grandfather or my grandmother telling her
that they, the Psychiatric Institute, but I am not sure who this spe-
cific "they" was, had some kind of damaging information about my
mother's relationship with her husband.
Heaven only knows what it could be.
My mother was in Mexico when all this happened, but coming from
a very conservative family, where, what will the neighbors think, was
kind of the operant language, it must have scared my mother to death.
Senator KENNmr. Thank you very much.
Final comments will be made by the Olson family and Colonel
Pewet.
We welcome you here.
I think the story is probably well-known by the American public.
It has been written about quite extensively.
I would appreciate it if you would just briefly tell us how your
husband came to take LSD, and was he aware that he was going to gety the American public.
It has been written about quite extensively.
I would appreciate it if you would just briefly tell us how your
husband came to take LSD, and was he aware that he was going to get

--- PAGE BREAK ---c.
It has been written about quite extensively.
I would appreciate it if you would just briefly tell us how your
husband came to take LSD, and was he aware that he was going to get

--- PAGE BREAK ---

139
it, and then perhaps Mr. Rewet can tell us a little bit about the
follow up.
Mrs. Oiow. I knew nothing about the LSD until June of this
year when I read it in the Washington Post, that he had been ad-
ministered LSD and that as a result he had gone out the window.
This whole 22 years I had thought that somehow or other he had
had a breakdown, and whether he jumped or fell from the window
I don't know, but I knew nothing about any LSD experiments at all.
Senator KENNEDY. Perhaps Colonel Rewet could tell us a little bit
about the circumstances.
Colonel REwzr. Shall I start from the beginning, SenatorI
Senator KrmNzwy. Summarize it; yes.
Colonel Rzwwr. To summarize it very briefly, the incident occurred
at a meeting in the vicinity of Deep Creek Lake in western Maryland.
The purpose of the meeting was completely disassociated with the
incident. The attendees at the meeting, aside from two CIA repre.
sentatives of whom I am aware and myself, there were five people
in my division, which included Dr. Olson.
After dinner that night we were offered a liqueur, four of us were,
one of whom was myself.
After the drug took effect-it later proved that the liqueur was
laced with LSD-they did notify us that. we had been drugged.
Senator KENNzDY. After you had taken itI
Colonel Rywrr. That is correct.
Senator MAnhus. While you were under the influence I
Colonel Rzwvr. While I was under the influence, correct; while we
were, excuse me.
Attempts were made to continue the discussion in a logical fashion,
and to make a long story short, that was a disaster.
I would guess I can only state that my reaction was pretty well
described by Mrs. Ray and Colonel Jordan.
To me, it was the most frightening experience I ever had or hope
to have. Perhaps this was complicated by the fact that I did not know
what was wrong with me, I suspect that Dr. Olson had the same feel-
ings, although I do not want to put myself into his mind, and I sus-
pect the other two gentlemen did also.
As best I can recall, this took place Wednesday evening, a week
beforii Thanksgiving 1953. We went home to Frederick, Md., Friday
-afternoon. I suspect we all had a bad weekend, I did.
On Monday, Dr. Olson, who was also a personal friend of mine,
came into work. He was quite agitated. We sat down in my office, and
he informed me that he had decided to resign from his position with
the Civil Service, and he seemed to be quite concerned about com-
mitting a security break, and he felt that his performance at the meet-
ing was not very good.
I suggested to Frank that he go home and rest and we could talk
again the following day.
My own condition at that point, I guess, was you might call margi-
nal, but I did have control.
The following morning he came in, and he was disoriented and it
was pretty obvious to methat he needed help.
I got in touch with the agency, and they asked me to have him
at the-
70-026 0 - 76 - 10l.
The following morning he came in, and he was disoriented and it
was pretty obvious to methat he needed help.
I got in touch with the agency, and they asked me to have him
at the-
70-026 0 - 76 - 10

--- PAGE BREAK ---ning he came in, and he was disoriented and it
was pretty obvious to methat he needed help.
I got in touch with the agency, and they asked me to have him
at the-
70-026 0 - 76 - 10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

140
Senator KEN NEY. Is this the CIA?
Colonel Rzw,-r. CIA.
They asked me to have him at the airport as soon as possible.
Frank asked me to go with him. We were. to go to New York.
I was told that we were going there because that was the place
where they could get the best treatment for him, and in an atmosphere
where he need have no fear of security breaks; that he would be
completely free to say anything he chose.
Senator KXNNWY. Is it your impression that one of the factors that
was distressing to him was this, that evidently he was under this kind
of cloud that he may have said something ?
Colonel Rinwrr. lie appeared to be quite concerned over a possible
security break at this time.
Senator MATIIAis. At that time at Fort Detrick security was a very
major preoccupation
Colonel REwzr. Certainly it was, and certainly in the particular
division we were in, it was more sensitive in some respects; yes, sir.
Senator KNNrJDY. He had never been bothered by this before, had
het
Colonel R.wrr. Not that I can recall, sir.
We went to New York, and as best as I can recall, we were accom-
panied-by representatives of the agency, and we went directly to the
office of a Dr. Abrahamson. I just met'him, that is all, and he talked
to Frank, and this was on a Tuesday.
On Wednesday afternoon at their suggestion I returned home for
Thanksgiving with the understanding that I would return on Friday
morning.
Frank and the man who was with him called me Friday morning
to tell me that they did not feel it was necessary for me to go back.
That evening Dr. Olson called me. I guess it was about 10 or 10:30.
He ap red to be in very good spirits and indicated to me that he
wouldbe seeing me the following day, which was Saturday; that they
were coming down home, and that they had arranged-and I believe it
was Dr. Abrahamson who had arranged-for him to receive treatment
at an installation, what I understood to be a mental institution, on the
outskirts of Rockville.
He told me the name of it, and the best I can recall it was Chestnut
Lodge or something similar to that. I repeat, he seemed to be in the
best of spirits and saying he looked forward to seeing me. The next
word I had was about, I would guess, 3 or 3:30 in the morning when
a CIA representative-not the one who was with him-phoned me to
tell me what had happened and asked me to inform the family. I did
it-at dawn.
Senator KZNNEDY. Would the members of the family like to add
an-_thing
Senator MATMIA. Before they do that, Mr. Chairman, let me just
ask Colonel Rewet two things. One, Colonel, you say you didn't get--
you weren't advised that you had had this arug until after you had
already swallow it.
Colonel Rwr. That is right. After it had taken effect.
Senator MATH&Is. You were really under the influence.
Colonel Rzwwr. The best I can recall, that is correct. I was wonder-
ing what was wrong with me.el Rwr. That is right. After it had taken effect.
Senator MATH&Is. You were really under the influence.
Colonel Rzwwr. The best I can recall, that is correct. I was wonder-
ing what was wrong with me.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t. After it had taken effect.
Senator MATH&Is. You were really under the influence.
Colonel Rzwwr. The best I can recall, that is correct. I was wonder-
ing what was wrong with me.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

141
Senator MATHuLS. That is about the same as telling you you are on
the way to the Moon when you see Cape Kennedy disappearing in the
other direction, isn't that right I
Colonel Rwrr. Not having been to the Moon, I can't say for sure,
sir.
Senator MATiKAs. But there is no more chance of getting back or
getting out.
Colonel REwrIr. You are beyond the point of no return.
Senator MATlIAS. How long did you continue your association at
Fort Detrick after this event?
Colonel Rzwwr. This was in November of 1953 and I was transferred
to Washington here in August of 1954.
Senator MATtiAs. And later you returned to Fort. Detrick.
Colonel Rzwer. I returned to Fort Detrick to be. its commander in
late 1963. 1 took command in-
Senator MATnIAs. And you were commanding officer there for what
period of time?
Colonel RrwIrr. April 1964 until I retired in September of 1966.
Senator KENNEDY. Let me just ask you--4id the group that took the
drug understand that at some time in a given time frame that they were
going to be administered some drug?
Colonel REwEr. To the best of my knoweldge. Senator-as far as I
am concerned, the answer to that question is "No."
Senator KEN.NEDY. Well, you were just invited down to somebody's
house to get together with a group of friends and the next thing you
know, you-
Colonel REwvr. This was a meeting that took place approximately
quarterly. It was a skull session type of thing-to review progress and
plan research.
Senator KENNEDY. But you had no awareness or understanding, you
yourself had no awareness or understanding that this meeting was
going to be any different from any other that you have been to?
Colonel Rzwrvr. That is absolutely correct.
Senator KEN.INIEDY. And at none of the other meetings, when you
drank the drink after dinner-it was just a normal-
Colonel REwEr. Social drink.
Senator KEzNEDY. Social drink.
Colonel REwr. Yes, sir.
Senator MATHiAS. Mr. Chairman, it might also be useful to set this
thing in context, to describe the actual location at Deep Creek Lake,
at that period of time a fairly remote and isolated area, not as accessi-
ble as it is today. Medical facilities in the area were very much limited,
is that right, Colonel ?
Colonel REwrr. That is absolutely correct. Senator. As far as I
know, there was no medical person present.
Senator MAnitxs. The small hospital in Oakland really is the only
fall-back medical facility that was available at that time.
Colonel Rwcr. I didn t even know that there was a hospital in Oak-
land at that time.
"Senator MArIiAS. So there was no provision made for any kind of
adverse creation to this administration?
Colonel Rzwrr. Not to my knowledge.
Senator KENNEDY. Do yoi have any idea why you people were
chosen to be given the drug?as no provision made for any kind of
adverse creation to this administration?
Colonel Rzwrr. Not to my knowledge.
Senator KENNEDY. Do yoi have any idea why you people were
chosen to be given the drug?

--- PAGE BREAK ---142
Colonel Rzwcrr.

No, sir.

Senator Kz.N, wy.

Do you know who gave you the drugI
Colonel Rzwrr.

I presume it was the CIA people who gave me the
drink.

Senator KzxNwy.

Did you ever ask or did anybody ever-
Colonel Rzwir.

I believe they confirmed this.

Senator K.,zy.

Would the members of the family like to make-
a brief remark?

You understand what our particular interests are in
terms of the notification and other factors.

If there is anything else
any of you would like to say, we would be glad to hear you.

Mr.

OsoN.

I think we want to emphasize that there are many areas
involved in this whole incident about which we know little or nothing.

One area is the whole trip to New York, what exactly the purpose of
that trip was, the kind of treatment he received, if it was treatment,
what the purpose of the consultation was with Dr.

Abrahamson, who
we now know from the CIA documents was a psychiatrist and had
been practicing in that specialty.

The concern that we have had has been that apparently my father
(lid pose some kind of security risk after he was given the drug, and,
given that, what kind of precautions were going to be taken for his
well-being.

We know very little about that.

We do know that there
was no medical professional available at the meeting where the drug
itself was administered.

Senator KENINEDy.

Senator Schweiker?

Senator SCIWEIKER.

No questions.

Senator MATHIAS.

Could you supplement Colonel Rewet's testimony
in any way with respect to Dr.

Olson's behavior when he came back
from Deep Creek LAke I
Mrs.

OWNsO.

Vhen he came back from Deep Creek, he had been gone
for 3 days and he came in very depressed, very quiet.

And I sat at the
table and I said it is a shame that the adults in this family don't com-
municate any more, because it was totally unlike him.

On the week-
end he spoke very little, but he was concerned about a bad mistake-he
had not done well at the meetings, people had laughed at him, and it
was totally unlike the kind of person that he was.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And I sat at the
table and I said it is a shame that the adults in this family don't com-
municate any more, because it was totally unlike him. On the week-
end he spoke very little, but he was concerned about a bad mistake-he
had not done well at the meetings, people had laughed at him, and it
was totally unlike the kind of person that he was. Senator MATH1uS. Would you consider this a real change in
personality? Mrs. OLso.. A real change in personality. And it had distressed me
forever, because I tried to reason with him-I asked him if he had ever
broken security, did he ever falsify data, which were the two things in
science that were most important. Then I said, well, this is ridiculous, it
can't be that bad. There was no way to reason with him, which is what I was trying to
do. Of course, I had no idea that this was not a normal depression. It
wasn't a normal kind of concern which he had-but it was not like
him. It was the most unreal weekend I could ever remember. Senator MAT US. The most unreal weekend ? Mrs. Otao. Unreal. When he left on Monday morning to resign,
because he had done so badly at the meetings-and, of course, I ac-
eepted this as fact. He walked out of the house and then called me about
10 o'clock in the morning and said he had talked to Colonel Rewet and
everything was fine. And that night his mood was ever so much better. So the next day, when he walked into the house about 10 o'clock in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---said he had talked to Colonel Rewet and
everything was fine. And that night his mood was ever so much better. So the next day, when he walked into the house about 10 o'clock in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

143
morning and told me that he had consented to have psychiatric care
and that someone had wanted to accompany him home because they
were afraid he might do me bodily harm, I suddenly had to sit down. I
could not comprehend what was happening.
Senator MATHIAS. Had he ever considered the possibility of psychia-
tric care before this weekend at Deep Creek Lake?
Mrs. OLsoN. No. I assumed, of course, I was talking to a rational per-
son, and that was the first time--when he said they felt that I might be
harmed-the first time it dawned on me that this man was not rational.
Then I asked if I could go to Washington and drove down with him
and Colonel Rewet, and took him to a building which I could not
identify, which I assumed was the CIA building. That was the last I
ever saw him.
I talked to him on Friday night just after Colonel Rewet had talked
to him, and it was a fine discussion--everything was we will see you
tomorrow-it was not a goodbye. That was the one thing that. consoled
me, was that I knew that this could not have been an international act,
because he did not call up to say goodbye-it was I will see you
tomorrow.
Senator MATHIAS. Forward looking.
Mrs. Ousox. Yes.
Senator MrmAs. Now, when did you know that he was going to
New York?
Mrs. OLeoN. When he came home on Tuesday morning, he said he
had consented to have psychiatric treatment and he was going to New
York to receive it.
Senator MAMrLu. 
He knew then it would be in New York f
Mrs. OuoN. Yes; they had apparently discussed that at work before
he came home. And this was about the middle of the morning on
Tuesday.
Senator MAmuis. But you did not know the name of the doctor?
Mrs. OLSoN. No; I had no idea. I later was told that the reason they
had taken him to Dr. Abrahamson was because he knew him slightly
from a tour at Edgowood, and also the doctor had high security
clearance so Frank would be able to talk with him freely, which was
necessary. I assumed he was going to be getting psychiatric care from
him, or treatment.
Senator MATHIAs. Colonel Jordon, I can't help but observe that
once apin you are nodding in a reminiscent way as if these experiences
are being relived, is that true I
Colonel JORDAN. That is right.
Colonel Rawzr. Mr. Chairman, could I say one thing ?
senatorr KaNmwr. Certainly.
Colonel Rzwvr. Something that has troubled me for 22 years is the
faot that, while I never recal having told Mrs. Olson anything that
was flatly untrue, I did allow her to think things were not true. I would
like to have that put on the record that I do regret it.
Senator KzNNEY. That is a very honorable gesture.
8ensmor MANLLAs. Colonel Rewet is a very honorable man.
Senator KzNNzDY. It points up even more dramatically, I think, that
we are talking about some of the most loyal and committed and dedi-
cated and patriotic Americans who have been included in this kind
of testing procedure, and whose lives have been obsiously, in termse are talking about some of the most loyal and committed and dedi-
cated and patriotic Americans who have been included in this kind
of testing procedure, and whose lives have been obsiously, in terms

--- PAGE BREAK ---144
of the direct testimony we have heard today, altered and changed in
the most significant and dramatic way, and tragic way, including
death, contemplation of death, disruption of lives.

Certainly, no one would question the need for drug experimentation
if there is to be progress in this field, but no one should experience
what we have heard lore today, in terms of the gross misrepresenta-
tion about potential side effects of any of these drugs, the complete
failure of notification in terms of some of those that participated, so
they are completely unprepared to cope or deal with these tragic
after-effects.

And even if they were notified, they were not notified
as ib the full extent of implications, as to what the effect of the drug
would be.

Apparently there was very little medical supervision during
the testing-and, woefully, tragic little follow-up on all the kinds of
emotional and psychological and physical damage that.

was the result
of these test.

And that is just wrong.

And I don't think any of us are so naive
as to believe that we are going to be able to, with the passage of any
kind of legislation, eliminate the ills of our society.

But what we can
do, as legislators is to set up the necessary kinds of protections for
our citizens which I think all of us here-and I think I speak without
exception for the Members ot the Senate and Congress, feel that every
American is entitled to.

I want to just reiterate whAt Senator Mathias, Senator Stafford,
and Senator Schweiker commented on, and that is that we want to
offer whatever help that we possibly can during this period.

But
there is nothing that we are going to be able to do that is going to
bring back a loved one, and in many senses the kind of damage that
has been done is irreversible.

But to the extent that we can help and assist, I want you to feel
that any of us, myself and the others all included, want to be of
whatever hel) and assistance that we possibly can.

Senator MfATHIAS.

Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Senator MfATHIAS. Mr. Chairman, it has been a particularly reveal-
ing morning of testimony. The chairman is to be thanked for having
taken the leadership in scheduling this hearing and bringing this
whole question to he kind of focus that it has come today. And
it is valuable, because, Mr. Chairman, I think in these hearings that
you have arranged, we not only get, really for the first time, a ind of
first-hand look at what. has happened, but I think, at least as far as I
am concerned, we understand some new facets of it. I think we have all been able to feel and understand the kind of
experience that the Olson family suffered in not knowing for more
than 20 years exactly what happened to Dr. Olson, in not being
sure what kind of cloud lay over them. But Colonel Rewet's last
remark, I think, is very revealing, the kind of pressures that are put
on an honorable man, the kind of pressures with which he has lived for
22 years, which are created by the system---and I do think we all have
an obligation to change the system and to remove this particular kind
of pressure on Americans, which I think is so alien to-the whole
system. Senator Kzssz'. Thank you very much, you are all excused. We will stay in order, please. We have got two more panels. What
we are going to do is excuse the third panel. We had given some

--- PAGE BREAK ---r Kzssz'. Thank you very much, you are all excused. We will stay in order, please. We have got two more panels. What
we are going to do is excuse the third panel. We had given some

--- PAGE BREAK ---

145
assurances to the Army to have them on and out by a certain time
and we are going to run into a time problem.
And so I will ask if Major Johnston and Captain Wannarka and
Lieutenant Colonel Dettor would just remain with us till the end of
the hearing, so in terms of reference to various materials they had,
the7 can clear those matters up. But we will go right to the panel,
U.S. Army-their General Counsel Mr. Ablard and Lt. Gen. R. R.
Taylor, the Surgeon General, and Brig Gen. K. R. Dirks, who is the
Assistant Surgeon General-if they would be-kind enough to come
up here.
As I understand, you have a prepared statement that is essentially
the same statement that you gave to the Hibert committee earlier
this week with the exception of one additional page.
Am I correct, or do you have new testimony today?
ST 
AET 01 CHARLES D. A LARD, Eft., GENERAL COUNSEL
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY; ACCOMPANIZD BY LT. GEN. R. R.
TAYLOR, SUREON GENERAL AND BRIG. GZN. KINITH IL
DI 
, ASSTANT 8UREON GENERAL FOR RESEARCH AND
DEVE 
PM , A PANEL
Mr. Awiiw. That is the major change.
Senator KZNNFY. Well, since you have basically presented, that
testimony already to the House, I would just think we could incorpo-
rate that in the record. If there was any other additional comment
that you would want to make, you may make that, I would think,
now.
But it seems to me that rather than running through the whole kind
of testimony which you have already given 2 days ago that we ought
to get on to some of the matters which have been brought up here
this morning, which we are interested in.
Mr. AwARmD. You would incorporate that, then?
Senator Kaz xmy. Yes, I will have it incorporated in the record
as if read.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ablard follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---rested in.
Mr. AwARmD. You would incorporate that, then?
Senator Kaz xmy. Yes, I will have it incorporated in the record
as if read.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ablard follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

146
STATEM ENT
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
SENATE JU')TrCJRY COMMITTEE
AND THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH
SENATE LABOR AND PUBLIC WELFARE COMMITTEE
BY
CHARLES D. ABLARD
GENERAL COUNSEL
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
SEPTEMBER 10, 1975

--- PAGE BREAK ---SENATE JU')TrCJRY COMMITTEE
AND THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH
SENATE LABOR AND PUBLIC WELFARE COMMITTEE
BY
CHARLES D. ABLARD
GENERAL COUNSEL
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
SEPTEMBER 10, 1975

--- PAGE BREAK ---

147
Mr. Ablard was appointed General Counsel of the Army on
19 February 1975. 
In this capacity he serves as legal counsel to
the Secretary, the Under Secretary, the Assistant Secretaries, and
their staffs.
Mr. Ablard was born on October 25. 1930, in Enid, Oklahoma.
He received a Bachelor of Business Administration from the
University of Oklahoma in 1952, an LLB from the University oi
Oklahoma in 1954, and an LLM from the George Washington University
Law Center in 1959. 
He has been admitted to practice before the
Supreme Court oi the United States. the Supreme Court of Okiahoma,
the U.S. Court of Military Appeals and several lower federal courts.
Immediately after he graduated from law school in 1954. Mr.
Ablard served as a judge advocate in the Air Force with duty
assignments at Maxwell AFB, Oklahoma, and Itazuke. Japan.
From 1958 to 1960 Mr. Ablard was the Judicial Officer and
Chairman of the Board of Contract Appeals of the Post Office
Department. 
Mr. Ablard was in the private practice of law in
Washington. D.C. from 1960 to 1963.
From 1963 to 1969 Mr. Ablard served as the Vice President
and Counsel of the Magazine Publishers Association and the
American Association of Magazine Editors, in Washington, D.C.
In 1969 Mr. Ablard became General Counsel and Congressional
Liaison of the United States Inforrm tion Agency. Washington. D.C.,
where he served until 1972. 
Mr. Ablard served as Associate Deputy
Attorney General in the Department of Justice from 1972 until 1974.
During 1974 Mr. Ablard was a Visiting Fellow of the Center of
International Studies, Cambridge University, England.

--- PAGE BREAK ---orney General in the Department of Justice from 1972 until 1974.
During 1974 Mr. Ablard was a Visiting Fellow of the Center of
International Studies, Cambridge University, England.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

N
148
Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee:
It is a privilege for me to appear before your subcommittee
this morning to discuss the Army's Drug Testing Program; a subject
which quite properly warrants your review. 
I am accompanied by
Lieutenant General Richard Taylor. The Surgeon General of the
Department of the Army. 
We welcon~e the opportunity to testify
within the limits of our present knowledge.
Current interest in the history of Army drug testing using
human subjects was prompted in part by the Rockefeller Commission
Report'sdisclosure that an unidentified Army civilian employee had
committed suicide several days after having been administered LSD.
This individual was, of course, later identified as Dr. Frank Olson.
On July ZI. 1975, the Acting Secretary of the Army directed
the Army Inspector General to conduct a comprehensive investigation
to establish the totality of historical facts and circumstances surround-
ing the Army's participation in drug testing, focusing particularly upon
the testing of hallucinogenic drugs on human subjects. 
The Secretary
also suspended all human testing, and ordered all volunteers to be
returned to their regular duty assignment. 
The Inspector General's
investigation which also encompasses the allegations concerning the

--- PAGE BREAK ---an testing, and ordered all volunteers to be
returned to their regular duty assignment. 
The Inspector General's
investigation which also encompasses the allegations concerning the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

149
Chief of the Medical Research Division. is currently in progress.
Although substantial investigatory effort has already been expended.
including formal interviews of over 55 witnesses, numerous informal
interviews of other individuals, and review of thousands of pages of
documentation, the bulk of this investigation remains to be completed.
In the course of this investigation, one fatality has been identified as
having occurred in connection with one of the contracts let by the
Army for drug testing. This was Mr. Harold Blauer, who at the
time of his death was a patient at the New York State Psychiatric
Institute. The Department of the Army announced this inforn-tion
shortly after it was learned on 7 August 1975.
As the time period of the investigation dates back to the late 1940's
many of the most knowledgeable witnesses are either deceased or
have not as yet been located, and the memory of many of those who
have been located is incomplete or imprecise. 
In addition, numerous
pertinent records have not as yet been located, and many may have
been routinely destroyed under standard procedure for destruction
of all records. 
In my testimony today I will attempt to summarize
the information that has thus far been developed as a result of the
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed under standard procedure for destruction
of all records. 
In my testimony today I will attempt to summarize
the information that has thus far been developed as a result of the
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

150
Inspector General's investigation. 
However. I wish to emphasize
that because this investigation is still in progress, and because of
the problems that I have just noted with regard to locating knowledge-
able witnesses and pertinent documentation, we have not as yet been
able to reconstruct a complete account of the Army's participaton in
drug testing. There are substantial gaps in our knowledge, and much
of the information that we have been able to assemble is incomplete.
For this reason, there are many questions to which we simply do
not have the answers at the present time.
Before discussing the specifics of the program, I believe it
appropriate to provide insofar as security considerations permit,
the factors which mandated that a program be initiated, and what
we perceived as the objectives of such a program.
Starting in the early 1950's, intelligence reports which were-
received indicated large purchases by other governments of possible
hallucinogenic agents which could be used as chemical warfare
material. These reports also cited documented studies of research
conducted by these countries in the 1940's and 50's with various
psychochemicals, as well as references to the capture by U.S. or
U.S. allies of foreign agents who were carrying syringes of fluid to
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---ountries in the 1940's and 50's with various
psychochemicals, as well as references to the capture by U.S. or
U.S. allies of foreign agents who were carrying syringes of fluid to
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

151
facilitate control of captives. 
Furthermore. on Otober 21, 1951.
after communication with several European medical personnel
concerning the effect of "'ego-depressant drugs," a civilian doctor
under sponsorship of The Surgeon General sent a report to him in
which he related reports of the utilization of drugs by foreign agents
and indicated the need for further research to determine the possible
eifects such drugs could have on national security.
This information presented a serious threat -- it indicated that
a major portion of our deterrent forces could be rendered helpless --
and defenseless -- by drugs which were odorless, colorless and
tasteless. It also reflected that our most sensitive security matters
could be unknowingly compromised. 
But perhaps of even greater
significance, it indicated that an alternative to nuclear weapons might
be available; a weapon which might render large forces helpless -- but
only temporarily -- and without any permanent damage to those forces
and none to their surroundings. These matters were covered in
testimony by Major General William M. Creasy, former Chief
Chemical Officer, U.S. Army, before hearings of the House Committez
on Science and Astronautics on June 16, 1959, wherein he discussed
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---jor General William M. Creasy, former Chief
Chemical Officer, U.S. Army, before hearings of the House Committez
on Science and Astronautics on June 16, 1959, wherein he discussed
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

152
at great length the possible use of chemical agents as a substitute
for n clea .- weapons.
The program initiated at that time therefore had three specific
objectives: to determine what hallucinogenic drugs might provide an
effective alternative to more drastic weaponry; to ascertain the
potential application of such drugs in intelligence operations;
and finely, to attert 
to develop an antidote tc, suc!h dr".u 
h-.oud
they be used against U.S. or Allied forces.
Once decisions were made at levels above that of the Department
of the Army to proceed with the testing of psychoactive and other drugs,
the Chemical Corps, then a separate technical service of th-iIArmy,
headquartered at Edgewood Arsenal, Maryland, entered into a series
of contracts with various universities, state hospitals, and medical
foundations. 
Unfortunately, many of the early contracts are unavailable.
Our best information is that many of these contracts were routinely
destroyed some time ago. However, we have located some documentalbn,
all of which indicates that the Army's primary interest was in acquiring
the results of investigations and experimentations being conducted by
these civilian research organizations.
Our review has encompassed a total of fifty-two contracts,
starting from the early 50's and continuing to the 70's. 
I should like
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---ucted by
these civilian research organizations.
Our review has encompassed a total of fifty-two contracts,
starting from the early 50's and continuing to the 70's. 
I should like
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

153
to stress that of the fifty-two contracts of which we have knowledge.
only a small number (13) involve testing compounds which might be
described in a broad sense as hallucinogenic or delirient. The 39
remaining contracts can all be placed into three categories: first,
tests of various anticholinergic agents, such as atropine, and basic
research into organophosphates, in a constant effort to refine anti-
dotes to organophosphate nerve poisons; second, tests of various
common drugs in medical use, such as morphine, and other analgesics
as well as miscellaneous non-psychoactive drugs; and, third, non-drug
tests of physiological functions, such as lung function or skin permeability.
In the interest of time, I have not prepared detailed remarks on these
contracts, but I have pertinent documents should you have any questions.
Turning to the research on hallucinogenic drugs, we discovered
9 such contracts. 
The first two of these were negotiated in 1951 with
the Now York State Psychiatric Institute, a leader in the field of the
use of hallucinogenic in the diagnosis and treatment of the mentally
ill. The subjects were psychiatric patients. 
The records are ambiguous
concerning the matter of the consent of the patients. The drugs util-
ized included LSD, mescaline, and others. 
In the course of one of
these contracts, a subject, Mr. Harold Blauer, then a patient at the
New York State Psychiatric Institute, was administered a
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---LSD, mescaline, and others. 
In the course of one of
these contracts, a subject, Mr. Harold Blauer, then a patient at the
New York State Psychiatric Institute, was administered a
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

154
mescaline derivative which proved fatal. This matter is presently
the subject of a pending claim against the Army by Mr. Blauer's two
daughters.
Information regarding Mr. Blauer's death came to light
during the course of the Inspector General's investigation as
the result of the discovery of a file at Edgewood Arsenal on
7 August of this year. 
The Department of the Army announced
this discovery on 12 August. 
Although originally classified, the
Army recently has made available to the two daughters those
documents in the file containing (actual data concerning Mr. Blauer's
death. 
More recently additional information regarding Mr. Blauer's
death has become available as the result of the discovery of another
classified file maintained by the Department of Justice.
These files indicate that Harold Blauer entered Bellevue
Hospital in New York City in October of 1952. 
On December 5,
1952 he was transferred to the New York State Psychiatric Institute.
We have thus far been unable to locate any records reflecting how
Mr. Blauer was chosen by the Psychiatric Institute to participate in
the mescaline derivative experiments. 
Nor is there any indication
as to whether his consent was obtained by the attending physician.
Mr. Blauer died at the Institute on January 8. 1953, several hours
after having been administered a mescaline derivative.
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---her his consent was obtained by the attending physician.
Mr. Blauer died at the Institute on January 8. 1953, several hours
after having been administered a mescaline derivative.
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

155
Harold Blauer was survived by his former wife, since
deceased, and two minor daughters. 
In April of 1953. Mrs.
Blauer initiated two lawsuits against the State of New York
in the New York Court of Claims. 
It appears that officials of
the Army's Chemical Corps, which had entered into the con-
tract with the New York State Psychiatric Institute, were
informed of Mr. Blauer's death by Institute officials shortly
after it occurred. 
These officials apparently were concerned
that public disclosure of the Army's interest in the compounds
being tested could prove detrimental to the national security,
and that classified information might be required to be disclosed
in the course of litigation. Consequently, following meetings
wii.. Department of Justice officials a settlement was negotiated
witi. Mrs. Blauer by New York State attorneys. 
The New
York Court of Claims ultimately required assurance of an
$18,000 award before it would approve the settlement. On
June 17. 1955, the settlement was finalized by a Court order.
8
70-036 0 -
- t

--- PAGE BREAK ---f Claims ultimately required assurance of an
$18,000 award before it would approve the settlement. On
June 17. 1955, the settlement was finalized by a Court order.
8
70-036 0 -
- t

--- PAGE BREAK ---

156
Turning to some of the other contracts involving research on
hallucinogenic drugs, we have learned of a 1955 contract with
Tulane University which Involved the administration of LSD,
Mescaline, and other drugs to mental patients who had there-
tofore had electrodes implanted in their brains as a part of their
medical treatment unrelated to an Army contract. 
The electrodes
were utilized to study the effects of the drugs on the brain's iunCLionang.
The methodology used might be subject to some criticism on the ground
that a range of compounds was administered to at least one patient
without apparent relation to therapy or diagnosis. 
However, work
on the brain n chemistry of mental illness was still pioneering work
in 1955, and perhaps it is not surprising in the cool light of analysis
20 years later that some of the techniques then employed now appear
less than perfect.
0! the six remaining contracts, one was with the University of
Washington, two were with the Research Foundation for Mental
Hygiene. Inc., the successor to the New York State Psychiatric
Institute. two others were with the University of Maryland and one
was with the Institute for Behavioral Research. 
Five of the six
studied LSD the remaining one studied many compounds including
amphetamines. 
They covered the time period 1953 to 1965. 
None
of them appears remarkable, but, again. I have more complete
information should you desire it.
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---compounds including
amphetamines. 
They covered the time period 1953 to 1965. 
None
of them appears remarkable, but, again. I have more complete
information should you desire it.
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

157
Although the medical profession has had ethical codes and
procedural safeguards on the use of human beings in drug experimen-
tation for over a century. I must admit that they appear not always
to have been followed in these tests. These standards require,
for example. that the individual be informed as to all aspects of
the nature, methods and effects of the experiment, that he give his
voluntary written consent before any testing and that he be free to
withdraw from the experiment at any time. The Surgeon Guneral
will elaborate on these matters in his testimony. These are the
obligations of the attending physician, or the researcher conducting
the experiment. Our records, admittedly incomplete, do not reflect
that these procedures were necessarily followed by the research
organizations with whom we contracted. 
To insure compliance with
these requirements, the Army has, since at least the early 60's,
followed the practice of requiring contract clauses setting stringent
controls over the use of human beings in experiments. 
Such a
clause is present, for example, in our contract with the Institute
for Behavioral Research.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---auses setting stringent
controls over the use of human beings in experiments. 
Such a
clause is present, for example, in our contract with the Institute
for Behavioral Research.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

168
Chemical Corps I'esting of LSD
Based upon the results obtained under early contracts with
civilian research organizations, military- related testing of
hallucinogenic was initiated. 
Insofar as we have been able to
determine, Army in-house testing of LSD on human subjects com-
menced some time in 1955 and was conducted intermittently through
1967 using military and Army civilian personnel recruited from the
Army areas within the United States. 
Most of this testing was conducted
at Edgewood Arsenal, Maryland.
-In addition, available information indicates that a number of field
tests were conducted at certain other Army installation s. The purpose
of these field tests was to determine the effects of LSD administration
on the ability of soldiers to perform various normal military functions.
For example, in December 1957, 16 men were tested under LSD
influence during operation of a radar van at Aberdeen Proving Grounds,
Maryland. 
During this same period, at Edgewood Arsenal, 40
individuals were tested under LSD, influence in the performance of such
activities as rifle assembly and disassembly, masking and skin
decontamination procedures. a volley ball game, and close order drill.
Films were made of the latter test and used as a demonstration
vehicle within the Army as to the effects of LSD.
II

--- PAGE BREAK ---amination procedures. a volley ball game, and close order drill.
Films were made of the latter test and used as a demonstration
vehicle within the Army as to the effects of LSD.
II

--- PAGE BREAK ---

169
In September. 1958, field tests were conduct ted at Fort Bragg,
North Carolina. 
One of these tests involved administration of LSD
to 20 Special Forces personnel engaged in a guard post exercise and a
simulated interrogation exercise. 
In another series of tests at Fort
Bragg, 59 men from the XVIII Airborne Corps Field Artillery were
tested under LSD influence while engaged in a meteorological survey,
a ground survey, a 40 mm artillery crew drill, and fire direction
center and forward observer exercises. 
These latter tests were
also filmed.
Available information also indicates other field tests involving
personnel of the advanced officers courses at the Chemical Corps
School, Fort McClellan, Alabama: four members of an instructor
class at Dugway Proving Grounds, Utah, in 1959; and approximately
34 members of an infantry advanced course at Fort Benning, Georgia,
in January, 1960.
Available records characterize all of the LSD test subjects,
both at Edgewood Arsenal and at the field locations, as volunteers.
However, as I will discuss later in connection with testing of LSD,
for intelligence purposes. it is not certain how much advance information
was imparted to each prospective subject regarding the possible effects

--- PAGE BREAK ---in connection with testing of LSD,
for intelligence purposes. it is not certain how much advance information
was imparted to each prospective subject regarding the possible effects

--- PAGE BREAK ---

160
of LSD or the exact nature of the experiments to be conducted, or
whether some coercion may have been brought to bear upon prospective
subjects by their superiors in order to obtain their participation.
Testing of LSD for Intelligence Purposes
During the period 1958 through 1962 a series of experiments
were conducted specifically designed to evaluate potential apkz,'*ations
of LSD to intelligence operations. 
In particular, these experiments
focused upon the possible use of LSD as an aid in intelligence interro-
gations. 
In this regard it was desired to determine whether, as a
result of the administration of LSD, a well-trained and experienced
intelligence agent could be rnde to divulge classified information that
could not be obtained from the agent solely through use of conventional
questioning.
A series of clinical experiments were performed during the period
1958 through 1960 at Edgewood Arsenal, Maryland. 
These experimenrt s,
which were conducted as a joint project of the U.S. Army Intelligence
Board and the Medical Research Directorate of the Army's Chemical
Warfare Laboratories, used as subjects military intelligence personnel
made available by the U.S. Army :ntelligence Center. Subjects were
specifically selected for a high degree of security conditioning and
intelligence experience. 
In addition, preliminary mental and physical
examinations were a prerequisite to acceptance into the program.
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---high degree of security conditioning and
intelligence experience. 
In addition, preliminary mental and physical
examinations were a prerequisite to acceptance into the program.
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

161
Available records indicate that approximately 31 Army
intelligence personnel participated as subjects in the program.
Because these records are incomplete, there are significant
unanswered questions as to whether participation in the program was
truly voluntary by today's criteria. Planning documents indicate that
prospective subjects were to be advised generally as to the nature of
the program, and that they could terminate their particips tion at any
time. 
In particular, prospects were to be advised that the project
would consist of a series of mental and physical tests of human reaction
to a specific material which would be administered under in-patient
clinical conditions. Prospects were not. however, to be informed
as to the exact properties of the material to be administered or its
potential intelligence application, nor, in connection with certain of the
experiments, the time, location, or method of administration. This
information was withheld in order not to prejudice experimental
results by suggestion. 
Planhing-documents also indicate that each
prospect who agreed to participation in the program was to sign a
statement indicating in part that the general nature of the experiments
had been explained to him from the standpoint of possible hazards
to health; that he understood that the experiments would be so
conducted as to avoid all unnecessary physical and mental s-ffering
and injury; that he would be at liberty to request that the experiments
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---tood that the experiments would be so
conducted as to avoid all unnecessary physical and mental s-ffering
and injury; that he would be at liberty to request that the experiments
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

162
be terminated at any time; that he recognized that in the pursuit of
certain experiments transitory discomfiture may occur; and that
there had been no coercion, undue moral suasion or other adverse
pressure brought to bear in his volunteering; and that he had done
so of his own free will. Available records do not indicate, however,
whether these procedures were in fact followed in each case. 'r
exactly what informaion was imparted to the prospective subjects.
The experiments at Edgewood were conducted by qualified
medical personnel of the Chemical Warfare Laboratories under
controlled clinical conditions. 
Project officers of the U. S. Army
Intelligence Center provided technical advice and assistance in the
structuring of experiments. 
In addition to a number of standard tests
of mental and physical abilities related to performance of intelligence
* tasks, conducted so as to compare pre and post drug administration
results, the experimentation program included certain structured
situations wherein the applicability of the drug for intelligence purposes
was assessed. 
In these situations an attempt was made to overcome
- the security training and experience, principally interrogation
resistance, of the subjects by exploitation of the effects of the drug.
The structured situations consisted of: (1) Simulated social receptions
where LSD was administered surreptitiously to the subjects (in cocktails);
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---on of the effects of the drug.
The structured situations consisted of: (1) Simulated social receptions
where LSD was administered surreptitiously to the subjects (in cocktails);
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---

163
(2) Simulated stress situations wherein subjects were given polygraph
examinations after administration of LSD; and (3) Administration of
LSD in conjunction with confinement in an isolation environment.
In each situation medical personnel were present at all times.
Observation reports by those supervising the experiments, as well
as subjective reports by the subjects themselves, were used 1.
assessing the effect of the drug. 
In general, it was found that use of
LSD, either alone or in conjunction with conventional interrogation
techniques, could be effective in reducing the resistance to interrogation
of well-trained and experienced intelligence personnel.
In viiw of the results of the clinical experimentation at Edgewood
Arsenal, and in recognition of the limited capability to structure
realistic interrogation situations in a laboratory environment using
volunteers, a proposal was submitted by the U.S. Army Intelligence
Center, in coordination with the Chemical Warfare Laboratories, to
conduct field experimentation in conjunction with actual interrogation
situations. This proposal was approved by the Army's Assistant Chief
of Staff for Intelligence, and subsequently two series of field tests
were conducted.
Available records indicate that on 10 April 1963, the Deputy
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence directed that no further field
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---y two series of field tests
were conducted.
Available records indicate that on 10 April 1963, the Deputy
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence directed that no further field
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---

164
testing of LSD be conducted. 
No records nave been found to indicate
that any Army intelligence testing of LSD has been performed since
that time.
Available records indicate that approximately 600 individuals
were administered LSD during the course of the Army in-house testing
programs at Edgewood Arsenal and at the field test locations. 
There
is reason to believe, however, that these records may not be complete,
and that the total number of participants may have been somewhat
higher. 
Hence, a priority effort is continuing as part of the Inspector
General's investigation in an attempt to compile a complete listing of
participants in the LSD testing programs. 
The names of all of the
participants thus far identified have been forwarded to the Army's
Surgeon General for the purpose of conducting a comprehensive
follow-up medical evaluation program on all individuals who can be
located. 
This effort, which is currently underway, will require the
assistance and cooperation of at least two other agencies, the National
Academy of Sciences - National Research Council Medical FoUow-up
Agency and the Veterans Administration.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared remarks. 
I have
attempted to describe within the structure of security considerations
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---FoUow-up
Agency and the Veterans Administration.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared remarks. 
I have
attempted to describe within the structure of security considerations
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---

165
and the right of privacy of the individuals involved the external factors
which caused our government to initiate a testing program; the manner
in which the program was conducted; and the actions we have recently
initiated in an attempt to insure that the- participants in the program
have and will continue to receive appropriate medical treatm,.
Mr. Chairman, as I indicated at the outset, the Inspector General
investigation has not been completed. As soon as any additional
information is developed, it will be provided to you. 
-.
I will be pleased to attempt to respond to any questions you may
have..
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---s not been completed. As soon as any additional
information is developed, it will be provided to you. 
-.
I will be pleased to attempt to respond to any questions you may
have..
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---

N
166
Senator KNN wY. Mr. Ablard you may proceed.
But I do think, since I understand it is virtually identical to the
one that you gave to the Armed Services Committee--and staff has
had a chance to go over it-it doesn't make much sense, since I have
had a chance to review it-to take the time of the committee or your
own time to run through it now.
So we might get to some of the questions that I have, if that is an
agreeable way to proceed.
I am just wondering, Counsel Ablard, whether there is any individ-
ual in the Department of Defense who knows the full extent of Army
research involving human subjects, as it has actually been carried out
in the past 10 years.
Mr. ABtAmw. Any individual at the present time ?
Senator KENNrEy. Yes.
Mr. APARD. Well, one of the things thatI discussed in my state-
ment is the fact that we have an ongoing investigation by the Inspec-
tor General, which has been under way since July 21 the date on which
all human testing by the Army was discontinued.
This investigation was prompted in part by the revelation in the
Rockefeller Commission report about the death of Dr. Olson. And, as
you can well imagine, Senator, we are attempting to reconstruct his-
tory that goes back to the 1940's. Thits, until that investigation is com-
pleted, the answer to your question is no.
I am sure you can appreciate my position. I have no personal
knowledge of the testing program. The Surgeon General is with me
today. He-has probably as good a grasp as any man of the extent of
the Army's current and recent program.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, maybe we can't for the period of the whole
10 years, but do we have anybody that can talk about what is going
on today over the period, say, of the last 3 to 5 years?
Mr. ABLARD. The Surgeon General would be the best authority for
that, Senator.
General TAYLoR. The information concerning the details of the un-
classified work in the Army is well established with continuity. The
information on all studies by the Medical Department, involving non-
classified studies, since 1964 is a matter of record and filed with the
FDA.
The information concerning classified studies is reasonably known
at the present time related to specific classes, but we, even as of last
week, are getting additional information that was not known cen-
trally in the Surgeon General's office, so that we have one large
unclassified area that, I believe, is reasonably, if not complete in-
formation, and spotty certainly before 1W4, related to classified
information.
Senator KENNEDY. Well, leaving out the new drugs, in the areas of
human experimentation what can you tell us about what is going on
today?
General TAYLOR. Except for new drugs, and I assume you include
vaccine development in that work related to the diseases
Senator KZNzDY. Behavioral therapy.
General TArwOm I have no knowledge at all of work being done in
-that area.
Senator KNm.Y. Well, is there any going on now?ent in that work related to the diseases
Senator KZNzDY. Behavioral therapy.
General TArwOm I have no knowledge at all of work being done in
-that area.
Senator KNm.Y. Well, is there any going on now?

--- PAGE BREAK ---ated to the diseases
Senator KZNzDY. Behavioral therapy.
General TArwOm I have no knowledge at all of work being done in
-that area.
Senator KNm.Y. Well, is there any going on now?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

167
GeneralmT 
. I am told that then 
is not any going on in the mii-
tary department,
Senator KzzNNEY. There is no research in behavioral therapy going
on in the Defense Department ?
General TAYW L -ot that I am aware of.
Senator KzNNEDY. Well, would you know-is it conceivable that it
could be go'mg on without you being aware of it f
General TAnwx. If the procedures included the use of inves-
tional new drugs, the regulations, the policy, requires that our off*
know and has since 1984.
Senator Kmmw'. Well, what if it does not involve drugs?
General TAYoR. Are you talking about the test pilots or-
Senator Kzxwmy. It could be electroshock therapy behavioral-
General TAYLoa. We have no information at all of Department of
Defense involvement in electric shock.
Senator KENmwir. Well, any other-I don't want to get tied up in
words here-any other kind of experimentation in terms of any
behavioral therapy.
General TAYwjL We-have no information of Defense support of
that type of research.
Senator Kzmmy. There is no research, then, in terms of behavioral
therapy that is taking place today upon any--either members of the
military or women or children or any other American citizen ?
General TAYLOR. Not that I am aware of. And it should have been
reported, if it----
Senator KNNEDY. When did it stop ?
General TAYLOR. I am not sure when it started.
Senator KZNNEDY. Stop--when did it halt ?
General TAYLR. Are we talking about psychotropic drugs or psy-
chotomimetie drugs.
Senator KENNEDY. Any kind of drugs that are used in any be-
havioral research or experimentation.
General TAYnOR. The Secretary of the Army suspended all testing
in the Army in July of 1975, pending an IG investigation.
Senator KNNEDY. Now, can you tell us at the time that it stopped
in 1975, what was going on ?
General TAY LR. At that time there were several compounds, anti-
dotes, related to agents that were proposed for investigation. These
protocols were being evaluated in the Human Use Review Office in the
Surgeon General's Office to determine whether or-not the protocols
would be approved. And those have iust been suspended pending the
results of the investigation by direction of the Secretary of the Army.
Senator KeNwEDY. Well, let's get down to laymen's language. Prior
to the time that the Secretary put a termination on it, what was the
circumstance of behavioral research in the Department of Defense?
General TAYLOm. I would say that related to the Edgewood--
Senator KNNEDY. First of all, was there some active work being
done
General TATLOR. The information that the Surgeon General had, or
his office, had been significantly increased from about 1972 or 1978 on.
To my knowledge, there lave been none approved during this
period. Several protocols have been returned for additional informa-his office, had been significantly increased from about 1972 or 1978 on.
To my knowledge, there lave been none approved during this
period. Several protocols have been returned for additional informa-

--- PAGE BREAK ---significantly increased from about 1972 or 1978 on.
To my knowledge, there lave been none approved during this
period. Several protocols have been returned for additional informa-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

168
tion, and all of them had been suspended in #July, pending the result
of the investigation.
Senator KzNmwy. Well, irrespective of the ones that were being re-
quested for new approvals, can you tell us about the ones that were in
existence?
General TAYwR. I believe that I can sgk as far as the Army is con.
cerned, not the other departments. At Edgewood, work had been going
on there for some time related to four general classes of drugs, anti-
dotes related to the nerve gases, phosgene, various vessicants and cer-
tain psychotomimetic chemicals.
Senator KENNE=Y. And who was being used in those experiments?
General TAYLoR. Of the ones that I am aware of-and these would
be the ones during the period from tMe mid-1950's on--these were all
of the volunteers, active duty personnel, that had been recruited from
all over continental United States to come in for several weeks to a'
couple of months under the medical volunteer program.
Senator KENNzDY. As far as the Army is concerned, they never
used other than armed services personnel, is that right I
General TAYLOR. We are talking about in the last approximately 10
years? Not that I am aware of-unless there was work under contract
sponsored by Edgewood-that would be supporting contracts.
Senator KZNNEDY. Why not under those circumstances I
General TAYwoR. Well, under contracts they would not be military
personnel, they would be civilian.
Senator KNNEDY. But it was under an Army contract?
General TAYLoR. From Edgewood; yes, sir.
Senator KENvDY. What sort of personnel would be used ?
General TAYLOR. Those would ie either students-in one case the
are .prisoners in- Holmesburg Prison near the University of Pennsyl-
vania.
Senator KNwmwy. Students and who else?
General TAYLOR. Prisoners in-one contract that I am aware of.
Senator KNNzDY. There is only one contract on the prisoners?
General TAY.oR. That I am aware of.
Senator KENNEDY. And there were other contracts?
General TAYLOR. They were universities, primarily university stu-
dents, I believe.
Senator KzNNzDY. At which universities ?
General TAYLOR. I will have to provide that for the record, I am
ndt sure.
[The following information was subsequently supplied for the
record:]ts, I believe.
Senator KzNNzDY. At which universities ?
General TAYLOR. I will have to provide that for the record, I am
ndt sure.
[The following information was subsequently supplied for the
record:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

169
RtSLARE 
1 
MWR 
S FI1 EDGi(OD ARSENAL INVOLVING DRIU STINGG VOUNIERS,
1965-7S
The following research contracts from Edavood, Arsenal
involved drug testing in volunteers during the period 1965-1975. 
There
have been no such contracts since 1971 according to available information.
I. 
TITLE: 
Clinical Pharmacology of Prophylactic and/or Therapeutic
Compounds in Volunteer Subjects
INSTIUTION: 
Uahnemnnn Medical College of Philadelphia
SOURCE OF VOLUNTEERS: 
Male and female clinic patients, all aSea over 21 years.
tATURE Of STUYD: 
Basic research into physiological implications of oximes,
which are the never antidotes to anticholinesterase poisons.
DRUGS STUDIED: 
Pralidoxime chloride and other oximeas.
CONTRACT MEMBER: 
PERIOD OF CONTRACT: 
TOTAL COST:
DA-18-108-CHL-6623(A) 
26 Jun 61 - 31 Jul 65 
$227,863.00
DAAA-15-67-C-0489 
24 May 67 - 24 May 68 
$40,060.00
DAAA-l5-68-C-0641 
11 Jun 68 - 11 Doc 68 
$25,000.00
DAAA-15-69-C-0295 
&_Jan 69 - 6 Apr 70 
$49,755.00
2. 
TITLE: 
Drug Effects and Complex Behavioral Repertoires Under Condition
of Full Environmental Control
INSTITUTION: 
Institute for Behavioral Research
SOURCE OF VOLUNTEERS: 
Primarily U.S. Army volunteers; a few female subjects
paid by the contractor.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n
of Full Environmental Control
INSTITUTION: 
Institute for Behavioral Research
SOURCE OF VOLUNTEERS: 
Primarily U.S. Army volunteers; a few female subjects
paid by the contractor.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

170
NATURE OF STUDY: 
A broad range of compounds was studied to quantify the
degree to which these drugs interfered with performance of a series of
behavioral tasks.
DRUGS STUDIED: 
Disethyltryptimine (a drug with similar effects to LSD),
chlorpromaine, anphetmine, secobarbital and Edgewood Arsenal chemical agent
3580, a glycolate compound.
CONTRACT NUMBER: 
PERIOD OF CONTRACT: 
TOTAL COST:
DA-18-108-ANC-26(A) 
1 Oct 62 - 31 Dec 65 
$156,681.61
3. 
TITLE: 
Effects of Drug on Huan Performance
INSTITUTION: 
American Institute for Research
SOURCE OF VOLUNTEERS: U. S. Army volunteers
NATURE OF STUDY: 
Involved establishment of a humn performance measuring
laboratory at Edgewood Arsenal. 82 volunteers were given these agents to
determine how certain psychomotor functions were affected. No adverse results
are discernible in the available records.
DRUGS STUDIED: 
Edgewood Arsenal chemical agent 3580 (a glycolate compound)
and scopolamine.
CONTRACT NUMBER: 
PERIOD OF CONTRACT: 
TOTAL COST:
DA 18-035-ANC-282(A) 
1 Jul 64 - 23 Oct 67 
$192,096.00
4. TITLE: Threshold Doses in liuans
INSTITUTION: 
University of Pennsylvania
SOURCE OF VOLUNTEERS: 
Subjects were prisoners at Holmesburg Prison,
Philadelphia.
NATURE OF STUDY: 
The study was to determine the minimum dose level of the
drug at which task performance was affected.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---ubjects were prisoners at Holmesburg Prison,
Philadelphia.
NATURE OF STUDY: 
The study was to determine the minimum dose level of the
drug at which task performance was affected.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

171
DRUGS STUDIED: Ditran, atropine, scopolamine, a glycolate type of
anticholinergic compound and several other anticholinergic drugs.
CONTRACT NUMBER: 
PERIOD OF CONTRACT: 
TOTAL COST:
DA-l6-O35-ANC-126(A) 
I Apr 64 - 31 Mar 67 
$326,840.00
5. TITLE: 
Study of Effects of Certain Analgesic Drugs on the Respiratory
Center and Circulation in Humans
INSTI7TION: 
Beylor University
SOURCE OF W)IAUNTES: 
Hales and females over 21 years of age of varying
occupations, Includinlg housewives, registered nurses, part-time students,
inhalation therapists, machinists, beauty operators.
NATURE OF STUDY: Measured analgesic and psychoactive potency of the
drugs. The drugs tested had mild short term psychoactive effects.
DRUGS STUDIED: 
Scopolamine and a proprietary bentomorphan narcotic
analgesic preparation identified as WIN 19,362.
CONTRACT NUMBER: 
PIROC 
OF CONTRACT: 
TOTAL COST:
DA-l8-035-ANC-397(A) 
2 Jun 65 - 30 Jun 68 
$44,000.00
6. 
TITLE: 
Study of Effects of Certain Analgesic Drugs on the Respiratory
Center and Circulation of Humans
INSTITUTION; J-aylor University, College of Medicine (Department of
Anesthesiology)
SOUIRCE OF VOLUNTEERS: 
Adult patients undergoing surgery at Baylor and
some normal volunteers recruited either from the hospital personnel or from
the community. The surgical patients received effective pain relief from
the drugs and were appropriate subjects for study.
3
0-06 0 - 15 - 12

--- PAGE BREAK ---r from the hospital personnel or from
the community. The surgical patients received effective pain relief from
the drugs and were appropriate subjects for study.
3
0-06 0 - 15 - 12

--- PAGE BREAK ---

172
NATURE OF STUDY: 
Investigators evaluated the effects of the drugs on
breathing and blood pressure using simple non-invasive techniques. 
No
serious adverse reactions appear to have been observed.
(NOTE: 
The group of investigators was the se one which performed work
~ 
under contract DAL8-035-AC-397(A).)
DRUGS STUIED: The anesthesiologists were evaluating effects of four
morphine-like, potent pain relieving drugs. One of the drugs, CS 42251
(Fentanyl),is nov commonly used for surgical anesthesia and pain relief.
CONTRACT WEIR : 
PEIOD OF COTCT: 
TOTAL COSTs
DAIS-10-A4C-l49 (A) 
15 May 63 - 28 Feb 65 
$22,754.20
7. TITLE: 
Threshold Doses in Humans
INSTI'TUTIO: 
Ivy Research Laboratories, Inc.
SOURCE OF iUWNTEERS: 
Prisoners at Holmsburg Prison, Philadelphia.
NA TRE OF STUDY: 
Determine the threshold response dose of human adult
subjects to incapacitating agents, irritant agents, and other classes of
chemicals.
DRUGS STUDIED: 
A glycolate type of anticholinergic compound, an apomorphine
type of nausea and vomiting producing compound, and a series of isomers of
tetrahydrocannabinot.
CONTRACT NIBER: 
PERIOD OF 
CONTRACT: 
TOTAL COST:
DAAA-15-68-C-0627 
28 Jun 68 -
I Dec 69 
$78,135.00
8. 
TITLE: 
Threshold Doses in Humans
INSTITUTION: 
Ivy Research Laboratories, Inc.
SOURCE OF VOWTEUS: 
Prisoners at Holwesburg Prison, Philadelphia.
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---un 68 -
I Dec 69 
$78,135.00
8. 
TITLE: 
Threshold Doses in Humans
INSTITUTION: 
Ivy Research Laboratories, Inc.
SOURCE OF VOWTEUS: 
Prisoners at Holwesburg Prison, Philadelphia.
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

173
NAT V 
OF STUDY: 
To determine the intravenous dose of nausea and vomiting
producing compound necessary to produce an incapacitating effect in man. 
The
study was discontinued after the fourth subject reacted adversely vith
retching and fainting.
DI1110 
STUDIes: 
An apomorphine type of nausea and vomiting producing
compound.
CONTRACT VM415a: 
PERIOD Of CONTRACT: 
TOTAL COST:
DAAA-15-70-C-0324 
10 Mar 70 - 30 Sep 71 
$48,700.00

--- PAGE BREAK ---10 
STUDIes: 
An apomorphine type of nausea and vomiting producing
compound.
CONTRACT VM415a: 
PERIOD Of CONTRACT: 
TOTAL COST:
DAAA-15-70-C-0324 
10 Mar 70 - 30 Sep 71 
$48,700.00

--- PAGE BREAK ---

174
Senator KzENswy. Are you talking about 1 or 2 or are you talking
about 10?
General TAYTLR. I do not know.
Senator KZNNzDY. Do you know the ages of the people that were
being usedI
General TAYLoR. I do not know.
Senator KzNNEDY. Do you have regulations or requirements on
those?
General TAYLOR. There are regulations in the guidance from the
Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of the Army going back to
the February 1953 time frame, and then subsequent departmental
regulations that did put restrictions on age .for protection particularly
of children and of women of child-bearing age.
Senator KzNNEDY. And those have been observed, is that right?
General TAYwOR. The problem as I see it is as follows: The policy
which comes from the 10 points of the Nuremberg codes of 1947 are
very clear and have been promulgated through all departmental
regulations since February 26, 1953. It is clear to me, in reading the
records, that in the 1950's the rules were not followed-that is, the
standard codes. I have no information in more recent time that there
has been a problem related to the moral and ethical codes.
Senator KzrNwy. You would know, wouldn't you? Wouldn't
you have that information if they hadn't been followed?
General TAYLo. 
The rules that are promulgated are related to
the quality of consent, quality of informed consent, t: e capability
of the volunteer to withdraw without prejudice, on the adequacy
of animal experimentation prior to use in humans.
So that the individual that would really know should be the doctor
who is responsible for directing and conducting the studies. In .fact,
as you undoubtedly know, the Nuremberg codes clearly established
the responsibility at that level.
Unless there was an untoward event, we would not necessarily
know whether the individual did in fact give the quality of consent
that was required.
. Senator K1raPxx. 
Now, do you know how many of the protocols
in the Army's biomedical laboratories at Edgewood Arsenal were
actually submitted to the Human Use Review Committee up to 1975?
General TAYLOR. Yes; I have gone into that in considerable depth.
In 1958, when the Secretary of Defense policy waapromulgated, it
provided authority to conduct such research, and second, it required
that the laboratories participating in such activities would provide
information to the Surgeon General, who would review the informa-
tion and would make recommendations on the medical aspects to the
Secretary of the Army for approval.
In the fall of 1953 there is evidence that the work that was ging
on prior to that directive was given approval for continuation. The
approval covered three general Classes of drugs. The first were related
to the nerve agents, the second related to phosgene and the third
related to the blistering gases.
The next record that we have evidence of having probably been
approved by the Surgeon General and the Secretary of the Army is
in 1958 or 1959-I say "probably," because we don't have the documentses.
The next record that we have evidence of having probably been
approved by the Surgeon General and the Secretary of the Army is
in 1958 or 1959-I say "probably," because we don't have the document

--- PAGE BREAK ---175
that has either the Secretary's or the Surgeon General's signature on
it, but a secondary document suggesting that that might have
han 
noed.

hat document was a class clearance for the psychochemicals.

We
are still missing considerable information about that.

It is known that
there were volunteer studies with psychochemicals at Edgewood as
early as June 1955.

The next document in our office-and, as you-know, the Human Use
Review Committee is really a very new operation-that is, I a approved
that last year.

The next document we have is in 1969, which was a
request related to stress studies involving drugs.

A separate protocol
was to be forwarded related to specific drugs for approval by the
Secretary of the Army.

We have no evidence that such approval was
reauesteA.

In 1972 and 1978 there was increasing concern about the breadth of
the class clearances, and actions were started to require detailed pro-
tocols being submitted.

In 1973 the need for greater medical super-
vision over the activities of the Biomedical Laboratory, Edgewood,
was recognized by the U.S.

Army Medical Research and Develop-
ment Command, and the Acting Commander gave oral instructions to
the Director, Biomedical lAboratory, identifying the scope of infor-
mation required to be submitted to the Surgeon General.

On October 1,
1974, the Surgeon General established the Human Use Review Office,
which for the first time provided a single focus for review of all human
subject research whether or not investigational drugs were proposed
for use.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Army Medical Research and Develop-
ment Command, and the Acting Commander gave oral instructions to
the Director, Biomedical lAboratory, identifying the scope of infor-
mation required to be submitted to the Surgeon General. On October 1,
1974, the Surgeon General established the Human Use Review Office,
which for the first time provided a single focus for review of all human
subject research whether or not investigational drugs were proposed
for use. An early action of the Human Use Review Office was to comment
on a proposed revision of a memorandum of agreement between the
Commanding General, Army Materiel Command, and the Surgeon
General regarding responsibilities for the conduct of research and
development for Lefense against chemical agent& The Human Use
Review Office found that draft memorandum unsatisfactory in that
it did not mandate protocol by protocol review in studies involving
use of drugs in volunteers. At the time of this testimony efforts to re-
solve differences in opinion between Edgewood and the U.S. Army
Medical Research and Development Command were being negotiated. I do know that there have been four or five such proposals sent in
during the past year. I do know that prior to the suspension in
July 1975 that several had been returned because of inadequate in-
formation. And I do know that there was some dissension from
Edgewood Arsenal about providing the detail of information that
was required for a legitimate technical review, as required by the
DOD-PDA understanding. Senator KzNNYy. Why was thatt"
General TAYWR. That was because of really unacceptable reasons. It had to do with differences in opinion on the scope of information
required to comply with the rules. This came to my attention at 9:80
last night and s1ould have been brought to a high enough level for
resolution months ago. Senator KzAxmY. Well, how many were submitted f
General TAYLO. I believe that we have had three proposals sub-
mitUd. Senator KrxNvwi. In the last ?t to a high enough level for
resolution months ago. Senator KzAxmY. Well, how many were submitted f
General TAYLO. I believe that we have had three proposals sub-
mitUd. Senator KrxNvwi. In the last ?

--- PAGE BREAK ---evel for
resolution months ago. Senator KzAxmY. Well, how many were submitted f
General TAYLO. I believe that we have had three proposals sub-
mitUd. Senator KrxNvwi. In the last ?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

176
General TAYLoR. From July 1973 to the present.
Senator KNNEDY. What about before that ?
General TAYLOR. Before that time I have described all of the ones
that I am aware of, and they were al class-
Senator KaNNEDY. Well, so there weren't any individuals?
General TAmoR. They were not individual protocols.
Senator KENNEDY. The nature of the agreement indicated that they
were going to be individuals, did it not?
General T^moiS. I am told that it was ambiguous in the 1964
agreement.
Senator KENNEDY. Pardon?
General TAYwoR. I am told that it was ambiguous at best that the
wording does not describe that. I do know, in fact, that the people
at the time who were implementing that, and who were involved in
writing that, did implement class clearances, whether they should have
or not. Now, that is a matter of fact.
Senator KENNEDY. It says each protocol.
General TAYLOR. It talks about each request for approval related to
nonclassifled studies and about approval of classified tests by the
appropriate review board and Surgeon General. Different people read
and interpreted the several Army regulations differently in the 1964-
1973 period.
I do know that from this agreement, the FDA did have people
visit Edgewood in 1966, 1967, 1972, and 1974. We have a record. as
Dr. Schmidt has indicated, of only knowing of the first meeting and
who was at-the meeting. Dr. Schmidt has a copy of the Dr. Herbley
visit report of 1967.
Senator KENNEDT. I understand your testimony to be that DOD de-
signed an agreement that said that each protocol would be submitted.
We heard Dr. Schmidt indicate that that was clearly what should
S 
have been done. There are internal memorandums in your own de-
partment expressing the feeling that that was the understanding of
the nature of the agreement And you are trying to say now that there
are different people within your own shop that interpreted 
it dif-
ferently and that that is a justifiable response or answer?
General TAYoR. No; I didn't say that exactly, Senator.
Senator KzNEDY. Well, then, let's see if we can get it somewhat
more precise.
Should they have submitted each protocol UTIS6that your under-
standing of what should have been done?
General TAYwoR. My understanding is that at least since October
1974, in my office there has been agreement that the memorandum of
understanding unequivocally requires submission and review of all
protocols from Edgewood. Of the 1964 agreement, there clearly was
a difference on how that was interpreted.
Senator KzNNEDY. Well, what do those words mean to you, counsel f
Doesn't "each protocol" mean "each protocol," or do you have a dif-
ferent understanding of the meaning of the English languageI
Mr. ADLARD. I must confess, Senator, that this is the first time that
I have had an opportunity to review this problem. We came up here
to testify about drug-testing on hallucinogenics, it was my understand-
ing, and this gets beyond----that this is the first time that
I have had an opportunity to review this problem. We came up here
to testify about drug-testing on hallucinogenics, it was my understand-
ing, and this gets beyond----

--- PAGE BREAK ---177
Senator KZNNEDY.

Of course, in my note to you, I indicated--do
you have a copy of that ?

My letter to you indicated that it was in this
whole area, not just the.-
Mr.

AsLnD.

This is a Department of Defense memorandum that
was probably negotiated with the General Counsel's office of DOD, and
I am not prepared to comment upon it at this time.

Senator 
ENNEDY.

Well, it says each research proposal from its own
agency.

Mr.

Asn.m.

Well, I think the question would be whether that was
a class proposal, as I understand the doctor, or whether it breaks down
into subsections of that.

Senator KZNMMY.

Well, it is certainly Commissioner Schmidt's
understanding that it was each proposal, not each class proposal.

Well, in any event, what do you feel is the understanding now I Is
it each proposal or elch classification of proposal or what ?

General TAYLOR.

There isn't any doubt about what it is since Octo-
ber 1974.

It is each protocol, one by one.

Senator KZNNEDY.

Why was there such concern, do you think, by
Captain Johnston that each and every protocol involving separate
compounds must be reviewed when it is established?

No a proval
should be granted to allow investigation or experiment with entire
classes of compound.

It seems to me that the language is clear on the
face and Captain Johnston's memoranda-interprets it the way I think
any reasonable examination of that memoranda would reflect.

And yet we just haven't had the submission of those matters.

And
with the obvious tragic implications, some of which we have heard in
the court;e of the day today.

General DrKs.

Mr.

Chairman, If I may.

I am Brig.

Gen.

Kenneth R.

Dirks.

I am the commanding gneral of the Army Medical Research
and Development Command.

And part of my responsibility has been
to oversee this area of review, namely, the Human Use Review Office,
since it was established in October, 1974-the first of October, 1974.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I am the commanding gneral of the Army Medical Research
and Development Command. And part of my responsibility has been
to oversee this area of review, namely, the Human Use Review Office,
since it was established in October, 1974-the first of October, 1974. Prior to that time we had an Army Investigational Drug Review
Board whose activities I did supervise. For the record, I would like to indicate that I assumed this role the
15th of August, 1973. The renegotiation of the memorandum of under-
standing with the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
began in September of 1973, and I was a part of those negotiations
which led to the current agreement, signed in November of 1974, which
does require a protocol-by-protocol submission and a protocol-by-pro-
tocol review by those of us in the military departments. Like you and like General Taylor, I am committed to fulfilling that
objective. We have moved progressively, we think, in that direction. The one area of control which has needed tightening, from my view-
point at least, has been in relation to human studies in the program at
Edgewood. That has been all too graphically illustrated in the testi-
mony we heard this morning and the events that hrve been revealed
since the 15th of July this year. At any rate, we were moving in the direction of updating our memo-
randum of agreement internally within the Army between the Surgeon
General's office and the Army Materiel Command to correct this prob-
lem with those negotiations having beiun in November of 1974. The staffing procedure has been 
gthy and admittedly so. The

--- PAGE BREAK ---178
final draft was distributed for complete final staffing on the 18th of
June of this year with comments requested back by the 7th of July.

We are now assembling those comments to see if there is any sub-
stantive change.

The major change that we have made in that agree-
ment is to explicitly specify that all protocols will be submitted, with
p roper documentation to the Surgeon General's office for review in his
Human Use Review Office, including the attention of the Army In-
vestigational Drug Review Board, the Human Use Committee and,
where appropriate, our Contract Review Board, when contracts are
involved in human studies.

The recommendation which Major Johnston made in his memo-
randum in March of this year was that we should send to the com-
mander of the Army Materiel Command a letter directing him to
comply with the regulations and the agreement.

That letter-has been
held in abeyance until we were sure that we had the complete under-
standing of all parties that would be required to implement the intent
of that directive.

I can assure you that that letter will be signed very shortly.

Ac-
cordingly, I think that we have the corrective action required in-
ternally within the Army in process, and it will be consummated, as I
say, within a matter of T week to 2 weeks maximum.

Senator KZNNDY.

Why do you think this area was so ignored,
General?

Why was it forgotten?

General Dnms.

One -has to appreciate the history of how this pro-
gram began.

We are talking about the chemical warfare defense pro-
gram that was initiated in the early 1950's.

You have heard General
Taylor refer to the Secretary of Defense's memorandum of 1953, Feb-
ruary 26, 1953, specifically, which initiated this program of human
studies, specified the controls that were to be observed, which were al
of those ethical standards defined in the Nuremberg Code.

Those stand-
ards have been continued as a matter of policy to the present time.--- PAGE BREAK ---

You have heard General
Taylor refer to the Secretary of Defense's memorandum of 1953, Feb-
ruary 26, 1953, specifically, which initiated this program of human
studies, specified the controls that were to be observed, which were al
of those ethical standards defined in the Nuremberg Code. Those stand-
ards have been continued as a matter of policy to the present time. As the program evolved, there was the perception on the part of
those responsible for the chemical warfare defense program that it
was a unique requirement, different from the usual run of medical
research, if you will. And, accordingly, it was handled in a somewhat
different manner. The original-policy indicated clearly the Surgeon General was to
review, medically, all of this research and all of these protocls. The
facts of history, as I see them, at least, are that the senior physician at
Edgewood Arsenal was the advisor on this program, from a medical
point of view, to those responsible for the program in the early days. And it was not until 1958, as General Taylor has said, that we have
evidence that there was a clear referral to the Surgeon General for
appropriate approval. The concern that was already felt-and this
is evidenced in internal memoranda in the files of the Surgeon Gen-
eral's Office--the concern that was reflected in those memoranda came
to a crescendo in the world with the thalidomide disaster of the early'
1900', which led to the amendment of the Food, Dri,_C, and cosmjk
Act of 1962. And as a product of that national concern, we published the first
Army regulation covering the use of volunteers as subjects in re-
search-Army regulation-
Senator KiNNEDY. That was what year?

--- PAGE BREAK ---179
General Dn s.

1962, sir.

Senator KzNNEDY.

And what since then?

How many have been
submitted I It seems they blow the whistle, you have an awareness, you
promulgate these regulations and still we haven't had the submission
of the protocols.

General Dums.

There again the collective judgment of the per-
sons running the program was that the chemical warfare program
was unique.

The next step in this process of improved control was the
memorandum of understanding between the Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare and the Department of Defense, 1984, from
which flowed our Army Regirlation 40-7, establishing our Army
Investigational Drug Review Board and comparable boards in the
other military departments.

Senator KENNEDY.

Well, the problem as I see it, General, is that
the collective judgment that was made is that the human rights of
these American citizens were subverted to what you consider to be-
now we find out it was a collective judgment in terms of chemical
warfare.

We are not talking about now, as we mentioned earlier,
about the need for research.

There has to be experimentation done.

But
what we am talking about is equipping these people with the infor-
mation so that they can make a judgment s to whether they want to
volunteer or not.

Quite clearly that wasn't the case.

Do I understand you to say
that your -people made a collective judgment some time then that they
didn't have to comply with this kind of a responsibility?

General DIRKs.

No, Senator, I did not mean to imply that in any
way.

What happened as a product of the publication of AR 70-25,
"Use of Volunteer Subjects in Research, 1962," was that a review
mechanism to protect the rights of human subjects was established
and its channel was through the Surgeon General's Office, with the
Surgeon General recommending to the Chief of Research and Devel-
opment of the Army what action should be taken.--- PAGE BREAK ---

No, Senator, I did not mean to imply that in any
way. What happened as a product of the publication of AR 70-25,
"Use of Volunteer Subjects in Research, 1962," was that a review
mechanism to protect the rights of human subjects was established
and its channel was through the Surgeon General's Office, with the
Surgeon General recommending to the Chief of Research and Devel-
opment of the Army what action should be taken. Final approval
authority for any research involving human subjects on nuclear,
chemical, or biological warfare agents was made resident in the Secre-
tary of the Army. He had the sole approving authority for those
studie. Senator KENNEDY. General, the only point that I am making is that
you might have issued the regulations, but they weren't complied with. They weren't complied with. General TAYLOP Why do you say that, Senator ? Senator KzNEDY. Wellbecause you cannot tell me how many times
that you did submit those. I would think, General, that after listening
to the witnesses that testified here this morning on issue after issue in
terms of notification and consent, that it is obvious that it wasn't being
done. -
Now, issuing regulations is one thing, but listening to-amy of these
witnesses here this morning testify that they had absolutely no kind of
idea of what they were getting into is another thing. NOw, you can talk about all the regulations that were issued in
1950, 1958, 1962, 1968, setting up special boards and all the rest, but
you can't get away from the fact that on the human experimentation
issue that there was not the kind of notification, awareness, the kind of

--- PAGE BREAK ---180
attention, the medical supervision and followup that was needed.

And
I had hoped that you wouldn't arjue with that.

We are not interested
at this time about trying to-Monday morhiing quarterback-we recog-
nize that.

But we ought to be impressed with the importance of the
tragedy of that experience to say, by God, we are not going to let it
happen again, and that the Department of Defense is going to do
everything it possibly can to insure that it won't and they are going
to work with us in terms of the development of legislative kinds of
programs to insure that it won't happen again.

general DIRKS.

Mr.

Chairman, with all- due respect, may I pointout
that the witnesses related to Army sponsored studies we heard this
morning were subjects of research prior to 1962.

Senator KENNEDY.

Well, how many protocols were submitted from
1962 to the present from EdgewoodI
General DiiKs.

From Fgewood, directly submitted to the purview
of the hunan use-review office--it did not exist then, let's start with
1964, to the Army Investigational Drug Review Board-the only
submissions that that board has received are three since 1073, July
1973.

Senator KENNY.

Three in 11 years ?

General DIRKS.

That is correct, Senator.

Senator KENNEDY.

You will rest on that record-three in 11 years?

General DimKs.

What I would like to point out is that periodic re-
view was accomplished with representatives from the Food and Drug
Administration and with a local medical committee.

Admittedly that
is not up to today's standard, but that was what was done at that time.

Senator KENNEDY.

Well, if three in 11 years is what the testimony
is---
General DiRxs.

That is right.

Senator KENNEDY.

And yet we find scores of different experiments,
human experiments, that have been taking place during that period
and where the protocols weren't submitted; am I correct F
General Dums.

You are correct, sir, they have not been submitted
to that particular office.

Senator K.NNEDY.--- PAGE BREAK ---

You are correct, sir, they have not been submitted
to that particular office. Senator K.NNEDY. Well, that is what we are talking about, from the
mid or early 1960's to the present time. That is the period we are talk-
ing about. Well, t am, as I say, hopeful that we can get-the support; Obviously,
we are hopeful that all of the steps are going to be taken by the DOD
in terms of medical followup on not only the people that have testified
here but all the other individuals who have been participating in the
tests. And I think the DOD has a strong responsibility to do this and
I am sure you -recognize it. I think that in more recent times the Department of Defense nor- -
mally has been following up. But I am hopeful that we could get your
complete and wholehearted support for including the Department of
Defense in terms of the coverage of the legislation on that commis-
sion. I think it is essential. I think the record has been made through
a tragic set of circumstances. Obviously you are expressing your own
deep concern about this issue here today. And I am hopeful we can
move ahead and have the complete and wholehearted support of the
Department of Defense in trying to achieve this kind of inclusion,
wlh 
hopefully will eliminate the necessity for these kinds of tragic
hearings

--- PAGE BREAK ---181
General TAYLoR.

Mr.

Chairman, I will speak personally about that,
because I have profound personal feelings about people.

I have been
in combat and seen the problems with that, both civilian and military
casualties.

Aud as far as the Department of Defense or the Army
using individuals for things that need to be done we must be able to
con orm to the letter and spirit of established policy and to show that
we do respect the rights of humans, that volunteers are fully informed
and true volunteers, and that we accept the responsibility for our
actions.

There is no issue about that and we will cooperate.

Senator KzNNEDY.

Well, that is a commendable attitude and I be-
lieve it deeply, from what I know about you, General-and you are
committed to it.

And there is a lot that has happened on it that-
General TAYL.on I was the one that directed initiation of the cur-
rent medical followup study.

As enclosure 4 on my statement, there is
a statement as to where we are on that to date.

There was one misstatement this morning that I would like an insert
for the record.

Mr.

Chaffin did sign a volunteer statement.

Senator KNZNEDY.

I think he ust said he didn't recall.

General TAYLOR.

I understand that, we are talking about 17 years ago,
and that is just to clarify that.

Senator 
EiNNEDY.

I want to make it clear that any of the comments
that have been made involving DOD-the record is going to be open,
and you may add whatever material you wish.

I think what we are
really interested in is where we are going from here.

That is what we
are interested in.

I know of your own commitment to this, General, and that of the
others here, and I am just hopeful that we can move expeditiously.

That is what we want to try and do.

And I want you to know we want to work with you and yom: de-
partment in getting legislation and doing the best we can.

We want
to look to where we go from here.

And I thank you all for appearing
here today.--- PAGE BREAK ---

We want
to look to where we go from here. And I thank you all for appearing
here today. At this point we will include in the record additional questions sub-
mitted to General Taylor by Senator Thurmond. [The material referred to and subseuently supplied follows:]
ADMONAL Qu&wrxoNs BY SATOzr TnURMOND 'o GTOm 
AL TAYLoR, WIr
RESrowsssm
Senator TiHxUMON 
Does the FDA presently exercise a review function with
reference to DOD drug experiments? General TAmeD. Under the 1974 Memorandum of Understanding Between the
FOod and Drug Administration (FDA) and the Department of Defense (DOD)
on Investigatonal Use of Drugs by the DOD, FDA exercises a clear review func-
tion. The substance of the FDA-DOD Agrement follows:
'The Food and Drug Administration and the Department of Defense agree
that:
"l. Clinical investigations that are classified for reasons of national security
will not require the filing of a formal 'claim for exemption' to the FDA. The
DOD shall be solely responsible for determining the security classification of
such research projects. Approval by the a--oprlte 'Review Board' and Burgeon
General of a test classified for reasns of national security will automatically
exempt the drug being employed from the application of the new drug section
of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act during such Investigational study. The
DOD will report to the FDA unclassified findings asociated with such studies
which the FDA should be aware of In order to make a sound evaluation of non--

--- PAGE BREAK ---182
classified studies proposed on the same or similar drugs.

Additionally, the DOD
will discuss its classified investigations of drugs on a frequent basis with per-
sonnel from the FDA who have proper security clearance.

"2.

When the unique requirements of the military dictate the extensive use in
military personnel of drugs which, though not yet approved, have been tested
under the Investigational new drug regulations sufficiently to establish with
reasonable certainty their safety and efficacy; special ad hoo review and ap-
proval for such use will be effected expeditiously through joint action by repre-
ientatives of the Department of Defense and the Food and Drug Administration
to ensure timely response to the military need.

The DOD will report to the FDA
findings associated with such use which the FDA should be aware of in order to
make a sound evaluation of other studies proposed on the same or similar drug.

'IS.

In all other cases involving the clinical testing of investigational drugs
under programs sponsored by the DOD and conducted either by the DOD within
its own research facilities, or for the DOD by a contractor or grantee, the ordi.

nary provisions of 21 CFR 812.1 (formerly 180.8) of the Code of Federal Regu-
lations governing the investigational use of new drugs in human beings shall be
followed."
Thus, the only use of investigational drugs by DOD which is exempted from
detailed FDA IND review under the provisions of CFR 812.1 is that classified
for reasons of national security.

Even this work must be discussed on a fre-
quent basis with personnel from the FDA who have proper security clearance.

Currently, there are no classified DOD studies involving investigational drugs.

The vast majority of drug research within DOD has always been unclassified.Currently, there are no classified DOD studies involving investigational drugs.

The vast majority of drug research within DOD has always been unclassified.

Since the signing of the original agreement on investigational drugs between
the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare and DOD in 1964, DOD has
provided FDA with detailed unclassified test plans and results.

The Army has
filed 97 separate Claims for Exemption (IND's) to study Investigational drugs
and has 51 currently active IND's on file with FDA.

The Navy has five spon-
sored IND's on file and the Air Force has one.

DOD projects such as the study
of vaccines and antimalarial drugs have been reviewed by FDA since 1964.

I
am not aware of any failure to report unclassled DOD drug tests to FDA during
the last 11 years.

Senator THUtmOND.

How much was known about LOD when the Army began
to conduct experiments with it?

General TAYLOR.

Available records indicate that the Army Chemical Corps
began to support contracts Involving medical research with LBD-25 In 195& It
began to conduct Its own tests with this drug at Edgewood Arsenal In 1955.

Dur-
ing the decade following the discovery of the drug's hallucinogenic effect in
1943, LSD was studied widely in the civilian medical community, primarily by
psychiatrists.

By the end of 1958, approximately 40 scientific papers had been
published in the medical literature dealing with the use of LSD for the treatment
of mental illness and as an experimental model for the study of psychosis.

The
experiments described In those papers involved extensive studies of LOD In
animals, normal subjects and psychotic and neurotic patients.

Experimental
work with the drug proliferated over the next few years and by 1957 over SO)
additional papers had been added to the literature.

Noteworthy studies on the
details of the metabolism of LSD In cats and monkeys were published by Dr.

Julius Axelrod and co-workers at the National Institutes of Health in 1956.

Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Julius Axelrod and co-workers at the National Institutes of Health in 1956. Dr. Edward Evarts, also of the National Institutes of Health, published an ex-
haustive review of the-iterature describing the effects of LSD on the physiology
of the nervous system of animals and humans In 1957 (A inUl of the New York
Academy of 8ciesem#, Volume 56, pages 478-495). At the beginning of the Army tests, LSD was regarded as being potentially
very useful for treatment of illness and understanding normal brain processes. It was generally regarded as safe when used In a properly controlled setting. The hazards visible during the early years were summarized In a 1960 scientific
paper by Dr. Sidney Cohen in Jourtwa of Nervoua an Mevnal Dteeasee (Volume
130. pages 80-40). Dr. Cohen based his report on a questionnaire solicited from
44 researchers who had administered LSD to 5,000 men and women on more than
25.000 occasions. The results of this inanury and of a literature search revealed
very few toxic or psychologic complications. In normal experimental subjects on
confirmed instance of attempted or completed suicide following LOD Ingestion
was found. The incidence of psychotic reactions extending beyond 48 hours was
one case In 1.800 of these subjects. That subject recovered within a few days. In
patients undergoing LD type psychotherapy, the completed suicide rate was

--- PAGE BREAK ---183
0.04% and psychotic reactions persisting longer than two days was 0.18%.

No
instance of addiction to LSD was discovered.

It must be added that Dr.

Cohen
could not have been aware of Dr.

Olson's suicide In the 1958 CIA tests.

Senator THuauMON.

What is your opinion of the degree of voluntariness of
those who participated in drug tests conducted at Edgewood Arsenal In the 1950's
and 1960's?

General TAr.Jo 
Review of the available records shows that the soldiers who
participated in that period did volunteer to come to Edgewood for the purpose
of participating In medical experiments.

Before participating, each subject
signed a consent form which contained the following language:
"I certify that I have received, read and understand a document, entitled,
'Medical Research Volunteer Program,' copy of which is annexed hereto, and
that the general nature of the experiments I have volunteered to participate in
have been explained from the standpoint of possible hazards to my health.

It is
my understanding that the experiments are so designed, based on the results of
animal and previous human experimentation, that the anticipated results will
Justify the performance of experiment.

I understand further that experiments
will be so conducted as to avoid all unnecessary physical and mental suffering
and injury, and that I will be at liberty to request that the experiments be
terminated at any time if In my opinion I have reached the physical or mental
state where continuation of the experiments becomes undesirable.

I recognize that in the pursuit of certain experiments transitory discom-
fiture may occur and when such reactions seem especially like to occur I will
be so advised.

I recognize, also, that under this circumstances, I must rely
upon the skill and wisdom of the physcian supervising the experiment to
Institute whatever medical or surgical measures are indicated to protect me.I recognize that in the pursuit of certain experiments transitory discom-
fiture may occur and when such reactions seem especially like to occur I will
be so advised.

I recognize, also, that under this circumstances, I must rely
upon the skill and wisdom of the physcian supervising the experiment to
Institute whatever medical or surgical measures are indicated to protect me.

"I certify that there has been no coercion, element of fraud or deceit, undue
moral suasion or other adverse pressure brought to bear or my volunteering
for this duty.

I have done so of my own free will, completely aware of all
hazards, rewards and recognition Involved."
The exact content of the briefings given to subjects of the LSD tests is
not available but I understand that many of the subjects were told they
would receive a drug with effects similar to alcohol.

This certainly would not
fulfill today' Army requirement for giving subjects reasonably complete In-
formation about effects of Investigational drugs.

Looking back on the infor-
mation known at the beginning of the tests, I think that It was not really
accurate to portray LaD as being merely like alcohol.

I think this does raise
questions about the voluntariness of the soldier's participation.

However, It
Is very likely that the Information provided to the subjects varied depending
upon the researcher conducting the briefings.

During the later years of the tests
these briefings were conducted for small groups by experienced psychiatrists.

I believe that the information they provided was more complete.

Unfortu-
nately, the content of these briefings was not documented In writing.

A small group of 81 subjects was given LSD at Edgewood without being told
what they would be given nor when or how It would be administered.

These
subjects are described In the report of these events as "unwitting vounteers".

They agreed In writing to participate in this test even though they were not
provided with full information about It.--- PAGE BREAK ---

These
subjects are described In the report of these events as "unwitting vounteers". They agreed In writing to participate in this test even though they were not
provided with full information about It. The factors which motivated soldiers to volunteer for these tests in the
first place is difficult to evaluate. They certainly were not ordered to partici-
pate. Undoubtedly, many of them were attracted to Edgewood by the liberal
pass policy, pleasant surroundings and relief from duties they considered boring. Some had altruistic motives. Overall, they appear to have been motivated by a
combination of factors similar to those which motivate subjects In medical
experiments In the civilian community. )Senator 
THuIMAN. What type follow-up is done on present subjects of drug
experimentation? General TATLWIL All subjects given Investigational drugs in DOD research
are studied carefully at the time they are given the drugs and for a period of
several weeks after they have received the last dose. Subjects with any per-
jisting evidence of drug effects are followed until they have returned to normal. In cases where subsequent medical evidence suggests that former subjects may
be at risk from delayed effects or from previously unknown effects, follow-up
and care in accordance with our best medical judgment and guidance from the
Food and Drug Administration and recommendations of the National Research
Council-National Academy of Sciences are pursued. (The prepared statement of General Taylor follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

184
PREPARED
STATEMENT
BY
UEUTENANT GENERAL RICHARD R. TAYLOR,' M.D.
THE SURGEON GENERAL
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
OF THE
JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
AND THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH OF THE LABOR AND PUBLIC WELFARE COMMITTE!
UNITED STATES SENATE
FIRST SESSION, 94th CONGRESS
10 September 1975
NOT FOR PUBLICATION
UNTIL RELEASED BY THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE
PRACTICE AND PROCEDUREE LABOR AND PUBLIC WELFARE COMMITTE!
UNITED STATES SENATE
FIRST SESSION, 94th CONGRESS
10 September 1975
NOT FOR PUBLICATION
UNTIL RELEASED BY THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE

--- PAGE BREAK ---ELFARE COMMITTE!
UNITED STATES SENATE
FIRST SESSION, 94th CONGRESS
10 September 1975
NOT FOR PUBLICATION
UNTIL RELEASED BY THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

186
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF WITNESS: Lieutenant General Richard R. Taylor, M.D.,
was barn InlFralreburg, Iowa, on November 21, 1922. After completing premedical
studies at the University of Chicago in 1944, he graduated in 1946 with a doctor of
medicine degree.
General Taylor attended the Army Medical Department officer's basic course, after com-
pleting an Internship at the Highland Alameda County Hospital, Oakland, California,
In 1947. HIs first medical assignment was as a general medical officer at the Army-Navy
General Hospital In Hot Springs9 Arkansas. After attending the company grade medical
officer's course, he completed his residency training at Letterman General Hospital In
Internal medicine and cardiology.
In 1953, General Taylor was assigned to Korea, first as Assistant Division Surgeon, then
as Commander, 7th Medical Battalion, 7th Infantry Division, later serving as an internist
at the Hemorrhagic Fever Center, 45th Evacuation Hospital. In 1955, General Taylor
returned to the United States as a resident in pulmonary disease at Fitzsimons General
Hospital and later became Chief, Non-TB Chest Disease Service.
In 1957, he became Commanding Officer, US Army Medical Research and Development
Unit, Fitzsimons General Hospital.
Following a fellowship in tropical medicine at Louisiana State University In 1959, General
Taylor became Chief, Biophysics and Astronautics Research Branch of the US Army Medical
Research and Development. Command. After successive staff assignments, he was named
Deputy Commander of the Command in 1963.
September 1964 saw General Taylor serving as Staff Surgeon of the Joint US Military
Assistance Group in Thailand and Command Surgeon of the Military Assistance Command,
Thailand. After attending the Army War College at Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania, he
served in the Office of the Secretary of Defense as Chief, Biological and Medical Sciences
Division, Office of the Director of Defense Research and Engineering.
He served as Command Surgeon, Headquarters, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam,
from 1969-70, where he was promoted to Brigadier General on October I, 1969. In
September 1970, he became Commanding General of the US Army Medical Research
and Development Command. 
He was sworn in as the Deputy Surgeon General on March
I, 1973, and became The Surgeon General, US Army, on October 1, 1973.
He Is certified by the American Board of Internal Medicine, and Is a Fellow of both
the American College of Physicians and the American College of Chest Physicians.
He Is a member of the American Medical Association, the Association of Military
Surgeons of the US (Pest President), and the New York Academy of Science.
His awards and decorations include the Distinguished Service Medal, the Legion of
Merit with oak leaf cluster, the Bronze Star Medal, the Joint Services Commendation
Medal with oak leaf cluster and the Army Commendation Medal with oak leaf cluster.shed Service Medal, the Legion of
Merit with oak leaf cluster, the Bronze Star Medal, the Joint Services Commendation
Medal with oak leaf cluster and the Army Commendation Medal with oak leaf cluster.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

186
;'4. Chabni
I am pleased to appear before you to review Department of Defense policies and
procedures to protect the rights and welfare of human subjects of biomedical and
behavioral research conducted under Its sponsorship. I believe that your invitation
was based upon a desire to know whether the Deportment of Defense has sponsored or
Is now sponsoring medical research which-exposes human beings to unreasonable risks.
I refer to the risks of death or likely permanent damage to the mind, personality, or
physical well-being as a result of research. I assure you that Department of Defense
policy prohibits research carrying this degree of risk as well as research on humans
who have not given their free and informed consent. I believe that you also wish
to know whether the Department of Defense meets current standards for conduct of
research In human subjects. The Department of Defense and the military departments
today follow standards for protection of research subjects which equal or exceed those
followed by other Federal ogencles and the medical communal' at large.
The basic-Deportment of Defense policy governing medical experiments was
promulgated by the Secretary of Defense on 26 February 1953 (Ind I). This policy
Is based on the Nuremberg Code of 1947, which followed the war crimes trials (Incl 2).
The Chief of Staff published an implementing Memorandum In 1953. The departmental
regulations implementing the tightening Federal controls of studies using Investigational
drugs, use of volunteers In medical research, and clinical Investigations are listed
at Inc 3. Copies of these regulations are available to your staff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tudies using Investigational
drugs, use of volunteers In medical research, and clinical Investigations are listed
at Inc 3. Copies of these regulations are available to your staff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

187
Some Impocts of these, various regulations ore that on individual participating
a a subject is required to be fully informed of the nature, purposes, and the effects
of the experlmentationj he must give voluntary written Informed consent without
coercon; and he must be allowed to withdraw at any point from-ithe experiment.
These basic moral, ethical, and legal principles, Identified above, are common
to the regulotlons of the military departments. The Department of Defense has
demonstrated a continuing concern in this area and has reviewed the procedures
and taken corrective action where it was needed.
In 1964, HEW and DOD entered into a Memorandum of Understanding related
to new regulatory authority and responsibilities of the FDA concerning investigational
drugs. This Memorandum and subsequent DOD Directives and service regulations
established Investigational Drug Review Boards within the Offices of the Surgeons
General. 
The boards provide professional review of proposed investigations with
new drugs and biologicals. With these boards, the DOD was permitted certain
exceptions from ordinary FDA review, including military requirements work which
was classified, for reasons of national security. The DOD agreed to discuss its
classified investigations of drugs periodically with FDA personnel who had proper
security clearance and to report to FDA findings associated with such studies
which FDA should be aware of to make a sound evaluation of non-classified studies
proposed on the some or similar drugs.
2
70-026 0 - 1 
o 
- 13

--- PAGE BREAK ---ndings associated with such studies
which FDA should be aware of to make a sound evaluation of non-classified studies
proposed on the some or similar drugs.
2
70-026 0 - 1 
o 
- 13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

188
In May 1974, the Army staff responsibility for research Involving life sciences
was transferred from the Army Research Office, Office of the Chief of Research
and Development, to The Surgeon General. 
In July of 1974, the approval authority
for all research Involving human subjects In the Army, except for nuclear and
chemical warfare related studies, was transferred from the Office of the Chief of
Research and Development to The Surgeon General. 
Proposals for research with
nuclear or chemical warfare agents are forwarded by The Surgeon General with
recommendations on the medical aspects to the Secretary of the Army for approval.
In October 1974, The Surgeon General established the Human Use Review Office
under the direction of the Assistant Surgeon General for Research and Development.
The Human Use Review Office was charged with administering and coordinating
activities of the Army Investigational Drug Review Board, the US Army Medical
Research and Development Command Contract Review Board, and The Surgeon
General's Human Use Committee and Clinical Investigation Committee to Insure
uniform application of ethical standards for human research studies conducted within
or sponsored by the Army Medical Department and other Army agencies.
The 
umon Use Review Committee Is the central Army processing point for
all extramural and intramural human subjects research which require approval under
provisions of Army Regulations. The staff Includes a full time physician, two pharmacists
with advanced training In pharmacology and a blostatigician. Legal advice Is provided
by attorneys in the Army Medical Research and Development Command. 
This medical,
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---harmacists
with advanced training In pharmacology and a blostatigician. Legal advice Is provided
by attorneys in the Army Medical Research and Development Command. 
This medical,
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

189
sclentlfic, and legal staff Identifies problem areas and requests review by expert
professional consultants, clarifications and/or revision before protocols are submitted
to appropriate committees For review and recommendations to The Surgeon General.
The Deputy Surgeon General has been delegated authority for final approval except for
nuclear and chemical warfare related studies. The Secretory of the Army retains final
approval authority for all studies with nuclear or chemical warfare agents. The Human
Use Review Office Is the authorized channel through which Army investigators communicate
with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 
The Army committees on human subjects
research reviewed and made recommendations on over 300 research proposals during fiscaT
year 1975. Provisions for the protection of human subjects and the detailed content of
consent agreements were the primary concern of the members. 
The careful review is
reflected by the fact that a large number of proposals were disapproved or deferred pending
revision of theWconsent procedures. The Human Use Review Office staff and committees
apply the standards contained in current Department of Defense and Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare (DHEW) regulations. For example, when the recent HEW mora-
torium on fetal research was promulgated, the files were searched to be sure such research
was not being conducted within the Army Clinical Investigation Program. 
The Human
Use Review committees have paid particular attention to special classes of subjects
Involved in Army research I.e. children, pregnant women, and prisoners, and have
often required special consent procedures appropriate to a particular project.
Within the Army, increased emphasis has been placed on insuring that agencies
outside the Army Medical Department follow the some high standards as those within
It. We have insisted that other Army agencies interpret the anguage of AR 70-25
4en placed on insuring that agencies
outside the Army Medical Department follow the some high standards as those within
It. We have insisted that other Army agencies interpret the anguage of AR 70-25
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

190
broadly to Include all experiments which may expose participants to risk even though
the project proponents may consider the testing to be primarily an operational exam-
Inotion of prototype machinery or equipment. If a test of a new uniform or vehicle,
for example, may expose subjects to risks from heat -stress, noise, or fumes# the
protocol Is examined in detail to be sure that the subjects ar fully informed volunteers
and to reduce risk as much as possible. A large amount of time and effort is often
required to adequately review tests of this type since their uniquely military setting
sometimes makes it difficult to distinguish clearly what tasks are reasonably "in the
lineof duty."
Scope of Department of Defense Research Involving Human Subjects
Within this context, I would like to discuss In broad terms the present Department
of Defense research effort Involving human subjects. Military missions expose troops
to extremely diverse hazards and stresses, including "exotic" Infections such as
malaria and scrub typhus, great pressure variations, as In deep diving, and crash
forces, and high and low velocity missile combat wounds. 
The effectiveness of even
our mast "automated" military systems still is intimately linked to proper human
performance. 
The rising cost of defense manpower means that efforts to decrease
non-effectiveness of military personnel are increasingly Important. Within our
military health core systems we must conserve the fighting strength, and maintain
quality health care. It should not be surprising that a defense environment of this
kind generates requirements for research and Investigation which can only be met by
the use of human subjects.
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---are. It should not be surprising that a defense environment of this
kind generates requirements for research and Investigation which can only be met by
the use of human subjects.
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

191
All Department of Defense work using human subjects Is conducted to meet
requirements of the Department of Defense. 
There are two main divisions of this
work. First, and by for the largest, Is the RDTE funded program. 
The second, and
newer program is that of clinical investigations funded In operations and maintenance
accounts.
The RDTE program is reviewed by the Director of Defense Research and Engineering
and conducted by the Military Departments. 
Its requirements ore generated by military
unique needs of the Department of Defense and the Military Departments.
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (Health and Environment) Is the DOD proponent
of the clinical Investigation program. The requirement for this program is generated
by the Department of Defense mission of providing health core and training of medical
personnel. The work here mare nearly resembles civilian (university) research programs.
Professional postgraduate medical training requires the experience of research or clinical
Investigation, while the opportunity to participate in clinical investigatlo? remains
an important corer Incentive. While the work may not be unique to the Military
Departments, it Is usually of considerable relevance and aimed at Improving the care
In military hospitals.
Some examples of military medical research ore:
Casualty Care
a. Use of electrical anesthesia in surgery.
b. Tissue 6o0e) transplantation In the treatment of severe maxillofocial wounds.
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---mples of military medical research ore:
Casualty Care
a. Use of electrical anesthesia in surgery.
b. Tissue 6o0e) transplantation In the treatment of severe maxillofocial wounds.
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

192
Infectious Disease. This area Is one of great importance and interest In the
Department of Defense and accounts for the largest use of human subjects, chiefly
In vaccine development.
a. 
Development and testing of a meningococcal meningitis vaccine to protect
recruit populations.
b. Development and testing of new antimalarial drugs against malaria resistant
to conventional medications.
Following tests for safety and effectiveness In experimental animals, humans
must be Involved initially in small and Ihter larger scale tests.
Hazard Piotection
Human testing of physiological techniques to improve tolerance to sustained
high acceleration forces encountered in combat aircraft.
Evaluation of body heat loss encountered in cold-water diving in various protective
suits.
This area of research is primarily performed by active duty military personnel
who are skilled ii operating in these unusual environments and who havo volunteered
for hazardous duty, for which they receive extra pay. 
This area of research is
potentially the most hazardous of Department of Defense research and the one with
the most highly trained subjects.
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---y, for which they receive extra pay. 
This area of research is
potentially the most hazardous of Department of Defense research and the one with
the most highly trained subjects.
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

193
Deferse Against Chemical Weopon.
This research is conducted in service and under contract by Edgewood Arsenal,
which is a part of the US Army Materiel Command. 
Research involving defense
against chemical and biological weapons was authorized by the Secretary of the
Army in 1953 and has been governed by Department of Defense and Army directives
originally written in 1953 containing the language of the Nuremberg Code which I
referred to earlier. This work was reviewed in open hearings before the House
Committee on Science and Astronautics, 16 and 22 June 1959, and on several later
occasions by Congressional Committees. 
The major research effort is involved with
trying to find more effective antidote drugs to counteract chemical weapons that we
know are in the arsenals of potential enemies. Many of the drugs that are used do
temporarily affect performance and ability to do complex tasks but this is a side effect
and not on intended purpose of using the drug. 
I am sure you may have many questions
about the history of this type of research and I will do my best to answer them. 
I would
like to point out, however, that no drug is tested if there is any suspicion from pre-
clinical testing in animals that it will have serious adverse or long lasting effects.
Furthermore, the review mechanisms applied to Edgewood have been tightened over
the last two years so that protocols are reviewed by the Army Investigational Drug
Review Board and Human Subjects Research Review Board and relevant Department of
Defense and Food and Drug Administration regulations are followed. A case in point
is the newly developed antidote called 'TAB" which will replace the traditional
atropine antidote carried by US Armed Forces. 
A meeting was held with the FDA in
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---A case in point
is the newly developed antidote called 'TAB" which will replace the traditional
atropine antidote carried by US Armed Forces. 
A meeting was held with the FDA in
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

194
November 1974 regarding the deployment of this new drug. Since that time, further
clinical studies hove been postponed pending submission of further data to FDA. 
Concerns
expressed by former participants in the Army Chemical Warfare human testing program on
lyserglc acid diethylamide (LSD) hove prompted me to direct a complete medical follow-
up study of all participants. The current status of the follow-up is at Ind 4.
Other Work with Investigational Drugs
There Is presently no classified work with investigational drugs being conducted
in the Department of Defense. 
The large majority of this work has always been open
and reported fully to the Food and Drug Administration. 
Presumably all use of inves-
tigational drugs in the Department of Defense is formally on file with the FDA and
projects are subject to that agency's review before projects ore begun. 
In addition
to the 1974 meeting, mentioned above, representatives of the Food and Drug Adminis-
tration reviewed the medical research activities at Edgewood Arsenal in 1967, pursuant
to the HEW/DOD agreement, and a liaison visit by FDA was mode to the Biomedical
Laboratory, Edgewood Arsenal in 1972. More detailed information about Department
of Defense research involving human subjects will be provided for the record. Historical
information which you may desire will be promptly retrieved.
As you hove heard, there is evidence that the sound ethical principles directed
in past and present DOD regulations appear not always to have been followed,
particularly in the 1950's. 
Where this has been true, I believe that the problem has
not been lack of guidelines but lack of compliance with them. We all deplore any
instances in which the welfare of human subjects was not properly protected.
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---that the problem has
not been lack of guidelines but lack of compliance with them. We all deplore any
instances in which the welfare of human subjects was not properly protected.
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

195
Procedures have been Implemented that tighten control of this work so that the
future will not provide more Incidents. 
I assure you that no contract or in service
projects calling for experimentation upon human beings will be done In the future by
any part of the Department of Defense without the proper safeguards. In addition,
action has been taken to insure that any participation in volunteer studies under the
sponsorship of Fort Detrick or Edgewood Arsenal by service personnel will be carefully
documented in individual medical records.
My aim has been to give you an overview of the subject. I assure you that when
we ask people to assume any degree of risk as part of a Department of Defense medical
or behavioral research project, we do it in the context of a long tradition of ethical
responsibility. I believe our post efforts to protect subjects have been vigorous but
we are always striving to improve.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---, we do it in the context of a long tradition of ethical
responsibility. I believe our post efforts to protect subjects have been vigorous but
we are always striving to improve.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

196
C 0 P Y 
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
Was hi ngt on
26 Feb 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF THE ARMY
SECRETARY OF THE NAVY
SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE
SUBJECT: 
Use of Human Volunteers in Experimental Research
1. Based upon a recommendation of the Armed Forces Medical
Policy Council, that human subjects be employed, under recognized
safeguards, as the only feasible means for realistic evaluation
and/or development of effective preventive measures of defense
against atomic, biological or chemical agents, the policy set
forth below will govern the use of human volunteers by the
Department of Defense in experimental research in the fields
of atomic, biological and/or chemical warfare.
2. By reason of the basic medical responsibility in connection
with the development of defense of all types against atomic,
biological and/or chemical warfare agents, Armed Services personnel
and/or civilians on duty at installations engaged in such research
shall be permitted to actively participate in all phases of the
program, such participation shall be subject to the following
conditions:
a. The voluntary consent of the human subject is
absolutely essential.
(1) This means that the person involved should
have legal capacity to give consent; should be so
situated as to be able to exercise free power of
choice, without the intervention of any element of
force, fraud, deceit, duress, over-reaching, or other
ulterior form of constraint or coercion; and should
have sufficient knowledge and comprehension of the
elements of the subject matter involved as to
enable him to make an understanding and enlightened
decision. This latter element requires that before
the acceptance of an affirmative decision by the
experimental subject there should be made known
to him the nature, duration, and purpose of
the experiment; the method and means by
TP 
T 
Downgraded to
UNCLASSIFIED 22 Aug 75
per S. Clements
DDR&E OSD(PA)imental subject there should be made known
to him the nature, duration, and purpose of
the experiment; the method and means by
TP 
T 
Downgraded to
UNCLASSIFIED 22 Aug 75
per S. Clements
DDR&E OSD(PA)

--- PAGE BREAK ---e should be made known
to him the nature, duration, and purpose of
the experiment; the method and means by
TP 
T 
Downgraded to
UNCLASSIFIED 22 Aug 75
per S. Clements
DDR&E OSD(PA)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

197
which it is to be conducted; all inconveniences
and hazards reasonably to be expected; and the
effects upon his health or person which may possibly
come from his participation in the experiment.
(2) The concept of the human subject shall be in
writing, his signature shall be affixed to a written
instument setting forth substantially the afore-
mentioned requirements and shall be signed in the
presence of at least one witness who shall attest to
such signature in writing.
(a) In experiments where personnel from more
than one Service are involved the Secretary of the
Service which is exercising primary responsibility
for conducting the experiment is designated to pre-
pare such an instrument and coordinate it for use
by all the Services having human volunteers involved
in the experiment.
(3) The duty and responsibility for ascertaining
the quality of the consent rests upon each individual
who initiates, directs or engages in the experiment.
It is a personal duty and responsibility which may
not be delegated to another with impunity.
b. The experiment should be such as to yield fruitful
results for the good of society, unprocurable by other methods
or means of study, and not random and unnecessary in nature.
c. The number of volunteers used shall be kept at a
minimum consistent with item b., above.
d. The experiment should be so designed and based on the
results of animal experimentation and a knowledge of the natural
history of the disease or other problem under study that the
anticipated results will justify the performance of the experiment.
e. The experiment should be so conducted as to avoid all
unnecessary physical and mental suffering and injury.
f. No experiment should be conducted where there is an
a priori reason to believe that death or disabling injury will
occur.
g. The degree of risk to be taken should never exceed
that determined by the humanitarian importance of the problem
to be solved by the experiment.
2
Downgraded to
UNCLASSIFIED 22 Aug 75y will
occur.
g. The degree of risk to be taken should never exceed
that determined by the humanitarian importance of the problem
to be solved by the experiment.
2
Downgraded to
UNCLASSIFIED 22 Aug 75

--- PAGE BREAK ---degree of risk to be taken should never exceed
that determined by the humanitarian importance of the problem
to be solved by the experiment.
2
Downgraded to
UNCLASSIFIED 22 Aug 75

--- PAGE BREAK ---

198
C 0 P Y
h. Propel preparation should be made and adequate
facilities provided to protect the experimental subject against
even remote possibilities of injury, disability, or death.
i. The experiment should be conducted only by scientifi-
cally qualified persons. The highest degree of skill and care
should be required through all stages of the experiment of those
who conduct or engage in the experiment.
J. 
During the course of the experiment the human subject
should be at liberty to bring the experiment to an end if he has
reached the physical or mental state where continuation of the
experiment seems to him to be impossible.
k. During the course of the experiment the scientist in
charge must be prepared to terminate the experiment at any stage,
if he has probable cause to believe, in the exercise of the good
faith, superior skill and careful judgment required of him that a
continuation of the experiment is likely to result in injury, dis-
ability, or death to the experimental subject.
1. The established policy, which prohibits the use of
prisoners of war in human experimentation, is continued and they
will not be used under any circumstances.
3. The Secretaries of the Army, Navy and Air Force are
authorized to conduct experiments in connection with the development
.-- of defenses of all types against atomic, biological and/or chemical
warfare agents involving the use of human subjects within the
limits prescribed above.
4. In each instance in which an experiment is proposed pur-
suant to this memorandum, the nature and purpose of the proposed
experiment and the name of the person who will be in charge of
such experiment shall be submitted for approval to the Secretary
of the military department in which the proposed experiment is to
be conducted. No such experiment shall be undertaken until such
Secretary has approved in writing the experiment proposed, the
person who will be in charge of conducting it, as well as informing
the Secretary of Defense.
5. The addresses will be responsible for insuring compliance
with the provisions of this memorandum within their respective
Services.
/signed/
C.E. WILSON
Copies furnished:
Joint Chiefs of Staff
Research and Development Board
Downgraded to UNCLASSIFIED
22 Aug 75
TOP 
CE
3ovisions of this memorandum within their respective
Services.
/signed/
C.E. WILSON
Copies furnished:
Joint Chiefs of Staff
Research and Development Board
Downgraded to UNCLASSIFIED
22 Aug 75
TOP 
CE
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---199
NUW4BERG CODE*
".

1e voluntary consent o1 the hums
abject is absolutely essential.

SThis mesa 
that the rtrson involved shoul
hare legal capacity to give conAnt: should b
- 'Copied from Experwmentiaton with
Human Beinaby Jay Katz, Russell
Sage Foundation, New York 1972.

M iftnet as to be able to e ercie free pop
of beice, without the intervention uf any ele-
m w 
forc, fraud.

dec'it.

dur:.s.

over.reach.

iM.

W other ulterior fomat of cont;:,nit or Co.

e'cw and should 
I€ suui.as't knowleJse
ad emprehent.im of th.

elnceints o the sub.

, jotsmitra 
involved as o enable hin to Make
" n edrtuatding and rnlthtcnej decision.

This
hue element requires thAt Wetore the accept.

"im 
SM O n atirmative decision by the epcri-
pmcmd 'ubje& there should be made koown to
Slhim the nature.

dura&n.

and purpose of the
.'aptrimnr.

the method and means by which it
Is to be conducted: all inconvenience% and has-
ads rasor.ably to be e.xpected; and tie iftects
" -poelhis 
health or person which may Possibly
come from his participation in the experiment.

Th 
duty and rsponstblhty for ascertain.

in 
he quality of the consent rets upV, rach
hdividral who iitiates.

directs.

or engages in
'the ezperi.ent.

It is a personal duty and re.

sportiNfity which may not be delcated to an.

other with impunity.

2.

The'experiment should be such as to
yield fruitful rcults for the good of society.

unpe 
rable by other methods or means of
vstdy.

and not random atnd unnecessary in na-
3.

The experiment should be so designed
aid based on the results of animal e.oerimenta-
tion and a knowledge of the natural history of
the dsase or.

other problem under study that
the anicipated results will justify the perform-
Oc f the experiment.

4.

The experiment should be so conducted
as to avoid all unnecessary physical and mental
v 
wiwe g and injury.

S.

No expermen 
should be conducted
when there is an a piori reason to believe that
"l 
death or disabling injury wbill occur; excep4.--- PAGE BREAK ---

S. No expermen 
should be conducted
when there is an a piori reason to believe that
"l 
death or disabling injury wbill occur; excep4. perha* 
in those experiments where the experi. mental physicians also serve as subjects
6. The degree of risk to be taten should
nevir exceed that determined by* the humani-
taiam importance of the problem to be solved
by te experimentL
Proper preparations should be made and
adequate facilities provided to protect the ex-
a 
periniental 
object against even remote posi-
bilities of injury. disihity. or death. d 
. The experiment should be conducted
Only by sciitmi'.callv qualified personsL The
11140" degree of skill and care should he re-
quire 
through all uages of the experiment of
tbn who conduct or enage in the experiment. " . Dsty" the course of the experiment the
bu 
subject should be at liberty to bring the
eq'ehienr to an end if he has reached the phys. kld r mental -state whete continuation of the
experiett seems to hint to be impo ,ible. Ml. During the coure of the experiences
dt wcntlist in charge must be prepared to
unuiiate 
the eaperimerni at any stage. if he hu
poebebe cause to believe. in the exerci 
of the
Pad faith, superior skill, and careful judgment
1ired 
of him that a continuation of the ex-
periuns Is likely to result in injury, disability,
r death to the expoeiment.,i subject.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ad faith, superior skill, and careful judgment
1ired 
of him that a continuation of the ex-
periuns Is likely to result in injury, disability,
r death to the expoeiment.,i subject.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

200
CURRENT REGULATIONS
Use of Investigational Drugs in Humans and
the Use of Schedule I Controlled Drug
Substances, 4 Apr 75
Clinical Investigation Program, 23 Feb 73
Use of Volunteers as Subjects of Research,
15 Sep 74
AR 40-7
AR 40-38
AR 70-25
BUNEDINST 6000.4B
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
SECNAVINST 3900.39
APR 169-6
APR 169-8
APR 80-33
Clinical Investigation Program, 15 Jan 75
Investigational Use of New Drugs in Human
Beings, 9 Jul 73
Use of Volunteers as Subjects in Research,
Development, Test and Evaluation, 28 Apr 69
Air Force
Clinical Investigation, 26 Jun 74
Use of Human Test Subjects in the Medical
Service, 19 Aug 74
Use of Volunteers in Aerospace Research,
28 Aug 69
~A13

--- PAGE BREAK ---aluation, 28 Apr 69
Air Force
Clinical Investigation, 26 Jun 74
Use of Human Test Subjects in the Medical
Service, 19 Aug 74
Use of Volunteers in Aerospace Research,
28 Aug 69
~A13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

201
fI;IFOW.ATION PAPER
9 S(ptCnbor 19175
SUJBJECT: 
Progross on Vollo'wtp of Subjectu of LSD 
tr,8 0:rv AIunly
l'syuboactivo Drug Research
FACTS.
1. 
List of TXD subjects, has ben col inted from 
1dctwnod Arsenal rvq'ird4
atnd atso fropi Tia tisw)p c'ttor (;Jc',tlt 
records. 
List evitios ,55O ntorr,, 40,'.o
of whJch wure added 
t'C1Jdically over the .ntt bcv'erp1 W,.ckt 
fln(, l:wvc:A,,,in
racordr, are h11oiMp14,LV oi-ior to .194.
2. 
,.r 
.:ttl'; 
o of Th( ' 
.
.,i.. 
tr,4,',.; 1, J 1.0 S I e 
o 
b 
..,,, 6
Center 25-29 August J975. 
Center wa-4 ablo 
to provide 
4 
Fo'ial 8ecmrlty
Account Nto:v'ars and old ow'dr,'tos nit 200 pcrFowr.i 
hitit of ;!roulp aj a 
,
found there oithe-r becoune of destruction of record. 
by fire or in-,h..Aiy
of computer to locate file from Informultdh (service nwt5vr) tvaLt1,h
3, 
Other data bason to bit used are Vet, raos Ai lnictratln (VA) 
fMlo :i-.
Social Sectrity fils. 
National Acadvniy of Scionces , dioil l'ollowtup Ago.mic'w
hato extunstw* experience using those data bnser,0 
LSD lroJ Irup Two); P'mr c
Is planiniy dt:Lotls of p'opo~nl for followup 
,armin tio=', 
Lo to sulw-1.tltod
to the National Acadvny of Sciences.
4. 
Nineteen of the Fort Bunning group have boor e:a 
,, 
t: 
altr 
od
Army Mledical Conter. 
Of thlo grotop, one mati, In addit,Jon to lIC Jordn,
had ant nbiniormal EM. 
Consul ants at Waltcr Rvee ,',r 'ldic,1 Center do
not fool thut SP was causally associated ith this abnoovnlity.
5. 
Several irrn from the Forf Benitiig 
roti 
,wu urilinialiy declined
oxamination we.re reconanoutei but declined 
igaIni 
The i;:vi-. mor who could
not be reached hasvo bcon 
'wit lutters throjh .the Social !% o0rity Account
Nutrber system.

--- PAGE BREAK ---declined
oxamination we.re reconanoutei but declined 
igaIni 
The i;:vi-. mor who could
not be reached hasvo bcon 
'wit lutters throjh .the Social !% o0rity Account
Nutrber system.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

202
SUBJI,:CTs
l'rogr#ars 
c 
: Folow'%.p of Subjects of L.SD and Other Army
Psv tovlv. 
IPrl , iesoarr'h
6. 
In the lest t.uver ,t,,ks, 
113 piorvono have hiquirod at the Office Mf
The Surg c, 
', 
ra1 ahit dtw; teatin,. 
Twonty-1Ax were on record (,a
having takc.p I.S) and 
o 
t .iflWed 
tLt they would bo oxilIned.
mately 30 ti 
fh.r Orv:. 
at J'dgc-vood Arspnil, Marytt.-nd, andI their r rck.,twws
for information hove hi 
handlitd approprIaLely.
7. 
A syste'mntic atinlysif, will be made of drug RtudLios porformod at
EdAcwood to dctermitie w1.0hi rubjec.s of tests 1ot Invelving LSD rc';ire,
fol towup,
- ,%\J Johnvton/3806''

--- PAGE BREAK ---

203
Senator Kzxumr. The subcommittee stands in recess until tomor-
row morning.
[Whereupon, A 1.2 pan., the subcommittee recmsed.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---owup,
- ,%\J Johnvton/3806''

--- PAGE BREAK ---

203
Senator Kzxumr. The subcommittee stands in recess until tomor-
row morning.
[Whereupon, A 1.2 pan., the subcommittee recmsed.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL RESEARCH, 1975
Human-Use Experimentation Programs of the Department
of Defense and Central Intelligence Agency
FRIDAY, ITI 
MBER 12, 1975
U.S. SENATE,
SUWnOMMIrrWFE ON HEALTH OF THE
CoMMITrE ON LABOR AND PUBLIC WELFARE,
SuBooMMIrEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE PRAcICE AND
PROCEDURE OF THE COMMITTEEE ON TIlE JUDICIARY,
Washingto, D.C.
The subcommittees met pursuant to notice, at 10:25 am., in room
42 32, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. EdwArd M. Kennedy
(chairman of the subcommittees) presiding.
Present: Senators Kennedy, Schweiker, and Stafford.
Senator KENNEDY. The subcommittees will come to order.
Over the period of these past few days, we have heard enormously
disturbing testimony about the. role of human experimentation spon-
sored by the Defense Department as well as the Central Intelligence
Agency, and we have heard extremely moving testimony from many
of the victims and the families of the victims who participated in
those studies.
Of course, we could not help but be enormously impressed by the
real lack of consent of many of those who participa 
in hese tes
and the lack of medical supervision, and a lack of medical followup.
To the greatest extent that took place in the mid 1950's, in the early
part of the 1960's.
Our interest now is really learning about what is happening cur-
rentlv. There are different. standards, there are. probably different
understandings of the importance of this whole question of human ex-
perimentation and. as tragic as those circumstances were, we really
want to try to understand better what has been happening in recent
times, what is happening today, and what the possibilities are for in-
suring that both -those who have participated in the 
experimenta-
tions are going to have adequate followup and, of course, be given the
best in terms of medical attention, but we want to make sure that those
who will continue to be used in human experimentation situations are
going to have adequate knowledge and understanding about the nature
of these experiments and be fully aware of what the dramatic effects
will be.
During the last few days of hearings, we have heard from spokes-
men for the Department of the Army and the DOD who indicated to
(205)eriments and be fully aware of what the dramatic effects
will be.
During the last few days of hearings, we have heard from spokes-
men for the Department of the Army and the DOD who indicated to
(205)

--- PAGE BREAK ---y aware of what the dramatic effects
will be.
During the last few days of hearings, we have heard from spokes-
men for the Department of the Army and the DOD who indicated to
(205)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

206
us that they could not tell us really about what the current situation
is at Edgew ood Arsenal, and really could not tell us very much, or
were unwilling to tell us, about what has been happening at the Edge-
wood Arsenal for the period of the last 5 years.
This is in spite of the fact that since July of this year, there has been
a termination of any experimentation with LSD.
However, we had witnesses from DOD who indicated to us that they
were in the process of bringing this material together, and that it was
a lengthy and exhaustive and very comprehensive problem.
Some have asked Dr. Van Sim, who is the chief of the medical re-
search division of the biomedical laboratories at Edgewood Arsenal,
to come here this morning so that we might obtain answers from him
on these various matters.
Subcommittee staff, who have had an opportunity to talk with Dr.
Sime, say that lie appeared clearly responsive and open and candid
and willing to answer various questions. I suppose one of the problems
that we have is wondering why the DOD and the Army have had prob-
lems obtaining answers which Dr. Sim has been all too willing to give
to our staff.
So we. look forward to your testimony, Dr. Sim.
As I understand from the preliminary exchanges, Doctor, some of
the material that you gave in terms of exchange with the staff is in
conflict with the testimony that we received from the Department of
Defense and the Department of the Army. Therefore, I am going to
ask that you be sworn in, because of the importance of this matter.
So I will ask you to rise and swear that. the testimony you are about
to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you, God.
I)r. Si3i. I do.
Senator KEN NEDY. Senator Schweiker.
Senator SCHWEIKER. Mr. Chairman, I feel this committee's work in
this area is very critical and very important..
I join the chairman in emphasizing its urgency and the priority.
I think the tragedy of the situation-not only as expressed by today's
hearing-is that it has taken so long for this material to come out. It
implies that our system is not working, that we in the Congress are not
adequately exercising our oversight authority, and that other areas of
the Government are using the term "national security" in a way in
which I am sure it was never meant to be used.
I think one of the jobs of this committee, particularly in this area, is
to inake sure whatever safeguards we set up in the future to protect our
people so the Government cannot hide behind "national security" as a
reason for the people not knowing what is happening.
The focal point of our actions after the hearing should be to provide
new mechanisms and techniques which will not permit improper prac-
tices and experimentation to be carried on under the guise of national
security.
That is all, Mr. Chairman.
Senator KE.NNrFJ 
. Thank you very much, Senator Schweiker.
Doctor, could you tell us what your position is?mentation to be carried on under the guise of national
security.
That is all, Mr. Chairman.
Senator KE.NNrFJ 
. Thank you very much, Senator Schweiker.
Doctor, could you tell us what your position is?

--- PAGE BREAK ---ied on under the guise of national
security.
That is all, Mr. Chairman.
Senator KE.NNrFJ 
. Thank you very much, Senator Schweiker.
Doctor, could you tell us what your position is?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

207
STATEMENT OF DR. VAN M. SIM, CHIEF, MEDICAL RESEARCH DIVI-
SION, BIOMEDICAL LABORATORIES, EDGEWOOD ARSENAL, MD.
Dr. SIM. My position is that of chief of medical research division of
the biomedical laboratories at Edgewood Arsenal.
As such, I have been responsible since 1956 for the conductance of
the drug testing program on Army and Air Force volunteers.
Senator KENFNDY. What kinds of human-use drug testing programs
have been underway at Edgewood since 1967?
We want to know what has been happening since 1967.
Dr. Six. Since 1967, we have four general classes of drug testing
programs that have been carried on.
The first would be the improvement of riot control type compounds
as typified by our present standard compound, which is C.S.
The second would be to complete the work, the necessary work, on
antidotes and treatment for the incapacitating agents, so-called, anti-
cholinergics, as typified by B.Z. (a benzilate).
The third is to improve the posture of the soldier and sailor and
marine and airman in providing for him a better and more compre-
hensive self-carrying package that he will be able to administer to
himself in the field or others in case of an attack by a compound, such
as GB (Savin), a nerve gas or nerve agent, so-called.
These are the three primary areas:
In addition to that, we have done work on improving our present
field therapy by adding Oxime preparations for use in the reversal
of anticholinesterase poisoning.
We have made studies using alcohol, drugs, and combinations of
the two. The barbiturates, Valium, amphetamines and tetrahydro-
cannibinols are commonly used. We had to understand what part they
would play if, in fact, a person were further tested with another type
of compound or, in fact, what impact it would have on both the civil-
ian and military population from chronic use of these materials.
Senator SCIWEIKER. Doctor, you mentioned the work you were do--
ingwas for the Army and Air Force, is that correct?
Dr. Six. Yes.
Senator SCHWEIKER. Is there any other intelligence agency or any
other branch of Government, any other program whatsoever being car-
ried out there in which you are cooperating, any other contractor or
subcontractor or any agent in any way?
Dr. Six. No.
We have the responsibility to the Department of Defense-that
means for the Department o the Navy, for the Army, the Air Force,
the Marine Corps--to investigate drugs and chemicals and their effects
on men, and come up with a diagnosis, treatment, prevention, prevent-
ative medicines, prophylactic medicines and treatment procedures for
the Department of Defense. That is it.
Senator SCHWEIKER. All right.
Senator KNNEDY. Then, some of the results that you found were
supposed to be sent to the Central Intelligence Agency, is that right?
Dr. Six. As far as I know, Senator, if they were sent to the CIA,
that was above my echelon.
We provided the information, we provided all of the documentse Central Intelligence Agency, is that right?
Dr. Six. As far as I know, Senator, if they were sent to the CIA,
that was above my echelon.
We provided the information, we provided all of the documents

--- PAGE BREAK ---ce Agency, is that right?
Dr. Six. As far as I know, Senator, if they were sent to the CIA,
that was above my echelon.
We provided the information, we provided all of the documents

--- PAGE BREAK ---

208
that were required, and where they were sent forth, I do not know.
Senator KE.NNW'. You sent them to whom?
-Dr. Sim. We sent them forward. We distributed all of our copies
of our publications Army-wide throughout the Department of De-
fense, to the Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps and to any requesting
agency within the Government.
That could be Food and Drug; it could be Central Intelligence; it
could be DIA; it could be anybody. But everybody gets the distribu-
tion of our report.
Senator KBNNEDY. What does the report say ?
Does it tell what you are doing at Edgewood Arsenal?
Dr. Six. It tells exactly about particular experimental programs. It
is a completed report.
Senator KEZNWY. Why do you think that the Surgeon General of
the Army was unable to tell us what was going on at Edgewood and
that it was going to take them a long period of time to find out what
was going on?
Dr. Sim. There are two parts to that, Senator.
The first p art is that every document-we have several types of
reports. We have technical memoranda which are generated in-house.
They are incomplete works.
Second, we have finished research reports.
Third, we have special publications and, fourth, we have open
publications.
Now, all copies of these have to go through the Army screening
program before they are published. When they are published, they are
sent through normal distribution channels to all agencies ot the
Government.
To further amplify that, I would say that in checking this over, 11
copies went to the Department of the Army, including the Surgeon
General's office throughout; 11 copies went to the Department of the
Navy, including several Bureaus and the Bureau of Medicine and Sur-
gery; 6 went to the Marine Corps; and the Air Force received 10
Copies.
ow, this is standard procedure. They all received this information.
Senator SCHWEIKER. You said there were four categories, did you
not?
Dr. Six. Four categories of ?
Senator ScHWEIKER. Which of those four categories are you de-
cribing now?
Dr. Sim. I am describing the finished technical report of any study
category.
Senator SCUWEIKEr. Categories 3 and 4, as you described?
Dr. Sim. Now, are you talking about category 4 as far as individ-
uals?
Senator SCRWErKER. You just said there were four categories of
data.
Which category of data is distributed as follows: 11 to the Army,
11 to the Navy, 6 to the Marine Corps ?
Dr. Sim. The second one, the Edgewood Arsenal technical report, or
the third one, the Edgewood Arsenal special publication, would be
distributed fully to all those.
The technical memoranda were not necessarily always sent to allEdgewood Arsenal technical report, or
the third one, the Edgewood Arsenal special publication, would be
distributed fully to all those.
The technical memoranda were not necessarily always sent to all

--- PAGE BREAK ---chnical report, or
the third one, the Edgewood Arsenal special publication, would be
distributed fully to all those.
The technical memoranda were not necessarily always sent to all

--- PAGE BREAK ---

209
groups, but they certainly would reach the Department of the Army,
the Surgeon General's office, the R. & D. Command, because they are
finished reports.
Now, the open publication ones have to go through those channels
anyway in order to be cleared.
Senator KENNEDY. How long have you been doing that?
Have you been doing that just recently ?
Dr. Six. No, sir.
We have been doing that since I have had the program, since I have
been responsible for the program, since 1956.
Every finished report went through the regular channels and is in
repository within governmental libraries of the Army, Navy, and Air
Force.
Senator KENNzDY. Does that include the number of experiments and
the subjects?
Dr. Six. It does not include the subject's name. It does include the
number of people.
Senator KENNDy. And the number of the experiments and the
nature of the experiments, is that right?
Dr. Six. Yes, sir.
Senator Ki.NNry. Why do y-u think Mr. Charles 0. Ablard, Gen-
eral Counsel for the Army, testified that of the total number of experi-
ments and human subjects, there is reason to believe that these records
may not be complete, and that the total number of participants may be
somewhat higher ?
He continued to say:
Available records do not Indicate whether these procedures were. In fact,
followed in each case or exactly what information was Imparted to the prospec-
tive subject.
Why do you think Mr. Ablard says there is reason to believe that
these records may not be complete?
Were they complete?
Dr. Six. Yes; they were complete.
Senator KENNzDY. These words had all the information on this that
you were required to provide under the regulations?
Dr. Six. Every one of the experiments from day 1 and the first
volunteer has a complete file on every test that he has been on and
every record; including a physical examination, psychiatric examina-
tion, psychological examination, complete test protocol, what drug he
received, what other tests he was on, a final written workup of that
individual, plus a complete evaluation bythe doctor.
That is part of the medical records, and we have every one of those
from the beginning.
They have not had time to look to see how complete they are,
Senator.
Senator SCHWIKEP. Would-this include informed consent proce-
dures and structuring of your experiments ?
Dr. Six. Yes, sir; it includes everything.
The average volunteer file is approximately 53 pages on each in-
dividual for every time that he became a volunteer.
Senator SCHWJKERL Are you saying, in essence, that these various
branches have been inundated with reports on what you have been
doing in detail ?-
dividual for every time that he became a volunteer.
Senator SCHWJKERL Are you saying, in essence, that these various
branches have been inundated with reports on what you have been
doing in detail ?

--- PAGE BREAK ---time that he became a volunteer.
Senator SCHWJKERL Are you saying, in essence, that these various
branches have been inundated with reports on what you have been
doing in detail ?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

210
Dr. Six. Perhaps it is not so much that, Senator, as not beingspecifi-
cally interested in a program. I think this has more to do with it.
After all, in the research area there are multiple reports that go in,
and there are those who are sitting in the chain of command that have
to review them; if they do not have a specific interest in that area, it
may be that they did not.
Senator ScIWEIKER. Who makes that decision, Doctor?
Dr. Sim. They do.
Senator ScItwzIKU. That is my point. That is not your decision.
Dr. Sim. That is not our decision.
Senator SCHwEixxR. As I understand it, your decision is to send 11
to the Army, 11 to the Navy, and then through the chain of command
they make that determination.
Senator KENNEDY. Let me ask you this, Doctor, if we can get back
to this.
I think you have been very responsive concerning the information
that you have made available to the Departments of Defense, the
Army, the Air Force, and other branches.
In completing your particular responsibilities in the three areas
that you initially identified, did you have to administer hallucino-
genic drugs to various human subjects?
Dr. Six. Yes, sir.
Senator KENNEDY. Other than LSD I
Dr. Six. Yes, sir.
Senator KENNEDY. Can you describe to us from 1967 to the present
the kind of drugs that were being used, the number of different kinds
of experiments that were taking place, and then I want to come to
questions of consent and medical supervision.
I)r. Six. There were several categories of drugs studied since 1967.
All of them were representative of classes of compounds for which we
had previous authority to study. Riot control compounds such as CS
and CR; incapacitating compounds represented by the glycolates B.Z.,
EA3580, EA3834; therapeutic and prophylactic compounds thought
to be effective against anticholinesterase compounds such as Sarin
(GB) or Soman (GD). We did not study the effect of nerve ants
themselves during this time period because they had been studied pre-
viously. Therapeutic and prophylactic compounds thought to be ef-
fective in prevention or treatment of incapacitating agents such as the
glycolates (agent B.Z., an anticholinergic compound) were also
studied.
Senator KENNEDY. Would you hold just a mInute, Doctr?
(Discussion off the record.)
Senator KENNEDY. We apologize to the witness.
Could we have the last question and answer read ?
[The last question and answer, as recorded, were read by the
reporter.]
Senator KENNEDY. You were talking about B.Z.
Would you continue?
Are these all hallucinogenic drugs ?
Dr. Sim. B.Z. is an anticholinergic like Atropen.
Senator KENNEDY. What does it do ?
Dr. Sim. B.Z. causes both physical and mental incapacitation. The
physical incapacitation comes on first. It is represented by feelings of a
dry mouth, difficulty with vision, some difficulty with gait, and then acauses both physical and mental incapacitation. The
physical incapacitation comes on first. It is represented by feelings of a
dry mouth, difficulty with vision, some difficulty with gait, and then a

--- PAGE BREAK ---l and mental incapacitation. The
physical incapacitation comes on first. It is represented by feelings of a
dry mouth, difficulty with vision, some difficulty with gait, and then a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

211
person does not remember, and for a period of time he is in a state in
which might best be described as semiquiet delirium.
Senator KvI.NrzY. For how long?
Dr. Sim. That depends.
With B.Z., it may be as long as 12 or 20 hours at which time he be-
comes ambulatory and gets ip and moves around, but is unable to
answer or retain memory for things that happened during the course
of the experiment.
In about 72 hours, they are completely recovered, and we have had
no reports of any difficulty as far as after effects.
Senator KZNNEDY. Will you continue.
l)r. Sim. Yes.
We have not studied any anticholinesterase compounds except when
Physostigm ie (a weak anticholinesterase) is used for the treatment
of B.Z. The work on nerve agents was terminated in about 1965, and
there has been no further work done with these compounds.
We have continued work on some of the tranquilizers which are
commonly used by the public, namely things like Valium, Trilafon,
Thorazine, and so forth.
A point about Thorazine, we found out in our early experience with
LSD, that it was effective in attenuating the LSD reaction. We studied
Thorazine alone also.
As far as the other incapacitating agents, they are all in the same
class as B.Z., except that they are glycol ates, which is only a structural
modification, but the effect is exactly the same.
I would like to clarify something because of erroneous newspaper
reporting. LSD-25 and its analogous compounds are entirely different
in their effects on humans. The dose required for effect from LSD is
between 50 to 200 micrograms per individual. The dose required for
effect from the anticholinergics such as B.Z. is from 5 to 10 times that
amount. The duration of LSD-25 effects is usually from 6 to 12 hours
for full recovery, but the effects of the anticholinergics may last from
2 hours to several days. The LSD-25 individual has few physiological
changes, but a heightened activity of their central nervous system.
During the period of acute effects, although hallucinating, they do
have moments where they are entirely aware of what is going on
around them. The person suffering from anticholinergic intoxication
has physical incapacitation first, represented by dry mouth, visual
disturbance, and ataxia (difficulty in balance). this is followed by a
somnolent state during which period the individual is completely out
of touch with his environment. Within a short time his physical dis-
ability improves, but he continues to be disoriented for a period of
time depending on the particular compound.
Senator Kzxmwy. This included VK.X, is that right?
Dr. Six. Yes, sir, but not since 1967.
This all terminated before that time.
Senator Kzwmiy. V.X. was terminatedI
Dr. Si. Yes.
Senator KzNmY. Is that a lethal drug?
Dr. Si. That is a lethal compound, yes, sir.
Senator KNNEDY. Can that be tested on human beings?
Dr. Sim. It can be and was.
Senator KzEmmY. What happened ?
Dr. Six. I was the first subject on that so I have some memory of it.ompound, yes, sir.
Senator KNNEDY. Can that be tested on human beings?
Dr. Sim. It can be and was.
Senator KzEmmY. What happened ?
Dr. Six. I was the first subject on that so I have some memory of it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---212
The test consisted of an intravenous infusion lasting 
seven hours.

My acetylcholinesterase level dropped to near zero, and I had all the
signs and symptoms of an anticholinesterase poisoning.

Senator KzNNEDY.

Did it almost kill you ?

Dr.

Six.

No, sir, it'did not, but I would never give a drug to an in-
dividual without first knowing what the facts and hazards were as
well as the necessary treatment required.

This is a personal thing as far as I am concerned.

I have never given
a drug toan individual when I have not had experience with that class
of drug personally.

The experiment is done first on me.

That has been
my credo since I have been in charge of the program.

People do not agree with me entirely on this.

They say it is not en-
tirely objective, but I have to live with myself, and I have to conduct
this program.

Senator KN NETY.

That is a very, very commendable attitude.

Senator STAmD.

Will the doctor tell us what his symptoms were
in this case
Dr.

Six.

The symptoms were those that are typical that would hap-
pen in a case of pesticide poisoning like Parathion.

There was some difficulty with breathing.

First, I had the sensation
of my nose running, and T was having difficulty with vision, seeing, a
distortion of vision; sweating; tremors; nausea and vomiting.

Finally, the exposure was terminated.

I might say we never do any
of this testing unless we have an antidote for the particular compound
that we are going to study.

This is inherent in medical investigation
practice.

We do not give drugs to people when you cannot reverse the situa-
tion with an antidote, and we have never tried treating or giving any-
body a drug without first having all the methods and all the materials
available that would terminate that exposure.

Senator KEYNNDt.

That may have been the practice at your center.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Senator KEYNNDt. That may have been the practice at your center. but we have heard some rather disturbing and distressing stories of
when that was not the case in tests sponsored by the Department of
Defense, experimentation which ended up in tragic situations. Just
briefly now. how many different drugs, hallucinogenic drugs, were
you testing from 1967 to the present that were designed to incapacitate
an individual? Dr. Six. I do not have the figures exactly. Senator KENNEDY. Approximately. Dr. Six. Approximately, I would say that we probably have done
seven of the incapacitating drugs since 1967, and they are all in the
same series as B.Z. like the ones that we have done before. Senator KENE.srI. Of those, how many individuals were involved? Dr. Six. The total number of people to come on the program of
this type I
Senator KENNEDY. Since 1967. Dr. Six. Since 1967. We had one hiatus, and no volunteers in 1973 and 1974, due to .a
change in assignment from Continental Army Command to Military
Personnel Center. That delayed us about I year, so we had no volun-
teers. The number of volunteers has averaged about 300 to 400 per year
that have gone into this program between 40 to 60 percent were found
eligible for drug studies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---had no volun-
teers. The number of volunteers has averaged about 300 to 400 per year
that have gone into this program between 40 to 60 percent were found
eligible for drug studies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

213
Senator KEavNrzY. Were they military?
Dr. Sim. They are all military, sir.
Senator SCHWiirmn. I understand Edgewood has done some con-
tract work with prisoners and students.
How many prisoners and students would be involved in that?
Dr. Six. In the present program-and there is only one program
involved-they were doing the same type of thing.
Senator SCHWEIKER. How many people were involved, prisoners,
and what drugs were used there?
Dr. Six. Tie same drugs that were used in our program.
What the prison drug program was designed to do was to make
studies on compounds to give us some feeling as to the potency of the
material of this class of compound, and then relate that information
to us so that we could make a decision as to whether or not it was an
important compound to continue.
The numbers in that were usually around 100 to 200 per year total.
Now, they never studied any compounds that we did not study, and
only did minimum effective dose studies.
Senator SCHWIRKER. How about students in that period?
Dr. Six. In the student program, nothing but therapeutic drugs
were used. The student program was set up in clinical pharmacology,
and the only thing that these students were given was Pam compounds,
Oxime, which are for therapeutic use. We did not do drug studies on
contract at all except for Oximes in students and minimal dose studies
of incapacitating compounds in prisoners.
Senator ScjwEIzK. 
In your supporting contract this would have
been reported through the same chain of command procedure as your
in-house work, is that correct, sir ?
Dr. Six. That is correct.
Senator SCHWZIKER. Does the Navy participate?
Dr. Six. We asked the Navy twice to participate in this program,
and went through the CNO, and got a negative response at all times.
Senator KzrtnxDy. Why was that, do you know ?
Dr. Six. I do not know. Because the Air Force dropped out of it,
too. I think because of the requirements for personnel elsewhere at
the particular time we were asking, and there just was not enough in-
terest to conduct it.
They said it is the Army's province. If they cannot find a
volunteer-
Senator KzNxzay. Your testimony is that the Surgeon General of
the Army was kept informed on all the tests that were taking place at
Edgewood?
Dr. Six. Senator, I want to say this. As far as I am concerned we
made the reports. Whether they were distributed by the Surgeon den-
eral's direct representative, who was the director of the lab all the
time from 1946 on, was not my responsibility.
Senator ScunHW x. 
You say everything you were doing went up
the chain of command, and do not ktow where it went from there?
Dr. Six. Yes, sir; that is right.
Senator Kzwxwy. You say your reports went to the Surgeon
General.
Do you know whether there were other ways in which the Surgeon
General was kept informedI
Dr. Sne. Yes.Six. Yes, sir; that is right.
Senator Kzwxwy. You say your reports went to the Surgeon
General.
Do you know whether there were other ways in which the Surgeon
General was kept informedI
Dr. Sne. Yes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---is right.
Senator Kzwxwy. You say your reports went to the Surgeon
General.
Do you know whether there were other ways in which the Surgeon
General was kept informedI
Dr. Sne. Yes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

214
Senator KNNEDY. Would you describe that?
Dr. Six. We had quarterly staff meetings, going over the whole pro-
gram. The Surgeon General had a liaison man come to those meetings.
We have a liaison man from the Surgeon General that is assigned to
us and he attends any of the staff meetings that are of interest to him.
In addition to that, we have a written report of these quarterly so-
called review and analysis of the program.
In addition to that, I have a semiannual in-department review
analysis of the program, and the Surgeon General's people are always
invited to that. They are always accompanied by a printed form so
that they have some idea of the program.
In addition to that, we have monthly reports on volunteers that have
been going on continuously, and these monthly reports merely state
what the progress was during the month, what type tests the people
were on; these have been current, they are all crossreferenced, so there
is no problem in relation to saying how many people were on this pro-
gram or how many people were on that.
We have another form of reference.
Now, those things, as far as I know, should have gone forward to
all interested parties that had a need to know.
Senator KENNE.DY. Let me ask you. as of the moratorium of 1975,
were there any drugs, incapacitating drugs, being tested?
I)r. Six. As of that time, not for that particular period. In the
two periods preceding. there had been some studies on skin penetra-
tion of one of the glycolate compounds.
Senator K..%NFDY. What period was that?
Dr. Six. That would be the 3-month period from January-no, I
am sorry-from October through December.
Senator KF.NNEDY. Of 1974?
Dr. Sim. Of 1974.
Senator KFiN1. .DY. But after December 1974 there was no testing
conducted?
Dr. Sim. Oh, yes.
Senator KE.NNEY. Of the incapacitating drugs.
Dr. Six. Well, Physostigmine as a treatment drug could be classi-
fied as an incapacitating drug.
Senator KP.NNEDY. What about hallucinogenic drugs?
Dr. Sim. Hallucinogenic, no. We were mainly concerned with our
new treatment problems that had been presented to the committee
before. I believe.
Senator KENNEDY. Do you plan any in the future?
Dr. Sim. I do not know what-I would plan some for the future;
yes, sir.
Senator KENirnmy. Pardon?
I)r. Six. I would r)lan some for the future. There are a few things
that need to be (lone that are necessary.
Senator KzNNEDY. Have there been proposals made to conduct
these?
Dr. Six. We have made four proposals to the Surgeon General since
1974, and we have had no positive action on any of them yet.
Senator KENEvDY. Why is that?
Dr. Six. I would like to, if I might, Senator, clarify as far as time,
if I have your permission, throughout the years.we have had no positive action on any of them yet.
Senator KENEvDY. Why is that?
Dr. Six. I would like to, if I might, Senator, clarify as far as time,
if I have your permission, throughout the years.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ive action on any of them yet.
Senator KENEvDY. Why is that?
Dr. Six. I would like to, if I might, Senator, clarify as far as time,
if I have your permission, throughout the years.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

215
This whole thing started in 1953, the first authorization was for
both the G agents and Vesicants.
In 1955, the psychochemicals, including LSD-25 the hallucinogenic
compounds and therapeutic compounds and antidotes were asked for
and approval granted.
In 1958, we went in for V compounds, and the Surgeon General
approved and commented.
In December of 1958, we had permission for the nerve agent V and
for LSD--25 and for many of the other compounds including 1476 or
marijuana type compound.
In 1959, we asked for authorization and received it for all the others
in the specific classes. The only other ones that we asked for during
the period of 1964-69 were those that involved physiological stress
and thermal stress in association with chemical agents and operations
in the field. wearing protective clothing.
So that is the story of asking for permission through the chains
of command up to the Secretary of the Army on down.
Senator KEN .NWxY. Could you describe for us what precautions
were taken in terms of obtaining informed consent from test indi-
viduals and what kinds of medical protection were provided, super-
vision during these tests, and followupI
Let us take, first of all, the consent issue.
How many protocols were submitted on thote and what steps did
you take to the Human Review Board?
Dr. SIM. Sir, every individual who has been on that program has
signed the same consent form with witnesses.
When I supplied the Surgeon General with the 585 cases on LSD,
I handed him 585 written consent proposals that were accompanying
the names of those individuals.
This has been true throughout our program. We have not changed
that consent. We have not changed our form, nor have we changed
our method of informing the individual about what type of test is
going on.
We do not tell him the exact structured formula of the drug. We
never have, because we feel that it would prejudice the test.
But we always tell them the type of drug, generally what he might
expect. how it will be administered, and over what duration of time
he might expect some discomfort.
Senator SCHWEIKER. Doctor, I would like some clarification.
Would a person know lie was taking LSDV
Dr. SIm. A person would not know he was taking LSD. sir, be-
cause we did not tell them they were taking LSD. LSD would mean
nothing to a man in the 1950's.
Senator SCHWEIKF.R What would you tell a man who was taking
LSDI
Dr. Sim. We would tell a man he was taking a drug that would
affect his behavior, and it would probably last for 6 to 12 hours,
during which time we were there at all times, and we would terminate
that exposure at any titpe that he so desired.
This has been an unwritten thing that we have always terminated
exposure if the subject desired.
Further, he can refuse any test program, any single drug, or anyosure at any titpe that he so desired.
This has been an unwritten thing that we have always terminated
exposure if the subject desired.
Further, he can refuse any test program, any single drug, or any

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat he so desired.
This has been an unwritten thing that we have always terminated
exposure if the subject desired.
Further, he can refuse any test program, any single drug, or any

--- PAGE BREAK ---

216
multiple drug, or he has always been able to refuse that. He has
always been able to stop it, and we have also been able to on the spot
terminate it if the physician decides.
Senator SCHWEIKER. How could you terminate a one-shot dose of
LSDV
I)r. Six. You might come up and say, "I want out of this."
Senator SCWEIKF.R. You would not give repeated doses, would you?
Dr. SIM. Not in the same day; no.
Senator SCJWRIKER. So that could not be terminated the same day;
could it?
Dr. SIM. No. No; but there is--the reason for the repeated dose of
LSD, if and when they were given, was to see whether or not the
person would build up a tolerance to the material. And if they did
build up a tolerance, how much it would require in order to go through
that tolerance.
Now, from our standpoint, this was important.
Very few people received multiple doses on, say, various days, but
we become interested in tolerance..
Senator STAFPORD. Doctor, to go back to terminating at the request
of the volunteer an experience. somebody in the middle of being under
the influence of LSI) and having a very bad experience, what could
you do to terminate that experience right then and there
Dr. SiM. Right then and there, sir. we gave Thorazine which attenu-
ates the acute reaction from LSD. It. modifies the experience. It sort
of "semidrugs" them, and they can tolerate this. And in the normal
period of time, which is about 6 to 8 to 10 hours, he comes out of it,
but he does not go through the most stressful part of the experience.
Whenever they asked to be. terminated, they were terminated.
Senator KE.NNEDY. On this question of informed consent, perhaps
you could submit for us copies of the forms that were provided to the
subjects.
The consent form which was signed by one of our witnesses earlier
this week says, "I recognize that in pursuance of certain experiments
transitory discomfiture may occur."
That is the extent of the warning, at least in this case, that the
victim who was taking LSD was giveD. And it does not seem to me
that if that is the same kind of form that was used at the Army Bio-
medical Laboratories at Edgewood Arsenal that test subjects were
given sufficient information.
Dr. SIM. Is that not the normal type of form V
Senator KE.N.-NEDY. If you would be kind enough to supply us with
copies. That is the type form that was signed by Colonel Jordan when
he participated in an experiment.
Dr. SiM. That, sir, is a different type of procedure for obtaining
consent.
Colonel Jordan was a member of a group team that volunteered.
He was at Fort Benning. There was some at Fort Bragg. There was
soine at Fort McClellan.
Now, that. was handled by the unit. That was handled entirely by
that unit at Fort Benning.
Senator KEN NEY. Maybe you could submit those so that we may
examine them.
But do you not think it is worthwhile to have one standard form?nit. That was handled entirely by
that unit at Fort Benning.
Senator KEN NEY. Maybe you could submit those so that we may
examine them.
But do you not think it is worthwhile to have one standard form?

--- PAGE BREAK ---217
Do you not think that would be worthwhile?

Dr.

Six.

Correct, sir, and they should have had-
Senator KENNEDY.

Let me ask you.

This committee authorized legislation for the Commission on the
Protection of Human Rights, and they had been developing the con-
sent forms in terms of experimentation for the Department of HEW.

Do you not think it would be useful and helpful if your particular
division, and the rest of the Department of the Army and DOD,
worked with them to develop the form which would provide the great-
est amount of protection for those that would be participating in
experimental
Dr.

Six.

Absolutely.

Senator KENNDY.

Will you welcome the opportunity to work with
the Commission in the development of such form?

Dr.

Sim.

Senator Kennedy, I would more than welcome the op-
portunity.

Senator KENNEDY.

I have not had a chance to talk with my col-
league, but I would hope that we might be able to join in a letter to
the Commission to request they review this and work with Dr.

Sim
and the Department of the Army.

We have some legislative aspects which we are working on, and I
think Dr.

Sim, your forthcoming attitude on this can be enormously
helpful, and we will pursue it.

Let me ask you this.

I understand that since 1964, you have submitted from Edgewood
directly to the Human Use Review Office only three different protocols,
is that correct ?

Dr.

Sim.

Yes.

Senator, I recited the agent agreements that were signed by the
Secretary of the Army preparatory to that.

These are a new thing.

Now, we had a Medical Advisory Council up until the AMC take-
over, and they met twice a year, to decide on these programs.

Since that time, we have attempted, not ourselves, but we have
suggested there be forums, outside groups, that would review this
program from time to time and make recommendations.

We have forwarded the names of the individuals to be contacted.

That is not as yet in effect except in the form of the NLRB.

Senator KENNDY.--- PAGE BREAK ---

That is not as yet in effect except in the form of the NLRB. Senator KENNDY. At least, we were under the impression on the
basis of that Memorandum of Understanding, that all the protocols
were going to be submitted. Dr. Sixm. Yes, sir, they are. [The following material was supplied by Dr. Sim to further qualify
the colloquy:]
There seems to be some confusion about the questions asked and the answers. What I am now led to believe Is that FDA and Surgeon General agreed that every
experiment would be subject to protocol review, Irrespective if it has been
granted previously. As a matter of fact, FDA really never entered into the
picture at all until the problem of efficacy of a drug for therapeutic value was
being considered, with the endpoint being the drug would finally arrive on the
civilian market for use (i.e., oximes for organophosphorus Insecticide poisoning). Since we were not involved in any new classes of compounds which we had
not stu ied previously, and since we did not receive specific information that all
future protocols must be submitted, we therefore did not become aware of this
until either late 1978 or early 1974. It must be remembered that we have had a
very strict protocol board in existence locally since the inception of the volunteer
program, and we have 7000 healthy volunteers to support us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---st be remembered that we have had a
very strict protocol board in existence locally since the inception of the volunteer
program, and we have 7000 healthy volunteers to support us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

218
Senator KE 
yNED. 
Only three were submitted.
Dr. Sim. That is right.
Senator KEN.EDY. Out of how many?
Dr. Six. Well, as I said, these are all new compounds, new types--
Senator K.NNwy. There were only three new ones?
Dr. Six. There were only three new ones that we submitted so far,
one for the treatment of cyanide, one for a new therapeutic compound
that we thought was extremely important.
Senator KzNNEDY. Your interpretation was that you were to submit
a protocol only if the experiment involved a new compound?
Dr. Sim. Not now it is not. Everything we have to submit.
Senator KF.NN'EDY. When did you adopt that practice ?
Dr. Sim. About 1974.
Senator KzNNFry. Not until then?
l)r. Sims. That is correct.
Senator KENNr.DY. Why is that?
Did not the Memorandum of Understanding provide that the proto-
col of each experiment was going to be submitted and reviewed?
Dr. Sire. The protocol of understanding came about as a result of
your investigation, I think, in 1973, and when we resubmitted for the
program in 1974, that is when it came out.
Now, not that it was not in being before, but it was not one in which
we were specifically instructed.
Senator KFENNDY. At least your instruction, I gather, that you re-
ceived was that your only requirement was to provide the submission
to the Human Review Office if there was going to be a new class?
Dr. SIm. New compounds, new classes of compounds or new items.
Senator KENNEDY. Even though the Memorandum of Understand-
ing between the FDA and the DOD explicitly shows that each protocol
was to be submitted.
I do not know whether you are aware of that, but your orders were
to submit protocols for each of the new experiments, is that correct?
Dr. Six. Right.
Senator KENNEDY. Could you give my staff a copy of the consent
form ?
Dr. Sim. Yes.
Senator KE.'N-DY. The point, I suppose, here is that although the
Food and Drug Adminstration felt that, under their memorandum of
understanding, there was going to be a submission of each protocol,
and even though the Army felt that way as well, by the time the word
got to you, your understanding was that it was supposed to be each
new experiment and in a new compound area ?
Dr. Sim. Yes.
Senator KENNEDT. Until 1974?
Dr. Six. Right.
Senator KENNEDY. And then every experiment?
I)r. Sim. Every experiment.
I might add to that, when we (lid all the work on oximes, we pre-
sented that as a complete technical data package to the 'Food and Drug
Administration. And from that time on, it said any company, if they
followed Food and Drug protocol in relation to this, could manufac-
ture this compound and Sell it. And there was no further animal work
and no further human work that was required to be done.if they
followed Food and Drug protocol in relation to this, could manufac-
ture this compound and Sell it. And there was no further animal work
and no further human work that was required to be done.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d and Drug protocol in relation to this, could manufac-
ture this compound and Sell it. And there was no further animal work
and no further human work that was required to be done.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

219
We handed that to Food and Drug and said here is the total package
on the oximes. You can use it for the common good of the public,
and let any manufacturer make it.
This is an example of the sort of cooperation we have had, but we
developed this early under a classified program, and then declassi-
fied it and gave it to Food and Drug for the civilian population's use.
Senator KivXDY. Could you tell us a little bit about what you did
over in your department for the protection of human subjectsI
Did you have any other kind of arrangement, or did you try to
develop any other kind of procedure for protection of human subjects,
or did you just follow the consent form and followed the procedures
that have been outlined by the Army I
Dr. Six. Over and above that, we did many things.
Each class, each compound, in fact, posed a new problem, Senator,
that we had to be completely aware of when we were conducting
studies. So, no matter what the regimen and protocol was that was
standard, we always had to have special precautions.
If it happened to be a coinpound that would cause respiratory
difficulties, we not only had to have respiratory drugs there., but we
had to have the people trained in a particular speciality where, if
necessary, immediate attention could be given to that problem, where
there would be prevention of anything rather than just doing a stand-
ard protocol andsaying we covered it.
We always did the standard protocol, but we did much more.
Senator KFN.N.KDY. Doctor, we just mentioned the consent form that
Colonel Jordan signed, which said, "I recognize in pursuance of cer-
tain experiments transitory discomfort may occur."
I just asked you for the one you used, and it is identical to that form.
Dr. Six. Yes, but I do not know whether his has--does his have the
first?
Senator KEN.EDY. It is absolutely identical. The two forms are
absolutely identical.
Dr. SiM. Well, I did not see .Jordan's form.
Senator KE4NEDY. I will send it down to you. We will insert it into
the record.
[The material referred to follows:]
10-026 0 - 76 - ISbsolutely identical.
Dr. SiM. Well, I did not see .Jordan's form.
Senator KE4NEDY. I will send it down to you. We will insert it into
the record.
[The material referred to follows:]
10-026 0 - 76 - IS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

220
Il
SGRD-O 
Tresmlttal of Forms
IM SRD- 
EU4 
S4RD-O0
Attached forms are forwarded for following action:
a. Revise DO Form 1498, if necessary, from info on OTSG Form 1079.
b. Forwerd original Form 1498 and certified copy to SGRD-ID.
2 Incl
1. 
Form 10v
2. 
Form 1496 /copy
TO: 
SGRD-ID
CCWMMhOLLE R
FROM: S RD-
I 
I DATE:
'DD Form 1498 with certified ccpy attached for submission to OCRD.
I Incl
a c 
PROJECT MONITOR
i
CTr 2
(-e -!I t - '-. -% itzitAirs bb ro ;*o*4 sLxm.j:,.jjUw.*L#
DA I r V 4 C3 CW- -A*i 
4 
9WWUD 440 UICIb VOT06 1 Pan '" %M" L20KLN t "AUSTEG- 
WO10 
MM
I- APPENIM 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---CT MONITOR
i
CTr 2
(-e -!I t - '-. -% itzitAirs bb ro ;*o*4 sLxm.j:,.jjUw.*L#
DA I r V 4 C3 CW- -A*i 
4 
9WWUD 440 UICIb VOT06 1 Pan '" %M" L20KLN t "AUSTEG- 
WO10 
MM
I- APPENIM 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

221
W.T."r.'?!"'S PAR"''CIPATIONt,.F', 
(
NIAME 
A 
% 
\_ 
_ 
_ 
_ 
_ 
_ 
_ 
_
Aee 
\ 
Race Cc,.. t, 
Grade 
I ' 
Serial hlo. 
CA4 ' % 1
Oreanizution 
' 
"-" 
(-', 
\ 
i_ 
_._
Name of N:carest i, 1otie g' 
', 
(- 
.r-,, 
.. 
.j 
( ' 
, .
Address of iearczt Rc e.i.ive 
", 
v- \., 
,', 
k. 
t 
N:
Telephone !:'i.'ber of ::,,re 
.. 
v 
n, t 
;____"_,__________
'*,.
I, 
k':11 
' 
\.. '.. 
', 
, certify " thrt I hnve recelvcd, read and
understaT;I a docuwment 
coptyt.( 
, "'.,...Ilal 
. "&arch 
' 
' 
Pro::,,"
of which is annexed hcrcto, "_., t-.. 
e 
of 
,,.1 
a.' .c .t the experinents I
have volunteered tc pi.rt"oIp ,.z 
i:% ,. 
.
-
,x,.. 
::, ! ' 'u:, the 
atnlpc:!rt
of possble hazLards, 
:. 
iAna 
*t 
it 
.
.ler.'.-. 
. that the experiments
are so de16:ei, 
ba:,.i o 
':.:- !.Z.I 
:.: 
Ufld r.v::ir huaa cx:eri-
rkentaticn, that the a. tv' 
.
r 
". 
wi 
thc perfcrm-tzce of the
eperireat. 
I ulde, 
.
r t .. 
'. 
" 
e so conducted
as to a. 
,ii 
all Ur, -:. 
:: 
1. 
.
.. iz. 
anti injury, and
that I will be at lil:.*,." 
%o.r.-ts 
be tv.rm:.Aed at
ar~y tiU.e 
-' i:I my oj. 
... re.. 
U .
.
.
cr 
r.ental slat! where
I rc 
mize thu 
in. 
r-u.ir t 
z-:rtr.'n ex,:.r'stransif.|c-y 
dis-
I will be 
adv v 
c , 
I re.....-, 
a:.), t'':r..r 
t..-, 
circtt~ twcres, 
I
m:ust rely 
ez: 
tc z:i.l a:; ;" 
'! 
the 
ah .'t 
c'rvzinC 
th- cxperi-
ment to lrn.tute 
whatov,:r r.e.>" 
.
:: -.
'-...,n.rz 
-
ind!catei to
protect me.
I certify that there " 
b- 
cn ca, .c., 
er.c.:t, of fraud or deceit,
undue m ."al 
.
) 
t 
,r 
' 
.
,.-r 
-' 
- b:-. 
t to beznr in 
my volun-
teer i rg cr t!,-s d-ty. 
:'-e :.e so 
.
" .: f:. 
, 
tc-ptely aware
of all ha-ard-, r 
Pa..: i: :'. • .. 
'n : 
'.:. 
cr
DAT: 
W I r;:-
-SIGtIED: 
.
~ 
-.-.....
________
A Orl C Form 6-9
22 May 57

--- PAGE BREAK ---s d-ty. 
:'-e :.e so 
.
" .: f:. 
, 
tc-ptely aware
of all ha-ard-, r 
Pa..: i: :'. • .. 
'n : 
'.:. 
cr
DAT: 
W I r;:-
-SIGtIED: 
.
~ 
-.-.....
________
A Orl C Form 6-9
22 May 57

--- PAGE BREAK ---

222
Dr. SIM. Those are the recommended ones that were supposed to go
to the unit, and I have not seen Jordan's.
Senator KE.xNN.DY. The point is whether they went to the unit or
-not ; the question is as to adequacy of the warnings.
We are talking about experiments. You say that they have given
consent, yet it says certain transitory discomforts may occur, and you
are feeding them LSD.
I)r. SiM. Let me answer in this way.
Number one, that was in 1958 or 1959, and what we know about
LSD today compared to what we knew then, would not have changed
the intent or care of our study.
Senator KENNEDY. Is this the form that is being used I
1)r. SIM. That is the form that is being used today and that was
processed through the Judge Advocate's office, and this is the recom-
mended form that eanie down from the I)epartment of the Army.
Senator KENN.WmY. That is the one that was being used on all those
drugs even from 1967 through 1974?
I)r. Sir. Yes, sir.
Senator KENNEDY. So regardless of what drug was used, the same
form was used for all test subjects?
Dr. SIM. Yes, sir.
When the volunteer comes in, he signs that agreement.
Now. any time these come up. he has the option of whether he wants
to go on that drug or not. So he does not sign one for every drug.
He signs one for every period.
Senator KFN.NErDY. That is even worse, is it not?
Dr. Sim. No.
Senator KFNNEI)Y. How is he going to find out about it, if he just
comes in and signs for a whole period?
You say in pursuance of certain experiments. transitory discomfort
may occur, and the drug may vary dramatically in terms of its impact.
Dr. Sim. You are correct.
For every drug, he is talked to individually in relation to that drug
and told what the effect is. He then has the option of sying. "Well,
I do not want to go on this test."
Senator KENNF.DY. How is that presented to him?
Let me finish.
Do you have some other form which is used, whether it. is for LSD
or B.Z., or any of these other drugs, or is the informal consent just
dependent upon oral communication?
Dr. Si. No.
It depends on the oral communication. This is a very close type
-roup that is working together with these people every day. And they
do talk to them prior to all these tests.
Now, the same physicians and the same nurses and the same people
practically live with these people during this period of time, so it is a
very, very close working relationship.
Senator KENN wY. Doctor, I do not doubt that the same doctors and
nurses are going to be staying there or supervising.
What I am asking is whether, on the basis of the form that is sub-
mitted, and on the basis of the conversations with test subjects that
they can have a complete awareness of what they are getting into with
all 'the implications of how a particular drug may affect the test
subjectsthe basis of the conversations with test subjects that
they can have a complete awareness of what they are getting into with
all 'the implications of how a particular drug may affect the test
subjects

--- PAGE BREAK ---versations with test subjects that
they can have a complete awareness of what they are getting into with
all 'the implications of how a particular drug may affect the test
subjects

--- PAGE BREAK ---

223
We have heard witnesses who sat at that very witness table just a
few days ago who testified to enormous kinds o change in their lives
and, in some instances, absolutely tragic circumstances, and it does not
appear to me that this form which refers to transitory discomfort, is an
adequate warning. The form does not even name the drug.
Nior does it appear that oral communications from doctors to test
subjects is adequate because there is nothing in writing that would help
determine the extent to which this kind of warning is given.
So that later in their lives even if they read about the after effects of
LSD, and have experienced the kinds of chronic depression and flash-
backs and all the other kinds of aftereffects associated with the. drug
they will never know why.
They will never be able to relate this because they do not even know.
They have not received any indication, any notice. You have not told
them and, evidently, your doctors working with them have not told
them.
So, these 300 to 400 military men who have taken these hallucino-
genic and incapacitating drugs since 1967-300 or 400 a year, which
is close to 3,000 servicemen-may have suffered these depressions or
flashbacks, or other mental problems, but they have no way of tracing
it back to your testing.
How are they going to know when they get these aftereffects, that
they are not suffering from epilepsy, but are sufferening drug after-
effects, as we saw with Colonel Jordan?
They are just loose somewhere out in this country, and the Army
evidently does not have the necessary followup procedure.
How are their interests going to be protected .
Dr. Srm. I understand what you are saying, and I have been con-
cerned with it. And I think if you provide copies of letters about my
concern to the individual who comes in with a letter, wondering about
something that happened to him as a result of the drug-
Senator KENNmY. But does the responsibility end there when an
individual comes in with a letter?
Do you not have at least a responsibility to make sure that they
have the most complete informed awareness of what this drug may
do to them and to their minds and their bodies ?
Do you not have a responsibility, and does not the Army have a
responsibility to follow up on these young people to make sure that
they are going to have adequate kinds of medical followup and not
just in the immediate future
Do you not have that responsibility today for those who have been
involved in these experiments?
Dr. Six. Yes, very definitely.
Senator KENNiDY. Are they doing anything now?
Dr. Six. Yes, sir.
Senator KENNymY. Are you following up on everyone of those young
persons?
Dr. Six. We are following up; the Army is following up on every
one of the 585 cases we have.
We started the program in 1971, which went back to 1967.
Senator KENNEDY. Let me understand your answer.
Are you prepared to say now that for everyone that has been partic-
ipating in the Army drug testing program, every young person whowent back to 1967.
Senator KENNEDY. Let me understand your answer.
Are you prepared to say now that for everyone that has been partic-
ipating in the Army drug testing program, every young person who

--- PAGE BREAK ---Senator KENNEDY. Let me understand your answer.
Are you prepared to say now that for everyone that has been partic-
ipating in the Army drug testing program, every young person who

--- PAGE BREAK ---

224
has participated in that program, that the Department of Defense is
following up with every individual. to notify him of the nature of the
drug he took, the potential side effects, and that the military is pre-
pared to insure that they are going to be given full and adequate
medical treatment loday and for any time that can be reasonably
related to involvement in that drug testing program f
Dr. Six. The answer is yes and no, both.
Senator Kz.N.D 
F Y. Ho%; can it be no?
Dr. Six. The yes is on the LSD which has been launched.
In 1971, we started on the other program. which included all drugs,
and started a program in which we had both the controls and people
who had been on experimental drugs.
Results of that small one were dissatisfying to us. We did not find
changes. We did not have either the money or the medical people to
continue the size of investigation that we felt was necessary.
Senator KENNEDY. Is it your testimony that you did not have the
money to follow up on these cases ?
Dr. Sim. No.
My testimony is we did not have the money to follow up on and
the people to follow up on the type of investigation that we thought
was necessary, and we stated it. That was in 1971.
Senator KEN. Y.DY. That is an intolerable situation, is it not, Doctor ?
Dr. Six. Well, it is intolerable.
Senator KENNEzY. Are you prepared to sy it is Army policy to
conduct a drug te-sting program using young Americans who may "suf-
fer the most. serious kinds of damagin effects--both mental and phys-
ical-and then say that the Army does not have the manpower or the
money to follow up and insure that those young people who have vol-
unteered are not going to receive the very. very best that this country
can afford ?
Dr. Sim. You are right, and I agree with you fully. Absolutely I
agree with you.
Senator KEN.DY. Wait a minute.
You agree with me what?
Dr. Six. That it should be done.
Senator KENNrDY. That it should be done?
Dr. Sim. That it should be done.
We went before the National Science Foundation in 1973.
Senator KEN 
DY. Is it being done?
Dr. Sixm. It is being done, as the Surgeon General testified, I believe.
Senator KENNEDY. What is your "no"?
You gave us & "no."
Dr. Six. My "no" is that we have not launched one for every class
of compounds that. we have.
Senator KENNP Y. So the answer is no?
Iet us understand it.
Tt is yes with regard to ISD for 485. but no with regard to?
Dr. Sni. With regard to some of the others, yes.
Senator KENNEDY. That is the point. It is not being done with
regard to every young American who particinated in these experi-
mental programs involving testing nf hallucinogenic drugs.
Can you tell us that it is covering every single American ?
Dr. Six. No: it is not covering everyone.rican who particinated in these experi-
mental programs involving testing nf hallucinogenic drugs.
Can you tell us that it is covering every single American ?
Dr. Six. No: it is not covering everyone.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed in these experi-
mental programs involving testing nf hallucinogenic drugs.
Can you tell us that it is covering every single American ?
Dr. Six. No: it is not covering everyone.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

225
Senator KENNEDY. Do you not think it should I
Dr. Six. I think it should, yes.
Senator KENNEDY. Why is it not?
Dr. Six. I do not. have the money or manpower to do this. I just do
not.
Senator KZNNztyv. Did you ask for money or manpower
I)r. Six. No; I have not asked for the money and manpower.
Senator KENNEDY. Will you?
Dr. Six. I would. I will.
Senator KENNF.DY. Iet us know if you do not get the money or
manpower.
Dr. Six. I would be happy to.
Senator KENNEDY. I think that is very important. I just want to
assure you that I will do everything that I possibly can to make sure
that you do get the money and manpower, and I am sure that the
members of this committee will work just as industriously as I to
insure it.
You stated yourself that this is something that must and should be
done.
Dr. Six. Right, sir.
Senator KEZN.jDy. It is really, I think, just an incredibly important
responsibility. I have been impresed by your obvious concern for
these young people, but you could not have listened to the witnesses
that we have heard in terms of the impact on their lives and not recog-
nize the continuing and ongoing responsibility for it.
Dr. Six. Right.
Senator KENNDY. We want to make sure at this point that we un-
derstand completely that there may very well be, and I am sure there
are, some extremely important reasons for human experimentation in
terms of drugs from the military point of view, although I think.
obviously, this ought to be. reviewed, but in terms of the protection,
and I think I have outlined that earlier.
Dr. Six. Yes.
Senator KENNEDY. Before there is an implementation of any test-
ing, there necessarily has to be a justification for experimentation. We
are not competent-at least I am not-to make that judgment, but
I think the need ought to be reviewed constantly.
What I think is really inexcusable is not having the complete and
full adequate notification, both in terms of the full implications of
the drug, and the kinds of supervision and the followup.
Let me ask you this.
I think you responded to the kind of medical supervision that takes
place during the experimentation. Maybe you can talk about the
medical attention during the experiment.
Did you have doctors around ?
Dr. Six. Right.
The entry physical examination and psychological examination
takes approximately a week. Those. people are categorized one, two,
three, four, on the basis of their medical history, medical workup, the
psychological and psychiatric interviews, and their total profile as far
as a multifaceted personality.
Then they are placed in four categories-one, drugs unqualified; no
drugs; limited drugs; and then only equipment or anything else.rviews, and their total profile as far
as a multifaceted personality.
Then they are placed in four categories-one, drugs unqualified; no
drugs; limited drugs; and then only equipment or anything else.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tal profile as far
as a multifaceted personality.
Then they are placed in four categories-one, drugs unqualified; no
drugs; limited drugs; and then only equipment or anything else.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

226
So those are the categories, and there is a medical staff decision
after review of the individual's record before, he is assigned to it.
Then, from the day the man is placed on a drug program, he is
briefed about the pr 
m. He is worked up with any specialties that
are required with a physician in attendance, and thie day he is in a
gettingg with the nurses and the physicians at all times.* he remains
there during the course of that test.
The material is given by a physician, he is followed on a 24-hour
basis bv a physician, and when he leaves that program he has follow-
up studies done during the course of his stay there.
Before he leaves Edgewood completely, he goes through another
whole hattery of tests again to assure there is nothing hanging on.
Sometimes they are asked to stay over if there is a question about
one lab test or something, for a week or 2 weeks, or even return at.
another period of time, to recheck things. This is the normal
procedure.
Now, if there is anything that causes a problem in relation to dis-
ease or something that. this person has had while he is there, that is
referred Ick to his Army station, to the dispensary there, and we
are asked to check.
For many of these men, this is a very unusual thing because we have
picked up so many things in physical examinations and taken them
off the program, sent them to specialists and consultants for both
physical and psychiatric reasons, where they could get adequate treat-
ment without ever going on a program.
So it is the most complete comprehensive medical review a person
has an opportunity to get. From that standpoint, it has been ex-
tremely valuable for the serviceman.
Senator KENNEDY. Did you have any deaths involved in this
program I
Dr. Six. No, sir.
Senator K.NNF.DY. Never a death?
Dr. Six. No, sir.
Senator KENNEDY. Do you know if any of the materials that were
developed at Edgewood were ever taken off the premises?
Dr. Six. Yes.
I do not. know whether the materials were actually made at Edge-
wood, but they could have been made by a pharmaceutical house or
chemical company and could have been taken to institutions or could
have been taken to a university, or could have been taken to a research
place for study.
Not necessarily at all. It could be just a chemical analysis, chemical
test or animal test that the investigator might have wanted to do.
Senator KENNEDY. Do you know if any of the materials were ever
used in the Army?
Dr. Six. Any of these materials that have been used in the Army?
Senator KEZNNEY. Any product that was developed there or used
at Edgewood, ever used in the military?
Dr. Six. No, sir.
Senator KENNEDY. Did you not know that?
Dr. Six. I do not know.
Senator KENNEDY. Whether it was or was not?
Dr. Six. I do not know whether it was or was not.
Senator KENNEDY. Would you know ?No, sir.
Senator KENNEDY. Did you not know that?
Dr. Six. I do not know.
Senator KENNEDY. Whether it was or was not?
Dr. Six. I do not know whether it was or was not.
Senator KENNEDY. Would you know ?

--- PAGE BREAK ---NEDY. Did you not know that?
Dr. Six. I do not know.
Senator KENNEDY. Whether it was or was not?
Dr. Six. I do not know whether it was or was not.
Senator KENNEDY. Would you know ?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

227
Dr. Six. I think I would know if it were something like B.Z., I
guess. I think I would.
Senator KZNNWY. Would you not know if it was any of the other
hallucinogenic drugs?
Dr. Six. No, not necessarily.
M reason for that is simple.
B.Z. was one that originated with us. Some of the others did not
originate with us. For instance, LSD, and it could have been used,
because they got them from other sources.
Senator KZNNIMY Can you tell me how many other subjects were
used at Fort Bragg, Fort McClellan and in the Fort Benning
programs#
Dr. Six. How many were used on it ?
Senator KZNWWY. Say for 1967.
Dr. Six. There was not any then, Senator. All the work at Fort
Bragg, Fort Benning wits doneprior to that period of time.
Senator KENNEDY. During wkiat period?
Dr. Six. 1958 to 1961.
Senator KzNNEDY. And that includes Fort Bragg, Fort McClellan
and Fort Benning?
Do you know the number of people involved?
Dr. Sim. I submitted the list. That can be made available to you.
I submitted the total list with the names.
Senator KZNNzDY. How do you know there were no deaths involved
if you did not have a medical followupI
Dr. Six. That is good a question because there have been people who
have been killed in Vietnam.
Senator KENNEDY. That is not what we are talking about.
I)r. Sim. No. But I mean not as a result of that, but people happen
to still be in the Army, and I do not know any which has been
attributed personally, who was on our program.
Senator KENNWY. Is it not possible that you would not know about
it if someone committed suicide or someone had an enormous
depression
Dr. Six. It is possible I would not.
Senator I[ENNwnY. There is probably very little chance that you
would, is that not so ?
Dr. Sim. In the case of some of these officers, I think I probably
would have heard.
Senator KENNEDY. Are the officers the larger percent?
Dr. Sixm. No. It is a small percent.
In the case of the officers, I would have. In the case of the others,
I would not have.
Senator KENNEDY. Are the tests put in the medical records of the
servicemen ?
Dr. Sim. The tests are not put in the medical records. They are
cross-referenced, but on the medical record of the servicemen is a
cross-reference in which it states the type of test, and there is another
location file for the test. This is done for security reasons.
Senator KzENNEY. So, in every enlisted man s case, at least in his
medical record, it is indicated he was involved?
Dr. Sixm. Yes, sir, or was not involved, because many of these people
are controls and received no drugs.
[The following material was subsequently supplied for the record:]indicated he was involved?
Dr. Sixm. Yes, sir, or was not involved, because many of these people
are controls and received no drugs.
[The following material was subsequently supplied for the record:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---228
FACT SHUT ON LSD STUDIES AT EDCEOD ARSENAL
(Author: 
Dr.

Van l.

Sim)
GRU AL
In April 1943, the hallucinogenic properties of d-lysorpir acid diethylamide
(LD) were discovered by Dr.

A.

Hofmann of the Sandoz :,0esrch Laboratories.

He filed a patent request 28 April 1944 that was approved by the Board of
Appeals of the US Patent Office (Case 291, serial no.

533,2616) JWue 27, 1941.

Universities, ph'ruaccutical houses, ard private in.stlgator.

conducted
numerous studies in both animals and san on LSD.

There were hundreds of re-
ports in the scientific literature of these studies.

and it ws decided at
Edgewood Arsenal to test the substance from the standpoint of whether it was
capable of disrupting ttilitary operations.

Studies were bepun at Edeool
Arsenal in 1955.

Pharmacological studies were conducted in animals In an
attempt to determine the mechanism of action of the drug.

Studies conducted
in busan subjects (Volunteert) were oriented toward !earning what the eftect4
of different doses, given by different routes, would bo; how these doses would
affect aillttry performance; and how predictable the effects are.

Included in
these studies were clinical laboratory methd~s of detection of ISD to blood,
tissues, and urine.

Studies of rnalogues of the compound, such as WOL (Brom-
lysergic acid) were conducted to see whether protective measures could be
taken with these compounds to give the person some prophylactic protection
against the more potent members of the series.

ISuch of this has been reported
in the open literature.

Throughout the period we used every known study on
cells, tissues, and organ culture in order to assess the potential Lazarl to
humans from a tissue or genetic standpoint.

Although human chromosome breaks
had been reported by others, we found them much more frequently from caffeine
and many other comon substances.

We were unable to demonstrate any damage
by LSD to any system used.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Although human chromosome breaks
had been reported by others, we found them much more frequently from caffeine
and many other comon substances. We were unable to demonstrate any damage
by LSD to any system used. This has been a continuing project on all
chemical substances which raa be introduced'into the body, so it is not
unique to this compound. We have done the same studies on every chemical
which is standard in CW, every therapeutic compound used to treat any com-
pound of interest, every riot control agent--everything. In no instance
was a human subject who did not volunteer used, and in every instance of
human exposure, the individual knew in advance that he would be given a
drug that had psychotomimtic properties. ie did not necessarily know
when or how he would be given the drug to avoid responses that would
be invalid because of the power of suggestion. These studies were conducted interittentily over the period of 1955 to .Jj2
when all work on LSD at Edgewood Arsenal was concluded. Prior to the establishment of the volunteer progran at Edgewood Arsenal,
Dr. Amadeo Marrazi, M.D., now at University of Hinnesota, was in charge of
medical research. From 1956 on, Dr. Van H. Sin has been responsible for the
program. He has served under the following Directors of the Laboratory:

--- PAGE BREAK ---y of Hinnesota, was in charge of
medical research. From 1956 on, Dr. Van H. Sin has been responsible for the
program. He has served under the following Directors of the Laboratory:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

229
1956-1959: 
COL Albert Dreisbach
1959-1962: 
COL Douglas Lindseay
1962-1963: 
COL Frank Sauer
1961-1974: 
CML Joseph Blair
1974-present: 
COL Claude McClure
Because of the organization structure of the post and the laboratory, COL
Nicholas Bottiglieri, COL Henry Uhrig, and COL Frank Leitnaker served as
Directors of the Laboratory during the time that COL Blair was Deputy
Director of Chemical Research and Development Laboratory from 1963 until
1971.
All work on ISD at this installation carried a military security classifi-
cation until March of 1970, when it was declassified. 
Immediate action %ms
taken to screen all documents on LSD and declassify those which did not
contain information on other agents that still carried a military classifica-
tion.
PROCWURES USM) IN CLINICAL AND FIELD TESTS
1. 
All human subjects were volunteers; all were told they would be given a
compound and, In tene 
, what they might expect and the duration of effects.
In all field tests adequate numbers of controls (without drug) were part of
the program.
2. 
The normal procedure of signing a statement of willingness to partic'-p~te
before a witness was carried out on the clinical program. 
In the group crij%!a,
this procedure was accomplished by the unit.
3. 
Extensive physical and psychological tests, including predictive personality
irdexes, were employed througt. 
In addition, specific psychological tests such
as *PQuarrle Mechanical Ability, reading tests, arithmetic tests, drawing and
picture tests were employed. 
The physical examination, history, clinical examina-
tion, and clinical laboratory studies, both before and after tests, were stand-
ardized from the onset of clinical testing. 
Psychiatric interviews and total
review of each subject were made before they were allowed to go on test.
4. 
Follovup procedures to determine that there were no residual effects of the
drug were instituted. 
These were reviewed by a Committee of the N national
Academy of Sciences for the Surgeon Ceneral in 1973. 
There was no recomendation
that further followup programs would be of any value.
S. 
The laboratory methods for identification of the material, the clinical
diagnosis of the individual who might be poisoned, the treatment of the indi-
vidual, and the problems of mass casualty handling were all a part of the program.ification of the material, the clinical
diagnosis of the individual who might be poisoned, the treatment of the indi-
vidual, and the problems of mass casualty handling were all a part of the program.

--- PAGE BREAK ---erial, the clinical
diagnosis of the individual who might be poisoned, the treatment of the indi-
vidual, and the problems of mass casualty handling were all a part of the program.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

230
Senator KENNEDY. We want to thank you very much for coming.
It has really been amazing that you are prepared to talk in such
detail about various programs that have been going on from 1967 to
the present. That was the nature of our inquiry to the Department of
Defense. They were very unresponsive in terms of answering that.
You have been very forthright in terms of time, numbers, people,
and figures, and have indicated that you have supplied reports to the
Surgeon General, so it mystifies me why they were so reluctant to
comment on what you have been quite willing and prepared to com-
ment upon this morning.
I think you understand our primary interest is in the area of
notification and consent, supervision and followup on these matters,
and I think your willingness to work with the Commission on Human
Rights and Subjects is extremely helpful and useful in the kinds of
consent programs and notification, so that, at any time in the future,
where the department of I)efense is involved, I am going to, as I
mentioned to you, ask the Commission itself if they will work with
,ou in the development of protocols to insure that kind of notification,
because, quite clearly, the ones that you do have, I feel, are inadequate.
Just before we receded the hearing, there was a part of Mr. Aboard's
testimony that I will read. It appears on page 16, when he said:
In view of the results of the clinical experimentation at Edgewood Arsenal
and recognition of the limited capability to structure realistic interrogation situa-
tions in the laboratory environment using volunteers, the proposal was sub.
mitted by the U.S. Army Intelligence Center in coordination with the Chemical
Warfare Laboratory to conduct field experimentation-this is now referring to
LSI)-in conjunctiou with actual Interrogation situations.
This proposal was approved by the Army's Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelli-
gence and subsequently two series of field tests were conducted.
I)o you know anything about that ?
Dr. Six. Sir, as I say, the only part of this that we provided was
some local support, and I think they have given all this to another
committee, and I am not privy to it.
Senator KENNEDY. I have asked the department of Defense for an
explanation, and they have said this was classified information, but
they would discuss this matter with the committee members this after-
noon at 3 o'clock.
So we are going to recess until 3 o'clock and listen to the explanation
in executive session to the two series of field tests being conducted.
I think it is very important to us to find out about that matter.
The subcommittee stands in recess.
(Whereupon, at 11:45 a.m., the subcommittee adjourned.)two series of field tests being conducted.
I think it is very important to us to find out about that matter.
The subcommittee stands in recess.
(Whereupon, at 11:45 a.m., the subcommittee adjourned.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---tests being conducted.
I think it is very important to us to find out about that matter.
The subcommittee stands in recess.
(Whereupon, at 11:45 a.m., the subcommittee adjourned.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL RESEARCH, 1975
Human-Use Experimental Programs of the Department
of Defense and Central Intelligence Agency
FRIDAY, N0VRXBEE 7, 1975
U.S. SENATE,
SUBCOMMITME ON HrALTH OF THE
CoMMrrrEE ON LABOR AND PUBLIC WELFARE,
SuBooMMITm E ON ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICE AND
PROCEDURE OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,
Wahi'nton, D.C.
The subcommittees met at 9:45 a.m., in room 4232 Dirksen Senate
Office Building, Hon. Edward M. Kennedy (chairman of the sub-
committees), presiding.
Present: Senators Kennedy, Schweiker, Javits, and Beall.
Staff members present: LeRoy Goldman, professional staff mem-
ber; Walter J. Sheridan, chief investigator; Jay B. Cutler, minority
counsel; Lawrence Horowitz, consultant, Thomas M. Susman. chief
counsel; James Michie, investigator.
- Senator KENNEDY. The subcommittees will come to order.
Today, the Health Subcommittee and the Subcommittee on Admin-
istrative Practice and Procedure resume their legslative and investi-
gative inquiry into the human-use experimentation activities of the
apartment of Defense [DOD] and the Central Intelligence Agency
[CIA].
The Rockefeller Commission Report, the LSD experiments of
the 1950's and 1960's, the experiments we will hear about today, all
raise profound questions about the record of these two vital agencies
in protecting the rights of human subjects of biomedical and
behavioral research.
The issue here is not one of national security. There is no ques-
tioning of the need for secret research. The issue is the protection of
human being who are used as subjects of that secret research.
This Nation is founded on the principles of individual liberty
and freedom. In this country, we do not sacrifice individual rights
for any "greater good." Ends do not, never have, and never will,
justify the means.
The goal of the subcommittees is not to weaken the Department
of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency. These agencies are
weakened when they lose the respect and confidence of the American
people. Nothing dissipates their trust more than the spectacle of
secret agencies operating unchecked, with no accountability, and with
a contemptuous disregard for individual rights.
(231)e American
people. Nothing dissipates their trust more than the spectacle of
secret agencies operating unchecked, with no accountability, and with
a contemptuous disregard for individual rights.
(231)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

232
Our goal is to strengthen these two agencies--to restore the trust
and confidence of the American people in them. We can do that by
developing institutional safeguards that protect the individual and
place the agencies within the tradition of Government checks and
alances.
S. 2515 is intended to accomplish these objectives. Its goal is to
afford equal protection to all human subjects of biomedical and be-
havioral research-regardless of the source of funding.
At this point I order a copy of S. 2515 printed in the record.
[The bill referred to follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

233
CONGRESS. 
2515
IN TIlE SENATE OF TIlE UNITED STATES
Oucromm 9 (lhgi.lu! ive day, S-r.IIun 
11) , 1975
Mr. KENNEY (for himself, Mr. .AvITs, a11d 'Mr. S(-Iw.IKX) 
introduced tim
following bill; which was wail twice and referred to the Committee on
Labor and Public Welfare
A BILL
To anend the lPublic Health s4,rvice(' Act to establish the 'resi-
dent's (ommisioni 
for the protection of human subjects
involved ini liomedical and hliQvioil research, mnd or other
purlmss.
1 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of RepresIenta-
2 tires of the United States of A merica in Congre.s assembled,
3 
That this Act, nuiy lie cited is (ite "President's Commission
4 
for the Protection of Iunn Subjects of Biomedical and
5 Behavioral Research Act of 1975".
(,6 
,AMENDMENT To TIlE PUBLIC hAULT1 HERVJ("E ACT
7 
Swx'. 2. Title 1V of the P'ublie Health &Service Act is
8 amended by inserting the following new part at the end
9 
thereof:

--- PAGE BREAK ---.
(,6 
,AMENDMENT To TIlE PUBLIC hAULT1 HERVJ("E ACT
7 
Swx'. 2. Title 1V of the P'ublie Health &Service Act is
8 amended by inserting the following new part at the end
9 
thereof:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

234
2
1 
"PART -PROTMION OF IIHUMA-N " SUBJECTS
2 
"IRSTAIBLIS! ilM ENT OF COM M 1881ON
3 
"Sm. 41. (at) 
There is established a Commission to
4 
he known as the President's Commission for the Protection
5 
of Human Subjects oif Bionedical and Behavioral Research
[; 
(hereinafter iii this title referred to as the 'Commission').
7 
T 
omm1
11 ('(IIIIi.sim, .hll ie 
cmposed (,f-
it (I) four Members of the Sntlte 
lppoild by the
9) 
President of the Keiate; and
10 
" (2) four ,Members of the House of Representatives
II 
- appointed by the Speaker (if (lie HI(im.e of Representa-
12 
lives; and
13 
" (3) 
the Secrehary of the I)epartnmtent 
of Health,
14 
Education, and Welfaure, the Secretary of )efense, the
15 
Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, and the
16 
Admini.strator of the Veteran's Administration; and
17 
" (4) eleven members appointed by tit- President of
18 
the united States with fhe advice and consent of the
19 
Semate.
20 
The President shall select nmemlers of the ('onmi.ssion under
21 paragraph (4) from individuals distinguished in tle fields
22 
of medicine, low, ethics, theology, tile biological, physical,
23 Iwhaviortl and soIcial sciences, philosophy, 
humanities, health
24 
administration, government, and public affairs; but. five (and
25 
not, more than five) of the nicmibers of tle Commission slall

--- PAGE BREAK ---Icial sciences, philosophy, 
humanities, health
24 
administration, government, and public affairs; but. five (and
25 
not, more than five) of the nicmibers of tle Commission slall

--- PAGE BREAK ---

235
8
1 be individuals who are or who have been engaged in bio-
2 
medical or behavioral research involving human subjects.
3 Until such time as the President acts to appoint members
4 of the National (A;minission for -the Protection of Human
5 Subjects of Biomedical and Ilhivioral Research are deemed
6 members of tile Coniniiissi.o 
as of the date of enaetiment of
7 this Act.
8 
" () 
The teri 
of office of each member 4f the Board
9 
shall be four years; except 1h.t (I) any member alpoin4ed
10 
to fill a vacincy occurrilng prior to the expiration of the term
11 for which his predeeessor was appointed shall be appointed
12 for the remainder of such term; (2) the terms of office f
13 members first taking office shall begin on the date of appoint-
14 ment and shall expire, as designated at the time of their
15 aplointment, four at the ed of one year, four at the end of
16 two years, and three at the end of four years; and (3) a
17 member vhose terii h. s expired may serve until his successor
18 
has qualified.
19 
" (c) The President shall designate one of the members
20 of the Commission as Chairman, and one as Vice Chairman.
21 Seven members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum,
22 but a lesser number may conduct hearings. Those members
23 appointed under paragraphs (1), 
(2), and (3) of section
24 481 (a) shall be nonvoting members and shall not be con-
25 sidered in constituting a quorum.
70-026 0 - 76 - 16

--- PAGE BREAK ---bers
23 appointed under paragraphs (1), 
(2), and (3) of section
24 481 (a) shall be nonvoting members and shall not be con-
25 sidered in constituting a quorum.
70-026 0 - 76 - 16

--- PAGE BREAK ---

236
4
1 
"(d) Members-of the Commission who are Members of
2 Congress or full-time officers or employees of the United
3 
States shall serve without additional compensation but shall
4 be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary
5 
expenses incurred in the performance of the duties vested in
6 
the omissionon. Members of the Commission from private
7 
life shall receive $100 per diemi while engaged in the actual
8 performance of the duties vested in the Comninssioti. plus
9 reimbursement for travel subsistence and other necessary
10 
expenses incurred in the performance of such duties.
11 
" (e) The Ciomnmission shall meet at the call of the
12 
Chairman or at the call of a majority of the members thereof.
13 
" (f) (I) The Commission shall have the power to ap-
14 
point and fix the compensation of such personnel as it deems
15 
advisable, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United
-teC.Vode, 
governing appointments in the competitive serv-
17 
ice, and the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of
18 chapter 53 of such title, relating to classification and Oen-
19 
eral Schedule pay rates.
20 
" (2) The Commission may procure, in accordance with
21 the provisions of section 3109 of title 5, United States Code,
22 
the temporary or intermittent services of experts -or con-
23 sultants. Persons so employed shall receive compensation at
24 a rate to be fixed by the Commission, but not in excess of
25 
$100 per diem, including traveltime. While away from his

--- PAGE BREAK ---ltants. Persons so employed shall receive compensation at
24 a rate to be fixed by the Commission, but not in excess of
25 
$100 per diem, including traveltime. While away from his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

237
5
t bone or regular place of business iii the performance of serv-
2 
ices for the ('oniniissioun, any such person aiy be allowed
3 
travel expenses, including per diemi 
in lieu of subsistence, as
4 
authorized by section 570: (b) of title 5, United States Code,
5 
for persons in the Government service employed internnit-
6 
tently.
7 
" (g) The commissionin muay secure directly from any
8 
department or agency of the lInited States information nee-
9 e..sary to enable it to carry out its duties. Uponm 
request of
10 
the Chairman of tle Commission, each and every agency or
11 
department of the 
united States siall furnish all information
12 
requested by tie Commission which is necessary to enable
13 
it to carry out its duties. If any information so requested has
14 been deemed to be classified for any purpose (including na-
15 
tional security) by such agency or department, such infor-
16 
nation shall be furnished to the Special Classified Infor-
17 
nation Committee of the Commission (hereinafter in this
18 section referred to as the 'Special Committee'), which shall
19 
be composed of those members of the Commission who are
20 appointed under paragraphs (1), 
(2), and (3) of section
21 
481 (a). Eight members of the Special Committee shall con-
22 stitute a quorum, but a lesser number may conduct hearings.
23 By a majority decision of the Special Committee, such in-
24 formation shall be disclosed without regard to the sensitivity
25 
of such information to the full Commission upon a finding by

--- PAGE BREAK ---ority decision of the Special Committee, such in-
24 formation shall be disclosed without regard to the sensitivity
25 
of such information to the full Commission upon a finding by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

238
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
6
the Special Committee that there is or will be an adverse
impact upon tie protection of human subjects of research.
"COMM ISSION DUTI E8
"SEC. 482. (a) The ('omnission shall carry out the
following:
"(1) (A) The Commission shall" (i) conduct a com-
preliensive investigation and study to identify the basic ethi-
cal principles which should underlie the conduct of biomedical
and behavioral research involving human subjects, (ii) de-
velop guidelines which should be followed in such research
to assure that it is conducted in accordance with such princi-
ples, and (iii) make recommendations to the appropriate
agency or department for such administrative action as may
be appropriate to apply such guidelines to biomedical and be-
havioral research conducted or supported under programs
administered by the appropriate agency or department, and
concerning any other matter pertaining to tie protection of
human subjects of biomedical and behavioral research.
(B) In carrying out subparagrapi (A) , the Commis-
sion shall consider at least the following:
"(i) 
The boundaries between biomedical or be-
havioral research involving human subjects and 
te
accepted and routine practice of medicine.
"(ii) The role of assessment of risk-benefit criteria

--- PAGE BREAK ---daries between biomedical or be-
havioral research involving human subjects and 
te
accepted and routine practice of medicine.
"(ii) The role of assessment of risk-benefit criteria

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-239
7
1 
inl the delerhaimaiu, of the alprurialmecs of re.wcarch
2 
iunvolv'ing hllllllisubject.;.
3 
" (iii) Approp)riate gpiiueliuhe. for the sehctioll of
4 
human -ubjects for participation 
hi leOdii.ll 1111d bi-
5 
havioral research.
6 
66 (iv) 'flt'e nature aind dliitiou of informed 
on-
7 
snII in 'ariouts rese. arch settings.
8 
( v) Me'lani nm for evalting n lall, i 
iitoring the
9 
lperforli'IeI 
of lesliltio;,al Review ]Board ("tallihled
10 
ill acrdance with section 474 of this Art, and appro-
11 
priate enforcement inechani.-m.N 
for carrying out their
12 
(ki..i(),I5.
1 
"((C) 
The Comlllli.ssioll s-hall conilsider lte applroplriate-
14 
ness of applving the principles It1d guidelines ideIltilied 11nid
15 
developed under .ubparagraph (A ) to the delivery of hialll
16 services to patients under programs conducted or supported
17 
by the we'relary of 1Iealth, Educalion, anid Welfare, an1d
18 shall review and sllggt the' ehlil, so,jIll, 3111 legal itljli-
19 
at'alins of all Iionliedival 'mid behavio'al resta'rh fill uIman
20 suijectk vtiiiducted Iv and through ll a 
ty federall agency (ill-
21 
ehudi,,g contractors) for which any Federal funds tre to he
22 appropriated.
23 
'(2) 
The ('onmmi.sio 
shall identify the requirements
24 for informed consent to participation in bionedical and I.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ors) for which any Federal funds tre to he
22 appropriated.
23 
'(2) 
The ('onmmi.sio 
shall identify the requirements
24 for informed consent to participation in bionedical and I.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

240
8
t havioral research by children, prisoners, inilitary lIersonnel,
2 and the institutionalized mentally infirn. The ('onniisiton
3 shall investigate and study biomedical and lIIvioril re-
4 
search conducted or supported under programs adnlinistered
5 
by the Secretary and involving children, prisoners, military
6 
personnel, and the institutionmlized mnentally infirnm to de-
7 
termnine the nature of the consent obtained fromta such per-
8 
sons or their legal representatives before such persons were
9 
involved in such research; the adequacy of the inforina-
10 tion given their 
respecting the nature and purpose of the
11 
research, procedures to be used, risks and disconforts, an-
12 
ticipated benefits fromn the research, and other matters Ineces-
13 
sary for informed consent; and the competence and tihe free-
14 
dom of the persons to nake a choice for or against involve-
15 
mnent in such research. On the basis of such investigation and
16 
study, the Commission shall iake such recommendations to
17 any department or-agency of the United States as it deter-
18 mines appropriate to assure that biomedical and behavioral
19 
research conducted by or supported under the appropriate
20 
department or agency of the United States meets the require-
21 
nients respecting informed consent identified by time Connis-
22 sion. For purposes of this paragraph, the term 'children'
23 
means individuals who have not attained the legal age of
24 
consent to participate in research as determined under the
25 applicable law of the jurisdiction in which the research is to

--- PAGE BREAK ---individuals who have not attained the legal age of
24 
consent to participate in research as determined under the
25 applicable law of the jurisdiction in which the research is to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

241
1 
he conducted; tile terin 'prisoner' means individuals involhut-
2 
tarily confined inl correctional institutions or facilities (as de-
3 
fined in section 601 of the ()mnibus Crime Control and 8afe
4 Streets Act of 1968 (43 U.8.('. 3781)) ; and the term 'in-
5 
stitut ionalized lientally infirn' includes individuals whoi are
6 
inentally ill, inentally retarded, einotionilly disturbed, psy-
7 
rhoti, or senile, or who have other iinpairments of a similar
8 
nature and who reside as patient,; in anl institution; the term
9 
'nnilitary personnel' means individuals who are active and in-
10 active nemhers of the United States Arned Forces, vet-
11 
erans of tile I'nited States Armed Forces, and employees amnd
12 agents of the Central Intelligence Agency.
13 
"(3) 
The commissionn shall conduct ant investigation
14 
and study of the use of psychosurgery in the United States
15 
during tine five-year period ending )ecenber 31, 1972. The
16 Commission shall determine the appropriateness of its use,
17 evaluate the need for it, and recomnnend to the Iecretary
18 
policies defining the circumstances (if any) under which its
19 use ay be appropriate. For purposes of this paragraph, tile
20 
term 'psychosurgery' means brain surgery on (1) normal
21 
brain tissue of an individual who does not suffer from any
22 physical disease for the purpose of changing or controlling
23 the behavior or emotions of such individual, or (2) diseased
24 brain tissue of an individual, if the sole object of the per-
25 
fornnance of such surgery is to control, change, or affect any

--- PAGE BREAK ---or emotions of such individual, or (2) diseased
24 brain tissue of an individual, if the sole object of the per-
25 
fornnance of such surgery is to control, change, or affect any

--- PAGE BREAK ---

242
10
I 
behavioral or emotional disturbance of such individual. Such
2 
term does not include brain surgery dosigned- to cure
3 or ameliorate the effects of epilepsy and electric shock
4 treatments.
5 
SPECIALL KTUDY
6 
",SP'. 483. The Cominission shall undertake a compre-
7 hensive study of the ethical, social, 
nd legal implications
8 
of advances in biomedical and behavioral research and
9 ttclinology. Such study shall include- 
--
10 
"(1) 
an analysis and evaluation of scientific and
11 
technological advances in past, present, and projected
12 
biomedical nad WIs 
havioral research and services;
13 
" (2) an amalysiN and evaluation of the implications
14 
of such advances, both for individuals and for society;
15 
"(3) 
an analysis and evaluation of laws and moral
16 
and ethical principles governing the use of technology in
17 
medical practice;
18 
"(4) 
an analysis and evaluation of public under-
19 
standing of and attitudes toward such implications and
20 
laws and principles; and
21 
"(5) an analysis and evaluation of implications for
22 
public policy of such findings as are made by the Com-
23 
mission with respect to advances in biomedical and

--- PAGE BREAK ---iples; and
21 
"(5) an analysis and evaluation of implications for
22 
public policy of such findings as are made by the Com-
23 
mission with respect to advances in biomedical and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

243
11
I 
behavioral research and technology and pullic attitudes
2 
toward such advances.
3 
"AiDM IN18TRATIVI{ 
IPPROVISIO NS
4 
''5.. 484. (a) The Conmission may for the purpose
5 
of carrying out its duties hold such larings, sit and act at
6 su.l times and places, take such te.tiniony, and receive such
7 
evidence is [hi (omis.sioni deenis advisable.
8 
" (b) Within sixty days of tie receipt of any recom-
9 nendation made by tie Commnission under section 482, tei
10 -appropriate department or agency of the United States shall
11 
publisli it in tie Federal Register and provide opportunity
12 
for interested persons to submit written data, views, and
13 
arguncints with respect to such recomnendation. The appro-
14 
priate department or agency of the United States shall
15 
(1) determine whether the administrative action proposed by
16 
such reconnendation is appropriate to assure the protection
17 
of 
:tuIn 
suhjet-ts of biomedical and behavioral research con-
18 
ducted or supported under programs administered by it, and
19 
(2) if it determines that such action is not so appropriate,
20 
publish in tie Federal Register such determination together
21 
with an adequate statement of the reasons for its determina-
22 
tion. If the appropriate department or agency of the United
23 States determines that administrative action recommended by

--- PAGE BREAK ---adequate statement of the reasons for its determina-
22 
tion. If the appropriate department or agency of the United
23 States determines that administrative action recommended by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

244
12
I 
the Coimi ion should be undertaken by it, it shall undr-
2. take such action as expeditiously its is fea ible.
3| 
"AU:TIORITY TO CONTRACT
• ! 
'S~"S.-. 
485. The Comuiss,ion moy contract for tie sludy
" 
i 
and design of mteclimiss to be included in such recommen-
6 (latlilns.
7 
"TRANSFEIR 
OF FINCTION8
8 
t"f:tc. 
486. Tile functions, powers, and duties of tie
9 National Commission for the Protection of Iunman Subjects
10 of Biomedical and Behavioral research (88 Stit. 348-351)
i1 shall be transferred to the Commisson.".
12 
IC8CELIANA)U8
13 
Sipw. 3. (a) Part A o' title 11 of the National Research
14 
Act (42 U.S.C. 2891) is repealed.
15 
(b) Sections 211 and 213 of the National Research Act
16 are repealed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---245
Senator KENNmD.

Before we begin taking testimony this morning,
I feel compelled to raise some procedural issues.

These subcommittees
have had an extraordinarily difficult time in obtaining material from
the CIA.

Much of the material we have obtained has been classified.

We have struggled to get the bulk of that material declassified.

We are not interested in compromising national security.

We were
willing to delete all names of projects and individuals, allreferences
to operational programs.

We were interested only in experimentation
with human subjects-both witting and unwitting.

Much of what was known about such experiments was destroyed
in 1973.

What is left is classified.

What little has been declassified is
inconsistent with what the Agency refuses to declassify.

I believe the American people need to know how difficult it is to
find the truth about the workings of these two particular Ageneies.

In the case of CIA, most records were destroyed; no individuals in
the Agency can remember what happeiied; reports done at the time
by the Inspector General remain classified.

Most of what is classified is tremendously embarrassing to the
Agency.

But embarrassment is not a valid ground for classification.

These subcommittees will explore every possible avenue to seek
complete declassification.

In this way, and only in this way, can we
learn the truth about our past.

I believe such knowledge is essential
for the protection of our liberty in the future.

Senator Schweiker.

Senator SciiwziKYvaI Thank you, Mr.

Chairman.

Mr.

Chairman, this morning the Senate Health Subcommittee and
the Senate Administrative Practice Subcommittee will be continu-
ing a study of human experimentation practices by the CIA and the
Defense Department.

I am deeply concerned about the practices in
this area which the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Activi-
ties and these subcommittees have discovered.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chairman, this morning the Senate Health Subcommittee and
the Senate Administrative Practice Subcommittee will be continu-
ing a study of human experimentation practices by the CIA and the
Defense Department. I am deeply concerned about the practices in
this area which the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Activi-
ties and these subcommittees have discovered. For the past 9 months, my colleagues and I on the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence Activities have been studying the CIA
and the intelligence activities of other governmental agencies, includ-
ing the Defense Department. Much of this time, too much of the
time I believe, has been spent behind closed doors, but this was the
result of the Senate Select Committee's real concern that the inquiry
not damage our vital intelligence agencies and the country's national
security. But the subject of this hearing-human experimentation by CIA
and Defense-demands to be heard by the public. Human experimen-
tation is no different if it is funded by the CIA or by HEW. The
symptoms which the victims of such testing faced, often for years
and years, were no less terrifying because a military intelligence
agency was responsible rather than the FDA. These hearings by the Health and Administrative Practices Sub-
committees have, and will, serve a valuable purpose. First, they have
allowed us to hear from those victims whose voices are lost in the
pallid governmental reports on these activities. Second, they help
ensure that those victims, and others, will be located by the agencies
responsible, and guaranteed the appropriate treatment for any condi-
-tion resulting from these experiments. Today's hearing provides an opportunity to determine what

--- PAGE BREAK ---246
happened and who authorized it, not an easy thing in the CIA
Finally, and most importantly, this hearing encourages discussion
of how to prevent such massive abuse of individual rights in the
future.

Through these hearings, we can search for ways to prevent
our conscience from being overrun by our invention.

I believe that one step in that process is to extend the jurisdiction
of the National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects
of Biomedical and Behavioral Research to cover all Government
agencies.

Extension of the Commission's authority would reduce the
secrecy and compartmentation which the Senate Select Committee
on Intelligence Activities has found in these agencies.

It would
foster accountability, replacing the system of plausible denial with
one of "acknowledged responsibility." And, above all, it would mean
that all Government agencies involved in human experimentation
would have to conform to the same high ethical standards which
we now dew c.id from anly a few.

Mr.

Chairman, at one of the Senate Select Committee's sessions, a
witness suggested that because of the needs of national security, the
same rules and laws which apply to the rest of the Government
should not apply to the intelligence community.

I cannot accept this.

In an area such as human experimentation, we can allow nothing
short of the highest ethical standards.

We cannot allow a false
national security to be purchased at the price of human life or
human misery.

Senator KENNrEY.

Thank you, Senator Schweiker.

-
Senator Javits.

Senator JAvrrs.

Mr.

Chairman, I wish to express my great satis-
faction that this work has been undertaken by the Subcommittees,
with Senator Kennedy and the ranking member, Senator Schweiker
of the Health Subcommittee, taking such a leading position.

It started with me well over 10 years ago on the Senate floor and
then went to the Food and Drug Act relating to the rights of persons
who are being experimented upon.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chairman, I wish to express my great satis-
faction that this work has been undertaken by the Subcommittees,
with Senator Kennedy and the ranking member, Senator Schweiker
of the Health Subcommittee, taking such a leading position. It started with me well over 10 years ago on the Senate floor and
then went to the Food and Drug Act relating to the rights of persons
who are being experimented upon. I believe that it should be a matter of great confidence to the
American people that this committee, notwithstanding the tradition
built around the idea of fine intelligence, and the necessity for
security of the country, that it is being dealt with very expertly
and wisely, a matter not to be compromised, while the basic human
rights involved are being sought to be protected by the bill which
we have all joined in introducing, S. 2515. As the ranking member of the Committee on Labor and Public
Welfare, I would like to assure my colleagues that I will give them
every suppA and every copration this morning in dispelling the
blanket of secrecy and the other actions, including action on the bill
which seems to be essential to the public interest. Senator KENNzEDY. Thank you very much, Senator Javits. I would like to welcome our first panel of witnesses this morning:
Dr. Harris Isbell of Eastland, Tex.; Mr. James H. Childs of Wash-
ington, D.C.; and Mr. Edward M. Flowers of Seabrook, Md. Do you swear the testimony you are about to give will be the truth,
the whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help you, God I
[The witnesses answered affirmatively.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---247
Senator KzNNWY.

We want to thank Dr.

Isbell, Mr.

Childs, and
Mr.

Flowers very much for their willingness to appear here this
morning.

We appreciate your cooperation.

I think you understand the purpose of our hearing.

We have at the
present time a Commission which was established for the protection
of human subjects.

The Commission is in the process of drafting
guidelines in terms of ensuring that anyone who is the subject of
research is going to have full knowledge and understanding of
the nature of any of the dru 
that that person is going to be
taking, and that there will be adequate medical protection during the
experiment, and that there will be adequate followup protection.

This is really what we are attempting to do.

We recognize that
such research in this area is necessary and must continue.

But we
just want to make sure that those people who are going to be partici-
pating in any of these research programs are going to be given
adeuate protection of their rights and health as well.

We have seen over a period of time where in many instances this
has not been the case.

This is the area that our legislation is directed
toward; to assure that the research that is being done or supported
by the Defense Department and the CIA is going to provide adequate
safeguards for people who are subjects of experimentation.

What we are trying to assess now in terms of justifying legislation
is whether there is a real need for it, because one should not pass
laws unless there is a need.

In our studies we have found in many instances in the past, in
those research programs which have been sponsored by the Defense
Department or the CIA, that those programs did not provide the
kinds of protection necessary.--- PAGE BREAK ---

What we are trying to assess now in terms of justifying legislation
is whether there is a real need for it, because one should not pass
laws unless there is a need. In our studies we have found in many instances in the past, in
those research programs which have been sponsored by the Defense
Department or the CIA, that those programs did not provide the
kinds of protection necessary. These research programs go back many years-but because much
of the information regarding CIA research was destroyed-we are
attempting to learn from individuals such as yourselves what the
pattern has been in the past so that we can protect people in the
future-and this is really why we are here, because we are interested
in the future. We are interested in this element only. We are interested in investi-
gating the CIA and DOD only with respect to their being able to
assure that any time they perform or fund research involving human
subjects, that these subjects are adequately protected. -
We know that you have had some experience in your own past
where you participated in various experiments. What we would
really like to hear from you in your own words is how this came
about, what you remember about the particular testing program, and
what medical followup took place afterwards. I will just ask you a few questions and ask you to respond to
those to the best of your ability and to the best of your recollection. I know this is probably the first time you have appeared before
a committee of the Congress, but we want you to understand that
hopefully, as a result of these hearings today, we can ensure that
all Americans are going to have notice as to what is happening to
them in any kind of drug testing program, and that they are going
to get the best in terms of medical supervision while the program is
taking place, and also that there will be adequate medicalfo lowup.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ug testing program, and that they are going
to get the best in terms of medical supervision while the program is
taking place, and also that there will be adequate medicalfo lowup.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

248
So I hope you have some idea of the purpose of this hearing. We
want you to feel relaxed, and we want you to know you are among
friends here, and we are very appreciative that you are willing to
share your experiences with us.
I will start with Mr. Childs, if I may. I would like, if you could,
Mr. Childs, to tell us when you were at the Lexington Rehabilitation
Center.
STATERT OF DR. HARRIS 
BELL, RESEARCHER IN DRUG
AREA, E, 
TEX.; IAXF H. CHILDS, WASHINGTON, D.C.;
AND EDWARD I 
FLOWERS, SEABROOK, XD.; A PANEL
Mr. CnrLS. I was sentenced to Lexington, Ky., in June 1951, for
use of narcotics. I arrived in Lexington about ,June, somewhere in
the latter part of June. I had been in jail for approximately 6 or 7
months before going to Lexington.
After I got down there, I went to L section. That is where they
keep the people who just came in.
Senator KENNEDY. Can you tell us how you became involved in the
program?
Mr. Crus. I heard about research, that they were giving you
tests and were paying off with drugs. I wanted that, you know,
because, having 16 months to 4 years, I wanted to get in on this.
Upon going down to apply for research. they examined you, saw
whether you were physically fit or not. Age limit was also, you know,
mandatory., that you be of age.
Senator KENNmDY. If I may, let me just see if I understand you.
You were in the Lexington center to be rehabilitated because you
had used drugs, as I understand; is that correct?
Mr. Cmwjs. That is correct.
Senator KENNEzDy. So you were down at the Rehabilitation center,
and while you were at the center you heard that there was a drug
testing program and you wanted to participate in that drug testing
program, is that correct?
Mr. Cmws. That is correct.
Senator KNNEDYr. Why did you want to participate?
I think you just told us, but I am not sure we all heard.
Mr. Citus. I wanted to participate in it because after the testing
and some time on the testing, they gave you some kind of drug-
some drugs called morphine, some other drugs called 10820-I do
not know what it was. All I know is that it made you high.
Senator KENNzzY. Was one of the reasons, or was the primary
reasonwhy you participated in the drug testing program so that you
could get other drugs after you completed -the tests?
Mr. Cvmws Yes. That was the payoff.
Senator KNNEDY. That was the payoff?
Mr. Cnrws. After completing the tests, you got so many milli-
grams of morphine, if you liked it, or either 10820. I do not know
what it was. f did not care. It made you high.
Senator KzNNtEY. So you participated.
Did you know what drugs you were taking at the time you were
participating in the program?her 10820. I do not know
what it was. f did not care. It made you high.
Senator KzNNtEY. So you participated.
Did you know what drugs you were taking at the time you were
participating in the program?

--- PAGE BREAK ---know
what it was. f did not care. It made you high.
Senator KzNNtEY. So you participated.
Did you know what drugs you were taking at the time you were
participating in the program?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

W9
Mr. C0m. No, I did not know. They said it would not kill me.
Senator KzNNmY. You did not know or care?
Mr. Cmwm. They said it would not kill you, and you had to sign
a piece of paper-that was the strange part about it, you know-if
anrhing happened to you, they were not responsible for it.
Senator S&wvnxm 
So you volunteered for this program to get
these drug payoffs. Is that what you are telling us?
Mr. Cmw.. Yes.
Senator ScHawniz 
Did you know ahead of time that that is
what you would get if you volunteered?
Mr. CHm. 
Yes.
I got it through the grapevine, and also when I went down to
sign up, they told you also, "You get your payoff upon completion of
the tests."
Senator JAvrrs. May I have one followup question.
You were there in connection with drug use, were you not, in
order to get free of drugs ?
Mr. Cmwm. Ye& I was there for rehabilitation, you know, to get
rid of the drug addiction.
Senator KENNEDY. Yet your testimony is that they gave you more
drugs after they completed these tests on you? 
-
Mr. Cnmw. 
Yes, they were going to give me some more drugs,
which the drug they had given me made me sick. They were giving
most of the drugs to make me well.
Senator KNNmEY. Do you know whether the gave you ISDI
Mr. 0mw. At that time, I did not know LSD from anything else.
Senator KzNNzEY. Do yoU know now whether they gave you LSD I
Mr. Crmws. I do not think they did, but I was down in research-
I came down there so often, and I saw these little rooms, you know,
which had beds in them, and they had mattresses on the floor, and
these people were down there, you know, in these rooms.
I did not know who they were, but I know that they told me
things, things that they had seen--elephants on the wall, they could
see the bones in their hands, they could see their brains-and I
thought they were crazy, you know.
Senator KZENNEDY. Who told you that they could see elephants on
the wall?
Mr. Cmww. 
They were other-well, patients, I guess you would
call them.
Senator KzNNEy. Do you know what drugs they were given ?
Do you know if they were given LSD?
Mr. CHum. Some of them were saying that they had these graham
crackers. They ate these graham crackers.
Senator KNm 
Y. Grham crackers are not going to have you
seeing elephants on the wall.
Mr. 0mw.. I do not know what was in those graham crackers.
[Laughter] 
I
But these graham crackers seemed to make them see things, and
they would tell me that they.could see the bones in their hands and
they could see their brains, and they could see the bones in their feet
and what-not.
I would look at them and think they were crazy. I did not see
anything like that. But they would constantly say these things.see their brains, and they could see the bones in their feet
and what-not.
I would look at them and think they were crazy. I did not see
anything like that. But they would constantly say these things.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d they could see the bones in their feet
and what-not.
I would look at them and think they were crazy. I did not see
anything like that. But they would constantly say these things.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

250
But I did not know it was LSD-I did not know anything about
LSD in those years. At that time, I do not think there was anything
said about that, to my knowledge.
Senator KZNNEY. And after they completed the testing on you,
did they give you any drugs?
Mr. Cinum. They gave me drugs sometime; they gave me some
morphine. You know, they have a bank, like you maybe have 30,
40 milligrams on completion of a test, and when you would go
down there, you knock on this little door, and the guy would look
out, and he would recognize you, and I would go there and say I
want 15 milligrams. He wouldsay, "Where do you want it? In your
arm, your skin or in your vein?'
Mostly all drug addicts like it in their veins, so I would tell him
to hit me in the veins, and I would get high and walk the halls.
Everybody did. Everybody that was on research. They got the
payoff of the drug.
Senator ScHWzrKER. How often did they shoot you up?
Mr. Citws. You could go down there in the morning, you know,
and you could go back in the evening, and you could go back in
the night.
Senator SCHWEIKzR. You could get shot three times a day if you
wanted it?
Mr. Cuiws. If you had that much in the bank. If you had 40
milligrams in there. I think the highest dosage they would sive you
would be 20 milligrams, you know, but you could get 10 milligrams,
15, but you could not get it all at one time. You could not get over,
at one time, 20 milligrams.
Senator ScmWzrwi And you got it in the bank by going through
these tests in a certain period of time
You had so many milligrams in the bank, is that right?
Mr. Cunus. Right.
Senator SCHWRIKE. Approximately how long were you on these
tests?
Mr. Cmw. I was on the tests, I guess, about 60 days, until the
doctor told me not to be on those tests, in working with her, so they
took me off the tests.
Senator KENNEzY. Mr. Flowers, do I understand correctly that you
ate some of those graham crackers?
Mr. Fwwvs Yes.
-Senator KNmwY. Were you at this same rehabilitation center in
Lexington ?
Mr. FLowms. I was at the same center.
Senator KENNEY. How old were you at that time?
Mr. Fww~ms. At that particular time I was 19 years old.
Senator KENEDY. Did you participate in this drug testing pro-
gram?
Mr. FLous. I did.
Senator KENNEY. Why did you participate?
Mr. FLwnats. For the simple reason that there were some drugs,
and I wanted them at that particuli-r time because the frame of mind
and everything else that I wasin, and I heard about it before I even
got there.. For the simple reason that there were some drugs,
and I wanted them at that particuli-r time because the frame of mind
and everything else that I wasin, and I heard about it before I even
got there.

--- PAGE BREAK ---son that there were some drugs,
and I wanted them at that particuli-r time because the frame of mind
and everything else that I wasin, and I heard about it before I even
got there.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

251
One of the things I did do, I lied about my age, because I rec-
ognized that in order to get on that particular program you had to
be a certain age.
Senator Krxw=Y. What age, do you remember?
Mr. FLowu. I think you had to be over 21.
The graham cracker situation was-and at that particular time,
I was not aware of LSD, I did not know what LSD and all that kind
of stuff was-but, at the same time, because of my awareness of a
lot of other things, and the symptoms and everything else, I would
be inclined to believe it was LSD or some kind of hallucinogenic
drug.
It was a graham cracker that they administered to you, and the
symptoms were hallucinogenic. If I recall the state I was in, I was
pretty much out of touch with the here and now, and the kind of
fantasies that they related seeing, it is very true that was the effect
it did have on me.
Senator ScmnxwrzR How long were you in the program?
Mr. FLowus. I was in thereor about R month.
Senator ScuwzmzR. How many times did you-
Senator KENNEDY. Did you eat graham crackers ?
Mr. FLowrs. I ate graham crackers once. It was not administered
to me through the channel of doctors and what-not; it was another
individual who had received it who I had gotten it from.
Senator KZNNzDY. Then what happened after that?
Did you get a payoff in drugs as well ?
Mr. FLow. 
The payoff was in drugs. The payoff not only was
in drugs, but it was in time. They had a choice of earnings days, a
certain amount of days each month on the time that you were doing,
or you could be paid off in narcotics.
I chose narcotics because, at that particular time, my whole reason
for going into the program was just t4 get some drugs&
Senator KENNEDY. What did most of the other patients choose,
narcotics or time off?
Mr. Fovwas. I would say the majority would choose narcotics.
You were dealing with drug addicts. I mean, that is-what they
wanted.
Senator SCHWzExIL So the people that were being offered these
drugs for services rendered were mostly addicts already, is that
correct?
Mr. FLowmS. Everyone that I k'.-w.
Senator Scwwmx= So they really did not have any choice?
Mr. FLOwwx. 
I would say that.
Senator Scuwumxm. They gave you a choice, but you really had
no choice. You had the habit, and the Government was hooking.
Senator KzNmY. Tell me how long you were there at the re-
habilitation center in Lexington?
Mr. Fwwus. I was there for close to 2 years I had a sentence of
2 ears in and 2 years out.
Senator Kwrwy. Tell us a little bit about what you do now, Mr.
Flowers.
Mr. FLowzm. At this particular time I am Assistant Director of
Second Genesis, Incorporated. That is a rehabilitation and reeduca-
tion program for ex-a. licts, people with people problems
70-036 O-- 7- 
17owzm. At this particular time I am Assistant Director of
Second Genesis, Incorporated. That is a rehabilitation and reeduca-
tion program for ex-a. licts, people with people problems
70-036 O-- 7- 
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---ular time I am Assistant Director of
Second Genesis, Incorporated. That is a rehabilitation and reeduca-
tion program for ex-a. licts, people with people problems
70-036 O-- 7- 
17

--- PAGE BREAK ---

252
Senator KZNNDY. You are working in that now?
Mr. Fww&s. I am working. I have been working in that partic-
ular field for close to 10 years now.
Senator KNxmEY. Whereabouts?
Mr. Fww=Us I work in the Alexandria area.
Senator Scnw=KzR. Do you recall how many people were with
you in this program at the time? Would you give us an estimate?
How many people were given the opportunity to get shot up if
they had enough in the bank ?
Mr. FLowwis. Would you rephrase that again ?
Senator SCHWzKER. How many other people that you knew about
were participating?
Mr. FwwzaL 
At that particular time, I would say I knew about
maybe 6 or 7 people who were participating in that particular pro-
gram.
Senator Scnwztxmr 
I can see now why the percentage of cure at
lexington may not have been too high. [Laughter.]
Senator KzNNDY. Dr. Isbell, we are glad to have you here. I
understand that you have been a distinguished researcher for a num-
ber of years in the area of drugs, hallucinogenic drugs, and that you
are probably one of the leading authorities in the 
action on these
particular types of drugs, and that you have done very, very im-
portant and useful work in this area.
I want you to understand that we appreciate your contributions
in drug research and we are not interested at this time in looking
back so much as we are in looking forward to the future.
As I understand it, you now know that in terms of the development
of this program, that it was funded initially by the CIA through
the Navy, through the NIMH, and then to Lexington.
Is that your understanding of the way this program was funded ?
Dr. IsEw.. Yes, sir.
Senator Scmmat. Did you know, Doctor, at the time that it was
a CIA project, or did you believe at that point in time that it was
an Office of Naval Research project?
What was-your understanding then?
Dr. Itswzu. The Office of Naval Research was involved before the
CIA appeared, and that, I think, went from about 1951 to 1953. That
particular thing had to do with synthetic substitutes for codeine.
Codeine is a drag etensively Med f1r trtIMIent of mild coughs
and so on, and so, at this time, there was concern that we might lose
our source of opium and, therefore, a shortage of morphine might
develop. The Department was stockpiling opium, morphium, and
codeine.
So they presented a question to the Drug Addiction Committee of
the National Research Council, asking about the adequacy of syn-
thetic substitues for morphine and edeine.-
Perhaps I am drawing this out too long. In any case, there was
a need to see if additional substitutes for codeine could be supplied.
I was asked if we could step up the testing of these codeine-tyTpe
drugs. I said that it would be difficult because we were already doing
as much as we could.
Senator KxNxxY. As I understand, Doctor, it -was thought that
there might be a shortage of these types of drugs for the military-would be difficult because we were already doing
as much as we could.
Senator KxNxxY. As I understand, Doctor, it -was thought that
there might be a shortage of these types of drugs for the military-

--- PAGE BREAK ---because we were already doing
as much as we could.
Senator KxNxxY. As I understand, Doctor, it -was thought that
there might be a shortage of these types of drugs for the military-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

253
pain killers-and your research, or at least part of your research
was for the development of some alternatives for combat conditions?
Dr. Isai~. For codeine, not only for combat conditions but for
civil defense as well.
Senator KENmN=. 
I think that is an understandable and com-
mendable project or program to try to achieve.
Can you tell us a little bit about this program that was taking
place in Lexington I
Can you tell us what you remember about the safeguards that were
in effect for the protection of human life?
Dr. Issmi. 
The system at Lexington involved, first of all, getting
a general consent.
As was indicated here, some people just heard about the program.
There was no active recruitment.
They would come down and sign this general consent form. Then
their records would be screened for the ordinary things, such as age,
number of times they had been treated, physical, and so on.
Then they were sent over for further screening and for final ap-
proval. Those that were approved then constituted a pool. of idi-
viduals eligible to participate in research. Then, when you had a
project, you would call them in, a number of men, and explain to
them what was going to be done, and then they could accept or reject
it. Also they were free to withdraw.
The safeguards were that they were in the institutional setting,
and that the work was carried out in a special ward with highly
trained observers so that observations were made at periodic in-
tervals.
People were under care, and we had all the facilities for any
emergency that might come up.
In addition to that, the men would be reexamined before they
went on a specific drug, and finally they would become ineligible for
research 6 months before their release. This was to allow time for
rehabilitative treatment which was estimated would require about
41% months.
Senator KNN 
Y. During this period of time, were you in touch
with the CIA people ?
Dr. IswLi. Not prior to 1958, sir.
Senator KENNZDY. But you were in contact with them about the
nature of this research, were you nott
Dr. -sa. Not prior to 1953.
Senator KNNEDY. After that ?
Dr. Isam. 
After that; yes. In 1953, the CIA appeared.
Senator KENNmY. So you knew during this period of time that
this was being indirectly funded by the CIA?
Dr. Isswz. 
Oh, yes.
Senator KNNEDY. To your knowledge, were the participants in
) 
these tests offered hard drugs such as morphine?
Dr. Isiut. Yes; that was the custom in those dayL Up until before
1955.
Senator KENxEDY. Do you think that was justifiable?
Dr. Isazt. Well, it was something that I inherited when I came
to Lexington. It goes back a long way, and this is a situation, of
course, that is very different from the way it is today. The ethical?
Dr. Isazt. Well, it was something that I inherited when I came
to Lexington. It goes back a long way, and this is a situation, of
course, that is very different from the way it is today. The ethical

--- PAGE BREAK ---t was something that I inherited when I came
to Lexington. It goes back a long way, and this is a situation, of
course, that is very different from the way it is today. The ethical

--- PAGE BREAK ---

254
codes were not so highly developed and there was a great need to
know in order to protect the public in assessing the potential use of
narcotics, a need to study these drug and to provide information to
the Drug Addiction Committee, and to make recommendations about
the need for control of these drugs. So it was very necessary, and I
personally think we did a very excellent job.
Senator ScHwairt. Doctor, you said the study was approved, as
I understood it, by a division of the National Security Councilf
Dr. IsBELL I did not hear you, sir.
Senator ScnwxU. 
You said a moment ago- that this study was
approved by what group of the National Security Council ?
Dr. Isnsmi. Not National Security Council, sir.
Senator ScnwzIK. 
What was it?
Dr. Tsea 
. The Drug Addiction Committee of the National Re-
search Council.
Senator SCHwEiKR. Do you know offhand whether the FDA's
National Institute of Mental Health Committee would have approved
it?
What timeframe are we talking about here? What year?
Dr. IsRnEI I think we have been talking in general. I do not think
we have come down on any specific drugs.
After the time that we are talking about, the early 1950's-
Senator ScnwztxzR. My question is how long did this program
go on?
Dr. IssLL. Which one program, sir?
The entire program at the Research Center, or you mean the CIA
timeframe?
Senator Scnw ixKt. The program that the Navy started and the
CIA picked up.
Dr. Isaxii. That went on, as far as addiction-research was con-
cerned, the Navy was involved in 1951-53. From 1953 until 1962.
Senator SCHWEtKZ. 
Until about 1962?
Dr. Isstiu. Yes.
Senator ScJwmtx .
Do you know whether the FDA National
Institute of Mental Health Committee approved the soundness of
the project?
In other words, was that mechanism in your structure or not ?
Dr. Isszui. No; it was not. The FDA regulations came later. I
think they came in the late 1960's.
Senator KEzNmY. Doctor, I want to thank you for your appear-
ance. I think you have really put your finger on the reason for this
kind of legislation. You pointed that it was an entirely different
climate and atmosphere in the period of the 1950'L The cold war
was very real, and so the protection for human subjects was at least,
by today's standards, heavily compromised.
What we ar attempting to do with this legislation is to establish
adequate safeguards for human subjects of experimentation that will
be enduring, no matter what the particular climate or atmosphere
that this country may face in the future.
That is really our objective here. That is why I think the legis-
lation is so necessary.
Sgenaator Son wErE. 
Doctor, you said that you inherited this
practice of trading drugs for people's services. I just wonder whatobjective here. That is why I think the legis-
lation is so necessary.
Sgenaator Son wErE. 
Doctor, you said that you inherited this
practice of trading drugs for people's services. I just wonder what

--- PAGE BREAK ---is why I think the legis-
lation is so necessary.
Sgenaator Son wErE. 
Doctor, you said that you inherited this
practice of trading drugs for people's services. I just wonder what

--- PAGE BREAK ---

255
was the rationale that the people from whom you inherited this pro-
gram gave as to justification for it.
In other words, here we have a drug rehabilitation center where,
hopefully, we send people to get rehabilitated, and just the contrary
is happening. You must have heard some rationale from your prede-
cessors, some reason as to why the purposes were being thwarted.
What was the rationale that they passed on to you ?
Dr. Isna.zL. Well, the overriding consideration of the protection of
the public. They had these new drugs coming in all the time, and
they had to be evaluated to prevent them from getting out in general
use without control.
Senator SCHw tIKm Protection of the public, did you say?
Dr. Isazu. Yes.
Senator ScHwziizR. In what way?
Dr. IsswL. May I give you an example ? Will that be all right ?
Back in the late 1930's or early 1940's, before I came on, the drug
Demerol came on the market. Tis was the first synthetic narcotic.
It could not be controlled by the narcotic laws at that time.
Also, it was said that it was nonaddictive, and it was even adver-
tised as being nonaddictive. So this drug was brought in and eval-
uated and found to have addiction potentialities similar to morphine,
using these methods that I had suggested.
Congress then passed legislation to control this one drug. As time
has gone on, the wisdom, the value of that determination about
Demerol has been well supported.
Senator SCHWZzIt. Perhaps I was not specific enough. I suppose
that what I am trying to find out is, in lieu of paying your testing
subjects money or time, as was mentioned here-to give them some
time off-in lieu of that, what was the rationale for giving them
drugs as opposed to giving them money l
Dr. ISai.LL At that time, sir, in the 1940's, the 1930's, there was
no authority to pay money and, in fact, there was no authority. for
time until somewhere in the 1950's.
Senator ScHwJxz . You certainly did not have authority to give
them drugs, did you?
Dr. Issaj. Sirt
Senator SCHWEIK Z. You said you had no authority to pay them
money.
DiI you have authority to give them drugs?
Dr. Issmi.. It was a different time, sir. If you do not have author-
ity to pay money, you cannot pay them.
Senator Kzvxr. Thank you very much, Dr. Isbell. We appre-
ciate your testimony. And we thank the other witnesses, Mr. Flowers
and Mr. Childs.
Senator Kwrwzry. Our second panel consists of Dr. Frederick
Sidell, who is chief of the Medical Volunteer Office, and Dr. Edward
M. Gunn, who served for 20 years as medical officer with the Central
Intelligence Agency.
Do you swear that the testimony you are about to give will be
the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help you,
Godf
rMe witnesses responded affirmatively.1
Senator KzNmy. We will start with Dr. Sidell.
What is your current position at Edgewood Ihe truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help you,
Godf
rMe witnesses responded affirmatively.1
Senator KzNmy. We will start with Dr. Sidell.
What is your current position at Edgewood I

--- PAGE BREAK ---truth and nothing but the truth, so help you,
Godf
rMe witnesses responded affirmatively.1
Senator KzNmy. We will start with Dr. Sidell.
What is your current position at Edgewood I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

256
STATEMENT 0 DR. FREDERICK SIDZLL, CHIEF, MEDICAL VOLUN-
TEER 07CE, EDGEWOOD ARMAL, 
D., AND DR. ZDWARD N.
GuIM, HILTON HEAD, S.C.; A PAUIL
Dr. SWzLL. I am chief of the Medical Volunteer Office.
Senator KENNEDY. How long have you held that position ?
Dr. SmzLi. About a month.
Senator -KNNZDY. Prior to that time, were you familiar with the
nature of human drug testing at Edgewood I
Dr. Smzut. I am sorry, sir?
Senator KENNEDY. Prior to the time you were named chief of the
Medical Volunteer Office, were you aware of the human testing that
was going on at Edgewood?
Dr. Szu1. Yes, sir.
Senator KENNEDY. You are clearly a key person in the clinical
testing program at Edgewood. The Inspector General is doing a
thorough evaluation of the testing at Fdgewood.
Has he been in contact with you?
Dr. SwzL. No, sir.
Senator KENEY. Does that seem strange to you?
Dr. Smzu . I am not sure what the Inspector General is investi-
gating. I was aware that he was investigating a time a number of
years ago before I came, so in that context it is not surprising, no.
SenatorK.NNEDY. Sometime ago, when we had Dr.-
Dr. Smetu. Dr. Sim?
Senator KENNEDY. Dr. Sim, yes, sir.
We asked Dr. Sim, also the Army, and they indicated in their
followup that they were going to be in touch and follow up on this.
At the time the testing stopped, in July, was it stopped abruptly ?
Dr. Smyu. 
Very abruptly, sir.
Senator KENNEDY. Would you describe that?
Dr. Sw.. We had volunteers. We were not doing drug studies
at the time. We were doing some other types of work. I came to
work the morning-that I saw in the Washington Post that the volun-
teers had been sent home. This was at 7:30.
At 8 o'clock, the volunteers walked into the building. I thought
that they had been sent home. We were kind of joking about it.
Fifteen minutes later, we had word that the volunteers were to
leave the Post by 4.0 that day. We had no choice in the matter.
Their morale was completely disrupted by that.
Senator KENNEDY. Did you understand the reasons for that?
Dr. Szmw. No, sir.
Senator XKNN 
Y. Did anybody ever tell you?
Dr. Swzxu. Not precisely, other than it was an investigation under-
way. They did not want Volunteers around. They wanted to stop the
program during the investigation.
Senator KENNEDY. Had any of them been taking drugs or been the
subject of experimentation prior to the time they had been sent
home
Dr. Smwz. 
Not drug experimentation.
Senator KENNEDY. Any other experimentation ?
Dr. Smzu. Yes. We were doing things like facial measurementsexperimentation prior to the time they had been sent
home
Dr. Smwz. 
Not drug experimentation.
Senator KENNEDY. Any other experimentation ?
Dr. Smzu. Yes. We were doing things like facial measurements

--- PAGE BREAK ---r to the time they had been sent
home
Dr. Smwz. 
Not drug experimentation.
Senator KENNEDY. Any other experimentation ?
Dr. Smzu. Yes. We were doing things like facial measurements

--- PAGE BREAK ---

257
for masks We were drawing blood for enzyme studies We were
doing some psychological testing
Senator KENNY. What has happened since ?
Dr. Swzm. We have had no volunteer program since.
Senator Kpxmwy. As I understand from previous testimony, you
were working on drugs that would be absorbed through the skin to
produce significant hallucinogenic effects. Is that true t
Dr. Smwt. From time to time, we have worked on such drugs. I
personally have not, but some of us have, yes.
Senator KNNDY. Were you supervising that work or were you
familiar with it?
Dr. Smwz. 
Not directly. I was very aware of it. Some of my
staff was working on it.
Senator KmNMT. What sort of things were they doing?
Dr. Sumat. There was a series of compounds, anticholinigenics,
which would be absorbed through the skin.
Senator KZNx 
Y. Could they be ?
Dr. Srzuj. Several of them, yes.
Senator Kzwmur. When they were absorbed through the skin,
did they give the kind of effect you just described?
Dr. Smwmxr. Yes, sir.
Senator KzNm4D. Did you -communicate the results of this to
the White House?
Dr. SmiLL. I do not think directly, no, not particularly that they
were absorbing them through the skin, no.
Senator KEN zDY. Do you know from your own knowledge
whether the White House was briefed on this kind of program?!
Dr. SrzuE. Yes, sir.
Senator KZNNU 
. You know about a briefing?
Dr. Srozu . I know that the medical staff of the White House was
briefed on this.
Senator KzNN=Y. Do you-know for what purpose they were
briefed ?
Dr. SmuT.. We were told it was in the interest of protecting and
preventing or treating, if this type of material were to be used in
the White House on some of the staff, and that is why the medical
people were here.
Senator KZNNEDY. Do you know if any nonmedical people at the
White House were briefed?
Dr. St)zui. No, I do not, sir.
Senator KNmwy. Was the CIA interested in the testing of these
drugs, that they could be absorbed through the skin?
Dr. Sw u . I have had contact with a man that I was told was
from CIA several times. I had not talked with him in any great
detail about any of the tests.
Senator KzNEY. Would you say from your own conversation, as
limited as it was, that he was familiar with the work that was being
done?
Dr. Smaj. I would sy that he kept pretty close watch, yes. He
seemed to be interested in it.
Senator KENxUY. Did you have a conservation with Dr. Sim
about whether the CIA wanted to fund some research in this area?
Dr. Swztu Yes, sir.pretty close watch, yes. He
seemed to be interested in it.
Senator KENxUY. Did you have a conservation with Dr. Sim
about whether the CIA wanted to fund some research in this area?
Dr. Swztu Yes, sir.

--- PAGE BREAK ---yes. He
seemed to be interested in it.
Senator KENxUY. Did you have a conservation with Dr. Sim
about whether the CIA wanted to fund some research in this area?
Dr. Swztu Yes, sir.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

258
Senator KENmY. Can you tell us about that conversation, sir?1
Dr. SIDEL. This was, I think, about 2 or 3 years ago. Dr. Sim told
another physician and myself who had supervisory positions that
there might be some money forthcoming to study one of these com-
pounds, specifically its ability to go through the skin.
This type test was not out of line with work that we had done
many times before.
Senator KENEmDY. What happens if an individual is exposed to
this kind of drug, the drug that is absorbed through the skint
What happens?
Dr. SwzLi. The best word to describe it is delirium. They become
disoriented, incoherent. They mumble. They are very confused and
so on.
Senator KENNEDY. Dr. Gunn, were you ever employed by the CIA ?
Dr. GUNN. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Senator KENNEDY. Can you tell us when and in what capacity t
Dr. GUNN. My employment began in May 1955--and I retired, I
think it was in May 1971.
Senator KENNDY. During that time, did you become aware of
human-use experimentation activities conducted by the Technical
Services Division of the CIA headed by Sidney Gottlieb?
Dr. GUNN. During that entire period, did I ever become aware?
Senator KzNNDY. Yes.
Dr. GUNN. Indirectly only.
Senator KENmmY. How did you become aware?
Dr. GUNN. I believe it was through meetings that would have been
conducted by security people, security office personnel and medical
office personnel, and Dr. Gottlieb's predecessor, his office anyway,
years before.
There would be references made to some, but I never knew of a
direct program for it, for the drugs.
Senator KENNEDY. Did you attempt to develop some input from
your office and TSS. Dr. Gottlieb's office with regard to the protection
of human subjects in this research?
Dr. GUNN. I would say that our interest from the medical office
was broader than that. In other words, we were responsible for
medical activities dealing with employees, personnel and operators,
and so we would annually regularly try to re-establish a type of
working relationship that allowed some direct input on such subjects.
As I believe I mentioned before, the results would be described,
as we hear so often today, the meeting was "useful," but in terms
of productivity-
Senator KENNEY. In terms of what?
Dr. GUNN. But for productivity, there was not anything to be
realized from one meeting to the next. Promises and teasing, but we
had no active direction over their program.
Senator KENNEDY. Let me see if I understand you correctly in
terms of your response.
Are you saying that you had some awareness that there was at
least some research being done in the area of human experimentation.
As I understand, you had some tneetings with Dr. Gottlieb's office
to try to insure that there was going to be some protection for the
human subjects of research.in the area of human experimentation.
As I understand, you had some tneetings with Dr. Gottlieb's office
to try to insure that there was going to be some protection for the
human subjects of research.

--- PAGE BREAK ---experimentation.
As I understand, you had some tneetings with Dr. Gottlieb's office
to try to insure that there was going to be some protection for the
human subjects of research.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

259
Dr. GUN. Right.
Senator KZwNEaD. 
Do I understand you correctly?
Dr. GUNN. From 1955 to approximately 1959 or 1960, there was at
least once a year a meeting that was held with the head of that
office. But we never saw more than some very general outline that
there was such a research program. We never saw the direct material
fora poram.
We ad offed to assist TSD by providing medical support and
guidance, but it was "thank you very much."
Senator KENNEDY. Were you satisfied that Dr. Gottlieb's group
was adequately protecting its subjects ?
Dr. GUNN. From the standpoint of the Office of Medical Services,
we could not, no, because we aid not know what they were doing.
Senator KENNEDY. They did not tell you what they were doing?
Dr. GUNN. I never heard of an outlying program, no.
Senator KENNEDY. But you tried at least to raise this issue with
them, did you not?
Dr. GUNN. That is correct.
Senator KENNEDY. Why did you want to raise this with them ?
Dr. GuNN. Because we felt that we had an obligation medical-
wise to the proper protection of people under medical jurisdiction
within the agency. That was all.
Senator KENNEDY. You were unsuccessful in convincing them of
this?
Dr. GUNN. I feel that was the case.
Senator KENNEDY. Did Howard Hunt or Gordon Liddy ever meet
with you and ask you to assist them in obtaining a new hallucino-
genic drug?
Dr. GUNN. I was called prior to March 24,1972, by Howard Hunt,
who asked if I would join him for lunch.
Senator KENNEDY. Did you?
Dr. GiN. I met him, at his request, at the Hay Adams House
in the downstairs coffee shop or restaurant.
At that time, he introduced me to an individual with the name
Gordon Liddy. I had never met Gordon Liddy before. Since I do
not accept as valid names given me under such circumstances until
I can prove it, I waited until I saw other material in the newspapers
later, then I was sure of who he was.
At that time I was asked if I could help them provide behavior
altering medication to an individual, unidentified, and in no way
could I detect of whom they were speaking. I said I could not.I
had retired in 1971. I had not practiced any medicine since 1971. I
had no access to any kind of medicines.
So I did not provide it. The luncheon was completed and I did
not have anything more to do with them.
Senator KtEWNzDY. Did they say they were working for the White
House?
Dr. GuN. They did not put it that they worked for the White
House, and they did not say for whom they were workin
Hunt said that he had an office in a part of the White HRous
Senator KENNEDY. What did you assume when he said that?
Dr. Gum. I had never worked with him on a one-to-one basis,
and I knew he was a good fiction writer.
[Laughter.]ce in a part of the White HRous
Senator KENNEDY. What did you assume when he said that?
Dr. Gum. I had never worked with him on a one-to-one basis,
and I knew he was a good fiction writer.
[Laughter.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---White HRous
Senator KENNEDY. What did you assume when he said that?
Dr. Gum. I had never worked with him on a one-to-one basis,
and I knew he was a good fiction writer.
[Laughter.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

260
So I could not tell for whom he was working.
Senator Scnwzmrm. Did you have a _feeling he was writing a
novel then?
Dr. OGuw. 
I did not know what he was up to, Senator.
Senator Kwwuwr. What kind of drug did he want?
Dr. GUNN. He wanted LSD type drug, as I understand it.
Senator KzNzN 
Y. The kind that could be absorbed through the
skin?
Dr. GUNN. He was not specific at the time.
I pointed out that it was very difficult to walk up to a target and
drop anything into his water glass, and particularly if he was not
a friend of the target, and people do not receive you well under
those conditions.
Then he wanted to know could it be absorbed elsewise through the
body and I said there was some work done of that nature but that
I did not know enough about it to be of any help to him.
Senator KNxzrY. That was the kind of drug he wanted ?
Dr. GUNN. I guess.
Senator KzN=EY. That was the first and only conversation or
contact that you had with either Hunt or Liddy?
Dr. GUNN. I had one other conversation later by phone with Mr.
Hunt. He called during the morning when I was doing my vacuum
cleaning. I have become a house spouse in retirement, and in the
process of that telephone call, he needed surgical assistance and a
tetanus shot for a hand injury on someone.
Now, this was referred by me to the Georgetown University-Hos-
pital emergency room because I was not practicing medicine. I did
not have the necessary things nor proper medical environment.
This would have been a month, I would say, a month to six weeks
after the March 24 visit with him.
-, 
Those, then, are the two contacts that I had with him.
Senator KzNmFy. Why did you go to lunch with Mr. Hunt in
the first place?
Did you know Hunt before?
Dr. GUN. I knew his name and I knew where he had worked in
the agency, and I had no reason at that time to believe that there
was anything abnormal, because I have advised people in terms of
occupational medicine for years, and I thought possibly there was
something I could help them with.
Senator KzxNNT. You had no idea when you went to lunch what
the purpose of the discussion was going to be ?
Dr. Gmm. No, sir.
Senator KwNwir. Were you surprised when he brought this upt
Dr. Guxx. Yes, sir.
Senator KNNmwy. When he brought this up, what did you assume
was going to be the purpose of thi request?
Dr. GNX. I thought he wanted to make someone behave pecu-
liarly in a public situation.
Senator KzNmXY. Did you have any idea who?
Dr. GUNr. No, sir.
Senator KENNEr. If this drug had been applied to somebody in a
public situation, would that person have behaved irrationally I
Dr. GUNN. I do not know.Y. Did you have any idea who?
Dr. GUNr. No, sir.
Senator KENNEr. If this drug had been applied to somebody in a
public situation, would that person have behaved irrationally I
Dr. GUNN. I do not know.

--- PAGE BREAK ---idea who?
Dr. GUNr. No, sir.
Senator KENNEr. If this drug had been applied to somebody in a
public situation, would that person have behaved irrationally I
Dr. GUNN. I do not know.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

261
Senator Kzwm~m. 
What do you think, Dr. Sidell I
Dr. Smriu. It depends on what drug.
Senator KENNzDY. The drug that we were talking about, I.85I.
The skin-
Dr. Smrna. I do not believe--and I am not absolutely certain of
this-LSD can be absorbed too well through the skin. But I am not
sure.
Senator KziNwrw. How about the drug that we talked about be-
fore, the drug that is absorbed through the skin!
Dr. SmDLL. Oh, with me?
Other types of drugs can be absorbed through the skin.
It might be a period of hours before it took effect.
Senator ScmwzrKmz 
Doctor, in your conversation with Mr. Hunt,
did he specifically ask the question about whether a drug-,any drug
--could be utilized, by being placed on the steering wheel of a car
and absorbed through the sfint Was that specifically discussed
Dr. GUNN. I would be dishonest if I said that he did or he did
not. I can't recall the steering wheel part. That question has been
asked me before by some of your people, but I cannot remember for
sure.
Senator ScHW IKER. In Dr. Gottlieb's program, do you know
whether he prescreened the persons who were tested with drugs?
In other words, in the prograni that Dr. Gottlieb was running, to
your knowledge, did they prescreen the people who ultimately were
the subjects of the drug tests?
Dr. GUNN. That would presume that I knew their program, sir.
I did not.
In some other programs, they did have some physicians--one or
two physicians of their own staff in one era-and they did use some
outstanding physicians as consultants during other periods of time,
but I do not know whether they used screening techniques on the
subjects for tests.
Senator Scnwmuxa. When you were working with the agency,
would people come and seek your advice or consult with you about
similar situations ?
Was that a part of your job with the agency I.
Dr. GUNN. In part, that would be true, yes, sir.
Senator ScmrxzxL Do you know what the situation was as far
as the office of medical services was concerned, as to why they were
kept in the dark about the details of this program ?
Dr. GuWN. It would have to be conjecture, sir, and I cannot give
a specific reason -why.
Senator 
nwmnzR. Since you are an expert in the field, what is
your conjecture?
Dr. GUNN. Some people like to be able to have a coup in their own
area of research when there might be opportunity to share it. It
would be better to make it available afterwards. Or they could have
had some question about what they were doing because the medical
officers might well have disapproved of their approach.
But I do not know why.
Senator Kzxmiy. Do you know of any other situation similar
to the Olson case ?
Dr. GUNN. By happenstance, as I walked into a meeting-thewell have disapproved of their approach.
But I do not know why.
Senator Kzxmiy. Do you know of any other situation similar
to the Olson case ?
Dr. GUNN. By happenstance, as I walked into a meeting-the

--- PAGE BREAK ---d of their approach.
But I do not know why.
Senator Kzxmiy. Do you know of any other situation similar
to the Olson case ?
Dr. GUNN. By happenstance, as I walked into a meeting-the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

262
details of membership of that meeting I cannot say-I can say it
was in one of the old buildings down by the Reflecting Pool-there
was a conversation, which stopped shortly after I entered the room,
by a couple of men which indicated to me that they had trouble with
an individual in conjunction with a foreign government.
This was in a foreign country; the subject was an individual
known to that foreign government; indigenous authorities in col-
laboration with our people, had administered some medication to
the subject and that, sall we say, had a fatal outcome.
That is the only other case I have any awareness of.
Senator KENNEDY. You learned that casually?
Dr. GUNN. Yes, sir, casually.
Senator BWALL. Dr. Sidell, you testified you have been in charge
at Edgewood just for a month or so, is that right?
Dr. SF.J. No, sir, I am not in charge. I report to the director
of the laboratory.
I have had my present job title for a month.
Senator BEALu. 
You have been there for a number of years?
Dr. SzDL. 
A number of years.
Senator BAuLL. In that period of time, was there a close relation-
ship between Edgewood and Fort Dietrich?
Dr. SWELL. Not in our area of work, no, sir. In fact, I have never
been at Dietrich. I have never met anybody from Dietrich who did
the same work.
Senator BEALL. And you are not familiar with the human testing
program at Fort Dietrich ?
Dr. Swzuj. 
I know they have one. I have been told it is run out
of the Office of the Surgeon General through Walter Reed. This is
what I have been told. That is about the extent.
I know a little about what they have done in the past about devel-
oping vaccines and various things.
Senator BFLL. But you are not aware of the way in which they
recruit, the details of the planning, et cetera?
Dr. Smzuj. No, sir.
Senator BwJm. Thank you.
Senator ScEwEIE. 
Dr. Gunn, was it usual to run operations in-
volving medical risks without consulting your office, the Office of
Medical Services ?
In other words, you mentioned a few cases where either they by-
passed it or restricted it, or did not accept it.
Dr. GUNN. The differentiation between research and operations is
an important one.
Are you differentiating between the two ?
Senator Scnwxm. Iam sorry. I probably should have phrased
it using research. Let me rephrase the question.
Was it usual to run a research project which involved medical
risks without consulting the Office of Medical Services or ignoring
the advice of the Office of Medical Services?
Dr. GU W. At least I would say probably without the knowledge
of the Office of Medical Services. It is possible that my former su-
perior might have known of some tests, work like this, that I did not
ow about, but not to my knowledge was it the usual thing.dge
of the Office of Medical Services. It is possible that my former su-
perior might have known of some tests, work like this, that I did not
ow about, but not to my knowledge was it the usual thing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Medical Services. It is possible that my former su-
perior might have known of some tests, work like this, that I did not
ow about, but not to my knowledge was it the usual thing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

263
In other words, they did not come and ask us routinely. That is
what you asked me, Ibelieve, sir.
Senator SCRWFjKZR When tests were conducted on unwitting
subjects, was that what you are defining as research or as operational
Dr. Guxi. We would not do any program testing in operations.
In operations we had to act using proven experience facts. There is
a distinct difference.
We did not engage in research from a medical standpoint. In
medical operations we would not engage in research, we applied
published clinical medicine and practice. We were interested, only,
in overseas foreign activities. The research was done by other offices
such as the one you have made mention.
I believe there was true scientific work done in another whole
department of the agency, but that was done under very good
academic circumstances from my point of view.
Senator SCHwzaKr. 
Docto!', earlier when you answered another
question, you used the word,-as I recall, "target" in referring to the
possible recipient of the drug that Howard Hunt and Gordon Liddy
were discussin with you.
Dr. GUNN. fe'.
Senator Scywzxz. I wonder if you would explain that word, as
to what "target" means?
Dr. GUNN. Target can mean the objective or the individual or the
aim or what you are trying to achieve.
Senator ScJiwvKm Would that necessarily be different from a
person who was used in a test, that is, a person who was used as a
subject for testing for research purposes?
You are differentiating, are you, by using that word, "subject" as
opposed to someone who was the object of a specific action who would
be a "target"?
Dr. GuNK. Yes, sir.
Senator SCHWFIKER. Is that the context in which you use the
word?
Dr. Gu N. Yes, sir. 
-
Senator Sciwnm-. So it would appear to you, as I gather from
your conversation, that it was a serious discussion directed against
one specific individual for a specific purpose?
Dr. GUNN. Yes, sir, that was my understanding, but I did not
know who the individual was.
Senator SwmwE 
. On the covert side, on the covert testing pro-
gram-the testing I am talking about now-it was compartmentalized
with your office excluded, and obviously that led to some of the
tra 
ies we are now hearing about because your office w" excluded.
I am just wondering as guidance to this committee and the other
committee on which fserve-Intelligence--can you suggest how we
might ,Avoid these pitfalls in the future. Is it a matter of non-com-
partmentalization or different lines of authority?
In your experience, what can we do to see that some of these
things do not happen without medical advice and consultation and
followup for recipients of the tests?
Dr. GuWN. First, I think it *ould be pretty presumptious for me
to "y it might not have happened, we would hope it would not have
happened.e and consultation and
followup for recipients of the tests?
Dr. GuWN. First, I think it *ould be pretty presumptious for me
to "y it might not have happened, we would hope it would not have
happened.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd
followup for recipients of the tests?
Dr. GuWN. First, I think it *ould be pretty presumptious for me
to "y it might not have happened, we would hope it would not have
happened.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

264
Senator Scnwzzus. I would agree with that fully.
Dr. Gu i. 
In order to hopefUy have better control, I think that
you do have to have medical people who are, let us say, not com-
pletely wrapped up in the outcome of the testing, who are, however,
a party to setting the stage and the parameters of who is being
tested and what condition they are in before and what condition
they are in afterwards.
They should know all about it, but they should not be, in any
way, dedicated to having that necessarily come out as a guaranteed
succesL
In other words, to look at it purely as to how does it come ? Does
it work ? Does it not work ? The ill effects.
Do you follow me I
Senator SCHWZKUZ. I think that is very good advice and I think
that is very badly needed. I think from this and our other hearings
as well, that the person making the-decision about the project was
also the one who had the most to gain or lose from the project, which
is a peitou-made a minute ago.
Are you saying we very strongly need some objective source whose
ego is not involved with the project's success or failure, but who can
rive an honest appraisal and competent advice to someone who,
hopefully, will listen to it?
Dr. Guxw. Yes, sir.
Dr. SMELT. Senator, may I make a slight correction to the ques-
tion Senator Beall asked me?
We did have one set of dealings before with Dietrich in that they
used some of our volunteers occasionally for testing of protective
equipment. Our volunteers would go there for mask testing and so
forth, but not with the medical program.
-senator 
KENNEDY. Thank you very much.
Our third panel this morning consists of representatives from the
Central Intelligence Agency, Mr. Carl Duckett, Deputy Director for
Science and Technology; Dr,. Sayre Stevens, Assistant Deputy Di-
rector for Science and Technology; Mr. George Cary, Legislative
Counsel; and Mr. Robert Chin, Associate Legislative Counsel.
Do you swear that the testimony you are about to give will be
the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth?
fThe witnesses-responded affirmatively.]
Senator KENNEDY. Proceed, Mr. Duckett.
13TATEXENT OF CARL E. DUCKETT, DEPUTY DIRECTOR; DR. SAYRE
STEVES, ASSOCIATE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, SCIENCE AND TECH-
NOLOGY; GEORGE L CART, LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL; AND ROBERT
CHIN, ASSOCIATE LEGISLATIVE COURNL; A PANEL FROX THE
CENTRAL INTELLIGNCE AGENCY
Mr. Duc~xrr. Thank you very much, sir.
I would like to address briefly, if I may, because of your opening
remarks, the matter of documents, since I would not like there to be
any misunderstanding on that question.
First, there might have been an lmp ression that we failed to pro-
vide documents to the Committee i believe that we have indeednce I would not like there to be
any misunderstanding on that question.
First, there might have been an lmp ression that we failed to pro-
vide documents to the Committee i believe that we have indeed

--- PAGE BREAK ---there to be
any misunderstanding on that question.
First, there might have been an lmp ression that we failed to pro-
vide documents to the Committee i believe that we have indeed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

265
provided all the documents available on the subject to the staff and
to the Committee.
The issue was rather whether these documents should be made
public. I would like to make that distinction.
Second, I would like to assure the Chairman of the Committee
that certainly the criterion for disagreeing on production of docu-
ments has nothing to do with embarrassment. We admit some of
the activities, that have already been revealed are embarrassing, but
that is not the criterion in the selection of documents for publication.
If I may, sir, I would like to read the status of the documents
issued.
Senator KENNmU 
. This is on the documents
Mr. DucKrr. Yes. I would like to make a very brief statement.
As you know, for several days, our agency representatives have
been meeting with your Committee staff, providing them with in-
formation and classiled documents which they thought were perti-
nent to your inquiry this morning.
I understand you also personally have read at least some of them.
The staff subsequently asked that we review certain of these docu-
ments or parts thereof to determine whether they might be made
public in this hearing. A number of the documents or parts thereof
we feel are, in fact, inappropriate for publication.
Our Director, Mr. Colby, has instructed me to advise the Subcom-
mittee that several of these documents may not be released. Some
of the documents pertain to matters which are currently under
active consideration by the Department of Justice. Others contain
recommendations and advice from the Inspector General to our
Director.
The Director believes that the future candor and integrity with
which the Inspector General may carry out his responsibilities to
the Director would be severely jeopardized if this type of communi-
cation would be made public.
We feel, in other words, that making these Inspector General
reports public would have a chilling effect on the candor with which
employees might communicate with the Inspector General.
In any event, most of the facts contained in the reports are in-
cluded in my prepared statement, or the prepared statement of Dr.
Stevens.
Further, we will be glad to work with the staff to assure that the
factual information contained in these reports will be made available
for release in another forum.
The other category of documents is under active investigation by
the Department of Justice. They have asked that we not make them
public.
That concludes my statement relative to the documents, Mr. Chair-
man.
Senator KENNEDY. Let me just at the outset indicate that I have
not, nor would I, personally declassify any materials that were
given to me or to the cleared members of the staff.
I would certainly say that a number of specific matters were par-
ticularly troublesome to me because they were classified and it
would have required determination as to the way we were going to
proceed.ould certainly say that a number of specific matters were par-
ticularly troublesome to me because they were classified and it
would have required determination as to the way we were going to
proceed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---266
I have indicated on two different occasions in direct conversation
with Director Colby that I thought the position which had been
assumed by the Agency, quite frankly, was untenable and I failed,
from my understanding of the material, to comprehend why the
Agey was reluctant to release the material.

Al we were interested in was just the area of human-use experi-
mentation and the protection of human subjects.

Now, it is just
incredible tome that the Agency would be reluctant to make avail-
able information on this subject going back over a period of years.

I want to indicate-and the record will s show this morning, and
I will let the record stand--that the Agency gave me one response
in terms of the questions that I directed to the Agency, and that you
had a second response that we were going to be able to release, and
then finally this morning you have indicated that as far as you are
concerned, certain material was going to be declamified.

I will let the record stand, as to whether the response that was
given by the Agency is a fair or accurate portrayal of what the real
situation was.

I think there is a significant inconsistency between these documents,
but I will just let the record stand.

I want to let the record show that the amount of time and effort
and energy that has been consumed by the staff in trying to work
out procedures so that we could gain this information that was
finally made available to us two minute before the opening of this
Committee is not what I would consider to be the kind of open
cooperation with a Congressional Committee that is limited only in
its interest in human experimentation, and the protection of human
sub*ects.

We ar not trying to supplant the Select Committee on Intelli-
gence.

We are interested in a very limited and targeted area.--- PAGE BREAK ---

We ar not trying to supplant the Select Committee on Intelli-
gence. We are interested in a very limited and targeted area. I am
going to let you say whatever you want to say, and add or subtract
from anything that you want, but I think any fair-minded person
would see that the responses you gave to the questions, what you
were going to let us refer to in terms of declassification and what
was declassified by you only this morning, are different descriptions of
the same subject matter, and the public can make a judgment as
to thXe 
gree of candor. But I do feel that I am completely within my rights in comment-
ing on the extraordinary difficulties that we have faced over a
period of time in gaining information. We asked about the Olson case on this particular matter. We wrote
to the Director of the Agency. He said, "We cannot-cooperate with
you because we are cooperation with the Select Committee on Intelli-
gence," as if that precluded legislative inquiry, and prohibited the
Agency from cooperating with us. So Talked to Senator Church and said, "Is there any reason you
cannot?"
The answer was, "Abolufely not."
We communicated with the Agency. Then, rather than cooperating
and giving us the information, the Agency, for the second time,
wrote to the Select Committee on Intelligence and said, "You are
going to have to make this information available so that we do not
have to duplicate it."

--- PAGE BREAK ---ncy, for the second time,
wrote to the Select Committee on Intelligence and said, "You are
going to have to make this information available so that we do not
have to duplicate it."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

267
So then I had to go back to Senator Church and ask, "Will you
write the Agency to try to make it possible for it to cooperate with
us directly P'
That must have taken a two-week period. Quite frankly, we have
a good many other things to do up here. 
t 
t
Mr. Duca=T. Mr. Chairman, Ithink I should respond that that
is part of the problem we ran into. We also find ourselves with a
great deal more to do.
We are facing many Committees, continuous investigations. It is
not possible to have a staff knowledgeable in this area dealing with
two or three staffs simultaneously and doing a proper job.
That was our concern and it remains our concern.
As to the delivery of the documents this morning, I think that
showed not lack of good faith but showed good faith, that we are
continuing and still will continue to do all possible to get this in-
formation public. That was another example of that this morning,
but I say the Director has not closed the issue on this, Mr. Chairman.
He has been, as you know, constantly testifying for the last several
weeks. I spent a very few minutes with him last evening. I had only
an opportunity to make a very brief-query as to this matter.
I certainly would hope the Chairman would not assume the issue
is closed-it certainly is not from my point of view.
Senator ScHwEikER. 
Mr. Duckett, you said one of the reasons you
are concerned about releasing this material is it would have a chilling
effect on people talking to your Inspector General in the future.
Mr. DucK-Tr. Yes, sir.
Senator SCHWZEKZR. I understand, but I wonder if releasing this
material, which does not relate to national security, or sources that
the CIA needs for the future, to the public would not also have a
more compelling, chilling effect on people doing this kind of thing
again?
Have you considered that factor as offsetting the first factor that
you mentioned I
It seems to me first there was an arrangement between the FBI and
the CIA for X period of time.
The FBI would not prosecute in this area; the CIA would clean
its own house.
Mr. DucKErrr. Senator Schweiker, I believe it was with the De-
partment of Justice rather than the FBI.
Senator SCHWEIMM. Now you are saying in essence the Inipector
General's report cannot be made public because it would have a
chilling effect, yet if you have an arrangement whereby prosecutions
cannot occur, and prosecutions cannot occur within the CIA itself,
what other resource, what other slap on the wrist, is there?
Mr. Dvczirr. Senator Schweiker, I indicated that the Depart-
ment of Justice is currently, in fact, conducting an investigation as
to the destruction of documents, and that is the reason that at the
request of the Department of Justice, we asked you not to make it
pulic, because it would interfere with that investigation that is
going on right now.
e do not any longer have any such agreement.
Senator S 
They are investigating the destruction of
70-026 0 - 76 - 18lic, because it would interfere with that investigation that is
going on right now.
e do not any longer have any such agreement.
Senator S 
They are investigating the destruction of
70-026 0 - 76 - 18

--- PAGE BREAK ---d interfere with that investigation that is
going on right now.
e do not any longer have any such agreement.
Senator S 
They are investigating the destruction of
70-026 0 - 76 - 18

--- PAGE BREAK ---

268
documents, but not malfeasance and the other things that occurred
in the time frame that we are talking about.
Mr. Ducxwr. Senator Schweiker, all of this material has been
presented to the Department of Justice. Whether they choose to
prosecute is their decision, not mine.
Senator Scuwzmz 
But the statute of limitations has run out
on virtually all these things we are talking about.
Mr. Ducwxrr. There is no agreement at the moment that has any-
thing to do with lack of either investigation or prosecution of our
employees with Justice.
That is no longer an agreement.
Senator Scin 
u Yes, but to get back to my point onmostof
these experimental situations,-the statute of limitations has long
since expired, and so, forgetting the destruction of records, the only
thing that this Committee is interested in are these experiments, and
how they were done and whether there was protection, so we really
have no mechanism at all to indicate there was some kind of di.-
approval and some kind of dissatisfaction.
The only recourse we have is to publicize it.
Mr. Ducxzxr. I am not denying it at all.
I pointed out, and would like to reiterate, we believe the substance
of Xh material about which you are questioning is indeed available
to be made public.
There is the question of some specific documents in their present
form.
I might note that much of the information which has been devel-
oped before these Special Investigative Committees has been devel-
oped because we learned of our past mistakes through our own
investigations.
I want to stress the fact that if we do not have an IG to whom
people will talk candidly, we will not in the future be able to get
the same response.
Senator Scawu~uw. I will concede that Point, and I think the
agency at that point is to be complimented for it, but I still think
we have a larger problem than just that.
But that is a matter of opinion.
Mr. Ducxwrr. Senator Schweiker, and Mr. Chairman, I would like
to proceed.
Again, I reassure you we have not closed the door on this issue. I
am not apologizig for the Director. He has been very much pre-
occupied of late. le has not given his final judgment. He has 
tten
some advice from his staff on the subject, but I hope we will not
consider this as something interferring with today's proceedings.
We will try to be as forthcoming as we can.
Senator Kmimmy. The Inspector General's report consists of some
26 pages
All we are interested in is a page and a half or possibly 2 pages.
Mr. Ducxurr. Senator Kennedy, what we had wanted to urge to
the Committee, if I may, is not that that information not be made
public, but it not be identified as having been extracted from an 1G
rep An CIA.
That is the point we are trying to make.
Senator KzmwmY. Of course, there have been other times whenmation not be made
public, but it not be identified as having been extracted from an 1G
rep An CIA.
That is the point we are trying to make.
Senator KzmwmY. Of course, there have been other times when

--- PAGE BREAK ---ublic, but it not be identified as having been extracted from an 1G
rep An CIA.
That is the point we are trying to make.
Senator KzmwmY. Of course, there have been other times when

--- PAGE BREAK ---

269
Inspector General reports have been-at least on three or four occa-
sions--made public, as I understand.
Mr. Ducxw'rr. We had heard some information on that subject as
we arrived this morning, and I must confess I cannot give you an
accurate answer to that matter.
Senator Krxmwr. Let us get on with the hearing.
Mr. Ducxzr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to
discuss that.
Mr. Chairman, as we now move into the substance of our testi-
mony, we are pleased to be provided this opportunity to testify in
connection with S. 2515, a bill to amend the Public Health Service
Act to establish the President's Commission for the protection of
human subjects involved in biomedical and behavioral research, and
for other purposes.
We share your concern over the ethical dilemma raised by human
experimentation and support the underlying objectives of the legis-
lation--to assure an interdisciplinary approach to resolving the
problem, and to assure that informed consent exists and there is
adequate protection of the individuals involved.
Later on, we intend to summarize the past agency activities in
this field. While there is no desire on our part to excuse any such
activities which may have violated the important premises upon
which your bill rests, Mr. Chairman, I do, however, want to make it
clear that for some time it has been our policy that informed con-
sent be obtained and adequate protection provided for individuals
involved in biomedical and behavioral activities which-e sponsor.
For this reason, we have absolutely no objection whatsoever to
subjecting agency activities in this field to this legislation, nor do
we have any problem in providing the Commission established under
your bill with appropriate access to information relating to our
activities and, of course, we will adhere to whatever guidelines are
issued by the Commission.
Senator Kmmwy. Do I understand yoU support the bill then?
Mr. Duczrrr. I would like to say this, Mr. Chairman: I am not
myself competent in the field of making judgment as to the precise
details of the bill in the area.
I would not like, therefore, to put myself in a position to try to
advise in that sense, in the sense that I would protect this type of
activity-
Senator KzmmTr. 
You have general counsel.
I know you have some Suggestions. I have read your testimony.
But do you have general counsel there.
Do you supported legislation with these changes made?
Mr. CAxy. Mr. Chairman, our view is that we have a very small
part of the overall picture and, as far as we are concerned, we can
comply with the provisions of the bill.
We would defer to those departments and agencies more directly
concerned with the major aspects of the bill.
Senator Kzwmvr. But as it relates to your agency ?
Mr. CAR. We can comply with the bill, with some of the sugges-
tions we have made for some minor chan ges.
- Senator KzN 
Twy. 
Let me ask for a third time.Kzwmvr. But as it relates to your agency ?
Mr. CAR. We can comply with the bill, with some of the sugges-
tions we have made for some minor chan ges.
- Senator KzN 
Twy. 
Let me ask for a third time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---elates to your agency ?
Mr. CAR. We can comply with the bill, with some of the sugges-
tions we have made for some minor chan ges.
- Senator KzN 
Twy. 
Let me ask for a third time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

270
Is that a yes or no answer I
Mr. CARY. My point, Mr. Chairman, is that we do not speak for
the Administration, but as far as CIA is concerned, we can comply
with the bill with minor changes.
Senator KENNDY. I know you will comply if we pass it.
Mr. CART. We have no problem with doing that.
Senator KENNDrY. You will not have any problem doing it.
My question is: Will you comply with it if we pass it?
I am not asking you to speak for other agencies that will likewise
be affected.
It is just a simple question.
Mr. Drucxvrr. The Agency's current activities in biomedical and
behavioral research are and should be limited to the Agency's essential
foreign intelligence mission. As a result. most of this research is in-
extricably related to areas which, if disclosed publicly, would ad-
versely impinge upon other activities of the Agency, where success
depends upon secrecy.
Therefore, a necessary condition attaching to Commission access
to such information is the need to protect that information from
public disclosure and assurance that it will not be disclosed without
prior consultation with the Agency.
Senator KENNEDY. Any suggestion that your counsel has on this
particular point we would welcome.
Mr. DucKE'rF. We have drafted a preliminary recommendation, Mr.
Chairman.
It is not yet completed. We will be very happy to make that
available to you.
We are certain that suitable procedures regarding this matter can
be worked out with the Commission. However, in the interest of
assuring that these fundamental security needs are met, we bave a
number of recommendations with respect to the legislation on this
and other matters which I propose we submit for the record for later
-eonsideration by the Committee. If this bill is approved, I would like
to ask your indulgence, Mr. Chairman, to permit our respective staffs
to work together on certain technical adjustments in the language of
the bill, in light of the fact that, for the most part, we have been con-
centrating our efforts in supplying information to the Committee
on our activities in this field. -
However, I think it appropriate to point out one aspect of the
bill which we do believe should be adjusted and that has to do with
placing the Director of Central Intelligence on the Presidential Corn-
mission.
Senator KENNEDY. Why do we not just put the next few pages of-
your testimony in the record?
Those concern your reservation about having the Director on the
panel. I am, quite frankly, in agreement with that for the reasons
that you have pointed out.
But we will let the Committee express its view on that, but that
seems to be in order.
Senator 
Hiwtxzm I agree with that.
Mr. DucKxrr. It is just we do not feel it is appropriate.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to have Dr. Stevens continue with his
portion of the testimony.to be in order.
Senator 
Hiwtxzm I agree with that.
Mr. DucKxrr. It is just we do not feel it is appropriate.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to have Dr. Stevens continue with his
portion of the testimony.

--- PAGE BREAK ----271
Dr.

Sizvrs.

Mr.

Chairman, at this point we would like to sketch
briefly for your Committee the nature of CIA activities which have
in one way or another involved human experimentation.

As you know, the Agency has been working with your Subcom-
mittee staff to piece together a full story on the agency's past pro-
grams Our records covering a significant portion of these activities
were destroyed in January 1973 and for that reason, it is not possible
for me to provide a fully detailed account.

Nonetheless, this testimony along with the materials provided to
the Subcommittee staff, should meet the requirements of today's
hearing on the bill under consideration.

The Agency has had an interest in behavioral studies since its
establishment.

The problems of understanding, anticipating, and in
some cases, affecting human behavior are key to the intelligence busi-
ness.

This interest was particularly acute in the late 1940's and early
1950's as we witnessed the bizarre confessions of Hungarian Cardinal
Mindszenty and others and the brainwashing of POW's during the
Korean War.

Indications that drugs had been employed in these
cases were augmented by evidence that Soviet Bloc intelligence
services were developing and using drugs to influence behavior.

Moreover it was reported from Europe that a new family of chemi-
cals had been isolated by chemists working with fungal infections
found in moldy grain which had tremendous mind-bending prop-
erties; the best known of these chemicals is, of course, LSD.

There was a natural concern that the Soviet KGB might have de-
veloped an early interest and competence in the use of these exotic
drugs to our great disadvantage.

Agency programs were, therefore,
instituted to study the nature and effects of these new materials with
a view toward developing ways to protect United States personnel
against them as well as developing a capability for their operational
use if the investigation justified 1E.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There was a natural concern that the Soviet KGB might have de-
veloped an early interest and competence in the use of these exotic
drugs to our great disadvantage. Agency programs were, therefore,
instituted to study the nature and effects of these new materials with
a view toward developing ways to protect United States personnel
against them as well as developing a capability for their operational
use if the investigation justified 1E. The Agency collected foreign intelligence on developments abroad
and reviewed related publications and activities of American Govern-
ment and private institutions. When the Agency learned of research
of activities particularly relevant to the Agency s mission or concern,
efforts were made to get access to the results of such work and, fre-
quently, to consult with the contractors themselves. By 1953, this activity led to the establishment of a fairly large and -
complex external research program which ranged from basic research
on lysergic acid and other compounds to extensive testing and experi-
mentation. More than 30 different universities and institutions were
involved in this program. Basic work included chemical studies, tissue
studies, and toxicological investigations. Testing on animals and
human volunteers then followed. There was by this time a growing
body of technical literature on the effects of LSD on -humans. As
the program developed, new materials and techniques for influencing
behavior were also investigated. A significant feature of this effort
was the use of covert funding techniques to protect the nature of our
foreign intelligence concerns. For the most part, human-use experiments were conducted by other
Federal agencies or private institutions with the security of Agency
interest being protected through the use of intermediaries. More
often than not, the contractors were already studying the field. Our

--- PAGE BREAK ---272
support enabled them to expand their work to meet our interests.

In
most cases, the results were published.

It is our understanding that
the experimentation or testing performed by the contractors followed
accepted guidelines for the protection of human subjects.

From 1953 to 1962, for example, the Agency, through a contract
with the National Institute of Mental Health, tested various drugs
including hallucinogenics on volunteer subjects at the NIMH Addic-
tion Research Center in Lexington, Kentucky, and in this case, the
Office of Naval Research was the funding intermediary.

The actual
testing was performed by NIMH personnel.

A major aim of the
project at Lexington supported by the Agency was to find a syn-
thetic drug as safe, or safer than codeine.

Agency participation ceased
when project goals were achieved.

Although Agency records are unclear, there are indications that
drug familiarization or training involving the administration of
drugs to volunteer and fully witting CIA employees also took place.

Experiments using hypnosis were conducted with volunteer Agency
employee&
Those involved in drug research programs were impressed with
the fact that the effects ofdrugs observed under controlled conditions
were apt to be quite different from those obtained in a real opera-
tional situation.

From this apparently grew the clearly felt need for testing in
more realistic circumstances with unwitting subjects.

This was an
extremely unfortunate phase of the program.

It did, nevertheless,
seem necessary to those trying to determine such things as whether
or not a CIA officer could be trained to spot evidence of a drugging
should it occur and to resist efforts to exploit his drugged state, or
whether drugs might be used to subtly lower the reserve and inhibi-
tions of hostile intelligence officers without their detecting it.

The tragic death of-Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It did, nevertheless,
seem necessary to those trying to determine such things as whether
or not a CIA officer could be trained to spot evidence of a drugging
should it occur and to resist efforts to exploit his drugged state, or
whether drugs might be used to subtly lower the reserve and inhibi-
tions of hostile intelligence officers without their detecting it. The tragic death of-Dr. Olson, as you well know, resulted from an
early unwitting test in which a number of people were given LSD
without their prior knowledge. This unfortunate experience served,
however, to emphasize further the uncertainties associated with using
drugs on the basis of clinical testing alone and demonstrated the
need for investigating the differences between clinical and operation-
al administration of drugs. In an effort to simulate operational conditions, the Agency worked
through the Bureau of Narcotics from perhaps early 1953 to 1963
to test the effects of certain drugs including LSD, on unwitting
subjects in social situations. The details of this testing are not in our records, but it appears
that individuals were administered drugs, without their knowledge
in normal social situations, to -study their behavior. The individuals
departed the test site when they were ready to do so. No follow-up
or monitor rin was normally possible. This program began in 1954
or perlap 1953 at one location and was expanded to another loca-
tion in 1961. Senator KzNmmY. Is it 1953
My copy says 1955. D 
Sfv 
s. I think in checking the records again we have an
indication that something was going on by February 1954 so it
could well have been 1953.

--- PAGE BREAK ---273
Mr.

Duczyrr.

That was the change we made this morning, and it
was made because we found indications we had not previously seen
on thi sMbeet.

Senator KgSxD.

What records are these I
Mr.

Ducruz-r.

I have a document dated 10 February 1954, and it
is that document that suggests certainly something was going on
at that time, and therefore, we canpresume it may very well have
started as early as 1958.

Senator Ksv 
mr.

We have a written response from CIA that
indicates something along these lines:
finally, in an effort to simulate operational use situations, a program was
instituted with the cooperation of the Bureau of Narcotics which tested these
drugs on persons in social situations.

Full details of this testing are not available, but It appears that selected
Individuals, associated with the "drug culture," were invested, to a house and
offered drink.

or drugs.

These subjects were then "unwittingly" given a drug
being tested as a possible aid in Interrogations and their behavior probed/
observed.

The individuals left the test site when they were ready to do so.

No
follow up or monitoring was normally possible.

This program bean in 1906
at one location and was expanded to a second location in 1961.

The precise
date of termination of this testing is unclear but It seems certain that all
such testing terminated by the end of fiscal year-44.

In the other documents that were made available this morning, I
will just mention this part of it that is related to the same area.

Talking about the same subject matter, it speaks about the
effectiveness of the substances on Individuals at all social levels, high and
low, native Americans and foreign, and testing has been performed on a
variety of individuals within these categories.

And we have your testimony here.

And it is difficult to believe
you are describing the same situation in all three.

Dr.

STEVENS.

I think, Senator, this is an attempt to, in brief fashion,
describe that program.--- PAGE BREAK ---

STEVENS. I think, Senator, this is an attempt to, in brief fashion,
describe that program. We have as I said, pointed out, made this other information
available. There was no attempt to conceal it. Senator KzNmwy. In answer to the questions I put to the Agency
on September 25, we werp told about a 
crug 
culture, and that people
of that culture were invited to a house, aZ that the program began
at one location in 1955 and at another second location in 1961. Mr. Ducxrr. I corrected that to say 1958 is the more likely date. Senator Kxxm 
. Now you say 1958. - It would be reasonable to assume, based on what 1 just read, that
there were just two instances where those tests were made with indi-
viduals who are involved in the drug culture. It would appear to me that this Is a fair and reasonable reading
of that particular response to ry question when in fact the intel
memorandum describing the same situation talks about the'effective-
ness of the substances on individuals at all social levels, high and
16w, native American and foreign, is of great signifcance, and tost-
ing has been performed on a variety of individuals within these cate-
gories. Now both of these responses refer to the the same subject. I am
not a semanticist, but I think that you would find Ua any fair
minded person would not feel that you are describing the same
situation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---esponses refer to the the same subject. I am
not a semanticist, but I think that you would find Ua any fair
minded person would not feel that you are describing the same
situation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

274
But if you want to try to bridge that particular gap, I would be
glad to hear you.
Mr. DucK-rr. I would like to bridge the gap in the following way:
As is true of any writing of a brief description-of a very, very in-
volved and complex subject, a subject on which we had far from
complete information, far from complete records, our statement
was simply an attempt to allow then for the record a brief summary.
We are here obviously prepared to answer any and all questions
the Committee might have and, as Dr. Stevens has pointed out, the
information which you read was indeed information which we pro-
vided you.
Senator KENNEDY. The internal document delivered to the Subcom-
mittees this morning refers to individuals at all social levels, high
and low, native Americans and foreign. Can you tell us what that
means? Can you develop that point a little bit?
Dr. STEVENS. I do not know what that meafts, Senator, in terms
of this specific program.
Insofar as I know, and our records indicate, I believe, the un-
witting programs that were conducted in regard to drug testing did
take place consistent with the information that we provided here,
and consistent then to what the other information that we had, that
it did involve a Bureau of Narcotics operation in conjunction with
the Agency undertaken at two locations between 1953 and 1961.
That broader statement may have included other kinds of tests
as well.
I do not know the answer to that.
Senator KNN 
Y. In light of what is stated in the Agency's in-
ternal document how were you able to draw the conclusion that it
was a drug culture ?
What additional kind of information or memorandum or docu-
ments or interviews did you conduct to be able to refine the internal
memorandum so that you are able to say the testing involved only
people within the drug culture, and only in those particular loca-
tions?
Can you tell us that ?
Mr. DumC 
rf. Mr. Chairman, I did not do something I should
have this morning.
I should have introduced Dr. Robert Chin who is a compatriot
of Mr. Cary.
Dr. 4vzNs. .1 think the drug culture reference was sort of poetic
license taken by the people who were preparing the answers to your
questions, based upon information that the reprentatives of the
Bureau of Narcotics had dealt with people who had contacts, who
were in some way associated with the drug world.
Senator ScwErKEw. How many people might have been involved
in toto in these programs
There was a news report this morning on the radip-that-approxi.
mately 7,000 people were involved.
I do not know where they got their information, but I wonder
if you can give us any guidance, any estimate of how many people
were involved in these programs. 
I
Dr. STENS. Senator Schweiker, I cannot.
I have no idea.re they got their information, but I wonder
if you can give us any guidance, any estimate of how many people
were involved in these programs. 
I
Dr. STENS. Senator Schweiker, I cannot.
I have no idea.

--- PAGE BREAK ---formation, but I wonder
if you can give us any guidance, any estimate of how many people
were involved in these programs. 
I
Dr. STENS. Senator Schweiker, I cannot.
I have no idea.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

275
Senator KzNEDY. If the Senator would yield, you mentioned two
locations where unwitting drug testing took place, are you saying
that you do not know how many people were tested at those different
locations.
Dr. S'zvzzs. No, sir, we do not know that.
Mr. DucKr. Mr. Chairman, the problem is that the documents
we have are summary type documents, internal memoranda, as you
have indicated.
Documents, for example, which would have given results, who was
responsible, how many, are documents we simply do not have.
Senator KENNEDY. Are you talking about a geographical area
Are you talking about a section of the country?
Mr. DucKrr. We are talking about a section of the country at a
specific location, at least as far as the city is concerned.
Senator KENNEDY. Let us do a little better than that.
Tell us- exactly what the word "location" means. Are you talking
about-premises like this room?
Are you talking about a city or what?
Dr. STzvENs. When the program began at one location and was
expanded to another location, it seems that a comparable program
was set up in a different city in 1961.
Senator KENNEDY. But it is a city and within the city was there
just one house?
Dr. STzvzS. Yes, sir, that is my understanding.
Senator KzNNEDY. Do you know that for certain?
Dr. STz"Ns. The indication is it was an apartment.
Mr. DucKir. I think we can be specific in one case because we
do know there have been plans to use photographic equipment to
observe the persons who had taken whatever drugs, and there is an
indication that the operation was not successful, so it would certainly
suggest we were equippmg what I would presume to be an apartment
for the purpose of running these experiments.
Senator KENNEDY. Do you know, or are you presuming now?
Mr. Ducxm-r. I do know there is reference to the fact that a room
was being equipped with a one-way mirror and camera equipment.
Ironically, the mirror was broken and never used.
That would tell me there was a fixed location.
Senator KzNNEDY. And the same for the West Coast as well ?
Mr. Ducuxrr. I would assume.
There was certainly a clear indication that testing was done in
the Washington, D.C. area. It is far less clear whether it was done
at various locations or at a central location.
Senator KENNEW. Where is that mentioned ? You said there were
two locations.
Mt. Ducxfrr. There are references to testing involving_ agency
personnel, and we believe that---
Senator KEN-zDY. We are not discussing Agency personnel.
Mr. DucKer. All right, sir.
Then I will stick with the fact there are indications of only two
locations.
Senator KNNmmY. What do you mean by social levels, high and-
low, native American and foreign ?Mr. DucKer. All right, sir.
Then I will stick with the fact there are indications of only two
locations.
Senator KNNmmY. What do you mean by social levels, high and-
low, native American and foreign ?

--- PAGE BREAK ---t, sir.
Then I will stick with the fact there are indications of only two
locations.
Senator KNNmmY. What do you mean by social levels, high and-
low, native American and foreign ?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

276
Does that describe the kind of people that visited these two
locations?
Mr. Ducwzrr. No, sir.
I do not have any basis to state yes or no.
I can tell you my interpretation of what was meant in the sense
of the objective.
These were people who were not of the same character and I would
presume the experimenter felt that there was a need to see if there
was a difference in the reactions of a person at the level of the drug
culture, and a person who might occupy a senior position.
Senator KzNNEY. That is what they were looking for ?
Mr. Ducxzrr. It appears to be.
Senator KZNNMY. So it is safe to say they were using people who
were not just in the drug culture, but actually the purpose of the
tests was to experiment with people outside the drug culture ?
Mr. DucKwrr. Certainly that was the plan. .
Senator KzN-mDy. Why did you, in answering the questions I put
to the Agency on Septem;ber 25, state that this testing involved only
the drug culture, when you are saying right now that this was not
the exclusive purpose?
Mr. Ducxi'r. No, sir.
It was not.
Senator KENNEDY. Why then did the Agency mention only the
drug culture in its response to my question?
Dr. STvENs. I think the response is-
Senator KENNEDY. Do you not agree that the connotation is quite
a bit different?
It is entirely different on the one hand, whether you are experi-
menting with people who are part of the drug culture who were
using drugs as compared to other people who had no understanding
or awareness and unwittingly are subject to experimentation by the
Central Intelligence A ncy
Dr. STEvENs. Even those within the drug culture were being given
the drugs unwittingly.
Senator KNmmY. Does that make it any better?
Mr. DucKTrr. It is wrong in either case, Mr. Chairman.
I want to emphasize that, and we are not making any bones about
it.
Senator K ZNN Y. It is wrong in either case, but it does seem to
me that the Agency's response indicating that the testing involved
only individuals associated with the drug culture is a good deal
different frony -what is stated in the internal document delivered to
us today which refers to testing of a cross-section of the American
people.
Mr. Ducxunr. I want to reiterate-
Senator KNEDY. I do not know a poet-maybe you do-who will
take that kind of license in describing a particular event.
Mr. Dvcxzwr. Senator Kennedy, we are here to answer any ques-
tions freely, and we certainly do not intend to mislead the public.
Senator Scnw=nxK 
Granted the records have been destroyed, have
you recently attempted to establish the fact as to what did'happen?
Mr. Duvcxwr. Yes, Senator Schweiker.t intend to mislead the public.
Senator Scnw=nxK 
Granted the records have been destroyed, have
you recently attempted to establish the fact as to what did'happen?
Mr. Duvcxwr. Yes, Senator Schweiker.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the public.
Senator Scnw=nxK 
Granted the records have been destroyed, have
you recently attempted to establish the fact as to what did'happen?
Mr. Duvcxwr. Yes, Senator Schweiker.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

277
This is why I asked Dr. Stevens to accompany me today because
Dr. Stevens has been doing this almost full-time over the past several
weeks.
Senator ScHwzzm. Have you talked to Dr. Gottlieb, Dr. Stevens I
I understand he is in town. I wonder if you have asked him some
of the questions we are asking you about the size of the program,
about the locations, about the regions, the specificity that we are
getting to today?
Have you asked Dr. Gottlieb I
Mr. Duczrrr. May I respond to that, Senator Schweiker?
Our ground rules on the subject have been as follows: We do not
feel it is appropriate, and I believe the Committee on which we serve,
in the Special Select Committee, agrees fully that we should not
engage in investigations of persons who are not in our employ, which
includes retired employees.
We made one significant exception. We felt we were absolutely
stymied. We had scheduled a meeting with Dr. Gottlieb after his
return to the United States. That was cancelled when we learned
that in fact the Justice Department was undertaking its own inves-
tigaton.
W felt it would be inappropriate for us to interview Dr. Gottlieb
under those circumstances and we did not.
Senator ScHwIAxL 
You are pursuing it from two different as-
pects. They are pursuing it from the aspect of the destruction of
documents, and we are trying to pursue it I would assume, fore tting
that the statute of limitations has run out with regard to the charges
regarding human experimentation-I wonder why you would not
attempt to find out the facts as guidance for yourself?
Mr. DuCKrT. I would like to stress that we did not feel it ap-
propriate for us to become a part of an investigation of former
employees.
We are not challenging the right of any Committee to talk to Dr.
Gottlieb.
Senator SCHWEIKNI. 
Yet you had an arrangement that you would
do the investigating, you would ferret it out?
Mr. Ducxzrr. Senator Schweiker, I think we have tried to express
to various Committees of the Congress that the ground rules of our
agency have changed markedly since 1978. I cannot do anything to
change the history before that time.
But I am telling you arrangements such as that do no longer exist,
nor does our attitude permit us to do that sort of thing today.
Senator ScHwzrKri 
Maybe the answer is that we will have to
interview Dr., Gottlieb, then.
Mr. Ducxzr. I stress that we do not try to prevent anybody from
talking to Dr. Gottlieb.
We did not think it appropriate for us to do so.
Senator KNNDY. You can see why this is important.
You find it appears that everybody is either retired so you cannot
talk to them, or the records have been destroyed so we cannot get
that information.
Mr. Ducxrr. I am sorry this is true, but can I change those facts?
Senator Kximwy. As chairmann of the Subcommittee on Admin-
istrative Practice and Procedure, I do not see, quits frankly, why theon.
Mr. Ducxrr. I am sorry this is true, but can I change those facts?
Senator Kximwy. As chairmann of the Subcommittee on Admin-
istrative Practice and Procedure, I do not see, quits frankly, why the

--- PAGE BREAK ---sorry this is true, but can I change those facts?
Senator Kximwy. As chairmann of the Subcommittee on Admin-
istrative Practice and Procedure, I do not see, quits frankly, why the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

278
CIA cannot talk to its former employees who worked on a particular
program within the Agency. I would like to know what your prac-
tices and procedures are in talking to former employees.
Mr. DucKwrr. I would be glad to give you a paper on this subject.
Senator KENNEDY. I think it is just incredible that we are looking
over the history and development of the testing program and you
can come up here and say, "We do not feel any responsibility to talk
to anybody," in spite of the fact that they had been involved in this
program, what you are saying is, we are not going to talk to them
about the past, and we are not going to develop that kind of infor-
mation, even though they may very well be getting a pension and
the Federal Government is supporting them in any number of ways;
and it is your feeling that they do not have any responsibility or ob-
ligation in this.
Mr. DUCKmr. You are putting a word in my mouth that I have
not used-feel no responsibility.
Our Director, right or wrong, based on the investigations that
were underway about domestic activities, felt that any attempt to
investigation in the sense of interviewing former employees, would
be misconstrued by this very body, and t at is why he has not done
so.
That is the reason. There is not any lack of responsibility.
Senator KNNEDY. Misconstrued by which body?
By me or by Senator Schweiker? "By whom?
It is just amazing.
If Mr. Colby had called up and said, "We would like to testify
but these records have been destroyed, and a number of the people
have been retired, do you feel it would have been appropriae or
us tW Ierview these people."
Why could he not have asked that?-
Mr. Ducuzrr. Obviously, Mr. Chairman, I can only speak from
my understanding of Mr. Colby's views.
I have talked with him on the subject many times. He felt it would
be misconstrued by many people if he were to start what-i-ppeared
to be a domestic investigation of prior activities with prior employees.
That was his view and that remainshis view.
You may question that, and say you do not agree, but that was his
opinion and still is.
Senator SoiwzrK . Of course, if you follow that line of thought
all you have to do is retire everybody over there, and we will not
find out anything.
Mr. DucKm-r. I believe our control, I believe the maintenance of
records is such that a particular type of event cannot occur again.
That is our intent. We have tried very hard to make sure such is
the case.
I cannot change past history. We all understand what was done
was wrong, but we believe today we have control of that situation,
and it is certainly the objective of the Director and alloFthe senior
officers, including me, to make sure we have procedures where this
will never again occur.
Senator Krshmmy. What are you doing to follow up on any of the
people who, wittingly or unwittingly, participated in these pro-
gramsto make sure we have procedures where this
will never again occur.
Senator Krshmmy. What are you doing to follow up on any of the
people who, wittingly or unwittingly, participated in these pro-
gramst

--- PAGE BREAK ---279
If you are not going to talk to anybody who had anything to do
with the program because they have retired, and you have scores of
people who have been involved in this' program, and with all the
implications of that to them as individuals, to their familietand to
their health, and you say "We cannot look after it because Jimmy
Jones who was running that program has retired, and so we cannot
look after that person.

What are you doing?

Mr.

DucKErfr.

We have no accumulation of names of who these
subjects were, and I know of no basis upon which we could pursue
this.

Senator SCHWVKMt.

I think there is no recourse but to subpoena
Dr.

Gottlieb, and I would strongly urge that this Committee do that.

We would be derelict in our duty if we do not get this information.

If you do not feel it is your responsibility to get us this informa-
tion, I feel it is our responibiiyto get it, and we have no recourse
but to subpoena Dr.

Gottlieb.

Senator KENNEDY.

Let us continue.

Dr.

STzvzNS.

An agency review of the program reported that in
a number of instances these subjects became ill for hours or days.

Thers Was at least one case of hospitalization.

The precise date of
termination of this testing is unclear, but it appears certain that all
such testing was terminated in mid-1963 when the Agency's Inspec-
tor General questioned the activity and recommended that it be
stopped.

This recommendation by the Inspector General and the un-
willingness of the Director to sanction its continuation effectively
brought the entire program to a close.

Although a small program of testing less dangerous material on
humans continued until about 1970, it was performed under highly
controlled circumstances on volunteer subjects.

From 1966 to January 1978 the Agency conducted a program in-
volving several different contractors to identify and characterize
new classes of behavior-affecting drugs that might pose a threat to
U.S.

officials abroad.--- PAGE BREAK ---

From 1966 to January 1978 the Agency conducted a program in-
volving several different contractors to identify and characterize
new classes of behavior-affecting drugs that might pose a threat to
U.S. officials abroad. A phased program was envisioned which would
consist of acquiring drugs having notable psychomorphic effects,
screening these materials in laboratory animal 4te 
and ultimately-
should a particularly significant compound be identified-perform-
ing clinical tests with human subjects at the Edgewood Arsenal
Research Laboratories. Though one compound was identified which
appeared to pose a significant threat, no testing on humans was sup-
ported by the CIA as the program ended before necessary prepara-
tog studies had been completed. Current programs on behavioral research and experimentation
are limited to developing improved ways to identify people partic-
ularly suited to perform specific tasks, to investigating various
polygraph countermeasures and the remote collection of physiological
information. These programs involve human subjects, but none of them in-
volve drugs. The conduct of these activities by agency contractors
meets Department of Health, Education and Welfare guidelines. Such programs undergo a number of internal reviews culminating
in the notification of the Director and obtaining his specific approval

--- PAGE BREAK ---280
if the research goals involve influencing human behavior.

This review
process ensures both the substantive technical review of proposed
research and its consideration at levels which ensure that broader
perspectives are taken into account.

Prior to obtaining approval at
the initial levels, the contractor must provide for review, a human
subjects package including the experimental protocol, the disclosure
form explaiing the experiment to the subject, the subject consent
form, and the findings of the contractor's institutional review board.

To assure adherence to the proposed procedures and continued
protection of the subjects, all contracts involving human subjects
contain the following language:
The contractor will assume responsibility for adhering to established and
accepted professional, ethical, and legal practices In the use of human subjects
for research purposes.

This will include the maintenance of medical confiden-
tiality of the Individual subjects' records and the maintenance of anonymity
in data forwarded to the sponsor.

Mr.

Chairman, the CIA is now involved only to a limited extent
in human-use experimentation.

We believe we have taken necessary
actions to prevent the recurrence of past mistakes and that our pro-
grams in these areas are and will be conducted on a sound basis to
meet the questions which are raised in the use of human subject&
In closing, Mr.

Chairman, we have no objection to subjecting our
activities in this field to external requirements to assure that there
is adequate protection of the individual involved.

Mr.

Ducxrr.

Mr.

Chairman, that completes our prepared state-
ment.

Senator KzENEDY.

How did the records on this whole program
come to be destroyedI
Mr.

Ducxrr.

I can only tell you that the information that we
have, in fact, uncovered suggests that documents were destroyed by
the individuals who were directly involved in the program on in-
struction from Dr.

Gottlieb.

Senator KEzNNrY.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Gottlieb. Senator KEzNNrY. And you do not know who gave him the in-
struction? Mr. Ducxiwr. The indications are in the handwritten note of one
of the individuals who was involved, that he was told by Dr. Gott-
lieb-he did not personally hear this-that Mr. Helms, the Director
at the time, gave him the instruction. Senator KENNEDY. I notice in CIA's answers to our questions that
the Technical Services Division sponsored research on human sub-
jects was confined to a Massachusetts hospital, State Hospital, Nar-
cotics Addiction Hospital, biological addiction laboratory in New
York, possibly a clinic in Michigan City. Did these institutions know that the CIA was the funding source ? Do you know I
Dr. S 
=vrNs. My understanding is, Senator, that the researcher did
not know that was the case but the funds made available for that
were handled through an intermediary, so indeed there was limited
knowledge. Mr. Ducxzrr. We would expect in most cases the head of the in-
situationq was not aware. Senator KENNEDY. I do not have any further questions, but I
would just like to make this comment. As you gentlemen well understand, in any kind of security agency

--- PAGE BREAK ---281
such as CIA, it is going to be very difficult if not impossible for the
Congress to perform its oversight function, to have a complete aware-
ness and understanding of all the various kinds of programs that
are taking place, and tragically and unfortunately, we find these
instances after the fact, when either through documents or individ-
uals, these matters come to the surface.

Even though much of the material and information that we have
gathered through the course of these hearings this morning related
to activities that took place a number of years ago, we want to make
exceedingly sure that it never happens again, and I believe that you
feel that way.

Mr.

Ducxrrr.

Mr.

Chairman, I assure you we share that view com-
pletely and absolutely.

Senator K 
ym-.

We believe that the best possible legislative
response that we can make-I think all of us know you cannot legis-
late every possibility-is to pass this legislation which you have
agreed that the Agency itself can live with.

We emphasized the differences in CIA's responses to our inquiry
for the important reason that I think it is imperative that we under-
stand the dimension of this particular program of testing on unwit-
ting citizens.

We have had other witnesses here who have testified that the De-
partment of Defense individuals tried for years to get medical fol-
ow up, and they were unable to do'so until relative 
recently.

I think it is imperative that we know thoroughly the magnitude of
these problems so that the American people understand how broad
and how widespread these types of experiments on American citizens
were without their knowledge or understanding, and the failure of
any kind of medical follow up, and all the implications to their
psychological and medical well-being.

CThis 
is exceedingly important, that is why we are pressing these
matters forward, and why we want to find out to the extent we can
flnd out-perhaps we cannot-the magnitude of this particular issue.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I think it is imperative that we know thoroughly the magnitude of
these problems so that the American people understand how broad
and how widespread these types of experiments on American citizens
were without their knowledge or understanding, and the failure of
any kind of medical follow up, and all the implications to their
psychological and medical well-being. CThis 
is exceedingly important, that is why we are pressing these
matters forward, and why we want to find out to the extent we can
flnd out-perhaps we cannot-the magnitude of this particular issue. This is, quite frankly, why we spent the time on this particular
aspect of the difference in responses provided by the Agency to pri-
marily the same. questions that we asked in writing on September
26 and again this morning. I want to thank you for coming. Senator ScIIwuKZ. I have a question. Dr. Stevens, I am a little bit puzzled here. You say now the program began probably back in 1953. It must
have been then because Dr. Olson's death was in 1958. As a result of Dr. Olson's death-you described Dr. Olson's death
in your statement:
The tragic death of Dr. Olson, as you well know, resulted from an early
-
unwitting test In which a number of people were given LSD without their
prior knowledge. This unfortunate experience served, however, to emphasize
the uncertainties associated with using drugs on the basls of dl 
testing
alone and demonstrated the need for Investigating the differences between
clinical and operational administration of drugs. I understand on February 10, 1954, some 4 or 5 months.after Dr. Olson's death, Alan Dulles sent a, memorandum to the Chief, Tech-
mcal Service Division, saying in essence, this is to advise you that
I consider the unwitting application of LSD in experiments with
which I am familiar to have been an indication of bad judgment.

--- PAGE BREAK ---282
My question is: Why on earth did we not only continue this pro-
gram for 10 years after that, but we even extended it to other parts
of the country I
Here is a letter reprimanding somebody for what happened, yet
the program on unwitting subjects continued for 10 years.

I am very puzzled by that.

Mr.

Ducxxrr.

May I try to answer that, Senator Schweiker.

I think the straightforward answer has to be this.

I have seen the letter to which you refer.

In fact, there were two
such letters.

I cannot give you any satisfactory answer as to why
the program continued.

I simply cannot explain it.

Senator ScHWzEK.

Your records confirm that he reprimanded
two--
Mr.

Ducxwrr.

Yes, sir; two different employees.

Senator SHwmrK 
.

He was upset, concerned, and took direct issue
with the Chief of the Technical Services staff at that time?

Mr.

Duaxm.

Yes, sir.

Senator Sowm 
Yet the program continued for 10 years, and
also continued completely on the same principle of using unwitting
subjects in both of the East and West Ooast areas.

It really boggles the mind as to just what wont on.

Mr.

Ducxurr.

I can confirm what you say, Senator Schweiker, and,
again, I repeat I can offer no satisfactory explanation for that at all.

Senator SCHwwmIK 
How did it finally end?

How did this perpetual motion machine finally get stopped?

Mr.

Ducuzrr.

I believe Dr.

Stevens indicated that there were two
steps in that process, and I would prefer that he go back to the dates
with which he is more familiar.

Dr.

STvz i s.

The ending of that program came with the inspector's
eview of the program in 198, and the very clear recommendation
that it be stopped.~
Senator KNNmmY.--- PAGE BREAK ---

STvz i s. The ending of that program came with the inspector's
eview of the program in 198, and the very clear recommendation
that it be stopped.~
Senator KNNmmY. On the points that you make here about it never
happening again, as you are well aware, following the Olson tragedy,
your general counsel in writing to the IG stated:
I am not happy with what seems to me a very casual attitude bn the part
of TS 8 representatives to the way this experiment was conducted and to
their remarks that this Is just one of the risks running with scientiUfo experi-
mentation. I do not eliminate the need for taking risks, but I do believe,
especially when human health or life is at stake, that at least the prudent
reasonable measures which can be taken to minimize the risk must be taken
and failure to do so 1o culpable neglgence. So you had the Olson tragedy, you had the general counsel point-
ing this matter up, indicating that the Agency is really on notice
that it is not going to happen again, after the Olson tragedy, and
nonetheless, we find even after that we see that the commencement of
additional kinds of tests resulted in other tragedies. Mr. Ducurrr. Let me just reiterate that I do not disagree in any
way with the fact, that I am very surprised that the events unfolded
as they did. I have been responsible for experimentation in-the Agency for the
last several years, and my attitude is, T can profoundly state, by no
means would we participat. in those kind of aetivitieL. Senator Scnwarz u. I did not read the second paragraph of the
letter, and I think that is almost as upsetting.

--- PAGE BREAK ---state, by no
means would we participat. in those kind of aetivitieL. Senator Scnwarz u. I did not read the second paragraph of the
letter, and I think that is almost as upsetting.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

283
Paragraph 2 says:
The purpose of this memorandum- Is to notify you officially of this con-
clusion and to advise you to take all appropriate steps to Insure a careful
-review within T88 of all experiments. The Deputy Director, Plans, has been
instructed to constitute a review board composed of the appropriate officials
from within the agency periodically to review TB research experiments.
I suppose my question is: Was such a review board set up, and
what happen 
to it?
Mr. Ducwxn'. I have to answer that I can further research that
point but from my personal knowledge I do not know whether the
board was established.
Senator ScHwaxz. There appears to be no indication that such
a board was established.
Mr. DucKzzr. I know of no record that suggests it existed, but I
can look further into the matter.
Dr. STzvNS. However, their activities were regularly reviewed
within the organization, but whether a special board was established,
we do not know.
Senator KENjwY. Who reviewed it?
Mr. Ducxmrr. The indications are that the review took place up
to the level of the deputy director for plans under which that orgam-
zation was then assigned. That has subsequently been reassigned to
my Director.
Senator KzNNzEy. And it still continued even with the review ?
Mr. Ducznrr. Yes, that appears to be the case.
Senator Scnwmxmu I wonder if this is not a perfect illustration
of what we learned to call plausible deniability.
It just seems to me we have the letter saying it should be stopped,
and yet for 10 years it went on a kind of perpetual motion.
I wonder if plausible deniabifity was not really the purpose of this
letter. It seems to me inconceivable that a director could issue a letter
like this and program then be broadened in terms of scope, regions,
and substance.
Mr. Ducwzrr. We tried to review some of the procedures in our
Agency, and the term plausible deniability we do not use anymore.
Senator Sc 
ximi commend you for that, and I was frankly
sorry to se Mr. Colby handled in the way that he was because I think
he was trying to make some honest institutional reforms in the Agen-
cy and had accomplished them.
I think some of these problems were well on the way to being
worked out.
I ersonally feel Mr. Colby got a fast shuffme, and I regret that this
happened.
Toeme, here is a classic case of plausible deniability.
Mr. DucKmr. I think you would agree with me, Senator Schweiker,
that I am not prepared to comment on your statement.
Senator KzNmmY. At this point we would like to make available
to the press the two sets of answers from the Agency.
They have been sanitized by the Agency. They still have a classifi-
cation mark.
Mr. Duciirrr. I think that was all taken into consideration pre-
viously.
[The prepared statement of the Central Intelligence Agency fol-
lows:]
70-026 0 - 76 - 19still have a classifi-
cation mark.
Mr. Duciirrr. I think that was all taken into consideration pre-
viously.
[The prepared statement of the Central Intelligence Agency fol-
lows:]
70-026 0 - 76 - 19

--- PAGE BREAK ---

284
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
STATEMENT BEFORE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH
COMMITTEE ON LABOR & PUBLIC WELFARE
AND
ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICE & PROCEDURE SUBCOMMITTEE
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
UNITED STATES SENATE
7 NOVEMBER 1975

--- PAGE BREAK ---

285
Mr. Chairman. we are pleased to be provided this opportunity to testify
in connection with S. 2515, a bill to amend the Public Health Service Act to
establish the President's Commission for the protection of human subjects
involved in biomedical and behavioral research, and for other purposes.
We share your concern over the ethical dilemma raised by human
experimentation and support the underlying objectives of the legislation--
to assure an Interdisciplinary approach to resolving the problem, and to
assure that informed consent exists and there is adequate protection of the
individuals Involved.
Later on, we intend to summarize the past Agency activities in this field.
While there is no desire on our part.to excuse any such activities which may
have violated the important premises upon which your bill rests, Mr. Chairman.
I do. however, want to make it clear that for some time it has been our policy
that Informed consentbe obtained and adequate protection provided for
Individuals involved in biomedical and behavioral activities which we sponsor.
For this reason, we have absolutely no objection whatsoever to subjecting
Agency activities in this field to this legislation, nor do we have any problem
in providing the Commission established under your b.,1 with appropriate
access to information relating to our activities and, of course, we will
adhere to whatever guidelines are issued by the Comomission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n established under your b.,1 with appropriate
access to information relating to our activities and, of course, we will
adhere to whatever guidelines are issued by the Comomission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

286
" 
The Agqncy's current activities in biomedical and behavioral research
are and should be limited to the Agency's essential foreign intelligence mission.
As a result, most of this research is inextricably related to areas which, if
disclosed publicly, would adversely impinge upon other activities of the Agency.
where success depends upon secrecy. Therefore, a necessary condition
attaching to Commission access to such information is the need to protect
that information from public disclosure and assurance that it will not be
disclosed without prior consultation witl the Agency.
We are certain that suitable procedures regarding this matter cabe
worked out with the Commission. However, in the interest of assuring that
these fundamental security needs are met, we have a number of recommendations
with respect to the legislation on this and other matters which I propose we
submit for the record for later consideration by the Committee. If this bill is
approved. I would like to ask your indulgence, Mr. Chairman, to permit our
respective staffs to work together on certain technical adjustments in the
language of the bill, in light of the fact that, for the most part, we have been
concentrating our efforts in supplying information to the Committee on our
activities in this field.
However. I think it appropriate to point out one aspect of the bill which
we do believe should be adjusted and that has to do with placing the Director
of Central Intelligence on the Presidential Commission.
It it, recognized that the essential purpose for placing the Director
on the Commission was to facilitate the Commission's review of unusually
sensitive research activity. As I have previously indicated, we would have
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---rpose for placing the Director
on the Commission was to facilitate the Commission's review of unusually
sensitive research activity. As I have previously indicated, we would have
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

287
no constraints under appropriate security procedures in providing access to
our activities in the field covered by- the legislation. Therefore, if that is
the principal reason for placing, the Director on the expanded membership
of the Commission, it would be an unnecessary step. Moreover, the Agency's
programs in these areas are limited and therefore his presence would not have
any significant impact in upgrading the importance of the work of the
Commission.
We also believe that there are other positive reasons why ,the Director
should not be a member of the Commission. First, he has no particular
expertise or program responsibility which would substantively contribute to
the establishment of guidelines fo-policing human-use experimentation in
the United States. Secondly, the public interest, we believe, would be best
served by conserving the Director's time for his principal statutory duties
in the foreign intelligence field.
I do no.t have any further comments on your bill, Mr. Chairman, except
to say that in light of the limited size and scope of the Agency's current and
foreseeable activities in the biomedical and behavioral research field, we
defer to the views of the departments and agencies more directly and deeply
affected.
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---ncy's current and
foreseeable activities in the biomedical and behavioral research field, we
defer to the views of the departments and agencies more directly and deeply
affected.
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

288
Mr. Chairman, at this point we would like to sketch briefly for your
Committee the nature of CIA activities which have in one way or another
involved human experimentation.
%Oh 
As you know, the Agency has been working with your Subcommittee
staff to piece together a full story on the Agency's past programs. Our
records covering a significant portion of these activities were destroyed in
January 1973 and for that reason, it is not possible for me to provide a
fully detailed account. Nonetheless, this testimony along with the materials
provided to the Subcommittee staff, should meet the requirements of today's
hearing on the bill under consideration.
The Agency has had an interest in behavioral studies since its
establishment. The problems of understanding, anticipating, and in some
cases, affecting human behavior are key to the intelligence business.
This interest was particularly acute in the late 1940's and early 1950's
as we witnessed the bizarre confessions of Hungarian Cardinal Mindszenty
and others and the "brainwashing" of POW's during the Korean war. Indica-
tions that drugs had been employed in these cases were augmented by
evidence that Soviet Bloc intelligence services were developing and using
drugs to influence behavior. Moreover, it was reported from Europe that.
a new family of chemicals had been isolated by chemists working with
fungal infections fo..nd in moldy grain which had tremendous mind-bending
properties; the bes; known of these chemicals, is of course, LSD. There

--- PAGE BREAK ---isolated by chemists working with
fungal infections fo..nd in moldy grain which had tremendous mind-bending
properties; the bes; known of these chemicals, is of course, LSD. There

--- PAGE BREAK ---

289
was a natural concern that the Soviet KGB might have developed an early
interest and competence in the use of these exotic drugs to our great
disadvantage. Agency programs were, therefore, instituted to study the
nature and effects of these new materials with a view toward developing
ways to protect United States personnel against them as well as developing
a capability for their operational use if the investigation justified it.
The Agency collected foreign intelligence on developments abroad
and reviewed related publications and activities of American Government
and private institutions. When the Agency learned of research or
activities particularly relevant to the Agency's mission or .concern, efforts
were made to get access to the results of such work and, frequently, to
consult with the contractors themselves.
By 1953. this activity led to the establishment of a fairly large
and complex external research program which ranged from basic research
on lysergic acid and other compounds to extensive testing and experimentation.
More than thirty different universities and institutions were involved in this
program. Basic work included chemical studies, tissue studies, and toxicological
investigations. Testing on animals and human volunteers then followed.
There was by this time a growing body of technical literature on the effects
of LSD on humans. As the program developed, new materials and techniques
for influencing behavior were also investigated. A significant feature of
this e0ort was the use of covert funding techniques to protect the nature of our
foreign intelligence concerns.
S

--- PAGE BREAK ---luencing behavior were also investigated. A significant feature of
this e0ort was the use of covert funding techniques to protect the nature of our
foreign intelligence concerns.
S

--- PAGE BREAK ---

290
. F;r the most part, human-use experiments were conducted
by other Federal agencies or private Institutions with the security of
Agency interest being protected through the use of intermediaries. More
often than not, the contractors were already studying the field. Our support
enabled them to expand their work to meet our interests. In most cases,
the results were published. It is our understanding that the experimentation
or testing performed by the contractors followed accepted guidelines for the
protection of human subjects.
From 1953 to 1962, for example, the Agency, through a contract
with the National institute of Menial Health, tested various drugs including
hallucinogenics on volunteer subjects at the NIMH Addiction Research Center
in Lexington, Kentucky. In this case, the Office of Naval Research was the
funding intermediary. The actual testing was performed by NIMH personnel.
A major aim of the project at Lexington supported by the Agency was to find
a synthetic drug as safe, or safer than codeine. Agency participation ceased
when project goals were achieved.
Although Agency records are unclear, there are indications that
drug familiarization or training involving the administration of drugs to
volunteer and fu1l? witting CIA employees also took place. Experiments
using hypnosis were conducted with volunteer Agency employees.
Those invol j ed in drug research programs were impressed with the
fact that :he effects of drugs observed under controlled conditions were apt
to be quite different from those obtained in a real operational situation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rams were impressed with the
fact that :he effects of drugs observed under controlled conditions were apt
to be quite different from those obtained in a real operational situation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

291
From this apparently grew the clearly felt need for testing in more
realistic circumstances with unwitting subjects. This was an extremely
unfortunate phase of the program. It did, nevertheless, seem necessary to
those trying to determine such things as whether or not a CIA officer could
be trained to spot evidence of a drugging should it occur and to resist
efforts to exploit his drugged state, or whether drugs might be used to
subtly lower the reserve and inhibitions of hostile intelligence officers without
their detecting it.
The tragic death of Dr. Olson, as you well know, resulted from an
early unwitting test in which a number of people were given LSD without
their prior knowledge. This unfortunate experience served, however, to
emphasize the uncertainties associated with using drugs on the basis of
clinical testing alone and demonstrated the need for investigating the
differences between clinical and operational administration of drugs.
In an effort to simulate operational conditions, the Agency worked
through the Bureau of Narcotics from circa 1953/54 to 1963 to test the effects-
of certain drugs including LSD, on unwitting subjects in social situations.
The details of this testing are not in our records, but it appears that individuals
were administered drugs, without their knowledge in normal social situations,
to study their behavior. The individuals departed the test site when they
were ready to do so. No follow-up or monitoring was normally possible.
This program began in 1955 at one location and was ,xpanded to another
location in 1961. An Agency review of the program reported that in a number
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---nitoring was normally possible.
This program began in 1955 at one location and was ,xpanded to another
location in 1961. An Agency review of the program reported that in a number
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

292
of instances these subjects became ill for hours or days. There was at least
one case of hospitalization. The precise date of termination of this testing is
unclear, but it appears certain that all such testing was terminated in mid-1963
when the Agency's Inspector General questioned the activity and recommended
that it be stopped. This recommendation by the Inspector General and the
unwillingness of the Director to sanction its continuation effectively brought
the entire program to a close. Although a small program of testing less dangerous
materials on humans continued until about 1970, It was performed under highly
controlled circumstances on volunteer subjects.
From 1966 to 1973 the Agency conducted a program involving
several different contractors to identify and characterize new classes of
behavior-affecting drugs that might pose a threat to U.S. officials abroad. A
phased program was envisioned which would consist of acquiring drugs having
notable psychomorphic effects, screening these materials in laboratory animal
tests, and ultimately -- should a particularly significant compound be Identified --
performing clinical tests with human subjects at the Edgewood Arsenal Research
Laboratories. Though one compound was identified which appeared to pose
a significant threat, no testing on humans was supported by the CIA as the
program ended before necessary preparatory studies had been completed.
Current programs on behavioral research and experimentation are
limited to developing improved ways to identify people particularly suited
to perform specific tasks, to investigating various polygraph countermeasures
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---h and experimentation are
limited to developing improved ways to identify people particularly suited
to perform specific tasks, to investigating various polygraph countermeasures
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

293
amd the remote collection of physiological information. These programs
involve human subjects, but none of them involve drugs. The conduct
of these activities by Agency contractors meets Department of Health,
Education and Welfare guidelines.
Such programs undergo a number of internal reviews culminating
in the notification of the Director and obtaining his specific approval if the
research goals involve influencing human behavior. This review process
ensures both the substantive technical review of proposed research and its
consideration at levels which ensure that broader perspectives are taken into
account. Prior to obtaining approval at the initial levels, the contractor
must provide for review a Human Subjects Package including the experimental
protocol, the disclosure form explaining the experiment to the subject, the
subject release form, and the findings of the contractor's Institutional Review
Board.
To assure adherence to the proposed procedures and continued
protection of the subjects, all contracts involving human subjects contain
the following language:
*The contractor will assume responsiblity, for adhering
t esta!lished and accepted professional. ethical, and legal
practices inx the use of human subjects for research purposes.
This will inchde the maintenance of medical confidentiality
df the indi-.idual subjects' records and the maintenance of
anonymity in data forwarded to the sponsor.0
Mr'. Chairman. the CIA is now involved only to a limited extent
in human-use experimentation.. 
We believe we have taken necessary actions
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---mity in data forwarded to the sponsor.0
Mr'. Chairman. the CIA is now involved only to a limited extent
in human-use experimentation.. 
We believe we have taken necessary actions
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

294
to prevent the recurrence of past mistakes and that our programs in
these areas are and will be conducted on a sound basis to meet the
questions which are raised in the use of human subjects.
In closing, Mr. Chairman, we have no objection to subjecting
our activities in this field to external requirements to assure that there
is adequate protection of the individual involved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

295
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON.D.C. 
20505
1 March 1976
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Chairman
Subcommittee on Administrative Practice
and Procedure
Committee on the Judiciary
United States Senate
Washington, D. C. 
20510
Dear Mr. Chairman:
Enclosed is one copy each of Agency documents which have been
declassified to complete the Subcommittee's Record relating to the
testimony of Mr. Carl Duckett on 7 November 1975.
The Justice Department, by letter dated 26 January 1976, from
Mr. Richard L. Thornburgh, Assistant Attorney General, to Mr. John Warner,
General Counsel, interposes no objection to the providing of these documents.
The name of the Agency employee referred to by Mr. Thornburgh in his
letter has been deleted.
This completes the submission of Agency material requested.
Sincerely,
Robert Chin
Associate Legislative Counsel

--- PAGE BREAK ---

296
3 5:I:~c)b~1.~J7:~
1. 
A 
en.dui dntc d, 
Jiu','y 
19"5 £ro.,
Actin 
Dircctor of tIc Offi.e of
ca:taipsa 
U. 
following parol;raph,:
)IKUJTIA f ile" aind correpodnce 
n& ).oie: 
ex €4t:.
.£evc.n boxes of )HULMJ.TRIL proprar.s reportK 
ut. 
rcenle.dc1
£r o:i 
' tie 
Arc,.vYu and deoroyed on 31 .lununry 1973 &t
t'he i'ivLru:tio. of Dr. 
/ thcn Chi ef o. 
TSh.
2. 
A dcscripI.ion of* 
-FL.T.tNA 
Is 
a t t a 
C.d.
Declassified by 2*895

--- PAGE BREAK ---o:i 
' tie 
Arc,.vYu and deoroyed on 31 .lununry 1973 &t
t'he i'ivLru:tio. of Dr. 
/ thcn Chi ef o. 
TSh.
2. 
A dcscripI.ion of* 
-FL.T.tNA 
Is 
a t t a 
C.d.
Declassified by 2*895

--- PAGE BREAK ---

297
Project MIKULTRA was an umbrella project for funding-
sensitive projects in TSD/DDP (as then styled) approved by-Allcn
_D_..ies o 
4 
3prt 
.' 
Cryptonyn MKf)ELTA covered DDP policy
and-procedure for use of blochamicaks in clai-destine operations,
being established'20 October 1952, part of which (the subject of this
memorandum) was funded and handled under MKULTRA.
This activity was inspected by the Inspector General in 1963.
It was founA that over the preceding ten year period the program.
had explored avenue ot control of human behavior involving such
subjects as :adiatlo.. elctro-shock, psychology, psychiatry, •
sociology and anthropology. graphology, harassment substances,
mid paramilitary devices and material.. At the time oL the inspection
in 1963 TSD doctrine wms described as being tW the effect that testing
of materials under accepted scientific procedures does not discIose,
. the full patter of reactions that may occur in operational. situations,.
leading to TSD'. initiating a program in 1955 of covert testing o*
materials on unwitting Us S. citizens.
The project wans coipaxrtnted end funded through sterile-
channls, employisa poarzn-aceutical houses, specialiots, hospitals
and federal nstU=n, thro'uSh which a search was conducted for
new matexial., (a. g. psyloebin from Mexican mushrooms; a 6twg
occurring in certain crops). The second phase involved testing
on voluntary participanks .The final phase involved applcation to
unwitting subject. in normal siteations commencing in 1955 under
an in-ormal .arramgsent with iiidividuals In the, Bureau of Narcotics,
under which two of its employees on the West Coast conducted tosts.
A simSil 
arransemnant was made for the East Coast in 1961.
In a number of instances the test subject became ill for hour&"
or days, includinS hospitalization in at least on& case. Whib~
evaluations indicated some operational value in the tests, it was'.
noted that scientific controls were absent; in addition i the basic
ethical probtlmn.
It is understood that the unwitting testing was suspended
following the insp&ction although other aspects of the program
continued, with annual decreases in funding until the program
was phased out in the late 1960s.
17 January 1975ing testing was suspended
following the insp&ction although other aspects of the program
continued, with annual decreases in funding until the program
was phased out in the late 1960s.
17 January 1975

--- PAGE BREAK ---

298
" ".. 
• 
17 January 197S
i.LMORAWDW4 FOR TIHE RECORD
SUBJECT: 
HIKULTR.
1. 
The following represents the bestJof. lay
unaided recollection regarding the 14VULTRA 'program.. 
"
I was first 
briefed on it 
in 1962. 
At that.time it
was in the process of a significant decrease in
activity and funding. 
As 
" ' 
continued to
decrease funds significantly eac!" year until the 
:,
program was phased out in thq la'.e 1960's..-
2. 
MULTRh-was a group of projects most of.-
which dealt'with drug or counter-drug research and"
development. 
The DCI and the DDP were kept informed
on the program via annual briefings by C/TSD or his
Deputy. -Most of the R&D was exteknally contracted
and dealt with various mriterials which were puiportea
to have characteristics appealing for their covert
or clandestine administration under operational
conditions. 
The objectives were behavior control, :
behavior anomaly production and counter-measu.es
for opposition application ot.'similar substances."
.Work -.as-petformed at U.S. 
addustrial, 
academic, 
-n"
.governmental research facilities. 
J
I Testing. was usually
done at such -time as laboratory work was successfully
completed and was often carried out at such facilities
a. the U.S. Drug Treatment Center in Frankfort, Xy.
and the Californial State Prison Ln VacavilliZ I 
n 
..
all 
cashs that I am aware of, testing vias done using
volunteer inmates who were witting of the nature of
the test program but not the ultimate sponsoring 
*"
organization. 
.
4. 
Over my stated objections the M.ULT')iWiles
were destroyed by order of the DCX (4r. 
lelm4s 
shortly
before his departure from office.
Declassifiea 7 26 8 5
1 Narch 1976
'RESTW

--- PAGE BREAK ---4. 
Over my stated objections the M.ULT')iWiles
were destroyed by order of the DCX (4r. 
lelm4s 
shortly
before his departure from office.
Declassifiea 7 26 8 5
1 Narch 1976
'RESTW

--- PAGE BREAK ---

299
J'i. .
:-.C"". 
:
I~.. 
.v 
x 
1. 
II-,W
;: •. .:- 
J.,::;V... 
izi.- 
' 
tz: .'))~. 
:!
to C 
.- 
; 
I 
i t
0 'P. 
.
i;i.~ 
..
A'.." 
I 
C(I 
L 
he 
.
3'~
:c:-.:! 
i 
Fa-i. 
o 4i,'. 
i 
~;t. :: 
'e.i " 
, -; 
i 
c<- 
!' 
i :: 
:,-
Clos...,.; 4 
;'th;.t:: 
11. i:'.:" 
he. 
c 
-.Et., 
k t.. 
c'-O,
2 ). r~~t:)h~~d 
t ; ; c) 
f i (:: 
)Cv*-a.! 
ow 
3~
t: 
c:;... 
)C" 
, 
c;. 
11 
I 
!5;k."ti 
.
,.. 
a
3 
-L 
V:. 
151 
: 
-. 
t. 
.. h": 
,. .I: ciz*h 
:::t )
Y 
VI 
eir'.-. 
r.,
8.
OV 
Mac 197
.0hy0 
a 
BE 
-
10'.'. 
h 
-,.,LAB-
&L).:,:' 
•%O 
.
.. 
;I tltA--L 
; 
c,.j 
t:. h.'ota .. ; 
I 
-
; ca 
(;.: :.-j 
I 
': 
"ir U.--
txo'...- 
vu. Z;~ 
" hj- C 
, 
l 
-n t 
..',: d,' 
v 
I~ 
o.to 
; ;(i;;:), 
: 
.
-(..
3. 
1,A tv 3.)- the ;.':.);t..}) 
f 
vf,,t'; 
.. 
to 
};.It!.
3. 
-.
"1 
CI o.. 
t r. 
Y" -.
* 
t")i 
1
.. 
ci 
*. 
, 
. .n. 
, 
hadO t!f ,i)) 
... 
:. 
......
".: 
,I)" 
! i.
c". 
.
Declassified by 2689S
Y- March 1976
70-026 
0 ...
-7. 
...
BEST 
Off AY

--- PAGE BREAK ---

300
6 January 1975
MEMORANDUM FOR: 
Acting Director,
SUBJECT:
3IKULTRA Files
.
Per instructions from Dr. 
.former
Chief/DDP/TSD, all MKULTRA files, branch Liles 
-
and those retrieved from'archives, were destroyed.
on 31 January 1973. . (see attached) 
To the best.
of my' recollection the MKULTRA projects were
terminated in 1966: or 1967. 
I have no knowledge
of the ULTRA type materials having been used
operationally against US Citizens.
Declassified by 26895
1 March 1976 
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rojects were
terminated in 1966: or 1967. 
I have no knowledge
of the ULTRA type materials having been used
operationally against US Citizens.
Declassified by 26895
1 March 1976 
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

J
301
I 
.
.
-,,, 
As 
-I 
fly 
.coo 
s
RECORDS RETIREttEHT REQUEST 
j f 
" 
-
-1 
-
LI-- 
"
__ 
it, 
__ 
,_ 
.
_._ 
_.I 
Vi$ 
I".
th 
r 
, ~ ~ 
ti...e.Ii~-~cee~e4 ye.d ets 
.
.. * b.. 
r. 
: ..
t .c .
fndi ,..,, o.. ,.. ., 
0 
... , ... ,.---- 
j... 
-t-ar+*-.c",
coie N;++' 
+ 
.
.& 
" he -,-aso,-i -, Im-li,'-o by y'our Pgo. 
ma TO S.71 je.' 
.I+' 
+ 
-frw.m .
"rlI!"+
PA*T I 
(70 M stir Lme b 5,1 rtw OLCOSFS CUSTODIAN)
ro 
:. O.ZD
cbi. t, 
,ecrd, 
, 
Center... ..
, 
-
,...
.
.. 
*.. \. 
iiP .. •_•__,_ 
_•,_•
-
IIC0TOS 
IS 
IMDS 
FOR RErIPE.IZNT OF YIE I'VCOIIDS I)SCAII111II IEL. 
H
;_ 
LI 
- -I- 
(... c. 
... 
........ 
....
c-ct 
.... 
f .h 
hC *V 
----.-. 
.
.
."I
I 
I 
JOS 
l I10I3.4 h.COhS 
NI LF LIST (CA 
I 
"-
To 
I 
.P 
OX 
, 
.a
TI 
j4~i& 
Ghibf
+. ~ ~ 
~ 
10PL 
,-:_- 
oc+ 
'h.twt,-z+7, 
--<.I 
-- 
.- 
-:-:- 
.+? 
{. 
*.. 
.- ... ,.. -..
Droa..~ 
z~Ib3t 
th~ 
record. 
v___
"A 5 " 
j 
-
-
.
.
A" 
-
.
- ... 
.
•
,., 
.
,.~
.
.... 
, 
... 
,A- 
-
_. 
-- 
, 
.
•.,V 
.+ --.
TT_ 
_ 
.'.) 
-"-7 "T.,+. ;
IC 
ewL 
j.C 
TrdX 
.5.~*3PI*ItJtptI
.
.
..
____.__ 
____ 
___ 
-
---
i 
t/ 
.. 
.
.
.. 
..
( .
... , .
.. .
.
,
.:. 
.<+.. 
..... 
h .C . .h.,.,,C 
.. +,;. 
I.. 
.
l L £O,,.,. ;N_'..... 
I~ t. 
/ . ... 
.... '~ .... 
,
"' Ovt 
.3~ 
_ _ _ _
-'-- -" -.. . .
.
. .
-I- -
- X --- 
.
.
--
r- 
-- '--r 
b) 
.&1A ~ w... 
. I "+
.L4jIP 
;T 
-i 
i.OI 
r 
o 
-o 
i, :j' 
" 
\X "Ir 
• i 
-
brae 
".I "-'1. : evii ". -;'
!AP?'X II.Z 
PIEE(NDCC ACTIVITY pirIOt- 
I, 
\j
"I 
I 
~. 
.. 
-'"Z 
•
'__ 
X. 
" 
.L_" 
.*---' 
A2,A *JA. . S 
.
YflCFW) 
-
TV/i, OP II4TtAIAL 
3
kCS t hlz 
o, 
at r t. i 
. .
U32 
rv 
i . t...... 
-
' 
-- -
T -i
-. 
and bi:4, .DI / 
_ 
I_ 
_ 
_
---
, 
I IIPO% IT 
T 1 4 
/ 
... 
.
TI l ._ 
__ 
__. 
_ 
-_ ..
CITT 0C 
C 
OF.r.-T
.. .. .... 
4 Z"- 3 ,. .
e... 
. .
. . .
.. 
.
..- 
. . .
... 
.
Z''- 
-
- : .
.
.
.
.
.
.
I 
I 
- -
-
-
.-
IUI 
; 
-... .:----,.-- 
[(IT i,0' 
1*.. 
fII-IO 
-
AYC I.CE---=-'I 
R 
:
7 
'- ". 
_ ... 
..
34 
-- 
-
c 
,: 
.c. 
-.
,t, 
o 
+ 
,;, 
,,v 
" 
: 
' 
* 
I 
.
,' 
_.7 
4;
% " 
" 
... 
..
/-_7:.. 
.
.
.
..
; 
.
. ... 
.. 
.
..
: 
" " 
i- 
-
r. 
.. 
.
.I
I. . . ,, 
.
. . . ..: . .. 
_ ., . .. . .. . ....: = . . ...,-.. ._ , . . . ..,;, 
,,v 
" 
: 
' 
* 
I 
.
,' 
_.7 
4;
% " 
" 
... 
..
/-_7:.. 
.
.
.
..
; 
.
. ... 
.. 
.
..
: 
" " 
i- 
-
r. 
.. 
.
.I
I. . . ,, 
.
. . . ..: . .. 
_ ., . .. . .. . ....: = . . ...,-.. ._ , . . . ..,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

302
RZ0..! 
SULF4 LIT.
I NDS 
" 
.,--. SHELF LISTr 
-OA 
NO 
"Ol f ..,- 7 6
.. - e 
p r , . , _,., ...,at .., , 
D . ,,.. 
*Vi 
ta& 
to .
pre .a 
Cr 
te 
7 
.m 
,I 
t
* 
1 S(CJION
*ErSCI PIfS AND0 SATIS
M1KU1:TRA,'1.A. L', Mar. '1953 - .Sept 1955
- -
F 
51 -' 
Mb. 
'60'
.:.':J5s 
,.pt 53 
Apr 54
.-.. ,)r; -, :"t 
53 .. Feb 59 
"
* 
3  r. 
. -. d 
sy 
.. 
.. 
.
* 
. -, 
Jtur, 
_t V53 - Mai 54.
84*.-- -y ,. 
.
Tue 54
hJ.A0iMai. 
54.
: 
S. 
" 
Jau51 
" 
.. 
I. 
-
• 
" 
e
A"" 
44& 
"- 
-; olan 
"" 
-
.
Joul.53 -. 
54
- ,,.5z 
ct- 
oct. 55
* ~ ~~arci2 
958
., 
".. -
"Mar 54 - July55 -
.- 
., 
ZO : 
pr 53- 
ra -.54 
.- -c.-.
"'. 2Z.eb54 
- Mar63.
.
.23,Tb 
54 - Feb'55-
26,'. Feb 54 - Sept 55"'
.; Z..2.Mar 54- Dec 54.
P" 
*'9u1Y54 
July55
A! 
" 
3 an 54,- Doc 54'*'-
-3Z- .Jutly 54 -May s5
35"!"Oct 54- Dec.57
S37,Sept 5Z - Oct 63
" " 
37 Financial - May 56 - Apr 65
38 '. ov 54 - March 55
-- 39 'Sept 53 - Apr'59
40 
May SS - Mar 57
MKCULTRA: 43 
3Fob 55 
June 56
, -.. 
44. Mar 55 -
"- "45 -"J 
;ut 55 L
'S 
"46- 
Nov 55
" .47.. 
File I of 1
" 47* g 
Z of
47 
" 
3 of
'S 
48. 
eb 54 -
o 
49 
Nov 53 -
Oct 57
Nov 61
Nov. 6
C 
"
*C-104*
C-109
"C-110
C-111
C-113
C-l1Z
C-115
C-116
C106
C-1Z4
G-IZ6
•C-1Z7
C-130
"C-136
"C-137
C- 143
C-116
C-153
C 
C-156
C-168
C-169
*C-ill
C-170
C-171
C-IZ7
C-1zz
I:6 Rpts - Jan 55- May 60
3: July 55 - Aug 60
3:'Jun 60 - Aug 6Z
Apr 56 
C-17Z
May 57 
C-1Z9
J-
......-.
.... 
___
AW
• ,v 
-$ , .
.
C-113
Cc,ntinued Box 3 next page
I'Wa 
*l*I.,(,i.u S IPITlOAS. 
"a)
" i' 
" 
r 
col.
4"61 11 ,
|J~z)
0,14 VPCV1tlD 
Ililol.10.

--- PAGE BREAK ---May 57 
C-1Z9
J-
......-.
.... 
___
AW
• ,v 
-$ , .
.
C-113
Cc,ntinued Box 3 next page
I'Wa 
*l*I.,(,i.u S IPITlOAS. 
"a)
" i' 
" 
r 
col.
4"61 11 ,
|J~z)
0,14 VPCV1tlD 
Ililol.10.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

303
K-JRDS ^SHELF LIST
S 
.
.. 
D.. 
.
.
.... 
,
*IAL I.*. *u C6-alauEM
"*7 
4
IM 
dI$S 
PI9,m AO 
" 
AD tS
MKUtL.TRA 51. 
7
p, 
15-16 
C-179
* "': 
; 
:. 
Dec 1955-Juqe 1964 
C-481
* 53IA4,. July 1 9)544juty 1961 
C-184
S6eSept 
10, 1958 
C-190
8 
-j 
Ju u.56 - Z7 Nov9 
C-195
° -
57ot 
Fob 1956-.Jun. 1957 
c C-196
.. A", 
FobU 1956 
C-198
60i.Orgamizatku It Secur Ity, June 1956-Sopt
*-60-3 -A Sub.tauat. 
.lte 
Proposed Projects,
.1a 61~ 
r56.C Ja
M)I(UTRA 6Z. 
Z .553FEUS63 
C-Z06
.
6Z Jun. 59-may 65
6Z Flmmnd 
Tume S- 
4"ay"
-
" 
63 '" 
June 59-Feb 60 
C-ZOt
6. 
Ons, Financial Rpt - 1957- C-Z08
,,- 
68- 
Sept 57-oct 60 
.C-ZZ8
D7 
' 
Dc 57-may 58 
C4~37
", 
'IFeb 58-Fob 59" 
C-Z39
S 
.'74 
e 57 - Juu, 61 
: C-Z34
75 
: Sept57 
C-Z4?
," 
.
7s' 
Jun.S!-Feb 59 
.
:-Z43
-KULTR78 
Doc 57-Oct 64 
-.. Cz4
: 
78 Fidmuclat Sept 57-March 65-""
.79 
Dec 57-Noy 58 
- Z4
,80 Jan 56-Fob 65 
C-Z57
V-:' 80 Fluanctat Aug 58.-Jun 
65 
-;-f
-81 .
Sept 57-Jan-9 
CZ69
S 
' .. 
ec 57 -Mar 60 
4:7o
83, 1Juue 
$7-July 60 
c-Z74
1 
84'+~" Feb 58 - Jaa 61 
C73
" 
85 
Dec 59-(one repOrt) 
C-278
86 
May 56-June 6Z 
C-Z80
-
87 
Oct 56 - July 63 
•C-Z81
7 
B7 Financial May 58-Oct 66
8 
o 
'
; 
".4- .. 
-. 
.
1961'*- C-0
Dec 56-Jul 8
I 
: .
.
-:+
-V.
I.
CA Utinu6d" Box 6 next pagn
BEST KomfL&!AW
: .:' 1-
* ,.¢ 
,.
4..-. ..-
*o. 
"tr
V~c. " .
I 
* .?+
So! I q8 
1 
.
, 
,
|

--- PAGE BREAK ---".4- .. 
-. 
.
1961'*- C-0
Dec 56-Jul 8
I 
: .
.
-:+
-V.
I.
CA Utinu6d" Box 6 next pagn
BEST KomfL&!AW
: .:' 1-
* ,.¢ 
,.
4..-. ..-
*o. 
"tr
V~c. " .
I 
* .?+
So! I q8 
1 
.
, 
,
|

--- PAGE BREAK ---

304
KtCuRDS ,SHELF LUST 
IO~.NO
. ...1 
14.j C6011116
S3wfIs s.I 
-KIsf
.
.DP 
TSD
-- 
1-.SCRlPT 
v A-6 
.
.
$
b~ox 6 
MKUL.TRA- 
88 
June o 
July 59 
C4.84
" 89. . No 58 - Ja 60 
c-88
90 
July 58 -March 60 
C-z.97
'. 
91 
eb 196 a 
.C-300 
-.
ago 
9z 
Nov 58 - Oct s9 
.
C-308
-_43 
93 
Oct 59 - Nov 67 
no C number 
7.,
.. ." . -'93,Fai May59-Fob6 
.
-
94 -
uly. 60 o 
bct 6 
.
, 
C n.r. be.
95 , 
uty59-Dec61 
--
31.
91. 
July-;Aig 59 
C-3Z3
S .
" .99 
Oct6 1 
C-3 Z6
%.-,' 
100 
J 
5-lov64 
-
c-333 
June 59 N" 64
U. 
100 -Dta Sheets
' 
104 
Jan 60 - July 6 1 
" C-347
105 
Aug 61- Sept 67 
no C number'
.g 109 
Jan 60-- July 65 
C-35?.
,:;= I 
"" 
!110' 
Jan 62. - MaK 
y 64 
--'-no C number
110 FLuaacLal Aug.60 - Mar 65.-
1 
"' 
113 
Mar 60- Mar65 
C-365
' 
I113 
Fiaca 
66r 
607 - Ma6
116 
Apr 59 
Apr 64 
C-373
13m 7 .. 
MKULTR" " •118 
Sept 60 - Jan 64 
R-11"
" I 
IZO 
Aug 1960 
R-13
S" 
" 
iZO 
Apr 64 - Mar 67
F'" 
.
1z1 
one paper - Sept 61 
R-14
• IZ9 
one paper - Jut 61 
R--9
".133 
Jan 61 - 1965 
Rl-36
' 
138 
Oct 6 - June 63 
no number
, 
139 
Sept 61 -Apr 66 
•" 
".
* 
140 
Feb 6-. Apr 66 
i 
, 
.
141 
Dec 6Z - Jan 67 
" 
"/141 Finan. 4/6Z-9/6'
I 
143 
Nov 6Z- 
July 64 
.
"
I14 
May 61 -eb 
66 
i t 
K
to 
144 Finaucial Apr 63 - Jan 67
i 
145 
Jan 63 - Jar 61 
" 
"
H 
145 Fimancial Xuly .',3 - Oct 66
Contittuod DBox 7 next page 
.
Iraz
BE. 
co12 A"A"L

--- PAGE BREAK ---

305
.1ULRA.16.u.63. 
ep•6
148~C 
Nov63 
-
7p~6
,0RC 
RDS SHELF LIST 
!
.11 p-re 
In 
,afplizol. 
0.dt 
W l'.8 l OrI IA& I 
.
o Record. 
o 
r 
7
• 
DDP 
S
GPANT 
F1 eb 66- Dec 67
X5 
Ma 
2 
y66-3une, 66.-.
w 
.19, 
Vlo.ca
J...~.. 
.
.
.... 
.
J 
u:a.. 16 ". 
.
. .
. **
*.: 
g.:." 
.a :,:. 147 " Oct 63- 
,., .y[17
' 
.
" 
"". 
.- ::' 
::::.I.4S 
"No 63 
Lt 
"

--- PAGE BREAK ---5 
Ma 
2 
y66-3une, 66.-.
w 
.19, 
Vlo.ca
J...~.. 
.
.
.... 
.
J 
u:a.. 16 ". 
.
. .
. **
*.: 
g.:." 
.a :,:. 147 " Oct 63- 
,., .y[17
' 
.
" 
"". 
.- ::' 
::::.I.4S 
"No 63 
Lt 
"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

306
Senator KzNruy. We will hear next from our last panel, General
Kenneth Dirks, Assistant Surgeon General for Research and Devel-
opment, Lieutenant Colonel William Wisecup of the Air Force, and
Captain C. E. Brodine of the Navy.
General Dirks, do you wish to start?
Do you solemnly swear the testimony you are about to give will be
the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth?
(The witnesses indicated affirmative responses.)
Senator KENNDY. We will start with you, General Dirks, if you
wish to begin.
STATEMENT OF BRIG. GEN. KENNETH R. DIRKS, M.D., U.S. ARMY,
ASSISTANT SURGEON GENERAL FOR RESEARCH AND DEVELOP.
MENT; LT. COL. WILLIAM G. WISECUP, U.S. AIR FORCE, PROGRAM
MANAGER, DIRECTORATE OF LIFE SCIENCES, OFFICE OF SCIEN-
TIFIC RESEARCH; CAPT. C. E. BRODINE, U.S. NAVY, COMMANDING
OFFICER, NAVAL MEDICAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMFJT COM-
MAND; AND MAJ. LEO F. JAROSZEWSKI, EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
DIRECTORATE OF PROFESSIONAL SERVICES, AIR FORCE SURGEON
GENERAL'S OFFICE, WASHINGTON, D.C., A PANEL
General DIRKS. Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, I am
pleased to appear before you to comment in behalf of the Depart-
ment of Defense on bill S. 2515, cited as the President's Commission
for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral
Research Act of 1975, and to provide testimony concerning the fol-
lowup of subjects of LSD drug testing in the chemical warfare de-
fense program.
The Department of Defense generally favors the objective of S.
2515. We would point out, however, that the present National Com-
mission for Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and-Beha-
vioral Research established by Public Law 93-348 has been highly
productive. As you may be aware the DOD appointed a representa-
tive to interface with the National Commission in March 1975. This
representative is from the Army Surgeon General's Office. He has
already had considerable contact with the Commission staff over the
last 7 months. The Commission staff has been provided with detailed
information on DOD policies and programs. We do not believe, there-
fore, that the establishment of another similar commission would
be appropriate at this time.
Senator KRNNEDY. General, we are not proposing the creation of
another commission.
We are just attempting to broaden the jurisdiction of the existing
Commission to include the CIA and the DOD. Do you have any
-p ,robem with that?
General DIRKS. We have no objection to having our programs made
fully available to such a commission.
In fact, we welcome that opportunity.
We believe that any legislative initiatives concerning Federal reg-
ulation of research involving human subjects should not be takenailable to such a commission.
In fact, we welcome that opportunity.
We believe that any legislative initiatives concerning Federal reg-
ulation of research involving human subjects should not be taken

--- PAGE BREAK ---mmission.
In fact, we welcome that opportunity.
We believe that any legislative initiatives concerning Federal reg-
ulation of research involving human subjects should not be taken

--- PAGE BREAK ---

307
until the present Commission has made its recommendations to the
President and the Congress as required by Public Law 93-348.
Senator KENNEDY. Given the situation at the present time, as you
understand the Commission's function as an ongoing advisory com-
mission, all that we are hoping to accomplish is to include the CIA
and the DOD under the Commission's oversight.
Do you endorse that concept?
I am sure you have particular suggestions to offer, but we have
heard the CIA endorse it and say they can live with it.
I am just wondering if there is any reason why you cannot.
General DntKs. The continuation of this function is certainly sup-
ported by the DOD. It is our position, Mr. Chairman, that better
legislation can probably be prepared after the present Commission
makes its report and recommendations.
Senator KENNEDY. So long as the present Commission is in, is there
any reason why CIA and DOD should not be included?
You can always alter the legislation-we are doing that for HEW.
The CIA has indicated that it is prepared to live with it and all
we are asking is whether you are as well.
At some time we have to know whether you can or cannot.
It is not an unreasonable question to ask. That is the subject of
our hearing.
General Dnu~s. At the present time, Mr. Chairman, we are cer-
tainly prepared to live with it, and we are presently making all of
our information available to the Commission.
Senator KENNEDY. I know if we pass this legislation you will have
to live with it, but I find it difficult to understand the reluctance.
I understand that there may be changes or adjustments. The CIA
has indicated some, but it is difficult for me to understand if the
CIA can live with it, why the DOD cannot live with it.
General DImKS. I do not think our position is that we cannot live
with it.
Our position is we believe it is premature at this time to proceed
with legislation.
Senator KENNEDY. For the protection of human subjects in re-
search that is being financed and supported by the Department of
Defense?
General DuiKs. In terms of protecting the rights of human sub-
ects, we are certainly fully in accord with the principles which
have been enunciated in past legislation and the principles which
are included in the proposed bill.
We have no problem with that. We simply suggest, respectfully,
that the legislation may be more effectively prepared after the cur-
rent Commission has had an opportunity to complete its work and
its report and recommendations.
Senator ScHwrKEm. What troubles you about it?
I have trouble understanding why DOD opposes it.
What really, mechanically, structurally, or procedurally, are you
doing now that this would obviate?
General DnuKs. Let me try again to explain.
We do not oppose the legislation, but at this time we think-
Senator SCHWEIKE. 
You just do not like it.
General DuiKs. We think it is just premature.iate?
General DnuKs. Let me try again to explain.
We do not oppose the legislation, but at this time we think-
Senator SCHWEIKE. 
You just do not like it.
General DuiKs. We think it is just premature.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Let me try again to explain.
We do not oppose the legislation, but at this time we think-
Senator SCHWEIKE. 
You just do not like it.
General DuiKs. We think it is just premature.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

308
Senator SCIWXzIKm. Why?
General DIRKS. It will not change our mode of operation as pres-
ently drafted.
Senator ScItwFaKEB. Why do you not like it?
Senator KENNEDY. It is a nice bill.
[lAughter.]
General DIRKS. I find it difficult to justify having established a
commission a year ago with a specific charter, and then not to await
the work of that commission before proceeding with further legisla-
tion.
I recognize certainly that it is one possible course of action.
Senator SCHWEIKr. Could we not dovetail those things?
General DIRKS. It certainly could be done.
Senator SciIwKF.. 
I do not think that they are incompatible.
It seems to me that they could supplement the efforts and I just
have trouble understanding it.
General DIRKS. May I proceed, Mr. Chairman?
Senator KENNEDY. I do not mean to hammer away on it, but you
understand what we are interested in is the protection of human
subjects.
General DmKs. I fully understand that, Mr. Chairman.
Senator KENNEDY. We have seen over a period of time that some
of this experimentation is done by HEW, some by DOD, some by
CIA or other agencies, but really in terms of the individual it does
not make any difference at all. 
_
But the individuals who are subjects of experimentation need pro-
tection, and they need assurances in terms of kinds of medical atten-
tion while they are the subjects of this kind of experimentation and
medical follow up.
It is just extremely difficult, I am sure, for any American to
understand why if they participate in such a program that is spon-
sored by HEW, that they cannot be at least assured of adequate
protections.
If they are sponsored by CIA, they know that there are adequate
protections as established by the panel, but DOD is reluctant to
participate.
That is something that is difficult, I think, for us to understand.
You have indicated you were prepared to comply with it if we
pass it.
I have indicated that you are prepared to draw up your own
standards which you think will do the job, but it is exceedingly
difficult to understand and comprehend why for the benefit of your
people in your shop they cannot interact with those of HEW and
CIA, so we can get the best program, rather than have little bits and
pieces.
That is the reason we are pressing you hard on this issue.
I am sure you understand it, but I think, looking over your re--
sponses, you probably are unwilling to go further than you have.
Senator ScIIWxKFR. I would like to say this is the heart of the
issue, and I am still having trouble understanding from General
Dirks exactly what the problem is.
You have your own commission that you appointed, which was
set up October 8. They are going to report back on military testing.ng trouble understanding from General
Dirks exactly what the problem is.
You have your own commission that you appointed, which was
set up October 8. They are going to report back on military testing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ding from General
Dirks exactly what the problem is.
You have your own commission that you appointed, which was
set up October 8. They are going to report back on military testing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

309
What is so incompatible with another commission which will have
ongoing permanent oversight and simply provide the input which
your commission has, and feed that input into the ongoing permanent
commission?
They are two separate things-apples and oranges-one is a one-
shot look at military investigations, which I am sure the oversight
group would probably be delighted to have an(d make use of.
I do not see they are opposed in any sense. My question is: Are
you opposed to the concept of putting military testing under a
civilian group?
Is that what your opposition really is?
General DIRKS. Indeed not, Senator.
We have participated already in this program and are providing
all our information to the commission.
Senator SCHWEIKER. But you are not covered by it because it does
not cover the military agencies.
This bill would cover you.
General DIRKS. We are at the moment not required by existing
legislation to participate. in the active sense or covered by it, as you
say, Senator, but the fact is that we do subscribe and d diligently
and conscientiously attempt to comply with all of the present re-
quirements in the law and all of the stipulations by the commission
in pursuit of our programs.
Senator SCHAwEIKER. Are you objecting to being covered by it?
General DraKs. Ultimately, no, we certainly are not.
Senator SCHWEIRER. I suppose we have a communications gap. I
do not understand your objection.
General DIRKs. I think we have in existence now a national com-
mission which is ably dealing with what amounts to a first try to
bring under its umbrella a major part of biomedical and behavioral
research in this country.
We with the present legislation are asking to impose a respon-
sibility on that commission for an expanded role and an additional
responsibility for overseeing a much larger segment of biomedical
and behavioral research.
I only raise the question: Is this wise at this time?
Shou1( we not have a report from that commission as to how it
feels about its capability to manage the volume of work on research
that comes before it for review at the present time before expanding
its responsibilities?
Senator SciiwrIKxR. The commission that you have will not be
binding on your part.
In other words, you have an Army volunteer program study group.
One: You would not be bound by its recommendat ions.
Two: You will not provide any permanent oversight of your op-
eration.
Is that true?
General DraKs. No, Senator, it is not.
We will be bound by the recommendations of our study group as
approved and implemented by the Secretary of the Army.
That study group will make its recommendations to the Secretary
of the Army by the first of January 1976 and any recommendations
which are approved by the Secretary of the Army will be binding
on all of us.tudy group will make its recommendations to the Secretary
of the Army by the first of January 1976 and any recommendations
which are approved by the Secretary of the Army will be binding
on all of us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---its recommendations to the Secretary
of the Army by the first of January 1976 and any recommendations
which are approved by the Secretary of the Army will be binding
on all of us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

310
Senator SCHwnmKE. 
But the Secretary of the Army could ignore
the findings of the study group.
General DIRKS. If he intended to do this, he would not have
chartered that group.
Senator SCHWEIKER. I have seen a lot of commissions that were
never implemented.
The law of averages is the other way.
I think this is really the heart of our differences, because there are
no teeth in it, and it is purely whether the Secretary wants to imple-
ment it or not.
That is all the difference in the world from what we are proposing.
General DIRKS. We currently have in existence in all of the mili-
tary departments, drug review boards.
Senator SciiwTKER. Were they operating back in 1951? 1960?
General DIRKS. They were not.
They began to operate specifically in November 1964.
They are operating today, and operating quite effectively.
We now have under scrutiny within the Army all human subject
research by either our Army Investigational Drug Review Board,
our Central Human Use Committee, or our Contract Review Board,
serving in the Office of the Surgeon General.
I cannot speak specifically for my Navy and Air Force colleagues;
they are here. and can speak in their own behalf, but I believe they
have parallel organizations within their respective departments.
The particular study group to which you have referred, and
which is included as a part of my prepared statement, has been
chartered to examine, all research development and testing within
the Army to insure that there are not aspects of material develop-
ment or other kinds of pursuits which have not for whatever reason,
come to the attention of medical review in the past.
Senator KEN.NEDY. Do the other services agree as far as their
programs are concerned?
Captain BRODINF. Agree on the DOD position?
Senator KENNEDY. Yes.
Captain BRODINE.. The Navy concurs.
Senator KENNFY. I wonder if there is any independent thought
going on?
Captain BRODINE. It seems reasonable to have the commission first
report out before considering the establishment of the Commission.
Senator SCHwEIKr.R. Does the Navy have a commission like the
Army?
Captain BRODINE. The Navy does not have a commission like the
Army.
Senator KENNEDY. Do you know what they are doing now?
Do you know the requirements or the things they are doing at the
commission?
Captain BRODINE. We are following that very closely.
Senator KENNI.DY. What is your impression of it?
Captain BRODINE. The impression is that the actions of this com-
mittee will be very beneficial to the military medical sector, and at
this particular time we are looking forward to the findings that willain BRODINE. The impression is that the actions of this com-
mittee will be very beneficial to the military medical sector, and at
this particular time we are looking forward to the findings that will

--- PAGE BREAK ---ression is that the actions of this com-
mittee will be very beneficial to the military medical sector, and at
this particular time we are looking forward to the findings that will

--- PAGE BREAK ---

311
come out of that commission to provide further guidance to the
developing of the instructions and regulations.
Senator KENNEDY. Do I understand your position to be that you
have looked at it and you think you are doing good work, and you
have no similar body within the Navy, but you are still not pre-
pared to say that you think the Navy ought to be guided by it
That is uiy understanding of your position.
Captain BRODINE. There is no argument in terms of the Navy
ultimately being guided by the commission.
Senator KFNNEDY. As soon as we pass .it, you are in.
I mean, we are not asking whether the Navy will comply or
whether it is necessary for the Navy to comply.
You are in.
We are asking you now based upon the record.
What about the Air Force?
I am trying to see who is going to make the best case, the most
indefensible case.
Major JAROSZEWSKI. Sir, in the Air Force we have currently review
boards set up for reviewing-
Senator KENNEDY. That is not my question.
Do you support the extension of this to the Air Force?
Major JAaoszzwsKr. Yes, sir.
We have no problems at all with the objectives of this legislation.
Senator KENNEDY. Do you support it, then?
Major. JARoszwsKI. Sir, we would be willing to wait until the
commission has had a chance to report.
Senator SCHWEIKER. I would like to ask the general who put out
this policy and who is responsible for this policy.
General DIRKS. I am not sure I understand your question.
Senator ScHwziKER. You all have the same policy, and it is a
DOD policy.
Who has the ultimate responsibility to make that policy decision?
Who made that policy decision?
Did you make it? Didthe Assistant Secretary of Defense make it?
General DIRKS. You are referring to the DOD position, sir?
Senator SCHWEIKER. Yes.
Does that rest with you?
General DIRKS. It does not.
Senator SCHWEIKER. Does it rest with the Assistant Secretary of
Defense? Where did it come from?
General DIRKS. The fact is, this position has been provided to us
by the Office of Management and Budget.
Senator ScnwziKE. The Office of Management and Budget?
L Laughter.]
nator KENNEDY. What do they have to do with it?
You mean on the question of protection of human subjects OMB
calls the tune?
The answer is yes ?-
General DIRKS. When a witness such as myself must appear before
a congressional committee, our testimony must be cleared in advance
through the Office of Management and Budget.
Senator KE.NNEY. Did you make a recommendation, General ?
General DmKs. I did.r before
a congressional committee, our testimony must be cleared in advance
through the Office of Management and Budget.
Senator KE.NNEY. Did you make a recommendation, General ?
General DmKs. I did.

--- PAGE BREAK ---onal committee, our testimony must be cleared in advance
through the Office of Management and Budget.
Senator KE.NNEY. Did you make a recommendation, General ?
General DmKs. I did.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

312
Senator KENNEDY. Will you tell us what your recommendation
was?
General DRKs. My recommendation was that we support the
enactment of the legislation.
Senator KENNEDY. Wonderful.
Why?
Senator SCIMWJIKER. All of a sudden you have white hats on.
Senator KENNEDY. That is just unbelievable, that you have to be
put in that kind of position.
I resent that greatly.
Senator SCHWEIKER. I think we ought to have the Office of Man-
agement and Budget here, Mr. Chairman, I really do.
I can't comprehend that the Office of Management and Budget
should be able to set a policy like this.
I really do not think we ought to bother these gentlemen.
Senator KENNEDY. It is just that the people who know this sub-
ject, who are living with the subject, concerned about the subject,
make the recommendation for suplmrting this legislation-but the
decision on policy is made by those who have not the responsibility
for understanding of the facts.
I quite frankly feel that to put members of the Armed Forces in
that kind of situation is just untenable and unconscionable.
Asking you to come up here and defend an indefensible position
when your own belief on this is different.
Senator ScuwEIKER. I think you do very well under the circum-
stances, General.
General DRKs. Thank you, Senator.
I hope I fare as well when I get back to the office. [Laughter.]
Senator KF.NN.vDY. I think that does it.
I wonder if we could get your recommendation from OMB and
put that in the record.
General DIRKS. Mr. Chairman, I think you would have to request
that of the Office of Management and Budget.
Senator SCUWEIKER. I think in fairness we ought to do that, and
I certainly want to see the Office of Management and Budget testify
here.
Senator KNNEDY. I think it was indicated in the earlier hearing
on September 10 that Mr. Ablard said that they were going to get
into t 
human testing, the IG was going to get into the question
of human testing, and yet we have the fellow who is running that
program, and has been for some time, and he still has not been
contacted.
I)o you have any intention to have him contacted, Dr. Seidell?
He has not been contacted. The IG is doing a report on human
testing now at Edgewood, and I am just wondering if you plan to
contact him?
General DIRKS. Mr. Chairman, I would assume that the Inspector
General would intend to contact Dr. Seidell.
I do know the Inspector General has many more interviews to
accomplish. They have not completed their investigation.
I do not know whether Dr. Seidell is explicitly on their list, but
I would think it would be logical for him -to be there, and certainlyews to
accomplish. They have not completed their investigation.
I do not know whether Dr. Seidell is explicitly on their list, but
I would think it would be logical for him -to be there, and certainly

--- PAGE BREAK ---

313
I would encourage the Inspector General to interrogate him.
Senator SciiwzIKFR. I wonder, General, for the record, if you
would tell us who comprises the Army volunteer study group, or if
you do not have it handy, would you give it to us?
General DIRKS. I can provide that for the record.
Perhaps I have it right here with me.
It was chartered by a Chief of Staff Memorandum on the 8th of
October of this year, and the chairman is a member of my staff,
acting for The Surgeon General.
Represented upon that study group are personnel from the Office
of the Deputy Chief of Staff of Research, Development, and Acqui-
sition, the Deputy Chief of Staff of the Army for Personnel, and
The Judge Advocate General. There is other membership which
escapes me at the moment, and I am not able to quickly turn to it.
Senator SCiWEIKr.R. All right.
Just submit it for the record.
[The material referred to follows:]
MEMBERSHIP OF THE ARMY VOLUNTEER PROGRAM STUDY GROUP
Office represented: 
Name of incumbent:
1. The Surgeon General (Chairman). 
1. Colonel Edward L. Bueseher.
2. Deputy Chief of Staff for Research, 2. Mr. Harold S. Block.
Development, and Acquisition.
3. Deputy Chief of Staff for Personnel 3. Dr. David W. Witter.
4. The Judge Advocate General. 
4. Captain Richard L. Huff.
5. Chief of Engineers. 
5. Mr. Robert T. Flower.
Senator KENNEDY. We want to thank you for coming.
We appreciate it very much.
We will be looking forward to working with you.
[The prepared statement of Brigadier General Dirks follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---r KENNEDY. We want to thank you for coming.
We appreciate it very much.
We will be looking forward to working with you.
[The prepared statement of Brigadier General Dirks follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

314
STATEMENT
BY
BRIGADIER GENERAL KENNETH R, DIRKS, MD,
ASSISTANT SURGEON GENERAL
FOR
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
OF THE
JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
AND THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH OF THE LABOR AND PUBLIC WELFARE COMMITTEE
UNITED STATES SENATE
FIRST SESSION, 94TH CONGRESS
7 NOVEMBER 1975
NOT FOR PUBLICATION
UNTIL RELEASED BY THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE

--- PAGE BREAK ---WELFARE COMMITTEE
UNITED STATES SENATE
FIRST SESSION, 94TH CONGRESS
7 NOVEMBER 1975
NOT FOR PUBLICATION
UNTIL RELEASED BY THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

315
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF WITNESS: 
Brigadier General Kenneth R.
Dirks, M.D., was born in Newton, Kansas, on February 11, 1925.
He graduated in 1947 from the Washington University School of
-Medicine, St. Louist Missouri, with a doctor of medicine
degree.
General Dirks attended the Army Medical Department officer
basic course in 1954 after completing his internship at St.
Louis City Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri, and his residency in
Pathology at the Veterans Administration Hospital, Indianapolis,
Indiana. His first medical assignment was Chief, Laboratory
Service, US Army Hospital, Fort Ord, California. After attendinc
the Medical company grade officer course, he completed a resi-
dency in clinical pathology at Letterman General Hospital and
became Chief of the Pathology Service at Madigan General Hospital
General Dirks participated as an Exchange Officer with the
Royal Army Medical Crops in 1959-1960 and was assigned to the
Queen Alexandra Military Hospital, Millbank, London, England.
Subsequently, he became Deputy Commander of the US Army, Europe,
Medical Laboratory. Upon his return to the United States in
1963, General Dirks became Deputy Commander of the US Army
Medical Unit, Fort Detrick, Frederick, Maryland.
In 1967, General Dirks served in Vietnam successively as Com-
mander, 406th Mobile Medical Laboratory; Commander, 3d Field
Hospital; and Acting Commander, 67th Medical Group. Concurrently
he was Blood Program Officer and Consultant in Pathology for the
US Army, Vietnam.
General Dirks was assigned to the US Army Medical Research and
Development Command, initially in 1968, as Director of Research
and later, in 1969 as Deputy Commander. After attending the
Industrial College of the Armed Forces, where he was Distin-
guished Graduate, he became Deputy Commander and then Commander
of the US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases,
Fort Detrick, Maryland. He was promoted to Brigadier General
in July of 1973 and became Commander of the US Army Medical
Research and Development Command on August 15, 1973. 
He serves
concurrently as Assistant Surgeon General for Research and De-
velopment, Department of the Army.
He is certified by the American Board of Pathology and is a
Fellow of both the College of American Pathologists and the
International Academy of Pathology. He is a--member of the
American Medical Association, the American Society of Clinical
Pathologists, the Ass6ciation of Military Surgeons of the United
States, the Association of the United States Army, the Scientific
Research Society of America, and of Rotary International.
In addition to being the author of a number of professional
publications, General Dirks has been awarded the Legion of
Merit with Oak Leaf Cluster, the Meritorious Service Medal,
and the Army Commendation Medal with Oak Leaf Cluster.
70-026 0 - 76 - 21ssional
publications, General Dirks has been awarded the Legion of
Merit with Oak Leaf Cluster, the Meritorious Service Medal,
and the Army Commendation Medal with Oak Leaf Cluster.
70-026 0 - 76 - 21

--- PAGE BREAK ---

316
MR. CHAIRMAN, MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE:
I AM PLEASED TO APPEAR BEFORE YOU TO COMMENT IN BEHALF OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ON BILL S,2515, CITED AS THE
'PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION FOR THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS
OF BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL RESEARCH ACT OF 1975," AND
TO PROVIDE TESTIMONY CONCERNING THE FOLLOW UP OF SUBJECTS
OF LSD DRUG TESTING IN THE CHEMICAL WARFARE DEFENSE
PROGRAM.
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE GENERALLY FAVORS THE OBJECTIVE
OF S.2515. WE WOULD POINT OUT, HOWEVER, THAT THE PRESENT
NATIONAL COMMISSION-FOR PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS OF
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL RESEARCH ESTABLISHED BY PUBLIC
LAW 93-348 HAS BEEN HIGHLY PRODUCTIVE. As YOU MAY BE
AWARE, THE DOD APPOINTED A REPRESENTATIVE TO INTERFACE
WITH THE NATIONAL COMMISSION IN IARCH 1975, THIS REPRE-
SENTATIVE IS FROM THE ARMY SURGEON GENERAL'S OFFICE. HE
HAS ALREADY HAD CONSIDERABLE CONTACT WITH THE COMMISSION
STAFF OVER THE LAST SEVEN MONTHS. THE COMMISSION STAFF
HAS BEEN PROVIDED WITH DETAILED INFORMATION ON DOD POLICIES
AND PROGRAMS. WE DO NOT BELIEVE, THEREFORE, THAT THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF ANOTHER SIMILAR COMMISSION WOULD BE
APPROPRIATE AT THIS TIME. WE BELIEVE THAT ANY LEGISLA-
TIVE INITIATIVES CONCERNING FEDERAL REGULATION OF RESEARCH

--- PAGE BREAK ---ORE, THAT THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF ANOTHER SIMILAR COMMISSION WOULD BE
APPROPRIATE AT THIS TIME. WE BELIEVE THAT ANY LEGISLA-
TIVE INITIATIVES CONCERNING FEDERAL REGULATION OF RESEARCH

--- PAGE BREAK ---

317
INVOLVING HUMAN SUBJECTS SHOULD NOT BE TAKEN UNTIL THE
PRESENT COMMISSION HAS MADE ITS RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE
PRESIDENT AND THE CONGRESS AS REQUIRED BY P.L. 93-348,
ACCORDINGLY, WE DO NOT RECOMMEND FAVORABLE CONSIDERATION
OF S,2515 AT THIS TIME. 
FOR THE INFORMATION OF THE
COMMITTEE WE WISH TO POINT OUT A NUMBER OF PROBLEMS
WITH THE BILL, FOR EXAMPLE, IN PARAGRAPH (2) 
OF SECTION
482(A) OF THE BILL UNDER "COMMISSION DUTIES," THE COM-
MISSION IS CHARTERED TO "INVESTIGATE AND STUDY BIOMEDICAL
AND BEHAVIORAL RESEARCH CONDUCTED OR SUPPORTED UNDER
PROGRAMS ADMINISTERED BY THE SECRETARY,.." THE WORD
"SECRETARY" 
IS A1MBIGUOUS 
IN THIS CONTEXT SINCE BOTH THE
SECRETARIES OF DEFENSE AND THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH,
EDUCATION, AND WELFARE ARE REPRESENTED ON JHE COMMISSION.
THIS LANGUAGE ALSO SUGGESTS THAT RESEARCH BY AGENCIES
WITHOUT "SECRETARIES," SUCH AS THE VETERANS ADMINISTRATION,
WOULD NOT BE EXAMINED. ALSO THE WORDS "INVESTIGATE AND
STUDY" ARE UNCLEAR WITH RESPECT TO THE SCOPE OF THE COM-
MISSION'S INVESTIGATIVE AUTHORITY.
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY ON BEHALF OF THE DOD ALSO
BELIEVES THAT THE DEFINITION OF THE TERM "MILITARY
PERSONNEL SHOULD NOT INCLUDE VETERANS OR INACTIVE
MEMBERS OF THE UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES NOR EMPLOYEES
AND AGENTS OF THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY IN SECTION
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---TERM "MILITARY
PERSONNEL SHOULD NOT INCLUDE VETERANS OR INACTIVE
MEMBERS OF THE UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES NOR EMPLOYEES
AND AGENTS OF THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY IN SECTION
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

318
482(A) (2). 
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE DEFERS TO THE
VIEWS OF THE RESPECTIVE AGENCIES REGARDING THE SPECIAL
CATEGORIZATION OF VETERANS AND EMPLOYEES AND AGENTS OF
THE CIA FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS BILLS
EMPLOYEES AND AGENTS OF THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
ARE NOT MILITARY PERSONNEL AND THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DOES NOT HAVE CONTROL OVER THEIR WORK OR ACTIVITIES.
INCLUDING SUCH CATEGORIES OF PERSONS. AS."MILITARY PERSONNEL"
FOR ANY PURPOSE WOULD SET AN UNACCEPTABLE PRECEDENT AND
WITH REGARD TO S.2515, THEIR INCLUSION WOULD COMPLICATE
RECORD KEEPING AND ADMINISTRATION OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
RESEARCH ACTIVITIES.
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE UNDERSTANDS THE INTENT OF THIS
SECTION TO BE TO IDENTIFY FOR SPECIAL ATTENTION CERTAIN
CLASSES OF SUBJECTS WHO MAY NOT ALWAYS BE IN A POSITION
TO GIVE FREE AND INFORMED VOLUNTARY CONSENT TO THEIR
PARTICIPATION AS HUMAN SUBJECTS OF RESEARCH. WHILE THE
DEPARTMENT DOES NOT AGREE THAT ACTIVE DUTY MILITARY
PERSONNEL ARE NECESSARILY SIMILAR IN THIS RESPECT TO THE
OTHER TYPES OF SUBJECTS CITED, PARTICULARLY CHILDREN
AND THE INSTITUTIONALIZED MENTALLY INFIRM, THIS IS A
VALID AREA OF INQUIRY.' IT IS POSSIBLE THAT SPECIAL
SAFEGUARDS MAY BE NECESSARY FOR ACTIVE DUTY PERSONNEL
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---RTICULARLY CHILDREN
AND THE INSTITUTIONALIZED MENTALLY INFIRM, THIS IS A
VALID AREA OF INQUIRY.' IT IS POSSIBLE THAT SPECIAL
SAFEGUARDS MAY BE NECESSARY FOR ACTIVE DUTY PERSONNEL
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

319
UNDER SOME CIRCUMSTANCES WHEN THEY ARE SUBJECTS IN
MILITARY EXPERIMENTS. FURTHERMORE, VETERANS SHOULD NOT
BE CONSIDERED "SPECIAL SUBJECTS' IN THIS CONTEXT. ONCE
VETERANS HAVE BEEN RELEASED FROM DUTYj THE FACTORS THAT
MOTIVATE THEM TO PARTICIPATE IN RESEARCH WOULD SEEM TO
BE VIRTUALLY IDENTICAL WITH THOSE WHICH INFLUENCE
OTHER CITIZENS WHO HAVE NOT SERVED. As WRITTEN, THE
BILL SEEMS TO IMPLY THAT A VETERAN'S ABILITY TO GIVE FREE
AND INFORMED CONSENT PAY BE IN QUESTION MERELY BECAUSE
HE HAS SERVED IN THE ARMED FORCES.
ACTIVE DUTY PERSONNEL, VETERANS OR CIA EMPLOYEES SHOULD NOT
BE CONSIDERED "SPECIAL SUBJECTS" IF THEY ARE PARTICIPATING
*IN EXPERIMENTS WHIC't ARE NOT SPONSORED OR CONDUCTED BY THE
MILITARY OR THE CIM. 
ANY POSSIBLE ELEMENT OF IMPLIED
COERCION WOULD APPEAR TO BE ABSENT IF THESE PERSONNEL ARE
PARTICIPATING IN A STUDY CONDUCTED ENTIRELY BY AN ORGANIZA-
TION NOT CONNECTED WITH THEIR PARENT AGENCY,
SINCE THE APPEARANCE OF DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY REPRESENTA-
TIVES BEFORE THESE SUBCOMMITTEES 10 SEPTEMBER 1975 PROGRESS
HAS BEEN MADE IN LOCATING FOR FOLLOW UP PARTICIPANTS IN
LSD TESTING UNDER ARMY AUSPICES IN THE CHEMICAL WARFARE
DEFENSE PROGRAM. EVtRY APPROPRIATE ARMY STAFF AGENCY HAS
BEEN DIRECTED TO AID THIS EFFORT AND THE RESOURCES OF THE
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---ANTS IN
LSD TESTING UNDER ARMY AUSPICES IN THE CHEMICAL WARFARE
DEFENSE PROGRAM. EVtRY APPROPRIATE ARMY STAFF AGENCY HAS
BEEN DIRECTED TO AID THIS EFFORT AND THE RESOURCES OF THE
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

320
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION NATIONAL PERSONNEL RECORDS
CENTER AND THE VETERANS ADMINISTRATION (VA) HAVE BEEN
UTILIZED.. LETTERS HAVE BEEN WRITTEN TO THE CIVILIAN
INSTITUTIONS WHICH CONDUCTED LSD TESTING UNDER CHEMICAL
CORPS CONTRACTS REQUESTING THEIR AID IN CONDUCTING FOLLOW
UP STUDIES OF THEIR SUBJECTS,
IN SPITE OF TREMENDOUS DIFFICULTY IN FINDING CURRENT
ADDRESSES FOR FORMER SUBJECTS, WHO WERE TESTED 8 TO 20
YEARS AGO, 93 OF THE APPROXIMATELY 600 LSD SUBJECTS HAVE
ALREADY BEEN LOCATED. OF THESE, 19 WERE EXAMINED IN A
PREVIOUS FOLLOW UP STUDY. 
TWENTY ARE NOW SCHEDULED FOR
COMPLETE EXAMINATION AT ALTER REED AR11Y MEDICAL CENTER,
ONE WAS ADMITTEb TO THE HOSPITAL FOR EXAMINATION THIS WEEK.
THE REMAIDER 
-'!II 
E SCHEDULED FOR EXAMINATIONl AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE. 
AIuOTIIER 39 SUBJECTS WERE AIR FORCE PERSOHIEL,
THESE ARE BEING FOLLOWED UP BY THE AIR FORCE, THE
VETERANS ADMINISTRATION HAS LOCATED 300 RECORDS AND WE
EXPECT THIS TO SPEED UP THE EXAMINATION PROCESS CON-
SIDERABLY. As A RESULT OF VA CONCERN ABOUT THE LEGALITY
OF RELEASE OF INFORMATION UNDER PROVISIONS OF THE
PRIVACY ACT, CLEARANCE FOR ARMY USE OF THESE RECORDS
WAS GRANTED ONLY LAST WEEK. THE ARMY WILL CONTINUE THIS
FOLLOW UP EFFORT UNTfL AS MANY OF THE PARTICIPANTS IN
THE LSD TESTING AS POSSIBLE HAVE BEEN LOCATED AND EXAMINED,
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---RECORDS
WAS GRANTED ONLY LAST WEEK. THE ARMY WILL CONTINUE THIS
FOLLOW UP EFFORT UNTfL AS MANY OF THE PARTICIPANTS IN
THE LSD TESTING AS POSSIBLE HAVE BEEN LOCATED AND EXAMINED,
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

321
IT IS IMPORTANT TO EMPHASIZE THAT "THE ARMY IS MAKING EVERY:
EFFORT TO INSURE THAT THESE EXAMINATIONS ARE PERFORMED
CAREFULLY AND IN SUCH A MANNER THAT USEFUL INFORMATION
WILL RESULT. EXTENSIVE EXPERT PROFESSIONAL EFFORT HAS
BEEN INVESTED IN DESIGNING THE FOLLOW UP EXAMINATION PLAN.
IT WILL BE NECESSARY TO EXAMINE SUITABLY MATCHED CONTEMPOR-
ARIES OF THE FORMER LSD TEST SUBJECTS TO ENABLE VALID
INTERPRETATION OF MEDICAL FINDINGS IN THESE SUBJECTS#
HUMAN SUBJECT RESEARCH At THE BIOt-EDICAL LABORATORY,
EDGEWOOD ARSENAL, WHICH WAS HALTED IN JULY 1975, WILL IUOT
BE RESUMED UNTIL EXPLICITLY APPROVED BY THE SECRETARY OF
THE ARMY. THE VICE CHIEF OF STAFF OF THE ARMY HAS
DIRECTED THAT THE COMMAND AND CONTROL OF THE BIOMEDICAL
LABORATORY BE EXAtIED A:ND A PLAN PREPARED FOR ITS CONTROL
TO INSURE COMPLIANCE- WITH FDA GL'IDELIWES AID ARMY REGULA-
TIONS WHICH REQUIRE SUBMISSION OF RESEARCH PROTOCOLS
TO THE SURGEON GENERAL AND THE SECRETARY OF THE ARMY
FOR APPROVAL PRIOR TO INITIATION OF STUDIES WHILE THE
LABORATORY IS ACCOMPLISHING ITS MILITARY MISSION.
ON 8 OCTOBER 1975, THE CHIEF OF STAFF, UNITED STATES ARMY,
CHARTERED AN ARMY VOLUNTEER PROGRAM STUDY GROUP TO PREPARE
PROCEDURES TO INSUREADEQUATE REVIEW AND MONITORING, BY A
GROUP INDEPENDENT OF THE RESEARCH OR TESTING PROPONENT,
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

322
OF ANY USE OF VOLUNTEERS IN RESEARCH AND TESTING WITHIN OR
SPONSORED BY THE ARMY. THIS GROUP WILL COVER THE ENTIRE
SPECTRUM or RESEARCH WIrH HUMAN SUBJECTS, ESPECIALLY THOSE
PROGRAMS WHERE THERE MAY BE UNCERTAINTY ON THE PART OF THE
TESTING AGENCY W14ETHER OR NOT THE TEST IS IN THE "LINE OF
DUTY" OF THE TEST SUBJECTS. THE RESULTS OF THIS GROUP'S
STUDY AND ITS RECOMMENDATIONS ARE TO BE PRESENTED TO THE
SECRETARY OF THE ARMY BY 1 JANUARY 1976,
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---TEST IS IN THE "LINE OF
DUTY" OF THE TEST SUBJECTS. THE RESULTS OF THIS GROUP'S
STUDY AND ITS RECOMMENDATIONS ARE TO BE PRESENTED TO THE
SECRETARY OF THE ARMY BY 1 JANUARY 1976,
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

323
$
INSERT FOR THE RECORD
COWITTE~I 
JUDICIARY CONI~fTTEE AND THE
LA3)R AND PUBLIC WLFAR COM4KITTEE
HERING DATE: 
7 November 1975
PAGE NO: 
113 
LINE NO: 
8
SUBJECT: S.2515, President's Coameission
for the Protection of Human Subjects of
Biomedical and Behavioral Research Act
of 1975
4
General Dirks.
Nembership of the Army Volunteer Progran Study
Group follows:
Office Represented:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Nam of Incumbent:
The Surgeon General (Chairmi )
Deputy Chief of Staff for Research,
Development, and Acquisition
Deputy Chief of Staff for Personnel
The Judge Advocate General
Chief of Engineers
1. 
Colonel Edward L. Buescher
2. 
Hr. Harold S. Block
3. Dr. David W. Witter
4. 
Captain Richard L. Huff
5. 
Mr. Robert T. Flove
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

324
Senator KzImwUY. The subcommittee stands in adjournment.
[Whereupon, at 12:32 p.m., the subcommittees were adjourned.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIXES
I. DOD and Service Directives and Guidance.
II. Description of DOD and Service Review Mechanisms Sub-
mitted to National Commission for Protection of Human
Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research.
IIL Summary of Current Research Involving Human Subjects
- in DOD.
IV. Research Plans Submitted to Army Investigation Drug
Research Board by Biomedical Laboratory, Edgewood
Arsenal, Md.
V. Central Intelligence Agency Directives and Pertinent
Reports.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I. DOD and Service Directives and Guidance

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A

--- PAGE BREAK ---atory, Edgewood
Arsenal, Md.
V. Central Intelligence Agency Directives and Pertinent
Reports.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I. DOD and Service Directives and Guidance

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

329
DOD AND ARHED,.FORCES REGULATIONS ON HUMAN SUBJECTS
RESEARCH
DODI 6000.4
DODI 5030.29
AR 40-7
AR 40-38
AR 70-25
BUNEDINST 6000.4B
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
SECHAVINST 3900.39
AFR 169-6
APR 169-8
APR 80-33
Department of Defense
Clinical Investigation Program, 7 April 1971
Investigational Use of Drugs by the Department
of Defense, 12 May 1964
Department of the Army
Use of Investigational Drugs in Humans and the
Use of Schedule I Controlled Drug Substances,
4 April 1975
Clinical Investigation Program, 23 February 1973
with interim change effective 1 September 1975
Use of Volunteers as Subjects of Research,
15 September 1974
Department of the Navy
Clinical Investigation Program, 15 January 1975
Investigational Use of New Drugs in Human Beings,
9 July 1973
Use of Volunteers as Subjects in Research, Develop-
ment, Test, and Evaluation, 28 April 69
Department of the Air Force
Clinical Investigation, 26 June 1974
Use of Human Test Subjects in the Medical
Service, 19 August 1974
Use of Volunteers in Aerospace Research,
28 August 1969

--- PAGE BREAK ---ment of the Air Force
Clinical Investigation, 26 June 1974
Use of Human Test Subjects in the Medical
Service, 19 August 1974
Use of Volunteers in Aerospace Research,
28 August 1969

--- PAGE BREAK ---

330
April 7. 1971
NUMBER 6000. 4
ASD(HM)
Department of Defense Directive
SUBJECT 
Clinical Investigation.Program
I. 
PURPOSE
This Directive sets forth basic policy governing the conduct
of clinical investigation programs in the Department of
Defense. It assigns responsibility for conducting clinical
investigation as a continuing program in military medical
facilities and outlines administrative and funding procedures
for carrying out this program.
II. 
APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE
A. The provisions of this Directive apply to the military
departments and the unified and specified couands. It
encompasses all elements of a clinical investigation
program as they apply to the medical missions of the
Armed Services, except those projects which may be appro-
priately sponsored by the Director of Defense Research and
Engineering.
B. 
The scope of clinical investigation under this program vill
include all clinical conditions which are of significant
concern in meeting the prime objective of providing the
necessary health care of the entire military community,
including active duty personnel, dependents and retirees.
III. POLICY AND OBJECTIVES
A. Clinical investigation is an essential component of optimum
medical care and consists of the organized inquiry into
clinical health problems, for the following purposes:
1. To achieve continuous improvement in the quality of
patient care.
2. To provide experience in the mental discipline achieved by
participation in such organized inquiries, and to provide
experience for personnel who will ultimately be teaching
chiefs in military hospitals and medical specialty con-
sultants. 
0
a

--- PAGE BREAK ---cipation in such organized inquiries, and to provide
experience for personnel who will ultimately be teaching
chiefs in military hospitals and medical specialty con-
sultants. 
0
a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

331
3. 
To maintain an atmosphere of inquiry because of the dynamic
nature of the health sciences.
.
To maintain high professional standing and accreditation of
advanced health education programs.
B. 
The Clinical Investigation Program established pursuant to this
Directive will have as its objective the goals enumerated in III. A.,
above, 
The effectiveness of this program may be judged by the extent
to which it advances the quality of health care rendered in military
medical facilities, as measured by presently accepted professional
standards, including statistical health data, accreditation evaluations,
and such other criteria as may be devel6ped to assay health care and
the professional competence of health care personnel.
IV. 
RESPONSIBILITY
The Secretaries of the Military Departments will establish programs for
clinical investigation which will:
A. Disseminate information about the programs to all who are eligible
to participate; including personnel in both graduate training and
non-graduate training hospitals and other treatment facilities.
B. 
Set procedures and criteria for evaluation of the merit and design
of clinical investigations and mechanisms for approval and disapproval.
C. Monitor the effectiveness of the program.
D. Provide support staffing and material.
V. 
FUWDING
Clinical investigation conducted under this Directile will be funded
from operating funds; funds will be programed for t.is purpose.
Clinical investigation is a patient care related function and will be
programmed separate from efforts Coming under the purview of the
Director, Defense Research and Engineering.
VI. EFFECTIVE DATE AND IMPLEMENTATION
This Directive is effective immediately. Two (2) copies of implementing
instructions will be forwarded to the Assistant Secretary of Defense
(Health and Environment) within 90 days after the date of this Directive.
Ketar 
f 
Jefen
2
70-026 0 - 76 - 22pies of implementing
instructions will be forwarded to the Assistant Secretary of Defense
(Health and Environment) within 90 days after the date of this Directive.
Ketar 
f 
Jefen
2
70-026 0 - 76 - 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---332
OAR 70-25
Anr Ry 
I.yroN 
lWADQ.\RTFV'.

RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
USE OF VOLUNTEERS AS SUBJECTS OF RESEARCH
Effective 15 September 1974
This rerision transfers flee final approral authority frout lie Chief of Research and Derelop.

1 nct to :Phc Surgeon General for all research usi#.g vol:nteers, *xcept research lnrolring
nuclear and chemical trarfare agents and identifies flhe requirement for use of active ditty
military ,person net as roluntc(rs and instructs major commanders to proride assistance In
their recruitment.

Local limited supplementation o!

this regulation Is permitted, but is not
required.

If supplements are Issued, Army Stcir agencies and major Army comuuands will
furnish one coly of each to HQDA (DASG-RDZ).

Washington, DC 20310.

Other commands will
furnish one copy each to the next higher headquarters.

raapispb
Purpete..........................................................

1
DefAition ..........................................................

2
E1xemiptions .......................................................

3
basis principks ............................................................

Additional saf-guards ...........................................

5
Approval to conduct experiment .................................

0..

* ........

Ciai3n employees ..........................................................

7
Itecruiitmnct of active duty military volunteers .................................

8
Appendiz.

L4%4 implicatioas
1.

Purpose.

These regulations prescribe policies
and procedures goveruig tho use of volunteers
as :iubject-s in Department of the Army research
vhcrein human beings are deliberately exposed to
unusaal or potentially hazardous couditions.

Theso regulations are applicable worldwide, wher-
ever voluuteers are used as subjects in Department
of the Army research.

2.

Definition.2.

Definition.

For the purpose of these regu-
lations, unusual and potentially hazardous condi-
tions are those which may be reasonably expected
to involve the risk, beyond the normal call of duty,
of privation.

di.,t-omfort.

diktresi, pain, damage to
heltl., bodily harm, physical injury, or death.

3.

Exemptions.

The 
following categories of
activities tiil investigative programs are exempt
front the piuvisitns of tbe-e regulations:
o.

Jte-A-tirrh and nonresearch programs.

tasks,
and te-,ts Uli-h mDv involve inherent occupa-
tional hazard, to health or exposure of personnel
to potentially hazardous situations encountered as
part of training or other notrnal duties, e.g.; flight
training, jump trainiitg, mnarkmanship training,
rauger training, fire drill-, gas drills, and handling
of explotves.

6.

That portion of human factors research
which involves normal training or other military
duties as part of iat experiment, wherein disclosure
of exlIkriukental conditions to participating per-
*This reualtiea supersedes AR 70-25.26 1archi lf*L
TACO) 55A1-Jutr S-I0---?4
sonnel would reveal 
the artificial nature of
such conditions and defeat tite purpose of th
investigation.

e.

Ethie.l medical and clinical investi-ations
invot'ing the bacic disease process or ncw treat-
men, procedures conducted by the Army medicall
Service for the benefit of patients.

4.

Diie principles.

Certain basic principles mnust
be observed to satisfy moral, ethical, and le",l
concepts.

These are-
a.

Voluntary consent is absolutely essential.

(1) The volunteer will huve legal capacity to
give consCnt, and must give consent freely -without
bein, subjected to any force or duress.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Voluntary consent is absolutely essential. (1) The volunteer will huve legal capacity to
give consCnt, and must give consent freely -without
bein, subjected to any force or duress. He inu.-t
have sulffcieut understanding of the implications
of his participation to enable him to make ,t
informed decision, so far as such knowledge does
not compronatise the experiment, lie will be told --
mucai of the nature, duration, and purpose of the
expe.iment, the method and means by which it is
to t e conducted, and the inconveniences and
haza.xls to be expected, as will not invalidate the
results. He -ill be fully informed of the erects
upor his health or person which may possibly come
from his participation in the experiment. .2) The consent uf the volunteer will be in
writing. A document setting forth substantially
the above requirements will bo signed by the
volwiteer in the presence of at least one witness
I
)f

--- PAGE BREAK ---333
AR 70-25
not involved in the research study who will attest
to such signature in writing.

(3) The responsibility for asertaining the
quality of the consent rests upon each person who
vitiates, directs, or conducts the experiment.

It is
a personal responsibility which may not be
delegated.

b.

The number of volunteers used will be kept
at a minimum cousiitent with c below.

C.

The experiment must be such as to contribute
siguiicantly to approved research and have rea-
sonable prospects of yielding militarily important
results essential to an Army research.

program
which ore not obtainable by other methods or
means of study.

d.

Ili experiment will be conducted so as to
avoid all unnecessary physical and mental suffering
and injury.

S.

No experiment will be conducted if there is
any reason inherent to the nature of the experi.

meut to believe that death or disabling injury
will occur.

f.

The degree of rik to be taken will never ex-
ceed that determined to be required by the urgency
or importance of the Army program for which the
experinwnt is necessary.

V.

Proper prepart.tions will be made and ade-
quate facilities provided to protect the volunteer
against all fore.-eeable possibilities of injury, dis-
ability, ordeath.

A.

The experiment will be conducted only by
scientifically qualified persons.

The highest de-
gree of skill and care will be required during all
stages of the experiment of persons who conduct
or engage in the experiment.

i.

The volunteer will be informed that at any
time during the course of the experiment he will
have the right to revoke his consent and withdraw
from the experiment, without prejudice to himself.

j.

Volunteers will have no physical or mental
di-,avwi which will make the prolp'sed experi-
wutt more hawudous for themi than for normal
healthy per-on4.

This determination will be made
by the project leader with, if nece*.ary, competent
mntdical advice.

k.This determination will be made
by the project leader with, if nece*.ary, competent
mntdical advice.

k.

The .cicutit int charge will be prepared to
terminate the experimentt at any stage if he has
protble cuu.ie to klwieve, in the exercise of !te
gowl laitl.

superior .-kill, and carcftul j'tdgteint
re, uired of hint thtat conitiutation is likely to result
in injury, disability, or death to the volunteer.

I.

P'ri-,ior, of war will wif I.

e-:-A 
..

:,er ery-
.

5.

Additional safeguards.

As added protection for
volunteers, the following saeguards will be
provided:
a.

A physician approved by The Surgeon General
will be responsible for the medical care of volut-
teer.

The physician may or may not be the project
leader but will have authority to terminate the
experiment.

at any time that he believes death,
injury, or bodily harm is likely to result
b.

All apparatus and instruments necessary to
deal with likely emergency situations will be
available.

c.

Required medical treatment and hospitaWa..

tion till be provided for all casualties.

d.

The physician in charge will have consultants
available to him on short notice throughout the
experiment who are competent to advise or assist
with.

complicaLions which can be anticipated.

6.

Approval to conduct experiment.

It is the re-
sponsibility of the head of each major command
and other agency to submit- to Tho Surgeon
General a written proposal for studies which come
within the purview of this directive.

The proposal
will include for each study the name of the
person to be in charge, name of the proposed
attending physician, and the detailed plan of the
experiment.

The Surgeon General has final
approval authority for all research using volun-
teers excep: research with nuclear or chemical
warfare agents.

Proposals for research with nuclear
or chemical warfare agents wvill be forwarded by
The Surgeon General with recommendations ot
medical aspects to the Secretary of the Army for
approval.

7.

Civilian employees.--- PAGE BREAK ---

7. Civilian employees. Mhen civilian employ-
ees of the Department of tle Army volunteer
under this program, the following instruction:, will
be observed:
a. Any duty as a volunteer performed during
the employee's regularly scheduled tour of dti-
will be coniklered as conttiutive duty ior wiji.Ii
straight tiu, rates are payable. Time sp..Ii iu
connection with an experiment. out-e the em-
ployee's reglarly scheduled tour will be coutid-
ired as volurLtary overtime for whtict no 1 ziyuicnt
may be made nor compensatc!y time grated. The employee will be so infornied b..forc accep-
tance of his volunteer services. b. Claims submitted to the Bure.tm 
of ]L.'-
ployees' 
Compensation, 
U.S. Departmowt of
Lalor, betax-o of disability or d.,'h r,-ultia-
TAGO t51
MEST 
VIL

--- PAGE BREAK ---

334
U:it ! $'tc!. 
Code, section 4A03 es t!,c Depart.,
r:It of the Arwy authority for the vze of Euch
vohmutcr set 2.
C. All y':>nti..ts concernin-, hours of duty, v'-,
leave, COImI'clIen::" on chi:A,, or al.'Iliealion of e-
Cisili'n prnsoml re iultio,- to vohnteer
jlovce" wvili be 1re.ented I!, 
-h chrnels t(
Deputy Chie( of Staff for .'eronnci, AT
Office cf Civilinn Personnel.
8. )eerultrie:,t or active dwy.
pc:.,Del t. volirste,- b'evi-, e
tOe inve-figa',iom. 
1", mioi: 
i2 
v 
,-
p 
-i 
d by r .b.rch 
eo'l I 
..:.-,'
co:n .-jet of the rc.e-rch. Ml .,r cr. 
' ::,k:
pro- "do assitanec to r ,:uiui:v 
tv .i.
tinvi recruii.- 
wi!l be condj:te'd il t ;.;G:
e: 
illy, and legally acceptablo umaner.
I
mESiAiir
Ap

--- PAGE BREAK ---335
AR 70-25
APPENDIX
LEGAL IMPLICATIONS
The following olfinion.

of The Judge Advocate
General funi.i specific guidance for all partici-
patits in re.,earch using volunteers:
1.

Authority.

The Sm-rett"ry of the Army is
authorized to conduct re.earcl and development
programs including the procurement of services
that are needed for these programs (10 U.S.C.

4503).

'hue Secretary has the authority to ":sign
detail and pre.crihe the dulie." of both members
of the Army and civilian personnel (10 U.S.C.

3012(e)).

2.

Military personnel and Department of the
Army civilian employees.

Compensation for the
d4hilily of death of a civilian employee re-
sulting from personal injury or diwea,, 
proxi-
mately caused by hi, employment is payable under
the Federal Employc.

Compensation Act (39
Stat.

742 et seq.), as amended (5 U.S.C.

751 et
seq.), regardle.;s of whether his c.nployment was
of n hazardous nature.

The amount and type of
disability compensation or other benefits payable
by reason of the dea.h or di;abilitv of a member
of the Army resultiung from injury or di-ease in-
cidentt to service depends upon the individual
status of each member, anid is covered by various
provisions of law.

It may be stated generally that
under isr.sent law.

no additional rights against
the Govenimnent uill result fromn tie death or dis-
ability of military and civilian per_onnel par-
ticipatling in exlwrments by reason of the hazard-
ous imtture of the operations.

3.

Private citizens.

It is the policy of the United
States to iot,hilit the acceptance of voluntary
service 
particularly when they may provide
a ba.is for a future claim against, the Government.

({.S.

3679, as amended; 31 U.S.C.

065(b)).

4.

Use of appropriated funds for the purchase of
Insurance.

As the imymentit of insurance pre-
-m 
n.i on the life of an~ officer or employee of the
Uitied Stales ii a fouin of compensation which
is not eumrrnlV uuhorized, payment of tho.-e
preuni1mai 6 lor-!,il hd (1{.S.

1705; c ioa,iisiontr
Oi.As the imymentit of insurance pre-
-m 
n.i on the life of an~ officer or employee of the
Uitied Stales ii a fouin of compensation which
is not eumrrnlV uuhorized, payment of tho.-e
preuni1mai 6 lor-!,il hd (1{.S.

1705; c ioa,iisiontr
Oi.

Itorna 
' 
v.

Shin'dt, 
g7 F 2.1 764 (2d
Cir.

I'71; (.t,,,:eIb, v.

.g1le-tir, SG F 2d :03 (6th
Cir.

11y'41; 24 Comp (i;ci.

643 (194-)).

5.

Contra¢lor's cnmploces.

There .1pl-airS to
be no IeT.al 
bjelt.in to the iCA.

of enmplovec.

of
conlraelori- iin r-4a.-rrh limil ,,.uvel.pment, experi-
nitVw.

It iz 
ie r...., 
.:...

,..

,t...- 
.

4; .

4-r tp,.

: , 
.

.

tract are sti-ciently broad to permit the partici-
pation of these employees.

Generally.

benefits to
which private employees may become entitled by
reason of &ath or disability resulting from their
employment are payable under State law except
persons covered by the survivors insurance pro-
isions of the Social Security Act (49 Stat.

623,
as amended (42 U.S.C.

402)).

Reimbursement of
the employer for additional costs by reason of this
liability of his employees will depend upon the
terms of each contract.

These employees are not
disqualified from prosecuting claims against the
Government under the Federal Torts Claim- Act
(2S U.S.C.

?471 et seq., see AR 25-70).

In cost,
reimbursemettt type research contracts with com-
mercial orgauizations the cost of maintaining
group accident and life insurance may be reim-
bursed to the contractor (subject to certain ex-
ceptions) under ASPR 15-205.16 provided that
the approval of the head of the Procuring Activity
is obtained (APP 10-551).

6.

Irregular or fee.basis employees.

Intermittent
services of -..h emplny,.s are .uthorized.

(For
experts and consultants see See.

15, Act of 2 Aug
1940 (GO Stut.

SI1; 5 U.S.C.

55a); Sec.

501, l~d-
Appropriatiin Act, 1961 (74 Stat.

340); note APP
30-204.1, CPR A7; See.

710 Defense Production
Act of 1900 (G Stat.

819; 50 U.S.C.--- PAGE BREAK ---

710 Defense Production
Act of 1900 (G Stat. 819; 50 U.S.C. App 21G0);
and for arc.tects, engineers, and other technical
and professional personnel on a fee basis, see 10
U.S.C. 4540.). Whether these employees can be
detailed or assigned to the proposed experiments
will depend upon the statutory authority for
employment and the provisions of their employ-
ment agreement in each case. The Federal Eiu-
ployee Com.pensation Act. supra, in all probability
applies with respect to these irregular anti fee-
ba::,s employees for any injury or di.eaia rcsultin-
hom their employment, although a fi'ntl deter-
uination in s,.ch cases will have to be made by the
Bureau of Employees Compensation, Depa.-tinent,
of Labor. Subject to such res:riction- a:%d limit,--
tions as may appear in the statutory authority
under which l.e is employed, it would fpp,:-r tl'at
the Government vay legally bear the expense of
premiums up'rn the life of an irregular or fee"
basik employee whose rate of compenatio- 4 pot,
TAGO f$A
L nr
KSTff AVA

--- PAGE BREAK ---fpp,:-r tl'at
the Government vay legally bear the expense of
premiums up'rn the life of an irregular or fee"
basik employee whose rate of compenatio- 4 pot,
TAGO f$A
L nr
KSTff AVA

--- PAGE BREAK ---

336
additional allowance to the employee for financing
such private insurance arrangements as he may
wish to make rather than to undertake direct
negotiations with insurance carriers for the desired
coverage.
AR 7C
7. inclusion. Subject to the above condition
Arm, d Forces personnel and/or civilians ou d
at installations engaged in research in subj
fields mill bo permitted to actively participate
all phases of the program.
The proponent agency of this regulation is the 0Mce of The Surgeon
General. Users we'invited to send comments and suggested improve-
ments on DA Form 2028 (Recommended Changes to Publications and
Blank Forms) to HODA IDASG-RDZI, WASM DC 20310.
By Order of the Secretary of the Army:
Official:
N1, VR1NE 
L. BOWERS
Major General, Uited States Army
TAe AdWant General
CREIGIITON W. ABRA%
General, United taies Ari
hief of Stal
DISTRIBUTION:
Actire Army, AR, NG, USAG: To be distributed in accordance with DA Form 12-9A requii
ments for AR, Research and Development-D (Qty Rqr Biock No. 112)
T~iI 11-A
14.." 
*

--- PAGE BREAK ---337
Atur Iurimo
No.

40-38 
1
"'Al 40 3S
)D1 ,'.A)IQUA irJtiAIs
D.PAlRTo.XT OF TllJ: A1R.MY
1r'A IIIKro, 
DC, 23 Mitats] 197,1
MiI)IC, 
WI 
IIVICES
CLINICAL INVTS'I'IGATION PROGRAM
Iffeclirc I April 1973
This revulofn reflects cotilinually rhanging legal requirennts In the field of hinena inres!.

"gotion.

local vupplentatenciion of this regulation is proi41ilcd except upot approval of The
Sturgeon Gcneral (DASG).

rurimm --------------------------------------- 
------------- 
a
A loldtealiley ---------------------------------- -------.-.-.-.

-.

-.

--------........

Aiallillnb-t-.-- 
................------------------------------ 
--------------- 
3
Sw) 
---------------------------- 
-------------------- ----------------------
34
Sl111oVl011OfW--11-------------------- 
---------------------- 
46
|utnql 
O 
m oi f 
r 
aul'rad:...................................................

5
Jkottithic 
quivi'mmi.s --------------------------------------------
TRO €Oilca| im-s.iag.ation mnmd 
hmmmmmtimm 
m om 
lle-------------......

.----- 
I
Alp.mifll 
A.

Voluttteer Arrtsix-nt.

3).

AplIaillon for Cilu| 
lt Immqg.a 
lion Project.

Q.

Rloring Cuidv,.ires.

1.

Purpaose.

This regniatiiit pmovid a Army policy
gtmid,o" for cliiml ini vstigtions funded aider
otlh r Ailnn tlime )))'J' rmpraai;Ition and )ne-
wribc.i t ie , ocwdumres for ioo-e.irg proposals
and for repor imlg ijrogrez.

7.

Applikability.

v.

The provisions of this rev'i-
bltion rS ) applicable to all Army aicwdical facili-
ties &old act ivifie
.

Tito provisions of tii.t regulation are not
applicable to plm.vl*Js ue;a'dinig lcalfli care ro-
ward as dcrmed lkiow.

3.

Definitions.

.

Ciakol it4fim 
tion.

Umder
this pt-ogmant clinical imi ed i igatioat con.-.ists of tie
organized reientific inquiry, both ll iiin.tanls nnd
by dim-clly related laboratory work, into clinical
problems of significant cosaeem a ill the necc.-ary
health care of cmm rl'i.s 
of l(be nilitarvoy commltitV,
including active duly peiomtel, dcp.m.dent., and
reti eme.Ciakol it4fim 
tion.

Umder
this pt-ogmant clinical imi ed i igatioat con.-.ists of tie
organized reientific inquiry, both ll iiin.tanls nnd
by dim-clly related laboratory work, into clinical
problems of significant cosaeem a ill the necc.-ary
health care of cmm rl'i.s 
of l(be nilitarvoy commltitV,
including active duly peiomtel, dcp.m.dent., and
reti eme.

bs.

Jllallk cm rycseassi.

The aploliention of
Scientific atethodlx 
to tile study of time avaial,ility,
organi-mt ion, administr tion, sad m 
ageaeat, of
health services to include the efficiency amd effec-
tr ciem with which such 
a-ivrices are delivered.

c.

Subjects.

Any persons who mraiy be at risk be-
cual 
of participation as an object of clinical
investigate ion by unmbets of the AMI EI)) or their
appoited eprevitative.%.

Tlte 
may include it.-
'This reg htlon Puperscecs Alt 4-3S.1 August 1tll.

rACO 40,A-Pdurl 
10-412-1
pat ients, or;atientsovan doitoit-, inforanmits, or
norimnl imt.;'dduaiS wmo I-arti'ipate in mtudies of
medical, I6ysiological, sociolnicai, or
logical orie-.Iatioa.

d.

As ti .

A person is "at riik" if ie/Kli.

t;ay
be exo ed "o tie posMAbility of iant (phyiC.Ai.

psyclmolovarl, or sociological) its a con'cjiemce of
activity -.

1,0h extCndA bi-.od m.-o of V'Iti..t1-ed
tlnd accel!4 methods ne martty to intet bi.,/hzer
siemd..

J).e:ti,mIiatioi, of mature aind extlit of "t
risk" is a lit ter of oamtiitos-i e mid lwro.iot.4 
!

judgtenti.

)c.irspitsibiliit) for tis dletemniadina
residess at II levels of inmtituioaaal and dei 
,-1.

iiietital ii'w.

Defnitivo detirinat 
, 
ion will be
nvide by 11P.

eliciating agency.

4.

Policy.

v.

It, is tie policy to encourage the Ier-
fornlimi v[ clinical ilivedtlgntioli by" .\.MI'I)I)
liersoiitl, qiecially by persoitnl aiiged to
Army hoi.

ils where Iol -graditale edtcalio-al
progamriin a; colductcd.

b.

m'illita tlewc A-ny li aciag lhaoiik-l', baSic
personnel report, for clinical ii-vet4igation is a
mailer of lmpital stafi aulhoriatlion.--- PAGE BREAK ---

b. m'illita tlewc A-ny li aciag lhaoiik-l', baSic
personnel report, for clinical ii-vet4igation is a
mailer of lmpital stafi aulhoriatlion. (1) S i-e resources are limited altd the pro-
editiiel Ua1r1mle, clinical investigation sttpport jier-
sonatel slic'!d be organized within a wavrtate
Chiaical Ibt-.igation Service of tie lIopilal or-
gantixlion Structur. Tie Chief of the Clinical
.1

--- PAGE BREAK ---338
Alt 40-.%
T~vestig..ntinn Serviet will serve i:s coordinator
of 
clinical 
inv:e.ligation 
for 
the 
lin.

pital
Comani1der.

(2) 'J'hI 
cinmunasder of tile hospital will ap-
point the.

following comliltk,-ik 
fron tloe irofe.-
sionnl Ma f:
() 
Woliicaol 1, 1Vc*;9.h011 Co,,an;,lhe-'o
review all clinical iuiverligation 
pc',:as for
scientific adrcju.cy and to tel piorities for sup-
oort.

This committee will h.

ccn.

| of the
Chief, ]Proft.ionMl Service or his designated
repre.vetative %iho iil) act, a.

Chairman, 
and at
le.sft six ot her Indicilly qualified indalividials
d(.wiglpticd Ihy the h-u.mil.: col 
nider.

(b) )Iaumnn lihe 
U 
.'oAneufllc..--'To IeView
for mdicil safety and suitrbility nil clinical i.-
vetigalio!) l'ro!

o'.s involviu.v tile ume of human
sulhjeut.

5 lhi coianiitec will b cnmpoi-d of the
Chief, PSofici.al 
,-,ricc.

who will at ax
Chairman, a Chaplain, a ,lAG officer ad four
other qlunlified individual.

d-, inated by the
Coannider of the lorpitnla 
who are not imni-
bers of tle Clinical 1nve'ldia,."oi Conilttee.

(3) 'Ilse Chicf, C(lincal Intestigalinit Serv-
ieo will Serve as the recorlder of the Clinical In-
ve.digati.an ad )lUama 
E.ve Coniiiitcee.

lie will
be responsible for mainininlug 
c-ords of all ac-
tions ipeulanig• to iiidividual proloeols.

(4) Where al)rojlhte in.\: my non-teaching
htlpital.% the Chief, Profe.zilonal Service may
sorvo as coordinator of clinical investigation
activities.

e.

Ilhe iuioral, ethical antl legal concepts relat-
ing to the u.C of hniuall suhlje'ts will be followed
*s outlined in All 70-25.

The voluntary consent
of (le liuan subject is e.-Clintil.

Each individual
who initiates or directs the clinical investigation
has a personal dity and responsibility for aswr-
tabling he quality of tih subjects cosent.

before
the ac~epace of tli subject, he mutst be given
adequate exlanation.Each individual
who initiates or directs the clinical investigation
has a personal dity and responsibility for aswr-
tabling he quality of tih subjects cosent.

before
the ac~epace of tli subject, he mutst be given
adequate exlanation.

Tle should be informed of
tse nature, durat inn, and iurpose of the study; ithe
method and mcans by-whicl it is to be conducted;
all inconveniences and hamirls reasonably to be
expected; and the effects upon his health or per-
son which may pos-ibly colie fmom his participa-
tion in the study.

The ,-gre-ient will le prepa red
iWi afcrotl':ce wi th fhe format oullined il appeni-
dix A, and will be in itoii-medical la.

nge that,
iseasil- understood by the s.lbjecL.

d.

tesoure requirements for tho Clinical ln-
vemigafion.

Pm!aa 
will be pi-ora4-alted 
und
budgeted through eatbli-led progm/l~ud; -t
proc(edtvt
e.

Clinical hnave.

litinn )orojects should .1e
oriented toward clinical prol)ldeil 
of si:.pificalit
concern in the nwce.wary 
ealth care of tle mili-
tary comnlnuity.

/.

Jve-sligatiml objectihea should allow con-
clusio, of studtiis within th 
antlicipa|t 
tour of
the investigator, or careful plans hold be m;,de
to I.-mit coutiliiation when the invest.igtor
leaves.

p.

Plrolmxals it the following categori: mu.1 lIe
approved by The Surgeon General prior to initia-
tion of ilvesig.sion :
(1) Whciu funding 
equirei1 -nts 
cxceeds
$5,000.

A --
(2) When hminma stuihjelts arc ii.d.

(3) 
\'hei hive5ligatioihl i-ug.

Pie eiilo3ed
in huans, or n11v us is made of 
tilee:lut, 
I cont-
I rolhd substat.'-a.

See AP 40-7.

(4) When tidioisotelos ate u.ed.

See AV, 40-
37.

(5) Whet a protitl is submilted from a-i
Army hospital tot having a clinical inmesliation
errice.

-- 
(0) 
nI the Iropoualr 
is concerned wilh
dlntg or alcoic2 abute.

S.

-Subm.-Ma in 
of propoal.

o.

Promo.wls m ill Ie
prepa ed in *..voiance will the format outlined
in appendix )*.--- PAGE BREAK ---

o. Promo.wls m ill Ie
prepa ed in *..voiance will the format outlined
in appendix )*. All alopr(,printe paragralih will
be completed and tho information on the back-
ground data, iroblen, exlerimental design, nud
method of alsi-!oaeh will be sufficient. to facilitate
evaluation. b. Coinplete- proposals will be submitted to th-
local commander or Isis desi-nated repreentative
(pama .b) for critical review. Th11e 
10roll 
,. will be
evaluated for i,-.ientifi¢ validity, miced, practicality,
personnel, arud funding reqI irements. Unsatis-
factory or incomplete proposals will be rethrned
to lia or-gintator without further action. c. Sat isfaetory proposals will be stbmitted to the
local Clinical nv-estigation and Human ise Coon-
miltees for rpproval. Al)i)roved I)ropO ils will
then be sulmitted to flie commander for approval. d. Propos-, ;i not subject to pror approval .srait-
linl in pAr.-.gralit 49 will he forwarded tliolu;;h
channels te Tho Surgeon 
General, ][QI)A
TACO 40A

--- PAGE BREAK ---ie commander for approval. d. Propos-, ;i not subject to pror approval .srait-
linl in pAr.-.gralit 49 will he forwarded tliolu;;h
channels te Tho Surgeon 
General, ][QI)A
TACO 40A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-
339
(i)\SG) W'ASlI DC !01 
for information
Only.
C. P1lp)ot'c. 
fallimg wiilin the mcjlmimi'emnls of
para mrapihs .ig(i), (2), (), 
() 
or (G) will be
forwtr'ded I|rO-mgm1- 
appropriaU 
t' 
cm.1mi meis to 'i'|lo
Surgeon Gener.i, IIQI)A (DASG) for evitluation
sid approval. 
,
I. Proposals falling within lie 1-( 
iCleients of
paragrahli 4/(.p), will b, proecescd as provided in
a, b and C, Above, alld il-Idil ion 
'-111 have Aill
aplicalion p)expawld as lwp.Ecrii)d ill ptragrnpil
Sb, ore, .\ 
.J-0-7. Such ropo-als ,wiii be forwarded
as p..'fribed ill A 1 J04.
g. Forwn-disqg co'rcvitpoldenlce Should ichido
all Aclion Ink ml Oil lim0 plopoxi by lmo 
ioz A Cliii,-
cal Investipalion.mnd 
mDumn 
Use colmittes
(pams 46).
Alt .10-7.S
G. Itciort li:; 
rcqu 
lel." Act ii iv~ awl/or ill.
dividmils 
nmderlaiking cidi. 
inlmlt .liu 
mll 
V iii
sribmit an inu wi pIogwisv 
mpolt entilhd, Clini-
cal Jwcvl i.ition PIjvgram )Reio, 
ji; ('ml rol Sym-
bol 311,;D ,-00, followii,.g tle g,,idclimms tet foIhm
ill alilimliX C. Prior to fimal printing und dish-i-
bilion, Iio diaft. copies will be Submilted to 'he
Surgeon (ellcml. 
)iQD.\ (D.ASC) W'.II )0
20:314 for format review within 30 wol Lrumg 
tlats
ifter" Ie do!4 of the fic.d year.
7. T'SG cliuicml fitve.tinIion and llumnll wco
commit re.-. A DASG Clinieti I ml(c-sti-to, i 
-ll
mimullWe 
:,| 
lm11111311 Ise. oConim(llco % ill b esl:, -
iiShed to ievW6w nil jrpock.s for npprovl- mi-
milted tu The Surgeon General a. sl',ified in
ar-gaph -Ig.
T 
WACO 1OA
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---l
mimullWe 
:,| 
lm11111311 Ise. oConim(llco % ill b esl:, -
iiShed to ievW6w nil jrpock.s for npprovl- mi-
milted tu The Surgeon General a. sl',ified in
ar-gaph -Ig.
T 
WACO 1OA
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

340
An 4(L,,'
APPENDIX A
VOLUhnTEER AGILI),MM"NT
1, 
having attained my eighteenth (18th)
birthday, and olheruiise having (till capacity to cousent, do hereby volunteer
to participate in anl investigation study entitled
under the direction of
TIle implications of my voluntary participation; itme nature, duration and
purpose; tile anethods and mean by whichh it. is to he conducted; and tie
iueonveicelces and hazards to be expected have been. thoroughly explained to
ite by 
, and are rot forth in full on tie reverie
side of this Agreement, which I have initirled. I have been given an opportunity
to rask question, concerning thit investigation study, and any suclh questions
havo' been answered to my ftll and complete satisfaction.
I understand tlmat I inny at ony time during tite course of this investigation
study revol:e ny consent, and withdraw frum the study without prejudice;
however, I may be required to undergo certain further examinations, if, in tIme
opinion of tile attending physician, such exainhmsariols are nccesary for iny
health or well being.
Bigmtaure 
)ato
I was pne.net during time explanation rr.ferred to above, as weil as the
Volunteer's opportunity for questions, and herelby witness his sigonatue.
witet 
Sifts tuae 
Date
Onl this side of tie Volunteer Agreement, time principal investigIttor should
set forth full details concerning the investigation study, insofar as such wold
Affect or influeme time tentative subject in) any way. This explanation should be
worded so that it call be charly undertooi by time sitject. The subject Should
place his initials at. the end of the last line of explanation.
* 
A prop-r explnnlion should, at. a mJi 
umn, puo;-ide tile answers to the
"following questions:
1. What will e adminitered or done to the subject?
2. How long will tie subject's participation last?
, 
3. To %%liat tests or examinations will time subject be required to submit.?
4. Why is the investigation being conducted?
5. Has this particular study becm done previously, and, if so, with what
results?
6. What inconveniences or discomforts is the subject likely to experience?
7. What risks or hazards can be reasonably anticipated?
S. What steps will be taken to prevent or minimize these risks or hazards?
;5
TAOO 40.Ances or discomforts is the subject likely to experience?
7. What risks or hazards can be reasonably anticipated?
S. What steps will be taken to prevent or minimize these risks or hazards?
;5
TAOO 40.A

--- PAGE BREAK ---is the subject likely to experience?
7. What risks or hazards can be reasonably anticipated?
S. What steps will be taken to prevent or minimize these risks or hazards?
;5
TAOO 40.A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

341
AR 40-3s
APPI:NDIX B
APPLICATION FOR CLINICAL INIVFTIGATION PIIOJI'C'r
*'.(xempt report, parA% 7-25, Alt 335-15)
I. PRINCIPALL INVESTJGAVOI:
2. PROJECT TITLE : (Enter theft project title.)
3. OBWE1',IVE : (Brief but. specific statement of the objective of the projectt)
* 4. ME I)ICAI APPI,JCAJ'ION: (E'rxplin briefly the medical inilprtnce and
* possible uiefulneis of the project.)
6. ST'A'I'US: (What h.-s been accomluJishlcd or publi.ed in the l)r.o)led area
of study aud ill wh:,t manner will the project, reletes to or differ fmrou that which
Is been accomllithed. If references or personal co:nnunction with olher
Army medical facilities are involved, wo indicate.)
0. PLAN: (Outlite exactly what is proIo"ed to be accomplished in sufficient
detail to indicate a clear course of action. 'J'echuological validity of lirocedurcs
and cmronological steps should be shown.) (Notc. The Surgeon Generul and the
local commander must have a very clear picture of how i/f. it cstigati,: will
proccecd to mect the objcclive of the project. Tisis p2
3 i-,agraph frequently fimiui.leI
the basis for approval or disapproval of a project.)
7. BJfI,1OG!AIPJIY: (lst 
sources of information.)
S. FACILI'IE S 'J'O IE USED: (Such as laboratoiy, ward, clinic.)
9. 'TIME IIEQUI IEiD TO COMPLETE: (Give moulh asad year of expected
start and anticipatd complelion).
10. PERSONNE'J, TO CONDUCT I'lOJWIXrr: (list amnes and positions
of persons to bc directly involved in project wik.) (At tnch short. biographkal
sketch, including Pesumic of education, research traihntig, and lit of publications,
for catch pert;on stained.)
1. FUNDING IMPJCATIONS:
O&MA 
O1'4 
7'(al
a. Per.,onncl: (itemie and explain need) ---.. 
$..... 
" 
-
b. Equipment: (iteuize and explain isced) -.-- 
.. 
S.-.-.
c. Coisaunble Supplies: (itemize) .--------------.. $ 
$ 
-
-
d. Travel: (ileaize amid explain ieed) -----------.... -
S
e. Modification of facilities: (explain) ------------ 
S- 
S-
f. Other (explain) --------------------------- 
&. 
$- 
S..
TM~AI, 
$,--. 
6..- 
6.-
12. DATE IREPARlED: (Give day, month, ad yeur of preparation.)
(1 nature of Priacipal havcstiAtor) 
mslguNo of Department Chif)
(Enter 
ie and mUiing address of 'rincipal Iuvstipator)
.
:-.. 
-
-...... 
.. 
...-.....
":: 
;.- 
.. , -
.
.""
- TACO 403Aeparation.)
(1 nature of Priacipal havcstiAtor) 
mslguNo of Department Chif)
(Enter 
ie and mUiing address of 'rincipal Iuvstipator)
.
:-.. 
-
-...... 
.. 
...-.....
":: 
;.- 
.. , -
.
.""
- TACO 403A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

342
Al 40- I
APPND)IX C
REPORTING GUIDELINES
I. FROXNT1 COVER
It. nT'rI, 
"PAGE:
)Jr. FOIRF\VORD
IV. TABLE OF (XNTIE'J'S.
6. Iilt acconling to Io.1pital Departmn[t 
(i.e., .Modine, Suigery, Mc.)
b. Jndielo ycar project, w 
initiated and itm lrescLt dipositiou:
Ongning (0), leimintted (r), romplecd (C), submitled for uublicn-
tion (SP) or uubli-lhed (')
V. TAEII OF 'UIITACI(- 
ONS AND VRI.SSNTATIONS FOR CUI-
iENrI'T FP. ,T, YE"All
Ii4 according to Hospital I)epnrl ment
VI. 1]MNT SUMMARY SITETJ
Report total letivilies of Clinicel n)lT:Vcigatios Unit:
0. Objectives
I. Technical approndh
(i) Manpower 
-.I--
(2) Funding (preceding mid current Fiscnl Year)
9. 
rogres
VII. DETAIL SIIETs
Report, specific information (f individual protocols:
a. Objteetive
. Technical rpproncli
(1) Sminary of experimental design
(2) Manimwer
(3) Fonding (preceding end current, Fiscal Year)
Progre
Sgjumary of prior and current, progress and all publication(s) and/or
presenlttion (s)
VIII. INDEX
a. Subject
&. Author
IX. BACK COVER
T'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AU "4.0-,
Tho proponent vfscncy of thi$ 
jeguilcion is the OSM1ce of The Surgeon
General. Users Ps 
invited to ;cond coimmenis and sucj;vstcd Impeove-
ments on DA roin 2020 (tRecct'imended Changvs to PNolicclions) c4iiect
to HODA DASO) W/.Stl, DC 20314.
)By Order of (bu Secitnqry of t e Army:
CRFEIGIITrON W. ABRAMS
Gencral, Unitcd Statcs Arm'y
O/filci:d: 
Chicf of Staff
VEIIN, L. BOWERS
Major (,'encial, U iicd ,Statc. A my
7'1w Adjutant ,irol
DISTI" BUTTON:
To be distributed in nccordnuce with )A Form 12-9 requiremmti 
for AR, Medicnl Service.s--
Applicable to oil Army E lements
Aciirc Army: 13 (Q(y ){jr Block No. 103)
A INAG: C (Qty Rqr iBlock No. 10G)
USA):: D (Qty Rqr Block No. 107)

--- PAGE BREAK ---quiremmti 
for AR, Medicnl Service.s--
Applicable to oil Army E lements
Aciirc Army: 13 (Q(y ){jr Block No. 103)
A INAG: C (Qty Rqr iBlock No. 10G)
USA):: D (Qty Rqr Block No. 107)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

344
•* 
UNCLASSIFIED
DAI-N
702162
CDSN 
FOR948 
MCN ,5 
,Z,, 
TOR a 151992341
' 
RTTUZYUW kULADRD454 1992324 ;UL'UU--RUEAPPP.
ZNR UUUUU
R 15153OZ JUL 75
FM VA (TSG) WASH DC//DASG-7A SSRD-HR//
TO RUt1T!FA/CO0AiSAHiSC FT SAMl HOUSTON4 TX
RUWTNFA/CDR;A.IC 
Fl SAN HOUSTI3N 
TX
RUWTlA/CDR..%A.lC 
EL PASO TX
RUVED\C/CAFAIC 
DENVER CO
RUIK.AHA/CDRL AMC SFR4'J CA
RUW ,FD?/CDk.,A.C TAC3AA WA
RUEBPDA/CDkA:tAMC 
WAS 
DC
RUHHHMA/CDRIAP.C HONULULU HI 
.
BIT 
"" 
-
1
UN LAS
SUBJECT: 
INTERIM CHANGE TO AR 40-38 (EFFECTIVE DATE: 
I SEP 75)
1. PAGE 
2. 
PA.PA 4G IS SUPERSEDED AS FOLLOWS: '
G. THE SU:GEON GENERAL (TSG) 
WILL BE RESPtU SILE FOR REVIEIW
OF A MY CL]I:ICAL ]tVESTI.,4T T9 
RESEhRC4 
PRJPPSALS INVOLVI-G 
HU%'.t
SU3JELTS AN ) FOR REVISI- , Ak4Y POLICIES AND PEGULlkT3)\S 
IN THE USE
OF H A.4 SUBJECTS I4 RESE41C.I IN ACC3)DANCE WITH ACCEPTED ETHICAL
STANDArDS. 
THE HUMAN USE REVIEW OFFICE 
(HURD), 
OFFICE 
O-F TIF SUl;ZGt"'
GENEkAL (DOSGit WILL BE TIE ACTION OFFICE FJR SUCH POLICY qEVISICNS*
AND WILL INSURE 
THAT RESEARCH PROT.3C)LS INVOLVItNG HU.AI! SUBJECTS
ARE REVIEWED :Y APPn',,PRt. TE COMIMITTFS 
AS DIiECTFD BY T'G.
2. PAGE 2. PARAS 4Ht 41, AND 4Jt ARE ADDED AS FOLLOWS;
H. 
THE C: MMANDER, US AR4Y HEALTH SEkVICES CV4A4D (NSC)t 'ILL.
ASSUME RESPLU.SI;ILITY FU 
PRJGRA.i GUIDANCE FOR THE CLINICAL IN-
VESTIGATIJN PkDOGRA,. 
IN SBOORDItNATE AR.4Y MEDICAL (ENTERS ANJD %EDI-
CAL DEPARTMENT ACTIVITIES.-A CLINICAL INVESTIGATI)l C;SULTA41
WILL 
GE DESIGNAIED 
AT HOt HSC, 
THE CJNSULTAT WILL PROVIDE ,DVICE
1ON CLINICAL INVESTIGATION MATTERS TO SUBD.DI.tATE UNITS AND Tu TIE
COMMANDERt 
IlSC, 
AD WILL 4ONITOR MEDICAL 
CARE 
SUPPORT E:JUIPMENI 
FUND-
ING FOR 1HE CLIU:ICAL INVESTIGATION PROGRAM 
THE CONSULTA'i WILL iN-
SURE THAT RESEARCH PROTOCOLS I.VOLV]INS THE EXPENDITURE OF %QRE TIA,,
$10,033 (T5TAL OKMA AND OPA FUNDS) ARE REVIEWED AKD APPROVED Ui
DISAPPROVED BY THE CDRt ISC. 
THE CONSULTANT WILL ALSO PE TIE PR3-
PONENT FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF CHANGES DIRECTED BY TSG TO BE MAUE IN
REVIEW PROCEDURES 
FOR HUAAN EXPERIMEN-TATON 
IN SUUORDINATE UNITS OF
HSC.
vl 
l" 
"
.,,.,- 2, 
1; .
.
.... so.o0*.°.o°.o 
PAGE 01
UNCLASSIFIED 
4 
1515301 JUL 75
",*,**e**, 
,***ooo**o*°° 
o~*RUEADWD/2454W PROCEDURES 
FOR HUAAN EXPERIMEN-TATON 
IN SUUORDINATE UNITS OF
HSC.
vl 
l" 
"
.,,.,- 2, 
1; .
.
.... so.o0*.°.o°.o 
PAGE 01
UNCLASSIFIED 
4 
1515301 JUL 75
",*,**e**, 
,***ooo**o*°° 
o~*RUEADWD/2454

--- PAGE BREAK ---AAN EXPERIMEN-TATON 
IN SUUORDINATE UNITS OF
HSC.
vl 
l" 
"
.,,.,- 2, 
1; .
.
.... so.o0*.°.o°.o 
PAGE 01
UNCLASSIFIED 
4 
1515301 JUL 75
",*,**e**, 
,***ooo**o*°° 
o~*RUEADWD/2454

--- PAGE BREAK ---

345
* 
UNCLASSIFIED
1, PROPOSALS 
IN THE FOL.ONING CATEGORIES 
MUST BE 
APPROVED 
BY'
THE SURGEON GENERAL PRIOR T3 INITIATION OF THE 
INVESTIGATIoJN
(1) 
WHEN HUi4AN 
SUBJECTS ARE USED.
(21 
V1H[N INVESTIGATIJVAL 
DRUGS ARE EMPLOYU.. 
IN HUMANS, 
OR
ANY USE IS MADE 
CIF SCHEDULE 
I CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES. 
SEE AR 40-7.
(3) 
WHEN "RADI(1ISOTOPES ARE USED. 
SEE AK4O-37.
(4) 
WHEU A P!.UPOSAL 
IS SUBMITTED 
FRONT AN ARMY HOSPITAL WHICH
IS N3T SUbODRDINATE 
TO HEALTH SERVICES COMMAND AND WHICH DOES NOT
HAVE A CLINICAL 'INVESTIGTIJN 
SERVICE.
(SI 
WHEN TH.E PROPOSAL IS CONCERNED 
WITH DRUG OR ALCO-43L 
ABUSE.
J, 
PROPOSALS 
IN THE FOLL WING CATEGORIES 
FRO.I UVITS SU.3DI-
RATE 
TO HSC 4UST 
BE 
APPROVED 
BY THE CO.SANDER, 
H
AII.N OF INVESTIGATION:
(13 
WHER FUNDING REDUIRE4E.NTS 
(TOTAL 
OKA AND OPA"FUNDS) 
EXCEED
(2) IHEIN A PROJECT IS PLA:34ED IN A FACILITY WII1IOUT A CLINICAL
INVESTIGATION SERVICE.
3. PA.E ?, PAIAS 5D 
5E, 
AND 5F, ARE 
SUPERSEDLD A.'S 
FOLL3bWS:
D, 
P' ,DI'SALS NO.T SUIJJErT 
T3 PI3% .PPR1VIL AS 3UTLI:dD 
IN P;.PAS
41 AND 4J VILL BE FORWARDED THiU CHANNELS TO )HE 
Ct9.44D0E., 
US ARMY
HEALTH SERVICES Crj'tAi4DO 
ATTN: HSC-PA-Cp FOR I'.!'F3R'ATIO;N ONLY.
E. PPOPOSALS 
FALLING AIIHIN THE 
REhQUIREKE11T 
bF PARA. toil 
!.UT
NOT OF PARA 4J, WILL BE FOR..ARDED DIRECTLY 
TO 
THE 
SURGE1 
5ENfE1:,L
(H{OA 
(5GRD-H-.II 
FOR EVALJATIO]4 AND APP;LrVAL. 
RESLR.kCH Pi, P3SIALS
FALLING V111%TIl 
THE REI UIREv ENTS OF BOTH PARAS fo] A.D 4J MUST 
BF 
I-DR-
WARDED 
TO TilE SURGES'9 GENERAL 
THROUGH THE 
CDMHANDE1, 
HSC, 
ATTN:
HSC-PA-C
F. 
PROPOSALS FALLING WITHIN THE REQUIRE!;L.TS OF PARA 41(Z)
WILL BE PROCESSED 
AS PROVIDED 
I 
At Be t.D C, AbnVE, 
AND IN ADDITIX1,
WILL HAVE 
All APPLICATION PREP r.ED AS DESCAIiED 
1 
PARAGRAPH 
3b OP. 3C
AR 40-7. 
SUCH PROPOSALS 4ILL 5LSO BE FORWARDED 
TO HQDA (SGRD-HR),
4, PAGE 3. PAA 7 IS SUPERSEDED AS FOLLZIUS"
7. 
TSG CCIM.I1TEE 
ON .ESEARCH 
INV3LVIIG HU.KA4 SUBJECTS. 
1HE
SURGE!iN GENERAL WILL ESTABLISH A CO4ITTEE 
TO BE KNJll-N AS T'E HUMAN
SUBJECT RESLAkCH REVIEW 
.)ARD, 
THE BOARD WILL BE COKPOSED OF "EM-
BERS WHO, BY VIRTUE DE 
hEIiR 8ACKGRqUNIDS, 
EXPERIENCE 
AND TRAINING,
ARE DUALIFItD 
TO EVALUATE 
THE ACCEPTABILITY 
OF Pa OPJSALS IN TERS
OF 
MEDICAL SAFETY, 
APPLIC43LE LAWS AND REGULATIO"S, 
43RAL AND ETHI-
CAL SIANDArOS AND COMUNITY ATTITUDES. 
THE BOARD WILL- RLVIjEW ALL-
PROPOSALS FOR APPROVAL SU4ITTED 10 TSGt AS SPECIFIED I1 
PA- 
AAPIAPH
41, WHICH HAVE NOT BEEN REVIEWED 
BY A PROPERLY CONSTITUTED HUNAN
~ 
.PAGE C.z
UNCLASSIFIED 
S 
1.15.Ol JUL 75
"**e. 
*** 
******,*** 
RLUEADOlD/Z245
BEST- 
IukE10 TSGt AS SPECIFIED I1 
PA- 
AAPIAPH
41, WHICH HAVE NOT BEEN REVIEWED 
BY A PROPERLY CONSTITUTED HUNAN
~ 
.PAGE C.z
UNCLASSIFIED 
S 
1.15.Ol JUL 75
"**e. 
*** 
******,*** 
RLUEADOlD/Z245
BEST- 
IukE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

346
U'CLASIF lED
USE CJIYITtE 1PiKAt 
4.B.2(r). 
THE BOARD WILL ALS3 REVIEW THISE
Pl1(POSALS V lICH HAVE UILL' 
APPROVED IY A PROPEKLY C9..CS"TUTED LJC,.IL
HUMAN 
USE C4"1ITTEL 
IF THE PRJ!jSALS INVOLVE (1) 
MhE USE 
OF IEViS-
TIGATI43AL 
()RUGS 
Ok RADI.30MAR4AACEUTICALS 
IN HUMAA'IS,; 
(6f) 
THE USE "IF
FETUS[St CtHlLOREIt PkIS,14ES JR MLt|1IMLLY DISAIBLED 
PERSONS tS SUr6-
JECIS; 
(3) EXPOSl'E UF 
SU3JECTS TO UJUSUAL RISK. 
THE BOARD WILL
RIEVI~f, 
AXY UMiER PRJPJSAL AS DIRECTED BY THE 
SURGEON GENERAL.
B7
ACTION ADDRESSEES
004 DA.S5
!NF(I",ATION ADOKESSEES
EtA SGR;)
00004 
lOTAL NU'"BER OF COPIES REOUIrED
02 454
1 N N N
* 
UVCLASSIFIED
f- 
-4 E C :4
1515301 JUL 75
RUEADWD/2454
BEST C 
AVAILABLE
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---347
Antl lrWxifoi
No.

40-71
"Alt 40-7
HEADQUARTERS
DEPAT11 I1ENT OF TIlE ARJMY
WAs11IGoN, DC, 4 A pril 197.

MEDICAL SUIIR'ICUS
USE OF INVESTIGATrIONAL DIIUG( IN ILUiANS AND THE USE OF
SCHEDULE I Ct;.* TrROLED DRUG SU13STANCES
.i.Lrectivc 15 May 1075
Thiar rerisirt updtiles required information i'tally neccrsarC in providing guidance oil current
rcquierc 
nl( for lcsfitig amn 
rlI!Ol 
inesliglotimaaI dusS biologics.

inn.sliuio:.al
radiophar;,iacciecfals amn ::chr.€-dic I controlIld drttq ;:b~n1a::ccs.

Local .ruiplemenelioil of
this rcgullin i.

prohibited except pon approval of The qsrreon General.

l'araivriph
P'urio-e nivi.

trixl .......................................

..................

lotsui.

1...................................................................

4
Cainpotili-°li of lit Ai l)1(11................................................

..

5
Itcrd ..................................................................

6
Invcrligmaicivl l)rur.

irors 
Reori, IWCS MED-254 ..........................

7
Sc ioal cinl~diim 
i 
.................................................

1- : ......

.

lI, lorrot, l i t,, V,' ).kt ----------------------.-----............................

9
M edic i1 titicrgv i 
e ------------ 
------------ ----------...

..

..................

so
Custoy 
oeid di-petming of investigational dru s ---..

.....

..

...........

.

.

.

1
Armyi~ coiatl kett.

..

...

.....

......................

........

.

.............--- 
12
Army gr--t, ................................................

...........

.

-
3
Appeiix A.

Ai,t o,!

S ;,pdulc I drur .........................................

7
App~enads\ % .

nvest i;!,,( 
mil i)rv; Applic.illn ..................................

9
1.

Pu'pos ,arcld Scci,.

''Vis regiladtion pr'.c.

iOrs
partt niet, of the A rin" polios aid proccdUr.s
'plilic.nblc -o (hi 
isk.

of iniVeztial 'o 
i diiigi in
iUliia-is itild I le ois of Sch bile I contrsollud drig
hub-Ialicr.

:ri (efltled.

2.

Applicability.--- PAGE BREAK ---

2. Applicability. This re-ilation is aaplim.b' e
worldwide to i 
tiditnI, 
all Atinil 
medici facilities
111l11 
Vie!ivil ic.. 3. 1)ervnilion;. For tlie pUrpo-e of Ihis rgulatioii,
the followhjlg dc-l.litioi apply:
a. LJriu. Any aulicle iiitei;ded for uise? in U
diagnosis.., cure. nitiatioi, tri.tntn.nt, or preven-
tion of dioea-e in liims. tuid any article (other
than food) ittended to affect tilt structuie or any
function of thr huniiii bidy. b. lnt,e-at;gatliorial drug. Any drug not generally
recognize',l among exp It s its Eafe and effective for
use tinder the. conditions suggested. Wilh few ex-
cejitionis, a drug is considered to 1e. unsafe and
ineffective until approved by the Food nd Drug
Administiatio, (FDA) for gener,! use by the
public. The exceptions are drugs xvlhich, although
not. FDA aiimcd, aic oi,,dicd ):- C\ pr: 
i,
lP safe ittl r: 
1tve. Jiive'- i.etiul di ,1" i.,, l'i,-
chmc-dile" I ( , s. biolo::ien I pi',Jnt-., 
lnt i~d;
hliarmoaCeuti.:i%, -,s lercafter (r(dfiii4. c. Sc cduk- I diuvg. Any di ig and Or :et!)-JtiIl:,
by 't liavei.r;,.i-i, 
tTlle, collinloll o1 i.il:1.1 
.- ,
chemical iiu- or hrald iui 
Iimted by the l)r;i'! Enforcelieil Adiniiir 
srttion (IE.A) 
ii til c21
of tile Codeof Federill 1(cgolatiol. ch.-it.er 11,
ectioii 3SO.i. (alip A), iiinti.d for clinical ur
nonclinical Ia.,. d. liolog" 
p'rod lct. Any drisg prepared f roi
virus (i;cilltk 
but is not limiled to fil!r-r.std
viruses, bacttrin, ricketisia, fskngi, mid Ii'otrizoa),
erull, toxin. Iitiioxii, or aralogou.i 
promlicti a-,
fturther dcf.-il in tille -1, Ode of Feder.ai l'gi:-
lations, Feciim 273.101. e. J'adio i"riaceidicl. Any drug prepartil
front reati or p.nd iice( or accelerator iadioi-t. npa.,,
and naturaii- o cirring rittioitotolK.&
Jr. P 
'ise , ine sd arlor
(1) 
limes 
I 
trIs itfter adequidt.., lrini.A tind
* This regulation supersedes Alt 40-7. 30 September 1%59. TACO 40SA--Avall 
580- 4T4-
70-026 0 - 76 - 23

--- PAGE BREAK ---348
AR 40-7
in vitro (tesZ tube) data live been obtained and
covers the first -idininistration to hutlans of aul
inve.-tigatifinal drug.

It include-, as appropriate,
SLtudies to dctelnitte huiii:i toxicity, metabolism,
immiuaogenicity.

absorption, 
elhinination, 
and
other pharmnacological neinit, preferred route of
adiniristrntioin, and .afe dosage iange.

(2) Phase 11 covers uise of an itivesti.,ational
drug in a lhinited mmnixhr of iildividuals ;or spe-
cific di.

ae co;iLiol or prophylactic pulrposes.

(3) 
lhaso III prtividecs for assessment of the
safety.

effreeivels'Fz and optimuitui dosage -ched-
tiles of tile investigatowm-d drug in groups of
individuaJ,.

(4) Phvime IV covers tie use.

of investiga-
tional drugs which.

althot,.h not FI)A approved,
are e senti:al to the jni:-sion of the Amyiv -Medical
Department and whidh, after testing in Plle,
I-II, are considered by experts to be safe and
effect .

c.

4.

Procedures.

a.

A;~i-ioral.

Except for medical
ene,.:(i 
(covered ill pa'a 10) 
written ap-
prov"d of Thie Sirgeon ClIei'eral (TSG).

IlQDA
(JD)SA -ZA) \VASIi 
)(' 
DC0311, is imeccs-alv a;
a )icittsiiisite for uc of r.- invest igati-inai dirg
in htnanc.

Indivitni.

cal king npp-ovai1 for such
u.e %iII file an npilic;tion with (lie Artiy Iim-
ve.

tigatiO il 
Thlug )Jb'l1(.W Boa|.d 
(AITIUI]).

Piwcdutires -tld fle aJ)plication for applroral of a
D)epatminwnt (if Army ( DA) sponisored i:m e-tia-
tional dutwz ale outline, 
in & below, nd for a
pharmiiaceitticnl coanlpum1y or oeher Imol-DA agency
spona-oted iivestigational diig ini e below.

It is
also imerativ 
: that (lie guidelines ald J)rinlil)I(s
for tm, pItotecii(m of hiililn subjects eibahli.hed
in AlI' 70-21.

be reviewed aod ob-ernlt by the
principal ins atligator in tile proposed applicat ion.

b.

Aplicatio*m-PA apom'*ocd invest gaionol
drugs.b.

Aplicatio*m-PA apom'*ocd invest gaionol
drugs.

An individual (hereafter called principal
investigator) requesting approval to use a I)A
sponsored investigational drug will submit, in
triplirate, an Investigatiolal 
)rug A)plication.

If the clinical investigation is funded under lIe-
search, ])erelopnnt, Test.

Evaluation (RDTE)
appropriated futidnd, Ilie application should be for.

warded in the format shown in appendix B
through 
tim facility commander 
to IIQI)A
(SGRD-.IIR) WASh DC 20314.

When the pro.

posed clinical investigation is to be funded from
2
other than UJ)TE appropriations, the aplliCatiol
should 
.

rub:aitied in the format shown in ap-
pendix KI awl as outlined in AR 40-33.

It will Iie
forwarded t:roughm tile local Clinical Investli.,-
(ion and lhimuian lse Coimnittees and indor.d
by the facility commdam er to JIQDA (SG1I-
}iR) WASll i)C 20314.

c.

A pplicatio--Non-DA sponsored int'esf;pa-
tional drugs.

An individual (hereafter called prin-
cipal inve.-tigztor) reqt.-sting approval to use a
investigational drug snowzor.d by It pharmaceut i-
cal company or other non-PA agency will sunnit.

as his apjlicalion, the foliowc.: ini'nation
(1) 
hIme 
completely for m required by thr (it ,
company.

anl the FDA, either F) Form 152, '
Stateinent of Inwestigator--('linical l'unrittaeo-
ogy, or F) Form 1573.

Statement of Insestiga-
tar-Clinical Trial.

Pl) F'orimis 1572 aid )T lni"
be obtained fo,;n tIL Food anid Diug Adimiti-
tration or tlie dnim comiiialy.

(2) )Iitu Ilfo'mal-ion:-A copy of the clinical
brochure usuoilly supplied by tile Sp.n.oriIg
lha rinaecutical copa ny.

(3) A coi, plate lprotool to include-
(a) lIac'-' round.

(b) Obj.'0tse.

(e) Pati,-nt election criteria.

(d) 
fe.-urn.mnents, ob,ervalionis ani treat-
unent to be titilized.

(e) Dc.-v iption of report forins to lI.

u.,ed
to iecoud oli-errahionis and test results.

(f) 
%h"v-ivy.

of follow-Ip if applic.U,-.

(4) A oin.,lete copy of proposed vinlite"
rgretmFuient.--- PAGE BREAK ---

of follow-Ip if applic.U,-. (4) A oin.,lete copy of proposed vinlite"
rgretmFuient. Ap:dieations 
involving 
reeurch
frttled by )ll)E;J' app-ropiiatimns will h. for-
war'ed through; 
the Medical Facilitiei 
n-|,-
mander to JIQDA (SGIID-IIRl) 
WASII DC
20311. Aaplhaati-,ns involving re.oarch supported
by other than Pfl)TIF lepprop t iions will !e for-
warded in the nileve format and as ontlined, in
AR 43-38. Thev will be referred to the Cliaaic-al
Investigation and Human Use Committees and
indoised by the 3%edical Facilities Comnman.iler to
JIQDA (SGIRD-111R) WASII DC 20314. d. Application for the non-clinical us& of
Schedule I contr,2 drug tubstancei. An individual
(hereafter called principal investigator) who re-
quests approval to use a Schedule I drug(s) in a
non.clinical Weting will subunit, in triplicate, the
following information:
AOO 403A

--- PAGE BREAK ---349
A 
(I) A cotpleited Drtng I'nfoiceinit Aduin-
iilrltion Formi 
(I)DE.A #2.2) 
or tlie jiimber of
tIme cmidyIv arti-e Certilicnic of lRegistration,
)EA Form 22 may be otained from the )rug
Enforeceini!t A dniiistrat tn.

(2) A cArriclln vitae of tite principal in-
ve-ligalor and llny asociaie inv"ei/;ac..

(3) A complete prolocol which tliouid, is a
Illtiimlil.

illdicale Ilte foliowilig:
(a) Purlsoe of propcrecd inve.

ligation.

(h) Exierimential design.

(r) 
luralioti of study.

(d) Alnoint of drug ficeded.

(r) Nuiter antd typlles of atiial species
involved.

(I)
(9)
(,'a)
Route of administration.

Projlxnd statistical antltysis.

?tumler of experiments to he con-
deI -let).

(4) Atimelli 
Rnd location of facility whete ex-
permeti(.l!

work -' ili be conducted.

({5) .Method of slor1ge, inventory, control,
di-Ati it liott, aid dispensin.- of Flsch d Iuilg(s).

e.

A #,,?fcolion for the clin;cal ise of Sc/edule
I cozalol drmg substantces.

An iwveti pator who te-
quets .alrovn 
to use a Sdwedule I dnig(s) ill
volititvr, will mblimit, in triplicate Ihe following
informant ion:
(1) A comllete ])ilg Enforcement Admin-
istralm Form (l)EA #.') 
or the nuler of lime
currelifl" ativ, ('Ciii ficale of PDegistlatiot.

(2) A cotiililcle aplirical iln dcpmding Oil I lie
type (if sponsor.

If ime IN) will !e slionsored by
the Artny, the saplication should bIe silinited itt
accordance with the DA sponsored applicati,.i
procedure.

f.

APlieation for radiopmarmaceutical.

An
ivestigator who requests.approval to tiso an in-
vestigalional radiipharnacetmical will submit his
application ihrouigh local lladioisotope C 
moiinittee
in accoidimce with b or c above, whichever is
applicable.

g.

Review and erolua'ion.

The AIDIIB will re-
view and evaluate all apiulicatiois for approval to
use an investigational drug and may enter into
atty pertinent correspondence with the itvestiga-
(or; e.g., to obtain additional information.

The
AIDRB will transmit its recommendations to The
Surgeon General.The AIDIIB will re-
view and evaluate all apiulicatiois for approval to
use an investigational drug and may enter into
atty pertinent correspondence with the itvestiga-
(or; e.g., to obtain additional information.

The
AIDRB will transmit its recommendations to The
Surgeon General.

The ATD1RB will notify the in-
TAGO 404L
Alt 40,7
vCSt igAtort o:' c approval, di.almptoval, or defer-
rad of his il'J ;t~iot.

it.

14a 
, P..

diOp)prOrdl.

The Stigcoit Gets.

erAl's app.

o' 1 may be withheld or revoked.

it%
whole or" ill ) It.

ott aly of tile following gr uids:
(1) ],oll I of M nl 
ititi ev ir.nec to 
low.tm:ltt
the drug i- t:-' dat gerous if tiscil for the i.;tpo.c
alid/l" in M Im:1itte" proposed.

(2) 'Th ie fiact eturilg ome iods ai, itiade-
qtite to Itai' arkit alpr)opl ia 
ti 
mndatid, 
of luoal-
ity needed (I :sl-ure tam fry 
mid give.

simtifitca-i
to tile use 0.0; 1v ditf itt hitilnato.

(3) Ti.

,% erall pistl 
for ise (Ioe6 itoe t :no llear
reatsonable o, ,ithet wise %Voi I0V of l ujiport.

(4) Thr- iopotied im of Ite dtig is slot itt Ite
tK-.%t irtte;e-t 
f i 
Ae rmtty Medical Deliai I titailt
5.

Comlosi:, n of the AIDII.

'lim l 
l)lll %%ili
be omporse: 4 tile Astmiit Sitrg.i 
t Generul for
lessearcth 
n;..

) evetonitt, or his de:,etaled
reire centti.

, who will letP,; chttliiraii, atd at
least fotr n.

,,r profe .-ion ill Y qualified iitlivid-
ital'i d.ilii:' d lmv 'llhe 
t 
ewteA.,i.

The
('lilnin'alt 
kh-m-witc a recorder, who iced not
be a tienwi.l- 
t Ilth lwo);rd.

0.

Records.f.

P.1 *,pomtlorcd ;it' -( galiowll,,.9.

For Phaa., -.

1.

atId III.

tir il:e.tig.ator will
iltsuic t1,tl * tCcold.

j1ia t1 frotm clill 
ra-
ord,& 
, 
itht..imed.

lm 
iccordi will iarhliidc.

imitihi-
imally: a li-.

of sulje'ts rec-'aairig the dio : I lic
ilial L!, Iot.

i li.'r, 
(l date.

Rnd rat-mtilitv of tlc (1'lt g
til.

ats ap li 
iiatc, d.tal.

of cli:sical ol..c'ra-
IJt 
t 
:tl(-'I ldaboratory llovduivie 
For lia,-
IV, recorli -'il be nitilaincd ^.S diteelcd hiy Ir.

AIDRli.

1.--- PAGE BREAK ---

AIDRli. 1. Non-., 
spmonsord ifire,'l'ational dritg. -The ittve.fi:--'(mr will maintain recor-ds tiitrie
above aind ti .&o required by the pharutmaceutical
comlpm&iy at I lie FDA. e. The c4uftmdion of t/ih iltrc-al;maa 
drm,:qs. Tito plarma% is the appropriate foragee ancm% 
for
all iiTvesti-tia:lil dtt11 
ill medical caro facilitie.q. 1Te pharni,,ry is respotisible for the proper re-
cording, ]aWr1ig, storage., nd dipllcn,,itg of ilt-
vestigatioi)-ldtitgs in accordance with the investi-
Pator's wrt-4 
orders. An exception to tile above
would bo rdopliarimactltical dosam-e forms which
may be storlu in the Nuclear Medicine Service's
area if appriMiate security arrangementA can Io
deinonstraleL 
"ITo 
Nuclear Medicine Service
would assui. the responsibilities of proper rec-
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---350
AR 40-:7
ord keepim, ishidelog, storage and handling of
thee lcpt-CifiC Jilinr1luaMcC13icaS A.S ler lppI0lJWialte
reguitiouc.

()liewise, a complete record of each
inve.digatioxial drug will Ie maintained by tlhe
phav miacy and will contain the following i' earlin-
tion :
(I) Nanic of drug.

(2) 
fMannf,|cturer, or otiher xource of (I uig.

"-) Amotnt and dale r.eeived.

(4) Expiratinn (late.

(5) Lot or count rol numiner.

(0) Date of aulhority to use.

(7) 
niiie(,) of isidividil(s) uiiitg dilui;.

() 
J)ate o: vislicli uite of di%- is lerliinnumat.d.

(9) Dat on F'D.\ apnupval of the h ig for
genei a]l use 
(if dutig 
ip 
cnure of the
i n v(.s Aipation ).

iii rescxuch facilities (]Il-i .i,,ries.

etc.) whihh do
not have a pharai.y .

11.

-ilip'al illvestfl-irllor
will n|aitahi 
or de'igat, a .

pecific r'u.todii to
in-aimitin accltintability for all itie+t igathixil
dhn11,; as noted above.

S!CIilljt 
iC'jIliiel.icits for
ii'vest:gati oial dii u,.

will lie the 
:eine as those
I'eecgnived for se uity of I"it'., 
dic- 
or drugs
rinler J)FA control if apllicl,'..

d.

in~rmstiqoiol drug iqforix;on.

(1) The facility coimuiiandel will e.t al,lihI a
central ilit, where basic c--ent jal in fo, nation of
investi 
nai:il (Irigs is 
,iiaii ,,iiu.d ail 
caii he
made available to all nuthot i-...d lirnont:.l.

in
Itdical facilitir., the phdai ',aey it the approp iate
oent ioni for such a di-uiv inuwmation criteac d
like Theilal-Kultic Aents ietrd (TAlM 
shlouhl
net as the monitor of %ueh activities.

(2) The facility cointiider will awzure that
persouciPl called upon to adiiinister invesliga-
tionil (rugs wili have available to them basic in-
fornation concerning such drugs which includes
side effect-, antidote if appropriate, probable in-
teraction%.

etc.

e.

Rekilion period.

All records required by
this jparagrajph will Ie kept.

for :; .vcas after com-
plelion of use and then retired.

See AR 340-lz-i,
File No.

914-A1.

7.

Investigational Drug Progresms Report, RCS
MED-251.7.

Investigational Drug Progresms Report, RCS
MED-251.

All iinvesligat-ois will prepani 
reports
whelier or not the drug is )A or non-J)A spon-
sored as described below:
a.

Pases 1.

11, and I/I.

Progress reports will
be prepared after 1 year from dale of approval to
4
u.( the iwill.g.-iaxal drug.

amd aniuially tire-
after.

'Io-re'-i ie;ortsi will also he stubnitted .s
bac!:,rouiid ific:,tioi aplended to an applica-
tion at stch tii.e+ a% the apIrovcd protocol is iv-
vi-ed or exte,d,-d.

A filal elao, t will lie subiniuted
by the 33ti d.'y followicig lermination of t:e.

A nnual relioi 0.

u ill le sib,aiiled iy tihe 
l 1, ;1; 1
following the viiiiversurya 
d.ale of the approved
study, 
and uill Ie doi-latched direct, o lQI A
(S(ID+ iltr NVASII DC 2(1,i i.

lelolu will I
in nariaive fi, i anid, aits ia ilimuni, consi I of--
(I) 
Identili .it ion 
of 
hil-cific 
btudy 
and
Wtae(s) of ilu ligatir(.,).

(2) 1~Ch.iof 'tuidy.

(3) X, ,im ' of S1113jecls i,,volved in the ttidy
d11i6m1g IO.

le,;-, t lik id.

(4) N.rr.:ive of pioic!s and results oh-
taitw.d dui inx tCit, rclku I period.

(5 ))n.-,:,," 
of dire.-t ion of 
ifdtre .,.

uli.

;:ith-r hlie al,..

,o (Iiltoeol.

lecila, 
., of ia11e-ti-
g.ator (ouer.

i!, ally aidve-e Iactions to, thie
dru;+, and .1' IC in forinat oll col-idred bY I..

inve.-tigat.r or ithe AlI)II 
to in ppctii.i or
(G) Fiu:.l 
upo it will include d.l ails of d
po4t11on txi.

o- ;,1) lu.inrd ,,uppie.

of i've.t :,-
I tonal drtig (.).

It.

Phase l'.

]lepoiLs will be Eubmilite 
:,z ui-
rrcltd ly the k I)lIlJ.

e.

.% ~ i 
di scrrabons.

Si.'nific.icst n1- *-rva-
lion; ill illy lIa 
will lie epfrled iunodat i,!v
to 0IQII.

(S;I"j) 1-Il") AVA.Sll I D' 
.03!

I.

8.

Special c- (itions.

o.

,IAlcrriot.ion 
lis.t i.:u-
tors trill insu"e that an invest igaliotiil dig is
tidiniiiisleicl only under their iii.:ttal 
sp,,:vi
Sioll or Under tile supeuvision of qualified l,?

+tin
ne to whom tley have per.oimll, dlr~gnteald :hi<
authority.

b.

('onrcrl.--- PAGE BREAK ---

b. ('onrcrl. iuvestigators will imisire that all
subjects, or their representatives, are fully in-
formed and understand that the drug is 
ill;.,
ijed for inve.-- igational purl)oses-:
(1) li l'ua.-" I and lI the ivtigalcr will
obtain the wtiten consent of the subject, or Ills
represent al.i e. (2) Written consent will normally Ibe hm-
tained in llhnes III and IV. ii ,peeiAl sittnl iii-
the Al DRB may authorize the use of oral coii,. 'itt. (3) When minors who have attained the age
of reason are involved, informed eonsent to the
TACO 1 1A

--- PAGE BREAK ---IV. ii ,peeiAl sittnl iii-
the Al DRB may authorize the use of oral coii,. 'itt. (3) When minors who have attained the age
of reason are involved, informed eonsent to the
TACO 1 1A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

351
A e.teiti of their ability to ur:dcr sal 
irit le (,-
tained frn 
tlhen as wO.!l fit fioton their lptielutts/
guardianl.
9. informalhn to FDA. Ir the crse of unc. ssi-
fred inrv misgatiorrs of a DA rpollsoid 
(ilrig 
tre
AIDIll will file colpies of il:(, Notice ol Clrinrl d
Investigtional 
E xeinptioi 
for a Ne. 
D-ilru
(INI)) and tire AIllflt approvAl iiti tire t 
nCo-
milsion(r of Food slid lDiug-, DeliartnWieti 
of
heAltlh. V'licafion, and \\'clf,.rr, lockville, .Mlary-
lanrd 20M52 (hereafter called Corni'sioirr'). Ad-
ditionilly, any report 
of sigiificant rd,-i.ie
TffcetF of ail in vest iational drug will Is. filexi with
tile Commiinrer wili 
received. Airy exirtiirg
DA report corei.ceriiiig all investigational drtig
specitcally requisted bry Aiuliolized FlD.A l(rcr-irl-
ivel will be f(uriii-hed.
In. Medic-ial enrt rcelie. 
In emer:elie 
sihrrin-
tiOis5, .Al.iicl 011('ritul1hl to Tie 
urljfoil (ien-
erdl, IIQi)A (J)ASGAIl(-I'rM) 
ma- 
aIipiosc
141rl'1 I4,lli 11%c of art ill s 
vs;mTaioiil i dii i Oil all
inrlividuil liticit who c irs( ,so In .tici rise uiih-
outl, tuhi 
.sitlor of rii applieritioni to the All)llI,
upoi request of alr Aliiy m-dical facility c1in-
5
Alt .10-7
11110rder. This re cuet mili 
include, 
hririially:
path it 
's wrnae ; diagnlois; nat'. qUntlrrI!y. aid
source of the di ug: :r.,tikal officer i c.po: isilc for
tire p.lit it; r;r.d uiatuie of the eioer ciecy. ]it
wbele erfergeiuey use i 
l 
approved, a I'koli( 
I.s'.*-
Jpitubairg t01 
Cao will te filed with ]i 
.\ A
(SOIII)-IIC) WASH DC -0314. to,etlr uitir
copif-sof tny fo is or repoits furnished to a (iug
company or cAhcr rroz-DA agency irt co:iwwdioi
therew;f h.
II. Custody ind dik!;e'nng of investik.1 tlifu:I
drug.s. ]nbwe i::i lioial di ur r ill thi. cu-.t-dy of I ire
D)A will be -tforcd and di.jrwiiseul in accfl :iu(%l
with tie. appli aile plovi,.ioils of All 40-_ tarid
jiaa.gii:lh G r'lrvc.
12. Atrmy contracts. All cont.riu-l. imtolhi:g Ih,.
use of investi.::tiorral u]rtc,,s in hunis will con-
taiui fire clarr-v prerciil,"d ini Ar,ity Piocurria'nt,
Proce'lrre 1- 150 -3. 
'
13. Army gror'nF. All/i 
Ill -
iohi:, ii-, of
im'c-I igatitn:,| di'-t'p ill hulrrisrrs mill 
ent .-in
clhuss meuirir! 
l t- it 
antite to corjply wih
paingr:iloh, 
. 4. G, and 7 of this regul:it r,,r.
TA 
TAOO 
OA'nF. All/i 
Ill -
iohi:, ii-, of
im'c-I igatitn:,| di'-t'p ill hulrrisrrs mill 
ent .-in
clhuss meuirir! 
l t- it 
antite to corjply wih
paingr:iloh, 
. 4. G, and 7 of this regul:it r,,r.
TA 
TAOO 
OA

--- PAGE BREAK ---352
AR 40-7
APPENDIX A
List of Schedule I I)rugs
I$0 .11 
Schledille 1.

(nt) S 'lelile.

I rhlall cxcI,.-i- 
of tito ..

ia,, aeeid
o,'hi .r miih,,Imvei,% 
%%h~lnlv~r~lrr 
il:tl c-1oi 
v 
o 
in-
I110io r 
eit 
l 
lel'e 
c 
ifl I(oir.llt 
1".

1e.1i 
Ih.ll:1C
de.i.iiatedi.

I1 
1 
i 'i 
ttic, 
l.

".

:c, 
rii 
or
Fl.A .Illi.

bi:" 
14.€ii ll 
i,: 
r 
Ole 
hitl.v u C'i:-
liolld ,il lle ilirXcf (' | 
N1,1li gl .-Ct f,10 0iih 
ol1lt
site it.

(1) 
op,,of1.,.

ii'.., 
q 
fil-ftily e..

-p 
1 
iiill) -
)e'- )J k l ' 
nill 
I 
Scoivtiit,' li:.v of titt fl 
.

il 
l , 
t 
*ial t.

." 
0ili 
1 
144., 
I.

l 
tl-., 
ell.cr'.

s 
al; 
llid .(-0l; 
1, 
ie 
..

€ i 
.

1411,d ell -,< .

r ,
fl 
.

| t lie c 
' ii.

i 
ell 
itmu 
l 
3 
4 ersl 
i 
i 
ll lcl..

sic I l 
t.

i., IN- .itlc wiltlIh tle, fj '-ifi dic inica.l
(ICailmt jilt :
(I)
(2)
(3;
It)
(4)
(W)
(I I)
(Ill
01)
(14)
(I L)
(10;)
(17)
(is)
(20)
(21)
(r2)
(23)
(24)
(2i)
(?7)
(23)
(29)
(30)
(31)
(32)
(33)
(34)
(35)
(36)
All 
- ----- --.-
I------....

.

.

11l.l 
3,r,,tl,.(0....

...................

l .

:...

.....

.

.

.

l(.i, 
iti!

-'.....

..................

It.1 
,: ,diir 
.

.

......

...

......

.

Il il:.c-e.iarn ..

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

I )u.r.

r.

.......

...

.

.

.

I)i 
lh Ipillmcj 
.

-, .i- , .

.

..

...

...

.

...

..

1)iiitiikc ,!id.

....................

it.

h'.

i tlle --- 
-- -
...

e.

...

e..

......

'ii.

...

....

....

MI u 
; o olliii ".

....

.........

.......

N ora) l'l l.-I lli.- I .

.

n ..

..

..

......

-- 
.

.

rl-lov 
I 
lati c .............................

Sote, Idoce--- 
..........................

u.t' iw 
idi 
inic ....

.......................

Itloc d: 
e 
hidit......................

Norc ecllit~cliil.1.......................

)Ii1icWlll.l %|ll,.l3i 
.......

.

Noreitunjo-anlces..........................

r 
'i 
cimor pb.

..

.......................

l'lii.'ione 
.............................

l 'he'lciioterocnidce..........................

lhcniliOr I.iun ...........................l 'he'lciioterocnidce..........................

lhcniliOr I.iun ...........................

060"
9(,11%
9%12
08.31
9014
9613
OG17
91.11
981.t
"824
026
9G27
9828
9029
9G31
902
9G33
t634
9035o
9G37
9w3
U047
(37)
(38)
(391
(40)
(41)
(42)
(4:)
PI|it liO tl1 'ii.

I r............................

V'aitr, m i ...

.............................

i~ro 
j, bil " 
.............................

Plcwre'.r/...

...........................

i' ,i 
.

.

...

....

.

.

.

.

..

..

.

.

.

.

.

..-
f(il(li 
.!

.

.

.

..

..

..........

.....

2'i?~ 
iC ie'.A±'-"J 
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

(c) (ip;uie
cepled (or tii!

tle flllo( 
1li;
alclI .lt 
of' i
Selt." ieIcu 4I
%,Vfjiul (lie S;
!613
96(44
V6111
9(1I0
f6 G
dfieql- rt.

l'icS 
.lrec-ifictllYv (\-
|i.sl'd in ll 
w l.

w.

ll.

',v 4,4
dv,i.iii 
d rc ;' 
iv 3, it- 
i, i- ci-;,
ili1: 
l* %1 hl l v' r f l 
ee 
t\ 
!t 
iee of 
'.llvli
ilcc ll 
s of I d 
lvi -s isi
%Ali.

cutili ti 
I d & 
celatioctc
(I) 
# .

,I!..

z 
.

.

.

.

3' 19
i2) 
l d..., 
..

....

.

.....

te!el
(4) 
vh 
,'.....

..

.

....

.

-",
(,) (!.." 
r 
i.

il......................

!0'
(:0) (04, it, 
' 
I 
*.

....................

(Ii) DI <,i.

,, 
, ;,,...

..

.....................

934, ,
(9 ) Ftilie.;ll' .-..

it.............

.c.

9.l
(0) j'li.'.............................

a,3
(11) ItItrc i- 
,il.

..

........

Q 4 i
(I 
Yym?

,' m .

i...........

e3'
(14) 
I.

~lr.u..

, t!)IPlr-.cdjI-.

.

................

(10) 1.lorp2.ie.- .

de........................

!;307
07) .M)'roill.".....................

i ) 
.

od.

..........

(19) Ncc-c-------.-......

..

~I
(1 ) 
." .

....

.......

......

!#307
(21) IhIc.eoir 
............................

('4,I
(2') 1e-,l.ena...........................

.S315
(23) iOrntcl,:cr!

.

.........

9335
(d) IJaliv.;*it.'ivcidc %olistasices.

Uilc31.

,- 
-
cifically 
eA;.:.i or uletes, li-ted ill aw-iocr
.

leteie.--- PAGE BREAK ---

,- 
-
cifically 
eA;.:.i or uletes, li-ted ill aw-iocr
. leteie. atcy aiatcritlt, 
ojiolucid, cuiixtcuil, 
or
prelmcalio 
"n, which continis sily ilantity of the
follolvieg hal iutciogelic suloslnllC(- , or which
conctitcs any of its salts, irofliers, knd rvilki of
Iomers wh-e.-vcr thie existed co of milch sat-,
isoicrm ied 
Its of oilerss is possible wiihei fice
speciic cierci...I dc.igiiaticii (for leUi pos.es of Ili
paragraph o.'i 
the terin "isomer"' ilc(l 
Ilice
oliical, lp-ilit.:i. anld gcoicil'c is omersn):
(1) 3.4-mettt)l, icdioxy amnpheLunine ........... 7400
(2) Setho,-.,!-met-hylcuedioxyamlheL.anlhe. 7401
(3) 3,4,5-trim, - 'oxy amtntIeanicnit ............. 7399
TAGO 403A
|l .l i ) ' tl.,.nr. z.ldl.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cdioxy amnpheLunine ........... 7400
(2) Setho,-.,!-met-hylcuedioxyamlheL.anlhe. 7401
(3) 3,4,5-trim, - 'oxy amtntIeanicnit ............. 7399
TAGO 403A
|l .l i ) ' tl.,.nr. z.ldl.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

353
Al 40-7
(4) 
)Ptuluke 
.
....................... 
7433
Somue Irmde 
tad oflvr 
okAuoI-A: 3-P-1)-
dirnLc )Luubi:,.j-, Ia'droyv.N.ditneth-
ylt, yptto-,ille; 1,,.,kl*l,4ini.
(b) 
iit-t1 h)I 
... 
.. 
.. 
........ 
... 
7434
Some trade and other namr(s: N.N Di-
ethyltrylat..,linit; | IIT.
(0) 
I)imrethyIaItrylfiams 
.. 
... 
7435
&Pmol trule t~f 0 be(r suw, 
I+ 
]wT
(7) 4-n tl,)1-2'.-dmsctl.oi).nsII- t:,,Imn 
... 
7395
Some trado and 1th r i.'v,.w 
4-vietiy'-2,-
")OM", 
sald ",41(1 '.
(8) Iborut,,,....... 
.. 
.. 
720
Some t.idc asd otlf-r 
Id al - " -lm bb I -
6.9-nethno-5|i !m. 
(1'.2'. 1.2 
,.i-,ao
4,6-b) iwit-le; LiIL.rw-t~thv itog.
(9) 
,q-'mrpT-srd 
di-hIlanlmd. 
.............. 
7315
(10) 
1i,vib,io,.... ........................ 
7360
(II) 
NIo'-,a,.c ............................... 
734I
(12) 
'e)otc_ ............................. 
7415
(13)
(14)
(10)
(10)
(17)
N -tth)I--,-ii',I idyl 1-f.4 
liI.1" ..... 
.
Pt d l.) n .
... 
.... 
... 
. ..
1y-ntlatic C111n olostts (A the m.l,.t.
Brwactsvnro 
of 
(tmloj t 
1o 
.nd 
.. 
r
cyxh.atic 
o fut 
.,am,,'., 
-a|ui'1 
%w
tIIti 
IW1uro 
TIII 
11irlr caenw-ar 
d
ste.urc oaid pb:-itm..eolopit.A nrat."
A'~l ti O tr~oiastlfmjttdr.
As 
c;s or ir.mlsl 
Jouol)41{( 
'11 
|l.
on.I Uaeir opticM iol. I..
,-9 
?r tr#nb 'tluthydio4al.th iIl.m(jo%
awh1l their optical iso:,4f
A'' 
.4 ci 
or tr:a. V'|t..hayl'roci .1,;sfoisl,
.and it, (.jLc a| li.
(Kilt1, 
.4'Ihlil- lft 
of( %is --e 
5uls-
f rtiIp~d! 
.
4 j.{ / iil, ri-fs I ( rip4 i tivt i (If
*han,,iC 
IiriC-I.% are totIcd.)
TACO 403A
7437
743S
,370
a

--- PAGE BREAK ---.and it, (.jLc a| li.
(Kilt1, 
.4'Ihlil- lft 
of( %is --e 
5uls-
f rtiIp~d! 
.
4 j.{ / iil, ri-fs I ( rip4 i tivt i (If
*han,,iC 
IiriC-I.% are totIcd.)
TACO 403A
7437
743S
,370
a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3,54
AR 40-7
APPENDIX 1B
INVESTIGATIONAL DR UG APPLICATION
1. Ideiitify;ng information. 
a. Nituae of invueSti-
gatc, (s').
It. ]Date of Ie tltesL
c. Na 
:e 
or other clear idmif'.ildimit of dt'g,,
iclC11,18- Clv'llicidtl 
lem (Igo fle~ extellft ],iiowI),
and
(1) A comlleo list aid source of cumIoto
(2) A complete staettenilt of qualitit:tie
cA1t11 
10-il ion.
(:3) 
A M't:(tllaeilt of the ticfi(l 
;od, f:xcilitic .,
al 
(it 
rlt 
m.'ed for IijuatUfat uriJig, piOc<(e -iii-,
J. N lmat of tagntttuf;c(it-er or otlier solelle (of
e. Qti hlkat ins of invc- igll, r(s) int detail.
f. N met- ailid ,ad_ cs of facility or farcjli is
11. J'hliJt Ottitl dlati.". Al il 1.,,.wn Islet,. 1t, iilfor-
li 
mi 
, l.at 
lm 
.-
t uSc Ot 
p iC 
i ttt ic(f( 
Ciiv.
lie 
i, tl. :'.1% jli6t1 
to ot I fite lliv l;.dttr(s) nlill
the ali- ulotiliet, inrlulili- aill oier lini.ul titn
sld all oilier iifor-i:ution jstif3ing;(lIe it'. 
e 
-
gratiol., i.e... the -afcty nlti ratioli.le of like p.ro-
po.ed .q uliy, mid
(i) If lw di-, 
as' 
leti 
Ixl.ite(! 
wCltitter-
cially Iml itm. 
al 
c.F.., out itle fhe Uintiteil
Stimesl (omlot-i,- 
in forutat int tiOat mtr-l di. rbat-
tion or iivc.t ignt ion.
(2) If 
Ute drug is a colnbinaLion of pie-
viou.ly invea.igatcd or tnitketed drugs, a stin-
illat. Of infus 
i, 
tt 
11 
t 
iat 
a 
tCliliiicl liid clonicl
itlve sti-alioa-; 
i11, exl'rielce', 
with w noloniiiss
iaul,;t iOta 
o 
, :nld iriclTv'. ii'lle.tei in u-c of iitel coIm-
(3) I1.li'o';ar.46hy of pletili;.-lit da , iitlu,-
illg tel illi 
wh14t :,lli opt-Jri:tC.
i11. Plhn atid ct-nduct of iliOl)ms.d ili'. 
liga.
lioll. a. Spr-.ific 
,alntid ihilaitar wied for or
ua.'e*a.-u of ittoii(- it 
t'.c 
t".1in
b ..
piOXil.:lc iiitair of w,bjects, tli-ir 3 e,
re\, .-tilii- (i.,... jiiihli )" 1o civ'iliant), "iitl o ihcr
1loc1 lliel iiif'u 
li 
Ito lti 
t1 ' 
ll ll to I lie 
fli, c 
lil 
ir111
of I le 
I 
i 
i 
itin'al, it h 
-a-; iI 
t 
; 'lliill of liut"I lie
dar'g i-, to lot: .il; 6 ;Iu;aie-ed awtilta 
Ihe c-.l- 
,lt 
ita 
dii.t-
I lt of Ihe ill r.- " gat ioll.
c. N1utiie'r of ;.alljctc. 
to 6.- 1:iloil .1 .. 1411-
I kol (if 
lli' ) 
'i .t 
lC infOll ittiA a'% ill b n fl 
e.
fur sll ruit lo! -.
i. An otfhli' of the oha-,ve. of ii'.-, .tigalluai 
(;.
hleiated Itl pul.il..ajab 3( 
af I i-, a 'gulu~tioil) 
I!-
aeid " jaltillt 
l il, I 
h 
i 
(-I Iy r'.'f-ietllc t
(Ic :il 
ai -:lmdv to., file iii Al 
IM it 
Iecords. Thit. uial
lit 
irloil- auoahl,leltut tl ima ri r.s ,uiil $; -.
i mnt, and will I. . uillJiliit-Ifed or uInelziked whwn
Rlll .g; ll lltl , i1.11 
lit (lit vem- it lt 
,r 
Scope of i 
.
tait c-I a~ialt mii is . -rila-a-t'lel.l'i
C. I )w t' iptirou or rnlaieb of fOl I, 
t, 
uicd to leotld
( 1: 1.
I. lDesctiliio: or copies of ag ae-etict atnd Pro-
cedires tiscd tea obtain and record the suijr-d's
colifweat to parl i, ;pate in the itt.i c.tigat ioi.
TAGO 403Af fOl I, 
t, 
uicd to leotld
( 1: 1.
I. lDesctiliio: or copies of ag ae-etict atnd Pro-
cedires tiscd tea obtain and record the suijr-d's
colifweat to parl i, ;pate in the itt.i c.tigat ioi.
TAGO 403A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

355
All 40-7
The proponent ouoncy of this regulation Is Oi Offce of The Surgeon
General. Users are invited Io sond comments ond suojested improve.
ments on DA Form 2028 (Recommended Churqes to Publications and
Blank Forms) to tIQDA iSGkD-DR| WASH DC 20314.
By Oder of the Sectrary of tie .Lnny:
VI';tNE IL 
OVI;[
Aijor Gcrrl, United Stqtes Army
7he Adjutont generall
FltI'EI) C. WCI.YAN
General, Uitd Slates Arpty
Chief of Staff
J)IS'iJI1uJ'1(N:
Active At,,i, 
USAl:: To be di-tibuted in acrord.s 
c will; )A Fo I 12- 9A reyiiietentit 
for AIt.
Medici I Servirv.4--Ajlplictbln to All Army 1]k-menl- - )I (Qly 11qr ];lock No. 74).
AIA'G: 'T'o be dialiibruted in accordfne ritl 
)A 1 oen 12-OA tejtluirclmnts for AR, .Medica-.I
Servict-ApIidienblo to Medical Activitire. wnly- 
B (Qfy Rqr 
olock No. 69).
10
140O 403A
IL6 *o9b861Be 
I',MINV, 
office We'

--- PAGE BREAK ---356
DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE
Headquarters US Air Force
Washington DC 20330
AF REGULATION 169-2
19 August 1974
Medical Education and Research
USE OF HUMAN TEST SUBJECTS IN THE MEDICAL SERVICE
This regulation establishes policies and procedures for using human volunteers as test subjects or "controls"' in the
Medical Service.

In conjunction with AFR 169-6, it implements DOD Instruction 5030.29, 12 May 1964.

I.

Application:
a.

The provisions (f this regulation apply to:
(I) Investigatois or research involving the bio-
logical, behavioral, or psychological study of a person,
his body or his surroundings conducted by or in
collaboration 
,th Ai Force Medical Service personnel
generally in Air Force Medical Service treatment and
dinical investigation facilities.

This includes but is not
limited to any medical or surgical procedure, any
withdrawal or removal of body tissue or fluid, any
administration of a ,:ierical or biological substance.

any deviation from normal diet or daily regimen, and
any manipulation or observation of bodily processes.

behavior or environm:nt.

Examples are studies which
represent a dcviatio:i from accepted practice, but
whic, 
are specificaJl, 
aimed at improved diagnosis,
prevention, or treatrient of a specific illness in a
patient; studies which are related to a patient's disease
but from which he c- she will not necessarily receive
any direct benefit; and investigative, non.therapeutic
research in which the-e is no intent or expectation of
treating an illness fro -n which the patient is suffering,
or in which the subjct is a "normal control" who is
not suffering from at illness but wbo volunteers to
participate for the potential benefit Of others.

Medi-
cations not listed it 
the US Pharmacopoeia.

the
National Formulary, cr the Accepted Dental Remedies,
of not approved for general use by the Food and Drug
Administration 
and those accepted but 
used in a
manner not provided for in the drug labeling are
specifically included.Medi-
cations not listed it 
the US Pharmacopoeia.

the
National Formulary, cr the Accepted Dental Remedies,
of not approved for general use by the Food and Drug
Administration 
and those accepted but 
used in a
manner not provided for in the drug labeling are
specifically included.

(2) Field trials of vaccines and prophylactic
drugs.

b.

The provisions of this regulation do not apply
to:
(1) Treatment administered with the consent of
the Director of Base Medical Services as a life-sustain-
ing measure.

(2) The use of human volunteers in the Air
Force RDT&E program provided: --
Supersedes AFR 169-8, 27 May 1968.

(For summary
of revised, deleted, or added material, see signature
1311ThT~tlON: S
(a) Diagnostic and treatment procedures use
techniques or therapeutic 
regimens conforming to
accepted professional practice, and
(b) All medications used are listed in the US
Pharmacopeia, 
the 
National 
Formulary, 
or the
Accepted Dental Remedies, or are approved for general
use by the Food and Drug Administration and are
administered in a manner provided for in the drug
labeling.

2.

Policy.

The following requirements apply to the use
of human volunteers in Medical Service treatment
facilities and clinical investigation facilities:
a.

The rights and welfare of tLe volunteer must be
safeguarded throughout the investigation.

The risks to
the volunteer must be outweighed by potential benefits
in terms of medical advances.

b.

The nature of the investigation must require
participation by a human test subject.

All necessary
preliminary tes's with laboratory animals and human
simulators, insofar as these are possible, must have
been conducted and evaluated before a human test
subject is used.

c.

Research studies using volunteers will be so
conducted as to avoid all unnecessary physical or
mental discamfort.

The number of volunteers will be
kept to the minimum consistent with the particular
study.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Research studies using volunteers will be so
conducted as to avoid all unnecessary physical or
mental discamfort. The number of volunteers will be
kept to the minimum consistent with the particular
study. Studies are not permitted if there is significant
probability that disease, injury, or death could occur. Proper ptein:ations will be made and adequate facili-
ties provided to afford the volunteer the maximum
possible protection against injury, disability, or death. Before the kivestigation or test begins, the physician or
dentist will conduct, or cause to be conducted, and
record such examinations and evaluations of the volun-
teer as his professional judgment dictates. d. A medical or dental officer other than the
investigator will be responsible for assuring proper
conduct of the experiment and the professional care of
the volunteer when circumstances warrant. The physi-
cian, dentist, or investigator may terminate the study
at any time. The volunteer, at any time, has the right
to revoke his consent and withdraw without prejudice
from the experiment. The volunteer must be fully
informed of these facts and procedures. e. The pricipal investigator will normally be either
a physician or dentist, as appropriate, lie must insure
that the volunteer has the capacity to consent, is able
to exercise !rue freedom of choice-wihout overt ot
hidden perw w.on, and is fully informed.

--- PAGE BREAK ----
357
2
s.

Before a volunteer is permitted to give his con-
', the investigator must give him an accurate, under.

siandable cxplaaton of the investigation.

The exila-
nation will-be made a part of the voluntary consent
form.

The explanation must include at least-
(1) The purpose, nature and duration of the
study;
(2) A fair explanation of the procedures to be
followed, and their purposes.

including identification
of any experimental procedures;
(3) A description of the attendant discomforts
and risks reasonably to be expected;
(4) A description of any benefits reasonably to
be expected;
(5) A disclosure of any appropriate alternative
procedures that night be advantageous to the subject;
(6) An offcr to answer any inquincs concerning
the procedures; and
(7) An instruction that the subject is free to
withdraw his consent and to discontinue participation
in the project or activity at any time.

g.

Forensic medicine consultation will be obtained.

The volunteer niust give his consent in witig.

A copy
of the voluntary consent form wtl be attached to the
protocol.

The consent form must be signed n the
presence of at least one witness who wel then attest to
the volunteer's signature by srnin.

in r, 
pl.ce pro-
vided.

In addition, the offer who advises of possible
consequences must also sign the consent in the pre-
ce of the same witness.

TI- completed consent
norm will be filed in the volunteer's medical records.

Copies may be retained by the investigator and the
Institutional Review Committee.

h.

With the exceptions noted in paragaph lb, HQ
USAF review and approval is required prior to per.

forming research and investigations that require ,olun-
teers and that use or collaborate with Medical Service
treatment facilities, clinical laboratories, or personnel.

3.

Responsibilities:
a.

Investigator:
(I) Prepares a protocol of the proposed investi-
gation in the format prescribed in AFR 169-6.Responsibilities:
a.

Investigator:
(I) Prepares a protocol of the proposed investi-
gation in the format prescribed in AFR 169-6.

(2) Assures that the policies outlined in para-
graph 2 above are complied with during the course of
the research/study.

BY ORDER OF 4?IIE SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE
OFFICIAL
JACK R.

BENSON, Colonel, USAF
Director of Administration
AFR 169-a 19 August 1974
b.

Commanders of Medical Treatment Facilities:
(I) When 
circumstances warrant.

appoint a
medical or dental officer otier than the investigator
(and who is neither directly associated with the invest-..

gation nor under the control of the investigator .o be
responsible for advising tie volunteer.

(2) Assure compliance with paragraph 2 above.

c.

The Surgeon General approves or disapproves
proposed protocols involving investigational new drugs
or field trials of vaccines and prophylactic drugs.

4.

Medical Investigation of Mishaps.

The Director of
Base Medical Services reports direct to HQ USAF/
SGPR, Wash DC 20314, any mishap that is coincident
with or possibly results from procedures using volun-
teers.

He also sends an information copy to the
appropriate command surgeon.

If the mishap is life.

threatening or otherwise serious, the Director of Base
Medical Services:
a.

Transmits initial reports as quickly as feasible by.

electrical means to the above addressees.

When MINI-
MIZE is imposed, reports will be made by the most
expeditious alternate means available.

b.

Within 15 days of the mishap, submits a final
complete narrative report to the above addressees.

NOTE: If reports in a and b above are not otherwise
classified, mark them "FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY"
(AFR H -30) and "SENSITIVE MEDICAL DATA."
S.

Publications Pertaining to Volunteers.--- PAGE BREAK ---

NOTE: If reports in a and b above are not otherwise
classified, mark them "FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY"
(AFR H -30) and "SENSITIVE MEDICAL DATA."
S. Publications Pertaining to Volunteers. All printed
papers, articles, and reports that pertain to the use of
volunteers within the provisions of this regulation must
contain the following statement: "The voluntary fully
informed consent of the subjects used in this research
was obtained as required by AFIR 169-S."
6. Reports. The reports required by this regulation are
exempt from assignment of a reports control symbol in
accordance with AFR 300-5. paragraph 3k. DAVID C. JONES, General, USAF
Chief of Staff
SUMMARY OF REVISED, DELETED, OR ADDED MATERIAL
This revision explicitly defines the applicability of human volunteers in research (par& I); clhrifies policy regarding
man volunteers (para 2); establishes the requirement for forensic medicine consultation (par 2); deletes specific
.rmat for volunteer consent form.

--- PAGE BREAK ---358
I)IMI'ARI MIN I 01 
li- 
AIR I ORI-l
Iciad l..ir let% US \A I olr c
Waslingoi IDc 20330
26 June 1974
Medical udlicati-lland Rewc+rch
CLINICAL INVIS lIGATION
This regulation explams how the Air Forie Chnical Invcsti.tion I'rogiarr I% sp,ns i.ed and supported at Medica
.StviLce IcarI nent I 
ic itres, 
S 
L1iri1J!l tI,.

.r,.'I, la t rhiriri iC, aid toiler l tIdrca!

support cntcis.

Ills ig-lhitioi d v.s..not
apply to the A IFr..c Blo:.

., 
: 
&l: prirar.

vh:: 
i.

isuled 1), nirc 8U- .d 
800-s.rics of Air :orce
reg!ialihos It iiplorcr:', It 5' 
[.c,..

(0W-4.

7 April '11i id I)(J) ln,:cti, 
05 3.

19January 196ind.iri
conjunciou with AIR I .g,-b.

uj,.)I) Ittu.ron )U.0 'W .

1 ' May 19(A.

I.

Air Force Policy.

lhIe Ai Fo..c ciiui.iges and
supports chill.il iise.tiirt 
atu oliritlbll1e to the
progress of the bioiidl.al scre'ces .lld I.

the eflc.icry
of the USAF 
Ie-,.lz.iI Serrate 1 he r.'qmrnicnts arc that
an IivCsilgalive project be
a.

Related 
to 
ineJical.

denl.

vtenary, 
or
biomedical sciente.S pifCitic.

b.

Conducted it 
omphaice wahI this regulation;
and,
c.

J'erformcd by members of tire Medical Service in a
mairner that does not corrproinisc tire prciforirance of
liel!

ass~ired dies.

All liiirca irCO zgrr ins by or iii
USAF hedical 
Sen r.c facrhr,:c, iu: hie pcItoined
according to fil, 
recujnrori 
cp.

tII se directed 
ild
funded by IIQ AMI) (AlVSC) 
usrdc 
tOx b0- aid 80-
series Air Forc ichulitions.

2.

Definition.:
a.

Chnic 
hI 
Irrsesrt: ii 
R, earchi gr.:hly involving
aliril 
r O iriisiins perio uired by or lit ou1 laborariun
with Ali I-oice Mcii.al SCivi.,.

pcrsonrcl.

usuall) in
Medical S ricc fa.hirics
b.

I'ricipa!

Iricstigator.

A member of the Medical
Service 
,,hio initrites a proposal ftr arid conducts a
cliic.I investig.rtion after 
approval by the Surgeon
General.

c.

Asso,5.ate Iivesriptur.

A rremiber of the Medical
Service whir) collaborates with the principal rInvesigator.

d.

(licil 
Investigation 
Faciity.d.

(licil 
Investigation 
Faciity.

A 
capability
established 
to 
assist 
fi 
cuinducti:g 
rhs clinicrl
investigation and 
teaching missions ii: USAF medical
centers.

This 
cipabrlity 
corisrts 
of 
personnel,
equipment.

and facilities and is marnt:i~nel at a relatively
consiil level or a Cotll rI rill:Ing 
bisr
C.

Ciiiic.rIJI Re.irr.

Bed.

A h:cal research hod miay
be designated only by I1Q USAF The following criteria
govern the designaio 
of a hospital bed as a clinical
research bed:
(1) 
hlie iivcstq;ition must bc .oriducted 
in a
controlled hospital ervaror:ssent ,vcr a prutrailed period
of tiue.

Supersedes AFR 169.6, 26 August 1971.(For summary
of revised, deleted, or added material, see signature
page.)
-OPR" SGPR
DISTRIBUTION: S
(2) Tire bed occup.rt retluircs ;rid receives 24
houi-a-d-Y obseivatcir.

(3) It i% not included in tho overall operting bed
allucathon of the facility.

(4) It is riot conied a bed for dornivilialy or
convalescent patients.

15) It is riot uscd for paillts admitted ol a
tiltlie hsis.

(6) Its us, does riot mifringe upon restrictions oi
funds cited in para 4.

f.

Iristitutiiatl 
Review 
Committee.

A 
foinial
corniiilce' 
lit,.!- d at 04c medical f.icility to pcrfrii
initial aid curIi:;rruii' rev::w, of proposed studio'.

Ihe
0i.rusnirtltee is ,h', .'Ollslf.i.1t1tir Of ti".

nature.

s icrlltific
iert.

arid Ir eo;'siy ot thr c 
iical isve.tigatiori is well
as tIre acceri liity o!

th chiird riii|grtiori in terns
of ilevirit 
l.,;s 
-,:Ii 
co,;r.riursity acceptane 
The
lcintiship iimist Lc cri-,;ooscd of ;: miniuns of five
persons of var',n i 
bakground 
(that 
is.

lawyers.

clergynicir ard Iy icit.

.s well ac stielltists) to assrile
colliplete 
ati 
.dequ.'e 
review 
of 
the 
clinical
iivestigito p,,cett The iseribeiship wdl iot include
tie investigatof( 
to: prpusA(s) under consideration;
the c arinan snmst be a physician.

3.

Asiginment in, Responribilities:
a.--- PAGE BREAK ---

3. Asiginment in, Responribilities:
a. Pririnpi lscshg.rtr
(1) Preparei the priposal for clinical insrtig.itiuni
and submi:s it to the medical facility corinnnaidcr
through 
the medical f:cniliy's Institutional Review
Comsnittee. (So, 
;,Jh I f7n format ) If the investigation
concerns evaluarr.-rs oi a ness drug, the investigator also
forwards 
cir.-i-ted 
alpro-priate 
Food and 
Drug
Adminstratnor; I. ,ils (see atch I. para 7). (2) If required by tie rirvesiga.ticii. rtole~ts the
designaiol o l ci.ri.al re :eac.i bedss. b. Media! Facility Conmandcr. ( I ) Fyahdies 
ain 
Istinutionl 
Revie'
CommiiIt tee. (2) Approves 
or 
disapproves 
tIre 
clnical 
-
inivestrtioll pr-posal si bcqucrit to fcvrcw Iny lic
Institutional R:vivw Con 'ilc. Appioval iorniily will
be withheld if the princi )a! investigator is likely to be
transferred pritr to th estimated completion date of tire
project. (3) Insures 
compl ance 
with 
AFR 
169-8 if
volunteers are .o be used and AFR 169.2 if animals ate
to be used. At: I{RtIAIMItO 169'-6

--- PAGE BREAK ---AR 169 6 
26 Jostl 1974
(4) I'orwdJid 
tie otigioil 
arid one copy of
approved 0lKaI si'vest'r.lVo:n propoJ.4s NJudriag a
uloly of tee volmmtai 
:siviscnt strenicnt required if
human test 
subjects are 
involi:dl 
dircm.

to IIQ
USAfISGI'R.

lniestal (ti~ifiur.

Wish IC 20314 for
approval 
Selds onle iifurrlutati 
.opy 
e.hl 
it, hii.

coininid sugolil 
aind to IiN A%0ltJi 
, Biovk% AitD
TX 78235.

(5) Assures that approval is rcccvcd fr in tile
Office of the Surgeon GCelral pilot to siratililg the
investigiion.

(6) Assumes responsibility for tile prooclunent
arid proper titilirtoni of c-juipeieni aid luds allotted
after reci 
i 
:'i; 
tire approval tt' ti 
e.

Gent isi
(7) 
aiciht.ite 
tile conduct ol appoved dimal
invcstigit roIs.

(8) Subnts the following sq'irts of each clmiA
tiivscstlatitOn for wlidh 
Ie 
i, responli'le to ilO
USAF/S(GUR.

Fotreslal Buddiig.

%'a% 
3 
X" 20314.

wilh
iiforI,1ioni 
LOpICS it Isis L.omnild s tre.on ind to IIQ
AMI)/IR.

Hinks Al B TX 78235
.(a) 
N.iratlavc 
inlnlarij'e, 
of 
lrloge .s 
and
findings, required 
it 
liasz evcry 6 i oathis tS 
aldi 2.)
(b) A tloiiil anid consripcnrn.ivc te-i.irt of the
Ilildrilrs 
Jind 
c'olClusloll; s,,h.ll Ill.

iviv¢ nie.tiaua 
is
L.omnp!ctcd 
of it iItillaltd ihm 1i) o.Ulnpijlitlt.

if
indicated.

lakes suggstio:ts for ,ppli..iiinr ad possible
iddltonil i;seaircih.

(i.) 
1 wo 
cOpric 
of 
ailV 
ab|.lzst.

otil
pfresenaition.

thi.lanarca!

frJor I.

or jon IA p.pcr that IS
based in wiole or it paill on the clnicil isivestigr 
aion
when it is publitsed or presentcd.

(9) It the pitncipil osvecstiitor is i(.rssagnd, the
medical facility coninaiidlei.

(a) Aiianges 
to: 
tile Lonlinujaon of the
project by a mew prilacailal iliVC ti:AgtO if practicable
(b) Suibnits to IIQ USAFJSGPR.

Futrestal
Buildoig.

Wash DC 20314 (with nfmrnation copies to
lis command su.e,,¢on anJ to 110 A'ID;RD, Bvoks AFB
TX 78235) a narrative summary concerning the status of
thrl clinical investigation arnd the actions taken.Futrestal
Buildoig.

Wash DC 20314 (with nfmrnation copies to
lis command su.e,,¢on anJ to 110 A'ID;RD, Bvoks AFB
TX 78235) a narrative summary concerning the status of
thrl clinical investigation arnd the actions taken.

If the
project must be terminated a formal.

comprehensive
report of findings to date is required.

c.

'Te Surgeon General
(I) Appoints a Clinhi31 Investiaton Committee
to review 
and approve or 
disapprovC all 
ciinical
investigations poposals not involving uiv$ligationai use
of drugs.

lhe Clinical invcstig.io.n Commin1ttee also
serves as tc Review Board, Invoslsgational Use of i)rugs.

which reviews ard may recommend appiovail by the
Surgeon 
General of clinical invesigation proposals
involving invCstiptional new drugs.

including proposed
field 
trials 
of vaccnes 
and 
prophylactic drugs.

Modificatisas of tile proposals and resubmission may be
suggested.

(2) 
Renders final decision on recommendations
made by the Review Board.

Investigational Use of Diugs.

(3) Autlaoritcs or disapproves tic designation and
use 
of 
clinical 
rcseairch 
btds 
for 
a 
particular
investigation.

(4) No'ics li, 
AMSIAt It.

It,,-,k 
Al It 
IX
7X215., of All approved propth,, 
so that r;¢e.( s.siy
I riding dc.ulinelits iaiy t- issued
(.) 
Si onslis tie Air I-ors 
Cl.

t .d It, e* :iw'.

n
Progiarn.

d Acaospaac tklcdn al t)sviNui iAI 
I
(I) 
Budgets 
.id 
silikel, amJjc 
laldl s 
to
purJiasig supplr;s 
lid csjir, 
i!!

a.d itircsirncnt
cquipinril to Wfwiti i 
iridtid il 
u 
.Ji 
i5C5Plili1)5
approved by tle Sorl;,cli Geiicial
(2) On Ot-.lsiOi linas furnih cqq.yvieii rc.pilrd
in approved s.l1i,.3l 
1IIVC3siZi 
ntiu 
po , ,'I 
.: 
s 
ofI~vo 
0
equiprniret to be used in apple5 e I.tsk., odc 
tisis
regulatiolil 
aie e.

ip 
front Vr .cdkl*, 
..

i0iied sit
AI 
671.

voine V, iVli.i i 
I S
C.

Air Ttaiiril; (oi,,iiinJ 
I 
iind 
.:isa 
miji.

oi iJICs a
clinical invesiralriin ti.-artY in o 'i 
t.l n wilh the
LISAF Medical Cer .er Keesl~e
(- Milli iar.

Aiii,!oi iJICs a
clinical invesiralriin ti.-artY in o 'i 
t.l n wilh the
LISAF Medical Cer .er Keesl~e
(- Milli iar.

Aiii,!

('C it ia:d I .t..}'si .5 aiim ipi.its
a clinical ivestir.lnii Lthit) i,.i 
jdiitii 
milli tire
David (;iiii U.%Al 
W.c'dlj1 C'nie.

g.

Ali I.ic 
S)l'Ilis Cornih...,d 
;I.,lrhnc¢s 
.iSiy
opelate 
a 0 1in1.i 
nr;sesti .

.ii 
!

.

i, 
i' 
.

ji, it 
o
with the Wilfoid I lill USAF WMdi.

aI (lfin
4.

hd(.etiig and Faiiidiig -
a.

Ojwitairmr;s air] naiicit 
'tin(!i!

ic usd fri 04t
opl'rtioir (if tie .le :l 
fise5: 
i.t 
, 
-,Is \iiit 
Wid-.rt
IliAi 
tSAI 
ledi.

i (cerl 
.

I S% 1 klcd,.ai 
(cl lii
KccslcI.

alid ()t, itt (.i 
niit 
.iS \I 
lcJ.

't ( illr 
1lite
budget i 
i d fiuniil.io ol dir ia::.iini .-
I .l 
ml ih-se,
incd lical tri ll!

% til e 
A 
11t1;411
Comnirnai 
iirind
b Oic rtrioa s 
iid 
rrimilten , , 
ii" di:Ig 
fIor ill
apptlu 
t aicIl 
,r ttliglinnrns Iv h( 
I Icri 
i 
l 
t 
b.

1a
Prin.p.il Ih,%sesF.rigtor arc prog ra 
:-:d ,it -' udetd it
itre Acw ir 
.c" MlcJja~l I)ivmoti I 
mids 1i tili 
.l.l
liirsstr' .rtt'.

ai 
iillri ty 
%%ll iioi: 
lie 
swal %i tliig
add~ironil peisonii 
r fto: IDY tiv, 
l Ihst,,i, if
exccpliOlis arc griirted by 110 t"SAl S(A'K..t;.a!.

lechnicIl.

or profesional p sir;n: .li, 
.i lired t1i or
part time, to aid ill a s.11111 I inv, i 1+3a 
plopIt..

-'1iy
not othlwise by enplo)cd 
within 
tile 
edlcl
treatment facility or tile base.

c.

lrstinienit equipmetia rcquiremcnrts fit rspresls
identified as a part of a spe.

J:rrl 
rrrvcstr g,tl
plioposil aie sublillited to th.lr ilrl;ull 4.i11.111d is pilj t
tlie hbis itiedim..l serviei is t sirui invcttm ti.

t ctarapoil
budget.

Invcltinent 
equipmct 
aczn 
sil.

h a 
te
speciticlly uircluded 
o proposals approvedd b) llQ USAF
will b " funded b) tie 110 ANI) is i pata 'J( I I
d.

Medical ficilrry coninianders aid 
ves,pttS
must not enter into --ontractual apeitnents that i'viv'!vc
clinical investigation 
proti 
siilhour 
tlic ipe'r.il
approval of tire Slrr -oil Geniral
e.--- PAGE BREAK ---

h a 
te
speciticlly uircluded 
o proposals approvedd b) llQ USAF
will b " funded b) tie 110 ANI) is i pata 'J( I I
d. Medical ficilrry coninianders aid 
ves,pttS
must not enter into --ontractual apeitnents that i'viv'!vc
clinical investigation 
proti 
siilhour 
tlic ipe'r.il
approval of tire Slrr -oil Geniral
e. Unexpended funds fron a terminated project arid
any equipment prlovided by H1Q A\ID must be returned
to 1IQ AMD. BroiLks AFB TX 7h:C"
S. Pubiciiton of 
Reports. Puabicatron 
of papels
2
359

--- PAGE BREAK ---

360
AI'R 169-6 
26 Junc 1974
le'SI l( I 
rfihil 
fro 
I0tiilhhuI llhV,, u J I 
phlJCCI -, 
I'
A.'lI tIIIljV'j III lan imtlsy J11d A .+I1'jl lw 
Sin~u+ 
.. l jouilfls
(Note AIK 19Ii17 Io proper lkil.i 
proccdures.)
BY 
RDLR 01- TIIE SIECRUTARY OF TIlE AIR 1"ORCL
OFFICIAL
6. Rrpolr! 
Reqiuire'd. 
1 I 
,'ltcla1 
rcI.'tiitl't 
by Ihi%
iC 
jg.' 
u 
I 
C 
.I'u1deJud Iil11 lrun) 
),i 
iu uItl 
jl I.Iipuuill
Control Symbol unlder AI:R 300-S.
GEORGE S. BROWN, General, USAF
Chief of Stjff
JACK K. BENSON. Cuhltel. USAF
I)itclof of AdilnllilorjIton
2 Atlimhnsnls
Simple Fomtlls
SUMMARY Of RIEVISLD, I)FIA.ITED, OR ADDED MATERIAL
Thii% e~icisr. establiilu 
the n 
iirnum knioilion of Ii%,litutonal Rcvww Committees (Tara 2). requires IpprovIl of
Ihe Office of fIhe Sumqcoi (eneial prior tw initawilng work on invcsti 
trens (para i), provides thc fortnt for prugl¢ss
Ilepits$(iltch Z )

--- PAGE BREAK ---ommittees (Tara 2). requires IpprovIl of
Ihe Office of fIhe Sumqcoi (eneial prior tw initawilng work on invcsti 
trens (para i), provides thc fortnt for prugl¢ss
Ilepits$(iltch Z )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

361
AI'R 169 6 
Aitaelrnc.it I 
26 June 1974
Sample Format
PROPOSAL rOR CLINICAl INVESTIGATION
(Title of Iivcstaiiuo)
I. I'urpl e of Inesligtiol. (;Iv, .i bl)f 
3sniniraly.
2. Bibligrapli)'. After a careftil ser.h of the scientific
hicl;tille foi related studies. l1%t heli ajor rllb!latiulls
in tihe field ul the iiivestigiaii
3. Technical 
Approach 
Summii 
e All itformaitiri
needed tr aii adci.;(li-te cl 
iUatoii. riludc dl:itis of the
expeiientl dcesigi, a dskription L.f methods It) be
used, and iurmber. age, sex. arid so iorth, as appropriate.
of subject aid cuuriotls, For pioto,:'ls inivulvog hu in
test subjects. desrtibc LaLadi-nd sweguards.
4. Equipment. List itcms of required cquipmet and the
e$lsimated cost of cai: Item.
S. hi'elialio Schedule.
a. Datc investigation will be-in
b. Dirutih i
C. Tirits' ihas,.
d. Date of ,,tilrpltllo1 (see pala 3b(2))
NOTE' List ay fact 
hi nm.iy adwrcsely influence
this schedule.
6. Expeirnential Subject%. If ::;-cs,nmcntil 
subjects ale
involved, include a s$alieiiicnt indiL.1n 
o:mpiane with
the appropilaic 
tregnlilloI
a. tlum-,n lest suhj..ts- See AFR 169-8
b. Aimmals See AI'K 169-2.
7. U'. 
of InvetipgiiuiAl 
Drug,.. If tie inIvcsifig.ri
concerns 
humn 
studies, treatment, 
or digriostic
proc.edures involving tihe use of medications riot listed in
the JUS Phiargnaiopcia or the National Foriiltary. or
11Ot approved 1o geicral use by the Food and Drug
Administration. or employed in a manner not provided
for 
in the drug labeling. include copies of the
appropriate FDA fm inis):
a. FD.1571. 
Notice 
of Claimcd 
Investigptional
E xemiption for a New Drug.
b. FD.1572. S,.tcinit of Investigator (Clinical
Pharilac.logy)
c. FD- 573. St.;emcnt of Iivstigator
These 
forms may t.: ob:.itied from ihe Office of New
Diup, Food and D.ug Administratior. Wash D)C 20204.
8. Personnel Data: 
.
.
a. Medical Fachity CommIndcr (name, giadc. and
title).
b. Investigator anud Assc.ciawe Invcstigator(s) (name,
grade, and title). A:,:h curiicula vitae.
9. Manpower. Lsli .ici number of roan-hours to bc
applied to the inv.i.halitiol categorized by Air Force
Specialty Code (AF.-C). for example"
I Captain, AFS1.'_ 
._lrours
I SSgt. AFSC... .
hours
I GS-5 Secrcary. 'JSC__ ,__-hours
4of roan-hours to bc
applied to the inv.i.halitiol categorized by Air Force
Specialty Code (AF.-C). for example"
I Captain, AFS1.'_ 
._lrours
I SSgt. AFSC... .
hours
I GS-5 Secrcary. 'JSC__ ,__-hours
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

362
AUR 169-6 
Aiti.chnent 2 
26 June 1974
SamplC Formal
PROGRESS REPORT
SUBJECTC. Clincal Invcistiajti, n Prupusil #
TO. IIQ USAFISGPR
I. Swus of swidy including suinnry vf findings to date and probleis experiencing or anticipated.
2. Sittis of rs ttur.-cs allottd for the study.
3. tUstiniated c(omrnption date
4. Other.
Copy to 
Major Comnuand/SG
AML)/RD
Less than one pige in length.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

363
DEPARTMENT OF I HE NAVY
OLHLAU Cf MLOIC,14r ,AVID SUIlGEfY
WASHINGTON. 0 c n 
20372
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
NIDRB
9 July 1973
BUMED INSTRUCTION 6710.49D
From: Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery
To: 
Stations Having Medical/Dental Personnel
Subj: 
Investigational use of new drugs in human beings
Ref: 
(a) Code of Federal Regulations, Title 21, Section
130, New Drugs (NOTAL)
(b) DODINST 5030.29, Subj: Investigational Use of
Drugs by the Department of Defense. (NOTAL)
(c) MANMED art. 20-10
(d) BUMEDINST 3900.3 B 
Subj: 
Rc-earch re-
porting procedures for the R-search, Explora-
tory Development, and Advanccd. Development
Categories at the Work Unit Level (NOTAL)
(e) BUMEDINST 6000.4 A Subj: 
Clinical
Investigation Program (CIP) 
(11O0TAL)
(f) SECNAVINST 3900.39, Subj: 
Use of volunteers
as subjects in research, development, test:
and evaluation (NOTAL)
Encl: 
(1) FDA Requirements for Institutional Review
Committees
(2) New Drug Regulations, Part 130.37
(3) Sample Consent Format
(4) Guideline Procedures for Local Control and
Use of Investigational Drugs
(5) Overview of Approval Procedure
1. Purpose. To establish policies and procedures for
the investigational use of new drugs in patients and
healthy human subjects involved in clinical or other
research conducted under the auspices of the Department
of the Navy.
10-026 0 - 76 - 24es for
the investigational use of new drugs in patients and
healthy human subjects involved in clinical or other
research conducted under the auspices of the Department
of the Navy.
10-026 0 - 76 - 24

--- PAGE BREAK ---tional use of new drugs in patients and
healthy human subjects involved in clinical or other
research conducted under the auspices of the Department
of the Navy.
10-026 0 - 76 - 24

--- PAGE BREAK ---

364
BJ?4EDINST 6710.49D
9 July 1973
2. 
Cancellation. 
BUMED Instruction 6710.49C is canceled.
3. Definitions
a. FDA. 
Food and Drug Administration of the U.S.
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.
b. Investigational New Drug. A new drug not yet
approved for general use and marketing by the FDA, but
intended solely for investigational use by experts
qualified by scientific training and experience to in-
vestigate the safety and effectiveness of drugs, and
exempted from the prohibition of introduction, or
delivery for introduction, into interstate commerce for
use in man on the basis of a Notice of Claimed Investi-
gational Exemption for a New Drug (Form FD-1571), filed
with the FDA. 
(In addition, a new "biologic product" -
meaning any virus, therapeutic serum, toxin,-antitoxin,
or analogous product applicable to the prevention,
treatment, or cure of diseases or injuries in man -
is
subject to license under Section 351 of the Public
Health Service Act, and the FD-1571 Notice, as well as
all subsequent communications should be submitted to the
Bureau of Biologics, FDA, which monitors tthe development
of biologic products.)
c. Sponsor. The person or agency who assumes re-
sponsibility for compliance with-applicable provisions
of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, as amended,
and Federal regulations. The sponsor may be an individ-
ual, partnership, corporation, or government agency and
may be a manufacturer, scientific institution, or an
investigator regularly and lawfully engaged in the in-
vestigation of new drugs. To sponsor an investigational
new drug requires submission to FDA of form FD-1571.
When the Navy assumes sponsorship of an investigational
new drug, the sponsor will be a field activity under the
command of the Chief, 
BUMED, that is qualified to under-
take sponsorship responsibilities and has an appropriate
institutional review committee for proposed research usinga field activity under the
command of the Chief, 
BUMED, that is qualified to under-
take sponsorship responsibilities and has an appropriate
institutional review committee for proposed research using

--- PAGE BREAK ---

365
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
9 July 1973
investigational drugs and biologicals. Normally, the Navy
sponsor will be the Veld activity proposing the research.
d. Investigator. A physician or clinical pharmaco-
logist who is designated by the sponsor as qualified to
perform a particular phase of the investigation and who
has executed for the sponsor the FDA form, Statement of
Investigator (FD-1572 or FD-1573).
e. Institutional Review Committee. A group to study
investigational new drugs for use on human subjects will
be reviewed by an "institutional review committee".
"Institution" is 
interpreted to include naval medical/
dental treatment facilities and BUMED command RDT&E
research facilities. The membership must be comprised
of sufficient members of varying background to assure
complete and adequate review of the research project or
clinical investigation study (see encl. ()).
f. 
G::antee. 
Recipient of a grant, usually a nonprofit
institution or organization. 
The grant is 
a written agree-
ment executed by both the Government (,7!rantor) and the
institution (grantee). 
Normally the grant document will
contain a limited number of express conditions relating
to funds, methods of payment, general nature and scope
of the research, patents and copyrights, revocation, and
other related matters. Grantees are required to partici-
pate in a share of the costs incurred in the performance
of a grant.
g. Navy Contractor. A nonprofit or a commercial
organization. Contract procedures are subject to the
requirements of the Armed Services Procurement Regu-
lation. Contracts may-be either cost, fixed price, cost-
reimbursement, or cost-plus-fixed fee. The selection
of the type of contract is based on various factors, such
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---ment Regu-
lation. Contracts may-be either cost, fixed price, cost-
reimbursement, or cost-plus-fixed fee. The selection
of the type of contract is based on various factors, such
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

366
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
9 July 1973
as type of research to be'performed, the contractor's
experience in maintaining cost records, and the degree
of definitiveness that can be established in the pro-
posed costs and performance of the work.
h. Phascs of Clinical Investigation and Required
Qualifications of the Investigator. 
Reference (a)
describes the phases of clinical investigations with
new drugs. The phase of a particular study is deter-
mined by the rDA in consideration of supporting data
supplied by te sponsor. Following the completion of
preclinical studies on experimental animals, clinical
investigation of a new drug progresses through three
phases:
(i) 
rhase I. The investigational drug is
administered to healthy volunteers to determine human
toxicity, metzbolism, absorption, elimination, or other
pharmacological action, preferred route of ad.inistra-
tion, and safe dose range. 
In Phase I, the investigator
must be able to evaluate the toxicity and pharmacological
effects of the drug on man.
(27- Phase 2. Initial trials in the diagnosis,
treatment or prevention of a specific disease to deter-
mine safety and efficacy. Additional pharmacologic
studies performed concurrently in animals may be neces-
sary to indicate safety for the Phase 2 extension of the
investigation. In Phase 2, the investigator should be
a physician or dentist familiar with the conditions to
be treated, the drugs used in these conditions, and the
methods of their--evaluation.
(3) Phase 3. This is the clinical trial phase
which is designed to assess the drug's safety and effec-
tiveness and optimum dosage schedules in the diagnosis,
treatment, or prophylaxis of groups of subjects involving
a given disease or condition. A reasonable protocol is
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd effec-
tiveness and optimum dosage schedules in the diagnosis,
treatment, or prophylaxis of groups of subjects involving
a given disease or condition. A reasonable protocol is
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

367
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
9 July 1973
developed on the basis of the facts accumulated in the
earlier phases, including completed and submitted
animal studies. 
This phase is normally conducted by
separate groups following the same protocol (with
reasonable variations and alternatives permitted by the
general plan) to produce well controlled clinical data.
In Phase 3, in addition to experienced investigators,
physicians or dentists not regarded as specialists in
clinical pharmacology may serve as investigators.
4. Relationship Between the FDA, Sponsor, and Investi-
gator. 
R:fcrence (a) requren the sponsor of an
investigational drug to approve, monitor, and correlate
data on all studies conducted under the FDA investiga-
tional new drug (IND) exemption authorizing his study.
To insure that each investigator is qualified and that
the protocol for the study and facilities 
are adequate, the
sponsor mist obtain from each investigator either a
form FD-1572, Statement of Investigator (Clinical Pharma-
cology), for Phase I and 2 trials or a form FD-1573,
Statement of Investigator, for Phase 3 trials. The
sponsor will, in turn, submit copies of these forms and
other material to FDA, who will include this information
as part of the total study for which that sponsor is
responsible.
5. 
Navy Reviewing Procedures
a. BUMED Responsibility and Review Procedures. Re-
ference (b) requires that all studies using investiga-
tional drugs under the -a-uspices of the Department of
the Navy be approved by a departmental review board of
professionals and that the approval be confirmed by the
Surgeon General of the Navy. Because of certain hazards
inherent in new drug development, BUMED reviews pro-
posals to use investigational drugs to insure protection
of human subjects used in Navy studies as well as to
insure Navy program relevance and compliance with FDA
regulations. Proposals to use investigational drugs
5estigational drugs to insure protection
of human subjects used in Navy studies as well as to
insure Navy program relevance and compliance with FDA
regulations. Proposals to use investigational drugs
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

368
*.' BUMEDINST 6710.49D
9 July 1973
may be submit'ted as RDT&E'research proposals or pro-
posals under -:he Clinical Investigation Program (CIP)
as outlined below:
(I) RDT&E research proposals must meet the
criteria of RDT&E funded investigations and will be
submitted as prescribed by references (c) and (d).
The Research Iivision (BuMed-Code 71) hAj the overall
administrative! responsibility for such investigations
and will cons:der these proposals using the same
criteria of scientific conduct, Navy relevance, and re-
porting standards as applied to other studies (Work
Units) under :.ts cognizance.
(2) Cl:nical Investigation Proposals are studies
funded by 0 ai~d M,N allotment and OPN ailotnment when-
ever investment equipment is approved, and will be sub-
mitted as prescribed by reference (e). The Clinical
Investi g ation 
Control Center (CICC), BUW:D, reviews
each CIP proposal for merit and program relevance con-
siderations.
(3) Naval Investigational Drug Review Board(NIDRB).
After program review by either the Research Division or
the CICC, each proposal to use an investigational drug
will be reviewed by the NIDRB regarding:
(a) the safety and efficacy of the proposed
study; and
(b) compliance with Federal regulations, in-
cluding Federal laws and FDA regulations and procedures.
(4) Approval and Notification. After NIDRB
approval, the proposal will be submitted to the Surgeon
General for confirmation of approval. Approval notifi-
cation to the requesting activity will be made by either
the Research Division or the CICC. See paragraph 6b
below for required delay of beginning studies sponsored
by Navy investigators or activities.
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---g activity will be made by either
the Research Division or the CICC. See paragraph 6b
below for required delay of beginning studies sponsored
by Navy investigators or activities.
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

369
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
9 July 1973
(5) Use of Human Volunteers. Compliance with
reference (f) 
is required in using human volunteers in
certain investigational drug studies.
b. 
Command Responsibility and Procedures
C.) 
Proposals to use investigational drugs in
humans wiU. be reviewed and approved by appropriate com-
mand revi,:w committees (as required by reference 
(d) or
(e) and the commanding officer prior to submission to
BUMED. 
S-.e enclosure (I) for FDA requirements.
(.) 
investigators will prepare and submit pro-
posals to use investigational drugs in accordance with
reference (d) or te), as appropriate. Depending upon
whether the drug to be tested is sponsored by-organi-
zations o:" individuals outside the Navy or by Navy
activitie; or investigators, the following additional
information is required for NIDRB review.
(a) Non-Navy Sponsored Drugs. 
It is
expected :hat most clinical trials of investigational
drugs performed by naval investigators will be with
drugs sponsored by an organization other than the Navy;
e.g., National Institutes of Health, civilian medical
centers, or the pharmaceutical industry. Before approval
of a clinical trial with an investigational drug may be-
considered, the following documentation must be submitted
for review:
1 The "Information-Data for Clinical
Investigators" (IDCI) 
prepared for the drug, obtained
from the sponsor.
2 
A "Statement of Background Information"
containing the following:
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---1 The "Information-Data for Clinical
Investigators" (IDCI) 
prepared for the drug, obtained
from the sponsor.
2 
A "Statement of Background Information"
containing the following:
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

370
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
9 July 1973
a. Confirmation by the investigator
that he and ant associate investigators have read and
understand the IDCI.
b. Name of manufacturer and sup-
plicr of drug, if different from the sponsor.
c. If the study represents parti-
cipation by th,! Navy in a larger coordinated effort by
other investigators, 
a description of this program and
the extent of participation.
d. -Any information in addition to
that contained ir 'he IDCI which the investigator'considers
pertinent to the safety and therapeutic rationale of the
use of the drucj.
e. Statement that written consent
will be obtained from patients. 
If it is felt that an
exception to consent is warranted as described in para-
graph lla(2) of this instruction, then a detailed justi-
fication of this opinion is required.
3. A Statement of Investigator, Form
FD-1572 or FD-1573 (as determined by the sponsor).
4. A study protocol submitted in ac-
cordance with reference (d) or (e) including the approxi-
mate number of subjects, their age, sex, condition, and
other relevant information concerning the subjects who
receive the drugs and subjects (if any) that will serve
-
as controls. The protocol should also include an outline
of dosage regimens, clinical monitoring and safety pro-
cedures, and anticipated methods of data analysis.
5. If BUMED approval is granted, form
FD-1572 or 1573 will be forwarded to the sponsor by the
command or activity initiating this form, and the
sponsor instructed to forward the drug directly to the
pharmacy of the facility concerned.
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---ll be forwarded to the sponsor by the
command or activity initiating this form, and the
sponsor instructed to forward the drug directly to the
pharmacy of the facility concerned.
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

371
BUM-EDINST 6710.49D
9- July 1973
c. 
1.1ternate Procedure. An investigator may wish
to participate in an FDA approved study encompassing
several drugs (such as those used in cancer chemotherapy).
Prior approval to use a group of drugs may be obtained
by following the basic procedures outlined above.
6. Navy--ponsored Dru s (see par- 3c) 
The occasion may
arise whece an individual desires to investigate a drug,
the use o which is not yet approved by the FDA, and
which is iot sponsored by another organization for clini-
cal testitg. 
in such a case, the Navy investigator or
his commai d .nay request sponsorship through the same
review pr(ccrlures as described above and providing, 
ini
additi 
4o the reuirements of reference 
(d) or (e),
the folloirg documentation:
a. 
C(m:lcted Notice of Claimed Invesntigational
Exemption fcr a New Drug, FD-1571, whicn requires the
fol lowing :
(]) 
All chemical, generic, and trade names by
which the drug is known.
(2) The supplier of the drug.
(3) The dosage form(s) of the drug to be used.
including the concentration of all active and inert sub-
stances in the preparation.
(4) The route(s) of administration to be used.
(5) The disease condition(s) for which the drug
will be used.
(6) Toxicity data which would indicate, to-date,
that the drug is safe to use on humans. Toxicity data
may be submitted directly or by reference to relevant
literature.
(7) The plan of the investigation (as listed in
reference 
(d) or (e)).
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---is safe to use on humans. Toxicity data
may be submitted directly or by reference to relevant
literature.
(7) The plan of the investigation (as listed in
reference 
(d) or (e)).
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

372
BUMEDINST 671).49D
9 July 1973
(8) Ef the drug for administration is prepared
in Navy suppo:ted laborat-ries, the method of prepara-
tion, quality control, sterilization, etc.
b. Upon approval by BUMED, 
required documentation
shall be submitted to FDA by the sponsor. 
FDA should
be instructed to send acknowledgement of receipt of the
form FD-1571 directlyy to the sponsor. Initiation of
clinical studies may not begin prior to receipt of FDA
acknowledgement.
7. Use of In'e*.tigational Drugs in Emergeicy Situations
a. Basic Procedure. 
Urgent situations may arise
when a clinic.an feels that emergency use of an investi-
gational drug i-: indicated in the case of one patient
where mainteniince of life or vital function is threatened.
The following procedures should be used for approval, pro-
curement, and use of an investigational drug in such a
circumstance.
(1) Obtain approval of the institutional review
committee and the commanding officer.
(2) Obtain mandatory BUMED authorization and
guidance by calling the Chairman of the Naval Investi-
gational Drug Review Board. The Chairman or his
designee may be contacted via the BUMED Information Desk
during working hours, or the BUMED Duty Officer outside
of normal working hours (Area Code 202, 254-4348) (Auto-
von 294-4348). 
The following information is required
for telephone approval:
(a) Name and supplier of drug.
(b) Sponsor, investigator, and IND number
of the drug.
(c) Principal investigator.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---The following information is required
for telephone approval:
(a) Name and supplier of drug.
(b) Sponsor, investigator, and IND number
of the drug.
(c) Principal investigator.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

373
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
9 July 1973
(d) 
Name,- status, and diagnosis of the patient.
(e) 
Confirmation of patient consent.
(3) 
The emergency procedure does not relieve the
Navy clinician from FDA requirements for using investi-
gational 
iew drugs. 
The clinician must be a designated
investiga :or 
(by submitting an FD-1572 or 1573 to the
sponor 6" '.be drug), 
or his name must be included as
associate iiivestigator on an approved investigator's
FD-1572 or 1.573. 
These procedures are necessary to insure
that all data regarding the use of an investigational new
drug are .:ollected and reported to the sponsor for eventual
submission -;c FDA.
(4), 
1.11 emergency telephone requests must be con-
firmed wi -h an official request in writing to BUMED(NIDRB)
submitted within 2 working days after receipt of tele-
phone authorization. Include documentation of patient
consent.
(5) 
Authorization for emergency use of an investi-
gational drug shall not be construed as being authorization
for use'iii other patients.
(6) 
At the termination of the use of the drug by a
Navy investigator, a report must be filed with the NIDRB
stating the results and including a case summary.
b. On Foreign Soil. 
Paragraph 9 provides information
for emergency use on foreign soil.
8. Procedure for Navy Contractors or Grantees
a. All contracting or granting offices are required
to review contracts or grants to civilian factilities for
use of investigational drugs in human subjects. 
If the
cognizant office agrees to support the study based on its
U1

--- PAGE BREAK ---uired
to review contracts or grants to civilian factilities for
use of investigational drugs in human subjects. 
If the
cognizant office agrees to support the study based on its
U1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

374
BUMEDINST 67L0.49D
9 July 1973
own research criteria, it will solicit the information
from the contractor or grantee and submit to BUMED as
indicated in paragraph 5 or 6 as appropriate. Approval
by the NIDRB and confirmation of the approval by Chief,
BUMED, is required before the clinical trials are under-
taken. Action by Chief, BUMED, will be transmitted to
the cognizan: contracting office. The contractor should
then be inst.-ucted to submit the appropriate forms to
the sponsor.
b. If a civilian contractor or grantee wishes the
Navy to spon.;or an investigational drug, the cognizant
contracting office shall obtain from the requester the
information -equired by paragraph 6a. 
This information
should be fo.-warded to BUMED (NIDRB) via BUMED(Code 71)
for action. 
If approval is granted, the Navy field
activity ser',ing as sponsor will submit the required
information 
'*o FDA and will solicit a form FD-1572 or
1573 from thf! contractor via the contracting office.
c. All reporting requirements detailed in this in-
struction shall apply to contractors who shall submit-
reports to the cognizant contracting office for forward-
ing to BUMED in accordance with reference 
(d) or (e).
9. Application to Naval Facilities on Foreign Soil
a. Naval personnel stationed on foreign soil must
comply with this instruction in connection with the
administration of drugs to any patient within a facility
under the administrative control of the U.S. Government.
This applies to:
(1) Investigational drugs having a U.S. sponsor.
(2) Foreign drugs which are available on the
world market but which have no status in the U.S.
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---U.S. Government.
This applies to:
(1) Investigational drugs having a U.S. sponsor.
(2) Foreign drugs which are available on the
world market but which have no status in the U.S.
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---

375
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
9 July 1973
b. The medical commanding officer may grant ap-
proval for emergency use of drugs described in this
paragraph. When emergency approval is granted, BUMED
(NIDRB) should be informed of the circumstances in
writing iffmediately utilizing the reporting procedures
described in paragraph 7.
c. If a drug described in this paragraph is being
utilized in the treatment of a patient being transferred
to a hospital in the U.S., its Commonwealths, territories,
and possessions, BUMED (NIDRB) must be notified prior to
the transfer. 
Notification must include the "name of-the
drug and the condition for which it 
is being utilized and
the name and destination of the patient.
d. 
T-e use of investigational drucis.in connection
with clinical investigation (CIP) or clinical research
(RDT&E) 
irvolving non-U.S. citizens at overseas activi-
ties must be approved by the commanding officer and
must comply with the legal requirements of the host
country. This requirement applies whether the studies
are conducted on board the overseas U.S. naval facility
or whenevcr the U.S. 
Navy physician or dentist is parti-
cipating in a joint study with local investigators at
another facility within the host country.
10. Classified Drugs
a. For clinical investigations with Navy-developed
drugs that are classified for reasons of national security
as defined in reference (d), 
the filing of a formal Notice
of Claimed Investigational Exemption for a New Drug (Form
FD-1571) to the Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare is not required, provided the study has been ap-
proved by the Naval Investigational Drug Review Board
and the Surgeon General of the Navy.
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---ent of Health, Education, and
Welfare is not required, provided the study has been ap-
proved by the Naval Investigational Drug Review Board
and the Surgeon General of the Navy.
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

376
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
9 July 1973
b. BUMED will report to FDA personnel who have
proper security clearance.
II. 
Local Handling of Investigational Drugs and Admini-
stration of Clinical Trials
a. Principles. Since hospitals are the primary
ceiiers -or clinical investigation of drugs, the
hospitals and the medical staffs are responsible for
insuring thAt proper procedures are established.
.I
(1)' 
rivestigational drugs should be used only
under the direct supervision of the principal staff
investigator who shall secure the necesrnry consent and
assure that' sich investigations shall be in accordance
with the applicable provisions of referne-e (f), and
within the frameWork of the study appro:-!d by BUMED.
Consent for use of investigational new d~igs shall be
in accordance with the policies states ini enclosure (2)
and reference (e). 
Enclosure (3) is a Eirmple consent
format to be used for guidance.
(2) In. general, 
.n patient may b treated with
an investigational drug without his written consent, or,
in the case of a minor child, the consent of the child's
parents or guardians. Where patients arc given a new
drug for treatment, written consent must be obtained in
all but exceptional cases. These exceptions include
relatively rare situations where it is not feasible to
obtain the patient's consent or the consr:nt of his rep-
resentative (e.g., emergency treatment o- matter of
professional judgment exercised in the b',st interest of
a particular patient under the investigator's care) or
where it would be contrary to the patient's welfare to
obtain his consent. The decision to grant exceptions
to the requirements for written consent rests with Chief,
BUMED. In emergency situations described in paragraph 7
of this instruction, two or more members of the NIDRB,
in agreement, may grant an exception.
14quirements for written consent rests with Chief,
BUMED. In emergency situations described in paragraph 7
of this instruction, two or more members of the NIDRB,
in agreement, may grant an exception.
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

377
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
9 July 1973
(3) Nurses may administer investigational drugs
only under the supervision of an investigator or associ-
ate investigator. Nurses who administer investigational
drugs shall be specifically designated by the investi-
gator and shall be provided with such basic information
as dosage forms, strengths available, actions and uses,
side effects, and symptoms of toxicity.
4) The pharmacy service shall store, properly
label, anid dispense investigational drugs in accordance
with the irvestigator's written orders.
b. 
Guideline Control Procedures. Suggested pro-
cedures for the control and use of investigational drugs
are attachcd as enclosure (4).
12. 
Reporting Procedures
a. 
In addition to reporting requirements in re-
ferences (d) report symbol MED 3900-2(DD-DR&E(AR)636
(3900)) 
and (e) report symbol MED 6000-3, reports on
the use of the investigational drug shall be forwarded
to BUMED (NIDRB) 
upon termination of -Me 
study. 
Con-
tractors or grantees need only submit the latter report
to their cognizant contracting office for forwarding to
BUMED..
b. BUMED (NIDRB) shall receive a copy of all reports
to sponsors; e.g., pharmaceutical firms.
c. The observation of any untoward side effects
must be reported immediately by letter or message to
BUMED (NIDRB) report symbol MED 6710-2 
(MIN:ETAUTH).
13. 
Forms and Reports
a. The below listed forms required to comply with
reference (a) may be obtained from the Food and Drug
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---MED (NIDRB) report symbol MED 6710-2 
(MIN:ETAUTH).
13. 
Forms and Reports
a. The below listed forms required to comply with
reference (a) may be obtained from the Food and Drug
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---

- 378
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
9 July 1973
Administration, Office of Scientific Evaluation, Bureau
of Drugs, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, Maryland 20852:
FD Form 1571 Notice of Claimed Investigational
Exemption For a New Drug
FD Form 1572 
Statement of Investigator (Clinical
Pharmacology)
FD Form 1573 Statement of Investigator
b. NAVMED 6710/1, Narcotic and Controlled Drug Account
Record, prescribcdi:.n enclosure (4), is available from Cog I
stock points.
c. NAVMED &710/2, Investigational Drug Data Record,
and NAVMED 6710/3, Investigational Drug Inventory and
Prescription Record, prescribed in enclosure (4), are
available from BUMED.
d. Reports required by paragraphs 7, 9, 12b and c,
are assigned report symbol MED 6710-2. 
The reporting
requirement has been approved by the Chief of Naval
Operations.
IS
V. CSTIS
Copy to:
A3 (CNO-OP-09B14)
(CNO-OP-09B18)
FKM (NavPubFormCen)
Stocked:
COMNAVDIST Wash. DC
(Supply & Fiscal Dept. - Code 514.3)
Wash. Navy Yard
Wash. DC 20374
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---tions.
IS
V. CSTIS
Copy to:
A3 (CNO-OP-09B14)
(CNO-OP-09B18)
FKM (NavPubFormCen)
Stocked:
COMNAVDIST Wash. DC
(Supply & Fiscal Dept. - Code 514.3)
Wash. Navy Yard
Wash. DC 20374
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---

379
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
9 July 1973
FDA Requirements for Institutional Review Committees
The Code of Federhl Regulations, part 130.3, New
Drugs for Investigational Use in Iluman Beings, has been
amended to include the following requirements:
a. Each study involving investigational new drugs
using institutionalized human subjects will be reviewed
by an institutionall review committee". 
(Institution is
interpreted to include naval medical/dental treatment
facilities and BUMED research (RDT&E) facilities, and the
requiremcnt for institutional committee review applies
to all three phases of clinical studies as described in
reference. (b).)
b. Assurance must be given that an institutional
review committee is responsible for initial and continuing
review and approval of the proposed clinical study.
c. The membership must be comprised of sufficient
members of varying background, that is, lawyers, clergy-
men, or laymen as well as scientists, to assure complete
and adequate review of the research project. The member-
ship must possess not only broad competence to comprehend
the nature of the project, but also other competencies
necessary to judge the acceptability of the project or
activity in terms of institutional regulations, relevant
law, standards of professional practice, and community
acceptance.
d. Assurance must be presented t) at neither the
sponsor nor the investigator has participated in se-
lection of committee members; that the review committee
does not allow participation in its review and conclusions
by an individual involved in the conduct of the research
activity under review (except to provide information to
the committee).
Enclosur- (1)
70-026 0 - 76 - 25

--- PAGE BREAK ---ew and conclusions
by an individual involved in the conduct of the research
activity under review (except to provide information to
the committee).
Enclosur- (1)
70-026 0 - 76 - 25

--- PAGE BREAK ---

380
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
9 July_1973
C. Reviews of the stidy will be conductr.d by the
review cnr,rnmttoe at intervals appropriated to the
decree of ri.;k, but not exceeding I year, to assure
that thve rz.,arch project is beinj corvliJct,,d in com-
pliancy, with thl 
committee's understanding and
recorjnridaLio is;.
f. 
The r- view committee will maintain adequate
documevntaticn o 
its activities and develop adequate
procedures 
fo" ":eporting its findings to the insti-
tution. The 
lo 
lu:mnts maintained by the cci-writtc-
are to include 
-I,:! names and qualifications of com-
mittee meber;, records of information provided to
subject- .in 
-)tiinincj 
informed consent, coirmittee
din;cussion on substantive issues and their resolution,
committee rec,rrendations, and dated reports of suc-
cesive reviowi as they are-performed. 
Copies of all
documents are to be retained for a period of 3 years
past the completion or discontinuance of the study
and are to be made available upon request to duly
authoriz ,d representatives of the Food and Drug
Administration.
Enclosure (I)
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---381 -
DUMEDINST 6710,49D
9 July 1973
New Drug Ilegulations, Part 130.37
130.37 Cone, nt for use of investigational new drugs (IND) on humans;
statement of policy
(a) Section 505(1) of the act provides that regulations on use of
investigational nex drugs on humans shall impose the condition that in-
vestigators "obtain the consent of such human beings or their representa-
tives, excpt %here they deem it 
not feasible or in their professional
judgment, contrary to the best interests of such human beings."
(b) 
"lhl, 
hI 
ensl- 
that tit' 
con ton t ol 
suchl imnin- (or the consent of
the.r 
rupiis'.enta lives) to whom itives L.i ttinnal flr.;gs- are administered
t'i' t11y for th'- accumulation of scientific knowli-dge, 
for such purposes
as tuAdy u,; drug behavior, 
body processes, or the course of a disease,
must b- 
obtailred in all cases and, 
in 
all 
but exceptional cases, the con-
sent of patients under treatment with investigatienal drugs or the con-
sent of their re' r4sentativcs must be obtained.

(c) 
"Under tioatment" applies when the admirstration of the investi-
gational drug, f- 
diagnostic, 
therapeutic, or oth,.,r purpose involves medi-
cal judgment, taking Into account the individual circumstances pertaining
to the patient t-i whom the investigational drug i:, 
to be administered.

(0) 
"Exceptional cases" as used in pararraph 
(b) 
of this section are
those relatively rare cases in 
which it 
is not fc.

,i.ble 
to obtain the
-patient's cos-)lrnt or the consent of his representative, 
or in which as a
matter of professional judgmnent exercised in 
the best interest of a par-
ticular patient under the investigator's care, 
it 
would be contrary to
that patient's %elfare to obtain his consent.

(e) 
"Patient" means the person under Lrcatmvnt.--- PAGE BREAK ---

,i.ble 
to obtain the
-patient's cos-)lrnt or the consent of his representative, 
or in which as a
matter of professional judgmnent exercised in 
the best interest of a par-
ticular patient under the investigator's care, 
it 
would be contrary to
that patient's %elfare to obtain his consent. (e) 
"Patient" means the person under Lrcatmvnt. (f) 
"Not feasible" is 
limited to cases wherein the investigator is
not capable of obtaining consent because of inability to communicate with
the patient or his representative; for example, 
the patient is 
in 
a coma
or is otherwise incapable of giving consent, his representative cannot be
reached, and it 
is imperative to administer the drug without delay. (g) "Contrary to the best interests of such hunian beings" applies
when the communication of information to obtain con.-ent would seriously
affect the patient's well-being and the physician has exercised a pro-
fessional judgment that under the particular cirt-umstances of this patient's
case, the patient's best interests would suffer if consent were sought. (h) "Consent" means that the person involved has legal capacity to
give consent, is so situated as to be able to exercise free power of choice,
and is provided with a fair explanation of perti:ient information concerning
the investigational drug, and/or his possible use as a control, as to enable
_him to make a decision on his willingness to receive said investigational
drug. This latter element means that before the acceptance of an affirma-
tive decision by such person tile investigator should carefully- consider
Enclosure (2)

--- PAGE BREAK ---id investigational
drug. This latter element means that before the acceptance of an affirma-
tive decision by such person tile investigator should carefully- consider
Enclosure (2)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

382
%D-UMEDINST 6710.49D
#' 9 July 1973 
-
and make known to him (taking into consideration such person's well-being
and his ability to understand) thd nature, expected duration, and purpose
of the administration of said investigational drug; the method and means
by which it 
is 
to be administered; the hazards involved; the existence of
alternative forms of therapy, if 
any; and tile beneficial effects upon his
health or person that may possibly come from the administration of the in-
vestigational drug.
When consent is necessary under the rules set forth iii this section 
the
consent of persons receiving an Investigational new drug in Phase land
Phase 2Viivestigations (or their representatives) shall be in writing,
When consent is necessary under such rules in Phase 3Y investigations, it
is the responsibility if investigators, taking into consideration the
physical and mental stiLte of the patient, to decide -hen 
it 
is necessary
or preferable to obtaip (onsent in other than writtclTform. 
When such
written consent is not obtained, the investigator must obtain oral con-
sent and record that ftct in the medical record of the person receiving
the drug.
YAs discussed
130.3(a) (2).
enclosure (2)
in item 10 of Form FD-1571, 
which Form is set forth in
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---ent and record that ftct in the medical record of the person receiving
the drug.
YAs discussed
130.3(a) (2).
enclosure (2)
in item 10 of Form FD-1571, 
which Form is set forth in
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

383
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
9 JUly 1973
SAMPLE 'CONS ENT 
FORMAT
(Activity)
CONSENT FOR VOLUNTARY PARTICIPATION
in a
CLINICAL RESEARCH(RDT&E)/CLINICAL 
INVESTIGATION 
(CIP)
STUDY
Date:
1. 
I, 
-
born
hereby volunteer to participate as subject in the clinical
research/clinical investigation study entitled:
Work Unit or CIP Number
2. 
The purpose of this study has beer. fully explained to
me in simple language which I understand. 
All potential
risks have been explained to me. 
I further understand
that the adequacy of safety measures I-as been certified
by the Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. 
These
consist of the following:
3. 
In making my decision to volunteer, 
I am not relying
on any information or representation not set forth in
this document; and consent is given as an exercise of
free will without any force or duress of any kind. 
I
understand that the study is experimental in nature,
and that my consent to participate does not constitute
a release from any possible future liability by the
Navy attributable to this study. 
I further understand
that I may voluntarily withdraw as a volunteer partici-
pant in this study at any time Iso 
desire. 
Should there
Enclosure (3)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

384
-- 
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
9 July 1973
be any additional potential risks which might become
known during the course of ,.his study, I understand
that these will be fully explained to me.
SIGNED:
WITNESS:
(Signature)
(Typed NAME,GRADE or
RATE and SSN)
(Typed NAME, 
GRhDE or RATE
and SSN)
INVESTIGATOR:
(Signature)
(Typed NAM)C,GRADE or
RATE and SSN)
Copy to:
Service Record, jacket or personrel file
Hospital Chart (if applicable)
Enclosure (3)
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---RhDE or RATE
and SSN)
INVESTIGATOR:
(Signature)
(Typed NAM)C,GRADE or
RATE and SSN)
Copy to:
Service Record, jacket or personrel file
Hospital Chart (if applicable)
Enclosure (3)
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

385
SUMI) INST 6710.49D
9 July 1973
Guideline Procedures for Local Control and Use of Investi;;ational Drugs
Prior to submission to BU;D requests for the use of investigational drugs
shall be approved by the commanding officer or senior medical officer aboard •
who may utilize recommendatlon- of advisory panels; e.g., pharmacy and thera-
peitic cos.nittee or clinical research committee. 
Upon BUNTD approval to use
th' investigational drug, the following procedures are stigeested:
I. The drur shall be requisitioned from the manufacturer, 
sponsor, or other
source 5pecifying that the shipirisnt be m.-de directly to the iha.1rimacy to assure
safekeeping under proper storage and for establish ent of record keeping pro-
Cedures.
2. Upon receipt, the Pharmacy Officer shall, with the assistance of the In-
vestigator, insure that a NAVMD 6710/2, Investigational Drug Data Record,
is prepared.
3. The pharirac: :;hall attach to each container a distirctic label (color
or shape) conta:n.ng the statement, "Investigational Drug -
Not for General
Use, 
the name (J' the drug (or if a code number is used, then the pharma-
cological class f .cation; for-oxample, "Analgr(sic Drug" or "Antihistaminic
Drug"), and the na-ne of the investigator.
4. 
The pharmacy !;aall allocate a separate locked anea for the exclusive
storage of the drtgs.
5. 
The principal investigator, or authorized a.irociate investigator (as
indicated on Form FD-1572 or 1573), 
shall request Ine drug from the phar-
macy by means of a writtenn prescription form. The pharmacy shall not.
honor any prescription signed by a person other than the specific inves-
tigator or af.sociate investigator(s).
6. The prescription shall be kept in a separate file, numbered consecu-
tively, and the number prefixed by "IND".
7. 
A separate KAVMED 6710/3, Investigational Drug Inventory and Prescrip--
tion Record, shall be maintained in the pharmacy for each drug. 
This pro-
vides a perpetual pharmacy inventory and serves as a ready reference of
all patients receiving the drug.
8. 
When the drug is delivered to the ward, a completed copy of the HAV&iD
6710/2, Inivestigational Drug Data Record, and a NAV.M'. 6710/1, Narcotic and
Controlled Drug Account flecord, shall be delivered to the ward flrlse and a
receipt shall be obtained. 
This will assure strict accountability and a per-
petual inventory for all drugs on the wards. Nursing personnel shall be
responsible for returning unused drugs and the completed NAVMED 6710/1 to the
pharmacy.
9, The pharmacy shall dispose of (by return to the manufacturer or by
destruction, as indicated) all drugs no longer in use or for which future
use is not anticipated.
10. 
If "double blind" studies or any other studies requiring coding are
utilized, a copy of the code shall be in the pharmacy.
Enclosure (4)longer in use or for which future
use is not anticipated.
10. 
If "double blind" studies or any other studies requiring coding are
utilized, a copy of the code shall be in the pharmacy.
Enclosure (4)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

386
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
9 July 1973
OVERVIEW OF APPROVAL PROCEDURE
(FOR RDT&E PROPOSALS A"D CLINICAL INVESTIGATION PROPOSALS (CIP))
I 
NVESTIGATOR
ACTIVITY
Institutional Reviev,
Committee & C.O.
(APPROVAL)
RDT&E -Code 
71 BU;IED
CIP-Code 10CICC BtUhCZD
(PROGRAM REVIEW)
NIDRB BUMED
(APPROV AL) 
-
I 
SURGEON GENERAL,
(APPROVAL CONFIRMATION
NIDRB BUMED
I
R 
RTE 
- CODE 71 BL-,ED
IP-Code 10 CICC Bt* tED
APPROVAL NQT1F1CA"T(,!4.
NON-NAVY SPONSORED
DRUG-
I
(FD 1572/1573)
SFDA 
APPROVED SPONSQ
NAVY SPONSORED DRUG
ACTIVITY
(FD 1571)
-*FDAI
(AC KOWLEDGEMENT)
ACTIVITY
* FDA acknowledgement is
required prior, to com-
menc,.ng study.
Enclosure (5)
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---573)
SFDA 
APPROVED SPONSQ
NAVY SPONSORED DRUG
ACTIVITY
(FD 1571)
-*FDAI
(AC KOWLEDGEMENT)
ACTIVITY
* FDA acknowledgement is
required prior, to com-
menc,.ng study.
Enclosure (5)
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

387
DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
eUnEAU O" MEDICINE AND SURGEriY
WASHINGTON. D.C. 20372
IN REPLY RtllfUa TO
BUMEDINST 6000.4B
BUMED-0011
15 January 1975
BUMED INSTRUCTION 6000.4B
From: 
Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery
SubJ: 
Clinical Investigation Program (C?)
Ref: 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Cf)
Encl: 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
DOD Directive 6000.4 dtd 7 Apr 1971 
(NOTAL)
BUMEDINST 3900.3B
BUMEDNOTE 1500, BUMED-316 of 2 Nov 1974(Cane Jun 75)*
BUMEDINST 6320.31 series
BUMEDINST 6710.49D
SECNAVINST 3900.39 series
Regional Clinical Investigation Centers
Clinical Investigation Study Iroposal,
MED-6000-3 PART I
Clinical Investigation Budget Hstimate Format,
MED-6000-3 PART 2
Clinical Investigation Situational Report,
MED-6000-4
Clinical Investigation Progra. Report of Costs,
MED-6000-5 PART 1
Clinical Investigation Progra: Civilian Personnel
Report, MED-6000-5 PART 2
Clinical Investigation Progra. Resources Summary
Estimate, MED-6000-6
1. Purpose. To state policy for the corluct of clinical
investigation as a continuing program in naval medical
facilities, to assign respontlibilities f ' the Navy's
Clinical Investigltion Program, and to ou:tlire administra-
tive and funding procedures.
2. Cancellation. BUMEDINST 6000.4A is canceled.
3. Applicability and Scope. 
In accordance with references
(a) and (d, 
the Clinical Investigation 
program (CIP) applies
all naval medical activities and qncompatses all elements
within a clinical investigation program. %;'9ch enhances and
promotes optimal health care delivery to The entire mili-
tary community. 
An exception is those research proposals
that are unique to the operational mission of the Navy and
Marine Corps (militarily relevant), whieh may be approved
and supported through the Director of Defense Research and
Engineering (DDR&E), 
in accordance with reference (b).
(R
tossion of the Navy and
Marine Corps (militarily relevant), whieh may be approved
and supported through the Director of Defense Research and
Engineering (DDR&E), 
in accordance with reference (b).
(R
to

--- PAGE BREAK ---d
Marine Corps (militarily relevant), whieh may be approved
and supported through the Director of Defense Research and
Engineering (DDR&E), 
in accordance with reference (b).
(R
to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

388
BUIEDINST 6000.14B
15 January 1975
4. 
Policy and Cb'ectiv,,n
a. Clinical Investigation is an essential conporent cf
an optimal health care system of the Medical Department of
the Navy. 
The pr ncIpal I'nvestigator shall be an active
duty mer'.er cf 
he Navy Medical Department (Medical Corps,
Dental Corps, Me1cal S.rvice Corps, Nurse Corps). 
The
objectives are to:
(1) 
Achieve continuous improvement in the quality
of patient care.
(2) Create a.d rialr,taln a continuing atmosphere of
inquiry into better r.calt*, 
care delivery techniques, systems
and procedures.
( 3) 
P:'r.c' 
experience and new knowledge In health
care dellve:'y t.:;,h 
c:-:r.ized clinical Investigations.
(M) Cortr!bute te naintaining high professional
sta-dlnri 
and acbre,:at'c;, of advanced health care, educa-
tional and traf.ninG prcgrars.
b. The effecti'vr.ec 
of the program Is to be monitored
by the exte:,t to whr'e,.h clinical Investigation advance.s the
quality o.f health care rendered in naval medical fac:l1ties,
as jud cd by accepted professional standards, lnclud:r.g
stat'stical 
health da-a, accreditation evaluations, 
:.nspec-
tions an-d surveys, 
and such other criteria as nay be
developed to monltr health care and the professional.
competence of health care personnel.
R) 
5. 
Oreanization and Furctions
a. Director, C'Inical Investigation (DCI). In compli-
ance with reference (c), the Navy's Clinical Investigation
Program (CIP) 
is established in the Naval Health Sciences
Education and Tralning Cc.r.and (HSETC), 
with a director and
staff. Under the Cc.n.anding Officer, HSETC, 
the Director,
Clinical Invest'gat'.on, shall be responsible for the overall
management of the Navy's CIP, and shall:
(1) Serve as the management focal point for the CIP.
(2) Estahlish and promulgate policy which will
guide naval medical facilities in the conduct of clinical
invest igat ions.
2Navy's CIP, and shall:
(1) Serve as the management focal point for the CIP.
(2) Estahlish and promulgate policy which will
guide naval medical facilities in the conduct of clinical
invest igat ions.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---l:
(1) Serve as the management focal point for the CIP.
(2) Estahlish and promulgate policy which will
guide naval medical facilities in the conduct of clinical
invest igat ions.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

389
BUMEDINST 6ooo.4B
15 January 1975
(3) Determine and promulgate relative priority
decisions pertaining to the various clinical investigation
requirements submitted by naval medical facilities.
(4) Determine, direct and execute criteria and
procedures for administrative control, and for evaluation
for approval or disapproval of the merit and design of
clinical investigations.
(5) Ascertain, program, and support total resource
needs.
(6) Approve allocation of resources to the eligible
medical facilities in consonance with established priorities
for the clinical investigation effort.
(7) Monitor the effectiveness of the CIP.
b. Regional Clinical Investigation "enters (RCICs). 
(R
Regional Clinical Investigation Centers established in the
Regional Medical Centers at Bethesda, Oak:land, Philadelphia,
Portsmouth, Virginia and San Diego, serve as focal points
for local management and direction of th! Regional Medical
Centers' Clinical Investigation Program. HSETC will deter-
mine CIP fund allocations to support each Clinical
InvestigatiDn Center.. RCIC report requirements will be
submitted in accordance with paragraphs 3b(l) and 8b(2).
c. Regional Clinical Investigation Review Committee 
(R
(RCIRC)
(1) A Clinical Investigation Review Committee,
established at each regional medical center having an RCIC,
reviews clinical investigation study proposals submitted
within its area of responsibility as listed in enclosure
(1). 
Suggested membership of this commniitee would be the
Director, Clinical Services, or Director, Regional Clinical
Investigation Center, as Chairman; at least three other
chiefs of service or senior staff medical officers knowl-
edgeable in clinical investigation; a dental officer repre-
sentative; a Medical Service Corps representative; a Nurse
Corps representative; and a fiscal representative (non-
voting). 
All Medical Department activities shall submit
proposed clinical investigation studies to HSETC (Attn: DCI)
via the appropriate RCIRC as indicated In enclosure (1),
with an advance copy of the proposal being forwarded
directly to HSETC (Attn: DCI).
3posed clinical investigation studies to HSETC (Attn: DCI)
via the appropriate RCIRC as indicated In enclosure (1),
with an advance copy of the proposal being forwarded
directly to HSETC (Attn: DCI).
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---tigation studies to HSETC (Attn: DCI)
via the appropriate RCIRC as indicated In enclosure (1),
with an advance copy of the proposal being forwarded
directly to HSETC (Attn: DCI).
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

390
BUMEDINST 6000.4B
15 January 1975
R) 6. Submission Requirements
a. New Clinical InvestiL~tion Study Proposals. Orig-
inal and two copies required 
n format or enclosures (2) 
and
(3).
(1) 
Generally, new proposal submissions originate
with the individual investigator, although the Chairman of
the Department or Chief of Service may require a clinical
Investigation with subject area selected by the graduate
trainee as part of a residency or other training program.
(2) 
The RCIRC should satisfy itself that the Inves-
tigator is sufficiently knowledgeable in the proposed area
of clinical investigation; that the investigator's clinical
investigation proposal demonstrates a specific need for
investigation; that it 
is scientifically sound; 
that the
objectives are realistic; that the approach is suffic ehtly
detailed and presents a logical plan to accomplish the
objective(s); that the resources requested are reasonable
and justified in the conduct of the study; and that all
other requirements as outlined in this directive and Its
references are met. 
The RCIRC assigns a priority rating to
the proposal, using a score range of 1.00 to 5.00 witn 1.00
being the highest possible and 5.00 being the least prom-
ising.
(3) 
Upon RCIRC approval and the other special
requirements (review by Pharmacy and Therapeutic Cc.-rnittee,
Human Use Committee, etc.), the command covering erdorse-
ment is made, forwarding the clinical investigation proposal
with all applicable enclosures and appended summaries to
HSETC (Attn: DCI).
(4) HSETC (DCI) will:
(a) Review the clinical investigation study
proposal and notify the originating activity directly.
(b) 
Assign a permanent clinical investigation
study number to the study proposal, approve resources sup-
port and continually monitor progress through periodi-
follow-up reporting requirements and on-site visits.
b. Pilot Studies
(1) Short-term, specific need, scientifically
sound, low-funding pilot studies which have good potential
14gress through periodi-
follow-up reporting requirements and on-site visits.
b. Pilot Studies
(1) Short-term, specific need, scientifically
sound, low-funding pilot studies which have good potential
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---i-
follow-up reporting requirements and on-site visits.
b. Pilot Studies
(1) Short-term, specific need, scientifically
sound, low-funding pilot studies which have good potential
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

391
BUMEDINST 6ooo4B
15 January 1975
as a formal clinical investigation study proposal are
encouraged. Pilot study proposals should be expedited
through comand review and submitted to HSETC in the format
of enclosure (2). 
HSETC will conduct a priority review and
promptly notify the activity. Targeted pilot study funds
will be utilized to conduct approved pilot studies.
(2) A report utilizing enclosure (4) 
is required
upon completion or termination of each pilot study. Pilot
studies subsequently leading to formal clinical investiga-
tion'should be appended to a clinical investigation proposal
submiesion.
7. 
Funding. The CIP is a special program authorized by 
(R
refer-enc!a), with O&WN and OPN funds provided through
BJMED in support of the individual clinical investigation
studies ind the Regional CIC. 
Costs are charged against the
activity approved funding provided for this program (invest-
ment equipment shall be fully identified and justified on
MED-6C00-3 PARTS 1 and 2 of this instruction). 
Requests for
changes ,r deletions by the activity af CIP approved invest-
ment equipment shall be submitted to HSETC (Attn: DCI). 
-
HSETC Is to be notified when investment equipment is re-
ceived and of actual procurement cost.
8. Reporting Requirements 
(R
a. Periodic and situational reporting on approved
clinical investigation studies is necessary. Enclosure (4)
format (original and two copies) should be submitted to
JiSETC (Attn: DCI) via the area RCIC as follows:
(1) Progress. A progress report is required
annually to reach HSETC by 1 February on each approved
study.
(2) Change. 
Submit whenever significant changes in
an approved study indicate, e.g., change of investigator,
-unusual delays encountered, change in objectives, or new
funding requirements. A change report may be combined with
the progress report provided an unusual delay does not
result.
(3) Termination Report. Submit when the objectives
are not being met or when directed by HSETC. The reasons
for termination should be fully explained.
5port provided an unusual delay does not
result.
(3) Termination Report. Submit when the objectives
are not being met or when directed by HSETC. The reasons
for termination should be fully explained.
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

392
BUMEDINST 6000.4B
15 January 1975
(4) 
Completion Report. 
Submit when the objectives
of the study have been accomplished. This should be a
carefully formulated scientific report covering the entire
period of the study and should include a detailed suminary
and abstract suitable for publication. A complete bibliog-
raphy of all publications and presentations resulting from
the study should be included.
b. CIP Management Reports
(1) Surnarv Report of Costs. Using enclosures (5)
and (6), all activities having approved clinical investiga-
tion studies will submit an annual summary report of expen-
ditures for the i.,ediate past fiscal year. 
This report
should reach HSETC (Attn: DCI) not later than 1 September.
Summary data on funds expended from the CIP budget, as well
as those costs from other contributing sources, must be
provided.
(2) Resources Estimate Future Fiscal Years*.
Regional medical centers with RCICs in addition to the
annual progress reports should submit ahnuafly by ' February
fiscal year resources requirements for the rext two fIscal
years, using enclosures (6) and (7).
A) 9. Acknowledgment Credit. The principal Investigator of an
approved clinical investigation study shall ensire that any
presentation or publication resulting from such study
acknowledges and identifies the Naval Medical Dp .rtment CIP
as the sponsor of the study. 
The assigned C1 number shall
also be included in any presentation, publicati.,n or written
reference to the study. Acknowledgment to Le a.z follows:
"This study supported by Bureau of Medicine and SLrgery,
Clinical Investigation Program #
10. Report Symbols. 
The following report symbol 
are
assigned:
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---gment to Le a.z follows:
"This study supported by Bureau of Medicine and SLrgery,
Clinical Investigation Program #
10. Report Symbols. 
The following report symbol 
are
assigned:
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

393
BUMEDINST 6000.4D
15 January 1975
Symbol
Clinical Investigation Study Proposal
Clinical Investigation Budget Estimate
Clinical Investigation Situation Report
Clinica. Investigation Program Report
or . costs
Clinical Investigation Program Civilian
Personnel Report
Clinical Investigation Program Resources
Suna.y Estimate
MED-6000-3 PART 1
MED-6000-3 PART 2
MED-6oo0-4
MED-6000-5 PART I
MED-6000-5 PART 2
MED-6000-6
D. L. CU5TIS
Distrib it Ion:
S-'*DL FF
Copy to:
A3 CNO (OP-09B18)
FFI (CO7NAVDIST, DDAS,
FKM27/CL(NPPSfO) •
DDOS, 
DMOS)
Stocked:
CO, 
NA'PUBFORI4CEN
5801 Tabor Avenue
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19120
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

394
BUMEDINST 6000.41
15 January 1975
REGIONAL CLINICAL INVESTIGATION CENTERS
Location.. 
Area
Naval Regional Medical Center
Betlhesda, Maryland
Naval Regional Medical Center
Oakland, California
Naval Regional Medical Center
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Naval Regional Medical Center
Portsmouth, Virginia
Naval Regional Medical Center
San Diego, California
All Medical Department
activities in TENTH and
FIFTEENTH Naval Districts,
In the Naval District
Washington, and all over-
seas naval medical activitic
ashore in the Atlantic,
Mediterranean, and Caribbea
areas.
All Medical Department
activities in the TWELFTH,
THIRTEENTH and FOURTEENTH
Naval Districts.
All Medical Department
activities in the FIRST,
TiIRD, FOURTH and NINTH
Naval Districts.
All Medical Department
activities in the FIFTH,
SZXTH and EIGHTH Naval
Districts, and those under
the control of CINCLANT
FLEET.
All Medical Department
activities located in the
E1 EVENTH Naval District,
overseas in the Pacific
aid Indian Ocean areas, and
under the control of
C]NCPAC FLEET.
Enclosure (1)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ET.
All Medical Department
activities located in the
E1 EVENTH Naval District,
overseas in the Pacific
aid Indian Ocean areas, and
under the control of
C]NCPAC FLEET.
Enclosure (1)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

395
BUEDINST 6000.4B
15 January 1975
MED-6000-3 PART 1 (Rev 1-75)
CLINICAL INVESTIGATION STUDY PROPOSAL
DATE:
ACTIVITY:
TITLE:
INVESTIGATORS:
PRINCIPAL: 
1.' Name, grade, department, position.
2. Percent of time required for study.
3. Projected rotation date.
ASSOCIATES: 
Same as above.
A. OBJECTIVES: 
State specific aims.
B. BACKGROUND: 
Show scientific need for study,.benefits of
study; investigator's background experience with subject and
related areas. 
Include bibliography from investigator's
publications and from the literature.
C. APPROACH: Outline each phase of study. Clearly state
plan cf experimental design leading to accomplishTm.ent of
objectives.
D. INVESTIGATIONAL NEW DRUG OR HUMAN VOLUNTEER PLANS: 
If
not applicable, indicate; otherwise, enclose information per
BUMEDINST 6710.49D (ref (e)), SECNAVINST 3900.39 series
(ref (f)), and other applicable directives.
E. INVESTMENT EQUIPMENT (OPN) (unit value of $1,000 or
greater): 
Provide specific identification and justificktion
as a requirement in this study. 
Provide cost data on part 2
of this report.
F. OTHER SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS, NEEDS, AND SUPPORTING
DATA: 
(Explain).
closure (2)
70-036 0 - 76 - 26

--- PAGE BREAK ---

396
BUMEDINST 6000.4B
15 January 1975
MED-6000-3 PART 2 (Rev 1-75)
CLINICAL INVESTIGATION BUDGET ESTIMATE
ACTIVITY
SHORT TIT1E
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR
ESTIMATE) COMPLETION OF STUDY FY
CI NO.
COMMAND PRIORITY
CURRENT 
FUTVF' 
...... 
.
.
.
DESCRIPTION 
FY 19 
FY 19 
_-.-'YY19 
FY 19 
FY 19
CIVILIAN
SALARIES AND
BENEFITS
CONSULTANT COSTS-
O&MN EQU IPMENT
OPN EQUIPMENT
SUPPLY 
AL 
""
SERVICES
TRAVEL
PUBLICATION
COSTS
OTHER EXPENSES
PUNDiNC F19:..
OTHER SOURCT.S (1)
TOTALS
OPN
(1) List source below or on reverse.
Enclosure (3)

--- PAGE BREAK ---IPMENT
OPN EQUIPMENT
SUPPLY 
AL 
""
SERVICES
TRAVEL
PUBLICATION
COSTS
OTHER EXPENSES
PUNDiNC F19:..
OTHER SOURCT.S (1)
TOTALS
OPN
(1) List source below or on reverse.
Enclosure (3)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

397
BUMEDINST 6000.""B
15 January 1975
MED-6000- 
(Rev 1-75)
CLINICAL 
INVESTIGATION SITUATIONAL REPORT
ACTIVITY 
DATE
SHORT TITLE 
IIN._______
PRIU1CIPAL INVESTIGATOP.______________________
ASSOCIATE INVESTIGATRS_______________________
A. 
TYPE: 
PROGRESS
CHANGE 
COMPLETION 
TERMINATION
B. PERIOD OF REPORT: FROM (BEGINNING OF STUDY) 
TO
C. 
SIGNIFICANT FACTORS AFFECTING/DELAYING STUDY
D. COSTS BY FISCAL YEAR: 
-pan 
cvcrexcenditurez (over !C%) 
and
requests for a,!ditio:. A 
.
c- 
dn, previous sub:d 
1os 
ns.
(ACTUAL) 
ESTIMATEDD)
DESCR N 
IM.EDATE 
CURRENT AND FUTURE FISCAL !'EARS
DESCRIPTION 
~PAST 
,,
FY 1_ 
' 
FY 19 
FY 19 
FY 19
S A L h ~ C E 3 =4,!: 
D 
, 
_ 
.. ..
BE 
'FITS 
(CIV) __s_.___.... .... 
.
..
SUPP!.IES
VE'1T FQUIPMENT 
_____ 
_____ 
_____
EQU IP ME.NT 
.. 
...
TRAVEL
PU BI. CATI!O:S 
,
CONSULTANT
COSTS
OTHER COSTS 
.....
TOTALS
E. PRESENTATIONS TO DATE: List all presentations coverir.g period of
this report by title, 
place, date and presenting investigator.
Enclose copy (or abstract) of each presentation not forwi.rded with
previous progress report.
F. 
PAPERS FOR PUBLICATION TO DATE: 
List all papers covring period
or this report by tite, date, stage of presentation or submission,
authors and journal. Submit copies of articles published (with this
report or when received), 
if not previously forwarded.
G. 
PROGRESS SUMMARY: 
IN NARRATIVE FORM (COVER ENTIRE PERIOD OF
STUDY TO DATE).
Enclosure (4)
11 NO.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s published (with this
report or when received), 
if not previously forwarded.
G. 
PROGRESS SUMMARY: 
IN NARRATIVE FORM (COVER ENTIRE PERIOD OF
STUDY TO DATE).
Enclosure (4)
11 NO.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

398
BUMEDINST 6000.4B
15 January 1975
MED-6000-5 PART 1 (Rev .- 75)
CLINICAL INVESTIGATION PROGRAM REPORT OF COSTS
DATE
PY 19_
DISTRIBUTION OF COSTS
DESCRI ?TION 
RCIC 
STUDIES 
TOTAL
TOTAL O&MN
TOTAL OP, (1)
OTHER
(IDENTIFY)
BREAKDOW' OF ABOVE
PAYROLL
SUPPLIES
E UIi PidE iT--.. 
.
.
...
(NONINVES17MENT) 
(1)
MAINTENIANCE
CONTRACTS (1)
PRINTING A.ND
PUBLICATICNS
PUBLIC WOEKS
PROJECTS (1)
CONSULTANTS
TRAVEL
OTHER
(IDENTIFY) 
_ __,,._,,_,.
Man Years: 
Military
Civilian
Number of studies supported this FY
Number presentations this FY
Number journal publications this FY
(1) Identify each item of equipment, clinical investigation
number and purchase cost on reverse/separate sheet.
Enclosure (5)
wI

--- PAGE BREAK ---

399
BUMEDINST 6000.4B
15 January 1975
NED-6000-5 PART 2 (Rev 1-75)
CLINICAL INVESTIGATION PR(GRAM CIVILIAN PERSONNEL REPORT
ACTIVITY:
FY
NAME AND TITLE/
POSITION
DATE
HIRED
DEPARTMENT
OR DIVISION
ASSIGNED TO
(1) Identify CIP studies by last three digits of CI number followed
by percentage; i.e., 301-40; 317-15. Identify percent o" time
allotted to clinical investigation center; i.e., RCIC-50.
enclosuree (6)
ANNUAL
SALARY &
BENEFITS
GRADE OR
POSITION
LEVEL
PERCENT
OF TIME
CHARGED TO
CIP STUDY:
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---fy percent o" time
allotted to clinical investigation center; i.e., RCIC-50.
enclosuree (6)
ANNUAL
SALARY &
BENEFITS
GRADE OR
POSITION
LEVEL
PERCENT
OF TIME
CHARGED TO
CIP STUDY:
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

400
BUMEDInST 6000.b
15 January 1975
MED-6000-6 (Rev 1-75)
CLIJICAL INVESTIGATION: PROGRAM
RESOURCES SUMMARY ESTINAT;:, FY 19
NAVAL ACTIVITY:
-DATE___________
DESCR" PTIO
O&MN PROJICTEJ 
COSTS
OrIN PROJE TED COSTS (2)
CIVILIAN I.A:J YEARS
BPEAKDOWN OF ABOVE
O&1-1 CO:'.TS
I APPROVED
STUDIES
I 
.,SzO su.-
I MISSION'S k
RCIC SUPPORT I
P)OUEQ'FM*JTS
CIVILIA:: 
'AYROLL
AND 
E 
:TS
SUPPLIES
h" 
-., 1 :7 .7
Q U TP.%-7" 
:
MAIi:TE; 
,:
CO:TCTZ
PULTrATJIs
SPECIAL ALT
PROJECTS
COXSSU
COSTS
TRAVEL
OTHER
IDENTIFYY'
COhTiNUi:U (NI
COSTS
ESTIMATED NUMBER STUDIES TO LIE
TERMINATED/COMPLETED THIS FISCAL
YEAR
ESTIMATED NEW SUBMISSIONS THIS FISCAL YEAR
(1) Total new and planned submissions not y.et approved by DCI.
(2) List specific investment equipment on reverse by priority number.
Include clinical investigation short title, if known.
Enclosure (7)
TOTAl.
., 
-, -
... 
..
I
I
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---oved by DCI.
(2) List specific investment equipment on reverse by priority number.
Include clinical investigation short title, if known.
Enclosure (7)
TOTAl.
., 
-, -
... 
..
I
I
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

401
DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
DiURAU Or McoIclVr AND SUFtGVRY
WASHINGTON. O.C 
10)90
R4DIWINST 6000.4
/ 
lO: JVC-nah
17 June 1971
WUMED INSTRUCTION 6000.4
From: 
Chief, Bureau of Hedicine and Surirery
To: 
All Activities Under the Coraand of BL.X0)
Subj: 
Clinical Investigation Program (CIP)
Ref: 
(A) BU.,4FDI,4S1 3900.3 series (NOTAL)
(b) BV11INST 6320.31 series
(c) V&JEDI"ST 3900.4 serJeu (NIUTAL)
Encd: 
(1) DOD Directive 6000.4 did 7 Apr 1971
(2) Clinical Investigation Study Prcposal Forrat
(3) Procedural Guidelines for Prt.ari.g .study Proposal
(4) Clinical Investigation Revice." Ceater Sum-.ary
(5) Annual Resources Target Total Surstar:
1. 
Pu__r2oje. 
To implement enclosure (1), 
and to rtate tlme Department of
the Navy's pclicy for conduct of clinical investii.tion as a continuing
program in naval mediral activities. 
It assigns -. rponnibility for the
Navy Clinicai Investigation Program, and outlines a.linir.trative and
funding procedures therefor.
2. Applicabt-i-t 
and c .
a. 
The provisions of this Instruction apply to all naval medical
activities, and encompass all elements of a clinical investigation pro-
gram as they apply to the medical missions of the r:aval establishment,
except those projects which may be appropriately s-onsored by the Director
of Defense Research and Engineering (DDR&E) 
under reference (a).
b. The scope of clinical investigation under this program will include
all clinical conditions which are of significant cr.cern in meeting the
prime objective of providing the necessary health care for the entire naval
community, including active duty personnel and tae.ir dependents, retirees
and their dependents, and other persons as authorized by reference (b).
3. Policy and Objectives
a. Clinical investigation is an essential cotmponent of an optimal
health care system, and consists of an organized inquiry into clinical
health problems for the following purposes:icy and Objectives
a. Clinical investigation is an essential cotmponent of an optimal
health care system, and consists of an organized inquiry into clinical
health problems for the following purposes:

--- PAGE BREAK ---. Clinical investigation is an essential cotmponent of an optimal
health care system, and consists of an organized inquiry into clinical
health problems for the following purposes:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

402
IWHEDINST 6000.4
17 June 1971
(1) To achieve a continuous improvement in the quality of patient
c are.
(2) To provide experience in the mental discipline achieved by
participation in such organized inquiries, and to provide experience for
personnel who will ultimately be teaching chiefs of service in naval hos-
pitals and/or medical specialty consultants.
(3) To maintain an atmosphere of inquiry because of the dynamic
nature of the health care sciences.
(4) To maintain high professional standing and accreditation of
advanced health carc, education, and training programs.
b. The Clinical Investigation Program (CIP) established pursuant to
this instruction will have as its objective the goals enumerated in 3a
above. The effectiveness of this program is to be monitored by-the extent
to which it advances the quality of health care rendered in naval medical
activities, as judged by accepted professional standards, including sta-
tistical health Jata, accreditation evaluations, inspections .nd surveys,
and such other criteria as may be developed to monitor health care and the
professional competence of health care personnel.
4. Organization and Functions
a. In accordance with enclosure (1), a Clinical Investigation Program
(CIP) is hereby established under cognizance of the Chief, Bu.eau of Hedi-
cine and Surgery.
b. A Clinical Investigation Control Center (CICC) 
with a director and
staff is established in the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, and is respon-
sible for the following functions:
(1) Serves as the management focal point for the Clintcai Investi-
gation Program.
(2) Establishes and promulgates the policy which will guide naval
medical activities in the conduct of clinical investigations other than
those efforts under the purview of the Navy Medical Research and Develop-
ment Program promulgated in reference (a).
(3) Determines and promulgates relative priority decisions pertain-
ing to the various clinical investigation requirements submitted by naval
medical activities.
(4) Determines, directs, and executes criteria and procedures for
evaluation and approval/disapproval of the merit and design of clinical
2tigation requirements submitted by naval
medical activities.
(4) Determines, directs, and executes criteria and procedures for
evaluation and approval/disapproval of the merit and design of clinical
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---s submitted by naval
medical activities.
(4) Determines, directs, and executes criteria and procedures for
evaluation and approval/disapproval of the merit and design of clinical
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

403
BUHEDINST 6000.4
17 June 1971
investigations which are not under the purview of reference (a).
(5) Ascertains, programs, and supports total resource needs
through Chief, 
BUIIED, 
in consultation and cooperation with the Assistant
Chief for Planning and Logistics.
(6) Approves allocation of resources to the eligible medical
activities in consonance with established priorities for the clinical
investigation effort.
(7) Monitors the effectiveness of the program through application
of the cfiteria of 3b above.
c. Clinical Investigation Review Centers (CIRC) are designated as
follows:
Naval Hospital, Bethesda, Maryland
Nav31 Hospital, 'Boston, 
Chelsea, Massachusetts
Nav3l Hospital, Great Lakes, Illinois
Naval Hospital, Oakland, California
Naval Hospital, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Naval Hospital, Portsmouth, Virginia
Naval Hospital, San Diego, California
d. All other naval medical activities will be considered as satellite
activities :or conduct pf efforts under purview of the CIP as designated
in enclosure (4).
5. New Proposals. for Clinical Investigation Efforts
a. Each activity initiating a proposal for a clinical investigation
effort shal:. utilize the Clinical Investigation Study Proposal Format pre-
scribed in enclosure (2) if 
approval and funding under the CIP is sought.
Enclosure (3) provides guidelines for the preparation of proposals. 
On
the other hand, if 
the originating activity considers the effort to be
under the purview of the Hedical Department Research and Development Pro-
gram, the provisions of reference (a) 
apply.
(1) Satellite medical activities shall forward clinical investi-
gation study proposals to Chief, 
BUMED (Attn:CICC), via the cognizant
(see encl. (4)) CIRC, with advance information copies to BUMED for record
purposes.
(2) 
Graduate training hospital commands designated as CIRCs shall
each review all clinical investigation proposals originating from profes-
sional services within that hospital, as well as those from satellite
medical activities.
3commands designated as CIRCs shall
each review all clinical investigation proposals originating from profes-
sional services within that hospital, as well as those from satellite
medical activities.
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---as CIRCs shall
each review all clinical investigation proposals originating from profes-
sional services within that hospital, as well as those from satellite
medical activities.
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

404
U1EDINST 6000.4
17 June 1971
b. Guidance to the CIRCs for review and forwarding of clinical
investigation proposals:
(1) Each study proposal shall be reviewed by the Research and
Clinical Investigation Committee for merit, feasibility, and ethical and
human utilization considerations where applicable. Consultation opinions
from university medical center consultants shall be obtained when indi-
cated. Opinions and recommendations of other In-house boards and committees
shall be obtained when indicated; e.g., Pharmacy and Therapeutic Committee,
Tumor Board, and Radioisotope Board. The Executive Council of the Graduate
Training Comittee should comment if a question of ethics and human utili-
zation arises.
(2) The study proposal shall then be forwarded to Chief, BUJED
(Attn:CICC), endorsed by the comanding officer with a recommendation for
either approval or disapproval. Opinions of cognizant committees, boards,
and consultants should be enclosed or summarized in the forwarding endorse-
ment.
(3) BUMED (CICC) will:
(a) Review the clinical investigation study proposal.
(b) Notify the originating activity directly whether the
study proposal has been either approved or disapproved.
(c) Furnish only information copies of Bureau action to the
cognizant CIRC.
(d) If approved, furnish the originating activity appropriate
funding data and expenditure reporting requirements.
(e) Assign a permanent Clinical Investigation Study Number to
the approved study proposal. This number shall then become the proper
means of all future reference to the approved study proposal.
6. Reporting Requirements
a. 
The Clinical Investigation Study Proposal is assigned Report Symbol
MED-6000-3.
b. 
Management Repnorts. 
Eaci activity conducting clinical investiga-
tion studies approved by IBUME2D 
shall submit each year, prior to 1 February,
to Chief, BUIED (CICC), an Annual Resources Target Summary for approved
studies using the format of enclosure (5). 
This report is assigned Report
Symbol MED-6000-4.
c. Scientific/Technical CIP Study Reports shall be submitted/distri-
buted in accordance with the provisions of reference (c). 
BUMED (CICC)
shall be included in the recorimended distribution list from each activity
4hnical CIP Study Reports shall be submitted/distri-
buted in accordance with the provisions of reference (c). 
BUMED (CICC)
shall be included in the recorimended distribution list from each activity
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

405
BW(EDINST 6000.4
17 Junt 1971
conducting CIP studies. An-Annual Progress Report is required on each
on-going CIP study. The Annual Progress Report shall be forwarded to
SUMED (CICC) prior to 1 February. Reprints of published articles shall
be included with the Progress Report. Antral Progress Reports should be
carefully formulated scientific documents. They will assist the Director,
CICC, in ordering priorities within the total CIP.
G. H. DAVIS
Distribution:
SNDL FH
Copy to:
FF1 (COOtAVDISTO
DDAS, 
DDOS, 
DIlOS)
Stocked: Supply & Fiscal Dept.
Code 514.32 NAVSTA WASHDC 20390
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---406
D_.' ....

or 'jie Alit FORCE
Hoa .

unrters US Air Force
V., 
?330
AF ItGULATION V-0-43
28 August 19G9
Research and Development
USS OF VOLUNTEERS IN AEROSP-CE RESEARCII
Tuis registation estnali.hes ihe poliry and assigns 14' re ynnsibiliry for using riolunteer test
sulijeus in rarspunce rsrarch, d,.rloletient, test uni 
,tnd ifi 
(UIfDT,&I).

It uplis to the
ese o/lhisillonh il 5t ui's onsuduicted n fnrfilities
and there therc is a risit of health donvane.

).

App!iciti in ,f Td; 
ik Rr::tulain.

The pro-
visions of ths regulaton:
-.

Apply to RDT&E procedures in which
human 4l).iece s are ijsed and inl which there
is ihercnt ri.

( of distre,.s, pain, daniage to
h1C.'thl~.- 
11..l 
Ilr emotional injury, 
inva%-
sionh of privacy, ,urrengler of nutmionty or
death.

Such t -.%t% usually are conducted to
deferniue e.it, c- thoe level of huinan toler-
ance/pCrfor:n: lce for a condition that Iny
be inipo-ed &) Air Force oplration:s or the
adeiaacy t.f c.lui!,,men't designed for human
use (.*co Al: FRo_ 
nu).

T 
in ~cllte:- totsa.

nd
exl)erfnentt c( miuccd within a .ederal Gov-
erii..:ut nu.ta&..itio:i or facility rej.ridle:.s of
Itc coiill'o.,i.ii n1 nf the ilivesti:gatiii 
tc:an
(cinttactor p :'sim:iiel.

nulitary pcr.omIel.

civil service !).

ismni!

or a mix.urc thereof)
or at contract r facilities whei the human
subjects are (;ocrnment emplo:yces.

either
military or cix ilia.

b.

Do not alply to:
(1) 
lnve.ti-ation.

conducted under the
provixiowi of AFis IG)-6 and IG9-S.

(2) 
ID'&' 
that involves inhcrent oc-
cupatioilal h a."..r&; to hc:alth.

or exposure to
poten'tially 
hatardot.s .itwations 
such as
those encountered in training or other duties
rcquirinf- orde:' 
for rc::i!ar and frequent
performance of hazardous duty; for ex-
ample: fliht traiui'g.

j.;mnp training.

pres-
sure chamber indoctr:natiou, and handling
of explosivC3, etc.--- PAGE BREAK ---

j.;mnp training. pres-
sure chamber indoctr:natiou, and handling
of explosivC3, etc. (3) The human engineering portions of
A research project when they involve only
hazards e:coun.ered in normal tr:%inins or
other normal military duties and when dis-
chere the .tubjrcfs are CovCrnnem8t Cem7lny-e-S
closure of the research conditions would
defeat tile putrpos.e of the inve.tigationl by
revealing the artificial nature of tha expert. nieiit. () 
Ex:primentl using human subjects
that Pre ji(W.cd . tlj noinhazardous on the
basis of =::co.tin: nll of the following criteria:
(a) They are conducted in the ustUal
ambmit. emviroimeut of the Inloratory, of. ficc. or in irmc-*crae weather outdoors. () 
Tlhcy involve only the ap;'icat'.'n
to the .-Oje.t f -M inulti to the comnmunici-
tio;n . E...:: (. heari-:t. touch, alt smell)
at. e-ner%:y levels and dlir:atiou% moving to bZ7
we.ll 
within 
co:11,mo111!y 
experienced 
and
toler.ated range. . (c) Thty (10 not ilvolve the planned
altpl ic:.ti'~ oo ua:al (,," unown to I. h1:irz:-
ful illyical or cheniic;! cner.y to tile .ill. jcct. sulch ::u roise, vi'.'rati.on. blarom,,tr;.-
picss.I 
nitratio:s. clcuieratio: or =ccule='.-
tion. immerion in water, cicmical aeCnis, or
dru:s, etc. d) They do not involve unusual
physical exertion or apl)ication of force by
the ubect. (e) Tile experimental environment. have no ground safety hazards, such as elec-
trical sho:'s, 
sharp objects, slippery floors, or
obst.ckc 1otrc;: ily visible. (f) Have no combination of condi. tiois which are expected to produce any of
the adverse e;ccts covered in paragraph In. 2. Obtaining Voluntary Consent:
a. TIe prii:eipal investigator must insure
that the volunteer (or the person acting for
OPR: AFlRDDG
DISTRIBUTION: S
I

--- PAGE BREAK ----407
I.

APR 6O-:13
him) has the lej'al capacity to consent.

is abi
to exereire true ficrni'of chnice wiihn,
overt or hililen 3l.i;i:i, 
and i% fully it
formed.

The fact lhat a :nicnticr of ti
Arnled l'ores is le.s than 21 years of aV
doer.

not impair hiu .eral capacity for lii
purpose.

1).

before a vnltniteer (or the person acting
for him) is lIernitt.'d to give his (nmient.

Ih
ilve'Atilg.ttor tmi-.L gIve 11111i .1 acura;tte 's
palanation tif tile re.,.rl'h s"tliv Ih;at Ile C.1
Iinl loes i:ler.!:-i:,i.

'ihe exlaiiatl nl ,.haI
Include at h :st:
(i) Te purpose.

nature, and duration
or tle %tildy.

(2) The niethol.i and means by whiel
the stutly wil be comiluctcd.

(3) Fore.ceable 
ii conveniences, 
haz
ards, and effcc1 :; u;p:'n tic volunteer's health
that coulirsi4 
, ev'on lis participation it
tile ex I 
cl'lnviA.

(4) An i,]cntif~cat o: of any larts O1
the test lr1;!:.n.

titat ieilher the volunteer
nor the individual con i:cing the test cal
stop hiniediately.

e.

The voltinter (or he ;):rsoa actingg foi
hin) 
munit give h.

ccum(w.

ii: writhi;: w,
lllIhowI by ;att:lchiniet.

-.-hen a 'ilel:;on i.

aCtilll for- tile vlChllaeer t;e woding will ic
approlni:utely Inidioied.

lie n1u1ist sign thc
Ciolient in tile pre.%vlle of at least one wit.

nMS who will then att -t .0 te Vl ohte,,a"a
.iillu 
hit1l- 
y 
I)!si 
:liui: if 
life place provided.

In :,hiition.

thfe iuave.tlI ator who advised cof
possible colixsqhtlcnlaes in :.st also ,ii:n the con-
sent in% the presence of lie same witness.

3.

Use of Volnnteer.

in ItDr&l..

The follow.

ing cr;IIria .Iapply to .fll I 1i'&I': eflorts which
involve volunite.rs ai,.t bjccts.:
a1.

All iec.ss:'y prc ili:ary tests with
lalsol';d,1l'y atliillial'.

atl" 
h 
llllylitim 
lors
iiust haie 
lien rialithhiei 
nla111I 
e'aluat:et 
lIe-
fills .; 
halni: 
sb 
el;hject 
i.4 1iIstei.

Il;i.z:lral'ol1S re-
sc:tirh thit I.e.s voltilites will be l)crfornled
(lilly hi validate iiluirt:lit 
ui:lta eCcilitial to
-1 pl jct.atl" 
h 
llllylitim 
lors
iiust haie 
lien rialithhiei 
nla111I 
e'aluat:et 
lIe-
fills .; 
halni: 
sb 
el;hject 
i.4 1iIstei.

Il;i.z:lral'ol1S re-
sc:tirh thit I.e.s voltilites will be l)crfornled
(lilly hi validate iiluirt:lit 
ui:lta eCcilitial to
-1 pl jct.

devehilimilat .y.tem oi" Air Force
lili.-.ifiu.

It.

I[:,,"-rell stsldi,-e 
l';l 
vnl li llP"s.

will
lie c llill ed Io av,ill ;,l I31.nee.

' 
a y1"' 
ill ..-
it*' l f- it* 1 1 0 : l d ii .

1, 
e 1fol 1 .

I .

l'lua 
" ( i i " I1 : \ '' .t .,
|g.;till 
ir- 
ICA l.l, 
, 
,:1; 
Ishs.

licilll wilt coil1-
thhct.

;allil I'ev'rn 
i:ti c 
exam li an, ons ;ll
l;atioils of the vohluner as |his professional
Judllgiieilt 11 cItV'tc..

1'eraanent records of
the.

xexaminations will be- lainttined as
-)art of the project record, as r,-qieil'd ill
-WW1
021S August P49'
ie 
AFR IAl-2, ad al.o in the volunteer's DID
it 
Form 722.

"l lalth Jtecord."
).l 
C.

A physician.

otiter than the principal
iinvestirator will lie (4hsigi.ateJ 1o be re.%lon-
i 
,ihle (or (lie pro.f enmonl care and safety of
the volunteer dir 
tile project.

Tiis physi-
cian will not be involved in tile research or
g 
test in any way oth'r than to be the proteet,,r
e 
of tite'life :ig;j h:d:h of tile volisnteve.

i'iiis
lIlly:;hl.

or i ' 
, :.tiatls 
alay 
terminate
I) 
life .1t/ily at alily t1ilie.

11 
d.

The voluntccr, at ;any time, 1:.;.% the
rilht to revC;e Iis consent and withdraw
1 
from tie ir.*xp,-riniclt without prejdid je.

The
w7ilinter 
I 
.

,.

f;';y informed of these
h 
facts and procedures.

e.

Before beiig a subject of RDT&I.

tho
consent of the vosintcer, or his legal repre.

scla'tlive, n'tw t b.

b'.

;iCu 
and placed in the
records (f the proeet.

(See attacnweat 1.)
r 
f.

If the volunteer Ilas tacii medication
r 
or received ,rrdic.J or dental treatment i.:Ice
t 
last tl.%e(d 
as n suhect.

it is mandatory that
lie inform the pI 3'-:i;:;al invcsti;:atoe anc the
pllysician of this ;'ac b2'o-e (lie eoLdLet of
the next experinlllt.

g.

For each rZDT-.--- PAGE BREAK ---

g. For each rZDT-. p "o;ect. the Labora-
tory or Te:. l Direc:or n1ni a physician must
exani::e a protocoll ':";bai ted by the project/
-
task scieitAm. to deteI1,m| . (1) 'rise icce'sity t. use volunteers. * 
(2) Tile safety prec. ution,. (3) The protective m.ieaurcs. (4) The adequacy cf medical surveil. lance. foth the Lahoratory or Test Director and a
Il)'siian wi-: 
* 
n a ccrTtil.catioi attestini, to
tile above eon: itinns. Tuche ;octnrent- will
become permanent rccorcis ill the Ai[U&E
protocol. 4. Comnmnd nc.s)onstihitics:
. Tajor conmanld 
will establish siutable
jiitwlesllr 
IS 
to i311,oiinllia;ice 
with the
policies tated in this regulation. ) f.al,laory ¢: 11om1an3ders will a%,prove
c,1 di:a;iji-iiov. ;ll: 
;0i'0ro:Ncoes involving
It, h 
'.c of vOh:li,.r : .:,jed% ;i:cI are rc.spon. .ilie for tb::.ln;". tllis fi,:.-C' 
upon appropri. ate medical review and advice. 5. PuM;!cniiow. Perfaining to Ihlm.arn Volun. leers. All mIrinted pal)Crs or art'clcs repartings
iu .,.a'ch in v'eirhvohin:;tcer subdC, "-_ are tu.Cd
BES hf AWE
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

408
21 Auw.t 1969 
." 
t.93,
.will contain the following footnote: "The 
used in thi- research wa 
obtained in n,
voluntary informed consent of the aubjccts 
cordh'nce wis.it A:It SO-3.
BY ORDi. OF THE SECRETARY OF TIIr, Air. For.cE
OPFIClA.,
JOHN F. RASI. Colonel, USAF
Director of Aediniiistraio 
.
JOIN D. RYAIN, G,:cral, USAF
Chc 
i 
o!ff
I Attnchrnit
VolunteeCr*s Co3tet
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---THE SECRETARY OF TIIr, Air. For.cE
OPFIClA.,
JOHN F. RASI. Colonel, USAF
Director of Aediniiistraio 
.
JOIN D. RYAIN, G,:cral, USAF
Chc 
i 
o!ff
I Attnchrnit
VolunteeCr*s Co3tet
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

409
.0
VOLUNTEER'S CUNSi N'T
(Use o0gauiai:41iona lrttrrhcad)
* 4.
SU;-.,-CT: 
Conicnt of Volunteer
1. I 
, 
va.;ltcer to participate vi a test .tb,,cct in tie followitq' (in.
:.C:. 
"In 
.:'l" 
or "test- .. 
appropriMe) 
wh.¢i-c 
ha-. :.V its purjo:,c
( 
I.~d 
* if' ~ ""~C ~ suffccii..: 
to .1 
re th1. it wi;! bC c'carly under.
-*-*I 
t!c medical review authority 
t'd 
,hc volunteer). (Insert,
c. oni;oent, and 
.orps) I'as discus';,cd with n- to I:y s tisfac.
t.O.; 
I 
.
c .n.: for this (insert "-nvcsti;. 
" or "tcst" -as approriatC)
.dvCf.C and bcnu:cj 11 conscrucncc.,.
h'2. sh: co -,c:;t, is voluntary and has been given urd.:r circumtAncc$ in
c. -;:-. 
ci' 
f cc pawier of choice. , have lwcn informed that I
,t.:;..vo% 
" 
1e:; 
my 
11 
i:it 
Cl.V.. fo,.l th cxperinvit
-. ; 
.::..,:' 
:: 
" the invc'sti:.wtor or ;m:;ICi1 may torininltC
1 ', 
c:: n'::: 
. :tt any tiie reardless of ily 'iscs."
3. I 
..... " th. 
b efore my use as a test. ,.--hcet. I rust in"orm "he
:-;:-:'. 
:r,'c:ti;,atr and project phy-ician of ,.ny.chan;:e to my mcdica;
:.fi 
o.;r..tion will include any 
Ica':o;;s 
I nave takcn 
nd
,.iCl or decent care/treatment rccjcic s*r.cc my ,,ast, ;so as a test
(Sgnatue of VoCi.nicc-)
(S)rnaturc of O:*cer who Advised of Possiac Co.scqr~caccs)
!9-
.
(biz:ia;.re of WVitness)
4.
0 
. 2. GOvre...ifft pn.4nlaG OrCe . I'ee
Att;chincnt I

--- PAGE BREAK ---a test
(Sgnatue of VoCi.nicc-)
(S)rnaturc of O:*cer who Advised of Possiac Co.scqr~caccs)
!9-
.
(biz:ia;.re of WVitness)
4.
0 
. 2. GOvre...ifft pn.4nlaG OrCe . I'ee
Att;chincnt I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

410
DReviev of Proposal No. ,...
DIIS g,.D- 
C UAT. 
GMT I
'I,
I. 
Attached are two copies of Proposal No. 
_ 
with OTSG Form 1079 and
DD Form 1498 for evaluation and comment by your directorate, NLT
2. If this proposal i favorably considered, the following actions should be accomp-
lished by your directorate:
a. 
Complete items 4 through 31 of attached Form 1079. 
qn
b. Prepare attached Form 1498 in accordance with AR 70-9.
c. If proporal Involves Investigational Drugs and Volunteers, or Schedule I Drugs,
,obtain AIDRB's concurrence and attach conasnts of AIDRB.
d. Upon completion of the above actions return to SGID-ID.
3. If proposal is unfavorably considered, the following actions should be taken:
a. Prepare turn down letter to the investigator. letter will be signed by the
___swauding General.
b. Return this Dr, with Forms 1079 and 1498 and one copy of unsigned letter, to
S(;RD- ID.
4. 
If this proseal cannot be evaluated by the above suspense date, due to requirement
for outside review or other reasons, a telephonic request for extension should be rAde
to the STINO Dranch, extension 37801.
3 Incl__
as 
CHIEF, IiCFORMATION.SYSTEhS DIVISION
TO: 
SGRD- ID 
FROM4: 
SGRD- 
DATE: 
CWT 2
U- 1. Proposal has been favorably considered and Forms 1079 and 1498 are attached.
0- 
2. Proposal has been unfavorably considered. DF vith Forms 1079 and 1498 with
copy of unsigned turn down letter are returned.
-
3. 
Proposal involves use of Investigational Drugs and Volunteers, or Schedule I
Drugs. Comments of AIDRB, are attached.
IncI 
AIDR8
as
[ 
DIRECTOR
APPENDIX D
DA 
m 
I 
mdi

--- PAGE BREAK ---rned.
-
3. 
Proposal involves use of Investigational Drugs and Volunteers, or Schedule I
Drugs. Comments of AIDRB, are attached.
IncI 
AIDR8
as
[ 
DIRECTOR
APPENDIX D
DA 
m 
I 
mdi

--- PAGE BREAK ---

411
801. ID
SUBJECT: 
Review of Proposal No.
TO: 
SGRD-LD 
FRGH: 
SGRD-ID
Proposal forwarded for appropriate action.
fuel
DATE:
. CHT 3
CHIEF, 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS DIVISION
SGRD- LD
THRU: 
SGRD-JA 
FROM: 
SGRD-LD 
DATE: 
Cmi
TO: 
SGRD-ZB
Forwarded.
Incl
Ac 
LOGISTICS DIVI*ION
JUDGE ADVOCATE
SGRD-ZB
TO: 
SGRD-OC 
FROM: 
SGRD-ZB 
DATE: 
CMr 5
Approved.
Incl
ne 
DEPUTY COMH&NDER
SGRD-OC
TO: 
SGRD-ID 
FROM: 
SGRD-OC 
DATE:
Proposal has been distributed as follows:
a. 
Original proposal and Form 1079 to SGRD-LD.
b. One copy Form 1079 and copies of Form 1498 to
(Projec
c. One copy Form 1079 to SCRD-ID.
d. One copy Form 1079 to CG/DCO for info.
a. Other:
Incl
as 
COMPTROLLER
CHT 6
t Monitor)
70-026 0 - 76 - 27
as

--- PAGE BREAK ---and copies of Form 1498 to
(Projec
c. One copy Form 1079 to SCRD-ID.
d. One copy Form 1079 to CG/DCO for info.
a. Other:
Incl
as 
COMPTROLLER
CHT 6
t Monitor)
70-026 0 - 76 - 27
as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

412
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
U.S ARMY MEDICAL 
UEAR^fCH 
AND 06MVILOfP CMMND
WASHINGTON., D.0. 4"14
SGRD-
Dear Doctor
We are pleased to advise you that your research proposal,
entitled " 
t,
has been technically revic ed bcyi the 
............
Directorate, USASIRDC, and recommended for further considera-
tion. 
We have, therefore, requested our Logistics Division
to enter negotiations with your institution.
As negotiations are yet to be undertaken between our Logis-
tics Division and your Business Office, this is not notifica-
tion of an award of a contract (grant), and is not to be
construed as authority to assume any contractual liabilities
or to begin any proposed work.
If you have any questions regarding the contractual aspects
of your proposal, please contact your Business Office. Should
you have questions regarding the scientific or technical as-
pects of your proposal, please write me at the address listed
above or telephone Area Code 202-693-
Sincerely,
(Blind copies to:
Logistics Division
Advisors, if applicable)
(Project Monitor)
APPENDIX F

--- PAGE BREAK ---l, please write me at the address listed
above or telephone Area Code 202-693-
Sincerely,
(Blind copies to:
Logistics Division
Advisors, if applicable)
(Project Monitor)
APPENDIX F

--- PAGE BREAK ---

413
Ala 
1*0- 
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
.
UAL. AMY MICL. RCS.ACI H AND DgvA 
MIMC'T COMMAND
WASHINGTON. MOC. 90314
SGRD-
Dear Doctor
We are pleased to advise you that your request for (sup-
plemental funding) (extension without additional funding)
(renewal) of Contract Ulo. 
has been recommended
for approval. 
We have, therefore, requested our Logistics
Division to enter negotiations with your institution.
As negotiations are yet to be undertaken between our Logis-
tics Division and your Business Office, this is not a noti-
fication of (supplemental funding) (extension without ad-
ditional funding) (renewal), and is not to be construed as
authority to assume any contractual liabilities br to continue
any work.
If you have any questions regarding the contractual aspects
of the proposed modification, please contact your Business
Office. Should you have questions regarding the scientific
or technical aspects of your request, please write me at the
address listed above or telephone Area Code 202 693-
Sincerely,
(Blind copies to:
Logistics Division
Advisors, if applicable)
(Project Monitor)
APPENDIX G

--- PAGE BREAK ---t, please write me at the
address listed above or telephone Area Code 202 693-
Sincerely,
(Blind copies to:
Logistics Division
Advisors, if applicable)
(Project Monitor)
APPENDIX G

--- PAGE BREAK ---

414
D001'Reg70-25
HEADQUARTERS
U. S. 
ARMY MEDICAL RESEARCH AND~ 
DEVELOPEIrrT COMMAND
Washington, D. C. 
20314
REGULATION
hVI$IER 70-25
1974
Researcfi and De-vclopvnt
USE OP HI'JJ 
SUBJECTS IN 1.SEA1RC11
Paragraph
CHAPTER 1.
1-1
1-2
1-3
1-4
1-5
1.-5-1
1-5-2
1-5-3
1-6
1-7
1-0
1-9
1-10
1-1i0-1
1-10-2
1-10-3
1-11
1-12
CHAPTER 2.
2-1
2-2
2-3
2-4
2-4-1
2-4-2
2-5
2-6
2-7
2-8
2-9
2-10
2-11
CHAPTER 3.
3-1
3-2
3-3
GENERAL
Purpose
Aliplicabi1i ty
RPferences
Definil tons
Basic Principles
Consent Standayds
Study Standards.
Debrief iins
Exceptunz-.1 Circum.stances
Investigational Prugs
Advance Deterr.;nation
Clinical 
nrvstiracions
Liricat.onrs on Use of Special Classes as
Human Subjects
Use of Children as Hur.an Subjects
Use of Prisoners as lhr.an Subjects
Use of Mentally Disabled or Institutionalized
entally r.fir, Persons as Hum. an Subjects
Studies to be Conducted Outside the United States
Sur mission of Proposals
IN-IIOJSE STUDIES
General
Policy
Additional Safeguards
Human Use Cep'mitLees
Committee Ccvposition
Ccmmittee Feview
Type Protocols
Civilian Erployees
Irregular or Fee-Basis Employees
Contractor's Frployees
Military Personnel
Other persons Entitled to Hedical Care
Private Citizens
CONTRACTOR STUDIES
General
Policy
Submission of Assurances
Page

--- PAGE BREAK ---

415
3-4 
Special Assurances
3-5 
Certifications
3-6 
Contractor's ResponsibilitLies
3-7 
Contractual Obligation
3-8 
Description of Methods
APPENDIX A. 
Consent Forms
APPI: DIX B. 
Sarple General Ashurance Letter
APPENDIX C. 
CertificatJon Form
APPENDIX D. 
Contract Claure 'I-e of Ium.an Subjects"
APPENDIX E. 
Contract Clause "Prohibition of Ute of Ilu.an Subjects"

--- PAGE BREAK ---General Ashurance Letter
APPENDIX C. 
CertificatJon Form
APPENDIX D. 
Contract Claure 'I-e of Ium.an Subjects"
APPENDIX E. 
Contract Clause "Prohibition of Ute of Ilu.an Subjects"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

416
a. 
At Risk. 
A human subject is considered at risk if 
he may be
exposed to the possibility of harin - physical, biological, psycho-
loaical, sociological, or other - as a consequence of any act or
omission whlch .ocs beyond the application of those established and
accepted litlods or procedures which are in his best interests, or
which incrcase ordinary zl-s 
of dily 
life, including the recognized
risks inherent in a cho'.en eccepation or ficld of service. Deter-
mination of the nat tre aild extent of the term "at risk" is 
a matter
of coumeo; se.n.e imd sound profes.-ie-.Il jud C).Cnt, 
and re.sponsibility
for this deterriini or, Y(:ts at all leveln of revic,
b. 
Child. 
Aiiy perna, oth.r than active duty military persouncwl
particilpat 
jg in an in-hoiose stuc!y, %.ho has not attained the lcgal age of
consent to Varticipate In rcscarch as eeter;,ided under the applicable
law of the jurisdiction in which such research is to be conducted.
c. 
Clinical lnves!stion. 
The organized scientific inquiry,
both in humans and by directly related laboratory work, into clinical
problems of significant concern in the necessary health care of mem-
bers of the military community, including active duty personnel, dc-
pendents, and retirees.
d. 
Consent. 
Consent ray take two forms as outlined below:
(1) 
Subject Consent. 
Consent given by a prospective human
subject who has the legal capacity to give such consent. 
Generally,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ent. 
Consent ray take two forms as outlined below:
(1) 
Subject Consent. 
Consent given by a prospective human
subject who has the legal capacity to give such consent. 
Generally,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

417
a mini uw age of 21 years will be a precondition of such legal capacity
to Cive consent except in the e jurisdictions where a lesser age is 
-
specified. For active duty vflitary personnel participating in an in-house
study there Js no trini-u:n rpe livdtation. 
It Must be voluntarily given,
freely and without any use of force, fraud, deceit, duress, constraint,
coercion, or unluw(til or -rpropl r induceurnt. 
It i..ust be based upon his
possession of sufficient understanding of the Irrplications of his
participation In the study to cnzb1c him to rke a Informed decision.
lie r.ut be told its i-t.ch of the r.atu-e, duration, rud purpose of the
study ss vll 
not invalldite the results, and the inconveniences znd
hazards which can reasonabJy be anrJcipatcd.
(2) 
T:,Jrd P;-rt': Crnsent. 
Content given by the 1.arLnLS, ]cl
guardian, next of kit., or other legally authorized third party rep-
resentative of the prospective hulaan subject's welfaree and intere t.
Tird party consent nay be used only -.:hen the prospective human subject
is incapable of giving subject consent. 
It is subject to all of the sow.e
criteria for f,,ll and corplete disclosure as is subject consent, 
and r.st
be freely given.
e. 
Contract. 
Any contract, Lrant, inter-agency transfer, or other
agreement by which funds chargeable to the Department of the Army are made
available to any organization. 
Likewise, the term "contractor" shall in-
clude any contractor, grantee, or other organization party to a contract,
as defined above.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Army are made
available to any organization. 
Likewise, the term "contractor" shall in-
clude any contractor, grantee, or other organization party to a contract,
as defined above.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

418
f. 
luman .Rubjet. 
Any human being who, knowinrly or umknot#ingly,
is subjected to an act or om, -sion, whether r at risk or not, the object
of which is to contribute to &nowledrv to be gained as a part of a
research project.
g. 
Hi.m'an U. 
C11 
t, 
-j 
tr 
.,.._ _, 
The revii 
of study protocol.,
by on institutional revie;: board or other similar cornittee established
by the ortanization repotsible for the study, to insure that any proposed
use of hui:an sul-ject, for rest.arch $s consitA.uit wtit the basic principles
outlined in paragraph 1-5.
h. 
]nsli t. tt,',1 
J:.d ,c,.tx1u 
mr. Amy p.,son %ilho is confined,
whether by court order, voluntary col--iLuent, or othnvise,
in an instJtutJon for the care and/or treatncnt of the mentally Ill,
the mentally retarded, the ertwtionally disturbed, the psycotic, the
senile, and others with itipairr:!nts of a similar nature, regardless
of whether or not such person :a!s beet deterrJned to be legally in-
competent, 
and regardless of whether .r not he is capable of giving
legally effective subject consent.
i. Mentally Disabled Person. Any person who, due to mental illness,
mental retardation, e,.-ational distrubance, psychosis, senility,
or other impairment o: 
similar nature, is not capable of giving
legally effective sub,..L consent.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ental illness,
mental retardation, e,.-ational distrubance, psychosis, senility,
or other impairment o: 
similar nature, is not capable of giving
legally effective sub,..L consent.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

419
J. 
Orpanx:ntion. Any r'edera. , Strte, municipal or other govern-
m3nt. agency, or any corporation, institution, foundation, agency, or other
legally accountable entity.
k. 
Priuonrr. 
Any pcrsor. wio 1,; invol:ntartly confined in a penal
or correcton:- 1 illrtitut :r--, vhett ir :uch institut on is for the cot,-
firnei..nt or ruh.bi]itatio. cf juvenile offenders, for persons charged
with or convicted cf civil or crii'Inul offenses, or for other purposes.
1. 
Prejc~ct .
I.y research pro.ri., project, toskz, test, expc-rincnt,
or similar undtita.$i'.
m. Prot-ocr.1 .
TI.e dcailed plan by which a research project is to
be conducLed, and which contains, as a Pint..um, the objectives of the
project, the method and i-aans by vhich they are to be achieved, an
analysis of potential ris. to-buman subjects and contraindications,
safety reasurcs, and other r*ans to be used to reduce any risks to
human subjects.
n. 
Study. That portion of any project which involves a human
subject.
1-5. 
BASIC PRINCIPLES 
Certain basic principles must be rigidly
observed in order to satisfy oral, 
ethical, and legal concepts. 
These

--- PAGE BREAK ---any project which involves a human
subject.
1-5. 
BASIC PRINCIPLES 
Certain basic principles must be rigidly
observed in order to satisfy oral, 
ethical, and legal concepts. 
These

--- PAGE BREAK ---

420
principles include:
1-5-1. 
Consent Stond.r-d. 
Jet following standards shall be adhered to
in all cases:
a. 
All cotisent n.ust be voluntary. 
It 
mast be the knowing consent
of the indivodu;,l or hi: Ically cvutlioi::ed rc7rescnttive, so situated
as to be rble to ,xerc-.e free- l .cr of choice vJthout undue inducer.nt
or any elet .'nt cf force, 
frnud, Ot-ccit, elurcns, or other forn of rol-
straint or coercion. 
Tiae tosic ele)-cintn of lnfor:ztLion necessary to
such con!.,-nL Jnclu,:
(1) 
A f.:Ir cxpl.ntion of the procedures to be foll,cd, 
and
their 
U'oes, 
itic]udini 
i¢ketification ef any procedures which are
exporr -. In talI;
(2) 
A description of nny attcneant dliscoaforts and risks
reasonably to be expected;
(3) A description of any benefits reazow:bly to be expected;
(4) A disclosure of any appropriate alternative procedures
that right be advantageous to the subject;
(5) An offer to answer iny inquiries concerning the procedures;
and
(6) 
An instruction that the subject is free to withdraw his
consent and to disconti ue participation at any time, without prejudice
to himself.
b. 
Exculpatory language through which the subject is made-to waive

--- PAGE BREAK ---ject is free to withdraw his
consent and to disconti ue participation at any time, without prejudice
to himself.
b. 
Exculpatory language through which the subject is made-to waive

--- PAGE BREAK ---

421
or appear to waive, any of his legal rights, including any release of
any person, organization, or agency from liability for negligence, is
contrary to public policy and expressly prohibited.
c. Consent by a subject or his legally authorized representative
&hall be obtained in writing whenever it is reasonably possible to do
so. 
The consent form may be read to tise subject or his legally authorized
representative, 
but in any event lie or his legally authorized repro-
sentutLive lust be givtn adequate opportunity-to read it and to ask any
questions they right have. 
This consent form must then be signed by
the subject or his legally authorized representative, and by a witness
not directly involved in the project. 
Sa.Vple copies of "the cousent form
as al.peved by the )Is:vt U.. 
Co. ;Ittee shiAl be retained in the records, as
well as the actual consent forti for each subject.
d. 
Under the exceptional circuratances in which the use of written
convent is inpracticable (c.g., certain surgical procedures on trauma
patients), oral consent tivy be used. Oral consent is subject to all of the
same standards as apply to written consent, except that the signature of the
subject or his legally authorized representative is not required.
'Where oral consent is used, the protocol must specifically so indicate and
provide adequate justification for its use.
e. All consent, whether written or oral, must be recorded on a
consent form, together with the signature of the witness, and
appropriate records maintained to prove that such consent was secured.

--- PAGE BREAK ---whether written or oral, must be recorded on a
consent form, together with the signature of the witness, and
appropriate records maintained to prove that such consent was secured.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

422
It rih'uIJ ': e..'i as-z I 
t., . eL. 
ur volwti. 
f, 
(o' 
c- r-.,,
is a N11 
iC I. . .
C" 
.
C Cf l... _:,'y by
cor'Lt(it 
pero 
o i lIth 
t o rrorcctiv3 lul;r iibjects in Lhz prc.!cr.:e
of a %!itntts not 
l'"'y 
i11;oi\vd In t-,, p:-oJcct. 
lae cor!,.nt
form I., only a te-tJl:-.',v to IltC fact thati 
:.xch a full and rcponstc-
discosv:t~ ,.", 
" |'1.% .
f. 
The vt.e of i" ,giud 
tocwiont ir e::.oressly proibIcm4.
g.Third 1-i-ty coir;oit r-%y never b-- e'-ploycd txrlcis rxsch U&c 
>
been iiciiculy 
ir.pprv'vd in advance for that parttculcr protocol.
"~quest for tho uie of third party co isent in a rerc1d rrotocol %-ill
not be approved 
stlcr. ong and cog..at rcasons cm be shoirn :hy cr'jvct
consflL is Iret33ible, or will not pe rit the achelvcnuent of the rcoquiutc
results. 
Here convenience will never suffice as justification for taice.
party consent. 
In the case of ninors 
consenit of both parents will
normally be required.
b. 
Appendix A contains sample consent form. which should be
mo4ified when necessary and appropriate to sake them fully re-
spomive to the principles contained in this regulation. 
The use of
these samle forms, or appropriate modifications thereof, is mandatory
or in-house studies under chapter 2 of this regulation, but is only
advisory in nature for contractor studies uder ckster 3 of this re-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ropriate modifications thereof, is mandatory
or in-house studies under chapter 2 of this regulation, but is only
advisory in nature for contractor studies uder ckster 3 of this re-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

423
t 
',:(:., 
tr* , ,- coatractor rctaln3 I r'.'-.;ry r .: 
: .', 
.:"fv'r .'
1. 
11 
t.:'" 
j .'ct II studlex 
.1 
cot 
".
.- .- 
- :.ztrds. 
The foll,,ing standards shall be achred to In
all c.',e.:
a. 
T.e .t 
y rxit be such o to c.ntribut 
.
tu an
i:~,'. owd Ar.:; r"c.-crc. pro Laiw, and heve reasonable prospect 
of y;U!.'•,
i,4.irLan1 reiu.t.., ecseti. l to such proErr:, which are not o'L.inr':],:
by c.tl: r .:t1hc.J. or mas of study.
b. 
"Man 
''. 
of huaaa subjects used will be k'ept to tie in'.u.:
nur,%er : ich wtl 
rea'!.omibly achie'e ti 
required results.
c. 
TLhe study Will he conducted -o as to avoid all unne.zcsary
phy).;cal or r-nLal discorfort, suffet'.ng, or injury.
d. 
go study wtll be conducted i " there is any inherent reason
to believe that death or disabling injury is likely to occur. 
Suf-
flient animal or laboratory experiments or other evaluations must have
been completed to give assurance of acceptable risk prior to use of
hburn subjects.
a. The degree of risk to be taken vLll never exceed that dater-
mined to be required by the urpncy or importance of the Arqy research
program to which the study Is related.
BEST 
PrLINA9W

--- PAGE BREAK ---degree of risk to be taken vLll never exceed that dater-
mined to be required by the urpncy or importance of the Arqy research
program to which the study Is related.
BEST 
PrLINA9W

--- PAGE BREAK ---

424
".",*All ... '.'r-c:. 
411 
e 
dt,, and adequ.:ie fici.; 
:.*.--
t 
p',. 
, 
subjnct av inst all forcec*-Ile pr-; 
t:
7. t - st,'v 
,.,i 
!.,. conducted ouly by persons possessir,; the
su.1- 
.' 
c q!;.Il .'icatibn. The highest degree of A:iR1 and
cz:c ;il) t:- r-.t,itd !ur. 
all sars of the study of persons ulao
cI'NI.ct c!- 
'b~ 
in th.-- ztu'y.
h,. 
*.- h:.:,n subjc:t will ba inforid that at any tir.a during tC
cou:-,. V' ;,a: 
l,.cric~ j~aJon he has the rlrit 
to revoh:: 
him cenrcnt, and
wtlve1- .
ficr. furtscr participation without prejudice to hit.s-lf.
i. 
fi,..-2n suhjects will have no physical or moutl 
conditions which
will t~ike p-'rtic.patiou Eoru hazardous for them than it 
Would bc for
normal he;.1LhIy persons, unless such condition is a necessary prereq-
uisite for the particular 
study involved. 
In ay such case, the
use of human subjects with iuch pre-existing conditions must have been
specifically approved in advance for that particular protocol.
j. 
The scientifically rtualif.ed person conducting the study and
each member of his research team, will be prepared to terminate the subject's
participation at any stage if fe has reasons to beateve, in the exercise
of the good faith, superior skill, and careful judgement required of him,
that continuation is likely to result in Injury, disability, or death to
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---ons to beateve, in the exercise
of the good faith, superior skill, and careful judgement required of him,
that continuation is likely to result in Injury, disability, or death to
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

425
,. 
7.c. 
:- 
I... 
no zrcnter intrusion into the pr-va;,y o: the
,. 
,.., >.. 
:h. 
i.i .,bslutely necessary for the conduct of the
o. 
uo:is %f ill 
not be used uider any circ:,st-,.ccs.
3.-%-. 
r.r;. :.,'N. 
Provi;ions should nor-ally bc. nade for a port.-&tt,::
dtir'cf;.-, 
f tau.jects. 
Such provision recotnizes an ethiccl ol! 
'i ,t
to li-va 
., 
cub.'Oett rccc~cin well iiuforL., 
as to al; at-pCCtS of t-heii
part; ciprtAnn, zid rJn :izc. the chance that subjects 
lJtht tcrr.u:ate Lheir
p3rtlciptlon %l Ith nisu(;errt-andios as to the naturo of their pe~icip.U~-.'
or the rerults obt.ined. 
Such debriefing rould be considered r--neatoc,
wherever the experir.ntal desip contained so rc elem'ent of deception
(Including, but not limited to, "double-blind" or uie of placebos) to
insure that the deception is revealed and explained.
1-6. 
EXCEPTIONAL CIRCW.'STANCES. 
Certain exceptional circumstances
might aske it necessary to request an exception to one or mors of the
policies or procedures contained in this regulation. 
In such cases, full
just ification not be provided as to why such policies or procedures should
be waived.
1-7. 
INVESTICATIONAL DRUGS. 
Any proposal which involves the use of
iuvestigStionsl drugs tn human subjects 
smat, in addition to the re-

--- PAGE BREAK ---policies or procedures should
be waived.
1-7. 
INVESTICATIONAL DRUGS. 
Any proposal which involves the use of
iuvestigStionsl drugs tn human subjects 
smat, in addition to the re-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

426
quircrents c:.;t." 
-cihere iu this reulcLIO: 
'e ha 
.
haidd *,. .rir:
accord anct- ;w 
.,r /.4 
.
1-8. 
ADVAoC. I!- L "'JO'S 
Advance qleterivn:. 
n1s my f.-cn ti2 
Lo
time be %!e 
lftrit:'i: 
those projects or clat... o: proicct ; I 
"
methods ard procc-u.cs; and/or other situations i; w.iich hu::, &C 
i.- ,
Involved, to %,hicit , zJ,1c porticus of this re..Lion -.'.a!l r: 
.
!,;.'-
cable. 
Such advance df-errinatiops, including a:: of tl~e rcsri 'I ..
, 1."--
Itatiors, rn! cc:di':cz. attcndent thereon, 
ha" "c- pu:ulM.1: 
.c 
r.:l
appendix to this rer,.tion. 
Requests or rco.-..-:t.-.on!, .-or
ditcrntna-,io:3 
n11 
be forwarded in writin-, 
I fullstie:
tberefors to this I:Lae-uarters, ATfl': SGRi)-11R.
1-9. 
C.I 
CI'.L II\:STCATJONS. 
Clinical invest, 
-;c;ns ,erfor,- 
Fi
t3AIDC personnel at any Army medical facility or activity, and fun:dcd
undo other than RDT appropriation, 
shall be su ject to the provisions
of Al 40-38.
1-10. 
LIhITATIO:S C USE OF SPECIAL CLASSES AS II-MN SUBJECTS.
a. 
The first principle of the 
uremburg Co&s provides that subjects
of biomedical research must be "so situated as to li 
able to exercise
free power of choice" concerning their 1articipation. 
Where liberty
Is 'Limited. where freedom air choice Is restricted, or where the subject's
Ability to fully comprehend is dimiuished, there In a corresponding
d2L1Mtioo of the capacity to give truly voluntary consent. 
For these
reasons, the ost careful evolution must be gives a 
any proposal

--- PAGE BREAK ---ehend is dimiuished, there In a corresponding
d2L1Mtioo of the capacity to give truly voluntary consent. 
For these
reasons, the ost careful evolution must be gives a 
any proposal

--- PAGE BREAK ---

427
vlotc% 
u-:c.7 
c of n.y le-., 
i tcaLent.1ag I.o or.2- of -te
follu.. nr .... 
s 
1
a. 
It 
is not a.'prFopriate to permit a child to participate as a
hw**.,n rubjecL v.:s 
th- - nrturc of thl.- xcsuzrch Involved is suc. tiat
it vuoald be !: 
; .'bc o-, 
r,-ifu1 
if 
-C~r:CtF..ion 
vrz retrt:. 
,
solc.ly to ei:cts, cr c.rr 
.;ecJ1 co,6d,:rvtieOas --r 
iX1'..d. 
car 
-
convo)3f.)ce c' 
i:cv. z %ufi!ce i.s jv!rtlfic:.tio 
for the uC of a C,!sl."
as a hu.-.all subtrct. 
It is pcri.s.ibl¢t, 
ho-c'er, to pL-rr.tL a ch,1'd to
particJpatc v':en tLiere Is a direct po:entlal bencflt to such ch*.d
and acequ;.te prior tsi;ng has been 
:e-ct plished to givc ar::ur;.nce of
acceptable rl k.
b. 
A-child nay not participate -s a human subject unless:
(1) The child's parents, 1, .rdian, 
or other legally authorized
representative has given effective third party.conuent, under conditions
which meet the legal requirements of the place in *kich such consent is
secured.
comditions
provided
(a) 
The diagnosis, treatment, prevention, or etiology of
not usually encounted in adults; or
(b) Any other condition from wich the child is suffering,
here is a direct potential benefit to the ciild and adequate
70-026 0- 
76 - 28

--- PAGE BREAK ---ogy of
not usually encounted in adults; or
(b) Any other condition from wich the child is suffering,
here is a direct potential benefit to the ciild and adequate
70-026 0- 
76 - 28

--- PAGE BREAK ---

428
prior testii-', hi.. .v-'. "ccopilishcd to give assurance of ccc,,:2..L
risk; or
() 
-:.L.-en 
which cannot be obtained frou any other
class of stiluect.
c. 
The trad'.,ionai rcquireu:!nt of scouring the consent of parenLs
or guardiait prior to p :'rorinr, a radical procedure on a child should
be viev-ed Ls prot-ctlvl. either than coercive. 
Theefore, in addition
to securing, t! e r(-7iottt:- third party consent from parents, guardiz , or
other locally auti-or z z-d repre-sentntive, the child, depun:dln3 upon his
maturity, rhorld tlro be concult,:d. 
Clearly, infantV of te-ader year's
have neir-- the cor.-'rehcnsion nor judget-ant to enable then to r.a:e a
maninful deter...iiation. 
Older children idght wl 
be able to
comprehend sufficiently tO understand uhat it is that they will. bc
subjected to and, depending upon the circurstances, should in 
mny
cases be given the right to refuse to participate. 
As a child approaches
the age of majority, his ability to comprehend vill-likely become
closer and closer to that of an adult and It would be improper to
permit him to participate unless he bad also given subject consent.
All of the above considerations apply to maturity of judgement and
comprehension, and not solely to chronological age. 
Therefore, no hard
and fast rules can be laid down, and careful cousideration must be
given to provisions which -ll insure compliance with these principles.
1-10-2. 
USE OF PRISONERS AS MUM SUBJECTS.
. a. 
It Is not appropriate to permit a prisoner to* participate as a

--- PAGE BREAK ---en to provisions which -ll insure compliance with these principles.
1-10-2. 
USE OF PRISONERS AS MUM SUBJECTS.
. a. 
It Is not appropriate to permit a prisoner to* participate as a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

429
lei _a subject u! nl.: 
It his f rst been datc- nbed hat th.; e %-1:' be i.,
MI.,,e ir.ducci7rn:r to such pc 
ic;r:,'. "on, takir.g ln.o o'ci,,"c 
st:. ,
vh:tricr tl:t. ea.rr.r., li'ir,,v 
Co 
tLiony., vdlcal c7.re, quality c..
fo£ ., 
and other er-rrics offered tc pa.ticipznts k- the study at,:
allpificantly Cratrer than thoso avz'lable to non-..rticip-ting
pr lsoncrn
b. 
A prisoner who is not serving a sentence .'..osed ,y a court o'd
co'r,-.tCtt j1'ri-!IcuiJoL (a.r., pro-trial confLncaxr. or dc'.-tioi) at.y
not participate es a )iu-,zan uuljcct u lens the prop, 'led rc -irc.t 
is con-
cerred with:
(1) 
The diarnosis, treatrznt, prevortic', or etiolo.- of a
particular condition from uhich he is suffering, r;.-vided thI re ins n dr.;. r
poLCntia 
benefit to hiw: and adequate? prior testi:. has bicn acco,Vlih--
ed to Ctve'assurance of acceptable risk; or
(2) 
The effect of confln=.:ent upon the :rlsoner, and involves
no apprcciehle risLk to the subject.
c. 
Prior to the approval of an7 protocql imolving the use of
prisoners as human subjects, a site visit shall be performed by appropriate
representatives of the Headquarters. including at a minimal a senior
medical officer and a member of the legal staff# ind the report of visit
sbuitted by these representatives shall be carekcly considered in the
evaluation of any such protocol.
1-10-3. 
USE OF MENTALLY DISABLED OR INSTIW1TIUit ED MWTALLY INFIRM
PER$US AS HUMAN SUBJECTS.
A. It Is not appropriate to permit a maentGl 
dixs..led or
T
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---n of any such protocol.
1-10-3. 
USE OF MENTALLY DISABLED OR INSTIW1TIUit ED MWTALLY INFIRM
PER$US AS HUMAN SUBJECTS.
A. It Is not appropriate to permit a maentGl 
dixs..led or
T
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

430
r 
-rc-a to I'at 
Z' 
C
-:.:"t .. 
.
v .
is 
u, 
i 
A 
.. '= 
-. 
:
1c-,o0." 
ur 
f 'nr'.c 
1 
motion were rc:tr.:tF.d to 
lh,'-
tvntc-'; " 
-t, 
r 
t-: 
.
: .. ' I 
o:-.:Ideratfcnis irt .n o x, 
, 
!.r
r 
". 
:. 
..
' Jtification fc : the 
s 
of 
-Y 
.
persc'-.... 
L 1~u..
b. 
A rant;A.1y t'll 
lvt! or Institutionalized rtcnta..y infi:. -r--.
may ePt partcipaLc 
i:. 
au:.. 
subject unless:
(1) Le.v,." :iect ive subject consent has been obtained, ur,
vhe-c ri.: st,')Jcc 
is 
.-
y incou-etent, the subject's legally
author' :,-d 
j',. 
.-. .l .:. 
h,.: 
Vivr effective third party consent.
(2) 
ii?- ;:) -r.,- c rcnrd'h is concerned with:
(a) 
" 
di.nosis, treatment, prcvention, or e.Liolo-; c.f
the p;,rt.;cu!ar i,-,',:i'r.si 
'itl, which he is afflicted; or
(b) 
Any other condition from which he is sufferin-, provie,.-
there is a direct pot.,eril.. bekicfit to him adequate prior testi7
has brc-., acco..plished to give Pssurance of acceptable risk; or
(c) 
The effect of institutional life upon the institu-
tionalized t.antally infirm subject, and Involves no appreciable risk
to the subject; or
(d) 
Information which cannot be obtained from any other
class of subject.
c. 
Whenever the mentally disabled or institutionalized mentally
Infirm person appears to have sufficient mental capacity to comprehend
what is proposed and to cxpriss an opinion as to his willingness to
participate, his subject consent, even though not legally effective
' T ,-V 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

431
1I 
.
Vpcn rar.rpt , all 
uch 
l.-'.:.T, 
.
': 
i 'c
,, .
,cLr'.nc.. ,.:tI ar 
8l'Piic.: 
Cirt,.iveS of CLAC r.; 
"'.!
N

--- PAGE BREAK ---h not legally effective
' T ,-V 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

431
1I 
.
Vpcn rar.rpt , all 
uch 
l.-'.:.T, 
.
': 
i 'c
,, .
,cLr'.nc.. ,.:tI ar 
8l'Piic.: 
Cirt,.iveS of CLAC r.; 
"'.!
N

--- PAGE BREAK ---

432
CUTAMPR 2
IN-I!0;JS1: STUDIES
2-1. 
GC*.'.. 
Tisr, c, .;itr 
prescrilt es pc licies and procedures, In
adjLtIon to those coA ii 
In Clapter 1, which cpp'y in all cases
idiecein a rtudy in,-olvin t'Ce use of hu-an subjects in rp.'forz.d 
.c"Cr
the direct superviicn or control of USIM'DC personnel.
2-2. 
POLI'Y. 
No research study involving the use of husutn subjects
sall be coroenLed until all of the requirements of this regulation have
bee 
fully wet.
2-3. 
ADDITIONAL SArEGUAMDS. 
As added protection for human subjects,
thi following safeguards shall be required:
a. A physician, military or civilian, approved by The Surgeon
Cmamral, will be responsible for the medical care of all human subjects.
Ths physician should, whenever possible, be other than the project
leader. 
le shall have full authority to terminate the subject's
participation at any time that he believes death, Injury or bodily har
Is likely to result.

--- PAGE BREAK ---other than the project
leader. 
le shall have full authority to terminate the subject's
participation at any time that he believes death, Injury or bodily har
Is likely to result.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

433
b. 
A i 
;;,.'r. tus a,;id in.- u 
.': 
t,'-c. 
t ary tr t'%.-l %:i 
1 
" 
;'-
I.-f tcits, id 
r ,eruel 
tr. -in 
JI , th 'Ir use, srl1 be .. ,ai 
.
,
all tfi r,.
c. 
Requircd truudical traati':nt, includtine hos..irtalii!tion if ::c:-: 
,
will be provided to Lay human Fu),ject uho requires -uch trent-*nt or
ho.pitalivanton .s a result of his pcticipation, is coon cs stuclh tced
is reco£.nized.
d. 
Provisions sc-il 
be mide for repid u:dical V acu-tLio of hu-.a
subjects to an adequate hospital facility, rliLter c" othert,ire, in
cnse of eavarcncy.
2-4. 
I IN1M 
USE c.N1-TTECS. 
Each lat oratory which erut- ec, or intc..-do
to engage, in research studies involving huin subjects, shall provJde
for the establishment cf a hunan use conaittcc, aut shall report
to this Headquarters, ATTN: 
SGRD-HI' 
the wakeup o such corrdttee,
identifying each member by name; earned degrees, If any; position
or occupation; representative capacity; and by otbr pertinent
Indications of exerience such as board certification, licenses,
etc., sufficient to describe each meber's chief mticipated
contribution to committee deliberations. 
Any employment or other
rezationship between each member and the Departmwt of the Army
shall be clearly identified. 
Any additions, deletions, or substitutions
In mubership shall be reported in writing, vithlU 10 calendaF days

--- PAGE BREAK ---ach member and the Departmwt of the Army
shall be clearly identified. 
Any additions, deletions, or substitutions
In mubership shall be reported in writing, vithlU 10 calendaF days

--- PAGE BREAK ---

434
to this 
.
, 
tc inci:1e 
., to c '.i rc': r.-' 
:
of the znfo;:.-iic." 
"-cd 
alo'..
2-4-1. 
COI!![ir- C'" 
!"IN. 
Uc 
human ure cc 
!.. 
all
co"'Use' 
o 
1 L 
otl* _" 
five peetson2 
i th 
pro;:atn bac' 
.A to
assure ccr: lte 
.!. ! 
':. 
review cf each propo-.d stue.. bcinr's
wonsidercd. 
",,.e cC 
i. 
tuJt 
be nufficiently qu.:ifie. Lh.ruu- 
.
maurity, ex.-.-rence, n... c,:r-rti ,• of its rrberr end th.o divcr,. 
of
Its 
rbtship, 
to 1-'; ;¢ rcspect for its advice .- d ccwi':el for
safeutisrdi'g 02e right:; .- d 
fre 
of hu-an subj~Ls. 
In a.Jcit.lon to
possessin-, the prof 
.'i; 
co-eLencc, necessary t, prov'-hdc init ie, am
continuir.- irnviet of e::ch rroposcd 3tudy, the corT 
ttee xistL Le cbit. to
ascertait the accefLib;1ity of the proposed study Interi..s of 
pl tc~.
lam and regulations, standards of professional co ,iuct and practice,
orel and ethical standards, and conriunity attitudas. 
The cormittce
must, therefore, include persons whose experience sad expertise are in
these areas, including %,;ienever possible, at least one lawyer and one
clergyman. 
No committee -!tall consist entirely of members of a single
profession. 
No coon'ittc 
all consist entirely of members of the
- laboratory concerned, and i. least one member of the comttee shall be
a person who, except for mebership on this committee, is not an officer,
employee, agent, or otherwise associated with the Department of the Army.
No mber of such comittee shall be involved in either the initial or con-
tLnuing review of any study in which he has a direct interest, except to
provide information requested by the committee.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ch comittee shall be involved in either the initial or con-
tLnuing review of any study in which he has a direct interest, except to
provide information requested by the committee.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

435
* ,."."". 
: 
,:.unless it h3s iirst been LLe:' 
':,
,: ,::,.,, 
t 
,,..,'- 
":t:ry co;zat--e. 
Tttis review sh: g.l e- tr;r. no.
.
Yi-' r,'.: 
tc t;, subject are so outweighed by the fu=- of "10
1l'. -'.t io Gle 
'.-'jec' z:'o the Importance of the knv.:Jcee to tc gM-r,.d
-v. to, a- 
it L dcel-,io:- ro allow thc stbject to acc4%;t thae*;e ri,'..L;
h. 
Tie :1ptb tod inlfare of any such subject 'ill 
be c!-:u~te1.
pro t s.b
c. 
Le:t;lly effective infoimcd cou.vnt w11l be otained by cdc,,%;-.te
end 
r.'..ru',-La 
te r.theds in accordance vrith the provL..ions of this
rcgula;t1or,; and
d. 
The conduct of the study will be reviewed at timely intervals.
2-5. 
TYPE PROTOCOLS. 
A "Type Protocol" ts a study ;:an involving the
use of human subjects in a group of closely related L.ad similar studies
which differ from each other in ways which are ialikcly to change the
degree of risk involved. A '"ype Protocol" does not contain a detailed
plan of every possible study which might be undertake i. but includes a
description of conditions under which the studies vii k be conducted, and
the standards which will be followed to safeguard the subject. 
The
equipment to be used, Including safety equipment, =us-. be discussed in

--- PAGE BREAK ---hich the studies vii k be conducted, and
the standards which will be followed to safeguard the subject. 
The
equipment to be used, Including safety equipment, =us-. be discussed in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

436
* 
• ?. 
" 
.(1 
n' to Which the sub Jct 
1- 
.
.
fr;..'..1 
v!'.1. zigs that vi'! " 
lio,,c- 
r;r,:
1 
,ec 
aion. 
The use oi a 
7r-, 
:L,.
i't ,cccpt., 
e c.1ly if the coi-d: ions under which thl 
stud !.; 
bOins
:, re sc. ' 
a-d: rf-cui 
tr.t 
the &scribe scfcLy Un.-its i.re
c|..r'y 
-;.,t2' 
for ti 
rt, ject,. proposed to be incliLC.d. 
All "%?v
Pro'ocl " , 
ler.t ri rcvc.d I,- t'is Headquarters and, 
-htn so approvcd,
co:t~t,,,. ¢c-- 
.t.. 
',-Jth par,-rarh 1-12 of this regulatio",. 
o:..r,
sivi,, a "i,,e rrotocol" does not Fo'rcit evcluation of all of Oie ftct(,--.;
rc,uired r:ior to ,pr'ovat 
of a patticular study (C.Z., parc.ra.)it 2-4-2,f.
of this re-.ulat'.,.) 
eech inad iduai study to be conduct€- ur.:r n 
.Pt
Protocol" t.. t receive approval by the laboratory human use cornittec
(see 
arucraphi 2-4-2 cf this relulatioc), and a copy cf the approved pro-
tocol for cnch ruch individual study, together with * ccpy of the r :,nut.- of 
.
laboratory human use co::itteo, shall be forwarded to this UeLquarte-.,
ATTh: 
SCPRt-IIR, not later than 10 calendar days prior to iutititiou of tLe
study. 
Approval by this Pleadquarters of a "Type Protocol" shall be for
a stated time period (generally one yearr, 
subject to renewal. 
"rypc
Protocols" involving investigational e.-ugs vili not be approved.
2-6. 
CIVILIAN EHPLWYEES. 
When civilian employees of the Department
of the Army volunteer to participate as hun subjects the following
provisions shall apply:
a. 
Any duty es a volunteer humm subject performed during the
l*oy7e 'a regularly scheduled tour of duty Ill 
be eonsidered fka

--- PAGE BREAK ---s hun subjects the following
provisions shall apply:
a. 
Any duty es a volunteer humm subject performed during the
l*oy7e 'a regularly scheduled tour of duty Ill 
be eonsidered fka

--- PAGE BREAK ---

437
cmtruct've e-:.v for -.
c.h str,%1!;ht tire ratc ore p.: 
o.
in partic&r-:tJo- ouo tPY t!he culoyee's regularly sch t-ct t,'r, 
r,
while in a l.unve statu:;, '0ll b- convtdered as voluntary o'--'°r/ i,
whlch m pavyr nt r.y be r.,' nor compensatory tive gr.-.t od. 
The c,,. 
c.
shatIl ba so iii,-3..:e prior to acceptance of his scrvi. s Cs
hvnI a subject an.d the (oretoing understandingg shall be it corroratt:1 
n
the conomt Corr.
b. 
Cl,.-Im 
subn.tced to the Office of liorkors' Couenr.t:in 
Pte"-',
ft91oment Stme-.rds .d-intstration, US Departrent of Labor, bec-it%!.c vr
dilsability or c!.ath rett.-ItIng from a cuployee's volv'ntiy artlic':.,
Lu ay study will include a citation to Title 10, Unitcd Statch CouX.,
Section 450.3, as the Decpartment of the Ar@y authorization for the ufe o 
i .r'.
voluntary services.
c. 
All questions concerning hours of duty, pay, leave , coi. NlenscLlo.
claim, or application ef other civilian personnel regulations to
aiploees' 
olutary services, will be forwarded through appropriate
chmmels to the Deputy Cief of Staff for Personnel, ATTM: 
Director
of i1vlian Personnel.
d. 
Such employees are entitled to medical care in Army medical
treatment facilities in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs
4-31 or 4-62, AR 40-3.
2-7. 
IRIECTAI OR FEE-I;ASIS VIPLOYTIS. 
Interudttont services of such
emptoae are authorized. 
whether such employees can be used fs human

--- PAGE BREAK ---ons of paragraphs
4-31 or 4-62, AR 40-3.
2-7. 
IRIECTAI OR FEE-I;ASIS VIPLOYTIS. 
Interudttont services of such
emptoae are authorized. 
whether such employees can be used fs human

--- PAGE BREAK ---

438
.. "Iu ,p 
r:: 
t.e satitor: nuthorl., 
i
e- .- 
t 
-
,, 
.
v!:.'. 4 4 
t,," 
er1)Iov--.nt L. reement 
.
"e 
:'X ' 
,i E '. 
.
",.-' 
', 
A 
(5 UC 751. 
E .) 
.
"
aspp" 
': :!w rej-. 
to i,ny 
.r. 
or dci.caso result--a from thV1 
.
stant, 
, _!'u7. 
f 1; ..1 d. 
c rrAi -tIon 
In each case v-il1 have to '
the Office of Vor4c-:;' ['t;: nsatien Prograas, Eaplo'-ment St..Ln'ra'-;,
Ad; 
rt'tor., 
U. ;' 
' 
.t 
o 
La')vr. 
Subject to such rec"L 
ct'-c- cx-7
liJLat$.- r.:, 
r, 
in the statutory authority under '-h1ch c-,1..
the Govv. v.. ',t ii iv I -;:..'Lly 
b-.ar t!,e e p.ensc of ignorance prC-'-.3 cAi
life of such c .-. 
-y- 
2',sz rae 
of corpensation is not fixed by I 
- o-
regu]at oI;. 
in ri:c| cl 
.- :; 
it 
is preferable that the Goverrrai:'. 
,';.c.
an additleo,..1 ,llc'.:j:': 
to the v'vloyte so that he .-a) purchw,.e 
o.:n
covcr& ;e rather tha 
to undertake 
direct neotiations with i-surr.ne. 
sr.- ' 
.
Such ecioloyoes Pre cr.tJtd to r.'.-dicc, care in Ary treatment fzc!I. c-
in accordance with the prov-r.ions of 1-sragraph 4-62, AR 40-3.
2-8. 
CONTR!.CTOa'S rITLOYEES. 
Contra-.tor's employees my participate
human subjects in studies perfor: 
" under the direct supervision or
control of Dapartmeni of the Army personnel. 
It to the responsibility
of the contracting officer to deterire whether the term of the contract
permit such participation. 
Such employees are entitled to medical
care in Army medical treatwmnt facilities in accordance with
paragraph 4-62, AR 40-3.
2-9. 
MILITARY PERSONNEL. 
Military personnel my participate as human
sbjects. 
Additional compensation for such servicAs is *prohibited, except
s
sspecifically authorized by law (e.g., fureishiag blood (24 U.S.C. 30),
K

--- PAGE BREAK ---onnel my participate as human
sbjects. 
Additional compensation for such servicAs is *prohibited, except
s
sspecifically authorized by law (e.g., fureishiag blood (24 U.S.C. 30),
K

--- PAGE BREAK ---

439
dut;." S 
iic 
" 
a 1. 
-pr.!.Fure 
h,. 
(7 
U,.; C. 
A'" , 
I.;
an a Ltn 
Leat 
' 
tr: 
.1.-.L 
L tz',', 
(r- 
r,..!. 
07': 
0 
".
2- 10 .
O ir':" r* .
, : 
'; L D TO MI )IC 3. 
Z 
-t ' . :V:!:"
Iper*-,'' 
c 
'L.z 
. d ott~er 
rvut.:n=ly ent'te 
t-' 
o .... !C. 
v-
In rilItary r 
1i'ci 
, 
Jtis, t 
p, ri-cil;,Ite M hu;-.' 
'.ct.. 
,
perso: : r.oy be c:. 
9) L 
-rtd f er the 
cc rviccr. &s .2o; i 
.
',y az:'.I
dirccti'e 
(L 
'..; C 
. G:'. 
69), e:r--;,t that 
0t"i 
,ic:. 
r
t:lk.1" co:'n, 
C- 
.-
ccL to the 3 -':y 
itltt1lc.,i Of 5 U.S.C.
5532(c) (2).
2-11. 
P.I"ATE CITIZ!.." 
It is the policy of the Unitud SU-cu 110t to
accept voimutary Eer: .c*', 
ostenibly t:Ithout coL..er.,.;,tcn, Ohir. 
uc'a
ssrvlcc3 fr.y provide a basis 
&or a future claim 
iy't 
the Go-errt . A-L
for the value of the services provided. 
AccordivC-ly, 
4ny such
services should be accoroanied by a statcr-ant to the effect that the
Individual will not receive or become entitled to any corcnsatio- for
thee services. 
Such Individuals may, however, enter into an indepcndcnt
contractor relationship and participate for coupinsation as a,:" )rized
by applicable directives (see 45 Coup. 
Gen. 649). 
Such Lndiv: 
.Is are
entitled to medical care in Army medical treatmet facilities :.i accordance
with the provisions of paragraph 4-62, AR 40-3.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rectives (see 45 Coup. 
Gen. 649). 
Such Lndiv: 
.Is are
entitled to medical care in Army medical treatmet facilities :.i accordance
with the provisions of paragraph 4-62, AR 40-3.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

440
QOtJ'TEJt 3
O:WTRIX.C rSR .fJT ES
- .
c 
'. 
1i:., 
.-.-.. Ter escribus police. 
-.nd procc-ure., 
il
.
1 o' 
"' -c. conttcince- in Ci.,ter I, Oitic!• c?,il y in ,.! I
-" ", 
" 
'c" 
in,. 
.", 
tha ure of hu. .n sul,J.cta Is "o h, r: .
3-2. 
PLICY. 
1 o (-,Lract 
RI.oll be aw-.rdod for any rcscarch 
nll,'.'ir
tIh- tar of hoI..n .r1'-.1. 
ts until -l 
of the requ'r-PnLti of t1! rt"., 
'
have beca1 
.0 y t t.
a. 
SafuguardJnt; the ritrhts and welfare of all hurn suJect-" In
activities supported undercontracts with this Coumand is primarily the
responsibility of the contractor. 
In order to provide for the adcqu.tc
discharge of this responsibility, no contract shall be warded which
involves the use of human subjects unless the contractor's human use
comittee has reviewed and approved the proposed study, in accordance
vith the requirements of this regulation. 
This review shall determine
whether:
(1) 
The risks to tlke subjects are so outvcighed by the sum of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed the proposed study, in accordance
vith the requirements of this regulation. 
This review shall determine
whether:
(1) 
The risks to tlke subjects are so outvcighed by the sum of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

441
.
--o' 
' 
., 
j 
acn. tn 
"' 
t z .c. 
of ts 
k,t ,,
: . to,:, r 
a d-cJ.-cf.i t.; 
the ru!jcct tc rc. 
.
(2) 
: 
tts 1:t v:elfi.:c of amy such s 
%u! 
.cts I.i1 1
(3) 
e.:?]y 
t-ffectivc inve -d 
consqent tci-. be ebt.ned L-y
v: .'latc ,.','. 
, 
: ,.i2L. 
:-...le:J 
L- z 
+' 
c wth Le 
r; 
1~~t
.,. a~(., ;-.-,ce wi~t 
tli 
U , prvv',-r,nt;n 
c'f
(4) 
TS.- ,.onduct oA th. SLudy :ilX be revic:ed at tli .ely
intervels .
b. 
No contract involving hi: :on 
L-)jccts i-iIl be awardAd to an
Individual halcsn he is affili-'ted irith or sponsored by an orgaiization
Vaich can end does msswue responibilit, for the subjects involved.
3-3. 
SUBJ4SSIONS OF ASSURMICES. 
Any organization, other than an agency
of the Federal Government, applying for a contract isvulving human subjects
mast provide written assurances that it vill abide by the policy for the
protection of human subjects as contained in this reglation. 
If the
organization currently has no file with the Departmao 
of Health, Education,
and Welfare (ME1W) 
an approved general assurance, as provided for in Part 46
of Title 45 of the Code of Federal Regulations, this may be accomplished by

--- PAGE BREAK ---mao 
of Health, Education,
and Welfare (ME1W) 
an approved general assurance, as provided for in Part 46
of Title 45 of the Code of Federal Regulations, this may be accomplished by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

442
Adlhatting to this Cvw:.,,nd a state 
t that such g.crr. 
.
,.:l
apply equally to the study to be performed under thn con tr 
Ct 
w:.i chis
Camid (See Appetidix r). 
If the organization does .ot currenLly hav
am approval general asuranace oa 
e vith MM, tLn a spvriel assurene:
ast be negottat-d with this Conaud.
3-4. 
S 
CIAL A.StM1NCEiS. 
A speci-l 
assurance vill describe those
revw #=d iqplei-.ctatioa procedures applicable to :, sin Ie proj.,ct.
A special assuranct- vill not be solicdted or accepted front an ora--
Izat.Lo 
which h-. an approved general assurance currently on file with
MM 
in lieu of the sLatexant required by paragrapj 
3-3 ef t1,is rceul.t'.c.
An acceptable spe'.ial assurance shall:
a. 
Identify the cpccific protocol or existing contract by its
msaer, if known; by its full title, and by name of the principal
investigator. 
The special assurance s 
l be signed by the individual
imers o f a ommittee satisfying the requirements of Section 46.6 (b)
of Title 45 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and endorsed by
an appropriate official of the ormanization.
b. 
Describe the makeup of the omittee and identify each verker
by name; earned degrees, if my; position or occupation; representative
capacity& and by other pertinent indications of experience such as board
certification, licenses, etc., sufficient to describe each member's
chief anticipated -con'tributlons to aommttee deliberations. 
Any

--- PAGE BREAK ---tinent indications of experience such as board
certification, licenses, etc., sufficient to describe each member's
chief anticipated -con'tributlons to aommttee deliberations. 
Any

--- PAGE BREAK ---

443
erloyment or other elections p bieifec each mexabor and the orva.'-
ration shall be Identifie d i.e.# fuUl-tir. employee, part-tnq e:-loyes,
mezier of governing parel or board, paid consultant, or unpaid consult; :a;.*
c. 
Describe in pgueral tom the risks to sbjocts that the
oat~ittes recenise. ar tIrh ~rt 
In the study Sad Justify Its decision
that thcue tisLk 
arc so outueighed by sun of the benefit to the
subject and the importance of the kunoledge to be pined as to warrant
the cow-ttee's decision to pexndt the subject to accept these risks.
d. Describe the infortrd consent procedures to be qsed and ettach
copies of all approved consent forms and other Inforration vhich will be
presented to prospective subjects.
e. 
Doccribe procedures which the cour-ittee wil follow to insure
prompt reporting to the couittes of proposed changes in the protocol
end of any unanticipated problems involvinG risks to subjects or
others, aid to insure that say such problem, including adverse
reactions to biological*, drugs, radioisotope labelled drugs, or medical
devices are promptly reported to the Arm 
InvestiSatioual Drug Review
Board amid MM.
.f. Indicate at what tim istervals the coemLttee will meet to
proviAe for continuing review of the protocol. 
Such review must occur
no e.e then aualy.
,)
70-026 0 - 76 - 29

--- PAGE BREAK ---id MM.
.f. Indicate at what tim istervals the coemLttee will meet to
proviAe for continuing review of the protocol. 
Such review must occur
no e.e then aualy.
,)
70-026 0 - 76 - 29

--- PAGE BREAK ---

444
p.. 
Provide 
.. :TjlcC3 that:
(1) 
Io tn.Ner. of the cormittcc :;hcll be tav'olved in either t:
initial or coctin. ,,g ic:.'w C" any study in which lie has a conflictinZ
Interest, except to provide Jnforrntion requested b..! the corctte-,;
(2) 
The co.-:-ittee shall not con-,ist entirely of persons Vho
are officers, exploycce, agents, or othcnise associated ulth, the
organization, apcrL from their membership on the co.rirttee; and
(3) 
The co.aittce shall not cotsist entirely of nerbCrs of a
single profcssona:1 jroup.
3-5. 
CERTIFIc:TIG: S. 
All proposalc involving burzn qubjricts, -hct',er
at risk or not, riut be given revle,7 and approval prior to the rutrd of a
contract. Failure to provid. such review and approval at the tid-e of
subadasion of the proposal can delay the award of any contract. 
All pro,osti..:.,
other than those subi.-tted by an agency of the Federal Governmcnt, nust
contain a copy of the certification fc.rm ac-shown In Appendix C.
3-6. 
COENhACTOR'S RESPONSIBILITIES. 
The contractor bears the ultimate
responsibility for the health, safety and welfare of all human subjects
involved in research carried out as a part of the contract. 
This
Includes responsibility for insuring that all necessary clearances,
perstit, 
and/or co-ordination vith other agencies, whether Federal,
state or local, have been properly. effected. 
Contractor must always
bear tn wmid 
that, umlike certain other agencies ubich ohly impose
restrictions upon the use of hman subjects at risk. this Command
S
Imposes strict review qnd approval standards, as specified in this
1 
UWE1

--- PAGE BREAK ---rtain other agencies ubich ohly impose
restrictions upon the use of hman subjects at risk. this Command
S
Imposes strict review qnd approval standards, as specified in this
1 
UWE1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

445
regulation, upon all uses of human subjects whether at risk or not.
3-7. 
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATION. 
An addition to all other pertinent
contractual provisions, each contract awarded by this Command shall,
if the contract permits the use of human subjects, contain the "Use of
Ruman Subjects" clause set forth in Appendix D. 
If the contract does
Mt permit the use of human subjects, the contract shall contain the
,Prohibition of Use of Human Subjects" clause set forth in Appendix E.
3-8. 
DESCRIPTION OF MITHODS. 
Any proposal which involes the use of
human subjects will include, at the end of the "Methoos"-section of the
proposal, a separate evaluation consisting, at a minium, of the
following:
a. 
A description of the requirements for a subject population
ad rationale for using in this population any members of special
groups such as prisoners, children, the mentally disabled, or other-
groups whose ability to give voluntary consent may be questioned.
b. 
A description of the consent procedures to be followed,
including how and where informed consent will be obtained.
c. 
A description and assessment of any potential risks, and the
likelihood and seriousness of such risks. 
If methods of research
create potential risl~s, describe other methods, if any, that were
cqaidered and why they will not be used.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd the
likelihood and seriousness of such risks. 
If methods of research
create potential risl~s, describe other methods, if any, that were
cqaidered and why they will not be used.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

446
d. 
A description of procedures (including protection of confi-
dentiality) for protecting ega.nst or aiuluizIng Potential risks and
a assessment of their likely effectiveness.
e. 
An assessment of the potential benefits to be gained by the
subjects, as well as benefits which nay accrue to society in general,
as a result of the planned work.
f. A careful analysis of the risk-benefit ratio.
SCRD-SSJ
FOR THE (XOIRANDER:
FRACE F. JORMM
Colonel 
WC
-- 
Executive Off iier
DISTRIBUTION:
A, C &F

--- PAGE BREAK ---

447
1. 
tach conswmt £orn mest be tailored to met the specific conditions
Involved, cougterin the mature of the research, the class of humn
subjects. compensation or lack thersof, special requirements, and other
factors..
2. 
Wbasemver the human 
subject is to be compensated for his services,
the ce went form should set forth the amount of such compensation, and
the coditions attached thereto. 
If the subject is to receive compensation,
then. tLere mist be provisions to provide equitable compensation for services
actually performed if the subject either voluntarily or involuntarily fails
to complote all required services.
3. 
The followvmg additional clauses cr mdifiations thereof, should be
added to the consent form as appropriate:
a.. "this study involves the use of the-Anvestigational drugs
____ 
.........
___ 
I un4erstand that such drugs have previously been
us"dfo 
.. 
I also understand that although such drugs
wW have been previously used in the iner described on. the reverse of
this ps, they have not yet been approved by the Food and Drug
d 
tratioa for use in this manner by the general public."

--- PAGE BREAK ---een previously used in the iner described on. the reverse of
this ps, they have not yet been approved by the Food and Drug
d 
tratioa for use in this manner by the general public."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

448
b. 
"I understand that for my participation In this study I shall be
entitled to payment as follows:
_ 
and further understand that in the event I revoke my
consent or my participation is terminated for any other reason, I shall
be entitled to receive 
."
c. 
*I understand thAt I shall not be entitled to any payment for my
participation."
4. 
Consent forms to be signed by civilian employees. (see para 2-5)
should contain the following additional clauses:
"I understand thaS any time spent participating in this study during
my regularly scheduled duty hours will be considered as constructive duty
for which straight time rates shall be payable. 
I further understand that
ay time spent participating in this study during other than my regularly
scheduled duty hours, or while in a leave status, vill be considered as
vluntary overtime for which no payment way be made nor compensatory time
granted."

--- PAGE BREAK ---g other than my regularly
scheduled duty hours, or while in a leave status, vill be considered as
vluntary overtime for which no payment way be made nor compensatory time
granted."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

449
VOLUNTEER AGREEMENT I
(Kiitary Personnel)
I, 
_________ 
having full capacity to consent, do hereby
volunteer to participate In a research study entitled:
under the" direction of
The Implications of my voluntary participation; the nature, duration
and purpose; the methods and means by which it is to be conducted; and
the inconveniences and hazards which may reasonably b& expected havc been
explained to me by _._ 
and are set forth on
the reverse side of this Agreewent, which I have initialed. 
I have been
given an opportunity to ask questions concerning this investigational
study, &nd any such questions have been answered to ny full and complete
satisfaction.
I understand that I Lay at any time during the course of this study
revoke my consent, end withdraw from the study without-PYeJudice;
however, I may be required to undergo certain further examinations, if
In the opinion of the attending physician, such examinations are necessary
for my health or well being.
Signature 
Date
/
I vas present during the explanation referred to above, as wel 
as the
volunteer's opportunity for questions, and hereby witness his signature.
Signature 
Date

--- PAGE BREAK ---g.
Signature 
Date
/
I vas present during the explanation referred to above, as wel 
as the
volunteer's opportunity for questions, and hereby witness his signature.
Signature 
Date

--- PAGE BREAK ---

On this side of the Volunteer Agreement, the principal investigator
shall set forth full details concerning the investigational study,
insofar as such would affect or influence the tentative subject in
any way. 
This explanation should be worded in non-technical language
so that it can be clearly understood by subject who has no partic-
ular familiarity with radical terednolo8y. 
It is suggested that
-when technical terms are necessary, they should be defined i 
the
space belew the explanation. 
The subject should place his initials
at the end of the last line of explanation.
A proper explanation should, at a uin1/un provide the answers to the
foUowing questions:
1. What will be administered or done to the subject?
2. Now long will the subject's participstio lost?
3. To what tests or eaxantations wUll the subject be required to
subuidt?
4. 
Why Is the Investigation being conducted?
5. 
Has this particular study been done previsly, and if so,
with what results?
6. 
What Inconveniences or discouforts is the subject likely to
experience?
7. What riaks or hazards cau be reasesobly aticipated
8. 
What steps will be taken to prevent or adnilse these risks
* or hazards? 
/
0 
Wbat benefits, if any, may the subject expect from parteicpation
In th)v study?
-' 
10. 
1Mhat appropriate alternative procedures, If am*, MAht be more
advantageous to the subject?

--- PAGE BREAK ---Wbat benefits, if any, may the subject expect from parteicpation
In th)v study?
-' 
10. 
1Mhat appropriate alternative procedures, If am*, MAht be more
advantageous to the subject?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

451
VOWKINT 
ACREDWEtNT II
(Civilian Adults)
l,__ 
, having attained my
birthday, and otherwise having full capacity to consent,
do hereby volunteer to participate in an Investigational study
entitled:
under the direction of
The implications of my voluntary participation; the nature, duration
and purpose; the methods end uwa:ns Ly which it is to be conducted; and
the inconveniences and hazards which ray reasonably be expected have
been explained to me by ___________________, 
and are
set forth on the reverse side of this Agreement, which I have initialed.
I have been given an opportunity to ask questions concerning this in-
vestigational study, and any such questions have been answered to my
full and complete satisfaction.
I understand that I uay at any tine during the course of this study
revoke my consent, and withdraw from the study without prejudice; how-
ever, I may be requested to undergo certain further examinations are neces-
sary for my health or well being.
Signature 
Date
I was present curing the explanation referred to above, as well as the
Volunteer's opportunity for questions, and hereby witness his signature.
Witness' Signature 
Date

--- PAGE BREAK ---ature 
Date
I was present curing the explanation referred to above, as well as the
Volunteer's opportunity for questions, and hereby witness his signature.
Witness' Signature 
Date

--- PAGE BREAK ---

452
On this side of the Volunteer Agreement, the principal investigator
shall set forth full details concerning the investigational study,
insofar as such would affect or influence the tentative subject in
any way. This explanation should be worded in non-technical language
so that it can be cleary understood by asubject vho has no partic-
ular familiarity with medical terninology. It is suggested that
when technical terms are necessary, they should be defined in the
space below the explanation. The subject should place his initials
at the end of the last line of explanation.
A proper explanation should, at a lnirsu:, provide the-answers to the
followinZ questions:
1. 
What will be administered or done to the subject?
2. How loi g will the subject's participation last?
3. 
To what tests or examinations will the subject be required to
submit?
4. 
Why is the investigation being conducted?
5. 
Has this particular study been done previously, and if so,
with what results?
6. 
What inconveniences or discomforts is the subject likely to
experience?
7. 
What risks or hazards can be reasonably anticipated?
B. What steps will be taken to prevent or minimize these risks
or hazards?
9. 
What benefits, if any, may the subject expect from participation
in this study?
10. 
What appropriate alternative procedures, if any, might be more
advantageous to the subject?

--- PAGE BREAK ---9. 
What benefits, if any, may the subject expect from participation
in this study?
10. 
What appropriate alternative procedures, if any, might be more
advantageous to the subject?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

453
VOlI TEER AGWEWPNT III
(Children "der Legal Age of Consent
and Adults Not Competent to Give Infoered Consent)
I/We,
having full capacity to consent, do-bereby consent for wy/our
Relationship 
Name of Participsat
to participate in an investigational study entitled:
under the direction of
The implications of his/her participation; the nature, duration and
purpose; the methods and means by vhich it is to be conducted; and
the Inconveniences and hazards which may reasonably be expected have
been explained to ne/us by 
-,
and are set forth on the reverse side of this ;,rcerent, which 1/we have
intialed. 
I/we have been given an opportunity to ask questions con-
cerning this Investifational study, and any such questions have been
answered to my/our full and complete satisfaction.
I/we understand that I/we may at say tine during the course of the inves-
tigational study revoke my/our consent, and withdraw the above named
participant from the study without prejudice; however, lie/she may be requested
to undergo certain further examinations, If -In the opinion of the
attending physician, such examinations are necessary for his/her health
or well being.
Signature 
Relationship 
Date
Signature 
, 
Relationship 
Date,
I was present during the explanation referred to above, as well as the
Volunteer's opportunity for questions, and hereby witness his signature.
Witness' Signature
' 
Date

--- PAGE BREAK ---ip 
Date,
I was present during the explanation referred to above, as well as the
Volunteer's opportunity for questions, and hereby witness his signature.
Witness' Signature
' 
Date

--- PAGE BREAK ---

454
On this side of the Volunteer Atreement, the principal investigator
shall set forth full details concerning the investigational study,
insofar as such would affect or influence the tentative subject in
any way. This Qxplantion should be worded in non-technical language
so that it can be c.#arlv ur.derstood by subject who has no partic-
ular farailiarity with r-adic.l terminology. 
It is suggested that
when technical terms are necesary, they should be defined in the
how 
space below the explanation. 
The subject should place his initials
at the end of the last line of explanation.
A proper explanation should, at a minitum, provide the answers to the
following questions:
1. 
Miat will be adrministcred-or done to the subject?
2. How lonZ will the subject's participation last?
3. To what tests or exazinctions will the subject be required to
submit?
4. hy is the investigation being conducted?
5. Has this particular study been done previously, and if-so,
with what results?
6. What inconveniences or discomforts is the subject likely to
experience?
7. What risks or hazards can be reasonably anticipated?
8. 
Mhat steps will be taken to prevent or minimize these risks
or hazards?
9. 
What benefits, if any, may the subject expect from participation.
in this study?
0.lO 
What appropriate alternative procedures, if any, might be more
advantageous to the subject?
N

--- PAGE BREAK ---What benefits, if any, may the subject expect from participation.
in this study?
0.lO 
What appropriate alternative procedures, if any, might be more
advantageous to the subject?
N

--- PAGE BREAK ---

455
APPERDIX B
Cousander
US Army VxdIcal Research and Development Command
Washington, 
DC 
20314
Dear Sir:
The 
(name or org.aniyr.tion) 
will corply with the policy for the protection
of the rights and welfare of all human subjects in atty. research supported
directly or Itdirectly by grants or contracts with the US Army . medical
Research and Dovelopr.nt Co,-uand, as contained in yout regulation nuwr4ber
70-25. 
In fulfillment of its assurances this organizatibn w-ill continue to
maintain a committee, in accordance with the general assurance currently
on file with the Impartwnt of Health, Education, znd Wel*are, competent
to review projects and ectivIties that invloves huran subjects. 
Thie
committee has the responsibility to determine for each protocol that:
(a) 
The rights and uelfare of subjects are adequately protected,
(b) 
The risks to the subjects are so outweighed by the sun of
the benefit to the subject and the Irportance of the knowledge to be
gained as to warrant a decision to allow the subject to accept these risks,
(c) 
Legally effective informed consent will be obtained by
adequate and appropriate 
ethods in accordance with your regulation, and
(d) 
The conduct of the study will be revie-ed at timely intervals.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ve informed consent will be obtained by
adequate and appropriate 
ethods in accordance with your regulation, and
(d) 
The conduct of the study will be revie-ed at timely intervals.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

456
APPENDIX C
The US Army Kedical Researoh and Development Cosm.and (USA4RDC) requires
assurances from organizations conducting research involving human subjects
that they will carry out initial and continuing review of all such research
In'accordauce with the policy and instructions contained in Section 46 of
Title 45 of the Code of Federal Regulations and US1.PRDC Regulation 70-25.
Certification of the performance of the initial review and approval should
accompany the proposal wihen submitted, but in any event oust be submitted
prior to actual award of a contract or grant. 
Each organization vublmittitp,
a proposal mist complete the following, checking only the one applicable
box:
El A. 
This proposal includes research involving human subjects.
Our organization has an accepted and currently valid general
assurance on file with DHEV. 
Our committee has reviewed and
approved this research protocol on 
_, 
in
accordance with the r.ssurance provided to DIE7U, and will provide
for continuing revic, as specified in that general assurance.
B. 
This proposal includes research involving human subjects.
Our organization h.s an accepted and cur:ently valid general
assurance on file with D11I1. 
Our cornittee has not yet revitwecd
this research protocol, but will do so on or about
In accordance with the assurance provided to DIM.. 
It is under-
stood that a cartificatLion of such revicn, by submitting a new
copy of this form with Bloc; A checked and completed, and
properly signed, will be required before the contract or grant
can be awarded.
C. 
This proposal includes research involving human subjects.
@Our 
organization does not have an accepted and currently valid
general assurance on file with DREW. 
Attached hereto is the nec-
essary documentation to meet the requirec'.nts fo a special
assurance as set forth in paragraph 3-4 of USAMR'J)C Regulation 70-25.
E 
D. 
This proposal does not include research Involving human subjeWcts,
and we hereby certify that human subjects will not be used in any
research performed under this grant or contract without specific,
prior written approval.
(Signature)
(Title of Proposal)
(Position)
(Name of Organization)
(Proposal Date)
(Hame of Prinrn .1 .
.n any
research performed under this grant or contract without specific,
prior written approval.
(Signature)
(Title of Proposal)
(Position)
(Name of Organization)
(Proposal Date)
(Hame of Prinrn .1 .
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

457
APPENDIX D
USE OF H -W SUBJECTS
(a) 
The following definitions are used in this clause:
(1) 
At risk means that the human subject may be exposed to the
possibility of harm - physical, biological, psychological, sociological,
or other -
as a consequence of an act or omission which goes beyond the
applicationi of those established and accepted methods or procedures which
are in his best interests or which increase ordinary risks of daily life,
including the recognized risks inherent in his chosen, occupation or field
of service.
(2) 
Human Sub!'ect weans aity human being who, knowingly or
unknowingly, 
is subjected to an act otomission, whether at risk or not,
the object of which is to contribute to knowledge to be gained as a part
of work to be performed under the scope of this contract.
(b) 
The Contractor, before undertaking to perform any study involving
human subjects, whether at risk or not, shall insure that the following
minimum conditions are complied with:
(1) 
The proposed study has been reviewed and approved by a
couittee meeting the requirements set forth in Chapter 46 of Title 45 of
the Code of Federal Regulations.
(2) 
The number of human subjects used will be kept to the minimum
number which will reasonably achieve the required results.
(3) 
The study must be such as to contribute significantly to

--- PAGE BREAK ---e number of human subjects used will be kept to the minimum
number which will reasonably achieve the required results.
(3) 
The study must be such as to contribute significantly to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

458
medical knowledge, and have reasonable prospects of yielding important
results which are not obtainable by other sethods or means.
(4) The study will be conducted only by persons possessing the
requisite scientific qualifications. The highest degree of skill and care
vil be required during all stages of study of persons vwi conduct or
assist in the study.
(5) 
Th human subject vil be Informed that at any time during
the course of his participation he has the right to revoke his consent and
vithdrav from further participation without prejudice to himself.
(6) 
Participation by subjects will be immediately terminated if 
it
subsequently appears that the risk to the subjects Istsignificantly
greater than anticipated at the tine review and approval was granted.
(7) 
There shall be no greater intrusion itLo the privacy of the
human subject than is absolutely necessary for the conduct of the study
Involved. 
Except for the submission of reports and other data required by
this contract, any information obtained about human subjects as a results
of his participation, shall be held as confidential as the law allows.
(8) 
The study will be conducted so as to avoid all unnecessary
physical or mental discomfort, suffering, or injury.
(9) 
No study will be conducted if there Ls any inherent reason
to believe that death or disabling injury is likely to occur. 
Sufficient
msimal or laboratory experiments, or other evaluations, must have been
completed to give assurance of-acceptable risks prior to the use of
human subjects.
(10) The degree of risk to be taken will never exceed that which
Is justified by the benefit to the subject and/or the humanitarian
Importance of the knowledge to be gained.

--- PAGE BREAK ---jects.
(10) The degree of risk to be taken will never exceed that which
Is justified by the benefit to the subject and/or the humanitarian
Importance of the knowledge to be gained.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

459
(11) Proper preparatior.s will be made, and adequate facilities
provided, to protect the subject against all foreseeable possibilities of
Injury, disability, or death. 
This includes hospitalization and medical
treatment as may be required.
(12) 
Human subjects will have no physical or mental conditions
which will make participation more hazardous for them than it would be
for normal healthy persons, unless such condition is a necessary pre-
requisite fcr the particular study involved. 
In any such case, the use
of human subjects with such pre-existing conditions must have been
specifically described end justified in the scope of work to be performed
under this contract.
(13) 
The scientifically qualified person conducting the study,
and each member of his research team, will be prepared to terminate the subject's
participation at any stage if he has reason to believe, in the exercise of
the good faith, superior skill, and careful judgement required of him, that
continuation is likely to result in injury, disability, or death to the
human subject.
(c) 
The Contractor, before permitting any person to participate as a
human subject,. whether at risk or not, shall insure that the following
minimum conditions are complied with:
(1) 
Legally effective informed consent v11 be obtained by
adequate and appropriate methods in accordance with the provisions of this
clause.
(2) 
All consent mudt be voluntary. 
It mst be the knowing consent
of the individual or his legally authorized representative, so situated as
to be able to exercise free power of choice without any use of foree,
70-026 0 - 76 - 30

--- PAGE BREAK ---knowing consent
of the individual or his legally authorized representative, so situated as
to be able to exercise free power of choice without any use of foree,
70-026 0 - 76 - 30

--- PAGE BREAK ---

460
fraud, deceit, duress, contrainto coercion, or lwful or Improper
inducement. 
The basic elements of Information rwcessary to such consent
Include:
(1) 
A fair explarostion of the proceAsres to be followed, and
their purposes, Including identification of any procedures which are
experimental;
(i) 
A description of any attendant discomforts or risks
reasonably to be anticipated;
.(iii) 
A description of any benefits reasonably to be
anticipated;
(iv) A disclosure of any appropriate alternative procedures
that might be advantageous to the subject;
(v) 
An offer to answer any questions concernin- the procedure;
and
(vi) 
An instruction that the subject is free to revoke his
consent and to discontinue participation at any t~za without prejudice to
himself-
(3) Exculpatory language through which the subject is made to waive,
or appear to waive, any of his legal rights, includingg any release from
liability for negligence, is prohibited.
. .
(4) 
Consent by a subject- or his legally authorized representative
shall be obtained in writing whenever it is reascaably possible to do so.
The consent form may be rea4 to the subject or his legally authorized
representative, but in any event he or his legallp authorized represent-

--- PAGE BREAK ---r it is reascaably possible to do so.
The consent form may be rea4 to the subject or his legally authorized
representative, but in any event he or his legallp authorized represent-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

461
stive must be given adequate opportunity to read it 
and to ask any
questions they might have. 
This consent form should then be signed by
the subject or his leglly authorized representative and by a witness nor
directly involved in the study. 
Oral consent may be used only when it
has been specifically described and justified in the scope of work to be.
performed under this contract or approved in writing by the contracting
officer. When so authorized and used, oral consent is subject to all the same
standards as aply to written consent# except that the signature of the
subject or his legally authorized representative is not required.
(d) The Contractor shall not undertake to conduct either the clinical
pharmacology or clinical trails of an investigational drug unless this
contract contains the clause entitled "Clinical Study of Investigational
Drugs".
(a) Prisoners of var will not be used under any circumstances.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

462
APrIDTX E
?FORIBITIOU O USE OF IrUMAN SUBJECTS
Notwithstmading any other provision contained in this contract, or
incorporated by reference hereln,-the contractor is expressly forbidden to
use human subjects in any manner whatsoever. 
The contractor.agrees not to
come into contract with, use or employ, any human subjects for research,
experimontation, tests or other treatment under the scope of work as set
out in this contract.
VP

--- PAGE BREAK ---es not to
come into contract with, use or employ, any human subjects for research,
experimontation, tests or other treatment under the scope of work as set
out in this contract.
VP

--- PAGE BREAK ---

403
iMLICY STA'TLK
POLICY WMER 
SUBJECT
73-70-25 
Use of Human Subjects in Medical Research
ACKGROUjtD
The US Army Medital Research and Development Command has not pre-
viously "ad a clear policy on the use of volunteers in medical
research.
1. The US Army Modical Research and Development Command (USAMRDC)
will not support contracts or grants for medical research to be
conducted outside the United States of America when human subjects
are considered to be at risk except where the research is of un-
usually high priority. In that exceptional case special arrange-
ments must be made for direct supervision and monitoring of the
research by the USAMRDC. Under no circumstances will contracts or
rants for medical research be supported outside the USA using
umans who are subjected to limited civil freedoms as a result
of being inmates of correctional institutions or residents/clients
of institutions for the mentally ill or mentally retarded, or
similar institutions.
2. 
Before approving any contract or grant in COXUS or OCONUS (or
any extension thereof--with or without funds) involving human sub-
jects deemed to be at risk, the Director of the appropriate re-
search directorate will insure that a site visit has been made to
the research organization. The site visit team will consist of,
at a minimum, the director of the appropriate research directorate,
or his designee, and the Judge Advocate, USAMRDC, or his designee.
When appropriate, consideration should be given in each case to
.including in the site visit team the Chairman, Army Investigational
Drug Review Board, the directors of other research directorates,
and other interested parties from the Office of The Surgeon General,
or their designees.
3. Furthermore, whether the subject is deemed to be at risk or not,
approval for the study (whether extramural or intramural) must be
obtained from the Commander, USAMRDC, when it involves the use of
prisoners, other institutionalized persons, children (under 18
years of age), or pregnant subjects. 
For purposes of this para-
graph, a human fetus is considered to be a child, whether living
or not.
WiI OXITY AND/Olt SOURCE 
TW.ED 
: 
WE AM $I(; 
TUR 
Of ORIGINXATO
VOCC USAc 
DALE E. 'MOFF. Colonel, 
MSC
Chief, Research Planning Office "USA,R9C_
I~ 
~ 
~~m 
q 
.
)cj,
AC 4 F 
INETH R. DIRKS, M.D.,iG, )PC
Commander. 
USAR IDC
0 ?11 666
EDITION Of I FES 70, IS OiSOLETE.USAc 
DALE E. 'MOFF. Colonel, 
MSC
Chief, Research Planning Office "USA,R9C_
I~ 
~ 
~~m 
q 
.
)cj,
AC 4 F 
INETH R. DIRKS, M.D.,iG, )PC
Commander. 
USAR IDC
0 ?11 666
EDITION Of I FES 70, IS OiSOLETE.

--- PAGE BREAK ---464
S3AUG W75
REVIEW PROCESS FOR RESEARCH INVOLVING HU1IAN SUBJECTS IN THE US ARMY
I 
HUMAN USE REVIEW OFFICE, OFFICE OF THE SURGEON GENERAL
In October of 1974 The Surgeon General established the Ruman Use Review
Office (HURO) under the direction of the Assistant Surgeon General for
• Research and Development.

The HURO was charged with administering and
coordinating activities of the Army Investigational Drug Review Board (AIDRB),
The US Army Medical Research and Development Command (USAHRDC) Contract
Review Board, and The Surgeon General's Human Use Committee and Clinical
Investigation Committee in order to insure uniform application of ethical
standards for hyman research studios conducted within or sponsored by the
Army Medical Department (AHEDD).

The Chief of this office serves as the
point of contact and action officer for Office of The Surgeon General (OTSG)
actions involving human subjects in medical research, including: 
proponency
for and review of Department of the Army and Army Medical Department regulations
concerning human subject studies; proposing N(EDD policy in accordance with
present and future ethical standards adopted by the Government; and review of
compliance with Army policy regarding the use of human subjects in research.

An important part -of his responsibility is to handle action on proposals
submitted to The Surgeon General under provisions of Army Regulation 70-25,
"Use of Volunteers as Subjects of Research."
The HURO is tha central Army processing point for all extramural and
intramural human subjects research which require approval under provisions
of the Army Regulation cited above.

The staff Includes a physician, two
pharmacists with advanced training in pharmacology and a biostatisticLan.

Legal advice is provided by attorneys in the Office of the Attorney Advisor,
USAMRDC.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The staff Includes a physician, two
pharmacists with advanced training in pharmacology and a biostatisticLan. Legal advice is provided by attorneys in the Office of the Attorney Advisor,
USAMRDC. This medical, scientific, and legal staff identifies problem areas
and requests outside review, clarifications and/or revision before protocols
are submitted for approval to appropriate comittees or The Surgeon General. The gURO is the authorized channel through which Army investigators communicate
with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). U - CO9OITTEES .ON RESEARCH INVOLVING HU AI SUBJECTS. Army research involving human subjects fall into two broad categories:-
Research, Development, Test and Evaluation (RDTE) supported programs and the
Clinical Investigation Program. RDTE programs, such as the USAHRDC research
effort, are reviewed in accordance with AR 70-25 and, if investigational
drugs are involved, with AR 40-7. Clinical Investigt iost projects in eight
Army Medical Centers and a few smaller hospitals are performed in the context
of patient care situations. They are handled in accordance with AR 40-38 and
AR 40-7. Strict interpretation of these various regulations would require that
ROTE funded projects would only be reviewed by a Department of the Army (DA)
level committee (AIDRB) if the project involved use of an Investigational
drug. In contrast, clinical investigation projects vouldalways be reviewed
by at least two headquarters committees (TSG Human Use Committee and Clinical
Investigation Committee) and by a third group (AIDRI) if investigational drugs
I#

--- PAGE BREAK ---ldalways be reviewed
by at least two headquarters committees (TSG Human Use Committee and Clinical
Investigation Committee) and by a third group (AIDRI) if investigational drugs
I#

--- PAGE BREAK ---

465
are involved. In practice, the OTSC committee system has been made more
uniform by combining the groups into one which considers project plans regard-
less of whether they receive ROTE or Clinical Investigation funding. This
committee, which will be officially known as the Human Subject Research
Review Board after I September 1975, to composed of the professionally qualified
members required for the AIDRB by AR 40-7 and the "comunity oriented" members
previously on the OTSG Human Use Comittee. The group previously known as
the OTSG Clinical investigation Committee will be disestablished after
I September 1975 since responsibility for fiscal monitorship of the Clinical
Investigation Program will be transferred to a subordinate Comand.
The combined AIDRB and Human Use Committee includes the following members
by position: 
.
Assistant Surgeon General for Research and Development, or his designee,
Chairman
OTSC Nedical Consultant
OTSG Surgical Consultant
USAMRDC Director of Medical Research
OTSC Pharmacy Consultant
OTSG Psychiatry Consultant
OTS0 Preventive Hedicine Consultant
OTSG Family Practice Consultant
OTSG Nurse Consultant
Chaplain Ruprehentative
USAMRDC Attorney Advisor
Librarian, Joint Hedical Library (civilian)
The Committees handled over 300 research proposals during fiscal year 1975.
Provisions for the protection of human subjects and the detailed content of
consent agreements were the primary concern of the members. 
The careful
review is reflected by the fact that a large number of proposals were d4s-
approved or deferred pending revision of the consent procedures. 
As a minimum,
the HURO staff and committees apply the standards contained in current Depart-
ment of Health, Education, and Welfare (DHEW) regulations and other directives,
even when they do not have the force of law within the Department of Defense
(DOD). 
For example, when the recent moratorium on fetal research was promulgated,
the files were searched to be sure such research was not being conducted within
the Army Clinical Investigation Program. The committees have paid particular
attention to special classes of subjects involved in Army research and have
often required special consent procedures appropriate to a particular project.
2rogram. The committees have paid particular
attention to special classes of subjects involved in Army research and have
often required special consent procedures appropriate to a particular project.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---es have paid particular
attention to special classes of subjects involved in Army research and have
often required special consent procedures appropriate to a particular project.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

466
III DESCRIPTION OF REVIEW/APPROVAL MECHANISMS FOR INTRAMJRAL RESEARCH
IVOLVIMG HUMAN SUBJECTS
A. 
Army Medical Department Hospitals
Protocols from the Army Medical Centers (teaching hospitals) are locally
reviewed by a Clinical Investigation Committee and a Human Use Committee as
outlined in AA 40-38. 
All protocols Involving human subjects are forwarded
te OTSG for approval before subjects may participate. 
Under provisions of
the "Interim Change" to AR 40-38 that will be effective on I September 1975.
the iUNO will review those protocols and present them to the Human Subject
Research Review Board if they involve: 
(1) Investigational drugs or radio-
pharmaceuticals in humans; (2) the use of fetuses, children, prisoners or
mentally disabled persons as subjects; (3) exposure of subjects to unusual
risk. The board will review any other proposal as directed by The Surgeon
General. 
Protocols coming from smaller facilities without established review
committees must all be reviewed by the OTSG committee. 
-
Local commanders and representatives of The Inspector General are responsible
for determining compliance with-TSG directives on consent procedures. 
Annual
reports on the progress of clinical investigation projects and separate detailed
reports to AIDRS on investigation drug projects are sent to the HURO. 
A
planned revision of AR 40-38 will provide guidance fos Medical Center Human
Use Committees to increase representation by non-DODi personnel and to provide
more detailed supervision of projects Involving special classes of subjects or
unusual risk.
B. 
US Army Medical Research and Development Command Laboratories
Propoals to study human subjects in USAMtDC laboratories are submitted to
3U1O for approval by The Surgeon General under provision of AR 70-25.
Laboratory human use committees are not required by that regulation.
In practice, the laboratories have ad hoc and/or established professional
review boards coupled of laboratory professional personnel which look at
projects primarily from the standpoint of subject safety. Laboratories also
utilize SUman Use Comittees of Army Medical Centers located in close proximity
to them. 
USARDC Regulation 70-25 on Use of Volunteers in Research will
formally establish Human Use Committees at research laboratories.
/
Protocols submitted to OTSG are reviewed by HURO staff and presented to
the Human Subject Research Review Board if they involve Investigational drugs,
special subjects or unusual risk as specified above for Medical Centers. --bow
risk protocols not involving drugs are approved directly by the Assistknt
Surgeon General for Research and 
evelopment. 
Yearly Command visits by
USAKHDC Ueadquarters personnel provide an opportunity to review laboratory
comiance with consent procedures.
3by the Assistknt
Surgeon General for Research and 
evelopment. 
Yearly Command visits by
USAKHDC Ueadquarters personnel provide an opportunity to review laboratory
comiance with consent procedures.
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.467
C. AMY trojects from Outside the Kedicel 3".c 
t
Propoxab which are submitted froA Oter Army qpacLos in aeordsA. with
Al 70-25 and An 40-? are ve1ved by the 
= sad n.ed- is to same fehlon
outlined abvw. 
, 
OTO h". sew raed otbe AM aMisetes to Interpret the
leapos¢ of A 70-25 broadly to luacoe alL experiamsts which sy epose
pertiCIPOnts to risk eve. tbhoug. the ptoJOct prOposents may Consider the testing
to be primartly as o0arst 
al exaoowtis.a of proytepe vs4bpaYv of eqtpmeat.
Ifs tesot of sa 
s ilftra of voiele, for nAVgLOe Way pofbly oxpoaq soblects
to rska twes hot acreso. 
Noise, or fumes, the Pu 41i is e 
eda4 
St m dotalt
to be *ue tbot the subjects ase f9lly Inftensd volumteers w4d to rodugy risk
Sa Mwcb as poatle., A lerp muwt of im sad Wort is 
lm sse t 
ired to
adoq tely rplew tests of tis 
typo bluess bofs ndqw udlitory 0tsiebel
soM6sue0 
akos It 61,fdoua 
to a Lo&wuisb e 
rly bat teeks eve gOee 
LY
"io the Us*e of 
fyI
4. 
I. 
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ired to
adoq tely rplew tests of tis 
typo bluess bofs ndqw udlitory 0tsiebel
soM6sue0 
akos It 61,fdoua 
to a Lo&wuisb e 
rly bat teeks eve gOee 
LY
"io the Us*e of 
fyI
4. 
I. 
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

48
' 
; "1 
"A 
PI /; 
.1'!T ':" YI 1 ; AVY
* 
~~~~OFaILL? 
O;4 s. :.&Il:Yr*
. .
., 
W 
Y A S 1 ; c ' 
. ::. C . ;.O z l.o
'Wo.'"I:ZT 
390:'- v
OP 07H
6cr I0.
Z8 April 1969
.j,,.\, I:..;arC: :,:o..9
rom: 
,r." 
o the 1:-vy
TO: 
I)Diributl$.n J,i,
flubj: 
U.;n of vol.u.-.t. 
a.s stubjects in reccsrch, devop..ent,
teoult, and ovfr.;ttion.
)WS: 
(t) 
;; mr- of tle .
: Dpt:bcnt Cnapter 20, Rleccarch
mayl rPanvcr.e-,:.t, l'ar :.iph 20-4, Ui~e of Vohwuxc.rs
Dic1:. 
(3.) 
i.'efu.iVomncrConsecnt DI-ze~nt
3. 
x*. 
Ti pre.crlbe policies ford prozoitres of flic 
of::ui 
i
The ";7-I.. 
,. 
,v'r1:' 
t::"-' 
4 ' vn] u~r..rr si' 
'..e' 3 
.n ve':.c~: ' _e.1C;::,.::,
tt., 
v 
.. 
"'e 
1 
~ 
(I (l.~:,v;.) c:,'..'h;A 
ted by,, 
.i .ii, 
or for ti' 
3]'v:.Iv:t"
34h'",5 :",r.n 
h 
., bei.; 
(rtre exrpnt 
.- 
oxjo.:a0 t 
hto ::z',
e '' 
' '. 
4 
.* 
.I.4...,b 
......... 
* 
d..- : 
.
..
:.. 
I... .
U...?.. 
-
,.q;z- u., 
rr. epp.,-c t UJ'f." ro,.-t or Vi.-; ii-
of 
.
.
p.-mnc, v- m" vol :iv:: 
pu. ""n m"
piri.craen:; 
; :,h ich th.. experin-nt.u! du- test.ir.- ha.a no rcaltioi-hip to the
cauw.u e" thcir beir, on tie ick UiAt.
2. 
rov.I 
In h 
uce of voluvtcers c 
subjcctr, In hazardou. c;:puri-
ment..i :,1 ..;on3, 
it 
o* 
oun; 
hrit r.1-ri 
-
UM cC,.:zar-,erS, selcn..ff ic
ani tee.cl 
1 pro-rllw :.:xr.Lcrs, 
ml project directca-3 )i-vceel 
re-
r.poci,.1.3'01s leon h z.'l 
and 1v;i:A1 
.n nature. 
It h 
1o::; bz;ct r.. 
.
% th .t)'o 
c.hr~: 
tl;i 
vi~=m test subjects ;grc 
..o .by
imee :' 
.:/ 
~ 
~ 
rf Joe>=cI-Z.' 
£c~lr 
of ,jdjCa!j SCienee, tUfeo7'pace 
'.o 
%
nnAlu~c'; 
explc:.;;-:tion. 
Silh 
r,%,-oltJ1cr, ",hich vere-c r.itte al 
;ns
hiv.n be;.,p. diwir4; luha Secnd World War srced as Ca deesi\, factor In
the 
by-LACTn 
17 th l:orl6 EzI. 
t.zArociJat..n of a cemx'3y eteted 00;!C of
mepdch]. cth:ics. 
It 
ir neceptcd Unitcd Statc3 n tional un:t D art: : 'at 
of
D 'on:e. pnllcy 
-at t.e ue of i]tan subjects be b~iel upon volvJt'Ur,',
itnform'.'t ecnct i:. 
m:e 
ca Cfi.'-I -to cxperiment3 or tests which aro
nrcor.se"'r/, 
1.ctiCff.C:y so&ul, an1 reaLsomlbly cafe.
3. 
3D.fittois. 
P-,r'tim purpoie of ihio Inhi tretion, ha?.ardouc con.l-
tiom' or i-.fc.yiAh. itre thboc* 
whichh precent rlsk of privation, dlzer-crt,
1BESTU 
VYIEf.C:y so&ul, an1 reaLsomlbly cafe.
3. 
3D.fittois. 
P-,r'tim purpoie of ihio Inhi tretion, ha?.ardouc con.l-
tiom' or i-.fc.yiAh. itre thboc* 
whichh precent rlsk of privation, dlzer-crt,
1BESTU 
VYIE

--- PAGE BREAK ---Lsomlbly cafe.
3. 
3D.fittois. 
P-,r'tim purpoie of ihio Inhi tretion, ha?.ardouc con.l-
tiom' or i-.fc.yiAh. itre thboc* 
whichh precent rlsk of privation, dlzer-crt,
1BESTU 
VYIE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

469
(ii brCr, ),.i, 
rJ'y4ictL] W- ) ,L.,1t!I Ji•jury, or decth G-t',r 
than %1.c
hrmmrda. 
inwrnt 
I tli-nin 
or wwk. vithii ui:t-cptcd (. o -cu)t~Loia
18. P olc. 
Cit'nin b:w.e .rincJplc ; its.t be obreryed to nittify Li:r)al
id lovrl co-weptn. 
'Aeu , re: 
t
a. 
Vohultalw connen. i 
esneW.Atil.
(1) 
'mie volmitc"e 
rnvit havo ).cAl cr.ptc ty to fi'v. consent,.
NO Vill be so sit-t ted rc. kto be ablo t.o ve'cil ue true pl.zr" of 0h-. ce,
wSt-hu'; 
h 
J, crr:-w-caii of* any v].e':ent of 
rcrce, deccit, 
Cturl 
, or
ultcerlor :£or?-i o&1%~nrJ.~ 
or cpOc*z; :). 
Heo will Istom :Aciiciwt k,.':%I'-
Ldge Vi, 
cIt roh))3io:t of l'O 
.:,.entuc of he subjuct, ..tA.vr invo1';,:;
to enab]e bli: 
t.o -
u 
v u rit .i 
arAd me,l tt.ened dccit;on. 
OumA
)}ncytlc;.L:c Vj 
be provc*.l toc the Yro.unter i.n ruch a nmcnrir an not to
co.ro., i-o thP 
ic 
.or.. 
Tuz h . wU..l be tc-M', prior to rcceptnc f or
Mr. coo'tnt., i.10 )r:tU. 
iprvxLr•-A':t 
dit.timc:a, Id 
pu.P.e of the (2'rr-
L:(.nt; t'e 
w-- 
tj:o, 
;; 
-
by vhi; 11h It to be coM-A..Ated; iei the ;r,-rn-
vwioncec. a;I ;zrds 
cdcd 
;- 
.3 in such a wn..y an mA.; 14-o in':ml. ' 
A
Vie re 
Nto. 
Jie 1u131 b: fuly 
"::., 
of 
ie cffectu u;,c-a bit; ht'-ttWh
or pc.!:a -.40.A r7.y 
rc. u't. "v . h.' 
1... 
.
..
i::lt. 
i 
111.i be r:.-de t 
rr:kervt:n. c.trly tll. t., at any 
.-- D 
-,
the cnizzwe e01 t.huce 
.;:'c 
t, he r%0: I :AvC th' 
O'*'.t 
tVo C'ev.! 
hi; 
.
Awl to vith, 
--.
w from. 
eCporinmnt, vi1.tout I' .. tlicc to
the bt(;e 
-. 
:' 
"]t':-:t,.:; 
i2: 
eo::.uir,!i,; or" hr.dl:'[ Ii.Vclt;-' 
i.::i 1e1':..',';.I
a StriP-'o"f the "ft'to;a 
(1VV; to the vt.i's'.&or puri 
to t n 
.r'e-
-
q 
rc. ui'c;:elcut. 
t !;htl a1so.c:(.ti-Jn 
t. 
Lhe volteio..t 
b 
,:c:r
tha~t he i. 
':& re3:$n.; u-,:n c'n' 
o:y,,on or -. prczent:.:n n't cet
forth It the ctmt:.:nt of cricnt 
,0 i;at hi 
cGnz'ergt. 3# 
,!lven as vin
cve)'cire of free vill, v'iho',t arg force or duirceu 
of any :.'d. 
d• 
-e
docrment vill be ci.ncd by the ,oiu:tr.-- 
over his full 
=.e; his r,';%,
rate, g; .re 
or tit!e; tnl hir dito of birth -- In the pr'e-:.ence of Ut
least one- %Inei:s *.ho Is n.t O irecly 
O1-'l 
, 
ie ey 
p: 
'.r t':t
SnM vhi 
uill utt.et to rtmh Signature in writir,[;. 
F]clo.urc (1) prc..,1vJe.
a nwjpile oi r-i acceptf.b!t 
\olwtcor consent dosu.aent, t)ic coriml 
o.
which uwil 
r(c:cuip in the records of the activity ; cosidtatin- the iIIilY.
(3) Te i'erepowiObilty for anccrtainJn5 the validity of the
.consent rest, ujton the pvrto:, V'o directs the ezporir.ent o" test. 
It
is a persotl. responnibil;ty uhich m.y not be deloatc4d.
.2
)ilY.
(3) Te i'erepowiObilty for anccrtainJn5 the validity of the
.consent rest, ujton the pvrto:, V'o directs the ezporir.ent o" test. 
It
is a persotl. responnibil;ty uhich m.y not be deloatc4d.
.2
)

--- PAGE BREAK ---iObilty for anccrtainJn5 the validity of the
.consent rest, ujton the pvrto:, V'o directs the ezporir.ent o" test. 
It
is a persotl. responnibil;ty uhich m.y not be deloatc4d.
.2
)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

470
=mvITi2 
39KC.39
to Ara 1L969
b. 
ft 
muo*r o vair 
ms uo4 vill be kopi at a minizam consict-
emt vift oMspI-sio rocuruaAmts mmagmA7-for ati aaiftea1ij vall4 
Op
a. 
the experiment mut, be snoh as to cnebrbuto to an ihpjvrovcd
-
r nv4t 
XW"1 
i'otb. Ini additiono, the ozporlmoft *%- toot tdiould be
su& as I* y124 frattfl re ults for the good of society, un'btinable
by ohar athoU or ,mmon of 
0t y, rrul not rmacm rnd wmo surf In
mture. 
Thor 
il). to ratasr.)o anticlptton that the results viLU
3iwtiry tho i'er~br4=i&** of Vh6 
~ 
$n 
or teut. 
Aecordit.';r all.
oxper1ontD and tosts will be baced iqp 
prior utaiy Or o pr-4ontatiorn
and d(ein l to acccp 
V.1oh this ob ec ivo. All abiScal arperizents or
2ri~'~.aivr.'c'J.vinC the meB of' an exorietita1 dr%;g Phcald be besni
vpw the iVesrtv" or umiml 
orarimntation WAn a tnow.lodge or the natural
history of the d4scmr.e or othur prob)r. weier stwV.
d. Ile oex' 
iJensn or tcnt V il 
be corn'u,44 9o ds to amoid unuocci-
vary jihyimll or mani. 
stress. 
oIZ eaprtment or toot-vili be conducted
Ito upo C:rai. 
convidi1stIon by the piraOto ii 
directo the cvxp~ric 'ent,
there in reason to bel crm that dea) 
or dirabli., 
.n.jmuy vJi. 
oem.
f1io dip*'r 
of rink to be ttken v.ll nuver exceea. tli. t dce:tn ril to be
,Atj'iablco UP thim )ar-nin":t, 
iolz 
ine" of' tjn 
rob1im to Iba tolve3
vjisiua Cd 
.qu.-iV 
,.'ioi~n, 
w,, 1vo1 
in the tetet fieli, 
ani
11ths4~vAo 
~ 
f 
it Lea uO~. m.-Pecty equip .nt bain- prcO i4Co to
protect the vc, 'Wttocr £ti)L~r.1t the p Mrt 
iti-- C. Cd.* 
ifxlry7, d i bility, or
death. 
tMcqnito ai vuwplcLte iftdiiitl troaL~tC!Jnt YM,1 be UYuih1:13 e for
troptment of caswtmltiJ.. 
rje piy-iclnn- n-chur~a 4M.1. 
hao 
cvn uvtr.tr,
availAoW 
on uhort nc.-tce, 
'ho are coi 
nt to crvbse or assst vitli
* lmeXp.etcl 
1~liC.tioaB. 
'. 
.
0. 
Oia 
ex 
'r..rnt or test v£11 be directed on)y by sciontifically
-qu tlfitd persons with e. hijh doeroe of teednicol and proft6oaoral
competence in co.'AluctinG sueh proodures. 
All pvroonn4A-'svuervi6inS
or pnWUi)xtJnr in such procedures must be uAiqmtel(1"na1 tfo perform
toeir d t ,, 
reiiafy lit 
foroecbl 
ac rextanee5. "Thsbitost 6degie
of are 'll 
be required at all staece of the experikot or t-Ot.
r .
%viteeTD vt!.l hnw no ph)ysicftl or mental dieuens which will
nke t. 
proposal emcrimant rordi h.z.ardotts for thm than for noiml
healthy pmrtnoo. 
tis 
WtvarAlnation i',ll be mi 
Iy the oxporiment or
test director on the buazS' of vopt*pt uidiftl rAvice.
g. 
7he cxperkfint or tent director., o U"socting stbordinate,-
wJl exorcise careful Judtmit, oaporior skiJl, ail cood faith at all
3poriment or
test director on the buazS' of vopt*pt uidiftl rAvice.
g. 
7he cxperkfint or tent director., o U"socting stbordinate,-
wJl exorcise careful Judtmit, oaporior skiJl, ail cood faith at all
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---ector on the buazS' of vopt*pt uidiftl rAvice.
g. 
7he cxperkfint or tent director., o U"socting stbordinate,-
wJl exorcise careful Judtmit, oaporior skiJl, ail cood faith at all
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

471
' 
m.y;n\ :OWJ3.39
X<1 Arl 
1969
tijsc.% drinfl tse fnwv.Ld 4f the 0 p kant or tc.. 
'Aw 41roctor wili
teiavate the proac4ure at aW &(s.vtt i 
t i 
in lltk)y that comaitnmtion
JvI] re u .t i-.% in3ur,, 
s 
dw 
lityp or dO&th to a volutocr. 
*Irtag 
the
crnrac of' in exporwn-16 or tcit. ta v citcvr W,.1 be at l.bort to
+Id 
revoke or withold hi, cwzlni ..,s4 to "W'mth 't, vithc4* preCu!i4ce to
hiroolf, Frcri tie experis.:citt ar '.c:it, or fren (I par tion t4sioct. 
11.0
d1Lklrs uti4 cdvcrcc dvyeop.. 
L:to aricir, durinZ tc source of the
jrim.nt or tet., Lbmit *4h1ch the vo1;ivtcvr b'as not bco 
n nrJot
or wsrii,, 
sloal bo rep'ort-d to the voln .oor in a tia.*1 
-simer vniscs
Bueh cceirtnicutia"a voulld.po-)c nit Ji.l..dinte thr.ut to hi 
safety.
h. 
Prisoners. of v.ir will not be usicxi iuwlr snr of rci.:r-tjccS.
5.Procedures
a. 
Ifte e 
.creut. or tcrt director viil'praro n vritton requen't
for appr.':al of tho un:o of voltuiteru. li, ry propzvl procodbru ccmn"
within the pu-VICw ol' this InMhoru.ti 
,. 
' 
riie 
ro1oV wifl inc3.do ti.
nw.,.oz of tho director tnml Wl, coadructfi5 rx-ctivity s4 -tha Identity caf
th re.pon tble supportiar 
c U.cal act'cl-ty. 
It 0i1 spottk allwoprittoly
to t 
prinCipie." of policy r~uAuih~ce 
o". 
le~o 
n irdrih 
Uj or thic
Lirtrt.:c v,. 
Zie rccluect vii. 
encloce( .
plan. of the exporr -rnt or test
ccnsiatrent with 3cc%,ty (rocqiie;~z:U).
la. 
Iva:e rqtt-.vt vi-11 bte forittrdcrit V'a 
(:,) Vi:n " 
ropriatc rtltarl
.b.1i11 01" 
(2) 
Utz~C~f 
ukt.u ur )&iA~c1:n2 
&0r Eter; (3) tbe
Chief of' )',,*. I~r 
ci' 
te )K:rino Ourp, or' b-oth$ at
u pprop)riatc,; and IC) tile Cio of L;Xva11 Opjrfltionz (r;ODm:)) to tile
S,-,retea 
of the :I', (ii-vy))
(1) 
lUciU RTU.-J3- cheb r of comunO, cilorsementu are to be dIroer.
pr i.niJ.iy to the te .hnical owndnr 'na, pirgrtoUsiortanco of the
experiment or teat. for which 
m me 
of hium 
volunteers is propoecc.
(2) The (kief, Jlqreu of M.edlino w* 9uroNzy, VlflAlireot his
ondor"cut specifically to the de-rcr of hazrt uhorent .n tho tosto
the adequmcy of afey . mnsureoa the ad cquwy of acdiia'"Ouporviadon
ald ouppowt, und the adecMcy of the hi,.m)-volutoer couent statwcent
to be utilized.
(3) 
Wh M~idt Cf nUivai'NPr1ome/Co~raOxAt of the BMakina CarP3
vii direct their roupoc ive endoraemmts in partidalar to the utilipta-
tion of active-duty mili .ry lmrsonncl iu Gistiu big' ts ior volwntAi-
duty as expenrijtal vul jects,, uAr 
a.pc 
s thet 
dcem appro-
priate. 
,
• 
t 
•ive endoraemmts in partidalar to the utilipta-
tion of active-duty mili .ry lmrsonncl iu Gistiu big' ts ior volwntAi-
duty as expenrijtal vul jects,, uAr 
a.pc 
s thet 
dcem appro-
priate. 
,
• 
t 
•

--- PAGE BREAK ---

472
28 April 1969
(hj) The~ Caicf of !-:iv,0. 0Uxr.:Lions (DC.'o0)L.Y)) vill dircct, Mu
cn-Jor 
'.nt,t t.o the ,'alldity oL thv rLquJrom.prt for .oitnL the cxpcri-
ment; the .
u-rwy of tile c-rtitic 
-ltan by )AZ-.',, 
on po--binont i:.J 
-.ti
aspects; tlhc .p-oV,- 
ttSJ .:':din of por, oi; c). in the vanner prcpopod;
ancl thne ft:,c.cri 
of 
rero,. 
ed bIy the 
....
ing ccxamaK1. 
IclAnin-
tr' tIvc" and ecordc'r-:.,iro,. action vill b) nssi~nd to thc Stuff Assiz'unt
for IU.icI cnd Al;.d Sicncer.
(5,,) 
A 
ts A:. 
-A 
,crobnry 
of h 
]4ivy (-le'J.irch 
and )evclop-
ront) V:13. 
V 
Ln i ;,);vin; .
P h'1h.h'.y 
o'r tbo furetr.-,y of the )Ivy,
evJ'w of lc3tal u'e}cd.,i; :ill be ucc.ps.irhed by the 01"fice of tlhe
Ju3&e Advo::crta Ounrf,.
6. 
:_*.'., .
Si .,o the use of' volurcers Jn cxperi.:-ntttl or test
sitri.,io:ir I., an ii 
earr 
of the conduct of tbe ] 
I)l 1'ro-rw.
ani dor, Ilot. nvol,c the e- 
b).i:h:nt of* r.iti3. 
-
1
.or 
billet,
Istieion ( 
v'.')i reu-t.:i, in#cludI 
rg ecI i'i i 
onv',t~cmn 
o" 
p:er 
oIIl* 
iCle1i
b:i 
.
e ~h'ou- 
the ]U]I.10 chain of c::l,
'(. 
,']..1(.'. Jt.(;2.Adtdr-',:;.:eren are wit1,ox-izC 
to t :;e Au,"h L..!on CS
in 
nc*!(.:r{:: :,.,'-,, Io 
.O- -
{: ::.- , ;:nc 
t! 
this. 111rti t i¢,n I%'-rou.-,,m'. 
t
JOHN W. WAR 
AN
Undei Secretary of the Navy
Distribution (Bee Ji'f;e 6)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Au,"h L..!on CS
in 
nc*!(.:r{:: :,.,'-,, Io 
.O- -
{: ::.- , ;:nc 
t! 
this. 111rti t i¢,n I%'-rou.-,,m'. 
t
JOHN W. WAR 
AN
Undei Secretary of the Navy
Distribution (Bee Ji'f;e 6)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

473
23 I.pr~4 3~$2
DI!i 
II?
BINDJ.
A2A
A3"
A5
A6
01 A
I|D].
16CL
MI
3.1Jj
= A6
JIi0-
)'J20-
Rimediato Orr 
O 
co of tne S eretnr ')
(ID.;i- 
"'-, 'U,Y 1'OJAO 
o)
03fF 
J¢ ,.].Y 2:'.€OFq I;;..-: i'Avr)
E'AVAL 
Glifj:; 
:!'C;:-
III-t L *A,,, .- 'r;,! ) 
,
(,0~ ,. .
o.. .. 
.= 
... | 
.,
CO'P TO:
DW- U (6)
Sdiif 
r) U. so /", y (P)
D./J l2.. 
la.f' ('2)
W-.Ccle "71 (50)
(ozc) (ordt)
t;
/
/
Supply an'd Fi3cal D-p!Ytr-4nt
U. 8. Eaval Station (CcAe 511.32)
bashirletono D. C. 
20390 (i00)
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

474
"-I 
5-n 
rMWC1,
l." i uwby voi.utmtr to partieipto as a atibjt In an MM pr o 
ure.
belrnt aocluctoa under M~cmont L'a. 
Project N~o._____
Woi-k Unit "wt)e" 
0 
1
thn~t the E4.-1ZLc'/~ of isfty musburos Into0 bsoit certitiod by the Qhiof,
baromu or M.41cino und fOursory, anvl tIt 
autlhority to uce hiiamn volun-
tcers has bon g"ntcl by thU fkcrolcry ofrthU lbvy.
2. 'Zie natve end pu-r.poue of tho proeoduros hvc beoen cvVIuned to mo
Eus folo;'t: 060o aA;tvtic1c-c 
fimmry.)
3. 
In m-.ji. 
r 
dcklon to voluiiLour, I rur no roItyiv),g %por. aU 
infrma-
ian or 
mo7~f 
t(? 
t 
b r7or~i In ti-hIL doC.urzont; or clt~cOei.cd 
z:y
M4y consent Is (Ivcn 
its an oit 
xo 
c of f'roo i:l, 
withomo, uy forec- or
durces or wnv !:inl. 
I undrsztand Vhi- 
ilq comn~srt tor3 
ep4drs
SIGNED:
MIAPEDED:_ 
"
Skrvlce pacor l, Ja"-. -u.o-n 
lele 
-
* *4Q 
1 
I
• .
.
..
_ 
, 
'.
• 
,,. 
e 
,

--- PAGE BREAK ---forec- or
durces or wnv !:inl. 
I undrsztand Vhi- 
ilq comn~srt tor3 
ep4drs
SIGNED:
MIAPEDED:_ 
"
Skrvlce pacor l, Ja"-. -u.o-n 
lele 
-
* *4Q 
1 
I
• .
.
..
_ 
, 
'.
• 
,,. 
e 
,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

475
A~hGTv-RI?.~22217
..
OIR:60:.S:doV
2? Farch 1974
CODS' 6C0 ._-, .,IDTl 
N0. 97, 
.
.
To: 
AU 600 Co.es
Subj: 
Use of Human Volunteer, Su'oJects
I,, Code 600 
eiftorandum t;o. 97 dated 9 Irch 1970 In hereby canceled
and sperseded by this mioranduz.
2. ,nere ht,.an volunteer subjects are to be used on any Office of ?1aal
Roearch contract v..hich fact can be determined by tho budget information, the
"follo'Ang language shall be inserted in the c 
racL or modification as a new
Section.
SCIN - U S 01F H WUfkN voLm.-mma SU3rJ.CTS
1.* D'initions, (a) A hur~An volunteer subject io a male or fe7.A~e individual
of &NIF&.69 
e, 
vic.S full rental and le gal capacity aqd is free of nntal or
phy/aical disease wnich would rake the propose' exp.ment, no"e har.ar3dous than
for a nor.al healthy person. 
A war prisoner ry not beco-e a h.ran volunteer
c ubject. 
.
(b) Hazardous expert snts or hazardouss conditions or materials are those
*:hic~h pressnt to the volunteer risks of privation, discomfort, distress, pain,
ploqicll or mental r.ju.y, or deith and those, are grater than thi hazards
inherent in training or vork within acceptable occupational "per-tsr.s 
.7.
2. 
unenever hmar. volunteer subjects are used in hazardous exrlenls unde
this contract, the Contractor shall. be respo., slble that (i) proper preparations
for e>-,erinont are made undor the supermision pf a cualified physician,
kdowled?-nble in that field, andrt.ht (ii) 
adeo:'uate medical facilities and
a.eot. r. u ? nent are provided as to protect t.a vol nt ter against the
. o:4bi 1. : of irt.--r, disability . or deati..
-. 
T, 
.-mmcian-in-c;ctg--hale 
i have consl'.s 
a-ailaolg on short notice,
wv 
are, comnpetes-o 
;o ad,-ise cr ascis; woitn une~ecsoti coypiicL'mions.
u 
Trne e"peri, nt or test sh.l be directed o:y by scientifically qualified
porc.n3 :,-ith. a hire dcerte 
of zchn.&ical and prfessional co-pazence in
conduwting such procedures.
Th Contractor shall be res.no.ns.b' 
tht. t.e adeouac 
of the rn"ecal safe.-7
':,=iltmietn, 
the superv.olon of t 
aslcian-_n-cha.r~e. 
and of the coh3ultar.ts
:*f- con:isent vith the st.-nd.-d3 cf g edIcal e-hics aen.ciated +Cn4'prazcticed
-. V ;he A._-i:az) l.:edi:al Azso:ia;tc.
70-026 0 - 74 - 31
I-.olon of t 
aslcian-_n-cha.r~e. 
and of the coh3ultar.ts
:*f- con:isent vith the st.-nd.-d3 cf g edIcal e-hics aen.ciated +Cn4'prazcticed
-. V ;he A._-i:az) l.:edi:al Azso:ia;tc.
70-026 0 - 74 - 31
I-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

476
AI
" 
-- 
''--'. 
" 
#A
U. 
The contrat.to" shall detcr:s that Une r!&hta and welfare of the
Au'-ecta Involved aro adiquately protc.ted, that -.he rickg to an individvAln
Are Jus'..Aied by th* irpor.anci of the exeri.ento, and that informd consent
be obt-enel by metnoda that aeo adequate, a: appropriate.
7. 
The Contractor shall be retponslblo tha- the volunteer subj'.ct is fully
Infor..e.i that he is 
at liberty to revoke or witihhold his consent arA to
idithd'av, without prejudice to itselff, fromL the oxerir.ent or test or "rom
a po tion thereof.
8. The Contractor hall assume th;e responsibility that the legal capacity
* to contract of the volunteer is established and his written cfnBsnt is obtained;
also that the volunteer is free of nental or ph. rcal disease which would rake
the exp rimnt more hazardous th an for a nor.-. 
healthy person.
T. H. LAVT"MSCHAOZ.
• Acting Director, Procurement Services
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---, DPATXi::, 0.

T i: AI, rOtCE.

|leafquar',rs US Air Ferce
• Washington VC 20330
477
: .* 
' •I ." 
• 
.2..

...

.

" 
* 
Ar 
"lrVlATIP..' "
S 
.

2d August 
wtuu'
Research and DvclopMnt
USE OF VOLUANT':ERS IN AEROSPACE RESEARCH
This regulation establishes uhe polhry and assigns the responsildlty I.r rising roluatrer test
subJects in aerospnae research, 
terrlopn.snt 
test anti -raluntion (RDT&Q).

I applies o tihe
use of humans in stiedis conducted in facilities where thi- subjects are Gorernment enpoayers
and schere there is a risk of health lanae.

1.

Application of This Regulation.

The pro-
visions of thisreulatlon:
a.

Apply to RDT&E procedures in which
human subjects are used end in which there
Is inherent rk of distress.

p .in.

daniage to
health., physical or emotional injury, inva-
sion of privacy, surrender of autonqmv or
death.

Such tests usually are conducted to
determine either the level of human "oler-
anee/performance for a condition that may
be imposed by Air Force operations or the
adequacy of c€uipment cdesi,,ned for human
use (see AFR 0-l4).

Ti:s .nclude.% tests and
experiments conducted '.ithin a Feeieral Gov-
ernment i::st-'.ation or f~ciity re.ar4iess of
the composition of the investi-atin; team
(contracwqr personnel, military personnel.

civil ser'.'ic.

rcrsonnel or a mixture txhireof)
or at contractor facilities when the human
subjects are Government employees, either
military or civilian.

b.

Do not apply to:
(1) Investlfatlons conducted under the
provision's ol, AFils 169-1; .nd 169--8.

(2) RDT&E that involves inherent oc.

cupational i.z.rds to health, or expo.ure to
tential!v hazardous situations %uc*.% as
toseoncountered in training.

or other duties
requiring orders for regular and fre-;uent
performance of hazardous duty: for cx-
• amnle: tlldit:':ai:i.

j'.inp tranim:,g.

press.

sure chamber indoctrir.ation, and handing
.of explosives.

etc.--- PAGE BREAK ---

sure chamber indoctrir.ation, and handing
.of explosives. etc. (3) The human engir.erirg portions of
a research' project when they, involve only
hazards encountered in normal training, or
other normal military duties and when dis-
closure of the research conditions wou
defeat the purpose of the investi.-ation by
revealing the artificial nature of the e:cperi. meant. (4) Experiments using human subjects
that are judged to be no:hi-rdo-:, on ti'c
basis of mnecting all of the foilo-Vir:M crict'Ka:
(a)* They are conducted in t'e usu-.l
ambient environmentt of the l alor:aory. el-
rice, or lit qioierato weather ou:c:'ors. (b) They Involve only . ar-.!-cation
t6 the sunicct of s'.imuli to the co:-. mar.:ct-
tion scns-os (sight, hbarin7. touch. a::d sr-1
at energ:- levels and duration. 4ro1:1 to "e
well within commonly experienced 
aid
tolerated ranges. (e) They do not invo!ve the p!anned
applicat'on of unusual or 
tno-' 
to !x har.m-
fu! phys.tzal or chemical 
',, 
to the sulo-
ject, such as noise. vibr=*c:. brome'..'c
pressure ,xlterations. deceeran*on or ,n.cceiera. ion, immersion in water, chemical aents, or
drugs, etc. (d) They do not involve unusual
physical exertion or application of force by
the subject. (e) The experimental environments
have no -round safety hazards, such as e!ec-
trical she,. sharp objects. slippery floors. cr
obstacles ::ot readily visible. (f) h1ave no combination of condi-
tions wh!ch are cxp 
ed to produce any of
the-adverxe effects, covered in paragraph la. 2 Obtain!ng Voluntary Consent:
a. The .principal investigator must insure
that the volunteerr (or the person acting for
OPR: AFPDDG
DISTRIgUTION: S
Ip

--- PAGE BREAK ---478
S YVR .- 33
him) has tile legal capacity to consent.

is M.OU
to exercie true freclom nf choice without
overt or hidden por.uas:n.

and ik fully in-
forntlM.

Thc fact twt t n.:nIlt of 9.hc
Armed Forces is less than 21 years of age
does not impair his legal capacity for this
purpose.

b.

Before a volunteer (or the person acting
for him) is permitted to give his consent., the
investigator must give him an accurate ex-
• planution of the r-carch study that he can
and does understand.

The explanation shall
* Include at least:
(1) The purpose, nature, and duration
of the study.

.

(2) The methods and means by wiich
the study will 4)e conducted.

(3) Foreseeable inconveniences, 
haz-
ards, and effects upon the volunteer's health
that could result from his participation in
.

the experiment.

(4) An identification of any parts of
the test program that neither the volunteer
nor the inlividual conducting tie test can
stop immediately.

c.

The volunteer (or the person actin.

for
him) must -ive his consent in writing as
shown by Attachment 1; whiei a person is
actin- for the volunteer, the wordit: vi!l be
appropriately modilicd.

lie must si,-n tile
consent in tie lircsen-.e of at !east one wit-
ness who will then at.esto the volunteer's
signature by sin'inr *i '.o place pJovidcd.

In addition, tile investigator who ,tdv;,cd of
possible consequences must also sign the con.

sent in the presence of the same witness.

3.

Use of Volunteers in IDT&E.

The follow.

Ing criteria apply to alt 
rDT&i: efforts which
involve volunteers as subjects:
a.

All necessary preliminary test% with
laboratory animals and human sinuiators
must hNhve been conducted and evaluated be-
fore a hunan subject is used.

lHazardous re-
search that use.

volunteer.

will be petro'rmed
only to validlte itl,1rt:411t datat ('sst-lit'il o
a 
srjvtt, 
ilevt'lsl"';L.

syst'ni or Air Yorve
b.

Rest'trel.

studex i u.itil, vtlnleers will
be colilucte lto avoid ll uuiu1ece,; s~y plhys-
Ical or isetital di:;cnmnurtu.Rest'trel.

studex i u.itil, vtlnleers will
be colilucte lto avoid ll uuiu1ece,; s~y plhys-
Ical or isetital di:;cnmnurtu.

before the iuve.tti-
station or test 
ae~ie1.

phlvsici:tn willcon-
duct, anti record such examinations and eval.

nations of tile volunteer a.v his pro.esxional
Judgment dictates.

Permanent records of
Otese ex:uminations will be maintained as
port of the project record, as required in
AFit !61-4, anld aia 
i' tile vuiuntt,Ler' 
jj
Form 72.1 "Health Record."
ilvCstlgatV: will ix- desigited to be r'e.,|i.

sible for t-e professional care and safe-v ,.)
the voluntt.,r during the project.

This.;'-.

clan will r A be involved in the rescart',i 
o'
test In any ".:ay other than to be thi, prot,'c:or
of the life *-nd health of the volunteer.

IhL,
physician c:" the investigators may terminate
t.e study z.

ally time.

•
"d.

The Tolunteer.

at nny time, has the
right to r-voke his consent and withdr.'.w
from the c..perim,:.,t without prejudice.

The
volunteer 
ruust be fully informed of these
facts and ;rocedures.

e.

Before being a subject of RDT&E.

the
consent of ".he volunteer, or his legal repre-
sentative.

.ust be obtained and placed in the
records of -he project.

('See attaciunent 1.)
f.

If the volunteer has taken medication
or received -edical or dental treatnient since
last used .1 a" subject, it is inandato'y taa:
he inform '':q principal investigatoi and the
physician cf this fact before tile conduct-oC.

thd rext experinienz..

g.

For t-ch RDTME project.

the Labora-
tory or Ti.t Director and a l)hys.ica:n must
examine a -- protocol submitted by the projcci/
task scie.

.t to determinee:
- (1) Z..:e necessity-to use volunteer..

(2) 1:-e safety precautions.

(3) Te protective measures.

(4) ::.e adequacy of medical surveil.

lance.

Both the L".boratory or' Test Director and a
physicianw'Ul sign a certification atteiti:tg to
the above ctondition-..

These doctments w.il
become x-nanent records in the RDT&E
protocol.

/
/ 
/
4.

Comm d Rtcponsibilities:
a.--- PAGE BREAK ---

/
/ 
/
4. Comm d Rtcponsibilities:
a. 3MajW commands will establish suitable
procd:ure% to in:air,, comtplinate with the
policies Auted ill this rI;ralultioll. i,. T.aibmtnry 
willn:aale., 
wil approve
or diNaliiimve all IrrT& hitoiol.t involving
tile utcs orvadUittcr .4taijecir alid are r-s.lolnt. sible for Wsing this decision UponI appropri-
ate medici, review and advice. 5. Puhlieaon. Pertaining to Human Volun-
teers. All I-.ntcd papers or articles reporting
research ix which vo-unteer subjects are used
2
2-1 ., 
i 
rr, 
|.-i~

--- PAGE BREAK ---

479
.. 
:I Au'.,0It P.9
will Contain tne ioliowing footnote: ""io
voluntary informed consent of the subjects
used in thiis research was obtained in ac.
cordance with AF 
80-33.I
By OltorOF Tire SECrETARY %r 
'TnE At For cE
JOHN D. RYAN,
Chief of .Staff
Generd, 
rUSAF
JOHN F. RASH. Colonel, USAF
Director of Administration
i Attachment
Volunteer's Consent
3
OMCIAL
Eli
.\Pr ,-.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rETARY %r 
'TnE At For cE
JOHN D. RYAN,
Chief of .Staff
Generd, 
rUSAF
JOHN F. RASH. Colonel, USAF
Director of Administration
i Attachment
Volunteer's Consent
3
OMCIAL
Eli
.\Pr ,-.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

480
* 
I
VOLUNTIE kWS CONSENT
(Use organi:ational Irtfrhcnd)
SUBJECT: Consent of Volunteer
1. I hereby volunteer to participate as a test subject in the following (in-
sert "investigation" or "test" as appropriate) which has as its purpose
(state the purpose in sufficient detail to assure that it will be clearly under-
stood byboth the medical review authority and the volunteer). (Insert
rank, name, component, and corps) has discussed with me to my satisfac-
tion theorcaso:ns for this (insert "investigation" or "test" as appropriate)
and its possible adverse and beneficial consequences.
2t This consent is voluntary and has been given under circumstances in
which I can exercise free power of choice. I have bten inforyned that I
may at any time revoke my consent and withdraw from the experiment
without prejudice and that the investigator or physician may terminate
the experiment at any time regardless of my wishes.
8. I understand that before my use as a test subject, I mtfst inform the
principal investigator and project physician of any change to my medical
status. This information will include any medicat!Gos I have taken and
any siedical or dental care/treatment received since my last use as a test
subject.
(Siginature of Volunteer)
(Signature of Officer who Advised of Possible Consequences)
(Signature of Witness)
Io.
Attachment. I 
.
4
". 
.. 
*,.e .
SOYtlinw~gtr PRI'fW,'cgOF, 
sees-

--- PAGE BREAK ---(Siginature of Volunteer)
(Signature of Officer who Advised of Possible Consequences)
(Signature of Witness)
Io.
Attachment. I 
.
4
". 
.. 
*,.e .
SOYtlinw~gtr PRI'fW,'cgOF, 
sees-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

481
PERSONAL HISTORY STATEMENT
Alex "aimon, 
Esq.
853 Loxford Terrace, Silver spring, Maryland 20901 
593-14199
IhERE ADITTED TO PRACTICE: 
District of Columbia and Now York
DIPWYMENT HISTORY
PRESENT E4PLOYM1Xj: 
Legislative-Legal Liaison Officer and Regulations Officer,
NCHSR, HRA (1971 - 1975).
LEGAL (& RATED) 
MPOYME.NT
Previous
D 
e _yers 
Period 
Position Held 
Grade
Office of the Surgeon 
4/53 to 
Deputy Judge Advocate, & Member, Army 
GS-14
General, Department 
10/70 
Board for Correction of Military 
(promoted
of the Army 
Records (& Injustices), formerly Asst. 
5 times)
General Counsel, formerly Asst. Chief,
Legal Office, formerly Asst. to Chief,
Legal Office, formerly Attorney-Adv(Gn)
Office of Price 
5/51 to 
Attorney-Advisor 
CS-1l
Stabilization 
3/53 
(promoted
2 times)
Private Practitioner 
11/50 to 
Law Clerk 
NA
3/51
LEGAL & OTHER EDUCATION BACKGROUND
Harvard JAW School 
9/47 to 6/50 
J.D. (IAW)
Columbia University 
9/46 to 6/47 
N.A. 
(ECONOMICS)
College of the City of New York 
9/40 tO 6/44 
I.S. (Statistics)
Misc. courses: Govt contracts, Labor Relats (Georgetown Law); Procurement Lav (JAG
School, U.of Vs.) Income Tax (IRS); speed reading, Pentagon; Electronics (in Navy at
NRL), Congressional Relations (3), Ctv.Svc.Com.), Air Pollution Control (D/Army),
Public Law and Public Policy (Littauer School of Public Administration, Harvard
Graduate School), Seminar for Attorneys on Freedom of Information & Privacy Acts.
HIGHLIGHTED ACTIVITIES
h-le in Covornment Service (at O=)C!.
-1st Chairman, Federal Bar Association Committee on Law & Poverty (1965-1967)
-Member, 
Army Board for Correction of Military Records (1966 to 1970)
-Commended by National Council, Federal Bar Assn. for initiating FBA Law & Poverty Program
-Vice President, Federal Bar Assn. Committee on Food and Drugs (1964-1965)
-Legal Counsel, Inter-Dept. OCHMPUS LIAISON CROUP
-Ranked No. 1, Procurement Law Course, Advanced Class, JAG School at U. of Vs.
-Member, Army Procurement Legal Problems Comm., 
representing TSG at Dept. level
-Lecturer at Walter Reed Army Medical Center, (Social & Preventive Psychiatry Course,
Registrar Course, Information Officer Course, Nurse Officer Course)
-Formulated or assisted in formulation of TS, 
Army & DOD legislative positions
across whole gamut of health legislation
- Formulated TS 
position on Army implementation of P.L. 85-934 (authorizing Federal
agencies to make grants to nonprofit institutions for basic research), on unsolicitede gamut of health legislation
- Formulated TS 
position on Army implementation of P.L. 85-934 (authorizing Federal
agencies to make grants to nonprofit institutions for basic research), on unsolicited

--- PAGE BREAK ---482
I 
-2-
inventive proposals received by AMEDD, and on proposed changes in Army and DOD
procurement regulations
-Originator of revised medical research contract procedures
-Reviewed litigation reports in re malpractice suits brought against AMEDD personnel
-As AMEDD Labor Compliance Officer, monitored compliance by AMEDD contractor* vith
the President's EEO Program under Covt contracts
-Was TSO's expert on misc.

subjects, e.g., personal legal assistance for military
personnel, income tax, immigration, labor problem under govt contracts, patents,
Rights in Data, procedures for processing legislative matters, and legal aspects of
medical standards for procurement and retention of military personnel
-Sole civ.

attorney on govt teams negotiating original "Medicare" contracts (CHAMPUS)
-Awarded plaque as "Distinguished Deputy Judge Advocate" by International & Civil
Affairs Health Society (at 1968 Americah Public Health Association convention)
-Comnented on legal and policy implications of proposed Army regulations affecting
AMEDD or health of the Army
-Speaker, Federal Bar Association, Annual Convention, San Francisco, 1967
-Appointed Legal Consultant to OTSG Management Team (to review CHAMPUS program)
-M4ember, 
Legislative Panel, Inter-Department Study Group for a Unif.

Services Med.

Academy (chaired by Dr.

"Pete" Rousselot, then Asst.

Sec."Pete" Rousselot, then Asst.

Sec.

of Defense (Health & Envir))
-Conceptualizer & Member (Mon-voting), Army Investigational Drug Review Board, and
drafter of regulations and other papers relating thereto)
While in Government Service (at DIEW):
-Member, 
Health Resources Administration (HRA) 
Legislative Options Task Force
-Member, 
HRA Task Force on Implementation of the Privacy Act
-Member, 
PIlS Task Force on Malpractice
-Help formulate, then draft Bureau's legislative strategy, positions, and legislative
specifications
-Determine which Bureau legal issues should be referred through Bureau Director to
Cencral Courn.cl, 
ar.n 
preparau necssary -atoila
Pre-Government Service:
*-Selected as member of Professor Freund's Constitutional Litigation seminar
-Law seminar paper: 
Coal Strikes: 
A Problem Area
-Haster's Thesis: "The LMRA and the NILA"
-Dean's List (college)
-Awarded New York State War Service Scholarship
-Ranked No.

8 in statewide exam for New York State civil service attorneys
Community Service Activities:
-Chairman, 
Montgomery County Public Schools Citizens Advisory Council (Area 4)
-Member, Montgomery County Public Schools Citizens Advisory Council on Career
Education
-Member, Montgomery County Public Schools Area 4 Comittee for the Gifted
-Chairman, 
Subcommittei on Health & Welfare, Urban Affairs Comittee, Jewish
Community Council of Greater Washington
REFERENCES: (Additional References Avallable on Request)
-Paul Freund, Loeb University Professor, Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Mass.

(617-495-3100)
-Vernon McKenzie, Deputy Asst.Secretary of Defense (Health & Envir) (OX-75186)
-LC.

Dick Taylor, M.D., The Surgeon General of the Army (OX 71295)
-Leon Satenstein, Esq., Ex-Director, Office of Financial Management, Peace Corps,
now Asst.

Coner.

for Welfare, State of Mass.

(617-324-5567 or 617-727-6190)
-Robert van Hoek, M.D., Act.--- PAGE BREAK ---

for Welfare, State of Mass. (617-324-5567 or 617-727-6190)
-Robert van Hoek, M.D., Act. Administrator, HSA, Public Health Service (443-2216)
-M, George Hayes, Ex-Director, -Professional Service, Office of the Surgeon General
and Ex-Principal Deputy to Asst. Secretary of Defense (Health & Envir) (751-4727).

--- PAGE BREAK ---ce (443-2216)
-M, George Hayes, Ex-Director, -Professional Service, Office of the Surgeon General
and Ex-Principal Deputy to Asst. Secretary of Defense (Health & Envir) (751-4727).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

483
ALEXANDER 
NAIMON
ATTONgy 
AT LAW
853 Loxford Terrace
Silver Spring, Maryland
October 20, 1975
The Honorable Edward Kennedy
Chairman, Sub-Committee on Health
Committee on Labor & Public Welfare
U.S. Senate
Washington, D.C.
Dear Senator Kennedy:
I trust my submission of this statement for inclusion in the Record
of your Sub-Committee's September 10, 1975, hearing concerning the
DHEW-DOD Memorandums of Understanding will not be considered
presumptuous, and will be considered a useful supplement to the fine
statements heard-that day of Surgeon Aeneral of the Army, Richard
Taylor. and Dr. Alexander Schmidt, Commissioner of FDA. 
As the
classic Japanese film, RASH(WON, made clear, events in retrospect
look quite different when viewed from the different perspectives
of the several participants, and so it is with the clinical use
of investigational drugs by the military in the early 1960's.
This limitation on any one individual's perceptions should be kept
in mind throughout this statement.
I speak from the vantage point principally of conceptualizer (and
so to an extent defender and explainer) of the arrangement worked
out between DOD and DHEW in the period between late 1962 and 1964
for the clinical use of investigational drugs by the military
Departments. 
I believe it to be inevitable that in this Sub-
Committee hearing concerning matters most of which occurred more
than 10 years ago, certain perspectives will be lost, and it is my
purpose to draw attention to some of those perspectives to which I
am most sensitive.
First and foremost is the %vrk of the Amy Investigational Drug
Review Board (AIDRB) itself under the February 1964 Memorandum of
Understanding. 
To the best of my knowledge, none of the Sub-
Committee's causes celebre and other cases involving either alleged
mismanagement of or adverse results in the use of investigational
drugs on the part of the Government involved the AIDRB at all. The
cases of those whose use of investigational drugs was later shown to
have been mismanaged all appear to be cases which either antedated
the creation of the AIDRO, or which were never referred to the AIDRR
for its review and approval. 
(Discussion here is limited to the
AIORB, because it is 
DOD's most significant investigational drug
review board, and because it is the one with which I was associated,
but it is assumed that the others had similar experiences).o the
AIORB, because it is 
DOD's most significant investigational drug
review board, and because it is the one with which I was associated,
but it is assumed that the others had similar experiences).

--- PAGE BREAK ---484
-2-
Next, the impression appears widespread that FDA was first required
by the Kefauver-Harris Drug Amendments Act of 1962 to control the
use of Investigational drugs, and has failed to do so.

In fact,
as far back as 1938, the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act authorized
FDA to regulate new drugs, but FDA chose not to regulate new drugs
in their investigative -itage, but only after they had been approved
as new drugs.

With the occurrence and coming to the attention of
the public of the thalidamide cases in 1962, however, FDA finally
decided that controls were indicated at an earlier stage in a new
drug's development, inasmuch as thalidamide was never approved for
marketing in the U.S.

(thanks to Dr.

Frances Kelsey), wreaking all
its damage in the United States in its investigational drug stage.

So it is significant to note that FDA left investigational drugs
unregulated from 1938-62, and first proposed regulatinq them in
August 1962, citing authority contained in the 1938 Act as authority
for such regulation.

This is important to note because when FDA
finally did promulgate regulations to control use of investigational
drugs, it exempted from the regulation's coverage investigational
drugs being studied by certain investigators whom FDA considered
very expert and responsible in handling such investigational drugs.

In essence, as will be described infra, my policy conception of
the proper DOD-DHEW relationship, an implied part of the 1st
DOD-DHEW Memo of Understanding, was that FDA should treat the three
Surgeons General of the military departments as responsible officials
who could be trusted to assure that only responsible investigators
would be in charge of research projects involving the clinical use
of investigational drugs being paid for by the three military
medical services, whether through extramural or intramural arrange-
ments for such study.This is important to note because when FDA
finally did promulgate regulations to control use of investigational
drugs, it exempted from the regulation's coverage investigational
drugs being studied by certain investigators whom FDA considered
very expert and responsible in handling such investigational drugs.

In essence, as will be described infra, my policy conception of
the proper DOD-DHEW relationship, an implied part of the 1st
DOD-DHEW Memo of Understanding, was that FDA should treat the three
Surgeons General of the military departments as responsible officials
who could be trusted to assure that only responsible investigators
would be in charge of research projects involving the clinical use
of investigational drugs being paid for by the three military
medical services, whether through extramural or intramural arrange-
ments for such study.

That this was a sound approach was brought
home to me and placed within r 
philosophical, ethical, and legal
frame of reference by the eminent lawyer, and Incidentally one of
the high officials who approved the 1964 Meo of Understanding
(from a legal standpoint), Alanson Wilcox, General Counsel, DHEW.

Mr.

Wilcox, in a carefully worded and thoughtful speech, indicated
that the thrust of DHEW's regulations controlling the clinical use
of investigational drugs vas not designed to limit in any significant
way, if at all, the way responsible companies, sensitive to their
scientific integrity and moral and ethical responsibilities, con-
ducted their investigational drug clinical studies.

He asserted
that the new regulations covering investigational drugs were only
designed to get at "the bad apples in the barrel", to identify
then, and ferret them out; he stated further that the vast bulk of
commercial pharmaceutical firms already used appropriate ethical
and scientific practices, and that the regulations were not designed
to limit such operations.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Wilcox, in a carefully worded and thoughtful speech, indicated
that the thrust of DHEW's regulations controlling the clinical use
of investigational drugs vas not designed to limit in any significant
way, if at all, the way responsible companies, sensitive to their
scientific integrity and moral and ethical responsibilities, con-
ducted their investigational drug clinical studies. He asserted
that the new regulations covering investigational drugs were only
designed to get at "the bad apples in the barrel", to identify
then, and ferret them out; he stated further that the vast bulk of
commercial pharmaceutical firms already used appropriate ethical
and scientific practices, and that the regulations were not designed
to limit such operations. It therefore was no' great jump in
reasoning to go from that view by DHEW's General Counsel to the one
further step of considering DOD studies, when carefully monitored,
to have a similar trustworthy base, using the premise that DOD is
also a government agency, equally dedicated as FDA to the public
interest even if viewed from a different perspective, and certainly
one as worthy as the better drug companies of being trusted by FDA. In fact, this 1962-4 rationale to some extent presages certain
current legislative proposals, such as contained in the Nelson bill,

--- PAGE BREAK ---486
-3-
S.13219 94th Contress, in that they place responsibility for testing
the safety and efficacy of investigational drugs (as distinct from
discovering or inventing them) in the hands of a government agency
rather than the drug concern which will market the drug when approved
by FDA as "safe and effective." 
The fact that the Kefauver-Parris
Drug Amendments Act of 1962 was subsequently enacted, while consistent
with the desires of FDA and The Surgeon General of the Army to
tighten up on the clinical use of investigational drugs, should
therefore be seen as a condition subsequent to the conception of
-the Memorandum of Understanding, rather than the basis for it,
contrary to some views expressed at the September 10 hearing.

This
distinction brings out the authority of FDA to use "selective
exemptions" or inter-Departmental Memos of Understanding as a
method of administering a regulatory statute, especially where
enforcement resources are limited.

Next, while non-classified research programs involving the clinical
use of investigational drugs were only listed as the 2nd of 3 types
of drug investigations covered by the DOD-DHEW Memo of Understanding
(February 18, 1964), and classified clinical investitetions of drugs
were listed as the 1st such type, the fact is that the milieu out
of which the agreement arose show almost conclusively that it 
was
the unclassified drug studies rather than the classified drug
studies which lay at the heart of the Surgeon General of the Amy's
interest in the aqreement.

The classified drug studies referred to
in item 1 of the February 18 -emo-4fUnderstanding were in fact an
afterthought, only a minute part of the Army Surgeon General's
frame of reference.

It follows that any additional weight given
the classified studies in the Memo of Understanding must have been
initiated somewhere within DOD between The Surgeon General and
Deputy Secretary of Defense Vance.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The classified drug studies referred to
in item 1 of the February 18 -emo-4fUnderstanding were in fact an
afterthought, only a minute part of the Army Surgeon General's
frame of reference. It follows that any additional weight given
the classified studies in the Memo of Understanding must have been
initiated somewhere within DOD between The Surgeon General and
Deputy Secretary of Defense Vance. This assessment of the situation
is based on the fact that the February 1964 Memo of Understanding
was a culminating document, based on draft regulations previously
prepared in 
The Surgeon General's Office in 1%3 and correspondence
within and between the two Oepartments antedating the Memo of Under-
standing, rather than an originating Document, whose policies would
have started with such document (See enclosed proposed draft Army
Regulation, dated 13 February 1963, and draft DOD letter to
Secretary Celebrezze, circa flay 1963). In these enclosed background
papers, it is clear that classified drug studies were almost out of
mind, since, to the best of my knowledge, the Office of the Surgeon
General was involved in very few, if any, classified drug studies
at the time. Such classified drug studies were generally conducted
by Class I activities, e.g. Edgewood Chemical Center, an Army base
not under Surgeon General comand. Although medical officers were
assigned to monitor the medical aspects of any such studies in-
volving the use of human subjects, these medical officers were
staff officials assigned to the Class I commander, and not to The
Surgeon General on matters of administration. It is not very
surprising therefore that the Class I commanders, jealous of their
prerogatives, as are most commanders similarly situated, cJhose not
to consult The Surgeon General on such studies, even after promulgation

--- PAGE BREAK ---486
-4-
and distribution throughout the Army of AR 40-7 In 1964, implementing
the DHEW-DOO Memo of Understanding of February 1964.

In essence,
the proposal of The Surgeon General in December 1962, ultimately
approved in the Memo of Understanding in substance, was larc'ely
intended to qive the Surgeon General an overall cognizance and
control within the Army staff over clinical drug investigations,
mostly if not entirely unclassified taking place under Army medical
research contracts and In Army hospitals under Surgeon General
cognizance, and at other places where the Army activity under
AR aO-7 was required to apply for Surgeon General approval, and to
add both a level of scientific review, i.e.

the AIDRB, 
in addition
to the then existing review by Army medical officers who were Project
Officers of medical research projects under Army Medical Service
contracts with universities, hospitals, etc., and a further level
of approval, i.e.

personal administrative approval by The Surgeon
General.

Particularly these additional review requirements were
intended to demonstrate to FDA that such studies could be monitored
carefully and scientifically by Army medical experts as good or
better than FDA could apply to this situation in 1962-4.

At this
time, FDA had only 2 pharmacologists on its staff, to the best of
my recollection, and was having difficulty recruiting more.

In
addition it should be noted that it was acknowledQed fairly widely
that the Army anti-malarial drug studies dating back to Vorld War I
had been widely acclaimed not only for the high scientific level
maintained, but for the huge successes it had achieved in discovering
primaquine and chloraquine, all apparently with due regard for the
rights of prisoner subjects equal or greater than available under
other aLspices.At this
time, FDA had only 2 pharmacologists on its staff, to the best of
my recollection, and was having difficulty recruiting more.

In
addition it should be noted that it was acknowledQed fairly widely
that the Army anti-malarial drug studies dating back to Vorld War I
had been widely acclaimed not only for the high scientific level
maintained, but for the huge successes it had achieved in discovering
primaquine and chloraquine, all apparently with due regard for the
rights of prisoner subjects equal or greater than available under
other aLspices.

These studies had been conducted by the University
of Chicago, among others, under an Army contract, under which there
had always existed harmonious relationships between the University's
Principal Investigator and the Army's Project Officers, including
a useful cross-fertilization of ideas.

Vere FDA to suddenly demand,
and The Surgeon General to acquiesce in such demand that all decisions
of a scientific nature regarding such anti-malarial drug study were
to be made by FDA, even aside from the question of whether FDA could
have staffed such an operation as well as the Army, it was our
perception that Army medical officers whose career specialty was
medical research on military medical problems would be loathe to
devote their careers to being Project Officers for several years on
projects where they could frequently be second-guessed by FDA
staffers, some of whom at least at that time would be far less
qualified to make such Judgments.

One such Army medical officer-
Project Officer was Dr.

Herbert L.

Ley, later to become Commissioner
of FDA.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Herbert L. Ley, later to become Commissioner
of FDA. From the University's viewpoint, its Principal Investigator,
who had developed cordial relationships and a modus operandi with the
Surgeon General's Office, would have to learn to deal with a
different federal agency, which would have the last word from a
scientific view.point, so that the result could easily be that the
flow of communications between the Principal Investigator and the
Army's Project Officer might have tended to dry up, with consequential
damage to the Army medical research program. Another cost of the
shift in these relationships under the Memo of Understandinq from a
professional responsibility essentially shared between the Surgeon
General and FDA to one of sole responsibility by FDA, would be to

--- PAGE BREAK ---487
place investigational drugs in their precommercial stage, even when
being investigated under an Army contract as having a possible
military interest, on a time-table like that of other drugs covered
by INO's sponsored by drug companies, even though there would be a
national interest in their being treated differently.

Thus, FDA
quite properly is extremely careful and cautious before a proving
a new drug for sale in interstate commerce, in light of the great
potential damage to the public which could occur if the decision
to approve such drug should be incorrect, particularly in view of
the difficulty in getting a drug once approved off the market.

In
the same vein, when considering whether to approve a new drug for
movement in interstate commerce as safe and efficacious, FDA before
approval might take into account the fact that the country has
managed to get along without such drug until now.

The Army, on the
other hand, cannot always wait a long time before acting, from the
standpoint of efficiency anyway, and the Amy has the additional
flexibility that if it tries a drug out, with less than satisfactory
results, or even if satisfactory, but a better drug shows up, it can
stop using the first drug immediately, and start using the second
drug.

The Ist factor is illustrated by the case of Dapsone as an
anti-malarial in Vietnam in 1966.

Gen.

Westmoreland, facing a
fearsome malaria problem at that time, telegraphed The Surgeon
General to make available to him the hest antimalarial then avail-
able for use of all troops in Southeast Asia.

Clearly, this type
situation calls for a different type decision than FDA typically
makes when approving a new drug.

It is no secret that the two
flepartments agreed within a period of two months to make Dapsone
available to troops at risk (rather than all troops); Dapsone was
an investigational drug when used as an antimalarial, but had
previously been approved as a new drug at a higher dosage level
for use in treating leprosy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Clearly, this type
situation calls for a different type decision than FDA typically
makes when approving a new drug. It is no secret that the two
flepartments agreed within a period of two months to make Dapsone
available to troops at risk (rather than all troops); Dapsone was
an investigational drug when used as an antimalarial, but had
previously been approved as a new drug at a higher dosage level
for use in treating leprosy. This arrangement served the country
well at the time, in my opinion, and paragraph 2. of the 1974 DHEW-
DOD Memo of Understanding appears to concur in this opinion inasmuch
as it specifically contemplates similar future arrangements. A word should be said about the policy underlying the original 1964
Memo of Understanding in light of some of the surprise registered
by some of the communications media, and possibly others, that FDA
was not itself assuring compliance by the military departments with
FDA regulations. In the area of proposed legislation to be adminis-
tered by one federal agency affecting a 2nd federal agency, a number
of different health legislative programs had been considered by the
Office of the Surgeon General, the three military Departments as a
whole, and DOD as a whole. In general, it appeared that in those
situations where a health program was proposed by another federal
Department to which there was no DOD objection, inasmuch as the
Army Medical Service was a complete health service inclusive of
professional health personnel of all types, the interests of both
federal agencies could best be accomodated by the propronent federal
agency prescrihing standards for imple-menting the new health legis-
lation and for The Suroeon General to monitor the Army's cornliance
with such prescribed standards. This had the a ddeRadvantage of

--- PAGE BREAK ---488
-6-
keeping Army Medical Service personnel up-to-date with the latest in
law and regulations, and in charge of their own Department's
compliance with such laws and regulations integrated into the Amy
Medical Service health programs, and would not burden the primary
federal agency with enforcement responsibilities in an area where
Amy Medical Service personnel had more insight into the extent of
need for personnel to monitor adherence, and how to accomplish same.

This was the position proposed and accepted, for example, in commenting
on bills in the fields of humane 
treatment of laboratory animals,
as well as in all aspects of environmental pollution control, both
air and water.

Placing the first agency in a position to oversee
the operations of the 2nd federal agency, as by inspecting it,
could lead to awkward situations in which one agency has the appear-
ance of preeminence over the second federal agency, and could be
interpreted by the inspected agency as an encroachment on its mission,
with bad feelings engendered as a result.

It therefore appears to
have been entirely justified, notwithstanding the criticisms voiced,
to have left the monitoring of the Army's compliance with FDA
regulations initially with the Army Surgeon General, and only
ultimately with FDA, rather than directly with FDA.

A word should also be said about the application of the word "sponsor"
to the Army in its drug studies, both extramural and intramural.

This
is no mere question of semantics but a very basic policy issue, at
least a of the time of the February 1964 Memo of Understanding.

The
Surgeon General of the Army in relation to such investigational drugs
was in a substantially different position than a drug company "sponsor"
of an investigational drug.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This
is no mere question of semantics but a very basic policy issue, at
least a of the time of the February 1964 Memo of Understanding. The
Surgeon General of the Army in relation to such investigational drugs
was in a substantially different position than a drug company "sponsor"
of an investigational drug. In the latter case, all parties involved
on behalf of the drug company in its application, who sign the IND,
bear some responsibility for the proposed use if they are all employed
by the one sponsoring company, and their communications are within
the company rather than being at arm's length. In the case of the
Amy's oversight of its medical research program, e.g., its malaria
research program, whereas all the members of the University of Chicago's
staff assigned to the malaria research project bear a similar rela-
tionship one to the other as in the case of a pharmaceutical firm
sponsoring its investigational drug, such is not the case with the
relationship between the University's Principal Investigator and the
Army Project Officer, where the relationship is spelled out by
written contract, and by regulation must be an arm's length relation-
ship. In substance, the role of the Army Surgeon General In such
malarla studies is much more assimilable to that of FDA's role vis-
a-vis a drug company than is it assimilable to that of the University
of Chicago, the "sponsor." 
In addition, whereas a drug company
"sponsor" is principally interested in the marketing of a new drug
in commerce after FDA approval for such use, The Surgeon General of
the Army's Interest is primarily in use of an investigational drug
determined to be safe and effective in the immediate stage following
the investigational phase and often preceding the commercial marketing
phase of the drug in question, since The Surgeon General has no
financial interest in the drug's commercial exploitation, unlike the
usual sponsor.

--- PAGE BREAK ---489
-7-
To an extent, one Sub-Committee member appears to have been correct
in his statement at the hearing that FDA appears in 1964 to have
delegated its responsibility for assuring compliance by the Army
Medical Service with appropriate Investigational drug regulations,
thus resulting in a sharing of such responsibility (since the
delegator always retains overall responsibility, and can in his
discretion at any time revoke the delegation), but does not appear
to have been correct in my opinion in the conclusion he appears to
have drawn from such fdct, i.e., that "the Army Medical people are
the very people EDA was supposed to regulate;" it appears to me that
the people FDA should regulate are the principal investigator
proposing to clinically study an investigational drug, and the
institution with which the Responsible Investigator is affiliated.

In the case of an investigational drug study falling within the
Army's medical research program, such as described above, the
people to be regulated should be the Principal Investigator and
Administrative Director of the University-Contractor in the case
of a contract study, and the medical officer-Principal Investigator
for the study and hospital commander or facility commander or area
commander in the case of a study undertaken by the Army as intra-
mural research; in either case, the Project Officer overseeing the
technical aspects of the investigational drug study for the Army
Medical Research and Development Command and for The Surgeon
General, the AIDRB, and all other officers and Boards reviewing
the applications at The Surgeon General (or Medical R&D Co.mand)
level are clearly acting more as FDA's agent rather than as the
Principal Investigator's agent, and so are not "the people FDA
is supposed to regulate" (except to the limited extent spelled
out in the Memo of Understdnding).489
-7-
To an extent, one Sub-Committee member appears to have been correct
in his statement at the hearing that FDA appears in 1964 to have
delegated its responsibility for assuring compliance by the Army
Medical Service with appropriate Investigational drug regulations,
thus resulting in a sharing of such responsibility (since the
delegator always retains overall responsibility, and can in his
discretion at any time revoke the delegation), but does not appear
to have been correct in my opinion in the conclusion he appears to
have drawn from such fdct, i.e., that "the Army Medical people are
the very people EDA was supposed to regulate;" it appears to me that
the people FDA should regulate are the principal investigator
proposing to clinically study an investigational drug, and the
institution with which the Responsible Investigator is affiliated.

In the case of an investigational drug study falling within the
Army's medical research program, such as described above, the
people to be regulated should be the Principal Investigator and
Administrative Director of the University-Contractor in the case
of a contract study, and the medical officer-Principal Investigator
for the study and hospital commander or facility commander or area
commander in the case of a study undertaken by the Army as intra-
mural research; in either case, the Project Officer overseeing the
technical aspects of the investigational drug study for the Army
Medical Research and Development Command and for The Surgeon
General, the AIDRB, and all other officers and Boards reviewing
the applications at The Surgeon General (or Medical R&D Co.mand)
level are clearly acting more as FDA's agent rather than as the
Principal Investigator's agent, and so are not "the people FDA
is supposed to regulate" (except to the limited extent spelled
out in the Memo of Understdnding).

Worthy of separate mention was the one single sentence comment at
the hearing by Senator Mathias, i.e., "Which way workss the Best?"
(for investigational drugs being studied clinically under Army
Medical Department auspices).In the case of an investigational drug study falling within the
Army's medical research program, such as described above, the
people to be regulated should be the Principal Investigator and
Administrative Director of the University-Contractor in the case
of a contract study, and the medical officer-Principal Investigator
for the study and hospital commander or facility commander or area
commander in the case of a study undertaken by the Army as intra-
mural research; in either case, the Project Officer overseeing the
technical aspects of the investigational drug study for the Army
Medical Research and Development Command and for The Surgeon
General, the AIDRB, and all other officers and Boards reviewing
the applications at The Surgeon General (or Medical R&D Co.mand)
level are clearly acting more as FDA's agent rather than as the
Principal Investigator's agent, and so are not "the people FDA
is supposed to regulate" (except to the limited extent spelled
out in the Memo of Understdnding).

Worthy of separate mention was the one single sentence comment at
the hearing by Senator Mathias, i.e., "Which way workss the Best?"
(for investigational drugs being studied clinically under Army
Medical Department auspices).

Using Sen.

Mathias' criterion, as
noted above, the AIDRB would have to be given high marks and
characterized as virtually an unqualified success in light of the
known facts, e.g.

none of the "tragicases" brought to public or
the Sub-Committee's attention involving the clinical use of
investigational drugs had been reviewed and approved by the AIDRB.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mathias' criterion, as
noted above, the AIDRB would have to be given high marks and
characterized as virtually an unqualified success in light of the
known facts, e.g. none of the "tragicases" brought to public or
the Sub-Committee's attention involving the clinical use of
investigational drugs had been reviewed and approved by the AIDRB. Using the same Mathias criterion, it would appear that investiga-
tional drug clinical projects undertaken at Army facilities which
did not meet Army Regulation 40-7's requirement that all such
projects be submitted to The Surgeon General for review and approval
by the AIDRB and The Surgeon General do not warrant similar com-
mendations, and raise the question whether-practical and efficacious
means shouldn't be found for persuading facility commanders such as
at Edgewood to comply with AR 40-7 and possibly other applicable
regulations as well, e.g., AR 70-25, by submitting protocols of
such proposed studies to The Surgeon General, Attention: AIDRB for
critical review; Such submission to The Surgeon General has been-
required by AR 40-7 ever since it was first promulgated in 1964.

--- PAGE BREAK ---490
-8-
The 1974 Memo of Understanding may be a step in the right direction
on this Issue insofar- as classified drugs are concerned by conditioning
the exemption of such classified drug studies from the new drug
regulations of FDA to those where prior approval of the Review
Boards and The Surgeon General h4d been obtained.

Worthy also of at least some clarification is the somewhat adverse
comment that over the course of more than 10 years under the DOD-
DHEW Memo of Understanding, available records only indicate four
meetings of the two agencies for purposes of studying the classified
tests.

After first reiterating what is mentioned above, that the
real purpose of the Memo of Understanding of February 1964 was to
get agreement on how to handle reviews of unclassified studies, it
is also important to mention, in order to gain a fuller perspective,
that Army Regulation 40-7, which was the Army's implementation of
the Memo of Understanding, in paragraph 8, captioned "Information to
be Furnished FDA", provided for very comprehensive transmittal of
information pertaining to investigational drug studies by The
Surgeon General to FDA (Enclosure).

In essence, and to all intents
and purposes, the substance of every unclassified Army investigational
drug case file approved by the AIDRB and The Surgeon General would
be forwarded to FDA for its information, and FDA's usual IND form
for claiming exemption, FO Form 1571, would be transmitted to FDA
in the case of investigational drug classified studies after Surgeon
General approval of such studies.

In sum, what to some has appeared
to be a rather small number of meetings between FDA and DOD repre-
sentatives may be largely attributed to the relative success of the
AIDRB, and the rather full disclosure-to-FDA provision contained in
paragraph 8, AR 40-7.In essence, and to all intents
and purposes, the substance of every unclassified Army investigational
drug case file approved by the AIDRB and The Surgeon General would
be forwarded to FDA for its information, and FDA's usual IND form
for claiming exemption, FO Form 1571, would be transmitted to FDA
in the case of investigational drug classified studies after Surgeon
General approval of such studies.

In sum, what to some has appeared
to be a rather small number of meetings between FDA and DOD repre-
sentatives may be largely attributed to the relative success of the
AIDRB, and the rather full disclosure-to-FDA provision contained in
paragraph 8, AR 40-7.

Next, there have been informal suggestion% nore authoritative, that
the DOD-DHEW Memorandums of Understanding may be legally insufficient,
and that therefore consideration should be given to cancelling them.

In weighing this suggestion, it should be borne in mind that the
February 1964 Memo of Understanding was specifically concurred in
by DHEW General Counsel Alanson Wilcox (and quite possibly by his
opposite number in DOD), 
and was executed by two very distinguished
lawyers in their own right on behalf of their respective Departments,
Secretary Celebrezze himself for DHEW, 
now a federal Circuit Court
Judge, and Cyrus Vance, Deputy Secretary of Defense on behalf of
DOD, formerly General Counsel, DOD, and now a senior partner in a
large Wall Street firm.

In addition, the Army Surgeon General
proposal, on which the original 1964 Memo of Understanding was based,
was concurred in by the Judge Advocate General of the Army.

Also
to be noted is the judicious August 21, 
1975 opinion of Mr.

Richard
Merrill, Asst.

General Counsel, DHEW (Food & Drugs), in which he
noted that the Dept.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Richard
Merrill, Asst. General Counsel, DHEW (Food & Drugs), in which he
noted that the Dept. of Justice would probably attempt to restrain
any FDA assertion of regulatory authority likely to disrupt the
activities of a sister agency, e.g., DO0, and did not find it
necessary to reach the question of whether authority existed on the
part of the two Departments to enter the Memos of Understanding.

--- PAGE BREAK ---a sister agency, e.g., DO0, and did not find it
necessary to reach the question of whether authority existed on the
part of the two Departments to enter the Memos of Understanding.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

491
-9-
It has also been suggested that the primary reason for granting an
exemption from IND requirements to DOD was so that FDA would not have
to handle classified security matters; while this may have been true
of the 1974 Memo of.Understanding, it was not the case, as noted above,
for the 1964 Memo of Understanding, in which classified drug 
studies
were little more than an afterthought. 
The further suggestion has been
made that the "exemption" granted DOD for classified studies was based
on a desire to be courteous to DOD, rather than a legal inability to
handle classified materials. 
While it is clearly correct that there
is no legal disability which would preclude FDA from handling class-
ified materials, it appears equally clear that what motivated the
1964 Memo of Understanding,at least in this connection, was not a
desire to be courteous to DOD as regards classified studies, but
rather the "Mathias" criterion, i.e., which way would work best.
Although there is much to be said in favor of Congress clarifying
respective responsibilities of FDA to regulate, on the one hand, and
of other Federal agencies to develop, test, and use investigational
drugs on the other, there appears to be at least as much to be said
for the approach implicitly taken by Dr. Schmidt on the last page of
his September 10th prepared statement, i.e., that neither FDA nor DOD
pressed its legal position to its ultimate rationale, but rather
arrived atimutual practical understandings as to how best to deal with
issues of mutual concern, both being fully aware that the boundary
line between their respective jurisdictional areas as regards investi-
gational drugs was not firmly fixed. 
Perhaps an ideal integration of
these two approaches would be achieved if Congress limits its "clar-
ification" to what is mutually agreeable to both Departments.
Cordially, 
'.
Alex Naimon, J.0.
(former Deputy Judge Advocate,
Office of The Surgeon General, DA)
70-026 0 - 76 - 32ss limits its "clar-
ification" to what is mutually agreeable to both Departments.
Cordially, 
'.
Alex Naimon, J.0.
(former Deputy Judge Advocate,
Office of The Surgeon General, DA)
70-026 0 - 76 - 32

--- PAGE BREAK ---

492
ft&t AM LO TO ClSOLCbl WftSt44t1tuI &W Sw Wj44
)OLWA
LA m/G to
Jet*0 MOOC.t*
U 1mb. 1963
Its1.eo "- 
o dredt 43 cCOZUS.L3 wk C11014301 L~atzau% ofc~ =v em
,t"4 
La c.Co3 C=3 Cz. "ZiLc3 C01ct.-.* Col. 1z.14w 
mZjG? t=2
the 
ibm 
to~o d. 
BL"c.. It 0~ LTt~c 
ot!=. ' 
7": zC~ CAI 
pV. 
i~q
-.
by V= to.;b 
.- 
.-
t t=_2
(49:k4 
*. 
.
or 
;* 
• 
.
.
* .
*. 1-o r, 
,I"c 
& D~p 
,t. 
:;
I to" ".
...... 
_ PriVAW- IE-. 
°... _... I
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

493
-
o 
s,.a 
-. 
.
+ 
• 
,. 
.
')=4 
49" IN" 
" 
""
1ut.,o 
"eo• 
.
c, 
.
m. 
.uw.~ 
* 
e 
~ 
w 
3
Ifo .'-' 
: 
.
• 
s4. 
m 
u 
mm .
~ 
'.'
* 
N 
MIW Z EA 
1L f 
.
,@ , 
-* .
.
m
* 
° 
" 
"-r* 
" : 
.
+ 
'
+.: 
.....
, ." 
.'j 
t.'" 
,~ j 
a. 
-
", ,- 
.
.
.. .'
C .
.
.
.
.
• .. . . .. , , ,+. ...-
• 
of t 
(" 
az'' 
.. 
o 
we..- 
"" 
m 
.w w 0 
4
.P ii 
" 
+ " 
"sa " 
• 
o ,a 
. w a a af "a 
a a 
• 
* 
1
q 
asSppLcb) 
tO CMi-941 
Zc=Gfl.sc P3I *W em w -
• 
aue 
.
.a- 
=. 
a; 
" 
,
'" 
' 
ko-,,- 
-o-o---.,,--- 
.
I'
.
It
f 
...
• --.. 
.
0
* 
4. 
" 
#. 
3# 
"
*3.,. 
•*4* 
3. 
-
-
-
:*. 
-
3-3 
6 
"
* 
.- 
*. 
, 
' 
*
... 
3 
.
3 
.
34 
l. 
•+
: 
' 
"44 " " 
*3 
"" 
" 
3;
*., 
.
• 
• 
• • 
.
.. 
l 
+ 
.
4 
-
,. 
-
-+
-
+..n /,.:.. 
ew Ib 
U 
P.. 
.
d. 
•JW 
.~O .
.
.
.
+ 
-; • 
.
.. ""-: ; - S' :. 
,, 
lm 
s 
l + Z 
Sw 
-
-
-2 
.
.
....

--- PAGE BREAK ---3 
"" 
" 
3;
*., 
.
• 
• 
• • 
.
.. 
l 
+ 
.
4 
-
,. 
-
-+
-
+..n /,.:.. 
ew Ib 
U 
P.. 
.
d. 
•JW 
.~O .
.
.
.
+ 
-; • 
.
.. ""-: ; - S' :. 
,, 
lm 
s 
l + Z 
Sw 
-
-
-2 
.
.
....

--- PAGE BREAK ---

494
I. 1 po ., 
k,, -
rsu t~cmI 1z e.s4.ls. Imlra.ioL.
" i J 
4T ., _ : 
E~,~~p 
f, Co. 
C 
.
wa=* by Got" 
s wti tb& vweu e.6 0=c4&m~z~ 
OI9LLB 
to au OUWANI
I=sof 
snBIGAaLee dnao Onct de vape 
cc Wh p~t 
lt 
~
g S. .btdao.. 
An "~s~A6GvLazu=2 d~rcc 
Coi 
O 
a~so. 
tU4is 5Ap)4Z.m#
Le dft*as a6 mew dte. mot yet &"cow0ed by tba cainLtCES ad UVadm 
MA nplo
Dfi~xtmat. of Wth,. Aauaw~ s 
mama 
up~oat 
u'"cra to 
rm ) I"
a.wal ww b? the VAuo a* a Wis " *UL=.tm & * aa4pccvWd As 4L=o
ta o.ad w 
pamout of the Aug soap&*" 
ac" 
A&.w 
" 
c 
"•c-
Wo -boabtAIDOL 
-
.3. 9r.=* 
to 1e gtta"d 
A. U 
L~4 
CSI' 
s. of& a. tsnwADU.1*al, dZW&
=W be autbaoiLrMa1 
nyuo wtuca .pproa 
of U& duaroa GesX-4. 9*6 lSymiscL-
&am iw toq 
4 utbLwt to 0 
54 e t la 
ya quw;" to CuXuK:. g OLzW
doe 4l~s~cAl phumcaor w s1lal~At 
tzln~o c an *ImomUsaietI 
4ca wLU w*.Ut
94m 
empl 
cayet.4 paLAUis a.6 tbee ccpks to Me S~mCso.ATLI'
g 
la ~ t. 
-
• 
...
:. 
.: 
.--
, 
-
t'b Z 
I. 
, .
.
.
.
.
- .
-
'pe..
II. 
e 
3.tuce suem
... 
-
0.. 
• 
49""M 
sleeg L-..slfa *1 
" 
a1 
: 
;
... 
.
w by* 
-" 
; 
' 
" to
does.S. ";1.a. 
5" 
'. 
I 
-
"Z 
:m 
.
-
.
. " -b 
h .... 
".t '.
.- 
.. 
.. 
.
/. 
.
*-,.
-..-.'..: 
. ,;, 
.:.e.e. 
d 
dz .
"..lL .-_. 
,. . . .,. :-.* .
: , .
:..,
• :. 
-. ' ;."- 
.. 
' 
.
Oa 
d 
lo 
ue 
.
"• 
• 
" 
,: 
:. 
.-..':' 
.:. 
-I...
.. , .. .
,. 
.. .
' 
.
.. 
, , . -. -: 
-. -. ..

--- PAGE BREAK ---d 
dz .
"..lL .-_. 
,. . . .,. :-.* .
: , .
:..,
• :. 
-. ' ;."- 
.. 
' 
.
Oa 
d 
lo 
ue 
.
"• 
• 
" 
,: 
:. 
.-..':' 
.:. 
-I...
.. , .. .
,. 
.. .
' 
.
.. 
, , . -. -: 
-. -. ..

--- PAGE BREAK ---

495
Satto wll be ceo4ustod
O0 .
bow C4swas 1410=tic 
abcm* rat wo or p"Um4aC*f
safewa 
CUW*et &v~*ble to both tto Stlzu= Cr tha adq cuiptx. 
aumsa~
all 
d4LL@& 
aAt 
of the MOO) and ci) 06L=i Safco 
30ts~vlx gm
4145aL £ave 
oa (ao 
xas 
, 
mi o cm prc 
od 
.
-., 
" 
'
U 
ruan a COdU&t of VCGPmood CIL~1a -
SA~i&L
As fteUio 
La 
pom ma mUlls 
aond ga Cu 
gair 4C 
941
36 AWMU*t 
mubo .5 hmbJctof bolt AO 664, S&o.Uti*
-i 
pmut~a 
£afazuUlm w)ovaast to owe cvxafima Ge tbhe lavwiLoU"oa
0 ..
; 
of eubj*it. to ba =p3pd g .q4 
(&I! aV) 4W
-
Sat 
*nLmi aa. Sm 5I ebum C os msh az4,o.e 
"
Do A, 9A Li of 
,b. 
pbct. of tba. 
.,taw.&4
*.bur La 
ndet~by zer 
"a to deatob .2. 
*a' Meo LA Am tuoods. %Us 
.,
gaugI~e W9 t =.to"Mrsomb laoaamd yoalttona= 
ed;U3 to &V.plaa4
-
good" u 
ow 91PU&" obomm to dSmu4=, c .cae at " sm'.etuhtOn 14.
.o 
.
.
A 
b. 
Us AUM 1" wil atme Md ova""otscl pvoal =Ctvuit (itmf umto
amy laddetd eropndu wt the lwewgomuw, au4lto theasa~t ck& the PC**
P.s", If reeto, 
N Ia uboe *a 
In put/vWI 
mv 
t c 
to r.* 
Lwm 
&sAt.tW, 2e- Z.A
the q&p• 
ACfft 
e p 
fg. 
it 
.bdL 
W. 
-A
dtepe 
• o 
patn. 
** 
.
,-
e1as 
llLsdcer 
iaa I 
:' 
'
.
.. 
.
; 
'.
"":"'" 
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---*a 
In put/vWI 
mv 
t c 
to r.* 
Lwm 
&sAt.tW, 2e- Z.A
the q&p• 
ACfft 
e p 
fg. 
it 
.bdL 
W. 
-A
dtepe 
• o 
patn. 
** 
.
,-
e1as 
llLsdcer 
iaa I 
:' 
'
.
.. 
.
; 
'.
"":"'" 
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

496
(1) That there is substantial evLdence to sho 
the drug t4 be wo
dangerous for use for the purposes and in the manner for tuhicb it Ls proosod for
iavestigational use, 
-
(2) That the manufacturing methods are "indequate to maintain approp-
vstea standards of quality needed to sure safety and Sive siLuiifcanee to the
clinical Investigation of the drug,
(3) That the overall plan for clinical Investigation does not appear
reasonable or otherwise 
worthy of support.
4. 
Composition of Board (ALUMB). 
The Board shall be composed of the Special
'Assistant to The Surgeon General for Research and Development, or his personally
selected designee as Chairman8 and at .least four other professionally qualified
indivLduals designated by Th Surgeon General, all of von shall servo at TIe
Surgeon GeneralIs pleasuresand one of vhom shall be designated as the Recorder.
S. Record-keeping requirements, 
as .
Znveti sator;" Each investksator 
+
subject to thi*' regulation-- will maintain a record of clinical iwcsti~ation$ separate
This record of clinical investigation
from the patient's clinical records, 
A1 ll Include, minimally, a list ot paccnts"
receiving the Investigational drug; the names' lot number, date. and quantity of
Investigational drug prescribed; case histories' the details of eltaical observations,
tests and laboratory procedures carried out on each subject before, during, and after
* adpinstration of the drug In question along with a description of or copa of forms
used to record such data*
b. 
by Custodian. 
A complete record of each Investigational drug will be
* maintained by an official designated by the Comnding Officer, norm lly the pharmacy
" officer, if the Lnvestigational drug Is being used in an AM facility, and by the
investigator himself or a responsible individua. desLnated by him for the .purpose,
This z cord will
where the drug is being used under & DA contract or grants -nlude 
the following
4 
•y, and by the
investigator himself or a responsible individua. desLnated by him for the .purpose,
This z cord will
where the drug is being used under & DA contract or grants -nlude 
the following
4 
•

--- PAGE BREAK ---

497
I .
.. 
, .w- ,. 
.
.S
(2) l.safanwwo a ob
(3) 
Ac~mtaMA ta vLvW,
t4 
~~.;Pumtm dates it a
(5) Lor 
as otral suMbeu
(6) 
))&t ot autboL y to 
..
,
(7) 
MAC" 
.5 iIr4uvl aua bo 
to puo0ewlb rb d.S.
(0) Ru 
of Precztbt 
pbw*Ucla 
w ds.unt
(9) aAee v Ich 'iaa of tba drua to tvroistw4 Ll eopU4abUe
(10) 
Dean h 
u4a of teL dri 
to approve" for genal U s
a ad&. #d oCfU "LoUo 
druZ& 
-
4xing c so of tawotie. st
*A AU wsor4a rquxo. r 
this p aapk 
o 
U 
l be kpt, Asv
-Qemf £AT=& Chizaa, £IMM by tWe 
oesp 
bl 
te 
Uwwtisma 
tes 
4u 
u.Uye
A tI *4o 
t mdio 
oeo be submicted by the I 
tietaor to the AtW 
wry&kj ato
Am Reve leed Fravtly. 
termintLon of th e 
m tStioa.s 
dd 
m 
.
tLuwAvA 
.
wr Erpt..t owmvatLmsVWQb loQote 
Ps mtly to oush Dowrd& pertLuu4y £5- -
-
&boy Lmdsva sq advam off"*t that may be rogardad an amad by l. 
am duan& ML on
advoge- effect U. 4s 
,gs 
t vy• 
ba r., rt. to 
.UA 
Doard 1 
ts.ly
I* Op"tL4 Cw"14.m Applkablae to Cbtadul KitiutLU 
at33 U Gne.
16 m bwtuvt 
no mai cww* tg 
tg Lwqtlpt 
mi *ngs 
aimstted to
o 
.Y 
, 
.
P 
" 
4am" 
cm/ 
of
WjA4fU 
pertGS*4 to U~u ia hs 4asd 
this 32wt.
.
.
." 
, • 
7 
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---KitiutLU 
at33 U Gne.
16 m bwtuvt 
no mai cww* tg 
tg Lwqtlpt 
mi *ngs 
aimstted to
o 
.Y 
, 
.
P 
" 
4am" 
cm/ 
of
WjA4fU 
pertGS*4 to U~u ia hs 4asd 
this 32wt.
.
.
." 
, • 
7 
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

498
b. 
The investAtor 
n 
s certain that *11 subjects partcating
La te L estiatitoa at twIX V2t5Saetivts are, f LL17 Inforaod ar4 u 
r44;an 
t"-a
the new drug is beiug used for LnvestLatioal purposes. 
Us will obtain the consent
of the subjects, or their wspresenratLves, except wers this Ls not fe"ble or, ia
the investigator's professional judgantg is contrary to the beat Lterests of the
subjects.
8. 
Army Contracts and Grants. 
An Departmnt of the Army contracts and
grants wider vhich in vestigatlonal drugs are to be clini 
Ly investatd.
will contain clauses requiring the contractor or grantee to caply with the
• requirments of paragraphs 3, 5, 6, atd 7 of this regulation.
9." InformatLon to be furaLshed FMe, Tb. Surgeon Coenral vIii iu rnsh
* information copies of the following to authorized representatives of FDA, providing
personnel security clearances, if needed, are obtained:
ao Alarming and other adverse reports to The Surgeon General on the
-
effects of an Investigational drug when received.
eb. 
A 
existing Departmant of the Army report concerning an investi-
gational drug specifically requested by an authorized representative of FDA.
a# In the case of unclassified clinical studies of investigational drugs,
The Surgeon General shal transmit copies of the "Investigator's Statement", signed
copies of the AMDU's and The Surgeon General's evaluation and approvals to the
Commissioner of Food and Drugs, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare,
"ashinton 25. D.C. 
In the case of classified clinical Lnvestigations'of now drugs,
and in the case where the investigational drug to be studied is beiLn 
eonsored by
the pharmacoutical industxy, such materials need not be transitted to FDA, subject
to the provisions of a and b above, but Form lT (see 28 Federal Register 179), FDA's'
usual claim for exouptionlvill be forvarded.to The Surgeon General for transmittal to
'FDA after approval by The Surgeon General.
d. 
Nothing herein should be construed as preiludi g .Te Surgeon General or
6laim for exouptionlvill be forvarded.to The Surgeon General for transmittal to
'FDA after approval by The Surgeon General.
d. 
Nothing herein should be construed as preiludi g .Te Surgeon General or
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

499
kti delegate from transmittig eq D infocatios pertaln* to LmvUOs4PtLOAI 4r%*&
vhich, L their discretion, appears should be of LnaWaest to DA.
1.0s 
MbdScal 9mrpcis. 
In cruci astwattons MWe Swrgob 05OeW~a -ATTU I KZWS.04
may approve short totm eas of an iaveet~itL4me drug bin spon sMed bY 
.
parmceutieai firm m an Lndividual patLeutfviLtout submisLos of she Inves 
ta ' 8
Statsemt prescrLbed iA pauagraph 37 
upo a hospital ooamsmer's request for $AM-
Such request vi.fl: include the follavin informtion iolmilyi 
pati&nt#r 
Dw 
"
disanos. 
mam end quantity of the drug proposed for use. 
medial off icer
rsponsible for the patient# and 
nature of the medical s 
lersacy. 
In 
1 
&GGS whert
IM Sieo4a 
lme l appr 
e e emergency use of am nListtigtioa. drug being sponsored
by 7 pharmaceutical fLm the responsible investigator vLIl furAIsh both A cplsted
n 
1573Ato the apoaorin phax ;Uetical fIra m Ad a siged copy 0 aid 
L 
rmA 
573
to The Surgeon General a exp*ditiously as cicuestatcee permit.
Ile Custody and Dispensing of IestgatnsAl ks 
laatipa 
onaI drus in the
custody of t i "'ertmeof 
-the Ar' 
vLij be Etored and dispeas 
in accordance vit
'the applcable pFoies of A& 40-2, subject to the provisions of paragraph 5,
* 
.. 
* 
..
' 
.c..j 
.
.
f 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---of t i "'ertmeof 
-the Ar' 
vLij be Etored and dispeas 
in accordance vit
'the applcable pFoies of A& 40-2, subject to the provisions of paragraph 5,
* 
.. 
* 
..
' 
.c..j 
.
.
f 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Is 
D3AVrlA
near buys
Thask you for your prompt reply of 24 Hay 63 to vW 10 MW letter roquasting
tbat w seek to set forth an agreement covorLng DoD ElinLal investigations of new
omchLe first on ou area of agreement, I &ball be happy to designate me or
mone representatives to meet with your representatives with a view to drafting a
Peuorandim of UderstandLn 
between our Deprtments covering the rules which will
apy to DoD clinLial investigation of new drugs,
As to the balance of your letters you appear to be under sou mwbat of a misco-n
eaption as to our desire in this matter. 
We have no desire under any eircusenes,
even woer classified DoD research projects using miiLtary subjects, to avoid reporting
to you eV Informtiona we haves which you consider applicable to the civilian
community 
s well, assuming proper security clearances have been obtained by those
to be given access to the infometion. 
What we do desire is for the Llitary depart-
merts to continue to exercise control of DO clinical investigations of new drugs
during such drug's pre-commrcal stage only within the framewvork of existing Responsible
Iovestfgator-Vroject Officer retltionshi* 
In this connection, it appears to me Alat
first blush that drugs being investigated as part of the Defese Department's
research program are not drugs 
in comerce" and so ate outside the roach of your
regulations*
We, of course, agree with all four purposes set forth i 
the d para of your
28 Pay letter that your S Jan regulations are designed to provide 
in the belief
that the proposed ti-service regulation enclosed with ny 10 Hay letter accomplishes
the self-sae four purposes in a meaner tallori-ade to this Departmet's needs, 1'
urge you to review such regulations with a view to accepting then as the basis for
Do4 program in this are and so that I my have the benelit of your comments on such
draft regulations*met's needs, 1'
urge you to review such regulations with a view to accepting then as the basis for
Do4 program in this are and so that I my have the benelit of your comments on such
draft regulations*

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I a"-501
In regard to research studies on investigattonal drugs falling within the Defense
Departments mission of defense of the nation# I confess that for suah studies to be
monitored and subject to control by anyone other than DoD. as by IDAs vould In my
opinion adversely affect DoD operation* vhther such studies are denominated classified
or unclasoified.
(closing sentence)

--- PAGE BREAK ---control by anyone other than DoD. as by IDAs vould In my
opinion adversely affect DoD operation* vhther such studies are denominated classified
or unclasoified.
(closing sentence)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

502
IMMPOZOTOAD 
FORMW
;5M 
4 WIA "" 
swaac 
...
Proposed Army Reulations - "Clinical
IDJA 
Use of InvostLCational Drus"
to 
DCSP8SR 
ran. 
TSG 
DAYS 
tdLW 
C,.vI
OCRD 
A. Haimma/aln165988
OTJAG
TAG
III TU
I* By $unmary Slhet, dated 12 December 1962, TSO forwarded a proposed DA Rome to
OSD# requastina essentially that DoD request exception from proposed FDA regulations
concornin3 now drugs for invetiCgational use (Incl 1). 
Tte ASA (IML) soinnd and trans-
mitted such Ilerorandum on 2 January 1963 (Iecl 2). 
Thereafter DoD. thru DDME entered
nootistions with the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare with a view to ar-
rLving at a common understanding as to the appropriate relationship between the respec-
tive Departments in the area of invoatiaational drues. 
Those negotiations culminated
in a hemorandum of Undorstanding betimen the two Departments, siLGed by Deputy Secre-
tary Vance and Secretary Colebrezzo (Intl 3). 
DDRM implemented such HInorandum of
Understanding by isouLno DoD Instruction 5030.29, dated 12 Iay 64 (ncl 4), which in
turn requested all DoD components to prepare instructions implemontins DoD Instruction
5030.29. Proposed AR 40- 
(Inel 5) is TSG's proposed Army implomentatLon of DoD
Instruction 5030.29.
2. 
Ti 
proposed AR provides that all proposed invastigatLonal drug studies on
humans under Army auspices shall be described in detail on an "Inveasi.atores State-
ment," evaluated by a now-"Army Invstirational Dru Review Board" to be established
within the Office of The Surgeon General, which planned studies shall be executed only
to the extent they are approved by both such Board and The Surgeon General. 
Proposed
AL also calls for conductLnn l1nigal studies of invosci.'atio-. 
aLcuQ 
renerally in the
iLt 
oomul 
d 
axeula 
on this subject, pubfliTNd-on 0-af-
l96I-i 210Feder 
,a3). 
It coos on to provide that in the case of non-
classLfied drug investiGations, relevant DA materials will be transmitted to 1M as tle
claim for exeamtion for the investiLgational drua it question; in the case of classified
clinical investiations, drugs employed will be autoatically exempt upon final approv-
al by TSG. 
Technical information concernin, investiGational drugs of interest to FDA
and DA personnel will be exchanged, consistent with security regulations. 
The proposed
AR also provides for amr~oncy approval by TSG of the short term use on an Army patient
of invastLAtional drugs obtained from and being sponsored by a pharmaceutical firm
without the prerequisite of first subitting the proscribed "Investigatorls Stecdamat."
3. In view of the above, it is requested that inclosed Army implementation
(Inel 5) of DoD Instruction 5030.29 be approved and published.
4. This Roeulation was initiated by hr, iaimoni, Office of the Judge Atvocates,
wb may b-coitaeted a-itl-xt.65988-Lf additional'information is needed.
10M TIZ SURG9CE 
NE5AL
5 
CncN
as 
Colonel, 1.
Executive Of ecar
%A 
PON 
C 
tP"&cFUn 
.
V 
+. .. 
.. ,a 
' 
' 
-
ire Atvocates,
wb may b-coitaeted a-itl-xt.65988-Lf additional'information is needed.
10M TIZ SURG9CE 
NE5AL
5 
CncN
as 
Colonel, 1.
Executive Of ecar
%A 
PON 
C 
tP"&cFUn 
.
V 
+. .. 
.. ,a 
' 
' 
-
ir

--- PAGE BREAK ---503
ARMT RrEGULATION1
No.

40-7 
|
GAR 40-7
|IFADQUARTFEIS
DEPAUTM)N1'T OF TIlE ARMY
S 
WAStltoCT0,, I)C., 1S Noiefnbirr 1904
MEDICAL, SEHMICE
CLINICAL USE OF INVESTIGATIONAL DRUGS
Purpose 
d sco .....................................................

.

I
I)efiftioa .................................................................

" 
2
1'roccdurs!

to hi 6#utwed .....................................................

3
('uzijv.mkm of It.6.611 (MII, 
) .................

I ............................

4
ttOil.L 
e.lire.

' 
l 
.................................................

6
Ige4lom tior |if ritil ,.01hill I ......................................................

6
Ficcpral caomlitil..

hllaiCla..

to clinical li.tig'tWoM of nW drugs ................

I
limformatilol t) IP.

furs.hdA 
-'FDA 
.............................................

3
1l icl % o -1.lwk ........................................................

9
Custody lpl lI!NII.illt, U( mtvebti'tionil drum ................................

t0
Anny eoadrarts .............................................................

i
AMly grants ..............................................................

12
I.

Purpose and scope.

This regultton pre-
ucribes tie policic aml pruccdiure 
applicable to
all clinlicAl ue tf il C.A.igitiomiil drul,.

umsider tile
auspices of tile )cpnrtnt 
of tie Army.

2.

l)cfiniliaim.

For the purlow of thi4 re,,-ulA-
tion, the following dellitiom.

Apply:
a.

Drup.

Any su&bbtsee intended for mise 
in the
diagnCosis, cure, mhitig-tiom, treatment, or preven-
Lion of disease in man; and any substnce (other
than food) intended to affect the strucLure or any
function of the human body.

6.

Inreaigafioaal drug.

A new uirtmg, not yet
approved by the Ccmmmnienr of Food amd Drugs,
Dopairtmenit of lealtb, Elductiun, and Welfare
(hereinafter referred to an FDA) fur getmerad me by
the public ns a safe nd eificauiou- drug.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Inreaigafioaal drug. A new uirtmg, not yet
approved by the Ccmmmnienr of Food amd Drugs,
Dopairtmenit of lealtb, Elductiun, and Welfare
(hereinafter referred to an FDA) fur getmerad me by
the public ns a safe nd eificauiou- drug. mid that ik
proposed for climieil study under Department of
the Army auspices after adequate preclinical
information ima been obtained. c. (imical use. The admintration of a dnig
to 
ailt. 3. Procedure to lie followed. a. .Aprom/l. Tie chikmcal use of an investitational dru:g tm y ie
authorized only upon written approval of T7.:
Surgeon General (fee al o par. 76). C:mch inveti-
gator who reql:est 
authority to con, uct or is
officially requcted to conduct either time cli,,ica. pharmacology orclinial iakt of an i:ve;tig.tional
drug %ill suibmnit a 
,iied completed applicati:
and thme copie.., indt -ed by the li.Opi t.: or other
medical fa-ility commuiamder, to Tlie .ir.eon 
Gen-
eral, ATTN: Chairman, Army Invesid.mti-mi.il
l)rue Review Boarti (Al DRB), Depem tinetIt of te
Army, Wa4iigtim, D.C., 20315, uiag the follu-.-
icg format:
Im893O' 
a 
silg 
tar'le:met
1. ]lackground d.ta. A. ant.: of iivestigalor. 1. Date of request. C. Name or other clear idemtific.ttion ot drug. 1). Name of wasufacturcr or other source of drug. E. Qualificatio 
of iit.uti.:tor in detail or by refererce to details already
on file in Army records. F. Nsame andt address of facility or facilities %here imestigations will be
eoadueted. 0.-All know relivatit information about past use or pertinent reference
thereto available to both the inve-btigator and the drug supplier. in-
eluding all preeliilcal data. and all other information justifying the
clinical Investigatumm (i.e., the safety and rational of the propOd
study). *This rrgmlaion supersedes para.graph 79b. A11 40-2. 4 November 100. TAOO 6TA-Nev. M-46O'-44
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---504
Alt 40-7
11.

I;t.

and (.-.Iii't of I'rol.

,'i Clital Inmcstir.atiouh
A.

81 
Ilic ;Ipripme said malimdlry 
ti Iur or urcanrty of propoard cisicl
.l"Vestir-.l..

II.

Alalr, 
a.

t' 14-1 of oaS., %t.

t vi s.ite.

usx, condition, sid other
perli|uitl iifoolsationu rti-atiat 10 th ColditlOmllS Of til itiMa litlioa.

C.

Number of bil,j.

eta to be ateip6%ed as tontrils (el wafy) aid somne 
in-
foresiosw 
u 
as in II &6si' flor iwi101 
COlitrobl.

D.

An outhic of tl.

ith.vrx of li.

in 
tig.almlol already pL nmnud eillacr In
detail or lay rf-r.' ti% to dA.alh .Araady on ile in Ar iy r"erds.

This
oltlille ni-y iaalude rtmovousle alshratesl 
and vatiatious, ad will be
suppkaa oto:w or anstnald whets ally vlignificaal ch.nie iln direction or
scope of tlae imave-mtr.at"e is unwk.flukta.

R..

lk-icriltlom or cnpit of forms usod to fcord dAta.

4.

Recnrw and 
nraluawn.

The AJ1)lltl 
will
teview alill evnlliate all Il,,-iw-d.4 hrc¢iiil, eiiter
into ally itillitwatil Corr l~wlo-i-liwe wilh tile iliV.

tigator, and, to tine extelit Ilhat tlme plljpoal i6
rejectrl il uluile 'r ill ialt, mill traisnini, -aittle to
ti e ilvebligutor.

To the extent lirto liet AID1lJ
tplifoves a )rolio'.al, it wiill trsnamnail it.

racoom-
luefldallioi to The Smr,gemma 
literal, % lao m ill then
confirm or ali-affim ill %% 
luo or in part lite Hoard's
approval of the prulioni iii ltuestion.

e.

)az'cs fur di.'aspp'orisag 1rniupoals fur irreti-
Vsaeionl drug--stuwies.

ERithar the AII)]B or
The Sm.*ean Gencial fully withhold alplirbva to
study nit iivetia..atimml drug clinically if it is
detcrmised -
(1) That there i..

s'tsl..tatial ae idemc, to .aow
tiae drug to be too datigrrous fur uis for
timo liUrpw.4 ad in tile musamalier 
fur
which it i., i1' ,x 
faor isva.i.-!wiilual use.

(2) 'hmi, 
tile moiltnifiataUriii- 
Ilsthoda.

are
inaldcqn.-tc to mauailt ala aplplroairlat.

:i1l11d-
ards of (talaaity 
ia'dla'd to a-,saire safety
and give aigtifiemcc 
to tile 
clilticiwl
investignlii ta te drug.are
inaldcqn.-tc to mauailt ala aplplroairlat.

:i1l11d-
ards of (talaaity 
ia'dla'd to a-,saire safety
and give aigtifiemcc 
to tile 
clilticiwl
investignlii ta te drug.

(3) That the overall plan for vliaial iivesti-
gation dies not appear rcmiaOliale or
otlerwie worthy of minplitirt.

4.

Compobilion of Caird (AII)iRU).

The board
will be cilla 
d if tile Special .A-.staliaL to Titl
Burgeona Casarial f r ]e.-,arch still Develulnmimit
or Isia i iOr.oitlly uhcted designisee 
Chairmiii,
and it It.,t; 
four aLicr prores-ioaally ualifiel
iuidividmlLa ih,-i;-intlrd hy The 'nir-eol 
Gelnerni,
all of wiwun %%ill w.rte sia Tiie Faairi lom Caeliral's
plea-ture, slid ule o "t hissi 
o 
will be dhiguated as
the Itecorher.

S.

Record-keepiag 
requirements.

a.

fy in-
weSgadup.

Each inv-ltigator amhject to this rxgu-
latioa uill lmailitiiii a record of tliiied iiivcztiga-
2
tlion separate from lte pitlieit's Cliaicail rc'uixt.

'I'lmi.

record of Cliniral invastiastioii will ilaehlde,
limlilsisillly, a list of latniaiiti reerivinn;I the iliv-ti.

-fttional drg; the llaia, lot nmslber, ulte sntsl
qualtnlit 
i f imaeti-atioual dra; prre.cribral; c.-e
lim.lolies; the dla Wi.

of clinical obacrvatios tets,
and laboratury lprocedures carried out on eslt
subject l .fore, disi iu, 
asnd after admnaiitration of
tlme dru-- in que.tiom.

6.

By euoldain.

A complete record of e:tela
itiveti:.ational dru- will be maintaied by ai
official dez:igiiatedl by Life commalnadinlg officer nf
tile medical utsi, or intAllatios, nonally tle
plhnrmstacy ofl.eer, if time iivetivwia0iai sal drV i.:
being i.;ed ill ai Armsay facility, aid by the ill-
vestilator himielf, or a re.,ponsib!a iidiimal
desigiaated by hsimia 
for time titiri)os.C?

li limo drt:l
is being used ossAler a Delimirmaneiat of the Arliny
contract or grait.

h'lils 
record will inctlule tie
fwIlomitag iisformaatiwl:
(I) Nane ,J dimg.

(2) Mauufcturer, or other source of druag.-
(3) Amoulst and date received.

(4) Expirtiul date, it ally.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(2) Mauufcturer, or other source of druag.-
(3) Amoulst and date received. (4) Expirtiul date, it ally. (5) I o or eullivl number. (G) Date of aullhority to tae. (7) \allies of individuals autlhorized to pre. scribe the drug. (8) Nassac of presciiihg lhysician or denti.t. (9) Date on which use of tle dru; is terini-
nated, if applicable. (tO) Date on which te of tile drug is sp-
proved for general use as a safe slaid
efficaeious drug, if during court" 
of
lnveligatin. e. Reeimea 
pemriom. All records reqNired by thi
paragrosjils *1ll 
be kept 3 years after comupletiou
of the project and then retired permnanently. See AR 345-210, File No. 003-38. TAGO 7 iA

--- PAGE BREAK ---6.

Reporting requircmeti.ltn, 
Pre., 
rep rti
will loe smiomitted tee ie 
Snrgron General,
ATTN ClN: 
iirn 
.ll )lhll.

lay the reslbont-ihle
Investigator 
iat 
0..4t 
oce asniutlly.

.A filed
report will al-n he uihniitaed Ily the itiveli!at,,r
to the Army l1ve.ti..l 
I)rng Iteiiew Board
promptly toes triiutitn al, the inve-ligillin.

In
addition., unuial or inmel.rtnt oh-ervationis will
be reported promltlly to suih Board, p:tnticularly
It th,6y involve any aadilr.e clltct that may le
regarded as eailted hy the new dihna; if the Pver..,
effect i-1 alartuSing, it will be reported to such
Board iii.,etiately.

?.

Special conditlomns applicable to clinical in-
vesltgatlons of new drug.

a.

The investigator
will inake certain that the iives-tigatiuml drte 
is
adininitered to sulject- oily under lii iueritonil
*upervi-ilata or tider the sipervi-ini of other
qualified per.-,nniel to whin lie has ,l,-leoiated this
authority.

4.

The inveligatar uill Inake certaii lhal all
subjects particilating in the inv-tfignaiou or their
roprefsiittivi are f(lly itiuteenall antl tide-tanel
that the iaew dris" i; heisg used iar isivetiaatkinl
purp w.e- 
lie %ill 
htetoain the written consent of
tho subjert, tar their repreentative., except where
this is not, a'-ible.

or, in tile investigator'A profes-
sional judgment, i contrary to the best interests
of the stbjectst.

When the purpose of administer-
lag an inveltigationl drug is not to benefit, tile
individual to whon it is administered, final ap.

proval for the us-e of volunteer sijjects will be
obtained its provided i.

par-arraph 6, AR 70-?3.

Benefit to the individual i defined as the admin-
istration of a drug to an inilividtal expected to
result in the dia..o.aL, litigation, treatment, clare,
or prevention of disea,.e or injury of the sane
Individual.

L Information to be furnished FDA.Benefit to the individual i defined as the admin-
istration of a drug to an inilividtal expected to
result in the dia..o.aL, litigation, treatment, clare,
or prevention of disea,.e or injury of the sane
Individual.

L Information to be furnished FDA.

The
Burgeon General will furnish inform nation copies
of the following to authorized representatives of
FDA, provided persontiel security clearances, if
needed, 
are obtained:
a.

Alarming and other adverse reports to The
Burgeon General on the effects of all investiga-
tional drug- when received.

I.

Alay existing Departucut of the Army report
concerning an inveti.ati-,anal dru slpecifirally re-
quested lhy nl authorized relremelattite of FDA.

e.

In the Cabe of unclase-ificl clidiit'd btnmlies.

of
nvetetigatiolial druG, Tile Sila" 4c.i (c:icr1tI uill
IrO@ IVTA
505
Alt .10-7
tranamuit c,,tic of the "ovcC.tlOr's Satelneit,"'
s.ignel copie.4 of tile AI)1111's anti "'ri Surgeon
.etieral's evotlatin &fil aplmrnvals to the (%Ill.

ali-imler of Food aid 
)lirgi, 
apartmentt of
lialhh, Education, and Welfure, Wa-hin-tIm,
D).C., 2003.

]I etIe e ,e of cha-siflcal elisical
ilve.ti-aliun,; of new lruid% atid in the co~e %lere
the iuvestipottionRl drug to be studied is hei,lt
aiaon.ored by the phannacettical inditstry, such
materials aced not be trawiainitted to 1DA.

, subject
to the provi-imoa of a &flat & above, biut Form
YD 1571 ('ce 24 Federd ]e -iter 170), F)A's
usual elni 
fair exemption, will be forwarded to
lie Su-geon Gencral for traiumn.ittal to F)A after
approval by The Surgeon General.

d.

Nothing herein should be col.trueol a% pre-
elutlin: The .urgeon G;eneral or his del-gate fron
transinsilting any Department oif the Army iushr.

rittion pertainiig to biveti .atiunal drugs which,
in their di-crelion, appears should be of intea-eit
to FDA.

9.

Medical emergctnies.

itn crucial -itlations
Ilie Surgeon General, ATTN: MEDI'*-C.

may
appruve ihurt lerna u- of an investignlimuaail ,rt.--- PAGE BREAK ---

itn crucial -itlations
Ilie Surgeon General, ATTN: MEDI'*-C. may
appruve ihurt lerna u- of an investignlimuaail ,rt. being sllonsored by a hlihnrnaaeitical fitie msn al
individual patient, without suhniviun Pf the
Investigator's Statement prescribed in paragra.m. 3, upon a hospital conmmander's recluet for sanile. Such request v. ill include tile follouing information
minimally: patient'a name, diagnosis, name and
quantity of the drug proposed for uie, medical
officer responsible for the patient, and nature of
the medical emeregency. In caie. where The Sur. geon General approves emergency use of an invei-
tigational drug being ssponiored by a pharnaaceu-
lieal firm, the responsible invctigator %iU furn sh
both a completed FD 1373 (Statement of Invc:-
tigator (see 28 Federal Uegistcr 170)) to the spon-
soring phanuaceutical firm. and a i;mned copy of
%aid Fonu FD 1573 to The Surgeon General i
expeditiouly as circumstances pennit. 10. Custody and dispensing of Investigational
drugs. Investigational drugs in the custody of
the Department of the Army will be stored and
dispensed in accordance with the applicable pro-
visions of AR 40-2, subjet to the provisions of
paragraph 5 above. 11. Army contracts. All euntractu under wbich
investigational drug are to be clinically iuvedti-
gated will contain the following clause:

--- PAGE BREAK ---AR 4.-7
CLINICAL.

STUIPY or INVI.TlGATIONAl.

DRUGS
a.

The V etc-etur anres that Is-lure unilrtaLing to conduct either the clinical 1larma.

eol4 o e' chu;eeal ti.ld of an iis,-tegatsosl drug under & 
c4partsnent 
c, the Arny c€n-
tract, it will 
lanuit (-or IIP stittn apIrbv:1 of T,.

Ssroe'u CGam-r.al, 
lhplartment of the
Army, a oigss.d €-1i 10 tri, alAlieuukin ani th e, eC¢O14fs to The burgeen (Gloiral, ATT :
Chairman.

Aremy hs vetictivanAl isrsg Ie~ir 
Iloard, Department of the Army, Wah.

Inglo., ha.'..

ftl.

u-i-ig te fuiiig 
format:
Iansligifer'i s sehkRil
1.

Background data.

A.

Name, of inviligittor.

It- Data of requft 
.

C.

Name or other ckar ilentiflcation of drug.

1).

Name of manufaeturer or other source of drug.

M.

Qusliatlins of inv,-tiga or in detail or by rcrnee to details already
on Mie in Army records.

F.

Name and aeJilreac of facility or facilities ihere Ianvestigakons wiU be
conducted.

0.

All keown relv.,st information ashml, pa#A use or pertinent reference
thereto aaiLatole to both the invetigator and the drug supplier, in.

shding all preclinical data, and ill other information justifying the
clinical ivertigaltia (1., the safety and rationale of the proposed
study).

11.

tlan and Coiehiet Pf 'ripoad Clinical Investigation.

A.

Specific purpose and military need for or urgency of propwd clinical
invetirtiun.

11.

Appruaitnate nuiler of sibk,-vto.

their age, sex, condition and other
perinent i.furinatimn rvid.vant to tie conlltiras of the invettigati, n.

0.

Numlor of subjects to he e nl.pyed as controls (if any) and same in.

formation .s in 11 bve for rh 
cnnt-ilt.

D.

An outline of the phases of the investigation already planned either in
detail or by reference to details alread)- on file in Army records.

This
outlne may include reasonable alternates and variations, and sill be
supplemented or amended when any siiitcant change In direction ur
Goe of the invediiation is undertaken.

1t Description or copies of forms uped to record data.

b.--- PAGE BREAK ---

1t Description or copies of forms uped to record data. b. The Contractor agrees that each of its inveaticators who conduct either the clinial
pharmacology or clinical trial 
of an investigational drug will maintain a record of elitical
investigatIon PCparate from the patient's Clinical record. This record of clinical investigation
w 
includr,. minimally. a list of patients receiving the Investigational drug; the name, lot
number, date; and quantity of investigational drug prescribed; ras- hitoric.; the detail% of
clinical observations. teta. and laboratory procedures carried out on each subject before. dAing, arId after administralioloof the drug in question. 9. The ('odractor agrees also that either its responsible investig-%tor or a responsible
Individual desip ated by him for the purpose will maintain a complete record of each investi-
gational drug used unier a I)A contract for at least 3 years after comcplction of the iuN4ti. galomd drug study. This record will include the following Information:
1. Name of drug. S. DManufActurer, or other source of drug. 3. Arnount and datc recehi-vd. 4. Expiration date, If any. . Lot or control number. 6. Date of authority to use. T. Namcs of Individuals authorized to prescribe the drug. . Names of prescribing physician or dentist. 9. Date on shich ue of the drug is terminated, If apphieabli. 10. Date on uhich use of the dnig was approved for general use 
a safe and e c€. cklus drug, if during Course of invcitt .iton. d. The Contractor arres to submit prorcts ,-ports to The Surgeon General, ATT.N:
Chairman, ARll, 
at lea-t tc annually, and to submit a final report on termination of the
lvestigation. In aioutution (iLrnrgor agrees tet pro-litly report to the AI)ItIl suhy unusual
r important oloservatiolns occuerig during the course of the inve-.tigatiunal drug study,
TACO #"A

--- PAGE BREAK ---. In aioutution (iLrnrgor agrees tet pro-litly report to the AI)ItIl suhy unusual
r important oloservatiolns occuerig during the course of the inve-.tigatiunal drug study,
TACO #"A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

507
An 111-7
etikularly It Ihy invl.c any aIhrtpr rWet thai way ie rrMqrid as tauv by the ew.
drug; I tile aivrr tlrrt k 
iaatinni,. It l 
e 
ti 
Mloortetd to de AII)ltlo alnsdlatety.!
C. 5pmelal (.whtsltons Aliqalr 
e to 
o.lif 
" Ihu¢.iilast Oe .1 Kew ilru.: The Con.
tractor aglres to mtakL: certain that tile in - tliginnal dlrug 
ol 
eduialster 
to Fulmljets only
h*ner tI* Ixr.nat.t vtowpv.I'sn of the to ,ponmJlle invtliqator or a quliuki 
peron to whorm
the 
invae 
,.,ar.las 
d.1. lrAtil IA autheily. lb. Contractor *to al ees to
mel. cetiain %led ell auI+ cU olrtkinting it tihe Invrth1atloa or tidr n rl"eeniatlves are
yll Imforintl and unk'rstanl lhitl Un nrw otrus1t 
iA t-ig W.i4 fof InveltltI;atttA 
purpOeSC.
')e morittrn coo-wri of tlt subjects, or tei*r 
will be oItaind cxet14 %here
tWIs Is not f- -aillc or. In tim: rrvponitie Inv:Mlcatora' profr-Alonl jitlgenot. Is contrary to
the be t Ilntelft so the iubiL 
Mhen tie purr' of aelud''etertmg ai I"Veltlgstlottl drug
Is not to b-,.ttli, tile ilgltyihluat to ,hnm It It alnlni-trred. final aplvuat for the use of
%vonutcer oubects %il The otitbe~l as provld..t In parigia3.hs 6, Alt 7O-21 
l1eneit to the
Individual if d'-ficnl as the a.dninlstoiallon o( a drug to an Individasl eapeet- to reult In tho
diagecals, tiligatiol, treatnfteet, cure. or preventwoe of diwfe or iljury of the "ame individual.
12. Arwy grants. All departmentt of lio Alny grmtI tunder which investi-Atiounl dru;s are to
blie eiiactily iiw'+iig 
lill cointain clAtivs rt-quiriag tbe grantee to comly with the requirments o(
jarahraahs 3, 5, 0, tad 7.
ItM1 
AL
31yeotrder of lthe Scercleary of tho Army:
Official:
J. C. LAMIIIif',
Major 
csncrol, Usifed Statcs Arnruty,
T'Ac Adjutant CTcncral.
Distribution:
A/cire Army: To
Services-D.
NO: Nole.
USA 1. None.
IfAtOLD K. JO!INSON,
Gencral, Uniled Stiot 
Army.
OAIC/ 1810,.
bW diktribut d in accordance with DA Form 12-0 requirements for Medical
YAGO ITTA
a.5O swamu rat.. Met. m.
70-036 0 - 76 - 33SA 1. None.
IfAtOLD K. JO!INSON,
Gencral, Uniled Stiot 
Army.
OAIC/ 1810,.
bW diktribut d in accordance with DA Form 12-0 requirements for Medical
YAGO ITTA
a.5O swamu rat.. Met. m.
70-036 0 - 76 - 33

--- PAGE BREAK ---K. JO!INSON,
Gencral, Uniled Stiot 
Army.
OAIC/ 1810,.
bW diktribut d in accordance with DA Form 12-0 requirements for Medical
YAGO ITTA
a.5O swamu rat.. Met. m.
70-036 0 - 76 - 33

--- PAGE BREAK ---

N08
SWULARY $lET
,".. 
.. 
.. .. 
. .. .
...... 
, --
l2i 
A-40 
2f 
i$T 
e i 
t
N. 
Iinre 
TeloNiwos 
a511" 
13O C ri"il
( )~ ~ 
~ 
~~a 
" i 
440 f1firl 
ilt 
2"3=0 prop3e Manx= 06000 
-mv
proposed oclionsl 
reco 
Inis 
esniall 
i 
tha 
BO 
revlIques 
fC 
f 
X196fom
.
n the wadb~k. e f 
1g 
t 
e 
l.e ml. epeiencesee the~ Poemd 
w'. 
and ~ 
W 
Du 
Ad 
isratio
'ae0Ied 
¢o 
ougot 
6 deral 
me 
isud 
ose 
reguleim gerov 
ti.:e..e
cinical 5uof loveU 
L0te 
v 
i 
l&sn 
t lipropoed 
li 
uld
i 
dditional ud 
ee 
Ing 
aild 
r 
uSoUSili Ae 
stie 
t ot 
in concion w
c Iliistuieso 
Invigaoal 
di o%* by requiring that tdtl 
plno
record 
t 
mltoran ii to procliat 
erti ar 
of 
se 
teter 
oiuh
proposed 
prlailoa 
rndg 
ofrthese 
c 
ad 
the 
qunt 
itat 
O of e 
lit
sUh IrntlairOs fao the 
Dfs a 
lrin 
l 
2)f .v 
1 at 
T 
o
lYU 
aoudiioal rheaorkeiy 
nd detailed reotig 
1303(dutofets 
conncti-
.nae 
of the 
thaec 
prloe 
ioi 
eperien, 
pth 
oodlo ISdee mined tati
th) du coe 1ut 
e inia 
Fuedl 
wr eais ise 
parfoos 
eutlat in 
geserig thi
liiasluse 
oin 
woie o irls 
Ior esse 
the 
priossedreulaton 
wodt 
eis
c cliicl 
tstd 
oa 
in 
v 
teiginan g il, rii 
tdtil 
pl 
of
2.Iebe08dtyfo 
the 
detaited 
peoson.s bakronnodh 
researchers 
anh 
uniaeoan 
quealta-
Itie 
copostion 
2f 
thergeo 
Geertasted be repoedilAsin 
to byThe 
rgesonso.
Geneal for 
teResearch projDeeltoimewtoleorn 
artif, ofore 
eaxletrmine 
othateor
the drugicold noxta elinled 
vimtSa 
reasonabl 
sfetorthat the esarch poo
wao 
une asoal 
noeonpartma 
or thatth th 
ivetiations&dWlae 
setal 
resnt be 
i
to~ 
lbsue efndv cyfomtefetedpoor 
and resetngcniearchrson 
be toen 
et.
*~federal *Sencies from the application of subject regulations. 
Copies of their respee-
tive letters dated S October 1962 (tIal 3) and 11 October 1962 (1nl 4) ar inclosed.
Tha, by 
owrandium, dated 15 October 1962 (leel 1), ASDQO requested the cements of
Ithe thre military deparnts an above subject. 
Inlosure 2 constitutes such -
-
proposed Am 
moments. 
In substance, 
inclosed proposed AnV cements roecoeonds thas
DoD sack as agreement with FM under which DoD would agree to adhere to prescribed
tarards for conducting clinical studies of investigational drugs, Which would likely
parallel the substance of subject proposed regulation., modified by provisions inappli
cable to Covermint agencies; 
adherence to such agreed standards by DoD, however,
would be entirely DDo's rather than L's responsibility. 
By this errangment, 
DOD
would of cour" 
bear full (Instead ofpartial.) responsibility for asW DOD clinical
researches of LvestigatiolI drogs which involved unfavorable results. 
Jiat mIr
sftnifLcantly, DOD would bp able to supervise Lis clinil 
investigations of new
drugs within the fraawork of existing Responsible Investigator-Project Officer
relations 
without the necessity of preparing papers for an obtaining approval of
I
*am" 
Me6 
fee "uc. 
o*,wmmos 
, 
-," 
m 
, 
"no 
em*
e*
0
Few
uA& I avi. of 44
Isible Investigator-Project Officer
relations 
without the necessity of preparing papers for an obtaining approval of
I
*am" 
Me6 
fee "uc. 
o*,wmmos 
, 
-," 
m 
, 
"no 
em*
e*
0
Few
uA& I avi. of 44
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---roject Officer
relations 
without the necessity of preparing papers for an obtaining approval of
I
*am" 
Me6 
fee "uc. 
o*,wmmos 
, 
-," 
m 
, 
"no 
em*
e*
0
Few
uA& I avi. of 44
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

509
13 OFt 19 i
SUIJWCT 
proposed FDA Regulatioms, published ie 10 August 1962 Vede81 AeLtsMte
in res 
New Dugs for Investisational Us
l, 
on unosma quantity, with no similar background of built-up relationships for
supervising such work. 
Further, the Comassioner of M has no background In
evalustins the potential military value of a drUG which may prove out successfully$
as cespaced to the degree of risk involved in clinical trLalsp which evaluations
would be required of him under proposed rogulations. 
In additions It to considered
that the 
tmLtary midieal service& have the persoumnl and are i a better posLiLon
than Fa to evaluate the qualifications or lack thereof of the reosarc Ieattestos
it sponsors, and whether their research plans are or are not reasonble. 
(DoD
could of course furnish information copies to FM of mterLals of value to FM in
protecting the general public under this proposal). 
At the amss tim, the sar
koe 
concern foe the fair treatomt of human test subjects generally as is reflected
in proposed FM regulations he. been shors by the Arup, foa example, in its treat-
ms t of volunteer test subjects; 
this concern wos evLdenced by written Ara 
lsdLcal
Service policies in this regard, sd culminstad in the publication of A 70-25, Use
of Volunteers as Subjects of Research, dated 26 Horc 1962, copy attached (m l 5).
TA sun It is considered that DoD can, better than FM, end therefor should, Lnst"d
of IA, eereise control over the clinical investigations of 
dm 
drugs sponsored by
3. 
The proposed Anp muaxrndum reco mnds this new relationship between DoD
and MA for the administration, of DoD-sponsored clinical investigations of new drugs
rather than providing detailed critical coments on the proposed regulatiLons the-
selves first because all indications are that FV will have a revised draft of
subject proposed regulations published soon anyway (see mci 6), secoods because
moccof the substantive objections to the new regulations are being or have already
been made by individual physicians, drug firm, and organizations to FM,, third,
because mach of subject regulations is sound, fulfilling n admitted ned for
tightening up existing procedures foe the clinical Investigation of investigational
drug and lat, 
because it the recomnded exception is obtaLid, there will be no
need to conern ourselves with the provisions of subject proposed regulations. 
Io
significant substantive criticism of subject regulations are included, however.
II(IIiTICKI
That inclosed usoandus to Assistant Secretary of Defens 
(Npoeer) 
(coo
tamis 
the above recmindation for partial exception from proposed FM regattis)
be approved and dispatched (Iaol 2).
ch.i 
of Research end Developnt
@?JA 
I~s I*b ctbW 
*E51 
U., 
Z 
MM
a1. fso 
from ASD 
Lieutenant Gemaral
to IgA 
15 Oct 62 
Tba Surgeon General
20 Ltno to ASO, (1) for Mgr
6.H M 169 
Re 
ord, 7 0e4 62 
2of Research end Developnt
@?JA 
I~s I*b ctbW 
*E51 
U., 
Z 
MM
a1. fso 
from ASD 
Lieutenant Gemaral
to IgA 
15 Oct 62 
Tba Surgeon General
20 Ltno to ASO, (1) for Mgr
6.H M 169 
Re 
ord, 7 0e4 62 
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

510
*. ; I It
ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
D 
W,,-,,oN,,,. 
o.A. 'JHIGO 
27 
1. 
D.C. U
ME AwLt
OCT 15 1962
"PA014YAW11 
' Zlg 1A'
sn=- my or UM My 11
SWAT 
Or M AR 70=c
B3JB=1 
Proposod Recculatioas of tbe Food an M n~A&.nstr-
as ubliohad in the Pe&._ -WotcV.A wwt 30# 962p
10800, 7990.1992 1001%,uivo.
the propoood remulatioas ot the Food and Ua M~tl 
on 
goverait
"NoV Prwot 
for Ivetloatlon 
Ub" as pobllhel In the Federal Raet.
Auut 0s 2962, vao first brought to the attentl n 
th -ofice an
Cotlober 9- 40 1962(.1-11 
tW)
It In ou underatandiM that thcoo rWAtIomo oe Issued und 
th
gonoal rule vcutiia outbority In the Scrotar-y of Health# Rduatioam end
Votcro by the Federal rood, Dzw, anid Cc=atio Act (21 U. S. Code 37),
and under the oectoi 
ot that Aot gwnng "now drug oleorane popoodedres
(21 U, B. Code V5~), 
Hpr 
mDw 
mnlinao
In the Conierence o r 
3a9u 
mnc~aoo 
62 to accospany B. l359
by the Houn. ot Roreontativeo, 07th Couogmoa 
2ad Saslonp Report No. 
256p
the Bcc otary of leaith,, Duatioup and Welfar' Is given epress authority to 
.
wc~ep.t drugs Intended solely for layctleational uao. Both Homses adopted
the Awanckits aed 
to by te Confeees and, the Ant va s I& 
by the
We have reqwastedp twa 
the Secretary of Health, aMuuatioi, and Wltarep
an eztensoia in tize to sumit view an cents to the 
at&oas 
o 
de
ik the Feder"l Reglatere
%a to attcwt to present ademtel.y the c e t md vies that agoet -
-
the thohts of various Deputent of Dfense a 
,cnccs 
end tho military depart.
sents, It Ii requeatcd that yw ito 
be forwarded to reach this ofse
Norma S. If"
f,

--- PAGE BREAK ---vies that agoet -
-
the thohts of various Deputent of Dfense a 
,cnccs 
end tho military depart.
sents, It Ii requeatcd that yw ito 
be forwarded to reach this ofse
Norma S. If"
f,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

511
ions 
5 OCT 1962
Secretary of Rolethk UdaeeU"
and Welfare
shiLVtof 
* D.C. 
Me
AM u 
esi Clark
Dear Sir8
Wrercea is made to the proposed amwndmnt of section 130.3 of as
naw drug regulations (21 CPR Part 130) published in the 10 Aurust 1962
Federal Rtlester Vihicb has only recently em to Ip attention.
Uo to the Arnm 
Hedical Service are vitally Interested In am7y revlalaowu
whLch might Lpeode our rate of progress i 
the search for sew thdrepeutLe
agents required from a medical standpoint In this ntion's defense# for
e.-nA*le 
ne 
drugs and vaccines ur3ntly needed to coat tho effects of
chemical and bioLogical varface agents* Based-on ouch examination of *bove.
mentioned proposed regulations as my staff has been Able to nke at this
timo it appear# that such regulations my vell stifle our entire medical
research program Involving new drugs. 
Althou:bJ time does not permit an
exhaustive oaminstlio of or detailed comants on these proposed reaulatim
to be mde 
it can be pointed out even now that the requirement sat forth In
Proposed item 10 of subsection 130.3(a)(2) would bove the effect of discourw-
gineg and delay ve qualified researchers from l~ l 
Lng new and promsing
leads not theretofore listed is their Invest Iatio.-*' exception application,
which requirement would be LnconLtent with sound research principles*
Accordingly, It to strongly vecdmended that these proposed regulations
sot be placed Into of fet for a porLod of at least 90 days aid that addLtLonal
counts during such or a lesser period be Invited. 
I 
is further requste
that consideration be gives to eAenpting from the application of proposed
section 130.3 delivertes of drug to the Federal Goerm 
, 
such a appears
presently to be containd in sub~ectcs 130.3(3)(iL).
Sincerely,.•
COt 
WWugl~ 
a, WO
1oe attached draft) 
WJor GDnosl2 )l. 4
Dir Prof Svc 
Acting the Surgeon General
C.. 
iOSELIe 
ROBERT L, BLOWT
Colonel, N.C. 
Nrigdier 
General, N.C.
Na 
ec, AIlS 
Spec~A~et to T= for A"5
C"Zi- 
#rhem? Cosulttt 
ALtIU 
BA 
Ser I 
Cin
S 
Actin General Comme1ing the Surgeon General
C.. 
iOSELIe 
ROBERT L, BLOWT
Colonel, N.C. 
Nrigdier 
General, N.C.
Na 
ec, AIlS 
Spec~A~et to T= for A"5
C"Zi- 
#rhem? Cosulttt 
ALtIU 
BA 
Ser I 
Cin
S 
Actin General Comme1

--- PAGE BREAK ---ral
C.. 
iOSELIe 
ROBERT L, BLOWT
Colonel, N.C. 
Nrigdier 
General, N.C.
Na 
ec, AIlS 
Spec~A~et to T= for A"5
C"Zi- 
#rhem? Cosulttt 
ALtIU 
BA 
Ser I 
Cin
S 
Actin General Comme1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

512
UCON 
U Octoe 
1962
Se" 
r of 0alitb, 1detaMWf
and Wslfare
Vashintou 25, 
. C.
AT'M 
Uear ri 
Clark
Dowt Sir$
efeolnce is 
sde to the proposed 
nertS to Regulations
80ve0n63 tie clinical trial of nm dru&, 
as submitted by the Con.
isstOnr of Fed ad Dm and published in the Federal hAistor on
1 August 1962.
The Sureon CeUeTals DeArtast of the A=W, has erosed his
ken fiterest in tL 
proposed 
.aedtwatas and deep concemu that the
pro.eod Renulations =4 have the effect of discowa:in3 md delyl~in
qualified InvstiGators In their saarrh for wvw therapeutic mad pro.
phylactic saents required by the military for national defense. The
undersigned bellevos that the proposed I*CmlatLows# which have only
recently caa to our attention, will Certainly iogo" and OWy wall
stifle ou entire research %Pro^.xe ivolviun new dru&$ and vaceina
required for entertc and reeplratary Iafections and ewote parasitic,
viral and richttsiat dsase .
One illustration us be given as to possible urriarranted delays
to the trial of therapeutic antss that are required by the Armed
Forces. 
In several tropical countries# trains of chloroquir&-
resistant felcipapn malaria have recently been towd. Te pocntial
threat of such a strain of malaria to military operations io obvious*
The search for mvA anti-malaria eents aatn bomes imperativo. 
An.
active program of testing pramLtant now 4rWA ts beivnz su'portod by
the Army lodical Servico. 
i..h priority is 
stained to this project
under a thorougbly qualified and nminoat physician ivestigator. 
It
appears very likely that iuwsti:ative pto3rwe suh as this one,
ibich are-vital to the defense of te nation, ay %all 
be delays.4 by
the &ppare nt 
of the control procadwrs proposed.
Tor the reasons stated above, it is reco=ndd that every effort
be wale to delay th 
implewtatioao of these RgulatLos for a nLminua
of ninety days pending a careful evaluation of the tap"t of the pro-
posed Regulatios ma te medical esarch and development prearazs.
CO'i IFU 
?SMD RECORD ROt".ry
o Specti Ass 
nt , 
4s 
1 
c0
or.ad 
Developmentays pending a careful evaluation of the tap"t of the pro-
posed Regulatios ma te medical esarch and development prearazs.
CO'i IFU 
?SMD RECORD ROt".ry
o Specti Ass 
nt , 
4s 
1 
c0
or.ad 
Development

--- PAGE BREAK ---l evaluation of the tap"t of the pro-
posed Regulatios ma te medical esarch and development prearazs.
CO'i IFU 
?SMD RECORD ROt".ry
o Specti Ass 
nt , 
4s 
1 
c0
or.ad 
Development

--- PAGE BREAK ---

__ 
613
W.I'JI 01 ) v.A ND 
I 
U T 
I)ITAR'TI'I'r OF III',:ltU(',T'O., 
I.I' 
wiCr.\RI
ldchard A. Fhrrill 
DTr July 28, 1975
ROM 
William W. Vodra
SU5JF.Cr 
Dibuption for Departrmt. of Defense
rm 110 iPquir 
ents
AS you know, last fall- e executed a IeDrandum of Uniderstanding
with the DeparLment of Defense which providod that they would be
exempt from 11D requirements for drug research which vas being
conduted for national security p=rpcses. 
(Attached) 
In light of
the recent revelations regarding LSD experiments conducted on
qptoximately 1500 subjects during a ten year period fraud 1957
to 1967, I wonder whether we should recor.nsider the propriety
of this exception. 
The General counting Office has been* looking
into this exeuIption in the past and has concluded that it ig not
legal under the terms of the Food, Drug. and Cometic Act. 
This
Office has internally concurred in that interpretation. Specifically
Peter Hutt and I infonred Dr. Jennings last year that 5505(i) provides
no prooodure for vaiving the application of DID rules for research
on drugs shipped in interstate caun-.rce. 
Our regulations apply to
al 
rugs, *regardless of the researcher (e.g., a university professor,
en NXH investigator, or a DOD investigator), if interstate 
eroe
is involved.
It is possible that the Agency will be asked to explain the reasons
fr continuing this exemption, possibly in a ongessional hearing.
The primary reason why we granted the exemption was a feeling that
this Agency should not handle classified security matters. 
This premise
would not hold up in close scrutiny. 
IiAppropriate security clearances
could be given to the necessary medical officers, pharmacologists,
cheists, hareau amegement personal, and mearers of the Cm issioner's
office. Facilities for storing classified doczrnts (such as safes)
are already available or could readily ba obtained by the agency. 
The
at erial which viould be contained in such an UI) wculd not necessarily
disclose the pposes to which the chemical was intended to be used
in military operations. Thus, we are abdicating our statutory responsi-
bility in this area out of a desire to be courteous to the Dapartmmt
of Defense (and out of realization that we do not have effective
tonal authority and enforomerent po.ers over that Dapartzent)
rather than out of a legal inability to handle the classified m.atcrials.of Defense (and out of realization that we do not have effective
tonal authority and enforomerent po.ers over that Dapartzent)
rather than out of a legal inability to handle the classified m.atcrials.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

514
pIddkrd A. Marrill - Page TWO
%o lvfcn-y has often professed, a strong desire for openness in the
scientific coriunty as a way to stop unvientific and unethical
resoarch. 
Mile a classified review by t-he_ FWA would not be open,
it would provide an objective review on behalf of the scientific
cuwmuity on the science and ethics of the research being conducted.
I wold personally rooomrand that this Agaefhy seek to terminate the
Hqmrandum of Understanding with the Departnent of Defense, at least
Inofwar as it exaqipts the DeparMent of Defense from the IND require-
aeits for drugs to be used for national security purposes. 
V should
instead provide a special, secure processing" 6f DO's research.
I dictated this 1101oranda, before I saw Carl Leventhal's nor.ndm
of a conversaticn with Carl CLlure of GAO. 
I do not see how chemicall
weapons" would not be "drugs" urder S201(g) (1) (C) as "articles (oLher
than food) intended to affect the structure of any function of the
body Of man."
If you concur, I re=cm- 
%e immediately get together with" Dr. Jennings
(M liaison with DO0), 
Sam Fine, Dick Crout or Carl Leventhal, and the
Oamissioner or Deputy Ocmuissioner and discuss thii.

--- PAGE BREAK ---I re=cm- 
%e immediately get together with" Dr. Jennings
(M liaison with DO0), 
Sam Fine, Dick Crout or Carl Leventhal, and the
Oamissioner or Deputy Ocmuissioner and discuss thii.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

515
5030.29 (Inal 1)
May 12, 64
M.NRAN1VM OF UNERSTAN!DIIG
EUTE!' !h2 
DE wEIT1 
OF 1rmATd, 
EDUCATION/, XID WELFARE, 
AND THE
DZPAXR 
.T 0? DENSZ.- CONCERNING IMVESTIGATIONAL USE OF DRUGS
BY THE DEPARTMFENT OF DEFEWsE
BacIkground
Section 505(a) of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act., as amended
by Section l10 of P. L. 8T-781, T6 Stat. 784i, 21 U.S.C. See. 355, (1962
Supp.) established new procedures for the approval re.iuJ red before the
new drug can be introduced into interstate commerce. 
Station 355(i) of
Title 21, United States Code (1962 Supp.) established, e>enptionc from
the* new a p-cval procedures for drugs which will be 
.:;ek only for manu-
facture of ether drus or for investigational purpost,:. 
That section
establishes the general basis for exemption end prov-c.eE that the Secretary
of Health, Education, and Welfare shall promulgate rt .ulations to give
effect to the general guidance of the statute.
On January 8, 1963 the Secretary published the regu: atlons in 28 Federal
Register 17 (1963; the regulations will eventual.y ap;. ar in Title 21,
Part 130, Section 130.3 of the Code of Federal Reglr t.ic is. 
Tnese regu-
lations establish the procedure and prescribe the :.ez essiry formts to be
filed in order to exempt drugs to be used only for ir"es.igational pur-
poses fronr. The approval procedures of the Food. Dr.e -nd Cosmetic Act.
Purpose
The purpose of this M'emorandun of Understanding is t: st tte the procedures
that wil be followed by the Departments of Defense .; )d Iealth, Education,
and Welfare to insure that the requirements of the F: 3erLl Food, Drug,. and
Cosmetic Act and the investigational drug regulations, issued under that Act
are fully met 'ithoat jeopardizing or impeding the re lxt-ements of rational
security or the requLrements of Federal laws and reguLat ..ons relating to such
use of drugs.
The Sur--e~n Cera 
erct of each Military D:!partment has e ta'!ished
within his office a form "Review IloarV" wich carefully" consider- each
research ,rops.al £ro:s it,, own ogcncy or from outride co:.tractorc which
nay involve the use of human subjects in the clinical in-estiigtion of new
drugs. 
Each "Review Board" is staffed with professional pooplc capable of
perfo-.-in4 cou.retcnt review of such research proposals t(! insure adequate
protection of h-rumn subjects. 
The Department of Defense assures :,i.l re-
sponsibility for the protection of humans involved in research under its
sponsorship whether this involves investigational drug or other hazards.subjects. 
The Department of Defense assures :,i.l re-
sponsibility for the protection of humans involved in research under its
sponsorship whether this involves investigational drug or other hazards.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tment of Defense assures :,i.l re-
sponsibility for the protection of humans involved in research under its
sponsorship whether this involves investigational drug or other hazards.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

516
5030.ey
gay 2., 6!.
Before a clinical test may. be performed vith an* investigational drug,
the plan of the test and other pertinent details must be submitted to
the appropriate "Review Board," the Board must indicate its approval,
and the approval nust be confirmed by the appropriate Surgeon General.
agreement
Under these circmstances, the Departments of Defense, and Health, Education,
and Welfare a-rea that the following procedure meets the requirements of the
Food., Drug, and Coanetic Act:
1. -Clinical investigations that are classified for reasons of national
security will not require the filing of a formal "Claim for 1Mxemption" to
the .Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. 
Approval of the teat by
the appropriate Review Board and Surgeon General will automatically eme1ipt
the drug bein- e'.tloye' d front the application of the ner drua section of the
Food, Drug, and Cosntic Act during the investigational study. 
The Depart-
ment of Defense will report to FMA findings associated with such studies
which FDA should be aware of in order to make a sound evaluaton of non-
classified studies proposed on the same or sanllar d&-ve. 
Additionally,
the Depirtmant of Defense will discuss its classified i'trestigations of
drugs periodicall.y with FDA personnel who have prope: u ;-iuty clearance.
2. 
In the case of non-classified security research *?rams sponsored
by 'the Depart.ant of Defense and conducted within it. 
r :;iei rob facilities
~~r- for the Derartzeut upon contracts, copies of the r 
;..,It for approval
submitted to the appropriate DOD Reviev Board, the Rc'i! ir loard's evaluation
and approval, and notice of approval by the appropria-;: Mwugeon General vill
be filed with the FDA as the claim for exemption for ";: ir vestigational drug.
3. 
When the Deprtent of Defense performs clinical t~sts upon new
drugs being sponsored by the pharmaceutical industry, the ordinary claim
for exemption (,'oru 157]. of" the Investigational Drug Regulations) will be
filed with the Food and Drug Administration.
k e cretary of Defense 
Tb. Secre 
of 
el.0&Wfa'
DEPUTY
FEB 18 1964 
L 
.
.2
(date)xemption (,'oru 157]. of" the Investigational Drug Regulations) will be
filed with the Food and Drug Administration.
k e cretary of Defense 
Tb. Secre 
of 
el.0&Wfa'
DEPUTY
FEB 18 1964 
L 
.
.2
(date)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

517
A 
,MWEPI' 
W. 1 "?O
, ,ORANDUN OF ACGR RH
OK RSSPON 
1 
IILITIES FOR THE 
n 
-
CONDUCT OF RESEARCH AND DVEW1.1HE 
FOR
DEFENSE AGAINST CIEMICAL AGENTS
BE7VEEN 1i.E'
C 
AN NVIG GENERAL, 
US A$IY 
A4TERIEL COMOA
AND
THE SURGEON GENERAL, 
DMPAXTINT OF ABY
AUGUST 1972
Paragraph 5b of the December 1971 Aareeeunt is to be replaced with the folloving"
be 
The Comandint General, US Army Materiel Conrand, will establish and
maintain liaison with the staff of The Surgeum Gencral through the Special
Assistant for Chemical and Biological Affairs, US ArWt', 4aterial Command.
When requested, this officer 'ill provide advice an* coordination to The
Purgeon General in the fields of chemical operations and activities.
FOR TI E SURGEON GENERAL:
IC I RD R. TAYLOR, M.)'.
Special Assistant for 07 
X
Research and Developmen
FOR THE CO. ANDINC GENRAL
AMN 
HATERTRJ. COvvAND:
Major Cendral, L.A
Chief of Staff
Date__ 
_ 
_

--- PAGE BREAK ---NERAL:
IC I RD R. TAYLOR, M.)'.
Special Assistant for 07 
X
Research and Developmen
FOR THE CO. ANDINC GENRAL
AMN 
HATERTRJ. COvvAND:
Major Cendral, L.A
Chief of Staff
Date__ 
_ 
_

--- PAGE BREAK ---

518
FOR,OFFICIAL USE Ot1LY
Ar-, 
HE"ORANDU.i OF ACREE-NT
ON RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE
CONDUCT OF RESF-RCH AND DEVELOPXF\ T FOR
DEFENSE AGAINST CHEMICAL AGENrS
BETWEEN THE
(.r,-DIKG 
GENERAL, 
US ARXY MATERIEL CO.ZANMD
AND
THE SURGEON GENERAL, 
DEPARTMENT OF ARMY
KOVEKBER 1971
1. References.
a. DOD Instruction 5160.5, 7 February 1964.
b. AR 705-5, 9 April 1968.
c. AR 70-55, 18 May 1970.
2o 
General. 
a. 
Under the'provisions of reference lb, the Cornanding
Geniral,LS Arc Materiel Co:zand is charged with the price responsi-
bility 
for cher ical weapons and defense and The SurReon General with
the attekidant rcsponsitility for the medical aspects of chernical weapons
and defense.
b. 
This Agreement between the Comm ending Geiieral,. 
3 Army Materiel
Conmand and The Surgeon General clarifies and delJne4.e!: specific roles
of each in the conduct of research and development on t e defensive
aspects of chef>icJ. agents. 
This Agreement does not :.m:ly modification
of the Department cf the Arry assiLied responsibilities of t6e Cocmnanding
General, 
US Ar." Materiel Co.-.and In research and de-i,,.,p-ent matters.
The term "respomnsbility" as used herein refers to tihe. ag eei roles of
the subject parties in the prosecuLion of research and development on
the defensive aspects of chemical agents. 
Also, this Agreement does not
prohibit direct co-.unication on technical matters between the Office of
The Surgeon General and the Biomedical Laboratory, 
Edge-,ood Arsenal.
I
C., Program guidance and revlcv on medical res.e'rch for defensive
aspects of chc.ical operations will be carried out jointly by 'he Surgeon
General and the Con.nandinag General, US Arr" ;!ateritol Co.-.:and. 
This
guidance and fundin- will be inple.entd thmroe-|, US Arm., Materiel Cot and
channels. 
Annual program planning and evaluation of technical progress
of the program will be r:ade Jointly by Ihe Surg,-on General and the
Corxnanding GUIMLl, 
U.s Arz-$ ..Materiel Cor-and.Cot and
channels. 
Annual program planning and evaluation of technical progress
of the program will be r:ade Jointly by Ihe Surg,-on General and the
Corxnanding GUIMLl, 
U.s Arz-$ ..Materiel Cor-and.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Annual program planning and evaluation of technical progress
of the program will be r:ade Jointly by Ihe Surg,-on General and the
Corxnanding GUIMLl, 
U.s Arz-$ ..Materiel Cor-and.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

519
Je 
t VE
d. 
The Special Assistant to The Surkeon Gencral for Research and
Development. who is also the Coranding Generbl, 
US 
Mr 
Xedical research
and De--elop=ent Cc=--and, will be the point of- contact for The Surgeon
"Goneral for all ".itters concerning the Biomedical Laboratory, Edgewood
Arsenal.
3. 
Ar-.v MeIcdical )'?art.ent Personnel. 
a. 
Wader the provisions of
refe-rence Ic, &ao burgcon (jer.ral will assign two senior 'Nedical Corps
officers, as r.utually agreed upon between T.e SJrteon General and the
Comar.ding General, 'IS Army ;Materiel Co:a.nd, to serve as Director and
D- puty Director of the Bio=edical Laborat.ory at £dg -eood Arsenal. 
The
normal tcur of dl:Lv of each officer will be four years, the first two
as Deputy i)irecrar and the last two as Director. 
The senior Medical
Corps off iter, i:n addition to directing the research program of the
Bieecical Laboratory, will serve on the staff of the Technical Director
of tdg.,-eood Arsrnal as the Associate Technical Director for -edlcal. 
In
the az.ence of the D)irector of the Bio..dical l.aboraLory, the Deputy
Director w-ill ass.zre the above resporsibilities.
b. 
As Consultant to The Surgeon Geeral on Medical Defense Against
Chemical Weapons, 
the Director of the Bio.ediral Laboratory will keep
The SurG..con General informed of te current status of the program on
medical defense against cle-alcal agents. 
He w'ill in turn receive pro-
fes 
,;oa. 
:-dlcal aJvice and 
uidan.ce directly front The Surteon General.
c. 
The efficiency report of the Director of the Biomedical Laboratory
will be prepared by the Technical Director, Edgt.'ood Arsenal. 
The Corrand-
In& Officer of Edge-aoad Arsenal will attach a letter of corr.ent to the
report. 
7':e report will be indorsed by the Sp,!cial Ass-stant to The
Surgeon General for Research and Develop.ent aud revi.-wd by The Surgeon
General. 
!he Deputy Director will be rated by the bire, tor, indorsed
by the Co.-zanding Officer of Ldg-ex'cd Ar.cnal, and revi.-wed b- the
Special Assistant to The Surgeon General for Rusearch ad 
Developnent.
d. 
The Surgeon General will 
assign to the Bioredical Laboratory
such other Ar - Iedical Departmecnt pers-onoel as are required and authorized
on the Table of Distribution and mutually agreed upon between The Surgeon
generall and Co-.z..anding General, US Arr.:- .Materiel Co.-;-.-.nd. 
The Special
,ssi btant to-The Surgeon General for IRejearch atd iPevelop-eat will monitor
Ar.m* .dical 
Dcp.,rtnrcnt perso;unel positions and a-.sist The Surieon General
ill 11.0 selection of personnel to fill 
tLeln.
4. 
tVce of V*~ - "'r 
As Fti'-Iects of ':.-enrrh. 
a. 
Tase Dircrtor of tsic
Bio.'X.;;icl Laoraturv, by dir.ctLon of teac Sccretary of the Ar.y, has
full profcssioazii, 
uli 
, ci',, 
n;7J 
_ 
i 
.
r-bi1!%y for
planning and control of experim.ents iivolving voitinteer. utiiized in
renve'rel; perfor=.ed at or under control of Edgc.-oc-d Arsenal.as
full profcssioazii, 
uli 
, ci',, 
n;7J 
_ 
i 
.
r-bi1!%y for
planning and control of experim.ents iivolving voitinteer. utiiized in
renve'rel; perfor=.ed at or under control of Edgc.-oc-d Arsenal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---i, 
uli 
, ci',, 
n;7J 
_ 
i 
.
r-bi1!%y for
planning and control of experim.ents iivolving voitinteer. utiiized in
renve'rel; perfor=.ed at or under control of Edgc.-oc-d Arsenal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

520
*FOR O.:c,'. USE 0:LY
b. In compliance with AR 70-25, 26 Marc. 1962, and/or AR 40-7,
30 September 1969, the Director of the Bione ical Laboratory will
submit thru US Arcy Materiel Cosznmnd all research protocols (written
-proposals for tndies) utilizing volunteers as subjects for investiga-
tion of representative compounds of new classes of chemicals, not
previously approved, to The Surgeon General for review and forwarding
to the Secretary of the Army for approval prior to initiation of research
studies. 
;:o research with che.Acal agents using volunteers will be under-
taken without the written consent of the Sbctetary of the Army.
c. 
All reseArch task plans utilizing volunteers must be unanimously
approved by the ,:dgevood Arsenal Medical'Rev... 
Board, consisting of the
physician responsible for the research plan, the chiefs of the Medical
Research Division and the Clinical Research Branch, and the Director and
Deputy Director of the Biomedical Laboratory.
d; Upon approval by the Edgeood Arsenal Medical Review Board,
copies of all research task plans utili.r. -.olunteers will be submitted
to The Surgeon General for Information end inclusion in reference files.
5. 
Liaison. 
a. 
The Interdependence of all phases of chemical warfare
researiincessitatcs the full collaboration and timely exchange of
information between the Cosnanding General, I'S 
Arry Materiel Cor-mand
and The .t.r~eon General. 
Effective coordination will be maintained and
any ne -.J 
adjustments to the program, rrioritics, .id facilities will
be made when required.
b. 
The Surgeon General and the Commanding General, 
US Army Hateriel
Command will coordinate the assignment of a Chenical Corps officer of
appropriate grade, training, and experience tc the staff of the Co.manding
General, US Army X.edical Research and Developrent Command. 
This officer
will provide advice and coordination to The Strgeon General in the fields
of choe.ical operations and activities. 
lie will establish and r.airtain
liaison with the Weapons Division, Research, Development and Engineering
Directorate, Headquarters, 
US Army Materiel Covmand, and its subordinate
comans. 
-
c. 
The "Sureon General 
:ill establish and maintain liaison with the
Ltaff of the Com.ianding Geteral, US An" 
'-atcriel Command through the
Chief,'C.e=icat a.d Biological Agent Defense Bracich, Preventive ':edicine
Research Divisioa, medical l I.+rectorate, US Ar.. :'-dical Research and
Deveo:,tnent Co:'.a.nad. 
The Chief, Chemical and riolo-.ical A gent Defense
Branch,, :;dlc:l Dlroctorate, US Arr" Xceical Rese-ch ;nd DeV'e:-.--ct
Command, will also serve as Special ProIcct Officer for Medical Defense
Against Chemicnl and Biolotical Weapons within the Directorate of Health
anid Ltavlt-oan~t, 
0111A ca o f Th- 
Sgn C.-era .
3ct
Command, will also serve as Special ProIcct Officer for Medical Defense
Against Chemicnl and Biolotical Weapons within the Directorate of Health
anid Ltavlt-oan~t, 
0111A ca o f Th- 
Sgn C.-era .
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---o serve as Special ProIcct Officer for Medical Defense
Against Chemicnl and Biolotical Weapons within the Directorate of Health
anid Ltavlt-oan~t, 
0111A ca o f Th- 
Sgn C.-era .
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

521
d. 
khere appropriate, thu Arry Medical Departrment will seek partici-
pation of the radical services of the Navy, Air Force, and US Public
Health Service in providing qualified -technicsl and professional personnel
-for either. duty or training assignments to the Biomedical Laboratory,
Bdgewood Arsenal.
6. 
Pub)icatiors. 
a. 
Any.articles originati-g in the Bionedical Labora-
tory will be cleared in accordance with change, dated 7 April 1971, to
Section III, paragraph Sc(3), AR* 360-3, or other applicable regulations
published subsequently.
b. 
Edgevood Arsenal reports containing rLco randations concerning
medical defense s;ainst che-Acal agents will be.subr-tted to The Surgeon
General (or costnts or concurrence before publication or transmittal
to higher headquarters.
7. JolIt t SAC-1.LG . 'visory Co-.ittee On medical l t -ects Of Defence
Ar.tanst m-.-Ical *.r%,nts. 
a. 
ihe purpose of the above Cozmittee, estab-
lished in accordance with AR 15-1, 14 January 1966, will be:
(1) 
To serve in an advisory capacity to the C.^m-anding General, US
AMly Materiel Co.-and and The Surecon General (through the Special Assistant
to The Sur.eon General for Research and Develop-ent) on rAtters relating
to the rciiical aspects of defense against cieMical .r'.n s.
(2) 
To review and evaluate the In-service and contract research and
developnont programs conducted under this Agreement.
(3) 
To evaluate the procedures for use of volunteerss as subjects of
research to insure maxirnu 
safeLy and most efficient procedures in human
experirentat ion.
b. 
The Co.ittee will consist of six civilian rCbers who are recog-
nized authorities in appropriate technical fields. 
Three rebers will be
appointed by the Cor.nding G-neral, US Aray Materiel Cor.sand 'and three
by The Surgeoft General. 
The Cormanding Ceneral, US Aray Materiel Co.-amnd
and The Surgeon General will each designlate one liaison representative
tq the Co:,-tittee, .ho will serve as coordiu.tor. 
Representatives of the
Navy, A~r Force, and US Public Health Service will be invited to attend
moeting.-; of the CoM-Itoe as oservers.
r. 
liev CoL-itLce will nrct at least once a ycar at Edgarw.ood Arbenal
for a critical rcvj.. of the z.dical volunter 
pro r:.t and once P year
it 1'ashiu.ton, DC, alternately at the Office of Vie Surgeon Geueral and
at Headquarters, 
US Aty Nateriel Coruzand.
4d Arbenal
for a critical rcvj.. of the z.dical volunter 
pro r:.t and once P year
it 1'ashiu.ton, DC, alternately at the Office of Vie Surgeon Geueral and
at Headquarters, 
US Aty Nateriel Coruzand.
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

522
io; . il,
d. 
The tenure Gf -erbers of the Corjzittee, other -than the liaison
representatives, will be three years. 
Two we,-bers (one appointed by
the Co.--anding Gereral, US Army 'Materiel Comand and one appointed by
-The Surgeon Gcncral) will be dropped annually and will not be eligible
for reappointrcent for one year.
e. 
All report and reco.=endatiois arising, out of Comm ittee action
will be sub-ittcd to the Cor.tandin:g General, US Army Materiel Co=and
and 1rhe Surgeon General.
S. 
View And R .vision. 
This Agrec.cnt will be reviewed annually, or
upon r0;u1s 
ul .,cner party, and will. be revised by joint action as
often as necessary.
RAL.H. JE:N:NGS, Jr., ,.D,
Lieutenant General
The Surgeon General
Departwnt of the Army
Date
General, 
U'SA
Commanding General
US Ar-y Materiel Cocnand
Date
I:.,P 
, 
,l y

--- PAGE BREAK ---cessary.
RAL.H. JE:N:NGS, Jr., ,.D,
Lieutenant General
The Surgeon General
Departwnt of the Army
Date
General, 
U'SA
Commanding General
US Ar-y Materiel Cocnand
Date
I:.,P 
, 
,l y

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LI[GISL
AFFA
70-.26 0 - 76 - 34
523
ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF OEFENSE
WAHINGTON 0 C . 203
AT IV,
In$
Honorable Edward M. Kennedy
United States Senate
Washington, D. C. 
20510
Dear Senator Kennedy:
In response to your letter of October 28, 1975. the following
material has been provided by the cognizant military department
in response to respective questions. This is in the format
listing your questions and our responses.
1. Our staff has been advised by your legislative liaison
office that the Inspector General has recently conducted an inves-
tigation into human experimentation activities of, or on behalf of,
the armed services. Would you furnish copies of any reports or
memoranda reflecting the progress or results of this investigation?
Answer: The Inspector General's office is conducting a research
effort to determine the facts and circumstances surrounding the
Army's role in the use of humans in haUucinogenic drug experimenta-
tion. The majority of the effort to acquire and review pertinent
documents has been completed. 
However, several more witnesses
must be interviewed before the data can be analyzed and the written
report prepared. Accordingly, completion of the research effort
is not anticipated prior to January 1976.
2. 
What has been the nature and extent of review or monitoring
by the Navy and the Air Force concerning human experimentation
conducted by them or on their behalf?
Answer: a. The Department of the Air Force has regulations
expressly establishing the procedures for the review and monitoring
of human experimentation. 
Attachment I is composed of Air Force
regulations on this matter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rce has regulations
expressly establishing the procedures for the review and monitoring
of human experimentation. 
Attachment I is composed of Air Force
regulations on this matter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

524
b. The Navy has had long standing instructions on
the review and monitoring of human experimentation. 
AttachmeAnt Z
is composed of Navy instructions on this matter.
c. Both the Air Force and Navy are following these
regulations in the approval and monitoring of research that uses
humans as test subjects.
3. 
What is the status of the followup being conducted concerning
persons who were subjects of human experimentation by or on behalf
of the armed services?
Answer: a. The Department of the Navy is currently reviewing
hospital records for the period 1 September 1949 to 1 September 1951
to identify patients and controls that were involved in the therapeutic
trials of hallucinogenic drugs conducted by Dr. Savage. 
Approximately
1/3 of the available hospital admission records, which iot only names
of patients, have been reviewed to date. However, in discussing the
magnitude of the effort to locate these patients with staff psychiatric
personnel, it would now appear that data derived from a twenty-five
year followup would not permit conclusions regarding harmful effects
clearly attributable to the administration of hallucinogens. 
Moreover,
we have been advised that followup involving the questioning of former
psychiatric patients could have adverse effects on the individuals'
mental health and is medically contra-indicated. On this basis, no
further followup action is proposed to identify the above patients.
b. The Department of the Army is conducting followup
study of subject s who received LSD in the Chemical Warfare Defense
Program. Those who participated in the in-house program are being
identified by review of military records. Civilian institutions which
conducted similar research under contract have been contacted but
have not responded. Of approximately 600 LSD participants identified,
93 have already been located. 
All relevant Army Staff agencies, the
Veterans Administration, and the General Services Administration are
actively assisting in efforts to locate the remaining individuals. The
long interval since many of these individuals participated and the
relative paucity of the identifying information in the original records
make extensive manual cross-checking necessary, which unavoidably
delays the location process. Because of the nature of the followup, it
is imperative that identification as a participant be verified to avoid
causing undue concern in non-participants. 
Nineteen of the 93 located
2tion process. Because of the nature of the followup, it
is imperative that identification as a participant be verified to avoid
causing undue concern in non-participants. 
Nineteen of the 93 located
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---e of the nature of the followup, it
is imperative that identification as a participant be verified to avoid
causing undue concern in non-participants. 
Nineteen of the 93 located
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

525
participants were examined under an earlier followup program. 
An
additional 22 have agreed to participate in followup and are scheduled
for examination at Walter Reed Army Medical Center. The remainder
will be scheduled for examination as rapidly as possible. The required
medical examination is a complex one, since it must seek subtle physical
and behavioral changes as well as more obvious ones. It includes a
wide range of medical, neurological, and. psychological tests, many
of which are not routine hospital procedures. 
The complete examina-
tion for each individual takes about five days. To provide meaningful,
interpretable information, efforts are now underway to identify and
locate for examination for comparative purposes a suitable population
of non-LSD recipient contemporaries of participants.
-
c. The Air Force is assisting the Army in the medical
followup program by taking the responsibility for locating and conducting
the medical examination of the Air Force members who volunteered for
the LSD studies which were performed at the Edgewood Arsenal. The
Air Force is working with the Defense Intelligence Agency and the
Internal Revenue Service in locating the volunteers who are former
members of the Air Force. The medical protocol for the examination
is being coordinated with the Army Research and Development Command
for consistency in medical and psychiatric examinations.
4. Documents relating to the death in 1953 of Dr. Frank Olsen,
an employee of the U. S. Army. as a result of the administration of
ISD by CIA representatives, indicate that the Army was conducting
its own investigation of the incident. Please furnish copies of reports
or memoranda reflecting the progress of results of that investigation.
Answer: The DAIG has not conducted an investigation into the
death of Dr. Frank Olsen.
5. 
We recently learned that an investigation by the Inspector
General was conducted earlier this year in connection with the
exposure of Army personnel to nerve gas during a demilitarizing
program at 0 Field at the Edgewood Arsenal. Please furnish a copy
of the Inspector General' s report.
Answer: The reports compose Attachment 3.
6. 
Our staff has been informed by former and present repre-
sentatives of the National Institute of Mental Health that drug tests
were conducted on behalf of the CIA at the Addiction Research Center
3. 
Our staff has been informed by former and present repre-
sentatives of the National Institute of Mental Health that drug tests
were conducted on behalf of the CIA at the Addiction Research Center
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---n informed by former and present repre-
sentatives of the National Institute of Mental Health that drug tests
were conducted on behalf of the CIA at the Addiction Research Center
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

526
at Lexington, Kentucky, by NIMH during the period 1954-1962 and
that these tests were funded by the CIA through the Office of Naval
Research and NIMH. 
Were such tests in fact funded by the CIA
through the Office of Naval Research and NIMH? If so, would you
furnish information concerning the purpose and nature of the tests
and copies of documents reflecting this arrangement.
Answer: The research on synthetic codeine substitutes carried
out at the Addiction Research Center was started during the Korean
War. Codeine was very important to the military forces because of
its properties as a pain killer, a cough suppressant and an anti-
diarrheal agent. Since it was derived from opium which had to be
imported from abroad, the Department of Defense could see the
disastrous medical consequences if our raw material source for
codeine was cut off.
To avoid such a situation, the DOD encouraged the Committee
on Drug Addiction and Narcotics of the National Research Council
to set up a screening program on a national basis to develop and
test new and promising substitutes for codeine. 
The final link in
the screening process (testing on human subjects) was carried out
at the Addiction Research Center under Dr. Harris Isbell.
In 1951, the Navy through the Office of Naval Research was asked
by the Army Surgeon General' s Office to take over the funding of this
project from it. 
The Office of Naval Research agreed to this and by
government order provided its own funds along with some funds from
the Army Surgeon General' s Office. This funding responsibility was
later taken over completely by the Naval Bureau of Supplies and
Accounts. 
The funding from the Navy expired on 30 June 1963, at
which time the National Institute of Mental Health took over.
Under the aegis of these government orders, Dr. Isbell and his
research team tested 73 compounds that had been recommended by
the National Research Council. 
No single substitute for codeine
emerged that was less addictive but yet retained the advantageous
properties of codeine. 
Amongst all those tested, three separate
compounds, however, were shown to possess one of the advantages
of codeine while being either non-addictive or much less addictive.
These compounds were: dextromethorphan (a cough suppressant),
darvon (a pain killer), and lomotil (an anti-diarrheal agent). 
These
pharmaceuticals are currently being used medically to a great extent.
4se compounds were: dextromethorphan (a cough suppressant),
darvon (a pain killer), and lomotil (an anti-diarrheal agent). 
These
pharmaceuticals are currently being used medically to a great extent.
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---extromethorphan (a cough suppressant),
darvon (a pain killer), and lomotil (an anti-diarrheal agent). 
These
pharmaceuticals are currently being used medically to a great extent.
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

527
Attachment 4 is the final report on this project, submitted by
Dr. Isbell shortly after the conclusion of his Navy support. There
is no indication in this report or in-the ONR files on this project
that the CLA funded any of Dr. Isbell's research through the Office
of Naval Research.
7. 
Documents furnished to the Subcommittees by the Air Force
indicate that there were contracts between the Air Force and the
Baylor University Medical Center for the conduct of drug tests
during the period 1956 to 1961 and between the Air Force and the
Houston State Psychiatric Institute from 1964 to 1968. Dr. Nell R.
Burch was listed as an investigator on all of these contracts.
Dr. Burch has stated publicly that he was instructed by the CIA
in 1964 to apply for the funding of tests to the Air Force and that,
although the records indicated that the subsequent funds come from
the Air Force, they in fact come from the CIA and the tests were in
fact done for the CIA. 
Did the CIA fund the tests conducted by
Dr. Burch from 1964-1968 through the Air Force? Is so, would you
furnish information concerning the purpose and nature of these or
any other tests funded by CIA through the Air Force and copies of
documents reflecting this arrangement.
Answer: The Directorate of Life Sciences under contract
AF18(603)79 supported research at Baylor University College of
Medicine from 1956-1961. 
The Principal Investigator is listed as
Dr. William T. Lhamon, Chairman, Department of Psychiatry and
Neurology. 
Dr. Neil R. Burch is listed as "assistant professor"
and "director aeronredical project." There is nothing in our records
to indicate that the funds for this research were other than from
AFOSR. 
Dr. Neil R. Burch is listed as Principal Investigator
under the following AFOSR contracts monitored by the Directorate
of Life Sciences with the Houston State Psychiatric Institute:
AF-AFOSR-727-65 
I Jul 64 -
30 Jun 65
AF-AFOSR-951-65 
I Jul 65 -
30 Jun 66 (Continuation
of previous work)
AF-AFOSR-951-66 
I Jul 66 - 30 Jun 67 (Continuation
of previous work)
AF-AFOSR-951-67 
1 Jul 67 -
30 Jun 68 (Continuation
of previous work)
51-65 
I Jul 65 -
30 Jun 66 (Continuation
of previous work)
AF-AFOSR-951-66 
I Jul 66 - 30 Jun 67 (Continuation
of previous work)
AF-AFOSR-951-67 
1 Jul 67 -
30 Jun 68 (Continuation
of previous work)
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

528
These research efforts were the result of unsolicited proposals
from Dr. Butch, and the stated objective of these studies is
identified in attachment S. The CIA utilised USAFOSR contracting
capabilities to fund these grants, which were for the purpose of
developing an improved polygraph. Hq USAF is not in possession
of more detailed information, other than that already provided by
the Surgeon General' s office. For information regarding Dr. Burch' s
'.. 
statement of CIA involvement, inquiries should be addressed to the
Central Intelligence Agpncy.
It is hoped that this information will be helpful to you.
Sincerely,
Ion[M. 
Maury
Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Legislative Affairs
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---ssed to the
Central Intelligence Agpncy.
It is hoped that this information will be helpful to you.
Sincerely,
Ion[M. 
Maury
Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Legislative Affairs
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

520
During the period 1958-1972, the Air Force commissioei
se~vral research studies to inquire into the effects pf
halucinogens. These studies were conducted to investigate
possible uses of the drugs in treating severe psychiatric
disorders and to investigate human behavior patterns
inherent in use of these drugs. All of the studies were
conducted by civilian researchers at leading universitiep
and medical schools, The tests were conducted in
controlled clinical area#, at reputable institutions A'4 py
highly qualified investigators.
A list of contracts sponsored by the Air Force
primarilyy Office of scientific Research) follows;
-
Duke University School of Medicine# 1958-1960,
Contract I AF-49(.638)354, use4 five (5) civilian,
volunteers, $80,000, results containe4 in report I AD-608
,402.
-
UCLA brain Research Institute, 1961-1967v Contract
I's AF(630)-1387, AF-AFOSR 61-81# AF-AFOSR 246-63, using.
animals (cats). 
Results contained in reports # AD-653 680
AD-623 497, AD-622 846, AD-623 Q60.
-
Institute Superiore di Sanita Rome (Italy),
1960-1961, Contract I AF- 61 (052)-399, using rabbits
report I AD-414 045.
-
Tufts University, 1962-1965, Contract I AF-AFOSR
62-11, $10,000, 20 civilian volunteers participated in a
mescaline study; report I AD-615 698.

--- PAGE BREAK ---using rabbits
report I AD-414 045.
-
Tufts University, 1962-1965, Contract I AF-AFOSR
62-11, $10,000, 20 civilian volunteers participated in a
mescaline study; report I AD-615 698.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

530
Minnesota University Depirtment of Pharmacology,.
19611968, Contract I AF-AFOSR 764-65, AF-APOSR 1334-67,
56,d00 for human research studies irivolvig 12
psychiatric patients and 30 civilians, 
Animal studies
also conducted. Results contained in reports I AD-647 796
AD-686 793, AD-686 593, AD-740 438 * AD-686 5959
-
Missouri University Instttute of Psychiotry,
1969-1972, Contract I AF-AFOSR 1821-69, 
;56,000 for
research using seven (7) psychiatric patiepstB 
Results in
report I AD-740 431,
-
NYU, March 1960, contract-# AF 33(616)-6103,
$20,000, using 30 civilians. 
Results contained in report
AD-240 935.
The reports may be obtained from either the Defepse
Documentation Center, Cameron StatLon, 5010 puke Street#
Alexandria, Virginia 22304t or the National Technical
Information Service, 5285 Port Royal Roadr Springfieldr
Virginia 22151.
Dollar figures are approximate And represent those
portions of the contractor's research program used for
hallucinogen or drug research.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

531
Air Force funded Contracts
-for 
.'."
foychotomLmetLo Reseqrchl
Human InvolyVment
I* Now York UniverLtyp 1960p Contract Number
AF 33(616)-6103o.....
2. 
Duke University School of )Iadictag .l958-1?
Contzact Number AF 49(638)
3. Tufts University KedLsl choot"tlV62 4964
Contract Number qOO3 62-11 
j*
.4 
- .
" 
-
.
.
.
.
.
, 
'# 
' : .: " • .V, 
.
-
: . ,
4* Minnesota Univoretty apartment of ?ham oloey,
1965-19689 Contrat Number AF-AMR 764-05t
AY-AYOSR 1334-67t' 
"" 
: 
'
5. 
Missouri University Institute of.]sjaobIq
9 169-
1972. Contract Number AF-APOSI. 1821-49, .. -..

--- PAGE BREAK ---am oloey,
1965-19689 Contrat Number AF-AMR 764-05t
AY-AYOSR 1334-67t' 
"" 
: 
'
5. 
Missouri University Institute of.]sjaobIq
9 169-
1972. Contract Number AF-APOSI. 1821-49, .. -..

--- PAGE BREAK ---

532
Septcabcr *2., 197.
Honorable Prank Chur-h
Select Committee To Study Govcrnmental
Operations With*Rlspcet To Int llicne*e
Activities
United States Senate
Dcar r. Chairman:
In a' recent Joint hccrin 
before the Scnatc 8ubcoeuittc. on
Health ani thL Subcoeai tt-c on Admirtitratw: Practice anl!
Proce.urt, 
tht Okneral Counsel of the Army, Mr. CharIcs
Ablard, prnsent 
-a- pre"r4- stabttt-eontaining the
follo-ina poragraph:
In vicv- of the reults of the clinicci 
pc.pr-
imctnation at Edgewod Arsenal, atd in rcco-.
nition of the limitcd capability to structure
rcisllatic intcrrogatlon situatlos in a lab-
oratory envirooent using volunteers, a pro-
poael was submitted by the U.S. Army Intelli-
gyncco Center, in coordination i:ith the Chemlcl
Warfare Lboratorlesp to conduct field 
zpcri-
mentation in conjunction viith actual interroetion
altuationo. 
This proposal uas approved by thc
Any's Assistant Chief of Staff for IntellIGence,
anl subsequently two series of field tests werc
conducted.
The Subcommittees met in close-P seaon on 8epteubtr 12 vith 
-
the Deputy General Counsel of the Army, lHr. Richar Carney,
to clarify the background and 1plicationco~f 1&. Ablar.'s
statement. 
A copy of the transcript of that acasion i
appended.
t
BESTEJ
J

--- PAGE BREAK ---neral Counsel of the Army, lHr. Richar Carney,
to clarify the background and 1plicationco~f 1&. Ablar.'s
statement. 
A copy of the transcript of that acasion i
appended.
t
BESTEJ
J

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-
533
Honorable Frank Church
September 
, 197.
Wr. Carney stated that the Selfct Committee already has infor-
mation concerning the use of drugs in conection with
intelligence activities. 
At the same time, the issues
raised appear to be beyond the scope of our current inquiry
respecting government drug research on humans. 
Consequently,
the members of both Subccmmitteessbelieve that additional
follow-up on the implir:ations revealed in the attached
should be undertaoken by the Shlect Committee.
Ve believe the Select Comittee should determine 
what
ecttiqn is necessary to pursue these Issues further, and
we urge the Select Committee to provide the Congress with
such fitllngs and recowendations on them as the Committee
believes are uarronte,1.
Sincerely,
Edward 1. Kennedy
Chairman,
Subcommittee on Administrative
Practice and Procedure
Subcommittee on Health

--- PAGE BREAK ---

II. Description of DOD and Service Review Mechanisms Sub.
mitted to National Commission for Protection of Human
Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-4

--- PAGE BREAK ---Description of DOD and Service Review Mechanisms Sub.
mitted to National Commission for Protection of Human
Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SAREA-. LRC 
8 August 1976
COL C.C. fleClura, M.D.
Director
Blomedi cal Laboratory
Edge.ood Arsenal, ID 21010
Dar COt. MiCluret,
I am writil this letter to document t y distress concerning the sudden
discOaroe of medical Vol unteers from our resemch program on 29 July 1975
and the manner In which the situation vns handled. 
I would hope that this
letter rwy be forwrded through the chiin of comrand to the appropriate
authorities because fundamental medical and ethical issues have been
raised in . "hlid over the propriety of this precipitous decision.
As becknromnd let me explain that as a nte 
r of the Clinical Investigations
Section of the Medical Research Division it ma and is my responsibility
to inlster to the nedical problems of te volunteers who enter our
program,. This not nly Involves overviewing the entire Inprocessing
medical evaluation, but also involves t4e ongo#ifi follow up and
resolute on of the ndical Illness of o,,r volunteirs. While this function
has never been an officially designated one, it was an lnplied one I
assuewd as a m-tter of routine soie 11fteen wnths aco when our physician
stre"lth lntthe laboratory was redueed by S9i. 
It is a responsibility
which I consider, and have always considered, of parariount importance to
the hpan research program, exceeding ny responsibilities for research,
because of the need to avoid subjecting any volunteer to und~a risks which
might be ca ilicated by existing medical problem..
In virtually all of the five groups of volunteers that I have been
respnsbll* for inprocessinq we have, In the course of their eValuations,
uncovered active redical problems, rangi t 
In severity from minor to major
illness, In 25 to r% of cur subjects. 
because of cur di.sire to avoid
utilizing. persons not fit to participate In studies, ar~d because of a
promise and coritnent to the volunteers to nive then the most thorough
medical evaluation most of them will erer probably have, a considerable
(a?)not fit to participate In studies, ar~d because of a
promise and coritnent to the volunteers to nive then the most thorough
medical evaluation most of them will erer probably have, a considerable
(a?)

--- PAGE BREAK ---te In studies, ar~d because of a
promise and coritnent to the volunteers to nive then the most thorough
medical evaluation most of them will erer probably have, a considerable
(a?)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

538
V.PS1'--PC 
.8 
August 1975
prtiin if my 
hi s been sent in obtaining thesough attention to
er .~~.:. 
ost rlnor of their prooles. Uron discharge from the
prc-ri:- those pr-t_ns that are not resolved are docurwited to the volunteer,
aP4 n his redicalt-c3,i- 
Letters to Chief Medical Officers at home
duty stations are written when deemed necessary.
The directive of 29 July 1975 to return the present group of 36 volunteers
to t.lnir home duty station on ei'ht hours notice, without even the
cour-'.r" 
of prior consultation with either Dr. Sdel" or myself at the
very ;o-st demonstrated an absolute lack of respect for the well being of
these Individuals, and comletely undermined our efforts to discharge
our medical responsibilities to them.
Of the ?6 volunteers, 12 of them had unresolved problem; and of these
twelve I vas only ahle to appraise four of them personel)bf the status
of their medical problems at the tire of discharge. 
While letters were
sent to the Chief Medical Officers of seven other volunteers together with
copies of our extensive work-ups, it has been my impression In the past
that those letters are generally disregarded by dispensaries at home duty
stations if they ever reach the appropriate destination. 
Hence I am
left with the distasteful thought that soe of these individuals may
never rpeeivedappropriate medical follow up. 
Had I been given even one
hour to talk to these volunteers, this trouble could have been avoided.
It is ironic that the current Investigations being conducted by the
Dlpartrent of the Amy were initiated, presurmbly in part, to identify
and possibly rectify improper medical practices of the past, because
the action of swmarily discharging our volunteers makes the Army respon-
sible, in fact, for the same types of injustices of which It is being
accused.
I refuse to accept the ethical responsibility for any consequences of the
aforer .ntioned decision about which neither I nor Dr. Sidell was consulted.
Though this type of situation will hopefully not arise again, I would
hope that rare thoughtfulness would be exerted in the future.
Sincerely,
3O0fVJ6SSLSON / M.D..
l 
/
\.- ,inical 
Investigations Section
medical Research Divison
Biomedical' Laboratory
Edgewood Arsenalhope that rare thoughtfulness would be exerted in the future.
Sincerely,
3O0fVJ6SSLSON / M.D..
l 
/
\.- ,inical 
Investigations Section
medical Research Divison
Biomedical' Laboratory
Edgewood Arsenal

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3m ZO310
SCID-UR2 
2i;
Mr. MIehael S. Yesloy
Staff Director, Nationsl Cealesion
for the Protection of )Itrman Subjecto
of Bio.mdical aid 
eiavloral search
lkotwood DuAldiur, Voom 125
5333 Vestberd A-.-enu
gethesda, 'Zoryland 20016
.Dear r. Yealey:
The following P'.oints of information concerning h. :un subject rteearch -ithtin
the ft, 
z+t.at of 
ferre (DO!)) are provided in r-zpoaoc to the telep :ololc
requont of 29 July 1973 from M4r. Albert Glov.cky .f your staC.
,-tlinn 1 
Is tharo any classified research, ir...ving hum= subjects vnO.
iu-3t.Ja 
tional drugs row in progress wIthin t~o I"D?
Ana.ur: 
There Is no closificd research in p:oer-.se within the DOD icvolvin
invnotigatio.al drugs it hizaan subjectu.
1tutLou 2: 
lMt 
are o:oaplos of "unclaopifled f' adinge associated with such
ClE'sl 
fted) srviiev 0tich the Food and Drug 
miu.-istration (I.A) sho-;1 be
cvaro of In ordnr to np.a:c a sound evaluation c4 tin-clOasIfLcd studlcn pro-
posed on the o-ne 3r siitlar drurn" 
tc rofezra to in the 24 October 1975
HorankuIn of Understandln 
(119U) 
between the 'oo, and Drug Administration
and the Departuunt of Defense?
Answers 
This lsng-'ge was Inered in the 19M5 v:.rulou of the EOU, end
retained in tho 1974 version of the HIWU, to cover the contiuncncy tU.r euch,
Information ulghc be developed. 
The historical experience to tbls ti-!:3 ha
not proviOed ezanplee of such lufortton wbtcb 1.;o been forrnlly trv.is,.:ted
from thte DOD to the IDA. 
In ta* cae of Lrvy expLrimants uith LSD, 
Am~y
clessifted reseArch apparently did not establish Loy findings of wito'ard
effects which were not already weli Lnown and adei.uately reported n tho
open scientific literature.
70-026 0 - 76 - 35

--- PAGE BREAK ---640
NC.

Michas 
.

Tesl" 
2?

AUG 1971
feston 31 
om is contracted nr eztra 
sul 
mas subject research revised
at agency leel?

Anw .mrs 
Within the Army, the gudellnes contalood in AM Regulations 70-25 and
,iP ;-re applicable to contracted aud other extremrsl work.

Copies of then
regulations have already boou provided to you.

Standard contract clauses
(Incloeuroas I wAd 2) bind investigatorss to follow t-.sse guidelines.

Cootrects
proposing work with investigational driogs in humans mist contain both clatec.

The clause entitled "use of hukn subjects" stipulal:a 
that the research must
be reviad and approved by a local Inotitutional rci6v cocmIttee as set forth
In -45 CYR' 46.

Extrasminal research proposals ivolving bmun subjects sponsored by the US Arny
Kedical Resaech end L .elopment 
Co--r.4 (UOA'CI) 
r-jat be rovieed by the I!ttt
Uca Pve.

Offlei (Office of The Surgeols C-eral) am 
the US!4..'JDC Contrct )'-Vitc.

Dord.

Il.o Cc.,-dar.

MIJDC, reviews contract pxxi ,ocala if they i-avolve
child n, iastit 1ornli .w-J subjects or prernantw uo-i.

or if the Ccntrect Pcv,,#i
Doard forv-rdo, pro;o.,l to hLs.

The co.;voltlou c-4 op"ation of the Contract
rtevie )'cod io ottlt-cd In U 
RAo0:- 
le.ulation 70-7, Inzloauro 3.

Propo'r.

isvollir.t.

iuvestivat.io' I1 drug.a Mat Alo be rcvie'jctl by the AMY it-Mstl'RCs ionz--l
Di.

r.oviei )Bo'rit.

In a-dition to the rerulnticno cetP4 above, the currcn.

Dc,-p.rtrount of '.lth, 
EL.' tion stud Welfara (A--!) r 'e.ulntov,.

on prot-cctir,-, of
h--An subjcts (45 C1.

45) are oppliod it the coorre of thicoreviv.

"T;h10"e m-lid-
lines and other that cr 
oapliesd in practice ar' reflected In UStZ{)C l',.lu1en
7-25 whirh-is n€i in fl-v.l sta: as of prcp.ratn fc.r publicntiou.

A craft XG
provided no Inclosure 4.

US.q.%*' 
policy on project site vilito Ic attlachnd
(Ituclo use 5).--- PAGE BREAK ---

A craft XG
provided no Inclosure 4. US.q.%*' 
policy on project site vilito Ic attlachnd
(Ituclo use 5). A1thoup.h the lcrpu bull of Arry nxtr-nmral biozedical reseetch
involvn, huwan oubjects is supported by US=-)C, I itolleve that there 
.svy be a
fc niiticr contracts supported by other Army r~yentles. The proviotirs of 
-. and the contract provision are applicable to t!e,2 nu well. IHowevrwr, tha a.'-ey
level review procedures they s.uloy are unfomaui1ir to wt, 
I viII send you thi. information when it is available. A sore detailed clscription of the Amy'a
* rviev proceois for other types of work luvolving hutan subjects io provided as
Inclosuro 6. Vithin the Departent of the Navy all contracted or extramural bu n subjects
research is processed through the Office of Haval research, 
Arlington, Virziu::n
22217. til 
such contracts are tevicod by the Director, Biological Sciences
Division. Ilavy policy on protection of htwmn subjects In thie research is 
at
forth In Secretary of tim Plavy Instruction 3900.39 (Inclocurn 7). Each principal
investigator certifies in writing that he ts aware of, and will abide by the V'vy
policy as stated in Code 600 )lomerandum Io. 97A (I osmre 8). Within the US Air force, contracted work Involvingq httmn subjects is handled
through the Air Force Office of Scimt1fic Research (AOSR). Air Force
Regulation 
0-33, Use of Volunteers In Aerospace Lenarch (Inclosure 9),
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---Involvingq httmn subjects is handled
through the Air Force Office of Scimt1fic Research (AOSR). Air Force
Regulation 
0-33, Use of Volunteers In Aerospace Lenarch (Inclosure 9),
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

541
IsD-HR 
2 eAUG 197S
er Michael S. Teley
contains policy procedures 
4.. 
nsurinl" the safety and well being of uon
subjects In Intrawural and e.rniural programs &j msored-by the Air Force.
Although this regulation stLipustes that it appl'.s when subjects are
Dovcrment euployces, the eame policy is appliac 
Lo contracted projects
involving other subjects. 
After professional :zaev, contract proposals.
are reviewed by the AMOSR Procurevent Reiwev V*.-ttoe uhich ascertnins
that projects have been approved by a Local Ita.rftonl reoview committee
which generally meets DHLW requirents. 
Stselmz1 clAuses on hucan subject
research are not used in Air Force contracts.
Sincerely,
SigwK4
R. F. 1%
9 Inal 
RZCaUD F. r-JPQIs*T, N.D.
As stated 
Colonel, 1-
Acting Ass.taM Surgeon Ceneral
for Rcoeare 
and Dvelopant
S

--- PAGE BREAK ---

542
WIt Ltr provide fafornation requested by Hr. Clowasky, Staff meber for
National Comission for Protection of Human Subjects. Input va requested
from USAF and USX. 
Both & rvices concurred in raft 
to answers I end,
and provided suggested res 'nses 
to question 3 (BG Z. J. Clark, M, USA?
and D. L. CustLa, Vice Admikal, VC, UT-,0. 
Additional telephonic input wes
obtained on question 3 from Havy (CAPT Brodine, )IC, Cdr, 
WDC., pbone
295-1453, Dr. Pollard, Life Sciences Directorate, Office of taval Research,
phone OX2-4051) end 
Wr Force (LTC Vaeiskopf, Directoratoof Life Sciences,
A? Office of Scientific Research, phone OX4-5041, and Hr. Vasa, AFOSR
Procurement Division, Chairman, Procureaent Reviev Co-mttee, phone OX4-4967).
USvy, 
Office of the 
General
US Air ,orc', Office o the Surgeon Ceneral
ACTION: Major Michael V. Johnston. KC, F4-" UC ,41/38 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---rman, Procureaent Reviev Co-mttee, phone OX4-4967).
USvy, 
Office of the 
General
US Air ,orc', Office o the Surgeon Ceneral
ACTION: Major Michael V. Johnston. KC, F4-" UC ,41/38 5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

543
USE OF HUKAW SUBJECTS
1. The following definitions are used in this clause:
a. 
A. risk means that tue human subject ma be exposed to the possibility
of harm - physical, biolog';4l; psychological, sociological, or other - as a
consequence of an act or omission which goes beyond the application of those
.established and accepted methods or procedures which are in his best interests
or which increase ordinary risks of daily life, including the recognized risks
inherent in his chosen occupation or field of service.
b. 
Human subject means any human being who, knowingly or unknowingly, is
subjected to an act or omission, whether at risk or not, the object of which
is to contribute to knowledge to be gained as apart of work to be performed
under the scope of this contract.
2. 
The contractor, before undertaking to perform. any study involving human
subjects, shall insure that the following minimcm conditions are complied with
a. The proposed study has been reviewed a approved by a committee meet-
ing the requirements set forth in Chapter 46 of Tttle 45 of the Code of Fedora
Regulations. 
This review shall determine whether these subjects will be at
risk.
b. 
The number of human subjects used will "e kept to the minimum nuc.ber
which will reasonably achieve the .required results.
c. The study must be such as to contribute significantly to medical know-
ledge, and have reasonable prospects of yielding important results wiich are
not obtainable by other methods or means.
d. 
The study will be conducted only by persons, possessing the requisite
scientific qualifications. 
The highest degree rf skill and care will be
required during all stages of the btudy'of persmis who conduct or assist in
the study.
e. 
The human subject will be informed that at any time during the course
of his participation he has the right to revoke his consent and withdraw from
further participation without prejudice to him 
f.
f. 
If the study has previously been determined to involve human subjects
not at risk, participation by subjects will be i/edLately terminated if it
subsequently appears that risk is, 
in fact, Luvdved.
S. 
There shall be no.greater intrusion into the privacy of the human
subject than is absolutely necessary for the conduct of the study involved.
Except for the submission of reports and other data required by this contract,
any information obtained about a human subject a a result of his participa-
tion shall be held as confidential as the law allows.or the submission of reports and other data required by this contract,
any information obtained about a human subject a a result of his participa-
tion shall be held as confidential as the law allows.

--- PAGE BREAK ---reports and other data required by this contract,
any information obtained about a human subject a a result of his participa-
tion shall be held as confidential as the law allows.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

644
3. 
The contractor, before undertaking to perform any study involving human
subjects at risk, shall, in addition to the above, insure that the following
minimum requirements are complied with:
e. The study viii be conducted so as to avoid all unnecessary physical
or mental discomfort, sutferis, or injury. 
Sf
b. So study will be conducted if there Is any inherent reason to believe
that death or disabling injury is likely to occur. Sufficient animal or
laboratory experiments, or other evaluations, must have been completed to
give assurance of acceptable risks prior to the use of human subjects.
c. The degree of risk to be taken will never exceed that which is justi-
fied by the benefit to the subject and/or the humanitarian importance of the-
knowledge to be gained.
d. Proper preparations will be made, and adequate facilities provided,
to protect the subject against all foreseeable possibilities of injury, dis-
ability, or death. This includes hospitalization and medical treatment as
may be required.
a. Human subjects will have no physical or mental conditions which will
ake participation more hazardous for them than it would be for normal health
persons, unless such condition is a necessary prerequisite for the particular
study involved 
aj_.py.such case, the use of human subjects with such pre-
existing conditions must have been specifically provided for in the scope of
work .to be performed under this contract.
f. The scientifically qualified person conducting the study will be
prepared to terminate the subject's participation at any stage it he has res
to believe, in the exercise of the good faith, superior skill, and careful
judgment required of him, that continuation is likely to result in injury,
disability, or death to the human subject.
4. 
The contractor, before permitting any person to participate as a human
subject, whether at risk or not, shall insure that the following minimum con-
ditions are complied with:
A,
a. 
Legally effective informed consent will be obtained by adequate and
appropriate methods in accordance with the provisions of this clause.
b. 
All consent must be voluntary. It must be the knowing consent of the
individual or his legally authorized representative, so situated as to be abld
to exercise free power of choice without any use of force, fraud, deceit,
duress, "constraint, coercion, or unlawful or Impropor inducement. 
The basic
elements of information necessary to such consent includes
(1) 
A fair explanation of the procedures to be-followed, and their
purposes, including identification of any procedures which are- experimental;
09C 1974nformation necessary to such consent includes
(1) 
A fair explanation of the procedures to be-followed, and their
purposes, including identification of any procedures which are- experimental;
09C 1974

--- PAGE BREAK ---to such consent includes
(1) 
A fair explanation of the procedures to be-followed, and their
purposes, including identification of any procedures which are- experimental;
09C 1974

--- PAGE BREAK ---

646
(2) A descripti. of any attendant discomsorts or risks reasonably
to be anticipated;
(3) A description of any benefits reasonably to be anticipated;
(4) 
A disclosure of any eppropriate alternative procedures that Aight
be advantageous to the subject;
(5) 
An offer to answer any questions coacernIn& the procedure; and
(6) 
An instruction that the subject is free to revoke his consent and
to discontinue participation at any time, without prejudice to himself.
c. 
Exclpatory language through which the subject is made to vaive, or
appear to waive, any of his legal rights. Including any release from liability
for negligence, is prohibited.
d; Consent by a subject or his legally authorized representative shall
be obtained in writing whenever it is reasonably possible to do so. The
consent form may be read to the subject or his legally authorized representa-
tive, but in any event he or-his legally authorized representative must be
given adequate opportunity to reed it and to asksany questions they might hav
This consent form should then be signed by the subject or his 'legally authorhi
representative and by a witness not directly involved in the sudy. 
Oral
consent may t-e used only when it has been specifically provided for in the
scope of work to be performed under this contract or approved in writing by ti
contracting officer. 
When so authorized and used, oral consent is subject to
all the same standards as apply to written consent, except that the signature
of the subject or his legally authorized representative is not required.
5. 
The contractor shall not undertake to conduct either the clinical pharma-
cology or clinical trials of an investigational drug unless this contract con-
tsns the clause entitled "Clinical Study of Investigatiqnal Drugs."
6. 
Prisoners of war will not be used under ay circumstances.
C 1974cal trials of an investigational drug unless this contract con-
tsns the clause entitled "Clinical Study of Investigatiqnal Drugs."
6. 
Prisoners of war will not be used under ay circumstances.
C 1974

--- PAGE BREAK ---estigational drug unless this contract con-
tsns the clause entitled "Clinical Study of Investigatiqnal Drugs."
6. 
Prisoners of war will not be used under ay circumstances.
C 1974

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6"
CLINICAL SMWD ff IIIVTICATIOUAL DRUGS
1. The contractor, before undertaking to conduct either the clinical
pharmacology or clinical trials of an investigational drug under a
Department of the Army contract, shall submit for the written approval of
The Surgeon General, Departmen. of the Army, a signed completed applica-
tion and three copies to IHQDA .SGRD-DR) Washington, DC 20314, using the
following format:
lnvestigator's statement
1. Background Data.
A. Name of investigator.
3. ite of request.
C. Mam 
or other clear identification of drug.
D. Nams of manufacturer or other source of.drug.
1. Qualifications of investigator in detail or by reference to
details already on file in Army records. 
I ""
7. Nam and address of facility or facilities where investigations
will be conducted.
G. All known relev-ant Information about prst use or pertinent
reference thereto available to both the invustigat-ir and the drug supplier,
including all preclinical data, and all other information justifying the
clinical investigation (i.e., the safety and rationale of the proposed
study).
U1. Plan and Conduct of Proposed Clinical Investigation.
A. Specific purpose and military need for or urgency of proposed
clinical investigation.
I. Approximate number of subjects, their age. sex, condition, and
other pertinent information relevant to the conditions of the Lmvestigation.
C. Number of subjects to be employed as controls (if 
any) and same
information as in 3 above for such controls.
D. 
An outline of the phases of the investigation already planned
either In detail or by reference to details already on file in Army records.
This outline may include reasonable alternates and variations, and will be
supplemented or amended when any significant change in direction or scope
of the investigation is undertaken.
JAN 1974cords.
This outline may include reasonable alternates and variations, and will be
supplemented or amended when any significant change in direction or scope
of the investigation is undertaken.
JAN 1974

--- PAGE BREAK ---may include reasonable alternates and variations, and will be
supplemented or amended when any significant change in direction or scope
of the investigation is undertaken.
JAN 1974

--- PAGE BREAK ---

_~ 
647
Z. Description or copies of forms used to record data.
2. 
The contractor shall ensure that each of its investigators wto
conduct either the clinical pharmacology or clinical trials of an tnvesti-
gational drug viii vointain a record of clinical investigation separate
from the patient's clinical rLzord. 
This record of clinical investigation
shall include, minimally, a If ;t of patients receiving the LvestilationM
drug; name, lot number, date, and quantity of investigational drug prescribed;
case histories; the details of clinical observations, tests, and laboratory
procedures carried out on each subject before, during, and after administra-
tion of the drug in question.
3. 
The contractor shall also ensure that either the responsible investi-
gator or a responsible individual designated for the purpose will maintain a
complete record of each investigational drug used under a Department of the
Army contract for at least 3 years after completion of tfre investigation drug
study. 
This record shall include the following information:
a. 
Name of drug.
b. 
Manufacturer, or other source of drug.
c. 
Amount and date received.
d. 
Expiration date, if 
any.
e. 
Lot or control number.
f. Date of authority to use.
g. 
Names of individuals authorized to prescribe the drug.
h. 
Names of prescribing physician or deatist.
i. 
Date on which use of the drug is terminated, if applicable.
J. 
Date on which use of the drug was appoved for general use
as a safe and efficacious drug, if during course of investigation.
4. The contractor shall submit progress reports to HQDA (SGRD-DR) 
Wash-
ington, DC 20314, at least once annually, and &all submit a final report
on termination of the investigation. 
In additim the contractor shall promptly
report to HQDA (SGRD-DR) 
any unusual or importat observations occurring
during the course of the investigational drug atudy, particularly If they involve
any adverse effect that may be regarded as caused by the now drug; if the
adverse effect is alarming, it shell be reported to UQDA (SGRD-DI) 
immediately.onal drug atudy, particularly If they involve
any adverse effect that may be regarded as caused by the now drug; if the
adverse effect is alarming, it shell be reported to UQDA (SGRD-DI) 
immediately.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

648
5. 
Special Cgnditions Applicable to Clinical 
investigation of New Druas.
The contractor shall ensure that the investigational drug is administered to
subjects only under the personal supervision of the responsible investigator
or a qualified person to vhom the responsible Investigator has delegated this
authority. 
The contractor she'l also ensure that oll subjects participating
in the investigation or their r-presentatives are fully informed and undet'
stand that the now drug is beigg used for inveetigational purposes. 
The
written consent of the subjects, or their representatives. shall be obtained
except where this is not feasible or, in the responsible investigator's pro-
fessional judgement, is contrary to the best interests of the subject. 
When
the purpose of administering an investigational drug is not to benefit the
individual to whom it ts administered, final approval for the use of volunteer
subjects hall be obtained as provided in paragraph 6, AR 70-25. 
Benefit to
the individual is defined as the administration of a drug to an individual*
expected to result in the diagnosis, mitigation, trostment, cure, or prevention
of disease or injury of the same individual.
JAN 1974

--- PAGE BREAK ---the administration of a drug to an individual*
expected to result in the diagnosis, mitigation, trostment, cure, or prevention
of disease or injury of the same individual.
JAN 1974

--- PAGE BREAK ---

549
USAMRDC Reg 70-7
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMW
US AJIY MEDICAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT COMMAND
Washington, DC 
20314
REGULATION 
22 June 1973
NUMBER 70- 7
Change No. 2
Research and Development
PROCESSING OF UNSOLICITED PROPOSALS
1. USAIRDC Regulation 70-7, 
28 September 1972, is changed
as follows:
Para Sb 
Add: (4) The Forms 1498 on projects from ARO-
Far Fast nud \RO-Ehiroe vill l-e .renared by tho.me organiza-
tions, not by Headquarters, 
USAMRDC. 
The i'orms 1079 will,
however, be completed on all projects regardless of origin.
2. 
This transmission sheet should be filed in the front of
the publication for reference purposes.
SGRD- RP
FOR TilE CO.MIAN.\DER:
STEIE 
E. HACKETT
1LT, MSC
Adjutant
DISTRIBUTION:
AMC plus 1 cy ea
Indiv concerned

--- PAGE BREAK ---be filed in the front of
the publication for reference purposes.
SGRD- RP
FOR TilE CO.MIAN.\DER:
STEIE 
E. HACKETT
1LT, MSC
Adjutant
DISTRIBUTION:
AMC plus 1 cy ea
Indiv concerned

--- PAGE BREAK ---

55O
USAMRDC Reg ,70-7
DEPARThENT OF THE ARMY
US ARMY MEDICAL RESEARCi AND DEVELOPI41NT COMMAND
Wash;ngton, DC 20314
REGULATION 
23 February 1973
NUMBER 70-7
Change No. 1
Research and Development
PROCESSING OF UNSOLICITED PROPOSkLS
1. 
USARDC Itegulation 70-7, 28 September 1972, is changed as follows:
a. 
Pari Ic(3) Insert: 
AR 705-S (70-1) before Army Research and
Development.
b. 
Para Ic Add: 
(4.) 
AR 70-40, US Amy Groups (Research Offices)
Overseas.
c. 
Para 2 Insert: 
after USA4RDC "for review,' funding, and/or
contractual action."
d. 
Para 2 Add: 
Those that come from US Aimy Research Offices
Overseas are addressed in paragraph S.
e. Para Sb(2)(c) Add: 
after proposal, "except in the cases of
US Army Groups (Research Offices) Overseas."
f. 
Para Sb(S) Add: 
after Project Monitor: 
(See also (11) (e
and 1161 and paragraph 8).
S. 
Para Sb(I8) Add: 
(c) prepares Gold Flow Determination and
Findings document on any accepted proposal from US Army Groups
(Research Offices) Overseas.
h. 
Remove page 13 from original regulation and insert new pages
13 and 14.
2. This transmission sheet should be filed in the front of the pub-
lication for reference purposes.
SGRD-RP
FOR THE COMMANDER:
GERALD R. NcCMLLIS
ILT, NSC
Adjutant
DISTRIBUTION:
A A C plus 1 cy ea
Indiv concerned

--- PAGE BREAK ---be filed in the front of the pub-
lication for reference purposes.
SGRD-RP
FOR THE COMMANDER:
GERALD R. NcCMLLIS
ILT, NSC
Adjutant
DISTRIBUTION:
A A C plus 1 cy ea
Indiv concerned

--- PAGE BREAK ---

551
*Reg 70-7
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARM
US ARMY MEDICAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT COMMAND
WASHINGTON, 
DC 
20314
REGULATION 
28 September 1972
NUMBER 70:7
Research and Developmert
PROCESSING OF UNSOLICITED PROPOSALS
1. References.
a. 
Armed Services Procurement Regulaiion (ASPR).
b. 
Army Procurement Procedure (APP).
c. 
Army Regulations:
(1) 
70-S 
Grants to Non-Profit Organ*iZations.
(2) 
70-55 
Management of US Army R&D Centers and
Laboratories.
(3) Army Research and Development.
2. 
Purpoe. This regulation establishes procedures for pro-
cess unsolicited 
research and developwrnt proposals from
sources outside USAMRDC for funding or contractual action.
Proposals may come from other DA agencies. other DOD agencies,
other government agencies and from non-goiernment organiza-
tions as defined in paragraph 3.
3. 
Definitions. For the purpose of this regulation, the
following terms are defined to provide uniformity to all
staff offices.
a. 
Contractual Action - includes all contracts and
grants, changes, extensions, and renewals.
b. Extramural R&D Proposal - all requests for support
of RAD originating from non-government organizations.
c. 
Miscellaneous Obligation Document (MOD) 
- the docu-
ment used to reserve USAMRDC funds for ust of government
agencies other than the Department of Definse where a com-
monly used form is not'feasible.
*This Regulation supersedes Regulation Nuuber 70-7, dated
21 September 1970.

--- PAGE BREAK ---government
agencies other than the Department of Definse where a com-
monly used form is not'feasible.
*This Regulation supersedes Regulation Nuuber 70-7, dated
21 September 1970.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

552
Reg 70-7
d. Military Interdepartmental Purchase Request (MIPR)
the document used to provide USAMRDC funds to other-Military
departments within DOD.
e. Intra-Army Order - document used to provide USAMRDC
funds to other Department of the Army organizations.
f. Proposal - request for funds or resources with which
to finance research and development.,
4. Applicability. 
This regulation is applicable to all
personnel of this Command involved in processing research
and development proposals from sources outside USAMRDC for
funding and/or contractual actions by this Headquarters.
S. Chronological Sequence of Responsibilities.
a. General. 
Pro ect Monitors, Staff Officers, or per-
sonnel assigned to subordinate elements will advise prospec-
tive investigators to submit proposals, new or- renewal, in
three (3) copies to the Commanding General, 
US Army Medical
Research and Oevelopment Command, 
ATTN: 
SGRD-ID, Washington,
DC 
20314.
(1) Each individual involved in the processing of a pro-
posal is responsible for insuring timely action on new and
renewal proposals.
(2) Each technical directorate or separate division is
responsible for photocopying necessary quantities of any pro-
posal for which it is designated as responsible office.
(3) All proposals received by a Project Monitor, Staff
Officer, or laboratory staff, will be promptly recorded with
Proposal Coordinator, Information Systems Division.
(4) A Contracting Officer, by law, is the only person
authorized to enter into contracts or to change the terms
or conditions of an existing contract.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---formation Systems Division.
(4) A Contracting Officer, by law, is the only person
authorized to enter into contracts or to change the terms
or conditions of an existing contract.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

663
Reg 70-7
b. 
Specific duties e 
individuals and offices.
(1) Principal Investigator forwards proposal
tion Systems Division, USAMRDC.
to Inform&-
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR
PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
COMMANDING GENERAL, USA4RDC
L 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS DIVISION
Proposal Coordinator_
(2) Proposal Coordinator (ISD) receives, registers,
acknowledges, initiates administrative records and distri-
butes proposals.
(a) 
Receives all copies of each proposal, files original
copy by Control Number for later use.
(b) Registers all proposals received; minimal data will
include name of principal investigator, name of performing
organization, title of proposal, date that proposal was re-
ce lived, technical directorate assigned review, and CONTROL
NUMBER.
(c)' 
Prepares and sends pre-printed cards (OTSG Form 499)
(Appendix A) to Principal Investigator and the business office
of the performing organization, acknowledging receipt of pro;
posal.
3
II

--- PAGE BREAK ---and sends pre-printed cards (OTSG Form 499)
(Appendix A) to Principal Investigator and the business office
of the performing organization, acknowledging receipt of pro;
posal.
3
II

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Reg 70- 7
(d) Completes block 1, 2, and 3 of OTSG Form 1079 (Ap-
pendix B) and attaches it to copies of proposal being sent
to technical directorate :or review. (Control Number and
date prepared are placed r:n OTSG Form 1079.)
(e) Attaches DD Form 1498 (Appendix C) with Control
Number at top.
(f) Attaches copy of DA Form 2496 (DF), Subject: Review
of Proposal. 
(Appendix D).
(g) Maintains a 30-day sus 
e 
file for proposals sent
to Project Monitors through the DirectoR-tes.
(h) Rejected proposals will be destroyed after ninety
days.
(i) Proposals approved by the Technical Directorate will
be forwarded with the completed OTSG Form 1079 to Logistics
Division for contract negotiation.
(3) Diagram of Downflow of Technical Review Process:
Proposal Coordinator
,7Director, Directorate
Division Chief
ISD LProject 
Monitor
Technical Expertise
Outside HQ, USAMRDC
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---on.
(3) Diagram of Downflow of Technical Review Process:
Proposal Coordinator
,7Director, Directorate
Division Chief
ISD LProject 
Monitor
Technical Expertise
Outside HQ, USAMRDC
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

555
Reg 70-7
(4) Director or Separate Division Chief:
(a) Reviews all proposals for relevance to Directorate
or Division mission.
(b) Forwards any proposal without attached OTSG Form
1079 and Control Number to Proposal Coordinator for action.
(c) Returns proposal to Proposal Coordinator if not
relevant to mission.
(d) Assigns relevant proposal to appropriate Division
or Project Monitor for action.
(5) Project Monitor: 
(See also (ll)(e) and (16).)
(a) Reviews proposal for completeness; scientific merit,
military relevance.
(b) When appropriate, refers proposa) to another staff
member, subordinate element, advisory board or committee and
consultant for review, evaluation and recommendations. 
In-
sures timely response to prevent delay in final action.
(c) 'If needed, requests literature searches and/or as-
sistance in determining other US Governmeht support for pro-
posal under consideration through Information Systems Division.
(d) Whenever possible, attaches actual review comments
to OTSG Form 1079.
(e) If proposals are recommended for approval, assembles
recommendations and processes as follows:
1. Completes OTSG Form 1079 insuring that the subjects
in blocks 4 through 29 are given special attention and where
necessary discussed in Comments, block 51. 
The comments in
block 51 need not repeat comments of other reviewers attached
to'the 1079. Where the Project Monitor is in agreement with
other reviewers, this fact should be stated, with his recom-
mendation for dollar level of support. Should he not agree,
this'should be stated, along with his reasons therefor, and
recommendation for funding. 
(Note: OTSG Form 1079 will be
prepared in two copies; the original may have attached all
5
70-D26 0 - 76 - 36

--- PAGE BREAK ---ted, along with his reasons therefor, and
recommendation for funding. 
(Note: OTSG Form 1079 will be
prepared in two copies; the original may have attached all
5
70-D26 0 - 76 - 36

--- PAGE BREAK ---

556
Reg 70-7
comments of reviewers, and the duplicate OTSG Form 1079 ill
have a copy of the proposal attached as well as copies of thi
comments. Both sets will be forwarded to the Division Chief
for review.)
2. If recommendation is for a terminal period or reduc-
tion-in level of funding requested by investigator, the pro-
posal should be discussed with the investigator prior to
preparation of OTSG Form 1079. Appropriate comments regarding
the conversation will be recorded in Item 51. 
The investigators
should be informed that the proposed action is subject to ap-
proval by the Commanding Genera and also subject to negotia-
tions between the performing organization and USAMRDC Contracting
Officer.
3. Completes DD Form 1498 and makes ooe additional copy.
The copy must be certified as to military relevancy.
(f) If proposals are recommended for dispproval, pro-
cesses as follows:
1. Prepares letter to investigator for signature of
Comminding General. Letter with substantiating papers and
OTSG Form 1079 annotated to reflect disapproval will be for-
warded to Division Chief for review. 
(Information copy of
letter for Logistics Division in the case of renewal disap-
provals.)
2. One copy of turn-down letter will be designated for
Information Systems Division in order to close log entry prior
to the signature of Commanding General.
(6) Diagram of Upflow of Technical Review Process:
DIVISION 
LOISTICS-
DIVISION
"-"I RCTOPLATE
DIVISION
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---in order to close log entry prior
to the signature of Commanding General.
(6) Diagram of Upflow of Technical Review Process:
DIVISION 
LOISTICS-
DIVISION
"-"I RCTOPLATE
DIVISION
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

557
Reg 70-7
(7) Division Chief:
(a) Reviews Project Monitor's recommendation.
(b) Concurrence with recommendation for contractual
action. Signs original OTSG Form 1079, ve ifies lD -Form
149 nd forwards package to Director.
(c) Cohcurrence with recommendation for disapproval.
Writes "disapproved" in Item 30 of origint1 OTSG Form 1079,
signs and forwards package to Director.
(d) Non-concurrence with recommendation. Returns to
Project Monitor for necessary action.
(6) Director or Separate Division Chi.ef:
(a) Reviews recommendations of Division Chief and Pro-
ject Monitor. The degree and nature of tLe'external tech-
nical review of grant and contract proposals will be determined
by the Director of each technical directorate. 
Where there
is divergence of opinion among the externl.reviewers, the
actual comments of the reviewers will be iade available to
the Contract Review Board.
(b) 
Concurrence with recommendation U0r approval. 
Signs
original OTSG Form 1079, verifies DD Form 
498 and forwards
these to Information Systems Division. 
Signs duplicate OTSG
Form 1079 and returns package to Project Monitor for file.
(c) 
Concurrence with recommendation for disapproval.
Writes "disapproved" in item 31 o 
oTSG Fcrm 1079, signs, and
forwards package to Deputy Commander. 
Copy of turn-down let-
ter will be sent to Information Systems Division.
(d) Non-concurrence with recommendation. Returns to
Division Chlef or Project Monitor for necessary action.
(e) 
For proposals requiring action by Formal Contract
Review Board, Administrative Officer in each Directorate
will make copies for all members of the Contract Review Board
and forward to the Adjutant to be attached to the Agenda.
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---t
Review Board, Administrative Officer in each Directorate
will make copies for all members of the Contract Review Board
and forward to the Adjutant to be attached to the Agenda.
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

558
Reg 70-7
(9) Information Systems Division:
(a) Receives DA Form 2496 (DF), Subject: 
Review of
Proposal.
(b) Receives completed OTSG Form 1079.
(c) Receives two copies of completed DD Form 1498.
(d) 
Forwards original proposal to Logistics Division
with DA Form 2496 (DF), OTSG Form 1019 with Control Number,-
and DD Fork 1498.
(10) Adjutant furnishes secretarial support to the Re-
corder of the Formal Contract Review Board in preparing agenda
and minutes and in the distribution of these and copies of
proposals to members.
(11) 
Contract Review and Award:
(a) Logistics Division will route all pending proposals
through the appropriate contract awarding process following
technical review. 
(See USAMRDC Regulation 15-18 on Contract
Review Boards.)
ra) 
INFORMAL BOARD
LOGISTICS 
I-I=CMPTOU
DIVISION 
b) FORMAL BOARD
(b) Less than $50,000 and not involving investigational
drugs in humans or use of volunteers will be reviewed by the
following people who constitute the Informal Contract Review
Board:
1. Technical directorate director involved with proposal.
2. Chief, Logistics Division or representative.
3; 
Judge Advocate or representative.
4. 
Deputy Commander.
8
-J

--- PAGE BREAK ---ew
Board:
1. Technical directorate director involved with proposal.
2. Chief, Logistics Division or representative.
3; 
Judge Advocate or representative.
4. 
Deputy Commander.
8
-J

--- PAGE BREAK ---

559
Reg 70-7
(c) Proposals for $SO,000 and above or any proposal
requiring use of investigational drugs in humans or use of
volunteers will be reviewed by Formal Contract Review Board
consisting of the following members:
1. Deputy Commander (Chairman).
2. Directors of technical directorates or designated
representatives.
S. Chief, Logistics Division or representative.
4. 
Judge Advocate or representative.
S. Chief, Research Planning Office or representative.
(d) Logistics Division will furnish a Contracting Of-
ficer to serve as recorder for the Formal Contract Review
Board. This individual will prepare the agenda with secre-
tarial assistance from the Office of the Adjutant.
(e) Other staff officers present at a Board meeting in
a non-voting status are the Comptroller, the Project Monitor
involved, and the Division Chief involved. The Project Moni-
tor will conduct necessary action for any proposal rejected
or deferred by any contract review process.
(12) 
Judge Advocate Office:
(a) Will conduct legal review of all research proposals
and technical reviews for legal sufficiency in accordance
with provisions of ASPR and APP.
(b) Reviews all proposals involving use of volunteers
or human subjects.
(c) Performs other legal services as required.
(d) Reviews contracts before final dispatch to the per-
forming organization.
(13) 
Comptroller:
(a) Receives all proposals that are approved by either
contract awarding process.
(b) Processes approved OTSG Form 1079.
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---atch to the per-
forming organization.
(13) 
Comptroller:
(a) Receives all proposals that are approved by either
contract awarding process.
(b) Processes approved OTSG Form 1079.
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

560
Reg 70-7
1; 
One copy to Commanding General/Deputy Commander for
information.
2. One copy plus original DD Form 1498 and one copy for
Project Monitor through Directorate using suggested format
in Appendix E.
3. One copy to Information Systems Division with DA Form
2496-(DF), Subject: 
Review of Proposal.
4. Four copies for Comptroller's use.
S. Original OTSG Form 1079 and original proposal go to
Logistics Division.
(14) 
Deputy Commander:
(a) Reviews and approves/disapproves any proposal of
less than $50,000 and not involving investtgational drugs
in humans or use of volunteers (informal review).
(b) 
Serves as Chairman of the Formal Contract Review
Board and approves/disapproves the recommendation on pro-
posals up to $100,000. On proposals of $100,000 and above
Deputy Commander signs the recommendation that the Commanding
General approve the proposal.
CMR(1498) 
OLL. 
.. .. 
.
...
](1498)
PROJECTT 
rLtter) 
P RINCIPAL
1 NONI TOR 
INVIESTIGATORI
I 
lSION 
lRGAIzATTo
COMMANDING GENERL/I
-1DEPUTY COMMANDER 
.
I(Info)
110
L 
_ 
! 
.
, 
r

--- PAGE BREAK ---498) 
OLL. 
.. .. 
.
...
](1498)
PROJECTT 
rLtter) 
P RINCIPAL
1 NONI TOR 
INVIESTIGATORI
I 
lSION 
lRGAIzATTo
COMMANDING GENERL/I
-1DEPUTY COMMANDER 
.
I(Info)
110
L 
_ 
! 
.
, 
r

--- PAGE BREAK ---

561
Reg 70-7
(15) 
Commanding General:
(a) Reviews completely recommendations forwarded by the
Formal-Contract Review Board and takes necessary action.
(b) Reviews correspondence regarding disapproval, ter-
xinal period support, reduced funding of proposals and takes
necessary action.
(c) Recqives completed copy of OTSG Form 1079 for in-
formation purposes.
(d) Approves/disapproves any proposal of $100,000 or
more.
(16) Project Monitor. (See also (S) and (11)(e).) Upon
receipt of notification of-Command approval for contractual
action (a copy of OTSG Form 1079 with fiscal approval and two
copies-of DD Form 1498):
(a) Propares appropriate letter to pzincipal investigator
as follows:
1. New contract or grant (Appendix F).
2. Renewals, extensions without additional funding or
suppTemental funding (Appendix G).
3. Terminal period or reduction in funding: 
Prepare
appropriate letter for signature.
(b) Conducts final review of completed DD Form 1498
and sends original and one copy to Informction Systems Divi-
sion. 
The copy must be certified for military relevancy.
(17) 
Information Systems Division:
(a) 
Will receive one copy of completed OTSG Form 1079
from Comptroller for processing and annotation in Log Book.
(b) Receives original DD Form 1498 to be forwarded to
the Office of the Chief of Research and Development, Army
......
h Off iccz- 
O ~ 
j)... 
r the Defense Documentation
Center (DDC) 
anA the Smithson ian Science Information Exchange,
Incorporated (SIE).
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---f Research and Development, Army
......
h Off iccz- 
O ~ 
j)... 
r the Defense Documentation
Center (DDC) 
anA the Smithson ian Science Information Exchange,
Incorporated (SIE).
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---

562
Reg 70-7
(c) Files the copy of DD Form 1498 which has been certi-
fied for military relevancy.
(18) 
Logistics Division (Contracting Officer):
(a) Reviews original OTSG Form 1079 before completing
contract negotiations.
(b) Negotiates contract with performing organization.
6. Approval Authorities:
a. Less than $50,000 without use of investigational
drugs and/or volunteers -- Deputy Commandor as Chairman of
the Informal Contract Review Board.
b. Formal Contract Review Board -- approval is required
for all actions of $SO,000 or more and any action which in-
cludes use of volunteers or investigationelldrugs in humans.
c. Approval of Commanding General, USAMRDC, is required
for contracts in the amounts of $100,000 to $500,000.
d. Approval of The Surgeon General is required for all
awards of $500,000 or more.
e. Assistant Secretary of the Army (rGD) approval is
required for negotiation of contracts for S100,000 or more
for other than educational institutions. The required De-
termination and Findings (D4F) will be prc,)ared by the Logis-
tics Division upon receipt of necessary information from
Project Monitor.
f. TAW AR 40-7 proposals involving the use of investi-
gational drugs will be reviewed by the Army Investigational
Drug Review Board before the Formal Contract Review Board
reviews them.
.
g. 
JAW ASPR, Contracting Officer, Logistics Division,
will prepare D&F for all OCONUS proposals involving interna-
tional balance of payments. Those involving less than
$15,000 will be signed by Contracting Offi:er. Those in- -
volving $15,000 or more. require the approval of The Surgeon
General.
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---l balance of payments. Those involving less than
$15,000 will be signed by Contracting Offi:er. Those in- -
volving $15,000 or more. require the approval of The Surgeon
General.
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---

563
Reg 70-7
7. Periods of time normally required for processing proposals within
Logistics Division are:
a. Contract renewal -
30 days.
b. New contract - 60 days.
-c. Actions requiring D&F signed by The Surgeon General - 75 days.
d. Actions requiring D&F signed by Assistant Secretary of the
Amy (RWD) - 120 days.
S. Review: of Research Proposals from US Amy Groups Overseas (OCRD)
or directly from other foreign national investigators:
a; 
Research proposals are forwarded to USAMRDC for review from
the Office of Chief of Research and Development in accordance with
AR 70-40. 
Other research proposals may come directly to USAIRDC from
foreign individual investigators or their institutions.
I'"
b. 
The procedures for processing these research proposals are
similar to those for all other unsolicited proposals, except for the
following:
(1) A required Balance of Payment Determination and Findings (D&F)
prepared and followed up on by Logistics Division.
(2) An Intra-Army Order prepared by the Office of the Comptroller.
(3) A response to OCRD with recommendation regarding the proposal,
prepared by Project Monitor.
c. 
The Project Monitor reviews the proposal and makes reconnenda-
tions on OONUS research in the same way as for CONUS research. 
His
response to OCRD will be coordinated with his Directorate, the Comp-
troller, Logistics Division, and Research Planning Office prior to
submission to Headquarters for signature.
SGRD-RP
FRR THE CORANDER:
LID 
R. McCRILLIS
ILT, NSC
Adjutant
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

64R
Rog 70-7
DISTRI BUION:
A 4 C pIuS. 1 cy e
Indiv concerned
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---o Headquarters for signature.
SGRD-RP
FRR THE CORANDER:
LID 
R. McCRILLIS
ILT, NSC
Adjutant
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

64R
Rog 70-7
DISTRI BUION:
A 4 C pIuS. 1 cy e
Indiv concerned
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

565
We acknowledge with daiks receipt of your meercl Ipropoal which you
*mlited for coasldoarticia.
As soon as review by thalsteff ad apIroprlOste sdhloy ops hns bees
completed, you will be Infomed of t"e decision.
Your Interest In he problems of the Amy Medical Depatent Is greatly
appreciated.
' ly.
GERALD R. McCRILUS
ILT, MSC
ADJUTANT
LrOTIOn Or I MAY5 I4O19 
O*SLttT. 
tgPt.AC[S
OT" 
FRM 41-I. I OCT to, 1141CH Is OPIOLETr.
I 
P
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
U.IL ARMY MEDICAL RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT COMMAND
VASINOGI7o. D.C. 20M4
OFFICIAL BUSINESS
PiENALTY FoRt PINVATE USg. 590l
POSTAGE AND FEES PAID
EPAtTMNEHT OP THE ARMY
DOD-2i4
APBNDIX A
010 FORM 49
1 JUL va
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---ND
DEVELOPMENT COMMAND
VASINOGI7o. D.C. 20M4
OFFICIAL BUSINESS
PiENALTY FoRt PINVATE USg. 590l
POSTAGE AND FEES PAID
EPAtTMNEHT OP THE ARMY
DOD-2i4
APBNDIX A
010 FORM 49
1 JUL va
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66
-
#IGNAlUft 
DzEil 
SIGNAIIlTt 
-
A" 
-
-
sINATURC 
' 
BAL
LOGISTICS DIVISION
"*. CONRACT/RANS. .U.I. P.ERne)
TYPE OF INSTITUTION 
TYPE OF CONTRACT
EDUCATIONAL 
OIEt 
4 1. $-COST I, U 
T 
at4. 
G-OA 
.
.
SEDL 
3.SsT 
ri 
AND MATTER.
1
3.D 
VAL 
'3 
OC AL 
' 
4 
COWMCRCIAL 
Sb. Ovta4E-,, 
fly)
VC Ut HEALTH 
POVATE 
i 
INDUSTRIAL
46T CONTRIACTING 
O 
UFICEtAS 
REPRESENTATIVE 
47. JUDGES 
ADVOC. *.E REVIEW
SIGUIATURE 
DT 
rr_____I.oATURE 
T
At. BOARD OF AWARD 
OAA.ROVE 
W 
DISAPPROVED~d 
ReesE .1 AvC)5480si' 
Y
(DAPPROVED SITYN MODIFICATION
SOON ATUREC-DEPUTY COMMANDERt 
DATE 
SIGN Al 
C)1. -COwiMAN DINO GENERAL 
lt
ft. BUDGET ACTION
CHIEF. 
UIJIUET AVD ACCOUN 1114 SRANCN 
DATE
*SC FORM 1079
1 "EP Ila
PREViOUS SOITIOS OF ThIS FORN AVE ODSO4ETL
~~atW
RECOMMENDATION FOR SUPPORT OF 
cONT.o. 
NumoR 
Dia- rLpAREo.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
I
PRINCIPAL INVISTIGATORo
0 CONTACIING ORGANIZATION IN1mo. Sitp. IiStd. lAwgdl 
L INV0ST6ATOR'S AORESS(ii oAhm 
fti"l#4 
)
D p (De)e
DIRECTORATE
4. TITLE OF PROPOSAL 
.
S. CONTRACT'GRANT ,o 
,oATC STARTEO 
?. PRES.IT KEPR *AT *. LAT AHL 
UND L9E SV . FUNDS 
ACDo TO DATE
0. NEW FUNoN. 
.. 
i. 
PRESENT LINE lTEu AND TAK
S
It. AECOMUMEkOC 
LINE ITCM AND TASK(lidh.aml S Pfw Y*d) 
1S. TOTAL ESTI ATD" FUNDS
S
IS. new - STAN? 
It. ExpIRE 
al. ClIFF 
9011doiQsv.Ugee,
0 
-
, EXTENSION 
FToD 
10p 
-#I~I 
AL
CONTINVAIION oIvidOU 
$ 
_0 
_ 
_ 
?O 
2 
VOFtN 
1l.S
OiA 
-
i. S.JPpLEN4[iI TfNe lio, 
eqe..n) 
-
It. IA 
TLPS
10. ?tAkSFCR TO OTHER GnVENNIMN T ACTIVITIES 
? 
as1I. 
5IV( 
IEUOS
80. 
ADJUSTMENT 
IN 
T 
OF Ri 
ITV 
NTZ8fLsDlr
Is 
6P EC 
IEPORTINO REQUIRfMCNT ipI.I*n an
... 
.
.... 
.... 
-
... .- 
"' 
.
.. 
.. 
.. j 
.
I .
.
3b. Pnoj[CT 
OFFICER 
X. 
oIVISt'oN APPmVAL 
'51. D ftCTOftAT9 AP0VAt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Z8fLsDlr
Is 
6P EC 
IEPORTINO REQUIRfMCNT ipI.I*n an
... 
.
.... 
.... 
-
... .- 
"' 
.
.. 
.. 
.. j 
.
I .
.
3b. Pnoj[CT 
OFFICER 
X. 
oIVISt'oN APPmVAL 
'51. D ftCTOftAT9 AP0VAt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

567
ftflfRO4 AND TECHNOLOGY W071K 
WLT WYMARY 
00W065 
540 
u5 
Ol~Ve
0419 09 v 94 
ll 
.
.. 
mul 00 6iii.a 
00 
ne" 
n1 
•
so00 0 coo0*6 0 
0000&U CLCU901 
0P4jcI %fts54U 
T 
,5 ".s. &me&V54(qw 
0101 VI 
avwo
S li 
P.. 
S .. 5 (...0 
......
i 
|a 
.,,6,,., 
,
is tCIII*(lsv 
g Tlcw*tqW(*L £0141'
palMall 
a 
~V2664"V.O wall 
&00551AC
0556.'-*........ 
I5*o 
P.uS _ *3_ 
. . .
...........
a4*
4,1 
I* 
r $Ato 
I5u4 
wl
tii 
0ILu.l~~I1l 
Ill++I 
11II 
~I 
5*60* 41, 
..... 
.. 
soge
as 
"N941, 
wil
p.* 
4~jA oacv,(.44DP@C. 
I 
UOAIEP 
~ 
M'UE+ 
, 
'.. 
I 
, 
c,,.,...u..,vc. 
.j 
,,.-,
•6540 
"+""i +"aS 
II I.In c.-a. 
I, , 
6.,4'.' 
'- 
' 
' 
.
..
ll~~~~l 
huglll 
-
IDHI II 
• 
NI 
,41Ml
"OMlmPA 
(F-.xIII 
far&l 
MM 1-/00 
IIC0 
cmhD
1& C 
AL 9&-.¢ 
It OP PAC,1P It. 
POD*^& 
64 
A4 
OF OWM V 
a0ut 
0 
.06 S.w 
C 0#2481mw 
C 
.0 
US ~ 
~ 
culiul 
j 
N ~~sWT 
oN r If..* #00%04 'tot OuOLI.g. 
O 
0 ^s 
luse. 
I Nov so
DDb'ta.'4 9L~ 
3 
4. 
AMO 
rI. # 04-LA 65 WO3 RIS 
phdV Vtta 
601og

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

III. Summary of Current Research Involving Human Subjects
in DOD.
(

--- PAGE BREAK ---

~7Q

--- PAGE BREAK ---rI. # 04-LA 65 WO3 RIS 
phdV Vtta 
601og

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

III. Summary of Current Research Involving Human Subjects
in DOD.
(

--- PAGE BREAK ---

~7Q

--- PAGE BREAK ---

0a
U
ARMY RESEARCH INVOLVING HUMAN SUBJECTS
Army work involving human subjects can be divided into two broad groups:
Research, Development, Test and Evaluation (RDTE) program and the
Clinical Investigation Program. 
RDTE research is aimed at answering
militarily unique questions. 
The Clinical Investigation Program more
nearly resembles civilian medical center programs. 
It is required to
Improve the care of patients in military hospitals and to provide
research experience for medical personnel in training.
The following material sumarizing current Army projects involving
human subjects Is divided according to whether or not investigational
or Schedule I drugs are being used. 
Inclosure 1 is a consolidated
list of projects approved by the Army Investigational Drug Review Board.
The list includes clinical investigation projects and RDTE projects,
both intramural and contract studies. 
Inclosure 2 contains projects
not involving investigational drugs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---oard.
The list includes clinical investigation projects and RDTE projects,
both intramural and contract studies. 
Inclosure 2 contains projects
not involving investigational drugs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

IFOHMATION PAPER
8 September 1975
SUBJECT: 
Current Army Research with Investigatonal Drugs Involving Human Subjects
FACTS.
1. 
There are no classified studies concerning Department of Defense (DOD) research with Investigational
drugs involving tuman subjects.
2. 
Number and Type of Drug Research Project.
a. 
Army - All on file with the Food and Drug Adonistration (FDA).
(I) 
Fifty-five Department of Army-Sponsored Investigational New Drug Applications (IND's).
19 Blood Preservation
19 Vaccines
8 Cardiovascular
20 Anti-infection (10 Mlaria)
3 Anti-radiat on (no patients)
3 Skin and others
(2) 
Ninety-three - Drug Company Sponsored:
Drug trials for treatment of patients in Army hospitals.
(3) 
One hLdred nineteen National Institutes of Health (NIH) or Investigator-Sponsored:
107 Cancer treatment, National Cancer Institute (NCI)
9 Vaccines
3 Skin and others
(4) 
Alcohol, Drug Abuse, Psycboactive Drugs:
See Table 1, attached.

--- PAGE BREAK ---) or Investigator-Sponsored:
107 Cancer treatment, National Cancer Institute (NCI)
9 Vaccines
3 Skin and others
(4) 
Alcohol, Drug Abuse, Psycboactive Drugs:
See Table 1, attached.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

iSept 75
Table 1.
WJIAIJ SUBJECTS RE!EARCh INVOLVIIMG ALCOHOL ANUD 
DR=G ABUSE O.t P-YCHOACTIVE DRLCS
i. 
USA!.D3C SUPPORTED COITRACTS
Ye.-r
Apr 73 -
Aug 7,
Jul 73 -
Jul 75
May 65 - Jun 75
May 73 - Jul 75
Principal
Investi rfator
Mendelson, J., 
.D.
Hanrvard University
Nut IAk&W1
Callaway, 9., 
M.D. 
-Alcohol
University of California, San Francisco
Willi.wis, 1, 
Ph.D. 
Alcohol
University of Oklahoma dealth Sciences Center
Jampolsi-j, A., N.D. 
Alcohol & Karihauna
Optical Sciences Corporation
Type of
SubJect
U r 
?.-?..Jited through
ne%-qzpt.r advertisements
College students
.College students
College students
Descriotion
Effects of chronic m. rih-tuna use on
motivation and pcrfo.-::tncc.
Biorze.dical e.fccts of very lo':
doses of alco.-ol on co-.plex
sensorr and rotor ta s ard uron
EEG's recori.d during -ruch
per formance.
Effects of rderate doses of
alcohol on ino.r.stion, proce ri-r,
and sleep.
Combined effects of low and -odcr-i-
doses of cirii-una and alcohol 
.-
ability to -Asurlly track objct.
and other viru~l fUnctAons.
II.' US.A . r2DC 
11-1USE RF.SEkRCH
Feb 75 -
present 
1ollov2y, 14., 
M.D. 
Alcohol
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research
College students
Influ.rx-e of moderate does of
alcohol on attention and mcnory
prolesS.s.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1.Sept 75
UPDER REVIEW BY ARMY IWJESTIGATIO!AL DRUG REVIEW BOARD (Not yet approved)
Type of
Facility 
Drug 
SubJct
Edgewood Arsenal 
Atropine & 
Enlisted Volunteers'
Scopolamine
Edgewood Arsenal 
k.phetamine, Ritalin, 
Enlisted Volunteers
Alcohol, Barbviturates,
Valium
Description
Effects of dru,. u:,ld as ant.idoLez
on woaen.
Interaction of dru,-. of abuc." with
now TAB ncrvc Ca. antidotc.
III. 
PROJECTS
Year
Co-.iing year
Coi M year
,-., Tble. 1..(Cont.inued)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ects of dru,. u:,ld as ant.idoLez
on woaen.
Interaction of dru,-. of abuc." with
now TAB ncrvc Ca. antidotc.
III. 
PROJECTS
Year
Co-.iing year
Coi M year
,-., Tble. 1..(Cont.inued)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

au1RW 
IZYSTIGnONAL DU G STUDIES APPW= BY TR 
U 
MVEsTGATO" 
MG XMW som
1 August 1975
LIST I - Studies at Research and Develosmet Laboratories amd with Cost.actora,
LIST 11 - Studies at Army Medical Centers and Medical Dtmep 
nt activities.
TIM TO ABI 
STIORS
USARIBM -
US Army Research Institute of tviromim.tal Memdcine
WRAIR -
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research
USAHMIID - US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases
LAIR -
Letterman Army Institute of Research
USAISR -
US Army Institute of Surgical Research
WRANC -
Walter Reed Army Medical Center
FA'. 
-
Fitzeiom 
Amy Medical Center
LAMC -
Letterman Army Medical Cater
5AMC -
Brooke Army Medical Caster 
Cu
TANC -
Tripler Army Medical Center
WUMC -
Willam 
eausicat Arm 
Medical Center
MAC -
Madiga 
Army Medical Center
AM= 
-
Army Medical Department
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---C -
Brooke Army Medical Caster 
Cu
TANC -
Tripler Army Medical Center
WUMC -
Willam 
eausicat Arm 
Medical Center
MAC -
Madiga 
Army Medical Center
AM= 
-
Army Medical Department
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4r ~.
LIST I
C-Ia I=V1TG&ItAL DOG STUDIES APPWMD UI TH 
ARM INESTIGATICOAL OM 
BMYW DOMI
.t: 
(. 
memrmch and Development Laboratories mod Contractors)
Drug(m) Involved
Acetauolndde
Acetasolamide
Acetezolaulde
Adenne-Lmaine
Ademovia Type 4
Adenvirm 
Type 7
AdenovIrts Type 4 & 7
Anthrax vaccine
Atropine & 1nUIn
Cikamaaya vaccine
laomyI Cyso-
scrylate
Desoxycorticoeterme
Dentran -
70
Dextra - 40
Principal lave
S Robinson, Ph
KU J Stokes
COL L Jones
P Strmia. M.D
COL I Buescher
COL R Buescher
COL I Bumcher
CPT D 
re
mm G Ansoff
COL J Metagpr
COL V kers
J Mile.r Ph.D.
L Ym, I.D.
X Litwin, N.D.
Subject Gro
Heathy adults
Healthy &aut*
Heathy adults
Patients requirin
blood trameflems
I Auust 1975
Investigator's
,tia tO , 
L o,,t 
.c•
.D. 
USA=
USAII:D
220 Mam 
PA
VIM
WRAIl
USARIID
USAIM
USAMIID
srimp
Cl-Jc* CA
Tuml U.
medical Ctr.
adults
adults
adults
adults
adults
adults
Heathyn adts
Rospitaused
Patients
1
Dafte Started
1972
1973
1974
1971
1967
19%7
19%7
1974
1949
1972
197'
1972
m
Healthy
Healthy
Healthy
Healthy
Healthy
Healthy
Healthy

--- PAGE BREAK ---dults
adults
Heathyn adts
Rospitaused
Patients
1
Dafte Started
1972
1973
1974
1971
1967
19%7
19%7
1974
1949
1972
197'
1972
m
Healthy
Healthy
Healthy
Healthy
Healthy
Healthy
Healthy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ir*
CURN 
IN 
IGATIONA 
DRUG STUDUZS AhflVI 
W! ThE ARK INVESXIOEAL MG UIXW DOM
( 
erch n 
md Deve1omt Laboratories and Contractors)
I &nowt 1915
Drum(*) Involved
Dextras - 40
DoJ.pro_
J5 S. coll
Pri. ctel asttOr
NAJ K Tmg
A R. Vei.kopf
A BrwAsd, 
M.D.
5pL & 
t 
A Siwou, 
M.D.
Lipopolysacchsaride Vaccue.
R.collL& I, 
ybhmUrUm 
A Braude, N.D.
Momovkalnt Vaccifne
veneuea 
zquine 
COL J l stWr
ncephabits VaccineAttenutated)
Eastern EquIne 
COL J 
ouptier
Encephalitis Vaccle
Venexuelan Equine 
COL J Metzqer
Encephaitis 
Imsw Globulin
Venexualso Equine 
COL J Vst&er
Encephalitis -vaccin( luact.)
Western Equine 
'COL S metager
Encephalitis VYcctne(Inact.)
Vitamin C 
G Irwer. M.D.
lepatiti 
I zmne 
5 Krus"An W.1
setia Gobuln
boom Grotf 
Morms 
COL 2 Fuitt
ftflusmaa VaccIneS 
7 De'veaprts
I.
LL~
2
II 
I
invetigator' 
Toocatlcn
U of Cal aop
at Sn Dego
U of Caa 
seep
at Sm Dies
U of Cal amsp
at San Vg.
USh flD
USAMIUD
IUSAMIID
U of Nich
5:*: 
sobool
WwAr 
o
YJ Of JRi*
sav 
-ain
boult OWNs
Subject grone
Frostbite
victim
I althy adults
Hospitalized
petionts
petesats
no"ItsaLsed
patimete
healthy adults
Uessthy adults
Usmithy adults
Iseathy adults
sUs1ty adults
Deto Started
1%?7
1974
1971
1371
1971
39"
19"
1975
39"
1974"
1374
3974
1971
3974
salthy
Issithy
adults
adults

--- PAGE BREAK ---lthy adults
Uessthy adults
Usmithy adults
Iseathy adults
sUs1ty adults
Deto Started
1%?7
1974
1971
1371
1971
39"
19"
1975
39"
1974"
1374
3974
1971
3974
salthy
Issithy
adults
adults

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AV t
CURE 
INVES 
GAT 
AL DRUG STUDIES APPROVED BY 111 A M! I 
SGICIAL D9 
W W SOID
(Research and Developownt Laboratories and Contractors)
1 August 1975
Drug(s) Involved
Influenza Vaccine
(monovalent)
Inosine, Pyruvate &
Phosphate
Intrallpid 1OZ
meningococcal Vaccine
(Grpe A, 1 & C)
Ouabain
Porcine heterograft
Propramolol & Atropine
MarJ uas-&
Q Fever Vaccine
Q Buyer Vaccine, Live
Q ever Vaccine,
Inactivated
Rift Valley Fever
Vaccine
Sheatosom Antigen
Shgel Vaccine
Frincivpl Investismator
F Davenport, N.D.
P Strumia, M.D.
COL 3 Pruitt
K Artanateln. M.D.
MAJ G Belier
COL B Pruitt
COL L Jones
A Janpolsky. M.D.
J
J
J
Metzger
Metzger
COL J Metzger
K Artematein, N.D.
R Hormick, M.D.
Investigator's
Location
U of Nich
Bryn Nnr Doep
Bryn Nmr, PA
USAISR
USAISR
?ecific Medical
center
USMID
USA311UID
USAIID
USAID
Sublect Groom
Heathy adults
loapitalized
patients
Sar patimte
Healthy adults
Healthy adults
Burn 
-
sathy adult
Healthy adults
xHealthy
Healthy
Healthy
adult
adults
adults
healthy adults
mAIR 
healthy & infected
Patients
Mssylmd 501s of Prlaamsrs
29',
1968
39"8
3
COL
COL
CmL
I
Date Started
1974
1973
1974
INm
1972
1970
1973
1973
65
1972
1972

--- PAGE BREAK ---ts
adults
healthy adults
mAIR 
healthy & infected
Patients
Mssylmd 501s of Prlaamsrs
29',
1968
39"8
3
COL
COL
CmL
I
Date Started
1974
1973
1974
INm
1972
1970
1973
1973
65
1972
1972

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CURRIET INVESTIGATIONAL DRUG STUDIES APPROVED BTRE A1IT INVESTIGATION 
L DRUG 
XVIXW BOARD
(Research and Developmnt Laboratories and Contractors)
I August 1975I 
t
Drux(s) Involved
Sulfawloa Solution
Tilarone
Tricaicium Phosphate
Tricophyton Antigen
Tularemia Vaccia
a Strain Typhus Vaccine
Vitamin C
Leishminiac Skin Test
Antigen
AntimnaL..al 
Druzs
P1184,806
MR 142,490
VR 122,45S
WR 6798/2978
Princra. Investigator
COL 3 Pruitt
COL J Metzger
LTC M. Levin
J Hanif in, N.D.
COL J Metzger 
.
C Wisemmn, MLD.
CPT G ,ynum
R Zeledom, DC.S.
COL C Canfiteld
COL C Canfield
COL C Canfield
V0L C Canfield
Investigator's
Location
USAISI
USMHRIID
USA ID
U of Oregon
loepitals
USA1WIID
USARIWM
Costa Rica
WAIR
PlAZA
VRAIR
Date Started
1971
1973
1974
1972
196
1967
1974
1970
SubJect Group
Bur patients
Healthy adults
Dental 
-aiet
Patients
bAlthy adults
mdby adults
Healthy adults
Ind iseno
Population
Free Living
Volunteers
1975
(Washington Hospital
center)
Prisoners, Maryland 
ln
House of Correction;
Patients. Thailand;
free lUving volumtemws
Washington Hmspital Cenor
Prisners, Marylam 
1971
Bome of Correction
Prophyleadi for 
1973
-poe 
AIS
4
0'

--- PAGE BREAK ---ryland 
ln
House of Correction;
Patients. Thailand;
free lUving volumtemws
Washington Hmspital Cenor
Prisners, Marylam 
1971
Bome of Correction
Prophyleadi for 
1973
-poe 
AIS
4
0'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

41 
V
CURIDIT DIVESTIG&AIOA L DRUG STUDIES APPROVED BY THE ARMY INVESTZGATIONAL DRUG RIZEW BOARD
(Rese-arch and Development Laboratories and Contractors)
" 
1 August 1975 
e 
t
Dr(s) 
Involved
U 158,122
S58.12/7557
WR 171,669
Da"oe/Qaloraquue
WiR 2721
Wd 2823
U 5949
WR 30090
WI 3883.
W& 33063
fslff 0i a/Triustbopriut
ma "9M1
Principal Investigator
COL C Canfield
COL C Cas Leld
COL C Canfield
COL C Canfield
COL C Caufteld
COL R Olson
COL R Olason
COL C Canfi.ld
COL C Canfi.14
COL C Canfield
COL C Canfteld
COL C Canf eld
COL~ C Canftol.1
SubJect G
IND Activ
studies)
Location
WRAIR
WRAIR
WRAIR
WvI"'
WI"'
WRAIR
WAR
WRAIL
WRAIE
WAIL
5
"* 
I
roup 
Data Started
( oE active 1972
* 
2973
* 
" 
1973
" 
1965
" 
1971
" 
1969
" 
1971
"' 
1971
" 
1969
" 
1966
" 
1969
-
1968
" 
1973
dr

--- PAGE BREAK ---"'
WI"'
WRAIR
WAR
WRAIL
WRAIE
WAIL
5
"* 
I
roup 
Data Started
( oE active 1972
* 
2973
* 
" 
1973
" 
1965
" 
1971
" 
1969
" 
1971
"' 
1971
" 
1969
" 
1966
" 
1969
-
1968
" 
1973
dr

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-
-
~
LIST II
CURRENT INVESTIGATIONAL DRIUGSTUDIES APPSDVED Sr AwK 
, 
inSTic&nOUAL DRUG 
VXWDBOARD
(Subjects are patients in Medical Centers.mad Medical Department 44tivitl.s)
1 August 1975
Invest~sator '
Drug(s) Involved 
Principsl Investi4ator 
Location 
Date Stred
Albuterol, atropine 
NAJ H Kapim 
WRANC 
3975
Albuterol. ephedrine 
COL R Nelson 
FANC 
1974
Albuterol, ephedrine 
LTC" K Evans 
VU3C 
1974
Albuterol, 4soproterenol 
MAJ C Casterline 
WRANC 
1974
Albuterol 
COL iH *Is= 
IArC 
1974
Larnt 
-
MAJ D Megalnick 
IDAC, Fort 
1975
Csspbenl
Perisatln(Cyproheptadine) 
LTC V Iriggs 
VRAC 
1974
Antigen D 
COL H Nelson 
FANC 
1974
Antilymphocyte Globulin 
LTC J Light 
WAMG 
3973
Azatbl: zne 
LTC J Stetart 
LAW 
1970
Qiyuopapain 
-
MAJ A Rmiraz 
WRAC 
1974
Cromolyn Na 
COL a Nelson 
FNC 
1975
(Cpraheptadlue 
MAJ I Merrill 
SAW 
' 
974
Difenormn-atr0pln 
LTC M Putler 
TAMG 
1974
Freande 3 
CPT C Oettinugr 
WAN 
397a
Prerine K 
MAJ M Kwinski 
WIANC 
1972
lrmiste K 
MAJ D Anderson 
WAW 
1972
Chorionic ouadotropin 
( 
LJ Dallor 
LAW 
1975
liMyperiune Games GloblUA 
COL J erain 
FANC 
972.
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lHyperui 
Gem Globulin
Iodin, 
itbiu
L-Dope,
Lithim
Medrogestone
minoxidel
)ioddil
Norethiidror$ Ethi~ 
4sradicl
Pentagastrin
Phospbolipase A
Prc4*glandin E2
Prostoglandin E9
Indi i 
DTPA
Indium 
cl
Cobalt 57 Blewycin
Oslium-67 citrate
MAJ R Pastore
LTC D Madison
LTC F Stark
IW J Carpenter
CPT T Boebm
MAJ C Oettinger
CPT K Buman
CPT B Paulson
CL A Borukl
LTC W rgs
?IA* J Bal
COL D Cox
LTC R Ansbache-
LTZ R 
rans
QOL W Scregg
COL D Cox
COL H Johnson
COL M Johnson
COL M Johnson
•W f Littnberg
FAW
FL'C
TRMC
emAC
WRANC
FR C
WJRA24C
*MIC
WC
MANC
WRIC .
WRA vC
TRXC
L973
1974
1971k
Inh
1975
1975
1M7.
3.972
1974
9734
1972

--- PAGE BREAK ---L H Johnson
COL M Johnson
COL M Johnson
•W f Littnberg
FAW
FL'C
TRMC
emAC
WRANC
FR C
WJRA24C
*MIC
WC
MANC
WRIC .
WRA vC
TRXC
L973
1974
1971k
Inh
1975
1975
1M7.
3.972
1974
9734
1972

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Omlium-67 Citraze
U
U
U
Ind±im-111DTPA
Indivim-lil C1
Zndiu-1 
meowein~
Indiin-Ill 
MPA
Indlum-Ml DTPA
IndIm-.1 MA
Indium.-liYZPA
Iodia-23
Iodine-131 Iodocholesterol
godine-.W 
idne
Iodie-223 idine
10dim-123
Iniuam.-11 D&A
COL M Johnson
MAJ D Milstein
KAJ D Johnson
LTC R Blumhardt
LTC R Lull
MAJl D Milstein
?XCN 
Ghaed
LTC N Gha*d
MJ R Lull
LYC Iamardt
MAJ D Milstein
MAJ R Lull
LTC R Blimardt
WX 
Lull
MA.l W McCartney
MAl M Lawon
LTC T Verdow,
L2C D Co*-
NAl L fobmon
3.
WRA'C
3A C
LWNC
FMC
BAMC
WBAHC
IMC
BANC
LAW-
FAIC
F&L 
C
19719
19Th
1975
1975
9h
19VTh
IM
IYTI
1974
1974
1973
19Th
1974
1975
1973
1974
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tacbmt1m-99 a
?Tomhasin-99 M
Tatcatim-99 Olusot.
Teahmst±-u99 X"
smetblse pracaim picin
?TbtaUl
?Twmuva Reseift~bua.T
Trasfe Factor
Trao y'1w
M J L Johnon
COL N Johwmo
XlC 2 ludifts
1143 K LIMOm
LIC R Nminm8t
MAJ w 11csmw
LTV Z Morita
0(1. 3 on"
LIC S IeX ,Jr
OL I Nellm
LTC J IsrU
mNa U 
CSOW
PW N BIUoy
TC J SLAV~t
Lac
VIM
TMC
7LVC
i'm
I'm
I~m
1Im
2n,
1973
1Im
ins
2m7
urn
1,7
inm
I'm
I'm
Ina

--- PAGE BREAK ---

hioaroglin
Vaoillin
Aulmogycosido antibiotic
KAJ w ArT3A'
MAJ R DVfl.,ls
XLI T Molitt
XLI T Witt
LTC V'...
SAM~
2Mb
197
I'm
1973

--- PAGE BREAK ---ns
2m7
urn
1,7
inm
I'm
I'm
Ina

--- PAGE BREAK ---

hioaroglin
Vaoillin
Aulmogycosido antibiotic
KAJ w ArT3A'
MAJ R DVfl.,ls
XLI T Molitt
XLI T Witt
LTC V'...
SAM~
2Mb
197
I'm
1973

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ONCOLC'31 'STUD -E
(The folowin is a list of o=cAoM 
piotsols that a
active in A E'D feciltles. Altbougb tbW 1.uolve
Investigtiowl drqgs, these 
pwlpicati. 
s*bo=2d be
cosidered the latet In osec 
Oe Moteand not
cli4n4cal reseirm 
poeoat.o)
FrrZSD4=~ ArlM NMAL cDn!T
Adriamiyein
L-Aspariginase
BSCIllUB ClWtt* GUeriM (WO)
BMI
CQxu
Cytosiee Ababimosede
DTIC
huzmqoin
Hexuethylamizu
Adrisqoin
L-Aupraginuw., Daunomcin
Vinoiatine, bwednisone, methotrexatep 6-mrcaptopwaz*,
cyclophosphamid., daunaqcin, cytosine arshinoides 
'IU,
XL-esperqinase
LC X DI BUa
U
S
U
U
U
U
U
U
U
U
COL D Plunett
.
1973
173
1973
L073
1972
1972
197,
1973
1973
1971

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C
tb
a
*ALGB- Acute LeaksMl 
OwouP B
eCQ.Weeten Cancer Studr GrayW
LETTMW ARY MEDICAL CWTER
'..
ALOB 71-2 
Adriavicn
WSO 129 
Adria&cin, bleaycin
132 
'~iapucin, methotreoxto
126 
A-zacytidtne
35 
Hle.clcn,adrtlaycin, DTIC# ICEW-159
DC?:C"
107 
BCNU, Vincritimn
A9 
CCNU
32 
Chromotycin A-3
Daunorubicin
72-1 
DTIC
Ths ICRF-159
L-Pherylalanire mustard
128 
Melphalan, predns 
e, methotrexate, vincristine
13 
Methotrexate, bleamycin, 5-FU, cyclohosphamid.
130 
Yustargen, vincristine, prednison., pmearbasin,
CGNU, vinblasatime
31Cwd
U
Ut
Um
U
Us
U
S,
U
U
U
U
U
U
1972
1973
1973
ImT
1972
1972
1973
1971 -
1973
29Th
197e
197
8"0
19Th

--- PAGE BREAK ---

iS
NADIOA 
3M4 
NED= 
CENTE
WMWG 
126 
5-Aaacytid1D
W09 
CQIu
DTICS cowU
LiV NcCciumef
UI
eU
1973
1973
OWC 
s -
West 
Srm 
w , t*d o VO 
W
7,

--- PAGE BREAK ---197e
197
8"0
19Th

--- PAGE BREAK ---

iS
NADIOA 
3M4 
NED= 
CENTE
WMWG 
126 
5-Aaacytid1D
W09 
CQIu
DTICS cowU
LiV NcCciumef
UI
eU
1973
1973
OWC 
s -
West 
Srm 
w , t*d o VO 
W
7,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MPIMX-A= :-DIMA 
CDIT
M00 7123 
-AsacYtdlnm
70O 
DIC
7122 
Cycloleotcia
70U 
5-FU
7032 
%-FU
7030 
5-FU
7031 
Homm rthlm , dibroamulcltols qcylopbpbod•
L-45pamise.
7 231 
Actinawcia-. 
Ph.w.Alanine wmtaxd, viacristlue
ASC 1026, Adriqcin
7230 
5-FUq tabzotallnd, stTeptomOtoc ln
x.
4000 
cafa. 0.aafo 0row
S.
R~AJ L C.m2
S
S
S
U
II R1.4
IIJ 
Cudal
19h
I'm
I'm
I'm
I'm
197%
1"72
19h

--- PAGE BREAK ---

alson AzW Hospital
Port Dix,
Walson AWi Hospital
Fort Dix
Robert 
.Uspt 
M.D.
RoetBllet, 
M.D.
1.973
IL9?3
IcW- 159
DTIC

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WIUZVL A 
M 
U& 
N10 ARM! MEDCAL CFMrZ
,W=S 
126 
5-Aaacyt141n
W1~ 31.qcin, adzlaaytin
122 
Cytol n armaboside, 6-thiagmanine
133 
Cyclophowphmul, 
ccxu
119 
CCN, 
vincristin.
121 
Cylophophmoide, vincristie, predntoN.,
21.6  
Cyclophaphlimide, 5-FU, mothotreoxate, vacrlstiLm
144 
ICRF-159
128 
Welphabn, prednisone, methrotrete, vincrLstim
130 
HM=targm, vlncriatine, predniaone, procearbslne,
CCNU
l3 123, 
Vlncristine, methotroxate, 
, cycltosl ad1.A
6-thtioqmine, tydro3qra, daun=Kcn
118 
Vincristlne, cyclophosqhmie, actidnamcn,
~tWMcomen
wLJ w.18.Z
U
So
S
S
U
U
SO
0U
1975
1975
2975
L975
IS75
X975
1975
CA
a

--- PAGE BREAK ---e, 
, cycltosl ad1.A
6-thtioqmine, tydro3qra, daun=Kcn
118 
Vincristlne, cyclophosqhmie, actidnamcn,
~tWMcomen
wLJ w.18.Z
U
So
S
S
U
U
SO
0U
1975
1975
2975
L975
IS75
X975
1975
CA
a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WAL2I
AmS
B 
AM MZDAL GDITER
7306 
Adzr1in, dibromodualdta
eoS 
5-Aaaytidlm
7407 
BC,0, 
"IC., KA.CIU 
X0
7406 
BooP 5-
709 
WON 
Us, mgtotr te 
J,
7L 
qrcopIpmmide, smetb 
mtes %..70 y.ncrl tm.,
pzdnei,,one, M
7405 
OONU bleo 
u 
Ni
7301 
¢bol.etyonii,
711 
yteloptmph"W .
mothtr mte, 5-U,
L-PM, C.Paryvm
7303 
CylophophmAe otbotamte, 5-Py. OMaivo1n
74U21 
Cytoelne a.mbnoside, daimorubeln, Wclopbm ldi
CCXU, tbioguanim
7361 
Cyclopbu~~md.d* CNU, L-PAM, proda.om
7305 
Cyl 
ho~~,mthotrmt*, 5-pup
721 
I&nouinycm 
D, bleoqinpn vi=t 
im
7307 
Dibromodaottal
70 
"aC, adrzl 
,,in
I I"
R Pu
U
UI
eU
UI
1973
197%
19T
1973
1973
1273
V973
11
J. UmLa. 
19
r. Rein 
1W7
le, L.D. 
W19T
* 
197%$
,a3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

J. 
R.1 
M.D.
wl~ tqm, douamixc, 
l 
s
lb~n 
mlfat 
MR SMkA1la
731 
Ifcsfml& 
J.Ma4ND.
M3I , NBC=, 
d1*4nti
iblO 
FNmC, 
VP 2&-2n3
.,31 
-
s-U 
d 
-bodobdto1,
A2 
Swtpbzm, ahatteut5s 
9
L~bCmpam 
8336 
MUG Noel
7206 
No=W 
I D1m4 M.D.
7261 
Ndn~~m 
ylpboalqinbds,- BU, 
-mdo
730h' 
dylp 
oqi, 
inethatzamte, 5-MU
?hll Vlnrstlk, pre~dsmes notboutrfe,
7303 
11P 26-2a3
,..
2973
2973
27Wk
1911
2M73
19m

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7201
7107
707
7202
7b08
J. ml, N.DJ.
XAJ A Hi.lotf
J. Moas, XtD.
*AJAfB -Acute 
Lonkoda Grou B
/S.
NKU# 
cyclophosphaides adriycin, mthotrott
Mriacin, bleo~c a, 5-nU
Nth6rxats, cytose arabinosido, bloom~ein
Streptozotacia
Tanoxifen, fluozymstrone
1972
1972
1.972
x9T
\

--- PAGE BREAK ---Grou B
/S.
NKU# 
cyclophosphaides adriycin, mthotrott
Mriacin, bleo~c a, 5-nU
Nth6rxats, cytose arabinosido, bloom~ein
Streptozotacia
Tanoxifen, fluozymstrone
1972
1972
1.972
x9T
\

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HUMAN SUBJECTS RESEARCH NOT INVOLV 
IG 
XNVESTICATIOtKAL DRUCS
A. Army Hospitals (Clinical investigation)
B. US Army 
edcial Research and Development Comand In--ouse Projects
C. US Army Medical Research and Development Comaod Contracts
D. Other Army Agencies
(Human factors projects at Aberdeen Proving Ground, Marylabd. are not
listed in detail since none are being done which expose subjects to risk.)
Information contained herein is current as of 15 August 1975

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A. Auy Hospitals (Clinical Invest4stiom)
WALTER REED ARMY MEDICAL CENTER, WASHINGTON, DC
TITLE OF STUDY 
SPECIAL WTPE(S)
Procainamide Metabolism in Renal FaLlure and on Hemodlalysis
Hyperalimentation and Bilateral Nephrectomy
Pharmcokinetics of Propoxyphene (Darvon) In Anephric Patients and in Normal Subjects
Comparison of Conventional Irradiation vith Trans-sphenoldal Surgery under Direct
Vision in Treatmant of Acromegaly
Inderal Kinetics In HyperthyroLdiam
Effects of Cancer Chemotherapy Agents on Endocrine Function
Differentiation of Benign from Malignant Thyroid Nodules: 
Assessment of 3ew
Diagnostic Techniques
Intestinal Bile Salt Clearance In Thyrotoxic Patients with and without Dles
Comparison of Endoscopic and Radlologic Evaluations of the Upper Gastrointestinal Tract
CholestyrauLne of Peptic Dis-Lrdecs
Effects of Operative Stress on the Coagulation Profile
Causalgia: 
A Study of Sympathetic Activity In Affected Patients
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---Gastrointestinal Tract
CholestyrauLne of Peptic Dis-Lrdecs
Effects of Operative Stress on the Coagulation Profile
Causalgia: 
A Study of Sympathetic Activity In Affected Patients
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A, I
WAIC (Continued)
A. AM Hoepitals (Clinical lnestigation)
TITLE OF StUDY 
S 
A 
TYPE ()
Study of the Use of Radioactive Phosphorous In the Diagnosi. of Ilioma Tunmrs
An Aerodynamic Evaluation of the Speech of Patients with Voice Disorder*
A Comparison of an Objective Hearing Aid Evaluation rith a Subjective leering Aid
Selection Procedure
Dimensions of Visual Consonant Perception In Heering Impaired Adults
In Vitro and In Vivo Properties of Sensitized Lyphocyte. in Transplantation
Exclusive Use of Autologcus Blood Transfusions (Auto-Transfusions) In Effective
horacic and Open Heart Surgical Procedures
Techniques for the Detection of Antinuclear Antibodies. 
A Comparative Study
An Evaluation of umunoloSLc Resposes In 
agwood Sensitive Patients by Mower Techniques
Imunologic Aspects of Lung Disease
Complement Deficiencies and their Relationahip to Disewe in lMa
The Detection of Anti-Skin Antibodies in Sera and Skin biopsoie of Patients wich P 
WOphus,
Pam 
8oJid, and Luus Erthtoa8
Lymphocyt*e Subpopulation Identification
Synovial fluid Analysis i" Weuat:1", 1ease 
--
Evaluation and Study of Patients vith Primary and Secondary 
umimodefiLency Diseases
An Ivaluation of the Immnologic Response to Specific Imumotheray in symmoptera Ryper-
sensitivity
Study Immune laschaime in Systemic trytbematoeus

--- PAGE BREAK ---econdary 
umimodefiLency Diseases
An Ivaluation of the Immnologic Response to Specific Imumotheray in symmoptera Ryper-
sensitivity
Study Immune laschaime in Systemic trytbematoeus

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WAIC (Continued)
A. Anry NopItals (Clinical Invstipci)
TITLE OF STUDY
The Effect of Viral Antigens on Lymphocyte Tranafonatum In 
altiple Scleros
Patients
Study of the Relationship between Growth Pattern and Lympesetic and Vascular
Involvement in 
woen 
vith Stag* LA Cervical Cancer
Clinical Evaluation of Fluorescence Scanning of the Thyroid vith Amnriciim 241
Source
Study of Effect of Seadina bath 
on T4 Levels in the 3Nwborn
An Evaluation of the Effect of Corcicoeceroids on Serm Theopyllise
Continuous Electrocasliographic Noncioring of Nyocardlal Infarcto 
Patients
Preoperacive Nursing InterveCion with the Patient for Surgery: 
Outcome of Three
Alternative Approaches
SPECIAL rE(S)
lof auts

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A. Army Hospitals (Clinical Investigation)
WILLIAM BEAUMONIT AXrMY 
MEDICAL CENTER, 
EL PASO, TEXAS
TITLE OF STUDY 
SPECIAL TYPE(S)
Couparison of Clindamycin and Penicillin in the Treatment of lactertal Lung Abscesses
Steroid Metabolism in Oligospermia
Vascular Complications of Percutaneous femoral Arterial Catheterization Using Systemic
HeparinLzation - prospective Evaluation with the Doppler Ultrasonic Velocity Detector
Search for gone Marrov Cranuloms in Infectious Mononucleosis
Parathyroid Gland FunctLon in Hyperthyroidiss
Maternal and Fetal Plasma Levels of Steroid Hormes in Normal and Pathological Pregnancies
during Labor
An Evaluation of Rh Sensitization of Rh negative Infants Bora to Rh Positive Nothers 
Infants
A Single blind Study to Determine the Effects of CortLcosteroid on Subsequent
Developments of Infants Subjected to Severe Lnctrspartus Asphyxia
Pathogenesis of Stress Ulcer Syndrome: 
A Prospective Study of Gastr 
in 50 Trauma
Patients

--- PAGE BREAK ---osteroid on Subsequent
Developments of Infants Subjected to Severe Lnctrspartus Asphyxia
Pathogenesis of Stress Ulcer Syndrome: 
A Prospective Study of Gastr 
in 50 Trauma
Patients

--- PAGE BREAK ---

t
A. Army Hospitals (Clinical nvestigstiou)
FITZSMOUS ARMY MEDICAL CENTER, 
DOVER, 
COLORADO
TITLE OF STUDY
Tuberculosis Reserh Follow-up Program
Chemotherapy of Tuberculosis: 
Cooperative Study 33 (1ifampin)
Clinical Demonstration ot Pulsus Alternans
Effective Respiratory Maneuvers on the bedside Diagnosis of Cardiac Mazkars
A Controlled Clinical and Laboratory Evaluation of Co-Seasonal Injection Tbeapy
in the Treatment of Allergic Rhinitis and Asthma
Deceptions in Cardiology: 
Cancellation of Abnormal Electro-cardiograpbic Patterns
by an Aditional Abnormal Event
The Effect of Ephedrine on the Physiologic Responses to ZzcLse and Eplnepbrine
Infusion
Response of Nonsensltized Atopic Individual to Long-Term Injections of Allergy Etract
Active Antigens in Rouse Dust
mmuno-chamical Evaluation of Nyelopoliferative and Plasmsproliferative Diseases
Serum 
A Levels in Atopic Individuals and Their Relation to Imediate Skin Test
Reactivity and Serum ISE Levels
Controlled Study of Dander Imunotherapy
Reactive gypoglycema: 
An Analysis of Glucose-Inaulin-4lucsam Interrelatomskihps
and Counter Hormonal Regulatory Factors
spEI 
TyE(s)
§

--- PAGE BREAK ---vels
Controlled Study of Dander Imunotherapy
Reactive gypoglycema: 
An Analysis of Glucose-Inaulin-4lucsam Interrelatomskihps
and Counter Hormonal Regulatory Factors
spEI 
TyE(s)
§

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
A. Amy Hospitals (Clinical ZavMetigati*s)
TANC (Continued)
TTLE of STUDY 
SP
evaluation of Peripheral Nerve Injuries at Fitzeinas Cemeral. espital
External otation Contractures in the Above Mee Amputee
Acalculous Biliary Tract Disease
Measurement of Adenine ucleotlde Release In Platelets of luhebrs
Comparison of Metabolic sad Functional Changes In Defects of Platelet Function
Nycoplam and Infertility: 
Therapeutic Results of Dovyase Therary
Evaluation of 'Pereyra-Berer" Procedure in Treating Urinary I Stress Lcstlsce
Cynecologic follow-up after Tubol Surgery for Sterilization
The effect of Positive Transpulmenary Pressure on Effective Pulsoary Blood 1v,
Cardiac Output, Functional Residual Capacity, and Dymidc Pulmona y Coupliance
In Idiopathic Respiratory Distress Syndrome In Neonates
Clinical evaluation of Effective Thyr*xin 
Ratio in Netborns
The Relationship of Estrogenic Hormones to the Coagulation 3almce
Establibment of and Training in Methods for Special Studies of Aboormal Uemogloblns
A Comparison of the Results of lyposensitization with Aqueos 
Grass extract and
Alumimm-Ptecipitated Aquos-Etracted Cres Extract In the Treatmat of Patients
with Allergic Symptoms due to Crass Allergy
The Effect of Corticosteroids on IumogloblIn Levels In Asthmtic Patients
The Incidence of brouchoconstriction ILduced by Aspirin, F.D.& C. dyes. and food
Preservatives in a Group of Severe Pereal Astmatics
InfAnts
Waste
2
TYPES)

--- PAGE BREAK ---els In Asthmtic Patients
The Incidence of brouchoconstriction ILduced by Aspirin, F.D.& C. dyes. and food
Preservatives in a Group of Severe Pereal Astmatics
InfAnts
Waste
2
TYPES)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

r.
A. Ary Hospitals (Clinical lnrvewsc 
tin)
I'AIC (Continued)
TITLE Of STUDY 
SMEIAL TYP(S)
Effect of Prophylactic Antibiotic Therapy on Gravid Group B beta' emolytic
Streptococcus Carriers 
infante lacluded
The Feasibility and Clinical Application of Precordial ST Seaet Napping
The Incideace of lgC Skin Sensitizing Antibodies in an Allergic Population
Effecc of Oral Water Loading on Plasms Prolaccin
Clinical Applications of TSM 
adolunmmasay
Computer Assisted Diasmosia in a Military Hospital
Echocardiographic Assessmet of Ventricular Size and Function in 
Wnfants of Diabetic
Mothers (ID's) 
lfas
Incidence of Subcapsular Posterior Cataracts In Severe Asthmstic Childrem with a.
History of Systeaic Corticosterold Tlerapy 
Himove
The M&ratin& Placenta
Role of lypercoagulability in Patients Undergoing Nyocardial 
onia
Small Airway Disease (SAD) 11: 
A Simplified Method for Detecting Smakl Airmay Dinseae

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A. Army Hospitals (Clinical Investigation)
0
920M 
AMY MEDICAL CEiTU. SAN AIONIO. TEXAS
TITLE OF STUDY
MHixnin Treatment of Gonorrheal Urethrite
Platelet Transfusion - Efficiency and Methods to Improve Current esults in
ThrombocytopenLa Patients
Hypertension vith Polycystid idney Disease
Phytoagglutinin Stimulation of Sarcoid Lymphocytes
Cefazolin as a Prophylactic Antibiotic in Vaginal Hysterectomy
Laminaria: 
Two Outpatients Uses
Evaluation and Treatment of Male Infertility
Evaluation of Antigens in Fire Ant Venom
Rejection of Verrucae Vulgaris A Clinical Therpeutic Trial (Collaborative Study
with Letterman AMC)
Incidence of Transient bacteremia during troachoscopy
Oral Transplants of Freeze-Dried Allografts
Efficacy of Topical Haloprogin In the Treatment of Chroaic Tinee Pedis
SPECIAL TYPES)

--- PAGE BREAK ---idence of Transient bacteremia during troachoscopy
Oral Transplants of Freeze-Dried Allografts
Efficacy of Topical Haloprogin In the Treatment of Chroaic Tinee Pedis
SPECIAL TYPES)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

F
BANC (Continued)
A. ArV beopitals (Clinical lowtstigation)
TITLE OF STUDY
Correlation of Phenotypic Sex of Fetues with Amaotic Fluid Testoeterose Levels
Evaluation of Renal Handling of Blicarbonate in Patients with lyperperathyroidIsm
Incidence and Characterization of Adrenal insufficiency in Oat Cell Carcinoma
Evaluation of Basal Blood Pressures and Casual Blood Pressure
In-Vitro Lymphocyte Stimulation and Leukocyte Inhibitory Factor Assay in Patients
who have been Imanised Aainst Rabies
The Effect of Design Alterations Upon Abutment Tooth Nobility vith Removable Partial
Dentures
Measurement of Trmsaepidermal Water Loss in Anhidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia and
trythroderms
Ocular Flora in Burn Patients
An Evaluation of Water Diuresis for the Prevention and Control of Recurrent Urinary
Tract Infection in Woman
Done Scanning as a Vetbod for Detecting Early Renal Osteodystropby
SPECIAL T E(S)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion of Water Diuresis for the Prevention and Control of Recurrent Urinary
Tract Infection in Woman
Done Scanning as a Vetbod for Detecting Early Renal Osteodystropby
SPECIAL T E(S)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A. Army Hospitals (Clinical Investigation)
MADIGAN ARMY MEDICAL CENTER, TACOMA, 
tWASHINGTON
TITLE OF STUDY
Renal Glycosuris: 
Evaluation of Renal Function, Catobydrate Mtabolism, and
Possible Developmunt of Diabetes ellitus
Suppression of ACTR in Patients vith BiLateral Adrenalectomies
Evaluation of Individuals With Flat Oral Glucose Tolerance Tests
The Hormonal and Metabolic Consequences of Vasectomy
Family Studies of EL-A Antigens in Reiter's Syndrome and Other boustoid
Variants
The Incidence of Reactl e Rypoglyces.a In Patients vith Active Peptic Ulcer
Disease (A State of Endogenous lyperinasutnlsm?)
Effect of Physiologic Doses Of Conjugated Equine Estrogens (Premarln) 
oan srm
Coatisol and the Overnight Dzikxmethaeoae Suppression Test
Prospective Study of the Incidence and Manifestations of Allergy to Foods In the
First Year of Life In a Well-Mhild Clinic Population
Filter Paper Technique for Neonatal Screening Program for Congenital RypthroIdims
A Clinical Validation Study of the Walter Reed WMuropsyc.olgoical Screening Battery
Cooperative Study for the Analysis of Risk Factors in YOng Coronary Patients
SPEIAL TIP (S)
FamiLly mmbera of
all ages
Zafants
Infants

--- PAGE BREAK ---ter Reed WMuropsyc.olgoical Screening Battery
Cooperative Study for the Analysis of Risk Factors in YOng Coronary Patients
SPEIAL TIP (S)
FamiLly mmbera of
all ages
Zafants
Infants

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A. Army Hospitals (Clinical Investigation)
KAMC (Continued)
TITLE OF STUY
Cenetic Survey of Neutropenia in Blacks
Lid Magnets 
6r Correction of Orbicularis Palsy
SPWIAL TYPE(s)
TRIPLE ARMY MEDICAL CENTER, 
HAWAII
The Effect of Acute Rypoxia on Plasm Concentrations of Antidiuretic Normme
and flaams Renin Activity
The Effect of Exercise in Man on Plasm Renin Activity and Plasm end Urine
AntidLuvetic Hormone and Alsoeterone Concentration
The ffect of Ingested Antihistamines o 
In Vitro Aggregation oof Platelets
Possible Etiological Role of Airspora in Respiratory Allergies
Diagnostic Correlation of Plasm Angiotensin Converting Easy.e Activity to Disease
Use of Bolter Avionics Monitor to Diagnose Ischemic leart Disease
Effects of Position on Second SL**- v Labec
Evaluation of Immunity in Children Previously Vaccinated with Live Attenuated
Measles and Poliomylitis Vaccines
Imnmaoglobulins in A=nLotic Fluid and Aiotic Fluid Infections
Children 
included

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A. Arty Hospitals (CIaLLc3 Invstigation)
TA C (Contlnuaed)
TITLE OF STUVY
Aseesment of Surfactmnt in Amniotic MWid by Surface Tension
Standardisation and evaluations of Sural serve Conduction
Gastrointestinal Meifeatation 
of Infectiou 
Moenonucleosis
The Correlation of Total Lung CppacitIea In Children Age 6-10 as beterammed by
Helim Dilution end Chest Sadiogtaphs
Hinged Cylinder Cast Management of Femral Shaft Fracture*
Parameters of Mobility In the Lumbar Spine
Ultraonography in the Evaluation of Pancroatcis
Ieual ouship if 
bile RefLux to Stress Ulceraction In weurosur$ical ractetst
Children
Ckildren Ln:luded

--- PAGE BREAK ---Mobility In the Lumbar Spine
Ultraonography in the Evaluation of Pancroatcis
Ieual ouship if 
bile RefLux to Stress Ulceraction In weurosur$ical ractetst
Children
Ckildren Ln:luded

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V
A. Amy Hospitals (Clinical Investiation)
LErWME 
ARM MEDICAL CENTER, PRESIDIO Of SAN FUACISO, CALIFOMIA
TITLE OF STDr
A clinical Trial to Compare Combination Chemotherapy in the tlnage 
t of Patiemts
with Surgically "Curable" Breast Cancer Who Have One or More PositLve Axillary Nodes
The Effect of Intravenous Droperidol on the Reoting Ventilation and Ventilatory
Response to Carbon Dioxide in Men
Prophylactic Antibiotics in Cesarean Section
Pediatric Enteropathogen Study
The Incidence avid Natural Course of Subacute Hepatitis with bridging in Early
Viral Hepatitis
EG= and Body Physiological Alterations Associated with Successful Use of
liofeedback in the Treatment of Migraine
Clinical Trial of Hyperimmem Gma Globulin for Pophylaxi 
of Patients Roceiving
Multiple blood Transfusions
Study of the Effects of NeoplasLa, Irradiation and Chemotherapy on Colony Forming
Units and Colony Stimulating Activity
Dynamic Rehabilitation of the Injured ftee: a New Concept
Normal Nerve Conduction in the First Year of Life
Comparison of Arterial Blood Gases in Dostoperative Cesarean Section Patients
Versus Routine Post Vaginal. Delivery Patients
Rejection of Verrucae VulgarLs- A Clinical Therapeutic Trial I and It
bowel Anastoiosts Study
SPECIAL, TYPE(S)
Children
Infants

--- PAGE BREAK ---

'V
A. Army Rospitale (Clinical Investigation)
LAC (Continued)
TITLE OF STUDY
Polybrene Neutralization Deterainations of Ilood HepaWin Levels Compared to Otber
Laboratory Parameters of Heparin Activity In Commn Clinical Usage
Development of a Method for Enhancing Scintigraphic Images by Compuer
Electrophysiological Indicators of Infantile Deafness or Central Nervous Systen
aldevelopment or Malformation
SPECIAL TIP(S)
Infants
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---for Enhancing Scintigraphic Images by Compuer
Electrophysiological Indicators of Infantile Deafness or Central Nervous Systen
aldevelopment or Malformation
SPECIAL TIP(S)
Infants
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

B. US A*RM MEDICAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPI 
T aX*M 
IN-SOUSE PROJECTSS 
IVOLIG NAX SULCTS
Facility
etteman Army Institute
Research
Lottermn Arm Institute
Research
Letteran Army Institute
Research
Letterman Army Institute
Research
US Army Institute of
Dental Research
US Army Institute of
Surgical Research
US A-my Institute of
Euvironmental Medicine
US Army institute of
Environmental Medicine
US Army institute of
Environmental Medicine
US Army Institute of
Environmental Medicine
of
of
of
of
Title
Physical, Chemical Characteristics of
Human Stratum and Cornewu
Skin Disase Among Soldiers
The Effects of ?rolonged Witer Exposure
on Human Skin
Delayed Type Skin Reaction and Lymphocyte
Transformation in Cutaneous Diseases
Osteogenic Potential of Degradable Ceramic
in Periodontal Defects
General Studies of Better Ways to Treat
The Central and Peripheral Ventilatory
Drive During AcclIaatizalon to Hi1h Altitu&
Patbogenesis of Acute Montain Sickness:
The Role of Blood Platelets
TMM of subjects
military mo-combatats
Active duty and retired military
Military non-combatants
Military personnel and civill&
dependents
Dependents, retired mUlitary and
active duty
Most patients
Military peionmel.
Military personnel
An Evaluation of Physical Fitness Before 
Military perso=el
and After Infantry Advanced Individual Traiiing
Effect of Training Frequency o the Maintenance Military personnel
of Physical Fitnese
0~

--- PAGE BREAK ---Physical Fitness Before 
Military perso=el
and After Infantry Advanced Individual Traiiing
Effect of Training Frequency o the Maintenance Military personnel
of Physical Fitnese
0~

--- PAGE BREAK ---

S.US ARY MEDICAL RESFAR 
AND 
COT AD 1-O 
S 
POOJECrTS INLVIG 33(15 SUBJECTS
Facility
Walter Read Army Instltute
of Research
Walter Reaed
of Research
Army Institute
Walter Read Amy Institute
of Research
Walter Reed
of Research
Walter Reed
of Research
I
Army Insitute
Army Institute
Walter Reed Army Institute
of Research
Walter Read Army Institute
of Research
Title
"I. 
The Effects of Stress on Risher-
Order Components of 
u 
Perforwmance;
Sensitivity and Decision Criteria in
Speech Recognition.
It. The Influence of Alcohol and
Multiple Task Demands on Attention
and Nenory Processes"
"Study of Correlation Between Direct
and Indirect Indicators of Pulmonry
Functions"
"Proposal for Feasibility of Continuma
feedback Method for Modifying Physio-
logic Behavior Using &man Subjects"
"Proposal for Coatimous Mitoring
of Multiple Physiologic Systenm
During Wichdrawl froe Beroi 
in
Military Perseonal Stationed in sVw
"Effect of Low Level Electro-Stinulation
of Peripheral Nerves on Judgman 
of
Tbermlly Induced Cutaneous Psin"
"ffects 
of Sleep Deprivation on
Physiological ad Performace Rhyiucity"
"Caneelgia: 
A Study of Sypathetic
Activity in Affected Patients"
Type of Subjects
college students
college students
College 
students
military
college Students
college etudeant
civilian volustees
Walter Reed Army Medical
Center patlenet

--- PAGE BREAK ---atients"
Type of Subjects
college students
college students
College 
students
military
college Students
college etudeant
civilian volustees
Walter Reed Army Medical
Center patlenet

--- PAGE BREAK ---

L. US AUM NICAL USEAUM iA 
DEVELOP 
T C 
ND ZN-lOUSE PROJECT IJVOLVX 
MM SULTS
fecIlity
Walter Red Army Institute
of Research
Walter Reed Army Institute
of Research
Walter Reed Army Institute
of Research
Welter Rod Army Institute
of Research
Walter Reed Army Institute
of Research
Walter Reed Army Institute
of Research
Walter Rod Army Institute
of Research
US Army Research Institute of
Environmental Medicine
US Amy Reaearch Institute
of Environmental Medicine
US Army Research Institute
of Envitnmetal Medicine
Title
"PsychophysioloLcal 
bq 
AsocIated
vith Aspects of Problems Solving"
"Epidesology of Drug and Alcohol Abuse"
"Family Study"
"Socil-Psycbological Ristory Study at the
Old Soldiers' Boo"
"Drug Abuse ?revention in Military Personnel
"Antigenic Components of the Cell Wall of 1.
Heningitidis
"Militar7 Performance and Stress: factors
leading to decrement of Performance and
Disease
"The Effect of Eotional Stress on Hand
Temperature Response to Acute Cold Ex-
posure"
"Voluntary Warming of Fingers end Toes in a
Cold Environment"
"V02 m, 
endurance performance, ozySen
delivery as functsnd Pikes Peak Laboratory
Type of Subiects
college stwuents
military
military families
retired military
civilian adult
Military ale volunteer
Female and Male Civilian adults
Army test subjects
Amy test subjects
Am test subjects
altitude"

--- PAGE BREAK ---ts
military
military families
retired military
civilian adult
Military ale volunteer
Female and Male Civilian adults
Army test subjects
Amy test subjects
Am test subjects
altitude"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

B. US AWY MEDICAL RESEARCH AnD DEVELOPMET COW ND I-MOUSE 
PROJECTS IMVOLVI 
HUM 
SUBJECTS
Facility
US Army Research Institute
of Environmental Medicine
US Army Medical Research
Institute of Infectious
Disease
Letterswma Army Institute
of Research
Lettermen Army Institute
of Research
Letterman Army Institute
of Research
Ittermw Army Institute
of Research
Letterman Army Institete
of Research
Title
"An Evaluation of Physical Fitness
Before and After basic Training -
"Initial clinical evaluation of Rocky.
Mountain Spotted fever vaccine,
formalin-inactivated Shelis Smith
strain, chick embryo cell origin,
locked one, for safety and Immanogenisity
Metabolic, Physiological and Psycho-
logical Effects of Altitude
"More, Effective Topical Repellenat
Against Malaria Mosquitoes
*Studies on Blistering Produced
by Mechanical, Termal and Cbemical
Agents
*Studies on the Effects of Meat and
Humidity Upon the Skin vith Particular
Emphasis on Prickly Meat and Consequent
Disabling Dermatoses
Role of Skin Lipids in Prevention and
Control of Infectious Disease in M1litary
Personnel
Type of students
basic training subjects
(Ft. Jackson)
Active duty military and
government civilian. 
Employee
on staff (MD, 
VETS. Ph.D.)
Military on-combatants
Military am-cmatants
Military mo-combatants
Military mon-combatants
Military mon-combatants
* 
No studies carried out during year 1975 - projected 76

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ph.D.)
Military on-combatants
Military am-cmatants
Military mo-combatants
Military mon-combatants
Military mon-combatants
* 
No studies carried out during year 1975 - projected 76

--- PAGE BREAK ---

S. US ARMY MEDICAL KESEARC M N D DEVELOPMENT COMMAND 1.-HOUSE PROJECTS INVOLVING NO 
SUBJECTS
Facility 
Title of Proect 
Type of SubJects
US Army Institute of 
Determining Anaerobic Threahbold by Lactate 
Military personnel
Environmental Medicine 
Curve Plots
US Army Institute of 
Posssible Use of Vitamin C to Alter Patteras 
Military personnel
Environmental Medicine 
of Acute Cold Injury and Hest Loss Under Cold
a 
Stress
US Army Institute of 
Meat Prpduction and Neat Loss in Chronic Over- 
Military personnel
Environmental Medicine 
eight as a Function of Endocrine Patterns 
4M
US Army Institute of 
An Assessment of Vigilence Decrements and 
Military personnel
Environmental Medicine 
Visual Response Times During Nitrous Oxide

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C. CURRENT US ARKY MEDICAL RESEARCH AN 
DEVELOPMENT COMMAND
CONTRACTS INVOLVING HUMA 
SUBJECTS
Principal Investigator:
Title of Proposal:
Arbar, Michael
"ODetemination of SubpIcogram Quantities of Drugs and Narcotics in Urine of Hunn Subjects"
Altemeer. William A.
"Studies in Septic Shock and Other Pathophysiologic Effects of Infection In Injured Patients"
Bellanti, Joseph A.
"Studies of Cell-mediated Immunity to Viral Infections"
Butler, Ernest 
I
"The Preservation of Human Blood"
Bjornson, Ann B.
"Studies of Imunological Abnormalities Foll ing Burn Traum" 
_
Blacklow, Neil R.
"The Etiology and Pathogenesis of Acute Infectious Nonbacterial Enteritis"
Callaway, Enoch, III
"Neuropsychological Studies in Alcohol"
Closes, George H. Jr.
"Pmmon tis of Post Traumatic and Septic States: Identification of Causative Agents"
Cohen, Phin
"Search for the Lesion(s) of Platelet Storage"

--- PAGE BREAK ---ies in Alcohol"
Closes, George H. Jr.
"Pmmon tis of Post Traumatic and Septic States: Identification of Causative Agents"
Cohen, Phin
"Search for the Lesion(s) of Platelet Storage"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4r
C. USAMDC Contracts
Principal Investigator:
Title of Proposal:
Davis. Charles t.
*Prevention of Intravascular Coagulation by Means of Antibody to Mfeningococcal Endotoin"
Floyd W.
1  
~Studies 
on the Etiology and Epidmiology of Acute Respiratory Infections"
DeRubertis, Frederick R.
"Rol of Cyclic Nucleotides in the Regulation of Lymphocyte Transformation"
Dillon, Hug C. Jr.
*Streptococcal Infections: 
Natural History, Recognition, Managment and Control on
Non-suppurative Sequelae"
Gordon, Irving
*Isolation or Characterization of Human Hepatitis Virus"
Helustra, Norman W.
*The Effects of Smoking on Peripheral Visual Detection of Movmento
Hendley, *Me J.
*Pathogenesis of Respiratory Infections in Volunteers"
Higuchi, Takeru
Improving Oral Bloavailability of Some Antimalarialsu
Hinrichs, David J.
*Studies on the antigentic comppsition of Coxiella burneti
Honick, Richard B.
*Pathogenesis. Detection. Prevention and Treatment of Infectious Diseases of Military
Importance (Prisoners)
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---on the antigentic comppsition of Coxiella burneti
Honick, Richard B.
*Pathogenesis. Detection. Prevention and Treatment of Infectious Diseases of Military
Importance (Prisoners)
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C. USAIRDC Couttacca
Principal Investigator:
Title of Proposal:
Howe, Richard C.
"Analysis of EEG Records Obtained During Heroin Withdrawal in Vietnt
Johnson, Donald E.
"Evaluation of the Health Effects Associated with The Application of Wastemater to Land"
Jones, Henry E.
"Anima 
Models and Imunologic Mechanism in Dermatophytosis".
Kasper, Dennis L.
"Imnunochemlcal Investigations of Cell Surface Antigens of Anaerobic Bacteria"
Kawam, Antoine
"Ultrafine Carrier Network for Extending the Active Period of DIET Effectiveness"
Kline, David G.
"Evoked Potential to Evaluate Mechanisms of Peripheral Nerve Repair"
Kraning, Kenneth K.
Water Content of Stratum Cornem In Vivo"
Levenson, Stanley "1.
"Wound Healing Studies"
Limoe, Aime
"Point Electroanesthesial
Lowe. Dr.
"Salt Solutions vs. Colloid Solution in Resuscitation in Man"
tibach, Howard 1.
"Development of Mosquito Repellents Heving Increased Protection Time for Nan"
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---nesthesial
Lowe. Dr.
"Salt Solutions vs. Colloid Solution in Resuscitation in Man"
tibach, Howard 1.
"Development of Mosquito Repellents Heving Increased Protection Time for Nan"
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C. USAMDC Contracts
Principal Investigator:
Title of Proposal:
mcN 
ra, Judson J.
"Formation of Debris in Stored Blood: Physiological Significance and by Filtration"
Nelnick, Joseph L.
"Search for Hepatitis Virus by New Methods"
Moore, Francis D.
"A Program for Clinical Care In Physical Trauma"
O'Brien, Charles
Alcohol and Drug Abuse in the Viet Nam Veteran: A Controlled Follow-up Study"
Orne, 
artin T.
"Recovery from Fatique"
Prata. Aluizio
"Chamotheraputic Studies on Schistosomissis"
R0.. Richard C.
"Antimalarial Drug Development Program for Phase I Clinical Pharmacology Studies*
Riegelmon, Sidney
"Developmt of Prophylactic Antifungal Preparations"
Sack, Bradley
"Studies of E. coli Enterotoxin"
Sacks, Joel G.
"The Innovation Process and Comind Consultation in the US Army"
Salvidio, Emanuele
"In Vivo and in Vitro Studies for the Detection of Hemolytic Action of Antimlarial and
other Drugs on 66PO Deficient Erythrocytes (A - and S - variants)"
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---Army"
Salvidio, Emanuele
"In Vivo and in Vitro Studies for the Detection of Hemolytic Action of Antimlarial and
other Drugs on 66PO Deficient Erythrocytes (A - and S - variants)"
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C. US&JSDC Contracta
S* 
Principal Investigator:
o 
Title of Proposal:
Savara, B. S.
"The Application of Electrical Current in entel Aalgesia"
Silva, Martins da
"Epidemtologlc Studies of Infectious Disease Transmission along the Trans-Anzon and
Cuieba-Santarm Highway*
Smith, Crred D.
"Prophylectic Methods in the Prevention of Diseases among Army Personnel"
Solis. Robert T.
"Qantitative Studies of Mcroomolization in Man During Surgical Trama"
Stoughton, Richard B.
"Mechanism of Perctaneous Absorption"
Taplin. David
"Fungeous and Bacterial Skin Infections in the Tropics"
Theofilopoulos, Argyrios N.
"Establishment of an in vitro model of dengue infection for the Study of Imnologic
events In this disease"
Vinson, Witllim J.
"Rickettsial Diseases: 
Trench Fever and Scrub Typhus"
Wagner, Henry N. Jr.
"Radlometric Methods for Rapid Diagnosis of Viral Infection"
Wangen.st 
, Stephen L.
"Role of Lysosoml Enzyme Release in Circulatory Shock and Critical Illness"
Wannmer, Las V.
"Relationship of Biological and Epidaological Characteristics of Group A Streptococci" (inors)
S

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C. USAMSD 
Contracts
Principal Investigator:
Title of Proposal:
Ward, Gerald N.
"Evaluation of Body Cmposition of Human Subjects by Mem of Height. Weight and
Visual Appraisal"
Weiss Marvin B.
"(U) Use of Metallic Endosseous Implants as a Tooth Substitute"
William, Harold L.
"Effects of Alcohol on Human Information Processing"
Witherup, Sylvan
*The Toxicity and Irritancy of Ultrafiltrates of Non-sanitary Military Wastes"
0

--- PAGE BREAK ---ubstitute"
William, Harold L.
"Effects of Alcohol on Human Information Processing"
Witherup, Sylvan
*The Toxicity and Irritancy of Ultrafiltrates of Non-sanitary Military Wastes"
0

--- PAGE BREAK ---

0
D. OTHER ARNT AGENCIES
Facility 
Title of Project
US Army Environmencal 
Evaluation of 
lt1Ih Hazards of Selected Explosives
Rygien 
Agency
UQ;.WASSTER, Ft. Hood, TX 
Strobes Against Troops at Night
US Army Coubat Develop- 
USADEC Experiment FC 027, Grand Plot III (Involves alitary personnel)
met Experimentation
Command, Ft. Ord, CA
US Amy Natick Laboratories 
Physiologicsl Testing of Extreme Cold Weather Kandvear and Jackets
US Army Natick Laboratories 
The Effects of Cold Exposure oan Mnual Performence as a Function of
Individual CIVD Responses
Ft. Carson, CO 
Live Further Attenuated Measles Vaccines: Serologic Response Auosg
Children 6 to 11 
oMathe of Age
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---an Mnual Performence as a Function of
Individual CIVD Responses
Ft. Carson, CO 
Live Further Attenuated Measles Vaccines: Serologic Response Auosg
Children 6 to 11 
oMathe of Age
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

622
SOUD-HR
9 Septelber 1975
NAVY PROJECTS INVOLVING HUMAN SUBJECTS 
7 - 4
"L'.:.IcA! 
Ihe 
stc.--. 'r: C:: S7UD1S 
';VOJVi.O 
.HUMNAR StJECTS
BETHESDA%
,dy No. 
t 1C
3-06-132 
Test of irnunogenicity of Polymers of Amino Acids
in 1*'an and the Relationship of Histocompatibility
Type
2-^.0)-34G 
Use of 1,3-bls (2-chlorethyl)-l Nttrosourea
(BCiU) 
In !-'iltary and Other EliSible Personnel
,.t ;:al~'-ntDisea.se
1 
Disodium Cro-oglycate and Pulmoinary Function
-- 06-31 
Treatment of Chronic Osteoradionecrosis of the
Nandible .:ith Hyp--rbar-c Oxygen
5-035-50OR 
lntlarnato-y Bowel Disease
5-06-577 
Central Amines and Psjchiatric Illness
5-06-600 
Cl!nica.l E&'luation of Freeze Dried Bone Allo-
grafts In the Treatment of infrabony PerJodontal
Defects
5-05-624 
Tissue-Covered Vital Root Retention in Humans
5-06-625 
Onto~eny of Lymphocyte Function in Children
5-06-626 
Use of i.!yocardial Perfusion
5-06-627 
Evaluation of Total Hip Prosthesis by Technetium 99
S c in t irit 
r.";-
5-06-628 
Reflex Syrpathetic Cystrcphy: Treatrent with
Propanolol
5-0-629 
Clinical Utility of Serum Glycoprotein Profiles
in Diagnosis and P.-ognosis of M.alignant Reoplasia
5-35-630 
!.-nunotherapy 
of Carcinoi,- of #he Lung
5-'.5-658 
Cardiovaseular Effecls of Ketamine and Thiopental
as Anesthetic Induction Agents for Patients with
Artericsc .erotic Cardl:)va3cular Disease
-A-707 
;:,ur. 
--
t cf Total 
um2n Serun I-E by U dio-
ir-,unoaszay in Atop!- and irmunoCificient States
E7= 
7Z 
VAII,~
I
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---atients with
Artericsc .erotic Cardl:)va3cular Disease
-A-707 
;:,ur. 
--
t cf Total 
um2n Serun I-E by U dio-
ir-,unoaszay in Atop!- and irmunoCificient States
E7= 
7Z 
VAII,~
I
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

623
C- S"%*D'zS TNVOLVIIN3 HUYAI SUBJ-.C73 - O!.KLArID:
N. 
Title
5--.-147% 
Control of IAdrenal An.-ogen Productlz'n
-:3-;93C 
Fff,,ct of Filicit 
_; '-"ln; 
Ho--;;e (P3.)
ProicLion Upton tc Testes, Testicular S.-ze,
Scc::ci, P6'o, luct ton, an.; Libido
5-14,0-99C 
The Evaluation of RerIn and A'dosterone System's
in Essential Hypartonsion
5-'-3-57. 
OnstrtiA and .uod'. .
: Endoacopic .-nn 
!.'sto-
pat!. lo;i c Cp ri so.. 
-
5-4-572 
Gastric Ulcer: A Controlled Study of in-patient and
Outpatient, 'reatument ?rotocols
5-4o-573 
Evaluation of Ifypothaaric 'iaturation in Children
ith Premau:.e Tnellar-.-.e and Adrenarcie Using
Gonadot ropl n-i leas ing !iornon 
(GRE)
44 5 
Cholinermic Therapy of R3eflux Esophasitis .n
Pobt-Gastrector.,y Patients
5-48-581 
Furosemide/Spironolactone Comparison in the Treet.-
ment of Essential Hyertension
5-- E-58 
Study of Prostasland.n (!5S)-l5-!-eth_'--02 
ethyl
Ester (U-35,960)
5-3-637 
Cor.parison of the Preoperative Anxi-ly~ic Effect
of Five Medication 
.tie.-.ens
5-'-.-38 
The Additicn of 
FAC 
Fractions
5-- E-539 
Evaluation cf Hypnosis for Postoperative ?ain
Relief
-" 
-
The Relationship of Peripheral Co:version Ra;e
of Androstenedione to -strone in Obes.--y and
Patients with Endo ..e't,. 
and :anary Carclnora
c.,'_-C4 
Evaluattion of infants of Gestationl Diabetic
o;hcra (IDi) 
!ign.=.ed .:ith Insulin a.d Det
.
21 
....
s
.:... 
.
- .,..- 
.
.
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s with Endo ..e't,. 
and :anary Carclnora
c.,'_-C4 
Evaluattion of infants of Gestationl Diabetic
o;hcra (IDi) 
!ign.=.ed .:ith Insulin a.d Det
.
21 
....
s
.:... 
.
- .,..- 
.
.
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

624
C*.:::rCA° 1;VESTIGAe1O:. STUDIES 7 :'.X"VIt'G IIU4AIN SUBJECTS:
Study No. 
Title
6-o6-844 
Efficacy Study of Vaginal ProstaGlandin E2
(U-12,062 Dinoproszone) Termination of Preg-
nancy with Fetal Intrauterine Death or tlydat%-
difor. I.Fole
6-o6-8117 
Use of Adenine Arabn-_ide (Ara-A) or Rheum-'toid
Factor for tChe Treat-.ent of DNA Virus Infections
of a Life Threaten f-z ::tura Chiaracterized by
the Prcsa.zc, 
of a S--.:..... "c 
Blockin 
Factor or
Absence of Effective Zn-.munity
6-0'-484 
A Clinical Evaluation of the Periodontiua.. of •
Renal Transplant Patients Undergoing iz-muno-
suppressive Therapy
6-36-850 
The Zffect of Acute Leukenic Bone Marro-a Cell
Extracts on Tn Vivo anj In Vitro Colony For:'!Ing
Capatcity

--- PAGE BREAK ---nal Transplant Patients Undergoing iz-muno-
suppressive Therapy
6-36-850 
The Zffect of Acute Leukenic Bone Marro-a Cell
Extracts on Tn Vivo anj In Vitro Colony For:'!Ing
Capatcity

--- PAGE BREAK ---

625
CLINICAL, I,:VESIGATMO: SUDiES :":OLV!' 
IIUfAN S- .T-'S0."-
OAKLA:!:7
1- 
' :o.- 
T1 t le
3- 43-093 
The Effect os -ethotcx-te (.MITX) 
on the 'ro3wh 
o."
Phytohena7ziutinin (--Y'.) 
Stimulated Ly.-cc:-s
3-0.8-096 
The Ilse o. Helium in :e 
Treatment of Otft!. Yediz
and Acute Barotitis
3-LS-188 
Navy Codoperat Ive Chen:z-herapy (VCSII)
.-L3-269 
Attenua !c,. Var ?:iv, 
Devices
%-48-274 
The Half iAC Equivaler.; of Thiopental o. Ccnatanz
Serum Level
L-L3-276 
The Use of 
Tuosal 
T:ooin to Vark Intre-r-a. and
Pharyngeal Epiderr.oid Carcinona Prior to Radiation
Therapy
:-'8-292 
Benzquinaide: An Anz_.e-etic to be Used "!t. Ct.zer
Chemotherap,
:--20-364 
Glucose Control in ?re!;nant Diabetic 1-..en t: ;:3F"
and Regular Insulins
1-48-382 
Counter1r..unselectro-*- ores.s for the Detac:in of
Bacterial infection CZa-sed by Pseudoronas Aerug'.rcs s
5-48-383. 
Determinatlon or Age Erd Healing of Vertebral_ E-z:
Fractures Utilizing Radioisotope
50--B-384 
The Early Deter inratt: 
of the Incidence and
Healing of A3ceptic ::erosiS of the Feoral :-ea-
Follo;ing Trauma Ut.llzingRadioisotope Scar.
5-40-389 
Effect of ilydrochlorth-'azide on Calcium :-,e:._tol:s-
in the Hyperaelciur.: and ;!ormocalciurlc nu-an
5-Z8-390 
The Effect of Cancer Them-otherapy on the 
nh
Respon 
vizness of Peripheral B.ood LYpho.,y.es
to Phytchenailutir.. 
'..HA;
S-'- -39 
The Reenerat'on of -7.test!nal ',ucosa c, De.-.;ded
Surface3
'!alue of 
?t1 
no-3 Ltver BRic"s- 
in 
.p-._.
Liver Dis~,;

--- PAGE BREAK ---al B.ood LYpho.,y.es
to Phytchenailutir.. 
'..HA;
S-'- -39 
The Reenerat'on of -7.test!nal ',ucosa c, De.-.;ded
Surface3
'!alue of 
?t1 
no-3 Ltver BRic"s- 
in 
.p-._.
Liver Dis~,;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

626
C! STUDIES I!IVOLVI:;"' 
-. 
SU3JEOTS - OAKLAN'D:
stjdxNo. 
?Tlel
6-43-668 
The U3e of Intravenrs Lidocane to Bloc!, the
Circulptorj Response to Lar.yngoscopy &id In-
tubation
6-48-669 
In Vivo ?3:telt Adh:s.-veness
6-48-670 
Detection of Ser-m .n.ti-Platelet Antibody via
Stimulat.on of Ly.,,phocytes by Platelot Antibody
6-48-673 
Evaluation or Urethrcscopy with Urethral ani
Bladder Pr-3sure Profl.. a in Cyeeolc-lc Uroo' y
6,"8-675 
A Cont.-o!l-d S-,udy of the 
se of Rolazatton
Mediation '7chnique in an Alcoholls. Rehrb~il-
tation Treatment
5-Uh-678 
Response o. 
-.'yoogonadotropic ;ypo~onadl Wo.-.en
to OonadctZoIis
6-48-679 
Correlation of Vaginal Cytology with Seru., -stradiol
6-48-680 
The SiGnIfc -nce of Se'-inal Plasnaain Early Sper-
Transpor; in the Hu.an
6-48-682 
Osteochondral Defects of the Hunan Knee Join".
Evaluation of
6-48-686 
Effect of ir.a. 
cinolcng (Kenalog) on Ovarian
Steroid and Gonadotro'37ns
6-48-687 
Ratio Of -3.rogen E2 and E3 to Progesterone in
Human Amniotc Fluid
6-48-691C 
Relationship of Hyper-lyce-' a to the C.rcadlan
Pattern c: ?lasa Fe .in Ac:ivity and ?lasra Aldosterone
Concentratlcn in ,on-"etotic Diabetes 
Iel 
'_-u 
"n
the Hunan
6-48-852. 
Comparative Evaluation or ':iconazole and "iystatin
in the Treatp.-ent of Vulvova-,in-l Cardais
i- a-854 
EvalutLo.. of Cholest;'raIne in the 
.-,=e.. 
of
Clinda..ctn-AssoCietlel Severe Diarrhea
-3-

--- PAGE BREAK ---tion or ':iconazole and "iystatin
in the Treatp.-ent of Vulvova-,in-l Cardais
i- a-854 
EvalutLo.. of Cholest;'raIne in the 
.-,=e.. 
of
Clinda..ctn-AssoCietlel Severe Diarrhea
-3-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

627
CLINICAL I:'VSTIGwATIC:,I STUDIES ! VCL1;:C HU": 
SUJCS
PHILADELP!:TA
S~ua'v :o.
3-^5-152
11-05-295
V--5-3g0
5-'v5-439
5-G5-534R
5-05-559
=-05-570
5-05-583
5-)5-651
.697
Title
Comparison of the Pro- and Postoperative Tread-
nihl Electroccrdio"r.-' 
in Patients Undcrgo'nC
Coronary Sypa*3 Sut';e.-y
Chemotherapy of Blood Diseases
Allergic Therapy for !:eniere's Disease
T-he Effect of Antepart-., Zetan..thaso-i 
on the
lncidoie-v ,..R 
ewwlt -,C 
o.i~ojDsrs
Syndrona in Prir:atur: I. -nts
Evaluation or" Smnall 
c':li 
..,croflora in Ci.ncer
Patients :iith and witho-t T. herapy and Their
Possible Pole in 
,nt.-c 
Infectoou7 Cc.p!Catio-ns
inflntx.natory Derm.toph:tos .s
Oral Contraceptives, 
hc.' 
VIII, 
and the
Hypercoagulable State
Platelets in Coronary A'tery Disease
3ioche-istry and I-ionUnog'Ey of the Factor VIII/
von Ifillebrand Complex
Alpha Wave Control
Cholinergic Therapy of Reflux Esophagitis in
Post Oastrectow.q Patients
Sun Damage -nd Enhanc.e-nt. of Epide_-al Pigmentation
Change in .tie Refracct-'ve State of the Eye
The Clinical Effect of 7o.ica! lg 
-.
1 
t ox,-
psoralen Fallo'::ed by ;'ear Ultraviolt Light
o. P-oven Der-tophyt.sii
?harokin tics of "ethotrxate: 
I# SzUdy in
?soriatic Patients
EST ITAUE

--- PAGE BREAK ---al Effect of 7o.ica! lg 
-.
1 
t ox,-
psoralen Fallo'::ed by ;'ear Ultraviolt Light
o. P-oven Der-tophyt.sii
?harokin tics of "ethotrxate: 
I# SzUdy in
?soriatic Patients
EST ITAUE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Aw-
I
628
CLINICAL INWVSTIGA!011O 
STUDIES J:;*wLVI:C iU.A:,': SUOJEC'iS
PowSIIOUTHA V R C::I,'
Study Io. 
Title
3-08-180 
Role of the Alternate (?roperdtn) PV*hwy for
Co.plc.cziL Act'vation !n .un.n 
DiseaCe
4-08-363 
E mbryopathy end Reinf-.ioon Rtblle
4-08-470 
Mechanism of Secondary Peristalsis: Studies Usin3
Intralumir.al Pressure 2ransducec3
k-08-273PS 
Fui.n Choriori:c Sorra 0..otropin 
'r. Fypertensive
Diseases of P.e.rnancy
5-08-475 
Participation in Acute Leuke-it Group B Inveszi-
gational Protocols
5-08-477 
Incidental Appendectomy
2-08-501 
Treatn.ent of Dysplasri and In-S.itu ^arcino.a of
the Crv'x .#ith Cryjsau.ery "- ,C02 
L~war
5-08-586 
Measurerent of Colonic V'otility
5-08-567PS 
Farr Binding Assay for Antibodies to :'ative :)!;A
5-08-588PS 
Resenstitation to Car'a.azepine in the Managem~ent
of "Tic Douloureux"
5-08-592 
Treatment of Acute Myelocytic Leu!:eia and Related
Disorders, M!unber PH H 001
5-08-593 
Use of Adriawnycin in Certain Metastzt.c.-;Nzlinant
Turc rs
c-0-3-594 
linotherapy of Pat1.n:s .;ith Carcinoma of the
Lung
5-38-6";3 
Use of Etidocaine (Duranest) for Lu-:oar Peridural
Anesthesia in Obstetrics
-, -PD 
'.-. 
-.-
' 
'- 
-ter,... Abortionts isins 
n r.- 
m o l
Pro3taslandin F2a and L-.a 
Tent Cervical
Dl 'ato 
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---aine (Duranest) for Lu-:oar Peridural
Anesthesia in Obstetrics
-, -PD 
'.-. 
-.-
' 
'- 
-ter,... Abortionts isins 
n r.- 
m o l
Pro3taslandin F2a and L-.a 
Tent Cervical
Dl 'ato 
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

629
c'.I::IcAL I.'STICAT:! 3?UDTES I,!VHt.VI::0 HU::.' 
SUBJECT$:
S:., 
!No. 
Title
5-38-665PS
5-!, S-7o3rS
5-08-705PS
5-"' 8-798PS
5-08-799PS
5-8-e0o
Evaluvtion or Trachet. Darge from Proloned
Endg2racheal Intubatt.n
Ra~ionz-l ;.neathesia .:-r Low+er Extremity Sur.;-"
A Study Co.paring the Spirocaro(R) Incentive
Break h.1n1 
Cxerc3er L'.± the Dtrd(R) Intermit tent
Position ?resstare Brea;Mng Unit in the Preven-
tion of Postoperative ?ul.onary Cozmplications
.Corpar'-:, of Zpidura" Sallne Placem.nt end Ei.-
dural BloJ 
1 ?laeme.n: ":n th. Treatment o: Pos.-
Lunbar-?uncture H.eda:,he
The Effect or General ;.neathesia on Platelet
Function
Efficacy of ?re- and :ntra-operative Cephaloridine
in Prevention or Po3t.perative Wound Infecti.on
in Orthopedu.c Surgery
-2-

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Effect or General ;.neathesia on Platelet
Function
Efficacy of ?re- and :ntra-operative Cephaloridine
in Prevention or Po3t.perative Wound Infecti.on
in Orthopedu.c Surgery
-2-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

630
.IIIICAL 
I'VESTIGATiON STUDIES -:VOLIO YU2" 
SUS
SAN DIG.
3 -'J-29 
Endoscopic Pancreatocto1noan;iography and Eanonetry
of the Sph4nctcr of Cd04.
3-15-033 
Evaluation or Routine Strip Chart Recording of
Echncardloraujt 
on lecbo'ns as ,n Aid in DiaTnosis
of' Congenital Cardiac Abnormalities
3-16-039 
Disorders of Honaglob.n Synthesis in Xe;iborn
F1ipinos
3-15-157 
DeterrAnants of Lo;ier 3sophae lSp'-.cter 
Pressure
i-16 257 
Early Di.., osis of Ascept-,c !0'1oss 
of the ?e-oral
Head Pollo;ing Trauratic Dislocation of the Hip
.- 1-260 
;onitorln3 .irterial Blood Flo: in 
A-S-O
-- 1 
Ultravlolct Altered D:A in .- id-nal '"urs
L-15-2052 
Hyperoxaluria and Infln.atory Bowel Disease, the
Effect of Ileostoy
4-155-369 
Deterraination of the Cause of Red 3lood Cell
!'icrocytosis of Infau.c::
Z,!S.-414 
The Recovery of V/Q Follo'ing Pneumothorax
=-i-~441 
Recurrent Lo.:er Urins.'y Tract Irfections in '1men:
The Effect of Urethral Dilation, a Prospective
Study
-1-16 
yperfibrin-,Zenemia in Cancer Detection
:-1- -Epidermoloay 
of Peritconsillar Abscess and Prognesis
of Dise.3e
Influence or Sodium Chrcmolyn on M0ast Cells in
Allerg.ies
-
-14- 53 
Lymphocyte T--c lls and B-cells in Patients with
Naliznant Me lanorna
- .- 
7 -. 
t .
.
...- 
" rc :'3 a. 
_ to=l A.:3et 1,ic 
f-:-

--- PAGE BREAK ---hrcmolyn on M0ast Cells in
Allerg.ies
-
-14- 53 
Lymphocyte T--c lls and B-cells in Patients with
Naliznant Me lanorna
- .- 
7 -. 
t .
.
...- 
" rc :'3 a. 
_ to=l A.:3et 1,ic 
f-:-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

631
CLI'-'ICAL 
H:t 
S -A 
O,.€.. .
.,Tq ..r" 
-T".., .
U. 
~.$I,: 
S W E-.S
SDIEG0
5-16-45PS 
Zoster Irr%7*-ne Globuir. Proirar.
5-!6-485 
Therapeutic Beneftts ,& Fiberoptic 3onchoscpy
5-16-539R 
Anriographlc Analysis of Left Ventricular " echwnics
in Youn- ?atients *.::. Atypical Chest ?ain .nd
Ischenidc Fzart Disease-
5-16-632PS 
Dia;nostic Value of ?aritoneoscopy ePnd Tra.sc!d;:=enal
CholangloC-r-:-y in th.e Dia~no3!s or Obsc.--e -loo'
5-16-635?S 
Treat,-,.-, 
of" od:'.., 
Accumi-ne. 
b-%Ato!. 
u
Vaccine
6-16-803 
Eeasurene.v- or Artcr/ovenous Differen- Ca.ac
Patholoic _i ,.onCI;;iorns
6-16-809 
!.easureent of Insulin Resistance in New-Dlasr.sed
Juvenile C.-set Diabetic Subjects
6-16-810 
RiAanp!n as Adjunct 'Terapy for Chronic Osteo-
ry elitia
6-16-811 
Triclycer'e ?rodu:in Rates in Obese Dia*.etic
with Hypert.-g 
~ycer 
de-.a; Effects of Fasting
6-16-812 
Detection of ?ericard/al Effusion by Echoca.rd/o-
graphy
6-16-813 
Fascial Co.partne.,t pressuree Study
6-16-815 
Transfer Factor Treat.,ent or Cocq!dio.-,Ycosts
6-15-824 
Alterations in Tiss.e P02 Levels Following Ex-
cesoi ve .xe':is3e
6-16-826?S 
Obstructl:n ot Vernos Return by P3E? Ventlaticn
6-16-827 
High Freqcency Hearing Loss and Eyor 
popro-eine,-Ia
-6-837 
Studies o! 
Effects of Abuse on Infants a...
Children (Ccoperatl-e study with VA)
€-'6-338 
- Androger. s-! E:tro=r. etebo'isn in ?os.e..sn.i--.ss
-2-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

632
"MT!CAL 
,N\'STIr:ITIO. STUDPT3 IVILVING '":"'"
S: 
D131,10
E-A6-839
CM1n.cil and Sxper-.intal 
Mud3es 
of the Aud!o.-.etr"
System
O-15-84j 
Ojective IA.Wtss3ent or the Cpoi11!y ot External
-
Presaure Circuiatorj A34Ist
-3-

--- PAGE BREAK ---:"'"
S: 
D131,10
E-A6-839
CM1n.cil and Sxper-.intal 
Mud3es 
of the Aud!o.-.etr"
System
O-15-84j 
Ojective IA.Wtss3ent or the Cpoi11!y ot External
-
Presaure Circuiatorj A34Ist
-3-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AVI COMUACT PGa-- 
Volunteer Mumma Subjects
(k .t •..-,"t 
As of
.!C 7Itla 
tscription 
jPatenticl- 
PUaa2S 
Oz 
Zi)%tof 
a
I 
I 
j 
a
*ief of Auto Ad 
Studies of 
ntal.
: ,.Zn€ic EoW.ures to 
ceps.al. visvl. Audi-
-;' 
Pressurts of 
tory. 1ltrt, lun2 a.
.- ;,- &. l~t. 54201 
WeSring-t.. 
fur :tic-I
*..CIft 
lv~nO~.ca- 
dirin; &?-4 follo.in
Os 
*aIcut@ 
and Chronic ex-
I courts to different
levels of oxs 
alope
or ir ctrblmsticm %it0.
'other ismes at Offer-
Got avzi *nt pressures.
• 
;d"Z,'- 
,4
P-m1ctive Stui~Ces of
" 
, 
a 
Itmerz.ct U.
r~*~2k GS.20tPr 
u
:ncrss4. Gas Pressure
Studies :f rental 
- I
p2'.=.,C3. St¢,i:r7 SC- 
!
a4v "i e::. 
r.or
tw.C.l.bain. 
9*Ort
i and 
fts functions
tvriq em fol1c€ting
te .:reS tOfferent
1:,ar%: 'and to different
stable Pressures to a
Uxlmn of 1600 FSl
in dry And wt OvIW~-
., Sllt.•
I
x
To find solutions 
Dr. C. ,J. 
L-r 
s
for cirrec.A bic- 
1iro:ter. !r u4,slA
d4ivif; to seftly 
.0lv. oa. 
IasT-
tatend diving d"'Alv:.-da 
j
And duration ft 
IdtCal Ceter
F itt 1 
44 
PA
To sarzta 
znd 
* -
-
'.ULs'tJ-s
riscJI effects of jfc.. Eil~ri
hydrostatic Pent- 
'im 
1:4
sure c" 
aaa to 
Univ. e f Pms$t-
sifely eatend dlv- v~sia
Ing gapth amd 
MIsca1 Coeutr
duration capabill- WbladeIP4. FA
O Ne 
1 1 7 4 
1
, 
I
I. 
-
lJvlyTh-: ?2$f t
~Juneflj 
jj
I 
a
I 
*; 
I 
a
I 
I
g 
a
!S "sr -
____________________ 
*4-.;-----i 
I 
t 
.
"!
4,
of 
ave~ 
*toercb
i
I..
Ii
1'
!
d
I
I
= 
I 
R
I 
.
! 
_ 
J
• | -
i
?
!
°,!
ii
|I
e!
i
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---flj 
jj
I 
a
I 
*; 
I 
a
I 
I
g 
a
!S "sr -
____________________ 
*4-.;-----i 
I 
t 
.
"!
4,
of 
ave~ 
*toercb
i
I..
Ii
1'
!
d
I
I
= 
I 
R
I 
.
! 
_ 
J
• | -
i
?
!
°,!
ii
|I
e!
i
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

uVY CONTRACT flOGRAK- Volertmer * 
Subjects
(Activa c.racts as of is kl:.s: 1M.
-
o 
* -
.!
%r~4Ic 
0Udtr IW 
-
trrit Deedition
ufnta0
qlanitate " beat
less by mn worktrw 
In
wt arg ft hyperbaric
OgAu rconts
ftwsiolm 
rnswe dorlag wal-
Stot vs. feet first;
Ef.tt of exter,,l
b 
ering 
mist
on resitrotion during
wdrjoui~r work
I
#P.rpos*
To Safely eztm
diver's ca-btlity
for repetitive
tvi, o In cold
water
I't T@o 
se'xterx
tin'
I !';'e~~I~i
Or. T. . romr
antv. of P-01low
aV. Ofnoa
I at.¢ljlI5, 
.- 'ti1 4
S'azz
or. r1,r- 
Vat 
I
P,'cf~ss~r, Dot. of:
ssut 66. of r
York 
I
ScoJiS of 1"4lcifn
1 M-4:.tcstuy
1WV310, r*4 
A
1*'
of 
t," 
.
Ts:irt 
-
Ioct 
7P 
V"
30 Sot. 
.
, " 
-
I
I D.~ 74 
sct 
li
31 ec 7SI.1
(41wilttiWC ASiMS-amt Determine CaIus of 
x 
To safely extid 
Dr. H. S4Itofl 
A" ?S 10%.
4of uirdto-"Ittry 
",reasw heart rite 
dtvi" dipo sod 
Vt. of SurMo7 
31 
5i 
61 
:
F!ct= in t l 
dutrir exercise In 
durati.o ctPaill- cum University
2rypr M.ich Pr"Swn 
tworba¢ nri M.cm -te 
t4ti 
¢ties 
raia Coster"
I 
rh a , . C .
I 
I 
' 
I 
lll 
'i 
t
, . .U~IIWI 
•____________ 
_ 
....
• , 
.. 
.
a
I
I
!I
I
-
~ 
,~z*~gggw' 
-
_____ 1!1 
&
4
I!
!
! I
t°
e
i" ~ 
~ 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 
I 
M. 
.
-
,,, 
j 
..
' 
.
..
[tir
Ii !!
t
I!
i
I
I
I
%
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---.U~IIWI 
•____________ 
_ 
....
• , 
.. 
.
a
I
I
!I
I
-
~ 
,~z*~gggw' 
-
_____ 1!1 
&
4
I!
!
! I
t°
e
i" ~ 
~ 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 
I 
M. 
.
-
,,, 
j 
..
' 
.
..
[tir
Ii !!
t
I!
i
I
I
I
%
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.e P;f 1 
s4 r
P.veitlon of Ur and
:I:52'bulr Cenest In
.:in; C,,,rations
.:.y tatt Loss Is
"::': :,. cc 
Cf Cairs
:, 
z% s a 
r.,a
:-,rIrq SAu~ration
o IU
Alll
.S", of hesrin2.
msuexart of br.*n
Y~~~*Ar 
vispons
=oinceesed moolvnt
presures and differ-
*n1t COs aSdItuI
AVY CUA 
fOGRA- 
Volutmceer Rum= Sub]jets
as cf iS 
.s.. 
* 
-
.
*. 
* 
• 
.
lyt t l
1*
I4*'tsis~l t cf hiers 
I2
.War: uslg water
U ss -r.42*
i.
S' .:1 of C",OV , *,*Satr
f Ir su-6cts partidc-
pating in yverbaric
dW*W~e 03xposUMs
1'
X
tirposo
1ftwst19:*.4?
tus Cu-rio 4'vi.*4 Ichiv. of :1I*rtu
ktivities; to 
ICarolna
safely extr4 div-I amp&l 111l, 
. C.
2. depth W or-S
To datermine t'w 
tr. Paul Vr*,
cam am 
r.. anC t I 1 
Asc 
SCI 
=
ti:. to sag!,j 
Call4~g
depk am d ivtionI
To detarmin the
cous of m~ighut
loss i subjcts
unldr. tikoq sat-
urction dives; to
11ty ented v-
iog topt " der,
tie
2r. Paul Yoeb
lUtbb Assoi:%tes
P. O. Ilox 3
yello Ei M5
I
tat%.%
C.
*1
t t
74
I ect ?S-
I 
M
$I JancIS
31 Dec is
I
i~
~a 
.5-
-
-.
II
*1 ~
ii
7; I
AK
AK
I
1.
-
.~t-- -
*1
*~1
I:
7;
I_
0
Oscription
C 
I
S
i
t!
!
[
:.-*Jt,:t yi le
W 
.
I 
l 
I 
.
IN
i
II
I
Ii

--- PAGE BREAK ---I ect ?S-
I 
M
$I JancIS
31 Dec is
I
i~
~a 
.5-
-
-.
II
*1 ~
ii
7; I
AK
AK
I
1.
-
.~t-- -
*1
*~1
I:
7;
I_
0
Oscription
C 
I
S
i
t!
!
[
:.-*Jt,:t yi le
W 
.
I 
l 
I 
.
IN
i
II
I
Ii

--- PAGE BREAK ---

:" ~:;. 
MW 
TMUC, R!s A 
-
S)
(Acli.a cemtccts a o0 * Aspist ISM)
estOAv IUTR==~ no. of 21 9%41) If.9
w=~ Code 60 
m o. VIA of 27 ftvco 1$14
* 
'* 
~ 
~ 
-
I I-1l~aSwg lMitorl 
X
* 
~ 
.. 
...... 
j 
ia 
-
*..*.-c
* 
.6,. 
6 *tki.
To I olop me 
Dr. tot S0th
s 
te 6 s %r 4 
IV, mS arulc ftw slto.
d c'. 
c.Sor
10)~e Sto treet
I-eatfowat
II Sept 74-
31 ftf n
ix
St
*1
T 
Ilk*"
AW
E':x~ ccv. 
u 
liviel's( 
I 
T 
lest effec 
of 
I J. F. Oaioo 
I1 NOW w 
S-
CAP 
simiaug ship 
t 
0 Sept7 5 
Z.
i&- 
afnec 
I
Irtimn 
;*vfrog-. 
II-o
c: stsctivwm Snti U5rbii- 
'SOO
V=c1 Csrta 
i,, 
D 
i 
". 
I1'. 
CA 9 -
"
""__""___"_""____________"_"_____
* 
.
.
.1 
.6
6~
C.
lltl14Slb 1r1S Of; . f. C'iZ @o
ai.tytd 
*=choI 
'#storc
a&ti.e & Preewcti. 
Selts 3le#re b'c
m crtom tr"v
IClOets. 
2W.
I aly 74-
IS A"g 75
1 7 
.
I
3" [
d
I.
~4
V. I~3ai
j 
I;a!~c 
6
I 
I
'p
!!
I
I
I!Ii
i
!
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---o
ai.tytd 
*=choI 
'#storc
a&ti.e & Preewcti. 
Selts 3le#re b'c
m crtom tr"v
IClOets. 
2W.
I aly 74-
IS A"g 75
1 7 
.
I
3" [
d
I.
~4
V. I~3ai
j 
I;a!~c 
6
I 
I
'p
!!
I
I
I!Ii
i
!
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mNvY coOt4T 
KESEAR HI PiWGA- 
Volunteer Hums Subjects
-. -
.
*- 
.
&14s 
and&chansm
gm'rsturf fer -
..
* yn~dfm 
amd 102rt
as Rarcosis
Irelr.' r ;onsos, 
apor/
p"Cl, parforarce mwd
caordinatti" tests
stu'e at increase
wefit pressures using
different S mixtures
ard varying ters-
tures.
x
C
I.° I:
'~ 
.p.
a 
4... 
,
4*!
anod 
durationu satly.4z:. of ~~x- 
il %c 7S
islology
~IU% tCoIvcrslty
• vv?.. 
!. 
2)710.
I 
I
Ii
I ~
* 
I
ax.
fljiilosical Facto"s 
Espcsar of anileels 
1 
1O~? 
hsoq~r 
.
. Coorri 
; .:c 7c- 
z: 
'
r .lved with Survival 
ran to cool vater 
itca! reswoJs to 
zw !aw.-30 
-
D 
v 75
eery Cold 
water 
itmarsion 
suddsm cold Wa r 
Cov.llsaOf 
c 
a 
I 
tc.1
*xpCwmf 
& dovC'0V 'Ph,-'olop 
I
I wry, ltr
I. 
i i 
.CLa 
.
*.4sio!jical Studies
.2:*at , Olve to
To study hert Zed log
furctiol. fluid tancue
bo , tto"Npere and
era*rgy tete'sism
dr-One "an, Omaclse
and cold epoue thilf
breat.u ng h,11m/oayges
for I tw 12 %Uks at
high pressure
I
To mool tor poteet- for. S. K. "n 
fII Jan IS-
till o.ysiolvicai I 
-. of Phynioic.31 ftc is
diangs and Sao- lm.of Ituili at
tatioms to prasewvlP0ane 
I
I#posure; to extend 1960 talst 
st foad
dive turstioa 
su.- M0t 
, H ta 
I
I" 
I "
5~t j
'I..
I.
4
~i'isic.'
$
. -l-- 
-
--
!
ei
!
I
t
!
!
s
!
!
t
!
e
!
1
t

--- PAGE BREAK ---oms to prasewvlP0ane 
I
I#posure; to extend 1960 talst 
st foad
dive turstioa 
su.- M0t 
, H ta 
I
I" 
I "
5~t j
'I..
I.
4
~i'isic.'
$
. -l-- 
-
--
!
ei
!
I
t
!
!
s
!
!
t
!
e
!
1
t

--- PAGE BREAK ---

NAVY CONTRACT RESUACH PRO(ZM- Volunteer Bom Subjects
( t1 
cc -tr T , 
...J 
of 
" 
l'75-
(Activi eCr trzc:u as of 1.5 -*'. 
15S)
*~::: 
'S~'a
*g:inst lalarfa In
Adnistraton of
experimtsl malaria
vaccine
'1
Potnntlal-
ly
I~azev~ous
I
purpose
Plaria Provo.tion
in Miarint Cops
and r.vy Forces
Ka~rl H. Ikteckmn.
M. 0.
Pr|r.,,
Cas *tter M411
Univ. Of rAv F*zico
ft~v FYafco 
7131
I 
I
* 
.
~.. I
I 
*
~ 
t 
I
III. .
St 
.
I
I. 
; 
I
Uzv. 
1 taircmh
V.
L
@
T.sats
I1 .10 74-
1 gq 7S
.1 I I
I' 
iS
Ii
'*1
!i
+.,e
. tscr1 t4.on
fn*.'stics wm
!i
!I
I
!
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---fco 
7131
I 
I
* 
.
~.. I
I 
*
~ 
t 
I
III. .
St 
.
I
I. 
; 
I
Uzv. 
1 taircmh
V.
L
@
T.sats
I1 .10 74-
1 gq 7S
.1 I I
I' 
iS
Ii
'*1
!i
+.,e
. tscr1 t4.on
fn*.'stics wm
!i
!I
I
!
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

:2-=.
07-3012
07-3013
0W-3014
W-3016
Research at Navy Reearch Laboratories Involvig Humm Subjects 
-
1'ric m'J prs 
k:,-Lc 
"eLc. 
CCV 
' " 
O 
Ak2 
"~., 
"
Effect of oc~w itwx &,.-: 
-
h-'h .i p 
c= 
=|i
sl~ppattetm.- = per~mcoca In ca..doaml almims4
ACUM Orl 
zclCC" 
nin ac.r Aii 
i In CmqV of Lw-l PcrcEzl 
"I
rcta 
of psyddilrdc eamty rmamm h~ nia1muI 
'I
Id 
..
tmcod 
early Inlc-=s of alcdfLi ri 
nmw. o vA pcruwe 
l 4
Wtdaltr=~ roc p drri~ Lm~Cvtnl daid"1a In tM, f leat 
-4
The effects ef aR4pboard oaL-i 
=tlr 
nIj~ 
ai 
w-L.Uliy C!,cftcccc 
l 
Ga hbz 
Z 
ka
tWc-dcrid beAth ow-4$.e wuxs In doi 
"v aid MItir 0po 
V
J, 
W•lSI.4.c&Y-2002 
iom 
M 
MLcbibcy in a~me bdonatlon pcoamosoir, -1 
m
0O',-901 
OpimcOaf =X~itacy PaoCcOL* 
Of adiMvd xuN=d'i 
1c~~il 
.
M.M.08-30l 
U.iwo cdt of Vitaa s r 
±m.. 
a 
,m 
£ aJ 
......
M ".21.023:0%, 7 m UPWCit of mmdca 
swomeic and mmactical t 
am s 
a 
r 
tooo 
.
A *i.
LJIM 
3.03-
Itta.0-oo1. 
Samwi 
ap ra imr Initial anal &tstlan pearx ccdv vut~nltlpl tm~ 
tradkIzd 
'
01-l002 
Viswl =*lroqtrs fo opvam 
of viamd r==n, dtalym
** 
mIA.03-2WO 
eevo 
tii 
tc 
k ausnmt of Wqv divef park~ae~
03-03. 
rLo~~lcl 
zidco of &My divar periarmc 
4
son. 
Wl.S4.0-5ol2 
t 
mottial diAl 
saoaaitial O&Vt* 
q =a lbvy aid rigac C' 
avii-.,t Cr A,::
00~-0LlViunk ~a 
tw .
i 
n epor 
ml aw~xoatv=s
=34-=0L 
ftrfoc!uITIPA 
o 
Ai 
b7 w=t an" 
clwspam in =wft aLUay ,yuo 
4
3I.W.03-3020 
Ox 
,,w cwtlm of 
aplam 
In 
y 
,-s 
d 
.-
tI 
W5.524.0l-112 PP-Ltionid4P of blato 
4#- 
%d& AA 
a 
*t1 
.
nvlUttv Pam-l
tY C-10:15 
iilqca effec .fwemict aigecontalmud boduiaw 
n 
~vsIn beat sixocts
U1C43 
I,wvmd eutqrns ft fremgft Iptelets to 
Cat 
emamlle 
Id
01.-#O 
3cairlatva 
Of bittl * 
t 
by%&a 
wI: 
clinical wet of k 
mtoLtcy 
t:m 
y
01-W 
fte 
wrr apLasa Sn dUta y csm,,,sa 
-
I " pby u 
plmsi atm 
.
)5L.524.013-LUA 
Rapxaiva mamL of ommAlt by t 
ImItstin Inmac~sa of upocfi r. 
amamixm Vida p~w-~ 
of ;x
W-0s306a 
ilparoci 
y 
*s mw~ 
t 
dwoc ucciao 
dOUm U" 
r
K"11.01-0033 
tiatck a 
ln 
toe tIa 
of ost 
lit" 
r
0J-Coft 
.r[fto hwtbok -
mlom wom fmcbma (cuiL-) bssl 
fa bi=w 
,
W, -W-2 
Srmwmp Or ime m;= 
0 ' t 
-wli*Lom 
<
01 -OV6 
W=eaiqt 
stWd of do ume at a &ow 
bleed ba daan 
IMI
Oi-C45 
In At= 
zo teartI 
of I - II 
Ppo 
in bm m-- 
pofud
M1I~a.0-l4I 
Caa 
care 
m 
mcdl Iiiaeuw ftm) 
t
I
4
10m;= 
0 ' t 
-wli*Lom 
<
01 -OV6 
W=eaiqt 
stWd of do ume at a &ow 
bleed ba daan 
IMI
Oi-C45 
In At= 
zo teartI 
of I - II 
Ppo 
in bm m-- 
pofud
M1I~a.0-l4I 
Caa 
care 
m 
mcdl Iiiaeuw ftm) 
t
I
4
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---<
01 -OV6 
W=eaiqt 
stWd of do ume at a &ow 
bleed ba daan 
IMI
Oi-C45 
In At= 
zo teartI 
of I - II 
Ppo 
in bm m-- 
pofud
M1I~a.0-l4I 
Caa 
care 
m 
mcdl Iiiaeuw ftm) 
t
I
4
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-9oRS
YI, 
Im.O01.1.00
&l 
*140.01-002
02-6011
02-70m 
.
02-0015
'Wc.5A.02$4-00.
124.00-701
VCCn 
WS.54.00-t.2'
AM. 
150#1~.01.01-0152
tC W51.524.002501
022-000
4fI t0.03-l0
01,-205r.
lemarch at Now3~ac 
Laboratorbes tUwNLAS 
SN=m SIO4,.cmts
at¢oca 
MA 
aicl 
fwwn in powtc.l al MA a 
-
upv.t ai s
&rAntm of =ptatza 
d cS 
-QfM at 
wat OA oaifr O 
is In Uxal di ,r or... 
.
CUMat of mpotitW 
-I- 
ot 
"~w -mIa 
" d 
"qcl 
b 
1atuOa.-Mamid Of boouaZ1 
Onc~ 
m'i.--a1 
colz 
i
beawotiotkn Int 
bmumtm roAacim In bium bood pLvdct Ixmd b bi%'b-..xi
HLV% pmumc aw 
aid/u I 
.mt 
to"j offacts MPM 
o m trmf wt ad acod-bat bu, 
vlJtvw. In U
Mo.a di 
eftuntifa of g* dqv*±ccpw s 
to m at. 
o 
am divus 
-wi.=M&"m
lkvftato~cy W 
raipa"sa 
to 
-s 
In 
ftd vt11tocy Ian&
a,..:&wM&4 
to Cold Imm4oriAi 
OWiC1a 
S
11x n--o I 
mn t0'Z.d C- 
' 
s*Enrc', 
fm. 
ae, eace
IomIA 
aid 
1 
by*cstodc pmwsAu %Vw exlaa ozpac Ir nn Z
D 
It*=l=ilnn 
of 
"dmbl. vdxmts of afrcm 
pcoo*,=1 ',cqApad with wsbmi-zc
ITaioMty boazkn 
In alzwrmsai so~oe to cold I
1*ltn 
t oftwM drauide rco"WA to loricc accohccdm.I
TVw prenxwm M oft sSIAsrOtIKa' by inarm of ekr 
.
M.* 
%-Ai~ 
no&mcraiao 
to vk-cot-s ococtr. 
~~~iltypri~~~ 
3
Lf CXccts of cokbinod Mecsmo ca m vl Mirmv'i Pm~rtu= 
I
a h~ea'dici. e oluatLon of C.- 
.vttvc pa'tttami. systemi 
%
V* %-ftt. o" bl.fchtlus aetmrdth aid pmxfou w 
I
PrtoCM3.cc vltnmm t tl 
CD.j V 
I'toijiu, 
Od o 
F 
* d aoICah 
m 
v.MM 
I
Ur. QOfc.C of £lunuaPMn an 
oculolm thcdvld =4idr d~ 
fois 
Wa d aid pwo srolrwiro 
)
IftyrbochcM~l.l assays of 
sso ceicraic 
m=V uuwas 
ptr=mm 
I
S1'.wty &aulh: Ibo 40ols ofj 
adjmswnc to wwatiam 
I
S accacs %V38"c to 1*4bmlio oci 
rw'Lowwsof 
*Ew 
Ox- 
:.a.. mxlcr to M~A lvU y
3 ~wqA4alc47 -M 'VLol PCmfroww nkv h byj%.nimdic awl ada.*M 
*omlcwka'.mew 
a 
I
DMVU"KV 
ot7 dLWr MftepoCaO WMWWamt .nb 
3
Sn"wwY 01,41M 
fut tCXWio Iu'i 4Vwok-h faa UWaovV-. W~klmmor VaRa' 
3lvU y
3 ~wqA4alc47 -M 'VLol PCmfroww nkv h byj%.nimdic awl ada.*M 
*omlcwka'.mew 
a 
I
DMVU"KV 
ot7 dLWr MftepoCaO WMWWamt .nb 
3
Sn"wwY 01,41M 
fut tCXWio Iu'i 4Vwok-h faa UWaovV-. W~klmmor VaRa' 
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7./
0"1.01-=2
'3 
:,T,'3. 2-5027
V3 1'R3.12-5Y030
13.-5022
tI. 111.524.023-3000
M03. 14-lOl
W•l-- 02-IV,,
023-1006
023-2032
023-033
;. 
OZ3-Xtdt
'1' LU 
023..20r5
Remarch at Na7v 
Research Laboratorlss lavolving 
--8 
Subjects
rCrac*d 
of Adw bOCd call- auk-pltelet-oor rod tells (fer deco 
-xie t=.cr-
FrAM:U 
o pm-zW9d rod Col: to PWOv',o f£um .cfl 
rcrd c lb to t ,o 
a 
&'!.7 
an ,' 
" ,-.. 
. .'
Lvalwuin of liquid and previously frast 
=dieod lan red colii in dicc o 
aqoe 
~cL:~ 
z'..(.:
in'cAktvm of CLxwmI.alovIv Infecion 
1
I rccx~.c-pration of I wayca (r ute* 
of mwpitu 1.
ii4 role o 1 
reaocc 
in tbo paet 
mtim of dAtswcwol ,pluca 
is 
1
~~ of louce-borno relepsirg fever; a diame of tof iCy l~
IGRWan 
rmalent Of 00Miu fever 
a
r-Anria wcim:llad 
in war. 
-' 
r e 
9omcd 
.. .
'*o-.'
Tm&mnt of p=*rA.dt 
dioc-sw of military lwpowe in SE Asia 
u!
DiSO0Ce 
Of MlitaY 1orac; 
pi miolojayprcticm. dimi$.s an c 
t*rwt of Ictu.r$al C 
.-
II:
Lectiomc 
d par•siti1am of W1it 
= 
In a[ilca 
0 tiKar Et
Dscece 
of miltry Uportonc: 
Lr.;ao. 
&6ir. 
Md FventJon of wslamma cnccw'r 
f 
.c... 
c 
•e o*'*: c.;rc, e
fl 
.
of a 
c m m fee prooceimy Rd l ' a 
ar caM ualJto 
i 
I
Woct 
Of Irit=eCU 
ction 
dc sViQC3 On pwums=l pcrranc. saftq and w~ol b-I1x,
ioc~leffets of 010Icriia 
to bO-"t 
twvcnr- In u11IAbmvd iq~vm
inlmto trmile). etwirmconcl 1"nt x*d laply dvru~*Vtia 
C" jduy.o-qIM.c uaLw.
Ja.dil 
ofa re.ci 
of vw= iumcc on e 
,at 
o'c:itia.al 
*e: 
S
r.L* 
Vc£itigm = rd"tod to bm
r.iM:IE.i 
oJ Of bt 
=dchtats 
3
rI~wVorrut of 4uqwm riak critorin far anOCIVims nolac aqomtwc in tr&-mic Cm.,-
Nemlmco -Of 
=ezi 
lao. Ja VmIomRv rae priumuie1 
3
lbatim )oo* 
pwrmme i 
tin 
f 
U.S. Iv 
and "Wan 
ft" 
3
/
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---of 4uqwm riak critorin far anOCIVims nolac aqomtwc in tr&-mic Cm.,-
Nemlmco -Of 
=ezi 
lao. Ja VmIomRv rae priumuie1 
3
lbatim )oo* 
pwrmme i 
tin 
f 
U.S. Iv 
and "Wan 
ft" 
3
/
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

642
of
9 September 1975
.
1 
.
AIR FORCE PROJECTS INVOLVING HUMAN SUBJECTS
Attached is a proposed Air Force reply to Congressman Roybal that
contains pertinent information regarding the AF Clinical Investigation
Program in general summary term. The reply olso addresses the issue
of AF use of hallucinogenic diuge. 
Following that material is summary
information onAF contracts and in-house clinical research wherein human
subjects are used.
SGiD-I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

843
2 September 1975
SGP
Experimentation
SAF/LL (Major Gregory)
I. The following is a proposed reply to Congressman Roybal:
"This is in reply to your letter to the Secretary of the
Air Force concerning Air Force intramural and sponsored
extramural research and experiments involving human subjects.
[APR 169-6 (atch.l)].
"The Air Force participates in clinical research with
new drugs in conjunction with'civilian research institutions,
universities, medical schools and teaching hospitals,
through the Clinical Investigative Program. This program is
governed by Nir Force Regulation 169-6 (coo Attachment 2).
The Air Force effort is to participate in the clinical trials
of new therapeutic agents developed by other investigators
and new treatment regiments of proven drugs.
"The application for a research project by a principal
investigator is carefully reviewed and evaluated at multi-
management levels. The final review, approval and monitoring
responsibility rests with the Surgeon General through his
Clinical Research Committee. The Clinical Research Committee
insures that the investigator complies with the guidelines
and safeguards of the Department of Health, Education and

--- PAGE BREAK ---is
Clinical Research Committee. The Clinical Research Committee
insures that the investigator complies with the guidelines
and safeguards of the Department of Health, Education and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

844
Welfare and the Food and Drug Administration. Members of
this Committee are military physicians with specialty training,
national board certification and research backgrounds.
Proscribed formats for research protocols, reports and data
collection are standardized for each research project.
"The Air Force has not accomplished any In-house research
with hallucinogenic or related drugs. The only direct involve-
ment was the participation of approximately 30 military
volunteers in the late 1950s with the United States Army
Biomedical Laboratory at the Edgewood Arsenal.
"There were several Air Force contractual efforts; one
by the Wright Air Development Division (WIADD), Air Force
SyGtems Command, with the New York University Research Center
and several others by the Air Force Office of Scientific
Research (AFOSR) (see Attachment 2). 
These were an outgrowth
of the Harvard Symposium on sensory deprivation held in 1958.
That symposium recommended very strongly that LSD might',
simulate sensory deprivation effects, a fact which would
negate the need for time consuming experiments with sensory
deprivation. 
The Office of the Air Force Surgeon General
advises that many organizations went to work with LSD and other
psychotomimetics; this particular research was conducted in
civilian medical research programs and medical centers.
"Conduct and supervision of the research were the respon-
sibility of the civilian institution where the contract was
performed. 
The final reports received by the Air Force on
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---.
"Conduct and supervision of the research were the respon-
sibility of the civilian institution where the contract was
performed. 
The final reports received by the Air Force on
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

86
the research studies were summations of the total effort and
do not include detailed data procedures or computations such
as the total number or descriptive information on human
subjects involved. Most of the data obtained by the Air Force
from this research was published in open scientific literature.
"Many of the controls now required for medical research
contract monitors were not in effect during the period and the
research was performed under the then accepted standards.
Thus, the AJOSR from the information now available cannot
ascertain whether or not volunteer statements were obtained
from the patients, their legal guardians, or the volunteers
themselves in each and every case. Copies of Air Force
regulations which mandata current safcguards in the wellbeing
of subjects in Air Force research projects are attached for
your information (Attachments 3 and 4)."
2. We are pleased to be of assistance and trust that you will
find the foregoing information helpful.
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

846
.
.o.
6 Aug 75 
I.Ag7
' " 
" 
"'" 
'''" 
"J 
' 
'~ 
?*. ':
DEPARTfHENT OF TIlE AIR FORCE
Washington, D. C...... 
G.
^f,/s 
_ ,..
1EVOiitANDUt; FOR:
.SUBJECT: 
EXPERIMENTATION
The attached Conaressional Inquiry is forwarded for
the action(s) indicated. Adherence to the provisions of
H1 10-20 is imferative, with particular attention being
given to meeting the suspense established above.
(x) Request a proposed reply .(double-spaced draft
in duplicate.)
( ) Provide a telephone response to Action O£ c-'r.
(DO) (DO×;OT) 
return this memorandum ani attachments.
MAJ Gregory
Action officer
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS:
57361
Extension
RAPVH /,'LN
Major General, 
USAF
Director
Legislative Liaison
.** 
.1*#

--- PAGE BREAK ---T) 
return this memorandum ani attachments.
MAJ Gregory
Action officer
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS:
57361
Extension
RAPVH /,'LN
Major General, 
USAF
Director
Legislative Liaison
.** 
.1*#

--- PAGE BREAK ---

647
te .M 'Alft) ftr. OlaQYIAt, 
I.,,,eI~e 
gOe~
84NarvSU orvract £UVOL0.w.
waein,.,o 
.
mssC 
f,,..,,u 
"t 
~A'5~~EAg(%.4~FW.1
"* ! 
* 
' 
r 
.ad'l
__ 
,, ,,3o,, , 
[)Ioiu of L . €. 
cIt'fttnlc 
'
Tia.#u 
Vec 
r.N. 
P,.O. i
83"N l' 
"e' 
.
i*n. 
W, t..?2CwS 
" 
.rr'; 
em
NoasC"" 
"
August 4, 1975 
O, 
AV 
ON o,.w,
IHr. 
John .-cLucns
Secretary of the Air "orce
The Pentagon
Waohington, 
D.C. 
20,-030
DeAr Mr. Secretary:
As a rtembe" of, the .ppropri.;tions Committee, 
I am conccrneot
aIxbut thu c::p-nditurc of any fe,:era) funds by ,ouc floart.ient t(, car
re-wcarch or (:>:;,,-riwn ttic:s 
Jnvolvinr 
human subject';. 
Consecu'-, tly,
I would 
,;p-ec.ate yuuar coo,, raV, icn i1 cleveloing: n linti1! of .- il
LJ~'t' r,: 
.11 
.'n.:c:, 
.- ;I.11", 
strojr.c 't; w:lcr'e hu.ntan ztl.)j cc -.*-were u::('t-.!
cut-fntj an 
n',zrt of tl.- ;)zL3OL 
fror: 11M.5 'to the 
r
Thi 
listing shouldd 
:-cludc the followip,.rj 
infor=a:ion for each proje
I. Description of zny iractJ,.cs oc proccdu.c:; (e.g., hahavior
w i.dification or -tain-tsrc>,I1cing tcchniquer), 
incLu'-ini ex... 
c 
;r.lcnta
testing 
of any ci;:.!C?.-oLraj)cutic or mind-alterinI ;gcnts involving
hu.an subjects,
2. 
Purposes of t'esc studios,
3. 
Dates of testing,
4. 
Responsible investigators,
5. 
runOing lcavcln,
6. 
!.Thether int-'a;,ural or extramural,
7. 
;;whbcr of human subjects involved, including a brOak.'wn by
the follow-in." catcgorle': 
children or minors, consciontious objecto;
military, or civilian prisoners, mental patients, and other military c
civilian,
3. 
Dcp:rt"cntnl regulati.ons and procedures designed to assure
irforr.:c 
con.',-t, protection of hurwan subjects, as %ioll as the ethic:
conduct of e.-wri,:cnts,
S. 
D.scri'),tion o' Ceprtr.ental rcviewvin-y authorities, thai-
i-iiiviC.l 
;inaali!icatenc, an: 
scope and exercise of their rovic'% or
enlorcau;cnt Power s,l as the ethic:
conduct of e.-wri,:cnts,
S. 
D.scri'),tion o' Ceprtr.ental rcviewvin-y authorities, thai-
i-iiiviC.l 
;inaali!icatenc, an: 
scope and exercise of their rovic'% or
enlorcau;cnt Power s,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

848
10. 
Cw.a'lcs of all inforr w connvsit procdurac aall 
forms uzcd
during tAc conduct of 
cI. 
c, 
:rivcntz.
I %:oul14 *.) tratcful if 
you cotild forward -this information at
tho earliest -os s)jle date. 
I .n cdrtain that, in liqltt of recent
revelations co:.ccrnin. :i ii .,r;.- un' 
o::ror Mmfntc involving itu;tan
subjccts, you are at; aix.:.ov.3 an I am to develop i.nprovedsafccjurds.
Thank you for your 
n siutance in this r.natter.
Since roly yours,
"DWARD ;. 
ROYPIAL
I.¢embor o! Congress
J.:!R/.r,n

--- PAGE BREAK ---

COMMgA= SU4."RY
"iNiSTITUTIOh1
..W E S 
CO;..",CT ,: 
.. 
COST v.
-zylor University #'%d1ca1
Center
a SS-PR 57
-
. ra S7-PR 58
APR 53-APR 59
APR 59-APR 60
APR GO-APR 61
AF 13 (603) 79
AF 18 (603) 79
AF 18 (603) 79
AF 18 (603) 79
AF IS (603) 79
$ 55,200.00
74,431.00
60,000.00
60,000.00
40,000.00
TITLE: 
"Investi ation of the Effects and
.un:in State of ConsciOusne.ss"
Vode of Action of the 'Psycho-cl'amIcalsi.°n'.
T: 
Thv effects of psycliotom.iatic drugs on states of consciousr, ss, for
,..1vidual par om:iice and group activity. Identification of psycho-
to'.,tic 
drj3 poisoning on iasdv-d'.,ls and vreups with related activity
Leir9 
intain;d.. Perceptual disortations ill be studied and cans of
ounterill 
b explored.
I N". ST ! t"\TO4
I'.9 
&
m 61 Q
""' ILITARY 
I:."..A

--- PAGE BREAK ---s and vreups with related activity
Leir9 
intain;d.. Perceptual disortations ill be studied and cans of
ounterill 
b explored.
I N". ST ! t"\TO4
I'.9 
&
m 61 Q
""' ILITARY 
I:."..A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CO:;TiL-.CT SU:."&-*!A,
i 
.-'ST I.TO R N-0
I;ST!TUTIO:1
Hcuston State Psychiatric
Institute (D.y'sor
University, College of -
I. dicire) 
•
OM.{ 
IES ..
JUL 64-JUL 65
JUL 65-JUL C=
JUL 66-JUL 67
JUL 67-JUL 68
Cc:ITPACT IMU 3ER
AF-AFOSR 727-65
Ar-. rO..SR 951-65
AF-AFOS. 931-66
AF-AFOSR 951-67
COST..
$ 53,303.00
65736.00
8S,327.00
63,412.63
TITLE: 
uPsychohysiological Correlate6s of Hu.an Infornation Processing*:
ISILITARY I.sPACT:
,.• 
e. , 
..
The results of the research will luva direct potential applic3tlon
to problems of interrogatlon. 
The firror plethys o-gram and EEG
variables may approciably increase discrimination over that obtainable
t:ith tin variables currently used.. If gerrerally applicable classes
can be define, these may be employed In programing an online autmatic"
analysis of data from interrooation, •

--- PAGE BREAK ---

0
0
-S
C 
"S
INVEST I
ki1edoo S.
~r%Tn).r? C11%'A'CDV
M R 
.
.VM 
DATESO, 
IT.CT 
I'M
MUM 
Z 
I. 
.
...
UPJ'A.ZI, 
University of gissouri 
"lUL. 69-4:Y 70" 
AF-A. OSR 69-i
BER
loll
.
". 
.
.. 
.. 
.:.. ........ 
.A 
704t' Y 71 
AF-AFQS. 69-182 ,,
S 
.
d 
.
• 
..... 
.
.
.
S So . ....... 
.
.
.
.
..
°° 
*
... 
...... 
........ 
.--. 
:... 
. .... 
....... 
.... 
.. 
.... 
.
.
HILITARY IRI 
?ACT: 
One of the very scricus problems In the Air Force is th. ability of
individuls to pcrfor.i under stress of various sorts an degrees and
n co-yetent and trust.:orthy. The results when applied ;ould be
useful in hu an reliability testing programs In the Air Force and
could be significant as a way to enhance learning and o-wory.
COST
-$ 21." 
,...

--- PAGE BREAK ---The results when applied ;ould be
useful in hu an reliability testing programs In the Air Force and
could be significant as a way to enhance learning and o-wory.
COST
-$ 21." 
,...

--- PAGE BREAK ---

r
i *
I'ES"TATOa
At.odco S. 
.ARRZZ1.
University of ln
COiT .T 
SUz 
.RY 
.: .
... 
.
, 
-
,
DATES 
.
OTAT1U-~R 
COST 
~
• 
• 
- ., ' 
.
-": 
-
.: .
.. 
*.
"1f 
O 
4OTA 
C 
It. 
3 
.
-.
~st 
OC 
6,,"+,T 
65' 
AF0 
SR.:'PC 764,-65 
' 
56------.00T 
' 
'"
TITLE-- : 
I 
ail 
ca 
Chne 
n.eri
}in. 
.
.
.
.
.
.
... 
.
.
... 
.
.
.
.
, 
.
..... 
.
...... 
... 
".., 
.
+
.-.
" 
.,. 
* 
.
o+ 
.
' 
" 
.. 
.
.
.-. 
.. 
.- 
.
,. 
.
.
.
.
.
... 
.
.... 
.... .
.
.
.
.-..- 
..
;.. 
.
.
.
.+;-., 
~.. 
.
+ .. 
.
.
.
....-. 
-
.
.
"TITLE: 
c'Chical Chan.ces in Lezirning"
SEP 66-SEP 67 
AF-AFOSR 764-67 
27,535.00
SEP 68-SEP 69 
AF-AFOSR 1334-67; 
27,440.00 "
.. ... .. :- +- -...,: +.. .. ;.:.-- ! .' _.. 
. . .. . .
. . .. .,-
..
"., 
.. 
.
.
.
.
.
• 
.
.
.
:
MILITARY If:?ACT: This is a study- of'srccific chemical change. which have been found
-
by so,& Investigators to occur during learning, 
lWe.i patterns of
learning are laid down and stored in V e brain is imcportant to
studies of new classes of co .puers,.
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---n found
-
by so,& Investigators to occur during learning, 
lWe.i patterns of
learning are laid down and stored in V e brain is imcportant to
studies of new classes of co .puers,.
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

t t
?A
.i:VESTGATOR
Sanford I. C036E21a EM
A1 brt J. SILVERt1,'4
lt; 
"*
.1.*J!.
r"
CO14RiACT SU-ZARY:-'*
'ST TUT 103
Oul: University r~edical
Center
DATES
COiP~T fJ
OCT 57-OCT 58 .
AF 49 (638
• " 
&'' 
-:* 
"" 
s.. 
" .
•
-%. 
.
.
.-. ' 
.
I ka.t. 
:COST..,
~354 
3_20.630,00'
APR 59-I.PR 61 
AF 49 (633) 354". 
4nO49.00.
APR 61-1AR 62 
AF 49 (63,) 354 
.
40,049.C-z.
AR 62-OCT 62 
AF 49 (633) 334 
000.00
TITLE: 
'Psyc'o.ohysological tUechanism.s of Stress Rc-spor.sir Ity'
I
1) 
v2awlepingj the ability of Idantifying characteristics of huNan
teingt ;liich are rst related to tl fu-cticns that are expected
to b% perford In wricus situations.
2) 
a'elopinq the ability to predict the raspoisos various individuals
Wculd cE!: '. in certain situations at certain t1r.:s u.hen as,,ed to
F :rer~ invzrious cairex.-.nts.
3) Clcrification cf th '-21chiznisris u:Viary, 
t~o r~spo:'scs; the
i::i'iicti-ca * 
, f.ct.;r-s cwausi:n' ta r.s. 
at ci:y
par%,ici' 
t.: CcJid i::s;)ly ezuia, 
cc 
o:nt' to e-'o 
: 
.
ciC 
fic
iMznrls to alter or i-::ify tig-z responses in any desired f;s'idon.
MILITARYY I.:A.CT :.
.. . -B

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"' 
*: .. .
... 
.
., 
, 
..
.I VEST I C-k1O,,"" 
''
Ro'bert R. MfJLT, PhD
&
Leo C-LO3ERGER, PhD
CO;rfRACT SIUMV*RY
T!STITUTIOI.,
CATES
* 
t~E% P%~
Research Center f6r
,.-,l lalth, 
Y
Univer'sity/.
TITLE: 
mResearch on the Effects of Isolation on Cognito
p 
p
CO' 
,ACT 
E' R
9 
AF 33 (616) 6103
ye Furic61 ortinig
MILITAY IVJPACT: 
Infor..tion on hu.amn functions during long'perlods of isolation,,.
• .. 
.
* 
as In prolonged rann.d space ventures.
i
k,,, 
& Q="Uk, 
0
rd

--- PAGE BREAK ---03
ye Furic61 ortinig
MILITAY IVJPACT: 
Infor..tion on hu.amn functions during long'perlods of isolation,,.
• .. 
.
* 
as In prolonged rann.d space ventures.
i
k,,, 
& Q="Uk, 
0
rd

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CURRENT CLI'lCL INWESTIG. Ic': PROoRAws INVOLVING
UUH1A2N 
TEST SU:.JECTS
USA? YGDICAL CENTER KEESLER
PTOCOL NUMBER
5310
52
TITLE OF PROTOCOL
Double Blind Study of Clotrimazole as Coupared to
Nystatin for the Treatment of Vaginal Candidiasis
Effect of Disodium Etidronate on a Fetale Patient with
Calcinosis as Part of the CRST Syndrome
MB-CPK Specificity in Dianosis of Acute Ph'cardial
Infarction
Study of the Pathops~iolo 
of Adverse Reaction
Folloving the Intravenous Administration of Ra4iogaphic
Contrast Media
AEC By-Product Material License 023-01002-02
Plasma Renin Activity and Plasma Aldosterone Concentration
in Essential Hypertension
Double-Blind Study of Clotrimazole vs Haloprogin in
Deruatophytosis and Clotrimazole/vs Nfystatin in Candidiasis
542
580
633
E
I
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---dosterone Concentration
in Essential Hypertension
Double-Blind Study of Clotrimazole vs Haloprogin in
Deruatophytosis and Clotrimazole/vs Nfystatin in Candidiasis
542
580
633
E
I
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I,
CURRZ:T CLINICAL INVESTIGATION GRAMS r 
LVI,
HUMAN TEST SUBJES
DAVID GRANT USAF MEDICAL
PrOCOL mrom 
TITLE OF PROTOCOL
482 
A Coaqrison of Tvo Anti Efetics in Oncology Patients
Treated vith CCVU
.86 
fron-invasive Assessment of Regional Left Ventricular
Performance in Coronary Artery Disease
490 
Evaluation of Rubidium 81 As An Agent in Spleen Scamlag
Red-Cell Uptake, and Voeardial Scanning
2.99 
" 
u-Invasive Assessment of Coronary Artery Disease:
Wocadia1l Iaigig vith Itubdli 
81 and the Scittlllatioa
Camera
500 
The Effects of Perhexillne Ialeate Upon Regional Nscazdial
Perfusion and the Extent of Transient Myocardial Iscbemia
as Assessed by Potassium-i.3 Mocardial Pertuslu Imaging
533 
!enstrual Extraction Protocol
552 
Effect of Administration of Coenzyme Q on Periodontal
Disease
553 
Evaluation of Woven Ceramic Fabric as an Allograft in
Correction of Periodontal Osseous Defects
551 
Indiww-l. for Clsternograp y
55 
Tuor Localization Using Gallium 67
622 
Participation of David Grant Medical Center in the
northern California Cancer Program (iCC)
'i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(
.cuRRDI 
.CLminCAL IVESTIGATIOw POGRA.S ImNVLV t
IIAN TEST SUBJECTS
DAVID 
OWrA 
MEDICAL C
L NUM 
TITLE OF PTOCL
6a2. 
The Use of Corynebacterium Parvum, Innuotber&W in
Stage. I ad II Carcinowa of the LwAg
66 
Imnotherapy Utilizing Autocenous Laukumic Cells in
Patients with Chronic 
relocenous Leukemia'
637 
Morphologic Evaluation of Patients with The Syndrcm
of Angina Pectoris and Normal Coronar 
.gi 
grVspb
Utilizi 
End oocardial liops
-
Topical Li6ocain. in Pre-awscopic Nsdlcation

--- PAGE BREAK ---Morphologic Evaluation of Patients with The Syndrcm
of Angina Pectoris and Normal Coronar 
.gi 
grVspb
Utilizi 
End oocardial liops
-
Topical Li6ocain. in Pre-awscopic Nsdlcation

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CURRWT CLINICAL INVWSTILICU PROGRMS INYVIN&
HUMAN TEST SUBJECT
WILFOR 
HALL USAF MEDICAL CUMU
37
279
326
.V1 (phase II)
#*6
4
459
'477
523
526
539
TITLE OF PWWSAL
"Effectiveness of Various Cancer Chemotherapeutic Agentsw
"Clinical Study of Renal Allograft Patients"
"Study of the Immunopathogenesis of Hn 
GloMruophritis in Active Day
and Dependent air Force Population
"The Radiolmoasa 
of Serum Human Follicle-Stimulating ffornme (M58) 
and
lteinising Hormne (LB) t SOO File No. 381-
RA Study of the Characteristicsof Patients at in Air Force Child Oldan.ce Clinic"
"The Pathogenesis of Idiopathic fparcalciuriaw
"Vitreous Carbon Tooth Root Implant"
"A Slide-PresentedComputer-Scored Projective Test: 
Two Eequivalmnt
Group Fors of the Holtzma 
Inkblot Technique (HIT)"
"Evaluation of Outpatient Children with Acute Febrile Illnesses:
Correlation of Clinical Findings with the Nitroblue Tetrasolim
Test and Blood Cultures"
"Ultrasonic Detection of Air REbolizationO
"Ib-roxyethyl Starch Compared to .Corticosteroids in Normal Donors on
the Continuous Flow Cell Contrifuge"
"A Phase III Comparison of Parenteral Foulations of Haldol (haloperidol),
Prochloropsrasines and Placebo for te 
Therapeutic Control of Postoperative
Nausea and Vomiting"

--- PAGE BREAK ---ntrifuge"
"A Phase III Comparison of Parenteral Foulations of Haldol (haloperidol),
Prochloropsrasines and Placebo for te 
Therapeutic Control of Postoperative
Nausea and Vomiting"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CWRDWT CLINICAL IN:YTI LON PROGRAM 
I3WLVINM
HW 
IZNST SURBECS
VILP0JD HALL W.10 HDICAL c,
PROPSAL
547
560
/
56k,
56 
"
582
600
601
602
606
611
620
61 
"
617
TITE OF P)P-AM
;Efficacy Study of Ticrcillin (ML 2288) In Septicemia, 3in and LJwr
Respiratory Tract nf.ctlons Dj to Selected Or= Negative Organsms"
"Combination Imrnotherapy and 41=a thwraW in Localised Osteogenio Sarcom-"
"The Us of Povidone-Iod' 
in %be Prop12&laxis of Wound Infection"
"The Effect of Ventila:try Pattern on Intrspleual Pressure and Cardiac Oatit"
*Ninoxidil as an Antibhypetensve in Patients Refractr7 to Available Nediattopse.
"The Significance of Antibody Coated kctw1wU 
in Infants ad Cildrea
"The Value of Hean Cborionic Qoadotropin in Weight Hsdoctiom
"Detection of Anti-MIA Antibodies btr the Farr Technique of Amonimi
Sulfate Precipitatione
"Clinical Evaluation bf Vytol Dintal Anterior Restwative Naterial"
"Relation between Dose Effectiveness and Levels of Gentamicin in Blood
"Evaluation of Hnmerbaric Oxygen Treatment of Patients Following
Anterior axillary Osteotomes*
"Transfer Factor Treatment of Coccidioidocosis"
the Intravenous Use of. Prostaglandin 
2
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---uation of Hnmerbaric Oxygen Treatment of Patients Following
Anterior axillary Osteotomes*
"Transfer Factor Treatment of Coccidioidocosis"
the Intravenous Use of. Prostaglandin 
2
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

r
'+
CURRENT QlMCAL IO 
PROGRAMSII 
I 
.VzDI
XAL 
m or OEM~A
69 
*An Investigation of Chest Physical Therapy Rmg. 
(ctrnal 
lrcuasion)
in Coamrt with Intewittent Positive P ssure kSath ng (I?) 
tn
Plmoairy Cytopatoob 
with special reference to etectioa of Pri~psr l
or Early &ncbogmdc 
i 
"
636 
Oms b y- 
Its ftl. in haalcitsat Rand anam
639. 
-Cob.ination lbare 
With 5-rU*V12it 
CiL - mthy-a 
Intensive
Radiotherapy with or witbt astolactoe for Losaliaed Admacooaola
of the btocrine Hacrese'
613 
'h 
lfthets an latritios of Intraejml Esmutal Diet 
La Patients with
Colna Uesectioes 
A respective., bope 
eam vith Staaftf
6*6 
Ca=sim of 3lam~ ad framswbdal Aepirate In Fetleate with Ft~wxa

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A! '
= 
W CLINICAL IMnSTId 
-OR PRJ 
I 
MLvI
MA TWT SUw-TS
TITLE OF UMTOML
Dental Survey of First Term Volunteer
Airmen in Training at an Air Training
Connand Base
Comprehensive Survey of Steroid
Metabolism in Patients with Previous
Myocardial Infarction
Cromolyn Sodium" in the Treatment of
Refractory Perennial Rhinitis
Use of Tricalcium Phosphate in
Various Dental Procdure
Follow-up of Patients Receiving
Clindamycin
A Phase I Clinical Evaluation of the
Combination of Spironolactone and
Hydrochlo;othiaxide in Hyp.rten$ive
Aviators
USAF Clinic Lowry
Lowry APB Colorado
Malcolm Grow USAF
ned Cen, Andrews AFR
Malcolm Grow VSA?
Med Cen Andrew A"
Malcolm Grow qAW
Ned Cen, Andrm Al
Malcolm Grow USAF
Hed Cen, Andrews AIR
WSA 
school of Aerospace
Medicine, Brooks AFR TX
541
461
618
574
613
642
I
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

663
IV. Rsarch Plans Submitted to Army Investigational Drug
Research Board by Biomedical Laboratory, Edgewood Arsenal,
Md.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

how

--- PAGE BREAK ---REAK ---

/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

663
IV. Rsarch Plans Submitted to Army Investigational Drug
Research Board by Biomedical Laboratory, Edgewood Arsenal,
Md.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

how

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6-4
SMlr, 
I 
tUIUOU Of 14016 
~ 
)tedeeal Yeskr
V, 
0 
O0@ Wealotorn, DC 
20316
IUPAt 
Cowaseder, IUgsdo 
ro 
Aberdees froviat Oreqad IN 2103.0
10S 
0Wrester, t1oxod*eal Laboratory, tjrpawed Arsenl Abrdoee Provi g
CM0n19 .M UI1)
1. protool eartto4, OthS ffets of kopelem la Ma 
Atropmae & ele
SubJeset." hao been rsvLeed Ia aeerdeo vith AR 40-7p 4 April, LOIS.
2. Above proocol Is betax returued vithst aettes etae. 
sudL 
e 
which
otiose buma subjects to peycheotropia or CMS active draus hae beew eu-paded
p"I a rvtn 
by "pertaet of the ArM of policies rordig hie type
of reser). 
As soon as poley has been clarified, you vil be notified.
3. After a rthrou0s revew, the Protool In its preat form to felt to be
'lasiplete. to the evest latr review to app 
rtae, the following ad-
ditlow 
Information will be reolaeds
o. %at Infomation is presently avalable from pruvtowe swdiearon
the cliical pharmacology of etgplae ad seopolmne it 
the proposed
doeaa: 
in rate eubJcts?
b. 
Itha information is presently available from the literatua oe the
effects of tese drugs I femle eubjecte?
t. 
Vhsat omaour" will be reake to Acertain that fealo eubjeots are
got prensat et tse tum of the" studies?
d. What 
fortioa i available oe the potential teratopaeekity of
Otroijine ad eCopoLaLnO at the dose proposed?
0. 
l1hat is the "Wibor FaIlity Test" aM What ealeocs of coittve
futcLoaiha does it wmerst
3. A aoseat egroueatt for this study should alo be submittoe 
The
a0reteAr sold be u ss 
a format sm0laT to the eMM La KACLosurs 3.
Sp"eci4 atteettos should be directed to the sttement of rsks and dis-
esfdotme 
ubeb the ulbjOct my reaonably be expected to experleace is
these eperLanate. 
Tugs etetesmt Must be deAtilod but wittes i 
coamn
seosi1 
understood lespuago. If it is felt that se Safrnaeon should
2ubeb the ulbjOct my reaonably be expected to experleace is
these eperLanate. 
Tugs etetesmt Must be deAtilod but wittes i 
coamn
seosi1 
understood lespuago. If it is felt that se Safrnaeon should
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66
SG3 
(30 May, 7) 
Lotted38 
JULWS
I-JMmis UtLaa tlm of Fral bU.Ars 
l t 
e 
eeaSm 
l 
e 
diet Volsates
be mtt, ed from the sttees 
hVe... 
it night aWtest the espermrmtal
reim 
o this request mut b 
erefully Justified.
21.4p. 
F. S.
2~1A 1"1 
UmmS? 
KomUM 
.D.
vd 
.
1 1 & dupe ey 
0ooeL 4C
fteL 2 
0airum 
, army 
A 
nv etiptlWAL
Add 
I Iml 
Drug Review loord
S. a.. 
.
.
Wl1s 
Protocol ws reviewed and c usultation wae obtained via
discussion and FONWC0W. with COL Harry Holloway, NC,
Director of the Divieiom of Neuropyehiatryp WAIl, 00L
Robert letchum, NC, CIPT Kewmth Zych, MSC, Division of
-Somedial Stress, UWADC, and LTC Charles Dttor, MSC,
Toxicology Research Officeror, gnviromnal Quality
Directorate, USAWDC. 
The consensus of thea, consultations
cam be stated as follows 
(1) 
The quetiou of what effect
moderate and high dose 
of anticholinorgics have on femles
is a worthhLle question but not an Smediately urgent one;
(2) 
the project will probably be acceptable but the study
plan ad literature review leaves too much to the imagination.
RAquest is being mds for information which is 
integral to
the proper review of this protocol. 
Consent formust also
be swhmitted.
COWMCURINCI 
See Concurrence Stamp.
ACTION OFFICE~s 
MAJ 
c AEL V. JODSTO, 
K.
m/38065
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---ich is 
integral to
the proper review of this protocol. 
Consent formust also
be swhmitted.
COWMCURINCI 
See Concurrence Stamp.
ACTION OFFICE~s 
MAJ 
c AEL V. JODSTO, 
K.
m/38065
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

667
OEPARTENT Of THC ARMY
IAsDOW1*uigs. 
[O6WOO 
AtfNAgL
AIE[WO 
PINO 
OhO0N0. MAITLAD 8SM
SAREA-BL
30 May 197S
SUBJECT: Utilization of Fe,,,le Enlisted Personnel as Medical Volunteers
HQDA (SGRO-HR)0
WASH DC 20314
1. Reference is made to letter SGRD-HR, 24
(ncl 
1).
2. In accordance with para 2, enclosure 1.
volving subject personnel is enclosed (incl
,isapproval.
FOR THE COMMANDER:
2 Incl
as
Dec 74, subject as above
a research protocol in-
2) for your approval/
C. MCCLURE, M.D.
Colonel, MC
Director, Biomedical Laboratory
70- 
90
10-06 0 - U6 - 48

--- PAGE BREAK ---

68
VMPARTN'I 
." COf TIJ-1-0 AMAY
WA%4?If.." * 
.l.C. 
*.14
JWPV To
ilMMO~l ef 
t
GRD-llM
SUDCT: Utiltiation of Feale, Enlisted ?cnsionnal as HIdicl Voluiteers
US Army ',LattrLol Co.
5001 iso,,t.'.r Aveli
Algw.oe 'e, 
VA 
2233:
.:and: 
,
n!, 
-!"-21010
.-Cow.ander
Edgewood-Aree'r al
.Aberdeoor-PrevLng, Groi
TO t 
Droctor 
-
Bic'--dical Laboratory
Edgevood Arsenal
Aberdeen 'roving Ground, 
D 21010
1. Reference letter, SW A-DL, 18 Septoab.r 1974., subject as above.
2. 
Female enlisted personnel iay participate ua subjcct.o in Biormedical
Laboratory research projects which have been apuovod :)y 
Ihe Surgeon
General. 
Dris. compound, biolnaLcal products orra 
iois*topes ray
not be administered to frirczle peraonel as part of rcsa.rch projects
unless their ad-inistraLion to fertales ha3 been specificall,.ppoved
Jy the Artuy Investipaticnal DruP Revcv Bord.
rOR Titz SUGMI O GE[,aAL:
Ori~tadiw1 Ccraral, MC.
Assistant Surgeon General
for Roweareb cd Development
./
4 DEC W4

--- PAGE BREAK ---pecificall,.ppoved
Jy the Artuy Investipaticnal DruP Revcv Bord.
rOR Titz SUGMI O GE[,aAL:
Ori~tadiw1 Ccraral, MC.
Assistant Surgeon General
for Roweareb cd Development
./
4 DEC W4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

669
VOW~h"MM. AMIELrTNT I
0Hilitary Personel)
I 
_ 
_ 
_ 
_ 
_ 
_, 
havi, 
attained Py
e*ighteonth (18h) tIrtiday, .nd othorwisu having Cut) capacity to
consent, do hereby volunteer to participate Ln 
n Invcstigational
study entitled:
under tio direction c-f 
, 
_•_•
The impicationu of v.y voluntary participatitot; At. nature, duration
and purpoza; the iLwO.ods and roans by which it is Lo to conducted; and
the inCoivenLar.ocs &rtcI hazards which tray reasonably be expected hRve
baonxeplaned to wao by 
.... , and are
sot forth on the reverse side of this Arcaeint, vwich I have Initialed.
I have ben given an opportunity to at, questions conicarning this
investiLationcl study, and ,ony such questions have been answorud to my
ftll aqd complete satisfaction.
I understand that I vay at Any OmP durf ithe cour 
nf 0414 e-. 
.
ever# I nay bo req ,reod 
to usidargo certain further c.a- nations, 
if#
in the opinion of the 
ttcr, din physician, such examinations are
necoosary for rwy health or well being.
Signature 
Date
I yeas present luring the explanation referred to abovo, as well as the
Volunteer's opportunity for questions, and hereby vitnoss his signature.
Witness, Signature-. 
Date

--- PAGE BREAK ---re 
Date
I yeas present luring the explanation referred to abovo, as well as the
Volunteer's opportunity for questions, and hereby vitnoss his signature.
Witness, Signature-. 
Date

--- PAGE BREAK ---

670
On this side of the Volunteer Agreetent, the principal ivae.Lator
should set forth full details concerning the invotigatLonal study,
insofar s such would affect or influence the tentative subject in
any way. 
This explanation should be vorded in non-technical language
so that it can be Licjll% understood by a subject who has no partic-
ular famLltirity with rdical terninology. 
It is suggested that
uhen technical terms ae necessary, chey should be dofiad in the
space below the explanation. The subject should place his initials
at the end of the last line of explanation.
A proper explanation should# at a ninimmo, provide the answers to the
following questions"
I. 
Vhat will be admiaistored or dote to the subject?
.,.2; 
liow long will tho subject's participation lest?
3. To what tosts or examinations will the subject be required to
submit?
.
Mhy is the LvseticotLan being conducted?
5. 
Hasu, thlti pnctLculat -tvy been dor.e previously, And, if no,
W*:a..u 
gouua
6. 
that inuonvt.leinces or dLz.comforts is the subject likely to
ex.er cnoca?
7. 
tl1.t risks or harords can be reo.o:nably ant:eat~d?
S. Mat steps 
Ll. bo talen to prevent or aini.izo those ris'xs
or hatacd3?
9. 
Miat- bcntr., if any, ma.y the subject cxpa.L reom participation
iin this .tdr
10. 
Miit appro;- t.'c.e alternative procudures, it any, -night be more
advantLaeouc to th'iv ru;Jet7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---iat- bcntr., if any, ma.y the subject cxpa.L reom participation
iin this .tdr
10. 
Miit appro;- t.'c.e alternative procudures, it any, -night be more
advantLaeouc to th'iv ru;Jet7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

671
RESFANCH IAIXWRATOWItS
US AIM ZGVAO) 
AURAL
Xdgawnod Arsenal, larylwM 
21010
1. 
UI.IXCR PzMX:
Title -
The
Xuabor -
Date -
Effects of Scopolamine and Atropine in Female Subjects
2. 
AUMTITY:
s. 
PHOJWr: 
umber- 
1W762718AU)21-
Title -
Medical Effects of Clemical Agents
b. TASK: 
Number -
-" 
Title-
03
Clinical Evaluation of Chemical Agents
0. 
WORK L.IT:
'3. 
PARTICIPATION A.D.,'O:t CCO.%I:;;.T1QX.
a. 
AJOR PRO 4t4*-;:
b. 
OR 
' ZTJON.8:
a. 
CcWPAC'tS:
d. 
K.TWED rF..CII
PLANS (XuL 
.rs):
4. 
IWELTIGATORIS: 
PrI,.vipat inv'estirator nd all other personnel.
Frederick R. Sidell, M.D.
Nurse (1) 
--
Medical Corpsoin (1)
Gradc
GS14
GS09
L231._
20
100
100
wAttsch, *:trA sher's It addltiowI' spaco reoqtirc4 for sny.1tem. 
... 
3 
I75
S.U4-R Foa: 36 (Pogo I of 
" par'?)
17 %or 68

--- PAGE BREAK ---Medical Corpsoin (1)
Gradc
GS14
GS09
L231._
20
100
100
wAttsch, *:trA sher's It addltiowI' spaco reoqtirc4 for sny.1tem. 
... 
3 
I75
S.U4-R Foa: 36 (Pogo I of 
" par'?)
17 %or 68

--- PAGE BREAK ---

672
RZ5MUM FLA.- $.__________
a. "-UTlrrZlCATZOI 
Source ot requirement and/or statesent of p 1 ble.
Studies previously repeated from this Laboratory have shown the effects of moderate to high
doses of scopolamine and atropine In male subjects. Female subjects hav, not been studied,
using these compounds. Since these drugs are pharmacologically similar to or identical to standard
treatment compounds and agents, It Is desirable to learn whether women repct differently,
qualitatlively or quantitatively, when they receive these compounds.
6. 
OIJMCTVZ: 
%that is expected to be accoaplishod under this plan.
Information about the effects of these compounds on female subjects. These dta will be
compared to that previously obtained from male subjects.
7. 
torWTED TI 
AI 
?JJVZP.JJ:
6-12 months.
8. 
APPROACH!:
a. US Army enlisted women who volunteer for the study after it has been fully explained to
them wil be the subjects.
b. The protocol will in general be that outlined In SOP #1 (Inclosed. This Is as follows:
(1) Subjects will report to the ward at 2000 hours the evening before the study. At
this .ine 3 batteries will be done (a battery is a heart rate cunt, a blooJ pressure measurement,
measurement of pupil size, and a Number Facility Test).
(2) They will have a light breakfast at least an hour before drug is administered.
(3) They will have 3 batteries in the hour before drug; one will include axillary
temperature.
(4) The drug will be given intramuscularly by a physician.
(5) A battery will be given every 30 minutes for 6 hmrs after drug; then every hour for
4 more hours (the post-drug battery will also include thE Behavior Check List). Temperatures
will be taken every hour after drug.
(6) The subjects will be discharged by a physician not sooner than 24 hours post drug.
c. The starting doses will be 5 mcg/kg of scopolamine hydrobromide (as the base) and
30 mcg/kg of atropine sulfate (as the base). Doses will be increased at 407. increments until
a dose is reached at which half tie subjects score less than 107" on the Number Facility Test.
Two to four subjects will be used per dose.
d. The drugs will be obtained conunercially: atropine sulfate, from Torigiap Laboratories,
Queens Village, NY; scopolamine hydrobromide from Elkitis-Sinn Corporation, Cherry Hill, NJ.
These drugs have been widely studied over decades and the effects are well documented (ref.:
Goodman and Gilman: The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics).
e. Data will be recorded as outlined in SOP #3 (inclcsed).
SWLA-R Form 36 (Pace 2 of 3 pages)
17 lY'Au 06cts are well documented (ref.:
Goodman and Gilman: The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics).
e. Data will be recorded as outlined in SOP #3 (inclcsed).
SWLA-R Form 36 (Pace 2 of 3 pages)
17 lY'Au 06

--- PAGE BREAK ---

673
RUEAWVIH PIA 
S.l 
___._ 
_
s. 
Contracts
researchh
Service
b. 
Transfer to other agencies or laboratories.
a. 
Travel.
10. 
SUPPORT:
a, 
FACILITIES RQUIRED: 
Other than those available in Branch.
4
W. 
MY!?XEX'T ANT ;UPPLIZS X9D:
9stifmsted Cost.
c. 
AXIMZALM: 
Species. 
numbers, and when required.
AFY PRCAUtIO-xS:
It. 
APPOVA:/ fps 
tros signify approval
C (W
FREDER [CX A. SIDELL,"D.
Principal ,vestigator
FREERIC. R. SIOELL, M.D.
branch Chief (Acting)
of task plm r 
sybmitted.
VAN M. SIA, M.D.
Division 
€bivf
C. McCLURE, M.D.
Director, Biomedical Laboratory
V=FA-R Torr.- 38 (Page 3 of 5 ps;es)
1 I xr 
6
@

--- PAGE BREAK ---

674
RtSZARCH PLN h.__
13, 
MEDICAL VWUN'TrRS: 
Requirement$, with ddtes and duration.
100-150 volunteers; 10 per week.
14. 
RESPONSISBL 
PYSICIAt(: 
Xa* 
and telephone extension,
Frederick R. Sidell, M.D. 
671-3393
0t
1. 
AFETY RI UIRrJ4'rS: 
For safety of medical volunteers.
Phystological monitoring equipment and appropriate resuscitation equipment will be on hand.
Physostigmin, an effective antidote for both drugs, will be available.
10. 
APPR,\L 
A 
ptues signify approval of .tho Medical Board.
UKR.~i 
l~bE1.L, rvt, 
*... 
.... 
.,. 
.
Respo s1 
Physian
FB '' KR. Sfo=LL,h...0
Acting Chief,,lnical Research Branch
-" 
VANM. SIMM.D. 
.. 
.
Chi f, hiedical Research Division
C. McCLURE, M.D.
Director, Biomedical Lahoratory
VAUEA-R Form- 30 (Page 4 of 5 pages)
17 $IUr 66
S.
|t

--- PAGE BREAK ---al Research Branch
-" 
VANM. SIMM.D. 
.. 
.
Chi f, hiedical Research Division
C. McCLURE, M.D.
Director, Biomedical Lahoratory
VAUEA-R Form- 30 (Page 4 of 5 pages)
17 $IUr 66
S.
|t

--- PAGE BREAK ---

676 
SOP 1
Biomedical Laboratory
Medical Research Division
Third Revision,
PROTOCOL FOR MIIIMUM EFFECTIVE DOSE STUDIES IN MAN
I. 
Introduction
The object of this protocol is to outline the procedure for determiningthe minimal
dose at which the effects of an agent (drug, chemical, or compound) can be detected in
50Y, of the subjects studied (i.e., MEDs0). In general, this consists of testing
Increasing doses of an agent on small groups of subjects and recording individual responses
in an "all or nonce' manner. Thus, the percentage of subjects showing a positive response
to an agent (according to pro-set criteria) can be determined at each dose level, and the
dose (with confidence limits) at which 5OY. of the subjects respond can be calculated by
probit analysis.
Primary concern is given to the incapacitating effects of agents tested, but all
readily measurable physiological and psychological effects should be recorded and
analyzed;
II.- 
Methods 
-
.
.
.
.
.
A. 
Selection of sihijects: 
Subjects selected for testing should he free from
any slif 
:,.ical orla' )rtory abnoradliLy and slo'h! be from the volunteer pupu-
latlooi eesics nted A or 0 ifter psy chiatric and psychological examination. Where .he
primary effect is expected to be physical and not, mental C+ subjects may be used at low
.doses. 
.. 
.
.... 
.
. .. 
.
.. 
o- 
.
. .
" . .. . .-. 
' 
: -
B. 
Varia51es to be sttc!ied:
1. 
The performance test found most useful is the Number Facility subtest
of the Texas Battery. 
Determihal ion of the subject's orientation to time, place, and
person aw." preseii-.c of hallucinations or other mental disturbances should also be noted.
A description of behavior should be included when appropriate. 
-
2. linp l.-ant p!siolocical variables are the blood pressure recorded in
both llhe cupie ntd !.;licjht position, resting hlcrd rate, p:apil size, axillary tetapratre,
respiratory rate, amnd a symptom -eview as directed for each drug by the physician in charge.recorded in
both llhe cupie ntd !.;licjht position, resting hlcrd rate, p:apil size, axillary tetapratre,
respiratory rate, amnd a symptom -eview as directed for each drug by the physician in charge.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he cupie ntd !.;licjht position, resting hlcrd rate, p:apil size, axillary tetapratre,
respiratory rate, amnd a symptom -eview as directed for each drug by the physician in charge.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

876
soP #1
C. 
Determination of doses to be studied:
Doses are calculated In a geometrically Increasing series. A typical
schedule might utilize a starting dose of one microgram per kilogram. Subsequent
doses will be derived by increasing each previous dose by 40?. increments (e.g., 1.0,
1.4, 2.0, 2.7, 3.8, 5.3). When ti approximate MEDSO is approached, half-
increments (about 20) are used for closer approximation. -The half-increment can best
be detennined by taking the square root of the product of two adjacent doses (e.g.,
2.0 + 2.7: 2.0 x 2.7 = 5.4 
5.4 m 2.33).
D. 
Conduct of experiment:
1. Baseline measures must be obtained for each subject according to the
procedure described tinder Testing Procedures (paragraph E, below). 
..
2. Subjects should be assigned to the test area during the day or night
prior to testing in order to provide a period of familiarization.
3. Nothing by mouth (NPO) except water for a 1-hour period prior to adminis-
Iratlon of the agent. A light, low-fat breakfast (no eggs, butter, bacon, sausage, cream
orw vJo.le .milk) may be administered at least 1, hour prior to the start of the test.
4. Following administration of the agent by the ph-.sician, subjects will
be observed continuously by medical personnel (or at least 24 hours, and thereafter, as
long as specified by the respons;ofe physician. A quiet; secure area, at comfortable
temperature and humidity, will be provided during this period. 
.. 
., 
.I
5. Beginning at a designated time following injection of the agent, subjects
will individually receive a measurement battery (described below) at prescribed intervals
-' 
:for a length of time specified until complete recovery from the effects of the agent has
occurred. The physician will decide when a subject can be released from the test, or
whether follow-ip test measures at 48 hours (and/or 72 hours) are indicated.
6. If practical, subjects may converse, read, play cards, etc., when not
undergoing test measuremeits.--Coffco ai 
cigarettes are permitted in accordance with
normal regulations, except that smoking is prohibited for at teast 20 minutes prior to
the measuremnent of blood pressure and heart rate. Regular meals mnay be served during
the'lest at the discretion of the supervising physician.
E. 
Testing procedure:
1. Baseline measurements:
a. Perfonnance tests: The NF and other standard performance tests will
be baselined according to SOP &A (Procedure for Using the Data Sheet). Other tests may
be baselined according to instructions specified by the investigator.F and other standard performance tests will
be baselined according to SOP &A (Procedure for Using the Data Sheet). Other tests may
be baselined according to instructions specified by the investigator.

--- PAGE BREAK ---performance tests will
be baselined according to SOP &A (Procedure for Using the Data Sheet). Other tests may
be baselined according to instructions specified by the investigator.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

677
SOP #1
b. Physiological measurements: Supine head rate, blood pressure,
(supine and erect), and respiratory rate will be recorded wder resting conditions on three
occasions the night before the test and again on three occasions Io the morning of the test.
If desired, this may be Integrated with the numerical facility baseline testing, by alternat-
ing NF and vital sign measurements. 
Subjects rmust be lying supine for at least two full
minutes prior to beginning the measurement of the vital signs. A minimum of three pupil
size and axillary temperature mtast.,ements should be included among the ten sets of
vital signs. 
The following regimej may be used for bosh baseline and experimental
determinations:
(1) Place axillary thermometer under otlht arm.
(2) Check pupil size with card pupillmeter. With overhead light at
prescribed setting, have subject gaze at light willie estimate is made. 8e careful not to
obstruct light source.
(3) Count heart rate with subject lying completely flat except for
single pillow, with arms at sides. Count full 60 seconds, then continue holding wrist
and count respirations for 60 seconds.
(4) Measure blood pressure In left arm, when supine and after
standing.for one minute. 
.
.. 
.
.. 
.
-
(5) Remove axillary thermometer .nd mad.
2. Experimenti.l measuremei'.s:* After injestion'o(tie est ;'-en" at each of the 
,
times designated by the physician, the following procedures will be carried out: 
-
a. General:. With the subject supine, in a private, room or quiet screened
area on the hospital ward, general questions by the nurse or tec*linician will be asked as
follows: 
". 
" 
" 
.
(1) How is the subject feeling?
(2) Can lie estimate what time It is, tell whether it is a.m. or p.m.,
and how long lie has been on test? If lie seems tincertain, checlk knowledge of day,
date, month, ycar, location, reason for being here, abilky to identify nurse, doctor',
other personnel.
(3) After being sure he knows lie has received an agent, ask what
effects he notices, if any. If he notes none, does he foel perfectly normal? Check
specifically for diffirulty concentrating, umasual dreams, visions or voices, dry mouth,
visual symptoms, muscular discomfort or weakness.f any. If he notes none, does he foel perfectly normal? Check
specifically for diffirulty concentrating, umasual dreams, visions or voices, dry mouth,
visual symptoms, muscular discomfort or weakness.

--- PAGE BREAK ---one, does he foel perfectly normal? Check
specifically for diffirulty concentrating, umasual dreams, visions or voices, dry mouth,
visual symptoms, muscular discomfort or weakness.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

678
SOP P1
(4) Inquire as to immediate needs or wishes of subject.
':Atend to these, If possible, or provide assurance as necessary.
b. Physiological measurements: Done as described under baseline
measurements.
c. Performance measures: In a quiet environment with subject sitting
on edge of bed and test material on clipboard, administer the Number Facility test. Score
test as soon as possible and tell subject how much he earned (when applicable).
d. At least one comprehensive description of subject's appearance
and behavior should be entered in the chart by the pltiician, nurse or technician during
each time period. Additional observations, including verbatim quotation of subject's
remarks are highlyvaluable and should be made whenever possible. The results of any
special examinations should be recorded. Ideally, the clinical record should be sufficiently
detailed to permit'the reader to reconstruct the subject's activities and the course of any
mental or physical disturbances from the time the agent is administered to the time at which
the subject is released from the test.
ill. 
Evaluation, Tabulation and Reporting of Results
•. As.each new drug is studied, it will be necessary to plot the drug response versus
time for each variable studied at each dose. This will determine tile period of maximum
effect of the !rug and attention can be focused on this period during future tests with the
same agcnt or class of agents. Tie plots should usually be in terms of percentage
'decrease (or ir:rease) of the vat;.bl,., from the baseline value at each experimental time
in hours.
Since the results are calculated in terms of "all or none" responses, arbitrary
criteria have been selocied (based on previous experience) as to what level of response
should be considered as positive. These criteria are listed below and may be subject to'
change:
1. For NF's, the average of the three lowest scores (taken from the range
of peak activity) must be below 757.-..
2. For pupil size, an increase of 50.', above baseline for two consecutive
readings..
3. For heart rate, a change of 30'. from baseline.
4. For blood pressure, a difference of 15 mm H9 systolic or 10 nn Hg
diastolic between lying and standing BP's; a change of 30 nm H9 systolic or 20 mm
diastolic from baseline in either lying or standing position, or a change from baseline
of 10 mm Hg in the mean BP in either position.n lying and standing BP's; a change of 30 nm H9 systolic or 20 mm
diastolic from baseline in either lying or standing position, or a change from baseline
of 10 mm Hg in the mean BP in either position.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

679
SOP *,
5. 
For temperature, an increase of 1.50 or more (axillary).
-
6. Other parameters, 1.0., presence of extrapyramidal signs, may be
used when indicated.
t"or each varia5le under consideration, the positive response fractions and
percentages are tabulated for each dose tested as in the following table:
Agent Q - NF Test
Dose 
No. of positive response fractions/
No. of subjects tested
1.0 
1/4 
25
1.4 
2/5 
40
2.0 
4/5 
80
2 ;.7 
5/6 
83
The MED 50 and the confidence limits are determined by probit analysis (method of
Bliss preferred). This procedure will be done by computer.
IV 
Follow Up Examination
Psychological or physical examinations are to be performed as indicate.d.at
Intervals folhowin.j tle test and all results entered in the clinical chart.
Laboratory %work will be done as outlincd in SOP .,2.
Other examii.iations, clinical or laboratory, are to be done as indicated.

--- PAGE BREAK ---test and all results entered in the clinical chart.
Laboratory %work will be done as outlincd in SOP .,2.
Other examii.iations, clinical or laboratory, are to be done as indicated.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

680
SOP #3
Biomedical Laboratory
Medical Research Division
Third Revision
SDAA 
REPORTING
The purpose of this SOP Is to outline the method to be used for Identifying data from
clinical studies and in recording certain information. Regulations require that all
experimental data be recorded in a registered notebook. Because of the voluminous
amount of data generated during clinical testing, this is not practical. Therefore, the
following method will be used:
1. All dosage data and calculations (dose, concentrations of solution, volume,
etc.) will be recorded in a permanent type notebook and signed each day of use by the
Investigator. At the conclusion of each project the notebook will be placed in the
Division's datf file..
0
2. Each report resulting from these data shall contain the statement "The.data
reported herein were obtained from the clinical cases and charts listed below. A
4 notebook containing dosage calculation is on file In the Medical ReSearch Division.'!
This statement Is to be followed by the case numbers of the clinical charts, If the
subjects are identified in the report by inIrfals or other means, these identifying
symbols should appear with the case numbers.
3. 
The clinical daa will be recorded in the clinical charts In the usual way
and for data processing, pt:a;oses in a manner described in another SOP.

--- PAGE BREAK ---appear with the case numbers.
3. 
The clinical daa will be recorded in the clinical charts In the usual way
and for data processing, pt:a;oses in a manner described in another SOP.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

681
SOP #4
Biomedical Laboratory
e. 
Medical Research Division
Third Revision
OUTLINE FOR USE OF SERIAL MEASURES DATA SHEET
Administration of Initial Control Trials
A. 
Procedure
B. 
Entering tlh Data
Ii. 
Initial-Utilization of Subject for Drug Evaluation
A. 
*Administration of Evening and Morning Control Trials
1. Procedure
2. Entering the Data
B. 
Calculation of the Baseline
C. 
Enterng the Data During thi Agent Evaluaion"
Ill. 
Grapiing the Data

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion of Evening and Morning Control Trials
1. Procedure
2. Entering the Data
B. 
Calculation of the Baseline
C. 
Enterng the Data During thi Agent Evaluaion"
Ill. 
Grapiing the Data

--- PAGE BREAK ---

682
PROCEDURE FOR USING THE DATA SHEET
Serial Measures (NF-SC)
t. 
Administration of Initial Control Trials
A. 
Procedure
1. 
The subj( .ts are .:ivcn 20 control trials (1-20).
2. These triAls are given in groups of five (1-5; 6-10; 11-15; 16-20).
3. 
Each (jroup of live trials is considered a session which may be
conducted in a morning or afternoon.
4. Normally, the four sessions would be completed in a period of two days.
5. The time bctiee, the beginning of *ne trial and the beginning of the
next trial is ten mn ii.tes. 
"
6. 
To the extent tIIat it is possible, each subject should start with a
different fotn number.
B. 
Entering the Data
1. The raw scoics are ctlered on ts, forn1 in ordcr of trial nunibei in the
column designated "Rav Score."
2. 
A snall circle will be placed in tfe space provided which represents
the r.-., Store o5tailc,! for the ti:l.
3. 
The foiia nun-er which was used for tl;e trial will be placed in the
column esiga;ated 'FormI No."
4. 
The tlrc llit!',st sc(,res of these first tv.eiAy iia s will be placed
it1 the t.ice k siqn.:e "Hi 3, 1-20" iii the 
:'C-A called "A-66,scliic ."
5. 
Several colies of the form should be imade at this time which ialI be tiscd
for te caculation of tlK subject's baseline for ;Jditional drug evaluation
studies using this subject.
I1. 
Initial Utili-ation of a Subject for Drug Evalutiotion
A. Administration of Evening aid Morning Control Trials
1. 
Procecfire
a. 
The evening (9 p.m.) before the subject is to be used for a drug
evaluM.tionf he is 
;dministeiil t%:o ,rote co;'trol trials (21A-22A).
b. 
The w:,aii,, . (6:30 a.m.) before tl 
su!,jcct is to be used for a
drn. c aluation, lie is administereJ three :more control trials
(23A-24A-25A).

--- PAGE BREAK ---ote co;'trol trials (21A-22A).
b. 
The w:,aii,, . (6:30 a.m.) before tl 
su!,jcct is to be used for a
drn. c aluation, lie is administereJ three :more control trials
(23A-24A-25A).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

683 
soP i
2. Entering the Data
a. 
The evening control ra:.a scores and (om numbers ae entered
in the appropriate columns and ws for trials 21 and 22.
b. The morning control raw scores and form numbers are entered
in the appropriate columns and rows for trials 23, 24, and 25.
c. 
The two hi -hest of the three morning control scores are placed
In the spact designated "Hi 2, 23A-25" in the block called
"A-Baseline."
B. 
Calculation of the Baseline
The first time a subject is used for a dng evaluation, his baseline
(A-Baseline) is calculated in the following manner:
1. The information necessary for calculation should be In the block
designated "A-Baseline" and is used as follows:
a. Take the three highest scores obtained on tie first 20 control
trials (1-20).
b. Take the two highest scores obtained on the three control trials
given the c:iorning bWfore the drug is to be administered (23A,
24A, 25A).
c. 
Add these five scores.
d. Divide these five scores by 5.
2. 
The result of this calculation is the "A-Baseline" score.
C. 
Entering the Data Obtained During Agent Testing
1. 
The rai scores and form nz::ibers will be cltcrcd in the appropriate
columns in the large blocked section designated "AGENT TESTING."
2. A small circle representing the r.' score for each trial will be placed
in the space provided to the i eight of the raw score.
3. 
Each of the raw scores will then be divided by the baseline score
which Clill its1slt in a ;xcrcen age score to be entered in the colurmnI
desivnatee ". score."
10-0 
0 - 76- 44

--- PAGE BREAK ---. 
Each of the raw scores will then be divided by the baseline score
which Clill its1slt in a ;xcrcen age score to be entered in the colurmnI
desivnatee ". score."
10-0 
0 - 76- 44

--- PAGE BREAK ---

684
ISOP64
Il1. Graphing the Data 
I
A. Each raw score may be represented by a small circle placed appropriately
in the space provided to the right of the "Raw Score" column.
B. The circles can then be connected by a solid line.
C. Once the baseline is calculated, a dotted line can be drawn to represent
the subject's asymptote of performance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

686
0
I
0 +
.0
, 
,,.. 
.. 
........ 
-1 
f##
r" t 
• 
* 
, 
_ _-'=I
r'. .. ...
I
- ,. 
I' 
I 
- -.- 
-; --
3-
... .
-. 
--...... 
-.-
-
-*- 
----
':i
-..... .
.
. ,' - - .
_ , _
' '1,2
-6- 
** 
I 
I
-.. 
----.--
"
N.' 
,.,.._. 
_._ 
, 
I
-at-, 
_l_.,- 
,_ -- , -- 
_ 
-; - -
a ,,-,- : _._i 
__ 
__-- 
.
.
.
" -
I 
I 
7 
I 
! 
,.,. 
..,.. 
m
".--- 
-- 
-;--
* 
'.__ 
_ _______-,*--.-. 
.
.
-
.L . *1-_ I_ _ , _ _ 
,-- -- . - - --
_.
'll 
.
T Z
Alan M

--- PAGE BREAK ---; - -
a ,,-,- : _._i 
__ 
__-- 
.
.
.
" -
I 
I 
7 
I 
! 
,.,. 
..,.. 
m
".--- 
-- 
-;--
* 
'.__ 
_ _______-,*--.-. 
.
.
-
.L . *1-_ I_ _ , _ _ 
,-- -- . - - --
_.
'll 
.
T Z
Alan M

--- PAGE BREAK ---

680
CURRICULUM VITAE
FREDERICK R. SIDELL
EDUCATION:
EXPERIENCE:
AWARDS:
MEMBERS 1IPS:
PUBLICATIONS:
(internal)
BS (Chemistry), 1956, Marietta College, Marietta, Ohio
MD, 1960, New York University College of Medicine,
New York, New York
Rolating Internship 1960-1; Resident, Internal Medicine
1961-4: Cleveland Metropolitan G.n.ral Hospital,
Cleveland, Ohio
1964-66 - CPT, US Any Medical Corps, Edgewood Arsenal,
Maryland
1964-66, Chief, Clinical Investigation Section, Clinical
Research Branch, Medical Rearch Division, Biomedical
Laboratory, Edgewood Arsenal, Maryland
1966-60; 1974 - present, Actinq Chief, Clinical Research
Braach, he.ical Reser.rch Laboiatory, Edtewood Arsenal,
Abclee Proving Ground, Mayland
De.artnicijt of the Army Certificate of Aclievc.nent, Jily 1969
Amcicaii f..cdical Associ.lion
I!;irfnrd Comity Medicail Sociviy
Fellow of the Royal Society of Health
Member, American Society of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapetics
Member, 
AAAS
Sidell, F. R., Harper, n. G., and Bottiglierl, N.G. Effects on
Iumans of Low Concentrations of GB Vapor. CRDL TM 2-15,
April 1965. Secret Report.
Sidell, F. R., Groff, W. A., and Vocci, F. Effects of EA 3143
Adnministered Intravenously to Humans. 
TM 2-31, Novembcr 1965.
Secret Report.
Sidell, F. R. and Groff, W. A. Oral Toxicity of VX to Hunmis.
EATR 4009, May 1966.
Sidell, F. R. Human Responses to Itravenous VX. EATR 4082,
April 1967.
Ib

--- PAGE BREAK ---cr 1965.
Secret Report.
Sidell, F. R. and Groff, W. A. Oral Toxicity of VX to Hunmis.
EATR 4009, May 1966.
Sidell, F. R. Human Responses to Itravenous VX. EATR 4082,
April 1967.
Ib

--- PAGE BREAK ---

687
Sidel, F. R., McSiae, W. P., and Ilayes, A. H. The
Failmle of Methylplicii .l.e to lllitcoce the Therapy of VX
Poisoinza Rats. EATR '1125, August 1967. Confidential
Report.
Sidell, F. R. and Groff, W. A. Reactivation of VX-lihibited
Clio 
.i..tcrasen by 2-PAMCI in Ihmans. EATM 114-11,
Septene!r 1967.
Sidcll, F. fP. 
A Suu ary of the Evaluation of CAP 302,196
in Hutwins. EATR 4213, Januzry 1969. Co:ifideiltial Report.
Sidell, F. R. and Kysor, K. P. A Review of the Tine Course
of the Ccitral Effects of Incapacitating Compomds in Humans.
EATM 114-19, October 1968. Confidential Report.
Sidell, F. fl., Croff, W. A., aivd Ellini, R. I. 3lood Levels
of Oxihm:, Ecr+tiu, Rfls, al Sidc Efkcts Pioduced by
Sin(jle Oit.I Doses of Ul- I.ethyl)% ricni tim- 2 -A(dloyimc
Me'i,.wifonic (112 S) li 
.u,,ans. 
EATR 4256, January
1969.
Sidell, F. R., Mcrho:i, 
M. M., Savolf;, Rt. H., Schwartz,
II. H., Wiles, J. S. ane lMcShaiie, W. P. Tieat ienm of
Percitu.incous VvX hatoxit-atioii ill "*%.:-)I)itS U, rlr Cowllitionls
Sinuilaiig Szlf-Thuirapy in tIlK Field. EATM 114-22,
Seeptc-!)v.r 1963.
SiticlI, F. R. aid McShaie, W. P. A Comp;irison of Separate
Versus klixed Solutioas of Atropine and 2-PAI'OCl in Vie Therapy
of VX Poisoned Rats. 
EATM 114-23, April 1969.
Sidell, F. R., Karger, S., SinolsC. J., and Weiumar, J. T.
CAR 302,6G0,: Aerosol AdministroLionI to Mal. EATR '1395,
May 1970. Confidential Report.
Bottiglieri, N. G., Sidell, F. R., Sim, V. M. Human Effects
from Atmospheric Contamination With Low Concentiations of GB.
TM 2-27, August 1965. Secret Repolt.
Fleisher, J. H., Clarke, J. H. and Sidell, F. R. Dose-Response
Effects and "Agin9" of Human Red-Blood-Cell Cholinesterase After
Poisoning With EA 3148. EATR 4012, June 1966. Secret
Report.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, J. H., Clarke, J. H. and Sidell, F. R. Dose-Response
Effects and "Agin9" of Human Red-Blood-Cell Cholinesterase After
Poisoning With EA 3148. EATR 4012, June 1966. Secret
Report.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

88
Craig, F. N., McMich1Il, P. D.. Robinson, P. R., anid
Sidon, F. R. Effects of BZ on Teiporture Regulation in Mais.
EATM 112-11, October 1969.
Oberst, F. W., Ellio, R. I., Fawand, R. I., Billups, N. B.,
Koon, W. S., Mussehan, N. P., Crouse, C.'L., aid
Sidell, F. It: Development of Method- for Detecting and
Measurin(j Volatile Elflucots. A Status Report. EATR 4416,
August 1970.
Sidell, F. R. and Gratin, B. G. EA 3834A: Effects In Man
After a Sincjle Oral Dose. EATR 4597, Match 1972.
Sidell, F. R., and Kctclum, J. S. Per Capita, Per Kilo,
Per Liter, or Per Meter: An AnaJv-is of Dose Expressions in
Clinical Phannacology. EATR 4599, Decedber 1971.
Sidill, F. R. Drug Absorption: Som. Mathematical
Considerations. EA1R 4619, May 1972.
Sidcell, F. R., Ketchum, J. S., 
.aikis, J. E. and Kytor,
K. P. Com.lpound 302,196: Intram 
scmlar Administration to
Man. 
FA' 1', 4014, April 1972. Conii(lential Report.
Sidell, F. R., Groff, W. A., and Kaminskis, A. Ethyl Alcohol:
Is Elimination Rate Dose Delnd? EATR 4645, April 1972.
Ketchm, 
J. S., Shiner, P., Kyswr, K. P., Houff, C., Sidell,
F. ft. ad Sim, V. M. Relationships Among Dose, Time,
and Various Measures of Laboratoy and Military Perforance in-
Volunteers Receiving a Centrally Active Chlineric-llocking
Agent (EA 3580). EATR 4670. Confidential report.
Swartz, It. D. and Sidell, F. R. Renal Tubular Secretion of
Pralidoximc in Man. EATR (Appvced for publication).
Sidell, F. R., Culver, D. L. and rtamiinskis, A. Senim
Creatfne Phosphokinase Activity After Intramuscular Injection:
The Effect of Dose, Concentration, and Volume, EATR
(Approved for publication).
(Journal Articles) 
Sidell, F. R., Groff, W. A., and Ellin, R. I. Blood Levels
of Oxime and Symptoms in Humans After Single and Multiple
Doses of 2-PAMCI. J. Phann. Sel. 58, 1093-1090, 1969.ication).
(Journal Articles) 
Sidell, F. R., Groff, W. A., and Ellin, R. I. Blood Levels
of Oxime and Symptoms in Humans After Single and Multiple
Doses of 2-PAMCI. J. Phann. Sel. 58, 1093-1090, 1969.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rticles) 
Sidell, F. R., Groff, W. A., and Ellin, R. I. Blood Levels
of Oxime and Symptoms in Humans After Single and Multiple
Doses of 2-PAMCI. J. Phann. Sel. 58, 1093-1090, 1969.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

689
Sidell, F. R., Mbiqess, J. S., and Oollen, T. E.
Modification of the I'lfects of Atropic oi Iluann Hear
Rate by 2-PAMCI. J. Clin. Plannacol. Ther. 11,
68-76, 1970.
Sidell, F. R., and Gruff, W. A. Toxagonln: Blood
Levels and Side Effects After Intraumscular Administration
In Man. J. Pharm. Sci. 59 (6), 793-797, 1970.
Sidell, F. R., and Pless, J. E. Ethyl Alcohol: Blood
Levels aid Performn.-tce Decrenscits After Oral Adinistra-
lion to Man. 
Psychophannacologia 19, 246-261, 1971.
Sidell, F. R. and Groff, W. A. Toxogonin: Oral
Administration to Man. J. Pharmaccut. Sciences 60,
860-863, 1971.
Sidell, F. R., and Groff, W. A. Intra:muscular aod
Intravenous Administra'tion of Smll Do.es of 2-Pyridinimn
Aldoxime to Man. J. Pharm. Sci. 60, 1224-1223, 1971.
Hays, A. H., Jr., McShane, W. P., tnd Sidell, F. R.
The Effect of Acetyl Strephanlidin on the Hearts of Normal
Dojs. Briish Jourimla of Plu macolo9', M'arch 1970,
Vol log, 
1No. 3, p. 616.
Ketchumn, J. S., Sidell, F. R., Crowell, E. B., Aghajanian,
G. K. and Hayes, A. H. Atropine, Scopolamine, and Ditran:
Comparative Pharniacology ;ujul Aidawlunists in Mtn.
Psyct0&pmmcologia, 28, 121-145, 1973.
Swart?, R. 0. and Sidell, F. R. The Effect of Chancies in
Retial Blood Flow on the Renal Excretion of Pralidoxime
Chloride. Abs: Fed Proc 312518 (1972) also: Effects of
Heat and Exercise on the Elimination of Pralidoxine in Man.
Clin. Phanu. Therap. 14, 83-89, 1973.
Sidell, F. R., Groff, W. A., and Kamiuskis, A. Pralidoxime
Methane Sulfonate: Plasma Levels and Phannacokinctics After
Oral Administration of a New Preparation to Man. J. Pharm.
Sci. 61, 1136-1140, 1972.
Klapper, J. A., McColloch,.M. A. and Sidell, F. R. The
Effect on Personality of Reactivity to 1,2-Dimethy!-heptyl
Tetrahydrocannabinol. 
Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 26, May 1972.m.
Sci. 61, 1136-1140, 1972.
Klapper, J. A., McColloch,.M. A. and Sidell, F. R. The
Effect on Personality of Reactivity to 1,2-Dimethy!-heptyl
Tetrahydrocannabinol. 
Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 26, May 1972.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

690
Ellit, R. I., Groff, W. A., anl Sidcll, F. R. Penetration
of Pyridinim Oximes !;ao luman Red Clood Cells. Bioclein.
Phannacol. 23, 2663-2670, 1974.
Swartz, R. D., Sidell, F. R. and Cucinell, S. A. Effects
of Physical Stress on the Disposition of Onigs Eliminated
by the Liver in Man. J. Pharm. Exp. Therap. 188, 1-7,
1974.
Sidell, F. R., Aphajaiian, G. K. and Gioff, W. A. The
Pfevesal of Anticholincrgic Intoxication in Man With the
Cholinesterase Inhibitor VX. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med.
144, 725-730, 1973.
Sidcll, F. R. and Groff, W. A. The Reactivatability of
Clolitiesterae ld hibitcd b VX and Sarin in Man. Toxicol.
Apple. Phaimacol. 27, 241-252, 1974.
Sidcll, F. R. Sarin and Soman: Clinical Manifestations
and Tr-ntinit of Acciecital Posoniiij. Cliii Toxicol., 7,
1-17, 1974.
Sidell, F. Rl., Gioff, W. A. aid Kainskis, A. Toxo(onin
and Pmalidoxi:vw: Kii.tic Comi;ikon After Intravcnous
Adnisi.tration to l. ai. 
J. Phaun. Sci. 61, 1765-1769,
1972.
Sidell, F. R., Plt s, J. E.-, Pleitlich, H., Sussman, P.,
Copelan, H. W. imKI Sir, V. M. Dilnthylhcptyl-dlta-6a-
10a-tetril'ydrocaniiibinol: Effects After Parc,,teraTl"mninis-
tration to Man. 
Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Mcd. 142, 067-
873, 1973.
Sidcll, F. R., Swartz, R. D., Safer, 0. J. and Cucinell,
S. A. The Effects of Various Stresses on Dn Disposition
in Man (Talk at ASPET symipsiimn, Aiiguit 1974, Moireal,
Canada). Federation Proceedings, accepted for publication.
Sidell, F. R., Clinical Aspects of Intoxication by Choli.sterasc
Inhibitors in the Treatment of Aidicholinesterase Intoxication,
book, to be published.
Swartz, R. D., Sidell, F. R. Renal Tubular Secretion of
Pralidoxime in Man. Proc. Soc. Expcri,,. Biol. Med. 146,
'419-424, 1974.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cholinesterase Intoxication,
book, to be published.
Swartz, R. D., Sidell, F. R. Renal Tubular Secretion of
Pralidoxime in Man. Proc. Soc. Expcri,,. Biol. Med. 146,
'419-424, 1974.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

691
ElIin, R. I., Farrand, R. L. Oberst, F. N., Crouse, C. L.,
BilIgips, N. B., Koon, W. S., Mus,,elin, N. P., Sidell,
F. R. An Apparatus kor the Detection ad Quatititation of
Volatile Hunan Effluets. J. Clom. 100, 137-152, 1974.
Sidell, F. R., Culver, D. L., Kamitskis, A. Serum Creatine
Phosplookinase Activity After Intraiuscular Injection, JAMA,
229, 1094-1897, 1974.
Sidc'll, F. P., Modification I)y Dil;cigls of Effects of
hlii 
l.usctil.'r Atropi;a. on Ik:rt Rate in Manu. Cli. 
Plumnlac.
Tlcrap. 16, 711-715, 1974.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

692
DEPARTMULN 
OF THE ARMY
NE, 
P"cI*Nr 
Gs. 
gor[wooo AOUS 
tw
£MB(( 
rPIOV~IN UIJ~MO. MACYrlLNS! 3lO@
SAREA-BL
30 Hay 1976
SUBJECT: Utilization of Female Enlisted Personnel as Medical Volunteers
HQD (SGRD-HR)
WASH DC 20314
1. Reference is made to letter SGRD-HR, 24 Dec 74, subject as above
(incl 1).
27 In accordance with para 2, enclosure 1, a research protocol in-
volving subject personnel is enclosed (incl 2) for your approval/
disapproval.
FOR THE COWWtDER:
C. MCCLURE, M.D.
Colonel, MC
Director, Biomedical Laboratory
2 Incl
as

--- PAGE BREAK ---protocol in-
volving subject personnel is enclosed (incl 2) for your approval/
disapproval.
FOR THE COWWtDER:
C. MCCLURE, M.D.
Colonel, MC
Director, Biomedical Laboratory
2 Incl
as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

603
!D-mr 
• 
" 
| 4 
W4
M IU~ 
UcLl~tatLon of 7mals 
e Ralitod Porscoel as JIedLeat Volstaers
T UWI 
Corizander
IS Any IMterLet Ccnwn
5301 ISenuer Avoue
S 
Atcax 
ria, VA 
2233
r 3evood fr4eMl
Aorien tProYLP Ground, H 
21010
DLUr.lica 
laborstory
W-aod Arsenal
Iherdacn Proving Ground, ND 
21010
1. 
ftefroncs letter, SARVA-BL, 18 Ceptb r 1974, subject as above#
2. 
ramblee 
nUstcod personuot nay participate "s oubjocts lin Lo.rdLcsl
L .oratory reaserch projects uiLch have been approved by Tie Sur.eon
General. 
ru-.o. corpow'ee, biological products or radioluotopes riay
not he administered to fe4la personnel as part of uetach projects
vmlcus their cdiniettr4tion to (o 
le 
has bean seiftcally approved
by Use ay Xnvsstiational Vnn4l aviev DoA.
FOR TU 
SuxwOM G3CALt
1ow1 R. DZUS, Ih.b.
Xrigadier General, It
Assistant Suron Gewetr
for Research and Dovelovent

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.894
SUtUCCT 
UtILsatiou of Fol" aliLated terinstL as HtdLgat
Yo)amtoare
ni 
.
i~t apprwes partictiatios of fornLe oulstaod
personnL in rmooar, 
projects of OWc.edal
Laboratories itf tlm projects do 
oct present a
risk to a tets through the use of auy drut,
bLoogcals or radlowtopo.s 
This position ts
basMd on the fact that utQh available mtlwods,
It is Lnpossible to dstmLoo v th certainty that a
femalo is not prosulnt, ospeci lly cu01 
the first
wok of pregnancy wuhn potenLiat dzmai 
from
teratotena 
is 
tost.
coaCVwwxrS:(pl 
-#4 
.d 
jwconsuitise, orzo
JIda dvocatep U.~fD
* 
F6
ACflO~ o?FCERS 
MSCI.'J= V. im0U 
11 11.0.0 cri Ins CO "MO,
EX¢V CIR
$fd3IX DtR
: 
'.-"DIV
rl 
D/5IV
'.* -: ,PT
l!OIFO SYS DIV
- ORG
JA/
I4/7R
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---ise, orzo
JIda dvocatep U.~fD
* 
F6
ACflO~ o?FCERS 
MSCI.'J= V. im0U 
11 11.0.0 cri Ins CO "MO,
EX¢V CIR
$fd3IX DtR
: 
'.-"DIV
rl 
D/5IV
'.* -: ,PT
l!OIFO SYS DIV
- ORG
JA/
I4/7R
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

696
ROUTI '1G AND TRANSIT 4
'To 
00---
0, 
N :" 
t _. 
. :, . ,.
REM~AMSK
Do NOT uw ths inn. a a WRrD,
_I O 
I', 
.
.... 
.
..
OPTIOUJAL roRIA 41
AUGUSTr I"?
GSA wplkt 4plera) 1.1~4N
&*. lops @-sIIM 
W4t110

--- PAGE BREAK ---

898
DIPARTMNT OF THC ARMY
MHCAOVNTIRS. CO4WOOD £Aa.L
AKntmI 
P110Um 
ONVOW 
&YLJ
GA3ZAD. 
38 
ptbw 3.T4
SJUA 
MUtU OUo ot FW*. 
C0,o1o 
Arsmal 
O 
o 
.
HQM (M504:J.A)
WMAI w 
210141
1. rfotroo A% 7O- , 
Uso of' kn 
Volwtoors s 
"bjoto of floGmV1h#
SJoLtsLod t 
re curiin 
aontly 
mo n3 nodiool voluntoor3 for DBwo.dical
1l~rr~tory rconwh 
~ 
!O1w 
.
ver, duo to tb,2 = ~ 
aoro 
nd 10
o0platntO, rqu-wzt= 
y wr poLtion roo.-cne roovLLtIUnG ' t-lo peoonnol.
..
Fomalo vUntoors v1) participate in th? Loblowina reocarch aroao:
a. Devolot of rrotoctvo oquil4ont.
b. 
Psychloica l teatinZ-.
o.- fltc1lo;ic.X stt:loo to inclwdo oodorate host otroae# otffoots
of protective cloUitin:, oto
.
o co."unc's ull bo at.1nistod for otudy md A 
falo-.o cublocts
,411 ba carconw4 ror propncy prior to Initiation of anW of tho abovo
5. 
If yoi p~oition In favorable,,%a arc pro prod to initiate rouruit-
inS or subject pornomol In 1;ov=kor 
71 ,.
C. flCUPmo N.D.
Colonwl, u-
Dioctao Umeindical lWboratory
CD Am
CJro XWm

--- PAGE BREAK ---yoi p~oition In favorable,,%a arc pro prod to initiate rouruit-
inS or subject pornomol In 1;ov=kor 
71 ,.
C. flCUPmo N.D.
Colonwl, u-
Dioctao Umeindical lWboratory
CD Am
CJro XWm

--- PAGE BREAK ---

697
et0
Wmc~s 
MAWl of NIAF Proposal
SE2wood Arsenal
AM. 
Digester of AILnedLcal inbemr r
Abaeen 
ointag 
reiWd. NKlaA 
21010
1 
In preliatnary discussion on 3 August 197. 
the Amy Inestlational
tuselleview Board (0"W) easbee reqnuest&4 aidittonl consultatLons an
the proposal to stur M.AP ln normal buns subjects. 
a-atrLburted
conmmts reoeivod #re provided for you Lmfommtoe,
3. 
00revlsl 
the WeisslaM tJr folGIng pOrts soul be ooaaldene
a. 
Protocol shOul4 more 
loasly eardve to F 
ldelines,
b. 
]touto of eainistrat 
aot 
of ti 
drug should be the sams for
animals ad tnuna.
9. 
Consent fom shoul4 be revised to follow that la Al 0-38 and
AN 40-7 draft. 
(Copy of AR 40-7 drsft Inclosed).
do 
Using a 8maller w t1r4eeTr g S 
eLAW 
tk.s I.e a MUse I study.
o. 
-.evaluate seed for b~lcLas as high a 301 nathmmogloblu,
f, 
Describe mwthol of testing for reductse activity.
.
Describe In core detal. procedures Involved in sterllity
pyrOPeacity. A purity tastns.
b. 
Injectable products should et 
Urn latest, US? rquloemsnts.
1. 
Analyzing stability of final pr uct (e.g. is It beat stable).
j. 
Supporting documents should "ore clearly indicate uere Vogt was
dose ant by vb 
, also, all listed refemene should be included.
V

--- PAGE BREAK ---lity of final pr uct (e.g. is It beat stable).
j. 
Supporting documents should "ore clearly indicate uere Vogt was
dose ant by vb 
, also, all listed refemene should be included.
V

--- PAGE BREAK ---

698
'Can-CR17 
SEPS 
67?
SUIICIs NvOWU 
of WAI ?IgPeS
It 
&inv 
et1aest ebeuU4 give wemoe.
to ZaeowporatLas MG mwasmtes 
sa#V.
a, 
g 
of lelulde blue "ea aemldoto t usla 
m 
.me Weeiloatiesal
d 
tr to eore as as a tdote fe altbrs end to not a SeOd deslga.
so 
Doin 
o e eute sad eueoute touiooloy stulle lavlolvla am
mamme of slftle.llM 
masn dose.
$1 Ilease dtnegd the 
t 
mmr 
st 
o0oTa quality of epr 
Mad
*oopleteaen 
of p"gW (loot 1-4)o sinc the LID10 staff wus responle1
for these aspects. 
hoSmewr, it to felt that 4Mema 
substArtt
*geaptooeas for I proe 
t Is the ubmeesifm to"e been rdt and should
soseo consideration before the pt 
aaopo 
Is &eol& 
reviewed b the 
lard.
FOR TOl 
SUWAOS OWUALs
P. F. L,
7 
feel 
laIO 1P. 
toMRIIkW 
, 1.M.
1,-6, CosulAntS COMUlS 
Colonel. &C
7. 
AR 40-7 Draft 
Chasamns. Aay Investlgatlioal
Dugl Review o4
COORDIUATIOs 
Nom 
eq hired.
ACTION OFFICERs 
CIPT Gerald L. Wawarka, MSC. Ch. AIDI Office
yv!37791'14 Sep 73

--- PAGE BREAK ---el. &C
7. 
AR 40-7 Draft 
Chasamns. Aay Investlgatlioal
Dugl Review o4
COORDIUATIOs 
Nom 
eq hired.
ACTION OFFICERs 
CIPT Gerald L. Wawarka, MSC. Ch. AIDI Office
yv!37791'14 Sep 73

--- PAGE BREAK ---

699
D1SPOSmON PORN
inutos of th Mooting of the Army Invostia-
SGRD-DR 
ional Dru1 Review Board (AIDRB) 
field on
W DASG-ZA ,.SGR 
Z 
am 
cur
CPT Wannark/sja/37791
1. Pursuant to AR 40-7, dated 30 September 1969, and OTSG Memorandum
1S-4, dated 7 January 196S, a meting of the Army Investigational Drug
Review Board (AIDRB) was hold at 1405 hours, 3 August 1973, in Room
&G096.
a. Voting members present were:
(1) COL Richard F. Barquist, MC, Acting Commander, 
USAMRDC, 
and
Chairman, AIDRB.
(2) COL Nicholas F. Conte, MC, Chief Medical Consultant, OTSG.
(3) 
COL Francis C. Cadigan, Jr., MC, Director of Medical Research,
USAMRDC.
(4) 
AJ Dennis R. Swanson, 
NC, Disease Control Consultant, Health
and Environment Division, OTSG.
b. Nonvoting members present were:
(1) COL A. Gordon Moore, MSC, Pharmacy Consultin:, OTSG.
(Z) 
CPT Royce H. Brown, JAGC, Assistant Judge .td--ocato, USA4RDC.
(3) 
CPT Gerald. L. Wannarka, NSC,..Chief, AIDRB Of .ice.
2. 
The Board Chairman opened the meeting at 1400 h,)u:-s. 
The order of
business was as follows:
a. The Chairman of the Board indicated that the minutes of the
last meeting held 13 July 1973 had been approved by T1.e Surgeon General.
b. 
The existance of duplicate IND's, one Army sponsored and one
investigator sponsored, was discussed. Subject of each is:
Investigational Use of E. Strain Typhus Vaccine, submitted by
Charles L. Wisseman, Jr., M.D., 
Department of Microbiology, University
of Maryland, School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
?A~~0 
=18 
34W 
MWITOW
I0.406 0 -
- 45

--- PAGE BREAK ---, submitted by
Charles L. Wisseman, Jr., M.D., 
Department of Microbiology, University
of Maryland, School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
?A~~0 
=18 
34W 
MWITOW
I0.406 0 -
- 45

--- PAGE BREAK ---

70
SGRD- DR
SUBJECT: Minutes of the Meeting of the Army Investigational
Drug Review Board (AIDRS) Held on 3 August 1973
Board Decision: 
Since the US Aray is preparing the vaccine
and Dr. Uissaman is using the vaccine in a Dopartment of the
Army study, it was decided that a representative from the
Board.would discuss with Dr. Vissoman the possibility of dis-
continuing his IND, with retention of the Army IND.
c. Investigational drug applications considered were:
(1) Clinical Use of 4-Dimethylaminophenol, submitted by
LTC Samuel A. Cucinoll, MC, Biomedical Laboratory, Edgewood
Arsenal.
board Decsion: Deferred pending review by the Medicinal
Chemistry Consultant, h'RAIR. 
The consent form should be
revised to give mov 
details and include the potential risks
involved.
(2) Clinical Use of Prostaglandin tZ, submitted by LTC
Rudi Ansbacher, MC, Family Planning and Consultant Service,
Brooke Army Medical Center.
board Decision: 
Disapproved on the basis that the benefit
to risk ratio is too low.
(3) Anti-Neoplastic Therapy with Bleomycin, submitted
by MAJ Nicholas J. Dibolla, MC, Chief, Hematology Service,
Fitzsimons Army .Mdical Center.
Board Decision: Approved.
(4) 
Anti-,Neoplastic Therapy with lexametiylamelamine,
submitted by MAJ Nicholas J. Dibella, MC, 
Chief, Hematology
Service, Fitzsimons Army Medical Center.
Board Decision: 
Approved.
(5) 
Anti-Neoplastic Therapy with L-Asparaginase, sub-
mitted by MIAJ Nicholas J. Dibella, 14C, Chief, Hematology
Service, Fitzsimons Army Medical Center.
Board Decision: Approved.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---) 
Anti-Neoplastic Therapy with L-Asparaginase, sub-
mitted by MIAJ Nicholas J. Dibella, 14C, Chief, Hematology
Service, Fitzsimons Army Medical Center.
Board Decision: Approved.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

701
SGRD- DR
SUBJECT: 
MIinutes of the Meeting of the Army Investigational
Drug Review Board (AIDRB) Held on 3 August 1973
(6) AMti-Neoplastic Therapy with CCNU, submitted by
tAJ Nicholas J. Dibella, MC, Chief, Hematology Service,
Fitzaimons Army Modical Center.
Board Decision: 
Approved.
(7) Ajiti-Nooplastic Therapy with DTIC, submitted by
RAJ Nicholas J. Dibella, NC, Chief, Hematology Service,
Fitzsimons Army Medical Center.
Board Decision: Approved.
(8) Anti-Neoplastic Therapy with Adriamycin, submitted
by*MAJ Nicholas J. Dibell&, MC, Chief, Hematology Service,
Fitzsimons Army Medical Center.
Board Decision: Approved.
(9) Use of Daunomycin (NSC 82151) in Acute Leukemia,
submitted by MAJ Nicholas J. Dibolla, MC, Chief, Hematology
Service, Fitzsimons Army Medical Center.
Board Decision: 
Approved, providing the following changes
are made to the consent form:
a. 
That the word "you" 
be deleted and "your child"
be substituted.
b. That the phrase in the first paragraph. "it has been
shown by several researchers to be effective for acute leu-
kemia" be changed to read. "several researchers have shuwn
it may be of benefit for acute leukemia".
(10) 
Treatment of Psoriasis with Pyrimethamine, sub-
mitted by 
AJ Nicholas J. Dibella, MC, Chief, Hematology
Service, Fitzsimons Army Medical Center.
Board Decision: 
Deferred pending review by consultants in
Dormatoloiy and 1kzratology.
(11) 
A Phase III Study Using 5-Azacytidine in the Treat-
ment of Acute Leukemia, submitted by Johannes Blom, M.D.,
Oncology Service, Walter Reed Army Medical Center.
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---kzratology.
(11) 
A Phase III Study Using 5-Azacytidine in the Treat-
ment of Acute Leukemia, submitted by Johannes Blom, M.D.,
Oncology Service, Walter Reed Army Medical Center.
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

702
SGRD- OR
SUBJECT: 
Minutes of the meeting of the Army Investigational
Drug Reviorw Board (AIDRB) Held on 3 August 1973
Board Decisioai: 
Approved.
(IZ) 
Treatment of Metastatic Malignant Melanoma With
a Combination of ICDT, .Nethyl-CCNU, and Vincristine. sub-
mitted by Johannes :ioa, M.D., Chief, Ilematology/Oncology
Service, Walter Reed Army medical Center.
Board Decision: 
Approved pending revision of consent form
to-useless t 
chnical terminology in explaining the procedure
to the paticnt/subject.
(13) 
To Lv 
uato the Iffcct of Oophorectomy with and
without Adjuvant Chemotherapy in the Management of Recurrent
Mammary Carcinorma in Pre-Menopausal Women, submitted by
Johannes Bloat,. M.J., Chief, Ilematology/Oncology Service,
Walter Reed Army Medical Center.
Board Decision: 
Approved.
RICHARD F. DARQe1[ST, 
M.D.
Colonel, MC
Chairman, Army I:vestigational
4Prug Review Boir-i
APPROVED:
/ tz4" • 
I'iI!,",
Te S. Jun 
, 
J.c.,l
Lieutenant ('/L'era I
The Surgeon GecrAl
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

703
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
WALTR MUD ARMY INSTIUTIe OF fteAMCH
WALT"R USED ARMY M90[COA4. CIWER
WAS"I4OTO. 
D.C. AI5
i. 
V 10
&VMT,"tu We
SGRD.UWZ-A
15 August 1973
SUBJECT: 
Review of DMA? Proposal from Biomedical Laboratories,
Edgewood Arsenal, Maryland
HQDA (SGRD- DR)
WASH DC 20314
1. 
Enclosed DMAP Proposal has been reviewed by WRAIR staff. Their opinions
are appended to this letter.
2. It Is the unamious opinion of the reviewers that this proposal would be un-
acceptable to the FDA in its present form and that It should not be used as an
IND submission without correcting the errors and omissions cited by the
reviewers.
7 Incl
1. DMAP Proposal
2-7 Reviewers' Comments
Cy Furn:
COL C. J. Canfield, MC
Colonel, MC
Acting Director

--- PAGE BREAK ---sion without correcting the errors and omissions cited by the
reviewers.
7 Incl
1. DMAP Proposal
2-7 Reviewers' Comments
Cy Furn:
COL C. J. Canfield, MC
Colonel, MC
Acting Director

--- PAGE BREAK ---

704
Review of Addendum to nclos.. I
of Proposed IND on '-dietylainophenol 
(DIAP).
General Comments
1. 
This was an extremely difficult document to read because it was
poorly written, poorly reproduced, poorly assembled (margins so far
to the right, part of the text is hidden), and obviously not proof
read (either before or after the reproduction of the copies). 
Words
are alsspelled,'portIons of pages are missing or out off, pages are
missing, figures are missing and there are serious errors on dosages.
2. There are statments throughout the document which contain no
references and the reprints of some Important refences are missing
from the document.
3. 
Toxicology and Pharmacology protocols are incmplete.
4: There is no description of the methods used.
5. Is it the intention that this IND be submitted for FDA approval?
6. What (specific) peer review groups will consider this study?
7. 1 suggest letterhead paper be used on the first page of each
different report so that one can determine where the studies were
performed. 
Each report should be signed so that om can determine
who wrote the report.
S. 
Hard data is lacking. 
One has to rely too heavily on the
investigators summary in the absence of the raw data.
9. 
I suggest the investigators obtain a Form FD-1571 and follow
it, 
giving the appropriate data (in detail) that support their
claim.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tors summary in the absence of the raw data.
9. 
I suggest the investigators obtain a Form FD-1571 and follow
it, 
giving the appropriate data (in detail) that support their
claim.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

705
Specific Coments
1. 
See "Introduction." page S:
A. I an confused on who will do what. 
On pages, 
section b,
they state that an aidaan will make "continuous" observations on the
individual subjects. 
Is this really true? 
How long will he observe
each subject? 
How often? 
They also state a nurse will "continuously"
observe the "groups" under study. 
What is her specific responsi-
bility. 
It is also stated that a physician in the "premasis" 
(do
they mean "premises") will be "continuously" available at all times.
Will the physician look at the subjects? 
How often? 
What will he do?
How long will he observe each subject?
D. The investigators state this is a phase I Human tolerance
study. Is this true? Are the Investigators going to stop when and
if methemoglobin appears in the blood or are they going to proceed
untl. they willfully and carefully produce methemoglobin values of
20 to 30%?
2. Some of the important work was performed in a foreign country.
R6port:L are published in German. 
Why not give the complete reprint
plus the English translation along with the naew and credentials of
the translator.
3. I am somewhat concerned about the toxicology workup.
A. Why was only one dose tried?
S. Why are there only t"o control dogs?
C. If the histopathology was read by a pathologist, who was
he and what were his credentials to evaluate rat and dog data?
D. Why were not more tissues examined for histopathology?
E. Who performed the gross pathology and what were his
credentials?
4. It is difficult for me to read the reproduction of figure 1 on
page 22.
5. 
The investigators state on page 6, in section XI, that "values
shown in figure I do not reflect those from animals dying spontane-
ously, although the measured values did not differ substantially
from one another." 
What caused the death of the rats? This seems
to me to be an important question, if the investigators plan on
using this drug in large enough quantities to produce 20-30% methe-
moglobin values in people.caused the death of the rats? This seems
to me to be an important question, if the investigators plan on
using this drug in large enough quantities to produce 20-30% methe-
moglobin values in people.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the rats? This seems
to me to be an important question, if the investigators plan on
using this drug in large enough quantities to produce 20-30% methe-
moglobin values in people.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

706
6. 
On page 7 of section XI, the investigators state "about 70%
.
. * medullary zone. 
In 60% .
.
. calcified nodules." 
Why
don't they discuss the histopathology of the individual rats,
then give a supury of the results.
7. Figures 3 through 7 are not visible in my copy.
S. Page 9 under section XI is missing.
9. 
The blood glucose levels sees rather low. 
What method did they
use?
10. 
The average weight of the two control animals was somewhat
lower than that of the treated beagles. 
How did the Investigator
select the dogs? 
random numbers?
11. XI. page 1"5: 
X/2 of the page is missing.
page 16 & 17: are completely absent.
page 18: right part of page is cut off.
12. 
It is obvious that no One proof read the copies. 
There is a
blank sheet of paper between pages 22 and 23.
13. 
Is section XI English translation from German? 
Who translated
it?
14. Who wrote section XIV? This section has no title. Were there
any pages deleted?
15. 
Did human beings actually receive 3.215 grams of DHAP?
16. In section XIV, first page, under "Endocrine:" 
Do the investi-
gators mean 2.5 p/kg (micrograms)?
17. 
Why was not eye pathology performed? 
or brain pathology?
18. The sunmary contains statements with no references.
19. 
I should think the investigators would want to measure the EKG
before and at various times after the administration of the compound.
Also I would include at least blood electrolytes if not renal clearance
tests considering the limited animal pathology data.
20. 
1 hope the manner in which the human protocols will be carried
out and the subsequent clinical reports will not be a reflection of
the wrilte-up of this document.
21. 
No studies were contained in this document which describe the toxic-
ology of I.M. injections. 
How certain are the investigators that there
will be no muscle damage from I.H. injections?
Melvin H. Heifter, Ph.D.
Chief, Dept of Pharmacology
Division of Medicinal Chemistry
August 10, 1973tions. 
How certain are the investigators that there
will be no muscle damage from I.H. injections?
Melvin H. Heifter, Ph.D.
Chief, Dept of Pharmacology
Division of Medicinal Chemistry
August 10, 1973

--- PAGE BREAK ---

707
Cowents and/or questions on
Proposed IND for -dimethylaminophenol
Section 1: 
Is the proposed c..ug DKAP. NMC), or a mixture?
p. I & IS: 
(4-DMXP-HC1) also other lines
Where and what are references?
p. 3, 1. 2: 
Na2CO3?? 
Do they mean MaC0 3?
p. 4 and Table 1: 
Proposed to prepare at 1200C.
What are kinetics for that?
Table 1; 
a. 
What Is (h)?
b. 
Is there really 100% decomposed material
at time 0?
Where is Figure 1?
Section II:
Section III:
Section IV:
Very difficult to read.
Where and when was paper published?
p. 4 , sect. I: 
says 8.0 mg NaHCO 3
p. 1 
sect. III: says 8.5 mg NaHCO 3
p. 1, bottom line: What did Veterinary Pathology
report on sterility?
p. 3: should give exact wavelength.
Portions of pages cut off.
Section V: 
This is in cats. Introduction p. 3, f. doesn't say, and
gives impression it may be in humans. Also in this para-
graph in introduction is "The rapid and safe production of
'. 
This paper (Addendum V) doesn't show safety.
It doesn't appear that animals were followed for more than
one hour.
PAGES CUT OFF
Section VI:
This paper does not support contention in Introduction
p. 3, f. that "DHAP is the most rapid and most potent
methemoglobin producing compound known". 
Also, the paper
reported gave the drug IV to humans and in Introduction
p. 3 Absorption, the statement (last 2 sentences) implied
that the information is good for IN dosing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---own". 
Also, the paper
reported gave the drug IV to humans and in Introduction
p. 3 Absorption, the statement (last 2 sentences) implied
that the information is good for IN dosing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

708
Section VII:
Section VII:
Section IX:
p. 1: 
How toxic is dimethylamine? 
(70% of 50 
ca 35% of DKAP recovered ao dimethylemLne)
Human protocol should be evaluated by a clinician.
However, since this type of phenol might produce
hepatic toxicity, why not check SGPY. 
Also, why
not go whole hog and do ROC count? I am sure other
tests should be carried out, but vwLi 
defer to the
specialists.
Hissing figures and pages.
Section X: 
OKay
Section XI:
S'ctioo XUI:
Did they give DMAP, 
DKAP, HCi or what?
Very.poorly written.
Wher6 is histology of other important tissues and organs?
Missing pages, can't evaluate toxicology report.
This case history simply says that a large number of drugs
were used in the patient to pull her through. 
It does
indicate that she lived through 250 xg DMAP IV when
given with 300 mg Co-EDTA
Why are there 2 sets of the same qase report?
SectionXIII:
Section XIV:
Where are the tables?
Which figure is what?
Line 4: 3 grams/kg ?
Line 10: 2.5 %is grams/kg?
a. 
Final page: 
Drug was not given daily.
b. 
DMAP 100 mg/kg killed 18 429. 
Are they saying
that if the rats lived they didn't die of renal effect?
In conclusion, I feel that the state of the art of IND writing has
progressed well past the point that this submissice is even remotely
acceptable. 
Toxicology, pharmacology, chemistry amd human protocols
are incomplete. 
The packet contains numerous examples indicating
that much material was not read after typin 
and tkat no one checked the
copy after Xeroxing.
Robert S. Rozm, Ph.D.
Department of Pamrmacology
Division of Medicinal Chemiptry
August 10, 1972

--- PAGE BREAK ---material was not read after typin 
and tkat no one checked the
copy after Xeroxing.
Robert S. Rozm, Ph.D.
Department of Pamrmacology
Division of Medicinal Chemiptry
August 10, 1972

--- PAGE BREAK ---

070
DISPOSITION FORM
I'*# woe O* Ih.t 
see. All so- I&&*.em. Oe1,1 lrTe &wep"40C 
& 
V*eas 
'" Olb.
Sow-m.UReUview 
of DI 
ptropoal
TO Up Dir, WRZ1 
M Sp roet for Malaria Is& 0AT 
14 Au 
73 
CUTI
VRIRl 
jo/32&8
1. Subject proposal reviewed s requested by several W IK scientists from view-
point of chemistry, phacolog, toxicolop Mn clinical imnvetlgation. 
Individual
comunts are Included as attchimnts.
2. 
The proposal enerally follows AR 40-7 which offers liited guidmce on the
quality of prectinical studies. 
It vs 
seemed that the subject proposal was in-
tended for forwarding to the FM end therefore TPA guidelines were .loyd 
in
Judging the adequacy of the chemistry md toxicologic atudios. 
The application of
these guidelines clearly demntrates the proposal to be inadequate i 
this respect.
Of particular note Is the discrepancy between tb method of admistration i* aLst
studies compared with proposed huan trials.
3. 
The retionalefor the studies is not convincing from a military viewpoint.
4. 
The proposal should also be reviewed by ropreentatives of the Jude advocate
in relard to peer review and consent. 
Ie proposed por review procedure does not
appear to follow FDA guidelines.
S ncl 
CAIG J. CAMFIDP, N. D.
AS 
Colonel, NC
Special Assistant for
Malaria Rsesarch
Ae
A ,;'., 249
iEPLACM[ 
0 fOA 94 [L*SyG*G 1iPPALSIRV OFV Sk 
-fL L 1
MU1[O a0 Uery Ljt41f.eg Ir 
LF UnLess Sz ,"oC 
man 
I 
... 'i
111 
II 
iii II 
I
I II
I 
I II 
I 
I I 
I l 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ae
A ,;'., 249
iEPLACM[ 
0 fOA 94 [L*SyG*G 1iPPALSIRV OFV Sk 
-fL L 1
MU1[O a0 Uery Ljt41f.eg Ir 
LF UnLess Sz ,"oC 
man 
I 
... 'i
111 
II 
iii II 
I
I II
I 
I II 
I 
I I 
I l 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

710
Review of the chem-*try section of the proposed I"D on
o-01CTIYLANI 
f 
MPEL, 
OXAP.
Documentation of the following aspects is in4dequate:
1. The method for V-;-4ring and purifying the final crystalline
new drug substance.
2. The inspections for the crystalline new drug substance as
veil as for the final dosege form, DHAP Hydrochloride
Injection. 
It is not indicated that the final dosage
fore po3seses USMII! 
requirements for injectable
solutions.
3. 
The stability studies performed on the cry!tallIne new
drug substance as well as on the final dosage form.
Mo experimental wort h.s been reported indicatirg that
the final Ivsage form is stable under conditions of
steral|zdst;on.
4. The conposil ion of t,,e final dosage form; the limits
for accepting or rejecting the final dosage fore are
not Indicated.
S. The labels for the final dosage form.
Richard E. Strube, Ph.D.
Department of Organic Chemistry
Division of Medicinal Chemistry
August 10, 1973

--- PAGE BREAK ---nal dosage fore are
not Indicated.
S. The labels for the final dosage form.
Richard E. Strube, Ph.D.
Department of Organic Chemistry
Division of Medicinal Chemistry
August 10, 1973

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DISPOSITION FORM
W ie 
at6-1 6.-., .le AS 3 11. 
.
u Ii 
I1ce 
& d 
s 
IWl
SGRD-UWH-C 
Review of Application
O Director. WRAIR 
" 
Che. 
Dept 
hematology 
y DAT 
10 August 73 
CU,,
ATTH: COL C. Canfield
I have reviewed this request previously and forwarded my comments to the Surgical Re-
search Branch, USAMRD at their direct request. A summary of my comments is below:
1. The military importance for the performance of this research is not provided. It should
be substantial in order to justify the testing of this drug in a significant number of human
volunteers in a military facility. The civilian requirement for a new drug for the treotmel
of cyanide poisoning is small because of the rarity of this form of poisoning and its rapid
effects when lethal dosages are taken.
2. 1 do not believe that the toxicity studies of only two animals at dosages in excess of those
planned to; man and mostly performed in a foreign laboratory are sufficient to justify testing
in man in the U.S. in accordance with current interpretations of the practice of FDA.
3. The' previous correspondence forwarded to me indicated that 100 volunteers would be
used and included an informed consent form. I indicated previously that I believed the
number of subjects was excessive for a Phase I study and the informed consent form was in-
adequate. Even though this research is not subject to AR40-38. the guidelines for prepara-
tion of a consent form should be used.
4. 1 would anticipate that normal subjects will develop significant methemoglobinemia (about
30%) from the dosage of DMAP planned. It can be predicted that this will be tolerable at
bedrest but will produce symptoms with exercise. In previous experiments using DDS we
observed symptoms with 10% methemoglobinemia at conventional activities.
S. The text states that subjects will be tested for methemoglobin reductase activity. Yet
I was unable to find the methodology for testing and an understanding of the problems of
identifying heterosygous NADH methemoglobin reductase (metkb. reductase) deficiency
from normal subjects. This is often difficult and it can be anticipated that carriers will have
a much greater production of methemoglobin in response to DMAP. It is believed that 0.5 to
1.0 percent of the Population are carriers.
6. Methods of sterility testing, pyrogenicity testing, and testing for purity are provided in
a rather saanty manner.
# 
0
246 
1'tnto%*alwq 
fat 
uhts 
s 
*048 "'CO 
cr'M&he Population are carriers.
6. Methods of sterility testing, pyrogenicity testing, and testing for purity are provided in
a rather saanty manner.
# 
0
246 
1'tnto%*alwq 
fat 
uhts 
s 
*048 "'CO 
cr'M&

--- PAGE BREAK ---

712
SGRD-UWH-C 
10 August 19?3
Dir WRAIR
7. This Is the type of study which ihould be scrutinised carefully by a Human
Ue Committee. There is no benefit to the volunteer from the study and there
Is some hasard.
Incl 
CONRAD. M.D.
nc 
Colonel. MC
Chi*(# Department of Hematology

--- PAGE BREAK ---

713
Review of Adden-l 
to Inclosure a
of Proposed IND on 4-dioethyleaminophenol (DRAP).
General Comments
1. This was an extrenaly difficult document to read because it was
poorly written, poorly reproduced, poorly assembled (margins so far
to the right, 
part of the text is hidden), ani obviously not proof
read (either before or after the reproduction of the coIes). 
Words
are misspelled,. portions of pages are missine or cut otf . pages are
missing, fij;ures are missing and there are serious errors on dosages.
2. 
There are stat-ents throughout the docu.ent which contain no
references abd the reprints of some important references are missing
fron jhe document.
3. Toxicology and Pharmacology protocols are incomplete.
4: There is no description of the methods used.
5. Is it the intention that this IND be submitted for FDA approval?
6. What (specific) peer review groups will consider this study?
7. I suggest letterhead paper be used on the first page of each
different report so that one can determine where the studies were
performed. Each report should be signed so that one can determine
who wrote the report.
S. Hard data is lacking. One has to rely too heavily on the
investigators s-unary in the absence of the raw data.
9. 1 suggest the investigators obtain a rorm .D-1571 and follow
it, giving the appropriate data (in detail) that support their
claim.

--- PAGE BREAK ---gators s-unary in the absence of the raw data.
9. 1 suggest the investigators obtain a rorm .D-1571 and follow
it, giving the appropriate data (in detail) that support their
claim.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

714
Specific Co.n 
J
1. See "Introduction," page S:
A. I am confused on who will do what. 
On page S, section b,
they state that an aidrmun will make "continuous" observations on the
individual cu0jects. Is this really true? How long will he observe
each subject? How often? They also state t nurse will "continuously"
observe the "groups" under study. What is her specific responsi-
bility. It is also statd that a physicirti In the "prepaasis" (do
they rean "Pre'3ises") will be "continuously" available at all times.
Will the phyi cian look at the subjects? 
tIk4 often? 
What will he do?
How long will he observe each subject?
B. The investigators state this is t Fhase I Hunan tolerance
study. Is this true? Are the Invest!gatcrs going to stop when and
if methe-oalobin appears in the bloot or are they going to proceed
until" they willfully and carefully prod-uce r.theroglobin values of
20 to 30%?
2: 
Sons of the Important work was perfor-ed in a ,foreign country.
Reports are published in Germ-an. 
Uhy not give the complete reprint
plus the *nl ish translation along with the name and credentials of
the tra.slatcr.
3. 1 am somewhat concerned about the toxicology workup.
A. 
Why was only one dose tried?
B. 
Why are there only two control dogs?
C. If the histopatholoey was read by a pathologist, who was
he and what were his-credentials to evaluate rat and dog data?
0. Why were not more tissues examined for histopathology?
E. Who perfor.med the gross pathology and what were his
credent La ls?
40 
It is difficult for me to read the reproduction of figure 1 on
page 22.
5. The investigators state on page 6, In section XI, that "values
shown in figure I do not reflect these from animals dying spontane-
ously, although the measured values did not differ substantially
from one another." 
What caused the death of the rats? 
This seems
to me to be an important question, f the investigators plan on
using this drug in lar;e enough quantities .to produce 20-30% methe-
moglobin values in people.caused the death of the rats? 
This seems
to me to be an important question, f the investigators plan on
using this drug in lar;e enough quantities .to produce 20-30% methe-
moglobin values in people.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the rats? 
This seems
to me to be an important question, f the investigators plan on
using this drug in lar;e enough quantities .to produce 20-30% methe-
moglobin values in people.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

715
6. On ; 
7 7 of sect.cn XI, the investigators state "about 70
* 
.
• M 
liar- :one. in 60% .
.
. calcified nodules." 
Why
don't t. : discuss t~e histopathology of the individual rats,
then giv. a suxnarl of the results.
7. Figures 3 through 7 are not visible in my copy.
8. Page 0 under section XI is missing.
S. The b'ood glucose levels seem rather low. What method did they
use?
10. Th &,vera-6 weight of the two control anirals was somewhat
lower tha:: t at of tht treated beagles. 
How did the Investigator
select th.' dogs? 
randoi numbers?
11. X, iage IS: 
1/2 of the pale is missing.
page 16 & 17: 
are co-pletely absent.
SI-ago 18: 
right part of page is cut off.
12. It I. obvic-us that no one proof road the copies. 
There is a
blank sh©ct of paper between pages 22 and 23.
13. 
Is "s-!ction X1 English translation from German? 
Who translated
it?
14. UNo w-rote section XIV? 
This section has no title. 
Were there
any pages deleted?
15. 
Did human beings actually receive 3.215 Crams of DHAP?
16. In section X!V, first pa ,e, under "Endocrine:" Do the Investi-
gators mean 2.5 y/kg (nicrograns)?
17. 
Why was not eye pathology performed? or brain pathology?
18. The summary contains statements with no references.
19. 1 should think the investigators would want to measure the EKG
before and at various tines after the administration of the compound.
Also I would include at least blood electrolytes if not renal clearance
tests considering the limited auirial patholog,,y data.
20. I 'hope the manner in which the human protocols will be carried
out and the subsequent clinical reports will not be a reflection of
the write-up of this document.
21. 
::o studies were contained In this document which describe the toxic-
ology of I.:. 
injections. How certain are the investigators that there
will be no muscle da.-ge from I.. 
jnjpethlr.
70-2 
0 - 76 - 46tudies were contained In this document which describe the toxic-
ology of I.:. 
injections. How certain are the investigators that there
will be no muscle da.-ge from I.. 
jnjpethlr.
70-2 
0 - 76 - 46

--- PAGE BREAK ---

716
Coments and/or Questions on
Proposed IlD on 4-dimethylaminophenol
Section 2: 
Consent form - which part Is written by the physician,
and which by the volunteer?
Section 3: In general - editing required.
Where are the figures?
p. 3: 
"Chemical compositions"
Figure 1.
Section 4: 
Add III: Stability data from Edgewood is non-existent.
& 
Method of sterility check unknown.
Section 5: 
Add V: 
Requires editing into good English.
p. 2: 
What is LiqueminR ?
p. 3: What is "C02EDTA"? - is this a Cobalt EDTA complex,
such CO**or C62 ?
Section 6: Add VIII: 
4. A. - "methemoglobin monitor" undefined 
as
is the sampling method.
Reproductions often poor.
Photographs - in color? If so, state so, as well as what
type of emulsion will be used (sensitivity to blue varies
considerably).
What is relationship between "Task plan 12,202" and the main
protocol? (If any.)
Section 7: Add IX: 
Usual problems with editing, spelling in English
(eg. cytochromozidase).
Some pages missing.
p. 4 does not follow p. 3.
Hissing Figures 1, 2, 5, 6, Table 1.
Section B: 
Add X: In introduction (p. 4) it is proposed to use toluidine
blue as an antidote to Methb. Where is the IND data for this
unaccepted technique?
This is grossly insufficient.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n B: 
Add X: In introduction (p. 4) it is proposed to use toluidine
blue as an antidote to Methb. Where is the IND data for this
unaccepted technique?
This is grossly insufficient.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

717
Section 9: 
Add XI: p. 3. Formulation makes much of the fact that
the excipients are used to .wdify the toxicity of injection.
However, this section does not use the excipients.
Section 10: Add XI: Why examine so few organs? (p. 3)
p. 4a: Why S drug (one dose) and only 2 control animals?
Why no BUN, since kidney toxicity is expected?
What blood chemistry was done on the rats?
p. 5: 
Histology still incomplete (eg., why testicles
but not ovaries?)
What about urinalysis?
p. 7: 
"About 70% .
.
. " 
Give numbers.
Figures totally useless. Even rig. 8 (no comparison).
p. 15: Totally inadequate, even if you intend kidney
biopsies on volunteers.
Section 11: Add XII: Origin? Author?
As is, this is an unsubstantiated rumor.
p. 5: In view of "comment" why include this at all?
Why second copy?
Why no page one on either copy?

--- PAGE BREAK ---.
Section 11: Add XII: Origin? Author?
As is, this is an unsubstantiated rumor.
p. 5: In view of "comment" why include this at all?
Why second copy?
Why no page one on either copy?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

718
Conclusion
1. This is an extremely sloppy presentation. 
Proofreading is notable
by its absence.
2. Chemistry fatally defective.
A. No stability data, only a conclusion.
B. There are accepted sterility tests (USP XVIII, p. 851) and
pyrogen tests (p. 886). The letter was not thought of; some sterility
test is claimed, but the method is not stated, and the "certificate of
assay" is rather Irregular with no method given.
3. For IND purposes tthefleis NO TOXICITY DATA.
Fatal omissions include:
A. Total lack of detectable signs of toxicity, other than
histological. Daily kidney biopsies are not a recommended procedure,
but in view of the apparent lack of a drug effect on BUN, clearances,
urinalysis, etc., they are required.
B. Hlstological examination grossly inadequate. (Few organs,
no organ weights).
C. The rat study would be useful as a reversal study of the
histological effects, but not otherwise.
arry 
V. 1 s 
III
CPT, 
HSC
Department of Pharmacology
Division of Medicinal Chemistry
August 10, 1973

--- PAGE BREAK ---be useful as a reversal study of the
histological effects, but not otherwise.
arry 
V. 1 s 
III
CPT, 
HSC
Department of Pharmacology
Division of Medicinal Chemistry
August 10, 1973

--- PAGE BREAK ---

719
SGRD- DR 
31 July 1973
MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: 
Clinical Use of 4-Dimethylaminophenol, submitted
by LTC Samuel A. Cucinell, MC, Biomedical Laboratory,
Edgewood Arsenal
1. Objective: 
A Phase I study on the absorption metabolism,
excretion and methemoglobin generation and pharmacological
action of 4-dimethylaminophenol (DMAP) 
in man.
Z.' Protocol. 
The proposed study calls for approximately 100
men; however, in the first phase only 10 men will be evaluated.
Not more than 3.S mg/kg of the drug will be administered I.M.
-in a single dose. Some subjects are to receive a single weekly
dose for three consecutive doses.
Prior to admission, the volunteer will be given a work-up to
obtain base line data on hemapoietic, renal and liver function.
Once a patient is admitted to the study and the drug adminis-
tered, continuous monitoring of the cardiovascular, CNS and
respiratory system will be maintained. The methemoglobin
level will be monitored continuously and if a level of 30t
is exceeded, the individual will be removed from the test.
Continuous observation of subjects will occur while on the
study and an aidman-nurse-physician channel will be open in
case of an adverse situation. The subject will be followed
for one week in the normal situation.
3. 
Comments. A copy of the proposed label is not included;
however, te investigator said a copy would be forwarded.
Preparation, formulation and purity of the drug product for
I.H. 
use appears adequate.
The consent form was discussed with the investigator and he
was given a copy of the draft AR 40-7. Although there is an
advantage to having the physician and the subject write down
what they understand is to occur, I feel the advantages of
completeness and uniformity outweigh the former.

--- PAGE BREAK ---there is an
advantage to having the physician and the subject write down
what they understand is to occur, I feel the advantages of
completeness and uniformity outweigh the former.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

720
SGRD- DR 
31 July 1973
SUBJECT: 
Clinical Use of 4-Dimethylaninophenol, submitted
by LTC Samuel A. Cucinell, MC, Biomedical Laboratory,
Edgewood Arsenrl
I prefer to see more anirwIls used and more subacute studios
with various dose levels performed prior to initiation of a
Phase I study.
4. Recommend approval.
GERALD L. 
WANNARKA
Captain, MSC
Chief, AIDRB Office
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

* ri~.ci'.- ~LL~K~ .- 4 
itvej 
tT 
tv41(
-.t.:- :-10in ti 
tv U.: rite, ::ef:e-.:.iooA.n binds
t.e0 
.
.
.
.- 
.
, reAo:s it from u 
rtinm, a to):cJ
eirro,'t 
e 
,. 
en 
Ceh.e 
e 
l 
',) 
, 
.
s,, 
"zx." 3,' 
, 
:,:, 
. *"..L:OL Cy .. 
t? ; .C .' 
! r , 
s 
' :, 
w l
-
, 
.:',, 
n" --. 
: 
er- 
,. 
A thor,.i 
h In ,. 
. tio.
.
"- ' 
: 
t 
rzI 
t 
." 
rit id of ell 
mc.po.,uncts
:t:' .
.','' 
:',. !,e 
: 
.' 
ha-ve re,'-ealed ':*rP to 1te bc*,i safer"
a!. 
::Psrlee -.n this rji;rd. 
It Ic rei:ver.ied
" ~ 
.' u:.ed in -r. 
'ith 
.;e object of :-;leeir, 
scdiu,
re...ice 
.*or the troten. of cyanide
exTosure.
, Esi 
Its 
-rum

--- PAGE BREAK ---afer"
a!. 
::Psrlee -.n this rji;rd. 
It Ic rei:ver.ied
" ~ 
.' u:.ed in -r. 
'ith 
.;e object of :-;leeir, 
scdiu,
re...ice 
.*or the troten. of cyanide
exTosure.
, Esi 
Its 
-rum

--- PAGE BREAK ---

722
1. Application for the use of a new drug in U.S. Arry personnel.
A. 
Name of Investigator - COL Joneph R. Di.ir
COL Frank C. Ltitn-lkcr
LTC St..ut, A. Cuciell
Conuil 1 ' ,;. Investir.-utor - W.J Nickltuv 
WrOcr
Dr. IVnfred KZxse
B. Date -
C. 
1I3e of drug - 4-di ethiylanin,pheol (D:AI)
1. 
The ccrpo.'itioa of. the DM.,P t0 1.e ued t% Vll investiotcon:;
will ie a 200 r,.!..l 'onccntrnt.on In w':tvr (or injection vith suficicIL:
Nai;cO3 to maintain the pH at 5.0 (&dacnd. 
I, 
pare 3-5).
2. 
Ihis fcsr~iulit on lshs beert csti-atcd to devixeMSO it 
P %CIMcy
to 96.X 
cvt.r o t:. 
year period. 
All ir.ples used in third. sid7
will be lcss th:: 6 months old. 
(cddendu:s 1, pa-,a 5).
3. 
TWo crytalline tajp)es of D:A are available to us.
One sPr.plc was prcpurcd by Aldrich Che.ical Cc.zpany for these
laboratories. 
The ether was synthesizcd ty Hoechst Pharcaccutical
Company, grankfurt-.:-in addendumn 1I).
The pure recryrtaillzcd D:-IaP will be .eighed by a registered
pharracist, Mr. Peter Zvirblis, under the direction of the chief
itnvevioator and prepared in 5 ml ctcrile injectiun vials at a
concentration of 200 og/ml. 
The solution will be steile by both
micropore filtratioa and heat sterilizatioa. 
addendumn III).
Detail description of the chcical and pharmaceutical characteristics
of the compound available for human study at Edtcoed is givcn In
*dder.dur III. 
Current investigation with phareraccuticlly prepurod
compounds at Ed&.:;wood Is given in adder.du4l.

--- PAGE BREAK ---f the compound available for human study at Edtcoed is givcn In
*dder.dur III. 
Current investigation with phareraccuticlly prepurod
compounds at Ed&.:;wood Is given in adder.du4l.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

723
D. 
See C (3)
Z. 
Curriculum vitae of in'vtitors 
cnd principle
acistants inclosd Sn ad.endu.-.
F. 
All hu.3-n Inv'csti.tior.:. will be carried cut in
the DLioerical Laboratorios, Edru.t.'cod Irse,;l, I:D 
21010.
It. 
Purpose: 
a. 
Provide infort.ation on thi. absorption,
-;.tabolisn, t::cretion cd vcthce,JCShn ,encTaLio;n ad
phaurca€olcr;ic effect vf d...thyV1. .;ophcnol ( 
n) 
i r:..,
Production" of T.t'e-.olo!)in in the rcd blood cull is
critical in th1e treatr.Lnt of cyanide ctq-osure, 
The rcpid
and safe protection of the pir runt in the red blood cell
in both offective treatemnt and prophylaxis of cyanide
tOXiCiLy (AddfndUM V). 
D.P is Lhv rment rapid &r.d =cat
potent icetl: . %,lobin pi'ou'uciur cerpound 
n:wt-,. 
(.-".d- 
,
Wtc-ble 1s 2, fig. 3).
; SO .T;O::: 
Intn.xuacular injertion Ic t!he only
practical -- da of ad-inistration of a conpeunS %,hich must
be self-a=inistercd, elthou,h it is possible that an
intr-.vcn-'us doni;,i 
on occasion uould be possible in
cyanide treatL:.t. 
It is estimated thr.t 302 viathcrnglobin
will protect %eainst four times the LD 5 
done of cyanide.
The dose necessary to produce 20% in the sbortcst period
of time and no rnore than 304" nethe-olubin tust be obtained.
Good esft..ates of what this dose might be in umn Wive been
established. 
Addendum VI, page 102.
TTABOLIS': 
Considerable work has been accomplished
on the mctabolin.rn of this notpound in both animals and
in vitro (addendum 
). Additional studies are necessary
on the duration of the rthenoSlobin effect in both resting
men and men under combat conditions. 
It is Inrortant to

--- PAGE BREAK ---mals and
in vitro (addendum 
). Additional studies are necessary
on the duration of the rthenoSlobin effect in both resting
men and men under combat conditions. 
It is Inrortant to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

estsaplish if oti.or dzu,s thrt the rAm -y bn tahl11% could
Interfere wiith ta he-oSloblin effect or a~ravate St.
Certain a., 
tvulcriai drugs rry even precipitate heoolysis
in tho preirenct, of C'.. Thi& possibility 
'st be con;id-
ereJ. 
(rro 
ocol for vach of the expetir.ents in sddcndum V111).
lir:... ";,l:: .r." 
TJ4:: 
I!,j:.s3r studire have 
lraecdy
been perforrcd to establish t"e m.the o-lohizn producing
effects of this c€:.)ound (eddondu2 
v 
, Since volutccra
era not to bc ev):pcrd to cyan d, 
c.p1i.cntary stu~tcr 
in
anc '.:;. 
..,tL 
be pea freed to L t.'h 
the dcrce of
prctc.Lin that the araicipated cltemol;Icbin rill yjel.d.
(ad ;.e'.. 
V).
':rcit., toec.-r.ce: 
Very little data is precently
avail.,W on the crcire tolcr.mnLe of Individuals vith
circ:€~ 
.&#.,u 
any case teddentisn OY)
(i.e. X,). 
Since 
this trcattcnt Is itttr. ed for cogt'at
troops as yell a5 othr-, it Is ir.portanL to 1Inow the
capability cf soldizs who have a stniftIc.out a;:ount of
pit~cnt replacing their heroglobtn. 
Altitudo adaptotion
may be* inhlbited by rethc~olobin. 
A clear urderstandlng
of this effect %!ovld be essential for the selection of
personnel to operate in high terrain or reduced a.-bic:t oxygen
pressure. (zddencu 
VIII).
Pht. o.oi'ic rffett: 
D.?P appears to have no pharm-
colo ic tIfect other than the generation of aretheuo.1ein.
A rcvits of dat.4 on body rybtem J.t -Aven In r.dde%%ltt AV
(C.Ge report of pcr-on treated with iu;P for cyanide
4xposure givcn in addendum X1i).
3.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he generation of aretheuo.1ein.
A rcvits of dat.4 on body rybtem J.t -Aven In r.dde%%ltt AV
(C.Ge report of pcr-on treated with iu;P for cyanide
4xposure givcn in addendum X1i).
3.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

725
.?.TflO1! : 
iCnce ict tites it 
i1 be ir.ortevnt to rid
the bofy c 
r-e rz h,,' 
n. ontotcs will be : cessary.
Nkthy3ons tlui hscr. tern uved for thJ 
pprpoie for nAny years.
Rsen.t datc suv,st trt toluidine blut ic both rore effective
with fever tido uffectc. Evaluatien of the efi.cts of thcsc
co.pnu.rid Loti in chortenina the d.rttion of the sothonoGlob.n
vffr.rt 
..d tl.:. 1-hcrracoior.'c~l effuct of the ant.'ote Itself
is i.eecsrarv;. 
(.'jdcnduj 
Xv).
Th:,h'1ct: 
I.1l.r1 to;:Icity of the L... 
hay,. been porofr'.cd
in dug .n" 
t,,. 
:ln to:*,city (other th: 
the 6.xalred orthe'io-
0jo1,n effcet) h-s boen seca In the dosac to be uscd In t:n
(lors t!,.An 3.5 r../L'). 
A rovercibe renva 
tvetl r 
,ar.occ is
rcca 
iiLh do:c of 100 r.-/kg .ivcn to rAts Lntravonc.usly (oddcndu:
Mi). 
All 1eiU..t 
u 
t~~.l 
~wv 
ri-...i. l 
.d
ce).. profrl)e, th;1sr.vut the course of ttlc! 
invacitatIons.
1lsu ecr.rntt:d ha. never boen trorketed as a l'har~ceutical.
(Datitilv of to:;Acty rivrn adden:um Y.I ,ndXI11).
Nu.-ber of tc.t sjb.ects: 
It in cstiuated that )CD ten will
receive the. e 
Sr eurlr.r the test period. 
This includes ccn on
all phases of the study; dose rerponse, exercise tolerance,
*ntdotes effects. 
In the present phase of the study only
10 rcn will be givcn repeated doses of the D.:AP. 
The
injection on ech of three auccessive veeLo vi.l be givcn
in order to det'rnine if there i; 
!.evelop;-cnt of rceistance
or sensitivity to the conpoundo (Protocul dotal:;, addcndun IX).
The blood of all volunteers will be studied for glucose
6 phosphate and nethcroglobin reductan'e activity. Only men
with no'cal levels of both enzymes will be included in this
study.
A

--- PAGE BREAK ---blood of all volunteers will be studied for glucose
6 phosphate and nethcroglobin reductan'e activity. Only men
with no'cal levels of both enzymes will be included in this
study.
A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

726
,~ 
z. 
:.e. ,V y,." .:r ed z't-:1": 
"i 
€<-r. un'd 4i1l 
1q.
r.Pr 
iC. l rF'. 
i c( r:.:d*..- Ic:~a 
'A .tj.
S 
n 
' 
r 
" 
-a, 
r:,1 
in 
-
i
&tuc!"I 
raist 
3. 
reerdd~ 
hseIen r.
Pro'l 
r!iwrl.' 
r.;' d 
i 
.
: 
.l 
i.d tv- n;ett:
p:P 'Ies 
;,r r:':. : c. etc. 
'. :*rh 
- I! 
e
V. 
el!.ev 
:: 1 '...''~,. 
-vr 
i 
,%s 
I 
.v I 
-.or'.'r r 
vii dual
e. ~ ~ 
~ ~ ~ ~ -J 
"t. 
''h:~-.ci;:11 
e r ori,ored co:'-'os4.
If" Lt lev.e) c' 
C 
is e'xzec"-ed " 
i ndil ,.l 
uill/ 
Le
r¢ .
-:ro:. -
":;m .
.
.
.s 
-e '; I 
te c b : e r .e1d 
-O.- 
1. r v-
o' ., i:." 
'- -" e -.*". :.' nr n o. 
n- i d o 'V!r .
-':n a s " .1, .1 '% e".0
d. 
Since no ".lun*.eer will b~e exposed to c~a, 'dte, 
this
s uey" nut tz 
rei-ardled 
.:; lhase. r en-.ir:).
e. 
Copl, : 
,,of *.'.e Fo 
w'" 
.d, 
I~::r 
::( :s i 
t 
-,IC "
in,'lo:ESI 
GO 
-
:,=i;',du'm

--- PAGE BREAK ---ill b~e exposed to c~a, 'dte, 
this
s uey" nut tz 
rei-ardled 
.:; lhase. r en-.ir:).
e. 
Copl, : 
,,of *.'.e Fo 
w'" 
.d, 
I~::r 
::( :s i 
t 
-,IC "
in,'lo:ESI 
GO 
-
:,=i;',du'm

--- PAGE BREAK ---

727
1-¢tord!A:
;r,'.ec" ".:e 
r 
•"'°e
i, 
Ce -..-vi, 
fur.:. 
:,;o:r, 
)
P&?*:k,. 2,i i; m 
A. v .
,.','Ic d' dru,- ry. Vc rj..- .1 0
:.v .. :. 
: !' 
'..T 
conrsr. o:': 
T!uc 
u .' 
!rc.tor
of't, *;t:' 
orn,' :.e. ' 
f 
:dcl.e.'rh::-l.. 
the
Se:,.:; 
m 
:.?.I r %.:.';,.r:a wid two 
.:rI'./!cl,na 
~ :".
I-.*JZac', i u a 
- .c.:- 
re'vr. '>:.ls Crovp cun:ed.',i
t*-e en 
:cx:c 1:: ., 
". e cjo*.o;d' jrceoscd 14 te Give... to
rA'.. .•
If t*.':e co' :youd IC co:.sidercd .er.ooxi! 
.thin the
ranne o'b doc-s ind-,csled then approval ir. !tvan. 
The
Review 
oir.t 1i dc a not !ass on specific I:rotoco3 , bt
only on tl.o drtt 
ad :maxi.- 
dose. 
7"e 1 evicw toir.t 11
is advisory to the nire.-tor of the Laboratory and itself"
has ncith.?r veto or r ZmIasve .oo:ers.
Approv:.l of sp .eiflc 
Porto.ols 
for the use of eli-.Acers
in ex.'er..: '.io. i. obtained by t te.In:esti;zter ty sui.dss-
ion of a "ask 
Plan" upi2.nticn. 
r&.e Task Plae. 
is !.n ;ur

--- PAGE BREAK ---

* 
728
' 
or .
u; .o Chiet or #.!.o c11r.ao1 cu..tion
ain 
:rc-: 
".-e : IAll 
or 
,,,ts,
for 
; 
exrkr'-.e 
" vr.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tell
,743
I .
*. 
¢,...,.. 
t e ; 
.' 
c er......I 
toodur
.1 
41
.. 
... /.,' 
., 
i . .. 
... 
, 
_'...-,._ 
_ .
/r -
-I 
p
I- 
• 
' 
-
I.d____ 
..
__ 
,,. 
.
.
.
, 
.
., 
,., 
* .,
c ;-;.: .
-
:1 
-... .
-
_.___. 
_
..
, 
; 
/ 
, 
, 
.;' 
_.. 
.* 
•/ 
,
.,Z 
-': 
-
*. -:,:L.. 
.: 
.-
__ 
..
L./
*d 
x.. 
/"/". 
,/'- 
9 
,
.. 
.. .
_ _. ._ 
. . . / 
,
urcrc',v.i. "e 
e.. 
... e 
.o b e oono €c..-.t.,
*, -
.
., 
....
Ia 
*
.-/-'1, 
-.. .. 
,* 
.~ / 
-
// 
:. 
*/
"'. 
.. 
" ".! 
1-
Taskc plan_______
rate 
________ 
_

--- PAGE BREAK ---_ 
. . . / 
,
urcrc',v.i. "e 
e.. 
... e 
.o b e oono €c..-.t.,
*, -
.
., 
....
Ia 
*
.-/-'1, 
-.. .. 
,* 
.~ / 
-
// 
:. 
*/
"'. 
.. 
" ".! 
1-
Taskc plan_______
rate 
________ 
_

--- PAGE BREAK ---

730
.... ........ 
... 
. .
.... 
.
.~ 
'Y 
... 
... 
, 
. :
~. ~ 
.eCcp'O 
rn.~~.eln 
-
"}C.e.A-:
7'IL.'g* 
6 
C 
I..T 
J' 
U:C't 
C
I C -i' et 
tr 
ci-t~r 
'c:4z 
by "sir:
., e,- 
-
^? 
.
.. 
.
or:" ,"".' 
e 
-ai. 
' 
^ 
.
r- -t.tl:"
r"c.r 
t t. 
,o .sure 
- :;r) '.- 
rei') 
-
'* el. ,. 
r 
' 
r 
v 
i.,
rt vi 
tr!~h:~ 
~i1 
~~ 
cr: *?:1 ; *.
b,- 
. ;;;'' 
': 
1
,"r':" 
.r 
:1 
": 
:r 
v' nti. 
u.. 
.. 
.
t 
c"s 
.
'rc-p*,:.e 
V.ror 
.-
s 
r .:\r 
u 
I't:n,
e- 
e.
con' 
b..:o
rc .,gll 
:r !'*'. 
m.?:.r 
0 .n)Ip.:e;.. 
!Irce 
'r .:r!- 
e'ury,
r 
c i.:, 
' 
.! 
c 
, 
f 
15 
I 
-':, du'!I., "l.tcll
|,c-~d'r.. }':c" . ,-.'. !,,o. 
" 
rs, n.m. n.. 
a llbc a -
'.,. • ',..o
Le',-9. 
A r. 
ir 
ri-.'$y c'.-rt "-11 to dyvne ccr:*;-::t.; si.te
of 
A:, 
'o 
, 
:i 
.. 
lib.
......... 
5 ".. 
n:-1o
prm- cd ,. 
-' " 
u 
i-. 
... 
.:-,. 
::.- 
r 
a 1: c 
t%? 
r 
:,
-a.' r 41 w..

--- PAGE BREAK ---

731
u. cc-.'i:."e "" 
".. 
,: 
a- 
ce v( 
:'.!. 
e---ry 15 :'.. 
bys
*P 
.
tl. -,n 
n 
.
' 
n.! 
vA 
:JI 1.~ 1-10A 13c' 
.aicre
c. * 
.. ., . . .-
..,, 
t *:-, 
. x . -
. , .
.
e r 
.
.
. .
.
..
. .
6. 
:" 'c" 
* 
p 
r"e .s 
o- 
r:.1!.i-n to ti:c tt 
b 
..
,
.nn
*xt.: 
"'r T-='. 
:"•1 
:r .,..-' 
-.. 
t:r.. n 
.e- 
1:,; 
-;C :tO ,.
2h 
j.rl 
yme-
10-036 0 - to- 41

--- PAGE BREAK ---. .
.
..
. .
6. 
:" 'c" 
* 
p 
r"e .s 
o- 
r:.1!.i-n to ti:c tt 
b 
..
,
.nn
*xt.: 
"'r T-='. 
:"•1 
:r .,..-' 
-.. 
t:r.. n 
.e- 
1:,; 
-;C :tO ,.
2h 
j.rl 
yme-
10-036 0 - to- 41

--- PAGE BREAK ---

732
Tll, rrotoco 
r.::c! c-t. fer. for tie evaluation of tia mther)otJn
reC.rattita 
fro;' vomo.
Cor.tre) li 
vc
fvnctiop tc..t 
dC Y I 
post WAP day 2 
day I (foileo%-up)
I'Ilirutin 
---
elk phospi 
Ite 
ft
Ito. l fuction tsit 
d'y I 
post e::,r'oure ,ry 2 
d&y 7
crotcirn 
i 
-
I;*rtc n 
-
-
ite- t o| lv 
fu~lct cn
tey 
44" 1 
post C:.,-ure dcy 2 
day 7
plct~t.€ 
--
ruticuloc:., 
vo .t 
-c--
O the rlnninr rf -.y 1, urfi;.c ard blood r.:.rples are to be-
obtained for cc 
ren:avl 
'.anol 3'-vr and hrntclo,:: functlo. 
.he
voluntcir v..il r, -E.Ive &P **%t'.rusculer 
Injection of D"%P less
than 3.25 r?l;.r in te 
Itneral thich area by roans of ,n autr-
1njpctcr. 
lYoc4 ":ill 1-e sr."lcd eontintt'-4y for t,-e nm;:t
a hours (0.07 ril rer rtn) for the continvous deterr./nation of
rc Lherolobln.
V4. 
lood pres.ure. .,tifo (t:K, Icad 11) deterrir.ed every 15 -inutes.
l'hotorr-,s of t;-.! lir!. aid nall I-ed every 2 hour-.
diet - t,'ma)fast - rerplar 
FluIco ad lib
'lunch - fluid
Volurtecr to rcrain on the vord for 24 hours after eorplctiou of
the study.

--- PAGE BREAK ---,s of t;-.! lir!. aid nall I-ed every 2 hour-.
diet - t,'ma)fast - rerplar 
FluIco ad lib
'lunch - fluid
Volurtecr to rcrain on the vord for 24 hours after eorplctiou of
the study.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

733
The prr;ncol and d.itr "cr the cvaltion C1 t' 
effect of
r.4t'. 
rr. 
'afn r 
.
: 
,: -reJpe toicr,;nce.
Contrt')I ('
fCtzeiC t 
n test 
y 
O 
WV.P dl:" 2 
day 7 (follc"-up)
" ('Y 
-
-
all .;or;.ht; 
-.;
r.Vnnl fi.,ctdon trot 
day I 
port ,rpesur 
d!-: 2 
day 7
cre-.' 
L 
-
-
VIClO!&Coric
3Iera't c 1c",,. 
fu~rt'e,
t.t 
d 
I 
post or'posur,, dry 2 
day 7
jr3'.tt 1,rt (eC.. 
---
rc- J c;ocyt. 
-
On tie rm;nfnF of e.-.v I ur!r,, rnt bleed r-t' ]c% are to be otztincd
for cm-trel reiJa, 
3 -er n' 
1:e 
tolory f 
ctioLso.
The v'alw:,iccrit %*) c:urci. , cot the tread ri31 ,%t & ri/hour
ticw. 
'" 
reJt.- .
.. 
."(€Iv 
5-17. 
O(r.'ln cciir: 
c 
p.. 
in to be
detnrr.:r.-" 
cpntiiw 
: 
lv iurirjr ti;in prcree. 
.%,ter cne Iho.r an
rlntrariscu~ar in.J 
C9 'r 
of r!j'.r (no rore t!'"In 3..5 rrll'0 
in to
bo riv:;. 
Me*- J, sartJec' mr;Onuousv for rvtr.cr *r^FLe6nci4a.
Centin.uo to roniter e.xyrn cM;'-ption znd exorcise pace is to
cot S nuo 
unchanged.
M',ood prctnurc. plune - detcrrLned ery 
fifteen ninutes.
Diet - ad lib
Expcrf.-.-nt i 
to be ter:inated three Ioursr after the I.n. I'VIP
or is the redical velur cer cc.-plaJs of difficulty in coitinua-
tion of the exercise.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

734
] I 
N .Vo 
u,:i 
.
.
.-ri 
t.:
0 
I1S.a)C7 , 
J-ln 
!,.,lacoll',
.
: 
-Accl,!-v.'% 1 rxf0osuru
7 
TO-Oiuthie 
. ,,'ncaos
T ro'-C;;d 
k ! 
In-Ik 
-e Grcup
12 
I 
.i 
XV1; s.!,-ent 
s.ii tort 4
' 
'-- 
.
.
..
(CC. 
(,: 1o 65)
IN 
! 
i 
J 
I 
Ttno .\ro'it Adltis~l,, 
lca%
" I 
I 
'
:.6 
;I-";. 
fk Pitt;'1 No.
30 
F Y%&j 
Ni-
-1 1 
IL
,ol--I);. 0 i i l, !-, 
F -- 
, ,
"-'- 
--"' -
*:to 
FF~ 
~ 
i 
Nctanv or Code No.
Spec 
Trea I xi
i 
Rep 1 L
68 L__ 
--
Addi tive or Treatmnt Uso 
Mixture
7[" 
Actual CT or CT Eauivalenrce
76 
Total Hours Observed
79 
_Pges 
in 
Recor-'- 
--"' -
*:to 
FF~ 
~ 
i 
Nctanv or Code No.
Spec 
Trea I xi
i 
Rep 1 L
68 L__ 
--
Addi tive or Treatmnt Uso 
Mixture
7[" 
Actual CT or CT Eauivalenrce
76 
Total Hours Observed
79 
_Pges 
in 
Recor

--- PAGE BREAK ---

735
[-I 
L:? 
""L
-:: 
L 
Lw -' 
"Fc:4:
L2IZ17L-Li
I1 1 
" 
-' 
' 
.
I 
, 
.
I ! 
I ! 
.,'.
,$i- " 
I ' 
I 
I i i-
' 
i 
i, 
-St
i 
;, 
' 
I
I 
t!
- _ -
I 
i 
! 
I 
/ 
I I 
I I_
_, , _ 
. _ 
I_ 
! 
' 
* 
I 
I 
i I j
.. .J ....- 
, 
, 
S.i....h I] 
C L
" 
ii'I 
' 
LL 
I 
I 
"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

736
I 
V* 
c.u:ir....',au
7 7111 
-"" "' _
'I__
i
I 
I
I 
a
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

737
DAT.
I
T1IL or 1,jtcTic".: 
( 
!CVC C:;L ) 
I:E[itLZ IND SiVKl?.
FIu. C T "THE 
Fn::G 
ye 
,;r 
T 
s:c:S:,,TrD TI'ZS, 
Ir. A rCIV: 0? S - 0 To1.1l
TIrE i'.t.14 
U :: .
.. 
0 
IS :,0 r, A:. 
S 1 SE .'.rJ, 
.cP.1A i ::G.
P-A
SI
"I
) (:A.~ ~1 
-
.l4~a
-
-
4/ 
/~*4.
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

738
[E--T .:-" 
'
ry i_4-! 
;,
>'LIT 
"" 
v 
•
S:,ci7J
~r 
:~A ~-- 
-Lic
:.l :C-t
~?
4
.i% 
~
'* ~ 
.. iC.?,)
:..
*155,
-I
* 
-' 
"
c' ird I
. 2 zc 
*-
t'~
~ 
:-~.d
S....'.
7
27
31
3?
32
3)
Ih3
3?
I.L
hi
1h9
3-.
C"
-9
53
5v1
:( .
..
In -
.
i.! I had
V: e C11 : 
: 
li?;v-
tten 
-It 
" " 
.:
V-g 
Er=. 
.
,''
- .- rr 
..
tr 
Z 
I 
.
I "t-' -';-: 
':', .
,': ' 
-
Ai I 
-ii'
"-
-. J
L1.:t g(E:?: ":t.r~
* 
'C 
t"..J-f.c:**r.
.;r: 
.
t 
r.^ 
t 
{";€.e
Ile
Z..%-c ...
in: -.
! 
' ,-
C. : 
.= 
v :, .
,cra
(~U j~] *;A~;tire "c:-ed to btIt:
hours or 
in.
h5 
. I 
.
--
Catc 1:o. 
',.k PL1.4
.5. 
.
.
.
5***'*~ 
-~
-, c~~:
r~> 
~-:*~?~ 
J. .. 
I 
'V 
~f
2so -.I
31 .
331
3 I
3:
l 
. - i
l!: F
EST 
Hmt F-
cr-,
• U:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

* 
.
.
.. 
.
/2
.. .. . . ... .
,. --
... ., ... _ , , 
...
J 
t, 
00. 
'
* 
, 
*,'. 
_ 
.
.. 
.
I2.
" 
" 
.
. .
. .
.
. .
. ." 
" 
"° .
, " 
* . t . * 3
.
.
a.. 
1
-
.-
,. 
.,.-. 
.
,, 
.
..
U.-.~d~ 
r44~Uem 
$14
.
-'

--- PAGE BREAK ---... ., ... _ , , 
...
J 
t, 
00. 
'
* 
, 
*,'. 
_ 
.
.. 
.
I2.
" 
" 
.
. .
. .
.
. .
. ." 
" 
"° .
, " 
* . t . * 3
.
.
a.. 
1
-
.-
,. 
.,.-. 
.
,, 
.
..
U.-.~d~ 
r44~Uem 
$14
.
-'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

740
.!eLc' 
:.q": ]:,.,? 
-
:!' 
,,'r'' 
I' ,pfIA'
6. 
... 
,. 
r e -
, 
i ' 
, r .
.
r .
.
1r ~ 
~ 
~ 
t 
-:r 
cv! 
%C ho! 
tlT~ 
i~ 
.u 
;3
be : r. ' et 
.
.
" :..-.. %c .ro!3 "cu. r,.-.ull hw' 
... , 
-
" "
.':": 
.* 3, .'!: i:t:.';-..- -control 
bl,'od i.% d-..m.
e1 "r,: 
:;1"¢:y i.:.r. 
e 
d 
or.
67. 
a.'--:. two.:i 
r' 
:... q I/#- I to '<r 5 h.r %.*.-.n q..'.h
9 '€:r ~~ 
~ 
~ 
i 
"cs 
ts." 
"....: 
-
" 
't. 
"0 fir.
7. 'c:; :w;- .!..r" 
6rr :;- 
f"or ^.Yi* Wt. cjsi-;n-d 1.1-nz-. 
e.or
ej4.:..r .';oy. 
!r:.-.A 
'rx1 
nevle or au'oln'vctor.
9.~~~n 
s.nt.' 
,'' 
' :- 
'i sb~ec'.s it, 
g1,io: 7.,61-fal alc.rt
czrr.-c Vt:tvs 
to:* ni-vu 
;%*rAT.-.;:tureE. 
TbiM 
1-3 dftcd to
co'-.r i " 
-.
: com 
eti.cn of, #est.
10. ' F-e i 
!nzrc:: 
r,'.'tl 
"or ex.-ercire sludy of C17.
eont-,ined!"'!i 
sA 
,"'h . vilea

--- PAGE BREAK ---

741
TP 12.02 
CM V1. SMAu.Ia,
I. %iubJccts tu, r:t'c1- tP. %:.rd at V2Y)~ hJe. t.!z avcni1r; berf test.
2. tubJtc. 
,t c-.cd a'..,':€cn rrly rr 
bt. fcd by 0711K.
3. LI: c 
'-3' 
t upirsc 
O rd~ PJ x 3 1A 
10 O~n- 
rs
,. Dru; to b: civcn Mt:' , 030.
,, 
a.P 
cnd 11". a-crJ 1/2 !:r. fer 3 %ra., t%..cm ev 
IT 
t 
:r 3 hm.
. t..ectL are to. r-.4'in bed (c€cept fc.r b thre pr3-ilerge.)
0-.th e'w-4"--i ectivV." fcr 10 hrr. pe st drii..
~.rcoai end CrIs-Ik Pd llb.
of mlracd fe 
CI .ts 
c.- v-ra. 
4o S 
12j, 16, 2% 24, 27pr3 * 369
an' - 4c I 
r10-. 
U~ed 
.:!:, 
VI: ke,;'a ' 
p~riv- tov 1, ,,',.

--- PAGE BREAK ---0 hrr. pe st drii..
~.rcoai end CrIs-Ik Pd llb.
of mlracd fe 
CI .ts 
c.- v-ra. 
4o S 
12j, 16, 2% 24, 27pr3 * 369
an' - 4c I 
r10-. 
U~ed 
.:!:, 
VI: ke,;'a ' 
p~riv- tov 1, ,,',.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

742
P 1. 0~ 7 C 0 L
I. 
!.uljectf. ti rc)crt t, .-nrrd at 2W.' Irs tI'. e':enin. brfor.. ttc 
tuty.
2. 
P,;r. cr.'tvr 
.*, !;iP 
-
!r: 
2
A.'. 
cc :- r. 
, r- 
3
3. 
1tc 
,I, 
: ' 
,. 
';g; 
.n e ,'-}" t,: 
:v 
c.n 
.') 
¢ 
ws.
4. 
1.4u!, to .
.' 
n 
Iit,.tt 
(,f-i I,",
5. 
After n 
-rfns 
C ., 1/2 *3r ,. 3 Isr.
6. 
"hrer 
%.031 It" u'.-.* e 
cCI rvt, tnd tf.c 
vta" 
xol ;itvvrzi O' 1l *.
ar S!r,.C4 to I v,.
'. 
u'K,:s 
t.a-c to, rc--in In ILce (exccpt to rn to' ti., bnthroOr,)v'.th
Ir'nj 
p-.j c'cti.;:, ior I, i 
eaijta 
post 
1ris.
c"'rtTi 
i 
-
a. 
;:o ' rul r vcu
5 r.-.,:, 
10 
vi 
.
'ts
50 X u.,, a 
In p.-ccc
Ille, 11ove urc., 
tt. 1"¢ teone
cicoa iour x 6.
G:€'1r IJI -
-
3. 
i" ;" 
i?""
,. 3,r../ 
r .
:1.'.at 
O0600
S I'r.-$.r.n J 
lh %,ti. 
overhead
20 J:l pl- 
Jazcl-.r
5(0 Kt|Iipr Jn p)..rc,
71.c above c);. rcJ:;c:.; to Its done every" hour x 6 horum.
UP ad lib
StREJECT
A
c
Dr.
F
I
I1
tlt
II!
1111!
lzlli
III
1
I
lit
U
I
III
I
II

--- PAGE BREAK ---

743
(V4: AIIh (M."%,,'S:
1. 
SimJ srecir'-ntr. att 24 hr r.oc test, control th,: Lemring of the test*
2, 4, 6, 
8, 10, 24, 2?, 
30 and 48 hours.
2. 
CPI 
to be &?ter:-rid 
on all spec! rs..ts cxire at 2, 4, and f. hours.
3. 
2. brur urlr.c for oxire rtcrttnr at ('VO 
the der of the tent.
IN.0 
L. CU;LUM;
1n 
!C
Clinical T-nventiratic'n Section

--- PAGE BREAK ---:-rid 
on all spec! rs..ts cxire at 2, 4, and f. hours.
3. 
2. brur urlr.c for oxire rtcrttnr at ('VO 
the der of the tent.
IN.0 
L. CU;LUM;
1n 
!C
Clinical T-nventiratic'n Section

--- PAGE BREAK ---

74
" 
I~~~[1r..- 
.n Fl r 
~j~:
.
-
, 
. t ., 
, 
. .
Iii]".........- I 
I....].
V! ' I I,,U 
I 
I
•- .o .-- .. 
.
... - -
.~--r 
... 
.
.
. ~-..- .. 
.
.
.
--- , 
-
_, _ 
.
.
1.- 
.
._ I ' 
.
1 1. . -
.
..
1_
.... . .. 
...
I 
_ i 
.. ! . .., - ._" 
. ." ,. 
.
..- 
'- 
-
-- 
*- 
-,_ 
__L 
J_ 
_ 
_
_.. 
D 
, L i _.I __ 
I .. _ 
K T, 
_
ii..-- 
-T- 
' I 
_
-' -1 .L. .
.
i.- 
-i 
L L 
_ T j _ ..
-T 
, j 
..
, -- .
~JI 
K! 
K 
I 
L.
SHI 
_' 
_j 
I
,&. 
IiiI

--- PAGE BREAK ---

745
,I 
I 
..
I._ 
_......
SI 
!.I
I
I 
I_ 
__ 
_
_ 
_I 
_ 
_ 
_ 
_ 
_ 
_ 
_
R ev 1
I'll:, "
:, 
. .
o'JL
,.!- 
.41c

--- PAGE BREAK ---

746
'm. or 3 JLC 
" 
( Ci!:':: 
o:r. ) 
::Lr')LC P:- 
-
r**'L 
*1' TI:. r:: . -:7:; 
.
': 
D,;slr.;.,;! 
.
' , A s 
:' s - 0 "0 , 
?ATC
l~:;P.*.I:: '6110 
1 
; 
:.''; 
1, M: PAM .;; 5 
If- 
''R',[('.'|J 
'G
M:.". 
T ".r 
:*.plRi:t'!l 
T1"; 
0 
1 
I 
5
i 
0."4,5
I 
,. 
-- 
.". 
.
.. 
.. 
-
-
eI 
I 
t 
I 
I
* 
" 
001.5 
,
, 
, 
, 
5 
, 
I 
,
* 
03(:~ 
S. 
, 
" 
, 
i
* 
.
, 
I 
I
* 
' 
0200
* 
S 
I 
S 
s 
S 
t0
* 
0300 
, 
, 
, 
9 
,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

747
9.. 
.
., 
$
I
9 
I
I 
B
I
! 
.
.
'1
* 
I
i 
B 
j
a 
B
I 
2 
'
I 
iI
I 
i! 
IB 
B
; a
__ 
II_ 
_
70-026 0 - 16 - 48

--- PAGE BREAK ---

748
1
72
18
:
60
01
72
70
79
CA.SL; 
i!.; .,: 
CAI*."
5 
.
1 lt 
s,-i :' ..
c rt- 
s*dr,, 
.
-- 
-
-
2 
rt~-i-C'a 
'r
', 
P--- 
-
~ 
( 
.
' 
10 
-G :L,,,h=r" ,i,)1 -?
.
%..
, o 
i 
I'~~Ult 
' 
.*~ :.'4vf 
""".tt PI*|r1":.:€'G ¢';-
I 9H 
! f,
-
1 
(..:. 
1 0 63)
; I : 
.
( 
rt f 
oet 
:.tc,
: 
i
;] 
.- %fie * (.dc N
*p-V--'l 
Featurs 
Ex t 
.
.
i 11iiV-4
Addiatlive i' Titavitt U-I 
flvp'. L
Actw 
CT or CTte
Total Isiurs Obsorved
Total Pacs In Record
i
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---f 
oet 
:.tc,
: 
i
;] 
.- %fie * (.dc N
*p-V--'l 
Featurs 
Ex t 
.
.
i 11iiV-4
Addiatlive i' Titavitt U-I 
flvp'. L
Actw 
CT or CTte
Total Isiurs Obsorved
Total Pacs In Record
i
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

749
MIMONANDUM OF MEETING
Subject: Investigational Use of Drugs by the Department of Army
At 11:00 a.m. on February 28,1Wk7, Dr. Lay met In Colonel Howle's office
with the followingtfee representatives of tie Office of the Surgeon General
Department of the Army: Colonel Donald L. Howie, Medical Corps, Research
and Development Command (OX 6-1209), Colonel Marshall E. McCabe, Medical
Corps, Professional Division (OX 6-2395), and Lt. Colonel Julian B. Carrick,
Judge Advocate General's Corps, Research and Development Command (OX 6-2441).
The meeting had been arranged by Dr. Ley to discuss the memorandum of under-
standing between the Deiortment of Health, Education, and Welfare and- the
Department of Defense concerning Investigational use of drugs by the Deportment
of Defense, which was placed Into effect on April 8, 1964 (see copy attached).
Subsequent to arranging for this meeting, Dr. Ley learned that the Commissioner
was Interested to know whether there were significant problems In the implemen-
tation of this memorandum of understanding during the past three years.
The memorandum of agreement outlines three categories of drug studies as follows-
(I) studies in which the Army acts as sponsor of Investigations of a classified nature;
(2) studies in which the Army acts as sponsor of unclassified clinical Investigation;
(3) studios in which the sponsor is a pharmaceutical firm for whom a member of
the military service is conducting a clinical study.
The third category listed above Is in no way different from any.Industry sponsored
clinical Investigation except that the Investigation is conducted 11n an Army medical
installation. The Army currently conducts a review of the protocol of the studies
at the level of the Surgeon General but recognizes this is not required by the low.
In the second category listed above the Army Itself acts as sponsor of the investigation
and (as defined In the memorandum) submits to the Food and Drug Administration a
set of documents representing a request for the study and the Review Board evaluation
and approval of this study as the claim for exemption for the investigational drug
studies. It should be noted that the information required to be submitted to the
FDA by the memorandum is not in the format of a conventional submission by a
drug firm. It is my impression that individuals reviewing information submittedinformation required to be submitted to the
FDA by the memorandum is not in the format of a conventional submission by a
drug firm. It is my impression that individuals reviewing information submitted

--- PAGE BREAK ---to be submitted to the
FDA by the memorandum is not in the format of a conventional submission by a
drug firm. It is my impression that individuals reviewing information submitted

--- PAGE BREAK ---

750
2
by the Department of Defense do not recognize the fact that the memorandum
permits submission in a form distinctly different from that submitted by drug firms.
The first category in the listing represents classified studies in which the Army
acts as sponsor. 
Because of the problems involved in handling classified infor-
mation, the memorandum specifically excluded submission of details of this
kind of investigation and substituted a discussion on a periodic basis with FDA
personnel who have proper security clearance. ft is my Impression that these
periodic discussions have not keen held during te three-year period the memo-
rondum has been in effect. It it possible that the reason no such discussions have
occurred has been that the oproprita personnel in the Bureau of Medicine have
not hod offcial 
apartment of Defense security clearance.
Current areas of clinical studies of Interest to the Food and Drug Administration
Include the following: (I) stuu 
treatment and prophylaxis of nerve gas
poisoning (classified as Secret), (2) studies on 4ayllucingenic drugs c assifled
as Secret), (3) studies on treatment and prophyl 
Tc~iso 
r 
aon njury (classi-
fled Confidential), (4) studies on 
onvlmaiorial compons (unciassiied, (5)
studies on modifications of existing procedures of military utillty (examples
might be the use of silicone ointments for prevention at oot Inlury ; the
Tropics, modifications of onticoogulent solutions for improved preservation of
blood, etc.), and (6) studies on military use of new vaccines. (DBS is the
monitoring agency.)
Recommendation:
It is proposed that the periodic discussion of classified DOD drug projects
outlined in the memorandum of understanding be implemented to include both
Bureau of Medicine and Bureau of Drug Abuse Control personnel having
appropriate DOD security clearances.
Herbert L. Loy, Jr., M.D.
Attachment
cc:
Mr. Rankin
Mr. Davis
Mr,>'finlator
Dr. Minchew
Dr. Hodges
HLLey/mjl 4/17/67Bureau of Drug Abuse Control personnel having
appropriate DOD security clearances.
Herbert L. Loy, Jr., M.D.
Attachment
cc:
Mr. Rankin
Mr. Davis
Mr,>'finlator
Dr. Minchew
Dr. Hodges
HLLey/mjl 4/17/67

--- PAGE BREAK ---e Control personnel having
appropriate DOD security clearances.
Herbert L. Loy, Jr., M.D.
Attachment
cc:
Mr. Rankin
Mr. Davis
Mr,>'finlator
Dr. Minchew
Dr. Hodges
HLLey/mjl 4/17/67

--- PAGE BREAK ---

751
MEMORANDUM FOR THE FILE
Subjects 
,u 
n 
the 4r 
4 hic iirl 
, 
Mod! 
I L_*rJrli
snul tgewoodo 
2 -16
The following Individuals traveled to Edlgewood, M"Iybad, to prttlpe 
n/~
a briefing given by the Resewch Lnbortorls, Edgewood Anulnar
Dr. Herbert L. Ley, Jr., Director, Bureau of Med1clnej
Dr. S. H'xvey Mlnchew, Deputy Director, Bureau of Modicinel
Dr. Robert M. Hodges, Associ ute Director, Offilce of New Drui,
Bureau of Medlilne;
Dr. MI ton H. Joffe, Biological Research Coordinator, Bureau of
Drug Abuse Control.
The FDA staff were met by Coloneil Blair ,md welcomed by Colonel William W.
Stone, Commanding Officor, Edgewood Arsenal. The noenda for the briefing
Is attached as Encloure I. The pfrtlclpohts In the briefing are listed on the
second page of the Enclosure. 
The Initial phases of the briefing were devoted
to the use of medical volunteers In the research program of the m.rof cory,
Enclosure 2 si atsiginoragudeiWno GWQiIth Icootr In wTlig
volunteers and also provides a cooy of ohe volunteers participation 
agreement
for studies undertaken. Enclosure 3 Is a medical volunteer handbook provided
to prosoectlve volunteers for the program. 
Enclosure 4 sumwizes the rmescrch
protocol used In planning for volunteer particloatlon In studies. Pege 4 of this
Enclosure Indicates that final -opprovol for specIfIc protocol Is made by the
medical board, consisting of five members of the Edgewood Arsenal medical
staff. In summary, the use of medical volunteers In this program Is well planned-
and represents a twelve-year arograrn on the part of Dewrrtment of Amy In
obtaining datm from this stvxce. 
it 
is e5-is-wtst 
& 
r-6 
t 
toher 
have been
no aanitI as wiut e 
eatotiom rating fom th use of volunteers in this
oCrganiztion.
Typical outline for use of serial measures data sheet far the study of psycho-
chemicals In medical volunteers I attached ts Enulosure S. These studies are
of Interest In that there have been only two Instances In which volunteers 
Nmeasures data sheet far the study of psycho-
chemicals In medical volunteers I attached ts Enulosure S. These studies are
of Interest In that there have been only two Instances In which volunteers 
N

--- PAGE BREAK ---far the study of psycho-
chemicals In medical volunteers I attached ts Enulosure S. These studies are
of Interest In that there have been only two Instances In which volunteers 
N

--- PAGE BREAK ---

752
2
.xpwlncd a tronsltnt psychosis lasting beyond the normal duration of i
psyChochomlcal effect. P third case which has been quoted frequently In
the pnt of on Individual allegedly rendered nermanently psychotic wa shown
upon Investig tion to be on Insonce of del lberite malingering on he wrt of
the Individual subject. It must be pointed out, however, that the volunteers
for this program ore exceedingly carefully screened In term of psychological
qualities and are not typical or chroclerlstlo of the poputl-lon using psycho-
chemlcll drup Illicitly.
A typical urotoool used for minimum effective dose studies of orgonophosphorous
comrounds in medlc-l volunteers Is attached as Enclosure 6. In general, the
st-rtin' dose of my orgrmnophospharous compound Is est,)blIshed at 1/100 of the
5(% effective dose In the most sesillve anlmal species known. This dose b
Increase In grewwtric progreslon until observable effects ore found. A general
outline of orecllnlc-il evluotlons In tem of animal phorm ecology Is attached to
Enclosure 7. It should be noted fhit the studies we In contlderble detail -,nd
represent a tyoe of nreoarwtlon for clinical experience th't Is far more detlied
than that found In most new drug opplc-tlons. An Item of Incident.l Interest is
Enclosure 8, representing a protocol for Iong-term psychological assessment of
subjects. 
Enclosure 9 Is * general Informotional pamphlet on Edgewood Arsenal
Res". ch Lborntorles.
Two additional Items In the form of classified documents were provided to FDA
participants at the tite of the meeting. Coies of the documents will be
mailed to Mr. Ch man for file In the Office of Policy Monagement where they
may be accessible to Individuals having need to know. The documents represent
research progress summnrles for the past fiscal yer In both psychochemicals and
.rganohosphorous ompus.
Following lunch the group was given a tour of the medical flclitles of th
Rese-rch Laborltorles, Including the now John R. Wood Memorial Labortory
Iuliding. Although present facilities are antiquated In the sense that they we
housed In World War II type b-rlls, the oc4iational equipment is up-to-dote
and comprehensive. The now loborutoy facility which Is expected to be occupied
later this calendar year will provide a modern environment for the studies.
In summary, 
th research program at Edgewood Arsenal asses soundly based
upon on Informed volunteer consent obtained In writing. Furthermore, the
program has mat Import-int military objectives which have on ,ut least onearch program at Edgewood Arsenal asses soundly based
upon on Informed volunteer consent obtained In writing. Furthermore, the
program has mat Import-int military objectives which have on ,ut least one

--- PAGE BREAK ---

753
3
oemeeion In the pot resulted in 0he prvldlng of FDA with a complete file of
pertinent Infonwmion on one antidote for on erginoplopharous Intolcatlon.
jpre Ahe members of the FDA staff felt concerned regrdlng the method of
operation 
this r 
ts 
e art r w
6ndequix W21 = 
09. 
In ne~roI, this research effort Is not oam
In 
ic 
in 
r 
yexpeced that more thnon oeslnol drug will
be developed which ',uld have civilian ol plcntlon In medical proctlce. The
topic of antimal'vlol drug research being carried on ot Valter Reed Army Institute
of hiearch wa discussed In general ten at the cloe of the briefing. Dr. Ley
Indicated sh t he would be aranglng Ovough Colonel Howle of the Medical
Rmerch and Development Command a briefing at Wltir Reed to cover this
area.
A letter of thanks ho been dispotched to Colonel Jeeph Blair of the Medical
Unit of the Research Laoratories.
Herbert L. Ley, Jr., M.D.
Director, Bureau of Medicine, FDA
)

--- PAGE BREAK ---is
area.
A letter of thanks ho been dispotched to Colonel Jeeph Blair of the Medical
Unit of the Research Laoratories.
Herbert L. Ley, Jr., M.D.
Director, Bureau of Medicine, FDA
)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

754
August 21, 1975
MEMORAMtM FOR THE RECORD
FROM: 
Associate Commissioner for Medical Affairs
SUBJECT: 
Telephone Conversation with Colonel Richard F. Barquist, MC, USA,
Department of Army, August 21, 1975, re: 
DOD/FDA 4OU
Colonel Barquist called this date with regard
liaison under the DOD/FDA Memorandum of Understanding with regardto clinical
investigations. He referred to our Orrr.eInnd-arua &a,1Ir in the year On
this j 
.
.
cLAndnated 
that there had ben sa 
difficulty in getting every-
one's schedules to coincide-to- hold a meeting.
I told Colonel Brquist we were In-the process of drafting 1 hitter
to the Army on this same subject and indicated c -W Were Interested in a
briefing on any data derived from classified research that might be of use
-_ 
to the Agency, as well as an overview of all clinical research (non-classified),
with special interest in determining whether ItNDs are being submitted for all
studies for which they would be appropriate.
olon1 Barguist told me that 
ly there were no classified ,
s 
nuuna 
u 
P Tht U6jV 1bft7_ bf Vefese.
HeIsnjAl3t the-Army is -reviewing all drug research, going back to the '50se
elaresult of 
t 
'dTscoisre 
o these controvrstal drug studies. 
In
this connection, he recar thaTT-fo1f 4j'a-disciitWf 
Wtlfrth-b.ey, former
Commissioner of Food and Drugs, there had been a meeting of Defense Departrent
personnel and FDA people, .uJ;t-196,Z, 
and wondered if we had a record of this
meeting. 
I told Colonel Isrquist that any such record would be in our security
files because of the Army's classification of the studies and that I was sure
Defense personnel could have access to this file upon written application.
We agreed that the meeting should occur sometime in the last full
week of September at a time and place mutually agreeable. 
I promised Colonel
Barquist a note confirming our conversation.
cc: H j-0
HFB-l
HP"L-1
HF-1 (Mr. Barnes)ould occur sometime in the last full
week of September at a time and place mutually agreeable. 
I promised Colonel
Barquist a note confirming our conversation.
cc: H j-0
HFB-l
HP"L-1
HF-1 (Mr. Barnes)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

755
ROUTING AND TRANSMITTAL SLIP
* TO
" it 
rvi 
C
f llos gat
REMARKS
C4,, 
td.?. 
esei 
,r
Do NOT use ftk lorm asa RECORD of appfovok concunenoms
dowpprov.s dkwncos. eNW *nr 
cilons
I~CHARD F. BARQUIST9 M.D. 
AUG 17S
' 
Deputy Commander, USAMRDC
.
.
.. 
.
..... 
... .
.
, , , 
,6 5 
,,, 
1 6 ,
OPTIONAL FORM 41
AUGUSDT SWy
GAO 
IPM 
bf?R3I.L6___
_., 
eun 
*lu~ .li.'4v
O 
O 
lpo-8364m
"i 41-101

--- PAGE BREAK ---S
' 
Deputy Commander, USAMRDC
.
.
.. 
.
..... 
... .
.
, , , 
,6 5 
,,, 
1 6 ,
OPTIONAL FORM 41
AUGUSDT SWy
GAO 
IPM 
bf?R3I.L6___
_., 
eun 
*lu~ .li.'4v
O 
O 
lpo-8364m
"i 41-101

--- PAGE BREAK ---

768
DISPOSITION FORM
, 
Waylay loud. Clinical 
Am 
, pMJvetistio 
Coit.. 
....
d.we
mina te, of Joist Meeting of Arw 
svestigtioIal Drug
8000-41, 
Review 
Bard, Clinical Investigatlon Comittt 
CCW Nusn
Use Comitte on 
u 
July 
rs
1. 
Pvousa. to Alt 
W4)7, dated 4 April IM.5 
OTSO Nsiorstolus 15-4, dated 2 April 1074g
an AR 
-34. dated 23 February 1973, a joint natinj of the An 
Investigatonl Drl
Review Board (A1U)q) I%* Surgeon General's Clinl to 
mt Jcatitt 
Conittoo (CIC)o and
Th 
urgon General Is Htu 
Use Comitttes (UC), 
was Imd at 13 
bouts on 1ursday,
I July 1975 ie Room 32468 in the Pentagon.
a. Voting .umbqs present woret
(1) Colonel IRibard F. larquist, NC, Deputy Commder, US Arm 
Medical Research
and Development Comad (USANID), Chairman,, AIDER 
and Acting Chairmn, CIC (for COL
siebusem).0
(2) 
Colonel 0. F. Conts, NC. Medical Consultant, Krectorate of 
ealt Care
Operations, Off Lceo of The Surgeon 
enoral (0M), Naer of A1D0R and CXC.
(3) 
Colonel Marshall Steinberg, MIC, Laboratory Sclenes Consultant, Directorate
of Wealth Care Operations, 0TS1, 
Member of C[C.
(4) lMjor Dennis Swanson, MC, Medical Research Direc.torate, USAMAC, Alternate
Member of ADI 
and CXC (for COL Cadigan).
(5) 
Colonel Theol 8o1as,0. 
Office of the Chief of Chaplains, Member of NIUC.
(6) 
Colonel A. C. Moore, MSC, 
Pharmacy Consultant, Directorate of Kelth Care
Operations, OTS, 
Member AIDRA.
(7) Lieutenant Colonel osmary McCarthy: ANC. Versing Consultant, Directorate
of Health Care Operations, OTSG, Member HUC.
(8) 
Captain Jan Shekitka, JAQC, Assistant Judge Advocate, USANRDC, Alternate
Voting hember EHC an 
Alternate Nonvoting Member, AIDIS (for LTC Lloyd).
(9) Colonel David Doane, MC. Ambulatory Care and fauly Practice Consultant,
Directorate of Wealth Care Operations, O0, Acting 
irvan, HUC (for COL Johnson).
(10) 
Colonel D. T. Sanders, NC. Aviation Medical Consultant, Health and Enviroament
Division, OTS, 
Alternate Member of AIDU and CTC (for Major Chloupek).
(11) 
LTC Bruce Brient, KC. Surgical Research Directorate, USAIDC. Alternate Membe:
of CIC (for COL Scheots).
nl A ft* 
9ACA 
AtMACIS 00 FORM 
05. VW1T160 SUPPUlS Of WAC14 WNLL 
U
W 
*a SwMWIV.I 
F53W~ 
01 
W 
Truce Brient, KC. Surgical Research Directorate, USAIDC. Alternate Membe:
of CIC (for COL Scheots).
nl A ft* 
9ACA 
AtMACIS 00 FORM 
05. VW1T160 SUPPUlS Of WAC14 WNLL 
U
W 
*a SwMWIV.I 
F53W~ 
01 
W 
T

--- PAGE BREAK ---gical Research Directorate, USAIDC. Alternate Membe:
of CIC (for COL Scheots).
nl A ft* 
9ACA 
AtMACIS 00 FORM 
05. VW1T160 SUPPUlS Of WAC14 WNLL 
U
W 
*a SwMWIV.I 
F53W~ 
01 
W 
T

--- PAGE BREAK ---

757
SUJICts 
Minutea of Joint Neting of Amy tvest iational Drug 
review 
oard,
C1lnica Investigation Comwittee, Ad lam Use Coenittee a 
3 July 1975
b. 
Voting m*re not present w.a*
(1) 
Miss Dom Griffitts, Cbef Librarln, Joist Amy/Air force Medical Library,
Nesber f MUC.
(2) 
Colonel Robort-. 
Ruker, MC, lurgical Consultant, Directorate of 
ealth Car.
Operatonans 
01GO Meber CIC and AIDUI.
*. 
hsnotLn8 usabere present eo$
(1) 
Mjor Michael V. Johnston, MC, Chief, Munms Use Review Office.
(2) 
Mejor F. Judeon Leach, NSC. 
Nsmas 
Use Reve 
Office.
2. 
Colonel larquiet opened the meeting at 1315 hours after determining that 8 quoro.
vA present. 
The order of business was as follovss
a. 
MiNute of the 5 June 1975 meeting vere reviewed sad accepted without cement.
b. 
Investigational protocol considered was
Clinical Trials with the "TAX" Nerve Gas Antidote (submitted by COL C. McClure, NC,
Ugavood Arsenal). (Because of the sensitive nature of the this project, 
minutes of
the meeting have been separated from those Is the remainder of the agenda to permt
Individual review.)
This is a proposal from Iiomedical Laboratory to study the drug interactions between
the new TAB antidote formlation and potential drugs of abuse such a secobarbital,
alcohol, dextroamphetanne, mthylphenidate and diesepan. 
The material reviewed at
this meeting includes the backup information to be submtted to the food and Drug
Administration for an IND on the antidote.
N06ere discussed the se* for thin Information on the drug interactions and concluded
that it would be useful. 
1AJ Swanson questioned why this work could not be done in
subhumna 
primates. 
Major Johnston felt that the needed information could not be
obtained frem snial studies alone and that In view of the extensive humn experience
with these drugs, the experiments would be safe. 
COL Conte agreed with this position
but had reservations about using the high (20 ug) dose of dextroamphetLamina in view
of the demonstrated effect of the antidote to increase heart rate. 
There was alsO
eoma discussion about the dose of diasepa. since some members felt that 20 mg was
rather high. 
The Comittee agreed that only the low does of sach drug should be usedrease heart rate. 
There was alsO
eoma discussion about the dose of diasepa. since some members felt that 20 mg was
rather high. 
The Comittee agreed that only the low does of sach drug should be used

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SGRD4-1
SUBJECT$ 
Minutee of Joint Meeting of Army investigational Drug Review bard,
Clinical Investigation Committee, ad Human Use Committee on 3 July l97S
Initially and that experimentation vith the higher doee should be reconsidered by
the Committee after the initial results are submitted and reviewed. 
The other sug-
Seated modification to the protocol itself was proposed by COL Steinberg who thought
that the methodology for determining cholinestere 
levels should be stated.
The Comittee found that the consent agreement waw unacceptable since it did not
indicate the details of the experiments to be performed and the potential risks or
discomforts involved. 
The Human Use Reviev Office villa help the investigators to
draft a consent agreqent that meets acceptable standards.
AIDU and MC Decision: 
Approved, provided that the modifications agreed on above
are 
a 
ds,
3. There being no further business before the Joint Committee, the meeting was
adjourned at I515 hours.
4. After the close of the meeting, the members of The Surgeon General's Human Use
Comittee indicated their concurrence in the decisions reached during the Joint
Committee Meeting. 
Attached as Incl I is a statement of their concurrence signed by
each mosher.
I loci 
RICHARD' F. LANUIST, 
D.
as 
Colonel, MC
Chairman, Amy Investigational
Drug Reviov Board
Acting Chairman, Clinical
Investigation Committee
DAVID G. OObME
Colonel, MC
Acting Chairman, Human Use Comittee
APPDVED/DISAP&6VED:
RICHARD R. TAVOR, M.D.
Lieutenant General
The Surgeon General
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Clinical
Investigation Committee
DAVID G. OObME
Colonel, MC
Acting Chairman, Human Use Comittee
APPDVED/DISAP&6VED:
RICHARD R. TAVOR, M.D.
Lieutenant General
The Surgeon General
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

759
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
S 
OF "ft SU0.N GM9XA
INAoMINGeOKe,0. 
WOO,
#W1ly ve
&tZon" VIS
Iuow-m
Supplement to Minutes of Coubined Mooting of Army investigational Drul
rview oard, Human Use Committee and Clinical Inveetigation Committees
03 July 1975
Ve 
the members of-me Surgeon General'e Human Use Committee, 
concur in
the decisions reached at the combined meeting on research involving human
subjects. 
We agree that the rights 
and welfare ot human subjects were
adequately considered in reaching the decisions.
<2 
./
~di
ILA&. 
-7'7V ;g
XI
/
0

--- PAGE BREAK ---research involving human
subjects. 
We agree that the rights 
and welfare ot human subjects were
adequately considered in reaching the decisions.
<2 
./
~di
ILA&. 
-7'7V ;g
XI
/
0

--- PAGE BREAK ---

760
8SSD-R 
19 JnA 
It(
* SIBJICT$ Clinical Trials with the "TAR" Nerve ge Antidote (submitted
by COL C. McClure, MC, Director, Siomcdlcal Lboratory,
Id$eWod Areenal
Is% ftjclivs: To obtain information on the effects i 
e of the gerve
8801t antidote "TA" 
(BAT) when taken with coUi UliOitly used dmUS,
.
urtocl I',Study plea calls for concurrent administrationn of a potential
drUS of abun,0 ions; with the TAS foruulation (4 a& benactyline, 40 ag of
20-4 and I as of atropine fulphate). 
TWo dos levels of ach of the
following viii be admniaterod: 
dextroamphotamiwo, 10 and 20 egg secobarbital,
100 and 200 agi dtiepam, 10 and 20 mg; and lcc hol, 0.6 ad 1.2 ul/ke. 
One
and two doses of the TAR sutopen syrett s will be administered, The low dose
of each will be studied first, then a hilh dose 3fd 4r 
;ione 
I;k 
"**
Section, a low doss of drug ard two "SAT" injecdion? 1 
0UN 
CTJto 
r 
5s 
"
will be used at each of the dose combinations. Witl the exception of the 
,r,'l'
"AT" 
combination, all drugs will be given orally and on a testing stomach.
The "RAT' will be given one hour after the oral drugs. 
Lab tests will be
done at one, two, seven and 14 days. 
One hundred to 150 volunteers wil be
Involved.
3. 
Coments: 
This protocol will require ean ID submission to the Food aad
Drug Administration because the combination i# new and not an approved fornuo
lotion. 
Soenctysine. is marketed In an oral dosage form In combination with
Wmprob 
te. 114-4 is not marketed in any form and consequently I
investigational. 
The Investigators were notified of this some time So and
Were gIven a list of what additional materials would be necessary for an
acceptable submission. 
Most of the requested information has now trickled
in; ever, the requested stability date has not been forwarded nor has
a sample labl been forwarded. 
Details of the label can ge worked outb
prior to forvvrding the proposal to the rDA. 
Supporting date-for the
submission hes'ben received pLecmeal and s a result, it is somewhat
disorganised. .I anticipate the FDA Will slow an IND on what has been sub-
mIsted so far but I do believe the issuance will be followed by an extensive
list of qastions from the FDA reviewers.
4. 
Repeated requests have been made over many months for resonably definitive
stability data; however, none has been provided. 
This is information the
FDA will eventually require.
5. 
The consent fOrm is totAlly itnesnuete for the proposed e.'uy lUckin;
basically "hst is going to transpire and what are the potential cose-
quencso" 
Edgavood dops have a useful sad informative general "olunteer
taforoation packaae 
(only certain p=: "ere reproduced for bhe L4&nd4).
6AM:9l 
A 
4- 
Vv 
7 
, A%&t 
r4.&e the potential cose-
quencso" 
Edgavood dops have a useful sad informative general "olunteer
taforoation packaae 
(only certain p=: "ere reproduced for bhe L4&nd4).
6AM:9l 
A 
4- 
Vv 
7 
, A%&t 
r4.&

--- PAGE BREAK ---

781
.8K,'I 
Cusl.al Trials WMA the "W Seram Cas AutSdot (eumsitted
by COL C. WcClur, 
NC, Uge.B d Arseaul)
6. 
t would ask that the Mard numbers coeedW 
the uceesity of the pro-
posed 200 as doe of secobarbital sad also the appropriateness ad sf " 
t
of the 20 al dose of dextioaephertasae whees the "l? 
formlatio does In
feet hve carditameic properties,
7. 
To sewal protocul L tow ns 
the back of thes packet.
So 
The isvestiptors are still collection 
blood ehesstry and liver
ftntio datao the studies already done vith the formulation &cd vill
tormard It before additional huu 
studies ao dose.
Captain,, NSC
nu* 
Use Rseviev Office
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

OPARTMUE T OF THE ARMV 
Reed HUWtq
IAOMUTS, 9UWOOM A*SUAL
OWW"'ASIZW* 
P'vDIW UoIuu. 
AO"A*L 100
SAREA-BL 
May 1975
SUDJECT: Investigational New Drug - TAS
"W (SD-HR)
MASH DC 20314
1. Inclosed are preliminary raw data and draft summaries of In-
house/independent studies of the components of subject drug.
2. It is to be emphasized that the data supporting claimed in-
vestigational exemption for this drug are the dat available as
of 31 March 1975.
3. Further preclinical studies are required and no further human
research with TAB will be done pending the outcome of these pre-
clinical data.
FOR THE COM4ANDER:
I Incl 
C. MCCLURE, M.D.
as 
Colonel, HC
Director, Biomedical Laboratory

--- PAGE BREAK ---er human
research with TAB will be done pending the outcome of these pre-
clinical data.
FOR THE COM4ANDER:
I Incl 
C. MCCLURE, M.D.
as 
Colonel, HC
Director, Biomedical Laboratory

--- PAGE BREAK ---

763
1. Chollnesterase reactivator/cholinolytic mixture (TAB) - Administered
by the Intramuscular (IN) 
route.
*2. a. N,N'-trtmethylenebis(pyridinium-4-aldoxime)dibromide (THS-4).
b. dl-tropanyl-2-hydroxy-l-phenylpropionate sulfate (Atropine sulfate)
C. 4-diethylaminoethyl benzilate hydrochloride (Benactyzine)
3. 
TH-4 - 39.20 mg per dose
Atropine Sulfate - 1.03 mg per dose
Senactyzire - 4.40 mg per dose
pH adjusted to 3.8 + 0.1
Concentration variation allowed is 
S %S.
4. Source Of TV1-4 (new drug):
Aldrich Chemi';al Co., Inc.
940 West St. Paul Avenue
Milwaukee, WI 
53233
Tel (414) 273-3850
S. See Incl 2.
.
.
Incl 3 contains a-draft summaryof the available orer'linical
pherm4ological studies in non-hu-an pri mates, available raw data
from clinical pharmacological observations, and bibliographic material.
b. Incl 4 is a draft review of toxicology/lharmacology of the oximes.
7. Not applicable.
8. 
Responsible" inVestigator - NO "degree with 'experience/formal training
4n- physiology - pharmcology. 
Additional training in biochemistt'
desirable,
9. See Inc) 5.
S
10. 
a. &Clinical pharmacologic studies of interaction of TAB with comminly
uOed drugs will be determined, i.e., ethanol, various tranquilizing
agents, narcotics (morphine, den-erol, etc.).
b. Not applicable.
c. Controllcd by OTSG, Hm".A.
*Incl 1
O.026 0 - 76 - 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---ugs will be determined, i.e., ethanol, various tranquilizing
agents, narcotics (morphine, den-erol, etc.).
b. Not applicable.
c. Controllcd by OTSG, Hm".A.
*Incl 1
O.026 0 - 76 - 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

176A
I
(1) TloB..4 brom ide:
NrN'.Irlmethylenebis(pyrldlnum-4aldoxlme)dibromid
e- 
,O... 
HNOH 
.2Br "H20
.
CH"-CH2-CH2-OV
(2) Atroplne sulfate: 
molecular weight 464
Tropyl tropate qr
dl-tropanyl-2-hydroxy-1-phenylproplonate sulfate
*H
2C 
CH 
CH2  
CH20H
..
H2
N-CH. 
HC-O-C-CH 
H
2S04 'H20
HCCH. 
CH2
'" ": ":" 
• 
... 
' : 
• 
" ';inoe~iir 
WeigIht 6"95""
. ..... **" 
.
*. **-.:* 
; 
.. 
: 
-
; 
., 
..
*,. 
". 
"
". 
.
..
.
.
,. 
.
.-. 
.
.. 
.* 
: 
""' 
." 
." 
-' 
.... "' 
.
2 
" 
a 
1
(3) 
Benactyzine (benactizine):y 
" 
'" 
"
2 diethylaminoethyl benz 
roteohydrochlorie 
.
.1 
.
• 
i 
.
,
• "'" 
" /~C2H15 
•"" 
""
-C-C-O-CH2-CH2-N\ / 
HCI 
*
molecular weight 364
-
"L 
.' 
"" "iC 1"5" 
" ';" 
"" 
'C..
I NCL 1.

--- PAGE BREAK ---thylaminoethyl benz 
roteohydrochlorie 
.
.1 
.
• 
i 
.
,
• "'" 
" /~C2H15 
•"" 
""
-C-C-O-CH2-CH2-N\ / 
HCI 
*
molecular weight 364
-
"L 
.' 
"" "iC 1"5" 
" ';" 
"" 
'C..
I NCL 1.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

765
PRODUCTION PROCESS
Contract number
DAAAIS-75-C-OOS8
=Mrding the item s furnished to Edgewood Arsenal under contract number
IS-7S.C.0058# the following information is applicable:
1. Items were produced at Cartrix Parenteral Systems of St. Louis,
Missouri. 
Reference Master' File F125O for information regarding the
facility.
2. Preparation of the solution for each of the three lots T02110,
T02210 and T02310 wis carried out under the supervision of Richard K. Traub,
Chief, Human Factor: Offices Edgewood Arsenal. 
Reference process sheets
for these batches which were transmitted to Mr. Traub on 10/11/74.
3. Items were tested for sterility at K-V Fharmceutical In St. Louis.
Missouri. 
Reference letter of transmittal from Survival Technology, Inc.
to Mr. Traub dated 11/11/74 and attachments for test results. 
Reference
contract DAAA15-75-C-O058 and attachments for test parameters.
4. 
Items were tested for mechanical operation at Survival Technology, Inc.
in Bethesda, Maryland. 
Under the supervision of or under cognizance of
Mr. Melvin E. McGee of Edgewood Arsenal. 
Reference lettercf transmittal
from Survival Technology, Inc. to lr. Traub dated 11/11/74 and attachments.
.. for test results. 
Reference contract OAAAIS-75-C-0058 and attachments for
test parameters.
These data and all refetenr.ed data furnished in connection with contract.
"' 
' 
AA15-75-C-OQ58 'shall not -e disclose, outside the gove.-nt. 
"
INCL 2 
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---nts for
test parameters.
These data and all refetenr.ed data furnished in connection with contract.
"' 
' 
AA15-75-C-OQ58 'shall not -e disclose, outside the gove.-nt. 
"
INCL 2 
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

766
Sao
Stues pertoystd, ou bometysinev V04 aM atropine
3ssa~
"
Denaetyalne
2
Denaotyxine
3
Densotyzine 
4.00 
ES 
.
Atropine 
1.0 a &
Defnactysixw
Atroptne .
8.04 
"
1.0 
.,
.* .
m ., 
: 
k- o '.' .'...'" ;
Atropine 
1.0 kI
ax* 
1O.0 mg5
S
Sena~tysir.e
Atropine
JNW*3
,.0m...-.
1.0 as
1.0.0 xg
3
.9.. 
9*.,.
%~99
2'
I
Mesures
Heart rate, blood
pressure$ visual
Setivity, pupil.
site, performance
Measure
Heart rate, blood
pressure, visual
ativity, pupil
size, performance
measure
Heart rate, blood
pressure, visual
activity, pupil
else, performance
.heart rate; blco-
S .
pressure, visual
a.tiviity, pupil
4 * 
.'r*roa" 
ir: 11a4,
o° 
c
Heart rate, blood
-pressureI visal
alse, perfornance
Se l~st .rae, 
blood
pressure, visual
activi- , pUPil
• tze, performnce
measure
H eart rate (M3j,
perfor- ance measure
66
" 
e
S 
.
- -
- "..nM
• 
• 
.
O

--- PAGE BREAK ---

767
Atropine
semeptysine
Atropne
DenaetysS/ne
Atropine
L*ose
h.0 as
1.08u
2.0 wS
80.0 vs
1.. 0 ug
1.0 us
8.0 us
2.0 s
8.0 Mg
10. oft ubect-.
1'+
1*
8
2 
.
4't
ILeaSureu
heart xate (O)
Perfuumme *"siure
Heart rate (MIos
performance measure
Operant performce,
Heart rate
Operant performance',
H heart rate
* 
..**. ~-:**.~ 
*
.9
...~* 
.
.
.. 
.. 
.. 
... 
.
.
.
.
•
* .
.*. 
, ; '. 
... 
.. * 
.. .. 
". ; 
*.... 
.. 
.*..* 
': . .
.
: . .
. .
.
* 
.
.
-
.
.
-... *. 
*b* 
*
* 
... 
., 
*.)*. .4'..
* 
.d~ *D
* *. 
.
.
4' 
.... 
""." " 
" 
•. 
.
" 
.
..
) .~l .. '. 
....
o- 
. .
.
•** 
• 
•* 
• 
*• 
.
.,
* 
.
... 
.
*0
* 
* 
.... 
.... 
.
*9
* 
'Tcpera urc W"C, Relative humidity 1d540
T4ZPert~re 350C, Relative huidiS4ty -:~o Wa1ing on trea1dnl13 nph
n T 
I- 
7_W"
loe' 
f 
,inal
" " 
ee .
.
.. • 
; 
.
" 
• 
I 
"e 
.
O,

--- PAGE BREAK ---* 
'Tcpera urc W"C, Relative humidity 1d540
T4ZPert~re 350C, Relative huidiS4ty -:~o Wa1ing on trea1dnl13 nph
n T 
I- 
7_W"
loe' 
f 
,inal
" " 
ee .
.
.. • 
; 
.
" 
• 
I 
"e 
.
O,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Yap.-nents Ut15ss~i. 2 
for treatetat of D .&z 
U inticatimo.I
UP 
-
b:
A; 
?oio dose of M3 Sm Us camOp ak 
uobalaeredA bv
ntletholirsteras. exos 
e:...
"&tinistrtiocn of 5 to 20 t1es the bum-."a equivalent
,ago 
o. 
s leeam$ to no noticeable 0 met in t.,caed anq4 in an.
air conditions ecvlr 
ent1  
,,
oAministratIo of 25 tit** the hu".n equivalent dose
Sladutos the aral 
to ecoz.e lethwrgic &s*" o*ewhat gro&y .u t there
U o ts t  
~ si~~i" 
"e 
.
A~.
AhUw4 valwd' 14.)' 
wi~OCO2iO1~y 
th hCat Stress.
B. 
.
ivra-zasculiz OXposure of =wkeyot to. OD
* 
at &aLose of 31 
04? the oneV t.eyrptomaro. 
are
. .:tcd 
In 2 to 3 Olnute. Aeadln to 
t 
e&tb at 8 to 10 ninue.
.... 
, a the 
-st 
of. aj"o"tos the wtidot. so.tiot 
o 
A3".
is amd=nisterod i.=.) 
Via con 
vie nove=eLts stop a.iest .*O 
ia.oby
vith sOra otura of 
&o-osc.an1lns. 
a--ns lyi" in he
.' 
* 
, 
.
.
.
.
* 
.. 
.• 
" 
, 
• 
.
.
votta of .te ;eis 
respzo:4sve, to tactile sti- 4atloa but mapers
Unwrawe of *ur:wr4Ir.P. the OUea' 
coatinues to breath srftMclent
*to support itsrlf for a ~period of 5to~bowit (cop=roa to 10 
15I.
xinitos it the 5 
-
s-_tcs are treated vie atropine xao.).
AwS~lateio; of *a41.t~cma doses e 
d~J 
o not apear to S.pr-.rw the
-cQ4244on 
&=-1 
~S5Li.or Itrzzet t 
*3 
si 
ra uze- .O the L*o'-1
Is suppartea- 'wilth S 
.
rztO. 0n a ., 
t- 1 
of w 
.-&tU.'. hrat,
li1a -wzz t'c rovlcze bt tho am!=a 1LOeS u.') bet=* ftz~;teait of

--- PAGE BREAK ---Li.or Itrzzet t 
*3 
si 
ra uze- .O the L*o'-1
Is suppartea- 'wilth S 
.
rztO. 0n a ., 
t- 1 
of w 
.-&tU.'. hrat,
li1a -wzz t'c rovlcze bt tho am!=a 1LOeS u.') bet=* ftz~;teait of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

769
* 
.
-. 
- .
9
A.Ietbal 
r 
a--ertcrlte 
solution va plscaG o the
sbavea to*a&= or s r-r 
teI 
of a conscios restrained mooke).
00 lethal doe (2 d-ope/X& spreal WNW, j= 2 of *aved b*11, 
area
&t 75 - 8° 
oF) kUc 
'o 
fte control. 
saas s a pro at 
"
4o to 60 nllutes. 
DbcoutaSA.ation of the OD exjm..6 are. ts Uanseess.
since al o & the CD voiltilfzos trc3 the nerthecrolate r:xture tn
less then l5 n1cutes r£t roo 
te:pro'amture. 
Treetaznt vas initiated.
at the first 
"eti n 
it 
E 
m 
f't j 
(trcmorp.8 fas i¢ 
.99. 
i 
c sls of 
,
.4*oxcIo "nssbrl4cmrda or respiratory distress), vhIch oocure4"
*~~'
9
4iSar 
'.A 
:*.Ve 
;..'t'..9'..*9 
..
, .
ap p m I. t ey 20 zo hO vi 
m tei 
Cft r *X p * U . • 
".. 
". "
..(3j.,, Atr!Mlre at.o* it a dosX. carable. to t 
s
in.)ecin anowed t,. Anz4 to,"io 
in 9 
"3 
ourS vthout
.9. 
... 
.
*.: 
.
.
:
..
9.', 
.
• 
.
.
.
.,.. 
., 
... 
.
.
.
.: 
** 
*. ... 
:' 
", 
. 9 
... 
..
* 
t 
.
.
9 
a. 
.
,9*
* 
aA P 
at & icotritLon ccc-pable t the s 
vtt rixtoure
* 
.9.. 
~ .9 
* 
9 9
firsbl 
Wth 
woe. hsi
$cme recovery %of 
ithge fis 
do 
-ft 
I
T o11o~ed eae vs]-ePe to thetc~s 
oiO~va syv*err
appsant vitth 
e scco.o&e o the sz:e.rxt e but not toltbe s=*
extent uo.-ure4 & 
r tberst 
do". "aft ani_-s 
die a-ftr 3 I"
hours even 
a 
otter 
i -ww arc treated with at-roptne or r e. 
atropine.
S 
* 
. .,

--- PAGE BREAK ---the sz:e.rxt e but not toltbe s=*
extent uo.-ure4 & 
r tberst 
do". "aft ani_-s 
die a-ftr 3 I"
hours even 
a 
otter 
i -ww arc treated with at-roptne or r e. 
atropine.
S 
* 
. .,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

770
* 
-
3 
retat@ 
~t~ 
ih 
~ 
~~, 
3ea:sr
A COMOntrWt 
S cto 
the str.t 
zU4.re.
MW anjo-ul recovers ilth th firct .dos (reeuier viii stouh to, tee,
fb, 
.bite sa *at) the ~rlapsos to a stite vith nizo treors A
sow 
loss Of ¢OsOlCCsteSS 
&ZiOfrtV&tOa Of & eOOc& 
doss e960 leas
-to XSouternt 
A? 
re 
W li 
oiijt 
a 
z4t
Szwaiu in a core stable condltion. 
The antzal often reuIsres alditiowa
atropine or nethy atropine to oobat respiratory obstrotion end.
excess salivation*
the blood cholinostr~ae level tall to 6% o. nor-al bofor
Ubp onset of symptcwx 
oc-pur. Treatment vith. .j box no affect on the
.,. 
.
.
.
. .
;. .
• .r 
' 
.
.
' .
.. , 
.
-
t-. 
.
.. .
. ., : .* 
. .. 
.4t
blool cholinestorase level. *AltJouh there Is rZ recover) of the bloo
, 
.
.
I 
,-f
• : 
f€oory of tho "bIral. 
h.. function of the cxkA in thv, treataost of
.. o,, r z 
ai. umar ,ai , ., 
... ..,... :.... 
... 
. .,.. 
.
.
.
,.,,.
* 
* 
*0* 
* 
o
* 
.
.f 
".. 
o1.
4:. 
%, • 
-A. 
* 
L, 
06. 
.
•*
* 
, 
: 
.
..
• 
.. 
.*J.
00".CIOUaS restrained mo-ey. 
Tho ietm 
doI e (W'r- s :read 
over'
3A l. t r, &Ved WUl area at '; 
.h' 
900) 
killed all of the. control ..
a•" was lh a 
--e .1c4't' .0 to 75 nrtutes; "Do¢tAfatlon vas carried
"* 
' ' 
.
"' 
* 
• 
; 
". 
" 
* 
' 
* 
". 
* 
' 
•.* 
". 
*- 
.
,
out La all a=Lbols (Control as val as treated) v£M the.a=.onlun
. Wbeulate.chlo .WAn 
T solutions or the Oblack toe 15 minutes after
expoure to i.
IC
a

--- PAGE BREAK ---". 
* 
' 
•.* 
". 
*- 
.
,
out La all a=Lbols (Control as val as treated) v£M the.a=.onlun
. Wbeulate.chlo .WAn 
T solutions or the Oblack toe 15 minutes after
expoure to i.
IC
a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.... 
..
* 
.o
*a 
• D( 
alone v7noat uttept( in this sort 
at operxe:,=tg.
0), ( 
trezt~out ot m.Ttoms vith a embSlation ofAt _____
ea Ihnscty'21re at a concentration osa 
sreable to the rrette nlxtwo
" 
imttaItes a response vary aft-1ar to that observed In troat.ent o 
GD.
. te 
anizol rocovors tor a period of' . to 10 
tutes iaA U.n release.
fte ant=% stov sce recovery vith succeeding iposes.ut dies vitbin
to 3 tArs. 
.
(3) 
notkeys treated vLth a combirAtion 
'i..-. 
A6rof4ne
~~~~rcvr 
enA 
'nc~~~WCVI 
a ianbor vor' c11w to,.theonpz-4*vW exposed 
.
to GD. 
The animal recovers, relappes an& recover& again with thme
,, ,... 
. / 
- :*,., , 
.. 
e. , 
,.: 
.....
• 
. .
. .
.. J.*.* 
• 
..
mefthl atropine to ccelt, sallvatioi and 6ironcb;a coiitLctlO!.-
Afteor VX exposure arzA;s 'be In ~Pb 
uh*9v .
.
.
.
.
* 
t 
;" " 
.
*b6o o, ye 1#'p" 
iO%;t 
6 
oial. "A 
,itration 
of-
. . . . .
.
.. 
.. 
.. 
.
.
1"
520. Inluces a trans.ont , a.ost insicnifl9utstinnarease it .blood-.
* boansteraso levels (2-3 ) with a rcir 
totbt6oi~ina ' dtaprasseo'
" evel" 
The anirAl recovers after the seen doe. -ot Us vithoat a
-I 
1pT 
D 
t 
* 
2. 
blool.. abollnesterasi level.,
The Initial syi)ptos of VX poisoning can be chello=W~d vith
atropino and bensety-Ine. 
It PAU is then abiuistre4 1ntravenowsly
"the blood eholinasterase level- can be elevate b, I-%. Cinicafly
the anla. recovers faster than those vtich aw trewt4 Vith a
morul dose or TAB. 
If the saze experirm.eit is conmiutcd uttl:i;rg
W 
(ait 1, to 20 tUzes the no 
yl 
s-rette coneet ation) 1e Sof
* blool en:,e level can be acbovoe but the anmal dies. 
.e le't 
l
effect Is pmba'iy due tip the hij&a level *V 2S'* zmraLzed to-
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---0 tUzes the no 
yl 
s-rette coneet ation) 1e Sof
* blool en:,e level can be acbovoe but the anmal dies. 
.e le't 
l
effect Is pmba'iy due tip the hij&a level *V 2S'* zmraLzed to-
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

772 
..
achieve those wea.-7 )v.).* 
Tboretocoo the Oda* *Wst es 
;63, OS
the teoat 
t of both 0 and V3 but 104 may mttzat 
be top.aod vift a
afr oxI** O
5. 
htAV&Dois Okposure of Mocey tow
'An intravenous infusion of G at a rate ot 7.5 Uag/XZ/IAnu t OL-uatos
an aerosol eKSODUCO of I WN/anitep
(a) 
Treatekmt of exposure to 2 wn GD 
,v,
The first UP antLdotwa troeaont Is administered at the onset of saypto s
which occur at I - 1 1/2 ninutos after t~.e beginning of exposwo., 
After
ad~nIstra tion of the LArst TAS antLdot* £n/action# woh.e 
-y 
still exporLence
total body convulsions vhich deteriorato to random Lnvolur.tary rov=,Dnt of.
£ 
th l~n.~ 
u~i~1~ 3~* v~tQa e..icn~vi~asstate exh~bit.n ~
:-: response' to t a 
"otio 4" ti visuali stLnmlus. "Upon-aft zstxajLq" of. a.seoond- vA) 
. .
antidote injecto. aftw a duratio, o. at loast ,thiee r.knuto8 folloang the.
first antidotinjeotion, tIy 
a.sign are o*t.*L~ize 
but the~ levelof
.. 
sc.os 
,n • .,." .sc.p 
40" , 
.. 
."
obstruc tio 
i *viont and rospLtatip~ 
as 
noa 
~cnlpten. 
h
&DWIult-Atly dice of apparent respiratoryjselluze t~o to three hoiart alter
exposure. 
.
'.A. 
;..
* 
.
* 
.
• .
* 
% 
.. 
.
..
• 
-
.
, 
,.
* (b) 
Repeat of expericant utilizing iv. 
infusion ~f41/3.WS' GD for *
duratLn of 3 1/2 Vinutes. 
The onset of sy- ptoms and ad.-dastra tio. of
antidote ocor at app roxritely te e 
tieo At this OeOsure o! 1 1/2 LV5, G2
the animals are able to suv-ixe slightly Icn..er than exper-Lent cendctod at*
a ISO, 
lhowvo# there a 
0e 
no pea-.Ant s"V=iV's." 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---ely te e 
tieo At this OeOsure o! 1 1/2 LV5, G2
the animals are able to suv-ixe slightly Icn..er than exper-Lent cendctod at*
a ISO, 
lhowvo# there a 
0e 
no pea-.Ant s"V=iV's." 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

773.'
Te rats, approxir.ately 250 gme each yore injected intramuscularly
Ste the hind 15 wit.% 0.5 allrat of T.AO3. solution,
A11 rats were .unable to properly use the Injected leg for a period
of 2.4 hre. 
Thereafter, all rate recovered cmpletely without shoving
any other sign of ;osicity; There wereto 
deaths*

--- PAGE BREAK ---s were .unable to properly use the Injected leg for a period
of 2.4 hre. 
Thereafter, all rate recovered cmpletely without shoving
any other sign of ;osicity; There wereto 
deaths*

--- PAGE BREAK ---

774
~%AW.~
4
8 A e~,4 
*4p.*~ 
2.o
I
S
Table I su=-.&rLses the vork thus far completed on coubinatfs of
benActyaine 1CL, atropine sulfate, and TB-k IA referred to heren as
AT.
W3UkhTIO~s AND
-1 
St 
2.1;) 
t 
I 
,ItJ,,3R, 
TS, 
vA
SIW10 
9(3.9)o A(.85) 
I 
w RS bPP SVA
8(3.9) A(.s) T(3.A) 
3 
Nip HRS SPPS, VA
is TI, VIO)i
•. 
_ 
, 
35I0 
2 
pr IIRI RT
S"-35 
gO14 1 
HFKR* P.T
5 (8.5) 
3 
II H 
P+Y
3(7.8) A(I.?) T(71.8) 
3 
?IP,'I;RPIPPS, A
of 
3 M, 
kus P. 
DPs %phV.
*6 
S 
KFPI PPS VA
D 
OuM,. 
(8.0) A(2.0), T(80.0) 
t,VIG,,R
•". 
" 
2 
Up V I, F.R
-
Subjects traed with
* 
SO lapII. 
phy~ost ri tr.s 
.
1(7.8) AL. 
(4.8)
3 3$0/9079 
.
1 
II.T
a S benactygine HCL A I atropine sufAte; T a TIM-4 HIR, UP n -u,-r
Facility test HA a beart rato, SP v blood pressure 
PS a pupil sitc
VA a visual acuity, TI a tir ostLmatiqn test, VIO = vigilanco tcst,
aR 
a rectal temperature.
the effects oF
The thrust of the ex.erirt 
'ts 
vos to compare and contrzst-.(tin-le aid
double doses of WT txixc*.rr.u physic&l.ly tknd psychologically. 
-crp are
obvious dLf-orences bo'teen single an$ double does on soze measures au:h
s ) 
.J-:Z- 
the ?04 tests tie estL-Ations vigil.nceo 
and heart Tate.
Oa othvr rasursrt.. dif frences are r .ll and for the W.oft art % Ith i:t
sigqifiC LnCe oilicirily. 
D'; 
."Ia;z 
u':x:xi Date is not yet tVaLIcble
to c6.-.P'rq the tuo doses with respect to icctal tecporature. 
Althoulh I-ere
wctttx% 
ezict* cone -ciczr dUIffcranzes tetvan single z:sd ecu%$I* iCofes
When P*?U!3t,'on. Le" 
are ccom-pared, there As,, exists a stgnificti positive
correlationce cn Ircrecstnr, dso size by body aiSbt and inc.cas;i, 
.4rj3
effects,* That i3s within the Fin le ani double cste;ories a graded 4aru-
effect is found vhich should be considered in any treatment regimen.
I
.,- Ntnr, dso size by body aiSbt and inc.cas;i, 
.4rj3
effects,* That i3s within the Fin le ani double cste;ories a graded 4aru-
effect is found vhich should be considered in any treatment regimen.
I
.,- N

--- PAGE BREAK ---y aiSbt and inc.cas;i, 
.4rj3
effects,* That i3s within the Fin le ani double cste;ories a graded 4aru-
effect is found vhich should be considered in any treatment regimen.
I
.,- N

--- PAGE BREAK ---

S o .
775 
•
Consider now some comparisons between sinse And doable doses on
the various measures recorded. 
.i
•eart rate (R11) ma with the subject In the supie position 
increescd
about Ar with a single dos 
,5 with a double dose# and 60o 
wlth a singe
dose plus 35C90% relative hbaldlty. These Increases are with respect to
haaeline rates at room temperature and huzLdLty. Standing heart rate increased
Adu 
about 2CZ with a single dose and S0 vLth a double dose. Under 35$/9C
conditions staadLig R Increased 7S 
after a single dose. to general the
effect of a single d6so of MT on heart rate under 35*/90% conditions vis to
produce alm Me 36% higher than when no drug was $Iven. Only one subject
vas tested In the beat chamber with v double gam dose. The subject reques td to
taken out of the chamber shortly after the Injection. He complained of n :
being able to breathe, 
Ne was removed as he appeared to be byperventill- ing
which 
Txhi-xv.bzr.u 
was probably core an ecotionat reaction than drug efct.
Once removed from the heat chamber the subject's respiration and HR dropped
zkaz#*Fx to only 6uderately elevated levels.
Blood pressure& (tP) after either a double or single dose showed only
a slight increase durLn 
the fLrst 40 Pin. followed by ap Ltghtly depresseA5..,
•+'evo1 2-3 his aftir the injection; CXzA".X..
P 
?upil 
sar (IS) increased only 1-1.5 6s over aro-al following LtLr a
Visual acuity (VA) k.tzpxat d decreased shirol:' after either a sLntle
or double dose and then improved slcwly over the next 12 hours. The decr.act
was about U1ZV 15-207o slightlyy core for the double dose). 
X.st subjcc:s'
eyes tam= bec&= injected within minutes following the Injection. Blacki
subJects. feem*4 to .have.oa pronounced ocular Injection.
* 
* 
iubor facility (1F) performance dropped 15 and IOZvithin' 10 nin.
Zbllowing single aJs and double doses$ respectively. 
.
dais Return to baseline took about 2-2 1/2 hts regsrdiess of dose. 
So=e
of the decrement on the F is attributable to zha visual impairenat. ltsts
hovevero seems due to the central effects of ta 
MT.
Time estizaton (T£) per.Aprance dropped 20-00 
after a single dose 'th
ram return to baseline reqi.-ir.g about 1-1 1/2 bra. 
After a double dove, -73
drdpped '75-90. and required rUuclonger t" 
than u.5 bra for recovery.
Treatund uith rhysostLcniro.was most effective z*±-.x 1 hr after dose,. Give-n
30 nin after dose the zU t:eatnt 
effect -as not as co=pletc.
Vigilance perforr-ance dropped only slightly after a single dose for
most mx.n xz subjects. After a double doze error rate was about l00 
itLb
some recovery at 4 hour after dose. Treatont vith physostigine reduced
error rate to u 
near ze*o 
iLhLn 3-3 qinutos.dose for
most mx.n xz subjects. After a double doze error rate was about l00 
itLb
some recovery at 4 hour after dose. Treatont vith physostigine reduced
error rate to u 
near ze*o 
iLhLn 3-3 qinutos.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nuawr adIlity Tet -
freenaoge of 3a4oILVA
A
D0SZ. 
CONTROL 
-
.
cr=IFX-ru 
TDW
I 'scones onio 0010 'pito 
wl1 o o'10 cc
S
59 67
3i'8 
19 
12
? 
0 O 0.40 
0'A~O
9o 
8 
89 
89 
al 
ICO
1, 
I 
• 
2517 
18 
7
71 82 
9s 
99 
.96 
96 
107
13 
T 
17 
15 
.5 
13 
13
I'
PM C
V1."i 
11100
~:10 9
13 
S
G 
I.
?spa sin (W
s 
A 
3.2 . .2 
3.0
.3 
.
.3
DJ- 
4L .o-4.
'4.::
.0
I..,
3.7 
3.6 
3.8
.6 
.5 
.3
5.0 .,.8 
.
.7
3.8
i,,6
i.0
4.0
4. S
.b 
0,. 
.. S 
.5 
.3 
.6 
.5
.
.
.. 
.....
S 
0.9 
7. a 
8.3 
9.0 
8.2 
8.7 
9.7 
9.8 
9.7 
9.5. 9.8 
9.q • 
9.2
, VLruAI Afty, 
.
.... 
-
.
2.0 
2-. 
2. 
3.0 
2 2.8 
3.2 
3.3 
3.2 
3. 
3.3 3.3 
2.8
•110 
8.8, 9.o 
9.0 
9.2 10.0 
9.8 
9.s 
10.3 10.3 
10.3 11.3 
1.U0
.".' 
'96 1. 
0 
8 
.. 
7.5 
1. 
1. 0 
-,
VLual AmuLcy - Vat
(Orthotater)
ATsrt PtA - SaplAs
(fteao r"a 
m7T~()
5 
9.7 
8. 5-.0
2.0 
2.2K 2.6
D 
.8 
8.8 •.7.7.
1.2 
1. 
1.8
-s 
.5 
75?
75
8.5
69 
l8 
-78
9.3 
8.7
2.9 
2.3
8.S 
8.7
.5 1.-2
72
79 -09 
100 
87
~j~-y.21,
8.7 
8.8 10.0
2.8 
3.3 
3.5
9.2 
8.7 
9.0
2.0 
.3 
1,0
67 
65
3 
6
,85
76
67
9.0
3.S
9.2 10.2 
8.8
3.2 
2.9 
2.0
9.S 
10.2 
9.7 
10.2
1.7 
1.9 
1.8 
1.2
S7 
60 
71 -
62.
" 
1 " 157 
"i
C'
*1 
*.
It
TABLE 
M eans &0. stoodyd devition.- comparing a sLza~1e to a double dcce of SATV. A= 3
79 
.,.7 
9 
7 
67 
f I
12 
". - 1-0 
' 
III
Wio
qW.01040M 
-
- 404bap-wo- 
,Wft 
ww
I
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---It
TABLE 
M eans &0. stoodyd devition.- comparing a sLza~1e to a double dcce of SATV. A= 3
79 
.,.7 
9 
7 
67 
f I
12 
". - 1-0 
' 
III
Wio
qW.01040M 
-
- 404bap-wo- 
,Wft 
ww
I
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

aV
I
'EZJK I 
(Co~tinuod)
D 
SU 
CWL0 
.
"0 Lt=" 
I 
n 
0 
M 
O02
SCRES 
0010't 004.0 
0110 
01).0 0210 020 D3l.0 040 ' O5*,0 agiO 
I20 
21i0
S 
'87 
S: 
103 
.100 
97 
81 
91 
89 
9" 
82 
77 
7-1 
7
fleslt 
la€e. 
-
aa.g 
11 
5 ,48 
4 
.13 
a 
5 
16 
23 
16 
16 
B 
"10
-"(heas 
Nw liat)
itfg)
86 
Ilr 147-:127 
105 
109 
9 
106 
9 
93 
93 
71 
9g
12 
W 
2..a 
94 
2 
16 
15 
a9 
8 
13,
8 
125 
11s 117 '12 
107 
105 
103 
110 
-111 
103 
103. 
113 
M32
" 
"10 %r-. 16 
1-4 'IT " 
-3 
'2 
T 
"
0 
115* 
123: 
135 
.128 
117:131 
106 
111 
110 
118 
1.20 
117 
110
22 ~ 
09 
5 
5 
4 
9 
2 
4~
D I tol£L 
$ 
83 
781.: 
74 ; 61 
b2 .70 
61 
63 
1 
63 
58 
; 
£2
(mi 
4g
D 
70 
go 
B0 
S 
80 
7S5-7S 
72 
CC 
73 
77 
7P#. 
63
8 5* 
9.11 
6 
6 
5 
7 
5S 
2 
10 
4 
s
'SycetolL 
S 
114 
il 105 .4 
96 
112 
100 
97 
100 
113 
99 
D1S 133 
115
R1iod ftosa 
-e Suafito 
b 
40 
14 
14 
5 
14 
12 
11 
15- 
19 
r G
S fig);"
D 
119 
1,'o 
122 
21s 
106 
112 
123 
123 
119 
111 
113 
11G 
104
.~~f. 
"" 
-
a 
-"s 
1-. 
0-6 
""' 
"' 
"
10 
11. 
7 
10 
7 
6 
22 
U1 
ai 
9i' 
~~
DLAs-tolic 
-S 
82 
77 
69 
57 
68 
60 
60 
GS 
.73 
61 
69 
o.'5 72
• 
80 
89 
S 
8so 
79,. 01 
83 
81 
72 
86 
0 
i1 
to
"- 
'7 ".,3 
" 
.
1- 
3 
S. 
"7 T
I
",4
"4
i I IIIII 
I I N 
-
-- 
II 
IIII I 
.
II III' -
" 
-
' ... 
.. 
II
".. 
,.
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

t
L1
* 
4,
• . \ 
-"
r7
0 
-.
r 
":: 
• \ "
• 
' 
.::.1
4,
4 
.'
• 
t, 
.
!!.. 
" .
.
• 
" 
" 
" 
" 
" 
."d- 
," 
.
.
a
@' ~yfc-Dose&
0 rt" 
l
m%l
ra S;ne.14 Dare,
.J.L le' Doseo
30
S" 1t -
6* 
U 
I
'r
I-
flo10-
n:
'C 
tio
'0 
* 1,0
4,
U,
y.
1oo-
.5O~
'C
I 
-
-
SI- 
i
/2.o 
Z..c
L 
: c
|
• 
1 ,,,,, 
-
... .. 
.
.. .. 
_
...
o: 
o
q
L
• °
I
A

--- PAGE BREAK ---.J.L le' Doseo
30
S" 1t -
6* 
U 
I
'r
I-
flo10-
n:
'C 
tio
'0 
* 1,0
4,
U,
y.
1oo-
.5O~
'C
I 
-
-
SI- 
i
/2.o 
Z..c
L 
: c
|
• 
1 ,,,,, 
-
... .. 
.
.. .. 
_
...
o: 
o
q
L
• °
I
A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 
1%
8
* 
ES
TT
IPres, ure 
(.P,1 r.
0
*
S
6~4
-C7 
tic~
tL04 
~LQ//Aours 
--
O Do~4ce~
0LIOoe
i6*? 
I 
, 
,*--
130
mo
I
i
;IT1
~0-
d
'.4e,
.n=3
VJ
''0/i
p 
.#
a4o
A
1
I
I
Q
4
I
et0

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Blood Press.-re - ~S~JL:Dias'
O'las o/,;:
o $jof.b D .Oc"
J05kll.
o
1 
%
Syro/
/ Ck-- C3%
Ha
0-o
0•- 
-
* 
0
-. 
'-u----(' 
\ /
( 
I= 
3. 
•
(1=3"' 
"":-•
ISO-
-130-I
.Io-
'C,-
a o0dt~ !~.
T0
ii1
4.
so-
70-
O-
0
4u
01zl
X7 
.
# 
r4-- 
.-4.-0
0: '-'-r 
. z 
,i./€ , ! z~.10 
.4*1 .',. 
",.. , 
: u

--- PAGE BREAK ---

,° 
,-,
Siz 0 
Z
0-*
I 
*. 
t. 
I 
I 
1 
'I~I.
•1.g 
2..C92.747 
4? 
.
' "7 
.
20,] 1 
" 
w
Pupil
I
* 5-
C
(:~)
2..-
.0
9
n=3
1~
*1I
.o 
&o 
,b/e
I.
/U1
,6-
I
00

--- PAGE BREAK ---

*11
v o". 
./ /c 
.
o' 1,,, " 
• " 
."
Fa,s 
/A Lasc" 
"
'u 
/Iu 
I 
+- 
o--o"
,, 
.- OU.O 
ZJ ... 
,. 
i 
'
J0-
'0ID
V
V
I /6 7 1 2:7 I I. 
, 4 7
•3. 
T47
-
*
o -
I
hI 
°.
0
U
5-
/
/
Me
6
7
0
% 
7..:
.ti
-. 7
IZ.OO
|
. ol
€
,2,0

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Al I./)e t Taclf" Ta sT
I 
I 
I 
I 
I I
Mi 
W? '.*C7 
4.Wt 4C41
% N
(:5
,. .1
N
N.
/I
co-
40-
0-
n =3
Dose.
o 
ul/
o Dubl.
CA4
I 
-~ 
-
eIo"
I 
.
I 
--
I
, ' 
'/.A 
A .t.7
.° 
I
1
Alo
ob
U

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7"
So- IWf, 
&40
gcO- 1
ZtYk 
.// ..
*
I. 
:
/0 
I 
,20 30 
.:
,;tt 
.
.
/0 
0"2'o:.6t 
.
.35
Ilj
4' 
,
3
I
0
'I"
€.fl
-0:
I
0 ,
-4
%

--- PAGE BREAK ---

. 0
~.. 
I
'Ii
* 
'
a
0
* 
.0
0 "1* 
AiF
I .
0
0,
0
a 0
.
.
*, 
.*
2/ne.
, 
.0 
, 
.
/D
4i~,eJ Sc~4re. os~-. 
-C ~
.100-
j~~A"~
-.. ,
K
20-
4-
e-!
I
o0oA
00

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7\,.
I 
I 
.
30 
40 
;~ 
A
° ! "I" 
'
LWIJ
" : 
/e '
F
?Z 60
o 
d,,.
rjr
9,
0'
°
; 
°
,t
14(q ICIZ 
I ii 3(j-

--- PAGE BREAK ---787 
'
Calesnick, B.; Christensen, J.

A.

end Richter, M.

Ruin toxtcity of various
oxics, 
Archives of E..virn-r.ntxl P.eolthp, 
599-c08 
1967.

Chronic study of 12.5-33.2 zgi/kg T;%CL 2 yes Given to 11 subjects.

)st
Co' 'a 
copleints vere of gastrointestinal disco=iort: epiga.eric pain,
abdouinel diste.nsion.

diarrhea, and weight loss.

All toxic s;=ptoms
developed &pproxi-ately 6 uk efter continuous administration of drug.

In 8/11 it vas siter I Smlday and for 3/11 for 2 gz/lay.

THB- is
6-10 tites nocro toxic then 2-P;.4, CL.

6 hrs after L Sm p.o.

T.,3-4 CL2 - a decrease in systolic end diastolic
blood press-ire.

No significant chsn es occurred in the ZCG though blood
levels of 2-3 ut&/=1 ap- epred in the b.ood bct%'een 2 and 4 hours.

24-hr
urinary recover- retea vas 30'..

30 rz/tg i.v.

resulted in blood pressure
decrease bout .

hours 
after injection.

Urinsry recovery rate irxx± (2-..-r)
for iLv.

vs 96;.

..d for I.,.

was 34.

7,',47.

1 etchu-#, 3.

S.; Side'l, P.

R.; Cro'well.

E.

B.; Aghajenian 0.

X.; and P!ayes,
A.

I!.

Atropine, scopol..iine, end ditran: Co-.parctive pharrocology and
rnt,8onists in ran.

Psychh~r=col.-JP (Lri.)1 
28 
121-145" 1973
The findifr:s Indicxte that there are no qualitative differences in the
.,ctions of these compounds, but.

there Jre differences in potency, relative
ccntrpl Pffi-ity, Pnd ti=t course of effects.

Effects of hithh eoses
occur ito 3 p mtses: induction, stuppr, eelirfu.

Is disturbtnce in ti7-c
percep icn v.-s thc r-st cc.-n "bn 
.r-.,lizy of cl': 
sc.ort..

!

Zi..

::r.;.

..dir)rien.rt.-.ion*,'nd ino'-er"Wce consisctentiv peo.ed whenever N F icor_ 
:
fell below.

C..

of b.neline.

The ED5 
e 
for tnis t' orcur was calculated
by pro'bit tnlysis to be : 152, 20, r.d 100 ug/1Iq; for atropi.e, scop1;..-.e,
rnd Ditrpn, respectively.

60 ui;/*Izg 
.h.ysosti ,ine 
salicylste i.n.

.iven 2
after 175 ug/k, t-tropine produced dr .- tic clinical i-prover,:nt within
15 minutes.

Is-.-effect lp-ted less t'..: 4 hr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

.iven 2
after 175 ug/k, t-tropine produced dr .- tic clinical i-prover,:nt within
15 minutes. Is-.-effect lp-ted less t'..: 4 hr. Tre.t.vant with neoticr..n
produced a drp.r.tic reduction in hze. heart rite but did r.ot a fect !:F s:zres
Tre't.2,.:t with th.e phenothirri.e tcr.nuilizers, C chlorpro=-:inn rnd
perl.henotine. portentiated the effects of the enticholiner$ic d.-ucs. Only 17.8 ug/kr, atr.pize necked to raire Ihcart rete 30 bpm uhile 63.6 s, ik
required to lo'er N7 score below 75Z of beaeliie. %"
Lor-Sof V. G. Sehovioral and electroenche-L,.b;raaphic effects of ittropine e.. reloted cozpctun.ds. brrch 
tce .vfevs, 
IS (2), 965-93-, 
1966. . I
/.t
1:'o-.e 
.c--tole 
in .in: 
0.5 r- -
sltht 
erei 
c slo-'i".; &ome 
1 
2-.s
of the r-o-ith: i.hibitto. o. seating. 1.0 r.3 - definite dry-ess of
thirst: fccc e-..t 
of herrt; soeti!-es preceded by slowi.--; =id dii ,'.:i-'i
of pupil. 2.0 :-g rapir heert rote; rJ.i-ntition; -,.-red xe:ost.--.=.;
dilpteJ pupils; so-e blurring of near vision. 5.0 =S all the ebove s5=vtc-6-
fcti'e; 
.erdc:h.e; 
dry s'cfn; difficulty in mictu-ition. 2 rg i.c. fol'¢1e6
by b Ltcry of 
.lofc. tests resu'ted in nk-.-xtt rain ch.,rgcteristC
.ta:. !-2~2 
For bp.co:- 
3 
;~oor 
r.C
" 
;c !-.- 
";;-=~~~~~~~~~~~~..--:.-. ;..-;.".... .. 1;.-e.... .-. .c.-'-". In nir.n ils anti:.holi-erjfc drugs (1) little 
i fluenco on discrete :r!F1
eis-c() 
s: 
ivn of instr-.:-.ntcd and oter-nt rc:.nri 
..- =.Z:.-
(3) 
' 
:-"e: 
" 
"n 
l 
. . "
. .". .. . -- 
.b 
o 
. p• 
'

--- PAGE BREAK ---788 
-
Hildebrandt, R.

J.* Com%,lned antidote therapy In ani--sl poiso.le4 with Tabun,
Sorin, xrsd ond So--n.

Archive.

%sr'..ol.

(7.avr-,vcolor" Archivec); 263
t2 222-22), 1969.

Rate were ch-llenged with the -lkylphosphstes s.c.

end the.

antidote was
administered i.n.

1 
in.

leter in injection volume of .1 el.

The LD
for Tabun, Sirin, end S;--an Vob 1.65, 1.16, and .75 u .o-Ii.

, respectively.

Obidoxi=e Plone In 10 or 50 u !.lI/kg yielded a rximu, FR of 1.3.

The -eddition of 0.', 1.0, or 10 u.olkC of -tropine to obieoxirom yielded mmx.

P 
JRs of 1.5 (Tabun), 6 (S-rin, 
end 1.2 (Somn).

By 
dein 
G3053 and
triflupro--ezine (.-,x.

30 + 3 ufallkg) Pchieved rx 
Pts of 22 for Tabun,
30 for Srin, and 1.7 for So=pn.

YXotor cra-ps could be eliminated within
1-2 nin.

even if 
they Pre fully developed.

lock, P.

end Rileebrsnet, H.

J.

On the reectivatior.

of acetylcholinesterase.

Titrimetric studies on ho-ogenetes of brain and on plasma after inhibition
in vitro with Tpbu., 
Sprin, rnd Som.an.

Archlv.

F.,nr-.pkoI.

(PhArnecolcc-
Archives), P., 26)1-26 , 1969.

The repctlv.ting effet of oxi.nes on elkylphosphbite-Inhibited Pcet lcholit.rster
crn be more reli.bly eer, 
ne!

by =-:=.

of suteo-'itic elpctrn netric titr.tin
than by r-ans of spectrophotonetric and mbno-etric r ethods.

10-".

obidoxiz;
can reverse AntiChE effect of farin (CT less thn 10' Y) to 507.

of control
-
ct tivity.

Si.ilr 
conditions hold for ScrIn-inhibited ples:-, ChZ.

After
Tabun *nlb., bicn," 
rerct!-ton occurr.

in brain ho-.ogenate following
obidoxir-- oniy if enzyr.e Pctivity hcs dropped below 25.

of control.

Na
react iv'L!:,n 
s ot-tpined In ils~.After Eo..

1miteed reoctivition ccur~s
.

if 
Sor-n concentr-t~on lb sufficient to block 9A of cnzy:;,e 
ut Lhish
does not perrlt r surplus of So=an.

So=an:-inh.bted ICNEY plas.a ChE cannot".

be resctivateo...-......-..........

.

.Sidell, F.

R.; Aghajanian, C.

K.

and Groff, V'.

A.--- PAGE BREAK ---

and Groff, V'. A. .The reversal of anticholfrer;.c
.|ntoxitio, in r r v'ith ths colir.esterese inhhitor VY. (37';0). roe.--.. . S clotv for E nerf.-zzt-l 
iole-: rni Medicine. ILL 
75-730, 1973. Secordry purpose of study vrs to investlgrte the effect of en oxie on
the tntidotrl rct'. ity of the rntiChZ. If the oxi-m- crosses tte blood-
-brain barrier, it should be Able to interfere with the antidotal effect
of WA on anticholinergic Into,:ic~tion,(!s tu;Ig scopolaine.). A 15 -.,,%
dose of 2-K..L after V\ failed to alter therpeutit: eifects of VX uhich
within .Snutei prod zed drr-atiz clinic.-l S=?rove-znt.-nd persisted for
* 
dutption of 
corols.-ine effects. Ped cell Cn3 of VX-.lone croup ups 31. of co-.ZS;bl 
ior 2-77A%!:!, tre:'ted grovzp was 75-9M. This The oxime
Was t!-.!-ri, to have only li-ited prop,'yltic v~.-ue rg-inst AntiCiS
I into):icrtion. VoJtechovsL:4, 
M.; 
Soukupox.A, 
B.; end gofretovA, V. Psychotropic pro;>ertics
of the cholinesterasa, reactivator TX-h in healthy .n. Activ. : erv. ucr. ),3 
1 1, ;0. ?..-.tn~.J 
A~QA 
iven to 22 l'eaichy volortecrs (university ztu--ents)
Only 3 r:: 
s r.rtdz 
n. lips, 
, 
in c-..s, uv..-- 
cu:.. -.-.-
feelinc.z4 sy:-tm 
~ 
jitter.-2S'. Stira-..ati 
.a~
pover. Slf',at t:t sisni!icont in:rerza !: heart r,te, slia.ht do:re.se i;'
systolic t-:t not di-vtol'e 3.2. No ch.-n.es observed in pupill.tr r.cs!n sa
or sil-e 
arfthr.eti: rzst ta*k uv. .or test of detention. ::3 ci 
n:-
tI-.'I., C~r'. on -,enton test. t.ird Flu. ,:y Test, Fisher's i;o.dy ins.:
.1
Ii

--- PAGE BREAK ---erved in pupill.tr r.cs!n sa
or sil-e 
arfthr.eti: rzst ta*k uv. .or test of detention. ::3 ci 
n:-
tI-.'I., C~r'. on -,enton test. t.ird Flu. ,:y Test, Fisher's i;o.dy ins.:
.1
Ii

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hfcr.ich, R. Z. Siothbeical and r.europhysilogical action of psychoasZive
drugs. 
In L, 
I.ir and J. C. Miller (Uds.)o Drues 
.d behavior. New
York: 
itley & !enso 1960. Pp. 
18-5.
Zenoctyzine hPs been called Pn'antipbic drug because it *u reduces
rbnomrrl fePrs Pnd lowers ecotionpl reactivity to stress.
Jacobzinerp H. and R-ybin, 11. WJ. Parathion poinsoning successfully treated
with 2-F/X. (0-pralidoxime chloride). 
The New En.l.nd Journal 
! Xt.dici-,
26s(9), )4S.L37, 1961.
2.FAM is pit-ent.iI1y vriuble for treotmnt of chemical iusrfere casualtic..
An effective ,tadote to onticholittesterpse pois-nina has to react vith
the phosho ry 
onzy--e f-ster than that er..ye reacts 
ith wptcr; i.e.,
one that could be rbso.bed right :a on the rhosphoryl ent)ym tn.'
dephosphoylote it. 
CoT--bin.ticn of 2-PAX en'J Ptropire were fourd effective
agpinst praoxone paisonin.
l]anb-0 T.; Volte. C. T.; Jackrel, J. end Grob, V. 
Poitconing due to orgrn 
hos-
ph te insectIciecps.- 
Acue rnd chronic 
rnifestitons. The A-'rfc:I
.*:... 
.Journ,1 
of 1!2dicir., 
5 
L&7I-J;92j, 1971.
Pr~lido:i-e i 
effective in rectlvatir 
.anot,". 
.-
nhlhtcd
chcline 
rt.se -t tbe cht.-l,.re-A 
synir":.s,, tic 
!r the CN;.. 
.rtmono-
: 
-j .phosp-tes 
rre powerful ithiib!tors of£,,rboxylic esterese .enzy-_s, includirv
Pcetyl c.olinester..e treee chol inestcr..ce) 
r.d pseuce:.Sl incsterpse.
.
In m-n nst ch.Ai 
-terp.e in the nervous tissue &nd erythrocytes is
mcetylcholinester're, whereps in the l!ver snd pl~s-a it 
is r-.,st!v
..pseud..oholinester'se. 
InhibitLLn of these enzy..es by orgrnoehos- .Ates
is ib result of firn bindin, of r"er:hae rrdicals of 
the o 
.;:os~hatcs
• .;,.,*to the active sites of the enzy:.es, fortingptosphoryloted en-yt-es. ihis
results in accu.-ulattlon of Acccylchol.ne c 
t-e syn:,pscs, which initia~ly
st1i ltes, 
then p.ralyzes tr.ns-ission in choliner;ic syn.pses, sparinr
.... edrenergic synrpses. The cholfrargic synopses ere the C:;SX so.-tic.
.,nerves, grnelionic synapses of .u~tno= i 
nerves, 
raasy-;tet ic r.erve
endirrgs 
nd'so.-_e sy-,athetic nervaendints e.g.," s-eoPt glands.
The rmjor 
e 
c~lo3i- action of- praliexi.e is to reactivcte Ly
removini the Thoslrte group czu.d to tn este. ctic site before *&ing
S 
. of the, binding occurs. Pralidoxi. e is'nzt ey:rected to cross tte blood-
.-
brain brrrler since it is r curternayy rnir. . The cvi ene 
to dt.c is
"re 
ux~rrtcr.rz conflicting. The toxicity o- prolidoxi=e is relatively low.Pralidoxi. e is'nzt ey:rected to cross tte blood-
.-
brain brrrler since it is r curternayy rnir. . The cvi ene 
to dt.c is
"re 
ux~rrtcr.rz conflicting. The toxicity o- prolidoxi=e is relatively low.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ey:rected to cross tte blood-
.-
brain brrrler since it is r curternayy rnir. . The cvi ene 
to dt.c is
"re 
ux~rrtcr.rz conflicting. The toxicity o- prolidoxi=e is relatively low.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

790
Hess, C. 
ond Jacobsen, Z. 
The effect of benactyxirne on the 1electroenceph1lo;rcz
t. can. 
Act.o Po,--olx i. 
et 7ci'.c.!.ricr, 13, t25-134, 1957.1
Denactyzine in 3-10 =in. after s.c. dose of 5-6 tg produced desynchroni:2tfon
in the a-oves with gradual decrease in amplitude until the O-wave dtsa :are
The EEG chenSes occurred si-ulteneously with on.et of subjective s7y-;tcms
usually consisting of heaviness in the li=bs and blocking of thoughts.
lenactyzins did not reduce response to potic stir!.Astionp end in a third of
subjects the =px responsee yes oprkedly incr.esed. 
A single subject received
12 r% s.c. Pulse- 
te increased fro= about '0 7 min. after the dose to &-out
100 bpo ,tO 
nia after tha dose , a.ter uhi-h the heart rate £radueI1,
decreased to n r[ al. The subject reacted Ps cr. having modcrttely strong,
enticholinergtic sy.-pto.s. IVone of the subjects Pt the 1o-i dosec repchod sny
anxiety feelinG.
Reventlow, 
I. The ir,fluence of benact'yzine on learning in cats. 
Act&
Pn,rp.colo;.ir, rt ToYA,:olo. ic., 
1 
13-143, 19V,.
Attepted to f-cilitte Ss' leornlr,; in the i'-oscr a.n technique by us..S
.
" 
benptysine (I P9 dores).- It ws obserVed the t tenectyzine does not
specifically affect "cc.nd.ti onec." or "ins i-tful" behavior p-.r se
but does &ce. to 1c bee-cf.-i.i 
lixthe to per.orr.;:ce if 
it 
is inhibi'tJ
by eraotionPL Le.tors.
" " ' -"' ,~~~~.". ""............... 
"..........
• .: 
f.hito.,s Ye. 
Y.:. 
The effect ,,f r-%gnesIu.3 sulfr.te in eoninmition nx 'th
trvnouildzersof cerebral bioeleccric P'-4 chol.ntsterAse activity.
T,riu-l:-lcw.f- 
i 7ol.sil-olo .iva. 
2(1), 
13-17, 
1.965.
.. 
*. , .. 
)'Snesium -ctivrtcs cholir.esterpse vhile , .L 
otcr narcoticf! &jbstarces
suppress it. 
Chlorpro.-zine produces P significant depression in
cho)ir&stcerse. Believed thet tn 
xcers qua;"t!t" 
of aceylchol_'ne
produces 
l'r-nges in the EEG typical of cortic l 6tit-jlation.
Rabbitz-,--.e:4 
used in the stuck .
Amixyl (benecty -ne) 
and cdiaphen in
10 r./kg eoscs andt chlorpr:- 
zie 
irs 10 -;lh: 
, se given S.c. l0'%tftce;r
.5 gll:g doie of 25 . m-gnesiu.- sulicte solution s.c. Detert-.ired that
Simultrncous injection oi r...esiu. sulfate -with tranquill.:e-rs incre*aE.a
sits narcotic e~fect. In rtts it %':s orferved t.t 
beth 
&.es.. 
end
: b¢nctr'z ne ectivete Chi and th:.t 1O.xe their cormbin.ticn act!%t,-Ls
.ChE ct the reen of the ts-o separately, 
.
-incre*aE.a
sits narcotic e~fect. In rtts it %':s orferved t.t 
beth 
&.es.. 
end
: b¢nctr'z ne ectivete Chi and th:.t 1O.xe their cormbin.ticn act!%t,-Ls
.ChE ct the reen of the ts-o separately, 
.
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---cotic e~fect. In rtts it %':s orferved t.t 
beth 
&.es.. 
end
: b¢nctr'z ne ectivete Chi and th:.t 1O.xe their cormbin.ticn act!%t,-Ls
.ChE ct the reen of the ts-o separately, 
.
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-
791
Jpcobsen, E. and Som-et, Z. 
7he effect of bentlic scid dietbylm!noet 7lester.
MCL (benoctyzire) on stress-induced tbehviour in the rst. Acta F1,r.x:o;C-.!:J.
Used rots in shuttle box in e signalled evoidpnce/escape task. Yost *nfi=!s
were tested undt- drug cor.ditions several ti=es &nd little 
tithin subject
v-ristion -ps observed. 
There was cujch variation betueen subjects, however.
The lack of within Fubject vtriation over tests sugests no tolera.:e or
sensitizption to uenactyzine. A species difference in sensitivity to bentc:yzi
ups observed. lhe drug see::ed to in:rerse the number of conditioned respc:es
in vnin3als not yet fully cor.ditioned. The rain effect appeared to be a
dirnin tion of tit 
fert of the coitr,, stir tjut. nnd net just to an influen e 
en
muscular tonus clone. The drug does .not appear to affect learnin; silIL.
It 
seent that benectyuine effects increase wtth 4evelop=ent of the nervot.s
systen.I
Holten, C. H. and Sone, 
E. 
Action of a series of ennctizineiderivrtivct onb.
other compounds on stress-ir.duced bebPviour in Lae rat. 
Act. 
P,-:---
et Toxitclo~cA, 1i. 11.8-155, 1955.
Used a shuttle box, rats, and.& si~nclled avoidance/escl e task. Mnactfz.:,e
yes observed to Le 10 to P0 ties 
ntzu: ct more effective than atraine anJ
^bout 1/20 
-amxm Ps effective as sco'o!:.ine. Tcr.-d to"r 
'--11ie. 
'" the
rt-!tu 
r! " .c 
,r 
of v !.. 
rrt.. 
" 
, 
! 
tbe 
.
,..rer.oves all activity .(). 
11 the benpctyzine derivatives effective in rtts
.were a&lv xib able to n--=.ize the bethvio: of cats.
* 
..
" 
1 
•
Hess 
G. r-nd Jacobsen, Z. The influence of ben.etyr.e on reaction-ti e. 
Aect.
* 
Ftrc.!~iect*7omice~n,!;-. 
13 
135-1l, 1 l7.
S" 
..-:In r test in-conjuntio.n with. EEG-recordin;, using hu %ns, 1i 5-6 r s.c.
A repction-t:-e test aPdinst red 20-40 rm.n. *fter the injection. 'Sbject
wrA instructed to pull - lever through r.ar 
;i 
i 7- 
-
o
.- at the sound of s bell or a buzzer. At the T ju.ction.the subject vtr 
to
r 
.
ull the lever left or .igth rirht depending on the sti.--.i!us. Repqt ,on
tir-s rnd error scures q.cre r.epsur:d. 
Ccner lly, an increcse in reAt... t 
!-7.
S 
vs 
found follc-ving the drug injection. 
However' 
the increrte was 
.lro.t
(lh-ys conecte 
to on!y oe sti=-jlu 
or the o-t.:er u.ich *-.ts.efted th.at
thei 
--ttent~c-n to one ol either si:t-aU.
" the subjects u-cre fcx',.: 
focusi ng their 
tetoto..eoetle 
i. 
.
Tencctyzine did not -ppetr. to r.ke the subjects sleepy, 
"
*rehlet-1.V.ro, 
i. 
,%ct a rsvchittr cp srfe- 
tIa.v'icn 
3 
721, 
1955.
Used hun-n subjects, h r.& s.c. bensctyzine had little 
or no obser'ble c.'c:
on rbllity to subtract, to do puzzles, to assoiate or to 
k-e abstr.ctir ..
*BJerner, B. 
Acts Fr.vs!olotica Scpnai'.vica, 19, Supp. 65, 1949.
I- 
D
studied benac)ty'inz 
.-.e sleep-derrived s'ubjects.n rbllity to subtract, to do puzzles, to assoiate or to 
k-e abstr.ctir ..
*BJerner, B. 
Acts Fr.vs!olotica Scpnai'.vica, 19, Supp. 65, 1949.
I- 
D
studied benac)ty'inz 
.-.e sleep-derrived s'ubjects.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t, to do puzzles, to assoiate or to 
k-e abstr.ctir ..
*BJerner, B. 
Acts Fr.vs!olotica Scpnai'.vica, 19, Supp. 65, 1949.
I- 
D
studied benac)ty'inz 
.-.e sleep-derrived s'ubjects.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

792
Lkshin-, It. J. The effect of benpctyzine on the activity of! mono-mi.e oxilas&
in the brvin Pnd liver of h the cat. Federation Proteed!n.?s. .252-2S.,
Eenectyxine (10 t-1/k$ 
.a.) decreased AO zcZxw activity in the
dienceph-lon ,nd the liver of the cat *pproxicAtpty 20". while it 
increased
xtmzspproxiustely 2C. 
in the visual cortex.
I
Golikov, S. ;9. #nd Pechenkin, V. A.4 A study of the penetration of ita certain
cholinolytic drus throu.i 
the blodd-brain berrier by perfusing the cere*-ral
ventricles. 
Julletin of Ex~erirental llolo7. and :cdicir.e. S(I), 
12,9-
1251s 1963.
Tested the ebitty of one quaternary (Iechesine), and fv-% tertiary
(Ptropine Pnd benpctyzine) cholinolytics to pass ht through the blood-brain
barrle-.u'ts given 4 z&/kg of each c;rug. 
Mean con-entration in the perfusion
vS 9 uig benactyzin, 
4.6 &lr stropire, ani 0.0 jg lachesine.
• 
• 
V/
VojtrhovsL, 
.-.; Crof, St.; Vitek, Vl.; and ftysanek, K. 
Kliniso 4v. und"
-
tlochemische 
.) 
studied der zentrelen cholinolytits, insbesondere eer
benrectyzins. (Clinaict and biochemical study of central cholinolytics, with
speciall Pttention to benactyzine). ActI Ps_chiaOrcn £,dlnavlca,-O(3)1
219-233, 1 A.
-
Delirious h.llucinptf(.y exparlnenral psychosis vs-e Vroduced in t-o 
•
%cluntary subjects 
by 15 and ?5 mg ben-ctyzine. 
In I subj rt 25 rg proouced
.
3 hours of eelirv',, following 11 =in.- short veatAtive r.~tse. 
After 2, =in.
mrssive di::urbr.ccs of perception, nny visual hp'.lucinattons. Osc ilitcd
between euphorip xnd fright.
..Jecobsen, £, end Skatrup, Y.Experinental induction of conflict-behavior in
cats: The effect of so.e anticholinergic co=p4unds. Acta 
rr.-_-vcolr!
et 
11, 125-134, 1955.
C onflict behavior vas induced using the YAssarnln technique (the cot is
exposed to 6 rtrong blAt of air apprxi-.te-ly every lfth tire it puts
its hesd into P bcx from which it has lerr.cd to ext-cct food. After
Pbout 20 experi.entnl sessions the cot eevclops %.hct is tcntr'ount to
fxperi.er.trl neurosis) which is rn rparoach-.voidi.ce conflict situcticn.
A set-L-s o. czl!.c a,:. 
u 
_4z~~cr&i-: CS wce tes-Lcz 10o
ti'c.L: i- e 
c e was :: 
e 
-
;e in 
o.-- 
.e
he ~: .-. i e t 
-L -. c : ';: 
- i- ' " v c 
e:-c 
i ed 
t- r C
o." 1.3 -2. n; "':
walk a.---d the case. It was also obst-.-d that 
; =ore prg 
-.vd the
neUrosi.s Was 1.he less the effect of a Eirvn !nem..-. i e t 
-L -. c : ';: 
- i- ' " v c 
e:-c 
i ed 
t- r C
o." 1.3 -2. n; "':
walk a.---d the case. It was also obst-.-d that 
; =ore prg 
-.vd the
neUrosi.s Was 1.he less the effect of a Eirvn !nem.

--- PAGE BREAK ---: ';: 
- i- ' " v c 
e:-c 
i ed 
t- r C
o." 1.3 -2. n; "':
walk a.---d the case. It was also obst-.-d that 
; =ore prg 
-.vd the
neUrosi.s Was 1.he less the effect of a Eirvn !nem.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

IJ 
793
Castellano, C. 
Effects of so*e onticholinergic drugs on water mate learned
behaviour in rtce. Pechother-ttolo t,, 
2 
361-359o 1971.
four.d opposite effects for benctysine compared to atrooine 0 scopolamiw ,
,rd DJtri. in the.Ij effect on water rate behAv.-,r in mice. 
2 
IAlq,, 
,.'_
L9X6VA:." 
X
Kiryuhhfn, V. G. 
The effect of central cholfnoreceptors blocking on the
rt(,resstve;.es% of rale-rots vith & varyfr& level of sex hormones.
(Russ) Zorn.,.cir, 
t 
,'-si1.;2Ivi 
1 
54l-544. 
1972.
Treated w.le vr.ts for 10 drys with, 10 ,"/Lb in testosterone-propionate.
benactyzin. rductd shock-induted orressLon in nirr.el and castrate 
r.%le rst&
but not in s(lplr rrts treated witha the testosteruns-proptonpte. This was tv. Pn
to sunxt thit n-c lutnoeActlve structures of the brain heve significa rce
in inifi Sting egres lye behavior.
Krorylv, S. S. Ykc€.rts-.s of ,tatyl (Lenectyzime) rnd dt&.actl action on tho
brln. (Russ) 
-( 
,), 
529-533, 192.
-Evidence that bbnactyztne not only blocks cholinoreceptors but also
releases r.oridrer-.olin from the zyneptic vesicles.
lietink, J.;. Hrdinp, V. 
(Purkvrie fledicot 
ee*cic 
In.!oute, 
Sor~1tnvp 9113
Ilrr.ec Vrplve, Ciechvulov'ti) The ¢c:.,%riron of the effects of stro-,'nc• .'
bent-cty~r~e , n sor-t s#. rct';rce of 
t! a I ' :-Sic systcr. .,f tha tAts. /.:t 1';t
:er':. s* 
? 
?'',_ 
... r ,. 
.
13(3), 221-2, 
1971.
toth ropnfe And benrcty:(ne vere ohervcLd to have xk en fnfluene en tt~e
lztc 
.
orx 
eorsrl port of tke ItterMl sc'rl 
n-r:Iu- ind the w-ir zeptc-
nucleus Ps r-s.ured ty afterdisclbprges In the hip-campuz, 
--ygdala, and cortcx.
Soith, C. V. J.; Ur, L.; Pollard, J. C. 
; end Miller, J. G. An exploratc©y
study of the bebavicral effects of Susvvtil (benictyzine hydro:hlortde).
University o& 1€icaisn Xcdicel ruIlctin, 
hC, -2-407, 1958.
'Effects of Pcute a=inistrrticn of ben.cty:ine VCL on erivir:, vision,
ond re,:trc 
ti--e tests %.-re &tulitd in 
r c-'s of 6 patients e.-ch -
obsef.fiie fo-,ulve, ftr.xiety .eurntics, rv'a.,-e e 
sjve,-sl, 
r.! 
.
o tre"-
There l"s-tn 
lreizrt!.n of i=,romed 1,erfor:.-e in tle ebressive 
o,-2Ilsir~eS.
SkWIlP, 
1. Pnd L;-oco:J, 
V. Vliv ltentct-,::inu n.- zalud:ri ;'rec 
(Effect 
of
bct:t-;zir.e on & stric secretrr.). 
Cs'.:'l.'.-:. 
C-r:rc-': 
.
.17, 271-274, 1963. 
fron r'yi;-.%-6;rrvoo..bst-Mc"
871, 
93.
M-nu,l)• :s'-tr-:te 
-rstric 
.
e-e 
*r.-'-- 
9 r.-.les 
Hr I fe-le
?tS 
C.TA 
W
....
: 
IIZtric secretrr.). 
Cs'.:'l.'.-:. 
C-r:rc-': 
.
.17, 271-274, 1963. 
fron r'yi;-.%-6;rrvoo..bst-Mc"
871, 
93.
M-nu,l)• :s'-tr-:te 
-rstric 
.
e-e 
*r.-'-- 
9 r.-.les 
Hr I fe-le
?tS 
C.TA 
W
....
: 
IIZ

--- PAGE BREAK ---'.:'l.'.-:. 
C-r:rc-': 
.
.17, 271-274, 1963. 
fron r'yi;-.%-6;rrvoo..bst-Mc"
871, 
93.
M-nu,l)• :s'-tr-:te 
-rstric 
.
e-e 
*r.-'-- 
9 r.-.les 
Hr I fe-le
?tS 
C.TA 
W
....
: 
IIZ

--- PAGE BREAK ---

794
Jaeob~e11 5 7' 
niaty:~.ne. 
In M. Goreor. (U,.)j Pyct.-harre, .. o-tca1
Loue Yorks: ketdo-sc ?rests lSZv. 
aper C.
.S.it-- 
-
i? 
vt"-_ 
.
* is coridered to be an anti.c)ollnergic
7r4-Itcan ts briefly -dscribe s 1, 
ta.ch>6r.src,,
¢o-,tr.od vith aboe:v, 
ot certain t:r:.r ,ur.ctior4 of ths CN;3. It
has to sedatlve or tran"12.ti 
Cn 
I¢'Ao¢-
First rynthouited in 1936. Its phar,-cological action WaS first reported
in 9%
The CL fore cacur, as a hite 
ryst;l114Ar.2 pour -with a bitter taste,
soluble In wa'.or, €. orcfo-::, ar.d alceh 
,.-"ol. 
, 
,1; 
soiubl.e In ether.
In aqvenus aolu*.en. e 
cc.': ly 
n .ka:alrse, 
i 
ity:io 
.s r-.pi uy
hydroli:cd to 
ran.'i1.Ic ac'd and diet~ 
ar.iroe,r.sr.4. The camn is aeon
in Knar 
terum In -nt..,
Mr,~ in =ice i 
i&ie 7 ICO rh:. ?abbitz a&r3.'kfled with 15 sre/k&
1... 
over 20 tec.
• .•,In J!; single doses'up to ED r- orally have been tolerated. 
Dai17 doses
of T"r.- ri o :-Ild cyar,.c.'s ar 
rr3 .L:,;o 
ot rieart rate. No doat,h,
thc-r.'t bl cka:-o. N;r:.sl)y d.or r.ot ti-awo sleep . Skin ra0 ,s 
).ive" bee.-
. zerte, .
No bh.. 
dyscrts-ri s or liv r 
ec- .... 
..
,r 
dc..;.,.
? :n ?C-103 or "- 
r. 
In :C n 
n 
, rn':--t s ths ur!-n, exeroon of 
-
to 7cro. Fas a t..derato eofcclt on r.'tA.cn s~l.:tas1. 
Ferentar- of alpha
waves in h-ran 7'l 
: 
' 
afr 
de 
oa .
, 
"-/:"- ar.e
*after r'I*Gt17 '6:r1:r dor?$ U7. 
alphl W;Vt3 dls.:'rar co;etel. This
: .
effect is r.ot cmnnected with loss-of ccrcic-zu. 
s. 0*n t-. ea-ha waver St
1 s rr.-a effect thin .e-:. 
ri 1::: ..ec.... 
than see.7-- 
r.e.
Y.or':ey' 
ar.- otl.r .h!Sher :.ls 
are ro. 
Larnd" i-:. -er.ac'.yin-.
•$ir.le reacxtic tr.e is r.t Prole.ed. Cu traln92 to react d,ferer.tV
to 2 a-idttcr7 sr:-i 
eg*c. 
to foe*-s e. ore of
L-13,r' 
"- 
s.c. er 
p.o. c3*,ud 
-
-cr b-eckli.Z cf 
c' -n.
There 
.o 
zs a 
te:.'z. 
to I.*'-.. 
of rothi:- 1 &r.2 sc-tor. cu. as.'t".cn 
c "
.. 
..- 
e-o i 
a 
-.--
x ,o c 
res, ::e 
ti-a .r. 
.t
of h 0jn,5 if 
,1".. 
no 
f'r.zz- 
1e .
.......
.
=-:4. 
". 
c 
.c ,. 
is fCound
t, f 
.. r 
V.. 
'. 
.. 
• 
L* 
-
obse 'ui. Al h 
c-.z 
d .s 
beit', 
et;:n_ to devetc-p, and ve~etttt"e an;d
verbal r:z; nzc 
K6 
A. 
I., 
:o'--n 
,L.
L X 
:-., 
Vis. a low affi.ri-ty for th-: t.*-e eh:. .:.!st erase,.. 
_en!erg for
off6c:t is C.-;;t i33 
".h".,. 
3f.'to;~,: 
n-1a: 
-.
:c 
fo 
: 
e
REST COPY"AAUI
.":' ' :,' J :,'r ;;or. 
'--...:' :,ea 
e 
.; ._ r 
>±t 
-.."- eff ct 
s ;.- 
'--.-eh:. .:.!st erase,.. 
_en!erg for
off6c:t is C.-;;t i33 
".h".,. 
3f.'to;~,: 
n-1a: 
-.
:c 
fo 
: 
e
REST COPY"AAUI
.":' ' :,' J :,'r ;;or. 
'--...:' :,ea 
e 
.; ._ r 
>±t 
-.."- eff ct 
s ;.- 
'--.-

--- PAGE BREAK ---795
AFs"[PAC's il 
r ,.."1..

4a VDIA 
OLU, i l.

E % ..

.

.

.

.,-"lr 
.

.; 
.

.

Twelve volur.teers '.3rt6Ci1at.G in a test to d.:crmL' : the clipical- efects of c.n.:'-.-cd i.rao
muscular doses of atropin (0 S to 1.6 mg), be.actyzine (2.

C to 7.

& r..g) 4.1 TM4 (39 to 6
Bc.,-iacvi-zine was admiastcr-- alone and i combL'ritlon with the atroptne and T'4.

Rtep:at
doses were administered 1 wtec apart, Four mcs were givei the drugs in high temnperatre
C105117) and L.o.xnidity (90T).

Heart rzte, blood pressure restingg and standing), respirazien
-ate,-,Ipclar..-K 
, .....

4e, 
" -A acuity, and cogmitive function (NF test)were measu.ed every
15 min for 2 hr, ti'.cs eva y 40 min for 4 hr, and again at 12 and 24 hr.

The data have not been,
,completely tabul-ted but wvhei the highest doses of cch drmg were combined, the subjects'
ability to functJon was moderf.tely affected for a short period (30 mLn) heat slightly worsen,.

.the effects.

.

" 
.

.

-
in the study to determine the clinical effects of combinations of atropine, benactyzLne, and
TMB4 In man, 12 volutccxs were tested to obtain control dat.

They received no dv-s.

Eight of the subjects %."ere placed in a hot environment (95 i, 90,humidity) for 3 hours.

Four of these mcn rLm'aincd supine for the entire period wiale the other four walked on a
trcadmill at a rate of 3 rmph for 10 min of every 30-min period (Qhr total).

The heart rat.-3
Iand 
shn and rental tcp.peraturcs of the testing voluteers were recorded c..ch 15 miu..

* ):o"
* .- *~.:-simnilar 
recordings v.ere made !-.,fore the walk, 5 m !.n an d
3 ...after n.c wa..

4I..ied.

2nd*5 min after the walk ..

ile Cie .;mai were s..

=...:.as
n.

o , re- 
1 l;y -- cr-ture In the resting group but the rec t trp 
crnu of t'-.

waking group continued to rise during the test (a men of 101.7° F at 3 hr).

The heat t..',:-..

to elevate th.e heart rate of the men at rest and elevated thq.

heart rate of *be waLkes to a 
.

h1gh mca of 140 tpm at the end of the last walking period.

.

.

.--- PAGE BREAK ---

. . . .... The rzc'natnin four mcn performed an opexant task (time estimation and vigilance) for
rJ 
nin on fotr diiiffrct occasions to evaluate the level. of performance over a long b:-erval
An an 
'--4r 
r 
d state. 7'T" maintained an Lcremcly high level of pertormanice. Tests were conck'.cted to observe the ejects of a single combined close of bc 
yzn3I'-
atropi e (0 S z), ana *rmIc (7.0 mg) and to heaer tindcrstaici its short tine course. Vr --r
w~~untr.'.In 
f or 
8.'-j 
hr to perform a continuotz tzs!. The'tas,-wn to (s,! ic •cutve 
j-sc interv3ls ard a at the same time remain ,i-ilant for a sig-nal whic fVashc:t
i), u uiet= on an average ot once each minute. On the sixth tcst day, the subjects were .nc Ic
intravenously nd a-M 
k-. .:o continue the tns). Subjects were test-d separately for 60 or 90 n In
Ieacih :'.d .t:(J. i .attd ;m 
s:.ost stir 
aiont othc;" t-.an that .c:1erat1d by thre !ask or 
e..i
fno'veients. They were observed through a one-way gass. The mean heart rate (1mc 
:v -
........ -
-'':. i atrox . .:eh,1 
O pin at the heig!t ol the dru; effect. lm 
ff.c ..--
'
time el-ti naiin ire 
L-pcd 
ve--.n 20 and 25' during ihe first 30 min after the druo, ,i-,t . s
I Z 
:.: ..J --.ca began to i;; .!rove slov.,l, during the rn.e.t hour. Vi ilance perfor.na'ce ;
r'at(d 30- 
,to .,!o rnca Lt was hardly affected in the other r::o subjects. Observed -
'.--
.ot re-f 
."w 
"'-. ; ti.-: 
e,.rlu:n typical of a':ticolinerzic dru s but :"rihtt-n St:.itL,'
. "e. -
: .... htc 
tha... had e.pcrico.,cc-i some lIlluc'matton;s and delusions. 70-026 0 - 76 - 51

--- PAGE BREAK ---"'-. ; ti.-: 
e,.rlu:n typical of a':ticolinerzic dru s but :"rihtt-n St:.itL,'
. "e. -
: .... htc 
tha... had e.pcrico.,cc-i some lIlluc'matton;s and delusions. 70-026 0 - 76 - 51

--- PAGE BREAK ---

796 
-
HOUTHLY VOLUIITEER PEFORT - OCTOBER 1974 - RTP 12,25
Eight volunteers were used to assess the effects of single and double doses of
BAT on continuous performance. 
A single dose is 4 ng benactyzine HCL, 1 irg 
atropine
sulfate, and 40 rg T3-4 HBR. 
Four volunteers received a single dose and 4
received a double dose. 
Tvo of the 4 receiving the double dose were subscquently
treated with 50 Vgk.g physostig.ine. 
The continuous performance test used is
referenced in previous reports. Briefly, it consists of concurrent URL 27.5"
LH 50 with feedback (a tire estimation task) and VI "'signalled avoidance tasks. 
The
volunteers were tested individually. The EAT administered i.m. at the beginning
of the test session., Perfonrance was recorded until the subject regained baseline pr
ficiency on both tasks or for a minimum of 00 min. 
Three of the 4 subjects recpivir"J
-a single dose returned to baseline perforr.ance within the 90-m in test session.
One subject, however, failed to recover baseline. perfoir.tnce for 130 min. .The
effects of a double dost: failed to diminish for over 4.5 hours. 
Treatr.ent with
phvsostienine At either ?0 or 60 m 
af*"-- 
a .... 
d,..,e 
.....
perfcvnaic,'-decr.ents with 5 o'n." The"physostiSnine eid not gretly inflvenc-
'the" effect of a double'dose of EAT on heart rate which onthe average increased
S.froa 68 to 130 bpr within 17 min and then de-r;ased slc...-. over aout 3.5 h
to near no..ial*evels. 
Previous tests suggested that EA 
has a ruch shorter duratlo:
- of effect than sho'n in this study. 
It.ray be that the continuous de, ands. placed.
on the subject prevented orat last delayed the recovery of acetylcholini levels
-thereby reecing synaptic traisniSsion efficiency in certain areas of -the central
nervous sys tem.
0..
- " 
STAN LEY fH. FUC.GTE, Ph.D.
Clinical REsearch Brr,hed the recovery of acetylcholini levels
-thereby reecing synaptic traisniSsion efficiency in certain areas of -the central
nervous sys tem.
0..
- " 
STAN LEY fH. FUC.GTE, Ph.D.
Clinical REsearch Brr,h

--- PAGE BREAK ---

*797
I*-* 
*
V4ONTKLY VOLUNTEER REPORT - OCTOBER 1974 - RTP 12,255
Eight volunteers received the BAT mixture 4 times intreanuscularly.
Ti4 volumes of the 4 solutions ' are 0.5; i.o. 2.0, and 3.0 ml; the
amount of drug was the same In each. 
Heart rates were recorded continuously
for 3" hours after drug. 
The purpose was to establish which volume
(and concentration) produced the tost rapid onset of effects. 
The
study is not complete and the data have' not been analyzed.
FREDERICK ft. SICELL
-
Acting Chef, Clin Rsch Br
** 
.
* 
-. 
* 
* 
-
.
.
.. 
• 
-
.
•

--- PAGE BREAK ---tost rapid onset of effects. 
The
study is not complete and the data have' not been analyzed.
FREDERICK ft. SICELL
-
Acting Chef, Clin Rsch Br
** 
.
* 
-. 
* 
* 
-
.
.
.. 
• 
-
.
•

--- PAGE BREAK ---

798
RPJHi LAEO?A1 )*Ut1S
M.W.0' AP.S- 
L
DJgc.oc4 Arsenal, Maryland 
21010
QUARTERLY PPROUOESS PJ: ORT
.
i 
PAN: 
S 
-
12.253 
.-
SeptLer 74
Titie -
Cl~ni-al Effects of Cow-ir.tion of Atrcpine, Beractyzire,
and 1i i4
2. 
PR)P.ESS: 
1nc)%:@o suc-.ry of each tupsortie; ContraCt.
eour oluntesrs v-re trair,.2 
on a DL 27.5 LH5 stL.e-ile (-:ith feeet,:;:)
ccrncurre-r,; i.t; 
a VT 1-r ir 
., 
z 
cili 
a:ien 
(i-scc si,-irt 
;Gs!
inter':i) s 
, 
in 2 ..- :-3, srss':.s. 
Durlr.e tie tir 
.-
1n 
qicn
* 
feeC-.!c!, cn t- 
sCi.-'eve vaS drery' d. 
In the th 9Q-nin. sessicr 
-
not onl, 
:as CL1 1,.:t. 
i:iei; '" 
t:-1'?L i .. 
I .
-
frc.:, 27.5 sec to 57.5 sec. 
The 5:h s.ssicn lest. oly 
r.CO ane
the t st prc.ee.-te :es th,, s!-? Es s,:i.s 
1 amn 2. Ses.i~n 6 vas
.
the sa,-e as sEssicns I an 
2 eycep, t- 
ei.=,&1y te 
!'.e 
vr.i
o" ti," t-:-t st<siv:, each 
,:b.ct 
a 
c':"'n a 
f !,- 
-
.se of t-.T
Il eart ratC ac ; 
c..e d .:h tel -,--'.... c;vip..ent fer 
,.? 
Curaion Of
each svs!cMn. 
•
Oe. r s--slo., 1-5 heart rate re. nsired rrA tively stb1e. Cn 
-:ru;e 
i
BAT prl".vccde a ,:' ir.crc-:s e in ,.e-!rt re c-,hich 
rc,:e during, the firs;
-
20 .sn of the scss'en. r -- , 
e1;'-tc 
cr 40 v.**.n and-decr,-es 
" 
.
-over th., 
:,r.31 '- :.r,. 
itf:Idi 
ti:-.- fc3c5: 
..- in. sts sicn 3
* 
pre-fac 
cnly a sV;t 
drc. in perv.:-e 
Uhile vi'tkLtldin.= fci. 
_'c 
d
effccti-' i y 
. the 
:L sc .=-''" .:..c d alctt a 2D; r...n loss iF,
" 
tirngr, 
Mr.i7.ce folic-:ir.; the si.-.i 
C-se of -AT %:as cnly 15-.
Avoisr.ce peric -n.e in-r'o;-d cover ssslc.s r&;'.ssof 'Lsch 
i
chan.cs until Sa.sr-,cn 6 or. v-hich case t!.., sir.le eSe Of LiT prc":ued
a tr-plir3 of vki;le-:e err.r rate frc-. 5'; 1o 1;. AIditior.- t-iMr.g a.
vi ;i 
ncr 
c 
rfc-r-.M.nze testirj is prc:.:.d to irclu'e a eou-ie eose
.
of BAT Er.d cls6 
ic--6-.t :, h physcs i T:lm e.
30M
3.,S.C.A.. 
.
c';P, 
:-:s;--
Datc. 3D S,- ;'"--, 
1974 CV(.lc-l "..: 
:r e.ih
*" 
...... 
ic 
L.:-'ctCDiv i ns prc:.:.d to irclu'e a eou-ie eose
.
of BAT Er.d cls6 
ic--6-.t :, h physcs i T:lm e.
30M
3.,S.C.A.. 
.
c';P, 
:-:s;--
Datc. 3D S,- ;'"--, 
1974 CV(.lc-l "..: 
:r e.ih
*" 
...... 
ic 
L.:-'ctCDiv i n

--- PAGE BREAK ---e a eou-ie eose
.
of BAT Er.d cls6 
ic--6-.t :, h physcs i T:lm e.
30M
3.,S.C.A.. 
.
c';P, 
:-:s;--
Datc. 3D S,- ;'"--, 
1974 CV(.lc-l "..: 
:r e.ih
*" 
...... 
ic 
L.:-'ctCDiv i n

--- PAGE BREAK ---

799
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARNY 
.- 
/
4 :AU/X, 
oo4 
s 1£dWOOO ARsILA, 
" " 
"i "
AKQDO,14 PROfiNG GO*JND. WANrLADO 
8iCt10 ,j 
,
SL6 
I .,4t
SAREA-BL-R 
•'O 
April197
1 
.,_
SUBJECT: Transmittal of Research Proposal 
.
.
" 
..
HQDA (SGRD-DR)
WASH DC
1. The proposed ..tudies contain some of the problems 
hilch have already risen
from medical trai,,i~ij and publication persuiel in respect to an item which is now
in medical supply channels. We have had a great deal of experience with both
atropine and oximes and combinations of the two drugs. In addition, we have had
a lot of experience with cholinergic blocking agents such as benactyzine. Besides
having a mild antihistaminic effect, it also possesses a cardiac antifibrillatory
action, both of %hicLh should be beneficial. 
The drug closely resem,.bles both
atropine and scopolamine, the latter being our reference dint, for both benzilate
and glycolate compounds. We have studied over 20 of these compounds In man.
2. Previous experience with the "TAB mixture," wh:ch is t be supplied to the
individual soldier for self-administration in two ComboPens ,' 
indicates that
temporary incapacitation may result fiom its use if the individual had not previously
been exposed to an anticholinesterase agent. 
The sa-ne may be said for unwarranted
use of present autoinjectors of atropine now available. The present program is
planned to study sowe of the piobules which may arise as a result of illicit use of
other drugs which may be available.
3. Standard operating procedures are included. They are revised when indicated,
or new ones are written when results from aniatral pharmacological profiles indicate
-specific, needs for safety evaluation. The use of the nuc.erical facility test ias
withstood many years of validi'tinl the preniiction of mnii's ability to perform certain
critical tasks, both in the laboratory and in the field.
4. Suggestions for change or modification of plans are always welcome to the
personnel who constitute our Medical Review Board.
1 
Icl 
VAN f1. SIM, M.D. 
; 
-
Research Proposal 
Chief, Medical Researcih Dii 
.
)p
Biomedical Laboratorycation of plans are always welcome to the
personnel who constitute our Medical Review Board.
1 
Icl 
VAN f1. SIM, M.D. 
; 
-
Research Proposal 
Chief, Medical Researcih Dii 
.
)p
Biomedical Laboratory

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Research Proposal: The Effects of "BAT" and Other Drugs in Man
I
Index
I. 
Research Proposal
2. Clinical Resezrch SOP *1
3. Clinical Research .3P #2
4. Clinical Research 5OP #3
5. Clinical Research SOP #4
6. Clinical c;;rts of subjects receiving one and wo doses of "BAT"
7. Backjround data on drugs
8. Maa iacturiwj specifications of drugs
9. Curriculum oliie of investigators
10. Letter dtd 21 Jan 75, Academy of Health Science, Fort Sam Houston, TX

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-801
Research Proposal
P.SSFA, rIII 
')IXATOP! t%,
US AW 
lY V-%r1 
AR&VEN:AT
Wgcod Arsmial, M4arylanad 
21010
1. R3U8AJN PUN: 
number 
Da te - 20 March 1975
Title -
Tlw Efficts of "BAT" .3nd 0ther Drugs In Man
2. 
AUThfI'TY:
a. PROJIXT: 
ur.ber- 
lW762710AD25
Tj tie -
Medical Defcnse Agains: Chemical Aceits
b. 
TASK: 
Nu.bor -
02
Tit)& -
.
YORK UNIT:
9.
Q. PARTICIPATION AND/OR COOJ1DIKXTIO:
a. 
MAJOR 
PROGRAM:
b. 
OftO AlZATIO%S-:"
c. 
CONTRAC.8:
d. 
RLATW) R 
EARCH
PILAN 
(Numbers):
4. 
INV£LTIGAT0flS: 
Principal investii:ator sn, all oiber personnel.
Freufcricl. it. 
i'ell, MA.D.
Nurses
Medic! Ccr;smen
C oia; L;*, TeC 
.D.
Ronald C. Pelcrs.,en, Phi.D.
%_pR Time
?0
100
100
5o
15
GS-14
CPT
*Attsi.., 
,.trp 
%hoetq if 
pd4tfonnl spsen requtrcd for any iten.
F'.;,A-i. .'..,n 
36 ( 
1,.: of 
pagwo)

--- PAGE BREAK ---C 
.D.
Ronald C. Pelcrs.,en, Phi.D.
%_pR Time
?0
100
100
5o
15
GS-14
CPT
*Attsi.., 
,.trp 
%hoetq if 
pd4tfonnl spsen requtrcd for any iten.
F'.;,A-i. .'..,n 
36 ( 
1,.: of 
pagwo)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

802
JuSTFICATION: 
Soui'co of requiroe'nt and/or stattz.ent of problem.
The purpose of this inwestigation is to obtain information on the effects In man of the nerve
agent antidote "BAT" when taken with common illicitl' used dugs. This isto partially aoiswcr
a question posed by HSA-CDC.
5a. Reference (copy .ttac'oed)
Nerve Ajent Antidote and XM?58 Kit
Ltr dtd 21 Jan 75 from Academyi., of Health Sciences, Fort Sam Houston, TX
6. 
OBJLCTIVI: 
Y.hat Is expect to be accomplished uvJ.r this plan.
Information of valise to medical and paramedical personnel to be published in official medi'ral
memoranda and field treatment manuals.
7. 
EST!-MATM; 
T=Z: 
L:TAUIRTP:
US Ariiy enlisted im.n who volunteer for the stucly after i, hs been explained to thrwill
be used as 5:.rnjCt5.
Druis to he studied in coi,bina'itn viit': "BAT"* art. as follir.-is: dextro.np'1*ctamin2,
,""cobarbit.l, s;itlyhtphen : ,, 
dia-cw, 
and aio ol. Two (dv:,c oi vac;, dh 
it:., , .,: 
s
of "BAT" will !)e used. 
T;oc In-. dosoe (r:g an,! lot. djse "3AT" vill be sttc:ied first; t':,n t,e
high dose (Iriq - low dose "UAT," low dose dhu.) - iiVi dose "AT ," and the tl,. hiclh (lose dg.i9 -
high dose '1,,AT." The doses of th- dt',gs, v.hich will be ivc.a orlly, aie as follows:
dexitoamphtlminniu, 
10 inq arnd 20 ;w.; secobabital, 100 mig asid 200 ,nq; diazcpam, 10 mg
and 20 mg; aw:' alcohol, 0.6 mnl/kl 
:wl 1.2 rnl/l:q. The doses of "BAT" are the standard
"single" and ";cuble" (lose*.
The Pcnei.l baselifiic I)rocezlie itrr the pero:,amice tcst (Tl.e Num;-r Facility Test) will
follow Cli,ic.! Rescrch SOP Mi (in:l'cscd). TI;e s .rey procedure will follow Clinical Research
SOP 01 an; SOP #2 (inclosed) with th? followvn!i exceptions:
SOP i."l, lic, 
Doses of test drug will be given orally and one hour later receive
"BAT" by itranmuscular injction.
lid.3. St;jects %-;il: Lz !:stirn,.
III 
Tl.re will 1.c I:-) cz.lcu.io- ef MED-:O .
SOP t2 
Control ant! ;--, 
dr:q labo':.roy tests- vll be hentaosrit, W5C,
difterential, c0,.1dete 
rine i..ialysis, tot:.i bilirobi;, SGOT, SU,
alkaline ph 
,:.!se v:ih 24-hr, 48-hr, 7-day ant! 1'-day post d-rn.
Subjects niry be retested to se;ve z-,. t';cir own controls: i.e., test dne. alo;i, or ."BAT" alone.
Vliesevi V.,o dwu9 a, ; "CrT" are cjiv:,a 
!ii 
c,.. :ahi.n," the 
CC.:-,, 
inter, 
.,Oratory 
test
results will (etenriie the frequency c repetiti-i of combination studies. Two or jour st.i:s;cts
will bc ....
ach dusi:
It si.l. ,%'C ;sC 0. 
~ 
'1 Ite 
.
atropine s.lLe. TM34 is 1,. -:a. -(.ridii:i;--;oxinIe),,rupaI~e ':'" ' "'i'e
-'"'A-* 
L 
'%,': :Fr 0 
3Z 
,;e 2 co!es. Two or jour st.i:s;cts
will bc ....
ach dusi:
It si.l. ,%'C ;sC 0. 
~ 
'1 Ite 
.
atropine s.lLe. TM34 is 1,. -:a. -(.ridii:i;--;oxinIe),,rupaI~e ':'" ' "'i'e
-'"'A-* 
L 
'%,': :Fr 0 
3Z 
,;e 2 co!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

803
* 
The parenteral dr:aq administration will be by a physician. The oral drugs will be
given by a physician -Or 
by nurses under the close supenision of a-physician.
The Number Facility (NF) test, one of Moran and Mefferd's (Moran, L.J. and
Mefferd, R.B.: Repetitive Psychometric Measures, Psychol. Rep. 5, 269-276,
1959) battery of repcLitive psychometric measures, Is -i series of addition problems,
each consisting of thrte randomly selected 1 or 2 digit numbers. The sc6re is the
number correctly added within a 3-rain period. The score is expressed as a percentage,
100 times the nuibe; correct divided by the baseline score.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

804
ULL,. 
II PMIN ;:0.|
("a FUDS RIUIRWD:
a, Contracts -
Research
Bervlce
b. 
Transfer to other agencies or laboratories.
c. Travel.
10. 
SUPPORT:
a. 
FACILITIES Fd J'JI1PE: 
Other than those available in Dranch.
b. 
ESUIVP4L\T AND SUPPLIES XEZED[: 
Estimated Cont.
0
c. 
ANIALS: 
Species, numbers, and when required.
11. 
SAFErY PRECAUTIONS:
12. 
APPROVAL: 
Signatturgssignify approval of task plan hs submi)'.a
FREDF4UICK R. SIDELL, M.D. 
VAN Li. S1,44, M.D..;1
RONALD) C. PETERSEN, Ph.
Pliici)al I.vesti~i.or 
Divisioi Chidf 
Co-investigitor
FREDERICK R. SIDELL, M.D.
-,Act;-,-(, 
Branch Chief
C. C. 
.
t-CLU-E, 
v.D.
Director, Bijae ical Labo,'.:ory
-AC (Pice 3 c:f 5 pu-cs)

--- PAGE BREAK ---I.vesti~i.or 
Divisioi Chidf 
Co-investigitor
FREDERICK R. SIDELL, M.D.
-,Act;-,-(, 
Branch Chief
C. C. 
.
t-CLU-E, 
v.D.
Director, Bijae ical Labo,'.:ory
-AC (Pice 3 c:f 5 pu-cs)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

805
R1RE CH,,I 
.I -'N iiCO. ___ 
,
13. 
MEDICAL %YUJINTEERS: Rlequirements, with datos *.d duratiol.
100 - 150 volunteers; 10 per week for 6 months.
14. 
RESPONSIBL. PHYSICIAN: 
NRae *nd telephone extension.
Frederick R. Sidell, M.D., ext 3393
15. 
SAI'IT' 
ft .
R '.'3: 
tor safety of mWical voluuteers.
Physiological 111onitorintl e(ti)Hent and4 a)propriate astidole (e.(j. , physostigjninc)
will be on hand.
16. 
APPROVAL: 
Si.natures,.signify approval of the Medical 
ooi-d.
FIEDERICK R. SIDELL, M.b.
Responsibs e Physiptjanl
FREDERICK R. SIDELL, M.D.
* Acting. CJ1iif, Clinical Rescarch Biranch
VAN f, S IMI 
1.
Chlief, Medical Resv,.arch Division
(A
.C. McCLURE, 
Is;',.D.
Director-, 
:....:.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

806
Protocol
I':"'1. Subjects to report to the ward at 2000 hours, the evening before the study.
2. During the evening: NF (Number Facility test), HR (heart rate), BP (blood
pressure, PS (p-upil size) times 3 at 10-minute intervals.
3. 
Fasting past 2400 hours until 3 hours post drug.
4. In a.m.: NF, HR, BP, PS, R (respiratio) time's 3 at 10-minute intervals;
T temperaturer) times 1.
5. Will have In.. orally zt time 0 ("zero") and dnj intramuscularly at experimental
time 1 hour
6. Testing: IF, HR, RP, PS, R, BCI. ('eh.aior chork list) every .5 mnittes
for 3 houts; theii every 30 minutes for 3 hours; the:n every hour for 4 hours.
T every hour for 10 hours.
7. 
Laboratory tests as follov,s i.t control, 21 hours, 43 hours, 7 days, and
14 (lays: Len-."ocrit, W[XC, differen.i, urine analysis, BUtJI, alkaliae
phosphatase ad SGOT.
8. 
To be discharged on physician's order not sooner than 24 hours post drug.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ays, and
14 (lays: Len-."ocrit, W[XC, differen.i, urine analysis, BUtJI, alkaliae
phosphatase ad SGOT.
8. 
To be discharged on physician's order not sooner than 24 hours post drug.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

807
SOP #1
Biomedical Laboratory
Medical Research Division
Third Revision
PROTOCOL FOR MINIMU1t EFFECTIVE DOSE STUDIES IN MAN
I. 
Introduction
The object of this :rotccol Is to outline the procedure for detennininy the minlimal
dose at which the effects of an agent (drug, chemical, or compound) cal be detected in
507/ of the sab jets Stt:died (i.e., M ED5(o). In gcocral, this consists of te,ting
increasing (o:,es of an iqcwt on small cjrc,ups of suljct.. ind recordintj individ-ail respon-, •
In an "all or nonc" man.,r. Thus, the pciccsitage of s"',cts sho.iarj a positive respons,.
to an agent (acco;ding to pre-set criteria) ctn be deartn;in d ,t each ease lcvel, and th;-
dose (with cotfidcence limits) at which 50/2 of the stoj-ct. respond can be calculated by
probity analysis.
Primary concern is given to the incapacitating effects of agents tested, b ,t all
readily measurable physiological and psychological effects should h recorde.d and
analyzed.
II. 
Methods
A. 
Selection of s,,!tjcts: Suibjects selected for testing should be free from
any significant physical nr h.baratory abnormality aA should be from'i the volh||tcrr poj)u-
lation designated A or B after p%ychitric and psychlo Jical examination. 
Mere the
primary effect is e>'.ected to be physical and not mne;ftal C+ subjects inay be :cd zt !ow
doses.
B. 
Variables to be studied:
1. The performance test found most urcfil Is the. Number Facility siabtr.st
of the Texas !Battery. Deicn:iiuation of the subj-ct's orientation to time, place, and
person and prese|ze of hauci a.io.,s or other ::ntal disturlances should also be noted..
A descriptio of behavior should be included when appropriate.
2. 
Important phiysiolo.iral variables are the blood pressure recorded in
both the supine ;n,. iipright pisitio. , resting heaft ralte, pupil size, axillary te.:perat ,a",
respiratory rate, atid a sympto:;m review as directed for each drug by the physician in charge.ded in
both the supine ;n,. iipright pisitio. , resting heaft ralte, pupil size, axillary te.:perat ,a",
respiratory rate, atid a sympto:;m review as directed for each drug by the physician in charge.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ne ;n,. iipright pisitio. , resting heaft ralte, pupil size, axillary te.:perat ,a",
respiratory rate, atid a sympto:;m review as directed for each drug by the physician in charge.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

808
SOP 
1
C. 
Determinatinsi of doses to be studied:
Doses are c.1ctlatcd in a .Cjoretric.lly increasingr series. A typical
schedule miglt utilize a starting dose of one microoran per kilogram. Subsequent
doses will be-derived by increasing ecch previous dose by 401/. increments (e.g., 1.0,
1.4, 2.0, 2.7, 3.8, 5.3). When the approximate lvLDO50 is approached, half-
increments (about 207.) a:e used for closer approximation. The half-increment can best
be determined by takirg the square root of the product of two adjacent doses (e.g.,
2.0+2.7: 2.0x2.7=5.4 
5.4 
2.33).
D. 
Conduct of vxpcriment:
1. Bateliw- me ".ures mst be obtein',d for ,ach stibject according to the
procedure described u'-kr Testing Proccdatres (paragraph E, below).
2. Subjects shonild be assiyred to the test area duriie, the day or night
prior to testim! in order to i)It)vi(le a period of familimiz nation.
3. Nothing by mouth (IMPO) except water for a 1-ho-or period prior to adminis-
tration of the aMcnt. A light, low-fat bc,-1-fast (no er:;s, butter, bacon, sausage, cream
or whole niil-) :r'.y be adinistered at least 1 hour prier to the start of the test.
4. 
Fo!loviinu ..
iiistratioii of doe atl. ii, by the physician, subje"t-, wi's
be o:)served con, inueusly by in:eical pcrsomiuil for at least 24 hours, and th.2rcafter, as
oug as specified by the resp.)isible physician. A quiat, 
secure area, at co.mlortable
temperature and h raidity, will be provided during this period.
5. Deginnii.q at a desiQnated time following injection of the a(!ent, subjects
will individually receive r inz.asuremei;t battery (described beloe) at prescribed intervals
for a leIngth of Lie.;c specfied util cei-nplete rcsov,-ry from the effects of tl'c ztent h,.s
occurred. 
The physician will decide when a subject can he released from the test, or
whether follow-up test measures at 48 hours (and/or 72 hours) are indicated.
6. "If practiced, subjects may converse, read, pray cards, etc., when not
undeEgoing test er asr-.:Peu.. 
Coffee -1nd cigarctes ire permitted in accordance with
nornil rcc;u'.ti.ns, except thit smolirg is prohibited for at least 20 minutes prior to
the measure, :at of blood pressure and heart rate. Regular meals may be served during
the test at the discretion of the supervising physician.
E. 
Testing procedure:
1. 
Baseline neasurements:
a. 
Perfl," -ce 
te'.s: The ?NT aicd other stas rard 
rfn~r.:',e ","ts ':ill
be baselisl:e. *V.ccorg1 
,!, Z 
s , -'-I 
,.o: Uto, 
sri 
Wu-i 
by the in-Astiga .:
be baseliv'ed i-ccording to instructions s peciiid by tlhe investigator.cd other stas rard 
rfn~r.:',e ","ts ':ill
be baselisl:e. *V.ccorg1 
,!, Z 
s , -'-I 
,.o: Uto, 
sri 
Wu-i 
by the in-Astiga .:
be baseliv'ed i-ccording to instructions s peciiid by tlhe investigator.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rfn~r.:',e ","ts ':ill
be baselisl:e. *V.ccorg1 
,!, Z 
s , -'-I 
,.o: Uto, 
sri 
Wu-i 
by the in-Astiga .:
be baseliv'ed i-ccording to instructions s peciiid by tlhe investigator.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

809
SOP 
-
• ". " 
* 
o"b. 
Ph.slolovic.l inas ie-.crts: Suoi:'c 1:-.-zrt rate, blood pressure,
(supine and 'erct), and respirotry rat/ wilt 1to recore::,l tinder restintg conditions on thr-e
occasions the nirhL before Cc test and again on three occasions in the morning of the test.
If desired, this may be intci rated with the numerical fa(cility baseline testing, by altema.-
I!:ing NF and vital sign measirements. 
Subjec.ts must be lying supine for at least two full
Ininutes prior to beginning the measurement of thOe vital signs. A minimum of three pupil
--size and axillary temperature measurements should be included among the ten sctu of
vital signs. 
The following regimen may be used for bhth baseline and experimental.
determinations:
(1) Place axillary thern-ometer under eightt arm.
(2) Chec!k pupil size with card pupll:oncter. With overhead light at
prescribed setting hove stobject gaze at I""t while es.haate is made. Be careful not to
obstruct l;cht sotq(ie.
(3) Co-rn. hewt rate will subject lyi (: completely flat excep, for
single pil with 
Zris a: 
ai 
.
Count fm:fl 60 se.onils, the..n contiwe holding wrist
and count ,espiratiows 'or 60 scconds.
(4) Measure blood pressure in left arm, when supine and after
standing for one minute.
(5) Remove axillary thenn:,nmter and read.
2. Experimental measurements: After injection of the test a(lent at each of the
times designated by the physician, the following procedures will be carried out:
S • 
a. Generall. With the subject supine, in a private room or quiet screl-ned
area oii the hospital ward, (,;ecral 
questions by the nurse or technician will be a o!:d as
fo I lows:
(.) How is thl' subject feeling?
(2) Can he estimate what time It is, tell whether it is a.m. or p.m.,
and how long he has been oii tost? If lie seems ti-certain, check knowledge of day,
date, j.-nth, year, Icz;tio;m, reason for hbii,*j here, al;ii~ty to identify nurse, sector,
other 'eisoenel.
(3) After being sure he knows he has received i-n agent, ask what
fcts :,.I- notices, if any. I! he notes non.-,-oes ha f'..el perfectly norrial? C!,cck
sp"cificilly for 6ificulty concentration, unusual dreams, visions or voices, try mouth,
yi~mtI ~,,silnrc~ 
~~~ilr! 
rqfrt onotices, if any. I! he notes non.-,-oes ha f'..el perfectly norrial? C!,cck
sp"cificilly for 6ificulty concentration, unusual dreams, visions or voices, try mouth,
yi~mtI ~,,silnrc~ 
~~~ilr! 
rqfrt o

--- PAGE BREAK ---he notes non.-,-oes ha f'..el perfectly norrial? C!,cck
sp"cificilly for 6ificulty concentration, unusual dreams, visions or voices, try mouth,
yi~mtI ~,,silnrc~ 
~~~ilr! 
rqfrt o

--- PAGE BREAK ---

810
!' sop -1
1(.) 
Inquire as to.immediate needs Nt wishes of subject.
Attend to these, If possible, or provide assurance as nrcessary.
• 
b. 
Physiological measurements: Done as described under baseline
Measurements.
c. 
Performance measures: In a quiet evwironmerit with subject sitting
on edge of bed and test material on clipboard, zdtninistf.r 1he Number Facility test. Score
test as soon as possible and tell subject how much ie eanid (when applicable).
d. At least one comprehensive descripiion of subject's appearance
and behavior should be cr.'crcd in the chart by the physician, nurse or tcclhician during
each time period. AtiMtitional observations, including vcrbatim quotation ol subject's
remarks are highly va1wt')le and should he made Henever possible. The results of any
special exam.;nations smild be recorded. 
ldeall,., the clinical record should be sufficic'eiy
detailed to ;)r.-iit the reade-r to reconstruct the stuj-ct's activities and the course of any
mental or physical 
.,cs 
fro. the time tlh" at-ent is adrinistcred to t.e time -.t which
the subjcct is released lroi:i the test.
Ill. 
Evaluation, Ta'vlation and Reporting of R~esults
As each new dnig is studied, it will be n-cessary to pi11- the drug response veistis
time for earh variable sttidied at each (lose. 
This will d!ciaiie the period of maxi.mi
effect of l:. a 
ao d .id cioi can be 'ocuse' c' t!i pt,;k" ,ii.aj futurc t 
vss..*;. 
" I 
."C
same a(-ent o class of acc,ts. The plots should is.ally bc in terms of Percentage
decrease (or increase) of tho variale from the baseline value at each expcrimental ti.,;c
in hours.
Since the results are calculated in terms of "all or none" responses, arbitrary
criteria have been selected (based on previous ex!),prienc.) as to what level o! response
should be considered as positive. Thcse criteria .re listed below and may Ie subject to
change:
1. For NF's, the average of the three lowest scores (taken frorm the raje
of peak activity) must be below 75%.
•2. 
For pupil size, an increase of 50/. above baseline for two consecutive
readinns.
3. For hcart rate, a chonage of Y)'/, from baseline.
4. 
For ..!)od press,.re, a difference of 15 m I-h1 
svrtolit, or 10o 
mm H1
diastolic teenwen iying and standing BPs; a cila,'e of 30 nn 11U bybLuiic or 20 .WA
diastolic fro.- hseline in either lying or standier position, or a change from bascline
of 10 , " '-. ,1 #:! I ?.",,P in ei".1 z position.g and standing BPs; a cila,'e of 30 nn 11U bybLuiic or 20 .WA
diastolic fro.- hseline in either lying or standier position, or a change from bascline
of 10 , " '-. ,1 #:! I ?.",,P in ei".1 z position.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

811
SOP 1
5. 'For tes:inerature, an increase of 1.5- or m;ore (axillary).
6. Otlhr parameters, i .e. , presence of extrapyramidal signs, may be
used when indicated.
For each variable udcr consideration, the posit-ve response fractions and
percentages are tabu!.tel for each close tested as in the following table:
Agent Q - FF Test
Dose 
Ro. of positive response fractions/
No. of subjects tested
1.0 
1/4 
.
25
1.4 
,2/5 
40
2.0 
4/5 
80
2.7 
5/6 
83
The MED 50 ,"nd the confidence limits are determined by piol)it analysis (t:icthod o(
Bliss prefecu-). This procedure will be done by computer.
IV 
Folloi Up Exan;inatioI
Psychological or !);,ysi(al exam iint ions are to be performed as indicted at
intervals fol. vinq the test a:;d '-II results entr,.d in the clinical chart.
Laboratory worlt .will be done as outlined in SOP 12.
Other examinations, clinical or laboratory, are to be done as indicated.
10-026 0 - 76 - S2

--- PAGE BREAK ---lts entr,.d in the clinical chart.
Laboratory worlt .will be done as outlined in SOP 12.
Other examinations, clinical or laboratory, are to be done as indicated.
10-026 0 - 76 - S2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

812
SOP #2
Biumedical Laboratory
Medical Research Division
Third Revision
LABORATORY STUDIES FOLLOWING HUMAN EXPERIMENTS WITH DRUGS/AGENTS
The following procedures will be used in this Division to Insure adequate clinical
safeguards during dit-I/agent studies.
1. As part of in-processing each volunteer will have tlie laboratory tests listed
in Battery 3 plus an EKG, chest x-ray and cholinesterase analysis. Those volunteers
who are suitable for eng testing will have Battery 2 pls an EKG, chest x-ray and
choline terase anilys's.
2. A volunteer r.ceivin r ?.n FDA-a,'r-),ed dnig, a lettered agent (VX, DZ, etc.)
a numbered conip'w),m which h: s itc.en orevic:."ly thoro,::!,ly tested in hurinns (3500, ei .),
a co,,:'oily Ilsed irit?.'! (CS), or ,,stard ,.ill !!ive B:.tty 3 at ap-proyin ately 7-10
days after the aqccnt.
3. A volunteer receiving, a compound which is in the initial sta-cs of humnn testing
will have B:attery 1 at 24 hom's amid 48 hours (or the clay the subject leaves the V;ar(. in
the cu.se of Iong-histing coalltili-o:s) and P,-.1tvr, 2 at approximately 10 '.ys aftar expostre.
4. Chronoso:me studies will be done on all subjects receiving ncw agents and/or
as many subjects receiving old agents as possible. This obviously depends on the
capabilities of the chronosoiie study group and any drug studies are to be closely
coordinated with that group.
It is difficult to be speriric about the way in which these tests are used. The fcowing
are set as quidelin-'s:
1. After receiving a "new" agent (paragraph 3, above) no volunteer is to kave on
pass until his 2'1- amd 43-botr laboratory results have beel approved by the physician
responsible for tire test.
2. A "new" agent shal! not be given to a second group of volunteers until the
24-hour data fro,,m the previo',s t.*oup ha;%ve biMl ap )o\:d by the physician. Ideally the
48-hour and 7-.!a-y 6,ta sho:ihk be available and satisfactory, but this is not always
practical or possible.
3. The next highest dose of a "new" agent lhutmld never be umure than 40"/ (,reate ,
the previous dose, nor should the next dose of any drug io a study, unless the drug has
previously been sti!ed iin !.-,a;,.is at the h ,'her cose.new" agent lhutmld never be umure than 40"/ (,reate ,
the previous dose, nor should the next dose of any drug io a study, unless the drug has
previously been sti!ed iin !.-,a;,.is at the h ,'her cose.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

813
SOP Q2
-4. Each Ihysician is respons;bl for reviewing ;I laboratory tests oi. 
his
subjects onl the day the tests are done and conducting and tecordinj a proper investigation
as soon as possible of any abnormality. He is also responsible for noting any physical
abnormality that ntigl't be considered a toxic effect.
5; A Complete write-up shouts. be made on cach test chart describing any
abnormality and the work-up perform; to elucidate it.
At the conclusion of the lest and foll,-tip period, the physician should notify the Clinical
Facility Administrator th.t the volunteer is cleared and cn be used oil other tests.
Batt-_ry.1 - Albulmin, giohtilin, total protein, hematori:, WBC, differential, ESR, urine
a-naysis, SGOT, BUN, bilinihin, alkaline phosp tase. Others (ElG, EEG, cholines-
terase analysis, LDH, SO PT) may be aeded as indicatcd or at the discretion of the
physician. 
%
Batter,2 -
.,tery 1 Ilis [ISP.
B 
r 
- Heciatocrit. WIC, differential, complete urine analysis, SGOT, GUN,

--- PAGE BREAK ---O PT) may be aeded as indicatcd or at the discretion of the
physician. 
%
Batter,2 -
.,tery 1 Ilis [ISP.
B 
r 
- Heciatocrit. WIC, differential, complete urine analysis, SGOT, GUN,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

814
SGPf3
Bioiledicz'l Laboratory
Medical Research Division
Third Revision
DATA REPORTING
The purpose of this SOP is to outline the method to be used for identifying data from
clinical studies and in recording certain information. Regulations require that all
experime tal data be recorded in a rejistered notebook. Because of the voluminous
amount of tdata gencrated during clinical testing, this is not practical. Therefore, the
Iollowir.g i..,thod .vill i:-, uscd:
1. Alr dosage .lat3 and calculations (dose, con:entrations of soltdio), volume,
etc.) will 
. recor(!c in- j- --rat':'cnt 1,pe noteb(1o: ind signed cach day of i.se by the
investi.jat.r. At the c iclt.sion of c;ich project the no -,bool; will i)e placed in the
Division's ,l ta file.
2. 
Each report rcs~tltinq fro: i fih:se data shall cmitain th, statement "The data
reported h. :.i 
u 
were o!.taiiii.dI from !:. clinical ceses and chaits listed below. A
notebook coatz.ilinj doszt-C, calcul;:..i is on file in the 
Ruedicel 
flesearc:i Division."
This stat:mr2.t is to !): f(ollo,\..e( b%, 
!1. cns, nu,,! ?rs of the climicil clnrts. If the
subjects are id,;ntili-.d iii t.. report !, i u iais or o:.:va r.eCuti, 
t;ese ide.ittfyihu
symbols should app:..r wit!, the case m:-'bcrs.
3. The clinical data will be recorded in the clinical charts in the tsal way
ard for data processing "im poses in a manner described in anot'Oet SOP.

--- PAGE BREAK ---p:..r wit!, the case m:-'bcrs.
3. The clinical data will be recorded in the clinical charts in the tsal way
ard for data processing "im poses in a manner described in anot'Oet SOP.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

815
SOP -4
Biopwdical Laboratory
Medical Research Division
Third Revision
OUTLINE FOR USE OF SERIAL MEASURES DATA SHEET
Administration of Initial Control Trials
A. 
Procedure
B. 
Enterin-j the Data
II. 
InitialUthitaion of Su!-ject for Drti'j Evaloation
A. 'Admiistration of Eveninj and Morii;iq Control Trials
1. Pro..cc:ure
2. Entering the D.ata
B. 
Calculation of the Baseline
C. 
Enterihj t!:e Data Durinj the Agent Evaluation
III. 
Graphing the Data

--- PAGE BREAK ---Eveninj and Morii;iq Control Trials
1. Pro..cc:ure
2. Entering the D.ata
B. 
Calculation of the Baseline
C. 
Enterihj t!:e Data Durinj the Agent Evaluation
III. 
Graphing the Data

--- PAGE BREAK ---

816
SOP *-4
PROCEDURE FOR IJSIi(d THE DAA SHEET
Serial Measures (NF-SC)
Administration of Initial Control Trials
A. 
Procedure
1. The subjects ate given 20 control trials (1-20).
2. These trials aie given in grotips of five a-5; 6-10; 11-15; 16-20).
3. 
Each group of five trials is considered a session which may be
con(lucted in a morning or afternoon.
4. Norm;J!ly, the four sessions would be (.oipleted in a period of to days.
5. 
The tme between the beginning of one 'ulaI and the beginning of the
next h ial is ten minutes.
6.' To the extent thIt it is possible, each st)ject should start with a
diflce -nt form nurn.ler.
B. 
Entering tl,, Data
1. The raw scores are entered on the form in order of trial number in the
column eesiganale "Raw Score."
2. 
A small circle wil be placed in the space provided which represent's
the ;,.w score cz"i;:e. for th.- ".i.
3. The form number o;hich was used for the tuii %:i.l be placed in tl
column desitnrted "Forn Io"
4. 
The three highest scores of tlicse first tv.tnty trials will be placed
in the space designated "Hi 3. 1-20" inthe block called "A-Baseli;c."
5. 
Several copies of the form should be mace at this time which will be used
for the calculation of the subject's bascl.v (or additional drug evalli.hon
studies using this subject.
II. 
Initial Utilization of a Subject for Drug Evaluation
A. Administr.;ion of Evening and Morning Control Irials
1. 
Procedure
a. The evening (5 p.m.) b,,Jore the sujict is to be t-sed for a (*nig
evaluation lie i, ndmini'rrod two mnm control tri;A; (21A-2A).
b. The morning (3:30 a.m.) befnie t;. wbjrect i3 to b- used fei a
lnin evaltiat inn, he in nrminikOprM Otrm nnre connrol trials
(23A-24A-25A).

--- PAGE BREAK ---rrod two mnm control tri;A; (21A-2A).
b. The morning (3:30 a.m.) befnie t;. wbjrect i3 to b- used fei a
lnin evaltiat inn, he in nrminikOprM Otrm nnre connrol trials
(23A-24A-25A).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

817
SOP '4
2. Enteriiq the Data
a.. The evening control raw scores and form numbers are entered
S b. 
in the appropriate columns and row. for trials 21 and 22.
-
b., TIhe morning control rawv scores and form mmbers are entered
In the appropriate collins and rows for trials 23, 24, and 25.
c. The two highest of the three morni,- control scores are placed
i the space designated "Hi 2, 23A-25" In the block called
"A-Baseline.
B. 
Calculatiom. of the Baseline
The first lime a subject is uscd for a dniq evaluation, his baseline
(A-Basel;ne) is calculated ii the following xmiunner:
1. the Wnormation necessary for calculnat;on should be in the blo,;k
desitnm.ted "A-U.iselinc" and is used itS follows:
a. Take ti:e three hicghcst scores obtdiiKd oii tie fist 2L, coi,10l
trials (1-20).
b. Take.the two highest scores obtained on the thee control trials
given tlh norninq bore the dnitj is to be adcm.initered (2.A,
24A. 25A).
c. 
Add thcse five scores.
d. D;vide these five scores by 5.
2. 
The result of this calculation is the "A-Baselinc" score.
C. 
Entering the Data Obtained During Agent Testing
1. The raw scores and fomi numbers will be entered in the aporoprifle
columns inthe large blocked section designated "AGENT TESTING."
2. 
A small circle iepresentinto the raw score for each trial will be pla.ced
' 
in the space provided to the right of the raw score.
3. Each of the raw scores will then b. divided by the baseline score
which will iesult in a percentage score to be entercd in the colh:n'
designated "7. score." 
V

--- PAGE BREAK ---f the raw score.
3. Each of the raw scores will then b. divided by the baseline score
which will iesult in a percentage score to be entercd in the colh:n'
designated "7. score." 
V

--- PAGE BREAK ---

818
SOP e4
IM. Graphing the D.-ta
A. Each ravi score may be represented! .,, a small circle placed appropriately
In the space provided to the right of the "Raw Score" column.
B. 
The circl,.s can then be connected by a scid line.
C. Once thn baseline is calculated, a (Dotted line can be drawn to represent
the subject's asymptote of performance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

819
0 
2;,, 
" 
""'-
-
' 1 
-
l~i-- __ __ ... 
.......
.),- , .:'Z.:' .
::.:-a.i
J, G~? 2£5 
:.
Clinical Charts
:1", 
.* 
.
.
-
I 
.
I- 
* 
-
a
IL 
0
.
C_ 
E .4,:- 
:L~ : 
.!.. 
I... i_*- 
- ,
-a 
' 
.. 
.....
A..
1
...... 
1
...... 
.
.
.
.
-, 
,
:13T 
IL.'
. .. .
I 
, 
I 
- ! 
I 
I 
.
IL!L 3J, 
' 
___-._ 
o 
____.__ 
!
'1 
.0 
Io 
-
-
;- 
I 
1' 
! 
:l"
• 
4S"- 
,.a - -
- -
- I .. 
.
I 
a'- 
. .
ga--i-
;! 
41 ' 
! 
a 
I 
I 
,-
:i ro' 
a t 
ac 
I 
a, 
-
. i''l 
-
, 
I I 
l 
I C 
,.* 
.
-
'a I 
,0 
! 
: 
I 
I 
i 
I 
,
rL.'I "AO • 
l 
f 
% 
I 
a 
, 
a.
( i. , 4 '. 
I 
a 
I" 
I:. 
I 
I 
a
ifj 
_ 
.
,T 
I. 
o 
.
, 
.
-
Ic 
) 
) 
) 
0 
C 
IO 
C. 
C)
-- --
__-_;i_.--i 
-;_T,._- 
" 
-- 
, 
.! 
i---l.'----:- 
-
--
-- -Ia 
; i 
.
,, _ -- 
-
-
-
v -- ,. 
.. --
,. 
.. i . .. 
Ij. ___ -_
___ 
:'_.I 
C 
, ... 
., 
O 
, 
I 
,, 
j 
2......I--. i- 
I 
I.
jI 
.
MI 
I
E___.__ 
..... 
.
.
:..4. ,....,. 
-7 
,-, 
, 
'; 
i 
I
t.:- 
' 
"" 1- ' 
; 
.
+., 1 
... 
I 
_~ . .__ ' I 
' 
.
, 
, :. 
, 
< 
,II' 
-
, 
;.'..._._.,
;/.~ ; 
.
; : 
-..
: 
• 
:. 
.
. J .
a.. 
L, 
" 
.i2 " 
.I
• a 
, 
! 
I 
I' 
" '"
, 
,. 
" 
i,.;: . .. , 
I ; i) I 
..'Z 
, 
I 
.
_-
I ," 
I.* -' 
I 
, .
: ,.-;. 
I 
I 
I 
":
_ _- 
.
.. 
!. .:: . . " 
' " 
' 
.j 
.
a 
g. 
, 
.
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---.i2 " 
.I
• a 
, 
! 
I 
I' 
" '"
, 
,. 
" 
i,.;: . .. , 
I ; i) I 
..'Z 
, 
I 
.
_-
I ," 
I.* -' 
I 
, .
: ,.-;. 
I 
I 
I 
":
_ _- 
.
.. 
!. .:: . . " 
' " 
' 
.j 
.
a 
g. 
, 
.
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

820
Backgrourd dwta: Dc:.tro3!npetamine, methylphenidcte, secobarbital, diazepain
and ethyl alcohol are FDA-approved drugs and have been widely distributed and
marketed.
The mixture "BAT" catiscs tim following effects in man at a dose of 8 mg of
benactyzine, 80 my of TMi)4 and 2 nig of atropine: tachycardia of about
-
110-120, xerosto,.aia, sliojit ccv.tion of blcod pressure (10-15 mm 
.j),
mydrlasis (1-2 nun increa-e), ato.ia, mild to moderate confusion and mild
disorientation; halluri;-:' ions may Mlsf) be noted.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

821
Manufacturing Specifications
The drugs to be used:
r 1. "Dextroamphetamine. 
Purchased as DexadrinefO manufactured by
Smith, Kline & French Co.
2. Mcthylpl'enidate. 
Purchased as RitalinR' manufactured by CIBA
Pharmaceutical Co.
3. Secobarbital. 
Purchased as Secorral,I manufactured by Eli Lilly and Co.
4. Ethyl alcohol, p).rchased ethyl alcohol 203 proof, manufactured by
Chemical Solv'mt:s Corpo.-,Mion.
5. Dirzepam is niketed as .Valimif by Roc!.e Laboratories.
6. "P'AT." 
3nactzinm p..,cl'a,Pd from Pi., Ilz ind Bztmcr, Inc., 99.91A.
pure. Atropiit- sulfate, U.S. P., pochs-d from 
lInc. TA , IHurcl':,sCd
from Aldric Ch!:iical Co., 991 pure. "Ie fital seluion coawains 30 nGm 
T!34,
8 mj bctiLyiinz", 2 mg wtro:)inc sulf;,te, 0.05'" .et!ylpara'rxii anid 0.005 propyl.
pari;:1-n FcI 
N 
l, in s'crilk v*atie 
for inmjc.' ica, U. S. P. Final p 
-
adjusted to
3.0 wi'th ICi ",l : 
l'oh 
iom %':1s fil!cr..(" Iirowl' 0.22 ti millip.e filter. Th
drug wii l, 
w ctc,.id 
in 
:- 
ampuics in. a reiriceror amtii use.
-Y
0 7.
.1 
al.' 
00

--- PAGE BREAK ---822
Curriculum Vitae of Investigators
K 
ar 1975 
.

• 
s
Tb, ,.Jd.,,,.ta..

.__.iiU.deMC1lure
so"blls this Stalir-, 
as weqvlted ev ofectson 
of Or1 
e 
Fqedzal Fcoi.0auO.

a.a Cosmetic Ac and, l Y).

I.

To-a 
"
I€ h'e-rl of FeieJ.

R ui.s!

a 
I 
a co an:lIc 
Lts cq 
.4 afdJ cosibuct :g clIfcal p.sMat-oBY wit'i ame 
Jr&-
I?

1 .#ttl (of v'aso-1 .tlelll lw to 
rlll' 
~l cit.

1.

$10T Ilc 
£TU-t :.C.

5.4 
Ak.

%.

vC 
S 
4AVC 
4 :; T -At QUAiIrsIS YOU f0ft CLINICAL PA4ACCI.OsY
B.S..

1947 (Fselicdl Science) 
Wake Forest University
H.S., 1958 (Physiology) 
a 
=
M.D..

19L0 
.

"
Ph.D., 1960 (Biochtmistry) University of North Carolina
Intern, Surgery, *:ale Univ, 1950-51
Asst Resident, Surcery, Yale Univ.

1951-52
Asst Resident, fNeirosurgery, Duke Univ, 1952-5S.

1954-55
Resident, fleur6oloqy, Du'e Univ, 1953-54
Residents Iee,'w.ur~ery, DuXie Univ, 1955-56
Po-.t-doctorl, 
Uriv of IHort Cirolina, 1960-61 (See coit piinf-
*.41 
0,'v 
,A-- 
8.

% j.

an 
"E 
' 
IL 
.1CM()L.

- 014iiAL.

Olt c.

itN AtSEASiC-4 IL Pft.

I 
v 
t eh 
t 
CL 
of ci.

I 1AS.OL(..% 
PtlL -0 C ,f,' 
I 
Ut
Biomedical Laboratory, Ed-eiood Arsenal, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD 21010
s 
I-, 
,In.

I.

If t!e e .'- 
i'.i 
g,,ir:l 
Il,' 
IC .34l.iCied .4.

i, 
sa 
saih lnd lblrs 
i.

w r.1,Ce a:€ It.

ino,;i.:i 
, 
.; r,-: 
.' -
Ss ., .

.&.:I 
i~t 
.

% 
..

34.14..

-
i4.4.

IC 
l, ii S 
l i 
....

sXc.IistGtsICn 
i n 
.:*.: 
1 i 
r( f s 
* 
a 
*.

t t'.: 
.'.:"
soil 
.4l- 
IC 
i-se 
4 
:.i.' 
..

s.t, 
aij 
CO 
eOII.e 
CC lMlnJa:'ols.Ai ane c..fe: t --., .1 tvc
e,*,*ii...l.

±t4il 
*.

,.

.

'tl~~a 
w I 
V 
i, 1jStJ C.1,*lal 
t.witis as they ate pe::iantd.

Co..

.

c- 
.f* JS..-
* J .

; .

t 
s 
e 
l .

i, 
,.

v 
t 
to be 
i.&itci 
i 
ofo a .tii ca of 
)c .

t 
'lts 
;.s-s !

r,.-ea l.

of va.

-.

i;.,.

u.z 
~eiunJ, d 
.s.

,,cs.

t~cl tG*, 
lion of JSconiinu,r C't it, 
[t.:Jv 
.

Aie :2 :e -
SL 
a 
s 
i 
t 
l 
At 
sc Iet, l.4.S.

I." 
,3 
t 
i- 
f'i 
p.

I 
lJ 
a ,I .i 
c v'I 
ron aequcs.

t.

JutV sat 
r 
, 
-
c.

-e-ei 
" 
t 
- !--- PAGE BREAK ---

JutV sat 
r 
, 
-
c. -e-ei 
" 
t 
- ! Aies;U 
t 
e', em .w 
-
-
th : #I 
-.tC% 
.- cet 
1. t.r 
-..&,, 1 
t 
of te'. ro.ss,,-i 
l :., 
ro*i an!,'L.I 
j.) ;4j.f 
.. . ... 5-isbi .,-19ss 01i .nl) t.:,j. a o 
tc tv c..r 
e'-r- 
. i.e I 
macii.!.itfons t.the 
eo.ft,'i':e .- S %Ii -- c 
:.. .. itte 
. I 
. . t. Aff; I 
t s, 
fe 
.I 
S:.,a c:%eI. I 
Cencor. .. e.. at~t 
tre 
4a! Sea.t~ 
..n i'.ii:'...i
.0 ow or 
0 A 
.:c 
I 
.!% 4 i r 
Vr., 
Off ct 
i 
tit 
in ItCIS 
able i 
t:Vt--e 
'-- 
t 
..4 
' 
, 
c 
'*fh. or 
l..1 i- -
. "
.tsoonf! t . -n% 
e~.. t 
j..s. i 
: I-js 
of 
Ite *..i;U&ej Lt. litt 
1% . ~ 
.itf.. 1 ia*"
l* eio -.. i 
ina-S 
. .J(-, . .- n:, -
. the 
. gario 
e 
eg 
Ctf.-ii-. . ' 
.r, 
ac-o llp. s' 
tf 
ii.i 
€ 
-3I: it "h -
" 
"
11115 Ic rteseftte.. :9 ;* 
k
4
s 
n.*i-ti 
has -tot ?Atesre;A:rJ 
milses aie Coetlitie.! to) tiii.ti tt iI~iiiJ
iiil. *. tctt-. ne 
mit:' 
." 
:ie i- 
.. o 
.h.j 
.. . 1  
ts 
.Gun :, 4 . .:i
t 
.* .A oi :1
s.itlee J.'i5ao 
14.01 
os 
.:i 
i 
a-1 lelset, a.$I con- 
Orvitnt of ifeati. F.%.cAs~n. At.,' * -Iate. 8%-
sr:*ssirr~ S, 
a-11 .. -i 
.. ! '.4.'f... 2 N the col"e..: oi t*W 
ironc the U.S. G.a.es,,ao: 
0:.ts~ 
ti 
o 
It is 
. .eseatch 
z.iws 
.!. i. 6c . vtr,. ueov,.!c 
x 
eJe 
I%&.: :-eat 16ua3ewiie 
&, 1* 
&.I 
ci. .I.zAi 
. a 
t 
. cc.-JC. 0... 4.' 
bil ItA:Il 
.-
t-1 
SC 
.5)4.. *-'. .'; n.fl Ic~ 
hs ir 
c I %! sr 
3r'.. 10: 
Ite n 
tI s
va.- "'t, 
a* 
.t 
"at 
:':u:;a:f' 
li. :e . ce .1 
M|4k. c.iTvI4Ie 
It lt 
ries 
* 
5C.- 
lii 
,lnt 
s.- 
4 
1
t i 
esc 
'..1 
: 
I )., 
. I 
!l4..C' 
el 
. . tt l¢w:i 
.- 
*I0(-.J"*. tli 
5 -.. I 
:..t 
:n Iii 
,.:
r .tlt f 
-
C 
l.- . ! 2t1.C 
t..i, 
o 
4 . 'ls 
t 
peJ 5- 
':- . . a... li, n:. .; 
f , 
. -- 
. ..... 0.. I- 
v W 
o 
• 
-," 
: 
r 
E'; 
-
.:- 
. C. SAY CLs ;.af' 
v '" .- 
. ' fK'S.. INCL 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---C 
l.- . ! 2t1.C 
t..i, 
o 
4 . 'ls 
t 
peJ 5- 
':- . . a... li, n:. .; 
f , 
. -- 
. ..... 0.. I- 
v W 
o 
• 
-," 
: 
r 
E'; 
-
.:- 
. C. SAY CLs ;.af' 
v '" .- 
. ' fK'S.. INCL 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

823
C. KcClure
item 1, Education and Training continuedd)
Fellow, Nat Cancer Inst, Duke Univ, 1953-55
Fellow, Nat Inst for Neurological Dis & Blindness, Univ of North Carolina,
1958-61
Instructor, Neurology, Duke Univ, 1953-54
Instructor, NeurosLr~ery, Duke Univ, 1955-56
Assistant, Neurosurgery, Univ of Tennessee, 1956-57
Research Associate, Physiology, Bowman Gray School of Medicine of Wake Forest,
1957-58
Research Associate, Biochemistry, Univ of North Carolina, 1958-61
Assistant Professor, Biochemistry, Univ of North Carolina, 1961-62
Clinical Instructor, Nleurosurgery, Univ of Colorado, 1966-67
American Board of 'Iurological Surgery
American Board of Clinical Chemistry (Toxicological Chemistry)

--- PAGE BREAK ---824
jot 
e 
nase xj.te)*.

4%2 
%'!E -t 
US 
V4-- Ili-Allo 
#1 vfS ICAT 0..% IP 
.c
0 
-
Indeterainate
~j~imoof 
0U.tL 
1 
1 
PROJ I 
To Sia UNOL'IAKesi 
'Ee.c 
a 
,e0folt 
Perutaiodn IA.

Rosso of toere,.or~ 6660041 bocl
,4#ewtebe 
.

ot 
e 
m 
e so of 
eol e09 
&aet 6 'A obe4 
oleo 
veal 
wo 
,1 
#o 
4c 
o 
* &" .c 
of Ille
General clinical pharftcology studies to determine the interactions of the
drug TAB with such copronly used drugs as ethanol, tranquilizing agents, and
various narcotic compounds.

i.e., morphine, demerol.

T 
TH 
olmb"r.-o.N .cA.

.: 
l.IT 
1.0E FOLLOM.hi 
COhOIT4.49 GtIOIILLV APPLICAULI TO Nt0 ONUG$s FOR
136i ETIGAIO6IPL ust GOVeRN sios iCcIPv Alto use Or TellS INVE$Y400T SONAL ORUOG
T*e so 
e 
.ted 
.i 
1lop9 
l 
S0 .

*muel@lguec utI" 
h 
.

It Am.

Ilr~ilt~b(t 
4l 
1.*1 reell 
fl.

wos tl 
aost tks'.

qwe"Ilos
C .e1# 8A Pa.me..llg C.

poti 
& 
0.

4esgl.

F.~ou
b 
0%.01.401o 
1t 
S*0Ipoes.sltO 
0t0.ol 
odego..:.

.*t.

do o110
.i 
oo by seb..00.

so4 $l 8.-olmoal-ue.0o10 
Is sus.

p..ed t me 
ao~ utsed • ehelo I te 
speole &AV tomnsJ 
qgo l
e4 eke d4g.

6.

T3.6 
tlq 
to as eloglted to peep.

ORA tomloswme *44d40t
tit 
pa-lolnt 
telagoel 
go -stood ell .os,3als ai 
tad .t0.,
dal pfl"A0eft to the tlotecal phSokolesr
d.

T ol ...

Yc.4rl 
.qroeedleo to-.o.

s100 
eC0ebe 
lp 
o 
h 
#
0%0 sl0 
fre €olie1 lg 
8"'4 ocvtes 
bike 
I%@ tI'u.

c-4 oteftls'e- 1 .'.es 
eop.etl to 
oi Foed 8od Oecs Adcoce.s0
to'-o 
&I 
01 *pp..olo 
rleIl.

lO.

.

',droin I post.

Any
aferreo 
i(oe..0.

mt 
e 
o 
eotlot be oregodeld as ced 
by.

cois pt.bstt torOdt l.

ille 
&.allg 
be epoed 
lt 
It@h
s0.o 
e..plf_ 
.Ad alwbi off.ee.0 effect so 4toa4lo l if $haIl
.I eepe tod~t tlr 
lelnr.

Am o*dQucle reaie.

of felct 
, 
0loI
a106tilly Ihe*ed be furmshled 
It 
sqpelhel 
Oenl .feet
a.

tro laO l 
.8lt 4":at" She.

ecoaofbo 
l d el$seoic 
of
Ibe drog 6^a,4# Cott .

.4 
# 
o 
*ol 
tbeJ abtte for ap enod of 
.

yeats fotle-..s q0.

do)I 'e 
se.drl 
'-tl.o1 
l o 
faoervld
I" 
the dcowg.--- PAGE BREAK ---

yeats fotle-..s q0. do)I 'e 
se.drl 
'-tl.o1 
l o 
faoervld
I" 
the dcowg. .e 
o1 o 
c~pli cco.,e ale be fM o to 
osl o.ed
pen 
'. os . . y 
r 
a 
, 11o 
l f 
'. . I 
ie to tseanntelf *#-I -ho
FeDA .mO Dne AS-s-,lteAlion tsc Roe.lo6d. VU~a .0. gmiaool of
* ttvalsf,..3,-#.ade uo9 *oc.f.:o'lor 
oasleets~ e-Plelow
*.e 
ho 
eparo.- 
n 
e~.ioee...,0 
A, 
~ 
et 
l 
oot wilt
-* 
urO #-W-es 
Cut~bI N.-tc 
a *rd 
-re, 
~. Tle
&me* 1f tt, 
oub.etto seed mel be dsoi,?ged umlo, 
6o 
.oCOs
of SO. poflelef, 
Svb'e.S. eee.ee 
egeve deloJ 
01sa 
: 
b 
. of I". c, e Sll 
M.bhle 
**pat 
a. o 
owl 4o 0.1 0 
eec.. is '-
.0 t 
p,. tCl 
8 
a 
. :oo 
I 
Itee 
s be.,*, 
0- 10 4%0 C 
to .'t
f. TMO 
e 
eave"6661.0erals*O 
shot he 
elw e .ill 
be *dOlS 
._
"mIp so 4111#I04 
.f.det 
f 
l 
roese.Ol 110w10et• O 
s She
Dooleevisiou of ae fo.11.-ld wmteslegeteeSo Peeavisome 10 ;".. Med41cal officers a1signed to Clinizal
Resea rchM 
ch. Medical ReICarchiL 
v
Lhardipn POrnuinn 
.rstanud 
IMf 
2111l
cad Mal sl drug sill et be suaioshd 4o may .ohte ftwellsolso
of tom 
llcgo el d.&lttaillms 
to oub'ects. The eo%•otibgalo cenotCes to., he Mi:l 
legions 607 pollorlo of
bay peri 
Woird at 
etAo#SIe. O t.:r 
4%lo 
lPttatale 
1ol
dg.9 
o 
b 
dea 
ul 
Of1eP 
l o md 
(OfI 
-01o
tolotho codsali! !the I~BI. leeg~elmo•,tioe-I
she ,. tha is see feaible of. am %be Ibolvel 
.. e's p .eeoliosoI
odgueratm. Is ceeiauy eq the bas el 
iglel . the *%*Sor$. b. Th, icvooltdlsrc Is oo 
iu 
--
l to mute. sho upelao' that fIris-
tolletis..,oorItelto 
cc.O 
aBob~r 
otho 
$14.1006
INeI.eod OAd approeJ 
e 
aoo 
1I.A1y. T,%* ePgIctdI 
.l.! p0'l 
PW. 4e644to PVC-40¢-3*Sl~~~ 
f. # Such~ 0 cat-'irilloo shols 
bye q.V:4'rcd
Codo~to eeg.,8eot. l* 
soy.oaelso eel fotbilee bto 
IMl. lIe 
.-f .. sUecteeb at.. pooc 
e 
e$iFiu7 
~
Vol 
ll77et. V1,i4
Cltude McClure. M.D.. COL_,_J4_____-
C'Xc.- 
, 
.1 I rc .me 't.e 
-. . Edgewood Ars5nal, AP0. f-"3 2101- 
_.. (AdW- 0 P)
m
.... . .u 
. ....... .y 
-- ,---; 
-,- 
::_;e 
e$iFiu7 
~
Vol 
ll77et. V1,i4
Cltude McClure. M.D.. COL_,_J4_____-
C'Xc.- 
, 
.1 I rc .me 't.e 
-. . Edgewood Ars5nal, AP0. f-"3 2101- 
_.. (AdW- 0 P)
m
.... . .u 
. ....... .y 
-- ,---; 
-,- 
::_;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

825
CURRI CULUM'V ITAE
Name: Claude McClure, Jr.
Place and Date of Birth: 
Dungar-on, Virlinia
21 November 1923
Education: B.S., 1947 )
N.S., 1954) 
Wake Forest University
K.D., 
1950 )
Ph.D., 1960 (Biochemistry) - University of Iorth Carolina
Post-Graduate Train..1g:
InternSurgery, Yale University - M50-51
Asst Resideint, Surgery, Yale University - 19';1-52
Asst Resident., :.erosur~ery, Du'e University - 1952-53, 1954-55
Resident. NIcurojsny, Duke University - 195 3-.'
Resident, hcurosrSery, Duke University - 1955-56
Post-doctoral Frellow, Biochemistry, University of IVorth Carolina - 1960-61
Fel lows h i ps:
Fellow, 
I:Vat Cancer Inst. Duke Uni-er:.ity - 1953-55
Felld, *:aL IeisL for Iheurological bis & Blirdness Utversity of Nlorth
Carolina -
1953-61
• 
-
.
"°. 
-
'•
' 
C 
edc A 
0ntmns
Instructor, Neurology, Duke University- 1953-S4
. Instructor,. leurosurcgry, Djke University - 1S'5-55
Assistant, Iheurosurgery, University of Tenncssec - 1956-57
Research , sociate, Fn/siology, Ec-.;,an Gray Sc.ool of Y.zdicine of
Wake Forest - 1957-58
Research Associate, Bicceistry, University ef N~orth Carolina - 19r8-61
Assistant Professor, Diochemistry, Unlvers.Ly of North C.-rolina - lec-62
Clinical Instructcr, !.eurosurgery, University of Colorido -
1966-67
Societv "x~ersh ins:
Phi Let! Kappa
Ml ;, 
O:,e dA ri 
a
S., '> Xi
k."rican 'icel 
Association
krmrican Che,ical Society
A- ric6n Au .idtion for tne Av ancr.int nf Science
Iew York Acadry of Science
North C3-nlin 
Aca.-.:. 
cf Sciec-
C,,. !r-,., s 
7_. 
.
,r 
,. 
,., 
-7 ."" 
-rec-:".;-

--- PAGE BREAK ---,ical Society
A- ric6n Au .idtion for tne Av ancr.int nf Science
Iew York Acadry of Science
North C3-nlin 
Aca.-.:. 
cf Sciec-
C,,. !r-,., s 
7_. 
.
,r 
,. 
,., 
-7 ."" 
-rec-:".;-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

826
Medical Licens-ire: 
North Carolir.s an' Tennesse!
American Board Certification:
American Bo.'rd of Neurological Surgery
American Board of Clinical Che,istry (Toxicological Chemistry)
Military:
Staff Sergeant. USAAF - 1943-45
Colonel, USA -
1962-
Decorations:
Legion-of .'erit
Heritor~o;. Service Pedal
Bronze Sta-
Air Kedal .,12 Oak Leaf Clusters.
Army Cor.-erdaticr, fe-dal
Purple Ieart
Publications:
McClure, C. ":iffenrential Diagnosis of [soplageal Obstruction"
Journal of the Bov,.,.an Gray School of I.edicine 7: 35 (1949)
Woodhall, B., 
Odom, G.L., Stephr n, C.R., McClure, C., 
and Neill, '.R.
*The Us- v f 
!h:.n 
1:,duced 1'.-:otc-eicv 
r. the- TreaL,:-ent o0,
lntracrarial Aneury.-" 
tNorth Carolina I.edical Jo'a-ral 14: 513 (1953)
. oodhall,-B., Odom, G.L., Stephen, C.R., V:Clure, C., 
and Rte1ll, V.R.
rCerebrel Intravascular Pressure in Chemiclly Induced Plypotension"
Archives of Surgery 69: 496 (1q54)
McClure, C., Holland, H.C., and Woodha11, B. "A Method for the
Quantitative Ceter..:ination of iPyaluronic Acid in the Hu.an Inter-
vertebral Disk" Science 119: 19 (1954) 
.
- cClure, C. and Green, H.D. 
"Cerebral Venous Outflow in the Dog"
Federation Proceedings 17: 103 (1954) 
.
McClure, C, et al 
"Cerebral Venous Ojtflr,.: in the Dog; Influ?.nce of
Adrenervic and Cholinergic St!stance" 
,4,.erican Jounral of IPhysiolo,,
197: 1i3 (1959)
-cClurc, C. and Irvin, J.L. "[lcctrophoresis of Calf Thyr.is Histones'"
Federzzicn 
ro,ce~inqgs 1..9: 339 (1960)
Ir;,in, 3.L., 
'l, 
, 
ai..."-
... 
L.. 
ard 
Su,, cv. 
"EliTLNL 
of Histones on Grow;zh
and protein ana ,.ucieic A 
ci Content of Lhrlich Ascites Carcino-3 Cells"
Proceedings of the Arierican Associaticn of tancpr 'Psearch 
3: ?_7 (1l.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---EliTLNL 
of Histones on Grow;zh
and protein ana ,.ucieic A 
ci Content of Lhrlich Ascites Carcino-3 Cells"
Proceedings of the Arierican Associaticn of tancpr 'Psearch 
3: ?_7 (1l.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

827
McClure, C. 'An Electrof;,-cretic St'A:' of Calf Th)yaus Hi 
ot.,nes*
Dissertatim- Abstracts 21: 2461. (1951)
Irvin, J.L. and 1-.Clure, C. OPhysicoche.ical Properties of Deoxypentosn
kucleohistoes" Journal of the Elisha Mitchell Society, Vol. 78 (1062)
McClure, C. et al *Electrophoresis of Calf Thymus Histones" Journal of
the Elisha Mitchell Scientific Society 
965)
Kapp, et al, and McClure, C. "An Internal Shunt for Use in the Reconstructic
of Dural Venous Sinuses" J. Ileurosurgery (1971)
3
70-036 0 - 76 - 53

--- PAGE BREAK ---828
Vn " Sim, 4.0..-
F Am It
3; ;hrt976S
L TAB 
I
Peat Sir
el..huils t$is stamlewal as ¢ ef 
ted b y Seuo 
.45a it of tthe rdel 
Food.

Pwm.

sad Cotmeteic Act and 413" .I a tee o o 
"
he4"c.le -A fede'ei; I1egutetr .t as 0 co.t,4i 
oae eeo.not Sod cogadoti..

el SaCal 4aeatIOT *h 
a atrw dI 
.

;..

j
NY Federal (of i.

led states.

.6% to atett .psaiLl 
get.

Vt)~ ~ 
.

U 
~ 
ClPAMACCL*T 
wr
Univ of thashington, 1931-35, UI)- 
PhAhlInCo logy; l9al9U 
H.i~st 
work
in I'hysiolugy anti l;,arlacology
St.

Louis Univ School of llodicine, 1941-1944, M.D.

Instructo; in Ikdiciixo, St.

Louis Univ School of Wledcine, 1951
Chief, lkm an Pharrirolo'y Proraw, Chemical Defen.e Ixperimental Establishment,
Porton, England, 1954-1956
Chief Resc.;.rch Physician responsible for Army Volunteer Program, Biomedical
Laboratory, 195(- 175
Chicf, Clinical Rpsea:ch Division medicall Reseach Pivision), liorwdical
laboratory.

195(.- I"75
.

C.'v( m*L' 
ab.rato 
It 
tdgt.

CkoOL, NOtIAL.

Od OTPr 
vLiCng GCrLd 
14D 2101%0¢&.

Biomedical Laboroto -y, [dgewood Arsenal,* Aberdeen Proving Ground, 14D 21010
I, ligt 
eayretaaarsal pi:,tt , ito be coJatzerd on .*Oiv'
tut~t~ltslc#h 
iitt-ltl 
al t 6 c.'.'.1cse 
t.l 
an sndaltq!,alI
01141 .

I-.-.

t -
.s t;t.k.-t;.

.C'- 40 
8..

,- a.0i.

at
iantestt at 
tl' 
s cotirtlt:c ls :M ;40tbe 'O 
aI€.11 a1
Aa.csllrrg 
of then .a-il 
;I :hc 
(tie; ..

scJ 
I 
laihae
mt Jj.

tc.+to S "*breihi 
otjat 
t copecd co 
wllicita
tsml't II 
t~ 
I 
'ac 
byapal t'ac 
i.

Lift ee$.

€ ttt 
~.

*t 
Ilmta 
a.

Il 
II, 
lstrtt.

to att+i,' 
¢ompletc and
a~lc.lutlq ct-cern .1 te l*rrcic% 
cec 
I¢ 
lie t-.cu,%a{*p~ll
to j6JSt IC &CC ,-tillt.

e-l:c 
4 
r 
tCftL.

le 
t Iiltttn 
tIr.

of ofan 
nl 
I 
t?!ijklb..'t 4.

It ttrS.tt Ia..

%'.itI 
t 
oftleo.

Ilfebsteot1 Cact..

e.

to.

coo"?uftl) ACCeyjactr.

Aa.trawce
atieitb iow t -a e.!thal 
1 
.

f2tnIsa"ol rt 
t.:*t ri:cticipatic
jci.

I t;trtoon olcoir'lset 
-thet 
.t 
tries coa.-
tnhitit 
J.i:c ni a- l.f2tnIsa"ol rt 
t.:*t ri:cticipatic
jci.

I t;trtoon olcoir'lset 
-thet 
.t 
tries coa.-
tnhitit 
J.i:c ni a- l.

paftC2,'aAoi 
9t 1I 0611 Cl8"% and CC^-
ClaS:0-4i bV aiF *aJ,j 
Ml $oticJ 
90 tlit CI-'eAI 6, the
stcarch at:.' 
4ty 
lr ite't .c'C%- 
ecICpt #t-A 
* tl 
-alotma-
t.-'A tc !.L 
C 
tr"e at.

It 
o, 
ct.pA-~ 
-.!l "otl 
ti
the Cf.i- 0:1c.

@1 Ittles .) ail e et 
.z Ig'P-.ie.

stecian
aiJ.tlrc 
&:o 
*i.

of P.:..

-..

J r .?oa4thl: t- A..irs 
ine
opt) 
%(I.- 
e*.

c:s 
C!

- t *:.Va ic 
z 
t 
a 
op sch
ct.lter 
.

ke 
XiAe 
.:t 
a 
* Cr.T..etre al uc- Al facep-
*heCr: rt.

''.

el " 
..

J.i.tA14Mt ar -r 
a- 
3c "IajrJ.

ILA: 1it 
S ..

!..

.- 
.

: 
oaw;t 
!.- 
t 
e
t.omlttt..

I.

'-,aecall 
ac'tOpe.-I-Re' to stir d 
c a!

d 
t1L.

la" 
%4.r1s 
.- u* I 
tJr.

., 05S.Cor that Ishe tflcatda 
le-
le.tfif !'Cor 
' 
t.1 
;-.-'.atae wit% t~rc''.te
pa.!.

..- a~'-i.

.

-J .rc,..

-prt.' ..

'.c.

tha th iccac 
ftsn-Oq
i C 
' 
.

162 t S 
e ..

t 
..t'
+ 
..

-
-
.

.

_ 
.

-
9.31alsrrk{ed byr INe cemagatteie 
age to amlvetlf 
t-c 
A:
It's 
-at *s thy 
.

ta, pCttcj.

..

ts 
ti ai l .+.c.iatr'w
as 43, e etastJ 1*1 & peocd at 3 yeats pt,' the C.-.-rle-
tic.a or discogetatiaar 
of she staj+j 
and ate to I; 
r-a-"t
&tlsable 
op...

lt.i.est to Jutl, aeshoneed .rat it"ono 
ot
of 
.

Fl*cd Aal 
-uC Ac.,,.atOn.

(I a% ,..tu Jteu:-
tdtleittaffil wk 
Ik 
Con=6t1T 
-1 
et 
t1€ tttt le 
lt91.- 
s'l7" 
I
pll1l9 
It~li, 
Xf3Jl&4tjl{llll 
InblstlvlhlollI8lel&J.

L51&%.>7-
Able Itto.yt.r 
jAtIOee.,.

Mesltliot%.

at COed.l' -76.

PA 
t- -
Ie git.|ilej ry ese aist.tl 
f- 
*itmciasl.) 
&..) 
.

.;.

time 
o 
lI 
ta.'S and -
o1 lat 
it 
i 1w.t4uI.al 
I¢clt 
% 
,
r#tflec 
are coatateJ 
ian 5cal.e 
gt 
ilt 
rso-tel, ts
CLsgtes 1 '4!ei the Giants 
tsatat oi jirval of t-.: U.5
I)€NxtllA64ti 
; 
I~esI:F.

Ldc.tiOls.

a1nt lkill 
, * 
j "11
IteM the V.S.

G^V0.6ctaet 11't4atar.'t Collie.

-it as :tc
agtJeJ 
I 
se 
l 
u.fel.met 'r loloveJ in 
khts.

-":0944q.32 -mtwtp 
c4r1.istc, 
AJ tI.--- PAGE BREAK ---

-it as :tc
agtJeJ 
I 
se 
l 
u.fel.met 'r loloveJ in 
khts. -":0944q.32 -mtwtp 
c4r1.istc, 
AJ tI. t 
t : 
"%qfI
lN.iwt0o 
to.st+.: 
Io tie ptotelres Jlesi ed 
t 
r
titsnp oifc. r-^ to 15S.!Sol; te 
,rJ, 
;:-" 
,-. 11. ittr 
16-.. a.!ieunc. . %-gict. a, tmt.:f: 
j
.Ct'llgee 
{)ilioa 
.-I .Z'orcar.;- C--tthb.. l+' 
]I 
+ t.6l
Of 3 r4et.. an "AA. r&C crret-* Dsi-tiC. i... e 
it $1" j
Co.'u114:tr Is ta :ties 
-he ru-'poseJ Sl-.!t+ iilPs IaiT I. "
pocedofte.. Ittis so ac.erP1ah'r inf !1C cif 
a c 
iI$%1" I
actze- 
rt 
a 
t-+ 
I.tt t o tt 
e et 
.-..t.. -
r.. ".'
a,% 
the si 1 'ei ro -
-:. (n 
,. -
to s+ep 
% ,
I 1 O'.. -
.' 
• Pft I 
$t.l. I 
qn 
av 
I 
.. g 
t 
b..PItV 
L 6 
''A STCO. ZhCL 6
-- _. Ii
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---829
Indeterminate
*5t4|l?.;- Cutt'vet 
Or 1O-t 14 ACCT T) Of- ut S-LATC.1 
4Ve.Ialo, 
e ot ee*' 
'.4 
tI 
14e .

...p 
ol 
taqo geeEtr * 
o 
-il
General clinical pharracology studies to determine tMe interactions of the
drug TAB with such comonly used drugs as ethanol, tranquilizing agents, and
various narcotic compounds, i.e., morphinedsnerol.

T lyE .' 
..

vf,.JLD t.

e,?

-
4 1 
=.8T, 
'.t 
I 
L 
%t 
tU 
4.T $ 
, 
f8t....,APPL.ICAdI.[ TO %iL1 Dst.

.f"
ItIUIVS 
iI4 TO4ti AL 
X G -.

dit l" 
06S 
6 
tCt.t1 A0@0 Ul 
O THI.I 
e 
te 
.Ae.

OlUG
a 
II 
fel 
s 
1 leet-o 
et 
6.544.

111@
6
66%b0,etowes.l, 
at .

formc Ii mb 
"iolV-.

gutseiSo pha...

66
S.~ ~ ~ $ fhiwt08t 
64*t'#Vith 
s4a.6sat 
-1h.4 
0486 mottle
0dI .

hr 16mb-*841e'.

4.4 0 the et.etel 
Ie'*,- 
6.%V -1 '6tat.-
poo801 .

e4 eallt 
*t-toss.

aw 
pa....

&..e &.Aw 
aoed 
o
of 660 soe.

TV I'lsospow 
IID 
so flerdt 
le 
rei 
6" 
ll 
trow-t.lfa 
040"
e 
t 
%,.e~.

66.002"d 
fg00 
eos "aw01A 
saa 
ad 
S.eats
40* 
,.ttooto 
Ik thessta1 
( 
ltftS .

at 
d,
*t ?ho6.

04s 
46t0o 
.eqatc tllthIt 
!..poee 
asoo ope taot
-- o 6 
etsAc% 
fee tollort.;g a" 
o4 obs*.£ot 6%a .eios .

a" 
*6#t'.

to~s tee66eew 0.

-*1 
0 
Pa- 
J :;.c4A>5Oieae'
U64.00 at 
6014o" 
tt.0l 
mot Ostowl.-C 
I es.

^at
deoweall 011041 -herheot coasote hfo*a404 so gallows sel.

So to prooahahe 4 "sod 5.

te of.

dogShalt ho 
beporeed tat 66.

0,4.6.

pt.oveti.

sad tr tes 0sest 
oev 
Of.6 
et~ts....

of %"0$I
ho 10,0104 
IS.,.~,A.,OJ 
ilg~t~e 
.of "' 
I.

het
0"" O 4140
11 
sh64Ogi 60 5..c..hd 
te 
..

f.tossu teve,
*TUO 
eeea**at 
we-st.4.ca terds 
of des"p41eteo f
Rt so14 Mai4 
Is* 
.

Co*"Parts Jerstred 
504I 
fo aPassed .5
seats, r.;io...

teol 
ite 
6 .0a41chtg 
-£'.a 0"00%04
lot-&t : V..

..

6 -ON 1,* 
-
0.

..

560 
I _-A.

r # 
*-4 -,*
it* 
.

11, 
1.

.**';V1I 
-
*# 
* 
14 
.t
soee a.

fl.

i~aetst 
It~t..

'.Sttc 
n a- S t-er 
..

T*
talE 
.1 tt*e 9j.

*t't 
reel #..e ' , 
diverted .ot' 
%e lelllll
104-1410' 
6 
%'0.

15 #01 .0..

6ft.* 
E..t.

et.8.

.4 41e
casI.

6OV 
0#.e.

11*.--- PAGE BREAK ---

6OV 
0#.e. 11*. t 
o 
601.16 
ei 
. I 
op 
IS.- 
.6 Ni i"
A 2 
tlere e*% 
| 
* 
S 
I at 
l 
** 
Al a, 
1 
tr 
l lsq t 
orrep-We¢
1 
t**.ajd. r tI e 
fr.men s 
e 
eTfss 0 d.6l e-it "a of.-tttea4
0"T 
410 
tb e19 4004" be$ .*S'-'.61 *lopqo e 
e. It 0 
4e# t
ot.1400.taf of a%& fatlew.4 At-.. 10l 
s oa-e 
.1* 
#0 hses. Medical officers 
a tnrd 
_C hnk.L
Aber 
Prcyjrin Gror. d. : 
711 
.. sad "Agaofe d.1 mbet Aar be apgld to &or *the# .0680465060
So to a,* to 
lsr got .4tt! lto 
l 
taboI.t 
il
a. T% toftftt 
e 
-
ts,, 
tast, 
%it 6o.-d e a 
-, 
rov.1e ', 
S
*py postefts 
00 
So 
.416 
So oel 
ot#60 81 -
8'. Ahot
dougo off btttt4 %%*d Its, ouw 
.tB6£..~0 pict'. :040S% *all stb
*edg. to v04.4 lte 
So. fte.aot jar 
a6 i.t£.GIS
Is. Theoa..-s 
.. c toaso to *aw*. ths, bp&atf 1%41 lt st-
etei, retI~ 
^- 
For %,%% 
t t&4oe, 
to., te .plamocd
to the rte.6d~ 
c 
e e 
0"6000f 
est, 
4%.;?.r 
ISTIt. W. 665 f 
V-set C.)
Se 
. 145 
j 0 
.10 
.. 1#Iu.#z
Ver trl 
yours. ef 
" 
as... t 9..ry.., . -
,

--- PAGE BREAK ---t t&4oe, 
to., te .plamocd
to the rte.6d~ 
c 
e e 
0"6000f 
est, 
4%.;?.r 
ISTIt. W. 665 f 
V-set C.)
Se 
. 145 
j 0 
.10 
.. 1#Iu.#z
Ver trl 
yours. ef 
" 
as... t 9..ry.., . -
,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

83O
29 August 1074
(a) 1 ane: 
Van ":rray Sin
(b) Position: 
Chief, Medical Research Division
Biomedical Laboratory, EdeU00od Arsenal
(c) 
Present -salary: GS 17 equivalent, Step 2,
(d) Proposed sh'ory: 
" 
Step 3
(e) 
Education:
Cashmere WO, School, Cashere, 
.. ; 1927.193)1 - Class Presient, 191:#:
Student botiy 'rcsi;.-nt, I.1; Presiden's Cup, Oltstandir, Student, 
.ql.
University ? 0! 1.ashineton, 1931-1!.e6 .
R.;., Pharn.
1938-1940 - '!.S. 
and graduate wor:; in P;.vsiolo;y and Phar.acology
St. Louis University Sc!,zal of Veedicine, 
1941-1944 - M.D. 
-
Class Preside,;:; Junior 
nd Senior years
Alpha Slern '-' (.bOesuit. Vv:,r Seci. 
)
(f) tcfnt CpZr.'C.:a: 
C6,,,hf Sciun::.;t. :cdical I(escarcn Laborator'es
(g) 
Current position sur'nary:
The cthnCe in position has engendered direct responsibility for the
lk'dical 1:csearch Li;isicn in additict to that as Scientific Director.
This constitutes t.e resposi!:ility for the pro.ran of four brancnes
involving approxi:;ately 130 "'ilitary --.d civilian personnel. 
In addition,
it 
has r-eant an aditicnal c:.Panie on tL4e errhasis of the position of
EdgewocJ Arsenal in work is ecology -ad environmental quality ap iliqd
research and report. 
-she :;utt.a1 
weaponss [ievelo-i.ent Data Exchan.:e
Agreerent and interch~nne of scientists for visits and exten-ed Periods
of work, such as t:e presc;, t:ork Period of Dr. Nicholas he-.cr, have
aStivatcd not c:;v ;:est Gcr.:.rv coll..-oratzion in the chenic.l pro-ra
resenrc. projects but also h;.e created greaterr stirulation .nd interest
anong scientific cc;nte.jrt- in the :ctcerlans, Si.e"lcn, an.- Switzerland.
(h) 
Assessnent (,f contributions and ;erforance: 
See attzc$,cd list of
recent publications.
(1) Publications: 
Attnche.4.

--- PAGE BREAK ---;nte.jrt- in the :ctcerlans, Si.e"lcn, an.- Switzerland.
(h) 
Assessnent (,f contributions and ;erforance: 
See attzc$,cd list of
recent publications.
(1) Publications: 
Attnche.4.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

831
Van )urray Sin (continued)
24 hispust 1974
(j) 
Patents: ratent 13,642,9SI, 
I 
Feb 72, "Toxic Chemical Vaccines."
(EAPI 15 
n)
(k) 
Awards or othor honors:
Exceptional Civilian Scvice Award, Department of the Amy
Distinguished Civilian Service Award, Department of Defense
Rockefeller Iluolic Sevice Award :oninec in Sclcnce,
Dept of the Amy and Dept of Dofense
Paul I. Siple !eror.al Award, ,'ost Outsttnding research
Report at 
a 
Ar-ny Science Conkf' ence at
vost Point
Rockefell " Public Service Award Nonn,.e in Science,
Dept of thn Ar-y and Dept of Defense
(I) Professional societies:
Pollow of krer can A-ezn 
of Clinic.l r-'.ac)o:y
Felli of Ancrican Federation of Clir--..lt Research
Research Society of k/ crica
Signa Xi
2
19S9
1962
1964
1972
1964 & !°73
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ties:
Pollow of krer can A-ezn 
of Clinic.l r-'.ac)o:y
Felli of Ancrican Federation of Clir--..lt Research
Research Society of k/ crica
Signa Xi
2
19S9
1962
1964
1972
1964 & !°73
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

832
Groff, .
A., counter, L. A., and Sin, V. 1-. EATR 4034., A H.lti-
Channel Analytical System for Continuous Monitoring of Rlood Cholinesterase.
Nover ber 1966,
Sin, V. H., 
and Sui, T. K. 
Sulfonsaido Tlheray of Trachoma. 
Shantung
University Hospital Bulletin. 
December 1945.
Tien Mien Chang, T. K. Lu, and Si., V.. It. Kaim-Azar Incidence in
Pekinp Hospital Adnissions, 1945-1946. Peking Union Modical College
Bulletin. 1ay 1046.
Sim, V. M. The Iffect of Possible Smag Irritants on uman Subjects.
J.A.14.A. 
165, 1H.S-1913 (1957).
Sin, V. H. 
Deteztion and Defense Against Chraical Warfare. 
Hilt.
meJ. )23,, lO-IS (1159).
Lindscy, D., Hc.rara, B. P., and Sin, V. It. Off.the Rocker and On
the Floor. 
Art.t4 Forces Chem. J. 3, 8 (1960).
Sin, V. H. TIhe Indole fuclcus, A Connon Denoninator of Psychotropism?
J. 
Forensic Set. 6, 39-47 (1951).
Sin, V. Ff. 
Medical Aspects of Chenical Warfare. 
.. 
A. M. A. 
175, 1-3
(1961).
Bowers, M. 
B., Jr., Sim, V. M., 
and GoOdr3n, E. tone Behavioral Chanpes
in Kin Following Anticholinestcrase Administration. 
J. Nerv. r-cnt. Dis.
138, 33-389 (1964).
Sin, V. 11. Diagnosis and Therapy for Antichollnesterase Poisoning.
J.A.14.A. 192 , 405-404 (1965).
Sin, V. M. Chemicals Used as Weapons in liar. 
In Drill's Pharnacology
in fledicine. 
Ld. by J. R. DiPal&ma. 
McGraw-lfill Book Co. 
Nvw TOr;. 
1965.
Groff, N. A., 
':o-iter, L. A., 
and Sin, V.. 1-1. A 4ilti-Chasne 
Analytical
ystcn for Cotin-.ious :!enitoring of Gloo" Cholnesterase. 
Presented at
Technicon Sy;'osiuni "Automation in Analytical re.4stry," Ncw York.
October 1966.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---4ilti-Chasne 
Analytical
ystcn for Cotin-.ious :!enitoring of Gloo" Cholnesterase. 
Presented at
Technicon Sy;'osiuni "Automation in Analytical re.4stry," Ncw York.
October 1966.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

83
Ketchun, J. S., Kitzes, D. L., !'ershon, H. M., 
'eir.er, J. T.,
Farrand, R. L.. !ottilliei, 
N. G., 
and Sin. V. M. 
EATR 4066.
Tho 
uoan Assess-ent of EA 3443. 
.arch 
1967.
Harris, L. W., Fleisher, J. H., In.ere:.-.er, T. A.. Cliff, 
If. J..
and Sin, V. I. EATR 4276. 
The Effec.s of Atropine-Oxime Therapy on
Cholinesterase A:ivity i.nd the Survival of ninals Poisoned with
Diazition. April 1969.
Rangstorff, R. I., 
S16, V. 
M., 
and Petrali, J. P. 
EATR 4378.
CS itt 
Water: 
Efects of Massive Doses Sprayed into the Eyes of
Rabbits. 
Dece:c.er 1969.
Sim, V. M. FAP-400-60. 
F, 3834, Su--,ary R,:ort of Status as of
Scptcr.tber 1069. 
February 1970.
Renpstorff, R. 11., 
Petrali, J. 
P., Mershon, ;I. M., 
and Sin, V. H.
EATR 4455. 
EA 3S47 in Rabbit Eyes: 
A Clinical a:d 1iistolo-ical Study.
October 1970.
Sib, Van !f. 
EASP )00-95. 
C.pound 
',..a- 
S;;-.Fr 
Frport.
Sim, V. 1-. 
EMP.. 103-96. -.EA'3934: 
Anuex 'to Six.ary.flep6rt (E'SP100-60).
; ,April 
1971.: 
...-
' 
-. 
.
Klapper, J. A., 
'etchim, J. S., McColloch, !I. A.,- ysor, K. P., and
Sin, V. M, EAT, 4536. 
Studies of the Effect of Perscnality on
Reactivity to LS). July 1971.
Rengstorff, R. if., 
Petrali, J. P., and Sii, V. H. 
EATR 4S50. 
Cataracts
Induced-in Guinea Pigs by Acetone, Cyclohexanone and Dir.ethyl Sulfolide.
August 1971.
Klapper, J. 
A., !1-crolloch, !!. S., 
1Kysor, Y. P., 
-md Sin, V. M. 
EATR 4616.
PCTson lIity Cor-.Incs of ;.es;:cnse to kt.opine, Scopolamine, and Glycol 'e
Com:p;n d. 
'.!nrch 
1972.
l-cCaroll, J. F., :!ar'kis, J. E., Ketc1.:., 
3J S., 
:.. ., 
C. w., 
and
Sin, V. !1. 
EAT• 65.. 
EA 1.35: Eff.ects on Per-c..race of a Snall
Infantry Rifle Elemizat 
.necr Si.ulaat. 
Co.bat Cmoiitions. 
April 1972.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ketc1.:., 
3J S., 
:.. ., 
C. w., 
and
Sin, V. !1. 
EAT• 65.. 
EA 1.35: Eff.ects on Per-c..race of a Snall
Infantry Rifle Elemizat 
.necr Si.ulaat. 
Co.bat Cmoiitions. 
April 1972.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

834
tharris, 
L. !., 
Fleisher, J. II., 
JInerebr.er, 1. 
A., Cliff, W. J.,
and Sim, V. .. 
The Effects of Atroine-Oxi-. ThcrpV' 
o. Cholinester-
iso Activity and the Survi\'.. of Anir.als Pc~soned With 0, O-Diethyl-O-
2.isoproy)-6--cth'l-'-pyri:.idinyl Phosp,.oro:hioate. 
Toxic. 
Apple.
S a, Van H. 
Discussion. In Psychotoninctic Drugs. Ed. by
Daniel II. Ef:on. 
Raven Press, New York. 
1.70.
Sir!. V.n ;M. Ticat.ent of Ortf.tu*...oijIhate Poisoning. 
Science 170,
1332-1333 (1970).
Rcigstoff. R. It., Sin, V. 4., 
on-Petrali, J. P. 
CS in Water:
I. 
Effcct.s of :.ssive loses Sprayed into the Lycs of Rabbits.
14ilit. necd. 
13_6, 
1.,6-14S (571j.
Sin, V.j4. 
Chcacals Used ns I-capoms in W ar. 
Chapter S9 in Drill's
Pharnacology ill :1ediciie, 
4th l!diticn.,. 
ld. J.R. DiPaltia. 
Mc(raw liiM
book Corpany, New York, .tcw Yor):, 
1971.
Rene.tor"f, 
r.v. I!., Pctn]l, Jo.h 
P. nnd Si. 
V-%" 
1. 
tarartAC 
-,dtcd
in Gu:inca P. ;s by ;,ccc:-o, C-'C¢C,:jx:.cr.e aia, Pia:.:.!,y: 3;, :.:.iic, A.
J. Opto;actry and Archivcs of A:..crican Acrdcn)" of Optoictry .19, 30S-,19,
(1972).
Ketchu., J.S., Schiner, P., Kys,)r, 
K'.P., llouff, C., 
Sicdell, 
F.R., Sin, \'..!.
EATR J67S, Rclatior.shins A-ong Dose. Tine and Various :!zasures of
Laboratory :md Military Perforn.;nce in Volii:ters Rcceivi:r. a Centrally
Active Choli:;ergic Blocking A:-:et (EA 35SO)., 
Sup 19? ."
Sidell, F.R., 
Pless, J.t., 
Nottlich, II.,&S'ssran, P., Colln, 
11-. 
rb ol
and Sin, V.M. 
EA'TR 46SJ. 
-nethylheltyl-Pelt 
6an-OA-Tetrhyerocanbinol
Effects After Parcntcral Adninist.;tion to !:ia:. 
I1cc. 197-.
Also publis!'td in Prcc. 
Soc. Exp. Sio. 
M!cd. 
i,!2,S67-S?3 (1973).
Sin, v\'at !1. Anticholinestcrtse Poisoning. 
A,.ricani 
'a..ilY P-sicinln.
C~i;. 'i;.z:ac 
}. 
, i'6-4S (1974).
Rengstor.ff, r'oy 1;., Hill, 
M 
:|. 
Petr;:li J!n P. 
M. 
S, 
'nn ?.
Critical Oxyen Peaquir."nent of the Come.. 
Epit!tclit.- as Jz;dicaCd
by Succinir Z'ehydro-nasc Reacti'ity. 
Am. J. 
Opto. 
and PiysiolicaZ
Sin, V.*!. 
Lenc-Tc:v: I:-. 
Lffccts c- lnsct'c-de -Nrrc 
.;I 
t!c. 
Pii:.te
%,-'C."nent of the Come.. 
Epit!tclit.- as Jz;dicaCd
by Succinir Z'ehydro-nasc Reacti'ity. 
Am. J. 
Opto. 
and PiysiolicaZ
Sin, V.*!. 
Lenc-Tc:v: I:-. 
Lffccts c- lnsct'c-de -Nrrc 
.;I 
t!c. 
Pii:.te
%,-'C

--- PAGE BREAK ---

836
Sls V. H. Anticholinesterase Poisoning. 
In Cholineric Mechanisrs.
Ed. by.P. G. Waser. Raven Press. 
Now York. 
I5
burchfiel, J. L., Duffy, P. II., 
and is, V. M. E.-TR-74004.
Persistent Effects of sarin and Dieldrin upon the Prinate Electro-
encophalogram. April 197S.
Rengstorff, Roy 1l.0 Petrali, John P.. ;orshon. Millard H. and
Sin. Van .4. The Effects of tho RPiot Control A.ent CR in the Rabbit
Eyo. 
Toxic. App.. Pharmacol (in press).
S

--- PAGE BREAK ----
836
I~.

L 
t -~~~ 
-- 
-.

-
-
-
l'i: 
,.

" 
..

.

..

I 
..

.

..

.......

J,; 
.

,D,-.

..

-
4i 
-.

.

.

''"'
I Fri:.il; .

S ;;, :.D.

I 
l;ir 1975
m Sit: 
, 
,rick 
R.

Sidel1
*,pri's 
this sla..eel.

as ,cVrite: by aec,.w% .bfI 
of sie tedtlt Fod.rr.t.

snd Cos-ttic Act Sod 51O.

1 T:!: 
of 
O.

all; rotJe of lreetal 
Pe.Vad;actae as 
ca slatloo .01 Ieaatitsg atd codojleeas clinical phamac.logy -.ith a bes dr 
fis!.t.-tJ
by tcaeeea (or called stst, 
law toaestil 
use.

I.

STAT& 1Ot CO'J.CATSOU AN5.0 1 AINSIO Y 
bAet[ hAD IHAT OUALIFI IL VOJ F CRCLINIC&.

PHARMA 
LOGY
B.S.(Cte.mistry), 1966, Marietta College; 14.0., 
1960, flew York Univ College of
Medicine; rotating internship 1960-61, Resident, Internal Medicine, 1961-64,
Cleveland Metropolian General Hospital; CPT, 
US Army fledical Corps, Edge:ood
Arsenal, i964-66; 'hiei, Clinical Investigation Section, Clinical Research Branch,
Medical Research ri'vision, Bioridical Laboritory, Edjewood Arsenal, 1964-66;
Acting Chief, Clirical Research -Branch, 
medical Research Laboratory, Edgeiooti
Arsenal, 1966-68, 1974-present.

PIAM1WSCOLXI 9r :LL St Cz .'JOj IFO
t.

listr eIs,|.'t*tapc- 
o 
itt 
e 
h..cJrto 
rd 
oni satli-
IttoterAf,,-J ...'eclo 
0.- as 
reita~acsed by as ir~~da
.f.' 
%-t 
as: 
; 
-.

a&.:Ce~ 
f 
., A~Ab...e I.-
t 
i 
tlullt) Ie if ta 
;l.

*u .

"3tice ro,.u 
*t &gsc* ttaI :
S4ttviItIe..

A'~ tC 
!tftt Igo 
as*!

easi-.ar 1.21 stai onj
COOt ION,.

tc..t5 
143 d 
o5 
V1t ll'.

r:f-';osCJ 
CmtCal
stnjy.

'Ie 
r,,-St-.rhip r -, oe I, 
opasej 
Iuf sufiicreat
~1a6begS .f 
.tr 
.h.u 
ia 
is.

J'I) CIS.

C!CjTVC.

or 16a4aef a.

%Wl as scletrr.:s.

to a ss.

cowuilcle and
OW'st IPOSSt-tt t.t ecr.v bre-j r.

'?

tataC.

to c.'nMr 
reiW 
she
to~f wOq i;L .t;, eltabiot-:t dl 
.1e ;tini'tt 
i itt 
, 
e.s
of I t 
f 11., rwi 
t&g.:'& At 
U-- t., 
iwi t 
nc 
% 
5& i.l 
ta 
'ss -
waith, pit : 
kttJc the c 
i 
Accpanc.

.

Assu ranc:Lptej
mikle Jtt 
nett lci.-m.Itte 
.nbe 
rev 
I in ii1 " 
et: w co.-
Ails.c 
Jc.

n*enot ai*a f.tta 
toe.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Assu ranc:Lptej
mikle Jtt 
nett lci.-m.Itte 
.nbe 
rev 
I in ii1 " 
et: w co.-
Ails.c 
Jc. n*enot ai*a f.tta 
toe. isl 
-:-ta 
and
CJti.t 1t Ally 
Im Itc" 
.,t. '%tJ 
in the ~re.Jsc Of !.. rgaqrcn at~ ~: ~e 
#Nts 
lor-f 
I 
.': 
;ao'to
11-a .t • .!w 
-
%:e ".I: I" 
aatcsP& sl c. -
2 
eme: t 
so
4ar..,. i:A-c:s. a p-. .,. ¢ t 
ocuI.ra 
-1..lea€ .itur.. ,ri. "- 
. . . ta* t ,€. . *.t..i 
, rt.!utIo , 
-
a., aO-"
ch; " 
-"J. n 
.'r".- 
-rcep-
?Ct. ~ 
t 
.? 0..~ttt 6):te lart C,
eeri 
*. A: irtrvat, 
g~~h~ 
o she -erte~ 
ef risk. 0.z tt. a 
eIto
-Itt=,r..n. ... ,I%*.tto 
rm
naintlaed 1) the C€mfmitive $-it C2 r|t.li-;t sr ij-rs 
Fm.;
qcallekactims 44-%.m n.itce( -etr. tcS. :, 
:ds Of 
".: , 
"
pr--.."e to s'1.t-i 
.uIIIt.iit 
-
ti-t..M*JtCtY 
t..: 
SC,
tICWs 
aS they at: 
rperffi t--. orbles - | 
I...;,t-
aie tO be ImOteit 
1-s a pcric.' .L" 4 )cars ;ust I.% cr-,ir-
Itrn 04 diseor.:isa.1-gC 
oi t.e slaiy aod ate :.t .-- -.. :r
avollae o, 
er 
request to dl 
A:,.%otzed Fre.-:;€'.-
1i€ciLJ&Onst 
I| the COm.llt aI 
svblleCt .O lii.. ,- -
mIS' etu 
. -1 1ICAi,4c4 
)" :"1,:ItI'lOfhc*l. .:I;)tt. We CCCCT...tfJfitls, 
ffttt, 
I". Of cOa.i:t.-'-. .t 
r.r
ike a .smita~ne and 
:1tal 
n 
i.lllsitioaf It 
--
anticts at 
centaineJ in r~i. ei-%C$ issued rtr: sot,
C:srtet I-4rt,"t% Grts.3!t 
s, 
f**$' 
6Jlli 
"'a, V
Dqe;r~tr. O.* II¢altho [luar't,.-.. jrJ~ 
tecif:c. &:.. (-A-= the U.S. ,ote.mmcn- t'::nrf Offir.. It i. arfta.,s ,-Ia 
w 0 
-tCrt 
3r.; i 21 tc 
.r 
I
I..Iljr 
-f I ac-. % F-) *s;: 
l 
Its .2ej 3'
k-, 
" Wae 0-% the- Der:srn.: o' tic :h. Fa!a.. t.*, 
a
, i 
e 
e2-t. a. -
:*: 
;..I 
i! .I. . -. r- 
.i. catlaitter is to ettalt 
;.e Prtr.rc 
*:tt 
.usa 
"c 
sn
*. *-.. .. :- 
-
. ; 
. I 
-
-
.Ls .CsAai 5: 2 
515)
P pCjIE;'Tot I AT BULC 
-^7' 
j.L 
W.CIOLY . iA.T:
AST OPrIM
I. I

--- PAGE BREAK ---.i. catlaitter is to ettalt 
;.e Prtr.rc 
*:tt 
.usa 
"c 
sn
*. *-.. .. :- 
-
. ; 
. I 
-
-
.Ls .CsAai 5: 2 
515)
P pCjIE;'Tot I AT BULC 
-^7' 
j.L 
W.CIOLY . iA.T:
AST OPrIM
I. I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

837
W, 
'" 
* 
1 T' 4 
.
%
I 
ndetermilnate
OUT * 
:. --.. OF de.6aet 
POPE ft., I'll 
u .e 
bgtCP 
AKER 
k 
it.. I a 
*5 
owia 
Ike ,e 
i 
t t 
&to~e n 
of 
,e 
*sji 
t 
t.aIn 
jj 
* 
1 
a 
t.
*p~lSM.)
General clinical pharmacology studies to determine the interactions of the
drug TAB with tuch conrnonly used drugs as ethanol, tranequilizing agents,
and various narcotic compounds, i.e., morphine, demerol.
I. .5 
I 
$T* 
fTAtt' 
74-TAT 1_'L 
COv7t". 
^eL0""LY 
A9AUfTtCAdEt 10 NEW 1RGS I'A
PoVCST.GAi&OflAk VLt GOVERNe %IS CtC~iPi AltO USC Cj tellS idVEfairt.&TIOAL OR-,,.
* 
T Cl* tz lllllle 
I 
S I^1- 
o* t 
It 
ft..e** 
5 le f 
.
11%I 
I. f* 
-O
1% T 
IeT a ,I iso 
I 
o% 
t.-4 
in * 
af a 
lI 
g j., e we 
C s 
f Via
I 
*t 
.tht0- 
t. e 
* 
t 
arAialo 
* 
oius.
If .11 or Ife 
... ei, 
.f ort 
we 
s 
nclt 
p'anyategy ow *,
o*f IvJr dat.tevs 
tdte iihl* 
t*the 
t.el 
.
.
it1
fit I* 
lt.ItI 
I 
CI--1 
il 
t. 
t, 
l i51lt'l 
....
t 
lint 
I1e 
#
c 
1. 
rtesolstrotat 
rt~eqe 
o 
ptee 
ns.n ossa adt.,eae
f 
s hisVi 
ttow 11 
tc 
" 
I 
j 
gS' 
a 
4f wSitt.j 
I
estft. 9It* 
.3 
po f.Cl~ 
ftd 
8ItcoIC.ltf
fte 
s tf 
t 
.
(-- 
.
-
.l 
th 
0-1 .
6, 40t.0 
Ike* 
.
t 
1 
I 
a.
s 
..
i 
-lott.e 
I 
' 
s .t. 
It, 
-
'e-i 
cfs 
ed 
routacli
at 
-
.. If.e*e.w 
n " 
I 
" 
e .
Any'-
&!%*rl 
Cco-. 
• 
, 
or-s 
e I 
s-.- 
as ca*."(€ 
t.f 
h%
of i. NIt... 
.* 
C&or .
.
ke 
*.w-,, %)s. bet 
Stw 
e -a 
*g 
the
be t-OMd 
r',.. 
.
&.-.*.'. 
& 
io 
-f 
owot 
i*.l 
the 
$',,ft ga
S 
.tt- t-l .. s 
.tu* 
be 
C 
.oeslo 
weth 
s oned 
I 
slo 
t 
.aft
lo e 18h f~. I....:too 
too 
1' 
c.. 
1 
P 
t tu 
fo 
Vtrjo
mltlttC@o the ow *bcut d fe* be 
to- 
d 
p41 
t 
milf 
Ilt 
se 
rerds
ow th. 
1a 
Ifl.tw#91l5 
f 
f a .-
f 
deil .#4 ttudyt C V.,
.pt' let. 
t 
jteI 
*. 
%o4 S* Lt* 
l'-. 
th 
,flB 
-. 
ed,
.
t'*t 
mvesoitsltel CCgtl*it.* 081 th% tr a wtl; be *dtdinie t¢ I
.t.: 
1 
t1 1:l1I 
01 
l 
4 
,161 w..% t 
erlftor 
o.-. 
f Of 
-w 
b 
-
t
sop1 rVwre. 
of the# feletr.6 
welvetsRl t l 
Iipons lo It 
low".
Medical officers alPsic'noo 
t 
ini C.a1.
Research Briicp.,ycia 
to 
~ 
ab_~~
A bardcen Provjl 
G 
_:. 21010
od lit 
d e 
o il* am! be Ctpol.Jl 
on t 
i de Gsetb, 
rstigalo
on 
It 
.y 1lie 
i 
to 0 
-4,nth.
6. The sistaeo 
firfifO 
itht 
h w 
il firp 
Sal valitfft 
so
nt 
lottsow.0 
ls t 1 
I 
I 
lCtf 
&S 
fllfl8.-o 
11 
t 
.
Ua 
i
d'gts owee bfowt wr dr.e 
Ctf 
!-so~at~.Ip 
I 
Ilo. 411411drss *I,
Itlliht 
c"Or.I 0! O 
tiC i. .5'*tl. 
let tlt 
olrl 
Silol. 
iea
.
tfe ihlu Is 
e.. 
i 
.*. , r,*e the i 
t. t 
I 
t-, 
', 
pletesiloal
is; il 
ltat. 
to ct-,% 
1 .'t 
"It IoIot 
ItII .a 
t- 
we ubl ettei.
Tw l 
% 
r 
stee loi, 
.f 
l 
t 
r s 
p w t f 
tfoI 
k.i
'f.Z-..q nwCt.roll-en 
f.-.'.:. 
a c.I- 
te 
P 
a
10'eti.b, 
t 
.
iOiflICet~e 
0i;
Vorr truly 
rts. 
./ 
!
&Z t 
-ef.,i 
.
in 
-
/,." /~ 
. _ 
-/ .
I% 
r 
stee loi, 
.f 
l 
t 
r s 
p w t f 
tfoI 
k.i
'f.Z-..q nwCt.roll-en 
f.-.'.:. 
a c.I- 
te 
P 
a
10'eti.b, 
t 
.
iOiflICet~e 
0i;
Vorr truly 
rts. 
./ 
!
&Z t 
-ef.,i 
.
in 
-
/,." /~ 
. _ 
-/ .
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

838
CURRICULUM VITAE
FREDERICK R. SIDELL
EDUCATION:
EXPERIENCE:
4 AWARDS:
MEM ERSI'IPS:
PUBLICATIOI.1S:.,
(Internal)
BS (Chemistry), 1956, Mdarietta College, Mairletta, Ohio
MD, 1960, New York University College of Medici,e,
New York, New York
Rotating internship 1960-1; Resident, Internal Medicine
1961-4: Cleveland Metropolitan General Hospital,
Cleveland, Ohio
* 1964-66 - CPT, US Army Me'iical Corps, Edgewood Arsenal,
Maryland
196-1-66, Chief, Clinical IiVc-.tigation Section, Clinical
Rese:rc.ir 
Branch, Irc.,dical Hic,. .:,.rch Division, lioinedicl
Laboralory, Edv;c.-otd Arsenal, %liaryland
1966-60; 197,1 - Irzscnt, Acting Chief, Clinical Rceearch
Branz.1, 
IAe:Jic.A P",sarci L;:"t.ry, Edycwood Arsnal,
Abe:.'cin Piovi.. Gtoind, l-;'.rylaud
Depadr,:'nt ot 11h Arm'y CertificI.e of Achicv.ment, July 1 %9
Amc~iican Medical Association
Harford Coi.ty i 1chdical Society
Fellow. of the Roya! Society of health
Member, Artericon Society of l'hrracoloqy and Expri;uxii'.al
Thlera;,zutics
Member, AAAS
Sidell, F. R., Harper, D. G., and Bottiolieri, N.G. Effects on
Humans of Low Con:cntr-tions of G, Vapor. CRDI. T M, 2-15,
April 10,65. Secrct RporLt-
Sidell, F. R., Croff, W. A., z-m Vocci, F. 
Effccts of EA 3.4
Admiriisterad In,:avn-,usly a lo1unans. 
TMi 2-31, N~ovember 1965.
Seciet Repor..
SidM!I, F. R. and Greff, W. A. Oral Tomicily of VX to lunans.
EATR 4009, lvay 1966.
Si:'!ll, F. R. I 
.
*..',-3 to lnlr,".',!b vs V, 
EATP 
"?,
A:i S7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ovember 1965.
Seciet Repor..
SidM!I, F. R. and Greff, W. A. Oral Tomicily of VX to lunans.
EATR 4009, lvay 1966.
Si:'!ll, F. R. I 
.
*..',-3 to lnlr,".',!b vs V, 
EATP 
"?,
A:i S7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

839
.ova
Sidell, F. R., McShane, W. P._ and Hayes. A. H.' The
Failure of hethylphonidate to Iniluence the Tl'erspy of VX
Poisoned Rats. EATR 4125, Aug~ust 1967j Confidential
Report.
Sidell, F. R. and Groff, W. A. Reactivation of VX-Inhibited
Cholinesterase by 2-PA- Cl in Iuimans. EATM 114-11,
September 1967..
Sidel:, F. R. A Suwnmary of the lEvaluation of CAR 302,196
In Humans. EATR 4213, January 1969. Confidential Rcp'wt...
Sidell, F. R. and Kysor, K. P. A Revie-o of the Time Course
of the Central Efl'ccts of Inca;;citatini, 
Comtpotwns! 
in Huma:s.
':ATM 114-19, October 1968. Confidcnlial Report.
Sidell, F. R., Groff, W. A., and Ellin, R. I. Blood Levels
of Oxi.ne, Excretion Rates, and Side Eifects Prozhived by
Single Oral DoSes of Is-..-lpyricinitii-2-Aleoy't-;,e 
. : 
.
tictlzMest'lc"iLe (P2 S) il E-.:n;,ns. 
EATR 4256, January
o 1 6 .... 
.
..
Sidell, F. 
;. 
, M.crs1o1, f. M , SIon, 
J1. 
, Sdw:a,
H. N., Wiles, J. S. and L.cShane, V.'. P. " re.. 
Ir¢ 
of
Percitanezos VX lntoxici:tion in R'.-bits Under Con;ditions
Sibiuiating Sclf-Thtrapy in the Ficld. 
E'TTM 114-22,
September 1963.
Sidell, F. R. and tf'cShia.e, w. r. A Comparison of Separ;'wi:
Vcrsus f, ix.t! Soluti;n. cr Atropin: z; 2-Pa|.Cl in the Thc;;.Iy
of VX Poisoned lats. EATM 114-23, April 1969. 
'
Sidell, F.R., Karger, S., S;mons, C. J., an. \7oi,n.r, J. T.
CAR 302,60_: Acrosol A'::;ia~s,,n to Man. EATR 459,
limy 1970. Coan!iential Rep:t.
BottigJlieri, P. G., Sihcll, F. R. , Si-!, V. M 
... 
.!win Effccts
fio'-i Ati;nosp'.., ic Co:;tz.: -intiion With L.' Concen'ra.ions o: (.i;.
TrMj 2-27, Autgust 1965. Secret Reprt.
Fieiskhr, J. H., Clarke, J. 11. and Si:!clI, F. R. Daso-Resp.:%se
Effects a:Id "A:i:j'9 (f 1c 
:iv. 
A

--- PAGE BREAK ---tiion With L.' Concen'ra.ions o: (.i;.
TrMj 2-27, Autgust 1965. Secret Reprt.
Fieiskhr, J. H., Clarke, J. 11. and Si:!clI, F. R. Daso-Resp.:%se
Effects a:Id "A:i:j'9 (f 1c 
:iv. 
A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

840
Craig, F. N., Mc;.ichaell P. D., Robinson, P. R., and
,.-Sidel, F. R. Effects of BZ on Temperifture Regul.tion in "an.
EATM 112-11, October 1969.
Oberst, F. W., Efln, R. I., Frrand, R. I., Billups, 14. B.,
Koon, W. S., .. sselnan, J. P., Crouse, C. L., and
Sidell, IF. R. Develop-c:et of i:hods for Detectin and
MAeasuminy Vuatile Efflu,'l;s. A Status Rep3rt. 
EATR 4416,
August 1970. 
.
.
Sidell, F. R. and Braun, B. G. EA 3834A: Effects in "'n
Mfter a Single Oral Dos;.. 
EAT!. ,1597, f.arch 1972.
Sidell, F. R., an 
-l'tc!i tu, J. S. Per Capita, Per Kilo,
Per Litcr, or Pcr 
An.:-ter: 
A.:n':sis of Dose Exrre.si.:,s in
Clinical 
.ar:. cck: ;. EAT 
-
, Dceiber 1971.
Sidell, F. R. Dri,, A'.orption: 
o:o M.!.:,tical
Consideraiions. E;ATR A619, l.Aiy 1972. 
.- ......
Sidcll ,f 
.', 
l ira., 
J, 
, ;,'r|is, J. E . id Ie 'Kr,
K. P.. Coi;id. 
u 
_d 
132, 3 96: lsit r;!:::scul; AI%;-inisiratik:nn to
Man. 
EA1R (,6 l, All'ii 1972. Confi(-r,idal report.
Si$'ell, F. R., Groff, W. A., anzl Kamins.is, A. 
Ethyl ,..hoi:
Is Eli:ii.ntion Rate DcUse Dcp-.l:',eiA? EA', , 645, Ap:il 1972.
Ketc!-,:m, J. S., S')L-_ , P. , Kyzor, K. P., louff, C. , Si:'-l
F. R. :ri S im., V. 
i. 
Relatic,:.-hips Anx.xj Vase, Ti,;,.e,
and Vaiiovs Licasw,,es of Labor;!tory and h.ili:i.ry Peiforr:-.:ie i1
Volu:tccrs Rccchii::; 41 C.T:tr[,.!,; Active C!,' ......ic 
.,;.
Agent (LA 3500). EATR 467..3. Confic.ntia! relret.
Swalt', 
R. D. and Si:,c!l, F. R. Rcnal Tub.lar Sccw ic: uf
Pralidr-,>.:,: in f.;.n. EATR (f ;,; :oved for inulic,.tion).
Si~el 
F 
2, 
:." 
,D. 
L. an';: ,..lnll,,A. 
Serlt:
Creziwh; 
P ,.;).'... ,,s Acl .ivi.y* A.I r 
n.-C,l-r 
J'i;- :.
The Effect of Dose, C9.'cenlration, and Voluoe, EATR
f.p ;:^ 
, f .r -'! .
-.......
).
i..1 
I 
., R. 
0!' " 
.
, 
Elin 
R. 
1. 
P'_d 
-
L..Zsc-s G, ": -PA '..:Ci. I 
" 
ial,. 
S l.5 , 
,"::., 
,.,,":" 
""ffect of Dose, C9.'cenlration, and Voluoe, EATR
f.p ;:^ 
, f .r -'! .
-.......
).
i..1 
I 
., R. 
0!' " 
.
, 
Elin 
R. 
1. 
P'_d 
-
L..Zsc-s G, ": -PA '..:Ci. I 
" 
ial,. 
S l.5 , 
,"::., 
,.,,":" 
""

--- PAGE BREAK ---

841
Sidell, F. R,, iaunress, J. S., and Bollen, T. E.
Modification of the Effe,'ts of Atropine on l-',nan Heart
Rate by 2-PAI-'Cl. J. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 11,
68-76, 1970.
Sidell, F. R., aid Groff, W. A. Toxogonin: Blood
Levels and Side Effcts After Irntravtasculpr Aerninistration
in Man. 
J. Ph;rm. Sci. 59 (6), 793-797, 1970.
Sidell, F. R., and Pless, J. E. Ethyl Alcohol: Blood
Levels aid Performaacc Decr,;:;.ts After Oral Administa-
lion to Wan. 
Psych -,Mharnmacn'oria 19, 246-261, 1971.
Sidell, r. R. aw! Groff, W. A. Tozogo-iin: Oral
Adminis:,,:ic:i to ..an. J. Ph':uwaceut. Sc.iecccs 60,
60- 6.0, 1971.
Sldell, F. 11%. 
, a-d Groff, W. i. 
l!ra:,,sctilar .etdl
Intraveio:s A ':i::i:;r.o: of Si::;Jli i)oucs of 2-Pyrinir
...Aldoxie to L.an• J. Piann. Sci. 60, 1224-1223, 1971.
ll -- s, A . 14., Jr.•, 
!. c, 1.....-S 
in... 
I 
--
t 
-%-if! 
r
The Efiect of Acetyl Stro!ih-ldiiin on th . lits of Nor nal
Docs. 
Critics h J.;r!:l o! Ph :,:.:.ec. :y, L.atch 1970,
Vol s, !'. 3 p. 616.
Ketchm:., J. S., Si"ell , F. R. , Cro-ell , E. B., Anl,.ni vi;,,
D .
. : fH.y,'s, A. i.. At,'opin2, Sco;:o.',ie, anJ Di'.r.an:
Com in-ali'c P!-.-: -
.c , 
" A; 
)". fwi..s ;:. !,'a.
Ps yc hopliarma olocia, 28, 121-145, 1973.
Swartz, 
D 
.. 
D 
Sitell, F. R,. 
The Effect of Chp.,:-es in
Renal Blood Flovw on the Rzwl Excr6tion of P alixi."'
Chloric'e. Abs: Fed Proc ;" 2 
(51 97 2 
9:.- 
E'-U-, 
of
Ucat anwl Exercis:: on tof. i 
o'r"1i";.....
Clin.P~:. "rh,:.p,) 14, 0"-0 .973.
Sidcll, F. R 
W. 
"" 
. , 
•-w 
" 
A.'"""
lactlian-2 5 
ct;d.ae: Plas,'a Levc.s and F ;:,u~aco~iti:tic 
.
Oral Administrz inn nf 1 f~t,' ProFmraiOfl tO [.!.. J. P!r:'1.
Sci. 61, 
ll- 
O, 1972.
.
.u, 
.. .
... 
. .n. 
Psy!i .. 
.
.i5
I.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ct;d.ae: Plas,'a Levc.s and F ;:,u~aco~iti:tic 
.
Oral Administrz inn nf 1 f~t,' ProFmraiOfl tO [.!.. J. P!r:'1.
Sci. 61, 
ll- 
O, 1972.
.
.u, 
.. .
... 
. .n. 
Psy!i .. 
.
.i5
I.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

842
Ellin, R. I., Groff' W. A., and Slieell, F. Ri. Penetration
.#.. of P'yridiniu:n Oxi rcs Into Human Red Blood Cells. Biochem.
Phannacol. 23, 2663-2670, 1974.
Swartz, R. D,, Sidell, F. R. and Cucinell, S. A. Effects
of Physical Stress on the Disposition of Drugs Eliminated
by the Liver in Man. J. Pharm. Exp. Therap. 183, 1-7,
1974.
Sidell, F. R., AcIhajanian, G. K. and Groff, W. A. The
ReverspI o! Anticho!isrerqic Into:-i.tion in Mian With the
Cholinesterase Inhibito; %'X. Prrc. Soc. E:p. Biol. Med.
144, 725-730, 1973.
Fidell, F. R. Nnd Croff, W. A. 71;r Reactiva'li6ility of
Cholinestrse Inhibited by VX and S;.rin in hian. 
Toxicol.
Apple. Phatriacol. 27, 241-252, 1974.
• Sidell, F. R. Sarin and Soman: Clinical Manifestations 
.- *.
and Ttz.ats.. cii of Acci:cnt'al Poise:ing. Cli To:.icol., 7,
1-17, 
%94."
Sidell, F. P., Croft, W. A. and Ka.inskis, A. Toxco!nn
and Pral',:-e, Kine-'ic Corpris.n After I;ni;avencous
Administraion to MaTin. J. Pharn. Sci. 61, 1765-1769,
1972.
Sidell, F. R., Mess, J. 
r k, H., Susw, 
P.,
Copelan, H. W. and Sirn, V. LI. Dinl.thyieptyl-(elta-6n-
lOa-ctrzl:hdroeatnnbiaol: Effects After PareiW.era.ini 
i is-
tration to i.n. Proc. Soc. Exp. Giol. Mcd. 142, a.,67-
873, 1973.
*Sidell, F. R., S;;'.rtz, R. D., Saer, D. J. and Cucin:arl,
S. A. Ti- Effects of Vriou:s Strc ses on Drug Di.p:isition
in Man (Tal!k at ASPET sy:n1-.oium, AjiJtst 197-, t.:3a'real
Canada). 
-ederation Proxedinc;s, .cceptcd for pu!ic.ion..
Sidell, F. 
, 
.lh~k..Aur.,-locIu 
.... 
... 
WI 
"
Inhibitors in the Titi:,aei aul i;iufes 
Se atozi.;,i,
book, to be published.
S%-.Zk'a;z I" D.10 Si.;-,, 
F. F. " .: 
:h,- 
c .
.
_-
ll.., . Pfcc. Sac. E 
Qri.. 
.%iol 
:d. 1- ,
419-424, 1974.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the Titi:,aei aul i;iufes 
Se atozi.;,i,
book, to be published.
S%-.Zk'a;z I" D.10 Si.;-,, 
F. F. " .: 
:h,- 
c .
.
_-
ll.., . Pfcc. Sac. E 
Qri.. 
.%iol 
:d. 1- ,
419-424, 1974.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

843
Ellin, R. I., Farrand, R, L. Oberst, F. N., Crouse, C. L.,
1.. 
Bllps, N. B., Koon, W. S., M-usselman, N. P., Sidell,
F. R. An Apparatus lot the Dele'ctlon and Quantitt1on of
Volatile Human Effluents. J. Chroin. 100, 137-152, 1974.
Sidell, F. R., Culver, D. L., Kamlnskis, A. Serum Creatine
Phosphokinase Activity Aher Intr muscular Injection, JAMA,
229, 1894-1897, 1974.
Sidell, F. R., Modilicatien b,' 9iluents of Effects of
ntraI)uscular Attopine on 1-ua.lt R a.e In !M3an. Clin. Ph'rm'c.
Therap. 16, 711-716, 1974.
70-026 0 - 76 - 54

--- PAGE BREAK ---94-1897, 1974.
Sidell, F. R., Modilicatien b,' 9iluents of Effects of
ntraI)uscular Attopine on 1-ua.lt R a.e In !M3an. Clin. Ph'rm'c.
Therap. 16, 711-716, 1974.
70-026 0 - 76 - 54

--- PAGE BREAK ---

844
CURRICULUA VITAE
RON!ALD CARL PETERSEN
EDUCATION: 
BA (Psycholo.), 1968, Haraline University, St. Paul,
Minnesota
Ph.D. (Maj,,r: Experiir-zital P,.ychology; minor: Educational
Psychology,, Statistics), 1972, University of Minnesota,
Minncapolis, Minnesota
EXPERIENCE: 
1972-Present: Research Psycholoyffst, Captain, LS Army
Medical Sc:rvice Corps, IS Army Bionr-dical Labora.ory,
Edgewood Aisenal, A)ea;;en P;oving Gund, vMawylhmid
1974-Piesc 't: Instructor, Th-. EveninrJ Colleje, The Johns
Ilopkins U:iv.LiSity, Baltiaowe, Maryland
1973-Prescot: Assista;t Prfc.e.sor (parl.-thiv), Dv.unrtnent
of Educalion1,I Foundations, University of Delaware, Newark,
Delaware.
1970-1972: Prcdoctor,'l Associate, Ccntcr for Reearch in
Human Learni:., Uiivcrsity of Minnesota
1969-1972: Army Graidvte Sludent Prcgran in Exl)-2imctal
Psychology
•1969-1972: Research Asociate, Department of Psycholoy,
University of f;1innesota
1.972: Iltructor, Dep;.rtment ol Psychology, Univeisity of
Mintesota
1972: Teaching Assistant, Department of Psychological
Foundations, University of Minnesota
1971: Co.;..itnt, Mincapolis Public School System,
Minneap,)N.zi, 
Iinnesota
1971: Te:,c.iiin Asson..iate, DeK'rtnent of Psychological
Foundatioi.s, University of Minnesota
1968: Associat, ResearchScientist, Life Sciences Group,
Systems awl' Rerch r.-o-'er, HnywII, Inc., St. P.Il,

--- PAGE BREAK ---iate, DeK'rtnent of Psychological
Foundatioi.s, University of Minnesota
1968: Associat, ResearchScientist, Life Sciences Group,
Systems awl' Rerch r.-o-'er, HnywII, Inc., St. P.Il,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

846
ORGANIZATIONS: 
Ki;pa Phi (schblastic)
Psi Chi (onorary psycholorjy), Prc.sidcnt, Haifline University
Chapter, 1963
American Psychological Association (student affiliate)*
Midwestern Psychological Asscciation
Human Factors Society
PAPERS: 
Petersen, P.. C. Scorolamine Induced temory Failures
In Man. P,:'-r to be pt(vs..ted at tlu Federation of Arierican
Societits for Fxp,'imen'',l I;ioloy I,'-eting,/Atlantic City,
New Jersey, April, 1975.
Petersen, P. C. and JanS, S. H. Evidence for Context
F:oriuation i:. thna!.'ry anItl l1Il 
.
P'engr to be p;:esc1ted at thic
Easr, 
tern 
,. .,ic 
..I ',:.iati:s 
:&-ilJ, lew York, Wccw
York, tpril, 
197.5.
Petren, N:. (. 
Lvidnce for Ale." St.te-Detpenhioit
!earmin9 in !..:.n. P-l.-r press( 
i1d 
:. tk. Fedc-raiion of
Atwericaii .-c.c' ic.s far 
E.;ieui~ 
oiurJt','.ory 
feteing, Atlantic
City, New 
Ap 
.€:,/::il, )70.
Va-cisen, R. C. Rollc clrf 
,L i ,-.c;i 
h ,~ 
,:.c
Pazl'er-re., i.'cd at th- 
Ol-asr rn Psyr':,ir;:icral As.rj-.i;ion
Mv,:,ing, 
April.. 
,,.,,., 
1 7 .
.Petcrsen, P. C. Irx(;cry as a ConstnUctive Piocess.
Colloquiuim, Collcj% of E ucation, University of D-lz''are,
.February, 1.97.
Petersen, R. C. and i-ox, P. W. Latency and Vividness
of Iaes as Predictors of Recall. Papr presented at t'e
Psychonot;,;c Society v.,eting, St. Louis, Missouri,
November, 1972.
Petersen, !.. C., and r:o:,- P. W. Vividness of !. mgaes in
Recall mvn,' 2,;nition. Pax.r pre! r w,-d at .
Ps ychoic'..A. Atsociklion i;.etn.-.- .,;vel",nJ, Oitio,
L ay, 19Y2.
-Petcrsen, P. C., 
,,d Fox, P. W. Irsery as a \!i'ritble
in lncidr..:i Leri,,iit. P,.per presvitct6 at tie 
,.
Psvcholo,icM ,lA.ssoc-.'icon fUcetina. R.troit,
'.1y";?3

--- PAGE BREAK ---L ay, 19Y2.
-Petcrsen, P. C., 
,,d Fox, P. W. Irsery as a \!i'ritble
in lncidr..:i Leri,,iit. P,.per presvitct6 at tie 
,.
Psvcholo,icM ,lA.ssoc-.'icon fUcetina. R.troit,
'.1y";?3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

846
Petcrsen, R. C. and Kanarick, A. F. Information S.ipling
With Varying Source Costs and Dagnosticities. P;;.:r
presented at th: Western P.sychological Associations Meeting,
Vancouver, B3ritish Columbia, June, 1969.
Kanarick, A. F., and Petcrsen, R. C. Selectivity in
Keepiig-Track Prforniance. 
Paper presented at the Eastern
Psychological Aociation lkei.j, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, Ap;il, 1969.
Petersen, R. C. aid Kanarick, A. F. A Comparison or1 Modes
of Incentive Presretaton on Ri".-Taki1 g. Paper presented at
the Psychono..-ic Society L1ectz,.r,- St. Louis, Misso'.#i,
Octo!)er, 1963.
PUBLICATIOi;5: 
Petestn, R. C. hliery ar'! Ctu.Id Rec:al: Concretr:-ss or
Context? Jounal of Exleri.:n'.aI Psycholojy, 102, 8/11-
844, 1974.
Kawnzricl:, A. F. -iid Pctersc-n, R. C. Re,'Jodant Color Coding
and l(.rlinj-Ir' 
Perfon',:nce. 
Human rrctors, 13, 193-
, 1971.
SKanarick, A. F. and Petcrsci, R. C. El'ccts of Vallu,! on tle
Monitorinj of MuLti-Channcl Displays. Human Factors, 1],
•313-320, 1969.
Kanarick, A. F., ltuntinqton, J. M. and Petersen, R. C.
iuIlti-Sot:rce ,lnk..,aation Accouisiioii Ivit:i Optitonal Stopping.
Human Factors, 11, 379-386, 1969.
Petersen, R. C., Kanarick, A. F. and llernenhahn, B. R.
Effects of Icentive as a Within- and Cctween-Subjects Variable
in Risk-Taki: j. Psychoin.-;.ic Science, 12, 279-280, 1968.
Petcrs-n, R. C. and Hcr.j.n!iahn, B. R. Test of Ce;tnitive
Dissonance Theory in an Llcsr..:tary School Setting. Psycholojical
Reports, 22, 199-202, 1,'%8.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ience, 12, 279-280, 1968.
Petcrs-n, R. C. and Hcr.j.n!iahn, B. R. Test of Ce;tnitive
Dissonance Theory in an Llcsr..:tary School Setting. Psycholojical
Reports, 22, 199-202, 1,'%8.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

847?
Correspordence With Academy of Health Science
C
0
PY
DEPARTMENT OF T!E ARMY
ACADEMY OF HEALTH SCIENCES, US ARMY
FT SAM HOUSTON, 'IEXAS 7C234
HSA-CDC
21 Jau 1975
SUBJECT: Ncrve AS,cnt Antidloe and XM258 Kit
Comni'.v:,!cr
Bionw('icalLa 
rt,,-.
AT'r1,: COL Fr 
- i
Aberdc, n l'o'vinc l,,Ju,, 
0iL 0 
3 O. 
.
1. Rr,!crec,, FO!ECO, 
200." 00.t 74, bkeen COL Edmoild rovatain,
y 
ir 
a c , ii 
......... 
, .... , 
' Doctrir.c 'i-isio:n,
this Ic,-ny.
2. /ttached is a lisi r,f rlvestivi,r for rhich'ansvx;ers Pre required in oicder to
update Ari:,y ,MdicaM.ecar;:cl. 
doctrine and prepare a TB Mcd, as diire~cted by
The Sur jeon Geier.'i, for sLubjtct iteris.
FOR T".IVE SUPEI'':T!'PDET':
-PARRY L. BIGGS
MA,,. ,,4SC
Secretary
CF:
IIQDA (DASG-RDZ), WASH DC 20314
ln:l
as
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---B Mcd, as diire~cted by
The Sur jeon Geier.'i, for sLubjtct iteris.
FOR T".IVE SUPEI'':T!'PDET':
-PARRY L. BIGGS
MA,,. ,,4SC
Secretary
CF:
IIQDA (DASG-RDZ), WASH DC 20314
ln:l
as
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

848
1. Antidote, IRerve Acgent.
a. What are the signs and symptoms of overdose from this antidote?
Correlate the s-(jns and symptoins versus (jua-itity of drug.
b. What are the adverse effects of 0verdosage" At what point are
.
Irreversible deluetious effk.cts produced?
c. Provide spcific ruidzz:c for follow-on th.r,, , of overdose victims.
Drug, dosage, Uti, c::cctcJ ,slts, cl:;,ves in sl,;:is or symfto:s, etc.
d. Provide -1 1-, ific cjti.:.,.e for fooi- 
n tree 
ernL of nerve avciit
vic.Lirls who have ,d 
the .
iucctors "nr.'iecd bi- 
.:,o stil! show , mptonis
of In:'rve ; 
jA.g 
I 
t-:, .
'." i::tch 
1r..:1i::o 
, heo',( "'C: 1? Is IIi 
Lc of aditi:.n?,l
Icla (l;- 
( 5.scripi :.-'. of e: .c,, si!stlS a::u 
.;ipto:.' 
.?1.C:pCCte..6C 
1,s;6se 
.
e. What co:,;dicatioiis ::oihc re ul! it t!;is druc! iS M!IiciLly usee in conju:Uicnn
with alce)"ol td0/o othcr co l.-:nly ;iv)' 
:;t,:; (a:; :":, ':" 
r",
marijt'.ta , etc.)? 
a'a wo.o,'! this c:;! 
;m..:. 
?
2 
XM'i4,:O Sa. 
l;'ii ,, 
llltaII 
Kit.
a. Wiat will L- 
,.e '. result' of iljcStio: )f the COliiL;3 of thirs
kit? Or nmi;Ic kit inl(jetil:,?
b. What is thc toxicity of chloranmine 13 powder'
c. W~at are t!:2 eXp.:c e siq.1, ,. 
sympttoms o," iio.;estiou?
d. What is the method for treating ingestion?
e. What :,culd be th, ce:;;Iications in.vclved i 
r the councils 0f the
xL",58 kit F., 
i r 
": 
; :v v n 'tatl e ... r u ! ? 'V.':tTd this ch:,,.;':! -the
trc 
[t r.cei."'., ".? V ouldt 
t,'., 
iJ;c 
, 
,S 
or i-.,o: 
ons?

--- PAGE BREAK ---ved i 
r the councils 0f the
xL",58 kit F., 
i r 
": 
; :v v n 'tatl e ... r u ! ? 'V.':tTd this ch:,,.;':! -the
trc 
[t r.cei."'., ".? V ouldt 
t,'., 
iJ;c 
, 
,S 
or i-.,o: 
ons?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

849
0
p
Y
4 March 1975
SAREA-DL--R
SUBJECT: Nerve Ap:-," Antidote and AM258 Kit
S ucrinte:, ,;t
Academy ofI Ialth S:.:'es, Urited St; tcs Army
AU,,: Conrf-.'-ts and 0l..rtrioe Divi!.io - IQ*J Iobert Hi%',dren
Fort Sam I :toji, T,:.. s 762-4
1. 
Rvfercr 
,! is made to Iv.ter, HSA-CI)C, 21 .In 1975, sit5!.,ct as ?.Sove.
2. Anst,?r. to ;osti:,; cc 1taiver in closure 1 of telcren...I Iter pre
colk.inzd ii, -.
L.!csure 1 o, this Ic'tcr. ThC int, :l. oi this =!, is to ausi'wxr
btingJ f[i-Ili',1 1M i;' 1ti,.:.'., 
and .. itw d!.!:h 
.
a, 
.
.ion ile,, .
Tt,,'e are
p;' liiinm'ry ,':ers bas'vd on limited StLudis, an 
rc not iutlndcd for inchi-iin
into a TO I.i::d zi this tine.
FOR TIlE DIR..$.TOR:
1 Incl 
VAN M. SIM, M.D.
as stated 
Chief, fMical Research Divifsion
Biome(dical Laboratory
CF:
HO.DA (,)AG-ZA), ...
DC 20314
|IQDA (S4iR)-EDE), \!;6$h DC 20314

--- PAGE BREAK ---OR TIlE DIR..$.TOR:
1 Incl 
VAN M. SIM, M.D.
as stated 
Chief, fMical Research Divifsion
Biome(dical Laboratory
CF:
HO.DA (,)AG-ZA), ...
DC 20314
|IQDA (S4iR)-EDE), \!;6$h DC 20314

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ar0
0P.pY
4 March 1975
SAREA-BL*-R
SUBJECT: Nerve Agq.n Antidote and XM258 Kit
Superintendent
Academy of Ilkc-ith Szkines, United States Army
Atm: Conc.i:ts and Vcclrine Division - WIAJ Robert Hi.iidren
Fort Sain E;t .ton, TA...-s 702.4
1. Refereiisc is made to ftoter, HSA-CDC, 21 .Jan 1975, subject as above.
2. Answr, to (;uIstiu:1; cor.taived in Intlosuie 1 of referenced Ictter are
cowaird iii [-"-Iosurc 1 of this Iltter. The intact of this r.-ply is to answer
whercvr z-, 1 ? s r,- 3.' tlie ri 
£ 
stieos th l rma y .-;-.r- ai, rsp-jr I to trropS
beia3 fturni~lic.i wew trc, t.::..-:nf atd skirn dconta:ai z:tion itenis. These are
preliminary '.ers ba,;cl on limited studies, and tre not intended for incision
lito a lB I,,! at this tiwe.
FOR TIlE DIRECTOR:
1 Incl 
VAN M. SIM, M.D.
as stated 
Chief, Medical Research Division
Biov,'dical Laboratory
CF:
HQDA (DAS-ZA), WAS''I 
DC 20314
HQDA (SGPD-EDE), \:7i-SH DC 20314

--- PAGE BREAK ---FOR TIlE DIRECTOR:
1 Incl 
VAN M. SIM, M.D.
as stated 
Chief, Medical Research Division
Biov,'dical Laboratory
CF:
HQDA (DAS-ZA), WAS''I 
DC 20314
HQDA (SGPD-EDE), \:7i-SH DC 20314

--- PAGE BREAK ---

851
1. Antidote, HNrve Agjent.
a. What are the :;ins ind symptoms of overdosage 'rom this antidote? Correlate
the signs and symptor,;s versus quantity of drug.
Answer: One injector, or one dose, of the TAB ar,i.Ite will produce signs similar
to those produced by 2 mrj of atropine, i.e., slight increase in heart rate, a slight
pupillary dilatation, p41s sone ni:ital chiamcs, including very mild confusion. Two
injectors, or two eases, of the TAP antidote ci.aoe a greater pupillary dilatation, some
visual impairment, pV.rti':tlarly lor close vision, an increase iii heart rate, and ricntdl
changes. The nien'al clangc may include confusion, impairment of memory, 
illusions,
and distorted thil.!ing. Poor cooidination is also a feature of overdosage.
b. What are t!he -.lOerse effects of over:.osae? A, what point Pre irreversible
deleterious effects" ptodctced?
Answer: See 9'o-e. The pi,.i at whikh irceh , 
-rsiz 
.'ktcriour- effects art! prcdv!h,.
is not hao '.;. 
V.' c 
vc , 
s-v, 
see;. "eVL 
Ois 
" 
*f 
' " 
of 
.. 
.. 
.
it s
c. Provide s:::cific guidance for follo.,-on therapy of overc'ose victims. Drug,
dosage, tim,, expected resu lts, c. itges in signs or symptoms, etc.
An-w-r: Us;;.ly vX",i.'s of o':rse 
rd; 
' rcquire on! close ov.LonS a:'.!
custodial care wit i proteciic:i 
The effects froin over!.e with two doses wear off in
6-8 ihot,. 
Pihysosti:nine (50 Imc/i'k.(j, ii,) is an effective antidote if the victim
becomes a threat to himself or others.
d. Provide src.cific "guidanice for follov;-on treatment of nerve agent victims who have
used the two injeric.-s pri)vi.Ied l:tit who still s',w symiptus of Inve teni. 
.eui'wi 
uicJ.
How niti.h atropi:, , how otete? Is the use of a.-dition.,l co:-.h3ination antidote contra-
Indicated? Whea is 2-FAM Chloride indic-,tcd? Inckle descriptions of expected signs
andl symptoms and expected responses.
Answer: An individual who still shows signs and symptoms of nerve agent intoxication
after rcceivirj t'vo.doses of tho T".B mixtie should 6e treated with atropine and riven
assisted ve'ntila.io:., if reruiie, 
in the ma;MI.r coa;.;,co,;!y prescribed- for such ;;oi:;oaing.
SThe lose and freq.wcncy of atropic and oxime should Le 1-ft to the j,'i-;ment of the physicia'i.
OxiMe should be a'Linistcre' 
st=ks 
it is :,,,:,,n tha! thxe n:rve asciint is refractory to its
aotio:. 
It is anjicipa.ed th.t the si:ns ;nd sympiptcn's v.iald be no dif rent thmi; tfose of the
individual treated wilh atropic. Mt6;itiona.i doses of the TAB mixture zro prob:tdy Iot
contra-indicated, but this is norknown with certainty.
e. What complications would result if Lhis drug is illicitly used in conju.tioul
with alcohol anoil ,r r,'U'er co;m;.,,.n 
a ti.. ". ''.. (. 
',tadinos, 
l:;,'iturates
r:--riji:a~na, etc.)? "¢:;,.o ,. 
i s i :,; 
, 
:, ;.'.ould result if Lhis drug is illicitly used in conju.tioul
with alcohol anoil ,r r,'U'er co;m;.,,.n 
a ti.. ". ''.. (. 
',tadinos, 
l:;,'iturates
r:--riji:a~na, etc.)? "¢:;,.o ,. 
i s i :,; 
, 
:, ;.'.

--- PAGE BREAK ---drug is illicitly used in conju.tioul
with alcohol anoil ,r r,'U'er co;m;.,,.n 
a ti.. ". ''.. (. 
',tadinos, 
l:;,'iturates
r:--riji:a~na, etc.)? "¢:;,.o ,. 
i s i :,; 
, 
:, ;.'.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

852
-Answer: "he cf.: cts of the use of tie /A'3 mixture with coinfno.ily abused drtit,
are tiuniown. 
On the lizisis of previous experience, It woild he expected tha't
depressants, narcotics, and cannabis derivatives would tend to increase incapacita-
tion, and stimulants such as amphetamines either have ,o effect or shorten period.
2. XM258 Skin Decontamination 'it.
-a,--Wha 
will be the expected results of ingestion of the components of this kit?
Of multiple kit in.jestions?
Answer: It is highly unlikely that there will fie abuse of-the decontamination lits.
Although there is 72',"0 ethanol in Solution "A," tie phenol (10"/), the soJiwn
hydroxide (5,/.), and .lie aimmonia present would make it hitjhly tnpakl.tU!Jc, and very
irritating to mucous P,-.-,;I)ranes.
b. What is the to'.-icity of chierarmine B pow('er?
Ars:er: The sa., ray lIe tid for tN "" to[hition. 
Chloi,*LMin : 13 is irritathvj,
but no! extremely toxic, but it lhs a strong odor wh;iclh vo:ild negaie any desire for
ingestion.
c. W!at are the c:)ccted siy;as and symptonis of ingestion?
, 
,. 
... 
Th.,, s ,v cf acc*cL:. t.aI or ,...... 
i. 
. ,:. 
Id 
.... 
t 
•:4 
..
:..
and lo 
sr 
'. .rointestina; rtit;tion, nausea aind vomiting, with n'o(-' 
to severe
irritating of nmuccu. me'iranes of m;oouth and threat.
d. HIow is ingestian treated?
Ansiver, Gastric lavage will probably be ume-cessary.
e. What would be the complications iivolvcd if both the contents of the XM258
• , 
kit and tie nerve a-icnt antidote were used? Would this change the treatment rei;,n?
Would lis-chante the sins or syn.ptoms?
Answer: The anio:t.t of alcrihWl prescit in Sol.tion "A" would be equivalent to a
straight' shot of Lemn la.-t Rm;:u (1-1/2 o 144 proof). If both the con'.erts of tiLk
XM258 I:it and the n :ve agene: 1tidote hit i.ere used, the end result woulrl be a
diseriei%',t; individual %dio is i.:::.seated and vomiting. Gastric lava(je will probab;y bc
unnecessary.rts of tiLk
XM258 I:it and the n :ve agene: 1tidote hit i.ere used, the end result woulrl be a
diseriei%',t; individual %dio is i.:::.seated and vomiting. Gastric lava(je will probab;y bc
unnecessary.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

868
VOINTEER'8 PARTICIPATION AGt.U-.A(T
NAME
Age 
;_Grade 
Serial No.
Organization
Nae of Nearest Relative
Address of Nearest Relative
Telephone Number of Nearest Itelative
I ..... 
, have received, read 
and
understand.a drWL 4;.elt entitled, 
Medical Research \'luntoer Program", 
copy :f
which is annexed lihrcLo, 
and that the -;j.eral me.t :;o of the expt.rinents I have
volusiteered to pertscipatc lij have b, 
exp:Li;;. 
t . the 
ttalmsuilit Oqf P;.
ble hazards to my health. 
It is my tindtrstanditit: that the v.ulerir cnts are so
desigited. based on the results of animal and pre'.-rIs human expe:imentation ,
that the anticipated results till 
ju..tify the pcrLorvr.atce of the experime,.t.
I understand further that cxperincnts will be so conducted as to avoid all un-
necessary physical atnd mctal stifferi s. 
and injury. and that I uIll be at
libvrty #n 
rp,,pt 
that th 
Pxpertrentq tie ter'r,:,tt-l 
nt any tiuic if 
t, I..-;
opinion I have reached the physical or mental state where continuation of the
experiments becomes undesirable.
I recognize that in the pursuit of certain experiments transitory dis-
comfiture may occur and when such reactions seem especiall%" 
to occur I
will be so advised. 
I rccognize, also, that under these cii...;r.,nes, 
I -. st
rely upon the skill and wisdom of the physician supervisin. t o experiment to
institute whatever medical or surgical measures are ir.dicit-! to ;ritect -c.
There has been no coercion, element of fraud or deceit, 
.,, ;ue mv .l 
iutslon
or other adverse pressure brought to bepr in my volunteer. 
this duty. 
I
have done. so of-my own free will, completely aware of all ....-
, 
rewar-'s and
recognition involved.
DAM:. 
WITNESSS:
SIGNED: 
W ITXESS:
I BEST OFP ,I-VJJLIE
I
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---. 
this duty. 
I
have done. so of-my own free will, completely aware of all ....-
, 
rewar-'s and
recognition involved.
DAM:. 
WITNESSS:
SIGNED: 
W ITXESS:
I BEST OFP ,I-VJJLIE
I
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

854
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
NI[ADUASTERS. ZOGEWOOO AISENAL
I[g[WOOD ARSiNAL. 
ARLAND 81010
UNCONDITIONAL CONSENT POR USE OP PICTURE AND SOUND
The United States Government is Sranted the right to
use, to the extent and for the purpose it desires, any
pictures (still, motion, those transmitted via TV or recorded
on video tape or otherwise) and sounds (vocal, instrumental,
or otherwise) whether used together or soparAtely, taken or
recorded by or on behalf of Edgewood Arsenal.
(DATe)
(Signature)
( ilitary Xddress)
(Signature)
Above consent obtuined by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

865
MEDICAL VOLUNTEER
HANDBOOK
US ARMY
APRIL 1975
CLINICAL RESEARCH BRANCH
BIOMEDICAL LABORATORY
EDGEWOOD ARSENAL
-ABERDEEN PROVING GROUND, MARYLAND 21010

--- PAGE BREAK ---

86
MEDICAL
VOLUNT 
ER
HANDBOOK
April 1975
Medical Research Divisica
Biomedical Laboratory
Edgevood Arsenal, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD 21010

--- PAGE BREAK ---

857
INTOIXTIOI(
The Commander of Edgewood Arsenal and the staff of the Medical Research
Division of the Biomedical Laboratory welcome you as a participant in the
Medical Volunteer Program. 
We hope your stay here will be interesting
and that your participation in the various testing programs will be pro-
fitable to you and the US Army. 
In this handbook you will find general
information and an outline of the facilities available at Edgewood Arsenal
as well as your responsibilities as a medical volunteer.

--- PAGE BREAK ---US Army. 
In this handbook you will find general
information and an outline of the facilities available at Edgewood Arsenal
as well as your responsibilities as a medical volunteer.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

868
EDGEWOOD AR8EUAL AND ITS MEDICAL VIMNTEE 
PROGRAM
Edgewood Arsenal is the caodity management center for chemical agents
and munitions (including flame and incendiary systems, smoke generators,
burning smoke-type pyrotechnic items, smoke grenades, pots, and canisters),
chemical and biological protective equipment and systems, and related test
and handling equipment. 
The arsenal has also pioneered research in air and
water pollution detection and control.
The installation is located on the Gunpowder Peninsula in Harford County,
Maryland, approximately 20 miles northeast of Baltimore. 
The peninsula, often
referred to as the Gunpowder Neck or the Gunpowder Reservation, extends into
the Chesapeake Bay between the mouths of the Gunpowder and Bush Rivers. 
It is
approximately 8 miles long and averages 2 miles in width.
The arsenal dates from World War I when several plants were built here
for filling shells with toxic agents. 
After the war, the plants were placed
in standby and the major operation became the manufacture of protective (gas)
masks. 
During the 1920's the research and development work of the Chemical
Warfare Service (later known as the Chemical Corps) were centralized here. 
In
the years between the two world wars the installation became the chief center
of all chemical warfare activities. 
In the prewar and early years of World
War II major renovations of the physical plant and new construction were com-
pleted. 
The peak figure for civilian employment during World II was approx-
imately 10,000.
Many organizational changes have taken place since World War II. 
Re-
search and. development have replaced manufacturing as the major function and
Edgewood Arsenal became the Army'sa cconodity managemet center for chemical
research and development in January 1966. 
The arsenal's facilities are
modern and provide a vast range of special capabilities in scientific investi-
gation and engineering. 
The focus of the Biomedical aboratory, which is
responsible mainly for prophylaxis and therapy for chemical agent intoxica-
tion, is the John R. Wood Building, first occupied in 1968. 
It is a life
sciences laboratory building with advanced design for conducting clinical
research, experimental medicine investigations, and studies in pathology,
psychology, human factors engineering, and immunology.
In addition to offices from which the arsenal' s biomedical research ef-
fort is directed, the building houses 140 individual laboratory elements in-
cluding a clinical ward, X-ray facilities, observation rooms, and consulta-
tion roams. 
Computerized handling of medical data is also an adjunct to the
research programs.
Other buildings in the complex house many specialized facilities for
work in the life sciences. 
These include versatile facilities for physio-
logical testing (for example, a modern climate-control chamber), a Labora-
tory animal breeding and holding colony, diverse research laboratories, and
a center for ecological studies.ties for physio-
logical testing (for example, a modern climate-control chamber), a Labora-
tory animal breeding and holding colony, diverse research laboratories, and
a center for ecological studies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Professional medical personnel assigned here represent many special-
ties and are equipped with a wide variety of research tools.

Closed cir-
cuit television affords central, constant observation of volunteer test
subjects and its visual record advantage is used for various types of
clinical studies.

Since 1922 volunteer subjects have been an integral part of the bio-
medical effort.

For almost 20 years the-volunteers were employees, usually
connected with the particular research requiring human subjects, who offered
to submit to the various tests.

This expedient arrangement probably suf-
ficed for so long, because the staff was too smal to generate requirements
for large numbers of human tests.

For instance, in 1927 the staff consisted
of 18 people and by 1940 had only grown to 25.

However, during World War
II, the demand for volunteers burgeoned and authority was granted to recruit
volunteers from among enlisted personnel.

This was a tremendously success-
ful effort, but vith the end of the war, the requirement for volunteers
diminished, 
For the next 8 years, it was met satisfactorily by local per-
sonnel.

By 1955 new types of chemical agents were discovered or developed,
and the success of the medical research effort depended on a stable source
of volunteer subjects.

Although extensive preliminary work can be and is
done in animals, the ultimate test is in humans.

Therefore, in 1958 the medical volunteer programs, essentially as it
is today, began.

Each Army area in the Zone of Interior is responsible for
recruiting volunteers on a rotating basis.

Since 1958, over 7,000 volun-
teers have reported to the Biomedical Laboratory.

J
Approximately 300 to 600 volunteers for each cycle of the program (four
cycles per year) are screened, and approximately 55 are selected.

The sel-
ection process is based upon consideration of the individual's medical and
social histories and the results of standard psychological and intelligence
tests.--- PAGE BREAK ---

J
Approximately 300 to 600 volunteers for each cycle of the program (four
cycles per year) are screened, and approximately 55 are selected. The sel-
ection process is based upon consideration of the individual's medical and
social histories and the results of standard psychological and intelligence
tests. The evaluation, interpretation, and correlation of these data are
considerable tasks. But they-assure that only those volunteers who are
physically and mentally fit for the studies are selected. The medical vol-
unteer program is conducted by the Medical Research Division and many of the
actual tests are performed within its Clinical Research Branch. The mission
of the Clinical Research Branch includes the evaluation of chemical agent
effects in man with a goal of developing the most effective treatment. This
branch also provides medical support for tests of protective masks, clothing,
equipment, etc., performed elsewhere on the installation. In practicej this
means that tests involving volunteers may be in the wardj, in a hospital en-
viro ment, in special chambers, under carefully controlled conditions, and
in the field. The Director of the Biomedical Laboratory is the responsible
physician for the operation of the Medical Volunteer Program. If you. are one of those selected, you are to be commended for volun-
teering, and you can have the personal satisfaction of knowing that six to
nine other volunteers failed to qualify for every one that was selected. 70-026 0 * 76 * 55

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed for volun-
teering, and you can have the personal satisfaction of knowing that six to
nine other volunteers failed to qualify for every one that was selected. 70-026 0 * 76 * 55

--- PAGE BREAK ---

86O
GENERAL IKFON4ATION
Medical volunteers are assigned to Headquarters Company (HHC) 
for
rations, quarters, and administration. 
HHC must be notified of inability
to appear for morning formation as soon as possible (ext 4365).* 
The us-
ual army standards of military hearing, dress, and courtesy as set forth
by IhC must be complied with. 
r.ilure to do so wilU result in discipli-
nary action. 
Daily duties are determined by Chief, Clinical Research
Branch* and his representatives. 
Test schedules with dates, time, and
place of assignments ill be posted daily on the bulletin boards provided
in the barracks and in the dayroom of Building E3100. 
They should be con-
sulted frequently for deletions, additions, and possible changes. 
Failure
to comply with test schedules could result in the return of volunteers to
their permanent duty stations. 
You will be introduced to your Platoon
Leader and Platoon Sergeant who will be available at all times to assist
you in personnel problems, pay, leaves, passes and etc. 
Your daily ac-
countability and control vill also be their responsibility.
uarters
Volunteers will be quartered in Building E4465 located on Austin Road,
(Telephone 671-3465). 
All personnel in the barracks will be awakened at
0600 hours Monday through Thursday. 
Unless otherwise instructed volunteers
must be at Building E3100 for roll call at 0800 hows Monday through Thurs-
day. 
Normally, a standby inspection is conducted ii the barracks on Thurs-
day morning at 0730 hours by C4DR, 
1{HC and Platoon Sergeant. 
Other inspec-
tions will be announced when necessary.
Each volunteer is responsible for keeping his assigneti barracks area
clean. 
There are no fatigue details outside the barracks or in other areas
not used by volunteers.
Consolidated Mess
A numbered mess card (DD Form 714) will be issued by the administra-
wtive 
NCOIC of HWC during in-processing and must be shown when entering the
mess hall (ext 3279). 
Personnel on leave status (ecept for convalescent
leave) may not eat at the mess hall unless they pay for the meal since sep-
arate ration pay is drawn for leave.
Passes and Leaves
Every volunteer will receive 3 days of pass time for every 4 days of
duty. 
When possible pass time will include the weekend, but compensatory
time will be giveh if testing is scheduled for Friday, Saturday, or Sunday.
Ordinary leave cannot be granted prior -to arrival or departure from Edgewood
Arsenal; it must be obtained through your home post. 
While at Edgewood
Arsenal leaves for unusual circumstances may be aploved and issued by HHC.
Requests for leave (DA Form 31) must be approved first by the Volunteer
Administrative Office. 
Volunteers must sign in and out in the Orderly
Roas of HI 
when returning from or departing for nural or convalescent
leaves. 
Passes under 72 hours (short version of D& Form 31) do not requir-
5ce. 
Volunteers must sign in and out in the Orderly
Roas of HI 
when returning from or departing for nural or convalescent
leaves. 
Passes under 72 hours (short version of D& Form 31) do not requir-
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
861
signing out or in.
* 
To dial Edgewood Arsenal numbers frm outside the installation, first
dial 671 and then the extension you want.
Pay calls are held mid-month and at the end of the month in the
Administrative Office, Bldg E3100. Partial payment can be authorized
by the Cdr, HWD. No TDY payments will be made at this station. 
TDY
payments will be issued to Medical Volunteers in advance by their home
stations or upon their return to home station after completing their
TDY assignment. Any questions concerning pay or allowances should be
directed to the Platoon Sergeant.
Privately Owned Vehicles
TmpoMrary passes may be obtained at the Main Gate.
TMor registration. 
Vehicles will be registered as soon as
possible after arrival at the Pass and Registration Office in Bldg E4420
(ext 2222) which is open p 
on Wednesdays from 0900 to 1500 hours.
Proof of insurance, license registration, and a valid operator's license
must be presented in order to obtain a post decal. Post decals are not
needed if vehicles have decals from the volunteer's permanent duty station.
A copy of the volunteer's TDY orders should be kept in the vehicle at all
times. Motorcycles may be operated on this post.
Mail
Mail may be picked up at the mail drop at the following hours:
Monday through Friday 
1000 and 1500
Saturday 
None
Mail call is as follows:
Monday through Friday 
1130-1215
Saturday and Sunday 
None
The US Post Office at Edgewood Arsenal is located in Bldg E4405. It
is open:
Monday through Friday 
0830-1700 hours
Saturday 
0800-1200 hours
The address here for volunteers is: Name
Service No.
HHC, Edgewood Arsenal
Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD 21010
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---pen:
Monday through Friday 
0830-1700 hours
Saturday 
0800-1200 hours
The address here for volunteers is: Name
Service No.
HHC, Edgewood Arsenal
Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD 21010
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

862
Post Exchange Services
Main Store located on Lietzan Road 
Bldg E4415 
67(-1262
Service Station 
Bldg E4261 
676-2363
Barber Shop 
Bldg E4410 
676-2616
Watch Repair 
Bldg F14415 
676-1262
Automotive Repair 
Bldg E5137 
676-2363
Cafeteria 
Bldg E415 
676-1313
Laundry 
Bldg E4435 
676-1262
Medical and Dental Care
Volunteers must report to the Volunteer Administrative Office to pick
up their medical records before reporting to sick call or dental sick call.
Sick call is from 0800 to 1000 Monday through Friday at the US Army Dis-
pensary (Bldg £4110). 
Dental call is from 0800 to 0900 Monday through
Friday at the Dental Clinic (Bldg 
4110). 
Emergency treatment is availa-
ble at any time (ext 3236).
Chapel
The Chapel is located at the corner of Hoadley and Austin Roads where
chaplains of the various denominations are available for consultation by
appointment. 
Information concerning the times of all religious services
may be obtained by calling ext 4109.
Transportation
Location
Edgewood Arsenal is readily accessible by private automobile from US
Route 40 and Interstate Route 95, which connect Baltimore, Washington, D.C.,
Wilmington, and Philadelphia. State Route 24 runs east from US Route 40
into the town of Edgewood and to the installation. State Route 152 runs
east from US Route 40 direct to the installation.
Commercial Transportation
Air
The nearest air terminal is the Baltimore-Washington International
(BWI) 
Airport which is accessible from the Washington-Baltimore Parkway.
Information and reservations may be made locally by calling 7-2795 (Aberdeen
Proving Ground). 
Tickets may be picked up at Bldg E4603 at Deer Creek Loop
and Rodman Road on Aberdeen Proving Ground.
Bus
The Greyhound Bus Lines services are available in Edgewood at
2200 Pulaski Highway (Route 140), (Cross-corner from McDonald's). Telephone.
9-676-0500.
7and Rodman Road on Aberdeen Proving Ground.
Bus
The Greyhound Bus Lines services are available in Edgewood at
2200 Pulaski Highway (Route 140), (Cross-corner from McDonald's). Telephone.
9-676-0500.
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

863
Rail
Amtrak (M4troliner) service is available from the Pennsylvania
RR Station located between Charles and St. Paul Streets in Baltimore.
For information call: 
800-523-5700 (toll free).
Taxi
Taxi service is available from Edgevood (Route 40). 
Call 676-O5O,
or 676-0327.
Government Transportation
Taxi
A radio-dispatched taxi service is provided for official business,
from 0800 to 1200 hours and from 1230 to 1600 hours Monday through Friday
(ext 3063).
BuS
There are scheduled bus services throughout the day. 
Please
check bulletin board for the time and destination.
Bulletin
A Weekly Bulletin, issued on Thursday, contains both official and un-
official information about Edgewood Arsenal. 
It is posted on the bulletin
boards in the barracks and in the Administrative Office in Bldg E3100.
Banking Facilities
Comercial and Savings Bank 676-4242
Edgewood Road (near Main Gate)
Arsenal (PX Building) Open all day Friday
First National Bank 676-4321
Edgewood Shopping Center
705 Edgewood Road
Edgewood, MD
Telephone Calls 
-
Off-post telephone calls can be made from any public telephone at
various locations throughout the post including the dayroom at Bldg E3100.
Special Services Facilities
The Special Services Office is located in Bldg E405 at the corner of
Austin and Wise Roads (ext 3375). 
Activities under the jurisdiction of the
Special Services Office are listed below.
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---ial Services Office is located in Bldg E405 at the corner of
Austin and Wise Roads (ext 3375). 
Activities under the jurisdiction of the
Special Services Office are listed below.
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

864
Athletic
The Sports Office, located Bldg F.4210, Austin and Otto Roads, controls
the post gymnasium, seven softball fields, football and baseball fields, an
DI swiming pool, five tennis courts, and eight air-conditioned bowling
alleys located in the post Mmnaslu, 
Bldg 
O4210. 
The gym also basketball,
handball, and squash courts, ,nd table tennis and weight lifting facilities.
Equipment for hunting and fis';ing is available at Special Services Supply
located in the building. 
The number for the gymnasium is ext 3375; the
number for the bowling center is ext 2294.
Service Club
The Service Club is located in Bldg E4140, a completely air-conditioned,
modern building on Austin and Wise Roads. 
It contains a game room equipped
with pool and snooker tables, shuffleboard, and table tennis tables. 
There
is also a ballroom with a stage where dances and shows are held. 
A tele-
vision room with color television, a music room, a reading room, and a
snack bar are provided for off-duty relaxation. 
Two Service Club Directors
are on duty to plan entertainment and render numerous services for all en-
listed personnel. 
The hours of operation are Monday through Friday, 1100-
2230 hours; Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 1300-2230 hours. 
The club
serves the military 365 days a yepr (ext 2713).
Poet Library
The Post Library is located in Bldg E4405, Austin and Wise Roads,
across from the Stark Service Club (ext 3589). 
All military, military
dependents, and civilian personnel are invited to use Its many facilities.
Over 15,000 books in all subject fields, including reference and circulatir
collections, best sellers, mysteries, westerns, science fiction, and child-
ren's classics, may be found on the shelves. An excellent phonograph col-
lection includes 2,000 long-playing and stereo recordings of classical and
souiclassical music, plays, poetry, dramatic readings, and foreign language
courses. All recordings circulate or can be enjoyed in the library's com-
fortable listening room. Periodicals include over 75 magazines in both tech-
nical and popular fields, as well asnewspapers from major cities throughout
the country. 
Librarians are on hand to answer reference questions, give
readers' advisory service, and generally assist the patrons. 
Hours are
1200-2100 Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, the library is closed Thursday, Friday
and 1200-1800 Saturday and Sunday.
Movies
The post theater is located in Bldg E4810, located on Austin Road
across from the Chapel. 
Movie schedules are published in the Weekly Bulletin.
Museum
Aberdeen Proving Ground has an Ordance useus located at APO. 
It con-
tains many interesting and historical items of warfare used during WI and
WWII.
9les are published in the Weekly Bulletin.
Museum
Aberdeen Proving Ground has an Ordance useus located at APO. 
It con-
tains many interesting and historical items of warfare used during WI and
WWII.
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

865
Hours are: 
Tues-Fri 
1200 to 1700 hours
fat-Sun 
1000 to 1700 hours
Model Railroad
An extensive model railroad is maintained and operated in Bldg E4310
on EA and is open to the public 1830 to 2100 hours Tuesdays and Thursdays.
For information call 676-3636.
Noncommissioned Officers' Mess Facilities
The NCO Club is located on Junkin Road and is open to all enlisted
grades serving as Medical Volunteers (676-94+99).
Craft Shops
The Multi-Craft Shop, located in Bldg E4 1O, has a ceramic room,, model
airplane rocmp darkroom, and all types of hand and machine tools for wood-
working, metalworking and other crafts. 
Call ext 2153 for hours of opera-
tion.
Auto Hobby Shop
The Auto Hobby Shop is located in Bldg EJ4270. 
Call ext 3889 for hours
of operation.
Miscellaneous
1. 
Volunteers may secure valuables at the HHC safe.
2. 
All- privately owned firearms must be registered with the pass
and registration office ir Bldg E414 (ext 222) which is open only on
Wednesdays fror 0900 to 1500 hours. 
The weapons will be stored in the
.HC arms room.
3. 
Cameras are not allowed in the test area of Building E3100 or
in other designated areas.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---ednesdays fror 0900 to 1500 hours. 
The weapons will be stored in the
.HC arms room.
3. 
Cameras are not allowed in the test area of Building E3100 or
in other designated areas.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

866
THE TESTING PROGRAM
During most of your first week here you will go through "in-procesing"-
a series of physical, mental, and laboratory examinations that guide the
medical staff in assigning you to the tests for which you are best fitted.
You will receive a thorough physical examination during which the doctor
may talk to you about items iz-your medical history. 
You will have numer-
ous blood and urine tests to measure your red blood cells, white blood
cells,. liver function, and kidney function. 
You will have an electrocard-
iogram (heart test), a chest X-ray, and perhaps an electroencephalogram
-1bkin-wave test). 
Finally, you will be asked to complete AMC psycholog-
ical tests, including the Number Facility Test.
Occasionally during these examinations, an unexpected abnormality is
discovered.- In this case a physician may call you back for special exam-
inations or further tests, or you might be referred to Walter Reed Army
Hospital or another Army medical facility for further expert opinion.
The research program itself consists of a wide variety of tests.
These include tests of chemical agents that may affect a person either
mentally or physically (these are conducted in the ward or in a padded
roon area); tests of drugs under consideration as possible treatment for
chemical agents; tests of gas masks and other protective equipment;
studies on the skin penetration of agents under various temperature con-
ditions in a climatic chamber; studies of irritant (tear gas-like) com-
pounds both in the laboratory and in the field; studies of performance
measures, etc.
Each test proposal is carefully thought out by the investigator and
submitted as a research task plan to the Medical Board. 
This Board, con-
sisting of the Chief, Clinical Research Branch; Chief, Medical Research
Division; Deputy Director, Biomedical Laboratory; and Director, Biomedical
Laboratory; evaluates the plan in terms of need for the test, appropriate-
ness of the test, and, primarily, whether it is safe for a volunteer to
participate in the test. 
Before any volunteer is assigned to a test, all
of these physicians must signify their approval.
The schedule for tests and related duties is posted on the third floor
bulletin board in the barracks and should be consulted at 07 0 and 1700
hours daily. 
Volunteers leaving the barracks, the mess area, or the Clin-
ical Research area should sign out in the company register so they can be
contacted if an unexpected need arises.
Volunteers should report promptly to the test area at the time in-
dicated on the schedule. 
Tests which require an overnight stay in the
tet1 
area will be announced beforehand, and volunteers on such tests
should bring the necessary shaving and bathing equipment, cigarettes, etc.,
with them when they report.
All tests are conducted by a medical officer or a physician is in
charge of the medical aspects of the test. 
He should be consulted if there
Uequipment, cigarettes, etc.,
with them when they report.
All tests are conducted by a medical officer or a physician is in
charge of the medical aspects of the test. 
He should be consulted if there
U

--- PAGE BREAK ---

867
are axW questions before, during, or after the test. Volunteers are not
to leave the test area or use the telephone without the permission of the
pbysician in charge. 
No visitors are permitted during the test. 
If the
day roam in the Clinical Research Branch is not in use, volunteers con-
fined to the ward area while recovering from a test may use it with the
physician' s permission.
The MeWical Officers and other members of the professional staff
are interested in your welfare and you are free to consult with them at
any time. 
They will be happy to answer your questions and to assist you
in any way they can.
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---

868
Telephone Numbers
Emergency (On post)
Edgewood Arsenal
Clinical Research Branch
Administrative
Nurses Station
Volunteer Barracks
Headquarters Company
US Army Dijpensary and Dental Clinic
Post Taxi
Chapel
Taxi Service (Edgewood)
Bus Service (Greyhound Bus Lines)
Railways - Amtrak
Air Reservation and Information
Gym
Bowling Center
Special Services Activities
Post Library
Post Exchange
Barber Shop
Cafeteria (IX)
NCO Club
Post Service Station
draft Shop
Auto Hobby Shop
Model Railroad
Mess Hall
New Systems Laundry
Service Club
Four Seasons Shop (PX Garden Shop)
Clothing Sales Store
L and H Cleaners (Edgewood)
17
671-2011
3984
2336
326
3236
3063
4109
676-o5oo
676-0327
676-0500
800-523-5700
7-T795
3375
220
3375
3589
676-1262
676-2616
676-1313
6T6-94#99
6T6-9499
2153
3889
6T6-3636
3279
676-1551
2 13
676-1203
3224
676-3656
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

F-
0
ISMS 
.OO
EDGEWOOD ARSENAL
mOlta OTNU SO&ALLI2 
13t411G $MKSCIuIMS NOT
SO 
n Allt fOODV 04 COMSPONOIMG
;u 
At AlWaS

--- PAGE BREAK ---76-1551
2 13
676-1203
3224
676-3656
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

F-
0
ISMS 
.OO
EDGEWOOD ARSENAL
mOlta OTNU SO&ALLI2 
13t411G $MKSCIuIMS NOT
SO 
n Allt fOODV 04 COMSPONOIMG
;u 
At AlWaS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

870
Memo on DOD/FDA meetings
The only record of such a meeting involving Edgewood Arsenal
/ s attached. Many informal meetings have taken place between
The Army Investigational Drug Review Board staff and the Food
and Drug Administration on projects not conducted by Edgewood
Arsenal. /Colonel Barquist was not stationed in The Office of.
the Surgeon General in 1967 and it is believed that the
conversation'with Dr Jennings did not take place then.
j INN,.DIRK 
.D.
Brigadler Ceneral MC'
Commanding, USAMRDO
J
7JY

--- PAGE BREAK ---

871
5 NOVI:'.L1Ta 
1974'
1. 
1uri-c'. of .cu-inc 
Col. Barquist
2. 
Vidctdap ; 
lr. 
6"'cNantara
3. 
Comporit.ion of Antidote/ 
LTC Dcttor
Coii position of Dcacn Kit
4. 
Studies C,;.p'lvtcd 
Il. 
Van Sirm
a. 
Individua, 0o.v.oncntq Animal Stiuias
1). 
Individuals .
,::nn 
}u 
n:;u 
.
C. 
C:.'bined D'ru,-: Animal Studies
d. 
Co:rbined D)riuj- 
IM-tnan Studios
5 mlniUtcs
10 ILirutos
15 minutou
1 hour
• . r..:. :.*
6. 
Concpl)" for Dep]o:-en'"
7. 
Future Plans
8. 
Discu3nicm
Msr. 
Traub
LTC Dttor
Dr. Van Sim
COL Barquist
10 mninutes
5 minutes
10 minutes
30 miniften
LIES _MALEV

--- PAGE BREAK ---r
• . r..:. :.*
6. 
Concpl)" for Dep]o:-en'"
7. 
Future Plans
8. 
Discu3nicm
Msr. 
Traub
LTC Dttor
Dr. Van Sim
COL Barquist
10 mninutes
5 minutes
10 minutes
30 miniften
LIES _MALEV

--- PAGE BREAK ---

872
&IIIIJLG:T: 
flfura'&atio:.t 
uc.li 
viiL. 
u1:',':, ;...dI a.€ 
bL 
AOva; ~hbLr. " lOi.
Bureau of LW.';;S, Oftice Of S$ 
,,.1 iC LV-:1uaLic(,n 
Divis ivi of
:eu r 
.'actr~ s,,,yai I)rug I'roduc' r (11F-120) on the Antidotal
.14lie 
.1L,.. 
n 
u 
i L
Nerve AgL31t 
mi 5 NOv 7A at 5600 'I.,ler. Iake, Rockvilles 11) 
2".352
t * 
'Vrb'lIP Psc'sLn:
Barrec 
Scoville, M.D. 
COA, Rdt-und Fouatain, biomedical 1-.bor:tory
DAvid Stally, H.I). 
Dor.ard 
tcIN. ,.a, 
I',l 
Biomredlcnl L.'ito,.-
• , to.rt 
uv-\ 
.: 
Va 
, 
.i T 
i, M D,,..t-otLc
trr; .r ;r', 
.L-hik 
C01, Itic!; rd !'.1rtjui ,.., 
US 111Rl0
Nu Ve-ra Glocklin, PMU, 
LTG Ciwrles )LCLor, 
UIES IRDC
CPT Gerold :annarka# USAM1RDC
2. 
COL, 1;OL,.;i c : 
i 
;:.,'ucs 
Lh' 
.
,i|.t!,. (1,' 
A ) -1,d exs'1L 
i; 
"
prudice an;' .;idore 
,,id dcconlu..M natinto, 
lor 
r.hc"icta 
nerve 
.
and to solicit FDA's co::ents and suetesto:s.. 
Copies of the HMcorandwu
of Undcri,'tuding bcs.:ecn thc ood and Drug 
d 
Mi, nistracion and the UeparLmet
of I)ecensc Co;cvrnin; Ji.TvCs5ihaLionaL Usc of Drugs by L:U Departm,,nt of
l)efcs. o (Ia'A-sOU- 
75-:) 
were provided to thr!.c IpreenL (Incl W).
.
(.%)1. k' .utai n p r%,.*.ted lom, 
5
:u 
i',,d 
kfl.in. 
Sl'| I O 
Il t 
i 
le devevl 
,i,li. Il 
I fil.
sanidoLc alst- dcc4,Lit;im'iOLit. 
This I%r:CS1s.3 Lvn war. /oilowtd by a
vid 
v- 
'ar t'u waiii" III.0 
(4. 
C,... : 
* '1**VVQi:~ 
.' 
3 
. ~ 
d 
.r.t 
AI' 
iIste ncv
!~r 
t( ' 
ol I., 
t, Vt.1h ' 1.% p4,.t 
o-.: (r, .$!I,:,, :, I I.,I .,!Il1l Il,(l'.ny :11'd 0 lit- 
o+
deorL,.::£1 . ior', X:id 
t'nvra.ty

--- PAGE BREAK ---i:~ 
.' 
3 
. ~ 
d 
.r.t 
AI' 
iIste ncv
!~r 
t( ' 
ol I., 
t, Vt.1h ' 1.% p4,.t 
o-.: (r, .$!I,:,, :, I I.,I .,!Il1l Il,(l'.ny :11'd 0 lit- 
o+
deorL,.::£1 . ior', X:id 
t'nvra.ty

--- PAGE BREAK ---

873
4. 
LTC I'.%tr presun'.t LIO 
minLLd.,Lc 
am; 
t6i. ,t*..:,Lia 
Lion kit to the
group in ord:-r that tlicy fLeat se the labeltig a.nd examio tho con-
risiners'l 
midt cv.ntnts (Iic| 
3). 
Kl.fects vfl nr;ve al[tunt J liLOXlcatiul
were f.u:,., ejl ,.d (Inci 4) as well a-; Lila clic..ic.'t 
ctoL-iinc:d 
is the
On tldote 
( 
ic 
)
S. Dr. St:I I't'SCrLed 1 zu-mt.-ry of infor.-.-tor 1prerciy 
available from
miltmal and lvmvin testing of the antidote perf.isied at Biomdical Labors-
tory. 
I)isct.,;!;Lon cntiuccd conceniisisj; I.M1orator) mid chiaicil Cxperivts(,
:.i-.'Lr 
c ;:',i,:tto;s 
L.avr. !c d &*c.-;, I',,,.;nial .and Y.j.W:.1avian, livera.urc.
6. 
Dr. 
so 
show" 
Lite plans [or future. IustLi,, 
of the antLidoL
and any v.riaL|.on of the antidote in various r;:mcief, and against chal-
... 
I 
.
.
1. 
r. Tr'iub i: 
';vat'd fI{fOr JLC',fII 0n s0I'CCs and MnllAUACLure of
,..,Lcrial .;, fr iI I in 
i.'- 
-. o, 
ka 
.
, ,.| 
l 
silLi f-. 
t v Wll' 
G-6' 4 
t 
S t bi lity
And oporatio.al ttSLS to i'hich Lhe at-ido.Lc as;d its injcctor would be
subject ed.
8. 
LTC Dettor stated the presunt medical dccitse against norvo agents
and the prpOJICd d-!p10oy'.cn 
or f 
u antid.Le .i.t..nJoctos a 
on 
d------A
cotn-,i.m;,i.L.-i kit to ca.h sc(H!ier, repIlsci" 
Lhe three Atropcis be 
is
I:. 
t d .t:. Ip ' .
1.
.Ot, 
i'...l .1 {a ;.r. reiLeraj.cd d..t otir dcPl)'y:ao,:il is aoL Lte same c i'l.eot
• 
, l;.ci ;, 
.
: 
-
.o til 
Me 
* 
:.; t !.a! r er :i.t .
hSo)e iS that It
H. 
-v 
to ho.. 
.. 
: -
I 
.). 
-,p 
n10C
i'b)eCtiUIS 
LZIOou. 
cpo.;31 
,an be willi,i 
U,. rvviet, our tcstin, dia

--- PAGE BREAK ---.
: 
-
.o til 
Me 
* 
:.; t !.a! r er :i.t .
hSo)e iS that It
H. 
-v 
to ho.. 
.. 
: -
I 
.). 
-,p 
n10C
i'b)eCtiUIS 
LZIOou. 
cpo.;31 
,an be willi,i 
U,. rvviet, our tcstin, dia

--- PAGE BREAK ---

874
1.0. 
841.1t: L,....-MAL~s a.:d ,lucs;Lio;.., I, * 
ftir:le i;y '.ice M,%-Lb;.on ol Hou:r.,-
', 
aacol ,::i c ,1 tDrug I'roducts mcrilet's:
4. 
I)1 d;'t 
L i, tuic LiC.,, oL th.' alL| dril, riake .1 rait "dopey" act;Lng?
Is. 
Ik,.:.. Survival Tecchiol'o.v have the ca.'pabLLLy to £ll 
the autu-
injecctorr.?
C. 
.. tJd )ou ue 
tleis :f:ori. 
r" prophlAhInxs?
d. 
How wou)d you hv:,.dlc cecontarin'iston ,,f the face?
v. 
Oin dse may 
.t. nbed long Lerin Loxicol(,. 
dalt,.
.
;vhy (1u you ner-d so 
;y 
a:uillr. 
in all 
y.'r 
t'.icolory 
v ,rP:?
g. . Vc vtould liko Lu ruv;.w d.,La curro,;fly. avalablc on the. c(ficacy
!.Id value Of 
h 
propor-ed dose.
It ,.., 6o -S ubol. vT L;s, 
,,, 
,, 
,, 
; 
; "'i " ,... 
.
,,. 
,, .,,.,, 
,, ,
f 
I.*, yQu thnk Lh c 
' 
nrVI A.ynt inLxir:;,t d .nolditr will be able
J. 
h .
ha pernb to Lha p!hoa:.r:clogically effective g;roups in the
an.Ldo,.c. an .M[iui occurs?
k. 
Su,.SoeL dir:,..t contICL Iet-ween lts 
Libioratory ani our pcepie
Lo talk over various questionable areas encotintered.
I. 
..'oldn't 
a c.:%,bility to aritIciily 
veatilace a Caualty be
ta. 
,Th'|;st 
i .,,'.i 
t- 
a'. 
1t f Il 
r1 a.. .1!;,t 
for 
It e oLhafol I n LIc
P. 
L 
i 
l 
point:
Juhat Puvii, (443-3671).
!, 
: 
-
.
.:' 
r 
' 
:.* 
.:)j 
:~ ."" 
" -. 
"".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V. Central Intelligence Agency Directives wad Pertinent Reports.
70,024 0 - " - "

--- PAGE BREAK ---

)

--- PAGE BREAK ---1).
!, 
: 
-
.
.:' 
r 
' 
:.* 
.:)j 
:~ ."" 
" -. 
"".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V. Central Intelligence Agency Directives wad Pertinent Reports.
70,024 0 - " - "

--- PAGE BREAK ---

)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

877
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHIMMMun,DC. 
2040
Honorable Edward M. Kennedy
United States Senate
Washington, DC 
20510
Dear Senator Kennedy:
I am writing in response to your Freedom of Information Act request
concerning the following documents:
Memorandum for the Director, Central Intelligence.
from J. S. Earman. Inspector General, dated 26 July
1963. on Report of Inspection of MKULTRA, and
attached Report of Inspection of MKULTRA/TSD.
You may recall that when our Deputy Director for Science and Technology,
Mr. Carl Duckett, testified before your Subcommittee with respect to this
document, he expressed reservations about its release but indicated that
it was the desire of.the Director that we continue our review of the documents
to determine if any information therein could be released. These documents
have been reviewed and copies of segregable portions thereof are enclosed
herewith. Portions have been deleted in accordance with exemptions (b) (1).
(b)(3). and (b)(5) of the Freedom of Information Act as noted below.
Deletions 1, 2, 3. 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 15, 16. 17, 21. 22. 23. 24.
26, 28. 32, 33, 34, 35, and 36 are not provided inasmuch as the information
therein is in fact properly classified under criteria set forth in Executive
Order 11652 and is exempt from automatic declassification under 5(B)(2) of
the same order and thus is exempt under (b) (1) of the Freedom of Information
Act. Additionally, information contained in these deletions pertains to
intelligence sources and methods which the Director of Central Intelligence
has the responsibility to protect from unauthorized disclosure per section
1b)2(d)(3) of the National Security Act of 1947 and thus is exempt under (b)(3),
of the Freedom of Information Act.
Deletions 18, 19, 20. 27, 29, and 31 are not provided inasmuch as
the information therein pertains to the organization, functions, names and
official titles of Agency personnel which the Director of Central Intelligence
(0)7, 29, and 31 are not provided inasmuch as
the information therein pertains to the organization, functions, names and
official titles of Agency personnel which the Director of Central Intelligence
(0)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

878
has the responsibility to protect from unauthorized disclosure pursuant
to section 6 of the CIA Act of 1949 and thus is also exempt under (b)(3) of
the Freedom of Information Act.
Deletions 4, 6, 14. 2S, 30. 37, and 36 are not provided inasmuch as
the material therein is in the nature of intra-agency communications consisting
of advice, recommendations, opinions, saxd other material reflecting the
deliberative process and thus is exempt pursuant to (b)(S) of the Freedom
of Information Act.
Dr. Donald F. Chamberlain. Inspector General. made the determinations
set forth above.
As specified in the Freedom of Information Act, I am advising you of
your right to appeal, within 30 days. by addressing your appeal to the
CIA Informatir, Review Committee. via the undersigned.
Sincerely.
Gene F. Wilson
Information and Privacy Coordinator
Enclosures

--- PAGE BREAK ---al, within 30 days. by addressing your appeal to the
CIA Informatir, Review Committee. via the undersigned.
Sincerely.
Gene F. Wilson
Information and Privacy Coordinator
Enclosures

--- PAGE BREAK ---

879
Z6 July 1963
MEIMORADUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence
8UBJ=CT 
: Report of Inspection of MKULTRA
1. In connection with our survey of Technical Services
Division, DD/P, it was deemed advisable to prepare the report
of the MKULTRA program in one copy only, in view of its
umnual sensitivity.
2. This report is forwarded herewith.
3. 
The MKULTRA activity is concerned with the research
and development of chemical, biological, and radiological
materials capable of employment in clandestine operations to
control human behavior. The end products of such research
are subject to very strict controls including a requirement
for the personal approval of the Deputy Director/Plans for any
operational use made of these end products.
4. The cryptonym MKULTRA encompasses the R&D
phae and a second cryptonym MKDELTA denotes the DD/P
system for control of the operational employment of such materials.
5. 
M KULTRA was authorized by the then Director of
Central Intelligence, Mr. Allen W. Dulles, in 1953. 
The TSD
was assigned responsibility thereby to employ a portion of its
R&D budget 
.... 
.... 
for research in behavioral
materials 
... 3 .... 
under purely internal and com-
partmented controls, (further details are provided in paragraph 3
of the attached report). Normal procedures for project approval,
funding, and accounting were waived. However, special arrange-
inents for audit of expenditures have been evolved in subsequent
years.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ort). Normal procedures for project approval,
funding, and accounting were waived. However, special arrange-
inents for audit of expenditures have been evolved in subsequent
years.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

880
6. The scope of MKULTRA is comprehensive and
ranges from the search for and procurement of botanical and
chemical substances, through programs for their analysis
in scientific laboratories, to progressive testing for effect
on animals and human beings. The tasting on individuals
begins under laboratory conduits employing every safeguard'
and progresses gradually to more and more realistic opera-
tional simulatons. The program requires and obtains the
services of a number of highly specialized authorities in many
fields of the natural sciences.
7. The concepts involved In manila 
hman 
".
behavior are found by many people both within and outside the
Agency to be distasteful and unethical. There is considerable
evidence that opposition intelligence services are active and
highly proficient in this field. The experience of TSD to date:
indicates that both the research and the employment of the
materials are expensive and often unpredictable in results.
Nevertheless, there have been major accomplishments both "
in research and operational employment.
8.
A. 
.
a.4.* o
9., Attached for the signature of the Deputy Director of
Central .'.,telligence is a memorandum transmitting the report
to the Deputy Director/Plans requesting a summary of action
taken or comments on the recommendations contained therein.
n 
e
Inspector General
Attachments - as stated

--- PAGE BREAK ---

881
14 AUG 1963
MzMoRANDUM FOR Deputy Director/Pzins
SUBJECT 
-Report 
of Inspection of UKULTRA
oxwarded herewith is the Inspector General's report
of the inspection of the MKULTRA program. Please furnish
me within 30 days a sumnmary of action taken or comments
on the recommendations contained thereine-
Marshall S. Carter
• 
'Lieutenant General, USA
Deputy Director
Attachment - as statedPlease furnish
me within 30 days a sumnmary of action taken or comments
on the recommendations contained thereine-
Marshall S. Carter
• 
'Lieutenant General, USA
Deputy Director
Attachment - as stated

--- PAGE BREAK ---

882
RIEPURT OF INSPECTION OF MKULTRAJTSD
I. Introduction
1. Technical Services Division (TSD)s (then Technical Support
Staff), received author-isation from the then Director of Central
Intelligence, Mr. Alen W. Dulles, on 3 Ap#1"1953 to develop and
maintain continuing operational capabilities in the fields of a)
*and
"b) chemical and biological materials capable of producing human
• behavioral aiid physiological changes, (see Tab A). The cryptonym
?AKULTRA wa* assigned to encompass TSD's research. development
.and equipment activities In these two fields. The cryptonym MKDELTA
had alreac$, been assigned by DD/P Notice No. 220-1 on 20 October
.195Z (since revised - see Tab B). as the indicator covering DD/P policy
"and procedure for the use.of biochemicals in clandestine operations.
2. 
The MKULTRA charter provides only a brief presentation
of the rationale of the authorized activities. 
The sensitive asects
of the program as it has evolved over the ensuing ten years tre the
following:
a. 
searchh in the manipulation of human behavior is
considered by many authorities in medicine and related fields

--- PAGE BREAK ---m as it has evolved over the ensuing ten years tre the
following:
a. 
searchh in the manipulation of human behavior is
considered by many authorities in medicine and related fields

--- PAGE BREAK ---

883
to be professionally unethical, therefore the reputations
of professional participants in the MKULTRA program are
on occasion in jeopardy.
: 
b.
c. A final phase of the testing of MKULTRA products
places the rights and interest* of U. S. citizens in jeopardy.,
* 
d. Public disclosure of some aspects of MKULTRA•
activity could induce serious adverse reaction in U. S.
public opinion, as well as stimulate offensive and defensive
action in this field on the part of foreign intelligence services.
3. 
In recognition of the sensitivity of MKULTRA, TSD was
authorized exclusive control of the administration, records, and
financial accounting of the program. Simple statements of certificatjon
were all that were required of TSD to obtain advances of funds from
.finance Division. The DCI's memorandum also exempted MKULTRA
from audit, but this provision was modified to permit limited audit
before the end of the first year. Funding of MKULTRA was eventually
stabilized at 
o. 
7.... 
f TSD's annual research and development budget.
It has fallen in the neighborhood of .... 8.... 
er year over the ten-year
-history of the program. 
.......
9.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

884
4.
.. .. .. 10 ........
5. The inspection of MKULTRA projects in biochemical controls
of human behavior raised questions in the following area of policy and
management which are dealt with in the balance of this report:

--- PAGE BREAK ---on of MKULTRA projects in biochemical controls
of human behavior raised questions in the following area of policy and
management which are dealt with in the balance of this report:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

886
a. 
Scope of the MKULTRA charter:
(1) Over the ten-year life of the program many
additional avenues to the control of human behavior
have been designated by the TSD management as
appropriate to investigation under the MKULTRA charter,
including radiation, electro-shock, various fields of
psychology, psychiatry, sociology, and anthropology,
graphology, harrassment substances, and paramilitary.
devices and materials.
(2) Various projects do not appear to have been
sufficiently sensitive to warrant waiver of normal Agency
procedures for authorization and control.
.(3) Other secure channels for establishment and
funding of Agency-sterile activities have been evolved
over the past ten years by Deputy Director/Support (DD/S)
and in some cases could reasonably be employed by TSD
in lieu of MKULTRA procedures.
In view of these developments there is substantial agreement
among all parties concerned that redefinition of the scope of
MKULTRA is now appropriate.
b/ MKULTRA management policies:
(1) The original charter documents specified that
TSD maintain exacting control of MKULTRA activities.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n of the scope of
MKULTRA is now appropriate.
b/ MKULTRA management policies:
(1) The original charter documents specified that
TSD maintain exacting control of MKULTRA activities.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

888
In so doing, however. TSD has pursued & philosophy
* of minimum documentation in keeping with the high
sensitivity of some of the projects.. Some files were
found to present a reasonably complete record, including
most sensitive matters, while others with parallel
objectives contained little or no data at all. The lack
of consistent records precluded use of routine inspection
procedures and raised a variety of questions concerning
management and fiscal controls.
(2) Lack of records essential to inspection of
MKULTRA moved to the forefront among issues as the
present survey proceeded. 
Under normal, circumstances
the inspectors wow'd have examined an inventory of dis-.
crediting, disabling, and lethal substances perfected'or"
procured from whatever sources. The records on-
representative items would have been reviewed according
to such standard criteria as:
(a) How were the substance and its
properties. identified?
(b) What researcher was selected to
perform the research, and why?
(c) When was the work begun, where,;
involving what costs, at what rate
of progress, based on what tests?

--- PAGE BREAK ---tified?
(b) What researcher was selected to
perform the research, and why?
(c) When was the work begun, where,;
involving what costs, at what rate
of progress, based on what tests?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

887
(d) What are the present capabilities
and limitations of the substance
for clandesinte operations?
(e) What further research is being
conducted on this and related sub-
stances and how does this reflect
existing TSD capabilities, opera-
tional requirements and budget factors?
(3) MKULTRA records afforded no such approach
to inspection-.-- There are just two individuals in TSD who
have full substantive knowledge of the program and *most
of that knowledge is unrecorded. Both are highly skilled,
highly motivated, professionally competent individuals.
Part of their competence lies in their command of intel-
ligence tradecraft. In protecting the sensitive nature of
the American intelligence capability to manipulate human
behavior, they apply "need to know" doctrine to their
professional associates and to their clerical assistants to
a maximum degree. Confidence in their competence and
discretion has been a vital feature of the management of
MKULTRA.
c. Advanced testing of MKULTRA materials:
It is the firm doctrine in TSD that testing of materials
-under accepted scientific procedures fails to disclose the
full pattern of reactions and attributions that may occur
-6-

--- PAGE BREAK ---:
It is the firm doctrine in TSD that testing of materials
-under accepted scientific procedures fails to disclose the
full pattern of reactions and attributions that may occur
-6-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

888
in operational situations. TSD initiated a program for
covert testigng oaf 
@erls on unwittingU. S. citizens
in 1955. The present report reviews the rationale and
........ ..
risks attending this activity and recommends termination
of such testing In the United States cf. paragraphs 10-18
below.
U. Modus Operandi
6. The research and development of materials capable of producing"
behavioral or physiological change in humans is now performed within
a highly elaborated and stabilized MKULTRA structure. 
The search
for new materials; e.g.. psilocybin from Mexican mushrooms, or a
fungi occurring in agricultural crops, is conducted through standing
arrangements with specialists in universities, pharmaceutical houses,
hospitals, state and federal institutions, and private research organi-
sations who are authorities in the given field of investigation in their
own right.
........ ........... 
II .....

--- PAGE BREAK ---als, state and federal institutions, and private research organi-
sations who are authorities in the given field of investigation in their
own right.
........ ........... 
II .....

--- PAGE BREAK ---

889 
,. Key individuals
must qualify for top secret clearance and are made witting of Agency
sponsorship.
.. 
12 .......
His services typically include systematic search of the scientific
literature. procurement of materials, their propagation, and the appli-
cation of test dosages to animals and under some circumstances to
volunteer hL nan subjects. No quarrel ip found with the rkionale of.
this program to the extent that it fits the original MKULTRA charter.
However, for inspection purposes, there were lacking ;record*, year
-by year, of the progress of each project and the recorded judgments
of the project monitors on operational benefits vis-a-vis costs;
7.
........
13......
he original charte: of MKULTIRA
assumed that the sensitivity of activities would be sufficient to justify
both a) special protection for the researcher; and b) compartmentation
of MKULTRA knowledge within the Agency. On this basis the inherent
safeguards of DD/S procedures were waived, the DD/S was not consulted
in the design of the MKULTRA rra nagement system, and established Agency
-8-

--- PAGE BREAK ---gency. On this basis the inherent
safeguards of DD/S procedures were waived, the DD/S was not consulted
in the design of the MKULTRA rra nagement system, and established Agency
-8-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

890
audit procedures were waived. In the subsequent administration of
the program , however. TSD has found it feasible to contract for some
of the research on MKULTRA ojectives in accordace with prescribed
DD/S procedures. 
The DD/8; In turn* has evolved various secure
systems for the funding of sensitive activities. It appears feasible
and appropriate, therefore, to propose that the DD/S be consulted
during the re-charte rIg 
of UiULTRA in the design of an administrative
system that does justice to his responsibilities as well as to'the manage.
ment and security requirements of TSD. The Inspector General
accordingly has recommended
..........
14 .......
8. The next phase of the MKULTRA program involvs physicians,.
toxicologists, and other specialists in mental, narcotics, and general
hospitals and in prisons, who are provided the products and findings of
the basic research projects and proceed with intensive testing on human
subjects. These specialists are also recipients for testing purposes of
the flow of new products from pharmaceutical laboratories. Material;
and procedures with intelligence potential may be identified through this
-9-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ecipients for testing purposes of
the flow of new products from pharmaceutical laboratories. Material;
and procedures with intelligence potential may be identified through this
-9-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

891
relationship. The testing programs are conducted under accepted
scientific procedures including the use of control populations, the
employment of placebos, and the detailed observation, measurement,
recording, analysis, and publication of findings. 
Where health permits.
test subjects are voluntary participants in the program.
9. A current development in the testing of new products is the
tightening of controls over dosages and procedures by the U. S. Food
and Drug Administration. Since MAKULTRA files contained no docu-
mentation on this subject, it was not possible to appraise the signifi-
cance of this development for MKULTRA objectives. 
However.
interviews with the TSD officers concerned indicated that the new rules
are affecting procedures and causing controversy in research hospitals
and pharmaceutical house. 
The TSD officers have close relationships
with key individuals in many of the leading U. S. pharmaceutical houses
and count on their continued close cooperation in obtaining materials
and services deemed vital to U. S. intelligence.
10. 
The final phase of testing of MKULTRA materials involves
their application to unwitting subjects in normal life setting. 
It was
noted earlier that the capabilities of MKULTRA substances to produce
disabling 3r discrediting effects or to increase the effectiveness of
interrogation of hostile subjects cannot be established so)ely through
testing on ,olunteer populations. 
Reaction and attribution patterns are
- 10 -
70-026 0 - 76 - S

--- PAGE BREAK ---tiveness of
interrogation of hostile subjects cannot be established so)ely through
testing on ,olunteer populations. 
Reaction and attribution patterns are
- 10 -
70-026 0 - 76 - S

--- PAGE BREAK ---

892
clearly affected when the testing is conducted in an atmosphere of
confidence under skilled medical supervision.
11. 
TSD, therefore, entered into an informal arrangement
with certain rpleared and witting individuals in the Bureau of Narcotics
in 1955 which provided for the release of MKULTRA materials for
such testing as those mil ividuals deemed desirable and feasible. 
The.
initial arrangement obtained the services of a senior representative
of the Bureau and one of his assistants on the West Coast. A parallel
arrangement was established on the East Coast in 1961. 
The Director-
of the Bureau has been briefed on the activity, but the Deputy Chief,
TSD, who has guided MKULTRA from its inception, is of the opinion
that the former would disclaim all knowledge and responsibility in
the event of compromise. 
The MIKULTRA program director has, in
fac.t, provided close supervision of the testing program from the beginning
and makes periodic visits to the sites. The sum of ... 16.. .has been
provided annually to each of the two projects to cover cost of cultivation
of targets and of maintenance of a safehouse in each area for the
observation of effects of substances on selected test individuals.
IZ. 
The particular advantage of these arrangements with the
Bureau of Narcotics officials has been that test subjects could be sought
and cultivated within the setting of narcotics control. Some subjects
-
11 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---f these arrangements with the
Bureau of Narcotics officials has been that test subjects could be sought
and cultivated within the setting of narcotics control. Some subjects
-
11 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

893
have been informers or members of suspect criminal elements from
whom the Bureau has obtained results of operational value through the
tests. On the other hand, the effectiveness of the substances on
individuals at all social levels, high and low, siative American and
foreign, is of great significance and testing has been performed on a
variety of individuals within these categories.
13. A significant limitation on the effectiveness of such testing
is the infeasibility of performing scientific observation of results.
The Bureau agents are not qualified scientific observers. 
Their
subjects are seldom accessible beyond the first hours of the test. The
testing may be useful in perfecting delivery techniques, and in identifying
surface characteristics of onset, reaction, attrl-bution, and side-effect.
In a number of instances, however, the test subject has become ill for
hours or days, including hospitalization in at least one case, and the
agent could only follow-up by guarded inquiry after the test subject's
return to normal life. Possible sickness and attendant economic loss
are inherent contingent effects of the testing.
14. 
The NvKULTRA program officer stated that the objectives of
covert testing concern the field of toxicology rather than medicine;
further, that the program is not intended to harm test individuals, and
that the medical consultation and assistance is obtained when appropriate
through separate M.KULTRA arrangemehts. 
The risk of compromise'of
- 17 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed to harm test individuals, and
that the medical consultation and assistance is obtained when appropriate
through separate M.KULTRA arrangemehts. 
The risk of compromise'of
- 17 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

894
the program through correct diagnosis of an fllness by an unwitting
medical specialist is regularly considered and is stated to be a
governing factor in the decision to conduct the given test. The
Bureau officials also maintain close working relations with local
police authorities which could be utilized to protect the activity in
critical situations.
15. There have been several discussions in the public press in
recent months on the use of certain MI(ULTRA:-type drugs to Inauence
human behavior. Broadly speaking, these have argued that research
knowledge of possible adver@ effects of such substances on human
beings is inadequate, that some applications havQ done serious harm,
and that professional researchers in medicine and psychiatry are. split
on the ethics of'performing such research. Increasing public atten-tion
to this subject is to be expected.
16. The final step in the research and development sequence is
the delivery of MKULTRA materials into the MKDELTA control system
governing their employment in clandestine operations. 
The subject is
discussed further in the next section; however, it is appropriate here
to note that the employment of MKDELTA materials remains an art
rather than a scientific procedure. A significant number of variables
--- 4a the-target individual, including age, sex, weight, general health,
social status, and personality structure, may account for widely varying
and unpredictable reactions to a given drug in a given dosage.

--- PAGE BREAK ---including age, sex, weight, general health,
social status, and personality structure, may account for widely varying
and unpredictable reactions to a given drug in a given dosage.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

895
17. 
The final stage of covert testing of materials on unwitting
subjects is clearly the most sensitive aspect of MKULTRA. 
No
effective covw story appears to be available. 
TSD officials state
that responsibility for -covert testing is transferred to the Bureau of
Narcotics. Yet they also predict that the Chief of the Bureau would
disclaim an knowledge of the activity. Present practice is to maintain
no records of the planning and approval of test programs. The prin-
cipal responsibility for the propriety of such testing rests with'the..
MI(ULTRA program director and the Deputy Chief of TSD. The 
"
* handling of test subjects In the last analysis rests with the Narcotics
.agent working alone. Suppression of knowledge of critical results from
the top' 
MD and CIA management is an inherent risk in these operations.
S 
18. Final phase testing of MKULTRA substances or devices on
unwitting oubjects is recognized to be an activity of genuine importance
in the development of some but not all MKULTRA products. 
Termination
of such testing would have some, but an essentially indeterminate, effect
on the development of operational capability in this field. Of more
c ritical significance, however, is the risk of serious damage to the
Agency in the event of compromise of the true nature of this activity.
As now performed under Bureau of Narcotics auspices, non-Agency
personnel are necessarily fully wittin** of the true nature and signficAnc-..
of their assignments, and of the sponsorship of CIA. Compromise of
- 14 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---rcotics auspices, non-Agency
personnel are necessarily fully wittin** of the true nature and signficAnc-..
of their assignments, and of the sponsorship of CIA. Compromise of
- 14 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

896
third. information intentionally oru ,ittingly by those individuals at some
time in the future is a hazard that cannot be ruled out. A test subject
may on some occasion in the future correctly attribute the cause of his
re 
tion and secure independent professional medical assistance in
Identifying the exact nature of the substance employed, and by whom.
Anextreme reaction to a test substance could lead to a Bureau request
for-cooperation from local authorities in suppressing information of the
situationn. This would in turn broaden the circle of ndividuals who
possessed at least circumstantial evidence of the nature of the activity.
Weighing possible benefits of such testing against the risks of compromise
.and of resulting damage lo CIA has led the Inspector General to recommend
termination of this phase of the MKULTRA program. Existing checks
and balances on the working level management of such testing do not
afford the senior command of CIA adequate protection against the high
risks involved.
"i* 
19.
.......... 
17 ..........
Finally, the operational use of the substances clearly
serves the toasting function in view of the lack of predictability of human
reactions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed.
"i* 
19.
.......... 
17 ..........
Finally, the operational use of the substances clearly
serves the toasting function in view of the lack of predictability of human
reactions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

897
1ll. Current estimate of the M.KULTRA/MKDELTA capability
ZO.
.......... 18 .........
released a study (hereafter referred to as the 
. .19.. 
,'-export)
on ZI April 1960. covering his six-month Investigation of "Scientific
and Technical Prblems in Covert Action Opwations". Appendix B
of the report was entitled, "The Applicability of Special 'Chemicals and
Biological to Clandestine Operations". The Inspectors found this
Appendix to be a carefully prepared and very useful treatment of the
subject. The remaining paragraphs draw on the ... 20... report, take
account of developments since that date, and discuss management
and funding aspects of MKUITBIA.
Z1. 
The author opened his discussion with the question of what
the operational returns had been from an eight-year program involving
an investment of approximately ..... 21..... 
He observed that the
Clandestine Services had encouraged TSD on various occasions to
develop and maintain the operational capability in special drugs and
chemicals but that TSD had received little or no guidance in directing
the work and that the Clandestine Services had up to that time shown
little inclination to use the end products operationally.
.. ......... 22 ..........
- 16 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---idance in directing
the work and that the Clandestine Services had up to that time shown
little inclination to use the end products operationally.
.. ......... 22 ..........
- 16 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

898
.use of lethal substances was portede.
S22. 
The factors accounting for the law rate of use of thcs capa,-
bility were considered to be the following:.
a. the technical shortcomings of the drug&
b. 
the problem of testing in realistic pilot operations
"e 
" 
limitations on the dissemination of pertinent
Information to operations officers
7 d. organizational and.administrative restrictions on
operations
_ e. pgative attitudes toward the use of 14KDELTA materials
* 
f. problems in the training of case officers in this field -
g. the risk of stimulating increased use of MKDELTA
.
.
materials by opposition intelligence services
23. Technical shortcomings of the drugs:
As of 1960 no effective knouk~ut pill. tvuth serum, aphro-
disiac. ox recruitment pill was known to exist. MKDELTA was
described as inherently a high-risk, low-yield field of operations.
.......... 
23 ..........

--- PAGE BREAK ---

899
2... 
23 .........
.......... 24 ..........
-
.......... 25 ..........
25. Limitations on the dissemination of pertinent information to
case officers; organizational and administrative restrictions on
operations:
The present-day situation concerning both of these problem
areas is improved over 1960. 
TSD now regularly briefs a variety
- 18 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---al and administrative restrictions on
operations:
The present-day situation concerning both of these problem
areas is improved over 1960. 
TSD now regularly briefs a variety
- 18 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

900
of senior officers on its MKDELTA capability. Approval of
the use of MKDELTA materials is now accomplished within
the chain of command of'the DD/P. The DD/P may consult,
for example, with the Chief. Medical Staff, concerning
medical risks involved in MADELTA operations, but the
latter surely would not expect to exercise final authority for
the disapproval of operations.
26.
........ :.26 ..........
V7. Negative attitudes toward the use of MKDELTA materials;
problems in the training of case officers in this field:
The 1960 ... 27... report observed that some case officers
have basic moral objections to the concept of MKDELTA and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

901
therefore refuse to use the materials. 
Some senior officers
were reported to believe that the proper employment of the
capability required more sophistication than most case
officers possessed and that there would be a tendency toward
over-reliance on and misuse of drugs in lieu of perfecting
classic esjpionage techniques. Finally, it was suggested that'
MKDELTA. controls wore so restrictive as to have generated
a general defeatism among case officers concerning the chances
of getting approval for use of materials in routine rather than
extreme situations. These matters will be reviewed in future
field Inspections of DD/P area divisions.
.......... 28 ..........
28. The risk of stimulating increased use of MKDELTA materials
by opposition intelligence services:
The ... 29... -report stated that opposition intelligence
services are active in the MKDELTA field and recommended
that the CI Staff of the DD/P conduct a systematic study of the
evidence. 
This recommendation has not been implemented.
It is a subject of increasing significance as new materials and
techniques become available.

--- PAGE BREAK ---duct a systematic study of the
evidence. 
This recommendation has not been implemented.
It is a subject of increasing significance as new materials and
techniques become available.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

902
It is recommended that:
.. ....
30...
Z9. In summary. present evidence concerning the operational
value of the MKDELTA capability would appear to confirm the principal
judgments of the 1960 .. .31... reportt. There is an extremely low rate
of operational use of the controlled materials.
.......... 
32 .........
IV. Management of MKULTRA
30. 
TSD has initiated .. projects relating t,) the control of human
behavior; i.e., 
....... 34 ....... 
.
during the ten
years of operation of the MKULTRA program.
.......... 
35 ..........
31. 
Active projects may be grouped under the following arbitrary
- 21 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---....... 34 ....... 
.
during the ten
years of operation of the MKULTRA program.
.......... 
35 ..........
31. 
Active projects may be grouped under the following arbitrary
- 21 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

903
headings. 
Many projects involve activity in two or more of the areas
listed.
a. 
basic research in materials and processes
b. procurement of research materials
c. testing of substances on animals and human beings
d. development of delivery techniques
e. projects in offensive/defensive B]W, CW. and radiation
f. miscellaneous projects;
36.
3Z. The current management of ISD has initiated a policy of
directing the activities of MKULTRA and of the Behavioral Activities
Branch towards operations and away from long-range research. Prior
to this change in policy which occurred in 1962, MKULTRA sponsored
a large number of projects in the fields of applied psychology, sociology,
anthropology, and graphology. The present management is unlikely to
return to these fields of research under the MKULTRA charter. The
inspectors concluded that many of these projects were of insufficient
sensitivity to justify waiver of normal Agency control procedures. 
It
is recommended
........ 37 ........
33. 
The TSD chain of command for administration of the MKULTRA
program comprises the following:
a. 
Chief, TSD providing overall management
b. Deputy Chief, TSD, (a trained scientist) providing
tqp substantive guidance for the MKULTRtA program
c. Assistant Chief, TSD, for Research and Development,
contributing management but not substantive guidance
- zz -

--- PAGE BREAK ---tist) providing
tqp substantive guidance for the MKULTRtA program
c. Assistant Chief, TSD, for Research and Development,
contributing management but not substantive guidance
- zz -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

904
d. Chief Scientist (reporting to c., above), (a trained
scientist), contributing substantive guidance in some
areas and responsible for the technical administrative
processes of MKULTRA. He is supported by a GS-lZ
budget officer.
a. program manager for MKULTRA, also serves as
Chief of Biology Branch, (a trained scientist)
f. project monitors located in various branches of TSD
and specialized in the subject fields of the specific
• 
projects for which they are assigned responsibility
To date this chain of command has relied primarily on oral communica-
tion in the management of MKULTRA. Files are notably incomplete,
poorly organized, and lacking in evaluative statements that might give'
perspective to management policies overtime. A substantial portion
of the MKULTRA record appears to rest in the memories of the
principal officers and is therefore almost certain to be lost with their
departures. 
The senior officers in the MKULTRA chain of command
who are not substantively qualified need better records to measure the
validity of projects through time and to identify key areas in which to
require detailed periodic briefings from working specialists.
-
34. 
It will be noted that the Chief of Support, TSD, does not parti-
cipate in the MKULTRA administration. 
The predecessor of the present
Chief of Support served in TSD throughout the life of the program until
196Z without ever being associated with its management. 
In his stead,
the Chief Scientist and a GS-12 budget officer have provided administrative
support. The Chief Scientist ha. set policy on the funding of MKULTRA
- 23 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---management. 
In his stead,
the Chief Scientist and a GS-12 budget officer have provided administrative
support. The Chief Scientist ha. set policy on the funding of MKULTRA
- 23 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

905
projects in all respects including salaries, overhead rates, fees.
material, equipment, facilities, travel, and the like. The support
officer was only added in 196Z under pressure of critical audit
findings. This use of the Chief Scientist in a field where Chief of
Sup, ort possesses superior qualifications and facilities constitute*
a misuse of talent. The proposed new charter for MKULTRA. should
take account of this anomaly and also provide that Chief of Support
advise in the future on decisions to fund projects under the*MKULTRA.
authority and thereby to ivaive the application of DD/S procedures.
It is recommended that:
o.................38............
- Z4 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

906
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTrO.O.C. 
200S
10 December 1975
Honorable Edward M. Kennedy, Chairman
Subcommittee on Health
Committee on Labor and Public Welfare
United States Senate
Washington. D. C. 
20510
Dear Mr. Chairman:
In accordance with your request, enclosed are declassified portions
of two documents prepared by the Inspector General. (a memorandum
dated S February 1975 to the Director with attachment, and a paper
dated I I February 1975).
Please note that the 5 February 1975 paper is a draft version of the
attachment to the 11 February 1975 memorandum. 
The 11 February 1975
version is the official version and any quotations from the draft paper
that differ from the official version are incorrect and do not represent
CIA's understanding. A covering note has been affixed to the
5 February 1975 paper to clarify this apparent discrepancy.
Sin rel
Geor e L. Cary
Legislative Counsel
Enclosures
As stated
ikul

--- PAGE BREAK ---erstanding. A covering note has been affixed to the
5 February 1975 paper to clarify this apparent discrepancy.
Sin rel
Geor e L. Cary
Legislative Counsel
Enclosures
As stated
ikul

--- PAGE BREAK ---

907
5 February 1975
MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Inteolgence
SUBJECT 
t CIA R&D and TestInS of Belavloral
Dra.
... 
Atachd 
a paper suma i 
ng CIA it*rt 
over the
year* in behavioral dsugs. We believe that this touches on all
R&D programs that thi Agency has conducted In the past, includtng
the incident tavolving the death of an employee of the Depaxtment
of the Army Ia 1953. Records do not permLt a description of such
relationships as =ay have existed between these various activities;
It is apparent that there was see 
sharing of Information between
dUfrenk components in the Agency. and some overlap in time,
but: the" 
also are indications of independent approaches to the
problem.
Z. We hae been Inormed by ADDO that although the DDO
has as Instruction oa behavioral drugs -- M1XDELTA -- this was'
establhshed.agaInst the event that come such materials became
available and ha. ever been implemented In fact. There are
no operational records in the DDO in this connection.
3. We can sanifte'the paper for transmittal to the
investgatInS authorities when you have reviewed it..
" 
Donald-F. Chamberlain
Attachment a/s 
" iap actor General-
cc: Mr. Knoche
DECLASSIFIED BY 018186
70-026 0 - 76 - 58

--- PAGE BREAK ---l to the
investgatInS authorities when you have reviewed it..
" 
Donald-F. Chamberlain
Attachment a/s 
" iap actor General-
cc: Mr. Knoche
DECLASSIFIED BY 018186
70-026 0 - 76 - 58

--- PAGE BREAK ---

908
This draft (S February 1975) was prepared as a pre-
liminary editorial attempt to draw together in summary
fashion the various drug-related programs of CIA. The
author was not involved in the programs and prepared the
paper as a draft for review and comment by the substantively
qualified organizational elements of CIA. On completion
of the draft it was circulated, and factual corrections and
comments were incorporated in the final and official version
that was dated 11 February 1975. 
Any quotations from the
first paper that differ from those in the 11 February 1975
draft should bear the statement that they are incorrect and
do not represent CIA's understanding.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5 
FEB 1975
Behavioral Drugs, and Testing
1. CIA has had a recuLrring interest In behavioral drugs
The subject is of general interest because of the operational
applications that could be made against Agency employees by
hostile forces, for which there would be a defensive require.
ment, as well as for possible use against foreigners to influence
their behavior. 
The earliest record of this interest dates to
the post-WWII period When there were indications of Soviet
interest in the use of drugs for such purposes. the most famous
example being the bisarre confessions of Cardinal Mindssenty-
in February 1949. 
.
vS8
SDECiLASS IFIED'- 
1-816i6

--- PAGE BREAK ---et
interest in the use of drugs for such purposes. the most famous
example being the bisarre confessions of Cardinal Mindssenty-
in February 1949. 
.
vS8
SDECiLASS IFIED'- 
1-816i6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

910
MKDELTA/MKULTRA IMKSEARCH
7. 
On Z9 October 195Z a formal policy was established by
the Deputy Director of Plans (as then styled, now Deputy Director
for Operations) for the use of biochemicals in clandestine operations
(MKDELTA). 
This was brought under a special funding procedure
established on 3 Apri.,. 953 for special research purposes (MKULTRA).
The program considered various possible means for controlling
human behavior of which drugs were only one aspect, others being
radiation. electro-shock, psychology, psychiatry, sociology,
anthropology, harassment substances, and paramilitary devices'
and materials. There were contacts with individuals at such
institutions as the University of 
"-- 
University,
J University, 
WUniversity and the University
of 
as well as with various pharmaceutical houses,
hospitals and federal institutions, the names of which are no longer
available. Among the materials studied were psylocbin from
Mexican mushrooms, a fungus occurring in certain crops, and
LSD. 
Following laboratory testing a second phase was begun which
involved testing on voluntary participants. The final phase involved
-3-

--- PAGE BREAK ---a fungus occurring in certain crops, and
LSD. 
Following laboratory testing a second phase was begun which
involved testing on voluntary participants. The final phase involved
-3-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

911
application on unwitting subjects, in normal social situations.
commencing in 1955 under an informal arrangements with
individuals in the Bureau of Narcotics. Originally conducted
on the West Coast, a-similar arrangement was instituted in
1961 on the East Coast. 
Such tests were conducted from time to
time until 1963 when the Inspector General discovered the activity
and questioned the program. At that time it was reported that in
a number of instances test subjects became ill for hours or days
following the application, and there was one reported instance of
hospitalization, the detail of which are no longer available.
Project records do not now exist, but it is reported that the
project was decreased significantly each budget year until it
was completely terminated in the late 1960's.
8. 
Following the Inspector General's challenge of the program,
there was a review of its nature and it was resubmitted for approval
under the name of Project MKSEARCH, recommending continuation
of the testing; the written proposal did not specify whether it was
to be limited to volunteers. ReCords indicate that the DCI did not
approve this, and it is understood that there was no renewal of.
this aspect of the activity. Funding for MKSEARCH commenced
in FY-1966, running through 1972. There were various research
activities carried on under it. but the only aspect related to be-
havioral drugs dealt with an inquiry in improvement by drugs of
learning ability and memory retention; under this there is a record
of testing at Vacaville State Prison in California on volunteers,
OFTEN/CHICKWIT
9. 
In 1967 the Office of Research and Development (ORD)
and the Edgewood Arsenal Research Laboratories undertook a
program for doing research in influencing human behavior with
drugs. 
A phased program was envisioned that would consist of
acquisition of drugs and chemical compounds believed to have
effects on the behavior of humans, and testing and evaluating
these materials through laboratory procedures and toxic cological
studies. Compounds believed promising as a result of tests on
animals were then to be evaluated clinically with human subjects
at Edgewood. 
Substances of potential use would then be analyzed
structurally as a basis for symthesizing new derivatives of
greater utility.
-4-re then to be evaluated clinically with human subjects
at Edgewood. 
Substances of potential use would then be analyzed
structurally as a basis for symthesizing new derivatives of
greater utility.
-4-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

912
10. 
Samples of drugs and chemicals were obtained from drug
and pharmaceutical companies, government agencies such as Edge-
wood, NIH. FDA and-the Vet. 
as Adminiattation, as well as from
research laboratories and individual researchers. Most of the
materials came from the drug industry, consisting largely of
substances that had been rejected because of undesired side
effects from the point of view of medicinal use.
-5-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

913
* Behavioral Drugs. and Testin
.
1. CIA has had a recurring interest in behavioral drug*. The
subject is of general interest because of the operational applications
that could be made against Agency employees by hostile forces. for
which there would be a defensive requirement. as well as for possible
use against foreigners to Influence their behavior. The earliest
record of this Interest dates to the post-WWIIperiod when there were
indications of Soviet interest in the use of drugs for such purposes.
the most famous example' being the bizarre confessions of Cardinal
Mindszenty in February 1949.
DECLASSIFIED BY 018186

--- PAGE BREAK ---ons of Soviet interest in the use of drugs for such purposes.
the most famous example' being the bizarre confessions of Cardinal
Mindszenty in February 1949.
DECLASSIFIED BY 018186

--- PAGE BREAK ---

914
MRDELTA/MKULTRA/MKSEARCH
6. On 29 October 1952 a formal policy was established by the Deputy
Director of Plans (as then styled, now Deputy Director for Operations) for
the use of biochemical in clandestine operations (MKDELTA). 
This was
in anticipation of the development of behavioral drugs, but was never
implemented operationally. MKDELTA research was brought under a
special funding procedure established on 3 Apri. 1953 (MKULTRA). 
The
program considered various possible means for controlling human behavior
of which drugs were only one aspect, others being radiation, electro-
shock, psychology, psychiatry, sociology, anthropolojy, harassment
substances, and paramilitary devices and materials. There were contacts
with individuals at such institutions as the University of
University, 
I University, 
University and the
University of 
.as well as with various pharmaceutical houses,
hospitals and federal institutions, the names df which are no longer available.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y, 
I University, 
University and the
University of 
.as well as with various pharmaceutical houses,
hospitals and federal institutions, the names df which are no longer available.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

915
Among the materials studied were psylocbin from Mexican mushrooms,
a fungus occurring in certain crops, and LSD. 
Following laboratory
testing a second phase * was begun which involved testing on voluntary
participants. 
The final phase involved application on unwitting subjects,
in normal social situations, commencing in 195S under an informal
arrangement with individuals in the Bureau of Narcotics. Originally
conducted on the West Coast, a similar arrangement was instituted
in 1961 on the East Coast. Such tests were conducted from time to time
until 1963 when the Inspector General discovered the activity and questioned
the program. At that time it was reported that In a number of instances
test subjects became.iLl for hours or days following the application, and
there was one reported instance of h6spitalization. the details of which
are no longer available. Project records do not now exist, but It Is
reported that the project was decreased significantly each budget year
until It was completely terminated in the late 1960's.
7. 
Follwing the Inspector General's challenge of the program,
there was a review of its nature and It was resubmitted for approval
wrider the name of Project MKSEARCH. The written proposal did not
specify whether testing was to be limited to volunteers. Records
indicate that the DCI did not approve unwitting testing; it is understood
that there was no renewal of this aspect of the activity. 
Funding for
MKSEARCH commenced in FY-1966, running through 1972. 
There were
various research activities carried on under It, but the only aspect
related to behavioral drugs deal with an inquiry in improvement by
drugs of learning ability and memory retention; under this there is a
record of testing at Iden 1 State Prison in Iden 5 -
on volunteers.
-3-to behavioral drugs deal with an inquiry in improvement by
drugs of learning ability and memory retention; under this there is a
record of testing at Iden 1 State Prison in Iden 5 -
on volunteers.
-3-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

916
OFTEN/CHICKWIT
9. In 1967 the Office of Research and Development (ORD) and
the Edgewood Arsenal Research Laboratories undertook a program for
doing research on the Identification and characterization of drugs that
could influence human behavior. 
Edgewood had the facilities for the
full range of laboratory and clinical testing. A phased program was
envisioned that would consist of acquisition of drugs and chemical
compounds believed to have effects on the bebvior of humans, ahd
testing and evaluating these materials through laboratory procedures
ad toxicological studies. Compounds believed promising as a result
of tests on animals were then to be evaluated clinically with human
subjects at Edgewood. 
Substances of potential use would then be
analysed structurally as a basis for identifying and synthesizing
possible new derivatives of greater utility.
• 
e

--- PAGE BREAK ---

917
10. 
The program was divided into two projects. Project
OFTEN was to deal with testing the toxicological, transmisivity
and behavioral effects of drugs in animals and, ultimately,
humans. 
Project CHICKWIT was concerned with acquiring infor-
mation on new drug developments in Europe and the Orient, and
with acquiring samples.
11. 
Samples of drugs and chemicals were obtained from
drug and pharmaceutical companies, government agencies such as
Edgewood, NIH, FDA and the Veterans Administration, as well as
from research labortories and individual researchers. 
Most of
the materials came from the drug industry, consisting largely of
substances that had been rejected because of undesired side effects
from the point of view of medicinal use.
-5-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

918
Behavioral Drugs and Testing
IDEN j 
TRUE
1 
Vacaville
California

--- PAGE BREAK ---n rejected because of undesired side effects
from the point of view of medicinal use.
-5-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

918
Behavioral Drugs and Testing
IDEN j 
TRUE
1 
Vacaville
California

--- PAGE BREAK ---

919
................... 
....
,.
COW. 
040 
T. 
V-¢ 
fit 
ON1 
koi
* .~.* .4 
.
.... ,,"*.t 
.f,! 
e 
, 
,l
k.oMrTwv 
V f
F*..vut 
4Cf.C(9 &1U 
og$wee
WA9.4"4wo(1' 
61 C. 1#i16
September 25. 
19"5
U4r. William E. Colby
D i rec tor
Central Intelligence Agency
Washington. D.C. 
20505
Dear Mr. Colby:
The Subcommittees on Health ant) Administrative Practice and
Procedure are currently preparing for hearins on Central
Intelligence Agency and Department of Defense involvement in
experiments that involved the use of human subjects. 
The
p:,rpose of the hearings is to examine how and uhy these experi-
m-nts have been eonductd over tl-e past 25 years and what
safeguards were imposed for the protection of those who
participated.
It is necessary to the Subco'mittees' 
inquiry to obtain answers
to the questions liste- e., 
-,- October 3, 
1975. 
If ary of
this information is 
still 
classified, we will be prepared to
mike appropriate arrangements for vaintatning security pending
,' 
formal action by the Sutho n- ttees. 
Specifically, we
-,:ould like the following; inf.,rmation:
1. 
Identify the offices within CIA that are or were responsible
.oc monitoring or supporting errin-rn 
tation involving human
subjects.
A. Describe the functions and responsibilities of the
offices.
B. 
Describe the types of hi.man use ,ixpetiment.n m,-nitore.i
or supp~ortcd directly or in..ir, 
'tly';-- thee 
offices.

--- PAGE BREAK ---escribe the functions and responsibilities of the
offices.
B. 
Describe the types of hi.man use ,ixpetiment.n m,-nitore.i
or supp~ortcd directly or in..ir, 
'tly';-- thee 
offices.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

920
::"tr'r.< 
, 
?cto 
Pt.,
I. n 
V), 
t 
.
:) 
-- ,,r 
I: t 
" 
".. 
-
.
c: 
.' 
,;,t 
, 
or
t rln3lev" 
,f 
-u 
,ion'; 
I~ 
c'l 
-, 
!-C, .1.1 
--... ..-
im,.-11 
ati-)n
pEO ,-t 
.
P 
c. 
.
I.;i . t!' 
nitu: c iii 
o>:Lc 
r. 
f 
Lhis
ruo r, 
n;in 
z.za ti 
,-. rir t. 
, 
tar 
.
, 
.
".n 
*I, 
,.. 
rc ,rgani-
za ti 
ri or tr 
n 
ti 
'.. , 
.... 
.o 
u:- .rc : a
.
W a , D r .
S i dj 'v C 
_. t i .. -
r 
, 
i 
o 
f C ,, i d e n L i 
i c . l
i,i quesatlaon n 
hc, 
rY 
.r 
r 
n)t 
n 
.
..
,, 
-, 
2 to .,uc"
ofU ice---
A .
1t 
hI 
-r pc. i t 
a 
CIA?
b. 
.
.t '.. 
r,,e hi.:; 
a. ,e 
10 ;
C. 
When ( is 
he so,,' ,
D. 
W ho w %:; h 
-
f,:r:,: 
i it,, 
%ip,, 
io r
E. 
h!io wer 
) s 
t 
,
3. 
Was Dr. Robert 
!d-ilr 
.
? 
n. 
': 
.- 
rn 
. V it! 'iro.
A. 
l 
i. .
.. 
, 
*~-e 
.
i 2; 
t 
*- 
.i. ." .'
D. 
*., 
' a 
'tic! 
l
W% 
o. 
u -i ".. it-'rc' i 
" 
.
(5 t 
j ;I 
c 
I!
A..%':, ! 
, 
>i~hti iU; 
l;.o.,' 
i 
.
Cot 
e..,c. 
.
~ 
a 
ll,' 
.
-€': 
'.::~ 
oi/t 
tLh r
,.xp.ri~ 
,,t c,",. 
.
A. J 
L.2 k:1, 
4-C 
-
t. 1 
... 
1 
, 
, 
in 
Lthe
I:. .t.,,, m 
t 
i:, 
n t I 
: '.-n ai f 
< 
,!o ,I# 
:- !) w,-r,, - I Ik- drucjs
(r 
ch'-m ia 
ls 
/-1 
i'.At.oC. ,i 
n 
t 
' 
:M lj1**c(-4t-;?
C. 
In;. 
i'r 
. L1,v..', 
, 
(' 
-
.
,. ,(-a1 :; 
,.rr, 
;i:, 
A- 
to
D .
z' 
, 
,* A ! ..a ni: .
..
c.. 
.
, 
rI 
: 
-
C A 
i; ;c , .I 
t C) t.) e 
;;t0 .) -c t ; ?
,. 
I 
. tt 
:'. 
.' 
.. ,_ .
.. a -, -
'. 
ioal c:f 
t.1
c:: 
iTf 
t?
BEST~1 
wrLVAIE

--- PAGE BREAK ---.
z' 
, 
,* A ! ..a ni: .
..
c.. 
.
, 
rI 
: 
-
C A 
i; ;c , .I 
t C) t.) e 
;;t0 .) -c t ; ?
,. 
I 
. tt 
:'. 
.' 
.. ,_ .
.. a -, -
'. 
ioal c:f 
t.1
c:: 
iTf 
t?
BEST~1 
wrLVAIE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

921
;.' 
Willi .. t ". 
€', 
.
I';.)" I ht-. 
23
3
H,. 
Ias CIA cv-.- 
, 
.
L ct. I 
,r 
iii 
z. 
I ', 
': 
U-.r tr
involving hunaa .:t' 
ts 
-
or tivc'i:, 
f.',cr- 
.
' 
ijL~t' 
for
drug research z:-d rei 
i 
.o, 
o! 
iu.,- -,'ct2 
n, or near
Lexington, Kentucky. 
ve, 
Ir:srerI 
, f 
Ff
t.e 
Research l'r..,,.on, 
Ci, 
, 
L"
Research Found,%tien0 
!.niV,;it'v, 
College.
:,Untal llea!.th p, sea",7h! 
-
t1,l.lr*n 
Fi;!
State Universit-. 
" I ,r:.u 
t 
i 
L of
Medicine, 
Universi t-.,, 
jlti-,or:; ity or 
,
Pospital in 
Hew York Citv, t...1 
-
,:: 
i t o r,
on Long Island, N.Y. 
tAhu 
:.,.a I 
i,...t', 
Clinlic
in Boston, 
the 
r-
3titute 
in 
t..-,:i,.,;or, lar:;.,
the 
;:.At tit- in 
i,:.v Y r" Ci.,,
A.;soc i tion 
00, 
,,'
Inc. or tr, 
C:r.r'nni.ati.ons?
if 
so, ,,ro,.,id., dea 
, 
,,wm:'. 
w 
.',., 
...
, 
.1,I 1V. ..- i
thlese c:*:.':,'irentzn 
:- rc c( 
. 'rIt~ d, 
n 
'. .,. 
:.; 
.ii 
C, 112 '.",1
of these 
:-:pr 
t 
in.' 
-,.
G. 
Recz.'itl-,, 
C[A ," 
: 
,,: 
: 
' 
-
-,r 
.. " 
2t-,ff t2aat
Agency recnrdi and do -umnts p. rtC: 
-:V 
tO ,-:priit.L: 
in'ol'ing
human su);Ircts were .t 
rrn,.,d ir 
V);. 
P', aI .
I 
deLils
of t e nature f.: t',-*3r 
,.v', 
' 
.n dc..-:: 
.; v".v.-', 
i' l,",
under wl i .
c.irci::.ist:tu,.s, 
,: 
iG" %-i:mo- L- 
,.;
Jl'stroyed: an-I *-ico ',ttC1 
:-- 
J'.c 
d 
'. 
' 
'
7. 
Prior tr. ani 
,' 
.- '. 
.
" 
, 
.. :..'. "r 
,K .. 
.
. J CIA
t:':e fur iaec. i ::,.A 
,I i 11 
-', : 
' " 
n n 
f -'i 
c .
i..;v 
,trtic 
1z;' ted
in expnrinmnt. 
t;,.- t ":rr' f'J,-,rL.z' or 
6.: 
--
,, 
C'rcctl- or
ir.Jirectl, 
Ly CUtA?
,. 
Prior to aL.d 
;,i1. eC",2ut 
1., ,3, 
..t:t 
c,;t.:ol 
":ts 
C[IA
e:.:trciscd in 
in.oni 
Lor n; : 
*f'., ," , 
.j. 
, 
,'.,- ii 
e- 
wm 
ents
Lh,.L CiA .;up~port' -1 or ,:,rn'zt,:. 
0 , , -, .
1" 
," 
i.:i i r 
, 
,anleC",2ut 
1., ,3, 
..t:t 
c,;t.:ol 
":ts 
C[IA
e:.:trciscd in 
in.oni 
Lor n; : 
*f'., ," , 
.j. 
, 
,'.,- ii 
e- 
wm 
ents
Lh,.L CiA .;up~port' -1 or ,:,rn'zt,:. 
0 , , -, .
1" 
," 
i.:i i r 
, 
,anl

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-
922
PasJe 
4
in assuring that there wb *-diJequaIte infs..rt', 
con,,-nt fron rhose
human subjects involved in suchi e:pr:,-mcnLs?
9. 
Have there been any de-ths in connection with human use
eperiments thit were corhcted or iu~portc: , dir ctly or
indirectly, Ly CIA? 
I: 
so, provide (]-Laila; of 
i. .• experiment
and the deaths.
10. 
lave therc b ,n any i i juries ii 
c'i,,tirn 
-,.man
ose experiments that werf: conducted or .t.peorj-fd, 
,lireccIv er
indirectly, 
by CTI,? 
If 
so, pro.,ide det:.ls 
of Cv- experiments)
and the injuries.
11. 
Please supply a cop" of tll 
tccuments r, ]sting to the
Frank Olsen case.
12. 
Has CIA Us ed the 
rnoindatir.n, thc
!'und, tute Societ, 
Inc.
the 
Fuind, 
u..
_inc. 
'a 
an intcr'..-dinrv in 
fulin; 
on suy.,i-'rthnq in 
any, manner
e::oerisents involving 
i-- 
q 
su'bj,_.? 
If so, provide ,i'tLails
of when, where, why, 
ho-w, an,) b-,when,.se euper:' 
-; 
ere
conducted, an-] w1-t sp.-cific-,11'- eacl, of the, 
e::p-.i-- 
nts
involved?
_3. 
Iiave CIA p-_r-:ar, nel conduct,:] 
t 
ir ;olvin- ',-jman
.-ubiccts othere r tl,.azi 
e e-; 
.m 
n 
',t 
n,...: 
9 
r 
anl: O0)un
ar-d at least th--, 
other 2':s.-n-?
14. 
Besides thc -
enfiti., 
mentioned in 
-'c: -Irai 
m 
r 
12,
has CIA used an, other d.oe,..tic fu.-., 
Qunation, society ,
private or govvr-i.-,nt a3. ncy, or ortaizati 
:i at an iat-.:mediar,
in 
fundinc-cr sup:orti.nq in 
iny mnoner e::.crintt 
involving
human subjects?
1'#. 
lHas CIA ,iu.ld any foreigi fund, foln iattion, socieLy, pri vato
or go,7rr.:;-int a-j,.,rc;, or o-gaui zatioi 
its an int(, mc(]ilry in
Funding or supportinq ii an'/ ;..i:nner c.:p_-rimonLs involvingj
human i;ubjects?
)

--- PAGE BREAK ---attion, socieLy, pri vato
or go,7rr.:;-int a-j,.,rc;, or o-gaui zatioi 
its an int(, mc(]ilry in
Funding or supportinq ii an'/ ;..i:nner c.:p_-rimonLs involvingj
human i;ubjects?
)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

923
Sr.pt -:.r 
25 
'?
P;Igc 5
16.-- Has CIA uze,1 the U.S. :avy, Air Force, Army, Mlarines,
or Coast Guard as 
ain intermediary in finding 
or supporting
in any manner e.:peorimer.ts involving hunzan subjects?
17. 
Has CIA ever made acrangements, dire-_-tly or indirectly,
to have a public, ?rivato, or military ertit-y in a foreign
country conduct e.;:;etjrnts involving hurtan su:3ects in 
a
foreign country?
These quentionS are directed towards providing the Iub:commictoes
wiith information o: issues, individuals, institutions, and
events which are presently the subject of our investigation.
Your reponses :ill 
allow us to have a more complete picture
than uould other-odise be available if 
we relied -;ole)y or.
information obtained- from outside the Agency. 
As to questions
13 through 17, we have as'ted initially 
for conclusory answers.
Wo uroul, appreciate your providing further details on these
matter!., 
however: 
when, where, why, how and 1,/ 
w'iom the
e:.'perinents were conducted, 3nd what specificaly %tras involved
in eoch. 
T10is additional and more comprehensive information
may be zuL-itted :.ncrenentaly within the rext 30 days.--
We apprciate you:: cooperation and assistance. 
Tf you or your
.staff ha'e any q't 
tio::- concerning tf-is inquiry, please
Feel free to contact M r. Walter Sheri,..n or Mr. 
James Michie,
of the Adinistrcitive P1ractice and Procedure Su':.omnittee staff.
Sincerelv 
..-
., £4j- 
,/
Edward M. Kennfidk
Chai rman
Sublvcj n. ittesi orn Administrative
rectice & Procedure
(Sucowmittee on health
T0-026 0 - 76 - 59
r

--- PAGE BREAK ---re Su':.omnittee staff.
Sincerelv 
..-
., £4j- 
,/
Edward M. Kennfidk
Chai rman
Sublvcj n. ittesi orn Administrative
rectice & Procedure
(Sucowmittee on health
T0-026 0 - 76 - 59
r

--- PAGE BREAK ---

)24
October 28. 1975
Mr. W.B. Colby. Director
Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, D.C. 
20505
Dear Kr. Colbys
In my letter to you dated September 25, 1975. I requested
information pertinent to an ongoing inquiry by the Subcom-
ndttees on Health and Administrative Practice and Procedure
&nto Central Intelligence Agency and Department of Defense
involvement in human-use experimentation.
In your reply on October 1, you said that you thought addi-
tional inquiries into this area would be duplicative of
efforts already put forth on behalf of the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence. 
In your letter the same day
to Senator Church which you enclosed, you sa*dtbbt he
might want to suggest to me that I defer further inquiry
into this area until the Se&ect Committee had completed
Its' investigation. 
I have discussed the matter with
Senator Church and he said he has no objection to our
inquiry. 
Further, the full Select Committee has consi-
dered this matter and concluded that our interest at
this time in the human experimentation activities con-
ducted by your agency is entirely proper, as expressed
to you in Senator Church's letter of October 6# 1975.
I am therefore renewing my request to you for responses
to the questions listed in my letter to you dated September
25, 1975. In addition, we would like the followings
1. An unsanitized version of the Olsen documents delivered
to the Subcommittees on October 9, 1975 (including deleted
materials).

--- PAGE BREAK ---5, 1975. In addition, we would like the followings
1. An unsanitized version of the Olsen documents delivered
to the Subcommittees on October 9, 1975 (including deleted
materials).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

925
rae "or-* 
k OLDY
October 28, 1975
Page 2
2. A copy of all CIA Inspector General reports, annexbs
to reports, and internal memoranda concerning experimentation
that involved human subjects from 1947 to the present.
3. A copy of the "report(d) on destruction of files" as
referred to by Mr. Robert Chin of CIA's Legislative Counsel's
Office in a telephonic conversation with Hr. James Michie
of the Subcomaittee staff on October 15# 1975.
4. 
Access to and/or a copy of "the materials found in old
SRS files, specifically a box of materials provided out of
retirement from 
TC". as referred to in a Memorandum For
The Record dated February3, 1975, and entitled 'Project
Artichoke", which Memorandum was included in the Olsen
documents delivered to the Subcomlttees on October 9. 1975.
5. 
Access to and/or a copy of "certain sensitive files in
his (Dr. Tietjen of Medical Services) files", as referred to
in a Memorandum Por The Record dated February 3, 1975, and
entitled "Project Artichoke', which Memorandum was included
in the Olsen documents delivered to the Subcouulittees on
October 9, 1975.
6. 
Access to and/or a copy of man Office of Security soft
file entitled 'LSD Material'", as referred to in a Memorandum
dated Julyllj, 1975, for the Inspector Genmel from Charles
W. Kane, Director of Security, entitled "Alleged Illegal
Domestic Activities (Suicide of Prank R. Olsen), which
Memorandum was included in the Olsen documents delivered
to the Subcormittees on October 9, 1975.
7. 
Access to any other pertinent files regarding experimentation
that involved human subjects.
8. 
An interview by Subcommittee staff of the chief of CIA's
Behavioral Activities Branch on destruction of documents
relating to human-use experimentation.
9. 
Whatever information exists concerning the case of
Colonel James R. Christensen (USMC) who committed suicide
following a series of CIA tests and interviews in 1966.
Supporting documentation is requested.tever information exists concerning the case of
Colonel James R. Christensen (USMC) who committed suicide
following a series of CIA tests and interviews in 1966.
Supporting documentation is requested.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

926
fur 
z 
w*e 
o 
L y
October 28# 1975
Page 3
In view of the fact that many of these requests are of
long standing a prompt reply would be appreciated.
I want to thank you for providing the necessary security
clearance to Subosnittee staff so that we may conduct a
thorough inquiry,
Sincerely,
Sdwlmrd M4. Kennedy

--- PAGE BREAK ---ld be appreciated.
I want to thank you for providing the necessary security
clearance to Subosnittee staff so that we may conduct a
thorough inquiry,
Sincerely,
Sdwlmrd M4. Kennedy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

927
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
-
WAaIGTON.D.C. E05S
4 November 1975
Honorable Edusrd MI. Kennedy, Chairman
Subcommittee on Administrative
Practice and Procedure
Committee on the Judiciary
United States Senate
Washington, D. C. 20510
Dear Mr. Chairman:
I have your letter of 28 October 197S inquiring of our
response to your earlier questions and requesting copies or
access to Agency records on human-use experimentation.
Please be advised that we have responded to your
25 September 197S letter and my staff is now in touch with
yours in responding to your new request. 
In this connection,
and as you know, I have a responsibility to protect--intel-
ligence sources and methods including the confidentiality of
our relationships with cooperating Americans. Some of these
relationships are classified to prevent a foreign power from
learning of an intelligence interest in or use of certain
techniques. Other relationships are protected at the request
of cooperating Americans who are desirous of maintaining the
confidentiality of their association with the Agency. We
have worked out procedures with the Senate Select Committee
to deal with these concerns as well as to meet the full
requirements of the Committee's inquiry. Accordingly I suggest
that we apply the same procedures to handle the requirements
of your Subcommittee.
My staff will be in contact with yours to work out the
procedures as we proceed promptly to respond to your request.
I have further instructed my staff to bring to me any problems
in this regard so that I may work them out directly with you
to avoid delays. 
I hope the foregoing will neet with your
satisfaction.
Sincerely,
W. E. Colby
Director

--- PAGE BREAK ---e any problems
in this regard so that I may work them out directly with you
to avoid delays. 
I hope the foregoing will neet with your
satisfaction.
Sincerely,
W. E. Colby
Director

--- PAGE BREAK ---

928
060- La.".A1i1101 AFOAnRlS
'.$t..k 
bl-P 
bW*'.
S~ibJ: S. Z5 1 . Pt e idera' 
C -4v vt tFUIft-
Pr Aectb ; A Hury, n J~ e,-ct 
-~i - v -i
nd tonro vlor:I 
Ie .-
*. Act 
' :%,,
it: Gen. 
. ennret'k 
-s.'S.'. 
-.
&tu!or
LCOIW.G. Wiueciip. 
1S..r'at~gr. Direco0
' -irciences. Okce of S.clle-
i-; 
C.ii 
F. 
L. 
i 
i 
ii 
!1k 
.
-) 
!, 4 to , 17r %-'. P
Ph 
.
0eD 
Y7.,..
SD ,'-?.,431
TO
J
6IGATum
I
Coom. 
A - AcUom 
C - C oaatiu 
Cy . Cestrw rUes 
CR - Crows 
Rotsmce
DO D Osl.m 
DC - D..tmtwUo.. Cirt 
lcate of 
F - Oake P't. 
I - IaImbai.e
R- R..tif 
T -Tv..shirI 
ZOdw(spcify)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

929
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
flail 
Office of Legislative Counsel
z - -
Washington, D. C. 20505
Telephone: 351-6121 (Code 143-6121)
TO: 
Mr. James 
I stigator
Subcommittee on Administrative Practice
Procedure
Senate Comnittee on the Jimiiary.
Dear Jim:
Enclosed are preliminaries to the
first six (6) questions of Senator
Kennedy's letter of 25 September 1975.
Robert 
iQin
Associate Legislative Counsel
Enclosure
lsos S401
11911110

--- PAGE BREAK ---Enclosed are preliminaries to the
first six (6) questions of Senator
Kennedy's letter of 25 September 1975.
Robert 
iQin
Associate Legislative Counsel
Enclosure
lsos S401
11911110

--- PAGE BREAK ---

930
I. Offices within CIA thit were respisible for c:ositoring or
t.pr 
ting cxpcri;. ntt ion involving hraon subjects arc the Office of
Tecuctcal Service (015), Office of Research and ievelount (ORD),
Office of Scientific intelligence (OSI), and the Office of Security (OS).
A. Describe the funictiens and responsibilities of the
offices.
OTS
Provides a variety of technical and scientific
support to the intelligence collection effort.
ORD
"Is responsible for research and exploratory
doveloient directed tt'ward (a) anticipatihg
inte1li!,ence preble.b- and aalying tlem in con-
jtuiction with the respo.ible or proLcinn cm wmients
to identify the range of possible sob:tions, (b)
assessing and advancing emerging technologies, pro-
cess iM, tcc!:tlctos, aaid analytical itiodc,ies
applicable to the i&dwtified solutim, a.a, (c)
selectively investigtint'n' the feasibility of
reducing the nei: concepts to practical use.
Additionally, directed technical suprort is provided
to other Agency cmpnents, as appropriate.
MMJ) 
fulfills those responsibilities through a
many disciplineJ r~cjrch progrn. enccr.i:assing
activities in the physical and life sciences.
,Aoin.: 
the rcearch program activities is planning
and ci'mductin "life scicncos research to inchkle
beh:i orall !cicrncs, physiology, anl the related
physircal science materials with eomhasis on assess-
ment, liaalLh, bionics, narcotics and biological and
chemic7.l barf3re materials."
OSI
Provided in-hcise consulttion surpcrt in para-
psych'logy and physical he3ith assessr..t programs.
The former involved unusual sesisorv p-hrorana and the
latter rer.ze analysis to assess the physical health
of foreign leaders.
Declassified by
170374 1 February 1976

--- PAGE BREAK ---..t programs.
The former involved unusual sesisorv p-hrorana and the
latter rer.ze analysis to assess the physical health
of foreign leaders.
Declassified by
170374 1 February 1976

--- PAGE BREAK ---

931
S. Describe the types of human use experiments monitored
or supported directly or indirectly by these offices.
OTS
MT1 
was involved in a program to monitor the
behavior of individuals unler the influence of
druis. 
Following laboratory testing, the second
phnse of the program involved drun testing on
voltintary rirticipants. 
The final phase (195S-
1963), conducted in conjunction with officers of
the Bureatt of Narcotics, involved application o
unwitting stibjects in normal social sittutions.
ORD
Types of experiments monitored or supported by
ORD were ersentially those of (a) identifying ier-
sonatity traits, charntcristics, skills or aptitudes
that x.ay be useful in the selection of Agency
eMWlyces -- including physiological means for
establishing bona fidcs of foreign agents; (b)
exasaLning techniques and methods which were dened
likely to 1e effective in the assessmtnt of physical
or mental states by using equilp1nt that makes no
physical contact with the subject.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

932
C. Explain the nature and extent of the reorganization or
transfer of functions involving human experimntation projects,
the reasons for the reorganization or transfer, and who ordered it.
013
In 1962, OTS management began to orient its
behavioral activities toward the use of -psychological
assessments to support active operations and away
from peripheral long-range research. This trend
continued until the middle or late 1960's when OTS
totally disengaged from human experimentation research.
ORD
No documentation relating to "a reorganization or
transfer of functions involving human e.xperimentation
projects" was found in O1W files.
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---rom human experimentation research.
ORD
No documentation relating to "a reorganization or
transfer of functions involving human e.xperimentation
projects" was found in O1W files.
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

933
4. 
VO .t ,'.1riU-J 
to t,. "-ct !!.-
exc~rirent thit i.-olvWv Pr. Frank Ol:r e 
n4 t t Icast three o-hers as
Iwmn subjxts. af 
[or Jlt 
purposes was the experirent conducted?
A. Identify tho drugs or chemicals that wre used in the
" 
experlwnt.
eCh 
13 Aprl) 1953. Mr. Allen W. L[klles, Director
of Central Ilrtallitcnco, a-povcd a pr',,.ram related to
%%-resear 
d evelopricnt of a capabilit-: in the covcrt
use o" biolo .,ical and chemical materials. 
ite subse-
quent Cr.ri-.g 
t involving rr. Frark Olsen mis p3rt
of that. program; ;Lnd was con-Ji.cted to observe the effects
of-a specific dng in a conference setting.
" 
LSD ws Lmed in the experiment.
B, 
Iow .any tires and at what dose level uvre the drugs
or chemicals daaisttcr 
to the subjects?
The drua ws adzlnistcred one tim,"at an unknowm
'but appW retl* 1-# level.
C. 
Ho,. were these drugs or choicails acainistcred to tie
subjects?
1Th 
drug %s put In a bottle of cointreau.
D. 
bbo a"zialsteral the drugs or chemicals to the subjects?
The imtity of the individuals) actually
Sadainisterirg U.e drug is unknown, althot; h three CIA
ofriccrs were n-priirandcd for their roles in the incident.
.
Was t'.ere amzdical supervision of the experiment?
Them %s C.parently no medical s ervision of the
experimmt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hree CIA
ofriccrs were n-priirandcd for their roles in the incident.
.
Was t'.ere amzdical supervision of the experiment?
Them %s C.parently no medical s ervision of the
experimmt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

934
S. flas CIA bver supported, directly or indirectly, experiments
ialving hiMan subjects. at or through federal facilities for drug
rescarct and rehabilitation of drug aidlicts in or near (see letter of 25
Septc-dbr from Senator Kennedy for listing).
UIS
The records available to the OFfice of Technical
Service do not contain a conplcte listing of the
institutes, fcdotal facilities and specialists involved
in drug research e.'erimentation. 
It is known that the
Drug Addiction Cqnter at Lexington, KIentucky, was involved
in a program involving witting volunteers.
ORD
ORt) has contracted with the University of Texas,
Medical Branch, ' alveston, Texas for research to dictenhine
personality cluaracteristics-of people dcned to he good
assessors of other huams. 
ORD ah.o contracted with
Baylor University, College of medicine e for research to
determine Miether voice signals ca;t be used to assess the
emotional state of an individual.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

935
0 6. 
Please provide details of the nature of the records and
docxats that were destro)-wd in 1973 pertaining to huwon subjects.
* ~ OTS
In January 1973, 
, advising
that 1he was actir.w on instructions from 
I, Richard Helms,
ordered the. destruction of all recorJs associated with
dng research or... testing. 
On 31 January 1973, seven
boxes of pro-oress reports from 19S3 through 1967 were
recaUed frum the archives and destroyed. 
In addition,
25 copies of a booklet entitled "LSD-ZS, t0m Un-Psychedelic
lmpl ications," uvre destroyed.
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---rts from 19S3 through 1967 were
recaUed frum the archives and destroyed. 
In addition,
25 copies of a booklet entitled "LSD-ZS, t0m Un-Psychedelic
lmpl ications," uvre destroyed.
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

936
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Office of Legislative Counsel
Washington, 0. C. 20505
Telephones 351.6121 (Code 143-6121)
jim Michite
Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on
Administrative Practice and Procedure
0L. II
Enclosed is a response by OTS to your
letter of Z5 September 1975.
-i
,o*,, 1633 '"'"'"ev
eggs 
I0ITIOII
14.1
li
-&M--

--- PAGE BREAK ---

937
1. Offices within CIA that were responsible for
monitoring or supporting experimentation involving human
subjects wore the Office of Security, Office of Scientific
Intelligence, Office of Medical Services, Office of
Research and Development, and Office of Technical Service
and.its predecessor units. This paper confines itself to
the latter.
a. Office of Technical Services provides a
variety of technical and scientific support to the
intelligence cbllection effort.
b. Office of Technical Service was involved in
a program to monitor the behavior of individuals
under the influence of drugs. Following laboratory
testing, the second phase of the program involved
drug testing on voluntary participants. The final
phase (1955-1963)t conducted in conjunction with the
Bureau of Narcotics, involved the use of selected
drugs on "unwitting" subjects in normal social
situations. Further details of this testing are
included in paragraph 13.
c. In 1962, OTS management began to-orient its
behavioral activities toward operations and away from
peripheral lon.I-range research. This trend continued
until the middle or late 1960's when OTS totally

--- PAGE BREAK ---ent began to-orient its
behavioral activities toward operations and away from
peripheral lon.I-range research. This trend continued
until the middle or late 1960's when OTS totally

--- PAGE BREAK ---

938
disengaged from further efforts -to chemically
influence human behavior. At this point, with the
exception of (ROJC) 
the Office of Research and
Dovolopment would have been responsible for any
continuation of research on the identification and
characterization of drugs that could influence human
behavior believed necessary. The new direction taken
in 1962 resulted from decreasing concern regarding
Soviet drug activities, budgetary pressures# and
alternate and more pressing operational priorities.
(iOJEcT) 
-
The records of (MROJECT) 
were destroyed
along with other records relating to drug research. This
program ran from 1967 to 1972. It was a very small effort
which, with the exceptions to be noted below, con:,istcd
of small grants to individuals to enable them to continue
or expand work they were already doing and to give us
direct access to-that work. They did very little work
for OTS other than to serve as consultants in the area of
their expertise.
One of these individuals, an HD Psychiatrist, did
human testing research with Cylert (magnesium Pemoline)
which had been alleged to enhance learning and me:nory
ability. The work was supported by a research grant from
(A U.S. Drug Maiufacturer) 
• 
The unclassified study was conducted
on volunteer subjects at the (A I6DICAL FACILITf' 
I 
CALIFUTWA)
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

939
at Vacaville State Prison. 
TSD money say have helped.
,support this effort.
2. Dr. Gottlieb was assigned to one of the compon-
onto identified in question #I.
3
70-026 0- 76 - 60

--- PAGE BREAK ---

940
b.
c. 
See a. above.
d. Dr. Gottlieb's immediate supervisors were:
A

--- PAGE BREAK ---was assigned to one of the compon-
onto identified in question #I.
3
70-026 0- 76 - 60

--- PAGE BREAK ---

940
b.
c. 
See a. above.
d. Dr. Gottlieb's immediate supervisors were:
A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

941
4. 
On 13 April 1953. 1r. Allen W. Dulles, Director
of Central Intelligence, approved a program related to
research and development of a capability in the covert use
of biological and chemical materials. The subseqtient
experiment, involving Dr. Frank Olsen, was part of that
program. The experiment was conducted to observe the
effects of a specific drug on unwitting participants in
a conference setting and had the approval of.
, Chief, Technical Operations, TSS.
a. LSD was used in the experiment.
b. The drug was administered one time at a
dose level reported to have been about 70 micrograms.
In a subsequent memo to the DCI from the Inspector
General, dated 18 Dec. '53, the dose was reported as
1/7 of that formerly established as safe.
c. 
The drug was put in a bottle of cointreau.
d. The identity of the individuals) actually
administering.the drug is ur.known, although three
.
40

--- PAGE BREAK ---

942
CIA officers were reprimanded for their roles in"
the incident..
e. 
There was-apparently no medical supervision
of the experiment.
5. As far as can be determined, TSD-sponsorcd
research involving humarn subjects was COnfined to the
following institutions:
(A MASSACHUSETTS HOSPITAL )
State Hospital
Narcotic Addiction Hospital
(A BIOWGICAL IAB(ATaty IN 
NEW YORK)
and possibly the
Clinic of the Record Court in
(A iticHiGAn cerry)*
(see also Paragraph 13)
Unfortunately all files on the experimentation conducted
at these institutions were destroyed; hence, no details of
the type requested are available.
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---ry)*
(see also Paragraph 13)
Unfortunately all files on the experimentation conducted
at these institutions were destroyed; hence, no details of
the type requested are available.
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

943
2S copies of a booklet entitled *LSD-2S, Some Un-Psyche-
delic: Implications," were destroyed.
7. Since 1973 OTS has not engaged in any activities
relevant to this question. Prior to 1973 this type of
detail is simply unavailable. It is presumed that all of
the work done at universities and foundations was done
under the then current standards of those institutions.
S. 
We believe that drugs were used on fully witting
individuals within CIA.. It.was understood to have been
a policy of the researchers that no one could administer
the mind influencing drug until they were fully familiar
with them and had themselves experienced their effects.
Thus, it can be assumed that all of the program researchers
had been administered the drugs intended as interrogation
aids. Some operations personnel, case officers, who
planned to use these drugs operationally are believed to
have been administered them under the same philosophy.
Exactly what precautions were taken is not known. All
subjects selected would almost certainly have been from
among college educated operations personnel, persons who
by nature of their background and training would have
fully appreciated the significance of their consent and
involvement.
I% is believed that the only use of unwittingo sub-
Jects, apart from the Olsen case, is reported in all the
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---fully appreciated the significance of their consent and
involvement.
I% is believed that the only use of unwittingo sub-
Jects, apart from the Olsen case, is reported in all the
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

944
detail available in paragraph 13. It 
is believed that
drugs-were never used on unwitting Agency personnel. The
sketchy records available indicate frequent discussions
of the need to use the drugs on unwitting individuals and
of an awareness of the seriousness of such a decision.
The few instances where unwitting subjects were used, or
unwitting testing contemplated, stand out so conspicuously
that it can be assumed that any other testing involved only
fully witting subjects.
9. We know of no deaths in connection with human use
experiments conducted or supported directly or indirectly
by CIA other than the Dr. Olsen case. The Olson file is
available for review and is not extracted here.
10. 
One 1963 memo referring to the "unwitting' testing
of these drugs stated that it was reported that in a number
of instances these subjects became ill for hours or days.
There was one instance of hospitalization. The above,
taken from an I.G. review in 1963, are the full details
available and apart from the Olsen case, the only reference
to injuries encountered. This" remark was in reference to
a situation further outlined in paragraph 13.
11. The complete Olsen file is otherwise available
to theSubcommittee, hence it 
is not attached.
12. No record of the 
Foundation has been
located. The 
Fund was used as a mechanism to
non-attributively fund work of interest. Whether it did

--- PAGE BREAK ---ommittee, hence it 
is not attached.
12. No record of the 
Foundation has been
located. The 
Fund was used as a mechanism to
non-attributively fund work of interest. Whether it did

--- PAGE BREAK ---

945
any experimental work is 
Wvq 
..
". 
13. Two words in this question are susceptible to
ambiguous interpretations: conducted and experiments.
Using the broadest possible definition of each, the answer
is yes.
Finally, in an effort to simulate operational use
situations, a program was instituted with the cooperation of
%he Bureau of Narcotics, which tested these drugs on persons
in social situations. 
Full details of this testing are not
available but it appears that selected individuals, associated
with the "drug culture." were invited toa house and offered
drinks or drugs. 
These subjects were then "unwittingly" given
a drug being tested as a possible aid in interrogations and
their behavior probed/observed. The individuals left the test
site when they were ready to do so. No follow-up or monitoring
was normally possible. This program began in 19S5 at one
location and was expanded to a second location in 1961. The
precise date of termination of this testing is unclear but it
seems certain that ale. such testing terminated by the end of
FY-64.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---was expanded to a second location in 1961. The
precise date of termination of this testing is unclear but it
seems certain that ale. such testing terminated by the end of
FY-64.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

946
14. 
The Office of Naval Rosearch'was used as ;an
intermediary to fund a contract with NIM1l, 19S2-1962,
intended to test various hallucinogenic drugs. The testing
was reportedly done at the Addiction Research Center,
Lexington, Ientucky. Reportedly the mediiinals DAIRVON,
VERSIDYNE, and ROMILAR were at least partially the result
of this program.
IS. We are not aware of any foreign intermediaries
being used.
16. See Paragraph 14.
17. 
It is believed that within the intent of this
question the answer is no.
IThe accuracy of this statement is questionable. It was
retrieved from Dr. Abramson's statement after the death of
Dr. Olsen. 
Dr. Abramson was not present when the drug was
administered; hence, his testimony at best would have been
second-hand.
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---

947
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Office of Legislative Counsel
Washington, D. C. 20505
Telephonet 351-6121 (Code 143-6121)
29 October 1975
TO Mr. James Michie, Investigator
Subcommittee on Administrative Practice
and Procedure
.
tAtA 
(nmmitt a ian JTthA4 
.-
7
Dear Jim:
Enclosed are additional responses
to Senator Kennedy's letter of 25
Septembe' 1975.
RobetCi
Associate Legislative Counsel
Enclosure
63

--- PAGE BREAK ---.
tAtA 
(nmmitt a ian JTthA4 
.-
7
Dear Jim:
Enclosed are additional responses
to Senator Kennedy's letter of 25
Septembe' 1975.
RobetCi
Associate Legislative Counsel
Enclosure
63

--- PAGE BREAK ---

948
1. Offices within CIA that were responsible for
monitoring or supporting experimentation lnvolvin,- hura.n
subjects are the Office of Tcchnical Services (OT.), Office
of Research and Development (ORD), Office of Scientific
Intelligence (OSl), and the Office of Security (OS).
A. Describe the functions and responsibilities
of the offices.
OTS
Formerly known as Technical Services Staff
(TSD), OTS provides a variety of technical and
scientific support to the intelligence collection
effort.
ORD
a. ORD "is 
responsible for research and
exploratory development directed toward (a) anti-
cipating intelligence problems and analyzijig them
in conjunction with the responsible or producing
components to identify the range of possible
solutions, (h) assessing and advancing nvirgingo
technologies, processing techniques, and alalytical
methodologies alplicahle to thc identified solu-
tions, and (c) selectively investigating the
feasibility of reducing the new concepts to pi)cti-
cal use. Additionally, directed technical support
is provided to other Agency components, 
as appropriate."
b. OR fulfills those responsibilities through
a many-disciplined research program encompassing
activities in the physical, life, and social sciences.
Research program activities include life sciences
research in "behavioral sciences, physiolo::y, 
aiid
the related physical science materials with e yliasis
on assessment, health, bionics, narcotics, and bio-
logical and chemical warfare materi;als." 
Ihese
responsibilities are specified by Agetcy r'guolatio'nl.
It should be noted that the rcspol.sibilit) for
"narcotics and biological and chemical wasfiare
materials" is misleading. 
A more correct .titement
would be "narcotics control and detc-tion/identifi-
cation methods for h]-6-1bT 
-l'al ani'chmim' 
l w~i-t',i6
materiTals." 
We have requested a charge in the wording
of the regulation in order to convey the true respon-
sibilities of the Office of Research and lDevelopmeitt.
W AMJ=Zal ani'chmim' 
l w~i-t',i6
materiTals." 
We have requested a charge in the wording
of the regulation in order to convey the true respon-
sibilities of the Office of Research and lDevelopmeitt.
W AMJ=Z

--- PAGE BREAK ---

949
OS'
The Office of Science and Intelligene is
responsible for producing intelligence on foreign
scientific and engineering re. carch aind aI;,:iicud
technology in the physical and life sciencns. 
As
part of this mission the Life Sciences Pivisios,
produces intelligence on Soviet antkl Pi{ biticdicine;
Soviet behavioral sciences research andi 
applications;
, biological and chcmical warrare; world-
wide food research. technology and practices; and on
worldwide human and animal epidemiology.
as
Responsible for physical security of CIA
facilities, property, and information; security
clearances of personnel employed by, associated
with, or of interest to CIA; and security support
to other components of CIA.
B. Describe the types of human use experiments
monitored or supported directly or indirectly by these
offices.
OTS
OTS wns involved in a program to monitor the
behavior of individuals under the ififltenct, of
drtgs. 
Following laboratory testing, the -ccond
ph. se of the program involved drug testing on
voluntary participants. 
The final phase (1955-1963),
conducted in conjunction with officers of the Bureau
of Narcotics, involved application on unwitting
subjects in normal social situations.
ORD
a. The types of human experiments monitored
or supported by ORD were essentially those of:
1) Identifying personality traits, chaiac-
teristics, skills or aptitudes thbat may he useful
in the selection of Agency employees--iucluding
physiological 
ahenns for establishing (credibility)
bona fides of foreign agents.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---istics, skills or aptitudes thbat may he useful
in the selection of Agency employees--iucluding
physiological 
ahenns for establishing (credibility)
bona fides of foreign agents.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

950
Included in this category is research
leading to the'identification and codilication
of cultural, psychological, personality and con-
versational traits having a potential for use in
developing models of cultural/personulity profiles
for assessing foreign individuals. 
Such models
would hell) to determine observable characteristics
that indicate whether the foreign posst-s..or of
intelligence information is lying, being evasive,
being candid and possibly susceptible to recruit-
ment as an intelligence source. Tilc m,,dcl% will
also be used in assessing the reliabllity and the
bona fides of foreign agents who are providi:,
information. Such models would have application
in the polygraph interview setting where sensors
to measure physiological responses are attached
to the subject. They would also have application
to direct conversation in which a foreign source
may be assessed. In this setting, information
could be obtained through proper exploitation of
-cul-tural- psychological and personal characteristics
of the foreign individual.
/
OSI
No involvement.
OS
OS studied the effects of various drugs,
chemicals, and hypnosis for possible use as inter-
rogation aids.

--- PAGE BREAK ---sonal characteristics
of the foreign individual.
/
OSI
No involvement.
OS
OS studied the effects of various drugs,
chemicals, and hypnosis for possible use as inter-
rogation aids.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

951
C. 
FxllaniI the nature 011d otent of tIC lcorgani-
zation or transfer of.functions involving humans
experimentation projects, the reasons for the reorgani-
zation or transfer, and who ordered it.
OTS
In 1962, OTS management began to orient its
behavioral activities toward the use of ps-ychological
assessments to support active operations and away
from peripheral long-range research. This trend
continued until the middle or late 9ofl's when O'rs
totally disengaged from human experimentation research.
ORD
No documentation relating to "a reorganization
or transfer of functions involving human experimen-
tation projects" was found in ORD files. 
People
whose association with ORD dates back to the 196R-69
period recall a redefinition of ORD/TSD responsibilities
at about that time. Under the redefinition, ORI) was to
have a greater role in research projects with long term3
goals while TSD would concentrate more on the short term
operational aspects.
OS'
No information.
Os
No information.
2. Was Dr. Sidney Gottlieb ever assigned to any office
identified in question number 1? Whether or not hewas
assigned to such offices --
A. What was his position with the CIA?
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

952
3. Was Dr. Robert Lashbrook over assigned to-any office
identified in question number 1? Whether or not he was
assigned to such offices --
A. What was his position with the CIA?
4. Who authorized Messrs. Gottlieb and Lashbrook to
conduct the experiment that involved Dr. Frank Olsen and
at lcia. 
three others as human subjects, and for what purposes
was the experimentt conducted?
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---Gottlieb and Lashbrook to
conduct the experiment that involved Dr. Frank Olsen and
at lcia. 
three others as human subjects, and for what purposes
was the experimentt conducted?
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

953
A. Identify the drugs or chemicals that .ere
used in the experiment.
On 13 April 1953, Mr. Allen W. Pulls, 
Director
of Central Intelligence, approved a progr,'i rel:tted
to rcscarch and devclopncnt of a cnpabill:y iW the
covert use or biological and chemical ,iattrials.
Th subsequent experiment involving Dr. Frank Olson
was part of that program and was conducted to observe
the effects of a specific drug in a conference
setting.
LSD was used in the experiment.
B. -Ilow many times and at what dose level were the
drugs or chemicals administered to the subjects?
The drug was administered one time, at an unknown.
but apparently low level.
C. low were these drugs or chemicals administered
to the subjects?
The drug was put in a bottle of cointreau.
D. Who administered the drugs or chemicals to the
subjects?
The identity of the individual(s) actu ,lly
administering the drug is unknown, although three
CIA officers were reprimanded for their roles in
the incident.
E. Was there medical supervision of the experiment?
There was apparently no medical supervinioi of
the experiment.
5. Has CIA ever supported, directly or indirectly,
experiments involving human subjects at or through federal
facilities for drug research and rehabilition of drug addicts
in or near (see letter of 25 September from Senator Kennedy
for listing). 
"
The records available to CIA do 
ot contain a
complete listing of federal facilities or other
institutions pertinent to this question. From 195Z
to 1962, the Agency had a classified contact with
the National Institute (of Mental health, UI.S. 
Public
Health Service with the purpose of finding a synthetic
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---estion. From 195Z
to 1962, the Agency had a classified contact with
the National Institute (of Mental health, UI.S. 
Public
Health Service with the purpose of finding a synthetic
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

954
analgesic and anti-tussivo drug which war as s; fe
or safer than codoine. 
Actual testing of druj..
was performed by NIMIl at National lnItItutu of
Mtvntal Ilealth, Addiction Center, Lcxlngto., Keuttucky.
Testing was done on animals and human volititeers
(patients at the facility in iexington). 
-Tho Agency
terminated the contract in 1962 with a report that
the goals wore realized. 
Apparently the project
continued with NIMII financing.
Records also show funding of research ra;ty have
been provided to 
State tlniversity,
University, 
State Uni%'ersity,
University, University of
University of 
, and University of
The p)rccise nature of the activity has not been
identified.
6. Please provide detairs of the nature of the records
and documents that were destroyed in 1973 portaining to human
subjects.
7. 
Prior to and subsequent to 1973, what provisions did
CIA make for medical follow-up on human subjects who partici-
pated in experiments that were supported or conducted, directly
or indirectly, by CIA?
a

--- PAGE BREAK ---to 1973, what provisions did
CIA make for medical follow-up on human subjects who partici-
pated in experiments that were supported or conducted, directly
or indirectly, by CIA?
a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

955
tiT
Medical supervision of the drug experiment-; by
the Office of Technical Setvice varied widely ,-inco
they were conducted through a variety of different
cc 
,ean 
Isms. 
In the case of the L.exin:ton. KenocL.y
hospital, 
experiments were conducted by u well trined--
and competent staff of MD's and psychiatrists. 
In
other cases experiments were conducted with no apparent
medical oversight. 
The nature of other exporimcnts wits
such that no medical follow-up was reipuircd.
S. 
Prior to and subsequent to 1973, what control has
CIA exercised in monitoring and reviewing human use in experi-
ments that CIA supported or conducted, directly or indirectly,
and in assuring that there was adequate informed consent from
those human subjects involved in such experiments?
Some of the drug experiments conducted by the Office
of Technical Service wore conducted on unwittitig subjects.
The bulk of the experiments as indicated in paia, rarph lb,
however, involved consenting subjects. 
Prior to 1973 the
Agency followed the normal practices and procedures estab-
lished by the institutions where the work was conducted.
Subsequent to late FY 1973, the Agency has requiired in
all new contracts that the institutions involved adhere
to HEW Guidelines by requiring compliance with the follow-
ing contract provision:
"In the performance of this contract, the
Contractor will assume responsibility for :dhering
to established and accepted professional, 
ethical,
and legal practices in the use of human subjects
for research purposes. This will include the main-
tenance of medical confidentiality of the individual
subjects' records and the maintenance of anonymity
in data forwarded to the Sponsor."
Once the research is-underway these procedures are period-
ically reviewed by the project officer assigned to monitor
the research.
9. Have there been any deaths in connection with human
-use experiments that were conducted or supported, directly
or indirectly by CIA? 
If so, provide details.
We know of no deaths in connection with hu.man use
experiments conducted or supported directly or indirectly
by CIA other than the Dr. Olsen case.
10. 
[lave there been any injuries in connection with
human use experiments that were conducted or supported, directly
or indirectly, by CIA? 
If 
so, provide details.
We know of no injuries in connection with human
use experiments.
Tq
70-026 0 - 76 - 61human use experiments that were conducted or supported, directly
or indirectly, by CIA? 
If 
so, provide details.
We know of no injuries in connection with human
use experiments.
Tq
70-026 0 - 76 - 61

--- PAGE BREAK ---

956
11. 
Please supply a copy of all documents relating to
the Frank Olsen case.
This has been done.
12. 
lias CIA used the 
Foundation, the 
-
Fund, the Society
Inc., the 
Fund, or
, Inc., as an intermediary in funding or supporting
in any matter experiments involving human subjects? If so,
provide details.
CIA records show that 
l'und, thv Society
, and the
Fund might have been used as intermediaries in funding 
k
experiments involving human subjects. Complete details
of their use has not yet been developed. In 'Y 1965,
funds were transferred to the 
Funid under
a non-U.S. Government association agreement for the
research described in question 13. 
Funds were transferred
to 
, Inc., in 1973-
197S for collation and analysis of psychological test
data of human subjects. There is no indication the
Foundation was used as an intermediary in
funding or supporting experiments involving human subjects.
13. llave CIA personnel conducted experiments involving
human subjects other than the experiment that involved Dr.
Frank Olsen and at least three other persons?
ORD
The one instance in which ORID personnel have
been directly involved in conducting experimvants
with human subjects occurred in Orlando, I orida
during December, 1964. The subject alleg.,l1y had
transdermnl optical perception. The tests were
observed by a contractor under a classified associa-
tion contract that had been fundedtlbrough thc
Fund. 
In addition to the contractor,
the subject's father was present during all testing.
No drugs were used. With this one exception, all
ORD sponsored research involving human subjects has
been conducted by contractors.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---ject's father was present during all testing.
No drugs were used. With this one exception, all
ORD sponsored research involving human subjects has
been conducted by contractors.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

957
I EC SET
OSI
In 1971 the Office of Scientific Intelligence
and the orrice of Security, did participate in a
polygraph experiment on a voluntary human suhject.
This subject was a yoga expert who claimed to he
able to manipulate his autonomic nervous system and
thus be able to "beat the polygraph." Our interest
was in studying Soviet countermeasures to the poly-
graph.
OS
The Office of Security conducted exiteriments
with hypnosis in connection with the polyg:raph.
The experiments (1951-1953) involved volunteer
Agency employees.
14. 
Besides those entities mentioned in question number
12, has CIA used any other domestic fund, foundation, society,
private or Government agency, or organization as an inter-
mediary in funding or supporting in any manner experiments
involving human subjects?
OTS
The Office of Naval Research was us(d by the
Office of Technical Service as an intermediary to
fund a classified contract between CIA and NIMII
(1952-1962) to test various drugs.
ORD
See Tab A.
OSI
None.
OS
OS files indicate that the 
Founda-
tion and the 
Foundation were ustcd by
other components as funding intermediarie:, in
research, although there is no direct reference to
human subject experimentation as a part.of the
research.
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---undation were ustcd by
other components as funding intermediarie:, in
research, although there is no direct reference to
human subject experimentation as a part.of the
research.
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---

958
IS. 
lias CIA used any.foreign fund, foundation, society.
private or Government agency, or organization as an inter-
mediary In funding or supporting in any manner oxlsoriments
involving human subjects?
We arc not aware of any use of a foreign funding
intermediary to support human experimentation.
16. ls CIA used tho U.S. Navy, Air Force, Army,
Marines, or Coast Guard as an intermediary in funding or
supporting in any manner experiments involving human
subj octs ?
OTS
The Office of Naval Research was used by
the Office of Technical Service as an intermediary
to fund a classified contract between CIA and NIMH
(1952-1962) to test various drugs.
ORD
See Tab B.
17. 
Has CIA ever made arrangements, directly or in-
directly, to have a-public, private, or military entity in
a foreign country conduct experiments involving human
subjects in a foreign country?
We are not aware of any arrangements for a public,
private, or military entity in a foreign country to
conduct experiments involving humans in a foreign
country. 
lie are continuing our search for information
on this question.
12
c'MO."*

--- PAGE BREAK ---e, or military entity in a foreign country to
conduct experiments involving humans in a foreign
country. 
lie are continuing our search for information
on this question.
12
c'MO."*

--- PAGE BREAK ---

S SECRET
Iden 12a 
FiY 
1S65-1967
2b 
FY 1968-1969
2c 
FY 1971-1976
-
FY 1965
Fund
- Other than Ceoart-ent of Defense
Reason For
R:scarch
To er !:n o.r cz;z6.lVy to
screen personnel.
To enhance our capability to
screen personnel.
To examine information
elicitation techniques.
To examine new techniques for
obtaining information.
To determine whet).er unusual
sensory processes could be
used for Intelligence
purposes.
Description of
Research
':1.;rc roser:n tn.. 
in-
,volved attacirsent of sensors
for recording physiological
res:nses. to drugs were
used.
Folyraph research that In-
v=lve! attachrent of sensors
for recording physiolog~cal
responses. 
No dr;s were
used.
Sleep suggestibility studies
tnat involved the attachent
of sensors. 
No drugs were
used.
Irterrcgation research that
involved the atta:hr-nt of
sensors for recording phy-
siolo;ical responses. 
No
drugs were used.
Attec. ent of sensors for
recording; visual and tactal
se-scry processes. No drugs
vere used.
.3
*-o
Associazic. wit A
U.S. Govern 
t
was classified.
FY 1965-67 associ-
ation with V.S.
GoverrTent was
classified.
FY 19S-69 associ-
ation with the Age
is classified.
FY 1971-76 rssoci.
ation with tre Ag
is classified.
FY-65 association
with U.S. C vern-
rent is cicssiffedj
,his zztivi4y s
covered in the
ans-ers to ;,est|f
12 and 13.
I,
7 
.
I- 
I
CO
I
I J

--- PAGE BREAK ---rssoci.
ation with tre Ag
is classified.
FY-65 association
with U.S. C vern-
rent is cicssiffedj
,his zztivi4y s
covered in the
ans-ers to ;,est|f
12 and 13.
I,
7 
.
I- 
I
CO
I
I J

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SECR ET
.16. 
a) Research Funvs Throuth - Air Force Office
Reason for
Cottractor 
Cates, 
Pesearch
research
;nst. for
.-
6tal Sci-
erces,
Iden $3
University of
School
of :,'d(ci .a.
r 1965- 
To enhance our capabill
1972 
to screen personnel.
FT 1965 
To enhance our capability
to screen personnel.
FY 1967 
To evaluate speech in-
dices and patter-s to
deter,ire their useful-
ness in assessing brwns.
of Scio'tific Resebrch I June 1963
G',scri~tion of
Research
ity 
Polygrph research that in-
veclv, attat'-.1t of sen-
sors for -recoroing phy-
siological resposes. ce-
pressents and stimulants
(se-oral and ar-hetan-ines)
were used to establish
the physiological arousal
levels in subjects. This
took place in the 1967-
1968 contract year on a
small nw:ner (8-12) of
volunteers who had given
infor-ed consent.
Polygraph research that in-
volved attachr.ent of sen-
sors for recording physio-
logical responses. 
No drugs
were used.
Interview techniques were
developed and evaluated
through personal interviews.
o drugs were used.
17 Octcer 1971
Re-ark.$
Froi FY-65 though F'Y-68
this V:'-s a clissif~et asstcia-
tion. The identity of te
Wo-ractor is ircutd In
this !nst,.nce becae the
contractor nas acknole~ced
the association in tie reda.
Fro3 FY 1959 thro-.S 1972 the
Aqency contracted directly
with 
on an urclass~fie
association basis. That
decision was in res;cn.se to
the firdirgs of t".eKatze.bach
co=ission.
Classified association.
Clossified association in •
in FY-S7. Classified
association %as disco.ti-ed
in the FY-68 in response to
Co;-=ission.
SE CRET
9
r"
0,55-r': 17'

--- PAGE BREAK ---h
co=ission.
Classified association.
Clossified association in •
in FY-S7. Classified
association %as disco.ti-ed
in the FY-68 in response to
Co;-=ission.
SE CRET
9
r"
0,55-r': 17'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
16 b" 0 :x 
; undedTh
#5 
FY l9f4-1970
SECRET
roUeh - Off ice of Naval Research
Reason For
Research
To enhance our capability to
screen personnel.
FY 1966-1969 
To enhance our capability to
College, 
.
screen personnel.
To detemir whether unusual
sensory processes couId be
used for intelligence purposes.
I 
;6 
Y 190196
j.
"
Description of
Research
Polygraph research that in-
volved attach-zit of sensors
for recording physiolcgical
responses. 
No drugs were
used.
Polygraph research that in-
volved attachment of sensors
for recording physiological
respcnses. 
No drugs were
used.
Extrasensory research that
involved the attac--nt of
sensors for recordinq coin-
c.cence of b-ain Wav-s in
:hroc sub4,nts vhen ciny ere
of te three was st1.lated
by v'sal. a-ditory or :t:tal
-uans. 
No drug; uvre ;.s;d.
Re arks,
Classified
association.
The identity of the
contractor in this
instance is im:lut.
because the 4;2 y
contracted dire:tly
with .
clerie
on an urclossifie
association basis in
FY1969. 
Until t6t
tire the assc:iat1:
had been classi'loe.
The decision for an
unclassified essczi-
ation was in t-1
response to the
findings of the
Katzen:ack Cc!.!sslc
Classified asso-tati.
10
0
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16 c) R.tezrch Fundli ThroAh
cot'acter 
cates
-Deoa rtre:t of Arm'
Reason For
Research
Iden #7 
FY 19;1-1973 
Protection of US ViP's
Description of
Research
Analysis of the results of
drug testing ustg 
r.n
subjects.
A review of this |
activity #as dter4
mined tr.at CIA f--rl
were rt 
use. for
research teStang c
were used C.%' 
fVt
the arAlysls a..
evaluation of datt'
obtained frear.i-
or from datk-obtai
by others ia prier.
experiments.
1;8
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---CIA f--rl
were rt 
use. for
research teStang c
were used C.%' 
fVt
the arAlysls a..
evaluation of datt'
obtained frear.i-
or from datk-obtai
by others ia prier.
experiments.
1;8
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---

963
pC' L-rn 4et&
I. The final phase of testing of program materials involves
their application to unwitting subjects in normal life settings. 
It was
noted earlier that the capabilities of program substance to produce
disabling or discrediting effects or to increase the effectiveness of
interrogation of hostile subjects cannot be established solely through
testing on volunteer populations. 
Reaction and attribution patterns are
clearly affected when the testing is conducted in an atmosphere of
confidence under skilled medical supervision.
2. 
CIA, therefore, entered into an informal arrangement
with certain cleared and witting individuals in the Bureau of Narcotics
in 1955 which provided for the release of program materials for such
testing as those individuals deemed desirable and feasible. The
initial arrangement obtained the services of a senior representative
of the Bureau and one of his assistants on the West Coast. 
A parallel
arrangement was established on the East Coast in 1961. 
The Director
of the Bureau has been briefed on the. activity, but the Agency Offi-
cer, who has guided the program from its inception, is of the opinion
that the former would disclaim all know edae and responsibility in
the event of compromise. 
The program director has, in fact,
provided close supervision of the testing program front the beginning

--- PAGE BREAK ---ould disclaim all know edae and responsibility in
the event of compromise. 
The program director has, in fact,
provided close supervision of the testing program front the beginning

--- PAGE BREAK ---

964
and makes periodic, visits to the sites. The sum of $10, 000 has been
provided annually to each of the two projects to cover cost of cultivation
of targets and of maintenance of a safehouse in each area for the
observation of effects of-substances on selected test individuals.
3. 
The particular advantage of these arrangements with the
Bureau of Narcotics officials has been that test subjects could be sought
and cultivated within the setting of narcotics control. Some subjects
- -have-been informers or members of suspect criminal elements from
whom the Bureau has obtained results of operational value through the
tests. On the other hand, the effectiveness of the substances on
individuals at all social levels, high and low, native American and
foreign, is of great significance and testing has been performed on a
variety of individuals within these categories.
4. 
A significant limitation on the effectiveness of such testing
is the infeasibility of performing scientific observation of results.
The Bureau agents are not qualified scientific observers. Their
_subjects are seldom accessible beyond the first hours of the test.
The testing may be useful in perfecting delivery techniques,_and in
identifying surface characteristics of onset, reaction, attribution, and side-
effect. 
In a number of instances, however, the test subject has become ill
for hours or days, including hospitalizz Lion in at least one case, and the
agent could only follow-up by guarded it quiry after the test subject's
return to normal life. Possible sickness and attendant cconornic oss
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---zz Lion in at least one case, and the
agent could only follow-up by guarded it quiry after the test subject's
return to normal life. Possible sickness and attendant cconornic oss
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

965
are inherent contingeht effects of the testing.
5. 
The program officer stated that the objectives of
covert testing concern the field of toxicology rather than medicine;
further, that the program is not intended to harm test individuals, and
that the medical consultation and assistance is obtained when appropriate
through separate program arrangements. The risk of compromise of
the program through correct diagnosis of an illness by an unwitting
medical specialist is regularly considered and is stated to be a
governing factor in the decisionto conduct the given test. The Bureau
officials also maintain close working relations with local police authorities
which could be utilized to protect the activity in critical situations.
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---t the given test. The Bureau
officials also maintain close working relations with local police authorities
which could be utilized to protect the activity in critical situations.
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

966
I)
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASJ41fNTON.D.C. 
20505
I October 105
Honorable Frank Church, ChaIrman
Select Conaittee to Study Governinental Operations
' With Respect to InteUigence Activities
United States Senate
Wa*ehiston; D. C. 
Z0510" 
..
Dear Mr. Chilrman:
Forwarded herewith is a copy of a letter I received from Senat or
Edward Kennedy, Chairman of the Subcommittees on AdministratLve
-' Practice and Procedure and Health. 
In essence the letter request that
;sI provide Senator Kennedy's Subcommittees a considerable amount oit
Material related to certain experimental programs in which this Agency .
has parUcipated.
s 
As you know, this Agency has been cooperating with the Sena 8'i ,"4
Select Comurittee for some timre on the same subject matter.' Jt .wovild 
*
seem that Senator Kennedy's Subcommittee investigation parallels ha -.
of the Select Committee on this subject and that a separate respon#.. to., 
0
Senator Kennedy would be a duplication of the substantial off6ftt f4djo 
,4 :
expended on tId matter. In as much as the Select Committee 
..
, 
.
,
gone into these areas, you may wish to suggest to Senator -Keirtiba 't
order to avoid duplication of effort he defer inquiries into 
Ar 
b-
spch% 
programs until after the Select Commuittre haosconP16ef1Imb~ 
j*i4
.. atlon and-iseted its report on the object.
Since Senator Kennedy hats rCelUebted th', informrts 
by QctoiLo 
1 t3 
't
I would-appreciate an early response to the ,tbrvft 1i"KftIstiol.',, 
:
has been discussed with Messrs. Miller. BfadLr an4 M;xwelt of ya, r ntaIf.
S.Sincerely,
W. E. Colby: "
* 
~Director I:
E 
.]ncl~suye 
' 
*
• 
'' 
l 
,, 
++ 
-
s' 
" 
'
: 
:+,: 
.
, 
. " .,+- + .
;..+ + .. + 
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s. Miller. BfadLr an4 M;xwelt of ya, r ntaIf.
S.Sincerely,
W. E. Colby: "
* 
~Director I:
E 
.]ncl~suye 
' 
*
• 
'' 
l 
,, 
++ 
-
s' 
" 
'
: 
:+,: 
.
, 
. " .,+- + .
;..+ + .. + 
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

967
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON.D.C. 
20505
I October 1975
Honorable Edward M. Kennedy 
'
United States Senate 
.
Washington, D. C. 
Z0510 
.
" 
Dear Senator Kennedy: 
". 
"
I have yourletter of Z5 September 1975 requusting infnrn%%tO.'
and documents related to certain expe rimental prog rams in which this
Agency has been involved.
As' 
& youOow, this' same subject has been under investigation by
:4the ete 
Select Committee on lntelligonce and it would seem that addi-:
lil-. 
IsnqurliS 
aint6 this area at this time would be duplicative of the
';: 
conifderabe effort already put forth. 
I have today written to Senator
,L:..' 
r.WbUSgedtin' that perhaps you and he could work out some procedure
S'. :w 
Tby duptcation can be avoided at this time at least in some areaL. "A.
*. 
~ wu -" 
.. : 
..
4 *. ;. co; 
that letter Is attached.. 
:">,
A 14 .. ; 
.7'.
70, hrPj.v:t nf*yasure, you that I vill cooperate fully in whatever under-
'..".;ch 
" .Sincerely,
4L., lit
* 
,.., 
.' 
: :. ;.. 
ner. 
" 
...
IV.. 
E. 
Colby
t 
.
Director'.
.:. 
teasark 
, 
rd
70-026 i2CO.A, 
VC0
,, 
,,",--' 
;,','. 
,. 
"". 
J'. 
C 
lby.... 
.,.; 
',
,, 
'.. 
';,.- 
.
, 
;. 
; , 
.. 
.
.
.
..
Dieco 
/ 
~ 
* 
" 
""".'I
.4 
' 
" ; 
' 
:':1" 
;.:. .
-' '.' 
;

--- PAGE BREAK ---026 i2CO.A, 
VC0
,, 
,,",--' 
;,','. 
,. 
"". 
J'. 
C 
lby.... 
.,.; 
',
,, 
'.. 
';,.- 
.
, 
;. 
; , 
.. 
.
.
.
..
Dieco 
/ 
~ 
* 
" 
""".'I
.4 
' 
" ; 
' 
:':1" 
;.:. .
-' '.' 
;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

968
MU 
COM 
m. 
6 
ID 
abomA
,mm & Y1r. 
MTIM. 
VWA 
C0 6MIm
A. $"Of 
f 
M. 
HUWAU N. AIUem. M. I
*tMIM 
F. MomLL 
M. 
SAN" 
s.OWgSTi. Aol.
WALtEl I. 04VOLOSI. 
Si. 
CHALLAH 09. 
"NAIO 
A9 
M
M M 
60046M. we. 
M¢IiAUM S. 1' 
I.M PA.
,u 
A 
.$am. 
Am m
WWKJAM 
4. W"".~ll $TAFFl DtlWCi"
SELEC 
COMMITTEE TO
STUY GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS WITH
RESPECT TO INTL.GINCE ACTIVITIES
(mammvATMo S. Aec F. I" 
000W,)
WASHINGTON. 0.0. 20510
ctober 23, 1975
The Honorable Miword M. Kcnned'y
United States Sernt.
Wshington, D. C.
Dear Senator Kcnnedy:
Senator Church okcd va,; to send y,(su n copy of his letter
to Director Colby pureuont tr youth converectirin with I cnator
Church.
S; nec. rly,
WM .n, 
G. Milier
f '. f Directo~r
Enclosure

--- PAGE BREAK ---

969
CO@PY.
October 6 197
Mr. WMlM 20, Colby
Control lute11tgonce Agency
ImebhIntonp D. C.
Door Kr, Colbys 
-
The Demte Blect Committee on InteUltence Ativitin met
"Weduee 
y October 1, 
19 
D and during Its considerstionp took up
tUs questIon of Senator Mrd Xennedy'o request for reterrals
oonocrning certaln expcrlmentol prog 
s In vhIoh the CIA has
prtieSptt8.•-. 
,
The Comittee voted tit 
the question you raised in your letter
of Oct er 1, 1975, properly uoa o matter between 3cnotor Kmedi's
8abecauttees end tha CIA* 
The 3elect Comittee intends to coutUmei.w
-Its inquiry, into these smtte'o..
With kid reprds,
Linccrely
Frank Church
Chairman

--- PAGE BREAK ---ter between 3cnotor Kmedi's
8abecauttees end tha CIA* 
The 3elect Comittee intends to coutUmei.w
-Its inquiry, into these smtte'o..
With kid reprds,
Linccrely
Frank Church
Chairman

--- PAGE BREAK ---

970
1M4'3v.ORANOUM .OI.:O: 
Director of Ccr, trrl al-lh.liscc"
SU.BJECT 
S: .tv 
reithPorL,.-
4 
.
.
.
.
..
1. This rnernorandun is for actior, vi.nd conItaixrs X'JommdL.4
tions in parara 
6"..o 
*.
Z. 
On, 13 April. 1953 the tbhn'DirccLor of Central nt ollig.r.ce,"
Mr. Aien AW. Dulles, approved two cx-rerisely 
Pr 
it.v0 
a' f2Ifa 
a;,
one *)-elated to research and develop rnrit of a cap:.1il4ty in tjhe c o*%;(X-.
use of biological and chemical materials th. outer fo"c OtLe
-
[Owing to the unusual natuco of thcac,
progr ams, the'Mircctor waivcd normal Agencyfnndrng, 
,CCOImt:ir
"and contriacttual procedures. 
.
"
* 
.
.
* 
.
j .
.
.
3. In 1963, the Inspector Gnera "condu.c(:c.d ars i-nuection of
• KULTRA. , and notcd that "the structure and. operatinal.-, controls
over this activity ncedwd strengthening; improvemrt;itn axe n)c(eA.d
the arnirsistration of the research projects, and sonic: 
J 
the *t.s.j.-
of substances under simulated opiratiotial crrdition; yvixs.x xjnd(:d to
involve cccstive ri.c to the Aeucy." It w ; 'cc:ornrynertdd 1.l;:i: III
ori.'nral p.ulfhority for MKULTRA 
should bc rcd)-afJ-d. :tndc.Xflt:([
to the DCI for approval.
li'l' S ,sisl 
'
. _ + .++: 
0: ! .+.' 
v_

--- PAGE BREAK ---eucy." It w ; 'cc:ornrynertdd 1.l;:i: III
ori.'nral p.ulfhority for MKULTRA 
should bc rcd)-afJ-d. :tndc.Xflt:([
to the DCI for approval.
li'l' S ,sisl 
'
. _ + .++: 
0: ! .+.' 
v_

--- PAGE BREAK ---

971
5. After OlAven years of expericrtc:: wih Vhc 
MKULTRj. 
:rac::h..
an}.L,.-€, it is n'xy I)3lef 
Wh., the be.UiC rga;;ons for x(cjtu:BI.,s)mg tvaivcar-
of st aracl 'darcUd 
administrative control ovUe' 
thutsae UCnuitv activi :tiu
are as valid tod.y m.c they wore it Aj~p'L )953. 
However# cxporlonceO
with the mechaniisn, as wvol at tfj 
a.rn,,ng xitu :, a op:rt.oral
requirements slrong]y support rOvition and updaling (of authorif.y
for this activity. Thin new 
quettt would limit tho waMvir of 
r:t 
b.-
lished Agency impport procedures both in ths type of tc4iviti e con.-
ternplated and the fical resource to be exp 
e:d..
6. 
It is thqr foro rcquosted lhatthe Director of Cc:tra"
)nmelli ance approve the folovo.ng recorrwmndations.
a. 
.MKVILTRA 
Project, name be chan ed to..-MK-SEARC.-
b. Deputy Director for Plans be authorized t:o pemr 
L
ChiT 
-
D 
to ctntinnt to*
operate NKSBARC 
-..i s a program limited 1:o4
(1) Develop, tcsL and evaluate capabilities iI th"
covert use of biological, chemical and radio-- 
•
' 
""active material systems and techniques for
producing predictable human behavioral And/o'
physiological changes in support of highly sen-
sitive operational requirements.
c. Total annual authorizationts not to exceed 
-.
d, The: approval o; Lhc Dpitty Dircctor for T)aUr; br:
re q uiT ed to 
-ilUd 
: nLv pc cje ct ;, to arm e.r s , c 'j ,rnsd
renew or terminal corninuing effort: itt the
Pros rarr. 
.
.
I10classIified 4by ()r453)
* i 
io
(-
70-026 0 - 1. - 62
"1

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed to 
-ilUd 
: nLv pc cje ct ;, to arm e.r s , c 'j ,rnsd
renew or terminal corninuing effort: itt the
Pros rarr. 
.
.
I10classIified 4by ()r453)
* i 
io
(-
70-026 0 - 1. - 62
"1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

972
C:. 
MYeD 
j~t']ICC' 
or 
[()A 
1"Jawil! j(41lf.-t" \elt 
t|ile J):J)Uty
Director f.or .puqorclvii; 
,roce~divr.1 Im., lIII$- ;af.f.
niim 
;,tion or 
MIESARCI.
'f. 
"fb. I),',uty Dirct:tor for PIla,,t; 
rieL 
bic: 
eho D)-pty
DJfCCW.oi Of CC:-11.Lu't1l 
U00tcI 
ifc'e('c dlt Jc1;tt; 
tSO 
i'-aflitally
01 
NKSEARCH" 1tctivifiI ..
g. '.110 Chlief, T 
S 
D 
J; ]L. 3)iainj.rn
internal controlt. and rccords of all nt.;|ltt.ive irl.-
support. matters within each NMKSEARCII'.. 
Jf.{,t.
These, wil.) include:
(1) 
A plan of Lhe resecarch isid -dcveloprn-mri to ho por...
formed by each project. 
.
.
.
(2) An ad'ministrative plan for caclt pro, jc:ct ap rovea.
by the DD/S or Jic designect setting fo)'.t n tc:ci t:y,
.budget and dct;,ilcd accounting 
iangc-r 
ci...
* 
° 
*. 
.
• 
.
*h. Waiver of any of the established admini!;lraLive and.
control procedures of RKSEARCH.- 
will rcquire thci 
%'.
approval of the.Director of Central I1:ellinc-.
Sicha-l 
l mrs
* 
Deputy M)raoar~ for Plana
.CONCURREC' 
..
,
-
Deputy Director for Support
-e, 
Director'
I)CCJ-.SSjf j d 1)y O.i45-81
))putIY )i I4:lor of Central )n! ul)igenc
Vic 
.n 
-•z 
I
a. t-eout aagh i.,tr 
firupor 
lilt 
" 
•-tt 
"
)•~~ 
Ii*
" 
t" 
.I ' *, 
' 
L 
, 
" " 
.
..
" 
,, 
"

--- PAGE BREAK ---Sjf j d 1)y O.i45-81
))putIY )i I4:lor of Central )n! ul)igenc
Vic 
.n 
-•z 
I
a. t-eout aagh i.,tr 
firupor 
lilt 
" 
•-tt 
"
)•~~ 
Ii*
" 
t" 
.I ' *, 
' 
L 
, 
" " 
.
..
" 
,, 
"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

973
flAMM Chkt!,Oo Opmtlon Dvlcica
____ 
; 
V~Lc~I ~1 
cd~ 
for th7 Me~ G." Umcu in
to, t, oxrctun it 
th 
1.;:.)/P .l 
h 
UDS 
,:.,10A 
. f
1L. 
Rlc= 
In*o 
to thb rozm1tvi frcz t -: Acting YJ/1'o
"t1e!W- J- rr 
cealoct ua 
ac 
mrr. 
1-b* in re~m~t.i4 that yva~
.
p~Li"- 
-
.- r' 
yor..$ r-. 
:.-e to c ir-r
tho f a.1cv=.- 
i d pr. cr, 
uc±z.-dz a:. 
c. -,c:s 
'i 
f or 
v
2a ci' sub3cct 
3.dUa
mt 
Or e:. 
Uv.,' r.ejsiv-o to Atl-'7t to &7,,.4u 1'.n 6%-t-
tlot 
ovlt 
r -:t 
€rf c.t L-/ 
Uo 
- To 
c.' 
r
* be w-, oa. 
.
rt 
ehrc 
th' eatc.tl,. 
..
t 
r o im I 
to 
-.
&
latcxzesto by t!:,- Ca I 
c-i~C 
'ts-ic-=: 
i-d 
on nulvMco V-e.= hta
emponmtLop tha I.-tvtw cXC---cnItf nn Vi~. C~d.ap &4C 
SJEt~lt".
"Zmnm 
i~ ftr t±nnt vu1 
or1.'p -30 of driF rocr~-
t~mL~. 
pu-pc 
.% 
ye~ait. to tbo det-Xicl) PA4t~w'-taroeu-ch
* tentica vlUJ lo! :vc tl:.: rrbjvL. i, 'r~ 
cquiri',4
the pairtlr!,--cai .9 thf: hm= ~ns vj3J.b.- u~xor th.n
8izectlem Of tho Maec, 
micalca
3. 
Wcrwh 2c oC m.-Nect x~wr~~ 
e~ 
t 
; 
th~zrjntici
4izuvctlc= Vown btL,- a mci; tk3r la uvrrolt-:1, X 
imU~~ 
ohrj,
lndce~ 
to c rhi* c'w. 
z
belicto tblz~ i:. a p..-,P 
rMi-a.z-,.4cn in 
c-~ai*~
our =-Oco1 mi3ca and4 cur c:Ceeintiets ~1In 
S* z:ct 
Cie
tbrD:/P Ul? A~3 
.z 
in ro(=2.!cev~t 
zr7 2:c 
uvetrtnto
TSS in~ rmt ,,~ 
ipm 
i rx~A1±J3 
t2n 
ma~ e.tod In rc::
ccz~nbthf ccnsiz.ry resewa.h,, the. cnl.c-7= 
vckLuA'd be 
'v
thio dt>-cticn of a cc=±tt.eo. 
I would rcqr.w-st that, Ina a m~ttor Lz

--- PAGE BREAK ---

974
M. 
¢ 
-
;,". 
S, 
'Act! 
CI- 
w* 
4
Ilecl; 
si-fieI 
~ 
- A..1 
4 4 
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---uA'd be 
'v
thio dt>-cticn of a cc=±tt.eo. 
I would rcqr.w-st that, Ina a m~ttor Lz

--- PAGE BREAK ---

974
M. 
¢ 
-
;,". 
S, 
'Act! 
CI- 
w* 
4
Ilecl; 
si-fieI 
~ 
- A..1 
4 4 
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

975
,8 firit ric
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, Medical Staff
Director of Security
Chief, 
TSS
Clief, 
Staff
SUJ3JECT:, 
Pol.ey and Porocedure' for tho Use of
)Drugs in Connection with the DD/P MisiOx
E 
RFERENCE: 
DD/P Memorandum dated 14 Mari 1958
1. A meeting of the 'committee oitablished by reference•l
mornorandux-. 
is set for 10:30 a. in., 
11 April, A suggested
agenda for this meeting is a discussion of the advinability of:
a. 
Conducting a study of new drugs not cuironLly being
used by CIA;
b. 
The preparation of a report for the committee by the
Office of Security, the Medical Staff and TSS On the results
of past w;e of drugs;
c. 
Discussion of an interim policy relative to the
procedures leading up to the approval by COP of tire use of
drgs in any specific case; and
d. 
Discussion of formalizing an Agency policy con.
Corning the use of drugs.
Z. As a basis for discussion th" following draft is u;ub-
riltted an possible Agency policy:
"It is in the national interest, undcr certain circus s;tancers
to use drugs to 
achieve a ),articular
operational advance. 
It is the policy of CIA. not to u:e ny
Declassified by, 054581
,4.
*1• 
I 
;. 
'." 
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t, undcr certain circus s;tancers
to use drugs to 
achieve a ),articular
operational advance. 
It is the policy of CIA. not to u:e ny
Declassified by, 054581
,4.
*1• 
I 
;. 
'." 
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

976
digt,,,.. I. 
ietyv:'.t the. will ot a :ilojCct w-cre
i, iii; y re's'o:.Ady 10c L:xp.led. to ' jt':.c 
;O - b* 
ihw:L 
t iiJ~g
ll(:53tal or jhyi;icdl ha1r:m 
a.; cutl-A;tcd too!;iiC 
Iempora-y
di.-coo forZ. 
Drii,: in-t- 
b- .
.e,, oialy after certification by the
Chief of Oetroti,.i:; th:t the- 
u;: 
it; i i thc sa.tio,al intcre.t..
Exc.ep' for mcndic.,l red .ro!., 
no druvI wiIt h(: u;d 
oi any sti-ft
offi4L(.r or eniploye of CIA or:"ny 
Uhr 
. S. ;igcncy without
(a) the co;nent of the ernployce, (b) a ceiti i 
bation|by 
fte Chief,
)Aedical ";!Af, that the drug w6i 
not c:;'uiJe aay oriental or
physical d.'t;age to the eimpjloyce, ;-il (c) ;'pprova) by the DY)CI.
I'Sittce 
dru. 
are still it e. 
c.xper;i(, 'nfatl itage as to the
acopJ 
of their ttlthi atc use, the 
reema.r~dion for Use in any
particular care should be irmdd(; on the ba 6ir of )iced ;tl
national iittere-At. 
The co!t factor iu thi, 
eperi-llcit;t). p?.imt
is a s;eco:clary consid-treation. S,
3. As a basisj for disci--io:, 
thve following draft i; 
mlub..
rnitd 
ts t!-e comrniittee-rcorriaended iauterirn policy foZ the-
approv:tl of the use of the!..- drugs :
"Pcencling the. establi.;hrttctit &nd appxovaI of the fi nl.Jge31cy
policy for the control and tusc of drit,", for the purpose of
or operational objectives, all requests for the.
use of drutgs will be s.ub'nitted to this committee for its i'cozr-
mendation to the Chief of Operations, DD/P. 
The (:omrmrittee
will in v'; ch inntarcc !specific.lly recommend
a. 
Yhctlier or not drugs -;hould be used;
b. 
The specific drug to be uvcd 
!hk 
1 
is mnos, t JiRely
to acc,:nidh 
the d sir-d rc: . .Jt;
c. 
The ':(.tiirie.t('d rlmji. factr,v, 
if ally, 
JVOlveCd in
it:; usc;
d. 
The 
hp'ocfc!t:" 1 
and 6i rcuvtnv;,'..c!; u;1d'r ,v.lichi
the drug i' to h," adtii,.tc 
red;
ecIclassified hy .054581
BEST GOTAAWE':(.tiirie.t('d rlmji. factr,v, 
if ally, 
JVOlveCd in
it:; usc;
d. 
The 
hp'ocfc!t:" 1 
and 6i rcuvtnv;,'..c!; u;1d'r ,v.lichi
the drug i' to h," adtii,.tc 
red;
ecIclassified hy .054581
BEST GOTAAWE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

977
1. 
Tb:,-.-,n b.vs ll.--n n.,var-A r~cvst, 
vi 
~. 
> ,.thin tho ri'/? ,u
to poUcy n-mZ p-rma'cear.> vth r'c 
to 
uzo~~, 
i 
Cof~e 
Ybtt xvsutril
oic,.2 
-
X 
thrs O'tn, of 
va. l i 
.
1 
)?*-o 
1 ii;". iM
In thl:i pr 
'.i. 
sTSS 
to 
i-arr 
ic c.,ly 
,i_ : ro'
v3 t fp~lJ.7 tnd vr3codjcUC 
ii 
,i M y 
M 
;ftrhzitiv
2. 
r~ol 
P-qo t,3 nsk 
!-u to chilx ;tus inrkun l~rit-i
cor.t-rr 
o" ; 
n. 
t.! 
or TS$ t.:e Cf!cn oir -".car.Lty, 
Uhl 
.
W;edso"! 
Ltaf- e::d tha 
Z;taft to 
U1 
i~ ~o012:; pulposl.ut
a. 
rtgocm 
nd nn .j.am-y policy cov-'ein.g tk- uoto of e!rue-.3
b. 
prd 
Droc.-r-v 
lc.r 
vhch tho Cblcf of -ptatiorm,,,
M/can be PAdJ.y ini'orc 
in r,.ci :pqie -rlor to na 
n, a
t 
oe.r-i.wition ,-:.0 
tha .mq, i.o.A li;.ft to% 
em :~ 
tho
icsalme' rotult:s, fko r1sf f-ctor- iii-1.- 
d tbO prvc-idzro
usyier sich tlh 
, 
d"-is 
tm 
o, bo r-mia3ter.- 
d
C. 
trae 
' 
c rt " 
ie si-c(p 
r 
i--L' tora .e.c 
ti0r. of'
ul. 
o..
1,Atng revity 1ir 
c .•r-.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tor- iii-1.- 
d tbO prvc-idzro
usyier sich tlh 
, 
d"-is 
tm 
o, bo r-mia3ter.- 
d
C. 
trae 
' 
c rt " 
ie si-c(p 
r 
i--L' tora .e.c 
ti0r. of'
ul. 
o..
1,Atng revity 1ir 
c .•r-.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

978
_*C 
Ms"ssbsr 
1r)
.
2,t.e!:ed r-.,e t1.. co.'-I t4 
.
. .1e 
. " ,.f cz-t ",'Lc!% -.v 
,.
there . -', 
.'ug o'." €:;nver.,a 'L-; L' 
"r. :.';--= .
'/. 
:,t" cl;Lt~e.ct
5.. 
t." n I.-. 
,s €1rs:, *-:: , 
.: 
:',r.t 
",jn, 
, 
' 
; -
.;,L=
a .11 
c/...n 
.. tf : cove .r: , :"-r.loy .:'ll, 
idc..i*:u ertai.l
:, :'J ~ 
e,- 1 
.
t..7 
: ?"ece 
,z 
rt c 
2.3 
Artcr 1' t 
./.t"
;r, 
ct.:: 
:r.:": 
.- s 
t-:, !.* *.,a Vtz. ,.-,Irz;. 
rei-ort t:'.t
hte..-Xe- 
.. 
r. 
,'..Lnv' P 
t 
.-.
1 
:r 
.
.:Lb to c:.":ct : .r. cn
,ttttr,; 
t 
:.1r
2, 
T.:re 
.C 
.ch..s 
car. :o 
r:ar.. 
; 
oi.V: PfActr In '.c czza
c...e 
.r.'; 
:c.,.!z '.r;i I: ,et , 
.: -Ary ' 
e.#-1 
I 
: I
VA=O 
c :.0
-.f t 
.' -r.J ,ryr 
nrPit 
t.I
t. 
71.P t ".r 
o' 
..
0' 
,,.d 's a.l, t 
of 
at ;o cr rl d
"ht;v'~r' 
L 
. %', 
o~ar 
us h 
r~tl.'
recal 
1.",. 
r ;, .h.ot ,.v 
, 
:r r.t 
re of ".u ci 
"- ' 
M
.- c :. .cr:.*-v% -. 1, 
c 
- . in1.vt .;r. -.is 
fy: 
.-. r:: '..
!,: 
£.'' t ..?- A *: v ..krt 
-. 
t ' 
.3;) tt 
.
r ,". ,, z.e
tk.at o;-ir ,a =..."".. 
#-.f :iv- 3&3rq :ls :: ... !.o.8,.L-rartl '".d a
rutiLal t.endency.
d. 
It is rp--.rent thtt I.h.cre is 3 
ct 
= 
.sli 
ty ".!zt t.o
dru- wrcs a tri,; '.r -. en'..-...ni 
ctpltt;. 
Cie.--'r ctr-" 
.
so 
_-'.th th. exc,3sti..r :. 
-,3i 
arJ.%.:'. 
c.o-murr-ce 
"t.
"atly r-.ef 
:., 
3f 
"re¢r'i.c 
var ava":.flc or utl.li-c. '-r
r.ettra a.?r:.z 
.
.. ex-T-1tr.t in u,.ldc 
1:=.j.: ",' 
t:
tr.ontroll*d e.-r.-.s 
C.'.b &s :lee cc, zX-.ce~j .:y 7:'
could 
u:riouly v.cct T.e r-c'ord an rij:tr.t 
c- e t-. 
Ao,:fVi .
DECLASSIFIED 
-r. 
lt-. 
.,'r 
1.c 
.
.rt8.ch*,.e co.. Ito- 
:s 4Lc 
-,
ON 24.JULY 1975 
9 a., vcjrt. 
-t 8 
'it 
r-'Ltaoc 
v 
.r .-..
ee o
BY AUTHORITY OF
THE DCI 
° 
, 
n enrlitav ct er.,t~tr 
oncy ewila
our rcart!.p.'4th 
t'. 
: , t:er wj-nclet 
-
.'s becowo
--. 
• 
Ikw.T.* 
.
.1975 
9 a., vcjrt. 
-t 8 
'it 
r-'Ltaoc 
v 
.r .-..
ee o
BY AUTHORITY OF
THE DCI 
° 
, 
n enrlitav ct er.,t~tr 
oncy ewila
our rcart!.p.'4th 
t'. 
: , t:er wj-nclet 
-
.'s becowo
--. 
• 
Ikw.T.* 
.
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

979
so 
Tlhers s*.:u1d t-3 !--6-o.d1Mtely setat1)hcd a 
;'-.1
tra-,:..cy br.rd "^.ch :t..,.1 
reyt." r. 1. 
exori rcr.ts 
ec- v.o.
appronl I;r. L,:,k' ar.€ o 
r" 
it 
.r. :' *: 4c I.'- 
.. 
£.. 
t re t..n,"cbxi 
a r.
to 2i2 ot.ort 
.' .v.' .. tterj 2" poultry r.r 1.r = a-c'rr 
; 
.cy,
to 
'Mos -,enot f..£ic 
-Sr st-.€.ld t 
'.-.tra 
for I.ts tw 'r
as to "'ao!e. t...s t!'Y..". r!.o-ji cv .1. 
in.: ..r 
:.r.-.t
e. 
Me. 
':CC should 1t a 
tn 
,.trlcd 
* axercite t-,hter
u,:t'rv.. 
n. 
r/ 
:n.-I: 
-.
r t .* --. o " t!.'L, dr.'-, r'-. .,tI-';:=
rtrt.r :vrL,.iAc reat 
'o 7/*i' ikn 1io vie ar4 tLc rc'A;jt.
.a~r4~-4. ______
P" .-.
:-,g 
',- .e..r.
CI 
cn

--- PAGE BREAK ---:t'rv.. 
n. 
r/ 
:n.-I: 
-.
r t .* --. o " t!.'L, dr.'-, r'-. .,tI-';:=
rtrt.r :vrL,.iAc reat 
'o 7/*i' ikn 1io vie ar4 tLc rc'A;jt.
.a~r4~-4. ______
P" .-.
:-,g 
',- .e..r.
CI 
cn

--- PAGE BREAK ---

980
wtDV=I 
MRS: 
lA&;kcto7 CnewsLL
SUJC 
Yrauk R. 01.o
2. 
1 b"re. been 
-.f-ed 
by 
" 
.
.L 
-os "~.X. '1- .
t"a==
%eta 
-. 04 tle±d of a. fxmrmbj 
b- the*~a 
~
of Zr.41!0-rev 
f-rmx Avd .,*2* 
,o
th, . ra-a , 
c 
a e'-. 
, 
Bee 
r..- ca is c1osz 
.o :S': as
the Oeme.--l Czu-s--z' 1;:ice iz co.-=r.-nd. 
lz=1 Toszibl-2 th-,;&
r.37 be 
ca.: 
c 
to h all? 
cvc 
-:: 
-- 
; 
.'-
1.tration on t.he 1a=2i.ci 
!h 
-- bu: I t:rt 
ft 
=7
.such he12 uL.U be in t*e £o= of Mv*r.ce r 
V-= .
c:ioc.
2. 
N4y c#C-eflt3 cz A.Z. 
ezze =,& faS.x1y 
Tr 
is co
d1sputa 2~t 
z 
::. 
aU -, 
on twe c*-:te 
e-!izt -r.s
oa±~ 
ut, =1 
o2 t- 
zoci. 
tits al thel nelaza to
Dr. Ozron. 
':e 
in. 
= 
dii- 
c.u. 
!. I: '.-, of cz .:e,
perfzct! r ro*zs~bl3 z,;2a tte suiCi±±b 
:~cl 
of m
state uhich -,.-% co: 
7*c'd 
by te 
xpeiiL 
-. 
3cever. w e LVa.
takgm the . oa.81'.n of.icila--l'y thmm. 
W~ 
.-;,. 
. ' lensit
6tr1S&*r:.4 
':ze Z-Alclia, c-dj, o.i *U ta ::# 
-.= 
to zu-ot
tbliS coc!3-a, 
ua zhoull. ccep. 
1,40 a flna... 
a--n ca.;* thi.z
bas bee2 ;z : 
os±a 
fr 
:-e zt. 
of Dr. 
o 
--=. 
ir. 
A. 
.ab.-ooX,,
yet theSe t-. 
I 
-.
y 
1-. 
wbos 
, 
c 
t.ha t. 
its
practtlUy i 
size-- for 
to wm =7 .r
Cfts.4'30 
Ze.-OS 
t'd* ;osLIo.IDMS 
2 
.. 
%0 SMip 
scoy 
!ZZO 1
3. 
2 US 
t8 
#?'..ed" 
t.. 
e ..
C., 
,=,a* te.a t:!z
Itsel,' is~i 
~ 
~ ~ 
2~s-'& 
cez-mia c~t:s
Thta!ofo-s, I a=~ noz 
-, 
;t 
o = a vary =:iual
attitw.s on tha~- 
c:! T65 
.~±7 
to le !-Y
L'-V3et 
a4 cc=,;z. 
to t:m 
.
aiz t. 
i 
j; 
lt
=e of 'ariz...' 
lo 
Z.t~ 
4cii 
a-a~i
not elimllza 
the raod f'r 
tacl 
±sbu IZ
43ec'a. *4 O 
,'.z~a 
Leal=. a: 13 
isi &t st&a:Ws tbut &t lat

--- PAGE BREAK ---cc=,;z. 
to t:m 
.
aiz t. 
i 
j; 
lt
=e of 'ariz...' 
lo 
Z.t~ 
4cii 
a-a~i
not elimllza 
the raod f'r 
tacl 
±sbu IZ
43ec'a. *4 O 
,'.z~a 
Leal=. a: 13 
isi &t st&a:Ws tbut &t lat

--- PAGE BREAK ---

981
the pzi4.:t 
ao~wabla rmawes vhlch ca be tas.e to ±nL.z 
e
Ls3L must be to*, 
nd fal3.2-e to do to £ culp d ,S 
;Ce. 
' e
actloA of the -.
L3u. 
4-AT. 
..
' 
- coute--a 
.
v 
t 
.e .3 
ofhe
ox 
SLeo. am Dr. o0.on becs.e 
azfast1o 
".e fa 
o
obsari to-.. 
r-s.o=.e.a 
or.4 
cazl;. 
Ths, 
e o..*..es of the ,4e..Cy
charged -*-.-.: -e -es=.bi 
V7 :c. = 
rs of t.A oo-t, .
' --
the SeCUrl~t.w C-fla =i 
the :aditax Sto!:-&, tiers =~t 
~o.h
cm~ the ZO3e-.7 
.41443 &=d ZCWi~3. 7 T~f-4 
0-'. 
01=M: to ~.:bs.-Som
for: zoeal€ 
A3e~== 
a resul. a dusra% occ%.--td ;'h..142 =L..w- ZzT*
'btik provna-ap" 
thva 
e 
A~s as a uh*Uj, 
OC yahw.TUI 
1 0£C 
o""a~ 7
Dirseta: tie" 
at 
ea plea1, by 3u=.w±3e S. a szoat =-Iex aisig
0ae.-l COUsJ.•
SAt - Co=p21fa ba 
ou.=d"
rate&zl a& on.:a,4*ot
0000 4d

--- PAGE BREAK ---

982
Security Information
Chilcr 3ccurit7 -b3et.jcr Jt,£.rf
16 Jovc&ber ""
Chicf, 7och.cal Ernch •
* 
Confor.cop 22 Octocer 1953.
1. 
On
I Bi dL.in~
sBOting 30;
I-1w
re_'L.T," en
sentins. DDW.
.rocby, 
22 Oeo.r 1953, 
etwoe 
2sCO El and 3:25 YF,
Ccrfor.c 
w.'is 
,ld in tho 30 Conferenco ?oom, 
.X3
Pesemt at th.a Con ore.ce era ."r.,
'ft. 
-
and 1r.. 
r 
-
Dr 
re. 
-risntig 
CGI arnd CI; D r.
t~g the :- -dl.cal SJtaff and I-:r. 
r^ 1"
i)cd-1 
. ifiCd I'. 
065344
" 
J
.1 
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---X3
Pesemt at th.a Con ore.ce era ."r.,
'ft. 
-
and 1r.. 
r 
-
Dr 
re. 
-risntig 
CGI arnd CI; D r.
t~g the :- -dl.cal SJtaff and I-:r. 
r^ 1"
i)cd-1 
. ifiCd I'. 
065344
" 
J
.1 
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

983
J In addition,' Mfr- 
" Jestated a raft or the proooaL
for 
'n-oerfr,.tal 
project usin- opecially scr.erod trc.neo
volimtecro would akso ka. given to te 
* 
Conforence rmobers
at 
pen "wz0* ts::., 
r.u 
-
-ted all --.embers to 
th-ine 
Lbo
drofUt 
-ke ay notes, corm-ctionst rd*:.ition3 -Ac. arA to prepared
to discuss Ut.a propoeal3 ot the folo' v-g 
, 
Conforenco.
6 
je,-Un-- in reater detail the tprosal 
for
t. 
uW e o-t 
t r i..e-OVountears .
.
-
. oin -d out that 
.uch
ro3esrch u.ould be of bereijt in t~jinareast
A. It 
muld very clearl: dn=onstrote to cortAn
select A.cncy porsonr.el the e&octs of
chemical, h.-.osia Cr 
o33ibly other
Client,, otc. u-on th-27solves rnd their
e-3seciates.
3. It ,-".uld 4Zvc- tho 
r.,ri 
In
oip.o.-t'..nit 
to 
t.ia 
li 
eL.ons 
-)AP tpcOC
ARc~sca;<l. 
:. 
" 
Declasgified by (6334"4
1;01. P75
I'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

984
E~zN~
(
arCr 
t.3tip'j °b~q 
7tC-.oC23 and
r technidqu:.3.
Declassified by 063344
6 November 1975

--- PAGE BREAK ---ARc~sca;<l. 
:. 
" 
Declasgified by (6334"4
1;01. P75
I'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

984
E~zN~
(
arCr 
t.3tip'j °b~q 
7tC-.oC23 and
r technidqu:.3.
Declassified by 063344
6 November 1975

--- PAGE BREAK ---

985
. .
° : 
-. 
'. 
.L: 
"" 
•.
30 Oct 1950
From: 
0 P3221/J
To: 
oP322H2
Vias 
0P322F5
0P322U4
ibj : 
USSR, interrogation methods
1. 
In view of the a enal tive nature o f the subject treated in this report,
it is suggested that distribution changes a" made by the undersigned be
approved. 
It is also suggested that the writer be advised that a large.
pwojeot is already underway which follows to a great extent the lines of
his suggestion.
2. 
It is sugested that paragraph 3.1 be deleted fro. the report since the
officers concerned vi ln 
p project are well a%are of their responsibilities
and thereamay be somae i-propriety in having an officer in the field remind
fellow tcdicia officers of ele-ent~ry considerations of ethics of which they
are no doubt fully aware.
3. 
11th regard to the le.et pra,-raph of section 10, it is iugeoted that
the writer be instructed to disclose whatever classification .iay be arpropriate,
4.the ide tity 
of tf 
u nsricean investigator winoze liae L~e. 
not st lhat,
menTion a
.4. 
11.e a'-.iaior, or the urt .tr Lhould alo be called' to the fact that the
interest of the O.fice of Naval Intellio-ence in the project to Vhich he
refers was classifl--d T3 a:nd on a strictly uneed to 
ow" basis. 
The rlysicians
to tho:s, he refers rust have received the su:estion to contact the Office
of Naval Intellirence rron the writerr or sone one else associated .ith this
project. 
This fact would involve a serious breach of security.
5, In view of the fa,t th.,t tVis reTort b- -its naitLzre rele-te? the .rc~e:ts
involved to the interest of 041 in this ratt'sr, it is reco=.endod that the
'classification bo raised to TS for the report and enclovures (1) and (3)
when attached thereto. 
Enclosure (2) can remain unclassified.
6. 
Tois of fice concurs in the inclusion of F5 corraents in the report when
disseninated.
JA( 
i. ALBERTI
.........................(3)
when attached thereto. 
Enclosure (2) can remain unclassified.
6. 
Tois of fice concurs in the inclusion of F5 corraents in the report when
disseninated.
JA( 
i. ALBERTI
.........................

--- PAGE BREAK ---

986
DEC1.?
Se 
OOOMP32
8 Jun 1950
UEOAND M FOR MAJOR GNAL CRALS P. CAJLL
8ubJi 
Intro 
nation of *r. Robert Vagelm'
1. This office has been inforwsd of the negotiations now i' progross between
the State Dept. and the Iuiwaran Govt. leading to the liberation of Wk.
Robert Voeler.
2. 
Fcr yojr personal and confidential information, this iv to advise that
the Naval Medical Research Istttbite has for the past two and Lalf years
carried on an extensive project of investlation into the suitablit7 of
various drugs for 'nterroration purposes. 
This research has ben carried
on in co-ordination with the Arrq and the Air Fores and in connsetion r.th
special studies in the office of Naval Intelli-ence concerned with the
examination of the suitability of various methods of interrogation, of
whio the use of drugs is only a part.
3. 
It 
----
s, prrohqhla thnt Ur. Voeler may well posses infcraation that
instructions be ise.d to the Air 1lorce Attache at 1%aest and to the Air
3231 
Force authorities in Austria to insure that uron liberation necessary action
be taken to transport Lr. Voeler by the most rapid r.eana available to
ashin:-on, L. C., and tht.t no intprroontiens be carried out in the field
3 
prior to his repatriation. 
This matter is being coordinated with the Arr.y,
CIA and State.
3 
4. 
It is requested that this office he kept advised of- all developments in
this matter so that suitable arranrewents c-n be nade.
322T4
CARL T. ESPE
.Rear Admiral, U. S. Navy
Dicated by Lr. Alberti 
Actirp. Director of Naval Intelli-meca
Ext. 4002, 7 June 1950
O L. Phillips
DCLAtSi r iED

--- PAGE BREAK ---nrewents c-n be nade.
322T4
CARL T. ESPE
.Rear Admiral, U. S. Navy
Dicated by Lr. Alberti 
Actirp. Director of Naval Intelli-meca
Ext. 4002, 7 June 1950
O L. Phillips
DCLAtSi r iED

--- PAGE BREAK ---

987
ce Memorandum • UNiTED STATES GOVERNMENT
TO 
: Piles 
DATE: 27 Oct 1950
FROM 
: JH., 
Alberti
SUBJECT: Research projects for aids to interrogation
Tncl: 
(1) 
Proposal for an investigation of techniques, ir.trurmtation and
underlying psycholog,'cal ;rocesses in detection of deception
(2) 
Proposed supplement to Task 
rder I 
contract ML6ori 126 with
University of kochr' er for studies of motion sickness
1. 
A conference was held &t the Haval Hedical Research Institute .;ethesda by
OL'R, bDad and OI representatives to discuss two projects involving contracts
for the development of drugs aid instrumentation in connection with interrogati n
of prisoners of war, espionage agents, etc. 
The project of the University of
Rochester covers & study of drugs, psycholog-.cal pressure ratt.ods to irduce
cooperativeness and truth 
lr.ens 
on subjecJ under Interrogation. 
An excellent
security cover for the project is being developed by incoricratine it into
contract Y6ori-126 for the study of notion sickness, thereby making it possible
to conduct the entire program on an unclassified basis, except for top key
personnel. 
;Thle t.he cost estimate Le entirely tentative, the project would
allow up to 300,000 for three years. 
ONE and Buled representatives approved
the project. 
A conference will be held this date with AdmiLal Solberg, Chief
of Naval Research, to apprise hir. of the project. 
Admiral -
n will also
t.bria'on. 
This 11flC'ui sm nWpviiml y rflfrtp4 wil) he imnlll~I0i 
hy Sarrt.SW
Deense under authority o1 
Ar. 
"'-=_ 
Zircts 
.fL,.Z -..- v 
*, 
CZ.
2. 
The second project djscuaeed concerns the invoti-ation of todni.cques, In-
strumention and uncerly:ing psycholegical processes in the detection of deception.
This project will develop additiorl instri-rnntation to be combined wLth the
Keeler polygraph in order to improve its reliability and particularly to develop
siallfed and inroved methods for the more rapid and effective training of
operators. 
$this project will also produce additional training aids, other &-an
instrur.ntation, to enhance the ability of interrogators and oreratioral per-
sonnel concerned with the hnaling of eepionage and ether undercover agents to
detect deception and rel.abl- estimate croditility. 
This rejectt tas also beer.
tentatively approved, although the rioney to be expended for it has not yet been
definitely doter.ined. 
Both of the above projects are boing coordinated wit'.
Army, Air,, CIA and FLI.
J. H. ALBERTI
70-026 0 - 76 - 63ved, although the rioney to be expended for it has not yet been
definitely doter.ined. 
Both of the above projects are boing coordinated wit'.
Army, Air,, CIA and FLI.
J. H. ALBERTI
70-026 0 - 76 - 63

--- PAGE BREAK ---

988
20? SUMZT
W5.CEPA!-UU ?701M 
U SMRETAFY OF L;E7;SB
&bbjt Project CHIi
1. Since 1947 the IDepartnient of Lhe Navy has carried on a project in cocrdination
with I eart-ents of the Air Fcrce and IrW,, CIA and FBI for the development of
speech-ir-ucin, drugs. 
7he directors of Intelligetce of the thwee Services,
of CIA and FBI consider tids Tojoct of the uuost Imprtant and urgency to
Luro the ;ropcr fuliil'.1-ent of tI.oir aivLions for the security of the invited
States.
2. 
71e personiel and facilities available within the goverr4nent are not
adequate to bring this rroject to a successful conclusion. 
k project submitted
to tho OtT ice of Niaval fls~vrch hy Prnf-,w-r Vv*-r'3 " end!t 
t"icrit
of 
.ohecster, 
posed the greatest Tomlse of vuccest; in this most important
matter. 
Tie project saa hee;, i;roWcd 1.y &4 of 'the ag:oncics involved. 
ror
seocurity reasons, it is cons~iered uost un Lsirable that this project be hardled
tlwo,;gh the -isuru 
coraittee :.Uchnery of the rDB. 
It is therefore recorvended
that the ne,.-Prri: f-w)o ir.int:.- to a z4>:Lsu. 
of UlO00 
p0r 
0:.' 
for 
-ecc
yoars Lo aut;.ori;(, on tho 3Zcreta-j of i feEue coiingecy fund, and t;at an
immediate allocation of $50,000 be nude from this fundi to tho Navy conting.ency
fu:d for usc In the fiscal ycr 1951.
-o°
J 
' 
.'
Y;,. 1')7"2

--- PAGE BREAK ---f i feEue coiingecy fund, and t;at an
immediate allocation of $50,000 be nude from this fundi to tho Navy conting.ency
fu:d for usc In the fiscal ycr 1951.
-o°
J 
' 
.'
Y;,. 1')7"2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

989
• 
"° • 
-ad %*Ved- 0600
"rr 
F 1"!- 
.!:-'OF 
-- 
,'- 
F.' 
"
The devising of ne... 3 for ob'Ainisre intelligence from 
0 
-
interroCatees, independent of the interrogatee8' volition, at 
'
Without the use of physical duress.
PACT 
BYARDJO (K THS PROM=~
The urgent need for obtaining coupletey reliable intelligaeae
fram enemy or subversive personnel in a minima of time require
the application of methods other than conventional psychological
interrogationo
The use of physical duress is not only out of keeping with
the traditions of this country, but in koen to be generally of
dubious effectiveness.
Certain drugs and methods, while -possibly of the highest
effectiveness, require the use of specialised, qualified
personnel. 
There are, however, drugs available whose surreptitious
administration in possible without the need for highly qualified,
specialized personnel, and in which the safety factor is sufficiently
great o pwait. Itg 
er!men 
b-, 
u;A!Ly 
4e;! ijvoiaLators
and interrogators.
i Federal Bureau of Investigation in conducting a program
of research and experimentation in the field of drugs for
interrogation use.
By agreement between the Armed Services, the Navy Departuenit
has been conducting research and experimentation in the field of
drugs suitable for use by non-specialized personnel since 1917.
Authorization for additional expenditures by the Department of
Defense will permit more extensive clinical experir.ntation by
the Ilavy Department.

--- PAGE BREAK ---pecialized personnel since 1917.
Authorization for additional expenditures by the Department of
Defense will permit more extensive clinical experir.ntation by
the Ilavy Department.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

990
That close liaison between CIA, the Azued Services and FBI be
established and maintained in relation to the throe programs
outlined above, in such a marmner that the results developed be
quany available to all these Agencies.
Fror the purpose of implementing this liaison, it in recomnded
that sui tle 
representatives from each Agency concerned be
appointed to meet as an Ad Hoc Cmuittee.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

991
-
2 
)t.2'C. 
~wr-'j~
1 '-' 
~
ot J~sx.
I
u n 
t,--e1 
-:a 
the nt to.-I.:. 
",t 
" 
..
emi to IA-zth,1 
c:" Cr;:1.t 
iLt.,:t 
G- 
?1c'X" 4i'.;*
3. 
ft 
tv'%-:, 
i 
an
• C :..."..;--'.).,"'.: .
€. : ' :ticn.L (.'" 
.
tl:tr.t 
e v 
.
;":.:
€,.h .~~:1 
At:.x.: 
L ' 
-'Iy 
J'-, 
2'l 
.. '~ . t-l e L'.'- 
I .-Z'3-r"V:L!C C.r, .
i .(;;--%I
lttl 
Ol 11.1 
Cl r 
I XCC .l
f-,'ta 
r h 
c I'1, t(',e 1
IIc 
I.lsI 
lied by (113141
BELHim!3~
3-9 j, 
"
!i
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

992
THE SEC PEIA P 
Of HEALIM. CuCAYION. ANO WELrAR£
WASN INGION. 0 
C 
)3t
NG*: 6 
1975
Honorable Edward M. Kennedy
(airman, 
Subconmittee on Administrative
Practice and Procedure
Committee on the Judiciary
United States Senate
Washington, D. C. 20510
Dear Senator Kennedy:
As you requested in your letter of October 23, 1975, I have
attached a copy of the "Report on ADA4iA Involvement in LSD .
Pesearch." 
As you noted in your letter, this report was pro-
pared for the Assistant Secretary for Health by the Adnini-
trator of the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health
Administration.
Because the report raises many issues of serious human concern,
I am asking the Assistant Secretary for Health, Dr. Theodore
Cooper, to give his attention to these matters and to cooperate
fully with your efforts in this regard.
Cordialy
Secretary
Attachment
cc: 
Dr. Theodore Cooper

--- PAGE BREAK ---Health, Dr. Theodore
Cooper, to give his attention to these matters and to cooperate
fully with your efforts in this regard.
Cordialy
Secretary
Attachment
cc: 
Dr. Theodore Cooper

--- PAGE BREAK ---

993
REPORT ON ADAMHNA INVOLVEMENT IN LSD RESEARCH
OVERVIEW
Research interest in the drug LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) has
extended over a period of more than two decades. 
From 1953 to 1963
was the peak period of interest in LSD's potential use as a research
tool relating to the understanding And treatment of mental illness.
It is important to note that the height of this research interest was
prior to Federal action in 1966 making LSD an "illicit" 
drug.
The Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration (ADAMHA)--
and its predecessor, the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)--
have supported and conducted research on a variety of aspects of LSD
utilizing diverse approaches. Researchers have examined the physio-
logical and psychological effects of LSD on animals and on human
subjects, tested possible therapeutic use of the drug in alcoholism
and mental disorder, and collected data on the nature and effects of
illicit (or "street") use of LSD.
From 1953 to 1973, ADAMHA invested some $4 million in research projects
which involved administration of LSD to humans. These funds have sup-
ported research conducted through grants, and within intramural programs
at the National Ihstitutes of Health (NIH) Clinical Center, Bethesda,
Maryland, and the Addiction Research Center, Lexington, Kentucky.
While some research with LSD continues, currently ADANHA does not support
or conduct any research involving administration of LSD to humans. 
This
results from the accumulation of findings from earlier research, and may
reflect the current level of scientific interest in human research with
LSD.
Information included in this report about ADAMHA activities is based on
records available in the agency and telephone interviews with extramural
Investigators and former staff. Sufficient information is available on
which to develop estimates of funding and numbers of subjects, and to
reach conclusions about the overall adequacy of human subjects protec-
tions. 
However, it must be kept in mind that detailed records for every
ADAMHA sponsored LSD project cannot be obtained because many of these
projects were conducted over 10 years ago at a time when neither Federal
agency nor grantee records included many details typically in current
record systems; in some cases*, records of research projects conducted
years ago are no longer complete; and often it is not possible to
separate out funds for a particular study which was conducted as part
of a larger program.es*, records of research projects conducted
years ago are no longer complete; and often it is not possible to
separate out funds for a particular study which was conducted as part
of a larger program.

--- PAGE BREAK ---994
2
BACKGROUND ON DEVELOPMENT OF RESEARCH INTEREST
LSD is a man-made substance and was first synthesized in 1938 by a chemist,
Albert Hofmann, as an intermediate in the production of another compound.

In 1943, while looking for an effective psychostimulant, Hofmann accidently
ingested a small amount of LSD and was the first human to experience its
profound and unique psychological effects.

Publication of Hofmann's
discovery in a scientific journal stimulated a great deal of research
interest, particularly in the psychiatric community.

Reports of LSD's effects seemed to indicate that it produced changes in
perception and mood similar to changes which occur in schizophrenia and
other psychoses.

Thus, researchers hypothesized that the effects pro-
duced by the drug could be conceptualized as a "model psychotic state"
resembling schizophrenia.

If LSD could produce such a state, studies of
the mechanisms by which this drug causes its effects might help to identify
and elucidate biochemical and neurophysiological mechanisms active in
schizophrenia and other psychoses.

Knowledge of the psychological effects of LSD also prompted researchers
to study possible-therapeutic uses of the drug.

LSD was employed exper-
imentally as a possible aid in psychotherapy in the hope that its effects
would enhance, for certain patients, insights into their underlying psycho-
logical problems.

LSD was also tested as a treatment for alcoholism.

This
approach was stimulated by the observation that alcoholics with severe
delirium tremens sometimes "hit bottom" and seem to undergo a personality
transformation, with a positive outcome.

It was hoped that LSO might
produce under controlled treatment conditions a profound subjective
experience of a type which would result in a beneficial personality
reorganization.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This
approach was stimulated by the observation that alcoholics with severe
delirium tremens sometimes "hit bottom" and seem to undergo a personality
transformation, with a positive outcome. It was hoped that LSO might
produce under controlled treatment conditions a profound subjective
experience of a type which would result in a beneficial personality
reorganization. Another impetus to research on LSD has been the abuse potential of the drug
The popularity of LSD and other related hallucinogens as drugs of abuse
began in the 1960s when their use was advocated by some persons as a
means of "mind expansion" and for developing "mystical insights." Origi-
nally treated by its advocates as a profoundly serious experience with
ritualistic overtones, "street" use of LSD has since become more
recreationally-oriented and has diffused to a wider range of users. Recognition of LSD's abuse potential led to its classification in 1966
as a controlled drug, thus making "street" use of the drug illegal. WHAT HAS BEEN LEARNED FROM RESEARCH WITH LSD
The cumulative results of studies conducted and supported by ADAMHA, as
well as research by other investigators, have demonstrated that original
hopes for the use of LSD in understanding and treating mental illness were
not realized. It is now generally acknowledged that while there are
similarities in some of the specific effects produced by LSD to psycho-
pathological changes seen in schizophrenia, LSD does not produce a model
psychotic state resembling schizophrenia. Research 
findings demonstrate
that there are substantial phenomenological differences between LSD-induced
psychological changes and those seen in schizophrenia. For example, the
perceptual changes brought about by LSD are primarily in the visual field,
whereas perceptual changes in schizophrenia occur most connonly in

--- PAGE BREAK ---995
3
the auditory field.

Distortion of body images is common with LSD, but
less frequently seen in schizophrenia.

LSO causes shifting or inten-
sification of emotional experiences, whereas in schizophrenia such
experiences are usually flattened.

Also, the characteristic thinking.

disorder in schizophrenia is not present in LSO experiences.

Although studies with LSO have not led to discovery of the causes of
schizophrenia, they have resulted in a wealth of knowledge contributing
to a more sophisticated understanding of biochemistry and neurophysiology
of the brain and have stimulated research efforts examining possible
biochemical causes of schizophrenia.

Considerable knowledge has been
generated about the modes of action of various other hallucinogens.

Research investigating possible psychotherapeutic uses of LSO has not
clearly defined a therapeutic use for LSO either as an aid to
psychotherapy for mental illness or-as a treatment for alcoholism.

Psychological and physiological/pharmacological studies employing LSO
administration have defined a wide range of fairly predictable behavioral
and perceptual consequences of taking the drug in controlled conditions.

For example, in the perceptual field, LSD produces changes including
heightening of apparent brightness or beauty of colored objects in the
environment, distortion in the perceived nature or meaning of objects; and
hallucinations of colors, shapes, and even complex scenes or events.

These phenomena are usually accompanied by intense and often rapidly-
shifting emotional experiences (ranging from mild apprehension to panic,
from severe depression to elation), or by concurrent and conflicting
emotions (such as depression and joy).

It has been found that low doses of LSO tend to produce euphoria, and
larger doses produce predominantly perceptual distortions, hallucinations
and feelings of anxiety.--- PAGE BREAK ---

These phenomena are usually accompanied by intense and often rapidly-
shifting emotional experiences (ranging from mild apprehension to panic,
from severe depression to elation), or by concurrent and conflicting
emotions (such as depression and joy). It has been found that low doses of LSO tend to produce euphoria, and
larger doses produce predominantly perceptual distortions, hallucinations
and feelings of anxiety. However, the quality, nature, and content of
psychological experiences attending LSO use depend in a complex manner
on the personality and expectations of the subject, the dbse of the
drug, and the setting in which the drug is administered. Research on physiological effects of LSO has shown that the drug increases
pulse rate, blood pressure, body temperature and reflex activity. It
has also been found that "tolerance" to the drug develops rapidly, i.e. with frequent and repeated administrations of the same dosage of the drug,
its effects rapidly diminish. There are significant psychological dangers in the illicit use of LSD. We
have information about the occurrence of adverse effects of such use of
the drug from reported contacts with hospital emergency facilities and
surveys of users. Among adverse effects which have been seen and reported. the most common type is a so-called "panic reaction" where the individual
feels he cannot control the psychological experiences the drug-has triggered. Other types of problems which may develop include a psychotic reaction
similar to that seen in acute paranoid schizophrenia; recurrence of
psychological states experienced during a previous episode of LSO use
(comonly referred to as a "flashback" experience); and irrational,

--- PAGE BREAK ---996
4
dangerous acts due to a lack of critical Judgment that may occur in
persons under the influence of LSD.

It is difficult to assess reported
adverse effects of illicit LSD use (particularly alleged long-term effects)
and to predict the likelihood of their occurrence.

These problems of
assessment are due to such factors as unknown quality and dosage of the
drug when obtained and used illegally; frequent multi-drug use; unknown
mental status and personality characteristics of users prior to taking..

LSD; and variability In the setting of "street" use of the drug.

However,
so-called "flashbacks" seem to occur primarily with prolonged, heavy use of
the drug.

The known adverse effects of LSD when it is administered in a clinical
setting are few, and the reactions described above have been reported
largely In connection with illicit use of LSD.

Even potentially
unpleasant experiences attending LSD use can be warded off or redirected
by skilled therapists.

In 
general, if adverse effects (such as a "panic
reaction") do occur from LSD administration in a clinical setting, they
usually accompany or immediately follow the drug experience.

In such
cases, they typically last for hours or days, rarely longer.

Although it has been speculated that LSO might produce genetic damage,
data from a number of studies have led researchers to conclude that pure
LSD, ingested in 
moderate dosages, does not produce genetic damage.

Since
LSD used illicitly is often impure, and frequently contains other drugs, the
drug's potential for genetic damage when it is used illicitly still needs
to be determined.

However, there is no present genetic contraindication
to controlled experimental use of pure LSD.

With NIMH grant support (R01 MH 13484), Dr.

Nathan E.

Cohen at the University
of California at Los Angeles conducted a study during the period from
1967-1970 to examine the long-term effects of LSD.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nathan E. Cohen at the University
of California at Los Angeles conducted a study during the period from
1967-1970 to examine the long-term effects of LSD. The 247 persons studied
had been given the drug by physicians about 10 years previously for therapeutic
or experimental purposes. (None of these subjects had received the drug
under NIMH auspices.) The major conclusion of the study was that there is
little evidence that a few administrations of LSD will produce measurable
lasting personality, belief, value, attitude, or behavior changes in a
relatively unselected population of adults. While the study elicited some
reports of LSD-like occurrences subsequent to use of the drug, there was
little to suggest a causal relationship between LSD and the "flashback"
phenomenon. In sum, although research on LSD did not yield anticipated results
regarding possible similarity of its effects to schizophrenia or its
possible therapeutic usefulness, a great deal of important knowledge on
other topics has been gained from LSO studies. ADAI4HA INVOLVEMENT IN STUDIES OF LSD IN HUMAN SUBJECTS
Over the last several decades, ADAHA and its predecessor organization
NIMH have provided support for a variety of the research endeavors
related to LSD, including studies involving direct administration of LSD
to humans. At an estimated cost of $4 million, ADAMHIA provided support-
for 116 projects conducted from 1953-1973. Approximately 1750 subjects... received LSD in these research projects. Data on these projects arq
sumarized below, .. . -
. .;
I.-. . ° . -

--- PAGE BREAK ---116 projects conducted from 1953-1973. Approximately 1750 subjects... received LSD in these research projects. Data on these projects arq
sumarized below, .. . -
. .;
I.-. . ° . -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

997
5
ADAMHA STUDIES OF LSD IN HUMAN SUBJECTS
1953-1973
No. of 
Estimated No. 
Estimated
Projects 
of Subjects 
Funding
-
(In Millions)
Intramural Projects
Clinical Center 
20. 
150 
$ .5
Addiction Research
Center 
66 
300 
$ .8
Extramural Projects 
30 
1,300 
$2.7
Total, ADAMHA
Intramural and
Extramural Projects- 
116 
1,750 
$4.0
Thirty of the 116 projects were supported by extramural funds awarded
to other institutions. Of these, twelve studied psychological effects of
the drug; seven investigated the physiological/pharmacological effects of
the drug; and eleven tested the diagnostic/therapeutic potential of LSD
administration. A total of $2.7 million was expended from 1954-1973 for
these various projects (which were conducted under 1 contract and 24 grants,
some of which involved several separate projects).
Scientists working in ADAMHA's intramural programs also have conducted
research on LSD. 
In NIMH programs at the National Institutes of Health
Clinical Center, investigators conducted twenty studies involving
administration of LSO to humans in the period between 1954 and 1968.
Eleven projects studied the usefulness of LSD as'a treatment for the mentally
lll,and nine studied the effects of LSD on the behavior and physiological
functioning of normal subjects. We estimate that these studies cost
approximately $500,000.
Intramural studies using LSD 
were carried out also at the Addiction
Research Center (ARC), Lexington, Kentucky, now organizationally located
in the National Institute of Drug Abuse and formerly in the National
Institute of Mental Health. Subjects in these studies were Federal
prisoners with a history of narcotic addiction. During the period from
1953 to 1965, 66 studies involving administration of LSD to humans were
conducted at the ARC, at an estimated cost of $800,000. Studies sought
to characterize the physiological and subjective effects of LSO (including
perceptual distortions); to elucidate the neurochemica4-1mechanisms of
action of the drug and possibly provide clues to pathological changes in
schizophrenia; and to understand the mode of action and effects of LSD
whon taken with certain other drugs.ica4-1mechanisms of
action of the drug and possibly provide clues to pathological changes in
schizophrenia; and to understand the mode of action and effects of LSD
whon taken with certain other drugs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---998
6
At the present time, ADAMH}A does not fund any research involving administration
of LSD to humans.

This is not a policy, but rather the result of accumulated
findings in the field.

Currently active research funded by ADAMHA includes
studies of behavioral effects of LSD on animals; investigations of the
biochemistry and pharmacology of LSD in animals; and surveys on the nature
and effects of illicit human use of LSD.

SUPPLY OF LSD FOR RESEARCH PURPOSES
Another aspect of ADAMHA's involvement in LSD research has been to supply
LSD for research purposes.

LSD was initially available for experimental
purposes through Sandoz Pharmaceuticals.

Because of increasing adverse
publicity in the sixties regarding "street" use of the drug, Sandoz
turned over its remaining supply in 1967 to the National Institutes of Health
to be distributed by the National Institute of Mental Health (which was .then
part of NIH).

Later, with the creation of ADAMHA, and the National Institute
on Drug Abuse (NIDA) within ADAMHA, this function was transferred to NIDA's
Division of Research.

Obtaining LSD (and certain other research drugs) for
human experimentation'is contingent upon a detailed review of the proposed
research procedures by the FDA/NIDA Drug Abuse Research Advisory Committee.

This Committee, composed of outstanding researchers experienced in drug
research, reviews each application individually and recommends to FDA whether
to approve the application for a "Notice of Claimed Investigational
Exemption for a New Drug" (commonly known as an "IND") and recommends to
NIDA whether to supply the drug.

Only after receipt by the investigator of
FDA approval of the IND application and an appropriate license by the
Department of Justice can NIDA ship the compound to the researcher.

Currently, only six investigators hold an active IND for LSD research with
humans, and of these only two have received a supply of LSD from ADAMHA.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Only after receipt by the investigator of
FDA approval of the IND application and an appropriate license by the
Department of Justice can NIDA ship the compound to the researcher. Currently, only six investigators hold an active IND for LSD research with
humans, and of these only two have received a supply of LSD from ADAMHA. INSTANCES OF RELATIONSHIPS WITH THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY AND THE
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
" 
n the course of our review of LSD research, we became aware of two
instances of relationships with the Central Intelligence Agency-(CIA)--one
involved only brief informal discussions; the other involved provision of
the CIA funds through the Office of Naval Research (ONR), Department of
defense, for support of ongoing LSD research. In the late 1950s, several individuals one or more of whom were associated
with the CIA met with three researchers from the NIMH Intramural Research
Program (located at NIH facilities in Bethesda, Maryland) to discuss the
possibility of collaborative research on a variety of psychoactive drugs,
including LSD. The persons visiting NIMH were interested in the possible
use of such drugs by individuals taking lie-detector tests. There is no
record of the names of the persons associated with the CIA or the exact
dates of meetings which took place on two or three occasions within several
months. However, no collaborative research resulted from these discussions,
and there was no further contact with these individuals following the
exploratory meetings described.

--- PAGE BREAK ---999
-From 1954 to 1962, the Central Intelligence Agency provided approximately
$300,000 through the Office of Naval Research to the Addiction Research
Center (organizationally located in the N1I4H Intramural Research Program,
but situated at Lexington, Kentucky) largely to facilitate ongoing
studies of LSD by Dr.

Harris Isbell, then Director of the ARC.

We have
received detailed information about this arrangement from Dr.

Isbell.

The ARC's relationship with ONR began in 1951 when Dr.

Isbell agreed to a
request from the Department of Defense to work on the development and
testing of possible codeine substitutes (which they anticipated might be
needed during the Korean War).

The Office of Naval Research agreed to
provide sufficient funds for hospital beds to allow the work to be
carried out in a timely manner.

In 1954, the ARC was informed that this
program was no longer of priority concern, and that ONR funds would be
terminated.

Shortly thereafter, Dr.

Isbell was contacted by Mr.

Sidney
Gottleib, from the Central Intelligence Agency, who indicated that Dr.

Isbell's ongoing studies of LSD at the Addiction Research Center were
important to national interests.

Without specifying a precise interest
on the part of the CIA, Mr.

Gottleib stated that the CIA would provide
money to continue these studies.

CIA funds were provided for this work, through the ONR, from 1954-1962.

CIA
funds supported LSD studies at the ARC which are described briefly on
page 5 of this report.

Dr.

Isbell was encouraged to follow his own
scientific Judgments as to what questions and aspects of LSD he would study.

All of Dr.

Isbell's work in this area was published, and none of it was
kept secret.

However, awareness of the source of financial support was
restricted to a small number of senior people on the ARC staff, and was
probably discussed with the NIMH Scientific Directors.

Customary ARC
procedures for obtaining informed consent were employed with Federal
prisoner volunteers.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, awareness of the source of financial support was
restricted to a small number of senior people on the ARC staff, and was
probably discussed with the NIMH Scientific Directors. Customary ARC
procedures for obtaining informed consent were employed with Federal
prisoner volunteers. While informed consent procedures at the time did
not require specific written documentation in each case (as is now required),
subjects were told what drugs would be administered to them, the known
effects of the drugs at the time, and possible dangers to subjects. Potential
subjects were free to accept or reject participation in an experiment
without penalty, and subjects were also free to Vithdraw. CIA support to the ARC for the purposes described above was terminated in
1962. After that year, no more money from the CIA went into the Addiction
Research Center program. A LEGAL CASE CONNECTED WITH LSD RESEARCH
In a legal case Initiated in July, 1973 and filed in 1974 in the U.S. District Court in Los Angeles, California, claims are made against the
Federal Government in part on. the basis of alleged injury from the
plaintiff's participation some 20 years ago as a normal volunteer in
NIMH 
studies involving LSD. In 1955 and 1957, the plaintiff was a subject in studies examining the
effects of LSD administered to normal subjects. These studies by
HIMH intramural investigators were conducted at the NIH Clinical Center,
where the plaintiff also participated in studies conducted by other
Institutes which did not involve LSD. The case is still being litigated.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e conducted at the NIH Clinical Center,
where the plaintiff also participated in studies conducted by other
Institutes which did not involve LSD. The case is still being litigated.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1000
INFORMATION AND ISSUES RELATED TO HUMAN SUBJECTS PARTICIPATION
1. Subject Characteristics
Approximately 1750 subjects participated in ADANHA-sponsored research
Involving administration of LSD to humans. Of these, an estimated 1300
were subjects in grant-supported research projects. Most subjects were
men, and apparently no one under the age of 18 was involved in these
experiments. 
Some projects involved normal volunteers; others involved
patients of various types, including alcoholics, mentally ill persons
and drug addicts. 
All volunteer subjects at the Addiction Research Center
(ARC) were Federal prisoners with a history of drug addiction.
2. Subject Protection
a. Informed Consent
JAvailable 
information indicates that appropriate procedures
were followed to obtain the willing and informed participation of
subjects, though written informed consent (which was adopted
only relatively recently as a formal requirement for DHEW
research) was not always obtained. 
Typically, subjects were
told that they would receive LSD or a drug with mind-
altering properties. In some cases, subjects were not told
that the specific drug was LSD, as most people would not have
been familiar with its known and reported effects at the time the
experiments were conducted. 
Some subjects, such as those par-
ticipating in studies at the NIH Clinical Center and at the
Addiction Research Center, gave their consent to participate
in the general research program of the hospital facility, as
well as in a particular study (or studies) involving LSD. 
With
regard to LSD research involving mental patients, consent was
obtained from the patient and/or a duly authorized representative,
in the same way as with any investigational drug research using
such subjects.
b. Subject Selection and Screening
While subject selection and screening procedures varied depending
on the nature of the research and types of subjects, investigators
generally screened potential subjects through various medical ,.
and psychological testing procedures. 
Extra care was taken to
screen out potential participants with physical or mental
characteristics that. might predispose them to adverse effects
of LSO.
c. Protection During and Following LSD Administration
Existing records indicate that adequate protection and
observation were afforded subjects at the time they were given
LSD. In all cases, subjects were attended and observed by
qualified clinical personnel during administration of the drug.
Throughout the duration of the drug's effect, qualified personnel-
were available to handle adverse effects if they occurred. 
Long-. .
.. 
.
..
A. 
, 
.'personnel during administration of the drug.
Throughout the duration of the drug's effect, qualified personnel-
were available to handle adverse effects if they occurred. 
Long-. .
.. 
.
..
A. 
, 
.'

--- PAGE BREAK ---ministration of the drug.
Throughout the duration of the drug's effect, qualified personnel-
were available to handle adverse effects if they occurred. 
Long-. .
.. 
.
..
A. 
, 
.'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1001
9
term follow-up of subjects was conducted in some studies, but
was not typical of most projects.
Thirteen of the extramurally-supported projects conducted
relatively long-term follow-up (one month or more) of subjects.
In some of the alcoholism treatment studies, patients were followed
for a year or more to determine how effective the initial treat-
ment had been. 
While formal follow-up studies were not always
involved in ARC studies, prisoners generally remained in the ,
hospital at ARC for at least six months after their participation
in the LSD experiments, thus precluding any long-lasting effects
from going unnoticed and untreated. (Prisoners were not
accepted for such studies unless they had approximately six
months left until their discharge.) 
Subjects in intramural
studies at the Clinical Center typically were observed after the
period of the drug's primary effects as part of the behavioral
studies connected with the LSD research.
3. Formal-Requirements Relating to Human Experimentation
Available evidence indicates that appropriate protection was provided for
the rights, safety and welfare of subjects in ADAMHA-supported research
involving administration of LSD, even though in the 1950s and early 1960s
there were very few formal requirements in the country at large governing
human experimentation. The NIH Clinical Center was an exception;
formal guidelines-were adopted in the early 1950s, shortly after the Clinical
Center opened, to regulate research on human subjects in the Clinical
venter. In general, researchers throughout the country followed ethical
standards of the times, and in more recent years the clinical research
community and Government agencies began to adopt formal codes and
principles. In 1963, the Food and Drug Administration issued regulations
relating to issues of human experimentation, which incorporated consent
requirements for investigational new drugs. 
In 1966, NIH first issued a
formal policy on human experimentation, and this policy dealt with institutional
review and general principles for grant- and contract-supported research.
Both the FDA regulations and NIH guidelines--which were later adopted by PHS
and HEW--have been modified a number of times since their initial issuance;
and they have progressively included more specific requirements relating
to such matters as institutional review and informed consent.
Many of the grant-supported projects involving human LSO administration
were begun prior to the issuance of DHEW guidelines and regulations
requiring institutional review for assessment of human subjects
protections; yetalmost all of these projects received local review by
a hospital or university committee. Projects conducted at the NIH
Clinical Center were reviewed and approved by the Clinical Center's
Medical Board, and studies at the Addiction Research Center received local
review by experts.mmittee. Projects conducted at the NIH
Clinical Center were reviewed and approved by the Clinical Center's
Medical Board, and studies at the Addiction Research Center received local
review by experts.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nducted at the NIH
Clinical Center were reviewed and approved by the Clinical Center's
Medical Board, and studies at the Addiction Research Center received local
review by experts.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1002
10
ISSUES RELATING TO POSSIBLE FOLLOW-UP OF ALL LSD SUBJECTS
In connection with recent publicity and investigations relating to Depart-
ment of Defense and Central Intelligence Agency research involving LSD,
questions have been raised as to whether follow-up of subjects who
received LSO in research would be desirable and beneficial. ADAMA's
position-is that follow-up of all human subjects who received LSO under
the auspices of ADA4HA-sponsored research would be inappropriate. This
conclusion is based primarily on medical and scientific judgments, as well
as recognition of the enormous logistic and methodological problems such
a follow-up would entail.
In considering the appropriateness of undertaking any large effort to
determine the present status of subjects given LSD under ADAMHA auspices,
the following points must be taken into account along with our previous
description of research findings and protections afforded subjects at
the time research activities were carried out:
1) In general, ff adverse effects develop from the administration
of LSD in a clinical setting, they usually occur during or immediately
after the drug experience. Such adverse effects may last for hours
or days, but rarely longer.
As indicated previously, adequate and appropriate observation of
subjects was provided in ADAMHA-sponsored activities at the time
LSD was administered; and,adverse effects of LSD administration
would have been handled at the time by qualified personnel.
2) Anecdotal reports of long-term adverse effects of LSD must be
considered in the light of two potentially contributory factors:
a) In any sample of subjects who have taken LSD, either in
a legitimate clinical/research context or in "street" use
some subsequent incidents of psychopathology or mental
disturbance can be expected, just as they can be expected
in any group of normall" persons who have not taken LSD.
b) The purity, dosage, and even the chemical nature
of "street LSD" is frequently questionable, and individuals
using LSD illicitly often use one or more other types of drugs.
Thus, the subsequent occurrence of mental, emotional or behavioral
disturbance following an LSD experience--especially if such a
disturbance occurs years after the drug experience--cannot be directly
attributed to the drug. Nor can the existence of mental, emotional.
or behavioral disturbance in persons who use the drug in an illicit
context--often.habitually in high dosages of questionable purity and in
combination with other drugs--be directly attributed to LSD.or behavioral disturbance in persons who use the drug in an illicit
context--often.habitually in high dosages of questionable purity and in
combination with other drugs--be directly attributed to LSD.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1003
11
3) Scientific findings and clinical observations appear to indicate
that full blown recurrence of the LSO experience is very unlikely.
Research has yielded no evidence of any permanent chemical or physio-
logical changes caused by LSD that could explain the notion of a
"flashback" phenomenon. The LSD experience is a dramatic and intense
one, and it is reasonable to assume that components of any psychological
experience as strong as this would recur given the right set of
environmental stimuli. Any reexperience of the effects of the drug
is probably based on the psychological aspects of the experience.
4) Follow-up contacts with former subjects in LSO research might
arouse discomfort, embarrassment and distress for such individuals, and
might be seen as an invasion of privacy.
In sum, we believe the above evidence argues against any systematic attempt
to do a follow-up study of subjects previously given LSO under ADAUIA
auspices. Such an effort is unwarranted because of the minimal potential
humanitarian and scientific value of such a project when weighed with the
enormous practical problems it would entail; the potential arousal of
distress among former subjects; the inability to relate subsequent behavior
to earlier LSD administration; and evidence that adverse effects of LSD
when taken in a clinical/research setting usually occur during or shortly
after administration of the drug.
0-02-6 0 - 76 - 64

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1004
29 Agust 1973
ImRPJnnr.4""
J=r1 
: InfluencLng Hu-n Behavior
kW experiment or us* of drugs or other techniques for in-
fluenac.g humen behavior vill be undertaken orly vith the DLrector's
specLfi 
approvall ad in no case on unvitting Amertcsn citizens.
4
DECLASSIFIED ON Z4 JULY 1975
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCIues for in-
fluenac.g humen behavior vill be undertaken orly vith the DLrector's
specLfi 
approvall ad in no case on unvitting Amertcsn citizens.
4
DECLASSIFIED ON Z4 JULY 1975
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI

--- PAGE BREAK ---g humen behavior vill be undertaken orly vith the DLrector's
specLfi 
approvall ad in no case on unvitting Amertcsn citizens.
4
DECLASSIFIED ON Z4 JULY 1975
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1005
EMPLOYEE'S NOTICE OF INJURY OR OCCUPATIONAL DISEASE
Tode] Employers Comotaatioa Act
Thi1 *Mko 
$41114 
h thkmillet 1 the Immediate superor by so wjrred civil empl.neo le the rederat GorlomarAt.
at by "o"e"* on is helll. W1l.1ft 4. hours after the injury. 
.t 
ice may be 
%ersf 
vier eu oaatlr t o by r% at. II u l4
ho retaied b) It:C 1..A118 u:.-rbor ul.loi-q the onlpurf cau-ts dipabal' 
(..r mark h.-itnI thr da) or %iit 
hra in.,r% O.-tutrm.
or reswit' in al. lt. 
r ar.jo-t the t-urreu law mat.rdtt arel.e. &l-el it 'ho4 hW (noaardt l to the 1'. Q. Ii.I1.] MIT
OF LAM1)M. 
Ittrvau.I :l4 
k 
tui 
"Pr 
. it-tattoa. In~tither uath het. .cWat uloerior' rt'rt(injury. |lorm. 
A. 2 .lltrfure
coinIlOatIOun i pait. % rtirtle claim on I rom C. A.. 4 nau-t be submtllard I the .turrau.
Date of this notice ._ 
.
..
L I hereby certify that I am employed as a 
"_,..._____._
at the 
.
d!~~ ~ 
~ 
-. 
41%p&r tAJ
and on 
i..x 
at 
& 
9-".L
tiseot utuI 
*, 
toeot) 
I 
iSAL a. 
.. 
pm.t
Iloo 
t1 .a-l' --
se-lls 
' .L~ :.-
I w" injured in the performance of my duties at 
-L 
.. 
.
2. Cause of injury 
-. 
.,. 
Sj't!".,.. 
n- ............
406.like a a 
b,. *0 coo 
Mad os tar aoneI
Wllow Pon of bml 
h 
l W be. 
d 
riet W 
Iohh 
titIe
4. Names of witnesses to i.Jury 
• 
_ 
..
If this notice was not given within -IS houis afterthe injury, explain reason for delay and state name
of person to whoni notice was first given, and when.: 
' 
'" .. 
'- "" '.."'" 
"
This injury was not caused by my willful misconduct. intention to bring. about the injury or death of
myself or of another. nor by my intoxication. and I hereby make claim for compensation and medical
treatment to which I may be entitled by reason of the injury sustained by me.
Name 
f &L(4. V..__ 
-% 
a
Address 
. ...... .
.... .
........
(sthum "A alool,.e1
avorhooli~~~tie. 
madL 
2L193 
W eotbaWK 
o 
twlto which I may be entitled by reason of the injury sustained by me.
Name 
f &L(4. V..__ 
-% 
a
Address 
. ...... .
.... .
........
(sthum "A alool,.e1
avorhooli~~~tie. 
madL 
2L193 
W eotbaWK 
o 
twl

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1006
ET ;J"Jt025 P)
CA'..PDETRIC( 
'-D :OV r.6 II'/P*,.
IRECTO' 
FtURE/.U 
OF E..'PLO'EES CO.-;.E'-$1. 
DEPOT. OF LAbWfl
,)TOP FPA':X R OLSOM E'PLYEE OF CA' 
DETRICK' 
iAED
245 I 
28 t;OvE.'-EQ l153 JD)E/%ti APPAP'E.ITLY SEPVIC-
COsECT'D DETAILSL S F(,LLOVI 
4'., 
,
JO N E TH3JPSO'I CIvILIAN PERSO,'JELL
b 
5,5 
A

--- PAGE BREAK ---R OLSOM E'PLYEE OF CA' 
DETRICK' 
iAED
245 I 
28 t;OvE.'-EQ l153 JD)E/%ti APPAP'E.ITLY SEPVIC-
COsECT'D DETAILSL S F(,LLOVI 
4'., 
,
JO N E TH3JPSO'I CIvILIAN PERSO,'JELL
b 
5,5 
A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1007
X• i..-It !d ge .,oot, 
; ,,,.. 
.
I.t. 
I 
l.k I. 
Sr i;.. ,.=;m 
Ik! &LIJ)ji
1, A1.'~.!.XL.- 
bCEnX dzly suorn, on outh ,:ay tgit I &,rjj ro~idin,,
p ac 
o f 
.t 
tt.. 
.d 
f l.r 
.
. . .
.
.-
Mir 
: .:.. 
.... --- 
hadPersonal domicile in and was a resident
-..-
county of --- Al 
and Stati
ad on said day diejIt 
-estat 
; that burial expenses amounting to 
d, 
r
were incurred. na 
r original ite 
ed biUs hoc.ith; tat the amount of 
dollars 0$ou.tin. to 
". has been paid on such burial ex-enses by
_ _ _"_ 
_ 
from fueds b-l!n:n to
sad tha'. there isa balance of 
-,-. 
.
.
.
mluit: 
unplid, 
..... 
". 
.
.CRGre I . 3tz3an m,..I state speciGc ftct as in:e4 by instruction on back &C kria fo).
so___ 
.n 
--
-- 
I 
.. .
';!C'< 
0 -*n
..
~.
"."bu...e.* 
-
Ll*I ;;*.ks O!r-in" 
:," 
::.
Lernased svved 6 tlie 
or nat'd4 (eret of ~~~d~.'~uf~~ 
l
.
.
..... 
.
C :n .i 
.. 
.'. .:.
"'- 
.
" 
;- 
" 
e 
".aeiu. 
. " 
GJ9 .'*. 
. .
" 
- .. ' 
" .
, " 
.
: 
" " .
. . .
::. ,.$ 
"- 
, .. "" 
.
.. .
..... . .
... .
".
-- .
be made to the Vetcr'.ans' Azl-iaistrz:ioa for burial ce.penses; that at the tin. of
'aid decase co sensation ._ 
__- 
....... duesaid decelent from the Iacau of Emnloyeea Conr.Isa~ion, ;td
-hat theic hIa. bcen no almikit.r.tion, and if any mounts payable under the Emst~oyesV Compcnz. tion Act be pai.d,
to admini scat'on will be required.
• .,, 
.
.. 
.
,I 
.
:. 
5. .\, 
e.. - .
.. 
.
: 
". .9 ,
O to by 
:d 
-,. 
-,..,befor, 
me, and sIiberib.i in r..y
,rtsneo this d.y, at my cflice in st; i'.y. And I certify t::.t r.,.d :.n" iz ptr.or.-,lly .ell kr, ..n t, -e to be ,
.
.
;, rrimnts -ii 
i.: t in "!.e ,'t!i 
In. 
a,! tALhat 
*.J a .at i3 .a craJ:-., yc'.
4 ws'c.:-s WHr=? I h',emunto subzcrb my nim~e and aIax iny na3tarial .'.'al t.i 
""-.-----. 
day ,,
.• 
-.. 
.
.. 
. . ..
: .. 
..
[ 
; 
,.:~"!.e ,'t!i 
In. 
a,! tALhat 
*.J a .at i3 .a craJ:-., yc'.
4 ws'c.:-s WHr=? I h',emunto subzcrb my nim~e and aIax iny na3tarial .'.'al t.i 
""-.-----. 
day ,,
.• 
-.. 
.
.. 
. . ..
: .. 
..
[ 
; 
,.:~

--- PAGE BREAK ---1008
.

, 
.

...

, ,.

, 
, 
t 
, 
--.

,- 
-
.

.-..

.

-
I.D r.

.- all 
A 
t.0 
1 
f 
j* 
q^.-j 
ACV 
*'%- 
I--PO
- - - 1.1 r..

-
-
I'el 
.-; 
" 
,.

-
.4 
....

." 
fo 
.

1 0!

A
V" .

'Pa..l 
I 
, 
ob ..

, 
er.

I 
rJ 
-
.

0 
'd.

tJ: 
Me 6 
11," % 
' ,a.

Ia 
p " 
04 am-
" .

.' 
4t ..'" - .

-c- .

.

.

-I 
....

" .

.

..

,.%, 
" " -" 
..

"
re,-c the -%V.

V' .

m t!IA-", 
.L 
.

b-l".

v *!

-iti%r'a.

600o441.: 4- 1 * o 
..

i..

-t 
..

,I-.

4tw.

le 
.e 
," 
s 
.,dq
savew 
TLo.%m43i.1 
"lie 
:rrr;.e.

l~,rhl 
* Li' J 
U 
,( 
,ad4.-..4--,, 
.

leall 
* 4
h,.t 
th , e iatlrs ley W :s,- '..

..

l W -!q C4 I -w-* ar-.

d 
Ib ,...

m or I-L.t-m 
Al J tbs at-ov* tn.as #,#4 the SIr 
"gramd.

gbedhw-s *air vC*..swe 
U.t.

at~ 
t U.6 
Ikce 4-.1ofM tk- d.

-• *e-PLnYn2 w vdr 1S )- 
e ft:- 
or 
•w 
t 
,
Sa l 
t.

'n9.

..

gf 
,;: !

) 
-.- ;.

Th 'i 
.

l.

.

: rL 
e.'.ir.

-k ep ...

.sz 
:gs ..

tll 
ph.

-
I l.i s,' le, "idov
T  
Ial olk'
.* 
tie .l.- 
Iar, i.

i- 
o, 
;,.

:i.'i 
Cat 1w 
C ;.t.

il 
%e 
e 
..

-- 
L, .I 
t U t.s.l 4 
, 
death.

tit -J0" 
W e 
,m- 
IA.-tI .e'-
Iosty th i'.%ll'.

't 
if-uuu s mr-l 
f.

l 
il.t; 
al 
beebe"I.l'iii~rl 
r 
ad-'mh;.

r The 
Il, 
" 
,' 
b 
ills"dpd 
a4,'idogatlv
tse 
I lbS.

ll" le.ie- 
I&l' 
IN 
l eg 
-t 
sdt.l 
pif t.

io.

:5 al IL..

t-j P 
3 of
TI hel 
s..:.

W #:47-4 by It , orjecra".." 
ntoa-, Clain a.5 WS ar 
, 
i 
t 
l lg "lIoPiral 
tt'Uil .iI 
m hl- 
be give
th 
same 
I 
& 
0a-4.t Wes 
1!

.4 J*eroft% Vho gray bla eliUd Iwa 
t 
aiii oe 
aow.'ia 
a 
e( 
; 
tb.

reI 
rth 
U Sead"e tat"
thbe ptsifs amkis; the ctaa 
whit ashmi b3 icrst to by tib, petno eattid to rormp4 
we s by iA Ps aaIAboet 
, 
1
estee b b- -I.f.

Oaths of cIlas.%t, 
.ii 
f 
.-
SI fG.

uls 
CcoAtrle shuld be imedl be!*.

-L* 
d 
a 
t ii eoeuwstt 
sOlee* o .eortary ed k-:- itton
I beenc 
4 
I tacmr 
i/r:.

.--- PAGE BREAK ---

-L* 
d 
a 
t ii eoeuwstt 
sOlee* o .eortary ed k-:- itton
I beenc 
4 
I tacmr 
i/r:. . a cenzaCcate 
ef #e.ch Lzted Statco eaiuab c* dbli st as4,tuat 
Ol ktioa 
eihlagI tnilh.vii-itI- of
the LI 
*eMi to &;asixistlr omLts i0ebad be apscx*L
A eutilled copy ct tte dt-ash cecao kosldi accompany this elaL. If. fee aay 
iee. It ca1l 5 be 
cieCd, give r
*SPIMhlia at the L-,%. t, 
d Iis SUeeL
If the vttc 'l' 
t@ ir djc-.t% 
&f 
say iene. ctll to d" 
ea. mll 
Isthat of imapIses Cwtsd Copy o tob0
oiti of ehdoi;oz s.ou.l-d -. c "rApmy Ibis chla. I;Wjtcd hi:i- ;4% 
aupsalen catseti:.g Ilia wdclad 
wW WAtr s0peisca 
aewld he su 
oted Vith It iL'at. M. ,, 
S 
,-Of 
eft&" 
,i,, 
y 
, 
.... ..... k.... ...... s. Ag4.___ 
3. 4...._11 
1. OcCupstion 
......... L Was deceased ab!* to s$1e"k En;i4h? .L. 6. n1 
sot, what Ianua.? I. Tiuno of injury: (c) .. 'o 
.'. (4) 
..... (C) 
M..1 
,5....... (s,) 
2. .. M 
laei * whete injury o...ur d .".. .... ... "."
....... . 1 
i 
. ..... ...... L Na.tuo and exteat of injury..... ... .. '.l;.:..,"..-_l"mC 
1.It 
. .. . dn 
S ...... ... " 
-
10, Deta of death ... . 3 
....................... 11. 11we where dct ocuw --- 
"0"11 
':o 
-2 1 Yor,. Cit-', E'-r York
li. o , 
:u oc<,, 
~ 
.. ..., ...'... , ...... . ...Cl.... - -
............. . .. ......... It. lit of pay of dceased emplyee at tiro of injury wbich resulted in &uith, 
. per . pad subaitcce valued at S 
er..... 13. Itelatioamhip to the dtceatd oi the person claining to be entitled to 
.ematio, 
.i t
14. Did drIaeald teave any other rl--tives entiltAq to Coinpeusation? -f-.. _ 
r to, give nrs cs,
sdL ,euies, a;cs., ead rc!:O'un.o~hp h1.~i-3
. ._ .... ........... -,.............. ......... ..-....-................. . . -. L 
.... ........... .. .. I m.i-rir- ctr.TiY t t each and crcry ststewcant e " forth abovo ituo to tho bcst Cf my kr.i-l.J,! mid IDIKe. J- 
, 
1~
Add*eo 
............. 8,eei*Set 
wv oI,,,,e:.le..±...d 
iof 
- ... ";i 
. ...... - ... ov 
C ..TiY t t each and crcry ststewcant e " forth abovo ituo to tho bcst Cf my kr.i-l.J,! mid IDIKe. J- 
, 
1~
Add*eo 
............. 8,eei*Set 
wv oI,,,,e:.le..±...d 
iof 
- ... ";i 
. ...... - ... ov 
C .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1009
9 1Ts;chP: fS C.TII:ICA T
i. L'T -* e#(C 'P'""ei""r " 
e 
'e,.. 
":'.,'....,,,")r 
.... 
.. 
.
..... 
.
.... 
.. 
....
L Dale ef embPce'b deAth 
. Is
4Dkeet auese 
cl datk ... 
.
5. Oesammly essa ef det"I 
.
.
.. 
.-
4. Waabtwrye Iajeqr ;l-eo Ia ta "a ea:e 
............. 
.
If e.etate tulick
a. 
Ia yecr er;416. as tIe dtL. ci t* 
r.:rec due to -;ch !ry?
L Rmk..
L 
.
.. .. ..... . . .
iii. 
. ... ..... .
iii 
.. ....... .. . .. ......... ... 
.... .. 
.. 
.. 
.
i 
I 
........
I utaze cLarIVI that Itc aus acretl 
tPi above 
q4uwetious 
re 
t 
oee 
t1 leslast of my Lmw ed.. me leUd.
Sisk 
e4 aabw)
DoletE talt e l 
.
le 
.. 
o 
.
s
.
" 
" 
M 
luw 
W
ft h lmrwtt that abovecrtiicate be fcm.isbd, bat i fee a&y cause it esawet be seme 
rlve full p .pkstice, 
Wow
a e'itmit each otL.. proof sf desth I Rosy b obut a e.
CERTIFICATE OF OFFICIAL SUPERIOR
I 
MLaT CCRI~ra ttat MC pereOs ea aCte t ef Wbos deth the f14r&;is Cti e Is 
mAe 
W" es$*.r. by the 
laIted
8ta.e 
&-Lcn tlifoarcsd of'Na.st-rujt nt d4e.% wama& on 
2 
~T 
1;53
5.......*.o 
o..a
... .... .. 
.... .... 2 2 .. ... ... .. .. .. ...... .. 
... 
.....
i .. , -
'th 
, , 
:'' -
"" 
-: 
-, 
" 
" .
..,. .
.'......

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1010
3A Umc~3'er LtS3
Bweau of 
csplo~s' 
Copensation
Tasinton-25, D.C.
' 
• 
T 
I ~i;:+ r.Clyd2 R. V.Vdl.otoa
Ioar Sir:
This is to info.m you t'_t T- wish to apply for
tine ton-fits dua n -i:!3r tho 
oV-1a3'.s of t'.3 Fed-ral
Lvp.lor m' Cmnrr.ns:oian "%ct in lieu of the Civil S==-ico
ery truly yo,?s;.
ALC3 
OI:'s0LS 
s
R...D. -?S
Frod.Yric!k, :y.-ind
16
I --C.",,)
v1
I, t) '- 
vX 
.
4 .
.
.
**.
A 
'J'

--- PAGE BREAK ---l
Lvp.lor m' Cmnrr.ns:oian "%ct in lieu of the Civil S==-ico
ery truly yo,?s;.
ALC3 
OI:'s0LS 
s
R...D. -?S
Frod.Yric!k, :y.-ind
16
I --C.",,)
v1
I, t) '- 
vX 
.
4 .
.
.
**.
A 
'J'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1011
0
/J-".-.-- 
.-
; .. 
.. 
-
'-"Y 
:
1. History obt rocd at initial excrination ewA during the
source of treatment.
2. 
His pcrzo.al knorlcdCo of the decedent, particularly his
personality pattern prior to the acute illr9ss.
3- Co-pl ints and fir nCs (subjective as vrcll as objective)#
imluding laboratory ex~inations.
SC1..nlcpl -curse of coMition during the period of
observation arA tr(a.n.ant.
5;. 
DiJ.eo e-..
6. 
If this is in Rcute rsychosis, opinion as to relatlcnsip,
If wr, to th .o r 
in 
Le.h:h 
he =as en.:1cd. 
*;!c should
like a f-ul1 
-.d c:..lte discusci-n of ti.c #tuation, with
rea-on-d .xpan.-.Or. for a:iCt opir±on Cr;-. rsscd. If practi-
ctblc, cit:-to.2 frcm .dical l terot,.'.-c in s-p-.crt of
exrescsed opinion ro'uld be a prcciatid.
7. 
Ay other infornton considered p.- nt to the question
of 
.
between the -.:ork end tU,;e lilless resPon-
sible for the de3th,
C %, L.1 (Z 
I 
CJ 
C.
',C'( 
f%, 
r 
" I 
, -
L"1- ,(L%
,.. ,,.-(' ft. I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1012
f
% 
*
AcL.x~ (~L~czzA~,
((CCC
e
2....c 
4A
CxQCL
LC L&C,,? 
/7
(2L& -Ls; 
I
1 c t.,
%qh
V.
'a
.0
e
* 0.
.
.
(~ r (
*
0
e
0
e
ce
soft%
clntt, t o
ooQ
00
j 14
t .6,
Ck .Oti
uok, . %
a0cr

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1013 .0
t k• s 
G,-l. ., 
I.
*AdLC9
~LFL
C...T o L.
~4~CL~44A
*. 
I.
S
/L. 
- L.C-Awo,
a-Crcv<I
(
g', &C 
C1 t
70 
rLdk.
4& :1,
~~W(,LrL
a
SF1
wI11 
.
.
a
iL LCV" 
-
I,''
11 
~
0
* ~
A
lb a
V0.4
L
CA(.A
%A.A..Ak 
Q)
i ltat(t-
ci.
, ..ed4
.ao, .1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1014
£
*" (0 C.'
o°.
9-.
I
A
(A CJ" .7
oro
er 
t"
b~ / Izz~
8 0 I 
-'.
f1a
0 
0
t~d/.
6o
a
. " L'

--- PAGE BREAK ---lb a
V0.4
L
CA(.A
%A.A..Ak 
Q)
i ltat(t-
ci.
, ..ed4
.ao, .1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1014
£
*" (0 C.'
o°.
9-.
I
A
(A CJ" .7
oro
er 
t"
b~ / Izz~
8 0 I 
-'.
f1a
0 
0
t~d/.
6o
a
. " L'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1015
Vvemuber 21, 15753. 
.
tL
ttrv. Alice Ticksa OiJ6Oz.
L,.D. ?
w 
m 
.
., -
"
"" 
-Fsfr . c3 i: = do to poi; c2.- .%. c!...)arn 
on
*c Our f Vta dem'6 
GZ ;pu 
a 
Dr. ;t~:~ 
)1soV 
.
U-0 Tmu.- 0 k frdj 
7,--A ar.2 art24t 
to, :'w 
no'r
t-3 YOU-O.C 
, 
yar 
own 
c .
o&F 
;,&a 
on 
,o'&"'" 
ot u
•Uavc C, 
o1dr- 
on v 
;iara r4r 
i 
a1S~ca baots,
" * 
--'n±- 
on your c- 
ccco 
d.))-4 
.
u3 
paid u.11
your Cct:% cr r;r-t.C 
r.a.±. 
ncc 
a X o..cI 
of
Your 
:-rev 
vdz 
'-.41. 
cof*z 
ruan 
C-I 
dep~ 
!-o.'rs 
or
toheJ 
"*Y.e £1 of c£e.L-ten,, 
, 
.
Mme "rn of ,.O,.3 
L;ui.W, certif.cc. to t.e 
U1
U.nzrn , o1" C O~e~ 
.
3 
o 
.-.-
2 :'.r 
..
cu)us 
!.-16 ;
CA-13 
on :cccun 
o 
;'. cti4 L-.-h. 
You -r-- 
:c, :',P.c 
o cc-loo
ct 
i, r .33 c 
o 
.f 
Ci 
.
.... a 
.- 
c." 
.
.n.r .o 
h,'-.a. "7 
o 
'. . .:-- 
...-3- 
*.::-. 
_..1' 
.
r ti"a- "r'-C: '
n L~ ~ 
~~~ 
~~-1U Le'.Q 
.. e. 
in 
uz 
",'h, 
of -;5"'J 
'. 
:3 ,.m'.r-.a.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1016
-29 Deoe br 1953
Ratirement Divi~l.on
U. 
. Civil Soz-iice Cozio3ion
Vash1J,;t.o- 25, D. C.
C ntlcwna
This is to Lnforn you that as the vlwdov of Firnk 1.Udolph
Ol.scn, 'a forr 
o 
a ofj 
3 of ho Ch.::ical Cz:--., 
ID.-Q.-ent of the
An!~g C=..- Littrick, rr.d3r5.Ck, 
-
-d 
;etrj L~ah aqL-rd~d
ben*fi'ts by th3 
i 
of Labor %md-r the edarval Zp.loyor'3
Copenoatin .ct for tha d3Ath of vq husA. 
• 
-
I therefore wi-h to uJithdra- th* s,= d- re udar the Civil
ervico falvire.-nt Systea 
and an attachinr 
ths revuirod fo.. horsto..
Yo.r3 trulyp
litc Wilcks O1ns+-
I. cow of daath csrt1±a.

--- PAGE BREAK ---fore wi-h to uJithdra- th* s,= d- re udar the Civil
ervico falvire.-nt Systea 
and an attachinr 
ths revuirod fo.. horsto..
Yo.r3 trulyp
litc Wilcks O1ns+-
I. cow of daath csrt1±a.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1017
• 
IMD5
FrMderLc*, I'-trlarn
29 D ctbar 1953
ftreau of -plo7aesl Co=penation
Washin&tcn 25, D. C.
Attention: 
Ir. Clyde R. Middleton
Deputy Director
Gentienn:
This will *cP' owled,;s receipt of your lett,.-ile 
!Xo. X-
86287 dated 21 Dect'-aor 1953. 
I wish to thaanc you for the prompt
action tU.3en on iq .. lI. 
for co-;mensaticn on account of the death
of c husband, Frank R. Olzon.
I have obt.aLned the required certified true copy of c7
mrria;. corttficat.o and fornrd:d it to yoar office via sear'.,e
cover .&rA trust it has reached you by this tir-e.
I also wish to inform ycu th A I h-ay net and do not intend
to file clziLn ".th th.3 Veterans A-ini,..tiun for C34th bw.9fit,.
I also eniozs a con- -f a letter .ea*:- .o the Rztkre:..nt Divosica,
U. S. Civil Sorvico C -ission informi:-4 them of the approvall of
vW cli..' and zaqas'tir: 
i4?Oot with.raw Uhe =~nics accruld
•mder the Civil Se..,rce aRtirezer.t System.
ftcloaed you will find the follo'.rui:
a. Completel copies of Ca? 12 an CAY 13.
b. Completed ind not- ar_:ed Co*Aes of CZ 42 and
fm+ g~er! e;:.n.. 
I an tol that theis
constitute 
. claim for reiviburseent in the
amoi.t of U.94 O to 
h,v r~e-rtker in paymtnt
of a portion of the f~seal expenses.
I again wish to express rW appreciation for your interest,
Very truly- yo70.r,, 
,
Al. Wlcks Olson

--- PAGE BREAK ---1018
rr, 14go1- 5!-4 14 1-n.

g1.S.

nrIr .%.T*!r.%-r Oer i %r,?..

11- pi v or Lart,.ve-e Cv-.o.

Ww 
..

D.C..

Jl.,e..l:h, 
r 
.e 
.

S.

-".+ see*.

.?+,% 
iI 
It 1*...

.

a."'..

Cae..

INI.

.rIuC 
L 
-.

'- 
.

I alu 
jC.lk 
0lUPy mu.1,AU.

a8Y 
'P.4.

ab s b ,: .

; 
_ .

A tm '* .

.

r .

% , 
-l 
.

.

.

.

I c 
-.

t 
o r .

I
1.

Department ZV .

...

.......

2.

Bureau or ofkh.....

cl.

.:-,', 
i.

................

...

.

I Wa.

3.

asw.) 
I L140"M.

A$LdO.

SN
So Wise of emplopacit 
.

a; -A---ty...........

41.

TFtu] 
W of injured emplo)e
ran oJfm 
injury .

.....................

.......

.

..

n
L Tim employee itoppcl 
work .............

.........

_ 
_ 
....

41008 
qr we"l 
(N,.

6.

6Lwp 
a 
L I
1.

Tim employee's pay stoppld .....

............

.

.

..........

.

iM day employee was able to renwne work 
.

,1.

..................

9.

Did employee return to the same work and at sam rate o pay tf ter termination of disability I ....................

U ao, when I 
.....

..................

-
If not, state character of work performed upon r,-turu to
duty and rate paid employee for such work .......

10.

Actual tiao disa'lcd (includin; Sundars and holidays) ...................

days.

It.

Xumber of days for w.ich employee would have received pay had h not been disabled 
.........

.

days.

1.

If employee was rmeiviuj subsistce.o as part of his wa-cs, wu such subsisteoco furibed durio; entire Iriod
ef disabiliy 1 ....

..

If not, give dates on which ubaistence was ot furnised .........................

.

....

o.o........oo..

--- 
--
I&I.

las employee been paid for rny portion of above absence on account of-
(p) Anluael lve
0) Sick leave 
.......................

(r) Any other reason _ 
_....

14.

Natural of injury.......

.

..

.

.

.

.

M5 R .t 
rl..

................

R.r.

.....................

..

.........

.

..

..

.........

................

...................

(oi I*I ng Oe 
rtaf -ril.-nt 64 to I' 
,Nrlwhe4 owIs in ec- 
.

% 
..

ith 
-
r-.

e 
from un nivers " ..

tsino4 lile i-.

Ct 
tr lnmaIs .

.4
dJ.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ct 
tr lnmaIs . .4
dJ. If 
Cv% t., ,..:.ator 
IJ, 
en,.) Ior 
lAs palW I 
@1 Ji..) IUu.a pftI.,-ly". tot+- &,4.Vtt'qL ouch repol. on l'oan 
. A. 2. &ix,:d
be LusiOdee 
itq *as'k.)
FRE:PORT 
OF DEATH
IL. Fun nsune of dccer-seot emp lanc 
. ................ 11. Time of death 
19 
......... Poo 
M............. 19j3 
.. . . -pm. IL Time employee- p.ty stopped 
------- 
........ , 1953 
.......... ,. 19. Plae of death ..... ... .. ,-- 
... . ........ .. f 
"4..% 
' 
."-. g0. Immediate cauto of death ...-. . . . . , 
-
...ui. ..... .... , 
.r.-t. 1. ...... 91. Wrdow of decebed eamplore ...... Mic 
-- 
-.-
2. Children of decreed employee under IS years of are, or tb&e over IS whe arc incapable oi solf-support:
2L Xaw6. relatinnihip. and address oal& 
other persons known to be dcpesdcnt, in any d.gre*. upn decedent
at time ef death:
S. ° 
°... ........... .. . . .. ..................... ...-...... ..-
,.. . . ...... . . .............. Signed thia 
t 
*.W. (n 
I 
7t
... ............ . ...... f. eeo~ 
.. ,~ 
.. L
l..Y 
.I 
.E 
....... "
(Al 
1-V 
-J V #0S 
-j nf 
-s t- eAoL

--- PAGE BREAK ---1019
•g 
..

...

,as.

+ 
..

a...

lr i 
.f l- 
-m 
.

...

.

S ..

...

.

.

L l 
.

i' 
e+ 
.

.

.

..

...

..

...

.

....

.

Nl' 
of :@ , 
?a: .*t 
......

" ...

.

.

f 
.........

.

."" 
"
IL X~qo 
lnj 
t%.

impPl 
Sn 
7..- 
divasvx..

r, 
V.!).

tor 
t 
ftc 
~
So.

l t 
fr 
c 
i t); 
.........

...........

.

..

.

.

..........

....

.....

.

.

-
.zhc I.

L 
1 
Ocusion a r 
fl 
er 
diis,.

lS tiiI*.i.ft 
8.

0 
-.m 4d~ght1.-
|wk 
00 
!

....

..-
13.

Doal ofc o rmiur 
*j 
)t.

93egrn 
s 
ijms
ic 
'A- 
( O 
; 
at t 
ra 
n s, 
.

.

.

................

16.

Date* of pay 
ta 
of 
inuy 
zc
__V..

t.( r_....t 16
3$, JDt et .f 
pa r.

, .--S'ofi" 
-u .

..

..

p 
ay oft
-.

.................

............

-e 
ft 
..

....

....

....

, .

-.

.

..

,,..

36 Wllcma~~a rcaaoayfr 
I)'an portion *.

aboma ba.nce 
-o 
ac.

tual 4!,o+.l+
It.

onyr,'d 
Id ..

,.o.;o...

.

..

....

31.

DLe4r 
hre in j 
f 
,l o 
, inury 
C 
...

d 
..

.

,
36.

Dideo Intry aue l o 
o 
n 
er 
a 
o 
eegq 
....

d...

t 
o.

.

.r ......

.

....

h irofda
3.

Wa m 
4p y.'e 
eais -,.rk aht ..7." .

..

'.+" 
.......

.

a.

.

~fr 
d.i ,,r'.

.

.

..

" +c:.&.t.i +-..

~.......

2, at h 
a 
rs 
opd 
12S 
re- 
clyo 
.

oro 
a
ours 
.r+ .

rd ".

....

........

....

.

....

-
.

l.

.

.

.

.

1 ~ ~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
e ft 
.r 
P.

n 
".:m 
4,
S& %Vil CMP!V-- 
writtvn 
P:a f 
r 
ln 
a y 
po'.

itwii 
of avasa 
an sc, 
ht d 
a.

a 
d.e 
fro 
.

boahd.., ofI¢I 
l 
j 
ry~ 
-rf: 
.(...s 
..

:...

dn ...

P.+.*..

A ..'..

.+ 
, 
++....~qg ...

n 
'* 
." in .

.

.

.

......

...

...

83.

Caana--~ 
adr 
Ic 
Of w 
.s.at 
iaum t +lr.1m4,~ 
.,, 
'-.Ute -o-'* 
.*,~¢ 
~s,)
12 
D tjl oa i i.r ..

luu~..

.

n...

s.....i.....

...' 
'.

.r".

.

'a 
4:"o 
---
"t'''-"' 
...

.ro ~) .2 
'
(0..

.

.

.

.

...

....

.

......

* 
-.

,- 
., 
.

(6)~~(.+ 
Anyo.'..reso 
...

(e) A,,.':ual 
I , , 
................

....

.

.

.........

..

...

.

(1)~ 
rn) 
om:: ,2 
ron 
..........

nncz 
-ris' 
....

i.l 
-Lfa 
n 
-- -~cCz8' 
-
nn 
(ff,-%t 
-.

3 
ll'}
of.

herie 
in 
r 
l I ,, ln u or 
c rc 
3-.-.

.!

.......

t.

.

(r) 
.

...

.....

,+ 
_ 
..

.--- PAGE BREAK ---

,+ 
_ 
.. . ....,.. .,......................;:-
S... We$, writd . lhr 
" ase o o 
ny~r I.Cn %. 'sr ou -e rs. Usel...t;_ 
. dids inurdia' 
sxe¢;ly io 
Z• "
k1. w'I mlft e o inury? --
~ 
l i 
----
tm ¢ 
---- - -.y 
----------- -. . o1,i ......... ................... IP l: 
. .. . . .... •o 
,ti ._._n .A J 9! e 
-
..-W .. .w t oc,-r.o . w 
.... &LL NaYs andm adrere ofwtt 
"t 
ijr 
. . ...... ... jp ; ]L , "I.31........ ... ' 
............ " . .. . . l }i, 
© o 
- :', 
............. ...... .. : l" 
-r '" .: 
,: 
:+ -................................................... . .... . ... . .. .. . .. .. . 'Uras 
1 ur 
C .. ,- 
*N 
; 
!..4 . r. .1k 
t'& i 
-a 
3~ C., 
, .vt- . m 
? ..... Ia f, 's**- 
"$ 
:=-lI 
* ; 
. t-. 4'
12 em 
+rtxt n , 
trk1C!o 
is~J) :n 
.tn4 
: 
e 
.rd. .. ,". .... Ibi 
... . ,=e -;r 
.-. . :--. ,;&, 
a833 M:". C"-;,, 
I"','-r't--t.%: 
%
.... .''..-'-X 
..''+.:.?.......... ... ........... •e 
-"- 
;;00 
"w*.,''- 
-
-i 
*I
. , 
. . i .:;++";+m..";i;'; ; ;' 
;"+ ;' .;::,': ";;".7.- ;'; .;;;7 
. ',:'C.,i...... ,'. II. ~ 
u i: u." € +:.. :" t!;.J l-r: 
:hc l-a. =IC)+III:P. I+I*, , +IK 
+':.e) • ... ....... . I :% 
0". LtII 
):h 
;tl'r€o 
nI .... ,.t 
'rt: 
:.e.,l:.,~+:, 
,e,
70-026 0 - 76 - 65

--- PAGE BREAK ---1020
r 
A' 
C.' 
*.2:".T0N 
C' 
" 
-.1'7, 
;;;..;.'7,"
I..1..

"o.-;
fro 
.• .o .

.

.

.

r 
.

.

.

.-.

v .t 
;r 
"s:..s 
f r I.

-..

.

-w 
CA..

A,-8.:--z,' .j *W,,.

,,o' 
., 
4
..

.l..

.

-o 
'.

....

2 
u..

.

, 
.

.

or oC;...."
CA Tr A...'.o .

=1.A'....

...........

.

..

9.

.

" 
..

..

-.

L 
,, 
, 
.

-
...

..

........

.

...

.....

&.

Time of 
r 
......

o 
.

.u .

...

19 
..

...................

.

n.

9.Dd sloc rtrnt t.C 
001r08d4 tuai r~ o a af 
.

Pariuto 
o4-4 
it 
.....

I.

T 
, 
whPIo 
cn, stopped!

w-,c .

.

.

.......

.......

.

f r , 
t 
t 
.

.

.......

f.....

upo..

...

.

.

t:
.

Time a) ce's Paid ctto l ..........

,,.

.

.

...........

..

.........

......

.

0.

u ,9 u;, C 
ilePO dC: 
'inP able o nrc 
duma 
.;rk ......

.

..........................

.......

.

.

bo 
fo 
b 
ch 
rrc 
h 
1t 
tclc.) 
L .

.'.

a.

t:.

U epoyoe w return to 1e sahowork nc 
d ,aart fi 
uct py after terwiuktoa of dijduility ...................

It so, ,,'cl..

.

..................

If not, 
at.

.

do 
n 
i 
lto ch 
c r of work pra ,rm d upon r.mm to
duty and rate paid 
employee 
for 
bo 
wnok
.ta 
.9 ...

......

I.

AcTuh!

trino diibld includingn S:.da34 
fn 
huli.ay) ..................

day.

i1.

umb-tr + d.Ays for which enoloyeo wohl brwc receiril par Lad he not been d[ahled ..................

days.

]12.

H[ Calploto W'X rcceirin;; suh)43'.ca c.s pstrt of h'is wvmgs , w-s sueh sauttece furni.,hed duriD.- e:,tice pewiox
of dimbtility I ...

.............

It not, givo datos OR UKhih -014I.'EPCO "..

no#.

(u~k~hed .....

.....................

13.

fis crni,:oe been pa.id for r~ny -ort;on of above absence on r.ccount of-
(a) Annu~al l'vl.

s7 T 
ick eavol 
........

,.y
(Dc.)
(1 ) Any other ret soo ...........

.......

1.

m o 
in r 
..........

..............

........

.

.

O.

...

......

.

...

.

............

......................

22.

ildr, 4d 
s.c 
~~eudri cr 
fa.,o 
b.eoe 
~~a 
"r 
""ea~ 
Asi-ujpr
X i.

A ..

.

.

.

f 
., 
Ullow,:r'( i-i("m.,'^,n k, v') !, (urni-l.:d o- IV2 N' ev.+,e of 
ul 
+ .

!:- 
r"i 
, 
'j, 
ufi 
4s.--- PAGE BREAK ---

f 
., 
Ullow,:r'( i-i("m.,'^,n k, v') !, (urni-l.:d o- IV2 N' ev.+,e of 
ul 
+ . !:- 
r"i 
, 
'j, 
ufi 
4s. ,iic i" t*'A I-+ ,fr.w . .C¢, C? du. 11. Illh r, , ! . It 
. or 
cl: o 
Jit. hap 
l 
i..+ ar 
I 
:ti 
be 
ii. ed b,.ch apot. " 
u, t V. ,p 2. v,iA
be I 
11a- 
cle. ":th.l 
"
REPORTr 
OF 
DEATH 
"+
16. |luU a ,.t of dcmasel tupl-byeo ..... F' , 
.P .Oo 
.......... . .... ........ .. .................... ........... 37. Time of death .. '24 
',-- 
....... :. ........... .............. .. _3ttAx .,-Y .................. 2 3 
.. n
M. pT,-, 
emplyee' 
..... :F'.-+.... ...-
, 1953 
...- 
'k 
, ... ....... ........... A.J 
. a. l&'1 
o 
,". 19. Fhco of dtatlL..- .. ........... . ....... .. ."..... ,- -
.......-.-
1. 'idow of dctct 
-l o)e 
... t 
-€ 
. ! .... ... ........... ._ 
. Dj 
+r. , 
! '" . ,,.."
22. Mbildson of doces, cd rr.%,.ce ucder IS years of ,no, or thude over 1s -alto are iuccpablo ot leif-&up~port:
.... ', .a~x,.= ... . ............ ....... .o. .... . ..... . .......... ,.... I.......... ... ,0 
23. l 
rne.,rlpti,,..1.w;. .nnd o ttl-'--', 
of rl" ol1'et P,-'ocs tIxOwL' 
toI be 4. pna 
,lle 
ill ftayl dt-t-1? Invk. & d+-¢[rn"
at time V. ,,h
. . . ........ ................ ,....... . o
.i 
....... .. -:........... ........ _. ................ > " '- 
;- .. . 7 ;:'-- 
,-- 
;-. " . .. ..

--- PAGE BREAK ---? Invk. & d+-¢[rn"
at time V. ,,h
. . . ........ ................ ,....... . o
.i 
....... .. -:........... ........ _. ................ > " '- 
;- .. . 7 ;:'-- 
,-- 
;-. " . .. ..

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1021
Fatien 
rn 
. bered .c frvi ceAtin.-s dWixint' t.7 ",'ar in 1944
anI rellcd 
co.-.n 
i;.l-''rs. 
PTcrssnt weoru t..-o oL" the ret~c..t.'s
fricr.da. 
Convornatia:n r> a, :-d for so., ti'.e cn a :.acial level
in vihich te 
patient. 1'.Ji, 
czstrar., to !is 
later description of
hi-.Self.0 
=u .-. : l¢-:nt 1 -. r 
for i people, evco: ntn, : 
fe~ln:-. 
r: 
bo-ut
p . le. 
VCe dirc,:.-ned t' 
r :i 
tc 
l.;af:(:.., 
(--i onily - .p.
.n he %:as ;dth -c in -riv to thit hn -"houri nmiety f ':Uaut Us
sense of in. e-u~oy, 
ith -[.'iLI reference to tht; s ci:ctific ;or
fz -nco of h!; .'uties. 
"e %'-s o :erseoJ 
i-i*h the J:I 
tA-tt his
VWZ-:or.7 I-Is poor, V-"At'i 
.
k ". 
n;,::~ , 
, th'L |;, f'.led
US 
k:ily ,': -4 Ur co-x'aies. 
-.
C71 
: 
-r 
inol t!--t '.c felt th-at 1ho
was 
bine;L 
oeciu.e he )-%d 
- een retired frr zhzuo:a] ulcer. 
110
felt 
10 hvt Ic --: 
%] 
st..iw:..n-.., 
that %:a:nalt USi., r: a, iy,. 
:!.e stated
th't a'Ith.-,au 
he coaild Gcc t,.e V.ct th-t an autt:-.rizaa rovie., bord
irid actud, his n-zn 1',eas .-ere in crffllct on .V 
;:'ect. 
'( Eaid
he ha4 -va:ted Lo lewc r-, Trr;x.ent .
but that if" he eid Icave
he would ba 
.
to 
-
_!z; rctirc ,-.t 
:ay., 
t:; 1_a 
t 
he 
JCO 
c4dnot
face it--I atte:ptod to at.cwrt.in if h., fLelt.-czv 
i 
y pcr.:cutcd
at thick tL'e, or tr.t ::ed, 
e. 
e 
: hais -;a- on .hi.; o;rn c,:-.:l-
sive i cei t3 Ca : rcriect .'ob, stpd tis o -n i.nbi] I.' to I ive up
to .;; t he e:_eted -f 
F or cxr Alcl, ;..:j: lic v ai; a....-."
to .ke ov:.r i4ia .ivj: icn.
In or!er to furt.!'er Er-,.p it- c:nt-ict .,.itii hX.- ad to a' sav the
cor rtion f rtbl.r, I 
to L Uc h-tel in t'.e u;c 
-::; 
anu e;o;.t an
hour .it'h t}.c 
A:tient ,.,. his tao £ri.. 
.
a .Jn, 
Lhe 1.tif'ist
ap:ce rei to :;.ait;±iln an u;ceesn 
rei,;:.ip 
It: i. oplce, cA:,iJer-
ir.- he: an- ittaa .e 
IL.( 
: _-. reported to be. 
.%n i left he cid, 
"You
knoer 
I feel a lot. better. 
jiis 
is .- .' t I havo been neLcirg.."
Cn !*ov1.)cbr 25 til e 
aj.-zared rr--.. 
a.l'-td,cd. 
'Iero ranS
a.ain rmpe-Aed dic- .io 
.t.: 
:;ore a-.iLatLo:. 
of "is inner .arrIc-
about 
3is v:rk, -.l"iclcae 
of cl-a-siicd infor.,tiza , his ;,,i!t on
being reLirmd-fnr as ulcer. 
.e saici 4.e h.d alI.aj.; ha tlese fceli.,?E
and they had n-t 
-st st-irte6 the mck before, :I 
ti-A in fnet In
:arch of 1953 'is 
%ife th:c u-ht he v;11 so cep-.rsed -,nd r 
ti..ed that -he
thau ht he should see a dwter, 
e 
'id he Lad bcon slcrin, oorly
since "arch 1953. 
::e a-Tl4fjczi hia diffClrztic 
sa:nU 
at .is
sv-ell-in- l-ad 
ps.;e 
or. 
t.,t 
his :.:;.ory 
T', 
r :or. 
Thi 
o'id tot
.ceck A.th rmpe?.ted uet.nh 
r(!,.&ri:. m<u 
pziA 
ts althoo't.h uof:s
confiAon ",sprev.ent, but this3 confusion v:-.s re.tricteli to fcelin,-.u
of "Paot doin, t h-; Job ri,-h1t.":or. 
Thi 
o'id tot
.ceck A.th rmpe?.ted uet.nh 
r(!,.&ri:. m<u 
pziA 
ts althoo't.h uof:s
confiAon ",sprev.ent, but this3 confusion v:-.s re.tricteli to fcelin,-.u
of "Paot doin, t h-; Job ri,-h1t."

--- PAGE BREAK ---.ceck A.th rmpe?.ted uet.nh 
r(!,.&ri:. m<u 
pziA 
ts althoo't.h uof:s
confiAon ",sprev.ent, but this3 confusion v:-.s re.tricteli to fcelin,-.u
of "Paot doin, t h-; Job ri,-h1t."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1022
W* I 
ng 
""ti
ZEF November 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD: 
7 
-.
v -
SUBJECT: Suicide of Frank OLSEN. 
.4"7 t t
Army Civilian Employce. Camp Dietrich.
1. 1 was called by telephone at 5:00 A. M. this date by a CIA Officer
and as'sed to meet with him. Dr. Gibbons and D:. Sidney Gottliep
In the latter's office in Quarters Eye. 
I arrived there about 5:4IO and was
told the !21lowin- story:
Z. 
Mr. Robert V. Lashbrook, a TSS employee. had been i, Ncw York
City on two occasions during t!.e last wec" accomrpanyifl 
Subject. w:o was
taking psyclaatric trc;tmcnt fro,: a Dr. Alsra-n.son. 
Oisci is a civilian
employee of t!ne Chemical Corp' at Caim-, Dietricn. 
The arran:-cr.-ents for
Olsen to proceed tu !.cw Yorh were made hy Colonel Vincent Ructte (up.).
the officer in charr.e of Special (iptrations at C;a-r.p Dietrich, and at lthe
suggestion of Dr. Gottlieb. T:,c Iatter stated that he 
uestcd 
Dr. Atramso,1
due to the fac.that th,- latter i' 
a cleared cotsuflant oi Itoth this Aency and
the Chemical Corps. in,l that the sensitive n'tmare of Olsen's work, part of
which he was periormin-" 
for TSS. made this appear de.irable.
3. 
Dr. Gibbons stated that Olsen had been treated five or six times
during the last week by Dr. Abramson. 
Ol.en and Lashbrook returned to
the \Vashin, ton area ior Thanks-ivin. but went back to New York City ior
further coan.ultation &-ith Abramson. 
Yestcr ay. AlDrainson decided that
Olsen should be placed in a sanitarium for treatment for a period and
apparently arran,.emcnts were made with a sanitarium vear Rockville.
called Chcstsut Hill. 
Gottlieb rcorted that Subject had stated he was
willing to take this treatment.
4. 
List night. Lashbrook and Olsen had a room at the Statler Hotel.
At 2:30 A.X%. Lashbrooh was awakened by a crash, awoke and found that
someone had dived through the window, blind. flass and all. Olsen was
missing from t.e room.
.5. 
It appears that Lashbrook called Gottlieb before he called the desk.
He then called the des.k and police from the 14tiL Precinct arrived shortly.
Lashbrook told the police of the employment of Olsen by Army. 
He told
them that !-e. Lashbrook:. was a Governn-:cnt ezrployec who had tbeen
associated with Olsen. 
Lashbrook had an AGO card and also a CIA badge
DkCLASSIFED ON 24 JULY 1975 BY
AUTHORITY OF TIE DCIHe told
them that !-e. Lashbrook:. was a Governn-:cnt ezrployec who had tbeen
associated with Olsen. 
Lashbrook had an AGO card and also a CIA badge
DkCLASSIFED ON 24 JULY 1975 BY
AUTHORITY OF TIE DCI

--- PAGE BREAK ---e. Lashbrook:. was a Governn-:cnt ezrployec who had tbeen
associated with Olsen. 
Lashbrook had an AGO card and also a CIA badge
DkCLASSIFED ON 24 JULY 1975 BY
AUTHORITY OF TIE DCI

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1023
On his person. Police made notes of identifying data on both Lashbrook
and the body.
6. 
Whest I arrived in Gottlieb's office, he was talking to Lashbrook.
who had called from a pay station in the Statler. 
I told Gottlich to tell
Lashbrook to take another room at Statler and await later phonf' call from
us*
7. 1 questioned Dr. Gibbons and Dr. Gottlieb at some len-th on certain
matters which had occurred prior to this incident and which will follow later
in this memorandum.
B. I then told Gottlieb to call Lashbrook at his room, which turned out
to be Room 468 and to tell hima Special Agent 
of the Depart:r..n
of Defense would call on him at 8:0. A. 1?.. 
to assist and follow any future
deallns or interviews with the police. I then sent word of the incident tothe
8pM* 
and made the necessary arrangements with him.
EVENTS OCCURRI.G PUIO, TO TIEE SUICID.
9. 
In mj qfzectioninq of Drs. Gibbons and Gottlidb, they related the
following events which prcceded this incident.
10. 
It appears that on '.edne-day a:td o:a Thursday, Novembcr 18th an:d
19th. a grour, of j persons from Camp Dietrich and from TSS assemblcd at a
cabin (two-stor, ior, house) at Deer Creelh Lakv. 
Gottlieb .t-tcd t.;ere . ere
seven men from the "Special Opcrations" of Carnp Dietrich and three i-;cn
from TSS. 
T'%e latter were Gotlieb. Lashbrook and-Ilut hes of TSS. 
Gibbons
stated thut the TSS liaison and connection with thc"Spccial Operations" had
been kept "EYES ONLY" to a very few persons both in CIA and at Dietrich.
He said it was known to Generals Bullene and Creary of the Chemical Corps.
It appears that the purpose of this liaison and connection was to discuss and
work on rnatt-ers of mutual interest in the sensitive and covert fields.
Gpttlieb said the Dietrich_ group had meetings once or twice a year at the
log-house referred to above.
I1. 
In any event, it appears that the entire -roup had assembled at
Deer Creek Lake by Thursday. 
On Thursday evening, it was decided to
experiment with the drug LSD. and for the mermbers present to administer
the drug to themselves to ascertain the effect a claqdestine application
would have on a meeting or conference. 
Gottlieb stated a "very srnail dose"
of L.SD was placed in a bottle of cointreau and that all present except two
of the persons had a drink thereof. This included Gottlieb and the Co0m11n ndi:
Officer of Special Opcratio:au. Colonel Vinson Ruette (sp ?). 
Olsen alto was
included in the group. 
-esent except two
of the persons had a drink thereof. This included Gottlieb and the Co0m11n ndi:
Officer of Special Opcratio:au. Colonel Vinson Ruette (sp ?). 
Olsen alto was
included in the group. 
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1024
1U. 
Gottlieb reported that the drug had a definite effect on the group
to the point that they were boisterous and laughingg" and they could not
continue the mcetin, or en;ave in sensible conversations. Gottlieb asserts
that the rneetin; broke up about 1:03 A. .. Friday morning,. He stated
that Olsen amor. others eomp~ained of wakefulness during the night.
Gottlieb stated he drove home Friday morning as did Olsen.
13. 
On Tuesday. 24 November. It appears thai Colonel Ruette called
Gottlieb and stated that Olsen appeared mentally depressed and evidently
expressed sorne concern about him. Gottlieb then su, csted that Lashbrook
take Olsen up to New York City to be treated by Dr. Abramson. 
From that
point, there .ere the series of psychiatric treatments and plan to hospitalize
Olsen as narrated above.
14. 
When I arrived. Gottlieb had already communicated 
-ith Dr.
Abramson. Gottlich told me that Abramson said th.t Olsen's condition
was one that existed prior to the events of 18 and 19 N'ovember. 
it should
be recorded tl.at Dr. Abramson has been experimenting with LSD on bci.al,
of TSS. 
Got(liheb reiterated many times that outside oi the boir-terous e:.ect
and the inabilityto think properly. LSD has no harmftal or permanently
injuriou3 cifccts.-
DIret'0tr of Security

--- PAGE BREAK ---(liheb reiterated many times that outside oi the boir-terous e:.ect
and the inabilityto think properly. LSD has no harmftal or permanently
injuriou3 cifccts.-
DIret'0tr of Security

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1025
a.-
T!~J? 
' :3. *IAR L 
29j 19"~~Ar~T 
v~ 
s
(.'ots 
"Me date 
ar.d a..roxL-ate tL."e of vixits to :r. - ,r.-
son dr saed .,.r, to c11rif7 
Uh...azonl sL.;.=A, 
.
0*s7 
' ov,% 
'ber 2I4
.-uvst!&y. "o*,,
(a) 
4Lth ;r.±.rnt and I.. friAwds, i.- ;.Ow 7bizlfz
tbout 4:45 to S:CO 
0
to 6tCO P.j.
(o) 
;:t, 
p'4L'%t '.C 
'.O .rilr rd 
In :-tl l 
=oc, i&.At
1O:CO to U:CO P.,
* 
T, Ith Patient 11o69 L ;:'n 
" 
:4.Al 
' 43CO
•O :C :O.
(a) ".i.h patien. &.z,.,o~'€, 
i= • .t 
n .n. 
l 
:- ! Ezl 
d,
oftec., 
xbout ',:CO -40 5:C0 r. .!.
about 5:00 to 5:20 %.l.
Zd~w fv-mhwi 
27
9:30 A.J. to 12:CO noon, and frm 
about .:CG to
3:S0O 
.:1. )
DCISIFIED ON 24 JULY 1975
BY AMJ R 
OF TIE DCI

--- PAGE BREAK ---, 
xbout ',:CO -40 5:C0 r. .!.
about 5:00 to 5:20 %.l.
Zd~w fv-mhwi 
27
9:30 A.J. to 12:CO noon, and frm 
about .:CG to
3:S0O 
.:1. )
DCISIFIED ON 24 JULY 1975
BY AMJ R 
OF TIE DCI

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1026
..pin an atto.lpt Vas 
=3!o to IrAve th.e paUmit. atats that ho
nea the aubqect *f a plot or as es*cl137 ;ersocu to 
by 
:4 f Lr.edx,
but at no ti.= aid heo t;.a 
of anI but t~hi 
emb ro,rd 
for rr!ieLds
0-. faedl7. 
:*'* stated eXp1±Citl7 tha2t he4 Wi~hOS to 
o0 
A-.. 
I
saw no wa7 in -. Jc. t~hs coJA b. prevented, but j 
=3 -ora ;..3.e for
fu-ter d.iscu s on.
Mwe patient r tur.n.~1 .. ter ar. alitated trip to -38*1n toni WA
was seen at 4:CC %.'.."z-r:cay, o-eraber 26. 
ia lt h 
1x.t-r7±uw, fzr
the first t4.te, 
.io 
tient snowed Vha; ho h ad dlu=oniZ.' 
OA" TcrzeC~xion.
qI tool they were Siving me _o;. to koep :e awake". He ctd that for
se* 
w.em's the C-A 
'-.p 
had been puttir. gojet-g 
g 2e 
= 
benedrine in
his coffee. 
e .O...d out he 'ad reard voices t.'c :_.*T:, .e.ore 
.nd
that V's voice told =. to p't-r.o- it aay. 
('e *ad th-.-..n I..y.7 Us
w33let). 
His history dfifitely7 1-.4 cat"1 he had bea. 'd ~uon1 at
least for W9e3, probablir rr.tzo, but. th t h.e 4ad bcvai ."-o to o~crite
fairly uoU, aept i cream, It becans appuent tht.moL 
.~i~.
tUoa msa". r 
±;.".e4 as soon as Foia' 'e.
.pvezber 27
On Fiday 
o.., 
27, 
-"7, t" 
pa 
r.t "-J a -.
Ic..d and the
wrgiter 
in .
z*.etail the. 
.- iribIL0t 
of 1h.04ihnlta 
troa~':l.
to ":i.--ch 
?-Z*" 
a...:%t 
d finally s.-.-ed.*, 
:A t"-u-t;t. ".; 
:w 
= U.v Lo
be near h 
a.nce. 
-d for t 4 a reason 4 =wr.lal instil :Ii;' .ear ash. 
.
rm~s cosen' ,r.d .2 room r03erved. 
':he ::Ojactal A:J.1 
-'3'%'p %:_-3 t.4 C!.Matt
that d.a, 
.1± azrn;%Ants were P'.e for hos 
.tla. :.'in. 
the ne. dv.
•.9nelu icn
he pationt ha3 been, 3ccor-.ng t* hi o 
storj/, -dleu-nAral for
lon& :eriad of* t.a, 
bul. operating; -1in 
U3 c. y by 
" 
-
-o$:. 
.:7
inordinate ::;ilt f~2i~,as c-reased tz =e, ve-o speclfl:asfly re-.
lteul to hi13 r..nicn Ild %Edablity 
F.' 
or t.ato 
f.~lt. hu had to
be pnishd. 
: ~a~L d..t~c 
his 
c-4ltes to ths.e L.>e he --as
* retir- .
It -as than that, he recalls ;is a 
Uor-iiury 
-sIl 
"
*.ban, bec-L;n, pro,cazl7el; worsep .th the s 
:Lfic dol-.'sio=. 
events
occurring .:urlnn the precedin, -ant.hs.o ths.e L.>e he --as
* retir- .
It -as than that, he recalls ;is a 
Uor-iiury 
-sIl 
"
*.ban, bec-L;n, pro,cazl7el; worsep .th the s 
:Lfic dol-.'sio=. 
events
occurring .:urlnn the precedin, -ant.hs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1027 
-
0d-
1 December 1953
M6EMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General
SUBJECT: 
Use of LSD
1. Pursuant to your request, Dr. Willis Gibbons, Chief, TSS,
was contacted on the evening of 30 November 153 concerning points
hereinafter noted.
2. 
Dr. Gibbons has impounded all LSD material in CIA lcad-
quarters in a safe adjacent to his desk. 
No one else has the combi-
nation to this safe; the material was so impouncedl on 20 November
1953.
3. 
Dr. Gib'bons stated that he is stopping nny 'LSD tests which
may have beet instituted or contemplated u:..er CIA auspices. 
A
cable will be sent to the field on I December 1953 to this effect.
4. Only two (2) field stations, Manila and Atsj::i, have LSD
material. There is none in Germany athou-h Mr. William Ilhrvey
recently expressed interest in the subj ect. 
A cable to the field on
I December 1P53 will instruct the field as to notwtusc and request
data as to how much is on hand and who has custody and access.
5. 
CIA has furnished a limited quantity of LSD to Mr. George
White, Chief of Ne w York District, Narcotics Division, Treasury
Department. 
Dr. Gibbons does not now know the exact amount in
Mr. 
hite's possession. White is fully cleared according to Dr.
Gibbons.
6. 
In summary, LSD material over which CIA has or had
distributive responsibility is located in four places: (a) Dr. Gibbons'
safe, (b) MIanila, (c) Atsu-i, and (d) thlat in possession of George
White. 
Exact amounts in each location arc not yet available.
7. There are several "grants in aid" units and individuals in
the United States doing research with LSD. None of these received
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JUE.Y 
Ap,
1975 BY AUTHORITY OF THE
DCI 
"

--- PAGE BREAK ---are several "grants in aid" units and individuals in
the United States doing research with LSD. None of these received
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JUE.Y 
Ap,
1975 BY AUTHORITY OF THE
DCI 
"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1028
-2-
material from CIA; some know of the'CIA interest and furnish reports
to CIA. Only volutcers are used. While some of the wiork is done
with kno-'led-e of CIA interest, it does not appear to be done under the
aisspices of CIA.
8. 
Dr. Gibbons said there is very little or no correspondence,
either internal or external on the subject, but that he would collect
such as existed for the Inspector General.
9. 
Dr. Gibbons was also asked to collect and have carried to the
Inspector General all reports on the use and. effects of LSD. 
lie thought
by this definition -he would have a drawer full of papers.
10. 
Dr. Gibbons v.'as asked to prepare a list of known clinical
grants in aid units and individuals in this country en--aged in LSD re-
search. 
It appears that Dr. Abramson has experimented with this
drug.
11. Dr. Gibbons was not clear as to the mechanics of CIA acqui-
sition of LSD but siic: he w,",uld ;ct the answVers. 
The material is not
under FeCeral U.S. Government control to the best of his kso.wled,,re.
It Is an c:;,erimcntal cru;;, and as such, is not allowed to be sol: in
this country. 
Most LSD obtain-_-d by CIA comes from the Eli Lilly
Company vlith head offices in Inc:ianapolis, Inliann. 
Dr. Gibbons
thought some ini-ht have bect obtained from other parties but he "vas
not certain. The Eli Lilly Conpany apparently makes a gift of it to
CIA. 
Dr. Gibbons wa3 not certain whether the company brought it
here, to a cut-out arrazngemcnt, or whether it is picked up in Indi-
anapolis. 
The manner of reccipting for the material is not clear.
12. 
Answers to the questions asked by the Inspector General
.which are not given by the above are being obtained by Dr. Gibbons
and will be furnished as soon as he is able to get them to this Staff.
Chief, JInspection and Review
Distribution:
Orig. & I: addressee
1: I&R Subject file
.". 
*.ve are being obtained by Dr. Gibbons
and will be furnished as soon as he is able to get them to this Staff.
Chief, JInspection and Review
Distribution:
Orig. & I: addressee
1: I&R Subject file
.". 
*.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d by Dr. Gibbons
and will be furnished as soon as he is able to get them to this Staff.
Chief, JInspection and Review
Distribution:
Orig. & I: addressee
1: I&R Subject file
.". 
*.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1029
MEDORPANDUK FOR ThLE PLCORD 
I December 1953
MUFWECT: Conversation with Chief of ISS re Olsen Case
1. All LSD is in Chief's safe for which he only hat
conk'ination.
2. 
Preparing cables to field to find out whc has custcey
and access. Issitarace dJcre only with Chief's ccrcurrerce and
use only with tD/'r approval. 
Senior military officer wanted
work broadened to irclvde Liological, as well as chemical.
5. 
Acquisiticn. 
Not classified as narcotic--orgeric
chemical. Con't purchase it--because an r. xperircntl can't
be sold in U.S. 
Has been 6c)cd ot 
Ly a foreigr co 
r:py.
With cne exception I.ED hts teen given to us. 
An Americar.
company has given us sere.
6. 
Corrc!pordence and memorandum. 
Don't believe any
reports addressed to Agency. 
DD/P has one memo on subject.
8. CIA officer has discussed use of something of this
type with experts from Carp Dietrich and they had all agreed
that an unwitting experiment wouldd be desirable. 
The LSD was given
to all of the ten at the cz-.p except one (who doesn't drink)
and one other who has a heart condition, both of Camp Dietrich.
About 20 minutes after giving the dose the CIA officer told
them what they had been given. 
They all agreed that it 
was
an interesting experiment and there was no adverse coment.
Only after Olsen cor.nitted suicide was there any reaction
adversely to the experiment itself.
9. 
According to Chief TSS, Olsen has a history of
mental disturbances. 
Last sur.%er he apparently told his
wife that he was upset and she suggested he see a doctor. 
He
objected to being made division chief because of a fear he
couldn't do the job, and after receiving the job shortly thereafter
asked to be relieved. 
On the Monday following the experiment
he told his Army chief that he expected to be fired or asked
to.resign. He then went up to New York with the TSS employee
and saw the psychiatrist. 
After several trips between 
:ew
York and 1Washington, 
the psychiatrist finally came to the
conclusion that Olsen should go to a sanitarium. 
On Friday
night, November 27, Olsen at dinner with the TSS employee
in New York appeared to be completely rational and discussed the
time they would have to get up in the morning to get the train,
etc.
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY 1975
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI
Inspector General
y'f. 
1g 
.
r~~1
I-be completely rational and discussed the
time they would have to get up in the morning to get the train,
etc.
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY 1975
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI
Inspector General
y'f. 
1g 
.
r~~1
I-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1030
1 December 1953
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT% 
Conversation vith Dr.

Willis Gibbons of TSS to Olson Case
1.

All LSD is 
in Gibbons' safe for which he only has combination.

2.

Preparing cables to field to find out who has custody and
access.

Atsugi and Manila.

Issuance done only with Gibbons or
Drum's concurrence and use only with DDIP approval.

Bulline wanted
work broadened to include biological as well as chemical.

3.

Man in Bureau of Narcotics has some.

Has good access to
criminal types in 
N.

Y.--Ceorge White--expert for Kefauver Commission
and close friend of Halley.

Nov out of town.

Got it from us.

4.

Grants-in-aid to Dr.

Harold Abramson, 133 East 58th.

Dr.

lobert Hyde, Boston Psychopathic Hospital.

U.

S.

Public Service
Hospital, Lexington, Kentucky (Dr.

Harriss Isbell).

Dr.

Carl Pfeiffer,
Department of Pharmacology, University of Illinois, School of Medicine,
Chicago.

Lilly has been trying to make it.

Another trying by radio-
active to see what part of body it works on.

These are top secret
cleared.

Got grant from a foundation to work through.

Is overt.

Use
voluntary subject.

Give us reports.

Would go on normally but we
insure it does.

Abramson is a psychiatrist and his people are
abnormal.

Rest are normal.

-
5.

Acquisition.

Not classified as narcotic--organic chemical.

Don't purchase it--because an experimental can't be sold in U.

S.

Has been doled out by Sandoz Co.

of Basle.

*With one exception LSD
has been given to us--Gottlieb and Lashbrook.

Eli Lilly and Co.

has
given us some.

%
6.

Correspondence and memorandum.

Have file cabinet drawer
full.

Don't believe any reports addressed to Agency.

DD/P has one
memo on subject.

Gottlieb's trip to Far East.

Mentioned in reports of
monthly progress-- 
is pseudo.

7.

Lashbrook (TSS), Hughes (OF), Gottlieb (TSS), Alfred Ulmer
(SI), Harold Cooper (PP) all have had it.

De Flores, Gibbons, Drum
and Roosevelt all know about it.

Also Wisner, Helms, Barnes and Scott
and Field of the I & R Staff.

S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Also Wisner, Helms, Barnes and Scott
and Field of the I & R Staff. S. Gottlieb had discussed use of something of this type with
experts from Camp Dietrich and they had all 
agreed that an unwitting
experiment would be desirable. The LSD was given to all of the ten
at the camp except Wallnovsky (who doesn't drink) and one other who
has a heart condition, both of Camp Dietrich. About 20 minutes after
giving the dosev Gottlieb told them what they had been given. They
all agreed that it was an interesting experiment and there was no
adverse comment. Only after Olson committed suicide was there any
reaction adversely to the experiment itself. 9. According to Gibbons, Olson has a -history of mental dis-
turbances. Last summer he apparently told his wife that he was upset
and she suggested he see a doctor. He objected to being made division
chief because of a fear he couldn't do the job, and after receiving
the job shortly thereafter asked to be relieved. On the Monday
following the experiment he told Col. Ruette that he expected to be
fired or asked to resign. He then went up to New York with Lashbrook
and saw Dr. Abramson. After several trips between New York and
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY 1975
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1031
Washington, Abramson finally came to the conclusion that Olson should
go to the Chestnut Hill Sanitarium. On Friday night, November 27,
Olson at dinner vith Lashbrook in New York appeared to be completely
rational and discussed the time they vould" have to get up in the
morning to get the train, etc.
Lyman B. Kirkpatrick
Inspector General

--- PAGE BREAK ---hbrook in New York appeared to be completely
rational and discussed the time they vould" have to get up in the
morning to get the train, etc.
Lyman B. Kirkpatrick
Inspector General

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1032
lRmwo 
-
J . Os 
•. 
I
Office Menora-ndum 
uNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
TO 
8 
Colonel Edwards 
DT1 
2 December 1953
MON 
• 
Chief, SSD
suspJr: 
OLSON. Franklin
Subject's death certificate, a copy (photosiatic) 6f which
has been obtained and is being forwarded. indicates 'his occupation
as a biochemist and business where this occupation used as
"U. S. Army Post". 
It also gives his wife's narne and where
they lived.
With reference to cause of death, it states death caused
by multiple fractures, shock and hemorrhage; jurnped or fell
from 10th floor hotel. 
The certificate was si3ned by an
Assistant Medical Examiner whose signature is illegible.

--- PAGE BREAK ---aused
by multiple fractures, shock and hemorrhage; jurnped or fell
from 10th floor hotel. 
The certificate was si3ned by an
Assistant Medical Examiner whose signature is illegible.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1033
01'T OF NEW I -"
DEPARTMENT Oz HEALTHi
:" 
IUAEAU OP RECORDS A 1O $fATISSC$
3.,.jt,.1 MANHATTAN. N.w,,* N.Y. 
DI '2 
53
tUo,. ;s 0 PI-socow::: COPy 0; 0 ccll:Aco.- , o' .1' ;,, 
Ow 
.. Jo' t,.d
ea~ Uat 4 
6~c 
ef 11.4 D'.Qp,; 
t 
o of K154 
*1 .1%,v Get ofr Koo, y,.|
AA
-
*5.57-.;7-
'.sis to :" 
t"c "" .6 ..-. . -
" h , coy f a 
"r 
i 
" 
-""='
* * 
IL 
L. 
~ 
MI3 
-.
'g 
y'
I '.o ....- 
1: 
1 
.'m. 
N 1 07 
I 
L'.* 
1 
''.- I "'A Af 
"IX 
0 Drf..-;Eoee 
I- 
j*
o° 
r. " 
.
1- 
"1 
114 
• • 
s 
.
f. 
of 
1. " 
Rv. ra 
.. -
orp~ 
e. 
If 
e,".1 
""t
LE_ 
per*,.: 01422.'
REST 
.
' 
-
.,.,. 
.
w l 
ho h 
.
.
.
... 
... 
... INSC f 
..... 
0 
._ 
.
Cffd 
, 
' ie 
. '. ,; 
.:.
* 
.
*; 
WA 
*?' **.: 
q" 
.* 
.. 
CO 
.
A•~i 
.T'1 " .RA 
' 
1:. ' 
' ' 
*tj 
'';'---"---.i.- 
•
SUL 
" .
+.: ~P~,.:J 
+. 
--
4k: 
... 
A~~ 
:I-.~ "..' % '-. 
,,---
* O*T,' 
CCTH:$T-AaS*-.P 
.---
O t.lpEO
* 
O'; 
Ii II=:=" I.; "tn~#p 
" 
I"h 
-' 
•.od 
II.. C c 'r- ' 
-"--
./.-;..t,. 
: 
-06 "," 
YS 
." 
"~ 
t 
,. 
* 
"- "t "" t* 
' 
-tO 
eJIq t 
.... 
... 
'" 
""
• -.. 
.
.
-,..*. 
... 
.
.II ,,4 
o 
-
, _. 
.- 
.
.
BESTI"EAIA 
-' 
l'----.-.- 
.....

--- PAGE BREAK ---./.-;..t,. 
: 
-06 "," 
YS 
." 
"~ 
t 
,. 
* 
"- "t "" t* 
' 
-tO 
eJIq t 
.... 
... 
'" 
""
• -.. 
.
.
-,..*. 
... 
.
.II ,,4 
o 
-
, _. 
.- 
.
.
BESTI"EAIA 
-' 
l'----.-.- 
.....

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1034
Office A'lemorandzlm 
UNITED STATES GOVERN IENT
TO 
Colonel Edwards 
DATb 
Z December 1953
MOM 
: 
Chief, SSD
SJJ*ECT- 
ABRAMSON, Harold A.
New York State does not require a license to practice
psychiatry. Their only requirement is that an individual be
a physician. Subject is a physician but not known as a
psychiatrist.
He has engaged in the practice of medicine s.ince 1925. 
He
was educated at Columbia University, receiving his M. D. in
19Z3. 
He is a National Research Council Fellow; studied in
Germany at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute, physical And electro-
chemistry; instructor in medicine at Johns Hopkins University
19Z8-Z9; instructor in biocheristry at Harvard 19Z9-31; .sso-
ciate in Bacteriolo3y at Cornell 1934-35; Assistant Prof3sor
fPofPhysiolo3y at Columbia University .ince 1935; Associate
Physician and Chief of Allergy Clinic. Mt. Siahi Hosritnl,
New York City (this position indicate of his hi-h stature in
medecine at Mt. Siani known as one oi the best Hospital.);
member of the American Colle e of Allerries; member of
American Association for Advancement of Science; rnernbt 
of
American Academy of Aller3ies and American P3ychosomatic
Society.
A reliable source has advised that to be an authority on
allergies one would have to take courses in psychosomatic
sciences but this does not make one a psychiatrist.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY.1975
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI 
&
70-026 0 - 76 - 66
1035
TRANSMITTAL SL
BUILDING 
amiaO" 
m
REMARKS:
fROM:
Sif op*,
oom. No. 
iii8Ii
904,6- 
36-8o-
~o'yI..
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY.1975
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI 
&
70-026 0 - 76 - 66
1035
TRANSMITTAL SL
BUILDING 
amiaO" 
m
REMARKS:
fROM:
Sif op*,
oom. No. 
iii8Ii
904,6- 
36-8o-
~o'yI..
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1036
Cae No. 73317 
3 Deceber 1953
OiR''AL:
At Nov York, !lw York
On 28 ?lovehber 1953, at 750 a.m., ROD-T V. LASHBRCOK was
u 
etrviwed in Room 468, Statler Hotel, 33rd Street and Seventh Avenue*
1r. LA.MB.COK advised that the SUBJ!CT was a biochemist and
Agency e.iployee assim-d to a project at Ca.-m Dietrick, Frederick,
Maryland. 
He stated ti~at a Colonel Vr:cIrT P.'J-T is CornAnding Officer-
of the S'JPJ7CT's cro-p. 
LAS- 
CC'% indicated that he has known the
SUBJECT for about one Year. 
He stated that the SUBJZCT had been suffer-
ing front "persecution delusions and guilt fedlings.0 
He indicated that
these delusions and -Uilt Celinrs wire not in arsas r:4lated to the
SUBJECT's work. 
L.!.S.- MCCK stated that the S--JZCT had received a
medical dischar-e froa the :-litar-/ service because of ulcers and was
drawing disability pay. 
It was the SUBJECT' s felin- that he actually
had no ulcers and that ho therefore believed that he was cheating the
government. In this com-ection, LASi .CK stated that the SUZCT
would listen .to -no reasonacle solution to his .,rob1e. 
He stated that
Colonel P..437T had become aware of SUE3JWE's condition and suggested
that sonoth:.w be done abo4t it. 
As a result, on 24 %:ov.3.-ber 1553,
Colonel P.UWZT, LAS M-.K and the SLTCT cane to 1,ew lork to consult
with Dr. 11.OLD A. A-TSqOI " ho has offices at 133 East 5th Street,
New York City, and who resi de at 47 Ie'a Street, Cold Sprin Marbor,
Long Island, 1:ew York. 
The three consulted with -"r. A!.U:SO! on 24
and 25 :ov.vnb~r 1553 and on the ni.ht of 25 "!oveber all three went
to the Hotel Statler with the intent.ion of dapart.ne. for ash:Lirton,
D.C., at about 7:30 a.n., 26 november. 
At aboat 5:30 a.m., Colonel
RWE" and LUSIOCK arose and were unable to find the SUW*J"CT. 
They
proceeded to the lobby of the hotel and found M-SJECT there. 
The
SWPMC 
told then that he had been wandering ar-Mud for a while.
DECLASSIFIED ON Z4 JULY 1975 
A 
.
-e+- t 
sin: 
.- 
b
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI 
5. C;.
*m 
1='f the hotel and found M-SJECT there. 
The
SWPMC 
told then that he had been wandering ar-Mud for a while.
DECLASSIFIED ON Z4 JULY 1975 
A 
.
-e+- t 
sin: 
.- 
b
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI 
5. C;.
*m 
1='

--- PAGE BREAK ---d M-SJECT there. 
The
SWPMC 
told then that he had been wandering ar-Mud for a while.
DECLASSIFIED ON Z4 JULY 1975 
A 
.
-e+- t 
sin: 
.- 
b
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI 
5. C;.
*m 
1='

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1037
Cas No. T3317 
-
Dcember 1953
Be also told them that he had torn up what paper money he had and
variosA papers in his wallet. 
He also indicated that he then three
the wallet away. 
He was unable to indicate whnre he had discarded
the above articles. 
Colonel RL-4, 
11r. LAS.-BOCK and the S-.J-C12
returned to ;;ashii.nton, D.C., on tne morning of" the 26th. 
The SUB-
JECT's condition was such that it was ccnsidored advisable that they
return to :'ew York -ediately 
for further consultation with, Dr.
AMW:'=.1 
Colonel .' 
rna ined in ;ashington and LAS.&.OCK and the
S 
ECT retArn~d to "New York, arriving at La Guardia Airp.ort at aboat
2O0 p.r.. 
Sthey proceeded by taxi to Dr, A:.*.SC!,8 r-.sidence,
I7J aitr~et, . 'titon, 
Lone Island, arrivinr there at about
lOO p.r,. 
After about a oce-hour ccnsultation, LASIM.OCK and the
S EJECT want to '.e Anchoraze Guest %ouse at Cold Sprint' Harbor where
they remained ovrnight. 
At about e:1 a.n. on 27 ,'oviter 1953P
Dr* AM 
.SC:! 
met LAS:2..OCX and the SLJECT at the A.chorare Guest
Rouse and drove th.e. to Dr. A:!.SC1' a :ew York off. Ec at 133 Bast
58th Stret. 
Th.re w~s a further conference 
in which all three
participated and it was Dr. AZ-M.SCNl's su.reston that the SLJ3-CT
go to a hospital for treatment. 
LAS?3ROCK.stated that SUWJ=T
Indicated that tLl-s was arr-cable to him. 
Dr. AZ-. S: thou contact-
.4 the Chestnu4 Lod , at ockville, V'aryland, and .iads arrjements
for the SLWJ.C., 
acco.anied by WSI 
OCr;, to be th3re at noon on
28 lovember 1953o. 
Me alfstnut Lode was decided upon after tele-
phonic discussion between Dr. Ai.$0! and Dr. C?'7". 
LASEMOOK
Identified nr. GOL.LI.B3 as Dr. SID GC TMB3 his (LASFiBFCCK's) super.-
visor. After the conference and on tne afternoon of 27 'oveiber l553#
LMSH 
OK and the SUBJECT retrnad to the Hotal Statler and checked
In. 
They watched television for a while and then went to the hotel
cocktail lo~ms: 
wn, r 
each had two martinis. 
They later had dinner in
the hotel's =zin dining room. 
LASHE 
K stated that no other alcoholic
beverages ware consumed by either of tnem. 
AS-:W.MK stated that at
this time, the SUBJZCT appeared cheerful and in a considerably better
nood. 
Shortly before 10:00 p.m., the SUBJCT= telephoned his w-fe.
He stated that the SL-JCT appeared reluctant to cliscuss his condition
with his wife. 
LAS1iM 
K added that the S1YJCT's wife had had
psychiatric care early this year. 
At about 10:00 p..., the SUBJECT
md LASHMOCK returned to their room. 
They had Rooa #1018 which con-
taied twin beds. 
LA3hZ.CCK stated that shortly after lOO0 p..
he called Colonel 
-L'."T who a 
oeed to mest then at the plane arrival
at Washin~ton at about 9:30 a.m., 28 No.enber 1C53. 
IAS-B'OK and
the UBJECT watched television in their room until about 11s00 p.m.
S1,d Colonel 
-L'."T who a 
oeed to mest then at the plane arrival
at Washin~ton at about 9:30 a.m., 28 No.enber 1C53. 
IAS-B'OK and
the UBJECT watched television in their room until about 11s00 p.m.
S1,

--- PAGE BREAK ---1038
Case Io.

73317 
-
"' 
3 December 1953
LASHWCOK stated that the SUBJ3C remarked that he felt more relaxed
than he had for a long tine.

Both then went to bed and IH.AOCKA
fell asleep, 
LUS _CK stated that recalling that the SUWJ = had
"disappeared" the day before, he, IAS:-W., 
took the bed nearest
the door_ 
LASI 
.CXK stated that he was wnable to fix the ti!e
definitely but t-hat about 2t 30 a.m, he heard a loud-crash of eiass.

ft said that the SUBJE-CT had J'zped throaah the window shade and the -
glass and landed on "he sid3etalk of Seventh Avenue, across the street
from Pennsylvania Station.

He rzpeazad tnat his esti:ate of the time
was not accurate and that "that time may be way off." 
He stated that
he Immediately, and before r-portirn7 to anyone else telephonically
contacted his sup-rior, .r.

&CT _-B, at his home, telephone "
(Virginia) l.,A, 
and told hi.

what had happened.

Ie then reported the
incident to tho hotal telephone operator* 
LSHC OCK said that A.Wediate-
ly afterward he called Dr.

AE.'.A 
C who "wanted to be kept out of the
thing cc:Vpletel,.m Zhortly afterward, some uni.for.-ed police officers
and hotel e'.oloyees cane to his room, 
S..ZK s3tat-3d that he did
not obtain their na.-s.

He told the policgi at that t:ne that he did
not kno'w why the SUL.CT had J'.

oed and indicated to them that he
bew the SUBJZCT su~ffred from ulcw2rs.

The unifor.me police made a
search of tUhe roo.e and found no papers b3lonrinr to the SUBJiCM, "with
me exception, LS:--..CGX said that this was a letter to the SU5jECT
from the Veterans Acnistration cor.cern:n: a lapsed insurance oolicy.

This was in LASH-.RCOM's suitcase.

He explained that on Thursday nipht,
the 26th, the SUBJZCT had thrown the letter into a waste paper basket
and LAS- 
.O1K had retrieved it, 
Whle tMe police wero in the rooms,
Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This was in LASH-.RCOM's suitcase. He explained that on Thursday nipht,
the 26th, the SUBJZCT had thrown the letter into a waste paper basket
and LAS- 
.O1K had retrieved it, 
Whle tMe police wero in the rooms,
Dr. AE .S 
' called back and indicated that he had chanr.ed his mind
about wintinF to be "left out cowlotelyp" ar~A wiLd assist* LAS.EOOK
stated that no one exhibited any curiosity about this call. He stated
that he observed that du-4nc the first call to Dr. A-kvYS 
the
doctor's voice was loud and clear. .rinr the semad call, he could
not hear the doctor very well and speculated on th 
possibility of a
tapped wire. ?ollo'winc a search of the room by the police, LASI.OOK
was requested to ro to the police station house at 138 ;;est 30th Street
to identify the body. At the station house, he was £'iterviewed by
Detectives ..,_R9D 
and NLUE of the ]hth Detective Sauad, 
The detective
asked h .- .to turn out his pockets. IJSHhO.CCK stated that amone his
papers there w~re airline tickets for the trips that he and the SUB. JZGT had takan within the past few days and a recent on plain white
paper for OU.O0 dated 25 'overber 15053 and siVand by JO! ELEOLLOA.UD
he receipt indicated "Advance for Travel to Chicago," 
There was also
a post card with Colonel R:L=ZTs address appearing as follows: "Vi-nce
Ruwet, lOOh Rosemont Avenue, phone lionument 3.-346?.o 
LSEOK said
that his papers included some hotel bills and also a paper with the
/
I'

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ts address appearing as follows: "Vi-nce
Ruwet, lOOh Rosemont Avenue, phone lionument 3.-346?.o 
LSEOK said
that his papers included some hotel bills and also a paper with the
/
I'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1039
o,
~~ -2
Case NO. 73317 
3 Dece ber 1953
address of the Chestnut Lod-.e in Rockville, :aryland. 
This latter
paper was retained by Detectives .;A..D and ?LXEL'U. 
k.nong LASROCK's 
,-=
papers exanrLned by the detectives, th3re was one which contained 
" -=
Dfr AN.SOi'u office and home addresses and telephone timbers,
LASHBOOK stat d that this information was' copi 
by Detectives
WARD and .
and th'7 %zk3d hi% who G. .I. 
',:.-R and J..!. were. 
He
Indicated thmt he prefafrred not to identify tiohe 
becZ-se of security
reasons and thi matter "ms or-2sed no further tr., the detictiv.s.
LASU'.OOK idmntifiad 0. W. to the reporting aC'nt a3 
another He"
,.ne-t official.
"id that :.H.
LASHBROOK identified J.1. as
caring the nt3rview by the detectives, LISWCOK stated that he
tld thx- he -;as n.plo y3d by the Da. artatent of Defonse and exhibited
his AGO card for identi&cation. 
He said that th* police requested no
details concerninC his superior or office location and that he
Yoluntarad none. 
He Cave) te 
detectives his California home address,
111% m.ontrose, So ith Pauadcna, which is wh3re his par.rnts reside, and
his Washineton, D.C., address, Apt. 109, 1833 N!ew Ha&p3hire 11.1d.
LASiMOOK stated t:iat he told the detectives that the SU3JJCT was
oployed at Ca.p Dietrick, Fredrick, Maryland, that Colonel 'PMCM.T
RUWT was the person !iore to be notified and --hat the SUBJECT came
to Niew York with the knowlsd€e of Colonel .?.*.r.T and SUDIT Is wife*
LMSMV OX stated that he eave no details of SUBJECT"1s 
-7lo3.yent at
Cuip Dietrick. 
He indicated to t3 
police tnat he, LAS:-:O.CK, was
stationed in ".Iash4.iton, D.C. 
LASOOK stated that the detI.ctives
iudicat3d that he had been sonewnat uncooperative when questioned by
the police in his room at the hotol. 
LA3SSH.OCK said that he explained
to the detectives that b3cause of the nature of SUJ:-CT's illness he
• 
.
.. 
:.; 
.
" 
/ 
:.t uncooperative when questioned by
the police in his room at the hotol. 
LA3SSH.OCK said that he explained
to the detectives that b3cause of the nature of SUJ:-CT's illness he
• 
.
.. 
:.; 
.
" 
/ 
:.

--- PAGE BREAK ---questioned by
the police in his room at the hotol. 
LA3SSH.OCK said that he explained
to the detectives that b3cause of the nature of SUJ:-CT's illness he
• 
.
.. 
:.; 
.
" 
/ 
:.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-
1040
LT' 
-.V.I
" 
" -
Z"" 
""'
3 Deceaber 1953
Cse No. 7331?
wap reluctant to discuss it before so 
.m-y people. 
He indicated to the
detectives V'at he cwns to N~ew York with the SUJZCT to see Dr.
A%'. 
1'SC:i and tihat the SUJ!ECT was seeing Dr. 
'XSC. because of Rmntal
Illness. 
LAS'2-OCK told the detectives, that e was.-to acc.anay .:
SUW.ECT to Ch1ztut. Lode .at toc;._VLUe, 
utlant. -LASiMOCK statad-'
that the detictives tnen axa'tined his wallet. T 
rh6-al:lot contained .
his AGO pass, %95652, and an Aiy.- 
Menicl Canter pass, -C750. 
The
wallet also contained a small slip of paper with aboAt thirty unrelated
letters of the al.habot* 
LASNh?.OOK e.Vlained to the rcportnu, agent
that this was a coded safe combination. He stated that the police
passed right ovor th2s papers and. did not cony th=. 
The wallet also
contained A.ency pass 1-*-2hL with Serial .C116832IE29. 
This pass
indicated "If found return to 2o:x 192'5 W'ash.-ton, D.." This
pass was not ouostiott:d by the detectives and not id-,tified or
explained by LASi.-lCOKo 
He indicated also that he advised the
Police De.ar4-nt that ho, L3"-2'.CGXq, shared .is apart.-amt. in Washing-
tons D.C., with Z.7.flJ SPO0-M. 
Atthe conclZsion of' the interview
br the detectives, all papers were rets.Lned to LAS;.- ?.K and th3y
assured him that ta.re would be no publicity e.natinr 
,*ro.o: 
the Police
Departnent rorardin-? the incident. 
They reaueted that between the
hars of 9:00 a..m. and 12:00 noon on 28 N:ov-Lbir 1.953, LM!OOK
identify SU?4eCT's body at the Norgues Bellevue Hospital, 29th Street
and First Avenue, 
ew York City. 
They further indicated that there
woad not be any further need to question hi"
The intirvi-w was concluded at about 9:0 a..i,
agent advised LAS2.ICOK that he would contact him at the
,wen LASiBROOK returned from the 3ellevue Korguaeo
and reporting
Statler Hotel
At about 12:30 p.n., reporting agimt and LASPOOK mot at
the Hotal Statler. 
L.!3:2.OOK advised that he had =ade the official
identification of SUBJXT's body and that funral arrangents would
be made by Colonel RtWF or the 3UBJ CT's wife. .eportin 
agent re-
aiLnd with LS.RCCK until 5:00 p.m. 
LASHB.XCC made a nvibar of
phone calls during the a.zternoon and other than exhibiting! fati-ue,
appeared comIstely con-csed. 
He advised that pnrsuant to instrctions
received from Dr* GCTT1L63 he was to meet with Dr. A U .(I 
at
915 p.m. on the 2eth to obtain a report frao 
Dr. AMWZC-LI which -he
was to take to Washington.
Z<- /
3-.
"J44 
I 
06v.I 
I~ac~
ge 
06 C: 
" "
C7 
1.
.11
iGCTT1L63 he was to meet with Dr. A U .(I 
at
915 p.m. on the 2eth to obtain a report frao 
Dr. AMWZC-LI which -he
was to take to Washington.
Z<- /
3-.
"J44 
I 
06v.I 
I~ac~
ge 
06 C: 
" "
C7 
1.
.11
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---eet with Dr. A U .(I 
at
915 p.m. on the 2eth to obtain a report frao 
Dr. AMWZC-LI which -he
was to take to Washington.
Z<- /
3-.
"J44 
I 
06v.I 
I~ac~
ge 
06 C: 
" "
C7 
1.
.11
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1041
Y
Case No. 73317 
.
3 ecember 1953
At 5:00 p.',., Azent dAL.M P.T., Jr. s %et reporting agent
and-OB,.T LAS:-?3'&CK at Pezsylvan!AStation at Aew 
!or 
City. 
PUrsuant
tO tnstrct~ons Aant *A-;..LTZ 
P.T. accompanied LA3E-.ROCK thrughout
the evening and report-.in 
agent departed. 
&,.IS?.OCK indicated that
he would like to tak3 a walk and go to a movie until his 9:15 po.n
appoint.rmit. 
After seeing "Cease Fire* at the Criterion (,Uth Street
and Broacay) and dinner at '- c Ginnis's Rista- rant (48th Street and
Broadway), 
ILAS..BRZOX and Agent 
ALTM P.T. walked to 133 East 158th
Street, New York, N. T., arriving there at about 9:15 p.s. 
Upon
arrivingL .-.ra, thiy proceeded to Roort 310. 
LASHLOCK indicatd that
he preferred to have tne a7ent wait in the reception room wlhle he
spoke to Dr. A--.x:Sc:' 
LASl?.OCK introcod the agsnt to Dr. AL ,S-O
without the use of the a.nt's na-me and indicated that ha was a friend
accompanyir 
h!-% 4n an advisory capacity. 
While r~naininr in the
outer office, A"rnt '.L 
P.Te ov rh-3ard a portion of the convrsa-
tion between LAS 
.?00 and Dr. AatsC.o 
This conversation is su~iawrized
as follow3s
Upon closin? the door, Dr. AAMS, 
and 
iA3{lCK started a
discussion rilatin? to security. 
Dr. A3 X5C: was heard to co-nent
to LASHKB.OCK that he was worried about hi:. 
L'" 
-3CCK then stated
that he thought it woald be best if he dictated to Dr. AMWSO.1
Prior to his dictation, they listened to portions of'a conversation
which had ben .recordde 
Althouh na.ies wrs not mntfonod, it is
believed th;t the recording represented an int.ervtiw between a
physician or psychiatrist and the SUEJZCT. 
Following txiss LASi--K
started to dictate to Dr. A,. SQ; conccrn:Lnr the SUBj-CTo 
This
related to LAS3.B0' 
s observations of SU5 3JC''s behaviour prior to
SUB-CT's de-nise. 
LSHB?.O0C told Dr. A2.IM:SCI that SU=J-' 
had told
him that as far back as M.:irch 1953 S"3JECT's wife had sagEgsted that
SUBJECT so& a doctor because of his depressed condition. 
LASK!{LWCK
further stated that it was his impression that S1J3Ji*CT had delusions
and was suffering from guilt and persecution co 
texes. 
LU3HrM0CK
mentioned that SUBJZCT tho-Ight he was stealinr money from the fovern-
set. L&SH:;ROCK also indicated to Dr. AZRA::S& that Si;J-C 
had told
hia that he thought the agency group was putting benzedrine in his
coffee to keep him awake. 
Toward t-he close of his dictation, LShOOK
Indicated that he had had dinner at the hotel with, the SUBJECT at
iuich tine the SUBJECr had said to hin, "I ha'vmvt felt better for a
long ti.e" Several tiL-.es d.ring LASH ROCK's dictation, the dictation
was interrupted and he and Dr. AEAS- 
listened to portions of
the tape recording.
WON%
tV,,. .
,M-A,,/....,.vt felt better for a
long ti.e" Several tiL-.es d.ring LASH ROCK's dictation, the dictation
was interrupted and he and Dr. AEAS- 
listened to portions of
the tape recording.
WON%
tV,,. .
,M-A,,/....,.

--- PAGE BREAK ---long ti.e" Several tiL-.es d.ring LASH ROCK's dictation, the dictation
was interrupted and he and Dr. AEAS- 
listened to portions of
the tape recording.
WON%
tV,,. .
,M-A,,/....,.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1042
SCz
Cae 11o. 73317 
3 December 1953
Agent WLT- 
P.T. heard LASt-OOi( and Dr, A2?.LU:SO11 leave the
room closest to the outside of fice and enter 3nothor room. 
At this
point, LAS:-COK and Dr. AakSC| were a .arently having a drink* Dr.
AR W.SON was h-ard to r3mrrk to LAS-,E?.C'K that he was "worried as to
whether or not the doal was in Jeopardy" and thaf ha thought "that
the operation was danvqro'us and that the whole deal should be re-
analyzed." 
;-z-cCK and Dr. A 
:sz:I reJoinod Acent .;:.L 
P.T. in
the outer police at abo',t 10:33 p.m. 
'r. 
A!' AC: ac'on.anisd :AS'-
BROOK and the ar.nt to the street. 
on the way down, 
.
A-7"..:-SO.:
poke to LA3:.'CCK using medical terrs which LA.4-.CCK apparently -
mdrstood quit3 well, 
Ac!nt "LT -. P.T. Pot the impression that
LASHBROOK is a doctor or scientist-
Agent 
AL.. 
P.T. and LA3W 
2OCK took a taxi front 5th Street
and Park Avnui to Pnnsylvania Station where LAS 
COK boarded the
110 am. traLn for ..asningtons D.C., at 11:00 p.m.
On 2 December 1953, Agent JOMI 
D.P. obtained Certificate of
Death relating to the SUiJECT from the New York City D--parte.mnt of
Health~~reau o' Rscords and Stat~stic3. 
This certificate is attached
and marked Exhibit A.
On 2 Dec-bor 1953, Agsent Ja.-L4H J..?. examined 0'.4101
MPORTANT ri i!zDCI:.i,
3 Second Edition, 1952, at, the Vo3w York Public
Library, 42nd Street and Fifth Avnue. 
This book contained the
following information about Dr. HIIOLD AE.9.US01t:
9AR14SO., 
Harold Alexander, Physician; 
born f!ovember 27,
1.899, tIew York, .. Y.; son of F. Sa-rel and E. ?ose (Richard) Abram.son;
educated at Col'-bia Univ., AB 1920, .-D lc23; married Barbara Howland
Saith, June 26, 1933; 
Children- 
Alexandra Ho'land, Harold-Alaxandor,
Barbara Howland, Holand Wilson. 
Eh7aged in ths practice of Yedicino
since 1925. 
1:ational aesearch Couancil ?ellow, Kais~r Wilhela Institute
for Phys. Chemistry and Uectrocheristry, Berlin, 1926-27. 
Instructor
In Medicine, John opkins Univrsity, 1929-31. 
Associate in bactsriology
and DZwnolovy, Cornell Univrsity, 1L3L-37. 
Assistant Professor of
ftshiolory, ColUmbia University, since 1935. 
Associate Physician and
Odef of Allergy C(finic, Xt. Sinai Hospital. 
Discovered and developed
eleotrophoretic and ultrac.ntrifual isolation of molecules causing hay
fever; 
elec. charge of blood cells; electrolhoretic (sic) skin tests
and therapy with pollen extracts; 
mechanism of" alareic skin reactions,
nature of ionizinz grouPs of protein surfaces. 
Initiated (1942) andc. charge of blood cells; electrolhoretic (sic) skin tests
and therapy with pollen extracts; 
mechanism of" alareic skin reactions,
nature of ionizinz grouPs of protein surfaces. 
Initiated (1942) and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ells; electrolhoretic (sic) skin tests
and therapy with pollen extracts; 
mechanism of" alareic skin reactions,
nature of ionizinz grouPs of protein surfaces. 
Initiated (1942) and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1043
S
Case 1ro. 73317 
3 December 1953
directed pen.cillLn aerosol therapy for lunvs for Toch. Div., Chem.
War Srvice, Wrorld ;;ar -t. 
Assistant Cilef and Cief, 
e.fenss .at-griel.
Fellows 
N.Y. Acadwrl of I!edicine; 
k.erican College of .llargists
(Pres. 1951--2). 
;e.-.birt 
A-. ,rican Assn. for Advancr.ent of Science;
American Acadv.-y of Allery; knricwn Psychosoatic SocieVj 
:.Y.
Academy of Science; *,.T. Allergy Society Ores. ll-52); 
A.rican
Society of Crtified Aller ists; A.mrican Society o-. 
iolozical
Chemists; '.T. 
Co.&nty 
we'±ical Society; 
Society for -."ter-iental
Biol, and I!ed.; 
Society for Investi-ative e..-atolorj; 
Alpha Cnega
Alpha; 
Zpsilon Chi; 
B 
board of Tr.stees, Biolo-y Lab., Cold
Spring Harbor, L. I. 
Awarded Meyvrhof Prize, Coltrbia :.2dical College,
19211 
Stovens Triennia. Prize, Colo Univ., 1935; 
Le.ion of ::irit,
W6rld War !I. 
:Aeb r of Mitorial Board: 
Annals of Allergy; 
Psycho-
somatic E:adicii; 
Arcnives of Allirgy -nd :L-Toloy. Lt.-Col., ::ed
Corps ?as. (Rasac:i). 
Rs 
Cold Spring Harbors N.Y. 
Off: 133 East
58 St.,1 :.. 
22, N.Y."
The -MDICAL D0ICMV1fY 0' 
,1 
. YORK STAT.E, 7blumo XLIV, 1951,
published byr the -:edical Sccety oi t~h State of :Ie-r '-ork, 292 -adison
Avenue, V:iw Yor-:, '. Y., inlicatis that Dr. AS3.:SI's practice is
limited to Lunolorj and Alergy.
On 2 December 1953, Agent J.AW- 
J.YcC. contacted Dotectives
JAY. 
WARD and "Ai1D !U LL at the lLth Police Precinct, 138 .iast 3Oth
Street, 10ew York City. 
Dtectivn 
.
ade available th3 cowlaint
report in SUJXT.C's case w;ich indicated thle date and tims as 28 ::ov-.ber
1953 at 3:50 a.m. 
T'.h 
cass nuber was 125124 and te 
cred.o DOA (Death
an Arrival). 
Zhe place of oc':uroncs was noted to be the Hotel Statler,
Room 1OlEA, 33rd Street and Savinth Avenue, and the case was handled by
Detective J1.ZS 
U RDs lth 
Sq'ad.
The details as reported by co..,lainant PatrolAan GUASTM.3T.
)Leld 
#ML626, described the SUBJtCI as "un;mown, 14-W-L2-510-170 lbs.-
blue eyes-blonds hair-partly bald-w3aring white underwearo 
Registered
In hotel under r.-ne of F XX 
of Route #j, Frederick, ).
Jumped or fell throd;h window i 
r.og- at place of occurence and pro-
nounced DCA by Dr. D):OSI:O of St. Vincent' s Hospital, 
Deceased found
by Assistant Kanagr FITZMALD of Statler Hotel. 
Body to station house.3
*r- *. .ac: w Z.. 
-. 
*,. 
q 
±G. 
: S'
sEot 
r 
NFR 
TION~
(~' 
1-/al 
'D):OSI:O of St. Vincent' s Hospital, 
Deceased found
by Assistant Kanagr FITZMALD of Statler Hotel. 
Body to station house.3
*r- *. .ac: w Z.. 
-. 
*,. 
q 
±G. 
: S'
sEot 
r 
NFR 
TION~
(~' 
1-/al 
'

--- PAGE BREAK ---cent' s Hospital, 
Deceased found
by Assistant Kanagr FITZMALD of Statler Hotel. 
Body to station house.3
*r- *. .ac: w Z.. 
-. 
*,. 
q 
±G. 
: S'
sEot 
r 
NFR 
TION~
(~' 
1-/al 
'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1044
S 
CTY 
II
3
r. 
NATION
Case Uo. 73317 
3 Decembar 1953
Report of Investigating Officer dated U/28/53 stated that
the investigation was bzu., 
con.-cted 
r.nd that in view of the facts
set forth it was requested t hat the case remain active.
A supplmentary co.._aint report concerning the case indicated
that the crns or offense reported was now listed as DOA (Suicide). 
Te
status of the case was indicated as Closed X. (with written report).
The report of the investigation datod 30 Noviiber 1953 reflected
the following s
CAUSE OF D.ATH A;D DISPO'SITICN 07' B01.
1. 
Vpon b-ine notified of this occurw.ce, fi-,ediately visited
place of occurrence, Statler Hotel, whore a thore--h investigation Was
conducted. 
At thi3 time, it was disclosed that the dec easod had roristered
in Rlu. al)EA on Lovw~b-ir 26, 1553, under tir. zm-e of :-?_10 
R.
Frederick, Md., with another person naned RO0z 'r-T LkS-ZCOK, 
asnintcn,
D.C.# At. 109, who identified himself a3 a conVxtant ch-cmist e.-loyed
by the War Dpartnmt, iPefenso Bureau, Ad utant'$ Gneral's Office,
Washington, D.C., under Serial iM116E321E20 :lso had picture on card
with nwnber 2Lb. 
LAZHOOK at t.s 
ti.Le disclsed Itat the deceased
was one FM.A'K R. 
p Camp Detrick, Fredrics i'axjland, a bactqerol-
ogist, e-mloyed by t,, sano branch of the a.%rrnent as he (LASia:OK).
He further s atad that t.e deceased with himself and a Colonel *' _:CL;
RMET, attached to Carp Derrick, Fredarick, ;l.d., came to Lew York City
an november 2L, 1553, for t,,. 
purpose of having fhe deceased exained
by a Dr. !iXCLD ..
%.fLTSO!:, 
133 Z. S5th St., 
.Y.C. (PL 3-33), as he
was su fferLn, fron a -rintal aiM.nrl. 
They rernaijd in !:.Y.C. until the
morning of Iovmbar 26,, 1953. r~ristered at the Btatler J'otel, during
which time the deceased vas exa ined by th doctor on two occasions
and on the morning of oe.ber 26, 1953, 
, with the deceased,
returned to !:'-w York.City and registered in the l.atl3r Hotel. 
They
again visited th3 afor.enentcned doctor and -as a result of this visit
the deceased was advised to enter a sanitariu as he was suffering front
never 
psychosis and illusions. 
At this t-ne, a-a4 -r..nents were made
for the deceased to enter the Chestnut Lod7e, R o&YLv'-C
9 
'd. 
under
the gpervisicn of a Dr. FCRT. 
On the evening at""ovenber 27, 1953,
the deceased in tha cc-p.any of LASHEICOK had di=r in the Cafe Rouge
of the Statler Hotal and returned to their roan di. approxinately 9:30 p.m.
...... 
CIY" .'T'two 
,.'d. 
.' T " ,ovenber 27, 1953,
the deceased in tha cc-p.any of LASHEICOK had di=r in the Cafe Rouge
of the Statler Hotal and returned to their roan di. approxinately 9:30 p.m.
...... 
CIY" .'T'two 
,.'d. 
.' T " ,

--- PAGE BREAK ---e deceased in tha cc-p.any of LASHEICOK had di=r in the Cafe Rouge
of the Statler Hotal and returned to their roan di. approxinately 9:30 p.m.
...... 
CIY" .'T'two 
,.'d. 
.' T " ,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1045
'4
Cue No. 73317 
3 Decabr 195,3
looked at television for approxmately 1 hoir and then proceeded to go
to sleep. 
At approx.l-3tely 3:20 a.=. on Iov-b.r 2, 
1953, LA3F-.COK
stated that ha h3ard a crash of rlass wnich a dakened h.%. and u.on
turning on th2 lizht he observed -hat th3 deceased "rs not in his bed
and that te wl-.dow of the rooi leacdnC out to 7th Avenue was broken.
He then called the operator of t.hs hotel and at this time he learned
that 
had jrixped out of the i.ndow.
'2. The assigned i.- odiately chocked on the above facts re-
lated by Las-.ccK and they wer3 verified by 0p. HOOLD..o AE3.SCt1 and
Colonel VI.:C.;.:T .i7JT. 
.
-
'3. De to the importance of the positions hold by the
deceased and LASw2 CK "ith the U.S. Govern.-ient, the facts in this case
were related to ?.B.I. A-ent GLX ;O DAL.,I (by telephone).
*L. On 1ov-nbir 2e, 1003, autopsy per!for-..!d on body of deceased
by Assistant .:ed!.cal ZxLminnr DI :-:AIO and as a result of same it was
disclosed that.death resulted fron multiple fractures. 
.
.On 
I!oveinbr 2e, 195.3, bocy of th3 dsceased claimed by
his wife ALICE and d-livered by Fr.nk e. Caripb3ll, undzrta.-e.rs, 1076
Madison Ave., under removal .i7p for burial. 
CSZ CLCS""
This report was submitted and signed by Detective JA?.Z- U.
WARD, Shield #338, l|ith Squad.
Before) reviewing tho report, Detective 
A71D :-.LLE,"- who
had reported to duty on the evinig shift a little earlier than
Detective ;."$D, engaged in conve.rsation with Af.ent JLKI 
J. KcC.
W=e KLL-Z was contactad and advised that the arx3t was interested
in obtaining the report concernir. 
SU JLCT's case, NULL 
advised
that he was Detective AALRD's partner on the case. 
He stated that
WARD was responsible for the report and he personally discussed the
case and said that 
CErE,-.T LAS .CCK, 
who was with the SUWJ3CT, had
been quite uncooperatIvN 
and he and Detective .wA.?.D had to bring LASH.-
HNOOK to the station house before he would answer other questions.
Detective ?-.LL- said that they were first veryf sumpicious that LASH-
NOK and the 3UJ.CT night have been engaged in s3e homosexual affair
and also were mi4llir.v over in their minds the possibility that the case
was actually a hormocide. 
He further stated that they were considering
10-
rI 
710.'ve been engaged in s3e homosexual affair
and also were mi4llir.v over in their minds the possibility that the case
was actually a hormocide. 
He further stated that they were considering
10-
rI 
710.'

--- PAGE BREAK ---3e homosexual affair
and also were mi4llir.v over in their minds the possibility that the case
was actually a hormocide. 
He further stated that they were considering
10-
rI 
710.'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1046
ect'.A "t 
.-
T:.C:-
Cs ?o. 73317 
3 Decmber 1953
the possibility . that St3JZC"' and TJ.$-MOCK were involved in some eorrittee
hearing for *.,y wire aware t,;iit Sen. I:c Carthy's Comittee was in town
around this toe 
H stated t.t 
the case of "MMGA; of the State De-
partment c&ne to :%mid ivid as a result they call3d the ?BI to see wheth-
or not they m.s an thin aoit either LS. 
5Z.OCK or the SL3JZCT. 
About
tbis t1-sp Detectlv3 J':.'..s "2D app3arsd and he mors or less confirmed
what Detective .U.L' 
had said. 
".* advised t.-4t LAS'.MMOCK was un-
cooperativi and it was "like pullinq teeth to get anything out of hism.
He said that th1y secured Dr. Ana.SC!.s none from the hotel operator
who apparently had intercepted LA..-4K's call to Dr. AZ,..SCI$ and
be continued by s~a;l ti it he could not bileve awrt iinq could be so
secretive tat 
LX3- :-.CCK would nav3 been justified in being so un-
cooperative. 
Fa advised that he had been in touch with an F.B.I. avent
( hon Detective 
.'LL 
thou-ht was named l:c S.:-3) who. he, Detective
WAfD, did not identify, and who was equaLly unblievins and had e.ressed
the opinion tiat he did not k:ow of an, government. work so confidential
as to Justify a lack of cooperation with police officials.
After this diucusson, Detectiv* I1A?.D made available report
met forth above .and wnan tae report was returned to h i, in answer to
a query as to wn3thar the FBI was still interested in the case he
stat3d that he believed they were doing further checking into the
backround of LASWB.COK.
Detectives WARD and .MUL,-M advised that the 
U3JECT' s case
had been give-n little pblicity but this was not because the reporters
were not interested in the case at the time that it happened, but
rather that nono of tnh 
moro important :ew York newspapers have been
published since the incident occurr d. 
Thay said that reporters had
bn 
around the station house tryi-ng to get details on the story on
Us day it happened but advised znat after twenty-four hours news stories
lose their value.
Detectives 'A,.D and NXIM were fully cooperative and advised
that they would be willing to give further help if it were desired
aE 
/L 
a
S .". 
..
' 
d 
-
-1,*i'* 
1 17 
o'd
srrt/ 
7 
1,' 
.
i 
-.. 
.
....ives 'A,.D and NXIM were fully cooperative and advised
that they would be willing to give further help if it were desired
aE 
/L 
a
S .". 
..
' 
d 
-
-1,*i'* 
1 17 
o'd
srrt/ 
7 
1,' 
.
i 
-.. 
.
....

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1047
~cv
kve
lit rr.1

--- PAGE BREAK ---y would be willing to give further help if it were desired
aE 
/L 
a
S .". 
..
' 
d 
-
-1,*i'* 
1 17 
o'd
srrt/ 
7 
1,' 
.
i 
-.. 
.
....

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1047
~cv
kve
lit rr.1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1048
i December 1953
Memorandum for: 
General Coun.sel
BubJect: 
Observatio.ns on Mr. Frark Olson from 24 November
throuSh 27 I;ovenber 1953
1. 
I understerd that in co.-ection vith the submission of
& Claim to the bureau of r.pvoyees Cc-rcns.t1on, you wish a report on
the events prior to the death of Vr. 01son froa me. The following is
submitted for your records*
2. 
I saw .r. Olson in the eppany of Dr. Tti.brooif Mn
Colonel Rjwct in ry Office in 4"e'i York City, 133 iAst 5.th street. I
understo~i that hc liM been n;itr.tcd for sc.e t.-i- ar that he hW1 been
r.,kir.z nt-'cm.-.q;. which nr-v'-rcd.to be c.nfuo.e. 
I .as ar.c4 to re.:;e
further obnerve.-1ons so tia:t prcper trcat.ent for Mr. Olson could be
instituted for Yr. Olson if 
ary treatr.ent vas considered necessary.
3. 
On Tuesday, 2l4 Iove-ber 1953, coa'ersations were he'un
which cent.rel "I.inly on our cerlier r-netinr-s ditrire the vnr in 19!.
&ad l -45. !3r.y older irt.orcts were recaled. 
We diocuse-c.A co.-.tri t-
tion of -as rneks, filtraticn. problc -. , oUr attitt.leS tovar&.c rrit.al
frierdo 
a ni r,%';" thit:,rs which were ,.ot partir.ent at that tirie. 
Our
conversation at this 
moint vas or a social level in vhich the .raticnt
hadp contrary to his later attitudes, an excellent feeling 
anit ncrory
for people, ev,.nts und reelietic azptcts of" these people nr.. e-ents.
ge did shove that he vaG urer rt.uin by' his e-neris.ms but at no tire
durir.: his pr.r.L 
converrcticn did he appear to be definitely out of
touch with reality. 
Dr. L-ts.brook and Colonel .Soret loft the office
aDd I spent r'bout one hour alone with tr. Olson. 
As soon as these
__6entleen left, he showed greater an;%iety about his sense of irndequoacy
.Vith roa-ticular reference to the scicrtific performance of his duties.
Re u.tp obsessedwith the idea that his .e.ory was poor, thut his, york
-as ine.e.t,.te, and that he vas failin- t, live up to expeet.tions of
his fe. ilv ard friends. 
He rentionet that he vas dishonest because he
had been retirei frc the h.rrj f(r an ulcer arti shcwed a certain orcurt
of unroal.stic bti nevertheless anticip?.ted auilt feelnirs about tek:ing
retirement p.iy. 
I atte.-.tel& to confirm what I hal heard that an experi-
senta had been performed esreclaly to trap his the precedirn week but
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY
1975 BY AUTHORITY OF THE
DCIg
retirement p.iy. 
I atte.-.tel& to confirm what I hal heard that an experi-
senta had been performed esreclaly to trap his the precedirn week but
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY
1975 BY AUTHORITY OF THE
DCI

--- PAGE BREAK ---I atte.-.tel& to confirm what I hal heard that an experi-
senta had been performed esreclaly to trap his the precedirn week but
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY
1975 BY AUTHORITY OF THE
DCI

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1049
• 
:TA
he ea.hesized th.at his present problem did not lay in that area and that
his prO 'en 
vas his o;n ability to live vp to his ctmn concept of what his
perforw.nce of his d-ttos should be ard his itrablity to atto.in the per-
fections necessitated by the r.eeds of his vorek. 
He, himself, pointed out
that Vhen he -as asked to ta)te over more responsiblit-, a!4.he4A up a di-
vision he refusal a..A vent ir:o a state of pinic feeling that he could
hardly, with his own growir feelings of irsdequacy in his work, take over
more responsibility.
I. 
That evening, in order to keep in contact with hi.m arA to
accumulate more da-ta, I vent to the hotel a-'l spent from 10:30 to 11:30
vith V.r. Olon, Dr. Lashbrock anA Color.el Fv-et. 
Atin, Mr. Olon sp-
pearec to r.tn.ain en excellent reltlcrh.i.ip vith al. of us. 
AlthouEh
apprehensive he s.-trently vs vniech caln.r end after a strictly social
diccusslon %-.nA as I left, "You kzov, I ftel a lot better. r.is is what
I have been needir.f."
5. The n.'xt day ltr. Olcon snnt an hoyar v4th ne in which !'e
&aaln appebrel a.itate'l. 
There wos rete 
l discisnion of his :t-cern
vith the reality of his vork, his Cuilt ch.bcr.S retired from the Arr-,
for an ttlcor, r.nd his release of clas.ifiel information. He c.i4 that
he hod had tl.hso feelinr.s for c ':-. 
lo.r- tine a-1 t at t.ey ha. rot
started the week before vhen te partLici!,.e'l in an ex~rerinent Anm that.
Irdi, 
in ;':,rch of 1953 his vwi.e thow:ht- that he wes so depresned anA
agitatc4 that she tho'jh that he sirould ofet a doctor. 
H[e ttkM that
he hal been sl.epinv4 
poorly sin ce :arch of 1953,% end vnlific1 his. diffi-
culti s with rnsPerd to poor i.c'.or n.nA por -ork. 
foiever, I could not
harmonize v!at he Fid eboit his 4ob perlom.tce vith the attitude of his
superior snr.ce he hiA teen offerc 
a division. Ior did this cheek with
repeated q.,estiouir.., of past events. 
I a-atn attc.pte4 to 
4 
et further
InformAtion ir referd to his fcolir.s of parse-ttion but st no tine did
he spezk of anyone but with the hifhest re-wrl for both friet-s and
finally. 
H:e slted e.rplicitly that he vished to So back hcme aA th-t
srrerZecents had been r.sde. 
I saw no way in v ich this could be pre-
vented but plans were rtde for his return and further discussion.
6o 
I understand that on his way hae be became agitated, very
confused; end Insisted on ccr.i.n bac:6 tossee re. 
He arri',4 in rv Hnt-
1ngton office about four o'clock anA this tice the pent-up feelings which
he had succensfu3y hi~den blirst out in the Prestcst detail. 
The patient
explicitly statel that he hao 
lemns felt that his inibility to sleep was
connected with his belief that the CIA eroup hil been putting 
sonethi
-
-den blirst out in the Prestcst detail. 
The patient
explicitly statel that he hao 
lemns felt that his inibility to sleep was
connected with his belief that the CIA eroup hil been putting 
sonethi
-
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---e Prestcst detail. 
The patient
explicitly statel that he hao 
lemns felt that his inibility to sleep was
connected with his belief that the CIA eroup hil been putting 
sonethi
-
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1050
loge
like benzedrine In his coffee at ntight to keep him awske; that he had,
heard voices the nijht before tellic:3 hin to throv -.
evy his ballet. His
history n vd cr-stallize' into a definite forn if ve accept what he sail
that he hsd been delueoral at least for veekst probably rontIst, but that
he had been able to creraze felr:' veil except in certain criccs such as
beinZ offered rore responsibility in takIn3 over the division.
7. 
The die .osis vya quite clear of a p-sychotlo sate
vbich seentd to have been cryntnUizel by an exerir.ent in vhich Mr.
Olson pnrticipatcd the prectdir7 vek, ap:,srently on a Thursday. 
He
felt that his feelings doirins the experinent vere like those of belrg over-
v.ekr.ed by a .ountain very mich the saw's as he felt when he had to ta:o --
over a new res!,onsibilty. 
Since the experir.ent he fet 
that he was not
able to deal vith his work as vell as he h'-.1 before ant althoj -h he per-
sonally ccn:idtrcd the er.erlr.ent to be unrelated to hir, banic problem
he has neverthilecs felt worso since, en that the exp~rirent =zlht tave
IntensifieA rar 
of his problem.
8. 
With this Inforrntion I rcc.-:retle- hospitalization at
once erd cn Frid,,y ornt, 
Z1, Uo.-.er 
2 t'r. 'C.on, Dr. Lahbroo'-, nra
I ditcussel in r,,.e detail the choice of bcp-it:l. Pr. Olson thw.,ht
that he vould lihe to be rea'r home aw-l for tiss reason a mental inutitu-
tion rear :..hlr,:r tcn was chosen ^n-d a roont was reseryc.. 
The hcrpitni-
could not t-.l:e Mr. Olzon that dloy ard arranSceents were made for hospitll,-
uation the next zorninZ.
.. 
:.. 
CO.!C.St~5OI;
Mr. Olson vas in a ps.-chotic state %ben hospitalinntion vns
decideA ,tovn with deluslons of persectition. 
rt.re are tvo apeet.% in
re5.4d to the relatio:-chip to the worst in v.ntch he was ere*el. 
It is
ve l kno.n that it in an occu.s-ioral hai.d to rental stability to be
doir.- the ty..- of work connectc4 with his dutim. 
Guilt feeli. s are
Vell kno.n to occur to a Preater or less extept1. 
Siorirposei on these
guilt feelins vhich are cortqir.y an occpnttiial hazard is his rarti.
option in on experl'-ent herein he felt thati.W of his feclirgs be-
_me overv'cirtn-. 
It is well k-'.in that rary-ugu~s prcluce this effect.
For example, I have h9t a .ttient of rinc rece. ly atie-pt suicide efter
tekira one cursule of :embutal. 
A capsule of I1.butal contains one a-t
one-half grains. 
This is a therapeutic dose vtichi is taken by thousands
-W3-a .ttient of rinc rece. ly atie-pt suicide efter
tekira one cursule of :embutal. 
A capsule of I1.butal contains one a-t
one-half grains. 
This is a therapeutic dose vtichi is taken by thousands
-W3-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1051
Ot people dallj yet this .mtlcnt's peoanality structure was so oriented
that one dose of this rat.erial takn by t.hous.-ds of people detly was
suftciont to have her reach for the box which she did. 
rortmnte3y,
her husboni we* present ant euasol her to vogr1t up the cepsulcs. -It ts
oe"tAinly ccrceivible a:t certe.rly cannot be exclwSe& that !r. Olson's
particir.jtion in an oe eri.en' In which a drvn was W.-Anistered cold
In just the sane way 'recipitnte a crisis which voald upset the nntai
processes so that dlcorlentation oeM the lack of nental funetionir'; nMiht
be prodlucd with the results reatily obourve4. 
In this connection it has
b1ee n7 
exprie.ce thst cert.tin ilividualo %sho, in -an experiantal sltua-
tion pi¢, ho aiven no dn%3 whatsooverp yet show crest qynptca o" anxety
€a 
confusion.
harold A. Abrzaso, 
). D.
-t
7002 6 0 - 76 - 67

--- PAGE BREAK ---in ilividualo %sho, in -an experiantal sltua-
tion pi¢, ho aiven no dn%3 whatsooverp yet show crest qynptca o" anxety
€a 
confusion.
harold A. Abrzaso, 
). D.
-t
7002 6 0 - 76 - 67

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1052
h Dooorib*r 1953
IVO?X!."s ,70 alef, JnvontiatIvn Division
BU.J= 
: 
0 LW.!, ".mink.
0o. 73317 - $.I.-
1. 
Ref)rinc* is rmia to o"ir t .1-oi.'.ic con-.rsatior.s on
2 and 3 Dc:-.or 15"53 coxcirnint .
r. .,.CLD 
A. 
Jr.'.
2. 
Rofn'znco 
n 
ai:o nad3 to 
ft.ort ehtd 1 J'wno
1953.. Cav :!o. Vt15l). 
it w;ill b- notx.- 
I,*%.%. th!s ri*aort :Lc 
~y
that 'r..;2:SC:' 
. in 
v.- 
d -
b 
.r.n 
of Ii.o o&'c2 on
22 
ay 153. 
A airtiXict-a In "r, .. 
.3C"s oic 
Ii*dc; 
tM',
ho 
13 ats all.r1lz.t 
Th- rz,,ort ftartnr indic-u'vi t.tt Dr. :U". SO:l
was cn- t-.d in pc..',i:ritc i.:--ch 
tiiv' 
&.ii o f1acy-ci' a n::
dri4. vmrbr a ;r.nt 1y *oi3 fo, Ar.'Lion In 
M.W:dV*o:1, 
D.C. 
This re-
port f r-:~hr iidicjtsis 
t .J. 
.: 1. 
a-' 
anpyc.I :tr .t
had b3,n hirid 
S'-:. 
Af. ,C. = or ;:or:, on this r-nvrch pro:'*. 
..
W. "&.sc:: advj-d A-cnt 1L.7 tht r~r. 
..
2: is an Alli.--t
who is in chzarr., of a seri.ts of-)y-'fefitric 
nirnts. -
* 
3. Rof 3nco i 
midi to orAr CCC r-port in Satbjoot Ciao
datad 3 Dcxi-bir 153. 
Cn p 
?y~o 
7 and 6 of ',is r.nort ti,.r anae.rs
eZM3v i i n'o- : tton conc.:rni.n,. L 
". 7:'=-'SQ.' 
pa rof'-s:i'o.l. 
'.
ostio.s. Thi iC.o2 #-!ol indicates til.At Dr. A.:*.'.:ZC! 
limjU 
4.s
practice' to af 1-r.-y mnd !.n.-iro1o!-. 
It is to to not..d that L)r, 
: 
c;
Is a nam r 
o th, A.nerican Pzsc:.,oniotic Soci,.y and a nvb,.r o£ tho
itorial L-xd of "?P::choso~itic Xzdi±in,0," t.i ab*e 
.ifor:-.ion
was tak-m fro- **.'io'3 :po.-rtint :in !: cU .n3, " Sccond e.dltion, 1c52.
Two rnp ut:.I 
pl 
cins coilt~d Icy t 
"n derzinad advis.!d tnat
this is an unotf'icil tneo'z'1c:i.o 
and; 
o 
i.. 
c 
t*:-
in is oupp!i-zd y th.o doctor 1 tid in 
t h.v x= . imx 
as "..'ho's
tDro." 
To this .xtntm, 
it -,.T:: th.re.ori bg coi: dir,id as Ln *..a natAr3
of a sAf-_,rv.n: dc. ration, 
In th's coxm-ction, it was ,ol.t ,d out
by ths t:o r,h::sici!-r.s ccns'it W b:d tr." i "-o rsit-nd that if thi) doctor
In qwasticna 
hai for-al 
or s'a4bs 
tan*,6 
1 p3ychiat.ric training, 
h3 would
- .. I A.M
+~~i:(~u~;Ai,was ,ol.t ,d out
by ths t:o r,h::sici!-r.s ccns'it W b:d tr." i "-o rsit-nd that if thi) doctor
In qwasticna 
hai for-al 
or s'a4bs 
tan*,6 
1 p3ychiat.ric training, 
h3 would
- .. I A.M
+~~i:(~u~;Ai,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1053
Ou Uo, 73317
Muve listed it. 
'hmor 
io no nd.iaton th-.t Dr. 4M%.S:(I has e.v r
bold hi.*31f ojt as a pc'a.%4.trint,
L. On 3 D3-1i~r 15;3,, .ALS1T I. R*"c_:iCU, *:*i YorA, Stats
Eda nation :-;.pa.tint, !_.I.v.on of " 
... 
.v:3 
wrc3rt,
advised ;Ii. 
an-, licen$d ph:-.:iz-in nay pr3clica pzychit7-y ,: t.Ia~ t
ad itional 1'c )r:zin-,. 
i:- s:td, 
ho.:-.r, t.,t it is 
4sual 
Ccr
p)Wsicinm 
who pracuico p:,'cn±'ik.r to hImv- so-s- e.ra for-1ti2 ttr-.ning
in thE fie1d a-.1 to 1o cnt'fI31 L.: so-i orrin'.z.tion Such .ts ths
Amisria Pzy:::ii.rio A~uocirtti 
or tn tgwi=~c' 
Lo:,rd of ',o4dicaj.
5. 
On 3 !),c,-bir l13; t*:o r p itVbl. 1z r 
9! 
ciinz consu±lAod
by t~h, und. rsi-n~id adv_.s,)d ;,+t ?.,h 
.tcn~dic:-n,3 rilatc 
to
th at -.-.d~c'. 
V-thor 
Vt'ic'.' ho! U t'::!.t 
ill:-.izz1 
!- :.,W b3 o.f ":'ho.
conic or.W.i-n. 
7.ndict d 
'?d t;at nz;;o.o-umtc mx."no is not a
modicanI 
d..' 
-....in t;'-- 
II r 
h3 
Cn:.-dc-- 
u.l
aUir,',r, otc. 
T...y in,'i.-ltw:d t:r.t to '.os, oxtit t'.h p.:'ch0,xo'-itic
approach Js u-s*d I, all p%'.4.c'.2ns in Uso "t:r att.it of tVitr pationt3.
6. 
Cn 3 nto-i 
l~':)3# a ttlxh~io c=11 u.'ir suit-ible
pa.)wIt 
r~d to th- ni riv 
V :chozovitic Sati :t7 , ~::~ 
5- 27 F
52 iVa' ion Av.-.u.; 
!: r * -or.: !. 
.
A ,.:u:vIn 
Vio did hot i-d :ntiy'A. 
"
horspif a%,;V'zz 
tI.:mt; for-vtl 
~tV. trair.ni 
wa 
not a prs?-
r"143ito 
for 
.o'r:hi 
in t 
:vi ,r.cn P 
v;' ::ti: 
3oci9%.'. 
Sireo 
""
lndictatd , 
- nibirz;i.i. 
r:,r:,r.-n,-d All Lrac.. of :sdiicino
with a Cood proportion of pr:.cdha'.riots and itcnists.
CIA Officer
ta4l 
ACv nt in Ca13rp~

--- PAGE BREAK ---3oci9%.'. 
Sireo 
""
lndictatd , 
- nibirz;i.i. 
r:,r:,r.-n,-d All Lrac.. of :sdiicino
with a Cood proportion of pr:.cdha'.riots and itcnists.
CIA Officer
ta4l 
ACv nt in Ca13rp~

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10O4
10 VflO IT HAT CO:;C 
"
1Wy mse io incent L. Zuvet, a Lt. Colonel in the Chemlcal Corps.
At the fla of the death of Dr. Frknk 2, 01scn j was aseoiCd as Chief
of Special Operations Division in which division Dr. Oleon was a Branch
Chief,
I first net Dr. Olson on the lot of ;uly, 1951. on vhich date I re-
ported to the Division .
Fro July, 1951. to January, 1952, we vero in
latisate caortact professionally and on oow-.rablo levels professipLally,
that i, 
I was Assintant to the Division Ch.I.f and be was a Branch Chiff,
Also during that tite we became very frierhdly socially and I saw a areat
deal of him &nd his family both at his hoe and they at ny bone,
-Is Jnuai-, 1952, I loft 'the Division to nudortako the duties of £ze-
sitive Officor of-the Post at which tine ty daily profes.%icnar contact
was rore United but I did vork vith hia on a liaison bosir, particularly,
with referenco to ratters ;ertalnin to tho.-isuion of SO Division. 
Sub-
sequent to that tln in August, 19S20 I becano the Assistznt Deputy Director
of the Siol¢tiual Laboratories and y relatlons with the decoated continue&
o abont the sane level. 
During this Iperiod we continued our social friend-
SUip on k very clos end intimate basis.
Is Jue, 1952, 1 s* assigned as Acting Division Chief of S0 Division
In addition to my other duties. In October, 195. I was appointed Divisiou
Ghlef, which fact seemed to please Dr. Olson, very much.
f)ring the period juat coerote 
Dr. Olson ws Branch Chief until Ocob~er,
1952, at which tine be 
was prevailed upon by Dr. Schwsb and, myself to be-
some Atin Chief of SO Division by reason of the fact that Dr. Schab had
loft the Divislen. 
Dr. Olson did this reluctL.-tly since he said that he vo

--- PAGE BREAK ---y Dr. Schwsb and, myself to be-
some Atin Chief of SO Division by reason of the fact that Dr. Schab had
loft the Divislen. 
Dr. Olson did this reluctL.-tly since he said that he vo

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1055
adverse to takL; on ad inistrative typ of work and preferred closer
touch with the laboratory beach. 
Dr. Olson carried on as Listing Divisio
Chief until I YKarch, 1953 at which tix he. was removed at his own ro est
to mevert to Branch Chief, his old Job, and in edition to his other duties
Special Assistant to the Division Chief.
During tLe period described above and before the experiment my estimate
ot Dr. Freak R. Olson is as follows -
.lies personality wes that almost of an extrovort. 
Re liked & practical
joke# did not carry it to exess.
Socially, he was very popular, Glik, of the Farte type. 
Xe we the
first one on Land to assist anyone 'ho night Lave troubles either professio-
alI or personal. Re and his wife uere extreusly jopulAr persons on the
As a professional con ny ectinmite of his ability is that Ip was outstand,
ing. 
The extaqt of ny contact with bin has already been stated fron Octo-
ber (professio-.11y and fit work) froc Jly, 1951@ to Jwimnry, 1932, the om-
tact was daily. 
"
fre 
Janu=ry, 1952 to Juao, 1953), it was probably en the order of 2 or 3
tines a week. 
Fron June, 1953, until his death the contact was daily. 
At
all tioes frou June, 1951, sn until his death :q social contact with him and
hie raily vas intimate.
N 
For the prlod in which I have knowledge my estimate of the performance
of his duties officially was satisfactory to outstLadirn. 
I would say that
from the cuoultive standppirt and in co.psrisor with other scientists doing
similar tyTe of work he was outstanding.
Puribe the period prior to the experiment zy GARIno 
of his state of clnd

--- PAGE BREAK ---uoultive standppirt and in co.psrisor with other scientists doing
similar tyTe of work he was outstanding.
Puribe the period prior to the experiment zy GARIno 
of his state of clnd

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1056
was that I notice nothics which would lead m to beleivo that he was
of unsour.d uicd. Be hai the normal family worries, (worries that I con-
t 
sider to be nor--al). Occassiorally ho had trouble with his ulcers but
was always reluctant to discuss personal troubles with anyone.
Professionally he was making very fine ;roaress particularly in the
last )ear and was nost succocsful in the work he was doing,
I would further like to inzert as regards to this orsonallty or per-
sonal habits that he did coks and did take social drinks but did not use
either to excess
The expert: nt took plinco Thursday, 
ovecrbr 19th, 1953 in the oveninC.
I saw Dr. Olcon on FridLy moruirG, 
Wo had breakfast and. ho appeared to
be aCitated and'at the tico I did not consider this to be abnorm.al undcr
the circu-stancuei
Is.ediately after brekfust on Fridiy cornin:, N:ovember 20th, Dr. Olcon"
c,,.. to 
s an& had ao.ksi if I would object 110 he rode bac to Ohoo-statioa*
with Hr, Chauolin. 
I stated, 'Of ccirso, not; that It sia perfectly al-
i&Lt with to.*
The rext tis 
I saw Dr. Olson was on .onday norninC, 23rd of Sovc-bsr,
195, 
I cae to work about 7:30 and Dr. Olson -was waiting for me in his
office. 'H appeared to be agitated and as!:od co If I sho-'11 fir# him or
should he q7'tit, 
I was tzkon "a-back" by thin and asked him what ws wronc.
so stated t.at in his opir-ion he had nossed up the experiment ard did not
do well at the uoe 
s. I talked. with Dr. 011soa for about a half hour
and furt-sr d .susscd it with him stating that in mW opinion he Lad te
/
vron 
inproasion - that I th -' it he Cd. 
very 'voil at the r:ootin ;s a.d in

--- PAGE BREAK ---011soa for about a half hour
and furt-sr d .susscd it with him stating that in mW opinion he Lad te
/
vron 
inproasion - that I th -' it he Cd. 
very 'voil at the r:ootin ;s a.d in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1057
a 
*
his ;artictatioa in the oxperinent was above reproach. 
He appeared to
be eatistfie and relieved.
Ve atteniol two ;rofescional uptoIntzents tctethor ald I noticed no-
thing .ucusiul except that he a~pLred to hive some difficulty in concen-
tratinS. 
We also ha lunch toget..er oa that date. 
He did not eat very
vel;f I did notice that. 
We attended an official movie and meeting at -130
that afternconf'e was riding horo in a car-pool that nicht and I~odietoly
after the novio he suld, Oso-lnng," and ran to catch his car.
the next tit* I oav him vas the fmll?.dnr oornir., Tuetdsj, 24 rlvocbor,
1953. when he again ss vuitine for :. in my office vLen I can6 to vork,
about 7:30 a.n. 
Ho appeared to be gr~atly eStatai and in f.-is own words,
Oall mixed up." 
Re said he felt that ho was not compotent, that he hat
don3 something wrong. 
hen questicnod clocely he could not say exactly "what
he thu.ht he had done wror. 
He r.Ada reference to the fdct theat ho thouf.ht
ho should not havo been r-2tired for yhysLcal rer.ions but when t:is irs pushed
he shifted to the fact thut hse felt In cmpetent to the typc of worl: ho vas
doing - when this wse pure'sid he seoo.ce to look for nomethin 
else W:hich he
had dons wronS.
After about an hcur of discussion it becaZ4 apparent to ne that Dr. Olon
but
needed psychintric attention* I coutinwied the discmssion in such a um7 as
to atte.m.t to get him to su -;est that he needed soe- help, 
This he did$ fin&. 
-
"y. 
Dr. Stutba, who was present, and I irzeliatel;r agreed that this was our
opinion alto and I su,-ected to hin that I call 1f; Robert L asbrnok and
arrange for auch asoisteanes, 
This he agreed to a4 said that he urould go hout
at once and discuss the sittti 
n with his wife, which he did.
I 1odiatoly callal !:r. La.hbrook and e..laizr1 to hin what the 
%tu~tinh asoisteanes, 
This he agreed to a4 said that he urould go hout
at once and discuss the sittti 
n with his wife, which he did.
I 1odiatoly callal !:r. La.hbrook and e..laizr1 to hin what the 
%tu~tin

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1058
was and expressed the opinion thAt Dr. Olcon was In serious truble and
aseded i=Nediato prCfeosilal attenltlon,.. Dr. Ls.hbrook sald that he ur.-
d4estood and ould take iwneLiate action. 
eo aU.hile Dr. Olson had been
£aftsir this with his vifo. I received a call from his rifo asking If
the ould come along and& I told her that she could. 
Ye wore to go to Wash-
iagton. D.C. for further assistance.
Shortly after thls Dr. Lasbrook called back and wanted to know what
tiM we would be in .fachington since hc had arra.wed for an alpointrent
is Nev York with a psychiatrist ano that ho voitld obtain'air roservatLonu
for us to Co to 1ew York. 
Ab. ut 5 rAnutos after that Dr. and !Urs. Olcon
arrived at the office. 
We 
cut fro= thoro to cy home vhero I zhonaed frou
uilftrn to civilian clothes and -MIdriTt ipoa my houa to WaohirZton _y 11r.
J:On C. 1al~nowokl. 
,
Na route Dr. "Olson appeared to be greatly agitated, hi, hly suspicioua-s.
wan in his ova words, gall .-izoe up, 
'do toppedd at the Not Shoppe rcstanr-
eat in Bethosda, Vd., to havo lunch. 
Dr. blson oriered lunch but ato or
drank very little. 
S appeared to be highly suspicious of foot or drkeni:
eft then proceeded to Dr. Ichbrook's offico. 
I went in and saw Dr. laehbr.ok
eAn explinea the situation to br. aiun. 
Dr. Olson stayed out in the car
with his wife &and F.r. alinovcki. 
I founi out la:Sr that he hal asked Ihr.
klilnowski ,to leave the car so that he could talk to his wife, which was
After about 15 minutes I ca- 
out and slig-estedL to Mr. Klinowski and
oe. Olson that they leave us there and thAt we would got 43 the air-port
with Dr. Ioshbrook who was gIng with us. 
We ;roceedod for the air-port and
left for &eo 
York as I can estate the time nov about 2130 p.m. 
ov. 24.
/ve us there and thAt we would got 43 the air-port
with Dr. Ioshbrook who was gIng with us. 
We ;roceedod for the air-port and
left for &eo 
York as I can estate the time nov about 2130 p.m. 
ov. 24.
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-1059
Murin the trip Dr. Olsosa 
condition a;eared to be ,boat the san.
R e was ver aL L-oug and he Lal te 
feslirc tkat someone vs out to ot
him. 
Es didn't aIpeor to be q, ite sure vhy, etc.,
Vo arritod in New York without incident, prcssd91 from LL0uarlia
Airpo.t to Dr. Abruzion's offi ce; arrived there approxtzitely 5 p.n
We left Dr. Olson with Dr. Abrazson who requested us to corn back In
about 1 hour.
After an hour wo cane back and Dr. Abranson suGgeuted that we Go to
a hotel ard we told him we hod reservations at the Statler Iotol. 
s
stated that 
e. would co e up to cur rooa about 10130 with sone sedatives
and also sutCeste& tlht we have a 0hiGh-bcll. 
Dr. Olton. Dr. Lashbrook
and I vcnt. directly to tho hotel. sat und talked for a while, then went
to th2 cocktail-lo.ra, had a ) rtini and t.en went to dinner, 
Dr. Olson
dranc a VEArtIrt but refused to drink a second one, 
rP. ate veri little;
still ap-.n-red to very sunpiclcus, of Dr, lachbroo: en myself.
After dintor we u.at back to our roo=n, diucc'tuscd various things arA
Dr, Olson asked to talk with tA aloca. 
Again he arpared to very anxious,
upset and hapt askLn;, 
"What's behirid all thi? Gi7te .e the loW-own;
What are thoy tryinZ to do with io; are they checking no for security, etc.,?
I did uq best to re-assure him and trieo to show hi wherein factually
he toa ImgininM these difficulties and t1ought I had convinced hit, at
least, he said that he tbouCht things were clear.1g up and also he said
that he thou-ht Dr, Abrea.oon could help hin,
About 10:30 p.u, Dr. Abrex.en came and brout-t a bottle of bourbon and,
som 'leubutal." for Dr. Olson. We sat arcuned an 
bad Just a good, social
discussion and a couple of 8high-balls" 
About =aid-night Dr. Abramson

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd brout-t a bottle of bourbon and,
som 'leubutal." for Dr. Olson. We sat arcuned an 
bad Just a good, social
discussion and a couple of 8high-balls" 
About =aid-night Dr. Abramson

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1060
.7
saideVell, its 
tle 
to 9o to be.' 
9 suested to nr. Olson that he
take a 'Tenbutl' which he di4 at that ti.e and that Dr. Olson take sn-w
their should he have difficulty slepirg. by the usy Dr. Olsnn had cc.-
Plained to ze from the start that he had not been able to sloop after Thurs-
days. He said that he Got no sleep. 
Dr. Olson fell asleep. 
The undersignr&L
romined awake.
Dr. Olson fell asleep immediately after Sning to bed an& I heard hin umt
vp about 3 to go to the bath-rom. 
Us cuLme to bed but obviously could not
tall asleep as he was tossing ant turning and taldng to hinsolf. 
I don't
remember what he %as saying. 
I asked him about that time if he would take
another Nenbutal ard he said no. 
Finally zbout 5:30 a.m. he appeared to get
apeet *Gain and I stuected that he take a lenbutal; ht e.reed and took it.
V. started discussing the situation over &Gain - the content of the convur-
eation as alnest iC4atictl to w*vt It hat been before. 
Then he went back
to sleep, or.? bei,-ve, at least rested until about 9:30 a.x, on the .oraing
ot the 25th of Nfove-bor 
1953.
At this tius he cot up, tatciod television and the three of us. Dr. Lash-
brook, Dr. Olson ar4 myself went t* breakfast. 
He ate some breakfast and
appeared to be a little bettor althou& he 5-4 still b km in a rather anxious
stats In u 
opinion. 
Ve then aceonanied Dr. Lashbrook, at Dr. Lashbrook's
sugveston, on an official visit which he had to make. 
During this visit
D. Olson. a ain becsuw his -h supicimis and aizod up. then this became appa-
renat we tactfully cut the visit short ani left. 
Ve went from there to the
dotor's office for the 4 o'clock appointUent. 
We loft Dr. Olson there and
picked his shortly after 5 o'clock. 
Dr. Olson 1&d requested that he return
hoe for ThinksCiving dinner so that he could have dinner with his family4 o'clock appointUent. 
We loft Dr. Olson there and
picked his shortly after 5 o'clock. 
Dr. Olson 1&d requested that he return
hoe for ThinksCiving dinner so that he could have dinner with his family

--- PAGE BREAK ---t. 
We loft Dr. Olson there and
picked his shortly after 5 o'clock. 
Dr. Olson 1&d requested that he return
hoe for ThinksCiving dinner so that he could have dinner with his family

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1061
8
an& this %so oCred f by Dr. Abranson who su4osted that we make cn appiot-
meat to core back upp on Tuesday, I Decerber 1933. 
1 asked at that time if
hoe would like to have no core with Dr. Ols:n or if Dr. Olson should come alone.
.%id this was entirely up to Dr. Olson - If he wished he could cone alone;
If he with*& to have com;azy it woull be perfectly alright for to to come. So
then we left Dr. Abramson's office; cat back to the hotel and at n question
got tickets for a cusLcal show. "?.e and Jullot.m 
We went out to dinner and
from there to the show ubich started at 8:30 o,.
Dr, Olson a-opoared to et upsot during the first act &nd at Intprmlcolon
he vs highly a&itatod an& stated that ho knew that peopilo vore outside
vaitlC to arrest him cn his dolertura from the show. 
I tried to reatcare
that I perscrally it 
-u-rantoe him that he will be in Frodorick or at h,.=
the followLn. morning and that he vull be -thoro with hit family for Th2."ks-
gIvIn-. 
He stated that he d4in't bclaivo ce and I tolcihin, "Woll, he rinst do
so and that I'woU Cive hm ny wird of honor that this would be so. 
I pointed
out that we h.a 
the ;lan recorvations. 
I suested that n.uybe he diuiL't 'awnt
to see rest of the show and that he and I talk and walk. 
To this sue,,estion
he quickly agreed. 
We left the th atro v 
-h.in&ri he was in a ver'J anxious
state. 
We walkod back to the hotel from the theatre, talking all tha while,
anwd by the time ve arrived at the hotel he appesre& to be nor. relaxed, 
We
went back to the hotel-roo, 
talked and watched television, discussed noina
hone the 1ollowina dayp.ed Dr. Lathbrock stayed for the rercainior of thit s how.
a"d cane in about 11 or 11:30 p.m. 
We talked for a little while, called the
desk to arrange for beinZ called In tino get out to the airport the following
morning. 
The call was arranred for 3:30 a.m. 
I went toted and unf rtnmtoly
I fell asleep, did not hear anythi.g until 3:30 when the phon 
rmC. 
It usled In tino get out to the airport the following
morning. 
The call was arranred for 3:30 a.m. 
I went toted and unf rtnmtoly
I fell asleep, did not hear anythi.g until 3:30 when the phon 
rmC. 
It us

--- PAGE BREAK ---to the airport the following
morning. 
The call was arranred for 3:30 a.m. 
I went toted and unf rtnmtoly
I fell asleep, did not hear anythi.g until 3:30 when the phon 
rmC. 
It us

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1062
the hotel operator taking us up. 
I flicked on the light Dr. Olson %us
not In his be& and his clothes were gone,
I Iamediatoly Lafornod Dr. 14shbrok who was in the adjoining room
adL.vq dressed, vent dova to the hotel lobby as speedily as possible
unt-thvr- we found Dr. Olson fully dressed& vith his over-coat and hat on
sitting In a chair. 
ge stated ho uzs walkinG aroun- in the streets and
that In the process he had disposed of his identification button, his wallet,
and his mney. 
He stated that he had dno this because I ad instructed
him to do so sire, I was with hiz. 
I told hiA that I v,.tn't vith him; he
said, 'Yes, tlat's r ght, I must have been dreaming.* Since there 
aes no
tin to vi-_ we decided aCalnct looking for his wallet and identificutitn
badge $ iLrVA.iatoly vent up to the roon, shaved an& dressed; Dr. Olson alo
ahaved. 
We chocked out of the hotel; Cot a taxi and, wont to L&Ounrdia Air-
.port in tins to rake a 7:30 plano. 
Plano was delayed a.'roxir.2tely one
hour becaniue of aecianicul difficulties. 
We arrivedin ashinaton; Dr.
Olson are;eared to be na-re relaxed at this tit*.
4i. 
Olson ate on the plane anA slept the entire trip,(l hour 
w
arrived in VashIn ton wore net by M~r. Valino.:ski, Thursday, llov. 26th,
(ThanksGiving Dy.) 
We got in 14r. Nalinoc-skils car and headed for Fro-
4eriok,
1A north-west Vaehinrton on isc-esin avenue Dr. Olson asked if 
we
eouldn t stop the car and tall: t.:is thirg over and I asked Mr. if there
wes anythir 
wrorg and he said, 'Wll, I would like to talk tr.ngs over.'
V sto-;ed in the par:inkg lot at Hovard Johnson's on W'itacnsi evenus
ner. Bethesda-Chvy Chace Wooduurd Lothrop store. 
Be aske Kr. ).alincuski
to leave the car as he wanted to discuss rt ..othina with re - I:r. :V&!!no' k.
ocnplied. 
Be told me he could not go back to Frederick since he was to
alzed tp. He vas ashazod to meet his wife &n femly, and rq'osted tohe wanted to discuss rt ..othina with re - I:r. :V&!!no' k.
ocnplied. 
Be told me he could not go back to Frederick since he was to
alzed tp. He vas ashazod to meet his wife &n femly, and rq'osted to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1063
10
Just leave him CO Uid would. Co off by hieelto This I told hin I coid
not do. 
He then as:od ce to turn h~i over to te police since they van-
ted him u ..ay. V ditcusted i iost considers ble length and he at-;eared
satisf id - tV.at the police did nt wat hit, I then sucestod that taybe
he wold like to go tack to soe Dr. Abroa-son. 
Ea agreed to this esiwee-
tion.
I then called Dr. Laehbrcok azd told him vkat the situation was and
he told t.e to take Dr. Olson to his apartment iwoedlately. 
This b55
done, "e decided to t ako Dr. Olson back to Vov York to see Dr. Abrarcon
and it vas decided t~ht since 
Vro. Olcn vas eatitled to ;cnov '..t te
situation wae and because she %ao exzoctira him for ihankscivint. dirner
I should proceod to Froderick. to brief IVr. Clcz. 
Dr. Ols')n afceared to
te very much ur.st a.d aditated. 
k 
&in, ;41 =dc4 up, This was the warit
that I hnd ULen hiz, since the ex;eriment took pi.aco, 
This is' the last
tine I taw Dr. Olson.
On Friday evznU:C, approzicately 1030, Nw-.bor 27th, I receiv¢c
a call fro, r:w York fr3 Dr. lashbrook who stafti that reservati ns
had beo. cade for Dr. Olzon, at Chestnut LU4;o ix MRockvi.e, Marylen 
and
that they had plane reservations for the follaur5i 
iornin 
en.d were sche-
dvUd to arrive in Wnshicton at 9:04 on- the 251L of Noveiber. 
Thk
sutested th t I meet tte planqo 
ich I agreed tto do. 
I than aekd, if
Dr, Cls.'n vae still cpcakinc to no in a rather 
P.1ng manner. 
I herrd
Br. Lasbbr ok ask hiz this question =. kis e.nawz, was, 
shy, yes, let me
have tho jhone.4 Dr. Olon a;,Vearcd on te ;hom q'ite relad. He told
e'aboaut the trip in the morning, about the fact &hat he had resorvitions
at Chestnut L d-e. 
I told him thit Ithv the lw.tcr -as Dr. lashbrook, tad

--- PAGE BREAK ---on te ;hom q'ite relad. He told
e'aboaut the trip in the morning, about the fact &hat he had resorvitions
at Chestnut L d-e. 
I told him thit Ithv the lw.tcr -as Dr. lashbrook, tad

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1064
told me so. 
I alto told him I would coot the plane, 
ae suggests4 that
i not do to since that dUy was Saturday. and .e knoew that I probably had
york to do around the Louse. 
told hLn to think notsirg of that Lnd that
I woull moot him. 
Ne raid, *fine. 
I'll so you in the wornntag. 
this
Is the last tL.e I spoke to Dr. Olson.
At approxzi.atol7 2143 a.. 
Sat. 
foT. 28tW4 1953. I recoved a call
trom Dr. Gott.ieb with a zssLGe that Dr. Cleon had died*
I lIMRI Y CF.&IFY ITO TEM UST OF t1.Y K:Cd 
A0.: T. Th- AIQ0VZ s5A!.a1N~Z"'r
AR3 TEM,.'. ;! 'D C0R,.'P%0T.
Lt. Col. cric
Ohl-cf. ED ,)t',n
CaIe dutrick
Frederick-, Mary.rernd

--- PAGE BREAK ---died*
I lIMRI Y CF.&IFY ITO TEM UST OF t1.Y K:Cd 
A0.: T. Th- AIQ0VZ s5A!.a1N~Z"'r
AR3 TEM,.'. ;! 'D C0R,.'P%0T.
Lt. Col. cric
Ohl-cf. ED ,)t',n
CaIe dutrick
Frederick-, Mary.rernd

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1065
b
SUDB..CTs 
COronologot-ial Ralationship wit.1h Dr. Frak Re Olson
I first rat Dr. ?rcJ: R. %lson at C,-p Detrick c Wr- 
the month
of tI.1943 at whicih t:L-e he wa* a comaissioed of.cer in the Aray# *eSisod
to the clas3ified rema.-h projoct at this station. 
DwuinZ the period of
ay 1X3 to 
19:' 
1044 I vas also assigd to this project as a camissionmd
officor. 
Dr. Olson's work during tids ti. 
ras mainly in t.. fioll of
Mrobiolo. -.
nd m.rs assi.ed to ar.other division. I was not in close contact ,
In te above period of tims with Dr. Olson eit .or Pr1ofosstonallv or 8oci l,
Fton ?!Kr 194 to Saptmtbor lS 
I was nasi-*d to tho Vi.o Plint,
Indiana Chenical Corps.Inm allation, durina which tim I had no contact ith
Dr., Olson 
,-
noxt contact was made aftor ry reasirmmnt to C-p DMtrick in
October 19LS° 
.ron October 3.945 to Saptwnbor 1950, Dr. .lson -as asst:.-nd
to the Aaroblolo-' 
Er.-mch in tho J'iy-ical Ibfo:uo Division of' te C.113 
.
Biological Latratwies, 
In that ca acit7 ho .ms not closely associtV'Ad with
me prof os3iorl.l':; hcwoverj we had nwiorous social contact .
In Soptor.bor 
.5O Dr. Olson joird tho newly food 30 Division of
thich I was-Chiof.* His first assirnmant to this Division was to t6o charlp
of tha plannz9, trainLnt and intell1;once activitioso 
On Octobor 115 
I -as
transferred Pron the SO Division to the Diroctor's Office. 
From ctobor 1 52
to April 19153 Dr. Olson assw-od ny duties in the SO Division. 
In April 1253
Dr~edm, Safety Director of "th CnlC Biolo;ical Laboratorlas, recromendod
that Dr. Olson be rel!vad of his duties as Cief of SO Division dua to his
health (ulcers)* Lt Col DoCa'lo w s thon appointed Chiof of SO Division axd
Dr. Olson acszm d the duties as Chief of Plans a.-d Azoss=nt Branch, 
le
eontin-cd this assirrent up to t. .
date of his death.lth (ulcers)* Lt Col DoCa'lo w s thon appointed Chiof of SO Division axd
Dr. Olson acszm d the duties as Chief of Plans a.-d Azoss=nt Branch, 
le
eontin-cd this assirrent up to t. .
date of his death.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-4066
5UJZOT: 
Chronological rslation.Sip vith Dr. Frak R. Olson (Contd) 
2
Or* Olson wvs consilaorod as an' authority I: the field of aerobiolo.-j
a mcions which -w.s doonloptd considerably dur .n- ft puars 1943 to 1953 at
ap Detrick; Both his suporiors wd subordinates regarded hin as a hi-hlj'
qualifldasdcortiat I:- this field.
DurinC the yar I havo |n1.,.on J:. Olson I h.av had nurous social
octocts with him mid his far.iy- visitinZ often at his hoe 
H.e was always
extremely cheetJ1, coro than violin, to help anlyono in dintreso, often tirms
eJ.dng it a po-nt to cheer not onlylhis friends but. otots Who vere in a
depressed rood. 
r. Olson enjoyed an occas.o.al alcoiolio drim.: but did not
Izdulo o:cossiv*kl. 
!is pnoral stato of Or.nd and mitlook on life TnS aLm:ay
that of ox-tro 
optl.-in, 
Ibvor Tas theme xq ifr.lication of posairt-c.
Dr. Olson coAd bo clzsitod as a fa-ly r.en, takpn 
i'oat -torezt
in his ho.e m t:1e activitIs of his fx.ily. 
FA i'ini8*4 in the nizr.s of
his children the nood of relZi=.on in life, rI:I-v, sume that they attandood
their Sul, 
School rolyr: 
Lnd vrould al;so- e.co-ap his -frinds child dran
to t.te'l I-LIh th e,
W~y lust personal cont.-t with Dr. C-lson was on 1:oirnbor 
, 1053j,
at which t.-a ' 
brouZht his c!hld.on to visit a.d pa:? with vq-hildren.
At Uls tLne u= appeared noral in e.l rosnOct* and as cheerfu'.l as ever.
I had no personal contacts with Dr. Oloon after the exparimnt.
I adfirct lorrnd on londkvy !'e-Owbor 25rd, 1953, fron It. Cole V--cet
Weit tht 
Dr. Olson had been eaposed an das shorinx ynptecs of reaction.
04 Tuesday, ..+.'v!nbor 24th, I was notified that Dr. Olson was bo-
Ing t Akan to bw Yorkh City f*or trme-.:-.nt, e 
0
• 
" 
.4

--- PAGE BREAK ---had been eaposed an das shorinx ynptecs of reaction.
04 Tuesday, ..+.'v!nbor 24th, I was notified that Dr. Olson was bo-
Ing t Akan to bw Yorkh City f*or trme-.:-.nt, e 
0
• 
" 
.4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1067
5UT3Cs 
Chronolo;ic3l f bUtimon 
p ith Dr. FrL-k R. Olson (Contd) 
3
On Vdaisday VZo 
ber 25th, I was netif !d that condition
was not v riovs and that recovry was expectod,
Cb Thursday evn-In;,j 31!ombor 26th, I vras notified that Dr.
Wion has. returd to ra. York for *ui,.ar treae-ont,
Cl 
1Idayj 
o'on.-abor 27th, I vas notified thst Dr. Olson was
• mder troat-r:nt and that arrang..ents m-re binv ndo for truatent at
£ privato institution in this ar a 
(3ash:L,-ton, D.C.-"redorio)-: 1.)
At 
* 
.rxLrnatsl:r 
3 a.., cn Saturlav, !ov-bor 2.th, 1953,
I was notifod that P', Olson had o1',aod fr=n tho Statl~r Notol.
.
At appro z:teky 0 a.ei. sx date I rocoivd confir-mtion
that the leap was fatal.
MRCTI7f TO "" X-3? 0". lXY M71X4Z Z12 T 
B 
AB2VZ
STAW.?&'S X' t.C 
AM C',-T,A
( 
p Ibtrick
\Jz43rickp ?fVarylzand
70-020 0 - 76 - 68

--- PAGE BREAK ---rocoivd confir-mtion
that the leap was fatal.
MRCTI7f TO "" X-3? 0". lXY M71X4Z Z12 T 
B 
AB2VZ
STAW.?&'S X' t.C 
AM C',-T,A
( 
p Ibtrick
\Jz43rickp ?fVarylzand
70-020 0 - 76 - 68

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1068
oU3LTTO.:** 0':: M. 
M 
~~ oSOl: - 1951 - W-531
I have been perconally acqualnted vith Dr. Fr.nk Olson approxi=mtely
since Septeo'-er of 1951. 
The .ature of N-r personal contmets with him
have been ct the level of collabcrators in research activitiec of '4.tual
interest to his croup r.-d nine. 
T.his period his been characterized,
owon: other things, by tree pariolic metinvs in .cooludel areas where
the Croup invol-ed in the reetin.;s lively together for two or three 'lay
periods. 
At these r.eetin-s the writer ha,' an opportunity to ;ersonally
observe Dr. Olson in infor1 surronjdinr.:3 anc durn: period of tire
vhon he vzn not en:n:Qd in official scientific activities. 
Thae other
contacts, which aver'%el about one every two or three tontho involved
orficia. v*iit3 either by re to his research fz:ility-or vice verca. 
I
would estirate that the total num*)er of contacts which I had tolth him
durLn: the parl3l jepte-.'er 1, 1951 up to :ce elr 19, 1953 totale.
thirty n or fourteen. 
Alt.ou h the princi2l topic of conver:,ation t.
these contact 
was official .ciertific busi:.eCZs 
a fairly clo.e personal
relation 31:ip h 
-, ao dovebo'.d, 
and 
a ninor rt 
of the various convir-
Ation3 I hrAt voith li.- cozor:nci pr,-o.-n 
L=Lttcrz, unrelated to our
sciontiric or official reoltionchip.
During: this reriod Dr. Olz n seemed to re to be n very effective
research .c0ietist, in excelcl:.t cor:ind of hs field of exp rIr .r.tation
and very devote.i to the 3ucce.nZful e::ecution cf h13 luties. 
lie &cete.
to ze a ct-hle ir.lividtl, not p 
irticur.rly Civen to rz;:a,1 
sr..p
Jtzdr.t 
ani able to 
e alcn : very ttell 
o:n: his co1.le.:.ues. 
c 
t
was r ie !:nvan to re on severz.l occZ3sio-.s, t:rou:h incidentnl re:zr;-s
made eit!-.r by hir.i.elf or his collenaues, th-t he h:A 
acen sufi'erinz
from recurrir:; truuie with a duodenal ulcer. 
I had no o-casion to
observe any instance when this interf'ered with his itork.
Dr. Olson appeared to r.e to be ver impressed by the i=-'ortance
of the security aspects of his Job. 
Workin: in an installation where
extreme security recsures vere in effect for :h entire installation,
Dr. Olson conclentiou31y accepted. the adle.1 security burdeng that
his Croup's collrboation with zy jroup ontaide'l. 
He was not at
liberty.to discu33 these areas of research wiM any inliviluals except
perhaps six to e1. ht of his i:-edtcte nuocia:a. 
Occasionally,
*reas of effort %ere develoeml in which he um at liberty to discuss
certain infor:.=tion with only one other pero-- at hIs reelrl 
h facility.
Xe eozed to re to beer theo various security burdens Well.
During this eriol (from Septeber 1951 so ,.#ove: .br 19, 1953)
had no occ-sion to observe aberrer.t or unr=:ional behavior in any
of W contacts with Dr. Olon.beer theo various security burdens Well.
During this eriol (from Septeber 1951 so ,.#ove: .br 19, 1953)
had no occ-sion to observe aberrer.t or unr=:ional behavior in any
of W contacts with Dr. Olon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ecurity burdens Well.
During this eriol (from Septeber 1951 so ,.#ove: .br 19, 1953)
had no occ-sion to observe aberrer.t or unr=:ional behavior in any
of W contacts with Dr. Olon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1069
The "ovember 18- 
20 reetin: betveen Dr. 01son's -roup oI my
ovn, at vhich 7 :-.b::ters of his rro'-p yere prescet crn4 three of nira,
vas cncerr. with routine -ttorj of e.-41uktiz.: results of tho p3#%
*ix Conth3 research a.ni planmn; :th next six ro.t'ls uorX. 
Up to the
tis of' the ex:errant, I oe-ermcl€ 
r.otnin5 in Dr. Olcon13 behavior
or o tions v;ict u- dif.Oo.rnt fren t"-t descrihal "ove.
On flo'Mnber Z0, the 
af 
after the e. erient, I hal occa3on to
observe Dr. Clto: for A.pout :to !.otus in tho rrnin:, between 7 A-14.
mA 9 ,'4. 
Aside from wc.;* evil 
mrce of. fati :s, T obslrvo. r.ot*in
wiusuzl In his actions, convrr.tion, or .err 
bo*avior.
M1y next contact vith Dr. Olson vas on T6.aeI.y Novomber 24, Just
prior to his de;,-rt'ure for ::'Ov Yor: vith Dr. LUshlroo : a. Col. Mu-lot.
mThe 
ratir vith Dr. O130.n tool: 
In!co 
Ir. -y o!.':ce between -,roxi.'.eI,
1:30 a. 
2:00 P.:. ani lzztol Woout ten ;irute3. 
I tal;el briefly ".4fth
Dr. 013n Gbout various ssientit'e ani 
.rsor.nl =tters. 
F 
:ee:.,emi to
me to 1v confueul In cear'-in crees of Itis 
pir:lrarticult.rly no
resrrOal his fee.±. -o of Inccpet e:c in relation to his job cn to
the futility of t-'in to help hiz.
1i' ist 
contact with Dr. Olson too': place on 
h-mrdzy, :ovcr':or 25)
in Dr. Laibrcoks 
1 
partant , .twt prior" to t 
W.ei- 
re~Az.n to Low X rk
to see Dr. Abr.cn. 
I v: i vith Dr. Glsoh ar.I Dr. L,3:,rco: c. ra:dr-ately
I hour, o pn-in:: the 
lost 30 mlmr.utcz drvin.; 3r. 
lson 
And 
Dr.
Iasbroo': to t3.o reirnyrt. 
Uu.rin:. tW',.-s !Ysriol :r. Olzbn zc'rel rnora
disturbaA ir.l a-;tt.tai than *.a 1:=4 beer. tl.o pre-io.is '1.esi1uy. 
Ho
t 
e.A in a clear nr.ou-h r.:r.uer but his thou to vere co;:'-4ur. 
!e
aoin txalhcel aiccut his inc.-.:.-.ce in his vor4, the hoocla m.vcn
of anybo.l: hlpir.; hin, ora tie f-ct t,-1t thc teat thiv- to do van
to abandon him ar not bother s'Ocut h'.=. 
It seeceol to re that he was
very mentally di turbel at this tL-c.
7 Dece.bor 1953m.vcn
of anybo.l: hlpir.; hin, ora tie f-ct t,-1t thc teat thiv- to do van
to abandon him ar not bother s'Ocut h'.=. 
It seeceol to re that he was
very mentally di turbel at this tL-c.
7 Dece.bor 1953

--- PAGE BREAK ---pir.; hin, ora tie f-ct t,-1t thc teat thiv- to do van
to abandon him ar not bother s'Ocut h'.=. 
It seeceol to re that he was
very mentally di turbel at this tL-c.
7 Dece.bor 1953

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1070
To wcu I? m'y co.:?i-Zhu
8M1rn.T: 
Observations on Dr. 
rnk. Olson
I first rot Dr. Fran!t Olson the early part of 1952. 
Since that
tize I have seen 
in on an ;.era -. of. :hout once each month to six veo-:u,
In connection with =7 cficial b,'sir. s3. 
T6e3e contacts involved
diesussions of technic.-. problems in fields of 'utual interest, rocults
of past scientific vor, 
cid planni+.; of future ectivitie. 
In Zeneral,
other rAaM:ers of his Division vae aloo present.
In a4ditnor., both he ard I attonlel three 2-dc.y conferences which
yore held in isolutcd locations to discu3s the progress of his Division
for the past six nontho, ovr roquixo 
nus. ani plan" for the nert ai::
socths. 
c.o 
cIoncr. :e3 varo r.t. ttC-d by rembors o his Division ar.A
or r, Divicic)n nan 
involved. livinZ toot.her In C1oze proxiiWty" for t.e
duration of the conferer.ce.
During . the ti-e I !:nv Dr. Olson, he has been Actir'; Chief of his
Division, rA 
r-Mich Chieo.. 
'.t all t-:.co he hus hold pozitic:-: of
reoponsiblity 
r.1 his itiorlt nce to M'.3 .Division op.earcd to rornn
at a conior.tly l'h love. 
Prior to t.e eo.-rS-'ont, .Dr. Olzon vms
a corpt.r.t zci,::tit -with c.n excellc.t cc.-M oC his fiele. 
His
ju-k:euL'nt in:rscr$Ot 
r-n 
.. 
chr cn 
yoteris.icnly b 
hc:1 up by rztioral ni
carefully-con'ai 
lcrr t rcno;s. In mc*obevre.tion o 
per.oh-.yl his dut.t0
In a su eio- runner, oIt 
U-3 evicetit that Dr. Olson 'ins hio"hly re 
r-.
by, his collcmoz, both u a cie-ties anrd as a frianDi. lo was fricnlly
ad Zot rlon: t:oll with his collca_.ueo. 
Fr= vhrat Dr. Olson has za±.4
(and the r..nner in vhich he 
.o:'o) n 
frc= that hij colleagues have
said, it apptnrc-i his homa life .ras hap'y. 
In a experience, Ie drank
only to be sociable, wA then definitely in utioration.
Rio york w-s extremely ecxactin.; and definitely hazardous in a
technical sente. 
He operated unler ve:y. severe security restrictions,
under Which it "as r.eec.ry to ccnccal the true nature of his
activities even fron the other Divisions at his base. 
He yes permitted
to discuss much o!' his wor': only '4th a very limited number of
specifically 4esi-nated inWividuals.
The experiment vs3 on Thur 
?.d., 
:ovenber 19th. 
Cn Tuesday,
Nov 'oer 24th, Dr. Olson's Divizion Chief telephoned re an.1 sail that,
in the opinion of hiD, Dr. Olson, tni *:rs. Olson, Dr. Olon needed
psychi.r.t-'i: at.o::tnto. 
I sc::ested that he arnd Dr. Clson cecn 
to
Waohin:ton Lz.-diately. 
I confcrred wlth the Chief of cW' Divisicn,
and it Ia deci c that a certa-in ..,ev Yor: physicinn s.ecial.zr.:; in
such m.tterz shonll be cc.sultei. 
I telephone-1 Dr. 0lion'- Divi3ton
Chief a. su;;cuc.. they prepare for a trip to :zv Yor:k. 
.
h'-efIa deci c that a certa-in ..,ev Yor: physicinn s.ecial.zr.:; in
such m.tterz shonll be cc.sultei. 
I telephone-1 Dr. 0lion'- Divi3ton
Chief a. su;;cuc.. they prepare for a trip to :zv Yor:k. 
.
h'-ef

--- PAGE BREAK ---1071
pieced both hir.sel.

and Dr.

Olson on orders and met =a arA th* Chief
of rr Divisicr.

in 
ihir.,.ton.

:,fter c short discusion, Dr.

Olson,
the Ch:.C"' of hit Diviscn, :ml I bo-re- - .-laro for ,:v Yor'- _:.

urv.

t "-he :'z*., Yo'.

..

y:1:in's of.

.

-e tout 16 5.

After a short
eoreeronce with the doctor, Dr.

Olo vzs left with hie until ,-out
From tho time I sc.w Dr.

olco.

in ::1z hington until I left hi= at
the pS.y!.cizr.s off ico in !'ev Yor':, !e 3eezesl rat;'er do3re.szeo, 
zon-.hat
eonfuz:e., 
=-A convinced he ':culd ne.'er return to Lis ho-e c.d 1,0.

These v.r* quita $.1'*ferent front t~e attitudes I had observed prior to
the ex;vrinent.

At about 1S03 Dr.

Olson, his Division Chief, and I chec:e4 Into
the Stntler HMcto, 
h:-i _nno.-, returned to our ro.-o 
ano 
Vatc:ed tole- -
vision.

-rc:.t atojt 200 to 2?00 the :.:t Yorr: 'hysicinn violtel the
three cft u: in our hotel ror:...

ur[n.,- the "rriol co:erel by t."43
yararc.ph, Dr.

Olson ir.icr.,....

in q pr-.c that he fe.t he.

had
fall in .hs 'ob, he vas a disgrace to i3 Collea-.ucs, frier-la, 
nr.i
forily, 
:n d tl.rt his Y-.r., ..

i m-ntl 
shitl.: h.-'1 f.aile'l.

!:onver,
In t.

.

eo.!rsa of ror-.l conv.r::tion, it 
q:asuite 
r 'nrent t'--t both
his r.&-norad- ..

bility to -fi:utz zcnrti- c topics :ere excel.et.

Dr.

Olson rl:o i'.cnted he v:-:o -leepr., poorly, 
rAn- sai 
".ao ohoulln't
bother vi1th 
m, 
we sl:oul 
e1 h.n .ust 'd ispper".

The follo:in- day (U;olrez:.y) Dr.

Olson e.,-ain hrA a Private
session vith thi ::,3i Tor:: t.c:tor (.-.bout V00 to 1700).

At the
conclz'.:o:.

of this, the rh:':iciT.n t:t-.A:re 
to thn thr-.i of u3, 
i:.:.tirr
Dr.

0ln.

c oul'1 -o hot.te frt 
T.-.n;.z_-Iin.- .1 .6%ra-iay) 
if 
*.-,a dc~ir..,d, cr
ho coul2 acc1t hi 
(the r hy-in 
an's)in-'tt.to.

to 3.-cn.

.h.n: sz:IA'in"
and the vce-:-en.1d-th t.'e T.-ic i.n's :'nly at h- 
ho=e at Zo!d Zrrir.

Hiraor.

Dr.

Olsen prcferrcl to ro ho.-, 
al 
an a .-ointr.ent x ca =-i2
for Dr.

Olson to zee the -ih,"cion th.

follair:; Tu.:tcay.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Olson to zee the -ih,"cion th. follair:; Tu.:tcay. UDr. 013c.,
hi. DivIcdon Chief, VX4 I returnedt to the hotel. h=4 dinner, then ,.ent
to a play. :t the intenisioz. Dr. Olson bec.,o rather agitated, and
said he -=r.tel to leave. Pe anA his Divicion Chief returned to the
hotel. The folloain, mornin.; (!'u.'artay) vhen Dr. Olson's Division Chief
enA I M'. c:e 
(Wocut 0530), Dr. Olson vas &one. We fo*rA him. in the
hotel lobby. He said he hai left the hotel cbout 040O for a walk,
And i.diCatod several things that had transpired. Ee felt his Divi ion
Chief hr.1 been tal-ir.- to hin. He said he BhA torn up hic roney, throm
it anl several ncshcl cheC::3 ' y (baec.ust he wouldn't neel ther
arnyore), and hal thrrn his wallet ava',, dvn a chute sor.place. e sal he felt hi Division Chief 'ins tellin; hin to do these thir.s. We then returned to tashin-ton. Hcq:ever, we proba-bl*, would not have
retu.-r. -hi- it not been that Dr. Oloce never asee.-. to reala- 
believe
that ve vould return h. -.e, znl ire htl ra it r- poir.t of honor tht 
we
voul.A retuT. if .h 'ane. tc (this ".as done :,:tr 
Ve ht! cbt=i.e1.th.e
physici=s' -rov-l). 1ite "ere ret at the 
-%sh..n;ton 
Airport by a
member oC Dr. Olson'a Division, and Dr. Olcor. =nd his Division Chief
set off for their 4c-e tW-an.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1072
Shortly after.'rd-s 1 recoi'ol a call frn the Division Chief,
no: an the o*t3?.irt3 of '4zzh n.;ton.

1e sltl Dr.

Olson "a cha=;ei his
mint, L-.3 c.ito a::tatelt 
..± thot te (t.e D.vIizin Thief) no': felt
Dr.

Olson shoull to hos.it.±:ct 
ze 
-i defr.titely sh'oull not return ho-.e.

I tol hi- to cr.e to :.q m;.0.rr..not at om nea.

ile I contactel ry
Divicion Chief, vho alto set out fAor =7 r.'art;ent.

T;.en he arrivc±4 at
oart.- 
r.t, Dr.

Ceon 
ccaro deprez:e± arA retless.

Xe relented
i11 f..

-ecision 
timt he coJld not face -cinr hcr,.o.

Dr.

Olson's
Division Cie±' t.ea rotur::nel to hi3 h= 
tc-.n to ex.l.in to ':rz.

Olson,
an ny DL-ivicon C-ie ' drove Dr.

Olson ani L.e to the airport, 
hore
Dr.

Olon -.

' I boa.ed a plano for :'ev York.

:'e ret tha e;or York.

pVyeicio'^n at htI Hun'nrton, l"r.; I31I.A., of ice abcAUt 1603, 
r=A Dr.

Olson .vz: alone uithim cbcut, one hour, foUltcel by !bout W tninutes
vith Dr.

Oi.,on anxt =e.

7he Vph,olean obtalc local lod;in:.: for us,
swt Dr.

Cl:on a..

I then vent to a resturant for a 4n'n.ivir-.

dinner,
aftor vhcl ', ve ver.t to 
.

D .rin:; the vorio.

cove:re 
y ti.n
para.r.ht Dr.

Olson told n he felt he htA cheate 
.the Govrrr.er.t in
conne%:&.cn vith his rotiraenr.t fr, 
the Ary, ant that he chould be
punis!hol for thi.

(I u.

not e.i-liar ':tth tho Let.il' 
of "rb-z .e
vus referrin- to, *uz both Dr.

01:on's Di'.'iion C.nlef a.m the Viev Yor.

phys$c!nn hl 
ilnitc.nt- 
to .e thcat they covilt see not.h.n; dibc.-ne:t or
M0or1/ 
.UC3tio.l .4n 
cor.m.ction vith L.i, retiro::on;.) 
Dr,.

Olzon zal
everyone, ir..lulir." re, %=3 in r plot to "-ct" him; L.e zzlt I crI -h
other :',e the r:.scr plani for the plot, rrA he" 
to k1r.cr what it
W.

Re sail Ia I:J.

failo4 in 
0io :o 
t:.t he w- 
Jo lis:ra-eo 
be
could r.ot.

face returnin.; to his family.

M.0 siel ho 'clt .ho v.

guilty of zucutity v.olutions bcc'.uo ho felt lie on w:ensionz hr.'
exceoJ.l h!3 ir.tcrrtaticn or the neel-to-.:now priancle.--- PAGE BREAK ---

M.0 siel ho 'clt .ho v. guilty of zucutity v.olutions bcc'.uo ho felt lie on w:ensionz hr.'
exceoJ.l h!3 ir.tcrrtaticn or the neel-to-.:now priancle. Incernt
in certain well .lenvoi.d aro-.s ie o o.O;:o in.ellc 
aAn ratiow-lly,
and he octal it a socialIly aectal 
zancr. The follcuir.; :ornin: (Fri1.y) vo dro-e with the pysicli. to hL
cVW. Yore o.ficc 
T1here ,-v. had a con&0ercce durin.; v.ich t.he 
i. 'zicirn
told Dr. Olcon that hcspitalizaticn voull li lit M3 bect inter-.st-s. After a vhle Dr. Olon aZre:a. Dr. Olon ;roferrel so.-e place near
his ho.' 
anl .re:1i3, co a°ter diccuzsion :1 a tele2hone conference
vith vv Diviion Chief, a private hocpital ncar Washin-ton vas zalcated. The ;hys!cinn mde a..;-ents 
vith t.-o hospitz.1, but they had to
Troparo his room a-nd coulAd r.ct ta.e Dr. 0lon until the follovir.;, dty
8aturlcy). Dr. Olson a.;reed he vwoll be a voluntary atier.t (it 
-s
a3ree Ie woulA not be fo..---lly co.-Atted).. We could obtain no reservations for a return to Vz=hin;ton that
day, so 'e rnrde reservationo for 3Stur.dy rnornin 
andl cheel into the
Statler [otcl. .t thi3 tire ani for the re..in-.r of te evenin;,
Dr. Olson =apearci no lon.Zer particularly de-reasoi, art Ai=oct the
Dr. Olzon I %r.cv strior to tke cxn*trirr.t, although he still :mintained
tho various nisconce7tionl I have .- ntionet before. He vashed .out
his dirty clothin., 
arA t*hen I eallci his D vIsion C'Ief to clear our
proposed cc'irze cf action vith hin, Dr. Olson taled to him i. a

--- PAGE BREAK ---nl I have .- ntionet before. He vashed .out
his dirty clothin., 
arA t*hen I eallci his D vIsion C'Ief to clear our
proposed cc'irze cf action vith hin, Dr. Olson taled to him i. a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1073
eheertul rr~or oni happily antictinate4 ott. 
him a the Uzashinton
Airpo , u-'on our arriv.1 there. 
On his on. volit.on he tler-one4
his vice (th.a Va3 the fir;t timo he felt he 
-ro-i tpe.a to her).
At ahout 16!0 ve vent to the hota..'s r.Lt' noct.fl oUse an each h-
yo r.rr.is. 
At 2000 "ow entered the m.tn d4nir. rocj 
.A h a Atoer,
2&ev*rZ for mAr rccn at 22.4. 
At both the cc::t 
ur. 
nte 
n1 the
"ib,: ro. he v-9 aearfuI ~-. r-r- 
to en..oy tbe entertc.rr.ont.
Be 
po:.6 ire3y of t 
hozpitali:atio the follo(vi , da.q, 
.vX i-..4ate'i
be vuntel boo%* from hoe to ztuly, mr.i other thin-z: he 
nte.l to do
vhle hospi.i:e. 
('he .!yician h-- csurel him he could !o this, emn
m S214 he vouit1 help outlir.0 3=0 activities of M;tuL scientific
Interest Dr. Olson couli vor: on.)
After returnlr.! to our roo, ve -.mtcho televieton. for a vhile,
then Dr. Oloon su.-este4 be4, o yin: he felt nzre rc..xei ani contented
thn li 
hwl since ve 
e" to :ov York. 
Le cnkc1 tIO !otol telC.-nbo.e
aport.or to c.%Il us Ct A V672C fo.L 
tiM in the .o-.n.; (zo v couLU
mae orjr pl1.a).. I vould LCuns it v3 a little after 2300 vhvn ve
retired.
Somcvhre arund 0230 
morrur.-y 
orn 
I vrz aw-r.ered by a lout
solse. 
Dr. Olson i-.A cr 
' 
hro uh the clozol vi. i bln. .n. the
cLomel vi.c.mr ani h *o"ll to 1i , cnth frp.. the int.zv o " our room
on the tenth floor of t!,* t:tlor .Iote).. 1ater in tho ay I officially
ldantf. iol the boly for the 
'vj Yor: CuthorLtieo. 
,
S38033Ne" 
V. LS3i"C
7 Decesbor 1953*
EST FIAE
4.l),

--- PAGE BREAK ---on the tenth floor of t!,* t:tlor .Iote).. 1ater in tho ay I officially
ldantf. iol the boly for the 
'vj Yor: CuthorLtieo. 
,
S38033Ne" 
V. LS3i"C
7 Decesbor 1953*
EST FIAE
4.l),

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1074
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25. D. C.
9 D6cc_-':2 
1953
IMPOA.'=4 TC3: 
Record 
,
MsBJMC 
Frank R. Olson
I have cc= 1le-d cd reviewed all the 
w.J: 
ion 
-aJ:vb!z to
the A ency r 
1atir.3 to the d.- ath of L-, 
Frze=% R. 01on. 
It 
13 mY
conclusic-- t.t- 
the death of Dr. O1Lo3 Is tbi result of circstl-cep
ar1s1r 
out of an C, _.e.rieit ur.!--tc.n* IL the coux'-o of 1=i* ofIcIt.1
duties for the U. S. Go' 
.:-_=t e.nd ttat there 1-, thereor--., 
a di--.ct
causal co-.=ect_'z: 
betweeo ttat e;,iremt acJ his death. 
I have bczc
authori:ed by the Deputy DLrecter of Cectral Intellicnco to stato
that this Is the official P1 itiCn of the Cent-ma. 
IltclL1Scce Acncy.
W5 
R. EMJTOZ
general Couwe-
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY 1915
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI
p"*

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1075
0
lb December 1M3
of p
-.LA.
CON SATIN 111IM GIBBONS:
1. 
Lovell his not heard anything frcm Gibbon..
,12. Lov'll reported t.t 
Quarlcs an4 CeorSe 17erck were about
to kill 
t.e Schwab ectivitt at Detrick as "un-Amerkcan". 
Is It
Necessary to take action at a hielk place
3. 
Lovell knev of rrank R. Olrnn. 
to inahibitko:,r.. 
'Baring
of Inner =an. 
Suicidal ter.dencics. 
Or'entivc iuefulncss?
DE told bef Edwards Saturdcy AM, t'e 12th.
A ac," ..
io 
L 
'.)
7-'
*1LfC-
, q( 
J11'
cc: 
F1,04cahon
-
a
~ 
'!: 
trr
-r
~I-~
.C.

--- PAGE BREAK ---=an. 
Suicidal ter.dencics. 
Or'entivc iuefulncss?
DE told bef Edwards Saturdcy AM, t'e 12th.
A ac," ..
io 
L 
'.)
7-'
*1LfC-
, q( 
J11'
cc: 
F1,04cahon
-
a
~ 
'!: 
trr
-r
~I-~
.C.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1076
... 
.
.
.
a., 
'
.!" 
File ren. x-&S6237
Wak 9;"!A;hi Olson
Deewber 17, 1753
I~s~P.'.''D. 
.-D 
Ph 
,ZCO?D
Dr. F-r lin 
J. Hal.in, the Bureau's Ivcdicatl
Director, ar1. I, hve per-3only ' 
the czamifj-d
records of !t!*. 
uet'.nt.l 
:z 
ze 
-A--:,chcoti
&ll particu' 
s of the circa= sance3 lding up to ,zcu
atteni..nt upon the death of the d.cedant. on ioveabor 23,
1953.
Such nAter-l is highly sensitive ;ind is of a
nature -f'-dch if czil-d 
zirh-; se.ul1y a£.fct th
"nationa-l C-cujrit-, 
Such inf'o-mat4 -) is fo':A C.-Ifficient
to- ,o, that the co-r.itin rzs3onsi!ib for 
I1-d..-cti.n
*as pr;dnn-tol7 due to coni tl 2n-3 of Nis e-p~oTv.-. 
and
the claim of ths -daw is allo.ved. 
This decision was
reachetl after obt%: inr -he 
o:!2 ci."ion oS Dr. !j-I..,in
that. from a 
cdlicaI -.tad- oir. 
.
tre 
.ias a ver" 
diit
connection bt;;een the illness and thz act or 
.I--= 1c-
tion.
* 
Direc!.or
CPFIlc
*A CLASSIFIED ON 24 July 1975
AY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI
,-~~~~ 
~ 
~ 
...-- r.i,//-..

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1077
- " 
1 :.ce-br V,:3
t.. 
.. 
m z n, 
" 
.
' '.''.t
5:!.l 
1- 
tf .
, -.:. 17 -_ 
c.- c 
o 
at" 
zv-t 
:r,
AL!. 
t 
Z~:c
". 
.. .... 
.:~ .
'-c 
r.- r 
tr-. :, "z 
; 
-: '. :
..... 
t 
C 
.c 
., 
, 
' 
..
;: 
.
.
..
"r..."n;nr 
-i t 
-
r 
: .
.
". 
,-"c.zt 
: t
:et 
, 
.
..
r.- 
.
.: 
c-i-; 
,-r. 
" " 
, 
'.' ;:: 
C (,-C.
IECJ:.tIFIE 
, 
-
.' 
: 
,,- 
e -' 
: * 
rCt**. 
C'.. 
: 
: -l 
" 
-
i-,;L 
:.
ECI 
!t*- 
,*r 
% 
f--a
d. 
it/.t/ i r 2 
".n
d',ru; v .zF a t i. -r -:'c.&;'"- -r 
. ..... 
, 
.1 
L= 
", -t:.r 
-I.
.. 
, 
ti. :c' 
t i; .--- !' ',e *.* -_ . a .-.I n 
t 
c r, 
.
n.- 
t, .
, 
0. -. '-
_ _ _ __- 
_ 
_ 
.
.
.
.. 
.
... 
I 
-
.c
cud. !:tial 
,2rrct 
t!. 
t 
c-.-. 
2 -A
our 
"t. 
-
.
Be~'yr-ET f:j 
:,c 
:;. 
't.. 
;..., 
: 
tl':

--- PAGE BREAK ---I n 
t 
c r, 
.
n.- 
t, .
, 
0. -. '-
_ _ _ __- 
_ 
_ 
.
.
.
.. 
.
... 
I 
-
.c
cud. !:tial 
,2rrct 
t!. 
t 
c-.-. 
2 -A
our 
"t. 
-
.
Be~'yr-ET f:j 
:,c 
:;. 
't.. 
;..., 
: 
tl':

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1078
n. 
Th6er 
!*.-:uld b-3 i-n.edisitely srt&V-'irhed a ~1'o
intra-A ..ey 
bf.t.-ir 
...*,Ich . '''"rev'_v .11 
.',S ex c.-L-...nts 
riv 
-._e
app.-o-a ! .. 
'- bc 
ta 
in; 
r. "-'- ..
"-i -Qn t-zin.-.-." 
-: 
... ' 
-- =,rr
to 2!'1 v't.er.- 
'-v n; .-..tters % .oltcy :r 1 
aic;I 
.
.ccy.
b. 
Th.e 
Ie,'!i 
C¢.ic, :St' s.c.vd 't r.,.-t.,and. for ht.s -or
jut4Z--.* 
.:.. !7%. t".%Ir..n 
" 
t:t=*: 
t.,,--. 
,..'; 
.
1 ",:
as t. 
et.r 
t 
.--
s 
--......
V .."6r .c1reni 
.
P*Iti&.A.1.
e. 
I,'-.et' """ 
ou_. t'e 
f 
.-. v-.t.I.P to xerc._ t'..-ter
.M order 
3r.o 
.
;,.; 
c 
/ 
n :.. --re and,: 
V-- ree-u~t.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1079
MEMORANDUH FOR THE CASE FILE X-866287
Mr. C. R. 
Middleton informed the undersigned by telephone on this
date that the decedent following the injury in Frederick, Md.,
vas sent to Now York City for treatment author 
by the employing
Agency...
M. A. Stevenson
1/5/3
. . .. .... 
.. 
.
. ... 
... 
. .. . .. .
Z l~7 
'-.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the injury in Frederick, Md.,
vas sent to Now York City for treatment author 
by the employing
Agency...
M. A. Stevenson
1/5/3
. . .. .... 
.. 
.
. ... 
... 
. .. . .. .
Z l~7 
'-.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1080
)IPL 
N-INZI ?03: 
In.sector_ Gaerul
SV.23 J4 
2-.ucj 
R. Olz-ca
1. 
I bx',e been i.--_ed 
: 3. 
L 
o*oc t. 
:L-*. 
haz., 
s
slh e lp "JiIJ be on t- 
£.o-' 
-i='e L I 
,oz 
' 
:-.
the 
to t~el ?c.;.Al 
~ 
O~vcc~~..
.=- 
.be" 
s 
to :.nl*
c.,±~ 
O! 
o; 
.-- 
o-. ..... 
.. 
.... ... 
of e::e,
state "Jii 
"..-o c.: 
;'Z"".c5 -
b, 
t~e c _.i 
e;-:7. 
= ''eiL', 
:ie Lai_ -e
I-I-
trt~oa ca :^e 
lifz±, Zs 
=y1 
~ 
o:.:o
djSak.-n the 
Ao- 
-
ne o_2cr:- 
e o-n= 
10e C. 
'-_- 
bl-"
o co:c.ar.ui:d, 
,';e 
io.al_ 0 
eZ 
.271M 
.
a. 
., cave 
n.h.ta 
:
Dr. bee 
, 
o- 
* 
Y ;=' zt'- 
of2-. 
Wzo. 
-z21L 
of 
.
C-S. 
o s
prsectic-!!y i_--..~a. 
_ to 
.
---:. to ha 
:'7 -1"2 
o..'t.
erf6ct. 
t 
*-=7o 
stte~ aiil, 
to ,rr ct:-~ze1 
ofsinm
3. 
It te:- d..--i. 
l 
" 
-' 
tta- s-c2 , eo t3e tr 
a-
Thcel 
e-s 
.
, I 
:- 
.;a 7 " 
", 
,. 
tO 
a 
-
ca.;a 
la
att3t 
ea on 
3;ei.v 
, 
f= 
: -- 
.o 
.
D.
etthese 
bya ;-:&.. 
to 
'z~as 
teLe 
:: 
-i! ft~n;, i 
i4 
i
epr e-'-.eic 
al 
c 
f,',:,- -. :.3 do -..g to .. 
! 
.-, t 
:-- 
, 
a,.t, 
= .
o 
o 
1" 
t 
h di.!; 
a : 
t 
:a 
s 
-1 
t 
-
not ei~ 
the tfx= 'rls~ 
ti 
z.i , 'lu 
I Zo

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1081
the pruent =te&*o'b 
-.-ea.sues vich c= be ta-. 
to 
he e
riskA nus6 be ta.a 
-': :_ to dD -o is Cul;- 
: e
exprta o 
n B- ".. 0. zoo 
_-' 
" 
a..st = 
eJ.o '* c. 
.
.
to
obse 
=or--& a4 .
--
u:.s. 
Tze o%-es oe te 
-.Xe-y
cba±ed 
te 
'es .silh.I 
th Im ....
the Security 
'...- St.?, ";. 
_ot, .... 
, 
' 
__ 
not
ve weS 
'--_ 
- Z-- 0 
th 
.
.. 
deteny cc::e-e-d
OVt-. t.'* Ze~rt 
==.C. 
=d 
__C 
o
for zedca.3 &-e~a 
As a reaulz a -za.:2 occ-d-~ 
ca~±~ 
x
beeni - evem'--d, a 
the k.-gecy =z a 
-e 
-. 
--. 
,,
nG t!a. 
a 
;.. 
4 
-
t-c
cc: 
CGC4

--- PAGE BREAK ---. t.'* Ze~rt 
==.C. 
=d 
__C 
o
for zedca.3 &-e~a 
As a reaulz a -za.:2 occ-d-~ 
ca~±~ 
x
beeni - evem'--d, a 
the k.-gecy =z a 
-e 
-. 
--. 
,,
nG t!a. 
a 
;.. 
4 
-
t-c
cc: 
CGC4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1082
* I ?YPED FOR CLARITY
1. 
wr. Wiener-Personally
2. Mr. Heles-Personally
1. I
REMARKS:
a
'0,-
Frank-Dick: 
The DCI has reviewed the attached file and discussed the
same with me including my recommendations. On my suggestion he has
asked me to forward the file to you for recommendations as to action
to be taken--and suggests that this be given to him 
within a
weeks time. 
Please restrict the case to yourselves, as to this date
the knowledgeable persons are: 
Dulles, Cabell, Kirkpatrick, Houston,
Edwards, Scott, Fields and yourselves. Those involved, of course,
were Cibbons, Drum, Lashbrook, Gottlieb, and Hughes.
L. 
I. K.
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY 1975
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI
XF49 *

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1083
UKCLASS1FIED
RESTRICTED 
CONFIDENTIAL
(S@Adr will cile 
slalliAgatMo top and bottom)
S9C RE T
CENTRAL INTELLIGEtiCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL 11OUTING SLIP
.
'0
FROM-,
6001
.
I
3..
I 
I APPROVAL 
I FORMATIONS 
I 
SIGNATURE
ACTION 
[Z--.. DIRECT REPLY 
RETURN
.COMMENmT 
[ " 
PREPARATION OF REPLY 
DISPTCH
CONCURRENCE 
RECOMMENDATION 
FILE
I[--;c~u.c 
aro~~A 
o. 
__]m
SICRlT" 
CONrIDENTIAL 
RISTRICTEO 
UNCLASSIFIIO
1-4flu-I
w, 14 30-4
DECLASSIFIED ONCZ4 JULY
1975 BY AUTHORITY OF THE
DCl
70-026 0 - 76 - 69
r 
.
..... ..... ... 
.. 
-
- --- 
-==N
9
("7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1084
: 
q. g -f 
r 
" " 
°jr " 
/ 
4.-i. 
°
I -
I 
-
%Ow
J 
A
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY 1975
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---.
..... ..... ... 
.. 
-
- --- 
-==N
9
("7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1084
: 
q. g -f 
r 
" " 
°jr " 
/ 
4.-i. 
°
I -
I 
-
%Ow
J 
A
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY 1975
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10S5
r~rector of sac Irit7 
.- 
U Janauary 15
ChiC, Specizi secuwtv Ziv1s1o
LAXFX, 
rcctor 
oatI
I. 
Cn 28 CocL-_1er 
tba3 'Zractor ct S 
'In.t strctode
the Cblef Cover Vr:-ca, Z~to 30ot. 
Cp l~ey 
.~dA 
c;~n 
on
MAt rw~3l h13 COnuctacn, 
C:I. 
--
2. 
The ao'.7 ,etlaad Slb.ccl. 
!a n tho ceC.a: 
of :1. !raz%
R, Oboan, ZF-D i,-C5c, a r 
ttor 
1=7 e~ 
~ 
.nloy., t:toec- it0
suicide ia 
1=;c~ Cit7 curs-~ 
e 
19'3. 
t 
btt-, 
C--3iat
Lfo-a 
iora --A3 1 i7kn ;0~ local :oco ta 
an 
1-. 
4s !;a
dosi-,A o.f.: 
,;cry tnt~ 
c 
eit 
L~C 
ot 
e
in A37 ~~to 
aria; 
X of ti*at 31LI:!4O 06, 
a. 
~a'bt-~;
Oticida _--d -. ll m.rcln .7 ~;c-, o 
IArt~d: 
.
h.~. 7- x 
-
hapa so.w af Zizarals cc-; or~cors,
3. 
r 
na'. Laa!irockc 
i6#4.'c Vza ::,ro 'srwc City ;olics 
he~i -,?'
ad asoCC±.aao Of 02.3C... 
£bc.0a -s 
6rtployt 
.ry *_aa Zartin*s of t *,
I.rr. !Anbbrook t's atarii%:ed am 3z, -.'e;eer 1953 t7 a rt-3-
rescrntativs of t:.is 
r-i7-lt 
re~aruia; Uha 
!s,,±. 
A3 
ozo
to fi.t 1 waith the smtc.r, 
;:- 
tad -L17~ Z!:4 :: 
iork -,o_14 :, 
t
=&oto ths Le:t-&at of Ut -.
o 
j 
:;4, B~c~rc-, 
T
Ii:ra, C 
ot10-. t.1-Z 
1.~b4 
th Col. 3 
-oLtc3t 
.:d 
.t 
Col.
Jzck--a I:!czo 
booi-r 
iaa 
are e.-n;2c;a of t*t: -
S£V11,CC3 3-af: of C:A. 
_&. IASbZrOOI. 36%,;2d '.&.t he C!S.d :=t 
ozice
to* t6 'zc;tozed -it C.-.-o Z_-rcb a3 *&-. Z£1Z lt bxttba ;.-14 onr.
dray 3tt~antic 
to the instal!3;aicn.
5., 1. 1s thea 0o-inia Of '_-43 ;)_'73'1= tti1.t. a 
t:im
*.tr 
rt 
to arose 
.::I 
0tisaA 
.' 
dtZ 
.--
!.
rart-et, of the a'~f, -.;o a%, tbi3 :a:.-at, E.xt' no 
u th ie
clirc 
,Aacts or ;h4 icie 's 
~ 
cct~ ~~
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY 
# 
t
1975 BY AUTHORITY OF TH-E, DCI -
cc: -tvo r-_,

--- PAGE BREAK ---rart-et, of the a'~f, -.;o a%, tbi3 :a:.-at, E.xt' no 
u th ie
clirc 
,Aacts or ;h4 icie 's 
~ 
cct~ ~~
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY 
# 
t
1975 BY AUTHORITY OF TH-E, DCI -
cc: -tvo r-_,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1086
60 
C.
C. 
-ajr, ea-r 
J 
t.= 
d Ccn :.::4 ."-.r 
, 
a de A
in tbis case.
c€larud 17r Z. 
L¢crsc. Uaizo, :7 t O 
cii7 
throe 5a.-:' 
of r'L.
6. 
it 
;3&s tcec t",*.ht Z4 
* 4,CtcgJn VI Z.313
tbe U. S. 
%--V !.s crni-xtL~q in ;xrwauumeat. 
-at-L.:o
CIMWOZ.3-.Ze a Of : .
1ason' death~ and it caa be :r~z.pd t~a; ut.3
AM iaymt,;.a=o zae 
cow 
adarv of 
;Ar. _brc.c' 
C2.3r4iat.izi
ro~10rio'aio :o CUi.
9. 
Ca the tasis of tais kifor--,tica, it 
is rco:xin,d tbt,
:- r 
* .- ~ooa,5 ©c~lo:e~t e b.,.so--: 
t',;r= 
e 0o-'k.. of
lD. 
it 
1.3 f.wVtsr ?c--:.ned hat. Col. llncti 
z :r-I
:faj"or :b -t-.i 
* the Security Officer of Camp Ietrich, Haryland be contacted
ad advised 
t-.a x' 
-- 
rt.- 
n; 7r. L 
-mok 
!.r 
t 
.- rr.4 
j 
.!cI.I7
to the 4kf ict of Zen-.ra. EuU-ne 
.
-C.d Ze .t 
c 
of CA
4-.0 4dYA .o30 
£_. 
of .ha _."..y
It. 
.t is becyed t.;ea t 
s ryrpa !ackto-.pir; is thiu zim*. ±.
rel bacu;,o 
.n 
La -a'- .
wi.: 
Cs. 
o-ati, 
*,; "ind 
:;o ±.e 
:a!.!
th;W ~3. 
ciars- 
; 
t o 
*-- 
ti-s,: 
-
._,"-x 
a 
.:a; 
-.-.:ian_'-a,
,indue Int-Erest. 
It, i3 .,.tizred i* 
c:.2s; 
tLo-at 
Lo=i
Cnflica cC 
k~ 'r~i wo.L.d be !iccr 
iszts:. *&_ 
t.i.raOcc-_
o-mAd andi ,i.z cr:atd4 -an %xn.ze .ntorzst I.-vair -13 an i.asuarca ir.-
i 2. 
The 
see.-it7r Offitcs 
Zcaical
3 ~i~
~..Auf %&tLsod a recr.=stt!*aLj72 o! "'in %isii= 
i.-i c:1z~c
7r. Lj~f!rcck and ~..tl.3Of :5C!=!C.l..e-/ke3 
10 
o
ZiA3 "-4 Wn''Ct Of =3 ASa :003131d 
c 
~ 
;
:3. If ;mtu -m-c-ir Ln ti-cn. 
i.i-. 
.. 
a, 
~.o~ ~
:o :rt 
:1 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---sii= 
i.-i c:1z~c
7r. Lj~f!rcck and ~..tl.3Of :5C!=!C.l..e-/ke3 
10 
o
ZiA3 "-4 Wn''Ct Of =3 ASa :003131d 
c 
~ 
;
:3. If ;mtu -m-c-ir Ln ti-cn. 
i.i-. 
.. 
a, 
~.o~ ~
:o :rt 
:1 .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1087
timrtw at S.ority
CMiet 
:.ects3l 5eizt =7lsLoa
MLL1-7?.~'K !obat -1., rr.
1. 
hjrsuant 
tho )e .stlrs 
of "Jo lg'ctr" oe J.aj€xllt7,
C 
WSTr 
tiV." 
ois 
-avu.lt 
ec'.J:;- -r. 
..-. 
:.-o;.t!.L ,
Veyt.,e -1t aff a t 
is ofWico, 
2';ci ..
s..r= 
I'on..: 
i: 
".&) '
IM .
-r. Cot.LU'o was 
it 
vd 
-
.s 
to -A-:;, 
.
t:-
bo 
.
f;ust 
l 
zir 
*iL; 
..
: 
-ovt &-b4e 
zr 
3a o 13i ;=-
tio 
on 
.Li 
:L -.
n; 
C.-p Jtric. 
-.
s.- 
.y.-.
2 .Gett1lib 
az~iscd t.1hii he "oa1i -.rui,, to hram t.mo !XIb-
Sect. t&6mc1.*-;wd 
Col. 
:t:-o-~ 
of 
n~ge 
A-.
& ~ ~ ~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
-- 
-
iiL-,ti.~ 
a 
ss~n.~£ 
L Zt:1**
3i, Crh 3-1.2'- 
' 
.. 'e a 
.
.-
r. 
.ott!!- 
-'v-.e,. 
-
.,
f .
"he 
ov 
.cr- v'.ch ,,s 
.-.. , 
for 
-
.
-,
s tr1.-;cd as an i 
i 
-. t. cca A.l.vat ty Col. 
'.-r.-..s
2:f~~ 
~-.s tc. 
L 
c-en;r 
1- 
±~ 
2
'ho r.-s- 
of ftir v--ic 
sro c:c-*te~l rx31.!~t.i 0-1 cl--sd..L! 
:.I-
i-
,-* 
:DE
.
. -C19
- -- 
... 
.. " P
the r~if=r 
*i-r -.n'o th.at Z 
tl.:d 
a 
Z
.Jnd :L 
.a 
::i.:i-z 
td 
" 
ci., !.t.-~z.==-o: L.-Tes Li;, .loa -.± 
t. 
-. j
aLoit. ,s .i r: u_. t 
o 
.1'.- 
c--...d -i 
;e 
LLro e£ 
:a .-- ;a:o
C!' 
e- L ;0 "'Isr-c 
7 1.t
/el;'- 
3 3 r2sAit -f t-..s Icidcn.. 
:'0 
J"--., 
-t'.: 
"
hero dd .z'. 
.d c:--.j~a co :rV'Ji.-n ..= tile -- t-r =.-- tti.: 
',
CLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY
75 BY AUTHORITY OF THE
1pj'
is 
1;04

--- PAGE BREAK ---3 3 r2sAit -f t-..s Icidcn.. 
:'0 
J"--., 
-t'.: 
"
hero dd .z'. 
.d c:--.j~a co :rV'Ji.-n ..= tile -- t-r =.-- tti.: 
',
CLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY
75 BY AUTHORITY OF THE
1pj'
is 
1;04

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1088
=W i.--"z be -a4 to hnp he **=A hanrGls the 
t,= 
;nd " 
oon
as posgibla, 
.U7ty 
. Las, rooc of th. 
nc : 
t.
6. rho L,dices o the sacs1 
Cff!ce.v e €- chocl. 7or 
,o
-the tijta-rsv vLth Col. 7-'o3.-a and rrRa1 d : 
t. -th 
o nd
C@),. Lau'smce were cisred f= 
op 3srC2 
1SaLSC= 1=7 t o $oc7-..-:r
ContrUl St.aff on 13 October -953.
7,!: fwztber action Is a~t.cp-t~in Ia z ca*, -.-dIz~
boicg 
Frp.4dared as clcsod in t 
I:,isL=.
.". 
t~a.c==,.. 
9
a. -

--- PAGE BREAK ---SaLSC= 1=7 t o $oc7-..-:r
ContrUl St.aff on 13 October -953.
7,!: fwztber action Is a~t.cp-t~in Ia z ca*, -.-dIz~
boicg 
Frp.4dared as clcsod in t 
I:,isL=.
.". 
t~a.c==,.. 
9
a. -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1089
30 January 1.954
ETE"1S 
O0,t..T
M'P.I A 
VS 
.E R=3RD
SUBJT: 
Ites on Effect of LSD in Files of TSS
1. 
Project 
Technical Progress Report Zjo 1, sutitted
November 1952:
p.9. 
"in six out of the seven subjects of the-present
experiment anxiety was an outst.ncing syu-pton".
p.1. - " 
clear incidents ot distortion of others occurred
in a total of 233 Lnortant relationships, hence a
distort-on of 19. of the relationships".
'In 19 incidents (hll1) it 
WAs essentially hostile and
self-oriented."
2. Front Phartacology Laboratories of 
., status as of
govember 1952: 
%
p.10.. 
"D3layed Effects: The linosoication' of LSD Rencrally
vears off within t-U hours, out in practically every
" 
case a more or less unusual centaL ctatus persists
for J to 1 dsy and smnet-es for nore than 1 week."
NLess frequently a depressive state is observed.
This may last severai days,.
3. 
Project 
Interview of Dr.
p.17. 
"Then at 6:00... phoned my wile and told that she was
a friend of r.y wile arm! told L-r that Miss X is Vorf,
very disturl-cd about L3D and s.e told me, 'My Ood!
Why you haven't asked me? 
Sohe's not t~he person for
ISD'. That we should use LS3 only as a plan in
psychotherapy not only as an ex7perLnent, 
That's too
bad, ani she was so depressed for I4 days so heavy
that she couldn't voric for A days."
l8K zrm
* DECLUSSIFIFD ON 24 JULY 197S
BY AUTHORITY OF "l[E DCI,.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n ex7perLnent, 
That's too
bad, ani she was so depressed for I4 days so heavy
that she couldn't voric for A days."
l8K zrm
* DECLUSSIFIFD ON 24 JULY 197S
BY AUTHORITY OF "l[E DCI,.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lo.
1090
KIRKPATRICK DIARY
30 November 1953
DCI and DDCI: 
discussion of the Olsen case. 
It was agreed -
that Hbuston and I would make a thorough investigation and submit
our recommendations to the Director.
30 November 1953
HOUSTON, EDWARDS, FIELDS AND SCOTT: 
discussion of the Olsen
case. 
Scott and Fields will take steps to see that the tiles are
sent up here and the drug impounded.
.1 December 1953
GIBBONS: 
came in to make a strong plea that no disciplinary
action Be taken on the Olsen case.
2 December 1953
DCI and DDCI: 
discussed the Olsen case with them.
2 Dece ler 1953
WISHER: 
discussed the Olsen case. 
He stated that neither he
nor Helms knew anything about the intention to make this experiment.
He jointed out that Helms had held a staff meeting in 
Hay at which
Drum and Gibbons were present and had indicated that the drug was
dynamite and that he should be advised at all times when it was
intended to use it. 
A memorandum on this was later sent to the
Division and TSS which advised that there would be no use without
Wisner's permission.
3 December 1953
HAROLD COOPER: 
talked to him about his reaction to LSD. 
He
stated that he thought application on an unwitting basis was very
bad.
3 December 1953
GOTTLEIB: 
advised that Dr. Abramson would be here tomorrow and
would I want to see him. Told him that I would arrange it 
through
Houston.
3 December 1953
DE FLOREZ 
came in to say that he thought any reprimands in
the Olsen ca.e would be most unfortunate.

--- PAGE BREAK ---to see him. Told him that I would arrange it 
through
Houston.
3 December 1953
DE FLOREZ 
came in to say that he thought any reprimands in
the Olsen ca.e would be most unfortunate.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1091
8 December 1953
HOUSTON: 
reported that he had obtained a favorable ruling on
the Olsen case from BEC.
10 & 11 December 1953
HOUSTON: 
discussed the Olsen case,
17 December 1953
DDCI: 
reviewed the Olsen case and advised I would submit it
to him for.disciplinary action
17 December 1953
GIBBONS: 
cane with Drum to advise that Gottleib had cleared
with Drum, who was acting Chief TSS.
18 December 1953
EDWARDS and CHADWELL: 
advised me that Stanley Lovell had
considerable information about the Olsen case.
22 December 1953
HOUSTON: 
asked him for papers on Olsen case.
12 January 1954
Advised HOUSTON of comments in GOTTLIEB's files on LSD.
25 January 1954
Meeting with CABELL, FISHER, and HELHS on OLSEN case.
I February 1954
Discussion with DCI and DDCI on TSS reprimands and TSS meeting
(deFlorez, Drum, Gibbons, Gottleib, telms, Houston, Edwards, Cabell
and Dul'es).

--- PAGE BREAK ---HELHS on OLSEN case.
I February 1954
Discussion with DCI and DDCI on TSS reprimands and TSS meeting
(deFlorez, Drum, Gibbons, Gottleib, telms, Houston, Edwards, Cabell
and Dul'es).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1092
2 February 1954
MEMOR ANDUM FOR: MR. DULLES
VIA 
t Gen. Cabell
1. I have Just been advised of the proposed action to be
taken in the case of Messrs. Drum and Gott leb and feel that in
view of rr.y position and responsibilities. it is my duty to express
an opinion in this matter.
Z. 
I feel that a formal reprimand in this case would be
an injustice since re..rimands are a'nplicabie to 1'ose guilty of
neglience, dizloyzdltT, or willful act3 d-t'i:.-ntal to an organiza-
tion. ratl-cr than to those involved in diffic-lt circumstances
caused by .-.izcnancc or f(-c'oas beyond our co:.';ol., In this case.
I believe that both men concerned acted in vood ftith and with the
desire to advance their work. 
V;hctler they lacked the forrvsht
or wisdom to grasp all the po3sibilities that mri;ht occur is, of
course, debatable.
3. If such action were taken in the t;zdition of the sea
where the commander is automatically at fault in case of failure.
then it would be in order to apply the reprimand to both Dr.
Gibbons and myself.
4. 
1 sincerely hope that this matter will be again reviewed,
not only in the interest of justice, 
but also in C-e interest of main-
taining the spirit of initiative and enthusiasm ss necessary to our
work.
• -' 
.. 
-
'
LUIS d, LOREZ
Researcbhairman
TSS/OC:Idcfljel (Z February 1954)
temo for T. cord- 
Original returned to WJh deFlorez on 10 Feb,
w/note iron Uen Cabell (on the cover sheet) as follows:
"Your request acceded to."
DECLASSIFIED on Z4 JULY 1975 
/
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1093
3ZlA OLb A. .UAlIIII140 . It. D.
$82 I AST 31 
T ITm 
T
399W TOIK 33. NSW TOUE
February 9, 1954
Dear Mr
For your inforr.ation and files I an enclosing
a case report which might be oL interest.
Yours sincerely,
Harold A. Abramson, 
M. D.
BAA/nb31 
T ITm 
T
399W TOIK 33. NSW TOUE
February 9, 1954
Dear Mr
For your inforr.ation and files I an enclosing
a case report which might be oL interest.
Yours sincerely,
Harold A. Abramson, 
M. D.
BAA/nb

--- PAGE BREAK ---IK 33. NSW TOUE
February 9, 1954
Dear Mr
For your inforr.ation and files I an enclosing
a case report which might be oL interest.
Yours sincerely,
Harold A. Abramson, 
M. D.
BAA/nb

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1094
CASE REPORT ON PATIENT JOHN Q. SUITU
I was called in consultation to see 1r. John Q. 
Smith
about ten days alter !Lr. Smith had received 70 microgram-s by
mouth in a highly protected situation. 
1r. Smith, although
agitated and concerned over his relationships in vork situations,
related very well to his friends, to m~e, 
and to cor.tunity problems
in general. 
It 
appeared that :r. Smith had profound guilt feel-
ings because he had been retired as an oilicer during the last
war and was drawing a pension. His intense feelings of guilt
resulted from receivin- govcrn.ent money to which no felt that he
was not entitled. These ieelings were not eliuinated by his
realistic understanding that he had appeared before a retirement
board. 
A stron- feeling of inadeuacy dominated his present work.
Ho felt that he was not doing as good a job as he thought he
should even though he was thoug-ht \rell of by his colleagues and
promotions h-d come readily. 
In several hours of .intcrviewing
for a period of two days his agitation could not be directly
lined vwith a psychotic state until he-said that hi3.slecplcss-
toss had been caused by the FBI 
no had surreptitiously been
placing aphet-rtino or caffeine in his food at night to keep
him awtako. 
These feelin-s oi having dru-s being placed in his
food had been present lor at least live r:onths before he had
received his therapeutic dose of 70 r-icrog-ra-s. 
lie also dis-
closed that he had ihorn bizarre bheav.ior for vine m.onths before
so that his wife thought he needed medical attention." This led
to an outpourii,-" o" an intense cesire on his part to be punished
by the authorities lor his past conduct, of taking, money fraud-
ulently from the government following his retirement by an Army
board.
Subsequent discussion with the patient and an accom-
panying friend led to his aCrcerin 
to entering a mental insti-
tution. Dififrent hospitals were discussed. le chose one near
his hone and appeared to be relieved that some decision had
been .ade to take care of his problems. 
Accot;panied by his
friend w;ho shared the sane room rith him he went to a hotel for
the night because the hospital chosen vas distant and he could
not be accepted at once. 
In the middle of the night without
any warning he plunged head-first through a heavy glass window
shattering it and fell to his death on the pavement below.
Information subsequently received revealed that he
had discussed suicide ire.uently during the previous year and
to the best oi my information had been talked out of suicide
twice. 
In my opinion 11.r. 
Zraith had been suffering for sore
time with a paranoid type of depressivP psychosis which,
although reluctantly recognized by his family and friends, had
not received adequate 
medicall care. 
It is 
my opinion, also,
in view of n.y e..ericuce with various arulatory types of
subjects. that this dosage could hardly have had any signifi-
cant role in the course oi events which followed.are. 
It is 
my opinion, also,
in view of n.y e..ericuce with various arulatory types of
subjects. that this dosage could hardly have had any signifi-
cant role in the course oi events which followed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I.I.. JM so0. t@10.10 
J1 
.
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 Jury 1975
BY AUTHORITY OF TE DCI
1095
: 
t0
" 
o "-,,-
MEMORANDUM4
.~, 
Ai4-6~
/
~
4~tW~.
1475
FOR:
k4x

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1096
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON as. 0. C.
OFFICE 
OF THE DIRECTOR
!tL 
10 1954
*ETE 
O:LT3
MDoRAhDMU 
FOR: 
Chief# Technical Services Staff
SUBJECT 
s Unwitting Application of LSD
1. 
This is to advise you that I consider the
unwitting application of LSD in an ex:eririent with which
you are fan.iliar to be an indication of bad ju,1*.ent on
the part of two ne.bei3s of your staff: Jajmes H, Drum
and Dr* Sidney Gottlieb.
2. 
The purpose of this me-orandmza is- to inform
you officially of this conclusion and to advise you to
take all aoprooriate steps to insure a thorough and care-
ful review within , S of all experinerts. The Deputy
Director (Mar.) has been instructed to constitute a
review board co-oosed of the arprepriate officials frcn
within the Agency periodically to review TS 
research and
experiments.
AIN J. 
LES 
~
Director
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY 1975
by AUTHORITY OF THE DCI

--- PAGE BREAK ---f the arprepriate officials frcn
within the Agency periodically to review TS 
research and
experiments.
AIN J. 
LES 
~
Director
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY 1975
by AUTHORITY OF THE DCI

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1097
TER 
C CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25. 0. C.
OFFICE OF 
HE DIRECTOR
F.B 10 1954
PSRSO~KAL
Colonel James .H. Dr-
Chief, Technical Ocerations
Technical Services Staff
Dear Colorel Drmo
I have perronAlly reviewed the case in which
your staff ervloyed the use of a drug on a rroup of
subjects not entirely Uittin. that such an excerl;-.ent
was to be :-;,de on thcnselves. 
rt'is ny viet; that pccr
judg.ent was deronstrated by you in authorizing the use
of this drwJ, on sucn an ura4ittin , basis and withoutt
proximate redical safeguards.
This is to advise you that in the position of
responsibility which-. you hold you are expected to
exercise greater judC-ent than %;as indicated in this
casSo
S nce 
ly,
Direc~'r
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY 1975
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI 
.
f
70-,26 
330
AV~

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1098
/S T
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25. 0. C.
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR
CEB 10 
4
PE.SOV!AL
Dr. Sidney Gottlieb
-Chief, Chemical Division
Technical Services Staff
Dear Dr. Gottlieb:
I have personally roviewed the files from your
office concernin, the use of a drJi 
on an ur:vittinn group
of individu3Js. 
in rect.er.din7 the ur-itting application
of the drug to your superior, you apparently did not Cive
sufficier.t e.-phasis to the neccerity for nedical collabo-
ration and for proper consideration of the rights of the
Individual to whomu it was being ad.-inistred. 
This is to
Inform you that it is ny opinion that yo= exercised poor
judp.ent in this case.
O 
S 
rnc 
t
•i 
c o
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY 1975
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI

--- PAGE BREAK ---ad.-inistred. 
This is to
Inform you that it is ny opinion that yo= exercised poor
judp.ent in this case.
O 
S 
rnc 
t
•i 
c o
DECLASSIFIED ON 24 JULY 1975
BY AUTHORITY OF THE DCI

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1099
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25. 0. C.
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR
.S 
OMI° 
/
HE:ORA.'Dt74 FOR: 
Chicf, Technical Services Staff
SL! 
MT 
: 
Unwitting Application of LSD 
.
I. 
This is to advl.i 
you that I c-nsider the unwitting
application of LSD in an ex.,.rL-rent with which you are
fan.iliar to be an 
indication of 
hz 
,ed-:r 
bad judment
on the p-rt of. your stAff,11 ,upvt--.v--o-r-an.ot -ar-wikl-not
The purpose of this no 
is 
o advise you 
e
J 
},, 
)-neciesnaT. stes should-be t s:on to insure a
t.orouh ar.d careful review within 
.S: 
of all experiments.
The Deputy Director (Plan3) 
nas bee.n ins-.lcttd to corsti-
tute a review board ccnposed of the appr:-riate officials
front within the Aency to periodically review TSS research
and exeri.nents, 
-
ALLEJ Y. DULLES
Director
70-026 0 - 76 - 70

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1100
P_,EF)1,.4,L A.M.) ',.T.MTAL
Colonel Ja-es F. .rtmn
Chter, Technical O.erstions
Technical Cervices Staff
Dear Colonol Dr,m, 
.
I have pers,naily revicwaed the cise in.w),Lch-y(.ur
etaff-oiployeJ-tYo 
e-.eoi' n'-dric on an un-iittine, "rouo of
eubjcctn.* Icbhe t.hcra" :---v to so-.e r-ues-tion cc:'c 
n..tn 
thioj
cxperI:.-ent with the It4.&r 1wnfortun-rtto results, t,re 
t r0
question in r.y nlw. about nor ju,.;-.-ent ee.-G;-:.ratcd by 
Cou
In authorizin; te'-se o f thie drug on an unwitttIn basia.
This is to a advise you that in the por1ton of
respori. iblity ;:>:*ch -.nu h.nld, you nrc held l1I0le for the
excrrixo-of :reitcr jud-.nt than w .
inIcard in V'i
casa. 
Your iailure Jn Z*.%.-: connctfon right uell have
resulted in even nore s.crious consequencesp if that is
possible, than was the case.
Sincerely,
Allen W. Dulles
Director
cc: Security Office (to Col. Edwards for "Special Handling")

--- PAGE BREAK ---esulted in even nore s.crious consequencesp if that is
possible, than was the case.
Sincerely,
Allen W. Dulles
Director
cc: Security Office (to Col. Edwards for "Special Handling")

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1101
"M-hS 
ONLrY"
3Q-IORADL4 FOR: 
Chiefs Technical Scrviczi Staff
SUBJECT 
: 
ExparLment
1. 
This is to advise you that I co'sder the handling
of an eperinent v;ith which you are farifhr to be an
indication of exceedingly bad j"3gment onthe part or your
staff* Such action cannot and will not bccondoned in this
Agency.
2. 
The purpose of this mcroranduw Lk to advise you
that all necessary steps should be taken b insure a
thorou-h and careful review within 7SS" or,-ll experLents.
The Deputy Director (Plans) h.s bnen insticted to consti-
tute a review board co:'inosed eof the appro.-iato- officials
from within the A,ency to periodically re'iett TSS research
and experiments.
tLLEN ',',4 DULLES
Diretor
cc: Security Office 
-
Personnel Office
1-43 
)4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1102-
a IES C.'Ey
HCi.0IK'DUIr Fit Chiotp Technical sorvicos Staff
SUI3JECT
1. 
ThIs is to cdvise you that I conridcr the-.rLtting
application of LSD-in-an experi-nent 
l~thu ich you aro
fa.tflir to bo an inication of .ccdin.ly -ad Ju:!-5.nt
on the p-rt of yur stn.M'f. 
Such .ction cannot and will not
be condoned in this !rcncy.
2. 
The pur.nre of this rcorandu a is to advise you
tIat all ::oces-:ary ste s should t- t. 
to in~mrc a
Uiorou!-,h an 
c.--.rc'uI 
mvicw within 'L- 
of all cx!rinonts.
Tho Deputy Nmractor ('-var) 
'-s hvrn inctructcd to co:sti.-
tute a review Ioard c,.0scd of t9 
arro1riato offic~1.is
fro, within tho A!cncy tj pcritd1c;,-ly review 7SS research
and cxperJ -cnts.
ALLEN W. DULL.M
Director
cct Security Office (to Col. Edwards for "Special Handling")

--- PAGE BREAK ---riato offic~1.is
fro, within tho A!cncy tj pcritd1c;,-ly review 7SS research
and cxperJ -cnts.
ALLEN W. DULL.M
Director
cct Security Office (to Col. Edwards for "Special Handling")

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1103
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25. 0. C.
) 
OffICE Of Ttf 
DIRECTOR
PE/t IOAL A Z1 CO'!FID?'rIAL
Colonel Ja.es H. DrV%
Chief, TechnWcal Op_-ratiorns
Technical Services Staff
Dear Colonel Dnr, 
r 
-
..
-Thi.r-reit.s-btlTh.-unolassi fied.-)tar- to y'oit
of-ths -date. rofrri.. 
o a -"Ilasss 1 _e=- tivun) 
-and
Aind-by.rJe. 
I have pernilly revic-.:,i the case in
which your staff c-,nlofed the use or a dntg on a!-unwiting
A.. group of subjects. 
It is ry view that toor Jud,-enl. was
deonstrated b!- you in authorizing the "o of this drug
on such c-on l~t.ie unvitt.n- basis arnd without proximate
medical safecuirds.
This is to advise you that in the position of
responsibility vrtich you hold, you are 
:pected to
exercise greater jud.ient than was indicted in I.is case.
Sincerely,
Allen W. Tlles
DLrect(r
IFoe .Z
t 0- -
' - I 'T 0, -4 C It

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1104
6
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25. D. C.
OFFICE 
OF THE DIRECTOR
IMPERIAL AIM COTFME'.A!AL
Colonel James H. Drin
Chief, Technical Operations
Technical Services Staff.
Dear Colonel Dru. :
I have personally reviewed the case of a classi-
fied action :hich is fully identified in yur office files.
In my jud,.ent, poor julFi nt was dc-onstrjtod by you in
authorizing this action under the actual cnditions.
ls 
is to advice you that in th! position of
responsibility which you hold, you are exTacted to
exercise greater judpnent than was indicated in this case.
Sincerely,
Allen W. Dulles
Director
cc: Security Office
Personnel Office
fz,_ '.f; r r e~ / o 
V- 
( 
x 
. a , t 
! /-t 
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---xercise greater judpnent than was indicated in this case.
Sincerely,
Allen W. Dulles
Director
cc: Security Office
Personnel Office
fz,_ '.f; r r e~ / o 
V- 
( 
x 
. a , t 
! /-t 
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1105
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25. O. C.
O01ME Of 
MlE DIREC1OR
PFIRSOL&L KIJ COW.T!D)'TITAL
Colonel Jaos H. Drum
Chief, Technical O; .rations
Technical Services Staff
Dear Colonel Drm:/
I have persc-rally revit-wed tle case in %hich your
staff employed t.c we of a eru- on an ur;ittin- r.roup of
.---)- ept"-(,it .wit. , t 
.ter 
t 
-t',:S 
Lutcr.,.ult ,-.ee.e-is no
,, 
3uJcnLst "ic ,n'tratid b 
you
in authorizirv the w e of this dru 
orm-. urwittin,, Lmsisc-0"
This is to advise you thit in the pj.ition of
responsibility -hich you holh, 
you arcJh--i,.e 
--fo.tue
exercise c<s ereatcr j 
t.er.t than was'im:i1catcd in this
case * 
uk.-fe.i-lire, 
,. tr is -Or..weecon -ri 
t reI 1-Iwv 
.
Sincerely, 
.
.
,
Aller 1I. Pufles
.J 
Diector
I-Ay M-- 
cv

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1106
C
*
0
P
y
PURSO'ZAL A':DCI!!MTA
Colonel Ja-ns H. Drn
Chief, Technical Opo 
-ratllons
Technical ! crrices Staff
Dear Colonel Drum: 
/
I have personil)y reviewed the case o! -n-pxopriron.
which is fulh" identified in your office file., -,:hiie
th-rc_=-yb"c--:;=o OCj-etion concmrnii-tris oxtrL-cnt with
L 
o 
, 
, 9sor judIipnte,-4%on3trated by* you in authorizing -( 
-;
this e 
i.ie~b. 
-. 
.
This is to advice you th3t in the po.dtion of rc.non.i-
bility which you hpld, you arc L3d-iAble-for--the 
.xerci~o
-o 
rreater jul I.ent than was inl.icated in this case.,".":c' ---- 
-
/e' 
,
ai- 
-v- 
.
va-r.u1ted .v aeven
-ser..cAuoa.1.Aquncos,--it .h 
t. t, i - c.ssibLe 
i 
than uas.
.the case-
Sincerely,
Allen W. tuoles
Director
cc: 
Security Office ,-'
Personnel Office

--- PAGE BREAK ----v- 
.
va-r.u1ted .v aeven
-ser..cAuoa.1.Aquncos,--it .h 
t. t, i - c.ssibLe 
i 
than uas.
.the case-
Sincerely,
Allen W. tuoles
Director
cc: 
Security Office ,-'
Personnel Office

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1107
P SO'!:AL
Dr. Sidney Gottlieb
Chief, Ch..ndcal Division
Teehnical SCrvices Staff
Dear Dr. Gottlieb:
I have personally reviewed the files frcm volir
office conc'erning, the use of a drug on rn :v'uittin.! rroup
of IndivIduals. 
In reenere'ir 
tie uvit-tin' ap ication
of the drut, to your superior, you ap 
.y 
did not givo
surficient enphasis Lo 4he ncC!;:itV for -.edical collabo-
ration an-d for proper consideration of tc 
ri-hts of the
individ-al to ".,m it was be"n, ai- inl,:red. 
This in to
inform you tiat it 
is my opi-lon thAt )o, exercised poor
judg!-ent in this case.
Sincerelr,
Allen W. DIkles
Director
O/IG/IMKirkpatrick:tr:x 
29 Jan E
Rewitten by DDCI/CPabell:rm 
1 Feb 5h
Rewritten by DDI/CrCabel1:'.m 
6 Feb 54

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1108
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25. D. C.
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR
PERSO':AL I,, CO"m' T r"TAL
Dr. Sidney Gottlieb
Chief, Chenical Dirision
Technical Services Staff
Dear Dr. Gottlieb:
b--tdhiA -- reierr .-
o- a -" c) assifjd ac tion" l-and
signed-by re.- I have personally reviewed tho files fro.m
your office concernir., the use of a drug on an uniLtting
group of individ-uzs. 
In recc. .endin. the unwittinf
application of the dru3 to your suprior, you apparently
did not give Sufficient emph.sis to the necessity for
medical collabor'ntion and for proper consideration of the
rights of tte ir.diviaual to whc.m it was being adiinir,tercd.
This is to infor.r 
you that it is ny opinion that you exer-
cised poor judg&.ent in this case.
Sincerely,
Allen W. Dulles
Director
fL-c 
1 7-7 f.0 
-3 0~ 
OCXf_. C_ _ eat.. 
V: 
tA b-

--- PAGE BREAK ---is to infor.r 
you that it is ny opinion that you exer-
cised poor judg&.ent in this case.
Sincerely,
Allen W. Dulles
Director
fL-c 
1 7-7 f.0 
-3 0~ 
OCXf_. C_ _ eat.. 
V: 
tA b-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1109
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25. 0. C.
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR
7EMMSZ)AL A'rn CO-ATDE1TIAL
Dr. Sidney Gottlieb
Chiefs Che-ical Division
Technical Sermices Stoff
Dear Dr. Gottlieb:
I have personally reviewed the files from your
office concerning a classified action Ulich is idontiied
in the files. 
In recor-ending the action to your
superior, you did not.in .y opinion exercise satisfactory
,jud&-rent in the case.
Sincerely,
Allen t. Dulles
Director
cc: Personnel Office
Security Office
A00"itrrt -/ 
0o0 
L c i.l,,_. 
-
V . %L

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1110
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25. 0. C.
OFfICE OF IHE DIRIECION
PPA '.L ,A.. CC:--" Ir, E.:TTkL
Dr. Sidny Oottlieb
Chief# Ch--ical Uivis!on
Technical !Aervices Staff
Dear Dr. Gottlieb:
I have personally reviewed the files frcx your
office concerning Vie us~e of a drug on an umd~tting C~roup
of i ndivid,'_al 
-
There 's-eidoncc-in-you'-fI le*-that
c~aU9,j~q 
- p: 
r&wmof --,-.rous- tw-at ramer.t .- A DJ'a rent ly
,n 
recc.-:cr.lin- te 
u:nwittin, application of the irug
to your sJr,-rior yo~u- (vA'c-r did nt 
gCie efficientt 
..
Stht.-to- U. is. e 
.na orcose 
.to overlook i-t..--
a~n,-ven.,1itiz is to inforn you that !t is ny opinion
that you exercised *ory poor juc ent !.n tnis case.
Sincerely,
Allen V. Dulles
Director
.&rK 
7I(t~. .t7tjj~dj($2r~
I, 
I.
~
(-I:. /
/
I
L'~-L.~ 
~ 
~%~P /
/
4
-, '/,,.: 
04z 
, 
el 
-, 
.
/..-
\
€
\
41- CC 03 w: , , 
'; -I ;T -'w -% 
A

--- PAGE BREAK ---erely,
Allen V. Dulles
Director
.&rK 
7I(t~. .t7tjj~dj($2r~
I, 
I.
~
(-I:. /
/
I
L'~-L.~ 
~ 
~%~P /
/
4
-, '/,,.: 
04z 
, 
el 
-, 
.
/..-
\
€
\
41- CC 03 w: , , 
'; -I ;T -'w -% 
A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1111
C
0
P
PERSO:AL AI.M(..- 
.'It
Dr. Sidney Gottieb
Chiefs Chenical Division
Technical Services Staff
Dear Dr. Gottlieb: 
t 
£I -
rg ,-...%d
I have personally reviewed tl'a files.fr,/i your office
concern 
-
ri:L 
nich is identtficd in the files.
-Ay 
ueon$y in reco.-. .- v.iin.- ts.:.-i-ent,-to 
your superior
you-it-hcr-dida.-- 
v.iv3 fuica:.oir~.- 
to- evid-n e- in
t 
L1e or_ chaze. W ocriook. it ..
Io 
ny-ercnt, -this'is
.
o,- 
i-,my opinion ILyu 
exercise,-voryA01,',* 1'A 
.
peer 3ud. ient in thio ciso. 
-/
(s.. 
Sincerelys
Allen W Dulles
Director
cc: Security Office .
" S 
.
..........
Personnel Office
A- 43 se I PW -
'2- A Zr -, a 
L 4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1112
PT:R90'.AL 41) Cn*FID-% 
1TL
Dr. Sidney Ottlicb
Chiefsr, tO;ncal Di;vision 
.
i'
Technical Servicos Staff
Dear Dr. Gottliob:
I have personally rc-riced the Mgi 
frc-m your
offico conccrnbv: t. use-of a drug on-an urrittin; Sroup
of in, llvdi 
alo. 
',. -cre is e ' ience in yorr: fi]ea that
indicatoa3 t,-c neccssity-.or tL|e use of uhis dru:, with
caution on pertvwns of rnrvom, 
tn.arvnent, 
Ap.:Xarently
in race.oncndinp tue "x:..iw',n plication or the trug
to your s=..r -or v:u (.it:Er di& nzt riyve sufficient,
weight, to this ovidorce or c"3e to o\vrlo.'k% 
it. 
in
any cvcrt, tLin is tc infor. you that it is ny onpirion
that you cxsrcired verj poor Judgaent in ths caco.
-" 
[ 
Slncerce y,
(' 
.
F7.
Allen if. 
Iulles 
-
Director
cat Sec urity Office (to Col. Edwards for "Special Handling)
"* 
,. 
I. 
o

--- PAGE BREAK ---you cxsrcired verj poor Judgaent in ths caco.
-" 
[ 
Slncerce y,
(' 
.
F7.
Allen if. 
Iulles 
-
Director
cat Sec urity Office (to Col. Edwards for "Special Handling)
"* 
,. 
I. 
o

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1113
-
A-866247
Mr. DO kllic 
1.h 
Ci -IM3 cCutcti 
" 
t
for in~ornaticn on t.eir Ior--" .r 46-i2. 
ouch form IndicaLus deceziz.at v 
&
employee of the %rzy at Csp Detrick.
Do Felice .a!d 
tc hold up any repiy until he bhd checked "th his zu',orlors ad
rtceiZd 
tvrovc,. 
..
3/'7/54
Mr. Do k i:.ics calii back on this late and !:&,Id t.u-t w could ccre.ead'ith
Civil z'rvic. C:.. 
eas this cs. os 
"o:, 
bs reLrzinwl fro 
scciatin, th2
diecedet ,;ith tht C-ncral lnteliiXaace As.-tcy.
' 11" 3/17/54

--- PAGE BREAK ---late and !:&,Id t.u-t w could ccre.ead'ith
Civil z'rvic. C:.. 
eas this cs. os 
"o:, 
bs reLrzinwl fro 
scciatin, th2
diecedet ,;ith tht C-ncral lnteliiXaace As.-tcy.
' 11" 3/17/54

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1114
95 
JAIe V55
SUBJECT: 
Frank R. Olson
Mr. Olson, who committed suicide on 28 November 19S3,
was a civilian employee of the U. S. 
Army Chemical Corps
then located at Cam-p Dietrich. 
At 0500 hours on 28 November
1953, Colonel Sheffield Ld%:ards, 
then the Director of Security,
was called by Bernard Doran 'ho asked for a meeting among 
Ir.
Doran, 
Dr. Sidney Gottlieb, Dr. Gibbons, ind Colonel Edwards.
During this meeting, it was related that .Mr. Olson had been
in New York City during the preceding week undergoing psychiatric
treatment. 
---- 
.
... 
ft. Mr. Olson had been
accor.panied by Re 
5hi-ro. 
, a TSS cployco at that tine.
e, .
tit 
-V- 
ook and Mr. Olson had a roon at the Statler llotel in
~ 
1Nu.Yrk Cty.At Oz30-hours,'i,-. 
.4 rk was aw~akened by a
-rash 
and discovered that Mr. 
Olson had dived through 
the
hotel window. After this incident, Mr. Lishbrook called Dr.
Gottlieb and then called the hotel desk %tich, in turn, called
the police.
Drs. Gibbons and-Gottlieb related ta the Director of
Security the fact that on Veednesday and Tlursday, 
18 and 19
November 1953,. a group of individuals froth Carip Dietrich and
from TSS assembled at a cabin at Deer Crwk Lake. 
Dr. Gottlieb
stated that there were seven (7) individu-Is (not fully
identified) from Cann Dietrich and threeti3 ) individuals from
TSS. 
They stated that TSS liaison In comection with the
"Special Operatiens" group at Camp Dictri2t, had been kept on
an EYES ONLY basis known only to a few perzons in the Agency
and at Camp Dietrich. It was stated thatthis liaison was
known to 
.
dlt- 
y of r=-Army Chemical Corps.
The purpose of this liaison was to discus-ttheir work on matters
of mutual interest in the sensitive and cn'ert fields.
According to the information furni . d by Dr. Gottlieb
to Colonel Edwards, on the evening of 19:.ovember, 
it 
was
decided to experiment with the drug LSD =.i for the members
present t6 administer the drug to thenseivs to ascertain the
effect a clandestine application would hav on a meeting or
conversation. Dr. Gottlieb stated that a"very small dose"
DECLASSIFIED ON
Z4 July 1975 by Authority of the DCI 
.
. .. 
*. ,*....certain the
effect a clandestine application would hav on a meeting or
conversation. Dr. Gottlieb stated that a"very small dose"
DECLASSIFIED ON
Z4 July 1975 by Authority of the DCI 
.
. .. 
*. ,*....

--- PAGE BREAK ---clandestine application would hav on a meeting or
conversation. Dr. Gottlieb stated that a"very small dose"
DECLASSIFIED ON
Z4 July 1975 by Authority of the DCI 
.
. .. 
*. ,*....

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1115
of LSD was placed in a bottle of cointreau and that all present,
except two (2) individuals, had a drink thereof. 
M4r. Olson was
included in this group. Dr. Gottlieb reported that the drug
had a definite effect on the group to the point where they were
boisterous and could not continue the meeting or engage in
sensible conversation. 
Dr. Gottlieb stated that MEr. Olson,
among others, complained of wakefulness during the night.
The information contained in Colonel Edwards' 
memorandum
for the record indicates that the LSD was administered with
the knowledge of those present. However, a memorandum of
conversation contained in I.G. files, dated I Decenber 19S5
and bearing the signature block of the then Inspector General,
indicates that the LSD was given to eight (8) of the individuals
present, but that they were not told what :hey had been given
until 20 minutes afterwards. 
However, the use of some drug of
the LSD type had bcen discussed with Canp Dietrich representatives
by Dr. Gottlieb and they all had agreed that an unwitting experi-
ment would be useful.
On Tuesday, 
24 November 19S3, the Com=anding Officer of
Special Operations, C..,lo:1.1 
• 
j-s&A-called Dr. Gottlieb
and stated that Mr. Olson appeared nentally depressed. 
Dr.
Gottlieb then sugeested that M.-'Lshbrook take Mr. Olson to
New York City to be treated by Drn-braason. 
Fron that point
there tere a series of psychiatric treatreats in New York City
until 28 Novenber when it 
had been planned to place -Ir. Olson
in a sanitarium called Chestnut Hotel near Rockville, Maryland.
Because .:essrs. L.a-hbook-and Olson had wt been able to make
lane- reservations, they stayed overni-hi at the Statler on
8 November wheni 
the suicide occurred.
Subsequent to this incident, the natcr was investigated
by the I.G. staff, which recommended to Mr. Allen Dulles that
Drs. Gibbons, Drunn, and Gottlieb be -eprimanded. 
1. G. investi-
gation determined that Ir. Frank Wisner M 
M4r. 
Richard Helms
were not aware that this experiment was ta be conducted.
Piles of this Office reflect no indication that this
experiment was part of any formal project.
70-026 0 - 76 - 71isner M 
M4r. 
Richard Helms
were not aware that this experiment was ta be conducted.
Piles of this Office reflect no indication that this
experiment was part of any formal project.
70-026 0 - 76 - 71

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1118
29 January 1975
P. 'TjCT T .: 
:1) 1: 
/'Te 
T. II 0'%M
4, 
A note in the rocnrd 4,tted 23 Octo v.r 1953 by Dr.
t. 
It. Cushincy (Scirn=ific %etor 
to t 
AD/).r) note that
*I&SO hiii -r')trd 
-n% 'i 
!:t 
O 
-by 
t.a" 
for tho Co.-.itto,
which :i11 
incl:i-in ann'rov.nl of t-ctinn o ,r" 
.
on volvnt-rn
manq A 
r:icv- oerno.1". 
A .firoc, 
of 29 
2 
.)cto*,or 
1953 al.o
by Cuthri.. 
rctzrn to Iraft ,-orantia to he rctlrned to the!
AR 'I!:' ::: C~:,:it :-, 
on'! of '.hcih 
is 
entitl',! 
..
rr.n 
-1
Project Liz-litinn "rainv- volunt--c.ro". 
!:* c.nv o, thil, :..'o-
ranh. col hi.-, 
-d. 
A r.-ncr. o'r -& c 
,onv-r.,io-.O 
'.t
Or. it. e. 
Cr" 
-
,.il, :)r/o t vI 
-I:. 
ativ Gity 
of O'ti 
atcd
14 Dcce:*,-r 119ja ri.-ferr to t!: 
h 
9 
Jictivitv at Detrick: and
contains the Zo#1X
1
:ijnj cryptic notation:
'Lovell knew of 'ran: R. Olson. 
11o
inhilitic;an. 
'arinq of inner nan.
SuIcitL.al.I 
t, ?:;.encies. 
Offensive
BEST Mff-HYILIE_

--- PAGE BREAK ---: and
contains the Zo#1X
1
:ijnj cryptic notation:
'Lovell knew of 'ran: R. Olson. 
11o
inhilitic;an. 
'arinq of inner nan.
SuIcitL.al.I 
t, ?:;.encies. 
Offensive
BEST Mff-HYILIE_

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1117
31 
"^:; 3
MEIORANDUI FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: 
Project ARTIC!OKE
In the review; of file inforr-ation contained in SRS
materials, one incident which occurred in ..November 1953
appears worthy of note. Although it was not clear froa file
information whether r or not the incident occurred under tile
auspices of 1 roject A'TsCiIOCE., the incident did involve use
of LSD in.an experir.:ent.:1 exorcise. 
COn :ran'.- OLSON, a
civilian e:.-ployee of the Departneit of the AMy, co~.nitted
suicide a :eek or so after havin, been adninistered LSD by
an Agency representative. 
Details concernlng this incident
apparently till 
be reported in a separate r.enorandum, 
but
it 
appears that the dr:g.: was adinistercd to several unwitting
subjects by a Dr. 
GOTTLIZ3, at that ti.e a branch chief in
TSS (now OS) .
A short time after the LSO was administered,
the subjccts iuere told that they had been given LSD. 
On
the day following the exper;.-i.nt, OLSON began to behave in
a peculiar and erratic manner and was laLen placed under the
care of a psychiatrist. A few days later, OLSON crashed
through a window in a New York hotel in an apparent suicide.
A memoranz!u.m dated I December 19S3 from the IG Staff
caused the im?olunz.n: of all LSD materials. 
Information
contained in the above mentioned files reflected that the
drug had been administered without thz ?rior kno:wled-e or
approval of the Oifice of Security .or tie Office of Medical
Services.
- S-

--- PAGE BREAK ---the above mentioned files reflected that the
drug had been administered without thz ?rior kno:wled-e or
approval of the Oifice of Security .or tie Office of Medical
Services.
- S-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1118
31 JA,;I 1"73
MEMORANDUMS. FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: 
Identity 1
12. 
In the review of file information contained in
Identity 2 materials, one incident which occurred ia November
of 1953 appears worthy of note. 
Although it 
;as not clear -
fron file in:ornation whether or not the incident occurred
under the auspices at Identity 1, the incident did involve
use of LSD in an experimental exercise. 
Idcntit)y 17 cor.:nitted
suicide a tieek or sa after having 1bcen administered LSD by
an Agency representative. 
Details concerning this incident
apparently ,i;11 be reported in a separate hemor-andun, 
but it
appears that. the drug ias administered to sc'eral unwitting
subjects by Identity IS. 
A short tire after the LSD was
ad-ministered, 
the subjects were told by Identity IS that
they had been given LSD. On the day following the experiment,
Identity 17 began to behave in a peculiar and erratic
manner, and wias later placed under the care of a psychiatrist.
A few days later, Identity 17 crashed through a window in a
Now York hotel in an apparent suicide.
13. 
A nenorandun dated I Decer.ber 19S3 fron Identity 19
caused the inpoundment of all LSD natcrials. 
Infornation
contained in the above r.entioned files reflected that the
-
dru: had been adninistcred u:ithout the prior knowledge or
approval of the Office of Security or Identity S.
-6-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1119
IDENTITY SHEET
Identity 
1.
Identity 
2.
Identity 
*.
Identity 17.
Identity 18-.
Identity 19.
Project ARTICHOKE
Security Research Staff, Office of Security
Office of Medical Services (OMS)
Frank OLSON, a Department of Ary civilian
Dr. GOTTLIEB, OTS
Inspector General Staff

--- PAGE BREAK ---.
Project ARTICHOKE
Security Research Staff, Office of Security
Office of Medical Services (OMS)
Frank OLSON, a Department of Ary civilian
Dr. GOTTLIEB, OTS
Inspector General Staff

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1120
3 February 197S
MEMORANDUM FOR TIlE RECORD
SUBJECT: 
Project ARTICIO.KE
*
*
*
*
6
*
U
7. Little information pertaining to the suicide of
Frank OLSON was found in the collection of materials made
available by DDS*T. 
However, 
one brief memorandum dated
14 Deccmber 1953 e..entioned the OLSON incident. 
The rtemoran-
dun stated in part "LOVELL reported that QUARLES and George
-
MERCK were about to kill the Schwab activity at Detrick as
"un-A-ericen." 
The retorandum later continued "LOVELL knew
of Frank R. OLSON."

--- PAGE BREAK ---LOVELL reported that QUARLES and George
-
MERCK were about to kill the Schwab activity at Detrick as
"un-A-ericen." 
The retorandum later continued "LOVELL knew
of Frank R. OLSON."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1121
'3 February 197S
HEM'IORANDUM FOR TIHE RECORD
SUBJECT: 
Project ARTICHOKE
1. In the conduct of investigating Project ARTICIOKE,
attempts wore made to locate and review all available
Office of Security information pertinent to Project ARTICIIOKE.
The information base for the ,enaorandun "Tab A" was the
materials found in old SRS files, specifically a box of
materials provided out of retirement from ,'TC. 
The
referenced box of materials also contained a file entitled
"LSD," pertaining primarily to one Frank OLSO:N. 
Much of
the information contained in the "LSD" file appeared to be
I.G. file information. The Office of Security file on
Frank OLSO:" v.-as not reviewed as the OLSON natter was to
be handled. separately by a different reviewer.
2. 
In searching Office of Security records, an indices
card for a Project BLUEIRD was found in SRI), rcflccting 
in
OS file nuMber 69 20S. 
However, an exhaustive effort to
locate such file net wbith negative results. 
No record was
found in SPI) of any file entitled Project ARTIC!!O'KE. 
It was
speculated*that perhaps the Project M.1T.'BIRD file was purged
or destroyed routinely, and perhaps the indices card was
inadvertently lett in the file. However, the fact remaains
that although an indices card reflecting Projact' LUEBIRD
was found, no file could be located.
3. 
In attempting to locate all available information
pertinent to Project ARTICHIOEi 
incju;.ry, Messrs. COLE, 
SOLIE,
and 
w 'ere contacted and their assistance was obtained.
4. 
As reflected in "Tab C:' a meiiorandur. was prepared
utilizing information from DDS&T source .
Old OSI information
was reviewed for pertinent information regarding Project
BLUEBIRD'and Project ARTICHOKE.
*CIA Cfficer

--- PAGE BREAK ---ur. was prepared
utilizing information from DDS&T source .
Old OSI information
was reviewed for pertinent information regarding Project
BLUEBIRD'and Project ARTICHOKE.
*CIA Cfficer

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1122
S. -According to &.Ir. Robert G.'X3.O, a review by
Office of M.ledical Services personnel for pertinent
Project JARTICI1O.E naterials initially failed to reflect
relevant data. However, Dr. TIETJ7:N of :edical Services
Is reported to c.intain certain sensitive files in his
own safe, and on his return to duty, will search further
for pertinent Project ARTICH3OE materials.
6. In response to direction by Mtr. 
G.A.I3PYO, 
Mlr. Bill
SAM-PEY of DDST was contacted on 31 January 1975 in an
atter..pt to review'OTS records for pertinent Project ARTICIIONE
materials. .Ir. 
SAMPEY reported that a discussion with
Mr. Sayre STEVENS revealed that OTS had no pertinent records
available. 
4r. SAMPEY reflected that the Office of the DDST
had "-one back to OTS seven or eight tines" to obtain Project
ARTICHOXE information, but none apparently renained in OTS.
It has heen reported that Dr. Sid-GOTTLI.B destroyed anunber
of boxes of materials prior to his termination of Agency
omploynent.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1123
5 rbruary 1975
M.O:~.I- 
DU:.I'COZ.: I.reetor of Cca;tral L.tctlInl 
o
SUBJECT 
I C 
.flt.D and Tacair.?, of rlehavioral
Drugs
Donah! r. Charnberlain
1nupcctor Ccntral
r----

--- PAGE BREAK ---1123
5 rbruary 1975
M.O:~.I- 
DU:.I'COZ.: I.reetor of Cca;tral L.tctlInl 
o
SUBJECT 
I C 
.flt.D and Tacair.?, of rlehavioral
Drugs
Donah! r. Charnberlain
1nupcctor Ccntral
r----

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1124
Drur-rlatd lDe.th of an Investivation
0. -The predecessor org .nization of the Office of Technical
Service also was intercsvted itt behavioral drugs, allhou.h none of
the office's records on this activity .rt in existence, having been
destroyed i:n January 19T3. 
As noted above it participated in the
mactinns .of the so-called AR'IClO;(I 
Ccmniittce. 
"f.lat office
malntalicd liaison with personnel at Camp Diatrick. with whom
neetlngjs were held once or twice a year to discuss questions
Involving behavoria[ drugs. 
At one such meting at Deep Crcek
Lake In Maryltad. 13-10 N.ovember 1953. with seven representatives
from Crmp l)ictrick wnd three froni CIA. eight of those present w.:rc
adninitercd LSD which had been introduced into a bottle of Coijntre1.
Although records of an inquiry by the Inspector General into the
Incident indicato that those present discussed testing on u.wittinr
persons, and agreed in principle that such a program should be

--- PAGE BREAK ---s of an inquiry by the Inspector General into the
Incident indicato that those present discussed testing on u.wittinr
persons, and agreed in principle that such a program should be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1125
explored, none of them vere advised un:il some 20 ininutes after
they drank the Cointrcau that it had kieen tre;Jed with LSD. 
Of tI;e
two w'ho did nct tc-!e it. one did r.ot d:in'! alco.o!ic averagess at
all oand the other refrair.d because of a hcrt condition. 
One of
the members of the group. a civilian employee of the Depart:.ent
of Army tea.med Frank It. Olson. had serious after-cffects. lie
was sent at CIA expense. 
with an escort from CIA. to New York
where .e received trcatment fro,%-% a psychiatrist. coinmecncintg
24 Novebcr. While in '.e" 
York for thi. treatment he throw
hitmns'lf thrc-.-h a closed 4-indow in his room on the tenth flcor
of the Statler Ilotel. falling to his death. 
CIA, -in a docurnent of
9 Decer'ber 1953, sincd by it.. General Counsel. certified that
Dr. Osc,:'.'s dcath reulted from "circumstances %rising out o a:
experi:|tmnt unde'taken in the course of his official duties for the
United States Govrrnient. " This was the official position of the
Agency, estaiblishec 
for thc: purpose of aissuring that the survivors
of Dr. Oso:n recciv:d conpc.-t ion from the BEC. 
Dr. Olson
had expc:riunced sonic instabt ility and delusionn prior to the
incide::, 
and it wes j td:ied tlit the drup -erved to t riggcr the
act lc;,.€inl, to his death.. Official rcprima.nls were issued b- the
DCI to three CIA employees held respc, nsille for the incident. 
_

--- PAGE BREAK ---td:ied tlit the drup -erved to t riggcr the
act lc;,.€inl, to his death.. Official rcprima.nls were issued b- the
DCI to three CIA employees held respc, nsille for the incident. 
_

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1126
przJO-ct: 
Iit 
ictra'l Orlt$7 
i.; Tr-ttin-
R 
_______. 
__________56f 
I il 
14 Feb 1975
1-4. 
less' 
I'. 
V.- 
F
,"€-i 
I C 1 + ,€F ~i 
: I:1"1 ila 
l e.
-- __ ___ ___ _#_or 
cc-' 
s' 
, :.$ 
cc.;
4.I 
j 
1 )C,S'ibiV. 
A 'ai.4 '. ¢, 
l.''i. 
: I-
fluI 
siorilii i 
c 
.. :a~ 
a
-
.. 
II 
rc.:sed. 
!-a.c. ..- co::c.'i.:',:.c=
I 
I 
1s 
~rojv 
k u
7,
CiO
Rt 
1:..",
12.
14.
I I
1-4-0
I coacur in 
, recase of :!,c
suntnl"-ry ai.-J rcl;'z-t 
c:,i 
. .
toa
I.
a 
.. 
':.
BEST I 
AIIj im 
r
~1
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1127
11."...
U
U
U
U
0
Drug-rclated Deoat 
of an T:nvestiator
8. 
The preccecssor organization of the' Officc of Technical Scrvice
was the focal po:.-t for the operational investigation of behavioral drugs.
hithough none of the office's records on this activity are in cx;.stcnce.
having been destroyed in January 1973. 
As noted above it participated
'in the inectings oi the so-called ARfT!CiGCF- Comnittcc. 
That oiice
maintained liaison with personnel at 
Iden 6 , 
., with whom meetings
were held once or twicc a year to discuss questions involving behavioral
drugs. 
At one such inceting at 
Iden 7 
in Marylnd.
Idcn 8 
1953, with seven reoresentatives from 
Iden 6 
tand
three from CIA. eight of those present wlre administered LSD-which had
been introduced into a bottle of Cointrcau. 
Ahtltough records of an inquiry
by the Inspector General into the incident indicztc that those present
Beha. 
i ralD7,L".3. Z,,,!! 
.rl'.

--- PAGE BREAK ---en introduced into a bottle of Cointrcau. 
Ahtltough records of an inquiry
by the Inspector General into the incident indicztc that those present
Beha. 
i ralD7,L".3. Z,,,!! 
.rl'.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1128
discussed testing on unwitting persons. and agreed in principle
that such a program should be explored, none oi them were advised
until some Z0 minutes after they drank the Cointreau that It had
been treated with LSD. 
Of the two who did not take it, one did
not dtin" alcoholic beveraces at all and the other refrained be-
cause of a heart condition. One of the members of the group, a
civilian employee of the Dcpartmcnt of Army narmted Wen 9, had
serious after-effects. 
He was sent at CL.\ expcnsc, with an
escort from CL-\ tc*New York where he recei-ed trcatmcnt
from a psychiatrist. commncin3 Iden 10. 
While in New York for
this treatment he hrcw himself through a closed window in his room.
on the tenth iloor of the Iden 11. fallin; to his death. CL., in a
documen.: of dten |s. si-ned by i'5.GCner-l Counsel. 'certified Iden 9
death reul:ed irom "circu..sanccs arising; out oi an experi.nent
undertaken in the course of his official .uties ior the United States
Oovcrnr.-enl. " T'his was th.c 
pc:.l 
Fosition of t.c A.ency, establi{1 
eci
for the pur.n.e of .ssu.in. 
" 
,h: 
"hc survivors of l:!f 
' rvcceived c.um-
pensation irO:: the ."C. 
Iden 9 had vx;;cr-.cccd some instability aiti
delusions prior to the inciclnt. and it was judged that the drug servcd
to trigger tha act leadn. to hi. death.. Reprimands ,-ere issued by
the DCI to two CIA employees hcdd responsible for thb incident. (S.e
Tab A).
.4-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1129
Uchaviara! Drues ant Te.sting
IDE. -1 
TRUE
6 
Camp Dictrick
7 
Deep Crrek 
L~d.
8 
18-19 November
9 
Dr. Frank R. 
O31son
10 
24 November
11 
Stktlcr lintel
12 
9 Decenbcr 1953

--- PAGE BREAK ---29
Uchaviara! Drues ant Te.sting
IDE. -1 
TRUE
6 
Camp Dictrick
7 
Deep Crrek 
L~d.
8 
18-19 November
9 
Dr. Frank R. 
O31son
10 
24 November
11 
Stktlcr lintel
12 
9 Decenbcr 1953

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1130
5,ACL O 
Alleed Illegal IDonestic Activities
(Suicide of Frank R. Olson)
12,/ 
t',O ,
' .1 Iries 11. K~are 
bal
4Dlrcctor of Security 
6777 
11 JULiRS
blml,,l.gj 
-
I OfI 
(3S 
I 
O 
St, 
(N*b, 
.
oeh 
: 
* 
,
OW 
++1C4@
4
.
_____ 
j 
.I 
~~ lo~ 
€ ~ 1bee¢ 
"
2. 
'i
3. Inspector General... 
_
Att: 
Mtr. Brody
4.
* 
-I 
_
6.
7.
t.
'I.
12.
I), .
. .
ls.
I
-'1
DDA
5t

--- PAGE BREAK ---(N*b, 
.
oeh 
: 
* 
,
OW 
++1C4@
4
.
_____ 
j 
.I 
~~ lo~ 
€ ~ 1bee¢ 
"
2. 
'i
3. Inspector General... 
_
Att: 
Mtr. Brody
4.
* 
-I 
_
6.
7.
t.
'I.
12.
I), .
. .
ls.
I
-'1
DDA
5t

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1131
11 JUL 1975
MEIORAND . FOR: 
Inspector General
ATTENTION 
Mr. Allan E. Brody
VIA 
: 
Deputy Director for Administration
SUBJECT 
: 
Alleged Illegal Domestic Activities
(Suicide of Frank R. Olson)
1. 
Reference is made to a 10 July 197S request from
Mr. Allan Brody of your Staff concerning the location of
certain docunents related to the 1953 suicide of 'fr. Frank R.
Olson. Mr. Brody requested that the Office of Security review
the pertinent files concerning the suicide inan attempt to
locate certain memoranda which had been prepared by the then
Inspector General (Mr. Lyman Kirkpatrick) concerning the circum-
stances surrounding Mr. Olson's death.
2. A review of the documents contained in an Office of
Security soft file entitled 'LSD Material" disclosed several
memoranda related to :Mr. Olson which were of interest to the
Inspector General. During discussions with ?-fr. 
Brody and
Mr. Scott Breckinridge on 19 July 1975, %fr. Brody requested that
he be furnished with a copy of the entire "LSD Material" soft
file to aid in his review of the Frank R. Olson matter.
3. Per the above discussions, copies of the entire "LSD
Material" file ;re being forwarded herewith.
4. 
This..memorandum will further serve to confirm that on
10 July 1975 a copy of the entire Office of Security file con-
cerning Frank R. Olson (SFt98 450) was delivered to '.r. Allan
Brody per his request upon the authorization of
Deputy Director of Security (PSI).
"11.rles 
.Kane
Director of Security
Att
70-026 0 - 76 - 72

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ft98 450) was delivered to '.r. Allan
Brody per his request upon the authorization of
Deputy Director of Security (PSI).
"11.rles 
.Kane
Director of Security
Att
70-026 0 - 76 - 72

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1132
i.j. 
rfljf
.
. I
._jEAoi 
VAF030(1542) (2"015S41E259)PD 09/07/75 1542
ICS IPMMTZZ CSP
5166927049 COLLECT TD4T COLD SPRING HARBOR NY 312 09-07 0342P EST
P3AS SENATOR EDWARD M KENNEDY CHAIRMAN SUBCOMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE, DLR
ROOM 5214 NEW SENATE OFFICE BLMG
WASHINGTON DC 20510
IN RESPONSE TO A TELEPHONE REQUEST RECEIVED TODAY BY MR J MICHIE
THIS TELEGRAM IS AN ATTEMPT 
TO COMPLY WITH MR MICHIE'S QUESTIONS. 
IN
VIEV OF THE FACT THAT ALL OF HIS QUESTIONS GO BACK 15 YEARS OR MORE
THE FOLLOWING DATA MUST I1 EVERY INSTANCE BE PRECEDED WITH +TO THE
BEST OF MY RECOLLECTION .
I WAS A CONSULTANT TO THE DEPARTMENT OF 
-
THE ARMY IN PSYCHOLOGY AID PHYSICAL CHEAISTRY IN THE EARLY AND LATE
19500S. 
DR DILL OF THE MEDICAL- DIVISION AT EDGEWOOD KNEW OF MY
INTEREST IN SEARCHING FOR A CHEMICAL BASES FOR MENTAL ILLNESS. THE
DISCOVERY OF LSD OPENED A NEW AVENUE OF RESEARCH, FOR EXAMPLE IF WE
ag-l-m tA5-O6
,- 
• 
" 
",
COULD FIND AN ANTIDOTE FOR LSD WE MIGHT BE ABLE TO HELP MENTAL
ILLNESS HE ASKED IF I WOULD UNDERTAKE TO STUDY LSD I AGREED.
SU3SEQUENTLY DR GOTTLIES VISITED ME IN NEW YORK, 
HE IDENTIFIED
HI:ISELF EITHER AS DOD OR CIA, 
WE DISCUSSED VARIOUS ASPECTS OF
RESEARCH WHICH INTERSTED US BIOTH. 
A PROJECT WAS SET UP AT MOUNT
SINAI HOSPITAL NEW YORK CITY. 
THIS RESEARCH WAS SUPPORTED BY
GESCHICOTER FOUNDATION 
AT ITS INCEPTION AND LATER BY THE MACY
FOUNDATION. 
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY A4D DR GOTTLIEB AS WELL AS
OTHERS WERE INTERESTED IN THE RESEARCH WHICH WAS AND HAS BEEN MADE
AVAIL.3LE IN MORE THA4 42 PAPZRS AND IN 2 BOOKS EDITED BY ME. 
ON
INVITATIONAL CONRA4D I RECALL HOLDINGG A SEMINAR AT EDGEWOOD COVERING
SOME ASPECTS OF THE RESEARCH ON LSD. OTHER WORK WHICH I RECALL WHICH
WAS OF INTEREST TO IE AT EDGEWOOD WAS PANIC IN POPULATIONS, I SAY MR
OLSON APPROXIMATELY 4 TIMES, 
HE WAS VERY DISTURBED PSYCHOLOGICALLY.
AS OUN INTERVIEWS PROGRESSED IT 3SCAtIE CLEAR THAT HOSPITALIZATION
WOULD SE THE MOST DESIRABLE PROCEDURE 
HE FINALLY AGREED TO THIS AND
ARRA4'EAANTS WERE MADE TO HOPITALIZE HIM AT CHESTNUT LODGE MARYLAND
HAR3LD A 
A30AMON
NINNED IT 3SCAtIE CLEAR THAT HOSPITALIZATION
WOULD SE THE MOST DESIRABLE PROCEDURE 
HE FINALLY AGREED TO THIS AND
ARRA4'EAANTS WERE MADE TO HOPITALIZE HIM AT CHESTNUT LODGE MARYLAND
HAR3LD A 
A30AMON
NINN

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTRACT SUMMARY
INVESTIGATOR
Robert R. HOLT, PhD
&
Leo GOLOBERGER, 
PhD
INSTITUTION
Research Center for
Mental Health, New York
University
DATES
OCT 58-OCT 59
CONTRACT NUMBER
AF 33 (616) 6103
TITLE: 
"Research on the Effects of Isolation ?n Cognitive Functioning"
MILITARY IMPACT:
I
Information on human functions during long periods of isolation,
as in prolonged manned space ventures. 
i
ii
COST
$

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTRACT SUMMARY
INVESTIGATOR
Amedeo S. MARRAZZI,
MD
INSTITUTION
University of Minnesota
DATES
OCT 64-OCT 65
S
SEP 66-SEP 67
SEP 68-SEP 69
CONTRACT NUMBER
AF-AFOSR 764-65
AF-AFOSR 764-67
AF-AFOSR 1334-67
COST
$ 56,313.00
27,535.00 
"
27,440.00
TITLE: "Chemical Changes in Learning"
MILITARY IMPACT: This is a study of specific chemical changes which have been found
by some investigators to occur during learning. How patterns of
learning are laid down and stored in the brain is important to
studies of new classes of computers.
I
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTRACT SUMMARY
INVESTIGATOR
Amedeo S. MARRAZZI,
MD
INSTITUTION
University of Missouri
DATES
JUL 69-MAY 70
MAY 70-MAY 71
CONTRACT NUMBER
AF-AFOSR 69-1821
AF-AFOSR 69-1821A
COST
$ 27,440.00
28,583.00
TITLE: 
"Aerospace Stress and Human Reliability"
MILITARY IMPACT:
One of the very serious problems in the Air Force is the ability of
individuals to perform under stress of various sorts and degrees and
remain competent and trustworthy. The results when applied would be
useful in human reliability testing programs in the Air Force and
could be significant as a way to enhance learning and memory.
1-"

--- PAGE BREAK ---d trustworthy. The results when applied would be
useful in human reliability testing programs in the Air Force and
could be significant as a way to enhance learning and memory.
1-"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
CONTRACT SUMMARY
INVESTIGATOR
Neil R. BURCH, MD
INSTITUTION
Houston State Psychiatric
Institute (Baylor
University, College of
Medicine)
DATES
JUL 64-JUL 65
JUL 65-JUL 66
JUL 66-JUL 67
JUL 67-JUL 68
CONtRACT NUMBER
AF-AFOSR 727-65
AF-AFOSR 951-65
AF-AFOSR 951-66
AF-AFOSR 951-67
COST
$ 58,303.00
65,736.00
88,327.00
68,412.63
TITLE: "Psychophysiological Correlates of Human Information Processing"
MILITARY IMPACT:
The results of the research will have direct potential application
to problems of interrogation. The finger plethysmogram and EEG
variables may appreciably increase discrimination over that obtainable
with the variables currently used. If generally applicable classes
can be define, these may be employed in programing an online automatic
analysis of data from interrogation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTRACT SUMMARY
INVESTIGATOR
William T. LHAMON,
MD &
Neil R. BURCH, MD
INSTITUTION
Baylor University Medical
Center
BATES
APR 56-APR 57
APR 57-APR 58
APR 58-APR 59
APR 59-APR 60
APR 60-APR 61
CONTRACT NUMBER
AF 18 (603) 79
AF 18 (603) 79
AF 18 (603) 79
AF 18 (603) 79
AF 18 (603) 79
COST
$ 55,200.00
74,431.oo
60,000.00
60,000.00
40,000.00
TITLE: 
"Investigation of the Effects and
Human State of Consciousness"
MILITARY IMPACT:
Mode of Action of the 'Psycho-chemicals' on
The effects of psychotomimetic drugs on states of consciousness, for
individual performance and group activity. Identification of psycho-
Stomimetic drug poisoning on individuals and groups with related activity
being maintained. Perceptual disortations will be studied and means of
counter-protection will be explored.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tomimetic drug poisoning on individuals and groups with related activity
being maintained. Perceptual disortations will be studied and means of
counter-protection will be explored.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTRACT SUMMARY
INVEST IGATOR
Sanford I. COHEN, MD
&
Albert J. SILVERMAN,
MD
INSTITUTION
Duke University Medical
Center
DATES
OCT 57-OCT 58
APR 59-MAR 61
APR 61-MAR 62
APR 62-OCT 62
CONTRACT NUMBER
AF 49 (638) 354
AF 49 (638) 354
AF 49 (638) 354
AF 49 (638) 354
COST
$ 20,000.00
40,049.00
40,049.00
000.00
TITLE: 
"Psychophysiological Mechanisms of Stress Responsivity"
MILITARY IMPACT: 
1)
Developing the ability of identifying characteristics of human
beings which are most related to the functions that are expected
to be performed in various situations.
2) Developing the ability to predict the responses various individuals
would make in certain situations at certain times when asked to
perform in various environments.
3) Clarification of the mechanisms underlying the responses; the
identification of the factors causing the responses at any
particular time could possibly enable one to develop specific
means to alter or modify the responses in any desired fashion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1139
SNCAP'ACITATiNG ACLTr TI:SAED AT ,XIMY
MEDICAL RLe;.APC! I.;W?:ORY 
(YY 61-67)
JLtrc;. . nc
IDZ
Dit= rz]na 1
"fc zI le
K-A! I"/?5
"ME 3443
.CS'273:,n.
2!IC437
219-362
720549
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1140
INCAPACITATIC ANt:TS TESTED XT APNY
MEDICAL R SLA.C i LABORA2TOKY (FY 61-67)
301063
302034
3020.09
302196
302 366

--- PAGE BREAK ---43
.CS'273:,n.
2!IC437
219-362
720549
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1140
INCAPACITATIC ANt:TS TESTED XT APNY
MEDICAL R SLA.C i LABORA2TOKY (FY 61-67)
301063
302034
3020.09
302196
302 366

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1141
LIST OF AGENTS *'.EI 
-4 HUMAN VOLUNTEERS
U.S. 
ARMY MEDICAL RESEAR' 
It. ITUTE OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES
FORT DETRICK, 
F "'OE ' 
K, MARYLAND 
21701
12 Aug.'. 
1975
1958 -
1962
Tularemia Vaccine
Rift Valley Fever Vaccine
Venezuelan Equine Encephalomye- 
ii 
'.accine
Western Equine Encephalitis Va _ind
Yellow Fever Vaccine
1963 -
1967
Tularemia Vaccine
Venezuelan Equine Encephalonyeliti 
.accine
Bacterial Endotoxin
Q Fever Vaccine
Antibiotic Therapy
Sandfly Fever 
V 4
Low Dose Cortisol Administrati.
Plague Vaccine
Yellow Fever Vaccine
Eastern Equine Encephalitis Vaccine
1968 -
1973
Yellow Fever Vaccine
Eastern Equine Encephalitis Vaccine
Sandfly Fever
Tularemia
Chloromycetinw
Generic Preparation of Chloram.-ent.-, I
Venezuelan Equine Encephalomye: 
z4 Jaccine
Adenovirus Vaccine
Western Equine Encephalitis Va *.
Venezuelan Equine Encephalomye. 'Lit"..4jne 
Globulin
Rift Valley Fever Vaccine
Chikungunya Vaccine
Plague Vaccine
NO VOLUNTEER STUDIES SINCE 1973

--- PAGE BREAK ---Western Equine Encephalitis Va *.
Venezuelan Equine Encephalomye. 'Lit"..4jne 
Globulin
Rift Valley Fever Vaccine
Chikungunya Vaccine
Plague Vaccine
NO VOLUNTEER STUDIES SINCE 1973

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1142
DRUG
1955-1959
EA 1778
EA 1476
792
IN4
CS
Chloropicrin
GB
Nasal Toxic Inhala
sifP
Atropine
Mustard
Skin Lipids
Stypen Coagula Time
Malathion Povwder
Dibenz
1960 to March 1962
(;B
Thorazine
LSD
SNA
PAM-PS
Cs
BSP
Atropine
Urecholine
GF
GA
Neostigmine
Amphetamine like cps
BZ
ThA
D- tubocurarine
Crcoso 1/N- e t hy lmorpho I i ne
Detran (JB329)
Dexedrine
Carare
Disoditrnfl uorescinctetty
Seco Barbitol
Dibulaline
j
DRUG
March 1962 to PRESENT
EA 2233
IA 3148
Win 19362
18437
CS 27349
EA 3443
EA 3528
EA 3580
.A 3580/VX/P\M
CAR 302,034
302,089
302,368
301,060
302,282
302,668
302,582
302,537
302,196
220,548
226,036
EA 2277 (BZ)
EA 3834
MCN-JR-4929
lA 3167
BSP
BZ
CS
DFP
GB
GB c PAM
Vasoxyl
Valium
GD
1CG
PABA
PAHI
PAIl c PAM
PAi
PANI/ATRO
P2S
11M
VX
eneglycol
VX/SCOP
VX/PAHN~
Atropine
Ioat tropine
Methyl Atropine
Amyj Nitrate
Antuipyrinc
BAT
Benactyzine
Benac/Atropine
Benac/';B 4
Caffeine
Compazine
Dexadri ne
Ditran
Di lantin
Ethanol
Ethanol c Ritalin
.thanol c Thorazine
Ethanol c Scopolonine
E tanol c V\alium
Sleparin
Inderol
I suprel
Lanox i n
Lidocaine
Paminc
Phenobarbital
Physost igmine
Prolixin
Ritalin
Sodium A'nytal
Soditvn Nitrate
Sodiwi Pentobarbital
Sod Pento c Scopolomine
Scopol o nine
Scop toid Physo.
S.op and Thorazine
Scop an4 Prolixin
Secciarhital
iiiPaine
"llioraziuz
Toxco1~lon
TrilIafor~

--- PAGE BREAK ---tvn Nitrate
Sodiwi Pentobarbital
Sod Pento c Scopolomine
Scopol o nine
Scop toid Physo.
S.op and Thorazine
Scop an4 Prolixin
Secciarhital
iiiPaine
"llioraziuz
Toxco1~lon
TrilIafor~

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1143
ALEXANDER 
NAIMON
ATTONHCY AT LAW
853 Loxford Terrace
Silver Spring, Maryland
October 20, 1975
The Honorable Edward Kennedy
Chairman, Sub-Committee on Health
Committee on Labor & Public Welfare
U.S. Senate
Washington, D.C.
Dear Senator Kennedy:
I trust my submission of this statement for inclusion in the Record
of your Sub-Committee's September 10, 1975, hearing concerning the
DHEW-DOD Memorandums of Understanding will not be considered
presumptuous, and will beconsldered a useful supplement to the fine
statements heard that day of Surgeon General of the Army, Qichard
Taylor, and Dr. Alexander Schmidt, Commissioner of FDA. 
As the
classic Japanese film, RASHOMON, 
made clear, events in retrospect
look quite different when viewed from the different perspectives
of the several participants, and so it is with the clinical use
of Investigational drugs by the military in the early 1960's.
This limitation on any one individual's perceptions should be kept
In mind throughout this statement.
I speak from the vantage point principally of conceptualizer (and
so to an extent defender and explainer) of the arrangement worked
out between DOD and DHE14 in the period between late 1962 and 1964
for the clinical use of investigational drugs by the military
Departments. I believe it to be inevitable that in this Sub-
Committee hearing concerning matters most of which occurred more
than 10 years ago, certain perspectives will be lost, and it is my
purpose to draw attention to some of those perspectives to which I
am most sensitive.
First and foremost is the work of the Army Investigational. Drug
Review Board (AIDRB) itself under the February 1964 Memorandum of
Understanding. 
To the best of my knowledge, none of the Sub-
Committee's causes celebre and other cases involving either alleged
mismanagement of or adverse results in the use of investigational
drugs on the part of the Government involved the AIDRB at all. The
cases of those whose use of investigational drugs was later shown to
have been mismanaged all appear to be cases which either antedated
the creation of the A!DRP, or which were-never referred to the AIDRB
for its review and approval. 
(Discussion here is limited to the
AIDRB, because it Is DOD's most significant Investigational drug
review board, and because It is the one with which I was associated,
but it is assumed that the others had similar experiences)..o the
AIDRB, because it Is DOD's most significant Investigational drug
review board, and because It is the one with which I was associated,
but it is assumed that the others had similar experiences)..

--- PAGE BREAK ---1144
-2-
Next, the impression appears widespread that FDA was first required
by the Kefauver-Harris Drug Amendments Act of 1962 to control the
use of investigational drugs, and hds failed to do so.

In fact,
as far back as 1938, the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act authorized
FDA to regulate new drugs, but FDA chose not to regulate new drugs
in their investigative stage, but only after they had been approved
as new drugs.

14ith the occurrence and coming to the attention of
the public of the thalidamide cases in 1962, however, FDA finally
decided that controls were inicated at an earlier stage in a new
drug's development, inasmuch as thalidamide was never approved for
marketing in the U.S.

(thanks to Dr.

Frances Kelsey), wreaking all
its damage in the United States in its investigational drug stage.

So it is significant to note that FDA left investigational drugs
unregulated from 1938-62, and first proposed regulatinq them in
August 1962, citing authority contained in the 1938 Act as authority
for such regulation.

This is important to note because when FDA
finally did promulgate regulations to control use of investigational
drugs, it exempted from the regulation's coverage investigational
drugs being studied by certain investigators whom FDA considered
very expert and responsible in handling such investigational drugs.

In essence, as will be described infra, my policy conception of
the proper DOD-DHEW relationship, an implied part of the 1st
DOD-DHEW Memo of Understanding, was that FDA should treat the three
Surgeons General of the military departments as responsible officials
who could be trusted to assure that only responsible investigators
would be in charge of research projects involving the clinical use
of inve-tigational drugs being paid for by the three military
medical services, whether through extramural or intramural arrange-
ments for such study.This is important to note because when FDA
finally did promulgate regulations to control use of investigational
drugs, it exempted from the regulation's coverage investigational
drugs being studied by certain investigators whom FDA considered
very expert and responsible in handling such investigational drugs.

In essence, as will be described infra, my policy conception of
the proper DOD-DHEW relationship, an implied part of the 1st
DOD-DHEW Memo of Understanding, was that FDA should treat the three
Surgeons General of the military departments as responsible officials
who could be trusted to assure that only responsible investigators
would be in charge of research projects involving the clinical use
of inve-tigational drugs being paid for by the three military
medical services, whether through extramural or intramural arrange-
ments for such study.

That this was a sound approach was brought
home to me and placed within a philosophical, ethical, and legal
frame of reference by the eminent lawyer, and incidentally one of
the high officials who approved the 1964 Memo of Understanding
(from a legal standpoint), Alanson Wilcox, General Counsel, 
DHEW.

Mr.

Wilcox, in a carefully worded and thoughtful speech, indicated
that the thrust of DHEW's regulations controlling the clinical use
of investigational drugs was not designed to limit in any significant
way, if at all, the way responsible companies, sensitive to their
scientific integrity and moral and ethical responsibilities, con-
ducted their investigational drug clinical studies.

He asserted
that the new regulations covering investigational drugs were-only
designed to get at "the bad apples in the barrel", to identify
them, and ferret them out; he stated further that the vast bulk of
commercial pharmaceutical firms already used appropriate ethical
and scientific practices, and that the regulations were not designed
to limit such operations.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Wilcox, in a carefully worded and thoughtful speech, indicated
that the thrust of DHEW's regulations controlling the clinical use
of investigational drugs was not designed to limit in any significant
way, if at all, the way responsible companies, sensitive to their
scientific integrity and moral and ethical responsibilities, con-
ducted their investigational drug clinical studies. He asserted
that the new regulations covering investigational drugs were-only
designed to get at "the bad apples in the barrel", to identify
them, and ferret them out; he stated further that the vast bulk of
commercial pharmaceutical firms already used appropriate ethical
and scientific practices, and that the regulations were not designed
to limit such operations. It therefore was no': great jump in
reasoning to go from that view by DHEW's General Counsel to the one
further step of considering DO0 studies, when carefully monitored,
to have a similar trustworthy base, using the premise that DOD is
also a government agency, equally dedicated as FDA to the public
interest even if viewed from a different. perspective, and certainly
one as worthy as the better drug companies of being trusted by FDA. In fact, this 1962-4 rationale to some extent presages certain
current legislative proposals, such as contained in the Nelson bill,

--- PAGE BREAK ---1145
-3-
S.1321, 94th Contress, in that they place responsibility for testing
the safety and efficacy of investigational drugs (as distinct from
discovering or inventing them) in the hands of a government agency
rather than the drug concern which will market the drug when approved
by FDA as "safe and effective." 
The fact that the Kefauver-Harris
Drug Amendments Act of 1962 was subsequently enacted, while consistent
with the desires of FDA and The Surgeon General of the Army to
tighten up on the clinical use of investigational drugs) should
therefore be seen as a condition subsequent to the conception of
the Memorandum of Understanding, rather than the basis for it,
contrary to some views expressed at the September 10 hearing.

This
distinction brings out the authority of FDA to use "selective
exemptions" or inter-Departmental Memos bf Understanding as a
method of adninistering a regulatory statute, especially where
enforcement resources are limited.

Next, while non-classified research programs involving the clinical
use of investigational drugs were only listed as the 2nd of 3 types
of drug investigations covered by the DOD-DHEW Miemo of Understanding
(February 18, 1964), and classified clinical investigations of drugs
were listed as the 1st such type, the fact is that the milieu out
of which the agreement arose show almost conclusively that it was
the unclassified drug studies rather than the classified drug
studies which lay at the heart of the Surgeon General of the Amy's
interest in the aqreenont.

The classified drug studies referred to
in item 1 of the February 18 Memo of Understanding were in fact an
afterthought, only a minute part of the Army Surgeon General's
frame of reference.

It follows that any additional weight given
the classified studies in the Memo of Understanding must ha.e been
initiated somewhere within DOD between The Surgeon General and
Deputy Secretary of Defense Vance.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The classified drug studies referred to
in item 1 of the February 18 Memo of Understanding were in fact an
afterthought, only a minute part of the Army Surgeon General's
frame of reference. It follows that any additional weight given
the classified studies in the Memo of Understanding must ha.e been
initiated somewhere within DOD between The Surgeon General and
Deputy Secretary of Defense Vance. This assessment of the situation
is based on the fact that the February 1964 Memo of Understanding
was a culminating document, based on draft regulations previously
prepared in The Surgeon General's Office in 1963 and correspondence
within and between the- two Departments antedating the Memo of Under-
standing, rather than an originating Document, whose policies would
have-started with such document (See enclosed proposed draft Army
Regulation, dated 13 February 1963, and draft DOD letter to
Secretary Celebrezze, circa flay 1963). In these enclosed background
papers, it is clear that classified drug studies were almost out of
mind, since, to the best of my knowledge, the Office of the Surgeon
General was involved in very few, if any, classified drug studies
at the time. Such classified drug studies were generally conducted
by Class I activities, e.g. Edgewood Chemical Center, an Amy base
not under Surgeon General command. Although medical officers were
assigned to monitor the medical aspects of any such studies in-
volving the use of human subjects, these medical officers were
staff officials assigned to the Class I colander, and not to The
Surgeon General on matters of administration. It is not very
surprising therefore that the Class I commanders, jealous of their
prerogatives, as are most commanders similarly situated, chose not
to consult The Surgeon General on such studies, even after promulgation

--- PAGE BREAK ---1146
and distribution throughout the Army of AR 40-7 in 1964, implementing
the DHEW-DOD Memo of Understanding of February 1964.

In essence,
the proposal of The Surgeon General in December 1962, ultimately
approved in the Memo of Understanding in substance, was largely
intended to give the Surgeon General an overall cognizance and
control within the Army staff over clinical drug investigations,
mostly if not entirely unclassified taking-p 1ace under Army medical
research contracts and in Army hospitals under Surgeon General
cognizance, and at other places where the Army activity under
AR 40-7 was required to apply for Surgeon General approval, and to
add both a level of scientific review, i.e.

the A!DRS, in addition
to the then existing review by Army medical officers who were Project
-Officers of medical research projects under Army Medical Service
contracts with universities, hospitals, etc., and a further level
of approval, i.e.

personal administrative approval by The Surgeon
General.

Particularly these additional review requirements were
intended to demonstrate to FDA that such studies could be monitored
carefully and scientifically by Army medical experts as good or
better than FDA could apply to this situation in 1962-4.

At this
time, FDA had only 2 pharmacologists on its staff, to the best of
my recollection, and was having difficulty recruiting more.

In
addition it should be noted that it was acknowledged fairly widely
that the Army anti-malarial drug studies dating back to World War II
had been widely acclaimed not only for the high scientific level
maintained, but for the huge successes it had achieved in discovering
primaquine and chloraquine, all apparently with due regard for the
rights of prisoner subjects equal or greater than available under
other auspices.At this
time, FDA had only 2 pharmacologists on its staff, to the best of
my recollection, and was having difficulty recruiting more.

In
addition it should be noted that it was acknowledged fairly widely
that the Army anti-malarial drug studies dating back to World War II
had been widely acclaimed not only for the high scientific level
maintained, but for the huge successes it had achieved in discovering
primaquine and chloraquine, all apparently with due regard for the
rights of prisoner subjects equal or greater than available under
other auspices.

These studies had been conducted by the University
of Chicago, among others, under an Army contract, under which there
had always existed harmonious relationships between the University's
Principal Investigator and the Army's Project Officers, including
a useful cross-fertilization of ideas.

rere FDA to suddenly demand,
and The Surgeon General to acquiesce in such demand that all decisions
of a scientific nature regarding such anti-malarial drug study were
to be made by FDA, even aside from the question of whether FDA could
have staffed such an operation as well as the Army, it was our
perception that Amy medical officers whose career specialty was
medical research on military medical problems would be loathe to
devote their careers to being Project Officers for several years on
projects where they could-frequently be second-guessed by FDA
staffers, some of whom at least at that time would be far less
qualified to make such judgments.

One such Army medical officer-
Project Officer was Dr.

Herbert L.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One such Army medical officer-
Project Officer was Dr. Herbert L. Ley,later to become Commissioner
of FDA., 
From the University's viewpoint, its Principal Investigator,
who had developed cordial relationships and a modus operandi with the
Surgeon General's Office, would have to learn to deal with a
different federal agency, which would have the last word from a 
-
scientific viewpoint, so that the result could easily be that the
flow of communications between the Principal Investigator and the
Army's Project Officer might have tended to dry up, with consequential
damage to the Army medical research program. Another cost of the
shift in these relationships under the Memo of Understanding from a
professional responsibility essentially shared between the Surgeon
General and FDA to one of sole responsibility by FDA, would be to

--- PAGE BREAK ---1147
-5-
place investigational drugs in their precommercial stage, even when
being investigated under an Amy contract as having a possible
military interest, on a time-table like that of other drugs covered
by IN'Os sponsored by drug companies, even though there would be a
national interest in their being treated differently.

Thus, FDA
quite properly is extremely careful and cautious before approving
a new drug for sale in interstate commerce, in light of the great
potential damage to the public which could occur if the decision
to approve such drug should be incorrect, particularly in view of
the difficulty in getting a drug once approved off the market.

In
the same vein, when considering whether to approve a new drug for
movement in interstate commerce as safe and efficacious, FDA before
approval might take into account the fact that the country has
managed to get along without such drug until now.

The Army, on the
other hand, cannot always wait a long time before acting, from the
standpoint of efficiency anyway, and the Army has the additional
flexibility that if it tries a drug out, with less than satisfactory
results, or even if satisfactory, but a better drug shows up, it can
stop using the first drug immediately, and start using the second
drug.

The Ist factor is illustrated by the case of Dapsone as an
anti-malarial In Vietnam in 1966.

Gen.

Westmoreland, facing a
fearsome malaria problem at that time, telegraphed The Surgeon
General to make available to him the best antimalarial then avail-
able for use of all troops in Southeast Asia.

Clearly, this type
situation calls for a different type decision than FDA typically
makes when approving a new drug.Westmoreland, facing a
fearsome malaria problem at that time, telegraphed The Surgeon
General to make available to him the best antimalarial then avail-
able for use of all troops in Southeast Asia.

Clearly, this type
situation calls for a different type decision than FDA typically
makes when approving a new drug.

It is no secret that the two
flepartments agreed within a period of two months to make Dapsone
available to troops at risk (rather than all troops); Dapsone was
an investigational drug when used as an antimalarial, but had
previously been approved as a new drug at a higher dosage level
for use in treating leprosy.

This arrangement served the country
well at the time, in my opinion, and paragraph 2.

of the 1974 DHEW-
DOD Memo of Understanding appears to concur in this opinion inasmuch
as it specifically contemplates similar future arrangements.

A word should be said about the policy underlying the original 1964
Memo of Understanding in light of some of the surprise registered
by some of the communications media, and possibly others, that FDA
was not itself assuring compliance by the military departments with
FDA regulations.

In the area of proposed legislation to be adminis-
tered by one federal agency affecting a 2nd federal agency, a number
of different health legislative programs had been considered by the
Office of the Surgeon General, the three military Departments as a
whole, and DOD as a whole.

In general, it appeared that in those
situations where a health program was proposed by another federal
Department to which there was no DOD objection, inasmuch as the
Army Medical Service was a complete health service inclusive of
professional health personnel of all types, the interests of both
federal agencies could best .be accomodated by the propronent federal
agency prescribhing standards for implementin 
the new health legqiS-
lation, and for The Surgeon General to monitor the Armys- comply ance
wit such prescribed standard.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the area of proposed legislation to be adminis-
tered by one federal agency affecting a 2nd federal agency, a number
of different health legislative programs had been considered by the
Office of the Surgeon General, the three military Departments as a
whole, and DOD as a whole. In general, it appeared that in those
situations where a health program was proposed by another federal
Department to which there was no DOD objection, inasmuch as the
Army Medical Service was a complete health service inclusive of
professional health personnel of all types, the interests of both
federal agencies could best .be accomodated by the propronent federal
agency prescribhing standards for implementin 
the new health legqiS-
lation, and for The Surgeon General to monitor the Armys- comply ance
wit such prescribed standard. This had the added advantage nf
70-026 0 - 76 - 73

--- PAGE BREAK ---1148
-6-
keeping Army Medical Service personnel up-to-date with the latest in
law and regulations, and in charge of their own Department's
compliance with such laws and regulations integrated into the Amy -
Medical Service health programs, and would not burden the primary
federal agency with enforcement responsibilities in an area where
Army Medical Service personnel had more insight into the extent of
need for personnel to monitor adherence, and how to accomplish same.

This was the position proposed and accepted, for example, in commenting
on bills in the fields of humane treatment of laboratory animals,
as well as in all aspects of environmental pollution control, both
air and water.

Placing the first agency in a position to oversee
the operations of the 2nd federal agency, as by inspecting it,
could lead to awkward situations in which one agency has the appear-
ance of preeminence over the second federal agency, and could be
interpreted by the inspected agency as an encroachment on its mission,
with bad feelings engendered as a result.

It therefore appears to
have been entirely justified, notwithstanding the criticisms voiced,
to have left the monitoring of the Amy's compliance with FDA
regulations initially with the Amy Surgeon General, and only
ultimately with FDA, rather than directly with FDA.

A word should also be said about the application of the word "sponsor"
to the Amy in its drug studies, both extramural and intramural.

This
is no mere question of semantics but a very basic policy issue, at
least a of the time of the February 1964 Memo of Understanding.

The
Surgeon General of the Army in relation to such investigational drugs
was in a substantially different position than a drug company "sponsor"
of an investigational drug.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This
is no mere question of semantics but a very basic policy issue, at
least a of the time of the February 1964 Memo of Understanding. The
Surgeon General of the Army in relation to such investigational drugs
was in a substantially different position than a drug company "sponsor"
of an investigational drug. In the latter case, all parties involved
on behalf of the drug company in its application, who sign the ID,
bear some Fe-sponsibility for the proposed use if they are all employed
by the one sponsoring company, and their communications are within
the company rather than being at arm's length. In the case of the
Amy's oversight of its medical research program, e.g., its malaria
research program, whereas all the members of the University of Chicago's
staff assigned to the malaria research project bear a similar rela-
tionship one to the other as in the case of a pharmaceutical firm
sponsoring its Investigational drug, such is not the case with the
relationship between the University's Principal Investigator and the
Army Project Officer, where the relationship is spelled out by
written contract, and by regulation must be an arm's length relation-
ship. In substance, the role of the Army Surgeon General in such
malaria studies is much more assimilable to that of FDA's role vis-
a-vis a drug company than is it assimilable to that of the University
of Chicago, the "sponsor." 
In addition, whereas a drug company
"sponsor 
is principally interested in the marketing of a-new drug
in commerce after FDA approval for such use, The Surgeon General of
the Army's interest is primarily in use of an Investigational drug
determined to be safe and effective in the immediate stage following
the investigational phase and often preceding the commercial marketing
phase of the drug in question, since The Surgeon General has no
financial interest In the drug's commercial exploitation, unlike the
usual sponsor.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1149
-7-
To an extent, one Sub-Committee member appears to have been correct
in his statement at the hearing that FDA appears in 1964 to have
delegated its responsibility for assuring compliance by the Army
Medical Service with appropriate investigational drug regulations,
thus resulting in a sharing of such responsibility (since the
delegator always retains overall responsibility, and can in his
discretion at any time revoke the delegation), but does not appear
to have been correct in my opinion in the conclusion he appears to
have drawn from such fact, i.e., that "the Army Medical people are
the very people FDA was supposed to regulate;" it appears to me that
the people FDA should regulate are the principal investigator
"roposing to clinically study an investigational drug, and the
institution with which the Responsible Investigator is affiliated.

In the case of an investigational drug study falling within the
Army's medical research program, such as described above, the
people to be regulated should be the Principal Investigator and
Administrative Director of the University-Contractor in the case
of a contract study, and the medical officer-Principal Investigator
for the study and hospital conander or facility commander or area
commander in the case of a study undertaken by the Army as intra-
mural research; in either case, the Project Officer overseeing the
technical aspects of the investigational drug study for the Army
Medical Research and Development Command and for The Surgeon
General, the AIDRB, and all other officers and Boards reviewing
the applications at The Surgeon General (or Medical R&D Command)
level are clearly acting more as FDA's agent rather than as the
Principal Investigator's agent, and so are not "the people FDA
is supposed to regulate" (except to the limited extent spelled
out in the Memo of Understanding).1149
-7-
To an extent, one Sub-Committee member appears to have been correct
in his statement at the hearing that FDA appears in 1964 to have
delegated its responsibility for assuring compliance by the Army
Medical Service with appropriate investigational drug regulations,
thus resulting in a sharing of such responsibility (since the
delegator always retains overall responsibility, and can in his
discretion at any time revoke the delegation), but does not appear
to have been correct in my opinion in the conclusion he appears to
have drawn from such fact, i.e., that "the Army Medical people are
the very people FDA was supposed to regulate;" it appears to me that
the people FDA should regulate are the principal investigator
"roposing to clinically study an investigational drug, and the
institution with which the Responsible Investigator is affiliated.

In the case of an investigational drug study falling within the
Army's medical research program, such as described above, the
people to be regulated should be the Principal Investigator and
Administrative Director of the University-Contractor in the case
of a contract study, and the medical officer-Principal Investigator
for the study and hospital conander or facility commander or area
commander in the case of a study undertaken by the Army as intra-
mural research; in either case, the Project Officer overseeing the
technical aspects of the investigational drug study for the Army
Medical Research and Development Command and for The Surgeon
General, the AIDRB, and all other officers and Boards reviewing
the applications at The Surgeon General (or Medical R&D Command)
level are clearly acting more as FDA's agent rather than as the
Principal Investigator's agent, and so are not "the people FDA
is supposed to regulate" (except to the limited extent spelled
out in the Memo of Understanding).

Worthy of separate mention was the one single sentence comment at
the hearing by Senator Mathias, i.e., "Which way works the Best?"
(for investigational drugs betng studied clinically under Army
Medical Department auspices).In the case of an investigational drug study falling within the
Army's medical research program, such as described above, the
people to be regulated should be the Principal Investigator and
Administrative Director of the University-Contractor in the case
of a contract study, and the medical officer-Principal Investigator
for the study and hospital conander or facility commander or area
commander in the case of a study undertaken by the Army as intra-
mural research; in either case, the Project Officer overseeing the
technical aspects of the investigational drug study for the Army
Medical Research and Development Command and for The Surgeon
General, the AIDRB, and all other officers and Boards reviewing
the applications at The Surgeon General (or Medical R&D Command)
level are clearly acting more as FDA's agent rather than as the
Principal Investigator's agent, and so are not "the people FDA
is supposed to regulate" (except to the limited extent spelled
out in the Memo of Understanding).

Worthy of separate mention was the one single sentence comment at
the hearing by Senator Mathias, i.e., "Which way works the Best?"
(for investigational drugs betng studied clinically under Army
Medical Department auspices).

Using Sen.

Mathias' criterion, as
noted above, the AIDRB would have to be given high marks and
characterized as virtually an unqualified success in light of the
known facts, e.g.

none of the "tragicases" brought to public or
the Sub-Committee's attention involving the clinical use of
investigational drugs had been reviewed and approved by the AIDRB.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mathias' criterion, as
noted above, the AIDRB would have to be given high marks and
characterized as virtually an unqualified success in light of the
known facts, e.g. none of the "tragicases" brought to public or
the Sub-Committee's attention involving the clinical use of
investigational drugs had been reviewed and approved by the AIDRB. Using the same Mathias criterion, it would appear that investiga-
tional drug clinical projects undertaken at Army facilities which
did not meet Army Regulation 40-7's requirement that all such
projects be submitted to The Surgeon General for review and approval
by the AIDRB and The Surgeon General do not warrant similar com-
mendations, and raise the question wheth-erpractical and efficacious
means shouldn't be found for persuading facility commanders such as
at Edgewood to comply with AR 40-7 and possibly other applicable
regulations as well, e.g., AR 70-25, by submitting protocols of
such proposed studies to The Surgeon General, Attention: AIDRB for
critical review; Such submission to The Surgeon General has been
required by AR 40-7 ever since it was first promulgated in 1964.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1150
-8-
The 1974 Memo of Understanding may be a step in the right direction
on this Issue insofar as classified drugs are concerned by conditioning
the exemption of such classified drug studies from the new drug
regulations of FDA to those where prior approval of the Review
Boards and The Surgeon General had been obtained.

Worthy also of at least some clarification is the somewhat adverse
comment that over the course of more than 10 years under the DOD-
DHEW Memo of Understanding, available records only indicate four 
-
meetings of the two agencies for purposes of studying the classified
tests.

After first reiterating what is mentioned above, that the
real purpose of the Memo of Understanding of February 1964 was to
get agreement on how to handle reviews of unclassified studies, it
is also important to mention, in order to ga'n a fuller perspective,
that Army Regulation 40-7, which was the Army's implementation of .

the Memo of Understanding, in paragraph 8, captioned "Information to
be Furnished FDA", provided for very comprehensive transnittal of
information pertaining to investigational drug studies by The
Surgeon General to FDA (Enclosure).

In essence, and to all intents
and purposes, the substance of every unclassified Army investigational
drug case file approved by the AIDRB and The Surgeon General would
be forwarded to FDA for its information, and FDA's usual IND form
for claiming exemption, FD Form 1571, would-be transmitted to FDA
in the case of investigational drug classified studies after Surgeon
General approval of such studies..

In sum, what to some has appeared
to be a rather small number of meetings between FDA and DOD repre-
sentatives may be largely attributed to the relative success of the
AIDRB, and the rather full disclosure-to-FDA provision contained in
paragraph 8, AR 40-7.In essence, and to all intents
and purposes, the substance of every unclassified Army investigational
drug case file approved by the AIDRB and The Surgeon General would
be forwarded to FDA for its information, and FDA's usual IND form
for claiming exemption, FD Form 1571, would-be transmitted to FDA
in the case of investigational drug classified studies after Surgeon
General approval of such studies..

In sum, what to some has appeared
to be a rather small number of meetings between FDA and DOD repre-
sentatives may be largely attributed to the relative success of the
AIDRB, and the rather full disclosure-to-FDA provision contained in
paragraph 8, AR 40-7.

Next, there have been informal suggestion% nom authoritative, that
the DOD-DHEW Memorandums of Understanding may be legally insufficient,
and that therefore consideration should be given to cancelling them.

In weighing this suggestion, it should be borne In mind that the
February 1964 Memo of Understanding was specifically concurred in
by DHEW General Counsel Alanson Wilcox (and quite possibly by his
opposite number in DOD), and was executed by two very distinguished
lawyers in their own right on behalf of their respective Departments,
Secretary Celebrezze himself for DHEW, now a federal Circuit Court
Judge, and Cyrus Vance, Deputy Secretary of Defense on behalf of
DOD, formerly General Counsel, DOD, 
and now a senior partner in a
large Wall Street firm.

In addition, the Army Surgeon General
proposal, on which the original 1964 Memo of Understanding was based,
was concurred in by the Judge Advocate General of the Army.

Also
to be noted is the Judicious August 21, 
1975 opinion of Mr.

Richard
Merrill, Asst.

General Counsel, DHEW (Food & Drugs), in which he
noted that the Dept.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Richard
Merrill, Asst. General Counsel, DHEW (Food & Drugs), in which he
noted that the Dept. of Justice would probably attempt to restrain
any FDA assertion of regulatory authority likely to disrupt the
activities of a sister agency, e.g., DOD, and did.not find it
necessary to reach the question of whether authority existed on the
part of the two Departments to enter the Memos of Understanding.

--- PAGE BREAK ---a sister agency, e.g., DOD, and did.not find it
necessary to reach the question of whether authority existed on the
part of the two Departments to enter the Memos of Understanding.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1151
-9-
It has also been suggested that the primary reason for granting an
exemption from IND requirements to DOD was so that FDA would not have
to handle classified security matters; while this may have been true
of the 1974 Memo of Understanding, it was not the case, as noted above,
for the 1964 Memo of Understanding, in which classified drug studies
were little more than an afterthought. 
The further suggestion has been
made that the "exemption" granted DOD for classified studies was based
on a desire to be courteous to DOD, rather than a legal inability to
handle classified materials. 
While it it clearly correct that there
is no legal disability which would preclude. FDA from handling class-
ified materials, it appears equally clear that what motivated the
1964 Memo of Understanding,at least in this connection, was not a
desire to be courteous to DOD as regards classified studies, but
rather the "Mathias" criterion, i.e., which way would work best.
Although there is much to be said in favor of Congress clarifying
respective responsibilities of FDA to regulate, on the one hand, and
of other Federal agencies to develop, test, and use investigational
drugs on the other, there appears to be at least as much to be said
for the approach implicitly taken by Dr. Schmidt on the last page of
his September 10th prepared statement, i.e., that neither FDA nor DOD
pressed its legal position to its ultimate rationale, but rather
arrived at mutual practical understandings as to how best to deal with
issues of mutual concern, both being fully aware that the boundary
line between their respective jurisdictional areas as regards investi-
gational drugs was not firmly fixed. 
Perhaps an ideal integration of
these two approaches would be achieved if Congress limits its "clar-
ification" to what is mutually agreeable to both Departments.
Cord ia 1l1y" 
.7
Alex Naimon, J.D.
(former Deputy Judge Advocate,
Office of The Surgeon General, DA)hieved if Congress limits its "clar-
ification" to what is mutually agreeable to both Departments.
Cord ia 1l1y" 
.7
Alex Naimon, J.D.
(former Deputy Judge Advocate,
Office of The Surgeon General, DA)

--- PAGE BREAK ---imits its "clar-
ification" to what is mutually agreeable to both Departments.
Cord ia 1l1y" 
.7
Alex Naimon, J.D.
(former Deputy Judge Advocate,
Office of The Surgeon General, DA)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1152
Ke A ix uA R,.,Ej
16o7 -1 Al R 
A NG ( .. MAS)
0NI 2ED STAW AIR iFRC3
Dover Air Force Base Delaware
5rc.LAL ODgW) 
19 JiW 1993
U1A ER 
A-342)
1. 
356? GZCRGE H PFMtY AF14250390 (C1:- 
;'C-60lS:3) lot Alr 
.ATS
this station rll proceed on/about 20 Jun 58 to 375Oth 'ECriAAiRU Sbeppard Ais
Tex on TDT for sporoimtely forty-two (42) days for tne purpose of attending
Aeft Loadmaster Course Nr SS60153-1 with duration approxiAstely four (4) weeks
Report not earlier than 0800 24 Jun 58 but not later than 0800 25 Jun 58 Class
starting date ts 25 Jun 58 
Airman will be attached to 3750th 7CLiTRAC#RU for
administration and logistical support during period of this duty 
TPA. Travel
time by common carrier rail is four (L) days 
Travel time in eXcu4se will bm
chargeable to the delay enroute authorized 
Ten (10) XALVP -Airian is cleared
for access to classified material up to and including SCRET for the period of
this duty 
Upon completion will return to Dover AFM Del Tai 
FY58 5783400
S064_4 02 P443-02-03 S22-W0 
FY9 
5793400 064-4002 ?4L.3-02-03 S41-.94
Authority Part I Chap 16 AF, 35-11
2, 
The following named airmen organizations inceated this adaton will
proceed on/about 1 Jul 50 to Dot 3 (97.0) Arr 
Chemical Con Wd evood Xd on 'A'dX
for approximately thirty-three (331.ya for tne purpose of ?articipating in
Awy Chemical Corps Volunteer program for test for defense alairst chernca. war-
fare 
Report not later tran 2 Jul 53 
TPA 
Travel time by cocion carrier rail :s
two (2) days 
Travel time in excebs will be chargeable as DALVP 
Aireren will
report to TDY station in Class "A" Uniform and a mnin/nma 
of two (2) sets of
fatigue clothing will be required during the period of TOY 
Upon completion wilI.
return to Dover AFB Del 
TDA 
21A4992.i.05 0414000 ?100-i Si8-035 553-5>, 4 8
Authority Part I Chap 16 AFF 35-1l and let Ind from liq MATS to Ltr liq USAF AF'.&?
20 dated 18 Sep 57
.
Y I ..
%?Ljq 
le.07th 
TLA.JJ
oj41
607ta FLATiWN~
SSOr JON D HCLTZER A"15507254 
1607th FLTL;:!iSTR0N
3. 
So much of Para 7 SO A -335 this rq current series relating to a:,ioing,-
sent of Officers to Investigate ":*:.or Acft. accident as reads 
"MAJ 
, 
P
KEICIIlASIDS 25724A 39th Air iV.X.t2:" 
is amended to resd 
ic -,'th.. 
, 
jb
4. 
A/2C JACK T MAKA:ATSU AF!95 9062 (c ,;C-3bl51B) having been assirnod
this Hq from Hq 464th AECIRU TAC Pope Ai3 14 witn EX-SA 24 Jun 53 per Para 7 S0
A-192 is further assigned to 1607th CPfl.; .ATS this station with the same ECSA
Reporting not later than 19 Jun 58 
No Travel Involved Authority 
AF74 35-11
5. Para 3 SO A-318 this iq 10 Jun 58 relating to assignert of CAeT 
k 
e L
ANDLUO8N A0718838 to 40th Air MINSROIN XATS this station is revokedthan 19 Jun 58 
No Travel Involved Authority 
AF74 35-11
5. Para 3 SO A-318 this iq 10 Jun 58 relating to assignert of CAeT 
k 
e L
ANDLUO8N A0718838 to 40th Air MINSROIN XATS this station is revoked

--- PAGE BREAK ---Travel Involved Authority 
AF74 35-11
5. Para 3 SO A-318 this iq 10 Jun 58 relating to assignert of CAeT 
k 
e L
ANDLUO8N A0718838 to 40th Air MINSROIN XATS this station is revoked

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1153
SO A-3, 
Hk I7th 
Air Tran:aort ing Dover AT, De 
(Co.tinued)
'..Verbal Orders of the C:ilr If Jun 5d are comird ixigoncien of the
service having been aich as to preclw:e 
t .
issuwice of co:xpct.n-r& %urtttn 
orders
in advance 
The foll owing roamed airmen lO7th FL7L;"A1\RON HIATS thiu station
wll proceed on/.bou 16 Jun 58 to Kindley AFB Bermuds on 0f for approximately
ten (10) days for the purpose of Ierfornin 
vaintenance on Dover asaigled Acft
Airmen assigned to travel as additional a3rcrew mnecoer oj Dover C-?14 Acft 
.
(Unqualified) in accordance with 
. 55-1 Airren are cleared for acces to clas-
sified material up to and including 'ECRET during the period of this duty 
Upon
oomplitlwn will return to Dover AD Del 
TDN 
573O300 W5-13 2 P458-02 S 
03
Authorty' Part I Chap 16 AF, 35-L
A/iC oULLIAM( R NELT A?1353?410 
A/2C LI~~bXCE. E TA11A AFl1l496592
7. 
A/iC 
tODOLFO ALA:aZ AFI3314032 (FA~s--WL3A) 
having been asasi;ned this
Iq from 3753d 3 tOz 
with £4XSA 1 Jul W jxr Para 3 SC B-491 from Ikq 3750th
'CrXCnTtAtiU Sheppard AFB Tax Is further aseig.ed to 1607th FLTL1 0:AlW&ROI RATS
this station sdth the same RCA 
Reporting not later than 25 Jun 5a 
No Travel
involved 
Authority 
Part I Choap I A',. 35-11
8. 
SSOT PARIMCK K NELSON AFl,77588l (PAF&C-i0131b) hevin,4 been assined
this Hq from 3755th STUR0N with EDCSA 1 Jul 58 per Para 1 FO B,-492 from ltq 37 O5h
T9HTh AJTU Seppard AFB Tex is further assi;;iied to l6Oth FKT1'AIARON VATS this
station with the same EDCSA 
Reporting rnot later than 5 Jul 58 
No Traveal
Involved 
Authority Part I Chap I Al;; 35-1l
9. 
CAPT 
INTON W WILSON AC937351 1607th FLDiA1 
O2; MATS tha station will
proceed on/about 22 Jun 53 to General Electric Co Fvendale Ohio on TOY for a!!-
proximately seven (7) days for purpose of attending Jet EnCine Technician Accident
Investigation Course Nr S143270-47 with duration one (1) week Report not later
than 0800 23 Jun 58 
Class #tarts 23 Jun 58 Officer cleared for access to cl.a-
sifted material up to and including SECRET 
TPA 
Travel time by common carrier
rail is two (2) days Travel time in excess will be chargeable as delay eraoute
Upon completion will return to Dover AFE Del TDN 5783400 064-4O1 P443-02-03
S1-69 
Authority Part I Chap 16 AF3 
35-11 and telephonee conversation from
CAPT CAREY Hq ATLD McGuire APB .J
FOR THE C)(MANii~s
DIET IUTIONs 
Wr 
RUS
"IN4 
USAF
Aistant Cbief of Administration
P!USt 
10 General Electric Co 
vendale Chio (Para 9)
10 3750th TECHTRAGRU Sheppard AVB Tex (Para 1)
30A)et 3 (9710) Army Cheadcai Gen Edgewood Xd (Par& 2)US
"IN4 
USAF
Aistant Cbief of Administration
P!USt 
10 General Electric Co 
vendale Chio (Para 9)
10 3750th TECHTRAGRU Sheppard AVB Tex (Para 1)
30A)et 3 (9710) Army Cheadcai Gen Edgewood Xd (Par& 2)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1154
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
OFFICE OF T 
SURGEON ONRAL
WASHINGTON. ID6. 9014
5AUG 9197S
SGRD-Hf
Hr. 
iUiam F..Qcaff in
4449 North Jay treet
Tucson, Arizona 
85705
Dear Mr. Chaffin:
Thank you for your inquiry of 22 July 1975 concerning participation in the
Army LSD experimentation.
In checking our records, we find that you did receive LSD in the Army
research program. 
Medical consultants in the Office of The Surgeon General
are now making plans for a follow-up study of persons who took LSD. 
You
will be contacted within the next few months and invited to be examined.
If you have any questions, please feel free to write or call us at the
following address:
Human Use Review Office
Office of The Surgeon General
Department of Army
Room 8F053, Forrestal Bldg
Washington, D. C. 
20314
(202-693-8065)
Thank you for your cooperation in this matter.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL V. 
NSTON, H.D.
Major, MC
Chief, Human Use Review Office

--- PAGE BREAK ---3, Forrestal Bldg
Washington, D. C. 
20314
(202-693-8065)
Thank you for your cooperation in this matter.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL V. 
NSTON, H.D.
Major, MC
Chief, Human Use Review Office

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1155
Calmdar No. 33
"MT Cowrtss 
SENATiE 
RnvoaT
lat Swimn 
No. 94-33
MEDICAL DEVICE AMENDMENTS OF 1975 
MARCH 11, 1975.--Ordered to be printed
11r. K..NEDY, from the Committee on Labor and Public Welfare,
submitted the following
REPORT
[7b accompany S. 5101
The Committee on Labor and Public Welfare, to which was referred
the bill (S. 510) to protect the public health by amending the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to assure the safety and effectiveness of
medical services, having considered the same, reports favorably there-
on without amendment and recommends that the bill do pass.
I. INmoDuCrIoN
One year ago, on February 1, 1974, the Senate passed the Medical
Device Amendments of 1973, which would have provided the Food
and Drug Administration, for the first time, the authority to require
that all medical devices are sa!e and effective before they are allowed
in the marketplace. Unfortunately, the Hous, of Representatives was
unable to complete its deliberation on this important piece of
legislation.
On January 28, 1975, the Health Subcommittee conducted a hear-
ing which once again underlined the urgency of enactig medical
device legislation. The hearing focused on the Dalkon shield, an IUD
which was used by two million American women, and hundreds of
thousands of women overseas, before the very significant health -haz-
ards of the device became known. All witnesses before the Committee,
including the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration,
testified that many of the deaths and much of the illness attributed to
this device could have been prevented if medical device le islation, as
provided in the reported bill, had been in effect when the Dalkon
shield was developed.
*(Star Print) as-oioo

--- PAGE BREAK ---1156
Today the Food and Drug Administration only has limited au-
thority to act with respect to a medical device in the market place
which has been proven dangerous and patients have been injured.

Medical device legislati6n is intended to assure that medical devices
such as these IUD's meet the requirements of safety and effectiveness
before they are put in widespread use throughout the United States.

The United States is generally recognized throughout the world as
having the highest standards of safety and efficacy for prescription
drugs.

These standards have been made possible by Congress' deci-
sion to give the Food and Drug Administration sufficient authority to
require that drugs be shown to be safe and effective before they are
allowed on the market.

As medicine progresses, as research makes new breakthroughs, an
increasing number of sophisticated, critically important medical de-
vices are being developed and used in the United States.

These devices
hold the promise of improving the health and longevity of the Ameri-
can people.

The Committee wants to encourage their research and
development.

The Committee also wants to be sure that the FDA has
the proper authority to regulate that process so that Americans are not
put at risk from the use of unsafe and ineffective medical devices.

Therefore, the Committee believes it is a matter of utmost importance
for the Senate to re-enact the Medical Device Amendments of 1975,
which bill is identical to the legislation which passed last year.

What follows is the substance of a report filed last year by the Com-
mittee respecting S.

2368, which was favorably reported by the Com-
mnittee and passed by the Senate.

The Committee has reindorsed the
report and the only changes that have been made are to substitute S.

510 for S.

2368 and to make conforming changes in the Section of the
Committee's report respecting the tabulation of votes in the Com-
mittee.

II.--- PAGE BREAK ---

2368 and to make conforming changes in the Section of the
Committee's report respecting the tabulation of votes in the Com-
mittee. II. HISTORY op RzoutATIoN OF MEDICAL DEVICES AND NEED FOR
LEO SLATION
Federal authority to regulate medical devices was first provided in
the F ederal Food, )rug, and Cosmetic Act of 1938. There had been no
provisions in the Food and Drugs Act of 1906 to regulate device safety
and claims made for devices. During the 1930's reformers pressed for
enactment of legislation to enable the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) to undertake the same kind of effort against unsafe or quack
devices as the 1906 Act had allowed against impure or fraudulent
drugs. die 1938 Act defined "device" and provided the same basic authority
over devices as applied to drugs, with the important exception of pre-
clearance authority which was only provided for new drugs. From leg-
islative history it is clear the term "device" was intended to include
both quack machines and legitimate articles such as surgical instru-
nients, trusses, prosthetic devices, ultraviolet lights, contraceptives,
and orthopedic sloes. No additional authority has been provided since
1938 to improve public protection against unsafe or unreliable devices. At the time the 1938 Act became law, many of the legitimate devices
were relatively simple items which applied basic scientific concepts so
that experts using them could recognize whether the device was fune-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1157
tioning.

The major concern with these devices was assuring truthful
labeling.

In the early years, FDA's activity concerned grossly haz-
ardous products such as lead nipple shields which exposed nursing
infants to danger of lead poisoning.

FI)A also attacktd nasal vapor-
izors and stem pessaries used in contraception or for producing abor-
tion which had the potential for causing puncture or infection.

FDA
efforts against thermometers which failed to record properly stin-
ulated the development of standards for these products which greatly
improved their reliability.

Similarly, FDA actions against prophy-
tactics (condoms) forced, industry measures to reduce the incidence of
defects in these products.

Immediately after enactment of the 1938 Act, FDA made numerous
seizures of misbranded devices.

During World War II, however, reg-
ulatory activity in this area dropped off because war needs resulted i-
scarcity of metals and other materials used to make nonessential de-
vices.

When metals and other materials were again available after the
war, numerous devices again appeared, many of which were in viola-
tion of the Act.

Many of FDA's legal actions involved fraudulent devices.

Since
ancient times, mankind has used various kinds of gadgetry to cure
or ward off serious ailments.

Charms and talismans have been used
throughout recorded history by people who have attributed magical
qualities to them.

Inventive individuals have sought to apply the
latest scientific discoveries to the alleviation of health conditions.

For
example, after Benjamin Franklin's discovery of the electrical force
present in lightning, numerous individuals sought to use electrical
energy to treat human ailments.

At the time of the American Revolu-
tion, a gadget known as the Perkins Tractor became quite popular..

This device was claimed to be capable of drawing disease out of the
body by its electrical current.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At the time of the American Revolu-
tion, a gadget known as the Perkins Tractor became quite popular.. This device was claimed to be capable of drawing disease out of the
body by its electrical current. Although the construction and fan-
tastic claims made for many quack devices over the years often o
quite amusing, use of these devices can have serious health
qnences: Whether sold to a consumer or a health professional. a device
which does not perform as promised may pose-a risk to health as well
as an economic detriment to the purchaser. Reliance on unwarranted
claims made for a device, recommending use in serious disease condi-
tions, may induce the purchaser to forego seeking timely and appro-
priate medical treatment. Friudulknt devices were a major concern of
Congress in 1938 when it gave FDA authority to regulate devices. A quack device which was the subject of FDA action in the late
1940's was the Spectochrome, of one Dinshah P. Ghadiali, which con-
sisted of a 1.000-watt lamp, in a cabinet supplied with colored glass
slides to fit an aperture through which the light bathed the patient. By becoming a member of Ghadiali's "Institute" for a fee of $90 a
person could obtain the lamp plus voluminous literature which sought
to cloak the scheme in oriental mysticism and sanctity. Claims were
made for its value in treating such diseases as diabetes, cancer, tuber-
culosis and syphilis, and several thousand lamps were distributed. The
first action against the lamp was a single seizure. After a trial which
lasted thirty days, the jury rendered a verdict for the Government,

--- PAGE BREAK ---1158
and the court enjoined distribution of the lamp.

Ghadiali, neverthe-
less, continued to ship it.

Multiple seizures followed which did not
stop him.

Criminal prosecutions was then filed against Gliadiali and
his corporation.

After a trial, in which the Government presented an
array of physicians and relatives of victims who had used the device
and died from the diseases it was represented to cure.

After a verdict of
guilty, the court imposed against Ghadiali and his corporation fines
totaling $20,000 and"a thre-year prison sentence against Ghadiali,
but imprisonment was suspended on the condition that the business be
stopped.,
I'hr Spectochrome case is related in detail, since it indicates the
vast amount of effort the Government must expend in stopping the
marketing of bogus devices.

Another type of device which was the subject of FDA action was
the "Zerret Applicator," popularly called the "Plastic Dumbell,"
which consisted of two plastic water tumblers filled partially with
water, sealed with paraffin, joined at their mouths by scotch tape, and
set into paraffin in the handle of plastic baby rattles.

It was claimed to
introduce in the human body the energy given off by "expanded hy-
drogen atoms" or "Z rays" alleged to be present in the liquid sealed
in the tumblers.

The user was to hold the article in his hands keeping
the feet flatly on the floor without crossing the legs, or while reclining.

This it was claimed, caused the atoms of the body to expand and bring
health through the hands.The user was to hold the article in his hands keeping
the feet flatly on the floor without crossing the legs, or while reclining.

This it was claimed, caused the atoms of the body to expand and bring
health through the hands.

This article costing $50, was offered to cor-
rect obesity and abnormal thinness due to glandular malfunctioning,
correct diarrhea and constipation, reverse the a aging process, rejuve-
nate the user, and cure "any disease known to mankind."
The "Vrilium Tube" was a small pencil-shaped tube containing a
glass vial of a white granular substance (barium chloride) worth one
two-thousandths of a cent, but this tiny gadget, also called the "Magic
Spike," was sold for $300 to gullible sick people.

They were told that
it had radioactive powers that would cure disease when it was worn
on the body, and these trusting purchasers were using it for cancer,
diabetes, leukemia, ulcers, and other serious diseases.

One popular area for quack devices has been diagnostic products.

I)uring the 1950's, the biggest source of such devices was the Elec-
tronic Medical Foundation of San Francisco.

On March 16, 1954, an
injunction barred shipment in interstate commerce of "Blood Speci-
men Carriers" for use in the Foundation's diagnostic machine, the
"Radioecope." There were estimated to be about 5,000 of the devices
throughout the country.

The diagnostic service was based upon the
theory that any ailment can be diagnosed by measuring enanations
from a dried blood spot on sterile paper.

Practitioners who mailed in
the blood spots taken from their patients received, for a fee, a diag-
nosis blank filled in with the diseases which the patient was supposed
to have, their location in the body, and the recommended "dial set-
tings" for treatment with the Foundation's devices.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The diagnostic service was based upon the
theory that any ailment can be diagnosed by measuring enanations
from a dried blood spot on sterile paper. Practitioners who mailed in
the blood spots taken from their patients received, for a fee, a diag-
nosis blank filled in with the diseases which the patient was supposed
to have, their location in the body, and the recommended "dial set-
tings" for treatment with the Foundation's devices. The blood-spotted
paper was put into a slot of the electrical device called the "Radio-
scope" while the operator stroked with a wand the abdomen of a person
holding metal plates connected to the device. If a wand "stuck" to a
particular location, that was supposed-to be a manifestation of an
'electronic reaction," and the operator determined from this the iden-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1159
tity, kind, location, and significance of any disease )resent.

Investiga-
tion disclosed that this diagnostic service was incaPable of distinguish-
ing the blood of animals or birds from that of man, or that of the
living from the dead.

Even a spot of coal-tar dye was reported as indi-
cating systematic toxemia.

The Foundation's literature listed hun-
dreds of disease conditions which could be treated by their machines
once the diagnoses had been made by means of the "Radioscope." Other
devices for which dianotic as well as therapeutic claims were made
were the "Drownt Radio Therapeutic Instrument," the "Magnetic
Affinitizer," and the "Neuromicroneter." These devices involved their
own bizarre intricacies of operation.

A considerable number of devices for applyin electricity to the
body were subect to regulatory action.

This inc 
ltudd: (1) devices
which produced galvanic (direct) current of low voltage by means of
dry cells or batteries ("Electreat "Acme Electric Machine").) (2)de-
vices which used alternating current with a transformer to reduce the
voltage ("Sinuothermic," "Elector-Way"), (8) devices in which alter-
nating current as added tonlevanic in order to obtain a rippled or
pulsating galvanic current ("Facial and Body Genie," Vitalitone?)y
"Elector-Pulse").

Other devices sought to use radioactivity, ultrasonic
energy, or infrared, or ultraviolet light to diagnose or treat disease.

Some fraudulent devices have been sold to practitioners rather than
consumers.

One such device as the Micro-Dyuameter, a string gal-
vanometer for measuring minute electrical currents which was claimed
to be capable of allowing diagnosis of particular diseases based on each
disease's electrical potential.

Nearly 1,200 units of the product were
destroyed during one 12-month period after FDA obtained an injunc-
tion against continued shipment of the device in 1983.

FDA began focusing more attention on hazards from legitimate
medical devices around 1960.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nearly 1,200 units of the product were
destroyed during one 12-month period after FDA obtained an injunc-
tion against continued shipment of the device in 1983. FDA began focusing more attention on hazards from legitimate
medical devices around 1960. The post-war era was characterized by
many new medical discoveries and saw the development of a vast array
of new and complicated medical equipment. Inventions included heart
pacemakers, kidney dialysis units, and artificial blood vessels and heart
valves. Although many lives have been saved or improved by the new dis-
coveries, the potential for harm to consumers has been heightened by
the critical medical conditions in which sophisticated modern devices
are used and by the complicated technology involved in their manu-
facture and use. In the search to expand medical knowledge, new ex-
perimental approaches have sometimes been tried without adequate
premarket clinical or animal testing, quality control in materials
selected,-r obtaining patient consent. The present law's inadequacy has become a matter of acute concern
because of the rapid technological change in the medical device field. The sophistication of modem medical devices makes careful testing
necessary to determine if a device operates safely and as claimed. In
early regulatory actions FDA was able to carry its burden of proof
that a device is unsafe or misbranded through expert testimony; more
recently FDA has had to undertake testing of devices suspeted of
violating the law. Many devices are so intricate that skilled health pro-
fessionals are unable to ascertain whether they are defective. Increas-
ing numbers of patients have been exposed to increasingly complex
devices which pose serious risk if inadequately tested or improperly
designed or used. J

--- PAGE BREAK ---1160
S.

2868 recognizes the benefits that medical research and experi-
mentation to develop devices offers to mankind.

It recognizes, too, the
need for regulation to assure that the public is protected and that
health professionals can have more confidence in the performance of
devices.

The need for device legislation is demonstrated by the history of
several cases against unsafe devices undertaken by FDA during the
past few years.

Hundreds of thousands of consumers bought a device
called Relaxicisor during the 1950's and 1960's.

This device was rep-
resented as an aid in reducing weight and operated by sending shocks
through the muscles.

Testing revealed the device could aggravate
muscular, gastrointestinal, and other disorders.

It took FDA five years
to complete court proceedings necessary to eliminate Relaxicisors from
tho market.

FDA expended some half-million dollars in this effort.

FDA's experience eliminating the Diapulse device from the market
is another case demonstrating the unwieldy procedures and lack of
preventive provisions of present law.

Diapulse was a heat-generating
device which was marketed to medical practitioners for some 121
therapuetic claims.

The firm lacked scientifically valid data to substan-
tiate the efficacy of the device in any of the conditions for which it was
promoted.

The first seizure of a Diapulse device occurred in Decem-
ber 1965.

As a result of lengthy court proceedings againaLthe device
and company appeals it was not until 1972 that injunction against the
manufacturer was obtained.

During fiscal year 1973, FDA seized over
350 Diapulse devices.

In the late 1960's two important court decisions indicated that certain
products which are in the legal grey area between drugs and devices
may be considered drugs and hence subject to premarket clearance.

In
Amp, In.

v.

Gardner, 389 1F.

2d 825 (2 Cir.

1968), the Court of Ap-
-
-peals for the Second Circuit held that a nylon suture was a new drug
and not a device.--- PAGE BREAK ---

2d 825 (2 Cir. 1968), the Court of Ap-
-
-peals for the Second Circuit held that a nylon suture was a new drug
and not a device. Shoitly thereafter the Supreme Court held that an
antibiotic sensitivity disc was a drug in United State. v. An Article of
Drug ... Bacto-Unidisk, 395 U.S. 954 (1968). As a result of these deci-
sions FDA classified as drugs soft contact lenses, a pregnancy kit, and
intrauterine contraceptive devices which contain drugs or trace
metals. FDA has administratively developed a distinction between
drug and device, which favors classifying a product as a drug if its
intended action is chemical, or based on highly complex technology
potential hazards of which may be reduced through new drug controls. FDA has tried to avoid lengthy court battles that could tie up the rest
of its efforts. The need for more comprehensive authority to regulate medical-de-
vices has been recognized by Presidents Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon. )In 
1969, Dr. Theodore Cooper, Director of the National Heart and
Lung Institute, headed a panel to review the need for additional medi-
cal device legislation. That panel reported its results in 1970. The
Cooper committee searched the scientific literature for accounts of in-
juries from medical -devices. Some 10,000 injuries were rbcorded,of
which 731 resulted in death. For example, 512 deaths and 800 injuries
were attributed to heart valves; 89 deaths and 186 injuries to heart
pacemakers; 10 deaths and 8,000 injuries to intrauterine devices. After
hearing the views of the medical community, the industry and con-
sumer representatives, the Cooper Committee agreed with past pro-

--- PAGE BREAK ---IJ61
posals calling for device legislation to provide for standard-setting for
certain devices and premarket clearance for others.

A third category
would be exempt from standards or preclearance.

The Cooper commit-
tee also recommended that a balance be struck between the need for
continuing research and the need for improved patient protection
through a system of independent peer review for experimental devices.

iII.

HARINGs
The Committee held two days of hearings on-medical device
legislation in 1973 and received testimony from twenty witnesses rep-
resenting the Administration, industry groups, consumer groups, and
professional groups.

All witnesses agreed that there was a general
need for medical device legislation although each had specific recom-
mendations for changes in the Chairman of the Health Subcommittee
Senator Kennedy's bill, S.

2368; S.

1446, the Administration's bili
introduced by Senator Javits; and S.

1337, introduced by--Senator
Nelson.

Congressnian L.

H.

Fountain, Chairman of the House Intergovern-
mental Relations Subcommittee testified that "medical device legis-
lation is sorely needed." In his testimony, he reviewed the findings of
r5 days of hearings before his Subcommuttee concerned with issues re-
gardfing the safety a1(1 effectiveness of particular medical devices;
intrauterine contraceptive devices.

The Administration was represented by Assistant Secretary for
Health Charles C.

Edwards, who was accqmpanied by Dr.

Alexander
M.

Schmidt, Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration.

Dr.

Edwards stated "wesupport this legislation and urge its prompt
enactment." His testimony recounted the experience FDA has had
in trying to regulate medical devices in the absence of specific device
'I 
legislation.

Dr.

Edwards' testimony also reviewed the findings of the
"Cooper Committee," established by the Department of Health, Edu-
cation, and Welfare in 1969 to review the need for medical device
legislation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dr. Edwards' testimony also reviewed the findings of the
"Cooper Committee," established by the Department of Health, Edu-
cation, and Welfare in 1969 to review the need for medical device
legislation. After a thorough search of the scientific literature for
injuries associated 'with medical devices2 the "Cooper Committee"
reported that there were 10,000 serious i juries of which 731 resulted
in death. The "Cooper Committee" also eini-rsed the need for medical
device legislation. Dr. Edwards testified that "the increasing sophisti-
cation of medical devices has outpaced the Department's ability to
p)otect the public from those that are faulty. One reason for this is
that current law imposes no duty upon medical device manufacturers
to establish a safety or efficacy of their products prior to marketing."
Dr. Edwards went on to testify that. the Department did not "have
authority to prescribe standards of safety to which devices must
).conforl."
l)r. Sidney Wolfe testified on behalf of the Health Research Group
of Washington, D.C. I)r. Wolfe's testimony described the hazards
associated with the use of life-supporting medical devices which had
been developed without any regulatory oversight. He expressed the
view that the premarket clearance section of the legislation was the
key to appropriate safeguarding of the- public health, and questioned
whether standard setting would provide an adequate guarantee of
safety or efficacy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the legislation was the
key to appropriate safeguarding of the- public health, and questioned
whether standard setting would provide an adequate guarantee of
safety or efficacy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1162
1)r. Russel J. Thompson, M.D., of the Silas B. Hayes Army Hospital
at Fort Ord testified about his experience with the intrauterinedevice.
He felt that the history of the development of IUDs illustrated the
need for device regulation and testified:
* * * under current standards of nonregulation in the
United States, I could take a paperclip and fashion it into an
IUD. I could begin inserting it into women without even
informing them that it is an experimental and never-tested
IITD, and I would not even have to inform the FDA of my
newly invented IUD.
The testimony of Joel J. Noble, the Director of the Emergency Care
_ Research Institute in Philadelphia also endorsed the need for medical
device legislation. He testified about the results of his research which
showed that:
* * * the problems associated with most medical devices
which may lead to adverse affects, including injury or death,
are, in order of decreasing incidence: (1) operator error
resulting from inadequate training (2) deficit cies in repair
maintenance inspection and control of devices within health
care facilities, (3) fundamental design deficiencies, (4) de-
ficiencies in manufacturing quality control.
Foster Whitlock, Vice Chairman, Board of Directors, Johnson and
Johnson and the Chairman-Elect of the Board of Directors of the
Pharmaceutical Manufactrers Association, spoke on behalf of an
industry panel which consisted of Kenneth Marshall of the Health
Industries Association; James D. Weirman of the Medical Surgical
Manufacturers Association; Thomas E. Holleran of the National Elec-
trical Manufacturers Association; Rodney R. Munsey of the Phar-
maceutical Manufacturers Association; and Adrian L. Ringuette of
_the Scientific Apparatus Makers Association. Mr. Whitlock, on behalf
of the panel, testified:
Let me start by saying that in our opinion, S. 510 is in
most respects responsive to the needs of the public. We are in
basic accord with its major provisions.
Mr. Whitlock and each of the panel members presented a series- of
specific recommendations for changes in S. 510, each of which was
considered bv the Committee during its Executive (ommittee con-
sideration of the measure. and many of which were incorporated into
the Committee-reported bill.
Dr. Ralph B. Wolfe testified on behalf of the Planned Parenthood
Federation of America. He responded to the concerns raised by Russell
) 
"h'liomlpson about the safety and effectiveness of IUI)s rmd recounted
the experience of his organization using the IUD. With regard to the
specific legislation, Dr. Wolfe testified overall that:
* * * The proposed legislation is comprehensive and meri-
torious. It should satisfy the long overdue need for strict
regulation in an increasingly important area related to the
lublic's well-being.
I)r. George Meyers representing the American Dental Association
testified to the effect that the House of Delegates of the ADA had notn increasingly important area related to the
lublic's well-being.
I)r. George Meyers representing the American Dental Association
testified to the effect that the House of Delegates of the ADA had not

--- PAGE BREAK ---1163
yet formally reviewed the legislation, but that he personally endorsed
it and that it was appropriate for the dental industry to be included
in its jurisdiction.

Mr.

James Murray represented the American Den-
tal Trade Association.

In his testimony, he agreed that there was a
need for medical devices legislation but argued that dental devices
should be exempted from the provisions of the legislation.

He pointed
out that most dental devices do not have great potential for harm and
are not life-threatening, and that the market for dental products is
very small.

He testified:
* * *To subject dental devices to the costly premarket
clearance provision of the proposed legislation would seri-
ously impair the improvement of existing dental devices and
the development of new ones.

Carl Parker represented the Dental Manufacturers of America.

His
testimony also opposed the inclusion of the dental industry under the
jurisdiction of this legislation.

Dr.

Arthur Beall, Professor -of Surgery at the Baylor College of
Medicine represented the American College of Chest Physicians, the
American 9llege of Cardiology and the Society of Thorasic Surgery.

Dr.

Beall testified, "at the outset.Mr.

Chairman, let me say that S.* 510
is fundamentally a sound and helpful piece of legislation." Dr.

Beas
testimony presented specific suggestions for improvement in the legis-
lation allof which were consideid by the Committee during its Execu-
tive session consideration of the measure and many of the suggestions
were inx€orporated into the Committee-reported bill
Dr.

Gerald Ranier, a practicing thorasic and cardiovascular surgeon
and Associate Clinical Professor of Surgery on Voluntary Faculty of
the University of Colorado Medical School, testified on behalf of the
Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Beas
testimony presented specific suggestions for improvement in the legis-
lation allof which were consideid by the Committee during its Execu-
tive session consideration of the measure and many of the suggestions
were inx€orporated into the Committee-reported bill
Dr. Gerald Ranier, a practicing thorasic and cardiovascular surgeon
and Associate Clinical Professor of Surgery on Voluntary Faculty of
the University of Colorado Medical School, testified on behalf of the
Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. In his
testimony, he stated that "'AAMI supports, in principle, this legisla-
tion."1 Hi testimony also offered several specii suggestions for im-
provements, which were reviewed by the Committee during its Execu-
tive session consideration of the bill. The final witness was Dr. Richard E. Palmer, member of the Board
of Trustees of the American Medical Association. He testified on be-
half of the AMA that:
We support the principles and many of the provisions
contained in your bill, S. 510, which are similar to a House
counterpart bill, but we would like to offer in our supple-
mentary statements suggestions for modifications with re-
spect to the bill for the consideration of the Committee. He also testified that:
We believe that the general approach taken in the legisla-
tion should be supported. We think it is advisable that devices
should be defined, identified and classified. Similarly, it is
beneficial that provision should be made JQr maximum use
not only of the expertise within the FDA, but also signifi-
cant expertise which is to be found in the medical scientific
and manufacturing communities. We are pleased that the
legislation provides for the use of expert consultation on
70-026 0 - 16 - 74

--- PAGE BREAK ---1164
recommendations in the classification and evaluation of evi-
dence upon which determination for safety effectiveness and
proper classification are based.

Biised upon the widespread support for the Committee's bill and
the urgent need for medical device legislation, the Committee consid-
ers the hearing record to be adequate.

IV.

COMMITFE VIEWS ON THE MEDICAL D vICU BilL
Cormnittee View.-section 511
The Committee recognizes the great diversity among the various
medical devices and their varying potentials for harm as well as their
potential benefit to improved health.

Therefore the Committee rec-
ommends that all medical devices be classified into one of three cate-
gories based upon the degree of risk to the public health and safety
represented by each individual device or class of devices.

The Com-
mittee believes that those devices for which insufficient information
exists to assure effectiveness or to assure that exposure to such devices
will not cause unreasonable risk of illness or injury, and for which
standards or other means may not be appropriate, to reduce or elimi-
nate such risk of illness or injury, should be subject to the most
rigorous kind of premarket scientific review.

The Committee believes
that in respect to other devices, if the nation's experts, who will be
well represented on the classification panels, determine that it is appro-
priate to establish reasonable performance standards relating to safety
and effectiveness in order to protect the public health and safety, then
the devices may be placed in the standard-setting category.

Finally,
the Committee believes that if the panels conclude that still other
devices are safe and effective when used in conjunction with instruc-
tions for usage and warnings of limitation, then neither the premarket
% 
clearance nor standard-setfing mechanism should be necessary to pro-
tect the public health and safety.The Committee believes
that in respect to other devices, if the nation's experts, who will be
well represented on the classification panels, determine that it is appro-
priate to establish reasonable performance standards relating to safety
and effectiveness in order to protect the public health and safety, then
the devices may be placed in the standard-setting category.

Finally,
the Committee believes that if the panels conclude that still other
devices are safe and effective when used in conjunction with instruc-
tions for usage and warnings of limitation, then neither the premarket
% 
clearance nor standard-setfing mechanism should be necessary to pro-
tect the public health and safety.

It is the Committee's intent that the widest range of national exper-
tise in the medical devices area should be utilized in the establishment
of classification panels.

The Committee recognizes that experts from
the industry could significantly contribute to the work of such panels
because of their knowledge of industry practices and available tech-
nology.

The Committee was concerned, however, about potential con-
flict of interest if industry representatives were to have ultimate de-
cision-making responsibilities ni an area that could vitally affect their
own interest and perhaps their employment.

The Committee therefore
hs provided that industry members may serve on the panels, but has
specified that they be non-voting members.

The Committee was equally concerned that representatives of con-
isumer interests be able to participate on the panels.

The Committee
has therefore designated a non-voting consumer panel member for
each of the panels.

The Committee is aware that the Food and Drug Administration
has already begun a preliminary classification of medical devices.

In
this regard, there have been considerable questions with regard to the
appropriate weight that should be given to classifications already made
by the panels now in existence under present law.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Committee is aware that the Food and Drug Administration
has already begun a preliminary classification of medical devices. In
this regard, there have been considerable questions with regard to the
appropriate weight that should be given to classifications already made
by the panels now in existence under present law. These panels have
not fulry utilized or adhered to the criteria for classifications as em-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1165
bodied ii this bill.

Therefore the Committee does not believe that prior
classifications should be accepted as such, but that a review of the work
of these existing panels should be carried out.

On the other hand, the
Committee believes that the work of these panels has been most valt-
able and should wherever applicable, be utilized.

Therefore, the Corn-
mittee has authorized the Secretary to utilize the existing panels, and
the information and findings developed by such panels, wherever
review determines that to be the appropriate procedure.

The Committee recognizes the importance of the classification proc-
ess.

The report of the panel is considered to be a preliminary classifica-
tion.

This is to avoid a conflict which could arise if a device was classi-
fied by a panel under one classification and yet later failed to meet the
statutory prerequisites for being so classified or met the statutory
prerequisites for a different classification.

The Committee wishes to
make it clear that the classification report is to-be used as guidance by
the Secretary in pursuing the procedures sot out in other sections for
permanently subjecting devices to particular regulatory procedures.

This preliminary report is intended to serve as notice to manufacturers
and others of the intent to proceed in a certain direction and thereby
provide industry with an opportunity to begin developing any data or
information which may be needed later to support continued market-
ing of a device.

Because of the preliminary nature of the classification
there is no need to provide full administrative safeguards for this
process, which thereby facilitates and expedites the chore of classify-
ing thousands of devices.

The Committee has provided for full admiii-
istrative safeguards once classification is final and a course of action
has been embarked upon.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Because of the preliminary nature of the classification
there is no need to provide full administrative safeguards for this
process, which thereby facilitates and expedites the chore of classify-
ing thousands of devices. The Committee has provided for full admiii-
istrative safeguards once classification is final and a course of action
has been embarked upon. The Committee believes that a manufacturer who thinks he has de-
veloped a significantly new or modified medical device should have the
opportunity to petition for a classification of that new device. Until
such time as that new product is classified the manufacturer may not
market the product. The purpose of this provision is not intended to
be strictly comparable to the new drug provisions in the Food, Drug
and Cosmetic Act. This section is simply intended to provide a mechia-
nism whereby devices which are new or which significantly differ from
those devices previously classified, can be brought to the attention of
the Secretary for the purpose of classification prior to marketing. Section 513
This section authorizes the Secretary to'establish standards for medi-
cal devices. The Committee purposely added the word "performance"
before the word "standards' in. this section. It is not the intention of
the Committee to simply authorizethe establishment of standards for
the purpose of mechanically standardizing medical.devices. The Com-
mittee believes that standards must relate to the safety or effectiveness
(including reliability over time) of the device or other "performance"
characteristics. The Committee intends that performance standards
shall also go to questions of indicated uses, proper labeling, instruc-
tions for use, warnings and uniformity of manufacture when those
are in the interest of safety or proper and effective use. The Committee recognizes that the state of the art in the medical
devices field is rapidly changing and continually improving and has

--- PAGE BREAK ---1166
therefore provided that the Secretary shall undertake a periodic evalu-
ation of the adequacy of all performance standards to be sure that
they reflect changes in technology or medical science.

The Committee believes that maximum use should be made of stand-
ards that have already been developed by other Federal agencies and
other nationally recognized standard-setting agencies or organizations.

The Committee believes that the Secretary should review existing
standards and should determine their applicability to meeting the re-
quirenents of this section.

The Committee has provided for procedural safeguards in the stand-
ard-setting process.

There is time to comment upon the published no-
tice of the need to develop a standard.

If after reviewing those com-
ments the Secretary publishes findings which are not responsive to
the comments, a mechanism is provided for an appeal of the Secre-
tary's findings to the Court of Appeals and eventually to the Supreme
Court.

There is further review once a standard has been developed
and the Secretary has issued a proposal to promulgate a standard.

At that point interested parties may comment upon the proposal or
can request referral of the proposal to an independent scientific ad-
visory committee for review.

There is further recourse in terms of
appealing the order establishing the standard to the Court of Appeals
and, if necessary.

to the Supreme Court.

The Committee believes that
the availability of these safeguards will protect and balance the rights
of the different interests involved in the regulation of medical devices.

The Committee believes that the development of standards requires
the application of sophisticated knowledge.

It is recognized that a
considerable amount of expertise in this area exists outside the Gov-
ernment.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Committee believes that the development of standards requires
the application of sophisticated knowledge. It is recognized that a
considerable amount of expertise in this area exists outside the Gov-
ernment. The Committee wanted to use this expertise and yet at the
same time guard against a potential conflict of interest which might
result if a standard were developed by a party having a proprietary
interest in the nature of that standard. Therefore, the Committee-re-
ported bill provides that when more than one offer to develop a
standard is received, and where each offer is technically competent,
the Secretary shall give priority to offerors who have no proprietary
interest in the device for which the standard is to be developed. The
Committee believes that, when nongovernmental groups (offerors)
offer to develop standards for the Secretary's consideration, members
of such groups should be required to disclose certain information in
order to minimize the potential for conflict of interest that might
arise. Such information, as required by regulation, shall be made
publically available at such time as an offer is accepted by the Secre-
tary, in order to aid in the assessment of a proposed standard. The
language in the bill is derived from the guidelines used by the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences in requiring disclosure by committee mem-
bers "On Potential Sources of Bias." The Committee intends that
j 
the Secretary shall be guided by these guidelines, and by the Con-
flict of Interest provisions of Public Law 87-849 (18 U.S.C. 202(a),
in drafting regulations under this section. The Committee has authorized the Secretary, under this Section, to
impose individual lot-testing where it is necessary and where no
more practical means to achieve consistency or reliability are avail-
able. The Committee's intent is not to thwart the use ;f this pro-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1167
cedure but rather to insure that it will not be required as a regular
part of each and every standard.

To the extent that safety, effective-
ness and reliability can reasonably be achieved without imposing in-
dividual lot-testing, the Committee intends that the procedure not
be used.

The Committee was impressed by testimony at the hearings to
the effect that the skill of the user of the medical device has a direct
and significant bearing on the safety and effectiveness of that
device.

Therefore the Committee intends that the evaluation of the
safety and efficacy of a device be done in relation to the skill of the
person who is to utilize it.

The Committee intends that if a device
is safe only in the hands of eminently qualified specialists, that that
device will be restricted to use by those specialists.

The Committee believes it necessary to specifically prohibit manu-
facturers from stockpiling devices from the date of promulgation of
a performance standard and the effective date of such a standard.

This is analogous to provisions of the Consumer Product Safety Act
and is intended to prohibit manufacturers or distributors from build-
ing abnormal inventories of products which would not meet an appro-
priate standard.

The Committee wishes to make it clear that standards and pre-
market approval mechanisms are not mutually exclusive.

A component
of a device which is subject to premarket clearance may also be re-
quire(l to conform to an applicable standard.

The basic intent of the
legislation is to assure safe and effective devices and the Secretary is
iuthorized to use all of the authorities contained in this Act in any
combination deemed necessary to protect the public health and safety.

The Committee has specifically exempted all veterinary devices from
tile purview of this legislation.

The Committee is aware of the special relationship that each health
pactitioner has with his patients.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Committee has specifically exempted all veterinary devices from
tile purview of this legislation. The Committee is aware of the special relationship that each health
pactitioner has with his patients. It is also aware of the need to
develop special customized devices to meet the"particular needs of a
given patient. It is also aware of the need for individual research on
medical devices. Therefore the Committee exempts custom devices
from the standard setting requirements and from premarket scientific
review. This exemption shall apply only for devices ordered by physi-
cians and the other health professionals designated by regulation,
according to their own specifications. Those medical devices which are
ordered for individual patients, to qualify for this exemption, may not
be used as a course of conduct and may not be generally available
through commercial channels to the professions. It is the intent of
these provisions to allow physicians to order custom-made products
but not to permit manufacturers to circumvent standards-setting and
scientific review requirements by commercially exploiting these prod-
ncts. The phrase "devices not being used as course of conduct" does not
prohibit a physician from ordering a custom instrument and using it
in his practice on several patients. This exemption has been a cause of
serious concern for the Committee, although it recognizes the need
to exempt such devices so that innovation is not stifled and so that
custom fitting or sizing would not be prohibited. It is not the intent
of this exemption to allow for the development of customized "tquack"
devices or devices known to be unsafe or ineffective.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1168
The Committee has approached the problem of "quack" or worthless
devices in an additional way, by authorizingthe ban of certain devices
which present a risk of illness, inqury, disability or deception and for
which feasible standards could not be established and premarket sci-
entific review would not be adequate.

This section is aimed primarily
at quack, worthless or totally unproven devices, but the Committee
envisions that there will be other instances in which the banning of
devices would be the appropriate regulatory action to be pursued.

The Committee has also included a provision t6 authorize the seizure
of devices which are distributed wholly in intrastate commerce.

This
pEvision will be applicable to all devices and will assist enforcement
ly doing away with the cumbersome and time consuming task of estab-
lishing interstate shipment.

This provision will be particularly useful
against quack devices.

The Committee- recognizes the rapidly changing nature of the de-
vices field and therefore feels that provisions must be made to amend
standards on the basis of improved technology or new scientific evi-
dence.

Such amendments should be made in an expedited fashion so
that appropriate changes can be rapidly implemented.

The purpose of
this authority is to permit new orimproved devices to be marketed
without delay so that the public may have such beneficial devices avail-
able to them as soon as possible.

Section 514
This section provides for the premarket scientific review of medical
devices.

The Committee spent a great deal of time deciding upon the
criteria to be used in determining whether or not a particular device
should be subject to premarket scientific review.

The Administra-
tion's bill would have restricted such review to devices used in "life
threatening situations" among other preconditions for such review.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Committee spent a great deal of time deciding upon the
criteria to be used in determining whether or not a particular device
should be subject to premarket scientific review. The Administra-
tion's bill would have restricted such review to devices used in "life
threatening situations" among other preconditions for such review. The Committee believes that this approach would be too restrictive
because many devices could cause serious illness or injury which are
not necessarily used in life threatening situations. The' Committee
believes that the potential for harm inherent in a certain device may
not be determined solely on the basis of its intended use. Therefore
the Committee has provided that the Secretary may declare a device
subject to premarket clearance if, after consultation with appropriate
panels, such review is found appropriate to insure safety and effec-
tiveness or to reduce or eliminate unreasonable risk of illness or injury. -
The Committee intends that devices which are considered to be "Ife
supporting or life sustaining" shall be subject to premarket scientific
review. In addition, the Coinmittee believes that the Secretary should
have the authority to declare a device sub ject to scientific review when-
ever the Secretary feels that such a classification would be ap-r 
ate
to protect the public health and safety. This authority would enable
the Secretary to require premarket review even if the classification
panels had not recommended such review. Additionally, the Com-
mittee has provided that premarket scientific review should be im-
posed only when there is no more practical means available to reduce
or eliminate such risk of illness or injury. However, the Committee
wishes to make clear that this latter criteria should not be viewed in the
absolute. It is not intended to impose upon the Secretary that he estab-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1169
lish beyond any doubt that there is no other means available to ac-
complish the goals of safety and effectiveness.

Rather.

he must reason-
ably find that other readily available means do not offer the same
assurance of success or probability of success as premarket review
does.

In the course of its deliberations the Committee was guided by the
decisions that have been made by the classification panel on the review
of cardiovascular devices already in existence.

In particular the min-
utes of the panel meeting on October 9, 1973 said:
The panel also reviewed the classification results for all of
the cardiovascular devices.

It was pointed out that since the
scientific review or premarket clearance process may be the
only method available to the panel by which it may request
and analyze data pertinent to a device's safety and efficacy,
that sevei'al different types of devices may show'up in this pro-
posed regulatory category.

Obviously those devices which are
life supporting, life sustaining or potentially hazardous to
health, and which at the same time are in a stage of rapid-.....

development need premarket clearance in order to insure their
safety and efficacy.

Other devices which are also potentially
hazardous to health or life supporting or life sustaining may
also be placed in the scientific review category even though
their widespread clinical use may generally be considered safe
and effective.

It is not expected that this'latter group of de-
viees would require the same type of review as the first group
of devices mentioned.

However, under proposed legislation,
placing them in scientific review would give the Secre-
tary and the advisory 'panel the opportunity to request and
analyze the safety an'd efficacy data when this appears neces-
sary in order to protect the public health.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is not expected that this'latter group of de-
viees would require the same type of review as the first group
of devices mentioned. However, under proposed legislation,
placing them in scientific review would give the Secre-
tary and the advisory 'panel the opportunity to request and
analyze the safety an'd efficacy data when this appears neces-
sary in order to protect the public health. Pacemakers and artificial heart valves are examples of life
supporting devices which are in a stage of development which
is rapidly changing and which would require scientific review. Monitoring devices used in an intensive care unit and a num-
ber of devices used to diagnose cardiac function are exam-
p ies of the latter group of scientific review devices discussed
in the paragraph above. The Committee understands that the decision to require premarket
clearance is one of the most crucial decisions to be made under this Act. It has therefore constructed appropriate appeal mechanisms into the
legislation. Once a regulation has been published declaring that a de-
vice shall be subject to scientific review, a mechanism is provided
whereby that decision may be appealed to the Court of Appeals and
eventually the Supreme Court. The Committee believes that the scientific review process must be one
that is characterized by the highest standards of scientific excellence. In order to avoid a proliferation of scientific panels under this Sec-
tion, the Committee has decided that the panels used for classification
shall, to the extent possible, be utilized during the process of premarket
scientific review. These panels will be subject to the Federal Advisory
Committee Act. The Committee has built further appeals mechanisms into the scien-
tific review process. Once an application for scientific review has been
submitted and reviewed under this Section, the applicant may appeal

--- PAGE BREAK ---1170
a negative decision by requesting that his application be referred to
all independent advisory committee (in lieu of a hearing).

If the inde-
pendent advisory committee concurs in the decision to deny the appli-
cant's proposal or if the Secretary does not concur in the committee's
recommendation to permit marketing, the applicant may seek review
by the Court of Appeals and eventually appeal to the Supreme Court.

The Committee recognizes the necessity to eneourage-scientific in-
vestigation in the medical devices field and has attempted to provide
optimum freedom for individual scientific investigators in their pur-
suit of that objective.

The Committee has therefore provided an ex-
emption to qualified scientific investigators from the requirements of
this Section during the time of the investigational use of devices in
order that they may collect sufficient data to establish that the device
should be on the market.

The Secretary muy.

by regulation, (after an
opportunity for an informal hearing), establish procedures governing
this exemption in addition to those set out in the legislation.

The Com-
mittee has provided in the reported bill that the Secretary shall have
thirty days after the receipt of a submission under this Section to de-
termine whether or not the investigation is appropriate.

The Secretary
may not delay, the beginning of an investigation beyond thirty days
unless he finds that the investigation does not or will not conform to
this Section or to the regulations issued thereunder and has notified
the sponsor of such findings.

The Committee has also specifically de-
fined the meaning of informed consent which must be obtained in all
but exceptional cases from any individual being used in investigations
under this Section.

The Committee was impressed by the argument presented by the de-
A-ices industry of the need to establish a mechanism for the approval of
devices subject to rapid obsolescence or frequent modification.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Committee has also specifically de-
fined the meaning of informed consent which must be obtained in all
but exceptional cases from any individual being used in investigations
under this Section. The Committee was impressed by the argument presented by the de-
A-ices industry of the need to establish a mechanism for the approval of
devices subject to rapid obsolescence or frequent modification. There-
fore, the Committee has established in the reported bill the product de-
velopment protocol mechanism for such devices. The decision on
whether or not this provision should be used in a particular case rests
solely with the Secretary and in his discretion. The Committee wishes
to make it clear that only an informal hearing shall be provided for
a revocation of a product development protocol before the Secretary
has approved a notice of completion. However, once a notice of com-
pletion is approved, the applicant shall have the same administrative
rights as the holder of an approval under scientific review. Section .;15
The Committee has been guided in the development of this Section
by the provisions of tile Federal Hazardous Substances Act and the
(4onsimer Product Safety Act. The Committee believes that producers,
assemblers, distributors and importers of devices should immediately
notify the Secretary of any defect which could create a substantial
risk to the public health o" safety or fails to comply with the estab-
lished standards. The Committee wants to make itelear that infor-
mation or statements exclusively derived from the notification re-
quired by this Section cannot be used as evidence in any proceeding
brought against a natural person pursuant to Section 303 of the
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act with respect to a violation of
law occurring prior to or concurrently with a notification. The Com-
mittee feels that the Secretary should have considerable discretion in
determining whether or not users of devices must be notified of de-urring prior to or concurrently with a notification. The Com-
mittee feels that the Secretary should have considerable discretion in
determining whether or not users of devices must be notified of de-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1171
fects in any 
ven case.

The Committee believes, however, that notice
of defective devices should go to the general public unless the Secre-
tary determines that such notification would endanger the public
health or is unwarranted because of the insignificant nature of the
deviation from the standard.

Section 501
The Committee has amended Section 501 of the Federal Food, L)rug
and Cosmetic Act to authorize the Secretary to issue substantive cur-
rent good manufacturing practice regulations which will be applica-
ble to medical devices and establishments manufacturing, processing
or handling medical devices.

The Committee believes that both indus-
try and consumers have a vital interest in these regulations and that
each should have a full opportunity to participate in the develop-
ment of such regulations.

Section 502
The Committee believes that the Secretary of Health, Education,
and Welfare should have authority to regulate prescription medical
device advertising.

Therefore, the Committee has provided that the
Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C.

52-57) will not be appli-
cable to the advertising of prescription medical devices.

The Com-
mittee believes that the Secretary of HEW in administering this new
law will develop significantly more expertise in the area of medical
dowices than the Federal Trade Commission and that therefore the
regulation of prescription device advertising is more properly vested
in the agency most knowledgeable about the area and th* one that is
truly charged with matters affecting public health and thus assuring
the safety and efficacy of medical devices.

Section 709
The Committee recognizes that the medical device field is a rapidly
expanding industry.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Com-
mittee believes that the Secretary of HEW in administering this new
law will develop significantly more expertise in the area of medical
dowices than the Federal Trade Commission and that therefore the
regulation of prescription device advertising is more properly vested
in the agency most knowledgeable about the area and th* one that is
truly charged with matters affecting public health and thus assuring
the safety and efficacy of medical devices. Section 709
The Committee recognizes that the medical device field is a rapidly
expanding industry. The Committee feels that the Secretary should he
authorized to provide for (either directly or through contracts) new
research and investigation into the safety and effectiveness of devices
and the causes and prevention of injuries or other health impairments
associated with exposure to or use of such devices. In addition, research
should be carried out to lead to the development and improvement of
device performance standards. The Committee recognizes that a device
is only as good as the expert who uses it and-therefore authorizes the
Secretary to conduct programs for the education and training uiindi-
viduals with respect to proper installation and use. of devices. Section 90)
The Committee recognizes that there is confusion at the present time
about whether certain articles are to be treated as devices or drugs
under the-Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. Therefore, the Committee
reported bill has carefully defined "device" so as to specifically include
implants, in. vitro diagnostic products and other similar or related
articles. In vitro diagnostic products include those products which are
not ingested and which are used to assist in the diagnosis of disease or
other conditions of the body. Section 801
The Committfee reported bill has amended Section 801 of the Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act, which relates to the exportation of devices

--- PAGE BREAK ---se or
other conditions of the body. Section 801
The Committfee reported bill has amended Section 801 of the Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act, which relates to the exportation of devices

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1172
The Committee does not believe that substandard or unsafe or ineffec-
tive devices should be permitted to be exported to foreign nations and
has thus provided in its bill that the Secretary may deny export of any
devices which do not fully conform to the provisions of this Act. The
Committee has, however, found that mi many instances, articles subject
to the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act which may not meet
domestic standards for one reason or another might properly and sig-
nificantly benefit foreign nations. The Committee has therefore pro-
vided in this section of the bill that such articles may be exported to
foreign countries when the Secretary finds that the non-compliance is
not of such a nature as to expose the populations of foreign nations to
undue risks of the public health and provided that the foreign nation
specifically approves of such an export.
Gefera2
The Committee wishes to take specific note of the testimony of a
number of witnesses, both within and without the industry who ex-
pressed concern about the impact of this legislation on the small manu-
facturer of medical devices. The concern stemmed from the importance
of the small innovative manufacturer in the invention and develop-
ment of new medical devices and the inability of these firms, because
of limited financial resources, to sustain the high level of administra-
tive costs demanded of a highly regulated industry. The Committee
believes that these concerns are legitimate, as long as they are concerns
for the preservation of small business consistent with the public's need
for safe and effective medical devices. The Committee is confident that
the administration of this new law will also take into account the need
to preserve the small manufacturer's role in the device industry.
V. TABuLATION OF VOTEs CAST IN Comxrrm
Pursuant to section 133(b) of the Legislative Reorganization Act of
1049, as amended, the following is a tabluation of votes in Committee:
There were no rollcall votes cast in the Committee and the bill was
ordered reported to the Senate unanimously.
VI. Coer EsTzix&' 
PURSUANT TO SECTION 252 OF THE LEoIsLATmrv
ORGANIZATIONS ACTr OF 1970
In accordance with Section 252(a) of the Legislative Reorganiza-
tion Act of 1970 (Public Law 91-510, 91st Congress) the Committee
estimates that the cost which would be incurred in carrying out this
bill is as follows:
No new funds are authorized by this legislation. The administration
estimated that supplemental funds in the amount of $14 million would
be requested in order to carry out the provisions of this act.No new funds are authorized by this legislation. The administration
estimated that supplemental funds in the amount of $14 million would
be requested in order to carry out the provisions of this act.

--- PAGE BREAK ---thorized by this legislation. The administration
estimated that supplemental funds in the amount of $14 million would
be requested in order to carry out the provisions of this act.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1173
VII. Swcnr;-aY-Swnorzr 
ANALYSIS OF S. 510
SEcmo. 1. Short title "Medical Device Amendments of 1973."
TITLE I-PRELIMINARY CLASSIFICATION OF MEDICAL
DEVICES
SECrIov 101. Amends chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act to add a new section 511 as follows:
Srcriox. 511. (a) Requires Secretary, within 60 days following first
appropriation of funds for this purpose, to appoint panels of scientific
experts to review and classify devices into appropriate categories based
on safety and effectiveness. Panels are required to submit their find-
ings to the Secretary within one year of their appointment. To the
maximum extent practical, panels are to provide opportunities for any
interested persons to present their views on device classifications. Au-
thorizes use of any existing expert panels formed prior to enactment
of this Act for purposes of classification. Classification panels shall
also serve as scientific review panels referred to in a later section of the
bill.
(b) (1) Members are to be skilled in use of or experienced in devel-
opment, manufacture, perfection or utilization of devices. In addition
to such experts, panels shall include as nonvoting members, represent-
atives of consumer and industry interests. Panel members may fie
nominated by appropriate scientific, trade, and consumer organiza-
tions.
(2) Members are to have adequately diversified expertise in such
fields as clinical and administrative medicine, engineering, biological
and physical sciences or relating professions. The Secretary shall des-
ignate one member of each panel as Chairman. Sets methods of com-
pensation. for members.
(c) Panels are required to submit recommendations for the classifica-
tion of devices into one of the three following categories, and to the
extent practicable, assign priorities within such classes:
(1) Devices subject to premarket scientific review-Those devices
for which insufficient information exists to (A) assure effectiveness or
:ssure that the device will not cause unreasonable risk of illness or in-
jury and (B) standards or other means may not be appropriate to
eliminate such risk. Premarket scientific review shall be required for
any such device if the panels determine the device is life sustaining or
life supporting.
(2) 
vices subject to standards-those devices for which standards
are appropriate to eliminate unreasonable risk and for which other
means may not be appropriate.
(3) Exempt devices-Those devices which are safe and effective
when used in accord with directions (which are adequate for intended
users) and which present minimum risk.
(d) Requires Secretary to publish report on device classification
scheme in the Federal Register and to allow for comment by interested
persons. After reviewing comments, Secretary is required to provide
by regulation for preliminary classification of devices. Allows Secre-
tary to establish priorities for implementing regulatory action war-. After reviewing comments, Secretary is required to provide
by regulation for preliminary classification of devices. Allows Secre-
tary to establish priorities for implementing regulatory action war-

--- PAGE BREAK ---mments, Secretary is required to provide
by regulation for preliminary classification of devices. Allows Secre-
tary to establish priorities for implementing regulatory action war-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1174
ranted by such classification and to defer such action until an
propriate time consistent with expeditious implementation of
provisions.
(e) Permits Secretary to reclassify devices upon a specific finding
and with advice of the appropriate panel
Such findings shall be published in the Federa Regiete and inter-
ested persons shall have an opportunity to comment thereon.
TITLE 11-AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS
Szc. 513. (a) (1) Authorizes Secretary to issue a performance stand-
ard (including uniformity and compatibility with systems or environ-
ments) for any device for which a standard has been deemed appro-
priate, whenever such action is appropriate to reduce or eliminate un-
reasonable risk of illness or injury and when other means of reducing
such risks may not be appropriate.
Standard is to relate to safety, effectiveness over time, including
where appropriate, reference to any one or more of the following:
Composition, construction, properties, uniform identification, or per-
formance of such device.
Standard may also include: Provision for testing and measurement
of characteristics, including where necessary, individual lot testing by
or at direction of the Secretary.
Secretary may require the use of and prescribe the form and content
of instructions or warnings for proper installation, maintenance, oper-
ation and use of device.
(2) A performance standard may require device (or components)
to be marked, tagged or accompanied by adequate warning and in-
struction for protection of health or safety.
(3) Secretary shall provide for periodic review of standards to be
sure they keep pace with changes in the state of the art.
(4) When devices are intended for use by surgeons or other specially
qualified persons, their safety and effectiveness shall be determined in
the context of such intended use.
(b) (1) Prior to and during development of proposals for per-
formance standards, Secretary would be required to consult with and
consider relevant standards published by other Federal agencies of
nationally or internationally recognized standard-setting agencies or
organizations. Secretary may invite participation through conferences
or other means of informed persons representative of scientific, pro-
fessional, industry, or consumer organizations.
(2) In carrying out his duties under this section, the Secretary to
the maximum practicable extent shall utilize the personnel, facilities
and technical support available in other Federal agencies.
(c) (1) Requires Secretary to publish in the Federal Regyiter a
notice that proceedings are being initiated to promulgate a device
performance standard. The notification shall contain:
(A) Description of device, or type or class of device, to which
proceeding to promulgate a standard relates.
(B) Nature of risk to be controlled.
(C) Summary of data on which need for initiation of proceeds
ing is based.evice, or type or class of device, to which
proceeding to promulgate a standard relates.
(B) Nature of risk to be controlled.
(C) Summary of data on which need for initiation of proceeds
ing is based.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1175
(D) Identification of any existing standard which may be
relevant.

(E) Invitation to any person or Federal agency to submit a
proposed standard within 60 days of notice or to offer to develop
a proposed standard in accordance with prescribed procedures.

(2) Prior to an order to promulgate a performance standard the
Secretary shall consider:
The degree of risk of harm associated with the device.

B) Approximate number of devices subject to the order.

C) The device's benefit to public and probable effect standard
Will have on utility, cost or availability of the device.

(D) Means of achieving objectives with minimum market
d isruption.

(E) Data and comments submitted.

(3) Findings required by paragraph (2) above shall be published
in Federal Registar.

Such findings Sall be made only after review
of the report of the, appropriate panel and the preliminary classifica-
tion of the device.

The findings may be appealed to the Courts within
30 days after their publication.

(d) In lieu of accept 
an offer to develop a standard, Secretary
coul publish as a proposed device standard an existing standard pub-
lished by any Federal agency or other qualified agency if reference
to such standard was made in the initial notice in Federal Regiter
and if such standard were substantially acceptable.

(e) (1) Except as otherwise provided, directs Secretary to accept
cne or more offers to develop a proposed performance standard.

In
acceptir 
such offers, Secretary would determine whether offeror
is technically competent to undertake and complete development of
standard within the period of time specified in the invitation and
whether offeror has capacity to comply with prescribed regulations
governing development of proposed standards.

Where more than one
offer is received the Secretary, wherever possible, will give priority
to offerors with no proprietary interest in the device to be subject to the
standard.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In
acceptir 
such offers, Secretary would determine whether offeror
is technically competent to undertake and complete development of
standard within the period of time specified in the invitation and
whether offeror has capacity to comply with prescribed regulations
governing development of proposed standards. Where more than one
offer is received the Secretary, wherever possible, will give priority
to offerors with no proprietary interest in the device to be subject to the
standard. The Secretary shall by regulation require that each offeror
(and appropriate officials of an offeror company) disclose:
(A)All current industrial or commercial affiliations. B) Sources of research support. (C) Companies in which offeror has a financial interest. (2) The Secretary shall publish the name atnd address of offeror(s)
accepted and terms of offer as accepted. (3) Secretary could agree to contributa to offeror's cost in develop-
ig 
a standard if Secretary determines such contribution would
likely result in a more satisfactory standard and that offeror is finan-
cially responsible. Regulations would set forth acceptable items of cost,
except that such items could not include construction (except minor
remodeling) or acquisition of land or building. (4) Directs Secretary to prescribe regulations governing develop-
ment of proposed standards, so as to require that:
(A) Recommended standards be supported by test data or other
documents as Secretary may require;
(B) Recommended standards contain testing methods ap-
propriate for measurement of compliance with standard;

--- PAGE BREAK ---1176
(C) Interested persons be afforded an opportunity to partici-
pate in development of standard;
(D) Records be maintained to disclose the course of the devel-
opment of the standard;
(E) Secretary and 'omptroller General shall have access to
offeror's records, documents, etc.

for purposes of audit regarding
any contribution.

(f) If no person accepted invitation to develop a proposed standard,
or the Secretary did not accept a proposed standard or the Secretary
accepted an offer but found that offeror was unwillin or unable to
continue development of standard, Secretary could ten develop a
proposed standard according to procedures and regulations governing
such development.

(g) (1) (A) Within one year after period for submitting a proposed
performance standard or offer to develop standard (which time may
be extended for cause), the Secretary shall either publish a proposal
to promulgate a standard or terminate the procedure.

A proposal to
promulgate a standard shall set forth the standard and the manner in
which persons may examine the background data and the manner in
which they may present comments thereon (orally or in writing).

The
period for comment shall be at least 60 days but not more than 90 days
(except for cause).

(B) Within 90 days after such period for comment expires the Sec-
retary shall publish an order establishing a performance standard or
terminate the proceeding.

The order shall include the Secretary's rea-
soning for the standard and the date(s) it will be effective.

Effective
dates shall, consistent with public health protection, be established so
as to minimize market disruption.

If the standard in the order is sub-
stantially different from the proposal, 30 days for comment shall be.

permitted.

--
(C) The Secretary may, in such order, include findings in addition
to those required.--- PAGE BREAK ---

permitted. --
(C) The Secretary may, in such order, include findings in addition
to those required. (2) Secretary may revoke a standard by notice in the Federal Reg-
ister stating his reasons for determining that the performance stand-
ard (or portion thereof) may no longer be in the public interest, the
manner in which persons may examine underlying data and how they
may present their views (orally or in writing). As soon as practical
thereafter the Secretary shall act on such proposed revocation, publish
his reasons therefor, and set the effective date(s),
(3) Secretary may on his own or on petition amend a performance
standard which shall be published in the Federal Register and subject
to 5 U.S.C. 553, judicial appeal and referral to an advisory committee. (4) 5 U.S.C. 553 (regarding administrative procedure) shall, con-
sistent with this section, apply to all proceedings to promulgate, amend
or revoke a performance standard. (5) (A) In the case of controversy concerning an order to promul-
gate, amend, revoke or ban, adversely affected person may (within
30 days) petition an appropriate United States Court of Appeals. A
copy of the petition shall be transmitted to the Secretary by the Court,
whereupon the Secretary shall file with the Court the record upon
which the order is based. (B) Petitioner may apply for leave to adduce additional evidence
which shall be granted upon a satisfactory showing of the need and

--- PAGE BREAK ---1177
approprateness of additional evidence.

The Secretary, based on such
additional evidence, may modify or set aside his original order.

(C) The Court shall have jurisdiction to affrm or set aside (in
whole or in part) the order, temporarily or permanently.

If the order
of the Secretary refuses to issue, amend or repeal a regulation and
such order is not in accordance with law the Court may order the
Secretary to take action in accordance with law.

The findings of the
Secretary, if supported by substantial evidence, shall be conclusive.

D) 
pp 
to the Supreme Court.

E) 
Su 
action shall survive notwithstanding changes of vacan-
cies in the Office of the Secretary.

(F) A certified copy of the record of proceedings before the Secre-
tary shall be furnished at cost to interested persons and shall be ad-
missible in any criminal libel for condemnation (except imports) or
other proceeding arising under this Act notwithstanding proceedings
with respect to the order which may have been previously instituted or
become final under this section.

(6) The Secretary may by regulation prohibit the stockpiling of
nonconforming devices between date of promulgating the order and
the effective date.

(h) (1) Authorizes Secretary to appoint independent advisory coni-
mittees to which could be referred any matters involved in a proposed
device standard which requires the exercise of scientific judgment,
prior to or after its publication in the Federa Register.

Secretary
could refer such proposals on his own initiative, and would be directed
to refer such proposals when requested by any interested persons show-
Ig good cause.

For the purpose of such referral the Secretary shall establish an
advisory committee (which may be a standing advisory scientific re-
view panel) and shall refer to it, together with all underlying data,
the matter in question for a report and recommendation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Secretary
could refer such proposals on his own initiative, and would be directed
to refer such proposals when requested by any interested persons show-
Ig good cause. For the purpose of such referral the Secretary shall establish an
advisory committee (which may be a standing advisory scientific re-
view panel) and shall refer to it, together with all underlying data,
the matter in question for a report and recommendation. After inde-
pendent study, the committee shail certif a report and recommenda-
tions to the Secretary together with all its underlying data and rea-
sons for it recommendations. After considering all data before him
including the Committee's report, the Secretary shall by order affirm
or modify or act on the order in question. (2) Secretary shall appoint qualified persons as members of the
advisory committee. Such persons shall be of appropriate diversified
professional background. Members (other than regilar Government
employees) may receive compensation (not to exceed GS-18 rate) and
travel and per diem allowances. (i) (1) Manufacturers of devices subject to standards would have to
asmire the Secretary that such devices comply with any testing meth-
ods prescribed in the standard or that device has been manufactured
in accordance with current good manufacturing practice designed to
assure such compliance. ('2) To assure that devices are in conformance with standards, Sec-
retary is directed to review and evaluate on a continuing basis the test-
ing and quality control programs carried out by manufacturers of de-
vices subject to standards. (j) Exemtd 
from compliance with otherwise applicable standard
any device: Intende solely for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation,

--- PAGE BREAK ---1178
treatment, or prevention of disease in animals or to affect structure or
function of animals; declared subject to scientific review, except for
those characteristics of a device made subject to an existing standard
under an application approved through scientific review, or a particu-
lar device Which the Secretary finds pursuant to regulations (issued
after opportunity for a hearing) may notwithstanding an applicable
standard be marketed pursuant to premarket scientific review
approval
(k) directs Secretary to issue regulations permitting interstate
shipment of devices varying &om an applicable standard -or the pur-
pose of testing or investigation, prior to amendment of the standard.

(1) Exempts custom made devices ordered by a physician (or other
specially qualified person as authorized by regulations of the Secre-
tary) for individual patients.

(i) (1) After consultant with the appropriate panel and after af-
fording interested persons an opportunity for an informal hearing
Secretary may, by regulation, ban a device if he finds the device pre-
sents an unreasonable risk of harm or deception and that performance
standards or premarket approval would not adequately protect the
public.

(2) Secretary may declare a proposed regulation banning a device on
an interim basis pending administration and judicial appeals if (after
opportunity for informed hearing) he finds such banning will expedi-
tiously reduce risk of harm to public or gross deception.

(n) Secretary may amend performance standard on an interim
basis, pending completion of standard setting procedure, if he deter-
mines (after opportunity for informal hearing) that amendment is
needed to permit rapid implementation of desirable changes or expe-
ditiously reduce risk of harm but thereby shall not prohibit devices
conforming to existing standards.

SEC.

202.

(a) A device is adulterated unless it conforms to an appli-
cable standard or if it is a banned device.--- PAGE BREAK ---

202. (a) A device is adulterated unless it conforms to an appli-
cable standard or if it is a banned device. (b) A device is misbranded unless its labeling bears warning, etc. required by standard or if it fails to comply wit the quality testing
or measurement required under section 513 (i). TITLE III-SCIENTIFIC REVIEW OF CERTAIN MEDICAL
DEVICES
SEC. 301. (a) A device is adulterated if it is unsafe under section
513 (scientific review). (b) Amends Chapter V of Federal, Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
by adding a new section 514 as follows:
SEC. 514. (a) Secretary may declare a device, for which scientific
review has been deemed appropriate according to the device classifica-
tion scheme, subject to such review, if after consulting with appropri-
ate scientific review panels he finds that: Scientific review is appropri-
ate to ensure safety and effectiveness or is appropriate to reduce or
eliminate unreasonable risk of illness or injury associated with expo-
sure to or use of a device or if he determines that scientific review is
appropriate to protect public health and other means may not be appro-
priate to reduce the risk of harm. To the maximum extent practicble,

--- PAGE BREAK ---he determines that scientific review is
appropriate to protect public health and other means may not be appro-
priate to reduce the risk of harm. To the maximum extent practicble,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1179
the Secretary shall provide interested persons an opportunity to sub-
mit data and views on the matter. The declaration shall be by regula-
tion and shall set forth and be based on the report, recommendations
and comments developed as part cf the classification scheme. Promul-
gation of a regulation declaring a device subject to scientific review
may be appealed to appropriate Court of Appeals. A device declared
subject to scientific review shall be deemed unsafe unless-
1. An approval is in effect,
2. It is exempt, or
3. It is intended solely for veterinary use.
(b) Secretury shall utilize the standing advisory panels for review
applications, plans and protocols under this section.
(c) (1) Scientific review of a device declared subject to such review
may be obtained by submitting to the Secretary an application con-
taining the following:
(A) Reports of all information concerning investigations to
determine safety, reliability, or effectiveness of devices which ar
known or reasonably should be known to the applicant.
(B) Statement of composition, properties, construction, and
principles of operation of device.
(C) Description of methods used in, and facilities and controls
used for, manufacture, processing, and when relevant, packing and
installation of device.
(D) Identification of any standard applicable to such device, or
its component, and adequate information either to show device
meets such standard or to justify any deviation.
(E) Samples of device and its components.
(F) Specimens of proposed labeling.
(G) Any other relevant information as Secretary upon advice
of the appropriate panel may require.
(2) Directs the Secretary to refer application, upon receipt, to
appropriate panel (s) for report and recommendations within such
period as he may establish.
(d) No later than 120 days after receipt of application, unless addi-
tional period agreed upon by Secretary and applicant. Secretary is
required, after considering panel's recommendations, either to ap-
prove application, advise applicant that application is not in appro-
priate form and inform applicant of measures required to receive
approval, or deny approval if device fails to meet criteria set forth
below.
(e) (1) Secretary shall deny application, if on basis of information
submitted or other information before him and after opportunity for
review by an advisory committee he finds:
(A) Device is not shown to be safe for use under conditions
prescribed, recommended, or suggested in proposed labeling;
(B) The method used in, and facilities and controls used for,
manufacture, processing, packing, and installation do not con-
form to current good manufacturing practices;
(C) There is a lack of adequate scientific evidence to show
device will have effect it purports or is represented to have under
conditions on the label;
10-026 0 - 76 - 76ood manufacturing practices;
(C) There is a lack of adequate scientific evidence to show
device will have effect it purports or is represented to have under
conditions on the label;
10-026 0 - 76 - 76

--- PAGE BREAK ---actices;
(C) There is a lack of adequate scientific evidence to show
device will have effect it purports or is represented to have under
conditions on the label;
10-026 0 - 76 - 76

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1180
(D) The labeling itself is false or misleading.
(E) The device is not shown to conform with an applicable
standard.
In making such determination Secretary shall weigh the benefit to the
public from the use of the device against any hazard to the public
health which would probably result from its use.
(2) "Adequate scientific evidence" is defined as evidence consistin g
of sufficient well-controlled investigations, including clinical investi-
gations where appropriate, by qualified scientific experts, on the basis
of which it could fairly and responsibly be concluded that device will
have effect it purports or is represented to have under conditions pre-
scribed in its proposed labeling. However, Seretary may determine
that other valid scientific evidence is sufficient to.establish effective-
ness of device.
(3) The safety and effectiveness of devices intended for use by
physicians, surgeons or other specially qualified persons shall be de-
teriined in light of such intended use.
(4) (A) Applicant may, within 30 days of denial of application,
obtain review by an independent scientific advisory committee and
Secretary shall give its report appropriate weight in reviewing the
application.
(B) In lieu of review by independent advisory committee, appli-
cant may receive review pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 554 (relating to ad-
ministrative procedures).
(f) (1) Secretary may, after obtaining advice from a panels) 
if
appropriate, and after giving due notice and opportunity for hearing
to the applicant withdraw approval if he finds:
(A) (i) Clinical or other experience or tests show device to be
no longer safe, for use under conditions previously approved;
(ii) Evidence of clinical experience, not contained in original
application or not available until after application was approved,
or tests by new methods or methods not reasonably applicable at
time application was approved show device to be no longer safe;
(B) New information, evaluated together with evidence on
which application was originally approved, shows lack of ade-
quate scientific evidence that device will have effect it purports-
(C) Original application contains untrue statement of material
fact;
(D) Applicant fails to establish system for maintaining re-
quired records, or has repeatedly or deliberately failed to maintain
such records or make required reports, or has refused to permit
access to such records;
(E) New information, together with evidence in original appli-
cation, show methods used in, or facilities or controls used for, not
in conformance with good manufacturing practice, and were not
brought into conformance within reasonable time after formal
notification;
(F) New information shows labeling is false or misleading and
not corrected within a reasonable time; or
(G) New information shows device to be in non-compliance
with an applicable standard.fication;
(F) New information shows labeling is false or misleading and
not corrected within a reasonable time; or
(G) New information shows device to be in non-compliance
with an applicable standard.

--- PAGE BREAK ---formation shows labeling is false or misleading and
not corrected within a reasonable time; or
(G) New information shows device to be in non-compliance
with an applicable standard.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1181
(2) Secretiry may immediately suspend approval if he finds an
imminent health or safety hazard is involved. Applicant is to be noti-
fied promptly and given opportunity for expedited hearing. This au-
thority may not be delegated.
(3) An order under this section shall state the findings upon which
it is based.
(g) Whenever Secretary finds that facts so require he shall revoke
any previous orders denying, withdrawing or suspending approval of
application and shall approve or reinstate such approval of an appli-
cation.
(h) Order of the Secretary may be served by a designee or by
registered or certified mail to applicant's last known address in Secre-
tar' 
reod9
(1) An applicant may petition Secretary to obtain review of
application of Secretary's action by an independent advisory commit-
tee of experts. Secretary may also refer an application to such a com-
mittee on his own initiative. Committee shall after independent study
certify a report and recommendations to Secretary (a copy of which
shall be sent to applicant or petitioner). Applicant and representatives
of the Department would have the right to consult with the committee.
Secretary is to consider findings of the independent committee and
thereupon may conform or modify any prior order.
(2) Provision for establishing independent advisory committee in
standards section (Sec. 513(h) ) shall a pply here.
(3) Paragraph (3) of See. 513(h) shal/apply in case of rferral to
advisory committee under this section.
(j) Judicial review to Court of Appeals is provided with respect to
final orders denying or withdrawing approval.
(k) (1) Declaration that purpose of this subsection is to encoura.,e
discovery and development of useful devices and maintain optimum
freedom for individual scientific investigators, consistent with protec-
tion of public health and safety and with professional ethics. Informa-
tion required to be submitted shall be concise and no more burdensome
than necessary.
(2) Devices intended solely for investigational use (in an appro-
priate scientific environment) by qualified experts are exempt from
scientific review.
(3) Secretary shall promulgate regulations (after opportunity for
a hearing) relating to the application of such exemption to any device
intended for clinical testing in humans in developing data to support
an application.
(4) Such regulations may condition such exemption noon:
(A) Submission of outline of p~a of initial clinical testing to
either a local institutional review committee established to super-
vise clinical testing in the facility where initial testing is to occur,
or to the Secretary for review by appropriate standing scientific
review panel.
(B) Prompt notification to Secretary of approval of plan by
review panel.
. (C) Submission to either a local institutional review committee
or the Secretary of an adequate protocol for clinical testing to be
conducted by separate groups of investigators under essentiallyl.
. (C) Submission to either a local institutional review committee
or the Secretary of an adequate protocol for clinical testing to be
conducted by separate groups of investigators under essentially

--- PAGE BREAK ---to either a local institutional review committee
or the Secretary of an adequate protocol for clinical testing to be
conducted by separate groups of investigators under essentially

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1182
same protocol, together with report of prior investigations 'of de-
vice, including tests on animals, adequate to justify the proposed
testing.
(I)) Obtaining of signed agreements from investigators that
humans upon whom device to be used will be under their personal
supervision.
(E) Establishment and maintenance of records, and making of
such reports obtained from investigational use of device, as Sec-
retary finds will enable him to evaluate safety and effectiveness
of device.
(F) Other conditions relating to protection of public health
and safety as Secretary ma deem necessary.
Nothing in this subsection shal1 be construed to require investigators
to submit directly to the Secretary reports on investigations. 
ecre-
tary shall determine if investigation conforms to this section within
30 days of a submission or notification under this section, and the in-
vestigation shall not begin until sponsor receives notice from Secre-
tary that investigation conforms to this section provided Secretary
may delay beginning of investigation unless he so finds and notifies
sponsor of such finding(s). Secretary may exempt investigation from
all or part of this subsection in the public interest.
(5) Regulations must assure that-
Rights and welfare of subjects are adequately protected;
Risks are outweighed by potential benefits or importance of
knowledge to be obtained; and
Informed consent of participants is to be obtained by adequate
methods in all but exceptional cases.
(A) The term "informed consent" means consent qf a person, or his
legal representative, so situated as to be able to exercise free power
ofchoice without intervention of any element of force, fraud, deceit,
duress, etc. Such consent shall be evidenced by an agreement signed by
such person or his legal representative. Such agreement shall include:
(1) Explanation of procedures, including any of an experi-
mental nature;
(2) Description of any discomforts and risks which can be
reasonably expected;
S3) Fair explanation of likely results if experiment fails;
4) Description of reasonably expected benefits;
(5) Disclosure of alternative procedures potentially advan-
tageous for the subject;
(6) Offer to answer any inquiries concerning procedures; and
(7) Instruction to subject regarding his freedom to discontinue
participation at any time.
Consent agreement must contain no language through which subject
waives any legal rights or releases the institution or its agents from
liability for negligence. Requires that permanent record be kept of
such consent.
(B) "Exceptional cases" to be construed strictly, permits waiver of
only those elements of consent in subparagraph (A) 1-7, as justified
by circumstances, and requires written concurrence by two physicians
not involved in the research unless there is a life-threatening situation
and such concurrence is not feasible.) 1-7, as justified
by circumstances, and requires written concurrence by two physicians
not involved in the research unless there is a life-threatening situation
and such concurrence is not feasible.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1183
(6) Whenever Secretary finds device being investigated on humans
which fails to meet conditions for exemption he shall notify such
spnsor of his determination, and reason therefor and the exemption
shall not apply until failure to comply is corrected.

(7) In determining applicability of this subsection to any device
and/or its compliance therewith, Secretary may obtain advice of ex-
perts not employed in carrying out this Act (except as consultants).

(1) Exempts custom devices ordered by physician (or other spe-
cially qualified persons as determined in regulations) for individual
patients.

(m) (1) A device intended for use by a practitioner which is subject
to frequent modifications, rapid obsolescence or which will not be pro-
duced in substantial volume may be exempted from scientific review
if it is to be developed in accord with a product development protocol.

(2) Any person may petition Secretary to establish a product de-
velopment protocol for such a device.

Secretary may, within 30 days,
refer petition to an expert panel, which may, within 60 days or such
other times as agreed upon by panel and petitioner, approve an ap-
propriate protocol.

If approved, protocol must stipulate:
(A) Investigational procedures required prior to clinical trials
on device;
(B) That institutional review committee make written finding
of risk-to-benefit ratio and continually monitor and report on
clinical trials;
(C) Type and quantity of clinical trials required prior to filing
notice of completion of protocol;
(D) Maintenance of records to show compliance with protocol;
(E) Informed consent from all human subjects; and
(F) That copies of all required records be available to Secre-
tary upon his request.

(3) If panel does not approve a protocol within 60 days, Secretary
may consider and approve protocol (with or without modification)
within next 60 days.

If neither panel nor Secretary approves a proto-
col, a final order will be issued denying petition and stating reasons.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(3) If panel does not approve a protocol within 60 days, Secretary
may consider and approve protocol (with or without modification)
within next 60 days. If neither panel nor Secretary approves a proto-
col, a final order will be issued denying petition and stating reasons. (4) After approval of protocol, petitioner may submit notice of
completion of the requirements of protocol, indicating that to the best
of his knowledge, no reasons exist relating to safety, effectiveness, or
other public health considerations why device should not be marketed. The Secretary shall approve or disapprove such notice within 9) days. (5) Secretary may at any time prior to approving a product de-
velopment protocol and after providing petitioner with opportunity
for informal hearing, revoke a protocol or object to notice of comple-
tion, if he finds in writing:
(A) Petitioner failed to comply with protocol requirements;
or(B) Results of clinical trials differ so substantially from re-
suits required in protocol that further trials are unjustifiable; or
(C) Device is not safe for use under conditions prescribed in
labeling; or
(D) A lack of adequate scientific evidence showing device to
have effect it purports to have on label. . (6) Allows Secretary to immediately revoke an exemption pertain-
ing to a device subject to a product development protocol, if an im-

--- PAGE BREAK ---to
have effect it purports to have on label. . (6) Allows Secretary to immediately revoke an exemption pertain-
ing to a device subject to a product development protocol, if an im-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1184
minent hazard to public health or safety is caused by existence of such
exemption.
(7) Secretary may also revoke an exemption, after a notice of com-
pletion of protocol requirements has become effective, if he finds that
any grounds listed in subsection referring to withdrawal of approval
of application under scientific review apply.
(8) Secretary may reconsider an order revoking an exemption
under this section and reinstate such exemption.
(n) (1) Devices in use the day before such device is declared sub-
ject to scientific review will be considered adulterated (unless ap-
proved) on the closing date or, if sooner, with respect to-an applicant
the date his application is approved.
(2) Defines "closing date" shall be 30 months after date device is
declared subject to scientific review, except Secretary may extend
period to sixty months but may terminate such extension if progress
reports etc., and not supplied.
Szc. 802. (a) Makes it a prohibited act to fail to establish, maintain,
or make a report under the investigation device secton or the section
requiring records and reports.
(b) 
Prohibits any representation that a deviq has been approved
under section 514.
TITLE IV-NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTIVE DEVICES;
REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT
Sc. 401. Amends Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act by adding
new section 515 as follows:
Swc. 515. (a) (1) Every person acquiring information which reason-
ably supports the conclusion that a device produced, assembled, dis-
tributed, or imported by him to contain a defect which could create
a substantial risk to the public health or safety, or to be in noncompli-
ance with an applicable standard would be required to notify the Sec-
retary of such defect or failure if device has left control of the manu-
facturer. Information received under this section (except for required
records) shall not be used in prosecuting natural persons under the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
(2) Notification shall contain a clear description of the defect evalu-
ation of the hazards and measures being taken to correct defect and
protection against the hazaAi.
(3) The term "defect" as it relates to a device means a deficiency
in design, materials, or workmanship, and does !ot i.wiude any
defi*creulting from use of improper accessories, improper in-
stallation, maintenance, repair, or use of device or deficiency resulting
from normal use of device after expiration of lifetime represented by
manufacturer.
(b) (1) If Secretary determines device presents substantial hazard,
he may make certain adequate notification is made by most appropri-
ate persons and means to all persons including manufacturers, distrib-
utors, health professionals, and users.
(2) If Secretary determines users need not be notified he will notify
health professionals who may comment on advisability of notifying
general public. Thirty days thereafter he will notify public if he de-
termines notification will not endanger public health.l notify
health professionals who may comment on advisability of notifying
general public. Thirty days thereafter he will notify public if he de-
termines notification will not endanger public health.

--- PAGE BREAK ---essionals who may comment on advisability of notifying
general public. Thirty days thereafter he will notify public if he de-
termines notification will not endanger public health.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1185
(3) If the Secretary determines after opportunity for a hearing
that device presents substantial hazard he may order manufacturer
or distributor or retailer to take following action at his election to ex-
tent punhaser's (and, if appropriate his physician) consent is ob-
tained. Those actions are (1) bring device into compliance (2) replace
device, and (8) refund purchase price (less depreciation if over one
year old) Secretary may require submission of plan for carrying out
this requirement.
(d) (1) No charge will be made of persons availing themselves of
this remedy and they shall be paid for expenses necessary to do so.
('2) The Secretary may require manufacturer, distributor, or re-
taier to reimburse another manufacturer, distributor, or retailer if
in the public interest.
(3) An order requiring repair, replacement or refund may only be
made after opportunity for an informal hearing. If interested person
wishing to participate in hearing is one of a class that is represented,
the Secretary may limit his participation to such representative.
(e) Remedies under this shall be in addition to and not in substitu-
tion for any other legal remedies.
Swc. 402. Failure to furnish notification or information under sec-
tions 515 or 516 or failure to comply with an order under section 515
are made prohibited acts.
Ste. 40A. Conforming technical amendment.
TITLE V-REQUIREMENT OF GOOD MANUFACTURING
PRACTICE
SZc. 501. Amends section 501 of Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act to provide that a device is adulterated if it is manufactured, proc-
essed, or installed except in accord with current good manufacturing
practice as determined by the Secretary's regulations issued under
section 701(a) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
TITLE VI--RECORDS AND REPORTS INSPECTION ANT)
REGISTRATION 
OF 
ESTABLISHMENTS; 
OFFICIAL
NAMES
SEc. 601. Amends Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cos-
metic Act by adding a new section 516 as follows:
Src. 516. (a) (1) Requires persons manufacturing, processing, re-
packing, labeling, or distributing a device subject to a standard which
is subject to an approved application for scientific review, to maintain
record 
and make reports to the Secretary on clinical experience and
other data relating to safety or effectiveness of such device, or possi-
bility of adulteration or misbranding, etc. Regulations under this
section are to have due regard for professional medical ethics and
interests of patients.
(2) Persons required to maintain such records must allow em-
ployees of Secretary to have access to any copy and verify such
records.
(b) Exempts from the requirement of records the following:
(1) Licensed practitioners who manufacture or process devices
solely for use in their professional practice.ny copy and verify such
records.
(b) Exempts from the requirement of records the following:
(1) Licensed practitioners who manufacture or process devices
solely for use in their professional practice.

--- PAGE BREAK ---uch
records.
(b) Exempts from the requirement of records the following:
(1) Licensed practitioners who manufacture or process devices
solely for use in their professional practice.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1186
(2) Persons manufacturing or processing devices solely for use in
research or teaching and not for safe.
(3) Other classes of persons as Secretary may exempt.
(c) Every person engaged in manufacuring devices shall on request
furnish to the Secretary pertinent technical data.
SEc. 602. Provides that authorized inspection of establishments
processing or holding prescription devices may extend to all things
therein, including records, files, papers, processes, controls, facilities,
etc. but not to financial, sales or pricing data or personnel (except for
qualifications of technical and professional personnel). Such inspec-
tion is not authorized with respect to pharmacies, medical practi-
tioners, researchers, and other persons exempted by Secretary.
SEC. 603. Each device establishment is required to register annually
with the Secretary and submit a list of all devices processed therein
(which list may be updated) and submit certain labeling and adver-
tising for such 
devices.
Requires device label to bear (in type at least half the size of type
usedfor brand name) the established name of the device (unless ex-
empted). Defines "established name" to mean name designated by Sec-
retary, name of device as it appears in an official compendium or its
common or usual name.
Provides that device establishments engaged solely in intrastate
commerce are subject to registration as well as those engaged in inter-
state commerce.
TITLE VII-GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sxc. 701. Amends chapter VII of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cos-
metic Act by adding new section 708 as follows:
Sjc . 708. (a) Establishes Advisory Council on Devices to advise
Secretary on policy matters relating to carrying out provisions of the
Act. Members appointed by the Secretary are to be manufacturers,
scientists, engineers, and members of the professions using such de-
vices as well as consumers and other persons knowledgeable about
problems involved in device regulation.
(b) Secretary may, without regard to civil service and classification
laws, appoint other advisory committees and council as he deems
desirable.
(c) Sets methods of compensation of Council members.
Sc. 702. Amends chapter VII of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cos-
metic Act to add a new section 709 as follows:
SEc. 709. (a) Authorizes Secretary to conduct, either directly or
through contracts with public or private agencies, organizations or
individuals, research, studies, and education and training in areas re-
lated to device safety, development of standards, testing methods, etc.
(b) Directs Secretary to cooperate with and invite participation by
other Federal or State agencies and interested professional or indus-
trial organizations; to collect and publish results of research and
other activities. Authorizes Secretary to obtain devices for research
and testing purposes.
SEc. 703. Amends section 705 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cos-
netic Act to permit Secretary to disseminate information regardingrizes Secretary to obtain devices for research
and testing purposes.
SEc. 703. Amends section 705 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cos-
netic Act to permit Secretary to disseminate information regarding

--- PAGE BREAK ---1187
device standards, testing facilities and methods, other information on
nature and extent of device hazards.

SEc.

704.

Amends chapter IX of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cos-
metic Act; add new section 903 as follows:
SEc.

903.

(a) Prohibits States from establishing or maintaining
standards or regulations for any device which is specifically subject to
an official Federal standard or scientific review, unless State require-
ments are identical to the Federal requirements.

(b) Specifically allows Federal, State, and local governments to es-
tablish safety requirements applicable to a device -for their own use,
if such requirements impose a higher performance standard than
otherwise required by aplicable Federal law.

(c) Allows Secretary to exempt a State proposed safety requirement
from preceding provision if proposed requirement:
Imposes higher performance level than Federal standard;
Is requiredby compelling local conditions; and
Does not unduly burden interstate commerce.

Szc.

705.

Amends section 301(j) of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act to provide that information on methods or processes
which are trade secret received in submission under the Act shall not
be disclosed outside the Department except that trade secret informa-
tion may be given to contractors under appropriate security provisions
for a use in furtherance of the purposes of the Act.

Sr 706.

Amends section 2G1 ol the Federal Food, Drug, and Cos-
metic Act to define "device" as follows:
The term "device" means instruments, apparatus, implements, ma-
chines, contrivances, implants, in vitro reagents, or similar articles, in-
cluding their components, parts, and accessories which are:
(a) Recognized in the official U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sr 706. Amends section 2G1 ol the Federal Food, Drug, and Cos-
metic Act to define "device" as follows:
The term "device" means instruments, apparatus, implements, ma-
chines, contrivances, implants, in vitro reagents, or similar articles, in-
cluding their components, parts, and accessories which are:
(a) Recognized in the official U.S. Pharmacopeia or National
Formulary, or any supplement to them; or
(b) Intended for use in diagnosis, treatment, or prevention of
disease in man or other animals; or
(c) Intended to affect structure or any function of the body of
man or other animals; and
(d) Which do not achieve any of their principal purposes
through chemical action within or on the body of man or other
animals and which are not dependent upon being metabolized for
achievement of their principal purposes. Sr.c. 707. Provides that a prescription device is misbranded if its
advertising is false or misleading or unless the advertising contains
the established name, full description of its components or qualitative
formula; and a brief summary of side effects, contraindications, and
effectiveness (as provided in Secretary's regulations.) Prior approval
of advertising.shall not be required except in extraordinary circum-
stances. Prescription device advertisements shall not be subject to sec-
tions 12-17 of the Federal Trade Commission Act. Sm. 708. Defines the term "prescription device" to mean any device
so designated by the*Secretary as being restricted to sale or istribu-
tion only upon written or oral authorization of licensed practitioner. A device shall not be designated as prescription unless bicause of its
potential harm it is nnt safe for use except under supervision of li-
censed practitioner or Unless it is limited to prescription sale pursuant
to approval of an application for scientific review.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t is nnt safe for use except under supervision of li-
censed practitioner or Unless it is limited to prescription sale pursuant
to approval of an application for scientific review.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1188
S,. 709. knilellds ,ection :104 of the Federal Food, l)ruig, adl Cos-
uIetic ket to permit the seizure of adulterated or niibraned devices
f'ulldl 
ill 111y State.
Sv.c. 710..kmends section 801 of the Federal Food, Drug. alnd Cos-
inetic Act to prohilit tle exportation of none o)plvina devices. The
Secretallrv may permit. export of articles not in comnphante wvith the
Federal *Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act if he deterlnines that such
export, is in the interest of public health and has the approval of the
count ry to which it is to be exported.
_S 
L11. (a) Except as provided in subsection (1) the Act will take
cireet on its enactment.
(b) Provision that device is adultered without approval becomes
effectivee in one vear or on date of approval of application with respect
lo certain uses of the device.
(c) Person owningY device establishment prior to the enactment (late
shall have seven months to register such establishment. If such initial
registration takes place in 1975T 
such establishment will he deemed
ryetistered for that year. 
-
VIII. CHANoEs IN EXlINO LAW
In compliance with subsection (4) of rule XXIX of the Standing
Rules of the Senate, changes in existing law made by titles I through
Ill of the bill, as reported, are shown as follows (existing law pro-
posed to be omitted is enclosed in black brackets; new matter printed
il italic)
FEDERAL FOOD, I)RIG, AND COSMETIC ACT
S 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
S.0'- 
-
CHAPTER II-IDETNwTiONS
S~c. 201. * * *
[() 
The term "device" (except when used in paragraph (n) of
this section and in sections 301(i), 403(f), 50-2(c), and 602(c) means
istruments, apparatus, and contrivances, including their components,
patits, and accessories, intended (1) for use in the diagnooss, -gure,
mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease, in man or other ani-
meals; or (2) to affect the structure or any function of the body of man
or other animals]
(h ) The terni "device" (except when used in paragraph (,n) -of th.s
• section and in sections 301(i), 403(f), 502(c), alld 02(e)) means in-
st,'uments, apparatus, implements, machines, contriVnces, implants,
;in itro reagents, and other similar or related articles, including their
components, parts, and accesoie8 (1) recogyived in. the offial No-
,onal Form ularv, the official United States phamnacopeia or any 8up-
plement to them; or (2) intended for use in the diagnosis of disease
or other conditions or in the. cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention
of disease ;n man or other animals; or (3) intended to affect the
ir~lature or any function of the body of man or other anima.; -and
(4) which do not achieve any of their 1"ncipal intended purposes
through chemical action within o on the body of man or other amrialsir~lature or any function of the body of man or other anima.; -and
(4) which do not achieve any of their 1"ncipal intended purposes
through chemical action within o on the body of man or other amrials

--- PAGE BREAK ---ction of the body of man or other anima.; -and
(4) which do not achieve any of their 1"ncipal intended purposes
through chemical action within o on the body of man or other amrials

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1189
Mid which am not dependent upon being metabolized for the achieve-
ment of any of their piriwnipal intended purposes.
(y) The term "prescription device" means any device which the
Secretary shall designate by regulation as being restricted to sale or
distribution only upon the written or oral authoriation of a practi-
tioner licensed by law to administer or use such device and under such
other condition. as the Secretary may by regulation prescribe. The
Secretary may designate as a presc'riptor device, pursuant to the
preceding sentence, only a device which:
(1) because of its potentiality for harmful effect, or the col-
lateral measures necessary to its use, is not safe for use except
under the supervmion of a practitioner licensed by law to admin-
ister or use such device; or
(8) i8 limited by an approved application under section 614
to use under the professional supervision of a practitioner licensed
by law to administer or use such device.
CHAPTER III-PoHmiTED ACTS AND PENALTMS
PROHIBITED ACTS
SEC. 301. * * *
(e) The refusal to permit access to or copying of any record as
required by section 703; or the failure to establish or -maintain any
record, or make any report, required under section 505 (i) or (j) 507
(d) or (g) [or] 512(j), (I),or (m),514 (k),or516(a) or the refusal
to permit access to or verification or copying of any such required
record.
(j) The using by any person to his own advantage, or revealing,
other than to the Secretary or officers or employees of the Depart-
ment, or to the courts when relevant in any judicial proceeding under
this Act, any information acquired under authority of section 404,
409, 505, 506, 507, 611, 512, 513, 514, 515, 516, 704, or 706 concerning
any method or process which as a trade secret is entitled to protection.
The Secretary may provide any information which contains or re-
late, to a trade secret or other matter referred to in this section or in
section 1905 of title 18, United States 8Code, to a contractor in further-
ance of the provisions of this Act, and such contractor shall take euch
security precautions as are p rescribed in regulatins omulgated by
the SeretaY and shall be subject to the provision. and penalties estab-
lished in th?8 Act and in section 1.905 of title 18, United States Code.
(L) The using, on the labeling of any drug or device or in any ad-
vertising relating to such drug or dei-ice, of any representation or sug-
gestion that approval of an application with *respect to such drug or
de'%re is in effect. under stetion 50. or 514, as the case may be, [505]
or that such drug or device complies with provisions of such section.
(q) (!) The fallvre or retima! to fiwish any notification or other
materhi or hif0)'of 
It- 
a irequ;red b! section 515 or 516; or (2) thesuch drug or device complies with provisions of such section.
(q) (!) The fallvre or retima! to fiwish any notification or other
materhi or hif0)'of 
It- 
a irequ;red b! section 515 or 516; or (2) the

--- PAGE BREAK ---complies with provisions of such section.
(q) (!) The fallvre or retima! to fiwish any notification or other
materhi or hif0)'of 
It- 
a irequ;red b! section 515 or 516; or (2) the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1190
f, dlure or refiisal to comply tC/h any requrement pesriibed under
"authority of sertion 515 (c).
SEIZURE
Smv. 304. (a) (1)
(2) The following shall tb liable to b proceeded against at any time
on lil , of information and condemned in any district court of the
nlitd States or I ittd States cout of a reriitory within the juris-
diction of which they are found: (A) Any drug tfiat is a counterfeit
(1-1g, (1 ) Any container of a counterfeit drug, Cand] (C) Aniy punch,
die, plate. stone, labeliig,. container, or other thing used or designed
for use in making a counterfeit drug or drugs [j, and (D) Any adul-
terated or misbranded derice.
C I.AP1'r-F 
V-D1))I.S 
ANXI) 1)EVIES
.II 
\ 
AATI'r 
\' 
D RUO'K A.KD I)XVILtS
Svc. 501. A drtg or devie shall be deened to be adulterated-
(a) * **
(e) (1) if it is. 01 )urports to be or ;s represented a, it device ivith
respect to which. or with repeat to tiny co(nponent, part, or accessory
of which there has been )romalttated a pe'forniimce standard tnder
section J13, unless such (trice, or .turl ,omponent, port, or accessory,
ix 
;n all rexpeaes *it coo)# rtilt,/ w';th .uch pefo;-ifnce standard; or
(2) -if it i8 a banned device."
(f) If (1) ;t is a dei'e. and (:2) 
tvUtch derices, or any component,
part, or accessory thereof, is deemed ?tm.afe or ineffective within the
miem;iiq of section !1 wtith ic8pect to its use or inten cd use.
(g) fp it is a derive and the methods used in. or the facilities o-' con-
trols usd for. s manufacte., proessiiiq. pocrki ,, holding., or instal-
lotion do not coform. to, op ore not operated or administered in eon-
formity -with, current good manufacturmng practice, as determined by
regult;o-ns of the Secretary promulgated under section 701(a) after
consdtation with all interested persons and after an opportunity fr
a hearing, to assure that such de-ice is safe and effective.
MHSIIIANDED DRUGS AND DEVICE
SEC. 50'2. A drug or device shall be deemed to be misbranded-
(a) * * *
(e) (1) If it is a drug, unless (A) its label bears, to the exclusion
of any other nonproprietary name (except the applicable systematic
chemical name or the chemical formula), (i) the established name (as
defined in subparagraph (3)) C(2))] of the drug, if such there be,
and (ii) in case it is fabricated from two or more ingredients, themical name or the chemical formula), (i) the established name (as
defined in subparagraph (3)) C(2))] of the drug, if such there be,
and (ii) in case it is fabricated from two or more ingredients, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---1191
established name and quantity of each active ingredient, including tie
quantity, kind, and proportion of any alcohol, and also including
whether active or not, the established name and quantity or pro r-
tion of any bromides, ether, chloroform, acetanilide, acetophenetidin,
amidopyrine, antipyrine, atropine, hyoscine, hyoscyamme, arsenic,
digitalis, diitalis glucosides, mercury, onabain, strophanthin, strych-
nine, thyroid, or any derivative or preparation of any such sub-
stances, contained therein: Provided, That the requirement for stat-
in g the quantity of the active ingredients, other than the quantity of
those specifically named in this paragraph, shall apply only to pre-
scription drugs; and (B) for any prescription drug the establihed
name of such drug or ingredient, as the case may fe, on such label
(and on any labelinlg on which a name for such drug or ingredient is
used) is printed prominently and in type at least half as large as that
used thereon for any po prietary name or designation for such drug
or ingredient: and Provided, That to the extent that compliance with
the requirements of clause (A) (ii) or clause (B) of this subparagraph
is impracticable, exemptions shall be established by regulations pro-
mulgated by the Secretary.

(R) If it is a device, uitleas its labe1 bears.

to the e.cluioi_ of any
other itonproprietary nanme, the established name (as defined in sub-
paragraph (4)) of the device, if such there be, promninently printed
in type at least half as large as that used thereon for any proprietary
name or designation for such device: Provided, That to the extent
compliance with the requirements of this subparagraph is impractica-
ble, exemptins shall be established by regulations Promulgated by
the Secretay.

(3) [( 2) As used in, [this paragraph (e)] sub paragraph (1), the
term "established name".to the e.cluioi_ of any
other itonproprietary nanme, the established name (as defined in sub-
paragraph (4)) of the device, if such there be, promninently printed
in type at least half as large as that used thereon for any proprietary
name or designation for such device: Provided, That to the extent
compliance with the requirements of this subparagraph is impractica-
ble, exemptins shall be established by regulations Promulgated by
the Secretay.

(3) [( 2) As used in, [this paragraph (e)] sub paragraph (1), the
term "established name".

with respect to a drug or ingredient thereof,
means (A) the applicable official name designated pursuant to section
508, or (B) if there is no such name and such drug.

or such ingredient,
is an article recognized in an official compendium, then the official title
thereof in such compendium, or (C) if neither clause (A) nor clause
(B) of this subparagraph applies, then the common or usual name,
if any, of such drug or of such ingredient: Provided further, That
where clatise (B) of this subparagraph applies to an article recognized
in the United States Pharmticopeia and in the Homeopathic Pharma-
copeia under different official titles, the official title used in the United
States Pharmacopeia shall apply unless it is labeled and offered for
rale as a homeopathic drug.

ini which case the official title used in the
Iomeopathic Pharmacopeia shall apply.

(4) As used in subparagraph (g), the ter~n "established name".

with
respect to a device, means (A) the applicable of4ca name designated
pursuant to section 508.

or (B) if there is ito such name and suC device
iv an article recognized in an offlal compendium then the offial title
thereof in such compendium.

or (C) if neither clause (A) nor clause
(B) of this subparagraph applies, then the common or usual name of
such device, if any.--- PAGE BREAK ---

or (B) if there is ito such name and suC device
iv an article recognized in an offlal compendium then the offial title
thereof in such compendium. or (C) if neither clause (A) nor clause
(B) of this subparagraph applies, then the common or usual name of
such device, if any. (j) If it is dangerous to health when used in the dosage, or manner or
with the frequency or duration prescribed, recommended, or suggested
muathe labeling thereof.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1192
(o) If it [is a drug and] was manufactured, prepared, propagated,
compounded, or processed in an establishment in any State not duly
registereld under section 510.

(q) I/it ii a device subject to a performance standard promulgated
under section 513, unless (1) its labeling bears such instructioni and
warnings as may be prescribed in suck performance standard; and
(2) it complies with the requirements of section 513(i) (1).

( r) In the case of any device that is a prescription device, if its ad-
vertising is false or misleading in any particular.

(8) In the case of any prescription device distributed or offered for
sale in any M'tate, unless the manufartirer, packer, or distribut or
thereof includes in all advertisements, and other descriptive printed
matter issued or caused to be issued by the manufacturer, packr, or
ditributor with respect to that device a true statement of(1) the es-
tablished itine as defined in section 502(e), printed proninently and
in type at least half a* large as that used for any trade or brand name
thereof.

(2) a full description of the components of such device or the
formula showing quantitaticely each ingredient of such device to the
extent required in regulations which shall be issued by the Secretary
after an opportunity for a hearing.

rnd (3) sach, other, information in
brief sunimnry .relating 
to side effects.

contraindications, and effective-
ness as shall be required in regulations which shall be issued by
the Secretary after an opportunity for a hearing: Provided, That
(A) except in.

ex.traordinairy ehiumr'c 
ances, no regulation issued under
this paragrapIh shall .reqture pior approval by the Secretary of the
content of any advertisement, and (IB) no advertisement of a prescrip-
tion device ,,published after the effective date of wegulations issued
uler thi; paragraph applcable to advertisements of prescription
devices, shall, weith respect to the matters specified in this paragraph
or covered by such regulations.--- PAGE BREAK ---

contraindications, and effective-
ness as shall be required in regulations which shall be issued by
the Secretary after an opportunity for a hearing: Provided, That
(A) except in. ex.traordinairy ehiumr'c 
ances, no regulation issued under
this paragrapIh shall .reqture pior approval by the Secretary of the
content of any advertisement, and (IB) no advertisement of a prescrip-
tion device ,,published after the effective date of wegulations issued
uler thi; paragraph applcable to advertisements of prescription
devices, shall, weith respect to the matters specified in this paragraph
or covered by such regulations. be subject to the provisions of sections
12 through 17 of the Federal Trade ('ommisnmio 
Atct. as amended (15
U.S.C. 6'-57). "Thi8 paragraph shall not be pplicable to any printed
matter which the ,Secretary determinhus to be labeling as" defined in see-
/ion 201(m) of thisAet. .' 
TII RITY 1I)I*}-ESIGNATE OFFICIAL XAME.S
Si:c. 508. (a) The Secretary may designate an official niame for any
(irug or deice if he deteriniies that su i- action is necessary or desir-
able in the interest of usefulness and simplicity. Any official name
designated tinder this section for any drug or device shall be the only
official name of that drug or de,'ice used in any official coin lendium
tl)ublished after such name has been prescribed or for any other pur-
Ipose of this Act. In no event. however, shall the Secretary establish
an official name so as to infringe a valid trademark. (b) Within a reasonable time after the effective date of this section. and at such other times as he may d(n necessary, the Secretary shall
cause a review to hei made of the official names i)y which drug ,s are
identified in the official United States Pharmacopeia, the official
Hotmeopatlhic Pharmacopeia of the United States, and the official Na-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1193
tional Formulary, and all supplements thereto, and at such times as
he may deem necessary shall cause a review to be made of the offiial
names by wkkehk deices are identified in any oflieia2 compendium, and
fill supplements thereto, to determine whether revision of any of those
names is necessary or desirable in the interest of usefulness and
simplicity.

(c) Whenever he determines after any such review that (1) any
such official name is unduly complex or is not useful for any other
reason, (2) two or more official names have been applied to a single
drug or device, or to two or more drugs which are identical in chemical
structure and pharmacological action and which are substantially
identical in strength, quality and purity, or two or rnom devices which
are substantially similar in Jesign and purpose, or (3) no official name
has been applied to ii medically useful drug or device, he shall transmit
in writing to the compiler of each officia Ecompendium in which that
drug or drugs or device are identified and recognized his request for
the recommendation of a single official name for such drug or drugs
or device which will have usefulness and simplicity.

Whenever such
at single official name has not been recommended within one hundred
and eighty days after such request, or the Secretary determines that
any name so recommended is not useful for any reason, he shall des-
ignate a single official name for such drug or drugs or device.

When-
ever he determines that the name so recommended is useful, he shall
designate that name as the official name of such drug or drugs or
device.

Such designation shall be made as a regulation upon public
notice and in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 4 of
the Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C.

1003).Such designation shall be made as a regulation upon public
notice and in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 4 of
the Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C.

1003).

(d) After each such review, and at such other times as the Secretary
may determine to be necessary or desirable, the Secretary shall cause to
be compiled, published, and publicly distributed a list which shall list
all revised official names of drugs or devises designated under this sec-
tion and shall contain such descriptive and explanatory matter as the
Secretary may determine to be required for the effective use of those
lines.

(e) Upon a request in writing by any complier of an official com-
lpndium that the Secretary exercise the authority granted to him
under section 508(a), lie shall upon public notice and in accordance
with the procedure set forth in section 4 of the Administrative Pro-
cedure Act (5 U.SC.

1003) designate the official name of the drug or
device for which the request is made.

* 
5 
9 
5 
5 
5 
5
REGISTRATION OF PRODUCERS OF DRUG$ 
AND DRICIZES
Sm~v.

510.--- PAGE BREAK ---

* 
5 
9 
5 
5 
5 
5
REGISTRATION OF PRODUCERS OF DRUG$ 
AND DRICIZES
Sm~v. 510. (a) As used in this setion-
(1) the term "manufacture, preparation, propagation, corn-
)ounding, or processing" shall include repackaging or otherwise
I The Congress hereby SAnds and declares that in order to make regulation of Interstate
commerce In drugs avid devices effective It is necessary to provide for registration and
Inspection of all establishments In which drugs or devices are manufactured, prepared,
propagated, compounded, or processed; that the products of all such establishments are
likely to enter the channel of Interstate commerce and directly affect such commerce; and
that the regulation of Interstate commerce in drugs and derlres without provision for
regitrattob and Inspection of establlhinents that may be engaged only in Intrastate coin-
merce In such drugs or devices would discriminate against and depress interstate commerce
In such drugs end dericee, and adversely burden, obstruct, and affect such interstate
commerce.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1194
changing the container , wrapper, or labeling of any drug package
or device package il furtherance of the distribution of the drug
ol deoic from the original place of manufacture to the person
who makes final delivery or sale to the ultimate consumer or user;
and
(2) the term "name" shall include in the case of a partnership
the name of each partner and, in the case of a corporation, the
inme of each corporate officer and director, and the State of
incorporation.

(b) On or before December 31 of each year every person who owns or
operates any establishment in any State engaged in the manufacture,
preparation propagation, comp)ounding, or processing of a drug or
drugs or a device or devices shall register with the Secretary his name,
places of business, and all such establishments.

(c) Every person upon first engaging in the manufacture, prepara-
t ion, propagation, compounding, or processing of a drug or drugs or a
device or de vices in any establishment which he owns or operates in
any State shall immediately register with the Secretary his name,
place of business, and such establishment.

[(d) Every person duly registered in accordance with the foregoing
subsections of this section shall immediately register with the Secre-
tary any additional establishment which he owns or operates in any
State and in which he begins the manufacture, preparation, propaga-
tion, compounding, or processing of a drug or driugs.J
(d) (1) Every person duly registered in accordane with the fore-
going subsections of this section shall immediately register with the
'ecretai-y any additional establishment which he ownts or operates in
any 'tate aiul in, which be begins the manufacture, preparation, propa-
gation, compounding, or processing of a drug or drugs, or of a device
or devices.

-
(2) Every person itho is registered with the Secretary pursuant to
the first sentence of subsection (b) or (c) or paragraph (1) of this
subsection shall, if any device is thereafter manufactured.--- PAGE BREAK ---

[(d) Every person duly registered in accordance with the foregoing
subsections of this section shall immediately register with the Secre-
tary any additional establishment which he owns or operates in any
State and in which he begins the manufacture, preparation, propaga-
tion, compounding, or processing of a drug or driugs.J
(d) (1) Every person duly registered in accordane with the fore-
going subsections of this section shall immediately register with the
'ecretai-y any additional establishment which he ownts or operates in
any 'tate aiul in, which be begins the manufacture, preparation, propa-
gation, compounding, or processing of a drug or drugs, or of a device
or devices. -
(2) Every person itho is registered with the Secretary pursuant to
the first sentence of subsection (b) or (c) or paragraph (1) of this
subsection shall, if any device is thereafter manufactured. prepared,
propagated, compounded, or processed in any establishment with re-
spect to which ihe is so registered, intmediately file a supplement to
such registration with the Secretary indicating such fact. (g) The foregoing subsections of this section shall not apply to-
-(1) pharmacies which maintain establishments in conformance
with any applicable local laws regulating the practice of phar-
mac 
and medicine and which are regularly engaged in dis-
pensing prescription drugs or devices, upon prescriptions of prac-
titioners licensed to administer such drugs or devices to patients
under the care of such practitioners in the course of their pro-
fessional practice, and which do not manufacture, prepare, propa-
-
gate, compound, or process drugs or de-vices for sale other than in
the regular course of their business of dispensing or selling drugs
or devices at retail;
(2) practitioners licensed by law to prescribe or administer
drugs or devices and who manufacture, prepare, propagate, com-
pound, or process drugs or devices solely for use in the course of
their professional practice;icensed by law to prescribe or administer
drugs or devices and who manufacture, prepare, propagate, com-
pound, or process drugs or devices solely for use in the course of
their professional practice;

--- PAGE BREAK ---1195
(3) persons who manufacture, prepare, propagate, coinpoulid,
or process drugs or devices solely for.

use iii research, teaching, or
chemical analysis and not for sale;
(4) such other classes of persons as the Secretary may by regu-
lation exempt from the application of this section upon, a hinding
that registration by such classes of persons in accordance with
this section is not necessary for the protection of the public health.

(h) Every establishment in any State registered with the Secretary
pursuant to this section shall be subject to inspection pursuant to see-
tion 704 and shall be so inspected by one or more officers or employees
duly designated by the Secretary at least once in the 2-year period be-
gimning with the date of registration of such establishment pursuant
to this section and at least once in every successive 2-year period
thereafter.

(i) Any establishment within any foreign country engaged in the
manufacture, preparation, propagation, compounding or processing
of a drug or drugs or a device or devices shall be permitted to register
under this section pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Secre-
tary.

Such regulations shall require such establishment to provide the
ihi.formation required by subsection (U) in the case of a device or de-
Vices and shall include provisions for registration of any such estab-
lishment upon condition that adequate and effective means are avail-
able, by" agreement with the government of such foreign country or
otherwise, to enable the Secretary to determine from time to time
whether drugs or devices manufactured, prepared, propagated, com-
pounded, or processed in such establishment, if imported or offered
for import into the United States, shall be refused admission on any
of the grounds set forth in section 801 (a) of this Act.(i) Any establishment within any foreign country engaged in the
manufacture, preparation, propagation, compounding or processing
of a drug or drugs or a device or devices shall be permitted to register
under this section pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Secre-
tary.

Such regulations shall require such establishment to provide the
ihi.formation required by subsection (U) in the case of a device or de-
Vices and shall include provisions for registration of any such estab-
lishment upon condition that adequate and effective means are avail-
able, by" agreement with the government of such foreign country or
otherwise, to enable the Secretary to determine from time to time
whether drugs or devices manufactured, prepared, propagated, com-
pounded, or processed in such establishment, if imported or offered
for import into the United States, shall be refused admission on any
of the grounds set forth in section 801 (a) of this Act.

(j) (1) Every person who registers with the Secretary under sub-
section (b), (c), or (d) shall, at the time of registration under any
such subsection, file with the Secretary [a list of all .drugs (by estab-
lished name] a list of all drugs and a list of all devices (Tin each case
by established nnme (as defined in section 502(e)) and by any pro-
prietary name) which are being manufactured, prepared.

propagated,
compounded, or processed by him for commercial distribution and
which lie has not included in any list of drugs or derices filed by him
with the Secretary under this Iparagraph or paragraph (2) before
such time of registration.

Such list.

shall he prepared in such forn and
manner as the Secretary may prescribe and shall be accompanied by-
(A) in the case of a drug contained in [such] the applicable
list [list] and subject to section 505, 506, 507.

or 512, oi a device
.ontabied in.--- PAGE BREAK ---

shall he prepared in such forn and
manner as the Secretary may prescribe and shall be accompanied by-
(A) in the case of a drug contained in [such] the applicable
list [list] and subject to section 505, 506, 507. or 512, oi a device
.ontabied in. the ap Wlicable list 'with respect to w-hich a perform-
atee standard has been romulqated under section 513 or wh;ch
; Rtbjert to section 514 a refer nce to the authority for the mar-
keting of such drug or device and a copy of all labeling for such
dug or deviiee;
(B) in the case of any other drug or device contained in [such
list -] 
o1. appliable list-
[(i) which is subject to section 503(b)(1). a copy of all
labeling for such drug, a representative sampling ot adver-
tisements for such drug, and. upon request made by the See-
rectary for good cause, a copy of all advertisements for such
drug, product, or]
10-026 0 - 76 - 76

--- PAGE BREAK ---1196
(i) which drug is subject to sectioit 503(b) (1), or which
de-vice, is a prescription device a copy of all labeling for such
drug or device, a representative sampling of advertisements
for such drug or device, and, upon request made by the Secre-
tary for good cause, a copy of all advertisements for a par-
twiular drug product or device, or;
((ii) which is not subject to section 503(b) (1), the label
and package insert for such drug and a representative sam-
pling of any other labeling for such drug :]
(it) which drug is not subject to section 503 (b) (1), or
which device is not a prescription device, the label and pack-
ale insert for such drg or device and a representative sam-
ping Of any other labeling for suck drug or dee'
(C) in the case of any drug contained in [such list an appli-
cabe list which is described in subparagraph (B), a quantitative
listing of its active in 
dient or ingriients, except that with
respect to a particular drug product the Secretary may require the
submission of a quantitative listing of all ingredients if he finds
that such submission is necessary to carry out the purposes of this
Act: and
(D) if the registrant filing ltheJ a list has determined that a
particular drug product ontaimed in such list is not subject to
section, 
505, 
k' , 
or 512, or the particular device contained in
such a list is not subject to a performance standard promulgated
under secion 613, or is not a prescription device a brief statement
of the basis upon which the registrant made such determination
if the Secretary requests such a statement with respect to that par-
ticular drug product C.

or device.1196
(i) which drug is subject to sectioit 503(b) (1), or which
de-vice, is a prescription device a copy of all labeling for such
drug or device, a representative sampling of advertisements
for such drug or device, and, upon request made by the Secre-
tary for good cause, a copy of all advertisements for a par-
twiular drug product or device, or;
((ii) which is not subject to section 503(b) (1), the label
and package insert for such drug and a representative sam-
pling of any other labeling for such drug :]
(it) which drug is not subject to section 503 (b) (1), or
which device is not a prescription device, the label and pack-
ale insert for such drg or device and a representative sam-
ping Of any other labeling for suck drug or dee'
(C) in the case of any drug contained in [such list an appli-
cabe list which is described in subparagraph (B), a quantitative
listing of its active in 
dient or ingriients, except that with
respect to a particular drug product the Secretary may require the
submission of a quantitative listing of all ingredients if he finds
that such submission is necessary to carry out the purposes of this
Act: and
(D) if the registrant filing ltheJ a list has determined that a
particular drug product ontaimed in such list is not subject to
section, 
505, 
k' , 
or 512, or the particular device contained in
such a list is not subject to a performance standard promulgated
under secion 613, or is not a prescription device a brief statement
of the basis upon which the registrant made such determination
if the Secretary requests such a statement with respect to that par-
ticular drug product C.

or device.

(2) Each person who registers with the Secretary under this sub-
section shall report to the Secretary once during the month of June of
each year and once during the month of December of each year the
following information:
(A) A list of each drug or device introduced by the registrant
for commercial distribution which has not been included in any
list previously filed by him with the Secretary under this sub-
paragraph or paragraph (1) of this subsection.--- PAGE BREAK ---

or device. (2) Each person who registers with the Secretary under this sub-
section shall report to the Secretary once during the month of June of
each year and once during the month of December of each year the
following information:
(A) A list of each drug or device introduced by the registrant
for commercial distribution which has not been included in any
list previously filed by him with the Secretary under this sub-
paragraph or paragraph (1) of this subsection. A list under this
subparagraph shall list a drug or device by its established name
(as defined in section 502(e)) and by any proprietary name it
may have and shall be accompanied by the other information
required by paragraph (1). (B) 
If since the date the registrant last made a report under
this paragraph (or if he has not made a report under this para-
graph since the effective date of this subsection) he has discon-
tinued the manufacture, preparation, propagation, compounding,
) 
or recessing for commercial distribution of a drug or device in-
cluded in a list filed by him under subparagraph A) or para-
graph (1) notice of such discontinuance, the date of such discon-
tinuance, and the identity (by established name (as defined in sec-
tion 502(e)) and by any proprietary name) of such drug or
device. (C) If since the date the registrant reported pursuant to sub-
paragraph (B) a notice of discontinuance he has resumed the

--- PAGE BREAK ---1197
manufacture, preparation, propagation, compounding, or, proc-
essing for commercial distribution of the drug or devov with re-
spect to which such notice of discontinuance was reported; notice
of such resumption, the date of such resumption, the identity of
such drug or device (each by established name (as defined in sec-
tion 502(e)) and by any proprietary name), and the other infor-
mation required by paragraph (1), unless the registrant has
previously reported such resumption to the Secretary pursuant
to this subparagraph.

(D) Any material change in any information previously sub-
mitted pursuant to this paragraph or paragraph (1).

(3) The cretary may also requre each re 
rant under this sec-
tion to submit a list of each drug product which (A) the registrant is
manufacturing, preparing, propagting, compounding, or processing
for commercial distribution, and (B) contains a particidar ingredient.

The Secretary may not require the submission of such a list unless he
has made a finding that the submiion of such a list is necessary to
carry out the purposes of this Act.

PRNLIMINARY CLA8IPIOATIOY OF DKVICES
Sec.

511.

(a) Within sketyi days after funds ams first approriated
for the implementation of this section, t 
eretay shal appont and
orgae separate classification, panel.

of e~vpert, qUlfid by scientifi
training and experience, to review and.

clissfy &v 
intend for
human use into appropiate categories based on the safety and efe-
tiveness of such devices.

Each panel shall review all devies intended
for human use within its respective scentife 
field for purposes of ap-
propriate classification and shall submit within one year of its appoint-
ment a report of its findings and conclusions to the Secretary.

To the
mazImu 
m extent practical the panel or panels shall provide an oppor-
tunity for any intereted person to submit data and views on the classi-
fication of a device (or type or class of device).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Each panel shall review all devies intended
for human use within its respective scentife 
field for purposes of ap-
propriate classification and shall submit within one year of its appoint-
ment a report of its findings and conclusions to the Secretary. To the
mazImu 
m extent practical the panel or panels shall provide an oppor-
tunity for any intereted person to submit data and views on the classi-
fication of a device (or type or class of device). The Secretary may uti-
lize any such panels which may have been formed for the purpose of
such classificatwn prior to enactment of this section and such panes
may utilize information and findings developed prior to enactment of
this section in making such reports. Such panels shall also serve as sc&-
entifle review panels under section 514. (b) (1) Panel members shall be qualified by training and experi-
ence to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of devices in the category
or class of devices to be referred to such a panel and to the extent
feasible shall possess skill in the use of or experience in the develop-
ment, manufacture, perfection, or utilization of such devices. In ad-
dition to such experts, each panel shall include as nonvoting members
a representative of consumer interests and a representative of industry
interests. Panel members may be nominated by appropriate scientific,
trade, and consumer organizations. (2) The panels shall be organized according to the various fields of
clinical medicine and the fundamental sciences which utilize medical
devices, and shall consist of members with diversified expertise in such
fields as clinical and administrative medicine, engineering, biological
and physical sciences, or other related professions. The Se-'entary shall
designate one of the members of each panel to serve as chairman

--- PAGE BREAK ---1198
thereof.

Panel members shall, while attending meetings or conferences
of the panel or otherwise engaged on its business.

be compensated at
per diem rates fixed by the Secretary but not in excess of the rate for
grade GS-18 of the General Schedde at the time of 8UCh service, in-
cluding travel-'time, anid ulkile so s8eving away froma their hmnes or
regular places of business they lnay be allowed travel expenses (in.-
eluding per diem in lieu of subsistence) as authorized by title 5, United
States Code, section 5703, for persons in the Governtment service em-
ployed intermittently.

The ,Secretary shall furtish each panel with
adequate clerical and other necessary assistance, and shal prescribe
by regulation the procedures to be followed by each.

panel.

(') Panels appointed pursuant to subsection (a) shall submit (in
the final report of the panel Ol- sWh interim reports as may be appro-
priate) recomnwndations 'or the clasifation of devices for purposes
of and in accordance with sections 513 and 514 into one of the three
following classes and shall, to the extent practicable.

assign priorities
within such classes:
(1) Those devices (A) for which insuffcient information exists to--
(i) asmure effectir'eness, or
(ii) assure that exposure to such devices will not cause unreas-
onable risk of ille71C8 or injury, and
(B) for which standards or other means may not be appropriate to
i educe or eliminatfle such risk of illness or injury and which therefore
• hoidd bf.- subject to pemarket scientific reviewed pursuant to section
.3//.

Such re-view, either initial or continuing.

shall be required if the
panels determine that such der ice purports or is represented to be fm
a use Which is life sustailning m life supporting.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Such re-view, either initial or continuing. shall be required if the
panels determine that such der ice purports or is represented to be fm
a use Which is life sustailning m life supporting. (') 
Those devices for ithih in order to assure effectireness or to
i.educe or eliminate unmasonable risk of illness or intu7y it is (zppro-
p,'Ie to establish reasonable perfornance standards pursuant to sec-
lion 513 relating to safety and effectiveness and for which other mean? iay not be appropriate to reduce or eliminate such risk of illness or
injury. (3) Those devices which are safe and effective when used in conjunc-
tion with instructions for usage and warnings of limitation, which are
adequate for the persons by whom the device is represented or intended
for use, which present a minimum risk, and which should be exempt
/romr requirements for scientific review or performance standards. (d)As soon as possible after filing of the report required for com-
pliance with subsection (a), the Secretary shall publish suh report in
the Federal Register and provide interested persons an opportunity to
comment thereon After reviewing such comments the Secretar. shall
by regulation provide for preliminary classification of such devices. The Secretary may establish priorities for implementing the action
warranted by such classification under sections 513 and-614 and may
de/r such action for any device until an appropriate time, consistent
with expeditious implementation of these protnsz on. (0) The Secretary, with the advice of the appropriate panel and
after making a specific finding and publishing such finding in the Fed-
eral Register and providing interested persons an opportunity for
comment thereon may by regulation change the preliminary clasifi-
cation of a device or group of devices from one category to another.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1199
() T preliminar clasifation of a device shall constitute public
notice that, as expeditiouly as is fea*ible, the Secretary i issue d
final okiation in the form of a determination of a nied for a e-
f ormance standard pursuant to section.

513 or a determination of the
need for scientifio review pursan"t to section 514.

The plimninar ckw
sifcation shall not relieve the Secretary of any obligation to pro.

video notice as retired by sections 513 and 614.

Any inteted person
will have an opportunity.

pending such final classfcation, to udr.

take studies and other work appropriate to develop a performance
standard or to demonstrate tA safety and effectiveness of a device.

(g) After the promulgation of regulatiom under subsection (d) of
this section and commensurate with the effective date of section 501 (f)
a manufacturer of a medical device which has not been classif 
in
accordnce with this setion shall f an application for the clasuifia-
tion of the device and must receive from the Seortary notiflation
of the classification of such device.

The Secretary sha act on the
application within eixty days unless the Secretary and the manufac-
turer agree to an additional 
iod of time.

The Secretary shall la-
sify the device in accordno with t 
criteria and procedue litd
in 511, 613, and 514 inlding the requirement for consultation with
the appropriate panel or panel#.

The appeal provisions of sections 513
and S14 shall apply.

PBRPORMANOC I2'4NDARDS FOR MEDICAL DNVICOII
Authority To Set Standards
Src.

613.

(a) (1) Whenever in the judgment of the Secretary such
action is a proprzate to assure effectienes or to reduce or eliminate
unreasonable risk of illness or injury associated with expoure to or use
of a device (including the need for uniformity and compatibility with
system.--- PAGE BREAK ---

613. (a) (1) Whenever in the judgment of the Secretary such
action is a proprzate to assure effectienes or to reduce or eliminate
unreasonable risk of illness or injury associated with expoure to or use
of a device (including the need for uniformity and compatibility with
system. or enronments in which it is intended to be used) and for
which other means may not be a p 
priate to reduce or eliminate such
risk of illtss or injury he sha:Vby order issued in accordance with
subsection (c) of this sectio 
roulgate for any device, or type or
class of devwe2 for which a performance standard Uvs been determined
to be appropriate pursuant to section 611 (d), a performance standard
relating to safety ad effectiveness, (including effectiveness over time),
and including where necessary: the composition the comnution, the
compatibility with power system. and connections, and the properties,
and including where appropriate the uniform identification of such
device. Sch performance standard shall where appropriate inchlue
provision for the testing of the device and the measurement of its
characteristics (inchding individual lot testing by or at the direction
of the Secretary where necessary to assure the accuracy and reliability
of rests when it is determied that no other more practicable means
to assure accuracy and reliability are available to the Secretary) and
s8aWl where appropriate require the use and prescribe the form and
content of instructions or warnings neessary for the proper installa-
tion, maintenance, operation, and use of the device. (f) A performance standard may requre that the device or any
component thereof be marked, tagged, or acompanied by lear and

--- PAGE BREAK ---la-
tion, maintenance, operation, and use of the device. (f) A performance standard may requre that the device or any
component thereof be marked, tagged, or acompanied by lear and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1200
adequate warn 
or i, 
i 
eon 
a sonably moessary for the pro-
tection of health or safety.
(*) The Secreta.y shall pri for a per4i etah " of the
adequacy of all performance standards promulgated under this aec-
tion in order to reflect chamges in the state of the art of the developmet
of devices and in applicable medical, seientiftc, and other techmologi4cal
data.
(4) For the purposes of this section. when a device is intended for
use by a pAYsuIa 
surgeon or other peon licensed or otherwise
sPecilly ($z lifi_ there or, its safety and effectiveness shall be deter-
m fined Wi t regard to such intended use.
Consultatim with Other Federal A @now and Intoeted Groups;
Use of Other Fe 
Agencies
(b) (1) Prior *to (A) initiat mng a proceeding under subsection (c)
to promnuqate a performance standard under this section. (B) initint-
igthe development of a proposed performance standard under
subsection (f) of thus section, or (C) the taking 0 any action under
subsection (g) of this section. the 8ecretary shall to the maaimun
practicable extent cmsult ucith, and give appropriate weight to rele-
rant standards published by, other Federal agencies concerned with
standard setting and other nationally or internabionally recognized
standard-setting agencwis or organizations. In considering proposals
for the development of performance standards, the Secretary shall to
the mazirnum, extent practicable invite appropriate particpion,
through joint or other conference., workshops, or other means, by in-
formed persons repreentative of scientific, professional, industry~, and
consumer organizations which in his judgment can make a significant
contribution to such development.
(B) In carrying out his duties under this section, the Secretary shall
utilize to the ma4inum practicable extent the personnel, facilities, and
other technical support available in other F&era agenes.
Initiation of Proceeding for Performance Standards-Development
by Interested Parties
(c) (1) A proceeding to promulgate a performance stadard under
this section shall be initiated by the ere 
by pub oagm of notice
in the Federa Register. Such notice shall 
o 
portunityor
comment on the need to initiate such pc 
ing andsW includ-
(A) a description or other designation of the device (or type or
cls of device) towhich the p 
dinq r 
;
(B) the nature of the ritsk "r""sk i 
e to be ontroled;
S(C ) a sumnamy of the data on which the Secretary a found
a need for inaiation of the prose din;
(D) identification of any existing performance standard (if
knowtn to the Secretary) which may be levant to the proceeding;
and
(E) an inviao to aty person, including any Federal agency,
which has developed or is willin6 
to develop a p-roposed 
f orm-
ance standard to suln-si -to theSecretary 
grthe 
st 
dy af ter
the date of suck notice (Y) such a perf or~macestwufard; or~iagency,
which has developed or is willin6 
to develop a p-roposed 
f orm-
ance standard to suln-si -to theSecretary 
grthe 
st 
dy af ter
the date of suck notice (Y) such a perf or~macestwufard; or~i

--- PAGE BREAK ---eveloped or is willin6 
to develop a p-roposed 
f orm-
ance standard to suln-si -to theSecretary 
grthe 
st 
dy af ter
the date of suck notice (Y) such a perf or~macestwufard; or~i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1201
an offer to develop a proposed performance standard in accord-
ance with procedures prescribed by regulations of the Secretar.
Such invitation shall specif a peoof time, duing which the
performance standard is to be developed, Which sali be a period
ending ow_ hundred and eighty days after the publication of the
notice, unless the Secretary for good cause finds and includ such
funding in a notice published in the Federal Register) that a dif-
ferent period is appropriate.
(2) Prior to his issuance of an order to promulgate a performwce
standard, the Secretary shall consier-
(A) the degree of risk of illness or injury associated with those
aspects of the devices subject to the order;
(B) the appro ae 
number of devices, or types or classes
_,rOf$ sub * 09 t the order
(0) the benefit to the public froin the devices subject to the
order, and the probable effect of the order upon the utility cost or
availability of the devices to meet that nieed ;
(_D) means of achieving the objective ot the order with a mini-
mal disruption or dislocation of co petition and of reasonable
manufacturify and other commercial practices consistent with
the public hea th and safety; and
(E) data and comments subitted pursuant to subsection (c)
relevant to such order.
(3) Before taking action pursuant to subsections (d), (e), and (f)
concerning the use of an existing performance standard or the designa-
tion of a person or governmental body to formulate a proposed per-
formance standard, or simudtaneous with such action, the Secretary
shall publish a notice in the Federal Register containing his findings
pursuant to paragraph (9) on the need to establish a standard. Such
findings shall be mode only after consideration of the report, con-
ment8, and regulation, provided for in section 511 (d) and the com-
iments received under the notice described in subsection (a) (1),. and
may be appealed to the courts pursuant to subsectiom (g) (5) within
thirty da8 after publication in the Federal Register.
Use of Existing Performance Standards
(d) If the. Secretary (1) finds that there exists a standard which has
been published by any Federal agr,.y or other qualified agency, orga-
nization, or institution. (B) has made reference to such standard (un-
less it is a standard submitted under subsection (o) (1) (E)) in his
notice pursiant to aubsection (c) (1) (D). and (3) determines that such
performance standard may be substantially acceptable to him as a
derice standard, then he may, in lieu of accpting an offer under this
section, publish such performawe standard as a proposed device per-
lormanee standard in accorda4we with subsection (g).
Acceptance of Offers To Develop Performance Standavli
(e) (1) Except as otherwise provided by subsection (d), the Secre-
tary may accept one or mor of er to develop a proposed performance
standard pursuant to the invitation prescribed by subsection (c) (1)) (1) Except as otherwise provided by subsection (d), the Secre-
tary may accept one or mor of er to develop a proposed performance
standard pursuant to the invitation prescribed by subsection (c) (1)

--- PAGE BREAK ---1202
(E) if he determines that (A) the offeror is technically competenit to
utdertake and complete the developmicnt of an appropriate per-orm-
aiwe standard within the period specified in the invitation under sub-
section (c) (1) (E) and (B) the offeror has the calaity to comply
with procedures pi escribed by-regulations of the Secretary under par-
agraph (4- of this subsection.

WNhere more than one offer is received
and the 'eeretary determines that the requirements of subparagraphs
(A) and (B) have been met, the Secretary shall, wherever practicable,
give priority to offerors who have ito proprietary interest in the device
for which the standard is to be developed.

The ASecretary shall require,
by regulation , that in making an offer, each offeror and appropriate
individual directors, officers, consultasnts.

and employee of each offeror
company, disclose the following information:
(i) all current industrial or commercial affiliations;
(ii) sources of research support other than the offoror;
(iii) compantes in which offerors have fInancial interests:
(iv) such additional information as the Secretary deems per-
tinent to reveal potential conflicts of interest with regard to the
offer.

The information received by the Secretary from.an offa ror whose offer
has been accepted shall be .made public by the Secretary at the time
that an offer is a accepted.

(2) The Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register the name
and address of each person whose offer is accepted, and summary of
the torms of such offer as accepted.

(3) When an offer is accepted under this subsection the Secretain!

may agree to contribute to the offeror's cost in-developing a proposed
performance standard, if the Secretary determines that such contribit
tion i8 likely to .esult in a more satisfactory performance standard
than would'be developed without suck contribution., and that the of-
feror is fnawially responsible.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(3) When an offer is accepted under this subsection the Secretain! may agree to contribute to the offeror's cost in-developing a proposed
performance standard, if the Secretary determines that such contribit
tion i8 likely to .esult in a more satisfactory performance standard
than would'be developed without suck contribution., and that the of-
feror is fnawially responsible. Regulations of the Secretary, shall set
forth the itents of cost in which he may participate, except that such
items may not include construction (except minor remodeling), or the
acquisition of land or buildings. (4) The Secretary shall prescribe regulatims governing the devel-
opment of proposed perfmance standards under this subsection and
subsection (f). Such regulation shall include requirement-
(A) that performance standards recommended for proinulga-
tion be supported by test data or surh other documents or ma-
terials as the Secretary may reasonably require to be de.elopel. and be suitable for promulgation under subsection (g);
(B) that. performance standards recommended for promulga-
tion contain stwh test method as may be appropriate for measure-
ment of compliance with such perfm-mance stamards;
(C) for notice and opportunity by interested person, including
representatives of consumers or consumer organiz~ations, to par-
tieipate in the development of such performance standards:
(D) for the maintenance of such records as the Secretary pre-
scribes in such regulations to disclose the course of the develop-
ment of performance standards recommended for promudgation. the comments and other information submitted by any person
in connection raith such development, including conents and

--- PAGE BREAK ----
ment of performance standards recommended for promudgation. the comments and other information submitted by any person
in connection raith such development, including conents and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1203
information with respect to the need for such recommended per-
fon'maxce standards, and such other matters as may be relevant
to the evaluation of suh recommended performance standards;
and
(E) that the Secretary and the Comptroller Generalof the
United Stats, or any of their duly authord repmrentativea,
have access for the purpose of audit and exannato to any books,
documents, papers, and records, relevant to the ex penditure of any
contribution of the Secretary, under paragraph (3).
Development of Performance Standards by the Secretary
(f) I/ the Secretary has published a notice as provided by sub-
section (c), and-
(1) no peron accepts the invitation prescribed by subsection
(c) (1) (E);
(2) the Secretary has accepted neither an existing performance
standard pursuant to subsection (d) nor an offer to develop a
proposed performance standard pursuant to subsection (e); or
(3) the eretary has accepted an offer pursuant to subsection
(91) but determinmn that the offeror is unwilling or unable to con-
tinue the develop nt of the performance standard which was
the subject of the offer or the performnume standard which has
been developed is not satisfactory ;
then the Secretary shall proceed to develop a proposed performance
standard pursuant to procedures prescrib by subsection (g).
Procedure for Promulgation, Amendment, or Revocation of
Performance Standards
(g) (1) (A) Within one year after expiration of the period provided
or persons to submit a proposed performance standard or offer to
develop a proposed performance standard (which time may be ex-
tended by the Secretary by a notice pub listed in the Federal Register
stating the good cause therefor) and after review of any proposal
submitted under subsection (e), the Secretary shall publish in the
Federal Register either a proposal to promul gate a performance stand-
ard applicable to the device (or type or class of device) subject to the
proceeding, or a notice that the proceeding i8 terminated. The proposal
to promulgate a performance standard shall set forth the performance
standard, the manner in which interested persons may examine data
and other information on which the performance standard is based, and
the period within which interested persons may present their comments
on the standard (including the need therefor) orally or in writing.
Stwh period for comment shah be at least sixt days, but not to exceed
ninety days which time may be extended by t 
eeretary by a notice
publithed in the Federal Regite stating the caus thertfor.
(B) Within ninety days after the ewiration of the 
for com-
ments pursuant to paragraph (A), the Secretary sa, 
by order pub-
liehed in the Federal register, act upon the proposed perfortnce
standard or terminate the proceeding. The order hll set forth the
performance standard, if any, the reason 
r the Seoretary's aion,
and the date or dates upon which the perf orance standard, or por-e
standard or terminate the proceeding. The order hll set forth the
performance standard, if any, the reason 
r the Seoretary's aion,
and the date or dates upon which the perf orance standard, or por-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1204
tions thereof, will become effective.

Such date or dates shall be estab-
lished so as to minmise, consistent with the public health and safety,
economic los to, and diey tion or dislocati6n of, dometic and inter-
national trade.

If any 
romance standards set forth in the order is
substantially different from that set forth in the proposal an addi-
tional period o thirty days shall be permitted for comment on such
performance standard.

(C) The S eretar ma include in the order promulgating a per-
fortnance standard nch findings in addition to those made pursuant
to subsection (c ) (3) as he maay determine to be necessary to support the
.W.ment re 
red by sibeoction (a) (1).

(9) The Seoretary may revoke any performance standard, in whole
or in part, upon the ground that there no longer oit a need therefore
or that such performance stand 
~ orprt thereof) 4 no longer in
the public interest.

Such revocation sha be published as a proposal
in the Federal Regiter and shall set forth suwh performance standard
or portion thereof to be revoke, a summary of the reasons for his
determination that there may no longer be a need therefor or that
such standard (or any part thereof) may no longer be in the public
interest, the manner in which interested person!

may examine data
and other inf omotio relevant to the Secretary's determination, and
th period within which any interested Pe"on may present his view,
o 
or ;n writing, with respot to swh revocation.

As soon as prac-
tiable thereafter, the Secretary shall by order act upon such proposal
and shall publish such order in the F 
ralRegister.

The order shall
include the reasons for the Secretary's action and the date or dates
upon which such revocation shall become effective.

(3) The Seoretary may propose an amendment of a performance
standard on his own initiative or on the petition of any interested
person by publishing such proposal in the Federal Register.

Such pro-
posal sal be subject to paragraph.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(3) The Seoretary may propose an amendment of a performance
standard on his own initiative or on the petition of any interested
person by publishing such proposal in the Federal Register. Such pro-
posal sal be subject to paragraph. (4) and (5) of this subsection and
subsection (h). (4) To th# extent not inconm*stent with this section, the proviins
of section 553 of title 5 of the United States Code, shall govern pro-
eeodings under this section to promulgate, amend, or revoke a per-
formanc standard. a) 
(A) In a case of actual controversy as to the validity of an
r promulgating, amending, or revoking a performance stan-
ard or findings that a standard i needed or a regulation banning a
device, any poon who will be advorsely affected by such order if
placed in effect may at any time prior to the thirtieth day after-such
ot 
is issued file a petition with the United States Court of Appeals
for the District of Columbia or for the circuit wherein such person
resides or has his principal place of business, for a judicial review of
such order. A copy of the petition shall be transmitted by the clerk
of te court to the Seorotary or other oicer designated by him for
that p 
e. The Secrtary thereupon ahail file in the court the rec-
ord ofth proceedings on which the Secretary based his order, as
provided in section 
tl 
of title 8, United States Code. (B) If the petitioner applies to the court for leave to adduce addi-
tional eidene, and shows to the satisfaction of the court that such

--- PAGE BREAK ---1205
addhionial eidence is material and tha there were reasonable grounded
for the failw'ie to adduve such evidence in the Proceeding before the
Secretary the court may order such additia evidee (ind etnden e
in rebuttal thereof) to be presented to the Seretar.

The Secretary
may modify his findings as to the facts, or make new findings, by ra-
soni of the aidditional evidence, so taken, and he -#hall fiP suoc modified
or new findings, and his recommendation, if any, for the modi j,.ation
or setting aside of his oigin.

order, with the return of such additional
evidence.

(C) Upon the 
MU 
ng of the petition referred to in subparagraph (A)
Of this paragraphi,the court shall have jwisdiction to affrm, the order',
or to set it aside in whole or in part, teporarily, or permanently.

if
the order of the Seeretary refuses to issue, amnmd.

or repeal a reguo-
tion and swk order is not in accordance with law the court shc'a., 
its
judgment order the Secretary to take action with respect to such reg,-
lation, in accordance with law.

The fidings of the Secretary as to the
facts.

if supported by substantial ev 
e, shall be conelusive.

(IP) The judgment of the court a-firming or setting aside, in whole
or in part, any such order of the Secretary shall be final, subject to
review by the Supreme Court of the United States upon certiorari or
certification as provided in sections 239 and 940 of the Judicial Code,
(1s amended.

(E) AnV/ action instituted under this subsection shall survive not-
withstanding any change in the -person occupying the office of Secre-
tar or any vacancy in such ofce.(IP) The judgment of the court a-firming or setting aside, in whole
or in part, any such order of the Secretary shall be final, subject to
review by the Supreme Court of the United States upon certiorari or
certification as provided in sections 239 and 940 of the Judicial Code,
(1s amended.

(E) AnV/ action instituted under this subsection shall survive not-
withstanding any change in the -person occupying the office of Secre-
tar or any vacancy in such ofce.

-
(F) A certified copy of t4l transcript of the record of the proceed-
;ngs before the Secretary shall be furnished by the Seretary to any
interestedd party at his request, and payment of the costs therof, and
shall be admissible in any criminal libel for cond 
nation, exdusion
of imports, or other proceeding arising under or in respect of this Act,
notiethtanding proceedings with respect to the ordei have been pre-
riou.ly intituted or become final uwder this subsection.

(6) The Secrety may by regulation prohibit a manufacturer of
a device from stockpiling any device to wZ a perform 
e standard
,lpp)&es.

so as to prevent suA manufacturer from cirouwventing the
purpose of such performance standard.

For purpose of this para-
qraph, the term -stockpiling' means maucturing or importng a
devive between the date of yromugation of su h performance stand-
ard and its effective date at a rate which is sign 
-can greater (as
determined under the regulations under this paragraph) than the rate
at which such device was produced or imported during a base period
(prescribed in the regulations under thi pargrph) ending before
the date of promulgation of the performance standard.

Referral to Independent Advisory Commitee
(h) (1) The Secretary may refer a proposal under subsetion (g)
to an advisory committee of 
oxetsfr 
a report and recomenendation
With respect to any matter involved in suok pposal whio requires
tMe eercse of scntific jdgment.--- PAGE BREAK ---

For purpose of this para-
qraph, the term -stockpiling' means maucturing or importng a
devive between the date of yromugation of su h performance stand-
ard and its effective date at a rate which is sign 
-can greater (as
determined under the regulations under this paragraph) than the rate
at which such device was produced or imported during a base period
(prescribed in the regulations under thi pargrph) ending before
the date of promulgation of the performance standard. Referral to Independent Advisory Commitee
(h) (1) The Secretary may refer a proposal under subsetion (g)
to an advisory committee of 
oxetsfr 
a report and recomenendation
With respect to any matter involved in suok pposal whio requires
tMe eercse of scntific jdgment. Suek 
AAral.AaU be p 
to or
after publication uder suck subsection, 
shall be s refe 
d upon
a request, within the time for comment specified in the proposalof

--- PAGE BREAK ---1206
any interested person (unlen the Secretary $fn the re uet to bje
'Without good cause).

For the purpose of any such referral, the See-
tary shall appoint an advisory committee (which may be a standing
advisory scientific review panel established under section 514 (b) ) and
shall refer to it, together iith all the data before him, the matter so
involved for study, and for a report and recommendation The advi-
soiv committee shall, after independent study of the data furnished to
it by the Secretary and other data before it, certify to the Secretary
a report and recommend 
,tions 
together with all nde lying data and
a statement of the reasons or ba.

for the rcmmendations.

A copy
o/ stwh report shall be promptly supplied by the Secretary to any per-
son who has flied a petition, or who has requested such rferral to the
adi'isory committee.

After giving consideration to all data then before
him.

including such report, recommendations, underlying data, and
statement, and to any prwr order issued by him in connection with
such matter, the Secretary shall by order conform or modify any prior
order, or, if no such prior order has been issued, shall by order act upon
the proposal.

Any interested person shall have the right to consult with.

suc advisory committee, and such advisory committee is authorized
to consult with any person, in connection with the matter referred to it.

(P) The Secretary shall appoint as members of any such advriory
coninnttee persons qualified in the subject matter to be referred to
the committee and of appropriately diversified professional back-
ground.suc advisory committee, and such advisory committee is authorized
to consult with any person, in connection with the matter referred to it.

(P) The Secretary shall appoint as members of any such advriory
coninnttee persons qualified in the subject matter to be referred to
the committee and of appropriately diversified professional back-
ground.

Members of an advisory committee who are not in the regu-
lar full-time employ of the United States, ohile attending conferences
or meetings of there committee or otherwise serving at the request of
the Secretary, shall be entitled to receive compensation at rates to be
fled by the Secretary but not at rates exceeding the daily equivalent
for grade GKR-18 of the General Schedule for each day so engaged,
including traveltime; and while so serng away/fro their homes or
regular places of business they may be allowed travel expenses, in-
clu;ding per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by section 5703
of title 5 of the United States Code for person in the Government
service employed intermittently.

The Secret 
shall furni h the com-
mittee with clerical and other resistance, and shall by regulation.

pre-
scribe the procedures to be followed by the committee.

Testing or Manufacture of Devices To Assure Compliance With
Standard#
(i) (1) Every manufacturer of a device subject to a standard under
this section shall assure the Secretary, at such times and in such form
(hid manner as the .eetar~i shall by regulation prescribe, that test-
ing methods prescribed by the performance standard show the device
to comply therewith, or that the detsice has been.

manufactured under
a pro gram of quality control 'which is in accord with current good
manufacturing prac#ce (as may be determined by regulations of the
SecretarV) designed to assure such compliance.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Testing or Manufacture of Devices To Assure Compliance With
Standard#
(i) (1) Every manufacturer of a device subject to a standard under
this section shall assure the Secretary, at such times and in such form
(hid manner as the .eetar~i shall by regulation prescribe, that test-
ing methods prescribed by the performance standard show the device
to comply therewith, or that the detsice has been. manufactured under
a pro gram of quality control 'which is in accord with current good
manufacturing prac#ce (as may be determined by regulations of the
SecretarV) designed to assure such compliance. (2) To assure that devices conform to performance standards under
this section, the Secretary shall review and evaluate on a continuing
basis testing and other quality control programs carried out by mwnu-
facturers o devices suect to such performance standards.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e Secretary shall review and evaluate on a continuing
basis testing and other quality control programs carried out by mwnu-
facturers o devices suect to such performance standards.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1207
Exemption
(j) This section shall not apply to any device (1) intended solely
(A) for use in the dianm s 
wgat, 
treatment, or proven-
tion of disease in animal. oterthan man or (B) to afet thestru-
Lure or any function of the body of such animl or (9) subject to
section 51$ except for those oherac stiu of the detice made subject
to p 
of existing performnce standards by an applicao
approved pursuant to that section; or (8) any device of a particular
manufacturer which the Secretary finds pursuant to regulattons issued
after an opportunity for a hearing may notwith-setaing any standard
promulgatid under this section be marketed pursuant to an approval
III -. "Setion 614.
Temporary Permits
(k) The Secretary shall isue regulatio 
rtetin th interstate
shipment of devices varying from an appliable performance stand-
ard for the purpose of investigation or other testing prior to amend-
meit of the standard. Such regulations may include reasonable
conditions related to the safety and effectiveness of the devices.
Custom Devie
(1) This section shall not apply to any custom device to the extent
that it is ordered by a physician (or other specly qualified per-
sons, authoed byrega 
s promulgated by the.Secretary, after
an opportunity for a hearing) to be made in a special way for indi-
vidual patients. Any such device shall comply with alU aspects of any
applicable perfonwinee standard except those specifically ordered by
a physician or such other authorized person to be changed. This sub-
section shall apply only to devices ordered for individual patients,
and shall not otherwise exempt a device from subsection (k). Custom
devices shall not be used as a course of conduct and shall not be gen-
erally available in finished form for purchase or for dispensing upon
prescription, and whether in finished foiwt or otherwise, shall not be
made available through commercial channels by the maker or proces-
sor thereof.
Banned Device
(m) (1) Whenever the Secretary finds after consultation with the
appropriate pmel or panels established under section 614(b) and
after affording aal interested persons an opportunity for an informal
hearing. that-
"(A) a device presents an unreasonable risk of illness or injury
or deception; and
(B) no feasible performance standard or approved application
under section 514 would adeq.ately protect the public from the
unreasonable risk of illness or injury or deception associated with
such device,
he may propose and, in accordance with subsection (g), promulgate a
regidation declaring such product a banned device.
(9) The Secretary may declare a proposed regulation banning a
device to be effective on an interim basis after publication in then (g), promulgate a
regidation declaring such product a banned device.
(9) The Secretary may declare a proposed regulation banning a
device to be effective on an interim basis after publication in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---1208
Federal RegIster peoding completion of the procedures established in
subsction (g) (3), if hdartmines, after affording all inerted per-
sone an opportunity for an informal hearing, that such ban=ng will
expeditiosly reduce or laminate a hasard to the public health or
safety, fraud, or gross deception associated with such device.

Expedited Amendment
(n) The Secretary may declare a proposed amendment of a per-
formnance standard to be effective on an interm basis after publica-
tion in the Federal Register, pending ompletion of the proc
established in subsection (g) (3), if 
determines, after a wording all
interested persons an o 
or an infoa hearing, that suoh
amendment will 
riradimof 
desrable change.

or
will expeditioustre 
or eina 
a aadto the public health
or safety wit 
r 
iting devices permitted by the existing per-
formanoe t nd aiand that to do so is in the public interest.

SCINNTIPC REVrEW OP CEJrMTN MEDICAL DVIOES
When Scientifl Review Is Required
Sic.

514.

(a) (1) The Secretary may declare that a device (or type
or class of deiice) for which soientift review has been determined to
be appropriateU psuant to section 511 (d) shall be subject to scientii
review under this section with respect to any particular use or intended
use thereof if, after consultation with the a 
We panda or panel.

specifid 6n subsection (b), he fnds that (A) such revew is appropri-
ate to assure effectiveness or i appropriate to reduce or eliminate un-
reasonable risk of illness or injury associated with exposure to or use
of a device and (B) other means available to the Seeta y may not
be appropriate to reduce or eliminate such risk of illness or Sntusry.(a) (1) The Secretary may declare that a device (or type
or class of deiice) for which soientift review has been determined to
be appropriateU psuant to section 511 (d) shall be subject to scientii
review under this section with respect to any particular use or intended
use thereof if, after consultation with the a 
We panda or panel.

specifid 6n subsection (b), he fnds that (A) such revew is appropri-
ate to assure effectiveness or i appropriate to reduce or eliminate un-
reasonable risk of illness or injury associated with exposure to or use
of a device and (B) other means available to the Seeta y may not
be appropriate to reduce or eliminate such risk of illness or Sntusry.

()
Th weretary may declare that a device (or type or clas of device)
shall be subject to scientific review under this section with respect to
any particular use or intended use thereof if he (A) determines that
scientofic review for an devic is apprOpriate to protect the public
health and safety and B) finds that other means available to the Sec-
retary maty not be appropriate to reduce or eliminate such risk of ill-
ness or snury.

To the maximum extent practicable the panel or panel#
shall provide an opportunity for any interested person to submit data
and viws 
on the appropriateess of applying scientifl review to a
device (or type or class of device) or any particular use of a device.

The declaration shall be by regular ion (which may be rescinded by the
Secretary) which shall not set forth and be based upon the report,
comments, and regulations provided for in section 511 (d), the ftndigs
prescribed in this subsection, and findings as described in section
513(c) (9).

The Promulgation of such regulation, may be appealed to
the courts purmt4at to the aprOVisi 
of section 613(g) (6) within
thirty dapsafter publication on the Federal Register.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The declaration shall be by regular ion (which may be rescinded by the
Secretary) which shall not set forth and be based upon the report,
comments, and regulations provided for in section 511 (d), the ftndigs
prescribed in this subsection, and findings as described in section
513(c) (9). The Promulgation of such regulation, may be appealed to
the courts purmt4at to the aprOVisi 
of section 613(g) (6) within
thirty dapsafter publication on the Federal Register. device (or
type or clas of deice) declared to be subjet to scienil review sha
be deemed unsafe or ineffective for the purpose of the application of
seOiA 501 (f) unless either-"

--- PAGE BREAK ---r. device (or
type or clas of deice) declared to be subjet to scienil review sha
be deemed unsafe or ineffective for the purpose of the application of
seOiA 501 (f) unless either-"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1209
(i) there is 
et an approval of an appliation with respect
to such dsvice 
this section,
(ii) such device is exempted by or pursuant to subsections (k),
(l),1or (in) of this section, or
(iii) suk devce is intended solely (1) for use in the diagnosis,
curs, itigatioN treatment, or preveto ofdeasnanml
other thai man or (11) to affect the structure or any function of
the body of such animals.
Standing Advisory Scientifw Review Panels
(b) For the purpose of reviewing applications Fed under subsection
(c), and of reviewing plans and protocols submitted under subsection
(k) (4), and of reviewing product developmnt 
otocol under sub-
section (m) (B) the Secretary shall utilize the standing advisory panels
established under section 511. The seection, payment, and administra-
tion of these panel shall be governed by section 611.
Application for &ientiftc Review
(c) (1) Scienti f review of a device (or type or class of device)
which has been declared subject to such review in accordance with sub-
section (a) may be obtained by submitting to the Secretary an applica-
tion for his delermination of the safety and effectiveness of the -evice.
The pplWcation shall contain (A) full reports of all information,
pdsblished or known to or which should reasonably be known to the
applian.t, concerning investigation which have been made to show
whether or not such device is safe and effective for use; (B) a full
statement-of the composition, properties, and constructin and of the
princple or prnipe of operation of such device; (C) aul de.cip
Lion of the methd used n, and t); 
tacities and control. used for,
the manufacture, processing, and, when relevant, packing and installa-
tion of such do;vw 
(D) an identifying reference to any performance
standard, applicable to such device, or component of such device, which
is in effect pursuant to section 513, and either adequate information to
show that such device fully meets such perfomnw ce standard or ade-
quate infortion to *stify any deviation from such, standard; (E)
such samples of such devie and of the articles used as components
thereof as te Secretary may require; (F) specimens of the labeling
proposed to be sed for such deile; and (G) such other information,
relevant to jheifi74eW-t Matter of the application. as the Secretary, upon
adi.e of the appropriate panel or panel. established pursuant to sub-
secton( b) , may require.
(f .Upon reoeipt of an application meeting the reqiement set
fot paragraphs (1), the Secretary shall refer euch publication to
the apPro 
e panel or panel. (established pursuant t subsection
(b) ) for study aid for submission (withinswhA period,i" any, as he
may establish) of a report and recommendations, together with ill
underlying d42& and the reasons or basis for the recommendations. The
provisons of section 706(d) (B) shall apply with respect to the mate-
rial so submitted.rt and recommendations, together with ill
underlying d42& and the reasons or basis for the recommendations. The
provisons of section 706(d) (B) shall apply with respect to the mate-
rial so submitted.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ns, together with ill
underlying d42& and the reasons or basis for the recommendations. The
provisons of section 706(d) (B) shall apply with respect to the mate-
rial so submitted.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1210
Consideration of an Initial Action on Application
(d) As promptly as possible, but in no event later than one hundred
and twenty days after the receipt of an application under subsection
(c), unless an additional period i8 agreed upon by the Secretary and
the applicant, the Secretary, after considering the report and recom-
mendction. referred to in paragraph (2) of such subsection, shall-
(1) approve the application i/ he finds that none of the grounds
fordenyng approval specified in subsection (e) applies,
(f) advise the applicant that the application is not in approv-
able form; and inform the applicant, insofar as the Secretary de-
termno to be practicable, of the nwasures required to place such
application in approvable frm (which measues may include /ur-
t er research by the applicant in accordance with one or vtore
protocols, prescribed by the Secretary).; or
(3) deny approval of the application if he finds (and sets forth.
the basis of such findings as part of or accompanying such denial)
that one or more grounds for denial specified 'n subsection (e)
applies.
Basis for Approval or Disapproval; Opportunity for Review
(e) (1) If, upon the basis of the information submitted to the Sec-
etary as part of the application and any other information before him
with respect to such device the Secretary finds, after opportunity to the
applicant for the review prescribed by paragraph (4), that-
(A) such device is not shown to be safe for use under the con-
ditions prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the proposed
labeling thereof;
(B) the methods used in, and the facilities and controls used
for, the manufacture, processing, and packing and installation of
such device do not conform to the reqvdrements of section 501 (g) ;
(C) there is a lack of adequate scientific evidence that the de-
vice will have the effect it purports or is represented to have under
the conditions of use prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the
proposed labeling thereof;
(1) based on a fair evaluation of all material facts. such label-
;ns 
. false or misleading in any partiodar: or
(, ) huch device is not &hown to confon in all applicable re-
spects to a currently effective performance standard nronugated
under section 513;
e shall issue an order dening appr al of the application and stating
the fndlings upon which the order is bated. In determining if a device
is shwn to be safe for purposesof this paragraph, the Secretary shall
weigh any benefit to the public health probably resulting from the use
of the device against any hazard to the public health probably resulting
from suck use.
(2) As used in this subsection and subsection (f), the term 'ade-
quate scientific evidence' means evidence consisting of sughient well-
controfled investigation, including clinical investigations where ap-
proprate, by experts quo)ified by scientifc training and experience to
evaluate the effectiveness of the device involved, on the basis of whichvestigation, including clinical investigations where ap-
proprate, by experts quo)ified by scientifc training and experience to
evaluate the effectiveness of the device involved, on the basis of which

--- PAGE BREAK ---1211
57
it could fairly and responsibly be concluded by such experts that the
device will hwe the effect it purport* or is represented to have under
the conditions of use prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the
labeling or proposed labeling thereof, unless the Secretary determines
that other va 
scientifc evidence is muflcient to establish the effective-
ness of the device.

(3) For the purposes of this section, when a device is intended for
use by a pkyuican, surgeon, or other person licensed or otherwise spe-
cially qualified therefor, its safety and effectiveness shall be determined
in the l71At of such intended use.

(4) ( 1) An applicant whose application has been denied approval
may, by petition filed on or before the thirtieth day after the date upon
which he receives notice of such denial, obtain review thereof in accord-
ance with subsection (i).

The Secretary shall consider and give appro-
priate weight to the report and recommendations received from the
advisory committee condtucting such review under such subsection.

(B) In lieu of the review provided by subparagraph (A), such ap-
plicant may petition to obtain a hearing in accordance with section
5664 of title 5 of the United States Code.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Secretary shall consider and give appro-
priate weight to the report and recommendations received from the
advisory committee condtucting such review under such subsection. (B) In lieu of the review provided by subparagraph (A), such ap-
plicant may petition to obtain a hearing in accordance with section
5664 of title 5 of the United States Code. Withdrawal of Approval
(f) (1) The Secretary may, upon obtaining where appropriate, ad-
vice on scienifw matters from a panel or panels established pursuant
to subsectio (b), and after due notice and opportunity for hearing to
the applicant, sse an order wthdrawing approval of an application
with respect to a device under this section if the Secretary finds---
(A) (i) that clinical or other ewperine, tests, or other scientific
data show that such device is unsafe for use under the conditions
of use for which the application was approved; or (ii) on the
basis of evidence of clinical experience not included in or accom.-
panyrg such application and not available to the Secretary until
a ter th appliwation was approved, or of tests by new methods
or by methods not reasonably applicable when the application was
approved, evaluated together with the evidence available to the
,Secretary when the application 'was approved, that such device is
not shown to be safe for use under the conditions of use on the
basis of which the application was approved;
(B) on the basis of new information before him with respect
to such device, evaluated together with the evidence available to
An when the application was approved, that there is a lack of
adeq 
s4entifc evidence that the device will have the effect it
purports or is represented to have under the conditions of use
prescribed, recommended, or sugested in the labeling thereof;
(C) that the application filed pursuant to subsection (c) con-
tains or was accompanied by an untrue statement of a material--
fact;
(D) that the applicant has failed to establish a system for main-
taining records, or has repeatedly or deliberately failed to main-
tain records or to make reports, required by an applicable regula-
tion or order under subsection (a) of section 516, or that the
applicant has refused to e it access to, or oopyiln or verifca-
10-026 0 - 76 - 17or to make reports, required by an applicable regula-
tion or order under subsection (a) of section 516, or that the
applicant has refused to e it access to, or oopyiln or verifca-
10-026 0 - 76 - 17

--- PAGE BREAK ---required by an applicable regula-
tion or order under subsection (a) of section 516, or that the
applicant has refused to e it access to, or oopyiln or verifca-
10-026 0 - 76 - 17

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1212
58
_ tLion of such records as required by paragraph (2) of such sub-
section;-
(E) on the basic p now in o 
aion before him, evaluated to-
gether with the evi 
e beloan him when the application was
approved, that the methods used in, or the facilities and control
used for, the manufacture, procsing, king, or installation of
such device do not conform to the regtaremets of section 501 (g)
and were not brought into confo mity with such requirdments
within a reasonable time after receipt of written notice from the
Secretary; or
(F) on the basis of new information before him, evaluated
together with the evi dnce before him when the application was
approved, that the labeling of ,ach device, based on a fair evalua-
tuon of all material facts, is false or misleading in any particular
and was not corrected within a reasonable time after receipt of
written notice from the Secretary; or
(G) on the basis of new information before him, evatated to-
gether with the evidence before him when the application was
approved, that such device is not shown to conforIm in all respects
to an applicable performance standard promulgated pursuant to
section 513.
(2) If the Secretary (or in his absence the offwer acting as Sec-
retary) finds that an imminent health or safety hazard is involved, he
ma by order suspend the approval of suoh application immedinately
and give the applicant prompt notice of his action and afford the ap-
plicant an opportunity for an expedited hearing under this subsec-
tion. Such authority to suspend the approval of an application may
not be delegated.
(3) Any order under this subsection shall state the flndin.gs uepon
which it is based.
Authority To Revoke Adverse Orders
(g) Whenever the Sqecretary finds that the facts so require, he .hall
revoke an order under subsection (e) or (f) denying, withdraiiing.
or smuspending approval of an application and shall approve such ap-
lication or reinstate such approval, as may be appropriate.
Service of Secretary's Orders 
-
(h) Orders of the Secretary under this section shall be served (1)
in person by any opfier or employee of the Department designated by
the Secretary or (2) by mailing the order by registered mail or certi-
fled mail addressed to the applicant at his last known address in the
records of the Secretary.
Referral to Independent Advisory Committee
(i) (1) A person who has fled an application under subsection (c)
may petition the Secretary, in accordance with subparagraph (A) of
subsection (e) (4), to refer such application, or the Secretary's action
thereon. to an advisory committee of experts for a report and recom-
mendations with respect to any question therein involved which re-on (e) (4), to refer such application, or the Secretary's action
thereon. to an advisory committee of experts for a report and recom-
mendations with respect to any question therein involved which re-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1213
59
quires the exercie of scientific judgetUonukptitnorfth
Secretary on his own initiative deeme such referral necessary, the
Secretary shall aoint an advisory omitte and shall refer to it, to
gether With all the data before aim, the question so involved for
study thereof and a report and recommendations thereon.

The com-
mittee shall.

after independent study of the data furnished to it by the
Secretary and other data before it, certify to the Secretary a report
and recommendatiowns, together with all underlying data and a state-
ment of the reasons or bass for the recommendations.

A copy of the
foregoing shall be Inomptly supplied by the Secretary to any persm
who has filed a petition, or who has requested such referral to the ad-
visory committee.

After giving consideration to all data then before
h im, including such.

report, recommendot ions, unulerlying data, and
statement, and to omy prior order issued by him in connection with
such matter, the Secretary shall by order conform or modify any
prior order or, if no kuch prior order has been issued, shall by order
act upon the application.

The applicant, as well as representatives of
the Secretaryj, shal have the right to consult with such advisor com-
mittee, and such advisoy committee is authorized to consult with any
person in0 connection with the question referred to it.

(R) Section 513(h) (2) shall apply to the appointment.

compensa-
tio.,, staffing, and procedure of any such advisory committee.

Judicial Revieo
(j) The applicant may, by appeal taken in accordance with section
505 (h).

obtain judicial review of a final order of the Secretary denying
or withdrawing approval of an applicationied under subsection
(e) of this section or a final order under sbsection (m) revoking
an exemption in effect under that subsection.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Judicial Revieo
(j) The applicant may, by appeal taken in accordance with section
505 (h). obtain judicial review of a final order of the Secretary denying
or withdrawing approval of an applicationied under subsection
(e) of this section or a final order under sbsection (m) revoking
an exemption in effect under that subsection. Judicial review of such
final order shall not be denied upon the ground that the petitioner
has failed to avail himself of the review or hearing provided by sub-
section (e) (4) or the hearing provided by subsectin (m.). Exemption for Investigational Use
(k) (1) It is the purpose of this subsection to encourage, to the maxi-
mum extent consistent with the protection of the pubiw health and
safety and with professional ethics, the discovery and development of
useful devices and to that end to maintain optimum freedom for in-
dividual scientific investigators in their pursuit of that objective. All
information required under this section to be submitted to the Secre-
tary or to an institutional review committee shall be concise and no
more burdensome than is necemsary to permit adequate review. (2) Subject to the succeeding paragra ha of this subsection. there
shall be exempt from the requirement of approval of an application
under the foregoing provsions of this section any device which is
intended solely for investigational use (in an appropriate scientific
environs 
) by an expert or experts qualified by scientific training
and exp 
to investigate the safety and effectiveness of such
device. (3) The Secretary shall prondwlgate regulations after an 6ppor-
tunity for a hearing, relating to the application of the exemption re-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1214
60
erred to to in paragraph (2) to any device which is intended for use
in the clinical testing- thereof upon humans, in developing data required
to support an application under subsection (c).

(4) Such regulations may rovideor cnditioning the exemption,
in the case of a device intended for suchclinical use, upon-
(A) the submission, by the manufacturer of the device or the
sponsor of the investigation, of an outline of the plan of initial
clinical testing-
(i) to a local institutional review committee which has been
established to supervise clinical testing in the facility where
the initial clinical testing is to be conducted, the composition
and procedures of which comply with regulations of the See-
retary, for review as beinq adequate to justify the commence-
ment of such testing.1214
60
erred to to in paragraph (2) to any device which is intended for use
in the clinical testing- thereof upon humans, in developing data required
to support an application under subsection (c).

(4) Such regulations may rovideor cnditioning the exemption,
in the case of a device intended for suchclinical use, upon-
(A) the submission, by the manufacturer of the device or the
sponsor of the investigation, of an outline of the plan of initial
clinical testing-
(i) to a local institutional review committee which has been
established to supervise clinical testing in the facility where
the initial clinical testing is to be conducted, the composition
and procedures of which comply with regulations of the See-
retary, for review as beinq adequate to justify the commence-
ment of such testing.

or
(ii) if no such committee ezist or if the Secretary finds that
the process of review by such committee is inadequate or that
protection of health and safety so requires (whether or ,not
the plan has been approved by .suh committee), to the Secre-
tary for review by the appropriate panel or panels established
pursuant to subsection (b) as being adequate to justify the
commencement of such testing'
(B) prompt notification to the secretary by such manufacturer
or sponsor (under such circumstances and in such manner as the
Secretary prescribes) of approval of any plan pursuant to clause
(A) (i) ;
(C) the submission, by the manufacturer of the device or the
sponsor of the investigation, of an adequate protocol for clinical
testing to be conducted by separate groups of investigators under
essentially the same protoco togeter with a report of prior in-
vest;gations of the device (including, where appropriate, tests on
animals) adequate to justify the proposed testing, either (i) to a
local institutional review committee for review in accordance with
the proe isions of clauses (A) (i) aud (B), or (i) to the Seeretary
for review in accordance with the provisions of clause (A) (ii) if
such testing involrees facilities in which no such committee exists,
or facilities served by more than one local institutional review
committees if such committees are unable to agree on the adequacy
of te subnrission ;
(D) the obtaining, by the mmuforturer.(4) Such regulations may rovideor cnditioning the exemption,
in the case of a device intended for suchclinical use, upon-
(A) the submission, by the manufacturer of the device or the
sponsor of the investigation, of an outline of the plan of initial
clinical testing-
(i) to a local institutional review committee which has been
established to supervise clinical testing in the facility where
the initial clinical testing is to be conducted, the composition
and procedures of which comply with regulations of the See-
retary, for review as beinq adequate to justify the commence-
ment of such testing.

or
(ii) if no such committee ezist or if the Secretary finds that
the process of review by such committee is inadequate or that
protection of health and safety so requires (whether or ,not
the plan has been approved by .suh committee), to the Secre-
tary for review by the appropriate panel or panels established
pursuant to subsection (b) as being adequate to justify the
commencement of such testing'
(B) prompt notification to the secretary by such manufacturer
or sponsor (under such circumstances and in such manner as the
Secretary prescribes) of approval of any plan pursuant to clause
(A) (i) ;
(C) the submission, by the manufacturer of the device or the
sponsor of the investigation, of an adequate protocol for clinical
testing to be conducted by separate groups of investigators under
essentially the same protoco togeter with a report of prior in-
vest;gations of the device (including, where appropriate, tests on
animals) adequate to justify the proposed testing, either (i) to a
local institutional review committee for review in accordance with
the proe isions of clauses (A) (i) aud (B), or (i) to the Seeretary
for review in accordance with the provisions of clause (A) (ii) if
such testing involrees facilities in which no such committee exists,
or facilities served by more than one local institutional review
committees if such committees are unable to agree on the adequacy
of te subnrission ;
(D) the obtaining, by the mmuforturer.

of the device or the
sponsor of the inoestiqation.or
(ii) if no such committee ezist or if the Secretary finds that
the process of review by such committee is inadequate or that
protection of health and safety so requires (whether or ,not
the plan has been approved by .suh committee), to the Secre-
tary for review by the appropriate panel or panels established
pursuant to subsection (b) as being adequate to justify the
commencement of such testing'
(B) prompt notification to the secretary by such manufacturer
or sponsor (under such circumstances and in such manner as the
Secretary prescribes) of approval of any plan pursuant to clause
(A) (i) ;
(C) the submission, by the manufacturer of the device or the
sponsor of the investigation, of an adequate protocol for clinical
testing to be conducted by separate groups of investigators under
essentially the same protoco togeter with a report of prior in-
vest;gations of the device (including, where appropriate, tests on
animals) adequate to justify the proposed testing, either (i) to a
local institutional review committee for review in accordance with
the proe isions of clauses (A) (i) aud (B), or (i) to the Seeretary
for review in accordance with the provisions of clause (A) (ii) if
such testing involrees facilities in which no such committee exists,
or facilities served by more than one local institutional review
committees if such committees are unable to agree on the adequacy
of te subnrission ;
(D) the obtaining, by the mmuforturer.

of the device or the
sponsor of the inoestiqation.

if the device is to be distributed to
in vestigators for testing, of a signed agreement from each of such
investigators that humans upon whom the device is to be used
?"lll be under sueh, investigator's per-tonal supervision or under
the supervisim of investigators responsible to 1dm;
(') 
the establishment and maintenance of such records, and
the making of such reports to the Secretary, by the manufacturer
of the device or the sponsor of the iivvestigatioi, of data (includ-
ioq but not limited to analytical reports by in vestiators) obtained
as" it result of seh.--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the device or the
sponsor of the inoestiqation. if the device is to be distributed to
in vestigators for testing, of a signed agreement from each of such
investigators that humans upon whom the device is to be used
?"lll be under sueh, investigator's per-tonal supervision or under
the supervisim of investigators responsible to 1dm;
(') 
the establishment and maintenance of such records, and
the making of such reports to the Secretary, by the manufacturer
of the device or the sponsor of the iivvestigatioi, of data (includ-
ioq but not limited to analytical reports by in vestiators) obtained
as" it result of seh. invest national use of the device, as the Secre-
tarr finds will en able him to evaluate the safety and effectiveness
of the device in the event of the filing of an application pursuant
to subsection (c) ; and

--- PAGE BREAK ---1215
61
(~F) such other conditions relatig to the protection of the
14<, health and safety as the Secretary may determine 
to be
necessary.

Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require any clinical
investiqntor to submit directly to the Secretary reports on the investi-
gationl use of devices.

The Secretary shall within thirty days of the
receipt of a notification or submission.

pursuant to this paragraph,
determine whether the proposed investigation conforms to the requhr-
menis of this section.

An investigation shall not begin, until the sponsor
receives notice from the Secretary that the proposed investigation con-
forms with the requirements of this section.

The Secretary may not
delay the beginning of an investigation pursuant to this paragraph
unles he.

finds thai the investigation does not conform.

to the require-
ments of this section and he has notified the sponsor of such findings.

The Secretary may exempt investigations from part or all the reuire-
ments of this subsection when he determines that to do so is ifn the
public interest.

(5) Such regulations shall assure that the rights and welfare of the
subjects involved are adequately protected, that the i isks to an individ-
ua7Z ae outweighed by the potential benefits to him or by the inpor
tance of the knowledge to be gained and that informed consent is to lie
attained by methods that are adequate.

Such informed consent shall be
obtained it all but exceptional cases.

(A) For the purposes of this section, only the term "informed con-
xed" -shall mean the consent of a person, or his legal representative,
so situated as to be able to exercise free power of choice without the
intervention of any element of force, fraud, deceit, duress, or other
fo-in of constraint or coercion.

Such consent shall be evidenced by an
(Jreenent signed by such person, or his legal representative.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(A) For the purposes of this section, only the term "informed con-
xed" -shall mean the consent of a person, or his legal representative,
so situated as to be able to exercise free power of choice without the
intervention of any element of force, fraud, deceit, duress, or other
fo-in of constraint or coercion. Such consent shall be evidenced by an
(Jreenent signed by such person, or his legal representative. The in-
formation to be given to the subject in suck written agreement shall
include the following basic elements :_
(1) a fair explanation of the procedures to be followed, includ-
ing an identification of any which are experimental;
(2) a description of any attendant discomforts and risks rea-
sonably to be expected ;
(3) a fair explanation of the likely results should the experi-
mental procedure fail;
(4) a description of any benefits reasonably to be expected;
(5 
a disclosure of any appropriate alternative procedures that
miqht be advantageous for the subject;
(6) an offer to answer any inquiries concerning the procedures;
and
(7) an instruction that the subject -is free to either decline
entrance into a project or to withdraw his consent and to dis-
continue participation in the project or activity at any time with-
out prejudiing hts future care. In addition, the agreement entered into by such person or his legal
representative, shall include no exculpatory language through which
the subject is made to waive, or to appear to waive, any of hi. legal
rights, or to release the institution or its agents from liability fir
negligence. Any organization which initiates, directs, or engages in
programs of research, development, or demonstration which require
informed consent shall keep a permanent record of such consent and

--- PAGE BREAK ---1216
62
the information prt d 
the subject ed develop 
dooui-
mentation and reporting procedures as an essent 
trative
function.

(B) The term "e.,ceptional cases" as Used in araph (5) shall
be strictly constued ;shall permit the waiver o 
of t 
e ele 
of
consent listed in suiparagraph (A) as maybe justified by the ir-
curnsta(Ioes of each case; and shall rouire the written concurrence in -
the acti physician's decii* by at least two other licensed physiias
not involved in the research project, unless in a life th etning
situation, it is not feasible to obtain such concurrence.

(6) Whenever the Seoretary determines that a device is being or has
been shipped or delivered for shipment in interstate commerce for
investigational testing upon humans, and that such device is subject
to the preceding subsectins of this section and fails to meet the con-
ditions for exoemption therefrom for investigational use, he shall notify
the sponsor of his determination and the reasons there/or, and the
exemption will not thereafter apply oitA respect to such investiga-
t;onal use until such failure is corrected.

(7) In determining whether this subsection is applicable to any
device and, if so, whether there has been compliance with the condi-
tions of exemption, or upon application for reconsideration of any
such deter 
ination, the Secretaiy shall, if/so requested by the sponsor
of the investigation, or may on his own initiative, obtain the advice
of an appropriate expert or experts who are-not otherwise, except as
consultants, engaged in the carrying out of this Act.

Custom Devices
(1) This section shall not apply to any custom device to the extent
that it is ordered bya physician (or other specially qualified persons
authorized by reglations promulgated by the Secetary after an op-
portunity for a hearing) to be made in a special way for individual
patients.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(7) In determining whether this subsection is applicable to any
device and, if so, whether there has been compliance with the condi-
tions of exemption, or upon application for reconsideration of any
such deter 
ination, the Secretaiy shall, if/so requested by the sponsor
of the investigation, or may on his own initiative, obtain the advice
of an appropriate expert or experts who are-not otherwise, except as
consultants, engaged in the carrying out of this Act. Custom Devices
(1) This section shall not apply to any custom device to the extent
that it is ordered bya physician (or other specially qualified persons
authorized by reglations promulgated by the Secetary after an op-
portunity for a hearing) to be made in a special way for individual
patients. Any such device shall comply with all aspects of any appli-
cable performance standard except those spe-ifoly ordered by a
physician or such other authorized person to be changed. This sub-
section shall apply only to devices ordered for individual patients,
and shall not otherwise exempt a device from subsection (k). Custom
devices shall not be used as a course of conduct and shall not be gen-
erally available in finished form for purchase or for dispensing upon
'prescription, and, whether in finished form or otherwise, shall not be
made available through commercial channels by the maker or processor
thereof. Product Development Protocol
(m) (1) Any device (or type or class of device), manufactured or
(;stributed by a particular person, whih has been made subject to
this section by a regulation promulgated by the Secretary, may be
exempted by the Secretary from the re irement of approval of an
application wnder the foregoing provsions of this section if-
(A) the nature of th devWice (or type or class of device) is
such that it is likely that it will be #ubect to frequent modifi-
cation or rapid obsolescence or will not be produced in substan-
tial volume; and

--- PAGE BREAK ---1217
63
(B) it is intended solely for use by or under the direction or
mupervision of a practitioner licensed by law to use or to prescribe
the use thereof; and
(C) it is, or will be, investigated in accordance with an ap-
proved product development protocol establ'.thed pursuant to
paragraph (0) of this subsection, or it is subject to an effectie
%otice of completion of the requirements of such protocol.

(2) Any person may submit a petition to the Secretary to establish
a product development protocol with respect to a particutar device (or
type or class of device) meeting the requirements set forth in sub-
paragraphs (A) 
and (B) of paragraph (1) of thts subsectim
Such petition shall include supporting data and a proposed protocol.

The Secretory shall, within thirty days, refer any such petition to the
appropriate panel of experts appointed purstdnt to subsection (b)
of this section.

Such panel may, within 8ixty days, or suwh other time
as may be agreed upon by the panel and the petitioner.

approve ?Pith
or without modification the proposed protocol.Such panel may, within 8ixty days, or suwh other time
as may be agreed upon by the panel and the petitioner.

approve ?Pith
or without modification the proposed protocol.

The protocol, if ap-
Proved, shall provide-
(A) the inrestigqatioiud and testhig procedures required prior
to the cmnmeucement of clinical trials of such device and Aubse-
quent significant modifications thereto;
(B) a requirement that an institutional eviem committee sini-
lar to that described in clause (i) of subparagraph (A) of para-
graph (4) of subsection (k) of this section shala make a written
finding that the predicted risk-to-benefit ratio applicable to the
uwe of the dei-iee justifies clinical trials and that one or more such
committees will continually monitor and make periodic written
records on all clinical trials cmducted in connection with the
institution in which such committee operates;
(0) the type and quantity of clinical trials and findings there-
from required prior to the fiing of a notice of completion of a
product development protocol;
(D) a requirement for complete records of the investigation
to be maintained which are adequate to show compliance with the
product development protocol;
(E) a requirement that consent, as described in paragraph (5)
oftsubsection (k) of this section, be obtained from all subjects of
the investigation; and
(F) a requirement tht_ copies of all records which are to be
maintained pursuant to this paragraph be made available to the
Secretary upon request.

(3) If the panel to which such petition has been referred does not
approve the proposed protocol within siXty days (rwithin such other
ti.e as may be agreed upon), the Secretary may consider and approve
with or without nwdification the proposed protocol 'within sixty days
after the date he il notified that the panel has conceded not to approve
a protocol.

If neither the panel nor the Secretary approves a proposed
protocol.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(3) If the panel to which such petition has been referred does not
approve the proposed protocol within siXty days (rwithin such other
ti.e as may be agreed upon), the Secretary may consider and approve
with or without nwdification the proposed protocol 'within sixty days
after the date he il notified that the panel has conceded not to approve
a protocol. If neither the panel nor the Secretary approves a proposed
protocol. the Secetary~ shall issue a flnal order denying the petition
and stating the grounds therefor. (4) At any time after a product development protocol or a partiu-
lar device (or type or class of device) has been approved pursuant to
this section, the petitioner may submit a notice of completion stating

--- PAGE BREAK ---1218
64
that the requirements of the protocol have been fulfilled and that; to
the beet of his knowledge, there is no reason bearing on safety, effec-
tiveness, or other public health considerations why the device should
not be marketed.

Such notice shall contain alL the data and informa-
tion from which the petitioner made this determination.

The Secre-
tary hall approve or dwsaprove the notice of completion within
Winety days after receipt o such notice.

(5) The Secretary may, after providing the petitioner az opportu-
nity for an in/orna2 hearing, at any time prior to approving a notice
of completion, issue a final order to revoke a product development
protocol or disapprove a notice of completion i he finds tha-t-
(A) the petitioner has failed substantially to comply with the
requirements of the protocol; or
(B) the results of the clinical trials conducted differ so sub-
stantially from the results required in the protocol that further
trials cannot be justified; or
(C) such device is not shown to be safe for use under the con-
dI;tons prescribed, -recommended, or suggested in the labeling
thereof: or
(P) there is a lack of adequate scientific evidence that the de-
vice will hare the effect it purports or is represented to have under
the conditions of use prescribed, recommended, or suggested in
the labeling thelreof.

.A flnal order issued under this paragraph shall be in writing and sha!l
contain the rtasons to support the conclusions thereof.

(6) The Secretary (or n his absence the officer acting a's Secretary)
may at any time, by an order in writing stating the flndiigs on iwh ich
it is based, immediately revoke ap exemption from the requiremelnt of
approval of an application under the foregoing provisions of this sec-
tion, if he finds that there is an immilnent hazard to the public health
or safety camed by the existence of the exemption.--- PAGE BREAK ---

.A flnal order issued under this paragraph shall be in writing and sha!l
contain the rtasons to support the conclusions thereof. (6) The Secretary (or n his absence the officer acting a's Secretary)
may at any time, by an order in writing stating the flndiigs on iwh ich
it is based, immediately revoke ap exemption from the requiremelnt of
approval of an application under the foregoing provisions of this sec-
tion, if he finds that there is an immilnent hazard to the public health
or safety camed by the existence of the exemption. In taking such
action the Secretar y shall give prompt notice to the person following
the protocol or haririq filed the notice of completionn, and afford suh
person au opportunity for an expedited hear ;ig under this pvnwvmrarh. (7) At ay time after a notice-of completion has been approved, the
Secretary may issue an order revoking an exemption of the deice (or
type or class of device) from the requiremevt of approval of an appli-
cation under the foregoing provision of this section if he finds that
any of the grounds listed An subparograjhs (A) through (F) of para-
graph (1) of #ubsection (f) of this section) apply. The prolmions of
paragraphs (1) and (3) of subsection (f) and s ubsections (9) through
(j) of this section shall apply. (8) lWhenever the Secretary finds that the facts so justify, he may
reconsider an. owler under this subsection revoking the exemption
granted by this subsection and reinstate the exemptiorL
Transitional Provisions
(n) (1) If. on the day immediately prior to the date upon which a
device is declared to be subject to scientific review under this section,
the device was in use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or
prevention of disease in man, or for the purpose of affectng the struc-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1219
65
ture or any function of the body of man, section 601(f) shall become
effective 'with respect to such preexisting use or uses of such device on
the closing date (as defined in parraraph (2) of thi subsection) or,
if sooner, with respect to any person who h 
an application, on
the effective date of an order- of the Boretary approing or denying
approval of such application with respect to sucA use of the device
under this section,
(2) For the purposes of this subsection, the term, "closing date"
means, with respect to a device, the first day of the thirty-first calendar
vmnth which begins after the nwneh in which the device is declared
to be subject to scientific review under this section, except that, if in
the opinion of the Secretary it would not involve any undue risk to
the public health, he may on application or on his own initiative post-
pone such closing date with respect to any particular use or uses of a
device until s12 later date (but not beyond the close of the sixtieth
month after the month of such declaration) as he determines is nec-
essary to permnit completurn, i good faith and as soon as practicable,
of the sctentiflc investigations necessary to establish the safety and
effectiveness of such use or uses.

The Secretary may terminate any
mich postponement at any time if he finds that such postponement
should not have been granted or that, by reason of a change in circum-
stances, the bass for such postponement no longer exists or that there
his been a failure to comply with a requirement of the Secre"ry for
submission of progress reports or with other conditions attWd d by
him to such postponement.

XOTIFICATIO.

OF DEFECTS IN.

AND REPAIR OR REPLACBMENT OF,
DEV ICiS
&Sr.

515.--- PAGE BREAK ---

AND REPAIR OR REPLACBMENT OF,
DEV ICiS
&Sr. 515. (a) (1) Every person who acquires information which rea-
sonably supports the conclusion that a device intended for human use,
which has been produced, assembled, distributed, or imported by him
(A) contains a defect whic7t could create a substantial risk to the
public health or safety, or (B) on or after the effective date of an
applicable performance standard promulgated pursuant to section 615
fails to comply with such standard, shall immediately notify the Sec-
retary of such defect or failure to comply if such device has left the
control of the manufacturer. No information or statements excluively
derit'ed from the notification required by this subsection (except for
information contained in recoi required to be maintained under any
provision of this Act) shall be used as evidence in any proceeding
brought against a natural person pursuant to section 303 of this Act
-with respect to a violation of law occurring prior to or concurrently
with the notification. () 
The notifwationa required by paragraph (1) of this subsection
shall contain a clear description of such defect or failure to emo.ply,
and evaluation of the hazard related thereto, an a statement of the
measures to be taken to correct such defect or failure or to effect pro-
tertion against the hazard created by the defect or allure. (3) FoTr purposes of this section,-the term "defect means a deficiency
in. design, materials, or workmanship, and does sot include any def-
ciency resulting from use of improper accessories or fromn improper
installation, maintenance, repair, or use of the device or any defwlefy

--- PAGE BREAK ---1220
66
resulting from normal use of the device after the lifetime represented
by the manufacturer has ewjired.

(b) (1) if LtA Secretar determines tt 
a device intended fr human
kf 
use distributed in commerce presents a substantial hazard to tAe public
health or safety and that notiflcation is required in order adequately
to protect t 
publi from such haard, e hall immediately make
certain that adequate notification is provided in an appropriate orm
by the persona and means beat suitedunder the circumstances involved
to all persons (including manufacturers, distributors, retailers, health
professional, and uaers =h should properly receive such notifction
in order to reduce or eliminate the effect f such haard.

() Where the Secretary deterndnes that users shall not be notifed
under paragraph (1), he aluzl provide those health professional.

who
receive notifcation an opportunity to comment on the advisability of
notify yng the general publi of the hazard.

Within 30 days after such
.oti~eation the Secretary 8hal notiy the general public of the hazard,
if after reviewing such comments he determines that such notifleatin
will not endanger the public healtA.

(c) If te Secretary determines (after affording interested parties,
including consumers and consumer organizations, an opotunty for
a hearing in accordance with subsection (e)) that a device intended or
human uae-distributed in commerce presents a substantial hazard to
the public health or safety and that action under this subsection is in
the public interest, it may order the manufacturer or any distributor
or retailer of such de e to take whichever of thefolkowitg actions the
person to whom the order is directed elect.Within 30 days after such
.oti~eation the Secretary 8hal notiy the general public of the hazard,
if after reviewing such comments he determines that such notifleatin
will not endanger the public healtA.

(c) If te Secretary determines (after affording interested parties,
including consumers and consumer organizations, an opotunty for
a hearing in accordance with subsection (e)) that a device intended or
human uae-distributed in commerce presents a substantial hazard to
the public health or safety and that action under this subsection is in
the public interest, it may order the manufacturer or any distributor
or retailer of such de e to take whichever of thefolkowitg actions the
person to whom the order is directed elect.

to the extent that the con-
sent of the purchaser and, where appropriate, his physician, is
obtained:
(1) bring such device into conformity with the requirement of
the applicable performance standard or repair the &fect in sch
device;
(9) replace such device with a like or equalent device which
complies with the applicable performance standard or which does
not contain th defect; or
(3) refund the purchase prie of such device (les a reason-
able allowance for ue, if such device has been in the po 
&sn
of a uer for one Year or more (A) at the time of public notice
under subsection (c), or (B) at the time the user receives actual
notice of the defect or noncompliance, whichever first occurs.

An order under this subsection may also require the person to whom
it applies to submit a plan, satisfactory to the Secretary for taking
action under whichever of the preceding paragrIts of this subsection
such person has elected to act.

The Secretary shall specfy i the order
the persons to whom refunded must be made if the person to whom the
order is directed elets to take the action described in paragraph
(3).

If an order under this subsection is directed to more than one
person, the Secretary shall specify which person has the election
under this subsection.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Secretary shall specfy i the order
the persons to whom refunded must be made if the person to whom the
order is directed elets to take the action described in paragraph
(3). If an order under this subsection is directed to more than one
person, the Secretary shall specify which person has the election
under this subsection. (d) (1) No charge shall be made to any person (other than a manu-
factur distributor, or retaikr) who avails himself of any remedy
provict under an order issued under subsection (c), and the person
subject to the order shall reimburse each person (other than a manu-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1221
67
facturer, distributor, or retaer) who is entitled to such a remedy
for any reasonable and foree 
epense ircurred by such person
in availing himself of suck rem() 
c 
h
().

An order issued under =section (b) or (0) with rept to
a eaevcO may require any person who is a manu 
turner distributor,
or retailer of the device to reimburse any other person wlo is a manu-
facturer, distributor, or retailer of such desvc for such other per-
son's expenses in connection with carry 
out the order, if the Sec-
retary determines such reimbursement to be in the public interest.

(3) An order under subsection (c) may be issued only after an
opportunity for an informal heariW.

If the Secretay determines that
any person wowishes to participate in such hearing is a part of a
class of participants who share an identity of interest, the Secre-
tary may limit iuck person's participation in such hearing to partic-
patin through a single representative designated by such class (or
by the Secreta it such class fails to deet 
suc a representative .

(e) The rem ies provided for in this section shall be in addition
to and not in substitution for any other remedies provided by law.

RECORDs 
AND REPORrS ON DRVICS
Sqr.

51G.

(a) (1) A'i'ery person.

engaged in manufacturing, process-
ing, or distributing, or selling a device that is r's&.bect to a performance
standard promulgated unde: section 513, or with respect to which there
is in effect an approral under section 514 of an applition filed under
subsecti~n (c) thereof, shall establish and mantain such records, and
make such reports to the ,Aeeretary.

of data relating to clinical experi-
es 
and other data or information, received or otkeri;oie obtained by
auch person with respect to such device, and bearing on the safety or
effrrteuewi of swh dere.

or on whether such device may be adul-
terated or misbranded.

as the Secretary may by genea regulation, or
by special 
g uelatikn or order applicable to such der;e, require.--- PAGE BREAK ---

or on whether such device may be adul-
terated or misbranded. as the Secretary may by genea regulation, or
by special 
g uelatikn or order applicable to such der;e, require. In
)reserrbtng such regulatims or issuing such orders the Secretary shall
hare da. regard for tL.a professional ethics of the medical profession
and the intr.8sts of pwtoeits and shall provide, inhaerer he deems it
appropriate. for the examination. upon request, by the persona to inhein
such regulations or orders are apphetble, of similar information re-
cefred or otherwise obtained by the Secreta:y. (2) Keery person ree q red under this subsection to maintain records. and every person in charge or custody thereof, shall, upon reet 
of
an officer or employee designated by the Secretary, permit suck officer
or employees at all itaxonable times to have access to and copy and
verfy #vwk records. (b) 8ubsection (a) shall ,not (Lppiy to--
.(I) practitioners ieened. by law to prescribe or administer
drugs and devices and unho manufacture or process devices solely
for use in the cotrse of their professional practice;
(d) person-s tho manufacture or process devices solely for use
i research or teaching and not for sale; and
(.4) such other lasses of persons as the Secretary may by or
pursuait to regulation exempt from the application of thIs sub-
section upon a finding that such application is not necessary to
fucomplish the purposes of this subsection.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1222
68
(c) E rery permon eigaqed in manufacturing a device subject to this
Act shall provide to the Secretary upon ia request such tecItniCal data
and other data or information with rpect to such device a may be
reasonably required to carry out thit Aot.

CHApIrs VII--GENERA.

ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
FACTORY INSPECTION
Sc.

704.

(a) For purposes of enforcement of this Act, officers or
employees duly designated by the Secretary, upon presenting appro-
priate credentials and a written notice to the owner, operator, or agent
in charge, are authorized (1) to enter, at reasonable times, any factory,
warehouse, or establishment in which food, drugs, devices, or cosmetics
are manufactured, processed, packed, or held, for introduction into
interstate commerce or after such introduction, or to enter any vehicle,
being used to transport or hold such food, drugs, devices, or cosmetics
in interstate commerce; and (2) to inspect, at reasonable times and
within reasonable limits and in a reasonable manner, such factory,
warehouse, establishment, or vehicle and all pertinent equipment,
finished and unfinished materials, containers, and labeling therein.

In
the case of any factory, warehouse, establishment, or consulting lab-
oratory in which prescription drums or prescription dotices are man-
ufactured, processed.

packed, or held, Inspection shall extend to all
things therein (including records, files, papers, processes, controls,
and facilities) bearing on whether prescription drugs or prescription
devices which are adulterated or misbranded within the meaning of
this Act, or which may not be manufactkired, introduced into inter-
state commerce, or sold, or offered for sale by reason of any provision
of this Act, have been or are being manufactured, processed, packed,
transported, or held in any such place, or otherwise bearing on viola-
tion of this Act.In
the case of any factory, warehouse, establishment, or consulting lab-
oratory in which prescription drums or prescription dotices are man-
ufactured, processed.

packed, or held, Inspection shall extend to all
things therein (including records, files, papers, processes, controls,
and facilities) bearing on whether prescription drugs or prescription
devices which are adulterated or misbranded within the meaning of
this Act, or which may not be manufactkired, introduced into inter-
state commerce, or sold, or offered for sale by reason of any provision
of this Act, have been or are being manufactured, processed, packed,
transported, or held in any such place, or otherwise bearing on viola-
tion of this Act.

No inspection authorized [for prescription drugs]
by the receding sentence shall extend to (A) financial data, (B) sales
data other than shipment data.

(C) pricing data, (D) personnel data
(other than data as to qualifications of technical and professional
personnel performing functions subject to this Act), and (E) research
data (other than data, relating to new drugs, antibiotic drugs, and de-
frle, [and antibiotic drugs.] subject to reporting and inspection
under regulations lawfully issued pursuant to section 1505 (i) or (j),
-erto 07 (d) or (g).

sear ion 51,J (k).

or sertmni 517 [or section 50T
(d) or (g)] of this Act, and data, relating to other drugs or devices,
which in the case of a new drug or of a delire *ubject to section 614
would be subject to reporting or inspection under lawful regulations
issued pursuant to section 505(j) or section 516 of this Act).

A separate
notice shall be given for each such inspection, but a notice hall not
be required for each entry made during the period cover 
by the
inspection.

Each such inspection shall be commenced and completed
with reasonable promptness.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A separate
notice shall be given for each such inspection, but a notice hall not
be required for each entry made during the period cover 
by the
inspection. Each such inspection shall be commenced and completed
with reasonable promptness. The provisions of the second sentence of
this sui-ection shall not apply to-
(1) pharmacies whici maintain establishments in conformance
with any applicable lo.a1 laws regulating the l)ractice of phar-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1223
69
macy and medicine and which are regularly engaged in dispensing
prescription drugs or devices, upon prescriptions of practitioners
licensed to administer such drugs or devices to patients under the
care of such practitioners in the course of their professional prac-
tice, and which do not, either through a subsidiary or otherwise,
manufacture, prepare, propagate, compound, or process drugs or
devices for safe other than in the regular course of their business
of dispensing or selling drugs or devices at retail;
(2) practitioners licensed by law to prescribe or administer
drugs or prescribe or use devices, as the case may be, and who
manufacture, prepare, propagate, compound, or process drugs or
manufacture or process devices solely for use in the course of their
professional practice;
(3) persons who manufacture, prepare, propagate, compound,
or process drugs or manufacture or process devices solely for use
in research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale;
(4) such other classes of persons as the Secretary may by reg-
ulation exempt from the application of this section upon a finding
that inspection as applied to such classes of persons in accordance
with this section is not necessary for the protection of the public
health.

(b) Upon completion of any such inspection of a factory, warehouse,
consulting laboratory, or other establishment, and prior to leaving the
premises, the officer or employee making the inspection shall give, to
the owner, operator, or agent in charge a report in writing setting
forth any conditions or practices observed by him which, in is judg-
ment, indicate that any food, drug, device, or cosmetic in such estab-
lishment (1) consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid, or de-
composed substance, or (2) has been prepared, packed, or held under
insanitary conditions whereby it may have become contaminated with
filth, or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health.1223
69
macy and medicine and which are regularly engaged in dispensing
prescription drugs or devices, upon prescriptions of practitioners
licensed to administer such drugs or devices to patients under the
care of such practitioners in the course of their professional prac-
tice, and which do not, either through a subsidiary or otherwise,
manufacture, prepare, propagate, compound, or process drugs or
devices for safe other than in the regular course of their business
of dispensing or selling drugs or devices at retail;
(2) practitioners licensed by law to prescribe or administer
drugs or prescribe or use devices, as the case may be, and who
manufacture, prepare, propagate, compound, or process drugs or
manufacture or process devices solely for use in the course of their
professional practice;
(3) persons who manufacture, prepare, propagate, compound,
or process drugs or manufacture or process devices solely for use
in research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale;
(4) such other classes of persons as the Secretary may by reg-
ulation exempt from the application of this section upon a finding
that inspection as applied to such classes of persons in accordance
with this section is not necessary for the protection of the public
health.

(b) Upon completion of any such inspection of a factory, warehouse,
consulting laboratory, or other establishment, and prior to leaving the
premises, the officer or employee making the inspection shall give, to
the owner, operator, or agent in charge a report in writing setting
forth any conditions or practices observed by him which, in is judg-
ment, indicate that any food, drug, device, or cosmetic in such estab-
lishment (1) consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid, or de-
composed substance, or (2) has been prepared, packed, or held under
insanitary conditions whereby it may have become contaminated with
filth, or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health.

A copy
of such report shall be sent promptly to the Secretary.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(b) Upon completion of any such inspection of a factory, warehouse,
consulting laboratory, or other establishment, and prior to leaving the
premises, the officer or employee making the inspection shall give, to
the owner, operator, or agent in charge a report in writing setting
forth any conditions or practices observed by him which, in is judg-
ment, indicate that any food, drug, device, or cosmetic in such estab-
lishment (1) consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid, or de-
composed substance, or (2) has been prepared, packed, or held under
insanitary conditions whereby it may have become contaminated with
filth, or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health. A copy
of such report shall be sent promptly to the Secretary. (c) If the officer or employee making any such inspection of a fac-
tory, warehouse, or other establishment has obtained any sample in
the course of the inspection, upon completion of the inspection and
prior to leaving the premises he shall give to the owner, operator, or
agent in charge a receipt describing the samples obtained. (d) Whenever in the course of any such insetion of a factory or
other establishment where food is manufactured, processed, or packed,
the officer or employee making the inspection obtains a sample of
any such food, and an analysis is made of such sample for the purpose
of ascertaining whether such food consists in whole or in part of any
filthy, putrid, or decomposed substance, or is otherwise unfit for food,
a copy of the results of such analysis shall be furnished promptly to
the owner, operator, or agent in charge. FUBLJCITY
SPc. 705. (a) 
* *
(c) To aist in coming ot the provo in 
of this Act, the Secretary
may cause to be disseminated information regarding standards, testing

--- PAGE BREAK ---gent in charge. FUBLJCITY
SPc. 705. (a) 
* *
(c) To aist in coming ot the provo in 
of this Act, the Secretary
may cause to be disseminated information regarding standards, testing

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1224
70
facilities, and testMng methods promulgatod, established, or approved
tinder this Act and other information relating tote 
wavean extent
of hazard# subject to this 2lot. Subject to 9Uhpro- isions Of section 801
the etary may also cause to be publihed 
sum_ .mwnara ing
cinical data relvant to marketed product. approved under tM4. Act.
ADVISORY 
OOUNOIL ON D8VICU8, 
AND OTEHN 
ADVISORY 
OMMITTBZB
Sec. 708. (a) For the pu"se of adviing the Seretay with respec
to matter. of police in arry 
~ ou hepovision. of th.s Act t'elati
to devices, there is established in the Department an Advisory Council
onDevices appoitfed by the Secretary without reqiard to the civil serv-
ice and clasig nation 
taws. The persons so appointed shall be manu-
facturers and other perons with special knowledVe of the problems
involved in the regulation of various kinds of devmoe under this Act,
members of t6e professions Using such devices, scienists enopert in the
inettigatsoal use of deavw, 
engteer expert in the developmew of
devices, and member. of the general public representing conswrs of
device..
(b) The Secretary may also from time to time appoint, uathout re-
gard to the civil service or classification laws, in addition to the ad-
tsory ouneils and committees oth*eise authorized under this Act,
such other ad 
orj cOmmites or councils as he d 
desirable.
(c) Memr. of an adviso council or committee a 
ntd
suant to subsection (a) or (b) wh"r ntihe 
r6jilrul-t1
employ of the United State shall, while attending metmigs or on-
ferences of the council or committee or otherwise engaged on its busi-
ness, be compensated at per diem rates fied by the Seretary but not
in excess of the rate for grade GS-18 of the 
ea schedule at the
time of such serv ice, including traveltime, and while so serving away
from their homes or regular places of business they may be allowed
travel expenses including per diem in lieu of subswtence) as author-
ized by title 5, United States Code, section 5703, for persons in the
Government service employed intermittently.
ARSBAROH AND STUDINM 
RNLATING To DNVIODS
SEc. 709. (a) The Secretary is authorized, directly or through con-
tracts with public or private agencies, institutions, and rganzaion
and with individuals, to plan, conduct, coordinate, and support-
(1) research and investigation into the safety and e &ctiveness
of devices, and into the causes and prevention of inurows or other
health impairments aociated with exposure to or ue of devices;
(9) studied relating to the development and improvement of
devic performance stand4ard, and device testing methods and
poeures; and
(8) euainand training with raspect to the proper installa.-
tion, minten dance, 
ion, and we of devie.
(b In carrying ou thes 
of -subsectioSwn,() 
,
iA edition to or in aid of the fo egoing- 
( 
tS 
a
(1) sal to the mawikmW 
p 
ae 
e 
tena o 
operltte with
and invite the jxarioipation Of other Federal or State departmentss 
of -subsectioSwn,() 
,
iA edition to or in aid of the fo egoing- 
( 
tS 
a
(1) sal to the mawikmW 
p 
ae 
e 
tena o 
operltte with
and invite the jxarioipation Of other Federal or State departments

--- PAGE BREAK ---1225
71
and agewi es kavinq related interests, and interested professiomal
or industrial organizations;
_,(B) hall collect and make available, through publications and
by other appropriate means, the results of, and other information
conerning, research and other activities undertaken pursuant to
subsection (a); and
(3) may procure (by negotiation or otherwise) devices for re-
search and testing purposes, and sell or otherwise dispose of such
products.

CHLmli VIII-IMrors ANID Exrorrs
SEc.

801.

(a) The Secretary of the Treasury shall deliver to the
Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare,.upon his request, sam-
ples of food, drugs, devices, ana cosmetics which are being imported
or offered for import into the United States, giving notice thereof to
the owner or consignee, who may appear before the Secretary of
Health, Education, and Welfare and have the right tb introduce testi-
mony.

The ecretary of Health, Education, and Welfare shall furnish
to the Secretary of the Treasury a list of establishments registered
pursuant to subsection (i) of section 510 and shall request that if any
drugs or devices manufactured, prepared, propagated, compounded, or
Processed in an establishment not so registered are imported or offered
for import into the United States, samples of such drugs or devices
be delivered to the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare with
notice of such delivery to the owner or consignee, who may appear
before the Secretary of Health, Education, andWelfare and have the
iight to introduce testimony.(a) The Secretary of the Treasury shall deliver to the
Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare,.upon his request, sam-
ples of food, drugs, devices, ana cosmetics which are being imported
or offered for import into the United States, giving notice thereof to
the owner or consignee, who may appear before the Secretary of
Health, Education, and Welfare and have the right tb introduce testi-
mony.

The ecretary of Health, Education, and Welfare shall furnish
to the Secretary of the Treasury a list of establishments registered
pursuant to subsection (i) of section 510 and shall request that if any
drugs or devices manufactured, prepared, propagated, compounded, or
Processed in an establishment not so registered are imported or offered
for import into the United States, samples of such drugs or devices
be delivered to the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare with
notice of such delivery to the owner or consignee, who may appear
before the Secretary of Health, Education, andWelfare and have the
iight to introduce testimony.

If it appears from the examination of
such samples or otherwise that (1) such article has been manufactured,
processed, or packed under insanitary conditions, or (2) such article
is forbidden or restricted in sale in the country in which it was pro-
duced or from which it was exported, or (3) such article is adulterated,
misbmranded, or in violation of section 505, then such article shall be
refused admission, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section.

The Secretary of the Treasury shall cause the destruction of any such
article refused admission unless such article is exported, under regula-
tions prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury, within ninety days
of the date of notice of such reMisal or within such additional time as
may be permitted pursuant to such regulations.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If it appears from the examination of
such samples or otherwise that (1) such article has been manufactured,
processed, or packed under insanitary conditions, or (2) such article
is forbidden or restricted in sale in the country in which it was pro-
duced or from which it was exported, or (3) such article is adulterated,
misbmranded, or in violation of section 505, then such article shall be
refused admission, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. The Secretary of the Treasury shall cause the destruction of any such
article refused admission unless such article is exported, under regula-
tions prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury, within ninety days
of the date of notice of such reMisal or within such additional time as
may be permitted pursuant to such regulations. Clause (2) of the third
sentence of this paragraph shall note construed to prohibit the ad-
mission of narcotic drugs the importation of which is permitted under
the Controlled Substances Import and Export Act. (b) Pending decision as to the admission of an article being im-
ported or-offered for import, the Secretary of the Treasury may au-
thorize delivery of such article to the owner or consignee upon the
execution by him of a good and sufficient bond providing for the pay-
ment of such liquidated damages in the event of default as may be
required pursuant to regulations of the Secretary of the Treasury. If
it appears to the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare that an
article included within the provisions of clause (3) of subsection (a)
of this section can, by relabeling or other action, be brought into com-
pliance with the Act or rendered other than a food, drug, device, or

--- PAGE BREAK ---1226
72
cosmetic, final determination as to admission of such article may be
deferred and, upon filing of timely written application by the owner
or consignee and the execution by him of a bond as provided in the
preceding provisions of this subsection, the Secretary may, in accord-
ance with regulations, authorize the applicant to perform such re-
labeling or other action specified in such authorization (including de-
struction or expot, of rejected articles or lpitions thereof, as may be
specified in the Secretary s authorization).

All such relabeling or other
action pursuant to such authorization shall in accordance with regula-
tions be under the supervision oAni officer or employee of the )epart-
nient of Health, Education, and Welfare designated by the Secretary.

or an officer or employee of the Department of the T1'reasury desig-
nated by the Secretary of the Treasury.

(c) All expenses (including travel, per diem or subsistence, and sal-
aries of officers or employees of the United States) in connection with
the destruction provi ded for in subsection (a) of this section and the
sulrvision of the relabeling or other action authorized under the pro-
visions of subsection (b) of this section.

the amount of such expenses
to be determined in accordance with regulations, and all expenses in
connection with the storage, cartage, or labor with respect to any arti-
cle refused admission under subsection (a) of this section.

shall be
paid by the owner or consignee and, in default of such payment, shall
constitute a lien against any future importations made by such owner
or consignee.

(d) A food, dng, device, or cosmetic intended for export shall not
be, deemed to be adulterated or misbranded under this Act if it (1)
accords to the specifications of the foreign purchaser.

(2) is not in
conflict with the laws of the country to which it is intended for expot
and (3) is labeled on the outside of the shipping package to show that
it is intended for export.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(d) A food, dng, device, or cosmetic intended for export shall not
be, deemed to be adulterated or misbranded under this Act if it (1)
accords to the specifications of the foreign purchaser. (2) is not in
conflict with the laws of the country to which it is intended for expot
and (3) is labeled on the outside of the shipping package to show that
it is intended for export. But if such article is so d or offered for sale
in domestic commerce, this subsection shall not exempt it from any
of the provisions of this Act. Nothing in this subsection shall author-
ize the exportation of any new animal drug, or an animal feed bearing
or containing a new animal drug, which is unsafe within the meaning
of section 512 of this Act.], or to authorize the exportation of any
device which does not comply with section 513 or 514 of this Act. The
Secretary may permit exportation of any article if he determines that
such exportation is in the interest of public health and safety, and has
the approval, of the country to which it is intended for export. CUAr'rE 
IX-M.mCEMtX 
LOUS
EFFECT ON STATE REQUIREMENT'S
Sec. 90S. (a) Whenever a performance standard pursuant to section
513 or scientific review pursuant to section 514 under this Act is in
effect, no State or political subdivision of a State shall have any
authority either to establish or to continue in effect any provision of
a standard or regulation -which prescribes any requirements as to the
performance, composition, contents, design, finish, constriction, pack-
aging, or labeling of such product which are designed to deal with the

--- PAGE BREAK ---prescribes any requirements as to the
performance, composition, contents, design, finish, constriction, pack-
aging, or labeling of such product which are designed to deal with the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1227
73
same devie unless suwh reaqiremnts are identical to the requirements
of the Federal requirements.
(b) Nothing in thi section shall be construed to prevent the Federal
Government or the gove ment of any State or political subdivisio
thereof from establishing a safety requrement applicable to a devio
for its own use if such f vguirement imposes a higher standard of per-
formawe than that required to comply with thi otherwise applicable
Federal reumments.
(c) Upon appliction of a State or political subdiviion thereof, the
Secretary may by rule, after ,wotioe and opportunity for oral prsent
tion of visws, ewempt from the provision of subsection (a 
nder
swh conditions as he may irvse) a proposed safety reu m 
de.
scribed in swh applicaticn, where theproposed requm -
impoes a higcy 
level of performane 
than the Federal
stana,
R is equired by compellin9 oa 
odtos 
n
3 do notunduly burden interstate commerce.
0
70-026 0 - 76 - 78

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1228
GENETIC ENGINEERING, 1975
HEARING
BRFORZ THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON
LABOR AND PUBLIC WELFARE
UNITED STATES SENATE
NINETY-FOURTH CONGRESS
-- 
FIRST SESSION
ON
EXAMINATION OF THE RELATIONSHIP OF A FREE SOCIETY
AND ITS SCIENTIFIC COMMUNITY
APRIL 22, 1975
Printed for the use of the Committee on Labor and Public Welfare
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
-74 0 
WASHINGTON : 1975

--- PAGE BREAK ---A FREE SOCIETY
AND ITS SCIENTIFIC COMMUNITY
APRIL 22, 1975
Printed for the use of the Committee on Labor and Public Welfare
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
-74 0 
WASHINGTON : 1975

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1229
COMMITTEE ON LABOR AND PUBLIC WELFARE
HARRISON A. WILLIAMS, Ji., New Jersey, Chakimm
JENNINGO 
RANDOLPH, West Virginia
CLAIBORNE PELL, Rhode Island
EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Massachusetts
GAYLO RD NELSON, Wisconsin
WALTER F. MONDALE, Minnesota
THOMAS F. EAOLETON, Missouri
ALAN CRANSTON, California
WILLIAM D. HATHAWAY, Maine
JACOB K. JAVITS, New York
RICHARD S. SCHWEIKER, Pennsylvania
ROBERT TAFT, In., Ohio
1. GLENN BEALL, JR., Maryland
ROBERT T. STAFFORD, Vermont
PAUL LAXALT, Nevaa
DONALD ELISaURo, 0~6eri Oouud
MbAaORIZ M. WHmAZuA, Chief Clrk
JAT B. CUILER, MlnorIp Coupe
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH
EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Massachusetts, Cuirmc
HARRISON A. WILLIAMS, Ja., New Jersey
GAYLORD NELSON, Wisconsin
THOMAS F. EAOLETON, Missouri
ALAN CRANSTON, California
CLAIBORNE PELL, Rhode Island
WALTER F. MONDALE, Minnesota
WILLIAM D. HATHAWAY, Maine
RICHARD S. SCHWEIKER, Pennsylvania
JACOB K. JAVITS, New York
J. GLENN BEALL, JR., Mayrland
ROBERT TAFT, JR., Ohio
ROBERT T. STAFFORD, Vermont
LERoY 0. GOLDMAN, Proemional &.I Member
JAY B. CuTLER, Mi wiy Coad
(II)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1230
CONTENTS
STATEMENTS
TuESDAY, APRI 
22, 1975
Page
Cohen, Stanley N., M.D., department of medicine, Stanford University;
Donald Brown, Ph. D., department of embryology, Carnegie Institute
of Washington, Baltimore, Md.; Wjllard Gaylin M.D., Institute for
Bioethics and the Life Sciences, Hastings-on-Huason N.Y.; and Hal-
sted Holman, M.D., school of medicine, Stanford University; a panel -
3
Holman, Halsted, M.D., school of medicine, Stanford University, prepared
statement ................. 
.................................... 
13
(M)

--- PAGE BREAK ---Stanford University; a panel -
3
Holman, Halsted, M.D., school of medicine, Stanford University, prepared
statement ................. 
.................................... 
13
(M)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1231
GENETIC ENGINEERING, 1975
TUESDAY, APRIL 22, 1975
U.S. SENATE,
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH OF THE
COMMITTEE ON LABOR AND PUBLIC WELFARE,
Waehington, D.C.
The subcommittee met pursuant to notice, at 10:40 a.m., in room
4232, Dirksen Senate aice Building, Senator Edward M. Kennedy
(Chairman of the Subcommittee, 
presiding.
Present: Senators Kennedy and Stafford.
Committee staff present: LeRoy G. Goldman, professional staff
member; and Jay B. Cutler, minority counsel.
Senator KENNEDY. The Subcommittee on Health will come to order.
Science is today at an important crossroad. The fantastic technologi-
cal advances of recent years have outstripped man's capacity to
fully understand the implications of those advances.
Although we can do things today which we have never done before,
we have not, as a society, thought through the consequences of what
science has enabled us to do. And what we can do today pales in
comparison to what we will be able to do tomorrow.
Increasingly, in recent years, areas of scientific inquiry have come
under public scrutiny. This has been of great concern to many mem-
bers of the scientific community who fear that such a trend represents
an antiscience feeling that is growing throughout the country. They
fear increased Federal regulation of their work and a resultant drop
ii productivity.
Regulation, in this view, would discourage young scientists from
doing certain kinds of research and would deTay breakthroughs in
areas which have the potential to greatly benefit mankind.
On the other hand, proponents of public accountability, have warned
of the consequences of allowing scientists alone to determine the
scope and nature of their own work, especially when that work
poses considerable risks for the society as a whole. They raise the
question as to whether the principles that the interests of science and
those of society usually coincide, and that the pursuit of knowledge,
any knowledge, is, in of itself, a noble and positive endeavor-are
valid.
Public debate over these issues has usually been particularly vigor-
ous when focusing on the implications of recent advances in genetic
research.
Last July, in a move unprecedented in the history of science, molecu-
lar biologists from around the world voluntarily ceased doing a par-
(1)the implications of recent advances in genetic
research.
Last July, in a move unprecedented in the history of science, molecu-
lar biologists from around the world voluntarily ceased doing a par-
(1)

--- PAGE BREAK ---recent advances in genetic
research.
Last July, in a move unprecedented in the history of science, molecu-
lar biologists from around the world voluntarily ceased doing a par-
(1)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1232
2
ticular kind of research. This voluntary moratorium grew out of the
concern by researchers themselves-primarily at Stanford Univer-
sity-that they did not fully understand the potentially grave risks
and implications of their own work. These scientists were literally
creating new forms of life in their laboratories-they were attempt-
ing to harness biologic activity of-an unprecedented nature.
They worried about the potential dangers for themselves, for their
laboratory technicians, for the surrounding population. They wondered
if there was any part of the research that should not be done-at all
because it could not be done safely.
They wondered-whether controls could not be developed to minimize
the risks and let the work proceed.
Two months ago, scientists from around the world met again, and
voted to lift the moratorium, subject to the development of strict
voluntary controls for this kind of experiment. The final report,
outlining those controls, will soon be completed and made public.
I believe these scientists are to be commended for their unprece-
dented action. 
-
Two of our witnesses today, Dr. Brown and Dr. Cohen, were leaders
in that activity. But I believe it must be pointed out that the decisions
to voluntarily adopt the moratorium and then to end it, were made
largely by scientists alone. They weighed the risks and benefits. They
refined them. They decided, and the work will go on.
Perhaps that is as it should be.
But several questions remain. What is the nature of this research
which so disturbed the investigators that they felt compelled to stop
it for a time?
Is there a safety threat to the general population?
What are the implications of the research for the society as a whole?
Was it proper for scientists alone to decide to stop and then resume
the research?
How could nonscientists participate in the process, even if that were
desirable, what should be done now in terms of public policy in this
area?
What are the potential dangers of Federal intervention?
These are the questions we are going to focus on today. The issues
being raised stretch beyond this form of research. They go to the
heart of the relationship between a free society and its scientific
community.
hope ths is the beginning of a continuing dialog on this subject.
I am pleased to welcome to the committee our panel of experts,
Dr. Stanley N. Cohen, Department of Medicine, Stanford University;
Dr. Donald Brown, Department of Embryology, Caree Institute
of Washington, Baltimore, Md. Dr. Willard Gayl 
Institute for
Bioethics and the Life Sciences, hastings-on-Hudson, K.Y.; and Dr.
Halsted Holman, Department of Medicine, Stanford University.
We will ask Dr. Cohen if you would be kind enough to begin.
And, at the outset, in your explanations, all of you, if you could
attempt to keep it in as lay terms as possible, so that I can understand
it, andthe other members of the committee can understand it as well.the outset, in your explanations, all of you, if you could
attempt to keep it in as lay terms as possible, so that I can understand
it, andthe other members of the committee can understand it as well.

--- PAGE BREAK ---explanations, all of you, if you could
attempt to keep it in as lay terms as possible, so that I can understand
it, andthe other members of the committee can understand it as well.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1233
3
STATEMENT OF STANLEY N. COHEN, M.D., DEPARTMENT OF XEDI-
CINE, STANFORD UNIVERSITY; DONALD BROWN, PH. D., DEPART.
MEANT OF EMBRYOLOGY, CARNEGIE INSTITUTE OF WASHINGTON,
BALTIMORE, MD.; WILLARD GAYLIN, M.D., INSTITUTE FOR BI0-
ETHICS AND THE LIFE SCIENCES, HASTINGS-ON-HUDSON N.Y.;
-AND HALTED HOLMAN, M.D., SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, STANFORD
UNIVERSITY; A PANEL
Dr. COHEN. In February of this year, a group of 150 scientists
met together with nonscientists for three and a half days at the Asilo-
mar Conference Center near Pacific Grove, Calif., to review progress
in the use of a recently described experimental technique for intro-
ducing new hereditary characteristics into bacteria and viruses, and
to formulate procedures for the safe research use of this technique.
The lay press, and some of the scientific press, have fancifully
termed the methodology "genetic engineering." While technically
correct, the choice of this term is unfortunate, since the term has long
been associated with ethical and religious issues of human experi-
mentation which are quite peripheral to the biological safety questions
considered at Asilomar.
It should be clearly stated at the outset that the engineering of the
heredity of man was not a subject of the Asilomar meeting, nor will
it be the subject of my testimony today.
I have come here with the dual perspective of a microbiologist who
has been involved in the development of this research methodology,
and of a physician engaged in the teaching of medicine at Stanford
University. My comments will relate to four principal questions:
(1) What are the scientific concerns that led to the Asiomar meeting
and to the preceding public discussion by scientists of the use of this
new research methodology?
(2) What are the potential benefits from experiments that employ
this procedure?
(3) What steps have been taken by the scientific community to
make certain that the research tool is used safely?
(4) What has been and what should be the role of the public in
insuring such safety?
It seems worthwhile spending a few minutes explaining the research
methods involved in the introduction of new hereditary characteristics
into bacteria and viruses, and considering the history of what has
been an extraordinary public discussion by scientists and nonscientists
of the safe research use of a particular kind of basic scientific knowl-
edge.
In brief, the method involves the joining together of hereditary
material-genes--into biologically functional combinations that do
not occur in nature.
Ordinarily, natural barriers prevent the union of hereditary char-
acteristics from widely dissimilar organisms. However, in late 1973,
Annie C. Y. Chang and I at Stanford, and Herbert W. 'Boyer and
Robert B. Holing at the University of California, reported a methodacteristics from widely dissimilar organisms. However, in late 1973,
Annie C. Y. Chang and I at Stanford, and Herbert W. 'Boyer and
Robert B. Holing at the University of California, reported a method

--- PAGE BREAK ---1234
4
that was applicable for the introduction of hereditary characteristics
from virtually any kind of animal or plant cell into bacteria-by
splicing the foreign gene to a "vehicle 
capable of propagation in
bacteria, and then inserting the genetic combination into functional
bacterial cells.

Using these methods, it has become possible to construct bacterial
cells specifically designed to further our understanding of how genetic
information is expressed.

Moreover, it is now potentially Possible
to construct bacteria capable of producing a wide variety of biological
substances, such as hormones, antibiotics and other drugs, vaccines,
and enzymes capable of directly utilizing the Sun's energy for food
production-all of which are currently obtainable only from their
original plant or animal sources.

Senator KENNEDY.

This provides a real opportunity for potential
benefit, does it not-
Dr.

COHZEN.

Yes, sir.

Senator KENNEDY [continuing).

The development of these types of,
I gessyou would call it, new lfe?

Dr.

COHEN.

It is not exactly new life, just a combining of hereditary
characteristics from already existing forms of life.

Senator KENNEDY.

Well, they do not exist now, do they?

They are combining things that do not exist today?

Dr.

COHEN.

The genes being combined already exist in separate
cells, but the particular combinations are new.

Senator KENNEDY.

Just so that we understand all of this, in terms
of the drugs and vaccines from food nutrients, what are the types of
things that you could do?

Do you see a possibility for vast expansion of, say, food production,
increased kinds of food production?

Is that a possibility or an entirely-new kind of drug development
that might meet some of the historical diseases?

Dr.

COHEN.

I think these are certainly among the potential uses of
this knowledge.--- PAGE BREAK ---

COHEN. I think these are certainly among the potential uses of
this knowledge. There is potentially the project of using this method
for the production of antibiotics and scarce hormones, for production
of enzymes that can convert light into food materials, and a number of
other applications. But I would like to try to focus at least this part of my testimony
on the research aspects of this rather than the applications, if I may. Senator KENNEDY. Well, I think we will probably have this issue
for a number of years to come in the future. I am trying to get at least some kind of handle as someone that is
involved in public life, on how people can understand its importance,
the opportunities, the potential good, and also so they understand the
potential dangers, and so that we can try to provide some kind of
public awareness to some of the issues we are going to explore here
today. I do not want to weigh this aspect too long, but I just wanted to
try, as we are beginning to develop the record, to get some understand-
ing for the layman to know what we are talking about, both the
potential risk as well as the potential benefits. Dr. COHEN. I think it is reasonable to say, Senator, that the poten-
tial benefits in terms of meeting some of the needs of society in the
area of solution of problems of pollution, and of energy and food short-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1235
5
ages are very substantial.

I use the word "potential," however, since
at this time the method is a research tool and has not yet been applied
to the solution of problems in these areas.

Senator KENNEDY.

That is fine.

Dr.

COHEN.

The method employed for the propagation of foreign
genes in bacteria required a special kind of genetic element known as
a plasmid.

Although plasmids occur naturally in many bacteria, at
the time of our initial report, only one particular plasmid was known to
be suitable for use in such experiments.

Because of the possibility that some of the new kinds of bacteria
that could be produced by the gene manipulation technique might be
biologically hazardous, we adopted the policy of sending the necessary
plasmid to other scientists only after receiving their assurance that it
would not be used for work with certain genes.

Recipients of the plasmid also agreed not to send it to other lab-
oratories so that we could maintain a record of its distribution.

How-
ever, soon other vehicles suitable for propagating foreign genes in
bacteria were discovered, and it became clear that a more general
mechanism for insuring experimental safety was advisable.

The groundwork for such a procedure of control had been estab-
lished earlier when a description of this new experimental methodology
at a scientific research conference prompted the participants to ask Dr.

Philip Handler, president of the National Academy of Sciences, to
establish a committee to consider the "possibility that potentially
biohazardous consequences might result from widespread or injudi-
cious use" of the gene manipulation technique.

The Academy asked
Stanford University biochemist Paul Berg who, for several years,
had been centrally involved in matters of biological safety, to form
such an advisory committee and to serve as its chairman.

In the spring of 1974, a committee of prominent U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Academy asked
Stanford University biochemist Paul Berg who, for several years,
had been centrally involved in matters of biological safety, to form
such an advisory committee and to serve as its chairman. In the spring of 1974, a committee of prominent U.S. scientists
assembled by Berg formally and publicly recommended the voluntary
deferral of two very specific types of gene manipulation experiments,
which had already been deferred informally by the scientific
community. Senator KENNEDY. Had that ever been done before? Dr. COHEN. Had what been done before, Senator? Senator KENNEDY. The stopping of work in particular research
areas. Dr. COHEN. I do not know of a precedent for this kind of action. Senator KENNEDY. What did you feel was the unique hazard? Dr. COHEN. The concern was prompted by the committee's recog-
nition of the pathogenic potential of the genes involved in the two
particular kinds of experiments, and by our inability to accurately
assess the hazards in advance of the experiments. Senator KZNNEDY. What is pathogenic? Dr. C-OHEN. Disease-causing potential. Guidelines for safety had long been available in other areas-
Senator KENNEDY. Just before we get into that, how serious is that
possibility? Are you talking about the dangers of people catching a cold, or
something more dangerous? Dr. COHEN. The particular types of experiments that the NAS
Committee recommended deferring were the introduction of animal
70-026 0 -
16 - 719

--- PAGE BREAK ---1236
6
tumor virus genes into bacteria, and also the bringing together of
new combinations of antibiotic resistance genes that do not already
exist together in nature.

Senator KENNEDY.

Those are the ones that you cannot treat then,
is that right?

Dr.

COHEN.

Do you mean antibiotic resistance?

Senator KENNEDY.

Yes.

Dr.

COHEN.

Not exactly.

There are presently naturally occurring
antibiotic resistance combinations that cannot be treated effectively.

These already exist in nature as a consequence of natural selection of
antibiotic resistant bacteria by the use of antibiotics for clinical popu-
lations and in animal feed.

It was important not to make new com-
binations of antibiotic resistance genes that might make it more diffi-
cult to treat bacteria carrying resistance.

Senator KENNEDY.

Well, as I understand, there was the danger
also of cancer virus, is that right?

Dr.

COHEN.

That was the second category of experiments considered
by the committee.-The committee was concerned with the possibility
that animal tumor virus genes might have properties in bacteria that
might lead them to cause disease in humans.

This was a precautionary step since there was no evidence that this
kind of experiment would actually cause any kind of human disease.

Senator KENNEDY.

As I undertsand it, given the potential danger,
we have heard potential benefit, but at least there was a moratorium
that was put on for the first time, really, in terms of any kind of
research activity.

I think you might mention just briefly, in terms of your own situa-
tion and terms of the laboratories, since this is as dangerous as it
apparently is, the controls to assure that there is not any leakage of
the material or any diversion of the material.

Is this a problem?

Dr.

COHEN.

What we are talking about are potential dangers and
potential hazards.--- PAGE BREAK ---

COHEN. What we are talking about are potential dangers and
potential hazards. No one knew whether the potential hazards of such
experiments would, in fact, materialize, but the actions of the group
resulted from a concern about the chance that they might, and from
a desire to take very stringent precautions to preclude any possibility
of danger. I think that there are some specific details of this in my prepared
statement. If I may go on, perhaps that will answer your question. Senator KENNEDY. OK. Dr. COHEN. Guidelines for safety had long been available in other
areas of potentially hazardous research, such as studies involving
known disease-causing bac .- ia and viruses, radioactive materials, or
toxic chemicals. However, because of the newness of the microbial gene manipula-
tion methods, no such guidelines had been developed yet for work in
this area. Furthermore, because of the great and immediate appeal of
the technique for the solution of a wide variety of scientific and medical
problems, there was a possibility that potentially hazardous experi-
ments might proceed before appropriate guidelines could be thought-
fully considered and rigorously implemented. Thus, a pause in some kinds of research was advisable until the
hazards could be more carefully assessed, until it was determined
whether there are ways in which the scientific work could be under-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1237
7
taken- safely, and until adequate safety precautions could be made
available.

Contrary to the understanding of some observers, there was no call
for a general "halt" or "ban" in genetic exprimentation, or even for
a "moratorium" on bacterial gene manipu aion.

Most studies using
the new technique did not and would not involve experiments of a
potentially hazardous nature; only certain investigations that pos-
sibly might lead to biological hazards if they were carried out without
adequate safety precautions were the subject of the NAS Committee
recommendations.

The membership of the NAS Committee included nearly all of the
scientists who had been directly involved in developing the new
experimental tool.

The actions of the committee were initiated by the
scientists themselves, and the discussion of possible hazards was
carried out under full public scrutiny.

Senator KENNEDY.

It was just scientists that were participating?

Dr.

COHEN.

On the NAS Committee; yes, sir.

However, the committee's recommendations were communicated
openly to the public at large in a press conference arranged by the
National Academy of Sciences, and subsequently were discussed in a
number of articles written in the lay press by an almost endless series
of journalistic visitors to our laboratories.

In addition to being subject to the scrutiny of the public at large,
these recommendations have been reviewed at the highest levels of
the National Science Foundation and of the National Institutes of
Health.

They have been the subject of discussion and debate by
scientists andnonscientists in the letter columns of major newspapers
of the United States and other countries, and also have been debated
on television in the United States and abroad.

Their health implications have been considered by scientists in other
areas of research and by disinterested members of the medical pro-
fession.

Moreover, the issues considered by the NAS Committee have
been subject to the scrutiny of the U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Their health implications have been considered by scientists in other
areas of research and by disinterested members of the medical pro-
fession. Moreover, the issues considered by the NAS Committee have
been subject to the scrutiny of the U.S. House of Representatives in
a report on "Genetic Engineering," prepared for the Subcommittee
on Science, Research, and Development, of the Committee on Science
and Astronautics, and the same issues are now being considered by a
committee of the U.S. Senate. I regard such scrutiny and public involvement in important matters
of public safety as entirely appropriate. Senator KENNEy. The fact remains that the public involvement
is really after the fact, is it not? You did not have any kind of public participation in the decision-
making? They are sort of being brought up to date after decisions had been
made by the scientists? Dr. COHEN. Awareness that a problem potentially existed neces-
sarily involved those scientists who knew about the development of
this methodology and who were therefore in a position to know that
some experiments that could be carried out using the method might
prove hazardous. As I mentioned, there was a desire to reach widespread groups of
scientists quickly and to call for a voluntary deferral of some kinds of
experiments because there were no guidelines that would allow such

--- PAGE BREAK ---1238
8
experiments to be carried out safely, or even guidelines by which one
could determine whether the experiments should, in fact, be carried
out at all.

Senator KENNEDY.

Are these issues too complex for lay people to
understand?

Dr.

COHEN.

Not at all, Senator.

Senator KENNEDY.

Well, should they or should they not have been
sort of included in terms of making determinations about the extent
or nature of biological hazard that will result from this type of
research?

It seems that the decision was made, as I mentioned before, just by
scientists, those familiar with the particular experiments, and they gave
their best judgment on it.

And they went about informing the public
and having press conferences and the rest.

Dr.

COHEN.

There was a need at that particular point for action for
the reasons that I have mentioned, or at least there was a perceived
need for action.

There was no way to quickly call in the public and
get their agreement for deferral of the experiments.

For that reason,
these recommendations were made by a group of scientists, not just
scientists working in this particular area of research, but scientists
involved in other areas of research as well were on this committee.

The goal of the committee was to rapidly obtain a deferral of
potentially hazardous kinds of experiments, in order to allow time for
a full public discussion of the issues, and I believe that has been done
subsequently.

I would like to go on, if I may, to the meeting at Asilomar.

At a recent meeting at Asilomar, discussions regarding matters of
experimental safety were again carried out under full public scrutiny
and with public participation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I would like to go on, if I may, to the meeting at Asilomar. At a recent meeting at Asilomar, discussions regarding matters of
experimental safety were again carried out under full public scrutiny
and with public participation. One of every eight attendees at the
conference was a representative of the press; many reporters recorded
the formal sessions of the meeting on tape and, in addition, spent the
evenings at Asilomar asking the scientist 'participants relevant,
pointed and challenging questions with a journalistic intensity that
I would imagine is quite familiar to the members of this Senate
committee. Also attending and participating actively in the discussions and
decisions of Asilomar were representatives of the National Science
Foundation and the National Institutes of Health, as well as invited
nonscientists from the fields of law and ethics. Following the Asilomar conference, a meeting of the newly appointed
NIH Advisory Committee on Recombinant DNA Molecules was again
attended by representatives of the national press and, at that session,
formal action was taken to add a nonscientist public representative
to the scientist group advising the NIH in this area. There was a general consensus among the scientists at Asilomar on
three major issues:
(1) Genetic manipulation of bacteria and viruses offers the prospect
for solution of a wide variety of important scientific and medical
problems, as well as other problems that plaque society--such as
environmental pollution, and food and energy shortages. Such poten-
tial uses for the new techniques have received widespread attention in
the press, and I will not elaborate on them here. (2) The participants agreed that accidental dissemination of certain
kinds of genetically altered bacteria and viruses may pose varying

--- PAGE BREAK ---1239
9
degrees of potential risk.

Thus, the scientists proposed a series of
safeguards, principally biological and physical barriers, adequate to
allow most experiments to be undertaken with minimal risk to labora-
tory.

workers, to the public at large, and to the animal and plant
species sharing our ecosystems.

(3) The participants at the conference concluded that there are
certain experiments in which the potential risks are of such a serious
nature that they ought not be done with the presently available con-
tainment facilities.

This determination was based simply on a judgment of potential
risk; it did not involve decisions about the merit of the experiments, or
judgments about their usefulness.

While it was acknowledged that future research and experience
may show that many of the potential hazards are less serious and less
probable than we now suspect, it was agreed that standards of protec-
tion should be greater at the beginning.

They could be modified if the
assessment of risk changed.

Physical containment barriers have long been used in the United
States space exploration program to minimize the possibility of con-
tamination of this planet by extra-terrestrial microbes.

The concept of biological barriers, which was formulated in some
detail at the Asiomar meeting, and which involves fastidious bac-
terial hosts unable to survive in natural environments and equally
fastidious vehicles able to grow only in specified hosts, will contribute
significantly to the safety of gene manipulation experiments.

Physical containment procedures have also been employed to pro-
tect laboratory workers and the public from hazards associated with
the experimental use of radioactive isotopes and toxic chemicals, and
with the study of disease-causing bacteria and viruses.The concept of biological barriers, which was formulated in some
detail at the Asiomar meeting, and which involves fastidious bac-
terial hosts unable to survive in natural environments and equally
fastidious vehicles able to grow only in specified hosts, will contribute
significantly to the safety of gene manipulation experiments.

Physical containment procedures have also been employed to pro-
tect laboratory workers and the public from hazards associated with
the experimental use of radioactive isotopes and toxic chemicals, and
with the study of disease-causing bacteria and viruses.

Radioisotope use in scientific research is additionally subject to
regulations designed to insure the safety of laboratory personnel and
the public, and there is public involvement in -the enforcement of
these safety procedures.

However, the merit or lack of merit of specific experiments employ-
ing radioactive.

materials remains entirely a scientific judgment sub-
ject to peer review.

The point I would like to make here is that the public is assured in
the case of radioisotope use that experiments involving radioactivity
will be carried out safely.

The public is also assured, through represen-
tation in the peer review process, that the experiments it supports in
this area have scientific merit.

However, the public does not require
that scientists desiring to use radioactive materials in the search for
basic scientific knowledge justify the use of this experimental tool in
terms of the social benefits that may result from the particular
experiment.

The operational details of the mechanisms now being developed to
monitor potentially biohazardous experimentation in the area of
bacterial and viral gene manipulation have not yet been announced.

However, it has been proposed that the extent of risk for particular
groups of experiments be determined by the current peer review
process; appropriate containment conditions would be specified by the
same mechanism.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The operational details of the mechanisms now being developed to
monitor potentially biohazardous experimentation in the area of
bacterial and viral gene manipulation have not yet been announced. However, it has been proposed that the extent of risk for particular
groups of experiments be determined by the current peer review
process; appropriate containment conditions would be specified by the
same mechanism. Furthermore, onsite inspection of containment facilities by local
biohazards committees would determine whether the required safety

--- PAGE BREAK ---1240
10
precautions are being implemented properly, just as onsite.inspection
occurs in use of radioactive materials.

Under such conditions of
biological and physical containment, experiments designed to assess
more accurately the actual extent of risk for various types of experi-
ments could be undertaken with relative safety.

Public involvement in the process would occur by the currently
available mechanism of nonscientist participation on the National
Councils concerned with the funding of scientific research.

In addition, the local committees assigned to monitor the safety
procedures employed by individual scientists could also include
publicly-appointed members.

However, a professionally-trained equiv-
alent of the radiation safety officer might be preferable for- this task.

I believe that procedures such as those described above are desirable,
adequate, and appropriate to insure public safety in this area of
resear ch.

I believe it is the public's prerogative to determine the extent of its
resources that will be devoted to the support of basic scientific re-
search and, in fact, the public clearly exercises its prerogative through
its legislative bodies.

It is the public's right, also, to be assured that
scientific experiments are carried out with safety.

It is also the public's responsibility to determine through various
mechanisms how basic knowledge that is acquired through basic
scientific research is to be applied within the public domain.

However,
I do not believe that it is in the public interest to insist that the search
for fundamental knowledge be justified in terms of immediate public
benefits-or to require that basic scientific research become an
instrument for the pursuit of specific short-range political, economic
or social goals.

The tone, I gather, from your presentation is that this is a bit of a
problem, but we can develop the kinds of safeguards or safety stand-
ards of procedures, and there is not really that much to be concerned
about.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However,
I do not believe that it is in the public interest to insist that the search
for fundamental knowledge be justified in terms of immediate public
benefits-or to require that basic scientific research become an
instrument for the pursuit of specific short-range political, economic
or social goals. The tone, I gather, from your presentation is that this is a bit of a
problem, but we can develop the kinds of safeguards or safety stand-
ards of procedures, and there is not really that much to be concerned
about. The pool of bacterial and viral hereditary material on this planet
is in the state of constant evolutionary flux, and the activities of
modern society have accelerated the pace of natural genetic change. In recent years, naturally occurring antibiotic resistant bacteria
have appeared with a growing frequency in response to the widespread
clinical use of antibiotics. Bacteria and viruses of increasing natural
virulence continue to threaten the health and well-being of the
public. I know of no way to halt these events, but there are means of
understanding the processes which cause them, and of learning to
deal with their consequences. The scientific methodology I have discussed here today promises to
further such a basic understanding of genetics in ways that have not
been possible previously. It also provides the prospect of specifically
constructed microbes able to make a wide variety of important
biologically produced substances. While it is essential for the public to be assured that experiments
seeking basic knowledge are carried out safely, I believe that it would
be contrary to the public interest if the initiative of the scientific
community in rising issues of experimental safety should lead to a

--- PAGE BREAK ---arried out safely, I believe that it would
be contrary to the public interest if the initiative of the scientific
community in rising issues of experimental safety should lead to a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1241
11
decision by the public to direct the scientific course of such
investigations.
Thank you.
Senator KENNEDY. Let me just ask a couple of questions because we
want to keep it moving this morning.
The tone, I gather, from your presentation is that this is a bit of a
problem, but we can develop the kinds of safeguards or safety stand-
ards of procedures, and there is not really that much to be concerned
about.
I do not know whether Lamn missing an important ingredient. It
seems to me if we started out for the first time effectively worldwide,
there was a moratorium on this kind of research because of the po-
tential dangers of it, I am just wondering whether the kind of voluntary
restraints that you pointed out in your testimony are really adequate
to do the job on this?
Dr. COHEN. I think it is important for us to define just what we
mean by this kind of research.
There was no call for a moratorium or general deferral of genetic
experimentation, or even of all genetic experimentation involving the
techniques I have been talking about.
There was a call for deferral of only two specific kinds of experi-
ments. Also contrary to the impression that one may receive from
reading some accounts of the Asilomar meeting in the press, there was
a continuation of the moratorium on some of these experiments
precisely because the participants at the meeting were not convinced
that such experiments could be carried out safely under present con-
ditions of containment.
In no sense, have I intended to belittle the hazards although, in all
honesty, I cannot say that the hazards definitely exist or that they
have been shown. They are potential hazards, but it was precisely
our inability to assess the extent of these potential hazards that led to
our recommendations for exercising the utmost caution.
Senator KENNEDY. You have some that will not go forward, is that
right?
Dr. COHEN. That is exactly right.
Senator KENNEDY. You have others that will go forward under
these voluntary kinds of restraints that you have outlined?
Dr. COHEN. The restraints I have outlined are not voluntary. I
expect that they will be enforced by the granting agencies and com-
pliance will be monitored by on-site committees.
Basically, the way that I envision the procedure as working is that
a scientist proposing experiments in this particular area would describe
both the experiments and his or her assessment of the hazards to the
granting agency committee reviewing the request for funding.
If their assessment of the containment conditions required for a
line of experiments to be carried out safely agreed with the scientist's,
than an on-site committee would inspect the facilities to make certaiD
the facilities required for that type of experimentation are, in fact,
available and are being used properly.
Senator KENNEDY. Have there been any accidents or have there
been any problems in controlling the material?
Dr. COHEN. In controlling which material?e, in fact,
available and are being used properly.
Senator KENNEDY. Have there been any accidents or have there
been any problems in controlling the material?
Dr. COHEN. In controlling which material?

--- PAGE BREAK ---e and are being used properly.
Senator KENNEDY. Have there been any accidents or have there
been any problems in controlling the material?
Dr. COHEN. In controlling which material?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1242
12
Senator KENNEDY. The plasmids.
Dr. COHEN. I am not aware of any accidents or consequences of any.
Senator KENNEDY. There has not been any diversion of-the material
at all?
Dr. COHEN. Any what Senator?
Senator KENNEDY. Diversion.
Has anybody that has gained any access to this material that should
not have!
Has there been any that has been misplaced or removed or taken
that you know about?
Dr. COHEN. The material? Do you mean the bacterial plasmids?
Senator KENNEDY. What is the problem?
I am a layman and new to this.
Has there been any material that has been either taken, removed,
that has not been accounted for?
Dr. COHE.. 
Plasmids are naturally occurring genetic elements that
are in many bacteria found in nature. Since bacteria and plasmids are
self-propagating, they can't be considered in terms that imply a
specific quantity-
Senator KENNEDY.Well, has there been anything-
Dr. CIOHEN [continuing]. Perhaps I can answer your question this
way, Senator. I know of no violation whatsoever of the voluntary
guidelines that were recommended in the initial NAS Committee
report. To my knowledge there has been strict compliance with all
of the recommendations, even though they were originally voluntary.
However, at this point formal mechanisms are in the process of being
established, with public participation, for insuring that compliance
continues to occur.
Senator KENNEDY. Given the fact that the guidelines have been
followed and the efforts have been made to try and comply with them,
has there, in spite of willingness for those who have responsibility to
follow those, has there been any diversion of any of the material?
Dr. COHEN. Not that I know of.
Senator KENNEDY. You mean there has not been an instance, for
example, where some of it is unaccounted for?
Dr. COHEN. One cannot really consider bacteria in terms of a
specific quantity of material that can or cannot be accounted for, since
we are talking about biologically reproducing organisms.
Senator KENNEDY. Has any of it been missing?
Dr. COHEN. No sir. If you are asking about unauthorized use, I
have no knowledge of any such use.
Senator KENNEDY. OK.
Dr. Holman.
Dr. HOLMAN. Senator, in view of the hour, I think, with your
permission, I will simply comment on a few points.
Senator KENNEDY. Good.
We will have the complete statement in the record.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Holman follows:]he hour, I think, with your
permission, I will simply comment on a few points.
Senator KENNEDY. Good.
We will have the complete statement in the record.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Holman follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---th your
permission, I will simply comment on a few points.
Senator KENNEDY. Good.
We will have the complete statement in the record.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Holman follows:]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1243
13
PRELIMINARY STATEMENT OF
TESTIMONY CONCERNING GENETIC MANIPULATION
SENATE SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH
April 22, 1975 
Halsted Holman, M.D.
I appreciate the opportunity to participate in this hearing. Sub-
c-antial issues of public and science policy are raised by the new techniques
- genetic manipulation. 
I commi end the subcommittee for exploring this matter.
I should like to stress that, though I do investigative iumunology,
* am not skilled in the technical area Pt question. 
I am participating there-
.re primarily as a physician and as a citizen.
Commendation is also due Drs. Berg, Cohen and their.colleagues for
rising these issues clearly before pursuing their experiments. 
Their action
wis perceptive and sensitive. I consider it 
to be in the best traditions of
social responsibility. At the same time, I would say that actions taken by
scientists alone are not sufficient. 
The well-being of the public and the
integrity of science require careful regulation of genetic manipulation. 
The
matter belongs in the public domain.
The capacity to modify gene function, or to introduce new genes into
!,t organism, represent a new stage in man's ability to manipulate nature.
'. therto alteration of inheritable characteristics of plants or animals was
.. rgely achieved by selective breeding or by environmental alterations. 
The
:ttter 
methods could affect individuals on a statistical basis over a long
..me period but could not predictably change a particular individual. 
An
c::ample would be the effects of radiation upon a population. 
Now the possi-
b.lity emerges of modification of specific genes of an individual or group
uhich will immediately alter the function of the individuals and possibly their
c;fspring.
Experiments in genetic manipulation have been proposed for the
following reasons: 
1. pursuit of knowledge which will improve mankind's
understanding and lead to important but unforeseen benefits in the future.s in genetic manipulation have been proposed for the
following reasons: 
1. pursuit of knowledge which will improve mankind's
understanding and lead to important but unforeseen benefits in the future.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ation have been proposed for the
following reasons: 
1. pursuit of knowledge which will improve mankind's
understanding and lead to important but unforeseen benefits in the future.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1244
14
-2-
This purpose derives its strongest support from the history of science in which
the importance of new knowledge has often not been perceived by the persons
developing it. 2. Design of specific means to modify or control individual
deleterious genes in the hope that their ill effects in animals or man can be
avoided. 3. Modification of micro-organisms, plants and possibly animals to
improve their usefulness to man as, for example, 
in increasing agricultural
output or producing medically useful materials such as hormones.
The goals are laudable. However, the precise outcome of such experi-
nents cannot be predicted. Harmful consequences could arise which are un-
Lntended. Organisms such as bacteria or viruses containing human or other
:'oreign genes could affect in quite unexpected ways the plants or animals they
;ubsequently encounter. Persons exposed to the experiments could suffer an
.nfection unsusceptible to present therapy. Genetic alterations induced in
domestic animals or in man might have overt or subtle consequences unantici-
pated by the experimenters.
This context is familiar to physicians and others who treat or ex-
rerience illness. 
It is the context of human experimentation and of the use
tf potentially dangerous methods of treatment. 
What is new is not the capacit;
-o alter individuals or populations by technical means; it 
is the power and
ap&i444-ty of the new techniques. 
Our past experiences in devising social
c:olicies to govern human experimentation and to secure informed consent to--
treatment are applicable here. We need an informed consent of society which
is analagousto informed consent of an individual .
In recent decades, understanding of human biology and the causes of
disease has increased. Methods of diagnosis and treatment have become more
powerful. These achievements have required increasingly complex experimenta-
tion on people. Such experimentation, and the use of new diagnostic and
therapeutic procedures, carry increased risk as well as potential benefit for
the subjects. 
In parallel, moral and practical rules have been developed toimentation, and the use of new diagnostic and
therapeutic procedures, carry increased risk as well as potential benefit for
the subjects. 
In parallel, moral and practical rules have been developed to

--- PAGE BREAK ---use of new diagnostic and
therapeutic procedures, carry increased risk as well as potential benefit for
the subjects. 
In parallel, moral and practical rules have been developed to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1245
15
regulate experimentation on humans and the use of dangerous medical practices.
Many national and international bodies have contributed to these rules. Cen-
tral to every code are three principles; 
1. the purpose of the experiment or
treatment must have high importance unattainable in other way&, 2. probable
gain must clearly outweigh probable risk for the subject, and 3. the. subject
must be fully informed of the nature of the experiment or treatment, assent to
it freely, and be able to terminate it at will.
In the present case, it is important to examine the applicability of
the three principles. In my view purposes of experiments in genetic manipula-
tion as presently stated do not clearly meet the test of the principles. Be-
cause of the newness and power of genetic manipulation the risks are not
known; the benefits must therefore be very great to justify the experiments.
However, for example, genetic manipulation is clearly not essential for the
achievement of increased agricultural production. Output could be greatly
increased through many-conventional methods. Similarly, the production of
materials such as hormones can continue to be achieved by other means. For
another example, most major human illnesses appear to result from the actions
of many genes. useful genetic manipulation in these instances would probably
be unattainable. For single gene illnesses, there are alternate approaches
which include genetic counselling, in utero diagnosis, and various specific
therapies such as those being developed for sickle cell diseae"and Tay-Sachs
disease. Thus, while genetic manipulation would theoretically be useful in
these circumstances, it is not the only path to a possible solution.
If the foregoing arguments are valid, increasing general human
knowledge remains as the predominant reason for conducting the experiments.
This is a problematic justification. 
Because the purpose is not specific, it
is virtually impossible to balance benefits and risks. It 
is particularly
difficult for those who might be affected to be fully informed or to assent
freely. Additionally, if for instance dangerous bacteria escaped from theto balance benefits and risks. It 
is particularly
difficult for those who might be affected to be fully informed or to assent
freely. Additionally, if for instance dangerous bacteria escaped from the

--- PAGE BREAK ---and risks. It 
is particularly
difficult for those who might be affected to be fully informed or to assent
freely. Additionally, if for instance dangerous bacteria escaped from the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1246
16
laboratory to the general environment, it would be impossible to terminate
the experiment easily.
In a situation where information is being sought generally, the lim-
its of what should and what should not be done lie largely in the conscience
of the investigators. Without impuning the investigators, I consider this a
dangerous position. 
It raises questions of conflict of interest. More im-
portant it raises questions of uses and misuses of knowledge.
Knowledge is a product of all prior human experience and, as such,
is a possession of all who live at present. 
It is specifically not the pos-
session of those who have it, to do what they wish with it. 
Rather, the social
role of knowledge is to benefit the public. The social responsibility of
those who have knowledge is to make it understandable and available to all.
It follows that decisions concerning the development and uses of knowledge
are a public concern, and a joint responsibility of the public and those with
the knowledge.
When knowledge is treated as a private possession, to be deployed
and exploited for private purpose, the needed social relationship is disrup-
ted. 
Experts become semi-autonomous. Their individual or group interests
prevail. The public remains ignorant and may become apathetic or hostile.
The experts, deprived of broad social input, develop attitudes of superiority
and tend to defend their actions by asserting that the actions are good in
their own right -
science for science's sake -
and by promising technical
solutions for complex problems. Because they are isolated from the public at
large, the experts' perspective narrows. Their solutions to problems tend
more toward manipulation than toward cooperative social efforts. In short,
the experts, though possessed of high technical skills, become inexpert in
the relationship of their activities to society as a whole. Their decisions
and actions can become narrow and harmful.
We have had many examples of misapplied, inadequate and even harmfulinexpert in
the relationship of their activities to society as a whole. Their decisions
and actions can become narrow and harmful.
We have had many examples of misapplied, inadequate and even harmful

--- PAGE BREAK ---ationship of their activities to society as a whole. Their decisions
and actions can become narrow and harmful.
We have had many examples of misapplied, inadequate and even harmful

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1247
17
practices introduced by experts. In the field of medicine, many practices
including use of complex and expensive systems have beon widely introduced
without appropriate forethought and have failed to meet expectations. Ex-
amples are the use of thalidomide, diethylatilbestrol for threatened abortion,
radiation for acne, a high percent of hysterectomies, lobotomies, mutiphasic
screening and even coronary care units. A significant amount of present sur-
gery is unnecessary. Some 7t of hospital admissions result from inappropriate
uses of drugs for therapy. In part because of this situation, good medical
practice seeks to adhere to the aphorism "first do no harm", and codes of
behavior have been developed to govern human experimentation and to secure
informed consent.
To my mind, solution to the genetic manipulation question lies in
careful forethought, rigorous testing before general application, and broad
consultation and agreement between those proposing action and those affected
by it.
Two questions merit brief attention. First, in complex settings
such as this, can the public learn enough to make an informed judgment? This
question is unanswerable with certainty. However, again arguing by analogy
with medicine, the public can learn. Physicians can attest to the willingness
and capability of citizens to learn about, and deal effectively with, complex
issues relating to their health when given the opportunity. Second, will the
time taken for such learning seriously delay important advances in scientific
knowledge? Delay it will. But it is doubtful that the delay would be nearly
as harmful in the long run as the damage done to public confidence and perhaps
to people by failure to consider the consequences of an action and achieve a
consensus beforehand. 
In a recent unanimous decision concerning informed
consent which is applicable to this situation, the California Supreme Court
stated "In many instances, to the physician, whose training and experience
enable a self-satisfying evaluation, the particular treatment which should beto this situation, the California Supreme Court
stated "In many instances, to the physician, whose training and experience
enable a self-satisfying evaluation, the particular treatment which should be

--- PAGE BREAK ---he California Supreme Court
stated "In many instances, to the physician, whose training and experience
enable a self-satisfying evaluation, the particular treatment which should be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1248
18
-6-
undertaken may seem evident, but it is the prerogative of the patient, not
the physician, to determine for himself the direction in which he believes
his interests lie. To enable the patient to chart his course knowledgeably,
reasonable familiarity with the therapeutic alternatives and their hazards
becomes essential." 
The court added, "In sum, the patient's right of self-
decision is the measure of the physician's duty to reveal. That right can
be effectively exercised only if the patient possesses adequate information
to enable bn intelligent choice. The scope of the physician's communications
to the patient, then, must be measured by the patient's need, and that need
is whatever information is material to the decision. Thus the test for .
determining whether a potential peril must be divulged is its materiality
to the patient's decision."
These arguments are not intended to support a permaupent ban on the
proposed experiments. They are intended to support a moratorium on the ex-
periments until an appropriate procedure can be devised for joint public-
scientific consideration of the issues, and until certain requirements are met.
The requirements would include: 
1. Design of a public process to define
conditions under which genetic manipulation experiments will be performed
and the codes of practice which will govern the experiments. This would
include extensive scientific consultation to a public body which retains
power of decision. In my view that public body should be genuinely repre-
sentative of the public at large and not consist primarily of those who re-
present only a fraction of society. 2. Clear definition of the purposes,
potential benefits and necessity of the experiments. 3. The best possible
identiLfication of risks. 4. A review mechanism to evaluate the experiments
as they progress and to guarantee termination if results are harmful.
The issue is not a struggle between science and anti-science or
anti-intellectualism. It is a struggle to achieve a healthy relationship
between science and citizens who support and are affected by it. 
Science as
a human endeavor, like medicine, can develop appropriately only with the
consent and support of those whom it affects. Scientists, like physicians,
should be partners of the public. That relationship can be forgotten only
at our peril.n develop appropriately only with the
consent and support of those whom it affects. Scientists, like physicians,
should be partners of the public. That relationship can be forgotten only
at our peril.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1249
19
Dr.

HOLMAN.

I would also like to say that though I do a certain
amount of investigative immunology, I am not an expert in the tech-
nical area under consideration here.

I am professor of medicine at Stanford, and am testifying as a
physician and as a-citizen.

The issue at debate is the relationship between science and the
public at large, and more particularly how that relationship influences
the ways in which we will direct our resources as a nation and as a
scientific medical profession.

There is no debate, as I understand it, about the existence of.

po-
tential risks in experimentation in the general area of genetic manipu-
lation.

Some of these risks can clearly be controlled by technical means.

Dr.

Cohen has spoken to that.

Others are more problematic, and we
cannot be sure about the effectiveness of our control of those risks.

A vivid example has to do with the placing of genes from one species
into another, and what it might mean to the public at large or to
those involved in the experiments, when these new types of life are
created.

The scientists who are involved are very cognizant of this problem
and have addressed themselves to it in a thoroughly commendable
way, in attempting to develop guidelines for their own experi-
mentation.

At the same time, I think that the participation of scientists alone
in decisionmaking on these issues is inadequate i-nd my remarks are
directed specifically to that point.

As a general background, I would like to make two or three com-
ments which I will not take the time to defend in detail.

The first is that knowledge including scientific knowledge is public
property.

It -is developed out of the experience of all of the people who
ave gone before us, and it is the property of those who live today.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The first is that knowledge including scientific knowledge is public
property. It -is developed out of the experience of all of the people who
ave gone before us, and it is the property of those who live today. Scientists and teachers have the obligation to interpret knowledge
in ways which will be useful for those who are living, who need the
knowledge and can use it for their special purposes as, for example,
recovery 
from illness. Now, it one looks at the knowledge in this sense, then one has to
define a set of relationships between those who work with knowledge,
such as the scientists, and the citizens as a whole. One of the reasons,
in my view, why this issue of genetic manipulation has posed such
concern is that it exemplifies the way in which knowledge might in-
advertently serve the purposes of harming rather than aiding the
people of this or other countries. Therefore, while the techniques that Dr. Cohen was speaking of do
not represent qualitatively new and necessarily unique capabilities
of scientistis, they do represent a development of scientific knowledge
where the potential outcomes ae particularly vivid, and where the
harm couldbe substantial. To my mind, this forces us to examine the appropriate relationships
between the development of scientific knowledge and the citizen's
receipt and use of that knowledge. The issue is analogous to the relationship between physicians and
people who, are ill. The analogy is partystained but basically
applicable.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1250
20
I would summarize by saying that we need in this setting a social
mechanism of informed consent similar to the informed consent we
seek from a patient prior to the use of a diagnostic or therapeutic
procedure that might be harmful.

Over the centuries, the nature of human experimentation has been
addressed, and various principles developed which allow for the
doctor-patient relationship to reflect the ways in which society views
such experimentation and potential harm in a medical setting.

Generally speaking, there are three components to every code of
behavior that has been developed.

The purpose of -the experiment or
the treatment must be very high and unattainable in other ways.

The
probable gain must outweigh the probable risk.

And the subject must
be fully informed of the nature of the experiment or treatment, assent
to it freely, and be able to terminate it at will.

In my view, these principles apply as well to the relationship among
science, its powerful potential particularly in application, and the
public at large.

We should find ways in which the public will understand the pur-
Doses of a scientific study or the application of scientific knowledge,
6 able to weigh the benefits and the risks, and be able to interact with
the project itself as it proceeds in terms of whether it is meeting the
accepted standards of safety and risk, and is worth pursuing.

If this is not done, then the scientific development of knowledge
proceeds outside of a relationship to the society at large.

Scientists,
by force of this circumstance, become isolated and, although they may
be highly expert in certain areas of thought, risk becoming inexpert
in their relationship with citizens and society at large.

That circumstance deprives society of an understanding of how its
knowledge is being used, and deprives scientists of an understanding
of the impact of their thought and action on their-fellow citizens.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Scientists,
by force of this circumstance, become isolated and, although they may
be highly expert in certain areas of thought, risk becoming inexpert
in their relationship with citizens and society at large. That circumstance deprives society of an understanding of how its
knowledge is being used, and deprives scientists of an understanding
of the impact of their thought and action on their-fellow citizens. To my mind, therefore, the solution to the problem lies in careful
forethought, vigorous testing before new procedures are applied, and
broad consultation and agreement between those who are proposing
a given action and those who will be affected by it. There are very practical ways in which this can be done, though
perhaps the purpose now is not to get into specific detail. But I wold
stress that we can define far betterthan has been done, means whereby
those of us in the scientific and medical communities confer with
citizens at large concerning the work we wish to do, and obtain
their reactions, thoughts and concerns. Then the decisionmaking
about the applications of science, about the ways in which science
should develop, and perhaps about certain speciic types of scientific
experimentation could and should rest public bodies working in
consultation with scientists. Through this public mechanism, the
benefits and risks could be identified, and mechanisms obtained for
assessing the outcomes as we are in the process of carrying out-the
studies. Such a social relationship is missing. We are struggling toward it
in our efforts to define the ways in which contemporary, potent,
technical means of diagnosis and treatment affect the doctor-patient
relationship. We need to struggle for it in the scientific arena seeking
to define ways in which scientific investigation and applied science
shall affect society at large.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1251
21
To my mind, the issue is not an issue of antiscience or anti-intellec-
tualism.

It is an issue of achieving a healthy relationship between
science and citizens, an essential partnership between those who
practice science and those who are affected by it.

Thank you.

Senator KENNEDY.

In practical terms, how do you do that?

Dr.

HOLMAN.

I do not know the best way, but I can give you a
specific proposal.

The Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, the National
Institutes of Health and National Science Foundation, deal with
the support and development of science.

Those agencies should have
associated with them groups, of citizens representative of all segments
of society who address the question of how scientific research should
be interpreted and acted upon by citizens.

Such groups would have to
be study groups, willing to commit time and effort to the task.

Dr.

Cohen is correct when he points out that a number of the review
bodies currently used by these agencies are appropriate.

But the
characteristic of these bodies is that they are popiuated by scientists
and medical people.

The citizens are in the action as an afterthought.

A review of the ways in which the public should learn and act upon
science is the necessary first step.

There are many individuals of
many different backgrounds who could address this question very well.

To give you a specific example, those of us involved with patients
with serious illness who have attempted to bring those patients to an
understanding of the nature of the illness, the inadequacies of present
medical knowledge, and the dangers of our procedures for diagnosis
and treatment, have been struck by the capacity of patients to under-
stand that information and act uvon it.

Often, if the disease is chronic
and runs a long course, they participate equally with the physicians
in the decisionmaking.

I do not know exactly how to apply that relationship to science.

But I suspect it can be attained.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I do not know exactly how to apply that relationship to science. But I suspect it can be attained. A way to start would be through a
commission to explore the relationships. Senator KENNEDY. That is very useful. I would like to work with you to try anid develop some kind of study
which would do that. I think it would be very useful and very helpful. I gather just from both listening to you and following your state-
ment here that you feel there should have been more of an input in
terms of the nonscientific community in reaching these decisions in
terms of the continuation of research or determination of some re-
search or the protocols in terms of safety in research? Dr. HOLMAN. Yes; in this specific instance, what Dr. Cohen and
his colleagues did was thoroughly responsible. They were under a very
real pressure) generated by their own consciences. They addressed
themselves to the issues very well at the Asilomar conference. I have
no retrospective criticism of what they did. But in terms of the needed new relationship, public considerations
and public participation were not adequately present at Asilomar. They did have the press; they did have some public representatives,
but the issue of the relationship between science and the citizens was
not focused upon or debated. The issue is, where do we go from here? Can we build upon the
beginning steps at Asilomar to bring the citizens in appropriately and
70-026 0 - 16 - 80

--- PAGE BREAK ---1252
22
establish a set of cencepts, codes if you will, certainly practices, that
can govern this type of penetrating scientific research and other simi-
lar types in the future.

It is an ongoing process.

We can be grateful
for what they did.

We should now seize the opportunity to build upon
that.

Senator KENNEDY.

What do you see as the dangers if we do not go
that route?

Dr.

HOLMN.

How much time do we have, Senator?

I risk overgeneralizing, because I do not want to take too much
time.

I see very real social risks.

I view this country as run by the
consent of the governed.

We may depart from that.

But when we do,
we should attempt to recover.

The governed, in order to give consent, must understand the issues
upon which they are consenting.

Today, when the governed provide
their moneys and their authority to a particular action like medical
or scientific research, they are giving consent, unfortunately at times,
without having the knowledge in advance.

A
If then the project runs its course with the public seemingly en-
dorsing an action but not understanding it, and the action has unde-
sirable consequences, we begin to have a citizenry that is withdrawn,
is hostile and apathetic.

It feels it cannot influence matters.

Govern-
ment is out of control, consent of the governed is not applied, de-
mocracy is not operational or effective.

Those who have found a way
of getting the authority without the appropriate citizens' consent,
begin to feel that they have a special role, that they are somewhat
better than others.

They may be expert in their special fields, but that
excellence does not extend to their political impact.

Gradually we
come to a situation not of a partnership in social endeavors, but of
manipulation of people by experts.

That te my mind vitiates democracy and certainly undermines the
concept of the consent of the governed.

People will say ic is difficult to understand science and its social
impact.--- PAGE BREAK ---

That te my mind vitiates democracy and certainly undermines the
concept of the consent of the governed. People will say ic is difficult to understand science and its social
impact. I gave you an analogy in terms of medicine, which I think
indicates the citizens can understand when given an opportunity. If
giving them an opportunity requires delay, then delay we should. They should have the opportunity to understand and to act upon that
knowledge. By rectifying this situation, I think we can achieve the appropriate
relationship between science and citizens, and avoid a serious under-
mining of the democratic process. Senator KENNEDY. Dr. Brown. Dr. BROWN. I spend most of my time doing experiments and that
gives me some ability to judge the research product, my own and that
of others. I think it is important for me to say what I am not qualified to do;
what I am not an expert witness in, and I question whether any of
us are in fact; and that is to actually make broad statements about
the applications of science and their moral and ethical consequences
I have very strong opinions about these matters. But I do not consider
my views on the uses and conditions of science any more or less
enlightened than any other scientist. I think these broad decisions need in fact participation of society as
a whole, but there are three areas in science which I. firmly believe the
scientists themselves must be responsible for.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1253
23
First, they should be the sole judges of the quality of biomedical
research.

Second, scientists must have significant inputs into insuring the
safety of their research, which was done at Asilomar, I believe.

Finally, I believe that the goals, priorities, so to speak, of medic-l--
research and society as a whole will be served best if scientists can
pursue the ideas and leads that they determine to be most produc-
tive-essentially to decide on the field of endeavor they want to follow.

Senator KENNEDY.

You do not think even in the very beginning,
even at the inception of research that there is a role of public aware-
ness or input?

Dr.

BROWN.

I think science is sensitive to public awareness.

I
think the policies, public problems, hit scientists just as they do anyone
else.

I think the way of movement of science in general areas, even
by their own volution, clearly reflects that social awareness.

Senator KENNEDY.

You do not think the question about whether a
society may or may not want to pursue, given a particular lead, is a
matter of importance-
Dr.

Brown.

I do not even believe that scientists are really qualified
to state at the inception of a branch of research in which direction that
research isgoing to go.

I think that my own feeling is that the search
for knowledge and truth really should go wherever it leads.

It is the
application of this knowledge which is where we really lack wisdom,
in my view.

Senator KENNEDY.

Well, you mean the public is brought in after
it is pretty well worked out; is that what you-are saying?

Do you not think they have a role in terms of the inception or the
direction of research?

Mr.

BROWN.

I think we are uninformed even among scientists of
where the next breakthrough is going to come from, where the next
socially beneficial thing is going to come from; but I cannot envision
any panel which would have the vision to carry out this task.

Senator KENNEDY.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I think we are uninformed even among scientists of
where the next breakthrough is going to come from, where the next
socially beneficial thing is going to come from; but I cannot envision
any panel which would have the vision to carry out this task. Senator KENNEDY. Well, then, is it that present modalities are not
sufficient to deal with this, or is it that you are opposed to trying to
get some kind of input and some public involvement or participation of
expression, when you are moving into new areas of departure or new
lines of research, such as we are considering here this morning? Dr. BROWN. I think the public has a great deal to say about the
risk of these things. I think it is a great responsibility for scientists to
explain the risks of what they do. Perhaps they have not always been successful in this. I think it was
one of the things which Asilomar or the scientists of Asilomar tried
to do. But what I do object to is the weighing of the risks versus
benefits. I think the risks must be treated by themselves. I can think of no research so beneficial that it should be permitted
to be done with risks. Risks should be minimized no matter what
happens. But the process of this weighing of risks versus benefits is
not something that I know how to do, nor do I believe any other
members of the panel here know how to do, nor in fact can I think of
any group of people whom I believe to be visionary enough to do this. This is at the level of the exploring of knowledge. This is not at the
level of applying this knowledge. This is quite a different matter, it
seems to me. -

--- PAGE BREAK ---1254
24
Senator KENNEDY.

Then scientists are going to make that decision;
is that right?

Dr.

BROWN.

Scientists make decisions from the scientific point of
view of what the problem looks like, what is now ready for solutionL
What area of research is now ready for exploration.

He does this from his experience, his studies, his consultation with
other scientists.

I believe that all of this research has a potential for good and poten-
tial for bad.

We cannot really weigh the bad versus the good ahead of
-timeJ.

think you cannot even outline an area of research, even one
which was completed some time ago where we could even now weigh
the good versus the bad very effectively.

Senator KENNEDY.

Proceed.

Dr.

BROWN.

Bionetical scientists have been regulating the quality
of their product for years.

It is considered a major responsibility to be
appointed to the editorial board of a scientific journal or the reviewing
panel of a granting agency such as NSF or NI.

Scientists are judged
and criticized by their peers.

The publication of their research papers,
the evaluation of their research proposals and, ultimately their ad-
vancement, are largely in the hands of their peers.

This system of peer
review works because there are strict rules for scientific success which
the scientific community understands and accepts.

As a taxpayer, I
would be delighted to see this peer review by merit applied to all
federally supported research and development.

Now, the safety of science has been discussed, and I do not wish to
summarize the description of the Asiomar meeting; but at the same
time I want to emphasize certain things.

First of all, scientists were assembled to assist a very restricted
matter of safety; that is, the risk of their own experiments.

It was
judged that new novel bacteria, with the new genes in them, could
conceivably now be more infectious than they were before.

That really
was the issue.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was
judged that new novel bacteria, with the new genes in them, could
conceivably now be more infectious than they were before. That really
was the issue. So scientists were actually in a sense dealing with
something that they had known before, and how to deal with before. They joined together with other scientists who had plenty of ex-
perience dealing with infectious bacteria, far more infectious than
anyone would predict at these particular even -new altered bacteria
might be. Now, they joined together to draw safeguards and logical contain-
ment-type rules, to keep these new bacteria within the laboratory, to
make certain they did not get out. This was in fact the limited goal of
safety assessment. There was no discussion of the applications of this
research and the potential danger of these applications socially. There
was not time for it. It was a very limited discussion. The physical containment; that is, the issue of how one keeps bac-
teria from getting outside the laboratory, was coupled with what I
believe to be an extremely important new concept of safety of re-
search, that was something which was called biological containment. The idea was in fact to weaken the bacteria, even with its new genes
to put additional genetic changes in the bacteria so they would be so
weak that they could not grow outside the laboratory at all, even if
they were released, even if purposely-and that I think is a very
important concept. For example, some day in the future this particular type of exper-
tise might be used, for example, to destroy some pollutant, like per-

--- PAGE BREAK ---1255
25
haps geneticists will produce a bacteria which would degrade the oil
which is spilled from the tanker.

In order to do this, they would have
to spray bacteria and basically release it into the environment.

If
that is the case, it should be very important that this bacteria does
not pose a worse problem than the actual oil itself, which it was de-
signed to treat.

And the geneticists at Asilomar came up with a very,
I think reasonable and novel idea.

The idea is that after the bacteria
in this hypothetical argument that I am giving after the bacteria eat
the oil, they would then destroy themselves.

They would basically be
biodegradable.

They would not accumulate in nature.

Another example is, we can think back upon it in retrospect; sup-
posing when insecticide DDT was first developed, its long-term effect
on living things could not have been predicted, and it was not pos-
sible to envision that they would accumulate within the shells of birds,
the DDT.

These affects could have been minimized, perhaps avoided,
if the chemical could have been modified so that it was unstable in
nature; that is, so it did not accumulate.

We all know now examples of how this type of reasoning might
have helped against accumulation of substances in the environment.

I think there are two areas where scientists must have a role in
safety.

First of all, they are the first to recognize the potential hazards of
their own work.

They must bring it to the public as was done in
Asilomar.

Second of all, scientists have a special expertise to reduce hazards
in a creative and constructive way.

I believe that was in fact done at
Asilomar.

Finally, it has been argued and it will be argued continually that the
public takes the risk; so why should they not have a vote?

Even
exercise a veto over research by means of a process called weighing
risks against the benefits of science?

In fact, we just heard an example
by Dr.

Holman, and that is analogous to the way the physician treats
his patients.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In fact, we just heard an example
by Dr. Holman, and that is analogous to the way the physician treats
his patients. I do not believe that is a valid analysis at all, as a matter
of fact. The phrase then implies that we know how to weigh benefits. And I
think that this is -Imost invariably never the case. In discussing the problem of weighing benefits, I wish to use the
term "nondirected research. " By this I mean research carried out by
an investigator on the subject o his choice. Nondirected research can
be either fundamental or applied in character. I believe that scientists and nonscientists, advocates of nondirected
and mission-oriented research alike have exactly the same goals-to
advance the well-being of society. There may have been a time when
scientists were not responsive to social needs, but that time has gone
before I entered science. Our debate before this committee is not on
the goals of science but how best to attain them. Can we solve biomedical problems such as cancer, by fielding
Manhattan project-type, "mission-oriented" 
research teams with
specific practical objectives? Alternatively, should scientists themselves decide which scientific
problems are ready for solution? Experience has taught us that we
must choose the latter course. Let us put nondirected versus mission-oriented research into
perspective. I could list at least 15 important biomedical problems

--- PAGE BREAK ---1256
26
whose solution we could all agree would benefit humanity.

An advance
in any one of these fields would relieve untold human suffering.

For
those who prefer to cost account research, an advance in any 1 of
these 15 problems would repay the costs of all biomedical researc h.

The practical, mission-oriented approach toward their solution
doesn't work because we don't have enough information on normal
biological processes.

We know from experience that these major bio-
medical problems will yield gradually to research but nobo dy can
predict which one will be solved first or from what research project
the next major breakthrough will come.

It has been pointed ou t that
a practical approach to pofio research in the 1940's would have resulted
in the development of better iron lungs, whirlpool baths, and pros-
theses, but not in the prevention of polio.

A crash program directed to the solution of one biomedical problem
inevitably will weaken support of the others.

For example, important
areas of research have been limited or curtailed to provide funds for
the national cancer program.

One field which suffered was research
on photosynthesis; it was assigned to low national priority.

It is now
being supported, a, I understand it.

But we wonder how much of t he
research in photosynthesis was inhibited and curtailed by the temp o-
rary lack of support which occurred.

Wish to summarize what I believe the roles of scientists and non-
scientists to be in this joint venture to reduce human suffering.

Non-
scientists must decide the importance of biomedical research in relation
to all the other pressing national priorities.

The practical applications
of scientific discoveries and their moral and ethical consequences are
matters which will need the collective wisdom of all society.

However,
the selection of who shall do research is a matter for scientists to
decide on the basis of merit alone.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The practical applications
of scientific discoveries and their moral and ethical consequences are
matters which will need the collective wisdom of all society. However,
the selection of who shall do research is a matter for scientists to
decide on the basis of merit alone. This decision should be made on
the quality of research without regard to a judgment of its relevance. Earlier, I raised the question of whether the risks of Acience can be
weighed against their benefits. My answer is that the risks of science
to society must be reduced to a minimum no matter how great the
anticipated benefits. On the-other hand, experience has shown tha t
neither nonscientists nor scientists can measure the future benefits
of a line of research with sufficient vision to direct the overall priorities
of research. There is a very simple solution to this apparent dilemma. We should permit scientists to choose their own projects and req uire
that their research be of highest. quality. Quality is something t hat
can be measured. The decision of what science is good and the re-
sponsibility to reduce the risks of this science to levels acceptable to
society must be borne by scientists. Senator KENNEDY. Just before hearing from Dr. Gaylin, I want to
give Dr. Holman perhaps an opportunity to respond to those com-
ments. Dr. HOLMAN. I would be willing to, but could we hear from Dr. Gaylin? I know he has to catch a plane. Senator KENNEDY. Fine. Dr. GAYLIN. I would try to be brief and summarize my statement
which you all have. I aught start by saying the distinction that Dr. Brown makes be-
tween nondirected research and directed research for science and
technology is one which scientists make all the time in their plea for a
free science.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1257
27
I think the problem is that the conditions are changing; that there
is very, very little that we are considering now that is nondirected
research.

To go over the Asilomar conference with some care, they are talking
about certain applied technologies.

I might be inclined to agree with
him on the nondirected aspects of it.

But indeed in the applications-
for grants to the various institutes of NIH, National Science Founda-
tion; these are accompanied by the potential values where they ex-
pect to go, granting they do not always know.

I think, however, the
purposes as stated should be taken with seriousness, as though this
was the intended purpose.

I do think the Government which sub-
sidizes such research does have, it seems to me, a legitimate reason
to say this direction which you hope you will venture toward is one
we do wish or do not.

Benefits and risk are always difficult.

I do not know of operating
any area of my life without evaluating benefits and risks even while
acknowledging my failures as a prophetin many of them.

I want to address very briefly in my remarks here not specifically
to this research, but to call your attention to the fact, Senator, that
this research is characteristic to what you have been hearing and are
going to be hearing, and it does not matter whether we are talking
about general manipulation or whether we are talking about psycho-
surgery or talking about the capacity to do experimentation on the
fetus or whether we are talking about the very exciting new potentials
for neonatal conditioning.

You will be coming across a basic problem
which is the only part of this to which I wish to address myself, and
that is the public interest in the regulation of science and its
technologies.

I think there are three questions that come out of that, and only
three that are important, although each one could be argued for
hours.

The first is, does the public have the right to regulate scientific
pursuit?--- PAGE BREAK ---

I think there are three questions that come out of that, and only
three that are important, although each one could be argued for
hours. The first is, does the public have the right to regulate scientific
pursuit? Two, can the public intelligently regulate science, that is, does it
have the knowledge, the ability, the expertise. Three, should the public regulate science,. and if so, what are the
appropriate methods of control? The rights of-the public to intrude in the scientific establishment are
often established on the failures of science. That I think is unfortunate. Dr. Cohen in his testimony said we do not anticipate any disasters. I
might point out that it is of the nature of disasters that they not be
anticipated, otherwise they would have been prevented. So the most
serious disasters of science have- always been unanticipated ones. Even then that is not argument on which I want to base my case. I
think it is the success of science which makes it part of the public
domain. Success in service of society may gain profit and prestige,
but the scientific community is confused if it thinks it gains freedom
and autonomy. It is because it has become and indispensable part of
our common culture. Because we can no longer do with it, like -water and air and other
essential supplies, it must enter into the public governance and the
public domain. It is one of the ironies of existence that those who
control the essentials for survival in a democracy become the servants
of society, not its masters.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1258
28
So I think there is an essential right for us to control it because of its
very success.

It is no longer a comfort and care thing.

It is essential to
a way of life we now have; indeed, to the nature of human beings or
the nature of our children.

Those are factors which are a product of success of scien--e; and
those are the kinds of decisions which no longer are scientific.

That brings me into my second point.

Senator KENNEDY.

This sort of public participation, public in-
volvement; it has been a fairly recent phenomenon, I would think, in
terms of general kinds of political dialog; and the idea that you had
this kind of public participation in a wide variety of endeavors has
been fairly recent.

I suppose scientists can say, "Look, I think we
have done pretty well by society so far.

We have been making deci-
sions; we have been the ones establishing priorities; and here we have
the most technologically advanced society in the world; have the
historical divaices in science, and people come up now with public
participation and public involvement.

And we have done pretty well
in the past; and why do you say now that we have to be included?"
Dr.

GAYLIN.

My answer would be twofold.

One is that the honey-
moon is over.

There have been some disasters.

Ecology disaster is one
that has impressed the public.

I am afraid if there is defensiveness in scienee, as there has been
at a recent National Academy of Sciences meeting, which was very
defensive dn-dv-y adversarial in its tone, what you are going to
find is a frightened society no longer seeing science as the only provider
of great benefits of the future, turning to often hurried and often
rhetorical, often frantic legislation.

I think science for its own sake would be wise from this point to
open the doors to knowledge.

It is quite translatable.

It is not that
difficult.

Obviously, no Senator or Congressman really understands the
necessities of physics of making the atomic bomb.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is not that
difficult. Obviously, no Senator or Congressman really understands the
necessities of physics of making the atomic bomb. It is unnecessary
for him to, to make decisions whether they should be made or-
Senator KENNEDY. They may be asked to make it with the Bauman
amendment on National Science Foundation. We may be asked to
become the scientists. Dr. GAYLIN. The second point I want to raise is: Can the public
intelligently supervise science? I want to make the point that because
an issue arises within the territory of science, is couched in the tech-
nology of science, and phrased with the language of science, does not
make it a scientific issue. While the nature of the questions may require
scientific expertise to understand them-this is an understanding
that can be readily translated and interpreted for the uninitiated-
and the nature of the solutions are never scientific. We must not con-
fuse the packaging with the product. This is where I think succ6ssfu science has become so great that
it is dealing with fundamental things where the scientist himself is
often -inexpert, because his training is so specialized, so early, he is
ma king decisions in which he himself is the inexpert. Granted, this
is often in the application of it. I can give you some examples, and if there is time later, perhaps
I will. But let me proceed; and then you can ask the questions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1259
29
Now, there is no scientist that you are ever going to call up here
who is not going to admit the public interest.

That would be rude
and discourteous when eating off the public table to say they have no
interest in their manners or behavior.

All of them are going to tell
you that the public indeed has an interest because they are aware
that you pay the bills.

If they thought this was a noble individual
activity, they would have no demand on the public coffer.

The
problem will be always in where and when, and they will raise the
question of how you are to enter into the process.

The National Science Foundation, for example, has been more
articulate than certainly the National Institutes of Health in its com-
mitment to the ethical, moral, and political issues.

Yet, in its budgets
for the past 2 years, it has budgeted-and I must say that I tend to
see the budgetary line as one of the true indices of interest in any
agency or any individual-I know it is important to me about how I
spend my money, and I assume this is true of agencies which have
control of their money-but the National Science Foundation, which
has spoken more to the issue than National Institutes of Health has
budgeted something like $200,000 to $400,000 out of budgets running
from $200 million to $500 million.

If my mathematics is correct, this is
less than one-tenth of 1 percent of their funds for potential implica-
tions, politically, socially, and morally, of their research.

And all of
this research is not pure research.

I would say the majority of it ends
up being research with definite applications.

So that the problems here which Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I would say the majority of it ends
up being research with definite applications. So that the problems here which Dr. Brown mentioned, may I just
say, that one of the mechanisms that he feels unhappiest with is the
peer review system, but there are no divisions of experts in this difficult
interdisciplinary field of the social applications and here I would take
his distinctions between applied science, at these various agencies, at
NIH, who are capable of interpreting the implications of some of this
scientific research. So what the do is they tend to turn to the very
scientists who feel threatened or expertise. The scientists, in judging philosophical and legal research, will use
the language and tools of bench science with such incredible naivete
as to either be expressive of their hostility to the research or thier
ignorance. The elaborate tests for research designs in the bench sciences seem
as nonsequiturs to the philosopher, political scientist, lawyer. Kant
could be rejected for having had an insufficient data base. Where-are the "testable hypotheses" of the New Testament? What
was the "reproducible methodology" of Darwin? And of what value
are those dialogs of Socrates which manifestly demonstrate an "un-
wilingness to reach conclusions."
I am trying to say-th-ese are times which serve science well. When
you ask a bench scientist to judge-and I am talking about applied
research with its possible influence on the society at large-he tends to
utilize these various terms. They are so inappropriate that one does
often question whether it is just ignorance of the methods of the
research or whether it is a way of express'.mg his hostility. These are
important issues. Prof. Paul Freund was visiting us at Columbia Law
School last week; and he said in his prediction the most important
field of developing law in the next 50 years will be the law of new
biology and law and potential control of it. So it is dominating the
law of the future.he said in his prediction the most important
field of developing law in the next 50 years will be the law of new
biology and law and potential control of it. So it is dominating the
law of the future.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1260
30
So I think that my second question is: Can the public intelligently
regulate science?

Does it have knowledge and ability?

Yes; because
most of the questions about which we want regulation are questions
which technically speaking are no longer scientific questions; and
that is something that often the scientist does not seem to recognize.

When we consider whether we ought to exercise these rights of
governing and how, you leave the easy question of generalization, it
would have to go to both issues.

Obviously you can legislate.

I can understand, as you can, the nature of risks.

I would like to say,
for example, to take again Dr.

Cohen's model and put it upside down,
that it may indeed be that the public representatives will feel that
certain subjects can best be controlled by self-discipline and will
turn over the control mechanisms in those areas to the scientific
community itself.

This is certainly a legitimate position, But then, the
scientific decisionmakers will be seen as the surrogates of the public
and, as such, the servants of the public's needs and wishes.

They may
in the end be vested with the same power as now, but with the knowl-
edge that it is with the indulgence of the community at large, whose
instrument they are, that they enjoy and exercise the power.

Now, I would like to just summarize what I feel as far as specific
interventions.

Obviously, the power of budgeting is one.

Certainly divisions
within the granting agencies where there is some expertise.

I know you
cannot just go out and get a representative of the public, but the
Asilomar Conference had visitors or guests-I am not sure whether
they were first-class citizens or not in terms of lawyers; and I think
they contributed a great deal.Certainly divisions
within the granting agencies where there is some expertise.

I know you
cannot just go out and get a representative of the public, but the
Asilomar Conference had visitors or guests-I am not sure whether
they were first-class citizens or not in terms of lawyers; and I think
they contributed a great deal.

One of the points that was made, the education of the scientists by
the lawyers, and I wouldlike to quote Alexander Capron; he said:
In legal systems which are based on public sovereignty, it is the right of the
public, through the legislature, to reach erroneous decisions-while it remains-
your right the scientists, and it's probably your obligation, to lobby against such
decisions, but to abide by them in the meantime.

I think it is unfortunate that, after all, those who have pursued the
scientific research do so young and they make their achievements
young and general education of the scientists often is neglected.

My last plea is to point out that sometimes my tone sounds more
adversarial than my intention is.

There are few villians and few heroes
in these battles.

We are all potential victims, and all potential bene-
ficiaries.

Arrogance and ignorance are the only enennes.

There.

is a
challenge here to the scientific community to temper its pride in
accomplishment and ambition for progress, with a sense of terror at its
power for abuse; there is a special challenge to the scientific community's
most prestigious agencies to lead that community to a more visibly
modest awareness of its dependency on the public at la ge-including
its critics; and there is the responsibility of the critics of science to
realize that polemic is unproductive.

And that overzealous and
unsympathetic emphasis on potential abuses of research, ignoring
promise, may ultimately yield a disservice to those very values and
purposes which they seek to protect.

Senator KENNEDY.

Dr.

Cohen, you look like you want to speak.

Dr.

COHEN.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dr. COHEN. I do want to make clear that I am not arguing that
scientists should be free from public scrutiny or that nonscientists
should have no participation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1261
31
My position is that the public does have a right to be involved in
decisions that affect public safety and the use of public funds; but I
also believe that suitable mechanisms currently exist for such public
participation.

Certainly, the public's role has been and should be most
direct in decisions about the applications of basic scientific knowledge,
as contrasted with primary decisions about the search for knowledge.

For example, whether or not basic scientific knowledge in the
field of nuclear physics should be used to construct an atomic bomb
certainly was a matter in which the public not only had a role but
the public through its elected representatives made- the primary
decisions.

However, I believe the question of whether scholarly
research in nuclear physics should be carried out is quite a different
kind of decision from one to use basic knowledge for a particular
application.

Nevertheless, the public should have a role in decisions involving
even the basic scientific research it supports, and it does.

This occurs through its control of funding, and through public
participants in the peer review process, I am not arguing that the
public must rely entirely on scientists to act responsibly.

Dr.

GAYLIN.

Senator, I think the ultimate power is the funding;
but it is a double-edged sword.

I am not sure that Dr.

Cohen is asking
now for Congress to say if they do not understand, to cut off funds.

I would hope there would be intermediate mechanisms, although I do
think funding power is the ultimate power.

But it is a double-edged
sword because if I can say anecdotalry for a moment about 4 years
ago there was an emphasis on the part of some of us in Hastings to
publicize some of these issues so that the layman would know a out
the issues at hand.

And to that end, I wrote an article and the medical
educator who had formerly been a great friend of mine was in a fury
with me for interfering with certain works that we had in common
and he was terribly upset.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But it is a double-edged
sword because if I can say anecdotalry for a moment about 4 years
ago there was an emphasis on the part of some of us in Hastings to
publicize some of these issues so that the layman would know a out
the issues at hand. And to that end, I wrote an article and the medical
educator who had formerly been a great friend of mine was in a fury
with me for interfering with certain works that we had in common
and he was terribly upset. I knew it was not the issue at hand. I asked him what the problems
were. He said, "That damned article you wrote." I said, "What was
wrong with it?"
"Full of errors of fact."
We sat down together, and he could not find any errors of fact. "Second, you went into the whole genetics area. What the hell do
you know about genetics?"
I pointed out I had interviewed five geneticists for the article, and
three of them were Nobel Laureates. Then the whole issue came out: "Well, it was where you published
it. What right do you have to publish information like this where you
did?"
It was published in the New York Times Sunday Magazine. What
he meant by where you published it-I always thought that was a
respectable published journal. It was that this kind of research was
not respectable in any periodical because it had come out at a time
that the medical center was coming up and he felt the kinds of issues
for public information-well, you are in kind of a trap if you only have
that to fall back on, if you only say we are going to take your money;
we can cut off money, or you may find the money cut off; and that
sort of thing. The Asilomar people did the best job I have seen with self-discipline. Yet it is strange that the participation of the public at large-and
NR

--- PAGE BREAK ---1262
32
I do not mean go'n out and picking out a woman at random or a
black at random-I meant lawyers, political scientists, economists,
and cost-benefit analyses that might have helped some of the gentlemen
to understand how there are particular other disciplines for evaluating
a risk beyond scientific risk.

Senator KENNEDY.

Have you got any sort of ideas about the way
that you would make sure that that public involvement would be
achieved in terms of the total decisionmaking process of this kind of
research application?

Dr.

GAYLIN.

Yes; I would certainly call public funding agencies to
greater accountability.

More of their funds must be spent proportion-
ately, for understanding of the political impact, again of those areas
of research where applicable.

I think they need interdisciplinary divisions.

I do not think you
call in necessarily a geneticist to understand the implications of
genetic screening, for example, which may be psychological.

I think
they need a division to budge the research that is going on in these
interdisciplinary areas.

They do not have those capacities at this point.

I think that some of the agencies of science itself might draw in
people from other expertise, like political science, in economics, ethics,
philosophy, whatever, to recognize the dimensions of their research.

When they talk about risk, they are talking about scientific risk,
because that is what they are primarily trained to see.

When they say
there is no expertise in moral, political it usually means they are not
aware; they--why should they be?

They are not experts in this.

These men, scientists, who must turn to experts, are-willing to talk
with expertise on subjects on which they are least expert because of
their specialized training.

Senator KENNEDY.

Dr.

Brown, do you want to get into this?

Dr.

BROWN.

I would like to pose a problem to Dr.

Gaylin.

Senator KENNEDY.

Fine.

Dr.

BROWN.

Perhaps they can make it clear to me.

Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Perhaps they can make it clear to me. Dr. Gaylin, for example, in his testimony, talks about the creation
of the atom bomb, and this should not be discussed. He says it would
be appalling if it were deemed a problem in physics, the problem of the
atomic bomb. Now, in the question of the 1920's and 1930's, it was a
problem of physics, clearly a problem of physics. Now, with hindsight
of the misuse of nuclear physics all in front of us, and the dispute about
nuclear fusion and powerplants and so forth, I would like to know
that if you now could reregulate hypothetically the nuclear physics
of the 1920's and 1930's, how would you do so, and what would you
change? Have you in fact come to terms, even this late in the game
of the risk versus benefits of the study of nuclear physics? Dr. GAYLIN. I could take a more current example. For instance,
the dialysis machine. This is technical training. Kidney disease is
certainly a matter of medical pursuit. Yet, it is people like Dr. Jibner
on the west coast who are saying they have no expertise in the appli-
cations of the use of this machine. No amount of knowledge of kidney
disease tells you which priorities should go to whom, to what indi-
viduals should use it. Now, if you ask me who does have the expertise, there is a whole
tradition of equity, justice; we do not learn this necessarily in science
courses in school, distributional justice. A man like John Rawls has

--- PAGE BREAK ---1263
33
written a whole book on it, which might be helpful to read to see
how we could equitably distribute some of the fruits of science.

I am not saying I could come up with an answer for you now.

But
I know just as I would turn to a physicist or engineer to help me
construct a bomb, I might turn to a political scientist about the
potential implications of that bomb in his field, and to an economist
in his field.

Dr.

HOLMAN.

Could I comment on that question from Dr.

Brown?

I, too, am not entirely satisfied with this answer, but I will take on
the question of physics in relationship to nuclear weapons in the
following way.

First, I am not arguing for cessation or nonscientific control of
scientific investigation.

I am arguing for shared decisions about it.

This would include the point that Dr.

Gaylin mentioned, that the
public may very well mandate the scientists to take the responsibility
themselves for developing certain lines of work or for dealing with
risks, et cetera.

Therefore, in your analogy about nuclear physics
research, I would not now argue-even though I think the fruits of
that research have been misused-that the research should not go on.

But I would argue that while it is going on that there be some form
of dialog between those who are doing it and those who will be affted
by it.

They should explore their best understanding of the ways in
which it can be used and misused.

In parallel as the knowledge evolves,
the social perceptions of its impact will then also develop to the best
of our ability to make sensible judgments.

Now, let me give you an example of what I mean.

Long after the nuclear research was done-and actually after the
first atomic weapons were used-while we were engaged in weapons
test, 
a number of issues emerged:.

The Nation was assured by the
scientists and the Government representatives in the AEC that there
were no risks.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Long after the nuclear research was done-and actually after the
first atomic weapons were used-while we were engaged in weapons
test, 
a number of issues emerged:. The Nation was assured by the
scientists and the Government representatives in the AEC that there
were no risks. Neither the scientists who were initially involved nor
the AEC recognized the existence of strontium 90 or iodine 131 in the
fallout and subsequently in the milk supply. -
It was only well after nuclear physics research had been applied to
weapons that aspects which were clearly potentially quite harmful to
the public became known. We can learn from that experience and say that it is necessary for
us to move in parallel with the research to consideration of its social
implications. We should not allow ourselves to be caught agam in a
situation where potentially a large number of people are affected by
a failure of the scientific inquiry to deal appropriately with the con-
sequences of its own work. Dr. BROWN. I believe we all agree that the consequences of science
are something to be very carefully looked at. But if we cannot, 30
years in advance, look back on an area of research, and even now assess
how serious and bad this has been for humanity, how good it might
yet be, that is an area for-that is the area of nuclear physics-how
should we do it for our genetic area? Senator KENNEDY. Is it completely unlike the situation that Henry
Ford describes where he says he could not possibly put a car together,
but he can-make a decision about size, about use, or about different
kinds of policy questions and issues; or are we talking about some-
thing entirely different?

--- PAGE BREAK ---1264
34
Dr.

BROWN.

I am sorry; I did not understand.

Senator KNNEDY.

He says you do not have to be an engineer to
run Ford Motor Co.; that he can make decisions not knowing the
technical problems of transformers and what happens inside in terms
of fuel combustion and all of the scientific and engineering skills.

Yet,
he can make important decisions with regard to the automobile indus-
try in terms of safety standards and other kinds of factors.

I mean,
is it completely unrelated?

Dr.

BROWN.

I do not think it is comparable.

I think his goals-the
goals for Ford Motor Co.

are considerably different than scientists'
goals or biomedical research.

Senator KENNEDY.

I mean in terms of one it is obviously a difference
in profit and responding to stockholders and the rest; but in terms of
responding to at least public kinds-if you underline sort of the basic
and fundamental importance of public consideration, should there be
or-well, does everybody have to be an engineer?

Does everybody have
to be a scientist?

I think this is one of the questions.

Dr.

BROWN.

Certainly not for the applications of our science;
absolutely not.

In my view,-for actual day-to-day experimentation,
with the knowledge of what field is now ready for advancement,
where we can push back, if you will excuse the cliche, the frontiers
are faster and what is ready for it, that I think is not even a matter
for a group of scientists to decide.

I do-not think individual scientists
seem much more predictive in making that decision themselves than
even groups of scientists.

Senator KENNEDY.

Let me ask, Dr.

Gaylin-and I will only keep
you 2 or 3 minutes; I know you have to leave-but let me get a quick
reaction about whether the research scientific protocol should be held
confidential, when applying for research money.

Just a quick reaction
from the panel.

Do you think it should or should not be?

We have got
different proposals on this issue.

Do you have a quick reaction on it?

Dr.

GAYLIN.

I really do not, Senator.--- PAGE BREAK ---

GAYLIN. I really do not, Senator. I do not feel that I have
examined that issue carefully enough to talk to it. Senator KENNEDY. Does anybody want to take a crack at it? Do
you want to think about it and get back to me? Dr. Holman, do you want to make a final comment? Dr. HOLMAN. The question of what to do is not an easy one. I
think the analogy with medicine has a lot to tell us. The fact that we
are here today, that the Senate is concerned with these matters,
underscores the potential importance of defining the relationship
between science and the citizen. In the field of medicine there have been efforts to define codes which
govern physicians' interactions with their patients. I do not know of
an analogous effort in the field of science. It would be entirely appro-
priate to begin seriously to look into this question and develop a set
of codes that will define that relation. Senator KENNEDY. Dr. Cohen? Dr. COHEN. As I understand this discussion, there is agreement
that the public should have a role in determining research priorities. In fact, as Dr. Gaylin has suggested it might, it delegates some of
that responsibility to-scientists through the peer review process. There is also, I believe, agreement that the public should have
major involvement in decisions about the application of knowledge
acquired in basic scientific knowledge.

--- PAGE BREAK ---1265
35
I think the substance of whatever disagreement there is here, is
how the public can best implement its participation in these areas.

I view the current mechanism as an appropriate and desirable way
for the public to participate in determining the general priorities of
science and in determining issues related to its safety.

Dr.

HOLMAN.

How do we define-this is a question to the two of
you-how do we define priorities in a public sense, if we cannot obtain
and make some sensible judgments as to the benefits of a particular
line of scientific endeavor?

As I understand it, your argument is that nobody has the wisdom,
either individually or collectively, to predict the benefits that will
accrue from scientific activity.

And yet if I understood correctly,
both of you agree that the public should participate in the develop-
ment of social priorities.

But I do not understand how that can be
done without some sensible prediction of what might develop.

Dr.

COHEN.

I think the public already determines its priorities
through its legislative bodies.

Senator KENNEDY.

How are we supposed to know?

I am in a legis-
lative body.

How am I supposed to know about it?

Dr.

COHEN.

I guess by obtaining the best advice that you can get
from those with special expertise and specific information about the
problems that you are considering, and then making your decision
on the basis of your best evaluation of that information.

Senator KENNEDY.

It would appear from earlier testimony that
you ought to decide what ought to go on national defense and what
ought to go on biomedical research; we ought to set those priorities
and let it fly.

I thought that was what Dr.

Brown's suggestion was on
itand not interfere in it.

As I understand Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brown's suggestion was on
itand not interfere in it. As I understand Dr. Holman says if we find that we are supposed
to be at least establishing some priorities, that there is great hope in
some particular areas; we ought to be able to understand that and
be aware of that as well as be able to have some kind of input in
terms of public involvement. Dr. BROWN. You correctly quoted how I do feel. I believe in bio-
medical research there should be a stable, long-term allocated money
to biomedical research, to support high quality research. Now,
superimposed on that, this can surely be what we consider short term
also, short-term projects as well, which also, in my view, should be
highly quality oriented and very carefully regulated. - Senator KENNEDY. All right. We want to thank you very much. We are just beginning to deal with this. I know the panel has
given a lot of attention to this. I think as a public issue of public
awareness that this is really a new area; and I think there is going to
be a great deal of interest and attention paid to it. We have been very fortunate, I think, this morning, to have four
of the real leaders in this whole area of science research. Obviously,
people have given a great deal of thought to this problem. We want
to thank you very much. _ The subcommittee stands adjourned. [Whereupon, at 12:31 p.m., the hearing in the above-entitled
matter was adjourned, subject to call of the Chair.]
0