10/24/71
Nisg Selma W.Warner,President
WideworldLectureBureau,Inc
18E48St。
New York,N.Y.10017
Dear rrs.Warner,
Pleasepormitna totakeyou backseveralyears
On December 16,1966,you telegraphedme,"Delightod prospect managing your
lectures"and then arranged a meetingat the Willard in Washington in January.Aftor
"umdergroundbook),witn honesty Iapreciated,youwrote"Ian still frightened at the
questions you sologically raised andtheirinplications",whichledyou to theconclusion
thatwe are not xn a position to offer you a contract"but would like to"keep ax
the door open for the subrisxion of an occasional request,"to whichI did agree,I think。
receptionat the more conservativeinstitutions,like innesotayTrinity（Hartford),
me,not through a bureau.
Ihave continued my workon the JohnKennedy assassination and have justcompleted
thowritingofa book that includes what there once wes great clamor for,"new evicence,
in this case official evidence actually withheld from the Warren Conission.Idon'tknow
how much interest there would be today.And I have done the only definitive book on the
assassination of Dr.Hartin Luther KingJr.(reviews enclosed).whileI have no way of
estinating thelecture interest there canbein this today,interestin the subject is
inevitable,I think,with the appearance ofim Bishop's type-set goose-grease,the coming
of Gerold Frahk's commercialization of the ofiicial mythology,after long delay now due
two books willhave enormous promotions behind them.oubleday edvenced Frank SloO,000,
and Little,Browm contracted the hiclillan bookin eight countries beiore he began to write。
Hehasntfinishedafteralnostfouryears
Tor your information,not for use or conmercialization,foIust keep y lives
separate,Ian Ray's investigator,arranged for his present coumsel,an in regular touch
with hin and his family.and have developed the defense the govermnntis resistingletting
go bfore a jury.You may recall he was never tried.It is I,not Ray, who ade this decision,
and until Iaa satisried that the cause of justice will be advanced by public disclosure
Earl Raykick.y purposes are to seek to effectuate justice,toake thc institutions of
However,I think you can tell fron the foregoing that I have a kmowledge of tnis aase.that
is not and wiii not be equalled.You have aneusure or thisin one incident: Porcy Fororan
appear on a TVshow.ie had read FRauE-UP,bushe hadnot been told hewasshedule to
confront ne.He learned this for the first tinwhen his make-up was being applied.He fled!
      g o      
York Tines could not be changed. Our confrontation got a highlight, but there was only anle to
confront ne.He learned this for the first tinwhen his make-up was being applied.He fled!
      g o      
York Tines could not be changed. Our confrontation got a highlight, but there was only an

--- PAGE BREAK ---

best crininal lawyer.
Because the caseisactivlyinthecourtsnowthereisagoodchanceoffurther
attention to it。
As you can see,I am sayingI can do this all first-person.Ind vith Forenan's
flight,there is one effective pronotion。There is another,and that proviees a separate
topic or a sub-topic.I am one of thc first to use the"Preedon of Information"law。
Isued the Departments of Justice and State,successfully,to get the recoris of the Ray
extradition hearing our governuent had confiscated in London,with the complicity of
atleast one TV show on this.In court Igot a sumrary judgement againstJustice,an
lmost unheard-oi thing.The recordsin this case,with long correspondence in which the
governnentvithout deviation ncver told the truthandusuallylied,including in court,
night be attractive.to sone specialized groups,professional and coliegiate
Vith the passing of four and a half year,what I can say is enornously increased
overwhatyoureadinJanuary1967.
what prompts thisletter atthis time is thelocal appearance ofny friend Dick
Gregory ata snall local college,Hiood.It is a very conservative school.With a student
body ofabout 5o0,they had moremhana thousandathis speech theothernight.Hie is,of
course,sui goneris,butI sugcest thisisa reflection of the fact that basically
conservative institutions today also seek the unusual,opinions and subjects not necessarily
consistcntvith theideasof those bookingthe speakers。
Ifyou have any intorest,I an available。
Bestregards,
Harold Weisberg.