The Moscow Signals Declassified: Irradiating Richard Nixon

Published: Sep 22, 2022 | Briefing Book # 806 | Edited by William Burr and Peter Kornbluh

Soviets Exposed Vice President Nixon to Radiation During Famous 1959 “Kitchen” Debate Trip to Moscow
Secret Service Detected Radiation at U.S. Ambassador’s Residence Where the Nixons Stayed

[Years after the 1959 incident and a few years after the 1976 press flurries, Secret Service Agent James Golden created a detailed chronological account of the trip to Moscow and the dosimeter readings at Spaso House. The roentgen numbers are somewhat different from those provided in Sherwood’s report (Document 3). For example, dosimeter 1288 was reported as climbing to 18 roentgen compared to 15 in Document 3. This document, unlike the August 1959 report, recounts the reaction by Golden and another Secret Service agent. The two “decided to try to a bluff to see if we could get them to turn off the energy.” On the assumption that the rooms were bugged, they began “berating the Russians in loud voices cursing them for pulling a trick like this.” The ploy apparently worked, and by the afternoon “the energy disappeared.” Golden also recounts his interactions in 1972 with CIA Deputy Director Walter Cushman (who as a senior Nixon aide had been on the 1959 trip to Moscow) and in 1976 with State Department medical consultants Dr. Herbert Pollack, Dr. William Watson and Robert Barry [misidentified as Blair]. Pollack later told Golden that the “energy radiated from an atomic battery that they [Soviet intelligence] used to power radio transmitters used for bugging purposes.” Golden was dissatisfied with Pollack’s explanation, believing it not entirely “frank.” Golden’s memorandum includes details of a conversation with another retired Secret Service agent, Robert Bouck, who echoed the PANDORA investigations and confused ionizing radiation with microwave radiation by saying that he had “heard” that radiation had been used for “behavior modification.” Bouck also conveyed gossip that Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and others had died from cancer caused by radiation exposure in Moscow ( Dulles never visited the Soviet Union during his years in office). A reporter also told Golden that several former ambassadors to the Soviet Union, including Llewellyn Thompson and Charles E. Bohlen, had died of leukemia.]

U.S. Secret Service special agent James O. Golden served on the security detail during Vice President Richard Nixon’s July 1959 trip to the Soviet Union, and with John T. Sherwood detected radiation aimed at the Nixon’s living quarters at Spaso House. (Photo source: obituary in Leader- Telegram )

Vice President Richard Nixon and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev walk in Sokolniki Park, Moscow, July 24, 1959, with Patricia Nixon behind Khrushchev’s left shoulder. (Source: National Archives )

Washington D.C. September 22, 2022 - The Soviets exposed then Vice President Richard Nixon and his wife, Pat, to ionizing radiation during his famous visit to Moscow in July 1959, according to declassified Secret Service records posted today by the National Security Archive. Using detection devices known as Radiac Dosimeters, Nixon’s Secret Service detail measured significant levels of radiation in and around Nixon’s sleeping quarters at Spaso House, the residence of the U.S. Ambassador, during the first days of his trip. A few hours after the agents initiated what one called “a bluff” by loudly and coarsely denouncing the Soviets’ dirty tricks, the radiation levels “settled down.”

According to the key Secret Service report on the incident, the U.S. Ambassador to Moscow, Llewellyn Thompson, and a senior member of Nixon’s entourage, Vice Admiral Hyman Rickover, decided “not to make this information known to the Vice President.”

The Secret Service records were obtained by Archive Senior Analyst William Burr from a request to the Nixon Presidential Library in California. According to Burr, “this unusual and virtually unknown Cold War episode deserves more attention so the mysteries surrounding it can be resolved.”

The story of the Spaso House radiation incident remained secret for 17 years until the scandal over the Moscow Signal broke in the media in February 1976. A member of Nixon’s Secret Service team, James Golden, believed the 1959 episode was immediately relevant to the State Department’s investigation into the health effects of the microwave beams directed at the Embassy building. On April 28, 1976, he shared the secret history about the discovery of radiation at Spaso House with a State Department Soviet Desk official and medical officers. According to Golden, he was later told that he had been exposed to “massive dosages” of ionizing radiation emanating from an atomic battery that Soviet intelligence “used to power radio transmitters used for bugging purposes.”

Just two days after the State Department meeting, the Nixon story broke in an obscure and unlikely media outlet called Black & White —the student newspaper at Walt Whitman High School in Bethesda, MD. The article, “Russian Radiation Thought ‘Diabolical,’ was written by two enterprising teenage journalists, Michael Gill and Richard Berke, based on an interview with an unnamed U.S. government source. That source, as Gill has subsequently confirmed to the National Security Archive, was former Secret Service agent James Golden—a family friend. [1]

The Black & White scoop provided the first published description of the dosimeter readings in Nixon’s quarters at Spaso House and the “ruse” that Secret Service agents then used to get the Soviets to turn off the radiation. The Washington Post quickly picked up the story, confirming the incident with Golden and a second Secret Service agent, John T. Sherwood.

But the radiation story remained undocumented for years until records were declassified as part of the vice presidential papers at the Nixon Presidential Library. Journalist Peter Carlson reviewed the files for his book on Nikita Khrushchev’s 1959 visit to the United States, while historian Irwin Gellman cited them in his book on Nixon’s vice presidency.

The National Security Archive’s posting today of the Secret Service records marks the first time this declassified information has been made publicly accessible on the Internet.

Today’s posting is part III of the Archive’s three-part series: “The Moscow Signals Declassified.” Part I, “Microwave Mysteries: Projects PANDORA and BIZARRE,” was posted on September 13; Part II, “Microwave Diplomacy, 1967-1977,” was posted on September 15. The Archive will post a larger special collection of supplementary documentation on the full history of the Moscow Signal in the near future.

Spaso House, the residence of U.S. Ambassadors in Moscow since diplomatic relations with the former Soviet Union were established in 1933. (Source: Wikipedia )

Irradiating Richard Nixon: An Overview of A Little Known Cold War Episode

On July 23, 1959, during Vice President Richard Nixon’s visit to Moscow, U.S. Secret Service agents discovered that the Soviets were beaming radiation at the vice president’s living quarters in Spaso House, the U.S. ambassador’s residence. Assuming that the rooms were bugged, the next morning the agents started “berating the Russians in loud voices” and “cursing them for pulling a trick like this,” hoping that this “bluff” might get the Soviets to turn the radiation off. By the afternoon, the radiation was gone. U.S. Secret Service and State Department documents published today for the first time by the National Security Archive provide details about the radiation incident, which Nixon did not know about at the time.

The Secret Service agents who protected Nixon were prepared for the possibility that the vice president could face exposure to radiation. On July 23, dosimeters brought to detect and measure ionizing radiation provided readings of up to 15 roentgen per hour during an inspection of Nixon’s quarters at Spaso House. [2] While far from lethal exposure—that would take a dose of well over 400-500 roentgen administered in a short time (“prompt radiation”)—15 roentgen was still ”alarmingly high,” according to J. Samuel Walker, the former historian of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, [3] far above the permissible dose—the level of exposure unlikely to cause harm. During the 1930s and early 1940s, the permissible dose for occupational exposure was one-tenth of a roentgen per day; by the late 1950s, it was much lower, one-tenth of a roentgen per week (or 5 roentgen per year).

Vice President Nixon's Secret Service team used Radiac pocket dosimeters something like these to detect radiation at Spaso House where Nixon and his wife Pat were staying in July 1959. (Source: National Library of Medicine )

How and why the rooms in Spaso House were exposed to ionizing radiation remains a mystery. Decades later, a State Department medical consultant opined that the radiation emanated from an atomic battery “used to power radio transmitters used for bugging purposes.” James Golden, the Secret Service agent who first detected the radiation, thought otherwise and suggested that the Soviets had some unspecified “diabolical” purpose. More than 60 years later, it also remains unclear whether Soviet intelligence deployed the ionizing radiation in Spaso House prior to (or following) Nixon’s visit, as part of a surveillance operation against the U.S. Ambassador, or whether the radiation was specific to the vice president’s presence in Moscow. An advance team of Secret Service agents found no radiation at Spaso House in the several weeks prior to the Vice President's arrival.

As the U.S. ambassador’s residence, Spaso House was the location of a previous and famous Soviet eavesdropping operation. In 1952, U.S. technicians discovered a small, sophisticated listening device hidden in a wooden carving of the “Great Seal” of the U.S.—a gift from Soviet girl scouts to the wartime and post-World War II U.S. Ambassador, Averell Harriman, in 1946. The device went undetected for six years because its power source was generated by radio frequency waves beamed at Spaso House from a van parked across the street.

Officially, Nixon was in Moscow for a ceremonial purpose—to open the American National Exhibition , where the U.S. displayed consumer goods, high-speed computers, elaborate demonstrations of household kitchens, and cultural products, including the work of artists and architects Edward Hopper, Jackson Pollack, Isamu Noguchi, and Buckminster Fuller. The Russian-speaking U.S. tour guides were all young and included five African Americans to demonstrate racial progress.

But the Vice President had far more important non-official purposes for making the trip. To advance his presidential prospects, Nixon wanted to engage and debate Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev; as he told Eisenhower , the trip to Moscow would provide an “excellent chance to probe and cause some blurting out of Khrushchev’s real feelings.” Nixon achieved his political objective. In one of the most famous moments of his career, he held the now legendary “ kitchen debate ” with Khrushchev, where each engaged in ideological jousting over the advantages of their respective political and economic systems. By publicly taking on the top Soviet leader, Nixon demonstrated once more his Cold Warrior credentials and generated some positive publicity for his 1960 presidential campaign.

The Nixon entourage included several Russian speakers, including State Department officials Alexander Akalovsky and Vladimir Toumanoff, as well as Raymond L. Garthoff, a young CIA Soviet expert working under Defense Department cover. [4] Nixon also brought the chief of the U.S. Navy’s nuclear propulsion program, Vice Admiral Hyman Rickover, with him to justify a visit to the nuclear-powered icebreaker Lenin . To provide day-to-day security, several Secret Service special agents were in Nixon’s party, including John T. Sherwood, Jack Golden, Donald Hughes, and Wade J. Rodham. Nixon’s party also included several military aides and his long-serving and later famous secretary Rose Mary Woods.

When the National Security Archive requested documents from the Secret Service on the Nixon incident, the latter excised the documents from 1959 and 1978 that we are publishing today. On appeal, the Secret Service released more information but still withheld the names of Secret Service agents and other government officials. Fortunately, the same documents, along with others, are in the Nixon vice presidential papers at the Nixon Presidential Library. Through dialogue with the Secret Service, the Nixon Library archives made sure that the documents could be shared without excisions. It is worth noting that when the Secret Service processed the Archive’s original request it found information produced by another government agency. The unidentified agency is most likely the CIA, which has yet to declassify any documents relating to the irradiation incident. Access to these still-hidden records may someday further illuminate this unusual Cold War episode.

Note : Thanks to Melissa Heddon and Meghan Kay-Parker, Richard M. Nixon Presidential Library, for their invaluable assistance.

[1] . E-mail from Michael Gill, 15 September 2022.

[2] . Roentgen (named after Wilhelm Röentgen) is a unit used to measure exposure to ionizing radiation. It did not measure actual absorption of radiation by soft tissue. During the 1950s, rem [roentgen equivalent man or mammal], a more accurate way of measuring radiation, had been developed and was beginning to be used.

[3] . E-mail from J. Samuel Walker, September 1, 2022. See Walker, Permissible Dose: A History of Radiation Protection in the Twentieth Century (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000).

[4] . Garthoff’s memoir, Journey Through the Cold War: A Memoir of Containment and Coexistence (Washington, D.C.: Brookings, 2001) includes a chapter on the Nixon trip. See also Jenny Thompson and Sherry Thompson, The Kremlinologist: Llewellyn Thompson, America’s Man in Cold War Moscow (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2018). See also Tommy Thompson — The Kremlinologist (National Security Archive briefing book 648)

Documents

JTS [John T. Sherwood] to RN [Richard Nixon], “Use of Radiological detection equipment in Moscow,” June 17, 1959, no classification marking
Jun 17, 1959 | Source Richard Nixon Presidential Library, PPS 325A VP Period, Secret Service Reports, 1959
Concerned that the Soviets could introduce a “controlled dosage” of radiation into food or drink or transmit it by way of furniture, Sherwood asks Nixon if he would like to have radiation detection devices such as dosimeters when he visited the Soviet Union. The Soviets did the same when Anastas Mikoyan and Frol Kozlov visited earlier in the year. A month later, en route to the “B.T.” club [yet to be identified], Nixon tels Sherwood that he did not want Geiger counters taken on the trip but that dosimeters could be used. He would not wear one and did not want it to be “known” that he and Sherwood had discussed the matter.

The Vice President’s Airplane Passenger List, n.d.
Source Richard Nixon Presidential Library, PPS 325A VP Period, Secret Service Reports, 1959
The list includes the variety of people accompanying Nixon, including several corporate chiefs and the President’s brother, Milton Eisenhower, probably there to keep an eye on the Vice President. Sherwood is not identified as a Secret Service agent, while Golden and Wade Rodham are not listed at all. CIA analyst and Soviet expert Raymond Garthoff is identified as an “Escort Officer (Unnamed agency).”

John T. Sherwood, “Report on Badges and Dosimeters Used Thruout [sic] Visit of Vice President Nixon to Russia and Poland, July 23, 1959 to August 6, 1959,” n.d. [circa August 1959]
The Secret Service brought to Moscow film badges for radiation detection and dosimeters for measuring it. The badges were provided to military aide Major James T. Hughes and to Secret Service agent Wade Rodham, and one was put in Nixon’s briefcase. Golden and Sherwood had the dosimeters. While Vice President Nixon and Patricia Nixon were attending a reception hosted by Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson and Jane Thompson, James Golden and John T. Sherwood measured radiation in Nixon’s quarters at Spaso House. One of the dosimeters climbed rapidly to 35 roentgens—which, along with other problems, made the Secret Service agents think the device was “out-of-wack”—while two others climbed “5 to 15 roentgens every hour or two.” By the next day, the readings on the dosimeters at Spaso House had “settled down” to low levels. The Secret Service agents discussed the dosimeter readings with Vice Admiral Hyman Rickover, who told Ambassador Thompson about them; both agreed that Nixon should not be told. Rickover also said that “consideration” should be given to bringing equipment to the Embassy for more accurate follow-up measurements.F

EUR/SOV - Robert L. Barry to A/SY/EX - Mr. Victor Dikeos, “Report of Radiation at Spaso House in 1959,” April 28, 1976, Secret
Apr 28, 1976 | Source Richard Nixon Presidential Library, PPS 325A VP Period, Secret Service Reports, 1959
Several months after the story of the Moscow Signal broke in the media, former Secret Service officer James Golden went to the State Department and shared the Nixon radiation story with the Deputy Director of the State Department’s Soviet desk, Robert L. Barry, and a State Department doctor, William Watson. This meeting was only a few days ahead of the publication of the story in Black and White , the Walt Whitman High School newspaper, and Golden may have thought that the State Department should not be blindsided. During the meeting, Golden recounted how, in July 1959, after they had taken the dosimeter readings, the Secret Service agents “complained loudly about the situation,” causing the radiation to disappear. Golden also said that it was later determined that “only ionizing radiation could cause the dosimeter to register.” In this memorandum to diplomatic security (SY) official Victor Dikeos, Barry wondered if the Secret Service had written reports about the incident. Barry advised Dikeos that he was sending his report of the meeting with Golden to a CIA official who might have information on what had happened at Spaso House during Nixon’s 1959 visit. It remains to be learned whether Nixon was told about the radiation incident before press stories appeared in 1976.

“Report of trip to U.S.S.R. 1959 and radiation discovered at Spaso House, Moscow, U.S.S.R. by James O. Golden, former Special Agent, U.S. Secret Service,” March 22, 1978, no classification marking
Mar 22, 1978 | Source Richard Nixon Presidential Library, PPS 325A VP Period, Secret Service Reports, 1959
Years after the 1959 incident and a few years after the 1976 press flurries, Secret Service Agent James Golden created a detailed chronological account of the trip to Moscow and the dosimeter readings at Spaso House. The roentgen numbers are somewhat different from those provided in Sherwood’s report (Document 3). For example, dosimeter 1288 was reported as climbing to 18 roentgen compared to 15 in Document 3. This document, unlike the August 1959 report, recounts the reaction by Golden and another Secret Service agent. The two “decided to try to a bluff to see if we could get them to turn off the energy.” On the assumption that the rooms were bugged, they began “berating the Russians in loud voices cursing them for pulling a trick like this.” The ploy apparently worked, and by the afternoon “the energy disappeared.” Golden also recounts his interactions in 1972 with CIA Deputy Director Walter Cushman (who as a senior Nixon aide had been on the 1959 trip to Moscow) and in 1976 with State Department medical consultants Dr. Herbert Pollack, Dr. William Watson and Robert Barry [misidentified as Blair]. Pollack later told Golden that the “energy radiated from an atomic battery that they [Soviet intelligence] used to power radio transmitters used for bugging purposes.” Golden was dissatisfied with Pollack’s explanation, believing it not entirely “frank.” n atomic battery that they [Soviet intelligence] used to power radio transmitters used for bugging purposes.” Golden was dissatisfied with Pollack’s explanation, believing it not entirely “frank.” Golden’s memorandum includes details of a conversation with another retired Secret Service agent, Robert Bouck, who echoed the PANDORA investigations and confused ionizing radiation with microwave radiation by saying that he had “heard” that radiation had been used for “behavior modification.” Bouck also conveyed gossip that Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and others had died from cancer caused by radiation exposure in Moscow ( Dulles never visited the Soviet Union during his years in office). A reporter also told Golden that several former ambassadors to the Soviet Union, including Llewellyn Thompson and Charles E. Bohlen, had died of leukemia.
