The Complete Books of Charles Fort
THE BOOK OF THE DAMNED  NEW LANDS  LO  WILD TALENTS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
Charles Fort was born in Albany, New York, August 6, 1874, and died in
the Bronx, May 3, 1932. He spent most of his life in New York City, but
lived in London for several years in the twenties. His published works
include The Books of Charles Fort and a novel, The Outcast Manufacturers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Letter from Charles Fort to Kenneth Roberts, the novelist.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS
THE BOOK OF THE DAMNED
NEW LANDS
LO
WILD TALENTS
INDEX

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Complete Books of Charles Fort

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE BOOK OF THE DAMNED

--- PAGE BREAK ---PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS
THE BOOK OF THE DAMNED
NEW LANDS
LO
WILD TALENTS
INDEX

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Complete Books of Charles Fort

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE BOOK OF THE DAMNED

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
1
PROCESSION of the damned.
By the damned, I mean the excluded.
We shall have a procession of data that Science has excluded.
Battalions of the accursed, captained by pallid data that I have exhumed,
will march. You’ll read them—or they’ll march. Some of them livid and
some of them fiery and some of them rotten.
Some of them are corpses, skeletons, mummies, twitching, tottering,
animated by companions that have been damned alive. There are giants that
will walk by, though sound asleep. There are things that are theorems and
things that are rags: they’ll go by like Euclid arm in arm with the spirit of
anarchy. Here and there will flit little harlots. Many are clowns. But many
are of the highest respectability. Some are assassins. There are pale stenches
and gaunt superstitions and mere shadows and lively malices: whims and
amiabilities. The nawve and the pedantic and the bizarre and the grotesque
and the sincere and the insincere, the profound and the puerile.
A stab and a laugh and the patiently folded hands of hopeless propriety.
The ultra-respectable, but the condemned, anyway.
The aggregate appearance is of dignity and dissoluteness: the aggregate
voice is a defiant prayer: but the spirit of the whole is processional.
The power that has said to all these things that they are damned, is
Dogmatic Science.
But they’ll march.
The little harlots will caper, and freaks will distract attention, and the
clowns will break the rhythm of the whole with their buffooneries—but the
solidity of the procession as a whole: the impressiveness of things that pass
and pass and pass, and keep on and keep on and keep on coming.
The irresistibleness of things that neither threaten nor jeer nor defy, but
arrange themselves in mass-formations that pass and pass and keep on
passing.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
So, by the damned, I mean the excluded.either threaten nor jeer nor defy, but
arrange themselves in mass-formations that pass and pass and keep on
passing.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
So, by the damned, I mean the excluded.

--- PAGE BREAK ---jeer nor defy, but
arrange themselves in mass-formations that pass and pass and keep on
passing.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
So, by the damned, I mean the excluded.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

But by the excluded I mean that which will some day be the excluding.
Or everything that is, won’t be.
And everything that isn’t, will be—
But, of course, will be that which won’t be—
It is our expression that the flux between that which isn’t and that which
won’t be, or the state that is commonly and absurdly called “existence,” is a
rhythm of heavens and hells: that the damned won’t stay damned; that
salvation only precedes perdition. The inference is that some day our
accursed tatterdemalions will be sleek angels, Then the sub-inference is that
some later day, back they’ll go whence they came.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
It is our expression that nothing can attempt to be, except by attempting
to exclude something else: that that which is commonly called “being” is a
state that is wrought more or less definitely proportionately to the
appearance of positive difference between that which is included and that
which is excluded.
But it is our expression that there are no positive differences: that all
things are like a mouse and a bug in the heart of a cheese. Mouse and a bug:
no two things could seem more unlike. They’re there a week, or they stay
there a month: both are then only transmutations of cheese. I think we’re all
bugs and mice, and are only different expressions of an all-inclusive cheese.
Or that red is not positively different from yellow: is only another degree
of whatever vibrancy yellow is a degree of: that red and yellow are
continuous, or that they merge in orange.
So then that, if, upon the basis of yellowness and redness, Science should
attempt to classify all phenomena, including all red things as veritable, and
excluding all yellow things as false or illusory, the demarcation would have
to be false and arbitrary, because things colored orange, constituting
continuity, would belong on both sides of the attempted border-line.
As we go along, we shall be impressed with this:
That no basis for classification, or inclusion and exclusion, more
reasonable than that of redness and yellowness has ever been conceived of.
Science has, by appeal to various bases, included a multitude of data.
Had it not done so, there would be nothing with which to seem to be.
Science has, by appeal to various bases, excluded a multitude of data. Then,
if redness is continuous with yellowness: if every basis of admission is
continuous with every basis of exclusion, Science must have excluded someto various bases, excluded a multitude of data. Then,
if redness is continuous with yellowness: if every basis of admission is
continuous with every basis of exclusion, Science must have excluded some

--- PAGE BREAK ---cluded a multitude of data. Then,
if redness is continuous with yellowness: if every basis of admission is
continuous with every basis of exclusion, Science must have excluded some

--- PAGE BREAK ---

things that are continuous with the accepted. In redness and yellowness,
which merge in orangeness, we typify all tests, all standards, all means of
forming an opinion—
Or that any positive opinion upon any subject is illusion built upon the
fallacy that there are positive differences to judge by—
That the quest of all intellection has been for something—a fact, a basis,
a generalization, law, formula, a major premise that is positive: that the best
that has ever been done has been to say that some things are self-evident—
whereas, by evidence we mean the support of something else—
That this is the quest; but that it has never been attained; but that Science
has acted, ruled, pronounced, and condemned as if it had been attained.
What is a house"
It is not possible to say what anything is, as positively distinguished from
anything else, if there are no positive differences.
A barn is a house, if one lives in it. If residence constitutes house-ness,
because style of architecture does not, then a bird’s nest is a house: and
human occupancy is not the standard to judge by, because we speak of
dogs’ houses; nor material, because we speak of snow houses of Eskimos—
or a shell is a house to a hermit crab—or was to the mollusk that made it—
or things seemingly so positively different as the White House at
Washington and a shell on the seashore are seen to be continuous.
So no one has ever been able to say what electricity is, for instance. It
isn’t anything, as positively distinguished from heat or magnetism or life.
Metaphysicians and theologians and biologists have tried to define life.
They have failed, because, in a positive sense, there is nothing to define:
there is no phenomenon of life that is not, to some degree, manifest in
chemism, magnetism, astronomic motions.
White coral islands in a dark blue sea.
Their seeming of distinctness: the seeming of individuality, or of positive
difference one from another—but all are only projections from the same sea
bottom. The difference between sea and land is not positive. In all water
there is some earth: in all earth there is some water.
So then that all seeming things are not things at all, if all are inter-
continuous, any more than is the leg of a table a thing in itself, if it is only a
projection from something else: that not one of us is a real person, if,
physically, we’re continuous with environment; if, psychically, there is
nothing to us but expression of relation to environment.ojection from something else: that not one of us is a real person, if,
physically, we’re continuous with environment; if, psychically, there is
nothing to us but expression of relation to environment.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing else: that not one of us is a real person, if,
physically, we’re continuous with environment; if, psychically, there is
nothing to us but expression of relation to environment.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Our general expression has two aspects:
Conventional monism, or that all “things” that seem to have identity of
their own are only islands that are projections from something underlying,
and have no real outlines of their own.
But that all “things,” though only projections, are projections that are
striving to break away from the underlying that denies them identity of their
own.
I conceive of one inter-continuous nexus, in which and of which all
seeming things are only different expressions, but in which all things are
localizations of one attempt to break away and become real things, or to
establish entity or positive difference or final demarcation or unmodified
independence—or personality or soul, as it is called in human phenomena
—
That anything that tries to establish itself as a real, or positive, or absolute
system, government, organization, self, soul, entity, individuality, can so
attempt only by drawing a line about itself, or about the inclusions that
constitute itself, and damning or excluding, or breaking away from, all
other “things”:
That, if it does not so act, it cannot seem to be;
That, if it does so act, it falsely and arbitrarily and futilely and
disastrously acts, just as would one who draws a circle in the sea, including
a few waves, saying that the other waves, with which the included are
continuous, are positively different, and stakes his life upon maintaining
that the admitted and the damned are positively different.
Our expression is that our whole existence is animation of the local by an
ideal that is realizable only in the universal:
That, if all exclusions are false, because always are included and
excluded continuous: that if all seeming of existence perceptible to us is the
product of exclusion, there is nothing that is perceptible to us that really is:
that only the universal can really be.
Our especial interest is in modern science as a manifestation of this one
ideal or purpose or process:
That it has falsely excluded, because there are no positive standards to
judge by: that it has excluded things that, by its own pseudo-standards, have
as much right to come in as have the chosen.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
Our general expression:ndards to
judge by: that it has excluded things that, by its own pseudo-standards, have
as much right to come in as have the chosen.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
Our general expression:

--- PAGE BREAK ---that it has excluded things that, by its own pseudo-standards, have
as much right to come in as have the chosen.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
Our general expression:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That the state that is commonly and absurdly called “existence,” is a
flow, or a current, or an attempt, from negativeness to positive-ness, and is
intermediate to both.
By positiveness we mean:
Harmony, equilibrium, order, regularity, stability, consistency, unity,
realness, system, government, organization, liberty, independence, soul,
self, personality, entity, individuality, truth, beauty, justice, perfection,
definiteness—
That all that is called development, progress, or evolution is movement
toward, or attempt toward, this state for which, or for aspects of which,
there are so many names, all of which are summed up in the one word
“positiveness.”
At first this summing up may not be very readily acceptable. At first it
may seem that all these words are not synonyms: that “harmony” may mean
“order,” but that by “independence,” for instance, we do not mean “truth,”
or that by “stability” we do not mean “beauty,” or “system,” or “justice.”
I conceive of one inter-continuous nexus, which expresses itself in
astronomic phenomena, and chemic, biologic, psychic, sociologic: that it is
everywhere striving to localize positiveness: that to this attempt in various
fields of phenomena—which are only quasi-different—we give different
names. We speak of the “system” of the planets, and not of their
“government”: but in considering a store, for instance, and its management,
we see that the words are interchangeable. It used to be customary to speak
of chemic equilibrium, but not of social equilibrium: that false demarcation
has been broken down. We shall see that by all these words we mean the
same state. As every-day conveniences, or in terms of common illusions, of
course, they are not synonyms. To a child an earth worm is not an animal. It
is to the biologist.
By “beauty,” I mean that which seems complete.
Obversely, that the incomplete, or the mutilated, is the ugly.
Venus de Milo.
To a child she is ugly.
When a mind adjusts to thinking of her as a completeness, even though,
by physiologic standards, incomplete, she is beautiful.
A hand thought of only as a hand, may seem beautiful.
Found on a battlefield—obviously a part—not beautiful.her as a completeness, even though,
by physiologic standards, incomplete, she is beautiful.
A hand thought of only as a hand, may seem beautiful.
Found on a battlefield—obviously a part—not beautiful.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s, even though,
by physiologic standards, incomplete, she is beautiful.
A hand thought of only as a hand, may seem beautiful.
Found on a battlefield—obviously a part—not beautiful.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

But everything in our experience is only a part of something else that in
turn is only a part of still something else—or that there is nothing beautiful
in our experience: only appearances that are intermediate to beauty and
ugliness—that only universality is complete: that only the complete is the
beautiful: that every attempt to achieve beauty is an attempt to give to the
local the attribute of the universal.
By stability, we mean the immovable and the unaffected. But all seeming
things are only reactions to something else. Stability, too, then, can be only
the universal, or that besides which there is nothing else. Though some
things seem to have—or have—higher approximations to stability than have
others, there are, in our experience, only various degrees of
intermediateness to stability and instability. Every man, then, who works for
stability under its various names of “permanency,” “survival,” duration,” is
striving to localize in something the state that is realizable only in the
universal.
By independence, entity, and individuality, I can mean only that besides
which there is nothing else, if given only two things, they must be
continuous and mutually affective, if everything is only a reaction to
something else, and any two things would be destructive of each other’s
independence, entity, or individuality.
All attempted organizations and systems and consistencies, some
approximating far higher than others, but all only intermediate to Order and
Disorder, fail eventually because of their relations with outside forces. All
are attempted completenesses. If to all local phenomena there are always
outside forces, these attempts, too, are realizable only in the state of
completeness, or that to which there are no outside forces.
Or that all these words are synonyms, all meaning the state that we call
the positive state—
That our whole “existence” is a striving for the positive state.
The amazing paradox of it all:
That all things are trying to become the universal by excluding other
things.
That there is only this one process, and that it does animate all
expressions, in all fields of phenomena, of that which we think of as one
inter-continuous nexus:
The religious and their idea or ideal of the soul. They mean distinct,
stable entity, or a state that is independent, and not a mere flux of vibrationswhich we think of as one
inter-continuous nexus:
The religious and their idea or ideal of the soul. They mean distinct,
stable entity, or a state that is independent, and not a mere flux of vibrations

--- PAGE BREAK ---one
inter-continuous nexus:
The religious and their idea or ideal of the soul. They mean distinct,
stable entity, or a state that is independent, and not a mere flux of vibrations

--- PAGE BREAK ---

or complex of reactions to environment, continuous with environment,
merging away with an infinitude of other interdependent complexes.
But the only thing that would not merge away into something else would
be that besides which there is nothing else.
That Truth is only another name for the positive state, or that the quest
for Truth is the attempt to achieve positiveness:
Scientists who have thought that they were seeking Truth, but who were
trying to find out astronomic, or chemic, or biologic truths. But Truth is that
besides which there is nothing: nothing to modify it, nothing to question it,
nothing to form an exception: the all-inclusive, the complete—
By Truth I mean the Universal.
So chemists have sought the true, or the real, and have always failed in
their endeavors, because of the outside relations of chem ical phenomena:
have failed in the sense that never has a chemical law, without exceptions,
been discovered: because chemistry is continuous with astronomy, physics,
biology— For instance, if the sun should greatly change its distance from
this earth, and if human life could survive, the familiar chemic formulas
would no longer work out: a new science of chemistry would have to be
learned—
Or that all attempts to find Truth in the special are attempts to find the
universal in the local.
And artists and their striving for positiveness, under the name of
“harmony”—but their pigments that are oxydizing, or are responding to a
deranging environment—or the strings of musical instruments that are
differently and disturbingly adjusting to outside chemic and thermal and
gravitational forces—again and again this oneness of all ideals, and that it is
the attempt to be, or to achieve, locally, that which is realizable only
universally. In our experience there is only intermediateness to harmony
and discord. Harmony is that besides which there are no outside forces.
And nations that have fought with only one motive: for individuality, or
entity, or to be real, final nations, not subordinate to, or parts of, other
nations. And that nothing but intermediateness has ever been attained, and
that history is record of failures of this one attempt, because there always
have been outside forces, or other nations contending for the same goal.
As to physical things, chemic, mineralogic, astronomic, it is not
customary to say that they act to achieve Truth or Entity, but it is
understood that all motions are toward Equilibrium: that there is no motionical things, chemic, mineralogic, astronomic, it is not
customary to say that they act to achieve Truth or Entity, but it is
understood that all motions are toward Equilibrium: that there is no motion

--- PAGE BREAK ---mineralogic, astronomic, it is not
customary to say that they act to achieve Truth or Entity, but it is
understood that all motions are toward Equilibrium: that there is no motion

--- PAGE BREAK ---

except toward Equilibrium, of course always away from some other
approximation to Equilibrium.
All biologic phenomena act to adjust: there are no biologic actions other
than adjustments.
Adjustment is another name for Equilibrium. Equilibrium is the
Universal, or that which has nothing external to derange it.
But that all that we call “being” is motion: and that all motion is the
expression, not of equilibrium, but of equilibrating, or of equilibirium
unattained: that life-motions are expressions of equilibrium unattained: that
all thought relates to the unattained: that to have what is called being in our
quasi-state, is not to be in the positive sense, or is to be intermediate to
Equilibrium and Inequi-librium.
So then:
That all phenomena in our intermediate state, or quasi-state, represent
this one attempt to organize, stabilize, harmonize, individualize—or to
positivize, or to become real:
That only to have seeming is to express failure or intermediate-ness to
final failure and final success;
That every attempt—that is observable—is defeated by Continuity, or by
outside forces—or by the excluded that are continuous with the included:
That our whole “existence” is an attempt by the relative to be the
absolute, or by the local to be the universal.
In this book, my interest is in this attempt as manifested in modern
science:
That it has attempted to be real, true, final, complete, absolute:
That, if the seeming of being, here, in our quasi-state, is the product of
exclusion that is always false and arbitrary, if always are included and
excluded continuous, the whole seeming system, or entity, of modern
science is only quasi-system, or quasi-entity, wrought by the same false and
arbitrary process as that by which the still less positive system that preceded
it, or the theological system, wrought the illusion of its being.
In this book, I assemble some of the data that I think are of the falsely
and arbitrarily excluded.
The data of the damned.
I have gone into the outer darkness of scientific and philosophical
transactions and proceedings, ultra-respectable, but covered with the dust ofsely
and arbitrarily excluded.
The data of the damned.
I have gone into the outer darkness of scientific and philosophical
transactions and proceedings, ultra-respectable, but covered with the dust of

--- PAGE BREAK ---excluded.
The data of the damned.
I have gone into the outer darkness of scientific and philosophical
transactions and proceedings, ultra-respectable, but covered with the dust of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

disregard. I have descended into journalism. I have come back with the
quasi-souls of lost data.
They will march.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
As to the logic of our expressions to come—
That there is only quasi-logic in our mode of seeming:
That nothing ever has been proved—
Because there is nothing to prove.
When I say that there is nothing to prove, I mean that to those who accept
Continuity, or the merging away of all phenomena into other phenomena,
without positive demarcations one from another, there is, in a positive
sense, no one thing. There is nothing to prove.
For instance nothing can be proved to be an animal—because animalness
and vegetableness are not positively different. There are some expressions
of life that are as much vegetable as animal, or that represent the merging of
animalness and vegetableness. There is then no positive test, standard,
criterion, means of forming an opinion. As distinct from vegetables, animals
do not exist. There is nothing to prove. Nothing could be proved to be good,
for instance. There is nothing in our “existence” that is good, in a positive
sense, or as really outlined from evil. If to forgive be good in times of
peace, it is evil in wartime. There is nothing to prove: good in our
experience is continuous with, or is only another aspect of evil.
As to what I’m trying to do now—I accept only. If I can’t see universally,
I only localize.
So, of course then, that nothing ever has been proved:
That theological pronouncements are as much open to doubt as ever they
were, but that, by a hypnotizing process, they became dominant over the
majority of minds in their era;
That, in a succeeding era, the laws, dogmas, formulas, principles, of
materialistic science never were proved, because they are only localizations
simulating the universal; but that the leading minds of their era of
dominance were hypnotized into more or less firmly believing them.
Newton’s three laws, and that they are attempts to achieve positiveness,
or to defy and break Continuity, and are as unreal as are all other attempts
to localize the universal:
That, if every observable body is continuous, mediately or immediately,
with all other bodies, it cannot be influenced only by its own inertia, so thatre all other attempts
to localize the universal:
That, if every observable body is continuous, mediately or immediately,
with all other bodies, it cannot be influenced only by its own inertia, so that

--- PAGE BREAK ---s
to localize the universal:
That, if every observable body is continuous, mediately or immediately,
with all other bodies, it cannot be influenced only by its own inertia, so that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

there is no way of knowing what the phenomena of inertia may be; that, if
all things are reacting to an infinitude of forces, there is no way of knowing
what the effects of only one impressed force would be; that if every reaction
is continuous with its action, it cannot be conceived of as a whole, and that
there is no way of conceiving what it might be equal and opposite to—
Or that Newton’s three laws are three articles of faith;
Or that demons and angels and inertias and reactions are all mythological
characters;
But that, in their eras of dominance, they were almost as firmly believed
in as if they had been proved.
Enormities and preposterousnesses will march.
They will be “proved” as well as Moses or Darwin or Lyell ever
“proved” anything.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
We substitute acceptance for belief.
Cells of an embryo take on different appearances in different eras.
The more firmly established, the more difficult to change.
That social organism is embryonic.
That firmly to believe is to impede development.
That only temporarily to accept is to facilitate.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
But:
Except that we substitute acceptance for belief, our methods will be the
conventional methods; the means by which every belief has been
formulated and supported: or our methods will be the methods of
theologians and savages and scientists and children. Because, if all
phenomena are continuous, there can be no positively different methods. By
the inconclusive means and methods of cardinals and fortune tellers and
evolutionists and peasants, methods which must be inconclusive, if they
relate always to the local, and if there is nothing local to conclude, we shall
write this book.
If it function as an expression of its era, it will prevail.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
All sciences begin with attempts to define.
Nothing ever has been defined.all
write this book.
If it function as an expression of its era, it will prevail.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
All sciences begin with attempts to define.
Nothing ever has been defined.

--- PAGE BREAK ---If it function as an expression of its era, it will prevail.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
All sciences begin with attempts to define.
Nothing ever has been defined.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Because there is nothing to define.
Darwin wrote The Origin of Species.
He was never able to tell what he meant by a “species.”
It is not possible to define.
Nothing has ever been finally found out.
Because there is nothing final to find out.
It’s like looking for a needle that no one ever lost in a haystack that never
was—
But that all scientific attempts really to find out something, whereas
really there is nothing to find out, are attempts, themselves, really to be
something.
A seeker of Truth. He will never find it. But the dimmest of possibilities
—he may himself become Truth.
Or that science is more than an inquiry:
That it is a pseudo-construction, or a quasi-organization: that it is an
attempt to break away and locally establish harmony, stability, equilibrium,
consistency, entity—
Dimmest of possibilities—that it may succeed.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
That ours is a pseudo-existence, and that all appearances in it partake of
its essential fictitiousness—
But that some appearances approximate far more highly to the positive
state than do others.
We conceive of all “things” as occupying gradations, or steps in series
between positiveness and negativeness, or realness and unrealness: that
some seeming things are more nearly consistent, just, beautiful, unified,
individual, harmonious, stable—than others.
We are not realists. We are not idealists. We are intermediatists —that
nothing is real, but that nothing is unreal: that all phenomena are
approximations one way or the other between realness and unrealness.
So then:
That our whole quasi-existence is an intermediate stage between
positiveness and negativeness or realness and unrealness.
Like purgatory, I think.
But in our summing up, which was very sketchily done, we omitted to
make clear that Realness is an aspect of the positive state.s and negativeness or realness and unrealness.
Like purgatory, I think.
But in our summing up, which was very sketchily done, we omitted to
make clear that Realness is an aspect of the positive state.

--- PAGE BREAK ---r realness and unrealness.
Like purgatory, I think.
But in our summing up, which was very sketchily done, we omitted to
make clear that Realness is an aspect of the positive state.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

By Realness, I mean that which does not merge away into something
else, and that which is not partly something else: that which is not a reaction
to, or an imitation of, something else. By a real hero, we mean one who is
not partly a coward, or whose actions and motives do not merge away into
cowardice. But, if in Continuity, all things do merge, by Realness, I mean
the Universal, besides which there is nothing with which to merge.
That, though the local might be universalized, it is not conceivable that
the universal can be localized: but that high approximations there may be,
and that these approximate successes may be translated out of
Intermediateness into Realness—quite as, in a relative sense, the industrial
world recruits itself by translating out of unrealness, or out of the seemingly
less real imaginings of inventors, machines which seem, when set up in
factories, to have more of Realness than they had when only imagined.
That all progress, if all progress is toward stability, organization,
harmony, consistency, or positiveness, is the attempt to become real.
So, then, in general metaphysical terms, our expression is that, like a
purgatory, all that is commonly called “existence,” which we call
Intermediateness, is quasi-existence, neither real nor unreal, but expression
of attempt to become real, or to generate for or recruit a real existence.
Our acceptance is that Science, though usually thought of so specifically,
or in its own local terms, usually supposed to be a prying into old bones,
bugs, unsavory messes, is an expression of this one spirit animating all
Intermediateness: that, if Science could absolutely exclude all data but its
own present data, or that which is assimilable with the present quasi-
organization, it would be a real system, with positively definite outlines—it
would be real.
Its 
seeming 
approximation 
to 
consistency, 
stability, 
system—
positiveness or realness—is sustained by damning the irreconcilable or the
unassimilable—
All would be well.
All would be heavenly—
If the damned would only stay damned.sistency, 
stability, 
system—
positiveness or realness—is sustained by damning the irreconcilable or the
unassimilable—
All would be well.
All would be heavenly—
If the damned would only stay damned.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
2
N the autumn of 1883, and for years afterward, occurred brilliant-
colored sunsets, such as had never been seen before within the memory
of all observers. Also there were blue moons.
I think that one is likely to smile incredulously at the notion of blue
moons. Nevertheless they were as common as were green suns in 1883.
Science had to account for these unconventionalities. Such publications
as Nature and Knowledge were besieged with inquiries.
I suppose, in Alaska and in the South Sea Islands, all the medicine men
were similarly upon trial.
Something had to be thought of.
Upon the 28th of August, 1883, the volcano of Krakatoa, of the Straits of
Sunda, had blown up.
Terrific.
We’re told that the sound was heard 2,000 miles, and that 36,380 persons
were killed. Seems just a little unscientific, or impositive, to me: marvel to
me we’re not told 2,163 miles and 36,387 persons. The volume of smoke
that went up must have been visible to other planets—or, tormented with
our crawlings and scurryings, the earth complained to Mars; swore a vast
black oath at us.
In all text-books that mention this occurrence—no exception so far so I
have read—it is said that the extraordinary atmospheric effects of 1883
were first noticed in the last of August or the first of September.
That makes a difficulty for us.
It is said that these phenomena were caused by particles of volcanic dust
that were cast high in the air by Krakatoa.
This is the explanation that was agreed upon in 1883—
But for seven years the atmospheric phenomena continued—
Except that, in the seven, there was a lapse of several years— and where
was the volcanic dust all that time"
You’d think that such a question as that would make trouble"

--- PAGE BREAK ---ontinued—
Except that, in the seven, there was a lapse of several years— and where
was the volcanic dust all that time"
You’d think that such a question as that would make trouble"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then you haven’t studied hypnosis. You have never tried to demonstrate
to a hypnotic that a table is not a hippopotamus. According to our general
acceptance, it would be impossible to demonstrate such a thing. Point out a
hundred reasons for saying that a hippopotamus is not a table: you’ll have
to end up agreeing that neither is a table a table—it only seems to be a table.
Well, that’s what the hippopotamus seems to be. So how can you prove that
something is not something else, when neither is something else some other
thing" There’s nothing to prove.
This is one of the profundities that we advertised in advance.
You can oppose an absurdity only with some other absurdity. But Science
is established preposterousness. We divide all intellection: the obviously
preposterousness and the established.
But Krakatoa: that’s the explanation that the scientists gave. I don’t know
what whopper the medicine men told.
We see, from the start, the very strong inclination of science to deny, as
much as it can, external relations of this earth.
This book is an assemblage of data of external relations of this earth. We
take the position that our data have been damned, upon no consideration for
individual merits or demerits, but in conformity with a general attempt to
hold out for isolation of this earth. This is attempted positiveness. We take
the position that science can no more succeed than, in a similar endeavor,
could the Chinese, or than could the United States. So then, with only
pseudo-consideration of the phenomena of 1883, or as an expression of
positivism in its aspect of isolation, or unrelatedness, scientists have
perpetrated such an enormity as suspension of volcanic dust seven years in
the air— disregarding the lapse of several years—rather than to admit the
arrival of dust from somewhere beyond this earth. Not that scientists
themselves have ever achieved positiveness, in its aspect of unitedness,
among themselves—because Nordenskiold, before 1883, wrote a great deal
upon his theory of cosmic dust, and Prof. Cleveland Abbe contended
against the Krakatoan explanation—but that this is the orthodoxy of the
main body of scientists.
My own chief reason for indignation here:
That this preposterous explanation interferes with some of my own
enormities.
It would cost me too much explaining, if I should have to admit that this
earth’s atmosphere has such sustaining power.e:
That this preposterous explanation interferes with some of my own
enormities.
It would cost me too much explaining, if I should have to admit that this
earth’s atmosphere has such sustaining power.

--- PAGE BREAK ---erous explanation interferes with some of my own
enormities.
It would cost me too much explaining, if I should have to admit that this
earth’s atmosphere has such sustaining power.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Later, we shall have data of things that have gone up in the air and that
have stayed up—somewhere—weeks—months—but not by the sustaining
power of this earth’s atmosphere. For instance, the turtle of Vicksburg. It
seems to me that it would be ridiculous to think of a good-sized turtle
hanging, for three or four months, upheld only by the air, over the town of
Vicksburg. When it comes to the horse and the barn—I think that they’ll be
classics some day, but I can never accept that a horse and a barn could float
several months in this earth’s atmosphere.
The orthodox explanation:
See the Report of the Krakatoa Committee of the Royal Society. It comes
out absolutely for the orthodox explanation— absolutely and beautifully,
also expensively. There are 492 pages in the “Report,” and 40 plates, some
of them marvelously colored. It was issued after an investigation that took
five years. You couldn’t think of anything done more efficiently, artistically,
authoritatively. The mathematical parts are especially impressive:
distribution of the dust of Krakatoa; velocity of translation and rates of
subsidence; altitudes and persistences—
Annual Register, 1883-105:
That the atmospheric effects that have been attributed to Krakatoa were
seen in Trinidad before the eruption occurred;
Knowledge, 5-418:
That they were seen in Natal, South Africa, six months before the
eruption.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
Inertia and its inhospitality.
Or raw meat should not be fed to babies.
We shall have a few data initiatorily.
I fear me that the horse and the barn were a little extreme for our budding
liberalities.
The outrageous is the reasonable, if introduced politely.
Hailstones, for instance. One reads in the newspapers of hailstones the
size of hens’ eggs. One smiles. Nevertheless I will engage to list one
hundred instances, from the Monthly Weather Review, of hailstones the size
of hens’ eggs. There is an account in Nature, Nov.1, 1894, of hailstones that
weighed almost two pounds each. See Chambers’ Encyclopedia for three-
pounders. Report of the Smithsonian Institution, 1870-479—two-poundersre is an account in Nature, Nov.1, 1894, of hailstones that
weighed almost two pounds each. See Chambers’ Encyclopedia for three-
pounders. Report of the Smithsonian Institution, 1870-479—two-pounders

--- PAGE BREAK ---Nature, Nov.1, 1894, of hailstones that
weighed almost two pounds each. See Chambers’ Encyclopedia for three-
pounders. Report of the Smithsonian Institution, 1870-479—two-pounders

--- PAGE BREAK ---

authenticated, and six-pounders reported. At Seringapatam, India, about the
year 1800, fell a hailstone—
I fear me, I fear me: this is one of the profoundly damned. I blurt out
something that should, perhaps, be withheld for several hundred pages—but
that damned thing was the size of an elephant.
We laugh.
Or snowflakes. Size of saucers. Said to have fallen at Nashville, Tenn.,
Jan. 24, 1891. One smiles.
“In Montana, in the winter of 1887, fell snowflakes 15 inches across, and
8 inches thick.” (Monthly Weather Review, 1915-73.)
In the topography of intellection, I should say that what we call
knowledge is ignorance surrounded by laughter.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
Black rains—red rains—the fall of a thousand tons of butter. Jet-black
snow—pink snow—blue hailstones—hailstones flavored like oranges.
Punk and silk and charcoal.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
About one hundred years ago, if anyone was so credulous as to think that
stones had ever fallen from the sky, he was reasoned with:
In the first place there are no stones in the sky:
Therefore no stones can fall from the sky.
Or nothing more reasonable or scientific or logical than that could be said
upon any subject. The only trouble is the universal trouble: that the major
premise is not real, or is intermediate somewhere between realness and
unrealness.
In 1772, a committee, of whom Lavoisier was a member, was appointed
by the French Academy, to investigate a report that a stone had fallen from
the sky at Luce, France. Of all attempts at positiveness, in its aspect of
isolation, I don’t know of anything that has been fought harder for than the
notion of this earth’s unrelatedness. Lavoisier analyzed the stone of Luce.
The exclusionists’ explanation at that time was that stones do not fall from
the sky: that luminous objects may seem to fall, and that hot stones may be
picked up where a luminous object seemingly had landed—only lightning
striking a stone, heating, even melting it.
The stone of Luce showed signs of fusion.may seem to fall, and that hot stones may be
picked up where a luminous object seemingly had landed—only lightning
striking a stone, heating, even melting it.
The stone of Luce showed signs of fusion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d that hot stones may be
picked up where a luminous object seemingly had landed—only lightning
striking a stone, heating, even melting it.
The stone of Luce showed signs of fusion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Lavoisier’s analysis “absolutely proved” that this stone had not fallen:
that it had been struck by lightning.
So, authoritatively, falling stones were damned. The stock means of
exclusion remained the explanation of lightning that was seen to strike
something—that had been upon the ground in the first place.
But positiveness and the fate of every positive statement. It is not
customary to think of damned stones raising an outcry against a sentence of
exclusion, but, subjectively, aerolites did—or data of them bombarded the
walls raised against them—
Monthly Review, I796-426
“The phenomenon which is the subject of the remarks before us will
seem to most persons as little worthy of credit as any that could be offered.
The falling of large stones from the sky, without any assignable cause of
their previous ascent, seems to partake so much of the marvelous as almost
entirely to exclude the operation of known and natural agents. Yet a body of
evidence is here brought to prove that such events have actually taken
place, and we ought not to withhold from it a proper degree of attention.”
The writer abandons the first, or absolute, exclusion, and modifies it with
the explanation that the day before a reported fall of stones in Tuscany, June
16, 1794, there had been an eruption of Vesuvius—
Or that stones do fall from the sky, but that they are stones that have been
raised to the sky from some other part of the earth’s surface by whirlwinds
or by volcanic action.
It’s more than one hundred and twenty years later. I know of no aerolite
that has ever been acceptably traced to terrestrial origin.
Falling stones had to be undamned—though still with a reservation that
held out for exclusion of outside forces.
One may have the knowledge of a Lavoisier, and still not be able to
analyze, not be able even to see, except conformably with the hypnoses, or
the conventional reactions against hypnoses, of one’s era.
We believe no more.
We accept.
Little by little the whirlwind and volcano explanations had to be
abandoned, but so powerful was this exclusion-hypnosis, sentence of
damnation, or this attempt at positiveness, that far into our own times some
scientists, notably Prof. Lawrence Smith and Sir Robert Ball, continued to
hold out against all external origins, asserting that nothing could fall to thissitiveness, that far into our own times some
scientists, notably Prof. Lawrence Smith and Sir Robert Ball, continued to
hold out against all external origins, asserting that nothing could fall to this

--- PAGE BREAK ---

earth, unless it had been cast up or whirled up from some other part of this
earth’s surface.
It’s as commendable as anything ever has been—by which I mean it’s
intermediate to the commendable and the censurable.
It’s virginal.
Meteorites, data of which were once of the damned, have been admitted,
but the common impression of them is only a retreat of attempted
exclusion: that only two kinds of substance fall from the sky: metallic and
stony: that the metallic objects are of iron and nickel—
Butter and paper and wool and silk and resin.
We see, to start with, that the virgins of science have fought and wept and
screamed against external relations—upon two grounds:
There in the first place;
Or up from one part of this earth’s surface and down to another.
As late as November, 1902, in Nature Notes, 13-231, a member of the
Selborne Society still argued that meteorites do not fall from the sky; that
they are masses of iron upon the ground “in the first place,” that attract
lightning; that the lightning is seen, and is mistaken for a falling, luminous
object—
By progress we mean rape.
Butter and beef and blood and a stone with strange inscriptions upon it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ning; that the lightning is seen, and is mistaken for a falling, luminous
object—
By progress we mean rape.
Butter and beef and blood and a stone with strange inscriptions upon it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

S
3
O then, it is our expression that Science relates to real knowledge no
more than does the growth of a plant, or the organization of a
department store, or the development of a nation: that all are
assimilative, or organizing, or systematizing processes that represent
different attempts to attain the positive state—the state commonly called
heaven, I suppose I mean.
There can be no real science where there are indeterminate variables, but
every variable is, in finer terms, indeterminate, or irregular, if only to have
the appearance of being in Intermediate-ness is to express regularity
unattained. The invariable, or the real and stable, would be nothing at all in
Intermediateness—rather as, but in relative terms, an undistorted
interpretation of external sounds in the mind of a dreamer could not
continue to exist in a dreaming mind, because that touch of relative realness
would be of awakening and not of dreaming. Science is the attempt to
awaken to realness, wherein it is attempt to find regularity and uniformity.
Or the regular and uniform would be that which has nothing external to
disturb it. By the universal we mean the real. Or the notion is that the
underlying super-attempt, as expressed in Science, is indifferent to the
subject-matter of Science: that the attempt to regularize is the vital spirit.
Bugs and stars and chemical messes: that they are only quasi-real, and that
of them there is nothing real to know; but that systematization of pseudo-
data is approximation to realness or final awakening—
Or a dreaming mind—and its centaurs and canary birds that turn into
giraffes—there could be no real biology upon such subjects, but attempt, in
a dreaming mind, to systematize such appearances would be movement
toward awakening—if better mental co-ordination is all that we mean by
the state of being awake— relatively awake.
So it is, that having attempted to systematize, by ignoring externality to
the greatest possible degree, the notion of things dropping in upon this
earth, from externality, is as unsettling and as unwelcome to Science as—tin
horns blowing in upon a musician’s relatively symmetric composition—ble degree, the notion of things dropping in upon this
earth, from externality, is as unsettling and as unwelcome to Science as—tin
horns blowing in upon a musician’s relatively symmetric composition—

--- PAGE BREAK ---on of things dropping in upon this
earth, from externality, is as unsettling and as unwelcome to Science as—tin
horns blowing in upon a musician’s relatively symmetric composition—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

flies alighting upon a painter’s attempted harmony, and tracking colors one
into another—suffragist getting up and making a political speech at a prayer
meeting.
If all things are of a oneness, which is a state intermediate to unrealness
and realness, and if nothing has succeeded in breaking away and
establishing entity for itself, and could not continue to “exist” in
intermediateness, if it should succeed, any more than could the born still at
the same time be the uterine, I of course know of no positive difference
between Science and Christian Science—and the attitude of both toward the
unwelcome is the same—”it does not exist.”
A Lord Kelvin and a Mrs. Eddy, and something not to their liking—it
does not exist.
Of course not, we Intermediates say: but, also, that, in Intermediateness,
neither is there absolute non-existence.
Or a Christian Scientist and a toothache—neither exists in the final sense:
also neither is absolutely non-existent, and, according to our therapeutics,
the one that more highly approximates to realness will win.
A secret of power—
I think it’s another profundity.
Do you want power over something"
Be more nearly real than it.
We’ll begin with yellow substances that have fallen upon this earth: we’ll
see whether our data of them have a higher approximation to realness than
have the dogmas of those who deny their existence—that is, as products
from somewhere external to this earth.
In mere impressionism we take our stand. We have no positive tests nor
standards. Realism in art: realism in science—they pass away. In 1859, the
thing to do was to accept Darwinism; now many biologists are revolting
and trying to conceive of something else. The thing to do was to accept it in
its day, but Darwinism of course was never proved:
The fittest survive.
What is meant by the fittest"
Not the strongest; not the cleverest—
Weakness and stupidity everywhere survive.
There is no way of determining fitness except in that a thing does
survive.
“Fitness,” then, is only another name for “survival.”rongest; not the cleverest—
Weakness and stupidity everywhere survive.
There is no way of determining fitness except in that a thing does
survive.
“Fitness,” then, is only another name for “survival.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---verest—
Weakness and stupidity everywhere survive.
There is no way of determining fitness except in that a thing does
survive.
“Fitness,” then, is only another name for “survival.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Darwinism:
That survivors survive.
Although Darwinism, then, seems positively baseless, or absolutely
irrational, its massing of supposed, data, and its attempted coherence
approximate more highly to Organization and Consistency than did the
inchoate speculations that preceded it.
Or that Columbus never proved that the earth is round.
Shadow of the earth on the moon"
No one has ever seen it in its entirety. The earth’s shadow is much larger
than the moon. If the periphery of the shadow is curved—but the convex
moon—a straight-edged object will cast a curved shadow upon a surface
that is convex.
All the other so-called proofs may be taken up in the same way. It was
impossible for Columbus to prove that the earth is round. It was not
required: only that with a higher seeming of positiveness than that of his
opponents, he should attempt. The thing to do, in 1492, was nevertheless to
accept that beyond Europe, to the west, were other lands.
I offer for acceptance, as something concordant with the spirit of this first
quarter of the 20th century, the expression that beyond this earth are—other
lands—from which come things as, from America, float things to Europe.
As to yellow substances that have fallen upon this earth, the endeavor to
exclude extra-mundane origins is the dogma that all yellow rains and
yellow snows are colored with pollen from this earth’s pine trees. Symons’
Meteorological Magazine is especially prudish in this respect and regards as
highly improper all advances made by other explainers.
Nevertheless, the Monthly Weather Review, May, 1877, reports a golden-
yellow fall, of Feb. 27, 1877, at Peckloh, Germany, in which four kinds of
organisms, not pollen, were the coloring matter. There were minute things
shaped like arrows, coffee beans, horns, and disks.
They may have been symbols. They may have been objective
hieroglyphics—
Mere passing fancy—let it go—
In the Annales de Chimie, 85-288, there is a list of rains said to have
contained sulphur. I have thirty or forty other notes. I’ll not use one of them.
I’II admit that every one of them is upon a fall of pollen. I said, to begin
with, that our methods would be the methods of theologians and scientists,
and they always begin with an appearance of liberality. I grant thirty orof them is upon a fall of pollen. I said, to begin
with, that our methods would be the methods of theologians and scientists,
and they always begin with an appearance of liberality. I grant thirty or

--- PAGE BREAK ---all of pollen. I said, to begin
with, that our methods would be the methods of theologians and scientists,
and they always begin with an appearance of liberality. I grant thirty or

--- PAGE BREAK ---

forty points to start with. I’m as liberal as any of them—or that my
liberality won’t cost me anything—the enormousness of the data that we
shall have.
Or just to look over a typical instance of this dogma, and the way it
works out:
In the American Journal of Science, 1-42-196, we are told of a yellow
substance that fell by the bucketful upon a vessel, one “windless” night in
June, in Pictou Harbor, Nova Scotia. The writer analyzed the substance, and
it was found to “give off nitrogen and ammonia and an animal odor.”
Now, one of our Intermediatist principles, to start with, is that so far from
positive, in the aspect of Homogeneousness, are all substances, that, at least
in what is called an elementary sense, anything can be found anywhere.
Mahogany logs on the coast of Greenland; bugs of a valley on the top of
Mt. Blanc; atheists at a prayer meeting; ice in India. For instance, chemical
analysis can reveal that almost any dead man was poisoned with arsenic,
we’ll say, because there is no stomach without some iron, lead, tin, gold,
arsenic in it and of it—which, of course, in a broader sense, doesn’t matter
much, because a certain number of persons must, as a restraining influence,
be executed for murder every year; and, if detectives aren’t able really to
detect anything, illusion of their success is all that is necessary, and it is
very honorable to give up one’s life for society as a whole.
The chemist who analyzed the substance of Pictou sent a sample to the
Editor of the Journal. The Editor of course found pollen in it.
My own acceptance is that there’d have to be some pollen in it: that
nothing could very well fall through the air, in June, near the pine forests of
Nova Scotia, and escape all floating spores of pollen. But the Editor does
not say that this substance “contained” pollen. He disregards “nitrogen,
ammonia, and an animal odor,” and says that the substance was pollen. For
the sake of our thirty or forty tokens of liberality, or pseudo-liberality, if we
can’t be really liberal, we grant that the chemist of the first examination
probably wouldn’t know an animal odor if he were janitor of a menagerie.
As we go along, however, there can be no such sweeping ignoring of this
phenomenon:
The fall of animal-matter from the sky.
I’d suggest, to start with, that we’d put ourselves in the place of deep-sea
fishes:
How would they account for the fall of animal-matter from above"henomenon:
The fall of animal-matter from the sky.
I’d suggest, to start with, that we’d put ourselves in the place of deep-sea
fishes:
How would they account for the fall of animal-matter from above"

--- PAGE BREAK ---of animal-matter from the sky.
I’d suggest, to start with, that we’d put ourselves in the place of deep-sea
fishes:
How would they account for the fall of animal-matter from above"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

They wouldn’t try—
Or it’s easy enough to think of most of us as deep-sea fishes of a kind.
Jour. Franklin Inst., 90-11:
That, upon the 14th of February, 1870, there fell, at Genoa, Italy,
according to Director Boccardo, of the Technical Institute of Genoa, and
Prof. Castellani, a yellow substance. But the microscope revealed numerous
globules of cobalt blue, also corpuscles of a pearly color that resembled
starch. See Nature, 2-166.
Comptes Rendus, 56-972:
M. Bouis says of a substance, reddish varying to yellowish, that fell
enormously and successively, or upon April 30, May 1 and May 2, in
France and Spain, that it carbonized and spread the odor of charred animal
matter—that it was not pollen—that in alcohol it left a residue of resinous
matter.
Hundreds of thousands of tons of this matter must have fallen.
“Odor of charred animal matter.”
Or an aerial battle that occurred in inter-planetary space several hundred
years ago—effect of time in making diverse remains uniform in appearance
—
It’s all very absurd because, even though we are told of a prodigious
quantity of animal matter that fell from the sky—three days—France and
Spain—we’re not ready yet: that’s all. M. Bouis says that this substance
was not pollen; the vastness of the fall makes acceptable that it was not
pollen; still, the resinous residue does suggest pollen of pine trees. We shall
hear a great deal of a substance with a resinous residue that has fallen from
the sky: finally we shall divorce it from all suggestion of pollen.
Blackwood’s Magazine, 3-338:
A yellow powder that fell at Gerace, Calabria, March 14, 1813. Some of
this substance was collected by Sig. Simenini, Professor of Chemistry, at
Naples. It had an earthy, insipid taste, and is described as “unctuous.” When
heated, this matter turned brown, then black, then red. According to the
Annals of Philosophy, 11-466, one of the components was a greenish-yellow
substance, which, when dried, was found to be resinous.
But concomitants of this fall:
Loud noises were heard in the sky.
Stones fell from the sky.11-466, one of the components was a greenish-yellow
substance, which, when dried, was found to be resinous.
But concomitants of this fall:
Loud noises were heard in the sky.
Stones fell from the sky.

--- PAGE BREAK ---components was a greenish-yellow
substance, which, when dried, was found to be resinous.
But concomitants of this fall:
Loud noises were heard in the sky.
Stones fell from the sky.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to Chladni, these concomitants occurred, and to me they seem
—rather brutal"—or not associable with something so soft and gentle as a
fall of pollen"
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
Black rains and black snows—rains as black as a deluge of ink —jet-
black snowflakes.
Such a rain as that which fell in Ireland, May 14, 1849, described in the
Annals of Scientific Discovery, 1850, and the Annual Register, 1849. It fell
upon a district of 400 square miles, and was the color of ink, and of a fetid
odor and very disagreeable taste.
The rain at Castlecommon, Ireland, April 30, 1887—”thick, black rain.”
(Amer. Met. four., 4-193.)
A black rain fell in Ireland, Oct. 8 and 9, 1907. (Symons’ Met. Mag. 43-
2.) “It left a most peculiar and disagreeable smell in the air.”
The orthodox explanation of this rain occurs in Nature, March 2, 1908—
cloud of soot that had come from South Wales, crossing the Irish Channel
and all of Ireland.
So the black rain of Ireland, of March, 1898: ascribed in Symons’ Met.
Mag. 33-40, to clouds of soot from the manufacturing towns of North
England and South Scotland.
Our Intermediatist principle of pseudo-logic, or our principle of
Continuity is, of course, that nothing is unique, or individual: that all
phenomena merge away into all other phenomena: that, for instance—
suppose there should be vast celestial super-oceanic, or inter-planetary
vessels that come near this earth and discharge volumes of smoke at times.
We’re only supposing such a thing as that now, because, conventionally, we
are beginning modestly and tentatively. But if it were so, there would
necessarily be some phenomenon upon this earth, with which that
phenomenon would merge. Extra-mundane smoke and smoke from cities
merge, or both would manifest in black precipitations in rain.
In Continuity, it is impossible to distinguish phenomena at their merging-
points, so we look for them at their extremes. Impossible to distinguish
between animal and vegetable in some infusoria—but hippopotamus and
violet. For all practical purposes they’re distinguishable enough. No one but
a Barnum or a Bailey would send one a bunch of hippopotami as a token of
regard.
So away from the great manufacturing centers:et. For all practical purposes they’re distinguishable enough. No one but
a Barnum or a Bailey would send one a bunch of hippopotami as a token of
regard.
So away from the great manufacturing centers:

--- PAGE BREAK ---l purposes they’re distinguishable enough. No one but
a Barnum or a Bailey would send one a bunch of hippopotami as a token of
regard.
So away from the great manufacturing centers:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Black rain in Switzerland, Jan. 20, 1911. Switzerland is so remote, and so
ill at ease is the conventional explanation nere, that Nature, 85-451, says of
this rain that in certain conditions of weather, snow may take on an
appearance of blackness that is quite deceptive.
May be so. Or at night, if dark enough, snow may look black. This is
simply denying that a black rain fell in Switzerland, Jan. 20, 1911.
Extreme remoteness from great manufacturing centers:
La Nature, 1888, 2-406:
That Aug. 14, 1888, there fell at the Cape of Good Hope, a rain so black
as to be described as a “shower of ink.”
Continuity dogs us. Continuity rules us and pulls us back. We seemed to
have a little hope that by the method of extremes we could get away from
things that merge indistinguishably into other things. We find that every
departure from one merger is entrance upon another. At the Cape of Good
Hope, vast volumes of smoke from great manufacturing centers, as an
explanation, cannot very acceptably merge with the explanation of extra-
mundane origin— but smoke from a terrestrial volcano can, and that is the
suggestion that is made in La Nature.
There is, in human intellection, no real standard to judge by, but our
acceptance, for the present, is that the more nearly positive will prevail. By
the more nearly positive we mean the more nearly Organized. Everything
merges away into everything else, but proportionately to its complexity, if
unified, a thing seems strong, real, and distinct: so, in aesthetics, it is
recognized that diversity in unity is higher beauty, or approximation to
Beauty, than is simpler unity; so the logicians feel that agreement of diverse
data constitute greater convincingness, or strength, than that of mere
parallel instances: so to Herbert Spencer the more highly differentiated and
integrated is the more fully evolved. Our opponents hold out for mundane
origin of all black rains. Our method will be the presenting of diverse
phenomena in agreement with the notion of some other origin. We take up
not only black rains but black rains and their accompanying phenomena.
A correspondent to Knowledge, 5-190, writes of a black rain that fell in
the Clyde Valley, March 1, 1884: of another black rain that fell two days
later. According to the correspondent, a black rain had fallen in the Clyde
Valley, March 20, 1828: then again March 22, 1828. According to Nature,
9-43, a black rain fell at Marls-ford, England, Sept. 4, 1873; more than
twenty-four hours later another black rain fell in the same small town., 1828: then again March 22, 1828. According to Nature,
9-43, a black rain fell at Marls-ford, England, Sept. 4, 1873; more than
twenty-four hours later another black rain fell in the same small town.

--- PAGE BREAK ---arch 22, 1828. According to Nature,
9-43, a black rain fell at Marls-ford, England, Sept. 4, 1873; more than
twenty-four hours later another black rain fell in the same small town.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The black rains of Slains:
According to Rev. James Rust (Scottish Showers
A black rain at Slains, Jan. 14, 1862—another at Carluke, 140 miles from
Slains, May 1, 1862—at Slains, May 20, 1862—Slains, Oct. 28, 1863.
But after two of these showers, vast quantities of a substance described
sometimes as “pumice stone,” but sometimes as “slag,” were washed upon
the sea coast near Slains. A chemist’s opinion is given that this substance
was slag: that it was not a volcanic product: slag from smelting works. We
now have, for black rains, a concomitant that is irreconcilable with origin
from factory chimneys. Whatever it may have been the quantity of this
substance was so enormous that, in Mr. Rust’s opinion, to have produced so
much of it would have required the united output of all the smelting works
in the world. If slag it were, we accept that an artificial product has, in
enormous quantities, fallen from the sky. If you don’t think that such
occurrences are damned by Science, read Scottish Showers and see how
impossible it was for the author to have this matter taken up by the
scientific world.
The first and second rains corresponded, in time, with ordinary
ebullitions of Vesuvius.
The third and fourth, according to Mr. Rust, corresponded with no known
volcanic activities upon this earth.
La Science Pour Tous, 11-26:
That, between October, 1863, and January, 1866, four more black rains
fell at Slains, Scotland.
The writer of this supplementary account tells us, with a better, or more
unscrupulous, orthodoxy than Mr. Rust’s, that of the eight black rains, five
coincided with eruptions of Vesuvius and three with eruptions of Etna.
The fate of all explanation is to close one door only to have another fly
wide open. I should say that my own notions upon this subject will be
considered irrational, but at least my gregarious-ness is satisfied in
associating here with the preposterous—or this writer, and those who think
in his rut, have to say that they can think of four discharges from one far-
distant volcano, passing over a great part of Europe, precipitating nowhere
else, discharging precisely over one small northern parish—
But also of three other discharges, from another far-distant volcano,
showing the same precise preference, if not marksmanship, for one small
parish in Scotland.cisely over one small northern parish—
But also of three other discharges, from another far-distant volcano,
showing the same precise preference, if not marksmanship, for one small
parish in Scotland.

--- PAGE BREAK ---l northern parish—
But also of three other discharges, from another far-distant volcano,
showing the same precise preference, if not marksmanship, for one small
parish in Scotland.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nor would orthodoxy be any better off in thinking of exploding
meteorites and their dpbris: preciseness and recurrence would be just as
difficult to explain.
My own notion is of an island near an oceanic trade-route: it might
receive dpbris from passing vessels seven times in four years.
Other concomitants of black rains:
In Timb’s Year Book, 1851-270, there is an account of “a sort of
rumbling, as of wagons, heard for upward of an hour without ceasing,” July
16, 1850, Bulwick Rectory, Northampton, England. On the 19th, a black
rain fell.
In Nature, 30-6, a correspondent writes of an intense darkness at Preston,
England, April 26, 1884: page 32, another correspondent writes of black
rain at Crowle, near Worcester. April 26: that a week later, or May 3, it had
fallen again: another account of black rain, upon the 28th of April, near
Church Shetton, so intense that the following day brooks were still dyed
with it. According to four accounts by correspondents to Nature there were
earthquakes in England at this time.
Or the black rain of Canada, Nov. 9, 1819. This time it is orthodoxy to
attribute the black precipitate to smoke of forest fires south of the Ohio
River—
Zurcher, Meteors, p. 238:
That this black rain was accompanied by “shocks like those of an
earthquake.”
Edinburgh Philosophical Journal, 2-381:
That the earthquake had occurred at the climax of intense darkness and
the fall of black rain.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
Red rains.
Orthodoxy:
Sand blown by the sirocco, from the Sahara to Europe.
Especially in the earthquake regions of Europe, there have been many
falls of red substance, usually, but not always, precipitated in rain. Upon
many occasions, these substances have been “absolutely identified” as sand
from the Sahara. When I first took this matter up, I came across assurance
after assurance, so positive to this effect, that, had I not been an
Intermediatist, I’d have looked no further. Samples collected from a rain at
Genoa—samples of sand forwarded from the Sahara—“absoluteer assurance, so positive to this effect, that, had I not been an
Intermediatist, I’d have looked no further. Samples collected from a rain at
Genoa—samples of sand forwarded from the Sahara—“absolute

--- PAGE BREAK ---itive to this effect, that, had I not been an
Intermediatist, I’d have looked no further. Samples collected from a rain at
Genoa—samples of sand forwarded from the Sahara—“absolute

--- PAGE BREAK ---

agreement” some writers said: same color, same particles of quartz, even
the same shells of diatoms mixed in. Then the chemical analyses: not a
disagreement worth mentioning.
Our intermediatist means of expression will be that, with proper
exclusions, after the scientific or theological method, anything can be
identified with anything else, if all things are only different expressions of
an underlying oneness.
To many minds there’s rest and there’s satisfaction in that expression
“absolutely identified.” Absoluteness, or the illusion of it —the universal
quest. If chemists have identified substances that have fallen in Europe as
sand from African deserts, swept up in African whirlwinds, that’s assuasive
to all the irritations that occur to those cloistered minds that must repose in
the concept of a snug, isolated, little world, free from contact with cosmic
wickednesses, safe from stellar guile, undisturbed by inter-planetary
prowlings and invasions. The only trouble is that a chemist’s analysis,
which seems so final and authoritative to some minds, is no more nearly
absolute than is identification by a child or description by an imbecile—
I take some of that back: I accept that the approximation is higher—
But that it’s based upon delusion, because there is no definiteness, no
homogeneity, no stability, only different stages somewhere between them
and indefiniteness, heterogeneity, and instability. There are no chemical
elements. It seems acceptable that Ramsay and others have settled that. The
chemical elements are only another disappointment in the quest for the
positive, as the definite, the homogeneous, and the stable. If there were real
elements, there could be a real science of chemistry.
Upon Nov. 12 and 13, 1902, occurred the greatest fall of matter in the
history of Australia. Upon the 14th of November, it “rained mud,” in
Tasmania. It was of course attributed to Australian whirlwinds, but,
according to the Monthly Weather Review, 32- 365, there was a haze all the
way to the Philippines, also as far as Hong Kong. It may be that this
phenomenon had no especial relation with the even more tremendous fall of
matter that occurred in Europe, February, 1903.
For several days, the south of England was a dumping ground— from
somewhere.
If you’d like to have a chemist’s opinion, even though it’s only a
chemist’s opinion, see the report of the meeting of the Royal Chemical
Society, April 2, 1903. Mr. E. G. Clayton read a paper upon some of thelike to have a chemist’s opinion, even though it’s only a
chemist’s opinion, see the report of the meeting of the Royal Chemical
Society, April 2, 1903. Mr. E. G. Clayton read a paper upon some of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---st’s opinion, even though it’s only a
chemist’s opinion, see the report of the meeting of the Royal Chemical
Society, April 2, 1903. Mr. E. G. Clayton read a paper upon some of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

substance that had fallen from the sky, collected by him. The Sahara
explanation applies mostly to falls that occur in southern Europe. Farther
away, the conventionalists are a little uneasy: for instance, the editor of the
Monthly Weather Review, 29-121, says of a red rain that fell near the coast
of Newfoundland, early in 1890: “It would be very remarkable if this was
Sahara dust.” Mr. Clayton said that the matter examined by him was
“merely wind-borne dust from the roads and lanes of Wessex.” This opinion
is typical of all scientific opinion—or theological opinion— or feminine
opinion—all very well except for what it disregards. The most charitable
thing I can think of—because I think it gives us a broader tone to relieve
our malices with occasional charities— is that Mr. Clayton had not heard of
the astonishing extent of this fall—had covered the Canary Islands, on the
19th, for instance. I think, myself, that in 1903, we passed through the
remains of a powdered world—left over from an ancient inter-planetary
dispute, brooding in space like a red resentment ever since. Or, like every
other opinion, the notion of dust from Wessex turns into a provincial thing
when we look it over.
To think is to conceive incompletely, because all thought relates only to
the local. We metaphysicians, of course, like to have the notion that we
think of the unthinkable.
As to opinions, or pronouncements, I should say, because they always
have such an authoritative air, of other chemists, there is an analysis in
Nature, 68-54, giving water and organic matter at 9.08 per cent. It’s that
carrying out of fractions that’s so convincing. The substance is identified as
sand from the Sahara.
The vastness of this fall. In Nature, 68-65, we are told that it had
occurred in Ireland, too. The Sahara, of course—because, prior to February
19, there had been dust storms in the Sahara— disregarding that in that
great region there’s always, in some part of it, a dust storm. However, just at
present, it does look reasonable that dust had come from Africa, via the
Canaries.
The great difficulty that authoritativeness has to contend with is some
other authoritativeness. When an infallibility clashes with a pontification—
They explain.
Nature, March 5, 1903:
Another analysis—36 per cent organic matter.oritativeness has to contend with is some
other authoritativeness. When an infallibility clashes with a pontification—
They explain.
Nature, March 5, 1903:
Another analysis—36 per cent organic matter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---contend with is some
other authoritativeness. When an infallibility clashes with a pontification—
They explain.
Nature, March 5, 1903:
Another analysis—36 per cent organic matter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Such disagreements don’t look very well, so, in Nature, 68-109, one of
the differing chemists explains. He says that his analysis was of muddy rain,
and the other was of sediment of rain—
We’re quite ready to accept excuses from the most high, though I do
wonder whether we’re quite so damned as we were, if we find ourselves in
a gracious and tolerant mood toward the powers that condemn—but the tax
that now comes upon our good manners and unwillingness to be too severe
—
Nature, 68-223
Another chemist. He says it was 23.49 per cent water and organic matter.
He “identifies” this matter as sand from an African desert—but after
deducting organic matter—
But you and I could be “identified” as sand from an African desert, after
deducting all there is to us except sand—
Why we cannot accept that this fall was of sand from the Sahara,
omitting the obvious objection that in most parts the Sahara is not red at all,
but is usually described as “dazzling white”—
The enormousness of it: that a whirlwind might have carried it, but that,
in that case it would be no supposititious, or doubtfully identified
whirlwind, but the greatest atmospheric cataclysm in the history of this
earth:
Jour. Roy. Met. Soc., 30-56:
That, up to the 27th of February, this fall had continued in Belgium,
Holland, Germany and Austria; that in some instances it was not sand, or
that almost all the matter was organic: that a vessel had reported the fall as
occurring in the Atlantic Ocean, midway between Southampton and the
Barbados. The calculation is given that, in England alone, 10,000,000 tons
of matter had fallen. It had fallen in Switzerland (Symons’ Met. Mag.,
March, 1903). It had fallen in Russia (Bull. Com. Geolog., 22-48). Not only
had a vast quantity of matter fallen several months before, in Australia, but
it was at this time falling in Australia (9ictorian Naturalist, June, 1903)—
enormously—red mud—fifty tons per square mile.
The Wessex explanation—
Or that every explanation is a Wessex explanation: by that I mean an
attempt to interpret the enormous in terms of the minute —but that nothing
can be finally explained, because by Truth we mean the Universal; and that
even if we could think as wide as Universality, that would not be requital toormous in terms of the minute —but that nothing
can be finally explained, because by Truth we mean the Universal; and that
even if we could think as wide as Universality, that would not be requital to

--- PAGE BREAK ---he minute —but that nothing
can be finally explained, because by Truth we mean the Universal; and that
even if we could think as wide as Universality, that would not be requital to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the cosmic quest—which is not for Truth, but for the local that is true—not
to universalize the local, but to localize the universal—or to give to a
cosmic cloud absolute interpretation in terms of the little dusty roads and
lanes of Wessex. I cannot conceive that this can be done: I think of high
approximation.
Our Intermediatist concept is that, because of the continuity of all
“things,” which are not separate, positive, or real things, all pseudo-things
partake of the underlying, or are only different expressions, degrees, or
aspects of the underlying: so then that a sample from somewhere in
anything must correspond with a sample from somewhere in anything else.
That, by due care in selection, and disregard for everything else, or the
scientific and theological method, the substance that fell, February, 1903,
could be identified with anything, or with some part or aspect of anything
that could be conceived of—
With sand from the Sahara, sand from a barrel of sugar, or dust of your
great-great-grandfather.
Different samples are described and listed in the Journal of the Royal
Meteorological Society, 30-57—or we’ll see whether my notion that a
chemist could have identified some one of these samples as from anywhere
conceivable, is extreme or not:
“Similar to brick dust,” in one place; “buff or light brown,” in
another place; “chocolate-colored and silky to the touch and slightly
iridescent”; “gray”; “red-rust color”; “reddish raindrops and gray sand”;
“dirty gray”; “quite red”; “yellow-brown, with a tinge of pink”; “deep
yellow-clay color.”
In Nature, it is described as of a peculiar yellowish cast in one place,
reddish somewhere else, and salmon-colored in another place.
Or there could be real science if there were really anything to be
scientific about.
Or the science of chemistry is like a science of sociology, prejudiced in
advance, because only to see is to see with a prejudice, setting out to
“prove” that all inhabitants of New York came from Africa.
Very easy matter. Samples from one part of town. Disregard for all the
rest.
There is no science but Wessex-science.
According to our acceptance, there should be no other, but that
approximation should be higher: that metaphysics is super-evil: that theegard for all the
rest.
There is no science but Wessex-science.
According to our acceptance, there should be no other, but that
approximation should be higher: that metaphysics is super-evil: that the

--- PAGE BREAK ---st.
There is no science but Wessex-science.
According to our acceptance, there should be no other, but that
approximation should be higher: that metaphysics is super-evil: that the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

scientific spirit is of the cosmic quest.
Our notion is that, in a real existence, such a quasi-system of fables as the
science of chemistry could not deceive for a moment: but that in an
“existence” endeavoring to become real, it represents that endeavor, and
will continue to impose its pseudo-positiveness until it be driven out by a
higher approximation to realness;
That the science of chemistry is as impositive as fortune-telling—
Or no—
That, though it represents a higher approximation to realness than does
alchemy, for instance, and so drove out alchemy, it is still only somewhere
between myth and positiveness.
The attempt at realness, or to state a real and unmodified fact here, is the
statement:
All red rains are colored by sands from the Sahara Desert.
My own impositivist acceptances are:
That some red rains are colored by sands from the Sahara Desert;
Some by sands from other terrestrial sources;
Some by sands from other worlds, or from their deserts—also from aerial
regions too indefinite or amorphous to be thought of as “worlds” or planets
—
That no supposititious whirlwind can account for the hundreds of
millions of tons of matter that fell upon Australia, Pacific Ocean and
Atlantic Ocean and Europe in 1902 and 1903—that a whirl-wind that could
do that would not be supposititious.
But now we shall cast off some of our own wessicality by accepting that
there have been falls of red substance other than sand.
We regard every science as an expression of the attempt to be real. But to
be real is to localize the universaI—or to make some one thing as wide as
all things—successful accomplishment of which I cannot conceive of. The
prime resistance to this endeavor is the refusal of the rest of the universe to
be damned, excluded, disregarded, to receive Christian Science treatment,
by something else so attempting. Although all phenomena are striving for
the Absolute—or have surrendered to and have incorporated themselves in
higher attempts, simply to be phenomenal, or to have seeming in
Intermediateness is to express relations.
A river.
It is water expressing the gravitational relation of different levels.themselves in
higher attempts, simply to be phenomenal, or to have seeming in
Intermediateness is to express relations.
A river.
It is water expressing the gravitational relation of different levels.

--- PAGE BREAK ---r attempts, simply to be phenomenal, or to have seeming in
Intermediateness is to express relations.
A river.
It is water expressing the gravitational relation of different levels.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The water of the river.
Expression of chemic relations of hydrogen and oxygen—which are not
final.
A city.
Manifestation of commercial and social relations.
How could a mountain be without base in a greater body"
Storekeeper live without customers"
The prime resistance to the positivist attempt by Science is its relations
with other phenomena, or that it only expresses those relations in the first
place. Or that a Science can have seeming, or survive in Intermediateness,
as something pure, isolated, positively different, no more than could a river
or a city or a mountain or a store.
This Intermediateness-wide attempt by parts to be wholes—which cannot
be realized in our quasi-state, if we accept that in it the co-existence of two
or more wholes or universals is impossible— high approximation to which,
however, may be thinkable—
Scientists and their dream of “pure science.”
Artists and their dream of “art for art’s sake.”
It is our notion that if they could almost realize, that would be almost
realness: that they would instantly be translated into real existence. Such
thinkers are good positivists, but they are evil in an economic and
sociologic sense, if, in that sense, nothing has justification for being, unless
it serve, or function for, or express the relations of, some higher aggregate.
So Science functions for and serves society at large, and would, from
society at large, receive no support, unless it did so divert itself or dissipate
and prostitute itself. It seems that by prostitution I mean usefulness.
There have been red rains that, in the middle ages, were called “rains of
blood.” Such rains terrified many persons, and were so unsettling to large
populations, that Science, in its sociologic relations, has sought, by Mrs.
Eddy’s method, to remove an evil—
That “rains of blood” do not exist;
That rains so called are only of water colored by sand from the Sahara
Desert.
My own acceptance is that such assurances, whether fictitious or not,
whether the Sahara is a “dazzling white” desert or not, have wrought such
good effects, in a sociologic sense, even though prosti-tutional in the
positivist sense, that, in the sociologie sense, they were well justified;s a “dazzling white” desert or not, have wrought such
good effects, in a sociologic sense, even though prosti-tutional in the
positivist sense, that, in the sociologie sense, they were well justified;

--- PAGE BREAK ---desert or not, have wrought such
good effects, in a sociologic sense, even though prosti-tutional in the
positivist sense, that, in the sociologie sense, they were well justified;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

But that we’ve gone on: that this is the twentieth century; that most of us
have grown up so that such soporifics of the past are no longer necessary:
That if gushes of blood should fall from the sky upon New York City,
business would go on as usual.
We began with rains that we accepted ourselves were, most likely, only
of sand. In my own still immature hereticalness—and by heresy, or
progress, I mean, very largely, a return, though with many modifications, to
the superstitions of the past, I think I feel considerable aloofness to the idea
of rains of blood. Just at present, it is my conservative, or timid purpose, to
express only that there have been red rains that very strongly suggest blood
or finely divided animal matter—
Dpbris from inter-planetary disasters.
Aerial battles.
Food-supplies from cargoes of super-vessels, wrecked in interplanetary
traffic.
There was a red rain in the Mediterranean region, March 6, 1888. Twelve
days later, it fell again. Whatever this substance may have been, when
burned, the odor of animal matter from it was strong and persistent.
(L’Astronomie, 1888-205.)
But—infinite heterogeneity—or dpbris from many different kinds of
aerial cargoes—there have been red rains that have been colored by neither
sand nor animal matter.
Annals of Philosophy, 16-226:
That, Nov. 2, 1819—week before the black rain and earthquake of
Canada—there fell, at Blankenberge, Holland, a red rain. As to sand, two
chemists of Bruges concentrated 144 ounces of the rain to 4 ounces—“no
precipitate fell.” But the color was so marked that had there been sand, it
would have been deposited, if the substance had been diluted instead of
concentrated. Experiments were made, and various reagents did cast
precipitates, but other than sand. The chemists concluded that the rain-water
contained muriate of cobalt—which is not very enlightening: that could be
said of many substances carried in vessels upon the Atlantic Ocean.
Whatever it may have been, in the Annales de Chimie, 2-12-432, its color is
said to have been red-violet. For various chemic reactions, see Quar. Jour.
Roy. Inst., 9-202, and Edin. Phil. Jour., 2-381.
Something that fell with dust said to have been meteoric, March 9, 10,
11, 1872: described in the Chemical News, 25-300, as a “peculiarsee Quar. Jour.
Roy. Inst., 9-202, and Edin. Phil. Jour., 2-381.
Something that fell with dust said to have been meteoric, March 9, 10,
11, 1872: described in the Chemical News, 25-300, as a “peculiar

--- PAGE BREAK ---Inst., 9-202, and Edin. Phil. Jour., 2-381.
Something that fell with dust said to have been meteoric, March 9, 10,
11, 1872: described in the Chemical News, 25-300, as a “peculiar

--- PAGE BREAK ---

substance,” consisted of red iron ocher, carbonate of lime, and organic
matter.
Orange-red hail, March 14, 1873, in Tuscany. (Notes and Queries 9-5-
16.)
Rain of lavender-colored substance, at Oudon, France, Dec. 19, 1903.
(Bull. Soc. Met. de France, 1904-124.)
La Nature, 1885-2-351:
That, according to Prof. Schwedoff, there fell, in Russia, June 14, 1880,
red hailstones, also blue hailstones, also gray hailstones.
Nature, 34-123:
A correspondent writes that he had been told by a resident of a small
town in Venezuela, that there, April 17, 1886, had fallen hailstones, some
red, some blue, some whitish: informant said to have been one unlikely ever
to have heard of the Russian phenomenon; described as an “honest, plain
countryman.”
Nature, July 5, 1877, quotes a Roman correspondent to the London Times
who sent a translation from an Italian newspaper: that a red rain had fallen
in Italy, June 23, 1877, containing “microscopically small particles of
sand.”
Or, according to our acceptance, any other story would have been an evil
thing, in the sociologic sense, in Italy, in 1877. But the English
correspondent, from a land where terrifying red rains are uncommon, does
not feel this necessity. He writes: “I am by no means satisfied that the rain
was of sand and water.” His observations are that drops of this rain left
stains “such as sandy water could not leave.” He notes that when the water
evaporated, no sand was left behind.
L’Année Scientifique, 1888-75:
That, Dec. 13, 1887, there fell, in Cochin China, a substance like blood,
somewhat coagulated.
Annales de Chimie, 85-266:
That a thick, viscous, red matter fell at Ulm, in 1812.
We now have a datum with a factor that has been foreshadowed; which
will recur and recur and recur throughout this book. It is a factor that makes
for speculation so revolutionary that it will have to be reinforced many
times before we can take it into full acceptance.
Year Book of Facts, 1861-273:
4uotation from a letter from Prof. Campini to Prof. Matteucci:so revolutionary that it will have to be reinforced many
times before we can take it into full acceptance.
Year Book of Facts, 1861-273:
4uotation from a letter from Prof. Campini to Prof. Matteucci:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That, upon Dec. 28, 1860, at about 7 A.M., in the northwestern part of
Siena, a reddish rain fell copiously for two hours.
A second red shower fell at 11 o’clock.
Three days later, the red rain fell again.
The next day another red rain fell.
Still more extraordinarily:
Each fall occurred in “exactly the same quarter of town.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---at 11 o’clock.
Three days later, the red rain fell again.
The next day another red rain fell.
Still more extraordinarily:
Each fall occurred in “exactly the same quarter of town.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
4
T is in the records of the French Academy that, upon March 17, 1669, in
the town of Chktillon-sur-Seine, fell a reddish substance that was “thick,
viscous, and putrid.”
American Journal of Science, 1-41-404:
Story of a highly unpleasant substance that had fallen from the sky, in
Wilson County, Tennessee. We read that Dr. Troost visited the place and
investigated. Later we’re going to investigate some investigations—but
never mind that now. Dr. Troost reported that the substance was clear blood
and portions of flesh scattered upon tobacco fields. He argued that a
whirlwind might have taken an animal up from one place, mauled it around,
and have precipitated its remains somewhere else.
But, in volume 44, page 216, of the Journal, there is an apology. The
whole matter is, upon newspaper authority, said to have been a hoax by
Negroes, who had pretended to have seen the shower, for the sake of
practicing upon the credulity of their masters: that they had scattered the
decaying flesh of a dead hog over the tobacco fields.
If we don’t accept this datum, at least we see the sociologically necessary
determination to have all falls accredited to earthly origins —even when
they’re falls that don’t fall.
Annual Register, 1821-687:
That, upon the 13th of August, 1819, something had fallen from the sky
at Amherst, Mass. It had been examined and described by Prof. Graves,
formerly lecturer at Dartmouth College. It was an object that had upon it a
nap, similar to that of milled cloth. Upon removing this nap, a buff-colored,
pulpy substance was found. It had an offensive odor, and, upon exposure to
the air, turned to a vivid red. This thing was said to have fallen with a
brilliant light.
Also see the Edinburgh Philosophical Journal, 5-295. In the Annales de
Chimie, 1821-67, M. Arago accepts the datum, and gives four instances of
similar objects or substances said to have fallen from the sky, two of whichgh Philosophical Journal, 5-295. In the Annales de
Chimie, 1821-67, M. Arago accepts the datum, and gives four instances of
similar objects or substances said to have fallen from the sky, two of which

--- PAGE BREAK ---rnal, 5-295. In the Annales de
Chimie, 1821-67, M. Arago accepts the datum, and gives four instances of
similar objects or substances said to have fallen from the sky, two of which

--- PAGE BREAK ---

we shall have with our data of gelatinous, or viscous matter, and two of
which I omit, because it seems to me that the dates given are too far back.
In the American Journal of Science, 1-2-335, is Professor Graves’
account, communicated by Professor Dewey:
That, upon the evening of August 13, 1819, a light was seen in Amherst
—a falling object—sound as if of an explosion.
In the home of Prof. Dewey, this light was reflected upon a wall of a
room in which were several members of Prof. Dewey’s family.
The next morning, in Prof. Dewey’s front yard, in what is said to have
been the only position from which the light that had been seen in the room,
the night before, could have been reflected, was found a substance “unlike
anything before observed by anyone who saw it.” It was a bowl-shaped
object, about 8 inches in diameter, and one inch thick. Bright buff-colored,
and having upon it a “fine nap.” Upon removing this covering, a buff-
colored, pulpy substance of the consistency of soft-soap, was found—“of an
offensive, suffocating smell.”
A few minutes of exposure to the air changed the buff color to “a livid
color resembling venous blood.” It absorbed moisture quickly from the air
and liquefied. For some of the chemic reactions, see the Journal.
There’s another lost quasi-soul of a datum that seems to me to belong
here:
London Times, April 19, 1836:
Fall of fish that had occurred in the neighborhood of Allahabad, India. It
is said that the fish were of the chalwa species, about a span in length and a
seer in weight—you know.
They were dead and dry.
Or they had been such a long time out of water that we can’t accept that
they had been scooped out of a pond, by a whirlwind— even though they
were so definitely identified as of a known local species—
Or they were not fish at all.
I incline, myself, to the acceptance that they were not fish, but slender,
fish-shaped objects of the same substance as that which fell at Amherst—it
is said that, whatever they were, they could not be eaten: that “in the pan,
they turned to blood.”
For details of this story see the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,
1834-307. May 16 or 17, 1834, is the date given in the Journal.could not be eaten: that “in the pan,
they turned to blood.”
For details of this story see the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,
1834-307. May 16 or 17, 1834, is the date given in the Journal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---that “in the pan,
they turned to blood.”
For details of this story see the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,
1834-307. May 16 or 17, 1834, is the date given in the Journal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the American Journal of Science, 1-25-362, occurs the inevitable
damnation of the Amherst object:
Prof. Edward Hitchcock went to live in Amherst. He says that years later,
another object, like the one said to have fallen in 1819, had been found at
“nearly the same place.” Prof. Hitchcock was invited by Prof. Graves to
examine it. Exactly like the first one. Corresponded in size and color and
consistency. The chemic reactions were the same.
Prof. Hitchcock recognized it in a moment.
It was a gelatinous fungus.
He did not satisfy himself as to just the exact species it belonged to, but
he predicted that similar fungi might spring up within twenty-four hours—
But, before evening, two others sprang up.
Or we’ve arrived at one of the oldest of the exclusionists’ conventions—
or nostoc. We shall have many data of gelatinous substance said to have
fallen from the sky: almost always the exclusionists argue that it was only
nostoc, an Alga, or, in some respects, a fungous growth. The rival
convention is “spawn of frogs or of fishes.” These two conventions have
made a strong combination. In instances where testimony was not
convincing that gelatinous matter had been seen to fall, it was said that the
gelatinous substance was nostoc, and had been upon the ground in the first
place: when the testimony was too good that it had fallen, it was said to be
spawn that had been carried from one place to another in a whirl-wind.
Now, I can’t say that nostoc is always greenish, any more than I can say
that blackbirds are always black, having seen a white one: we shall quote a
scientist who knew of flesh-colored nostoc, when so to know was
convenient. When we come to reported falls of gelatinous substances, I’d
like it to be noticed how often they are described as whitish or grayish. In
looking up the subject, myself, I have read only of greenish nostoc. Said to
be greenish, in Webster’s Dictionary—said to be “blue-green” in the New
International Encyclopedia—“from bright green to olive-green” (Science
Gossip, 10-114); “green” (Science Gossip, 7-260); “greenish” (Notes and
Queries, 1-11-219). It would seem acceptable that, if many reports of white
birds should occur, the birds are not blackbirds, even though there have
been white blackbirds. Or that, if often reported, grayish or whitish
gelatinous substance is not nostoc, and is not spawn if occurring in times
unseasonable for spawn.
“The Kentucky Phenomenon.”have
been white blackbirds. Or that, if often reported, grayish or whitish
gelatinous substance is not nostoc, and is not spawn if occurring in times
unseasonable for spawn.
“The Kentucky Phenomenon.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---kbirds. Or that, if often reported, grayish or whitish
gelatinous substance is not nostoc, and is not spawn if occurring in times
unseasonable for spawn.
“The Kentucky Phenomenon.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

So it was called, in its day, and now we have an occurrence that attracted
a great deal of attention in its own time. Usually these things of the
accursed have been hushed up or disregarded—suppressed like the seven
black rains of Slains—but, upon March 3, 1876, something occurred, in
Bath County, Kentucky, that brought many newspaper correspondents to the
scene.
The substance that looked like beef that fell from the sky.
Upon March 3, 1876, at Olympian Springs, Bath County, Kentucky,
flakes of a substance that looked like beef fell from the sky —“from a clear
sky.” We’d like to emphasize that it was said that nothing but this falling
substance was visible in the sky. It fell in flakes of various sizes; some two
inches square, one, three or four inches square. The flake-formation is
interesting: later we shall think of it as signifying pressure—somewhere. It
was a thick shower, on the ground, on trees, on fences, but it was narrowly
localized: or upon a strip of land about 100 yards long and about 50 yards
wide. For the first account, see the Scientific American, 34-197, and the
New York Times, March 10, 1876.
Then the exclusionists.
Something that looked like beef: one flake of it the size of a square
envelope.
If we think of how hard the exclusionists have fought to reject the
coming of ordinary-looking dust from this earth’s externality, we can
sympathize with them in this sensational instance, perhaps. Newspaper
correspondents wrote broadcast and witnesses were quoted, and this time
there is no mention of a hoax, and, except by one scientist, there is no
denial that the fall did take place.
It seems to me that the exclusionists are still more emphatically
conservators. It is not so much that they are inimical to all data of externally
derived substances that fall upon this earth, as that they are inimical to all
data discordant with a system that does not include such phenomena—
Or the spirit or hope or ambition of the cosmos, which we call attempted
positivism: not to find out the new; not to add to what is called knowledge,
but to systematize.
Scientific American Supplement, 2-426:
That the substance reported from Kentucky had been examined by
Leopold Brandeis.to find out the new; not to add to what is called knowledge,
but to systematize.
Scientific American Supplement, 2-426:
That the substance reported from Kentucky had been examined by
Leopold Brandeis.

--- PAGE BREAK ---not to add to what is called knowledge,
but to systematize.
Scientific American Supplement, 2-426:
That the substance reported from Kentucky had been examined by
Leopold Brandeis.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“At last we have a proper explanation of this much talked of
phenomenon.”
“It has been comparatively easy to identify the substance and to fix its
status. The Kentucky ‘wonder’ is no more or less than nostoc.”
Or that it had not fallen; that it had been upon the ground in the first
place, and had swollen in rain, and, attracting attention by greatly increased
volume, had been supposed by unscientific observers to have fallen in rain
—
What rain, I don’t know.
Also it is spoken of as “dried” several times. That’s one of the most
important of the details.
But the relief of outraged propriety, expressed in the Supplement, is
amusing to some of us, who, I fear, may be a little improper at times. Very
spirit of the Salvation Army, when some third-rate scientist comes out with
an explanation of the vermiform appendix or the os coccygis that would
have been acceptable to Moses. To give completeness to “the proper
explanation,” it is said that Mr. Brandeis had identified the substance as
“flesh-colored” nostoc.
Prof. Lawrence Smith, of Kentucky, one of the most resolute of the
exclusionists:
New York Times, March 12, 1876:
That the substance had been examined and analyzed by Prof. Smith,
according to whom it gave every indication of being the “dried” spawn of
some reptile, “doubtless of the frog”—or up from one place and down in
another. As to “dried,” that may refer to condition when Prof. Smith
received it.
In the Scientific American Supplement, 2-473, Dr. A. Mead Edwards,
President of the Newark Scientific Association, writes that, when he saw
Mr. Brandeis’ communication, his feeling was of conviction that propriety
had been re-established, or that the problem had been solved, as he
expresses it: knowing Mr. Brandeis well, he had called upon that upholder
of respectability, to see the substance that had been identified as nostoc. But
he had also called upon Dr. Hamilton, who had a specimen, and Dr.
Hamilton had declared it to be lung-tissue. Dr. Edwards writes of the
substance that had so completely, or beautifully—if beauty is completeness
—been identified as nostoc— “It turned out to be lung tissue also.” He
wrote to other persons who had specimens, and identified other specimensso completely, or beautifully—if beauty is completeness
—been identified as nostoc— “It turned out to be lung tissue also.” He
wrote to other persons who had specimens, and identified other specimens

--- PAGE BREAK ---eautifully—if beauty is completeness
—been identified as nostoc— “It turned out to be lung tissue also.” He
wrote to other persons who had specimens, and identified other specimens

--- PAGE BREAK ---

as masses of cartilage or muscular fibers. “As to whence it came, I have no
theory.” Nevertheless he endorses the local explanation— and a bizarre
thing it is:
A flock of gorged, heavy-weighted buzzards, but far up and invisible in
the clear sky—
They had disgorged.
Prof. Fassig lists the substance, in his “Bibliography,” as fish spawn.
McAtee (Monthly Weather Review, May, 1918) lists it as a jelly-like
material, supposed to have been the “dried” spawn either of fishes or of
some batrachian.
Or this is why, against the seemingly insuperable odds against all things
new, there can be what is called progress—
That nothing is positive, in the aspects of homogeneity and unity:
If the whole world should seem to combine against you, it is only unreal
combination, or intermediateness to unity and disunity. Every resistance is
itself divided into parts resisting one another. The simplest strategy seems to
be—never bother to fight a thing: set its own parts fighting one another.
We are merging away from carnal to gelatinous substance, and here there
is an abundance of instances or reports of instances. These data are so
improper they’re obscene to the science of today, but we shall see that
science, before it became so rigorous, was not so prudish. Chladni was not,
and Greg was not.
I shall have to accept, myself, that gelatinous substance has often fallen
from the sky—
Or that, far up, or far away, the whole sky is gelatinous"
That meteors tear through and detach fragments"
That fragments are brought down by storms"
That the twinkling of stars is penetration of light through something that
quivers"
I think, myself, that it would be absurd to say that the whole sky is
gelatinous: it seems more acceptable that only certain areas are.
Humboldt (Cosmos, 1-119) says that all our data in this respect must be
“classed amongst the mythical fables of mythology.” He is very sure, but
just a little redundant.
We shall be opposed by the standard resistances:
There in the first place;
Up from one place, in a whirlwind, and down in another.l fables of mythology.” He is very sure, but
just a little redundant.
We shall be opposed by the standard resistances:
There in the first place;
Up from one place, in a whirlwind, and down in another.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y.” He is very sure, but
just a little redundant.
We shall be opposed by the standard resistances:
There in the first place;
Up from one place, in a whirlwind, and down in another.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

We shall not bother to be very convincing one way or another, because of
the over-shadowing of the datum with which we shall end up. It will mean
that something had been in a stationary position for several days over a
small part of a small town in England: this is the revolutionary thing that we
have alluded to before; whether the substance were nostoc, or spawn, or
some kind of a larval nexus, doesn’t matter so much. If it stood in the sky
for several days, we rank with Moses as a chronicler of improprieties—or
was that story, or datum, we mean, told by Moses" Then we shall have so
many records of gelatinous substance said to have fallen with meteorites,
that, between the two phenomena, some of us will have to accept
connection—or that there are at least vast gelatinous areas aloft, and that
meteorites tear through, carrying down some of the substance.
Comptes Rendus, 3-554:
That, in 1836, M. Vallot, member of the French Academy, placed before
the Academy some fragments of a gelatinous substance, said to have fallen
from the sky, and asked that they be analyzed. There is no further allusion
to this subject.
Comptes Rendus, 23-542:
That, in Wilna, Lithuania, April 4, 1846, in a rainstorm, fell nut-sized
masses of a substance that is described as both resinous and gelatinous. It
was odorless until burned: then it spread a very pronounced sweetish odor.
It is described as like gelatine, but much firmer: but, having been in water
24 hours, it swelled out, and looked altogether gelatinous—
It was grayish.
We are told that, in 1841 and 1846, a similar substance had fallen in Asia
Minor.
In Notes and Queries, 8-6-190, it is said that, early in August, 1894,
thousands of jellyfish, about the size of a shilling, had fallen at Bath,
England. I think it is not acceptable that they were jellyfish: but it does look
as if this time frog spawn did fall from the sky, and may have been
translated by a whirlwind—because, at the same time, small frogs fell at
Wigan, England.
Nature, 87-10:
That, June 24, 1911, at Eton, Bucks, England, the ground was found
covered with masses of jelly, the size of peas, after a heavy rainfall. We are
not told of nostoc, this time: it is said that the object contained numerous
eggs of “some species of Chironomus, from which larvae soon emerged.”lly, the size of peas, after a heavy rainfall. We are
not told of nostoc, this time: it is said that the object contained numerous
eggs of “some species of Chironomus, from which larvae soon emerged.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---s, after a heavy rainfall. We are
not told of nostoc, this time: it is said that the object contained numerous
eggs of “some species of Chironomus, from which larvae soon emerged.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I incline, then, to think that the objects that fell at Bath were neither
jellyfish nor masses of frog spawn, but something of a larval kind—
This is what had occurred at Bath, England, 23 years before.
London Times, April 24, 1871:
That, upon the 22nd of April, 1871, a storm of glutinous drops neither
jellyfish nor masses of frog spawn, but something of a >line missing here in
original text. Ed.@
railroad station, at Bath. “Many soon developed into a worm like
chrysalis, about an inch in length.” The account of this occurrence in the
Zoologist, 2-6-2686, is more like the Eton-datum: of minute forms, said to
have been infusoria; not forms about an inch in length.
Trans. Ent. Soc. of London, 1871-proc. xxii:
That the phenomenon has been investigated by the Rev. L. Jenyns, of
Bath. His description is of minute worms in filmy envelopes. He tries to
account for their segregation. The mystery of it is: What could have brought
so many of them together" Many other falls we shall have record of, and in
most of them segregation is the great mystery. A whirlwind seems anything
but a segregative force. Segregation of things that have fallen from the sky
has been avoided as most deep-dyed of the damned. Mr. Jenyns conceives
of a large pool, in which were many of these spherical masses: of the pool
drying up and concentrating all in a small area; of a whirl-wind then
scooping all up together—
But several days later, more of these objects fell in the same place.
That such marksmanship is not attributable to whirlwinds seems to me to
be what we think we mean by common sense:
It may not look like common sense to say that these things had been
stationary over the town of Bath, several days—
The seven black rains of Slains;
The four red rains of Siena.
An interesting sidelight on the mechanics of orthodoxy is that Mr. Jenyns
dutifully records the second fall, but ignores it in his explanation.
R. P. Greg, one of the most notable of cataloguers of meteoritic
phenomena, records (Phil. Mag. 4-8-463) falls of viscid substance in the
years 1652, 1686, 1718, 1796, 1811, 1819, 1844. He gives earlier dates, but
I practice exclusions, myself. In the Report of the British Association, 1860-
63, Greg records a meteor that seemed to pass near the ground, between796, 1811, 1819, 1844. He gives earlier dates, but
I practice exclusions, myself. In the Report of the British Association, 1860-
63, Greg records a meteor that seemed to pass near the ground, between

--- PAGE BREAK ---4. He gives earlier dates, but
I practice exclusions, myself. In the Report of the British Association, 1860-
63, Greg records a meteor that seemed to pass near the ground, between

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Barsdorf and Freiburg, Germany: the next day a jelly-like mass was found
in the snow—
Unseasonableness for either spawn or nostoc.
Greg’s comment in this instance is: “Curious if true.” But he records
without modification the fall of a meteorite at Gotha, Germany, Sept. 6,
1835, “leaving a jelly-like mass on the ground.” We are told that this
substance fell only three feet away from an observer. In the Report of the
British Association, 1855-94, according to a letter from Greg to Prof.
Baden-Powell, at night, Oct. 8, 1844, near Coblenz, a German, who was
known to Greg, and another person saw a luminous body fall close to them.
They returned next morning and found a gelatinous mass of grayish color.
According to Chladni’s account (Annals of Philosophy, n.s., 12-94) a
viscous mass fell with a luminous meteorite between Siena and Rome, May,
1652; viscous matter found after the fall of a fire ball, in Lusatia, March,
1796; fall of a gelatinous substance, after the explosion of a meteorite, near
Heidelberg, July, 1811. In the Edinburgh Philosophical Journal, 1-234, the
substance that fell at Lusatia is said to have been of the “color and odor of
dried, brown varnish.” In the Amer. Jour. Sci., 1-26-133, it is said that
gelatinous matter fell with a globe of fire, upon the island of Lethy, India,
1718.
In the Amer. Jour. Sci., 1-26-396, in many observations upon the meteors
of November, 1833, are reports of falls of gelatinous substance:
That, according to newspaper reports, “lumps of jelly” were found on the
ground at Rahway, N. J. The substance was whitish, or resembled the
coagulated white of an egg;
That Mr. H. H. Garland, of Nelson County, Virginia, had found a jelly-
like substance of about the circumference of a twenty-five-cent piece;
That, according to a communication from A. C. Twining to Prof.
Olmstead, a woman at West Point, N. Y., had seen a mass the size of a
teacup. It looked like boiled starch;
That, according to a newspaper, of Newark, N. J., a mass of gelatinous
substance, like soft soap, had been found. “It possessed little elasticity, and,
on the application of heat, it evaporated as readily as water.”
It seems incredible that a scientist would have such hardihood, or
infidelity, as to accept that these things had fallen from the sky:
nevertheless, Prof. Olmstead, who collected these lost souls, says:seems incredible that a scientist would have such hardihood, or
infidelity, as to accept that these things had fallen from the sky:
nevertheless, Prof. Olmstead, who collected these lost souls, says:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“The fact that the supposed deposits were so uniformly described as
gelatinous substance forms a presumption in favor of the supposition that
they had the origin ascribed to them.”
In contemporaneous scientific publications considerable attention was
given to Prof. Olmstead’s series of papers upon this subject of the
November meteors. You will not find one mention of the part that treats of
gelatinous matter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---able attention was
given to Prof. Olmstead’s series of papers upon this subject of the
November meteors. You will not find one mention of the part that treats of
gelatinous matter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
5
SHALL attempt not much of correlation of dates. A mathematic-minded
positivist, with his delusion that in an intermediate state twice two are
four, whereas, if we accept Continuity, we cannot accept that there are
anywhere two things to start with, would search our data for periodicities. It
is so obvious to me that the mathematic, or the regular, is the attribute of the
Universal, that I have not much inclination to look for it in the local. Still,
in this solar system, “as a whole,” there is considerable approximation to
regularity; or the mathematic is so nearly localized that eclipses, for
instance, can, with rather high approximation, be foretold, though I have
notes that would deflate a little the astronomers’ vainglory in this respect—
or would if that were possible. An astronomer is poorly paid, uncheered by
crowds, considerably isolated: he lives upon his own inflations: deflate a
bear and it couldn’t hibernate. This solar system is like every other
phenomenon that can be regarded “as a whole”—or the affairs of a ward are
interfered with by the affairs of the city of which it is a part; city by county;
county by state; state by nation; nation by other nations; all nations by
climatic conditions; climatic conditions by solar circumstances; sun by
general planetary circumstances; solar system “as a whole” by other solar
systems—so the hopelessness of finding the phenomena of entirety in the
ward of a city. But positivists are those who try to find the unrelated in the
ward of a city. In our acceptance this is the spirit of cosmic religion.
Objectively the state is not realizable in the ward of a city. But, if a
positivist could bring himself to absolute belief that he had found it, that
would be a subjective realization of that which is unrealizable objectively.
Of course we do not draw a positive line between the objective and the
subjective—or that all phenomena called things or persons are subjective
within one all-inclusive nexus, and that thoughts within those that are
commonly called “persons” are sub-subjective. It is rather as if
Intermediateness strove for Regularity in this solar system and failed: then
generated the mentality of astronomers, and, in that secondary expression,
strove for conviction that failure had been success.rmediateness strove for Regularity in this solar system and failed: then
generated the mentality of astronomers, and, in that secondary expression,
strove for conviction that failure had been success.

--- PAGE BREAK ---for Regularity in this solar system and failed: then
generated the mentality of astronomers, and, in that secondary expression,
strove for conviction that failure had been success.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I have tabulated all the data of this book, and a great deal besides—card
system—and several proximities, thus emphasized, have been revelations to
me: nevertheless, it is only the method of theologians and scientists—worst
of all, of statisticians.
For instance, by the statistic method, I could “prove” that a black rain has
fallen “regularly” every seven months, somewhere upon this earth. To do
this, I’d have to include red rains and yellow rains, but, conventionally, I’d
pick out the black particles in red substances and in yellow substances, and
disregard the rest. Then, too, if here and there a black rain should be a week
early or a month late—that would be “acceleration” or “retardation.” This is
supposed to be legitimate in working out the periodicities of comets. If
black rains, or red or yellow rains with black particles in them, should not
appear at all near some dates—we have not read Darwin in vain—“the
records are not complete.” As to other, interfering black rains, they’d be
either gray or brown, or for them we’d find other periodicities.
Still, I have had to notice the year 1819, for instance. I shall not note
them all in this book, but I have records of 31 extraordinary events in 1883.
Someone should write a book upon the phenomena of this one year—that
is, if books should be written. 1849 is notable for extraordinary falls, so far
apart that a local explanation seems inadequate—not only the black rain of
Ireland, May, 1849, but a red rain in Sicily and a red rain in Wales. Also, it
is said (Timb’s Year Book, 1850-241) that, upon April 18 or 20, 1849,
shepherds near Mt. Ararat, found a substance that was not indigenous, upon
areas measuring 8 to 10 miles in circumference. Presumably it had fallen
there.
We have already gone into the subject of Science and its attempted
positiveness, and its resistances in that it must have relations of service. It is
very easy to see that most of the theoretic science of the 19th century was
only a relation of reaction against theologic dogma, and has no more to do
with Truth than has a wave that bounds back from a shore. Or, if a shop girl,
or you or I, should pull out a piece of chewing gum about a yard long, that
would be quite as scientific a performance as was the stretching of this
earth’s age several hundred millions of years.
All “things” are not things, but only relations, or expressions of relations:
but all relations are striving to be the unrelated, or have surrendered to, and
subordinated to, higher attempts. So there is a positivist aspect to this
reaction that is itself only a relation, and that is the attempt to assimilate allthe unrelated, or have surrendered to, and
subordinated to, higher attempts. So there is a positivist aspect to this
reaction that is itself only a relation, and that is the attempt to assimilate all

--- PAGE BREAK ---ave surrendered to, and
subordinated to, higher attempts. So there is a positivist aspect to this
reaction that is itself only a relation, and that is the attempt to assimilate all

--- PAGE BREAK ---

phenomena under the materialist explanation, or to formulate a final, all-
inclusive system, upon the materialist basis. If this attempt could be
realized, that would be the attaining of realness; but this attempt can be
made only by disregarding psychic phenomena, for instance—or, if science
shall eventually give in to the psychic, it would be no more legitimate to
explain the immaterial in terms of the material than to explain the material
in terms of the immaterial. Our own acceptance is that material and
immaterial are of a oneness, merging, for instance, in a thought that is
continuous with a physical action: that oneness cannot be explained,
because the process of explaining is the interpreting of something in terms
of something else. All explanation is assimilation of something in terms of
something else that has been taken as a basis: but, in Continuity, there is
nothing that is any more basic than anything else—unless we think that
delusion built upon delusion is less real than its pseudo-foundation.
In 1829 (Timb’s Year Book, 1848-235) in Persia fell a substance that the
people said they had never seen before. As to what it was, they had not a
notion, but they saw that the sheep ate it. They ground it into flour and
made bread, said to have been passable enough, though insipid.
That was a chance that science did not neglect. Manna was placed upon a
reasonable basis, or was assimilated and reconciled with the system that had
ousted the older—and less nearly real—system. It was said that, likely
enough, manna had fallen in ancient times— because it was still falling—
but that there was no tutelary influence behind it—that it was a lichen from
the steppes of Asia Minor— “up from one place in a whirlwind and down in
another place.” In the American Almanac, 1833-71, it is said that this
substance— “unknown to the inhabitants of the region”—was “immediately
recognized” by scientists who examined it: and that “the chemical analysis
also identified it as a lichen.”
This was back in the days when Chemical Analysis was a god. Since then
his devotees have been shocked and disillusioned. Just how a chemical
analysis could so botanize, I don’t know—but it was Chemical Analysis
who spoke, and spoke dogmatically. It seems to me that the ignorance of
inhabitants, contrasting with the local knowledge of foreign scientists, is
overdone: if there’s anything good to eat, within any distance conveniently
covered by a whirlwind— inhabitants know it. I have data of other falls, in
Persia and Asiatic Turkey, of edible substances. They are all dogmatically
said to be “manna”; and “manna” is dogmatically said to be a species of— inhabitants know it. I have data of other falls, in
Persia and Asiatic Turkey, of edible substances. They are all dogmatically
said to be “manna”; and “manna” is dogmatically said to be a species of

--- PAGE BREAK ---t. I have data of other falls, in
Persia and Asiatic Turkey, of edible substances. They are all dogmatically
said to be “manna”; and “manna” is dogmatically said to be a species of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lichens from the steppes of Asia Minor. The position that I take is that this
explanation was evolved in ignorance of the fall of vegetable substances, or
edible substances, in other parts of the world: that it is the familiar attempt
to explain the general in terms of the local; that, if we shall have data of
falls of vegetable substance, in, say, Canada or India, they were not of
lichens from the steppes of Asia Minor; that, though all falls in Asiatic
Turkey and Persia are sweepingly and conveniently called showers of
“manna,” they have not been even all of the same substance. In one instance
the particles are said to have been “seeds.” Though, in Comptes Rendus, the
substance that fell in 1841 and 1846 is said to have been gelatinous, in the
Bull. Sci. Nat. de Neuchatel, it is said to have been of something, in lumps
the size of a filbert, that had been ground into flour; that of this flour had
been made bread, very attractive looking, but flavorless.
The great difficulty is to explain segregation in these showers—
But deep-sea fishes and occasional falls, down to them, of edible
substances; bags of grain, barrels of sugar; things that had not been whirled
up from one part of the ocean-bottom, in storms or submarine disturbances,
and dropped somewhere else—
I suppose one thinks—but grain in bags never has fallen—
Object of Amherst—its covering like “milled cloth”—
Or barrels of corn lost from a vessel would not sink—but a host of them
clashing together, after a wreck—they burst open; the corn sinks, or does
when saturated; the barrel staves float longer—
If there be not an overhead traffic in commodities similar to our own
commodities carried over this earth’s oceans—I’m not the deep sea fish I
think I am.
I have no data other than the mere suggestion of the Amherst object of
bags or barrels, but my notion is that bags and barrels from a wreck on one
of this earth’s oceans, would, by the time they reached the bottom, no
longer be recognizable as bags or barrels; that, if we can have data of the
fall of fibrous material that may have been cloth or paper or wood, we shall
be satisfactory and grotesque enough.
Proc. Roy. Irish Acad., 1-379:
“In the year 1686, some workmen, who had been fetching water from a
pond, seven German miles from Memel, on returning to their work after
dinner (during which there had been a snow-storm) found the flat groundear 1686, some workmen, who had been fetching water from a
pond, seven German miles from Memel, on returning to their work after
dinner (during which there had been a snow-storm) found the flat ground

--- PAGE BREAK ---en, who had been fetching water from a
pond, seven German miles from Memel, on returning to their work after
dinner (during which there had been a snow-storm) found the flat ground

--- PAGE BREAK ---

around the pond covered with a coal-black, leafy mass; and a person who
lived near said he had seen it fall like flakes with the snow.”
Some of these flake-like formations were as large as a table-top.
“The mass was damp and smelt disagreeably, like rotten seaweed, but,
when dried, the smell went off.”
“It tore fibrously, like paper.”
Classic explanation:
“Up from one place, and down in another.”
But what went up, from one place, in a whirlwind" Of course, our
Intermediatist acceptance is that had this been the strangest substance
conceivable, from the strangest other world that could be thought of;
somewhere upon this earth there must be a substance similar to it, or from
which it would, at least subjectively, or according to description, not be
easily distinguishable. Or that everything in New York City is only another
degree or aspect of something, or combination of things, in a village of
Central Africa. The novel is a challenge to vulgarization: write something
that looks new to you: someone will point out that the thrice-accursed
Greeks said it long ago. Existence is Appetite: the gnaw of being; the one
attempt of all things to assimilate all other things, if they have not
surrendered and submitted to some higher attempt. It was cosmic that these
scientists, who had surrendered to and submitted to the Scientific System,
should, consistently with the principles of that system, attempt to assimilate
the substance that fell at Memel with some known terrestrial product. At the
meeting of the Royal Irish Academy it was brought out that there is a
substance, of rather rare occurrence, that has been known to form in thin
sheets upon marsh land.
It looks like greenish felt.
The substance of Memel:
Damp, coal-black, leafy mass.
But, if broken up, the marsh-substance is flake-like, and it tears fibrously.
An elephant can be identified as a sunflower—both have long stems. A
camel is indistinguishable from a peanut—if only their humps be
considered.
Trouble with this book is that we’ll end up a lot of intellectual roups:
we’ll be incapable of being astonished with anything. We knew, to start
with, that science and imbecility are continuous; nevertheless so many
expressions of the merging-point are at first startling. We did think thate of being astonished with anything. We knew, to start
with, that science and imbecility are continuous; nevertheless so many
expressions of the merging-point are at first startling. We did think that

--- PAGE BREAK ---d with anything. We knew, to start
with, that science and imbecility are continuous; nevertheless so many
expressions of the merging-point are at first startling. We did think that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Prof. Hitchcock’s performance in identifying the Amherst phenomenon as a
fungus was rather notable as scientific vaudeville, if we acquit him of the
charge of seriousness—or that, in a place where fungi were so common
that, before a given evening two of them sprang up, only he, a stranger in
this very fungiferous place, knew a fungus when he saw something like a
fungus—if we disregard its quick liquefaction, for instance. It was only a
monologue, however: now we have an all-star cast: and they’re not only
Irish; they’re royal Irish.
The royal Irishmen excluded “coal-blackness” and included fibrousness:
so then that this substance was “marsh paper,” which “had been raised into
the air by storms of wind, and had again fallen.”
Second act:
It was said that, according to M. Ehrenberg, “the meteor-paper was found
to consist partly of vegetable matter, chiefly of coniferva°.”
Third act:
Meeting of the royal Irishmen: chairs, tables, Irishmen:
Some flakes of marsh-paper were exhibited.
Their composition was chiefly of coniferva°.
This was a double inclusion: or it’s the method of agreement that
logicians make so much of. So no logician would be satisfied with
identifying a peanut as a camel, because both have humps: he demands
accessory agreement—that both can live a long time without water, for
instance.
Now, it’s not so very unreasonable, at least to the free and easy
vaudeville standards that, throughout this book, we are considering, to think
that a green substance could be snatched up from one place in a whirlwind,
and fall as a black substance somewhere else: but the royal Irishmen
excluded something else, and it is a datum that was as accessible to them as
it is to me:
That, according to Chladni, this was no little, local deposition that was
seen to occur by some indefinite person living near a pond somewhere.
It was a tremendous fall from a vast sky-area.
Likely enough all the marsh paper in the world could not have supplied
it.
At the same time, this substance was falling “in great quantities,” in
Norway and Pomerania. Or see Kirkwood, Meteoric Astronomy, p. 66:gh all the marsh paper in the world could not have supplied
it.
At the same time, this substance was falling “in great quantities,” in
Norway and Pomerania. Or see Kirkwood, Meteoric Astronomy, p. 66:

--- PAGE BREAK ---er in the world could not have supplied
it.
At the same time, this substance was falling “in great quantities,” in
Norway and Pomerania. Or see Kirkwood, Meteoric Astronomy, p. 66:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Substance like charred paper fell in Norway and other parts of northern
Europe,. Jan. 31, 1686.”
Or a whirlwind, with a distribution as wide as that, would not acceptably,
I should say, have so specialized in the rare substance called “marsh paper.”
There’d have been falls of fence rails, roofs of houses, parts of trees.
Nothing is said of the occurrence of a tornado in northern Europe, in
January, 1686. There is record only of this one substance having fallen in
various places.
Time went on, but the conventional determination to exclude data of all
falls to this earth, except of substances of this earth, and of ordinary
meteoric matter, strengthened.
Annals of Philosophy, 16-68:
The substance that fell in January, 1686, is described as “a mass of black
leaves, having the appearance of burnt paper, but harder, and cohering, and
brittle.”
“Marsh paper” is not mentioned, and there is nothing said of the
“coniferva°,” which seemed so convincing to the royal Irishmen. Vegetable
composition is disregarded, quite as it might be by someone who might find
it convenient to identify a crook-necked squash as a big fishhook.
Meteorites are usually covered with a black crust, more or less scale-like.
The substance of 1686 is black and scale-like. If so be convenience, “leaf-
likeness” is “scale-likeness.” In this attempt to assimilate with the
conventional, we are told that the substance is a mineral mass: that it is like
the black scales that cover meteorites.
The scientist who made this “identification” was Von Grotthus. He had
appealed to the god Chemical Analysis. Or the power and glory of mankind
—with which we’re not always so impressed—but the gods must tell us
what we want them to tell us. We see again that, though nothing has identity
of its own, anything can be “identified” as anything. Or there’s nothing
that’s not reasonable, if one snoopeth not into its exclusions. But here the
conflict did not end. Berzelius examined the substance. He could not find
nickel in it. At that time, the presence of nickel was the “positive” test of
meteoritic matter. Whereupon, with a supposititious “positive” standard of
judgment against him, Von Grotthus revoked his “identification.” (Annals
and Mag. of Nat. Hist., 1-3-185.)
This equalization of eminences permits us to project with our own
expression, which, otherwise, would be subdued into invisibility:oked his “identification.” (Annals
and Mag. of Nat. Hist., 1-3-185.)
This equalization of eminences permits us to project with our own
expression, which, otherwise, would be subdued into invisibility:

--- PAGE BREAK ---tion.” (Annals
and Mag. of Nat. Hist., 1-3-185.)
This equalization of eminences permits us to project with our own
expression, which, otherwise, would be subdued into invisibility:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That it’s too bad that no one ever looked to see—hieroglyphics "—
something written upon these sheets of paper"
If we have no very great variety of substances that have fallen to this
earth; if, upon this earth’s surface there is infinite variety of substances
detachable by whirlwinds, two falls of such a rare substance as marsh paper
would be remarkable.
A writer in the Edinburgh Review, 87-194, says that, at the time of
writing, he had before him a portion of a sheet of 200 square feet, of a
substance that had fallen at Carolath, Silesia, in 1839— exactly similar to
cotton-felt, of which clothing might have been made. The god Microscopic
Examination had spoken. The substance consisted chiefly of coniferva°.
Jour. Asiatic Soc. of Bengal, 1847-pt. I-193:
That March 16, 1846—about the time of a fall of edible substance in Asia
Minor—an olive-gray powder fell at Shanghai. Under the microscope, it
was seen to be an aggregation of hairs of two kinds, black ones and rather
thick white ones. They were supposed to be mineral fibers, but, when
burned, they gave out “the common ammoniacal smell and smoke of burnt
hair or feathers.” The writer described the phenomenon as “a cloud of 3800
square miles of fibers, alkali, and sand.” In a postscript, he says that other
investigators, with more powerful microscopes, gave opinion that the fibers
were not hairs; that the substance consisted chiefly of coniferva°.
Or the pathos of it, perhaps; or the dull and uninspired, but courageous
persistence of the scientific: everything seemingly found out is doomed to
be subverted—by more powerful microscopes and telescopes; by more
refined, precise, searching means and methods— the new pronouncements
irrepressibly bobbing up; their reception always as Truth at last; always the
illusion of the final; very little of the Intermediatist spirit—
That the new that has displaced the old will itself some day be displaced;
that it, too, will be recognized as myth-stuff—
But that if phantoms climb, spooks of ladders are good enough for them.
Annual Register, 1821-681:
That, according to a report by M. Laine, French Consul at Pernambuco,
early in October, 1821, there was a shower of a substance resembling silk.
The quantity was as tremendous as might be a whole cargo, lost somewhere
between Jupiter and Mars, having drifted around perhaps for centuries, the
original fabrics slowly disintegrating. In Annales de Chimie, 2-15-427, it is
said that samples of this substance were sent to France by M. Laine, andhaving drifted around perhaps for centuries, the
original fabrics slowly disintegrating. In Annales de Chimie, 2-15-427, it is
said that samples of this substance were sent to France by M. Laine, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd perhaps for centuries, the
original fabrics slowly disintegrating. In Annales de Chimie, 2-15-427, it is
said that samples of this substance were sent to France by M. Laine, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that they proved to have some resemblances to silky filaments which, at
certain times of the year, are carried by the wind near Paris.
In the Annals of Philosophy, n.s., 12-93, there is mention of a fibrous
substance like blue silk that fell near Naumberg, March 23, 1665.
According to Chladni (Annales de Chimie, 2-31-264), the quantity was
great. He places a question mark before the date.
One of the advantages of Intermediatism is that, in the oneness of
quasiness, there can be no mixed metaphors. Whatever is acceptable of
anything, is, in some degree or aspect, acceptable of everything. So it is
quite proper to speak, for instance, of something that is as firm as a rock
and that sails in a majestic march. The Irish are good monists: they have of
course been laughed at for their keener perceptions. So it’s a book we’re
writing, or it’s a procession, or it’s a museum, with the Chamber of Horrors
rather over-emphasized. A rather horrible correlation occurs in the Scientific
American, 1859-178. What interests us is that a correspondent saw a silky
substance fall from the sky—there was an aurora borealis at the time—he
attributes the substance to the aurora.
Since the time of Darwin, the classic explanation has been that all silky
substances that fall from the sky are spider webs. In 1832, aboard the
Beagle, at the mouth of La Plata River, 60 miles from land, Darwin saw an
enormous number of spiders, of the kind usually known as “gossamer”
spiders, little aeronauts that cast out filaments by which the wind carries
them.
It’s difficult to express that silky substances that have fallen to this earth
were not spider webs. My own acceptance is that spider webs are the
merger; that there have been falls of an externally derived silky substance,
and also of the webs, or strands, rather, of aeronautic spiders indigenous to
this earth; that in some instances it is impossible to distinguish one from the
other. Of course, our expression upon silky substances will merge away into
expressions upon other seeming textile substances, and I don’t know how
much better off we’ll be—
Except that, if fabricable materials have fallen from the sky—
Simply to establish acceptance of that may be doing well enough in this
book of first and tentative explorations.
In All the Year Round, 8-254, is described a fall that took place in
England, Sept. 21, 1741, in the towns of Bradly, Selborne, and Alresford,
and in a triangular space included by these three towns. The substance isRound, 8-254, is described a fall that took place in
England, Sept. 21, 1741, in the towns of Bradly, Selborne, and Alresford,
and in a triangular space included by these three towns. The substance is

--- PAGE BREAK ---cribed a fall that took place in
England, Sept. 21, 1741, in the towns of Bradly, Selborne, and Alresford,
and in a triangular space included by these three towns. The substance is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

described as “cobwebs”—but it fell in flake-formation, or in “flakes or rags
about one inch broad and five or six inches long.” Also these flakes were of
a relatively heavy substance—“they fell with some velocity.” The quantity
was great—the shortest side of the triangular space is eight miles long. In
the Wernerian Nat Hist. Soc. Trans., 5-386, it is said that there were two
falls—that they were some hours apart—a datum that is becoming familiar
to us— a datum that cannot be taken into the fold, unless we find it repeated
over and over and over again. It is said that the second fall lasted from nine
o’clock in the morning until night.
Now the hypnosis of the classic—that what we call intelligence is only
an expression of inequilibrium; that when mental adjustments are made,
intelligence ceases—or, of course, that intelligence is the confession of
ignorance. If you have intelligence upon any subject, that is something
you’re still learning—if we agree that that which is learned is always
mechanically done—in quasi-terms, of course, because nothing is ever
finally learned.
It was decided that this substance was spiders’ web. That was adjustment.
But it’s not adjustment to me; so I’m afraid I shall have some intelligence in
this matter. If I ever arrive at adjustment upon this subject, then, upon this
subject, I shall be able to have no thoughts, except routine-thoughts. I
haven’t yet quite decided absolutely everything, so I am able to point out:
That this substance was of quantity so enormous that it attracted wide
attention when it came down—
That it would have been equally noteworthy when it went up—
That there is no record of anyone, in England or elsewhere, having seen
tons of “spider webs” going up, September, 1741.
Further confession of intelligence upon my part:
That, if it be contested, then, that the place of origin may have been far
away, but still terrestrial—
Then it’s that other familiar matter of incredible “marksmanship” again—
hitting a small, triangular space for hours—interval of hours —then from
nine in the morning until night: same small triangular space.
These are the disregards of the classic explanation. There is no mention
of spiders having been seen to fall, but a good inclusion is that, though this
substance fell in good-sized flakes of considerable weight, it was viscous.
In this respect it was like cobwebs: dogs nosing it on grass, were
blindfolded with it. This circumstance does strongly suggest cobwebs—ll in good-sized flakes of considerable weight, it was viscous.
In this respect it was like cobwebs: dogs nosing it on grass, were
blindfolded with it. This circumstance does strongly suggest cobwebs—

--- PAGE BREAK ---kes of considerable weight, it was viscous.
In this respect it was like cobwebs: dogs nosing it on grass, were
blindfolded with it. This circumstance does strongly suggest cobwebs—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Unless we can accept that, in regions aloft, there are vast viscous or
gelatinous areas, and that things passing through become daubed. Or
perhaps we clear up the confusion in the descriptions of the substance that
fell in 1841 and 1846, in Asia Minor, described in one publication as
gelatinous, and in another as a cereal—that it was a cereal that had passed
through a gelatinous region. That the paper-like substance of Memel may
have had such an experience may be indicated in that Ehrenberg found in it
gelatinous matter, which he called “nostoc.” (Annals and Mag. of Nat. Hist.,
1-3-185.)
Scientific American, 45-337:
Fall of a substance described as “cobwebs,” latter part of October, 1881,
in Milwaukee, Wis., and other towns: other towns mentioned are Green
Bay, Vesburge, Fort Howard, Sheboygan, and Ozaukee. The aeronautic
spiders are known as “gossamer” spiders, because of the extreme lightness
of the filaments that they cast out to the wind. Of the substance that fell in
Wisconsin, it is said:
“In all instances the webs were strong in texture and very white.”
The Editor says:
“Curiously enough, there is no mention in any of the reports that we have
seen, of the presence of spiders.”
So our attempt to divorce a possible external product from its terrestrial
merger: then our joy of the prospector who thinks he’s found something:
The Monthly Weather Review, 26-566, quotes the Montgomery (Ala.)
Advertiser
That, upon Nov. 21, 1898, numerous batches of spider-web-like
substance fell in Montgomery, in strands and in occasional masses several
inches long and several inches broad. According to the writer, it was not
spiders’ web, but something like asbestos; also that it was phosphorescent.
The Editor of the Review says that he sees no reason for doubting that
these masses were cobwebs.
La Nature, 1883-342:
A correspondent writes that he sends a sample of a substance said to have
fallen at Montussan (Gironde), Oct. 16, 1883. According to a witness,
quoted by the correspondent, a thick cloud, accompanied by rain and a
violent wind, had appeared. This cloud was composed of a woolly
substance in lumps the size of a fist, which fell to the ground. The Editor
(Tissandier) says of this substance that it was white, but was something thatappeared. This cloud was composed of a woolly
substance in lumps the size of a fist, which fell to the ground. The Editor
(Tissandier) says of this substance that it was white, but was something that

--- PAGE BREAK ---d was composed of a woolly
substance in lumps the size of a fist, which fell to the ground. The Editor
(Tissandier) says of this substance that it was white, but was something that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

had been burned. It was fibrous. M. Tissandier astonishes us by saying that
he cannot identify this substance. We thought that anything could be
“identified” as anything. He can say only that the cloud in question must
have been an extraordinary conglomeration.
Annual Register, 1832-447:
That, March, 1832, there fell, in the fields of Kourianof, Russia, a
combustible yellowish substance, covering, at least two inches thick, an
area of 600 or 700 square feet. It was resinous and yellowish: so one
inclines to the conventional explanation that it was pollen from pine trees—
but, when torn, it had the tenacity of cotton. When placed in water, it had
the consistency of resin. “This resin had the color of amber, was elastic, like
India rubber, and smelled like prepared oil mixed with wax.”
So in general our notion of cargoes—and our notion of cargoes of food
supplies:
In Philosophical Transactions, 19-224, is an extract from a letter by Mr.
Robert Vans, of Kilkenny, Ireland, dated Nov. 15, 1695: that there had been
“of late,” in the counties of Limerick and Tipperary, showers of a sort of
matter like butter or grease . . . having “a very stinking smell.”
There follows an extract from a letter by the Bishop of Cloyne, upon “a
very odd phenomenon,” which was observed in Munster and Leinster: that
for a good part of the spring of 1695 there fell a substance which the
country people called “butter”—“soft, clammy, and of a dark yellow”—that
cattle fed “indifferently” in fields where this substance lay.
“It fell in lumps as big as the end of one’s finger.” It had a “strong ill
scent.” His Grace calls it a “stinking dew.”
In Mr. Vans’ letter, it is said that the “butter” was supposed to have
medicinal properties, and “was gathered in pots and other vessels by some
of the inhabitants of this place.”
And:
In all the following volumes of Philosophical Transactions there is no
speculation upon this extraordinary subject. Ostracism. The fate of this
datum is a good instance of damnation, not by denial, and not by explaining
away, but by simple disregard. The fall is listed by Chladni, and is
mentioned in other catalogues, but, from the absence of all inquiry, and of
all but formal mention, we see that it has been under excommunication as
much as was ever anything by the preceding system. The datum has been
buried alive. It is as irreconcilable with the modern system of dogmas asention, we see that it has been under excommunication as
much as was ever anything by the preceding system. The datum has been
buried alive. It is as irreconcilable with the modern system of dogmas as

--- PAGE BREAK ---it has been under excommunication as
much as was ever anything by the preceding system. The datum has been
buried alive. It is as irreconcilable with the modern system of dogmas as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ever were geologic strata and vermiform appendix with the preceding
system—
If, intermittently, or “for a good part of the spring,” this substance fell in
two Irish provinces, and nowhere else, we have, stronger than before, a
sense of a stationary region overhead, or a region that receives products like
this earth’s products, but from external sources, a region in which this
earth’s gravitational and meteorological forces are relatively inert—if for
many weeks a good part of this substance did hover before finally falling.
We suppose that, in 1685, Mr. Vans and the Bishop of Cloyne could
describe what they saw as well as could witnesses in 1885: nevertheless, it
is going far back; we shall have to have many modern instances before we
can accept.
As to other falls, or another fall, it is said in the Amer. Jour. Sci., 1-28-
361, that, April 11, 1832—about a month after the fall of the substance of
Kourianof—fell a substance that was wine-yellow, transparent, soft, and
smelling like rancid oil. M. Herman, a chemist who examined it, named it
“sky oil.” For analysis and chemic reactions, see the Journal. The
Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal, 13-368, mentions an “unctuous”
substance that fell near Rotterdam, in 1832. In Comptes Rendus, 13-215,
there is an account of an oily, reddish matter that fell at Genoa, February,
1841.
Whatever it may have been—
Altogether, most of our difficulties are problems that we should leave to
later developers of super-geography, I think. A discoverer of America
should leave Long Island to someone else. If there be, plying back and forth
from Jupiter and Mars and Venus, super-constructions that are sometimes
wrecked, we think of fuel as well as cargoes. Of course the most convincing
data would be of coal falling from the sky: nevertheless, one does suspect
that oil-burning engines were discovered ages ago in more advanced worlds
—but, as I say, we should leave something to our disciples—so we’ll not
especially wonder whether these butter-like or oily substances were food or
fuel. So we merely note that in the Scientific American, 24-323, is an
account of hail that fell, in the middle of April, 1871, in Mississippi, in
which was a substance described as turpentine.
Something that tasted like orange water, in hailstones, about the first of
June, 1842, near Nvmes, France; identified as nitric acid (Jour, de
Pharmacie, 1845-273).substance described as turpentine.
Something that tasted like orange water, in hailstones, about the first of
June, 1842, near Nvmes, France; identified as nitric acid (Jour, de
Pharmacie, 1845-273).

--- PAGE BREAK ---as turpentine.
Something that tasted like orange water, in hailstones, about the first of
June, 1842, near Nvmes, France; identified as nitric acid (Jour, de
Pharmacie, 1845-273).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hail and ashes, in Ireland, 1755 (Sci. Amer., 5-168).
That, at Elizabeth, N. J., June 9, 1874, fell hail in which was a substance,
said, by Prof. Leeds, of Stevens Institute, to be carbonate of soda (Sci.
Amer., 30-262).
We are getting a little away from the lines of our composition, but it will
be an important point later that so many extraordinary falls have occurred
with hail. Or—if they were of substances that had had origin upon some
other part of this earth’s surface—had the hail, too, that origin" Our
acceptance here will depend upon the number of instances. Reasonably
enough, some of the things that fall to this earth should coincide with falls
of hail.
As to vegetable substances in quantities so great as to suggest lost
cargoes, we have a note in the Intellectual Observer, 3-468: that, upon the
first of May, 1863, a rain fell at Perpignan, “bringing down with it a red
substance, which proved on examination to be a red meal mixed with fine
sand.” At various points along the Mediterranean, this substance fell.
There is, in Philosophical Transactions, 16-281, an account of a seeming
cereal, said to have fallen in Wiltshire, in 1686—said that some of the
“wheat” fell “enclosed in hailstones”—but the writer in Transactions, says
that he had examined the grains, and that they were nothing but seeds of ivy
berries dislodged from holes and chinks where birds had hidden them. If
birds still hide ivy seeds, and if winds still blow, I don’t see why the
phenomenon has not repeated in more than two hundred years since.
Or the red matter in rain, at Siena, Italy, May, 1830; said, by Arago, to
have been vegetable matter (Arago, ¯uvres, 12-468).
Somebody should collect data of falls at Siena alone.
In the Monthly Weather Review, 29-465, a correspondent writes that,
upon Feb. 16, 1901, at Pawpaw, Michigan, upon a day that was so calm that
his windmill did not run, fell a brown dust that looked like vegetable matter.
The Editor of the Review concludes that this was no widespread fall from a
tornado, because it had been reported from nowhere else.
Rancidness—putridity—decomposition—a note that has been struck
many times. In a positive sense, of course, nothing means anything, or
every meaning is continuous with all other meanings: or that all evidences
of guilt, for instance, are just as good evidences of innocence—but this
condition seems to mean—things lying around among the stars a long time.
Horrible disaster in the time of Julius Caesar; remains from it not reaching, are just as good evidences of innocence—but this
condition seems to mean—things lying around among the stars a long time.
Horrible disaster in the time of Julius Caesar; remains from it not reaching

--- PAGE BREAK ---

this earth till the time of the Bishop of Cloyne: we leave to later research
the discussion of bacterial action and decomposition, and whether bacteria
could survive in what we call space, of which we know nothing—
Chemical News, 35-183:
Dr. A. T. Machattie, F.C.S., writes that, at London, Ontario, Feb. 24,
1868, in a violent storm, fell, with snow, a dark-colored substance,
estimated at 500 tons, over a belt 50 miles by 10 miles. It was examined
under a microscope, by Dr. Machattie, who found it to consist mainly of
vegetable matter “far advanced in decomposition.” The substance was
examined by Dr. James Adams, of Glasgow, who gave his opinion that it
was the remains of cereals. Dr. Machattie points out that for months before
this fall the ground of Canada had been frozen, so that in this case a more
than ordinarily remote origin has to be thought of. Dr. Machattie thinks of
origin to the south. “However,” he says, “this is mere conjecture.”
Amer. Jour. Sci., 1841-40:
That, March 24, 1840—during a thunderstorm—at Rajkit, India,
occurred a fall of grain. It was reported by Col. Sykes, of the British
Association.
The natives were greatly excited—because it was grain of a kind
unknown to them.
Usually comes forward a scientist who knows more of the things that
natives know best than the natives know—but it so happens that the usual
thing was not done definitely in this instance:
“The grain was shown to some botanists, who did not immediately
recognize it, but thought it to be either a spartium or a vicia.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---al
thing was not done definitely in this instance:
“The grain was shown to some botanists, who did not immediately
recognize it, but thought it to be either a spartium or a vicia.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

L
6
EAD, silver, diamonds, glass.
I They sound like the accursed, but they’re not: they’re now of the
chosen—that is, when they occur in metallic or stony masses that
Science has recognized as meteorites. We find that resistance is to
substances not so mixed in or incorporated.
Of accursed data, it seems to me that punk is pretty damnable. In the
Report of the British Association, 1878-376, there is mention of a light
chocolate-brown substance that has fallen with meteorites. No particulars
given; not another mention anywhere else that I can find. In this English
publication, the word “punk” is not used; the substance is called “amadou.”
I suppose, if the datum has anywhere been admitted to French publications,
the word “amadou” has been avoided, and “punk” used.
Or oneness of allness: scientific works and social registers: a Goldstein
who can’t get in as Goldstein, gets in as Jackson.
The fall of sulphur from the sky has been especially repulsive to the
modern orthodoxy—largely because of its associations with the
superstitions or principles of the preceding orthodoxy—stories of devils:
sulphurous exhalations. Several writers have said that they have had this
feeling. So the scientific reactionists, who have rabidly fought the
preceding, because it was the preceding: and the scientific prudes, who, in
sheer exclusionism, have held lean hands over pale eyes, denying falls of
sulphur. I have many notes upon the sulphurous odor of meteorites, and
many notes upon phosphorescence of things that come from externality.
Some day I shall look over old stories of demons that have appeared
sulphurously upon this earth, with the idea of expressing that we have often
had undesirable visitors from other worlds; or that an indication of external
derivation is sulphurousness. I expect some day to ration alize demonology,
but just at present we are scarcely far enough advanced to go so far back.
For a circumstantial account of a mass of burning sulphur, about the size
of a man’s fist, that fell at Pultusk, Poland, Jan. 30, 1868, upon a road,are scarcely far enough advanced to go so far back.
For a circumstantial account of a mass of burning sulphur, about the size
of a man’s fist, that fell at Pultusk, Poland, Jan. 30, 1868, upon a road,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ugh advanced to go so far back.
For a circumstantial account of a mass of burning sulphur, about the size
of a man’s fist, that fell at Pultusk, Poland, Jan. 30, 1868, upon a road,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

where it was stamped out by a crowd of villagers, see Rept. Brit. Assoc.,
1874-272.
The power of the exclusionists lies in that in their stand are combined
both modern and archaic systematists. Falls of sandstone and limestone are
repulsive to both theologians and scientists. Sandstone and limestone
suggest other worlds upon which occur processes like geological processes;
but limestone, as a fossiliferous substance, is of course especially of the
unchosen.
In Science, March 9, 1888, we read of a block of limestone, said to have
fallen near Middleburg, Florida. It was exhibited at the Sub-tropical
Exposition, at Jacksonville. The writer, in Science, denies that it fell from
the sky. His reasoning is:
There is no limestone in the sky;
Therefore this limestone did not fall from the sky.
Better reasoning I cannot conceive of—because we see that a final major
premise—universal—true—would include all things: that, then, would
leave nothing to reason about—so then that all reasoning must be based
upon “something” not universal, or only a phantom intermediate to the two
finalities of nothingness and all-ness, or negativeness and positiveness.
La Nature, 1890-2-127:
Fall, at Pel-et-Der (L’Aube), France, June 6, 1890, of limestone pebbles.
Identified with limestone at Chkteau-Landon—or up and down in a
whirlwind. But they fell with hail—which, in June, could not very well be
identified with ice from Chkteau-Landon. Coincidence, perhaps.
Upon page 70, Science Gossip, 1887, the Editor says, of a stone that was
reported to have fallen at Little Lever, England, that a sample had been sent
to him. It was sandstone. Therefore it had not fallen, but had been on the
ground in the first place. But, upon page 140, Science Gossip, 1887, is an
account of “a large, smooth, waterworn, gritty sandstone pebble” that had
been found in the wood of a full-grown beech tree. Looks to me as if it had
fallen red-hot, and had penetrated the tree with high velocity. But I have
never heard of anything falling red-hot from a whirl-wind—
The wood around this sandstone pebble was black, as if charred.
Dr. Farrington, for instance, in his books, does not even mention
sandstone. However, the British Association, though reluctant, is less
exclusive: Report of 1860, p. 197: substance about the size of a duck’s egg,
that fell at Raphoe, Ireland, June 9, 1860—date questioned. It is notr, the British Association, though reluctant, is less
exclusive: Report of 1860, p. 197: substance about the size of a duck’s egg,
that fell at Raphoe, Ireland, June 9, 1860—date questioned. It is not

--- PAGE BREAK ---iation, though reluctant, is less
exclusive: Report of 1860, p. 197: substance about the size of a duck’s egg,
that fell at Raphoe, Ireland, June 9, 1860—date questioned. It is not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

definitely said that this substance was sandstone, but that it “resembled”
friable sandstone.
Falls of salt have occurred often. They have been avoided by scientific
writers, because of the dictum that only water and not substances held in
solution, can be raised by evaporation. However, falls of salty water have
received attention from Dalton and others, and have been attributed to
whirlwinds from the sea. This is so reasonably contested—quasi-reasonably
—as to places not far from the sea—
But the fall of salt that occurred high in the mountains of Switzerland—
We could have predicted that that datum could be found somewhere. Let
anything be explained in local terms of the coast of England—but also has
it occurred high in the mountains of Switzerland.
Large crystals of salt fell—in a hailstorm—Aug. 20, 1870, in
Switzerland. The orthodox explanation is a crime: whoever made it, should
have had his finger-prints taken. We are told (An. Rec. Sci., 1872) that these
objects of salt “came over the Mediterranean from some part of Africa.”
Or the hypnosis of the conventional—provided it be glib. One reads such
an assertion, and provided it be suave and brief and conventional, one
seldom questions—or thinks “very strange” and then forgets. One has an
impression from geography lessons: Mediterranean not more than three
inches wide, on the map; Switzerland only a few more inches away. These
sizable masses of salt are described in the Amer. Jour. Sci., 3-3-239, as
“essentially imperfect cubic crystals of common salt.” As to occurrence
with hail —that can in one, or ten, or twenty, instances be called a
coincidence.
Another datum: extraordinary year 1883:
London Times, Dec. 25, 1883:
Translation from a Turkish newspaper; a substance that fell at Scutari,
Dec. 2, 1883; described as an unknown substance, in particles—or flakes"
—like snow. “It was found to be saltish to the taste, and to dissolve readily
in water.”
Miscellaneous:
“Black, capillary matter” that fell, Nov. 16, 1857, at Charleston, S. C.
(Amer. Jour. Sci., 2-31-459).
Fall of small, friable, vesicular masses, from size of a pea to size of a
walnut, at Lobau, Jan. 18, 1835 (Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1860-85).v. 16, 1857, at Charleston, S. C.
(Amer. Jour. Sci., 2-31-459).
Fall of small, friable, vesicular masses, from size of a pea to size of a
walnut, at Lobau, Jan. 18, 1835 (Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1860-85).

--- PAGE BREAK ---leston, S. C.
(Amer. Jour. Sci., 2-31-459).
Fall of small, friable, vesicular masses, from size of a pea to size of a
walnut, at Lobau, Jan. 18, 1835 (Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1860-85).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Objects that fell at Peshawur, India, June, 1893, during a storm:
substance that looked like crystallized niter, and that tasted like sugar
(Nature, July 13, 1893).
I suppose sometimes deep-sea fishes have their noses bumped by cinders.
If their regions be subjacent to Cunard or White Star routes, they’re
especially likely to be bumped. I conceive of no inquiry: they’re deep-sea
fishes.
Or the slag of Slains. That it was a furnace-product. The Rev. James Rust
seemed to feel bumped. He tried in vain to arouse inquiry.
As to a report, from Chicago, April 9, 1879, that slag had fallen from the
sky, Prof. E. S. Bastian (Amer. Mour. Sci., 3-18-78) says that the slag “had
been on the ground in the first place.” It was furnace-slag. “A chemical
examination of the specimens has shown that they possess none of the
characteristics of true meteorites.”
Over and over and over again, the universal delusion; hope and despair of
attempted positivism; that there can be real criteria, or distinct
characteristics of anything. If anybody can define—not merely suppose,
like Prof. Bastian, that he can define—the true characteristics of anything,
or so localize trueness anywhere, he makes the discovery for which the
cosmos is laboring. He will be instantly translated, like Elijah, into the
Positive Absolute. My own notion is that, in a moment of super-
concentration, Elijah became so nearly a real prophet that he was translated
to heaven, or to the Positive Absolute, with such velocity that he left an
incandescent train behind him. As we go along, we shall find the “true test
of meteoritic material,” which in the past has been taken as an absolute,
dissolving into almost utmost nebulosity. Prof. Bastian explains
mechanically, or in terms of the usual reflexes to all reports of unwelcome
substances: that near where the slag had been found, telegraph wires had
been struck by lightning; that particles of melted wire had been seen to fall
near the slag—which had been on the ground in the first place. But,
according to the New York Times, April 14, 1879, about two bushels of this
substance had fallen.
Something that was said to have fallen at Darmstadt, June 7, 1846; listed
by Greg (Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1867-416) as “only slag.”
Philosophical Magazine, 4-10-381:
That, in 1855, a large stone was found far in the interior of a tree, in
Battersea Fields.June 7, 1846; listed
by Greg (Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1867-416) as “only slag.”
Philosophical Magazine, 4-10-381:
That, in 1855, a large stone was found far in the interior of a tree, in
Battersea Fields.

--- PAGE BREAK ---by Greg (Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1867-416) as “only slag.”
Philosophical Magazine, 4-10-381:
That, in 1855, a large stone was found far in the interior of a tree, in
Battersea Fields.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sometimes cannon balls are found embedded in trees. Doesn’t seem to be
anything to discuss; doesn’t seem discussable that any one would cut a hole
in a tree and hide a cannon ball, which one could take to bed, and hide
under one’s pillow, just as easily. So with the stone of Battersea Fields.
What is there to say, except that it fell with high velocity and embedded in
the tree" Nevertheless, there was a great deal of discussion—
Because, at the foot of the tree, as if broken off the stone, fragments of
slag were found.
I have nine other instances.
Slag and cinders and ashes, and you won’t believe, and neither will I, that
they came from the furnaces of vast aerial superconstructions. We’ll see
what looks acceptable.
As to ashes, the difficulties are great, because we’d expect many falls of
terrestrially derived ashes—volcanoes and forest fires.
In some of our acceptances, I have felt a little radical—
I suppose that one of our main motives is to show that there is, in quasi-
existence, nothing but the preposterous—or something intermediate to
absolute preposterousness and final reasonableness— that the new is the
obviously preposterous; that it becomes the established and disguisedly
preposterous; that it is displaced, after a while, and is again seen to be the
preposterous. Or that all progress is from the outrageous to the academic or
sanctified, and back to the outrageous—modified, however, by a trend of
higher and higher approximation to the impreposterous. Sometimes I feel a
little more uninspired than at other times, but I think we’re pretty well
accustomed now to the oneness of allness; or that the methods of science in
maintaining its system are as outrageous as the attempts of the damned to
break in. In the Annual Record of Science, 1875-241, Prof. Daubrpe is
quoted: that ashes that had fallen in the Azores had come from the Chicago
fire—
Or the damned and the saved, and there’s little to choose between them;
and angels are beings that have not obviously barbed tails to them—or
never have such bad manners as to stroke an angel below the waist-line.
However this especial outrage was challenged: the Editor of the Record
returns to it, in the issue of 1876: considers it “in the highest degree
improper to say that the ashes of Chicago were landed in the Azores.”
Bull. Soc. Astro, de France, 22-245:Editor of the Record
returns to it, in the issue of 1876: considers it “in the highest degree
improper to say that the ashes of Chicago were landed in the Azores.”
Bull. Soc. Astro, de France, 22-245:

--- PAGE BREAK ---returns to it, in the issue of 1876: considers it “in the highest degree
improper to say that the ashes of Chicago were landed in the Azores.”
Bull. Soc. Astro, de France, 22-245:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Account of a white substance, like ashes, that fell at Annoy, France,
March 27, 1908: simply called a curious phenomenon; no attempt to trace
to a terrestrial source.
Flake formations, which may signify passage through a region of
pressure, are common; but spherical formations—as if of things that have
rolled and rolled along planar regions somewhere—are commoner:
Nature, Jan. 10, 1884, quotes a Kimberley newspaper:
That, toward the close of November, 1883, a thick shower of ashy matter
fell at 4ueenstown, South Africa. The matter was in marble-sized balls,
which were soft and pulpy, but which, upon drying, crumbled at touch. The
shower was confined to one narrow streak of land. It would be only
ordinarily preposterous to attribute this substance to Krakatoa—
But, with the fall, loud noises were heard—
But I’ll omit many notes upon ashes: if ashes should sift down upon
deep-sea fishes, that is not to say that they came from steamships.
Data of falls of cinders have been especially damned by Mr. Symons, the
meteorologist, some of whose investigations we’ll investigate later—
nevertheless—
Notice of a fall, in Victoria, Australia, April 14, 1875 (Rept. Brit. Assoc.,
1875-242)—at least we are told, in the reluctant way, that someone
“thought” he saw matter fall near him at night, and the next day found
something that looked like cinders.
In the Proc. of the London Roy. Soc., 19-122, there is an account of
cinders that fell on the deck of a lightship, Jan. 9, 1873. In the Amer. Jour.
Sci., 2-24-449, there is a notice that the Editor had received a specimen of
cinders said to have fallen—in showery weather—upon a farm, near
Ottowa, Ill., Jan. 17, 1857.
But after all, ambiguous things they are, cinders or ashes or slag or
clinkers, the high priest of the accursed that must speak aloud for us is—
coal that has fallen from the sky.
Or coke:
The person who thought he saw something like cinders, also thought he
saw something like coke, we are told.
Nature, 36-119:
Something that “looked exactly like coke” that fell—during a
thunderstorm—in the Orne, France, April 24, 1887.
Or charcoal:nders, also thought he
saw something like coke, we are told.
Nature, 36-119:
Something that “looked exactly like coke” that fell—during a
thunderstorm—in the Orne, France, April 24, 1887.
Or charcoal:

--- PAGE BREAK ---he
saw something like coke, we are told.
Nature, 36-119:
Something that “looked exactly like coke” that fell—during a
thunderstorm—in the Orne, France, April 24, 1887.
Or charcoal:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dr. Angus Smith, in the Lit. and Phil. Soc. of Manchester Memoirs, 2-9-
146, says that, about 1827—like a great deal in Lyell’s Principles and
Darwin’s Origin, this account is from hearsay—something fell from the
sky, near Allport, England. It fell luminously, with a loud report, and
scattered in a field. A fragment that was seen by Dr. Smith, is described by
him as having “the appearance of a piece of common wood charcoal.”
Nevertheless, the reassured feeling of the faithful, upon reading this, is
burdened with data of differences: the substance was so uncommonly heavy
that it seemed as if it had iron in it; also there was “a sprinkling of sulphur.”
This material is said, by Prof. Baden-Powell, to be “totally unlike that of
any other meteorite.” Greg, in his catalogue (Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1860-73),
calls it “a more than doubtful substance”—but again, against reassurance,
that is not doubt of authenticity. Greg says that it is like compact charcoal
with particles of sulphur and iron pyrites embedded.
Reassurance rises again:
Prof. Baden-Powell says: “It contains also charcoal, which might perhaps
be acquired from matter among which it fell.”
This is a common reflex with the exclusionists: that substances not “truly
meteoritic” did not fall from the sky, but were picked up by “truly
meteoritic” things, of course only on their surfaces, by impact with this
earth.
Rhythm of reassurances and their declines:
According to Dr. Smith, this substance was not merely coated with
charcoal; his analysis gives 43.59 per cent carbon.
Our acceptance that coal has fallen from the sky will be via data of
resinous substances and bituminous substances, which merge so that they
cannot be told apart.
Resinous substance said to have fallen at Kaba, Hungary, April 15, 1887
(Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1860-94).
A resinous substance that fell after a fireball" at Neuhaus, Bohemia, Dec.
17, 1824 (Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1860-70).
Fall, July 28, 1885, at Luchon, during a storm, of a brownish substance;
very friable, carbonaceous matter; when burned it gave out a resinous odor
(Comptes Rendus, 103-837).
Substance that fell, Feb. 17, 18, 19, 1841, at Genoa, Italy, said to have
been resinous; said by Arago (¯uvres, 12-469) to have been bituminous
matter and sand.esinous odor
(Comptes Rendus, 103-837).
Substance that fell, Feb. 17, 18, 19, 1841, at Genoa, Italy, said to have
been resinous; said by Arago (¯uvres, 12-469) to have been bituminous
matter and sand.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s Rendus, 103-837).
Substance that fell, Feb. 17, 18, 19, 1841, at Genoa, Italy, said to have
been resinous; said by Arago (¯uvres, 12-469) to have been bituminous
matter and sand.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fall—during a thunderstorm—July, 1681, near Cape Cod, upon the deck
of an English vessel, the Albemarle, of “burning, bituminous matter” (Edin.
New Phil. Jour., 26-86); a fall, at Christiania, Norway, June 13, 1822, of
bituminous matter, listed by Greg as doubtful; fall of bituminous matter, in
Germany, March 8, 1798, listed by Greg. Lockyer (The Meteoric
Hypothesis, p. 24) says that the substance that fell at the Cape of Good
Hope, Oct. 13, 1838 —about five cubic feet of it: substance so soft that it
was cuttable with a knife—“after being experimented upon, it left a residue,
which gave out a very bituminous smell.”
And this inclusion of Lockyer’s—so far as findable in all books that I
have read—is, in books, about as close as we can get to our desideratum—
that coal has fallen from the sky. Dr. Farrington, except with a brief
mention, ignores the whole subject of the fall of carbonaceous matter from
the sky. Proctor, in all of his books that I have read—is, in books, about as
close as we can get to the admission that carbonaceous matter has been
found in meteorites “in very minute quantities”—or my own suspicion is
that it is possible to damn something else only by losing one’s own soul—
quasi-soul, of course.
Sci. Amer., 35-120:
That the substance that fell at the Cape of Good Hope “resembled a piece
of anthracite coal more than anything else.”
It’s a mistake, I think: the resemblance is to bituminous coal— but it is
from the periodicals that we must get our data. To the writers of books upon
meteorites, it would be as wicked—by which we mean departure from the
characters of an established species—quasi-established, of course—to say
that coal has fallen from the sky, as would be, to something in a barnyard, a
temptation that it climb a tree and catch a bird. Domestic things in a
barnyard: and how wild things from forests outside seem to them. Or the
homeopathist—but we shall shovel data of coal.
And, if over and over, we shall learn of masses of soft coal that have
fallen upon this earth, if in no instance has it been asserted that the masses
did not fall, but were upon the ground in the first place; if we have many
instances, this time we turn down good and hard the mechanical reflex that
these masses were carried from one place to another in whirlwinds, because
we find it too difficult to accept that whirlwinds could so select, or so
specialize in a peculiar substance. Among writers of books, the only one I
know of who makes more than brief mention is Sir Robert Ball. Heo difficult to accept that whirlwinds could so select, or so
specialize in a peculiar substance. Among writers of books, the only one I
know of who makes more than brief mention is Sir Robert Ball. He

--- PAGE BREAK ---t that whirlwinds could so select, or so
specialize in a peculiar substance. Among writers of books, the only one I
know of who makes more than brief mention is Sir Robert Ball. He

--- PAGE BREAK ---

represents a still more antique orthodoxy, or is an exclusionist of the old
type, still holding out against even meteorites. He cites several falls of
carbonaceous matter, but with disregards that make for reasonableness that
earthy matter may have been caught up by whirlwinds and flung down
somewhere else. If he had given a full list, he would be called upon to
explain the special affinity of whirlwinds for a special kind of coal. He does
not give a full list. We shall have all that’s findable, and we shall see that
against this disease we’re writing, the homeopathist’s prescription availeth
not. Another exclusionist was Prof. Lawrence Smith. His psycho-tropism
was to respond to all reports of carbonaceous matter falling from the sky, by
saying that this damned matter had been deposited upon things of the
chosen by impact with this earth. Most of our data antedate him, or were
contemporaneous with him, or were as accessible to him as to us. In his
attempted positivism it is simply— and beautifully—disregarded that,
according to Berthelot, Berzelius, Cloez, Wohler and others these masses
are not merely coated with carbonaceous matter, but are carbonaceous
throughout, or are permeated throughout. How anyone could so resolutely
and dogmatically and beautifully and blindly hold out would puzzle us were
it not for our acceptance that only to think is to exclude and include; and to
exclude some things that have as much right to come in as have the
included—that to have an opinion upon any subject is to be a Lawrence
Smith—because there is no definite subject.
Dr. Walter Flight (Eclectic Magazine, 89-71) says, of the substance that
fell near Alais, France, March 15, 1806, that it “emits a faint bituminous
substance” when heated, according to the observations of Bergelius and a
commission appointed by the French Academy. This time we have not the
reluctances expressed in such words as “like” and “resembling.” We are
told that this substance is “an earthy kind of coal.”
As to “minute quantities” we are told that the substance that fell at the
Cape of Good Hope has in it a little more than a quarter of organic matter,
which, in alcohol, gives the familiar reaction of yellow, resinous matter.
Other instances given by Dr. Flight are:
Carbonaceous matter that fell in 1840, in Tennessee; Cranbourne,
Australia, 1861; Montauban, France, May 14, 1864 (twenty masses, some
of them as large as a human head, of a substance that “resembled a dull-
colored earthy lignite”); Goalpara, India, about 1867 (about 8 per cent of antauban, France, May 14, 1864 (twenty masses, some
of them as large as a human head, of a substance that “resembled a dull-
colored earthy lignite”); Goalpara, India, about 1867 (about 8 per cent of a

--- PAGE BREAK ---14, 1864 (twenty masses, some
of them as large as a human head, of a substance that “resembled a dull-
colored earthy lignite”); Goalpara, India, about 1867 (about 8 per cent of a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

hydrocarbon); at Ornans, France, July 11, 1868; substance with “an organic,
combustible ingredient,” at Hessle, Sweden, Jan. 1, 1860.
Knowledge, 4-134:
That, according to M. Daubrpe, the substance that had fallen in the
Argentine Republic, “resembled certain kinds of lignite and boghead coal.”
In Comptes Rendus, 96-1764, it is said that this mass fell, June 30, 1880, in
the province Entre Rtos, Argentina: that it is “like” brown coal; that it
resembles all the other carbonaceous masses that have fallen from the sky.
Something that fell at Grazac, France, Aug. 10, 1885: when burned, it
gave out a bituminous odor (Comptes Rendus, 104-1771).
Carbonaceous substance that fell at Rajpunta, India, Jan. 22, 1911: very
friable: 50 per cent of its soluble in water (Records Geol. Survey of India,
44-pt. I-41).
A combustible carbonaceous substance that fell with sand at Naples,
March 14, 1818 (Amer, Jour. Sci., 1-1-309).
Sci. Amer. Sup., 29-11798:
That, June 9, 1889, a very friable substance, of a deep, greenish black,
fell at Mighei, Russia. It contained 5 per cent organic matter, which, when
powdered and digested in alcohol, yielded, after evaporation, a bright
yellow resin. In this mass was 2 per cent of an unknown mineral.
Cinders and ashes and slag and coke and charcoal and coal.
And the things that sometimes deep-sea fishes are bumped by.
Reluctances and the disguises or covered retreats of such words as “like”
and “resemble”—or that conditions of Intermediateness forbid abrupt
transitions—but that the spirit animating all Interme-diateness is to achieve
abrupt transitions—because, if anything could finally break away from its
origin and environment, that would be a real thing—something not merging
away indistinguishably with the surrounding. So all attempt to be original;
all attempt to invent something that is more than mere extension or
modification of the preceding, is positivism—or that if one could conceive
of a device to catch flies, positively different from, or unrelated to, all other
devices—up he’d shoot to heaven, or the Positive Absolute—leaving
behind such an incandescent train that in one age it would be said that he
had gone aloft in a fiery chariot, and in another age that he had been struck
by lightning—
I’m collecting notes upon persons supposed to have been struck by
lightning. I think that high approximation to positivism has often beenriot, and in another age that he had been struck
by lightning—
I’m collecting notes upon persons supposed to have been struck by
lightning. I think that high approximation to positivism has often been

--- PAGE BREAK ---age that he had been struck
by lightning—
I’m collecting notes upon persons supposed to have been struck by
lightning. I think that high approximation to positivism has often been

--- PAGE BREAK ---

achieved—instantaneous translation—residue of negativeness left behind,
looking much like effects of a stroke of lightning. Some day I shall tell the
story of the Marie Celeste—”properly,” as the Scientific American
Supplement would say—mysterious disappearance of a sea captain, his
family, and the crew—
Of positivists, by the route of Abrupt Transition, I think that Manet was
notable—but that his approximation was held down by his intense relativity
to the public—or that it is quite as impositive to flout and insult and defy as
it is to crawl and placate. Of course, Manet began with continuity with
Courbet and others, and then, between him and Manet there were mutual
influences—but the spirit of abrupt difference is the spirit of positivism, and
Manet’s stand was against the dictum that all lights and shades must merge
away suavely into one another and prepare for one another. So a biologist
like De Vries represents positivism, or the breaking of Continuity, by trying
to 
conceive 
of 
evolution 
by 
mutation—against 
the 
dogma 
of
indistinguishable gradations by “minute variations.” A Copernicus
conceives of helio-centricity. Continuity is against him. He is not permitted
to break abruptly with the past. He is permitted to publish his work, but
only as “an interesting hypothesis.”
Continuity—and that all that we call evolution or progress is attempt to
break away from it—
That our whole solar system was at one time attempt by planets to break
away from a parental nexus and set up as individualities, and, failing, move
in quasi-regular orbits that are expressions of relations with the sun and
with one another, all having surrendered, being now quasi-incorporated in a
higher approximation to system;
Intermediateness in its mineralogic aspect of positivism—or Iron that
strove to break away from Sulphur and Oxygen, and be real, homogeneous
Iron—failing, inasmuch as elemental iron exists only in text-book
chemistry;
Intermediateness in its biologic aspect of positivism—or the wild,
fantastic, grotesque, monstrous things it conceived of, sometimes in a
frenzy of effort to break away abruptly from all preceding types—but
failing, in the giraffe-effort, for instance, or only caricaturing an antelope—
All things break one relation only by the establishing of some other
relation—
All things cut an umbilical cord only to clutch a breast.giraffe-effort, for instance, or only caricaturing an antelope—
All things break one relation only by the establishing of some other
relation—
All things cut an umbilical cord only to clutch a breast.

--- PAGE BREAK ---instance, or only caricaturing an antelope—
All things break one relation only by the establishing of some other
relation—
All things cut an umbilical cord only to clutch a breast.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

So the fight of the exclusionists to maintain the traditional—or to prevent
abrupt transition from the quasi-established—fighting so that here, more
than a century after meteorites were included, no other notable inclusion
has been made, except that of cosmic dust, data of which Nordenskiold
made more nearly real than data in opposition.
So Proctor, for instance, fought and expressed his feeling of the
preposterous, against Sir W. H. Thomson’s notions of arrival upon this earth
of organisms on meteorites—
“I can only regard it as a jest” (Knowledge, 1-302).
Or that there is nothing but jest—or something intermediate to jest and
tragedy;
That ours is not an existence but an utterance;
That Momus is imagining us for the amusement of the gods, often with
such success that some of us seem almost alive—like characters in
something a novelist is writing; which often to considerable degree take
their affairs away from the novelist—
That Momus is imagining us and our arts and sciences and religions, and
is narrating or picturing us as a satire upon the gods’ real existence.
Because—with many of our data of coal that has fallen from the sky as
accessible then as they are now, and with the scientific pronouncement that
coal is fossil, how, in a real existence, by which we mean a consistent
existence, or a state in which there is real intelligence, or a form of thinking
that does not indistinguishably merge away with imbecility, could there
have been such a row as that which was raised about forty years ago over
Dr. Hahn’s announcement that he had found fossils in meteorites"
Accessible to anybody at that time:
Philosophical Magazine, 4-17-425:
That the substance that fell at Kaba, Hungary, April 15, 1857, contained
organic matter “analagous to fossil waxes.”
Or limestone:
Of the block of limestone which was reported to have fallen at
Middleburg, Florida, it is said (Science, 11-118) that, though something had
been seen to fall in “an old cultivated field,” the witnesses who ran to it
picked up something that “had been upon the ground in the first place.” The
writer who tells us this, with the usual exclusion-imagination known as
stupidity, but unjustly, because there is no real stupidity, thinks he can think
of a good-sized stone that had for many years been in a cultivated field, butthe usual exclusion-imagination known as
stupidity, but unjustly, because there is no real stupidity, thinks he can think
of a good-sized stone that had for many years been in a cultivated field, but

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that had never been seen before—had never interfered with plowing, for
instance. He is earnest and unjarred when he writes that this stone weighs
200 pounds. My own notion, founded upon my own experience in seeing, is
that a block of stone weighing 500 pounds might be in one’s parlor twenty
years, virtually unseen—but not in an old cultivated field, where it
interfered with plowing—not anywhere—if it interfered.
Dr. Hahn said that he had found fossils in meteorites. There is a
description of the corals, sponges, shells, and crinoids, all of them
microscopic, which he photographed, in Popular Science, 20-83.
Dr. Hahn was a well-known scientist. He was better known after that.
Anybody may theorize upon other worlds and conditions upon them that
are similar to our own conditions: if his notions be presented undisguisedly
as fiction, or only as an “interesting hypothesis,” he’ll stir up no prude
rages.
But Dr. Hahn said definitely that he had found fossils in specified
meteorites: also he published photographs of them. His book is in the New
York Public Library. In the reproductions every feature of some of the little
shells is plainly marked. If they’re not shells, neither are things under an
oyster-counter. The striations are very plain: one sees even the hinges where
bivalves are joined.
Prof. Lawrence Smith (Knowledge, 1-258):
“Dr. Hahn is a kind of half-insane man, whose imagination has run away
with him.”
Conservation of Continuity.
Then Dr. Weinland examined Dr. Hahn’s specimens. He gave his opinion
that they are fossils and that they are not crystals of enstatite, as asserted by
Prof. Smith, who had never seen them.
The damnation of denial and the damnation of disregard:
After the publication of Dr. Weinland’s findings—silence.ey are not crystals of enstatite, as asserted by
Prof. Smith, who had never seen them.
The damnation of denial and the damnation of disregard:
After the publication of Dr. Weinland’s findings—silence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---of enstatite, as asserted by
Prof. Smith, who had never seen them.
The damnation of denial and the damnation of disregard:
After the publication of Dr. Weinland’s findings—silence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
7
HE living things that have come down to this earth: Attempts to
preserve the system:
That small frogs and toads, for instance, never have fallen from the
sky, but were—“on the ground, in the first place”; or that there have been
such falls—“up from one place in a whirlwind, and down in another.”
Were there some especially froggy place near Europe, as there is an
especially sandy place, the scientific explanation would of course be that all
small frogs falling from the sky in Europe come from that center of
frogeity.
To start with, I’d like to emphasize something that I am permitted to see
because I am still primitive or intelligent or in a state of maladjustment:
That there is not one report findable of a fall of tadpoles from the sky.
As to “there in the first place”:
See Leisure Hours, 3-779, for accounts of small frogs, or toads, said to
have been seen to fall from the sky. The writer says that all observers were
mistaken: that the frogs or toads must have fallen from trees or other places
overhead.
Tremendous number of little toads, one or two months old, that were seen
to fall from a great thick cloud that appeared suddenly in a sky that had
been cloudless, August, 1804, near Toulouse, France, according to a letter
from Prof. Pontus to M. Arago. (Comptes Rendus, 3-54.)
Many instances of frogs that were seen to fall from the sky. (Notes and
Queries, 8-6-104); accounts of such falls, signed by witnesses. (Notes and
Queries, 8-6-190.)
Scientific American, July 12, 1873:
“A shower of frogs which darkened the air and covered the ground for a
long distance is the reported result of a recent rainstorm at Kansas City,
Mo.”
As to having been there “in the first place”:
Little frogs found in London, after a heavy storm, July 30, 1838. (Notes
and Queries, 8-7-437) ;eported result of a recent rainstorm at Kansas City,
Mo.”
As to having been there “in the first place”:
Little frogs found in London, after a heavy storm, July 30, 1838. (Notes
and Queries, 8-7-437) ;

--- PAGE BREAK ---recent rainstorm at Kansas City,
Mo.”
As to having been there “in the first place”:
Little frogs found in London, after a heavy storm, July 30, 1838. (Notes
and Queries, 8-7-437) ;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Little toads found in a desert, after a rainfall (Notes and Queries,
8-8-493).
To start with I do not deny—positively—the conventional explanation of
“up and down.” I think that there may have been such occurrences. I omit
many notes that I have upon indistinguishables. In the London Times, July
4, 1883, there is an account of a shower of twigs and leaves and tiny toads
in a storm upon the slopes of the Apennines. These may have been the
ejecta-menta of a whirlwind. I add, however, that I have notes upon two
other falls of tiny toads, in 1883, one in France and one in Tahiti; also of
fish in Scotland. But in the phenomenon of the Apennines, the mixture
seems to me to be typical of the products of a whirl-wind. The other
instances seem to me to be typical of—something like migration" Their
great numbers and their homogeneity. Over and over in these annals of the
damned occurs the datum of segregation. But a whirlwind is thought of as a
condition of chaos—quasi-chaos: not final negativeness, of course—
Monthly Weather Review, July, 1881:
“A small pond in the track of the cloud was sucked dry, the water being
carried over the adjoining fields together with a large quantity of soft mud,
which was scattered over the ground for half a mile around.”
It is so easy to say that small frogs that have fallen from the sky had been
scooped up by a whirlwind; but here are the circumstances of a scoop; in
the exclusionist-imagination there is no regard for mud, dpbris from the
bottom of a pond, floating vegetation, loose things from the shores—but a
precise picking out of frogs only. Of all instances I have that attribute the
fall of small frogs or toads to whirlwinds, only one definitely identifies or
places the whirlwind. Also, as has been said before, a pond going up would
be quite as interesting as frogs coming down. Whirlwinds we read of over
and over—but where and what whirlwind" It seems to me that anybody
who had lost a pond would be heard from. In Symons’ Meteorological
Magazine, 32-106, a fall of small frogs, near Birmingham, England, June
30, 1892, is attributed to a specific whirlwind—but not a word as to any
special pond that had contributed. And something that strikes my attention
here is that these frogs are described as almost white.
I’m afraid there is no escape for us: we shall have to give to civilization
upon this earth—some new worlds.
Places with white frogs in them.on
here is that these frogs are described as almost white.
I’m afraid there is no escape for us: we shall have to give to civilization
upon this earth—some new worlds.
Places with white frogs in them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e frogs are described as almost white.
I’m afraid there is no escape for us: we shall have to give to civilization
upon this earth—some new worlds.
Places with white frogs in them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Upon several occasions we have had data of unknown things that have
fallen from—somewhere. But something not to be overlooked is that if
living things have landed alive upon this earth—in spite of all we think we
know of the accelerative velocity of falling bodies —and have propagated
—why the exotic becomes the indigenous, or from the strangest of places
we’d expect the familiar. Or if hosts of living frogs have come here—from
somewhere else—every living thing upon this earth may, ancestrally, have
come from— somewhere else.
I find that I have another note upon a specific hurricane:
Annals and Mag. of Nat. Hist., 1-3-185:
After one of the greatest hurricanes in the history of Ireland, some fish
were found “as far as 15 yards from the edge of a lake.”
Have another: this is a good one for the exclusionists:
Fall of fish in Paris: said that a neighboring pond had been blown dry.
(Living Age, 52-186.) Date not given, but I have seen it recorded
somewhere else.
The best-known fall of fishes from the sky is that which occurred at
Mountain Ash, in the Valley of Abedare, Glamorganshire, Feb. 11, 1859.
The Editor of the Zoologist, 2-677, having published a report of a fall of
fishes, writes: “I am continually receiving similar accounts of frogs and
fishes.” But, in all the volumes of the Zoologist, I can find only two reports
of such falls. There is nothing to conclude other than that hosts of data have
been lost because orthodoxy does not look favorably upon such reports. The
Monthly Weather Review records several falls of fishes in the United States;
but accounts of these reported occurrences are not findable in other
American publications. Nevertheless, the treatment by the Zoologist of the
fall reported from Mountain Ash is fair. First appears, in the issue of 1859-
6493, a letter from the Rev. John Griffith, Vicar of Abedare, asserting that
the fall had occurred, chiefly upon the property of Mr. Nixon, of Mountain
Ash. Upon page 6540, Dr. Gray, of the British Museum, bristling with
exclusionism, writes that some of these fishes, which had been sent to him
alive, were “very young minnows.” He says: “On reading the evidence, it
seems to me most probably only a practical joke: that one of Mr. Nixon’s
employees had thrown a pailful of water upon another, who had thought
fish in it had fallen from the sky”—had dipped up a pailful from a brook.
Those fishes—still alive—were exhibited at the Zoological Gardens,
Regent’s Park. The Editor says that one was a minnow and that the resthad fallen from the sky”—had dipped up a pailful from a brook.
Those fishes—still alive—were exhibited at the Zoological Gardens,
Regent’s Park. The Editor says that one was a minnow and that the rest

--- PAGE BREAK ---sky”—had dipped up a pailful from a brook.
Those fishes—still alive—were exhibited at the Zoological Gardens,
Regent’s Park. The Editor says that one was a minnow and that the rest

--- PAGE BREAK ---

were sticklebacks.
He says that Dr. Gray’s explanation is no doubt right.
But, upon page 6564, he publishes a letter from another correspondent,
who apologizes for opposing “so high an authority as Dr. Gray,” but says
that he had obtained some of these fishes from persons who lived at a
considerable distance apart, or considerably out of range of the playful pail
of water.
According to the Annual Register, 1859-14, the fishes themselves had
fallen by pailfuls.
If these fishes were not upon the ground in the first place, we base our
objections to the whirlwind explanation upon two data:
That they fell in no such distribution as one could attribute to the
discharge of a whirlwind, but upon a narrow strip of land: about 80 yards
long and 12 yards wide—
The other datum is again the suggestion that at first seemed so incredible,
but for which support is piling up, a suggestion of a stationary source
overhead—
That ten minutes later another fall of fishes occurred upon this same
narrow strip of land.
Even arguing that a whirlwind may stand still axially, it discharges
tangentially. Wherever the fishes came from it does not seem thinkable that
some could have fallen and that others could have whirled even a tenth of a
minute, then falling directly after the first to fall. Because of these evil
circumstances the best adaptation was to laugh the whole thing off and say
that someone had soused someone else with a pailful of water in which a
few “very young” minnows had been caught up.
In the London Times, March 2, 1859, is a letter from Mr. Aaron Roberts,
curate of St. Peter’s, Carmathon. In this letter the fishes are said to have
been about four inches long, but there is some question of species. I think,
myself, that they were minnows and sticklebacks. Some persons, thinking
them to be sea fishes, placed them in salt water, according to Mr. Roberts.
“The effect is stated to have been almost instantaneous death.” “Some were
placed in fresh water. These seemed to thrive well.” As to narrow
distribution, we are told that the fishes fell “in and about the premises of
Mr. Nixon.” “It was not observed at the time that any fish fell in any other
part of the neighborhood, save in the particular spot mentioned.”
In the London Times, March 10, 1859, Vicar Griffith writes an account:It was not observed at the time that any fish fell in any other
part of the neighborhood, save in the particular spot mentioned.”
In the London Times, March 10, 1859, Vicar Griffith writes an account:

--- PAGE BREAK ---at the time that any fish fell in any other
part of the neighborhood, save in the particular spot mentioned.”
In the London Times, March 10, 1859, Vicar Griffith writes an account:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“The roofs of some houses were covered with them.”
In this letter it is said that the largest fishes were five inches long, and
that these did not survive the fall.
Report of the British Association, 1859-158:
“The evidence of the fall of fish on this occasion was very conclusive. A
specimen of the fish was exhibited and was found to be the Gasterosteus
leirus.
Gasterosteus is the stickleback.
Altogether I think we have not a sense of total perdition, when we’re
damned with the explanation that someone soused someone else with a
pailful of water in which were thousands of fishes four or five inches long,
some of which covered roofs of houses, and some of which remained ten
minutes in the air. By way of contrast we offer our own acceptance:
That the bottom of a super-geographical pond had dropped out,
I have a great many notes upon the fall of fishes, despite the difficulty
these records have in getting themselves published, but I pick out the
instances that especially relate to our super-geographical acceptances, or to
the Principles of Super-Geography: or data of things that have been in the
air longer than acceptably could a whirlwind carry them; that have fallen
with a distribution narrower than is attributable to a whirlwind; that have
fallen for a considerable length of time upon the same narrow area of land.
These three factors indicate, somewhere not far aloft, a region of
inertness to this earth’s gravitation, of course, however, a region that, by the
flux and variation of all things, must at times be susceptible-but, afterward,
our heresy will bifurcate—
In amiable accommodation to the crucifixion it’ll get, I think—
But so impressed are we with the datum that, though there have been
many reports of small frogs that have fallen from the sky, not one report
upon a fall of tadpoles is findable, that to these circumstances another
adjustment must be made.
Apart from our three factors of indication, an extraordinary observation is
the fall of living things without injury to them. The devotees of St. Isaac
explain that they fall upon thick grass and so survive: but Sir James
Emerson Tennant, in his History of Ceylon, tells of a fall of fishes upon
gravel, by which they were seemingly uninjured. Something else apart from
our three main interests is a phenomenon that looks like what one might call
an alternating series of falls of fishes, whatever the significance may be:seemingly uninjured. Something else apart from
our three main interests is a phenomenon that looks like what one might call
an alternating series of falls of fishes, whatever the significance may be:

--- PAGE BREAK ---. Something else apart from
our three main interests is a phenomenon that looks like what one might call
an alternating series of falls of fishes, whatever the significance may be:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Meerut, India, July, 1824 (Living Age, 52-186); Fifeshire, Scotland,
summer of 1824 (Wernerian Nat. Hist. Soc. Trans., 5-575); Moradabad,
India, July, 1826 (Living Age, 52-186); Ross-shire, Scotland, 1828 ^Living
Age, 52-186); Moradabad, India, July 20, 1829 (Lin. Soc. Trans., 16-764);
Perthshire, Scotland (Living Age, 52-186); Argyleshire, Scotland, 1830,
March 9, 1830 (Recreative Science, 3-339); Feridpoor, India, Feb. 19, 1830
(Jour. Asiatic Soc. of Bengal, 2-650).
A psycho-tropism that arises here—disregarding serial significance —or
mechanical, unintelligent, repulsive reflex—is that the fishes of India did
not fall from the sky; that they were found upon the ground after torrential
rains, because streams had overflowed and had then receded.
In the region of Inertness that we think we can conceive of, or a zone that
is to this earth’s gravitation very much like the neutral zone of a magnet’s
attraction, we accept that there are bodies of water and also clear spaces—
bottoms of ponds dropping out—very interesting ponds, having no earth at
bottom—vast drops of water afloat in what is called space—fishes and
deluges of water falling—
But also other areas, in which fishes—however they got there: a matter
that we’ll consider—remain and dry, or even putrefy, then sometimes
falling by atmospheric dislodgment.
After a “tremendous deluge of rain, one of the heaviest falls on record”
(All the Year Round, 8-255) at Rajkote, India, July 25, 1850, “the ground
was found literally covered with fishes.”
The word “found” is agreeable to the repulsions of the conventionalists
and their concept of an overflowing stream—but, according to Dr. Buist,
some of these fishes were “found” on the tops of haystacks.
Ferrel (A Popular Treatise, p. 414) tells of a fall of living fishes— some
of them having been placed in a tank, where they survived— that occurred
in India, about 20 miles south of Calcutta, Sept. 20, 1839. A witness of this
fall says:
“The most strange thing which ever struck me was that the fish did not
fall helter-skelter, or here and there, but they fell in a straight line, not more
than a cubit in breadth.” See Living Age, 52-186.
Amer. Jour. Sci., 1-32-199:
That, according to testimony taken before a magistrate, a fall occurred,
Feb. 19, 1830, near Feridpoor, India, of many fishes, of various sizes—
some whole and fresh and others “mutilated and putrefying.” Our reflex totestimony taken before a magistrate, a fall occurred,
Feb. 19, 1830, near Feridpoor, India, of many fishes, of various sizes—
some whole and fresh and others “mutilated and putrefying.” Our reflex to

--- PAGE BREAK ---ore a magistrate, a fall occurred,
Feb. 19, 1830, near Feridpoor, India, of many fishes, of various sizes—
some whole and fresh and others “mutilated and putrefying.” Our reflex to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

those who would say that, in the climate of India, it would not take long for
fishes to putrefy, is—that high in the air, the climate of India is not torrid.
Another peculiarity of this fall is that some of the fishes were much larger
than others. Or to those who hold out for segregation in a whirlwind, or that
objects, say, twice as heavy as others would be separated from the lighter,
we point out that some of these fishes were twice as heavy as others.
In the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 2-650, depositions of
witnesses are given:
“Some of the fish were fresh, but others were rotten and without heads.”
“Among the number which I got, five were fresh and the rest stinking
and headless.”
They remind us of His Grace’s observation of some pages back.
According to Dr. Buist, some of these fishes weighed one and a half
pounds each and others three pounds.
A fall of fishes at Futtepoor, India, May 16, 1833:
“They were all dead and dry.” (Dr. Buist, Living Age, 52-186.)
India is far away: about 1830 was long ago.
Nature, Sept. 19, 1918-46:
A correspondent writes, from the Dove Marine Laboratory, Cuttercoats,
England, that, at Hindon, a suburb of Sunderland, Aug. 24, 1918, hundreds
of small fishes, identified as sand eels, had fallen—
Again the small area: about 60 by 30 yards.
The fall occurred during a heavy rain that was accompanied by thunder—
or indications of disturbance aloft—but by no visible lightning. The sea is
close to Hindon, but if you try to think of these fishes having described a
trajectory in a whirlwind from the ocean, consider this remarkable datum:
That, according to witnesses, the fall upon this small area occupied ten
minutes.
I cannot think of a clearer indication of a direct fall from a stationary
source.
And:
“The fish were all dead, and indeed stiff and hard, when picked up,
immediately after the occurrence.”
By all of which I mean that we have only begun to pile up our data of
things that fall from a stationary source overhead: we’ll have to take up the
subject from many approaches before our acceptance, which seems quite asan that we have only begun to pile up our data of
things that fall from a stationary source overhead: we’ll have to take up the
subject from many approaches before our acceptance, which seems quite as

--- PAGE BREAK ---begun to pile up our data of
things that fall from a stationary source overhead: we’ll have to take up the
subject from many approaches before our acceptance, which seems quite as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

rigorously arrived at as ever has been a belief, can emerge from the
accursed.
I don’t know how much the horse and the barn will help us to emerge:
but, if ever anything did go up from this earth’s surface and stay up—those
damned things may have:
Monthly Weather Review, May, 1878:
In a tornado, in Wisconsin, May 23, 1878, “a barn and a horse were
carried completely away, and neither horse nor barn, nor any portion of
either have since been found.”
After that, which would be a little strong were it not for a steady
improvement in our digestions that I note as we go along, there is little of
the bizarre or the unassimilable in the turtle that hovered six months or so
over a small town in Mississippi:
Monthly Weather Review, May, 1894:
That, May 11, 1894, at Vicksburg, Miss., fell a small piece of alabaster;
that, at Bovina, eight miles from Vicksburg, fell a gopher turtle.
They fell in a hailstorm.
This item was widely copied at the time: for instance, Nature, one of the
volumes of 1894, page 430, and Jour. Roy. Met. Soc, 20-273. As to
discussion—not a word. Or Science and its continuity with Presbyterianism
—data like this are damned at birth. The Weather Review does sprinkle, or
baptize, or attempt to save, this infant—but in all the meteorological
literature that I have gone through, after that date—not a word, except
mention once or twice. The Editor of the Review says:
“An examination of the weather map shows that these hailstorms occur
on the south side of a region of cold northerly winds, and were but a small
part of a series of similar storms; apparently some special local whirls or
gusts carried heavy objects from this earth’s surface up to the cloud
regions.”
Of all incredibilities that we have to choose from, I give first place to a
notion of a whirlwind pouncing upon a region and scrupulously selecting a
turtle and a piece of alabaster. This time, the other mechanical thing “there
in the first place” cannot rise in response to its stimulus: it is resisted in that
these objects were coated with ice—month of May in a southern state. If a
whirl-wind at all, there must have been very limited selection: there is no
record of the fall of other objects. But there is no attempt in the Review to
specify a whirlwind.in a southern state. If a
whirl-wind at all, there must have been very limited selection: there is no
record of the fall of other objects. But there is no attempt in the Review to
specify a whirlwind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---If a
whirl-wind at all, there must have been very limited selection: there is no
record of the fall of other objects. But there is no attempt in the Review to
specify a whirlwind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

These strangely associated things were remarkably separated.
They fell eight miles apart.
Then—as if there were real reasoning—they must have been high to fall
with such divergence, or one of them must have been carried partly
horizontally eight miles farther than the other. But either supposition argues
for power more than that of a local whirl or gust, or argues for a great,
specific disturbance, of which there is no record—for the month of May,
1894.
Nevertheless—as if I really were reasonable—I do feel that I have to
accept that this turtle had been raised from this earth’s surface, somewhere
near Vicksburg—because the gopher turtle is common in the southern
states.
Then I think of a hurricane that occurred in the state of Mississippi weeks
or months before May 11, 1894.
No—I don’t look for it—and inevitably find it.
Or that things can go up so high in hurricanes that they stay up
indefinitely—but may, after a while, be shaken down by storms. Over and
over have we noted the occurrence of strange falls in storms. So then that
the turtle and the piece of alabaster may have had far different origins—
from different worlds, perhaps— have entered a region of suspension over
this earth—wafting near each other—long duration—final precipitation by
atmospheric disturbance—with hail—or that hailstones, too, when large, are
phenomena of suspension of long duration: that it is highly unacceptable
that the very large ones could become so great only in falling from the
clouds.
Over and over has the note of disagreeableness, or of putrefaction, been
struck—long duration. Other indications of long duration.
I think of a region somewhere above this earth’s surface in which
gravitation is inoperative and is not governed by the square of the distance
—quite as magnetism is negligible at a very short distance from a magnet.
Theoretically the attraction of a magnet should decrease with the square of
the distance, but the falling-off is found to be almost abrupt at a short
distance.
I think that things raised from this earth’s surface to that region have been
held there until shaken down by storms—
The Super-Sargasso Sea.ling-off is found to be almost abrupt at a short
distance.
I think that things raised from this earth’s surface to that region have been
held there until shaken down by storms—
The Super-Sargasso Sea.

--- PAGE BREAK ---be almost abrupt at a short
distance.
I think that things raised from this earth’s surface to that region have been
held there until shaken down by storms—
The Super-Sargasso Sea.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Derelicts, rubbish, old cargoes from inter-planetary wrecks; things cast
out into what is called space by convulsions of other planets, things from
the times of the Alexanders, Caesars and Napoleons of Mars and Jupiter and
Neptune; things raised by this earth’s cyclones: horses and barns and
elephants and flies and dodoes, moas, and pterodactyls; leaves from modern
trees and leaves of the Carboniferous era—all, however, tending to
disintegrate into homogeneous-looking muds or dusts, red or black or
yellow— treasure-troves for the palaeontologists and for the archaeologists
— accumulations of centuries—cyclones of Egypt, Greece, and Assyria —
fishes dried and hard, there a short time: others there long enough to putrefy
—
But the omnipresence of Heterogeneity—or living fishes, also— ponds
of fresh water: oceans of salt water.
As to the Law of Gravitation, I prefer to take one simple stand:
Orthodoxy accepts the correlation and equivalence of forces:
Gravitation is one of these forces.
All other forces have phenomena of repulsion and of inertness
irrespective of distance, as well as of attraction.
But Newtonian Gravitation admits attraction only:
Then Newtonian Gravitation can be only one-third acceptable even to the
orthodox, or there is denial of the correlation and equivalence of forces.
Or still simpler:
Here are the data.
Make what you will, yourself, of them.
In our Intermediatist revolt against homogeneous, or positive,
explanations, or our acceptance that the all-sufficing cannot be less than
universality, besides which, however, there would be nothing to suffice, our
expression upon the Super-Sargasso Sea, though it harmonizes with data of
fishes that fall as if from a stationary source— and, of course, with other
data, too—is inadequate to account for two peculiarities of the falls of
frogs:
That never has a fall of tadpoles been reported;
That never has a fall of full-grown frogs been reported—
Always frogs a few months old.
It sounds positive, but if there be such reports they are somewhere out of
my range of reading.s been reported;
That never has a fall of full-grown frogs been reported—
Always frogs a few months old.
It sounds positive, but if there be such reports they are somewhere out of
my range of reading.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t never has a fall of full-grown frogs been reported—
Always frogs a few months old.
It sounds positive, but if there be such reports they are somewhere out of
my range of reading.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

But tadpoles would be more likely to fall from the sky than would frogs,
little or big, if such falls be attributed to whirlwinds; and more likely to fall
from the Super-Sargasso Sea if, though very tentatively and provisionally,
we accept the Super-Sargasso Sea.
Before we take up an especial expression upon the fall of immature and
larval forms of life to this earth, and the necessity then of conceiving of
some factor besides mere stationariness or suspension or stagnation, there
are other data that are similar to data of falls of fishes.
Science Gossip, 1886-238:
That small snails, of a land species, had fallen near Redruth, Cornwall,
July 8, 1886, “during a heavy thunderstorm”: roads and fields strewn with
them, so that they were gathered up by the hatful: none seen to fall by the
writer of this account: snails said to be “quite different to any previously
known in this district.”
But, upon page 282, we have better orthodoxy. Another correspondent
writes that he had heard of the supposed fall of snails: that he had supposed
that all such stories had gone the way of witch stories; that, to his
astonishment, he had read an account of this absurd story in a local
newspaper of “great and deserved repute.”
“I thought I should for once like to trace the origin of one of these
fabulous tales.”
Our own acceptance is that justice cannot be in an intermediate existence,
in which there can be approximation only to justice or to injustice; that to
be fair is to have no opinion at all; that to be honest is to be uninterested;
that to investigate is to admit prejudice; that nobody has ever really
investigated anything, but has always sought positively to prove or to
disprove something that was conceived of, or suspected, in advance.
“As I suspected,” says this correspondent, “I found that the snails were of
a familiar land-species”—that they had been upon the ground “in the first
place.”
He found that the snails had appeared after the rain: that “astonished
rustics had jumped to the conclusion that they had fallen.”
He met one person who said that he had seen the snails fall.
“This was his error,” says the investigator.
In the Philosophical Magazine, 58-310, there is an account of snails said
to have fallen at Bristol in a field of three acres, in such quantities that they
were shoveled up. It is said that the snails “may be considered as a local58-310, there is an account of snails said
to have fallen at Bristol in a field of three acres, in such quantities that they
were shoveled up. It is said that the snails “may be considered as a local

--- PAGE BREAK ---account of snails said
to have fallen at Bristol in a field of three acres, in such quantities that they
were shoveled up. It is said that the snails “may be considered as a local

--- PAGE BREAK ---

species.” Upon page 457, another correspondent says that the numbers had
been exaggerated, and that in his opinion they had been upon the ground in
the first place. But that there had been some unusual condition aloft comes
out in his observation upon “the curious azure-blue appearance of the sun,
at the time.”
Nature, 47-278:
That, according to Das Wetter, December, 1892, upon Aug. 9, 1892, a
yellow cloud appeared over Paderborn, Germany. From this cloud, fell a
torrential rain, in which were hundreds of mussels. There is no mention of
whatever may have been upon the ground in the first place, nor of a
whirlwind.
Lizards—said to have fallen on the sidewalks of Montreal, Canada, Dec.
28, 1857. (Notes and Queries, 8-6-104.)
In the Scientific American, 3-112, a correspondent writes, from South
Granville, N. Y., that, during a heavy shower, July 3, 1860, he heard a
peculiar sound at his feet, and looking down, saw a snake lying as if
stunned by a fall. It then came to life. Gray snake, about a foot long.
These data have any meaning or lack of meaning or degree of damnation
you please: but, in the matter of the fall that occurred at Memphis,
Tennessee, occur some strong significances. Our quasi-reasoning upon this
subject applies to all segregations so far considered.
Monthly Weather Review, Jan. 15, 1877:
That, in Memphis, Tenn., Jan. 15, 1877, rather strictly localized, or “in a
space of two blocks,” and after a violent storm in which the rain “fell in
torrents,” snakes were found. They were crawling on sidewalks, in yards,
and in streets, and in masses—but “none were found on roofs or any other
elevation above ground” and “none were seen to fall.”
If you prefer to believe that the snakes had always been there, or had
been upon the ground in the first place, and that it was only that something
occurred to call special attention to them, in the streets of Memphis, Jan. 15,
1877—why, that’s sensible: that’s the common sense that has been against
us from the first.
It is not said whether the snakes were of a known species or not, but that
“when first seen, they were of a dark brown, almost black.” Blacksnakes, I
suppose.
If we accept that these snakes did fall, even though not seen to fall by all
the persons who were out sight-seeing in a violent storm, and had not beenrk brown, almost black.” Blacksnakes, I
suppose.
If we accept that these snakes did fall, even though not seen to fall by all
the persons who were out sight-seeing in a violent storm, and had not been

--- PAGE BREAK ---ck.” Blacksnakes, I
suppose.
If we accept that these snakes did fall, even though not seen to fall by all
the persons who were out sight-seeing in a violent storm, and had not been

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in the streets crawling loose or in thick tangled masses, in the first place;
If we try to accept that these snakes had been raised from some other part
of this earth’s surface in a whirlwind;
If we try to accept that a whirlwind could segregate them—
We accept the segregation of other objects raised in that whirl-wind.
Then, near the place of origin, there would have been a fall of heavier
objects that had been snatched up with the snakes—stones, fence rails,
limbs of trees. Say that the snakes occupied the next gradation, and would
be the next to fall. Still farther would there have been separate falls of
lightest objects: leaves, twigs, tufts of grass.
In the Monthly Weather Review there is no mention of other falls said to
have occurred anywhere in January, 1877.
Again ours is the objection against such selectiveness by a whirl-wind.
Conceivably a whirlwind could scoop out a den of hibernating snakes, with
stones and earth and an infinitude of other dpbris, snatching up dozens of
snakes—I don’t know how many to a den— hundreds maybe—but,
according to the account of this occurrence in the New York Times, there
were thousands of them; alive; from one foot to eighteen inches in length.
The Scientific American, 36-86, records the fall, and says that there were
thousands of them. The usual whirlwind-explanation is given—“but in what
locality snakes exist in such abundance is yet a mystery.”
This matter of enormousness of numbers suggests to me something of a
migratory nature—but that snakes in the United States do not migrate in the
month of January, if ever.
As to falls or flutterings of winged insects from the sky, prevailing
notions of swarming would seem explanatory enough: nevertheless, in
instances of ants, there are some peculiar circumstances.
L’Astronomie, 1889-353:
Fall of fishes, June 13, 1889, in Holland; ants, Aug. 1, 1889, Strasbourg;
little toads, Aug. 2, 1889, Savoy.
Fall of ants, Cambridge, England, summer of 1874—“some were
wingless.” (Scientific American, 30-193.) Enormous fall of ants, Nancy,
France, July 21, 1887—”most of them were wingless.” (Nature, 36-349.)
Fall of enormous, unknown ants—size of wasps— Manitoba, June, 1895.
(Sci. Amer., 72-385.)
However, our expression will be:Nancy,
France, July 21, 1887—”most of them were wingless.” (Nature, 36-349.)
Fall of enormous, unknown ants—size of wasps— Manitoba, June, 1895.
(Sci. Amer., 72-385.)
However, our expression will be:

--- PAGE BREAK ---21, 1887—”most of them were wingless.” (Nature, 36-349.)
Fall of enormous, unknown ants—size of wasps— Manitoba, June, 1895.
(Sci. Amer., 72-385.)
However, our expression will be:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That wingless, larval forms of life, in numbers so enormous that
migration from some place external to this earth is suggested, have fallen
from the sky.
That these “migrations”—if such can be our acceptance—have occurred
at a time of hibernation and burial far in the ground of larvae in the northern
latitudes of this earth; that there is significance in recurrence of these falls
in the last of January—or that we have the square of an incredibility in such
a notion as that of selection of larvae by whirlwinds, compounded with
selection of the last of January.
I accept that there are “snow worms” upon this earth—whatever their
origin may have been. In the Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. of Philadelphia, 1899-
125, there is a description of yellow worms and black worms that have been
found together on glaciers in Alaska. Almost positively were there no other
forms of insect-life upon these glaciers, and there was no vegetation to
support insect-life, except microscopic organisms. Nevertheless the
description of this probably polymorphic species fits a description of larvae
said to have fallen in Switzerland, and less definitely fits another
description. There is no opposition here, if our data of falls are clear. Frogs
of every-day ponds look like frogs said to have fallen from the sky—except
the whitish frogs of Birmingham. However, all falls of larvae have not
positively occurred in the last of January:
London Times, April 14, 1837:
That, in the parish of Bramford Speke, Devonshire, a large number of
black worms, about three-quarters of an inch in length, had fallen in a
snowstorm.
In Timb’s Year Book, 1877-26, it is said that, in the winter of 1876, at
Christiania, Norway, worms were found crawling upon the ground. The
occurrence is considered a great mystery, because the worms could not have
come up from the ground, inasmuch as the ground was frozen at the time,
and because they were reported from other places, also, in Norway.
Immense number of black insects in a snowstorm, in 1827, at Pakroff,
Russia. (Scientific American, 30-193.)
Fall, with snow, at Orenburg, Russia, Dec. 14, 1830, of a multitude of
small, black insects, said to have been gnats, but also said to have had flea-
like motions. (Amer. Jour. Sci., 1-22-375.)
Large number of worms found in a snowstorm, upon the surface of snow
about four inches thick, near Sangerfield, N. Y., Nov. 18, 1850 (Scientifice had flea-
like motions. (Amer. Jour. Sci., 1-22-375.)
Large number of worms found in a snowstorm, upon the surface of snow
about four inches thick, near Sangerfield, N. Y., Nov. 18, 1850 (Scientific

--- PAGE BREAK ---ions. (Amer. Jour. Sci., 1-22-375.)
Large number of worms found in a snowstorm, upon the surface of snow
about four inches thick, near Sangerfield, N. Y., Nov. 18, 1850 (Scientific

--- PAGE BREAK ---

American, 6-96). The writer thinks that the worms had been brought to the
surface of the ground by rain, which had fallen previously.
Scientific American, Feb. 21, 1891:
“A puzzling phenomenon has been noted frequently in some parts of the
Valley Bend District, Randolph County, Va., this winter. The crust of the
snow has been covered two or three times with worms resembling the
ordinary cut worms. Where they come from, unless they fall with the snow
is inexplicable.” In the Scientific American, March 7, 1891, the Editor says
that similar worms had been seen upon the snow near Utica, N. Y., and in
Oneida and Herkimer Counties; that some of the worms had been sent to
the Department of Agriculture at Washington. Again two species, or
polymorphism. According to Prof. Riley, it was not polymorphism, “but
two distinct species”—which, because of our data, we doubt. One kind was
larger than the other: color-differences not distinctly stated. One is called
the larvae of the common soldier beetle and the other “seems to be a variety
of the bronze cut worm.” No attempt to explain the occurrence in snow.
Fall of great numbers of larvae of beetles, near Mortagne, France, May,
1858. The larvae were inanimate as if with cold. (Annales Société
Entomologique de France, 1858.)
Trans. Ent. Soc. of London, 1871-183, records “snowing of larvae,” in
Silesia, 1806; “appearance of many larvae on the snow,” in Saxony, 1811;
“larvae found alive on the snow,” 1828; larvae and snow which “fell
together,” in the Eifel, Jan. 30, 1847; “fall of insects,” Jan. 24, 1849, in
Lithuania; occurrence of larvae estimated at 300,000 on the snow in
Switzerland, in 1856. The compiler says that most of these larvae live
underground, or at the roots of trees; that whirlwinds uproot trees, and carry
away the larvae— conceiving of them as not held in masses of frozen earth
—all as neatly detachable as currants in something. In the Revue et Magasin
de Zoologie, 1849-72, there is an account of the fall in Lithuania, Jan. 24,
1849—that black larvae had fallen in enormous numbers.
Larvae thought to have been of beetles, but described as “caterpillars,”
not seen to fall, but found crawling on the snow, after a snowstorm, at
Warsaw, Jan. 20, 1850. (All the Year Round, 8-253.)
Flammarion (The Atmosphere, p. 414) tells of a fall of larvae that
occurred Jan. 30, 1869, in a snowstorm, in Upper Savoy: “They could not
have been hatched in the neighborhood, for, during the days preceding, the
temperature had been very low”; said to have been of a species common in869, in a snowstorm, in Upper Savoy: “They could not
have been hatched in the neighborhood, for, during the days preceding, the
temperature had been very low”; said to have been of a species common in

--- PAGE BREAK ---in Upper Savoy: “They could not
have been hatched in the neighborhood, for, during the days preceding, the
temperature had been very low”; said to have been of a species common in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the south of France. In La Science Pour Tous, 14-183, it is said that with
these larvae there were developed insects.
L’Astronomie, 1890-313:
That, upon the last of January, 1890, there fell, in a great tempest, in
Switzerland, incalculable numbers of larvae: some black and some yellow;
numbers so great that hosts of birds were attracted.
Altogether we regard this as one of our neatest expressions for external
origins and against the whirlwind explanation. If an exclusionist says that,
in January, larvae were precisely and painstakingly picked out of frozen
ground, in incalculable numbers, he thinks of a tremendous force—
disregarding its refinements: then if origin and precipitation be not far apart,
what becomes of an infinitude of other dpbris, conceiving of no time for
segregation"
If he thinks of a long translation—all the way from the south of France to
Upper Savoy, he may think then of a very fine sorting over by differences
of specific gravity—but in such a fine selection, larvae would be separated
from developed insects.
As to differences in specific gravity—the yellow larvae that fell in
Switzerland January, 1890, were three times the size of the black larvae that
fell with them. In accounts of this occurrence, there is no denial of the fall.
Or that a whirlwind never brought them together and held them together
and precipitated them and only them together—
That they came from Genesistrine.
There’s no escape from it. We’ll be persecuted for it. Take it or leave it—
Genesistrine.
The notion is that there is somewhere aloft a place of origin of life
relatively to this earth. Whether it’s the planet Genesistrine, or the moon, or
a vast amorphous region super-jacent to this earth, or an island in the Super-
Sargasso Sea, should perhaps be left to the researches of other super—or
extra—geographers. That the first unicellular organisms may have come
here from Genesistrine—or that men or anthropomorphic beings may have
come here before amoebae: that, upon Genesistrine, there may have been an
evolution expressible in conventional biologic terms, but that evolution
upon this earth has been—like evolution in modern Japan—induced by
external influences; that evolution, as a whole, upon this earth, has been a
process of population by immigration or by bombardment. Some notes I
have upon remains of men and animals encysted, or covered with clay orces; that evolution, as a whole, upon this earth, has been a
process of population by immigration or by bombardment. Some notes I
have upon remains of men and animals encysted, or covered with clay or

--- PAGE BREAK ---as a whole, upon this earth, has been a
process of population by immigration or by bombardment. Some notes I
have upon remains of men and animals encysted, or covered with clay or

--- PAGE BREAK ---

stone, as if fired here as projectiles, I omit now, because it seems best to
regard the whole phenomenon as a tropism—as a geotropism—probably
atavistic, or vestigial, as it were, or something still continuing long after
expiration of necessity; that, once upon a time, all kinds of things came here
from Genesistrine, but that now only a few kinds of bugs and things, at long
intervals, feel the inspiration.
Not one instance have we of tadpoles that have fallen to this earth. It
seems reasonable that a whirlwind could scoop up a pond, frogs and all, and
cast down the frogs somewhere else: but, then, more reasonable that a
whirlwind could scoop up a pond, tadpoles and all—because tadpoles are
more numerous in their season than are the frogs in theirs: but the tadpole-
season is earlier in the spring, or in a time that is more tempestuous.
Thinking in terms of causation—as if there were real causes—our notion is
that, if X is likely to cause Y, but is more likely to cause Z, but does not
cause Z, X is not the cause of Y. Upon this quasi-sorites, we base our
acceptance that the little frogs that have fallen to this earth are not products
of whirlwinds: that they came from externality, or from Genesistrine.
I think of Genesistrine in terms of biologic mechanics: not that
somewhere there are persons who collect bugs in or about the last of
January and frogs in July and August, and bombard this earth, any more
than do persons go through northern regions, catching and collecting birds,
every autumn, then casting them southward.
But atavistic, or vestigial, geotropism in Genesistrine—or a million
larvae start crawling, and a million little frogs start hopping— knowing no
more what it’s all about than we do when we crawl to work in the morning
and hop away at night.
I should say, myself, that Genesistrine is a region in the Super-Sargasso
Sea, and that parts of the Super-Sargasso Sea have rhythms of susceptibility
to this earth’s attraction.nd hop away at night.
I should say, myself, that Genesistrine is a region in the Super-Sargasso
Sea, and that parts of the Super-Sargasso Sea have rhythms of susceptibility
to this earth’s attraction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---.
I should say, myself, that Genesistrine is a region in the Super-Sargasso
Sea, and that parts of the Super-Sargasso Sea have rhythms of susceptibility
to this earth’s attraction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
8
ACCEPT that, when there are storms, the damnedest of excluded,
excommunicated things—things that are leprous to the faithful—are
brought down—from the Super-Sargasso Sea—or from what for
convenience we call the Super-Sargasso Sea—which by no means has been
taken into full acceptance yet.
That things are brought down by storms, just as, from the depths of the
sea things are brought up by storms. To be sure it is orthodoxy that storms
have little, if any, effect below the waves of the ocean—but—of course—
only to have an opinion is to be ignorant of, or to disregard a contradiction,
or something else that modifies an opinion out of distinguishability.
Symons’ Meteorological Magazine, 47-180:
That, along the coast of New Zealand, in regions not subject to
submarine volcanic action, deep-sea fishes are often brought up by storms.
Iron and stones that fall from the sky; and atmospheric disturbances:
“There is absolutely no connection between the two phenomena.”
(Symons.
The orthodox belief is that objects moving at planetary velocity would,
upon entering this earth’s atmosphere, be virtually unaffected by hurricanes;
might as well think of a bullet swerved by someone fanning himself. The
only trouble with the orthodox reasoning is the usual trouble—its phantom-
dominant—its basing upon a myth— data we’ve had, and more we’ll have,
of things in the sky having no independent velocity.
There are so many storms and so many meteors and meteorites that it
would be extraordinary if there were no concurrences. Nevertheless so
many of these concurrences are listed by Prof. Baden-Powell (Rept. Brit.
Assoc., 1850-54) that one—notices.
See Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1860—other instances.
The famous fall of stones at Siena, Italy, 1794—”in a violent storm.”
See Greg’s Catalogues—many instances. One that stands out is— “bright
ball of fire and light in a hurricane in England, Sept. 2, 1786.” The
remarkable datum here is that this phenomenon was visible forty minutes.atalogues—many instances. One that stands out is— “bright
ball of fire and light in a hurricane in England, Sept. 2, 1786.” The
remarkable datum here is that this phenomenon was visible forty minutes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nces. One that stands out is— “bright
ball of fire and light in a hurricane in England, Sept. 2, 1786.” The
remarkable datum here is that this phenomenon was visible forty minutes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That’s about 800 times the duration that the orthodox give to meteors and
meteorites.
See the Annual Register—many instances.
In Nature, Oct. 25, 1877, and the London Times, Oct. 15, 1877,
something that fell in a gale of Oct. 14, 1877, is described as a “huge ball of
green fire.” This phenomenon is described by another correspondent, in
Nature, 17-10, and an account of it by another correspondent was
forwarded to Nature by W. F. Denning.
There are so many instances that some of us will revolt against the
insistence of the faithful that it is only coincidence, and accept that there is
connection of the kind called causal. If it is too difficult to think of stones
and metallic masses swerved from their courses by storms, if they move at
high velocity, we think of low velocity, or of things having no velocity at
all, hovering a few miles above this earth, dislodged by storms, and falling
luminously.
But the resistance is so great here, and “coincidence” so insisted upon
that we’d better have some more instances:
Aerolite in a storm at St. Leonards-on-sea, England, Sept. 17, 1885—no
trace of it found (Annual Register, 1885); meteorite in a gale, March 1,
1886, described in the Monthly Weather Review, March, 1886; meteorite in
a thunderstorm, off coast of Greece, Nov. 19, 1899 (Nature, 61-111); fall of
a meteorite in a storm, July 7, 1883, near Lachine, 4uebec (Monthly
Weather Review, July, 1883); same phenomenon noted in Nature, 28-319;
meteorite in a whirl-wind, Sweden, Sept. 24, 1883 (Nature, 29-15).
London Roy. Soc. Proc., 6-276:
A triangular cloud that appeared in a storm, Dec. 17, 1852; a red nucleus,
about half the apparent diameter of the moon, and a long tail; visible 13
minutes; explosion of the nucleus.
Nevertheless, in Science Gossip, n.s., 6-65, it is said that, though
meteorites have fallen in storms, no connection is supposed to exist
between the two phenomena, except by the ignorant peasantry.
But some of us peasants have gone through the Report of the British
Association, 1852. Upon page 239, Dr. Buist, who had never heard of the
Super-Sargasso Sea, says that, though it is difficult to trace connection
between the phenomena, three aerolites had fallen in five months, in India,
during thunderstorms, in 1851 (may have been 1852). For accounts by
witnesses, see page 229 of the Report.trace connection
between the phenomena, three aerolites had fallen in five months, in India,
during thunderstorms, in 1851 (may have been 1852). For accounts by
witnesses, see page 229 of the Report.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tween the phenomena, three aerolites had fallen in five months, in India,
during thunderstorms, in 1851 (may have been 1852). For accounts by
witnesses, see page 229 of the Report.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Or—we are on our way to account for “thunderstones.”
It seems to me that, very strikingly here, is borne out the general
acceptance that ours is only an intermediate existence, in which there is
nothing fundamental, or nothing final to take as a positive standard to judge
by.
Peasants believed in meteorites.
Scientists excluded meteorites.
Peasants believe in “thunderstones.”
Scientists exclude “thunderstones.”
It is useless to argue that peasants are out in the fields, and that scientists
are shut up in laboratories and lecture rooms. We cannot take for a real base
that, as to phenomena with which they are more familiar, peasants are more
likely to be right than are scientists: a host of biologic and meteorologic
fallacies of peasants rises against us.
I should say that our “existence” is like a bridge—except that that
comparison is in static terms—but like the Brooklyn Bridge, upon which
multitudes of bugs are seeking a fundamental—coming to a girder that
seems firm and final—but the girder is built upon supports. A support then
seems final. But it is built upon underlying structures. Nothing final can be
found in all the bridge, because the bridge itself is not a final thing in itself,
but is a relationship between Manhattan and Brooklyn. If our “existence” is
a relationship between the Positive Absolute and the Negative Absolute, the
quest for finality in it is hopeless: everything in it must be relative, if the
“whole” is not a whole, but is, itself, a relation.
In the attitude of Acceptance, our pseudo-base is:
Cells of an embryo are in the reptilian era of the embryo;
Some cells feel stimuli to take on new appearances.
If it be of the design of the whole that the next era be mammalian, those
cells that turn mammalian will be sustained against resistance, by inertia, of
all the rest, and will be relatively right, though not finally right, because
they, too, in time will have to give way to characters of other eras of higher
development.
If we are upon the verge of a new era, in which Exclusionism must be
overthrown, it will avail thee not to call us base-born and frowsy peasants.
In our crude, bucolic way, we now offer an outrage upon common sense
that we think will some day be an unquestioned common-place:
That manufactured objects of stone and iron have fallen from the sky:In our crude, bucolic way, we now offer an outrage upon common sense
that we think will some day be an unquestioned common-place:
That manufactured objects of stone and iron have fallen from the sky:

--- PAGE BREAK ---ic way, we now offer an outrage upon common sense
that we think will some day be an unquestioned common-place:
That manufactured objects of stone and iron have fallen from the sky:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That they have been brought down from a state of suspension, in a region
of inertness to this earth’s attraction, by atmospheric disturbances.
The “thunderstone” is usually “a beautifully polished, wedge-shaped
piece of greenstone,” says a writer in the Cornhill Magazine, 50-517. It
isn’t: it’s likely to be of almost any kind of stone, but we call attention to
the skill with which some of them have been made. Of course this writer
says it’s all superstition. Otherwise he’d be one of us crude and simple sons
of the soil.
Conventional damnation is that stone implements, already on the ground
—“on the ground in the first place”—are found near where lightning was
seen to strike: that are supposed by astonished rustics, or by intelligence of
a low order, to have fallen in or with lightning.
Throughout this book, we class a great deal of science with bad fiction.
When is fiction bad, cheap, low" If coincidence is overworked. That’s one
way of deciding. But with single writers coincidence seldom is overworked:
we find the excess in the subject at large. Such a writer as the one of the
Cornhill Magazine tells us vaguely of beliefs of peasants: there is no
massing of instance after instance after instance. Here ours will be the
method of mass formation.
Conceivably lightning may strike the ground near where there was a
wedge-shaped object in the first place: again and again and again: lightning
striking ground near wedge-shaped object in China; lightning striking
ground near wedge-shaped object in Scotland; lightning striking ground
near wedge-shaped object in Central Africa: coincidence in France;
coincidence in Java; coincidence in South America—
We grant a great deal but note a tendency to restlessness. Nevertheless
this is the psycho-tropism of science to all “thunderstones” said to have
fallen luminously.
As to greenstone, it is in the island of Jamaica, where the notion is
general that axes of a hard greenstone fall from the sky—”during the rains.”
(Jour. Inst. Jamaica, 2-4.) Some other time we shall inquire into this
localization of objects of a specific material. “They are of a stone nowhere
else to be found in Jamaica.” (Notes and Queries, 2-8-24.)
In my own tendency to exclude, or in the attitude of one peasant or
savage who thinks he is not to be classed with other peasants or savages, I
am not very much impressed with what natives think. It would be hard to
tell why. If the word of a Lord Kelvin carries no more weight, uponks he is not to be classed with other peasants or savages, I
am not very much impressed with what natives think. It would be hard to
tell why. If the word of a Lord Kelvin carries no more weight, upon

--- PAGE BREAK ---lassed with other peasants or savages, I
am not very much impressed with what natives think. It would be hard to
tell why. If the word of a Lord Kelvin carries no more weight, upon

--- PAGE BREAK ---

scientific subjects, than the word of a Sitting Bull, unless it be in agreement
with conventional opinion—I think it must be because savages have bad
table manners. However, my snobbishness, in this respect, loosens up
somewhat before very widespread belief by savages and peasants. And the
notion of “thunder-stones” is as wide as geography itself.
The natives of Burma, China, Japan, according to Blinkenberg (Thunder
Weapons, p. 100)—not, of course, that Blinkenberg accepts one word of it
—think that carved stone objects have fallen from the sky, because they
think they have seen such objects fall from the sky. Such objects are called
“thunderbolts” in these countries. They are called “thunderstones” in
Moravia, Holland, Belgium, France, Cambodia, Sumatra, and Siberia.
They’re called “storm stones” in Lausitz; “sky arrows” in Slavonia;
“thunder axes” in England and Scotland; “lightning stones” in Spain and
Portugal; “sky axes” in Greece; “lightning flashes” in Brazil; “thunder
teeth” in Amboina.
The belief is as widespread as is belief in ghosts and witches, which only
the superstitious deny today.
As to beliefs by North American Indians, Tyler gives a list of references
(Primitive Culture, 2-237). As to South American Indians—“Certain stone
hatchets are said to have fallen from the heavens.” (Jour. Amer. Folk Lore,
17-203.)
If you, too, revolt against coincidence after coincidence after
coincidence, but find our interpretation of “thunderstones” just a little too
strong or rich for digestion, we recommend the explanation of one, Tallius,
written in 1649:
“The naturalists say they are generated in the sky by fulgurous exhalation
conglobed in a cloud by the circumfused humor.”
Of course the paper in the Cornhill Magazine was written with no
intention of trying really to investigate this subject, but to deride the notion
that worked-stone objects have ever fallen from the sky. A writer in the
Amer. Jour. Sci., 1-21-325, read this paper and thinks it remarkable “that
any man of ordinary reasoning powers should write a paper to prove that
thunderbolts do not exist.”
I confess that we’re a little flattered by that.
Over and over:
“It is scarcely necessary to suggest to the intelligent reader that
thunderstones are a myth.”to prove that
thunderbolts do not exist.”
I confess that we’re a little flattered by that.
Over and over:
“It is scarcely necessary to suggest to the intelligent reader that
thunderstones are a myth.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---rbolts do not exist.”
I confess that we’re a little flattered by that.
Over and over:
“It is scarcely necessary to suggest to the intelligent reader that
thunderstones are a myth.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

We contend that there is a misuse of a word here: we admit that only we
are intelligent upon this subject, if by intelligence is meant the inquiry of
inequilibrium, and that all other intellection is only mechanical reflex—of
course that intelligence, too, is mechanical, but less orderly and confined:
less obviously mechanical—that as an acceptance of ours becomes firmer
and firmer-established, we pass from the state of intelligence to reflexes in
ruts. An odd thing is that intelligence is usually supposed to be creditable. It
may be in the sense that it is mental activity trying to find out, but it is
confession of ignorance. The bees, the theologians, the dogmatic scientists
are the intellectual aristocrats. The rest of us are plebeians, not yet
graduated to Nirvana, or to the instinctive and suave as differentiated from
the intelligent and crude.
Blinkenberg gives many instances of the superstition of “thunderstones”
which flourishes only where mentality is in a lamentable state—or
universally. In Malacca, Sumatra, and Java, natives say that stone axes have
often been found under trees that have been struck by lightning.
Blinkenberg does not dispute this, but says it is coincidence: that the axes
were of course upon the ground in the first place: that the natives jumped to
the conclusion that these carved stones had fallen in or with lightning. In
Central Africa, it is said that often have wedge-shaped, highly polished
objects of stone, described as “axes,” been found sticking in trees that have
been struck by lightning—or by what seemed to be lightning. The natives,
rather like the unscientific persons of Memphis, Tenn., when they saw
snakes after a storm, jumped to the conclusion that the “axes” had not
always been sticking in the trees. Livingstone (Last Journal, pages 83, 89,
442, 448) says that he had never heard of stone implements used by natives
of Africa. A writer in the Report of the Smithsonian Institution, 1877-308,
says that there are a few.
That they are said, by the natives, to have fallen in thunderstorms.
As to luminosity, it is my lamentable acceptance that bodies falling
through this earth’s atmosphere, if not warmed even, often fall with a
brilliant light, looking like flashes of lightning. This matter seems
important: we’ll take it up later, with data.
In Prussia, two stone axes were found in the trunks of trees, one under
the bark. (Blinkenberg, Thunder Weapons, p. 100.)
The finders jumped to the conclusion that the axes had fallen there.ith data.
In Prussia, two stone axes were found in the trunks of trees, one under
the bark. (Blinkenberg, Thunder Weapons, p. 100.)
The finders jumped to the conclusion that the axes had fallen there.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, two stone axes were found in the trunks of trees, one under
the bark. (Blinkenberg, Thunder Weapons, p. 100.)
The finders jumped to the conclusion that the axes had fallen there.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Another stone ax—or wedge-shaped object of worked stone—said to
have been found in a tree that had been struck by something that looked like
lightning. (Thunder Weapons, p. 71.)
The finder jumped to the conclusion.
Story told by Blinkenberg, of a woman, who lived near Kulsb-jaergene,
Sweden, who found a flint near an old willow—”near her house.” I
emphasize “near her house” because that means familiar ground. The
willow had been split by something.
She jumped.
Cow killed by lightning, or by what looked like lightning (Isle of Sark,
near Guernsey). The peasant who owned the cow dug up the ground at the
spot and found a small greenstone “ax.” Blinken-berg says that he jumped
to the conclusion that it was this object that had fallen luminously, killing
the cow.
Reliquary, 1867-208:
A flint ax found by a farmer, after a severe storm—described as a “fearful
storm”—by a signal staff, which had been split by something. I should say
that nearness to a signal staff may be considered familiar ground.
Whether he jumped, or arrived at the conclusion by a more leisurely
process, the farmer thought that the flint object had fallen in the storm.
In this instance we have a lamentable scientist with us. It’s impossible to
have positive difference between orthodoxy and heresy: somewhere there
must be a merging into each other, or an overlapping. Nevertheless, upon
such a subject as this, it does seem a little shocking. In most works upon
meteorites, the peculiar, sulphurous odor of things that fall from the sky is
mentioned. Sir John Evans (Stone Implements, p. 57) says—with
extraordinary reasoning powers, if he could never have thought such a thing
with ordinary reasoning powers—that this flint object “proved to have been
the bolt, by its peculiar smell when broken.”
If it did so prove to be, that settles the whole subject. If we prove that
only one object of worked stone has fallen from the sky, all piling up of
further reports is unnecessary. However, we have already taken the stand
that nothing settles anything; that the disputes of ancient Greece are no
nearer solution now than they were several thousand years ago—all
because, in a positive sense, there is nothing to prove or solve or settle. Our
object is to be more nearly real than our opponents. Wideness is an aspect
of the Universal. We go on widely. According to us the fat man is nearere, there is nothing to prove or solve or settle. Our
object is to be more nearly real than our opponents. Wideness is an aspect
of the Universal. We go on widely. According to us the fat man is nearer

--- PAGE BREAK ---to prove or solve or settle. Our
object is to be more nearly real than our opponents. Wideness is an aspect
of the Universal. We go on widely. According to us the fat man is nearer

--- PAGE BREAK ---

godliness than is the thin man. Eat, drink, and approximate to the Positive
Absolute. Beware of negativeness, by which we mean indigestion.
The vast majority of “thunderstones” are described as “axes,” but
Meunier (La Nature, 1892-2-381) tells of one that was in his possession;
said to have fallen at Ghardia, Algeria, contrasting “profoundment” (pear-
shaped) with the angular outlines of ordinary meteorites. The conventional
explanation that it had been formed as a drop of molten matter from a larger
body seems reasonable to me; but with less agreeableness I note its fall in a
thunderstorm, the datum that turns the orthodox meteorologist pale with
rage, or induces a slight elevation of his eyebrows, if you mention it to him.
Meunier tells of another “thunderstone” said to have fallen in North
Africa. Meunier, too, is a little lamentable here: he quotes a soldier of
experience that such objects fall most frequently in the deserts of Africa.
Rather miscellaneous now:
“Thunderstone” said to have fallen in London, April, 1876: weight about
8 pounds: no particulars as to shape (Timb’s Year Book, 1877-246).
“Thunderstone” said to have fallen at Cardiff, Sept. 26, 1916 (London
Times, Sept. 28, 1916). According to Nature, 98-95, it was coincidence;
only a lightning flash had been seen.
Stone that fell in a storm, near St. Albans, England: accepted by the
Museum of St. Albans; said, at the British Museum, not to be of “true
meteoritic material.” (Nature, 80-34.)
London Times, April 26, 1876:
That, April 20, 1876, near Wolverhampton, fell a mass of meteoritic iron
during a heavy fall of rain. An account of this phenomenon in Nature, 14-
272, by H. S. Maskelyne, who accepts it as authentic. Also, see Nature, I3-
531.
For three other instances, see the Scientific American, 47-194; 52-83; 68-
325.
As to wedge-shape larger than could very well be called an “ax”:
Nature, 30-300:
That, May 27, 1884, at Tysnas, Norway, a meteorite had fallen: that the
turf was torn up at the spot where the object had been supposed to have
fallen; that two days later “a very peculiar stone” was found near by. The
description is—“in shape and size very like the fourth part of a large Stilton
cheese.”the object had been supposed to have
fallen; that two days later “a very peculiar stone” was found near by. The
description is—“in shape and size very like the fourth part of a large Stilton
cheese.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---supposed to have
fallen; that two days later “a very peculiar stone” was found near by. The
description is—“in shape and size very like the fourth part of a large Stilton
cheese.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is our acceptance that many objects and different substances have been
brought down by atmospheric disturbance from what— only as a matter of
convenience now, and until we have more data—we call the Super-Sargasso
Sea; however, our chief interest is in objects that have been shaped by
means similar to human handicraft.
Description of the “thunderstones” of Burma (Proc. Asiatic Soc. of
Bengal, 1869-183): said to be of a kind of stone unlike any other found in
Burma; called “thunderbolts” by the natives. I think there’s a good deal of
meaning in such expressions as “unlike any other found in Burma”—but
that if they had said anything more definite, there would have been
unpleasant consequences to writers in the 19th century.
More about the “thunderstones” of Burma, in the Proc. Soc. Antiq. of
London, 2-3-97. One of them, described as an “adze,” was exhibited by
Captain Duff, who wrote that there was no stone like it in its neighborhood.
Of course it may not be very convincing to say that because a stone is
unlike neighboring stones it had foreign origin—also we fear it is a kind of
plagiarism: we got it from the geologists, who demonstrate by this
reasoning the foreign origin of erratics. We fear we’re a little gross and
scientific at times.
But it’s my acceptance that a great deal of scientific literature must be
read between the lines. It’s not everyone who has the lament ableness of a
Sir John Evans. Just as a great deal of Voltaire’s meaning was inter-linear,
we suspect that a Captain Duff merely hints rather than to risk having a
Prof. Lawrence Smith fly at him and call him “a half-insane man.”
Whatever Captain Duff’s meaning may have been, and whether he smiled
like a Voltaire when he wrote it, Captain Duff writes of “the extremely soft
nature of the stone, rendering it equally useless as an offensive or defensive
weapon.”
Story, by a correspondent, in Nature, 34-53, of a Malay, of “considerable
social standing”—and one thing about our data is that, damned though they
be, they do so often bring us into awful good company—who knew of a tree
that had been struck, about a month before, by something in a thunderstorm.
He searched among the roots of this tree and found a “thunderstone.” Not
said whether he jumped or leaped to the conclusion that it had fallen:
process likely to be more leisurely in tropical countries. Also I’m afraid his
way of reasoning was not very original: just so were fragments of the Bath-
furnace meteorite, accepted by orthodoxy, discovered.likely to be more leisurely in tropical countries. Also I’m afraid his
way of reasoning was not very original: just so were fragments of the Bath-
furnace meteorite, accepted by orthodoxy, discovered.

--- PAGE BREAK ---isurely in tropical countries. Also I’m afraid his
way of reasoning was not very original: just so were fragments of the Bath-
furnace meteorite, accepted by orthodoxy, discovered.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

We shall now have an unusual experience. We shall read of some reports
of extraordinary circumstances that were investigated by a man of science
—not of course that they were really investigated by him, but that his
phenomena occupied a position approximating higher to real investigation
than to utter neglect. Over and over we read of extraordinary occurrences—
no discussion; not even a comment afterward findable; mere mention
occasionally—burial and damnation.
The extraordinary and how quickly it is hidden away.
Burial and damnation, or the obscurity of the conspicuous.
We did read of a man who, in the matter of snails, did travel some
distance to assure himself of something that he had suspected in advance;
and we remember Prof. Hitchcock, who had only to smite Amherst with the
wand of his botanical knowledge, and lo two fungi sprang up before night;
and we did read of Dr. Gray and his thousands of fishes from one pailful of
water—but these instances stand out; more frequently there was no
“investigation.” We now have a good many reported occurrences that were
“investigated.” Of things said to have fallen from the sky, we make, in the
usual scientific way, two divisions: miscellaneous objects and substances,
and symmetric objects attributable to beings like human beings, sub-
dividing into—wedges, spheres, and disks.
Jour. Roy. Met. Soc, 14-207:
That, July 2, 1866, a correspondent to a London newspaper wrote that
something had fallen from the sky, during a thunderstorm of June 30, 1866,
at Notting Hill. Mr. G. T. Symons, of Symons’ Meteorological Magazine,
investigated, about as fairly, and with about as unprejudiced a mind, as
anything ever has been investigated.
He says that the object was nothing but a lump of coal: that next door to
the home of the correspondent coal had been unloaded the day before. With
the uncanny wisdom of the stranger upon unfamiliar ground that we have
noted before, Mr. Symons saw that the coal reported to have fallen from the
sky, and the coal unloaded more prosaically the day before, were identical.
Persons in the neighborhood, unable to make this simple identification, had
bought from the correspondent pieces of the object reported to have fallen
from the sky. As to credulity, I know of no limits for it—but when it comes
to paying out money for credulity—oh, no standards to judge by, of course
—just the same—the object reported to have fallen
from the sky. As to credulity, I know of no limits for it—but when it comes
to paying out money for credulity—oh, no standards to judge by, of course
—just the same—

--- PAGE BREAK ---to have fallen
from the sky. As to credulity, I know of no limits for it—but when it comes
to paying out money for credulity—oh, no standards to judge by, of course
—just the same—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The trouble with efficiency is that it will merge away into excess. With
what seems to me to be super-abundance of convincingness, Mr. Symons
then lugs another character into his little comedy:
That it was all a hoax by a chemist’s pupil, who had filled a capsule with
an explosive, and “during the storm had thrown the burning mass into the
gutter, so making an artificial thunderbolt.”
Or even Shakespeare, with all his inartistry, did not lug in King Lear to
make Hamlet complete.
Whether I’m lugging in something that has no special meaning, myself,
or not, I find that this storm of June 30, 1866, was peculiar. It is described
in the London Times, July 2, 1866: that “during the storm, the sky in many
places remained partially clear while hail and rain were falling.” That may
have more meaning when we take up the possible extra-mundane origin of
some hailstones, especially if they fall from a cloudless sky. Mere
suggestion, not worth much, that there may have been falls of extra-
mundane substances, in London, June 30, 1866.
Clinkers, said to have fallen, during a storm, at Kilburn, July 5, 1877:
According to the Kilburn Times, July 7, 1877, quoted by Mr. Symons, a
street had been “literally strewn,” during the storm, with a mass of clinkers,
estimated at about two bushels: sizes from that of a walnut to that of a
man’s hand—“pieces of the clinkers can be seen at the Kilburn Times
office.”
If these clinkers, or cinders, were refuse from one of the super-mercantile
constructions from which coke and coal and ashes occasionally fall to this
earth, or, rather, to the Super-Sargasso Sea, from which dislodgment by
tempests occurs, it is intermediatistic to accept that they must merge away
somewhere with local phenomena of the scene of precipitation. If a red-hot
stove should drop from a cloud into Broadway, someone would find that at
about the time of the occurrence, a moving van had passed, and that the
moving men had tired of the stove, or something—that it had not been
really red-hot, but had been rouged instead of blacked, by some absent
minded housekeeper. Compared with some of the scientific explanations
that we have encountered, there’s considerable restraint, I think, in that one.
Mr. Symons learned that in the same street—he emphasizes that it was a
short street—there was a fire-engine station. I had such an impression of
him hustling and bustling around at Notting Hill, searching cellars until he
found one with newly arrived coal in it; ringing door bells, exciting a wholee-engine station. I had such an impression of
him hustling and bustling around at Notting Hill, searching cellars until he
found one with newly arrived coal in it; ringing door bells, exciting a whole

--- PAGE BREAK ---had such an impression of
him hustling and bustling around at Notting Hill, searching cellars until he
found one with newly arrived coal in it; ringing door bells, exciting a whole

--- PAGE BREAK ---

neighborhood, calling up to second-story windows, stopping people in the
streets, hotter and hotter on the trail of a wretched imposter of a chemist’s
pupil. After his efficiency at Notting Hill, we’d expect to hear that he went
to the station, and—something like this:
“It is said that clinkers fell, in your street, at about ten minutes past four
o’clock, afternoon of July fifth. Will you look over your records and tell me
where your engine was at about ten minutes past four, July fifth"”
Mr. Symons says:
“I think that most probably they had been raked out of the steam fire-
engine.”
June 20, 1880, it was reported that a “thunderstone” had struck the house
at 180 Oakley Street, Chelsea, falling down the chimney, into the kitchen
grate.
Mr. Symons investigated.
He describes the “thunderstone” as an “agglomeration of brick, soot,
unburned coal, and cinder.”
He says that, in his opinion, lightning had flashed down the chimney, and
had fused some of the brick of it.
He does think it remarkable that the lightning did not then scatter the
contents of the grate, which were disturbed only as if a heavy body had
fallen. If we admit that climbing up the chimney to find out is too rigorous a
requirement for a man who may have been large, dignified and subject to
expansions, the only unreasonableness we find in what he says—as judged
by our more modern outlook, is:
“I suppose that no one would suggest that bricks are manufactured in the
atmosphere.”
Sounds a little unreasonable to us, because it is so of the positivistic spirit
of former times, when it was not so obvious that the highest incredibility
and laughability must merge away with the “proper”—as the Sci. Am. Sup.
would say. The preposterous is always interpretable in terms of the
“proper,” with which it must be continuous—or—clay-like masses such as
have fallen from the sky—tremendous heat generated by their velocity—
they bake— bricks.
We begin to suspect that Mr. Symons exhausted himself at Notting Hill.
It’s a warning to efficiency-fanatics.
Then the instance of three lumps of earthy matter, found upon a well-
frequented path, after a thunderstorm, at Reading, July 3, 1883. There are soNotting Hill.
It’s a warning to efficiency-fanatics.
Then the instance of three lumps of earthy matter, found upon a well-
frequented path, after a thunderstorm, at Reading, July 3, 1883. There are so

--- PAGE BREAK ---warning to efficiency-fanatics.
Then the instance of three lumps of earthy matter, found upon a well-
frequented path, after a thunderstorm, at Reading, July 3, 1883. There are so

--- PAGE BREAK ---

many records of the fall of earthy matter from the sky that it would seem
almost uncanny to find resistance here, were we not so accustomed to the
uncompromising stands of orthodoxy— which, in our metaphysics,
represent good, as attempts, but evil in their insufficiency. If I thought it
necessary, I’d list one hundred and fifty instances of earthy matter said to
have fallen from the sky. It is his antagonism to atmospheric disturbance
associated with the fall of things from the sky that blinds and hypnotizes a
Mr. Symons here. This especial Mr. Symons rejects the Reading substance
because it was not “of true meteoritic material.” It’s uncanny—or it’s not
uncanny at all, but universal—if you don’t take something for a standard of
opinion, you can’t have any opinion at all: but, if you do take a standard, in
some of its applications it must be preposterous. The carbonaceous
meteorites, which are unquestioned—though avoided, as we have seen—by
orthodoxy, are more glaringly of untrue meteoritic material than was this
substance of Reading. Mr. Symons says that these three lumps were upon
the ground “in the first place.”
Whether these data are worth preserving or not, I think that the appeal
that this especial Mr. Symons makes is worthy of a place in the museum
we’re writing. He argues against belief in all external origins “for our credit
as Englishmen.” He is a patriot, but I think that these foreigners had a small
chance “in the first place” for hospitality from him.
Then comes a “small lump of iron (two inches in diameter)” said to have
fallen, during a thunderstorm, at Brixton, Aug. 17, 1887. Mr. Symons says:
“At present I cannot trace it.”
He was at his best at Notting Hill: there’s been a marked falling off in his
later manner:
In the London Times, Feb. 1, 1888, it is said that a roundish object of iron
had been found, “after a violent thunderstorm,” in a garden at Brixton, Aug.
17, 1887. It was analyzed by a chemist, who could not identify it as true
meteoritic material. Whether a product of workmanship like human
workmanship or not, this object is described as an oblate spheroid, about
two inches across its major diameter. The chemist’s name and address are
given: Mr. J. James Morgan: Ebbw Vale.
Garden—familiar ground—I suppose that in Mr. Symons’ opinion this
symmetric object had been upon the ground “in the first place,” though he
neglects to say this. But we do note that he described this object as a
“lump,” which does not suggest the spheroidal or symmetric. It is ourt had been upon the ground “in the first place,” though he
neglects to say this. But we do note that he described this object as a
“lump,” which does not suggest the spheroidal or symmetric. It is our

--- PAGE BREAK ---ground “in the first place,” though he
neglects to say this. But we do note that he described this object as a
“lump,” which does not suggest the spheroidal or symmetric. It is our

--- PAGE BREAK ---

notion that the word “lump” was, because of its meaning of amorphousness,
used purposely to have the next datum stand alone, remote, without
similars. If Mr. Symons had said that there had been a report of another
round object that had fallen from the sky, his readers would be attracted by
an agreement. He distracts his readers by describing in terms of the
unprecedented—
“Iron cannon ball.”
It was found in a manure heap, in Sussex, after a thunderstorm.
However, Mr. Symons argues pretty reasonably, it seems to me, that,
given a cannon ball in a manure heap, in the first place, lightning might be
attracted by it, and, if seen to strike there, the untutored mind, or mentality
below the average, would leap or jump, or proceed with less celerity, to the
conclusion that the iron object had fallen.
Except that—if every farmer isn’t upon very familiar ground—or if every
farmer doesn’t know his own manure heap as well as Mr. Symons knew his
writing desk—
Then comes the instance of a man, his wife, and his three daughters, at
Casterton, Westmoreland, who were looking out at their lawn, during a
thunderstorm, when they “considered,” as Mr. Symons expresses it, that
they saw a stone fall from the sky, kill a sheep, and bury itself in the
ground.
They dug.
They found a stone ball.
Symons:
Coincidence. It had been there in the first place.
This object was exhibited at a meeting of the Royal Meteorological
Society by Mr. C. Carus-Wilson. It is described in the Journal’s list of
exhibits as a “sandstone” ball. It is described as “sandstone” by Mr.
Symons.
Now a round piece of sandstone may be almost anywhere in the ground
—in the first place—but, by our more or less discreditable habit of prying
and snooping, we find that this object was rather more complex and of
material less commonplace. In snooping through Knowledge, Oct. 9,1885,
we read that this “thunderstone” was in the possession of Mr. C. Carus-
Wilson, who tells the story of the witness and his family—the sheep killed,
the burial of something in the earth, the digging, and the finding. Mr. C.
Carus-Wilson describes the object as a ball of hard, ferruginous quartzite,y of the witness and his family—the sheep killed,
the burial of something in the earth, the digging, and the finding. Mr. C.
Carus-Wilson describes the object as a ball of hard, ferruginous quartzite,

--- PAGE BREAK ---his family—the sheep killed,
the burial of something in the earth, the digging, and the finding. Mr. C.
Carus-Wilson describes the object as a ball of hard, ferruginous quartzite,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

about the size of a cocoanut, weight about twelve pounds. Whether we’re
feeling around for significance or not, there is a suggestion not only of
symmetry but of structure in this object: it had an external shell, separated
from a loose nucleus. Mr. Carus-Wilson attributes this cleavage to unequal
cooling of the mass.
My own notion is that there is very little deliberate misrepresentation in
the writings of scientific men: that they are quite as guiltless in intent as are
other hypnotic subjects. Such a victim of induced belief reads of a stone
ball said to have fallen from the sky. Mechanically in his mind arise
impressions of globular lumps, or nodules, of sandstone, which are common
almost everywhere. He assimilates the reported fall with his impressions of
objects in the ground, in the first place. To an intermediatist, the phenomena
of intellection are only phenomena of universal process localized in human
minds. The process called “explanation” is only a local aspect of universal
assimilation. It looks like materialism: but the intermediatist holds that
interpretation of the immaterial, as it is called, in terms of the material, as it
is called, is no more rational than interpretation of the “material” in terms of
the “immaterial”: that there is in quasi-existence neither the material nor the
immaterial, but approximations one way or the other. But so hypnotic quasi-
reasons: that globular lumps of sandstone are common. Whether he jumps
or leaps, or whether only the frowsy and base-born are so athletic, his is the
impression, by assimilation, that this especial object is a ball of sandstone.
Or human mentality: its inhabitants are conveniences. It may be that Mr.
Symons’ paper was written before this object was exhibited to the members
of the Society, and with the charity with which, for the sake of diversity, we
intersperse our malices, we are willing to accept that he “investigated”
something that he had never seen. But whoever listed this object was
uncareful: it is listed as “sandstone.”
We’re making excuses for them.
Really—as it were—you know, we’re not quite so damned as we were.
One does not apologize for the gods and at the same time feel quite
utterly prostrate before them.
If this were a real existence, and all of us real persons, with real standards
to judge by, I’m afraid we’d have to be a little severe with some of these
Mr. Symonses. As it is, of course, seriousness seems out of place.
We note an amusing little touch in the indefinite allusion to “a man,” who
with his un-named family, had “considered” that he had seen a stone fall.s it is, of course, seriousness seems out of place.
We note an amusing little touch in the indefinite allusion to “a man,” who
with his un-named family, had “considered” that he had seen a stone fall.

--- PAGE BREAK ---seriousness seems out of place.
We note an amusing little touch in the indefinite allusion to “a man,” who
with his un-named family, had “considered” that he had seen a stone fall.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The “man” was the Rev. W. Carus-Wilson, who was well-known in his day.
The next instance was reported by W. B. Tripp, F. R. M. S.— that, during
a thunderstorm, a farmer had seen the ground in front of him plowed up by
something that was luminous.
Dug.
Bronze ax.
My own notion is that an expedition to the North Pole could not be so
urgent as that representative scientists should have gone to that farmer and
there spent a summer studying this one reported occurrence. As it is—un-
named farmer—somewhere—no date. The thing must stay damned.
Another specimen for our museum is a comment in Nature upon these
objects: that they are “of an amusing character, thus clearly showing that
they were of terrestrial, and not a celestial, character.” Just why celestiality,
or that of it which, too, is only of Intermediateness should not be quite as
amusing as terrestriality is beyond our reasoning powers, which we have
agreed are not ordinary. Of course there is nothing amusing about wedges
and spheres at all— or Archimedes and Euclid are humorists. It is that they
were described derisively. If you’d like a little specimen of the
standardization of orthodox opinion—
Amer. Met. Jour., 4-589:
“They are of an amusing character, thus clearly showing that they were of
a terrestrial and not a celestial character.”
I’m sure—not positively, of course—that we’ve tried to be as easy going
and lenient with Mr. Symons as his obviously scientific performance would
permit. Of course it may be that sub-consciously we were prejudiced
against him, instinctively classing him with St. Augustine, Darwin, St.
Jerome, and Lyell. As to the “thunder-stones,” I think that he investigated
them mostly “for the credit of Englishmen,” or in the spirit of the Royal
Krakatoa Committee, or about as the commission from the French Academy
investigated meteorites. According to a writer in Knowledge, 5-418, the
Krakatoa Committee attempted not in the least to prove what had caused
the atmospheric effects of 1883, but to prove—that Krakatoa did it.
Altogether I should think that the following quotation should be
enlightening to anyone who still thinks that these occurrences were
investigated not to support an opinion formed in advance:
In opening his paper, Mr. Symons say that he undertook his investigation
as to the existence of “thunderstones,” or “thunderbolts” as he calls themtigated not to support an opinion formed in advance:
In opening his paper, Mr. Symons say that he undertook his investigation
as to the existence of “thunderstones,” or “thunderbolts” as he calls them

--- PAGE BREAK ---rt an opinion formed in advance:
In opening his paper, Mr. Symons say that he undertook his investigation
as to the existence of “thunderstones,” or “thunderbolts” as he calls them

--- PAGE BREAK ---

—“feeling certain that there was a weak point somewhere, inasmuch as
‘thunderbolts’ have no existence.”
We have another instance of the reported fall of a “cannon ball.” It
occurred prior to Mr. Symons’ investigations, but is not mentioned by him.
It was investigated, however. In the Proc. Roy. Soc. Editi., 3-147, is the
report of a “thunderstone,” “supposed to have fallen in Hampshire, Sept.,
1852.” It was an iron cannon ball, or it was a “large nodule of iron pyrites
or bisulphuret of iron.” No one had seen it fall. It had been noticed, upon a
garden path, for the first time, after a thunderstorm. It was only a
“supposed” thing, because— “It had not the character of any known
meteorite.”
In the London Times, Sept. 16, 1852, appears a letter from Mr. George E.
Bailey, a chemist of Andover, Hants. He says that, in a very heavy
thunderstorm, of the first week of September, 1852, this iron object, had
fallen in the garden of Mr. Robert Dowling, of Andover; that it had fallen
upon a path “within six yards of the house.” It had been picked up
“immediately” after the storm by Mrs. Dowling. It was about the size of a
cricket ball: weight four pounds. No one had seen it fall. In the Times, Sept.
15, 1852, there is an account of this thunderstorm, which was of unusual
violence.
There are some other data relative to the ball of quartz of Westmoreland.
They’re poor things. There’s so little to them that they look like ghosts of
the damned. However, ghosts, when multiplied, take on what is called
substantiality—if the solidest thing conceivable, in quasi-existence, is only
concentrated phantomosity. It is not only that there have been other reports
of quartz that has fallen from the sky; there is another agreement. The round
quartz object of Westmoreland, if broken open and separated from its loose
nucleus, would be a round, hollow, quartz object. My pseudo position is
that two reports of similar extraordinary occurrences, one from England and
one from Canada—are interesting.
Proc. Canadian Institute, 3-7-8:
That, at the meeting of the Institute, of Dec. 1, 1888, one of the members,
Mr. I. A. Livingstone, exhibited a globular quartz body which he asserted
had fallen from the sky. It had been split open. It was hollow.
But the other members of the Institute decided that the object was
spurious, because it was not of “true meteoritic material.”asserted
had fallen from the sky. It had been split open. It was hollow.
But the other members of the Institute decided that the object was
spurious, because it was not of “true meteoritic material.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---from the sky. It had been split open. It was hollow.
But the other members of the Institute decided that the object was
spurious, because it was not of “true meteoritic material.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

No date; no place mentioned; we note the suggestion that it was only a
geode, which had been upon the ground in the first place. Its crystalline
lining was geode-like.
4uartz is upon the “index prohibitory” of Science. A monk who would
read Darwin would sin no more than would a scientist who would admit
that, except by the “up and down” process, quartz has ever fallen from the
sky—but Continuity: it is not excommunicated if part of or incorporated in
a baptized meteorite—St. Catherine’s of Mexico, I think. It’s as epicurean a
distinction as any ever made by theologians. Fassig lists a quartz pebble,
found in a hailstone ^Bibliography, part 2-355). “Up and down,” of course.
Another object of quartzite was reported to have fallen, in the autumn of
1880, at Schroon Lake, N. Y.—said in the Scientific American, 43-272 to be
a fraud—it was not—the usual. About the first of May, 1899, the
newspapers published a story of a “snow-white” meteorite that had fallen,
at Vincennes, Indiana. The Editor of the Monthly Weather Review (issue of
April, 1899) requested the local observer, at Vincennes, to investigate. The
Editor says that the thing was only a fragment of a quartz boulder. He says
that anyone with at least a public school education should know better than
to write that quartz has ever fallen from the sky.
Notes and Queries, 2-8-92:
That, in the Leyden Museum of Antiquities, there is a disk of quartz: 6
centimeters by 5 millimeters by about 5 centimeters; said to have fallen
upon a plantation in the Dutch West Indies, after a meteoric explosion.
Bricks.
I think this is a vice we’re writing. I recommend it to those who have
hankered for a new sin. At first some of our data were of so frightful or
ridiculous mien as to be hated, or eyebrowed, was only to be seen. Then
some pity crept in" I think that we can now embrace bricks.
The baked-clay-idea was all right in its place, but it rather lacks
distinction, I think. With our minds upon the concrete boats that have been
building terrestrially lately, and thinking of wrecks that may occur to some
of them, and of a new material for the deep-sea fishes to disregard—
Object that fell at Richland, South Carolina—yellow to gray— said to
look like a piece of brick. (Amer. Jour. Sci., 2-34-298.)
Pieces of “furnace-made brick” said to have fallen—in a hailstorm—at
Padua, August, 1834. (Edin. New Phil. Jour., 19-87.) The writer offered an
explanation that started another convention: that the fragments of brick hadade brick” said to have fallen—in a hailstorm—at
Padua, August, 1834. (Edin. New Phil. Jour., 19-87.) The writer offered an
explanation that started another convention: that the fragments of brick had

--- PAGE BREAK ---ave fallen—in a hailstorm—at
Padua, August, 1834. (Edin. New Phil. Jour., 19-87.) The writer offered an
explanation that started another convention: that the fragments of brick had

--- PAGE BREAK ---

been knocked from buildings by the hailstones. But there is here a
concomitant that will be disagreeable to anyone who may have been
inclined to smile at the now digestible-enough notion that furnace-made
bricks have fallen from the sky. It is that in some of the hailstones—two per
cent of them— that were found with the pieces of brick, was a light grayish
powder.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 337-365:
Padre Sechi explains that a stone said to have fallen, in a thunderstorm, at
Supino, Italy, September, 1875, had been knocked from a roof.
Nature, 33-153:
That it had been reported that a good-sized stone, of form clearly
artificial, had fallen at Naples, November, 1885. The stone was described
by two professors of Naples, who had accepted it as inexplicable but
veritable. They were visited by Dr. H. Johnstone-Lavis, the correspondent
to Nature, whose investigations had convinced him that the object was a
“shoemaker’s lapstone.”
Now to us of the initiated, or to us of the wider outlook, there is nothing
incredible in the thought of shoemakers in other worlds— but I suspect that
this characterization is tactical.
This object of worked stone, or this shoemaker’s lapstone, was made of
Vesuvian lava, Dr. Johnstone-Lavis thinks: most probably of lava of the
flow of 1631, from the La Scala quarries. We condemn “most probably” as
bad positivism. As to the “men of position,” who had accepted that this
thing had fallen from the sky—“I have now obliged them to admit their
mistake,” says Dr. Johnstone-Lavis—or it’s always the stranger in Naples
who knows La Scala lava better than the natives know it.
Explanation:
That the thing had been knocked from, or thrown from, a roof.
As to attempt to trace the occurrence to any special roof—nothing said
upon that subject. Or that Dr. Johnstone-Lavis called a carved stone a
“lapstone,” quite as Mr. Symons called a spherical object a “cannon ball”:
bent upon a discrediting incongruity:
Shoemaking and celestiality.
It is so easy to say that axes, or wedge-shaped stones found on the
ground, were there in the first place, and that it is only coincidence that
lightning should strike near one—but the credibility of coincidences
decreases as the square root of their volume, I think. Our massed instancesn the first place, and that it is only coincidence that
lightning should strike near one—but the credibility of coincidences
decreases as the square root of their volume, I think. Our massed instances

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd that it is only coincidence that
lightning should strike near one—but the credibility of coincidences
decreases as the square root of their volume, I think. Our massed instances

--- PAGE BREAK ---

speak too much of coincidences of coincidences. But the axes, or wedge-
shaped objects that have been found in trees, are more difficult for
orthodoxy. For instance, Arago accepts that such finds have occurred, but
he argues that, if wedge-shaped stones have been found in tree trunks, so
have toads been found in tree trunks—did the toads fall there"
Not at all bad for a hypnotic.
Of course, in our acceptance, the Irish are the Chosen People. It’s
because they are characteristically best in accord with the underlying
essence of quasi-existence. M. Arago answers a question by asking another
question. That’s the only way a question can be answered in our Hibernian
kind of an existence.
Dr. Bodding argued with the natives of the Santal Parganas, India, who
said that cut and shaped stones had fallen from the sky, some of them
lodging in tree trunks. Dr. Bodding, with orthodox notions of velocity of
falling bodies, having missed, I suppose, some of the notes I have upon
large hailstones, which, for size, have fallen with astonishingly low
velocity, argued that anything falling from the sky would be “smashed to
atoms.” He accepts that objects of worked stone have been found in tree
trunks, but he explains:
That the Santals often steal trees, but do not chop them down in the usual
way, because that would be to make too much noise: they insert stone
wedges, and hammer them instead: then, if they should be caught, wedges
would not be the evidence against them that axes would be.
Or that a scientific man can’t be desperate and reasonable too.
Or that a pickpocket, for instance, is safe, though caught with his hand in
one’s pocket, if he’s gloved, say: because no court in the land would regard
a gloved hand in the same way in which a bare hand would be regarded.
That there’s nothing but intermediateness to the rational and the
proposterous: that this status of our own ratiocinations is perceptible
wherein they are upon the unfamiliar.
Dr. Bodding collected 50 of these shaped stones, said to have fallen from
the sky, in the course of many years. He says that the Santals are a highly
developed race, and for ages have not used stone implements—except in
this one nefarious convenience to him.
All explanations are localizations. They fade away before the universal. It
is difficult to express that black rains in England do not originate in the
smoke of factories—less difficult to express that black rains of South Africations. They fade away before the universal. It
is difficult to express that black rains in England do not originate in the
smoke of factories—less difficult to express that black rains of South Africa

--- PAGE BREAK ---y before the universal. It
is difficult to express that black rains in England do not originate in the
smoke of factories—less difficult to express that black rains of South Africa

--- PAGE BREAK ---

do not. We utter little stress upon the absurdity of Dr. Bodding’s
explanation, because, if anything’s absurd everything’s absurd, or, rather,
has in it some degree or aspect of absurdity, and we’ve never had
experience with any state except something somewhere between ultimate
absurdity and final reasonableness. Our acceptance is that Dr. Bodding’s
elaborate explanation does not apply to cut-stone objects found in tree
trunks in other lands: we accept that for the general, a local explanation is
inadequate.
As to “thunderstones” not said to have fallen luminously, and not said to
have been found sticking in trees, we are told by faithful hypnotics that
astonished rustics come upon prehistoric axes that have been washed into
sight by rains, and jump to the conclusion that the things have fallen from
the sky. But simple rustics come upon many prehistoric things: scrapers,
pottery, knives, hammers. We have no record of rusticity coming upon old
pottery after a rain, reporting the fall of a bowl from the sky.
Just now, my own acceptance is that wedge-shaped stone objects, formed
by means similar to human workmanship, have often fallen from the sky.
Maybe there are messages upon them. My acceptance is that they have been
called “axes” to discredit them: or the more familiar a term, the higher the
incongruity with vague concepts of the vast, remote, tremendous, unknown.
In Notes and Queries, 2-8-92, a writer says that he had a “thunderstone,”
which he had brought from Jamaica. The description is of a wedge-shaped
object; not of an ax:
“It shows no mark of having been attached to a handle.”
Of ten “thunderstones,” figured upon different pages in Blinken-berg’s
book, nine show no sign of ever having been attached to a handle: one is
perforated.
But in a report by Dr. C. Leemans, Director of the Leyden Museum of
Antiquities, objects, said by the Japanese to have fallen from the sky, are
alluded to throughout as “wedges.” In the Archaeologic Journal, 11-118, in
a paper upon the “thunderstones” of Java, the objects are called “wedges”
and not “axes.”
Our notion is that rustics and savages call wedge-shaped objects that fall
from the sky, “axes”: that scientific men, when it suits their purposes, can
resist temptations to prolixity and pedantry, and adopt the simple: that they
can be intelligible when derisive.that fall
from the sky, “axes”: that scientific men, when it suits their purposes, can
resist temptations to prolixity and pedantry, and adopt the simple: that they
can be intelligible when derisive.

--- PAGE BREAK ---sky, “axes”: that scientific men, when it suits their purposes, can
resist temptations to prolixity and pedantry, and adopt the simple: that they
can be intelligible when derisive.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

All of which lands us in a confusion, worse, I think, than we were in
before we so satisfactorily emerged from the distresses of—butter and
blood and ink and paper and punk and silk. Now it’s cannon balls and axes
and disks—if a “lapstone” be a disk—it’s a flat stone, at any rate.
A great many scientists are good impressionists: they snub the
impertinences of details. Had he been of a coarse, grubbing nature, I think
Dr. Bodding could never have so simply and beautifully explained the
occurrence of stone wedges in tree trunks. But to a realist, the story would
be something like this:
A man who needed a tree, in a land of jungles, where, for some unknown
reason, everyone’s very selfish with his trees, conceives that hammering
stone wedges makes less noise than does the chopping of wood: he and his
descendants, in a course of many years, cut down trees with wedges, and
escape penalty, because it never occurs to a prosecutor that the head of an
ax is a wedge.
The story is like every other attempted positivism—beautiful and
complete, until we see what it excludes or disregards; whereupon it
becomes the ugly and incomplete—but not absolutely, because there is
probably something of what is called foundation for it. Perhaps a mentally
incomplete Santal did once do something of the kind. Story told to Dr.
Bodding: in the usual scientific way, he makes a dogma of an aberration.
Or we did have to utter a little stress upon this matter, after all. They’re
so hairy and attractive, these scientists of the 19th century. We feel the zeal
of a Sitting Bull when we think of their scalps. We shall have to have an
expression of our own upon this confusing subject. We have expressions:
we don’t call them explanations: we’ve discarded explanations with beliefs.
Though everyone who scalps is, in the oneness of allness, himself likely to
be scalped, there is such a discourtesy to an enemy as the wearing of wigs.
Cannon balls and wedges, and what may they mean"
Bombardments of this earth—
Attempts to communicate—
Or visitors to this earth, long ago—explorers from the moon— taking
back with them, as curiosities, perhaps, implements of this earth’s
prehistoric inhabitants—a wreck—a cargo of such things held for ages in
suspension in the Super-Sargasso Sea—falling, or shaken, down
occasionally by storms—ities, perhaps, implements of this earth’s
prehistoric inhabitants—a wreck—a cargo of such things held for ages in
suspension in the Super-Sargasso Sea—falling, or shaken, down
occasionally by storms—

--- PAGE BREAK ---ements of this earth’s
prehistoric inhabitants—a wreck—a cargo of such things held for ages in
suspension in the Super-Sargasso Sea—falling, or shaken, down
occasionally by storms—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

But, by preponderance of description, we cannot accept that
“thunderstones” ever were attached to handles, or are prehistoric axes—
As to attempts to communicate with this earth by means of wedge-shaped
objects especially adapted to the penetration of vast, gelatinous areas spread
around this earth—
In the Proc. Roy. Irish Acad., 9-337, there is an account of a stone wedge
that fell from the sky, near Cashel, Tipperary, Aug. 2, 1865. The
phenomenon is not questioned, but the orthodox preference is to call it, not
ax-like, nor wedge-shaped, but “pyramidal.” For data of other pyramidal
stones said to have fallen from the sky, see Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1861-34. One
fell at Segowolee, India, March 6, 1853. Of the object that fell at Cashel,
Dr. Haughton says in the Proceedings “A singular feature is observable in
this stone, that I have never seen in any other:—the rounded edges of the
pyramid are sharply marked by lines on the black crust, as perfect as if
made by a ruler.” Dr. Haughton’s idea is that the marks may have been
made by “some peculiar tension in the cooling.” It must have been very
peculiar, if in all aerolites not wedge-shaped, no such phenomenon had ever
been observed. It merges away with one or two instances known, after Dr.
Haughton’s time, of seeming stratification in meteorites. Stratification in
meteorites, however, is denied by the faithful.
I begin to suspect something else.
A whopper is coming.
Later it will be as reasonable, by familiarity, as anything else ever said.
If someone should study the stone of Cashel, as Champollion studied the
Rosetta stone, he might—or, rather, would inevitably— find meaning in
those lines, and translate them into English—
Nevertheless I begin to suspect something else: something more subtle
and esoteric than graven characters upon stones that have fallen from the
sky, in attempts to communicate. The notion that other worlds are
attempting to communicate with this world is widespread: my own notion is
that it is not attempt at all—that it was achievement centuries ago.
I should like to send out a report that a “thunderstone” had fallen, say,
somewhere in New Hampshire—
And keep track of every person who came to examine that stone— trace
down his affiliations—keep track of him—
Then send out a report that a “thunderstone” had fallen at Stockholm, say
—New Hampshire—
And keep track of every person who came to examine that stone— trace
down his affiliations—keep track of him—
Then send out a report that a “thunderstone” had fallen at Stockholm, say
—

--- PAGE BREAK ---eep track of every person who came to examine that stone— trace
down his affiliations—keep track of him—
Then send out a report that a “thunderstone” had fallen at Stockholm, say
—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Would one of the persons who had gone to New Hampshire, be met again
in Stockholm" But—what if he had no anthropological, lapidartan, or
meteorological affiliations—but did belong to a secret society—
It is only a dawning credulity.
Of the three forms of symmetric objects that have, or haven’t, fallen from
the sky, it seems to me that the disk is the most striking. So far, in this
respect, we have been at our worst—possibly that’s pretty bad—but
“lapstones” are likely to be of considerable variety of form, and something
that is said to have fallen at sometime somewhere in the Dutch West Indies
is profoundly of the unchosen.
Now we shall have something that is high up in the castes of the
accursed:
Comptes Rendus, 1887-182:
That, upon June 20, 1887, in a “violent storm”—two months before the
reported fall of the symmetric iron object of Brixton—a small stone had
fallen from the sky at Tarbes, France: 13 millimeters in diameter; 5
millimeters thick; weight 2 grammes. Reported to the French Academy by
M. Sudre, professor of the Normal School, Tarbes.
This time the old convenience “there in the first place” is too greatly
resisted—the stone was covered with ice.
This object had been cut and shaped by means similar to human hands
and human mentality. It was a disk of worked stone—“tres regulier.” “Il a
ptp assurement travaillp.”
There’s not a word as to any known whirlwind anywhere: nothing of
other objects or dpbris that fell at or near this date, in France. The thing had
fallen alone. But as mechanically as any part of a machine responds to its
stimulus, the explanation appears in Comptes Rendus that this stone had
been raised by a whirlwind and then flung down.
It may be that in the whole nineteenth century no event more important
than this occurred. In La Nature, 1887, and in L’Année Scientifique, 1887,
this occurrence is noted. It is mentioned in one of the summer numbers of
Nature, 1887. Fassig lists a paper upon it in the Annuaire de Soc. Met.,
1887.
Not a word of discussion.
Not a subsequent mention can I find.
Our own expression:tioned in one of the summer numbers of
Nature, 1887. Fassig lists a paper upon it in the Annuaire de Soc. Met.,
1887.
Not a word of discussion.
Not a subsequent mention can I find.
Our own expression:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

What matters it how we, the French Academy, or the Salvation Army
may explain"
A disk of worked stone fell from the sky, at Tarbes, France, June 20,
1887.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

What matters it how we, the French Academy, or the Salvation Army
may explain"
A disk of worked stone fell from the sky, at Tarbes, France, June 20,
1887.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

M
9
Y own pseudo-conclusion:
That we’ve been damned by giants sound asleep, or by great
scientific principles and abstractions that cannot realize
themselves: that little harlots have visited their caprices upon us; that
clowns, with buckets of water from which they pretend to cast thousands of
good-sized fishes have anathematized us for laughing disrespectfully,
because, as with all clowns, underlying buffoonery is the desire to be taken
seriously; that pale ignorances, presiding over microscopes by which they
cannot distinguish flesh from nostoc or fishes’ spawn or frogs’ spawn, have
visited upon us their wan solemnities. We’ve been damned by corpses and
skeletons and mummies, which twitch and totter with pseudo-life derived
from conveniences.
Or there is only hypnosis. The accursed are those who admit they’re the
accursed.
If we be more nearly real we are reasons arraigned before a jury of
dream-phantasms.
Of all meteorites in museums, very few were seen to fall. It is considered
sufficient grounds for admission if specimens can’t be accounted for in any
way other than that they fell from the sky— as if in the haze of uncertainty
that surrounds all things, or that is the essence of everything, or in the
merging away of everything into something else, there could be anything
that could be accounted for in only one way. The scientist and the
theologian reason that if something can be accounted for in only one way, it
is accounted for in that way—or logic would be logical, if the conditions
that it imposes, but, of course, does not insist upon, could anywhere be
found in quasi-existence. In our acceptance, logic, science, art, religion are,
in our “existence,” premonitions of a coming awakening, like dawning
awarenesses of surroundings in the mind of a dreamer.
Any old chunk of metal that measures up to the standard of “true
meteoritic material” is admitted by the museums. It may seem incredible
that modern curators still have this delusion, but we suspect that the date onf metal that measures up to the standard of “true
meteoritic material” is admitted by the museums. It may seem incredible
that modern curators still have this delusion, but we suspect that the date on

--- PAGE BREAK ---s up to the standard of “true
meteoritic material” is admitted by the museums. It may seem incredible
that modern curators still have this delusion, but we suspect that the date on

--- PAGE BREAK ---

one’s morning newspaper hasn’t much to do with one’s modernity all day
long. In reading Fletcher’s catalogue, for instance, we learn that some of the
best-known meteorites were “found in draining a field”—“found in making
a road”—”turned up by the plow” occurs a dozen times. Someone fishing in
Lake Okeechobee, brought up an object in his fishing net. No meteorite had
ever been seen to fall near it. The U. S. National Museum accepts it.
If we have accepted only one of the data of “untrue meteoritic
material”—one instance of “carbonaceous” matter—if it be too difficult to
utter the word “coal”—we see that in this inclusion-exclusion, as in every
other means of forming an opinion, false inclusion and false exclusion have
been practiced by curators of museums.
There is something of ultra-pathos—of cosmic sadness—in this universal
search for a standard, and in belief that one has been revealed by either
inspiration or analysis, then the dogged clinging to a poor sham of a thing
long after its insufficiency has been shown— or renewed hope and search
for the special that can be true, or for something local that could also be
universal. It’s as if “true meteoritic material” were a “rock of ages” to some
scientific men. They cling. But clingers cannot hold out welcoming arms.
The only seemingly conclusive utterance, or seemingly substantial thing
to cling to, is a product of dishonesty, ignorance, or fatigue. All sciences go
back and back, until they’re worn out with the process, or until mechanical
reaction occurs: then they move forward—as it were. Then they become
dogmatic, and take for bases, positions that were only points of exhaustion.
So chemistry divided and sub-divided down to atoms; then, in the essential
insecurity of all quasi-constructions, it built up a system, which, to anyone
so obsessed by his own hypnoses that he is exempt to the chemist’s
hypnoses, is perceptibly enough an intellectual anaemia built upon
infinitesimal debilities.
In Science, n.s., 31-298, E. D. Hovey, of the American Museum of
Natural History, asserts or confesses that often have objects of material such
as fossiliferous limestone and slag been sent to him He says that these
things have been accompanied by assurances that they have been seen to
fall on lawns, on roads, in front of houses.
They are all excluded. They are not of true meteoritic material. They
were on the ground in the first place. It is only by coincidence that lightning
has struck, or that a real meteorite, which was unfindable, has struck near
objects of slag and limestone.aterial. They
were on the ground in the first place. It is only by coincidence that lightning
has struck, or that a real meteorite, which was unfindable, has struck near
objects of slag and limestone.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the ground in the first place. It is only by coincidence that lightning
has struck, or that a real meteorite, which was unfindable, has struck near
objects of slag and limestone.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mr. Hovey says that the list might be extended indefinitely. That’s a
tantalizing suggestion of some very interesting stuff—
He says:
“But it is not worth while.”
I’d like to know what strange, damned, excommunicated things have
been sent to museums by persons who have felt convinced that they had
seen what they may have seen, strongly enough to risk ridicule, to make up
bundles, go to express offices, and write letters. I accept that over the door
of every museum, into which such things enter, is written:
“Abandon Hope.”
If a Mr. Symons mentions one instance of coal, or of slag or cinders, said
to have fallen from the sky, we are not—except by association with the
“carbonaceous” meteorites—strong in our impression that coal sometimes
falls to this earth from coal-burning super-constructions up somewhere—
In Comptes Rendus, 91-197, M. Daubree tells the same story. Our
acceptance, then, is that other curators could tell this same story. Then the
phantomosity of our impression substantiates proportionately to its
multiplicity. M. Daubree says that often have strange damned things been
sent to the French museums, accompanied by assurances that they had been
seen to fall from the sky. Especially to our interest, he mentions coal and
slag.
Excluded.
Buried unnamed and undated in Science’s potter’s field.
I do not say that the data of the damned should have the same rights as
the data of the saved. That would be justice. That would be of the Positive
Absolute, and, though the ideal of, a violation of, the very essence of quasi-
existence, wherein only to have the appearance of being is to express a
preponderance of force one way or another—or inequilibrium, or
inconsistency, or injustice.
Our acceptance is that the passing away of exclusionism is a
phenomenon of the twentieth century: that gods of the twentieth century
will sustain our notions be they ever so unwashed and frowsy. But, in our
own expressions, we are limited, by the oneness of quasiness, to the very
same methods by which orthodoxy established and maintains its now sleek,
suave preposterousnesses. At any rate, though we are inspired by an
especial subtle essence—or imponderable, I think—that pervades the
twentieth century, we have not the superstition that we are offering anythingterousnesses. At any rate, though we are inspired by an
especial subtle essence—or imponderable, I think—that pervades the
twentieth century, we have not the superstition that we are offering anything

--- PAGE BREAK ---rate, though we are inspired by an
especial subtle essence—or imponderable, I think—that pervades the
twentieth century, we have not the superstition that we are offering anything

--- PAGE BREAK ---

as a positive fact. Rather often we have not the delusion that we’re any less
superstitious and credulous than any logician, savage, curator, or rustic.
An orthodox demonstration, in terms of which we shall have some
heresies, is that if things found in coal could have got there only by falling
there—they fell there.
So, in the Manchester Lit. and Phil. Soc. Mems., 2-9-306, it argued that
certain roundish stones that have been found in coal are “fossil aerolites”:
that they had fallen from the sky, ages ago, when the coal was soft, because
the coal had closed around them, showing no sign of entrance.
Proc. Soc. of Antiq. of Scotland, I-I-121 :
That, in a lump of coal, from a mine in Scotland, an iron instrument had
been found—
“The interest attaching to this singular relic arises from the fact of its
having been found in the heart of a piece of coal, seven feet under the
surface.”
If we accept that this object of iron was of workmanship beyond the
means and skill of the primitive men who may have lived in Scotland when
coal was forming there—
“The instrument was considered to be modern.”
That our expression has more of realness, or higher approximation to
realness, than has the attempt to explain that is made the Proceedings
That in modern times someone may have bored for coal, and that his drill
may have broken off in the coal it had penetrated.
Why he should have abandoned such easily accessible coal, I don’t know.
The important point is that there was no sign of boring: that this instrument
was in a lump of coal that had closed around it so that its presence was not
suspected, until the lump of coal was broken.
No mention can I find of this damned thing in any other publication. Of
course there is an alternative here: the thing may not have fallen from the
sky: if in coal-forming times, in Scotland, there were, indigenous to this
earth, no men capable of making such an iron instrument, it may have been
left behind by visitors from other worlds.
In an extraordinary approximation to fairness and justice, which is
permitted to us, because we are quite as desirous to make acceptable that
nothing can be proved as we are to sustain our own expressions, we note:
That in Notes and Queries, 11-1-408, there is an account of an ancient
copper seal, about the size of a penny, found in chalk, at a depth of fromved as we are to sustain our own expressions, we note:
That in Notes and Queries, 11-1-408, there is an account of an ancient
copper seal, about the size of a penny, found in chalk, at a depth of from

--- PAGE BREAK ---tain our own expressions, we note:
That in Notes and Queries, 11-1-408, there is an account of an ancient
copper seal, about the size of a penny, found in chalk, at a depth of from

--- PAGE BREAK ---

five to six feet, near Bredenstone, England. The design upon it is said to be
of a monk kneeling before a virgin and child: a legend upon the margin is
said to be: “St. Jordanis Monachi Spaldingie.”
I don’t know about that. It looks very desirable—undesirable to us.
There’s a wretch of an ultra-frowsy thing in the Scientific American, 7-
298, which we condemn ourselves, if somewhere, because of the oneness of
allness, the damned must also be the damning. It’s a newspaper story: that
about the first of June, 1851, a powerful blast, near Dorchester, Mass., cast
out from a bed of solid rock a bell-shaped vessel of an unknown metal:
floral designs inlaid with silver; “art of some cunning workman.” The
opinion of the Editor of the Scientific American is that the thing had been
made by Tubal Cain, who was the first inhabitant of Dorchester. Though I
fear that this is a little arbitrary, I am not disposed to fly rabidly at every
scientific opinion.
Nature, 35-36:
A block of metal found in coal, in Austria, 1885. It is now in the Salsburg
museum.
This time we have another expression. Usually our intermediatist attack
upon provincial positivism is: Science, in its attempted positivism takes
something such as “true meteoritic material” as a standard of judgment; but
carbonaceous matter, except for its relative infrequency, is just as veritable a
standard of judgment; carbonaceous matter merges away into such a variety
of organic substances, that all standards are reduced to indistinguishability:
if, then, there is no real standard against us, there is no real resistance to our
own acceptances. Now our intermediatism is: Science takes “true meteoritic
material” as a standard of admission; but now we have an instance that
quite as truly makes “true meteoritic material” a standard of exclusion; or,
then, a thing that denies itself is no real resistance to our own acceptances—
this depending upon whether we have a datum of something of “true
meteoritic material” that orthodoxy can never accept fell from the sky.
We’re a little involved here. Our own acceptance is upon a carved,
geometric thing that, if found in a very old deposit, antedates human life,
except, perhaps, very primitive human life, as an indigenous product of this
earth: but we’re quite as much interested in the dilemma it made for the
faithful.
It is of “true meteoritic material.” In L’Astronomie, 1887-114, it is said
that, though so geometric, its phenomena so characteristic of meteoritesinterested in the dilemma it made for the
faithful.
It is of “true meteoritic material.” In L’Astronomie, 1887-114, it is said
that, though so geometric, its phenomena so characteristic of meteorites

--- PAGE BREAK ---ilemma it made for the
faithful.
It is of “true meteoritic material.” In L’Astronomie, 1887-114, it is said
that, though so geometric, its phenomena so characteristic of meteorites

--- PAGE BREAK ---

exclude the idea that it was the work of man.
As to the deposit—Tertiary coal.
Composition—iron, carbon, and a small quantity of nickel.
It has the pitted surface that is supposed by the faithful to be
characteristic of meteorites.
For a full account of this subject, see Comptes Rendus, 103-702. The
scientists who examined it could reach no agreement. They bifurcated: then
a compromise was suggested; but the compromise is a product of disregard:
That it was of true meteoritic material, and had not been shaped by man;
That it was not of true meteoritic material, but telluric iron that had been
shaped by man;
That it was true meteoritic material that had fallen from the sky, but had
been shaped by man, after its fall.
The data, one or more of which must be disregarded by each of these
three explanations, are: “true meteoritic material” and surface markings of
meteorites; geometric form; presence in an ancient deposit; material as hard
as steel; absence upon this earth, in Tertiary times, of men who could work
in material as hard as steel. It is said that, though of “true meteoritic
material,” this object is virtually a steel object.
St. Augustine, with his orthodoxy, was never in—well, very much worse
—difficulties than are the faithful here. By due disregard of a datum or so,
our own acceptance that it was a steel object that had fallen from the sky to
this earth, in Tertiary times, is not forced upon one. We offer ours as the
only synthetic expression. For instance, in Science Gossip, 1887-58, it is
described as a meteorite: in this account there is nothing alarming to the
pious, because, though everything else is told, its geometric form is not
mentioned.
It’s a cube. There is a deep incision all around it. Of its faces, two that are
opposite are rounded.
Though I accept that our own expression can only rather approximate to
Truth, by the wideness of its inclusions, and because it seems, of four
attempts, to represent the only complete synthesis, and can be nullified or
greatly modified by data that we, too, have somewhere disregarded, the
only means of nullification that I can think of would be demonstration that
this object is a mass of iron pyrites, which sometimes forms geometrically.
But the analysis mentions not a trace of sulphur. Of course our weakness, or
impositiveness, lies in that, by anyone to whom it would be agreeable toiron pyrites, which sometimes forms geometrically.
But the analysis mentions not a trace of sulphur. Of course our weakness, or
impositiveness, lies in that, by anyone to whom it would be agreeable to

--- PAGE BREAK ---sometimes forms geometrically.
But the analysis mentions not a trace of sulphur. Of course our weakness, or
impositiveness, lies in that, by anyone to whom it would be agreeable to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

find sulphur in this thing, sulphur would be found in it—by our own
intermediatism there is some sulphur in everything, or sulphur is only a
localization or emphasis of something that, unemphasized, is in all things.
So there have, or haven’t, been found upon this earth things that fell from
the sky, or that were left behind by extra-mundane visitors to this earth—
A yarn in the London Times, June 22, 1844: that some workmen,
quarrying rock, close to the Tweed, about a quarter of a mile below
Rutherford Mills, discovered a gold thread embedded in the stone at a depth
of 8 feet: that a piece of the gold thread had been sent to the office of the
Kelso Chronicle.
Pretty little thing; not at all frowsy; rather damnable.
London Times, Dec. 24, 1851:
That Hiram De Witt, of Springfield, Mass., returning from California,
had brought with him a piece of auriferous quartz about the size of a man’s
fist. It was accidentally dropped—split open —nail in it. There was a cut-
iron nail, size of a six-penny nail, slightly corroded. “It was entirely straight
and had a perfect head.”
Or—California—ages ago, when auriferous quartz was forming—super-
carpenter, million of miles or so up in the air—drops a nail.
To one not an intermediatist, it would seem incredible that this datum, not
only of the damned, but of the lowest of the damned, or of the journalistic
caste of the accursed, could merge away with something else damned only
by disregard, and backed by what is called “highest scientific authority”—
Communication by Sir David Brewster (Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1845-51):
That a nail had been found in a block of stone from Kingoodie 4uarry,
North Britain. The block in which the nail was found was nine inches thick,
but as to what part of the quarry it had come from, there is no evidence—
except that it could not have been from the surface. The quarry had been
worked about twenty years. It consisted of alternate layers of hard stone and
a substance called “till.” The point of the nail, quite eaten with rust,
projected into some “till,” upon the surface of the block of stone. The rest of
the nail lay upon the surface of the stone to within an inch of the head —
that inch of it was embedded in the stone.
Although its caste is high, this is a thing profoundly of the damned—sort
of a Brahmin as regarded by a Baptist. Its case was stated fairly; Brewster
related all circumstances available to him— but there was no discussion at
the meeting of the British Association: no explanation was offered—garded by a Baptist. Its case was stated fairly; Brewster
related all circumstances available to him— but there was no discussion at
the meeting of the British Association: no explanation was offered—

--- PAGE BREAK ---Its case was stated fairly; Brewster
related all circumstances available to him— but there was no discussion at
the meeting of the British Association: no explanation was offered—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nevertheless the thing can be nullified—
But the nullification that we find is as much against orthodoxy in one
respect as it is against our own expression that inclusion in quartz or
sandstone indicates antiquity—or there would have to be a revision of
prevailing dogmas upon quartz and sandstone and age indicated by them, if
the opposing data should be accepted. Of course it may be contended by
both the orthodox and us heretics that the opposition is only a yarn from a
newspaper. By an odd combination, we find our two lost souls that have
tried to emerge, chucked back to perdition by one blow:
Pop. Sci. News, 1884-41:
That, according to the Carson Appeal, there had been found in a mine,
quartz crystals that could have had only 15 years in which to form: that,
where a mill had been built, sandstone had been found, when the mill was
torn down, that had hardened in 12 years: that in this sandstone was a piece
of wood “with a nail in it.”
Annals of Scientific Discovery, I853-71:
That, at the meeting of the British Association, 1853, Sir David Brewster
had announced that he had to bring before the meeting an object “of so
incredible a nature that nothing short of the strongest evidence was
necessary to render the statement at all probable.”
A crystal lens had been found in the treasure-house at Nineveh.
In many of the temples and treasure houses of old civilizations upon this
earth have been preserved things that have fallen from the sky—or
meteorites.
Again we have a Brahmin. This thing is buried alive in the heart of
propriety: it is in the British Museum.
Carpenter, in The Microscope and Its Revelations, gives two drawings of
it. Carpenter argues that it is impossible to accept that optical lenses had
ever been made by the ancients. Never occurred to him—someone a million
miles or so up in the air— looking through his telescope—lens drops out.
This does not appeal to Carpenter: he says that this object must have been
an ornament.
According to Brewster, it was not an ornament, but “a true optical lens.”
In that case, in ruins of an old civilization upon this earth, has been found
an accursed thing that was, acceptably, not a product of any old civilization
indigenous to this earth.rue optical lens.”
In that case, in ruins of an old civilization upon this earth, has been found
an accursed thing that was, acceptably, not a product of any old civilization
indigenous to this earth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n that case, in ruins of an old civilization upon this earth, has been found
an accursed thing that was, acceptably, not a product of any old civilization
indigenous to this earth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

E
10
ARLY explorers have Florida mixed up with Newfoundland. But the
confusion is worse than that still earlier. It arises ‘ from simplicity.
Very early explorers think that all land westward is one land, India:
awareness of other lands as well as India comes as a slow process. I do not
now think of things arriving upon this earth from some especial other
world. That was my notion when I started to collect our data. Or, as is a
commonplace of observation, all intellection begins with the illusion of
homogeneity. It’s one of Spencer’s data: we see homogeneousness in all
things distant, or with which we have small acquaintance. Advance from the
relatively homogeneous to the relatively heterogeneous is Spen-cerian
Philosophy—like everything else, so-called: not that it was really Spencer’s
discovery, but was taken from von Baer, who, in turn, was continuous with
preceding evolutionary speculation. Our own expression is that all things
are acting to advance to the homogeneous, or are trying to localize
Homogeneousness. Homogeneous-ness is an aspect of the Universal,
wherein it is a state that does not merge away into something else. We
regard homogeneousness as an aspect of positiveness, but it is our
acceptance that infinite frustrations of attempts to positivize manifest
themselves in infinite heterogeneity: so that though things try to localize
homogeneous-ness they end up in heterogeneity so great that it amounts to
infinite dispersion or indistinguishability.
So all concepts are little attempted positivenesses, but soon have to give
in to compromise, modification, nullification, merging away into
indistinguishability—unless, here and there, in the world’s history, there
may have been a super-dogmatist, who, for only an infinitesimal of time,
has been able to hold out against heterogeneity or modification or doubt or
“listening to reason,” or loss of identity —in which case—instant
translation to heaven or the Positive Ab solute.
Odd thing about Spencer is that he never recognized that “homo-
geneity,” “integration,” and “definiteness” are all words for the same state,e—instant
translation to heaven or the Positive Ab solute.
Odd thing about Spencer is that he never recognized that “homo-
geneity,” “integration,” and “definiteness” are all words for the same state,

--- PAGE BREAK ---n to heaven or the Positive Ab solute.
Odd thing about Spencer is that he never recognized that “homo-
geneity,” “integration,” and “definiteness” are all words for the same state,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

or the state that we call “positiveness.” What we call his mistake is in that
he regarded “homogeneousness” as negative.
I began with a notion of some one other world, from which objects and
substances have fallen to this earth; which had, or which, to less degree, has
a tutelary interest in this earth; which is now attempting to communicate
with this earth—modifying, because of data which will pile up later, into
acceptance that some other world is not attempting but has been, for
centuries, in communication with a sect, perhaps, or a secret society, or
certain esoteric ones of this earth’s inhabitants.
I lose a great deal of hypnotic power in not being able to concentrate
attention upon some one other world.
As I have admitted before I’m intelligent, as contrasted with the
orthodox. I haven’t the aristocratic disregard of a New York curator or an
Eskimo medicine-man.
I have to dissipate myself in acceptance of a host of other worlds: size of
the moon, some of them: one of them, at least—tremendous thing: we’ll
take that up later. Vast, amorphous aerial regions, to which such definite
words as “worlds” and “planets” seem inapplicable. And artificial
constructions that I have called “super-constructions”: one of them about
the size of Brooklyn, I should say, offhand. And one or more of them
wheel-shaped things a goodly number of square miles in area.
I think that earlier in this book, before we liberalized into embracing
everything that comes along, your indignation, or indigestion would have
expressed in the notion that, if this were so, astronomers would have seen
these other worlds and regions and vast geometric constructions. You’d
have had that notion: you’d have stopped there.
But the attempt to stop is saying “enough” to the insatiable. In cosmic
punctuation there are no periods: illusion of periods is incomplete view of
colons and semi-colons.
We can’t stop with the notion that if there were such phenomena,
astronomers would have seen them. Because of our experience with
suppression and disregard, we suspect, before we go into the subject at all,
that astronomers have seen them; that navigators and meteorologists have
seen them; that individual scientists and other trained observers have seen
them many times—
That it is the System that has excluded data of them.ve seen them; that navigators and meteorologists have
seen them; that individual scientists and other trained observers have seen
them many times—
That it is the System that has excluded data of them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---avigators and meteorologists have
seen them; that individual scientists and other trained observers have seen
them many times—
That it is the System that has excluded data of them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

As to the Law of Gravitation, and astronomers’ formulas, remember that
these formulas worked out in the time of Laplace as well as they do now.
But there are hundreds of planetary bodies now known that were then not
known. So a few hundred worlds more of ours won’t make any difference.
Laplace knew of about only thirty bodies in this solar system: about six
hundred are recognized now—
What are the discoveries of geology and biology to a theologian"
His formulas still work out as well as they ever did.
If the Law of Gravitation could be stated as a real utterance, it might be a
real resistance to us. But we are told only that gravitation is gravitation. Of
course to an intermediatist, nothing can be defined except in terms of itself
—but even the orthodox, in what seems to me to be the innate premonitions
of realness, not founded upon experience, agree that to define a thing in
terms of itself is not real definition. It is said that by gravitation is meant the
attraction of all things proportionately to mass and inversely as the square
of the distance. Mass would mean inter-attraction holding together final
particles, if there were final particles. Then, until final particles be
discovered, only one term of this expression survives, or mass is attraction.
But distance is only extent of mass, unless one holds out for absolute
vacuum among planets, a position against which we could bring a host of
data. But there is no possible means of expressing that gravitation is
anything other than attraction. So there is nothing to resist us but such a
phantom as— that gravitation is the gravitation of all gravitations
proportionately to gravitation and inversely as the square of gravitation. In a
quasi-existence, nothing more sensible than this can be said upon any so-
called subject—perhaps there are higher approximations to ultimate
sensibleness.
Nevertheless we seem to have a feeling that with the System against us
we have a kind of resistance here. We’d have felt so formerly, at any rate: I
think the Dr. Grays and Prof. Hitchcocks have modified our trustfulness
toward indistinguishability. As to the perfection of this System that quasi-
opposes us and the infallibility of its mathematics—as if there could be real
mathematics in a mode of seeming where twice two are not four—we’ve
been told over and over of their vindication in the discovery of Neptune.
I’m afraid that the course we’re taking will turn out like every other
development. We began humbly, admitting that we’re of the damned—
But our eyebrows—heir vindication in the discovery of Neptune.
I’m afraid that the course we’re taking will turn out like every other
development. We began humbly, admitting that we’re of the damned—
But our eyebrows—

--- PAGE BREAK ---the discovery of Neptune.
I’m afraid that the course we’re taking will turn out like every other
development. We began humbly, admitting that we’re of the damned—
But our eyebrows—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Just a faint flicker in them, or in one of them, every time we hear of the
“triumphal discovery of Neptune”—this “monumental achievement of
theoretical astronomy,” as the text-books call it.
The whole trouble is that we’ve looked it up.
The text-books omit this:
That, instead of the orbit of Neptune agreeing with the calculations of
Adams and Leverrier, it was so different—that Leverrier said that it was not
the planet of his calculations.
Later it was thought best to say no more upon that subject.
The text-books omit this:
That, in 1846, everyone who knew a sine from a cosine was out sining
and cosining for a planet beyond Uranus.
Two of them guessed right.
To some minds, even after Leverrier’s own rejection of Neptune, the
word “guessed” may be objectionable—but, according to Prof. Peirce, of
Harvard, the calculations of Adams and Leverrier would have applied quite
as well to positions many degrees from the position of Neptune.
Or for Prof. Peirce’s demonstration that the discovery of Neptune was
only a “happy accident,” see Proc. Amer. Acad. Sciences, 1-65.
For references, see Lowell’s Evolution of Worlds.
Or comets: another nebulous resistance to our own notions. As to
eclipses, I have notes upon several of them that did not occur upon
scheduled time, though with differences only of seconds—and one
delightful lost soul, deep-buried, but buried in the ultra-respectable records
of the Royal Astronomical Society, upon an eclipse that did not occur at all.
That delightful, ultra-sponsored thing of perdition is too good and malicious
to be dismissed with passing notice: we’ll have him later.
Throughout the history of astronomy, every comet that has come back
upon predicted time—not that, essentially, there was anything more
abstruse about it than is a prediction that you can make of a postman’s
periodicities tomorrow—was advertised for all it was worth. It’s the way
reputations are worked up for fortune-tellers by the faithful. The comets that
didn’t come back—omitted or explained. Or Encke’s comet. It came back
slower and slower. But the astronomers explained. Be almost absolutely
sure of that: they explained. They had it all worked out and formulated and
“proved” why that comet was coming back slower and slower—and there
the damn thing began coming faster and faster.bsolutely
sure of that: they explained. They had it all worked out and formulated and
“proved” why that comet was coming back slower and slower—and there
the damn thing began coming faster and faster.

--- PAGE BREAK ---at: they explained. They had it all worked out and formulated and
“proved” why that comet was coming back slower and slower—and there
the damn thing began coming faster and faster.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Halley’s comet.
Astronomy—“the perfect science, as we astronomers like to call it.”
(Jacoby.)
It’s my own notion that if, in a real existence, an astronomer could not
tell one longitude from another, he’d be sent back to this purgatory of ours
until he could meet that simple requirement.
Halley was sent to the Cape of Good Hope to determine its longitude. He
got it degrees wrong. He gave to Africa’s noble Roman promontory a
retrousse twist that would take the pride out of any Kaffir.
We hear everlastingly of Halley’s comet. It came back—maybe. But,
unless we look the matter up in contemporaneous records, we hear nothing
of—the Leonids, for instance. By the same methods as those by which
Halley’s comet was predicted, the Leonids were predicted. November, 1898
—no Leonids. It was explained. They had been perturbed. They would
appear in November, 1899. November, 1899—November, 1900—no
Leonids.
My notion of astronomic accuracy:
Who could not be a prize marksman, if only his hits be recorded"
As to Halley’s comet, of 1910—everybody now swears he saw it. He has
to perjure himself: otherwise he’d be accused of having no interest in great,
inspiring things that he’s never given any attention to.
Regard this:
That there never is a moment when there is not some comet in the sky.
Virtually there is no year in which several new comets are not discovered,
so plentiful are they. Luminous fleas on a vast black dog—in popular
impressions, there is no realization of the extent to which this solar system
is flea-bitten.
If a comet have not the orbit that astronomers have predicted —
perturbed. If—like Halley’s comet—it be late—even a year late —
perturbed. When a train is an hour late, we have small opinion of the
predictions of timetables. When a comet’s a year late, all we ask is—that it
be explained. We hear of the inflation and arrogance of astronomers. My
own acceptance is not that they are imposing upon us: that they are
requiting us. For many of us priests no longer function to give us seeming
rapport with Perfection, Infallibility—the Positive Absolute. Astronomers
have stepped forward to fill a vacancy—with quasi-phantomosity—but, in
our acceptance, with a higher approximation to substantiality than had thetion, Infallibility—the Positive Absolute. Astronomers
have stepped forward to fill a vacancy—with quasi-phantomosity—but, in
our acceptance, with a higher approximation to substantiality than had the

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Positive Absolute. Astronomers
have stepped forward to fill a vacancy—with quasi-phantomosity—but, in
our acceptance, with a higher approximation to substantiality than had the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

attenuations that preceded them. I should say, myself, that all that we call
progress is not so much response to “urge” as it is response to a hiatus—or
if you want something to grow somewhere, dig out everything else in its
area. So I have to accept that the positive assurances of astronomers are
necessary to us, or the blunderings, evasions and disguises of astronomers
would never be tolerated: that, given such latitude as they are permitted to
take, they could not be very disastrously mistaken. Suppose the comet
called Halley’s had not appeared—
Early in 1910, a far more important comet than the an mic luminosity
said to be Halley’s, appeared. It was so brilliant that it was visible in
daylight. The astronomers would have been saved anyway. If this other
comet did not have the predicted orbit— perturbation. If you’re going to
Coney Island, and predict there’ll be a special kind of a pebble on the
beach, I don’t see how you can disgrace yourself, if some other pebble will
do just as well— because the feeble thing said to have been seen in 1910
was no more in accord with the sensational descriptions given out by
astronomers in advance than is a pale pebble with a brick-red boulder.
I predict that next Wednesday, a large Chinaman, in evening clothes, will
cross Broadway, at 42nd Street, at 9 P.M. He doesn’t, but a tubercular Jap in
a sailor’s uniform does cross Broadway, at 35th Street, Friday, at noon.
Well, a Jap is a perturbed Chinaman, and clothes are clothes.
I remember the terrifying predictions made by the honest and credulous
astronomers, who must have been themselves hypnotized, or they could not
have hypnotized the rest of us, in 1909. Wills were made. Human life might
be swept from this planet. In quasi-existence, which is essentially
Hibernian, that would be no reason why wills should not be made. The less
excitable of us did expect at least some pretty good fireworks.
I have to admit that it is said that, in New York, a light was seen in the
sky.
It was about as terrifying as the scratch of a match on the seat of some
breeches half a mile away.
It was not on time.
Though I have heard that a faint nebulosity, which I did not see, myself,
though I looked when I was told to look, was seen in the sky, it appeared
several days after the time predicted.
A hypnotized host of imbeciles of us: told to look up at the sky: we did—
like a lot of pointers hypnotized by a partridge.ook, was seen in the sky, it appeared
several days after the time predicted.
A hypnotized host of imbeciles of us: told to look up at the sky: we did—
like a lot of pointers hypnotized by a partridge.

--- PAGE BREAK ---sky, it appeared
several days after the time predicted.
A hypnotized host of imbeciles of us: told to look up at the sky: we did—
like a lot of pointers hypnotized by a partridge.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The effect:
Almost everybody now swears that he saw Halley’s comet, and that it
was a glorious spectacle.
An interesting circumstance here is that seemingly we are trying to
discredit astronomers because astronomers oppose us—that’s not my
impression. We shall be in the Brahmin caste of the hell of the Baptists.
Almost all our data, in some regiments of this procession, are observations
by astronomers, few of them mere amateur astronomers. It is the System
that opposes us. It is the System that is suppressing astronomers. I think we
pity them in their captivity. Ours is not malice—in a positive sense. It’s
chivalry— somewhat. Unhappy astronomers looking out from high towers
in which they are imprisoned—we appear upon the horizon.
But, as I have said, our data do not relate to some especial other world. I
mean very much what a savage upon an ocean island might vaguely think
of in his speculations—not upon some other land, but complexes of
continents and their phenomena: cities, factories in cities, means of
communication—
Now all the other savages would know of a few vessels sailing in their
regular routes, passing this island in regularized periodicities. The tendency
in these minds would be expression of the universal tendency toward
positivism—or Completeness—or conviction that these few regularized
vessels constituted all. Now I think of some especial savage who suspects
otherwise—because he’s very backward and unimaginative and insensible
to the beautiful ideals of the others: not piously occupied, like the others, in
bowing before impressive-looking sticks of wood; dishonestly taking time
for his speculations, while the others are patriotically witch-finding. So the
other higher and nobler savages know about the few regularized vessels:
know when to expect them; have their periodicities all worked out; just
about when vessels will pass, or eclipse each other —explaining that all
vagaries were due to atmospheric conditions.
They’d come out strong in explaining.
You can’t read a book upon savages without noting what resolute
explainers they are.
They’d say that all this mechanism was founded upon the mutual
attraction of the vessels—deduced from the fall of a monkey from a palm
tree—or, if not that, that devils were pushing the vessels— something of the
kind.ll this mechanism was founded upon the mutual
attraction of the vessels—deduced from the fall of a monkey from a palm
tree—or, if not that, that devils were pushing the vessels— something of the
kind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s founded upon the mutual
attraction of the vessels—deduced from the fall of a monkey from a palm
tree—or, if not that, that devils were pushing the vessels— something of the
kind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Storms.
Debris, not from these vessels, cast up by the waves.
Disregarded.
How can one think of something and something else, too"
I’m in the state of mind of a savage who might find upon a shore, washed
up by the same storm, buoyant parts of a piano and a paddle that was carved
by cruder hands than his own: something light and summery from India,
and a fur overcoat from Russia— or all science, though approximating
wider and wider, is attempt to conceive of India in terms of an ocean island,
and of Russia in terms of India so interpreted. Though I am trying to think
of Russia and India in world-wide terms, I cannot think that that, or the
universalizing of the local, is cosmic purpose. The higher idealist is the
positivist who tries to localize the universal, and is in accord with cosmic
purpose: the super-dogmatist of a local savage who can hold out, without a
flurry of doubt, that a piano washed up on a beach is the trunk of a palm
tree that a shark has bitten, leaving his teeth in it. So we fear for the soul of
Dr. Gray, because he did not devote his whole life to that one stand that,
whether possible or inconceivable, thousands of fishes had been cast from
one bucket.
So, unfortunately for myself, if salvation be desirable, I look out widely
but amorphously, indefinitely and heterogeneously. If I say I conceive of
another world that is now in secret communication with certain esoteric
inhabitants of this earth, I say I conceive of still other worlds that are trying
to establish communication with all the inhabitants of this earth. I fit my
notions to the data I find. That is supposed to be the right and logical and
scientific thing to do; but it is no way to approximate to form, system,
organization. Then I think I conceive of other worlds and vast structures
that pass us by, within a few miles, without the slightest desire to
communicate, quite as tramp vessels pass many islands without
particularizing one from another. Then I think I have data of a vast
construction that has often come to this earth, dipped into an ocean,
submerged there a while, then going away—Why" I’m not absolutely sure.
How would an Eskimo explain a vessel, sending ashore for coal, which is
plentiful upon some Arctic beaches, though of unknown use to the natives,
then sailing away, with no interest in the natives"
A great difficulty in trying to understand vast constructions that show no
interest in us:ome Arctic beaches, though of unknown use to the natives,
then sailing away, with no interest in the natives"
A great difficulty in trying to understand vast constructions that show no
interest in us:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The notion that we must be interesting.
I accept that, though we’re usually avoided, probably for moral reasons,
sometimes this earth has been visited by explorers. I think that the notion
that there have been extra-mundane visitors to China, within what we call
the historic period, will be only ordinarily absurd, when we come to that
datum.
I accept that some of the other worlds are of conditions very similar to
our own. I think of others that are very different—-so that visitors from
them could not live here—without artificial adaptations.
How some of them could breathe our attenuated air, if they came from a
gelatinous atmosphere—
Masks.
The masks that have been found in ancient deposits.
Most of them are of stone, and are said to have been ceremonial regalia
of savages—
But the mask that was found in Sullivan County, Missouri, in 1879
(American Antiquarian, 3-336).
It is made of iron and silver.

--- PAGE BREAK ---are said to have been ceremonial regalia
of savages—
But the mask that was found in Sullivan County, Missouri, in 1879
(American Antiquarian, 3-336).
It is made of iron and silver.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

O
11
NE of the damnedest in our whole saturnalia of the accursed—
Because it is hopeless to try to shake off an excommunication
only by saying that we’re damned by blacker things than ourselves;
and that the damned are those who admit they’re of the damned. Inertia and
hypnosis are too strong for us. We say that: then we go right on admitting
we’re of the damned. It is only by being more nearly real that we can sweep
away the quasi-things that oppose us. Of course, as a whole, we have
considerable amor-phousness, but we are thinking now of “individual”
acceptances. Wideness is an aspect of Universalness or Realness. If our
syntheses disregard fewer data than do opposing syntheses—which are
often not syntheses at all, but mere consideration of some one circumstance
—less widely synthetic things fade away before us. Harmony is an aspect of
the Universal, by which we mean Realness. If we approximate more highly
to harmony among the parts of an expression and to all available
circumstances of an occurrence, the self-contradictors turn hazy. Solidity is
an aspect of realness. We pile them up, and we pile them up, or they pass
and pass and pass: things that bulk large as they march by, supporting and
solidifying one another—
And still, and for regiments to come, hypnosis and inertia rule us—
One of the damnedest of our data:
In the Scientific American, Sept. 10, 1910, Charles F. Holder writes:
“Many years ago, a strange stone resembling a meteorite, fell into the
Valley of the Yaqui, Mexico, and the sensational story went from one end to
the other of the country that a stone bearing human inscriptions had
descended to the earth.”
The bewildering observation here is Mr. Holder’s assertion that this stone
did fall. It seems to me that he must mean that it fell by dislodgment from a
mountainside into a valley—but we shall see that it was such a marked
stone that very unlikely would it have been unknown to dwellers in a valley,
if it had been reposing upon a mountainside above them. It may have beenvalley—but we shall see that it was such a marked
stone that very unlikely would it have been unknown to dwellers in a valley,
if it had been reposing upon a mountainside above them. It may have been

--- PAGE BREAK ---see that it was such a marked
stone that very unlikely would it have been unknown to dwellers in a valley,
if it had been reposing upon a mountainside above them. It may have been

--- PAGE BREAK ---

carelessness: intent may have been to say that a sensational story of a
strange stone said to have fallen, etc.
This stone was reported by Major Frederick Burnham, of the British
Army. Later Major Burnham revisited it, and Mr. Holder accompanied him,
their purpose to decipher the inscriptions upon it, if possible.
“This stone was a brown, igneous rock, its longest axis about eight feet,
and on the eastern face, which had an angle of about forty-five degrees, was
the deep-cut inscription.”
Mr. Holder says that he recognized familiar Mayan symbols in the
inscription. His method was the usual method by which anything can be
“identified” as anything else: that is to pick out whatever is agreeable and
disregard the rest. He says that he has demonstrated that most of the
symbols are Mayan. One of our inter-mediatist pseudo-principles is that any
way of demonstrating anything is just as good a way of demonstrating
anything else. By Mr. Holder’s method we could demonstrate that we’re
Mayan—if that should be a source of pride to us. One of the characters
upon this stone is a circle within a circle—similar character found by Mr.
Holder is a Mayan manuscript. There are two 6’s. 6’s can be found in
Mayan manuscripts. A double scroll. There are dots and there are dashes.
Well, then, we, in turn, disregard the circle within a circle and the double
scroll and emphasize that 6’s occur in this book, and that dots are plentiful,
and would be more plentiful if it were customary to use the small “i” for the
first personal pronoun—that when it comes to dashes—that’s demonstrated:
we’re Mayan.
I suppose the tendency is to feel that we’re sneering at some valuable
arch ologic work, and that Mr. Holder did make a veritable identification.
He writes:
“I submitted the photographs to the Field Museum and the Smithsonian
and one or two others, and, to my surprise, the reply was that they could
make nothing out of it.”
Our indefinite acceptance, by preponderance of three or four groups of
museum-experts against one person, is that a stone bearing inscriptions
unassimilable with any known language upon this earth, is said to have
fallen from the sky. Another poor wretch of an outcast belonging here is
noted in the Scientific American, 48-261: that, of an object, or a meteorite,
that fell Feb. 16, 1883, near Brescia, Italy, a false report was circulated that
one of the fragments bore the impress of a hand. That’s all that is findable8-261: that, of an object, or a meteorite,
that fell Feb. 16, 1883, near Brescia, Italy, a false report was circulated that
one of the fragments bore the impress of a hand. That’s all that is findable

--- PAGE BREAK ---bject, or a meteorite,
that fell Feb. 16, 1883, near Brescia, Italy, a false report was circulated that
one of the fragments bore the impress of a hand. That’s all that is findable

--- PAGE BREAK ---

by me upon this mere gasp of a thing. Intermediatistically, my acceptance is
that, though in the course of human history, there have been some notable
approximations, there never has been a real liar: that he could not survive in
intermediateness, where everything merges away or has its pseudo-base in
something else—would be instantly translated to the Negative Absolute. So
my acceptance is that, though curtly dismissed, there was something to base
upon in this report; that there were unusual markings upon this object. Of
course that is not to jump to the conclusion that they were cuneiform
characters that looked like fingerprints.
Altogether, I think that in some of our past expressions, we must have
been very efficient, if the experience of Mr. Symons be typical, so indefinite
are we becoming here. Just here we are interested in many things that have
been found, especially in the United States, which speak of a civilization, or
of many civilizations not in-digenous to this earth. One trouble is in trying
to decide whether they fell here from the sky, or were left behind by visitors
from other worlds. We have a notion that there have been disasters aloft,
and that coins have dropped here: that inhabitants of this earth found them
or saw them fall, and then made coins imitatively: it may be that coins were
showered here by something of a tutelary nature that undertook to advance
us from the stage of barter to the use of a medium. If coins should be
identified as Roman coins, we’ve had so much experience with
“identifications” that we know a phantom when we see one—but, even so,
how could Roman coins have got to North America—far in the interior of
North America—or buried under the accumulation of centuries of soil —
unless they did drop from—wherever the first Romans came from" Ignatius
Donnelly, in Atlantis, gives a list of objects that have been found in mounds
that are supposed to antedate all European influence in America: lathe-made
articles, such as traders —from somewhere—would supply to savages—
marks of the lathe said to be unmistakable. Said to be: of course we can’t
accept that anything is unmistakable. In the Rept. Smithson. Inst., I881-619,
there is an account, by Charles C. Jones, of two silver crosses that were
found in Georgia. They are skillfully made, highly ornamented crosses, but
are not conventional crucifixes: all arms of equal length. Mr. Jones is a
good positivist—that De Sota had halted at the “precise” spot where these
crosses were found. But the spirit of negativeness that lurks in all things
said to be “precise” shows itself in that upon one of these crosses in anSota had halted at the “precise” spot where these
crosses were found. But the spirit of negativeness that lurks in all things
said to be “precise” shows itself in that upon one of these crosses in an

--- PAGE BREAK ---the “precise” spot where these
crosses were found. But the spirit of negativeness that lurks in all things
said to be “precise” shows itself in that upon one of these crosses in an

--- PAGE BREAK ---

inscription that has no meaning in Spanish or any other known, terrestrial
language:
“IYNKICIDU,” according to Mr. Jones. He thinks that this is a name,
and that there is an aboriginal ring to it, though I should say, myself, that he
was thinking of the far-distant Incas: that the Spanish donor cut on the cross
the name of an Indian to whom it was presented. But we look at the
inscription ourselves and see that the letters said to be “C” and “D” are
turned the wrong way, and that the letter said to be “K” is not only turned
the wrong way, but is upside down.
It is difficult to accept that the remarkable, the very extensive, copper
mines in the region of Lake Superior were ever the works of American
aborigines. Despite the astonishing extent of these mines, nothing has ever
been found to indicate that the region was ever inhabited by permanent
dwellers—“. . . not a vestige of a dwelling, a skeleton, or a bone has been
found.” The Indians have no traditions relating to the mines. (Amer.
Antiquarian, 25-258.) I think that we’ve had visitors: that they have come
here for copper, for instance. As to other relics of them—but we now come
upon frequency of a merger that has not so often appeared before :
Fraudulency.
Hair called real hair—then there are wigs. Teeth called real teeth—then
there are false teeth. Official money—counterfeit money. It’s the bane of
psychic research. If there be psychic phenomena, there must be fraudulent
psychic phenomena. So desperate is the situation here that Carrington
argues that, even if Palladino be caught cheating, that is not to say that all
her phenomena are fraudulent. My own version is: that nothing indicates
anything, in a positive sense, because, in a positive sense, there is nothing to
be indicated. Everything that is called true must merge away
indistinguishably into something called false. Both are expressions of the
same underlying quasiness, and are continuous. Fraudulent antiquarian
relics are very common, but they are not more common than are fraudulent
paintings.
W. S. Forest, Historical Sketches of Norfolk, 9irginia
That, in September, 1833, when some workmen, near Norfolk, were
boring for water, a coin was drawn up from a depth of about 30 feet. It was
about the size of an English shilling, but oval—an oval disk, if not a coin.
The figures upon it were distinct, and represented “a warrior or hunter and
other characters, apparently of Roman origin.”about the size of an English shilling, but oval—an oval disk, if not a coin.
The figures upon it were distinct, and represented “a warrior or hunter and
other characters, apparently of Roman origin.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---n English shilling, but oval—an oval disk, if not a coin.
The figures upon it were distinct, and represented “a warrior or hunter and
other characters, apparently of Roman origin.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The means of exclusion would probably be—men digging a hole —no
one else looking: one of them drops a coin into the hole—as to where he got
a strange coin, remarkable in shape even—that’s disregarded. Up comes the
coin—expressions of astonishment from the evil one who had dropped it.
However, the antiquarians have missed this coin. I can find no other
mention of it.
Another coin. Also a little study in the genesis of a prophet.
In the American Antiquarian, I6-313, is copied a story by a
correspondent to the Detroit News, of a copper coin about the size of a two-
cent piece, said to have been found in a Michigan mound. The Editor says
merely that he does not endorse the find. Upon this slender basis, he buds
out, in the next number of the Antiquarian
“The coin turns out, as we predicted, to be a fraud.”
You can imagine the scorn of Elijah, or any of the old more nearly real
prophets.
Or all things are tried by the only kind of jurisprudence we have in quasi-
existence:
Presumed to be innocent until convicted—but they’re guilty.
The Editor’s reasoning is as phantom-like as my own, or St. Paul’s, or
Darwin’s. The coin is condemned because it came from the same region
from which, a few years before, had come pottery that had been called
fraudulent. The pottery had been condemned because it was condemnable.
Scientific American, June 17, 1882:
That a farmer, in Cass Co., Ill., had picked up, on his farm, a bronze coin,
which was sent to Prof. F. F. Hilder, of St. Louis, who identified it as a coin
of Antiochus IV. Inscription said to be in ancient Greek characters:
translated as “King Antiochus Epiphanes (Illustrious) the Victorius.”
Sounds quite definite and convincing—but we have some more translations
coming.
In the American Pioneer, 2-169, are shown two faces of a copper coin,
with characters very much like those upon the Grave Creek stone—which,
with translations, we’ll take up soon. This coin is said to have been found in
Connecticut, in 1843.
Records of the Past, I2-182:
That, early in 1913, a coin, said to be a Roman coin, was re-ported as
discovered in an Illinois mound. It was sent to Dr. Emerson, of the Art
Institute, of Chicago. His opinion was that the coin is “of the rare mintage, a coin, said to be a Roman coin, was re-ported as
discovered in an Illinois mound. It was sent to Dr. Emerson, of the Art
Institute, of Chicago. His opinion was that the coin is “of the rare mintage

--- PAGE BREAK ---a Roman coin, was re-ported as
discovered in an Illinois mound. It was sent to Dr. Emerson, of the Art
Institute, of Chicago. His opinion was that the coin is “of the rare mintage

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of Domitius Domitianus, Emperor in Egypt.” As to its discovery in an
Illinois mound, Dr. Emerson disclaims responsibility. But what strikes me
here is that a joker should not have been satisfied with an ordinary Roman
coin. Where did he get a rare coin, and why was it not missed from some
collection" I have looked over numismatic journals enough to accept that
the whereabouts of every rare coin in anyone’s possession is known to coin-
collectors. Seems to me nothing left but to call this another “identification.”
Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc., I2-224:
That, in July, 1871, a letter was received from Mr. Jacob W. Moffit, of
Chillicothe, Ill., enclosing a photograph of a coin, which he said had been
brought up, by him, while boring, from a depth of 120 feet.
Of course, by conventional scientific standards, such depth has some
extraordinary meaning. Paleontologists, geologists, and archaeologists
consider themselves reasonable in arguing ancient origin of the far-buried.
We only accept: depth is a pseudo-standard with us; one earthquake could
bury a coin of recent mintage 120 feet below the surface.
According to a writer in the Proceedings, the coin is uniform in
thickness, and had never been hammered out by savages—“there are other
tokens of the machine shop.”
But, according to Prof. Leslie, it is an astrologic amulet. “There are upon
it the signs of Pisces and Leo.”
Or, with due disregard, you can find signs of your great-grandmother, or
of the Crusades, or of the Mayans, upon anything that ever came from
Chillicothe or from a five and ten cent store. Anything that looks like a cat
and a goldfish looks like Leo and Pisces: but, by due suppressions and
distortions there’s nothing that can’t be made to look like a cat and a
goldfish. I fear me we’re turning a little irritable here. To be damned by
slumbering giants and interesting little harlots and clowns who rank high in
their profession is at least supportable to our vanity; but, we find that the
anthropologists are of the slums of the divine, or of an archaic kindergarten
of intellectuality, and it is very unflattering to find a mess of moldly infants
sitting in judgment upon us.
Prof. Leslie then finds, as arbitrarily as one might find that some joker
put the Brooklyn Bridge where it is, that “the piece was placed there as a
practical joke, though not by its present owner; and is a modern fabrication,
perhaps of the sixteenth century, possibly His-pano-American or French-
American origin.”“the piece was placed there as a
practical joke, though not by its present owner; and is a modern fabrication,
perhaps of the sixteenth century, possibly His-pano-American or French-
American origin.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---d there as a
practical joke, though not by its present owner; and is a modern fabrication,
perhaps of the sixteenth century, possibly His-pano-American or French-
American origin.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It’s sheer, brutal attempt to assimilate a thing that may or may not have
fallen from the sky, with phenomena admitted by the anthropologic system:
or with the early French or Spanish explorers of Illinois. Though it is
ridiculous in a positive sense to give reasons, it is more acceptable to
attempt reasons more nearly real than opposing reasons. Of course, in his
favor, we note that Prof. Leslie qualifies his notions. But his disregards are
that there is nothing either French or Spanish about this coin. A legend upon
it is said to be “somewhere between Arabic and Phoenician, without being
either.” Prof. Winchell (Sparks from a Geologist’s Hammer, p. 170) says of
the crude designs upon this coin, which was in his possession—scrawls of
an animal and of a warrior, or of a cat and a gold-fish, whichever be
convenient—that they had been neither stamped nor engraved, but “looked
as if etched with an acid.” That is a method unknown in numismatics of this
earth. As to the crudity of design upon this coin, and something else—that,
though the “warrior” may be, by due disregards, either a cat or a goldfish,
we have to note that his headdress is typical of the American Indian—could
be explained, of course, but for fear that we might be instantly translated to
the Positive Absolute, which may not be absolutely desirable, we prefer to
have some flaws or negativeness in our own expressions.
Data of more than the thrice-accursed:
Tablets of stone, with the ten commandments engraved upon them, in
Hebrew, said to have been found in mounds in the United States;
Masonic emblems said to have been found in mounds in the United
States.
We’re upon the borderline of our acceptances, and we’re amorphous in
the uncertainties and mergings of our outline. Conventionally, or, with no
real reason for so doing, we exclude these things, and then, as grossly and
arbitrarily and irrationally—though our attempt is always to approximate
away from these negative states—as ever a Kepler, Newton, or Darwin
made his selections, without which he could not have seemed to be, at all,
because every one of them is now seen to be an illusion, we accept that
other lettered things have been found in mounds in the United States. Of
course we do what we can to make the selection seem not gross and
arbitrary and irrational. Then, if we accept that inscribed things of ancient
origin have been found in the United States; that cannot be attributed to any
race indigenous to the western hemisphere; that are not in any language
ever heard of in the eastern hemisphere—there’s nothing to it but to turnin the United States; that cannot be attributed to any
race indigenous to the western hemisphere; that are not in any language
ever heard of in the eastern hemisphere—there’s nothing to it but to turn

--- PAGE BREAK ---; that cannot be attributed to any
race indigenous to the western hemisphere; that are not in any language
ever heard of in the eastern hemisphere—there’s nothing to it but to turn

--- PAGE BREAK ---

non-Euclidian and try to conceive of a third “hemisphere,” or to accept that
there has been intercourse between the western hemisphere and some other
world.
But there is a peculiarity to these inscribed objects. They remind me of
the records left, by Sir John Franklin, in the Arctic; but, also, of attempts
made by relief expeditions to communicate with the Franklin expedition.
The lost explorers cached their records—or concealed them conspicuously
in mounds. The relief expeditions sent up balloons, from which messages
were dropped broadcast. Our data are of things that have been cached, and
of things that seem to have been dropped—
Or a Lost Expedition from—Somewhere.
Explorers from somewhere, and their inability to return—then, a long,
sentimental, persistent attempt, in the spirit of our own Arctic relief-
expeditions—at least to establish communication—
What if it may have succeeded"
We think of India—the millions of natives who are ruled by a small band
of esoterics—only because they receive support and direction from—
somewhere else—or from England.
In 1838, Mr. A. B. Tomlinson, owner of the great mound at Grave Creek,
West Virginia, excavated the mound. He said that, in the presence of
witnesses, he had found a small, flat, oval stone —or disk—upon which
were engraved alphabetic characters.
Col. Whittelsey, an expert in these matters, says that the stone is now
“universally regarded by archaeologists as a fraud”: that, in his opinion, Mr.
Tomlinson had been imposed upon.
Avebury, Prehistoric Times, p. 271:
“I mention it because it has been the subject of much discussion, but it is
now generally admitted to be a fraud. It is inscribed with Hebrew
characters, but the forger has copied the modern instead of the ancient form
of the letters.”
As I have said, we’re as irritable here, under the oppressions of the
anthropologists as ever were slaves in the south toward superiorities from
“poor white trash.” When we finally reverse our relative positions we shall
give lowest place to the anthropologists. A Dr. Gray does at least look at a
fish before he conceives of a miraculous origin for it. We shall have to
submerge Lord Avebury far below him—if we accept that the stone from
Grave Creek is generally regarded as a fraud by eminent authorities whoe conceives of a miraculous origin for it. We shall have to
submerge Lord Avebury far below him—if we accept that the stone from
Grave Creek is generally regarded as a fraud by eminent authorities who

--- PAGE BREAK ---aculous origin for it. We shall have to
submerge Lord Avebury far below him—if we accept that the stone from
Grave Creek is generally regarded as a fraud by eminent authorities who

--- PAGE BREAK ---

did not know it from some other object—or, in general, that so decided an
opinion must be the product of either deliberate disregard or ignorance or
fatigue. The stone belongs to a class of phenomena that is repulsive to the
System. It will not assimilate with the System. Let such an object be heard
of by such a systematist as Avebury, and the mere mention of it is as nearly
certainly the stimulus to a conventional reaction as is a charged body to an
electroscope or a glass of beer to a prohibitionist. It is of the ideals of
Science to know one object from another before expressing an opinion upon
a thing, but that is not the spirit of universal mechanics:
A thing. It is attractive or repulsive. Its conventional reaction follows.
Because it is not the stone from Grave Creek that is in Hebrew
characters, either ancient or modern: it is a stone from Newark, Ohio, of
which the story is told that a forger made this mistake of using modern
instead of ancient Hebrew characters. We shall see that the inscription upon
the Grave Creek stone is not in Hebrew.
Or all things are presumed to be innocent, but are supposed to be guilty
—unless they assimilate.
Col. Whittelsey (Western Reserve Historical Tracts, No. 33) says that the
Grave Creek stone was considered a fraud by Wilson, Squires, and Davis.
Then he comes to the Congress of Archaeologists at Nancy, France, 1875. It
is hard for Col. Whittelsey to admit that, at this meeting, which sounds
important, the stone was endorsed. He reminds us of Mr. Symons, and “the
man” who “considered” that he saw something. Col. Whittelsey’s somewhat
tortuous expression is that the finder of the stone “so imposed his views”
upon the congress that it pronounced the stone genuine.
Also the stone was examined by Schoolcraft. He gave his opinion for
genuineness.
Or there’s only one process, and “see-saw” is one of its aspects. Three or
four fat experts on the side against us. We find four or five plump ones on
our side. Or all that we call logic and reasoning ends up as sheer
preponderance of avoirdupois.
Then several philologists came out in favor of genuineness. Some of
them translated the inscription. Of course, as we have said, it is our method
—or the method of orthodoxy—way in which all conclusions are reached—
to have some awfully eminent, or preponderantly plump, authorities with us
whenever we can—in this case, however, we feel just a little apprehensiveorthodoxy—way in which all conclusions are reached—
to have some awfully eminent, or preponderantly plump, authorities with us
whenever we can—in this case, however, we feel just a little apprehensive

--- PAGE BREAK ---ch all conclusions are reached—
to have some awfully eminent, or preponderantly plump, authorities with us
whenever we can—in this case, however, we feel just a little apprehensive

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in being caught in such excellently obese, but somewhat negativized,
company:
Translation by M. Jombard:
“Thy orders are laws: thou shinest in impetuous elan and rapid chamois.”
M. Maurice Schwab:
“The chief of Emigration who reached these places (or this island) has
fixed these characters forever.”
M. Oppert:
“The grave of one who was assassinated here. May God, to revenge him,
strike his murderer, cutting off the hand of his existence.”
I like the first one best. I have such a vivid impression from it of
someone polishing up brass or something, and in an awful hurry. Of course
the third is more dramatic—still they’re all very good. They are
perturbations of one another, I suppose.
In Tract 44, Col. Whittelsey returns to the subject. He gives the
conclusion of Major De Helward, at the Congress of Luxembourg, 1877:
“If Prof. Read and myself are right in the conclusion that the figures are
neither of the Runic, Phoenician, Canaanite, Hebrew, Lybian, Celtic, or any
other alphabet-language, its importance has been greatly over-rated.”
Obvious to a child; obvious to any mentality not helplessly subjected to a
system:
That just therein lies the importance of this object.
It is said that an ideal of science is to find out the new—but, unless a
thing be of the old, it is “unimportant.”
“It is not worth while.” (Hovey.)
Then the inscribed ax, or wedge, which, according to Dr. John C. Evans,
in a communication to the American Ethnological Society, was plowed up,
near Pemberton, N. J., 1859. The characters upon this ax, or wedge, are
strikingly similar to the characters on the Grave Creek stone. Also, with a
little disregard here and a little more there, they look like tracks in the snow
by someone who’s been out celebrating, or like your handwriting, or mine,
when we think there’s a certain distinction in illegibility. Method of
disregard: anything’s anything.
Dr. Abbott describes this object in the Report of the Smithsonian
Institution, I875-260.
He says he has no faith in it.a certain distinction in illegibility. Method of
disregard: anything’s anything.
Dr. Abbott describes this object in the Report of the Smithsonian
Institution, I875-260.
He says he has no faith in it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n in illegibility. Method of
disregard: anything’s anything.
Dr. Abbott describes this object in the Report of the Smithsonian
Institution, I875-260.
He says he has no faith in it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

All progress is from the outrageous to the commonplace. Or quasi-
existence proceeds from rape to the crooning of lullabies. It’s been
interesting to me to go over various long-established periodicals and note
controversies between attempting positivists and then intermediatistic
issues. Bold, bad intruders of theories; ruffians with dishonorable intentions
—the alarms of Science; her attempts to preserve that which is dearer than
life itself—submission—then a fidelity like Mrs. Micawber’s. So many of
these ruffians, or wandering comedians that were hated, or scorned, pitied,
embraced, conventionalized. There’s not a notion in this book that has a
more frightful, or ridiculous, mien than had the notion of human footprints
in rocks, when that now respectabilized ruffian, or clown, was first heard
from. It seems bewildering to one whose interests are not scientific that
such rows should be raised over such trifles: but the feeling of a systematist
toward such an intruder is just about what anyone’s would be if a tramp
from the street should come in, sit at one’s dinner table, and say he
belonged there. We know what hypnosis can do: let him insist with all his
might that he does belong there, and one begins to suspect that he may be
right; that he may have higher perceptions of what’s right. The
prohibitionists had this worked out very skillfully.
So the row that was raised over the stone from Grave Creek— but time
and cumulativeness, and the very factor we make so much of—or the power
of massed data. There were other reports of inscribed stones, and then, half
a century later, some mounds—or caches, as we call them—were opened by
the Rev. Mr. Gass, near the city of Davenport. ^American Antiquarian, I5-
73.) Several stone tablets were found. Upon one of them, the letters
“TFTOWNS” may easily be made out. In this instance we hear nothing of
fraudulency—time, cumulativeness, the power of massed data. The attempt
to assimilate this datum is:
That the tablet was probably of Mormon origin.
Why"
Because, at Mendon, Ill., was found a brass plate, upon which were
similar characters.
Why that"
Because that was found “near a house once occupied by a Mormon.”
In a real existence, a real meteorologist, suspecting that cinders had come
from a fire engine—would have asked a fireman.s.
Why that"
Because that was found “near a house once occupied by a Mormon.”
In a real existence, a real meteorologist, suspecting that cinders had come
from a fire engine—would have asked a fireman.

--- PAGE BREAK ---that was found “near a house once occupied by a Mormon.”
In a real existence, a real meteorologist, suspecting that cinders had come
from a fire engine—would have asked a fireman.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tablets of Davenport—there’s not a record findable that it ever occurred
to any antiquarian—to ask a Mormon.
Other tablets were found. Upon one of them are two “F’s” and two “8’s.”
Also a large tablet, twelve inches by eight to ten inches “with Roman
numerals and Arabic.” It is said that the figure “8” occurs three times, and
the figure or letter “O” seven times. “With these familiar characters are
others that resemble ancient alphabets, either Phoenecian or Hebrew.”
It may be that the discovery of Australia, for instance, will turn out to be
less important than the discovery and the meaning of these tablets—
But where will you read of them in anything subsequently published;
what antiquarian has ever since tried to understand them, and their
presence, and indications of antiquity, in a land that we’re told was
inhabited only by unlettered savages"
These things that are exhumed only to be buried in some other way.
Another tablet was found, at Davenport, by Mr. Charles Harrison,
president of the American Antiquarian Society. “... 8 and other
hieroglyphics are upon this tablet.” This time, also, fraud is not mentioned.
My own notion is that it is very unsportsmanlike ever to mention fraud.
Accept anything. Then explain it your way. Anything that assimilates with
one explanation, must have assimilable relations, to some degree, with all
other explanations, if all explanations are somewhere continuous. Mormons
are lugged in again, but the attempt is faint and helpless—“because general
circumstances make it difficult to explain the presence of these tablets.”
Altogether our phantom resistance is mere attribution to the Mormons,
without the slightest attempt to find base for the attribution. We think of
messages that were showered upon this earth, and of messages that were
cached in mounds upon this earth. The similarity to the Franklin situation is
striking. Conceivably centuries from now, objects dropped from relief-
expedition-balloons may be found in the Arctic, and conceivably there are
still undiscovered caches left by Franklin, in the hope that relief expeditions
would find them. It would be as incongruous to attribute these things to the
Eskimos as to attribute tablets and lettered stones to the aborigines of
America. Some time I shall take up an expression that the queer-shaped
mounds upon this earth were built by explorers from Somewhere, unable to
get back, designed to attract attention from some other world, and that a
vast sword-shaped mound has been discovered upon the moon— Just now
we think of lettered things and their two possible significances.k, designed to attract attention from some other world, and that a
vast sword-shaped mound has been discovered upon the moon— Just now
we think of lettered things and their two possible significances.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ct attention from some other world, and that a
vast sword-shaped mound has been discovered upon the moon— Just now
we think of lettered things and their two possible significances.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A bizarre little lost soul, rescued from one of the morgues of the
American Journal of Science
An account, sent by a correspondent, to Prof. Silliman, of something that
was found in a block of marble, taken November, 1829, from a quarry, near
Philadelphia (Am. J. Sci., 1-19-361). The block was cut into slabs. By this
process, it is said, was exposed an indentation in the stone, about one and a
half inches by five-eighths of an inch. A geometric indentation: in it were
two definite-looking raised letters, like “I U”: only difference is that the
corners of the “U” are not rounded, but are right angles. We are told that
this block of stone came from a depth of seventy or eighty feet—or that, if
acceptable, this lettering was done long, long ago. To some persons, not
sated with the commonness of the incredible that has to be accepted, it may
seem grotesque to think that an indentation in sand could have tons of other
sand piled upon it and hardening into stone, without being pressed out—but
the famous Nicaraguan footprints were found in a quarry under eleven
strata of solid rock. There was no discussion of this datum. We only take it
out for an airing.
As to lettered stones that may once upon a time have been showered
upon Europe, if we cannot accept that the stones were inscribed by
indigenous inhabitants of Europe, many have been found in caves—whence
they were carried as curiosities by prehistoric men, or as ornaments, I
suppose. About the size and shape of the Grave Creek stone, or disk: “flat
and oval and about two inches wide.” (Sollas.) Characters painted upon
them: found first by M. Piette, in the cave of Mas d’Azil, Ariege. According
to Sollas, they are marked in various directions with red and black lines.
“But on not a few of them, more complex characters occur, which in a few
instances simulate some of the capital letters of the Roman alphabet.” In
one instance the letters “F E I” accompanied by no other markings to
modify them, are as plain as they could be. According to Sollas (Ancient
Hunters, p. 95) M. Cartailhac has confirmed the observations of Piette, and
M. Boule has found additional examples. “They offer one of the darkest
problems of prehistoric times.” (Sollas.)
As to caches in general, I should say that they are made with two
purposes: to proclaim and to conceal; or that caches documents are hidden,
or covered over, in conspicuous structures; at least, so are designed the
cairns in the Arctic.
Trans. N. Y. Acad, of Sciences, 11-27:to proclaim and to conceal; or that caches documents are hidden,
or covered over, in conspicuous structures; at least, so are designed the
cairns in the Arctic.
Trans. N. Y. Acad, of Sciences, 11-27:

--- PAGE BREAK ---conceal; or that caches documents are hidden,
or covered over, in conspicuous structures; at least, so are designed the
cairns in the Arctic.
Trans. N. Y. Acad, of Sciences, 11-27:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That Mr. J. H. Hooper, Bradley Co., Tenn., having come upon a curious
stone, in some woods upon his farm, investigated. He dug. He unearthed a
long wall. Upon this wall were inscribed many alphabetic characters. “872
characters have been examined, many of them duplicates, and a few
imitations of animal forms, the moon, and other objects. Accidental
imitations of oriental alphabets are numerous.
The part that seems significant:
That these letters had been hidden under a layer of cement.
And still, in our own heterogeneity, or unwillingness, or inability, to
concentrate upon single concepts, we shall—or we sha’n’t—accept that,
though there may have been a Lost Colony or Lost Expedition from
Somewhere, upon this earth, and extra-mundane visitors who could never
get back, there have been other extra-mundane visitors, who have gone
away again—altogether quite in analogy with the Franklin Expedition and
Peary’s flittings in the Arctic—
And a wreck that occurred to one group of them—
And the loot that was lost overboard—
The Chinese seals of Ireland.
Not the things with the big, wistful eyes that lie on ice, and that are
taught to balance objects on their noses—but inscribed stamps, with which
to make impressions.
Proc. Roy. Irish Acad., 1-381:
A paper was read by Mr. J. Huband Smith, descriptive of about a dozen
Chinese seals that had been found in Ireland. They are all alike: each a cube
with an animal seated upon it. “It is said that the inscriptions upon them are
of a very ancient class of Chinese characters.”
The three points that have made a leper and an outcast of this datum—but
only in the sense of disregard, because nowhere that I know of is it
questioned:
Agreement among arch ologists that there were no relations, in the
remote past, between China and Ireland;
That no other objects, from ancient China—virtually, I suppose —have
ever been found in Ireland;
The great distances at which these seals have been found apart.
After Mr. Smith’s investigations—if he did investigate, or do more than
record—many more Chinese seals were found in Ireland, and, with one
exception, only in Ireland. In 1852, about 60 had been found. Of all. Smith’s investigations—if he did investigate, or do more than
record—many more Chinese seals were found in Ireland, and, with one
exception, only in Ireland. In 1852, about 60 had been found. Of all

--- PAGE BREAK ---

arch ologic finds in Ireland, “none is enveloped in greater mystery.”
(Chambers’ Journal, I6-364.) According to the writer in Chambers Journal,
one of these seals was found in a curiosity shop in London. When
questioned, the shopkeeper said that it had come from Ireland.
In this instance, if you don’t take instinctively to our expression, there is
no orthodox explanation for your preference. It is the astonishing scattering
of them, over field and forest, that has hushed the explainers. In the
Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, 10-171, Dr. Frazer says that they
“appear to have been sown broadcast over the country in some strange way
that I cannot offer solution of.”
The struggle for expression of a notion that did not belong to Dr. Frazer’s
era:
“The invariable story of their find is what we might expect if they had
been accidentally dropped. . . .”
Three were found in Tipperary; six in Cork; three in Down; four in
Waterford; all the rest—one or two to a county.
But one of these Chinese seals was found in the bed of the River Boyne,
near Clonard, Meath, when workmen were raising gravel.
That one, at least, had been dropped there.

--- PAGE BREAK ---a county.
But one of these Chinese seals was found in the bed of the River Boyne,
near Clonard, Meath, when workmen were raising gravel.
That one, at least, had been dropped there.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
12
STRONOMY.
And a watchman looking at half a dozen lanterns, where where a
street’s been torn up.
There are gas lights and kerosene lamps and electric lights in the
neighborhood: matches flaring, fires in stoves, bonfires, house afire
somewhere; lights of automobiles, illuminated signs—
The watchman and his one little system.
Ethics.
And some young ladies and the dear old professor of a very “select”
seminary.
Drugs and divorce and rape: venereal diseases, drunkenness, murder—
Excluded.
The prim and the precise, or the exact, the homogeneous, the single, the
puritanic, the mathematic, the pure, the perfect. We can have illusion of this
state—but only by disregarding its infinite denials. It’s a drop of milk afloat
in acid that’s eating it. The positive swamped by the negative. So it is in
intermediateness, where only to “be” positive is to generate corresponding
and, perhaps, equal negativeness. In our acceptance, it is, in quasi-
existence, premonitory, or pre-natal, or pre-awakening consciousness of a
real existence.
But this consciousness of realness is the greatest resistance to efforts to
realize or to become real—because it is feeling that realness has been
attained. Our antagonism is not to Science, but to the attitude of the
sciences that they have finally realized; or to belief, instead of acceptance;
to the insufficiency, which, as we have seen over and over, amounts to
paltriness and puerility of scientific dogmas and standards. Or, if several
persons start out to Chicago, and get to Buffalo, and one be under the
delusion that Buffalo is Chicago, that one will be a resistance to the
progress of the others.
So astronomy and its seemingly exact, little system—

--- PAGE BREAK ---to Buffalo, and one be under the
delusion that Buffalo is Chicago, that one will be a resistance to the
progress of the others.
So astronomy and its seemingly exact, little system—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

But data we shall have of round worlds and spindle-shaped worlds, and
worlds shaped like a wheel; worlds like titanic pruning hooks; worlds
linked together by streaming filaments; solitary worlds, and worlds in
hordes: tremendous worlds and tiny worlds: some of them made of material
like the material of this earth; and worlds that are geometric super-
constructions made of iron and steel—
Or not only fall from the sky of ashes and cinders and coke and charcoal
and oily substances that suggest fuel—but the masses of iron that have
fallen upon this earth.
Wrecks and flotsam and fragments of vast iron constructions—
Or steel. Sooner or later we shall have to take up an expression that
fragments of steel have fallen from the sky. If fragments not of iron, but of
steel have fallen upon this earth—
But what would a deep-sea fish learn even if a steel plate of a wrecked
vessel above him should drop and bump him on the nose"
Our submergence in a sea of conventionality of almost impenetrable
density.
Sometimes I’m a savage who has found something on the beach of his
island. Sometimes I’m a deep-sea fish with a sore nose.
The greatest of mysteries:
Why don’t they ever come here, or send here, openly"
Of course there’s nothing to that mystery if we don’t take so seriously the
notion—that we must be interesting. It’s probably for moral reasons that
they stay away—but even so, there must be some degraded ones among
them.
Or physical reasons:
When we can specially take up that subject, one of our leading ideas, or
credulities, will be that near approach by another world to this world would
be catastrophic: that navigable worlds would avoid proximity; that others
that have survived have organized into protective remotenesses, or orbits
which approximate to regularity, though by no means to the degree of
popular supposition.
But the persistence of the notion that we must be interesting. Bugs and
germs and things like that: they’re interesting to us: some of them are too
interesting.
Dangers of near approach—nevertheless our own ships that dare not
venture close to a rocky shore can send rowboats ashore—hings like that: they’re interesting to us: some of them are too
interesting.
Dangers of near approach—nevertheless our own ships that dare not
venture close to a rocky shore can send rowboats ashore—

--- PAGE BREAK ---y’re interesting to us: some of them are too
interesting.
Dangers of near approach—nevertheless our own ships that dare not
venture close to a rocky shore can send rowboats ashore—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Why not diplomatic relations established between the United States and
Cyclorea—which, in our advanced astronomy, is the name of a remarkable
wheel-shaped world or super-construction" Why not missionaries sent here
openly to convert us from our barbarous prohibitions and other taboos, and
to prepare the way for a good trade in ultra-bibles and super-whiskeys;
fortunes made in selling us cast-off super-fineries, which we’d take to like
an African chief to someone’s old silk hat from New York or London"
The answer that occurs to me is so simple that it seems immediately
acceptable, if we accept that the obvious is the solution of all problems, or
if most of our perplexities consist in laboriously and painfully conceiving of
the unanswerable, and then looking for answers—using such words as
“obvious” and “solution” conventionally—
Or:
Would we, if we could, educate and sophisticate pigs, geese, cattle"
Would it be wise to establish diplomatic relation with the hen that now
functions, satisfied with mere sense of achievement by way of
compensation"
I think we’re property.
I should say we belong to something:
That once upon a time, this earth was No-man’s Land, that other worlds
explored and colonized here, and fought among themselves for possession,
but that now it’s owned by something:
That something owns this earth—all others warned off.
Nothing in our own times—perhaps—because I am thinking of certain
notes I have—has ever appeared upon this earth, from somewhere else, so
openly as Columbus landed upon San Salvador, or as Hudson sailed up his
river. But as to surreptitious visits to this earth, in recent times, or as to
emissaries, perhaps, from other worlds, or voyagers who have shown every
indication of intent to evade and avoid, we shall have data as convincing as
our data of oil or coal-burning aerial super-constructions.
But, in this vast subject, I shall have to do considerable neglecting or
disregarding, myself. I don’t see how I can, in this book, take up at all the
subject of possible use of humanity to some other mode of existence, or the
flattering notion that we can possibly be worth something.
Pigs, geese, and cattle.
First find out that they are owned.
Then find out the whyness of it.umanity to some other mode of existence, or the
flattering notion that we can possibly be worth something.
Pigs, geese, and cattle.
First find out that they are owned.
Then find out the whyness of it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---r mode of existence, or the
flattering notion that we can possibly be worth something.
Pigs, geese, and cattle.
First find out that they are owned.
Then find out the whyness of it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I suspect that, after all, we’re useful—that among contesting claimants,
adjustment has occurred, or that something now has a legal right to us, by
force, or by having paid out analogues of beads for us to former, more
primitive, owners of us—all others warned off—that all this has been
known, perhaps for ages, to certain ones upon this earth, a cult or order,
members of which function like bellwethers to the rest of us, or as superior
slaves or overseers, directing us in accordance with instructions received—
from Somewhere else—in our mysterious usefulness.
But I accept that, in the past, before proprietorship was established,
inhabitants of a host of other worlds have—dropped here, hopped here,
wafted, sailed, flown, motored—walked here, for all I know—been pulled
here, been pushed; have come singly, have come in enormous numbers;
have visited occasionally, have visited periodically for hunting, trading,
replenishing harems, mining: have been unable to stay here, have
established colonies here, have been lost here; far-advanced peoples, or
things, and primitive peoples or whatever they were: white ones, black
ones, yellow ones—
I have a very convincing datum that the ancient Britons were blue ones.
Of course we are told by conventional anthropologists that they only
painted themselves blue, but in our own advanced anthropology, they were
veritable blue ones—
Annals of Philosophy, 14-51:
Note of a blue child born in England.
That’s atavism.
Giants and fairies. We accept them, of course. Or, if we pride ourselves
upon being awfully far-advanced, I don’t know how to sustain our conceit
except by very largely going far back. Science of today—the superstition of
tomorrow. Science of tomorrow—the superstition of today.
Notice of a stone ax, 17 inches long: 9 inches across broad end. (Proc.
Soc. of Ants. of Scotland, 1-9-184.)
Amer. Antiquarian, 18-60:
Copper ax from an Ohio mound: 22 inches long; weight 38 pounds.
Atner. Anthropologist, n.s., 8-229:
Stone ax found at Birchwood, Wisconsin—exhibited in the collection of
the Missouri Historical Society—found with “the pointed end embedded in
the soil”—for all I know, may have dropped there —28 inches long, 14
wide, 11 thick—weight 300 pounds.ited in the collection of
the Missouri Historical Society—found with “the pointed end embedded in
the soil”—for all I know, may have dropped there —28 inches long, 14
wide, 11 thick—weight 300 pounds.

--- PAGE BREAK ---on of
the Missouri Historical Society—found with “the pointed end embedded in
the soil”—for all I know, may have dropped there —28 inches long, 14
wide, 11 thick—weight 300 pounds.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Or the footprints, in sandstone, near Carson, Nevada—each print 18 to 20
inches long. (Amer. Jour. Sci., 3-26-139.)
These footprints are very clear and well-defined: reproduction of them in
the Journal—but they assimilate with the System, like sour apples to other
systems: so Prof. Marsh, a loyal and unscrupulous systematist, argues:
“The size of these footprints and specially the width between the right
and left series, are strong evidence that they were not made by men, as has
been so generally supposed.”
So these excluders. Stranglers of Minerva. Desperadoes of disregard.
Above all, or below all, the anthropologists. I’m inspired with a new insult
—someone offends me: I wish to express almost absolute contempt for him
—he’s a systematistic anthropologist. Simply to read something of this kind
is not so impressive as to see for one’s self: if anyone will take the trouble
to look up these footprints, as pictured in the Journal, he will either agree
with Prof. Marsh or feel that to deny them is to indicate a mind as
profoundly enslaved by a system as was ever the humble intellect of a
medieval monk. The reasoning of this representative phantom of the
chosen, or of the spectral appearances who sit in judgment, or
condemnation, upon us of the more nearly real:
That there never were giants upon this earth, because gigantic footprints
are more gigantic than prints made by men who are not giants.
We think of giants as occasional visitors to this earth. Of course —
Stonehenge, for instance. It may be that, as time goes on, we shall have to
admit that there are remains of many tremendous habitations of giants upon
this earth, and that their appearances here were more than casual—but their
bones—or the absence of their bones—
Except—that, no matter how cheerful and unsuspicious my disposition
may be, when I go to the American Museum of Natural History, dark
cynicisms arise the moment I come to the fossils—or old bones that have
been found upon this earth—gigantic things— that have been reconstructed
into terrifying but “proper” dinosaurs —but my uncheerfulness—
The dodo did it.
On one of the floors below the fossils, they have a reconstructed dodo.
It’s frankly a fiction: it’s labeled as such—but it’s been reconstructed so
cleverly and so convincingly—
Fairies.
“Fairy crosses.”one of the floors below the fossils, they have a reconstructed dodo.
It’s frankly a fiction: it’s labeled as such—but it’s been reconstructed so
cleverly and so convincingly—
Fairies.
“Fairy crosses.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---low the fossils, they have a reconstructed dodo.
It’s frankly a fiction: it’s labeled as such—but it’s been reconstructed so
cleverly and so convincingly—
Fairies.
“Fairy crosses.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Harper’s Weekly, 50-715:
That, near the point where the Blue Ridge and the Allegheny Mountains
unite, north of Patrick County, Virginia, many little stone crosses have been
found.
A race of tiny beings.
They crucified cockroaches.
Exquisite beings—but the cruelty of the exquisite. In their diminutive
way they were human beings. They crucified.
The “fairy crosses,” we are told in Harper’ s Weekly, range in weight
from one-quarter of an ounce to an ounce: but it is said, in the Scientific
American, 79-395, that some of them are no larger than the head of a pin.
They have been found in two other states, but all in Virginia are strictly
localized on and along Bull Mountain.
We are reminded of the Chinese seals in Ireland.
I suppose they fell there.
Some are Roman crosses, some St. Andrew’s, some Maltese. This time
we are spared contact with the anthropologists and have geologists instead,
but I am afraid that the relief to our finer, or more nearly real, sensibilities
will not be very great. The geologists were called upon to explain the “fairy
crosses.” Their response was the usual scientific tropism—“Geologists say
that they are crystals.” The writer in Harper’ s Weekly points out that this
“hold up,” or this anaesthetic, if theoretic science be little but attempt to
assuage pangs of the unexplained, fails to account for the localized
distributions of these objects—which make me think of both aggregation
and separation at the bottom of the sea, if from a wrecked ship, similar
objects should fall in large numbers but at different times.
But some are Roman crosses, some St. Andrew’s, some Maltese.
Conceivably there might be a mineral that would have a diversity of
geometric forms, at the same time restricted to some expression of the
cross, because snowflakes, for instance, have diversity but restriction to the
hexagon, but the guilty geologists, cold-blooded as astronomers and
chemists and all the other deep-sea fishes—though less profoundly of the
pseudo-saved than the wretched anthropologists—disregarded the very
datum—that it was wise to disregard:
That the “fairy crosses” are not all made of the same material.
It’s the same old disregard, or it’s the same old psycho-tropism, or
process of assimilation. Crystals are geometric forms. Crystals are included“fairy crosses” are not all made of the same material.
It’s the same old disregard, or it’s the same old psycho-tropism, or
process of assimilation. Crystals are geometric forms. Crystals are included

--- PAGE BREAK ---not all made of the same material.
It’s the same old disregard, or it’s the same old psycho-tropism, or
process of assimilation. Crystals are geometric forms. Crystals are included

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in the System. So then “fairy crosses” are crystals. But that different
minerals should, in a few different regions, be inspired to turn into different
forms of the cross—is the kind of resistance that we call less nearly real
than our own acceptances.
We now come to some “cursed” little things that are of the “lost,” but for
the “salvation” of which scientific missionaries have done their damnedest.
“Pigmy flints.”
They can’t very well be denied.
They’re lost and well known.
“Pigmy flints” are tiny, prehistoric implements. Some of them are a
quarter of an inch in size. England, India, France, South Africa— they’ve
been found in many parts of the world—whether showered there or not.
They belong high up in the froth of the accursed: they are not denied, and
they have not been disregarded; there is an abundant literature upon this
subject. One attempt to rationalize them, or assimilate them, or take them
into the scientific fold, has been the notion that they were toys of prehistoric
children. It sounds reasonable. But, of course, by the reasonable we mean
that for which the equally reasonable, but opposing, has not been found out
—except that we modify that by saying that, though nothing’s finally
reasonable, 
some 
phenomena 
have 
higher 
approximations 
to
Reasonableness than have others. Against the notion of toys, the higher
approximation is that where “pygmy flints” are found, all flints are pygmies
—at least so in India, where, when larger implements have been found in
the same place, there are separations by strata. (Wilson.)
The datum that, just at present, leads me to accept that these flints were
made by beings about the size of pickles, is a point brought out by Prof.
Wilson (Rept. National Museum, 1892-455):
Not only that the flints are tiny but that the chipping upon them is
“minute.”
Struggle for expression, in the mind of a 19th-century-ite, of an idea that
did not belong to his era:
In Science Gossip, I896-36, R. A. Galty says:
“So fine is the chipping that to see the workmanship a magnifying glass
is necessary.”
I think that would be absolutely convincing, if there were anything—
absolutely anything—either that tiny beings, from pickle to cucumber-that to see the workmanship a magnifying glass
is necessary.”
I think that would be absolutely convincing, if there were anything—
absolutely anything—either that tiny beings, from pickle to cucumber-

--- PAGE BREAK ---manship a magnifying glass
is necessary.”
I think that would be absolutely convincing, if there were anything—
absolutely anything—either that tiny beings, from pickle to cucumber-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

stature, made these things, or that ordinary savages made them under
magnifying glasses.
The idea that we are now going to develop, or perpetrate, is rather
intensely of the accursed, or the advanced. It’s a lost soul, I admit— or
boast—but it fits in. Or, as conventional as ever, our own method is the
scientific method of assimilating. It assimilates, if we think of the
inhabitants of Elvera—
By the way, I forgot to tell the name of the giant’s world:
Monstrator.
Spindle-shaped world—about 100,000 miles along its major axis— more
details to be published later.
But our coming inspiration fits in, if we think of the inhabitants of Elvera
as having only visited here: having, in hordes as dense as clouds of bats,
come here, upon hunting excursions—for mice, I should say: for bees, very
likely—or most likely of all, or inevitably, to convert the heathen here—
horrified with anyone who would gorge himself with more than a bean at a
time; fearful for the souls of beings who would guzzle more than a dewdrop
at a time— hordes of tiny missionaries, determined that right should
prevail, determining right by their own minutenesses.
They must have been missionaries.
Only to be is motion to convert or assimilate something else.
The idea now is that tiny creatures coming here from their own little
world, which may be Eros, though I call it Elvera, would flit from the
exquisite to the enormous—gulp of a fair-sized terrestrial animal—half a
dozen of them gone and soon digested. One falls into a brook—torn away
in a mighty torrent—
Or never anything but conventional, we adopt from Darwin:
“The geological records are incomplete.”
Their flints would survive, but, as to their fragile bodies—one might as
well search for prehistoric frost-traceries. A little whirl-wind—Elverean
carried away a hundred yards—body never found by his companions.
They’d mourn for the departed. Conventional emotion to have: they’d
mourn. There’d have to be a funeral: there’s no getting away from funerals.
So I adopt an explanation that I take from the anthropologists: burial in
effigy. Perhaps the Elvereans would not come to this earth again until many
years later—another distressing occurrence—one little mausoleum for all
burials in effigy.om the anthropologists: burial in
effigy. Perhaps the Elvereans would not come to this earth again until many
years later—another distressing occurrence—one little mausoleum for all
burials in effigy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ts: burial in
effigy. Perhaps the Elvereans would not come to this earth again until many
years later—another distressing occurrence—one little mausoleum for all
burials in effigy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

London Times, July 20, 1836:
That, early in July, 1836, some boys were searching for rabbits’ burrows
in the rocky formation, near Edinburgh, known as Arthur’s Seat. In the side
of a cliff, they came upon some thin sheets of slate, which they pulled out.
Little cave.
Seventeen tiny coffins.
Three or four inches long.
In the coffins were miniature wooden figures. They were dressed
differently both in style and material. There were two tiers of eight coffins
each, and a third tier begun, with one coffin.
The extraordinary datum, which has especially made mystery here:
That the coffins had been deposited singly, in the little cave, and at
intervals of many years. In the first tier, the coffins were quite decayed, and
the wrappings had moldered away. In the second tier, the effects of age had
not advanced so far. And the top coffin was quite recent-looking.
In the Proceedings of the Society of Antiquarians of Scotland, 3-12-460,
there is a full account of this find. Three of the coffins and three of the
figures are pictured.
So Elvera with its downy forests and its microscopic oyster shells —and
if the Elvereans be not very far-advanced, they take baths— with sponges
the size of pin heads—
Or that catastrophes have occurred: that fragments of Elvera have fallen
to this earth:
In Popular Science, 20-83, Francis Bingham, writing of the corals and
sponges and shells and crinoids that Dr. Hahn had asserted that he had
found in meteorites, says, judging by the photographs of them, that their
“notable peculiarity” is their “extreme smallness.” The corals, for instance,
are about one-twentieth the size of terres trial corals. “They represent a
veritable pygmy animal world,” says Bingham.
The inhabitants of Monstrator and Elvera were primitives, I think, at the
time of their occasional visits to this earth—though, of course, in a quasi-
existence, anything that we semi-phantoms call evidence of anything may
be just as good evidence of anything else. Logicians and detectives and
jurymen and suspicious wives and members of the Royal Astronomic
Society recognize this indeterminateness, but have the delusion that in the
method of agreement there is final, or real evidence. The method is good
enough for an “existence” that is only semi-real, but also it is the method ofterminateness, but have the delusion that in the
method of agreement there is final, or real evidence. The method is good
enough for an “existence” that is only semi-real, but also it is the method of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ave the delusion that in the
method of agreement there is final, or real evidence. The method is good
enough for an “existence” that is only semi-real, but also it is the method of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

reasoning by which witches were burned, and by which ghosts have been
feared. I’d not like to be so unadvanced as to deny witches and ghosts, but I
do think that there never have been witches and ghosts like those of popular
supposition. But stories of them have been supported by astonishing
fabrications of details and of different accounts in agreement.
So, if a giant left impressions of his bare feet in the ground, that is not to
say that he was a primitive—bulk of culture out taking the Kneipp cure. So,
if Stonehenge is a large, but only roughly geometric construction, the
inattention to details by its builders— signifies anything you please—
ambitious dwarfs or giants—if giants, that they were little more than cave
men, or that they were post-impressionist architects from a very far-
advanced civilization.
If there are other worlds, there are tutelary worlds—or that Kepler, for
instance, could not have been absolutely wrong: that his notion of an angel
assigned to push along and guide each planet may not be very acceptable,
but that, abstractedly, or in the notion of a tutelary relation, we may find
acceptance.
Only to be is to be tutelary.
Our general expression:
That “everything” in Intermediateness is not a thing, but is an endeavor
to become something—by breaking away from its continuity, or merging
away, with all other phenomena—is an attempt to break away from the very
essence of a relative existence and become absolute—if it have not
surrendered to, or become part of, some higher attempt:
That to this process there are two aspects:
Attraction, or the spirit of everything to assimilate all other things —if it
have not given in and subordinated to—or have not been assimilated by—
some higher attempted system, unity, organization, entity, harmony,
equilibrium—
And repulsion, or the attempt of everything to exclude or disregard the
unassimilable.
Universality of the process:
Anything conceivable:
A tree. It is doing all it can to assimilate substances of the soil and
substances of the air, and sunshine, too, into tree-substance: obversely it is
rejecting or excluding or disregarding that which it cannot assimilate.l it can to assimilate substances of the soil and
substances of the air, and sunshine, too, into tree-substance: obversely it is
rejecting or excluding or disregarding that which it cannot assimilate.

--- PAGE BREAK ---te substances of the soil and
substances of the air, and sunshine, too, into tree-substance: obversely it is
rejecting or excluding or disregarding that which it cannot assimilate.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cow grazing, pig rooting, tiger stalking: planets trying, or acting, to
capture comets; rag pickers and the Christian religion, and a cat down
headfirst in a garbage can; nations fighting for more territory, sciences
correlating the data they can, trust magnates organizing, chorus girl out for
a little late supper—all of them stopped somewhere by the unassimilable.
Chorus girl and the broiled lobster. If she eats not shell and all she
represents universal failure to positivize. Also, if she does she represents
universal failure to positivize: her ensuing disorders will translate her to the
Negative Absolute.
Or Science and some of our cursed hard-shelled data.
One speaks of the tutelarian as if it were something distinct in itself. So
one speaks of a tree, a saint, a barrel of pork, the Rocky Mountains. One
speaks of missionaries, as if they were positively different, or had identity
of their own, or were a species by themselves. To the Intermediatist,
everything that seems to have identity is only attempted identity, and every
species is continuous with all other species, or that which is called the
specific is only emphasis upon some aspect of the general. If there are cats,
they’re only emphasis upon universal felinity. There is nothing that does not
partake of that of which the missionary, or the tutelary, is the special. Every
conversation is a conflict of missionaries, each trying to convert the other,
to assimilate, or to make the other similar to himself. If no progress be
made, mutual repulsion will follow.
If other worlds have ever in the past had relations with this earth, they
were attempted positivizations: to extend themselves, by colonies, upon this
earth; to convert, or assimilate, indigenous inhabitants of this earth.
Or parent-worlds and their colonies here—
Super-Romanimus—
Or where the first Romans came from.
It’s as good as the Romulus and Remus story.
Super-Israelimus—
Or that, despite modern reasoning upon this subject, there was once
something that was super-parental or tutelary to early orientals.
Azuria, which was tutelary to the early Britons:
Azuria, whence came the blue Britons, whose descendants gradually
diluting, like blueing in a wash-tub, where a faucet’s turned on, have been
most emphasized of sub-tutelarians, or assimilators ever since.a, whence came the blue Britons, whose descendants gradually
diluting, like blueing in a wash-tub, where a faucet’s turned on, have been
most emphasized of sub-tutelarians, or assimilators ever since.

--- PAGE BREAK ---lue Britons, whose descendants gradually
diluting, like blueing in a wash-tub, where a faucet’s turned on, have been
most emphasized of sub-tutelarians, or assimilators ever since.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Worlds that were once tutelarian worlds—before this earth became sole
property of one of them—their attempts to convert or assimilate—but then
the state that comes to all things in their missionary-frustrations—
unacceptance by all stomachs of some things; rejection by all societies of
some units; glaciers that sort over and cast out stones—
Repulsion. Wrath of the baffled missionary. There is no other wrath. All
repulsion is reaction to the unassimilable.
So then the wrath of Azuria—
Because surrounding peoples of this earth would not assimilate with her
own colonists in the part of the earth that we now call England.
I don’t know that there has ever been more nearly just, reasonable, or
logical wrath, in this earth’s history—if there is no other wrath.
The wrath of Azuria, because the other peoples of this earth would not
turn blue to suit her.
History is a department of human delusion that interests us. We are able
to give a little advancement to history. In the vitrified forts of a few parts of
Europe, we find data that the Humes and Gibbons have disregarded.
The vitrified forts surrounding England, but not in England.
The vitrified forts of Scotland, Ireland, Brittany, and Bohemia.
Or that, once upon a time, with electric blasts, Azuria tried to swipe this
earth clear of the peoples who resisted her.
The vast blue bulk of Azuria appeared in the sky. Clouds turned green.
The sun was formless and purple in the vibrations of wrath that were
emanating from Azuria. The whitish, or yellowish, or brownish peoples of
Scotland, Ireland, Brittany, and Bohemia fled to hilltops and built forts. In a
real existence, hilltops, or easiest accessibility to an aerial enemy, would be
the last choice in refuges. But here, in quasi-existence, if we’re accustomed
to run to hilltops, in times of danger, we run to them just the same, even
with danger closest to hilltops. Very common in quasi-existence: attempt to
escape by running closer to the pursuing.
They built forts, or already had forts, on hilltops.
Something poured electricity upon them.
The stones of these forts exist to this day, vitrified, or melted and turned
to glass.
The archaeologists have jumped from one conclusion to another, like the
“rapid chamois” we read of a while ago, to account for vitrified forts,
always restricted by the commandment that unless their conclusionsologists have jumped from one conclusion to another, like the
“rapid chamois” we read of a while ago, to account for vitrified forts,
always restricted by the commandment that unless their conclusions

--- PAGE BREAK ---from one conclusion to another, like the
“rapid chamois” we read of a while ago, to account for vitrified forts,
always restricted by the commandment that unless their conclusions

--- PAGE BREAK ---

conformed to such tenets as Exclusionism, of the System, they would be
excommunicated. So archaeologists, in their medieval dread of
excommunication, have tried to explain vitrified forts in terms of terrestrial
experience. We find in their insufficiencies the same old assimilating of all
that could be assimilated, and disregard for the unassimilable,
conventionalizing into the explanation that vitrified forts were made by
prehistoric peoples who built vast fires—often remote from wood-supply—
to melt externally, and to cement together, the stones of their constructions.
But negativeness always: so within itself a science can never be
homogeneous or unified or harmonious. So Miss Russel, in the Journal of
the B. A. A., has pointed out that it is seldom that single stones, to say
nothing of long walls, of large houses that are burned to the ground, are
vitrified.
If we pay a little attention to this subject, ourselves, before starting to
write upon it, which is one of the ways of being more nearly real than
oppositions so far encountered by us, we find:
That the stones of these forts are vitrified in no reference to cementing
them: that they are cemented here and there, in streaks, as if special blasts
had struck, or played, upon them.
Then one thinks of lightning"
Once upon a time something melted, in streaks, the stones of forts on the
tops of hills in Scotland, Ireland, Brittany, and Bohemia.
Lightning selects the isolated and conspicuous.
But some of the vitrified forts are not upon tops of hills: some are very
inconspicuous: their walls too are vitrified in streaks.
Something once had effect, similar to lightning, upon forts, mostly on
hills, in Scotland, Ireland, Brittany, and Bohemia.
But upon hills, all over the rest of the world, are remains of forts that are
not vitrified.
There is only one crime, in the local sense, and that is not to turn blue, if
the gods are blue: but, in the universal sense, the one crime is not to turn the
gods themselves green, if you’re green..
There is only one crime, in the local sense, and that is not to turn blue, if
the gods are blue: but, in the universal sense, the one crime is not to turn the
gods themselves green, if you’re green.

--- PAGE BREAK ---crime, in the local sense, and that is not to turn blue, if
the gods are blue: but, in the universal sense, the one crime is not to turn the
gods themselves green, if you’re green.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

O
13
NE of the most extraordinary of phenomena, or alleged phenomena,
of psychic research, or alleged research—if in quasi-existence there
never has been real research, but only approximations to research
that merge away, or that are continuous with, prejudice and convenience—
“Stone-throwing.”
It’s attributed to poltergeists. They’re mischievous spirits.
Poltergeists do not assimilate with our own present quasi-system, which
is an attempt to correlate denied or disregarded data as phenomena of extra-
telluric forces, expressed in physical terms. Therefore I regard poltergeists
as evil or false or discordant or absurd— names that we give to various
degrees or aspects of the unassimilable, or that which resists attempts to
organize, harmonize, systematize, or, in short, to positivize—names that we
give to our recognitions of the negative state. I don’t care to deny
poltergeists, because I suspect that later, when we’re more enlightened, or
when we widen the range of our credulities, or take on more of that increase
of ignorance that is called knowledge, poltergeists may become assimilable.
Then they’ll be as reasonable as trees. By reasonableness I mean that which
assimilates with a dominant force, or system, or a major body of thought—
which is, itself, of course, hypnosis and delusion—developing, however, in
our acceptance, to higher and higher approximations to realness. The
poltergeists are now evil or absurd to me, proportionately to their present
unassimilableness, compounded, however, with the factor of their possible
future assimilableness.
We lug in the poltergeists, because some of our own data, or alleged data,
merge away indistinguishably with data, or alleged data, of them:
Instances of stones that have been thrown, or that have fallen, upon a
small area, from an unseen and undetectable source.
London Times, April 27, 1872:
“From 4 o’clock, Thursday afternoon, until half past eleven, Thursday
night, the houses, 56 and 58 Reverdy Road, Bermondsey, were assailed
with stones and other missiles coming from an unseen quarter. Two childrenck, Thursday afternoon, until half past eleven, Thursday
night, the houses, 56 and 58 Reverdy Road, Bermondsey, were assailed
with stones and other missiles coming from an unseen quarter. Two children

--- PAGE BREAK ---on, until half past eleven, Thursday
night, the houses, 56 and 58 Reverdy Road, Bermondsey, were assailed
with stones and other missiles coming from an unseen quarter. Two children

--- PAGE BREAK ---

were injured, every window broken, and several articles of furniture were
destroyed. Although there was a strong body of policemen scattered in the
neighborhood, they could not trace the direction whence the stones were
thrown.”
“Other missiles” make a complication here. But if the expression means
tin cans and old shoes, and if we accept that the direction could not be
traced because it never occurred to anyone to look upward—why, we’ve
lost a good deal of our provincialism by this time.
London Times, Sept. 16, 1841:
That, in the home of Mrs. Charton, at Sutton Courthouse, Sutton Lane,
Chiswick, windows had been broken “by some unseen agent.” Every
attempt to detect the perpetrator failed. The mansion was detached and
surrounded by high walls. No other building was near it.
The police were called. Two constables, assisted by members of the
household, guarded the house, but the windows continued to be broken
“both in front and behind the house.”
Or the floating islands that are often stationary in the Super-Sargasso
Sea; and atmospheric disturbances that sometimes affect them, and bring
things down within small areas, upon this earth, from temporarily stationary
sources.
Super-Sargasso Sea and the beaches of its floating islands from which I
think, or at least accept, pebbles have fallen:
Wolverhampton, England, June, 1860—violent storm—fall of so many
little black pebbles that they were cleared away by shoveling (La Sci. Pour
Tous, 5-264); great number of small black stones that fell at Birmingham,
England, August, 1858—violent storm—said to be similar to some basalt a
few leagues from Birmingham (Rept. Brit. Assoc, 1864-37); pebbles
described as “common water-worn pebbles” that fell at Palestine, Texas,
July 6, 1888—“of a formation not found near Palestine” (W. H. Perry,
Sergeant, Signal Corps, Monthly Weather Review, July, 1888); round,
smooth pebbles at Kandahor, 1834 (Am. J. Sci., 1-26-161); “a number of
stones of peculiar formation and shapes, unknown in this neighborhood, fell
in a tornado at Hillsboro, Ill., May 18, 1883.” (Monthly Weather Review,
May, 1883.)
Pebbles from aerial beaches and terrestrial pebbles as products of
whirlwinds, so merge in these instances that, though it’s interesting to hear
of things of peculiar shape that have fallen from the sky, it seems best tobeaches and terrestrial pebbles as products of
whirlwinds, so merge in these instances that, though it’s interesting to hear
of things of peculiar shape that have fallen from the sky, it seems best to

--- PAGE BREAK ---ial pebbles as products of
whirlwinds, so merge in these instances that, though it’s interesting to hear
of things of peculiar shape that have fallen from the sky, it seems best to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

pay little attention here, and to find phenomena of the Super-Sargasso Sea
remote from the merger:
To this requirement we have three adaptations:
Pebbles that fell where no whirlwind to which to attribute them could be
learned of;
Pebbles which fell in hail so large that incredibly could that hail have
been formed in this earth’s atmosphere;
Pebbles which fell and were, long afterward, followed by more pebbles,
as if from some aerial, stationary source, in the same place. In September,
1898, there was a story in a New York newspaper, of lightning—or an
appearance of luminosity"—in Jamaica—something had struck a tree: near
the tree were found some small pebbles. It was said that the pebbles had
fallen from the sky, with the lightning. But the insult to orthodoxy was that
they were not angular fragments such as might have been broken from a
stony meteorite: that they were “water-worn pebbles.”
In the geographical vagueness of a mainland, the explanation “up from
one place and down in another” is always good, and is never overworked,
until the instances are massed as they are in this book: but, upon this
occasion, in the relatively small area of Jamaica, there was no whirlwind
findable—however “there in the first place” bobs up.
Monthly Weather Review, August, 1898-363:
That the government meteorologist had investigated: had reported that a
tree had been struck by lightning, and that small water-worn pebbles had
been found near the tree: but that similar pebbles could be found all over
Jamaica.
Monthly Weather Review, September, 1915-446:
Prof. Fassig gives an account of a fall of hail that occurred in Maryland,
June 22, 1915: hailstones the size of baseballs “not at all uncommon.”
“An interesting, but unconfirmed, account stated that small pebbles were
found at the center of some of the larger hail gathered at Annapolis. The
young man who related the story offered to produce the pebbles, but has not
done so.”
A footnote :
“Since writing this, the author states that he has received some of the
pebbles.”
When a young man “produces” pebbles, that’s as convincing as anything
else I’ve ever heard of, though no more convincing than, if having told ofuthor states that he has received some of the
pebbles.”
When a young man “produces” pebbles, that’s as convincing as anything
else I’ve ever heard of, though no more convincing than, if having told of

--- PAGE BREAK ---has received some of the
pebbles.”
When a young man “produces” pebbles, that’s as convincing as anything
else I’ve ever heard of, though no more convincing than, if having told of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ham sandwiches falling from the sky, he should “produce” ham sandwiches.
If this “reluctance” be admitted by us, we correlate it with a datum reported
by a Weather Bureau observer, signifying that, whether the pebbles had
been somewhere aloft a long time or not, some of the hailstones that fell
with them, had been. The datum is that some of these hailstones were
composed of from twenty to twenty-five layers alternately of clear ice and
snow-ice. In orthodox terms I argue that a fair-sized hailstone falls from the
clouds with velocity sufficient to warm it so that it would not take on even
one layer of ice. To put on twenty layers of ice, I conceive of something that
had not fallen at all, but had rolled somewhere, at a leisurely rate, for a long
time.
We now have a commonplace datum that is familiar in two respects:
Little, symmetric objects of metal that fell at Orenburg, Russia,
September, 1824 (Phil. Mag., 4-8-463).
A second fall of these objects, at Orenburg, Russia, Jan. 25, 1825 (Quar.
Jour. Roy. Inst., 1828-1-447).
I now think of the disk of Tarbes, but when first I came upon these data I
was impressed only with recurrence, because the objects of Orenburg were
described as crystals of pyrites, or sulphate of iron. I had no notion of
metallic objects that might have been shaped or molded by means other
than crystallization, until I came to Arago’s account of these occurrences
(CEuvres, 11-644). Here the analysis gives 70 per cent, red oxide of iron,
and sulphur and loss by ignition 5 per cent. It seems to me acceptable that
iron with considerably less than 5 per cent, sulphur in it is not iron pyrites—
then little, rusty iron objects, shaped by some other means, have fallen, four
months apart, at the same place. M. Arago expresses astonishment at this
phenomenon of recurrence so familiar to us.
Altogether, I find opening before us, vistas of heresies to which I, for
one, must shut my eyes. I have always been in sympathy with the
dogmatists and exclusionists: that is plain in our opening lines: that to seem
to be is falsely and arbitrarily and dogmatically to exclude. It is only that
exclusionists who are good in the nineteenth century are evil in the
twentieth century. Constantly we feel a merging away into infinitude; but
that this book shall approximate to form, or that our data shall approximate
to organization, or that we shall approximate to intelligibility, we have to
call ourselves back constantly from wandering off into infinitude. The thingte to form, or that our data shall approximate
to organization, or that we shall approximate to intelligibility, we have to
call ourselves back constantly from wandering off into infinitude. The thing

--- PAGE BREAK ---our data shall approximate
to organization, or that we shall approximate to intelligibility, we have to
call ourselves back constantly from wandering off into infinitude. The thing

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that we do, however, is to make our own outline, or the difference between
what we include and what we exclude, vague.
The crux here, and the limit beyond which we may not go—very much—
is:
Acceptance that there is a region that we call the Super-Sargasso Sea—
not yet fully accepted, but a provisional position that has received a great
deal of support—
But is it a part of this earth, and does it revolve with and over this earth—
Or does it flatly overlie this earth, not revolving with and over this earth
—
That this earth does not revolve, and is not round, or roundish, at all, but
is continuous with the rest of its system, so that, if one could break away
from the traditions of the geographers, one might walk and walk, and come
to Mars, and then find Mars continuous with Jupiter"
I suppose some day such queries will sound absurd—the thing will be so
obvious—
Because it is very difficult for me to conceive of little metallic objects
hanging precisely over a small town in Russia, for four months, if
revolving, unattached, with a revolving earth—
It may be that something aimed at that town, and then later took another
shot.
These are speculations that seem to me to be evil relatively to these early
years in the twentieth century—
Just now, I accept that this earth is—not round, of course: that is very
old-fashioned—but roundish, or, at least, that it has what is called form of
its own, and does revolve upon its axis, and in an orbit around the sun. I
only accept these old traditional notions—
And that above it are regions of suspension that revolve with it: from
which objects fall, by disturbances of various kinds, and then, later, fall
again, in the same place:
Monthly Weather Review, May, 1884-134:
Report from the Signal Service observer, at Bismarck, Dakota:
That, at 9 o’clock, in the evening of May 22, 1884, sharp sounds were
heard throughout the city, caused by a fall of flinty stones striking against
windows.
Fifteen hours later another fall of flinty stones occurred at Bismarck.
There is no report of stones having fallen anywhere else.the city, caused by a fall of flinty stones striking against
windows.
Fifteen hours later another fall of flinty stones occurred at Bismarck.
There is no report of stones having fallen anywhere else.

--- PAGE BREAK ---a fall of flinty stones striking against
windows.
Fifteen hours later another fall of flinty stones occurred at Bismarck.
There is no report of stones having fallen anywhere else.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is a thing of the ultra-damned. All Editors of scientific publications
read the Monthly Weather Review and frequently copy from it. The noise
made by the stones of Bismarck, rattling against those windows, may be in
a language that aviators will some day interpret: but it was a noise entirely
surrounded by silences. Of this ultra-damned thing, there is no mention,
findable by me, in any other publication.
The size of some hailstones has worried many meteorologists— but not
text-book meteorologists. I know of no more serene occupation than that of
writing text-books—though writing for the War Cry, of the Salvation Army,
may be equally unadventurous. In the drowsy tranquillity of a text-book, we
easily and unintelligently read of dust particles around which icy rain
forms, hailstones, in their fall, then increasing by accretion—but in the
meteorological journals, we read often of air-spaces nucleating hailstones—
But it’s the size of the things. Dip a marble in icy water. Dip and dip and
dip it. If you’re a resolute dipper, you will, after a while, have an object the
size of a baseball—but I think a thing could fall from the moon in that
length of time. Also the strata of them. The Maryland hailstones are
unusual, but a dozen strata have often been counted. Ferrel gives an
instance of thirteen strata. Such considerations led Prof. Schwedoff to argue
that some hailstones are not, and cannot, be generated in this earth’s
atmosphere—that they come from somewhere else. Now, in a relative
existence, nothing can of itself be either attractive or repulsive: its effects
are functions of its associations or implications. Many of our data have been
taken from very conservative scientific sources: it was not until their
discordant implications, or irreconcilabilities with the System, were
perceived, that excommunication was pronounced against them.
Prof. SchwedofPs paper was read before the British Association (Rept. of
1882, p. 453).
The implication, and the repulsiveness of the implication to the snug and
tight little exclusionists of 1882—though we hold out that they were
functioning well and ably relatively to 1882—
That there is water—oceans or lakes and ponds, or rivers of it— that
there is water away from, and yet not far-remote from, this earth’s
atmosphere and gravitation—
The pain of it:
That the snug little system of 1882 would be ousted from its re-
posefulness—f it— that
there is water away from, and yet not far-remote from, this earth’s
atmosphere and gravitation—
The pain of it:
That the snug little system of 1882 would be ousted from its re-
posefulness—

--- PAGE BREAK ---water away from, and yet not far-remote from, this earth’s
atmosphere and gravitation—
The pain of it:
That the snug little system of 1882 would be ousted from its re-
posefulness—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A whole new science to learn:
The Science of Super-Geography—
And Science is a turtle that says that its own shell encloses all things.
So the members of the British Association. To some of them Prof.
Schwedoff’s ideas were like slaps on the back of an environment-denying
turtle: to some of them his heresy was like an offering of meat, raw and
dripping, to milk-fed lambs. Some of them bleated like lambs, and some of
them turled like turtles. We used to crucify, but now we ridicule: or, in the
loss of vigor of all progress, the spike has etherealized into the laugh.
Sir William Thomson ridiculed the heresy, with the phantomosities of his
era:
That all bodies, such as hailstones, if away from this earth’s atmosphere,
would have to move at planetary velocity—which would be positively
reasonable if the pronouncements of St. Isaac were anything but articles of
faith—that a hailstone falling through this earth’s atmosphere, with
planetary velocity, would perform 13,000 times as much work as would
raise an equal weight of water one degree centigrade, and therefore never
fall as a hailstone at all; be more than melted—super-volatalized—
These turls and these bleats of pedantry—though we insist that, relatively
to 1882, these turls and bleats should be regarded as respectfully as we
regard rag dolls that keep infants occupied and noiseless—it is the survival
of rag dolls into maturity that we object to—so these pious and nawve ones
who believed that 13,000 times something could have—that is, in quasi-
existence—an exact and calculable resultant, whereas there is—in quasi-
existence—nothing that can, except by delusion and convenience, be called
a unit, in the first place—whose devotions to St. Isaac required blind belief
in formulas of falling bodies—
Against data that were piling up, in their own time, of slow-falling
meteorites; “milk warm” ones admitted even by Farrington and Merrill; at
least one icy meteorite nowhere denied by the present orthodoxy, a datum
as accessible to Thomson, in 1882, as it is now to us, because it was an
occurrence of 1860. Beans and needles and tacks and a magnet. Needles
and tacks adhere to and systematize relatively to a magnet, but, if some
beans, too, be caught up, they are irreconcilables to this system and drop
right out of it. A member of the Salvation Army may hear over and over
data that seem so memorable to an evolutionist. It seems remarkable that
they do not influence him—one finds that he cannot remember them. It is. A member of the Salvation Army may hear over and over
data that seem so memorable to an evolutionist. It seems remarkable that
they do not influence him—one finds that he cannot remember them. It is

--- PAGE BREAK ---lvation Army may hear over and over
data that seem so memorable to an evolutionist. It seems remarkable that
they do not influence him—one finds that he cannot remember them. It is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

incredible that Sir William Thomson had never heard of slow-falling, cold
meteorites. It is simply that he had no power to remember such
irreconcilabilities.
And then Mr. Symons again. Mr. Symons was a man who probably did
more for the science of meteorology than did any other man of his time:
therefore he probably did more to hold back the science of meteorology
than did any other man of his time. In Nature, 41-135, Mr. Symons says that
Prof. Schwedoff’s ideas are “very droll.”
I think that even more amusing is our own acceptance that, not very far
above this earth’s surface, is a region that will be the subject of a whole new
science—super-geography—with which we shall immortalize ourselves in
the resentments of the schoolboys of the future—
Pebbles and fragments of meteors and things from Mars and Jupiter and
Azuria: wedges, delayed messages, cannon balls, bricks, nails, coal and
coke and charcoal and offensive old cargoes—things that coat in ice in
some regions and things that get into areas so warm that they putrefy—or
that there are all the climates of geography in super-geography. I shall have
to accept that, floating in the sky of this earth, there often are fields of ice as
extensive as those on the Arctic Ocean—volumes of water in which are
many fishes and frogs—tracts of land covered with caterpillars—
Aviators of the future. They fly up and up. Then they get out and walk.
The fishing’s good: the bait’s right there. They find messages from other
worlds—and within three weeks there’s a big trade worked up in forged
messages. Sometime I shall write a guide book to the Super-Sargasso Sea,
for aviators, but just at present there wouldn’t be much call for it.
We now have more of our expression upon hail as a concomitant, or more
data of things that have fallen from the sky, with hail.
In general, the expression is:
These things may have been raised from some other part of the earth’s
surface, in whirlwinds, or may not have fallen, and may have been upon the
ground, in the first place—but were the hailstones found with them, raised
from some other part of the earth’s surface, or were the hailstones upon the
ground, in the first place"
As I said before, this expression is meaningless as to a few instances; it is
reasonable to think of some coincidence between the fall of hail and the fall
of other things: but, inasmuch as there have been a good many instances,—
we begin to suspect that this is not so much a book we’re writing as asome coincidence between the fall of hail and the fall
of other things: but, inasmuch as there have been a good many instances,—
we begin to suspect that this is not so much a book we’re writing as a

--- PAGE BREAK ---tween the fall of hail and the fall
of other things: but, inasmuch as there have been a good many instances,—
we begin to suspect that this is not so much a book we’re writing as a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sanitarium for overworked coincidences. If not conceivably could very
large hailstones and lumps of ice form in this earth’s atmosphere, and so
then had to come from external regions, then other things in or
accompanying very large hailstones and lumps of ice came from external
regions—which worries us a little: we may be instantly translated to the
Positive Absolute.
Cosmos, 13-120, quotes a Virginia newspaper, that fishes said to have
been catfishes, a foot long, some of them, had fallen, in 1853, at Norfolk,
Virginia, with hail.
Vegetable debris, not only nuclear, but frozen upon the surfaces of large
hailstones, at Toulouse, France, July 28, 1874. (La Science Pour Tous,
1874-270.)
Description of a storm, at Pontiac, Canada, July 11, 1864, in which it is
said that it was not hailstones that fell, but “pieces of ice, from half an inch
to over two inches in diameter” (Canadian Naturalist, 2-I-308):
“But the most extraordinary thing is that a respectable farmer, of
undoubted veracity, says he picked up a piece of hail, or ice, in the center of
which was a small green frog.”
Storm at Dubuque, Iowa, June 16, 1882, in which fell hailstones and
pieces of ice (Monthly Weather Review, June, 1882):
“The foreman of the Novelty Iron Works, of this city, states that in two
large hailstones melted by him were found small living frogs.” But the
pieces of ice that fell upon this occasion had a peculiarity that indicates—
though by as bizarre an indication as any we’ve had yet—that they had been
for a long time motionless or floating somewhere. We’ll take that up soon.
Living Age, 52-186:
That, June 30, 1841, fishes, one of which was ten inches long, fell at
Boston; that, eight days later, fishes and ice fell at Derby.
In Timb’s Year Book, 1842-275, it is said that, at Derby, the fishes had
fallen in enormous numbers; from half an inch to two inches long, and
some considerably larger. In the Athenceum, 1841-542, copied from the
Sheffield Patriot, it is said that one of the fishes weighed three ounces. In
several accounts, it is said that, with the fishes, fell many small frogs and
“pieces of half-melted ice.” We are told that the frogs and the fishes had
been raised from some other part of the earth’s surface, in a whirlwind; no
whirlwind specified; nothing said as to what part of the earth’s surface
comes ice, in the month of July—interests us that the ice is described asother part of the earth’s surface, in a whirlwind; no
whirlwind specified; nothing said as to what part of the earth’s surface
comes ice, in the month of July—interests us that the ice is described as

--- PAGE BREAK ---rth’s surface, in a whirlwind; no
whirlwind specified; nothing said as to what part of the earth’s surface
comes ice, in the month of July—interests us that the ice is described as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“half-melted.” In the London Times, July 15, 1841, it is said that the fishes
were sticklebacks; that they had fallen with ice and small frogs, many of
which had survived the fall. We note that, at Dunfermline, three months
later (Oct. 7, 1841) fell many fishes, several inches in length, in a
thunderstorm. (London Times, Oct. 12, 1841.)
Hailstones, we don’t care so much about. The matter of stratification
seems significant, but we think more of the fall of lumps of ice from the
sky, as possible data of the Super-Sargasso Sea:
Lumps of ice, a foot in circumference, Derbyshire, England, May 12,
1811 (Annual Register, 1811-54); cuboidal mass, six inches in diameter, that
fell at Birmingham, 26 days later (Thomson, Intro. to Meteorology, p. 179);
size of pumpkins, Bungalore, India, May 22, 1851 (Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1855-
35); masses of ice of a pound and a half each, New Hampshire, Aug. 13,
1851 (Lummis, Meteor-ology, p. 129); masses of ice, size of a man’s head,
in the Delphos tornado (Ferrel, Popular Treatise, p. 428); large as a man’s
hand, killing thousands of sheep, Texas, May 3, 1877 (Monthly Weather
Review, May, 1877); “pieces of ice so large that they could not be grasped
in one hand,” in a tornado, in Colorado, June 24, 1877 ^Monthly Weather
Review, June, 1877); lumps of ice four and a half inches long, Richmond,
England, Aug. 2, 1879 (Symons Met. Mag., 14-100); mass of ice, 21 inches
in circumference that fell with hail, Iowa, June, 1881 (Monthly Weather
Review, June, 1881); ‘pieces of ice” eight inches long, and an inch and a
half thick, Davenport, Iowa, Aug. 30, 1882 (Monthly Weather Review, Aug.,
1882); lump of ice size of a brick; weight two pounds, Chicago, July 12,
1883 (Monthly Weather Review, July, 1883); lumps of ice that weighed one
pound and a half each, India, May ("), 1888 (Nature, 37-42); lump of ice
weighing four pounds, Texas, Dec. 6, 1893 (Sc. Am., 68-58); lumps of ice
one pound in weight, Nov. 14, 1901, in a tornado, Victoria (Meteorology of
Australia, p. 34).
Of course it is our acceptance that these masses not only accompanied
tornadoes, but were brought down to this earth by tornadoes.
Flammarion, The Atmosphere, p. 34:
Block of ice, weighing four and a half pounds that fell at Cazorta, Spain,
June 15, 1829; block of ice, weighing eleven pounds, at Cette, France,
October, 1844; mass of ice three feet long, three feet wide, and more than
two feet thick, that fell, in a storm, in Hungary, May 8, 1802.
Scientific American, 47-119:eleven pounds, at Cette, France,
October, 1844; mass of ice three feet long, three feet wide, and more than
two feet thick, that fell, in a storm, in Hungary, May 8, 1802.
Scientific American, 47-119:

--- PAGE BREAK ---tte, France,
October, 1844; mass of ice three feet long, three feet wide, and more than
two feet thick, that fell, in a storm, in Hungary, May 8, 1802.
Scientific American, 47-119:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That, according to the Salina Journal, a mass of ice weighing about 80
pounds had fallen from the sky, near Salina, Kansas, August, 1882. We are
told that Mr. W. J. Hagler, the North Santa Fp merchant became possessor
of it, and packed it in sawdust in his store.
London Times, April 7, 1860:
That, upon the 16th of March, 1860, in a snowstorm, in Upper Wasdale,
blocks of ice, so large that at a distance they looked like a flock of sheep,
had fallen.
Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1851-32:
That a mass of ice about a cubic yard in size had fallen at Candeish,
India, 1828.
Against these data, though, so far as I know, so many of them have never
been assembled together before, there is a silence upon the part of scientific
men that is unusual. Our Super-Sargasso Sea may not be an unavoidable
conclusion, but arrival upon this earth of ice from external regions does
seem to be—except that there must be, be it ever so faint, a merger. It is in
the notion that these masses of ice are only congealed hailstones. We have
data against this notion, as applied to all our instances, but the explanation
has been offered, and, it seems to me, may apply in some instances. In the
Bull. Soc. Astro, de France, 20-245, it is said of blocks of ice the size of
decanters that had fallen at Tunis that they were only masses of congealed
hailstones.
London Times, Aug. 4, 1857.
That a block of ice, described as “pure” ice, weighing 25 pounds, had
been found in the meadow of Mr. Warner, of Cricklewood. There had been
a storm the day before. As in some of our other instances, no one had seen
this object fall from the sky. It was found after the storm: that’s all that can
be said about it.
Letter from Capt. Blakiston, communicated by Gen. Sabine, to the Royal
Society (London Roy. Soc. Proc., 10-468):
That, Jan. 14, 1860, in a thunderstorm, pieces of ice had fallen upon
Capt. Blakiston’s vessel—that it was not hail. “It was not hail, but irregular-
shaped pieces of solid ice of different dimensions, up to the size of half a
brick.”
According to the Advertiser-Scotsman, quoted by the Edinburgh New
Philosophical Magazine, 47-371, an irregular-shaped mass of ice fell at
Ord, Scotland, August, 1849, after “an extraordinary peal of thunder.”g to the Advertiser-Scotsman, quoted by the Edinburgh New
Philosophical Magazine, 47-371, an irregular-shaped mass of ice fell at
Ord, Scotland, August, 1849, after “an extraordinary peal of thunder.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---Scotsman, quoted by the Edinburgh New
Philosophical Magazine, 47-371, an irregular-shaped mass of ice fell at
Ord, Scotland, August, 1849, after “an extraordinary peal of thunder.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is said that this was homogeneous ice, except in a small part, which
looked like congealed hailstones.
The mass was about 20 feet in circumference.
The story, as told in the London Times, Aug. 14, 1849, is that, upon the
evening of the 13th of August, 1849, after a loud peal of thunder, a mass of
ice said to have been 20 feet in circumference, had fallen upon the estate of
Mr. Moffat, of Balvullich, Ross shire. It is said that this object fell alone, or
without hailstones.
Altogether, though it is not so strong for the Super-Sargasso Sea, I think
this is one of our best expressions upon external origins. That large blocks
of ice could form in the moisture of this earth’s atmosphere is about as
likely as that blocks of stone could form in a dust whirl. Of course, if ice or
water comes to this earth from external sources, we think of at least minute
organisms in it, and on, with our data, to frogs, fishes; on to anything that’s
thinkable, coming from external sources. It’s of great importance to us to
accept that large lumps of ice have fallen from the sky, but what we desire
most—perhaps because of our interest in its archaeologic and paleontologic
treasures—is now to be through with tentativeness and probation, and to
take the Super-Sargasso Sea into full acceptance in our more advanced fold
of the chosen of this twentieth century.
In the Report of the British Association, 1855-37, it is said that, at
Poorhundur, India, Dec. 11, 1854, flat pieces of ice, many of them weighing
several pounds—each, I suppose—had fallen from the sky. They are
described as “large ice-flakes.”
Vast fields of ice in the Super-Arctic regions, or strata, of the Super-
Sargasso Sea. When they break up, their fragments are flake-like. In our
acceptance, there are aerial ice-fields that are remote from this earth; that
break up, fragments grinding against one another, rolling in vapor and
water, of different constituency in different regions, forming slowly as
stratified hailstones—but that there are ice-fields near this earth, that break
up into just such flat pieces of ice as cover any pond or river when ice of a
pond or river is broken, and are sometimes soon precipitated to the earth, in
this familiar flat formation.
Symons’ Met. Mag., 43-154:
A correspondent writes that, at Braemar, July 2, 1908, when the sky was
clear overhead, and the sun shining, flat pieces of ice fell— from, in
this familiar flat formation.
Symons’ Met. Mag., 43-154:
A correspondent writes that, at Braemar, July 2, 1908, when the sky was
clear overhead, and the sun shining, flat pieces of ice fell— from

--- PAGE BREAK ---lat formation.
Symons’ Met. Mag., 43-154:
A correspondent writes that, at Braemar, July 2, 1908, when the sky was
clear overhead, and the sun shining, flat pieces of ice fell— from

--- PAGE BREAK ---

somewhere. The sun was shining, but something was going on somewhere:
thunder was heard.
Until I saw the reproduction of a photograph in the Scientific American,
Feb. 21, 1914, I had supposed that these ice-fields must be, say, at least ten
or twenty miles away from this earth, and invisible, to terrestrial observers,
except as the blurs that have so often been reported by astronomers and
meteorologists. The photograph published by the Scientific American is of
an aggregation supposed to be clouds, presumably not very high, so clearly
detailed are they. The writer says that they looked to him like “a field of
broken ice.” Beneath is a picture of a conventional field of ice, floating
ordinarily in water. The resemblance between the two pictures is striking—
nevertheless, it seems to me incredible that the first of the photographs
could be of an aerial ice-field, or that gravitation could cease to act at only a
mile or so from this earth’s surface—
Unless:
The exceptional: the flux and vagary of all things.
Or that normally this earth’s gravitation extends, say, ten or fifteen miles
outward—but that gravitation must be rhythmic.
Of course, in the pseudo-formulas of astronomers, gravitation as a fixed
quantity is essential. Accept that gravitation is a variable force, and
astronomers deflate, with a perceptible hissing sound, into the punctured
condition of economists, biologists, meteorologists, and all the others of the
humbler divinities, who can admittedly offer only insecure approximations.
We refer all who would not like to hear the hiss of escaping arrogance, to
Herbert Spencer’s chapters upon the rhythm of all phenomena.
If everything else—light from the stars, .heat from the sun, the winds and
the tides; forms and colors and sizes of animals; demands and supplies and
prices; political opinions and chemic reactions and religious doctrines and
magnetic intensities and the ticking of clocks; and arrival and departure of
the seasons—if everything else is variable, we accept that the notion of
gravitation as fixed and formulable is only another attempted positivism,
doomed, like all other illusions of realness in quasi-existence. So it is
intermediatism to accept that, though gravitation may approximate higher to
invariability than do the winds, for instance, it must be somewhere between
the Absolutes of Stability and Instability. Here then we are not much
impressed with the opposition of physicists and astronomers, fearing, a little
mournfully, that their language is of expiring sibilations.lutes of Stability and Instability. Here then we are not much
impressed with the opposition of physicists and astronomers, fearing, a little
mournfully, that their language is of expiring sibilations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd Instability. Here then we are not much
impressed with the opposition of physicists and astronomers, fearing, a little
mournfully, that their language is of expiring sibilations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

So then the fields of ice in the sky, and that, though usually so far away
as to be mere blurs, at times they come close enough to be seen in detail.
For description of what I call a “blur,” see Pop Sci. News, February, 1884—
sky, in general, unusually clear, but, near the sun, “a white, slightly curdled
haze, which was dazzlingly bright.”
We accept that sometimes fields of ice pass between the sun and the
earth: that many strata of ice, or very thick fields of ice, or superimposed
fields would obscure the sun—that there have been occasions when the sun
was eclipsed by fields of ice:
Flammarion, The Atmosphere, p. 394:
That a profound darkness came upon the city of Brussels, June 18, 1839:
There fell flat pieces of ice, an inch long.
Intense darkness at Aitkin, Minn., April 2, 1889: sand and “solid chunks
of ice” reported to have fallen ^Science, April 19, 1889).
In Symons’ Meteorological Magazine, 32-172, are outlined roughedged
but smooth-surfaced pieces of ice that fell at Manassas, Virginia, Aug. 10,
1897. They look as much like the roughly broken fragments of a smooth
sheet of ice—as ever have roughly broken fragments of a smooth sheet of
ice looked. About two inches across, and one inch thick. In Cosmos, 3-116,
it is said that, at Rouen, July 5, 1853, fell irregular-shaped pieces of ice,
about the size of a hand, described as looking as if all had been broken from
one enormous block of ice. That, I think, was an aerial iceberg. In the awful
density, or almost absolute stupidity of the 19th century, it never occurred to
anybody to look for traces of polar bears or of seals upon these fragments.
Of course, seeing what we want to see, having been able to gather these
data only because they are in agreement with notions formed in advance,
we are not so respectful to our own notions as to a similar impression
forced upon an observer who had no theory or acceptance to support. In
general, our prejudices see and our prejudices investigate, but this should
not be taken as an absolute.
Monthly Weather Review, July, 1894:
That, from the Weather Bureau, of Portland, Oregon, a tornado, of June
3, 1894, was reported.
Fragments of ice fell from the sky.
They averaged three to four inches square, and about an inch thick. In
length and breadth they had the smooth surfaces required by our
acceptance: and, according to the writer in the Review, “gave the impressioned three to four inches square, and about an inch thick. In
length and breadth they had the smooth surfaces required by our
acceptance: and, according to the writer in the Review, “gave the impression

--- PAGE BREAK ---hes square, and about an inch thick. In
length and breadth they had the smooth surfaces required by our
acceptance: and, according to the writer in the Review, “gave the impression

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of a vast field of ice suspended in the atmosphere, and suddenly broken into
fragments about the size of the palm of the hand.”
This datum, profoundly of what we used to call the “damned,” or before
we could no longer accept judgment, or cut and dried condemnation by
infants, turtles, and lambs, was copied—but without comment—in the
Scientific American, 71-371.
Our theology is something like this:
Of course we ought to be damned—but we revolt against adjudication by
infants, turtles, and lambs.
We now come to some remarkable data in a rather difficult department of
super-geography. Vast fields of aerial ice. There’s a lesson to me in the
treachery of the imaginable. Most of our opposition is in the clearness with
which the conventional, but impossible, becomes the imaginable, and then
the resistant to modifications. After it had become the conventional with
me, I conceived clearly of vast sheets of ice, a few miles above this earth—
then the shining of the sun, and the ice partly melting—that note upon the
ice that fell at Derby—water trickling and forming icicles upon the lower
surface of the ice sheet. I seemed to look up and so clearly visualized those
icicles hanging like stalactites from a flat-roofed cave, in white calcite. Or I
looked up at the under side of an aerial ice-lump, and seemed to see a
papillation similar to that observed by a calf at times. But then—but then—
if icicles should form upon the under side of a sheet of aerial ice, that would
be by the falling of water toward this earth; an icicle is of course an
expression of gravitation—and, if water melting from ice should fall toward
this earth, why not the ice itself fall before an icicle could have time to
form" Of course, in quasi-existence, where everything is a paradox, one
might argue that the water falls, but the ice does not, because the ice is
heavier—that is, in masses. That notion, I think, belongs in a more
advanced course than we are taking at present.
Our expression upon icicles:
A vast field of aerial ice—it is inert to this earth’s gravitation— but by
universal flux and variation, part of it sags closer to this earth, and is
susceptible to gravitation—by cohesion with the main mass, this part does
not fall, but water melting from it does fall, and forms icicles—then, by
various disturbances, this part sometimes falls in fragments that are
protrusive with icicles.h the main mass, this part does
not fall, but water melting from it does fall, and forms icicles—then, by
various disturbances, this part sometimes falls in fragments that are
protrusive with icicles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s part does
not fall, but water melting from it does fall, and forms icicles—then, by
various disturbances, this part sometimes falls in fragments that are
protrusive with icicles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Of the ice that fell, some of it enclosing living frogs, at Dubuque, Iowa,
June 16, 1882, it is said (Monthly Weather Review, June, 1882) that there
were pieces from one to seventeen inches in circumference, the largest
weighing one pound and three-quarters— that upon some of them were
icicles half an inch in length. We emphasize that these objects were not
hailstones.
The only merger is that of knobby hailstones, or of large hailstones with
protuberances wrought by crystallization: but that is no merger with
terrestrial phenomena, and such formations are unaccountable to orthodoxy;
or it is incredible that hail could so crystallize—not forming by accretion—
in the fall of a few seconds. For an account of such hailstones, see Nature,
61-594. Note the size— “some of them the size of turkeys’ eggs.”
It is our expression that sometimes the icicles themselves have fallen, as
if by concussion, or as if something had swept against the under side of an
aerial ice floe, detaching its papillations.
Monthly Weather Review, June, 1889:
That, at Oswego, N. Y., June 11, 1889, according to the Turin (N. Y.)
Leader, there fell, in a thunderstorm, pieces of ice that “resembled the
fragments of icicles.”
Monthly Weather Review, 29-506:
That on Florence Island, St. Lawrence River, Aug. 8, 1901, with ordinary
hail, fell pieces of ice “formed like icicles, the size and shape of lead
pencils that had been cut into sections about three-eighths of an inch in
length.”
So our data of the Super-Sargasso Sea, and its Arctic region: and, for
weeks at a time, an ice field may hang motionless over a part of this earth’s
surface—the sun has some effect upon it, but not much until late in the
afternoon, I should say—part of it has sagged, but is held up by cohesion
with the main mass—whereupon we have such an occurrence as would
have been a little uncanny to us once upon a time—or fall of water from a
cloudless sky, day after day, in one small part of this earth’s surface, late in
the afternoon, when the sun’s rays had had time for their effects:
Monthly Weather Review, October, 1886:
That, according to the Charlotte Chronicle, Oct. 21, 1886, for three
weeks there had been a fall of water from the sky, in Charlotte, N. C.,
localized in one particular spot, every afternoon, about three o’clock; that,the Charlotte Chronicle, Oct. 21, 1886, for three
weeks there had been a fall of water from the sky, in Charlotte, N. C.,
localized in one particular spot, every afternoon, about three o’clock; that,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

whether the sky was cloudy or cloudless, the water or rain fell upon a small
patch of land between two trees and nowhere else.
This is the newspaper account, and, as such, it seems in the depths of the
unchosen, either by me or any other expression of the Salvation Army. The
account by the Signal Service observer, at Charlotte, published in the
Review, follows:
“An unusual phenomenon was witnessed on the 21st: having been
informed that, for some weeks prior to date, rain had been falling daily,
after 3 P.M., on a particular spot, near two trees, corner of 9th and D streets, I
visited the place, and saw precipitation in the form of rain drops at 4:47 and
4:55 P.M., while the sun was shining brightly. On the 22nd, I again visited
the place, and from 4:05 to 4:25 P.M., a light shower of rain fell from a
cloudless sky. . . . Sometimes the precipitation falls over an area of half an
acre, but always appears to center at these two trees, and when lightest
occurs there only.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---l from a
cloudless sky. . . . Sometimes the precipitation falls over an area of half an
acre, but always appears to center at these two trees, and when lightest
occurs there only.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

W
14
E see conventionally. It is not only that we think and act and
speak and dress alike, because of our surrender to social attempt
at Entity, in which we are only supercellular. We see what it is
“proper” that we should see. It is orthodox enough to say that a horse is not
a horse, to an infant—any more than is an orange an orange to the
unsophisticated. It’s interesting to walk along a street sometimes and look at
things and wonder what they’d look like, if we hadn’t been taught to see
horses and trees and houses as horses and trees and houses. I think that to
super-sight they are local stresses merging indistinguishably into one
another, in an all-inclusive nexus.
I think that it would be credible enough to say that many times have
Monstrator and Elvera and Azuria crossed telescopic fields of vision, and
were not even seen—because it wouldn’t be proper to see them; it wouldn’t
be respectable, and it wouldn’t be respectful: it would be insulting to old
bones to see them: it would bring on evil influences from the relics of St.
Isaac to see them.
But our data:
Of vast worlds that are orbitless, or that are navigable, or that are adrift in
inter-planetary tides and currents: the data that we shall have of their
approach, in modern times, within five or six miles of this earth—
But then their visits, or approaches, to other planets, or to other of the
few regularized bodies that have surrendered to the attempted Entity of this
solar system as a whole—
The question that we can’t very well evade:
Have these other worlds, or super-constructions, ever been seen by
astronomers"
I think there would not be much approximation to realness in taking
refuge in the notion of astronomers who stare and squint and see only that
which it is respectable and respectful to see. It is all very well to say that
astronomers are hypnotics, and that an astronomer looking at the moon is
hypnotized by the moon, but our acceptance is that the bodies of thisle and respectful to see. It is all very well to say that
astronomers are hypnotics, and that an astronomer looking at the moon is
hypnotized by the moon, but our acceptance is that the bodies of this

--- PAGE BREAK ---see. It is all very well to say that
astronomers are hypnotics, and that an astronomer looking at the moon is
hypnotized by the moon, but our acceptance is that the bodies of this

--- PAGE BREAK ---

present expression often visit the moon, or cross it, or are held in temporary
suspension near it—then some of them must often have been within the
diameter of an astronomer’s hypnosis.
Our general expression:
That, upon the oceans of this earth, there are regularized vessels, but also
that there are tramp vessels:
That, upon the super-ocean, there are regularized planets, but also that
there are tramp worlds:
That astronomers are like mercantile purists who would deny commercial
vagabondage.
Our acceptance is that vast celestial vagabonds have been excluded by
astronomers, primarily because their irresponsibilities are an affront to the
pure and the precise, or to attempted positivism; and secondarily because
they have not been seen so very often. The planets steadily reflect the light
of the sun: upon this uniformity a system that we call Primary Astronomy
has been built up; but now the subject-matter of Advanced Astronomy is
data of celestial phenomena that are sometimes light and sometimes dark,
varying like some of the satellites of Jupiter, but with a wider range.
However, light or dark, they have been seen and reported so often that the
only important reason for their exclusion is—that they don’t fit in.
With dark bodies that are probably external to our own solar system, I
have, in the provincialism that no one can escape, not much concern. Dark
bodies afloat in outer space would have been damned a few years ago, but
now they’re sanctioned by Prof. Barnard—and, if he says they’re all right,
you may think of them without the fear of doing something wrong or
ridiculous—the close kinship we note so often between the evil and the
absurd—I suppose by the ridiculous I mean the froth of evil. The dark
companion of Algol, for instance. Though that’s a clear case of celestial
miscegenation, the purists, or positivists, admit that’s so. In the Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science, 1915-394, Prof. Barnard writes of an
object—he calls it an “object”—in Cephus. His idea is that there are dark,
opaque bodies outside this solar system. But in the Astrophysical Journal,
1916-1, he modifies into regarding them as “dark nebulae.” That’s not so
interesting.
We accept that Venus, for instance, has often been visited by other
worlds, or by super-constructions, from which come ciders and coke and
coal; that sometimes these things have reflected light and have been seenat Venus, for instance, has often been visited by other
worlds, or by super-constructions, from which come ciders and coke and
coal; that sometimes these things have reflected light and have been seen

--- PAGE BREAK ---ce, has often been visited by other
worlds, or by super-constructions, from which come ciders and coke and
coal; that sometimes these things have reflected light and have been seen

--- PAGE BREAK ---

from this earth—by professional astronomers. It will be noted that
throughout this chapter our data are accursed Brahmins—as, by hypnosis
and inertia, we keep on and keep on saying, just as a good many of the
scientists of the 19th century kept on and kept on admitting the power of the
system that preceded them—or Continuity would be smashed. There’s a big
chance here for us to be instantaneously translated to the Positive Absolute
— oh, well—
What I emphasize here is that our damned data are observations by
astronomers of the highest standing, excommunicated by astronomers of
similar standing—but backed up by the dominant spirit of their era—to
which all minds had to equilibrate or be negligible, unheard, submerged. It
would seem sometimes, in this book, as if our revolts were against the
dogmatisms and pontifications of single scientists of eminence. This is only
a convenience, because it seems necessary to personify. If we look over
Philosophical Transactions, or the publications of the Royal Astronomical
Society, for instance, we see that Herschel, for instance, was as powerless
as any boy stargazer, to enforce acceptance of any observation of his that
did not harmonize with the system that was growing up as independently of
him and all other astronomers, as a phase in the development of an embryo
compels all cells to take on appearances concordantly with the design and
the predetermined progress and schedule of the whole.
Visitors to Venus:
Evans, Ways of the Planets, p. 140:
That, in 1645, a body large enough to look like a satellite was seen near
Venus. Four times in the first half of the 18th century, a similar observation
was reported. The last report occurred in 1767.
A large body has been seen—seven times, according to Science Gossip,
1886-178—near Venus. At least one astronomer, Houzeau, accepted these
observations and named the—world, planet, super-construction—“Neith.”
His views are mentioned “in passing, but without endorsement,” in the
Trans. N. Y. Acad., 5-249.
Houzeau or someone writing for the magazine-section of a Sunday
newspaper—outer darkness for both alike. A new satellite in this solar
system might be a little disturbing—though the formulas of Laplace, which
were considered final in his day, have survived the admittance of five or six
hundred bodies not included in those formulas—a satellite to Venus might
be a little disturbing, but would be explained—but a large body approachingis day, have survived the admittance of five or six
hundred bodies not included in those formulas—a satellite to Venus might
be a little disturbing, but would be explained—but a large body approaching

--- PAGE BREAK ---d the admittance of five or six
hundred bodies not included in those formulas—a satellite to Venus might
be a little disturbing, but would be explained—but a large body approaching

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a planet—staying awhile—going away—coming back some other time—
anchoring, as it were—
Azuria is pretty bad, but Azuria is no worse than Neith.
Astrophysical Journal, 1-127:
A light-reflecting body, or a bright spot near Mars: seen Nov. 25, 1894,
by Prof. Pickering and others, at the Lowell Observatory, above an
unilluminated part of Mars—self-luminous, it would seem —thought to
have been a cloud—but estimated to have been about twenty miles away
from the planet.
Luminous spot seen moving across the disk of Mercury, in 1799, by
Harding and Schroeter. (Monthly Notices of the R. A. S., 38-338.)
In the first Bulletin issued by the Lowell Observatory, in 1903, Prof.
Lowell describes a body that was seen on the terminator of Mars, May 20,
1903. On May 27, it was “suspected.” If still there, it had moved, we are
told, about 300 miles—“probably a dust cloud.”
Very conspicuous and brilliant spots seen on the disk of Mars, October
and November, 1911. (Popular Astronomy, Vol. 19, No. 10.)
So one of them accepted six or seven observations that were in
agreement, except that they could not be regularized, upon a world —planet
—satellite—and he gave it a name. He named it “Neith.”
Monstrator and Elvera and Azuria and Super-Romanimus—
Or heresy and orthodoxy and the oneness of all quasiness, and our ways
and means and methods are the very same. Or, if we name things that may
not be, we are not of lonely guilt in the nomenclature of absences—
But now Leverrier and “Vulcan.”
Leverrier again.
Or to demonstrate the collapsibility of a froth, stick a pin in the largest
bubble of it. Astronomy and inflation: and by inflation we mean expansion
of the attenuated. Or that the science of Astronomy is a phantom-film
distended with myth-stuff—but always our acceptance that it approximates
higher to substantiality than did the system that preceded it.
So Leverrier and the “planet Vulcan.”
And we repeat, and it will do us small good to repeat. If you be of the
masses that the astronomers have hypnotized—being themselves
hypnotized, or they could not hypnotize others—or that the hypnotist’s
control is not the masterful power that it is popularly supposed to be, but
only transference of state from one hypnotic to another—notized, or they could not hypnotize others—or that the hypnotist’s
control is not the masterful power that it is popularly supposed to be, but
only transference of state from one hypnotic to another—

--- PAGE BREAK ---ld not hypnotize others—or that the hypnotist’s
control is not the masterful power that it is popularly supposed to be, but
only transference of state from one hypnotic to another—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

If you be of the masses that the astronomers have hypnotized, you will
not be able even to remember. Ten pages from here, and Leverrier and the
“planet Vulcan” will have fallen from your mind, like beans from a magnet,
or like data of cold meteorites from the mind of a Thomson.
Leverrier and the “planet Vulcan.”
And much the good it will do us to repeat.
But at least temporarily we shall have an impression of a historic fiasco,
such as, in our acceptance, could occur only in a quasi-existence.
In 1859, Dr. Lescarbault, an amateur astronomer, of Orgeres, France,
announced that, upon March 26, of that year, he had seen a body of
planetary size cross the sun. We are in a subject that is now as unholy to the
present system as ever were its own subjects to the system that preceded it,
or as ever were slanders against miracles to the preceding system.
Nevertheless few text-books go so far as quite to disregard this tragedy. The
method of the system-atists is slightingly to give a few instances of the
unholy, and dispose of the few. If it were desirable to them to deny that
there are mountains upon this earth, they would record a few observations
upon some slight eminences near Orange, N. J., but say that commuters,
though estimable persons in several ways, are likely to have their
observations mixed. The text-books casually mention a few of the
“supposed” observations upon “Vulcan,” and then pass on.
Dr. Lescarbault wrote to Leverrier, who hastened to Orgqres—
Because this announcement assimilated with his own calculations upon a
planet between Mercury and the sun—
Because this solar system itself has never attained positiveness in the
aspect of Regularity: there are to Mercury, as there are to Neptune,
phenomena irreconcilable with the formulas, or motions that betray
influence by something else.
We are told that Leverrier “satisfied himself as to the substantial accuracy
of the reported observation.” The story of this investigation is told in
Monthly Notices, 20-98. It seems too bad to threaten the nawve little thing
with our rude sophistications, but it is amusingly of the ingenuousness of
the age from which present dogmas have survived. Lescarbault wrote to
Leverrier. Leverrier hastened to . But he was careful not to tell Lescarbault
who he was. Went right in and “subjected Dr. Lescarbault to a very severe
cross-examination”—just the way you or I may feel at liberty to go into
anybody’s home and be severe with people—”pressing him hard step byent right in and “subjected Dr. Lescarbault to a very severe
cross-examination”—just the way you or I may feel at liberty to go into
anybody’s home and be severe with people—”pressing him hard step by

--- PAGE BREAK ---bjected Dr. Lescarbault to a very severe
cross-examination”—just the way you or I may feel at liberty to go into
anybody’s home and be severe with people—”pressing him hard step by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

step”—just as anyone might go into someone else’s house and press him
hard, though unknown to the hard-pressed one. Not until he was satisfied,
did Leverrier reveal his identity. I suppose Dr. Lescarbault expressed
astonishment. I think there’s something utopian about this: it’s so unlike the
stand-offishness of New York life.
Leverrier gave the name “Vulcan” to the object that Dr. Lescar-bault had
reported.
By the same means by which he is, even to this day, supposed— by the
faithful—to have discovered Neptune, he had already announced the
probable existence of an Intra-Mercurial body, or group of bodies. He had
five observations besides Lescarbault’s upon something that had been seen
to cross the sun. In accordance with the mathematical hypnoses of his era,
he studied these six transits. Out of them he computed elements giving
“Vulcan” a period of about 20 days, or a formula for heliocentric longitude
at any time.
But he placed the time of best observation away up in 1877.
But even so, or considering that he still had probably a good many years
to live, it may strike one that he was a little rash—that is if one has not gone
very deep into the study of hypnoses—that, having “discovered” Neptune
by a method which, in our acceptance, had no more to recommend it than
had once equally well-thought-of methods of witch-finding, he should not
have taken such chances: that if he was right as to Neptune, but should be
wrong as to “Vulcan,” his average would be away below that of most
fortune-tellers, who could scarcely hope to do business upon a fifty per
cent, basis—all that the reasoning of a tyro in hypnoses.
The date:
March 22, 1877.
The scientific world was up on its hind legs nosing the sky. The thing had
been done so authoritatively. Never a pope had said a thing with more of the
seeming of finality. If six observations correlated, what more could be
asked" The Editor of Nature, a week before the predicted event, though
cautious, said that it is difficult to explain how six observers, unknown to
one another, could have data that could be formulated, if they were not
related phenomena.
In a way, at this point occurs the crisis of our whole book.
Formulas are against us.x observers, unknown to
one another, could have data that could be formulated, if they were not
related phenomena.
In a way, at this point occurs the crisis of our whole book.
Formulas are against us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---to
one another, could have data that could be formulated, if they were not
related phenomena.
In a way, at this point occurs the crisis of our whole book.
Formulas are against us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

But can astronomic formulas, backed up by observations in agreement,
taken many years apart, calculated by a Leverrier, be as meaningless, in a
positive sense, as all other quasi-things that we have encountered so far"
The preparations they made, before March 22, 1877. In England, the
Astronomer Royal made it the expectation of his life: notified observers at
Madras, Melbourne, Sydney, and New Zealand, and arranged with
observers in Chili and the United States. M. Struve had prepared for
observations in Siberia and Japan—
March 22, 1877—
Not absolutely, hypocritically, I think it’s pathetic, myself. If anyone
should doubt the sincerity of Leverrier, in this matter, we note, whether it
has meaning or not, that a few months later he died.
I think we’ll take up Monstrator, though there’s so much to this subject
that we’ll have to come back.
According to the Annual Register, 9-120, upon the 9th of August, 1762,
M. de Rostan, of Basle, France, was taking altitudes of the sun, at
Lausanne. He saw a vast, spindle-shaped body, about three of the sun’s
digits in breadth and nine in length, advancing slowly across the disk of the
sun, or “at no more than half the velocity with which the ordinary solar
spots move.” It did not disappear until the 7th of September, when it
reached the sun’s limb. Because of the spindle-like form, I incline to think
of a super-Zeppelin, but another observation, which seems to indicate that it
was a world, is that, though it was opaque, and “eclipsed the sun,” it had
around it a kind of nebulosity—or atmosphere" A penumbra would
ordinarily be a datum of a sun spot, but there are observations that indicate
that this object was at a considerable distance from the sun:
It is recorded that another observer, at Paris, watching the sun, at this
time, had not seen this object;
But that M. Croste, at Sole, about forty-five German leagues northward
from Lausanne, had seen it, describing the same spindle-form, but
disagreeing a little as to breadth. Then comes the important point: that he
and M. de Rostan did not see it upon the same part of the sun. This, then, is
parallax, and, compounded with invisibility at Paris, is great parallax—or
that, in the course of a month, in the summer of 1762, a large, opaque,
spindle-shaped body traversed the disk of the sun, but at a great distance
from the sun. The writer in the Register says: “In a word, we know of
nothing to have recourse to, in the heavens, by which to explain thisbody traversed the disk of the sun, but at a great distance
from the sun. The writer in the Register says: “In a word, we know of
nothing to have recourse to, in the heavens, by which to explain this

--- PAGE BREAK ---disk of the sun, but at a great distance
from the sun. The writer in the Register says: “In a word, we know of
nothing to have recourse to, in the heavens, by which to explain this

--- PAGE BREAK ---

phenomenon.” I suppose he was not a hopeless addict to explaining.
Extraordinary—we fear he must have been a man of loose habits in some
other respects.
As to us—
Monstrator.
In the Monthly Notices of the R. A. S., February, 1877, Leverrier, who
never lost faith, up to the last day, gives the six observations upon an
unknown body of planetary size, that he had formulated:
Fritsche, Oct. 10, 1802; Stark, Oct. 9, 1819; De Cuppis, Oct. 30, 1839;
Sidebotham, Nov. 12, 1849; Lescarbault, March 26, 1859; Lummis, March
20, 1862.
If we weren’t so accustomed to Science in its essential aspect of
Disregard, we’d be mystified and impressed, like the Editor of Nature, with
the formulation of these data: agreement of so many instances would seem
incredible as a coincidence: but our acceptance is that, with just enough
disregard, astronomers and fortune-tellers can formulate anything—or we’d
engage, ourselves, to formulate periodicities in the crowds in Broadway—
say that every Wednesday morning, a tall man, with one leg and a black
eye, carrying a rubber plant, passes the Singer Building, at quarter past ten
o’clock. Of course it couldn’t really be done, unless such a man did have
such periodicity, but if some Wednesday mornings it should be a small child
lugging a barrel, or a fat negress with a week’s wash, by ordinary disregard
that would be prediction good enough for the kind of quasi-existence we’re
in.
So whether we accuse, or whether we think that the word “accuse” over-
dignifies an attitude toward a quasi-astronomer, or mere figment in a super-
dream, our acceptance is that Leverrier never did formulate observations—
That he picked out observations that could be formulated—
That of this type are all formulas—
That, if Leverrier had not been himself helplessly hypnotized, or if he
had had in him more than a tincture of realness, never could he have been
beguiled by such a quasi-process: but that he was hypnotized, and so
extended, or transferred, his condition to others, that upon March 22, 1877,
he had this earth bristling with telescopes, with the rigid and almost
inanimate forms of astronomers behind them—
And not a blessed thing of any unusuality was seen upon that day or
succeeding days.he had this earth bristling with telescopes, with the rigid and almost
inanimate forms of astronomers behind them—
And not a blessed thing of any unusuality was seen upon that day or
succeeding days.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ristling with telescopes, with the rigid and almost
inanimate forms of astronomers behind them—
And not a blessed thing of any unusuality was seen upon that day or
succeeding days.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

But that the science of Astronomy suffered the slightest in prestige"
It couldn’t. The spirit of 1877 was behind it. If, in an embryo, some cells
should not live up to the phenomena of their era, the others will sustain the
scheduled appearances. Not until an embryo enters the mammalian stage
are cells of the reptilian stage false cells.
It is our acceptance that there were many equally authentic reports upon
large planetary bodies that had been seen near the sun; that, of many,
Leverrier picked out six; not then deciding that all the other observations
related to still other large, planetary bodies, but arbitrarily, or hypnotically,
disregarding—or heroically disregarding—every one of them—that to
formulate at all he had to exclude falsely. The denouement killed him, I
think. I’m not at all inclined to place him with the Grays and Hitchcocks
and Symonses. I’m not, because, though it was rather unsportsmanlike to
put the date so far ahead, he did give a date, and he did stick to it with such
a high approximation—
I think Leverrier was translated to the Positive Absolute.
The disregarded:
Observation, of July 26, 1819, by Gruthinson—but that was of two
bodies that crossed the sun together—
Nature, 14-469:
That, according to the astronomer, J. R. Hind, Benjamin Scott, City
Chamberlain of London, and Mr. Wray, had, in 1847, seen a body similar to
“Vulcan” cross the sun.
Similar observation by Hind and Lowe, March 12, 1849 (L’Année Scien
tifiq ue, 1876-9 ).
Nature, 14-505:
Body of apparent size of Mercury, seen, Jan. 29, 1860, by F. A. R.
Russell and four other observers, crossing the sun.
De Vico’s observation of July 12, 1837 (Observatory, 2-424).
L’Année Scientifique, 1865-16:
That another amateur astronomer, M. Coumbray, of Constantinople, had
written to Leverrier, that, upon the 8th of March, 1865, he had seen a black
point, sharply outlined, traverse the disk of the sun. It detached itself from a
group of sun spots near the limb of the sun, and took 48 minutes to reach
the other limb. Figuring upon the diagram sent by M. Coumbray, a central
passage would have taken a little more than an hour. This observation was
disregarded by Leverrier, because his formula required about four times thatg upon the diagram sent by M. Coumbray, a central
passage would have taken a little more than an hour. This observation was
disregarded by Leverrier, because his formula required about four times that

--- PAGE BREAK ---ent by M. Coumbray, a central
passage would have taken a little more than an hour. This observation was
disregarded by Leverrier, because his formula required about four times that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

velocity. The point here is that these other observations are as authentic as
those that Leverrier included; that, then, upon data as good as the data of
“Vulcan,” there must be other “Vulcans”—the heroic and defiant disregard,
then, of trying to formulate one, omitting the others, which, by orthodox
doctrine, must have influenced it greatly, if all were in the relatively narrow
space between Mercury and the sun.
Observation upon another such body, of April 4, 1876, by M. Weber, of
Berlin. As to this observation, Leverrier was informed by Wolf, in August,
1876 (L’Année Scientifique, 1876-7). It made no difference, so far as can be
known, to this notable positivist.
Two other observations noted by Hind and Denning—London Times,
Nov. 3, 1871, and March 26, 1873.
Monthly Notices of the R. A. S., 20-100:
Standacher, February, 1762; Lichtenberg, Nov. 19, 1762; Hoffman, May,
1764; Dangos, Jan. 18, 1798; Stark, Feb. 12, 1820. An observation by
Schmidt, Oct. 11, 1847, is said to be doubtful: but, upon page 192, it is said
that this doubt had arisen because of a mistaken translation, and two other
observations by Schmidt are given: Oct. 14, 1849, and Feb. 18, 1850—also
an observation by Lofft, Jan. 6, 1818. Observation by Steinheibel, at
Vienna, April 27, 1820 (Monthly Notices, 1862).
Haase had collected reports of twenty observations like Lescar-bault’s.
The list was published in 1872, by Wolf. Also there are other instances like
Gruthinsen’s:
Amer. Jour. Sci., 2-28-446:
Report by Pastorff that he had seen twice in 1836, and once in 1837, two
round spots of unequal size moving across the sun, changing position
relatively to each other, and taking a different course, if not orbit, each time:
that, in 1834, he had seen similar bodies pass six times across the disk of
the sun, looking very much like Mercury in his transits.
March 22, 1876—
But to point out Leverrier’s poverty-stricken average—or discovering
planets upon a fifty per cent. basis—would be to point out the low
percentage of realness in the quasi-myth-stuff of which the whole system is
composed. We do not accuse the text-books of omitting this fiasco, but we
do note that theirs is the conventional adaptation here of all beguilers who
are in difficulties—
The diverting of attention.composed. We do not accuse the text-books of omitting this fiasco, but we
do note that theirs is the conventional adaptation here of all beguilers who
are in difficulties—
The diverting of attention.

--- PAGE BREAK ---accuse the text-books of omitting this fiasco, but we
do note that theirs is the conventional adaptation here of all beguilers who
are in difficulties—
The diverting of attention.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It wouldn’t be possible in a real existence, with real mentality, to deal
with, but I suppose it’s good enough for the quasi-intellects that stupefy
themselves with text-books. The trick here is to gloss over Leverrier’s
mistake, and blame Lescarbault—he was only an amateur—had delusions.
The reader’s attention is led against Lescar-bault by a report from M. Lias,
director of the Brazilian Coast Survey, who, at the time of Lescarbault’s
“supposed” observation had been watching the sun in Brazil, and, instead of
seeing even ordinary sun spots, had noted that the region of the “supposed
transit” was of “uniform intensity.”
But the meaninglessness of all utterances in quasi-existence—
“Uniform intensity” turns our way as much as against us—or some day
some brain will conceive a way of beating Newton’s third law—if every
reaction, or resistance, is, or can be, interpretable as stimulus instead of
resistance—if this could be done in mechanics, there’s a way open here for
someone to own the world—specifically in this matter, “uniform intensity”
means that Lescarbault saw no ordinary sun spot, just as much as it means
that no spot at all was seen upon the sun. Continuing the interpretation of a
resistance as an assistance, which can always be done with mental forces—
making us wonder what applications could be made with steam and electric
forces—we point out that invisibility in Brazil means parallax quite as truly
as it means absence, and, inasmuch as “Vulcan” was supposed to be distant
from the sun, we interpret denial as corroboration—method of course of
every scientist, politician, theologian, high-school debater.
So the text-books, with no especial cleverness, because no especial
cleverness is needed, lead the reader into contempt for the amateur of
Orgqres, and forgetfulness of Leverrier—and some other subject is taken
up.
But our own acceptance:
That these data are as good as ever they were;
That, if someone of eminence should predict an earthquake, and if there
should be no earthquake at the predicted time, that would discredit the
prophet, but data of past earthquakes would remain as good as ever they
had been. It is easy enough to smile at the illusion of a single amateur—
The mass-formation:
Fritsche, Stark, De Cuppis, Sidebotham, Lescarbault, Lummis,
Gruthinson, De Vico, Scott, Wray, Russell, Hind, Lowe, Coumbray, Weber,h to smile at the illusion of a single amateur—
The mass-formation:
Fritsche, Stark, De Cuppis, Sidebotham, Lescarbault, Lummis,
Gruthinson, De Vico, Scott, Wray, Russell, Hind, Lowe, Coumbray, Weber,

--- PAGE BREAK ---lusion of a single amateur—
The mass-formation:
Fritsche, Stark, De Cuppis, Sidebotham, Lescarbault, Lummis,
Gruthinson, De Vico, Scott, Wray, Russell, Hind, Lowe, Coumbray, Weber,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Standacher, Lichtenberg, Dangos, Hoffman, Schmidt, Lofft, Steinheibel,
Pastorff—
These are only the observations conventionally listed relatively to an
Intra-Mercurial planet. They are formidable enough to prevent our being
diverted, as if it were all the dream of a lonely amateur— but they’re a mere
advance-guard. From now on other data of large celestial bodies, some dark
and some reflecting light, will pass and pass and keep on passing—
So that some of us will remember a thing or two, after the procession’s
over—possibly.
Taking up only one of the listed observations—
Or our impression that the discrediting of Leverrier has nothing to do
with the acceptability of these data:
In the London Times, Jan. 10, 1860, is Benjamin Scott’s account of his
observation:
That, in the summer of 1847, he had seen a body that had seemed to be
the size of Venus, crossing the sun. He says that, hardly believing the
evidence of his sense of sight, he had looked for someone, whose hopes or
ambitions would not make him so subject to illusion. He had told his little
son, aged five years, to look through the telescope. The child had exclaimed
that he had seen “a little balloon” crossing the sun. Scott says that he had
not had sufficient self-reliance to make public announcement of his
remarkable observation at the time, but that, in the evening of the same day,
he had told Dr. Dick, F.R.A.S., who had cited other instances. In the Times,
Jan. 12, 1860, is published a letter from Richard Abbott, F.R.A.S.: that he
remembered Mr. Scott’s letter to him upon this observation, at the time of
the occurrence.
I suppose that, at the beginning of this chapter, one had the notion that,
by hard scratching through musty old records we might rake up vague,
more than doubtful data, distortable into what’s called evidence of
unrecognized worlds or constructions of planetary size—
But the high authenticity and the support and the modernity of these of
the accursed that we are now considering—
And our acceptance that ours is a quasi-existence, in which above all
other things, hopes, ambitions, emotions, motivations, stands Attempt to
Positivize: that we are here considering an attempt to systematize that is
sheer fanaticism in its disregard of the unsys-tematizable—that ithopes, ambitions, emotions, motivations, stands Attempt to
Positivize: that we are here considering an attempt to systematize that is
sheer fanaticism in its disregard of the unsys-tematizable—that it

--- PAGE BREAK ---otions, motivations, stands Attempt to
Positivize: that we are here considering an attempt to systematize that is
sheer fanaticism in its disregard of the unsys-tematizable—that it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

represented the highest good in the 19th century—that it is mono-mania,
but heroic mono-mania that was quasi-divine in the 19th century—
But that this isn’t the 19th century.
As a doubly sponsored Brahmin—in the regard of Baptists—the objects
of July 29, 1878, stand out and proclaim themselves so that nothing but
disregard of the intensity of mono-mania can account for their reception by
the system:
Or the total eclipse of July 29, 1878, and the reports by Prof. Watson,
from Rawlins, Wyoming, and by Prof. Swift, from Denver, Colorado: that
they had seen two shining objects at a considerable distance from the sun.
It’s quite in accord with our general expression: not that there is an Intra-
Mercurial planet, but that there are different bodies, many vast things; near
this earth sometimes, near the sun sometimes; orbitless worlds, which,
because of scarcely any data of collisions, we think of as under navigable
control—or dirigible super-constructions.
Prof. Watson and Prof. Swift published their observations.
Then the disregard that we cannot think of in terms of ordinary, sane
exclusions.
The text-book systematists begin by telling us that the trouble with these
observations is that they disagree widely: there is considerable
respectfulness, especially for Prof. Swift, but we are told that by
coincidence these two astronomers, hundreds of miles apart, were illuded:
their observations were so different—
Prof. Swift (Nature, Sept. 19, 1878):
That his own observation was “in close approximation to that given by
Prof. Watson.”
In the Observatory, 2-161, Swift says that his observations and Watson’s
were “confirmatory of each other.”
The faithful try again:
That Watson and Swift mistook stars for other bodies.
In the Observatory, 2-193, Prof. Watson says that he had previously
committed to memory all stars near the sun, down to the seventh magnitude
—
And he’s damned anyway.
How such exclusions work out is shown by Lockyer (Nature, Aug. 20,
1878). He says: “There is little doubt that an Intra-Mercurial planet has
been discovered by Prof. Watson.”—
And he’s damned anyway.
How such exclusions work out is shown by Lockyer (Nature, Aug. 20,
1878). He says: “There is little doubt that an Intra-Mercurial planet has
been discovered by Prof. Watson.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---yway.
How such exclusions work out is shown by Lockyer (Nature, Aug. 20,
1878). He says: “There is little doubt that an Intra-Mercurial planet has
been discovered by Prof. Watson.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That was before excommunication was pronounced.
He says:
“If it will fit one of Leverrier’s orbits”—
It didn’t fit.
In Nature, 21-301, Prof. Swift says:
“I have never made a more valid observation, nor one more free from
doubt.”
He’s damned anyway.
We shall have some data that will not live up to most rigorous
requirements, but, if anyone would like to read how carefully and minutely
these two sets of observations were made, see Prof. Swift’s detailed
description in the Am. Jour. Sci., 116-313; and the technicalities of Prof.
Watson’s observations in Monthly Notices, 38-525
Our own acceptance upon dirigible worlds, which is assuredly enough,
more nearly real than attempted concepts of large planets relatively near
this earth, moving in orbits, but visible only occasionally; which more
nearly approximates to reasonableness than does wholesale slaughter of
Swift and Watson and Fritsche and Stark and De Cuppis—but our own
acceptance is so painful to so many minds that, in another of the charitable
moments that we have now and then for the sake of contrast, we offer relief:
The things seen high in the sky by Swift and Watson—
Well, only two months before—the horse and the barn—
We go on with more observations by astronomers, recognizing that it is
the very thing that has given them life, sustained them, held them together,
that has crushed all but the quasi-gleam of independent life out of them.
Were they not systematized, they could not be at all, except sporadically
and without sustenance. They are systematized: they must not vary from the
conditions of the system: they must not break away for themselves.
The two great commandments:
Thou shalt not break Continuity;
Thou shalt try.
We go on with these disregarded data, some of which, many of which,
are of the highest degree of acceptability. It is the System that pulls back its
variations, as this earth is pulling back the Matterhorn. It is the System that
nourishes and rewards, and also freezes out life with the chill of disregard.
We do note that, before excommunication is pronounced, orthodox journals
do liberally enough record unassimilable observations.shes and rewards, and also freezes out life with the chill of disregard.
We do note that, before excommunication is pronounced, orthodox journals
do liberally enough record unassimilable observations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d also freezes out life with the chill of disregard.
We do note that, before excommunication is pronounced, orthodox journals
do liberally enough record unassimilable observations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

All things merge away into everything else.
That is Continuity.
So the System merges away and evades us when we try to focus against
it.
We have complained a great deal. At least we are not so dull as to have
the delusion that we know just exactly what it is that we are complaining
about. We speak seemingly definitely enough of “the System,” but we’re
building upon observations by members of that very system. Or what we
are doing—gathering up the loose heresies of the orthodox. Of course “the
System” fringes and ravels away, having no real outline. A Swift will
antagonize “the System,” and a Lockyer will call him back; but, then, a
Lockyer will vary with a “meteoric hypothesis,” and a Swift will, in turn,
represent “the System.” This state is to us typical of all intermediatist
phenomena; or that not conceivably is anything really anything, if its parts
are likely to be their own opposites at any time. We speak of astronomers—
as if there were real astronomers—but who have lost their identity in a
System—as if it were a real System—but behind that System is plainly a
rapport, or loss of identity in the Spirit of an Era.
Bodies that have looked like dark bodies, and lights that may have been
sunlight reflected from interplanetary—objects, masses, constructions—
Lights that have been seen upon—or near"—the moon:
In Philosophical Transactions, 82-27, is Herschel’s report upon many
luminous points, which he saw upon—or near"—the moon, during an
eclipse. Why they should be luminous, whereas the moon itself was dark,
would get us into a lot of trouble—except that later we shall, or we sha’n’t,
accept that many times have luminous objects been seen close to this earth
—at night.
But numerousness is a new factor, or new disturbance, to our
explorations—
A new aspect of inter-planetary inhabitancy or occupancy—
Worlds in hordes—or beings—winged beings perhaps—wouldn’t
astonish me if we should end up by discovering angels—or beings in
machines—argosies of celestial voyagers—
In 1783 and 1787, Herschel reported more lights on or near the moon,
which he supposed were volcanic.
The word of a Herschel has had no more weight, in divergences from the
orthodox, than has had the word of a Lescarbault. These observations are ofon or near the moon,
which he supposed were volcanic.
The word of a Herschel has had no more weight, in divergences from the
orthodox, than has had the word of a Lescarbault. These observations are of

--- PAGE BREAK ---which he supposed were volcanic.
The word of a Herschel has had no more weight, in divergences from the
orthodox, than has had the word of a Lescarbault. These observations are of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the disregarded.
Bright spots seen on the moon, November, 1821 (Proc. London Roy.
Soc., 2-167).
For four other instances, see Loomis (Treatise on Astronomy, p. 174).
A moving light is reported in Phil. Trans., 84-429. To the writer, it looked
like a star passing over the moon—”which, on the next moment’s
consideration I knew to be impossible.” “It was a fixed, steady light upon
the dark part of the moon.” I suppose “fixed” applies to luster.
In the Report of the Brit. Assoc., 1847-18, there is an observation by
Rankin, upon luminous points seen on the shaded part of the moon, during
an eclipse. They seemed to this observer like reflections of stars. That’s not
very reasonable: however, we have, in the Annual Register, 1821-687, a
light not referable to a star— because it moved with the moon: was seen
three nights in succession; reported by Capt. Kater. See Quart. Jour. Roy.
Inst., 12-133.
Phil. Trans., 112-237:
Report from the Cape Town Observatory: a whitish spot on the dark part
of the moon’s limb. Three smaller lights were seen.
The call of positiveness, in its aspects of singleness, or homogeneity, or
oneness, or completeness. In data now coming, I feel it myself. A Leverrier
studies more than twenty observations. The inclination is irresistible to
think that they all relate to one phenomenon. It is an expression of cosmic
inclination. Most of the observations are so irreconcilable with any
acceptance other than of orbitless, dirigible worlds that he shuts his eyes to
more than two-thirds of them; he picks out six that can give him the illusion
of completeness, or of all relating to one planet.
Or let it be that we have data of many dark bodies—still do we incline
almost irresistibly to think of one of them as the dark-body-in-chief. Dark
bodies, floating, or navigating, in inter-planetary space —and I conceive of
one that’s the Prince of Dark Bodies:
Melanicus.
Vast dark thing with the wings of a super-bat, or jet-black super-
construction; most likely one of the spores of the Evil One.
The extraordinary year, 1883:
London Times, Dec. 17, 1883:
Extract from a letter by Hicks Pashaw: that, in Egypt, Sept. 24, 1883, he
had seen, through glasses, “an immense black spot upon the lower part ofxtraordinary year, 1883:
London Times, Dec. 17, 1883:
Extract from a letter by Hicks Pashaw: that, in Egypt, Sept. 24, 1883, he
had seen, through glasses, “an immense black spot upon the lower part of

--- PAGE BREAK ---883:
London Times, Dec. 17, 1883:
Extract from a letter by Hicks Pashaw: that, in Egypt, Sept. 24, 1883, he
had seen, through glasses, “an immense black spot upon the lower part of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the sun.”
Sun spot, maybe.
One night an astronomer was looking up at the sky, when something
obscured a star, for three and a half seconds. A meteor had been seen
nearby, but its train had been only momentarily visible. Dr. Wolf was the
astronomer (Nature, 86-528).
The next datum is one of the most sensational we have, except that there
is very little to it. A dark object that was seen by Prof. Heis, for eleven
degrees of arc, moving slowly across the Milky Way. (Greg’s Catalogue,
Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1867-426.)
One of our quasi-reasons for accepting that orbitless worlds are dirigible
is the almost complete absence of data of collisions: of course, though in
defiance of gravitation, they may, without direction like human direction,
adjust to one another in the way of vortex rings of smoke—a very human-
like way, that is. But in Knowledge, February, 1894, are two photographs of
Brooks’ comet that are shown as evidence of its seeming collision with a
dark object, October, 1893. Our own wording is that it “struck against
something”: Prof. Barnard’s is that it had “entered some dense medium,
which shattered it.” For all I know it had knocked against merely a field of
ice.
Melanicus.
That upon the wings of a super-bat, he broods over this earth and over
other worlds, perhaps deriving something from them: hovers on wings, or
wing-like appendages, or planes that are hundreds of miles from tip to tip—
a super-evil thing that is exploiting us. By Evil I mean that which makes us
useful.
He obscures a star. He shoves a comet. I think he’s a vast, black,
brooding vampire.
Science, July 31, 1896:
That, according to a newspaper account, Mr. W. R. Brooks, director of
the Smith Observatory, had seen a dark round object pass rather slowly
across the moon, in a horizontal direction. In Mr. Brooks’ opinion it was a
dark meteor. In Science, Sept. 14, 1896, a correspondent writes that, in his
opinion, it may have been a bird. We shall have no trouble with the meteor
and bird mergers, if we have observations of long duration and estimates of
size up to hundreds of miles. As to the body that was seen by Brooks, there
is a note from the Dutch astronomer, Muller, in the Scientific American, 75-observations of long duration and estimates of
size up to hundreds of miles. As to the body that was seen by Brooks, there
is a note from the Dutch astronomer, Muller, in the Scientific American, 75-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

251, that, upon April 4, 1892, he had seen a similar phenomenon. In Science
Gossip, n.s., 3-135, are more details of the Brooks object—apparent
diameter about one-thirtieth of the moon’s—moon’s disk crossed in three or
four seconds. The writer, in Science Gossip, says that, on June 27, 1896, at
one o’clock in the morning, he was looking at the moon with a 2-inch
achromatic, power 44, when a long black object sailed past, from west to
east, the transit occupying 3 or 4 seconds. He believed this object to be a
bird—there was, however, no fluttering motion observable in it.
In the Astronomische Nachrichten, No. 3477, Dr. Brendel, of Griefswald,
Pomerania, writes that Postmaster Ziegler and other observers had seen a
body about 6 feet in diameter crossing the sun’s disk. The duration here
indicates something far from the earth, and also far from the sun. This thing
was seen a quarter of an hour before it reached the sun. Time in crossing the
sun was about an hour. After leaving the sun it was visible an hour.
I think he’s a vast, black vampire that sometimes broods over this earth
and other bodies.
Communication from Dr. F. B. Harris (Popular Astronomy, 20-398):
That, upon the evening of Jan. 27, 1912, Dr. Harris saw, upon the moon,
“an intensely black object.” He estimated it to be 250 miles long and 50
miles wide. “The object resembled a crow poised, as near as anything.”
Clouds then cut off observation.
Dr. Harris writes:
“I cannot but think that a very interesting and curious phenomenon
happened.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---ect resembled a crow poised, as near as anything.”
Clouds then cut off observation.
Dr. Harris writes:
“I cannot but think that a very interesting and curious phenomenon
happened.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

S
15
HORT chapter coming now, and it’s the worst of them all. I think it’s
speculative. It’s a lapse from our usual pseudo-standards. I think it
must mean that the preceding chapter was very efficiently done, and
that now by the rhythm of all quasi-things—which can’t be real things, if
they’re rhythms, because a rhythm is an appearance that turns into its own
opposite and then back again—but now, to pay up, we’re what we weren’t.
Short chapter, and I think we’ll fill in with several points in Intermediatism.
A puzzle:
If it is our acceptance that, out of the Negative Absolute, the Positive
Absolute is generating itself, recruiting, or maintaining, itself, via a third
state, or our own quasi-state, it would seem that we’re trying to conceive of
Universalness manufacturing more Universalness from Nothingness. Take
that up yourself, if you’re willing to run the risk of disappearing with such
velocity that you’ll leave an incandescent train behind, and risk being
infinitely happy forever, whereas you probably don’t want to be happy—I’ll
side-step that myself, and try to be intelligible by regarding the Positive
Absolute from the aspect of Realness instead of Universalness, recalling
that by both Realness and Universalness we mean the same state, or that
which does not merge away into something else, because there is nothing
else. So the idea is that out of Unrealness, instead of Nothingness, Realness,
instead of Universal-ness, is, via our own quasi-state, manufacturing more
Realness. Just so, but in relative terms, of course, all imaginings that
materialize into machines or statues, buildings, dollars, paintings or books
in paper and ink are graduations from unrealness to realness —in relative
terms. It would seem then that Intermediateness is a relation between the
Positive Absolute and the Negative Absolute. But the absolute cannot be the
related—of course a confession that we can’t really think of it at all, if here
we think of a limit to the unlimited. Doing the best we can, and encouraged
by the reflection that we can’t do worse than has been done by
metaphysicians in the past, we accept that the absolute can’t be the related.
So then that our quasi-state is not a real relation, if nothing in it is real. Onwe can’t do worse than has been done by
metaphysicians in the past, we accept that the absolute can’t be the related.
So then that our quasi-state is not a real relation, if nothing in it is real. On

--- PAGE BREAK ---han has been done by
metaphysicians in the past, we accept that the absolute can’t be the related.
So then that our quasi-state is not a real relation, if nothing in it is real. On

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the other hand, it is not an unreal relation, if nothing in it is unreal. It seems
thinkable that the Positive Absolute can, by means of Intermediateness,
have a quasi-relation, or be only quasi-related, or be the unrelated, in final
terms, or, at least, not be the related, in final terms.
As to free will and Intermediatism—same answer as to everything else.
By free will we mean Independence—or that which does not merge away
into something else—so, in Intermediateness, neither free-will nor slave-
will—but a different approximation for every so-called person toward one
or the other of the extremes. The hackneyed way of expressing this seems to
me to be the acceptable way, if in Intermediateness, there is only the
paradoxical: that we’re free to do what we have to do.
I am not convinced that we make a fetish of the preposterous. I think our
feeling is that in first gropings there’s no knowing what will afterward be
the acceptable. I think that if an early biologist heard of birds that grow on
trees, he should record that he had heard of birds that grow on trees: then let
sorting over of data occur afterward. The one thing that we try to tone down
but that is to a great degree unavoidable is having our data all mixed up like
Long Island and Florida in the minds of early American explorers. My own
notion is that this whole book is very much like a map of North America in
which the Hudson River is set down as a passage leading to Siberia. We
think of Monstrator and Melanicus and of a world that is now in
communication with this earth: if so, secretly, with certain esoteric ones
upon this earth. Whether that world’s Monstrator and Monstrator’s
Melanicus— must be the subject of later inquiry. It would be a gross thing
to do: solve up everything now and leave nothing to our disciples.
I have been very much struck with phenomena of “cup marks.”
They look to me like symbols of communication.
But they do not look to me like means of communication between some
of the inhabitants of this earth and other inhabitants of this earth.
My own impression is that some external force has marked, with
symbols, rocks of this earth, from far away.
I do not think that cup marks are inscribed communications among
different inhabitants of this earth, because it seems too unacceptable that
inhabitants of China, Scotland, and America should all have conceived of
the same system.
Cup marks are strings of cup-like impressions in rocks. Sometimes there
are rings around them, and sometimes they have only semi-circles. Greatnd America should all have conceived of
the same system.
Cup marks are strings of cup-like impressions in rocks. Sometimes there
are rings around them, and sometimes they have only semi-circles. Great

--- PAGE BREAK ---l have conceived of
the same system.
Cup marks are strings of cup-like impressions in rocks. Sometimes there
are rings around them, and sometimes they have only semi-circles. Great

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Britain, America, France, Algeria, Circassia, Palestine: they’re virtually
everywhere—except in the far north, I think. In China, cliffs are dotted with
them. Upon a cliff near Lake Como, there is a maze of these markings. In
Italy and Spain and India they occur in enormous numbers.
Given that a force, say, like electric force, could, from a distance, mark
such a substance as rocks, as, from a distance of hundreds of miles,
selenium can be marked by telephotographers—but I am of two minds—
The Lost Explorers from Somewhere, and an attempt, from Somewhere,
to communicate with them: so a frenzy of showering of messages toward
this earth, in the hope that some of them would mark rocks near the lost
explorers—
Or that somewhere upon this earth, there is an especial rocky surface, or
receptor, or polar construction, or a steep, conical hill, upon which for ages
have been received messages from some other world; but that at times
messages go astray and mark substances perhaps thousands of miles from
the receptor;
That perhaps forces behind the history of this earth have left upon the
rocks of Palestine and England and India and China records that may some
day be deciphered, of their misdirected instructions to certain esoteric ones
—Order of the Freemasons— the Jesuits—
I emphasize the row-formation of cup marks:
Prof. Douglas (Saturday Review, Nov. 24, 1883):
“Whatever may have been their motive, the cup-markers showed a
decided liking for arranging their sculpturings in regularly spaced rows.”
That cup marks are an archaic form of inscription was first suggested by
Canon Greenwell many years ago. But more specifically adumbratory to
our own expression are the observations of Rivett-Carnac (Jour. Roy.
Asiatic Soc., 1903-515):
That the Braille system of raised dots is an inverted arrangement of cup
marks: also that there are strong resemblances to the Morse code. But no
tame and systematized archaeologist can do more than casually point out
resemblances, and merely suggest that strings of cup marks look like
messages, because—China, Switzerland, Algeria, America—if messages
they be, there seems to be no escape from attributing one origin to them—
then, if messages they be, I accept one external origin, to which the whole
surface of this earth was accessible, for them.
Something else that we emphasize:scape from attributing one origin to them—
then, if messages they be, I accept one external origin, to which the whole
surface of this earth was accessible, for them.
Something else that we emphasize:

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng one origin to them—
then, if messages they be, I accept one external origin, to which the whole
surface of this earth was accessible, for them.
Something else that we emphasize:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That rows of cup marks have often been likened to footprints.
But, in this similitude, their unilinear arrangement must be disregarded—
of course often they’re mixed up in every way, but arrangement in single
lines is very common. It is odd that they should so often be likened to
footprints: I suppose there are exceptional cases, but unless it’s something
that hops on one foot, or a cat going along a narrow fence-top, I don’t think
of anything that makes footprints one directly ahead of another—Cop, in a
station house, walking a chalk line, perhaps.
Upon the Witch’s Stone, near Ratho, Scotland, there are twenty-four
cups, varying in size from one and a half to three inches in diameter,
arranged in approximately straight lines. Locally it is explained that these
are tracks of dogs’ feet (Proc. Soc. Antiq. Scotland, 2-4-79). Similar marks
are scattered bewilderingly all around the Witch’s Stone—like a frenzy of
telegraphing, or like messages repeating and repeating, trying to localize
differently.
In Inverness-shire, cup marks are called “fairies’ footmarks.” At Valna’s
church, Norway, and St. Peter’s, Ambleteuse, there are such marks, said to
be horses’ hoofprints. The rocks of Clare, Ireland, are marked with prints
supposed to have been made by a mythical cow (Folklore, 21-184).
We now have such a ghost of a thing that I’d not like to be interpreted as
offering it as a datum: it simply illustrates what I mean by the notion of
symbols, like cups, or like footprints, which, if like those of horses or cows,
are the reverse of, or the negatives of, cups—of symbols that are regularly
received somewhere upon this earth—steep, conical hill, somewhere, I
think—but that have often alighted in wrong places—considerably to the
mystification of persons waking up some morning to find them upon
formerly blank spaces.
An ancient record—still worse, an ancient Chinese record—of a
courtyard of a palace—dwellers of the palace waking up one morning,
finding the courtyard marked with tracks like the footprints of an ox—
supposed that the devil did it. (Notes and Queries, 9-6-225.)courtyard of a palace—dwellers of the palace waking up one morning,
finding the courtyard marked with tracks like the footprints of an ox—
supposed that the devil did it. (Notes and Queries, 9-6-225.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---e—dwellers of the palace waking up one morning,
finding the courtyard marked with tracks like the footprints of an ox—
supposed that the devil did it. (Notes and Queries, 9-6-225.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
16
NGELS.
Hordes upon hordes of them.
Beings massed like the clouds of souls, or the commingling
whiffs of spirituality, or the exhalations of souls that Dorp pictured so often.
It may be that the Milky Way is a composition of stiff, frozen, finally-
static, absolute angels. We shall have data of little Milky Ways, moving
swiftly; or data of hosts of angels, not absolute, or still dynamic. I suspect,
myself, that the fixed stars are really fixed, and that the minute motions said
to have been detected in them are illusions. I think that the fixed stars are
absolutes. Their twinkling is only the interpretation by an intermediatist
state of them. I think that soon after Leverrier died, a new fixed star was
discovered—that, if Dr. Gray had stuck to his story of the thousands of
fishes from one pail of water, had written upon it, lectured upon it, taken to
street corners, to convince the world that, whether conceivable or not, his
explanation was the only true explanation: had thought of nothing but this
last thing at night and first thing in the morning—his obituary—another
“nova” reported in Monthly Notices.
I think that Milky Ways, of an inferior, or dynamic, order, have often
been seen by astronomers. Of course it may be that the phenomena that we
shall now consider are not angels at all. We are simply feeling around,
trying to find out what we can accept. Some of our data indicate hosts of
rotund and complacent tourists in inter-planetary space—but then data of
long, lean, hungry ones. I think that there are, out in inter-planetary space,
Super Tamerlanes at the head of hosts of celestial ravagers—which have
come here and pounced upon civilizations of the past, cleaning them up all
but their bones, or temples and monuments—for which later historians have
invented exclusionist histories. But if something now has a legal right to us,
and can enforce its proprietorship, they’ve been warned off. It’s the way of
all exploitation. I should say that we’re now under cultivation: that we’re
conscious of it, but have the impertinence to attribute it all to our own
nobler and higher instincts.off. It’s the way of
all exploitation. I should say that we’re now under cultivation: that we’re
conscious of it, but have the impertinence to attribute it all to our own
nobler and higher instincts.

--- PAGE BREAK ---f
all exploitation. I should say that we’re now under cultivation: that we’re
conscious of it, but have the impertinence to attribute it all to our own
nobler and higher instincts.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Against these notions is the same sense of finality that opposes all
advance. It’s why we rate acceptance as a better adaptation than belief.
Opposing us is the strong belief that, as to interplanetary phenomena,
virtually everything has been found out. Sense of finality and illusion of
homogeneity. But that what is called advancing knowledge is violation of
the sense of blankness.
A drop of water. Once upon a time water was considered so
homogeneous that it was thought of as an element. The microscope —and
not only that the supposititiously elementary was seen to be of infinite
diversity, but that in its protoplasmic life there were new orders of beings.
Or the year 1491—and a European looking westward over the ocean—
his feeling that that suave western droop was unbreakable; that gods of
regularity would not permit that smooth horizon to be disturbed by coasts or
spotted with islands. The unpleasantness of even contemplating such a state
—wide, smooth west, so clean against the sky—spotted with islands—
geographic leprosy.
But coasts and islands and Indians and bison, in the seemingly vacant
west: lakes, mountains, rivers—
One looks up at the sky: the relative homogeneity of the relatively
unexplored: one thinks of only a few kinds of phenomena. But the
acceptance is forced upon me that there are modes and modes and modes of
inter-planetary existence: things as different from planets and comets and
meteors as Indians are from bison and prairie dogs: a super-geography—or
celestiography—of vast stagnant regions, but also of Super-Niagaras and
Ultra-Mississippis: and a super-sociology—voyagers and tourists and
ravagers: the hunted and the hunting: the super-mercantile, the super-piratic,
the super-evangelical.
Sense of homogeneity, or our positivist illusion of the unknown —and
the fate of all positivism.
Astronomy and the academic.
Ethics and the abstract.
The universal attempt to formulate or to regularize—an attempt that can
be made only by disregarding or denying.
Or all things disregard or deny that which will eventually invade and
destroy them—
Until comes the day when some one thing shall say, and enforce upon
Infinitude:ade only by disregarding or denying.
Or all things disregard or deny that which will eventually invade and
destroy them—
Until comes the day when some one thing shall say, and enforce upon
Infinitude:

--- PAGE BREAK ---ding or denying.
Or all things disregard or deny that which will eventually invade and
destroy them—
Until comes the day when some one thing shall say, and enforce upon
Infinitude:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Thus far shalt thou go: here is absolute demarcation.”
The final utterance:
“There is only I.”
In the Monthly Notices of the R. A. S., 11-48, there is a letter from the
Rev. W. Read:
That, upon the 4th of September, 1851, at 9:30 A.M., he had seen a host of
self-luminous bodies, passing the field of his telescope, some slowly and
some rapidly. They appeared to occupy a zone several degrees in breadth.
The direction of most of them was due east to west, but some moved from
north to south. The numbers were tremendous. They were observed for six
hours.
Editor’s note:
“May not these appearances be attributed to an abnormal state of the
optic nerves of the observer"”
In Monthly Notices, 12-38, Mr. Read answers that he had been a diligent
observer, with instruments of a superior order, for about 28 years—”but I
have never witnessed such an appearance before.” As to illusion he says
that two other members of his family had seen the objects.
The Editor withdraws his suggestion.
We know what to expect. Almost absolutely—in an existence that is
essentially Hibernian—we can predict the past—that is, look over
something of this kind, written in 1851, and know what to expect from the
Exclusionists later. If Mr. Read saw a migration of dissatisfied angels,
numbering millions, they must merge away, at least subjectively, with
commonplace terrestrial phenomena—of course disregarding Mr. Read’s
probable familiarity, of 28 years’ duration, with the commonplaces of
terrestrial phenomena.
Monthly Notices, 12-183:
Letter from Rev. W. R. Dawes:
That he had seen similar objects—and in the month of September —that
they were nothing but seeds floating in the air.
In the Report of the British Association, 1852-235, there is a
communication from Mr. Read to Prof. Baden-Powell:
That the objects that had been seen by him and by Mr. Dawes were not
similar. He denies that he had seen seeds floating in the air. There had been
little wind, and that had come from the sea, where seeds would not be likely
to have origin. The objects that he had seen were round and sharply defined,seen seeds floating in the air. There had been
little wind, and that had come from the sea, where seeds would not be likely
to have origin. The objects that he had seen were round and sharply defined,

--- PAGE BREAK ---in the air. There had been
little wind, and that had come from the sea, where seeds would not be likely
to have origin. The objects that he had seen were round and sharply defined,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and with none of the feathery appearance of thistledown. He then quotes
from a letter from C. B. Chalmers, F.R.A.S., who had seen a similar stream,
a procession, or migration, except that some of the bodies were more
elongated—or lean and hungry—than globular.
He might have argued for sixty-five years. He’d have impressed nobody
—of importance. The super-motif, or dominant, of his era, was
Exclusionism, and the notion of seeds in the air assimilates— with due
disregards—with that dominant.
Or pageantries here upon our earth, and things looking down upon us—
and the Crusades were only dust clouds, and glints of the sun on shining
armor were only particles of mica in dust clouds. I think it was a Crusade
that Read saw—but that it was right, relatively to the year 1851, to say that
it was only seeds in the wind, whether the wind blew from the sea or not. I
think of things that were luminous with religious zeal, mixed up, like
everything else in Intermediateness, with black marauders and from gray to
brown beings of little personal ambitions. There may have been a Richard
Coeur de Lion, on his way to right wrongs in Jupiter. It was right, relatively
to 1851, to say that he was a seed of a cabbage. Prof. Coffin, U.S.N. (Jour.
Frank. Inst., 88-151): That, during the eclipse of August, 1869, he had
noted the passage, across his telescope, of several bright flakes resembling
thistleblows, floating in the sunlight. But the telescope was so focused that,
if these things were distinct, they must have been so far away from this
earth that the difficulties of orthodoxy remain as great, one way or another,
no matter what we think they were—
They were “well-defined,” says Prof. Coffin.
Henry Waldner (Nature, 5-304):
That, April 27, 1863, he had seen great numbers of small, shining bodies
passing from west to east. He had notified Dr. Wolf, of the Observatory of
Zurich, who “had convinced himself of this strange phenomenon.” Dr. Wolf
had told him that similar bodies had been seen by Sig. Capocci, of the
Capodimonte Observatory, at Naples, May 11, 1845.
The shapes were of great diversity—or different aspects of similar
shapes"
Appendages were seen upon some of them.
We are told that some were star-shaped, with transparent appendages.
I think, myself, it was a Mohammed and his Hegira. May have been only
his harem. Astonishing sensation: afloat in space with ten million wivesthat some were star-shaped, with transparent appendages.
I think, myself, it was a Mohammed and his Hegira. May have been only
his harem. Astonishing sensation: afloat in space with ten million wives

--- PAGE BREAK ----shaped, with transparent appendages.
I think, myself, it was a Mohammed and his Hegira. May have been only
his harem. Astonishing sensation: afloat in space with ten million wives

--- PAGE BREAK ---

around one. Anyway, it would seem that we have considerable advantage
here, inasmuch as seeds are not in season in April—but the pulling back to
earth, the bedraggling by those sincere but dull ones of some time ago. We
have the same stupidity—necessary, functioning stupidity—of attribution of
something that was so rare that an astronomer notes only one instance
between 1845 and 1863, to an everyday occurrence—
Or Mr. Waldner’s assimilative opinion that he had seen only ice crystals.
Whether they were not very exclusive veils of a super-harem, or planes
of a very light material, we have an impression of star-shaped things with
transparent appendages that have been seen in the sky.
Hosts of small bodies—black, this time—that were seen by the
astronomers Herrick, Buys-Ballot, and De Cuppis (L’Année Scientifique,
1860-25); vast numbers of bodies that were seen by M. Lamey, to cross the
moon (L’Année Scientifique, 1874-62); another instance of dark ones;
prodigious number of dark, spherical bodies reported by Messier, June 17,
1777 (Arago, ¯uvres, 9-38); considerable number of luminous bodies
which appeared to move out from the sun, in diverse directions; seen at
Havana, during eclipse of the sun, May 15, 1836, by Prof. Auber (Poey); M.
Poey cites a similar instance, of Aug. 3, 1886; M. Lotard’s opinion that they
were birds (L’Astronomie, 1886-391); large number of small bodies
crossing disk of the sun, some swiftly, some slowly; most of them globular,
but some seemingly triangular, and some of more complicated structure;
seen by M. Trouvelet, who, whether seeds, insects, birds, or other
commonplace things, had never seen anything resembling these forms
(L’Ann¯e Scientifique, 1885-8); report from the Rio de Janeiro
Observatory, of vast numbers of bodies crossing the sun, some of them
luminous and some of them dark, from some time in December, 1875, until
Jan. 22, 1876 (La Nature, 1876-384).
Of course, at a distance, any form is likely to look round or roundish: but
we point out that we have notes upon the seeming of more complex forms.
In L’Astronomie, 1886-70, is recorded M. Briguiere’s observation, at
Marseilles, April 15 and April 25, 1883, upon the crossing of the sun by
bodies that were irregular in form. Some of them moved as if in alignment.
Letter from Sir Robert Inglis to Col. Sabine (Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1849-17):
That, at 3 P.M., Aug. 8, 1849, at Gais, Switzerland, Inglis had seen
thousands and thousands of brilliant white objects, like snowflakes in a
cloudless sky. Though this display lasted about twenty-five minutes, not oneug. 8, 1849, at Gais, Switzerland, Inglis had seen
thousands and thousands of brilliant white objects, like snowflakes in a
cloudless sky. Though this display lasted about twenty-five minutes, not one

--- PAGE BREAK ---, Switzerland, Inglis had seen
thousands and thousands of brilliant white objects, like snowflakes in a
cloudless sky. Though this display lasted about twenty-five minutes, not one

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of these seeming snowflakes was seen to fall. Inglis says that his servant
“fancied” that he had seen something like wings on these—whatever they
were. Upon page 18, of the Report, Sir John Herschel says that, in 1845 or
1846, his attention had been attracted by objects of considerable size, in the
air, seemingly not far away. He had looked at them through a telescope. He
says that they were masses of hay, not less than a yard or two in diameter.
Still there are some circumstances that interest me. He says that, though no
less than a whirlwind could have sustained these masses, the air about him
was calm. “No doubt wind prevailed at the spot, but there was no roaring
noise.” None of these masses fell within his observation or knowledge. To
walk a few fields away and find out more would seem not much to expect
from a man of science, but it is one of our superstitions, that such a seeming
trifle is just what—by the Spirit of an Era, we’ll call it—one is not
permitted to do. If those things were not masses of hay, and if Herschel had
walked a little and found out, and had reported that he had seen strange
objects in the air—that report, in 1846, would have been as misplaced as the
appearance of a tail upon an embryo still in its gastrula era. I have noticed
this inhibition in my own case many times. Looking back—why didn’t I do
this or that little thing that would have cost so little and have meant so
much" Didn’t belong to that era of my own development.
Nature, 22-64:
That, at Kattenau, Germany, about half an hour before sunrise, March 22,
1880, “an enormous number of luminous bodies rose from the horizon, and
passed in a horizontal direction from east to west.” They are described as
having appeared in a zone or belt. “They shone with a remarkably brilliant
light.”
So they’ve thrown lassos over our data to bring them back to earth. But
they’re lassos that cannot tighten. We can’t pull out of them: we may step
out of them, or lift them off. Some of us used to have an impression of
Science sitting in calm, just judgment: some of us now feel that a good
many of our data have been lynched. If a Crusade, perhaps from Mars to
Jupiter, occur in the autumn— “seeds.” If a Crusade or outpouring of
celestial vandals is seen from this earth in the spring— “ice crystals.” If we
have record of a race of aerial beings, perhaps with no substantial habitat,
seen by someone in India— “locusts.”
This will be disregarded:
If locusts fly high, they freeze and fall in thousands.f we
have record of a race of aerial beings, perhaps with no substantial habitat,
seen by someone in India— “locusts.”
This will be disregarded:
If locusts fly high, they freeze and fall in thousands.

--- PAGE BREAK ---a race of aerial beings, perhaps with no substantial habitat,
seen by someone in India— “locusts.”
This will be disregarded:
If locusts fly high, they freeze and fall in thousands.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nature, 47-581:
Locusts that were seen in the mountains of India, at a height of 12,750
feet—“in swarms and dying by thousands.”
But no matter whether they fly high or fly low, no one ever wonders
what’s in the air when locusts are passing overhead, because of the falling
of stragglers. I have especially looked this matter up—no mystery when
locusts are flying overhead—constant fall-ing of stragglers.
Monthly Notices, 30-135:
“An unusual phenomenon noticed by Lieut. Herschel, Oct. 17 and 18,
1870, while observing the sun, at Bangalore, India.”
Lieut. Herschel had noticed dark shadows crossing the sun—but away
from the sun there were luminous, moving images. For two days bodies
passed in a continuous stream, varying in size and velocity.
The Lieutenant tries to explain, as we shall see, but he says:
“As it was, the continuous flight, for two whole days, in such numbers, in
the upper regions of the air, of beasts that left no stragglers, is a wonder of
natural history, if not of astronomy.”
He tried different focusing—he saw wings—perhaps he saw planes. He
says that he saw upon the objects either wings or phantom-like appendages.
Then he saw something that was so bizarre that, in the fullness of his
nineteenth-centuriness, he writes:
“There was no longer doubt: they were locusts or flies of some sort.”
One of them had paused.
It had hovered.
Then it had whisked off.
The Editor says that at that time “countless locusts had descended upon
certain parts of India.”
We now have an instance that is extraordinary in several respects—super-
voyagers or super-ravagers; angels, ragamuffins, crusaders, emigrants,
aeronauts, or aerial elephants, or bison or dinosaurs—except that I think the
thing had planes or wings—one of them has been photographed. It may be
that in the history of photography no more extraordinary picture than this
has ever been taken.
L’Astronomie, 1885-347:
That, at the Observatory of Zacatecas, Mexico, Aug. 12, 1883, about
2,500 meters above sea level, were seen a large number of small luminous
bodies, entering upon the disk of the sun. M. Bonilla telegraphed to theObservatory of Zacatecas, Mexico, Aug. 12, 1883, about
2,500 meters above sea level, were seen a large number of small luminous
bodies, entering upon the disk of the sun. M. Bonilla telegraphed to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ecas, Mexico, Aug. 12, 1883, about
2,500 meters above sea level, were seen a large number of small luminous
bodies, entering upon the disk of the sun. M. Bonilla telegraphed to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Observatories of the City of Mexico and of Puebla. Word came back that
the bodies were not visible there. Because of this parallax, M. Bonilla
placed the bodies “relatively near the earth.” But when we find out what he
called “relatively near the earth”—birds or bugs or hosts of a Super-
Tamerlane or army of a celestial Richard C°ur de Lion—our heresies
rejoice anyway. His estimate is “less distance than the moon.”
One of them was photographed. See L’Astronomie, 1885-349. The
photograph shows a long body surrounded by indefinite structures, or by
the haze of wings or planes in motion.
L’Astronomie, 1887-66;
Signor Ricco, of the Observatory of Palermo, writes that, Nov. 30, 1880,
at 8:30 o’clock in the morning, he was watching the sun, when he saw,
slowly traversing its disk, bodies in two long, parallel lines, and a shorter,
parallel line. The bodies looked winged to him. But so large were they that
he had to think of large birds. He thought of cranes.
He consulted ornithologists, and learned that the configuration of parallel
lines agrees with the flight-formation of cranes. This was in 1880: anybody
now living in New York City, for instance, would tell him that also it is a
familiar formation of aeroplanes. But, because of data of focus and
subtended angles, these beings or objects must have been high.
Sig. Ricco argues that condors have been known to fly three or four miles
high, and that heights reached by other birds have been estimated at two or
three miles. He says that cranes have been known to fly so high that they
have been lost to view.
Our own acceptance, in conventional terms, is that there is not a bird of
this earth that would not freeze to death at a height of more than four miles:
that if condors fly three or four miles high, they are birds that are especially
adapted to such altitudes.
Sig. Ricco’s estimate is that these objects or beings or cranes must have
been at least five and a half miles high.ee or four miles high, they are birds that are especially
adapted to such altitudes.
Sig. Ricco’s estimate is that these objects or beings or cranes must have
been at least five and a half miles high.

--- PAGE BREAK ---h, they are birds that are especially
adapted to such altitudes.
Sig. Ricco’s estimate is that these objects or beings or cranes must have
been at least five and a half miles high.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
17
HE vast dark thing that looked like a poised crow of unholy
dimensions. Assuming that I shall ever have any readers, let him, or
both of them, if I shall ever have such popularity as that, note how
dim that bold black datum is at the distance of only two chapters.
The question:
Was it a thing or the shadow of a thing"
Acceptance either way calls not for mere revision but revolution in the
science of astronomy. But the dimness of the datum of only two chapters
ago. The carved stone disk of Tarbes, and the rain that fell every afternoon
for twenty—if I haven’t forgotten, myself, whether it was twenty-three or
twenty-five days—upon one small area. We are all Thomsons, with brains
that have smooth and slippery, though corrugated, surfaces—or that all
intellection is associative—or that we remember that which correlates with
a dominant—and a few chapters go by, and there’s scarcely an impression
that hasn’t slid off our smooth and slippery brains, of Leverrier and the
“planet Vulcan.” There are two ways by which irreconcilables can be
remembered—if they can be correlated in a system more nearly real than
the system that rejects them—and by repetition and repetition and
repetition.
Vast black thing like a crow poised over the moon.
The datum is so important to us, because it enforces, in another field, our
acceptance that dark bodies of planetary size traverse this solar system.
Our position:
That the things have been seen:
Also that their shadows have been seen.
Vast black thing poised like a crow over the moon. So far it is a single
instance. By a single instance, we mean the negligible.
In Popular Science, 34-158, Serviss tells of a shadow that Schroeter saw,
in 1788, in the lunar Alps. First he saw a light. But then, when this region
was illuminated, he saw a round shadow where the light had been.
Our own expression:tells of a shadow that Schroeter saw,
in 1788, in the lunar Alps. First he saw a light. But then, when this region
was illuminated, he saw a round shadow where the light had been.
Our own expression:

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat Schroeter saw,
in 1788, in the lunar Alps. First he saw a light. But then, when this region
was illuminated, he saw a round shadow where the light had been.
Our own expression:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That he saw a luminous object near the moon: that that part of the moon
became illuminated, and the object was lost to view; but that then its
shadow underneath was seen.
Serviss explains, of course. Otherwise he’d not be Prof. Serviss. It’s a
little contest in relative approximations to realness. Prof. Serviss thinks that
what Schroeter saw was the “round” shadow of a mountain—in the region
that had become lighted. He assumes that Schroeter never looked again to
see whether the shadow could be attributed to a mountain. That’s the crux:
conceivably a mountain could cast a round—and that means detached—
shadow, in the lighted part of the moon. Prof. Serviss could, of course,
explain why he disregards the light in the first place—maybe it had always
been there “in the first place.” If he couldn’t explain, he’d still be an
amateur.
We have another datum. I think it is more extraordinary than—
Vast thing, black and poised, like a crow, over the moon.
But only because it’s more circumstantial, and because it has
corroboration, do I think it more extraordinary than—
Vast poised thing, black as a crow, over the moon.
Mr. H. C. Russell, who was usually as orthodox as anybody, I suppose—
at least, he wrote “F.R.A.S.” after his name—tells in the Observatory, 2-
374, one of the wickedest, or most preposterous, stories that we have so far
exhumed:
That he and another astronomer, G. D. Hirst, were in the Blue Mountains,
near Sydney, N. S. W., and Mr. Hirst was looking at the moon—
He saw on the moon what Russell calls “one of those remarkable facts,
which being seen should be recorded, although no explanation can at
present be offered.”
That may be so. It is very rarely done. Our own expression upon
evolution by successive dominants and their correlates is against it. On the
other hand, we express that every era records a few observations out of
harmony with it, but adumbratory or preparatory to the spirit of eras still to
come. It’s very rarely done. Lashed by the phantom-scourge of a now
passing era, the world of astronomers is in a state of terrorism, though of a
highly attenuated, modernized, devitalized kind. Let an astronomer see
something that is not of the conventional, celestial sights, or something that
it is “improper” to see—his very dignity is in danger. Some one of theodernized, devitalized kind. Let an astronomer see
something that is not of the conventional, celestial sights, or something that
it is “improper” to see—his very dignity is in danger. Some one of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed kind. Let an astronomer see
something that is not of the conventional, celestial sights, or something that
it is “improper” to see—his very dignity is in danger. Some one of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

corralled and scourged may stick a smile into his back. He’ll be thought of
unkindly.
With a hardihood that is unusual in his world of ethereal sensitivenesses,
Russell says, of Hirst’s observation:
“He found a large part of it covered with a dark shade, quite as dark as
the shadow of the earth during an eclipse of the moon.”
But the climax of hardihood or impropriety or wickedness, pre-
posterousness or enlightenment:
“One could hardly resist the conviction that it was a shadow, yet it could
not be the shadow of any known body.”
Richard Proctor was a man of some liberality. After a while we shall have
a letter, which once upon a time we’d have called delirious—don’t know
that we could read such a thing now, for the first time, without incredulous
laughter—which Mr. Proctor permitted to be published in Knowledge. But a
dark, unknown world that could cast a shadow upon a large part of the
moon, perhaps extending far beyond the limb of the moon; a shadow as
deep as the shadow of this earth—
Too much for Mr. Proctor’s politeness.
I haven’t read what he said, but it seems to have been a little coarse.
Russell says that Proctor “freely used” his name in the Echo, of March 14,
1879, ridiculing this observation which had been made by Russell as well as
Hirst. If it hadn’t been Proctor, it would have been someone else—but one
notes that the attack came out in a newspaper. There is no discussion of this
remarkable subject, no mention in any other astronomic journal. The
disregard was almost complete—but we do note that the columns of the
Observatory were open to Russell to answer Proctor.
In the answer, I note considerable intermediateness. Far back in 1879, it
would have been a beautiful positivism, if Russell had said—
“There was a shadow on the moon. Absolutely it was cast by an unknown
body.”
According to our religion, if he had then given all his time to the
maintaining of this one stand, of course breaking all friendships, all ties
with his fellow astronomers, his apotheosis would have occurred, greatly
assisted by means well known to quasi-existence when its compromises and
evasions, and phenomena that are partly this and partly that, are flouted by
the definite and uncompromising. It would be impossible in a real
existence, but Mr. Russell, of quasi-existence, says that he did resist theomena that are partly this and partly that, are flouted by
the definite and uncompromising. It would be impossible in a real
existence, but Mr. Russell, of quasi-existence, says that he did resist the

--- PAGE BREAK ---y this and partly that, are flouted by
the definite and uncompromising. It would be impossible in a real
existence, but Mr. Russell, of quasi-existence, says that he did resist the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

conviction; that he had said that one could “hardly resist”; and most of his
resentment is against Mr. Proctor’s thinking that he had not resisted. It
seems too bad— if apotheosis be desirable.
The point in Intermediatism here is:
Not that to adapt to the conditions of quasi-existence is to have what is
called success in quasi-existence, but is to lose one’s soul—
But is to lose “one’s” chance of attaining soul, self, or entity.
One indignation quoted from Proctor interests us:
“What happens on the moon may at any time happen to this earth.”
Or:
That is just the teaching of this department of Advanced Astronomy:
That Russell and Hirst saw the sun eclipsed relatively to the moon by a
vast dark body;
That many times have eclipses occurred relatively to this earth, by vast,
dark bodies;
That there have been many eclipses that have not been recognized as
eclipses by scientific kindergartens.
There is a merger, of course. We’ll take a look at it first—that, after all, it
may have been a shadow that Hirst and Russell saw, but the only
significance is that the sun was eclipsed relatively to the moon by a cosmic
haze of some kind, or a swarm of meteors close together, or a gaseous
discharge left behind by a comet. My own acceptance is that vagueness of
shadow is a function of vagueness of intervention; that a shadow as dense
as the shadow of this earth is cast by a body denser than hazes and swarms.
The information seems definite enough in this respect—“quite as dark as
the shadow of this earth during the eclipse of the moon.”
Though we may not always be as patient toward them as we should be, it
is our acceptance that the astronomic primitives have done a great deal of
good work: for instance, in the allaying of fears upon this earth. Sometimes
it may seem as if all science were to us very much like what a red flag is to
bulls and anti-socialists. It’s not that: it’s more like what unsquare meals are
to bulls and anti-socialists—not the scientific, but the insufficient. Our
acceptance is that Evil is the negative state, by which we mean the state of
maladjustment, discord, ugliness, disorganization, inconsistency, injustice,
and so on—as determined in Intermediateness, not by real standards, but
only by higher approximations to adjustment, harmony, beauty,
organization, consistency, justice, and so on. Evil is outlived virtue, orn—as determined in Intermediateness, not by real standards, but
only by higher approximations to adjustment, harmony, beauty,
organization, consistency, justice, and so on. Evil is outlived virtue, or

--- PAGE BREAK ---ntermediateness, not by real standards, but
only by higher approximations to adjustment, harmony, beauty,
organization, consistency, justice, and so on. Evil is outlived virtue, or

--- PAGE BREAK ---

incipient virtue that has not yet established itself, or any other phenomenon
that is not in seeming adjustment, harmony, consistency with a dominant.
The astronomers have functioned bravely in the past. They’ve been good
for business: the big interests think kindly, if at all, of them. It’s bad for
trade to have an intense darkness come upon an unaware community and
frighten people out of their purchasing values. But if an obscuration be
foretold, and if it then occur—may seem a little uncanny—only a shadow—
and no one who was about to buy a pair of shoes runs home panic-stricken
and saves the money.
Upon general principles we accept that astronomers have quasi-
systematized data of eclipses—or have included some and disregarded
others.
They have done well.
They have functioned.
But now they’re negatives, or they’re out of harmony—
If we are in harmony with a new dominant, or the spirit of a new era, in
which Exclusionism must be overthrown; if we have data of many
obscurations that have occurred, not only upon the moon, but upon our own
earth, as convincing of vast intervening bodies, usually invisible, as is any
regularized, predicted eclipse.
One looks up at the sky.
It seems incredible that, say, at the distance of the moon, there could be,
but be invisible, a solid body, say, the size of the moon.
One looks up at the moon, at a time when only a crescent of it is visible.
The tendency is to build up the rest of it in one’s mind; but the unillumined
part looks as vacant as the rest of the sky, and it’s of the same blueness as
the rest of the sky. There’s a vast area of solid substance before one’s eyes.
It’s indistinguishable from the sky.
In some of our little lessons upon the beauties of modesty and humility,
we have picked out basic arrogances—tail of a peacock, horns of a stag,
dollars of a capitalist—eclipses of astronomers. Though I have no desire for
the job, I’d engage to list hundreds of instances in which the report upon an
expected eclipse has been “sky overcast” or “weather unfavorable.” In our
Super-Hibernia, the unfavorable has been construed as the favorable. Some
time ago, when we were lost, because we had not recognized our own
dominant, when we were still of the unchosen and likely to be more
malicious than we now are—because we have noted a steady tolerancetime ago, when we were lost, because we had not recognized our own
dominant, when we were still of the unchosen and likely to be more
malicious than we now are—because we have noted a steady tolerance

--- PAGE BREAK ---re lost, because we had not recognized our own
dominant, when we were still of the unchosen and likely to be more
malicious than we now are—because we have noted a steady tolerance

--- PAGE BREAK ---

creeping into our attitude—if astronomers are not to blame, but are only
correlates to a dominant—we advertised a predicted eclipse that did not
occur at all. Now, without any especial feeling, except that of recognition of
the fate of all attempted absolutism, we give the instance, noting that,
though such an evil thing to orthodoxy, it was orthodoxy that recorded the
non-event.
Monthly Notices of the R. A. S., 8-132:
“Remarkable appearances during the total eclipse of the moon on March
19, 1848”:
In an extract from a letter from Mr. Forster, of Bruges, it is said that,
according to the writer’s observations at the time of the predicted total
eclipse, the moon shone with about three times the intensity of the mean
illumination of an eclipsed lunar disk: that the British Consul, at Ghent,
who did not know of the predicted eclipse, had written enquiring as to the
“blood-red” color of the moon.
This is not very satisfactory to what used to be our malices. But there
follows another letter, from another astronomer, Walkey, who had made
observations at Clyst St. Lawrence: that, instead of an eclipse, the moon
became—as is printed in italics—“most beautifully illuminated” . . . “rather
tinged with a deep red” . . . “the moon being as perfect with light as if there
had been no eclipse whatever.”
I note that Chambers, in his work upon eclipses, gives Forster’s letter in
full—and not a mention of Walkey’s letter.
There is no attempt in Monthly Notices to explain upon the notion of
greater distance of the moon, and the earth’s shadow falling short, which
would make as much trouble for astronomers, if that were not foreseen, as
no eclipse at all. Also there is no refuge in saying that virtually never, even
in total eclipses, is the moon totally dark—“as perfect with light as if there
had been no eclipse whatever.” It is said that at the time there had been an
aurora borealis, which might have caused the luminosity, without a datum
that such an effect, by an aurora, had ever been observed upon the moon.
But single instances—so an observation by Scott, in the Antarctic. The
force of this datum lies in my own acceptance, based upon especially
looking up this point, that an eclipse nine-tenths of totality has great effect,
even though the sky be clouded.
Scott (9oyage of the Discovery, vol. II, p. 215) :wn acceptance, based upon especially
looking up this point, that an eclipse nine-tenths of totality has great effect,
even though the sky be clouded.
Scott (9oyage of the Discovery, vol. II, p. 215) :

--- PAGE BREAK ---upon especially
looking up this point, that an eclipse nine-tenths of totality has great effect,
even though the sky be clouded.
Scott (9oyage of the Discovery, vol. II, p. 215) :

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“There may have been an eclipse of the sun, Sept. 21, 1903, as the
almanac said, but we should, none of us, have liked to swear to the fact.”
This eclipse had been set down at nine-tenths of totality. The sky was
overcast at the time.
So it is not only that many eclipses unrecognized by astronomers as
eclipses have occurred, but that intermediatism, or impositivism, breaks
into their own seemingly regularized eclipses.
Our data of unregularized eclipses, as profound as those that are
conventionally—or officially"—recognized, that have occurred relatively to
this earth:
In Notes and Queries there are several allusions to intense darknesses
that have occurred upon this earth, quite as eclipses occur, but that are not
referable to any known eclipsing body. Of course there is no suggestion
here that these darknesses may have been eclipses. My own acceptance is
that if in the nineteenth century anyone had uttered such a thought as that,
he’d have felt the blight of a Dominant; that Materialistic Science was a
jealous god, excluding, as works of the devil, all utterances against the
seemingly uniform, regular, periodic; that to defy him would have brought
on— withering by ridicule—shrinking away by publishers—contempt of
friends and family—justifiable grounds for divorce—that one who would so
defy would feel what unbelievers in relics of saints felt in an earlier age;
what befell virgins who forgot to keep fires burning, in a still earlier age—
but that, if he’d almost absolutely hold out, just the same—new fixed star
reported in Monthly Notices. Altogether, the point in Positivism here is that
by Dominants and their correlates, quasi-existence strives for the positive
state, aggregating, around a nucleus, or dominant, systematized members of
a religion, a science, a society—but that “individuals” who do not surrender
and submerge may of themselves highly approximate to positiveness —the
fixed, the real, the absolute.
In Notes and Queries, 2-4-139, there is an account of a darkness in
Holland, in the midst of a bright day, so intense and terrifying that many
panic-stricken persons lost their lives stumbling into the canals.
Gentleman’s Magazine, 33-414:
A darkness that came upon London, Aug. 19, 1763, “greater than at the
great eclipse of 1748.”
However, our preference is not to go so far back for data. For a list of
historic “dark days,” see Humboldt, Cosmos, 1-120.ame upon London, Aug. 19, 1763, “greater than at the
great eclipse of 1748.”
However, our preference is not to go so far back for data. For a list of
historic “dark days,” see Humboldt, Cosmos, 1-120.

--- PAGE BREAK ---. 19, 1763, “greater than at the
great eclipse of 1748.”
However, our preference is not to go so far back for data. For a list of
historic “dark days,” see Humboldt, Cosmos, 1-120.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Monthly Weather Review, March, 1886-79:
That, according to the La Crosse Daily Republican, of March 20, 1886,
darkness suddenly settled upon the city of Oshkosh, Wis., at 3 P.M., March
19. In five minutes the darkness equaled that of midnight.
Consternation.
I think that some of us are likely to overdo our own superiority and the
absurd fears of the Middle Ages—
Oshkosh.
People in the streets rushing in all directions—horses running away—
women and children running into cellars—little modern touch after all: gas
meters instead of images and relics of saints.
This darkness, which lasted from eight to ten minutes, occurred in a day
that had been “light but cloudy.” It passed from west to east, and brightness
followed: then came reports from towns to the west of Oshkosh: that the
same phenomenon had already occurred there. A “wave of total darkness”
had passed from west to east.
Other instances are recorded in the Monthly Weather Review, but, as to all
of them, we have a sense of being pretty well-eclipsed, ourselves, by the
conventional explanation that the obscuring body was only a very dense
mass of clouds. But some of the instances are interesting—intense darkness
at Memphis, Tenn., for about fifteen minutes, at 10 A.M., Dec. 2, 1904—“We
are told that in some quarters a panic prevailed, and that some were
shouting and praying and imagining that the end of the world had come”.
(M. W. R., 32-522.) At Louisville, Ky., March 7, 1911, at about 8 A.M.:
duration about half an hour; had been raining moderately, and then hail had
fallen. “The intense blackness and general ominous appearance of the storm
spread terror throughout the city.” (M. W. R.,39-345.)
However, this merger between possible eclipses by unknown dark bodies
and commonplace terrestrial phenomena is formidable.
As to darknesses that have fallen upon vast areas, conventionality is—
smoke from forest fires. In the 8. S. Forest Service Bulletin, No. 117, F. G.
Plummer gives a list of eighteen darknesses that have occurred in the
United States and Canada. He is one of the primitives, but I should say that
his dogmatism is shaken by vibrations from the new Dominant. His
difficulty, which he acknowledges, but which he would have disregarded
had he written a decade or so earlier, is the profundity of some of these
obscurations. He says that mere smokiness cannot account for such “awe-h he acknowledges, but which he would have disregarded
had he written a decade or so earlier, is the profundity of some of these
obscurations. He says that mere smokiness cannot account for such “awe-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ut which he would have disregarded
had he written a decade or so earlier, is the profundity of some of these
obscurations. He says that mere smokiness cannot account for such “awe-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

inspiring dark days.” So he conceives of eddies in the air, concentrating the
smoke from forest fires. Then, in the inconsistency or discord of all quasi-
intellection that is striving for consistency or harmony, he tells of the
vastness of some of these darknesses. Of course Mr. Plummer did not really
think upon this subject, but one does feel that he might have approximated
higher to real thinking than by speaking of concentration and then listing
data of enormous area, or the opposite of circumstances of concentration—
because, of his nineteen instances, nine are set down as covering all New
England. In quasi-existence, everything generates or is part of its own
opposite. Every attempt at peace prepares the way for war; all attempts at
justice result in injustice in some other respect: so Mr. Plummer’s attempt to
bring order into his data, with the explanation of darkness caused by smoke
from forest fires, results in such confusion that he ends up by saying that
these daytime darknesses have occurred “often with little or no turbidity of
the air near the earth’s surface”—or with no evidence at all of smoke—
except that there is almost always a forest fire somewhere.
However, of the eighteen instances, the only one that I’d bother to contest
is the profound darkness in Canada and northern parts of the United States,
Nov. 19, 1819—which we have already considered.
Its concomitants:
Lights in the sky;
Fall of a black substance;
Shocks like those of an earthquake.
In this instance, the only available forest fire was one to the south of the
Ohio River. For all I know, soot from a very great fire south of the Ohio
might fall in Montreal, Canada, and conceivably, by some freak of
reflection, light from it might be seen in Montreal, but the earthquake is not
assimilable with a forest fire. On the other hand, it will soon be our
expression that profound darkness, fall of matter from the sky, lights in the
sky, and earthquakes are phenomena of the near approach of other worlds to
this world. It is such comprehensiveness, as contrasted with inclusion of a
few factors and disregard for the rest, that we call higher approximation to
realness—or universalness.
A darkness, of April 17, 1904, at Wimbledon, England (Symons’ Met.
Mag., 39-69). It came from a smokeless region: no rain, no thunder; lasted
10 minutes; too dark to go “even out in the open.”alness.
A darkness, of April 17, 1904, at Wimbledon, England (Symons’ Met.
Mag., 39-69). It came from a smokeless region: no rain, no thunder; lasted
10 minutes; too dark to go “even out in the open.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---of April 17, 1904, at Wimbledon, England (Symons’ Met.
Mag., 39-69). It came from a smokeless region: no rain, no thunder; lasted
10 minutes; too dark to go “even out in the open.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

As to darknesses in Great Britain, one thinks of fogs—but in Nature, 25-
289, there are some observations by Major J. Herschel, upon an obscuration
in London, Jan. 22, 1882, at 10:30 A.M., so great that he could hear persons
upon the opposite side of the street, but could not see them—“It was
obvious that there was no fog to speak of.”
Annual Register, 1857-132:
An account by Charles A. Murray, British Envoy to Persia, of a darkness
of May 20, 1857, that came upon Bagdad—“a darkness more intense than
ordinary midnight, when neither stars nor moon are visible. . . .” “After a
short time the black darkness was succeeded by a red, lurid gloom, such as I
never saw in any part of the world.”
“Panic seized the whole city.”
“A dense volume of red sand fell.”
This matter of sand falling seems to suggest conventional explanation
enough, or that a simoon, heavily charged with terrestrial sand, had
obscured the sun, but Mr. Murray, who says that he had had experience with
simoons, gives his opinion that “it cannot have been a simoon.”
It is our comprehensiveness now, or this matter of concomitants of
darknesses that we are going to capitalize. It is all very complicated and
tremendous, and our own treatment can be but impressionistic, but a few of
the rudiments of Advanced Seismology we shall now take up—or the four
principal phenomena of another world’s close approach to this world.
If a large substantial mass, or super-construction, should enter this earth’s
atmosphere, it is our acceptance that it would sometimes—depending upon
velocity—appear luminous or look like a cloud, or like a cloud with a
luminous nucleus. Later we shall have an expression upon luminosity—
different from the luminosity of incandescence—that comes upon objects
falling from the sky, or entering this earth’s atmosphere. Now our
expression is that worlds have often come close to this earth, and that
smaller objects—size of a hay-stack or size of several dozen skyscrapers
lumped, have often hurtled through this earth’s atmosphere, and have been
mistaken for clouds, because they were enveloped in clouds—
Or that around something coming from the intense cold of interplanetary
space—that is of some regions: our own suspicion is that other regions are
tropical—the moisture of this earth’s atmosphere would condense into a
cloud-like appearance around it. In Nature, 20-121, there is an account by
Mr. S. W. Clifton, Collector of Customs, at Freemantle, Western Australia,e of this earth’s atmosphere would condense into a
cloud-like appearance around it. In Nature, 20-121, there is an account by
Mr. S. W. Clifton, Collector of Customs, at Freemantle, Western Australia,

--- PAGE BREAK ---mosphere would condense into a
cloud-like appearance around it. In Nature, 20-121, there is an account by
Mr. S. W. Clifton, Collector of Customs, at Freemantle, Western Australia,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sent to the Melbourne Observatory—a clear day—appearance of a small
black cloud, moving not very swiftly—bursting into a ball of fire, of the
apparent size of the moon—
Or that something with the velocity of an ordinary meteorite could not
collect vapor around it, but that slower-moving objects— speed of a railway
train, say—may.
The clouds of tornadoes have so often been described as if they were
solid objects that I now accept that sometimes they are: that some so-called
tornadoes are objects hurtling through this earth’s atmosphere, not only
generating disturbances by their suctions, but crushing, with their bulk, all
things in their way, rising and falling and finally disappearing,
demonstrating that gravitation is not the power that the primitives think it is,
if an object moving at relatively low velocity be not pulled to this earth, or
being so momentarily affected, bounds away.
In Finley’s Reports on the Character of 600 Tornadoes very suggestive
bits of description occur:
“Cloud bounded along the earth like a ball”—
Or that it was no meteorological phenomenon, but something very much
like a huge solid ball that was bounding along, crushing and carrying with it
everything within its field—
“Cloud bounded along, coming to the earth every eight hundred or one
thousand yards.”
Here’s an interesting bit that I got somewhere else. I offer it as a datum in
super-biology, which, however, is a branch of advanced science that I’ll not
take up, restricting to things indefinitely called “objects”—
“The tornado came wriggling, jumping, whirling like a great green snake,
darting out a score of glistening fangs.”
Though it’s interesting, I think that’s sensational, myself. It may be that
vast green snakes sometimes rush past this earth, taking a swift bite
wherever they can, but, as I say, that’s a super-biologic phenomenon. Finley
gives dozens of instances of tornado clouds that seem to me more like solid
things swathed in clouds, than clouds. He notes that, in the tornado at
Americus, Georgia, July 18, 1881, “a strange sulphurous vapor was emitted
from the cloud.” In many instances, objects, or meteoritic stones, that have
come from this earth’s externality, have had a sulphurous odor. Why a wind
effect should be sulphurous is not clear. That a vast object from external
regions should be sulphurous is in line with many data. This phenomenon isxternality, have had a sulphurous odor. Why a wind
effect should be sulphurous is not clear. That a vast object from external
regions should be sulphurous is in line with many data. This phenomenon is

--- PAGE BREAK ---a sulphurous odor. Why a wind
effect should be sulphurous is not clear. That a vast object from external
regions should be sulphurous is in line with many data. This phenomenon is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

described in the Monthly Weather Review, July, 1881, as “a strange
sulphurous vapor . . . burning and sickening all who approached close
enough to breathe it.”
The conventional explanation of tornadoes as wind-effects—which we do
not deny in some instances—is so strong in the United States that it is better
to look elsewhere for an account of an object that has hurtled through this
earth’s atmosphere, rising and falling and defying this earth’s gravitation.
Nature, 7-112:
That, according to a correspondent to the Birmingham Morning News,
the people living near King’s Sutton, Banbury, saw, about one o’clock, Dec.
7, 1872, something like a haycock hurtling through the air. Like a meteor it
was accompanied by fire and a dense smoke and made a noise like that of a
railway train. “It was sometimes high in the air and sometimes near the
ground.” The effect was tornado-like: trees and walls were knocked down.
It’s a late day now to try to verify this story, but a list is given of persons
whose property was injured. We are told that this thing then disappeared
“all at once.”
These are the smaller objects, which may be derailed railway trains or big
green snakes, for all I know—but our expression upon approach to this
earth by vast dark bodies—
That likely they’d be made luminous: would envelop in clouds, perhaps,
or would have their own clouds—
But that they’d quake, and that they’d affect this earth with quakes—
And that then would occur a fall of matter from such a world, or rise of
matter from this earth to a nearby world, or both fall and rise, or exchange
of matter—process known to Advanced Seismology as celestio-metathesis
—
Except that—if matter from some other world—and it would be like
someone to get it into his head that we absolutely deny gravitation, just
because we cannot accept orthodox dogmas—except that, if matter from
another world, filling the sky of this earth, generally, as to a hemisphere, or
locally, should be attracted to this earth, it would seem thinkable that the
whole thing should drop here, and not merely its surface-materials.
Objects upon a ship’s bottom. From time to time they drop to the bottom
of the ocean. The ship does not.
Or, like our acceptance upon dripping from aerial ice-fields, we think of
only a part of a nearby world succumbing, except in being caught ine they drop to the bottom
of the ocean. The ship does not.
Or, like our acceptance upon dripping from aerial ice-fields, we think of
only a part of a nearby world succumbing, except in being caught in

--- PAGE BREAK ---ottom
of the ocean. The ship does not.
Or, like our acceptance upon dripping from aerial ice-fields, we think of
only a part of a nearby world succumbing, except in being caught in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

suspension, to this earth’s gravitation, and surface-materials falling from
that part—
Explain or express or accept, and what does it matter" Our attitude is:
Here are the data.
See for yourself.
What does it matter what my notions may be"
Here are the data.
But think for yourself, or think for myself, all mixed up we must be. A
long time must go by before we can know Florida from Long Island. So
we’ve had data of fishes that have fallen from our now established and
respectabilized Super-Sargasso Sea—which we’ve almost forgotten, it’s
now so respectable—but we shall have data of fishes that have fallen during
earthquakes. These we accept were dragged down from ponds or other
worlds that have been quaked, when only a few miles away, by this earth,
some other world also quaking this earth.
In a way, or in its principle, our subject is orthodox enough. Only grant
proximity of other worlds—which, however, will not be a matter of
granting, but will be a matter of data—and one conventionally conceives of
their surfaces quaked—even of a whole lake full of fishes being quaked and
dragged down from one of them. The lake full of fishes may cause a little
pain to some minds, but the fall of sand and stones is pleasantly enough
thought of. More scientific persons, or more faithful hypnotics than we,
have taken up this subject, unpainfully, relatively to the moon. For instance,
Perrey has gone over 15,000 records of earthquakes, and he has correlated
many with proximities of the moon, or has attributed many to the pull of the
moon when nearest this earth. Also there is a paper upon this subject in the
Proc. Roy. Soc. of Cornwall, 1845. Or, theoretically, when at its closest to
this earth, the moon quakes the face of this earth, and is itself quaked—but
does not itself fall to this earth. As to showers of matter that may have come
from the moon at such times—one can go over old records and find what
one pleases.
That is what we now shall do.
Our expressions are for acceptance only.
Our data:
We take them from four classes of phenomena that have preceded or
accompanied earthquakes:s and find what
one pleases.
That is what we now shall do.
Our expressions are for acceptance only.
Our data:
We take them from four classes of phenomena that have preceded or
accompanied earthquakes:

--- PAGE BREAK ---pleases.
That is what we now shall do.
Our expressions are for acceptance only.
Our data:
We take them from four classes of phenomena that have preceded or
accompanied earthquakes:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Unusual clouds, darkness profound, luminous appearances in the sky, and
falls of substances and objects whether commonly called meteoritic or not.
Not one of these occurrences fits in with principles of primitive, or
primary, seismology, and every one of them is a datum of a quaked body
passing close to this earth or suspended over it. To the primitives there is
not a reason in the world why a convulsion of this earth’s surface should be
accompanied by unusual sights in the sky, by darkness, or by the fall of
substances or objects from the sky. As to phenomena like these, or storms,
preceding earthquakes, the irreconcilability is still greater.
It was before 1860 that Perrey made his great compilation. We take most
of our data from lists compiled long ago. Only the safe and unpainful have
been published in recent years—at least in ambitious, voluminous form.
The restraining hand of the “System”— as we call it, whether it has any real
existence or not—is tight upon the sciences of today. The uncanniest aspect
of our quasi-existence that I know of is that everything that seems to have
one identity has also as high a seeming of everything else. In this oneness of
allness, or continuity, the protecting hand strangles; the parental stifles; love
is inseparable from phenomena of hate. There is only Continuity—that is in
quasi-existence. Nature, at least in its correspondents’ columns, still evades
this protective strangulation, and the Monthly Weather Review is still a rich
field of unfaithful observation: but, in looking over other long-established
periodicals, I have noted their glimmers of quasi-individuality fade
gradually, after about 1860, and the surrender of their attempted identities to
a 
higher 
attempted 
organization. 
Some 
of 
them, 
expressing
Intermediateness-wide endeavor to localize the universal, or to localize self,
soul, identity, entity—or positiveness or realness—held out until as far as
1880; traces findable up to 1890—and then, expressing the universal
process—except that here and there in the world’s history there may have
been successful approximations to positiveness by “individuals”—who only
then became individuals and attained to selves or souls of their own—
surrendered, submitted, became parts of a higher organization’s attempt to
individualize or systematize into a complete thing, or to localize the
universal or the attributes of the universal. After the death of Richard
Proctor, whose occasional illiberalities I’d not like to emphasize too much,
all succeeding volumes of Knowledge have yielded scarcely an
unconventionality. Note the great number of times that the American
Journal of Science and the Report of the British Association are quoted:ll succeeding volumes of Knowledge have yielded scarcely an
unconventionality. Note the great number of times that the American
Journal of Science and the Report of the British Association are quoted:

--- PAGE BREAK ---s of Knowledge have yielded scarcely an
unconventionality. Note the great number of times that the American
Journal of Science and the Report of the British Association are quoted:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

note that, after, say, 1885, they’re scarcely mentioned in these inspired but
illicit pages—as by hypnosis and inertia, we keep on saying.
About 1880.
Throttle and disregard.
But the coercion could not be positive, and many of the excommunicated
continued to creep in; or, even to this day, some of the strangled are faintly
breathing.
Some of our data have been hard to find. We could tell stories of great
labor and fruitless quests that would, though perhaps imperceptibly, stir the
sympathy of a Mr. Symons. But, in this matter of concurrence of
earthquakes with aerial phenomena, which are as unassociable with
earthquakes, if internally caused, as falls of sand on convulsed small boys
full of sour apples, the abundance of so-called evidence is so great that we
can only sketchily go over the data, beginning with Robert Mallet’s
Catalogue (Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1852), omitting some extraordinary instances,
because they occurred before the eighteenth century:
Earthquake “preceded” by a violent tempest, England, Jan. 8, 1704
—“preceded” by a brilliant meteor, Switzerland, Nov. 4, 1704— “luminous
cloud, moving at high velocity, disappearing behind the horizon,” Florence,
Dec. 9, 1731—“thick mists in the air, through which a dim light was seen:
several weeks before the shock, globes of light had been seen in the air,”
Swabia, May 22, 1732—rain of earth, Carpentras, France, Oct. 18, 1737—a
black cloud, London, March 19, 1750—violent storm and a strange star of
octagonal shape, Slavange, Norway, April 15, 1752—balls of fire from a
streak in the sky, Augermannland, 1752—numerous meteorites, Lisbon,
Oct. 15, 1755—“terrible tempests” over and over—“falls of hail” and
“brilliant meteors,” instance after instance—“an immense globe,”
Switzerland, Nov. 2, 1761—oblong, sulphurous cloud, Germany, April,
1767—extraordinary mass of vapor, Boulogne, April, 1780—heavens
obscured by a dark mist, Grenada, Aug. 7, 1804—“strange, howling noises
in the air, and large spots obscuring the sun,” Palermo, Italy, April 16, 1817
—“luminous meteor moving in the same direction as the shock,” Naples,
Nov. 22, 1821—fire ball appearing in the sky: apparent size of the moon,
Thuringerwald, Nov. 29, 1831.
And, unless you be polarized by the New Dominant, which is calling for
recognition of multiplicities of external things, as a Dominant, dawning
new over Europe in 1492, called for recognition of terrestrial externality tolarized by the New Dominant, which is calling for
recognition of multiplicities of external things, as a Dominant, dawning
new over Europe in 1492, called for recognition of terrestrial externality to

--- PAGE BREAK ---ominant, which is calling for
recognition of multiplicities of external things, as a Dominant, dawning
new over Europe in 1492, called for recognition of terrestrial externality to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Europe—unless you have this contact with the new, you have no affinity for
these data—beans that drop from a magnet—irreconcilables that glide from
the mind of a Thomson—
Or my own acceptance that we do not really think at all; that we correlate
around super-magnets that I call Dominants—a Spiritual Dominant in one
age, and responsively to it up spring monasteries, and the stake and the
cross are its symbols: a Materialist Dominant, and up spring laboratories,
and microscopes and telescopes and crucibles are its ikons—that we’re
nothing but iron filings relatively to a succession of magnets that displace
preceding magnets.
With no soul of your own, and with no soul of my own—except that
some day some of us may no longer be Intermediatisms, but may hold out
against the cosmos that once upon a time thousands of fishes were cast from
one pail of water—we have psycho-valency for these data, if we’re
obedient slaves to the New Dominant, and repulsion to them, if we’re mere
correlates to the Old Dominant. I’m a soulless and selfless correlate to the
New Dominant, myself: I see what I have to see. The only inducement I can
hold out, in my attempt to rake up disciples, is that some day the New will
be fashionable: the new correlates will sneer at the old correlates. After all,
there is some inducement to that—and I’m not altogether sure it’s desirable
to end up as a fixed star.
As a correlate to the New Dominant, I am very much impressed with
some of these data—the luminous object that moved in the same direction
as an earthquake—it seems very acceptable that a quake followed this thing
as it passed near this earth’s surface. The streak that was seen in the sky—or
only a streak that was visible of another world—and objects, or meteorites,
that were shaken down from it. The quake at Carpentras, France: and that,
above Carpentras, was a smaller world, more violently quaked, so that earth
was shaken down from it.
But I like best the super-wolves that were seen to cross the sun during the
earthquake at Palermo.
They howled.
Or the loves of the worlds. The. call they feel for one another. They try to
move closer and howl when they get there.
The howls of the planets.
I have discovered a new unintelligibility.They howled.
Or the loves of the worlds. The. call they feel for one another. They try to
move closer and howl when they get there.
The howls of the planets.
I have discovered a new unintelligibility.

--- PAGE BREAK ---loves of the worlds. The. call they feel for one another. They try to
move closer and howl when they get there.
The howls of the planets.
I have discovered a new unintelligibility.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal—have to go away back to
1841—days of less efficient strangulation—Sir David Milne lists
phenomena of quakes in Great Britain. I pick out a few that indicate to me
that other worlds were near this earth’s surface:
Violent storm before a shock of 1703—ball of fire “preceding,” 1750—a
large ball of fire seen upon day following a quake, 1755— “uncommon
phenomenon in the air: a large luminous body, bent like a crescent, which
stretched itself over the heavens, 1816—vast ball of fire, 1750—black rains
and black snows, 1755—numerous instances of upward projection—or
upward attraction"—during quakes—“preceded by a cloud, very black and
lowering,” 1795— fall of black powder, preceding a quake, by six hours,
1837.
Some of these instances seem to me to be very striking—a smaller world:
it is greatly racked by the attraction of this earth—black substance is torn
down from it—not until six hours later, after an approach still closer, does
this earth suffer perturbation. As to the extraordinary spectacle of a thing,
world, super-construction, that was seen in the sky, in 1816, I have not yet
been able to find out more. I think that here our acceptance is relatively
sound: that this occurrence was tremendously of more importance than such
occurrence as, say, transits of Venus, upon which hundreds of papers have
been written—that not another mention have I found, though I have not
looked so especially as I shall look for more data—that all but undetailed
record of this occurrence was suppressed.
Altogether we have considerable agreement here between data of vast
masses that do not fall to this earth, but from which substances fall, and
data of fields of ice from which ice may not fall, but from which water may
drip. I’m beginning to modify: that, at a distance from this earth, gravitation
has more effect than we have supposed, though less effect than the
dogmatists suppose and “prove.” I’m coming out stronger for the
acceptance of a Neutral Zone—that this earth, like other magnets, has a
neutral zone, in which is the Super-Sargasso Sea, and in which other worlds
may be buoyed up, though projecting parts may be subject to this earth’s
attraction—
But my preference:
Here are the data.
I now have one of the most interesting of the new correlates. I think I
should have brought it in before, but, whether out of place here, because notattraction—
But my preference:
Here are the data.
I now have one of the most interesting of the new correlates. I think I
should have brought it in before, but, whether out of place here, because not

--- PAGE BREAK ---preference:
Here are the data.
I now have one of the most interesting of the new correlates. I think I
should have brought it in before, but, whether out of place here, because not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

accompanied by earthquake, or not, we’ll have it. I offer it as an instance of
an eclipse, by a vast, dark body, that has been seen and reported by an
astronomer. The astronomer is M. Lias: the phenomenon was seen by him,
at Pernambuco, April 11, 1860.
Comptes Rendus, 50-1197:
It was about noon—sky cloudless—suddenly the light of the sun was
diminished. The darkness increased, and, to illustrate its intensity, we are
told that the planet Venus shone brilliant. But Venus was of low visibility at
this time. The observation that burns incense to the New Dominant is:
That around the sun appeared a corona.
There are many other instances that indicate proximity of other world’s
during earthquakes. I note a few—quake and an object in the sky, called “a
large, luminous meteor” (Quar. Jour. Roy. Inst., 5-132); luminous body in
the sky, earthquake, and fall of sand, Italy, Feb. 12 and 13, 1870 (La Science
Pour Tous, 15-159); many reports upon luminous object in the sky and
earthquake, Connecticut, Feb. 27, 1883 (Monthly Weather Review,
February, 1883); luminous object, or meteor, in the sky, fall of stones from
the sky, and earthquake, Italy, Jan. 20, 1891 (L’Astronomie 1891-154);
earthquake and prodigious number of luminous bodies, or globes, in the air,
Boulogne, France, June 7, 1779 (Sestier, ³La Foudre,´ 1-169); earthquake
at Manila, 1863, and “curious luminous appearance in the sky” (Ponton,
Earthquakes, p. 124).
The most notable appearance of fishes during an earthquake is that of
Riobamba. Humboldt sketched one of them, and it’s an uncanny-looking
thing. Thousands of them appeared upon the ground during this tremendous
earthquake. Humboldt says that they were cast up from subterranean
sources. I think not myself, and have data for thinking not, but there’d be
such a row arguing back and forth that it’s simpler to consider a clearer
instance of the fall of living fishes from the sky, during an earthquake. I
can’t quite accept, myself, whether a large lake, and all the fishes in it, was
torn down from some other world, or a lake in the Super-Sargasso Sea,
distracted between two pulling worlds, was dragged down to this earth—
Here are the data:
La Science Pour Tous, 6-191:
Feb. 16, 1861. An earthquake at Singapore. Then came an extraordinary
downpour of rain—or as much water as any good-sized lake would consist
of. For three days this rain or this fall of water came down in torrents. Inearthquake at Singapore. Then came an extraordinary
downpour of rain—or as much water as any good-sized lake would consist
of. For three days this rain or this fall of water came down in torrents. In

--- PAGE BREAK ---pore. Then came an extraordinary
downpour of rain—or as much water as any good-sized lake would consist
of. For three days this rain or this fall of water came down in torrents. In

--- PAGE BREAK ---

pools on the ground, formed by this deluge, great numbers of fishes were
found. The writer says that he had, himself, seen nothing but water fall from
the sky. Whether I’m emphasizing what a deluge it was or not, he says that
so terrific had been the downpour that he had not been able to see three
steps away from him. The natives said that the fishes had fallen from the
sky. Three days later the pools dried up and many dead fishes were found,
but, in the first place—though that’s an expression for which we have an
instinctive dislike—the fishes had been active and uninjured. Then follows
material for another of our little studies in the phenomena of disregard. A
psycho-tropism here is mechanically to take pen in hand and mechanically
write that fishes found on the ground after a heavy rainfall came from
overflowing streams. The writer of the account says that some of the fishes
had been found in his courtyard, which was surrounded by high walls—
paying no attention to this, a correspondent (La Science Pour Tous, 6-317)
explains that in the heavy rain a body of water had probably overflowed,
carrying fishes with it. We are told by the first writer that these fishes of
Singapore were of a species that was very abundant near Singapore. So I
think, myself, that a whole lakeful of them had been shaken down from the
Super-Sargasso Sea, under the circumstances we have thought of. However,
if appearance of strange fishes after an earthquake be more pleasing in the
sight, or to the nostrils, of the New Dominant, we faithfully and piously
supply that incense— An account of the occurrence at Singapore was read
by M. de Castelnau, before the French Academy. M. de Castelnau recalled
that, upon a former occasion, he had submitted to the Academy the
circumstance that fishes of a new species had appeared at the Cape of Good
Hope, after an earthquake.
It seems proper, and it will give luster to the new orthodoxy, now to have
an instance in which, not merely quake and fall of rocks or meteorites, or
quake and either eclipse or luminous appearances in the sky have occurred,
but in which are combined all the phenomena, one or more of which, when
accompanying earthquake, indicate, in our acceptance, the proximity of
another world. This time a longer duration is indicated than in other
instances.
In the Canadian Institute Proceedings, 2-7-198, there is an account, by
the Deputy Commissioner at Dhurmsalla, of the extraordinary Dhurmsalla
meteorite—coated with ice. But the combination of events related by him is
still more extraordinary:198, there is an account, by
the Deputy Commissioner at Dhurmsalla, of the extraordinary Dhurmsalla
meteorite—coated with ice. But the combination of events related by him is
still more extraordinary:

--- PAGE BREAK ---ount, by
the Deputy Commissioner at Dhurmsalla, of the extraordinary Dhurmsalla
meteorite—coated with ice. But the combination of events related by him is
still more extraordinary:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That within a few months of the fall of this meteorite there had been a
fall of live fishes at Benares, a shower of red substance at Furruckabad, a
dark spot observed on the disk of the sun, an earthquake, “an unnatural
darkness of some duration,” and a luminous appearance in the sky that
looked like an aurora borealis—
But there’s more to this climax:
We are introduced to a new order of phenomena:
Visitors.
The Deputy Commissioner writes that, in the evening, after the fall of the
Dhurmsalla meteorite, or mass of stone covered with ice, he saw lights.
Some of them were not very high. They appeared and went out and
reappeared. I have read many accounts of the Dhurmsalla meteorite—July
28, 1860—but never in any other of them a mention of this new correlate—
something as out of place in the nineteenth century as would have been an
aeroplane—the invention of which would not, in our acceptance, have been
permitted, in the nineteenth century, though adumbrations to it were
permitted. This writer says that the lights moved like fire balloons, but:
“I am sure that they were neither fire balloons, lanterns, nor bonfires, or
any other thing of that sort, but bona fide lights in the heavens.”
It’s a subject for which we shall have to have a separate expression—
trespassers upon territory to which something else has a legal right—
perhaps someone lost a rock, and he and his friends came down looking for
it, in the evening—or secret agents, or emissaries, who had an appointment
with certain esoteric ones near Dhurmsalla—things or beings coming down
to explore, and unable to stay down long—
In a way, another strange occurrence during an earthquake is suggested.
The ancient Chinese tradition—the marks like hoof marks in the ground.
We have thought—with a low degree of acceptance—of another world that
may be in secret communication with certain esoteric ones of this earth’s
inhabitants—and of messages in symbols like hoof marks that are sent to
some receptor, or special hill, upon this earth—and of messages that at
times miscarry.
This other world comes close to this world—there are quakes— but
advantage of proximity is taken to send a message—the message, designed
for a receptor in India, perhaps, or in Central Europe, miscarries all the way
to England—marks like the marks of the Chinese tradition are found upon a
beach, in Cornwall, after an earthquake—signed
for a receptor in India, perhaps, or in Central Europe, miscarries all the way
to England—marks like the marks of the Chinese tradition are found upon a
beach, in Cornwall, after an earthquake—

--- PAGE BREAK ---r in India, perhaps, or in Central Europe, miscarries all the way
to England—marks like the marks of the Chinese tradition are found upon a
beach, in Cornwall, after an earthquake—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Phil. Trans., 50-500:
After the quake of July 15, 1757, upon the sands of Penzance, Cornwall,
in an area of more than 100 square yards, were found marks like hoof
prints, except that they were not crescentic. We feel a similarity, but note an
arbitrary disregard of our own, this time. It seems to us that marks described
as “little cones surrounded by basins of equal diameter” would be like hoof
prints, if hoofs printed complete circles. Other disregards are that there were
black specks on the tops of cones, as if something, perhaps gaseous, had
issued from them; that from one of these formations came a gush of water
as thick as a man’s wrist. Of course the opening of springs is common in
earthquakes—but we suspect, myself, that the Negative Absolute is
compelling us to put in this datum and its disorders.
There’s another matter in which the Negative Absolute seems to work
against us. Though to super-chemistry, we have introduced the principle of
celestio-metathesis, we have no good data of exchange of substances during
proximities. The data are all of falls and not of upward translations. Of
course upward impulses are common during earthquakes, but I haven’t a
datum upon a tree or a fish or a brick or a man that ever did go up and stay
up and that never did come down again. Our classic of the horse and barn
occurred in what was called a whirlwind.
It is said that, in an earthquake in Calabria, paving stones shot up far in
the air.
The writer doesn’t specifically say that they came down again, but
something seems to tell me they did.
The corpses of Riobamba.
Humboldt reported that, in the quake of Riobamba, “bodies were torn
upward from graves”; that “the vertical motion was so strong that bodies
were tossed several hundred feet in the air.”
I explain.
I explain that, if in the center of greatest violence of an earthquake,
anything ever has gone up, and has kept on going up, the thoughts of the
nearest observers were very likely upon other subjects.
The quay of Lisbon.
We are told that it went down.
A vast throng of persons ran to the quay for refuge. The city of Lisbon
was in profound darkness. The quay and all the people on it disappeared. If.
The quay of Lisbon.
We are told that it went down.
A vast throng of persons ran to the quay for refuge. The city of Lisbon
was in profound darkness. The quay and all the people on it disappeared. If

--- PAGE BREAK ---

it and they went down—not a single corpse, not a shred of clothing, not a
plank of the quay, nor so much as a splinter of it ever floated to the surface.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d. If

--- PAGE BREAK ---

it and they went down—not a single corpse, not a shred of clothing, not a
plank of the quay, nor so much as a splinter of it ever floated to the surface.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
18
HE New Dominant.
I mean “primarily” all that opposes Exclusionism—
That Development or Progress or Evolution is Attempt to
Positivize, and is a mechanism by which a positive existence is recruited—
that what we call existence is a womb of infinitude, and is itself only
incubatory—that eventually all attempts are broken down by the falsely
excluded. Subjectively, the breaking down is aided by our own sense of
false and narrow limitations. So the classic and academic artists wrought
positivist paintings, and expressed the only ideal that I am conscious of,
though we so often hear of “ideals” instead of different manifestations,
artistically, scientifically, theologically, politically, of the One Ideal. They
sought to satisfy, in its artistic aspect, cosmic craving for unity or
completeness, sometimes called harmony, called beauty in some aspects.
By disregard they sought completeness. But the light-effects that they
disregarded, and their narrow confinement to standardized subjects brought
on the revolt of the Impressionists. So the Puritans tried to systematize, and
they disregarded physical needs, or vices, or relaxations: they were invaded
and overthrown when their narrowness became obvious and intolerable. All
things strive for positiveness, for themselves, or for quasi-systems of which
they are parts. Formality and the mathematic, the regular and the uniform
are aspects of the positive state—but the Positive is the Universal—so all
attempted positiveness that seems to satisfy in the aspects of formality and
regularity, sooner or later disqualifies in the aspect of wideness or
universalness. So there is revolt against the science of today, because the
formulated utterances that were regarded as final truths in a past generation,
are now seen to be insufficiencies. Every pronouncement that has opposed
our own acceptances has been found to be a composition like any academic
painting: something that is arbitrarily cut off from relations with
environment, or framed off from interfering and disturbing data, or outlined
with disregards. Our own attempt has been to take in the included, but also
to take in the excluded into wider expressions. We accept, however, that forom interfering and disturbing data, or outlined
with disregards. Our own attempt has been to take in the included, but also
to take in the excluded into wider expressions. We accept, however, that for

--- PAGE BREAK ---isturbing data, or outlined
with disregards. Our own attempt has been to take in the included, but also
to take in the excluded into wider expressions. We accept, however, that for

--- PAGE BREAK ---

every one of our expressions there are irreconcilables somewhere—that
final utterance would include all things. However, of such is the gossip of
angels. The final is unutterable in quasi-existence, where to think is to
include but also to exclude, or be not final. If we admit that for every
opinion we have expressed, there must somewhere be an irreconcilable, we
are Intermediatists and not positivists; not even higher positivists. Of course
it may be that some day we shall systematize and dogmatize and refuse to
think of anything that we may be accused of disregarding, and believe
instead of merely accepting: then, if we could have a wider system, which
would acknowledge no irreconcilables we’d be higher positivists. So long
as we only accept, we are not higher positivists, but our feeling is that the
New Dominant, even though we have thought of it only as another
enslavement, will be the nucleus for higher positivism—and that it will be
the means of elevating into infinitude a new batch of fixed stars—until, as a
recruiting instrument, it, too, will play out, and will give way to some new
medium for generating absoluteness. It is our acceptance that all
astronomers of today have lost their souls, or, rather, all chance of attaining
Entity, but that Copernicus and Kepler and Galileo and Newton, and,
conceivably, Leverrier are now fixed stars. Some day I shall attempt to
identify them. In all this, I think we’re quite a Moses. We point out the
Promised Land, but, unless we be cured of our Intermediatism, will never
be reported in Monthly Notices, ourself.
In our acceptance, Dominants, in their succession, displace preceding
Dominants not only because they are more nearly positive, but because the
old Dominants, as recruiting mediums, play out. Our expression is that the
New Dominant, of Wider Inclusions, is now manifesting throughout the
world, and that the old Exclusionism is everywhere breaking down. In
physics Exclusionism is breaking down by its own researches in radium, for
instance, and in its speculations upon electrons, or its merging away into
metaphysics, and by the desertion that has been going on for many years, by
such men as Gurney, Crookes, Wallace, Flammarion, Lodge, to formerly
disregarded phenomena—no longer called “spiritualism” but now “psychic
research.” Biology is in chaos: conventional Darwinites mixed up with
mutationists and orthogenesists and followers of Wisemann, who take from
Darwinism one of its pseudo-bases, and nevertheless try to reconcile their
heresies with orthodoxy. The painters are metaphysicians and psychologists.
The breaking down of Exclusionism in China and Japan and in the Unitedpseudo-bases, and nevertheless try to reconcile their
heresies with orthodoxy. The painters are metaphysicians and psychologists.
The breaking down of Exclusionism in China and Japan and in the United

--- PAGE BREAK ---

States has astonished History. The science of astronomy is going downward
so that, though Pickering, for instance, did speculate upon a Trans-
Neptunian planet, and Lowell did try to have accepted heretical ideas as to
marks on Mars, attention is now minutely focused upon such technicalities
as variations in shades of Jupiter’s fourth satellite. I think that, in general
acceptance, over-refinement indicates decadence.
I think that the stronghold of Inclusionism is in aeronautics. I think that
the stronghold of the Old Dominant, when it was new, was in the invention
of the telescope. Or that coincidentally with the breakdown of Exclusionism
appears the means of finding out— whether there are vast aerial fields of
ice and floating lakes full of frogs and fishes or not—where carved stones
and black substances and great quantities of vegetable matter and flesh,
which may be dragons’ flesh, come from—whether there are inter-planetary
trade routes and vast areas devastated by Super-Tamerlanes—whether
sometimes there are visitors to this earth—who might be pursued and
captured and questioned.

--- PAGE BREAK ---are inter-planetary
trade routes and vast areas devastated by Super-Tamerlanes—whether
sometimes there are visitors to this earth—who might be pursued and
captured and questioned.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
19
HAVE industriously sought data for an expression upon birds, but the
prospecting has not been very quasi-satisfactory. I think I rather
emphasize our industriousness, because a charge likely to be brought
against the attitude of Acceptance is that one who only accepts must be one
of languid interest and little application of energy. It doesn’t seem to work
out: we are very industrious. I suggest to some of our disciples that they
look into the matter of messages upon pigeons, of course attributed to
earthly owners, but said to be undecipherable. I’d do it, ourselves, only that
would be selfish. That’s more of the Intermediatism that will keep us out of
the firmament: Positivism is absolute egoism. But look back in the time of
Andrpe’s Polar Expedition. Pigeons that would have no publicity ordinarily,
were often reported at that time.
In the Zoologist, 3-18-21, is recorded an instance of a bird (puffin) that
had fallen to the ground with a fractured head. Interesting, but mere
speculation—but what solid object, high in the air, had that bird struck
against"
Tremendous red rain in France, Oct. 16 and 17, 1846; great storm at the
time, and red rain supposed to have been colored by matter swept up from
this earth’s surface, and then precipitated (Comptes Rendus, 23-832). But in
Comptes Rendus, 24-625, the description of this red rain differs from one’s
impression of red, sandy or muddy water. It is said that this rain was so
vividly red and so blood-like that many persons in France were terrified.
Two analyses are given (Comptes Rendus, 24-812). One chemist notes a
great quantity of corpuscles—whether blood-like corpuscles or not —in the
matter. The other chemist sets down organic matter at 35 per cent. It may be
that an inter-planetary dragon had been slain somewhere, or that this red
fluid, in which were many corpuscles, came from something not altogether
pleasant to contemplate, about the size of the Catskill Mountains, perhaps—
but the present datum is that with this substance, larks, quail, ducks, and
water hens, some of them alive, fell at Lyons and Grenoble and other
places.ut the size of the Catskill Mountains, perhaps—
but the present datum is that with this substance, larks, quail, ducks, and
water hens, some of them alive, fell at Lyons and Grenoble and other
places.

--- PAGE BREAK ---atskill Mountains, perhaps—
but the present datum is that with this substance, larks, quail, ducks, and
water hens, some of them alive, fell at Lyons and Grenoble and other
places.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I have notes upon other birds that have fallen from the sky, but
unaccompanied by the red rain that makes the fall of birds in France
peculiar, and very peculiar, if it be accepted that the red substance was
extra-mundane. The other notes are upon birds that have fallen from the
sky, in the midst of storms, or of exhausted, but living, birds, falling not far
from a storm-area. But now we shall have an instance for which I can find
no parallel: fall of dead birds, from a clear sky, far-distant from any storm to
which they could be attributed—so remote from any discoverable storm
that—
My own notion is that, in the summer of 1896, something, or some
beings, came as near to this earth as they could, upon a hunting expedition;
that, in the summer of 1896, an expedition of super-scientists passed over
this earth, and let down a dragnet—and what would it catch, sweeping
through the air, supposing it to have reached not quite to this earth"
In the Monthly Weather Review, May, 1917, W. L. McAtee quotes from
the Baton Rouge correspondence to the Philadelphia Times
That, in the summer of 1896, into the streets of Baton Rouge, La., and
from a “clear sky,” fell hundreds of dead birds. There were wild ducks and
cat birds, woodpeckers, and “many birds of strange plumage,” some of
them resembling canaries.
Usually one does not have to look very far from any place to learn of a
storm. But the best that could be done in this instance was to say:
“There had been a storm on the coast of Florida.”
And, unless he have psycho-chemic repulsion for the explanation, the
reader feels only momentary astonishment that dead birds from a storm in
Florida should fall from an unstormy sky in Louisiana, and with his intellect
greased like the plumage of a wild duck, the datum then drops off.
Our greasy, shiny brains. That they may be of some use after all: that
other modes of existence place a high value upon them as lubricants; that
we’re hunted for them; a hunting expedition to this earth—the newspapers
report a tornado.
If from a clear sky, or a sky in which there were no driven clouds, or
other evidences of still-continuing wind-power—or, if from a storm in
Florida, it could be accepted that hundreds of birds had fallen far away, in
Louisiana, I conceive, conventionally, of heavier objects having fallen in
Alabama, say, and of the fall of still heavier objects still nearer the origin in
Florida.s of birds had fallen far away, in
Louisiana, I conceive, conventionally, of heavier objects having fallen in
Alabama, say, and of the fall of still heavier objects still nearer the origin in
Florida.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n far away, in
Louisiana, I conceive, conventionally, of heavier objects having fallen in
Alabama, say, and of the fall of still heavier objects still nearer the origin in
Florida.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The sources of information of the Weather Bureau are widespread.
It has no records of such falls.
So a dragnet that was let down from above somewhere—
Or something that I learned from the more scientific of the investigators
of psychic phenomena:
The reader begins their works with prejudice against telepathy and
everything else of psychic phenomena. The writers deny spirit-
communication, and say that the seeming data are data of “only telepathy.”
Astonishing instances of seeming clairvoyance—“only telepathy.” After a
while the reader finds himself agreeing that it’s only telepathy—which, at
first, had been intolerable to him.
So maybe, in 1896, a super-dragnet did not sweep through this earth’s
atmosphere, gathering up all the birds within its field, the meshes then
suddenly breaking—
Or that the birds of Baton Rouge were only from the Super-Sargasso Sea
—
Upon which we shall have another expression. We thought we’d settled
that, and we thought we’d establish that, but nothing’s ever settled, and
nothing’s ever established, in a real sense, if, in a real sense, there is nothing
in quasiness.
I suppose there had been a storm somewhere, the storm in Florida,
perhaps, and many birds had been swept upward into the Super-Sargasso
Sea. It has frigid regions and it has tropical regions—that birds of diverse
species had been swept upward, into an icy region, where, huddling
together for warmth, they had died. Then, later, they had been dislodged—
meteor coming along—boat—bicycle— dragon—don’t know what did
come along—something dislodged them.
So leaves of trees, carried up there in whirlwinds, staying there years,
ages, perhaps only a few months, but then falling to this earth at an
unseasonable time for dead leaves—fishes carried up there, some of them
dying and drying, some of them living in volumes of water that are in
abundance up there, or that fall sometimes in the deluges that we call
“cloudbursts.”
The astronomers won’t think kindly of us, and we haven’t done anything
to endear ourselves to the meteorologists—but we’re weak and mawkish
Intermediatists—several times we’ve tried to get the aeronauts with us—
extraordinary things up there: things that curators of museums would giveelves to the meteorologists—but we’re weak and mawkish
Intermediatists—several times we’ve tried to get the aeronauts with us—
extraordinary things up there: things that curators of museums would give

--- PAGE BREAK ---logists—but we’re weak and mawkish
Intermediatists—several times we’ve tried to get the aeronauts with us—
extraordinary things up there: things that curators of museums would give

--- PAGE BREAK ---

up all hope of ever being fixed stars, to obtain: things left over from
whirlwinds of the time of the Pharaohs, perhaps: or that Elijah did go up in
the sky in something like a chariot, and may not be Vega, after all, and that
there may be a wheel or so left of whatever he went up in. We basely
suggest that it would bring a high price—but sell soon, because after a
while there’d be thousands of them hawked around—
We weakly drop a hint to the aeronauts.
In the Scientific American, 33-197, there is an account of some hay that
fell from the sky. From the circumstances we incline to accept that this hay
went up, in a whirlwind, from this earth, in the first place, reached the
Super-Sargasso Sea, and remained there a long time before falling. An
interesting point in this expression is the usual attribution to a local and
coinciding whirlwind, and identification of it—and then data that make that
local whirlwind unacceptable—
That, upon July 27, 1875, small masses of damp hay had fallen at
Monkstown, Ireland. In the Dublin Daily Express, Dr. J. W. Moore had
explained: he had found a nearby whirlwind, to the south of Monkstown,
that coincided. But, according to the Scientific American, a similar fall had
occurred near Wrexham, England, two days before.
In November, 1918, I made some studies upon light objects thrown into
the air. Armistice-day. I suppose I should have been more emotionally
occupied, but I made notes upon torn-up papers thrown high in the air from
windows of office buildings. Scraps of paper did stay together for a while.
Several minutes, sometimes.
Cosmos, 3-4-574:
That, upon the 10th of April, 1869, at Autriche (Indre-et-Loire) a great
number of oak leaves—enormous segregation of them—fell from the sky.
Very calm day. So little wind that the leaves fell almost vertically. Fall
lasted about ten minutes.
Flammarion, in The Atmosphere, p. 412, tells this story.
He has to find a storm.
He does find a squall—but it had occurred upon April 3rd.
Flammarion’s two incredibilities are—that leaves could remain a week in
the air: that they could stay together a week in the air.
Think of some of your own observations upon papers thrown from an
aeroplane.
Our one incredibility:ies are—that leaves could remain a week in
the air: that they could stay together a week in the air.
Think of some of your own observations upon papers thrown from an
aeroplane.
Our one incredibility:

--- PAGE BREAK ---could remain a week in
the air: that they could stay together a week in the air.
Think of some of your own observations upon papers thrown from an
aeroplane.
Our one incredibility:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That these leaves had been whirled up six months before, when they were
common on the ground, and had been sustained, of course not in the air, but
in a region gravitationally inert; and had been precipitated by the
disturbances of April rains.
I have no records of leaves that have so fallen from the sky in October or
November, the season when one might expect dead leaves to be raised from
one place and precipitated somewhere else. I emphasize that this occurred
in April.
La Nature, 1889-2-94:
That, upon April 19, 1889, dried leaves, of different species, oak, elm,
etc., fell from the sky. This day, too, was a calm day. The fall was
tremendous. The leaves were seen to fall fifteen minutes, but, judging from
the quantity on the ground, it is the writer’s opinion that they had already
been falling half an hour. I think that the geyser of corpses that sprang from
Riobamba toward the sky must have been an interesting sight. If I were a
painter, I’d like that subject. But this cataract of dried leaves, too, is a study
in the rhythms of the dead. In this datum, the point most agreeable to us is
the very point that the writer in La Nature emphasizes. Windlessness. He
says that the surface of the Loire was “absolutely smooth.” The river was
strewn with leaves as far as he could see.
L’Astronomie, 1894-194:
That, upon the 7th of April, 1894, dried leaves fell at Clairvaux and
Outre-Aube, France. The fall is described as prodigious. Half an hour. Then,
upon the 11th, a fall of dried leaves occurred at Pontcarrp.
It is in this recurrence that we found some of our opposition to the
conventional explanation. The Editor (Flammarion) explains. He says that
the leaves had been caught up in a cyclone which had expended its force;
that the heavier leaves had fallen first. We think that that was all right for
1894, and that it was quite good enough for 1894. But, in these more
exacting days, we want to know how wind-power insufficient to hold some
leaves in the air could sustain others four days.
The factors in this expression are unseasonableness, not for dried leaves,
but for prodigious numbers of dried leaves; direct fall, windlessness, month
of April, and localization in France. The factor of localization is interesting.
Not a note have I upon fall of leaves from the sky, except these notes. Were
the conventional explanation, or “old correlate” acceptable, it would seem
that similar occurrences in other regions should be as frequent as in France.f leaves from the sky, except these notes. Were
the conventional explanation, or “old correlate” acceptable, it would seem
that similar occurrences in other regions should be as frequent as in France.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y, except these notes. Were
the conventional explanation, or “old correlate” acceptable, it would seem
that similar occurrences in other regions should be as frequent as in France.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The indication is that there may be quasi-permanent undulations in the
Super-Sargasso Sea, or a pronounced inclination toward France—
Inspiration:
That there may be a nearby world complementary to this world, where
autumn occurs at the time that is springtime here.
Let some disciple have that.
But there may be a dip toward France, so that leaves that are borne high
there, are more likely to be held in suspension than high-flying leaves
elsewhere. Some other time I shall take up Super-geography, and be guilty
of charts. I think, now, that the Super-Sargasso Sea is an oblique belt, with
changing ramifications, over Great Britain, France, Italy, and on to India.
Relatively to the United States I am not very clear, but think especially of
the Southern States.
The preponderance of our data indicates frigid regions aloft. Nevertheless
such phenomena as putrefaction have occurred often enough to make super-
tropical regions, also, acceptable. We shall have one more datum upon the
Super-Sargasso Sea. It seems to me that, by this time, our requirements of
support and reinforcement and agreement have been quite as rigorous for
acceptance as ever for belief: at least for full acceptance. By virtue of mere
acceptance, we may, in some later book, deny the Super-Sargasso Sea, and
find that our data relate to some other complementary world instead —or
the moon—and have abundant data for accepting that the moon is not more
than twenty or thirty miles away. However, the Super-Sargasso Sea
functions very well as a nucleus around which to gather data that oppose
Exclusionism. That is our main motive: to oppose Exclusionism.
Or our agreement with cosmic processes. The climax of our general
expression upon the Super-Sargasso Sea. Coincidentally appears something
else that may overthrow it later.
Notes and Queries, 8-12-228:
That in the province of Macerata, Italy (summer of 1897") an immense
number of small, blood-colored clouds covered the sky. About an hour later
a storm broke, and myriad seeds fell to the ground. It is said that they were
identified as products of a tree found only in Central Africa and the Antilles.
If—in terms of conventional reasoning—these seeds had been high in the
air, they had been in a cold region. But it is our acceptance that these seeds
had, for a considerable time, been in a warm region, and for a time longer
than is attributable to suspension by wind-power:, they had been in a cold region. But it is our acceptance that these seeds
had, for a considerable time, been in a warm region, and for a time longer
than is attributable to suspension by wind-power:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“It is said that a great number of the seeds were in the first stage of
germination.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---, and for a time longer
than is attributable to suspension by wind-power:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“It is said that a great number of the seeds were in the first stage of
germination.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
20
HE New Dominant.
Inclusionism.
In it we have a pseudo-standard.
We have a datum, and we give it an interpretation, in accordance with our
pseudo-standard. At present we have not the delusions of Absolutism that
may have translated some of the positivists of the nineteenth century to
heaven. We are Intermediatists—but feel a lurking suspicion that we may
some day solidify and dogmatize and illiberalize into higher positivists. At
present we do not ask whether something be reasonable or preposterous,
because we recognize that by reasonableness and preposterousness are
meant agreement and disagreement with a standard—which must be a
delusion —though not absolutely, of course—and must some day be
displaced by a more advanced quasi-delusion. Scientists in the past have
taken the positivist attitude—is this or that reasonable or unreasonable"
Analyze them and we find that they meant relatively to a standard, such as
Newtonism, Daltonism, Darwinism, or Lyellism. But they have written and
spoken and thought as if they could mean real reasonableness and real
unreasonableness.
So our pseudo-standard is Inclusionism, and, if a datum be a correlate to
a more widely inclusive outlook as to this earth and its externality and
relations with externality, its harmony with Inclusionism admits it. Such
was the process, and such was the requirement for admission in the days of
the Old Dominant: our difference is in underlying Intermediatism, or
consciousness that though we’re more nearly real, we and our standards are
only quasi—
Or that all things—in our intermediate state—are phantoms in a super-
mind in a dreaming state—but striving to awaken to realness.
Though in some respects our own Intermediatism is unsatisfactory, our
underlying feeling is—
That in a dreaming mind awakening is accelerated—if phantoms in that
mind know that they’re only phantoms in a dream. Of course, they too aretermediatism is unsatisfactory, our
underlying feeling is—
That in a dreaming mind awakening is accelerated—if phantoms in that
mind know that they’re only phantoms in a dream. Of course, they too are

--- PAGE BREAK ---tisfactory, our
underlying feeling is—
That in a dreaming mind awakening is accelerated—if phantoms in that
mind know that they’re only phantoms in a dream. Of course, they too are

--- PAGE BREAK ---

quasi, or—but in a relative sense—they have an essence of what is called
realness. They are derived from experience or from senes-relations, even
though grotesque distortions. It seems acceptable that a table that is seen
when one is awake is more nearly real than a dreamed table, which, with
fifteen or twenty legs, chases one.
So now, in the twentieth century, with a change of terms, and a change in
underlying consciousness, our attitude toward the New Dominant is the
attitude of the scientists of the nineteenth century to the Old Dominant. We
do not insist that our data and interpretations shall be as shocking,
grotesque, evil, ridiculous, childish, insincere, laughable, ignorant to
nineteenth-centuryites as were their data and interpretations to the
medieval-minded. We ask only whether data and interpretations correlate. If
they do, they are acceptable, perhaps only for a short time, or as nuclei, or
scaffolding, or preliminary sketches, or as gropings and tentativenesses.
Later, of course, when we cool off and harden and radiate into space most
of our present mobility, which expresses in modesty and plasticity, we shall
acknowledge no scaffoldings, gropings or tentativenesses, but think we
utter absolute facts. A point in Intermediatism here is opposed to most
current speculations upon Development. Usually one thinks of the spiritual
as higher than the material, but, in our acceptance, quasi-existence is a
means by which the absolutely immaterial materializes absolutely, and,
being intermediate, is a state in which nothing is finally either immaterial or
material, all objects, substances, thoughts, occupying some grade of
approximation one way or the other. Final solidification of the ethereal is, to
us, the goal of cosmic ambition. Positivism is Puritanism. Heat is Evil.
Final Good is Absolute Frigidity. An Arctic winter is very beautiful, but I
think that an interest in monkeys chattering in palm trees accounts for our
own Intermediatism.
Visitors.
Our confusion here, out of which we are attempting to make quasi-order,
is as great as it has been throughout this book, because we have not the
positivist’s delusion of homogeneity. A positivist would gather all data that
seem to relate to one kind of visitors and coldly disregard all other data. I
think of as many different kinds of visitors to this earth as there are visitors
to New York, to a jail, to a church—some persons go to church to pick
pockets, for instance.isregard all other data. I
think of as many different kinds of visitors to this earth as there are visitors
to New York, to a jail, to a church—some persons go to church to pick
pockets, for instance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ata. I
think of as many different kinds of visitors to this earth as there are visitors
to New York, to a jail, to a church—some persons go to church to pick
pockets, for instance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

My own acceptance is that either a world or a vast super-construction—
or a world, if red substances and fishes fell from it— hovered over India in
the summer of 1860. Something then fell from somewhere, July 17, 1860,
at Dhurmsalla. Whatever “it” was, “it” is so persistently alluded to as “a
meteorite” that I look back and see that I adopted this convention myself.
But in the London Times, Dec. 26, 1860, Syed Abdoolah, Professor of
Hindustani, University College, London, writes that he had sent to a friend
in Dhurmsalla, for an account of the stones that had fallen at that place. The
answer:
“. . . divers forms and sizes, many of which bore great resemblance to
ordinary cannon balls just discharged from engines of war.”
It’s an addition to our data of spherical objects that have arrived upon this
earth. Note that they are spherical stone objects.
And, in the evening of this same day that something—took a shot at
Dhurmsalla—or sent objects upon which there may be decipherable
markings—lights were seen in the air—
I think, myself, of a number of things, beings, whatever they were, trying
to get down, but resisted, like balloonists, at a certain altitude, trying to get
farther up, but resisted.
Not in the least except to good positivists, or the homogeneous-minded,
does this speculation interfere with the concept of some other world that is
in successful communication with certain esoteric ones upon this earth, by a
code of symbols that print in rock, like symbols of telephotographers in
selenium.
I think that sometimes, in favorable circumstances, emissaries have come
to this earth—secret meetings—
Of course it sounds—
But:
Secret meetings—emissaries—esoteric ones in Europe, before the war
broke out—
And those who suggested that such phenomena could be.
However, as to most of our data, I think of super-things that have passed
close to this earth with no more interest in this earth than have passengers
upon a steamship in the bottom of the sea— or passengers may have a keen
interest, but circumstances of schedules and commercial requirements
forbid investigation of the bottom of the sea.passengers
upon a steamship in the bottom of the sea— or passengers may have a keen
interest, but circumstances of schedules and commercial requirements
forbid investigation of the bottom of the sea.

--- PAGE BREAK ---teamship in the bottom of the sea— or passengers may have a keen
interest, but circumstances of schedules and commercial requirements
forbid investigation of the bottom of the sea.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then, on the other hand, we may have data of super-scientific attempts to
investigate phenomena of this earth from above—perhaps by beings from
so far away that they had never even heard that something, somewhere,
asserts a legal right to this earth.
Altogether, we’re good intermediatists, but we can’t be very good
hypnotists.
Still another source of the merging away of our data:
That, upon general principles of Continuity, if super-vessels, or super-
vehicles, have traversed this earth’s atmosphere, there must be mergers
between them and terrestrial phenomena: observations upon them must
merge away into observations upon clouds and balloons and meteors. We
shall begin with data that we cannot distinguish ourselves and work our
way out of mergers into extremes.
In the Observatory, 35-168, it is said that, according to a newspaper,
March 6, 1912, residents of Warmley, England, were greatly excited by
something that was supposed to be “a splendidly illuminated aeroplane,
passing over the village.” “The machine was apparently traveling at a
tremendous rate, and came from the direction of Bath, and went on toward
Gloucester.” The Editor says that it was a large, triple-headed fireball.
“Tremendous indeed” he says. “But we are prepared for anything
nowadays.”
That is satisfactory. We’d not like to creep up stealthily and then jump
out of a corner with our data. This Editor, at least, is prepared to read—
Nature, Oct. 27, 1898:
A correspondent writes that, in the County Wicklow, Ireland, at about 6
o’clock in the evening, he had seen, in the sky, an object that looked like the
moon in its three-quarter aspect. We note the shape which approximates to
triangularity, and we note that in color it is said to have been golden yellow.
It moved slowly, and in about five minutes disappeared behind a mountain.
The Editor gives his opinion that the object may have been an escaped
balloon.
In Nature, Aug. 11, 1898, there is a story, taken from the July number of
the Canadian Weather Review, by the meteorologist, F. F. Payne: that he
had seen, in the Canadian sky, a large, pear-shaped object, sailing rapidly.
At first he supposed that the object was a balloon, “its outline being sharply
defined.” “But, as no cage was seen, it was concluded that it must be a mass
of cloud.” In about six minutes this object became less definite—whethere object was a balloon, “its outline being sharply
defined.” “But, as no cage was seen, it was concluded that it must be a mass
of cloud.” In about six minutes this object became less definite—whether

--- PAGE BREAK ---on, “its outline being sharply
defined.” “But, as no cage was seen, it was concluded that it must be a mass
of cloud.” In about six minutes this object became less definite—whether

--- PAGE BREAK ---

because of increasing distance or not—“the mass became less dense, and
finally it disappeared.” As to cyclonic formation—“no whirling motion
could be seen.”
Nature, 58-294:
That, upon July 8, 1898, a correspondent had seen, at Kiel, an object in
the sky, colored red by the sun, which had set. It was about as broad as a
rainbow, and about twelve degrees high. “It remained in its original
brightness about five minutes, and then faded rapidly, and then remained
almost stationary again, finally disappearing about eight minutes after I first
saw it.”
In an intermediate existence, we quasi-persons have nothing to judge by
because everything is its own opposite. If a hundred dollars a week be a
standard of luxurious living to some persons, it is poverty to others. We
have instances of three objects that were seen in the sky in a space of three
months, and this concurrence seems to me to be something to judge by.
Science has been built upon concurrence: so have been most of the fallacies
and fanaticisms. I feel the positivism of a Leverrier, or instinctively take to
the notion that all three of these observations relate to the same object.
However, I don’t formulate them and predict the next transit. Here’s another
chance for me to become a fixed star—but as usual—oh, well—
A point in Intermediatism:
That the Intermediatist is likely to be a flaccid compromiser.
Our own attitude:
Ours is a partly positive and partly negative state, or a state in which
nothing is finally positive or finally negative—
But, if positivism attract you, go ahead and try: you will be in harmony
with cosmic endeavor—but Continuity will resist you. Only to have
appearance in quasiness is to be proportionately positive, but beyond a
degree of attempted positivism, Continuity will rise to pull you back.
Success, as it is called—though there is only success-failure in
Intermediateness—will, in Intermediateness, be yours proportionately as
you are in adjustment with its own state, or some positivism mixed with
compromise and retreat. To be very positive is to be a Napoleon Bonaparte,
against whom the rest of civilization will sooner or later combine. For
interesting data, see newspaper accounts of fate of one Dowie, of Chicago.
Intermediatism, then, is recognition that our state is only a quasi-state: it
is no bar to one who desires to be positive: it is recognition that he cannotr accounts of fate of one Dowie, of Chicago.
Intermediatism, then, is recognition that our state is only a quasi-state: it
is no bar to one who desires to be positive: it is recognition that he cannot

--- PAGE BREAK ---f one Dowie, of Chicago.
Intermediatism, then, is recognition that our state is only a quasi-state: it
is no bar to one who desires to be positive: it is recognition that he cannot

--- PAGE BREAK ---

be positive and remain in a state that is positive-negative. Or that a great
positivist—isolated—with no system to support him—will be crucified, or
will starve to death, or will be put in jail and beaten to death—that these are
the birth-pangs of translation to the Positive Absolute.
So, though positive-negative, myself, I feel the attraction of the positive
pole of our intermediate state, and attempt to correlate these three data: to
see them homogeneously; to think that they relate to one object.
In the aeronautic journals and in the London Times there is no mention of
escaped balloons, in the summer or fall of 1898. In the New York Times
there is no mention of ballooning in Canada or the United States, in the
summer of 1898.
London Times, Sept. 29, 1885:
A clipping from the Royal Gazette, of Bermuda, of Sept. 8, 1885, sent to
the Times by General Lefroy:
That, upon Aug. 27, 1885, at about 8:30 A.M., there was observed by Mrs.
Adelina D. Bassett, “a strange object in the clouds, coming from the north.”
She called the attention of Mrs. L. Lowell to it, and they were both
somewhat alarmed. However, they continued to watch the object steadily
for some time. It drew nearer. It was of triangular shape, and seemed to be
about the size of a pilot-boat mainsail, with chains attached to the bottom of
it. While crossing the land it had appeared to descend, but, as it went out to
sea, it ascended, and continued to ascend, until it was lost to sight high in
the clouds.
Or with such power to ascend, I don’t think much myself of the notion
that it was an escaped balloon, partly deflated. Nevertheless, General
Lefroy, correlating with Exclusionism, attempts to give a terrestrial
interpretation to this occurrence. He argues that the thing may have been a
balloon that had escaped from France or England—or the only aerial thing
of terrestrial origin that, even to this date of about thirty-five years later, has
been thought to have crossed the Atlantic Ocean. He accounts for the
triangular form by deflation—“a shapeless bag, barely able to float.” My
own acceptance is that great deflation does not accord with observations
upon its power to ascend.
In the Times, Oct. 1, 1885, Charles Harding, of the R.M.S., argues that if
it had been a balloon from Europe, surely it would have been seen and
reported by many vessels. Whether he was as good a Briton as the General
or not, he shows awareness of the United States—or that the thing maya balloon from Europe, surely it would have been seen and
reported by many vessels. Whether he was as good a Briton as the General
or not, he shows awareness of the United States—or that the thing may

--- PAGE BREAK ---e, surely it would have been seen and
reported by many vessels. Whether he was as good a Briton as the General
or not, he shows awareness of the United States—or that the thing may

--- PAGE BREAK ---

have been a partly collapsed balloon that had escaped from the United
States.
General Lefroy wrote to Nature about it (Nature, 33-99), saying —
whatever his sensitivenesses may have been—that the columns of the Times
were “hardly suitable” for such a discussion. If, in the past, there had been
more persons like General Lefroy, we’d have better than the mere fragments
of data that in most cases are too broken up very well to piece together. He
took the trouble to write to a friend of his, W. H. Gosling, of Bermuda—
who also was an extraordinary person. He went to the trouble of
interviewing Mrs. Bassett and Mrs. Lowell. Their description to him was
somewhat different:
An object from which nets were suspended—
Deflated balloon, with its network hanging from it—
A super-dragnet"
That something was trawling overhead"
The birds of Baton Rouge.
Mr. Gosling wrote that the item of chains, or suggestion of a basket that
had been attached, had originated with Mr. Bassett, who had not seen the
object. Mr. Gosling mentioned a balloon that had escaped from Paris in
July. He tells of a balloon that fell in Chicago, September 17, or three weeks
later than the Bermuda object.
It’s one incredibility against another, with disregards and convictions
governed by whichever of the two Dominants looms stronger in each
reader’s mind. That he can’t think for himself any more than I can is
understood.
My own correlates:
I think that we’re fished for. It may be that we’re highly esteemed by
super-epicures somewhere. It makes me more cheerful when I think that we
may be of some use after all. I think that dragnets have often come down
and have been mistaken for whirlwinds and waterspouts. Some accounts of
seeming structure in whirlwinds and waterspouts are astonishing. And I
have data that, in this book, I can’t take up at all—mysterious
disappearances. I think we’re fished for. But this is a little expression on the
side: relates to trespassers; has nothing to do with the subject that I shall
take up at some other time—or our use to some other mode of seeming that
has a legal right to us.
Nature, 33-137:n on the
side: relates to trespassers; has nothing to do with the subject that I shall
take up at some other time—or our use to some other mode of seeming that
has a legal right to us.
Nature, 33-137:

--- PAGE BREAK ---es to trespassers; has nothing to do with the subject that I shall
take up at some other time—or our use to some other mode of seeming that
has a legal right to us.
Nature, 33-137:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Our Paris correspondent writes that in relation to the balloon which is
said to have been seen over Bermuda, in September, no ascent took place in
France which can account for it.”
Last of August: not September. In the London Times there is no mention
of balloon ascents in Great Britain, in the summer of 1885, but mention of
two ascents in France. Both balloons had escaped. In L’Aéronaute, August,
1885, it is said that these balloons had been sent up from fetes of the
fourteenth of July—44 days before the observation at Bermuda. The
aeronauts were Gower and Eloy. Gower’s balloon was found floating on the
ocean, but Eloy’s balloon was not found. Upon the 17th of July it was
reported by a sea captain: still in the air; still inflated.
But this balloon of Eloy’s was a small exhibition balloon, made for short
ascents from fetes and fair grounds. In La Nature, 1885-2-131, it is said that
it was a very small balloon, incapable of remaining long in the air.
As to contemporaneous ballooning in the United States, I find only one
account: an ascent in Connecticut, July 29, 1885. Upon leaving this balloon,
the aeronauts had pulled the “rip cord,” “turning it inside out.” ^New York
Times, Aug. 10, 1885.)
To the Intermediatist, the accusation of “anthropomorphism” is
meaningless. There is nothing in anything that is unique or positively
different. We’d be materialists were it not quite as rational to express the
material in terms of the immaterial as to express the immaterial in terms of
the material. Oneness of allness in quasiness. I will engage to write the
formula of any novel in psychochemic terms, or draw its graph in psycho-
mechanic terms: or write, in romantic terms, the circumstances and
sequences of any chemic or electric or magnetic reaction: or express any
historic event in algebraic terms—or see Boole and Jevons for economic
situations expressed algebraically.
I think of the Dominants as I think of persons—not meaning that they are
real persons—not meaning that we are real persons—
Or the Old Dominant and its jealousy, and its suppression of all things
and thoughts that endangered its supremacy. In reading discussions of
papers, by scientific societies, I have often noted how, when they
approached forbidden—or irreconcilable—subjects, the discussions were
thrown into confusion and ramification. It’s as if scientific discussions have
often been led astray—as if purposefully —as if by something directive,
hovering over them. Of course I mean only the Spirit of all Development.nd ramification. It’s as if scientific discussions have
often been led astray—as if purposefully —as if by something directive,
hovering over them. Of course I mean only the Spirit of all Development.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s as if scientific discussions have
often been led astray—as if purposefully —as if by something directive,
hovering over them. Of course I mean only the Spirit of all Development.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Just so, in any embryo, cells that would tend to vary from the appearances
of their era are compelled to correlate.
In Nature, 90-169, Charles Tilden Smith writes that, at Chisbury,
Wiltshire, England, April 8, 1912, he saw something in the sky—
“—unlike anything that I had ever seen before.”
“Although I have studied the skies for many years, I have never seen
anything like it.”
He saw two stationary dark patches upon clouds.
The extraordinary part:
They were stationary upon clouds that were rapidly moving.
They were fan-shaped—or triangular—and varied in size, but kept the
same position upon different clouds as cloud after cloud came along. For
more than half an hour Mr. Smith watched these dark patches—
His impression as to the one that appeared first:
That it was “really a heavy shadow cast upon a thin veil of clouds by
some unseen object away in the west, which was intercepting the sun’s
rays.”
Upon page 244, of this volume of Nature, is a letter from another
correspondent, to the effect that similar shadows are cast by mountains
upon clouds, and that no doubt Mr. Smith was right in attributing the
appearance to “some unseen object, which was intercepting the sun’s rays.”
But the Old Dominant that was a jealous Dominant, and the wrath of the
Old Dominant against such an irreconcilability as large, opaque objects in
the sky, casting down shadows upon clouds. Still the Dominants are suave
very often, or are not absolute gods, and the way attention was led away
from this subject is an interesting study in quasi-divine bamboozlement.
Upon page 268, Charles J. P. Cave, the meteorologist, writes that, upon
April 5 and 8, at Ditcham Park, Petersfield, he had observed a similar
appearance, while watching some pilot balloons—but he describes
something not in the least like a shadow on clouds, but a stationary cloud—
the inference seems to be that the shadows at Chisbury may have been
shadows of pilot balloons. Upon page 322, another correspondent writes
upon shadows cast by mountains; upon page 348 someone else carries on
the divergence by discussing this third letter: then someone takes up the
third letter mathematically; and then there is a correction of error in this
mathematic demonstration—I think it looks very much like what I think it
looks like.hird letter: then someone takes up the
third letter mathematically; and then there is a correction of error in this
mathematic demonstration—I think it looks very much like what I think it
looks like.

--- PAGE BREAK ---meone takes up the
third letter mathematically; and then there is a correction of error in this
mathematic demonstration—I think it looks very much like what I think it
looks like.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

But the mystery here:
That the dark patches at Chisbury could not have been cast by stationary
pilot balloons that were to the west, or that were between clouds and the
setting sun. If, to the west of Chisbury, a stationary object were high in the
air, intercepting the sun’s rays, the shadow of the stationary object would
not have been stationary, but would have moved higher and higher with the
setting of the sun.
I have to think of something that is in accord with no other data
whatsoever:
A luminous body—not the sun—in the sky—but, because of some
unknown principle or atmospheric condition, its light extended down only
about to the clouds; that from it were suspended two triangular objects, like
the object that was seen in Bermuda; that it was this light that fell short of
the earth that these objects intercepted; that the objects were drawn up and
lowered from something overhead, so that, in its light, their shadows
changed size.
If my grope seem to have no grasp in it, and, if a stationary balloon will,
in half an hour, not cast a stationary shadow from the setting sun, we have
to think of two triangular objects that accurately maintained positions in a
line between sun and clouds, and at the same time approached and receded
from clouds. Whatever it may have been, it’s enough to make the devout
make the sign of the crucible, or whatever the devotees of the Old
Dominant do in the presence of a new correlate.
Vast, black thing poised like a crow over the moon.
It is our acceptance that these two shadows of Chisbury looked, from the
moon, like vast things, black as crows, poised over the earth. It is our
acceptance that two triangular luminosities and then two triangular patches,
like vast black things, poised like crows over the moon, and, like the
triangularities at Chisbury, have been seen upon, or over, the moon:
Scientific American, 46-49:
Two triangular, luminous appearances reported by several observers in
Lebanon, Conn., evening of July 3, 1882, on the moon’s upper limb. They
disappeared, and two dark triangular appearances that looked like notches
were seen three minutes later upon the lower limb. They approached each
other, met and instantly disappeared.
The merger here is notches that have at times been seen upon the moon’s
limb: thought to be cross sections of craters (Monthly Notices, R. A. S., 37-roached each
other, met and instantly disappeared.
The merger here is notches that have at times been seen upon the moon’s
limb: thought to be cross sections of craters (Monthly Notices, R. A. S., 37-

--- PAGE BREAK ---met and instantly disappeared.
The merger here is notches that have at times been seen upon the moon’s
limb: thought to be cross sections of craters (Monthly Notices, R. A. S., 37-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

432). But these appearances of July 3, 1882, were vast upon the moon
—“seemed to be cutting off or obliterating nearly a quarter of its surface.”
Something else that may have looked like a vast black crow poised over
this earth from the moon:
Monthly Weather Review, 41-599:
Description of a shadow in the sky, of some unseen body, April 8, 1913,
Fort Worth, Texas—supposed to have been cast by an unseen cloud—this
patch of shade moved with the declining sun.
Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1854-410:
Account by two observers of a faint but distinctly triangular object,
visible for six nights in the sky. It was observed from two stations that were
not far apart. But the parallax was considerable. Whatever it was, it was,
acceptably, relatively close to this earth.
I should say that relatively to phenomena of light we are in confusion as
great as some of the discords that orthodoxy is in relatively to light. Broadly
and intermediatistically, our position is:
That light is not really and necessarily light—any more than is anything
else really and necessarily anything—but an interpretation of a mode of
force, as I suppose we have to call it, as light. At sea level, the earth’s
atmosphere interprets sunlight as red or orange or yellow. High up on
mountains the sun is blue. Very high up on mountains the zenith is black. Or
it is orthodoxy to say that in inter-planetary space, where there is no air,
there is no light. So then the sun and comets are black, but this earth’s
atmosphere, or, rather, dust particles in it, interpret radiations from these
black objects as light.
We look up at the moon.
The jet-black moon is so silvery white.
I have about fifty notes indicating that the moon has atmosphere:
nevertheless most astronomers hold out that the moon has no atmosphere.
They have to: the theory of eclipses would not work out otherwise. So,
arguing in conventional terms, the moon is black. Rather astonishing—
explorers upon the moon—stumbling and groping in intense darkness—
with telescopes powerful enough, we could see them stumbling and groping
in brilliant light.
Or, just because of familiarity, it is not now obvious to us how the
preposterousnesses of the old system must have seemed to the correlates of
the system preceding it.and groping
in brilliant light.
Or, just because of familiarity, it is not now obvious to us how the
preposterousnesses of the old system must have seemed to the correlates of
the system preceding it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ye jet-black silvery moon.
Altogether, then, it may be conceivable that there are phenomena of force
that are interpretable as light as far down as the clouds, but not in denser
strata of air, or just the opposite of familiar interpretations.
I now have some notes upon an occurrence that suggests a force not
interpreted by air as light, but interpreted, or reflected by the ground as
light. I think of something that, for a week, was suspended over London: of
an emanation that was not interpreted as light until it reached the ground.
Lancet, June 1, 1867:
That every night for a week, a light had appeared in Woburn Square,
London, upon the grass of a small park, enclosed by railings. Crowds
gathering—police called out “for the special service of maintaining order
and making the populace move on.” The Editor of the Lancet went to the
Square. He says that he saw nothing but a patch of light falling upon an
arbor at the northeast corner of the enclosure. Seems to me that that was
interesting enough.
In this Editor we have a companion for Mr. Symons and Dr. Gray. He
suggests that the light came from a street lamp—does not say that he could
trace it to any such origin himself—but recommends that the police
investigate neighboring street lamps.
I’d not say that such a commonplace as light from a street lamp would
not attract and excite and deceive great crowds for a week —but I do accept
that any cop who was called upon for extra work would have needed
nobody’s suggestion to settle that point the very first thing.
Or that something in the sky hung suspended over a London Square for a
week.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed upon for extra work would have needed
nobody’s suggestion to settle that point the very first thing.
Or that something in the sky hung suspended over a London Square for a
week.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“S
21
Knowledge, Dec. 28, 1883:
EEING so many meteorological phenomena in your excellent paper,
Knowledge, I am tempted to ask for an explanation of the following,
which I saw when on board the British India Company’s steamer Patna,
while on a voyage up the Persian Gulf. In May, 1880, on a dark night, about
11:30 P.M., there suddenly appeared on each side of the ship an enormous
luminous wheel, whirling around, the spokes of which seemed to brush the
ship along. The spokes would be 200 or 300 yards long, and resembled the
birch rods of the dames’ schools. Each wheel contained about sixteen
spokes, and, although the wheels must have been some 500 or 600 yards in
diameter, the spokes could be distinctly seen all the way round. The
phosphorescent gleam seemed to glide along flat on the surface of the sea,
no light being visible in the air above the water. The appearance of the
spokes could be almost exactly represented by standing in a boat and
flashing a bull’s eye lantern horizontally along the surface of the water,
round and round. I may mention that the phenomenon was also seen by
Captain Avern, of the Patna, and Mr. Manning, third officer.
“Lee Fore Brace.
“P. S.—The wheels advanced along with the ship for about twenty
minutes.—L. F. B.”
Knowledge, Jan. 11, 1884:
Letter from “A. Mc. D.”:
That “Lee Fore Brace,” “who sees ‘so many meteorological phenomena
in your excellent paper,’ should have signed himself ‘The Modern Ezekiel,’
for his vision of wheels is quite as wonderful as the prophet’s.” The writer
then takes up the measurements that were given, and calculates a velocity at
the circumference of a wheel, of about 166 yards per second, apparently
considering that especially incredible. He then says: “From the nom de
plume he assumes, it might be inferred that your correspondent is in the
habit of ‘sailing close to the wind.’” He asks permission to suggest an
explanation of his own. It is that before 11:30 P.M. there had been numerousmight be inferred that your correspondent is in the
habit of ‘sailing close to the wind.’” He asks permission to suggest an
explanation of his own. It is that before 11:30 P.M. there had been numerous

--- PAGE BREAK ---at your correspondent is in the
habit of ‘sailing close to the wind.’” He asks permission to suggest an
explanation of his own. It is that before 11:30 P.M. there had been numerous

--- PAGE BREAK ---

accidents to the “main brace,” and that it had required splicing so often that
almost any ray of light would have taken on a rotary motion.
In Knowledge, Jan. 25, 1884, Mr. “Brace” answers and signs himself “J.
W. Robertson”:
“I don’t suppose A. Mc. D. means any harm, but I do think it’s rather
unjust to say a man is drunk because he sees something out of the common.
If there’s one thing I pride myself upon, it’s being able to say that never in
my life have I indulged in anything stronger than water.” From this
curiosity of pride, he goes on to say that he had not intended to be exact, but
to give his impressions of dimensions and velocity. He ends amiably:
“However, ‘no offense taken, where I suppose none is meant.’”
To this letter Mr. Proctor adds a note, apologizing for the publication of
“A. Mc. D’s.” letter, which had come about by a misunderstood instruction.
Then Mr. Proctor wrote disagreeable letters, himself, about other persons—
what else would you expect in a quasi-existence"
The obvious explanation of this phenomenon is that, under the surface of
the sea, in the Persian Gulf, was a vast luminous wheel: that it was the light
from its submerged spokes that Mr. Robertson saw, shining upward. It
seems clear that this light did shine upward from origin below the surface of
the sea. But at first it is not so clear how vast luminous wheels, each the
size of a village, ever got under the surface of the Persian Gulf: also there
may be some misunderstanding as to what they were doing there.
A deep-sea fish, and its adaptation to a dense medium—
That, at least in some regions aloft, there is a medium dense even to
gelatinousness—
A deep-sea fish, brought to the surface of the ocean: in a relatively
attenuated medium, it disintegrates—
Super-constructions adapted to a dense medium in inter-planetary space
—sometimes, by stresses of various kinds, they are driven into this earth’s
thin atmosphere—
Later we shall have data to support just this: that things entering this
earth’s atmosphere disintegrate and shine with a light that is not the light of
incandescence: shine brilliantly, even if cold—
Vast wheel-like super-constructions—they enter this earth’s atmosphere,
and, threatened with disintegration, plunge for relief into an ocean, or into a
denser medium.
Of course the requirements now facing us are:ike super-constructions—they enter this earth’s atmosphere,
and, threatened with disintegration, plunge for relief into an ocean, or into a
denser medium.
Of course the requirements now facing us are:

--- PAGE BREAK ---ons—they enter this earth’s atmosphere,
and, threatened with disintegration, plunge for relief into an ocean, or into a
denser medium.
Of course the requirements now facing us are:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Not only data of vast wheel-like super-constructions that have relieved
their distresses in the ocean, but data of enormous wheels that have been
seen in the air, or entering the ocean, or rising from the ocean and
continuing their voyages.
Very largely we shall concern ourselves with enormous fiery objects that
have either plunged into the ocean or risen from the ocean. Our acceptance
is that, though disruption may intensify into incandescence, apart from
disruption and its probable fieriness, things that enter this earth’s
atmosphere have a cold light which would not, like light from molten
matter, be instantly quenched by water. Also it seems acceptable that a
revolving wheel would, from a distance, look like a globe; that a revolving
wheel, seen relatively close by, looks like a wheel in few aspects. The
mergers of ball-lightning and meteorites are not resistances to us: our data
are of enormous bodies.
So we shall interpret—and what does it matter"
Our attitude throughout this book:
That here are extraordinary data—that they never would be exhumed,
and never would be massed together, unless—
Here are the data:
Our first datum is of something that was once seen to enter an ocean. It’s
from the puritanic publication, Science, which has yielded us little material,
or which, like most puritans, does not go upon a spree very often. Whatever
the thing could have been, my impression is of tremendousness, or of bulk
many times that of all meteorites in all museums combined: also of relative
slowness, or of long warning of approach. The story, in Science, 5-242, is
from an account sent to the Hydrographic Office, at Washington, from the
branch office, at San Francisco:
That, at midnight, Feb. 24, 1885, Lat. 37° N., and Long. 170° E., or
somewhere between Yokohama and Victoria, the captain of the bark
Innerwich was aroused by his mate, who had seen something unusual in the
sky. This must have taken appreciable time. The captain went on deck and
saw the sky turning fiery red. “All at once, a large mass of fire appeared
over the vessel, completely blinding the spectators.” The fiery mass fell into
the sea. Its size may be judged by the volume of water cast up by it, said to
have rushed toward the vessel with a noise that was “deafening.” The bark
was struck flat aback, and “a roaring, white sea passed ahead.” “The master,ged by the volume of water cast up by it, said to
have rushed toward the vessel with a noise that was “deafening.” The bark
was struck flat aback, and “a roaring, white sea passed ahead.” “The master,

--- PAGE BREAK ---water cast up by it, said to
have rushed toward the vessel with a noise that was “deafening.” The bark
was struck flat aback, and “a roaring, white sea passed ahead.” “The master,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

an old, experienced mariner, declared that the awfulness of the sight was
beyond description.”
In Nature, 37-187, and L’Astronomie, 1887-76, we are told that an object,
described as “a large ball of fire,” was seen to rise from the sea, near Cape
Race. We are told that it rose to a height of fifty feet, and then advanced
close to the ship, then moving away, remaining visible about five minutes.
The supposition in Nature is that it was “ball lightning,” but Flammarion,
Thunder and Lightning, p. 68, says that it was enormous. Details in the
American Meteorological Journal, 6-443—Nov. 12, 1887—British steamer
Siberian—that the object had moved “against the wind” before retreating—
that Captain Moore said that at about the same place he had seen such
appearances before.
³Report of the British Association, 1861-30:
That, upon June 18, 1845, according to the Malta Times, from the brig
9ictoria, about 900 miles east of Adalia, Asia Minor (36° 40ƍ 56Ǝ, N. Lat.:
13° 44ƍ 36Ǝ E. Long.), three luminous bodies were seen to issue from the
sea, at about half a mile from the vessel. They were visible about ten
minutes.
The story was never investigated, but other accounts that seem
acceptably to be other observations upon this same sensational spectacle
came in, as if of their own accord, and were published by Prof. Baden-
Powell. One is a letter from a, correspondent at Mt. Lebanon. He describes
only two luminous bodies. Apparently they were five times the size of the
moon: each had appendages, or they were connected by parts that are
described as “sail-like or streamer-like,” looking like “large flags blown out
by a gentle breeze.” The important point here is not only suggestion of
structure, but duration. The duration of meteors is a few seconds: duration
of fifteen seconds is remarkable, but I think there are records up to half a
minute. This object, if it were all one object, was visible at Mt. Lebanon
about one hour. An interesting circumstance is that the appendages did not
look like trains of meteors, which shine by their own light, but “seemed to
shine by light from the main bodies.”
About 900 miles west of the position of the 9ictoria is the town of
Adalia, Asia Minor. At about the time of the observation reported by the
captain of the 9ictoria, the Rev. F. Hawlett, F.R. A.S., was in Adalia. He,
too, saw this spectacle, and sent an account to Prof. Baden-Powell. In hisabout the time of the observation reported by the
captain of the 9ictoria, the Rev. F. Hawlett, F.R. A.S., was in Adalia. He,
too, saw this spectacle, and sent an account to Prof. Baden-Powell. In his

--- PAGE BREAK ---e observation reported by the
captain of the 9ictoria, the Rev. F. Hawlett, F.R. A.S., was in Adalia. He,
too, saw this spectacle, and sent an account to Prof. Baden-Powell. In his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

view it was a body that appeared and then broke up. He places duration at
twenty minutes to half an hour.
In the Report of the British Association, 1860-82, the phenomenon was
reported from Syria and Malta, as two very large bodies “nearly joined.”
Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1860-77:
That, at Cherbourg, France, Jan. 12, 1836, was seen a luminous body,
seemingly two-thirds the size of the moon. It seemed to rotate on an axis.
Central to it there seemed to be a dark cavity.
For other accounts, all indefinite, but distortable into data of wheel-like
objects in the sky, see Nature, 22-617; London Times, Oct. 15, 1859;
Nature, 21-225; Monthly Weather Review, 1883-264.
L’Astronomie, 1894-157:
That, upon the morning of Dec. 20, 1893, an appearance in the sky was
seen by many persons in Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina. A
luminous body passed overhead, from west to east, until at about 15 degrees
in the eastern horizon, it appeared to stand still for fifteen or twenty
minutes. According to some descriptions it was the size of a table. To some
observers it looked like an enormous wheel. The light was a brilliant white.
Acceptably it was not an optical illusion—the noise of its passage through
the air was heard. Having been stationary, or having seemed to stand still
fifteen or twenty minutes, it disappeared, or exploded. No sound of
explosion was heard.
Vast wheel-like constructions. They’re especially adapted to roll through
a gelatinous medium from planet to planet. Sometimes, because of
miscalculations, or because of stresses of various kinds, they enter this
earth’s atmosphere. They’re likely to explode. They have to submerge in the
sea. They stay in the sea awhile, revolving with relative leisureliness, until
relieved, and then emerge, sometimes close to vessels. Seamen tell of what
they see: their reports are interred in scientific morgues. I should say that
the general route of these constructions is along latitudes not far from the
latitudes of the Persian Gulf.
Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 28-29:
That, upon April 4, 1901, about 8:30, in the Persian Gulf, Captain
Hoseason, of the steamship Kilwa, according to a paper read before the
Society by Captain Hoseason, was sailing in a sea in which there was no
phosphorescence—”there being no phosphores-cence in the water.”
I suppose I’ll have to repeat that:g to a paper read before the
Society by Captain Hoseason, was sailing in a sea in which there was no
phosphorescence—”there being no phosphores-cence in the water.”
I suppose I’ll have to repeat that:

--- PAGE BREAK ---fore the
Society by Captain Hoseason, was sailing in a sea in which there was no
phosphorescence—”there being no phosphores-cence in the water.”
I suppose I’ll have to repeat that:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“. . . there being no phosphorescence in the water.”
Vast shafts of light—though the captain uses the word “ripples” —
suddenly appeared. Shaft followed shaft, upon the surface of the sea. But it
was only a faint light, and, in about fifteen minutes, died out: having
appeared suddenly, having died out gradually. The shafts revolved at a
velocity of about 60 miles an hour.
Phosphorescent jellyfish correlate with the Old Dominant: in one of the
most heroic compositions of disregards in our experience, it was agreed, in
the discussion of Capt. Hoseason’s paper, that the phenomenon was
probably pulsations of long strings of jellyfish.
Nature, 21-410:
Reprint of a letter from R. E. Harris, Commander of the A. H. N. Co.’s
steamship ShahMehan, to the Calcutta Englishman, Jan. 21, 1880:
That upon the 5th of June, 1880, off the coast of Malabar, at 10 P.M.,
water calm, sky cloudless, he had seen something that was so foreign to
anything that he had ever seen before, that he had stopped his ship. He saw
what he describes as waves of brilliant light, with spaces between. Upon the
water were floating patches of a substance that was not identified. Thinking
in terms of the conventional explanation of all phosphorescence at sea, the
captain at first suspected this substance. However, he gives his opinion that
it did no illuminating but was, with the rest of the sea, illuminated by
tremendous shafts of light. Whether it was a thick and oily discharge from
the engine of a submerged construction or not, I think that I shall have to
accept this substance as a concomitant, because of another note. “As wave
succeeded wave, one of the most grand and brilliant, yet solemn, spectacles
that one could think of, was here witnessed.”
Jour. Roy. Met. Soc., 32-280:
Extract from a letter from Mr. Douglas Carnegie, Blackheath, England.
Date some time in 1906—
“This last voyage we witnessed a weird and most extraordinary electric
display.” In the Gulf of Oman, he saw a bank of apparently quiescent
phosphorescence: but, when within twenty yards of it, “shafts of brilliant
light came sweeping across the ship’s bows at a prodigious speed, which
might be put down as anything between 60 and 200 miles an hour.” “These
light bars were about 20 feet apart and most regular.” As to
phosphorescence—”I collected a bucketful of water, and examined it under
the microscope, but could not detect anything abnormal.” That the shafts ofs were about 20 feet apart and most regular.” As to
phosphorescence—”I collected a bucketful of water, and examined it under
the microscope, but could not detect anything abnormal.” That the shafts of

--- PAGE BREAK ---apart and most regular.” As to
phosphorescence—”I collected a bucketful of water, and examined it under
the microscope, but could not detect anything abnormal.” That the shafts of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

light came up from something beneath the surface—”They first struck us on
our broadside, and I noticed that an intervening ship had no effect on the
light beams: they started away from the lee side of the ship, just as if they
had traveled right through it.”
The Gulf of Oman is at the entrance to the Persian Gulf.
Jour. Roy. Met. Soc., 33-294:
Extract from a letter by Mr. S. C. Patterson, second officer of the P. and
O. steamship Delta a spectacle which the Journal continues to call
phosphorescent:
Malacca Strait, 2 A.M., March 14, 1907:
“. . . shafts which seemed to move round a center—like the spokes of a
wheel—and appeared to be about 300 yards long.” The phenomenon lasted
about half an hour, during which time the ship had traveled six or seven
miles. It stopped suddenly.”
L’Astronomie, 1891-312:
A correspondent writes that, in October, 1891, in the China Sea, he had
seen shafts or lances of light that had had the appearance of rays of a
searchlight, and that had moved like such rays.
Nature, 20-291:
Report to the Admiralty by Capt. Evans, the Hydrographer of the British
Navy:
That Gommander J. E. Pringle, of H. M. S. 9ulture, had reported that, at
Lat. 26° 26ƍ N., and Long. 53° 11ƍ E.—in the Persian Gulf—May 15, 1879,
he had noticed luminous waves or pulsations in the water, moving at great
speed. This time we have a definite datum upon origin somewhere below
the surface. It is said that these waves of light passed under the 9ulture. “On
looking toward the east, the appearance was that of a revolving wheel with
a center on that bearing, and whose spokes were illuminated, and, looking
toward the west, a similar wheel appeared to be revolving, but in the
opposite direction.” Or finally as to submergence— “These waves of light
extended from the surface well under the water.” It is Commander Pringle’s
opinion that the shafts constituted one wheel, and that doubling was an
illusion. He judges the shafts to have been about 25 feet broad, and the
spaces about 100. Velocity about 84 miles an hour. Duration about 35
minutes. Time 9:40 P.M. Before and after this display the ship had passed
through patches of floating substance described as “oily-looking fish
spawn.”locity about 84 miles an hour. Duration about 35
minutes. Time 9:40 P.M. Before and after this display the ship had passed
through patches of floating substance described as “oily-looking fish
spawn.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---s an hour. Duration about 35
minutes. Time 9:40 P.M. Before and after this display the ship had passed
through patches of floating substance described as “oily-looking fish
spawn.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Upon page 428 of this number of Nature, E. L. Moss says that, in April,
1875, when upon H. M. S. Bulldog, a few miles north of Vera Cruz, he had
seen a series of swift lines of light. He had dipped up some of the water,
finding in it animalcule, which would, however, not account for phenomena
of geometric formation and high velocity. If he means Vera Cruz, Mexico,
this is the only instance we have out of oriental waters.
Scientific American, 106-51:
That, in the Nautical Meteorological Annual, published by the Danish
Meteorological Institute, appears a report upon a “singular phenomenon”
that was seen by Capt. Gabe, of the Danish East Asiatic Co.’s steamship
Bintang. At 3 A.M., June 10, 1909, while sailing through the Straits of
Malacca, Captain Gabe saw a vast revolving wheel of light, flat upon the
water—”long arms issuing from a center around which the whole system
appeared to rotate.” So vast was the appearance that only half of it could be
seen at a time, the center lying near the horizon. This display lasted about
fifteen minutes. Heretofore we have not been clear upon the important point
that forward motions of these wheels do not synchronize with a vessel’s
motions, and freaks of disregard, or, rather, commonplaces of disregard,
might attempt to assimilate with lights of a vessel. This time we are told
that the vast wheel moved forward, decreasing in brilliancy, and also in
speed of rotation, disappearing when the center was right ahead of the
vessel—or my own interpretation would be that the source of light was
submerging deeper and deeper and slowing down because meeting more
and more resistance.
The Danish Meteorological Institute reports another instance:
That, when Capt. Breyer, of the Dutch steamer 9alentiMn, was in the
South China Sea, midnight, Aug. 12, 1910, he saw a rotation of flashes. “It
looked like a horizontal wheel, turning rapidly.” This time it is said that the
appearance was above water. “The phenomenon was observed by the
captain, the first and second mates, and the first engineer, and upon all of
them it made a somewhat uncomfortable impression.”
In general, if our expression be not immediately acceptable, we
recommend to rival interpreters that they consider the localization —with
one exception—of this phenomenon, to the Indian Ocean and adjacent
waters, or Persian Gulf on one side and China Sea on the other side. Though
we’re Intermediatists, the call of attempted Positivism, in the aspect of
Completeness, is irresistible. We have expressed that from few aspectsulf on one side and China Sea on the other side. Though
we’re Intermediatists, the call of attempted Positivism, in the aspect of
Completeness, is irresistible. We have expressed that from few aspects

--- PAGE BREAK ---

would wheels of fire in the air look like wheels of fire, but, if we can get it,
we must have observation upon vast luminous wheels, not interpretable as
optical illusions, but enormous, substantial things that have smashed down
material resistances, and have been seen to plunge into the ocean:
Athenceum, 1848-833:
That at the meeting of the British Association, 1848, Sir W. S. Harris said
that he had recorded an account sent to him of a vessel toward which had
whirled “two wheels of fire, which the men described as rolling millstones
of fire.” “When they came near, an awful crash took place: the topmasts
were shivered to pieces.” It is said that there was a strong sulphurous odor.

--- PAGE BREAK ---escribed as rolling millstones
of fire.” “When they came near, an awful crash took place: the topmasts
were shivered to pieces.” It is said that there was a strong sulphurous odor.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

E
22
Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 1-157:
XTRACT from the log of the bark Lady of the Lake, by Capt. F. W.
Banner:
Communicated by R. H. Scott, F.R.S.:
That, upon the 22nd of March, 1870, at Lat. 5° 47ƍ N., Long. 27° 52ƍ W.,
the sailors of the Lady of the Lake saw a remarkable object, or “cloud,” in
the sky. They reported to the captain.
According to Capt. Banner, it was a cloud of circular form, with an
included semicircle divided into four parts, the central dividing shaft
beginning at the center of the circle and extending far outward, and then
curving backward.
Geometricity and complexity and stability of form: and the small
likelihood of a cloud maintaining such diversity of features, to say nothing
of appearance of organic form.
The thing traveled from a point at about 20 degrees above the horizon to
a point about 80 degrees above. Then it settled down to the northeast,
having appeared from the south, southeast.
Light gray in color, or it was cloud-color.
“It was much lower than the other clouds.”
And this datum stands out:
That, whatever it may have been, it traveled against the wind.
“It came up obliquely against the wind, and finally settled down right in
the wind’s eye.”
For half an hour this form was visible. When it did finally disappear that
was not because it disintegrated like a cloud, but because it was lost to sight
in the evening darkness.
Capt. Banner draws the following diagram:

--- PAGE BREAK ---hen it did finally disappear that
was not because it disintegrated like a cloud, but because it was lost to sight
in the evening darkness.
Capt. Banner draws the following diagram:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
23
EXT-BOOKS tell us that the Dhurmsalla meteorites were picked up
“soon,” or “within half an hour.” Given a little time the
conventionalists may argue that these stones were hot when they fell,
but that their great interior coldness had over, come the molten state of their
surfaces.
According to the Deputy Commissioner of Dhurmsalla, these stones had
been picked up “immediately” by passing coolies.
These stones were so cold that they benumbed the fingers. But they had
fallen with a great light. It is described as “a flame of fire about two feet in
depth and nine feet in length.” Acceptably this light was not the light of
molten matter.
In this chapter we are very intermediatistic—and unsatisfactory. To the
intermediatist there is but one answer to all questions:
Sometimes and sometimes not.
Another form of this intermediatist “solution” of all problems is:
Yes and no.
Everything that is, also isn’t.
A positivist attempts to formulate: so does the intermediatist, but with
less rigorousness: he accepts but also denies: he may seem to accept in one
respect and deny in some other respect, but no real line can be drawn
between any two aspects of anything. The inter-mediatist accepts that which
seems to correlate with something that he has accepted as a dominant. The
positivist correlates with a belief.
In the Dhurmsalla meteorites we have support for our expression that
things entering this earth’s atmosphere sometimes shine with a light that is
not the light of incandescence—or so we account, or offer an expression
upon, “thunderstones,” or carved stones that have fallen luminously to this
earth, in streaks that have looked like strokes of lightning—but we accept,
also, that some things that have entered this earth’s atmosphere, disintegrate
with the intensity of flame and molten matter—but some things, we accept,
enter this earth’s atmosphere and collapse non-luminously, quite like deep-have entered this earth’s atmosphere, disintegrate
with the intensity of flame and molten matter—but some things, we accept,
enter this earth’s atmosphere and collapse non-luminously, quite like deep-

--- PAGE BREAK ---rth’s atmosphere, disintegrate
with the intensity of flame and molten matter—but some things, we accept,
enter this earth’s atmosphere and collapse non-luminously, quite like deep-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sea fishes brought to the surface of the ocean. Whatever agreement we have
is an indication that somewhere aloft there is a medium denser than this
earth’s atmosphere. I suppose our stronghold is in that such is not popular
belief—
Or the rhythm of all phenomena:
Air dense at sea level upon this earth—less and less dense as one ascends
—then denser and denser. A good many bothersome questions arise—
Our attitude:
Here are the data:
Luminous rains sometimes fall (Nature, March 9, 1882; Nature, 25-437).
This is light that is not the light of incandescence, but no one can say that
these occasional, or rare, rains come from this earth’s externality. We
simply note cold light of falling bodies. For luminous rain, snow, and dust,
see Hartwig, Aerial World, p. 319. As to luminous clouds, we have more
nearly definite observations and opinions: they mark transition between the
Old Dominant and the New Dominant. We have already noted the transition
in Prof. Schwedoff’s theory of external origin of some hailstones—and the
implications that, to a former generation, seemed so preposterous— “droll”
was the word—that there are in inter-planetary regions volumes of water—
whether they have fishes and frogs in them or not. Now our acceptance is
that clouds sometimes come from external regions, having had origin from
super-geographical lakes and oceans that we shall not attempt to chart, just
at present—only suggesting to enterprising aviators—and we note that we
put it all up to them, and show no inclination to go Columbusing on our
own account— that they take bathing suits, or, rather, deep-sea diving-suits
along. So then that some clouds come from inter-planetary oceans—of the
Super-Sargasso Sea—if we still accept the Super-Sargasso Sea—and shine,
upon entering this earth’s atmosphere. In Himmel und Erde, February, 1889
—a phenomenon of transition of thirty years ago— Herr O. Jesse, in his
observations upon luminous night-clouds, notes the great height of them,
and drolly or sensibly suggests that some of them may have come from
regions external to this earth. I suppose he means only from other planets.
But it’s a very droll and sensible idea either way.
In general I am accounting for a great deal of this earth’s isolation: that it
is relatively isolated by circumstances that are similar to the circumstances
that make for relative isolation of the bottom of the ocean—except that
there is a clumsiness of analogy now. To call ourselves deep-sea fishes hascircumstances that are similar to the circumstances
that make for relative isolation of the bottom of the ocean—except that
there is a clumsiness of analogy now. To call ourselves deep-sea fishes has

--- PAGE BREAK ---are similar to the circumstances
that make for relative isolation of the bottom of the ocean—except that
there is a clumsiness of analogy now. To call ourselves deep-sea fishes has

--- PAGE BREAK ---

been convenient, but, in a quasiexistence, there is no convenience that will
not sooner or later turn awkward—so, if there be denser regions aloft, these
regions should now be regarded as analogues of far-submerged oceanic
regions, and things coming to this earth would be like things rising to an
attenuated medium—and exploding—sometimes incandescently, sometimes
with cold light—sometimes non-luminously, like deep-sea fishes brought to
the surface—altogether conditions of inhospitality. I have a suspicion that,
in their own depths, deep-sea fishes are not luminous. If they are,
Darwinism is mere jesuitism, in attempting to correlate them. Such
advertising would so attract attention that all advantages would be more
than offset. Darwinism is largely a doctrine of concealment: here we have
brazen proclamation—if accepted. Fishes in the Mammoth Cave need no
light to see by. We might have an expression that deep-sea fishes turn
luminous upon entering a less dense medium—but models in the American
Museum of Natural History: specialized organs of luminosity upon these
models. Of course we do remember that awfully convincing “dodo,” and
some of our sophistications we trace to him—at any rate disruption is
regarded as a phenomenon of coming from a dense to a less dense medium.
An account by M. Acharius, in the Transactions of the Swedish Academy
of Sciences, 1808-215, translated for the North American Review, 3-319:
That M. Acharius, having heard of “an extraordinary and probably
hitherto unseen phenomenon,” reported from near the town of Skeninge,
Sweden, investigated:
That, upon the 16th of May, 1808, at about 4 P.M., the sun suddenly turned
dull brick-red. At the same time there appeared, upon the western horizon, a
great number of round bodies, dark brown, and seemingly the size of a hat
crown. They passed overhead and disappeared in the eastern horizon.
Tremendous procession. It lasted two hours. Occasionally one fell to the
ground. When the place of a fall was examined, there was found a film,
which soon dried and and vanished. Often, when approaching the sun, these
bodies seemed to link together, or were then seen to be linked together, in
groups not exceeding eight, and, under the sun, they were seen to have tails
three or four fathoms long. Away from the sun the tails were invisible.
Whatever their substance may have been, it is described as gelatinous
—”soapy and jellied.”
I place this datum here for several reasons. It would have been a good
climax to our expression upon hordes of small bodies that, in ourhave been, it is described as gelatinous
—”soapy and jellied.”
I place this datum here for several reasons. It would have been a good
climax to our expression upon hordes of small bodies that, in our

--- PAGE BREAK ---scribed as gelatinous
—”soapy and jellied.”
I place this datum here for several reasons. It would have been a good
climax to our expression upon hordes of small bodies that, in our

--- PAGE BREAK ---

acceptance, were not seeds, nor birds, nor ice-crystals: but the tendency
would have been to jump to the homogeneous conclusion that all our data in
that expression related to this one kind of phenomena, whereas we conceive
of infinite heterogeneity of the external: of crusaders and rabbles and
emigrants and tourists and dragons and things like gelatinous hat crowns.
Or that all things, here, upon this earth, that flock together, are not
necessarily sheep, Presbyterians, gangsters, or porpoises. The datum is
important to us, here, as indication of disruption in this earth’s atmosphere
— dangers in entering this earth’s atmosphere.
I think, myself, that thousands of objects have been seen to fall from
aloft, and have exploded luminously, and have been called “ball lightning.”
“As to what ball lightning is, we have not yet begun to make intelligent
guesses.” (Monthly Weather Review, 34-17.)
In general, it seems to me that when we encounter the opposition “ball
lightning” we should pay little attention; but confine ourselves to guesses
that are at least intelligent, that stand phantom-like in our way. We note here
that in some of our acceptances upon intelligence we should more clearly
have pointed out that they were upon the intelligent as opposed to the
instinctive. In the Monthly Weather Review, 33-409, there is an account of
“ball lightning” that struck a tree. It made a dent such as a falling object
would make. Some other time I shall collect instances of “ball lightning,” to
express that they are instances of objects that have fallen from the sky,
luminously, exploding terrifically. So bewildered is the old orthodoxy by
these phenomena that many scientists have either denied “ball lightning” or
have considered it very doubtful. I refer to Dr. Sestier’s list of one hundred
and fifty instances, which he considered authentic.
In accord with our disaccord is an instance related in the Monthly
Weather Review, March, 1887—something that fell luminously from the
sky, accompanied by something that was not so affected, or that was dark:
That, according to Capt. C. D. Sweet, of the Dutch bark, J. P. A., upon
March 19, 1887, N. 37° 39ƍ, W. 57° 00ƍ, he encountered a severe storm. He
saw two objects in the air above the ship. One was luminous, and might be
explained in several ways, but the other was dark. One or both fell into the
sea, with a roar and the casting up of billows. It is our acceptance that these
things had entered this earth’s atmosphere, having first crashed through a
field of ice—”immediately afterward lumps of ice fell.”a roar and the casting up of billows. It is our acceptance that these
things had entered this earth’s atmosphere, having first crashed through a
field of ice—”immediately afterward lumps of ice fell.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng up of billows. It is our acceptance that these
things had entered this earth’s atmosphere, having first crashed through a
field of ice—”immediately afterward lumps of ice fell.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

One of the most astonishing of the phenomena of “ball lightning” is a
phenomenon of many meteorites: violence of explosion out of all
proportion to size and velocity. We accept that the icy meteorites of
Dhurmsalla could have fallen with no great velocity, but the sound from
them was tremendous. The soft substance that fell at the Cape of Good
Hope was carbonaceous, but was unburned, or had fallen with velocity
insufficient to ignite it. The tremendous report that it made was heard over
an area more than seventy miles in diameter.
That some hailstones have been formed in a dense medium, and violently
disintegrate in this earth’s relatively thin atmosphere:
Nature, 88-350:
Large hailstones noted at the University of Missouri, Nov. 11, 1911: they
exploded with sounds like pistol shots. The writer says that he had noticed a
similar phenomenon, eighteen years before, at Lexington, Kentucky.
Hailstones that seemed to have been formed in a denser medium: when
melted under water they gave out bubbles larger than their central air
spaces. (Monthly Weather Review, 33-445.)
Our acceptance is that many objects have fallen from the sky, but that
many of them have disintegrated violently. This acceptance will co-ordinate
with data still to come, but, also, we make it easy for ourselves in our
expressions upon super-constructions, if we’re asked why, from thinkable
wrecks of them, girders, plates, or parts recognizably of manufactured metal
have not fallen from the sky. However, as to composition, we have not this
refuge, so it is our expression that there have been reported instances of the
fall of manufactured metal from the sky.
The meteorite of Rutherford, North Carolina, is of artificial material:
mass of pig iron. It is said to be fraudulent. (Amer. Jour. Sci., 2-34-298.)
The object that was said to have fallen at Marblehead, Mass., in 1858, is
described in the Amer. Jour. Sci., 2-34-135, as “a furnace product, formed in
smelting copper ores, or iron ores containing copper.” It is said to be
fraudulent.
According to Ehrenberg, the substance reported by Capt. Callam to have
fallen upon his vessel, near Java, “offered complete resemblance to the
residue resulting from combustion of a steel wire in a flask of oxygen.”
(Zurcher, Meteors, p. 239.) Nature, Nov. 21, 1878, publishes a notice that,
according to the Yuma Sentinel, a meteorite that “resembles steel” had been
found in the Mohave Desert. In Nature, Feb. 15, 1894, we read that one of.) Nature, Nov. 21, 1878, publishes a notice that,
according to the Yuma Sentinel, a meteorite that “resembles steel” had been
found in the Mohave Desert. In Nature, Feb. 15, 1894, we read that one of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the meteorites brought to the United States by Peary, from Greenland, is of
tempered steel. The opinion is that meteoric iron had fallen in water or
snow, quickly cooling and hardening. This does not apply to composition.
Nov. 5, 1898, Nature publishes a notice of a paper by Prof. Berwerth, of
Vienna, upon “the close connection between meteoric iron and steel-works’
steel.”
At the meeting of Nov. 24, 1906, of the Essex Field Club, was exhibited
a piece of metal said to have fallen from the sky, Oct. 9, 1906, at Braintree.
According to the Essex Naturalist, Dr. Fletcher, of the British Museum, had
declared this metal to be smelted iron— “so that the mystery of its reported
‘fall’ remained unexplained.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---cording to the Essex Naturalist, Dr. Fletcher, of the British Museum, had
declared this metal to be smelted iron— “so that the mystery of its reported
‘fall’ remained unexplained.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

W
24
E shall have an outcry of silences. If a single instance of anything
be disregarded by a System—our own attitude is that a single
instance is a powerless thing. Of course our own method of
agreement of many instances is not a real method. In Continuity, all things
must have resemblances with all other things. Anything has any quasi-
identity you please. Some time ago conscription was assimilated with either
autocracy or democracy with equal facility. Note the need for a dominant to
correlate to. Scarcely anybody said simply that we must have conscription:
but that we must have conscription, which correlates with democracy,
which was taken as a base, or something basically desirable. Of course
between autocracy and democracy nothing but false demarcation can be
drawn. So I can conceive of no subject upon which there should be such
poverty as a single instance, if anything one pleases can be whipped into
line. However, we shall try to be more nearly real than the Darwinites who
advance concealing coloration as Darwinism, and then drag in proclaiming
luminosity, too, as Darwinism. I think the Darwinites had better come in
with us as to the deep-sea fishes—and be sorry later, I suppose. It will be
amazing or negligible to read all the instances now to come of things that
have been seen in the sky, and to think that all have been disregarded. My
own opinion is that it is not possible, or very easy, to disregard them, now
that they have been brought together —but that, if prior to about this time
we had attempted such an assemblage, the Old Dominant would have
withered our typewriter —as it is the letter “e” has gone back on us, and the
“s” is temperamental.
“Most extraordinary and singular phenomenon,” North Wales, Aug. 26,
1894; a disk from which projected an orange-colored body that looked like
“an elongated flatfish,” reported by Admiral Ommanney (Nature, 50-524);
disk from which projected a hook-like form, India, about 1838; diagram of
it given; disk about size of the moon, but brighter than the moon; visible
about twenty minutes; by G. Pettit, in Prof. Baden-Powell’s Catalogue
(Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1849); very brilliant hook-like form, seen in the sky atize of the moon, but brighter than the moon; visible
about twenty minutes; by G. Pettit, in Prof. Baden-Powell’s Catalogue
(Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1849); very brilliant hook-like form, seen in the sky at

--- PAGE BREAK ---brighter than the moon; visible
about twenty minutes; by G. Pettit, in Prof. Baden-Powell’s Catalogue
(Rept. Brit. Assoc., 1849); very brilliant hook-like form, seen in the sky at

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Poland, Trumbull Co., Ohio, during the stream of meteors, of 1833; visible
more than an hour: large luminous body, almost stationary “for a time”;
shaped like a square table; Niagara Falls, Nov. 13, 1833 (Amer. Jour. Sci., 1-
25-391); something described as a bright white cloud, at night, Nov. 3,
1886, at Hamar, Norway; from it were emitted brilliant rays of light; drifted
across the sky; “retained throughout its original form” (Nature, Dec. 16,
1886-158); thing with an oval nucleus, and streamers with dark bands and
lines very suggestive of structure; New Zealand, May 4, 1888 (Nature, 42-
402); luminous object, size of full moon, visible an hour and a half, Chili,
Nov. 5, 1883 (Comptes Rendus, 103-682); bright object near sun, Dec. 21,
1882 (Knowledge, 3-13); light that looked like a great flame, far out at sea,
off Ryook Phyoo, Dec. 2, 1845 (London Roy. Soc. Proc., 5-627); something
like a gigantic trumpet, suspended, vertical, oscillating gently, visible five
or six minutes, length estimated at 425 feet, at Oaxaca, Mexico, July 6,
1874 (Sci. Am. Sup., 6-2365); two luminous bodies, seemingly united,
visible five or six minutes, June 3, 1898 (La Nature, 1898-1-127); thing
with a tail, crossing moon, transit half a minute, Sept. 26, 1870 (London
Times, Sept. 30, 1870); object four or five times size of moon, moving
slowly across sky, Nov. 1, 1885, near Adrianople (L’Astronomie, 1886-309);
large body, colored red, moving slowly, visible 15 minutes, reported by
Coggia, Marseilles, Aug. 1, 1871 (Chem. News, 24-193); details of this
observation, and similar observation by Guillemin, and other instances by
de Fonville (Comptes Rendus, 73-297, 755); thing that was large and that
was stationary twice in seven minutes, Oxford, Nov. 19, 1847; listed by
Lowe (Rec. Sci., 1-136); grayish object that looked to be about three and a
half feet long, rapidly approaching the earth at Saarbruck, April 1, 1826;
sound like thunder; object expanding like a sheet (Am. Jour. Sci., 1-26-133;
Quar. Jour. Roy. Inst., 24-488); report by an astronomer, N. S. Drayton,
upon an object duration of which seemed to him extraordinary; duration
three-quarters of a minute, Jersey City, July 6, 1882 (Sci. Amer., 47-53);
object like a comet, but with proper motion of 10 degrees an hour; visible
one hour; reported by Purine and Glancy from the Cordoba Observatory,
Argentina, March 14, 1916 (Sci. Amer., 115-493); something like a signal
light, reported by Glaisher, Oct. 4, 1844; bright as Jupiter, “sending out
quick flickering waves of light” (Year Book of Facts, 1845-278).
I think that with the object known as Eddie’s “comet” passes away the
last of our susceptibility to the common fallacy of personifying. It is one ofing waves of light” (Year Book of Facts, 1845-278).
I think that with the object known as Eddie’s “comet” passes away the
last of our susceptibility to the common fallacy of personifying. It is one of

--- PAGE BREAK ---(Year Book of Facts, 1845-278).
I think that with the object known as Eddie’s “comet” passes away the
last of our susceptibility to the common fallacy of personifying. It is one of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the most deep-rooted of positivist illusions— that people are persons. We
have been guilty too often of spleens and spites and ridicules against
astronomers, as if they were persons, or final unities, individuals,
completenesses, or selves—instead of indeterminate parts. But, so long as
we remain in quasi-existence, we can cast out illusion only with some other
illusion, though the other illusion may approximate higher to reality. So we
personify no more—but we super-personify. We now take into full
acceptance our expression that Development is an Autocracy of Successive
Dominants—which are not final—but which approximate higher to
individuality or self-ness, than do the human tropisms that irresponsibly
correlate to them.
Eddie reported a celestial object, from the Observatory at Grahamstown,
South Africa. It was in 1890. The New Dominant was only heir presumptive
then, or heir apparent but not obvious. The thing that Eddie reported might
as well have been reported by a night watchman, who had looked up
through an unplaced sewer pipe.
It did not correlate.
The thing was not admitted to Monthly Notices. I think myself that if the
Editor had attempted to let it in—earthquake—or a mysterious fire in his
publishing house.
The Dominants are jealous gods.
In Nature, presumably a vassal of the new god, though of course also
plausibly rendering homage to the old, is reported a cornet-like body, of
Oct. 27, 1890, observed at Grahamstown, by Eddie. It may have looked
comet-like, but it moved 100 degrees while visible, or one hundred degrees
in three-quarters of an hour. See Nature, 43-89, 90.
In Nature, 44-519, Prof. Copeland describes a similar appearance that he
had seen, Sept. 10, 1891. Dreyer says (Nature, 44-541) that he had seen this
object at the Armagh Observatory. He likens it to the object that was
reported by Eddie. It was seen by Dr. Alexander Graham Bell, Sept. 11,
1891, in Nova Scotia.
But the Old Dominant was a jealous god.
So there were different observations upon something that was seen in
November, 1883. These observations were Philistines in 1883. In the Amer.
Met. Jour., 1-110, a correspondent reports having seen an object like a
comet, with two tails, one up and one down, Nov. 10 or 12, 1883. Very
likely this phenomenon should be placed in our expression upon torpedo--110, a correspondent reports having seen an object like a
comet, with two tails, one up and one down, Nov. 10 or 12, 1883. Very
likely this phenomenon should be placed in our expression upon torpedo-

--- PAGE BREAK ---t reports having seen an object like a
comet, with two tails, one up and one down, Nov. 10 or 12, 1883. Very
likely this phenomenon should be placed in our expression upon torpedo-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

shaped bodies that have been seen in the sky—our data upon dirigibles, or
super-Zeppelins—but our attempted classifications are far from rigorous—
or are mere gropes. In the Scientific American, 50-40, a correspondent
writes from Humacao, Porto Rico, that, Nov. 21, 1883, he and several other
—persons—or persons, as it were—had seen a majestic appearance, like a
comet. Visible three successive nights: disappeared then. The Editor says
that he can offer no explanation. If accepted, this thing must have been
close to the earth. If it had been a comet, it would have been seen widely,
and the news would have been telegraphed over the world, says the Editor.
Upon page 97 of this volume of the Scientific American, a correspondent
writes that, at Sulphur Springs, Ohio, he had seen “a wonder in the sky,” at
about the same date. It was torpedo-shaped, or something with a nucleus, at
each end of which was a tail. Again the Editor says that he can offer no
explanation: that the object was not a comet. He associates it with the
atmospheric effects general in 1883. But it will be our expression that, in
England and Holland, a similar object was seen in November, 1882.
In the Scientific American, 40-294, is published a letter from Henry
Harrison, of Jersey City, copied from the New York Tribune that upon the
evening of April 13, 1879, Mr. Harrison was searching for Brorsen’s comet,
when he saw an object that was moving so rapidly that it could not have
been a comet. He called a friend to look, and his observation was
confirmed. At two o’clock in the morning this object was still visible. In the
Scientific American Supplement, 7-2885, Mr. Harrison disclaims
sensationalism, which he seems to think unworthy, and gives technical
details: he says that the object was seen by Mr. J. Spencer Devoe, of
Manhattanville.n Supplement, 7-2885, Mr. Harrison disclaims
sensationalism, which he seems to think unworthy, and gives technical
details: he says that the object was seen by Mr. J. Spencer Devoe, of
Manhattanville.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, Mr. Harrison disclaims
sensationalism, which he seems to think unworthy, and gives technical
details: he says that the object was seen by Mr. J. Spencer Devoe, of
Manhattanville.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“A
25
FORMATION having the shape of a dirigible.” It was reported from
Huntington, West Virginia (Sci. Amer., 115-241). Luminous object
that was seen July 19, 1916, at about 11 P.M. Observed through “rather
powerful field glasses,” it looked to be about two degrees long and half a
degree wide. It gradually dimmed, disappeared, reappeared, and then faded
out of sight. Another person—as we say: it would be too inconvenient to
hold to our intermediatist recognitions—another person who observed this
phenomenon suggested to the writer of the account that the object was a
dirigible, but the writer says that faint stars could be seen behind it. This
would seem really to oppose our notion of a dirigible visitor to this earth—
except for the inconclusiveness of all things in a mode of seeming that is
not final—or we suggest that behind some parts of the object, thing,
construction, faint stars were seen. We find a slight discussion here. Prof. H.
M. Russell thinks that the phenomenon was a detached cloud of aurora
borealis. Upon page 369 of this volume of the Scientific American, another
correlator suggests that it was a light from a blast furnace—disregarding
that, if there be blast furnaces in or near Huntington, their reflections would
be commonplaces there.
We now have several observations upon cylindrical-shaped bodies that
have appeared in this earth’s atmosphere: cylindrical, but pointed at both
ends, or torpedo-shaped. Some of the accounts are not very detailed, but out
of the bits of description my own acceptance is that super-geographical
routes are traversed by torpedo-shaped super-constructions that have
occasionally visited, or that have occasionally been driven into this earth’s
atmosphere. From data, the acceptance is that upon entering this earth’s
atmosphere, these vessels have been so racked that had they not sailed
away, disintegration would have occurred: that, before leaving this earth,
they have, whether in attempted communication or not, or in mere
wantonness or not, dropped objects, which did almost immediately
violently disintegrate or explode. Upon general principles we think that
explosives have not been purposely dropped, but that parts have beenness or not, dropped objects, which did almost immediately
violently disintegrate or explode. Upon general principles we think that
explosives have not been purposely dropped, but that parts have been

--- PAGE BREAK ---objects, which did almost immediately
violently disintegrate or explode. Upon general principles we think that
explosives have not been purposely dropped, but that parts have been

--- PAGE BREAK ---

racked off, and have fallen, exploding like the things called “ball lightning.”
May have been objects of stone or metal with inscriptions upon them, for
all we know, at present. In all instances, estimates of dimensions are
valueless, but ratios of dimensions are more acceptable. A thing said to have
been six feet long may have been six hundred feet long; but shape is not so
subject to the illusions of distance.
Nature, 40-415:
That, Aug. 5, 1889, during a violent storm, an object that looked to be
about 15 inches long and 5 inches wide, fell, rather slowly, at East
Twickenham, England. It exploded. No substance from it was found.
L’Année Scientifique, 1864-54:
That, Oct. 10, 1864, M. Leverrier had sent to the Academy three letters
from witnesses of a long luminous body, tapering at both ends, that had
been seen in the sky.
In Thunder and Lightning, p. 87, Flammarion says that on Aug. 20, 1880,
during a rather violent storm, M. A. Trpcul, of the French Academy, saw a
very brilliant yellowish-white body, apparently 35 to 40 centimeters long,
and about 25 centimeters wide. Torpedo-shaped. Or a cylindrical body,
“with slightly conical ends.” It dropped something, and disappeared in the
clouds. Whatever it may have been that was dropped, it fell vertically, like a
heavy object, and left a luminous train. The scene of this occurrence may
have been far from the observer. No sound was heard. For M. Trpcul’s
account, see Comptes Rendus, 103-849.
Monthly Weather Review, 1907-310:
That, July 2, 1907, in the town of Burlington, Vermont, a terrific
explosion had been heard throughout the city. A ball of light, or a luminous
object, had been seen to fall from the sky—or from a torpedo-shaped thing,
or construction, in the sky. No one had seen this thing that had exploded fall
from a larger body that was in the sky—but if we accept that at the same
time there was a larger body in the sky—
My own acceptance is that a dirigible in the sky, or a construction that
showed every sign of disrupting, had barely time to drop— whatever it did
drop—and to speed away to safety above.
The following story is told, in the Review, by Bishop John S. Michaud:
“I was standing on the corner of Church and College Streets, just in front
of the Howard Bank, and facing east, engaged in conversation with Ex-
Governor Woodbury and Mr. A. A. Buell, when, without the slightestding on the corner of Church and College Streets, just in front
of the Howard Bank, and facing east, engaged in conversation with Ex-
Governor Woodbury and Mr. A. A. Buell, when, without the slightest

--- PAGE BREAK ---f Church and College Streets, just in front
of the Howard Bank, and facing east, engaged in conversation with Ex-
Governor Woodbury and Mr. A. A. Buell, when, without the slightest

--- PAGE BREAK ---

indication, or warning, we were startled by what sounded like a most
unusual and terrific explosion, evidently very nearby. Raising my eyes, and
looking eastward along College Street, I observed a torpedo-shaped body,
some 300 feet away, stationary in appearance, and suspended in the air,
about 50 feet above the tops of the buildings. In size it was about 6 feet long
by 8 inches in diameter, the shell, or covering, having a dark appearance,
with here and there tongues of fire issuing from spots on the surface,
resembling red-hot, unburnished copper. Although stationary when first
noticed, this object soon began to move, rather slowly, and disappeared
over Dolan Brothers’ store, southward. As it moved, the covering seemed
rupturing in places, and through these the intensely red flames issued.”
Bishop Michaud attempts to correlate it with meteorological
observations.
Because of the nearby view this is perhaps the most remarkable of the
new correlates, but the correlate now coming is extraordinary because of
the great number of recorded observations upon it. My own acceptance is
that, upon Nov. 17, 1882, a vast dirigible crossed England, but by the
definiteness-indefinitness of all things quasi-real, some observations upon it
can be correlated with anything one pleases.
E. W. Maunder, invited by the Editors of the Observatory to write some
reminiscences for the 500th number of their magazine, gives one that he
says stands out (Observatory, 39-214). It is upon something that he terms “a
strange celestial visitor.” Maunder was at the Royal Observatory,
Greenwich, Nov. 17, 1882, at night. There was an aurora, without features
of special interest. In the midst of the aurora, a great circular disk of
greenish light appeared and moved smoothly across the sky. But the
circularity was evidently the effect of foreshortening. The thing passed
above the moon, and was, by other observers, described as “cigar-shaped,”
“like a torpedo,” “a spindle,” “a shuttle.” The idea of foreshortening is not
mine: Maunder says this. He says: “Had the incident occurred a third of a
century later, beyond doubt everyone would have selected the same simile
—it would have been ‘just like a Zeppelin.’” The duration was about two
minutes. Color said to have been the same as that of the auroral glow in the
north. Nevertheless, Maunder says that this thing had no relation to auroral
phenomena. “It appeared to be a definite body.” Motion too fast for a cloud,
but “nothing could be more unlike the rush of a meteor.” In the
Philosophical Magazine, 5-15-318, J. Rand Capron, in a lengthy paper,“It appeared to be a definite body.” Motion too fast for a cloud,
but “nothing could be more unlike the rush of a meteor.” In the
Philosophical Magazine, 5-15-318, J. Rand Capron, in a lengthy paper,

--- PAGE BREAK ---a definite body.” Motion too fast for a cloud,
but “nothing could be more unlike the rush of a meteor.” In the
Philosophical Magazine, 5-15-318, J. Rand Capron, in a lengthy paper,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

alludes throughout to this phenomenon as an “auroral beam,” but he lists
many observations upon its “torpedo-shape,” and one observation upon a
“dark nucleus” in it—host of most confusing observations— estimates of
height between 40 and 200 miles—observations in Holland and Belgium.
We are told that according to Capron’s spectroscopic observations the
phenomenon was nothing but a beam of auroral light. In the Observatory, 6-
192, is Maunder’s contemporaneous account. He gives apparent
approximate length and breadth at twenty-seven degrees and three degrees
and a half. He gives other observations seeming to indicate structure
—”remarkable dark marking down the center.”
In Nature, 27-84, Capron says that because of the moonlight he had been
able to do little with the spectroscope.
Color white, but aurora rosy (Nature, 27-87).
Bright stars seen through it, but not at the zenith, where it looked opaque.
This is the only assertion of transparency (Nature, 27-87). Too slow for a
meteor, but too fast for a cloud (Nature, 27-86). “Surface had a mottled
appearance” (Nature, 27-87). “Very definite in form, like a torpedo”
(Nature, 27-100). “Probably a meteoric object” (Dr. Groneman, Nature, 27-
296). Technical demonstration by Dr. Groneman, that it was a cloud of
meteoric matter (Nature, 28-105). See Nature, 27-315, 338, 365, 388, 412,
434.
“Very little doubt it was an electric phenomenon” (Proctor, Knowledge,
2-419).
In the London Times, Nov. 20, 1882, the Editor says that he had received
a great number of letters upon this phenomenon. He publishes two. One
correspondent describes it as “well-defined and shaped like a fish . . .
extraordinary and alarming.” The other correspondent writes of it as “a
most magnificent luminous mass, shaped somewhat like a torpedo.”dent describes it as “well-defined and shaped like a fish . . .
extraordinary and alarming.” The other correspondent writes of it as “a
most magnificent luminous mass, shaped somewhat like a torpedo.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---“well-defined and shaped like a fish . . .
extraordinary and alarming.” The other correspondent writes of it as “a
most magnificent luminous mass, shaped somewhat like a torpedo.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
26
Notes and Queries, 5-3-306:
BOUT 8 lights that were seen in Wales, over an area of about 8
miles, all keeping their own ground, whether moving together
perpendicularly, horizontally, or over a zigzag course. They looked
like electric lights—disappearing, reappearing dimly, then shining as bright
as ever. “We have seen them three or four at a time afterward, on four or
five occasions.”
London Times, Oct. 5, 1877:
“From time to time the west coast of Wales seems to have been the scene
of mysterious lights. . . . And now we have a statement from Towyn that
within the last few weeks lights of various colors have been seen moving
over the estuary of the Dysynni River, and out to sea. They are generally in
a northerly direction, but sometimes they hug the shore, and move at high
velocity for miles toward Aberdovey, and suddenly disappear.
L’Annee Scientifique, 1877-45:
Lights that appeared in the sky, above Vence, France, March 23, 1877;
described as balls of fire of dazzling brightness; appeared from a cloud
about a degree in diameter; moved relatively slowly. They were visible
more than an hour, moving northward. It is said that eight or ten years
before similar lights or objects had been seen in the sky, at Vence.
London Times, Sept. 19, 1848:
That, at Inverness, Scotland, two large, bright lights that looked like stars
had been seen in the sky: sometimes stationary, but occasionally moving at
high velocity.
L’ Année Scientifique, 1888-66:
Observed near St. Petersburg, July 30, 1880, in the evening: a large
spherical light and two smaller ones, moving along a ravine: visible three
minutes; disappearing without noise.
Nature, 35-173:
That, at Yloilo, Sept. 30, 1886, was seen a luminous object the size of the
full moon. It “floated” slowly “northward,” followed by smaller ones closeutes; disappearing without noise.
Nature, 35-173:
That, at Yloilo, Sept. 30, 1886, was seen a luminous object the size of the
full moon. It “floated” slowly “northward,” followed by smaller ones close

--- PAGE BREAK ---ithout noise.
Nature, 35-173:
That, at Yloilo, Sept. 30, 1886, was seen a luminous object the size of the
full moon. It “floated” slowly “northward,” followed by smaller ones close

--- PAGE BREAK ---

to it.
“The False Lights of Durham.”
Every now and then in the English newspapers, in the middle of the
nineteenth century, there is something about lights that were seen against
the sky, but as if not far above land, oftenest upon the coast of Durham.
They were mistaken for beacons by sailors. Wreck after wreck occurred.
The fishermen were accused of displaying false lights and profiting by
wreckage. The fishermen answered that mostly only old vessels, worthless
except for insurance, were so wrecked.
In 1866 (London Times, Jan. 9, 1866) popular excitement became
intense. There was an investigation. Before a commission, headed by
Admiral Collinson, testimony was taken. One witness described the light
that had deceived him as “considerably elevated above ground.” No
conclusion was reached: the lights were called “the mysterious lights.” But
whatever the “false lights of Durham” may have been, they were unaffected
by the investigation. In 1867, the Tyne Pilotage Board took the matter up.
Opinion of the Mayor of Tyne—”a mysterious affair.”
In the Report of the British Association, 1877-152, there is a description
of a group of “meteors” that traveled with “remarkable slowness.” They
were in sight about three minutes. “Remarkable,” it seems, is scarcely
strong enough: one reads of “remarkable” as applied to a duration of three
seconds. These “meteors” had another peculiarity; they left no train. They
are described as “seemingly huddled together like a flock of wild geese, and
moving with the same velocity and grace of regularity.”
Jour. Roy. Astro. Soc. of Canada, November and December, 1913:
That, according to many observations collected by Prof. Chant, of
Toronto, there appeared, upon the night of Feb. 9, 1913, a spectacle that was
seen in Canada, the United States, and at sea, and in Bermuda. A luminous
body was seen. To it there was a long tail. The body grew rapidly larger.
“Observers differ as to whether the body was single, or was composed of
three or four parts, with a tail to each part.” The group, or complex
structure, moved with “a peculiar, majestic deliberation.” “It disappeared in
the distance, and another group emerged from its place of origin. Onward
they moved, at the same deliberate pace, in twos or threes or fours.” They
disappeared. A third group, or a third structure, followed.
Some observers compared the spectacle to a fleet of airships: others to
battleships attended by cruisers and destroyers.ees or fours.” They
disappeared. A third group, or a third structure, followed.
Some observers compared the spectacle to a fleet of airships: others to
battleships attended by cruisers and destroyers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---disappeared. A third group, or a third structure, followed.
Some observers compared the spectacle to a fleet of airships: others to
battleships attended by cruisers and destroyers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to one writer:
“There were probably 30 or 32 bodies, and the peculiar thing about them
was their moving in fours and threes and twos, abreast of one another; and
so perfect was the lining up that you would have thought it was an aerial
fleet maneuvering after rigid drilling.”
Nature, May 25, 1893:
A letter from Capt. Charles J. Norcock, of H. M. S. Caroline
That, upon the 24th of February, 1893, at 10 P.M., between Shanghai and
Japan, the officer of the watch had reported “some unusual lights.”
They were between the ship and a mountain. The mountain was about
6,000 feet high. The lights seemed to be globular. They moved sometimes
massed, but sometimes strung out in an irregular line. They bore
“northward,” until lost to sight. Duration two hours.
The next night the lights were seen again.
They were, for a time, eclipsed by a small island. They bore north at
about the same speed and in about the same direction as speed and direction
of the Caroline. But they were lights that cast a reflection: there was a glare
upon the horizon under them. A telescope brought out but few details: that
they were reddish, and seemed to emit a faint smoke. This time the duration
was seven and a half hours.
Then Capt. Norcock says that, in the same general locality, and at about
the same time, Capt. Castle, of H. M. S. Leander, had seen lights. He had
altered his course and had made toward them. The lights had fled from him.
At least, they had moved higher in the sky.
Monthly Weather Review, March, 1904-115:
Report from the observations of three members of his crew by Lieut.
Frank H. Schofield, U. S. N., of the U. S. S. Supply
Feb. 24, 1904. Three luminous objects, of different sizes, the largest
having an apparent area of about six suns. When first sighted, they were not
very high. They were below clouds of an estimated height of about one
mile.
They fled, or they evaded, or they turned.
They went up into the clouds below which they had, at first, been
sighted.
Their unison of movement.
But they were of different sizes, and of different susceptibilities to all
forces of this earth and of the air.into the clouds below which they had, at first, been
sighted.
Their unison of movement.
But they were of different sizes, and of different susceptibilities to all
forces of this earth and of the air.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ow which they had, at first, been
sighted.
Their unison of movement.
But they were of different sizes, and of different susceptibilities to all
forces of this earth and of the air.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Monthly Weather Review, August, 1898-358:
Two letters from C. N. Crotsenburg, Crow Agency, Montana:
That, in the summer of 1896, when this writer was a railroad postal clerk
—or one who was experienced in train-phenomena— while his train was
going “northward,” from Trenton, Mo., he and another clerk saw, in the
darkness of a heavy rain, a light that appeared to be round, and of a dull-
rose color, and seemed to be about a foot in diameter. It seemed to float
within a hundred feet of the earth, but soon rose high, or “midway between
horizon and zenith.” The wind was quite strong from the east, but the light
held a course almost due north.
Its speed varied. Sometimes it seemed to outrun the train “considerably.”
At other times it seemed to fall behind. The mail-clerks watched until the
town of Linville, Iowa, was reached. Behind the depot of this town, the
light disappeared, and was not seen again. All this time there had been rain,
but very little lightning, but Mr. Crotsenburg offers the explanation that it
was “ball lightning.”
The Editor of the Review disagrees. He thinks that the light may have
been a reflection from the rain, or fog, or from leaves of trees, glistening
with rain, or the train’s light—not lights.
In the December number of the Review is a letter from Edward M. Boggs
—that the light was a reflection, perhaps, from the glare—one light, this
time—from the locomotive’s fire-box, upon wet telegraph wires—an
appearance that might not be striated by the wires, but consolidated into one
rotundity—that it had seemed to oscillate with the undulations of the wires,
and had seemed to change horizontal distance with the varying angles of
reflection, and had seemed to advance or fall behind, when the train had
rounded curves.
All of which is typical of the best of quasi-reasoning. It includes and
assimilates diverse data: but it excludes that which will destroy it:
That, acceptably, the telegraph wires were alongside the track beyond, as
well as leading to Linville.
Mr. Crotsenburg thinks of “ball lightning,” which, though a sore
bewilderment to most speculation, is usually supposed to be a correlate with
the old system of thought: but his awareness of “something else” is
expressed in other parts of his letters, when he says that he has something to
tell that is “so strange that I should never have mentioned it, even to myught: but his awareness of “something else” is
expressed in other parts of his letters, when he says that he has something to
tell that is “so strange that I should never have mentioned it, even to my

--- PAGE BREAK ---

friends, had it not been corroborated . . . so unreal that I hesitated to speak
of it, fearing that it was some freak of the imagination.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---ioned it, even to my

--- PAGE BREAK ---

friends, had it not been corroborated . . . so unreal that I hesitated to speak
of it, fearing that it was some freak of the imagination.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V
27
AST and black. The thing that was poised, like a crow over the
moon.
Round and smooth. Cannon balls. Things that have fallen from
the sky to this earth. Our slippery brains.
Things like cannon balls have fallen, in storms, upon this earth. Like
cannon balls are things that, in storms, have fallen to this earth.
Showers of blood.
Showers of blood.
Showers of blood.
Whatever it may have been, something like red-brick dust, or a red
substance in a dried state, fell at Piedmont, Italy, Oct. 27, 1814 (Electric
Magazine, 68-437). A red powder fell, in Switzerland, winter of 1867 (Pop.
Sci. Rev., 10-112)—
That something, far from this earth, had bled—super-dragon that had
rammed a comet—
Or that there are oceans of blood somewhere in the sky—substance that
dries, and falls in a powder—wafts for ages in powdered form—that there is
a vast area that will some day be known to aviators as the Desert of Blood.
We attempt little of super-topography, at present, but Ocean of Blood, or
Desert of Blood—or both—Italy is nearest to it—or to them.
I suspect that there were corpuscles in the substance that fell in
Switzerland, but all that could be published in 1867 was that in this
substance there was a high proportion of “variously shaped organic matter.”
At Giessen, Germany, in 1821, according to the Report of the British
Association, 5-2, fell a rain of a peach-red color. In this rain were flakes of a
hyacinthine tint. It is said that this substance was organic: we are told that it
was pyrrhine.
But distinctly enough, we are told of one red rain that it was of
corpuscular composition—red snow, rather. It fell, March 12, 1876, near the
Crystal Palace, London (Year Book of Facts, 1876-89; Nature, 13-414). As
to the “red snow” of polar and mountainous regions, we have no opposition,—red snow, rather. It fell, March 12, 1876, near the
Crystal Palace, London (Year Book of Facts, 1876-89; Nature, 13-414). As
to the “red snow” of polar and mountainous regions, we have no opposition,

--- PAGE BREAK ---t fell, March 12, 1876, near the
Crystal Palace, London (Year Book of Facts, 1876-89; Nature, 13-414). As
to the “red snow” of polar and mountainous regions, we have no opposition,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

because that “snow” has never been seen to fall from the sky: it is a growth
of micro-organisms, or of a “protococcus,” that spreads over snow that is on
the ground. This time nothing is said of “sand from the Sahara.” It is said of
the red matter that fell in London, March 12, 1876, that it was composed of
corpuscles—
Of course:
That they looked like “vegetable cells.”
A note:
That nine days before had fallen the red substance—flesh—whatever it
may have been—of Bath County, Kentucky.
I think that a super-egotist, vast, but not so vast as it had supposed, had
refused to move to one side for a comet.
We summarize our general super-geographical expressions:
Gelatinous regions, sulphurous regions, frigid and tropical regions: a
region that has been Source of Life relatively to this earth: regions wherein
there is density so great that things from them, entering this earth’s thin
atmosphere, explode.
We have had a datum of explosive hailstones. We now have support to
the acceptance that they had been formed in a medium far denser than air of
this earth at sea-level. In the Popular Science News, 22-38, is an account of
ice that had been formed, under great pressure, in the laboratory of the
University of Virginia. When released and brought into contact with
ordinary air, this ice exploded.
And again the flesh-like substance that fell in Kentucky: its flake-like
formation. Here is a phenomenon that is familiar to us: it suggests
flattening, under pressure. But the extraordinary inference is— pressure not
equal on all sides. In the Annual Record of Science, 1873-350, it is said that,
in 1873, after a heavy thunderstorm in Louisiana, a tremendous number of
fish scales were found, for a distance of forty miles, along the banks of the
Mississippi River: bushels of them picked up in single places: large scales
that were said to be of the gar fish, a fish that weighs from five to fifty
pounds. It seems impossible to accept this identification: one thinks of a
substance that had been pressed into flakes or scales. And round hailstones
with wide thin margins of ice irregularly around them— still, such
hailstones seem to me more like things that had been stationary: had been
held in a field of thin ice. In the Illustrated London News, 34-546, aren margins of ice irregularly around them— still, such
hailstones seem to me more like things that had been stationary: had been
held in a field of thin ice. In the Illustrated London News, 34-546, are

--- PAGE BREAK ---egularly around them— still, such
hailstones seem to me more like things that had been stationary: had been
held in a field of thin ice. In the Illustrated London News, 34-546, are

--- PAGE BREAK ---

drawings of hailstones so margined, as if they had been held in a sheet of
ice.
Some day we shall have an expression which will be, to our advanced
primitiveness, a great joy:
That devils have visited this earth: foreign devils: human-like beings,
with pointed beards: good singers; one shoe ill-fitting—but with sulphurous
exhalations, at any rate. I have been impressed with the frequent occurrence
of sulphurousness with things that come from the sky. A fall of jagged
pieces of ice, Orkney, July 24, 1818 (Trans. Roy. Soc. Edin., 9-187). They
had a strong sulphurous odor. And the coke—or the substance that looked
like coke—that fell at Mortrpe, France, April 24, 1887: with it fell a
sulphurous substance. The enormous round things that rose from the ocean,
near the 9ic-toria. Whether we still accept that they were super-
constructions that had come from a denser atmosphere and, in danger of
disruption, had plunged into the ocean for relief, then rising and continuing
on their way to Jupiter or Uranus—it was reported that they spread a
“stench of sulphur.” At any rate, this datum of proximity is against the
conventional explanation that these things did not rise from the ocean, but
rose far away above the horizon, with illusion of nearness.
And the things that were seen in the sky July, 1898: I have another note.
In Nature, 58-224, a correspondent writes that, upon July 1, 1898, at
Sedberg, he had seen in the sky—a red object—or, in his own wording,
something that looked like the red part of a rainbow, about 10 degrees long.
But the sky was dark at the time. The sun had set. A heavy rain was falling.
Throughout this book, the datum that we are most impressed with:
Successive falls.
Or that, if upon one small area, things fall from the sky, and then, later,
fall again upon the same small area, they are not products of a whirlwind,
which though sometimes axially stationary, discharges tangentially—
So the frogs that fell at Wigan. I have looked that matter up again. Later
more frogs fell.
As to our data of gelatinous substance said to have fallen to this earth
with meteorites, it is our expression that meteorites, tearing through the
shaky, protoplasmic seas of Genesistrine—against which we warn aviators,
or they may find themselves suffocating in a reservoir of life, or stuck like
currants in a blanc mange—that meteorites detach gelatinous, or
protoplasmic, lumps that fall with them.we warn aviators,
or they may find themselves suffocating in a reservoir of life, or stuck like
currants in a blanc mange—that meteorites detach gelatinous, or
protoplasmic, lumps that fall with them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---they may find themselves suffocating in a reservoir of life, or stuck like
currants in a blanc mange—that meteorites detach gelatinous, or
protoplasmic, lumps that fall with them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Now the element of positiveness in our composition yearns for the
appearance of completeness. Super-geographical lakes with fishes in them.
Meteorites that plunge through these lakes, on their way to this earth. The
positiveness in our make-up must have expression in at least one record of a
meteorite that has brought down a lot of fishes with it—
Nature, 3-512:
That, near the bank of a river, in Peru, Feb. 4, 1871, a meteorite fell. “On
the spot, it is reported, several dead fishes were found, of different species.”
The attempt to correlate is—that the fishes “are supposed to have been
lifted out of the river and dashed against the stones.”
Whether this be imaginable or not depends upon each one’s own
hypnoses.
Nature, 4-169:
That the fishes had fallen among the fragments of the meteorite.
Popular Science Review, 4-126:
That one day, Mr. Le Gould, an Australian scientist, was traveling in
4ueensland. He saw a tree that had been broken off close to the ground.
Where the tree had been broken was a great bruise. Near by was an object
that “resembled a ten-inch shot.”
A good many pages back there was an instance of overshadowing, I
think. The little carved stone that fell at Tarbes is my own choice as the
most impressive of our new correlates. It was coated with ice, remember.
Suppose we should sift and sift and discard half the data in this book—
suppose only that one datum should survive. To call attention to the stone of
Tarbes would, in my opinion, be doing well enough, for whatever the spirit
of this book is trying to do. Nevertheless, it seems to me that a datum that
preceded it was slightingly treated.
The disk of quartz, said to have fallen from the sky, after a meteoric
explosion:
Said to have fallen at the plantation Bleijendal, Dutch Guiana: sent to the
Museum of Leyden by M. van Sypesteyn, adjutant to the Governor of
Dutch Guiana (Notes and Queries, 2-8-92).
And the fragments that fall from super-geographic ice fields: flat pieces
of ice with icicles on them. I think that we did not emphasize enough that, if
these structures were not icicles, but crystalline protuberances, such
crystalline formations indicate long suspension quite as notably as would
icicles. In the Popular Science News, 24-34, it is said that in 1869, nearre not icicles, but crystalline protuberances, such
crystalline formations indicate long suspension quite as notably as would
icicles. In the Popular Science News, 24-34, it is said that in 1869, near

--- PAGE BREAK ---crystalline protuberances, such
crystalline formations indicate long suspension quite as notably as would
icicles. In the Popular Science News, 24-34, it is said that in 1869, near

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tiflis, fell large hailstones with long protuberances. “The most remarkable
point in connection with the hailstones is the fact that, judging from our
present knowledge, a very long time must have been occupied in their
formation.” According to the Geological Magazine, 7-27, this fall occurred
May 27, 1869. The writer in the Geological Magazine says that of all
theories that he had ever heard of, not one could give him light as to this
occurrence—”these growing crystalline forms must have been suspended a
long time”—
Again and again this phenomenon:
Fourteen days later, at about the same place, more of these hailstones fell.
Rivers of blood that vein albuminous seas, or an egg-like composition in
the incubation of which this earth is a local center of development—that
there are super-arteries of blood in Genesistrine: that sunsets are
consciousness of them: that they flush the skies with northern lights
sometimes: super-embryonic reservoirs from which life-forms emanate—
Or that our whole solar system is a living thing: that showers of blood
upon this earth are its internal hemorrhages—
Or vast living things in the sky, as there are vast living things in the
oceans—
Or some one especial thing: an especial time: an especial place. A thing
the size of the Brooklyn Bridge. It’s alive in outer space—something the
size of Central Park kills it—
It drips.
We think of the ice fields above this earth: which do not, themselves, fall
to this earth, but from which water does fall—
Popular Science News, 35-104:
That, according to Prof. Luigi Palazzo, head of the Italian Meteorological
Bureau, upon May 15, 1890, at Messignadi, Calabria, something the color
of fresh blood fell from the sky.
This substance was examined in the public-health laboratories of Rome.
It was found to be blood.
“The most probable explanation of this terrifying phenomenon is that
migratory birds (quails or swallows) were caught and torn in a violent
wind.”
So the substance was identified as birds’ blood—
What matters it what the microscopists of Rome said—or had to say—
and what matters it that we point out that there is no assertion that there wasnd.”
So the substance was identified as birds’ blood—
What matters it what the microscopists of Rome said—or had to say—
and what matters it that we point out that there is no assertion that there was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a violent wind at the time—and that such a substance would be almost
infinitely dispersed in a violent wind— that no bird was said to have fallen
from the sky—or said to have been seen in the sky—that not a feather of a
bird is said to have been seen—
This one datum:
The fall of blood from the sky—
But later, in the same place, blood again fell from the sky.

--- PAGE BREAK ---seen in the sky—that not a feather of a
bird is said to have been seen—
This one datum:
The fall of blood from the sky—
But later, in the same place, blood again fell from the sky.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
28
Notes and Queries, 7-8-508:
CORRESPONDENT who had been to Devonshire writes for
information as to a story that he had heard there: of an occurrence of
about thirty-five years before the date of writing:
Of snow upon the ground—of all South Devonshire waking up one
morning to find such tracks in the snow as had never before been heard of
—”clawed footmarks” or “an unclassifiable form”— alternating at huge but
regular intervals with what seemed to be the impression of the point of a
stick—but the scattering of the prints—amazing expanse of territory
covered—obstacles, such as hedges, walls, houses, seemingly surmounted
—
Intense excitement—that the track had been followed by huntsmen and
hounds, until they had come to a forest—from which the hounds had
retreated, baying and terrified, so that no one had dared to enter the forest.
Notes and Queries, 7-9-18:
Whole occurrence well-remembered by a correspondent: a badger had
left marks in the snow: this was determined, and the excitement had
“dropped to a dead calm in a single day.”
Notes and Queries, 7-9-70:
That for years a correspondent had had a tracing of the prints, which his
mother had taken from those in the snow in her garden, in Exmouth: that
they were hoof-like marks—but had been made by a biped.
Notes and Queries, 7-9-253:
Well remembered by another correspondent, who writes of the
excitement and consternation of “some classes.” He says that a kangaroo
had escaped from a menagerie—”the footprints being so peculiar and far
apart gave rise to a scare that the devil was loose.”
We have had a story, and now we shall tell it over from contemporaneous
sources. We have had the later accounts first very largely for an impression
of the correlating effect that time brings about, by addition, disregard and
distortion. For instance, the “dead calm in a single day.” If I had found thatccounts first very largely for an impression
of the correlating effect that time brings about, by addition, disregard and
distortion. For instance, the “dead calm in a single day.” If I had found that

--- PAGE BREAK ---argely for an impression
of the correlating effect that time brings about, by addition, disregard and
distortion. For instance, the “dead calm in a single day.” If I had found that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the excitement did die out rather soon, I’d incline to accept that nothing
extraordinary had occurred.
I found that the excitement had continued for weeks.
I recognize this as a well-adapted thing to say, to divert attention from a
discorrelate.
All phenomena are “explained” in the terms of the Dominant of their era.
This is why we give up trying really to explain, and content ourselves with
expressing. Devils that might print marks in snow are correlates to the third
Dominant back from this era. So it was an adjustment by nineteenth-century
correlates, or human tropisms, to say that the marks in the snow were
clawed. Hoof-like marks are not only horsey but devilish. It had to be said
in the nineteenth century that those prints showed claw-marks. We shall see
that this was stated by Prof. Owen, one of the greatest biologists of his day
—except that Darwin didn’t think so. But I shall give reference to two
representations of them that can be seen in the New York Public Library. In
neither representation is there the faintest suggestion of a claw-mark. There
never has been a Prof. Owen who has explained: he has correlated.
Another adaptation, in the later accounts, is that of leading this
discorrelate to the Old Dominant into the familiar scenery of a fairy story,
and discredit it by assimilation to the conventionally fictitious—so the idea
of the baying, terrified hounds, and forest like enchanted forests, which no
one dared to enter. Hunting parties were organized, but the baying, terrified
hounds do not appear in contemporaneous accounts.
The story of the kangaroo looks like adaptation to needs for an animal
that could spring far, because marks were found in the snow on roofs of
houses. But so astonishing is the extent of snow that was marked that after a
while another kangaroo was added.
But the marks were in single lines.
My own acceptance is that not less than a thousand one-legged
kangaroos, each shod with a very small horseshoe, could have marked that
snow of Devonshire.
London Times, Feb 16, 1855:
“Considerable sensation has been caused in the towns of Topsham,
Lymphstone, Exmouth, Teignmouth, and Dawlish, in Devonshire, in
consequence of the discovery of a vast number of foot tracks of a most
strange and mysterious description.”sed in the towns of Topsham,
Lymphstone, Exmouth, Teignmouth, and Dawlish, in Devonshire, in
consequence of the discovery of a vast number of foot tracks of a most
strange and mysterious description.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---Topsham,
Lymphstone, Exmouth, Teignmouth, and Dawlish, in Devonshire, in
consequence of the discovery of a vast number of foot tracks of a most
strange and mysterious description.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The story is of an incredible multiplicity of marks discovered in the
morning of Feb. 8, 1855, in the snow, by the inhabitants of many towns and
regions between towns. This great area must of course be disregarded by
Prof. Owen and the other correlators. The tracks were in all kinds of
unaccountable places: in gardens enclosed by high walls, and up on the tops
of houses, as well as in the open fields. There was in Lymphstone scarcely
one unmarked garden. We’ve had heroic disregards but I think that here
disregard was titanic. And, because they occurred in single lines, the marks
are said to have been “more like those of a biped than of a quadruped” —as
if a biped would place one foot precisely ahead of another— unless it
hopped—but then we have to think of a thousand, or of thousands.
It is said that the marks were “generally 8 inches in advance of each
other.”
“The impression of the foot closely resembles that of a donkey’s shoe,
and measured from an inch and a half, in some instances, to two and a half
inches across.”
Or the impressions were cones in incomplete, or crescentic basins.
The diameters equaled diameters of very young colts’ hoofs: too small to
be compared with marks of donkey’s hoofs.
“On Sunday last the Rev. Mr. Musgrave alluded to the subject in his
sermon and suggested the possibility of the footprints being those of a
kangaroo, but this could scarcely have been the case, as they were found on
both sides of the Este. At present it remains a mystery, and many
superstitious people in the above-named towns are actually afraid to go
outside their doors after night.”
The Este is a body of water two miles wide.
London Times, March 6, 1855:
“The interest in this matter has scarcely yet subsided, many inquiries still
being made into the origin of the footprints, which caused so much
consternation upon the morning of the 8th ult. In addition to the
circumstances mentioned in the Times a little while ago, it may be stated
that at Dawlish a number of persons sallied out, armed with guns and other
weapons, for the purpose, if possible, of discovering and destroying the
animal which was supposed to have been so busy in multiplying its
footprints. As might have been expected, the party returned as they went.
Various speculations have been made as to the cause of the footprints. Some
have asserted that they are those of a kangaroo, while others affirm that theyen expected, the party returned as they went.
Various speculations have been made as to the cause of the footprints. Some
have asserted that they are those of a kangaroo, while others affirm that they

--- PAGE BREAK ---ty returned as they went.
Various speculations have been made as to the cause of the footprints. Some
have asserted that they are those of a kangaroo, while others affirm that they

--- PAGE BREAK ---

are the impressions of claws of large birds driven ashore by stress of
weather. On more than one occasion reports have been circulated that an
animal from a menagerie had been caught, but the matter at present is as
much involved in mystery as ever it was.”
In the Illustrated London News, the occurrence is given a great deal of
space. In the issue of Feb. 24, 1855, a sketch is given of the prints.
I call them cones in incomplete basins.
Except that they’re a little longish, they look like prints of hoofs of
horses—or, rather, of colts.
But they’re in a single line.
It is said that the marks from which the sketch was made were 8 inches
apart, and that this spacing was regular and invariable “in every parish.”
Also other towns besides those named in the Times are mentioned. The
writer, who had spent a winter in Canada, and was familiar with tracks in
snow, says that he had never seen “a more clearly defined track.” Also he
brings out the point that was so persistently disregarded by Prof. Owen and
the other correlators —that “no known animal walks in a line of single
footsteps, not even man.” With these wider inclusions, this writer concludes
with us that the marks were not footprints. It may be that his following
observation hits upon the crux of the whole occurrence:
That whatever it may have been that had made the marks, it had
removed, rather than pressed, the snow.
According to his observations the snow looked “as if branded with a hot
iron.”
Illustrated London News, March 3, 1855-214:
Prof. Owen, to whom a friend had sent drawings of the prints, writes that
there were claw-marks. He says that the “track” was made by “a” badger.
Six other witnesses sent letters to this number of the News. One
mentioned, but not published, is a notion of a strayed swan. Always this
homogeneous-seeing—”a” badger—“a” swan—“a” track. I should have
listed the other towns as well as those mentioned in the Times.
A letter from Mr. Musgrave is published. He, too, sends a sketch of the
prints. It, too, shows a single line. There are four prints, of which the third is
a little out of line.
There is no sign of a claw-mark.
The prints look like prints of longish hoofs of a very young colt, but they
are not so definitely outlined as in the sketch of February 24th, as if drawnout of line.
There is no sign of a claw-mark.
The prints look like prints of longish hoofs of a very young colt, but they
are not so definitely outlined as in the sketch of February 24th, as if drawn

--- PAGE BREAK ---is no sign of a claw-mark.
The prints look like prints of longish hoofs of a very young colt, but they
are not so definitely outlined as in the sketch of February 24th, as if drawn

--- PAGE BREAK ---

after disturbance by wind, or after thawing had set in. Measurements at
places a mile and a half apart, gave the same inter-spacing—”exactly eight
inches and a half apart.”
We now have a little study in the psychology and genesis of an attempted
correlation. Mr. Musgrave says: “I found a very apt opportunity to mention
the name ‘kangaroo’ in allusion to the report then current.” He says that he
had no faith in the kangaroo-story himself, but was glad “that a kangaroo
was in the wind,” because it opposed “a dangerous, degrading, and false
impression that it was the devil.”
“Mine was a word in season and did good.”
Whether it’s Jesuitical or not, and no matter what it is or isn’t, that is our
own acceptance: that, though we’ve often been carried away from this
attitude controversially, that is our acceptance as to every correlate of the
past that has been considered in this book— relatively to the Dominant of
its era.
Another correspondent writes that, though the prints in all cases
resembled hoof marks, there were indistinct traces of claws—that “an” otter
had made the marks. After that many other witnesses wrote to the News.
The correspondence was so great that, in the issue of March 10th, only a
selection could be given. There’s “a” jumping-rat solution and “a” hopping-
toad inspiration, and then someone came out strong with an idea of “a” hare
that had galloped with pairs of feet held close together, so as to make
impressions in a single line.
London Times, March 14, 1840:
“Among the high mountains of that elevated district where Glenorchy,
Glenlyon and Glenochay are contiguous, there have been met with several
times, during this and also the former winter, upon the snow, the tracks of
an animal seemingly unknown at present in Scotland. The print, in every
respect, is an exact resemblance to that of a foal of considerable size, with
this small difference, perhaps, that the sole seems a little longer, or not so
round; but as no one has had the good fortune as yet to have obtained a
glimpse of this creature, nothing more can be said of its shape or
dimensions; only it has been remarked, from the depth to which the feet
sank in the snow, that it must be a beast of considerable size. It has been
observed also that its walk is not like that of the generality of quadrupeds,
but that it is more like the bounding or leaping of a horse when scared orst be a beast of considerable size. It has been
observed also that its walk is not like that of the generality of quadrupeds,
but that it is more like the bounding or leaping of a horse when scared or

--- PAGE BREAK ---

pursued. It is not in one locality that its tracks have been met with, but
through a range of at least twelve miles.”
In the Illustrated London News, March 17, 1855, a correspondent from
Heidelberg writes, “upon the authority of a Polish Doctor of Medicine,” that
on the Piashowa-gora (Sand Hill) a small elevation on the border of Galicia,
but in Russian Poland, such marks are to be seen in the snow every year,
and sometimes in the sand of this hill, and “are attributed by the inhabitants
to supernatural influences.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

NEW LANDS

--- PAGE BREAK ---ks are to be seen in the snow every year,
and sometimes in the sand of this hill, and “are attributed by the inhabitants
to supernatural influences.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

NEW LANDS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

L
PART I
1
ANDS in the sky—
That they are nearby—
That they do not move.
I take for a principle that all being is the infinitely serial, and that
whatever has been will, with differences of particulars, be again—
The last quarter of the fifteenth century—land to the west
This first quarter of the twentieth century—we shall have revelations.
There will be data. There will be many. Behind this book, unpublished
collectively, or held as constituting its reserve forces, there are other
hundreds of data, but independently I take for a principle that all existence
is a flux and a re-flux, by which periods of expansion follow periods of
contraction; that few men can even think widely when times are narrow
times, but that human constrictions cannot repress extensions of thoughts
and lives and enterprise and dominion when times are wider times—so then
that the pageantry of foreign coasts that was revealed behind blank horizons
after the year 1492, cannot be, in the course of development, the only
astounding denial of seeming vacancy—that the spirit, or the animation,
and the stimulations and the needs of the fifteenth century are all appearing
again, and that requital may appear again—
Aftermath of war, as in the year 1492: demands for readjustments;
crowded and restless populations, revolts against limitations, intolerable
restrictions against emigrations. The young man is no longer urged, or is no
longer much inclined, to go westward. He will, or must, go somewhere. If
directions alone no longer invite him, he may hear invitation in dimensions.
There are many persons, who have not investigated for themselves, who
think that both poles of this earth have been discovered. There are too many
women traveling luxuriously in “Darkest Africa.” Eskimos of Disco,
Greenland, are publishing a newspaper. There must be outlet, or there will
be explosion—rth have been discovered. There are too many
women traveling luxuriously in “Darkest Africa.” Eskimos of Disco,
Greenland, are publishing a newspaper. There must be outlet, or there will
be explosion—

--- PAGE BREAK ---ered. There are too many
women traveling luxuriously in “Darkest Africa.” Eskimos of Disco,
Greenland, are publishing a newspaper. There must be outlet, or there will
be explosion—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Outlet and invitation and opportunity—
San Salvadors of the Sky—a Plymouth Rock that hangs in the heavens of
Servia—a foreign coast from which storms have brought materials to the
city of Birmingham, England.
Or the mentally freezing, or dying, will tighten their prohibitions, and the
chill of their censorships will contract, to extinction, our lives, which,
without sin, represent matter deprived of motion. Their ideal is Death, or
approximate death, warmed over occasionally only enough to fringe with
uniform, decorous icicles—from which there will be no escape, if, for the
living and sinful and adventurous there be not San Salvadors somewhere
else, a Plymouth Rock of reversed significance, coasts of sky-continents.
But every consciousness that we have of needs, and all hosts,
departments, and sub-divisions of data that indicate the possible requital of
needs are opposed—not by the orthodoxy of the common Puritans, but by
the Puritans of Science, and their austere, disheartening, dried or frozen
orthodoxy.
Islands of space—see Sci. Amer., vol. this and p. that—accounts from the
Repts. of the Brit. Assoc. for the Ad. of Sci.—Nature, etc.—except for an
occasional lapse, our sources of data will not be sneered at. As to our
interpretations, I consider them, myself, more as suggestions and gropings
and stimuli. Islands of space and the rivers and the oceans of an extra-
geography—
Stay and let salvation damn you—or straddle an auroral beam and paddle
from Rigel to Betelgeuse. If there be no accepting that there are such rivers
and oceans beyond this earth, stay and travel upon steamships with
schedules that can be depended upon, food so well cooked and well served,
comfort looked after so carefully— or some day board the thing that was
seen over the city of Marseilles, Aug. 19, 1887, and ride on that, bearing
down upon the moon, giving up for lost, escaping collision by the swirl of a
current that was never heard of before.
There are, or there are not, nearby cities of foreign existences. They have,
or they have not, been seen, by reflection, in the skies, of Sweden and
Alaska. As one will. Whether acceptable, or too preposterous to be thought
of, our data are of rabbles of living things that have been seen in the sky;
also of processions of military beings—monsters that live in the sky and die
in the sky, and spatter this earth with their red life-fluids—ships from other
worlds that have been seen by millions of the inhabitants of this earth,ary beings—monsters that live in the sky and die
in the sky, and spatter this earth with their red life-fluids—ships from other
worlds that have been seen by millions of the inhabitants of this earth,

--- PAGE BREAK ---that live in the sky and die
in the sky, and spatter this earth with their red life-fluids—ships from other
worlds that have been seen by millions of the inhabitants of this earth,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

exploring, night after night, in the sky of France, England, New England,
and Canada—signals from the moon, which, according to notable
indications, may not be so far from this earth as New York is from London
—definitely reported and, in some instances, multitudinously witnessed,
events that have been disregarded by our opposition—
A scientific priestcraft—
“Thou shalt not” is crystallized in its frozen textbooks.
I have data upon data upon data of new lands that are not far away. I hold
out expectations and the materials of new hopes and new despairs and new
triumphs and new tragedies. I hold out my hands to point to the sky—there
is a hierarchy that utters me manacles, I think—there is a dominant force
that pronounces prisons that have dogmas for walls for such thoughts. It
binds its formulas around all attempting extensions.
But sounds have been heard in the sky. They have been heard, and it is
not possible to destroy the records of them. They have been heard. In their
repetitions and regularities of series and intervals, we shall recognize
perhaps interpretable language. Columns of clouds, different-colored by
sunset, have vibrated to the artillery of other worlds like the strings of a
cosmic harp, and I conceive of no buzzing of insects that can forever divert
attention from such dramatic reverberations. Language has shone upon the
dark parts of the moon: luminous exclamations that have fluttered in the
lunar crater Copernicus; the eloquence of the starlike light in Aristarchus;
hymns that have been chanted in lights and shades upon Linnp; the wilder,
luminous music in Plato—
But not a sound that has been heard in the sky, not a thing that has fallen
from the sky, not a thing that “should not be,” but that has nevertheless been
seen in the sky can we, with any sense of freedom, investigate, until first we
find out about the incubus that in the past has suffocated even speculation. I
shall find out for myself: anybody who cares to may find out with me. A
ship from a foreign world does, or does not, sail in the sky of this earth. It is
in accordance with observations by hundreds of thousands of witnesses that
this event has taken place, and, if the time be when aeronautics upon this
earth is of small development, that is an important circumstance to consider
—but there is suffocation upon the whole occurrence and every one of its
circumstances. Nobody can give good attention to the data, if diverting his
mind is consciousness, altogether respectful, of the scientists who say that
there are no other physical worlds except planets, millions of miles away,ive good attention to the data, if diverting his
mind is consciousness, altogether respectful, of the scientists who say that
there are no other physical worlds except planets, millions of miles away,

--- PAGE BREAK ---o the data, if diverting his
mind is consciousness, altogether respectful, of the scientists who say that
there are no other physical worlds except planets, millions of miles away,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

distances that conceivable vessels could not traverse. I should like to let
loose, in an opening bombardment, the data of the little black stones of
Birmingham, which, time after time, in a period of eleven years, fell
obviously from a fixed point in the sky, but such a release, now, would be
wasted. It will have to be prepared for. Now each one would say to himself
that there are no such fixed points in the sky. Why not" Because
astronomers say that there are not.
But there is something else that is implied. Implied is the general
supposition that the science of astronomy represents all that is most
accurate, most exacting, painstaking, semi-religious in human thought, and
is therefore authoritative.
Anybody who has not been through what I’ve been through, in
investigating this subject, would ask what are the bases and what is the
consistency of the science of astronomy. The miserable, though at times
amusing, confusions of thought that I find in this field of supposed research
word my inquiry differently—what of dignity, or even of decency, is in it"
Phantom dogmas, with their tails clutching at vacancies, are coiled
around our data.
Serpents of pseudo-thought are stifling history.
They are squeezing “Thou shalt not” upon Development.
New Lands—and the horrors and lights, explosions and music of them;
rabbles of hellhounds and the march of military angels. But they are
Promised Lands, and first must we traverse a desert. There is ahead of us a
waste of parallaxes and spectrograms and triangulations. It may be weary
going through a waste of astronomic determinations, but that depends—
If out of a dreary, academic zenith shower betrayals of frailty, folly, and
falsification, they will be manna to our malices—
Or sterile demonstrations be warmed by our cheerful cynicisms into
delicious little lies—blossoms and fruits of unexpected oases—
Rocks to strike with our suspicions—and the gush of exposures foaming
with new implications.
Tyrants, dragons, giants—and, if all be dispatched with the skill and the
might and the triumph over awful odds of the hero who himself tells his
story—
I hear three yells from some hitherto undiscovered, grotesque critter at
the very entrance of the desert.e skill and the
might and the triumph over awful odds of the hero who himself tells his
story—
I hear three yells from some hitherto undiscovered, grotesque critter at
the very entrance of the desert.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t and the triumph over awful odds of the hero who himself tells his
story—
I hear three yells from some hitherto undiscovered, grotesque critter at
the very entrance of the desert.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“P
2
REDICTION Confirmed”
“Another Verification”
“A Third Verification of Prediction”
Three times, in spite of its long-established sobriety, the Journal of the
Franklin Institute, vols. 106 and 107, reels with an astronomer’s
exhilarations. He might exult and indulge himself, and that would be no
affair of ours, and, in fact, we’d like to see everybody happy, perhaps, but it
is out of these three chanticleerities by Prof. Pliny Chase that we materialize
our opinion that, so far as methods and strategies are concerned, no
particular differences can be noted between astrologers and astronomers,
and that both represent engulfment in Dark Ages. Lord Bacon pointed out
that the astrologers had squirmed into prestige and emolument by shooting
at marks, disregarding their misses, and recording their hits with unseemly
advertisement. When, in August, 1878, Prof. Swift and Prof. Watson said
that, during an eclipse of the sun, they had seen two luminous bodies that
might be planets between Mercury and the sun, Prof. Chase announced that,
five years before, he had made a prediction, and that it had been confirmed
by the positions of these bodies. Three times, in capital letters, he screamed,
or announced, according to one’s sensitiveness, or prejudices, that the “new
planets” were in the exact positions of his calculations. Prof. Chase wrote
that, before his time, there had been two great instances of astronomic
calculation confirmed: the discovery of Neptune and the discovery of “the
asteroidal belt,” a claim that is disingenuously worded. If by mathematical
principles, or by any other definite principles, there has ever been one great,
or little, instance of astronomic discovery by means of calculations,
confusion must destroy us, in the introductory position that we take, or
expose our irresponsibility, and vitiate all that follows: that our data are
oppressed by a tyranny of false announcements; that there never has been
an astronomic discovery other than the observational or the accidental.
In The Story of the Heavens, Sir Robert Ball’s opinion of the discovery of
Neptune is that it is a triumph unparalleled in the annals of science. Heery other than the observational or the accidental.
In The Story of the Heavens, Sir Robert Ball’s opinion of the discovery of
Neptune is that it is a triumph unparalleled in the annals of science. He

--- PAGE BREAK ---bservational or the accidental.
In The Story of the Heavens, Sir Robert Ball’s opinion of the discovery of
Neptune is that it is a triumph unparalleled in the annals of science. He

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lavishes—the great astronomer Leverrier, buried for months in profound
meditations—the dramatic moment —Leverrier rises from his calculations
and points to the sky—”Lo” there a new planet is found.
My desire is not so much to agonize over the single fraudulencies or
delusions, as to typify the means by which the science of Astronomy has
established and maintained itself:
According to Leverrier, there was a planet external to Uranus; according
to Hansen, there were two; according to Airy, “doubtful if there were one.”
One planet was found—so calculated Leverrier, in his profound
meditations. Suppose two had been found—confirmation of the brilliant
computations by Hansen. None—the opinion of the great astronomer, Sir
George Airy.
Leverrier calculated that the hypothetic planet was at a distance from the
sun, within the limits of 35 and 37.9 times this earth’s distance from the
sun. The new planet was found in a position said to be 30 times this earth’s
distance from the sun. The discrepancy was so great that, in the United
States, astronomers refused to accept that Neptune had been discovered by
means of calculation: see such publications as the American Journal of
Science, of the period. Upon Aug. 29, 1849, Dr. Babinet read, to the French
Academy, a paper in which he showed that, by the observations of three
years, the revolution of Neptune would have to be placed at 165 years.
Between the limits of 207 and 233 years was the period that Leverrier had
calculated. Simultaneously, in England, Adams had calculated. Upon Sept.
2, 1846, after he had, for at least a month, been charting the stars in the
region toward which Adams had pointed, Prof. Challis wrote to Sir George
Airy that this work would occupy his time for three more months. This
indicates the extent of the region toward which Adams had pointed.
The discovery of the asteroids, or in Prof. Chase’s not very careful
language, the discovery of the “asteroidal belt as deduced from Bode’s
Law”:
We learn that Baron Von Zach had formed a society of twenty-four
astronomers to search, in accordance with Bode’s Law, for “a planet”—and
not “a group,” not “an asteroidal belt”—between Jupiter and Mars. The
astronomers had organized, dividing the zodiac into twenty-four zones,
assigning each zone to an astronomer. They searched. They found not one
asteroid. Seven or eight hundred are now known.
Philosophical Magazine, 12-62:ized, dividing the zodiac into twenty-four zones,
assigning each zone to an astronomer. They searched. They found not one
asteroid. Seven or eight hundred are now known.
Philosophical Magazine, 12-62:

--- PAGE BREAK ---odiac into twenty-four zones,
assigning each zone to an astronomer. They searched. They found not one
asteroid. Seven or eight hundred are now known.
Philosophical Magazine, 12-62:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That Piazzi, the discoverer of the first asteroid, had not been searching
for a hypothetic body, as deduced from Bode’s Law, but, upon an
investigation of his own, had been charting stars in the constellation Taurus,
night of Jan. 1, 1801. He noticed a light that he thought had moved, and,
with his mind a blank, so far as asteroids and brilliant deductions were
concerned, announced that he had discovered a comet.
As an instance of the crafty way in which some astronomers now tell the
story, see Sir Robert Ball’s Story of the Heavens, p. 230:
The organization of the astronomers of Lilienthal, but never a hint that
Piazzi was not one of them—”the search for a small planet was soon
rewarded by a success that has rendered the evening of the first day of the
nineteenth century memorable in astronomy.” Ball tells of Piazzi’s charting
of the stars, and makes it appear that Piazzi had charted stars as a means of
finding asteroids deductively, rewarded soon by success, whereas Piazzi
had never heard of such a search, and did not know an asteroid when he
saw one. “This laborious and accomplished astronomer had organized an
ingenious system of exploring the heavens, which was eminently calculated
to discriminate a planet among the starry host . . . at length he was rewarded
by a success which amply compensated him for all his toil.”
Prof. Chase—these two great instances not of mere discovery, but of
discovery by means of calculation, according to him—now the subject of
his supposition that he, too, could calculate triumphantly— the verification
depended upon the accuracy of Prof. Swift and Prof. Watson in recording
the positions of the bodies that they had announced—
Sidereal Messenger, 6-84:
Prof. Colbert, Superintendent of Dearborn Observatory, leader of the
party of which Prof. Swift was a member, says that the observations by
Swift and Watson agreed, because Swift had made his observations agree
with Watson’s. The accusation is not that Swift had falsely announced a
discovery of two unknown bodies, but that his precise determining of
positions had occurred after Watson’s determinations had been published.
Popular Astronomy, 7-13:
Prof. Asaph Hall writes that, several days after the eclipse, Prof. Watson
told him that he had seen “a” luminous body near the sun, and that his
declaration that he had seen two unknown bodies was not made until after
Swift had been heard from.ter the eclipse, Prof. Watson
told him that he had seen “a” luminous body near the sun, and that his
declaration that he had seen two unknown bodies was not made until after
Swift had been heard from.

--- PAGE BREAK ---f. Watson
told him that he had seen “a” luminous body near the sun, and that his
declaration that he had seen two unknown bodies was not made until after
Swift had been heard from.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Perched upon two delusions, Prof. Chase crowed his false raptures. The
unknown bodies, whether they ever had been in the orbit of his calculations
or not, were never seen again.
So it is our expression that hosts of astronomers calculate, and
calculation-mad, calculate and calculate and calculate, and that, when one
of them does point within 600,000,000 miles (by conventional
measurements) of something that is found, he is the Leverrier of the text-
books; that the others are the Prof. Chases not of the text-books.
As to most of us, the symbols of the infinitesimal calculus humble
independent thinking into the conviction that used to be enforced by drops
of blood from a statue. In the farrago and conflicts of daily lives, it is relief
to feel such a rapport with finality, in a religious sense, or in a
mathematical sense. So then, if the seeming of exactness in Astronomy be
either infamously, or carelessly and laughingly, brought about by the
connivances of which Swift and Watson were accused, and if the prestige of
Astronomy be founded upon nothing but huge capital letters and
exclamation points, or upon the disproportionality of balancing one
Leverrier against hundreds of Chases, it may not be better that we should
know this, if then to those of us who, in the religious sense, have nothing to
depend upon, comes deprivation of even this last, lingering seeming of
foundation, or seeming existence of exactness and realness, somewhere—
Except—that, if there be nearby lands in the sky and beings from foreign
worlds that visit this earth, that is a great subject, and the trash that is
clogging an epoch must be cleared away.
We have had a little sermon upon the insecurity of human triumphs, and,
having brought it to a climax, now seems to be the time to stop; but there is
still an involved “triumph” and I’d not like to have inefficiency, as well as
probably everything else, charged against us—
The Discovery of Uranus.
We mention this stimulus to the text-book writers’ ecstasies, because out
of phenomena of the planet Uranus, the “Neptune-triumph” developed. For
Richard Proctor’s reasons for arguing that this discovery was not accidental,
see Old and New Astronomy, p. 646. Philosophical Transactions, 71-492—a
paper by Herschel— “An account of a comet discovered on March 13,
1781.” A year went by, and not an astronomer in the world knew a new
planet when he saw one: then Lexell did find out that the supposed comet
was a planet.n account of a comet discovered on March 13,
1781.” A year went by, and not an astronomer in the world knew a new
planet when he saw one: then Lexell did find out that the supposed comet
was a planet.

--- PAGE BREAK ---discovered on March 13,
1781.” A year went by, and not an astronomer in the world knew a new
planet when he saw one: then Lexell did find out that the supposed comet
was a planet.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Statues from which used to drip the life-blood of a parasitic cult—
Structures of parabolas from which bleed equations—
As we go along we shall develop the acceptance that astronomers might
as well try to squeeze blood from images as to try to seduce symbols into
conclusions, because applicable mathematics has no more to do with
planetary inter-actions than have statues of saints. If this denial that the
calculi have place in gravitational astronomy be accepted, the astronomers
lose their supposed god; they become an unfocused priesthood; the stamina
of their arrogance wilts. We begin with the next to the simplest problem in
celestial mechanics: that is, the formulation of the inter-actions of the sun
and the moon and this earth. In the highest of mathematics, final, sacred
mathematics, can this next to the simplest problem in so-called
mathematical astronomy be solved"
It cannot be solved.
Every now and then, somebody announces that he has solved the
Problem of the Three Bodies, but it is always an incomplete, or
impressionistic, demonstration, compounded of abstractions, and ignoring
the conditions of bodies in space. Over and over we shall find vacancy
under supposed achievements; elaborate structures that are pretensions
without foundation. Here we learn that astronomers cannot formulate the
inter-actions of three bodies in space, but calculate anyway, and publish
what they call the formula of a planet that is inter-acting with a thousand
other bodies. They explain. It will be one of our most lasting impressions of
astronomers: they explain and explain and explain. The astronomers explain
that, though in finer terms, the mutual effects of three planets cannot be
determined, so dominant is the power of the sun that all other effects are
negligible.
Before the discovery of Uranus, there was no way by which the miracles
of the astro-magicians could be tested. They said that their formulas worked
out, and external inquiry was panic-stricken at the mention of a formula.
But Uranus was discovered, and the magicians were called upon to
calculate his path. They did calculate, and, if Uranus had moved in a regular
path, I do not mean to say that astronomers or college boys have no
mathematics by which to determine anything so simple.
They computed the orbit of Uranus.
He went somewhere else.moved in a regular
path, I do not mean to say that astronomers or college boys have no
mathematics by which to determine anything so simple.
They computed the orbit of Uranus.
He went somewhere else.

--- PAGE BREAK ---path, I do not mean to say that astronomers or college boys have no
mathematics by which to determine anything so simple.
They computed the orbit of Uranus.
He went somewhere else.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

They explained. They computed some more. They went on explaining
and computing, year in and year out, and the planet Uranus kept on going
somewhere else. Then they conceived of a powerful perturbing force
beyond Uranus—so then that at the distance of Uranus the sun is not so
dominant—in which case the effects of Saturn upon Uranus and Uranus
upon Saturn are not so negligible—on through complexes of inter-actions
that infinitely intensify by cumulativeness into a black outlook for the
whole brilliant system. The pal o-astronomers calculated, and for more
than fifty years pointed variously at the sky. Finally two of them, of course
agreeing upon the general background of Uranus, pointed within distances
that are conventionally supposed to have been about six hundred millions of
miles of Neptune, and now it is religiously, if not insolently, said that the
discovery of Neptune was not accidental—
That the test of that which is not accidental is ability to do it again—
That it is within the power of anybody, who does not know a hyperbola
from a cosine, to find out whether the astronomers are led by a cloud of
rubbish by day and a pillar of bosh by night—
If, by the magic of his mathematics, any astronomer could have pointed
to the position of Neptune, let him point to the planet past Neptune.
According to the same reasoning by which a planet past Uranus was
supposed to be, a Trans-Neptunian planet may be supposed to be. Neptune
shows perturbations similar to those of Uranus.
According to Prof. Todd there is such a planet, and it revolves around the
sun once in 375 years. There are two, according to Prof. Forbes, one
revolving once in 1,000 years, and the other once in 5,000 years. See
Macpherson’s A Century’s Progress in Astronomy. It exists, according to Dr.
Eric Doolittle, and revolves once in 283 years (Sci. Amer., 122-641).
According to Mr. Hind it revolves once in 1,600 years (Smithson. Miscell.
Cols., 20-20).
So then we have found out some things, and, relatively to the oppressions
that we felt from our opposition, they are reassuring. But also are they
depressing. Because, if, in this existence of ours, there is no prestige higher
than that of astronomic science, and, if that seeming of substantial renown
has been achieved by a composition of bubbles, what of anything like
soundness must there be to all lesser reputes and achievements"
Let three bodies inter-act. There is no calculus by which their inter-
actions can be formulated. But there are a thousand inter-acting bodies inmust there be to all lesser reputes and achievements"
Let three bodies inter-act. There is no calculus by which their inter-
actions can be formulated. But there are a thousand inter-acting bodies in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

this solar system—or supposed solar system—and we find that the highest
prestige in our existence is built upon the tangled assertions that there are
magicians who can compute in a thousand quantities, though they cannot
compute in three.
Then all other so-called human triumphs, or moderate successes,
products of anybody’s reasoning processes and labors—and what are they,
if higher than them all, more academic, austere, rigorous, exact are the
methods and the processes of the astronomers" What can be thought of our
whole existence, its nature and its destiny "
That our existence, a thing within one solar system, or supposed solar
system, is a stricken thing that is mewling through space, shocking able-
minded, healthy systems with the sores on its sun, its ghastly moons, its
civilizations that are all broken out with sciences; a celestial leper, holding
out doddering expanses into which charitable systems drop golden comets"
If it be the leprous thing that our findings seem to indicate, there is no
encouragement for us to go on. We cannot discover: we can only betray
new symptoms. If I be a part of such a stricken thing, I know of nothing but
sickness and sores and rags to reason with: my data will be pustules; my
interpretations will be inflammations—

--- PAGE BREAK ---toms. If I be a part of such a stricken thing, I know of nothing but
sickness and sores and rags to reason with: my data will be pustules; my
interpretations will be inflammations—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

S
3
OUTHERN plantations and the woolly heads of Negroes pounding
the ground—cries in northern regions and round white faces turned to
the sky—fiery globes in the sky—a study in black, white, and golden
formations in one general glow. Upon the night of Nov. 13-14, 1833,
occurred the most sensational celestial spectacle of the nineteenth century:
for six hours fiery meteors gushed from the heavens, and were visible along
the whole Atlantic coast of the United States.
One supposes that astronomers do not pound the ground with their heads,
and presumably they do not screech, but they have feelings just the same.
They itched. Here was something to formulate. When he hears of something
new and unquestionable in the sky, an astronomer is diseased with ill-
suppressed equations. Symbols persecute him for expression. His is the
frenzy of someone who would stop automobiles, railroad trains, bicycles,
all things, to measure them; run, with a yardstick, after sparrows, flies, all
persons passing his door. This is supposed to be scientific, but it can be
monomaniac. Very likely the distress and the necessity of Prof. Olmstead
were keenest. He was the first to formulate. He “demonstrated” that these
meteors, known as the Leonids, revolved around the sun once in six
months.
They didn’t.
Then Prof. Newton “demonstrated” that the “real” period was thirty-three
and a quarter years. But this was done empirically, and that is not divine,
nor even aristocratic, and the thing would have to be done rationally, or
mathematically, by someone, because, if there be not mathematical
treatment, in gravitational terms, of such phenomena, astronomers are in
reduced circumstances. It was Dr. Adams, who, emboldened with his
experience in not having to point anywhere near Neptune, but nevertheless
being acclaimed by all patriotic Englishmen as the real discoverer of
Neptune, mathematically “confirmed” Prof. Newton’s “findings.” Dr.
Adams predicted that the Leonids would return in November, 1866, and inclaimed by all patriotic Englishmen as the real discoverer of
Neptune, mathematically “confirmed” Prof. Newton’s “findings.” Dr.
Adams predicted that the Leonids would return in November, 1866, and in

--- PAGE BREAK ---otic Englishmen as the real discoverer of
Neptune, mathematically “confirmed” Prof. Newton’s “findings.” Dr.
Adams predicted that the Leonids would return in November, 1866, and in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

November, 1899, occupying several years, upon each occasion, in passing a
point in this earth’s orbit.
There were meteors upon the night of Nov. 13-14, 1866. They were
plentiful. They often are in the middle of November. They no more
resembled the spectacle of 1833 than an ordinary shower resembles a
cloudburst. But the “demonstration” required that there should be an equal
display, or, according to some aspects, a greater display, upon the
corresponding night of the next year. There was a display, the next year; but
it was in the sky of the United States, and was not seen in England. Another
occurrence nothing like that of 1833 was reported from the United States.
By conventional theory, this earth was in a vast, wide stream of meteors,
the earth revolving so as to expose successive parts to bombardment. So
keenly did Richard Proctor visualize the earth so immersed and so
bombarded, that, when nothing was seen in England, he explained. He spent
most of his life explaining. In the Student, 2-254, he wrote: “Had the
morning of Nov. 14, 1867, been clear in England, we should have seen the
commencement of the display, but not its more brilliant part.”
We have had some experience with the “triumphs” of astronomers: we
have some suspicions as to their greatly advertised accuracy. We shall find
out for ourselves whether the morning of Nov. 14, 1867, was clear enough
in England or not. We suspect that it was a charming morning, in England—
Monthly Notices, R. A. S. 28-32:
Report by E. J. Lowe, Highfield House, night of Nov. 13-14, 1867:
“Clear at 1.10 A.M.; high, thin cumuli, at 2 A.M., but sky not covered until
3.10 A.M., and the moon’s place visible until 3.55 A.M.; sky not overcast until
5.50 A.M.”
The determination of the orbital period of thirty-three years and a quarter,
but with appearances of a period of thirty-three years, was arrived at by
Prof. Newton by searching old records, finding that, in an intersection-
period of thirty-three years, there had been extraordinary meteoric displays,
from the year 902 A.D. to the year 1833 A.D. He reminds me of an
investigator who searched old records for appearances of Halley’s comet,
and found something that he identified as Halley’s comet, exactly on time,
every seventy-five years, back to times of the Roman Empire. See the
Edinburgh Review, vol. 66. It seems that he did not know that orthodoxy
does not attribute exactly a seventy-five year period to Halley’s comet. He
got what he went looking for, anyway. I have no disposition for us to enjoy66. It seems that he did not know that orthodoxy
does not attribute exactly a seventy-five year period to Halley’s comet. He
got what he went looking for, anyway. I have no disposition for us to enjoy

--- PAGE BREAK ---did not know that orthodoxy
does not attribute exactly a seventy-five year period to Halley’s comet. He
got what he went looking for, anyway. I have no disposition for us to enjoy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ourselves at Prof. Newton’s expense, because, surely enough, his method, if
regarded as only experimental, or tentative, is legitimate enough, though
one does suspect him of very loose behavior in his picking and choosing.
But Dr. Adams announced that, upon mathematical grounds, he had arrived
at the same conclusion.
The test:
The next return of the Leonids was predicted for November, 1899.
Memoirs of the British Astronomical Association, 9-6:
“No meteoric event ever before aroused such widespread interest, or so
grievously disappointed anticipation.”
There were no Leonids in November, 1899.
It was explained. They would be seen next year.
There were no Leonids in November, 1900.
It was explained. They would be seen next year.
No Leonids.
Vaunt and inflation and parade of the symbols of the infinitesimal
calculus; the pomp of vectors, and the hush that surrounds quaternions: but
when an axis of co-ordinates loses its rectitude, in the service of a
questionable selection, disciplined symbols become a rabble. The Most
High of Mathematics—and one of his proposed prophets points to the sky.
Nowhere near where he points, something is found. He points to a date—
nothing happens.
Prof. Serviss, in Astronomy in a Nutshell, explains. He explains that the
Leonids did not appear when they “should” have appeared, because Jupiter
and Saturn had altered their orbits.
Back in the times of the Crusades, and nothing was disturbing the
Leonids—and if you’re stronger for dates than I am, think of some more
dates, and nothing was altering the orbit of the Leonids—discovery of
America, and the Spanish Armada, in 1588, which, by some freak, I always
remember, and no effects by Jupiter and Saturn—French Revolution and on
to the year 1866, and still nothing the matter with the Leonids—but, once
removed from “discovery” and “identification,” and that’s the end of their
period, diverted by Jupiter and Saturn, old things that had been up in the
sky at least as long as they had been. If we’re going to accept the calculi at
all, the calculus of probabilities must have a hearing. My own opinion,
based upon reading many accounts of November meteors, is that decidedlys they had been. If we’re going to accept the calculi at
all, the calculus of probabilities must have a hearing. My own opinion,
based upon reading many accounts of November meteors, is that decidedly

--- PAGE BREAK ---we’re going to accept the calculi at
all, the calculus of probabilities must have a hearing. My own opinion,
based upon reading many accounts of November meteors, is that decidedly

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the display of 1833 did not repeat in 1866: that a false priest sinned and that
an equally false highpriest gave him sanction.
The tragedy goes comically on. I feel that, to all good Neo-astronomers, I
can recommend the following serenity from an astronomer who was
unperturbed by what happened to his science, in November, 1899, and some
more Novembers—
Bryant, A History of Astronomy, p. 252:
That the meteoric display of 1899 had failed to appear—”as had been
predicted by Dr. Downing and Dr. Johnstone Stoney.”
One starts to enjoy this disguisement, thinking of virtually all the
astronomers in the world who had predicted the return of the Leonids, and
the finding, by Bryant, of two who had not, and his recording only the
opinion of these two, coloring so as to look like another triumph—but we
may thank our sorely stimulated suspiciousness for still richer enjoyment—
That even these two said no such saving thing—
Nature, Nov. 9, 1899:
Dr. Downing and Dr. Stoney, instead of predicting failure of the Leonids
to appear, advise watch for them several hours later than had been
calculated.
I conceive of the astronomers’ fictitious paradise as malarchitectural with
corrupted equations, and paved with rotten symbols. Seeming pure, white
fountains of formal vanities—boasts that are gushing from decomposed
triumphs. We shall find their furnishings shabby with tarnished comets. We
turn expectantly to the subject of comets; or we turn cynically to the
subject. We turn maliciously to the subject of comets. Nevertheless,
threading the insecurities of our various feelings, is a motif that is the
steady essence of Neo-astronomy:
That, in celestial phenomena, as well as in all other fields of research, the
irregular, or the unformulable, or the uncapturable, is present in at least
equal representation with the uniform: that, given any clear, definite,
seemingly unvarying thing in the heavens, co-existently is something of
wantonness or irresponsibility, bizarre and incredible, according to the
standards of purists—that the science of Astronomy concerns itself with
only one aspect of existence, because of course there can be no science of
the obverse phenomena —which is good excuse for so enormously
disregarding, if we must have the idea that there are real sciences, but which
shows the hopelessness of positively attempting.science of
the obverse phenomena —which is good excuse for so enormously
disregarding, if we must have the idea that there are real sciences, but which
shows the hopelessness of positively attempting.

--- PAGE BREAK ---se phenomena —which is good excuse for so enormously
disregarding, if we must have the idea that there are real sciences, but which
shows the hopelessness of positively attempting.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The story of the Comets, as not told in Mr. Chambers’ book of that title,
is almost unparalleled in the annals of humiliation. When a comet is
predicted to return, that means faith in the Law of Gravitation. It is
Newtonism that comets, as well as planets, obey the Law of Gravitation,
and move in one of the conic sections. When a comet does not return when
it “should,” there is no refuge for an astronomer to say that planets
perturbed it, because one will ask why he did not include such factors in his
calculations, if these phenomena be subject to mathematical treatment. In
his book, Mr. Chambers avoids, or indicates that he never heard of, a great
deal that will receive cordiality from us, but he does publish a list of
predicted comets that did not return. Writing, in 1909, he mentions others
for which he had hopes:
Brooks’ First Periodic Comet (1886, IV)—”We must see what the years
1909 and 1910 bring forth.” This is pretty indefinite anticipation—however,
nothing was brought forth, according to Monthly Notices, R. A. S., 1909 and
1910: the Brooks’ comet that is recorded is Brooks’, 1889. Giacobini’s
Second Periodic Comet (1900, III)— not seen in 1907—“so we shall not
have a chance of knowing more about it until 1914.” No more known about
it in 1914. Borelly’s Comet (1905, II)—”Its expected return, in 1911 or
1912, will be awaited with interest.” This is pretty indefinite awaiting: it is
now said that this comet did return upon Sept. 19, 1911. Denning’s Second
Periodic Comet (1894, I)—expected, in 1909, but not seen up to Mr.
Chambers’ time of writing—no mention in Monthly Notices. Swift’s Comet,
of Nov. 20, 1894—“must be regarded as lost, unless it should be found in
December, 1912.” No mention of it in Monthly Notices.
Three comets were predicted to return in 1913—not one of them returned
(Monthly Notices, 74-326).
Once upon a time, armed with some of the best and latest cynicisms, I
was hunting for prey in the Magazine of Science, and came upon an account
of a comet that was expected in the year 1848. I supposed that the thing had
been positively predicted, and very likely failed to appear, and, for such
common game, had no interest. But I came upon the spoor of disgrace, in
the word “triumph”—”If it does come, it will afford another astronomical
triumph” (Mag. of Sci., 1848-107). The astronomers had predicted the
return of a great comet in the year 1848. In Monthly Notices, April, 1847,
Mr. Hind says that the result of his calculations had satisfied him that the
identification had been complete, and that, in all probability, “the cometthe year 1848. In Monthly Notices, April, 1847,
Mr. Hind says that the result of his calculations had satisfied him that the
identification had been complete, and that, in all probability, “the comet

--- PAGE BREAK ---onthly Notices, April, 1847,
Mr. Hind says that the result of his calculations had satisfied him that the
identification had been complete, and that, in all probability, “the comet

--- PAGE BREAK ---

must be very near.” Accepting Prof. Madler’s determinations, he predicted
that the comet would return to position nearest the sun, about the end of
February, 1848.
No comet.
The astronomers explained. I don’t know what the mind of an astronomer
looks like, but I think of a fizzle with excuses revolving around it. A writer
in the American Journal of Science, 2-9-442, explains excellently. It seems
that, when the comet failed to return, Mr. Barber, of Etwell, again went over
the calculations. He found that, between the years 1556 and 1592, the
familiar attractions of Jupiter and Saturn had diminished the comet’s period
by 263 days, but that something else had wrought an effect that he set down
positively at 751 days, with a resulting retardation of 488 days. This is
magic that would petrify, with chagrin, the arteries of the hemorrhagicalest
statue that ever convinced the faithful—reaching back through three
centuries of inter-actions, which, without divine insight, are unimaginable
when occurring in three seconds—
But there was no comet.
The astronomers explained. They went on calculating, and ten years later
were still calculating. See Recreative Science, 1860-139. It would be heroic
were it not mania. What was the matter with Mr. Barber, of Etwell, and the
intellectual tentacles that he had thrust through centuries is not made clear
in most of the contemporaneous accounts; but, in the year 1857, Mr. Hind
published a pamphlet and explained. It seems that researches by Littrow
had given new verification to a path that had been computed for the comet,
and that nothing had been the matter with Mr. Barber, of Etwell, except his
insufficiency of data, which had been corrected. Mr. Hind predicted. He
pointed to the future, but he pointed like someone closing a thumb and
spreading four fingers. Mr. Hind said that, according to Halley’s
calculations, the comet would arrive in the summer of 1865. However, an
acceleration of five years had been discovered, so that the time should be
set down for the middle of August, 1860. However, according to Mr. Hind’s
calculated orbit, the comet might return in the summer of 1864. However,
allowing for acceleration, “the comet is found to be due early in August,
1858.”
Then Bomme calculated. He predicted that the comet would return upon
Aug. 2, 1858.
There was no comet.f 1864. However,
allowing for acceleration, “the comet is found to be due early in August,
1858.”
Then Bomme calculated. He predicted that the comet would return upon
Aug. 2, 1858.
There was no comet.

--- PAGE BREAK ---owing for acceleration, “the comet is found to be due early in August,
1858.”
Then Bomme calculated. He predicted that the comet would return upon
Aug. 2, 1858.
There was no comet.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The astronomers went on calculating. They predicted that the comet
would return upon Aug. 22, 1860.
No comet.
But I think that a touch of mercy is a luxury that we can afford; anyway,
we’ll have to be merciful or monotonous. For variety we shall switch from
a comet that did not appear to one that did appear. Upon the night of June
30, 1861, a magnificent humiliator appeared in the heavens. One of the
most brilliant luminosities of modern times appeared as suddenly as if it
had dropped through the shell of our solar system—if it be a solar system.
There were letters in the newspapers: correspondents wanted to know why
this extraordinary object had not been seen coming, by astronomers. Mr.
Hind explained. He wrote that the comet was a small object, and
consequently had not been seen coming by astronomers. No one could deny
the magnificence of the comet; nevertheless Mr. Hind declared that it was
very small, looking so large because it was near this earth. This is not the
later explanation: nowadays it is said that the comet had been in southern
skies, where it had been observed. All contemporaneous astronomers agreed
that the comet had come down from the north, and not one of them thought
of explaining that it had been invisible because it had been in the south. A
luminosity, with a mist around it, altogether the apparent size of the moon,
had burst into view. In Recreative Science, 3-143, Webb says that nothing
like it had been seen since the year 1680. Nevertheless the orthodox
pronouncement was that the object was small and would fade away as
quickly as it had appeared. See the Athenaeum, July 6, 1861—”So small an
object will soon get beyond our view.” (Hind)
Popular Science Review, 1-513:
That, in April, 1862, the thing was still visible.
Something else that was seen under circumstances that cannot be
considered triumphant—upon Nov. 28, 1872, Prof. Klinkerfues, of
Gottingen, looking for Biela’s comet, saw meteors in the path of the
expected comet. He telegraphed to Pogson, of Madras, to look near the star
Theta Centauri, and he would see the comet. I’d not say that this was in the
field of magic, but it does seem consummate. A dramatic telegram like this
electrifies the faithful— an astronomer in the north telling an astronomer far
in the south where to look, so definitely naming one special little star in
skies invisible in the north. Pogson looked where he was told to look and
announced that he saw what he was told to see. But at meetings of the R. A.k, so definitely naming one special little star in
skies invisible in the north. Pogson looked where he was told to look and
announced that he saw what he was told to see. But at meetings of the R. A.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

S., Jan. 10 and March 14, 1873, Captain Tupman pointed out that, even if
Biela’s comet had appeared, it would have been nowhere near this star.
Among our later emotions will be indignation against all astronomers
who say that they know whether stars are approaching or receding. When
we arrive at that subject it will be the preciseness of the astronomers that
will perhaps inflame us beyond endurance. We note here the far smaller
difficulty of determining whether a relatively nearby comet is coming or
going. Upon Nov. 6, 1892, Edwin Holmes discovered a comet. In the Jour.
B. A. A., 3-182, Holmes writes that different astronomers had calculated its
distance from twenty million miles to two hundred million miles, and had
determined its diameter to be all the way from twenty-seven thousand miles
to three hundred thousand miles. Prof. Young said that the comet was
approaching; Prof. Parkhurst wrote merely that the impression was that the
comet was approaching the earth; but Prof. Berberich (Eng. Mec., 56-316)
announced that, upon November 6, Holmes’ comet had been 36,000,000
miles from this earth, and 6,000,000 miles away upon the 16th, and that the
approach was so rapid that upon the 21st the comet would touch this earth.
The comet, which had been receding, kept on receding.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd 6,000,000 miles away upon the 16th, and that the
approach was so rapid that upon the 21st the comet would touch this earth.
The comet, which had been receding, kept on receding.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

N
4
EVERTHELESS I sometimes doubt that astronomers represent
especial incompetence. They remind me too much of uplifters and
grocers, philanthropists, expert accountants, makers of treaties,
characters in international conferences, psychic researchers, biologists. The
astronomers seem to me about as capitalists seem to socialists, and about as
socialists seem to capitalists, or about as Presbyterians seem to Baptists; as
Democrats seem to Republicans, or as artists of one school seem to artists
of another school. If the basic fallacies, or the absence of base, in every
specialization of thought can be seen by the units of its opposition, why
then we see that all supposed foundations in our whole existence are myths,
and that all discussion and supposed progress are the conflicts of phantoms
and the overthrow of old delusions by new delusions. Nevertheless I am
searching for some wider expression that will rationalize all of us—
conceiving that what we call irrationality is our view of parts and functions
out of relation to an underlying whole; an underlying something that is
working out its development in terms of planets and acids and bugs, rivers
and labor unions and cyclones, politicians and islands and astronomers.
Perhaps we conceive of an underlying nexus in which all things, in our
existence, are different manifestations—torn by its hurricanes and quaked
by the struggles of Labor against Capital— and then, for the sake of
balance, requiring relaxations. It has its rougher hoaxes, and some of the
apes and some of the priests, and philosophers and wart hogs are nothing
short of horse play; but the astronomers are the ironies of its less peasant-
like moments— or the deliciousness of pretending to know whether a far-
away star is approaching or receding, and at the same time exactly
predicting when a nearby comet, which is receding, will complete its
approach. This is cosmic playfulness; such pleasantries enable Existence to
bear its catastrophes. Shattered comets and sickened nations and the
hydrogenic anguishes of the sun—and there must be astronomers for the
sake of relaxations.s; such pleasantries enable Existence to
bear its catastrophes. Shattered comets and sickened nations and the
hydrogenic anguishes of the sun—and there must be astronomers for the
sake of relaxations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---enable Existence to
bear its catastrophes. Shattered comets and sickened nations and the
hydrogenic anguishes of the sun—and there must be astronomers for the
sake of relaxations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It will be important to us that the astronomers shall not be less
unfortunate in their pronouncements upon motions of the stars than they
have turned out to be in other respects. Especially disagreeable to us is the
doctrine that stars are variable because dark companies revolve around
them; also we prefer to find that nothing fit for somewhat matured minds
has been determined as to stars with light companions that encircle them, or
revolve with them. If silence be the only true philosophy, and if every
positive assertion be a myth, we should easily find requital for our negative
preferences.
Prof. Otto Struve was one of the highest of astronomic authorities, and
the faithful attribute triumphs to him. Upon March 19, 1873, Prof. Struve
announced that he had discovered a companion to the star Procyon. That
was an interesting observation, but the mere observation was not the
triumph. Some time before, Prof. Auwers, as credulous, if not jocular, as
Newton and Leverrier and Adams, had computed the orbit of a hypothetic
companion of Procyon’s. Upon a chart of the stars, he had drawn a circle
around Procyon. This orbit was calculated in gravitational terms, and a
general theme of ours is that all such calculations are only ideal, and relate
no more to stars and planets or anything else than do the spotless theories of
uplifters to events that occur as spots in the one wide daub of existence.
Specifically we wish to discredit this “triumph” of Struve’s and Auwers’,
but in general we continue our expression that all uses of the calculus of
celestial mechanics are false applications, and that this subject is for
aesthetic enjoyment only, and has no place in the science of astronomy, if
anybody can think that there is such a science. So, after great labor, or after
considerable enjoyment, Auwers drew a circle around Procyon, and
announced that that was the orbit of a companion-star. Exactly at the point
in this circle where it “should” be, upon March 19, 1873, Struve saw the
point of light which, it may be accepted, sooner or later someone would see.
According to Agnes Clerke (System of the Stars, p. 173) over and over
Struve watched the point of light, and convinced himself that it moved as it
“should” move, exactly in the calculated orbit. In Reminiscences of an
Astronomer, p. 138, Prof. Newcomb tells the story. According to him, an
American astronomer then did more than confirm Struve’s observations: he
not only saw but exactly measured the supposed companion.
A defect was found between the lenses of Struve’s telescope: it was
found that this telescope showed a similar “companion,” about 10Ǝ fromhe
not only saw but exactly measured the supposed companion.
A defect was found between the lenses of Struve’s telescope: it was
found that this telescope showed a similar “companion,” about 10Ǝ from

--- PAGE BREAK ---exactly measured the supposed companion.
A defect was found between the lenses of Struve’s telescope: it was
found that this telescope showed a similar “companion,” about 10Ǝ from

--- PAGE BREAK ---

every large star. It was found that the more than “confirmatory”
determinations by the American astronomer had been upon “a long well-
known star.” (Newcomb)
Every astronomic triumph is a bright light accompanied by an imbecility,
which may for a while make it variable with diminishments, and then be
unnoticed. Priestcrafts are not merely tyrannies: they’re necessities. There
must be more reassuring ways of telling this story. The good priest J. E.
Gore (Studies in Astronomy, p. 104) tells it safely—not a thing except that,
in the year 1873, a companion of Procyon’s was, by Struve, “strongly
suspected.” Positive assurances of the sciences—they are islands of
seeming stability in a cosmic jelly. We shall eclipse the story of Algol with
some modern disclosures. In all minds not convinced that earnest and
devoted falsifiers are holding back Development, the story, if remembered
at all, will soon renew its fictitious luster. We are centers of tremors in a
quaking black jelly. A bright and shining delusion looks like beaconed
security.
Sir Robert Ball, in the Story of the Heavens, says that the period in which
Algol blinks his magnitudes is 2 days, 20 hours, 48 minutes, and 55
seconds. He gives the details of Prof. Vogel’s calculations upon a speck of
light and an invisibility. It is a god-like command that out of the variations
of light shall come the diameters of faint appearances and the distance and
velocity of the unseeable —that the diameter of the point of light is
1,054,000 miles, and that the diameter of the imperceptibility is 825,000
miles, and that their centers are 3,220,000 miles apart: orbital velocity of
Algol, 26 miles a second, and the orbital velocity of the companion, 55
miles a second—should be stated 26.3 miles and 55.4 miles a second
(Proctor, Old and New Astronomy, p. 773).
We come to a classic imposition like this, and at first we feel helpless. We
are told that this thing is so. It is as if we were modes of motion and must
go on, but are obstructed by an absolute bar of ultimate steel, shining, in our
way, with an infinite polish.
But all appearances are illusions.
No one with a microscope doubts this; no one who has gone specially
from ordinary beliefs into minuter examination of any subject doubts this,
as to his own specific experience—so then, broadly, that all appearances are
illusions, and that, by this recognition, we shall dissipate resistances,
monsters, dragons, oppressors that we shall meet in our pilgrimage. Thisexperience—so then, broadly, that all appearances are
illusions, and that, by this recognition, we shall dissipate resistances,
monsters, dragons, oppressors that we shall meet in our pilgrimage. This

--- PAGE BREAK ---broadly, that all appearances are
illusions, and that, by this recognition, we shall dissipate resistances,
monsters, dragons, oppressors that we shall meet in our pilgrimage. This

--- PAGE BREAK ---

bar-like calculation is itself a mode of motion. The static cannot absolutely
resist the dynamic, because in the act of resisting it becomes itself
proportionately the dynamic. We learn that modifications rusted into the
steel of our opposition. The period of Algol, which Vogel carried out to a
minute’s 55th second, was, after all, so incompetently determined that the
whole imposition was nullified—
Astronomical Journal, 11-113:
That, according to Chandler, Algol and his companion do not revolve
around each other merely, but revolve together around some second
imperceptibility—regularly.
Bull. Soc. Astro. de France, October, 1910:
That M. Mora has shown that in Algol’s variations there were
irregularities that neither Vogel nor Chandler had accounted for.
The Companion of Sirius looms up to our recognition that the story must
be nonsense, or worse than nonsense—or that two light comedies will now
disappear behind something darker. The story of the Companion of Sirius is
that Prof. Auwers, having observed, or in his mania for a pencil and
something to scribble upon, having supposed he had observed, motions of
the star Sirius, had deduced the existence of a companion, and had
inevitably calculated its orbit. Early in the year 1862, Alvan Clark, Jr.,
turned his new telescope upon Sirius, and there, precisely where, according
to Auwers’ calculations, it should be, saw the companion. The story is told
by Proctor, writing thirty years later: the finding of the companion, in the
“precise position of the calculations”; Proctor’s statement that, in the thirty
years following, the companion had “conformed fairly well with the
calculated orbit.”
According to the Annual Record of Science and Industry, 1876-18, the
companion, in half the time mentioned by Proctor, had not moved in the
calculated orbit. In the Astronomical Register, 15-186, there are two
diagrams by Flammarion: one is the orbit of the companion, as computed
by Auwers; the other is the orbit, according to a mean of many
observations. They do not conform fairly well. They do not conform at all.
I am now temporarily accepting that Flammarion and the other observing
astronomers are right, and that the writers like Proctor, who do not say that
they made observations of their own, are wrong, though I have data for
thinking that there is no such companion-star. When Clark turned his
telescope upon Sirius, the companion was found exactly where Auwers saidservations of their own, are wrong, though I have data for
thinking that there is no such companion-star. When Clark turned his
telescope upon Sirius, the companion was found exactly where Auwers said

--- PAGE BREAK ---

it would be found. According to Flammarion and other astronomers, had he
looked earlier or later it would not have been in this position. Then, in the
name of the one calculus that astronomers seem never to have heard of, by
what circumstances could that star have been precisely where it should be,
when looked for, Jan. 31, 1862, if, upon all other occasions, it would not be
where it should be"
Astronomical Register, 1-94:
A representation of Sirius—but with six small stars around him —an
account, by Dr. Dawes, of observations, by Goldschmidt, upon the
“companion” and five other small stars near Sirius. Dr. Dawes’ accusation,
or opinion, is that it scarcely seems possible that some of these other stars
were not seen by Clark. If Alvan Clark saw six stars, at various distances
from Sirius, and picked out the one that was at the required distance, as if
that were the only one, he dignifies our serials with a touch of something
other than comedy. For Goldschmidt’s own announcement, see Monthly
Notices, R. A. S., 23-181, 243.

--- PAGE BREAK ---as if
that were the only one, he dignifies our serials with a touch of something
other than comedy. For Goldschmidt’s own announcement, see Monthly
Notices, R. A. S., 23-181, 243.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

S
5
MUGNESS and falseness and sequences of re-adjusting fatalities—
and yet so great is the hypnotic power of astronomic science that it
can outlive its “mortal” blows by the simple process of forgetting
them, and, in general, simply by denying that it can make mistakes. Upon
page 245, Old and New Astronomy, Richard Proctor says—”The ideas of
astronomers in these questions of distance have not changed, and, in the
present position of astronomy, based (in such respects) on absolute
demonstration, they cannot change.”
Sounds that have roared in the sky, and their vibrations have shaken
down villages—if these be the voices of Development, commanding that
opinions shall change, we shall learn what will become of the Proctors and
their “absolute demonstrations.” Lights that have appeared in the sky—that
they are gleams upon the armament of Marching Organization. “There can
be only one explanation of meteors”—I think it is that they are shining
spear-points of slayers of dogmas. I point to the sky over a little town in
Perthshire, Scotland—there may be a new San Salvador—it may be a new
Plymouth Rock. I point to the crater Aristarchus, of the moon—there, for
more than a century, a lighthouse may have been signaling. Whether out of
profound meditations, or farrago and bewilderment, I point, directly, or
miscellaneously, and, if only a few of a multitude of data be accepted,
unformulable perturbations rack an absolute, sureness, and the coils of our
little horizons relax their constrictions.
I indicate that, in these pages, which are banners in a cosmic procession,
I do feel a sense of responsibility, but how to maintain any great seriousness
I do not know, because still is our subject astronomical “triumphs.”
Once upon a time there was a young man, aged eighteen, whose name
was Jeremiah Horrox. He was no astronomer. He was interested in
astronomic subjects, but it may be that we shall agree that a young man of
eighteen, who had not been heard of by one astronomer of his time, was an
outsider. There was a transit of Venus in December, 1639, but not a grown-
up astronomer in the world expected it, because the not always great andbeen heard of by one astronomer of his time, was an
outsider. There was a transit of Venus in December, 1639, but not a grown-
up astronomer in the world expected it, because the not always great and

--- PAGE BREAK ---e astronomer of his time, was an
outsider. There was a transit of Venus in December, 1639, but not a grown-
up astronomer in the world expected it, because the not always great and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

infallible Kepler had predicted the next transit of Venus for the year 1761.
According to Kepler, Venus would pass below the sun in December, 1639.
But there was another calculation: it was by the great, but sometimes not so
great, Lansberg: that, in December, 1639, Venus would pass over the upper
part of the sun. Jeremiah Horrox was an outsider. He was able to reason
that, if Venus could not pass below the sun, and also over the upper part of
the sun, she might take a middle course. Venus did pass over the middle part
of the sun’s disc; and Horrox reported the occurrence, having watched it.
I suppose this was one of the most agreeable humiliations in the annals of
busted inflations. One thinks sympathetically of the joy that went out from
seventeenth-century Philistines. The story is told to this day by the Proctors
and Balls and Newcombs: the way they tell this story of the boy who was
able to conclude that something that could not occupy two extremes might
be intermediate, and thereby see something that no professional observer of
the time saw, is a triumph of absorption:
That the transit of Venus, in December, 1639, was observed by Jeremiah
Horrox, “the great astronomer.”
We shall make some discoveries as we go along, and some of them will
be worse thought of than others, but there is a discovery here that may be of
interest: the secret of immortality—that there is a mortal resistance to
everything; but that the thing that can keep on incorporating, or assimilating
within itself, its own mortal resistances, will live forever. By its absorptions,
the science of astronomy perpetuates its inflations, but there have been
instances of indigestion. See the New York Herald, Sept. 16, 1909. Here
Flam-marion, who probably no longer asserts any such thing, claims Dr.
Cook’s “discovery of the north pole” as an “astronomical conquest.” Also
there are other ways. One suspects that the treatment that Dr. Lescarbault
received from Flammarion illustrates other ways.
In the year 1859, it seems that Dr. Lescarbault was something of an
astronomer. It seems that as far back as that he may have known a planet
when he saw one, because, in an interview, he convinced Leverrier that he
did know a planet when he saw one. He had at least heard of the planet
Venus, because in the year 1882 he published a paper upon indications that
Venus has an atmosphere. Largely because of an observation, or an
announcement, of his, occurred the climax of Leverrier’s fiascos: prediction
of an intra-Mercurial planet that did not appear when it “should” appear.
My suspicion is that astronomers pardonably, but frailly, had it in foroccurred the climax of Leverrier’s fiascos: prediction
of an intra-Mercurial planet that did not appear when it “should” appear.
My suspicion is that astronomers pardonably, but frailly, had it in for

--- PAGE BREAK ---of Leverrier’s fiascos: prediction
of an intra-Mercurial planet that did not appear when it “should” appear.
My suspicion is that astronomers pardonably, but frailly, had it in for

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Lescarbault, and that in the year 1891 came an occurrence that one of them
made an opportunity. Early in the year 1891, Dr. Lescarbault announced
that, upon the night of Jan. 11, 1891, he had seen a new star. At the next
meeting of the French Academy, Flammarion rose, spoke briefly, and sat
down without over-doing. He said that Lescarbault had “discovered”
Saturn.
If a navigator of at least thirty years’ experience should announce that he
had discovered an island, and if that island should turn out to be Bermuda,
he would pair with Lescarbault—as Flammarion made Lescarbault appear.
Even though I am a writer upon astronomical subjects, myself, I think that
even I should know Saturn, if I should see him, at least in such a period as
the year 1891, when the rings were visible. It is perhaps an incredible
mistake. However, it will be agreeable to some of us to find that
astronomers have committed just such almost incredible mistakes—
In Cosmos, n. s., 42-467, is a list of astronomers who reported
“unknown” dark bodies that they had seen crossing the disc of the sun:
La Concha............Montevideo ........Nov. 5, 1789;
Keyser ...............Amsterdam ........Nov. 9, 1802;
Fisher ................Lisbon ............May 5, 1832;
Houzeau .............Brussels ............May 8, 1845.
According to the Nautical Almanac, the planet Mercury did cross the disc
of the sun upon these dates.
It is either that the Flammarions do so punish those who see the new and
the undesired, or that astronomers do “discover” Saturn, and do not know
Mercury when they see him—and that Buckle overlooked something when
he wrote that only the science of history attracts inferior minds often not fit
even for clergymen.
Whatever we think of Flammarion, we admire his deftness. But we shall
have an English instance of the ways in which Astronomy maintains itself
and controls those who say that they see that which they “should” not see,
which does seem beefy. One turns the not very attractive-looking pages of
the English Mechanic, 1893, casually, perhaps, at any rate in no
expectations of sensations—glaring at one, a sketch of such a botanico-
pathologic monstrosity as a muskmelon with rows of bunions on it (English
Mechanic, Oct. 20, 1893). The reader is told, by Andrew Barclay, F.R.A.S.,ations—glaring at one, a sketch of such a botanico-
pathologic monstrosity as a muskmelon with rows of bunions on it (English
Mechanic, Oct. 20, 1893). The reader is told, by Andrew Barclay, F.R.A.S.,

--- PAGE BREAK ---e, a sketch of such a botanico-
pathologic monstrosity as a muskmelon with rows of bunions on it (English
Mechanic, Oct. 20, 1893). The reader is told, by Andrew Barclay, F.R.A.S.,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kilmarnock, Scotland, that this enormity is the planet Jupiter, according to
the speculum of his Gregorian telescope.
In the next issue of the English Mechanic, Capt. Noble, F.R.A.S., writes,
gently enough, that, if he had such a telescope, he would dispose of the
optical parts for whatever they would bring, and would make a chimney
cowl of the tube.
English Mechanic, 1893-2-309—the planet Mars, by Andrew Barclay—a
dark sphere, surrounded by a thick ring of lighter material; attached to it,
another sphere, of half its diameter—a sketch as gross and repellent to a
conventionalist as the museum-freak, in whose body the head of his
dangling twin is embedded, its dwarfed body lopping out from his side.
There is a description by Mr. Barclay, according to whom the main body is
red, and the protuberance blue.
Capt. Noble—”Preposterous . . . last straw that breaks the camel’s back”
Mr. Barclay comes back with some new observations upon Jupiter’s
lumps, and then in the rest of the volume is not heard from again. One reads
on, interested in quieter matters, and gradually forgets the controversy—
English Mechanic, Aug. 23, 1897:
A gallery of monstrosities: Andrew Barclay, signing himself “F.R.A.S.,”
exhibiting:
The planet Jupiter, six times encircled with lumps; afflicted Mars, with
his partly embedded twin reduced in size, but still a distress to all properly
trained observers; the planet Saturn, shaped like a mushroom with a ring
around it.
Capt. Noble—”Mr. Barclay is not a Fellow of the Royal Astronomical
Society, and, were the game worth the candle, might be restrained by
injunction from so describing himself” And upon page 362, of this volume
of the English Mechanic, Capt. Noble calls the whole matter “a pseudo
F.R.A.S.’s crazy hallucinations.”
Lists of the Fellows of the Royal Astronomical Society, from June, 1875,
to June, 1896:
“Barclay, Andrew, Kilmarnock, Scotland; elected Feb. 8, 1856.”
I cannot find the list for 1897 in the libraries. List for 1898— Andrew
Barclay’s name omitted. Thou shalt not see lumps on Jupiter.
Every one of Barclay’s observations has something to support it. All
conventional representations of Jupiter show encirclements by strings of
rotundities that we are told are cloud-forms, but, in the Jour. B. A. A.,rclay’s observations has something to support it. All
conventional representations of Jupiter show encirclements by strings of
rotundities that we are told are cloud-forms, but, in the Jour. B. A. A.,

--- PAGE BREAK ---has something to support it. All
conventional representations of Jupiter show encirclements by strings of
rotundities that we are told are cloud-forms, but, in the Jour. B. A. A.,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

December, 1910, is published a paper by Dr. Downing, entitled “Is Jupiter
Humpy"” suggesting that various phenomena upon Jupiter agree with the
idea that there are protuberances upon the planet. A common appearance,
said to be an illusion, is Saturn as an oblong, if not mushroom-shaped: see
any good index for observations upon the “square-shouldered aspect” of
Saturn. In L’Astronomie, 1889-135, is a sketch of Mars, according to
Fontana, in the year 1636—a sphere enclosed in a ring; in the center of the
sphere a great protruding body, said, by Fontana, to have looked like a vast,
black cone.
But, whether this or that should amuse or enrage us, should be accepted
or rejected, is not to me the crux; but Andrew Barclay’s own opening words
are:
That, through a conventional telescope, conventional appearances are
seen, and that a telescope is tested by the conventionality of its disclosures;
but that there may be new optical principles, or applications, that may be, to
the eye and the present telescope, what once the conventional telescope was
to the eye—in times when scientists refused to look at the preposterous,
enraging, impossible moons of Jupiter.
In the English Mechanic, 33-327, is a letter from the astronomer, A.
Stanley Williams. He had written previously upon double stars, their colors
and magnitudes. Another astronomer, Herbert Sadler, had pointed out some
errors. Mr. Williams acknowledges the errors, saying that some were his
own, and that some were from Smyth’s Cycle of Celestial ObMects. In the
English Mechanic, 33-377, Sadler says that, earnestly, he would advise
Williams not to use the new edition of Smyth’s Cycle, because, with the
exception of vol. 40, Memoirs of the Royal Astronomical Society, “a more
disgracefully inaccurate” catalogue of double stars had never been
published. “If,” says one astronomer to the other astronomer, “you have a
copy of this miserable production, sell it for waste paper. It is crammed with
the most stupid errors.”
A new character appears. He is George F. Chambers, F.R.A.S., author of
a long list of astronomical works, and a tract, entitled, Where Are You
Going, Sunday" He, too, is earnest. In this early correspondence, nothing
ulterior is apparent, and we suppose that it is in the cause of Truth that he is
so earnest. Says one astronomer that the other astronomer is “evidently one
of those self-sufficient young men, who are nothing, if not abusive.” But
can Mr. Sadler have so soon forgotten what was done to him, on a formerastronomer that the other astronomer is “evidently one
of those self-sufficient young men, who are nothing, if not abusive.” But
can Mr. Sadler have so soon forgotten what was done to him, on a former

--- PAGE BREAK ---other astronomer is “evidently one
of those self-sufficient young men, who are nothing, if not abusive.” But
can Mr. Sadler have so soon forgotten what was done to him, on a former

--- PAGE BREAK ---

occasion, after he had slandered Admiral Smyth" Chambers challenges
Sadler to publish a list of, say, fifty “stupid errors” in the book. He quotes
the opinion of the Astronomer Royal: that the book was a work of “sterling
merit.” “Airy vs. Sadler,” he says: “which is it to be"”
We began not very promisingly. Few excitements seemed to lurk in such
a subject as double stars, their colors and magnitudes; but slander and abuse
are livelier, and now enters curiosity: we’d like to know what was done to
Herbert Sadler.
Late in the year 1876, Herbert Sadler was elected a Fellow of the Royal
Astronomical Society. In Monthly Notices, R.A.S., January, 1879, appears
his first paper that was read to the Society: Notes on the late Admiral
Smyth’s Cycle of Celestial ObMects, volume second, known as the Bedford
Catalogue. With no especial vehemence, at least according to our own
standards of repression, Sadler expresses himself upon some “extraordinary
mistakes” in this work.
At the meeting of the Society, May 9, 1879, there was an attack upon
Sadler, and it was led by Chambers, or conducted by Chambers, who cried
out that Sadler had slandered a great astronomer, and demanded that Sadler
should resign. In the report of this meeting, published in the Observatory,
there is not a trace of anybody’s endeavors to find out whether there were
errors in this book or not: Chambers ignored everything but his accusation
of slander, and demanded again that Sadler should resign. In Monthly
Notices, 39-389, the Council of the Society published regrets that it had
permitted publication of Sadler’s paper, “which was entirely unsupported
by the citation of instances upon which his judgment was founded.”
We find that it was Mr. Chambers who had revised and published the new
edition of Smyth’s Cycle.
In the English Mechanic, Chambers challenged Sadler to publish, say,
fifty “stupid errors.” See page 451, vol. 33, English Mechanic—Sadler lists
just fifty “stupid errors.” He says that he could have listed, not 50, but 250,
not trivial, but of the “grossest kind.” He says that in one set of 167
observations, 117 were wrong.
The English Mechanic drops out of this comedy with the obvious title,
but developments go on. Evidently withdrawing its “regrets,” the Council
permitted publication of a criticism of Chambers’ edition of Smyth’s Cycle,
in Monthly Notices, 40-497, and the language in this criticism, by S. W.
Burnham, was no less interpretable as slanderous than was Sadler’s: thatof a criticism of Chambers’ edition of Smyth’s Cycle,
in Monthly Notices, 40-497, and the language in this criticism, by S. W.
Burnham, was no less interpretable as slanderous than was Sadler’s: that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Smyth’s data were “either roughly approximate or grossly incorrect, and so
constantly recurring that it was impossible to explain that they were
ordinary errors of observation.” Burnham lists 30 pages of errors.
Following is a paper by E. B. Knobel, who published 17 pages of
instances in which, in his opinion, Mr. Burnham had been too severe.
Knowing of no objection by Burnham to this reduction, we have left 13
pages of errors in one standard astronomical work, which may fairly be
considered as representative of astronomical work in general, inasmuch as it
was, in the opinion of the Astronomer Royal, a book of “sterling merit.”
I think that now we have accomplished something. After this we should
all get along more familiarly and agreeably together. Thirteen pages of
errors in one standard astronomical work are reassuring; there is a likeable
fallibility here that should make for better relations. If the astronomers were
what they think they are, we might as well make squeaks of disapproval
against Alpine summits. As to astronomers who calculate positions of
planets— of whom he was one—Newcomb, in Reminiscences of an
Astrono-mer, says—”The men who have done it are therefore, in intellect,
the select few of the human race—an aristocracy above all others in the
scale of being.” We could never get along comfortably with such awful
selectness as that. We are grateful to Mr. Sadler, in the cause of more
comfortable relations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---l others in the
scale of being.” We could never get along comfortably with such awful
selectness as that. We are grateful to Mr. Sadler, in the cause of more
comfortable relations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
6
English Mechanic, 56-184:
HAT, upon April 25, 1892, Archdeacon Nouri climbed Mt. Ararat. It
was his hope that he should find something of archaeologic
compensation for his clamberings. He found Noah’s Ark.
About the same time, Dr. Holden, Director of the Lick Observatory, was
watching one of the polished and mysterious-looking instruments that, in
the new ikonology, have replaced the images of saints. Dr. Holden was
waiting for the appointed moment of the explosion of a large quantity of
dynamite in San Francisco Bay. The moment came. The polished little
“saint” revealed to the faithful scientist. He wrote an account of the record,
and sent copies to the San Francisco newspapers. Then he learned that the
dynamite had not been fired off. He sent a second messenger after the first
messenger, 
and, 
because 
messengers 
sometimes 
have 
velocities
proportional to urgencies—”the Observatory escaped ridicule by a narrow
margin.” See the Observatory, 20-467. This revelation came from Prof.
Colton, who, though probably faithful to all the “saints,” did not like Dr.
Holden.
The system that Archdeacon Nouri represented lost its power be cause its
claims exceeded all conceivableness, and because, in other respects, of its
inertness to the obvious. The system that Dr. Holden represented is not
different: there is the same seeing of whatever may be desirable, and the
same profound meditations upon the remote, with the same inattention to
fairly acceptable starting-points. The astronomers like to tell audiences of
just what gases are burning in an unimaginably remote star, but have never
reasonably made acceptable, for instance, that this earth is round, to start
with. Of course I do not mean to say that this, or anything else, can be
positively proved, but it is depressing to hear it said, so authoritatively, that
the round shadow of this earth upon the moon proves that this earth is
round, whereas records of angular shadows are common, and whereas, if
this earth were a cube, its straight sides would cast a rounded shadow upon
the convex moon. That the first part of a receding vessel to disappear shouldof angular shadows are common, and whereas, if
this earth were a cube, its straight sides would cast a rounded shadow upon
the convex moon. That the first part of a receding vessel to disappear should

--- PAGE BREAK ---re common, and whereas, if
this earth were a cube, its straight sides would cast a rounded shadow upon
the convex moon. That the first part of a receding vessel to disappear should

--- PAGE BREAK ---

be the lower part may be only such an illusion of perspective as that by
which railroad tracks seem to dip toward each other in the distance. Meteors
sometimes appear over one part of the horizon and then seem to curve down
behind the opposite part of the horizon, whereas they describe no such
curve, because to a string of observers each observer is at the center of the
seeming curve.
Once upon a time—about the year 1870—occurred an unusual sporting
event. John Hampden, who was noted for his piety and his bad language,
whose avowed purpose was to support the principles of this earth’s earliest
geodesist, offered to bet five hundred pounds that he could prove the
flatness of this earth. Somewhere in England is the Bedford Canal, and
along a part of it is a straight, unimpeded view, six miles in length.
Orthodox doctrine—or the doctrine of the newer orthodoxy, because John
Hampden considered that he was orthodox—is that the earth’s curvature is
expressible in the formula of 8 inches for the first mile, and then the square
of the distance times 8 inches. For two miles, then, the square of 2, or 4,
times 8. An object six miles away should be depressed 288 inches, or,
allowing for refraction, according to Proctor (Old and New Astronomy 216
inches. Hampden said that an object six miles away, upon this part of the
Bedford Canal, was not depressed as it “should” be. Dr. Alfred Russell
Wallace took up the bet. Mr. Walsh, Editor of the Field, was the
stakeholder. A procession went to the Bedford Canal. Objects were looked
at through telescopes, or looked for, and the decision was that Hampden had
lost. There was rejoicing in the fold of the chosen, though Hampden, in one
of his most furious bombardments of verses from the Bible, charged
conspiracy and malfeasance and confiscation, and what else I don’t know,
piously and intemperately declaring that he had been defrauded.
In the English Mechanic, 80-40, someone writes to find out about the
“Bedford Canal Experiment.” We learn that the experiment had been made
again. The correspondent writes that, if there were basis to the rumors that
he had heard, there must be something wrong with established doctrine.
Upon page 138, Lady Blount answers— that, upon May 11, 1904, she had
gone to the Bedford Canal, accompanied by Mr. E. Clifton, a well-known
photographer, who was himself uninfluenced by her motives, which were
the familiar ones of attempting to restore the old gentleman who first took
up the study of geodesy. However, she seethes with neither piety nor
profanity. She says that, with his telescopic camera, Mr. Clifton hadnes of attempting to restore the old gentleman who first took
up the study of geodesy. However, she seethes with neither piety nor
profanity. She says that, with his telescopic camera, Mr. Clifton had

--- PAGE BREAK ---restore the old gentleman who first took
up the study of geodesy. However, she seethes with neither piety nor
profanity. She says that, with his telescopic camera, Mr. Clifton had

--- PAGE BREAK ---

photographed a sheet, six miles away, though by conventional theory the
sheet should have been invisible. In a later number of the English
Mechanic, a reproduction of this photograph is published. According to this
evidence this earth is flat, or is a sphere enormously greater than is
generally supposed. But at the 1901 meeting of the British Association for
the Advancement of Science, Mr. H. Yule Oldham read a paper upon his
investigations at the Bedford Canal. He, too, showed photographs. In his
photographs, everything that should have been invisible was invisible.
I accept that anybody who is convinced that still are there relics upon Mt.
Ararat, has only to climb Mt. Ararat, and he must find something that can
be said to be part of Noah’s Ark, petrified perhaps. If someone else should
be convinced that a mistake has been made, and that the mountain is really
Pike’s Peak, he has only to climb Pike’s Peak and prove that the most
virtuous of all lands was once the Holy Land. The meaning that I read in the
whole subject is that, in this Dark Age that we’re living in, not even such
rudimentary matters as the shape of this earth have ever been investigated
except now and then to support somebody’s theory, because astronomers
have instinctively preferred the remote and the not so easily understandable
and the safe from external inquiry. In Earth Features and Their Meaning,
Prof. Hobbs says that this earth is top-shaped, quite as the sloping
extremities of Africa and South America suggest. According to Prof. Hobbs,
observations upon the pendulum suggest that this earth is shaped like a top.
Some years ago, Dr. Gregory read a paper at a meeting of the Royal
Geographical Society, giving data to support the theory of a top-shaped
earth. In the records of the Society, one may read a report of the discussion
that followed. There was no ridiculing. The President of the Society closed
the discussion with virtual endorsement, recalling that it was Christopher
Columbus who first said that this earth is top-shaped. For other expressions
of this revolt against ancient dogmas, see Bull. Soc. Astro. de France, 17-
315; 18-143; Pop. Sci. News, 31-234; Eng. Mec., 77-159; Sci. Amer., 100-
441.
As to supposed motions of this earth, axial and orbital, circumstances are
the same, despite the popular supposition that the existence of these
motions has been established by syntheses of data and by unanswerable
logic. All scientists, philosophers, religionists, are today looking back,
wondering what could have been the matter with their predecessors to
permit them to believe what they did believe. Granted that there will betists, philosophers, religionists, are today looking back,
wondering what could have been the matter with their predecessors to
permit them to believe what they did believe. Granted that there will be

--- PAGE BREAK ---religionists, are today looking back,
wondering what could have been the matter with their predecessors to
permit them to believe what they did believe. Granted that there will be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

posterity, we shall be predecessors. Then what is it that is conventionally
taught today that will in the future seem as imbecilic as to all present
orthodoxies seem the vaporings of preceding systems"
Well, for instance, that it is this earth that moves, though the sun seems
to, by the same illusion by which to passengers on a boat, the shore seems
to move, though it is the boat that is moving.
Apply this reasoning to the moon. The moon seems to move around the
earth—but to passengers on a boat, the shore seems to move, whereas it is
the boat that is moving—therefore the moon does not move.
As to the motions of the planets and stars that co-ordinate with the idea
of a moving earth—they co-ordinate equally well with the idea of a
stationary earth.
In the system that was conceived by Copernicus I find nothing that can
be said to resemble foundation: nothing but the appeal of greater simplicity.
An earth that rotates and revolves is simpler to conceive of than is a
stationary earth with a rigid composition of stars, swinging around it, stars
kept apart by some unknown substance, or inter-repulsion. But all those
who think that simplification is a standard to judge by are referred to
Herbert Spencer’s compilations of data indicating that advancing
knowledge complicates, making, then, complexity, and not simplicity, the
standard by which to judge the more advanced. My own acceptance is that
there are fluxes one way and then the other way: that the Ptolemaic system
was complex and was simplified; that, out of what was once a clarification,
new complications have arisen, and that again will come flux toward
simplification or clarification—that the simplification by Copernicus has
now developed into an incubus of unintelligibilities revolving around a
farrago of inconsistencies, to which the complexities of Ptolemy are clear
geometry: miracles, incredibilities, puerilities; tottering deductions
depending upon flimsy agreements; brutalized observations that are slaves
to infatuated principles—
And one clear call that is heard above the rumble of readjusting collapses
—the call for a Neo-astronomy—it may not be our Neo-astronomy.
Prof. Young, for instance, in his Manual of Astronomy, says that there are
no common, obvious proofs that the earth moves around the sun, but that
there are three abstrusities, all of modern determination. Then, if
Copernicus founded the present system, he founded upon nothing. He had
nothing to base upon. He either never heard of, or could not detect one ofee abstrusities, all of modern determination. Then, if
Copernicus founded the present system, he founded upon nothing. He had
nothing to base upon. He either never heard of, or could not detect one of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

these abstrusities. All his logic is represented in his reasoning upon this
earth’s rotundity: that this earth is round, because of a general tendency to
sphericity, manifesting, for instance, in fruits and in drops of water—
showing that he must have been unaware not only of abstrusities, but of
icicles and bananas and oysters. It is not that I am snobbishly deriding the
humble and more than questionable ancestry of modern astronomy. I am
pointing out that a doctrine came into existence with nothing for a
foundation: not a datum, not one observation to found upon; no
astronomical principles, no mechanical principles to justify it. Our inquiry
will be as to how, in the annals of false architecture, it could ever be said
that—except miraculously, of course—a foundation was subsequently
slipped under this baseless structure, dug under, rammed under, or God
knows how devised and fashioned.

--- PAGE BREAK ---er be said
that—except miraculously, of course—a foundation was subsequently
slipped under this baseless structure, dug under, rammed under, or God
knows how devised and fashioned.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
7
HE three abstrusities:
The aberration of light, the annual parallax of the stars, the regular,
annual shift of the lines of the stellar spectra.
By the aberration of light is meant a displacement of all stars, during a
year’s observation, by which stars near the pole of the ecliptic describe
circles, stars nearer the ecliptic describe ellipses, and the stars of the
ecliptic, only little straight lines. It is supposed that light has velocity, and
that these forms represent the ratio between the velocity of light and the
supposed velocity of this earth in its orbit. In the year 1725, Bradley
conceived of the present orthodox explanation of the aberration-forms of
the stars: that they reflect or represent the path that this earth traverses
around the sun, as it would look from the stars, appearing virtually circular
from stars in the pole of the ecliptic, for instance. In Bradley’s day there
were no definite delusions as to the traversing by this earth of another path
in space, as part of a whole moving system, so Bradley felt simple and
satisfied. About a century later by some of the most amusing reasoning that
one could be entertained with, astronomers decided that the whole supposed
solar system is moving, at a rate of about 13 miles a second from the region
of Sirius to a point near Vega, all this occurring in northern skies, because
southern astronomers had not very much to say at that time. Now, then, if at
one time in the year, and in one part of its orbit, this earth is moving in the
direction in which the whole solar system is moving, there we have this
earth traversing a distance that is the sum of its own motion and the general
motion; then when the earth rounds about and retraces, there we have its
own velocity minus the general velocity. The first abstrusity, then, is
knocked flat on its technicalities, because the aberration-forms, then, do not
reflect the annual motion of this earth: if, in conventional terms, though the
path of this earth is circular or elliptic relatively to the sun, when
compounding with solar motion it is not so formed relatively to stars; and
there will have to be another explanation for the aberration-forms.earth is circular or elliptic relatively to the sun, when
compounding with solar motion it is not so formed relatively to stars; and
there will have to be another explanation for the aberration-forms.

--- PAGE BREAK ---elliptic relatively to the sun, when
compounding with solar motion it is not so formed relatively to stars; and
there will have to be another explanation for the aberration-forms.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The second supposed proof that this earth moves around the sun is in the
parallax of the stars. In conventional terms, it is said that opposite points in
this earth’s orbit are 185,000,000 miles apart. It is said that stars, so
differently viewed, are minutely displaced against their backgrounds. Again
solar-motion—if, in conventional terms, this earth has been traveling, as
part of the solar system, from Sirius, toward Vega, in 2,000 years this earth
has traveled 819,936,000,000 miles. This distance is 4,500 times the
distance that is the base line for orbital parallax. Then displacement of the
stars by solar-motion parallax in 2,000 years, should be 4,500 times the
displacement by orbital parallax, in one year. Give to orbital parallax as
minute a quantity as is consistent with the claims made for it, and 4,500
times that would dent the Great Dipper and nick the Sickle of Leo, and
perhaps make the Dragon look like a dragon. But not a star in the heavens
has changed more than doubtfully since the stars were catalogued by
Hipparchus, 2,000 years ago. If, then, there be minute displacements of
stars that are attributed to orbital parallax, they will have to be explained in
some other way, if evidently the sun does not move from Sirius toward
Vega, and if then, quite as reasonably, this earth may not move.
Prof. Young’s third “proof” is spectroscopic.
To what degree can spectroscopy in astronomy be relied upon"
Bryant, A History of Astronomy, p. 206:
That, according to Bplopolsky, Venus rotates in about 24 hours, as
determined by the spectroscope; that, according to Dr. Slipher, Venus
rotates in about 224 days, as determined by the spectroscope.
According to observations too numerous to make it necessary to cite any,
the seeming motions of stars, occulted by the moon, show that the moon has
atmosphere. According to the spectroscope, there is no atmosphere upon the
moon (Pubs. Astro. Soc. Pacific, vol. 6, no. 37).
The ring of light around Venus, during the transits of 1874 and 1882,
indicated that Venus has atmosphere. Most astronomers say that Venus has
an atmosphere of extreme density, obscuring the features of the planet.
According to spectrum analysis, by Sir William Huggins, Venus has no
atmosphere (Eng. Mec., 4-22).
In the English Mechanic, 89-439, are published results of spectroscopic
examinations of Mars, by Director Campbell, of the Lick Observatory: that
there is no oxygen, and that there is no water vapor on Mars. In Monthly
Notices, R.A.S., 27-178, are published results of spectroscopic examinationsy Director Campbell, of the Lick Observatory: that
there is no oxygen, and that there is no water vapor on Mars. In Monthly
Notices, R.A.S., 27-178, are published results of spectroscopic examinations

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the Lick Observatory: that
there is no oxygen, and that there is no water vapor on Mars. In Monthly
Notices, R.A.S., 27-178, are published results of spectroscopic examinations

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of Mars by Huggins: abundance of oxygen; same vapors as the vapors of
this earth.
These are the amusements of our Pilgrim’s Progress, which has new San
Salvadors for its goals, or new Plymouth Rocks for its expectations—but
the experiences of pilgrims have variety—
In 1895, at the Allegheny Observatory, Prof. Keeler undertook to
determine the rotation-period of Saturn’s rings, by spectroscopy. It is
gravitational gospel that particles upon the outside of the rings move at the
rate of 10.69 miles a second; particles upon the inner edge, 13.01 miles a
second. Prof. Keeler’s determinations were what Sir Robert Ball calls
“brilliant confirmation of the mathematical deduction.” Prof. Keeler
announced that according to the spectroscope, the outside particles of the
rings of Saturn move at the rate of 10.1 miles a second, and that the inner
particles move at the rate of 12.4 miles a second—”as they ought to,” says
Prof. Young, in his gospel, Elements of Astronomy.
One reads of a miracle like this, the carrying out into decimals of
different speeds of different particles in parts of a point of light, the parts of
which cannot be seen at all without a telescope, whereby they seem to
constitute a solid motionless structure, and one admires, or one worships,
according to one’s inexperience—
Or there comes upon one a sense of imposture and imposition that is not
very bearable. Imposition or imposture or captivation—and it’s as if we’ve
been trapped and have been put into a revolving cage, some of the bars
revolving at unthinkable speed, and other bars of it going around still faster,
even though not conceivable. Disbelieve as we will, deride and accuse, and
think of all the other false demonstrations that we have encountered, as we
will—there’s the buzz of the bars that encircle us. The concoction that has
caged us is one of the most brilliant harlots in modern prostitution: we’re
imprisoned at the pleasure of a favorite in the harem of the God of
Gravitation. That’s some relief: language always is—but how are we to
“determine” that the rings of Saturn do not move as they “ought” to, and
thereby add more to the discrediting of spectroscopy in astronomy "
A gleam on a planet that’s like shine on a sword to deliver us—
The White Spot of Saturn—
A bright and shining deliverer.
There’s a gleam that will shatter concoctions and stop velocities. There’s
a shining thing on the planet Saturn, and the blow that it shines is lightning.ot of Saturn—
A bright and shining deliverer.
There’s a gleam that will shatter concoctions and stop velocities. There’s
a shining thing on the planet Saturn, and the blow that it shines is lightning.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ht and shining deliverer.
There’s a gleam that will shatter concoctions and stop velocities. There’s
a shining thing on the planet Saturn, and the blow that it shines is lightning.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Thus far has gone a revolution of 10.1 miles a second, but it stops by magic
against magic; no farther buzzes a revolution of 12.4 miles a second—that
the rings of Saturn may not move as, to flatter one little god, they “ought”
to, because, by the handiwork of Universality, they may be motionless.
Often has a white spot been seen upon the rings of Saturn: by Schmidt,
Bond, Secchi, Schroeter, Harding, Schwabe, De Vico—a host of other
astronomers.
It is stationary.
In the English Mechanic, 49-195, Thomas Gwyn Elger publishes a sketch
of it as he saw it upon the nights of April 18 and 20, 1889. It occupied a
position partly upon one ring and partly upon the other, showing no
distortion. Let Prof. Keeler straddle two concentric merry-go-rounds,
whirling at different velocities: there will be distortion. See vol. 49, English
Mechanic, for observation after observation by astronomers upon this
appearance, when seen for several months in the year 1889, the observers
agreeing that, no matter what are the demands of theory, this fixed spot did
indicate that the rings of Saturn do not move.
The White Spot on Saturn has blasted minor magic. He has little, black
retainers who now function in the cause of completeness—the little, black
spots of Saturn—
Nature, 53-109:
That, in July and August, 1895, Prof. Mascari, of the Catania
Observatory, had seen dark spots upon the crepe ring of Saturn. The writer
in Nature says that such duration is not easy to explain, if the rings of
Saturn be formations of moving particles, because different parts of the
discolored areas would have different velocities, so that soon would they
distort and diffuse.
Certainly enough, relatively to my purpose, which is to find out for
myself, and to find out with anybody else who may be equally impressed
with a necessity, a brilliant, criminal thing has been slain by a gleam of
higher intensity. Certainly enough, then, with the execution of one of its
foremost exponents, the whole subject of spectroscopy in astronomy has
been cast into rout and disgrace, of course only to ourselves, and not in the
view of manufacturers of spectroscopes, for instance; but a phantom thing
dies a phantom death, and must be slain over and over again.
I should say that just what is called the spectrum of a star is not
commonly understood. It is one of the greatest uncertainties in science. Thea phantom death, and must be slain over and over again.
I should say that just what is called the spectrum of a star is not
commonly understood. It is one of the greatest uncertainties in science. The

--- PAGE BREAK ---must be slain over and over again.
I should say that just what is called the spectrum of a star is not
commonly understood. It is one of the greatest uncertainties in science. The

--- PAGE BREAK ---

spectrum of a star is a ghost in the first place, but this ghost has to be
further attenuated by a secondary process, and the whole appearance
trembles so with the twinkling of a star that the stories told by spectra are
gasps of palsied phantoms. So it is that, in one of the greatest
indefinitenesses in science, an astronomer reads in a bewilderment that can
be made to correspond with any desideratum. So it is our acceptance that
when any faint, tremulous story told by a spectrum becomes standardized,
the conventional astronomer is told, by the spectroscope, what he should be
told, but that when anything new appears, for which there is no convention,
the bewilderment of the astronomers is made apparent, and the
worthlessness of spectroscopy in astronomy is shown to all except those
who do not want to be shown. Upon the first of February, 1892, Dr. Thomas
D. Anderson, of Edinburgh, discovered a new star that became known as
Nova Aurigae. Here was something as to which there was no dogmatic
“determination.” Each astronomer had to see, not what he should, but what
he could. We shall see that the astronomers might as well have gone, for
information, to some of Mrs. Piper’s “controls” as to think of depending
upon their own ghosts.
In Monthly Notices, February, 1893, it is said that probably for seven
weeks, up to the time of calculation, one part of this new star had been
receding at a rate of 230 miles a second, and another part approaching at a
rate of 320 miles a second, giving to these components a distance apart of
550 miles x 60 x 60 x 24 x 49, whatever that may be.
But there was another seance. This time Dr. Vogel was the medium. The
ghosts told Dr. Vogel that the new star had three parts, one approaching this
earth at the rate of about 420 miles a second, another approaching at a rate
of 22 miles a second, a third part receding at a rate of 300 miles a second.
See Jour. B. A. A., 2-258.
After that, the “controls” became hysterical. They flickered that there
were six parts of this new star, according to Dr. Lowell’s Evolution of
Worlds, p. 9. The faithful will be sorry to read that Lowell revolted. He
says: “There is not room for so many on the stage of the cosmic drama.”
For other reasons for repudiating spectroscopy, or spiritualism, in
astronomy, read what else Lowell says upon this subject.
Nova Aurigae became fainter. Accordingly, Prof. Klinkerfues “found”
that two bodies had passed, and had inflamed, each other, and that the light
of their mutual disturbances would soon disappear (Jour. B. A. A., 2-365).fainter. Accordingly, Prof. Klinkerfues “found”
that two bodies had passed, and had inflamed, each other, and that the light
of their mutual disturbances would soon disappear (Jour. B. A. A., 2-365).

--- PAGE BREAK ---y, Prof. Klinkerfues “found”
that two bodies had passed, and had inflamed, each other, and that the light
of their mutual disturbances would soon disappear (Jour. B. A. A., 2-365).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nova Aurigae became brighter. Accordingly, Dr. Campbell “determined”
that it was approaching this earth at a rate of 128 miles a second (Jour. B. A.
A., 2-504).
Then Dr. Espin went into a trance. It was revealed to him that the object
was a nebula (Eng. Mec., 56-61). Communication from Dr. and Mrs.
Huggins, to the Royal Society—not a nebula, but a star (Eng. Mec., 57-
397). See Nature, 47-352, 425—that, according to M. Eugen Gothard, the
spectrum of N. A. agreed “perfectly” with the spectrum of a nebula: that,
according to Dr. Huggins, no contrast could be more striking than the
difference between the spectrum of N. A., and the spectrum of a nebula.
For an account of the revelations at Stonyhurst Observatory, see Mems.
R. A. S., 51-129—that there never had been a composition of bodies moving
at the rates that were so definitely announced, because N. A. was a single
star.
Though I have read some of the communications from “Rector” and “Dr.
Phinuit” to Mrs. Piper, I cannot think that they ever mouthed sillier babble
than was flickered by the star-ghosts to the astronomers in the year 1892.
We noted Prof. Klinkerfues’ “finding” that two stars had passed each other,
and that the illumination from their mutual perturbations would soon
subside. There was no such disappearance. For observations upon N. A., ten
years later, see Monthly Notices, 62-65. For Prof. Barnard’s observations
twenty years later, see Sci. Amer. Sup., 76-154.
The spectroscope is useful in a laboratory. Spoons are useful in a kitchen.
If any other pilgrim should come upon a group of engineers trying to dig a
canal with spoons, his experience and his temptation to linger would be like
ours as to the astronomers and their attempted application of the
spectroscope. I don’t know what of remotest acceptability may survive in
the third supposed proof that this earth moves around the sun, though we
have not found it necessary to go into the technicalities of the supposed
proof. I think we have killed the phantom thing, but I hope we have not
quite succeeded, because we are moved more by the aesthetics of slaughter
than by plain murderousness: we shall find unity in disposing of the third
“proof” by the means by which the two others were disposed of—
Regular Annual Shift of Spectral Lines versus Solar Motion—
That, if this earth moves around the sun, the shift might be found by
scientific Mrs. Pipers so to indicate—he two others were disposed of—
Regular Annual Shift of Spectral Lines versus Solar Motion—
That, if this earth moves around the sun, the shift might be found by
scientific Mrs. Pipers so to indicate—

--- PAGE BREAK ---isposed of—
Regular Annual Shift of Spectral Lines versus Solar Motion—
That, if this earth moves around the sun, the shift might be found by
scientific Mrs. Pipers so to indicate—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

But that if part of the time this earth, as a part of one traveling system,
moves at a rate of 19 plus 13 miles a second and then part of the time at a
rate of 19 minus 13 miles a second, compounding with great complexities at
transverse times, that is the end of the regular annual shift that is supposed
to apply to orbital motion.
We need not have admitted in the first place that the three abstrusities are
resistances: however, we have a liking for revelations ourselves. Aberration
and Parallax and Spectral Lines do not indicate only that this earth moves
relatively to the stars: quite as convincingly they indicate that the stars in
one composition gyrate relatively to a central and stationary earth, all of
them in one concavity around this earth, some of them showing faintest of
parallax, if this earth be not quite central to the revolving whole.
Something that I did not mention before, though I referred to Lowell’s
statements, is that astronomers now admit, or state, that the shift of spectral
lines, which they say indicates that this earth moves around the sun, also
indicates any one of three other circumstances, or sets of circumstances.
Some persons will ask why I didn’t say so at first, and quit the meaningless
subject. Maybe it was a weakness of mine—something of a sporting
instinct, I fear me, I have at times. I lingered, perhaps slightly intoxicated,
with the deliciousness of Prof. Keeler and his decimals—like someone at a
race track, determining that a horse is running at a rate of 2,653 feet and 4
inches a minute, by a method that means that no more than it means that the
horse is brown, is making clattering sounds, or has a refreshing odor. For a
study of a state of mind like that of many clergymen who try to believe in
Moses, and in Darwin, too, see the works of Prof. Young, for instance. This
astronomer teaches the conventional spectroscopic doctrine, and also
mentions the other circumstances that make the doctrine meaningless. Such
inconsistencies are phenomena of all transitions from the old to the new.
Three giants have appeared against us. Their hearts are bubbles. Their
bones wilt. They are the limp caryatides that uphold the phantom structure
of Palaeo-astronomy. By what miracle, we asked, could foundation be built
subsequently under a baseless thing. But three ghosts can fit in anywhere.
Sometimes astronomers cite the Foucault pendulum-experiment as
“proof” of the motions of this earth. The circumstances of this
demonstration are not easily made clear: consequently one of normal
suspiciousness is likely to let it impose upon him. But my practical and
commonplace treatment is to disregard what the experiment and itstration are not easily made clear: consequently one of normal
suspiciousness is likely to let it impose upon him. But my practical and
commonplace treatment is to disregard what the experiment and its

--- PAGE BREAK ---

complexities are, and to enquire whether it works out or not. It does not.
See Amer. Jour. Sci., 2-12-402; Eng. Mec., 93-293, 306; Astro. Reg., 2-265.
Also we are told that experiments upon falling bodies have proved this
earth’s rotation. I get so tired of demonstrating that there never has been any
Evolution mentally, except as to ourselves, that, if I could, I’d be glad to say
that these experiments work out beautifully. Maybe they do. See Proctor’s
Old and New Astronomy, p. 229.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tion mentally, except as to ourselves, that, if I could, I’d be glad to say
that these experiments work out beautifully. Maybe they do. See Proctor’s
Old and New Astronomy, p. 229.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
8
T is supposed that astronomic subjects and principles and methods
cannot be understood by the layman. I think this, myself. We shall take
up some of the principles of astronomy, with the idea of expressing that
of course they cannot be understood by the unhypnotized any more than can
the stories of Noah’s Ark and Jonah and the Whale be understood, but that
our understanding, if we have any, will have some material for its exercises,
just the same. The velocity of light is one of these principles. A great deal in
the astronomic system depends upon this supposed velocity: determinations
of distance, and amount of aberration depend. It will be our expression that
these are ratios of impositions to mummeries, with such clownish products
that formulas turn into antics, and we shall have scruples against taking up
the subject at all, because we have much hard work to do, and we have
qualms against stopping so often to amuse ourselves. But, then, sometimes
in a more sentimental mood, I think that the pretty story of the velocity of
light, and its “determination,” will some day be of legitimate service; be
rhymed some day, and told to children, in future kindergartens, replacing
the story of Little Bopeep, with the tale of a planet that lost its satellites and
sometimes didn’t know where to find them, but that good magicians came
along and formulated the indeterminable.
It was found by Roemer, a seventeenth-century astronomer, that, at times,
the moons of Jupiter did not disappear behind him, and did not emerge from
behind him, when they “should.” He found that as distance between this
earth and Jupiter increased, the delays increased. He concluded that these
delays represented times consumed by the light of the moons in traveling
greater distances. He found, or supposed he found, that when this earth is
farthest from Jupiter, light from a satellite is seen 22 minutes later than
when nearest Jupiter. Given measurement of the distance between opposite
points in the earth’s supposed orbit, and time consumed in traveling this
distance—there you have the velocity of light.
I still say that it is a pretty story and should be rhymed; but we shall find
that astronomers might as well try to formulate the gambols of the sheep ofdistance—there you have the velocity of light.
I still say that it is a pretty story and should be rhymed; but we shall find
that astronomers might as well try to formulate the gambols of the sheep of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ave the velocity of light.
I still say that it is a pretty story and should be rhymed; but we shall find
that astronomers might as well try to formulate the gambols of the sheep of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Little Bopeep, as to try to formulate anything depending upon the satellites
of Jupiter.
In the Annals of Philosophy, 23-29, Col. Beaufoy writes that, upon Dec.
7, 1823, he looked for the emergence of Jupiter’s third satellite, at the time
set down in the National Almanac for two hours he looked, and did not see
the satellite emerge. In Monthly Notices, 44-8, an astronomer writes that,
upon the night of Oct. 15, 1883, one of the satellites of Jupiter was forty-six
minutes late. A paper was read at the meeting of the British Astronomical
Association, Feb. 8, 1907, upon a satellite that was twenty minutes late. In
Telescopic Work, p. 191, W. F. Denning writes that, upon the night of Sept.
12, 1889, he and two other astronomers could not see satellite IV at all. See
the Observatory, 9-237—satellite IV disappeared 15 minutes before
calculated time; about a minute later it re-appeared; disappeared again; re-
appeared nine minutes later. For Todd’s observations see the Observatory,
2-227—six times, between June 9 and July 2, 1878, a satellite was visible
when, according to prediction, it should have been invisible. For some more
instances of extreme vagaries of these satellites, see Monthly Notices, 43-
427, and Jour. B. A. A., 14-27: observations by Noble, Turner, White,
Holmes, Freeman, Goodacre, Ellis, and Molesworth. In periodical
astronomical publications, there is no more easily findable material for
heresy than such observations. We shall have other instances. They abound
in the English Mechanic, for instance. But, in spite of a host of such
observations, Prof. Young (The Sun, p. 35) says that the time occupied by
light coming from these satellites is doubtful by “only a fraction of a
second.” It is of course another instance of the astronomers who know very
little of astronomy.
It would have been undignified, if the astronomers had taken the sheep of
Little Bopeep for their determinations. They took the satellites of Jupiter.
They said that the velocity of light is about 190,000 miles a second.
So did the physicists.
Our own notion is that there is no velocity of light: that one sees a thing,
or doesn’t; that if the satellites of Jupiter behave differently according to
proximity to this earth, that may be because this earth affects them, so
affecting them, because the planets may not, as we may find, be at a
thousandth part of the “demonstrated” distances. The notion of velocity of
light finds support, we are told in the text-books, in the velocity of sound. Ifthe planets may not, as we may find, be at a
thousandth part of the “demonstrated” distances. The notion of velocity of
light finds support, we are told in the text-books, in the velocity of sound. If

--- PAGE BREAK ---as we may find, be at a
thousandth part of the “demonstrated” distances. The notion of velocity of
light finds support, we are told in the text-books, in the velocity of sound. If

--- PAGE BREAK ---

it does, it doesn’t find support in gravitational effects, because, according to
the same text-books, gravitational effects have no velocity.
The physicists agreed with the astronomers. A beam of light is sent
through, and is reflected back through, a revolving shutter— but it’s
complex, and we’re simple: we shall find that there is no need to go into the
details of this mechanism. It is not that a machine is supposed to register a
velocity of 186,000 miles a second, or we’d have to be technical: it is that
the eye is supposed to perceive—
And there is not a physicist in the world who can perceive when a parlor
magician palms off playing-cards. Hearing, or feeling, or if one could smell
light, some kind of a claim might be made— but the well-known limitations
of seeing; common knowledge of little boys that a brand waved about in the
dark cannot be followed by the eyes. The limit of the perceptible is said to
be ten changes a second.
I think of the astronomers as occupying a little vortex of their own in the
cosmic swoon in which wave all things, at least in this one supposed solar
system. Call it swoon, or call it hypnosis—but that it is never absolute, and
that all of us sometimes have awareness of our condition, and moments of
wondering what it’s all about and why we do and think the things that
sometimes we wake up and find ourselves doing and thinking. Upon page
281, Old and New Astronomy, Richard Proctor awakens momentarily, and
says: “The agreement between these results seems close enough, but those
who know the actual difficulty of precise time-observations of the
phenomena of Jupiter’s satellites, to say nothing of the present condition of
the theory of their motions, can place very little reliance on the velocity of
light deduced from such observations.” Upon pages 603-607, Proctor
reviews some observations other than those that I have listed—satellites
that have disappeared, come back, disappeared, returned again so
bewilderingly that he wrote what we have quoted—observations by Gorton,
Wray, Gambart, Secchi, Main, Grover, Smyth-Maclear-Pearson, Hodgson,
Carlisle, Siminton. And that is the last of his awareness: Proctor then
swoons back into his hypnosis. He then takes up the determination of the
velocity of light by the physicists, as if they could be relied upon, accepting
every word, writing his gospel, glorying in this miracle of science. I call it a
tainted agreement between the physicists and the astronomers. I prefer mild
language. If by a method by which nothing could be found out, the
astronomers determined that the velocity of light is about 190,000 miles at between the physicists and the astronomers. I prefer mild
language. If by a method by which nothing could be found out, the
astronomers determined that the velocity of light is about 190,000 miles a

--- PAGE BREAK ---ists and the astronomers. I prefer mild
language. If by a method by which nothing could be found out, the
astronomers determined that the velocity of light is about 190,000 miles a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

second, and if the physicists by another method found about the same
result, what kind of harmony can that be other than the reekings of two
consistent stenches" Proctor wrote that very little reliance could be placed
upon anything depending upon Jupiter’s satellites. It never occurred to him
to wonder by what miracle the physicists agreed with these unreliable
calculations. It is the situation that repeats in the annals of astronomy—a
baseless thing that is supposed to have a foundation slipped under it,
wedged in, or God knows how introduced or foisted. I prefer not to bother
much with asking how the physicists could determine anything of a higher
number of changes than ten per second. If it be accepted that the physicists
are right, the question is—by what miracle were the astronomers right, if
they had “very little” to rely upon"
Determinations of planetary distances and determinations of the velocity
of light have squirmed together: they represent either an agreeable picture
of co-operation, or a study in mutual support by writhing infamies. With
most emphasis I have taken the position that the vagaries of the Jovian
satellites are so great that extremely little reliance can be placed upon them,
but now it seems to me that the emphasis should be upon the admission
that, in addition to these factors of indeterminateness, it was, up to Proctor’s
day, not known with anything like accuracy when the satellites should
appear and disappear. In that case one wonders as to the state of the theory
in Roemer’s day. It was in the mind of Roemer that the two
“determinations” we are now considering first most notably satisfied
affinity: mutual support by velocity of light and distances in this supposed
solar system. Upon his Third Law, which, as we shall see later, he
constructed upon at least three absences of anything to build upon, Kepler
had, upon observations upon Mars, deduced 13,000,000 miles as this earth’s
distance from the sun. By the same method, which is the now discredited
method of simultaneous observations, Roemer determined this distance to
be 82,000,000 miles. I am not concerned with this great discrepancy so
much as with the astronomers’ reasons for starting off distances in millions
instead of hundreds or thousands of miles.
In Kepler’s day the strongest objection urged against the Copernican
system was that, if this earth moves around the sun, the stars should show
annual displacements—and it.is only under modern “refinements” that the
stars do so minutely vary, perhaps. The answer to this objection was that the
stars are vastly farther away than was commonly supposed. Entailed by thisit.is only under modern “refinements” that the
stars do so minutely vary, perhaps. The answer to this objection was that the
stars are vastly farther away than was commonly supposed. Entailed by this

--- PAGE BREAK ---dern “refinements” that the
stars do so minutely vary, perhaps. The answer to this objection was that the
stars are vastly farther away than was commonly supposed. Entailed by this

--- PAGE BREAK ---

answer was the necessity of enlarging upon common suppositions generally.
Kepler determined or guessed, just as one pleases, and then Roemer outdid
him. Roemer was followed by Huygens, with continued outdoing:
100,000,000 according to Huygens. Huygens took for his basis his belief
that this earth is intermediate in size to Mars and Venus. Astronomers,
today, say that this earth is not so intermediate. We see that, in the
secondary phase of development, the early astronomers, with no means of
knowing whether the sun is a thousand or a million miles away, guessed or
determined such distances as 82,000,000 miles and 100,000,000 miles, to
account for the change-lessness of the stars. If the mean of these extremes is
about the distance of present dogmas, we’d like to know by what miracle a
true distance so averages two products of wild methods. Our expression is
that these developments had their origin in conspiracy and prostitution, if
one has a fancy for such accusations; or, if everybody else has been so
agreeable, we think more amiably, ourselves, that it was all a matter of
comfortably adjusting and being obliging all around. Our expression is that
ever since the astronomers have seen and have calculated as they should see
and should calculate. For instance, when this earth’s distance from the sun
was supposed to be 95,000,000 miles, all astronomers taking positions of
Mars, calculated a distance of 95,000,000 miles; but then, when the distance
was cut down to about 92,000,000 miles, all astronomers, taking positions
of Mars, calculated about a distance of 92,000,000 miles. It may sound like
a cynicism of mine, but in saying this I am quoting Richard Proctor, in one
of his lucid suspicions (Old and New Astronomy, p. 280).
With nothing but monotony, and with nothing that looks like relief for us,
the data of conspiracy, or of co-operation, continue. Upon worthless
observations upon the transits of Venus, 1761 and 1769, this earth’s orbit
was found by Encke to be about 190,000,000 miles across (distance of the
sun about 95,000,000 miles). Altogether progress had been more toward the
wild calculations of Huygens than toward the undomesticated calculations
of Roemer. So, to agree with this change, if not progress, Delambre, taking
worthless observations upon the satellites of Jupiter, cut down Roemer’s
worthless determinations, and announced that light crosses the plane of this
earth’s orbit in 16 minutes and 32 seconds—as it ought to, Prof. Young
would say. It was then that the agreeably tainted physicists started spinning
and squinting, calculating “independently,” we are told, that Delambre was
right. 
Everything 
settled—everybody 
comfortable—see 
Chambers’then that the agreeably tainted physicists started spinning
and squinting, calculating “independently,” we are told, that Delambre was
right. 
Everything 
settled—everybody 
comfortable—see 
Chambers’

--- PAGE BREAK ---bly tainted physicists started spinning
and squinting, calculating “independently,” we are told, that Delambre was
right. 
Everything 
settled—everybody 
comfortable—see 
Chambers’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Handbook of Astronomy, published at this time—that the sun’s distance had
been ascertained, “with great accuracy,” to be 95,298,260 miles—
But then occurred something that is badly, but protectively, explained, in
most astronomical works. Foucault interfered with the deliciousness of
those 95,298,260 miles. One may read many books that mention this
subject, and one will always read that Foucault, the physicist, by an
“independent” method, or by an “absolutely independent” method,
disagreed somewhat. The “disagreement” is paraded so that one has an
impression of painstaking, independent scientists not utterly slavishly
supporting one another, but at the same time keeping well over the
90,000,000 mark, and so essentially agreeing, after all. But we find that
there was no independence in Foucault’s “experiments.” We come across
the same old disgusting connivance, or the same amiable complaisance,
perhaps. See Clerke’s History of Astronomy, p. 230. We learn that
astronomers, to explain oscillations of the sun, had decided that the sun
must be, not 95,298,260 miles away, but about 91,000,000. To oblige them,
perhaps, or innocently, never having heard of them, perhaps, though for ten
years they had been announcing that a new determination was needed,
Foucault “found” that the velocity of light is less than had been necessary to
suppose, when the sun was supposed to be about 95,000,000 miles away,
and he “found” the velocity to be exactly what it should be, supposing the
sun to be 91,000,000 miles away. Then it was that the astronomers
announced, not that they had cut down the distance of the sun because of
observations upon solar oscillations, but because they had been very much
impressed by the “independent” observations upon the velocity of light, by
Foucault, the physicist. This squirm occurred at the meeting of the Royal
Astronomical Society, February, 1864. There would have to be more
squirms. If, then, the distance across this earth’s orbit was “found” to be
less than Delambre had supposed, somebody would have to find that light
comes from the satellites of Jupiter a little slower than Delambre had
“proved.” Whereupon, Glassenapp “found” that the time is 16 minutes and
40 seconds, which is what he should, or “ought to,” find. Whereupon, there
would have to be re-adjustment of Encke’s calculations of distance of sun,
upon worthless observations upon transits of Venus. And whereupon again,
Newcomb went over the very same observations by which Encke had
compelled agreement with the dogmas of his day, and Newcomb calculated,
as was required, that the distance agreed with Foucault’s reduction.omb went over the very same observations by which Encke had
compelled agreement with the dogmas of his day, and Newcomb calculated,
as was required, that the distance agreed with Foucault’s reduction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ry same observations by which Encke had
compelled agreement with the dogmas of his day, and Newcomb calculated,
as was required, that the distance agreed with Foucault’s reduction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Whether, in the first place, Encke ever did calculate, as he said he did, or
not, his determination was mere agreement with Laplace’s in the seventh
book of the Méchanique Celeste. Of course he said that he had calculated
independently, because his method was by triangulation, and Laplace’s was
the gravitational.
That the word “worthless” does apply to observations upon transits of
Venus:
In Old and New Astronomy, Proctor says that the observations upon the
transits of 1761 and 1769 were “altogether unsatisfactory.” One supposes
that anything that is altogether unsatisfactory can’t be worth much. In the
next transit, of 1874, various nations co-operated. The observations were so
disappointing that the Russian, Italian, and Austrian Governments refused
to participate in the expeditions of 1882. In Reminiscences of an
Astronomer, p. 181, Newcomb says that the United States Commission, of
which he was Secretary, had up to 1902 never published in full its
observations, and probably never would, because by that time all other
members were either dead or upon the retired list.
Method of Mars—more monotony—because of criticisms of the taking
of parallax by simultaneous observations, Dr. David Gill went to the Island
of Ascension, during the opposition of Mars of 1877, to determine alone, by
the diurnal method, the distance of this earth from the sun, from positions of
Mars. For particulars of Gill’s method, see, for instance, Poor’s Solar
System, p. 86. Here Prof. Poor says that, of course, the orbital motion of
Mars had to be allowed for, in Gill’s calculations. If so, then of course this
earth’s orbital motion had to be allowed for. If Dr. Gill knew the space
traversed by this earth in its orbit, and the curvature of its path, he knew the
size and shape of the orbit, and consequently the distance from the sun.
Then he took for the basis of his allowance that this earth is about
93,000,000 miles from the sun, and calculated that this earth is about
93,000,000 miles from the sun. For this classic deduction from the known
to the same known, he received a gold medal.
In our earlier surveys, we were concerned with the false claim that there
can be application of celestial mechanics to celestial phenomena; but, as to
later subjects, the method is different. The method of all these calculations
is triangulation.
One simple question:
To what degree can triangulation be relied upon"to celestial phenomena; but, as to
later subjects, the method is different. The method of all these calculations
is triangulation.
One simple question:
To what degree can triangulation be relied upon"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

To great degree in measuring the height of a building, or in the little
distances of a surveyor’s problems. It is clear enough that astronomers did
not invent the telescope. They adopted the spectroscope from another
science. Their primary mathematical principle of triangulation they have
taken from the surveyors, to whom it is serviceable. The triangle is another
emblem of the sterility of the science of astronomy. Upon the coat of arms
of this great mule of the sciences, I would draw a prism within a triangle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---able. The triangle is another
emblem of the sterility of the science of astronomy. Upon the coat of arms
of this great mule of the sciences, I would draw a prism within a triangle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
9
CCORDING to Prof. Newcomb, for instance, the distance of the sun
is about 380 times the distance of the moon—as determined by
triangulation. But, upon page 22, Popular Astronomy, Newcomb
tells of another demonstration, with strikingly different results—as
determined by triangulation.
A split god.
The god Triangulation is not one undivided deity.
The other method with strikingly different results is the method of
Aristarchus. It cuts down the distance of the sun, from 380 to 20 times the
distance of the moon. When an observer upon this earth sees the moon half-
illumined, the angle at the moon, between observer and sun, is a right angle;
a third line between observer and sun completes a triangle. According to
Aristarchus, the tilt of the third line includes an angle of 86 degrees, making
the sun-earth line 20 times longer than the moon-earth line.
“In principle,” says Newcomb, “the method is quite correct and very
ingenious, but it cannot be applied in practice.” He says that Aristarchus
measured wrong; that the angle between the moon-earth line and the earth-
sun line is almost 90 degrees and not 86 degrees. Then he says that the
method cannot be applied because no one can determine this angle that he
had said is of almost 90 degrees. He says something that is so incongruous
with the inflations of astronomers that they’d sizzle if their hypnotized
readers could read and think at the same time. Newcomb says that the
method of Aristarchus cannot be applied because no astronomer can
determine when the moon is half-illumined.
We have had some experience.
Does anybody who has been through what we’ve been through suppose
that there is a Prof. Keeler in the world who would not declare that
trigonometrically and spectroscopically and micro-metrically he had
determined the exact moment and exasperating, or delightful, decimal of a
moment of semi-illumination of the moon, were it not that, according to at
least as good a mathematician as he, determination based upon thatexact moment and exasperating, or delightful, decimal of a
moment of semi-illumination of the moon, were it not that, according to at
least as good a mathematician as he, determination based upon that

--- PAGE BREAK ---sperating, or delightful, decimal of a
moment of semi-illumination of the moon, were it not that, according to at
least as good a mathematician as he, determination based upon that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

demonstration does show that the sun is only 20 times as far away as the
moon" But suppose we agree that this simple thing cannot be done.
Then instantly we think of some of the extravagant claims with which
astronomers have stuffed supine credulities. Crawling in their unsightly
confusion that sickens for simplification, is this offense to harmony:
That astronomers can tell under which Crusade, or its decimalated
moment, a shine left a star, but cannot tell when a shine reaches a line on
the moon—
Glory and triumph and selectness and inflation—or that we shall have
renown as evangelists, spreading the homely and wholesome doctrine of
humility. Hollis, in Chats on Astronomy, tells us that the diameter of this
earth, at the equator, is 41,851,160 feet. But blessed be the meek, we tell
him. In the Observatory, 19-118, is published the determination, by the
astronomer Brenner, of the time of rotation of Venus, as to which other
astronomers differ by hundreds of days. According to Brenner, the time is
23 hours, 57 minutes, and 7.5459 seconds. I do note that this especial
refinement is a little too ethereal for the Editor of the Observatory he hopes
Brenner will pardon him, but is it necessary to carry out the finding to the
fourth decimal of a second " However, I do not mean to say that all
astronomers are as refined as Brenner, for instance. In the Jour. B. A. A., 1-
382, Edwin Holmes, perhaps coarsely, expresses some views. He says that
such “exactness” as Capt. Noble’s in writing that the diameter of Neptune is
38,133 miles and that of Uranus is 33,836 miles is bringing science into
contempt, because very little is known of these planets; that, according to
Neison, these diameters are 27,000 miles and 28,500 miles. Macpherson, in
A Century’s Progress in Science, quotes Prof. Serviss: that the average
parallax of a star, which is an ordinary astronomic quantity, is “about equal
to the apparent distance between two pins, placed one inch apart, and
viewed from a distance of one hundred and eighty miles.” Stick pins in a
cushion, in New York—go to Saratoga and look at them —be overwhelmed
with the more than human powers of the scientifically anointed—or ask
them when shines half the moon.
The moon’s surface is irregular. I do not say that anybody with brains
enough to know when he has half a shoe polished should know when the
sun has half the moon shined. I do say that if this simple thing cannot be
known, the crowings of astronomers as to enormously more difficult
determinations are mere barnyard disturbances.ow when the
sun has half the moon shined. I do say that if this simple thing cannot be
known, the crowings of astronomers as to enormously more difficult
determinations are mere barnyard disturbances.

--- PAGE BREAK ---half the moon shined. I do say that if this simple thing cannot be
known, the crowings of astronomers as to enormously more difficult
determinations are mere barnyard disturbances.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Triangulation that, according to his little priests, straddles orbits and on
his apex wears a star—that he’s a false Colossus; shrinking, at the touch of
data, back from the stars, deflating below the sun and moon; stubbing down
below the clouds of this earth, so that the different stories that he told to
Aristarchus and to Newcomb are the conflicting vainglories of an earth-tied
squatter—
The blow that crumples a god:
That, by triangulation, there is not an astronomer in the world who can
tell the distance of a thing only five miles away.
Humboldt, Cosmos, 5-138:
Height of Mauna Loa: 18,410 feet, according to Cook; 16,611, according
to Marchand; 13,761, according to Wilkes—according to triangulation.
In the Scientific American, 119-31, a mountain climber calls the Editor to
account for having written that Mt. Everest is 29,002 feet high. He says
that, in his experience, there is always an error of at least ten per cent, in
calculating the height of a mountain, so that all that can be said is that Mt.
Everest is between 26,100 and 31,900 feet high. In the Scientific American,
102-183, and 319, Miss Annie Peck cites two measurements of a mountain
in India: they differ by 4,000 feet.
The most effective way of treating this subject is to find a list of
measurements of a mountain’s height before the mountain was climbed, and
compare with the barometric determination, when the mountain was
climbed. For a list of 8 measurements, by tri-angulation, of the height of
Mt. St. Elias, see the Alpine Journal, 22-150: they vary from 12,672 to
19,500 feet. D’Abruzzi climbed Mt. St. Elias, Aug. 1,1897. See a paper, in
the Alpine Journal, 19-125. D’Abruzzi barometric determination—18,092
feet.
Suppose that, in measuring, by triangulation, the distance of anything
five miles away, the error is, say, ten per cent. But, as to anything ten miles
away, there is no knowing what the error would be. By triangulation, the
moon has been “found” to be 240,000 miles away. It may be 240 or
240,000,000 miles away.er cent. But, as to anything ten miles
away, there is no knowing what the error would be. By triangulation, the
moon has been “found” to be 240,000 miles away. It may be 240 or
240,000,000 miles away.

--- PAGE BREAK ---anything ten miles
away, there is no knowing what the error would be. By triangulation, the
moon has been “found” to be 240,000 miles away. It may be 240 or
240,000,000 miles away.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

P
10
SEUDO heart of a phantom thing—it is Keplerism, pulsating with Sir
Isaac Newton’s regularizations.
If triangulation cannot be depended upon accurately to measure
distance greater than a mile or two between objects and observers, the
aspects of Keplerism that depend upon triangulation should be of no more
concern to us than two pins in a cushion 180 miles away: nevertheless so
affected by something like seasickness are we by the wobbling deductions
of the conventionalists that we shall have direct treatment, or independent
expressions, whenever we can have, or seem to have, them. Kepler saw a
planetary system, and he felt that, if that system could be formulated in
terms of proportionality, by discovering one of the relations quantitatively,
all its measurements could be deduced. I take from Newcomb, in Popular
Astronomy, that, in Kepler’s view, there was system in the arrangement and
motions of the four little traitors that sneak around Jupiter; that Kepler, with
no suspicions of these little betrayers, reasoned that this central body and its
accompaniments were a representation, upon a small scale, of the solar
system, as a whole. Kepler found that the cubes of mean distances of
neighboring satellites of Jupiter, divided by the squares of their times, gave
the same quotients. He reasoned that the same relations subsisted among
planets, if the solar system be only an enlargement of the Jovian system.
Observatory, December, 1920: “The discordances between theory and
observation (as to the motions of Jupiter’s satellites) are of such magnitude
that continued observations of their precise moments of eclipses are very
much to be desired.” In the Report of the Jupiter Section of the British
Astronomical Society (Mens. B. A. A., 8-83) is a comparison between
observed times and calculated times of these satellites. 65 observations, in
the year 1899, are listed. In one instance prediction and observation agree.
Many differences of 3 or 4 minutes are noted, and there are differences of 5
or 6 minutes.
Kepler formulated his law of proportionality between times and distances
of Jupiter’s satellites without knowing what the times are. It should bere noted, and there are differences of 5
or 6 minutes.
Kepler formulated his law of proportionality between times and distances
of Jupiter’s satellites without knowing what the times are. It should be

--- PAGE BREAK ---are differences of 5
or 6 minutes.
Kepler formulated his law of proportionality between times and distances
of Jupiter’s satellites without knowing what the times are. It should be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

noted that the observations in the year 1899 took into consideration
fluctuations that were discovered by Roemer, long after Kepler’s time.
Just for the sake of having something that looks like opposition, let us try
to think that Kepler was miraculously right anyway. Then, if something that
may resemble Kepler’s Third Law does subsist in the Jovian satellites that
were known to Kepler, by what resemblance to logicality can that
proportionality extend to the whole solar system, if a solar system can be
supposed"
In the year 1892, a fifth satellite of Jupiter was discovered. Maybe it
would conform to Kepler’s law, if anybody could find out accurately in
what time the faint speck does revolve. The sixth and the seventh satellites
of Jupiter revolve so eccentrically that, in line of sight, their orbits intersect.
Their distances are subject to very great variations; but, inasmuch as it
might be said that their mean distances do conform to Kepler’s Third Law,
or would, if anybody could find out what their mean distances are, we go on
to the others. The eighth and the ninth conform to nothing that can be
asserted. If one of them goes around in one orbit at one time, the next time
around it goes in some other orbit, and in some other plane. Inasmuch then
as Kepler’s Third Law, deduced from the system of Jupiter’s satellites,
cannot be thought to extend even within that minor system, one’s thoughts
stray into wondering what two pins in a cushion in Louisville, Ky., look like
from somewhere up in the Bronx, rather than to dwell any more upon
extension of any such pseudo-proportionality to the supposed solar system,
as a whole.
It seems that in many of Kepler’s demonstrations was this failure to have
grounds for a starting-point, before extending his rea soning. He taught the
doctrine of the music of the spheres, and assigned bass voices to Saturn and
Jupiter, then tenor to Mars, contralto to the female planet, and soprano, or
falsetto, rather, to little Mercury. And that is all very well and consistently
worked out in detail, and it does seem reasonable that, if ponderous, if not
lumpy, Jupiter does sing bass, the other planets join in, according to sex and
huskiness—however, one does feel dissatisfied.
We have dealt with Newcomb’s account. But other conventionalists say
that Kepler worked out his Third Law by triangulation upon Venus and
Mercury when at greatest elongation, “finding” that the relation between
Mercury and Venus is the same as the relation between Venus and this earth.
If, according to conventionalists, there was no “proof” that this earthtest elongation, “finding” that the relation between
Mercury and Venus is the same as the relation between Venus and this earth.
If, according to conventionalists, there was no “proof” that this earth

--- PAGE BREAK ---nding” that the relation between
Mercury and Venus is the same as the relation between Venus and this earth.
If, according to conventionalists, there was no “proof” that this earth

--- PAGE BREAK ---

moves, in Kepler’s time, Kepler started by assuming that this earth moves
between Venus and Mars; he assumed that the distance of Venus from the
sun, at greatest elongation, represents mean distance; he assumed that
observations upon Mercury indicated Mercury’s orbit, an orbit that to this
day defies analysis. However, for the sake of seeming to have opposition,
we shall try to think that Kepler’s data did give him material for the
formulation of his law. His data were chiefly the observations of Tycho
Brahe. But, by the very same data, Tycho had demonstrated that this earth
does not move between Venus and Mars; that this earth is stationary. That
stoutest of conventionalists, but at the same time seeming colleague of ours,
Richard Proctor, says that Tycho Brahp’s system was consistent with all
data. I have never heard of an astronomer who denies this. Then the heart of
modern astronomy is not Keplerism, but is one diversion of data that beat
for such a monstrosity as something like Siamese Twins, serving both
Keplerism and the Tychonic system. I fear that some of our attempts to find
opposition are not very successful.
So far, this medi val doctrine, restricting to times and distances, though
for all I know the planets sing proportionately as well as move
proportionately, has data to interpret or to misinterpret. But, when it comes
to extending Kepler’s Third Law to the exterior planets, I have never read
of any means that Kepler had of determining their proportional distances.
He simply said that Mars and Jupiter and Saturn were at distances that
proportionalized with their times. He argued, reasonably enough, perhaps,
that the slower-moving planets are the remoter, but that has nothing to do
with proportional remoteness.
This is the pseudo heart of phantom astronomy.
To it Sir Isaac Newton gave a seeming of coherence.
I suspect that it was not by chance that the story of an apple should so
importantly appear in two mythologies. The story of Newton and the apple
was first told by Voltaire. One has suspicions of Voltaire’s meanings.
Suppose Newton did see an apple fall to the ground, and was so inspired, or
victimized, into conceiving in terms of universal attraction. But had he tried
to take a bone away from a dog, he would have had another impression, and
would have been quite as well justified in explaining in terms of universal
repulsion. If, as to all inter-acting things, electric, biologic, psychologic,
economic, sociologic, magnetic, chemic, as well as canine, repulsion is as
much of a determinant as is attraction, the Law of Gravitation, which is anr-acting things, electric, biologic, psychologic,
economic, sociologic, magnetic, chemic, as well as canine, repulsion is as
much of a determinant as is attraction, the Law of Gravitation, which is an

--- PAGE BREAK ---ctric, biologic, psychologic,
economic, sociologic, magnetic, chemic, as well as canine, repulsion is as
much of a determinant as is attraction, the Law of Gravitation, which is an

--- PAGE BREAK ---

attempt to explain in terms of attraction only, is as false as would be
dogmas upon all other subjects if couched in terms of attraction only. So it
is that the law of gravitation has been a rule of chagrin and fiasco. So,
perhaps accepting, or passionately believing in every symbol of it, a Dr.
Adams calculates that the Leonids will appear in November, 1899—but
chagrin and fiasco—the Leonids do not appear. The planet Neptune was not
discovered mathematically, because, though it was in the year 1846
somewhere near the position of the formula, in the year 1836 or 1856, it
would have been nowhere near the orbit calculated by Leverrier and
Adams. Some time ago, against the clamor that a Trans-Uranian planet had
been discovered mathematically, it was our suggestion that, if this be not a
myth, let the astronomer now discover the Trans-Neptunian planet
mathematically. That there is no such mathematics, in the face of any
number of learned treatises, is far more strikingly betrayed by those shining
little misfortunes, the satellites of Jupiter. Satellite after satellite of Jupiter
was discovered, but by accident or by observation, and not once by
calculation: never were the perturbations of the earlier known satellites
made the material for deducing the positions of other satellites.
Astronomers have pointed to the sky, and there has been nothing; one of
them pointed in four directions at once, and four times over, there was
nothing; and many times when they have not pointed at all, there has been
something.
Apples fall to the ground, and dogs growl, if their bones are taken away:
also flowers bloom in the spring, and a trodden worm turns.
Nevertheless strong is the delusion that there is gravitational astronomy,
and the great power of the Law of Gravitation, in popular respectfulness, is
that it is mathematically expressed. According to my view, one might as
well say that it is fetishly expressed. Descartes was as great a
mathematician as Newton: veritably enough may it be said that he invented,
or discovered, analytic geometry; only patriotically do Englishmen say that
Newton invented, or discovered, the infinitesimal calculus. Descartes, too,
formulated a law of the planets and not by a symbol was he less
bewildering and convincing to the faithful, but his law was not in terms of
gravitation, but in terms of vorticose motion. In the year 1732, the French
Academy awarded a prize to John Bernouli, for his magnificent
mathematical demonstration, which was as unintelligible as anybody’s.
Bernouli, too, formulated, or said he formulated, planetary inter-actions, aswarded a prize to John Bernouli, for his magnificent
mathematical demonstration, which was as unintelligible as anybody’s.
Bernouli, too, formulated, or said he formulated, planetary inter-actions, as

--- PAGE BREAK ---hn Bernouli, for his magnificent
mathematical demonstration, which was as unintelligible as anybody’s.
Bernouli, too, formulated, or said he formulated, planetary inter-actions, as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mathematically as any of his hypnotized admirers could have desired: it,
too, was not gravitational.
The fault that I find with a great deal of mathematics in astronomy is the
fault that I should find in architecture, if a temple, or a skyscraper, were
supposed to prove something. Pure mathematics is architecture: it has no
more place in astronomy than has the Parthenon. It is the arbitrary: it will
not spoil a line nor dent a surface for a datum. There is a faint uniformity in
every chaos: in discolorations on an old wall, anybody can see recognizable
appearances; in such a mixture a mathematician will see squares and circles
and triangles. If he would merely elaborate triangles and not apply his
diagrams to theories upon the old wall itself, his constructions would be as
harmless as poetry. In our metaphysics, unity cannot, of course, be the
related. A mathematical expression of unity cannot, except approximately,
apply to a planet, which is not final, but is part of something.
Sir Isaac Newton lived long ago. Every thought in his mind was a
reflection of his era. To appraise his mind at all comprehensively, consider
his works in general. For some other instances of his love of numbers, see,
in his book upon the Prophecies of Daniel, his determinations upon the
eleventh horn of Daniel’s fourth animal. If that demonstration be not very
acceptable nowadays, some of his other works may now be archaic. For all
I know Jupiter may sing bass, either smoothly or lumpily, and for all I know
there may be some formulable ratio between an eleventh horn of a fourth
animal and some other quantity: I complain against the dogmas that have
solidified out of the vaporings of such minds, but I suppose I am not very
substantial, myself. Upon general principles, I say that we take no ships of
the time of Newton for models for the ships of today, and build and
transport in ways that are magnificently, or perhaps disastrously, different,
but that, at any rate, are not the same; and that the principles of biology and
chemistry and all the other sciences, except astronomy, are not what they
were in Newton’s time, whether every one of them is a delusion or not. My
complaint is that the still medi val science of astronomy holds back alone
in a general appearance of advancement, even though there probably never
has been real advancement.
There is something else to be said upon Keplerism and Newtonism. It is a
squirm. I fear me that our experiences have sophisticated us. We have noted
the division in Keplerism, by which, like everything else that we have
examined, it is as truly interpretable one way as it is another way.me that our experiences have sophisticated us. We have noted
the division in Keplerism, by which, like everything else that we have
examined, it is as truly interpretable one way as it is another way.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ces have sophisticated us. We have noted
the division in Keplerism, by which, like everything else that we have
examined, it is as truly interpretable one way as it is another way.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The squirm:
To lose all sense of decency and value of data, but to be agreeable; but to
be like everybody else, and intend to turn our agreeableness to profit;
To agree with the astronomers that Kepler’s three laws are not absolutely
true, of course, but are approximations, and that the planets do move, as in
Keplerian doctrine they are said to move— but then to require only one
demonstration that this earth is one of the planets;
To admire Newton’s Principia from the beginning to the end of it,
having, like almost all other admirers, never even seen a copy of it; to
accept every theorem in it, without having the slightest notion what any one
of them means; to accept that moving bodies do obey the laws of motion,
and must move in one of the conic sections—but then to require only one
demonstration that this earth is a moving body.
Kepler’s three laws are popularly supposed to demonstrate that this earth
moves around the sun. This is a mistake. There is something wrong with
everything that is popular. As was said by us before, accept that this earth is
stationary, and Kepler’s doctrines apply equally well to a sun around which
proportionately interspaced planets move in ellipses, the whole system
moving around a central and stationary earth. All observations upon the
motions of heavenly bodies are in accord with this interpretation of
Kepler’s laws. Then as to nothing but a quandary, which means that this
earth is stationary, or which means that this earth is not stationary, just as
one pleases, Sir Isaac Newton selected, or pleased himself and others.
Without one datum, without one little indication more convincing one way
than the other, he preferred to think that this earth is one of the moving
planets. To this degree had he the “profundity” that we read about. He wrote
no books upon the first and second horns of his dilemma: he simply
disregarded the dilemma.
To anybody who may be controversially inclined, I offer simplification.
He may feel at a disadvantage against batteries of integrals and
bombardments of quaternions, transcendental functions, conics, and all the
other stores of an astronomer’s munitions—
Admire them. Accept that they do apply to the bodies that move around
the sun. Require one demonstration that this earth is one of those bodies.
For treatment of any such “demonstration,” see our disquisition, or our
ratiocinations upon the Three Abstrusities, or our intolerably painful
attempts to write seriously upon the Three Abstrusities.For treatment of any such “demonstration,” see our disquisition, or our
ratiocinations upon the Three Abstrusities, or our intolerably painful
attempts to write seriously upon the Three Abstrusities.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

We began with three screams from an exhilarated mathematician. We
have had some doubtful adventures, trying hard to pretend that monsters, or
little difficulties, did really oppose us. We have reached, not the heart of a
system, but the crotch of quandary.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ome doubtful adventures, trying hard to pretend that monsters, or
little difficulties, did really oppose us. We have reached, not the heart of a
system, but the crotch of quandary.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

W
11
E have seen that some of the most brilliant inspirations of god-
like intellects, or some of the most pestilential emanations from
infected minds, have been attempts to account for the virtual
changelessness of the stars. Above all other data of astronomy, that virtual
changelessness of positions stands out as a crucial circumstance in my own
mind. To account for constellations that have not changed in 2,000 years,
astronomers say that they conceive of inconceivable distances. We shall
have expressions of our own upon the virtually changeless positions of the
stars; but there will be difficulties for us if the astronomers ever have found
that some stars move around or with other stars. I shall take up the story of
Prof. Struve and the “Companion of Procyon,” with more detail, for the
sake of some more light upon refinement, exactness, accuracy in astronomy,
and for the sake of belittling, or for the sake of sneering, or anything else
that anybody may choose to call it.
Prof. Struve’s announcement of his discovery of the “Companion of
Procyon” is published in Monthly Notices, 33-430—that, upon the 19th of
March, 1873, Struve had discovered the companion of Procyon, having
compared it micrometrically, having tested his observations with three
determinations of position-angle, three measures of distance, and three
additional determinations of position-angle, finding all in “excellent
agreement.” No optical illusion could be possible, it is said, because another
astronomer, Lindemann, had seen the object. Technically, Struve publishes
a table of his observations: sidereal time, distances, position-angles; from
March 19 to April 2, 1873, after which his observations had to be
discontinued until the following year. In Monthly Notices, 34-355, are
published the resumed observations. Struve says that Auwers would not
accept the discovery, unless, in the year that had elapsed, the “companion”
had shown increase in position, consistent with theory. Struve writes
—”This increase has really shown itself in the most remarkable manner.”
Therefore, he considers it “decisively established” that the object of his
observations was the object of Auwers’ calculations. He says that Ceraski,eally shown itself in the most remarkable manner.”
Therefore, he considers it “decisively established” that the object of his
observations was the object of Auwers’ calculations. He says that Ceraski,

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the most remarkable manner.”
Therefore, he considers it “decisively established” that the object of his
observations was the object of Auwers’ calculations. He says that Ceraski,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of Moscow, had seen the “companion,” “without being warned of the place
where it was to be looked for.”
However—see back some chapters.
It may be said that, nevertheless, other stars have companions that do
move as they should move. Later we shall consider this subject, thinking
that it may be that lights have been seen to change position near some stars,
but that never has a star revolved around another star, as to fit pal o-
astronomic theory it should. I take for a basis of analogy that never has one
sat in a park and watched a tree revolve around one, but that given the
affliction, or the endowment, of an astronomer, illusion of such a revolution
one may have. We sit in a park. We notice a tree. Wherever we get the
notion, we do have the notion that the tree has moved. Then, farther along,
we notice another tree, and, as an indication of our vivid imagination or
something else, we think it is the same tree, farther along. After that we pick
out tree after tree, farther along, and, convinced that it is the same tree, of
course conclude that the thing is revolving around us. Exactness and
refinement develop: we compute the elements of its orbit. We close our eyes
and predict where the tree will be when next we look; and there, by the
same process of selection and identification, it is where it “should” be. And
if we have something of almost everybody’s mania for speed, we make that
damn thing spin around with such velocity that we, too, reel in a chaos of
very much unsettled botanic conventions. There is nothing far-fetched in
this analogy, except the factor of velocity. Goldschmidt did announce that
there were half a dozen faint points of light around Sirius, and it was
Dawes’ suspicion that Clark had arbitrarily picked out one of them. It is our
expression that all around Sirius, at various distances from Sirius, faint
points of light were seen, and that at first, even for the first sixteen years,
astronomers were not thoroughly hypnotized, and would not pick out the
especial point of light that they should have picked out, so that there was
nothing like agreement between the calculated and the observed orbit.
Besides the irreconcilable observations noted by Flammarion, see the Intel.
Obs., 1-482, for others. Then came standardized seeing. So, in the
Observatory, 20-73, is published a set of observations, in the year 1896,
upon the “Companion of Sirius,” placing it exactly where it should be.
Nevertheless, under this set of observations is published another set, so
different that the Editor asks—”Does this mean that there are two
companions "”irius,” placing it exactly where it should be.
Nevertheless, under this set of observations is published another set, so
different that the Editor asks—”Does this mean that there are two
companions "”

--- PAGE BREAK ---xactly where it should be.
Nevertheless, under this set of observations is published another set, so
different that the Editor asks—”Does this mean that there are two
companions "”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dark Companions require a little more eliminative treatment. So the
variable nebul , then—and do dark nebul  revolve around light nebul "
For instances of variable nebul , see Mems. R. A. S., 49-214; Comptes
Rendus, 59-637; Monthly Notices, 38-104. It may be said that they are not
of the Algol-type. Neither is Algol, we have shown.
According to the compulsions of data, our idea is that the stars that seem
to be fixed in position are fixed in position, so now “proper motion” is as
irreconcilable to us as relative motions.
As to “proper motion,” the situation is this:
The stars that were catalogued 2,000 years ago have virtually not
changed, or, if there be refinement in modern astronomy, have changed no
more than a little more nearly exact charting would account for; but, in
astronomic theory, the stars are said to be thought of as flying apart at
unthinkable velocity; so then evidence of changed positions of stars is
welcome to astronomers. As to well-known constellations, it cannot be said
that there has been change; so, with several exceptions, “proper motion” is
attributed to stars that are not well-known.
The result is an amusing trap. Great proper motion is said to indicate
relative nearness to this earth. Of the twenty-five stars of supposed greatest
proper motion, all but two are faintest of stars; so these twenty-three are
said to be nearest this earth. But when astronomers take the relative parallax
of a star, by reference to a fainter star, they agree that the fainter star,
because fainter, is farther away. So one time faintness associates with
nearness, and then conveniences change, and faintness associates with
farness, and the whole subject so associates with humorousness, that if
we’re going to be serious at all in these expressions of ours we had better
pass on.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
Observatory, March, 1914:
A group of three stars that disappeared.
If three stars disappeared at once, they were acted upon by something
that affected all in common. Try to think of some one force that would not
tear the seeable into visible rags, that could blot out three stars, if they were
trillions of miles apart. If they were close together that ends the explanation
that only because stars are trillions of miles apart have they, for at least
2,000 years, seemed to hold the same relative positions.miles apart. If they were close together that ends the explanation
that only because stars are trillions of miles apart have they, for at least
2,000 years, seemed to hold the same relative positions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---were close together that ends the explanation
that only because stars are trillions of miles apart have they, for at least
2,000 years, seemed to hold the same relative positions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In Agnes Clerke’s System of the Stars, are cited many instances of stars
that seem to be so closely related that it seems impossible to think that they
are trillions, or billions, or millions of miles apart: such formations as
“seven aligned stars appearing to be strung on a silvery filament.” There are
loops of stars in a cluster in Auriga; lines and arches in Opiuchus; zig-zag
figures in Sagittarius. As to stars that not only seem close together but that
are colored alike, Miss Clerke expresses her feeling that they are close
together—”If these colors be inherent, it is difficult to believe that the stars
distinguished by them are simply thrown together by perspective.” As to
figures in Sagittarius, Fison (Recent Advances in Astronomy cites an
instance of 30 small stars in the form of a forked twig, with dark rifts
parallel. According to Fison, probability is overwhelmingly against the
three uncommon stars in the belt of Orion falling into a straight line, by
chance distribution, considering also that below this line is another of five
faint stars parallel. There are dark lanes or rifts in the Milky Way that are
like branches from main lanes or rifts, and the rifts sometimes have well-
defined edges. In many regions where there are dark rifts there are lines of
stars that are roughly parallel—
That it is not distances apart that have held the stars from changing
relatively to one another, because there are hosts of indications that some
stars are close together, and are, or have been, affected, in common, by
local formative forces.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
For a detailed comparison, by J. E. Gore, of stars of today with stars
catalogued by Al-Sufi about 1,000 years ago, see the Observatory, vol. 23.
The stars have not changed in position, but it does seem that there have
been many changes in magnitude.
Other changes—Pubs. Astro. Soc. Pacific, No. 185 (1920)—discovery of
the seventeenth new star in one nebula (Andromeda). For lists of stars that
have disappeared, see Monthly Notices, 8-16; 10-18; 11-47; Sidereal
Messenger, 6-320; Jour. B. A. A., 14-255. Nebul  that have disappeared—
see Amer. Jour. Sci., 2-33-436; Clerke’s System of the Stars, p. 293; Nature
30-20.
In the Sidereal Messenger, 5-269, Prof. Colbert writes that, upon August
20, 1886, an astronomer, in Chicago, saw, for about half an hour, a small
comet-like projection from the star Zeta, in Cassiopeia.
So, then, changes have been seen at the distance of the stars.August
20, 1886, an astronomer, in Chicago, saw, for about half an hour, a small
comet-like projection from the star Zeta, in Cassiopeia.
So, then, changes have been seen at the distance of the stars.

--- PAGE BREAK ---astronomer, in Chicago, saw, for about half an hour, a small
comet-like projection from the star Zeta, in Cassiopeia.
So, then, changes have been seen at the distance of the stars.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

When the new star in Perseus appeared, in February, 1901, it was a point
of light. Something went out from it, giving it in six months a diameter
equal to half the apparent diameter of the moon. The appearances looked
structural. To say loosely that they were light-effects, something like a halo,
perhaps, is to ignore their complexity and duration and differences.
According to Newcomb, who is occasionally quotable in our favor, these
radiations were not mere light-rays, because they did not go out uniformly
from the star, but moved out variously and knotted and curved.
It was visible motion, at the distance of Nova Persei.
In Monthly Notices, 58-334, Dr. Espin writes that, upon the night of Jan.
16, 1898, he saw something that looked like a cloud in Perseus. It could
have been nothing in the atmosphere of this earth, nor anything far from the
constellation, because he saw it again in Perseus, upon January 24. He
writes that, upon February 17, Mr. Heath and Dr. Halm saw it, like a cloud,
dimming and discoloring stars shining through it. At the meeting of the
British Astronomical Association, Feb. 23, 1898 (Jour. B. A. A., 8-216), Dr.
Espin described this appearance and answered questions. “It was not a
nebula, and was not like one.” “Whatever it was it had the peculiar property
of dimming and blotting out stars.”
This thing moved into Perseus and then moved away.
Clerke, The System of the Stars, p. 295—a nebula that changed position
abruptly, between the years 1833 and 1835, and then changed no more.
According to Sir John Herschel, a star was central in this nebula, when
observed in 1827, and in 1833, but, in August, 1835, the star was upon the
eastern side of the nebula.
That it is not distance from this earth that has kept changes of position of
the stars from being seen, for 2,000 years, because occasional, abrupt
changes of position have been seen at the distance of the stars.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
That, whether there be a shell-like, revolving composition, holding the
stars in position, and in which the stars are openings, admitting light from
an existence external to the shell, or not, all stars are at about the same
distance from this earth as they would be if this earth were stationary and
central to such a shell, revolving around it—
According to the aberration-forms of the stars.
All stars, at the pole of the ecliptic, describe circles annually; stars lower
down describe ellipses that reduce more and more the farther down theyt—
According to the aberration-forms of the stars.
All stars, at the pole of the ecliptic, describe circles annually; stars lower
down describe ellipses that reduce more and more the farther down they

--- PAGE BREAK ---aberration-forms of the stars.
All stars, at the pole of the ecliptic, describe circles annually; stars lower
down describe ellipses that reduce more and more the farther down they

--- PAGE BREAK ---

are, until at the ecliptic they describe straight lines yearly.
Suppose all the stars to be openings, fixed in position relatively to one
another, in some inter-spacing substance. Conceive of a gyration to the
whole aggregation, and relatively to a central and stationary earth: then, as
seen from this earth, all would describe circles, near the axis, ellipses lower
down, and straight lines at the limit of transformation. If all were at the
same distance from this earth, or if all were points in one gyrating concave
formation, equi-distant at all points from the central earth, all would have
the same amplitude. All aberration-forms of the stars, whether of brilliant or
faint stars, whether circles or ellipses or straight lines, have the same
amplitude: about 41 seconds of arc.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
If all stars are points of light admitted from externality, held fixed and
apart in one shell-like composition that is opaque in some parts and
translucent in some parts and perforated generally—
The Gegenschein—
That we have indication that there is such a shell around our existence.
The Gegenschein is a round patch of light in the sky. It seems to be
reflected sunlight, at night, because it keeps position about opposite the
sun’s.
The crux:
Reflected sunlight—but reflecting from what"
That the sky is a matrix in which the stars are openings, and that, upon
the inner, concave surface of this celestial shell, the sun casts its light, even
if the earth is between, no more blotted out in the middle by the intervening
earth than often to considerable degree is its light blotted out upon the moon
during an eclipse of the moon, occupying no time in traveling the distance
of the stars and back to this earth, because the stars are near, or because
there is no velocity of light.
Suppose the Gegenschein could be a reflection of sunlight from anything
at a distance less than the distance of the stars. It would have parallax
against its background of stars.
Observatory, 17-47:
“The Gegenschein has no parallax.”
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ādistance less than the distance of the stars. It would have parallax
against its background of stars.
Observatory, 17-47:
“The Gegenschein has no parallax.”
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā

--- PAGE BREAK ---he distance of the stars. It would have parallax
against its background of stars.
Observatory, 17-47:
“The Gegenschein has no parallax.”
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā

--- PAGE BREAK ---

At the meeting of the Royal Astronomical Society, Jan. 11, 1878, was
read a paper by W. F. Denning. It was, by its implications, one of the most
exciting documents in history. The subject was: “Suspected repetitions in
meteor-showers.” Mr. Denning listed twenty-two radiants that lasted from
three to four months each.
In the year 1799, Humboldt noticed that the paths of meteors, when parts
of one display, led back to one point of common origin, or one point from
which all the meteors had radiated. This is the radiant-point, or the radiant.
When a radiant occurs under a constellation, the meteors are named
relatively. In the extraordinary meteoric display of Nov. 13-14, 1833, there
was a circumstance that was as extraordinary as the display itself: that,
though this earth is supposed to rotate upon its axis, giving to the stars the
appearance of revolving nightly, and supposed to revolve around the sun, so
affecting the seeming motions of the stars, these meteors of November,
1833, began under the constellation Leo, and six hours later, though Leo
had changed position in the sky, had changed with, and seemed still coming
from, Leo.
There was no parallax along the great base line from Canada to Florida.
Then these meteors did come from Leo, or parallax, or absence of
parallax, is meaningless.
The circumstance of precise position maintained under a moving
constellation upon the night of Nov. 13-14, 1833, becomes insignificant
relatively to Denning’s data of such synchronization with a duration of
months. When a radiant-point remains under Leo or Lyra, night after night,
month after month, it is either that something is shifting it, without parallax,
in exact coincidence with a doubly shifting constellation, which is so
unthinkable that Denning says, “I cannot explain,” or that the constellation
is the radiant-point, in which case maintenance of precise position under it
is unthinkable if it be far away—
That the stars are near.
Think of a ship, slowly sailing past a seacoast town, firing with
smokeless powder, say. Shells from it burst before quite reaching the town,
and all explosion-points are in line between the city and the ship, or are
traceable to one such radiant. The bombardment continues. The ship moves
slowly. Still all points of exploding shells are traceable to one point between
the ship and the town. The bombardment goes on and goes on and goes on,
and the ship is far from its first position. The point of exploding shells isxploding shells are traceable to one point between
the ship and the town. The bombardment goes on and goes on and goes on,
and the ship is far from its first position. The point of exploding shells is

--- PAGE BREAK ---traceable to one point between
the ship and the town. The bombardment goes on and goes on and goes on,
and the ship is far from its first position. The point of exploding shells is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

still between the ship and the town. Wise men in the town say that the shells
are not coming from the ship. They say this because formerly they had said
that shells could not come from a ship. They reason: therefore shells are not
coming from this ship. They are asked how, then, the point of explosion
could so shift exactly in line with the moving ship. If there be a W. F.
Denning among them, he will say, “I cannot explain.” But the other wise
men will be like Prof. Moulton, for instance. In his books, Prof. Moulton
writes a great deal upon the subject of meteors, but he does not mention the
meteors that, for months at a time, appear between observers and a shifting
constellation.
There are other considerations. The shells are heard to explode. So then
they explode near the town. But there is something the matter with that
smokeless powder aboard ship: very feeble projectile-force, because also
must the shells be exploding near the ship, or the radiant-point would not
have the same background, as seen from different parts of the town. Then,
in this town, inhabitants, provided they be not wise men, will conclude that,
if the explosion-point is near the town, and is also near the ship, the ship is
near the town—
Leo and Lyra and Andromeda—argosies that sail the sky and that
bombard this earth—and that they are not far away.
And some of us there may be who, instead of trying to speculate upon an
unthinkable remoteness, will suffer a sensitiveness to proximity instead;
enter a new revolt against a black encompassment that glitters with a light
beyond, and wonder what exists in a brilliant environment not far away—
and a new anguish for hyper sthesia upon this earth: a suffocating
consciousness of the pressure of the stars.
The Sickle of Leo, from which come the Leonids, gleams like a great
question-mark in the sky.
The answer—
But God knows what the answer to anything is.
Perhaps it is that the stars are very close indeed.Sickle of Leo, from which come the Leonids, gleams like a great
question-mark in the sky.
The answer—
But God knows what the answer to anything is.
Perhaps it is that the stars are very close indeed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---which come the Leonids, gleams like a great
question-mark in the sky.
The answer—
But God knows what the answer to anything is.
Perhaps it is that the stars are very close indeed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

W
12
E try to have independent expressions. Accept that it is not
distance that has held the stars in unchanging position, if
occasional, abrupt change of position has been seen at the
distance of the stars, and it is implied that the not enormously distant stars
are all about equally far away from this earth. or some would be greatly
particularized, and that this earth does not move in an orbit, or stars would
be seasonally particularized, but would not be, if the stars, in one
composition revolve; also if this earth be relatively close to all stars, if
many changes of magnitude and of appearance and disappearance have
been seen at the distance of the stars, and, if, in the revolutions of the stars,
they do not swirl in displacements as bewildering as a blizzard of luminous
snowflakes, and if no state of inter-repulsion can be thought of, especially
as many stars merge into others, this composition is a substantial, concave
formation, or shell-like enclosure in which stars are points. So many of the
expressions in the preceding chapter imply others, or all others. However,
we have tried to have independent expressions. Of course we realize that
the supposed difference between inductive and deductive reasoning is a
false demarcation; nevertheless we feel that deductions piled upon other
deductions are only architecture, and a great deal in this book expresses the
notion that architecture should be kept in its own place. Our general
expression is not that there should be no architecture and no mathematics in
astronomy, or neo-astronomy; not that there should be no poetry in biology;
no chemistry in physiology—but that “pure” architecture or “pure”
mathematics, biology, chemistry, has its own field, even though each is
inextricably bound up with all the other aspects of being. So of course the
very thing that we object to in its extreme manifestations is essential to us
in some degree, and the deductive is findable somewhere in every one of
our inductions, and we are not insensible to what we think is the
gracefulness of some of the converging lines of our own constructions. We
are not revolting against aspects, but against emphases and intrusions.ons, and we are not insensible to what we think is the
gracefulness of some of the converging lines of our own constructions. We
are not revolting against aspects, but against emphases and intrusions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---insensible to what we think is the
gracefulness of some of the converging lines of our own constructions. We
are not revolting against aspects, but against emphases and intrusions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This first part of our work is what we consider neo-astronomic; and now
to show that we have no rabidity against the mathematical except when
over-emphasized, or misapplied, our language is that all expressions so far
developed are to us of about 50 acceptability. A far greater attempted
independence is coming, a second part of this work, considering
phenomena so different that, if we term the first part of our explorations
“neo-astronomic,” even some other term by which to designate the field of
the second part will have to be thought of, and the word “extra-geographic”
seems best for it. If in these two fields, our at least temporary conclusions
be the same, we shall be impressed, in spite of all our cynicisms as to
“agreements.”
Neo-astronomy:
This supposed solar-system—an egg-like organism that is shelled away
from external light and life—this central and stationary earth its nucleus—
around it a revolving shell, in which the stars are pores, or functioning
channels, through some of which spray irradiating fountains said to be
“meteoric,” but perhaps electric—in which the nebul  are translucent
patches, and in which the many dark parts are areas of opaque, structural
substance—and that the stars are not trillions nor even millions of miles
away—with proportional reductions of all internal distances, so that the
planets are not millions, nor even hundreds of thousands of miles away.
We conceive of the variability of the stars and the nebul  in terms of the
incidence of external light upon a revolving shell and fluctuating passage
through light-admitting points and parts. We conceive of all things being
rhythmic, so, if stars be pores in a substance, that matrix must be subject to
some changes, which may be of different periodicities in different regions.
There may be local vortices in the most rigid substance, and so stars, or
pores, might revolve around one another, but our tendency is to think that if
light companions there be to some stars, they are reflections of light,
passing through channels, upon surrounding substance, flickering from one
position to another in the small undulations of this environment. So there
may be other displacements, differences of magnitude, new openings and
closings in a substance that is not absolutely rigid. So “proper motion”
might be accounted for, but my own preference is to think, as to such stars
as 1830 Groom bridge and Barnard’s “run-away star,” that they are planets
—also that some of the comets, especially the tailless comets, some of
which have been seen to obscure stars, so that evidently they are not wispsand Barnard’s “run-away star,” that they are planets
—also that some of the comets, especially the tailless comets, some of
which have been seen to obscure stars, so that evidently they are not wisps

--- PAGE BREAK ---away star,” that they are planets
—also that some of the comets, especially the tailless comets, some of
which have been seen to obscure stars, so that evidently they are not wisps

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of highly attenuated matter, are planets, all of them not conventionally
recognized as planets, because of eccentricity and remoteness from the
ecliptic, two departures, however, that many of the minor planets make to
great degree. If some of these bodies be planets, the irregularities of some
of them are consistent with the irregularities of Jupiter’s satellites.
I suggest that a combination of the Ptolemaic and the Tychonic doctrines
is in good accord with all the phenomena that we have considered, and with
all planetary motions that we have had no occasion to pay much attention to
—that the sun, carrying Mercury and Venus with him, revolves at a distance
of a few thousand miles, or a few tens of thousands of miles, in a rising and
falling spiral around this virtually, but not absolutely, stationary earth,
which, according to modern investigations, is more top-shaped than
spherical; moon, a few thousand miles away, revolving around this nucleus;
and the exterior planets not only revolving around this whole central
arrangement, but approaching and receding, in loops, also, quite as they
seem, to the remotest of them preposterously near, according to
conventional “determinations.”
So all the phenomena of the skies may be explained. But all were
explained in another way by Copernicus, in another way by Ptolemy, and in
still another way by Tycho Brahp. One supposes that there are other ways.
If there be a distant object, and, if one school of wise men can by their
reasoning processes excellently demonstrate that it is a tree, another school
positively determine that it is a house, and other investigators of the highest
authoritativeness variously find and prove that it is a cloud or a buffalo or a
geranium, why then, their reasoning processes may be admired but not
trusted. Right at the heart of our opposition, and right at the heart of our
own expressions, is the fatality that there is no reasoning, no logic, no
explanation resembling the illusions in the vainglories of common
suppositions. There is only the process of correlating to, or organizing or
systematizing around, something that is arbitrarily taken for a base, or a
dominant doctrine, or a major premise—the process of assimilating with
something else, making agreement with something else, or interpreting in
terms of something else, which supposed base is never itself final, but was
originally an assimilation with still something else.
I typify the result of all examinations of all principles or laws or
dominant thoughts, scientific, philosophic, or theologic, in what we find in
examining the pronouncement that motion follows the least resistance:sult of all examinations of all principles or laws or
dominant thoughts, scientific, philosophic, or theologic, in what we find in
examining the pronouncement that motion follows the least resistance:

--- PAGE BREAK ---ions of all principles or laws or
dominant thoughts, scientific, philosophic, or theologic, in what we find in
examining the pronouncement that motion follows the least resistance:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That motion follows least resistance.
How are we to identify least resistance"
If motion follows it.
Then motion goes where motion goes.
If nothing can be positively distinguished from anything else there can be
no positive logic, which is attempted positive distinguishment. Consider the
popular “base” that Capital is tyranny, and almost utmost wickedness, and
that Labor is pure and idealistic. But one’s labor is one’s capital, and capital
that is not working is in no sense implicated in this conflict.
Nevertheless we now give up our early suspicion that our whole
existence is a leper of the skies, quaking and cringing through space, having
the isolation that astronomers suppose, because other celestial forms of
being fly from infection—
That, if shelled away from external light and life, it is so surrounded and
so protected in the same cause and functioning as that of similarly
encompassed forms subsidiary to it—that our existence is super-embryonic.
Darkness of night and of lives and of thoughts—super-uterine
entombment. Blackness of the unborn, quasi-illumined periodically by the
little sun, which is not light, but less dark.
Then we think of an organism that needs no base, and needs nothing of
finality, nor of special guidance to any part local to it, because all parts
partake of the pre-determined development of the whole. Consequently our
spleens subside, and our frequently unmannerly derisions are hushed by
recognitions—that all organizations of thought must be baseless in
themselves, and of course be not final, or they could not change, and must
bear within themselves those elements that will, in time, destroy them—that
seeming solidities that pass away, in phantom-successions, are functionaries
relatively to their periods, and express the passage from phase to phase of
all things embryonic.
So it is that one who searches for fundamentals comes to bifurcations;
never to a base; only to a quandary. In our own field, let there be any
acceptable finding. It indicates that the earth moves around the sun. Just as
truly it indicates that the sun moves around the earth. What is it that
determines which will be accepted, hypnotically blinding the faithful to the
other aspect" Our own expression is upon Development as serial reactions
to successive Dominants. Let the dominant spirit of an era require that this
earth be remote and isolated; Keplerism will support it: let the dominantxpression is upon Development as serial reactions
to successive Dominants. Let the dominant spirit of an era require that this
earth be remote and isolated; Keplerism will support it: let the dominant

--- PAGE BREAK ---

change to a spirit of expansion, which would be impossible under such
remoteness and isolation; Keplerism will support, or will not especially
oppose, the new dominant. This is the essential process of embryonic
growth, by which the same protoplasmic substance responds differently in
different phases.
But I do not think that all data are so plastic. There are some that will not
assimilate with a prevailing doctrine. They can have no effect upon an
arbitrary system of thought, or a system subconsciously induced, in its time
of dominance: they will simply be disregarded.
We have reached our catalogue of the sights and the sounds to which all
that we have so far considered is merely introductory. For them there are
either no conventional explanations or poor insufficiencies half-heartedly
offered. Our data are glimpses of an epoch that is approaching with far-
away explosions. It is vibrating on its edges with the tread of distant space-
armies. Already it has pictured in the sky visions that signify new
excitements, even now lapping over into the affairs of a self-disgusted,
played-out hermitage.
We assemble the data. Unhappily, we shall be unable to resist the
temptation to reason and theorize. May Super-embryology have mercy upon
our own syllogisms. We consider that we are entitled to at least 13 pages of
gross and stupid errors. After that we shall have to explain.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ize. May Super-embryology have mercy upon
our own syllogisms. We consider that we are entitled to at least 13 pages of
gross and stupid errors. After that we shall have to explain.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

J
PART II
13
UNE, 1801—a mirage of an unknown city. It was seen, for more than
an hour, at Youghal, Co. Cork, Ireland—a representation of mansions,
surrounded by shrubbery and white palings— forests behind. In
October, 1796, a mirage of a walled town had been seen distinctly for half
an hour at Youghal. Upon March 9, 1797, had been seen a mirage of a
walled town.
Feb. 7, 1802—an unknown body that was seen, by Fritsch, of
Magdeburg, to cross the sun (Observatory, 3-136).
Oct. 10, 1802—an unknown dark body was seen, by Fritsch, rapidly
crossing the sun (Comptes Rendus, 83-587).
Between 10 and 11 o’clock, morning of Oct. 8, 1803, a stone fell from
the sky, at the town of Apt, France. About eight hours later, “some persons
believed that they felt an earthquake” (Rept. B. A., 1854-53).
Upon August 11, 1805, an explosive sound was heard at East Haddam,
Connecticut. There are records of six prior sounds, as if of explosions, that
were heard at East Haddam, beginning with the year 1791, but, unrecorded,
the sounds had attracted attention for a century, and had been called the
“Moodus” sounds, by the Indians. For the best account of the “Moodus”
sounds, see the Amer. Jour. Sci., 39-339. Here a writer tries to show the
phenomena were subterranean, but says that there was no satisfactory
explanation.
Upon the 2nd of April, 1808, over the town of Pignerol, Piedmont, Italy,
a loud sound was heard: in many places in Piedmont an earthquake was felt.
In the Rept. B. A., 1854-68, it is said that aerial phenomena did occur; that,
before the explosion, luminous objects had been seen in the sky over
Pignerol, and that in several of the communes in the Alps aerial sounds, as
if of innumerable stones colliding, had been heard, and that quakes had
been felt. From April 2 to April 8, forty shocks were recorded at Pignerol;
sounds like cannonading were heard at Barga. Upon the 18th of April, twoones colliding, had been heard, and that quakes had
been felt. From April 2 to April 8, forty shocks were recorded at Pignerol;
sounds like cannonading were heard at Barga. Upon the 18th of April, two

--- PAGE BREAK ---been heard, and that quakes had
been felt. From April 2 to April 8, forty shocks were recorded at Pignerol;
sounds like cannonading were heard at Barga. Upon the 18th of April, two

--- PAGE BREAK ---

detonations were heard at La Tour, and a luminous object was seen in the
sky. The supposition, or almost absolute belief of most persons is that from
the 2nd to the 18th of April this earth had moved far in its orbit and was
rotating so that, if one should explain that probably meteors had exploded
here, it could not very well be thought that more meteors were continuing to
pick out this one point upon a doubly moving planet. But something was
specially related to this one local sky. Upon the 19th of April, a stone fell
from the sky at Borgo San Donnino, about 40 miles east of Piedmont (Rept.
B. A., 1860). Sounds like cannonading were heard almost every day in this
small region. Upon the 13th of May, a red cloud such as marks the place of
a meteoric explosion was seen in the sky. Throughout the rest of the year,
phenomena that are now listed as “earthquakes” occurred in Piedmont. The
last occurrence of which I have record was upon Jan. 22, 1810.
Feb. 9, 1812—two explosive sounds at East Haddam (Amer. Jour. Sci.,
39-339).
July 5, 1812—one explosive sound at East Haddam (Amer. Jour. Sci., 39-
339).
Oct. 28, 1812—”phantom soldiers” at Havarah Park, near Ripley,
England (Edinburgh Annual Register, 1812-II-124). When such appearances
are explained by meteorologists, they are said to be displays of the aurora
borealis. Psychic research explains variously. The physicists say that they
are mirages of troops marching somewhere at a distance.
Night of July 31, 1813—flashes of light in the sky of Tottenham, near
London (Year Book of Facts, 1853-272). The sky was clear. The flashes
were attributed to a storm at Hastings, 65 miles away. We note not only that
the planet Mars was in opposition at this time (July 30), but in one of the
nearest of its oppositions in the 19th century.
Dec. 28, 1813—an explosive sound at East Haddam.
Feb. 2, 1816—a quake at Lisbon. There was something in the sky.
Extraordinary sounds were heard, but were attributed to “flocks of birds.”
But six hours later something was seen in the sky: it is said to have been a
meteor (Rept. B. A., 1854-106).
Since the year 1788, many earthquakes, or concussions that were listed as
earthquakes, had occurred at the town of Comrie, Perthshire, Scotland.
Seventeen instances were recorded in the year 1795. Almost all records of
the phenomena of Comrie start with the year 1788, but, in Macara’s Guide
to Creiff, it is said that the disturbances were recorded as far back as thee recorded in the year 1795. Almost all records of
the phenomena of Comrie start with the year 1788, but, in Macara’s Guide
to Creiff, it is said that the disturbances were recorded as far back as the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ar 1795. Almost all records of
the phenomena of Comrie start with the year 1788, but, in Macara’s Guide
to Creiff, it is said that the disturbances were recorded as far back as the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

year 1597. They were slight shocks, and until the occurrence upon Aug. 13,
1816, conventional explanations, excluding all thought of relations with
anything in the sky, seemed adequate enough. But, in an account in the
London Times, Aug. 21, 1816, it is said that, at the time of the quake of
August 13, a luminous object, or a “small meteor,” had been seen at
Dunkeld, near Comrie; and, according to David Milne (Edin. New Phil,
Jour., 31-110), a resident of Comrie had reported “a large luminous body,
bent like a crescent, which stretched itself over the heavens.”
There was another quake in Scotland (Inverness) June 30, 1817. It is said
that hot water fell from the sky (Rept. B. A., 1854-112).
Jan. 6, 1818—an unknown body that crossed the sun, according to Loft,
of Ipswich; observed about three hours and a half (Quar. Jour. Roy. Inst., 5-
117).
Five unknown bodies that were seen, upon June 26, 1819, crossing the
sun, according to Gruithuisen (An. Sci. Disc., 1860-411). Also, upon this
day, Pastorff saw something that he thought was a comet, which was then
somewhere near the sun, but which, according to Olbers, could not have
been the comet (Webb, Celestial Objects, p. 40).
Upon Aug. 28, 1819, there was a violent quake at Irkutsk, Siberia. There
had been two shocks upon Aug. 22, 1813 (Rept. B. A., 1854-101). Upon
April 6, 1805, or March 25, according to the Russian calendar, two stones
had fallen from the sky at Irkutsk (Rept. B. A., 1860-12). One of these
stones is now in the South Kensington Museum, London. Another violent
shock at Irkutsk, April 7, 1820 (Rept. B. A., 1854-128).
Unknown bodies in the sky, in the year 1820, February 12 and April 27
(Comptes Rendus, 83-314).
Things that marched in the sky—see Arago’s Œuvres, 11-576, or Annales
de Chimie, 30-417—objects that were seen by many persons, in the streets
of Embrun, during the eclipse of Sept. 7, 1820, moving in straight lines,
turning and retracting in the same straight lines, all of them separated by
uniform spaces.
Early in the year 1821—and a light shone out on the moon—a bright
point of light in the lunar crater Aristarchus, which was in the dark at the
time. It was seen, upon the 4th and the 7th of February, by Capt. Kater (An.
Reg., 1821-689); and upon the 5th by Dr. Olbers (Mems. R. A. S., 1-159). It
was a light like a star, and was seen again, May 4th and 6th, by the Rev. M.
Ward and by Francis Bailey (Mems. R. A. S., 1-159). At Cape Town, nightsthe 5th by Dr. Olbers (Mems. R. A. S., 1-159). It
was a light like a star, and was seen again, May 4th and 6th, by the Rev. M.
Ward and by Francis Bailey (Mems. R. A. S., 1-159). At Cape Town, nights

--- PAGE BREAK ---rs (Mems. R. A. S., 1-159). It
was a light like a star, and was seen again, May 4th and 6th, by the Rev. M.
Ward and by Francis Bailey (Mems. R. A. S., 1-159). At Cape Town, nights

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of Nov. 28th and 29th, 1821, again a star-like light was seen upon the moon
(Phil. Trans., 112-237).
Quar. Jour. Roy. Inst., 20-417:
That, early in the morning of March 20, 1822, detonations were heard at
Melida, an island in the Adriatic. All day, at intervals, the sounds were
heard. They were like cannonading, and it was supposed that they came
from a vessel, or from Turkish artillery, practicing in some frontier village.
For thirty days the detonations continued, sometimes thirty or forty,
sometimes several hundred, a day.
Upon April 13, 1822, it seems, according to description, that clearly
enough was there an explosion in the sky of Comrie, and a concussion of
the ground—”two loud reports, one apparently over our heads, and the
other, which followed immediately, under our feet” (Edin. New Phil. Jour.,
31-119).
July 15, 1822—the fall of perhaps unknown seeds from perhaps an
unknown world—a great quantity of little round seeds that fell from the sky
at Marienwerder, Germany. They were unknown to the inhabitants, who
tried to cook them, but found that boiling seemed to have no effect upon
them. Wherever they came from, they were brought down by a storm, and
two days later, more of them fell, in a storm, in Silesia. It is said that these
corpuscles were identified by some scientists as seeds of Galium spurium,
but that other scientists disagreed. Later more of them fell at Posen,
Mecklenburg. See Bull. des Sci. (math., astro., etc.) 1-1-298.
Aug. 19, 1822—a tremendous detonation at Melida—others continuing
several days.
Oct. 23, 1822—two unknown dark bodies crossing the sun; observed by
Pastorff (An. Sci. Disc., 1860-411).
An unknown, shining thing—it was seen, by Webb, May 22, 1823, near
the planet Venus {Nature, 14-195).
More unknowns, in the year 1823—see Comptes Rendus, 49-811 and
Webb’s Celestial Objects, p. 43.
February, 1824—the sounds of Melida.
Upon Feb. 11, 1824, a slight shock was felt at Irkutsk, Siberia (Rept. B.
A., 1854-124). Upon February 18, or, according to other accounts, upon
May 14, a stone that weighed five pounds, fell from the sky at Irkutsk
(Rept. B. A., 1860-70). Three severe shocks at Irkutsk, March 8, 1824 (Rept.
B. A., 1854-124).according to other accounts, upon
May 14, a stone that weighed five pounds, fell from the sky at Irkutsk
(Rept. B. A., 1860-70). Three severe shocks at Irkutsk, March 8, 1824 (Rept.
B. A., 1854-124).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

September, 1824—the sounds of Melida.
At five o’clock, morning of Oct. 20, 1824, a light was seen upon the dark
part of the moon, by Gruithuisen. It disappeared. Six minutes later it
appeared again, disappeared again, and then flashed intermittently, until
5:30 A.M., when sunrise ended the observations (Sci. Amer. Sup., 7-2712).
And, upon Jan. 22, 1825, again shone out the star-like light of Aristarchus,
reported by the Rev. J. B. Emmett (Annals of Philosophy, 28-338).
The last sounds of Melida of which I have record, were heard in March,
1825. If these detonations did come from the sky, there was something that,
for at least three years, was situated over, or was in some other way
specially related to, this one small part of this earth’s surface, subversively
to all supposed principles of astronomy and geodesy. It is said that, to find
out whether the sounds did come from the sky, or not, the Prrteur of Melida
went into underground caverns to listen. It is said that there the sounds
could not be heard.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t, to find
out whether the sounds did come from the sky, or not, the Prrteur of Melida
went into underground caverns to listen. It is said that there the sounds
could not be heard.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
14
ND our own underground investigations—and whether there is
something in the sky or not. We are in a hole in time. Cavern of
Conventional Science—walls that are dogmas, from which drips
ancient wisdom in a patter of slimy opinions— but we have heard a storm
of data outside—
Of beings that march in the sky, and of a beacon on the moon— another
dark body crosses the sun. Somewhere near Melida there is cannonading,
and another stone falls from the sky, at Irkutsk, Siberia; and unknown grain
falls from an unknown world, and there are flashes in the sky when the
planet Mars is near.
In a farrago of lights and sounds and forms, I feel the presence of
possible classifications that may thread a pattern of attempt to find out
something. My attention is attracted by a streak of events that is beaded
with little star-like points of light. First we shall find out what we can, as to
the moon.
In one of the numbers of the Observatory, an eminent authority, in some
fields of research, is quoted as to the probable distance of the moon.
According to his determinations, the moon is 37 miles away. He explains
most reasonably: he is Mr. G. B. Shaw. But by conventional doctrine, the
moon is 240,000 miles away. My own idea is that somewhere between
determinations by a Shaw and determinations by a Newcomb, we could
find many acceptances.
I prefer questionable determinations, myself, or at any rate examinations
that end up with questions or considerable latitude. It may be that as to the
volcanoes of the moon we can find material for at least a seemingly
intelligent question, if no statements are possible as to the size and the
distance of the moon. The larger volcanoes of this earth are about three
miles in diameter, though the craters of Haleakla, Hawaii, and Aso San,
Japan, are seven miles across. But the larger volcanoes of the relatively
little moon are said to be sixty miles across, though several are said to be
twice that size. And I start off with just about the impression ofmiles across. But the larger volcanoes of the relatively
little moon are said to be sixty miles across, though several are said to be
twice that size. And I start off with just about the impression of

--- PAGE BREAK ---e larger volcanoes of the relatively
little moon are said to be sixty miles across, though several are said to be
twice that size. And I start off with just about the impression of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

disproportionality that I should have, if someone should tell me of a pygmy
with ears five feet long.
Is there any somewhat good reason for thinking that the volcanic craters
of the little moon are larger than, or particularly different in any other way
from, the craters of this earth"
If not, we have a direct unit of measurement, according to which the
moon is not 2,160, but about 100, miles in diameter.
How far away does one suppose to be an object with something like that
diameter, and of the seeming size of the moon"
The astronomers explain. They argue that gravitation must be less
powerful upon the moon than upon this earth, and that therefore larger
volcanic formations could have been cast up on the moon. We explain. We
argue that volcanic force must be less powerful upon the moon than upon
this earth, and that therefore larger volcanic formations could not have been
cast up on the moon.
The disproportionality that has impressed me has offended more
conventional aesthetics than mine. Prof. See, for instance, has tried to
explain that the lunar formations are not craters but are effects of
bombardment by vast meteors, which spared this earth, for some reason not
made clear. Viscid moon—meteor pops in—up splash walls and a central
cone. If Prof. See will jump in swimming some day, and then go back some
weeks later to see how big a splash he made, he will have other ideas upon
such supposed persistences. The moon would have to have been virtually
liquid to fit his theory, because there are no partly embedded, vast, round
meteors protruding anywhere.
There have been lights like signals upon the moon. There are two
conventional explanations: reflected sunlight and volcanic action. Of
course, ultra-conventionalists do not admit that in our own times there has
been even volcanic action upon the moon. Our instances will be of lights
upon the dark part of the moon, and there are good reasons for thinking that
our data do not relate to volcanic action. In volcanic eruptions upon this
earth the glow is so accompanied by great volumes of smoke that a clear,
definite point of light would seem not to be the appearance from a distance.
For Webb’s account of a brilliant display of minute dots and streaks of
light, in the Mare Crisium, July 4, 1832, see Astro. Reg., 20-165. I have
records of half a dozen similar illuminations here, in about 120 years, all of
them when the Mare Crisium was in darkness. There can be noe Mare Crisium, July 4, 1832, see Astro. Reg., 20-165. I have
records of half a dozen similar illuminations here, in about 120 years, all of
them when the Mare Crisium was in darkness. There can be no

--- PAGE BREAK ---4, 1832, see Astro. Reg., 20-165. I have
records of half a dozen similar illuminations here, in about 120 years, all of
them when the Mare Crisium was in darkness. There can be no

--- PAGE BREAK ---

commonplace explanation for such spectacles, or they would have occurred
oftener; nevertheless the Mare Crisium is a wide, open region, and at times
there may have been uncommon percolations of sunlight, and I shall list no
more of these interesting events that seem to me to have been like carnivals
upon the moon.
Dec. 22, 1835—the star-like light in Aristarchus—reported by Francis
Bailey—see Proctor’s Myths and Marvels, p. 329.
Feb. 13, 1836—in the western crater of Messier—according to
Gruithuisen (Sci. Amer. Sup., 7-2629)—two straight lines of light; between
them a dark band that was covered with luminous points.
Upon the nights of March 18 and 19, 1847, large luminous spots were
seen upon the dark part of the moon, and a general glow upon the upper
limb, by the Rev. T. Rankin and Prof. Chevalier (Rept. B. A., 1847-18). The
whole shaded part of the disc seemed to be a mixture of lights and shades.
Upon the night of the 19th, there was a similar appearance upon this earth,
an aurora, according to the London newspapers. It looks as if both the moon
and this earth were affected by the same illumination, said to have been
auroral. I offer this occurrence as indication that the moon is nearby, if
moon and earth could be so affected in common.
But by signaling, I mean something like the appearance that was seen, by
Hodgson, upon the dark part of the moon, night of Dec. 11, 1847—a bright
light that flashed intermittently. Upon the next night it was seen again
(Monthly Notices R. A. S., 8-55).
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
The oppositions of Mars occur once in about two years and two months.
In conventional terms, the eccentricity of the orbit of Mars is greater than
the eccentricity of the orbit of this earth, and the part of its orbit that is
traversed by this earth in August is nearest the orbit of Mars. When this
earth is between Mars and the sun, Mars is said to be in opposition, and this
is the position of nearest approach: when opposition occurs in August, that
is the most favorable opposition. After that, every two years and about two
months, the oppositions are less favorable, until the least favorable of all, in
February, after which favorableness increases up to the climacteric
opposition in August again. This is a cycle of changing proximities within a
period of about fifteen years.
In October, 1862, Lockyer saw a spot like a long train of clouds on Mars,
and several days later Secchi saw a spot on Mars. And if that werehanging proximities within a
period of about fifteen years.
In October, 1862, Lockyer saw a spot like a long train of clouds on Mars,
and several days later Secchi saw a spot on Mars. And if that were

--- PAGE BREAK ---within a
period of about fifteen years.
In October, 1862, Lockyer saw a spot like a long train of clouds on Mars,
and several days later Secchi saw a spot on Mars. And if that were

--- PAGE BREAK ---

signaling, it is very meager material upon which to suppose anything. And
May 8-22, 1873—white spots on Mars. But, upon June 17, 1873, two
months after nearest approach, but still in the period of opposition of Mars,
there was either an extraordinary occurrence, or the extraordinariness is in
our interpretation. See Rept. B. A., 1874-272. A luminous object came to
this earth, and was seen and heard upon the night of June 17, 1873, to
explode in the sky of Hungary, Austria, and Bohemia. In the words of
various witnesses, termed according to their knowledge, the object was seen
seemingly coming from Mars, or from “the red star in the south,” where
Mars was at the time. Our data were collected by Dr. Galle. The towns of
Rybnik and Ratibor, Upper Silesia, are 15 miles apart. Without parallax, this
luminous thing was seen from these points “to emerge and separate itself
from the disc of the planet Mars.” It so happens that we have a definite
observation from one of these towns. At Rybnik, Dr. Sage was looking at
Mars, at the time. He saw the luminous object “apparently issue from the
planet.” There is another circumstance, and for its reception our credulity,
or our enlightenment, has been prepared. If this thing did come from Mars,
it came from the planet to the point where it exploded in about 5 seconds:
from the point of explosion, the sound traveled in several minutes. We have
a description from Dr. Sage that indicates that a bolt of some kind, perhaps
electric, did shoot from Mars, and that the planet quaked with the shock
—”Dr. Sage was looking attentively at the planet Mars, when he thus saw
the meteor apparently issue from it, and the planet appear as if it was
breaking up and dividing into two parts.”
Some of the greatest surprises in commonplace experience are
discoveries of the nearness of that which was supposed to be the
inaccessibly remote.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
It seems that the moon is close to this earth, because of the phenomenon
of “earthshine.” The same appearance has been seen upon the planet Venus.
If upon the moon, it is light reflecting from this earth and back to this earth,
what is it upon Venus" It is “some unexplained optical illusion” says
Newcomb (Popular Astronomy, p. 296). For a list of more than twenty
observations upon this illumination of Venus, see Rept. B. A., 1873-404. It
is our expression that the phenomenon is “unexplained” because it does
indicate that Venus is millions of miles closer to this earth than Venus
“should” be.ion of Venus, see Rept. B. A., 1873-404. It
is our expression that the phenomenon is “unexplained” because it does
indicate that Venus is millions of miles closer to this earth than Venus
“should” be.

--- PAGE BREAK ---pt. B. A., 1873-404. It
is our expression that the phenomenon is “unexplained” because it does
indicate that Venus is millions of miles closer to this earth than Venus
“should” be.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Unknown objects have been seen near Venus. There were more than
thirty such observations in the eighteenth century, not relating to so many
different periods, however. Our own earliest datum is Webb’s observation,
of May 22, 1823. I know of only one astronomer who has supposed that
these observations could relate to a Venusian satellite, pronouncedly visible
sometimes, and then for many years being invisible: something else will
have to be thought of. If these observations and others that we shall have,
be accepted, they relate to unknown bulks that have, from outer space, gone
to Venus, and have been in temporary suspension near the planet, even
though the shade of Sir Isaac Newton would curdle at the suggestion. If,
acceptably, from outer space, something could go to the planet Venus, one
is not especially startled with the idea that something could sail out from the
planet Venus—visit this earth, conceivably.
In the Rept. B. A., 1852-8, 35, it is said that, early in the morning of Sept.
11, 1852, several persons at Fair Oaks, Staffordshire, had seen, in the
eastern sky, a luminous object. It was first seen at 4:15 A.M. It appeared and
disappeared several times, until 4:45 A.M., when it became finally invisible.
Then, at almost the same place in the sky, Venus was seen, having risen
above the eastern horizon. These persons sent the records of their
observations to Lord Wrottesley, an astronomer whose observatory was at
Wolverhampton. There is published a letter from Lord Wrottesley, who says
that at first he had thought that the supposititiously unknown object was
Venus, with perhaps an extraordinary halo, but that he had received from
one of the observers a diagram giving such a position relatively to the moon
that he hesitated so to identify. It was in the period of nearest approach to
this earth by Venus, and, since inferior conjunction (July 20, 1852) Venus
had been a “morning star.” If this thing in the sky were not Venus, the
circumstances are that an object came close to this earth, perhaps, and for a
while was stationary, as if waiting for the planet Venus to appear above the
eastern horizon, then disappearing, whether to sail to Venus or not. We think
that perhaps this thing did come close to this earth, because it was, it seems,
seen only in the local sky of Fair Oaks. However, if, according to many of
our data, professional astronomers have missed extraordinary appearances
at reasonable hours, we can’t conclude much from what was not reported by
them, after 4 o’clock in the morning. I do not know whether this is the
origin of the convention or not, but this is the first note I have upon the now
standardized explanation that, when a luminous object is seen in the sky ate morning. I do not know whether this is the
origin of the convention or not, but this is the first note I have upon the now
standardized explanation that, when a luminous object is seen in the sky at

--- PAGE BREAK ---know whether this is the
origin of the convention or not, but this is the first note I have upon the now
standardized explanation that, when a luminous object is seen in the sky at

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the time of nearest approach by Venus, it is Venus, attracting attention by
her great brilliance, exciting persons, unversed in astronomic matters, into
thinking that a strange object had visited this earth. When reports are
definite as to motions of a seemingly sailing or exploring, luminous thing,
astronomers say that it was a fire-balloon.
In the Kept. B. A., 1856-54, it is said that, according to “Mrs. Ayling and
friends,” in a letter to Lord Wrottesley, a bright object had been seen in the
sky of Petworth, Sussex, night of Aug. 11, 1855. According to description,
it rose from behind hills, in the distance, at half past eleven o’clock. It was a
red body, or it was a red-appearing construction, because from it were
projections like spokes of a wheel; or they were “stationary rays,” in the
words of the description. “Like a red moon, it rose slowly, and diminished
slowly, remaining visible one hour and a half.” Upon Aug. 11, 1855, Venus
was two weeks from primary greatest brilliance, inferior conjunction
occurring upon September 30. The thing could not have been Venus,
ascending in the sky, at this time of night. An astonishing thing, like a red
moon, perhaps with spokes like a wheel’s, might, if reported from nowhere
else, be considered something that came from outer space so close to this
earth that it was visible only in a local sky, except that it might have been
visible in other places, and even half past eleven at night may be an
unheard-of hour for astronomers, who specialize upon sunspots for a reason
that is clearing up to us. Of course an ordinary fire-balloon could be
extraordinarily described.
June 8, 1868—I have not the exact time, but one does suspect that it was
early in the evening—an object that was reported from Rad-cliffe
Observatory, Oxford. It looked like a comet, but inasmuch as it was
reported only from Radcliffe, it may have been in the local sky of Oxford. It
seemed to sail in the sky: it moved and changed its course. At first it was
stationary; then it moved westward, then southward, then turning north,
visible four minutes. See Eng. Mec., 7-351. According to a correspondent to
the Birmingham Gazette, May 28, 1868, there had been an extraordinary
illumination upon Venus, some nights before: a red spot, visible for a few
seconds, night of May 27. In the issue of the Gazette, of June 1st, someone
else writes that he saw this light appearing and disappearing upon Venus.
Upon March 15, Browning had seen something that looked like a little shaft
of light from Venus (Eng. Mec., 40-130); and upon April 6, Webb had seen
a similar appearance (Celestial ObMects, p. 57). At the time of theBrowning had seen something that looked like a little shaft
of light from Venus (Eng. Mec., 40-130); and upon April 6, Webb had seen
a similar appearance (Celestial ObMects, p. 57). At the time of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

appearance at Oxford, Venus was in the period of nearest approach (inferior
conjunction July 16, 1868).
I think, myself, that there was one approximately great, wise astronomer.
He was Tycho Brahp. For many years, he would not describe what he saw
in the sky, because he considered it beneath his dignity to write a book. The
undignified, or more or less literary, or sometimes altogether too literary,
astronomers, who do write books, uncompromisingly say that when a
luminous object is said to have moved to greater degree than could be
considered illusory, in a local sky of this earth, it is a fire-balloon. It is not
possible to find in the writings of astronomers who so explain, mention of
the object that was seen by Coggia, night of Aug. 1, 1871. It seems that this
thing was not far away, and did appear only in a local sky of this earth, and
if it did come from outer space, how it could have “boarded” this earth, if
this earth moves at a rate of 19 miles a second, or 1 mile a second, is so
hard to explain that why Proctor and Hind, with their passionate itch for
explaining, never took the matter up, I don’t know. Upon Aug. 1, 1871, an
unknown luminous object was seen in the sky of Marseilles, by Coggia
(Comptes Rendus, 73-398). According to description, it was a magnificent
red object. It appeared at 10:43 P.M., and moved eastward, slowly, until
10:52:30. It stopped—moved northward, and again, at 10:59:30, was
stationary. It turned eastward again, and, at 11:3:20, disappeared, or fell
behind the horizon. Upon this night Venus was within three weeks of
primary greatest brilliance, inferior conjunction occurring upon Sept. 25,
1871.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t 11:3:20, disappeared, or fell
behind the horizon. Upon this night Venus was within three weeks of
primary greatest brilliance, inferior conjunction occurring upon Sept. 25,
1871.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

O
15
NE repeating mystery—the mystery of the local sky. How, if this
earth be a moving earth, could anything sail to, fall to, or in any
other way reach this earth, without being smashed into fine particles
by the impact"
This earth is supposed to rip space at a rate of about 19 miles a second.
Concepts smash when one tries to visualize such an accomplishment.
Now, three times over, we shall have other aspects of this one mystery of
the local sky. First we shall take up data upon seeming relation between a
region of this earth that is subject to earthquakes, or so-called earthquakes,
and appearances in the sky of this especial region, and the repeating falls of
objects and substances from this local sky and nowhere else at the times.
We have had records of quakes that occurred at Irkutsk, Siberia, and of
stones that fell from the sky to Irkutsk. Upon March 8, 1829, a severe
quake, preceded by clattering sounds, was felt at Irkutsk. There was
something in the sky. Dr. Erman, the geologist, was in Irkutsk, at the time.
In the Report of the British Association, 1854-20, it is said that, in Dr.
Erman’s opinion, the sounds that preceded the quake were in the sky.
The situation at Comrie, Perthshire, is similar. A stone fell, May 17,
1830, in the “earthquake region” around Comrie. It fell at Perth, 22 miles
from Comrie. See Fletcher’s List, p. 100. Upon Feb. 15, 1837, a black
powder fell upon the Comrie region (Edin. New Phil. Jour., 31-293). Oct.
12, 1839—a quake at Comrie. According to the Rev. M. Walker, of Comrie,
the sky, at the time, was “peculiarly strange and alarming, and appeared as
if hung with sackcloth.” In Mallet’s Catalogue (Rept. B. A., 1854-290) it is
said that, throughout the month of October, shocks were felt at Comrie,
sometimes slight and sometimes severe—“like distant thunder or reports of
artillery”—“the noise sometimes seemed to be high in the air, and was often
heard without any sensible shock.” Upon the 23rd of October, occurred the
most violent quake in the whole series of phenomena at Comrie. See the
Edin. New Phil. Jour., vol. 32. All data in this publication were collected by
David Milne. According to the Rev. M. Maxton, of Foulis Manse, ten milesthe whole series of phenomena at Comrie. See the
Edin. New Phil. Jour., vol. 32. All data in this publication were collected by
David Milne. According to the Rev. M. Maxton, of Foulis Manse, ten miles

--- PAGE BREAK ---phenomena at Comrie. See the
Edin. New Phil. Jour., vol. 32. All data in this publication were collected by
David Milne. According to the Rev. M. Maxton, of Foulis Manse, ten miles

--- PAGE BREAK ---

from Comrie, rattling sounds were heard in the sky, preceding the shock
that was felt. In vol. 33, p. 373, of the Journal, someone who lived seven
miles from Comrie is quoted: “In every case, I am inclined to say that the
sound proceeded not from undergound. The sound seemed high in the air.”
Someone who lived at Gowrie, forty miles from Comrie, is quoted: “The
most general opinion seems to be that the noise accompanying the
concussion proceeded from above.” See vol. 34, p. 87: another impression
of explosion overhead and concussion underneath: “The noises heard first
seemed to be in the air, and the rumbling sound in the earth.” Milne’s own
conclusion—“It is plain that there are, connected with the earthquake
shocks, sounds both in the earth and in the air, which are distinct and
separate.” If, upon the 23rd of October, 1839, there was a tremendous
shock, not of subterranean origin, but from a great explosion in the sky of
Comrie, and if this be accepted, there will be concussions somewhere else.
The “faults” of dogmas will open; there will be seismic phenomena in
science. I have a feeling of a conventional survey of this Scottish sky: vista
of a fair, blue, vacant expanse—our suspicions daub the impression with
black alarms—but also do we project detonating stimulations into the fair
and blue, but unoccupied and meaningless. One cannot pass this single
occurrence by, considering it only in itself: it is one of a long series of
quakes of the earth at Comrie and phenomena in the sky at Comrie. We
have stronger evidence than the mere supposition of many persons, in and
near Comrie, that, upon Oct. 23, 1839, something had occurred in the sky,
because sounds seemed to come from the sky. Milne says that clothes,
bleaching on the grass, were entirely covered with black particles which
presumably had fallen from the sky. The shocks were felt in November: in
November, according to Milne, a powder like soot fell from the sky, upon
Comrie and surrounding regions. In his report to the British Association,
1840, Milne, reviewing the phenomena from the year 1788, says:
“Occasionally there was a fall of fine, black powder.”
Jan. 8, 1840—sounds like cannonading, at Comrie, and a crackling sound
in the air, according to some of the residents. Whether they were sounds of
quakes or concussions that followed explosions, 247 occurrences, between
Oct. 3, 1839, and Feb. 14, 1841, are listed in the Edin. New Phil. Jour., 32-
107. It looks like bombardment, and like most persistent bombardment—
from somewhere—and the frequent fall from the sky of the debris of
explosions. Feb. 18, 1841— a shock and a fall of discolored rain at Comrieks like bombardment, and like most persistent bombardment—
from somewhere—and the frequent fall from the sky of the debris of
explosions. Feb. 18, 1841— a shock and a fall of discolored rain at Comrie

--- PAGE BREAK ---and like most persistent bombardment—
from somewhere—and the frequent fall from the sky of the debris of
explosions. Feb. 18, 1841— a shock and a fall of discolored rain at Comrie

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(Edin. New Phil. Jour., 35-148). See Roper’s List of Earthquakes—year
after year, and the continuance of this seeming bombardment in one small
part of the sky of this earth, though I can find records only of dates and no
details. However, I think I have found record of a fall from the sky of debris
of an explosion, more substantial than finely powdered soot, at Crieff,
which is several miles from Comrie. In the Amer. Jour. Sci., 2-28-275, Prof.
Shepard tells a circumstantial story of an object that looked like a lump of
slag, or cinders, reported to have fallen at Crieff. Scientists had refused to
accept the story, upon the grounds that the substance was not of “true
meteoric material.” Prof. Shepard went to Crieff and investigated. He gives
his opinion that possibly the object did fall from the sky. The story that he
tells is that, upon the night of April 23, 1855, a young woman, in the home
of Sir William Murray, Achterlyre House, Crieff, saw, or thought she saw, a
luminous object falling, and picked it up, dropping it, because it was hot, or
because she thought it was hot.
For a description, in a letter, presumably from Sir William Murray, or
some member of his family, see Year Book of Facts, 1856-273. It is said that
about 12 fragments of scorious matter, hot and emitting a sulphurous odor,
had fallen.
In Ponton’s Earthquakes, p. 118, it is said that, upon the 8th of October,
1857, there had been, in Illinois, an earthquake, preceded by “a luminous
appearance, described by some as a meteor and by others as vivid flashes of
lightning.” Though felt in Illinois, the center of the disturbance was at St.
Louis, Mo. One notes the misleading and the obscuring of such wording: in
all contemporaneous accounts there is no such indefiniteness as one
description by “some” and another notion by “others.” Something exploded
terrifically in the sky, at St. Louis, and shook the ground “severely” or
“violently,” at 4:20 A.M., Oct. 8, 1857. According to Timbs’ Year Book of
Facts, 1858-271, “a blinding meteoric ball from the heavens” was seen. “A
large and brilliant meteor shot across the heavens” (St. Louis Intelligencer,
October 8). Of course the supposed earthquake was concussion from an
explosion in the sky, but our own interest is in a series that is similar to
others that we have recorded. According to the New York Times, October
12, a slight shock was said to have been felt four hours before the great
concussion, and another three days before. But see Milne’s Catalog of
Destructive Earthquakes—not a mention of anything that would lead one
away from safe and standardized suppositions. See Bull. Seis. Soc. Amer., 3-another three days before. But see Milne’s Catalog of
Destructive Earthquakes—not a mention of anything that would lead one
away from safe and standardized suppositions. See Bull. Seis. Soc. Amer., 3-

--- PAGE BREAK ---efore. But see Milne’s Catalog of
Destructive Earthquakes—not a mention of anything that would lead one
away from safe and standardized suppositions. See Bull. Seis. Soc. Amer., 3-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

68—here the “meteor” is mentioned, but there is no mention of the
preceding concussions. Time after time, in a period of about three days,
concussions were felt in and around St. Louis. One of these concussions,
with its “sound like thunder or the roar of artillery” (New York Times,
October 8) was from an explosion in the sky. If the others were of the same
origin—how could detonating meteors so repeat in one small local sky, and
nowhere else, if this earth be a moving body" If it be said that only by
coincidence did a meteor explode over a region where there had been other
quakes, here is the question:
How many times can we accept that explanation as to similar series"
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
In the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, 19-144, a
correspondent writes that, in Herefordshire, Sept. 24, 1854, upon a day that
was “perfectly still, sky cloudless,” he had heard sounds like the discharges
of heavy artillery, at intervals of about two minutes, continuing several
hours. Again the “mystery of the local sky”—if these sounds did come from
the sky. We have no data for thinking that they did.
In the London Times, Nov. 9, 1858, a correspondent writes that, in
Cardiganshire, Wales, he had, in the autumn of 1855, often heard sounds
like the discharges of heavy artillery, two or three reports rapidly, and then
an interval of perhaps 20 minutes, also with long intervals, sometimes of
days and sometimes of weeks, continuing throughout the winter of 1855-56.
Upon the 3rd of November, 1858, he had heard the sounds again,
repeatedly, and louder than they had been three years before. In the Times,
November 12, someone else says that, at Dolgelly, he, too, had heard the
“mysterious phenomenon,” on the 3rd of November. Someone else—that,
upon October 13, he had heard the sounds at Swansea. “The reports, as if of
heavy artillery, came from the west, succeeding each other at apparently
regular intervals, during the greater part of the afternoon of that day. My
impression was that the sounds might have proceeded from practicing at
Milford, but I ascertained, the following day, that there had been no firing
of any kind there.” Correspondent to the Times, November 20—that, with
little doubt, the sounds were from artillery practice at Milford. He does not
mention the investigation as to the sounds of October 13, but says that there
had been cannon-firing, upon November 3rd, at Milford. Times, December
1 —that most of the sounds could be accounted for as sounds of blasting in
quarries. Daily News, November 16—that similar sounds had been heard, inring, upon November 3rd, at Milford. Times, December
1 —that most of the sounds could be accounted for as sounds of blasting in
quarries. Daily News, November 16—that similar sounds had been heard, in

--- PAGE BREAK ---3rd, at Milford. Times, December
1 —that most of the sounds could be accounted for as sounds of blasting in
quarries. Daily News, November 16—that similar sounds had been heard, in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1848, in New Zealand, and were results of volcanic action. Standard,
November 16—that the “mysterious noise” must have been from
Devonport, where a sunken rock had been blown up. So, with at least
variety these sounds were explained. But we learn that the series began
before October 13. Upon the evening of September 28, in the Dartmoor
District, at Crediton, a rumbling sound was heard. It was not supposed to be
an earthquake, because no vibration of the ground was felt. It was thought
that there had been an explosion of gunpowder. But there had been no such
terrestrial explosion. About an hour later another explosive sound was
heard. It was like all the other sounds, and in one place was thought to be
distant cannonading—terrestrial cannonading. See Quar. Jour. Geolog. Soc.
of London, vol. 15.
Somewhere near Barisal, Bengal, were occurring just such sounds as the
sounds of Cardiganshire, which were like the sounds of Melida. In the Proc.
Asiatic Soc. of Bengal, November, 1870, are published letters upon the
Barisal Guns. One writer says that the sounds were probably booming of
the surf. Someone else points out that the sounds, usually described as
“explosive,” were heard too far inland to be traced to such origin. A clear,
calm day, in December, 1871—in Nature, 53-197, Mr. G. B. Scott writes
that, in Bengal, he had heard “a dull, muffled boom, as if of distant
cannon”—single detonations, and then two or three in quicker succession.
In the London Times, Jan. 20, 1860, several correspondents write as to a
sound “resembling the discharge of a gun high in the air” that was heard
near Reading, Berkshire, England, Jan. 17, 1860. See the Times, January
24th. To say that a meteor had exploded would, at present, well enough
account for this phenomenon.
Sounds like those that were heard in Herefordshire, Sept. 24, 1854, were
heard later. In the English Mechanic, 100-279, it is said that, upon Nov. 9,
1862, the Rev. T. Webb, the astronomer, of Hardwicke, fifteen miles west of
Hereford, heard sounds that he attributed to gunfire at Milford Haven, about
85 miles from Hardwicke. Upon Aug. 1, 1865, Mr. Webb saw flashes upon
the horizon, at Hardwicke, and attributed them to gunfire at Tenby, upon
occasion of a visit by Prince Arthur. Tenby, too, is about 85 miles from
Hardwicke. There were other phenomena in a region centering around
Hereford and Worcester. Upon Oct. 6, 1863, there was a disturbance that is
now listed as an earthquake; but in the London newspapers so many reports
upon this occurrence state that a great explosion had been thought to occur,pon Oct. 6, 1863, there was a disturbance that is
now listed as an earthquake; but in the London newspapers so many reports
upon this occurrence state that a great explosion had been thought to occur,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ere was a disturbance that is
now listed as an earthquake; but in the London newspapers so many reports
upon this occurrence state that a great explosion had been thought to occur,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and that the quake was supposed to be an earthquake of subterranean origin
only after no terrestrial explosion could be heard of, that the phenomenon is
of questionable origin. There was a similar concussion in about the same
region, Oct. 30, 1868. Again the shock was widely attributed to a great
explosion, perhaps in London, and again was supposed to have been an
earthquake when no terrestrial explosion could be heard of.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
Arcana of Science, 1829-196:
That, near Mhow, India, Feb. 27, 1828, fell a stone “perfectly similar” to
the stone that fell near Allahabad, in 1802, and a stone that fell near
Mooradabad, in 1808. These towns are in the Northwestern Provinces of
India.
I have looked at specimens of these stones, and in my view they are
similar. They are of brownish rock, streaked and spotted with a darker
brown. A stone that fell at Chandakopur, in the same general region, June 6,
1838, is like them. All are as much alike as “erratics” that, because they are
alike, geologists ascribe to the same derivation, stationary relatively to the
places in which they are found.
It seems acceptable that, upon July 15 and 17, 1822, and then upon a later
date, unknown seeds fell from the sky to this earth. If these seeds did come
from some other world, there is another mystery as well as that of repetition
in a local sky of this earth. How could a volume of seeds remain in one
aggregation; how could the seeds be otherwise than scattered from Norway
to Patagonia, if they met in space this earth, and if this earth be rushing
through space at a rate of 19 miles a second" It may be that the seeds of
1822 fell again. According to Kaemtz (Meteorology, p. 465) yellowish
brown corpuscles, some round, a few cylindrical, were found upon the
ground, June, 1830, near Griesau, Silesia. Kaemtz says that they were
tubercules from roots of a well-known Silesian plant—stalk of the plant
dries up; heavy rain raises these tubercules to the ground—persons of a low
order of mentality think that the things had fallen from the sky. Upon the
night of March 24-25, 1852, a great quantity of seeds did fall from the sky,
in Prussia, in Heinsberg, Erklenz, and Juliers, according to M. Schwann, of
the University of Liege, in a communication to the Belgian Academy of
Science (La Belgique Horticole, 2-319).
In Comptes Rendus, 5-549, is Dr. Wartmann’s account of water that fell
from the sky, at Geneva. At nine o’clock, morning of Aug. 9, 1837, therelgian Academy of
Science (La Belgique Horticole, 2-319).
In Comptes Rendus, 5-549, is Dr. Wartmann’s account of water that fell
from the sky, at Geneva. At nine o’clock, morning of Aug. 9, 1837, there

--- PAGE BREAK ---ence (La Belgique Horticole, 2-319).
In Comptes Rendus, 5-549, is Dr. Wartmann’s account of water that fell
from the sky, at Geneva. At nine o’clock, morning of Aug. 9, 1837, there

--- PAGE BREAK ---

were clouds upon the horizon, but the zenith was clear. It is not remarkable
that a little rain should fall now and then from a clear sky: we shall see
wherein this account is remarkable. Large drops of warm water fell in such
abundance that people were driven to shelter. The fall continued several
minutes and then stopped. But then, several times during an hour, more of
this warm water fell from the sky. Year Book of Facts, 1839-262 —that
upon May 31, 1838, lukewarm water in large drops fell from the sky, at
Geneva. Comptes Rendus, 15-290—no wind and not a cloud in the sky—at
10 o’clock, morning of May 11, 1842, warm water fell from the sky at
Geneva, for about six minutes; five hours later, still no wind and no clouds,
again fell warm water, in large drops; falling intermittently for several
minutes.
In Comptes Rendus, 85-681, is noted a succession of falls of stones in
Russia: June 12, 1863, at Buschof, Courland; Aug. 8, 1863, at Pillitsfer,
Livonia; April 12, 1864, at Nerft, Courland. Also—see Fletcher’s List—a
stone that fell at Dolgovdi, Volhynia, Russia, June 26, 1864. I have looked
at specimens of all four of these stones, and have found them all very much
alike, but not of uncommon meteoritic material: all gray stones, but
Pillitsfer is darker than the others, and in a polished specimen of Nerft,
brownish specks are visible.
In the Birmingham Daily Post, June 14, 1858, Dr. C. Mansfield Ingleby,
a meteorologist, writes: “During the storm on Saturday (12th) morning,
Birmingham was visited by a shower of aerolites. Many hundreds of
thousands must have fallen, some of the streets being strewn with them.”
Someone else writes that many pounds of the stones had been gathered
from awnings, and that they had damaged greenhouses, in the suburbs. In
the Post, of the 15th, someone else writes that, according to his microscopic
examinations, the supposed aerolites were only bits of the Rowley ragstone,
with which Birmingham was paved, which had been washed loose by the
rain. It is not often that sentiment is brought into meteorology, but in the
Report of the British Association, 1864-37, Dr. Phipson explains the
occurrence meteorologically, and with an unconscious tenderness. He says
that the stones did fall from the sky, but that they had been carried in a
whirlwind from Rowley, some miles from Birmingham. So we are to
sentimentalize over the stones in Rowley that had been torn, by unfeeling
paviers, from their companions of geologic ages, and exiled to the
pavements of Birmingham, and then some of these little bereft companions,over the stones in Rowley that had been torn, by unfeeling
paviers, from their companions of geologic ages, and exiled to the
pavements of Birmingham, and then some of these little bereft companions,

--- PAGE BREAK ---Rowley that had been torn, by unfeeling
paviers, from their companions of geologic ages, and exiled to the
pavements of Birmingham, and then some of these little bereft companions,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

rising in a whirlwind and traveling, unerringly, if not miraculously, to rejoin
the exiles. More dark companions. It is said that they were little black
stones.
They fell again from the sky, two years later. In La Science Pour Tous,
June 19, 1860, it is said that, according to the Wolver-hampton Advertiser, a
great number of little black stones had fallen, in a violent storm, at
Wolverhampton. According to all records findable by me no such stones
have ever fallen anywhere in Great Britain, except at Birmingham and
Wolverhampton, which is 13 miles from Birmingham.
Eight years after the second occurrence, they fell again. English
Mechanic, July 31, 1868—that stones “similar to, if not identical with the
well-known Rowley ragstones” had fallen in Birmingham, having probably
been carried from Rowley, in a whirlwind.
We were pleased with Dr. Phipson’s story, but to tell of more of the little
dark companions rising in a whirlwind and going unerringly from Rowley
to rejoin the exiles in Birmingham is over-doing. That’s not sentiment:
that’s mawkishness.
In the Birmingham Daily Post, May 30, 1868, is published a letter from
Thomas Plant, a writer and lecturer upon meteorological subjects. Mr. Plant
says, I think, that for one hour, morning of May 29, 1868, stones fell, in
Birmingham, from the sky. His words may be interpretable in some other
way, but it does not matter: the repeating falls are indication enough of what
we’re trying to find out—”From nine to ten, meteoric stones fell in
immense quantities in various parts of town.” “They resembled, in shape,
broken pieces of Rowley ragstone . . . in every respect they were like the
stones that fell in 1858.” In the Post, June 1, Mr. Plant says that the stones
of 1858 did fall from the sky, and were not fragments washed out of the
pavement by rain, because many pounds of them had been gathered from a
platform that was 20 feet above the ground.
It may be that for days before and after May 29, 1868, occasional stones
fell from some unknown region stationary above Birmingham. In the Post,
June 2, a correspondent writes that, upon the first of June, his niece, while
walking in a field, was struck by a stone that injured her hand severely. He
thinks that the stone had been thrown by some unknown person. In the Post,
June 4, someone else writes that his wife, while walking down a lane, upon
May 24th, had been cut on the head by a stone. He attributes this injury tobeen thrown by some unknown person. In the Post,
June 4, someone else writes that his wife, while walking down a lane, upon
May 24th, had been cut on the head by a stone. He attributes this injury to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

stone-throwing by boys, but does not say that anyone had been seen to
throw the stone.
Symons’ Met. Mag., 4-137:
That, according to the Birmingham Gazette, a great number of small,
black stones had been found in the streets of Wolverhampton, May 25,
1869, after a severe storm. It is said that the stones were precisely like those
that had fallen in Birmingham, the year before, and resembled Rowley
ragstone outwardly, but had a different appearance when broken.

--- PAGE BREAK ---said that the stones were precisely like those
that had fallen in Birmingham, the year before, and resembled Rowley
ragstone outwardly, but had a different appearance when broken.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

U
16
PON page 287, Popular Astronomy, Newcomb says that it is beyond
all “moral probability” that unknown worlds should exist in such
numbers as have been reported, and should be seen crossing the
solar disc only by amateur observers and not by skilled astronomers.
Most of our instances are reports by some of the best-known
astronomers.
Newcomb says that for fifty years, prior to his time of writing (edition of
1878) the sun had been studied by such men as Schwabe, Carrington,
Secchi, and Sp|rer, and that they had never seen unknown bodies cross the
sun—
Aug. 30, 1863—an unknown body that was seen by Sp|rer to cross the
sun (Webb, Celestial ObMects, p. 45).
Sept. 1, 1859—two star-like objects that were seen by Carrington to cross
the sun (Monthly Notices, 20-13, 15, 88).
Things that crossed the sun, July 31, 1826, and May 26, 1828— see
Comptes Rendus, 83-623, and Webb’s Celestial ObMects, p. 40. From Sept. 6
to Nov. 1, 1831, an unknown luminous object was seen every cloudless
night, at Geneva, by Dr. Wartmann and his assistants (Comptes Rendus, 2-
307). It was reported from nowhere else. What all the other astronomers
were doing, September-October, 1831, is one of the mysteries that we shall
not solve. An unknown, luminous object that was seen, from May 11 to
May 14, 1835, by Cacciatore, the Sicilian astronomer (Amer. Jour. Sci., 31-
158). Two unknowns that, according to Pastorff, crossed the sun, Nov. 1,
1836, and Feb. 16, 1837 (An. Sci. Disc., 1860-410)—De Vico’s unknown,
July 12, 1837 (Observatory, 2-424)—observation by De Cuppis, Oct. 2,
1839 (C. R., 83-314)—by Scott and Wray, last of June, 1847; by Schmidt,
Oct. 11, 1847 (C. R., 83-623)—two dark bodies that were seen, Feb. 5,
1849, by Brown, of Deal (Rec. Sci., 1-138)—object watched by
Sidebotham, half an hour, March 12, 1849, crossing the sun (C. R., 83-622)
—Schmidt’s unknown, Oct. 14, 1849 (Observatory, 3-137)—and an object
that was watched, four nights in October, 1850, by James Ferguson, of thean hour, March 12, 1849, crossing the sun (C. R., 83-622)
—Schmidt’s unknown, Oct. 14, 1849 (Observatory, 3-137)—and an object
that was watched, four nights in October, 1850, by James Ferguson, of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---849, crossing the sun (C. R., 83-622)
—Schmidt’s unknown, Oct. 14, 1849 (Observatory, 3-137)—and an object
that was watched, four nights in October, 1850, by James Ferguson, of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Washington Observatory. Mr. Hind believed this object to be a Trans-
Neptunian planet, and calculated for it a period of 1,600 years. Mr. Hind
was a great astronomer, and he miscalculated magnificently: this floating
island of space was not seen again (Smithson. Miscell. Cols., 20-20).
About May 30, 1853—a black point that was seen against the sun, by
Jaennicke (Cosmos, 20-64).
A procession—in the Rept. B. A., 1855-94, R. P. Greg says that, upon
May 22, 1854, a friend of his saw, near Mercury, an object equal in size to
the planet itself, and behind it an elongated object, and behind that
something else, smaller and round.
June 11, 1855—a dark body of such size that it was seen, without
telescopes, by Ritter and Schmidt, crossing the sun (Observatory, 3-137).
Sept. 12, 1857—Ohrt’s unknown world; seemed to be about the size of
Mercury (C. R., 83-623)—Aug. 1, 1858—unknown world reported by
Wilson, of Manchester (Astro. Reg., 9-287).
I am not listing all the unknowns of a period; perhaps the object reported
by John H. Tice, of St. Louis, Mo., Sept. 15, 1859, should not be included;
Mr. Tice was said not to be trustworthy —but who has any way of
knowing" However, I am listing enough of these observations to make me
feel like a translated European of some centuries ago, relatively to a wider
existence—lands that may be the San Salvadors, Greenlands, Madagascars,
Cubas, Australias of extra-geography, all of them said to have crossed the
sun, whereas the sun may have moved behind some of them—
Jan. 29, 1860—unknown object, of planetary size, reported from London,
by Russell and three other observers (Nature, 15-505). Summer of 1860—
see Sci. Amer., 35-340, for an account, by Richard Covington, of an object
that, without a telescope, he saw crossing the sun. An unknown world,
reported by Loomis, of Manchester, March 20, 1862 (Monthly Notices, 22-
232)—a newspaper account of an object that was seen crossing the sun,
Feb. 12, 1864, by Samuel Beswick, of New York (Astro. Reg., 2-161)—
unknown that was seen, March 18, 1865, at Constantinople (L’Ann. Sci.,
1865-16)—unknown “cometic objects” that were seen, Nov. 4, 9, and 18,
1865 (Monthly Notices, 26-242).
Most of these unknowns were seen in the daytime. Several reflections
arise. How could there be stationary regions over Irkutsk, Comrie, and
Birmingham, and never obscure the stars—or never be seen to obscure the
stars" A heresy that seems too radical for me is that they may be beyond theere be stationary regions over Irkutsk, Comrie, and
Birmingham, and never obscure the stars—or never be seen to obscure the
stars" A heresy that seems too radical for me is that they may be beyond the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

nearby stars. A more reasonable idea is that if nightwatchmen and
policemen and other persons who do stay awake nights, should be given
telescopes, something might be found out. Something else that one thinks of
is that, if so many unknowns have been seen crossing the sun, or crossed by
the sun, others not so revealed must exist in great numbers, and that instead
of being virtually blank, space must be archipelagic.
Something that was seen at night; observer not an astronomer—
Nov. 6, 1866—an account, in the London Times, Jan. 2, 1867, by Senor
De Fonblanque, of the British Consulate, at Cartagena, U. S. Colombia, of a
luminous object that moved in the sky. “It was of the magnitude, color, and
brilliance of a ship’s red light, as seen at a distance of 200 yards.” The
object was visible three minutes, and then disappeared behind buildings. De
Fonblanque went to an open space to look for it, but did not see it again.

--- PAGE BREAK ---a distance of 200 yards.” The
object was visible three minutes, and then disappeared behind buildings. De
Fonblanque went to an open space to look for it, but did not see it again.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
17
F we could stop to sing, instead of everlastingly noting vol. this and p.
that, we could have the material of sagas—of the bathers in the sun,
which may be neither intolerably hot nor too uncomfortably cold; and of
the hermit who floats across the moon; of heroes and the hairy monsters of
the sky. I should stand in public places and sing our data—sagas of parades
and explorations and massacres in the sky—having a busy band of
accompanists, who set off fireworks, and send up balloons, and fire off
explosives at regular intervals—extra-geographic songs of boiling lakes and
floating islands—extra-sociologic meters that express the tramp of space-
armies upon inter-planetary paths covered with little black pebbles—
biologic epics of the clouds of mammoths and horses and antelopes that
once upon a time fell from the sky upon the northern coast of Siberia—
Song that interprets the perpendicular white streaks in the repeating
mirages at Youghal—the rhythmic walruses of space that hang on by their
tusks to the edges of space-islands, sometimes making stars variable as they
swing in cosmic undulations—so a round space-island with its border of
gleaming tusks, and we frighten children with the song of an ogre’s head,
with a wide-open mouth all around it—fairy lands of the little moon, and
the tiny civilizations in rocky cups that are sometimes drained to their slums
by the wide-mouthed ogres. The Maelstrom of Everlasting Catastrophe that
overhangs Genoa, Italy—and twines its currents around a living island. The
ground underneath quakes with the struggle —then the fall of blood—and
the fall of blood—three days the fall of blood from the broken red brooks of
a living island whose mutilations are scenery—
But after all, it may be better that we go back to Rept. B. A. —see vol.
1849, p. 46—a stream of black objects, crossing the sun, watched, at
Naples, May 11, 1845, by Capocci and other astronomers—things that may
have been seeds.
A great number of red points in the sky of Urrugne, July 9, 1853 (An.
Soc. Met. de France, 1853-227). Astro. Reg., 5-179—C. L. Prince, ofCapocci and other astronomers—things that may
have been seeds.
A great number of red points in the sky of Urrugne, July 9, 1853 (An.
Soc. Met. de France, 1853-227). Astro. Reg., 5-179—C. L. Prince, of

--- PAGE BREAK ---tronomers—things that may
have been seeds.
A great number of red points in the sky of Urrugne, July 9, 1853 (An.
Soc. Met. de France, 1853-227). Astro. Reg., 5-179—C. L. Prince, of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Uckfield, writes that, upon June 11, 1867, he saw objects crossing the field
of his telescope. They were seeds, in his opinion.
Birmingham Daily Post, May 31, 1867:
Mr. Bird, the astronomer, writes that, about 11 A.M., May 30, he saw
unknown forms in the sky. In his telescope, which was focused upon them
and upon the planet Venus, they appeared to be twice the size of Venus.
They were far away, according to focus; also, it may be accepted that they
were far away because an occasional cloud passed between them and this
earth. They did not move like objects carried in the wind: all did not move
in the same direction, and they moved at different speeds.
“All of them seemed to have hairy appendages, and in many cases a
distinct tail followed the object and was highly luminous.”
Flashes that have been seen in the sky—and they’re from a living island
that wags his luminous peninsula. Hair-like substances that have fallen to
this earth—a meadow has been shorn from a monster’s mane. My
animation is the notion that it is better to think in tentative hysteria of pairs
of vast things, traveling like a North and South America through the sky,
perhaps one biting the other with its Gulf of Mexico, than to go on thinking
that all things that so move in the sky are seeds, whereas all things that
swim in the sea are not sardines.
In the Post, June 3, 1867, Mr. W. H. Wood writes that the objects were
probably seeds. Post, June 5—Mr. Bird says that the objects were not seeds.
“My intention was simply to describe what was seen, and the appearance
was certainly that of meteors.” He saves himself, in the annals of extra-
geography—”whether they were meteors of the ordinary acceptation, is
another matter.”
And the planet Venus, and her veil that is dotted with blue-fringed cupids
—in the Astronomical Register, 7-138, a correspondent writes, from
Northampton, that, upon May 2, 1869, he was looking at Venus, and saw a
host of shining objects, not uniform in size. He thinks that it is unlikely that
so early in the spring could these objects be seeds. He watched them about
an hour and twenty minutes—”many of the larger ones were fringed on one
side, the fringe appearing somewhat bluish.” Or that it is better even to
sentimentalize than to go on stupidly thinking that all such things in the sky
are seeds, whereas all things in the sea are not the economically adjusting
little forms without which critics of underground traffic in New Yorko on stupidly thinking that all such things in the sky
are seeds, whereas all things in the sea are not the economically adjusting
little forms without which critics of underground traffic in New York

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng that all such things in the sky
are seeds, whereas all things in the sea are not the economically adjusting
little forms without which critics of underground traffic in New York

--- PAGE BREAK ---

probably could not express themselves —the planet Venus—she approaches
this lordly earth—the blue-fringed ecstasies that suffuse her skies.
With the phenomena of Aug. 7, 1869, I suspect that the “phantom
soldiers” that have been seen in the sky, may have been reflections from, or
mirages of, things or beings that march, in military formations, in space. In
Popular Astronomy, 3-159, Prof. Swift writes that, at Mattoon, Ill., during
the eclipse of the sun, of Aug. 7, 1869, he had seen, crossing the moon,
objects that he thought were seeds. If they were seeds, also there happened
to be seeds in the sky of Ottumwa, Iowa: here, crossing the visible part of
the sun, twenty minutes before totality of the eclipse, Prof. Himes and Prof.
Zentmayer saw objects that marched, or that moved, in straight, parallel
lines (Les Mondes, 21-241). In the Jour. Frank. Inst., 3-58-214, it is said
that some of these objects moved in one direction across the moon, and that
others moved in another direction across another part of the moon, each
division moving in parallel lines. If these things were seeds, also there
happened to be seeds in the sky, at Shelleyville, Kentucky. Here were seen,
by Prof. Winlock, Alvan Clark, Jr., and George W. Dean, things that moved
across the moon, during the eclipse, in parallel, straight lines (Pop. Astro.,
2-332).
Whatever these things may have been, I offer another datum indicating
that the moon is nearby: that these objects probably were not, by
coincidence, things in three widely separated skies, parallelness giving them
identity in two of the observations; and, if seen, without parallax, from
places so far apart, against the moon, were close to the moon; that
observation of such detail would be unlikely if they were near a satellite
240,000 miles away—unless, of course, they were mountain-sized.
It may be that out from two floating islands of space, two processions
had marched across the moon. Observatory, 3-137—that, at St. Paul’s
Junction, Iowa, four persons had seen, without telescopes, a shining object
close to the sun and moon, apparently; that, with a telescope, another person
had seen another large object, crescentically illumined, farther from the sun
and moon in eclipse. See Nature, 18-663, and Astro. Reg., 7-227.
I have many data upon the fall of organic matter from the sky. Because of
my familiarity with many records, it seems no more incredible that up in the
seemingly unoccupied sky there should be hosts of living things than that
the seeming blank of the ocean should swarm with life. I have many notes
upon a phosphorescence, or electric condition of things that fall from thesky there should be hosts of living things than that
the seeming blank of the ocean should swarm with life. I have many notes
upon a phosphorescence, or electric condition of things that fall from the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sky, for instance the highly luminous stones of Dhurmsulla, which were
intensely cold—
Amer. Jour. Sci., 2-28-270:
It is said that, according to investigations by Prof. Shepard, a luminous
substance was seen falling slowly, by Sparkman R. Scriven, a young man of
seventeen, at his home, in Charleston, S. C., Nov. 16, 1857. It is said that
the young man saw a fiery, red ball, the size and shape of an orange, strike a
fence, breaking, and disappearing. Where this object had struck the fence,
was found “a small bristling mass of black fibers.” According to Prof.
Shepard, it was “a confused aggregate of short clippings of the finest black
hair, varying in length from one tenth to one third of an inch.” Prof.
Shepard says that this substance was not organic. It seems to me that he said
this only because of the coercions of his era. My reason for so thinking is
that he wrote that when he analyzed these hairs they burned away, leaving
grayish skeletons, and that they were “composed in part of carbon,” and
burned with an odor “most nearly bituminous.”
For full details of the following circumstances, see Comptes Rendus, 13-
215, and Rept. B. A., 1854-302:
Feb. 17, 1841—the fall, at Genoa, Italy, of a red substance from the sky
—another fall upon the 18th—a slight quake, at 5 P.M., February 18th—
another quake, six hours later—fall of more of the red substance, upon the
19th. Some of this substance was collected and analyzed by M. Canobbia,
of Genoa. He says it was oily and red.

--- PAGE BREAK ---er quake, six hours later—fall of more of the red substance, upon the
19th. Some of this substance was collected and analyzed by M. Canobbia,
of Genoa. He says it was oily and red.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
18
N a pamphlet entitled Wonderful Phenomena, by Curtis Eli, is the report
of an occurrence, or of an alleged occurrence, that was investigated by
Mr. Addison A. Sawin, a spiritualist. He interpreted in the only way that
I know of, and that is the psychochemic process of combining new data
with preconceptions with which they seem to have affinity. It is said that, at
Warwick, C. W., Oct. 3, 1843, somebody named Charles Cooper heard a
rumbling sound in the sky, and saw a cloud, under which were three human
forms, “perfectly white,” sailing through the air above him, not higher than
the tree-tops. It is said that the beings were angels. They were male angels.
That is orthodox. The angels wafted through the air, but without motions of
their own, and an interesting observation is that they seemed to have belts
around their bodies—as if they had been let down from a vessel above,
though this poor notion is not suggested in the pamphlet. They “moaned.”
Cooper called to some men who were laboring in another field, and they
saw the cloud, but did not see the forms of living beings under it. It is said
that a boy had seen the beings in the air, “side by side, making a loud and
mournful noise.” Another person, who lived six miles away, is quoted: “he
saw the clouds and the persons and heard the sounds.” Mr. Sawin quotes
others, who had seen “a remarkable cloud,” and had heard the sounds, but
had not seen the angels. He ends up: “Yours is the glorious hope of the
resurrection of the soul.” The gloriousness of it is an inverse function of the
dolefulness of it: Sunday Schools will not take kindly to the doctrine—be
good and you will moan forever. One supposes that the glorious hope
colored the whole investigation.
Some day I shall publish data that lead me to suspect that many
appearances upon this earth that were once upon a time interpreted by
theologians and demonologists, but are now supposed to be the subject-
matter of psychic research, were beings and objects that visited this earth,
not from a spiritual existence, but from outer space. That extra-geographic
conditions may be spiritual, or of highly attenuated matter, is not my
present notion, though that, too, may be some day accepted. Of course allexistence, but from outer space. That extra-geographic
conditions may be spiritual, or of highly attenuated matter, is not my
present notion, though that, too, may be some day accepted. Of course all

--- PAGE BREAK ---outer space. That extra-geographic
conditions may be spiritual, or of highly attenuated matter, is not my
present notion, though that, too, may be some day accepted. Of course all

--- PAGE BREAK ---

these data suffer, in one way, about as much distortion as they would in
other ways, if they had been reported by astronomers or meteorologists. As
to all the material in this chapter, I take the position that perhaps there were
appearances in the sky, and perhaps they were revelations of, or mirages
from, unknown regions and conditions of outer space, and spectacles of
relatively nearby inhabited lands, and of space-travelers, but that all reports
upon them were products of the assimilating of the unknown with figures
and figments of the nearest familiar similarities. Another position of mine
that will be found well-taken is that, no matter what my own interpretations
or acceptances may be, they will compare favorably, so far as rationality is
concerned, with orthodox explanations. There have been many assertions
that “phantom soldiers” have been seen in the sky. For the orthodox
explanation of the physicists, see Brewster’s Natural Magic, p. 125: a
review of the phenomenon of June 23, 1744; that, according to 27
witnesses, some of whom gave sworn testimony before a magistrate,
whether that should be mentioned or not, troops of aerial soldiers had been
seen, in Scotland, on and over a mountain, remaining visible two hours and
then disappearing because of darkness. In Clarke’s Survey of the Lakes (fol.
1789) is an account in the words of one of the witnesses. See Notes and
Queries, 1-7-304. Brewster says that the scene must have been a mirage of
British troops, who, in anticipation of the rebellion of 1745, were secretly
maneuvering upon the other side of the mountain. With a talent for clear-
seeing, for which we are notable, except when it comes to some of our own
explanations, we almost instantly recognize that, to keep a secret from
persons living upon one side of a mountain, it is a very sensible idea to go
and maneuver upon the other side of the mountain; but then how to keep the
secret, in a thickly populated country like Scotland, from persons living
upon that other side of the mountain—however, there never has been an
explanation that did not itself have to be explained.
Or the “phantom soldiers” that were seen at Ujest, Silesia, in 1785 —see
Parish’s Hallucinations and Illusions, p. 309. Parish finds that at the time of
this spectacle, there were soldiers, of this earth, marching near Ujest; so he
explains that the “phantom soldiers” were mirages of them. They
were’marching in the funeral procession of General von Cosel. But some
time later they were seen again, at Ujest—and the General had been dead
and buried several days, and his funeral procession disbanded—and if a
refraction can survive independently of its primary, so may a shadow, andwere seen again, at Ujest—and the General had been dead
and buried several days, and his funeral procession disbanded—and if a
refraction can survive independently of its primary, so may a shadow, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ujest—and the General had been dead
and buried several days, and his funeral procession disbanded—and if a
refraction can survive independently of its primary, so may a shadow, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

anybody may take a walk where he went a week before, and see some of his
shadows still wandering around without him. The great neglect of these
explainers is in not accounting for an astonishing preference for, or
specialization in, marching soldiers, by mirages. But if often there be, in the
sky, things or beings that move in parallel lines, and, if their betrayals be
not mirages, but their shadows cast down upon the haze of this earth, or
Brocken specters, such frequency, or seeming specialization, might be
accounted for.
Sept. 27, 1846—a city in the sky of Liverpool (Rept. B. A., 1847-39). The
apparition is said to have been a mirage of the city of Edinburgh. This
“identification” seems to have been the product of suggestion: at the time a
panorama of Edinburgh was upon exhibition in Liverpool.
Summer of 1847—see Flammarion’s The Atmosphere, p. 160— story
told by M. Grellois: that he was traveling between Ghelma and B{ne, when
he saw, to the east of Bone, upon a gently sloping hill, “a vast and beautiful
city, adorned with monuments, domes, and steeples.” There was no
resemblance to any city known to M. Grellois.
In the Bull. Soc. Astro. de France, 21-180, is an account of a spectacle
that, according to 20 witnesses, was seen for two hours in the sky of Vienne
dans le Dauphinp, May 3, 1848. A city—and an army, in the sky. One
supposes that a Brewster would say that nearby was a terrestrial city, with
troops maneuvering near it. But also vast lions were seen in the sky—and
that is enough to discourage any Brewster. Four months later, according to
the London Times, Sept. 13, 1848, a still more discouraging—or perhaps
stimulating— spectacle was, or was not, seen in Scotland. Afternoon of
Sept. 9, 1848—4uigley’s Point, Lough Foyle, Scotland—the sky turned
dark. It seemed to open. The opening looked reddish, and in the reddish
area, appeared a regiment of soldiers. Then came appearances that looked
like war vessels under full sail, then “a man and a woman and a swan and a
peahen.” The “opening” closed, and that was the last of this shocking or
ridiculous mixture that nobody but myself would record as being worth
thinking about.
“Phantom soldiers” that were seen in the sky, near the Banmouth, Dec.
30, 1850 (Rept. B. A., 1852-30).
“Phantom soldiers” that were seen at Buderich, Jan. 22, 1854 (Notes and
Queries, 1-9-267.about.
“Phantom soldiers” that were seen in the sky, near the Banmouth, Dec.
30, 1850 (Rept. B. A., 1852-30).
“Phantom soldiers” that were seen at Buderich, Jan. 22, 1854 (Notes and
Queries, 1-9-267.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Phantom soldiers” that were seen by Lord Roberts (Forty-One Years in
India, p. 219) at Mohan, Feb. 25, 1858. It is either that Lord Roberts saw
indistinctly, and described in terms of the familiar to him, or that we are set
back in our own motions. According to him, the figures wore Hindoo
costumes.
Extra-geography—its vistas and openings and fields—and the Thoreaus
that are upon this earth, but undeveloped, because they cannot find their
ponds. A lonely thing and its pond, afloat in space—they crossed the moon.
In Cosmos, n. s., 11-200, it is said that, night of July 7, 1857, two persons of
Chambon had seen forms crossing the moon—something like a human
being followed by a pond.
“Phantom soldiers” that were seen, about the year 1860, at Paderborn,
Westphalia (Crowe, Night-side of Nature, p. 416).

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng the moon—something like a human
being followed by a pond.
“Phantom soldiers” that were seen, about the year 1860, at Paderborn,
Westphalia (Crowe, Night-side of Nature, p. 416).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

W
19
E attempt to co-ordinate various streaks of data, all of which
signify to us that, external to this earth, and in relation with, or
relatable to, this earth are lands and lives and a generality of
conditions that make of the whole, supposed solar system one globule of
circumstances like terrestrial circumstances. Our expressions are in physical
terms, though in outer space there may be phenomena known as psychic
phenomena, because of the solid substances and objects that have fallen
from the sky to this earth, similar to, but sometimes not identified with,
known objects and substances upon this earth. Opposing us is the more or
less well-established conventional doctrine that has spun like a cocoon
around mind upon this earth, shutting off research, and stifling even
speculation, shelling away all data of relations and relatability with external
existences, a doctrine that, in its various explanations and disregards and
denials, is unified in one expression of Exclusionism.
An unknown vegetable substance falls from the sky. The datum is buried:
it may sprout some day.
The earth quakes. A luminous object is seen in the sky. Substance falls
from the unknown. But the event is catalogued with subterranean
earthquakes.
All conventional explanations and all conventional disregards and denials
have Exclusionism in common. The unity is so marked, all writings in the
past are so definitely in agreement, that I now think of a general era that is,
by Exclusionism, as distinctly characterized as ever was the Carboniferous
Era.
A pregnant woman stands near Niagara Falls. There are sounds, and they
are vast circumstances; but the cells of an unborn being respond, or vibrate,
only as they do to disturbances in their own little environment. Horizons
pour into a gulf, and thunder rolls upward: embryonic consciousness is no
more than to slight perturbations of maternal indigestion. It is
Exclusionism.ances in their own little environment. Horizons
pour into a gulf, and thunder rolls upward: embryonic consciousness is no
more than to slight perturbations of maternal indigestion. It is
Exclusionism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ittle environment. Horizons
pour into a gulf, and thunder rolls upward: embryonic consciousness is no
more than to slight perturbations of maternal indigestion. It is
Exclusionism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Stones fall from the sky. To the same part of this earth, they fall again.
They fall again. They fall from some region that, relatively to this part of
the earth’s surface, is stationary. But to say this leads to the suspicion that it
is this earth that is stationary. To think that is to beat against the walls of
uterine dogmas—into a partly hairy and somewhat reptilian mass of social
undevelopment comes exclusionist explanation suitable for such
immaturity.
It does not matter which of our subjects we take up, our experience is
unvarying: the standardized explanation will be Exclusionism. As to many
appearances in the sky, the way of excluding foreign forces is to say that
they are auroras, which are supposed to be mundane phenomena. School
children are taught that auroras are electric manifestations encircling the
poles of this earth. Respectful urchins are shown an ikon by which an
electrified sphere does have the polar encirclements that it should have. But
I have taken a disrespectful, or advanced, course through the Monthly
Weather Review, and have read hundreds of times of auroras that were not
such polar crownings: of auroras in Venezuela, Sandwich Islands, Cuba,
India; of an aurora in Pennsylvania, for instance, and not a sign of it north
of Pennsylvania. There are lights in the sky for which “auroral” is as good a
name as any that can be thought of, but there are others for which some
other names will have to be thought of. There have been lights like
luminous surfs beating upon the coasts of this earth’s atmosphere, and lights
like vast reflections from distant fires; steady pencils of light and pulsating
clouds and quick flashes and seeming objects with definite outlines, all in
one poverty of nomenclature, for which science is, in some respects, not
notable, called “auroral.” Nobody knows what an aurora is. It does not
matter. An unknown light in the sky is said to be auroral. This is
standardization, and the essence of this standardization is Exclusionism.
I see one resolute, unified, unscrupulous exclusion from science of the
indications of nearby lands in the sky. It may not be unscrupulousness: it
may be hypnosis. I see that all seeming hypnotics, or somnambulists of the
past, who have most plausibly so explained, or so denied, have prospered
and have had renown. According to my impressions, if a Brewster, or a
Swift, or a Newcomb ever had written that there may be nearby lands and
living beings in the sky, he would not have prospered, and his renown
would be still subject to delay. If an organism flourishes, it is said to be in
harmony with environment, or with higher forces. I now conceive ofthe sky, he would not have prospered, and his renown
would be still subject to delay. If an organism flourishes, it is said to be in
harmony with environment, or with higher forces. I now conceive of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

successful and flourishing Exclusionism as an organization that has been in
harmony with higher forces. Suppose we accept that all general delusions
function sociologically. Then, if Exclusionism be general delusion; if we
shall accept that conceivably the isolation of this earth has been a necessary
factor in the development of the whole geo-system, we see that
exclusionistic science has faithfully, though falsely, functioned. It would be
worldwide crime to spread world-wide too soon the idea that there are other
existences nearby and that they have been seen and that sounds from them
have been heard: the peoples of this earth must organize themselves before
conceiving of, and trying to establish, foreign relations. A premature science
of such subjects would be like a United States taking part in a Franco-
Prussian War, when such foreign relations should be still far in the future of
a nation that has still to concentrate upon its own internal development.
So in the development of all things—or that a stickleback may build a
nest, and so may vaguely and not usefully and not explicably at all, in terms
of Darwinian evolution, foreshadow a character of coming forms of life; but
that a fish that should try to climb a tree and sing to its mate before even the
pterodactyl had flapped around with wings daubed with clay would be an
unnoticed little clown in cosmic drama. But I do conceive that when the
Carboniferous Era is dominant, and when not a discordant thing will be
permitted to flourish, though it may adumbrate, restrictions will not last
forever, and that the rich and bountiful curse upon rooted things will some
day be lifted.

--- PAGE BREAK ---thing will be
permitted to flourish, though it may adumbrate, restrictions will not last
forever, and that the rich and bountiful curse upon rooted things will some
day be lifted.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

P
20
ATCHED by a blue inundation that had never been seen before—this
earth, early in the 6o’s of the 19th century. Then faintly, from far
away, this new appearance is seen to be enveloped with volumes of
gray. Flashes like lightning, and faintest of rumbling sounds—then cloud-
like envelopments roll away, and a blue formation shines in the sun.
Meteorologists upon the moon take notes.
But year after year there are appearances, as seen from the moon, that are
so characterized that they may not be meteorologic phenomena upon this
earth: changing compositions wrought with elements of blue and of gray; it
is like conflict between Synthesis and Dissolution: straight lines that fade
into scrawls, but that reform into seeming moving symbols: circles and
squares and triangles abound.
Having had no mean experience with interpretations as products of
desires, given that upon the moon communication with this earth should be
desired, it seems likely to me that the struggles of hosts of Americans, early
in the 6o’s of the 19th century, were thought by some lunarians to be
maneuvers directed to them, or attempts to attract their attention. However,
having had many impressions upon the resistance that new delusions
encounter, so that, at least upon this earth, some benightments have had to
wait centuries before finally imposing themselves generally, I’d think of
considerable time elapsing before the coming of a general conviction upon
the moon that, by means of living symbols, and the firing of explosives,
terrestrians were trying to communicate.
Beacon-like lights that have been seen upon the moon. The lights have
been desultory. The latest of which I have record was back in the year 1847.
But now, if beginning in the early 6o’s, though not coinciding with the
beginning of unusual and tremendous manifestations upon this earth, we
have data as if of greatly stimulated attempts to communicate from the
moon—why one assimilates one’s impressions of such great increase with
this or with that, all according to what one’s dominant thoughts may be, and
calls the product a logical conclusion. Upon the night of May 15, 1864,lates one’s impressions of such great increase with
this or with that, all according to what one’s dominant thoughts may be, and
calls the product a logical conclusion. Upon the night of May 15, 1864,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ons of such great increase with
this or with that, all according to what one’s dominant thoughts may be, and
calls the product a logical conclusion. Upon the night of May 15, 1864,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Herbert Ingall, of Camberwell, saw a little to the west of the lunar crater
Picard, in the Mare Crisium, a remarkably bright spot (Astro. Reg., 2-264).
Oct. 24, 1864—period of nearest approach by Mars—red lights upon
opposite parts of Mars (C. R., 85-538). Upon Oct. 16, Ingall had again seen
the light west of Picard. Jan. 1, 1865—a small speck of light, in darkness,
under the east foot of the lunar Alps, shining like a small star, watched half
an hour by Charles Grover (Astro. Reg., 3-255). Jan. 3, 1865—again the red
lights of Mars (C. R., 85-538). A thread of data appears, as an offshoot from
a main streak, but it cannot sustain itself. Lights on the moon and lights on
Mars, but I have nothing more that seems to signify both signals and
responses between these two worlds.
April 10, 1865—west of Picard, according to Ingall—”a most minute
point of light, glittering like a star” (Astro. Reg., 3-189).
Sept. 5, 1865—a conspicuous bright spot west of Picard (Astro. Reg., 3-
252). It was seen again by Ingall. He saw it again upon the 7th, but upon the
8th it had gone, and there was a cloud-like effect where the light had been.
Nov. 24, 1865—a speck of light that was seen by the Rev. W. O.
Williams, shining like a small star in the lunar crater Carlini (Intel. Obs.,
11-58).
June 10, 1866—the star-like light in Aristarchus; reported by Termpel
(Denning, Telescopic Work, p. 121).
Astronomically and seleno-meteorologically, nothing that I know of has
ever been done with these data. I think well of taking up the subject
theologically. We are approaching accounts of a different kind of changes
upon the moon. There will be data seeming so to indicate not only
persistence but devotedness upon the moon that I incline to think not only
of devotedness but of devotions. Upon the 16th of October, 1866, the
astronomer Schmidt, of the land of Socrates, announced that the isolated
object, in the eastern part of the Mare Serenitatis, known as Linne, had
changed Linnp stands out in a blank area like the Pyramid of Cheops in its
desert. If changes did occur upon Linnp, the conspicuous position seems to
indicate selection. Before October, 1866, Linnp was wellknown as a dark
object. Something was whitening an object that had been black.
A hitherto unpublished episode in the history of theologies:
The new prophet who had appeared upon the moon—
Faint perceptions of moving formations, often almost rigorously
geometric, upon one part of this earth, and perhaps faintest of signal-liketheologies:
The new prophet who had appeared upon the moon—
Faint perceptions of moving formations, often almost rigorously
geometric, upon one part of this earth, and perhaps faintest of signal-like

--- PAGE BREAK ---prophet who had appeared upon the moon—
Faint perceptions of moving formations, often almost rigorously
geometric, upon one part of this earth, and perhaps faintest of signal-like

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sounds that reached the moon—the new prophet—and that he preached the
old lunar doctrine that there is no god but the Earth-god, but exhorted his
hearers to forsake their altars upon which had burned unheeded lights, and
to build a temple upon which might be recited a litany of lights and shades.
We are only now realizing how the Earth-god looks to the beings of the
moon—who know that this earth is dominant; who see it frilled with the
loops of the major planets; its Elizabethan ruff wrought by the
complications of the asteroids; the busy little sun that brushes off the dark.
God of the moon, when mists make it expressionless—a vast, bland,
silvery Buddha.
God of the moon, when seeing is clear—when the disguise is off—when,
at night, from pointed white peaks drip the fluctuating red lights of a
volcano, this earth is the appalling god of carnivorousness.
Sometimes the great roundish earth, with the heavens behind it broken by
refraction, looks like something thrust into a shell from external existence—
clouds of tornadoes as if in its grasp—and it looks like the fist of God,
clutching rags of ultimate fire and confusion.
That a new prophet had appeared upon the moon, and had excited new
hope of evoking response from the bland and shining Stupidity that has so
often been mistaken for God, or from the Appalling that is so identified
with Divinity—from the clutched and menacing fist that has so often been
worshiped.
There is no intelligence except era-intelligence. Suppose the whole geo-
system be a super-embryonic thing. Then, by the law of the embryo, its
parts cannot organize until comes scheduled time. So there are local
congeries of development of a chick in an egg, but these local centers
cannot more than faintly sketch out relations with one another, until comes
the time when they may definitely integrate. Suppose that far back in the
19th century there were attempts to communicate from the moon; but
suppose that they were premature: then we suppose the fate of the
protoplasmic threads that feel out too soon from one part of an egg to
another. In October, 1866, Schmidt, of Athens, saw and reported in terms of
the concepts of his era, and described in conventional selenographic
language. See Rept. B. A., 1867.
Upon Dec. 14, 16, 25, 27, 1866, Linnp was seen as a white spot. But
there was something that had the seeming more of a design, or of a pattern,
an elaboration upon the mere turning to white of something that had been, 25, 27, 1866, Linnp was seen as a white spot. But
there was something that had the seeming more of a design, or of a pattern,
an elaboration upon the mere turning to white of something that had been

--- PAGE BREAK ---p was seen as a white spot. But
there was something that had the seeming more of a design, or of a pattern,
an elaboration upon the mere turning to white of something that had been

--- PAGE BREAK ---

black—a fine, black spot upon Linnp; by Schmidt and Buckingham, in
December, 1866 (The Student, 1-261). The most important consideration of
all is reviewed by Schmidt in the Rept. B. A., 1867-22—that sunlight and
changes of sunlight had nothing to do with the changing appearances of
Linnp. Jan. 14, 1867—the white covering, or, at least, seeming of covering,
of Linnp, had seemingly disappeared—Knott’s impression of Linnp as a
dark spot, but “definition” was poor. January 16—Knott’s very strong
impression, which, however, he says may have been an illusion, of a small
central dark spot upon Linnp. Dawes’ observation, of March 15, 1867—”an
excessively minute black dot in the middle of Linnp.”
A geometric figure that was white-bordered and centered with black,
formed and dissolved and formed again.
I have an impression of spectacles that were common in the United
States, during the War: hosts of persons arranging themselves in living
patterns: flags, crosses, and in one instance, in which thousands were
engaged, in the representation of an enormous Liberty Bell. Astronomers
have thought of trying to communicate with Mars or the moon by means of
great geometric constructions placed conspicuously, but there is nothing so
attractive to attention as change, and a formation that could appear and
disappear would enchance the geometric with the dynamic. That the units of
the changing compositions that covered Linnp were the lunarians
themselves—that Linnp was terraced—hosts of the inhabitants of the moon
standing upon the ridges of their Cheops of the Serene Sea, some of them
dressed in white and standing in a border, arfd some of them dressed in
black, centering upon the apex, or the dark material of the apex left clear for
the contrast, all of them unified in a hope of conveying an impression of the
geometric, as the product of design, and distinguishable from the
topographic, to the shining god that makes the stars of their heavens
marginal.
It is a period of great activity—or of conflicting ideas and purposes—
upon the moon: new and experimental demonstrations, but also, of course,
the persistence of the old. In the Astronomical Register, 5-114, Thomas G.
Elger writes that upon the 9th of April, 1867, he was surprised to see, upon
the dark part of the moon, a light like a star of the 7th magnitude, at 7:30
P.M. It became fainter, and looked almost extinguished at 9 o’clock. Mr.
Elger had seen lights upon the moon before, but never before a light so
clear—”too bright to be overlooked by the most careless observer.” May 7,nter, and looked almost extinguished at 9 o’clock. Mr.
Elger had seen lights upon the moon before, but never before a light so
clear—”too bright to be overlooked by the most careless observer.” May 7,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ost extinguished at 9 o’clock. Mr.
Elger had seen lights upon the moon before, but never before a light so
clear—”too bright to be overlooked by the most careless observer.” May 7,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1867—the beacon-like light of Aristarchus—observed by Tempel, of
Marseilles, when Aristarchus was upon the dark part of the moon (Astro.
Reg., 5-220). Upon the night of June 10, 1867, Dawes saw three distinct,
roundish, black spots near Sulpicius Gallus, which is near Linnp; when
looked for upon the 13th, they had disappeared (The Student, 1-261).
Aug. 6, 1867—
And this earth in the sky of the moon—smooth and bland and featureless
earth—or one of the scenes that make it divine and appalling—jaws of this
earth, as seem to be rims of more or less parallel mountain ranges, still
shining in sunlight, but surrounded by darkness—
And, upon the moon, the assembling of the Chiaroscuroans, or the lunar
communicationists who seek to be intelligible to this earth by means of
lights and shades, patterned upon Linnp by their own forms and costumes.
The Great Pyramid of Linnp, at night upon the moon—it stands out as a
bold black triangularity pointing to this earth. It slowly suffuses white—the
upward drift of white-clad forms, upon the slopes of the Pyramid. The jaws
of this earth seem to munch, in variable light. There is no other response.
Devotions are the food of the gods.
Upon Aug. 6, 1867, Buckingham saw upon Linnp, which was in
darkness, “a rising oval spot” (Rept. B. A., 1867-7). In October, 1867, Linnp
was seen as a convex white spot (Rept. B. A., 1867-8).
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
Also it may be that the moon is not inhabited, and is not habitable. There
are many astronomers who say that the moon has virtually no atmosphere,
because when a star is passed over by the moon, the star is not refracted,
according to them. See Clerke’s History of Astronomy, p. 264—that, basing
his calculations upon the fact that a star is never refracted out of place when
occulted by the moon, Prof. Comstock, of Washburn Observatory, had
determined that this earth’s atmosphere is 5,000 times as dense as the
moon’s.
I did think that in this secondary survey of ours we had pretty well
shaken off our old opposition, the astronomers: however, with something of
the kindliness that one feels for renewed meeting with the familiar, here we
are at home with the same old kind of demonstrations: the basing of
laborious calculations upon something that is not so—
See index of Monthly Notices, R. A. S.—many instances of stars that have
been refracted out of place when occulted by the moon. See thebasing of
laborious calculations upon something that is not so—
See index of Monthly Notices, R. A. S.—many instances of stars that have
been refracted out of place when occulted by the moon. See the

--- PAGE BREAK ---calculations upon something that is not so—
See index of Monthly Notices, R. A. S.—many instances of stars that have
been refracted out of place when occulted by the moon. See the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Observatory, 24-210, 313, 315, 345, 414; English Mechanic, 23-197, 279;
26-229; 52—index, “atmosphere”; 81-60; 84-161; 85-108.
In the year 1821, Gruithuisen announced that he had discovered a city of
the moon. He described its main thoroughfare and branching streets. In
1826, he announced that there had been considerable building, and that he
had seen new streets. This formation, which is north of the crater Schroeter,
has often been examined by disagreeing astronomers: for a sketch of it, in
which a central line and radiating lines are shown, see the English
Mechanic, 18-638. There is one especial object upon the moon that has
been described and photographed and sketched so often that I shall not go
into the subject. For many records of observations, see the English
Mechanic and L’Astronomie. It is an object shaped like a sword, near the
crater Birt. Anyone with an impression of the transept of a cathedral, may
see the architectural here. Or it may be a mound similar to the mounds of
North America that have so logically been attributed to the Mound Builders.
In a letter, published in the Astronomical Register, 20-167, Mr. Birmingham
calls attention to a formation that suggests the architectural upon the moon
—”a group of three hills in a slightly acute-angled triangle, and connected
by three lower embankments.” There is a geometric object, or marking,
shaped like an “X,” in the crater Eratosthenes (Sci. Amer. Sup., 59-24, 469);
striking symbolic-looking thing or sign, or attempt by means of something
obviously not topographic, to attract attention upon this earth, in the crater
Plinius (Eng. Mec., 35-34); reticulations, like those of a city’s squares, in
Plato (Eng. Mec., 64-253); and there is a structural-looking composition of
angular lines in Gassendi (Eng. Mec., 101-466). Upon the floor of Littrow
are six or seven spots arranged in the form of the Greek letter Gamma Eng.
Mec., 101-47). This arrangement may be of recent origin, having been
discovered Jan. 31, 1915. The Greek letter makes difficulty only for those
who do not want to think easily upon this subject. For a representation of
something that looked like a curved wall upon the moon, see L’Astronomie,
1888-110. As to appearances like viaducts, see L’Astronomie, 1885-213.
The lunar craters are not in all instances the simple cirques that they are
commonly supposed to be. I have many different impressions of some of
them: I remember one sketch that looked like an owl with a napkin tucked
under his beak. However, it may be that the general style of architecture
upon the moon is Byzantine, very likely, or not so likely, domed with glass,
giving the dome-effect that has so often been commented upon.ak. However, it may be that the general style of architecture
upon the moon is Byzantine, very likely, or not so likely, domed with glass,
giving the dome-effect that has so often been commented upon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---be that the general style of architecture
upon the moon is Byzantine, very likely, or not so likely, domed with glass,
giving the dome-effect that has so often been commented upon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

So then the little nearby moon—and it is populated by Liliputians.
However, our experience with agreeing ideas having been what it has been,
we suspect that the lunarians are giants. Having reasonably determined that
the moon is one hundred miles in diameter, we suppose it is considerably
more or less.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
A group of astronomers had been observing extraordinary lights in the
lunar crater Plato. The lights had definite arrangement. They were so
individualized that Birt and Elger, and the other selenographers, who had
combined to study them, had charted and numbered them. They were fixed
in position, but rose and fell in intensity.
It does seem to me that we have data of one school of communicationists
after another coming into control of efforts upon the moon. At first our data
related to single lights. They were extraordinary, and they seem to me to
have been signals, but there seemed to be nothing of the organization that
now does seem to be creeping into the fragmentary material that is the best
that we can find. The grouped lights in Plato were so distinctive, so clear
and even brilliant, that if such lights had ever shone before, it seems that
they must have been seen by the Schroeters, Gruithuisens, Beers and
Madlers, who had studied and charted the features of the moon. For several
of Gledhill’s observations, from which I derive my impressions of these
lights, see Rept. B. A., 1871-80—“I can only liken them to the small discs
of stars, seen in the transit-instrument”; “just like small stars in the transit
instrument, upon a windy night”
In August and September, 1869, occurred a notable illumination of the
spots in Group I. It was accompanied by a single light upon a distant spot.
February and March, 1870—illumination of another group.
April 17, 1870—another illumination in Plato, but back to the first group.
As to his observations of May 10-12, 1870, Birt gives his opinion that the
lights of Plato were not effects of sunlight.
Upon the 13th of May, 1870, there was an “extraordinary display,”
according to Birt: 27 lights were seen by Pratt, and 28 by Elger, but only 4
by Gledhill, in Brighton. Atmospheric conditions may have made this
difference, or the lights may have run up or down a scale from 4 to 28. As
to independence of sunlight, Pratt says (Rept. B. A., 1871-88) as to this
display, that only the fixed, charted points so shone, and that other parts of
the crater were not illuminated, as they would have been to an incidenceht, Pratt says (Rept. B. A., 1871-88) as to this
display, that only the fixed, charted points so shone, and that other parts of
the crater were not illuminated, as they would have been to an incidence

--- PAGE BREAK ---

common throughout. In Pratt’s opinion, and, I think, in the opinion of the
other observers, these lights were volcanic. It seems to me that this opinion
arose from a feeling that there should be something of an opinion: the idea
that the lights might have been signals was not expressed by any of these
astronomers that I know of. I note that, though many observers were, at this
time, concentrating upon this one crater, there are no records find-able by
me of such disturbance of detail as might be supposed to accompany
volcanic action. The clear little lights seem to me to have been anything but
volcanic.
The play of these lights of Plato—their modulations and their
combinations—like luminous music—or a composition of signals in a code
that even in this late day may be deciphered. It was like orchestration—and
that something like a baton gave direction to Light 22, upon Aug. 12, 1870,
to shine a leading part— “remarkable increase of brightness.” No. 22
subsided, and the leading part shone out in No. 14. It, too, subsided, and
No. 16 brightened.
Perhaps there were definite messages in a Morse-like code. There is a
chance for the electricity in somebody’s imagination to start crackling. Up
to April, 1871, the selenographers had recorded 1,600 observations upon the
fluctuations of the lights of Plato, and had drawn 37 graphs of individual
lights. All graphs and other records were deposited by W. R. Birt in the
Library of the Royal Astronomical Society, where presumably they are to
this day. A Champollion may some day decipher hieroglyphics that may
have been flashed from one world to another.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ry of the Royal Astronomical Society, where presumably they are to
this day. A Champollion may some day decipher hieroglyphics that may
have been flashed from one world to another.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

O
21
UR data indicate that the planets are circulating adjacencies. Almost
do we now conceive of a difficulty of the future as being not how to
reach the planets, but how to dodge them. Especially do we warn
aviators away from that rhinoceros of the skies, Mercury. I have a note
somewhere upon one of the wickedest-looking horns in existence, sticking
out far from Mercury. I think it was Mr. Whitmell who made this
observation. I’d like to hear Andrew Barclay’s opinion upon that. I’d like to
hear Capt. Noble’s.
If sometimes does the planet Mars almost graze this earth, as is not told
by the great telescopes, which are only millionaires’ memorials, or, at least,
which reveal but little more than did the little spy glasses used by Burnham
and Williams and Beer and Mldler— but if periodically the planet Mars
comes very close to this earth, and, if Mars, an island with perhaps no more
surface-area than has England, but likely enough inhabited, like England—
June 19, 1875—opposition of Mars.
Flashes that were seen in the sky upon the 25th of June, 1875, by Charles
Gape, of Scole, Norfolk (Eng. Mec., 21-488). The Editor of Symons’ Met.
Mag. (see vol. 10-116) was interested, and sent Mr. Gape some questions,
receiving answers that nothing had appeared in the local newspapers upon
the subject, and that nothing could be learned of a display of fireworks, at
the time. To Mr. Gape the appearances seemed to be meteoric.
The year 1877—climacteric opposition of Mars.
There were some discoveries.
We have at times wondered how astronomers spend their nights. Of
course, according to many of his writings upon the subject, Richard Proctor
had an excellent knowledge of whist. But in the year 1877, two astronomers
looked up at the sky, and one of them discovered the moons of Mars, and
the other called attention to lines on Mars—and, if for centuries, the moons
of Mars could so remain unknown to all inhabitants of this earth except, as
it were, Dean Swift—why, it is no wonder that we so respectfully heed
some of the Dean’s other intuitions, and think that there may be Liliputians,unknown to all inhabitants of this earth except, as
it were, Dean Swift—why, it is no wonder that we so respectfully heed
some of the Dean’s other intuitions, and think that there may be Liliputians,

--- PAGE BREAK ---bitants of this earth except, as
it were, Dean Swift—why, it is no wonder that we so respectfully heed
some of the Dean’s other intuitions, and think that there may be Liliputians,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

or Brobdingnagians, and other forms not conventionally supposed to be. As
to our own fields of data, I have a striking number of notes upon signal-like
appearances upon the moon, in the year 1877, but have notes upon only one
occurrence that, in our interests, may relate to Mars. The occurrence is like
that of July 31, 1813, and June 19, 1875.
Sept. 5, 1877—opposition of Mars.
Sept. 7, 1877—lights appeared in the sky of Bloomington, Indiana. They
were supposed to be meteoric. They appeared and disappeared, at intervals
of three or four seconds; darkness for several minutes; then a final flash of
light. See Sci. Amer., 37-193.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
That all luminous objects that are seen in the sky when the planet Venus
is nearest may not be Venus; may not be fire-balloons :
In the Dundee Advertiser, Dec. 22, 1882, it is said that, between 10 and
11 A.M., December 21, at Broughty Ferry, Scotland, a correspondent had
seen an unknown luminous body near and a little above the sun. In the
Advertiser, December 25, is published a letter from someone who says that
this object had been seen at Dundee, also; that quite certainly it was the
planet Venus and “no other.” In Knowledge, 2-489, this story is told by a
writer who says that undoubtedly the object was Venus. But, in Knowledge,
3-13, the astronomer J. E. Gore writes that the object could not have been
Venus, which upon this date was 1 h. 33 m., R. A., west of the sun. The
observation is reviewed in L’Astronomie, 1883-109. Here it is said that the
position of Mercury accorded better. Reasonably this object could not have
been Mercury: several objections are comprehended in the statement that
superior conjunction of Mercury had occurred upon December 16.
Upon Feb. 3, 1884, M. Staevert, of the Brussels Observatory, saw, upon
the disc of Venus, an extremely brilliant point (Ciel et Terre, 5-127). Nine
days later, Niesten saw just such a point of light as this, but at a distance
from the planet. If no one had ever heard that such things cannot be, one
might think that these two observations were upon something that had been
seen leaving Venus and had then been seen farther along. Upon the 3rd of
July, 1884, a luminous object was seen moving slowly in the sky of
Norwood, N. Y. It had features that suggest the structural: a globe the size
of the moon, surrounded by a ring; two dark lines crossing the nucleus
(Science Monthly, 2-136). Upon the 26th of July, a luminous globe, size of
the moon, was seen at Cologne; it seemed to be moving upward from thisrounded by a ring; two dark lines crossing the nucleus
(Science Monthly, 2-136). Upon the 26th of July, a luminous globe, size of
the moon, was seen at Cologne; it seemed to be moving upward from this

--- PAGE BREAK ---

earth, then was stationary “some minutes,” and then continued upward until
it disappeared (Nature, 30-360). And in the English Mechanic, 40-130, it is
not said that a luminous vessel that had sailed out from Venus, in February,
visiting this earth, where it was seen in several places, was seen upon its
return to the planet, but it is said that an observer in Rochester, N. Y., had,
upon August 17, seen a brilliant point upon Venus.

--- PAGE BREAK ---it was seen in several places, was seen upon its
return to the planet, but it is said that an observer in Rochester, N. Y., had,
upon August 17, seen a brilliant point upon Venus.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

E
22
XPLOSIONS over the towns of Barisal, Bengal, if they were aerial
explosions, were continuing. As to some of these detonations that
were heard in May, 1874, a writer in Nature, 53-197, says that they
did seem to come from overhead. For a report upon the Barisal Guns, heard
between April 28, 1888, and March 1, 1889, see Proc. Asiatic Soc. of
Bengal, 1889-199.
Phenomena at Comrie were continuing. The latest date in Roper’s List of
Earthquakes is April 8, 1886, but this list goes on only a few years later.
See Knowledge, n. s., 6-145—shock and a rumbling sound at Comrie, July
12, 1894—a repetition upon the corresponding date, the next year. In the
English Mechanic, 74-155, David Packer says that, upon Sept. 17, 1901,
ribbon-like flashes of lightning, which were not ordinary lightning, were
seen in the sky (I think of Birmingham) one hour before a shock in
Scotland. According to other accounts, this shock was in Comrie and
surrounding regions (London Times, Sept. 19, 1901).
Smithson. Miscell. Cols., 37-Appendix, p. 71:
According to L. Tennyson, 4uartermaster’s Clerk, at Fort Klamath,
Oregon, at daylight, Jan. 8, 1867, the garrison was startled from sleep by
what he supposed to be an earthquake and a sound like thunder. Then came
darkness, and the sky was covered with black smoke or clouds. Then ashes,
of a brownish color, fell—”as fast as I ever saw it snow.” Half an hour later
there was another shock, described as “frightful.” No one was injured, but
the sutler’s store was thrown a distance of ninety feet, and the vibrations
lasted several minutes. Mr. Tennyson thought that somewhere near Fort
Klamath, a volcano had broken loose, because, in the direction of the
Klamath Marsh, a dark column of smoke was seen. I can find record of no
such volcanic eruption. In a list of quakes, in Oregon, from 1846, to 1916,
published in the Bull. Seis. Soc. Amer., September, 1919, not one is
attributed to volcanic eruptions. Mr. W. D. Smith, compiler of the list, says,
as to the occurrence at Fort Klamath—”If there was an eruption, where was
it"” He asks whether possibly it could have been in Lassen Peak. Butc eruptions. Mr. W. D. Smith, compiler of the list, says,
as to the occurrence at Fort Klamath—”If there was an eruption, where was
it"” He asks whether possibly it could have been in Lassen Peak. But

--- PAGE BREAK ---D. Smith, compiler of the list, says,
as to the occurrence at Fort Klamath—”If there was an eruption, where was
it"” He asks whether possibly it could have been in Lassen Peak. But

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Lassen Peak is in California, and the explosion upon Jan. 8, 1867, was so
close to Fort Klamath that almost immediately ashes fell from the sky.
The following is of the type of phenomena that might be considered
evidence of signaling from some unknown world nearby:
La Nature, 17-126—that, upon June 17, 1881, sounds like cannonading
were heard at Gabes, Tunis, and that quaking of the earth was felt, at
intervals of 32 seconds, lasting about 6 minutes.
July 30, 1883—a somewhat startling experience—steamship Resolute
alone in the Arctic Ocean—six reports like gunfire—Nature, 53-295-
In Nature, 30-19, a correspondent writes that, upon the 3rd of January,
1869, a policeman in Harlton, Cambridgeshire, heard six or seven reports,
as if of heavy guns far away. There is no findable record of an earthquake in
England upon this date. In the London Times, Jan. 12, 15, 16, 1869, several
correspondents write that upon the 9th of January a loud report had been
heard and a shock felt at places near Colchester, Essex, about 30 miles from
Harlton. One of the correspondents writes that he had heard the sound but
had felt no shock. In the London Standard, January 12, the Rev. J. F.
Bateman, of South Lopham, Norfolk, writes as to the occurrence upon the
9th—”An extraordinary vibration (described variously by my parishioners
as being ‘like a gunpowder explosion,’ ‘a big thunder clap,’ and ‘a little
earthquake’) was noticed here this morning about 11.20.” In the Morning
Post, January 14, it is said that at places about twenty miles from Colchester
it was thought that an explosion had occurred, upon the 9th, but, inasmuch
as no explosion had been heard of, the disturbance was attributed to an
earthquake. Night of January 13—an explosion in the sky, at Brighton
(Rept. B. A., 1869-307). In the Standard, January 22, a correspondent writes
from Swaffham, Norfolk, that, about 8 P.M., January 15, something of an
unknown nature had frightened flocks of sheep, which had burst from their
bounds in various places. All these occurrences were in adjoining counties
in southeastern England. Something was seen in the sky upon the 13th, and,
according to the Chudleigh Weekly Express, Jan. 13, 1869, something was
seen in the sky, night of the 10th, at Weston-super-Mare, near Bristol, in
southwestern England. It was seen between 9 and 10 o’clock, and is said to
have been an extraordinary meteor. Five hours later were felt three shocks
said to have been earthquakes.
Upon the night of March 17, 1871, there was a series of events in France,
and a series in England. A “meteor” was seen at Tours, at 8 P.M.—at 10:45, afelt three shocks
said to have been earthquakes.
Upon the night of March 17, 1871, there was a series of events in France,
and a series in England. A “meteor” was seen at Tours, at 8 P.M.—at 10:45, a

--- PAGE BREAK ---aid to have been earthquakes.
Upon the night of March 17, 1871, there was a series of events in France,
and a series in England. A “meteor” was seen at Tours, at 8 P.M.—at 10:45, a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“meteor” that left a luminous cloud over Saintes (Charante-Inferieure)—
another at Paris, 11:15, leaving a mark in the sky, of fifteen minutes’
duration—another at Tours, at 11:45 P.M. See Les Mondes, 24-190, and
Comptes Rendus, 72-789. There were “earthquakes” this night affecting
virtually all England north of the Mersey and the Trent, and also southern
parts of Scotland. As has often been the case, the phenomena were thought
to have been explosions and were then said to have been earthquakes when
no terrestrial explosions could be heard of (Symons’ Met. Mag., 6-39).
There were six shocks near Manchester, between 6 and 7 P.M., and others
about 11 P.M.; and in Lancashire about 11 P.M., and continuing in places as
far apart as Liverpool and Newcastle, until 11:30 o’clock. The shocks felt
about 11 o’clock correspond, in time, with the luminous phenomena in the
sky of France, but our way of expressing that these so-called earthquakes in
England may have been concussions from repeating explosions in the sky,
is to record that, according to correspondence in the London Times, there
were, upon the 20th, aerial phenomena in the region of Lancashire that had
been affected upon the 17th—”sounds that seemed to come from a number
of guns at a distance” and “pale flashes of lightning in the sky.”
Whether these series of phenomena be relatable to Mars or Martians or
not, we note that in 1871 opposition of Mars was upon March 19; and, in
1869, upon February 13; and in 1867 two days after the explosions at Fort
Klamath. In our records in this book, similar coincidences can be found up
to the year 1879. I have other such records not here published, and others
that will be here investigated.
There is a triangular region in England, three points of which appear so
often in our data that the region should be specially known to us, and I
know it myself as the London Triangle. It is pointed in the north by
Worcester and Hereford, in the south by Reading, Berkshire, and in the east
by Colchester, Essex. The line between Colchester and Reading runs
through London.
Upon Feb. 18, 1884, at West Mersea, near Colchester, a loud report was
heard (Nature, 53-4). Upon the 22nd of April, 1884, centering around
Colchester, occurred the severest earthquake in England in the 19th century.
For several columns of description, see the London Times, April 23. There
is a long list of towns in which there was great damage: in 24 parishes near
Colchester, 1,250 buildings were damaged. One of the places that suffered
most was West Mersea (Daily Chronicle, April 28).is a long list of towns in which there was great damage: in 24 parishes near
Colchester, 1,250 buildings were damaged. One of the places that suffered
most was West Mersea (Daily Chronicle, April 28).

--- PAGE BREAK ---wns in which there was great damage: in 24 parishes near
Colchester, 1,250 buildings were damaged. One of the places that suffered
most was West Mersea (Daily Chronicle, April 28).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There was something in the sky. According to G. P. Yeats (Observations
upon the Earthquake of Dec. 17, 1896, p. 6) there was a red appearance in
the sky over Colchester, at the time of the shock of April 22, 1884.
The next day, according to a writer in Knowledge, 5-336, a stone fell
from the sky, breaking glass in his greenhouse, in Essex. It was a quartz
stone, and unlike anything usually known as meteoritic.
The indications, according to my reading of the data, and my impressions
of such repeating occurrences as those at Fort Klamath, are that perhaps an
explosion occurred in the sky, near Colchester, upon Feb. 18, 1884; that a
great explosion did occur over Colchester, upon the 22nd of April, and that
a great volume of debris spread over England, in a northwesterly direction,
passing over Worcestershire and Shropshire, and continuing on toward
Liverpool, nucleating moisture and falling in blackest of rain. From the
Stonyhurst Observatory, near Liverpool, was reported, occurring at 11 A.M.,
April 26, “the most extraordinary darkness remembered”; forty minutes
later fell rain “as black as ink,” and then black snow and black hail (Nature,
30-6). Black hail fell at Chaigley, several miles from Liverpool (Stonyhurst
Magazine, 1-267). Five hours later, black substance fell at Crowle, near
Worcester (Nature, 30-32). Upon the 28th, at Church Stretton and Much
Wenlock, Shropshire, fell torrents of liquid like ink and water in equal
proportions (The Field, May 3, 1884). In the Jour. Roy. Met. Soc., 11-7, it is
said that, upon the 28th, half a mile from Lilleshall, Shropshire, an
unknown pink substance was brought down by a storm. Upon the 3rd of
May, black substance fell again at Crowle (Nature,
30-32).
In Nature, 30-216, a correspondent writes that, upon June 22, 1884, at
Fletching, Sussex, southwest of Colchester, there was intense darkness, and
that rain then brought down flakes of soot in such abundance that it seemed
to be “snowing black.” This was several months after the shock at
Colchester, but my datum for thinking that another explosion, or
disturbance of some kind, had occurred in the same local sky, is that, as
reported by the inmates of one house, a slight shock was felt, upon the 24th
of June, at Colchester, showing that the phenomena were continuing. See
Roper’s List of Earthquakes.
Was not the loud report heard upon February 18 probably an explosion in
the sky, inasmuch as the sound was great and the quake little" Were not
succeeding phenomena sounds and concussions and the fall of debris fromd report heard upon February 18 probably an explosion in
the sky, inasmuch as the sound was great and the quake little" Were not
succeeding phenomena sounds and concussions and the fall of debris from

--- PAGE BREAK ---

explosions in the sky, acceptably upon April 22, and perhaps continuing
until the 24th of June" Then what are the circumstances by which one small
part of this earth’s surface could continue in relation with something
somewhere else in space"
Comrie, Irkutsk, and Birmingham.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Then what are the circumstances by which one small
part of this earth’s surface could continue in relation with something
somewhere else in space"
Comrie, Irkutsk, and Birmingham.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

U
23
PON the night of the 13th of July, 1875, at midnight, two officers of
H. M. S. Coronation, in the Gulf of Siam, saw a luminous projection
from the moon’s upper limb (Nature, 12-495). Upon the 14th it was
gone, but a smaller projection was seen from another part of the moon’s
limb. This was in the period of the opposition of Mars.
Upon the night of Feb. 20, 1877, M. Trouvelot, of the Observatory of
Meudon, saw, in the lunar crater Eudoxus, which, like almost all other
centers of seeming signaling, is in the north-western quadrant of the moon,
a fine line of light (L’Astronomie, 1885-212). It was like a luminous cable
drawn across the crater.
March 21, 1877—a brilliant illumination, and not by the light of the sun,
according to C. Barrett, in the lunar crater Proclus (Eng. Mec., 25-89).
May 15 and 29, 1877—the bright spot west of Picard (Eng. Mec,
25-335).
The changes upon Linnp were first seen by Schmidt, in 1866, near the
time of opposition of Mars. In May, 1877, Dr. Klein announced that a new
object had appeared upon the moon. It was close to the center of the visible
disc of the moon, and was in a region that had been most carefully studied
by the selenographers. In the Observatory, 2-238, is Neison’s report from
his own memoranda. In the years 1874 and 1875, he had studied this part of
the moon, but had not seen this newly reported object in the crater Hyginus,
or the object, Hyginus N, according to the selenographers’ terminology. In
the Astronomical Register, 17-204, Neison lists, with details, 20 minute
examinations of this region, from July, 1870, to August, 1875, in which this
conspicuous object was not recorded.
June 14, 1877—a light on the dark part of the moon, resembling a
reflection from a moving mirror; reported by Prof. Henry Harrison
(Sidereal Messenger, 3-150). June 15—the bright spot west of Picard,
according to Birt (Jour. B. A. A., 19-376). Upon the 16th, Prof. Harrison
thought that again he saw the moving light of the 14th, but shining faintly.
In the English Mechanic, 25-432, Frank Dennett writes, as to anirt (Jour. B. A. A., 19-376). Upon the 16th, Prof. Harrison
thought that again he saw the moving light of the 14th, but shining faintly.
In the English Mechanic, 25-432, Frank Dennett writes, as to an

--- PAGE BREAK ---19-376). Upon the 16th, Prof. Harrison
thought that again he saw the moving light of the 14th, but shining faintly.
In the English Mechanic, 25-432, Frank Dennett writes, as to an

--- PAGE BREAK ---

observation of June 17, 1877—”I fancied I could detect a minute point of
light shining out of the darkness that filled Bessel.”
These are data of extraordinary activity upon the moon preceding the
climacteric opposition of Mars, early in September, 1877.
Now we have an account of an occurrence during an eclipse of the moon:
On the night of the eclipse (Aug. 27, 1877) a ball of fire, of the apparent
size of the moon, was seen, at ten minutes to eleven, dropping apparently
from cloud to cloud, and the light flashing across the road (Astro. Reg.,
1878-75).
Astro. Reg., 17-251:
Nov. 13, 1877—Hyginus N standing out with such prominence as to be
seen at the first glance;
Nov. 14, 1877—not a trace of Hyginus N, though seeing was excellent:
Oct. 3, 1878—the most conspicuous of all appearances of Hyginus N;
Oct. 4, 1878—not a trace of Hyginus N.
Upon the night of Nov. 1, 1879, again in the period of opposition of Mars
(opposition November 12) again the bright spot west of Picard (Jour B. A.
A., 19-376). But I have several records of observations upon this
appearance not in times of opposition of Mars. Whether there be any
relation with anything else or not, at five o’clock, morning of Nov. 1, 1879,
a “vivid flash” was seen and a shock was felt at West Cumberland (Nature,
21-19).
In the autumn of the year 1883, began extraordinary atmospheric effects
in the sky of this earth. For Prof. John Haywood’s description of similar
appearances upon the moon, Nov. 4, 1883, and March 29, 1884, see the
Sidereal Messenger, 3-121. They were misty light-effects upon the dark part
of the moon, not like “earth-shine.” Our expression is that so close is the
moon to this earth that it, too, may be affected by phenomena in the
atmosphere of this earth.
Something like another luminous cable, or like a shining wall, that was
seen in Aristarchus, by Trouvelot, Jan. 23, 1880 (L’Astro., 1885-215); a
speck of light in Marius, Jan. 13, 1881, by A. S. Williams (Eng. Mec., 32-
494); unexplained light in Eudoxus, by Trouvelot, May 4,1881 (L’Astro.,
1885-213); an illumination in Kepler, by Morales, Feb. 5, 1884 (L’Astro., 9-
149).
In Knowledge, 7-224, William Gray writes that, upon Feb. 19, 1885, he
saw, in Hercules, a dull, deep, reddish appearance. In L’Astronomie, 1885-in Kepler, by Morales, Feb. 5, 1884 (L’Astro., 9-
149).
In Knowledge, 7-224, William Gray writes that, upon Feb. 19, 1885, he
saw, in Hercules, a dull, deep, reddish appearance. In L’Astronomie, 1885-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

227, Lorenzo Kropp, an astronomer of Paysandu, Uruguay, writes that,
upon Feb. 21, 1885, he had seen, in Cassini, a formation not far from
Hercules, both of them in the northwestern quadrant of the moon, a reddish
smoke or mist. He had heard that several other persons had seen, not a
misty appearance, but a star-like light here, and upon the 22nd he had seen a
definite light, himself, shining like the planet Saturn.
May 11, 1885—two lights upon the moon (L’Astro., 9-73).
May 11, 1886—two lights upon the moon (L’Astro., 6-312).

--- PAGE BREAK ---had seen a
definite light, himself, shining like the planet Saturn.
May 11, 1885—two lights upon the moon (L’Astro., 9-73).
May 11, 1886—two lights upon the moon (L’Astro., 6-312).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
24
HAT through lenses rimmed with horizons, inhabitants of this earth
have seen revelations of other worlds—that atmospheric strata of
different densities are lenses—but that the faults of the wide glasses
in the observatories are so intensified in atmospheric revelations that all our
data are distortions. Our acceptance is that every mirage has a primary; that
in human mind all poetry is based upon observation, and that imagery in the
sky is similarly uncreative. If a mirage cannot be traced to the known upon
this earth, one supposes that it is either a derivation from the unknown upon
this earth, or from the unknown somewhere else. We shall have data of a
series of mirages in Sweden, or upon the shores of the Baltic, from October,
1881, to December, 1888. I take most of the data from Nature, Knowledge,
Cosmos, and L’Astronomie, published in this period. I have no data of such
appearances in this region either before or after this period: the suggestion
in my own mind is that they were not mirages from terrestrial primaries, or
they would not be so confined to one period, but were shadows or mirages
from something that was in temporary suspension over the Baltic and
Sweden, all details distorted and reported in terms of familiar terrestrial
appearances.
Oct. 10, 1881—that at Rugenwalde, Pomerania, the mirage of a village
had been seen: snow-covered roofs from which hung icicles; human forms
distinctly visible. It was believed that the mirage was a representation of the
town of Nexo, on the island of Bornholm. Rugenwalde is on the Baltic, and
Nexo is about 100 miles northwest, in the Baltic.
The first definite account of the mirages of Sweden, findable by me, is
published in Nature, June 29, 1882, where it is said that preceding instances
had attracted attention—that, in May, 1882, over Lake Orsa, Sweden,
representations of steamships had been seen, and then “islands covered with
vegetation.” Night of May 19, 1883—beams of light at Lake Ludyika,
Sweden—they looked like a representation of a lake in moonshine, with
shores covered with trees, showing faint outlines of farms (Monthly
Weather Review, May, 1883). May 28, 1883—at Finsbo, Sweden—a,
Sweden—they looked like a representation of a lake in moonshine, with
shores covered with trees, showing faint outlines of farms (Monthly
Weather Review, May, 1883). May 28, 1883—at Finsbo, Sweden—

--- PAGE BREAK ---d like a representation of a lake in moonshine, with
shores covered with trees, showing faint outlines of farms (Monthly
Weather Review, May, 1883). May 28, 1883—at Finsbo, Sweden—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

changing scenes, at short intervals: mountains, lakes, and farms. Oct. 16,
1884— Lindsberg—a large town, with four-storied houses, a castle and a
lake. May 22, 1885—Gothland—a town surrounded by high mountains, a
large vessel in front of the town. June 15, 1885—near Oxelosund—two
wooded islands, a construction upon one of them, and two warships. It is
said that at the time two Swedish warships were at sea, but were at
considerable distance north of Oxelo-sund. Sept. 12, 1885—Valla—a
representation that is said to have been a “remarkable mirage” but that is
described as if the appearances were cloud-forms—several monitors, one
changing into a spouting whale, and the other into a crocodile—then forests
—dancers—a wooded island with buildings and a park. Sept. 29, 1885—
again at Valla—between 8 and 9 o’clock, P.M.; a lurid glare upon the
northwestern horizon; a cloud bank—animals, groups of dancers, a forest,
and then a park with paths. July 15, 1888—Hudik-wall—a tempestuous sea,
and a vessel upon it; a small boat leaving the vessel. Upon Oct. 8, 1888, at
Merexull, on the Baltic, but in Russia, was seen a mirage of a city that
lasted an hour. It is said that some buildings were recognized, and that the
representation was identified with St. Petersburg, which is about 200 miles
from the Baltic.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
That a large, substantial mass, presumably of land, can be in at least
temporary suspension over a point upon this earth’s surface, and not fall,
and be, in ordinary circumstances, invisible—
In L’Astronomie, 1887-426, MM. Codde and Payan, both of them
astronomers, well-known for their conventional observations and writings,
publish accounts of an unknown body that appeared upon the sun’s limb,
for twenty or thirty seconds, after the eclipse of Aug. 19, 1887. They saw a
round body, apparent diameter about one tenth of the apparent diameter of
the sun, according to the sketch that is published. In L’Astronomie, these
two observers write separately, and, in the city of Marseilles, their
observations were made at a distance apart. But the unknown body was
seen by both upon the same part of the sun’s limb. So it is supposed that it
could not have been a balloon, nor a circular cloud, nor anything else very
near this earth. But many astronomers in other parts of Europe were
watching this eclipse, and it seems acceptable that others, besides two in
Marseilles, continued to look, immediately after the eclipse; but from
nowhere else came a report upon this object, so that all indications are thatand it seems acceptable that others, besides two in
Marseilles, continued to look, immediately after the eclipse; but from
nowhere else came a report upon this object, so that all indications are that

--- PAGE BREAK ---ble that others, besides two in
Marseilles, continued to look, immediately after the eclipse; but from
nowhere else came a report upon this object, so that all indications are that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

it was far from the sun and near Marseilles, but farther than clouds or
balloons in this local sky. I can draw no diagram that can satisfy all these
circumstances, except by supposing the sun to be only a few thousand miles
away.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
If little black stones fall four times, in eleven years, to one part of this
earth’s surface, and fall nowhere else, we are, in conceiving of a fixed
origin somewhere above a stationary earth, at least conceiving in terms of
data, and, whether we are fanatics or not, we are not of the type of other
upholders of stationariness of this earth, who care more for Moses than they
do for data. I’d not like to have it thought that we are not great admirers of
Moses, sometimes.
The rock that hung in the sky of Servia—
Upon Oct. 13, 1872, a stone fell from the sky, to this earth, near the town
of Soko-Banja, Servia. If it were not a peculiar stone, there is no force to
this datum. It is said that it was unknown stone. A name was invented for it.
The stone was called banMite, after the town near which it fell.
Seventeen years later (Dec. 1, 1889) another rock of banMite fell in
Servia, near Jelica.
For Meunier’s account of these stones, see L’Astronomie, 1890-272, and
Comptes Rendus, 92-331. Also, see La Nature, 1881-1-192. According to
Meunier these stones did fall from the sky; indigenous to this earth there are
no such stones; nowhere else have such stones fallen from the sky; they are
identical in material; they fell seventeen years apart.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
At times when we think favorably of this work of ours, we see in it a
pointing-out of an evil of modern specialization. A seismologist studies
earthquakes, and an astronomer studies meteors; neither studies both
earthquakes and meteors, and consequently each, ignorant of the data
collected by the other, sees no relation between the two phenomena. The
treatment of the event in Servia, Dec. 1, 1889, is an instance of
conventional scientific attempts to understand something by separately, or
specially, focusing upon different aspects, and not combining into an
inclusive concept. Meunier writes only upon the stones that fell from the
sky, and does not mention an earthquake at the time. Milne, in his
Catalogue of Destructive Earthquakes, lists the occurrence as ansive concept. Meunier writes only upon the stones that fell from the
sky, and does not mention an earthquake at the time. Milne, in his
Catalogue of Destructive Earthquakes, lists the occurrence as an

--- PAGE BREAK ---r writes only upon the stones that fell from the
sky, and does not mention an earthquake at the time. Milne, in his
Catalogue of Destructive Earthquakes, lists the occurrence as an

--- PAGE BREAK ---

earthquake, and does not mention stones that fell from the sky. All
combinations greatly affect the character of components: in our
combination of the two aspects, we see that the phenomenon was not an
earthquake, as earthquakes are commonly understood, though it may have
been meteoric; but was not meteoric, in ordinary terms of meteors, because
of the unlikelihood that meteors, identical in material, should, seventeen
years apart, fall upon the same part of this earth’s surface, and nowhere
else.
This occurrence was of course an explosion in the sky, and its vibrations
were communicated to the earth below, with all the effects’of any other
kind of earthquakes. Back in our earliest confusion of the data of a
century’s first quarter, we had awareness of this combination and its
conventional misinterpretation: that many concussions that have been
communicated from explosions in the sky have been catalogued in lists of
subterranean earthquakes. We are farther along now, in our data of the 19th
century, and now we come across awareness, in other minds, of this
distinguishment. At 8:20 A.M., Nov. 20, 1887, was heard and felt something
that was reported from many places in the region that is known to us as the
London Triangle, as an earthquake, though in some towns it was thought
that a great explosion, perhaps in London, had occurred. It was reported
from Reading, and from four towns near Reading, and Reading is said to be
one of the places where the concussion was greatest. There were several
accounts of slight alarm among sheep, which are sensitive to meteors and
earthquakes. But, in Symons’ Met. Mag., Mr. H. G. Fordham wrote that the
occurrence was not an earthquake; that a meteor had exploded. He had very
little to base this opinion upon: out of scores of descriptions, he had record
of only two assertions that something had been seen in the sky.
Nevertheless, because the sound was so much greater than the concussion,
Mr. Fordham came to his conclusion.
In Symons’ Met. Mag., 23-154, Dr. R. H. Wake writes that, upon the
evening of Nov. 3, 1888, in a region about four miles wide and ten or
fifteen miles long, in the Thames Valley (near Reading) flocks of sheep had
rushed from their folds in a common alarm. About a year later, in the
Chiltern Hills, which extend in a northeasterly direction from the Thames
Valley, near Reading, there was another such occurrence. In the London
Standard, Nov. 7, 1889, the Rev. J. Ross Barker, of Chesham, a town about
25 miles northeast of Reading, writes that, upon Oct. 25, 1889, many flocks, there was another such occurrence. In the London
Standard, Nov. 7, 1889, the Rev. J. Ross Barker, of Chesham, a town about
25 miles northeast of Reading, writes that, upon Oct. 25, 1889, many flocks

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of sheep, in a region of 30 square miles, had, by common impulse, broken
from their folds. Mr. Barker asks whether anyone knew of a meteor or of an
earthquake at the time. In vol. 24, Symons’ Met. Mag., Mr. Symons accepts
that all three of these occurrences were effects of meteoric explosions in the
sky. The phenomena are insignificant relatively to some that we have
considered: the significance is in this definite recognition in orthodoxy,
itself, that some supposed earthquakes, or effects of supposed earthquakes,
are reactions to explosions in the sky.

--- PAGE BREAK ---: the significance is in this definite recognition in orthodoxy,
itself, that some supposed earthquakes, or effects of supposed earthquakes,
are reactions to explosions in the sky.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

E
25
XPLODING monasteries that shoot out clouds of monks into
cyclonic formations with stormy nuns similarly dispossessed or
collapsing monasteries—sometimes slowly crumbling confines of the
cloistered—by which we typify all things: that all developments pass
through a process of walling-away within shells that will break. Once upon
a time there was a shell around the United States. The shell broke. Some
other things were smashed.
The doctrines of great distances among heavenly bodies, and of a moving
earth are the strongest elements of Exclusionism: the mere idea of
separations by millions of miles discourages thoughts of communication
with other worlds; and only to think that this earth shoots through space at a
velocity of 19 miles a second puts an end to speculation upon how to leave
it and how to return. But, if these two conventions be features of a walling-
away like that of a chick within its shell, or that of the United States within
its boundaries, and if some day all such confinements of the embryonic
break, our own prophecy, in the vague terms of all successful prophecies, is
that a matured view of astronomic phenomena will be from a litter of
broken demonstrations.
Our expression now is upon the function of Isolation in Development.
Specially it is not ours, because I think we learned it from the biologists, but
we are applying it generally. If the general expression be accepted, we
conceive that functionally have the astronomers taught that planets are
millions of miles away, and that this earth moves at such terrific velocity
that it is encysted with speed. Whether isolations function or not, that
exclusions that break down are typical of all developments is signified by
data upon all growing things, beginning with the aristocratic seeds, which,
however, liberalize to intercourse with mean materials or die. All animal-
organisms are at first walled away. In human circumstances conditions are
the same. The development of every science has been a series of temporary
exclusions, and the story of every industry tells of inventions that were
resisted, but that were finally admitted. At the beginning of the nineteentht of every science has been a series of temporary
exclusions, and the story of every industry tells of inventions that were
resisted, but that were finally admitted. At the beginning of the nineteenth

--- PAGE BREAK ---as been a series of temporary
exclusions, and the story of every industry tells of inventions that were
resisted, but that were finally admitted. At the beginning of the nineteenth

--- PAGE BREAK ---

century, Hegel published his demonstration that there could be only seven
planets: too late to recall the work, he learned that Ceres had been
discovered. It is our expression that the mental state of Hegel partook of a
general spirit of his time, and that it was necessary, or that it functioned,
because early astronomers could scarcely have systematized their doctrine
had they been bewildered by seven or eight hundred planetary bodies; and
that, besides the functions of the astronomers, according to our expressions,
there was also their usefulness in breaking down the walls of the older, and
outlived, orthodoxy. We conceive that it is well that a great deal of
experience should be withheld from children, and that, any way, in their
early years, they are sexually isolated, for instance, and our idea is that our
data have been held back by no outspoken conspiracy, but by an inhibition
similar to that by which a great deal of biology, for instance, is not taught to
children. But, if we think of something of this kind, equally acceptable is it
that even in the face of orthodox principles, these data have been preserved
in orthodox publications, and that, in the face of supposed principles of
Darwinism, as applied generally they have survived, though not in harmony
with their environment.
Tons of paper have been consumed by calculations upon the remoteness
of stars and planets. But I can find nothing that has been calculated, or said,
that is sounder than Mr. Shaw’s determination that the moon is 37 miles
away. It is that the Vogels and the Struves and the Newcombs have been
functionally hypnotized and have usefully spread the embryonic delusion
that there is a vast, untraversible expanse of space around this earth, or that
they have had some basis that it has been my misfortune to be unable to
find, or that there is no pleasant and unaccusatory way of explaining them.
April 10, 1874—a luminous object that exploded in the sky of
Kuttenberg, Bohemia. It is said that the glare was like sunlight, and that the
“terrifying flash” was followed by a detonation that rumbled about a
minute. April 9, 1876—an explosion that is said to have been violent, over
the town of Rosenau, Hungary. See Rept. B. A., 1877-147.
These two objects which appeared in virtually the same local sky of this
earth—points of explosion 250 miles apart—came from virtually the same
point in the sky: constellation of Cassiopeia; different by two degrees in
right ascension, and with no difference in declination. About the same time
in the evening: one at 8:09 P.M., and the other at 8:20 P.M. Same night in the
year, according to extra-terrestrial calendars: the year 1876 was a leap year.erence in declination. About the same time
in the evening: one at 8:09 P.M., and the other at 8:20 P.M. Same night in the
year, according to extra-terrestrial calendars: the year 1876 was a leap year.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n. About the same time
in the evening: one at 8:09 P.M., and the other at 8:20 P.M. Same night in the
year, according to extra-terrestrial calendars: the year 1876 was a leap year.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

If they had been ordinary meteors, by coincidence two ordinary meteors
of the same stream might, exactly two years apart, come from almost the
same point in the heavens and strike almost the same point over this earth.
But they were two of the most extraordinary occurrences in the records of
explosions in the sky. Coincidences multiply, or these objects did come
from the not far-distant constellation Cassiopeia, and their striking so
closely together indicates that this earth is stationary; and something of the
purposeful may be thought of. Serially related to these events, or
representing some more coincidence, there had been, upon June 9, 1866, a
tremendous explosion in the sky of Knysahinya, Hungary, and about a
thousand stones had fallen from the sky (Rept. B. A., 1867-430). Rosenau
and Knysahinya are about 75 miles apart. Of course one can very much
extend our own circumscribed little notions, and think of the firing of
projectiles from beyond the stars, just as one can think of our unknown
lands as being not in the immediate sky of Servia or Birmingham or
Comrie, but as being beyond the nearby stars, reducing everything more
than we have reduced—but the firing of stones to this earth seems crude to
me. Of course, objects, or fragments of objects made of steel, like the
manufactured steel of this earth, have fallen to this earth, and are now in
collections of “meteorites.” There is a story in a book that is not very
accessible to us, because it can’t be found along with C. R., or Eng. Mec., or
L’ Astro., of tablets of stone that were once upon a time fired to this earth. It
may be that inhabitants of this earth have been receiving instructions ever
since, engravings arriving very badly damaged, however.
I have data upon repeating appearances, said to have been “auroral,” in a
local sky. If they were auroral, repetitions at regular intervals and so
localized are challengers to the most resolute of explainers. If they were of
extra-mundane origin, they indicate that this earth is stationary. The
regularity is suggestive of signaling. For instance—a light in the sky of
Lyons, N. Y., Dec. 9, 1891, Jan. 5, Feb. 2, Feb. 29, March 27, April 23,
1892. In the Scientific American, May 7, 1892, Dr. M. A. Veeder writes that,
from Dec. 9, 1891, to April 23, 1892, there had been a bright light that he
calls “auroral” in the sky of Lyons, every 27th night. He associates the
lights with the sun’s synodic period, and says that upon each of the days
preceding a nocturnal display, there had been a disturbance in the sun. How
a disturbance in the sun could, at night, sun somewhere near the antipodes
of Lyons, N. Y., so localize its effects, one can’t clear up. In Nature, 46-29,there had been a disturbance in the sun. How
a disturbance in the sun could, at night, sun somewhere near the antipodes
of Lyons, N. Y., so localize its effects, one can’t clear up. In Nature, 46-29,

--- PAGE BREAK ---sturbance in the sun. How
a disturbance in the sun could, at night, sun somewhere near the antipodes
of Lyons, N. Y., so localize its effects, one can’t clear up. In Nature, 46-29,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dr. Veeder associates the phenomena with the synodic period of the sun, but
he says that this period is of 27 days, 6 hours, and 47 minutes, noting that
this period is inconsistent with the phenomena at Lyons, making more than
a day’s difference in the time of his records. This precise determination is
more of the “exact science” that is driving some of us away from
refinements into hoping for caves. Different parts of the sun move at
different rates: I have read of sun spots that moved diagonally across the
sun.
In Nature, 15-451, a correspondent writes that, at 8:55 P.M., he saw a large
red star in Serpens, where he had never seen such an appearance before—
Gunnersbury, March 17, 1877. Ten minutes later, the object increased and
decreased several times, flashing like the revolving light of a lighthouse,
then disappearing. This correspondent writes that, about 10 P.M., he saw a
great meteor. He suggests no relation between the two appearances, but
there may have been relation, and there may be indication of something that
was stationary at least one hour over Gunnersbury, because the object said
to have been a “meteor” was first seen at Gunnersbury. In the Observatory,
1-20, Capt. Tupman writes that, at 9:57 o’clock, a great meteor was seen
first at Frome, Tetbury, and Gunnersbury. The red object might not have
been in the local sky of Gunnersbury; might have been in the constellation
Serpens, unseen in all the rest of the world.
There is a great field of records of “meteors” that, with no parallax, or
with little parallax, or with little parallax that may be accounted for by
supposing that observations were not quite simultaneous, have been seen to
come as if from a star or from a planet, and that may have come from such
points, indicating that they are not far away. For instance, Rept. B. A., 1879-
77 —the great meteor of Sept. 5, 1868. It was seen, at Zurich, Switzerland,
to come from a point near Jupiter; at Tremont, France, origin was so close
to Jupiter that this object and the planet were seen in the same telescopic
field; at Bergamo, Italy, it was seen five or six degrees from Jupiter. Zurich
is about 140 miles from Bergamo, and Tremont is farther from Zurich and
Bergamo than that.
So there are data that indicate that objects have come to this earth from
planets or from stars, enforcing our idea that the remotest planet is not so
far from this earth as the moon is said, conventionally, to be; and that the
stars, all equi-distant from this earth might be reached by traveling from this
earth. One notices that I always conclude that, if phenomena repeatedlyoon is said, conventionally, to be; and that the
stars, all equi-distant from this earth might be reached by traveling from this
earth. One notices that I always conclude that, if phenomena repeatedly

--- PAGE BREAK ---

occur in one local sky of this earth, their origin is traceable to a fixed place
over a stationary earth. The fixed place over this earth is indicated, but that
fixed place—island of space, foreign coast, whatever it may be—may be
conceived of as accompanying this earth in its rotations and revolutions
around the sun. Accepting that nothing much is known of gravitation; that
gravitational astronomy is a myth; that attraction may extend but a few
miles around this earth, if I can think of something hanging unsupported in
space, I always think of an island, say, over Birmingham, or Irkutsk, or
Comrie, as soon flying off by the centrifugal force of a rotating earth, or as
being soon left behind in a rush around the sun. Nevertheless there is good
room for discussion here. But when it comes to other orders of data, I find
one convergence toward the explanation that this earth is stationary. But the
subject is supposed to be sacred. One must not think that this earth is
stationary. One must not investigate. To think upon this subject, except as
one is told to think, is, or seems to be considered, impious.
But how can one account for an earth that moves"
By thinking that something started it and that nothing ever stopped it.
Earth that doesn’t move"
That nothing ever started it.
Some more sacrilege.

--- PAGE BREAK ---account for an earth that moves"
By thinking that something started it and that nothing ever stopped it.
Earth that doesn’t move"
That nothing ever started it.
Some more sacrilege.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
26
F a grasshopper could hop on a cannon ball, passing overhead, I could
conceive, perhaps, how something, from outer space, could flit to a
moving earth, explore a while, and then hop off.
But suppose we have to accept that there have been instances of just such
enterprise and agility, relatively to the planet Venus. Irrespective of our
notion that it may be that sometimes a vessel sails to this earth from Venus
and returns, there are striking data indicating that, whether conceivable or
not, luminous objects have appeared from somewhere, or presumably from
outer space, and have been seen temporarily suspended over the planet
Venus. This is in accord with our indications that there are regions in the
sky suspended over and near this earth. It looks bad for our inference that
this earth is stationary, but it is the supposed rotary motion of this earth
more than the supposed orbital motion that seems to us would dislodge such
neighboring bodies; and all astronomers, except those who say that Venus
rotates in about 24 hours, say that Venus rotates in about 224 days, a
velocity that would generate little centrifugal force.
I have a note upon a determined luminosity that was bent upon Saturn, as
its objective. In the English Mechanic, 63-496, a correspondent writes that,
upon July 13, 1896, he saw, through his telescope, from 10 until after 11:15
P.M., after which the planet was too near the horizon for good seeing, a
luminous object moving near Saturn. He saw it pass several small stars. “It
was certainly going toward Saturn at a good rate.” There may be swifts of
the sky that can board planets. If they can swoop on and off an earth
moving at a rate of 19 miles a second, disregarding rotation, because
entrance at a pole may be thought of, why, then, for all I know smaller
things do ride on cannon balls. Of course if our data that indicate that the
supposed solar system, or the geo-system, is to an enormous degree smaller
than is conventionally taught be accepted, the orbital velocity of Venus is
far cut down.
About the last of August, 1873—Brussels; eight o’clock in the evening—
rising above the horizon, into a clear sky, was seen a star-like object. Itepted, the orbital velocity of Venus is
far cut down.
About the last of August, 1873—Brussels; eight o’clock in the evening—
rising above the horizon, into a clear sky, was seen a star-like object. It

--- PAGE BREAK ---elocity of Venus is
far cut down.
About the last of August, 1873—Brussels; eight o’clock in the evening—
rising above the horizon, into a clear sky, was seen a star-like object. It

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mounted higher and higher, until, about ten minutes later, it disappeared (La
Nature, 1873-239). It seems that this conspicuous object did appear in a
local sky, and was therefore not far from this earth. If it were not a fire-
balloon, one supposes that it did come from outer space, and then returned.
Perhaps a similar thing that visited the moon, and was then seen sailing
away—in the Astronomical Register, 23-205, Prof. Schafarik, of Prague,
writes that upon April 24, 1874, he saw “an object of so peculiar a nature
that I do not know what to make of it.” He saw a dazzling white object
slowly traversing the disc of the moon. He had not seen it approaching the
moon. He watched it after it left the moon. Sept. 27, 1881—South Africa —
an object that was seen near the moon, by Col. Markwick—like a comet but
moving rapidly (Jour. Liverpool Astro. Soc., 7-117).
Our chief interest is in objects, like ships, that have “boarded” this
moving earth with the agility of a Columbus who could dodge a San
Salvador and throw out an anchor to an American coast screeching past him
at a rate of 19 miles a second, or in objects that have come as close as
atmospheric conditions, or unknown conditions, would permit to the bottom
of a kind of stationary sea. We now graduate Capt. Noble to the extra-
geographic fold. In Knowledge, 4-173, Capt. Noble writes that, at 10:35
o’clock, night of Aug. 28, 1883, he saw in the sky something “like a new
and most glorious comet.” First he saw something like the tail of a comet,
or it was like a searchlight, according to Capt. Noble’s sketch of it in
Knowledge. Then Capt. Noble saw the nucleus from which this light came.
It was a brilliant object. Upon page 207, W. K. Bradgate writes that, at
12:40 A.M., August 29, at Liverpool, he saw an object like the planet Jupiter,
a ray of light emanating from it. Upon the nights of September 11 and 13,
Prof. Swift saw, at Rochester, N. Y., an unknown object like a comet,
perhaps in the local sky of Rochester, inasmuch as it was reported from
nowhere else (Observatory, 6-345). In Knowledge, 4-219, Mrs. Harbin
writes that, upon the night of September 21, at Yeovil, she saw the same
brilliant searchlight-like light that had been seen by Capt. Noble, but that it
had disappeared before she could turn her telescope upon it. And several
months later (November, 1883) a similar object was seen obviously not far
away, but in the local sky of Porto Rico and then of Ohio (Amer. Met. Jour.,
1-110, and Sci. Amer., 50-40, 97). It may be better not to say at this time
that we have data for thinking that a vessel carrying something like a
searchlight, visited this earth, and explored for several months over regions0-40, 97). It may be better not to say at this time
that we have data for thinking that a vessel carrying something like a
searchlight, visited this earth, and explored for several months over regions

--- PAGE BREAK ---

as far apart as England and Porto Rico. Just at present it is enough to record
that something that was presumably not a fire-balloon appeared in the sky
of England, close to this earth, if seen nowhere else, and in two hours
traversed the distance of about 200 miles between Sussex and Liverpool.
Aug. 22, 1885—Saigon, Cochin-China—according to Lieut. Rpveillere,
of the vessel Guiberteau—object like a magnificent red star, but larger than
the planet Venus—it moved no faster than a cloud in a moderate wind;
observed 7 or 8 minutes, then disappearing behind clouds (C. R., 101-680).
In this book it is my frustrated desire to subordinate the theme of this
earth’s stationariness. My subject is New Lands—things, objects, beings
that are, or may be, the data of coming expansions—
But the stationariness of this earth cannot be subordinated. It is crucial.
Again—there is no use discussing possible explorations beyond this
earth, if this earth moves at a rate of 19 miles a second, or 19 miles a
minute.
As to voyagers who may come to or near this earth from other planets—
how could they leave and return to swiftly moving planets" According to
our principles of Extra-geography, the planets move part of the time with
the revolving stars, the remotest planets remaining in, under, or near one
constellation years at a time. Any thing that could reach, and then travel
from, a swiftly revolving constellation in the ecliptic could arrive at a stellar
polar region, where, relatively to a central, stationary body, there is no
motion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---and then travel
from, a swiftly revolving constellation in the ecliptic could arrive at a stellar
polar region, where, relatively to a central, stationary body, there is no
motion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
27
T may be that we now add to our sins the horse that swam in the sky.
For all I know, we contribute to a wider biology. In the New York Times,
July 8, 1878, is published a dispatch from Parkersburg, West Virginia:
that, about July 1, 1878, three or four farmers had seen, in a cloudless sky,
apparently half a mile high, “an opaque substance.” It looked like a white
horse, “swimming in the clear atmosphere.” It is said to have been a mirage
of a horse in some distant field. If so, it is interesting not only because it
was opaque, but because of a selection or preference: the field itself was not
miraged.
Black bodies and the dark rabbles of the sky—and that rioting thing,
from floating anarchies, have often spotted the sun. Then, by all that is
compensatory, in the balances of existence, there are disciplined forces in
space. In the Scientific American, 44-291, it is said that, according to
newspapers of Delaware, Maryland, and Virginia, figures had been seen in
the sky in the latter part of September, and the first week in October, 1881,
reports that “exhibited a mediaeval condition of intelligence scarcely less
than marvelous.” The writer suggests that, though probably something had
been seen in the sky, it was only an aurora. Our own intelligence and that of
astronomers and meteorologists and everybody else with whom we have
had experience had better not be discussed, but the accusation of
medi valism is something that we’re sensitive about, and we hasten to the
Monthly Weather Review, and if that doesn’t give us a modern touch, I
mistake the sound of it. Monthly Weather Review, September and October,
1881—an auroral display in Maryland and New York, upon the 23rd of
September; all other auroras in September far north of the three states in
which it was said phenomena were seen. October—no auroras until the
18th; that one in the north. There was a mirage upon September 23, but at
Indianola; two instances in October, but late in the month, and in northern
states.
It is said, in the Scientific American, that, according to the Warrentown
(Va.) Solid South, a number of persons had seen white-robed figures in theber, but late in the month, and in northern
states.
It is said, in the Scientific American, that, according to the Warrentown
(Va.) Solid South, a number of persons had seen white-robed figures in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---month, and in northern
states.
It is said, in the Scientific American, that, according to the Warrentown
(Va.) Solid South, a number of persons had seen white-robed figures in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sky, at night. The story in the Richmond Dispatch is that many persons had
seen, or had thought they had seen, an alarming sight in the sky, at night: a
vast number of armed, uniformed soldiers drilling. Then a dispatch from
Wilmington, Delaware—platoons of angels marching and countermarching
in the sky, their white robes and helmets gleaming. Similar accounts came
from Laurel and Talbot. Several persons said that they had seen, in the sky,
the figure of President Garfield, who had died not long before. Our general
acceptance is that all reports upon such phenomena are colored in terms of
appearances and subjects uppermost in minds.
L’Astronomie, 1888-392:
That, about the first of August, 1888, near Warasdin, Hungary, several
divisions of infantry, led by a chief, who waved a flaming sword, had been
seen in the sky, three consecutive days, marching several hours a day. The
writer in L’Astronomie says that in vain does one try to explain that this
appearance was a mirage of terrestrial soldiers marching at a distance from
Warasdin, because widespread publicity and investigation had disclosed no
such soldiers. Even if there had been terrestrial soldiers near Warasdin
repeating mirages localized would call for explanation.
But that there may be space-armies, from which reflections or shadows
or Brocken specters are sometimes cast—a procession that crossed the sun:
forms that moved, or that marched, sometimes four abreast; observation by
M. Bruguipre, at Marseilles, April 15 and 16, 1883 (L’Astro., 5-70). An
army that was watched, forty minutes, by M. Jacquot, Aug. 30, 1886
(L’Astro., 1886-71) —things or beings that seemed to march and to counter-
march: all that moved in the same direction, moved in parallel lines. In
L’Année Scientifique, 29-8, there is an account of observations by M.
Trouvelot, Aug. 29, 1871. He saw objects, some round, some triangular, and
some of complex forms. Then occurred something that at least suggests that
these things were not moving in the wind, nor sustained in space by the
orbital forces of meteors; that each was depending upon its own powers of
flight, and that an accident occurred to one of them. All of them, though
most of the time moving with great rapidity, occasionally stopped, but then
one of them fell toward the earth, and the indications are that it was a heavy
body, and had not been sustained by the wind, which would scarcely
suddenly desert one of its flotsam and continue to sustain all the others. The
thing fell, oscillating from side to side like a disc falling through water.sustained by the wind, which would scarcely
suddenly desert one of its flotsam and continue to sustain all the others. The
thing fell, oscillating from side to side like a disc falling through water.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd, which would scarcely
suddenly desert one of its flotsam and continue to sustain all the others. The
thing fell, oscillating from side to side like a disc falling through water.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

New York Sun, March 16, 1890—that, at 4 o’clock, in the afternoon of
March 12th, in the sky of Ashland, Ohio, was seen a representation of a
large, unknown city. By some persons it was supposed to be a mirage of the
town of Mansfield, thirty miles away; other observers thought that they
recognized Sandusky, sixty miles away. “The more superstitious declared
that it was a vision of the New Jerusalem.”
May have been a revelation of heaven, and for all I know heaven may
resemble Sandusky, and those of us who have no desire to go to Sandusky
may ponder that point, but our own expression is that things have been
pictured in the sky, and have not been traced to terrestrial origins, but have
been interpreted always in local terms. Probably a living thing in the sky—
seen by farmers—a horse. Other things, or far-refracted images, or shadows
—and they were supposed to be vast lions or soldiers or angels, all
according to preconceived ideas. Representations that have been seen in
India— Hindoo costumes described upon them. Suppose that, in the
afternoon of Jan. 17, 1892, there was a battle in the sky of Montana— we
know just about in what terms the description would be published. Brooklyn
Eagle, Jan. 18, 1892—a mirage in the sky of Lewiston, Montana—Indians
and hunters alternately charging and retreating. The Indians were in
superior numbers and captured the hunters. Then details—hunters tied to
stakes; the piling of faggots; etc. “So far as could be ascertained last night,
the Indians on the reservations are peaceable.” I think that we’re peaceable
enough, but, unless the astronomers can put us on reservations, where we’ll
work out expressions in beads and wampum instead of data, we’ll have to
carry on a conflict with the vacant minds to which appear mirages of their
own emptiness in the sometimes swarming skies.
Altogether there are many data indicating that vessels and living things of
space do come close to this earth, but there is absence of data of beings that
have ever landed upon this earth, unless someone will take up the idea that
Kaspar Hauser, for instance, came to this earth from some other physical
world. Whether spacarians have ever dredged down here or not, or “sniped”
down here, pouncing, assailing, either wantonly, or in the interests of their
sciences, there are data of seeming seizures and attacks from somewhere,
and I have strong objections against lugging in the fourth dimension,
because then I am no better off, wondering what the fifth and sixth are like.
In La Nature, 1888-2-66, M. Adrian Arcelin writes that, while excavating
near de Solutrp, in August, 1878, upon a day, described as superbe, skyetter off, wondering what the fifth and sixth are like.
In La Nature, 1888-2-66, M. Adrian Arcelin writes that, while excavating
near de Solutrp, in August, 1878, upon a day, described as superbe, sky

--- PAGE BREAK ---what the fifth and sixth are like.
In La Nature, 1888-2-66, M. Adrian Arcelin writes that, while excavating
near de Solutrp, in August, 1878, upon a day, described as superbe, sky

--- PAGE BREAK ---

clear to a degree said to have been parfaitement, several dozen sheets of
wrapping paper upon the ground suddenly rose. Nearby were a dozen men,
and not one of them had felt a trace of wind. A strong force had seized upon
these conspicuous objects, touching nothing else. According to M. Arcelin,
the dust on the ground under and around was not disturbed. The sheets of
paper continued upward, and disappeared in the sky.
A powerful force that swooped upon a fishing vessel, raising it so far that
when it fell back it sank—see London Times, Sept. 24, 1875. A quarter of a
mile away were other vessels, from which set out rescuers to the sailors
who had been thrown into the sea. There was no wind: the rescuers could
not use sails, but had to row their boats.
Upon Oct. 2, 1875, a man was trundling a cart from Schaff-hausen, near
Beringen, Germany. His right arm was perforated from front to back, as if
by a musket ball (Pop. Sci., 15-566). This man had two companions. He had
heard a whirring sound, but his companions had heard nothing. At one side
of the road there were laborers in a field, but they were not within gunshot
distance. Whatever the missile may have been, it was unfindable.
La Nature, 1879-1-166, quotes the Courrier des Ardennes as to an
occurrence in the Commune Signy-le-Pettit, Easter Sunday, 1879—a
conspicuous, isolated house—suddenly its slate roof shot into the air, and
then fell to the ground. There had not been a trace of wind. The writer of the
account says that the force, which he calls a trouble inoui had so singled out
this house that nothing in its surroundings beyond a distance of thirty feet
had been disturbed.
Scientific American, July 10, 1880—that, according to the Plaindealer, of
East Kent, Ontario, two citizens of East Kent were in a field, and heard a
loud report. They saw stones shooting upward from a field. They examined
the spot, which was about 16 feet in diameter, finding nothing to suggest an
explanation of the occurrence. It is said that there had been neither a
whirlwind nor anything else by which to explain.
It may be that witnesses have seen human beings dragged from our own
existence either into the objectionable fourth dimension, perhaps then
sifting into the fifth, or up to the sky by some exploring thing. I have data,
but they are from the records of psychic research. For instance, a man has
been seen walking along a road—sudden disappearance. Explanation—that
he was not a living human being, but an apparition that had disappeared. I
have not been able to develop such data, finding, for instance, that someoneng a road—sudden disappearance. Explanation—that
he was not a living human being, but an apparition that had disappeared. I
have not been able to develop such data, finding, for instance, that someone

--- PAGE BREAK ---appearance. Explanation—that
he was not a living human being, but an apparition that had disappeared. I
have not been able to develop such data, finding, for instance, that someone

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in the neighborhood had been reported missing; but it may be that we can
find material in our own field.
Upon Dec. 10, 1881, Walter Powell and two companions ascended from
Bath in the Government balloon Saladin (Valentine and Tom-linson, Travels
in Space, p. 227). The balloon descended at Brid-port, coast of the English
Channel. Two of the aeronauts got out, but the balloon, with Powell in it,
shot upward. There was a report that the balloon had been seen to fall in the
English Channel, near Bridport, but according to Capt. Temple, one of
Powell’s companions, probably something thrown from the balloon had
been seen to fall.
A balloon is lost near or over the sea. If it should fall into the sea it would
probably float and for considerable time be a conspicuous object;
nevertheless the disappearance of a balloon last seen over the English
Channel, cannot, without other circumstances, be considered very
mysterious. Now one expects to learn of reports from many places of
supposed balloons that had been seen. But the extraordinary circumstance is
that reports came in upon a luminous object that was seen in the sky at the
time that this balloon disappeared. In the London Times, it is said that a
luminous object had been seen, evening of the 13th, moving in various
directions in the sky near Cherbourg. It is said that upon the night of the
16th three customhouse guards, at Laredo, Spain, had seen something like a
balloon in the sky, and had climbed a mountain in order to see it better, but
that it had shot out sparks and had disappeared—and had been reported
from Bilbao, Spain, the next day. In the Morning Post, it is said that this
luminous display was the chief feature; that it was this sparkling that had
made the object visible. In the Standard, December 16, is an account of
something that was seen in the sky, five o’clock, morning of December 15,
by Capt. McBain, of the steamship Countess of Aberdeen, off the coast of
Scotland, 25 miles from Montrose. Through glasses, the object seemed to
be a light attached to something thought to be the car of a balloon,
increasing and decreasing in size—a large light—”as large as the light at
Girdleness.” It moved in a direction opposite to that of the wind, though
possibly with wind of an upper stratum. It was visible half an hour, and
when it finally disappeared, was moving toward Bervie, a town on the
Scottish coast about 12 miles north of Montrose. In the Morning Post it is
said that the explanation is simple: that someone in Monfreith, 8 miles from
Dundee, had, late in the evening of the 15th, sent up a fire-balloon, “whichs north of Montrose. In the Morning Post it is
said that the explanation is simple: that someone in Monfreith, 8 miles from
Dundee, had, late in the evening of the 15th, sent up a fire-balloon, “which

--- PAGE BREAK ---In the Morning Post it is
said that the explanation is simple: that someone in Monfreith, 8 miles from
Dundee, had, late in the evening of the 15th, sent up a fire-balloon, “which

--- PAGE BREAK ---

had been carried along the coast by a gentle breeze, and, after burning all
night, extinguished and collapsed off Montrose, early on Thursday morning
(16th).” This story of a balloon that wafted to Montrose, and that was
evidently traced until it collapsed near Montrose does not so simply explain
an object that was seen 25 miles from Montrose. In the Standard, December
19, it is said that two bright lights were seen over Dartmouth Harbor, upon
the nth.
Walter Powell was Member of Parliament for Malmesbury, and had
many friends, some of whom started immediately to search. His relatives
offered a reward. A steamboat searched the Channel, and did not give up
until the 13th; fishing vessels kept on searching. A “sweeping expedition”
was organized, and the coast guard was doubled, searching the shore for
wreckage, but not a fragment of the balloon, nor from the balloon, except a
thermometer in a bag, was found.
In L’Astronomie, 1886-312, Prof. Paroisse, of the College Barsur-Aube,
quotes two witnesses of a curieux phénomenq that occurred in a garden of
the College, May 22, 1886—cloudless sky; wind tres faible. Within a small
circle in the garden were some baskets and ashes and a window frame that
weighed sixty kilograms. These things suddenly rose from the ground. At a
height of about forty feet, they remained suspended several minutes, then
falling back to the place from which they had risen. Not a thing outside this
small circle had been touched by the seizure. The witnesses said that they
had felt no disturbance in the air.
Scientific American, 56-65—that in June, 1886, according to the London
Times, ³a well-known official” was entering Pall Mall, when he felt a
violent blow on the shoulder and heard a hissing sound. There was no one
in sight except a distant policeman. At home, he found that the nap of his
coat looked as if a hot wire had been pressed against the cloth, in a long,
straight line. No missile was found, but it was thought that something of a
meteoritic nature had struck him.
Charleston News and Courier, Nov. 25, 1886—that, at Edina, Mo.,
November 23, a man and his three sons were pulling corn on a farm.
Nothing is said of meteorologic conditions, and, for all I know, they may
have been pulling corn in a violent thunder storm. Something that is said to
have been lightning flashed from the sky. The man was slightly injured, one
son killed, the other seriously injured—the third had disappeared. “Whata violent thunder storm. Something that is said to
have been lightning flashed from the sky. The man was slightly injured, one
son killed, the other seriously injured—the third had disappeared. “What

--- PAGE BREAK ---torm. Something that is said to
have been lightning flashed from the sky. The man was slightly injured, one
son killed, the other seriously injured—the third had disappeared. “What

--- PAGE BREAK ---

has become of him is not known, but it is supposed that he was blinded or
crazed by the shock, and wandered away.”
Brooklyn Eagle, March 17,1891—that, at Wilkes-Barre, Pa., March 16th,
two men were “lifted bodily and carried considerable distance in a
whirlwind.” It was a powerful force, but nothing else was affected by it.
Upon the same day, there was an occurrence in Brooklyn. In the New York
Times, March 17, 1891, it is said that two men, Smith Morehouse, of
Orange Co., N. Y., and William Owen, of Sussex Co., N. J., were walking in
Vanderbilt Avenue, Brooklyn, about 2 o’clock, afternoon of the 16th, when
a terrific explosion occurred close to the head of Morehouse, injuring him
and stunning Owen, the flash momentarily blinding both. More-house’s
face was covered with marks like powder-marks, and his tongue was
pierced. With no one else to accuse, the police arrested Owen, but held him
upon the technical charge of intoxication. Morehouse was taken to a
hospital, where a splinter of metal, considered either brass or copper, but
not a fragment of a cartridge, was removed from his tongue. No other
material could be found, though an object of considerable size had
exploded. Morehouse’s hat had been perforated in six places by unfindable
substances. According to witnesses there had been no one within a hundred
feet of the men. One witness had seen the flash before the explosion, but
could not say whether it had been from something falling or not. In the
Brooklyn Eagle, March 17, 1891, it is said that neither of the men had a
weapon of any kind, and that there had been no disagreement between
them. According to a witness, they had been under observation at the time
of the explosion, her attention having been attracted by their rustic
appearance.
There is an interesting merging here of the findable and the un-findable. I
suppose that no one will suppose that someone threw a bomb at these men.
But enough substance was found to exclude the notion of “lightning from a
clear sky.” Something of a meteoritic nature seems excluded.that no one will suppose that someone threw a bomb at these men.
But enough substance was found to exclude the notion of “lightning from a
clear sky.” Something of a meteoritic nature seems excluded.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ppose that someone threw a bomb at these men.
But enough substance was found to exclude the notion of “lightning from a
clear sky.” Something of a meteoritic nature seems excluded.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

O
28
UT from a round, red planet, a little white shaft—a fairy’s arrow
shot into an apple. June 10, 1892—a light like a little searchlight,
projecting from the limb of Mars. Upon July 11 and 13, it was seen
again, by Campbell and Hussey (Nature, 50-500).
Aug. 3, 1892—climacteric opposition of Mars.
Upon Aug. 12, 1892, flashes were seen by many persons, in the sky of
England. See Eng. Mec., vol. 56. At Manchester, so like signals were they,
or so unlike anything commonly known as “auroral” were they, that Albert
Buss mistook them for flashes from a lighthouse. They were seen at
Dewsbury; described by a correspondent to the English Mechanic, who
wrote: “I have never seen such an appearance of an aurora.” “Rapid
flashes” reported from Loughborough.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
A shining triangle in a dark circle.
In L’Astronomie, 1888-75, Dr. Klein publishes an account of de
Speissen’s observation of Nov. 23, 1887—a luminous triangle on the floor
of Plato. Dr. Klein says it was an effect of sunlight.
In this period, there were in cities of the United States, some of the most
astonishing effects at night, in the history of this earth. If Rigel should run
for the Presidency of Orion, and if the stars in the great nebula should start
to march, there would be a spectacle like those that Grover Cleveland called
forth in the United States, in this period.
So then—at least conceivably—something similar upon the moon. Flakes
of light moving toward Plato, this night of Nov. 23, 1887, from all the other
craters of the moon; a blizzard of shining points gathering into light-drifts
in Plato; then the denizens of Aristarchus and of Kepler, and dwellers from
the lunar Alps, each raising his torch, marching upon a triangular path,
making the triangle shine in the dark—conceivably. Other formations have
been seen in Plato, but, according to my records, this symbol that shone in
the dark had never been seen before, and has not been seen since.angle shine in the dark—conceivably. Other formations have
been seen in Plato, but, according to my records, this symbol that shone in
the dark had never been seen before, and has not been seen since.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ark—conceivably. Other formations have
been seen in Plato, but, according to my records, this symbol that shone in
the dark had never been seen before, and has not been seen since.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

About two years later—a demonstration of a more exclusive kind —
assemblage of all the undertakers of the moon. They stood in a circular
formation, surrounded by virgins in their nightgowns— and in nightgowns
as nightgowns should be. An appearance in Plinius, Sept. 13, 1889, was
reported by Prof. Thury, of Geneva— a black spot with an “intensely white”
border.
March 30, 1889—a black spot that was seen for the first time, by
Gaudibert, near the center of Copernicus (L’Astro., 1890-235). May 11,
1889—an object as black as ink upon a rampart of Gassendi (L’Astro.,
1889-275). It had never been reported before; at the time of the next
lunation, it was not seen again. March 30, 1889 —a new black spot in
Plinius (L’Astro., 1890-187).
The star-like light of Aristarchus—it is a long time since latest preceding
appearance (May 7, 1867). Then it cannot be attributed to commonplace
lunar circumstances. The light was seen Nov. 7, 1891, by M. d’Adjuda, of
the Observatory of Lisbon—”a very distinct, luminous point” (L’Astro., 11-
33).
Upon April 1, 1893, a shaft of light was seen projecting from the moon,
by M. de Moraes, in the Azores. A similar appearance was seen, Sept. 25,
1893, at Paris, by M. Gaboreau (L’Astro., 13-34
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
Another association like that of 1884—in the English Mechanic, 55-310,
a correspondent writes that, upon May 6, 1892, he saw a shining point (not
polar) upon Venus. Upon the 13th of August, 1892, the same object—
conceivably—was seen at a short distance from Venus—an unknown,
luminous object, like a star of the 7th magnitude that was seen close to
Venus, by Prof. Barnard (Ast. Nach., no. 4106).
Upon Aug. 24, 1895, in the period of primary maximum brilliance of
Venus, a luminous object, it is said, was seen in the sky, in day time, by
someone in Donegal, Ireland. Upon this day, according to the Scientific
American, 73-374, a boy, Robert Alcorn, saw a large luminous object
falling from the sky. It exploded near him. The boy’s experience was like
Smith Morehouse’s. He put his hands over his face: there was a second
explosion, shattering his fingers. According to Prof. George M. Minchin no
substance of the object that had exploded could be found. Whether there be
relation or not, something was seen in the sky of England a week later. In
the London Times, Sept. 4, 1895, Dr. J. A. H. Murray writes that, at Oxford,at had exploded could be found. Whether there be
relation or not, something was seen in the sky of England a week later. In
the London Times, Sept. 4, 1895, Dr. J. A. H. Murray writes that, at Oxford,

--- PAGE BREAK ---d be found. Whether there be
relation or not, something was seen in the sky of England a week later. In
the London Times, Sept. 4, 1895, Dr. J. A. H. Murray writes that, at Oxford,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a few minutes before 8 P.M., Aug. 31, 1895, he saw in the sky a luminous
object, considerably larger than Venus at greater brilliance, emerge from
behind tree tops, and sail slowly eastward. It moved as if driven in a strong
wind, and disappeared behind other trees. “The fact that it so perceptibly
grew fainter as it receded seems to imply that it was not at a great elevation,
and so favors a terrestrial origin, though I am unable to conceive how
anything artificial could have presented the same appearance.” In the Times,
of the 6th, someone who had read Dr. Murray’s letter says that, about the
same time, same evening, he, in London, had seen the same object moving
eastward so slowly that he had thought it might be a fire-balloon from a
neighboring park. Another correspondent, who had not read Dr. Murray’s
letter, his own dated September 3, writes from a place not stated that about
8:20 P.M., August 31, he had seen a star-like object, moving eastward,
remaining in sight four or five minutes. Then someone who, about 8 P.M.,
same evening, while driving to the Scarborough station, had seen “a large
shooting star,” astonishing him, because of its leisurely rate, so different
from the velocity of the ordinary “shooting star.” There are two other
accounts of objects that were seen in the sky, at Bath and at Ramsgate, but
not about this time, and I have looked them up in local newspapers, finding
that they were probably meteors.
In the Oxford Times, September 7, Dr. Murray’s letter to the London
Times is reprinted, with this comment—”We would suggest to the learned
doctor that the supposed meteor was one of the fire-balloons let off with the
allotments show.”
Let it be that when allotments are shown, balloons are always sent up,
and that this Editor did not merely have a notion to this effect. Our data are
concerned with an object that was seen, at about the same time, at Oxford,
about 50 miles southeast of Oxford, and about 170 miles northeast of
Oxford, with a fourth observation that we cannot place.
And, in broader terms, our data are concerned with a general expression
that objects like ships have been seen to sail close to this earth at times
when the planet Venus is nearest this earth. Sept. 18, 1895—inferior
conjunction of Venus.
Still in the same period, there were, in London, two occurrences perhaps
like that at Donegal. London Morning Post, Nov. 16, 1895—that, at noon,
November 15, an “alarming explosion” occurred somewhere near
Fenchurch Street, London. No damage was done; no trace could be foundke that at Donegal. London Morning Post, Nov. 16, 1895—that, at noon,
November 15, an “alarming explosion” occurred somewhere near
Fenchurch Street, London. No damage was done; no trace could be found

--- PAGE BREAK ---London Morning Post, Nov. 16, 1895—that, at noon,
November 15, an “alarming explosion” occurred somewhere near
Fenchurch Street, London. No damage was done; no trace could be found

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of anything that had exploded. An hour later, near the Mansion House,
which is not far from Fenchurch Street, occurred a still more violent
explosion. The streets filled with persons who had run from buildings, and
there was investigation, but not a trace could be found of anything that had
exploded. It is said that somebody saw “something falling.” However, the
deadly explainers, usually astronomers, but this time policemen, haunt or
arrest us. In the Daily News, though it is not said that a trace of anything
that had exploded had been found, it is said that the explanation by the
police was that somebody had mischievously placed in the streets fog-
signals, which had been exploded by passing vehicles.
Observation by Mller, of Nymegen, Holland—an unknown luminous
object that, about three weeks later, was seen near Venus (Monthly Notices,
R. A. S., 52-276).
Upon the 28th of April, 1897, Venus was in inferior conjunction. In
Popular Astronomy, 5-55, it is said that many persons had written to the
Editor, telling of “airships” that had been seen, about this time. The Editor
writes that some of the observations were probably upon the planet Venus,
but that others probably related to toy balloons, “which were provided with
various colored lights.”
The first group of our data, I take from dispatches to the New York Sun,
April 2, 11, 16, 18. First of April—”the mysterious light” in the sky of
Kansas City—something like a powerful search-light. “It was directed
toward the earth, traveling east at a rate of sixty miles an hour.” About a
week later, something was seen in Chicago. “Chicago’s alleged airship is
believed to be a myth, in spite of the fact that a great many persons say that
they have seen the mysterious night-wanderer. A crowd gazed at strange
lights, from the top of a downtown skyscraper, and Evanston students
declare they saw the swaying red and green lights.” April 16—reported
from Benton, Texas, but this time as a dark object that passed across the
moon. Reports from other towns in Texas: Fort Worth, Dallas, Marshall,
Ennis, and Beaumont—”It was shaped like a Mexican cigar, large in the
middle, and small at both ends, with great wings, resembling those of an
enormous butterfly. It was brilliantly illuminated by the rays of two great
searchlights, and was sailing in a southeasterly direction, with the velocity
of the wind, presenting a magnificent appearance.”
New York Herald, April 11—that, at Chicago, night of April 9-10, “until
two o’clock in the morning, thousands of amazed spectators declared thatcity
of the wind, presenting a magnificent appearance.”
New York Herald, April 11—that, at Chicago, night of April 9-10, “until
two o’clock in the morning, thousands of amazed spectators declared that

--- PAGE BREAK ---esenting a magnificent appearance.”
New York Herald, April 11—that, at Chicago, night of April 9-10, “until
two o’clock in the morning, thousands of amazed spectators declared that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the lights seen in the northwest were those of an airship, or some floating
object, miles above the earth. . . . Some declare they saw two cigar-shaped
objects and great wings.” It is said that a white light, a red light, and a green
light had been seen.
There does seem to be an association between this object and the planet
Venus, which upon this night was less than three weeks from nearest
approach to this earth. Nevertheless this object could not have been Venus,
which had set hours earlier. Prof. Hough, of the Northwestern University, is
quoted—that the people had mistaken the star Alpha Orionis for an airship.
Prof. Hough explains that astronomeric effects may have given a changing
red and green appearance to this star. Alpha Orionis as a northern star is
some more astronomy by the astronomers who teach astronomy daytimes
and then relax when night comes. That atmospheric conditions could pick
out this one star and not affect other brilliant stars in Orion is more
astronomy. At any rate the standardized explanation that the thing was
Venus disappears.
There were other explainers—someone who said that he knew of an
airship (terrestrial one) that had sailed from San Francisco. and had reached
Chicago.
Herald, April 12—said that the object had been photographed in
Chicago: “a cigar-shaped, silken bag,” with a framework— other
explanations and identifications, not one of them applying to this object, if
it be accepted that it was seen in places as far apart as Illinois and Texas. It
is said that, upon March 29th, the thing had been seen in Omaha, as a bright
light sailing to the northwest, and that, for a few moments, upon the
following night, it had been seen in Denver. It is said that, upon the night of
the 9th, despatches had bombarded the newspaper offices of Chicago, from
many places in Illinois, Indiana, Missouri, Iowa, and Wisconsin.
“Prof. George Hough maintains that the object seen is Alpha Orionis.´
April 14—story, veritable observation, yarn, hoax—despatch from
Carlensville, Ill.—that upon the afternoon of the 10th, the airship had
alighted upon a farm, but had sailed away when approached —”cigar-
shaped, with wings, and a canopy on top.”
April 15—shower of telegrams—development of jokers and explainers—
thing identified as an airship invented by someone in Dodge City, Kansas;
identified as an airship invented by someone in Brule, Wisconsin—stories
of letters found on farms, purporting to have been dropped by the unknownan airship invented by someone in Dodge City, Kansas;
identified as an airship invented by someone in Brule, Wisconsin—stories
of letters found on farms, purporting to have been dropped by the unknown

--- PAGE BREAK ---

aeronauts (terrestrial ones)—jokers in various towns, sending up balloons
with lights attached—one laborious joker who rigged up something that
looked like an airship and put it in a vacant lot and told that it had fallen
there—yarn or observation, upon a “queer-looking boat” that had been seen
to rise from the water in Lake Erie—continued reports upon a moving
object in the sky, and its red and green lights.
Against such an alliance as this, between the jokers and the astronomers,
I see small chance for our data. The chance is in the future. If, in April,
1897, extra-mundane voyagers did visit this earth, likely enough they will
visit again, and then the alliance against the data may be guarded against.
New York Herald, April 20—that, upon the 19th, about 9 P.M., at
Sistersville, W. Va., a luminous object had approached the town from the
northwest, flashing brilliant red, white, and green lights. “An examination
with strong glasses left an impression of a huge cone-shaped arrangement
180 feet long, with large fins on either side.”
My own general impression:
Night of Oct. 12, 1492—if I have that right. Some night in October,
1492, and savages upon an island-beach are gazing out at lights that they
had never seen before. The indications are that voyagers from some other
world are nearby. But the wise men explain. One of the most nearly sure
expressions in this book is upon how they explain. They explain in terms of
the familiar. For instance, after all that is spiritual in a fish passes away, the
rest of him begins to shine nights. So there are three big, old, dead things
out in the water—

--- PAGE BREAK ---of
the familiar. For instance, after all that is spiritual in a fish passes away, the
rest of him begins to shine nights. So there are three big, old, dead things
out in the water—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
29
HERE have been published several observations upon a signal-like
regularity of the Barisal Guns, which, because unaccompanied by
phenomena that could be considered seismic, may have been
detonations in the sky, and which, because, according to some hearers, they
seemed to come from the sky, may have come from some region stationary
in the local sky of Barisal. In Nature, 61-127, appears a report by Henry S.
Schurr, who investigated the sounds in the years 1890-91:
“These Guns are always heard in triplets, i.e., three guns are always
heard, one after the other, at regular intervals, and, though several guns may
be heard, the number is always three or a multiple of three. Then the
interval between the three is always constant, i.e., the interval between the
first and the second is the same as the interval between the second and the
third, and this interval is usually three seconds, though I have heard it up to
ten seconds. The interval, however, between the triplets varies, and varies
largely, from a few seconds up to hours and days. Sometimes only one
series of triplets is heard in a day; at others the triplets follow with great
regularity, and I have counted as many as forty-five of them, one after the
other, without pause.”
In vols. 16 and 17, Ciel et Terre, M. Van den Broeck published a series of
papers upon the mysterious sounds that had been heard in Belgium.
July, 1892—heard near Brpe, by Dr. Raemaekers, of Antwerp—
detonations at regular intervals of about 12 seconds, repeated about 20
times.
Aug. 5, 1892—near Dunkirk, by Prof. Gerard, of Brussels—four reports
like sounds of cannons.
Aug. 17, 1893—between Ostend and Ramsgate, by Prof. Gerard —a
series of distinct explosions—state of the sky giving no reason to think that
they were meteorological manifestations.
Sept. 5, 1893—at Middelkirke—loud sounds of remarkable intensity.
Sept. 8, 1893—English Channel near Dover—by Prof. Gprard— an
explosive sound.n to think that
they were meteorological manifestations.
Sept. 5, 1893—at Middelkirke—loud sounds of remarkable intensity.
Sept. 8, 1893—English Channel near Dover—by Prof. Gprard— an
explosive sound.

--- PAGE BREAK ---were meteorological manifestations.
Sept. 5, 1893—at Middelkirke—loud sounds of remarkable intensity.
Sept. 8, 1893—English Channel near Dover—by Prof. Gprard— an
explosive sound.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In Ciel et Terre, 16-485, M. Van den Broeck records an experience of his
own. Upon June 25, 1894, at Louvain, he had heard detonations like
discharges of artillery: he tabulates the intervals in a series of sounds. If
there were signaling from some unknown region over Belgium, and not far
from the surface of this earth, or from extra-mundane vessels, and if there
were something of the code-like, resembling the Morse alphabet, perhaps,
in this series of sounds, there can be small hope of interpreting such limited
material, but there may be suggestion to someone to record all sounds and
their intervals and modulations, if, with greater duration, such phenomena
should ever occur again. The intervals were four minutes and twenty-three
minutes; then three minutes, four, three quarters, three and three quarters,
three quarters.
Sept. 16, 1895—a triplet of detonations, heard by M. de Schryvere, of
Brussels.
There were attempts to explain. Some of M. Van den Broeck’s
correspondents thought that there had been firing from forts on the coast of
England, and somebody thought that the phenomena should be attributed to
gravitational effects of the moon. Upon Sept. 13, 1895, four shocks were
felt and sounds heard at Southampton: a series of three and then another
(Nature, 52-552); but I have no other notes upon sounds that were heard in
England at this time, except the two explosions that were explained by the
police of London. However, M. Van den Broeck says that Mr. Harmer, of
Aldeburgh, Suffolk, had, about the first of November, heard booming
sounds that had been attributed to cannonading at Harwich. Mr. Harmer had
heard other sounds that had been attributed to cannonading somewhere else.
He could not offer a definite opinion upon the first sounds, but had
investigated the others, learning that the attribution was a mistake.
It was M. de Schryvere’s opinion that the triplet of detonations that he
had heard was from vessels in the North Sea. But now, according to
developments, the sounds of Belgium cannot very well be attributed to
terrestrial cannonading in or near Belgium: in Ciel et Terre, 16-614, are
quoted two artillery officers who had heard the sounds, but could not so
trace them: one of these officers had heard a series of detonations with
intervals of about two minutes. A variety of explanations was attempted, but
in conventional terms, and if these localized, repeating sounds did come
from the sky, there’s nothing to it but a new variety of attempted
explanations, and in most unconventional terms. There are recorded definiteterms, and if these localized, repeating sounds did come
from the sky, there’s nothing to it but a new variety of attempted
explanations, and in most unconventional terms. There are recorded definite

--- PAGE BREAK ---localized, repeating sounds did come
from the sky, there’s nothing to it but a new variety of attempted
explanations, and in most unconventional terms. There are recorded definite

--- PAGE BREAK ---

impressions that the sounds were in the sky: Prof. Peleseneer’s positivement
aérien. In Ciel et Terre, 17-14, M. Van den Broeck announced that General
Hennequin, of Brussels, had co-operated with him, and had sent enquiries
to army officers and other persons, receiving thirty replies. Some of these
correspondents had heard detonations at regular intervals. It is said that the
sounds were like cannonading, but not in one instance were the sounds
traced to terrestrial gunfire.
Jan. 24, 1896—a triplet of triplets—between 2:30 and 3:30, P.M.— by M.
Overloop, of Middelkirke, Belgium—three series of detonations, each of
three sounds.
The sounds went on, but, after this occurrence, there seems to me to be
little inducement to me to continue upon the subject. This is indication that
from somewhere there has been signaling: from extra-mundane vessels to
one another, or from some unknown region to this earth, as nearly final as
we can hope to find. There are persons who will see nothing but a
susceptibility to the mysticism of numbers in a feeling that there is
significance in threes of threes. But, if there be attempt in some other world
to attract attention upon this earth, it would have to be addressed to some
kind of a state of mind that would feel significances. Let our three threes be
as mystic as the eleven horns on Daniel’s fourth animal; if throughout
nature like human nature there be only superstition as to such serialization,
that superstition, for want of something more nearly intelligent, would be a
susceptibility to which to appeal, and from which response might be
expected. I think that a sense of mystic significance in the number three
may be universal, because upon this earth it is general, appearing in
theologies, in the balanced compositions of all the arts, in logical
demonstrations, and in the indefinite feelings that are supposed to be
superstitious.
The sounds went on, as if there were experiments, or attempts to
communicate by means of other regularizations and repetitions. Feb. 18,
1896—a series of more than 20 detonations, at intervals of 2 or 3 minutes,
heard at Ostend, by M. Pulzeys, an engineer of Brussels. Four or five
sounds were heard at Ostend by someone else: repeated upon the 21st of
February. Heard by M. Overloop, at Ostend, April 6: detonations at
11:57:30 A.M., and at 12:1:32 P.M. Heard the next day, by M. Overloop, at
Blankenberghe, at 2:35 and 2:51 P.M.eated upon the 21st of
February. Heard by M. Overloop, at Ostend, April 6: detonations at
11:57:30 A.M., and at 12:1:32 P.M. Heard the next day, by M. Overloop, at
Blankenberghe, at 2:35 and 2:51 P.M.

--- PAGE BREAK ---of
February. Heard by M. Overloop, at Ostend, April 6: detonations at
11:57:30 A.M., and at 12:1:32 P.M. Heard the next day, by M. Overloop, at
Blankenberghe, at 2:35 and 2:51 P.M.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The last occurrence recorded by M. Van den Broeck was upon the
English Channel, May 23, 1896: detonations at 3:20 and 3:40 P.M. I have no
more data, as to this period, myself, but I have notes upon similar sounds,
by no means so widely reported and commented upon, in France and
Belgium about 15 years later. One notices that the old earthquake-
explanation as to these sounds has not appeared.
But there were other phenomena in England, in this period, and to
considerable degree they were conventionally explained. They were not of
the type of the Belgian phenomena, and, because manifestations were seen
and felt, as well as heard, they were explained in terms of meteors and
earthquakes. But in this double explanation, we meet a divided opposition,
and no longer are we held back by the uncompromising attempt by
exclusionist science to attribute all disturbances of this earth’s surface to a
subterranean origin. The admission by Symons and Fordham that we have
recorded, as to occurrences of 1887-89, has survived.
The earliest of the accounts that I have read of the quakes in the general
region of Worcester and Hereford (London Triangle) that associated with
appearances in the sky, was published by two church wardens in the year
1661, as to occurrences of October, 1661, and is entitled, A True and
Perfect Relation of the Terrible Earthquake. It is said that monstrous
flaming things were seen in the sky, and that phenomena below were
interesting. We are told, “truly and perfectly,” that Mrs. Margaret Petmore
fell in labor and brought forth three male offsprings all of whom had teeth
and spoke at birth. Inasmuch as it is not recorded what the infants said, and
whether in plain English or not, it is not so much an extraordinary birth
such as, in one way or another, occurs from time to time, that affronts our
conventional notions, as it is the idea that there could be relation between
the abnormal in obstetrics and the unusual in terrestrics. The conventional
scientist has just this reluctance toward considering shocks of this earth and
phenomena in the sky at the same time. If he could accept with us that there
often has been relation, the seeming discord would turn into a
commonplace, but with us he would never again want to hear of
extraordinary detonating meteors exploding only by coincidence over a part
of this earth where an earthquake was occurring, or of concussions of this
earth, time after time, in one small region, from meteors that, only by
coincidence, happened to explode in one little local sky, time after time.n earthquake was occurring, or of concussions of this
earth, time after time, in one small region, from meteors that, only by
coincidence, happened to explode in one little local sky, time after time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---urring, or of concussions of this
earth, time after time, in one small region, from meteors that, only by
coincidence, happened to explode in one little local sky, time after time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Give up the idea that this earth moves, however, and coincidences many
times repeated do not have to be lugged in.
Our subject now is the supposed earthquake centering around Worcester
and Hereford, Dec. 17, 1896; but there may have been related events,
leading up to this climax, signifying long duration of something in the sky
that occasionally manifested relatively to this corner of the London
Triangle. Mrs. Margaret Petmore was too sensational a person for our
liking, at least in our colder and more nearly scientific moments, so we shall
not date so far back as the time of her performance; but the so-called
earthquakes of Oct. 6, 1863, and of Oct. 30, 1868, were in this region, and
we had data for thinking that they were said to be earthquakes only because
they could not be traced to terrestrial explosions.
At 5:45 P.M., Nov. 2, 1893, a loud sound was heard at a place ten miles
northeast of Worcester, and no shock was felt (Nature, 49-245); however at
Worcester and in various parts of the west of England and in Wales a shock
was felt.
According to James G. Wood, writing in Symons’ Met. Mag., 29-8, at
9:30 P.M., Jan. 25, 1894, at Llanthomas and Clifford, towns less than 20
miles west of Hereford, a brilliant light was seen in the sky, an explosion
was heard, and a quake was felt. Half an hour later, something else
occurred: according to Denning (Nature, 49-325) it was in several places,
near Hereford and Worcester, supposed to be an earthquake. But, at
Stokesay Vicarage, Shropshire (Symons’ Met. Mag., 29-8) was seen the
same kind of an appearance as that which had been seen at Llanthomas and
Clifford, half an hour before: an illumination so brilliant that for half a
minute everything was almost as visible as by daylight.
In the English Mechanic, 74-155, David Packer calls attention to “a
strange meteoric light” that was seen in the sky, at Worcester, during the
quake of Dec. 17, 1896. I should say that this was the severest shock felt in
the British Isles, in the 19th century, with the exception of the shock of
April 22, 1884, in the eastern point of the London Triangle. There was
something in the sky. In Nature, 55-179, J. Lloyd Bozward writes that, at
Worcester, a great light was seen in the sky, at the time of the shock, and
that, in another town, “a great blaze” had been seen in the sky. In Symons’
Met. Mag., 31-180, are recorded many observations upon lights that were
seen in the sky. In an appendix to his book, The Hereford Earthquake of
1896, Dr. Charles Davison says that at the time of the quake (5:30 A.M.)0, are recorded many observations upon lights that were
seen in the sky. In an appendix to his book, The Hereford Earthquake of
1896, Dr. Charles Davison says that at the time of the quake (5:30 A.M.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---observations upon lights that were
seen in the sky. In an appendix to his book, The Hereford Earthquake of
1896, Dr. Charles Davison says that at the time of the quake (5:30 A.M.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

there was a luminous object in the sky, and that it “traversed a large part of
the disturbed area.” He says that it was a meteor, and an extraordinary
meteor that lighted up the ground so that one could have picked up a pin.
With the data so far considered, almost anyone would think that of course
an object had exploded in the sky, shaking the earth underneath. Dr.
Davison does not say this. He says that the meteor only happened to appear
over a part of this earth where an earthquake was occurring, “by a strange
coincidence.”
Suppose that, with ordinary common sense, he had not lugged in his
“strange coincidence,” and had written that of course the shock was
concussion from an explosion in the sky—
Shocks that had been felt before midnight, December 17, and at 1:30 or
1:45, 2, 3, 3:30, 4, 5, and 5:20, and then others at 5:40 or 5:45 and at 6:15
o’clock—and were they, too, concussions, but fainter and from remoter
explosions in the sky—and why not, if of course the great shock of 5:30
o’clock was from a great explosion in the sky—and by what multiplication
of strangeness of coincidence could detonating meteors, or explosions of
any other kind, so localize in the one little sky of Worcester, if this earth be
a moving earth—and how could their origin be otherwise than a fixed
region nearby"
In some minds it may be questionable that the earth could be so affected
as it was at 5:30 A.M., Dec. 17, 1896, by an explosion in the sky. Upon Feb.
10, 1896, a tremendous explosion occurred in the sky of Madrid:
throughout the city windows were smashed; a wall in the building occupied
by the American Legation was thrown down. The people of Madrid rushed
to the streets, and there was a panic in which many were injured. For five
hours and a half a luminous cloud of debris hung over Madrid, and stones
fell from the sky.
Suppose, just at present, we disregard all the Worcester-Hereford
phenomena except those of Dec. 17, 1896. Draw a diagram, illustrating a
stream of meteors pursuing this earth, now supposed to be rotating and
revolving, for more than 400,000 miles in its orbit, and curving around
gracefully and unerringly after the rotating earth, so as to explode precisely
in this one little local sky and nowhere else. But we can’t think very
reasonably even of a flock of birds flying after and so precisely pecking one
spot on an apple thrown in the air by somebody. Another diagram—ittle local sky and nowhere else. But we can’t think very
reasonably even of a flock of birds flying after and so precisely pecking one
spot on an apple thrown in the air by somebody. Another diagram—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

stationary earth—bombardment of any kind one chooses to think of—same
point hit every time—thinkable.
The phenomena associate with an opposition of Mars. Dec. 10, 1896—
opposition of Mars.
But we have gone on rather elaborately with perhaps an insufficiency to
base upon. We cannot say, directly, that all the phenomena of the night of
Dec. 16-17, 1896, were shocks from explosions in the sky: only during the
greatest of the concussions was something seen, or was something near
enough to be seen.
We apply the idea of the diagrams to another series of occurrences in this
period. Now draw a diagram relatively to the sky of Florida, and see just
what the explanation of coincidence demands or exacts. But then consider
the diagram as one of an earth that does not move and of something that is
fixed over a point upon its surface. Things can be thought of as coming
down from somewhere else to one special sky of this earth, as logically as
precariously placed objects on one special window sill sometimes come
down to a special neighbor.
In the Monthly Weather Review, 23-57, is a report, by the Director of the
Florida Weather Service, upon “mysterious sounds” and luminous effects in
the sky of Florida. According to investigation, these phenomena did occur
in the sky of Florida, about noon, Feb. 7, 1895, again at 5 o’clock in the
morning of the 8th, and again between 6 and 10 o’clock, night of the 8th.
The Editor of the Review thinks that three meteors may have exploded so in
succession in the sky of Florida, and nowhere else, “by coincidence.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---6 and 10 o’clock, night of the 8th.
The Editor of the Review thinks that three meteors may have exploded so in
succession in the sky of Florida, and nowhere else, “by coincidence.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C
30
HAR me the trunk of a redwood tree. Give me pages of white chalk
cliffs to write upon. Magnify me thousands of times, and replace my
trifling immodesties with a titanic megalomania—then might I write
largely enough for our subjects. Because of accessibility and abundance of
data, our accounts deal very much with the relatively insignficant
phenomena of Great Britain. But our subject, if not so restricted, would be
the violences that have screamed from the heavens, lapping up villages with
tongues of fire. If, because of appearances in the sky, it be accepted that
some of the so-called earthquakes of Italy and South America represented
relations with regions beyond this earth, then it is accepted that some of this
earth’s greatest catastrophes have been relations with the unknown and the
external. We have data that seem to be indications of signaling, but not
unless we can think that foreign giants have hurled explosive mountains at
this earth can we see such indications in all the data.
Our data do seem to fall into two orders of phenomena: sounds of
Melida, Barisal, and Belgium, and nothing falling from the sky, and nothing
seen in the sky, and excellently supported observations for accepting a
signal-like intent in intervals and grouping of sounds, at least in Barisal and
Belgium; and the unregularized phenomena of Worcester-Hereford,
Colchester, Comrie, and Birmingham, in which appearances are seen in the
sky, or in which substances fall from the sky, and in which effects upon this
earth, not noted at all in Belgium and Bengal, are great, and sometimes
tremendous. It seems that extra-geography divides into the extra-sociologic
and the extra-physical; and in the second type of phenomena, we suppose
the data are of physical relations between this earth and other worlds. We
think of a difference of potential. There were tremendous detonations in the
sky at the times of the falls of the little black stones of Birmingham and
Wolverhampton, and the electric manifestations, according to descriptions
in the newspapers, were extraordinary, and great volumes of water fell.
Consequently the events were supposed to be thunderstorms. I suppose,
myself, that they were electric storms, but electric storms that representedwere extraordinary, and great volumes of water fell.
Consequently the events were supposed to be thunderstorms. I suppose,
myself, that they were electric storms, but electric storms that represented

--- PAGE BREAK ---and great volumes of water fell.
Consequently the events were supposed to be thunderstorms. I suppose,
myself, that they were electric storms, but electric storms that represented

--- PAGE BREAK ---

difference of potential between this earth and some region that was fixed, at
least eleven years, over Birmingham and Wolverhampton, bringing down
stones and volumes of water from some other world, or bringing down
stones, and dislodging intervening volumes of water, such as we have many
data for thinking exist in outer space, sometimes in bodies of warm or hot
water, and sometimes as great masses, or fields. of ice.
Let two objects be generically similar, but specifically different and a
relation that may be known as a difference of potential, though that term is
usually confined to electric relations, generates between them. 4uite as the
Gulf Stream—though there are no reasons to suppose that there is such a
Gulf Stream as one reads of—represents a relation between bodies of water
heated differently, given any two worlds, alike in general constitution, but
differing, say, electrically, and given proximity, we conceive of relations
between them other than gravitational.
But this cloistered earth, and its monkish science—shrinking from,
denying, or disregarding, all data of external relations, except some one
controlling force that was once upon a time known as Jehovah, but that has
been re-named Gravitation—
That the electric exchanges that were recognized by the ancients, but that
were anthropomorphically explained by them, have poured from the sky
and have gushed to the sky, afferently and efferently, between this earth and
the nearby planets, or between this mainland and its San Salvadors, and
have been recognized by the moderns, or the neo-ancients, but have been
meteorologically and seismologically misconstrued by them.
When a village spouts to the sky, it is said to have been caught up in a
cyclone: when unknown substances fall from the sky, not much of anything
is said upon the subject.
Lost tribes and the nations that have disappeared from the face of this
earth—that the skies have reeked with terrestrial civilizations, spreading out
in celestial stagnations, where their remains to this day may be. The Mayans
—and what became of them" Bones of the Mayans, picked white as frost by
space-scavengers, regioned to this day in a sterile luxuriance somewhere,
spread upon existence like the pseudo-breath of Death, crystallized on a
sky-pane. Three times gaps wide and dark the history of Egypt—and that
these abysses were gulfed by disappearances—that some of the eliminations
from this earth may have been upward translations in functional suctions.
We conceive of Supervision upon this earth’s development, but for it theulfed by disappearances—that some of the eliminations
from this earth may have been upward translations in functional suctions.
We conceive of Supervision upon this earth’s development, but for it the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ces—that some of the eliminations
from this earth may have been upward translations in functional suctions.
We conceive of Supervision upon this earth’s development, but for it the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

names of Jehovah and Allah seem old-fashioned—that the equivalence of
wrath, but like the storms of cells that, in an embryonic thing, invade and
destroy cartilage-cells, when they have outlived their usefulness, have
devastated this earth’s undesirables. Likely enough, or not quite likely
enough, one of these earlier Egypts was populated by sphinxes, if one can
suppose that some of the statuary still extant in Egypt were portraitures.
This is good, though also not so good, orthodox Evolutionary doctrine—
that between types occur transitionals—
That Elimination and Redistribution swept an earlier Egypt with suctions
—because it was written, in symbols of embryonic law, that life upon this
earth must form onward—and the crouching sphinx on the sands of Egypt,
blinking the mysticism of her morphologic mixtures, would perhaps detain
forever the less interesting type that was advancing—
That often has Clarification destroyed transitionals, that they shall not
hold back development.
One conceives of their remains, to this day, wafting still in the currents of
the sky: floating avenues of frozen sphinxes, solemnly dipping in cosmic
undulations, down which circulate processions of Egyptian mummies.
An astronomer upon this earth notes that things in parallel lines have
crossed the sun.
We offer this contribution as comparing favorably with the works of any
other historian. We think that some of the details may need revision, but that
what they typify is somewhere nearly acceptable.
Latitudes and longitudes of bones, not in the sky, but upon the surface of
this earth. Baron Toll and other explorers have, upon the surface of this
earth, kicked their way through networks of ribs and protrusions of skulls
and stacks of vertebr , as numerous as if from dead land they had sprouted
there. Anybody who has read of these tracts of bones upon the northern
coast of Siberia, and of some of the outlying islands that are virtually
composed of bones cemented with icy sand, will agree with me that there
have been cataclysms of which conventionality and standardization tell us
nothing. Once upon a time, some unknown force translated, from
somewhere, a million animals to Colorado, where their remains now form
great bone-quarries. Very largely do we express a reaction against
dogmatism, and sometimes we are not dogmatic, ourselves. We don’t know
very positively whether at times the animal life of some other world has
been swept away from that world, eventually pouring from the sky ofand sometimes we are not dogmatic, ourselves. We don’t know
very positively whether at times the animal life of some other world has
been swept away from that world, eventually pouring from the sky of

--- PAGE BREAK ---not dogmatic, ourselves. We don’t know
very positively whether at times the animal life of some other world has
been swept away from that world, eventually pouring from the sky of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Siberia and of Colorado, in some of the shockingest floods of mammoths
from which spattered cats and rabbits, in cosmic scenery, or not. All that we
can say is that when we turn to conventionality it is to blankness or
suppression. Every now and then, to this day, occurs an alleged fall of blood
from the sky, and I have notes upon at least one instance in which the
microscopically examined substance was identified as blood. But now we
conceive of intenser times, when every now and then a red cataract hung in
the heavens like the bridal veil of the goddess of murder. But the science of
today is a soporific like the idealism of Europe before the War broke out.
Science and idealism—wings of a vampire that lulls consciousness that
might otherwise foresee catastrophe. Showers of frogs and showers of
fishes that occur to this day—that they are the dwindled representatives to
this day of the cataclysms of intenser times when the skies of this earth
were darkened by afferent clouds of dinosaurs. We conceive of intenser
times, but we conceive of all times as being rhythmic times. We are too
busy to take up alarmism, but, if Rome, for instance, never was destroyed
by terrestrial barbarians, if we cannot very well think of Apaches seizing
Chicago, extra-mundane vandals may often have swooped down upon this
earth, and they may swoop again; and it may be a comfort to us, some day,
to mention in our last gasp that we told about this.
History, geology, pal ontology, astronomy, meteorology—that nothing
short of cataclysmic thinking can break down these united walls of
Exclusionism.
Unknown monsters sometimes appear in the ocean. When, upon the
closed system of normal preoccupations, a story of a sea serpent appears, it
is inhospitably treated. To us of the wider cordialities, it has
recommendations for kinder reception. I think that we shall be noted in
recognitions of good works for our bizarre charities. Far back in the
topography of the nineteenth century, Richard Proctor was almost
submerged in an ocean of smugness, but now and then he was a little island
emerging from the gently alternating doubts and satisfactions of his era, and
by means of several papers upon the “sea serpent” he so protruded and gave
variety to a dreary uniformity. Proctor reviewed some of the stories of “sea
serpents.” He accepted some of them. This will be news to some
conventionalists. But the mystery that he could not solve is their
conceivable origin. To be sure this earth may not be round, or top-shaped,
and may tower away somewhere, perhaps with the great Antarctic plateauists. But the mystery that he could not solve is their
conceivable origin. To be sure this earth may not be round, or top-shaped,
and may tower away somewhere, perhaps with the great Antarctic plateau

--- PAGE BREAK ---y that he could not solve is their
conceivable origin. To be sure this earth may not be round, or top-shaped,
and may tower away somewhere, perhaps with the great Antarctic plateau

--- PAGE BREAK ---

as its foothills, to a gigantic existence commensurate throughout with the
sea monsters that sometimes reach regions known to us. Judging by our
experience in other fields of research, we suspect that this earth never has
been traversed except in conventional trade-routes and standard
explorations. One supposes that enormous forms of life that have appeared
upon the surface of the ocean, did not come from conditions of great
pressure below the surface. If there be no habitat of their own, in unknown
seas of this earth, the monsters fell from the sky, surviving for a while. In
his day, Charles Lyell never said a more preposterous thing than this—
however, we have no idea that mere preposterousness is a criterion.
Then at times the things have fallen upon land, presumably. To scientific
minds in their present an mia of malnutrition, we offer new nourishment.
There are materials for a science of neo-pal ontology—as it were—at least
a new view of animal-remains upon this earth. Remains of monsters,
supposed to have lived geologic ages ago, are sometimes found, not in
ancient deposits, but upon, or near, the surface of the ground, sometimes
barely covered. I have notes upon a great pile of bones, supposed to be the
remains of a whale, out in open view in a western desert.
In the American Museum of Natural History, New York City, is the
mummified body of a monster called a trachodon, found in Converse
County, Wyoming. It was not found upon the surface of the ground, which
is bad for our attempts to stimulate pal ontology. But the striking datum to
me is that the only other huge mummy that I know of is another trachodon,
now in the Museum of Frankfort. If only extraordinarily would geologic
processes mummify remains of a huge animal, doubly extraordinarily
would two animals of the same species be so exclusively affected. One at
least gives some consideration to the idea that these trachodons are not
products of geologic circumstances, but were affected, in common, by other
circumstances. By inspiration, or progressive deterioration, one then
conceives of the things as having wafted and dried in space, finally falling
to this earth. Our swooping vandals are relieved with showering mummies.
Life is turning out to be interesting.
Organic substances like life-fluids of living things have rained from the
sky. However, it is enough for our general purposes to make acceptable
simply that unknown substances have, in large quantities, fallen from the
sky. That is neo-ism enough, it seems to me. I consider, myself, all such
data relatively to this earth’s stationariness or possible motions. In Ciel etnces have, in large quantities, fallen from the
sky. That is neo-ism enough, it seems to me. I consider, myself, all such
data relatively to this earth’s stationariness or possible motions. In Ciel et

--- PAGE BREAK ---quantities, fallen from the
sky. That is neo-ism enough, it seems to me. I consider, myself, all such
data relatively to this earth’s stationariness or possible motions. In Ciel et

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Terre, 22-198, it is said that, about 2 P.M., June 8, 1901, a glue-like substance
fell at Sart. The story is told by an investigator, M. Michael, a
meteorologist. He says that he saw this substance falling from the sky, but
does not give an estimate of duration: he says that he arrived during the last
five minutes of the shower. Editors and extra-geographers can’t help trying
to explain. The Editor of Ciel et Terre writes that, three days before, there
had been, at Antwerp, a great fire, in which, among other substances, a large
quantity of sugar had been burned. He asks whether there could be any
connection. Antwerp is about 80 miles from Sart.
Sept. 2, 1905—the tragedy of the space-pig:
In the English Mechanic, 86-100, Col. Markwick writes that, according
to the Cambrian Natural Observer, something was seen in the sky, at
Llangollen, Wales, Sept. 2, 1905. It is described as an intensely black
object, about two miles above the earth’s surface, moving at the rate of
about twenty miles an hour. Col. Markwick writes: “Could it have been a
balloon"” We give Col. Markwick good rating as an extra-geographer, but
of the early, or differentiating type, a transitional, if not a sphinx: so he was
not quite developed enough to publish the details of this object. In the
Cambrian Natural Observer, 1905-35—the journal of the Astronomical
Society of Wales—it is said that, according to accounts in the newspapers,
an object had appeared in the sky, at Llangollen, Wales, Sept. 2, 1905. At
the schoolhouse, in Vroncysylite —I think that’s it: with all my credulity,
some of these Welsh names look incredible to me, in my notes—the thing in
the sky had been examined through powerful field glasses. We are told that
it had short wings, and flew, or moved, in a way described as “casually
inclining sideways.” It seemed to have four legs, and looked to be about ten
feet long. According to several witnesses it looked like a huge, winged pig,
with webbed feet. “Much speculation was rife as to what the mysterious
object could be.”
Five days later, according to a member of the Astronomical Society of
Wales—see Cambrian Observer, 1905-30—a purple-red substance fell from
the sky, at Llanelly, Wales.
I don’t know that my own attitude toward these data is understood, and I
don’t know that it matters in the least; also from time to time my own
attitude changes: but very largely my feeling is that not much can be, or
should be, concluded from our meager accounts, but that so often are these
occurrences, in our fields, reported, that several times every year there willlargely my feeling is that not much can be, or
should be, concluded from our meager accounts, but that so often are these
occurrences, in our fields, reported, that several times every year there will

--- PAGE BREAK ---s that not much can be, or
should be, concluded from our meager accounts, but that so often are these
occurrences, in our fields, reported, that several times every year there will

--- PAGE BREAK ---

be occurrences that one would like to have investigated by someone who
believes that we have written nothing but bosh, and by someone who
believes in our data almost religiously. It may be that, early in February,
1892, a luminous thing traveled back and forth, exploring for ten hours in
the sky of Sweden. The story is copied from a newspaper, and ridiculed, in
the English Mechanic, 55-34. Upon March 7, 1893, a luminous object
shaped like an elongated pear was seen in the sky of Val-de-la-Haye, by M.
Raimond Coulon (L’Astro., 1893-169). M. Coulon’s suggestion is that the
light may have been a signal suspended from a balloon. The signal-idea is
interesting.
In the summer of 1897, several weeks after Prof. Andrpe and his two
companions had sailed in a balloon, from Amsterdam Island, Spitzbergen, it
was reported that a balloon had been seen in British Columbia. There was
wide publicity: the report was investigated. It may be that had a terrestrial
balloon escaped from somewhere in the United States or Canada, or if there
had been a balloon-ascension at this time, the circumstances would have
been reported: it may well be that the object was not Andree’s balloon.
President Bell, of the National Geographic Society, heard of this object, and
heard that details had been sent to the Swedish Foreign Office, and cabled
to the American Minister, at Stockholm, for information. He publishes his
account in the National Geographic Magazine, 9-102. He was referred to
the Swedish Consul, at San Francisco. In reply to inquiry, the Consul
telegraphed the following data, which had been collected by the President
of the Geographical Society of the Pacific:
“Statement of a balloon passing over the Horse-Fly Hydraulic Mining
Camp, in Caribou, British Columbia, 52°, 20ƍ, and Longitude 120°, 30ƍ—
“From letters of J. B. Robson, manager of the Caribou Mining Co., and
of Mrs. Wm. Sullivan, the blacksmith’s wife, there, and a statement of Mr.
John J. Newsome, San Francisco, then at camp. About 2 or 3 o’clock, in the
afternoon, between fourth and seventh of August last, weather calm and
cloudless, Mrs. Sullivan, while looking over the Hydraulic Bank, noticed a
round, grayish-looking object in the sky, to the right of the sun. As she
watched, it grew larger and was descending. She saw the larger mass of the
balloon above, and a smaller mass apparently suspended from the larger. It
continued to descend, until she plainly recognized it as a balloon and a large
basket hanging thereto. It finally commenced to swing violently back and
forth, and move very fast toward the eastward and northward. Mrs. Sullivanl she plainly recognized it as a balloon and a large
basket hanging thereto. It finally commenced to swing violently back and
forth, and move very fast toward the eastward and northward. Mrs. Sullivan

--- PAGE BREAK ---ized it as a balloon and a large
basket hanging thereto. It finally commenced to swing violently back and
forth, and move very fast toward the eastward and northward. Mrs. Sullivan

--- PAGE BREAK ---

called her daughter, aged 18, and about this time Mrs. Robson and her
daughter were observing it.”
If someone saw a strange fish in the ocean, we’d like to know— what
was it like" Stripes on him—spots—what" It would be unsatisfactory to be
told over and over only that a dark body had crossed some waves. In
Cosmos, n.s., 39-356, a satisfactory correspondent writes that, at Lille,
France, Sept. 4, 1898, he saw a red object in the sky. It was like the planet
Mars, but was in the position of no known planet. He looked through his
telescope, and saw a rectangular object, with a violent-colored band on one
side of it, and the rest of it striped with black and red. He watched it ten
minutes, during which time it was stationary; then, like the object that was
seen at the time of the Powell-mystery, it cast out sparks and disappeared.
In the English Mechanic, 75-417, Col. Markwick writes that, upon May
10, 1902, a friend of his had seen in the sky, in South Devon, a great
number of highly colored objects like little suns or toy-balloons.
“Altogether beats me,” says Col. Markwick.
Upon March 2, 1899, a luminous object in the sky, from 10 A.M., until 4
P.M., was reported from El Paso, Texas. Mentioned in the Observatory, 22-
247—supposed to have been Venus, even though Venus was then two
months past secondary maximum brilliance. This seems reasonable enough,
in itself, but there are other data for thinking that an unknown, luminous
body was at this time in the especial sky of the southwestern states. In the
8. S. Weather Bureau Report Ariz. Sec., March, 1899) it is said that, at
Prescott, Arizona, Dr. Warren E. Day had seen a luminous object, upon the
8th of March, “that traveled with the moon” all day, until 2 P.M. It is said
that, the day before, this object had been seen close to the moon, by Mr. G.
O. Scott, at Tonto, Arizona. Dr. Day and Mr. Scott were voluntary observers
for the Weather Review. This association with the moon and this localization
of observation are puzzling.
La Nature Sup. Nov. 11, 1899—that at Luzarches, France, upon the
28th of October, 1899, M. A. Garrie had seen, at 4:50 P.M., a round,
luminous object rising above the horizon. About the size of the moon. He
watched it for 15 minutes, as it moved away, diminishing to a point. It may
be that something from external regions was for several weeks in the
especial sky of France. In La Nature Sup. Dec. 16, 1899, someone writes
that he had seen, Nov. 15, 1899, 7 P.M., at Dourite (Dordogne) an object like
an enormous star, at times white, then red, and sometimes blue, but movingLa Nature Sup. Dec. 16, 1899, someone writes
that he had seen, Nov. 15, 1899, 7 P.M., at Dourite (Dordogne) an object like
an enormous star, at times white, then red, and sometimes blue, but moving

--- PAGE BREAK ---

like a kite. It was in the south. He had never seen it before. Someone, in the
issue of December 30th, says that without doubt it was the star Formalhaut,
and asks for precise position. Issue of Jan. 20,1900—the first correspondent
says that the object was in the southwest, about 35 degrees above the
horizon, but moving so that the precise position could not be stated. The
kite-like motion may have been merely seeming motion—object may have
been Formalhaut, though 35 degrees above the horizon seems to me to be
too high for Formalhaut—but, then, like the astronomers, I’m likely at
times to expose what I don’t know about astronomy. Formalhaut is not an
enormous star. Seventeen are larger.
May 1, 1908, between 8 and 9 P.M., at Vittel, France—an object, with a
nebulosity around it, diameter equal to the moon’s, according to a
correspondent to Cosmos, n.s., 58-535. At 9 o’clock a black band appeared
upon the object, and moved obliquely across it, then disappearing. The
Editor thinks that the object was the planet Venus, under extraordinary
meteorologic conditions.
Dark obj., by Prof. Brooks, July 21, 1896 (Eng. Mec., 64-12); dark obj.,
by Gathmann, Aug. 22, 1896 (Sci. Amer. Sup., 67-363); two luminous objs.,
by Prof. Swift, evidently in a local sky of California, because unseen
elsewhere in California, Sept. 20, and one of them again, Sept. 21, 1896
(Astro. Jour. 17-8, 103); “Waldemath’s second moon,” Feb. 5, 1898 (Eng.
Mec., 67-545); unknown obj., March 30, 1908 (Observatory, 31-215); dark
obj., Nov. 10, 1908 (Bull. Soc. Astro. de France, 23-74).

--- PAGE BREAK ---03); “Waldemath’s second moon,” Feb. 5, 1898 (Eng.
Mec., 67-545); unknown obj., March 30, 1908 (Observatory, 31-215); dark
obj., Nov. 10, 1908 (Bull. Soc. Astro. de France, 23-74).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C
31
OLD HARBOR, Hanover Co., Virginia—two men in a field —”an
apparently clear sky.” In the Monthly Weather Review, 28-29, it is
said that upon Aug. 7, 1900, two men were struck by lightning. The
Editor says that the weather map gave no indication of a thunderstorm, nor
of rain, in this region at the time.
In July, 1904, a man was killed on the summit of Mt. San Gorgionio, near
the Mojave desert. It is said that he was killed by lightning. Two days later,
upon the summit of Mt. Whitney, 180 miles away, another man was killed
“by lightning” (Ciel et Terre, 29-120).
It is said, in Ciel et Terre, 17-42, that, in the year 1893, nineteen soldiers
were marching near Bourges, France, when they were struck by an
unknown force. It is said that in known terms there is no explanation. Some
of the men were killed, and others were struck insensible. At the inquest it
was testified that there had been no storm, and that nothing had been heard.
If there occur upon the surface of this earth pounces from blankness and
seizures by nothings, and “sniping” with bullets of unfindable substance,
we nevertheless hesitate to bring witchcraft and demonology into our fields.
Our general subject now is the existence of a great deal that may be nearby,
or temporarily nearby, ordinarily invisible, but occasionally revealed by
special circumstances. A background of stars is not to be compared, in our
data, with the sun for a background, as a means of revelations. We accept
that there are sunspots, but we gather from general experience and special
instances that the word “sunspot” is another of the standardizing terms like
“auroral” and “meteoric” and “earthquakes.” See Webb’s Celestial ObMects
for some observations upon large definite obscurations called “sunspots”
but which were as evanescent against the sun as would be islands and
jungles of space, if intervening only a few moments between this earth and
the swifting moving sun. According to Webb, astronomers have looked at
great obscurations upon the sun, have turned away, and then looked again,
finding no trace of the phenomena. Eclipses are special circumstances, and
rather often have large, unknown bulks been revealed by different light-on the sun, have turned away, and then looked again,
finding no trace of the phenomena. Eclipses are special circumstances, and
rather often have large, unknown bulks been revealed by different light-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ned away, and then looked again,
finding no trace of the phenomena. Eclipses are special circumstances, and
rather often have large, unknown bulks been revealed by different light-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

effects during eclipses. For instance, upon Jan. 22, 1898, Lieut. Blackett,
R.N., assisting Sir Norman Lockyer, at Viziadrug, India, during the total
eclipse of the sun, saw an unknown body between Venus and Mars (Jour.
Leeds Astro. Soc., 1906-23). We have had other instances, and I have notes
upon still more. The photographic plate is a special condition, or
sensitiveness. In Knowledge, 16-234, a correspondent writes that, in
August, 1893, in Switzerland, moonlighted night, he had exposed a
photographic plate for one hour. Upon the photograph, when developed,
were seen irregular, bright markings, but there had been no lightning to this
correspondent’s perceptions.
The details of the sheep-panic of Nov. 3, 1888, are extraordinary. The
region affected was much greater than was supposed by the writer whom
we quoted in an earlier chapter. It is said in another account in Symons’
Meteorological Magazine, that, in a tract of land twenty-five miles long and
eight miles wide, thousands of sheep had, by a simultaneous impulse, burst
from their bounds; and had been found the next morning, widely scattered,
some of them still panting with terror under hedges, and many crowded into
corners of fields. See London Times, Nov. 20, 1888. An idea of the great
number of flocks affected is given by one correspondent who says that
malicious mischief was out of the question, because a thousand men could
not have frightened and released all these sheep. Someone else tries to
explain that, given an alarm in one flock, it might spread to the others. But
all the sheep so burst from their folds at about eight o’clock in the evening,
and one supposes that many folds were far from contiguous, and one thinks
of such contagion requiring considerable time to spread over 200 square
miles. Something of an alarming nature and of a pronounced degree
occurred somewhere near Reading, Berkshire, upon this evening. Also there
seems to be something of special localization: the next year another panic
occurred in Berkshire not far from Reading.
I have a datum that looks very much like the revelation of a ghost-moon,
though I think of it myself in physical terms of light-effects. In Country
Queries and Notes, 1-138, 417, it is said that, in the sky of Gosport,
Hampshire, night of Sept. 14, 1908, was seen a light that came as if from an
unseen moon. It may be that I can here record that there was a moon-like
object in the sky of the Midlands and the south of England, this night, and
that, though to human eyesight, this world, island of space, whatever it may
have been, was invisible, it was, nevertheless, revealed. Upon this eveninglands and the south of England, this night, and
that, though to human eyesight, this world, island of space, whatever it may
have been, was invisible, it was, nevertheless, revealed. Upon this evening

--- PAGE BREAK ---of England, this night, and
that, though to human eyesight, this world, island of space, whatever it may
have been, was invisible, it was, nevertheless, revealed. Upon this evening

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of Sept. 14, 1908, David Packer, then in Northfield, Worcestershire, saw a
luminous appearance that he supposed was auroral, and photographed it.
When the photograph was developed, it was seen that the “auroral” light
came from a large, moon-like object. A reproduction of the photograph is
published in the English Mechanic, 88-211. It shows an object as bright and
as well-defined as the conventionally accepted moon, but only to the
camera had it revealed itself, and Mr. Packer had caught upon a film a
space-island that had been invisible to his eyes. It seems so, anyway.
In Country Queries and Notes, 1-328, it is said that, upon Aug. 2, 1908,
at Ballyconneely, Connemara coast of Ireland, was seen a phantom city of
different-sized houses, in different styles of architecture; visible three hours.
It is said that no doubt the appearance was a mirage of some city far away
—far away, but upon this earth, of course. This apparition is not of the type
that we consider so especially of our own data. The so-called mirages that
so especially interest us are interesting to us not in themselves, but in that
they belong to the one order of phenomena or evidence that unifies so many
fields of our data: that is, repetitions in a local sky, signifying the fixed
position of something relatively to a small part of this earth’s surface. We
cannot think that mirages, terrestrial or extra-terrestrial, could so repeat. But
if in a local sky of this earth there be a fixed region, perhaps not a city, but
something of rugged and featureful outlines, with projections that might
look architectural, reflections from it, shadows, or Brocken specters
repeating always in one special sky are thinkable except by the Chinese-
minded who regard all our data as “foreign devils.” The writer in Country
Queries and Notes says—”Circumstantial accounts have even been
published of the city of Bristol being distinctly recognized in a mirage seen
occasionally in North America.” If we shall accept that anywhere in North
America repeated representations of the same city or city-like scene have
appeared in the same local sky, I prefer, myself, a foreign devil of a thought,
and its significance, whether hellish or not, that this earth is stationary, to
such a domestic vagrant of a thought as the idea that mirage could so pick
out the city of Bristol, or any other city, over and over, and also invariably
pick out for its screen the same local sky, thousands of miles, or five miles,
away.
In the English Mechanic, Sept. 10, 1897, a correspondent to the Weekly
Times and Echo is quoted. He had just returned from the Yukon. Early in
June, 1897, he had seen a city pictured in the sky of Alaska. “Not one of usanic, Sept. 10, 1897, a correspondent to the Weekly
Times and Echo is quoted. He had just returned from the Yukon. Early in
June, 1897, he had seen a city pictured in the sky of Alaska. “Not one of us

--- PAGE BREAK ---, a correspondent to the Weekly
Times and Echo is quoted. He had just returned from the Yukon. Early in
June, 1897, he had seen a city pictured in the sky of Alaska. “Not one of us

--- PAGE BREAK ---

could form the remotest idea in what part of the world this settlement could
be. Some guessed Toronto, others Montreal, and one of us even suggested
Pekin. But whether this city exists in some unknown world on the other side
of the North Pole, or not, it is a fact that this wonderful mirage occurs from
time to time yearly, and we were not the only ones who witnessed the
spectacle. Therefore it is evident that it must be the reflection of some place
built by the hand of man.” According to this correspondent, the “mirage”
did not look like one of the cities named, but like “some immense city of
the past.”
In the New York Tribune, Feb. 17, 1901, it is said that Indians of Alaska
had told of an occasional appearance, as if of a city, suspended in the sky,
and that a prospector, named Willoughby, having heard the stories, had
investigated, in the year 1887, and had seen the spectacle. It is said that,
having several times attempted to photograph the scene, Willoughby did
finally at least show an alleged photograph of an aerial city. In Alaska, p.
140, Miner Bruce says that Willoughby, one of the early pioneers in Alaska,
after whom Willoughby Island is named, had told him of the phenomenon,
and that, early in 1899, he had accompanied Willoughby to the place over
which the mirage was said to repeat. It seems that he saw nothing himself,
but he quotes a member of the Duc d’Abruzzi’s expedition to Mt. St. Elias,
summer of 1897, Mr. C. W. Thornton, of Seattle, who saw the spectacle,
and wrote—”It required no effort of the imagination to liken it to a city, but
was so distinct that it required, instead, faith to believe that it was not in
reality a city.” Bruce publishes a reproduction of Willoughby’s photograph,
and says that the city was identified as Bristol, England. So definite, or so
un-mirage-like, is this reproduction, trees and many buildings shown in
detail, that one supposes that the original was a photograph of a good-sized
terrestrial city, perhaps Bristol, England.
In Chapter 10, of his book, Wonders of Alaska, Alexander Badlam tries to
explain. He publishes a reproduction of Willoughby’s photograph: it is the
same as Bruce’s, except that all buildings are transposed, or are negative in
positions. Badlam does not like to accuse Willoughby of fraud: his idea is
that some unknown humorist had sold Willoughby a dry plate, picturing
part of the city of Bristol. My own idea is that something of this kind did
occur, and that this photograph, greatly involved in accounts of the
repeating mirages, had nothing to do with the mirages. Badlam then tells of
another photograph. He tells that two men, near the Muir Glacier, had, byis photograph, greatly involved in accounts of the
repeating mirages, had nothing to do with the mirages. Badlam then tells of
another photograph. He tells that two men, near the Muir Glacier, had, by

--- PAGE BREAK ---ly involved in accounts of the
repeating mirages, had nothing to do with the mirages. Badlam then tells of
another photograph. He tells that two men, near the Muir Glacier, had, by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

means of a pan of quicksilver, seen a reflection of an unknown city
somewhere, and that their idea was that it was at the bottom of the sea near
the glacier, reflecting in the sky, and reflecting back to and from the
quicksilver. That’s complicated. A photographer named Taber then
announced that he had photographed this scene, as reflected in a pan of
quicksilver. Badlam publishes a reproduction of Taber’s photograph, or
alleged photograph. This time, for anybody who prefers to think that there
is, somewhere in the sky of Alaska, a great, unknown city, we have a most
agreeable photograph: exotic-looking city; a structure like a coliseum, and
another prominent building like a mosque, and many indefinite, mirage-like
buildings. I’d like to think this photograph genuine, myself, but I do
conceive that Taber could have taken it by photographing a panorama that
he had painted. Badlam’s explanation is that mirages of glaciers are
common, in Alaska, and that they look architectural. Some years ago, I read
five or six hundred pounds of literature upon the Arctic, and I should say
that far-projected mirages are not common in the Arctic: mere looming is
common. Badlam publishes a photograph of a mirage of Muir Glacier. The
looming points of ice do look Gothic, but they are obviously only loomings,
extending only short distances from primaries, with no detachment from
primaries, and not reflecting in the sky.
For the first identification of the Willoughby photograph as a photograph
of part of the city of Bristol, see the New York Times, Oct. 20, 1889. That
this photograph was somebody’s hoax seems to be acceptable. But it was
not similar to the frequently reported scene in the sky of Alaska, according
to descriptions. In the New York Times, Oct. 31, 1889, is an account, by Mr.
L. B. French, of Chicago, of the spectral representation, as he saw it, near
Mt. Fair-weather. “We could see plainly houses, well-defined streets, and
trees. Here and there rose tall spires over huge buildings, which appeared to
be ancient mosques or cathedrals. . . . It did not look like a modern city—
more like an ancient European City.”
Jour. Roy. Met. Soc., 27-158:
That every year, between June 21 and July 10, a “phantom city” appears
in the sky, over a glacier in Alaska; that features of it had been recognized
as buildings in the city of Bristol, England, so that the “mirage” was
supposed to be a mirage of Bristol. It is said that for generations these
repeating representations had been known to the Alaskan Indians, and that,
in May, 1901, a scientific expedition from San Francisco would investigate.of Bristol. It is said that for generations these
repeating representations had been known to the Alaskan Indians, and that,
in May, 1901, a scientific expedition from San Francisco would investigate.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is said that, except for slight changes, from year to year, the scene was
always the same.
La Nature, 1901-1-303:
That a number of scientists had set out from Victoria, B. C., to Mt.
Fairweather, Alaska, to study a repeating mirage of a city in the sky, which
had been reported by the Duc d’Abruzzi, who had seen it and had sketched
it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---om Victoria, B. C., to Mt.
Fairweather, Alaska, to study a repeating mirage of a city in the sky, which
had been reported by the Duc d’Abruzzi, who had seen it and had sketched
it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

N
32
IGHT of Dec 7, 1900—for seventy minutes a fountain of light
played upon the planet Mars. Prof. Pickering—”absolutely
inexplicable” (Sci. Amer., 84-179).
It may have been a geyser of messages. It may be translated some day. If
it were expressed in imagery befitting the salutation by a planet to its
dominant, it may be known some day as the most heroic oration in the
literature of this geo-system. See Lowell’s account in Popular Astronomy,
10-187. Here are published several of the values in a possible code of long
flashes and short flashes. Lowell takes a supposed normality for unity, and
records variations of two thirds, one and one third, and one and a half. If
there be, at Flagstaff, Arizona, records of all the long flashes and short
flashes that were seen, for seventy minutes, upon this night of Dec. 7, 1900,
it is either that the greetings of an island of space have been hopelessly
addressed to a continental stolidity, or there will have to be the descent,
upon Flagstaff, Arizona, by all the amateur Champollions of this earth, to
concentrate in one deafening buzz of attempted translation.
It was at this time that Tesla announced that he had received, upon his
wireless apparatus, vibrations that he attributed to the Martians. They were
series of triplets.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
It is our expression that, during eclipses and oppositions and other
notable celestial events, lunarians try to communicate with this earth,
having a notion that at such times the astronomers of this earth may be
more nearly alert.
An eclipse of the moon, March 10-11, 1895—not a cloud; no mist —
electric flashes like lightning, reported from a ship upon the Atlantic (Eng.
Mec., 61-100).
During the eclipse of the sun, July 29, 1897, a strange image was taken
on a sensitive plate, by Mr. L. E. Martindale, of St. Mary’s, Ohio. It looks
like a record of knotted lightning. See Photography, May 26, 1898.pse of the sun, July 29, 1897, a strange image was taken
on a sensitive plate, by Mr. L. E. Martindale, of St. Mary’s, Ohio. It looks
like a record of knotted lightning. See Photography, May 26, 1898.

--- PAGE BREAK ---29, 1897, a strange image was taken
on a sensitive plate, by Mr. L. E. Martindale, of St. Mary’s, Ohio. It looks
like a record of knotted lightning. See Photography, May 26, 1898.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the Bull. Soc. Astro. de France, 17-205, 315, 447, it is said that upon
the first and the third of March, 1903, a light like a little star, flashing
intermittently, was seen by M. Rey, in Marseilles, and by Maurice Gheury,
in London, in the lunar crater Aristarchus. March 28, 1903—opposition of
Mars.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
In Cosmos, n.s., 49-259, M. Desmoulins writes, from Argenteuil, that,
upon Aug. 9, 1903, at 11 P.M., moving from north to south, he saw a
luminous object. The planet Venus was at primary greatest brilliance upon
Aug. 13, 1903. In three respects it was like other objects that have been
observed upon this earth at times of the nearest approach of Venus: it was a
red object; it appeared only in a local sky, and it appeared in the time of the
visibility of Venus. With M. Desmoulins were four persons, one of whom
had field glasses. The object was watched twenty minutes, during which
time it traveled a distance estimated at five or six kilometers. It looked like
a light suspended from a balloon, but, through glasses, no outline of a
balloon could be seen, and there were no reflections of light as if from the
opaque body of a balloon. It was a red body, with greatest luminosity in its
nucleus. The Editor of Cosmos writes that, according to other
correspondents, this object had been seen, at 11 P.M., July 19th and 26th, at
Chatou. Argenteuil and Chatou are 4 or 5 miles apart, and both are about 5
miles from Paris. All three of these dates were Sundays, and even though
nothing like a balloon had been seen through glasses, one naturally
supposes that somebody near Paris had been amusing himself sending up
fire-balloons, Sunday evenings. The one great resistance to all that is known
as progress is what one “naturally supposes.”
In the English Mechanic, 81-220, Arthur Mee writes that several persons,
in the neighborhood of Cardiff, had, upon the night of March 29, 1905, seen
in the sky, “an appearance like a vertical beam of light, which was not due
(they say) to a searchlight, or any such cause.” There were other
observations, and they remind us of the observations by Noble and
Bradgate, Aug. 28-29, 1883: then upon an object that cast a light like a
searchlight; this time an association between a light like a searchlight, and a
luminosity of definite form. In the Cambrian Natural Observer, 1905-32,
are several accounts of a more definite-looking appearance that was seen,
this night, in the sky of Wales—”like a long cluster of stars, obscured by a
thin film or mist.” It was seen at the time of the visibility of Venus, then andefinite-looking appearance that was seen,
this night, in the sky of Wales—”like a long cluster of stars, obscured by a
thin film or mist.” It was seen at the time of the visibility of Venus, then an

--- PAGE BREAK ---pearance that was seen,
this night, in the sky of Wales—”like a long cluster of stars, obscured by a
thin film or mist.” It was seen at the time of the visibility of Venus, then an

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“evening star”—about 10 P.M. It grew brighter, and for about half an hour
looked like an incandescent light. It was a conspicuous and definite object,
according to another description—”like an iron bar, heated to an orange-
colored glow, and suspended vertically.”
Three nights later, something appeared in the sky of Cherbourg, France—
L’Astre Cherbourg—the thing that appeared, night after night, in the sky of
the city of Cherbourg, at a time when the planet Venus was nearest (inferior
conjunction April 26, 1905).
Flammarion, in the Bull. Soc. Astro. de France, 19-243, says that this
object was the planet Venus. He therefore denies that it had moved in
various directions, saying that the supposed observations to this effect were
illusions. In L’Illustration, April 22, 1905, he tells the story in his own way,
and says some things that we are not disposed to agree with, but also he
says that the ignorance of some persons in inénarrable. In Cosmos, n.s., 42-
420, months after the occurrence, it is said that many correspondents had
written to inquire as to L’Astre Cherbourg. The Editor gives his opinion that
the object was either Jupiter or Venus. Throughout our Venus-visitor
expression, the most important point is appearance in a local sky. That
unifies this expression with other expressions, all of them converging into
our general extra-geographic acceptances. The Editor of Cosmos says that
this object, which was reported from Cherbourg, was reported from other
towns as well. He probably means to say that it was seen simultaneously in
different towns. For all guardians of this earth’s isolation, this is a
convenient thing to say: the conclusion then is that the planet Venus,
exceptionally bright, was attracting unusual attention generally, and that
there was nothing in the especial sky of Cherbourg. But we have learned
that standardizing disguisements often obscure our data in later accounts,
and we have formed the habit of going to contemporaneous sources. We
shall find that the newspapers of the time reported a luminous object that
appeared, night after night, only over the city of Cherbourg, as the name by
which it was known indicates. It was a reddish object. The Editor of
Cosmos explains that atmospheric conditions could give this coloration to
Venus. I suppose this could be so occasionally: not night after night, I
should say. We shall find that this object, or a similar object, was reported
from other places, but not simultaneously with its appearance over
Cherbourg.be so occasionally: not night after night, I
should say. We shall find that this object, or a similar object, was reported
from other places, but not simultaneously with its appearance over
Cherbourg.

--- PAGE BREAK ---not night after night, I
should say. We shall find that this object, or a similar object, was reported
from other places, but not simultaneously with its appearance over
Cherbourg.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the Journal des Debats, the first news is in the issue of April 4, 1905.
It is said that a luminous body was appearing, every evening, between 8 and
10 o’clock, over the city of Cherbourg.
These were about the hours of the visibility of Venus. In this period,
Venus set at 9:30 P.M., and Jupiter at 8 P.M. It is enough to make any
conventionalist feel most reasonable, though he’d feel that way anyway, in
thinking that of course then this object was Venus. In my own earlier
speculations upon this subject, this one datum stood out so that had it not
been for other data, I’d have abandoned the subject. But then I read of other
occurrences: time after time has something been seen in a local sky of this
earth, sometimes so definitely seen to move, not like Venus, but in various
directions, that one has to think that it was not Venus, though appearing at
the time of visibility of Venus. Between these appearances and visibility of
Venus there does seem to be relation.
In the Journal, it is said that L’Astre Cherbourg had an apparent diameter
of 15 centimeters, and a less definite margin of 75 centimeters—seemed to
be about a yard wide—meaningless of course. In the Bull. Soc. Astro. de
France, it is said that, according to reports, its form was oval. In the
Journal des Debats, we are told that at first the thing was supposed to be a
captive balloon but that this idea was given up because it appeared and
disappeared.
Journal des Debats, April 12:
That every evening the luminous object was continuing to appear above
Cherbourg; that many explanations had been thought of: by some persons
that it was the planet Jupiter, and by others that it was a comet but that no
one knew what it was. The cornet-explanation is of course ruled out. The
writer in the Journal expresses regret that neither the Meteorological
Bureau nor the Observatory of Paris had sent anybody to investigate, but
says that the préfet maritime of Cherbourg had commissioned a naval
officer to investigate. In Le Temps, of the 12th, is published an interview
with Flammarion, who complains some more against general inénarrable-
ness, and says that of course the object was Venus. The writer in Le Temps
says that soon would the matter be settled, because the commander of a
warship had undertaken to decide what the luminous body was.
Le Figaro, April 13:
The report of Commander de Kerillis, of the Chasseloup-Laubut— that
the position of L’Astre Cherbourg was not the position of Venus, and thatto decide what the luminous body was.
Le Figaro, April 13:
The report of Commander de Kerillis, of the Chasseloup-Laubut— that
the position of L’Astre Cherbourg was not the position of Venus, and that

--- PAGE BREAK ---uminous body was.
Le Figaro, April 13:
The report of Commander de Kerillis, of the Chasseloup-Laubut— that
the position of L’Astre Cherbourg was not the position of Venus, and that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the disc did not look like the crescentic disc of Venus, but that the
observations had been made from a vessel, under unfavorable conditions,
and that the commander and his colleagues did not offer a final opinion.
I think that there was inénarrable-ness all around. Given visibility, I can’t
think what the unfavorable conditions could have been. Given, however,
observations upon something that all the astronomers in the world would
say could not be, one does think of the dislike of a naval officer, who,
though he probably knew right ascension from declination, was himself no
astronomer, to commit himself. In Le Temps, and other newspapers
published in Paris, it is said that, according to the naval officers, the object
might have been a comet, but that they would not positively commit
themselves to this opinion, either.
I think that somebody should be brave; so, though not positively, of
course, I incline, myself, to relate these appearances over Cherbourg with
the observations in Wales, upon March 29th; also I suggest that there is
another report that may relate. In Le Temps, April 12, it is said that, at
midnight, April 9-10, a luminous body, like L’Astre Cherbourg, was seen in
the sky of Tunis. Though it was visible several minutes, it is said that this
object was probably a meteor.
Every night, from the first to the eleventh of April, a luminous body
appeared in the sky of Cherbourg. Then it was seen no longer. It may have
been seen sailing away, upon its final departure from the sky of Cherbourg.
In Le Figaro, April 15, it is said that, upon the night of the eleventh of
April, the guards of La Blanche Light-house had seen something like a
lighted balloon in the sky. Supposing it was a balloon, they had started to
signal to it, but it had disappeared. It is said that the lighthouse had been out
of communication with the mainland, and that the guards had not heard of
L’Astre Cherbourg.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
In the London Times, Nov. 23, 1905, a correspondent writes that, at East
Liss, Hants, which is about 40 miles from Reading, he and his gamekeeper
had, about 3:30 P.M., Nov. 17th, heard a loud, distant rumbling. According
to this hearer, the rumbling seemed to be a composition of triplets of
sounds. We shall accept that three sounds were heard, but we have no other
assertion that each sound was itself so sub-serialized. This correspondent’s
gamekeeper said that he had heard similar sounds at 11:30 A.M., and at 1:30
P.M. It is said that the sounds were not like gunfire, and that the directionitself so sub-serialized. This correspondent’s
gamekeeper said that he had heard similar sounds at 11:30 A.M., and at 1:30
P.M. It is said that the sounds were not like gunfire, and that the direction

--- PAGE BREAK ---ized. This correspondent’s
gamekeeper said that he had heard similar sounds at 11:30 A.M., and at 1:30
P.M. It is said that the sounds were not like gunfire, and that the direction

--- PAGE BREAK ---

from which they seemed to come, and the time in the afternoon, precluded
the explanation of artillery-practice at Aldershot or Portsmouth. Aldershot is
about 15 miles from East Liss, and Portsmouth about 20.
Times, November 24—that the “quake” had been distinctly felt in
Reading, about 3:30 P.M., November 17th. Times, November 25— heard at
Reading, at 11:30, 1:30, and 3:30 o’clock, November 17th.
Reading Standard, November 25:
That consternation had been caused in Reading, upon the 17th, by sounds
and vibrations of the earth, about 11:30 A.M., 1:30 P.M., and 3:30 P.M. It is
said that nothing had been seen, but that the sounds closely resembled those
that had been heard during the meteoric shower of 1866.
Mr. H. G. Fordham appears again. In the Times, December 1, he writes
that the phenomena pointed clearly to an explosion in the sky, and not to an
earthquake of subterranean origin. “The noise and shock experienced are no
doubt attributable to the explosion (or to more than one explosion) of a
meteorite, or bolide, high up in the atmosphere, and setting up a wave (or
waves) of sound and aerial shock. It is probable, indeed, that a good many
phenomena having this source are wrongly ascribed to slight and local
earthshock.”
Mr. Fordham wrote this, but he wrote no more, and I think that
somewhere else something else was written, and that, in the year 1905, it
had to be obeyed; and that it may be interpreted in these words—”Thou
shalt not.” Mr. Fordham did not inquire into the reasonableness of thinking
that, only by coincidence, meteors so successively exploded, in a period of
four hours, in one local sky of this earth, and nowhere else; and into the
inference, then, as to whether this earth is stationary or not.
We have data of a succession occupying far more than four hours.
In the Times, Mrs. Lane, of Petersfield, 20 miles from Portsmouth, writes
that, at 11:30 A.M., and at 3:30 P.M., several days before the 17th, she had
heard the detonations, then hearing them again, upon the 17th. Mrs. Lane
thinks that there must have been artillery-practice at Portsmouth. It seems
clear that there was no cannonading anywhere in England, at this time. It
seems clear that there was signaling from some other world.
In the English Mechanic, 82-433, Joseph Clark writes that, a few minutes
past 3 P.M., upon the 18th a triplet of detonations was heard at Somerset
—”as loud as thunder, but not exactly like thunder.”In the English Mechanic, 82-433, Joseph Clark writes that, a few minutes
past 3 P.M., upon the 18th a triplet of detonations was heard at Somerset
—”as loud as thunder, but not exactly like thunder.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Reading Observer, November 25—that, according to a correspondent, the
sounds had been heard again, at Whitechurch (20 miles from Reading) upon
the 21st, at 1:35 P.M., and 3:08 P.M. The sounds had been attributed to
artillery-practice at Aldershot, but the correspondent had written to the
artillery commandant, at Bulford Camp, and had received word that there
had been no heavy firing at the times of his inquiry. The Editor of the
Observer says that he, too, had written to the commandant, and had
received the same answer.
I have searched widely. I have found record of nobody’s supposition that
he had traced these detonations to origin upon this earth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he commandant, and had
received the same answer.
I have searched widely. I have found record of nobody’s supposition that
he had traced these detonations to origin upon this earth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
33
N Coconino County, Arizona, is an extraordinary formation. It is known
as Coon Butte and as Crater Mountain. Once upon a time, something
gouged this part of Arizona. The cavity in the ground is about 3,800 feet
in diameter, and it is approximately 600 feet deep, from the rim of the
ramparts to the floor of the interior. Out from this cavity had been hurled
blocks of limestone, some of them a mile or so away, some of these masses
weighing probably 5,000 tons each. And in the formation, and around it,
have been found either extraordinary numbers of meteorites, or fragments
of one super-meteorite. Barringer, in his report to the Academy of Natural
Science of Philadelphia (Proceedings, A.N.S. P., December, 1905) says that,
of the traffickers in this meteoritic material, he knew of two men who had
shipped away fifteen tons of it. But Bar-ringer’s minimum estimate of a
body large enough so to gouge the ground is ten million tons.
It was supposed that a main mass of meteoritic material was buried under
the floor of the formation, but this floor was drilled, and nothing was found
to support this supposition. One drill went down 1,020 feet, going through
100 feet of red sandstone, which seems to be the natural, undisturbed sub-
structure. The datum that opposes most strongly the idea that this pit was
gouged by one super-meteorite is that in it and around it at least three kinds
of meteorites have been found: they are irons, masses of iron-shale, and
shale-balls that are so rounded and individualized that they cannot be
thought of as fragments of a greater body, and cannot be very well thought
of as great drops of molten matter cast from a main, incandescent mass,
inasmuch as there is not a trace of igneous rock such as would mark such
contact.
There are data for thinking that these three kinds of objects fell at
different times, presumably from origin of fixed position relatively to this
point in Arizona. Within the formation, shales were found, buried at various
distances, as if they had fallen at different times, for instance seven of them
in a vertical line, the deepest-buried 27 feet down; also shales outside the
formation were found buried. But, quite as if they had fallen more recently,at different times, for instance seven of them
in a vertical line, the deepest-buried 27 feet down; also shales outside the
formation were found buried. But, quite as if they had fallen more recently,

--- PAGE BREAK ---for instance seven of them
in a vertical line, the deepest-buried 27 feet down; also shales outside the
formation were found buried. But, quite as if they had fallen more recently,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the hundreds of irons were found upon the surface of the ground, or partly
covered, or wholly covered, but only with superficial soil.
There is no knowing when this great gouge occurred, but cedars upon the
rim are said to be about 700 years old.
In terms of our general expression upon differences of potential, and of
electric relations between nearby worlds, I think of a blast between this
earth and a land somewhere else, and of something that was more than a
cyclone that gouged this pit.
Other meteorites have been found in Arizona: the 85-pound iron that was
found at Weaver, near Wickenburg, 130 miles from Crater Mountain, in
1898, and the 960-pound mass, now in the National Museum, said to have
been found at Peach Springs, 140 miles from Crater Mountain. These two
irons indicate nothing in particular; but, if we accept that somewhere else in
Arizona there is another deposit of meteorites, also extraordinarily
abundant, such abundance gives something of commonness of nature if not
of commonness of origin to two deposits. There are several large irons
known as the Tucson meteorites, one weighing 632 pounds and another
1,514 pounds, now in museums. They came from a place known as Iron
Valley, in the Santa Rita Mountains, about 30 miles south of Tucson, and
about 200 miles from Crater Mountain. Iron Valley was so named because
of the great number of meteorites found in it. According to the people of
Tucson, this fall occurred about the year 1660. See Amer. Jour. Sci., 2-13-
290.
Upon June 24, 1905, Barringer found, upon the plain, about a mile and a
half northwest of Crater Mountain, a meteorite of a fourth kind. It was a
meteoritic stone, “as different from all the other specimens as one specimen
could be from another.” Barringer thinks that it fell, about the 15th of
January, 1904. Upon a night in the middle of January, 1904, two of his
employees were awakened by a loud hissing sound, and saw a meteor
falling north of the formation. At the same time, two Arizona physicians,
north of the formation, saw the meteor falling south of them. For analysis
and description of this object, see Amer. Jour. Sci., 4-21-353. Barringer,
who believes that once upon a time one super-meteorite, of which only a
very small part has ever been found, gouged this hole in the ground, writes
—”That a small stony meteorite should have fallen on almost exactly the
same spot on this earth’s surface as the great Canon Diablo iron meteorite
fell many centuries ago, is certainly a most remarkable coincidence. I haveeteorite should have fallen on almost exactly the
same spot on this earth’s surface as the great Canon Diablo iron meteorite
fell many centuries ago, is certainly a most remarkable coincidence. I have

--- PAGE BREAK ---

stated the facts as accurately as possible, and I have no opinion to offer, as
to whether or not these involve anything more than a coincidence.”
Other phenomena in Arizona:
Upon Feb. 24, 1897, a great explosion was heard over the town of
Tombstone. It is said that a fragment of a meteor fell at St. David (Monthly
Weather Review, 1897-56). Yarnell, Arizona, Sept. 12, 1898—”a loud, deep,
thundering noise” that was heard between noon and 1 P.M. “The noise
proceeded from the Granite Range, this side of Prescott. From all accounts,
a large meteor struck the earth at this time” (8. S. Weather Bureau Rept.,
Ariz. Section, September, 1898).
Upon July 19, 1912, at Holbrook, Arizona, about 50 miles from Crater
Mountain, occurred a loud detonation and one of the most remarkable falls
of stones recorded. See Amer. Jour. Sci., 4-34-437. Some of the stones are
very small. About 14,000 were collected. Only twice, since the year 1800,
have stones in greater numbers fallen from the sky to this earth, according
to conventional records.
About a month later (August 18) there was another concussion at
Holbrook. This was said to be an earthquake (Bull. Seis. Soc. Amer., 1-209).

--- PAGE BREAK ---rth, according
to conventional records.
About a month later (August 18) there was another concussion at
Holbrook. This was said to be an earthquake (Bull. Seis. Soc. Amer., 1-209).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
34
HE climacteric opposition of Mars, of 1909—the last in our records
—the next will be in 1924—
Aug. 8, 1909—see Quar. Jour. Met. Soc., n.s., 35-299— flashes in
a clear sky that were seen in Epsom, Surrey, and other places in the
southeast of England. They could not be attributed to lightning in England.
The writer in the Journal finds that there was a storm in France, more than
one hundred miles away. For an account of these flashes, tabulated at
Epsom—”night fine and star-light”—see Symons’ Met. Mag., 44-148.
During each period of five minutes, from 10 to 11:15 P.M., the number of
flashes—16-14-20-31-15-26-12-20-30-18-27-22-14-12-10-21-8-5-3-1-0-1-
0. With such a time-basis, I can see no possibility of detecting anything of a
code-like significance. I do see development. There were similar
observations at times in the favorable oppositions of Mars of 1875 and
1877. In 1892, such flashes were noted more particularly. Now we have
them noted and tabulated, but upon a basis that could be of interest only to
meteorologists. If they shall be seen in 1924, we may have observation,
tabulation, and some marvelously different translations of them. After that
there will be some intolerably similar translations, suspiciously delayed in
publication.
Sept. 23, 1909—opposition of Mars.
Throughout our data, we have noticed successions of appearances in
local skies of this earth, that indicate that this earth is stationary, but that
also relate to nearest approaches of Mars. Upon the night of Dec. 16-17,
1896, concussion after concussion was felt at Worcester, England; a great
“meteor” was seen at the time of the greatest concussion. Mars was seven
days past opposition. We thought it likely enough that explosion after
explosion had occurred over Worcester, and that something in the sky had
been seen only at the time of the greatest, or the nearest, explosion. We did
not think well of the conventional explanation that only by coincidence had
a great meteor exploded over a region where a series of earthquakes was
occurring, and exactly at the moment of the greatest of these shocks.the conventional explanation that only by coincidence had
a great meteor exploded over a region where a series of earthquakes was
occurring, and exactly at the moment of the greatest of these shocks.

--- PAGE BREAK ---planation that only by coincidence had
a great meteor exploded over a region where a series of earthquakes was
occurring, and exactly at the moment of the greatest of these shocks.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In November, 1911, Mars was completing its cycle of changing
proximities of a duration of fifteen years, and was duplicating the
relationship of the year 1896. About 10 o’clock, night of Nov. 16, 1911, a
concussion that is conventionally said to have been an earthquake occurred
in Germany and Switzerland. But plainly there was an explosion in the sky.
In the Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 3-189, Count
Montessus de Ballore writes that he had examined 112 reports upon flashes
and other luminous appearances in the sky that had preceded the
“earthquake” by a few seconds. He concludes that a great meteor had only
happened to explode over a region where, a few seconds later, there was
going to be an earthquake. “It therefore seems highly probable that the
earthquake coincided with a fall of meteors or of shooting stars.”
The duplication of the circumstances of December, 1896, continues. If of
course this concussion in Germany and Switzerland was the effect of
something that exploded in the sky—of what were the concussions that
were felt later, the effects" De Ballore does not mention anything that
occurred later. But, a few minutes past midnight, and then again, at 3
o’clock, morning of the 17th, there were other, but slighter, shocks. Only at
the time of the greatest shock was something seen in the sky. Nature, 88-
117—that this succession of phenomena did occur. We relate the
phenomena to the planet Mars, but also we ask—how, if most reasonably,
all three of these shocks were concussions from explosions in the sky, if of
course one of them was, meteors could ever so hound one small region
upon a moving earth, or projectiles be fired with such specialization and
preciseness" Nov. 17th, 1911, was seven days before the opposition of
Mars. Though the opposition occurred upon the 24th of November, Mars
was at minimum distance upon the 17th.
No matter how difficult of acceptance our own notions may be, they are
opposed by this barbarism, or puerility, or pill that can’t be digested:
Seven days from the opposition of Mars, in 1896, a great meteor
exploded over a region where there had been a succession of earth-quakes
—by coincidence;
Seven days from the next similar opposition of Mars, a great meteor
exploded over a region where there was going to be a succession of
earthquakes—by coincidence.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ādays from the next similar opposition of Mars, a great meteor
exploded over a region where there was going to be a succession of
earthquakes—by coincidence.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā

--- PAGE BREAK ---imilar opposition of Mars, a great meteor
exploded over a region where there was going to be a succession of
earthquakes—by coincidence.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Advantagerians of the moon—that is the cult of lunar
communicationists, who try to take advantage of such celestial events as
oppositions and eclipses, thinking that astronomers, or night watchmen, or
policemen of this earth might at such times look up at the sky—
A great luminous object, or a meteor, that was seen at the time of the
eclipse of June 28, 1908—“as if to make the date of the eclipse more
memorable,” says W. F. Denning (Observatory, 31-288).
Not long before the opposition of Mars, in 1909, the bright spot west of
Picard was seen twice: March 26 and May 23 (Jour. B. A. A., 19-376).
Nov. 16, 1910—an eclipse of the moon, and a “meteor” that appeared,
almost at the moment of totality (Eng. Mec., 92-430). It is reported, in
Nature, 85-118, as seen by Madame de Robeck, at Naas, Ireland, “from an
apparent radiant, just below the eclipsed moon.” The thing may have come
from the moon. Seemingly with the same origin, it was seen far away in
France. In La Nature, Nov. 26, 1910, it is said that, at Besancon, France,
during the eclipse, was seen a meteor like a superb rocket, “qui serait partie
de la lune.” There may have been something occurring upon the moon at
the time. In the Jour. B. A. A., 21-100, it is said that Mrs. Albright had seen
a luminous point upon the moon throughout the eclipse.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
Our expression is that there is an association between reported objects,
like extra-mundane visitors, and nearest approaches by the planet Venus to
this earth. Perhaps unfortunately this is our expression, because it makes for
more restriction than we intend. The objects, or the voyagers, have often
been seen during the few hours of the visibility of Venus, when the planet is
nearest. “Then such an object is Venus,” say the astronomers. If anybody
wonders why, if these seeming navigators can come close to this earth—as
they do approach, if they appear only in a local sky—they do not then come
all the way to this earth, let him ask a sea captain why said captain never
purposely descends to the bottom of the ocean, though traveling often not
far away. However, I conceive of a great variety of extra-mundanians, and I
am now collecting data for a future expression—that some kinds of beings
from outer space can adapt to our conditions, which may be like the bottom
of a sea, and have been seen, but have been supposed to be psychic
phenomena.
Upon Oct. 31, 1908, the planet Venus was four months past inferior
conjunction, and so had moved far from nearest approach, but there areave been seen, but have been supposed to be psychic
phenomena.
Upon Oct. 31, 1908, the planet Venus was four months past inferior
conjunction, and so had moved far from nearest approach, but there are

--- PAGE BREAK ---ave been supposed to be psychic
phenomena.
Upon Oct. 31, 1908, the planet Venus was four months past inferior
conjunction, and so had moved far from nearest approach, but there are

--- PAGE BREAK ---

vague stories of strange objects that had been seen in the skies of this earth
—localized in New England—back to the time of nearest approach. In the
New York Sun, Nov. 1, 1908, is published a dispatch, from Boston, dated
Oct. 31. It is said that, near Bridgewater, at four o’clock in the morning of
October 31, two men had seen a spectacle in the sky. The men were not
astronomers. They were undertakers. There may be a disposition to think
that these observers were not in their own field of greatest expertness, and
to think that we are not very exacting as to the sources of our data. But we
have to depend upon undertakers, for instance: early in our investigations,
we learned that the prestige of astronomers has been built upon their high
moral character, all of them most excellently going to bed soon after sunset,
so as to get up early and write all day upon astronomical subjects. But the
exemplary in one respect may not lead to much advancement in some other
respect. Our undertakers saw, in the sky, something like a searchlight. It
played down upon this earth, as if directed by an investigator, and then it
flashed upward. “All of the balloons in which ascensions are made, in this
State, were accounted for today, and a search through southeastern
Massachusetts failed to reveal any further trace of the supposed airship.” It
is said that “mysterious bright lights,” believed to have come from a
balloon, had been reported from many places in New England. The week
before, persons at Ware had said that they had seen an illuminated balloon
passing over the town, early in the morning. During the summer such
reports had come from Bristol, Conn., and later from Pittsfield, Mass., and
from White River Junction, Vt. “In all these cases, however, no balloon
could be found, all the known airships being accounted for.” In the New
York Sun, Dec. 13, 1909, it is said that, during the autumn of 1908, reports
had come from different places in Connecticut, upon a mysterious light that
moved rapidly in the sky.
Venus moved on, traveling around the sun, which was revolving around
this earth, or traveling any way to suit anybody. In December, 1909, the
planet was again approaching this earth. So close was Venus to this earth
that, upon the 15th of December, 1909, crowds stood, at noon, in the streets
of Rome, watching it, or her (New York Sun, December 16). At 3 o’clock,
afternoon of December 24th crowds stood in the streets of New York,
watching Venus (New York Tribune, December 25). One supposes that upon
these occasions Venus may have been within several thousand miles of this
earth. At any rate I have never heard of one fairly good reason forus (New York Tribune, December 25). One supposes that upon
these occasions Venus may have been within several thousand miles of this
earth. At any rate I have never heard of one fairly good reason for

--- PAGE BREAK ---, December 25). One supposes that upon
these occasions Venus may have been within several thousand miles of this
earth. At any rate I have never heard of one fairly good reason for

--- PAGE BREAK ---

supposing otherwise. If again something appeared in local skies of this
earth, or in the skies of New England, and sometimes during the few hours
of the visibility of Venus, the object was or was not Venus, all according to
the details of various descriptions, and the credibility of the details. The
searchlight, for instance; more than one light; directions and motions.
Venus, at the time, was for several hours after sunset, slowly descending in
the southwest: primary maximum brilliance Jan. 8th, 1910; inferior
conjunction February 12th.
There is an amusing befuddlement to clear away first. Upon the night of
Sept. 8, 1909, a luminous object had been seen sailing over New England,
and sounds from it, like sounds from a motor, had been heard. Then Mr.
Wallace Tillinghast, of Worcester, Mass., announced that this light had been
a lamp in his “secret aeroplane,” and that upon this night he had traveled, in
said “secret aeroplane,” from Boston to New York, and back to Boston. At
this time the longest recorded flight, in an aeroplane, was Farman’s, of 111
miles, from Rheims, August, 1909; and, in the United States, according to
records, it was not until May 29, 1910, that Curtiss flew from Albany to
New York City, making one stop in the 150 miles, however. So this
unrecorded flight made some stir in the newspapers. Mr. Tillinghast meant
his story humorously of course. I mention it because, if anybody should
look the matter up, he will find the yarn involved in the newspaper
accounts. If nothing else had been seen, Mr. Tillinghast might still tell his
story, and explain why he never did anything with his astonishing “secret
aeroplane”; but something else was seen, and upon one of the nights in
which it appeared, Tillinghast was known to be in his home.
According to the New York Tribune, Dec. 21, 1909, Immigration
Inspector Hoe, of Boston, had reported having seen, at one o’clock in the
morning of December 20, “a bright light passing over the harbor” and had
concluded that he had seen an airship of some kind.
New York Tribune, December 23—that a “mysterious airship” had
appeared over the town of Worcester, Mass., “sweeping the heavens with a
searchlight of tremendous power.” It had come from the southeast, and
traveled northwest, then hovering over the city, disappearing in the
direction of Marlboro. Two hours later, it returned. “Thousands thronged
the streets, watching the mysterious visitor.” Again it hovered, then moving
away, heading first to the south and then to the east.ction of Marlboro. Two hours later, it returned. “Thousands thronged
the streets, watching the mysterious visitor.” Again it hovered, then moving
away, heading first to the south and then to the east.

--- PAGE BREAK ---wo hours later, it returned. “Thousands thronged
the streets, watching the mysterious visitor.” Again it hovered, then moving
away, heading first to the south and then to the east.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The next night, something was seen, at 6 o’clock, at Boston. “The
searchlights shot across the sky line.” “As it flew away to the north, queries
began to pour into the newspaper offices and the police stations, regarding
the remarkable visitation.” It is said that an hour and a half later, an object
that was supposed to be an airship with a powerful searchlight, appeared in
the sky, at Willimantic, Conn., “hovering” over the town about 15 minutes.
In the New York Sun, December 24, are more details. It is said that, at
Willimantic, had been seen a large searchlight, approaching from the east,
and that then dark outlines of something behind the searchlight had been
seen. Also, in the Sun, it is said that whatever it may have been that was
seen at Boston, it was a dark object, with several red lights and a
searchlight, approaching Boston from the west, hovering for 10 minutes,
and then moving away westward. From Lynn, Mass., it was described as “a
long black object,” moving in the direction of Salem, and then returning, “at
a high speed.” It is said that the object had been seen at Marlboro, Mass.,
nine times since December 14.
New York Tribune, Jan. 1, 1910—dispatch from Huntington, West
Virginia, Dec. 31, 1909—“Three huge lights of almost uniform dimensions
appeared in the early morning sky, in this neighborhood, today. Joseph
Green, a farmer, declared that they were meteors, which fell on his farm. An
extensive search of his land by others who saw the lights was fruitless, and
many persons believe that an airship had sped over the country.”
In the Tribune, Jan. 13, 1910, it is said that, at 9 o’clock, morning of
January 12, an airship had been seen at Chattanooga, Tenn. “Thousands saw
the craft, and heard the ‘chug’ of its engine.” Later the object was reported
from Huntsville, Alabama. New York Tribune, January 15—dispatch from
Chattanooga, January 14 —”For the third successive day, a mysterious
white aircraft passed over Chattanooga, about noon today. It came from the
north, and was traveling southeast, disappearing over Missionary Ridge. On
Wednesday, it came south, and on Thursday, it returned north.”
In the middle of December, 1909, someone had won a prize for sailing in
a dirigible from St. Cyr to the Eiffel Tower and back.
St. Cyr is several miles from Paris.
Huntsville, Ala., and Chattanooga, Tenn., are 75 miles apart.
An association between the planet Venus and “mysterious visitors” either
illumines or haunts our data. In the New York Tribune, Jan. 29, 1910, it is, Ala., and Chattanooga, Tenn., are 75 miles apart.
An association between the planet Venus and “mysterious visitors” either
illumines or haunts our data. In the New York Tribune, Jan. 29, 1910, it is

--- PAGE BREAK ---oga, Tenn., are 75 miles apart.
An association between the planet Venus and “mysterious visitors” either
illumines or haunts our data. In the New York Tribune, Jan. 29, 1910, it is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

said that a luminous object, thought to be Winnecke’s comet, had been seen,
January 28, near Venus; reported from the Manila Observatory.
I have another datum that perhaps belongs to this series of events. Every
night, from the 14th to the 23rd of December, 1909, if we accept the
account from Marlboro, a luminous object was seen traveling, or exploring,
in the sky of New England. Certainly enough it was no “secret airship” of
this earth, unless its navigator went to extremes with the notion that the best
way to kept a secret is to announce it with red lights and a searchlight.
However, our acceptance depends upon general data as to the development
of terrestrial aeronautics. But upon the night of December 24th, the object
was not seen in New England, and it may have been traveling or exploring
somewhere else. Night of the 24th—Venus in the southwest in the early
hours of the evening. In the English Mechanic, 104-71, a correspondent,
who signs himself “Rigel,” writes that, upon December 24, at 8:30 o’clock
in the evening, he saw a luminous object appear above the northeastern
horizon and slowly move southward, until 8.50 o’clock, then turning
around, retracing, and disappearing whence it came, at two minutes past
nine. The correspondent is James Fergusen, Rossbrien, Limerick, Ireland.
He writes frequently upon astronomical and meteorological subjects, and is
still contributing to the somewhat enlightened columns of the English
Mechanic.
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
Nov. 19, 1912—explosive sounds reported from Sunninghill, Berkshire.
No earthquake was recorded at the Kew Observatory, and, in the opinion of
W. F. Denning (Nature, 9-363, 417) the explosion was in the sky. It was a
terrific explosion, according to the Westminster Gazette (November 19).
There was either one great explosion that rumbled and echoed for five
minutes, or there were repeated detonations, resembling cannonading
—”like a tremendous discharge of big guns” according to reports from
Abingdon, Lewes, and Epsom. Sunninghill is about ten miles from
Reading, and Abingdon is near Reading, but the sound was heard in
London, and down by the English Channel, and even in the island of
Alderney. In the Gazette, November 28, Sir George Fordham (H. G.
Fordham) writes that, in his opinion, it was an explosion in the sky. He says
—”The phenomena of airshock never have, I believe, been very fully
investigated.” His admissions and his omissions remain the same as they
have been since occurrences of the year 1889. He does not mention that,omena of airshock never have, I believe, been very fully
investigated.” His admissions and his omissions remain the same as they
have been since occurrences of the year 1889. He does not mention that,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ver have, I believe, been very fully
investigated.” His admissions and his omissions remain the same as they
have been since occurrences of the year 1889. He does not mention that,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

according to Philip T. Kenway, of Hambledon, near Godalming, about thirty
miles southeast of Reading, the sounds were heard again the next day, from
1:45 to 2 P.M. Mr. Kenway thinks that there had been big-gun firing at
Portsmouth (West. Gaz., November 21). In the London Standard, a
correspondent, writing from Dorking, say that the phenomena of the 19th
were like concussions from cannonading—”at regular intervals”—”at quick
intervals, lasting some seconds each time, for five minutes, by the clock.”
It develops that Reading was the center over which the detonations
occurred. In the Westminster Gazette, November 30, it is said that the
shocks had been felt in Reading, upon the 19th, 20th, and 21st. Only from
Reading have I record of phenomena upon the 21 st. Mr. H. L. Hawkins,
Lecturer in Geology, of the Reading University, writes that according to his
investigations there had been no gun-firing in England, to which the
detonations could be attributed. He says that Fordham’s explanation was in
accord with his own investigations, or that the detonations had occurred in
the sky. He writes that, inasmuch as the detonations had occurred upon
three successive days, a shower of meteors, of long duration, would have to
be supposed. How he ever visualized that unerring shower, striking one
point over this earth’s surface, and nowhere else, day after day, if this earth
be a rotating and revolving body, I cannot see. If he should say that by
coincidence this repetition could occur, then by what coincidence of
coincidences could the same repetitions have occurred in this same local
sky, centering around Reading, seven years before" The indications are that
this earth is stationary, no matter how unreasonable that may sound.
In the Westminster Gazette, December 9, W. F. Denning writes that
without doubt the phenomena were “meteoric explosions.” But he alludes to
the “airquake and strange noises” that were heard upon the 19th. He does
not mention the detonations that were heard upon the following days. Not
one of these writers mentions the sounds that were heard in Reading, in
November, 1905.
London Standard, Nov. 23, 1912—that, according to Lieut. Col.
Trewman, of Reading, the sounds had been heard at Reading, at 9 A.M.,
upon the 19th; 1:45 P.M., the 20th; 3:30 P.M., the 21st.mber, 1905.
London Standard, Nov. 23, 1912—that, according to Lieut. Col.
Trewman, of Reading, the sounds had been heard at Reading, at 9 A.M.,
upon the 19th; 1:45 P.M., the 20th; 3:30 P.M., the 21st.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tandard, Nov. 23, 1912—that, according to Lieut. Col.
Trewman, of Reading, the sounds had been heard at Reading, at 9 A.M.,
upon the 19th; 1:45 P.M., the 20th; 3:30 P.M., the 21st.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“U
35
NKNOWN Aircraft Over Dover.” According to the Dover
correspondent to the London Times (Jan. 6, 1913) something had been
seen, over Dover, heading from the sea.
In the London Standard, Jan. 24, 1913, it is said that, upon the morning
of January 4, an unknown airship had been seen, over Dover, and that,
about the same time, the lights of an airship had been seen over the Bristol
Channel. These places are several hundred miles apart.
London Times, January 21—report by Capt. Lindsay, Chief Constable of
Glamorganshire: that, about five o’clock, in the afternoon of January 17, he
saw an object in the sky of Cardiff, Wales. He says that he called the
attention of a bystander, who agreed with him that it was a large object. “It
was much larger than the Willows airship, and left in its trail a dense smoke.
It disappeared quickly.”
The next day, according to the Times, there were other reports: people in
Cardiff saw something that was lighted or that carried lights, moving
rapidly in the sky. In the Times, of the 28th, it is said that an airship that
carried a brilliant light had been seen in Liverpool. “It is stated at the
Liverpool Aviation School that none of the airmen had been out on Saturday
night.” Dispatches from town after town—a traveling thing in the sky,
carrying a light, and also a searchlight that swept the ground. It is said that a
vessel, of which the outlines had been clearly seen, had appeared in the sky
of Cardiff, Newport, Neath, and other places in Wales. In the Standard,
January 31, is published a list of cities where the object had been seen. Here
a writer tries to conclude that some foreign airship had made half a dozen
visits to England and Wales, or had come once, remaining three weeks; but
he gives up the attempt, thinking that nothing could have reached England
and have sailed away half a dozen times without being seen to cross the
coast; thinking that the idea of anything having made one journey, and
remaining three weeks in the air deserved no consideration.
If the unknown object did carry something like a searchlight, an idea of
its powers is given in an account in the Cardiff Evening Express, Jan. 25,ng three weeks in the air deserved no consideration.
If the unknown object did carry something like a searchlight, an idea of
its powers is given in an account in the Cardiff Evening Express, Jan. 25,

--- PAGE BREAK ---e air deserved no consideration.
If the unknown object did carry something like a searchlight, an idea of
its powers is given in an account in the Cardiff Evening Express, Jan. 25,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1913—“Last evening brilliant lights were seen, sweeping skyward, and
now, this evening, the lights grow bolder. Streets and houses in the locality
of Totterdown were suddenly illuminated by a brilliant, piercing light,
which, sweeping upward, gave many spectators a fine view of the hills
beyond.” In the Express, February 6, is a report upon this light like a
searchlight, and the object that flashed it, by the police of Dulais Valley.
Also there is an account, by a police sergeant, of a luminous thing that was
for a while stationary in the sky, and then moved away.
Still does the conventional explanation, or suggestion, survive. It is said
that members of the staff of the Evening Express had gone to the roof of the
newspaper building, but had seen only the planet Venus, which was brilliant
at this time.
Then writes a correspondent, to the Express, that the object could not
have been Venus, because he had seen it traveling at a rate of 20 or 30 miles
an hour, and had heard sounds from it. Someone else writes that not
possibly could the thing be Venus: he had seen it as “a bright red light,
going very fast.” Still someone else says that he had seen the seeming
vessel upon the 5th of February, and that it had suddenly disappeared.
There is a hiatus. Between the 5th and the 21st of February, nothing like
an airship was seen in the sky of England and Wales. If we can find that
somewhere else something similar was seen in the sky, in this period, one
supposes that it was the same object, exploring or maneuvering somewhere
else. It seems however that there were several of these objects, because of
simultaneous observations at places far apart. If we can find that, during the
absence from England and Wales, similar objects were seen somewhere
else, a great deal of what we try to think upon the subject will depend upon
how far from Great Britain they were seen. It seems incredible that the
planet Venus should deceive thousands of Britons, up to the 5th of February,
and stop her deceptions abruptly upon that date, and then abruptly resume
deceptions upon the 21st, in places at a distance apart. These circumstances
oppose the idea of collective hallucinations, by which some writers in the
newspapers tried to explain. If they were hallucinations, the hallucinations
renewed collectively, upon the 21st, in towns one hundred miles apart. One
extraordinary association is that all appearances, except the first, were in the
hours of visibility of Venus, then an “evening star.”
Upon the night of the 21st, a luminous object was reported from towns in
Yorkshire and from towns in Warwickshire, two regions about one hundrede
hours of visibility of Venus, then an “evening star.”
Upon the night of the 21st, a luminous object was reported from towns in
Yorkshire and from towns in Warwickshire, two regions about one hundred

--- PAGE BREAK ---y of Venus, then an “evening star.”
Upon the night of the 21st, a luminous object was reported from towns in
Yorkshire and from towns in Warwickshire, two regions about one hundred

--- PAGE BREAK ---

miles apart; about 10 P.M. All former attempts to explain had been
abandoned, and the general supposition was that Germain airships were
maneuvering over England. But not a thing had been seen to cross the coast
of England, though guards were patroling the coasts, especially
commissioned to watch for foreign airships. Sailors in the North Sea, and
people in Holland and Belgium had seen nothing that could be thought a
German airship sailing to or from England. A writer in Flight takes up as
especially mysterious the appearance far inland, in Warwickshire. Then
came reports from Portsmouth, Ipswich, Hornsea, and Hull, but, one notes,
no more, at this time, from Wales. Also in Ipswich, which is more than a
hundred miles from the towns in Warwickshire, and more than a hundred
miles from the Yorkshire towns, a luminous object was seen upon the night
of the 21st. Ipswich Evening Star, February 25—something that carried a
searchlight that had been seen upon the nights of the 21st and 24th, moving
in various directions, and then “dashing off at lightning speed”—that, at
Hunstanton, had been seen three bright lights traveling from the eastern sky,
remaining in sight 30 minutes, stationary, or hovering over the town, and
then disappearing in the northwest. Portsmouth Evening News, February 25
—that soon after 8 P.M., evening of the 24th, had been seen a very bright
light, appearing and disappearing, remaining over Portsmouth about one
hour, and then moving away. Portsmouth and Ipswich are about 120 miles
apart. In the London newspapers, it is said that, upon the evening of the
25th, crowds stood in the streets of Hull, watching something in the sky,
“the lights of which were easily distinguishable.” Hull is about 190 miles
northeast of Portsmouth. Hull Daily Mail, February 26—that a crowd had
watched a light high in the air. It is said that the light had been stationary for
almost half an hour and had then shot away northward. In the Times,
February 28, are published reports upon “the clear outlines of an airship,
which was carrying a dazzling searchlight,” from Portland, Burcleaves, St.
Alban’s Head, Papplewich, and the Orkneys. The last account, after a long
interval, that I know of, is another report from Capt. Lindsay: that, about 9
o’clock, evening of April 8th, he and many other persons had seen, over
Cardiff, something that carried a brilliant light and traveled at a rate of sixty
or seventy miles an hour.
Upon April 24, 1913, the planet Venus was at inferior conjunction.
In the Times, February 28, it is said that a fire-balloon had been found in
Yorkshire, and it is suggested that someone had been sending up fire-4, 1913, the planet Venus was at inferior conjunction.
In the Times, February 28, it is said that a fire-balloon had been found in
Yorkshire, and it is suggested that someone had been sending up fire-

--- PAGE BREAK ---Venus was at inferior conjunction.
In the Times, February 28, it is said that a fire-balloon had been found in
Yorkshire, and it is suggested that someone had been sending up fire-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

balloons.
In the Bull. Soc. Astro, de France, 1913-178, it is said that the people of
England were as credulous as the people of Cherbourg, and had permitted
themselves to be deceived by the planet Venus.
If German airships were maneuvering over England, without being seen
either approaching or departing, appearing sometimes far inland in England
without being seen to cross the well-guarded coasts, it was secret
maneuvering, inasmuch as the accusation was denied in Germany (Times,
February 26 and 27). It was then one of the most brilliantly proclaimed of
secrets, or it was concealment under one of the most powerful searchlights
ever seen. Possibly an airship from Germany could appear over such a city
as Hull, upon the east coast of England, without being seen to arrive or to
depart, but so far from Germany is Portsmouth, for instance, that one does
feel that something else will have to be thought of. The appearances over
Liverpool and over towns in Wales might be attributed to German airships
by someone who has not seen a map since he left school. There were more
observations upon sudden appearances and disappearances than I have
recorded: stationariness often occurred.
The objects were absent from the sky of Great Britain, from February 5
to February 21.
According to data published by Prof. Chant, in the Journal of the Royal
Astronomical Society of Canada, 7-148, the most extraordinary procession
in our records was seen, in the sky of Canada, upon the night of Feb. 9,
1913. Either groups of meteors, in one straight line, passed over the city of
Toronto, or there was a procession of unknown objects, carrying lights.
According to Prof. Chant, the spectacle was seen from the Saskatchewan to
Bermuda, but if this long route was traversed, data do not so indidate. The
supposed route was diagonally across New York State, from Buffalo, to a
point near New York City, but from New York State are recorded no
observations other than might have been upon ordinary meteors, this night.
A succession of luminous objects passed over Toronto, night of Feb. 9,
1913, occupying from three to five minutes in passing, according to
different estimates. If one will think that they were meteors, at least one will
have to think that no such meteors had ever been seen before. In the
Journal, 7-405, W. F. Denning writes that, though he had been watching the
heavens since the year 1865, he had never seen anything like this. In most
of the observations, the procession is described as a whole—”like anF. Denning writes that, though he had been watching the
heavens since the year 1865, he had never seen anything like this. In most
of the observations, the procession is described as a whole—”like an

--- PAGE BREAK ---

express train, lighted at night”— “the lights were at different points, one in
front, and a rear light, then a succession of lights in the tail.” Almost all of
the observations relate to the sky of Toronto and not far from Toronto. It is
questionable that the same spectacle was seen in Bermuda, this night. The
supposed long flight from the Saskatchewan to Bermuda might indicate
something of a meteoric nature, but the meteor-explanation must take into
consideration that these objects were so close to this earth that sounds from
them were heard, and that, without succumbing to gravitation, they
followed the curvature of this earth at a relatively low velocity that cannot
compare with the velocity of ordinary meteors.
If now be accepted that again, the next day, objects were seen in the sky
of Toronto, but objects unlighted, in the daytime—I suppose that to some
minds will come the thought that this is extraordinary, and that almost
immediately the whole subject will then be forgotten. Prof. Chant says that,
according to the Toronto Daily Star, unknown objects, but dark objects this
time, were seen at Toronto, in the afternoon of the next day—”not seen
clearly enough to determine their nature, but they did not seem to be clouds
or birds or smoke, and it was suggested that they were airships cruising
over the city.” Toronto Daily Star, February 10— “They passed from west
to east, in three groups, and then returned west in more scattered formation,
about seven or eight in all.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---over the city.” Toronto Daily Star, February 10— “They passed from west
to east, in three groups, and then returned west in more scattered formation,
about seven or eight in all.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
36
UGUST, 1914—this arena-like earth, with its horizon banking high
into a Coliseum, when seen from not too far above —faint, rattling
sounds of the opening of boundaries—tawny formations slinking
into the arena—their crouchings and seizures and crunchings. Aug. 13,
1914—things that were gathering in the sky. They were seen by G. W.
Atkins, of Elstree, Herts, and were seen again upon the 16th and the 17th
(Observatory, 37-358). Sept. 9, 1914—a host in the sky; watched several
hours by W. H. Steavenson (Jour. B. A. A., 25-27). There were round
appearances, but some of them were shaped like dumbbells. They were not
seeds, snowflakes, insects, nor anything else that they “should” have been,
according to Mr. Steavenson. He says that they were large bodies.
Oct. 10, 1914—a ship that was seen in the sky—or “an absolutely black,
spindle-shaped object” crossing the sun. It was seen, at Manchester, by
Albert Buss (Eng. Mec., 100-236). “Its extraordinarily clear-cut outline was
surrounded by a kind of halo, giving the impression of a ship, plowing her
way through the sea, throwing up white-foamed waves with her prow.”
Mikkelsen (Lost in the Arctic, p. 345):
“During the last few days (October, 1914) we have been much tumbled
up and down in our minds, owing to a remarkable occurrence, somewhat in
the nature of Robinson Crusoe’s encounter with the footprints in the sand.
Our advance load has been attacked—an empty petroleum cask is found,
riddled with tiny holes, such as would be made by a charge of shot Now a
charge of shot is scarcely likely to materialize out of nowhere; one is
accustomed to associate the phenomenon with the presence of human
beings. It is none of our doing—then whose doing is it" We hit upon the
wildest theories to account for it, as we sit in the tent, turning the
mysterious object over and over. No beast of our acquaintance could make
all those little round holes: what animal could even open its jaws so wide"
And why should anybody take the trouble to make a target of our gear" Are
there Eskimos about—Eskimos with guns" There are no footprints to beound holes: what animal could even open its jaws so wide"
And why should anybody take the trouble to make a target of our gear" Are
there Eskimos about—Eskimos with guns" There are no footprints to be

--- PAGE BREAK ---mal could even open its jaws so wide"
And why should anybody take the trouble to make a target of our gear" Are
there Eskimos about—Eskimos with guns" There are no footprints to be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

seen: it could scarcely have been an animal—the whole thing is highly
mysterious.”
Jan. 31, 1915—a symbolic-looking formation upon the moon— six or
seven white spots, in Littrow, arranged like the Greek letter Gamma Eng.
Mec., 101-47).
Feb. 13, 1915—Steep Island, Chusan Archipelago—a lighthouse-keeper
complained to Capt. W. F. Tyler, R.N., that a British warship had fired a
projectile at the lighthouse. But no vessel had fired a shot, and it is said that
the object must have been a meteor (Nature, 97-17).
In the middle of February, 1915, the planet Venus was about two months
and a half past inferior conjunction. If objects like navigating constructions
were seen in the sky, at this time, there may be an association, but I am
turning against that association, feeling that it is harmful to our wider
expression that extra-mundane vessels have been seen in the sky of this
earth, and that they come from regions at present unknown. New York
Tribune, Feb. 15, 1915—that, at 10 P.M., February 14, three aeroplanes had
been seen to cross the St. Lawrence river, near Morristown, N. Y., according
to reports, but that, in the opinion of the Dominion police, nothing but fire-
balloons had been seen. It is said that two “responsible residents” had seen
two of the objects cross the river, between 8 and 8:30 P.M., and then return
five hours later. In the Canadian Parliament, Sir Wilfred Laurier had said
that, at 9 P.M., he had been called up by the Mayor of Brockwell, telling him
that three aeroplanes with “powerful searchlights” had crossed the St.
Lawrence. The story is told in the New York Herald. Here it is said that,
according to the Chief of Police, of Ogdensburg, N. Y., a farmer, living five
miles from Ogdensburg, had reported having seen an aeroplane, upon the
12th. Then it is said that the mystery had been solved: that, while
celebrating the one hundredth anniversary of peace between the United
States and Canada, some young men of Morristown had sent up paper
balloons, which had exploded in the sky, after 9 P.M., night of the 14th. New
York Times—that the objects had been seen first at Guananoque, Ontario.
Here it is said that the balloon-story is absurd. According to the Dominion
Observatory, the wind was, at the time, blowing from the east, and the
objects had traveled toward the northeast. It is said that one of the objects
had, for several minutes, turned a powerful searchlight upon the town of
Brockwell.e time, blowing from the east, and the
objects had traveled toward the northeast. It is said that one of the objects
had, for several minutes, turned a powerful searchlight upon the town of
Brockwell.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the east, and the
objects had traveled toward the northeast. It is said that one of the objects
had, for several minutes, turned a powerful searchlight upon the town of
Brockwell.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Upon Dec. 11, 1915, Bernard Thomas, of Glenorchy, Tasmania, saw a
“particularly bright spot upon the moon” (Eng. Mec., 103-10). It was on the
north shore of the Mare Crisium, and “looked almost like a star.” In Dr.
Thomas’ opinion, it was sunlight reflected from the rim of a small crater.
The crater Picard is near the north shore of the Mare Crisium, and most of
the illuminations near Picard have occurred several months from an
opposition of Mars.
In December, 1915, another new formation upon the moon— reported
from the Observatory of Paris—something like a black wall from the center
to the ramparts of Aristillus (Bull. Soc. Astro. de France, 30-383).
Jan. 12, 1916—a shock in Cincinnati, Ohio. Buildings were shaken. The
quake was from an explosion in the sky. Flashes were seen in the sky. (New
York Herald, Jan. 13, 1916.)
Feb. 9, 1916—opposition of Mars.
In the English Mechanic, 104-71, James Ferguson writes that someone
had seen, at 11 o’clock, night of July 31, 1916, at Ballinasloe, Ireland, just
such a moving thing, or just such a sailing, exploring thing as is now
familiar in our records. For fifteen minutes it moved in a northwesterly
direction. For three quarters of an hour it was stationary. Then it moved
back to the point where first it had been seen, remaining visible until four
o’clock in the morning. Whatever this object may have been, it left the sky
at about the time that Venus appeared, as a “morning star,” in the sky at
Ballinasloe, and resembles the occurrence of Sept. 11, 1852, reported by
Lord Wrottesley. Inferior conjunction of Venus was upon July 3, 1916. We
have noticed that all occurrences that we somewhat reluctantly associate
with nearness of Venus associate more with times of greatest brilliance, five
weeks before and after inferior conjunction, than with dates of conjunction.
Somebody may demonstrate that at these times Venus comes closest to this
earth.
Oct. 10, 1916—a reddish shadow that spread over part of the lunar crater
Plato; reported from the Observatory of Florence, Italy (Sci. Amer., 121-
181).
Nov. 25, 1916—about twenty-five bright flashes, in rapid succession, in
the sky of Cardiff, Wales, according to Arthur Mee (Eng. Mec., 104-239).
Col. Markwick writes, in the Jour. B. A. A., 27-188, that, at 6:10 P.M.,
April 15, 1917, he had seen, upon the sun, a solitary spot, different from all
sunspots that he had seen in an experience of forty-three years. Col.in the Jour. B. A. A., 27-188, that, at 6:10 P.M.,
April 15, 1917, he had seen, upon the sun, a solitary spot, different from all
sunspots that he had seen in an experience of forty-three years. Col.

--- PAGE BREAK ---A., 27-188, that, at 6:10 P.M.,
April 15, 1917, he had seen, upon the sun, a solitary spot, different from all
sunspots that he had seen in an experience of forty-three years. Col.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Markwick had written to Mr. Maunder, of the Greenwich Observatory, and
had been told that, in photographs taken of the sun upon this day, one at
11:17 and another at 11:20 o’clock, there was no sign of a sunspot.
July 4, 1917—an eclipse of the sun, and an extraordinary luminous object
said to have been a meteor, in France (Bull. Soc. Astro, de France, 31-299).
About 6:20 P.M., this day, there was an explosion over the town of Colby,
Wisconsin, and a stone fell from the sky (Science, Sept. 14, 1917).
Aug. 29, 1917—a luminous object that was seen moving upon the moon
(Bull. Soc. Astro. de France, 31-439).
Feb. 21, 1919—an intensely black line extending out from the lunar
crater Lexall (Eng. Mec., 109-517).
Upon May 19, 1919, while Harry Hawker was at sea, untraceable
messages, meaningless in the languages of this earth, were picked up by
wireless, according to dispatches to the newspapers. They were interpreted
as the letters K 8 J and 9 K A J.
In October, 1913, occurred something that may not be so very mysterious
because of nearness to the sea. One supposes that if extra-mundane vessels
have sometimes come close to this earth, then sailing away, terrestrial
aeronauts may have occasionally left this earth, or may have been seized
and carried away from this earth. Upon the morning of Oct. 13, 1913,
Albert Jewel started to fly in his aeroplane from Hempstead Plains, Long
Island, to Staten Island. The route that he expected to take was over Jamaica
Bay, Brooklyn, Coney Island, and the Narrows. New York Times, Oct. 14,
1913—“That was the last seen or heard of him . . . he has been as
completely lost as if he had evaporated into air.” But as to the
disappearance of Capt. James there are circumstances that do call for
especial attention. New York Times, June 2, 1919 —that Capt. Mansell R.
James was lost somewhere in the Berkshire Hills, upon his flight from
Boston to Atlantic City, or, rather, upon the part of his route between Lee,
Mass., and Mitchel Field, Long Island. He had left Lee upon May 29th.
Over the Berkshires, or in the Berkshires, he had disappeared. According to
later dispatches, searching parties had “scoured” the Berkshires, without
finding a trace of him. Upon June 4th, army planes arrived and searched
systematically. There was general excitement, in this mystery of Capt.
James. Rewards were offered; all subscribers of the Southern New England
Telephone Company were enlisted in a quest for news of any kind; boy
scouts turned out. Up to this date of writing there has been nothing but aere offered; all subscribers of the Southern New England
Telephone Company were enlisted in a quest for news of any kind; boy
scouts turned out. Up to this date of writing there has been nothing but a

--- PAGE BREAK ---scribers of the Southern New England
Telephone Company were enlisted in a quest for news of any kind; boy
scouts turned out. Up to this date of writing there has been nothing but a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

confusion of newspaper dispatches: that two children had seen a plane,
about thirteen miles north of Long Island Sound; that two men had seen a
plane fall into the Hudson River, near Poughkeepsie; that, in a gully of
Mount Riga, near Millerton, N. Y., had been found the remains of a plane;
that part of a plane had been washed ashore from Long Island Sound, near
Branford. The latest interest in the subject that I know of was in the summer
of 1921. A heavy object was known to be at the bottom of the Hudson
River, near Poughkeepsie, and was thought to be Capt. James’ plane. It was
dredged up and found to be a log.
For an extraordinary story of windows, in Newark, N. J., that were
perforated by unfindable bullets, see New York Evening Telegram, Sept. 19,
1919, and the Newark Evening News. The occurrence is a counterpart of
Mikkelsen’s experience.
The detonations at Reading were heard seven years apart. Here it is not
quite seven years later. London Times, Sept. 26, 1919— that upon
September 25, a shock had been felt at Reading; that inquiries had led to
information of no known explosion near Reading. In the Times, October 14,
Mr. H. L. Hawkins writes that the shock was “quite definitely an
earthquake, but its origin was superficial” and that the shock “was
transmitted through the earth more than through the air.” In the London
Daily Chronicle, September 27, Mr. Hawkins, having considered all
suggestions that the shock was a subterranean earthquake, had written:
“However, as the whole thing terminated in a bump and a big bang, without
subsequent shaking of the ground, it points more to an explosion of a
natural type up in the air than to a real earthquake.” And, in the London
Daily Mail, Mr. Hawkins is quoted: that if the detonation were local, he
would believe that it was an aerial explosion (“meteoric”); but, if it were
widespread, it would be considered an earthquake. And in the whole series
of the Reading phenomena, this violent detonation was most distinctly local
to Reading.
Reading Observer, Sept. 27, 1919—“The most probable explanation of
the occurrence is that there was an explosion somewhere near enough to
affect the town. . . . Officials at the Greenwich Observatory were unable to
throw any light on the matter, and said that their instruments showed no
signs of earth-disturbance.”
It is said that the sound and shock were violent, and that, in the
residential parts of Reading, the streets were crowded with personsaid that their instruments showed no
signs of earth-disturbance.”
It is said that the sound and shock were violent, and that, in the
residential parts of Reading, the streets were crowded with persons

--- PAGE BREAK ---uments showed no
signs of earth-disturbance.”
It is said that the sound and shock were violent, and that, in the
residential parts of Reading, the streets were crowded with persons

--- PAGE BREAK ---

discussing the occurrence.
There was a similar shock in Michigan, Nov. 27, 1919. In many cities,
persons rushed from their homes, thinking that there had been an
earthquake (New York Times, November 28). But, in Indiana, Illinois, and
Michigan, a “blinding glare” was seen in the sky. Our acceptance is that this
occurrence is, upon a small scale, of the type of many catastrophes in Italy
and South America, for instance, when just such “blinding glares” have
been seen in the sky, data of which have been suppressed by conventional
scientists, or data of which have not impressed conventional scientists.
English Mechanic, 110-257—J. W. Scholes, of Huddersfield, writes that,
upon Dec. 19, 1919, he saw, near the lunar crater Littrow, “a very
conspicuous black-ink mark.” Upon page 282, W. J. West, of Gosport,
writes that he had seen the mark upon the 7th of December.
March 22, 1920—a light in the sky of this earth, and an illumination
upon the moon (Eng. Mec., 111-142). That so close to this earth is the moon
that illuminations known as “auroral” often affect both this earth and the
moon.
July 20 and 21, and Sept. 13, 1920—dull rumbling sounds and quakes at
Comrie, Perthshire (London Times, July 23 and Sept. 14, 1920).
According to a dispatch to the Los Angeles Times—clipping sent to me
by Mr. L. A. Hopkins, of Chicago—thunder and lightning and heavy rain, at
Portland, Oregon, July 21, 1920: objects falling from the sky; glistening,
white fragments that looked like “bits of polished china.” “The explanation
of the local Weather Bureau is that they may have been picked up by a
whirlwind and carried to the district where they were found.” The objection
to this standardized explanation is the homogeneousness of the falling
objects. How can one conceive of winds raging over some region covered
with the usual great diversity of loose objects and substances, having a
liking for little white stones, sorting over maybe a million black ones, green
ones, white ones, and red ones, to make the desired selection" One supposes
that a storm brought to this earth fragments of a manufactured object, made
of something like china, from some other world.
In the Literary Digest, Sept. 2, 1921, is published a letter from Carl G.
Gowman, of Detroit, Michigan, upon the fall from the sky, in southwest
China, Nov. 17 (1920") of a substance that resembled blood. It fell upon
three villages close together, and was said to have fallen somewhere else
forty miles away. The quantity was great: in one of the villages, the1920") of a substance that resembled blood. It fell upon
three villages close together, and was said to have fallen somewhere else
forty miles away. The quantity was great: in one of the villages, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---e that resembled blood. It fell upon
three villages close together, and was said to have fallen somewhere else
forty miles away. The quantity was great: in one of the villages, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

substance “covered the ground completely.” Mr. Gowman accepts that this
substance did fall from the sky, because it was found upon roofs as well as
upon the ground. He rejects the conventional red-dust explanation, because
the spots did not dissolve in several subsequent rains. He says that anything
like pollen is out of the question, because at the time nothing was in bloom.
Nov. 23, 1920—a correspondent writes, to the English Mechanic 112-
214, that he saw a shaft of light projecting from the moon, or a spot so
bright that it appeared to project, from the limb of the moon, in the region
of Funerius.
About Jan. 1, 1921—several irregular, black objects that crossed the sun.
To the Rev. William Ellison (Eng. Mec., 112-276) they looked like pieces of
burnt paper.
July 25, 1921—a loud report, followed by a sharp tremor, and a rumbling
sound, at Comrie (London Times, July 27, 1921).
July 31, 1921—a common indication of other lands from which come
objects and substances to this earth—but our reluctance to bother with
anything so ordinarily marvelous—
Because we have conceived of intenser times and furies of differences of
potential between this earth and other worlds: torrents of dinosaurs, in
broad volumes that were streaked with lesser animals, pouring from the sky,
with a foam of tusks and fangs, enveloped in a bloody vapor that was
falsely dramatized by the sun, with rainbow-mockery. Or, in terms of
planetary emotions, such an outpouring was the serenade of some other
world to this earth. If poetry is imagery, and if a flow of images be solid
poetry, such a recitation was in three-dimensional hyperbole that was
probably seen, or overheard, and criticized in Mars, and condemned for its
extravagance in Jupiter. Some other world, meeting this earth, ransacking
his solid imagination and uttering her living metaphors: singing a flood of
mastodons, purring her butterflies, bellowing an ardor of buffaloes. Sailing
away—sneaking up close to the planet Venus, murmuring her antelopes, or
arching his periphery and spitting horses at her—
Poor, degenerate times—nowadays something comes close to this earth
and lisps little commonplaces to her—
July 31, 1921—a shower of little frogs that fell upon Anton Wagner’s
farm, near Stirling, Conn. (New York Evening World, Aug. 1, 1921).
At sunset, Aug. 7, 1921, an unknown luminous object was seen, near the
sun, at Mt. Hamilton, by an astronomer, Prof. Campbell, and by one ofear Stirling, Conn. (New York Evening World, Aug. 1, 1921).
At sunset, Aug. 7, 1921, an unknown luminous object was seen, near the
sun, at Mt. Hamilton, by an astronomer, Prof. Campbell, and by one of

--- PAGE BREAK ---(New York Evening World, Aug. 1, 1921).
At sunset, Aug. 7, 1921, an unknown luminous object was seen, near the
sun, at Mt. Hamilton, by an astronomer, Prof. Campbell, and by one of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

those who may some day go out and set foot upon regions that are supposed
not to be: by an aviator, Capt. Ricken-backer. In the English Mechanic, 114-
211, another character in these fluttering vistas of the opening of the
coming drama of Extra-geography, Col. Markwick, a conventional
astronomer and also a recorder of strange things, lists other observations
upon this object, the earliest upon the 6th, by Dr. Emmert, of Detroit. In the
English Mechanic, 114-241, H. P. Hollis, once upon a time deliciously
“exact” and positive, says something, in commenting upon these
observations, that looks like a little weakness in Exclusionism, because the
old sureness is turning slightly shaky—”that there are more wonderful
things in the sky than we suspect, or that it is easy to be self-deceived.”
It is funny to read of an “earthquake,” described in technical lingo, and to
have a datum that indicates that it was no earthquake at all, in the usual
seismologic sense, but a concussion from an explosion in the sky. Aug. 7,
1921—a severe shock at New Canton, Virginia. See Bull. Seis. Soc. Amer.,
11-197—Prof. Stephen Taber’s explanation that the shock had probably
originated in the slate belt of Buckingham County, intensity about 9 on the
R.-F. scale. But then it is said that, according to the “authorities” of the
McCormick Observatory, the concussion was from an explosion in the sky.
The time is coming when nothing funny will be seen in this subject, if some
day be accepted at least parts of the masses of data that I am now holding
back, until I can more fully develop them—that some of the greatest
catastrophes that have devastated the face of this earth have been
concussions from explosions in the sky, so repeating in a local sky weeks at
a time, months sometimes, or intermittently for centuries, that fixed origins
above the ravaged areas are indicated.
New York Tribune, Sept. 2, 1921:
“J. C. H. Macbeth, London Manager of the Marconi Wireless Telegraph
Company, Ltd., told several hundred men, at a luncheon of the Rotary Club,
of New York, yesterday, that Signor Marconi believed he had intercepted
messages from Mars, during recent atmospheric experiments with wireless
on board his yacht Electra, in the Mediterranean. Mr. Macbeth said that
Signor Marconi had been unable to conceive of any other explanation of the
fact that, during his experiments, he had picked up magnetic wave-lengths
of 150,000 meters, whereas the maximum length of wave-production in the
world today is 14,000 meters. The regularity of the signals, Mr. Macbeth
declared, disposed of any assumption that the waves might have beeneters, whereas the maximum length of wave-production in the
world today is 14,000 meters. The regularity of the signals, Mr. Macbeth
declared, disposed of any assumption that the waves might have been

--- PAGE BREAK ---aximum length of wave-production in the
world today is 14,000 meters. The regularity of the signals, Mr. Macbeth
declared, disposed of any assumption that the waves might have been

--- PAGE BREAK ---

caused by electrical disturbance. The signals were unintelligible, consisting
apparently of a code, the speaker said, and the only signal recognized was
one resembling the letter V in the Marconi code.” See datum of May 19,
1919.
But, in the summer of 1921, the planet Mars was far from opposition.
The magnetic vibrations may have come from some other world. They may
have had the origin of the sounds that have been heard at regular intervals—
The San Salvadors of the sky—
And we return to the principle that has been our re-enforcement
throughout: that existence is infinite serialization, and that, except in
particulars, it repeats—
That the dot that spread upon the western horizon of Lisbon, March 4,
1493, cannot be the only ship that comes back from the unknown, cargoed
with news—
And it may be September this, nineteen hundred and twenty or thirty
something, or February that, nineteen hundred and twenty or thirty
something else—and, later, see record of it in Eng. Mec., or Sci. Amer., vol.
and p. something or another—a speck in the sky of this earth—the return of
somebody from a San Salvador of the sky—and the denial by the heavens
themselves, which may answer with explosions the vociferations below
them, of false calculations upon their remotenesses. If the heavens do not
participate with snow, the skyscrapers will precipitate torn up papers and
shirts and skirts, too, when the papers give out.
There will be a procession. Somebody will throw little black pebbles to
the crowds. Over his procession will fly blue-fringed cupids. Later he will
be insulted and abused and finally hounded to his death. But, in that
procession, he will lead by the nose an outrageous thing that should not be:
about ten feet long, short-winged, waddling on webbed feet. Insult and
abuse and death —he will snap his fingers under the nose of the outrageous
thing. It will be worth a great deal to lead that by the nose and demonstrate
that such things had been seen in the sky, though they had been supposed to
be angels. It will be a great moment for somebody. He will come back to
New York, and march up Broadway with his angel.
Some now unheard-of De Soto, of this earth, will see for himself the
Father of Cloudbursts.
A Balboa of greatness now known only to himself will stand on a ridge in
the sky between two auroral seas..
Some now unheard-of De Soto, of this earth, will see for himself the
Father of Cloudbursts.
A Balboa of greatness now known only to himself will stand on a ridge in
the sky between two auroral seas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fountains of Everlasting Challenge.
Argosies in parallel lines and rabbles of individual adventurers. Well
enough may it be said that they are seeds in the sky. Of such are the germs
of colonies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---erlasting Challenge.
Argosies in parallel lines and rabbles of individual adventurers. Well
enough may it be said that they are seeds in the sky. Of such are the germs
of colonies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
37
HAT the Geo-system is an incubating organism, of which this earth is
the nucleus—but an organism that is so strongly characterized by
conditions and features of its own that likening it to any object
internal to it is the interpreting of a thing in terms of a constituent—so that
we think of an organism that is incompletely, or absurdly inadequately,
expressible in terms of the egg-like and the larval and other forms of the
immature—a geo-nucleated system that is dependent upon its externality as,
in one way or another, is every similar, but lesser and included, thing —
stimulated by flows of force that are now said to be meteoric, though many
so-called “meteoric” streams seem more likely to be electric, that radiate
from the umbilical channels of its constellations—vitalized by its sun,
which is itself replenished by the comets, which, coming from external
reservoirs of force, impart to the sun their freightages, and, unaffected by
gravitation, return to an external existence, some of them even touching the
sun, but showing no indication of supposed solar attraction.
In a technical sense we give up the doctrine of Evolution. Ours is an
expression upon Super-embryonic Development, in one enclosed system.
Ours is an expression upon Design underlying and manifesting in all things
within this one system, with a Final Designer left out, because we know of
no designing force that is not itself the product of remoter design. In terms
of our own experience we cannot think of an ultimate designer, any more
than we can think of ultimacy in any other respect. But we are discussing a
system that, in our conception, is not a final entity; so then no metaphysical
expression upon it is required.
I point out that this expression of ours is not meant for aid and comfort to
the reactionaries of the type of Col. W. J. Bryan, for instance: it is not
altogether anti-Darwinian: the concept of Development replaces the concept
of Evolution, but we accept the process of Selection, not to anything loosely
known as Environment, but relatively to underlying Schedule and Design,
predetermined and supervised, as it were, but by nothing that we conceive
of in anthropomorphic terms., not to anything loosely
known as Environment, but relatively to underlying Schedule and Design,
predetermined and supervised, as it were, but by nothing that we conceive
of in anthropomorphic terms.

--- PAGE BREAK ---osely
known as Environment, but relatively to underlying Schedule and Design,
predetermined and supervised, as it were, but by nothing that we conceive
of in anthropomorphic terms.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I define what I mean by dynamic design, in the development of any
embryonic thing: a pre-determined, or not accidental, or not irresponsible,
passage along a schedule of phases to a climax of unification of many parts.
Some of the aspects of this process are the simultaneous varying of parts,
with destiny, and not with independence, for their rule, or with future co-
ordinations and functions for their goal; and their survival while still
incipient, not because they are fittest relatively to contemporaneous
environment, so not because of usefulness or advantage in the present,
inasmuch as at first they are not only functionless but also discordant with
established relations, but surviving because they are in harmony with the
dynamic plan of a whole being: and the presence of forces of suppression,
or repression, as well as forces of stimulation and protection, so that parts
are held back, or are not permitted to develop before their time.
If we accept that these circumstances of embryonic development are the
circumstances of all wider development, within one enclosed system, the
doctrine of Darwinian Evolution, as applied generally, will, in our minds,
have to be replaced by an expression upon Super-embryonic Development,
and Darwinism, unmodified, will become to us one more of the
insufficiencies of the past. Darwinism concerns itself with the adaptations
of the present, and does heed the part that the past has played, but, in
Darwinism, there is no place for the influence of the future upon the
present.
Consider any part of an embryonic thing—the heart of an embryo—and
at first it is only a loop. It will survive, and it will be nourished in its
functionless incipiency; also it will not be permitted to become a fully
developed heart before its scheduled time arrives; its circumstances are
dominated by what it will be in the future. The eye of an embryo is a better
instance.
Consider anything of a sociologic nature that ever has grown: that there
never has been an art, science, religion, invention that was not at first out of
accord with established environment, visionary, preposterous in the light of
later standards, useless in its in-cipiency, and resisted by established forces
so that, seemingly animating it and protectively underlying it, there may
have been something that in spite of its unfitness made it survive for future
usefulness. Also there are data for the acceptance that all things, in wider
being, are held back as well as protected and prepared for, and not permitted
to develop before comes scheduled time. Langley’s flying machine makese data for the acceptance that all things, in wider
being, are held back as well as protected and prepared for, and not permitted
to develop before comes scheduled time. Langley’s flying machine makes

--- PAGE BREAK ---tance that all things, in wider
being, are held back as well as protected and prepared for, and not permitted
to develop before comes scheduled time. Langley’s flying machine makes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

me think of something of the kind —that this machine was premature; that
it appeared a little before the era of aviation upon this earth, and that
therefore Langley could not fly. But this machine was capable of flying,
because, some years later, Curtis did fly in it. Then one thinks that the
Wright Brothers were successful, because they did synchronize with a
scheduled time. I have heard that it is questionable that Curtis made no
alterations in Langley’s machine. There is no lack of instances. One of the
greatest of secrets that have eventually been found out was for ages blabbed
by all the pots and kettles in the world—but that the secret of the steam
engine could not, to the lowliest of intellects, or to supposititiously highest
of intellects, more than adumbratively reveal itself until came the time for
its co-ordination with the other phenomena and the requirements of the
Industrial Age. And coal that was stored in abundance near the surface of
the ground—and the needs of dwellers over coal mines, veins of which
were often exposed upon the surface of the ground, for fuel—but that this
secret, too, obvious, too, could not be revealed until the coming of the
Industrial Age. Then the building of factories, the inventing of machines,
the digging of coal, and the use of steam, all appearing by simultaneous
variation, and co-ordinating. Shores of North America—nowadays, with
less hero-worship than formerly, historians tell us that, to English and
French fishermen, the coast of Newfoundland was well-known, long before
the year 1492; nevertheless, to the world in general, it was not, or,
according to our acceptances, could not be, known. About the year 1500, a
Portuguese fleet was driven by storms to the coast of Brazil, and returned to
Europe. Then one thinks that likely enough, before the year 1492, other
vessels had been so swept to the coasts of the western hemisphere, and had
returned—but that data of westward lands could not emerge from the
suppressions of that era—but that the data did survive, or were preserved
for future usefulness— that there are “Thou shalt nots” engraved upon
something underlying all things, and then effacing, when phases pass away.
We conceive now of all buildings—within one enclosed system— in
terms of embryonic building, and of all histories as local aspects of Super-
embryonic Development. Cells of an embryo build falsely and futilely, in
the sense that what they construct will be only temporary and will be out of
adjustment later. If, however, there are conditions by which successive
stages must be traversed before the arrival of maturity, ours is an expression
upon the functioning of the false and the futile, in which case these terms,er, there are conditions by which successive
stages must be traversed before the arrival of maturity, ours is an expression
upon the functioning of the false and the futile, in which case these terms,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ions by which successive
stages must be traversed before the arrival of maturity, ours is an expression
upon the functioning of the false and the futile, in which case these terms,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

as derogations, should not be applied. We see that the cells that build have
no basis of their own; that for their formations there is nothing of reason
and necessity of their own, because they flourish in other formations quite
as well. We see that they need nothing of basis, nor of guidance of their
own, because basis and guidance are of the essence of the whole. All are
responses, or correlates, to a succession of commandments, as it were, or of
dominant, directing, supervising spirits of different eras: that they take on
appearances that are concordant with the general gastrula era, changing
when comes the stimulus to agree with the reptilian era, and again
responding harmoniously when comes the time of the mammalian era. It is
in accordance with our experience that never has human mind, scientific,
religious, philosophic, formulated one basic thought, one finally true law,
principle, or major premise from which guidance could be deduced. If any
thought were true and final it would include the deduced. We conceive that
there has been guidance, just the same, if human beings be conceived of as
cellular units in one developing organism; and that human minds no more
need foundations of their own than need the sub-embryonic cells that build
so preposterously, according to standards of later growth, but build as they
are guided to build. In this view, human reason is tropism, or response to
stimuli, and reasoning is the trial-and-error process of the most primitive
unicellular organisms, a susceptibility to underlying mandates, then a
groping in perhaps all possible distortions until adjustment with underlying
requirements is reached. In this view, then, though there are, for instance,
no atoms in the Daltonian sense, if in the service of a building science, the
false doctrine of the atoms be needed, the mind that responds, perhaps not
to stimulus, but to requirement, which seems to be a negative stimulus, and
so conceives, is in adjustment and reaches the state known as success. I
accept, myself, that there may be Final Truth, and that it may be attainable,
but never in a service that is local or special in any one science or nation or
world.
It is our expression that temporary isolations characterize embryonic
growth and super-embryonic growth quite as distinctly as do expansions
and co-ordinations. Local centers of development in an egg—and they are
isolated before they sketch out attempting relations. Or in wider being—
hemisphere isolated from hemisphere, and nation from nation—then the
breaking down of barriers —the appearance of Japan out of obscurity—
threads of a military plasm are cast across an ocean by the United States.solated from hemisphere, and nation from nation—then the
breaking down of barriers —the appearance of Japan out of obscurity—
threads of a military plasm are cast across an ocean by the United States.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Shafts of light that have pierced the obscurity surrounding planets —and
something like a star shines in Aristarchus of the moon. Embryonic heavens
that have dreamed—and that their mirages will be realized some day.
Sounds and an interval; sounds and the same interval; sounds again—that
there is one integrating organism and that we have heard its pulse.

--- PAGE BREAK ---their mirages will be realized some day.
Sounds and an interval; sounds and the same interval; sounds again—that
there is one integrating organism and that we have heard its pulse.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

F
38
EB. 7, 1922—an explosion “of startling intensity” in the sky of the
northwestern point of the London Triangle (Nature, Feb. 23, 1922).
Repeating phenomena in a local sky—in L’Astronomie, 36-201, it
is said that, at Orsay (Seine-et-Oise), Feb. 15, 1922, a detonation was heard
in the sky, and that 9 hours later a similar sound was heard, and that an
illumination was seen in the sky. It is said that, 10 nights later, at Verneuil,
in the adjoining province, Oise, a great, fiery mass was seen falling from
the sky.
March 12, 1922—rocks that had been falling “from the clouds,” for three
weeks, at Chico, a town in an “earthquake region” in California (New York
Times, March 12, 1922). Large, smooth rocks that “seemed to come straight
from the clouds.”
In the San Francisco Chronicle, in issues dating from the 12th to the 18th
of March—clippings sent to me by Mr. Maynard Shipley, writer and
lecturer upon scientific subjects, if there be such subjects—the accounts are
of stones that, for four months, had been falling intermittently from the sky,
almost always upon the roofs of two adjoining warehouses, in Chico, but,
upon one occasion, falling three blocks away: “a downpour of oval-shaped
stones”; “a heavy shower of warm rocks.” San Francisco Call, March 16
—“warm rocks.” It is said that crowds gathered, and that upon the 17th of
March a “deluge” of rocks fell upon a crowd, injuring one person. The
police “combed” all surroundings: the only explanation that they could
think of was that somebody was firing stones from a catapult. One person
was suspected by them, but, upon the 14th of March, a rock fell when he
was known not to be in the neighborhood.
The circumstances point to one origin of these stones, stationary in the
sky, above the town of Chico.
Upon the first of January, 1922, the attention of Marshal J. A. Peck, of
Chico, had been called to the phenomena. After investigating more than two
months, he said (San Francisco Examiner, March 14) “I could find no one
through my investigations who could explain the matter. At various times Id to the phenomena. After investigating more than two
months, he said (San Francisco Examiner, March 14) “I could find no one
through my investigations who could explain the matter. At various times I

--- PAGE BREAK ---After investigating more than two
months, he said (San Francisco Examiner, March 14) “I could find no one
through my investigations who could explain the matter. At various times I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

have heard and seen the stones. I think someone with a machine is to
blame.”
Prof. C. K. Studley, vice-president of the Teachers’ College, Chico, is
quoted in the Examiner
“Some of the rocks are so large that they could not be thrown by any
ordinary means. One of the rocks weighs 16 ounces. They are not of
meteoric origin, as seems to have been hinted, because two of them show
signs of cementation, either natural or artificial, and no meteoric factor was
ever connected with a cement factory.”
Once upon a time, dogmatists supposed, asserted, angrily declared
sometimes, that all stones that fall from the sky must be of “true meteoric
material.” That time is now of the past. See Nature, 105-759—a description
of two dissimilar stones, cemented together, seen to fall from the sky, at
Cumberland Falls, Ky., April 9, 1919.
Miriam Allen de Ford (P. O. Box 573, San Francisco, Cal.— or see the
Readers’ Guide has sent me an account of her own observations. About the
middle of March, 1922, she was in Chico, and investigated. Went to the
scene of the falling rocks; discussed the subject with persons in the crowd.
“While I was discussing it with some bystanders, I looked up at the
cloudless sky, and suddenly saw a rock falling straight down, as if
becoming visible when it came near enough. This rock struck the roof with
a thud, and bounced off on the track beside the warehouse, and I could not
find it.” “I learned that the rocks had been falling since July, 1921, though
no publicity arose until November.”
There have been other phenomena at Chico. In the New York Times, Sept.
2, 1878, it is said that, upon the 20th of August, 1878, according to the
Chico Record, a great number of small fishes fell from the sky, at Chico,
covering the roof of a store, and falling in the streets, upon an area of
several acres. Perhaps the most important observation is that they fell from
a cloudless sky. Several occurrences are listed as earthquakes, by Dr.
Holden, in his Catalogue; but the detonations that were heard at Oroville, a
town near Chico, Jan. 2, 1887, are said, in the Monthly Weather Review,
1887-24, to have been in the sky. Upon the night of March 5-6, 1885,
according to the Chico Chronicle, a large object, of very hard material,
weighing several tons, fell from the sky, near Chico (Monthly Weather
Review, March, 1885). In the year 1893, an iron object, said to be
meteoritic, was found at Oroville (Mems. Nat. Acad. Sci., 13-345).ghing several tons, fell from the sky, near Chico (Monthly Weather
Review, March, 1885). In the year 1893, an iron object, said to be
meteoritic, was found at Oroville (Mems. Nat. Acad. Sci., 13-345).

--- PAGE BREAK ---fell from the sky, near Chico (Monthly Weather
Review, March, 1885). In the year 1893, an iron object, said to be
meteoritic, was found at Oroville (Mems. Nat. Acad. Sci., 13-345).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

My own idea is either that there is land over the town of Chico, and not
far away, inasmuch as objects from it fall with a very narrow distribution, or
that far away, and therefore invisible, there may be land from which objects
have been carried in a special current to one very small part of this earth’s
surface. If anyone would like to read an account of stones that fell
intermittently for several days, clearly enough as if in a current, or in a field
of special force, of some kind, at Livet, near Clavaux, France, December,
1842, see the London Times, Jan. 13, 1843. There have been other such
occurrences. Absurdly, when they were noticed at all, they were supposed
to be psychic phenomena. I conceive that there is no more of the psychic to
these occurrences than there is to the arrival of seeds from the West Indies
upon the coast of England. Stones that fell upon a house, near the Pantheon,
Paris, for three weeks, January, 1849—see Dr. Wallace’s Miracles and
Modern Spiritualism, p. 284. Several times, in the course of this book, I
have tried to be reasonable. I have asked what such repeating phenomena in
one local sky do indicate, if they do not indicate fixed origins in the sky.
And if such occurrences, supported by many data in other fields, do not
indicate the stationariness of this earth, with new lands not far away—tell
me what it is all about. The falling stones of Chico—new lands in the sky—
or what"
Boston Transcript, March 21, 1922—clipping sent to me by Mr. J. David
Stern, Editor and Publisher of the Camden (N. J.) Daily Courier—
“Geneva, March 21—During a heavy snow storm in the Alps recently
thousands of exotic insects resembling spiders, caterpillars, and huge ants
fell on the slopes and quickly died. Local naturalists are unable to explain
the phenomenon, but one theory is that the insects were blown in on the
wind from a warmer climate.”
The fall of unknown insects in a snow storm is not the circumstance that
I call most attention to. It is worth noting that I have records of half a dozen
similar occurrences in the Alps, usually about the last of January, but the
striking circumstance is that insects of different species and of different
specific gravities fell together. The conventional explanation is that a wind,
far away, raised a great variety of small objects, and segregated them
according to specific gravity, so that twigs and grasses fell in one place,
dust some other place, pebbles somewhere else, and insects farther along
somewhere. This would be very fine segregation. There was no very fine
segregation in this occurrence. Something of a seasonal, or migratory,r place, pebbles somewhere else, and insects farther along
somewhere. This would be very fine segregation. There was no very fine
segregation in this occurrence. Something of a seasonal, or migratory,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ewhere else, and insects farther along
somewhere. This would be very fine segregation. There was no very fine
segregation in this occurrence. Something of a seasonal, or migratory,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

nature, from some other world, localized in the sky, relatively to the Alps, is
suggested.
May 4, 1922—discovery, by F. Burnerd, of three long mounds in the
lunar crater Archimedes. See the English Mechanic, 115-194, 218, 268,
278. It seems likely that these constructions had been recently built.
St. Thomas, Virgin Islands, May 18, 1922 (Associated Press— particles
of matter falling continuously for several days. “The phenomenon is
supposed here to be of volcanic origin, but all the volcanoes of the West
Indies are reported as quiet.”
New York Tribune, July 3, 1922—that, for the fourth time in one month, a
great volume of water, or a “cloudburst,” had poured from one local sky,
near Carbondale, Pa.
Oct. 15, 1922—a large quantity of white substance that fell upon the
shores of Lake Michigan, near Chicago. It fell upon the clothes of hundreds
of persons, fell upon the campus of Northwestern University, likely enough
fell upon the astronomical observatory of the University. It occurred to one
of these hundreds, or thousands, of persons to collect some of this
substance. He is Mr. L. A. Hopkins, 111 West Jackson Blvd., Chicago. He
sent me a sample. I think that it is spider web, because it is viscous: when
burned it chars with the crinkled effect of burned hair and feathers, and the
odor is similar. But it is strong, tough substance, of a cottony texture, when
rolled up. The interesting circumstance to me is that similar substance has
fallen frequently upon this earth, in October, but that, in terrestrial terms,
seasonal migrations of aeronautical spiders cannot be thought of, because in
the tropics and in Australia, as well as in the United States and in England,
such showers have occurred in October. Then something seasonal, but
seasonal in an extra-mundane sense, is suggested. See the Scientific
Australian, September, 1916—that, from October 5 to 29, 1915, an
enormous fall of similar substance occurred upon a region of thousands of
square miles, in Australia.
Time after time, in data that I have only partly investigated, occur
declarations that, during devastations commonly known as “earthquakes,”
in Chile, the sky has flamed, or that “strange illuminations” in the sky have
been seen. In the Bull. Seis. Soc. Amer., for instance, some of these
descriptions have been noted, and have been hushed up with the
explanation that they were the reports of unscientific persons.ave
been seen. In the Bull. Seis. Soc. Amer., for instance, some of these
descriptions have been noted, and have been hushed up with the
explanation that they were the reports of unscientific persons.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e Bull. Seis. Soc. Amer., for instance, some of these
descriptions have been noted, and have been hushed up with the
explanation that they were the reports of unscientific persons.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Latest of the great quakes in Chile—1,500 dead “recovered” in one of the
cities of the Province of Atacama. New York Tribune, Nov. 15, 1922
—”Again, today, severe earthquakes shook the Province of Coquimbo and
other places, and strange illuminations were observed over the sea, off La
Serena and Copiapo.”
Back to Crater Mountain, Arizona, for an impression—but far more
impressive are similar data as to these places of Atacama and Copiapo, in
Chile. In the year 1845, M. Darlu, of Valparaiso, read, before the French
Academy, a paper, in which he asserted that, in the desert of Atacama,
which begins at Copiapo, meteorites are strewn upon the ground in such
numbers that they are met at every step. If these objects fell all at one time
in this earthquake region, we have another instance conceivably of mere
coincidence between the aerial and the seismic. If they fell at different
times, the indications are of a fixed relationship between this part of Chile
and a center somewhere in the sky of falling objects commonly called
“meteorites” and of cataclysms that devastate this part of Chile with
concussions commonly called “earthquakes.” There is a paper upon this
subject in Science, 14-434. Here the extreme abundance asserted by M.
Darlu is questioned: it is said that only thirteen of these objects were known
to science. But, according to descriptions, four of them are stones, or
stoneirons, differing so that, in the opinion of the writer, and not merely so
interpreted by me, these four objects fell at different times. Then the nine
others are considered. They are nickel-irons. They, too, are different, one
from another. So then it is said that these thirteen objects, all from one
place, were, with reasonable certainty, the products of different falls.
Behind concepts that sometimes seem delirious, I offer—a reasonable
certainty—
That, existing somewhere beyond this earth, perhaps beyond a revolving
shell in which the nearby stars are openings, there are stationary regions,
from which, upon many occasions, have emanated “meteors,” sometimes
exploding catastrophically over Atacama, Chile, for instance. Coasts of
South America have reeled, and the heavens have been afire.
Reverberations in the sky—the ocean has responded with islands. Between
sky and earth of Chile there have been flaming intimacies of destruction
and slaughter and woe—
Silence that is conspiracy to hide past ignorance; that is imbecility, or that
is the unawareness of profoundest hypnosis.hile there have been flaming intimacies of destruction
and slaughter and woe—
Silence that is conspiracy to hide past ignorance; that is imbecility, or that
is the unawareness of profoundest hypnosis.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hypnosis—
That the seismologists, too, have functioned in preserving the illusion of
this earth’s isolation, and by super-embryonic processes have been
hypnotized into oblivion of a secret that has been proclaimed with
avalanches of fire from the heavens, and that has babbled from books of the
blood of crushed populations, and that is monumentalized in ruins.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LO

--- PAGE BREAK ---claimed with
avalanches of fire from the heavens, and that has babbled from books of the
blood of crushed populations, and that is monumentalized in ruins.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

LO

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
PART I
1
NAKED man in a city street—the track of a horse in volcanic mud
—the mystery of reindeer’s ears—a huge, black form, like a whale,
in the sky, and it drips red drops as if attacked by celestial
swordfishes—an appalling cherub appears in the sea—
Confusions.
Showers of frogs and blizzards of snails—gushes of periwinkles down
from the sky—
The preposterous, the grotesque, the incredible—and why, if I am going
to tell of hundreds of these, is the quite ordinary so regarded"
An unclothed man shocks a crowd—a moment later, if nobody is
generous with an overcoat, somebody is collecting handkerchiefs to knot
around him.
A naked fact startles a meeting of a scientific society—and whatever it
has for loins is soon diapered with conventional explanations.
Chaos and muck and filth—the indeterminable and the unrecordable and
the unknowable—and all men are liars—and yet—
Wigwams on an island—sparks in their columns of smoke.
Centuries later—the uncertain columns are towers. What once were
fluttering sparks are the motionless lights of windows. According to critics
of Tammany Hall, there has been monstrous corruption upon this island:
nevertheless, in the midst of it, this regularization has occurred. A woodland
sprawl has sprung to stony attention.
The Princess Caraboo tells, of herself, a story, in an unknown language,
and persons who were themselves liars have said that she lied, though
nobody has ever known what she told. The story of Dorothy Arnold has
been told thousands of times, but the story of Dorothy Arnold and the swan
has not been told before. A city turns to a crater, and casts out eruptions, as
lurid as fire, of living things—and where Cagliostro came from, and where

--- PAGE BREAK ---orothy Arnold and the swan
has not been told before. A city turns to a crater, and casts out eruptions, as
lurid as fire, of living things—and where Cagliostro came from, and where

--- PAGE BREAK ---

he went, are so mysterious that only historians say they know—venomous
snakes crawl on the sidewalks of London—and a star twinkles—
But the underlying oneness in all confusions.
An onion and a lump of ice—and what have they in common"
Traceries of ice, millions of years ago, forming on the surface of a pond
—later, with different materials, these same forms will express botanically.
If something had examined primordial frost, it could have predicted jungles.
Times when there was not a living thing on the face of this earth—and,
upon pyrolusite, there were etchings of forms that, after the appearance of
cellulose, would be trees. Dendritic sketches, in silver and copper,
prefigured ferns and vines.
Mineral specimens now in museums—calcites that are piles of petals—or
that long ago were the rough notes of a rose. Scales, horns, quills, thorns,
teeth, arrows, spears, bayonets—long before they were the implements and
weapons of living things they were mineral forms. I know of an ancient
sketch that is today a specimen in a museum—a colorful, little massacre
that was composed of calcites ages before religion was dramatized—pink
forms impaled upon mauve spears, sprinkled with drops of magenta. I know
of a composition of barytes that appeared ages before the Israelites made
what is said to be history—blue waves heaped high on each side of a drab
streak of forms like the horns of cattle, heads of asses, humps of camels,
turbans, and upheld hands.
8nderlying oneness—
A new star appears—and just how remote is it from drops of water, of
unknown origin, falling on a cottonwood tree, in Oklahoma" Just what have
the tree and the star to do with the girl of Swanton Novers, upon whom
gushed streams of oils" And why was a clergyman equally greasy"
Earthquakes and droughts and the sky turns black with spiders, and, near
Trenton, N. J., something pegged stones at farmers. If lights that have been
seen in the sky were upon the vessels of explorers from other worlds— then
living in New York City, perhaps, or in Washington, D. C., perhaps, there
are inhabitants of Mars, who are secretly sending reports upon the ways of
this world to their governments"
A theory feels its way through surrounding ignorance—the tendrils of a
vine feel their way along a trellis—a wagon train feels its way across a
prairie—
8nderlying oneness—world to their governments"
A theory feels its way through surrounding ignorance—the tendrils of a
vine feel their way along a trellis—a wagon train feels its way across a
prairie—
8nderlying oneness—

--- PAGE BREAK ---nments"
A theory feels its way through surrounding ignorance—the tendrils of a
vine feel their way along a trellis—a wagon train feels its way across a
prairie—
8nderlying oneness—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Projections of limonite, in a suffusion of smoky quartz—it will be ages
before this little mineral sketch can develop into the chimneys and the
smoke of Pittsburgh. But it reproduces when a volcano blasts the vegetation
on a mountain, and smoke-forms hang around the stumps of trees. Broken
shafts of an ancient city in a desert—they are projections in the tattered
gusts of a sandstorm. It’s Napoleon Bonaparte’s retreat from Moscow—
ragged bands, in the grimy snow, stumbling amidst abandoned cannon.
Maybe it was only coincidence—or what may there be to Napoleon’s
own belief that something was supervising him" Suppose it is that, in
November, 1812, Napoleon’s work, as a factor in European readjustments,
was done. There was no military power upon this earth that could remove
this one, whose work was done. There came coldness so intense that it
destroyed the Grand Army.
Human knowledge—and its fakes and freaks. An astronomer, insulated
by his vanity, seemingly remote from the flops and frailties of everybody
else, may not be so far away as he thinks he is. He calculates where an
undiscovered planet will be seen. “Lo”—as the astronomers like to say—it
is seen. But, for some very distressing, if not delightful, particulars, see,
later, an account of Lowell’s planet. Stars are said to be trillions of miles
away, but there are many alleged remotenesses that are not so far away as
they are said to be.
The Johnstown flood, and the smash of Peru, and the little nigger that
was dragged to a police station—
ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā      ā
Terrified horses, up on their hind legs, hoofing a storm of frogs.
Frenzied springboks, capering their exasperations against frogs that were
tickling them.
Storekeepers, in London, gaping at frogs that were tapping on their
window panes.
We shall pick up an existence by its frogs.
Wise men have tried other ways. They have tried to understand our state
of being, by grasping at its stars, or its arts, or its economics. But, if there is
an underlying oneness of all things, it does not matter where we begin,
whether with stars, or laws of supply and demand, or frogs, or Napoleon
Bonaparte. One measures a circle, beginning anywhere.
I have collected 294 records of showers of living things.
Have I"e begin,
whether with stars, or laws of supply and demand, or frogs, or Napoleon
Bonaparte. One measures a circle, beginning anywhere.
I have collected 294 records of showers of living things.
Have I"

--- PAGE BREAK ---h stars, or laws of supply and demand, or frogs, or Napoleon
Bonaparte. One measures a circle, beginning anywhere.
I have collected 294 records of showers of living things.
Have I"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Well, there’s no accounting for the freaks of industry.
It is the profound conviction of most of us that there never has been a
shower of living things. But some of us have, at least in an elementary way,
been educated by surprises out of much that we were “absolutely sure” of,
and are suspicious of a thought, simply because it is a profound conviction.
I got the story of the terrified horses in the storm of frogs from Mr.
George C. Stoker, of Lovelock, Nev. Mr. John Reid, of Love-lock, who is
known to me as a writer upon geological subjects, vouches for Mr. Stoker,
and I vouch for Mr. Reid. Mr. Stoker vouches for me. I have never heard of
anything—any pronouncement, dogma, enunciation, or pontification—that
was better substantiated.
What is a straight line" A straight line is the shortest distance between
two points. Well, then, what is a shortest distance between two points" That
is a straight line. According to the test of ages, the definition that a straight
line is a straight line cannot be improved upon. I start with a logic as
exacting as Euclid’s.
Mr. Stoker was driving along the Newark Valley, one of the most
extensive of the desert regions of Nevada. Thunderstorm. Down came
frogs. Up on their hind legs went.the horses.
The exasperated springboks. They were told of, in the Northern News
(Vryburg, Transvaal) March 21, 1925, by Mr. C. J. Grewar, of Uitenhage.
Also I have a letter from Mr. Grewar.
The Flats—about 50 miles from Uitenhage—springboks leaping and
shaking themselves unaccountably. At a distance, Mr. Grewar could
conceive of no explanation of such eccentricities. He investigated, and saw
that a rain of little frogs and fishes had pelted the springboks. Mr. Grewar
heard that some time before, at the same place, there had been a similar
shower.
Coffins have come down from the sky: also, as everybody knows, silk
hats and horse collars and pajamas. But these things have come down at the
time of a whirlwind. The two statements that I start with are that no shower
exclusively of coffins, nor of marriage certificates, nor of alarm clocks has
been recorded: but that showers exclusively of living things are common.
And yet the explanation by orthodox scientists who accept that showers of
living things have occurred is that the creatures were the products of
whirlwinds. The explanation is that little frogs, for instance, fall from the
sky, unmixed with anything else, because, in a whirlwind, the creaturesccurred is that the creatures were the products of
whirlwinds. The explanation is that little frogs, for instance, fall from the
sky, unmixed with anything else, because, in a whirlwind, the creatures

--- PAGE BREAK ---creatures were the products of
whirlwinds. The explanation is that little frogs, for instance, fall from the
sky, unmixed with anything else, because, in a whirlwind, the creatures

--- PAGE BREAK ---

were segregated, by differences in specific gravity. But when a whirlwind
strikes a town, away go detachables in a monstrous mixture, and there’s no
findable record of washtubs coming down in one place, all the town’s cats
in one falling battle that lumps its infelicities in one place, and all the
kittens coming down together somewhere else, in a distant bunch that
miaows for its lump of mothers.
See London newspapers, Aug. 18 and 19, 1921—innumerable little frogs
that appeared, during a thunderstorm, upon the 17th, in streets of the
northern part of London.
I have searched in almost all London newspapers, and in many provincial
newspapers, and in scientific publications. There is, findable by me, no
mention of a whirlwind upon the 17th of August, and no mention of a fall
from the sky of anything else that might be considered another segregated
discharge from a whirlwind, if there had been a whirlwind.
A whirlwind runs amok, and is filled with confusions: and yet to the
incoherences of such a thing have been attributed the neatest of
classifications. I do not say that no wind ever scientifically classifies
objects. I have seen orderly, or logical, segregations by wind-action. I ask
for records of whirlwinds that do this. There is no perceptible science by a
whirlwind, in the delivery of its images. It rants trees, doors, frogs, and
parts of cows. But living things have fallen from the sky, or in some
unknown way have appeared, and have arrived homogeneously. If they
have not been segregated by winds, something has selected them.
There have been repetitions of these arrivals. The phenomenon of
repetition, too, is irreconcilable with the known ways of whirlwinds. There
is an account, in the London Daily News, Sept. 5, 1922, of little toads,
which for two days had been dropping from the sky, at Chalon-sur-Saone,
France.
Lies, yarns, hoaxes, mistakes—what’s the specific gravity of a lie, and
how am I to segregate"
That could be done only relatively to a standard, and I have never heard
of any standard, in any religion, philosophy, science, or complication of
household affairs that could not be made to fit any requirement. We fit
standards to judgments, or break any law that it pleases us to break, and fit
to the fracture some other alleged law that we say is higher and nobler. We
have conclusions, which are the products of senility or incompetence orr break any law that it pleases us to break, and fit
to the fracture some other alleged law that we say is higher and nobler. We
have conclusions, which are the products of senility or incompetence or

--- PAGE BREAK ---it pleases us to break, and fit
to the fracture some other alleged law that we say is higher and nobler. We
have conclusions, which are the products of senility or incompetence or

--- PAGE BREAK ---

credulity, and then argue from them to premises. We forget this process, and
then argue from the premises, thinking we began there.
There are accounts of showering things that came from so far away that
they were unknown in places where they arrived.
If only horses and springboks express emotions in these matters, we’ll be
calm thinking that even living things may have been transported to this
earth from other worlds.
Philadelphia Public /edger, Aug. 8, 1891—a great shower of fishes, at
Seymour, Ind. They were unknown fishes. Public /edger, Feb. 6, 1890—a
shower of fishes, in Montgomery County, California. “The fishes belong to
a species altogether unknown here.” New York Sun, May 29, 1892—a
shower, at Coalburg, Alabama, of an enormous number of eels that were
unknown in Alabama. Somebody said that he knew of such eels, in the
Pacific Ocean. Piles of them in the streets—people alarmed—farmers
coming with carts, and taking them away for fertilizing material.
Our subject has been treated scientifically, or too scientifically. There
have been experiments. I have no more of an ill opinion of experimental
science than I have of everything else, but I have been an experimenter,
myself, and have impressions of the servile politeness of experiments. They
have such an obliging, or ingratiating, way that there’s no trusting the
flatterers. In the Redruth (Cornwall, England) Independent, Aug. 13, and
following issues, 1886, correspondents tell of a shower of snails near
Redruth. There were experiments. One correspondent, who believed that the
creatures were sea snails, put some in salt water. They lived. Another
correspondent, who believed that they were not sea snails, put some in salt
water. They died.
I do not know how to find out anything new without being offensive. To
the ignorant, all things are pure: all knowledge is, or implies, the
degradation of something. One who learns of metabolism, looks at a Venus,
and realizes she’s partly rotten. However, she smiles at him, and he renews
his ignorance. All things in the sky are pure to those who have no
telescopes. But spots on the sun, and lumps on the planets—and, being a
person of learning, or, rather, erudition, myself, I’ve got to besmirch
something, or nobody will believe I am—and I replace the pure, blue sky
with the wormy heavens—
London Evening Standard, Jan. 3, 1924—red objects falling with snow at
Halmstead, Sweden.ot to besmirch
something, or nobody will believe I am—and I replace the pure, blue sky
with the wormy heavens—
London Evening Standard, Jan. 3, 1924—red objects falling with snow at
Halmstead, Sweden.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hing, or nobody will believe I am—and I replace the pure, blue sky
with the wormy heavens—
London Evening Standard, Jan. 3, 1924—red objects falling with snow at
Halmstead, Sweden.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

They were red worms, from one to four inches in length. Thousands of
them streaking down with the snowflakes—red ribbons in a shower of
confetti—a carnival scene that boosts my discovery that meteorology is a
more picturesque science than most persons, including meteorologists, have
suspected—and I fear me that my attempt to besmirch has not been
successful, because the worms of heaven seem to be a jolly lot. However, I
cheer up at thought of chances to come, because largely I shall treat of
human nature.
But how am I to know whether these things fell from the sky in Sweden,
or were imagined in Sweden"
I shall be scientific about it. Said Sir Isaac Newton—or virtually said he
—”If there is no change in the direction of a moving body, the direction of a
moving body is not changed.” “But,” continued he, “if something be
changed, it is changed as much as it is changed.” So red worms fell from
the sky, in Sweden, because from the sky, in Sweden, red worms fell. How
do geologists determine the age of rocks" By the fossils in them. And how
do they determine the age of the fossils" By the rocks they’re in. Having
started with the logic of Euclid, I go on with the wisdom of a Newton.
New Orleans Daily Picayune, Feb. 4, 1892—enormous numbers of
unknown brown worms that had fallen from the sky, near Clifton, Indiana.
San Francisco Chronicle, Feb. 14, 1892—myriads of unknown scarlet
worms—somewhere in Massachusetts—not seen to fall from the sky, but
found, covering several acres, after a snow-storm.
It is as if with intelligence, or with the equivalence of intelligence,
something has specialized upon transporting, or distributing, immature and
larval forms of life. If the gods send worms, that would be kind if we were
robins.
In Insect /ife, 1892, p. 335, the Editor, Prof. C. V. Riley, tells of four
other mysterious appearances of worms, early in the year 1892. Some of the
specimens he could not definitely identify. It is said that at Lancaster, Pa.,
people in a snowstorm caught falling worms on their umbrellas.
The wise men of our tribes have tried to find God in a poem, or in
whatever they think they mean by a moral sense in people, or in inscriptions
in a book of stone, which by one of the strangest freaks of omission is not
now upon exhibition in from fifteen to twenty synagogues in Asia Minor,
and all up and down Italy—
Crabs and periwinkles—ns
in a book of stone, which by one of the strangest freaks of omission is not
now upon exhibition in from fifteen to twenty synagogues in Asia Minor,
and all up and down Italy—
Crabs and periwinkles—

--- PAGE BREAK ---e, which by one of the strangest freaks of omission is not
now upon exhibition in from fifteen to twenty synagogues in Asia Minor,
and all up and down Italy—
Crabs and periwinkles—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ordinary theologians have overlooked crabs and periwinkles—
Or mystery versus the fishmonger.
Upon May 28, 1881, near the city of Worcester, England, a fishmonger,
with a procession of carts, loaded with several kinds of crabs and
periwinkles, and with a dozen energetic assistants, appeared at a time when
nobody on a busy road was looking. The fishmonger and his assistants
grabbed sacks of periwinkles, and ran in a frenzy, slinging the things into
fields on both sides of the road. They raced to gardens, and some assistants,
standing on the shoulders of other assistants, had sacks lifted to them, and
dumped sacks over the high walls. Meanwhile other assistants, in a dozen
carts, were furiously shoveling out periwinkles, about a mile along the road.
Also, meanwhile, several boys were busily mixing in crabs. They were not
advertising anything. Above all there was secrecy The cost must have been
hundreds of dollars. They appeared without having been seen on the way,
and they melted away equally mysteriously. There were houses all around,
but nobody saw them.
Would I be so kind as to tell what, in the name of some slight
approximation to sanity, I mean by telling such a story"
But it is not my story. The details are mine, but I have put them in,
strictly in accordance with the circumstances. There was, upon May 28,
1881, an occurrence near Worcester, and the conventional explanation was
that a fishmonger did it. Inasmuch as he did it unobserved, if he did it, and
inasmuch as he did it with tons upon acres, if he did it, he did it as I have
described, if he did it.
In /and and :ater, June 4, 1881, a correspondent writes that, in a violent
thunderstorm, near Worcester, tons of periwinkles had come down from the
sky, covering fields and a road, for about a mile. In the issue of June 11th,
the Editor of /and and :ater writes that specimens had been sent to him.
He notes the mysterious circumstance, or the indication of a selection of
living things, that appears in virtually all the accounts. He comments upon
an enormous fall of sea creatures, unaccompanied by sand, pebbles, other
shells, and seaweed.
In the :orcester Daily Times, May 30, it is said that, upon the 28th, news
had reached Worcester of a wonderful fall from the sky of periwinkles on
Cromer Gardens Road, and spread far around in fields and gardens. Mostly,
people of Worcester were incredulous, but some had gone to the place.
Those who had faith returned with periwinkles.inkles on
Cromer Gardens Road, and spread far around in fields and gardens. Mostly,
people of Worcester were incredulous, but some had gone to the place.
Those who had faith returned with periwinkles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---dens Road, and spread far around in fields and gardens. Mostly,
people of Worcester were incredulous, but some had gone to the place.
Those who had faith returned with periwinkles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Two correspondents then wrote that they had seen the periwinkles upon
the road before the storm, where probably a fishmonger had got rid of them.
So the occurrence conventionalized, and out of these surmises arose the
story of the fishmonger, though it has never been told before, as I have told
it.
Mr. J. Lloyd Bozward, a writer whose notes on meteorological subjects
are familiar to readers of scientific periodicals of this time, was
investigating, and his findings were published in the :orcester Evening
Post, June 9th. As to the story of the fishmonger, note his statement that the
value of periwinkles was 16 shillings a bushel. He says that a wide area on
both sides of the road was strewn with periwinkles, hermit crabs, and small
crabs of an unascertained species. Worcester is about 30 miles from the
mouth of the River Severn, or, say, about 50 miles from the sea. Probably
no fishmonger in the world ever had, at one time, so many periwinkles, but
as to anybody having got rid of a stock, because of a glutted market, for
instance, Mr. Bozward says: “Neither upon Saturday, the 28th, nor Friday,
the 27th, was there such a thing procurable in Worcester as a live
periwinkle.” Gardens as well as fields were strewn. There were high walls
around these gardens. Mr. Bozward tells of about 10 sacks of periwinkles,
of a value of about 20, in the markets of Worcester, that, to his knowledge,
had been picked up. Crowds had filled pots and pans and bags and trunks
before he got to the place. “In Mr. Maund’s garden, two sacks were filled
with them.” It is his conclusion that the things fell from the sky during the
thunderstorm. So his is the whirlwind-explanation.
There are extraordinary occurrences, and conventionalization cloaks
them, and the more commonplace the cloakery, the more satisfactory.
Periwinkles appear upon a tract of land, through which there is a road. A
fishmonger did it.
But the crabs and the fishmonger—and if the fishmonger did the
periwinkles, did he do the crabs, if he did it"
Or the crabs and the whirlwind—and, if the periwinkles were segregated
from pebbles and seaweed, why not from the crabs, if segregation did it"
The strongest point for the segregationists is in their own mental
processes, which illustrate that segregations, whether by wind action, or
not, do occur. If they have periwinkles and crabs to explain, and, say, that
with a story of a fishmonger, or of a whirlwind, they can explain theustrate that segregations, whether by wind action, or
not, do occur. If they have periwinkles and crabs to explain, and, say, that
with a story of a fishmonger, or of a whirlwind, they can explain the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

periwinkles, though so they cannot explain the crabs, a separation of data
occurs in their mentalities They forget the crabs and tell of the periwinkles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

periwinkles, though so they cannot explain the crabs, a separation of data
occurs in their mentalities They forget the crabs and tell of the periwinkles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

F
2
ROGS and fishes and worms—and these are the materials of our
expression upon all things Hops and flops and squirms—and these are
the motions.
But we have been considering more than matter and motion, to start with:
we have been considering attempts by scientists to explain them. By
explanation, I mean organization. There is more than matter and motion in
our existence: there is organization of matter and motion.
Nobody takes a little clot that is central in a disease germ, as Absolute
Truth; and the latest scientific discovery is only something for ideas to
systematize around. But there is this systematization, or organization, and
we shall have to consider it.
There is no more meaning—though that may be utmost meaning—to
arrangements of observations, than there is to arrangements of protoplasm
in a microbe, but it must be noted that scientific explanations do often work
out rather well—but say in medical treatments, if ailments are mostly
fancied; or in stock-market transactions, except in a crisis; or in expert
testimony in the courts, except when set aside by other expert testimony—
But they are based upon definitions—
And in phenomenal existence there is nothing that is independent of
everything else. Given that there is Continuity, everything is a degree or
aspect of whatever everything else is. Consequently there is no way of
defining anything, except in terms of itself. Try any alleged definition. What
is an island" An island is a body of land completely surrounded by water.
And what is a body of land that is completely surrounded by water"
Among savage tribesmen, there is a special care for, or even
respectfulness for, the mentally afflicted. They are regarded as in some
obscure way representing God’s chosen. We recognize the defining of a
thing in terms of itself, as a sign of feeble-mindedness. All scientists begin
their works with just such definitions, implied, if not stated. And among our
tribes there is a special care for, or even respectfulness for, scientists.ign of feeble-mindedness. All scientists begin
their works with just such definitions, implied, if not stated. And among our
tribes there is a special care for, or even respectfulness for, scientists.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ness. All scientists begin
their works with just such definitions, implied, if not stated. And among our
tribes there is a special care for, or even respectfulness for, scientists.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It will be an expression of mine that there is a godness in this idiocy. But,
no matter what sometimes my opinion may be, I am not now writing that
God is an Idiot. Maybe he, or it, drools comets and gibbers earthquakes, but
the scale would have to be considered at least super-idiocy.
I conceive, or tell myself that I conceive, that if we could have a concept
of our existence as a whole, we could have a kind of understanding of it,
rather akin to what, say, cells in an animal organism could have of what is a
whole to them, if they should not be mere scientists, trying to find out what
a bone is, or the flow of blood in a vein is, in itself; but if they could
comprehend what the structures and functions of the Organism are, in terms
of Itself.
The attempted idea of Existence as Organism is one of the oldest of the
pseudo-thoughts of philosophy. But the idea in this book is not
metaphysical. Metaphysical speculations are attempts to think unthinkably,
and it is quite hard enough to think thinkably. There can be nothing but
bafflement for anybody who tries to think of Existence as Organism: our
attempt will be to think of an existence as an organism. Having a childish
liking for a little rhetoric, now and then, I shall call it God.
Our expressions are in terms of Continuity. If all things merge away into
one another, or transmute into one another, so that nothing can be defined,
they are of a oneness, which may be the oneness of one existence. I state
that, though I accept that there is continuity, I accept that also there is
discontinuity But there is no need, in this book, to go into the subject of
continuity-discontinuity, because no statement that I shall make, as a
monist, will be set aside by my pluralism. There is a Oneness that both
submerges and individualizes.
By the continuity of all things we have, with a hop and a flop and a
squirm, jumped from frogs toward finality. We have rejected whirlwinds
and the fishmonger, and have incipient notions upon a selectiveness and an
intelligent, or purposeful, distribution of living things.
What is selecting and what is distributing"
The old-fashioned theologian thinks of a being, with the looks of himself,
standing aside somewhere and directing operations.
What, in any organism, is selecting and distributing—say, oxygen in
lungs, and materials in stomachs"
The organism itself.with the looks of himself,
standing aside somewhere and directing operations.
What, in any organism, is selecting and distributing—say, oxygen in
lungs, and materials in stomachs"
The organism itself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

If we can think of our existence as a conceivable-sized formation —
perhaps one of countless things, beings, or formations in the cosmos—we
have graspableness, or we have the outlines and the limits within which to
think.
We look up at the stars. The look is of a revolving shell that is not far
away. And against such a view there is no opposition except by an
authoritative feeble-mindedness, which most of us treat respectfully,
because such is the custom in all more or less savage tribes.
Mostly in this book I shall specialize upon indications that there exists a
transportory force that I shall call Teleportation. I shall be accused of
having assembled lies, yarns, hoaxes, and superstitions. To some degree I
think so, myself. To some degree I do not. I offer the data.

--- PAGE BREAK ---all call Teleportation. I shall be accused of
having assembled lies, yarns, hoaxes, and superstitions. To some degree I
think so, myself. To some degree I do not. I offer the data.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
3
HE subject of reported falls from the sky, of an edible substance, in
Asia Minor, is confused, because reports have been upon two kinds
of substances. It seems that the sugar-like kind cannot be accepted. In
July, 1927, the Hebrew University of Jerusalem sent an expedition to the
Sinai Peninsula to investigate reported showers of “manna.” See the New
York Times, Dec. 4, 1927. Members of the expedition found what they
called “manna” upon leaves of tamarisk trees, and on the ground
underneath, and explained that it was secreted by insects. But the
observations of this expedition have nothing to do with data, or stories, of
falls from the sky of fibrous, convoluted lumps of a substance that can be
ground into an edible flour. A dozen times, since early in the 19th century—
and I have no definitely dated data upon still earlier occurrences—have
been reported showers of “manna” in Asia Minor.
An early stage within the shell of an egg—and a protoplasmic line of
growth feels out through surrounding substance—and of itself it has no
means of subsistence, or of itself it is lost. Nourishment and protection and
guidance come to it from the whole.
Or, in wider existence—several thousand years ago—a line of fugitives
feels out in a desert. It will be of use to coming social organizations. But in
the desert, it is unprovided for and is withering. Food falls from the sky.
It is one of the most commonplace of miracles. Within any womb an
embryonic thing is unable to provide for itself, but “manna” is sent to it.
Given an organic view of an existence, we think of the supervision of a
whole upon its parts.
Or that once upon a time, a whole responded to the need of a part, and
then kept on occasionally showering “manna” thousands of years after a
special need for it had ceased. This looks like stupidity. It is in one of my
moments of piety that I say this, because, though in our neo-theology there
is no worship, I note that in this conception of what we may call godness, I
supply grounds for devotions. Let a god change anything, and there will be
reactions of evil as much as of good. Only stupidity can be divine.te that in this conception of what we may call godness, I
supply grounds for devotions. Let a god change anything, and there will be
reactions of evil as much as of good. Only stupidity can be divine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eption of what we may call godness, I
supply grounds for devotions. Let a god change anything, and there will be
reactions of evil as much as of good. Only stupidity can be divine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Or occasional falls of “manna,” to this day, in Asia Minor, may be only
one factor in a wider continuance. It may be that an Organism, having once
showered a merely edible substance upon its chosen phenomena, has been
keeping this up, as a symbol of favoritism, by which said chosen
phenomena have been receiving abundances of “manna” in many forms,
ever since.
The substance that occasionally falls from the sky, in Asia Minor, comes
from far away. The occurrences are far apart, in time, and always the
substance is unknown where it falls, and its edibleness is sometimes found
out by the sight of sheep eating it. Then it is gathered and sold in the
markets. We are told that it has been identified as a terrestrial product. We
are told that these showers are aggregations of Lecanora esculenta, a lichen
that grows plentifully in Algeria. We are told that whirlwinds catch up these
lichens, lying loose, or easily detachable, on the ground. But note this:
There have been no such reported showers in Algeria.
There have been no such reported showers in places between Algeria and
Asia Minor.
The nearest similarity that I can think of is of tumble weeds, in the
Western States, though tumble weeds are much larger. Well, then, new
growths of them, when they’re not much larger. But I have never heard of a
shower of tumble weeds. Probably the things are often carried far by
whirlwinds, but only scoot along the ground. A story that would be similar
to stories of lichens, from Algeria, falling in Asia Minor, would be of
tumble weeds, never falling in showers, in Western States, but repeatedly
showering in Ontario, Canada, having been carried there by whirlwinds.
Out of a dozen records, I mention that, in Nature, 43-255, and in La
Nature, 36-82, are accounts of one of the showers, in Asia Minor. The
Director of the Central Dispensary of Bagdad had sent to France specimens
of an edible substance that had fallen from the sky, at Meridin, and at
Diarbekis (Turkey in Asia) in a heavy rain, the last of May, 1890. They
were convoluted lumps, yellow outside and white inside. They were ground
into flour from which excellent bread was made. According to the ready-
made convention, botanists said that the objects were specimens of
Lecanora esculenta, lichens that had been carried in a whirlwind.
London Daily Mail, Aug. 13, 1913—that streets in the town of
Kirkmanshaws, Persia, had been covered with seeds, which the people
thought were the manna of biblical times. The Royal Botanical Society hadndon Daily Mail, Aug. 13, 1913—that streets in the town of
Kirkmanshaws, Persia, had been covered with seeds, which the people
thought were the manna of biblical times. The Royal Botanical Society had

--- PAGE BREAK ---. 13, 1913—that streets in the town of
Kirkmanshaws, Persia, had been covered with seeds, which the people
thought were the manna of biblical times. The Royal Botanical Society had

--- PAGE BREAK ---

been communicated with, and had explained that the objects had been
carried from some other part of this earth’s surface by a whirlwind. “They
were white in substance, and of a consistency of Indian corn.”
I believe nothing. I have shut myself away from the rocks and wisdoms
of ages, and from the so-called great teachers of all time, and perhaps
because of that isolation I am given to bizarre hospitalities. I shut the front
door upon Christ and Einstein, and at the back door hold out a welcoming
hand to little frogs and periwinkles. I believe nothing of my own that I have
ever written. I cannot accept that the products of minds are subject-matter
for beliefs. But I accept, with reservations that give me freedom to ridicule
the statement at any other time, that showers of an edible substance that has
not been traced to an origin upon this earth, have fallen from the sky, in
Asia Minor.
There have been suggestions that unknown creatures and unknown
substances have been transported to this earth from other fertile worlds, or
from other parts of one system, or organism, a composition of distances that
are small relatively to the unthinkable spans that astronomers think they can
think of. There have been suggestions of a purposeful distribution in this
existence. Purpose in Nature is thinkable, without conventional theological
interpretations, if we can conceive of our existence, or the so-called solar
system, and the stars around, as one organic state, formation, or being. I can
make no demarcation between the organic, or the functional, and the
purposeful. When, in an animal-organism, osteoblasts appear and mend a
broken bone, they represent purpose, whether they know what they’re doing
or not. Any adaptation may be considered an expression of purpose, if by
purpose we mean nothing but intent upon adaptation. If we can think of our
whole existence, perhaps one of countless organisms in the cosmos, as one
organism, we can call its functions and distributions either organic or
purposeful, or mechanically purposeful.n think of our
whole existence, perhaps one of countless organisms in the cosmos, as one
organism, we can call its functions and distributions either organic or
purposeful, or mechanically purposeful.

--- PAGE BREAK ---existence, perhaps one of countless organisms in the cosmos, as one
organism, we can call its functions and distributions either organic or
purposeful, or mechanically purposeful.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

O
4
VER the town of Noirfontaine, France, one day in April, 1842, there
was a cloudless sky, but drops of water were falling. See back to
data upon repetitions. The water was falling, as if from a fixed
appearing-point, somewhere above the ground, to a definite area beneath.
The next day water was still falling upon this one small area, as
mysteriously as if a ghost aloft were holding the nozzle of an invisible hose.
I take this account from the journal of the French Academy of Sciences
(Comptes Rendus, vol. 14, p. 664.
What do I mean by that"
I don’t mean anything by that. At the same time, I do mean something by
the meaninglessness of that. I mean that we are in the helpless state of a
standardless existence, and that the appeal to authority is as much of a
wobble as any other of our insecurities.
Nevertheless, though I know of no standards by which to judge anything,
I conceive—or accept the idea—of something that is The Standard, if I can
think of our existence as an Organism. If human thought is a growth, like all
other growths, its logic is without foundation of its own, and is only the
adjusting constructiveness of all other growing things. A tree cannot find
out, as it were, how to blossom, until comes blossom-time. A social growth
cannot find out the use of steam engines, until comes steam-engine-time.
For whatever is supposed to be meant by progress, there is no need in
human minds for standards of their own: this is in the sense that no part of a
growing plant needs guidance of its own devising, nor special knowledge of
its own as to how to become a leaf or a root. It needs no base of its own,
because the relative wholeness of the plant is relative baseness to its parts.
At the same time, in the midst of this theory of submergence, I do not
accept that human minds are absolute nonentities, just as I do not accept
that a leaf, or a root, of a plant, though so dependent upon a main body, and
so clearly only a part, is absolutely without something of an individualizing
touch of its own.s, just as I do not accept
that a leaf, or a root, of a plant, though so dependent upon a main body, and
so clearly only a part, is absolutely without something of an individualizing
touch of its own.

--- PAGE BREAK ---accept
that a leaf, or a root, of a plant, though so dependent upon a main body, and
so clearly only a part, is absolutely without something of an individualizing
touch of its own.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is the problem of continuity-discontinuity, which perhaps I shall have
to take up sometime.
However—
London Times, April 26, 1821—that the inhabitants of Truro, Cornwall,
were amused, astonished, or alarmed, “according to nerve and judgment,”
by arrivals of stones, from an unfindable source, upon a house in Carlow
Street. The mayor of the town visited the place, and was made so nervous
by the rattling stones that he called out a military guard. He investigated,
and the soldiers investigated, and the clatter of theorists increased the noise.
Times, May 1— stones still rattling, theorists still clattering, but nothing
found out.
Flows of frogs—flows of worms—flows of water—flows of stones —
just where do we expect to draw a line" Why not go on to thinking that
there have been mysterious transportations of human beings"
We’ll go on.
A great deal of the opposition to our data is connotative. Most likely
when Dr. Gilbert rubbed a rod and made bits of paper jump on a table, the
opposition to his magic was directed not so much against what he was
doing as against what it might lead to. Witchcraft always has a hard time,
until it becomes established and changes its name.
We hear much of the conflict between science and religion, but our
conflict is with both of these. Science and religion always have agreed in
opposing and suppressing the various witchcrafts. Now that religion is
inglorious, one of the most fantastic of transferences of worships is that of
glorifying science, as a beneficent being. It is the attributing of all that is of
development, or of possible betterment to science. But no scientist has ever
upheld a new idea, without bringing upon himself abuse from other
scientists. Science has done its utmost to prevent whatever Science has
done.
There are cynics who deny the existence of human gratitude. But it seems
that I am no cynic. So convinced am I of the existence of gratitude that I see
in it one of our strongest oppositions. There are millions of persons who
receive favors that they forget: but gratitude does exist, and they’ve got to
express it somewhere. They take it out by being grateful to science for all
that science has done for them, a gratitude, which, according to their dull
perceptions won’t cost them anything. So there is economic indignationThey take it out by being grateful to science for all
that science has done for them, a gratitude, which, according to their dull
perceptions won’t cost them anything. So there is economic indignation

--- PAGE BREAK ---being grateful to science for all
that science has done for them, a gratitude, which, according to their dull
perceptions won’t cost them anything. So there is economic indignation

--- PAGE BREAK ---

against anybody who is disagreeable to science. He is trying to rob the
people of a cheap gratitude.
I like a bargain as well as does anybody else, but I can’t save expenses by
being grateful to Science, if for every scientist who has perhaps been of
benefit to me, there have been many other scientists who have tried to
strangle that possible benefit. Also, if I’m dead broke, I don’t get benefits to
be grateful for.
Resistance to notions in this book will come from persons who identify
industrial science, and the good of it, with the pure, or academic, or
aristocratic sciences that are living on the repute of industrial science. In my
own mind there is distinguishment between a good watchdog and the fleas
on him. If the fleas, too, could be taught to bark, there’d be a little chorus
that would be of some tiny value. But fleas are aristocrats.
London Times, Jan. 13, 1843—that, according to the Courrier de l’Isére,
two little girls, last of December, 1842, were picking leaves from the
ground, near Clavaux (Livet), France, when they saw stones falling around
them. The stones fell with uncanny slowness. The children ran to their
homes, and told of the phenomenon, and returned with their parents. Again
stones fell, and with the same uncanny slowness. It is said that relatively to
these falls the children were attractive agents. There was another
phenomenon, an upward current, into which the children were dragged, as
if into a vortex. We might have had data of mysterious disappearances of
children, but the parents, who were unaffected by the current, pulled them
back.
In the Toronto Globe, Sept. 9, 1880, a correspondent writes that he had
heard reports of most improbable occurrences upon a farm, near the
township of Wellesley, Ontario. He went to the place, to interview the
farmer, Mr. Manser. As he approached the farmhouse, he saw that all the
windows were boarded up. He learned that, about the end of July, windows
had begun to break, though no missiles had been seen. The explanation by
the incredulous was that the old house was settling. It was a good
explanation, except for what it overlooked. To have any opinion, one must
overlook something. The disregard was that, quite as authentic as the stories
of breaking windows, were stories of falls of water in the rooms, having
passed through walls, showing no trace of such passage. It is said that water
had fallen in such volumes, from appearing-points in rooms, that the
furniture of the house had been moved to a shed. In all our records opennesshowing no trace of such passage. It is said that water
had fallen in such volumes, from appearing-points in rooms, that the
furniture of the house had been moved to a shed. In all our records openness

--- PAGE BREAK ---uch passage. It is said that water
had fallen in such volumes, from appearing-points in rooms, that the
furniture of the house had been moved to a shed. In all our records openness

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of phenomena is notable. The story is that showers fell in rooms, when the
farmhouse was crowded with people. For more details see the Halifax
Citizen, September 13.
I omit about sixty instances of seeming teleportations of stones and
water, of which I have records. Numerousness hasn’t any meaning, as a
standard to judge by.
The simplest cases of seeming teleportations are flows of stones, into
open fields, doing no damage, not especially annoying anybody, and in
places where there were no means of concealment for mischievous or
malicious persons. There is a story of this kind, in the New York Sun, June
22, 1884. June 16th—a farm near Trenton, N. J.—two young men, George
and Albert Sanford, hoeing in a field—stones falling. There was no building
anywhere near, and there was not even a fence behind which anybody could
hide. The next day stones fell again. The young men dropped their hoes and
ran to Trenton, where they told of their experiences. They returned with
forty or fifty amateur detectives, who spread out and tried to observe
something, or more philosophically sat down and arrived at conclusions
without observing anything. Crowds came to the cornfield. In the presence
of crowds, stones continued to fall from a point overhead. Nothing more
was found out.
A pig and his swill—
Or Science and data—
Or that the way of a brain is only the way of a belly—
We can call the process that occurs in them either assimilative or
digestive. The mind-worshiper might as well take guts for his god.
For many strange occurrences there are conventional explanations. In the
mind of a conventionalist, reported phenomena assimilate with
conventional explanations. There must be disregards. The mind must reject
some data. This process, too, is both alimentary and mental.
The conventional explanation of mysterious flows of stones is that they
are peggings by neighbors. I have given data as I have found them. Maybe
they are indigestible. The conventional explanation of mysterious flows of
water is that they are exudations from insects. If so there must sometimes
be torrential bugs.
New York Sun, Oct. 30, 1892—that, day after day, in Oklahoma, where
for weeks there had been a drought, water was falling upon a large
cottonwood tree, near Stillwater. A conventionalist visited this tree. HeSun, Oct. 30, 1892—that, day after day, in Oklahoma, where
for weeks there had been a drought, water was falling upon a large
cottonwood tree, near Stillwater. A conventionalist visited this tree. He

--- PAGE BREAK ---that, day after day, in Oklahoma, where
for weeks there had been a drought, water was falling upon a large
cottonwood tree, near Stillwater. A conventionalist visited this tree. He

--- PAGE BREAK ---

found insects. In Insect Life, 5-204, it is said that the Stillwater mystery had
been solved. Dr. Neel, Director of the Agricultural Experimental Station, at
Stillwater, had gone to the tree, and had captured some of the insects that
were causing the precipitation. They were Proconia undata Fab.
And how am I going to prove that this was a senseless, or brutal, or
anyway mechanical, assimilation"
We don’t have proofs. We have expressions.
Our expression is that this precipitation in Oklahoma was only one of
perhaps many. We find three other recorded instances, at this time, and if
they be not attributable to exudations from insects —but we’ll not prove
anything. There is a theorem that Euclid never attempted. That is to take Q.
E. D. as a proposition.
In Science, 21-94, Mr. H. Chaplin, of Ohio University, writes that, in the
town of Akron, Ohio—about while water was falling upon a tree in
Oklahoma—there had been a continuous fall of water, during a succession
of clear days. Members of the faculty of Ohio University had investigated,
but had been unable to solve the problem. There was a definite and
persisting appearing-point from which to a small area near a brickyard,
water was falling. Mr. Chaplin, who had probably never heard of similar
occurrences far from damp places, thought that vapors from this brickyard
were rising, and condensing, and falling back. If so there would often be
such precipitations over ponds and other bodies of water.
About the same time, water was mysteriously appearing at Martinsville,
Ohio, according to the Philadelphia Public Ledger, Oct. 19, 1892. Behind a
house, a mist was falling upon an area not more than a dozen feet square.
St. Louis Globe-Democrat, November 19 —that, in Water Street,
Brownsville, Pa., there was a garden, in which was a peach tree, upon
which water was falling. As to the insect-explanation, we note the statement
that the water “seemed to fall from some height above the tree, and covered
an area about 14 feet square.”
For all I know, some trees may have occult powers. Perhaps some
especially gifted trees have power to transport water, from far away, in
times of need. I noted the drought in Oklahoma, and then I looked up
conditions in Ohio and Pennsylvania. Rainfall was below normal. In Ohio,
according to the Monthly Weather Review, of November, there was a
drought. A watery manna came to chosen trees.hen I looked up
conditions in Ohio and Pennsylvania. Rainfall was below normal. In Ohio,
according to the Monthly Weather Review, of November, there was a
drought. A watery manna came to chosen trees.

--- PAGE BREAK ---itions in Ohio and Pennsylvania. Rainfall was below normal. In Ohio,
according to the Monthly Weather Review, of November, there was a
drought. A watery manna came to chosen trees.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There is no sense in trying to prove anything, if all things are continuous,
so that there isn’t anything, except the inclusive of all, which may be
Something. But aesthetically, if not scientifically, there may be value in
expressions, and we’ll have variations of our theme. There were, in places
far apart, simultaneous flows of water from stationary appearing-points, in
and around Charleston, S. C., in the period of the long series of earthquake
shocks there. Later I shall touch more upon an idea that will be an organic
interpretation of falls of water in places that have been desolated by
catastrophes. About the middle of September, 1886, falling water from “a
cloudless sky,” never falling outside a spot 25 feet wide, was reported from
Dawson, Ga. This shower was not intermittent. Of course the frequently
mentioned circumstance of the “cloudless sky” has no significance. Water
falling all the way from the sky, even at times of the slightest breezes,
cannot be thought of as localizing strictly upon an area a few yards in
diameter. We think of appearing-points a short distance above the ground.
Then showers upon a space 10 feet square were reported from Aiken, S. C.
There were similar falls of water at Cheraw, S. C. For particulars, see the
Charleston News and Courier, October 8, 21, 25, 26. For an account of falls
of water, “from a cloudless sky,” strictly to one point, in Charlotte, N. C.,
according to investigations by a meteorologist, see the Monthly Weather
Review, October, 1886. In the New York Sun, October 24, it is said that, for
14 days, water had been falling from “a cloudless sky,” to a point in
Chesterfield County, S. C., falling so heavily that streams of it had gushed
from roof pipes.
Then came news that water was falling from a point in Charleston.
Several days before, in the News and Courier, had been published the
insect-explanation of falls of water. In the News and Courier, November 5,
a reporter tells that he had visited the place in Charleston, where it was said
that water was falling, and that he had seen a fall of water. He had climbed
a tree to investigate. He had seen insects.
But there are limits to what can be attributed, except by the most
desperate explainers, to insects.
In the Monthly Weather Review, August, 1886, it is said that, in
Charleston, September 4th, three showers of hot stones had been reported.
“An examination of some of these stones, shortly after they had fallen,
forced the conviction that the public was being made the victim of a
practical joke.”e showers of hot stones had been reported.
“An examination of some of these stones, shortly after they had fallen,
forced the conviction that the public was being made the victim of a
practical joke.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---nes had been reported.
“An examination of some of these stones, shortly after they had fallen,
forced the conviction that the public was being made the victim of a
practical joke.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

How an examination of stones could demonstrate whether they had been
slung humorously or not, is more than whatever brains I have can make out.
Upon September 4th, Charleston was desolated. The great earthquake had
occurred upon August 31st, and continuing shocks were terrorizing the
people. Still, I’d go far from my impressions of what we call existence, if
I’d think that terror, or anything else, was ever homogeneous at Charleston,
or anywhere else. Battles and shipwrecks, and especially diseases, are
materials for humorists, and the fun of funerals never will be exhausted. I
don’t argue that in the midst of desolation and woe, at Charleston, there
were no jokers. I tell a story as I found it recorded in the Charleston News
and Courier, September 6, and mention my own conclusion, which is that
wherever jocular survivors of the catastrophe may have been cutting up
capers, they were not concerned in this series of occurrences.
At 2:30 o’clock, morning of September 4th, stones, which were found to
be “warm,” fell near the News and Courier building, some of them
bounding into the press room. Five hours later, when there was no darkness
to hide mischievous survivors, more stones fell. It was a strictly localized
repetition, as if one persisting current of force. At 1:30 o’clock in the
afternoon again stones fell, and these were seen, coming straight down from
a point overhead. If any conviction was forced, it was forced in the same
old way as that in which for ages convictions have been forced, and that is
by forcing agreements with prior convictions. Other details were published
in the Richmond Whig it was told that the stones, which were flint pebbles,
ranging from the size of a grape to the size of a hen’s egg, had fallen upon
an area of 75 square feet, and that about a gallon of them had been picked
up. In A Descriptive Narrative of the Earthquake of August 31, 1886, Carl
McKinley, an editor of the News and Courier, tells of two of these showers
of stones, which. according to him, “undoubtedly fell.”
The localized repetitions of showers of stones are so much like the
localized repetitions of showers of water, that one, inclusive explanation, or
expression, is called for. Insects did them" Or the fishmonger of Worcester
had moved to South Carolina"
A complication has been developing. Little frogs fell upon Mr. Stoker
and his horses, but we had no reason to think that either Mr. Stoker or his
horses had anything to do with bringing about the precipitation. But the
children of Clavaux did seem to have something to do with showers ofut we had no reason to think that either Mr. Stoker or his
horses had anything to do with bringing about the precipitation. But the
children of Clavaux did seem to have something to do with showers of

--- PAGE BREAK ---to think that either Mr. Stoker or his
horses had anything to do with bringing about the precipitation. But the
children of Clavaux did seem to have something to do with showers of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

stones, and trees did seem to have something to do with the precipitations
of water.
Rand Daily Mail, May 29, 1922—that Mr. D. Neaves, living near
Roodeport, employed as a chemist in Johannesburg, having for several
months endured showers of stones, had finally reported to the police. Five
constables, having been sent to the place, after dark, had hardly taken
positions around the house, when a stone crashed on the roof. Phenomena
were thought to associate with the housemaid, a Hottentot girl. She was sent
into the garden, and stones fell vertically around her. This is said to have
been one of the most mysterious of the circumstances: stones fell vertically,
so that there was no tracing of them to an origin. Mr. Neaves’ home was an
isolated building, except for outhouses. These outhouses were searched, but
nothing to suspect was found. The stones continued to fall from an
unknown source.
Police Inspector Cummings took charge. He ordered all members of the
family, servants, and newspaper men to remain in the house for a while: so
everybody was under inspection. Outside were constables, and all around
were open fields, with no means of concealment. Stones fell on the roof.
Watched by the police, the Hottentot girl went to the well. A large stone fell
near her. She ran back to the house, and a stone fell on the roof. It is said
that everything that could be done was done, and that the cordon of police
was complete. More stones fell. Convinced that in some way the girl was
implicated, the Inspector tied her hands. A stone fell on the roof.
Then everything was explained. A “civilian,” concealed in one of the
outhouses, had been caught throwing a stone. If so, whoever wrote this
account did not mention the name of the culprit, and it is not said that the
police made any trouble for him for having made them work.
Then everything was explained again. It was said that the girl, Sara, had
been taken to the police station, where she had confessed. “It is understood
that Sara admits being a party to all the stone-throwing, and has implicated
two other children and a grown native. So ends the Roodeport ghost story,
shorn of all its alleged supernatural trappings.”
Though usually we do not think piously of the police, their stations are
confessionals. But they’re confessionals more in a scientific than in a
religious sense. When a confessor holds a club over a conscience, he can
bully statements with the success of any scientist who slugs data with a
theory. There is much brutality in police stations and in laboratories, but Iconfessor holds a club over a conscience, he can
bully statements with the success of any scientist who slugs data with a
theory. There is much brutality in police stations and in laboratories, but I

--- PAGE BREAK ---lub over a conscience, he can
bully statements with the success of any scientist who slugs data with a
theory. There is much brutality in police stations and in laboratories, but I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

can’t say that we’re trying to reform anything; and if there never has been a
Newton, or a Darwin, or an Einstein—or a Moses, or a Christ, or a St.
Augustine—who has practiced other than the third degree upon
circumstances, I fear me that sometimes we are not innocent of one or two
degrees, ourselves.
However, the story reads more as if the girl had been taken to a barber
shop. Her story was shorn, we read. It was clipped bald of all details, such
as the cordon of police, search of the outhouses, and the taking of
precautions, such as will not fit in with this yarn of the tricky kids. In this
book we shall note much shearing.
The writer, in the Monthly Weather Review, is not the only clipper who
forces a conviction, when he can. There was a case, in another part of South
Africa, not long before the bombardments at Roodeport began. In the
Klerksdorp Record, Nov. 18, 1921, it is said that for several weeks there had
been “mysterious stonethrowing by invisible agencies” at the houses of Mr.
Gibbon Joseph and Mr. H. J. Minnaar, in North Street. A detective was put
upon the case. He was a logician. It was a ghost story, or it was a case of
malicious mischief. He could not pinch a ghost. So he accused two
Negroes, and arrested them. The Negroes were tried upon testimony given
by two boys of their race. But the boys contradicted each other, and it was
brought out that they were lying. They admitted that the logical detective
had promised them five shillings to substantiate his syllogisms.
In the Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 12-260, is published
a letter from Mr. W. G. Grottendieck, telling that, about one o’clock, one
morning in September, 1903, at Dortrecht, Sumatra, he was awakened by
hearing something fall on the floor of his room. Sounds of falling objects
went on. He found that little, black stones were falling, with uncanny
slowness, from the ceiling, or the roof, which was made of large,
overlapping, dried leaves. Mr. Grottendieck writes that these stones were
appearing near the inside of the roof, not puncturing the material, if through
this material they were passing. He tried to catch them at the appearing-
point, but, though they moved with extraordinary slowness, they evaded
him. There was a coolie boy, asleep in the house, at the time. “The boy
certainly did not do it, because at the time that I bent over him, while he
was sleeping on the floor, there fell a couple of stones.” There was no
police station handy, and this story was not finished off with a neat and
fashionable cut.e time that I bent over him, while he
was sleeping on the floor, there fell a couple of stones.” There was no
police station handy, and this story was not finished off with a neat and
fashionable cut.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ver him, while he
was sleeping on the floor, there fell a couple of stones.” There was no
police station handy, and this story was not finished off with a neat and
fashionable cut.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I point out that these stories of flows of stones are not conventional
stories, and are not well known. Their details are not standardized, like
“clanking chains” in ghost stories, and “eyes the size of saucers,” in sea
serpent yarns. Somebody in France, in the year 1842, told of slow-moving
stones, and somebody in Sumatra, in the year 1903, told of slow-moving
stones. It would be strange, if two liars should invent this circumstance—
And that is where I get, when I reason.
If strangeness be a standard for unfavorable judgment, I damn at a swipe
most of this book.
But damnation is nothing to me. I offer the data. Suit yourself.
Nobody can investigate the reported phenomena that we’re taking up,
without noticing the number of cases in which boys and girls, but a great
preponderance of girls, appear. An explanation by those who disregard a
great deal—or disregard normally—is that youngsters are concerned so
much, because it is their own mischief. Poltergeist-phenomena, or
teleportations of objects, in the home of Mr. Frost, 8 Ferrostone-road,
Hornsey, London, for several months, early in the year 1921, cannot be so
explained. There were three children. Phenomena so frightened one of them
that, in a nervous breakdown, she died (London Daily Express, April 2,
1921). Another, in a similar condition, was taken to the Lewisham (London)
Hospital (London Daily News, April 30, 1921).
In attempting to rationalize various details that we have come upon, or to
assimilate them, or to digest them, the toughest meal is swallowing
statements upon mysterious appearances in closed rooms, or passages of
objects and substances through walls of houses, without disturbing the
material of the walls. Oh, yes, I have heard of “the fourth dimension,” but I
am going to do myself some credit by not lugging in that particular way of
showing that I don’t know what I’m writing about. There’s a story in the St.
Louis Globe-Democrat, Jan. 27, 1888—large stones that were appearing
and “falling slowly” in closed rooms in the home of Mr. P. C. Martin,
Caldwell County, N. C. Madras (India) Mail, March 5, 1888—pieces of
brick that, in the presence of many investigators, were falling in a
schoolroom, in Pondicherry.
I can understand this phenomenon, or alleged phenomenon, of
appearances in closed rooms, no more than I can understand the passage of
a magnetic field of force through the wall of a house, without disturbing the
material. But lines of this force do not transport objects through a denses, no more than I can understand the passage of
a magnetic field of force through the wall of a house, without disturbing the
material. But lines of this force do not transport objects through a dense

--- PAGE BREAK ---n understand the passage of
a magnetic field of force through the wall of a house, without disturbing the
material. But lines of this force do not transport objects through a dense

--- PAGE BREAK ---

material. Then I think of X-rays, which do something like this, if it be
accepted that X-rays are aggregations of very small objects, or particles. X-
rays do, or sometimes do, disturb materials penetrated by them, but this
disturbance is not evident until after long continuance.
If there is Teleportation, it is in two orders, or fields: electric and non-
electric—or phenomena that occur during thunderstorms, and phenomena
that occur under “a cloudless sky,” and in houses. In the hosts of stories that
I have gathered—but with which I have not swamped this book—of
showers of living things, the rarest of all statements is of injury to the
falling creatures. Then, from impressions that have arisen from other data,
we think that the creatures may not have fallen all the way from the sky, but
may have fallen from appearing-points not high above the ground—or may
have fallen a considerable distance under a counter-gravitational influence.
I think that there may be a counter-gravitational influence upon
transported objects, because of the many agreeing accounts—more than I
have told of—of slow-falling stones, by persons who had probably never
heard of other stories of slow-falling stones, and because I have come upon
records of similar magic, or witchcraft, in what will be accepted as sane and
sober meteorological observations.
See the Annual Register, 1859-70—an account by Mr. E. J. Lowe, a
meteorologist and an astronomer, of a fall of hailstones, at Nottingham,
England, May 29, 1859. Though the objects were more than an inch across,
they fell slowly. In September, 1873, near Clermont-Ferrand, France,
according to La Nature, 7-289, hailstones, measuring from an inch to an
inch and a half across, fell. They were under an unknown influence.
Notwithstanding their size, they fell so slowly that they did no damage.
Some fell upon roofs, and rebounded, and it was as if these shook off the
influence. Those that rebounded then fell faster than fell those that came
down in an unbroken fall. For other records of this phenomenon, see
Nature, 36-445; Illustrated London News, 34-546; Bull. Soc. Astro. de
France, June 19, 1900.
If in the general electric conditions of a thunderstorm there be sometimes
a counter-gravitational effect upon objects, somebody might find out how
counter-gravitationally to electrify aircraft and aviators. If all work is
opposition to gravitation, somebody may make a big discovery of benefit to
general laziness. Elevators in sky-scrapers might be run with half the power
now needed. Here is an idea that may revolutionize industry, but just now Isomebody may make a big discovery of benefit to
general laziness. Elevators in sky-scrapers might be run with half the power
now needed. Here is an idea that may revolutionize industry, but just now I

--- PAGE BREAK ---big discovery of benefit to
general laziness. Elevators in sky-scrapers might be run with half the power
now needed. Here is an idea that may revolutionize industry, but just now I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

am too busy revolutionizing everything else, and I give this idea to the
world, with the generosity of somebody who bestows something that isn’t
any good to him.
But mysterious disappearances"
Our data have been upon mysterious appearances.
If I could appeal to what used to be supposed to be known as common
sense, I’d ask whether something that mysteriously appears somewhere had
not mysteriously disappeared somewhere else.
Annals of Electricity, 6-499—Liverpool, May 11, 1842—”not a breath of
air.” Suddenly clothes on lines on a common shot upward. They moved
away slowly. Smoke from chimneys indicated that above ground there was
a southward wind, but the clothes moved away northward.
There was another instance, a few weeks later. London Times, July 5,
1842—a bright, clear day, at Cupar, Scotland, June 30th— women hanging
out clothes on a common. There was a sharp detonation, and clothes on
lines shot upward. Some fell to the ground, but others went on and
vanished. There was a seeming of selection, which, because of possible
bearing upon various observations of ours interests me. Though this was a
powerful force, nothing but the clothes it seized was affected. I wonder
about the detonation, largely because it is in agreement with a detail of still
another story.
The closeness in time of these two occurrences attracts my attention.
They were a few weeks apart, and I have no other such record, until
seventy-seven years later. A sensible suggestion is that somebody, in Cupar,
having read the Liverpool story, had faked a similar story from his town. A
suggestion that is not so sensible is that, in this year 1842, somebody had
learned the secrets of teleportation, and to avoid attracting much attention in
any one place was experimenting in places far apart. It seems likely enough
to me that, if there be teleportation, human beings may have come upon
knowledge of it, and may have used it.
“Likely enough"” a spiritualist would say. “Has he never heard of
apports"´
But whether it’s narrowness and bigotry, upon my part, or not, I do not go
to seances for data. I have collected notes upon “mysterious robberies,”
wondering whether a teleportative power has ever been used criminally. As
to apports, if a medium could transport sea shells from the sea to his
cabinet, he could abstract funds from a bank to his pocket. If he could, buteleportative power has ever been used criminally. As
to apports, if a medium could transport sea shells from the sea to his
cabinet, he could abstract funds from a bank to his pocket. If he could, but

--- PAGE BREAK ---as ever been used criminally. As
to apports, if a medium could transport sea shells from the sea to his
cabinet, he could abstract funds from a bank to his pocket. If he could, but

--- PAGE BREAK ---

would not, how account for his being a medium" Looking through
newspapers, I have had a searching eye for something like an account of a
medium, who had become mysteriously rich, in a town where there had
been shortages of funds: clerks accused of embezzlement, and convicted,
but upon evidence that was not altogether satisfactory. Although usually I
can find data to “prove” anything that I want to “prove,” I have come upon
no such account, and I am skeptical as to apports, and think that mediums
are like most of the rest of us, who are not criminals, having no exceptional
abilities. However, there may be criminal adepts who are not known
mediums.
There was, in June, 1919, at Islip, Northampton, England, an occurrence
like the occurrences at Liverpool and Cupar. London Daily Express, June
12, 1919—a loud detonation—basketful of clothes shooting into the air.
Then the clothes came down. There may be ineffective teleportative
seizures.
London Daily Mail, May 6, 1910—phenomena near Cantillana, Spain.
From ten o’clock in the morning until noon, May 4th, stones shot up from a
spot in the ground. Loud detonations were heard. “Traces of an extinct
volcano are visible at the spot, and it is believed that a new crater is being
formed.” But there is no findable record of volcanic activity in Spain, at this
time—nor at any other time. I am reminded of the loud noises that often
accompany poltergeist disturbances.
In Niles’ Weekly Register, Nov. 4, 1815, there is an account of stones that
had been watched rising in a field, near Marbleton, Ulster County, New
York—that these stones had been seen to rise three or four feet from the
ground, then moving horizontally, from thirty to sixty feet.
Out in open fields, there have been showers of water, strictly localized,
and of unknown origin. A Dr. Neel will be heard from. He has captured, not
indefinitely alluded to insects, but Proconia undata Fab. Every mystery has
its fishmonger. Considered figuratively, he need not be a seller of fish. His
name may be Smith, or O’Brien, or it may be Proconia Undata Fab.
But presumably in the wintertime, in England, members of the Proconia
family are not busy and available for explanations. In the Chorley
(Lancashire) Standard, Feb. 15, 1873, is a story of excitement in the town
of Eccleston. At Bank House, occupied by two elderly women and their
niece, streams of water started falling, about the first of February,
seemingly from ceilings. Furniture was soaked, and the occupants of theon. At Bank House, occupied by two elderly women and their
niece, streams of water started falling, about the first of February,
seemingly from ceilings. Furniture was soaked, and the occupants of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ccupied by two elderly women and their
niece, streams of water started falling, about the first of February,
seemingly from ceilings. Furniture was soaked, and the occupants of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

house were alarmed. The falls seemed to come from the ceiling, but
“probably the most singular feature of the affair is that ceilings were
apparently quite dry.” See back to Mr. Grottendieck’s story of objects that
were appearing near a ceiling, or roof, with no signs of penetrating the
material. Workmen had been called to the house, and had investigated, but
were unable to explain. Openness again. House packed with neighbors,
watching the showers. These data would make trouble for spiritualistic
mediums and their requirements for special, or closed, conditions, and at
least semi-darkness, if mediums were bothered by more than unquestioning
or, occasionally politely questioning, faith. If some of them have been
knocked about a bit, they were relatively few. Nobody in this house sat in a
cabinet. Nobody was a logician. Nobody reasonably argued that chemists,
for instance, must have special conditions, or their reactions will not work
out. “For instance,” said nobody, “how could you develop a photograph,
except in the special conditions of darkness, or semi-darkness"”
The look to me is that, throughout what is loosely called Nature,
teleportation exists, as a means of distribution of things and materials, and
that sometimes human beings have command, mostly unconsciously,
though perhaps sometimes as a development from research and experiment,
of this force. It is said that in savage tribes there are “rain makers,” and it
may be that among savages there are teleportationists. Some years ago, I’d
have looked superior, if anybody had said this to me but a good many of us
are not so given to the “tut-tut” as we used to be. It may be that in civilized
communities, because of their storages, a power to attract flows of water,
being no longer needed, has virtually died out, still appearing occasionally,
however.
It could be that, in reading what most persons think are foolish little
yarns of falling stones, we are, visionarily, in the presence of cosmic
constructiveness—or that once upon a time this whole earth was built up by
streams of rocks, teleported from other parts of an existence. The crash of
falling islands—the humps of piling continents—and then the cosmic
humor of it all—or utmost spectacularity functioning, then declining, and
surviving only as a vestige— or that the force that once heaped the peaks of
the Rocky Mountains now slings pebbles at a couple of farmers, near
Trenton, N. J.
So I’d conceive of the existence of a force, and the use of it,
unconsciously mostly, by human beings. It may be that, if somebody, giftedow slings pebbles at a couple of farmers, near
Trenton, N. J.
So I’d conceive of the existence of a force, and the use of it,
unconsciously mostly, by human beings. It may be that, if somebody, gifted

--- PAGE BREAK ---a couple of farmers, near
Trenton, N. J.
So I’d conceive of the existence of a force, and the use of it,
unconsciously mostly, by human beings. It may be that, if somebody, gifted

--- PAGE BREAK ---

with what we think we mean by “agency,” fiercely hates somebody else, he
can, out of intense visualizations, direct, by teleportation, bombardments of
stones upon his enemy.
Water falls on a tree, in Oklahoma. It is told of in an entomological
magazine. Water falls in a house in Eccleston. I read that in a spiritualists’
periodical, though I went to a newspaper for the data. These are the
isolations, or the specializations, of conventional treatments. I tell of water
falling upon a tree, in Oklahoma, and of water falling in a house, in
Eccleston, and think that both phenomena are manifestations of one force. It
is my attempt to smash false demarcations: to take data away from narrow
and exclusive treatments by spiritualists, astronomers, meteorologists,
entomologists: also denying the validity of usurpations of words and ideas
by metaphysicians and theologians. But my interest is not only that of a
unifier: it is in bringing together seeming incongruities, and finding that
they have affinity. I am very much aware of the invigoration of products of
ideas that are foreign to each other, if they mate. This is exogamy, practiced
with thoughts—to fertilize a volcanic eruption with a storm of frogs—or to
mingle the fall of an edible substance from the sky with the unexplained
appearance of Cagliostro. But I am a pioneer and no purist, and some of
these stud-stunts of introducing vagabond ideas to each other may have
about the eugenic value of some of the romances in houses of ill fame. I
cannot expect to be both promiscuous and respectable. Later, most likely,
some of these unions will be properly licensed.
Sometimes, in what I call “teleportations,” there seems to be “agency”
and sometimes not. That the “agency” is not exclusively human, and has
nothing to do with “spirits of the departed” is indicated, I suppose, if we
accept that sometimes there are “occult powers” of trees. Some other time I
may be able more clearly to think out an expression upon flows of pigeons
to their homes, and flows of migratory birds, as teleportative, or quasi-
teleportative. My suggestion as to the frequently reported “agency” of
children, is that “occult forces” were, in earlier times of human affairs, far
more prevalent, and far more necessary to the help and maintenance of
human communities than they are now, with political and economic
mechanisms somewhat well-established, or working, after a fashion; and
that, wherein children are atavistic, they may be in rapport with forces that
mostly human beings have outgrown.cal and economic
mechanisms somewhat well-established, or working, after a fashion; and
that, wherein children are atavistic, they may be in rapport with forces that
mostly human beings have outgrown.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hanisms somewhat well-established, or working, after a fashion; and
that, wherein children are atavistic, they may be in rapport with forces that
mostly human beings have outgrown.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Though just at present I am no darling of the popes, I expect to end up
holy, some other time, with a general expression that all stories of miracles
are not lies, or are not altogether lies; and that in the primitive conditions of
the Middle Ages there were hosts of occurrences that now, considerably,
though not altogether, have been outgrown. Anybody who broadly accepts
the doctrine of relativity should accept that there are phenomena that exist
relatively to one age, that do not, or do not so pronouncedly, exist in another
age. I more or less accept a great deal that religionists piously believe. As I
see myself, I represent a modernization of the old-fashioned atheist, who so
sweepingly denied everything that seemed to interfere with his disbeliefs.
There are of course other explanations of the “occult powers” of children.
One is that children, instead of being atavistic, may occasionally be far in
advance of adults, foreshadowing coming human powers, because their
minds are not stifled by conventions. After that, they go to school and lose
their superiority. Few boy-prodigies have survived an education.
The outstanding suggestion, which, however, like many other
suggestions, I cannot now develop, is that, if Teleportation exists, it may be
used. It may be criminally used, or it may be used commercially. Cargoes,
without ships, and freights, without trains, may be of the traffics of the
future. There may be teleportative voyages from planet to planet.
Altogether, so many of our data are bound up with jokes, hoaxes, and
flippant treatments that I think of the toy and play genesis of many practical
inventions. Billions of dollars are today seriously drawing dividends from
toys and games that were put to work. Billions of laughs and jeers have
preceded solemn expressions of satisfaction with fat bank accounts. But this
is only reasoning, and is nothing but logic and argument, and there have
been billions of laughs that never turned into anything more satisfactory—
though where do I get the idea that there is anything more satisfactory than
a laugh"
If, in other worlds, or in other parts of one relatively little existence, there
be people who are far ahead of terrestrians, perhaps, teleportatively, beings
from other places have come to this earth. And have seen nothing to detain
them. Or perhaps some of the more degraded ones have felt at home here,
and have hung around, or have stayed here. I’d think of these fellows as
throw-backs: concealing their origin, of course; having perhaps only a
slightly foreign appearance; having affinity with our barbarisms, which
their own races had cast off. I’d think of a feeling for this earth, in othering their origin, of course; having perhaps only a
slightly foreign appearance; having affinity with our barbarisms, which
their own races had cast off. I’d think of a feeling for this earth, in other

--- PAGE BREAK ---course; having perhaps only a
slightly foreign appearance; having affinity with our barbarisms, which
their own races had cast off. I’d think of a feeling for this earth, in other

--- PAGE BREAK ---

worlds, as corresponding to the desire of most of us, now and then, to go to
a South Sea Island and be degraded. Throw-backs, translated to this earth,
would not, unless intensely atavistic, take to what we regard as vices, but to
what their own far-advanced people regard as perhaps unmentionable, or
anyway, unprintable, degradations. They would join our churches, and
wallow in pews. They’d lose all sense of decency and become college
professors. Let a fall start, and the decline is swift. They’d end up as
members of Congress.
There is another view, for which I am now gathering material—
New York Times, Dec. 6, 1930—“Scores die; 300 stricken by poison fog
in Belgium; panic grips countryside. Origin complete mystery. War scenes
recalled.” It may be that it was war.
Mostly, explanations by the scientists were just about what one would
expect, but, in the New York Telegram, December 6, Prof. H. H. Sheldon
was quoted—”If there is a widespread, lethal fog in the Meuse Valley, the
conclusion of science would be that it is being deliberately caused by men
or women.”
It may be that inhabitants of other worlds, or other parts of one, organic
existence, have declared war upon this earth, and have discharged down
here, sometimes under cover of fogs, volumes of poisonous gases. I have
other records that may indicate something of this kind, but, reluctantly, I
give up this interesting notion, as applied to the occurrence of Dec. 5, 1930,
because it associates with another phenomenon, of which I shall tell later.
Only two weeks after the tragedy in Belgium, appeared the fishmonger.
The writer of an editorial, in the New York Herald Tribune, Dec. 19, 1930,
started the conventionalizing and the minimizing and the obscurizing that
always cloak events that are inconsistent with a main norm of supposed
knowledge. “One may suspect that a sensational newspaper man, counting
up the deaths, some dark day, in the smoky steel towns on the Allegheny
River, could produce a story not far behind that from Belgium.”
Seventy-seven men and women were struck dead in Belgium. Oh, there’s
always some commonplace explanation for these occurrences, if we only
use our common sense.tory not far behind that from Belgium.”
Seventy-seven men and women were struck dead in Belgium. Oh, there’s
always some commonplace explanation for these occurrences, if we only
use our common sense.

--- PAGE BREAK ---that from Belgium.”
Seventy-seven men and women were struck dead in Belgium. Oh, there’s
always some commonplace explanation for these occurrences, if we only
use our common sense.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

U
5
PON the 9th of January, 1907, Mr. McLaughlin, of the town of
Magilligan, County Derry, Ireland, hadn’t a red light. Neither had
his sister, nor his niece, nor his maidservant. They hadn’t a cabinet.
But a show was staged at their house, as if they knew altogether too much
about phosphorescent paint, and as if Mr. McLaughlin bought false
whiskers. There were phenomena in sunlight, and there was an atmosphere
as unmystical as pigs and neighbors. If any spiritualistic medium can do
stunts, there is no more need for special conditions than there is for a
chemist to turn down lights, start operations with a hymn, and ask whether
there’s any chemical present that has affinity with something named
Hydrogen.
Mr. McLaughlin had cleaned soot from the chimney. I wonder what
relation there may be. It is said that immediately afterward, phenomena
began. There were flows of soot from undetectable sources, in rooms, and
from room to room, independent of drafts, sometimes moving against
drafts. Also there were flows of stones, or bombardments. About thirty
panes of glass were broken by stones, in the daytime, some of them in the
presence of neighbors. This is the story, as it was told by reporters of the
Derry Journal and the Coleraine Constitution, who had been sent to
investigate. Probably there was a girl, aged 14 or 15, in this house, but as to
the ages of Mr. McLaughlin’s niece and maidservant, I could not learn
particulars.
The conventionally scientific, or fishmongerish, thing to do would be to
think of some commonplace explanation of the soot, and forget the stones.
There would not be so much science, if people had good memories. The
flows of stones can be explained as peggings by neighbors, if the soot be
forgotten.
Our data have been bullied by two tyrannies. On one side, the
spiritualists have arbitrarily taken over strange occurrences, as
manifestations of “the departed.” On the other side, conventional science
has pronounced against everything that does not harmonize with itsualists have arbitrarily taken over strange occurrences, as
manifestations of “the departed.” On the other side, conventional science
has pronounced against everything that does not harmonize with its

--- PAGE BREAK ---rily taken over strange occurrences, as
manifestations of “the departed.” On the other side, conventional science
has pronounced against everything that does not harmonize with its

--- PAGE BREAK ---

systematizations. The scientist goes investigating, about as, to match
ribbons, a woman goes shopping. The spiritualist stuffs the maws of his
emotions. One is too dainty, and the other is gross. Perhaps, between these
two, we shall some day be considered models of well-bred behavior.
Showers of frogs and worms and periwinkles—and now it’s showers of
nails. St. Louis Globe-Democrat, Oct. 16, 1888—dispatch from
Brownsville, Texas—that, on the night of the 12th, the lighthouse, at Point
Isabel, occupied by Mrs. Schreiber, widow of the keeper, who had departed
not long before, had been struck by a rain of nails. The next night, about
dark, came another shower of nails. More variety—also down pelted clods
of earth and oyster shells. Bombardments continued. People gathered and
saw showers, mostly of nails, but could not find out where they were
coming from.
In Human Nature, March, 1871, is a story of flows of corn that were
passing from a locked crib, in Buchanan, Virginia. But, in this case, it was
said that apparitions were seen, and mostly, at least so far as apparitions are
concerned, our accounts are not ghost stories.
There have been mysterious showers of money, in public places. I have
gravely copied accounts from newspapers, but there must have been
something the matter with my gravity, because I put the notes away, without
indexing them, and just now can’t find them, among about 60,000. One of
the stories was of coins that, for several days, a few years ago, fell
intermittently into Trafalgar Square, London. Traffic was so interfered with
by scramblers that the police investigated, but could trace nothing to the
buildings around the Square. Every now and then there was a jingle of
coins, and a scramble, and the annoyance of the police was increased. They
investigated.
Maybe there are experimenters who have learned to do such things,
teleportatively. I’d see some sport in it, myself, if it wouldn’t cost too much:
There was a piker with pennies, in London, several years ago. New York
Evening World, Jan. 18, 1928—flows of copper coins and chunks of coal, in
a house in Battersea, London, occupied by a family named Robinson. “The
Robinsons are educated people, and scout the idea of a supernatural agency.
However they are completely baffled, and declare the phenomena take
place in closed rooms, thus precluding the possibility of objects being
thrown from outside.”out the idea of a supernatural agency.
However they are completely baffled, and declare the phenomena take
place in closed rooms, thus precluding the possibility of objects being
thrown from outside.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---pernatural agency.
However they are completely baffled, and declare the phenomena take
place in closed rooms, thus precluding the possibility of objects being
thrown from outside.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There’s small chance of such phenomena being understood, just at
present, because everybody’s a logician. Almost everybody reasons: “There
are not supernatural occurrences: therefore these alleged phenomena did not
occur.” However through some closed skulls, mostly independently of eyes
and ears and noses, which tell mostly only what they should tell, is
penetrating the idea that flows of coins and chunks of coal may be as
natural as the flows of rivers. Those of us who have taken this degree of our
initiation may now go on to a more advanced stage of whatever may be the
matter with us.
Aug. 30, 1919—Swanton Novers Rectory, near Melton Constable,
Norfolk, England—oil “spurting” from walls and ceilings. It was thought
that the house was over an oil well, the liquid percolating and precipitating,
but it was not crude oil that was falling: the liquids were paraffin and petrol.
Then came showers of water. Oil was falling from one of the appearing-
points, at a rate of a quart in ten minutes. Methylated spirits and
sandalwood oil were falling. In an account, dated September 2nd, it is said
that receptacles had been placed under appearing-points, and that about 50
gallons of oil had been caught. Of thirteen showers, upon September 1st,
two were of water.
The circumstance that is of most importance in this story is that such
quantities of oils and water appeared here that the Rector, the Rev. Hugh
Guy, had been driven out, and had moved his furniture to another house.
London Times, September 9—”Norfolk Mystery Solved.” We are told
that Mr. Oswald Williams, the “illusionist,” or the stage magician, and his
wife, who were investigating, had seen the housemaid, aged 15, enter the
house, which for several days had been unoccupied, and throw a glass of
water, which they had salted, to a ceiling, then crying that another shower
had occurred. They had shut off the water supply, in the house, and had
placed around glasses and pails of water, salted so that it could be
identified.
As Mr. and Mrs. Williams told it, they, in hiding, saw the girl throw the
salted water, and rushed out of their hiding place and accused her.
Conceivably all for the sake of science, and conceivably with not a thought
of publicity-values, Mr. Williams told newspaper reporters of his successful
stratagem, and put completeness into his triumph, by telling that the girl had
confessed. “She admitted that she had done it, and finally she broke down
and made a clean breast of it.”his successful
stratagem, and put completeness into his triumph, by telling that the girl had
confessed. “She admitted that she had done it, and finally she broke down
and made a clean breast of it.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---tagem, and put completeness into his triumph, by telling that the girl had
confessed. “She admitted that she had done it, and finally she broke down
and made a clean breast of it.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Times, September 12—girl interviewed by a representative of a Norwich
newspaper—denied that she had confessed—denied that she had played
tricks of any kind—denied that the Williamses had been in hiding—told
that she had gone to the house, with Mr. and Mrs. Williams, and that a wet
spot had appeared upon a ceiling, and that she had been wrongfully accused
of having thrown water.
“According to the little girl’s statement, she was at no time alone in the
kitchen” (London Daily News, September 10). “She insists that she was the
victim of a trick, and that great pressure was put upon her to admit that she
had thrown salted water to the ceiling. ‘I was told,’ she said, ‘that I would
be given one minute to say I had done it, or go to prison. I said that I didn’t
do it.’”
Having an interest in ways in which data are suppressed, I have picked
up some information upon how little girls are “pressed.” No details of the
“pressure” were published in the London newspapers. Norfolk News,
November 8—that, in the Holt Petty Sessions had come up the case of the
girl, Mabel Louisa Philippo— spelled Phillips, in the other accounts—
complainant against Mrs Oswald Williams, who was charged with having
assaulted her. The girl said that Mrs. Williams had time after time struck her
in the face, and had called attention to her face, reddened by blows, as
evidence of her guilt. Mrs. Philippo testified that, when she arrived at the
Rectory, her daughter’s first words were that she had been beaten. The Rev.
Hugh Guy testified, but he did not testify that he was in the house, at the
time. According to details picked up from other accounts, he was not in the
house, at the time.
It is said that legal procedure in Great Britain is superior to whatever
goes under that name in the United States. I can’t accept that legal
procedure anywhere is superior to anything. Mr. Guy, who had not been
present, testified that he had not seen the girl struck, and I found no record
of any objection by the girl’s attorney to such testimony. The case was
dismissed.
And then a document closed investigation. It was a letter from Mr. Guy,
published in the Times, September 13. Mr. Guy wrote that he had tasted the
water, upon the ceiling, and had tasted salt in it: so he gave his opinion that
the girl had thrown the water. Most likely there is considerable salt,
reminders of long successions of hams and bacons, on every kitchen
ceiling.nd had tasted salt in it: so he gave his opinion that
the girl had thrown the water. Most likely there is considerable salt,
reminders of long successions of hams and bacons, on every kitchen
ceiling.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n it: so he gave his opinion that
the girl had thrown the water. Most likely there is considerable salt,
reminders of long successions of hams and bacons, on every kitchen
ceiling.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to Mr. and Mrs. Williams, the girl had confessed. But see Mr.
Guy’s letter to the Times—that the girl had not confessed.
So, because of Mr. Guy’s letter, the Williamses cannot be depended upon.
But we’re going to find that Mr. Guy cannot be depended upon. To be sure,
I am going to end up with something about photographs, but photographs
cannot be depended upon. I can’t see that out of our own reasoning, we can
get anywhere, if there isn’t anything phenomenal that can be depended
upon. It is my expression that, if we are entering upon an era of a revised
view of many formerly despised and ridiculed data, there will be a
simultaneous variation of many minds, more favorably to them, and that
what is called reasoning in those minds will be only supplementary to a
general mental tropism.
The investigation was stopped by Mr. Guy. The inquiry-shearer, or the
mystery-bobber, was this statement, in his letter—”It would have taken only
a small quantity to create the mess.”
The meaning of this statement is that, whereas gallons, or barrels, of oils,
at a cost of hundreds of dollars, could not be attributed to a mischievous
girl, “only a small quantity” could be.
Flows of frogs—flows of worms—flows of lies—read this:
London Daily Express, August 30—“The Rector, in response to a request
from the Daily Express, for the latest news, reported as follows:
“‘To the Editor of the Daily Express
“‘Expert engineer arriving Monday. Drippings ascribed to exudations, on
August 8, of petrol, methylated spirits, and paraffin. House evacuated;
vapor dangerous; every room affected; downpour rather than dripping—
Guy.’”
In the Daily Express, September 2, is published Mr. Guy’s statement that
he had been compelled to move his furniture from the house.
According to other accounts, the quantities were great. In the London
Daily News were published reports by an architect, a geologist, and a
chemist, telling of observations upon profuse flows. In the Norwich
newspapers, the accounts are similar. For instance, the foreman of an oil
company, having been asked to give an opinion, had visited the house, and
had caught in a tub, two gallons of oil, which had dripped, in four hours,
from one of the appearing-points. Just how, as a matter of tricks, a girl
could have been concerned in these occurrences is not picturable to me. The
house was crowded, while the oil-expert, for instance, was investigating.ng-points. Just how, as a matter of tricks, a girl
could have been concerned in these occurrences is not picturable to me. The
house was crowded, while the oil-expert, for instance, was investigating.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

But it does seem that unconsciously she was concerned. The first of the
showers occurred in her room. Ceilings were bored and ripped off, but
nothing by which to explain was found. Then another stage magician, Mr.
N. Maskelyne, went to Swanton Novers, with the idea of exposing trickery.
Possibly this competition made the Williamses hasty. But Mr. Maskelyne
could find nothing by which to explain the mystery. According to him
(Daily Mail, September 10) “barrels of it” had appeared, during the time of
his observations.
Just how effective, as an inquiry-stopper, was the story of the girl and the
“small quantity,” is shown by the way the Society for Psychical Research
was influenced by it. See the Journal S. P. R., October, 1919. Mr. Guy’s
letter to the Times is taken as final. No knowledge of conflicting statements
by him is shown. The Society did not investigate. “A small quantity” can be
explained, as it should be explained, but “barrels of it” must be forgotten.
Case dismissed.
If the Rev. Hugh Guy described at one time a “downpour,” which had
driven out him and his tables, chairs, beds, rugs, all those things that I think
of seriously, because I have recently done some moving, myself, and then
told of “a small quantity,” why have I not an explanation of this
contradiction"
I wrote to Mr. Guy, asking him to explain, having the letter registered for
the sake of a record. I have received no answer.
In the London Daily Mail, Sept. 3, 1919, are reproduced two photographs
of oil dripping from different ceilings. Large drops of oil are clearly visible.

--- PAGE BREAK ---I have received no answer.
In the London Daily Mail, Sept. 3, 1919, are reproduced two photographs
of oil dripping from different ceilings. Large drops of oil are clearly visible.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

F
6
LOWS of blood from “holy images”— I take for a proposition that,
though nothing can be proved —because, if all phenomenal things are
continuous, there is, in a final sense, nothing phenomenal—anything
can be said to be proved—because, if all phenomenal things are continuous,
the most preposterous nonsense must somewhere be linked with well-
established beliefs. If I had the time for an extra job, I’d ask readers to think
up loony theories, and send them to me, and I’d pick out the looniest of all,
and engage to find abundant data to make it reasonable to anybody who
wanted to think it reasonable.
Once upon a time I thought that stories of flows of blood from “holy
images” were as ridiculous as anything that I had ever read in any
astronomical, or geological textbook, or in any treatise upon economics or
mechanics.
Well, then, what happened"
It occurred to me that stories of flows of blood from “holy images” are
assimilable with our general expressions upon teleportations. Whereupon,
automatically, the formerly despised became the somewhat reasonable.
Though now and then I am ill-natured with scientific methods, it is no pose
of mine that I am other than scientific, myself, in our expressions. I am tied
down like any college professor or Zulu wise man.
As a start-off, I suggest that if we accept that flows of water ever have
appeared at points in objects, called “houses,” a jolt is softened, and we
pass easily into thinking that other fluids may have appeared at points in
other objects, called “holy images.” The jolt is softened still more, if we
argue that other fluids did appear at points in the object, called a “house,” at
Swanton-Novers.
There may be Teleportation, and maybe for ages the secret of it has been
known by esoteric ones. It may be that priests, especially in the past, when,
sociologically, they were of some possible use, have known how to teleport
a red fluid, or blood, to points upon images. They may have been “agents,”
able to do this, without knowing how they got their effects. If I can acceptof some possible use, have known how to teleport
a red fluid, or blood, to points upon images. They may have been “agents,”
able to do this, without knowing how they got their effects. If I can accept

--- PAGE BREAK ---, have known how to teleport
a red fluid, or blood, to points upon images. They may have been “agents,”
able to do this, without knowing how they got their effects. If I can accept

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that our whole existence is an organism, I can accept that, if by so-called
miracles, its masses of social growths can best be organized and kept co-
ordinated, then appear so-called miracles. The only flaw that I note in this
argument is that it overlooks that there is no need for miracles. If there is a
need for belief in miracles, miracles can be said to have occurred.
We shall have an expression in terms of some of the other of our
expressions. If we arrange the ideas of it neatly, if not nattily, no more will
be required to impress anybody who would like to be impressed.
Out in open fields there have been mysterious, or miraculous, showers of
water. Then has appeared the seeming “agency” of human beings, and
similar showers have occurred in houses—
Out in open places, there are electrical manifestations, and they are
known as “lightning.” The general specializes, and human beings use
electricity, in their houses, or in images that are called “machines.” Or we’d
say that electricians are trained “agents” in the uses of lightning.
Out in open places there have been flows of a red liquid.
In La Nature, Sept. 25, 1880, Prof. J. Brun, of the University of Geneva,
writes that, near Djebel-Sekra, Morocco, he had heard rumors of a fall of
blood from the sky. He visited the place of the reported phenomenon. He
says that, to his stupefaction, he found rocks and vegetation covered with
scales of a red, shining material. Examining specimens under a microscope,
he found them composed of minute organisms, which he tells us were
Protococcus fluvialis.
The identification may be doubted. I don’t like it. The ease with which
any writer can pick to pieces any statement made by anybody who is not
present to bandy delusions with him is becoming tiresome, but if I will
write a book, I will write it triumphantly.
So this identification may be doubted. First we note that Prof. Brun says
that, instead of having the features of the Algae that he had named, these
organisms were simple, or undifferentiated. To explain this appearance, the
Professor, who had perhaps recovered from his stupefaction, says that the
things were young ones. But an aggregation exclusively of young
Protococci is as extraordinary as would be a vast assemblage, say filling
Central Park, New York, of human infants, without a sign of a parent.
The explanation sublimates segregationism. It attributes to a grab, an
exquisite discrimination. Somewhere in a swamp, said Prof. Brun, there
were hosts of Protococci—venerable ones, middle-aged ones, and theiration sublimates segregationism. It attributes to a grab, an
exquisite discrimination. Somewhere in a swamp, said Prof. Brun, there
were hosts of Protococci—venerable ones, middle-aged ones, and their

--- PAGE BREAK ---regationism. It attributes to a grab, an
exquisite discrimination. Somewhere in a swamp, said Prof. Brun, there
were hosts of Protococci—venerable ones, middle-aged ones, and their

--- PAGE BREAK ---

brats—or “all sizes,” as he worded it. Along came a whirlwind. Carrying
away all the minute organisms, this big, rough disturbance removed, with
microscopic fastidiousness, old Protococci from young Protococci,
according to differences in specific gravity. It cast down at one place all the
bereft parents, and precipitated, at Djebel-Sekra, a rain of little, red orphans.
When we recover from the sadness into which this tragedy cast us, we
reflect that of all organisms, red blood-cells are of the simplest, or least
differentiated. Anyway, here is an orthodox scientist who accepted that a
red fluid did fall from the sky. I have about a dozen other records of
showers of red fluids that were not rains colored by dusts. Upon several of
these occasions the substance was identified as blood.
Or that once upon a time, or once upon an archaic time, there came to
this earth, along arterial paths in space, red flows of a primitive plasm that
deluged continents, and out of which, by the plan, purpose, guidance, or
design that governs developments in all organisms, higher forms of life
developed—
And that maybe this mechanism has not altogether ceased, so that to this
day, but in a vestigial sense, or in a very much dwindled representation,
such flows are continuing—
And that, if human beings ever have had “agency” in directing such
flows, that is only a specialization of the general.
Once upon a time, it was the fashion with those of us who say that they
are of the enlightened, to reject all stories of the “Miracles at Lourdes.” The
doctors had much to do with this rejection. Somewhere behind everything
that everybody believes, or disbelieves, is somebody’s pocket. But now, as
to those “miracles,” the explanation of auto-suggestion is popular. Some of
us who were not interested are beginning to think. The tendency that I point
out is that of so often rejecting both data and an explanation, simply
because one rejects an explanation. Many of our data are in this position of
phenomena at Lourdes. Explanations have been taken over by theologians,
or by spiritualists, and scientists, instead of opposing this usurpation, have
denied the data. Whether it is only because I now want so to accept, or not,
I now accept that the phenomenon of the stigmata, or flows of blood from
points upon living images, has occurred.
Most likely those who deny the phenomenon of the stigmata are those
who have not read, or have not recently read, the story of Louise Lateau, for
instance. One would have to be of a very old-fashioned resistfulness not todeny the phenomenon of the stigmata are those
who have not read, or have not recently read, the story of Louise Lateau, for
instance. One would have to be of a very old-fashioned resistfulness not to

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the stigmata are those
who have not read, or have not recently read, the story of Louise Lateau, for
instance. One would have to be of a very old-fashioned resistfulness not to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

accept this story, half an hour after reading it. For the latest instance, that of
Theresa Neumann, of the village of Konnersreuth, near Munich, Germany,
see the New York Times, April 18, 1928. In recent years, several cases have
been reported, in the United States. Flows of blood from points in living
images lead us to flows of blood from points in graven images. If one
accepts the phenomenon of the stigmata, I don’t know that acceptance is
monstrously stretched by transferring the idea from bodies to statues.
“On Saturday (Aug. 21, 1920) all statues and holy pictures, in the home
of Thomas Dwan, of Templemore, Tipperary, Ireland, began to bleed.” See
newspapers of August 24th.
A boy, James Walsh, a devout youngster, aged sixteen, was the center of
the reported phenomena, at Templemore. Perhaps the bleeding statues and
pictures were trickeries of his.
All boys and girls are little rascals. This is a generalization that one can
feel somewhat nearly sure of, until it is examined. Then, because of
continuity, we find that we cannot define boys and girls, because no definite
line can be drawn between youngsters and adults. Also rascality and virtue
merge. Well, without arguing, I say that if all the boys and girls who appear
in our records were rascals, they were most expert little rascals.
“Towns in ruins—terrible bloodshed—bombs and burnings— shocking
series of murders—hellish vandalism—brutality and terrorism—hangings,
ambushes, raids.”
Whatever the association may be, I note conditions in Ireland, at this
time.
Here is one newspaper heading, telling of occurrences of one day
—”Reign of terror in Ireland—terrible massacre—appalling loss of life—
holocaust—bloodshed and horror.”
Five days before the phenomena at Templemore were first reported, this
town was raided. The Town Hall was burned down, and other buildings
were destroyed. Templemore was terrorized. All shops were closed. Few
persons dared to be seen in the streets. On the road to Templemore there
was not a cart. The town was partly in ruins. It was god-forsaken and
shilling-and-pence-deserted.
I take from the Tipperary Star
“In Dwan’s house, and in the house of his sister-in-law, Mrs. Maher,
where lived and worked the young man, James Walsh, statues started to
bleed simultaneously.”erted.
I take from the Tipperary Star
“In Dwan’s house, and in the house of his sister-in-law, Mrs. Maher,
where lived and worked the young man, James Walsh, statues started to
bleed simultaneously.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---he Tipperary Star
“In Dwan’s house, and in the house of his sister-in-law, Mrs. Maher,
where lived and worked the young man, James Walsh, statues started to
bleed simultaneously.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This news sneaked up and down the roads. Its carriers were stealths
amidst desolation and ruin. Then they scurried from farm to farm, and
people were coming out from their homes. They went to Templemore to
see. Then they went in droves. The roads began to hum. Sounds of tramping
and the creaking of wheels—men and horses and primitive old carts and
slickest of new cars from cities— it was medievalism honked with horns—
or one of the crusades, with chariots slinging out beer bottles—and
anachronism is just one more of the preposterous errors of Life, Nature, or
an Organism, or whomever, or whatever may be the artist that does these
things. The roads began to roar. Strings of people became ropes of marching
thousands. Hope and curiosity, piety, and hilarity, and the incentive to make
it a holiday: out for the fun of it, out to write letters to the newspapers,
exposing the fakery of it, out to confirm religious teachings—but maybe all
this cannot be explained in terms only of known human feelings: it was as
enormous as some of the other movements of living things that I shall tell
of. Then the news that was exciting Ireland was going out to the world.
The terror that chanting processions were threading may have had
relation with these rhythms of marchers. They were singing their song of
the long, long way, and then arriving shiploads took up the song. Messrs.
Cook, the tourist agents, sent inquiries as to whether the inns of
Templemore could provide for 2,000 pilgrims from England. Scotchmen
and Englishmen and Frenchmen— tourist agencies in the United States,
European countries, and Japan sent inquiries. Waves that billowed from this
excitement beat upon Table Mountain, South Africa, and in the surf that fell
upon Cape Town, people bobbed into a Committee that was sent to
investigate. Drops of blood from a statue in Ireland—and a trickle of
turbans down a gangway at Bombay—a band of pilgrims set out from
Bombay. I am far from making a religion of it, but whatever was directing
all this would make hats come off at Hollywood. Also, whether somebody
was monkeying with red ink, or not, is getting lost in this story. Because of
a town that the world had never before heard of, Paris and London were
losing Americans.
Other phenomena, which may have been teleportations, were reported. In
the earthen floor of the Walsh boy’s room, a hollow, about the size of a
teacup, filled with water. No matter how it was drained—and thousands of
persons took away quantities—water, from an unknown source, always
returned to this appearing-point. The subject of “holy wells” occurs to me,with water. No matter how it was drained—and thousands of
persons took away quantities—water, from an unknown source, always
returned to this appearing-point. The subject of “holy wells” occurs to me,

--- PAGE BREAK ---r how it was drained—and thousands of
persons took away quantities—water, from an unknown source, always
returned to this appearing-point. The subject of “holy wells” occurs to me,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

as a field of neglected data. Everything that I can think of occurs to me as a
field of disregard and neglect. Statues in Walsh’s room bled—that’s the
story —and, as in poltergeist doings—or as in other poltergeist doings—
objects moved about in an invisible force.
I take notice of these stories of objects that moved in the presence of a
boy, because scarcely can it be said that they were of value to priestcraft,
and it can be said that they are common in accounts of occult phenomena of
adolescence. I now offer as satisfactory an expression upon phenomena at
Templemore, as has ever been conceived of by human mind. A Darwin
writes a book about species. By what constitutes a species" He does not
know. A Newton explains all things in terms of gravitation. But what is
gravitation" But he has stopped. I explain the occurrences at Templemore in
terms of poltergeist phenomena. Any questions" But I claim scientific
license for myself, too.
Marvelous cures were reported at Templemore. What teleportations have
to do with cures, I don’t see: but I do see that if people believe that any
marvel, such as a new arrival at a Zoo, has curative powers, there will be a
pile of crutches outside the cage of that thing.
Walkers, bicyclists, motor cars, donkey carts, lorries, charabancs,
wheelbarrows with cripples in them: jaunting cars, special trains rushing
from Dublin. Some of the quietest old towns were in uproars. Towns all
around and towns far away were reporting streets resounding with tramping
thousands. There were not rooms enough in the towns. From storms of
people, drifts slept on door steps. Templemore, partly in ruins, stood black
in the center of a wide growth of tents. This new city, mostly of tents, was
named Pilgrimsville.
I have not taken up definite accounts of the bleeding statues. See
statements published in various issues of the Tipperary Star. They are
positively convincing, or they are fairy stories for grown-up brats. I could
fill pages, if I wanted to, but that would imply that I think there is any
meaning in solemn assertions, or in sworn testimony, with hands on Bibles.
For instance, I have notes upon an account by Daniel Egan, a harness-
maker of Templemore, of blood that he had seen oozing from a statue—but
this statement may be attributed to a sense of civic responsibility. He would
be a bad citizen who would testify otherwise, considering the profit that was
flowing into Templemore. The town’s druggist, a man of what is said to be
education, stated that he had seen the phenomena. He was piling up awould testify otherwise, considering the profit that was
flowing into Templemore. The town’s druggist, a man of what is said to be
education, stated that he had seen the phenomena. He was piling up a

--- PAGE BREAK ---wise, considering the profit that was
flowing into Templemore. The town’s druggist, a man of what is said to be
education, stated that he had seen the phenomena. He was piling up a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fortune from people who had caught bad colds sleeping in the fields. I
suppose that some of them had come devoutly from far away, but had
begun to sneeze, and had back-slid from piety to pills. However, something
that I cannot find a hint of is that either Dwan or the Mahers charged
admission. At first, people were admitted in batches of fifty, somebody,
holding a watch, saying, every five minutes: “Time, please” Soon Dwan
and the Mahers placed the statues in windows, for all to see. There were
crowds all day, and torchlight processions moved past these windows all
night.
The blood that was shed in Ireland continued to pour from human beings:
but the bleeding statues stopped, or statements that statues were bleeding
stopped. However, wherever the water was coming from, it continued to
flow from the appearing-point in the Walsh boy’s room. In the Tipperary
Star, September 25, the estimate is that, in about one month, one million
persons had visited Pilgrimsville. To some degree the excitement kept up
the rest of the year.
They were threading terror with their peaceful processions. They
marched through “a terrible toll of bloodshed—wild scenes at Nenagh—the
Banshaw Horror.” Past burned and blackened fields in which corpses were
lying, streamed these hundreds of thousands: chanting their song of the
long, long way; damning the farmers, who were charging them two
shillings apiece for hard-boiled eggs; praying, raiding chicken houses,
telling their beads, stealing bicycles. “Mr. John McDonnell gave a pilgrim a
lift, and was robbed of 250.”
But one of these detachments enters a town. In another street, a man runs
from a house—“My God I’m shot” Not far away—the steady sound of
tramping pilgrims. These flows of beings are as mysterious as the
teleportations of substances. They may mean an organic control, or
maintenance of balance, even in a part that is diseased with bombs and
ambuscades and arson.
But it is impossible, except to the hopelessly pious, to consider, with
anything like veneration, any such maintenance of a balance, because, if a
god of order be conceived of, also is he, or it, a god of murder.
But, regarded aesthetically, sometimes there are effects that are
magnificent.
“Bloody Sunday in the County Cork” But, upon this day, somewhere
upon every road in Ireland is maintained a rhythm.der.
But, regarded aesthetically, sometimes there are effects that are
magnificent.
“Bloody Sunday in the County Cork” But, upon this day, somewhere
upon every road in Ireland is maintained a rhythm.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Somewhere, a lorry of soldiers is moving down a road. Out of bushes
come bullets, and the sides of the car are draped with a droop of dead men.
Not far away, men and women and children are marching. Along the roads
of distracted Ireland—steady pulsations of people and people and people.

--- PAGE BREAK ---are draped with a droop of dead men.
Not far away, men and women and children are marching. Along the roads
of distracted Ireland—steady pulsations of people and people and people.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

N
7
OSE in the mud, and the bend of a thing to the ground. There are
postures from which life is acting to escape: one of them, the
embryonic crouch; another, whether in the degradation of worship,
or as a convenience in eating grass, the bend of a neck to the ground. The
all-day gnaw of the fields. But the eater of meat is released from the munch.
One way to broaden horizons is to climb a tree, but another way is to stand
on one’s own hind legs, away from the grass. A Bernard Shaw dines on hay,
and still looks behind for a world that’s far ahead.
These are the disgusts for vegetarians, felt by the planters of Ceylon, in
July, 1910. Very likely, I am prejudiced, myself. Perhaps I think that it is
gross and brutal to eat anything at all. Why stop at vegetarianism"
Vegetarianism is only a semi-ideal. The only heavenly thing to do is to do
nothing. It is gross and brutal and animal-like to breathe.
We contribute to the records of strange alarms. There was one in Ceylon.
Gigantic vegetarians were eating trees.
Millions of foreigners, big African snails (Achatena fulica, had suddenly
appeared, massed in the one small district of Kalutara, near Colombo.
Shells of the largest were six inches long. One of them that weighed three
quarters of a pound was exhibited at the Colombo Museum. They were
crowded, or massed, in one area of four square miles. One of the most
important of the data is that this was in one of the mostly thickly populated
parts of Ceylon. But nothing had been seen of these “gigantic snails,” until
suddenly trees turned knobby with the monsters. It was as surprising as it
would be, in New York, going out one morning, finding everything covered
with huge warts. In Colombo was shown a photograph of a tree trunk, upon
the visible part of which 227 snails were counted. The ground was as thick
with them as were the trees.
They were explained.
So were the periwinkles of Worcester: but we had reasons for omitting
from our credulities the story of the mad fishmonger of Worcester and his
frenzied assistants.ere the trees.
They were explained.
So were the periwinkles of Worcester: but we had reasons for omitting
from our credulities the story of the mad fishmonger of Worcester and his
frenzied assistants.

--- PAGE BREAK ---were explained.
So were the periwinkles of Worcester: but we had reasons for omitting
from our credulities the story of the mad fishmonger of Worcester and his
frenzied assistants.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the Zoologist, February, 1911, Mr. E. Ernest Green, the Government
Entomologist, of Ceylon, explained. Ten years before, Mr. Oliver Collet, in
a place about fifty miles from Kalutara, had received “some of these snails”
from Africa, and had turned them loose in his garden. Then, because of the
damage by the monsters, he had destroyed all, he thought: but he was
mistaken, some of them having survived. In Kalutara lived a native, who
was related to other natives, in this other place (Watawella). In a parcel of
vegetables that he had brought from Watawella two of these snails had been
found, and had been turned loose in Kalutara, and the millions had
descended from them. No names: no date.
All the accounts, in the Ceylon Observer, in issues from July 27 to
September 23, are of a sudden and monstrous appearance of huge snails,
packed thick, and not an observation upon them until all at once appeared
millions. It takes one of these snails two years to reach full size. All sizes
were in this invasion. “Never known in Ceylon before.” “How they came
here continues to be a mystery.” According to Mr. Green’s report, published
in a supplement of the Ceylon Observer, September 2, stories of the
multitudes were not exaggerations: he described “giant snails in enomous
numbers,” “a horde in a comparatively small space,” “a foreign pest.” This
was in a region of many plantations, and even if the hordes could have been
hidden from sight in a jungle, the sounds of their gnawing and of the
snapping of branches of trees under the weight of them would have been
heard far.
Plantations—and the ceaseless sound of the munch. The vegetarian bend
—the sagging of trees, with their tops to the ground, heavy with snails.
Natives, too, and the vegetarian bend—they bowed before the invasion.
They would destroy no snails: it would be a sin. A bubonic crawl—lumps
fall off and leave skeletons. There would be a sight like this, if a plague
could hypnotize a nation, and eat, to their bones, rigid crowds. Tumors that
crawl and devour— clothing and flesh disappearing—congregations of
bones.
There was a hope for infidels. When a lost soul was found, there was
rejoicing in Kalutara, and double pay was handed out, satanically. The
planters raked up infidels, who sinfully gathered snails into mounds and
burned them.
One of our reasons for being persuaded into accepting what we wanted to
accept, in the matter of the phenomenon at Worcester, was that not onlyho sinfully gathered snails into mounds and
burned them.
One of our reasons for being persuaded into accepting what we wanted to
accept, in the matter of the phenomenon at Worcester, was that not only

--- PAGE BREAK ---snails into mounds and
burned them.
One of our reasons for being persuaded into accepting what we wanted to
accept, in the matter of the phenomenon at Worcester, was that not only

--- PAGE BREAK ---

periwinkles appeared: also appeared crabs, which could not fit in with the
conventional explanation. Simultaneously with the invasion of snails, there
was another mysterious appearance. It was of unusually large scale-insects,
which, according to Mr. Green (Ceylon Observer, August 9), had never
before been recorded in Ceylon.
Maybe, in September, 1929, somebody lost an alligator. According to
some of our data upon the insecurities of human mentality, there isn’t
anything that can’t be lost by somebody. A look at Losts and Founds—but
especially at Losts—confirms this notion. New York American, Sept. 19,
1929—an alligator, 31 inches long, killed in the Hackensack Meadows, N.
J., by Carl Weise, 14 Peerless Place, North Bergen, N. J. But my attention is
attracted by another “mysterious appearance” of an alligator, about the same
time. New York Sun, September 23—an alligator, 28 inches long, found by
Ralph Miles, in a small creek, near Wolcott, N. Y.
In the Gentleman’s Magazine, August, 1866, somebody tells of a young
crocodile, which, about ten years before, had been killed on a farm, at Over-
Norton, Oxfordshire, England. In the November issue of this magazine, C.
Parr, a well-known writer upon antiquarian subjects, says that, thirty years
before, near Over-Norton, another young crocodile had been killed.
According to Mr. Parr, still another young crocodile had been seen, at Over-
Norton. In the Field, Aug. 23, 1862, is an account of a fourth young
crocodile that had been seen, near Over-Norton.
It looks as if, for about thirty years, there had been a translatory current,
especially selective of young crocodiles, between somewhere, say in Egypt,
and an appearing-point near Over-Norton. If, by design and functioning, in
the distribution of life in an organism, or in one organic existence, we mean
anything so misdirected as a teleportation of young crocodiles to a point in
a land where they would be out of adaptation, we evidently mean not so
very intelligent design and functioning. Possibly, or most likely. It seems to
me that an existence that is capable of sending young butchers to medical
schools, and young boilermakers to studios, would be capable of sending
young crocodiles to Over-Norton, Oxfordshire, England. When I go on to
think of what gets into the Houses of Congress, I expect to come upon data
of mysterious distributions of cocoanuts in Greenland.
There have often been sudden, astonishing appearances of mice, in great
numbers. In the autumn of 1927, millions of mice appeared in the fields of
Kern County, California. Kern County, California, is continuous with all theudden, astonishing appearances of mice, in great
numbers. In the autumn of 1927, millions of mice appeared in the fields of
Kern County, California. Kern County, California, is continuous with all the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ppearances of mice, in great
numbers. In the autumn of 1927, millions of mice appeared in the fields of
Kern County, California. Kern County, California, is continuous with all the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

rest of a continent: so a sudden appearance of mice there is not very
mysterious.
In May, 1832, mice appeared in the fields of Inverness-shire, Scotland.
They were in numbers so great that foxes turned from their ordinary ways
of making a living and caught mice. It is my expression that these mice may
have arrived in Scotland, by way of neither land nor sea. If they were little
known in Great Britain, the occurrence of such multitudes is mysterious. If
they were unknown in Great Britain, this datum becomes more interesting.
They were brown; white rings around necks; tails tipped with white. In the
Magazine of Natural History, 7-182, a correspondent writes that he had
examined specimens, and had not been able to find them mentioned in any
book.
I have four records of snakes that were said to have fallen from the sky,
in thunderstorms. Miss Margaret McDonald, of Hawthorne, Mass., has sent
me an account of many speckled snakes that appeared in the streets of
Hawthorne, one time, after a thunder-storm.
Because of our expressions upon teleportative currents, I am most
interested in repetitions in one place. Upon May 26, 1920, began a series of
tremendous thunderstorms, in England, culminating upon the 29th, in a
flood that destroyed 50 houses, in Louth, Lincolnshire. Upon the 26th, in a
central part of London—Gower Street—near the British Museum, a crowd
gathered outside Dr. Michie’s house. Gower Street is in Bloomsbury. To the
Bloomsbury boarding houses go the American schoolmarms who visit
London, and beyond the standards of Bloomsbury—primly pronounced
Bloomsbry—respectability does not exist. Dr. Michie went out and asked
the crowd what it, or anything else, could mean by being conspicuous in
Bloomsbry. He was told that in an enclosure behind his house had been seen
a snake.
In a positive sense, he did not investigate. He simply went to a part of the
enclosure that was pointed out to him. Though, in his general practice, Dr.
Michie was probably as scientific as anybody else, I must insist that this
was no scientific investigation. He caught the snake.
The creature was explained. It was said to be a naMa haMa, a venomous
snake from Egypt. Many oriental students live in Gower Street, to be near
the British Museum and University College: in all probability the oriental
snake had escaped from an oriental student.enomous
snake from Egypt. Many oriental students live in Gower Street, to be near
the British Museum and University College: in all probability the oriental
snake had escaped from an oriental student.

--- PAGE BREAK ---gypt. Many oriental students live in Gower Street, to be near
the British Museum and University College: in all probability the oriental
snake had escaped from an oriental student.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

You know, I don’t see that oriental students having oriental snakes is any
more likely than that American students should have American snakes: but
there is an association here that will impress some persons. According to
my experience, and according to data to come, I think that somebody
“identified” an English adder, as an oriental snake, to fit in with the oriental
students, and then fitted in the oriental students with the oriental snake,
arguing reasonably that if an oriental snake was found where there were
oriental students, the oriental snake had probably escaped from the oriental
students. As I have pointed out, often enough, I know of no reasoning
process that is not parthenogenetic, and if this is the way the identification
and the explanation came about, the author of them has companionship with
Plato and Darwin and Einstein, and earthworms.
The next day, there was another crowd: this one in a part of London far
from Gower Street (Sydenham). A snake had been seen in a garden. Then a
postman killed it. Oriental students do not live in Sydenham. This snake
was an adder (London Daily Express, May 28).
Upon the 29th, in Store Street, near Gower Street, a butcher, Mr. G. H.
Hill, looked out from his shop, and saw a snake wriggling along the
sidewalk. He caught the snake which was probably an adder—picture of it
in the Weekly Dispatch, of the 30th.
So there were some excitements, but they were mild, compared with
what occurred in a crowded part of London, June 2nd. See the Daily
Express, June 3. Outside the Roman Catholic Cathedral (Westminster) an
adder appeared. This one stopped traffic, and had a wide audience that
approached and retreated, and reacted with a surge to every wriggle, in such
a disproportion that there’s no seeing how action and reaction can always be
equal. Three men jumped on it. This one is told of, in the Westminster and
Pimlico News, June 4 and 11, and here it is said that another adder had
appeared in Westminster, having been caught under a mat at
Morpethmansions. About this time, far away in North London (Willesden),
an adder was killed in a field (Times, June 21).
Common sense tells me that probably some especially vicious joker had
been scattering venomous snakes around. But some more common sense
tells me that I cannot depend upon common sense.
I have received letters upon strange appearances of living things in tanks
of rain water that seemed inaccessible except to falls from the sky. Mr.
Edward Foster, of Montego Bay, Jamaica, B. W. I., has told me ofved letters upon strange appearances of living things in tanks
of rain water that seemed inaccessible except to falls from the sky. Mr.
Edward Foster, of Montego Bay, Jamaica, B. W. I., has told me of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ange appearances of living things in tanks
of rain water that seemed inaccessible except to falls from the sky. Mr.
Edward Foster, of Montego Bay, Jamaica, B. W. I., has told me of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

crayfishes that were found in a cistern of rain water at Port Antonio,
Jamaica. Still, such occurrences may be explained, conventionally. But, in
the London Daily Mail, Oct. 6, 1921, Major Harding Cox, of Newick,
Sussex, tells of an appearance of fishes that is more mysterious. A pond
near his house had been drained, and the mud had been scraped out. It was
dry from July to November, when it was re-filled. In the following May,
this pond teemed with tench. One day, 37 of them were caught. Almost
anybody, interested, will try to explain in terms of spawn carried by winds,
or in mud on the feet of water birds, but I am going right ahead with ideas
different from Darwinian principles of biologic distributions. Major Cox,
who is a well-known writer, probably reviewed all conventional
explanations, but still he was mystified. There would not be so much of the
interesting in this story, were it not for his statement that never before had a
tench been caught in this pond.
Eels are mysterious beings. It may be that what are called their “breeding
habits” are teleportations. According to what is supposed to be known of
eels, appearances of eels anywhere cannot be attributed to transportations of
spawn. In the New York Times, Nov. 30, 1930, a correspondent tells of
mysterious appearances of eels in old moats and in mountain tarns, which
had no connection with rivers. Eels can travel over land, but just how they
rate as mountain climbers, I don’t know.
In the Amer. Jour. Sci., 16-41, a correspondent tells of a ditch that had
been dug on his farm, near Cambridge, Maryland. It was in ground that was
a mile from any body of water. The work was interrupted by rain, which fell
for more than a week. Then, in the rain water that filled the ditch, were
found hundreds of perch, of two species. The fishes could not have
developed from spawn, in so short a time: they were from four to seven
inches long. But there was, here, a marksmanship that strikes my attention.
Nothing is said of dead fishes lying upon the ground, at sides of the ditch:
hundreds of perch arrived from somewhere, exactly in this narrow streak of
water. There could have been nothing so scattering as a “shower.” Accept
this story, and it looks as if to a new body of water, vibrating perhaps with
the needs of vacancy, there was response somewhere else, and that, with
accuracy, hundreds of fishes were teleported. If somebody should have faith
in us, and dig a ditch and wait for fish, and get no fish, and then say that
we’re just like all other theorists, we explain that, with life now well
established upon this earth, we regard many teleportations as mereditch and wait for fish, and get no fish, and then say that
we’re just like all other theorists, we explain that, with life now well
established upon this earth, we regard many teleportations as mere

--- PAGE BREAK ---fish, and get no fish, and then say that
we’re just like all other theorists, we explain that, with life now well
established upon this earth, we regard many teleportations as mere

--- PAGE BREAK ---

atavisms, of no functional value. This idea of need and response, or of the
actively functional, is taking us into a more advanced stage of a conception
of an organic existence. For a while, we shall make no progress with this
expression, having much work to do, to make acceptable that there is
teleportation, whether organic, or not.
Perhaps some sudden and widespread appearances of exotic plants were
teleportations. Such appearances in Australia and New Zealand seem to be
satisfactorily explained, as ordinary importations: but, in the London Daily
News, April 1, 1924, Dr. F. E. Weiss, Professor of Botany, University of
Manchester, tells of the Canadian pond weed that suddenly infested the
canals and slow-moving rivers of England, about the year 1850, and says
that the phenomenon never had been satisfactorily explained.
Cardiff (Wales) Evening Express, July 1, 1919—”The countryside is set
by the ears” That’s a queer way for a countryside or anything else to be set.
There may have been a queer occurrence. It is said that, upon land,
belonging to Mr. William Calvert, between the villages of Sturton and
Stowe, ten miles from Lincoln, wheat had appeared. It was ten years since
wheat had grown here. There had been barley, but this year the field had
been left fallow. “It was a fine crop of wheat, apparently of more robust
growth than some in the cultivated fields around. Farmers from far and near
were going to see this phenomenon, but nobody could explain it.”
Perhaps, at the same time, another “mystery crop” appeared somewhere
else. Sunday. Express (London), Aug. 24, 1919—that, in a field, near
Ormskirk, West Lancashire, where, the year before, because of a drought,
wheat had died off so that there was nothing worth harvesting, a crop of
wheat had appeared. That some of the seeds that had been considered
worthless should sprout would not have been considered extraordinary, but
this was “one of the best crops of vigorous, young wheat in West
Lancashire, for the season.”
Though I am not a very pious theologian, I take respectful notice here. A
Providence that gives one snails, or covers one’s property with worms, has
to be called “inscrutable”: but we can understand a good crop of wheat
better, and that is enough to make anybody grateful, until come following
seasons, with no more benefactions.
We take up again the phenomenon of localized repetitions, which suggest
the existence of persisting translatory currents. If again we come to the
seemingly preposterous, we reflect that we have only preposterous pseudo-e phenomenon of localized repetitions, which suggest
the existence of persisting translatory currents. If again we come to the
seemingly preposterous, we reflect that we have only preposterous pseudo-

--- PAGE BREAK ---lized repetitions, which suggest
the existence of persisting translatory currents. If again we come to the
seemingly preposterous, we reflect that we have only preposterous pseudo-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

standards to judge by. In this instance, the sending of salt water fishes to a
fresh water lake is no more out of place than, for instance, is the sending of
chaplains to battleships: and, of course, in our view, it is what is loosely
called Nature that is doing all things. Perhaps what is called Nature amuses
itself by occasionally sending somewhat intelligent fellows to theological
seminaries, and salt water fishes to fresh water. Whether we theologians
believe in God, or accept that there is an Organism, wherein we agree is in
having often to apologize for him or it.
In Science, Dec. 12, 1902, Dr. John M. Clarke writes that a strange-
looking fish had been caught in Lake Onondaga, Western New York, and
had been taken to Syracuse. Here it was identified as a squid. Then a second
specimen was caught.
Whatever thoughts we’re trying to develop did not belong away back in
the Dark Age, or the other Dark Age, of the year 1902. Just where they do
belong has not been decided yet. Said Dr. Clarke, with whatever reasoning
abilities people had in the year 1902: “There are salt springs near Lake
Onondaga: so perhaps there is, in the lake, a sub-stratum of salt water.” The
idea is that, for millions of years, there had been, in Lake Onondaga, ocean
life down below, and fresh water things swimming around, overhead, and
never mixing. Perhaps, by way of experiment, Dr. Clarke put salt water and
a herring in an aquarium, and then fresh water and a goldfish on top, and
saw each fish keeping strictly to his own floor, which is the only way to get
along as neighbors.
Another scientist turned on his reasoning abilities. Prof. Ortman, of
Princeton University, examined one of the specimens, which, according to
him, was “a short-finned squid, of the North Atlantic, about 13 inches
long.” Prof. Ortman reasoned that Atlantic fishermen use squid for bait.
Very well: then other fishermen may use squid for bait. So somebody may
have sent for squid, to go fishing in Lake Onondaga, and may have lost a
couple of live ones.
This is the science that is opposing our own notions. But for all I know, it
may be pretty good science. An existence that would produce such
explainers, might very well produce such fishermen. So perhaps fishermen
of Lake Onondaga, with millions of worms around, send several hundred
miles for squid, for bait, and perhaps Atlantic fishermen, with millions of
squid available, send all the way to Lake Onondaga for worms. I’ve done
foolisher, myself.orms around, send several hundred
miles for squid, for bait, and perhaps Atlantic fishermen, with millions of
squid available, send all the way to Lake Onondaga for worms. I’ve done
foolisher, myself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---veral hundred
miles for squid, for bait, and perhaps Atlantic fishermen, with millions of
squid available, send all the way to Lake Onondaga for worms. I’ve done
foolisher, myself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It seems to me that there is something suggestive in the presence of large
deposits of salt near this lake, but I have heard nothing of salt water in it.
There’s no telling about a story that was published, in the New York Times,
May 2, 1882, but if it could be accepted, here would be something worth
thinking about—that a seal had been shot, in Lake Onondaga. Some years
before the appearance of the squid, another sea creature, a sargassum fish,
had been caught in Lake Onondaga. It had been exhibited in Syracuse,
according to Prof. Hargitt, of Syracuse University (Science, n. s., 17-114). It
has to be thought that these things were strays. If they were indigenous and
propagated, they’d be common.
For various reasons, I do not think much of an idea of an underground
passage, all the way from the ocean to Lake Onondaga: but, in the London
Daily Mail, July 1, 1920, a correspondent expresses an idea, like this, as to
mysterious appearances and disappearances of the Barbary apes of
Gibraltar, conceiving of a submarine tunnel from Gibraltar to Africa. “All
these creatures were well-known to the staff of the signal station on the
Rock, many of the apes being named. The numbers sometimes change in
the most unaccountable way. Well-known monkeys are absent for months,
and then reappear with new, strange, adult monkeys of a similar breed.
Those who know Gibraltar will agree that there is not a square yard on the
Rock where they could have hidden.”
Chicago Citizen, Feb. 27, 1892—an alligator, 5ò feet long, found frozen
to death on a bank of the Rock River, near Janesville, Wisconsin. In the
Field, Sept. 21, 1895, it is said that a parrakeet had appeared in a farm yard,
where it was caught, at Gledhill, Ardgay, Scotland, and that, about two
years later, another parrakeet appeared in this farm yard, and was caught.
Both birds were males. “No one living anywhere near had missed a bird,
upon either occasion.”
Later, we shall have expressions upon psychological, and also
physiological, effects of teleportative seizures. It may be that a living thing,
in California, was, upon the first of August, 1869, shot from point to point,
and was torn to pieces, in the passage.
Flesh and blood that fell “from the sky,” upon Mr. J. Hudson’s farm, in
Los Nietos Township, California—a shower that lasted three minutes and
covered an area of two acres. The conventional explanation is that these
substances had been disgorged by flying buzzards. “The day was perfectlyhip, California—a shower that lasted three minutes and
covered an area of two acres. The conventional explanation is that these
substances had been disgorged by flying buzzards. “The day was perfectly

--- PAGE BREAK ---ower that lasted three minutes and
covered an area of two acres. The conventional explanation is that these
substances had been disgorged by flying buzzards. “The day was perfectly

--- PAGE BREAK ---

clear, and the sun was shining, and there was no perceptible breeze,” and if
anybody saw buzzards, buzzards were not mentioned.
The story is told, in the San Francisco Evening Bulletin, Aug. 9, 1869.
The flesh was in fine particles, and also in strips, from one to six inches
long. There were short, fine hairs. One of the witnesses took specimens to
Los Angeles, and showed them to the Editor of the Los Angeles News, as
told in the News, August 3rd. The Editor wrote that he had seen, but had not
kept the disagreeable objects, to the regret of many persons who had
besieged him for more information. “That the meat fell, we cannot doubt.
Even the parsons of the neighborhood are willing to vouch for that. Where
it came from, we cannot even conjecture.” In the Bulletin, it is said that,
about two months before, flesh and blood had fallen from the sky, in Santa
Clara County, California.
London Daily Express, March 24, 1927—a butterfly, a Red Admiral, that
had appeared in a corner of the Girls’ National School, at Whittlesey. It is
said that every year, for sixteen years, a butterfly had so appeared in this
corner of this room, about the end of February, or the first of March. I wrote
to Miss Clarke, one of the teachers, and she replied, verifying the story, in
general, though not vouching for an appearance every one of the sixteen
years. I kept track, and wrote again, early in 1928. I copy the letter that I
received from Miss E. Clarke, 95 Station Road, Whittlesey. As to the idea
of jokes by little girls, I do not think that little girls could get Red Admiral
butterflies, in the wintertime, in England.
“On the 9th of February, a few days before I received your letter, a lovely
Red Admiral again appeared at the same window. The girls were all quietly
at work, when suddenly a voice exclaimed: ‘Oh Miss Clarke—the
butterfly’ This child was with me, last year, and remembered the sudden
appearance then, which I may add, was later, March 2nd, in fact.
“As I am writing, the visitor is fluttering about the window, and seems
quite lively. Last year’s visitor lived about a month after its appearance, and
then we found it dead.
“There is nothing else that I can tell you about our annual visitor, but
really it does seem remarkable.”
Early in the year 1929, I again wrote to Miss Clarke, but this time she did
not answer me. Maybe a third letter was considered too much of a
correspondence with somebody who had not been properly introduced.
Anyway, people do not like to go upon record, in such matters.e did
not answer me. Maybe a third letter was considered too much of a
correspondence with somebody who had not been properly introduced.
Anyway, people do not like to go upon record, in such matters.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Maybe a third letter was considered too much of a
correspondence with somebody who had not been properly introduced.
Anyway, people do not like to go upon record, in such matters.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There are circumstances in the story of the children of Clavaux that
linger in my mind. It was a story of a double, or reciprocating, current. I
have searched for accounts of a mysterious disappearance and an equally
mysterious appearance, or something in the nature of an exchange, in the
same place.
Upon Dec. 12, 1910, a handsome, healthy girl disappeared somewhere in
New York City. The only known man in her affairs lived in Italy. It looks as
if she had no intention of disappearing: she was arranging for a party, a tea,
whatever those things are, for about sixty of her former schoolmates, to be
held upon the 17th of the month. When last seen, in Fifth Avenue, she said
that she intended to walk through Central Park, on her way to her home,
near the 79th Street entrance of the park. It may be that somewhere in the
eastern part of the park, between the 59th Street and the 79th Street
entrances, she disappeared. No more is known of Dorothy Arnold.
This day something appeared in Central Park. There was no record of any
such occurrence before. As told, in the New York Sun, December 13th,
scientists were puzzled. Upon the lake, near the 79th Street entrance,
appeared a swan.
Mountainous 
districts 
of 
Inverness-shire, 
Scotland—mysterious
footprints in the bogs—sheep and goats slaughtered. “A large, fierce,
yellow animal of unknown species” was seen by a farmer, who killed it.
More mysterious tracks in the bogs, and continued slaughter—another
large, fierce, yellow animal was shot. Soon a third specimen was caught in a
trap. “The body was sent to the London Zoo, where it was identified as that
of a lynx.” See the London Daily Express, Jan. 14, 1927. There is no record
of the lynx, as indigenous to Great Britain. “It is found, in Europe, in the
Alps, and the Carpathians, and more often in the Caucasus. The last
specimen, in France, was killed 100 years ago.”
I have a feeling of impiety, in recording this datum. So many of our data
are upon a godness that so much resembles idiocy that to attribute
intelligence to it may be even blasphemous. Early in this theological treatise
we noted a widespread feeling that there is something of the divine in
imbecility. But, if these three lynxes were teleported, say from somewhere
in the Carpathians, there was good sense to this teleportation, and there was
a good shot this time, because they landed in a lynx’s paradise. There is no
part of Great Britain that is richer in game than is Inverness-shire, and the
country abounds with deer and sheep. However, if into this Eden were shotse they landed in a lynx’s paradise. There is no
part of Great Britain that is richer in game than is Inverness-shire, and the
country abounds with deer and sheep. However, if into this Eden were shot

--- PAGE BREAK ---lynx’s paradise. There is no
part of Great Britain that is richer in game than is Inverness-shire, and the
country abounds with deer and sheep. However, if into this Eden were shot

--- PAGE BREAK ---

an Adam and two Eves, and these two Eves cats, we may think of this
occurrence with a restored piety.
In the London evening newspapers, Aug. 26, 1926, it was told that a
mystery had been solved. People in Hampstead (London) had reported that,
in the pond, in Hampstead Heath, there was a mysterious creature.
Sometimes it was said that the unknown inhabitant was a phantom, and
there were stories of dogs that had been taken to the pond, and had sniffed,
and had sneaked away, “with their tails between their legs.” All this in a
London park. There was a story of “a huge, black creature, with the head of
a gorilla, and a bark like that of a dog with a sore throat.” Mostly these were
fishermen’s tales. Anglers sit around this pond, and sometimes they catch
something.
Upon the night of August 25th, the line of one of these anglers, named
Trevor, was grabbed. He landed something.
This is Mr. Trevor’s story. For all I know, he may have been out on an
iceberg somewhere, hunting for materials for his wife’s winter coat,
catching something that was insufficient, if he had a large wife. All that can
be said is that Trevor appeared at a hotel, near the pond, carrying a small
animal that he said he had caught in the pond.
Mr. F. G. Gray, proprietor of the hotel, had an iron tank, and in this the
creature was lodged: and the next day the newspapers told that a young seal
had been caught. Reporters went to the place, and one of them, the Evening
News representative, took along Mr. Shelley, of the London Zoo. Mr.
Shelley identified the animal as a young seal and no tame specimen, but a
wild one that snapped at fingers that were poked anywhere near him.
So it was said that a mystery had been solved.
But there were stories of other seals that had been seen or had been heard
barking, before the time of the birth of this seal, in this London pond. One
would think that the place was somewhere in Greenland. It was Mr. Gray’s
statement that for several years, there had been, intermittently, these sounds
and appearances. The pond is connected with the River Fleet, which runs
into the Thames, and conceivably a seal could make its way, without being
reported, from the ocean to this park, far inland in London: but the idea of
seals coming and going, without being seen on the way, in a period of
several years, whereas in centuries before nothing of the kind had been
heard of, was enough to put this story where most of our other stories, or
data, have been put. Mostly the opinion is that they should stay there.reas in centuries before nothing of the kind had been
heard of, was enough to put this story where most of our other stories, or
data, have been put. Mostly the opinion is that they should stay there.

--- PAGE BREAK ---fore nothing of the kind had been
heard of, was enough to put this story where most of our other stories, or
data, have been put. Mostly the opinion is that they should stay there.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

London Daily Mail, Nov. 2, 1926—”Tale that taxes credulity” “A story
of two seals, within three months, in a local pond, is taxing the credulity of
residents of Hampstead.” But there is a story of another seal that had been
caught, after a struggle, dying soon after capture. In the Daily Chronicle, it
is said that the “first mysterycatch” was still in the tank, in a thriving
condition.
I have come upon more, though to no degree enlighteningly more, about
the apes of Gibraltar. In the New York Sun, Feb. 6, 1929, Dr. Raymond L.
Ditmars tells of an “old legend” of a tunnel, by which apes travel back and
forth, between Africa and Spain. No special instances, or alleged instances,
are told of. In Gilbard’s History of Gibraltar, published in 1881, is mention
of the “wild and impossible theory of communication, under sea, between
Gibraltar and the Barbary coast.” Here it is said that the apes were kept
track of, so that additions to families were announced in the Signal Station
newspaper. The notion of apes in any way passing across the Mediterranean
is ridiculous to Gilbard, but he notes that there are so many apes upon the
mountain on the African side of the Strait of Gibraltar that it is known as the
Hill of Apes.
In November, 1852, a much talked about subject, in England, was
reindeer’s ears. There were letters to the newspapers. Reindeer’s ears came
up for discussion in Parliament. Persons who had never seen a reindeer
were dogmatizing upon reindeer’s ears. It had been reported that among
reindeer’s skins that had arrived at Troms|, Norway, from Spitzbergen were
some with the ears clipped.
Many Englishmen believed that Sir John Franklin had sailed through the
Northwest Passage, and that survivors of his expedition were trying to
communicate with occasional hunters in Spitzbergen, by marking reindeer.
Spitzbergen was uninhabited, and no other explanation could be thought of.
Spitzbergen is about 450 miles north of North Cape, Norway, and possibly
an exceptional reindeer could swim this distance, but this is a story of many
reindeer. All data upon drifting ice are upon southward drifts.
Branded reindeer, presumably from Norway or Finland, continued to be
reported in Spitzbergen, but by what means they made the journey never
has been found out. Lamont, in Yachting in Arctic Seas, p. 110, says that he
had heard of these marked animals, and that, in August, 1869, he had shot
two stags, each having the left ear “back half-cropped.” “I showed them to
Hans, a half-bred Lapp, accustomed to deal with reindeer since infancy, andd animals, and that, in August, 1869, he had shot
two stags, each having the left ear “back half-cropped.” “I showed them to
Hans, a half-bred Lapp, accustomed to deal with reindeer since infancy, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

he had no doubt whatever of these animals having been marked by the
hands of men.” Upon page 357, Lamont tells of having shot two more
reindeer, similarly marked. Nordenskiold (9oyage of the 9ega, vol. 1, p.
135) tells of these marked reindeer, some of them marked also upon antlers,
and traces reports back to the year 1785. Upon one of these antlers was tied
a bird’s leg.
Wherever they are coming from, and however they are doing it, or
however it is being done to them, the marked reindeer are still appearing in
Spitzbergen. Some of them that were shot, in the summer of 1921, are told
of in the Field, Dec. 24, 1921. It must be that hundreds, or thousands, of
these animals have appeared in Spitzbergen. There is no findable record of
one reindeer having ever been seen drifting on ice in that direction. As to
the possibility of swimming, I note that Nova Zembla is much nearer the
mainland than is Spitzbergen, but that Nordenskiold says that the marked
reindeer do not appear in Nova Zembla.

--- PAGE BREAK ---possibility of swimming, I note that Nova Zembla is much nearer the
mainland than is Spitzbergen, but that Nordenskiold says that the marked
reindeer do not appear in Nova Zembla.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

T
8
HERE is no way of judging these stories. Every canon, or device, of
inductive logic, conceived of by Francis Bacon and John Stuart Mill
has been employed in investigating some of them, but logic is ruled
by the fishmonger. Some of us will think as we’re told to think, and be
smug and superior, in rejecting the yarns: others will like to flout the
highest authority, and think that there may be something in them, feeling
that they’re the ones who know better, and be just as smug and superior.
Smug, we’re going to be, anyway, just so long as we’re engaged in any
profession, art, or business, and have to make balance somewhere against a
consciousness of daily stupidities. I should think that somebody in a
dungeon, where it is difficult to make bad mistakes, would be of the least
smug. Still, I don’t know: I have noted serene and self-satisfied looks of
mummies. The look of an egg is of complacency.
There is no way of judging our data. There are no ways, except arbitrary
ways, of judging anything. Courts of Appeals are of the busiest of human
institutions. The pragmatist realizes all this, and says that there is no way of
judging anything except upon the basis of the work-out. I am a pragmatist,
myself, in practice, but I see no meaning in pragmatism, as a philosophy.
Nobody wants a philosophy of description, but does want a philosophy of
guidance. But pragmatists are about the same as guides on the top of a
mountain, telling climbers, who have reached the top, that they are on the
summit. “Take me to my destination,” says a traveler. “Well, I can’t do
that,” says a guide, “but I can tell you when you get there.”
My own acceptance is that ours is an organic existence, and that our
thoughts are the phenomena of its eras, quite as its rocks and trees and
forms of life are; and that I think as I think, mostly, though not absolutely,
because of the era I am living in. This is very much the philosophy of the
Zeitgeist, but that philosophy, as ordinarily outlined, is Absolutism, and I
am trying to conceive of a schedule of predetermined—though not
absolutely predetermined— developments in one comprehensibly-sized
existence, which may be only one of hosts of other existences, in which theing to conceive of a schedule of predetermined—though not
absolutely predetermined— developments in one comprehensibly-sized
existence, which may be only one of hosts of other existences, in which the

--- PAGE BREAK ---schedule of predetermined—though not
absolutely predetermined— developments in one comprehensibly-sized
existence, which may be only one of hosts of other existences, in which the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

scheduled eras correspond to the series of stages in the growth, say, of an
embryo. There is, in our expressions, considerable of the philosophy of
Spinoza, but Spinoza conceived of no outlines within which to think.
In anything like a satisfactory sense there is no way of judging our data,
nor of judging anything else: but of course we have ways of forming
opinions that are often somewhat serviceable. By means of litmus, a
chemist can decide whether a substance is an acid, or an alkali. So nearly is
this a standard to judge by that he can do business upon this basis.
Nevertheless there are some substances that illustrate continuity, or
represent the merging-point between acids and alkalis; and there are some
substances that under some conditions are acids, and under other conditions
are alkalis. If there is any mind of any scientist that can absolutely
pronounce either for or against our data, it must be more intelligent than
litmus paper.
A barrier to rational thinking, in anything like a final sense, is continuity,
because of which only fictitiously can anything be picked out of a nexus of
all things phenomenal, to think about. So it is not mysterious that
philosophy, with its false, or fictitious, differences, and therefore false, or
fictitious, problems, is as much baffled as it was several thousand years ago.
But if, for instance, no two leaves of any tree are exactly alike, so that all
appearances are set apart from all other appearances, though at the same
time all interrelated, there is discontinuity, as well as continuity. So then the
frustrations of thought are double. Discontinuity is a barrier to anything like
a finally sane understanding, because the process of understanding is a
process of alleged assimilation of something with something else: but the
discontinuous, or the individualized, or the unique, is the unassimilable.
One explanation of our survival is that there is underlying guidance, or
control, or organic government, which to high degree regularizes the
movements of the planets, but is less efficient in its newer phenomena.
Another explanation is that we survive, because everybody with whom we
are in competition, is equally badly off, mentally.
Also, in other ways, how there can be survivals of persons and prestiges,
or highest and noblest of reputations, was illustrated recently. About April
Fool’s Day, 1930, the astronomers announced that, years before, the
astronomer Lowell, by mathematical calculations of the utmost complexity,
or bewilderingly beyond the comprehension of anybody except an
astronomer, had calculated the position of a ninth major planet in this solarell, by mathematical calculations of the utmost complexity,
or bewilderingly beyond the comprehension of anybody except an
astronomer, had calculated the position of a ninth major planet in this solar

--- PAGE BREAK ---calculations of the utmost complexity,
or bewilderingly beyond the comprehension of anybody except an
astronomer, had calculated the position of a ninth major planet in this solar

--- PAGE BREAK ---

system: and that it had been discovered almost exactly in the assigned
position. Then columns, and pages of special articles, upon this triumph of
astronomical science. But then a doubt appeared—there were a few stray
paragraphs telling that, after all, the body might not be the planet of
Lowell’s calculations—the subject was dropped for a while. But, in the
public mind, the impressions worked up by spreadheads enormously
outweighed whatever impressions came from obscure paragraphs, and the
general idea was that, whatever it was, there had been another big,
astronomical triumph. It is probable that the prestige of the astronomers,
instead of suffering, was boomed by this overwhelming of obscure
paragraphs by spreadheads.
I do not think that it is vanity, in itself, that is so necessary to human
beings: it is compensatory vanity that one must have. Ordinarily, one pays
little if any attention to astronomers, but now and then come consoling
reflections upon their supposed powers. Somewhere in everything that one
does there is error. Somebody is not an astronomer, but he classes himself
with astronomers, as differentiated from other and “lower” forms of life and
mind. Consciousness of the irrationality, or stupidity, pervading his own
daily affairs, is relieved by a pride in himself and astronomers, as contrasted
with dogs and cats.
According to the Lowell calculations, the new planet was at a mean
distance of about 45 astronomical units from the sun. But, several weeks
after April Fool’s Day, the object was calculated to be at a mean, or very
mean, distance of 217 units. I do not say that an educated cat or dog could
do as well, if not better: I do say that there is a great deal of delusion in the
gratification that one feels when thinking of himself and astronomers, and
then looking at a cat or a dog.
The next time anybody thinks of astronomers, and looks at a cat, and
feels superior, and would like to keep on feeling superior, let him not think
of a cat and a mouse. The cat lies down and watches a mouse. The mouse
moves away. The cat knows it. The mouse wobbles nearer. The cat knows
whether it’s coming or going.
In April, 1930, the astronomers told that Lowell’s planet was receding so
fast from the sun that soon it would become dimmer and dimmer.
New York Times, June 1, 1930—Lowell’s planet approaching the sun—
for fifty years it would become brighter and brighter.was receding so
fast from the sun that soon it would become dimmer and dimmer.
New York Times, June 1, 1930—Lowell’s planet approaching the sun—
for fifty years it would become brighter and brighter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t from the sun that soon it would become dimmer and dimmer.
New York Times, June 1, 1930—Lowell’s planet approaching the sun—
for fifty years it would become brighter and brighter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A planet is rapidly approaching the sun. The astronomers publish highly
technical “determinations” upon its rate of recession. Nobody that I know
of wrote one letter to any newspaper. One reason is that one fears to bring
upon oneself the bullies of science. In July, 1930, the artist, Walter Russell,
sent some views that were hostile to conventional science to the New York
Times. Times, August 3rd— a letter from Dr. Thomas Jackson—a quotation
from it, by which we have something of an idea of the self-apotheosis of
these pundits, who do not know, of a thing in the sky, whether it is coming
or going:
“For nearly three hundred years no one, not even a scientist, has had the
temerity to question Newton’s laws of gravitation. Such an act on the part
of a scientist would be akin to blasphemy, and for an artist to commit such
an absurdity is, to treat it kindly, an evidence of either misguidance or crass
ignorance of the enormity of his act.”
If we’re going to be kind about this, I simply wonder, without
commenting, what such a statement as that for nearly three hundred years
nobody had ever questioned Newton’s laws of gravitation, is evidence of.
But in the matter of Lowell’s planet, I neglected to point out how the
astronomers corrected their errors, and that is a consideration of importance
to us. Everything that was determined by their mathematics turned out
wrong—planet coming instead of going— period of revolution 265 years,
instead of 3,000 years—eccentricity of orbit three tenths instead of nine
tenths. They corrected, according to photographs.
It is mathematical astronomy that is opposing our own notions.
Photographic astronomy can be construed any way one pleases— say
that the stars are in a revolving shell, about a week’s journey away from this
earth.
Everything mathematical cited by me, in this Lowell-planet-controversy,
was authoritatively said by somebody one time, and equally authoritatively
denied by somebody else, some other time. Anybody who dreams of a
mathematician’s heaven had better reconsider, if of its angels there be more
than one mathematician.time, and equally authoritatively
denied by somebody else, some other time. Anybody who dreams of a
mathematician’s heaven had better reconsider, if of its angels there be more
than one mathematician.

--- PAGE BREAK ---thoritatively
denied by somebody else, some other time. Anybody who dreams of a
mathematician’s heaven had better reconsider, if of its angels there be more
than one mathematician.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
9
HAVE come upon a story of somebody, in Philadelphia, who, having
heard that a strange wild animal was prowling in New Jersey,
announced that he had caught it. He exhibited something, as the “Jersey
Devil.” I have to accept that this person was the press agent of a dime
museum, and that the creature that he exhibited was a kangaroo, to which
he had attached tin wings and green whiskers. But, if better-established
branches of biology are subject to Nature-fakery, what can be expected in
our newer biology, with all the insecurities of newness"
“Jersey Devils” have been reported other times, but, though I should not
like to be so dogmatic as to say that there are no “Jersey Devils,” I have had
no encouragement investigating them. One of the stories, according to a
clipping that was sent to me by Miss F. G. Talman, of Woodbury, N. J.,
appeared in the Woodbury Daily Times, Dec. 15, 1925. William Hyman,
upon his farm, near Woodbury, had been aroused by a disturbance in his
chicken coop. He shot and killed a never-before-heard-of-animal. I have
written to Mr. Hyman, and have no reason to think that there is a Mr.
Hyman. I have had an extensive, though one-sided, correspondence, with
people who may not be, about things that probably aren’t. For the latest
account of the “Jersey Devil,” see the New York Times, Aug. 6, 1930.
Remains of a strange animal, teleported to this earth from Mars or the
moon—very likely, or not so likely—found on a bank of a stream in
Australia. See the Adelaide Observer, Sept. 15, 1883—that Mr. Hoad, of
Adelaide, had found on a bank of Brungle Creek, a headless trunk of a pig-
like animal, with an appendage that curved inward, like the tail of a lobster.
New Zealand Times, May 9, 1883— excitement near Masterton—unknown
creature at large—curly hair, short legs, and broad muzzle. Dogs sent after
it—one of the dogs flayed by it—rest of the dogs running away—probably
“with their tails between their legs,” but the reporter overlooking this
convention.
There have been stories of strange animals that have appeared at times of
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. See Sea Serpent stories, about the timegs,” but the reporter overlooking this
convention.
There have been stories of strange animals that have appeared at times of
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. See Sea Serpent stories, about the time

--- PAGE BREAK ---r overlooking this
convention.
There have been stories of strange animals that have appeared at times of
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. See Sea Serpent stories, about the time

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the Charleston earthquake. About the same time, following a volcanic
eruption in New Zealand, there were stories in New Zealand.
The volcano Rotomahana was a harsh, black cup that had spilled scenery.
Or the somber thing was a Puritan in finery. It had belied its dourness with
two broad decorations of siliceous deposits, shelving down to its base, one
of them the White Terrace and the other the Pink Terrace. These gay
formations sloped from the bare, black crater to another inconsistency,
which was a grove of acacias. All around, the famous flowering bushes of
this district made more sinful contrast with a gaunt, towering thing. Upon
the 10th of June, 1886, this Black Fanatic slung a constitutional
amendment. It was reformation, in the sense that virtue is uniformity that
smothers variation. It drabbed its gay Terraces: the grove of acacias was a
mound of mud: it covered over the flowering bushes with smooth, clean
mud. It was a virtuously dismal scene, but, as in all other reformations, a
hankering survived in it. A left-over living thing made tracks in the
smoothness of mud. In the New Zealand Herald, Oct. 13, 1886, a
correspondent writes of having traversed this dull, dead expanse, having
seen it marked with the footprints of a living creature. He thought that the
marks were a horse’s. But there was another story that was attracting
attention at this time, and his letter was in allusion to it. Maoris were telling
of a wandering animal, unknown to them, that had appeared in this desert of
mud. It was a creature with antlers, or a stag, according to descriptions, an
animal that had never been seen, or had never before been seen, by Maoris.
Just what relation I think I can think of, between volcanic eruptions and
mysterious appearances of living things may seem obscure. But I have been
impressed with several accounts of astonishing revivifications in regions
that were volcanically desolated. 4uick growths of plants have been
attributed to the fertilizing properties of volcanic dust: nevertheless writers
have expressed astonishment. If we can have an organic view of our
existence, we can think of restorative teleportations to a place of desolation,
quite as we think of restorations occurring in places of injury in an animal-
organism.
There are phenomena upon the border-line between the organic and the
inorganic that we can think of: such as restorations of the forms of broken
crystals in a solution. It is by automatic purpose, or design or providence, or
guidance by which lost parts of a starfish are regenerated. In higher animal-
organisms, distinct structures, if lost, mostly are not restored, but injuredtomatic purpose, or design or providence, or
guidance by which lost parts of a starfish are regenerated. In higher animal-
organisms, distinct structures, if lost, mostly are not restored, but injured

--- PAGE BREAK ---design or providence, or
guidance by which lost parts of a starfish are regenerated. In higher animal-
organisms, distinct structures, if lost, mostly are not restored, but injured

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tissues are. Still even in the higher organisms there are some restorations of
mutilated parts, such as renewals of forms of a bird’s clipped wing-feathers.
The tails of some lizards, if broken off, renew.
For a conventional explanation of reviving plants in a fern forest that had
been destroyed by flows of liquid lava, from the volcano Kilauea, Hawaii,
see an account, by Dr. G. R. Wieland, in Science, April 11, 1930. Dr.
Wieland considers his own explanation “amazing.” I’d not say that ours is
more than that.
Strange animals have appeared and they may have been teleported to this
earth from other parts of an existence, but the easiest way of accounting for
strange animals is to say that they are hybrids. Of course I could handle, or
manhandle, this subject any way to suit me, and be about as reasonable one
way as another. I could quote many authorities against the occurrence of
bizarre hybrids, leaving hard to explain, in terms of terrestrial origin,
strange creatures that have appeared upon this earth. There are biologists
who will not admit fertility between creatures as much alike as hares and
rabbits. Nevertheless, I think that there have been strange hybrids.
The cow that gave birth to two lambs and a calf.
I don’t know how that will strike all minds, but to the mind of a
standardized biologist, I’d not be much more preposterous, if I should tell
of an elephant that had produced two bicycles and a baby elephant.
The story is told in the Toronto Globe, May 25, 1889. It is said that a
member of the staff of the Globe had been sent to investigate this outrage
upon conventional obstetrics. The reporter went to the farm of Mr. John H.
Carter, at South Simcoe, and then wrote that he had seen the two lambs,
which were larger and coarser than ordinary, or less romantically derived,
lambs, having upon their breasts tufts of hair like calves’ hair. Other
newspapers—Quebec Daily Mercury, for instance—published other details,
such as statements by well-known stockbreeders that they had examined the
lambs, and were compelled to accept the story of their origin.
So I am harming our idea that creatures, unlike anything known upon this
earth, but that have appeared upon this earth, may have been teleported
from Mars or the moon: but I am supporting our general principle that,
whether in biology, astronomy, obstetrics, or any other field of research,
everything that is, also isn’t; and that everywhere there are data, partly
sense and partly nonsense, that oppose established nonsense that has partly
some sense to it.or any other field of research,
everything that is, also isn’t; and that everywhere there are data, partly
sense and partly nonsense, that oppose established nonsense that has partly
some sense to it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---f research,
everything that is, also isn’t; and that everywhere there are data, partly
sense and partly nonsense, that oppose established nonsense that has partly
some sense to it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It does not matter what scientific dictum may be brought against us. I
will engage to find that it is only an approximation, or that it is a work-out
only in imaginary conditions. The most rigorous science is frosted
childishness. Every severe, or chaste, treatise upon mechanics is only a
fairy story of frictionless and non-extensible characters that interact up to
the “happy ending.” Nowadays, a scenario-writer will sometimes tone down
the absolute happiness of a conclusion, with just a suggestion that there is a
little trouble in the offing: but the tellers of theorems represent about the
quality of intellect in the most primitive times of Hollywood. For
everything that is supposed to be so well-known that it is proverbial, there
are exceptions. A mule is a symbol of sterility. For instances of fertility in
mules, look over indexes of the Field. As to anything else that we’re taking
as absolute truth—look it up.
One afternoon, in October, 1878, Mr. Davy, a naturalist, who was
employed at the London Aquarium, took a stroll with a new animal. I think
of a prayer that is said to have been uttered by King Louis XIV. He was
tired of lamb chops and beef and bacon—“Oh, God send me a new
animal.” Mr. Davy took a stroll with one. People far away were attracted by
such screeches as are seldom heard in London. Some ex-slaves, who were
playing in 8ncle Tom’s Cabin, were following the new animal, and were
letting loose their excitability. The creature was about two feet long, and
two feet high, and was formed like nothing known to anatomists—anyway
to anatomists of this earth. It was covered with wiry hair: head like a boar’s,
and curly tail like a boar’s. It was described as “a living cube.” As if with
abdomen missing, its hind legs were close to its forelegs. If Mr. Davy’s
intention had been to attract attention, he was succeeding. Almost anybody
with the modern view of things will think what a pity he wasn’t advertising
something. The crowd jammed around so that he ran into an Underground
Railway Station. Here there was an uproar. He was compelled to ride in the
brake, because of a fear that there would be a panic among the passengers.
At the Aquarium, Davy told that an acquaintance of his, named Leman, had
seen this creature with some peasants, in the South of France, and had
bought it, but, unable to speak the patois of the district, had been unable to
learn anything of its origin. At the Aquarium the only explanation that could
be thought of was that it was a dog-boar hybrid.
Davy’s publicity continued. He took the new animal to his home, and a
crowd went with him. His landlord looked at the animal. When the animalhat could
be thought of was that it was a dog-boar hybrid.
Davy’s publicity continued. He took the new animal to his home, and a
crowd went with him. His landlord looked at the animal. When the animal

--- PAGE BREAK ---of was that it was a dog-boar hybrid.
Davy’s publicity continued. He took the new animal to his home, and a
crowd went with him. His landlord looked at the animal. When the animal

--- PAGE BREAK ---

looked at the landlord, the landlord ran to his room, and from behind closed
doors, ordered Davy to take away the monster. There was another hold-up
of traffic all the way to the home of Frank Buckland.
In Land and Water, of which he was the editor, issue of October 5,
Buckland wrote an account of this “demon,” as he called it, saying that it
looked like a gargoyle, or like one of Fuseli’s satanic animals. He did not
try to explain, but mentioned what was thought at the Aquarium. In the next
issue of Land and Water, Thomas Worthington, the naturalist, wrote that the
idea of the hybrid was “utterly untenable”: but his own idea that the
creature was “a tame hyena of some abnormal kind” leaves mysterious how
the “demon” ever got into the possession of peasants in the South of France.
It would be strange if they had a tame hyena of a normal kind.
In January, 1846 (Tasmanian Journal of Science, 3-147), a skull was
found on a bank of the river Murrumbridgee, Australia. It was examined by
Dr. James Grant, who said that the general form and arrangement of the
teeth were different from those of any animal known to him. He noted
somebody’s suggestion that it might be the skull of one of the camels that
had been sent to Australia, in the year 1839. He accounted for its having
characters that were unknown to him, by thinking that it might be foetal. So
then, whether in accordance with a theory or not, he found that some of the
bones were imperfectly ossified, and that the teeth were covered with a
membrane. It was not a fossil. It was a skull of a large, herbivorous animal,
and had not been exposed long.
Melbourne Argus, Feb. 28, and March 1, 1890—a wandering monster. A
list of names and addresses of persons who said that they had seen it, was
published. It was a creature about thirty feet long, and was terrorizing the
people of Euroa. “The existence of some altogether unheard-of monster is
vouched for by a cloud of credible witnesses.”
I am tired of the sensible explanations that are holding back new
delusions. So I suggest that this thing, thirty feet long, was not a creature,
but was a construction, in which explorers from somewhere else, were
traveling back and forth, near one of this earth’s cities, having their own
reasons for not wanting to investigate too closely.
I don’t know what will be thought of zoologists of Melbourne, but
whatever will be thought of me can’t be altogether focused upon me,
because there were scientists in Melbourne who were as enlightened as I
am, or as preposterous and sensational as I am. Officials of the Melbournebe thought of me can’t be altogether focused upon me,
because there were scientists in Melbourne who were as enlightened as I
am, or as preposterous and sensational as I am. Officials of the Melbourne

--- PAGE BREAK ---’t be altogether focused upon me,
because there were scientists in Melbourne who were as enlightened as I
am, or as preposterous and sensational as I am. Officials of the Melbourne

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Zoological Gardens thought that, whether this story was nonsense or not, it
should be looked into. They got a big net, and sent a man with the net to
Euroa. Forty men, with the man with the net, set out. They hunted all day,
but no huge bulk, more or less in the distance, was seen, and a statement
that enormous tracks were found may be only a sop to us enlightened, or
preposterous, ones.
But the man with the net is a significant character. He had not the
remotest of ideas of using it, but, just the same, he went along with it. There
are other evidences of occasional open-mindedness among biologists, and
touches of indifference, now and then, to whatever may be the fascinations
of smugness. Why biologists should be somewhat less dogmatic than
astronomers, or why association with the other animals should be rather
more liberalizing than is communion with the stars is not mysterious. One
can look at a rhinoceros and at the same time be able to think. But the
stupefying, little stars shine with a hypnotic effect, like other glittering
points. The little things are taken too seriously. They twinkle humorously
enough, themselves.
A reported monster is told of, in the Scientific American, July, 1922. Dr.
Clement Onelli, Director of the Zoological Gardens, of Buenos Aires, had
published a letter that had been sent to him by an American prospector
named Sheffield, who said that, in the Argentine Territory of Chebut, he had
seen huge tracks, which he had followed to a lake. “There I saw in the
middle of the lake an animal with a huge neck, like that of a swan, and the
movement of the water made me suppose the beast to have a body like that
of a crocodile.” I wrote to Dr. Onelli, and received a reply, dated Aug. 15,
1924, telling that again he had heard of the monster. Maybe this same huge-
necked creature was seen somewhere else, however we explain its getting
there. The trouble in trying to understand all reported monsters is their
mysterious appearances and disappearances. In the London Daily Mail,
Feb. 8, 1921, a huge, unknown animal, near the Orange River, South Africa,
is told of by Mr. F. C. Cornell, F.R.G.S. It was something with a neck like a
bending tree trunk, “something huge, black, and sinuous.” It devoured
cattle. “The object may have been a python, but if it was it was of incredible
size.” It is only preposterously unreasonable to think that the same thing
could have appeared in South Africa and then in South America.
The “blonde beast of Patagonia,” which was supposed to be a huge
ground sloth, parts of which are now in various museums, attractedthing
could have appeared in South Africa and then in South America.
The “blonde beast of Patagonia,” which was supposed to be a huge
ground sloth, parts of which are now in various museums, attracted

--- PAGE BREAK ---eared in South Africa and then in South America.
The “blonde beast of Patagonia,” which was supposed to be a huge
ground sloth, parts of which are now in various museums, attracted

--- PAGE BREAK ---

attention, in the year 1899. See the Zoologist, August, 1899. Specimens of
the blonde’s hide were brought to England, by Dr. F. P. Moreno, who
believed that the remains had been preserved for ages. We prefer to think
otherwise: so we note that Dr. Ameghino, who got specimens of the hide
from the natives, said that it was their story that they had killed it.
There was a volley of monsters from some other world, about the time of
the Charleston earthquake, or some one thing skipped around with
marvelous agility, or it is that, just before the quake, there were dull times
for the newspapers. So many observations in places far apart can be
reconciled by thinking that not a creature but explorers in a construction,
had visited this earth. They may have settled down in various places.
However, it is pretty hard to be reconciled to our reconciliations.
New York Sun, Aug. 19, 1886—a horned monster, in Sandy Lake,
Minnesota. More details, in the London (Ontario) Advertiser— Chris.
Engstein fired a shot at it, but missed. Then came dispatches from the sea
coast. According to one of them, Mr. G. P. Putnam, Principal of a Boston
grammar school, had seen a monster, in the sea, at Gloucester. In Science,
8-258, Mr. B. A. Colona, of the U. S. Coast Survey, writes that, upon the
29th of August, he had seen an unknown creature in the sea off Cape Cod.
In the New York newspapers, early in September, a monster was reported as
having been seen at sea, off Southport, and off Norwalk, Conn.: in
Michigan, in the Connecticut River, and in the Hudson River. The
conventional explanation is that this was simply an epidemic of fancied
observations. Most likely some of them were only contagions.
There’s a yarn, or a veritable account, in the New York Times, June 10,
1880—monstrous, dead thing, floating on the sea, bottom up. Sailors rowed
to it, and climbed up its sides. They danced on its belly. That’s a merry, little
story, but I know a more romantic one. It seems that a monster was seen
from a steamship. Then the lonely thing mistook the vessel for a female of
his species. He overwhelmed her with catastrophic endearments.
But I am avoiding stories of traditional serpentine monsters of the sea.
One reason is that collections of these stories are easily available. The
astronomer has not lived, who has ever collected and written a book upon
data not sanctioned by the dogmas of his cult, but my slightly favorable
opinion of biologists continues, and I note that a big book of Sea Serpent
stories was written by Dr. Oudemans, Director of the Zoo, at The Hague,
Holland. When that book came out, a review of it, in Nature, was not far