THE GREAT SEAL 
UNITED STATES 
ITS HISTORY, SYMBOLISM AND 
MESSAGE FOR THE NEW AGE 
PAUL FOSTER CASE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5 
I 
L2 
m* 
i 
5 
G b e Great Seal 
of Gl)c United States 
Its. Wistory, Symbolism and 
c7tlessage for the sew oAge 
br 
'Tpaul J o s ter Case 
Published by 
BUILDERS OF THE ADYTUM 
5 101 NORTH FIGUEROA STREET 
LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA 90042 
PHONE: 
(323) 255-7 141 
FAX: 
(323) 255-4166 
WEBSITE: http://bota.org 
E-MAIL: 
botahq@aol.com 
FOR EUROPEAN INFORMATION: 
B.O.T.A. EUROPE 
12 RU FUSTEL DE COULANGES 
66000 PERPIGNAN 
FRANCE 
PHONE: 
(33) 468-506-843 
FAX: 
(33) 468-62 1-059 
E-MAIL: 
101645.25 1 I @compuserve.com 
*- 
- 
m*

--- PAGE BREAK ---

=be @teat Seal of Obe Uniteb Stater

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. PAUL POSTER CASE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Co~yrisht, 1935 
6~ 
J. F. ROWNY PRESS 
Santa Barbara 
Calif. 
ISBN #0-938002-01-5 
Reprinted 197 6 by 
Builders of the Advtum, Ltd. 
Los Angeles, California 
Eleventh Edition 
Printed in the United States of America

--- PAGE BREAK ---SS 
Santa Barbara 
Calif. 
ISBN #0-938002-01-5 
Reprinted 197 6 by 
Builders of the Advtum, Ltd. 
Los Angeles, California 
Eleventh Edition 
Printed in the United States of America

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HISTORY OF THE SEAL 
HE purpose of this little book is to set before you, as 
briefly as is consistent with clearness, certain facts 
concerning the history, symbolism and significance 
of the seal of the United States. As the national arms, 
the seal states symbolically the principles which ani- 
mated the founders of the republic. Today those 
principles are being forgotten. Because they are neg- 
lected in our political and economic practice, grave danger 
threatens the national life. To avert that danger, we must go 
back to the fundamentals of true Americanism, clearly set forth 
in the symbolism of the seal. 
In the official History of the Seal of the United States, pub- 
lished by the Department of State in 1909, Gaillard Hunt writes: 
"Late in the afternoon of July 4, 1776, The Continental Con- 
ess 'Resolved, That Dr. Franklin, Mr. J. Adams and Mr. Jef- 
grson be a committee to prepare a device for e Seal of the United 
States of America,' this being the same committee, except for 
the omission from it of Robert R. Livingstone and Roger Sher- 
man,which had drawn up the Declaration of Inde endence.The 
R 
Declaration had been signed about two o'clock in t e afternoon, 
and the members of the Congress assembled after dinner desired 
to complete the evidence of the independence of the United 
States by formally adopting an official sign of sovereignty and a 
national coat of arms. It was intended that the device for the 
seal should be the device for the national arms, and the first and 
each succeeding committee having the business in charge con- 
strued its duty to be to devise the arms by devising the seal." 
In the design proposed by the first committee the obverse of 
the seal was a coat of arms in six uarters, with emblems repre- 
senting England, Scotland, ~relang, France, Germany and Hol- 
land,the countries from which the new nation had been peopled. 
The Eye of Providence in a radiant triangle, and the motto E 
PLURIBUS UNUM were also proposed for the obverse. 
For the reverse they suggested a picture of Pharaoh sitthlg in 
an open chariot, a crown on his head and a sword in his hand, 
3le, and the motto E 
PLURIBUS UNUM were also proposed for the obverse. 
For the reverse they suggested a picture of Pharaoh sitthlg in 
an open chariot, a crown on his head and a sword in his hand, 
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---PLURIBUS UNUM were also proposed for the obverse. 
For the reverse they suggested a picture of Pharaoh sitthlg in 
an open chariot, a crown on his head and a sword in his hand, 
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

passing through the divided waters of the Red Sea in pursuit of 
the Israelites. Hovering over the sea was to be shown a pillar of 
fire in a cloud, expressive of the Divine Presence and command. 
Rays from this pillar of fire were to be shown beaming on 
Moses, standing on the shore and extending his hand over the 
sea, causing it to overwhelm Pharaoh. The motto for the reverse 
was: REBELLION TO TYRANTS IS OBEDIENCE TO GOD. 
A second committee, appointed by Congress on March 25, 
1780, considered the report of the first committee, and submit- 
ted further suggestions in which we find the first mention of a 
constellation of thirteen stars, a shield, red and white stripes, 
and an olive branch as a symbol of peace. 
A third committee was appointed in 1782, and on June 20 of 
that year its report was accepted by Congress. The text of that 
law is as follows: 
On report of the secretary, to whom were referred the several 
reports on the device for a great seal, to take order: 
The device for an armorial achievement and reverse of the 
great seal of the United States in Congress assembled, is as 
follows : 
ARMS. Paleways of thirteen pieces, argent and gules; a chief, 
azure; the escutcheon on the breast of the American eagle display- 
ed proper, holding in his donter tnlon an olive branch, and in his 
sinister a bundle of thirteen arrows, all proper, and in his beak 
a scroll, inscribed with this motto, "E PZuribue Unum." 
For the CREST. Over the head of the eagle, which appears 
above the escutcheon, a glory, or, breaking through a cloud, 
proper, and surrounding thirteen stars, forming a constellation, 
argent, on an azure field. 
REVERSE. A pyramid unfinished. In the zenith, an eye in a 
triangle, surrounded with a glory proper. Over the eye these 
words, "Annuit Coeptis." On the base of the pyramid the numer- 
ical letters MDCCLXXXI. And underneath the following motto, 
"Novua Ordo Seclwum. 
REMARKS AND EXPLANATION 
The Escutcheon is composed of the chief and pale, the two 
most honourable ordinaries. The pieces, paly, represen. the Sev- 
eral Stabs all joined in one solid compact entire, supporting a 
Chief which unites the whole & represents Congress. The Motto 
alludes to this union. The pales in the arms are kept closely unit- 
ed by the chief and the chief depends upon that Union & the 
strength resulting from it for its support, to denote the Confed- 
eracy of the United States of America & the preservation of their 
Union through Congress. The colours of the pales are those used 
in the flag of the United States of America: White, signifies pur- 
ity and innocence. Red. hardiness & Valour, and Blue, the colourr 
Union through Congress. The colours of the pales are those used 
in the flag of the United States of America: White, signifies pur- 
ity and innocence. Red. hardiness & Valour, and Blue, the colour

--- PAGE BREAK ---gress. The colours of the pales are those used 
in the flag of the United States of America: White, signifies pur- 
ity and innocence. Red. hardiness & Valour, and Blue, the colour

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Its History, Symbolism, and Message for the New Age 
5 
of the Chief signifies vigilance, perseverance & justice. The Olive 
branch and arrows denote the power of peace & war which is ex- 
clusively vested in Congress. The Constellation denotes a new 
State taking its place and rank among other sovereign powers. 
The Escutcheon is born on the breast of a n American Eagle with- 
out any other supporters, to denote that the United States of 
America ought to rely on their own Virtue. 
Reverse. The pyramid signifies Strength and Duration: the Eye 
over it & the Motto allude to the many signal interpositions of 
Providence in favour of the American cause. The date underneath 
is that of the Declaration of Independence and the words under 
it signify the beginning of the new American B r a , which com- 
mences from that date. 
Besides the nine members of the three committees, four per- 
sons were directly concerned with the composition of the seal. 
An artist named Du Sirnitiere made sketches for the first com- 
mittee. William Barton, a private citizen of Philadelphia, drew 
several designs for the third committee. So did Charles Thom- 
son, then secretary of Congress, who chose the mottoes for the 
reverse. More than a hundred years passed before James Horton 
Whitehouse, chief designer for Tiffany & Co., drew the official 
version of the seal in 1884. He was the thirteenth person re- 
sponsible for the formulation of the national arms. 
A die of the obverse was cut in 1782, but it showed a crested 
eagle instead of the American bird prescribed by law. A second 
die, cut in 1841, had an American eagle, but there were only six 
arrows in his sinister talon. No reverse was cut for either of 
these incorrect seals. 
July 7, 1884, Congress passed an act making appropriation "to 
obtain dies of the obverse and reverse." In December of that 
year Mr. Whitehouse's desigris were accepted, and a die for the 
obverse was cut by Tiffany & Co. By 1902 this was badly worn: 
and an exact duplicate was made, which is now used by the 
Department of State. 
The reverse has never been cut. On the ground that it "can 
hardly look otherwise than as a dull emblem of a masonic fra- 
ternity," the explicit directions of the Acts of 1782 and 1884 
have never been obeyed. For more than a century the ignorance 
of the many and the bigoted prejudices of a powerful minority 
have combined to bring about the violation of two laws as 
specific and mandatory as any on our statute books. To this 
day the intention of the founders of our nation remains but 
half fulfilled.ty 
have combined to bring about the violation of two laws as 
specific and mandatory as any on our statute books. To this 
day the intention of the founders of our nation remains but 
half fulfilled.

--- PAGE BREAK ---bring about the violation of two laws as 
specific and mandatory as any on our statute books. To this 
day the intention of the founders of our nation remains but 
half fulfilled.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER 
I1 
FREEMASONRY AND THE AMERICAN IDEAL 
The conceptions behind the pattern of govenunent adopted 
in 1776 are expounded in the lectures, dramatized in the rituals, 
and summarized in the symbols of Freemasonry. Prior to 1776, 
the only place where these principles were explained and put 
into practice, either in England or in America, was the Masonic 
lodge. Eighteenth century lodges were schools, teaching and 
practicing liberty, equality and fraternity. In their lodges 
Masons of that period met as equals, and learned from innum- 
erable experiences of practical helpfulness, one to another, the 
great truth that all men are brothers. 
From the membership of St. Andrew's Lodge, of Boston, was 
formed the Caucus Pro Bono Publico, a patriotic society that 
labored valiantly for the American cause. The lodge records are 
still to be seen at the library of the Grand Lodge of Massachu- 
setts, and at the bottom of the page recording the minutes of 
a meeting held December 16, 1773, is a long line of printed 
capital "Ts." The secretary of the lo e was a good symbolist, 
for it was that night, under the leaders % 
'p of Joseph Warren, a 
Past Master of St. Andrew's, who later gave his life at Bunker 
Hill, that the members of the Caucus Pro Bono Publico disguised 
themselves as Indians, and made history at the BostonTeaParty. 
Paul Revere began his famous ride after an adjourned meet- 
k g of a Masonic lodge. Feeling ran high in those days. On 
every hand were supporters of the British policies, eager to 
betray the American patriots. Utmost secrecy was imperative, 
and whom could Paul Revere trust better than his lodge breth- 
ren? Here were friends, bound to him by common obligations 
and ideals, upon whom he could rely for the help needed to 
carry out his plan. 
Seven signers of the Declaration of Independence are known 
to have been Freemasons. Probably there were more, but in 
those days lodge records were not so carefully kept as now, 
and research by competent Masonic scholars has failed to pro- 
duce adequate evidence to support the claim, sometimes ad- 
vanced, that a majority of the Continental Congress of 1776 
were members of the Craft. Yet we know that the great leaders 
of the Revolution, civil and military, were Freemasons, and 
many were as prominent in the fraternity as they were in the 
affairs of the new nation.of the Craft. Yet we know that the great leaders 
of the Revolution, civil and military, were Freemasons, and 
many were as prominent in the fraternity as they were in the 
affairs of the new nation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e know that the great leaders 
of the Revolution, civil and military, were Freemasons, and 
many were as prominent in the fraternity as they were in the 
affairs of the new nation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Its History, Symbolism, and Message for the New Age 
7 
When Benjamin Franklin he1 ed draft the Declaration of 
S 
Independence, he was Past Gran Master of the Pennsylvania 
Freemasons. He was a deep student of Masonic hilosophy, and 
E 
had delved into its historic sources. Although e parodied as- 
trological charlatans in Poor Richard's Almanac, he, like 
Thomas Jefferson, knew and practiced genuine astrology. He 
had, also, great skill in the construction of magic squares, and 
in his day almost the only sources of information concerning 
these mathematical curiosities were the books of such writers 
on the occult arts as Henry Cornelius Agrippa and the Qabalists. 
All his life he was very active in the Craft. While at Paris he 
served with distinction as Master of the Lodge of the Nine 
Muses. At that time he may well have become acquainted with 
those two Masonic adepts, the incomparable St. Germain and 
the misunderstood and maligned Cagliostro. 
George Washington was a Mason, and so were twelve of his 
generals: Greene, Marion, Lee, Sullivan, R. and I. Putnam, Ed- 
wards, Jackson, Girt, Baron Steuben, Baron De Kalb, and La- 
fayette. When Washington took office as President, he was 
sworn in by a Past Grand Master of New York, on a Bible 
brought from a Masonic lodge. 
The Freemasons who founded this nation drew their inspira- 
tion from the Hebrew and Christian Scriptures, and from the 
doctrines of Pythagoras, Plato, the Alexandrian School, the 
Qabalists and the Rosicrucians. As Jefferson said in his inaug- 
ural address, they were "enlightened by a benign religion, 
fessed indeed and practiced in various forms, et all of 2:: 
B 
inculcating honesty, truth, temperance, gratitu e, and the love 
of man, acknowledging and adoring an overruling Providence, 
which, by all its dispensations, proves that it delights in the 
happiness of man here, and his greater happiness hereafter." 
The Holy Bible rests open on the altar of every American 
lod e. It is the Great Light which rules and 
des the Craft in 
Y 
faifjl and practice. In its pages are to be foun those conceptions 
of God, Man and the Universe which were briefly proclaimed 
in the Declaration of Independence, more ex licitly worked out 
of the United States. 
\ 
in the Constitution, and most admirably sym olized by the seal 
Shallow intellectualists sneer at these principles of Freema- 
sonry and Americanism. They term the inspired phrases of the 
Declaration of Independence "mere glittering generalities." So 
did the enemies of America in 1776. Cynical materialism assertsf Freema- 
sonry and Americanism. They term the inspired phrases of the 
Declaration of Independence "mere glittering generalities." So 
did the enemies of America in 1776. Cynical materialism asserts

--- PAGE BREAK ---Americanism. They term the inspired phrases of the 
Declaration of Independence "mere glittering generalities." So 
did the enemies of America in 1776. Cynical materialism asserts

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that the aspirations and hilosophy of a Jefferson, a Franklin, 
or a Washmgton are no & ing but eighteenth century idealism. 
Idealism, yes! And more of it is what this sick world needs. 
Benjamin Franklin thought that the truths set forth in the Dec- 
laration were truths indeed, and to make this clear he inserted 
into Jefferson's draft the word "self-evident," to emphasize their 
axiomatic quality. Truths they are, tested in the fires of millen- 
iums of human experience. Truths as valid now, and therefore 
just as practica1,as they have been in any other period of history. 
The equality of man is not equality of ability or capacity. 
They misunderstand both Freemasonry and Americanism who 
would make the words of the Declaration proclaim any such 
absurdity. Human equality is equality in the sight of God, and 
implies that every man may, sooner or later, attain to mastery 
of self and circumstance. Politically it is equality in the sight of 
the law, with the same justice for all, no matter what differences 
there may be in wealth or station. Economically it is equality of 
opportunity to make the most of one's natural talents, and to 
secure adequate return for one's labors. Such equality is nat- 
ural, and founded on the laws of Nature and of Nature's God. 
Whatever in our social structure seems to the contrary, is a 
temporary and artificial frustration of the natural order. The 
sooner we go back to it, the better for us and for posterity. 
The pattern of the New World Order, as shown by the syrn- 
bolism of the seal of the United States, rests upon the Masonic 
virtues of Fortitude, Prudence, Temperance and Justice. Forti- 
tude is represented by the hardiness and valour symbolized by 
the color red on our flag and on our seal. Temperance is implied 
b the purity symbolized by white. Justice, and Prudence (im- 
by the vigilance and perseverance mentioned in the Act 
of 1782), are indicated by the color blue. 
None of these human virtues can arrive at full fruition but 
by the aid and favor of Divine Providence, and in their Masonic 
lodges the fathers of our country learned this lesson well. No 
system of government which ignores or denies God can be 
truly American. No system of economics which does not take 
Him into account can be in harmony with the great principles 
to which the Revolutionary heroes pledged their lives, their 
fortunes, and their sacred honor. 
The words of the Declaration are explicit. So are the phrases 
of explanation in the Act of 1782. Deny it some may, repudiate 
it others do. but the fact remains that the government of thered honor. 
The words of the Declaration are explicit. So are the phrases 
of explanation in the Act of 1782. Deny it some may, repudiate 
it others do. but the fact remains that the government of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---s of the Declaration are explicit. So are the phrases 
of explanation in the Act of 1782. Deny it some may, repudiate 
it others do. but the fact remains that the government of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Its History, Symbolism, and Message for the New Age 
9 
United States of America, like that of ancient Israel, was con- 
ceived as being really a theocracy, a government ruled by God, 
working through the outward forms of democracy, but doomed 
to ignominious failure should it ever remove that first of the 
ancient landmarks of Freemasonry, recognition of the over- 
shadowing presence of the Great Architect of the Universe, 
and submission to His will, as revealed in the laws of Nature. 
THE NUMBER THIRTEEN 
Throughout the history of the United States the number 13 
has been prominent, "'76," used to designate the year of the 
Declaration, as when we say, "The spirit of '76," is composed 
of digits which add to 13. "July the Fourth," the birthday of 
the nation, has thirteen letters. So has the name of the national 
bird, "The American Eagle." During the Revolution, the flag of 
Massachusetts displayed a ~ i n e 
tree, with a rattlesnake coiled at 
its base. Above the tree was the motto, "An Appeal to God," 
thirteen letters, and beneath the snake, "Don't Tread on Me," 
also thirteen letters. Ry modern numerology the values of the 
words "In God We Trust," a peculiarly Masonic phrase used 
on our coinage, are as follows: IN (9 + 5 = 14) GOD (7 + 6 
+ 4 = 17) WE ( 5 + 5 = lo) TRUST (2 +9+3+1+2=17), 
so that the sum of these values is 58, and 5+8=13. 
WTashington and twelve of his generals were Freemasons, 
thirteen again. Thirteen ships were in our first navy. In the 
Civil War, though there were but eleven States in the Confed- 
eracy, the Confederate flag had thirteen stars. In the World 
War, the first expedition to France sailed on June 13, 191 7, 
was carried in thirteen ships, and took thirteen days to cross. 
Ilurillg that period our President signed his name Woodrow 
LVilson, thirteen letters. 
The horoscope of the Declaration of Independence. set up for 
the hour at which that document was signed on July 4, 1776, 
shows the sun in thirteen degrees of the sign Cancer, and makes 
the ascendant thirteen degrees of the sign Scorpio, which sign 
is represented bv the number 13 in the ancient Rosicrucian and 
Masonic Tarot Keys. 
The designers of the seal of the United States emphasized theant thirteen degrees of the sign Scorpio, which sign 
is represented bv the number 13 in the ancient Rosicrucian and 
Masonic Tarot Keys. 
The designers of the seal of the United States emphasized the

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the sign Scorpio, which sign 
is represented bv the number 13 in the ancient Rosicrucian and 
Masonic Tarot Keys. 
The designers of the seal of the United States emphasized the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

number 13 when they composed the national arms. Their pri- 
mary intention, of course, was to commemorate the banding 
together of thirteen States to form the new nation. We cannot 
tell to what extent they were familiar with the deeper esoteric 
meanings of the number 13; but we do know that in books ac- 
cessible to properly instructed Freemasons of the eighteenth 
century there is strong emphasis on this number, and it is 
certain that there has been deliberate repetition of 13 in the 
composition of the seal. 
The law of 1782 specifies paleways of thirteen pieces for the 
escutcheon, thirteen arrows for the bundle i r ~ 
the eagle's sinister 
talon, and a motto of thirteen letters. For the crest it prescribes 
a constellation of thirteen stars. For the reverse it mentions a 
motto at the top consisting of thirteen letters. It also says that 
the date shall be in Roman letters, nine in number, and by using 
the spellin "seclorum" instead of the more usual "saeclorum," 
1 
makes the ower motto consist of seventeen letters. Thus there 
are thirty-nine letters, three times thirteen, on the reverse. 
The law does not mention thirteen courses for the unfinished 
pyramid, but William Barton's sketch had that number, and 
Whitehouse followed Barton when he prepared what is now 
fixed by law as the correct version. 
There is definite intention, too, in the number of leaves and 
berries on the olive branch. When submitting the Whitehouse 
drawings Tiffany & Co. wrote: 
"We have used the classical olive and have decided not to 
introduce the flowers; the fruit (13) and the 13 leaves speak 
for themselves in a very clear and positive manner, but the 
flowers, while they suggest a growin and fruitful future, would 
as no special number could be use$ give an uncertainty not 
desirable, as it would always be supposed that the particular 
number of flowers used must have a meaning while that mean- 
ing is not there." 
This shows that in making the final designs great care was 
taken to introduce nothing not truly significant. A recent letter 
from Tiffany & Co. to the writer confirms this view, for it says: 
"Mr. James H. Whitehouse was for many years prior to 1900 
the chief designer of our House, and the details of the present 
seal were perfected and carefully drawn under his personal 
direction, and the steel seal was cut by us. The original details 
of the design were arranged and decided in 1782. . . . .Thethe present 
seal were perfected and carefully drawn under his personal 
direction, and the steel seal was cut by us. The original details 
of the design were arranged and decided in 1782. . . . .The

--- PAGE BREAK ---ere perfected and carefully drawn under his personal 
direction, and the steel seal was cut by us. The original details 
of the design were arranged and decided in 1782. . . . .The

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lts History, Symbolism, and Message for the New Age 
11 
masonic character of the Reverse was also settled at the same 
time as the face of the seal." 
Thus it is that the seal of the United States conveys a code- 
message in symbolism, to which the number 13 is one of the 
most important keys. The message would have been perfectly 
clear to any eighteenth century Qabalist, Rosicrucian, or Free- 
mason of high grade. Whether it is there by accident, by in- 
tention, or by some mysterious interposition of Providence, 
guiding the hand of the designer, the reader must judge for 
himself. This book aims to decode the message, so that it may 
be intelligible to all. 
THE NUMBER - LETTER CODE 
The ancient Hebrews and Greeks had no numerals. They 
performed their arithmetical calculations with the letters of 
their alphabets. In Hebrew and Greek every letter is a number. 
Every word is therefore a number, the sum of the values of its 
letters. In manuscripts of the Old and New Testaments, not only 
are the numbers of chapters, verses and pages indicated by com- 
binations of letters, but there are many examples of special 
spelling and unusual phrasing intended to indicate definite 
numbers. 
Based upon this fact that in Hebrew and Greek every word 
is a number, is a method of Biblical inter retation called gema- 
tria, a term derived, 
pmbably 
%e Greek goometria, 
whence comes the Eng ish noun, geometry. Rabbinical com- 
mentators on the Old Testament used ematria long before the 
Christian era. Their precedent was fo f lowed by the Qabalists 
and Rosicmcians who did so much to influence Freemasonry. 
The underlying notion of gematria is that words having &e 
same number often have a hidden correspondence in meaning, 
of which the identity in number is a signal. Gematria is not 
limited to single words. It applies to ~hrases and sentences also. 
The idea of such a correspondence in meaning between words 
and phrases having the same number is foreign to our ordmary 
modes of thought. It is easy to reduce it to fantastic absurchty. 
One has only to run through a Hebrew dictionary in order to 
find words of the same number which have irreconcilable mean- 
ings. Gematria, again. has been abused by charlatans who haveic absurchty. 
One has only to run through a Hebrew dictionary in order to 
find words of the same number which have irreconcilable mean- 
ings. Gematria, again. has been abused by charlatans who have

--- PAGE BREAK ---as only to run through a Hebrew dictionary in order to 
find words of the same number which have irreconcilable mean- 
ings. Gematria, again. has been abused by charlatans who have

--- PAGE BREAK ---

employed it to further their schemes, and by cranks who have 
tried by means of it to bolster up their imaginings. 
It is a fact, nevertheless, that in the composition of the Old 
and New Testaments, and of other sacred and esoteric writ- 
ings, this number-letter code was utilized in order to preserve 
a record of arcane knowledge while at the same time concealing 
the real significance of the writing from all but those who 
possessed the key. 
The 
matria of the Hebrew Scriptures applies particularly 
to the tr 'vine and angelic names, and to the proper names of 
places and persons. The numbers they reveal are usually impor- 
tant in geometry, or are expressive of those laws of proportion 
which are manifested in the natural organization of crystals, 
plants and the bodies of animals and men. These numeral for- 
mulas are therefore those which underly the ancient canons of 
architecture and music, and they are numbers, too, which are 
clues to astronomical laws. 
According to Qabalists, every letter of the Hebrew alphabet, 
besides representing a number, corresponds also to various 
other things. These ideas, familiar to many Freemasons today, 
as any one may see for himself by reading General Albert Pike's 
Morals and Dogma of ths Scottish Rite, were even better under- 
stood by the average member of the Craft in 1776, and must 
certainly have been knpwn to so indefatigable a researcher 
into all things strange and curious as Benjamin Franklin. 
The table which concludes this section gives the names, 
numbers, and some of the corres ondences of the twenty-two 
letters of the Hebrew alphabet. T f~ 
ese correspondences include 
the four elements of ancient physics, the heavenly bodies known 
to the ancients, and the twelve signs of the zodiac. The table 
shows also the correspondences of the heraldic metals and tinc- 
tures to certain of the Hebrew letters. In old works on heraldry 
these metals and tinctures were named after the sun, .noon and 
planets. Hence they correspond to the letters assign:d to those 
celestial bodies, as shown in the table. The Rornar characters 
following the letter-names are those employed throughout this 
book for the purpose of transliterating Hebrew words. Thus we 
shall avoid the use of Hebrew characters, which would confuse 
many readers. 
By means of this table we shall be able to decode the hidden 
meaning of every detail of the symbolism of the seal.us we 
shall avoid the use of Hebrew characters, which would confuse 
many readers. 
By means of this table we shall be able to decode the hidden 
meaning of every detail of the symbolism of the seal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Its History, Symbolism, and Message for the New Age 
13 
Aleph 
Beth 
Gimel 
Daleth 
Heh 
Vau 
zain 
Number Sign,Planet or EIemrnt 
Heraidic Metal or Tincture 
A 
1 Air, Spirit 
B 
2 Mercury 
G 
3 Moon 
Luna, Ar~ent, White 
D 
4 Venus 
Venus, Vert, Green 
H 
5 Aries 
V 
6 Taurus 
Z 
7 Gemini 
Cheth 
Ch 
8 Cancer 
Teth 
T 
9 Leo 
Yod 
I 
10 Virpo 
Kaph 
K, C 
20 Jup~ter 
Jove, Azure, Blue 
Lamed 
L 
30 Libra 
Mem 
M 
40 Water 
Nun 
N 
50 Scorpio 
Sarnekh 
S 
60 Sagittarius 
Ayin 
0 70 Capricorn 
Peh 
P 
80Mars 
hlars, Gules. Red 
Tzaddi 
T z 
90 Aquarius 
Qoph 
Q I00 P i e s 
Resh 
R 200 Sun 
Sol, Or, Yellow 
Shin 
Sh 300 Fire 
Tav 
T h 400 Saturn. Earth 
Saturn, Sable, Black 
SYMBOLISM OF THE OBVERSE 
The eagle is an ancient symbol of spiritual vision. It was 
supposed to be the only creature that could look directly into 
the sun. It is also connected with the zodiacal sign Scorpio, 
the ascending sign of the United States. In astrology this sign 
is said to rule the physical forces and functions in the human 
body which must be controlled and re-directed, or sublimated, 
before one may develop the true higher vision. Much in Free- 
masonry refers to this control and sublimation. Thus the eagle 
proclaims that spiritual vision is essential to true Americanism, 
and suggests the means whereby that vision may be attained. 
-- 
The olive branch in the eagle's dexter talon symbolizes 'I? 
ce. 
Its presence there is a radical departure from the heral y of 
the Old World. The eagles of the monarchies which preceded 
the United States usually carried the symbols of war on the 
dexter side. Our national arms proclaim the principle that the 
primary aim of the United States shall be to establish peace. 
Hence the eagle faces the olive branch.arried the symbols of war on the 
dexter side. Our national arms proclaim the principle that the 
primary aim of the United States shall be to establish peace. 
Hence the eagle faces the olive branch.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

OBVERSE 
The branch has 13 leaves and 13 berries, indicating the num- 
ber 26, the number of *e divine name I H V H (10 + 5 + 
6 + 5), usually translated "Jehovah." The ancient Hebrews 
supposed this to be the proper name of their tribal deity. Its 
grammatical derivation shows its true meaning. It is from the 
Hebrew verb meaning "to be," and its literal significance is, 
"That which was, is, and will be." What better designation 
for the Deity could the mind of man devise? 
One man, closer to that Reality in feeling or understanding, 
fray have a better concept of its nature than another; but verbal 
definition is impossible. The immensity of that One can never 
be expressed by any creed. 
Perhaps the symbolism of the seal comes close to the inner 
nature of that Reality, for it links up "That which was, is, and 
will be" with the notion of peace expressed by the olive branch. 
"Thou vnlt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on 
thee: because he trusteth in thee." This affirmation of Isaiah

--- PAGE BREAK ---th the notion of peace expressed by the olive branch. 
"Thou vnlt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on 
thee: because he trusteth in thee." This affirmation of Isaiah

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Its History, Symbolism, and Message for r h New Age 
15 
echoes through all the inspired scriptures of the world. A nation 
that dedicates itself to the establishment of eace dedicates itself 
to the quest for an ever-increasing knowle i! ge of God. 
The arrows in the eagle's left talon represent the power of 
war. 13, their number, is the value of the noun achad (A Ch D) , 
used in Hebrew as a divine name, signifying "The One." 13 is 
also the number of ahebah (A H B H), "love." This is an es- 
sential divine attribute, as we learn from St. John's words: 
"God is love." 
Arrows are more than emblems of the power of war. They 
are symbols of aim, denoting purpose, will, intention. By com- 
bining these ideas with those of unity and love corresponding to 
the number 13, we may read the symbolism of the arrows as 
meaning that it is a cardinal principle of true Americanism that 
recourse to arms shall be for no other purpose than the main- 
tenance of a just cause having for its object the establishment 
and preservation of unity and love. 
The shield affirms by its colors, valor (red), purity (white) 
and justice (blue). The heraldic tinctures are Mars (gules), 
Luna (argent) and Jove (azure). In the foregoing table Mars 
corresponds to the letter Peh. Luna to Girnel, and Jove to Kaph. 
The values of these letters are 80, 3 and 20, giving as a total for 
the three colors, the number 103. 
This is the number of ehben ha-Adam (A B N H A D M), 
"the stone of Adam." This is an alchemical term designating 
what was also termed "The Perfect Red Stone." This is the 
same as the perfect ashlar, or squared stone, of Freemasonry. 
It represents perfected humanity. 
103 is also the value of the verb gawnan (G N N), "to guard, 
protect, shield," which is certainly appropriate to the symbolism 
of this portion of the seal. 103 is also the number of Hua ha- 
Elohim (H V A H A L H I M) "He is God," (Deut. 4:38). 
Qabalists interpret these words as applying particularly to God 
when He is considered as being the Ancient of Days. On the 
seal they are associated with the shield, so that the colors of the 
shield and flag are seen to be symbols of divine protectip. 
Finally, 103 is the number of the noun bonaim (B N A I M), a 
Rabbinical word signifying "builders, masons." Thus the na- 
tional colors spell out by gematria the name of the great frater- 
nity which did so much for the American cause. 
The dexter wing of the eagle has 32 feathers, the number of 
the "Paths of Wisdom" which summarize the entire Qabalistic 
philosophy, and the number of ordinary degrees in Scottishhe American cause. 
The dexter wing of the eagle has 32 feathers, the number of 
the "Paths of Wisdom" which summarize the entire Qabalistic 
philosophy, and the number of ordinary degrees in Scottish

--- PAGE BREAK ---The dexter wing of the eagle has 32 feathers, the number of 
the "Paths of Wisdom" which summarize the entire Qabalistic 
philosophy, and the number of ordinary degrees in Scottish

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16 
THE GREAT SEAL 
OF THE UNITED STATES: 
Rite Freemasonry. The sinister win has 33 feathers, corres- 
i! 
onding to the thirty-third degree o the same Rite, conferred 
For outstanding Masonic services. The total number of feathers 
is 32 + 33 -- 65, or 5 times 13. This is the number of the 
divine name Adonai (A D N I), "Lord," used at the beginning 
of the 91st psalm. 65 is also the number of huihl (H I K L), 
"temple," a word of especial importance in Freemasonry, inas- 
much as the whole legend of the Craft evolves from the history 
of Solomon's temple. The idea behind this symbolism is that 
man lives in God, as the 91st Psalm says, and that God also 
lives in man, so that every human personality is venerable and 
holy as the living shrine of the indwelling presence of the Lord. 
The number 65, again, is that of the Hebrew phrase gam 
yawchad (G M I Ch D) "together in unity." The verse in 
Psalm 133 where this phrase appears is: "Behold, how good and 
how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity." It 
is familiar to American Freemasons as part of the ritual of the 
first degree, and expresses the ideas of fraternity and unity 
characteristic of the American system of government. 
These ideas are more explicitly stated in the motto, "E PLUR- 
IBUS UNUM," 
consisting of thirteen letters referrin as do the 
%' 
thirteen arrows, to unity and love. Apart from its o vious sig- 
nificance, the motto suggests that true Americanism is by no 
means to be understood as being merely the rule of the many. 
That is a false definition of democracy, for such rule is but the 
tyranny of the mob. The motto indicates a movement away 
from the hydra-headed multifariousness of clashing opinions 
toward singleness of purpose and effort, based on real knowl- 
edge of the One whence all things proceed. 
In 1776, and for many years thereafter, neither academic 
science nor academic philosophy accepted the idea that all 
things are from One. Today this is an accepted postulate of 
physics, as it was a primary assumption of the Hermetic and 
abalistic schools which did so much to shape Masonic thought, 
& e great source of the ideals of the founders of tbe United 
States. The motto E PLURIBUS UNUM indicates the move- 
ment of the human mind from the many-ness of external ap- 
pearances toward the discovery of the One whence all those 
appearances spring. 
The crest over the eagle's head includes a golden glory, an 
azure field, and thirteen silver stars. Gold corresponds to Sol, 
and the letter Resh; azure to Jove, and the letter Kaph; silver 
to Luna, and the letter Gimel. Here we have Sol, Luna anbglory, an 
azure field, and thirteen silver stars. Gold corresponds to Sol, 
and the letter Resh; azure to Jove, and the letter Kaph; silver 
to Luna, and the letter Gimel. Here we have Sol, Luna anb

--- PAGE BREAK ---eld, and thirteen silver stars. Gold corresponds to Sol, 
and the letter Resh; azure to Jove, and the letter Kaph; silver 
to Luna, and the letter Gimel. Here we have Sol, Luna anb

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Its History, Symbolism, and Message for the New Age 
17 
Jove, and Freemasons will recognize the allusion when they 
remember that Jove, the "sky-father," is evidently the "Master 
of the Lodge above." Hence the crest refers to the sun, moon 
and Master of the lodge, mentioned in the rituals. Furthermore, 
since the stars are silver, and this metal is connected with the 
letter Gimel, or "G," the crest should recall to Masons the let- 
ter "G," on an azure ground surrounded by a golden glory, to 
be seen in all properly furnished lodges. 
The values of the three Hebrew letters Resh, Ka 11 and Gimel 
ere 200, 20 and 3, adding to 223. This is the num k' er of kabzeel 
(Q B Tz A L), "God has gathered," and abrek or abrac ( A B 
R K or A B R C), "father of tenderness." 
The Book of Splendor says the place-name Kabzeel refers to 
Kether, the Crown, the highest manifested aspect of God, "the 
hidden grade where 'no eye hath ever seen,' etc. (Isaiah 64-:4), 
a grade which contains the whole and which is the focus of the 
supernal light, and from which everything issues." Kether is the 
seat of Jechidah, the Indivisible. This Jechidah is the innermost 
self of man, identical with the Atman of Hindu psychology. 
This Self, the true "I AM," is that which, according to Jesus' 
declaration of His inner experience, is one with the Father. The 
inner unity of the indivisible spiritual Self constitutes the essen- 
tial equality of mankind, and establishes the fact of human 
brotherhood. 
Abrek or abrac, occurs but once in the Bible (Gen. 41:43). 
In the Authorized Version it is translated, "Bow the knee," but 
the margin gives "tender father." The four letters composing 
it may be written A B R C in Roman characters, the final let- 
ter representing the hard "C" in English. 
By taking the first two letters together we have ab (A B), 
"father," and the last two form the noun rob, "tenderness." 
Hence the translation in the margin of the Authorized Version. 
If we write the same letters this way, AB R. C., we have 
"Father R. C.," the designation given in the Fama Fraternitatis 
to the Founder of the Rosicrucians. In my True and Invisible 
Rosicrucian Order I have shown that the Fama Fraternitatis is 
an allegory, and that its hero, Father R. C., is a personification 
of the Christos. He is the Indivisible One, the true Self dwelling 
in Kether, the mystical Kabzeel. 
The Book of Splendor says: "The term abrek signifies the 
spot where the sun is joined to the moon, towards which all 
bow down." This is just what the symbolism of the crest on the 
seal indicates. And the Leland Ms., an ancient Masonic docu-signifies the 
spot where the sun is joined to the moon, towards which all 
bow down." This is just what the symbolism of the crest on the 
seal indicates. And the Leland Ms., an ancient Masonic docu-

--- PAGE BREAK ---where the sun is joined to the moon, towards which all 
bow down." This is just what the symbolism of the crest on the 
seal indicates. And the Leland Ms., an ancient Masonic docu-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ment, tells us that Freemasons have the power of "winning the 
faculty of abrac." So also the Fanla Fraternitatis says the Rosi- 
crucians agreed that the letters R. C. should be their seal, mark 
and character, by which it means to inform us that tenderness 
or com assion is the distinguishing mark of character by which 
a true $ osicrucian may be distinguished. That compassion is the 
direct consequence of spiritual vision, in which the true nature 
of the One Self is realized. He who knows that Self as present 
in all his fellow-men must needs be compassionate, and his ten- 
derness toward all humanity finds active expression in deeds of 
helpfulness and charity. 
The constellation, composed of thirteen stars, emphasizes the 
ideas of unity and love which are suggested by the words 
Kabzeel and abrac. Their color, white or silver, corresponds, as 
has been said, to Gimel, or the letter "G." Their number signi- 
fies the divine name Achad, "The One." Thus the constellation 
reminds us of the words of the Masonic monitors, which say: 
"The letter 'G' is the initial letter of the great and sacred name 
of God, before whom all . . . should most humbly, reverently, 
and devoutly bow." 
The constellation is composed of pentagrams, or five-pointed 
stars, so arranged that their grouping forms a hexagram, or 
six-pointed star. This hexagram is corn sed of two equilateral 
r 
triangles, and in each triangle are exac y ten stars, forming the 
figure known as the Tetraktys, on which Pythagoras is said to 
have sworn his pupils to secrecy. The six-pointed star, again, 
is the standard of Israel, known as the Shield of David. 
It will be remembered that the first committee suggested for 
the reverse of the seal a design which indicated clearly that they 
traced an analogy between the situation in 1776 and the one 
described in the Bible story of the Israelites' escape from Pha- 
raoh. The same analogy is suggested by the presence of the 
standard of Israel on the seal. 
From time' immemorial the hexagram has been a symbol of 
the forces of the macrocosm, or great universe, the forces at 
work in the heavenly spaces, which were active millions of 
years before man made his appearance on earth. The order ex- 
pressed by these forces is the "kingdom of the heavens," and 
that order runs throu h all the earth. All that we experience is 
pan of it, nothing we &low escapes from it. Every point in space 
$t one and the same time receives the total influence of radia- 
bons coming from every direction, and sends back radiations 
throughout the whole extent of the universe. Thus a physicistnt in space 
$t one and the same time receives the total influence of radia- 
bons coming from every direction, and sends back radiations 
throughout the whole extent of the universe. Thus a physicist

--- PAGE BREAK ---and the same time receives the total influence of radia- 
bons coming from every direction, and sends back radiations 
throughout the whole extent of the universe. Thus a physicist

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Its History, Symbolism, and Message for the New Age 
19 
has said recently that there is a sense in which even a sinele 
electron may be regarded as being omnipresent, since its raha- 
tions must extend to every point of the s ace-time continuum. 
The fire-pointed star, or pentagram, Qe the perfect ashlar, 
is a symbol of perfected man. Eliphas Levi, a French occultist, 
whose books, published about the middle of the nineteenth cen- 
tury, exerted so strong an influence upon the mind of General 
Albert Pike that whole pages of The Morals and Dogma of the 
Scottish Rite are little more than direct transcriptions from 
Levi's writings, says: 
"The pentagram expresses the mind's domination over the 
elements. It is the star of the Magi, the burning star of the 
In drawing a pentagram we divide each of its five lines in 
exact extreme and mean proportion, which may be defined as 
the division of any uantity mto two such parts or proportions 
9 
as that the measure o the lesser part shall bear the same relation 
to the measure of the 
eater part as the measure of the greater 
part bean in turn to 
whole quantity. The occult interpreta- 
tion of this mathematical proportion is sometimes expressed in 
the maxim: "Nature is to man as man is to God." The propor- 
tion itself is often called the Golden Section of Pythagoras, and 
is associated with the Hexmetic axiom: "That which is above 
is as that which is below, and that which is below is as that 
which is above." 
Numerically the Golden Section is closely approximated, 
though not exactly expressed, if the length of any line of a 
entagram be taken as 21 units, the number of letters in UNIT- 
& STATES OF AMERICA. Then the two equal and longer 
segments of the line will be 8 units in length, and the shorter 
segment, which is the base of an isoceles triangle forming one 
of the five points of the pentagram, will be 5 units long. 
The distance between the points of a penta 
of one side of a regular pentagon which wi yam 
1 exactly 
is the enclose 
length 
the five-pointed star. That distance, of course, will be 13 units, 
if the pentagram line be taken as 21 units long. On the seal this 
enclosing penta on around each of the stars is invisible, but it 
f 
is shown as a otted line in the accompanying diagram. This 
'Condensed from The Mysteries of Magic, Part V, Section 111.seal this 
enclosing penta on around each of the stars is invisible, but it 
f 
is shown as a otted line in the accompanying diagram. This 
'Condensed from The Mysteries of Magic, Part V, Section 111.

--- PAGE BREAK ---penta on around each of the stars is invisible, but it 
f 
is shown as a otted line in the accompanying diagram. This 
'Condensed from The Mysteries of Magic, Part V, Section 111.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20 
THE GREAT SEAL OF THE UNITED 
STATES: 
is a reproduction of a diagram found often in Hermetic, Rosi- 
crucian and Masonic manuscripts. 
The letters at the five points of the pentagram are the Roman 
characters corresponding to Yod, Heh, Shin, Vau and Heh. 
They are the letters which spell the divine name I H V H, 
Jehovah, with the "holy letter," Shin, symbol of the Holy 
Spirit, placed between the first two and last two letters, thus: 
I H Sh V H. This is the occult and Rosicrucian spelling of the 
name Yehesh~xa, or Jesus. Because Eliphas Levi knew that the 
pentagram is often drawn with these letters, he wrote, "It is the 
symbol of the Word made flesh." (See Illustration, page ii). 
The numeral value of I H Sh V H is 326. This is the number 
resulting from the addition of 103, the number corresponding 
to the colors of the escutcheon, and 223, the number correspond- 
ing to the tinctures of the crest. Thus every pentagram in the 
constellation symbolizes the mystical name I H Sh V H, and so 
does the total value of the colors used on the obverse of the seal. 
Surrounding the constellation is a golden glory divided into 
twenty-four equal parts. The Masonic reference is to the 
twenty-four-inch gauge, emblematical of the twenty-four hours 
of the day, which are divided into three equal parts of eight 
hours each. This division of the twenty-four-inch gauge is rep- 
resented numerically by the three digits of the number 888. 
This is the numeration, by Greek gematria, of the name Jesus. 
Thus the symbolic reference of the twenty-four divisions of 
the glory, on the Masonic side, connects with compassion and 
charity, because the first division of the twenty-four-inch gauge 
according to the monitors, is that "whereby are found eight 
hours for the service of God and a distressed worthy brother." 
And in its deeper meaning it is connected with the Christos or 
Logos symbolized by the pentagrams. Nor are the two meanings 
unrelated. He who is filled with the spirit of service to God and 
his distressed brethren is filled with the spirit of the meaning of 
the mystical name I 14 Sh V H. 
This name, which we render as Jesus, is the same as that of 
Joshua, who succeeded Moses as leader of the Israelites. Its lit- 
eral significance is: "That which is liberates," or "The nature 
of Reality is to set free." Not mere rescue from danger or tor- 
ment, but liberation, in the widest and best meaning of that 
term, is what is meant. Not mere escape from misery in the 
after-death state, but perfect liberty, here and now, is the prom- 
ise of this Name of Names. Hence St. Paul wrote: "Where the 
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty;" and St. James declared:the 
after-death state, but perfect liberty, here and now, is the prom- 
ise of this Name of Names. Hence St. Paul wrote: "Where the 
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty;" and St. James declared:

--- PAGE BREAK ---ate, but perfect liberty, here and now, is the prom- 
ise of this Name of Names. Hence St. Paul wrote: "Where the 
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty;" and St. James declared:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Its History, Symbolism, urui Message for the New Age 
21 
"But whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty, and con- 
tinueth therein, he bein not-a forgetful hearer, but a doer of 
the work, this man sha lf be blessed in his deed." 
Behind the constellation is an azure background, and on the 
seal as cut for the Department of State, this is represented by 
exactly twenty-six horizontal lines. Behind the liberating nature 
of Reality, represented by the name I H Sh V H and the penta- 
P 
ams, is that Reality itself, represented by the 26 of the name 
H V H, Jehovah. Here is yet another reference to the Master 
of the Lodge above. 
Around the glory are nineteen clouds. 19 is the number of the 
roper name Chavah (Ch V H), the name rendered "Eve" in 
f;nglish. It is derived from a verb spelt the same way, meaning 
'Lto show, to declare, to manifest." Mother Eve in the Hebrew 
Scriptures re resents the power of manifestation whereby the 
cosmic light- ? 
orce, or Logos, clothes itself in hysical form. Thus 
she is said to be the mother of all living. S i 
e is like the power 
termed Praluiti or Maya-shakti by Hindu philosophy. As the 
cause of form, Eve or Maya brings about the fall of Spirit into 
Matter, and the veiling of the One Light, but through that 
veiling the Light is also made manifest. 
To be a "doer of the work" one must have a 
ht founda- 
tion, and on the seal that foundation is represented ? 
y the nine 
feathers of the eagle's tail. In the Qabalah the number 9 is nam- 
ed Yesod, Basis or Foundation. The word Yesod (ISVD) adds to 
80, and this, as you will see in the table of the alphabet, is the 
number of the letter Peh, to which is attributed the planet Mars. 
In heraldry Mars is red, and on the seal it signifies hardiness 
and valor, typically Martian qualities. Mars is also the ruler of 
Scorpio, the ascending sign of the United States. Through 
Scorpio Mars is associated with the force expressed in genera- 
tion, and this is the force which must be transmuted in order 
that one may have the higher vision. 
Thus the nine feathers of the eagle's tail refer to this control 
of the Mars-force, and to the coura e and hardiness which are 
among the results of continence an % self-control. 
The addition of 19 (the clouds in the crest), 24 (the divisions 
of the glory), and 9 (the feathers of the eagle's tail) is 52, or 
4 times 13. This number corresponds to the noun ben (B N), 
"Son," used by Qabalists to designate the aspect of the Life- 
power which they call Tiphareth, or Beauty. 
They also say that the noun ben, "Son," refers to the "secret 
nature" of the material world, or physical plane. Here is a con-te the aspect of the Life- 
power which they call Tiphareth, or Beauty. 
They also say that the noun ben, "Son," refers to the "secret 
nature" of the material world, or physical plane. Here is a con-

--- PAGE BREAK ---Life- 
power which they call Tiphareth, or Beauty. 
They also say that the noun ben, "Son," refers to the "secret 
nature" of the material world, or physical plane. Here is a con-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22 
THE GREAT 
SEAL 
OF THE UNITED STATES: 
nection with the doctrine of the Logos given in the opening 
sentences of the Gospel of St. John, who says that the Word, 
identified throughout the New Testament with the Christos, or 
Son, is the power whereby all things were made. Qabalists, Her- 
metic philosophers, Rosicrucians and Freemasons of the eight- 
eenth century understood this as being an exact expression of 
a great truth concerning the nature of the physical plane. That 
truth is today a fundamental postulate of science, since physi- 
cists have demonstrated that all forms of physical matter are 
manifestations of a single energy, like light in its essential 
nature, which is also the underlying power expressed in every 
kind of vital activity. 
This universal light-energy, the mystical Son, is made flesh 
and dwells within us as the central point of illumination per- 
sonified as Horus in the Egyptian rituals, as Krishna in Hin- 
duism, where Krishna is termed "the ego seated in the heart of 
man," as the liberating I H Sh V H in the esoteric Christianity 
of the school which described that light also in the Rosicrucian 
allegory of "Our Father and Brother, R. C." 
The Declaration of Independence implies just what the seal 
symbolizes by including, in the various ways just mentioned, 
references to the abalistic and Hermetic spelling of the name 
Jesus. The basis o 7 all that our fathers fought for is the truth 
that the underlying law of the universe is the law of liberty. 
Tyrants seek to enslave humanity, but tyranny is self-des- 
tructive. Old tyrannies have passed away, to give place to 
others more subtle, but even these are doomed before the irre- 
sistible force expressed in the law of liberty. Most of the world 
today is in bondage to Mammon, but the time is at hand when 
Mammon shall take its proper place as the servant, not the 
master, of man. Millions are enslaved by the machine, but the 
hour is striking when a revolution greater than that of 1776 
shall throw off the shackles of that hateful servitude. 
This revolution is now in progress, Its field is not the field of 
battle between armies of men. It is the field of the human soul. 
It is a revolution in consciousness, overturning the old false 
standards of value. 
Down through the ages prophets have foreseen this time. 
l''heir visions have been ignored, misunderstood, disregarded. 
Yet these visions are being realized in the history of our owfl 
times. They who have eyes to see may discover abundant evl- 
dence that the perfect law of liberty is about to become mani- 
fest as never before in the affairs of men.zed in the history of our owfl 
times. They who have eyes to see may discover abundant evl- 
dence that the perfect law of liberty is about to become mani- 
fest as never before in the affairs of men.

--- PAGE BREAK ---f our owfl 
times. They who have eyes to see may discover abundant evl- 
dence that the perfect law of liberty is about to become mani- 
fest as never before in the affairs of men.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Its History, Symbolism, and Message for the New Age 
23 
Wars there are, and nunors of war, so that superficial readers 
of the headlines might suppose us far from the fulfillment of the 
greatrmises which have sustained the hope of spiritually- 
mind 
men and women for so long. The utter destruction of 
our false economic system is imminent, for that structure rear- 
ed on a foundation of lies is falling of its own weight. In the 
Old World, political tyranny makes its last dying gestures, 
as ever, but expiring even while it 
Surface appearances may be dismaying, but they who have 
taken pains to follow St. James' advice, and look into the law 
of liberty, are serenely confident that the day is dawnin when 
here in the New World we may see the beginning of %e ful- 
fillment of Victor Hugo's tremendous vision: 
"In the Twentieth Centu 
war will be dead, the scaffold will 
7 
be dead, hatred will be dea , frontier boundaries will be dead, 
dogmas will be dead; man will live. He will possess something 
higher than all t h e s ~ 
great country, the whole earth, and a 
great hope, the whole heaven." 
SYMBOLISM OF THE REVERSE 
A Masonic emblem the design for the reverse of the seal 
surely is, but he must be ignorant of what it means who calls 
it dull. It may lack esthetic appeal, and want finish as a work of 
art; but as a symbolic statement of the essentials of true Ameri- 
canism it is a mawel of ingenuity. 
The upper motto contains thirteen letters. The date on the 
lower course of the pyramid has nine letters. (Notice that it is 
in approximately the same position as the nine feathers on the 
other side of the seal, and that it is placed on the foundation of 
the pyramid.) The lower motto contains seventeen letters. 
Thus the total number of letters on the reverse is thirty-nine, or 
three times thirteen, and this is the number of the phrase in 
Deuteronomy 6:4, "Jehovah is One," which concludes the sen- 
tence translated in the Authorized Version thus: "Hear, 0 
Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord." Even this sentence, in 
Hebrew, is connected with the number 13, for the total value 
of the six words composing it is I I 18, or 86 times 13; and since 
86 is the number of the Divine Name Elohim (A L H I M),sentence, in 
Hebrew, is connected with the number 13, for the total value 
of the six words composing it is I I 18, or 86 times 13; and since 
86 is the number of the Divine Name Elohim (A L H I M),

--- PAGE BREAK ---

REVERSE 
which represents the creative powers sometimes called the Seven 
Spirits of God, what is implied in this sentence: which is a part 
of the Jewish ritual, is that behind the manifold forms of mani- 
festation, true science perceives the unity of spiritual causa- 
tion. This, of course, is also one of the meanings of the thirteen- 
letter motto: E PLURIBUS UNUM. 
The motto at the top means, "He hath rospered our under- 
taking," and the words of explanation in t K e Act of 1782 show 
that those who chose this motto were confident that the United 
States were under Divine Guidance. They knew that their un- 
dertaking was more than the work of men, and courageously 
declared that knowledge to their contemporaries and to posterity. 
Underneath the upper motto is the Eye of Providence in a 
triangle surrounded by a golden glory. The Eye corresponds 
to the letter Ayin in the Hebrew alphabet, because the name of 
that letter means "eye." Thus the Eye designates the number of 
Ayin, which is 70. The triangle is the geometrical representa- 
tive of 3. The gold of the glory corresponds to Sol, and thus to 
the letter Resh and the number 200. Hence these three details

--- PAGE BREAK ---is 70. The triangle is the geometrical representa- 
tive of 3. The gold of the glory corresponds to Sol, and thus to 
the letter Resh and the number 200. Hence these three details

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Its History, Symbolism, and Message for the New Age 
95 
of the design add Qabalistically to the number 273. This is the 
result of multiplying 13, the number of letters in E PLURIBUS 
UNUM, and in ANNUIT COEPTIS, by 21, the number of 
letters in UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. 
The number 273 is shown also by the constellation of the 
crest. For if the shortest se 
ent of any pentagram line be taken 
!? 
$" 
as 1, the len h of each o the two longer segments will be 1.6, 
so that any ine of a pentagram, measured thus, will be 1.6+ 
1+1.6, or 4.2 units long. Hence the total length of the five 
lines of a pentagram may be taken as 5 times 4.2 units, or 21 
units. Since there are 13 pentagrams in the constellation, if they 
be measured thus the total length of their lines will be 273 units. 
Finally, the number 273 is shown in another way, as follows: 
Horizontal lines in azure background of crest .....-.... 26 
............................................................ 
Stars in the constellation 
13 
Divisions in the glory ...................................................................... % 
Clouds surrounding glory ........................................................... 19 
Letters in E PLURIBUS UNUM 
13 
Feathers in eagle's wings ............................................................ 
65 
Stripes on escutcheon ............................................. - ......................... 13 
Feathers in eagle's tail .............................................................. 
9 
Olive leaves and berries ................................................................ 26 
Arrows ....................................................................................................... 
1 3 
Letters in ANNUIT COEPTIS ................................................ 13 
Courses of pyramid ........................................................................... 1 3 
Letters in MDCCLXXVI ............................................................ 
9 
Letters in NOVUS ORDO SECLORUM ........................ 17 - 
273 
273 is the value of the phrase, ehben masu ha-bonim (A B N 
M A S V H B V N I M), "the stone which the builders re- 
fused," (Ps. 118: 22) ; of the words aur genaz (A V R G N V 2) , 
"the hidden light;" of the noun arba (A R B 0), "four;" of 
the verb gawar (G 0 R), "he rebuked;" of the verb gawrah 
(G R 0 ) , "he took away;" of the verb rawgah (R G 0), "he set 
in motion, he analyzed;" of the Greek noun attranasia, "immor- 
tality;" and of the Hebrew proper noun Hiram Abiff (Ch V R 
M A B I V ) . 
In the building of governments, until 1776, the stone of 
human equality had been refused by all the builders. This prin- 
ci le of equality, founded upon the presence of the mystical 
~ L s t o s 
within the tem le of every human personality, was the 
1 
hidden light transmitte from generation to generation throughrin- 
ci le of equality, founded upon the presence of the mystical 
~ L s t o s 
within the tem le of every human personality, was the 
1 
hidden light transmitte from generation to generation through

--- PAGE BREAK ---ity, founded upon the presence of the mystical 
~ L s t o s 
within the tem le of every human personality, was the 
1 
hidden light transmitte from generation to generation through

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5% 
THE 
GREAT 
SEAL OF THE UNITED 
STATES: 
the mystery schools, until the time arrived when that light 
could be announced to the world. This principle of equality is 
symbolized by the four equal lines of a square, and the square 
is incorporated into the symbolism of the seal as the form of 
the base, and of each course, of the pyramid. The Declaration 
of Independence rebuked the tyranny and oppression of the 
British crown. It took away the thirteen States from the mother 
country. It analyzed the fundamentals of natural law which are 
the basis of all good government, and set in motion a series of 
litical changes which have transformed the whole world. It 
L e d its doctrine on the principle of immortality made familiar 
to every Freemason by the legend of Hiram Abiff. 
In that legend Hiram Abiff represents the Christos, the stone 
refused by the builders. He is beset by ruffians who demand 
from him the Master Mason's word. On the ground that the 
sanctum sanctonun of the temple has not been completed, he 
rebukes them for their presumption. At his refusal to reveal the 
Word, they kill him, and i r k his death he takes away the secret, 
which is the hidden light of Freemasonry. Hiram Abiff is the 
Masonic pattern of perfect rectitude, symbolized geometrically 
by the square, and numerically by the number 4. Associated 
vvith him as an indispensable part of the Masonic legend, is the 
idea of immortality. 
Accident or coincident this may be, though I do not for a 
moment believe it, but fact it undoubtedly is. It may be that this 
threefold use of the number 273 on the seal is not the result of 
conscious intention on the part of the various ersons respon- 
sible for the design and its execution. I believe t E at anything SO 
im ortant as the composition of a national arms is likely to be 
K 
in uenced by something higher than the personal knowledge 
of those concerned. I am persuaded that the Divine Mind guides 
the course of human events, down to the smallest detail. Thus 
1 am convinced that not the least of the many signal interposi- 
tions of Providence in favor of the American cause, commemo- 
rated by the motto ANNUIT COEPTIS, is the fact that the 
seal of the United States expresses, in a cipher code common to 
the Qabalah, Rosicrucianism and Freemasonry, principles whose 
essence is clearly set forth in the Declaration of Independence. 
The triangle enclosing the Eye is the pattern for the con- 
struction of the pyramid below it. That is to say, the triangle 
1s of the same proportions as would be any one of the four tri- 
angular faces of a completed pyramid built according to the 
same proportions as that shown in its unfinished state on the seal.angle 
1s of the same proportions as would be any one of the four tri- 
angular faces of a completed pyramid built according to the 
same proportions as that shown in its unfinished state on the seal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e proportions as would be any one of the four tri- 
angular faces of a completed pyramid built according to the 
same proportions as that shown in its unfinished state on the seal.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Its History, Symbolism, and Message for the New Age 
27 
Careful measurement of the basal 
les of this triangle shows 
that they are angles of 67 degrees, s x a t the angle at the apex 
must be one of 46 degrees. This is the closest possible integral 
measurement of the angles of a triangle having a base of 10 
units, an altitude of 12 units, and equal sides of 13 units each. 
These measurements of sides, base and altitude are exact. Only 
the angular measurement is approximate, and this varies so little 
from exact that it is invisible to the naked eye when the angles 
are tested with a rotractor. It is made evident only by the 
calculations of m em mathematics, which were unknown to 
the ancients. 
J 
It will be seen that this isoceles triangle is composed of two 
right-angled triangles having sides of 5, 12 and 13, put together 
so that their sides of 12 units coincide to form the altitude of 
the isoceles triangle. Thus here is concealed a variant of the 
famous 47th Problem of Euclid, which the Masonic monitors 
say "was an invention of our ancient friend and brother, the 
great Pythagoras." For the square of 13, or 169, is the sum of 
25 and I%, the squares of 5 and 12. 
The determining measurements of the triangle enclosing the 
Eye are the base of 10 units and the altitude of 12 units. The 
base-line suggests the ten commandments of Moses, and the ten 
aspects of Reality, the Sephiroth or Numerations of the Qaba- 
listic system. Concerning these The Book of Formation says: 
"Ten ineffable Sephiroth, ten and not nine, ten and not 
eleven: understand with wisdom and apprehend with care; ex- 
amine by means of them and search them out; know, count, and 
write. Put forth the subject in its light, and place the Formator 
on His throne. He is the only Creator and the only Fomator, 
and no one exists but He: His attributes are ten and have no 
limits."' 
The altitude suggests the 12 tribes of Israel, and the 12 signs 
of the zodiac, which are attributed to the 12 simple letters of the 
Hebrew alphabet. The number 12 also sug ests the 12 founda- 
tions and ates of the New Jerusalem, as f escribed in Revela- 
tion, and &e form also of the sanctum sanctorum, or Holy of 
Holies, in the Hebrew Tabernacle and Temple. 
The two sides of the triangle, measuring 13 units each, may 
be taken as representing achad, unity, and ahebah, love, Taken 
together, they represent the number 26, and the Divine Name, 
I H V H, Jehovah. 
*The Book of Formution. trandated by Knut Stenring, 1:4.e taken as representing achad, unity, and ahebah, love, Taken 
together, they represent the number 26, and the Divine Name, 
I H V H, Jehovah. 
*The Book of Formution. trandated by Knut Stenring, 1:4.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing achad, unity, and ahebah, love, Taken 
together, they represent the number 26, and the Divine Name, 
I H V H, Jehovah. 
*The Book of Formution. trandated by Knut Stenring, 1:4.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28 
THE 
GREAT SEAL OF THE UNITED 
STATES: 
Thus the triangle symbolizes the unity and love which are the 
fundamental qualities of "That which is, was, and will be." 
And that Supreme Reality is shown, in this triangle, resting 
upon the foundation of that One Being's tenfold self-expression, 
which is the basis of the ten commandments given at Sinai. 
As a single figure the triangle represents the number 3, and 
since the Eye is equivalent to the Hebrew letter Ayin, having 
the number 70, the triangle and the Eye, apart from the glory, 
represent the number 73, the value of the Hebrew noun Chok- 
mah (Ch K M H), "Wisdom." 73 is also the numeration of the 
letter-name Gimel (G M L). Thus the number 73 is related to 
the letter which in English is "G." In other words, the Eye in the 
trian le re resents the same overshadowing Wisdom that is sug- 
geste f by t R e constellation in the crest on the obverse of the seal. 
All this symbolism was familiar to Qabalists and Freemasons 
of the eighteenth century, who would certainly have under- 
stood the Eye in the triangle just as it is understood by present- 
day members of the Craft, who learn from their monitors that 
the All-seeing Eye is a symbol of the Heavenly Wisdom "which 
the sun, moon and stars obey, and under whose watchful care 
even comets perform their stupendous revolutions." They also 
learn that the vision of this Eye "pervades the inmost recesses 
of the human heart, and rewards us according to our merits." 
Careful analysis of the unfinished pyramid underneath the 
Eye of Providence shows that in whole numbers each of its slop- 
ing lines is 60 units long, its base-line 70 units, and each of the 
four lines of its square top 24 units. Thus the length of the 
four lines enclosing each of its trapezoidal faces would be 60 
+60+70+24 
units, or 214 units. 214 is the number of the 
Hebrew noun Ruach (R V Ch), "Life-Breath, or Spirit." Here 
is a hint that the structure of our national government was 
intended by its founders to be a spiritual building, truly a 
"temple not made with hands, eternal in the heavens." 
These measurements, extended so as to make a finished pyra- 
mid, whose upper point would coincide with the upper point 
of the triangle enclosing the Eye of Providence, would give a 
pyramid each of whose faces would have equal sides of 91 
units, and a base-line of 70 units. Thus each face of the finished 
pyramid would have a perimeter of 91 +91+70 units, or 252 
units. 252 is the number of the Hebrew phrase ad adi ad (0 D 
0 D I 0 D), "forever and forever," which is in harmony with 
the words of explanation in the Act of 1782, to the effect that 
the pyramid represents Strength and Duration.ebrew phrase ad adi ad (0 D 
0 D I 0 D), "forever and forever," which is in harmony with 
the words of explanation in the Act of 1782, to the effect that 
the pyramid represents Strength and Duration.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ad (0 D 
0 D I 0 D), "forever and forever," which is in harmony with 
the words of explanation in the Act of 1782, to the effect that 
the pyramid represents Strength and Duration.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Its History, Symbolism, and Message for the New Age 
29 
91, the length in units of each side of the finished pyramid 
corresponding to that on the seal, is the number of the Hebrew 
word Amen (A M N), signifying "to be firrr~; to be faithful," 
and this also agrees with what is written in explanation of the 
meaning of the pyramid. 
182, the total length of the two equal sides of each face, is 
the number of the proper name Jacob (I 0 Q B), and of the 
phrase, melakh ha-Elohim (M L A K H A L H I M), "messen- 
ger of God." Here is a suggestion that the finished work of the 
New World Order begun in 1776 is to be the fulfillment of the 
promises to Jacob, or Spiritual Israel. That fulfillment is to 
make the completed realization of the principles of true Amer- 
icanism a message of God to all the world. 
The basis of this structure of government is represented by a 
line of 70 units long. 70 is the number of the letter Ayin, corres- 
ponding to the Eye in the triangle. It is also the number of 
Adam Ve-Chavah (A D M V Ch V H), "Adam and Eve." 
Thus it su gests that the foundation of the building contemplat- 
f 
ed by the athers of the republic is the Heavenly Vision (Ayin, 
the Eye), expressed through the illuminated consciousness of 
humanity (Adam and Eve). 
On the bottom course of the p amid is the date, MDCCG 
XXVI, or 1776. This date is si&nt 
to all students of pmph- 
ecy. It is the culmination of a time-period which began mth the 
first captivity of Israel in 745 B. C. Seven prophetic "times" 
from that date is a eriod of 2520 years, or seven times a proph- 
etic year of 360 orflnary years. This makes the year 1776 the 
culmination of the seven "times" mentioned in the Book of 
Daniel. 
In the gematria of the Greek language, 1776 is the number 
of the phrase he soteria Israel, "the salvation of Israel." It may 
be regarded as mere coincidence by those who prefer that ex- 
but the fact remains that the New World Order 
was the first to admit Jews and Gentiles to 
and economic equality. Since then, all over the 
world, except in reactionary Germany, there has been a steady 
trend toward the emancipation of the descendants of the Tribe 
of Judah. 
Since the date, 1776, is placed on the bottom course of the 
yramid, and since the number 13 has been so important in the 
gistory of the United States and is the symbolism of the seal, 
it is not unreasonable to suppose that the thirteen courses of the 
pyramid may represent thyteen time-periods of thirteen yeanin the 
gistory of the United States and is the symbolism of the seal, 
it is not unreasonable to suppose that the thirteen courses of the 
pyramid may represent thyteen time-periods of thirteen yean

--- PAGE BREAK ---the United States and is the symbolism of the seal, 
it is not unreasonable to suppose that the thirteen courses of the 
pyramid may represent thyteen time-periods of thirteen yean

--- PAGE BREAK ---

30 
THE 
GREAT 
SEAL 
OF THE UNITED 
STATES: 
each. I do not insist on this interpretation, but my readers may 
be interested to consider what it leads to. 
The first course would include the Revolution (1 776-1 783) ; 
the establishment of the first daily newspaper, the "Advertiser," 
issued in Philadelphia in 1784; and the adoption of the Constitu- 
tion in Convention (1 787). 
The second course begins with 1789. This year marked the 
first Presidential election, and the establishment of the United 
States Supreme Court. During this cycle the first steamboat 
plied the Delaware River (1 790), the United States Mint was es- 
tablished (1 792), and Whitney invented the cotton-gin (1 793). 
During the third cycle of thirteen years came the Louisiana 
Purchase (1803), and the second war with Great Britain (1812- 
1814). 
The fourth course covers the period from 1815 to 1827 in- 
clusive. The most important governmental action of this period 
was the declaration of the Monroe Doctrine in 1823. 
The fifth course begins with 1828. In that year the first pass- 
enger railroad began running trains on July 4. The reaping ma- 
chine, destined to make possible the g-ranaries of the West, was 
invented in 1834. In 1835 Morse invented the telegraph, and 
thus began the modern Age of Electricity. 
During the time-period represented by the sixth course (1841 
to 1853, inclusive) Texas was annexed (1845). In 1846 came 
the war with Mexico, resulting in the acquisition of the Terri- 
tories of New Mexico, Arizona and California, completing the 
extension of the land surface of the country from the Atlantic 
to the Pacific. Gold was discovered in California in 1848, and 
this helped to open the West. 
The seventh course begins with 1854, the year Commodore 
Perry opened Ja an to commerce. During this thirteen years 
P 
the Atlantic Cab e was laid (1857-1858), the Civil War was 
fought (1861-1865), and slavery was abolished (1863). In this 
period came the rise of the Republican Party, and the Presi- 
dency of Abraham Lincoln. 
The eighth cycle begins with 1867. It included the tragedy 
of Reconstruction, and the development of big business. In 1869 
the Pacific Railroad was completed, the air-brake was invented, 
and in September of that year came Wall Street's dreadful 
Black Friday. The first of the great expositions was held in 
Philadelphia in 1876. It definitely stressed the material, rather 
than the spiritual, progess of the nation. In this era the farm 
lands of the West were opened, and toward its close the farmersin 
Philadelphia in 1876. It definitely stressed the material, rather 
than the spiritual, progess of the nation. In this era the farm 
lands of the West were opened, and toward its close the farmers

--- PAGE BREAK ---1876. It definitely stressed the material, rather 
than the spiritual, progess of the nation. In this era the farm 
lands of the West were opened, and toward its close the farmers

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Its History, Symbolism, and Message for the New Age 
31 
began to make themselves heard, and labor began to improve 
its conditions. 
During the ninth cycle, ca ital, by means of its control of the 
machine, and its alliance wi% corrupt politics, fastened its grip 
on the economic condition of the nation. Evil seed was sown 
during this period which still bears its poisonous fruit. 
The tenth cycle, beginning in 1893, was signalized by the 
opening of the World's Fair at Chicago; but this same year 
brou ht the worst panic the country had, until then, experi- 
ence!. 
Labor troubles multiplied. The war with Spain began in 
1898, during McKinley's Presidency. The election of McKinley 
was a victory for the East, for the predominance of the city over 
the country, and for the rule of industrialism. It was followed 
by a period of imperialism under McKinley and Theodore 
Roosevelt . 
The eleventh cycle was one of disaster. It opened with the 
San Francisco earthquake and fire. Then came the panic of 
1907, A few years of deceptive peace followed. Then came the 
World War, which brought the eleventh cycle to a close. 
The twelfth cycle began in 1919. Durin it we reaped the 
fruit of the evil seed sown in the eighth, nin t% , and tenth cycles. 
Troubles multiplied as never before. Organized crime aped the 
methods of bi business, and the triumph of the city over the 
country broug !i 
t as one of its consequences the development of 
great rings of gangsters. A dream of ima 
ary prosperity end- 
ed suddenly with the panic of 1929, and b 
e remaining years of 
the twelfth cycle saw a progressive depression which continues 
until now. 
In 1932 began the thirteenth cycle, corresponding to the 
uppermost course of the unfinished pyramid. Franklin D. Rws- 
evelt was elected to the Residency. The various e eriments 
now going on under the designation of the New Dea ? were be- 
gun. What their outcome will be, it is impossible at this writing 
to say. But whatever is before us in this cycle, which comes to 
its end in 1944, all intelligent persons are agreed (whether they 
are for the New Deal of Roosevelt or against it) that the Old 
Order, as represented by the political and economic opinions 
and practices of the eighth, ninth, and tenth cycles, must never 
be dominant in Amenca again. 
Students of the pro hetic measures of the Great Pyramid 
believe that the years k e e n 1932 and 1945 will be of great 
importance to the whole world. Several schools of Bible inter- 
preters find similar indications in the prophecies of Daniel. Notyramid 
believe that the years k e e n 1932 and 1945 will be of great 
importance to the whole world. Several schools of Bible inter- 
preters find similar indications in the prophecies of Daniel. Not

--- PAGE BREAK ---the years k e e n 1932 and 1945 will be of great 
importance to the whole world. Several schools of Bible inter- 
preters find similar indications in the prophecies of Daniel. Not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

33 
THE 
GREAT SEAL 
OF THE UNITED 
STATES: 
many years since, the notion that either the Pyramid or the 
Bible might be sources of enlightenment on olitical and econ- 
B 
omic questions elicited nothing but smiles of erision from most 
persons. Today, as it becomes increasingly evident that we can- 
not go back to the Old Order, and that our present miseries are 
the reaping of the fruit of errors characteristic of the period 
between 1867 and 1919, it may be that some will have more 
open minds. 
Nearly three million Freemasons call the Bible their Great 
Light, and open it upon their altars as their rule and guide in 
faith and practice. Millions of other Americans accord the Old 
Book lip-service on Sundays. The founders of the United States 
accepted it, and based their lan for a New World Order upon 
the principles of eternal wis d' om recorded in its pages. If we are 
to go ahead to the full realization of their dream, we must not 
onl look into the law of liberty so clearly set forth in the 
ib e. We must be doers of the work, if we are to be blessed 
I3 f 
in our deeds. 
The New Order is represented by the capstone which will 
complete the unfinished structure depicted on the seal. Since a 
complete pyramid of the roportions shown will have sloping 
R 
boundaries of 91 units eac , and those on the unfinished pyra- 
mid are of 60 units, the four sloping lines of the capstone will 
measure 31 units each, and the four lines of its square base will 
measure 24 units each. 
Now, this number 24 has already been explained in connec- 
tion with the M divisions of the glory, and we have seen that in 
the number 24 is concealed a reference to the 24-inch gauge, 
with its three parts of 8 inches each. And this has been shown 
to be a Qabalistic reference to the number 888, the gematria of 
the name Jesus in Greek. What does this mean? Simply that 
the foundation of the work which will complete and erfect the 
New World Order must be the recognition of the 8 hristos in 
every human heart. Further, that the work to be done must pro- 
ceed from the principle s u m m e d up in the name Jesus, which 
sigmfies, "The nature of Reality is to liberate." Analysis of all 
the errors of 
vernment and economics that today threaten 
civilization a a l w a y s show that the evils in human thought 
and action have their roots in the belief that the nature of Real- 
ity is at bottom inimical to man, at bottom a principle of bond- 
age, not of liberty. Out of this seed of error grows all tyranny, 
no matter what forms it may assume. The New World Order 
must begin with the principle, set forth by implication in theple of bond- 
age, not of liberty. Out of this seed of error grows all tyranny, 
no matter what forms it may assume. The New World Order 
must begin with the principle, set forth by implication in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ot of liberty. Out of this seed of error grows all tyranny, 
no matter what forms it may assume. The New World Order 
must begin with the principle, set forth by implication in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Its History, Symbolism, and Message for the New Age 
33 
words of the Declaration of Independence, that the laws of 
Nature, and of Nature's God, are but variations of this one basic 
law of liberty. 
Every face of this capstone will be an isoceles triangle, with 
two equal sides of 31 units, and a base of 24 units. Hence each of 
the equal sides will represent the Divine Name, El (A L), and 
the total length of the lines bounding each triangular face will 
be 86 units (31 +31+24), the number of the Divine Name, 
Elohim (A L H I M). Furthermore, the unit-length of the four 
lines of the square base of the capstone will be 4 times !W equals 
96, and this is the number of El Adonai (A L A D N I), "God 
the Lord." And the unit-length of the four sloping lines will be 
4 times 31 equals 124, the value of the phrase Jehovah hua Elo- 
him (I H V H H V A A L H I M), "Jehovah, He is God." So 
that from all these measurements we et the one idea that the 
capstone is to be the manifestation o the Divine Power and 
Presence in the affairs of men. 
B 
The total length of the boundaries of this capstone will be 
96 + 1241- 220 units. This is the number of the Hebrew 
adjective bawkheer (B Ch I R), "chosen," used in Psalm 89:3, 
"I have made a covenant with my chosen." It is also the number 
of the words moosawd moosawd (M V S D M V S D), " a sure 
foundation," used in Isaiah 28: 16, "Behold, I lay in Zion for a 
foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure 
foundation: he that believeth shall not make haste." It is like- 
wise the number of le-kates (L Q Tz), used twice in Daniel 
12: 13 as meaning "at the end, at the limit." The verse reads: 
"But go thou thy way till the end be: for thou shalt rest, and 
stand in thy lot at the end of the days." Finally, it is the num- 
ber of car (CR or KR) and of roke (RC or RK), the words 
meaning respectively "Lamb" and "Tenderness,': 
which are 
the designations of the Christos particularly associated with the 
central figure of the Rosicrucian allegory, named, in the Fama 
Fraternitatis, "Our Brother and Father C. R." 
What, then, is indicated by all this as to the real nature of 
the New World Order represented by the motto at the bottom 
of the reverse of the seal? What else but that the wise men who 
established our republic knew that the time would come when 
the work of men, which is represented by the unfinished pyra- 
mid, would have to be completed by a power higher than man? 
When the individual "stones" of the temple of government, 
the persons com osing the body politic, awaken to the truths so 
clearly recordecf in the Declaration of Independence and soigher than man? 
When the individual "stones" of the temple of government, 
the persons com osing the body politic, awaken to the truths so 
clearly recordecf in the Declaration of Independence and so

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the individual "stones" of the temple of government, 
the persons com osing the body politic, awaken to the truths so 
clearly recordecf in the Declaration of Independence and so

--- PAGE BREAK ---

plainly set forth in the symbolism of the seal, then we shall have 
the completion of the structure begun in 1776. "Where there is 
no vision the people perish," and truly has that old saying found 
verification in the sad history of the whole world. 
But the time is at hand that was foreseen by the prophet Joel, 
and recorded in the second chapter of his prophecy: 
"Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice in Jehovah 
your God: for he hath given you the former rain moderately, 
and he will cause to come down for you the former rain, the 
former rain, and the latter rain in the first month. And the 
floors shall be full of wheat, and the vats shall overflow with 
wine and oil. And I will restore to you the years that the locust 
hath eaten, the cankerworm, and the caterpillar, and the palm- 
erworm, my great army which I sent among you. And ye shall 
eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the name of Jehovah 
your God, that hath dealt wondrously with you: and my people 
shall never be ashamed. And ye shall know that I am in the 
midst of Israel, and that I am Jehovah your God, and none else: 
and my people shall never be ashamed. 
"And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my 
spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall 
prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men 
shall see visions: and also upon the servants and upon the hand- 
maids in those days will 1 pour out my spirit. And I will shew 
wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and 
pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the 
moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of Jehovah 
shall come. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call 
upon the name of Jehovah shall be delivered: for in mount Zion 
and in Jerusalem shall he deliverance, as Jehovah hath said, and 
in the remnant whom Jehovah sl~all call." 
May this brief account of the symbolism of our national arms 
aid all who read it to a better understanding of the fundamen- 
tals of true Americanism. May it hasten the day when we shall 
all be duly and truly prepared, in our hearts, to do our part 
in the completion of the edifice begun by our forefathers. May 
it be the means of reviving among us the spirit expressed in the 
motto ANNUIT COEPTIS, the same spirit which led our 
Brethren of another day to end their allegory of Our Father 
and Brother C. R. with the words which seem to me most fitting 
to conclude this little book: 
Under the shadow of Thy wings, Jehovah!our 
Brethren of another day to end their allegory of Our Father 
and Brother C. R. with the words which seem to me most fitting 
to conclude this little book: 
Under the shadow of Thy wings, Jehovah!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

http://www.biblewheel.com/GR/GR_GreatSeal.asp 
The Great Seal of the United States of America

Blessed is the nation whose God is the LORD; and the people whom he hath 
chosen for his own inheritance.  
Psalm 133:12 
The Great Seal of the United States of America employs traditional symbols of heraldry 
 to tell 
the story of the foundation and the hopes of the fledgling nation. The origins and meanings of the 
symbols are explained, for the most part, in the official document 
 (PDF format) supplied by the 
U.S. State Department 
. Additional details are found on John D. MacArthur's excellent site 
GreatSeal.com 
. 
The Great Seal is used to seal 2,000 to 3,000 documents each year. It identifies the authority and 
ensures the authenticity of the documents sealed by the United States Government. As such, it 
provides an apt analogy of the Bible Wheel as God's Divine Seal of Approval on the structure of 
the Bible, the fundamental founding document of the Christian Faith. 
The Great Seal was designed to explicitly acknowledge God's hand in the foundation of the United 
States, as stated in the official description 
 (page 12) of the reverse side of the Seal: 
The pyramid signifies strength and duration: The eye over it and the motto, Annuit 
Coeptis (He [God] has favored our undertakings), allude to the many interventions of 
Providence in favor of the American cause. The date underneath is that of the 
Declaration of Independence and the words under it, Novus Ordo Seclorum (A new 
order of the ages), signify the beginning of the new American era in 1776. 
The "many interventions of Providence" include the integration of the numbers, mottos, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---lorum (A new 
order of the ages), signify the beginning of the new American era in 1776. 
The "many interventions of Providence" include the integration of the numbers, mottos, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

geometric forms of the Great Seal with God's design of the Holy Bible and His intent for the new 
nation. Regardless of the theological variations amongst the founding fathers, every signer of the 
Declaration of Independence 
, to a man, placed his life and sacred honor in the hands of Divine 
Providence, as recorded in the last sentence of that great document: 
And for the support of this Declaration, with a firm Reliance on the Protection of divine 
Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our Lives, our Fortunes, and our sacred 
Honor.  
The online article Religion and the Founding of America 
 provided by the Library of Congressof divine 
Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our Lives, our Fortunes, and our sacred 
Honor.  
The online article Religion and the Founding of America 
 provided by the Library of Congress

provides more insight into the true Christian character of the members of the early Congress: 
The Continental-Confederation Congress, a legislative body that governed the United 
States from 1774 to 1789, contained an extraordinary number of deeply religious 
men. The amount of energy that Congress invested in encouraging the practice of 
religion in the new nation exceeded that expended by any subsequent American 
national government. Although the Articles of Confederation did not officially authorize 
Congress to concern itself with religion, the citizenry did not object to such activities. 
This lack of objection suggests that both the legislators and the public considered it 
appropriate for the national government to promote a nondenominational, 
nonpolemical Christianity.  
Congress appointed chaplains for itself and the armed forces, sponsored the 
publication of a Bible, imposed Christian morality on the armed forces, and granted 
public lands to promote Christianity among the Indians. National days of thanksgiving 
and of "humiliation, fasting, and prayer" were proclaimed by Congress at least twice a 
year throughout the war.  
These are the men used of God to found this nation. Three of them were also commissioned by 
the newly formed Continental Congress to design the Great Seal. Before they adjourned on July 4, 
1776, Congress passed this resolution:  
Resolved, that Dr. Franklin, Mr. J. Adams and Mr. Jefferson, be a committee, to bring 
in a device for a seal for the United States of America.  
Truly, the Lord's hand was on the foundation of this great country, this City on a Hill, this Beacon of 
Light, Life, and Liberty to all the peoples of the world! America is the Land of the Free because of 
the freedom wrought by Christ, our Eternal Light. May His Light shine on us forevermore!eacon of 
Light, Life, and Liberty to all the peoples of the world! America is the Land of the Free because of 
the freedom wrought by Christ, our Eternal Light. May His Light shine on us forevermore!

--- PAGE BREAK ---e, and Liberty to all the peoples of the world! America is the Land of the Free because of 
the freedom wrought by Christ, our Eternal Light. May His Light shine on us forevermore!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A Radiant Constellation of Thirteen Stars 
The beautiful mystery of God's hidden hand on the foundation of America, the design of the Great 
Seal, and the structure of the Bible manifests most clearly in the Number 13. Seven features of the 
Great Seal are based on this number which, in natural terms, alludes to nothing more than the 
original thirteen colonies. If God had no hand in these events, the number of colonies would be 
nothing but a mere accident of history and there would be no meaning to be found in it. It is here 
that the glory of God shines with great clarity, leaving little doubt about His involvement in the birth 
of the nation.  
The biblical meaning of the Number 13 has been rigorously established by God in the reiterative 
structure of the Shema, the first and greatest commandment given in Deuteronomy 6:4 (cf. The 
Unity Holograph and Shield of the Blessed Trinity). The root ideas are Love and Unity, as seen in 
this fundamental pair of alphanumeric identities: 
ne 
cha
 = 13 =  
ove  
hava
The Bible calls Love "the perfect bond of unity" (Colossians 3:14, NASB). The digits One and 
Three reiterate the idea of the One Triune God, Who is represented by the Eye in the Triangle 
above the unfinished pyramid. The Triangle is an ancient Christian symbol for the Trinity, and the 
Eye denotes God's omniscience. It is called the "Eye of Providence" in the official State 
Departments description of the Seal. The relation between the Three members of the Godhead is 
the root ontological source of Love in the Universe. These ideas find their ultimate expression in 
the greatest declaration of the nature of Love ever written, the thirteen verses of I Corinthians 
Thirteen, where the thirteenth verses is itself explicitly built on a 
pattern of One and Three. 
All of this was historically illustrated in the foundation of the 
United States when thirteen colonies united to form one 
nation under God. This means that the premier biblical number 
of Unity - the Number 13 - was historically manifested and 
inextricably stamped on the foundation of the USA, and has 
been propogated all over the planet via the ONE dollar bill. A similar work was accomplished when 
Israel manifested the meaning of the Number 430 in the history of their years in Egypt. In both 
cases, God designed History and Scripture in accordance with the alphanumeric values ofomplished when 
Israel manifested the meaning of the Number 430 in the history of their years in Egypt. In both 
cases, God designed History and Scripture in accordance with the alphanumeric values of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fundamental Greek and Hebrew words (cf. Introduction to the Gematria Reference to learn about 
the numeric values of words).  
Yet this is but the beginning. The idea of composite unity is exemplified in the Twelve Disciples 
surrounding Christ and the Twelve Tribes of Israel united in God. This is geometrically expressed 
in the hexagonal Star Number, commonly known as the Star of David, which appears in the 
constellation of 13 Stars above the eagle's head. Numbers of the form figure prominently in both 
the Creation and the Logos Holographs. It also relates to the name "Israel" that God gave to 
Jacob, with its numerical weight of 541 which is the Tenth Hexagonal Star Number, so that the 
numerical value of the name Israel forms a Star of David! 
There are seven features of the Great Seal based on the Number 13: 
Patterns of 13 in the Great Seal 
The Number 13 as Star of David 
 
13 Stars in the constellation above the 
eagle's head. The constellation forms a Star 
of David.  
 
13 Stripes in the eagle's shield made of 6 
red and 7 white stripes.  
 
13 Arrows by the eagle's left talon.  
 
13 Leaves on the Olive branch in the eagle's 
right talon.  
 
13 Letters in E Pluribus Unum. The letter 
counts of 1, 8, and 4 spell Echad (One).  
 
13 Letters in Annuit Coeptis divided into 6 
Letters and 7 Letters.  
 
13 Levels in the unfinished pyramid.13 Letters in E Pluribus Unum. The letter 
counts of 1, 8, and 4 spell Echad (One).  
 
13 Letters in Annuit Coeptis divided into 6 
Letters and 7 Letters.  
 
13 Levels in the unfinished pyramid.

The official description 
 of the constellation above the eagle's 
head specifies the number but not the pattern of the stars. 
MacArthur notes 
 that the pattern violates the traditional laws 
of heraldry which forbid heraldic stars from being placed in a 
pattern, and in a personal communication indicated he knew of 
no historical explanation for the use of the hexagonal Star 
Number formation. All that is known is that it was used in the 
original seal made in 1782, and every seal thereafter. It would

--- PAGE BREAK ---rical explanation for the use of the hexagonal Star 
Number formation. All that is known is that it was used in the 
original seal made in 1782, and every seal thereafter. It would

--- PAGE BREAK ---

seem that the the Star pattern is another manifestation of the hidden hand of Divine Providence 
guiding the foundation and development of the USA. 
In his article Thirteen Arrows 
 on GreatSeal.com, under the heading "The Power of Unity", 
MacArthur comments: 
Infinitely stronger than a single rod, the unbreakable nature of aligned rods means that 
the bundle of arrows also symbolizes the power of unity – the attitude needed to 
successfully protect and defend one's nation, and if necessary, wage war to do so. 
He then cites the moral of Aesop's Fable "The Bundle of Sticks", which is "In Unity is Strength." 
Given its inextricable integration with both Scripture and American History, it remains a mystery 
how triskaidekaphobia 
 (fear of the Number 13) ever found root in America. 
E Pluribus Unum 
The Latin phrase written on the banner held in the eagle's beak 
means "Out of Many, One" refering to the union of 13 States to 
form one nation under God. The source of of this phrase is 
explained on page 8 of the State Department's official document 
: 
The motto E Pluribus Unum, emblazoned across the scroll 
and clenched in the eagle's beak, expresses the union of 
the 13 States. Recent scholarship has pointed out the 
probable source of this motto: Gentlemen's Magazine, 
published in London from 1732 to 1922, was widely read by 
the educated in the American Colonies. Its title page carried 
that same motto and it is quite possible that it influenced the 
creators of the seal. 
The thirteen letters of E Pluribus Unum are divided into three 
words consisting of 1, 8, and 4 letters, resepectively. These numbers correspond to the letters 
Aleph, Chet, and Dalet, spelling the word 
(Echad, One), which is the basis of the Unity 
Holograph. Clearly, no human could have contrived such a coincidence - the phrase is standard 
Latin that was in use before the seal was even conceived. We have a threefold integration of 1) the 
meaning of the phrase with 2) the number of letters and 3) the division of those letters into words. 
And all this is found in the Great Seal that commemorates the union of thirteen colonies as one 
nation under God. Nothing but the infinite Wisdom of God could have caused so many lines - 
(Echad, One) 
in the USA Motto 
E 
1 
(Aleph) 
P 
L 
U 
R 
I 
B 
U 
S 
8 
(Chet) 
U 
N 
U 
M 
4 
(Dalet)ne 
nation under God. Nothing but the infinite Wisdom of God could have caused so many lines - 
(Echad, One) 
in the USA Motto 
E 
1 
(Aleph) 
P 
L 
U 
R 
I 
B 
U 
S 
8 
(Chet) 
U 
N 
U 
M 
4 
(Dalet)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

biblical, linguistic, geometric, symbolic, and historical - to converge with such grace and simplicity. 
1776 and the Eye of God 
The reverse side of the Great Seal is officially described (page 8) as follows:

The reverse, sometimes referred to as the spiritual side of the seal, contains the 13-
step pyramid with the year 1776 in Roman numerals on the base. At the summit of 
the pyramid is the Eye of Providence in a triangle surrounded by a Glory (rays of light) 
and above it appears the motto Annuit Coeptis. Along the lower circumference of the 
design appear the words Novus Ordo Seclorum, heralding the beginning of the new 
American era in 1776.

Traditional Christian Iconography  
combining the Triangle with  
symbols of the the Trinity 
Note the reference to the "Glory" radiating from the "Eye of Providence." There are many examples 
of this symbol in Christian Churches, such as the image on the right from Kansas Wesleyan 
University, or this stained glass window 
 from Brophy College Prep. Oddly, there are many 
Christians who have lost their historical moorings to such an extent as to assert that the Eye in the 
Triangle is primarily an occultic symbol that has infected Christian iconography. This is a reversal 
of proper historic understanding. Occultists are, to a large extent, merely bad (spiritually blind)

--- PAGE BREAK ---an occultic symbol that has infected Christian iconography. This is a reversal 
of proper historic understanding. Occultists are, to a large extent, merely bad (spiritually blind)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

copiers. They misuse many Christian symbols, just as they misuse Scriptures, because they 
somehow sense that that is where the true spiritual power lies. The Triangle itself is an ancient 
Christian symbol of the Trinity, (cf. The Shield of the Blessed Trinity), and the Eye in the Triangle 
first appeared as a Christian symbol of the Omniscient Trinity no later than the seventeenth 
century, about a hundred years before it was adopted by occultists. The Eye in the Triangle is 
simply another reiteration of the interplay of Three and One that marks the Great Seal, the 
foundation of the United States, and the true doctrine of the Triune God revealed in Christianity.ngle is 
simply another reiteration of the interplay of Three and One that marks the Great Seal, the 
foundation of the United States, and the true doctrine of the Triune God revealed in Christianity.

Eye of Providence from 
Kansas Wesleyan University 
The unfinished pyramid is generally taken as refering to the country as a work-in-progress, 
overseen by God. This then links to the Hebrew alphabet and the structure of the Wheel. The 
name of the Sixteenth Letter 
(Ayin) denotes the Eye (cf. The Eyes of God). It is the basis of 
the themes of Genesis 16 where the divine title "The God Who Sees" is revealed. It also manifests 
with perfect clarity in the Book of Zechariah (Spoke 16, Cycle 2) where the Stone with Seven Eyes 
is revealed and the rebuilding of the Temple of God is prophesied. All of this comes together in the 
date inscribed at the base of the unfinished pyramid surmounted by the 
Eye of Providence. 
Each group of three Roman numerals is a multiple of 16, the ordinal 
value of Ayin (Eye). The triplets are divided between the doubled letters: 
MDC CLX XVI: This then means that the date 1776 naturally divides into 
multiples of powers of Ten when written in Roman numerical letters: 
1776 = 16 x 100 + 16 x 10 + 16 x 1 = 16 (Eye) x 111 (Aleph) 
The Number 111 is the value of the name of the first letter 
(Aleph), which is literally God's 
Initial - the first letter of 
(Elohim, God) - which He designed to reflect His triune nature in 1 
= A = Aleph = 111 (if we allow a little mathematipoetic license). This all conspires to declare 1776 
as the Eye of God: 
1776 = MDCCLXXVI 
MDC 
CLX 
XVI 
1600 
160 
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---ature in 1 
= A = Aleph = 111 (if we allow a little mathematipoetic license). This all conspires to declare 1776 
as the Eye of God: 
1776 = MDCCLXXVI 
MDC 
CLX 
XVI 
1600 
160 
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1776 = 16 (Eye) x 111 (Aleph)   ==> The Eye of God 
This then integrates with the Creation Holograph and the first declaration of Vision from God - a 
metaphoric reference to the Eye of God - in the Bible, Genesis 1:4: 
And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light from the darkness. 
The sum of these words in Hebrew is exactly 1776. It is a very significant portion of the Creation 
Holograph (cf. The First Day). Is it possible to fail to see the true desitiny of the United States of 
America as the witness to God's Light in Christ? Her birth is marke by the numbers of His Name 
and His great Work of Creation! 
This association between the Eye, the Number 16, and the Number 1776 has been distributed 
over the entire planet on the back of the American One Dollar Bill. Obviously, any meaning found 
here must be attributed to the Mind of God since mere men could never control their destiny 
sufficiently to integrate the date of a national revolution with the order and meaning of the Hebrew 
Alphabet as revealed in Scripture! 
Light, Life, and Liberty!

Liberty Enlightening the World  
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word 
was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by 
him; and without him was not any thing made that was made. In him was 
life; and the life was the light of men. 
John 1:1-5

--- PAGE BREAK ---was in the beginning with God. All things were made by 
him; and without him was not any thing made that was made. In him was 
life; and the life was the light of men. 
John 1:1-5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The two numbers 13 and 1776 are profoundly integrated with the Divine Prologue fragment of the 
Creation Holograph, through the identity: 
Sum of John 1:2-5 = 23088 = 13 x 1776 
These numbers can be rearranged to reveal the values of the names of 
(YHVH, The LORD) 
and 
(Iesous, Jesus): 
Sum of John 1:2-5 = 23088 = 26 (YHVH) x 888 (JESUS) 
The integration of these names with the Divine Prologue and the The First Day Holographs is 
discussed in the Jesus and YHVH article. The two largest factors - 13 and - are both hexagonal 
Star numbers, which God used as the basis of the Creation Holograph. This means that the Great 
Seal of the United States of America and the combined alphanumeric structure of Genesis 1 and 
John 1 conspire to reveal the names of the Creator, the true Founder of America and Author of 
Scripture, the Lord God Almighty! Praise His Holy Name now and forever! 
Rearranging the factors again now integrates these the Number 23088 with the Greek word for 
Genesis (with the definite article) and the Hebrew word for Jubile (the year of Release). Note the 
pattern of N x 10N+1 : 
Sum of John 1.2-5 = 23088 = 48 (Jubile) x 481 (The Genesis) 
The Genesis of the Jubile! Note that the Jubile happened every fifty years, and that this number 
now marks the number of the United States. Let us pray this be the destiny of the USA. Amen! 
Finally, it is also very intriguing that John 1:1 is highly reminescent of the unfinished pyramid, since 
it forms the trapezoidal basis of the triangular form of Genesis 1.1 (shown here ascending rather 
than descending to correspond with the Seal):

--- PAGE BREAK ---t of the unfinished pyramid, since 
it forms the trapezoidal basis of the triangular form of Genesis 1.1 (shown here ascending rather 
than descending to correspond with the Seal):

--- PAGE BREAK ---

An image of how this all fits together is given in the full Creation HyperHolograph. There is much more to 
say, but it must wait until other stones are laid. John 16:12.  
http://www.biblewheel.com/GR/GR_GreatSeal.asp