Dr.J.ALLEN H¥NEK 
AUTHOR OF 
THE UFO EXPERIENCE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dr. J. Allen Hynek is Professor of 
Astronomy at Northwestern University in 
the United States. He is also head of the 
Centre for UFO Studies and was for twenty 
years scientific consultant to Project Blue 
Book, the US Air Force's UFO research 
project. More recently, he has worked as the 
technical consultant to Columbia Pictures 
and Steven Spielberg on the blockbusting 
multi-million dollar UFO movie Close 
Encounters of the Third Kind.* Dr. Hynek 
has written several books on the UFO 
phenomenon in addition to THE HYNEK 
UFO REPORT: his best-known previous 
title is probably The UFO Experience. 
* The novel CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF THE 
THIRD KIND by Steven Spielberg is also available 
as a Sphere paperback.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Hynek UFO Report 
DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
SPHERE BOOKS LIMITED 
30/32 Gray's Inn, Road, London WClX 8JL

--- PAGE BREAK ---

First published in Great Britain by Sphere Books Ltd 1978 
Copyright© by Dr. J. Allen Hynek 1977 
Published by arrangement with Dell Publishing Co. Inc., 
New York, N.Y., U.S.A. 
TRADE 
MARK 
This book is sold subject to the condition that 
it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, 
re-sold, hired out or otherwise circulated without 
the publisher's prior consent in any form of 
binding or cover other than that in which it is 
published and without a similar condition 
including the condition being imposed on the 
subsequent purchaser. 
Set in Intertype Times 
Printed in Great Britain by 
Cox & Wyman Ltd., 
London, Reading and Fakenham

--- PAGE BREAK ---condition 
including the condition being imposed on the 
subsequent purchaser. 
Set in Intertype Times 
Printed in Great Britain by 
Cox & Wyman Ltd., 
London, Reading and Fakenham

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS. 
PROLOGUE 
7 
Chapter 1 
BLUE BOOK IS NOT A BOOK 
11 
Chapter 2 
THE UFO EXPERIENCE: THE 
PHENOMENON ITSELF 
1 28 
Chapter 3 
IT CAN'T BE: THEREFORE IT ISN'T 
33 
Chapter 4 
VERY STRANGE LIGHTS AT NIGHT 
65 
Chapter 5 
FLYING DISCS IN THE DAYLIGHT 
95 
CfmJter 6 
f "ANGELS," "BOGIES," AND "BLIPS": 
THE RADAR UFOs 
122 
Chapter 7 
UFOs CLOSE UP: CLOSE ENCOUNTERS 
OF THE FIRST KIND 
145 
Chapter 8 
THE UFO LEAVES ITS MARK: CLOSE 
ENCOUNTERS OF THE SECOND KIND 
167 
Chapter 9 
APPROACHING THE EDGE OF 
REALITY: CLOSE ENCOUNTERS 
OF THE THIRD KIND 
199 
Chapter 10 
UFOTOS: A PICTURE. IS NOT 
NECESSARILY WORTH A 
THOUSAND WORDS 
230

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 11 
THE AIR FORCE NUMBERS OAMB 
253 
Chapter U 
BLUE BOOK END GAME: 
THE CONDON REPORT 
279 
EPILOGUE 
289 
APPENDIX 
290 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
299

--- PAGE BREAK ---WORDS 
230

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapter 11 
THE AIR FORCE NUMBERS OAMB 
253 
Chapter U 
BLUE BOOK END GAME: 
THE CONDON REPORT 
279 
EPILOGUE 
289 
APPENDIX 
290 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
299

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PROLOGUE 
Under the Freedom of Information Act, much government 
material that for years. had been considered "classified" and 
otherwise restricted-material from the judiciary, foreign 
relations, and the· FBI and CIA files-has been made avail­
able to the public. Only those matters that might jeopardize 
national security or involve an individual's constitutional 
rights continue to remain withheld. 
Project Blue Book, the Air Force's project on UFOs, was 
always regarded officially as "unclassified," but this 
amounted to a standing joke among those who knew better. 
Not only were many of the reports labeled "Confidential" 
or "Secret," but the citizen who tried to examine Blue 
Book files was given a polite runaround or an outright 
refusal on various grounds. Those who sought to find out 
about the Air Force's investigation of UFOs were usually 
brushed off on the basis that the UFO files contained in­
formation that might reveal secrets about experimental 
military aircraft and hardware, new and advanced radar 
equipment and its secret locations; missiles, and military 
bases and installations. 
In short, what was true in theory was not true in prac­
tice. Blue Book files were not open to the public, even 
though the Air Force claimed publicly that Blue Book 
was an open book. 
Well, . finally' it is. The essentially complete files are 
available at the National Archives in Washington, D.C. For 
a price, one can obtain rather poor quality reels of micro­
film of the files extant.* Or, one can examine the files in 
*I say they are "essentially" complete because over the course of 
twenty-two years some cases were partially or completely lost or 
misplaced. Photographs and supplementary material like telephone 
notes, teletype messages, etc., were "borrowed" from the files andtwenty-two years some cases were partially or completely lost or 
misplaced. Photographs and supplementary material like telephone 
notes, teletype messages, etc., were "borrowed" from the files and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ome cases were partially or completely lost or 
misplaced. Photographs and supplementary material like telephone 
notes, teletype messages, etc., were "borrowed" from the files and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
person at the National Archives. Either approach involves 
hours of tedious work. 
· 
The Center for UFO Studies, in Evanston, Illinois, of 
which I am the Scientific Director, has obtained a com­
plete set of the microfilms, and these are available for 
serious students of the UFO phenomenon. I have written 
much of the present book from these films, adding material 
from my own personal experience as scientific consultant 
to Project Blue Book. Therefore, the reader will find in 
this book material that cannot be found in the files them­
selves. 
In all, there are 13, 134 reports in the Air Force files. 
A simple catalogue of these cases, giving only their geo­
graphical locations, dates, Air Force evaluation (and the 
revised evaluation suggested by my associates at the Cen­
ter for UFO Studies and myself) represents a pile of sheets 
on my desk nearly a foot high! And these cases themselves 
represent only a fraction of the total number of UFO 
reports that have come to the attention of the Center, where 
a computerized data bank (called UFOCAT) of over 
50,000 individual entries from all over the world is lo­
cated. 
It is very important to remember that the "raw ma­
terials" for the study of the UFO phenomenon are not the 
UFOs themselves but the reports of UFOs. These reports 
include the total circumstances surrounding each case and 
the caliber and reputations of the witnesses-information 
that will allow us to make a logical and rational judgment 
about the nature of the UFO phenomenon, if such judg­
ment is at all possible. 
In the public mind, UFOs seem to be synonymous with 
spaceships and visitors from outer space. Certainly a care­
ful study of the more extraordinary and unexplained UFO 
cases, not only from the Air Force files but from the 
more extensive files at the Center for UFO Studies, leaves. 
little doubt that an "intelligence" of some sort is operat­
ing. But what kind and where from? 
We must be extremely careful not to be too self-centered 
about this question. It is only too natural for us to think 
that all intelligence must necessarily be like our own-that 
never returned, often probably through carelessness. The files were 
not kept in apple-pie order, a fact I both observed and deplored.ink 
that all intelligence must necessarily be like our own-that 
never returned, often probably through carelessness. The files were 
not kept in apple-pie order, a fact I both observed and deplored.

--- PAGE BREAK ---igence must necessarily be like our own-that 
never returned, often probably through carelessness. The files were 
not kept in apple-pie order, a fact I both observed and deplored.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
9 
i 
visitors, if these they be, must think and act as we do. In­
deed there are 'people in other nations whose actions we 
sometimes find difficult to understand; why, then, presume 
that the intelligence that appears to manifest itself in one 
way or another through the UFO phenomenon must be 
akin to ours? Or why assume that it necessarily operates 
under the conditions we are accustomed to? And, whence 
this intelligence? Does it really _hail from afar, or is it per­
haps much closer to us than popularly supposed? Is it meta­
terrestrial rather than extraterrestrial? Or, going even 
further afield, is it in some way, as the psychologist Jung 
held, a strange manifestation of the human psyche? 
This overall concern has even invaded Hollywood, a sure 
index of its pervasiveness and popular appeal. It is the cen­
tral theme of the motion picture Close Encounters of the 
Third Kind (the title of which comes directly from the 
author's previous book, The UFO Experience) whose di­
rector, Steven Spielberg, has had an intense interest in the 
subject of UFOs for many years. Spielberg has succeeded 
in capturing on film the essence of the UFO enigma, the 
mounting evidence that intelligence other than our own 
not only exists, but, in a manner peculiarly its own, is mak­
ing itself known to the human race. 
In this vein, I am reminded of a conversation I once 
had with U Thant, the late Secretary General ohhe United 
Nations, during my days as a skeptic. We qad been dis­
cussing UFOs and interstellar travel, and he asked me 
whether I thought extraterrestrials might possibly visit our 
world. I responded that as an astronomer I found the dis­
tances and the times necessary to make the journey so 
great as to preclude it entirely. U Thant looked at me, 
arched his eyebrows, and said: "You know, I am a Bud­
dhist, and we believe in life elsewhere." I told him that as 
an astronomer I did too, but that the physical conditions, 
especially the length of time involved in journeys from 
outer space, seemed insuperable. The Secretary General 
paused, leaned back in his chair, and said, "Ah, but what 
may seem like years to us, may be just a day or two to 
others." 
And so it may. We know so little about the vast universe, 
poised as we are on our tiny vantage point, the earth, that 
things far beyond our imagination may indeed be possible. 
In the meantime, we must satisfy ourselves by studyingabout the vast universe, 
poised as we are on our tiny vantage point, the earth, that 
things far beyond our imagination may indeed be possible. 
In the meantime, we must satisfy ourselves by studying

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10 
THE HYNEK l.JFO REPORT 
UFO reports, not UFOs. Reports are made by people and 
people are often mistaken about what they observe. There­
fore, reports made by several witnesses very probably 
should be given greater weight, for each account can be 
measured against the others for accuracy. Still, it is im­
possible to vouch for the validity of each of the puzzling 
reports listed in Project Blue Book, even for those cases 
which I investigated and in which I became personally in­
volved. The witnesses I interviewed could have been lying, 
could have been insane, or could have been hallucinating 
collectively-but I do not think so. Their standing in the 
community, their lack of motive for perpetration of a hoax, 
their own puzzlement at the turn of events they believed 
they, witnessed, and often their great reluctance to speak 
of the experience-all lend a subjective reality to their UFO 
experience. 
The question we must puzzle over is simply this: What 
level of objective reality? 
So, here now, is the gist of what you Will find if you 
take the trouble to spend weeks at the National Archives or 
wade through more than a mile of microfilm at home-plus 
what I have been able to add from my long personal asso­
ciation with Blue Book. 
I leave you to judge for yourself. 
-J. ALLEN HYNEK

--- PAGE BREAK ---gh more than a mile of microfilm at home-plus 
what I have been able to add from my long personal asso­
ciation with Blue Book. 
I leave you to judge for yourself. 
-J. ALLEN HYNEK

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1=============== 
BLUE BOOK IS NOT A BOOK 
Please send me a copy of the Air Force Blue Book. 
-from a letter by a student 
There is not now nor was there ever an Air Force Blue 
Book. The Air Force never published a comprehensive 
compilation of the work of their Project Blue Book, which 
was the name given to the project concerned with the re­
ceipt and analysis of thousands of individual UFO re­
ports recorded over a span of some twenty years. • 
Strange apparitions in the sky and on or near the ground 
have been reported on occasion throughout history. There 
was a "UFO flap" of considerable proportions in the United 
States in 1897--98, and in Europe during World War II 
"foo fighters" (luminous balls that followed airplanes) 
were reported by pilots on both sides. There was also a 
rash of "ghost rockets" in the Scandinavian countries in 
1946. But the year 1947 is generally credited as the. year 
in which the modern wave of "flying saucer" or UFO re­
ports began. 
The early reports of UFOs were largely of discs observed 
during the daytime or of strange lights seen at night. "Close 
Encounters" or reports of UFO experiences in close prox­
imity to the witness or percipient-as close as a few hun­
dred feet or less-do not occur frequently in Blue Book 
files. The discs, oval, ellipsoid, or "egg"-shaped objects 
*From time to time the Air Force did issue news releases and 
short summaries--generally called "Fact Sheets"-as well as a series 
of Project Blue Book reports. One of these, Special Report No. 14, 
did contain a statistical study of 2,199 reports made through 1952. 
This report is well worth reading for the things it says-and does 
not say (see Chapter 12).

--- PAGE BREAK ---al Report No. 14, 
did contain a statistical study of 2,199 reports made through 1952. 
This report is well worth reading for the things it says-and does 
not say (see Chapter 12).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
were "flying saucers" because they generally looked some­
what like saucers, or more specifically, like two saucers­
one overturned upon the other-to most observers report­
ing them. And although other terms were used to describe 
them, the term flying saucer soon became popular with 
both press and public alike. 
Actually, the term_flying saucer had been coined a half­
century before by a farmer named Martin (see Vallee, p. 
1 ) * But it wasn't popularized in the modern press until the 
widely publicized sighting of Kenneth Arnold, a private 
pilot, on June 24, 1947 (see p. 99). 
The United States Air Force, the military arm charged 
with protecting us from any mechanical device that flies 
(outside of our own), naturally was given the responsibil­
ity of investigating this bizarre and-for all the govern­
ment knew-potentially fearsome aerial weapon. It was 
only because "flying saucers" might pose a serious threat 
to the national security that the Air Force regarded them 
in the beginning as a priority matter; it wasn't important 
whether their origin was some country here on Earth, some 
other planet, or even some distant solar system. The fact 
was, they might be dangerous. 
Thus, although the Air Force paid lip service to the "po­
tential scientific advances" that might derive from a study 
of UFOs, there were only two aspects of the UFO problem 
that ever really concerned them: whether or not UFOs 
were a threat to national security, and whether or not they 
were extraterrestrial. The Air Force satisfied itself rather 
quickly that UFOs posed no threat to the United States, 
and after much internal and, at times, bitter controversy 
(not reported in the press), it was also decided that there 
was no compelling evidence that UFOs were extraterres­
trial. Therefore, most of its job was done. 
At that point it would have been well had the vexing 
problem of dealing with the continued flow of UFO reports 
been· turned over to a scientifically oriented organization. 
In all fairness to the Air Force, its primary responsibility 
to the nation is national defense and not abstract scientific 
research. Instead, the Air Force was stuck with the job, 
although it tried, repeatedly, down through the years, to 
*Anatomy of a Phenomenon, Henry Regnery, Chicago, 1965.nd not abstract scientific 
research. Instead, the Air Force was stuck with the job, 
although it tried, repeatedly, down through the years, to 
*Anatomy of a Phenomenon, Henry Regnery, Chicago, 1965.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ntific 
research. Instead, the Air Force was stuck with the job, 
although it tried, repeatedly, down through the years, to 
*Anatomy of a Phenomenon, Henry Regnery, Chicago, 1965.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
13 
foist this most unwelcome task onto some other govern­
mental agency.* 
In 1947-48, the first UFO reports were channeled to 
the Air Technical Intelligence Center (ATIC) at Wright­
Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio-the agency re­
sponsible for analyzing intelligence information of inter­
est to the Air Force. 
When I became personally involved nearly a year later, 
I learned that there had been great consternation in the in­
telligence (.livision over the sudden and seemingly preposter­
ous series of reports that were corning in from both civilian 
and military quarters. A TIC could easily have discounted 
the civilian reports (and they generally did), but they could 
not discount outright their own trained personnel-the 
military witnesses. 
In the beginning, UFO reports were vague and sketchy. 
as I was to learn when I took on the responsibility of trying 
to explain as many as I could astronomically. A TIC just 
couldn't get the kind of "hard data" the military was used 
to getting; they wanted close-up photos, pieces of hard­
ware, detailed descriptions, and so forth. Instead, a military 
pilot would report that he saw a rnetallicбlooking object, 
possibly "disc-shaped"; a wingless craft which "buzzed" 
him and then shot away at incredible speed-and that was 
about all. 
The Air Force was balled. A wingless craft? Nonsense! 
It couldn't be. Perhaps the pilot had seen a meteor or had 
hallucinated. Undoubtedly the airman had been confused, 
perhaps inhaling too much, or too little, oxygen. Besides, 
since no one else had reported it, why not just write it off 
as a rnisperception of a natural event or phenomenon, or 
perhaps as a full-fledged hallucination?! Within the con­
fines of the Pentagon, where precision reports and snappy 
decisions were the rule, A TIC's bewilderment about UFOs 
was not very highly regarded. 
In the meantime, two schools of thought about UFOs 
quickly developed at A TIC in Dayton, and in intelligence 
circles elsewhere. One school felt that UFOs should be 
taken very seriously. Their belief was so strong that a top­
secret "Estimate of the Situation" was sent to Washington, 
stating that flying saucers were probably interplanetary and 
*Jacobs gives a fine account of these maneuvers.ief was so strong that a top­
secret "Estimate of the Situation" was sent to Washington, 
stating that flying saucers were probably interplanetary and 
*Jacobs gives a fine account of these maneuvers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---at a top­
secret "Estimate of the Situation" was sent to Washington, 
stating that flying saucers were probably interplanetary and 
*Jacobs gives a fine account of these maneuvers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
that the military should be put on an "alert" footing. Some 
didn't go as far as that, but were ready to accept that flying 
saucers were real. Ineed, in a letter to the Commanding 
General of the Army Air Forces General Twining wrote: 
As requested . . . there is presented below the con­
sidered opinion of the Command concerning the so­
called "flying discs" that: 
a. the phenomenon reported is something real and 
not visionary; 
b. there are objects probably approximating the 
shape of a disc, of such appreciable size as to appear 
to be as large as man-made aircraft."' 
The other school of thought took the much easier way 
out and summarily dismissed the entire subject as mis­
perceptions, a fad, postwar nerves, or the effects of a "silly 
season," particularly when the reports came from civilians. 
The top brass in Washington chose to adopt the latter 
view. It was much simpler. And, after all, their Scientific 
Advisory Board composed of reputable and highly placed 
scientists had said such things just couldn't be-they had 
to be mirages or the result of plain good old-fashioned 
imagination. It was against all known science that a craft 
could behave in the manner attributed to UFOs: amazing 
accelerations from a standing start, right-angled turns, 
rapid, noiseless disappearances after seemingly and openly 
defying gravity by hovering effortlessly above the ground. 
Science had said that it was impossible and the Air Force 
theorem which was to cause so much trouble later on was 
born: "It can't be, therefore it isn't." 
Still, reports of unusual sightirigs persisted (that was to 
be one of the very annoying things about UFOs-fads, 
after all, disappear in time). Reports continued to pile up 
at Wright-Patterson in Dayton. Finally A TIC recom­
mended, and Washington agreed, that a separate and 
formal project be set up to evaluate the situation and get to 
the bottom of the problem once and for all. 
In February of 1948, Project Sign was born. It lived 
*Lt Gen. Nathan Twining, Commander of -the Air Materiel 
Command, to Commanding General, Army Air Forces, September 
23, 1947.once and for all. 
In February of 1948, Project Sign was born. It lived 
*Lt Gen. Nathan Twining, Commander of -the Air Materiel 
Command, to Commanding General, Army Air Forces, September 
23, 1947.

--- PAGE BREAK ---In February of 1948, Project Sign was born. It lived 
*Lt Gen. Nathan Twining, Commander of -the Air Materiel 
Command, to Commanding General, Army Air Forces, September 
23, 1947.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
15 
for almost one year. But as the forerunner of Projects 
Grudge* and Blue Book, it started the Air Force down a 
long path of dealing with one of the most prolonged and 
controversial issues in its history. 
Shortly after Sign had been started, I was asked, as an 
astronomer (a point I always emphasize) , to join the pro­
ject as technical consultant. I was to see how many of the 
reports up to that time could be explained rationally and 
astronomically as meteors, twinkling stars, and bright 
planets. Obviously, few of the many daylight discs could 
be so explained. No astronomical object appears as a me­
tallic flying disc violently cavorting through the daytime 
sky. But there were many others that could and did have 
astronomical explanations. Here are some examples of re­
ports that I evaluated as astronomical: 
On October 13, 1947, many witnesses in Dauphin, 
Manitoba, reported an object, blue in color, which 
appeared to be the size of a softball and to have the 
shape qf a meteor. It pursued a straight course at low 
altitude and was seen for a duration of three seconds. 
My evaluation statement read: 
The reports of this incident answer to the description 
of a, large meteor or fireball. The trajectory, speed, 
color, and explosion arc particularly convincing 
evidence. 
On July 11, 1947, in Codroy, Newfoundland, two 
people noted a disc-shaped 'Object moving at a very 
high velocity and having the size of a dinner plate. 
The object was very bright and had an afterglow be­
hind it that rriade it look like a cone. 
My evaluation statement reads: 
The descriptions given by the observers of this object 
answer quite closely to that of a typical bright, "slow-
*While there probably was some significance to the names given 
the Air Force's official investigations of the UFO problem (Capt. 
Ruppelt indicated that there was), no official explanations of the 
code name were ever offered.ome significance to the names given 
the Air Force's official investigations of the UFO problem (Capt. 
Ruppelt indicated that there was), no official explanations of the 
code name were ever offered.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
moving" bolide. It is extremely unlikely that the object 
was anything more than a fireball. 
On October 8 or 9, 1947 in Las Vegas, Nevada, an 
ex-Air Force pilot and others reported observing a 
trail apearing high in the sky at an estimated speed of 
400-1000 MPH. The object producing the trail was 
not visible. The trail was as white as a cloud and dis­
sipated in fifteen to twenty minutes. The object pro­
ceeded in a straight line and then made an approxi­
mate 180-degree turn of radius 5-15 miles and pro­
ceeded away towards tl:te direction of the. first appear­
ance. The weather was "almost cloudless." 
My evaluation statement reads: 
In everything except the course flown, the description 
given answers to that of a fireball. The course indi­
cated, however, appears fatal to this hypothesis. No 
fireball on record, to this investigator's knowledge, has 
ever been known to turn back on itself. 
The planet Venus was a frequent culprit: 
Oil March 7, 1948 USAF officers in Smyrna, Ten­
nessee, watched an oval object in a direction WNW 
from Smyrna. It was yellow-orange in color and 
moved very slowly until about five degrees above the 
horizon. They watched it for about forty-five minutes 
until it faded away. 
My evaluation stated: 
The object sighted here was undoubtedly the planet 
Venus. The stated position checks exactly 
(within 
allowable observational error) with the computed po­
sition of Venus. Description of color, speed, and 
setting time all check closely. 
In both World Wars, I have learned, many rounds of 
ammunition were fired at Venus, each side thinking this 
bright planet was a device of the enemy. Even comets were 
occasionally reported as UFOs:

--- PAGE BREAK ---, I have learned, many rounds of 
ammunition were fired at Venus, each side thinking this 
bright planet was a device of the enemy. Even comets were 
occasionally reported as UFOs:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
17 
On November 8, 1948 a weather observer in Panama 
observed a spherical object with a tail like a comet 
for forty minutes. He stated that it was larger than 
Venus, had the color of a star, and was apparently at 
a high altitude. 
My evaluation stated:, 
It seems entirely probable that the object sighted was 
the comet 1948L, which had been discovered two days 
earlier in Australia . . . There is no single statement 
in the limited report that contradicts the comet hy­
pothesis. 
Sometimes, even the setting sun and moon, or the moon 
seen through scudding clouds, was reported as a UFO. 
It may be that my interim reports helped the transforma­
tion of Project Sign into the extremely negative Project 
Grudge, which took as its premise that UFOs simply could 
not be. I tried hard to find astronomical explanations for as 
many cases as I could, and in those that I couldn't I 
reached to draw out as many natural explanations as pos­
sible. Sometimes, I stretched too far. 
Clearly, I, too, thought at the time that UFOs were just 
a lot of nonsense. I enjoyed the role of debunker even 
though I had to admit that some of the original 23 7 cases 
I studied were real puzzlers. 
The final tally or box score that I turned in to the Air 
Force on April 30, 1949, after nearly a year (by no means 
full-time) of attempting to force-fit normal explanations 
to these cases is of suffic'ient interest to reproduce here. 
Class 
1. Astronomical 
a. High probability 
Number of 
Incidents 
b. Fair or low probability 
42 
33 
Total 
15 
2. Non-astronomical but sugges­
tive of other explanations 
Approx. % 
1 8 
14 
32

--- PAGE BREAK ---omical 
a. High probability 
Number of 
Incidents 
b. Fair or low probability 
42 
33 
Total 
15 
2. Non-astronomical but sugges­
tive of other explanations 
Approx. % 
1 8 
14 
32

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
a. Balloons or ordinary 
aircraft 
b. Rockets, .flares, or falling 
bodies 
c. Miscellaneous (reflections, 
auroral streamers, birds.) 
etc. 
48 
23 
Total 
84 
3. Non-astronomical, with no 
evident explanation 
a. Lack of evidence precludes 
explanation 
30 
b. Evidence offered suggests 
no explanation 
48 
Total 
78 
io 
1 0 
3 5 
1 3 
20 
33 
After having submitted the above report, I returned to 
full-time astronomical research and teaching. 
On December 27, 1 949, the Air Force announced that 
Project Grudge had been terminated, its investigations of 
the UFO phenomenon completed. Within several days, a 
report was issued. It was entitled "Unidentified Flying Ob­
jects-Project Grudge," Technical Report No. 102-AC-
491 1 5-100, and was aptly abbreviated by some as "The 
Grudge Report." 
My work figured in one of the appendices of the report. 
After studying, analyzing, and evaluating 23 7 of the best 
reports, my assistant and I had found that 32 percent could 
be explained astronomically. Others who worked on the re­
port found 12 percent to be balloons. Another 33 percent 
were listed as misidentified aircraft, hoaxes, or reports too 
sketchy to attempt evaluation. That left 23 percent that 
could not be identified or classified in any of the previously 
mentioned categories. They were "Unknowns."* 
*One must bear in mind that these statistics were based on only 
237 cases. Where the full 13,134 cases are (see Chapter 11) critical­
ly appraised, the percentages of unknowns falls to some 5 per­
cent. The high percentage of "unknowns" in the "early returns" 
may have been because, in the beginning, the public was "new" 
to reporting sightings and hence tended toward reporting only the 
more unusual cases.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nowns" in the "early returns" 
may have been because, in the beginning, the public was "new" 
to reporting sightings and hence tended toward reporting only the 
more unusual cases.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
19 
Twenty-three percent unknowns! That could have been 
considered extremely newsworthy. But hardly a peep out 
of the press. Why? According to Ruppelt, the newsmen 
who got copies of the report felt that it was ambiguous and 
possibly misleading. "Since the press had some questions 
about the motives behind releasing the Grudge Report, it 
received very little publicity while the writers put out feel­
ers. Consequently, in early 1950 you didn't read much 
about flying saucers. " 
Perhaps the reason the press failed to grasp the signifi­
cance of the 23 percent unknowns was that one .of the 
Grudge Report's main recommendations called for the 
project to be reduced in scope, rather than increased. This 
in the face of nearly one-quarter of the report unexplained! 
Further, a note following the Grudge Report recommenda­
tions stated that: "It is readily apparent that further study 
along the present lines would only confirm the findings 
herein." While ambiguous, the statement seemed to firm 
up the position that there was nothing of importance to in­
vestigate, the high percentage of "Unknowns" notwith­
standing. 
So, for all intents and purposes, Project Grudge no 
longer existed and UFOs were a dead issue. ATIC in Day­
ton continued to receive and record reports, but hardly 
anyone showed any interest and there was little if any in­
vestigation going on. 
UFOs, however, did not cease their activities. On the 
contrary, 1950 was a fairly good year for UFO reports, 
with 210 compiled before year's end; twenty-seven, or 13 
percent, of these were unidentified. 
But UFOs weren't a very good story in 1950. They were 
being swept aside by the really big news-the advance of 
the North Korean armies on the 38th Parallel. The Korean 
War was a reality and UFOs were not (at least as far as 
the U.S. Air Frce was concerned). 
So it went until 1952. T.he year began with only a trickle 
of reports coming in to A TIC, bolstering the beliefs of 
those who predicted that UFOs, like old soldiers, would 
just fade away. But in July of that year, a major UFO 
"flap" occurred. It occurred in, of all places, Washington, 
D.C. 
Capt. Ruppelt, who was on band when the now historiclike old soldiers, would 
just fade away. But in July of that year, a major UFO 
"flap" occurred. It occurred in, of all places, Washington, 
D.C. 
Capt. Ruppelt, who was on band when the now historic

--- PAGE BREAK ---ould 
just fade away. But in July of that year, a major UFO 
"flap" occurred. It occurred in, of all places, Washington, 
D.C. 
Capt. Ruppelt, who was on band when the now historic

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
incident took place, described the situation in his book, 
Report on Unidentified Flying Objects: 
When radars at the Washington National Airport 
and at Andrews AFB, both close to the Nation's 
capital, picked up UFOs, the sightings beat the. Dem­
ocratic National Convention out of headline space. 
They created such a furor that I had inquiries from 
the office of the President of the United States and 
from the press in London, Ottawa, and Mexico City. 
A junior-sized riot was only narrowly averted in the 
lobby of the Roger Smith Hotel in Washington when 
I refused to tell the U.S. newspaper reporters what I 
knew about the sightings. 
' 
Besides being the most highly publicized UFO sight­
ings in the Air Force annals, they were also the most 
monumentally fouled-up messes that repose in the 
files. 
The great "Washington flap" of 1952 and the tremendous 
wave of UFO reports that swamped the Blue Book office 
that summer was a true source of worry to the Air Force 
and to the government-from two entirely different stand­
points. There was the question, "What are they?"; but the 
CIA was even more interested in the possibility that enemy 
agents might clog military communications with a bar­
rage of false flying-saucer reports, thus camouflaging a real 
attack on the country. 
The second concern took overriding precedence. On 
December 4, 1952, the Intelligence Advisory Committee 
recommended that: "The Director of Central Intelligence 
will 'enlist the services of selected scientists to review and 
appraise the available evidence in the light of pertinent 
scientific theories. . . .' " But this was only the official 
reason, as is clearly indicated by the recommendations of 
the "selected. scientists," convened under the chairmanship 
of Dr. H. P. Robertson, a noted physicist and relativity 
expert. The true purpose of the panel was to "defuse " a po­
tentially explosive situation from the standpoint of national 
security. In short, in convening the panel, the CIA was 
fearful not of UFOs, but of UFO reports. So, under the 
guise of a symposium to review the physical nature of 
UFOs, the meetings of the scientists, who already sub-convening the panel, the CIA was 
fearful not of UFOs, but of UFO reports. So, under the 
guise of a symposium to review the physical nature of 
UFOs, the meetings of the scientists, who already sub-

--- PAGE BREAK ---, the CIA was 
fearful not of UFOs, but of UFO reports. So, under the 
guise of a symposium to review the physical nature of 
UFOs, the meetings of the scientists, who already sub-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
2 1 
scribed to the "It can't be, therefore it isn't" philosophy, 
got underway on January 14, 1953. I sat in on three of the 
five day-long meetings as an associate panel member. 
The other question, "What are they?," was already being 
studied intensively at the Battelle Memorial Institute, in Co­
lumbus, Ohio˖ The rising tide of reports in 1952 had caused 
the Air Force to contract with Battelle, a most prestigious 
scientific institution, to study secretly all reports through 
the end of 1952 to determine primarily whether the "Un­
knowns" 
differed 
in 
basic 
characteristics 
from 
the 
"Knowns." (For the surprising results of this study, see p. 
253.) 
When Battelle heard of the CIA's intent to convene the 
Robertson panel, an urgent letter, classified SECRET (and 
therefore not part of the Blue Book files), was dispatched 
to the CIA via the Blue Book office. It strongly recom­
mended that the scientific panel be postponed until the 
Battelle study was completed. Even Battelle did not realize 
that the primary issue was not science but national security! 
Predictably, the CIA went ahead with its plans. 
On the three days I sat in on the series of meetings I 
was negatively impressed by the relatively few cases ex­
amined by the panel. Several now classic UFO reports were 
discussed: the famous Tremonton, Utah (p. 235), and 
Great Falls, Montana (p. 251), films were reviewed and 
summarily dismissed as "seagulls " and "jet aircraft," re­
spectively. But only five other cases were discussed in any 
detail, one of which (Bellfontaine, Ohio, August 1, 1952) 
has disappeared from the Blue Book files. The others were 
the Yaak, Montana (August 1, 1952); the great Washing­
ton flap of July 19, 1952 (which was dismissed as "effects 
of inversion," even though the weather records showed 
only a trivial inversion of one and a half degrees-on 
many nights that summer the inversion was greater but no 
radar UFOs appeared); the Haneda AFB case (August 5, 
1952) , ,and the Presque Isle, Maine case (October 10, 
1 952) . Some fifteen other cases were briefly reviewed, in 
contrast to the 2,199 cases then under detailed study at 
Battelle. Scarce wonder Li.at Battelle considered the conven­
ing of a mere five-day panel, no matter how prestigious 
the panel members, both premature and hardly to be com­
pared with the study of many months they were then en­
gaged in.considered the conven­
ing of a mere five-day panel, no matter how prestigious 
the panel members, both premature and hardly to be com­
pared with the study of many months they were then en­
gaged in.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n­
ing of a mere five-day panel, no matter how prestigious 
the panel members, both premature and hardly to be com­
pared with the study of many months they were then en­
gaged in.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
The Robertson Panel Report* begins thusly: "Pursuant 
to the request . . . the undersigned panel [Dr. H. P; Robert­
son, Dr. Luis Alvarez, Dr. Lloyd Berkner (who was 
present on the last two days of the meeting only), Dr. S. 
A. Goudsmit, and Dr. Thornton Page] . . . has met to 
evaluate any possible threat to the national security posed 
by Unidentified Flying Objects, and to make recommen­
dations thereon. " It is clear that the panel understood its 
true purpose from the outset. 
The report continues: "As a result of its considerations, 
the Panel concludes: That the evidence presented . . . shows 
no indication that these phenomena constitute a direct 
physical threat to national security . . . and that there 
is no evidence that the phenomena indicate a need for the 
revision of current scientific concepts." 
The main thrust of the panel, and the dictum that set 
the Pentagon policy on UFOs for all the remaining sixteen 
years of the existence of Blue Book was: "The Panel 
further concludes 
•
.
.
 that the continued emphasis on the 
reporting of these phenonmena does, in these parlous times, 
result in a threat to the orderly functioning of the protec­
tive organs of the body politic." This was followed by: "We 
cite as examples the clogging of channels, the danger of 
being led by continued false alarms to ignore real indica­
tions of hostile actions, and the cultivation of a morbid 
national psychology in which skillful hostile propaganda 
could induce hysterical behavior and harmful distrust of 
duly constituted authority." [Italics added]. 
The report ended with the recommendation that "nation­
al security agencies take immediate steps to strip the Uni· · 
dentified Flying Objects of the special status they have 
been given and the aura of mystery they have unfortunate· 
ly acquired." 
Blue Book was now under direct orders to debunk, and 
what captain, or even major, would go against the recom­
mendations of such an august body of scientists as was re­
layed through the Pentagon? 
Because of the very great secrecy surrounding the Bat­
telle study (for years, the rule around Blue Book was that 
the name Battelle must never be mentioned!) it is unlikely 
that any of the Robertson panel members were even aware 
*Obtainable through the Center for UFO Studies.the rule around Blue Book was that 
the name Battelle must never be mentioned!) it is unlikely 
that any of the Robertson panel members were even aware 
*Obtainable through the Center for UFO Studies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Book was that 
the name Battelle must never be mentioned!) it is unlikely 
that any of the Robertson panel members were even aware 
*Obtainable through the Center for UFO Studies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
23 
that the expensive study was in progress; indeed, had they 
known, they might well have recommended that it be 
stopped in the interests of national security. The implica­
tion in the Panel Report was that UFOs were a nonsense 
(non-science) matter, to be debunked at all costs. I remem­
ber the conversations around the conference table in which 
it was suggested that Walt Disney or some educational car­
toon producer be enlisted in this debunking process. 
The Robinson Panel report was signed by the five prin­
cipal panel members. As an associate member I was not 
asked to sign, but I remember clearly resolving well in 
advance that were I asked, I would refuse. Even at that 
early date, when I was still much of a skeptic, I remember 
feeling that short shrift was being made of UFOs from a 
scientific standpoint. In retrospect, it is now clear that in-
deed it was. 
· 
At about this time, I was asked by Battelle to undertake a 
particularly interesting study: poll astronomers to find out 
how they feel about flying saucers! To initiate this survey, 
I was to seize the opportunity afforded by a national as­
tronomical meeting, after which I was to travel to various 
observatories and query astronomers directly. I was to 
bring up the subject casually, and not in an argumentative 
form, so as to discover what each scientist thought about 
the subject-privately. 
I did feel somewhat like an intelligence operative, but 
since I knew that the quest was for a good cause, and 
would result in no embarrassment to my fellow astrono· 
mers, I went along with it. 
It may come as a surprise to the reader that 41 percent 
of those I queried were sufficiently interested in the whole 
subject to go so far as to offer their services if ever they 
were really needed. Twenty-three percent felt that UFOs 
represented a problem that was more serious than people 
recognized. Only 36 percent were not interested at all or 
were totally hostile to the subject.* 
*A recent survey of professional astronomers, ("Report on a Sur­
vey of the Membership of the American Astronomical Society Con­
cerning the UFO Problem," P. A. Sturrock. Report #681, Institute 
for Plasma Research, Stanford University, Stanford, California; Jan­
uary 1977) showed a marked increase in their interest in the UFO 
phenomenon. In answer to one of the twelve questions submittede 
for Plasma Research, Stanford University, Stanford, California; Jan­
uary 1977) showed a marked increase in their interest in the UFO 
phenomenon. In answer to one of the twelve questions submitted

--- PAGE BREAK ---ch, Stanford University, Stanford, California; Jan­
uary 1977) showed a marked increase in their interest in the UFO 
phenomenon. In answer to one of the twelve questions submitted

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
The 41 percent figure-those that were sympathetic or 
more than sympathetic-deserves comment. I have heard 
some of these men disavow any interest at all in the sub­
ject of UFOs when engaging in a group discussion with 
their peers; yet when talking privately, they admitted the 
opposite. I have observed this phenomenon so often that 
I am led to call it the "committee complex." It might be 
stated as a theorem: A scientist will confess in private 
to interest in a subject which is controversial or not scien­
tifically acceptable but generally will not stand up and be 
counted when "in committee." 
Scientists are deathly afraid of voicing support for any­
thing that might make them look foolish in the eyes of their 
peers, anything that might be considered "unscientific;" 
Thus, the decisions reached by the various panels and com­
mittees which have met from time to time to consider 
UFOs were, in a sense, predictable. The panel members 
voted for the "safe" decision every time, which was, of 
course, anti-UFO. 
A striking corroboration of this "theorem" is found in 
the Sturrock survey mentioned below: of the 1,356 as­
tronomers replying to the questionnaire, only two waived 
anonymity as far as publication was concerned, yet all but 
34 were willing to sign their names to the questionnaire it­
self. Clearly, astronomers are not yet willing to let their 
peers know that they even think about UFOs! 
As Blue Book got going in late 1952 I was quite happy 
to be called back to active duty, so to speak, and enjoyed 
my regular visits to Dayton to look over incoming reports. 
My task was still to seek astronomical explanations for as 
many cases as I could, and I took pleasure in finding them 
whenever possible. 
Capt. Ruppelt, the first director of Project Blue Book, 
had a most difficult task. The intra-Air Force controversy 
on UFOs had by no means died down and Ed Ruppelt was 
called on to be a UFO spokesman in handling the many 
queries from Washington and the requests for "briefings" 
from generals and legislators. It seemed that he was out of 
to them, asking whether the UFO problem deserved scientific study, 
23 percent replied "certainly," 30 percent "probably," 27 percent 
"possibly," 17 percent "probably not," and only 3 percent "certainly 
not." Fifty-two percent of the questionnaires were returned, com­
prising 1,356 members of the Society.nt "probably," 27 percent 
"possibly," 17 percent "probably not," and only 3 percent "certainly 
not." Fifty-two percent of the questionnaires were returned, com­
prising 1,356 members of the Society.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rcent 
"possibly," 17 percent "probably not," and only 3 percent "certainly 
not." Fifty-two percent of the questionnaires were returned, com­
prising 1,356 members of the Society.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
2S 
the office a great deal of the time-tracking down cases or 
appeasing Washington. Ruppelt was, in my opinion, a 
prime victim of the "committee complex." He was there 
to tell the brass what UFOs were-not to perpetuate a 
mystery. Generals don't like mysteries; they want hard, 
crisp answers. "We showed that it was a balloon" or "it 
was definitely Venus" won more acclaim that "we don't 
know what it is; it might be extraterrestrial but we are 
puzzled." 
The ·term of office of each of the directors of Project 
Blue Book was never very long; turnover was frequent. The 
rank of the officers was relatively low-a further indication 
of the low level of priority given the project. 
With each new director there came some new viewpoint 
and methodology. But in the Air Force, or the military in 
general, one takes orders, and the unspoken orders from 
the Pentagon, stemming from the recommendation of the 
Robertson Panel, seemed clearly to be to "hold the fort," 
to "play down the UFO subject," and not to "rock the 
boat." And these directors were all, in turn, good officers: 
they knew what the orders were and they followed them 
well-perhaps too well. 
The following is a list of the successive directors of 
Project Blue Book: 
Mar. 1952-Feb. 1953 
Feb. 1953-Jul. 1953 
Jul. 1953-May 1954 
Mar. 1954-Apr. 1956 
Apr. 1956-0ct. 1958 
Oct. 1958-Jan. 1963 
Jan. 1963-Dec. 1969 
Capt. E. J. Ruppelt 
1st Lt. Bob Olsson 
Capt. E. J. Ruppelt 
Capt. Charles Hardin 
Capt. George T. Gregory 
Maj. (later Lt. Col.) 
Robert Friend 
Maj. (later Lt. Col.) 
Hector Quintanilla 
I knew all of these men quite well, lunching with them 
regularly on my visits to Dayton, sometimes at the Of­
ficers' Club and sometimes at nearby restaurants. Oc­
casionally, when one of the junior officers or a secretary 
had a birthday, I joined in celebrating it with a longer 
lunch than usual. But I knew my place; I was a consultant, 
not a director or policy setter. I knew, too, that to run 
counter to what I had observed to be their "orders" wouldating it with a longer 
lunch than usual. But I knew my place; I was a consultant, 
not a director or policy setter. I knew, too, that to run 
counter to what I had observed to be their "orders" would

--- PAGE BREAK ---er 
lunch than usual. But I knew my place; I was a consultant, 
not a director or policy setter. I knew, too, that to run 
counter to what I had observed to be their "orders" would

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
render me very shortly a persona non grata. This I did not 
want: it was important to me to maintain my status on 
Blue Book, for I was beginning at this time to suspect 
that there might just be something to the UFO phenomenon 
after all and I wanted to be on hand when "good" cases 
came along. There was no other way I could gain access 
to the military reports, which weren't being made public. 
So, I bided my time. 
Meanwhile, my attitude continued to change. I had 
started out as an outright "debunker," taking great joy in 
cracking what seemed at first to be a puzzling case. I was 
the archenemy of those "flying saucer groups and en­
thusiasts" who very dearly wanted UFOs to be interplane­
tary. My own knowledge of these groups came almost en­
tirely from what I heard from Blue Book personnel: they 
were all "crackpots and visionaries." It was not until con­
siderably later that I learned from direct contact with such 
groups as APRO (Aerial Phenomena Research Organiza­
tion) and NICAP (National Investigations Committee on 
Aerial Phenomena) that they counted among their mem­
bers many dedicated, rational people who were earnestly 
and independently trying to gather and evaluate UFO re­
ports, and who felt that Blue Book was not exactly a sci­
entific effort. 
As time went on and reports accumulated, so that my 
data base was far more extensive than it had been in 
Project Sign days, I came to realize that inherent in the 
better UFO reports there was much more than "fooled 
the eye or deluded the fool." There was a phenomenon 
consisting of new empirical observations that demanded 
far more serious attention than Blue Book was giving it. It 
was useless to remonstrate with the staff of Blue Book; it 
would have been a clear-cut case of "fighting City Hall." I 
made many recommendations during my tenure of office but 
generally to no avail.* When at last the Condon Commit­
tee (see Chapter 12) was created, I thought the atmo­
sphere would change. But the "committee complex" once 
again operated in full force (a few members of the com­
mittee who dared buck the committee complex were sum­
marily fired as "incompetent") . 
The transformation from skeptic to-no, not believer 
*See Jacobs for further discussion of these matters.e com­
mittee who dared buck the committee complex were sum­
marily fired as "incompetent") . 
The transformation from skeptic to-no, not believer 
*See Jacobs for further discussion of these matters.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
27 
because that has certain "theological" connotations-a sci­
entist who felt he was on the track of an interesting phe­
nomenon was gradual, but by the late '60s it was com­
plete. Today I would not spend one additional moment on 
the subject of UFOs if I didn't seriously feel that the 
UFO phenomenon is real and that efforts to investigate and 
understand it, and eventually to solve it, could have a pro­
found effect-perhaps even be the springboard to a revolu­
tion in man's view of himself and his place in the universe.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2=============== 
THE UFO EXPERIENCE: 
THE PHENOMENON ITSELF 
"Incredible tales told by credible persons •
•
•revolu­
tion in man's view of himself and his place in the universe.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2=============== 
THE UFO EXPERIENCE: 
THE PHENOMENON ITSELF 
"Incredible tales told by credible persons •
•
•

" 
-General Samford 
Blue Book wasn't interested in the broader philosophical 
and sociological questions implied by the very existence of 
UFO reports; but then, that wasn't their job. 
It does seem odd, however, that no one in the higher 
echelons of the military evinced any curiosity about the 
continued flow of UFO reports and about the nature of 
those reports. Why "flying saucers"? Why not flying cubes 
or flying pyramids, or for that matter, why not flying pink 
elephants or even flying buildings, reported from a hundred 
different countries? Indeed, if UFO reports were entirely 
the result of excited imaginations, why not hundrds, pos­
sibly thousands, of totally and radically different types of 
reports as people of different cultures let their locally con­
ditioned imaginations loose? But no. Instead, a continued 
flow of reports of fairly similar things which could be 
roughly classified into just a few categories. 
A number of years ago I devised a simple classifica­
tion system based solely on what was reported as observed 
and not on any preconceived idea.of what the actual nature 
of UFOs might be. It was purely an observational classifi­
cation system, much like an astronomer might use to clas­
sify different types of stars or a zoologist different types of 
beetles that he came across in his explorations. 
Since the most frequently reported sightings are those 
of strangely behaving lights in the night sky, I called 
these, simply, Nocturnal Lights. This doesn't include just 
any lights that puzzle the observer (many people are 
puzzled by bright planets, twinkling stars, and aircraft at 
night), but those which are truly puzzling, even to experts,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ust 
any lights that puzzle the observer (many people are 
puzzled by bright planets, twinkling stars, and aircraft at 
night), but those which are truly puzzling, even to experts,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
29 
because their behavior does not fit the pattern of lights 
from known sources. One must always keep in mind that 
the "U" in UFO simply means "unidentified"-but uniden­
tified to all, not just to the witnesses. 
Then there are the UFOs sighted in the daytime. Since 
the majority (but not all) of these have an oval shape and 
are often reported as metallic-looking, these are simply 
called Daylight Discs. Most UFO photographs made in the 
daytime portray such discs (see p. 95). It could be that 
Nocturnal Lights observed in the daytime would appear 
as Daylight Discs-we don't know. But observationally the 
distinction is useful. 
A separate category is also needed for UFOs that are 
indicated by radar. An important subdivision in this cate­
gory are radar findings that are supported by visual ob­
servations. If it can be established with reasonable assur­
ance that a radar sighting confirms a visual sighting, or 
vice versa, then obviously this sighting is of major im­
portance. 
A broad category of utmost importance consists of those 
UFO sightings, regardless of type, that occur very close 
at hand, say within a few hundred feet, or at least close 
enough so that the witness is able to use his stereoscopic 
vision and discern considerable detail. These sightings are, 
so to speak, in the immediate reference frame of the ob­
server-they are not "someone else's UFO," but very much 
this observer's UFO, a sort of very personal UFO ex­
perience. 
I have termed this broad .category of UFOs the Close 
Encounters. There are three obvious kinds of Close En­
counters, and it will be helpful to define them separately. 
Again the distinction lies in what is observed rather than 
in any certain fundamental difference. 
Close Encounters of the First Kind (CE I) 
Here we have a close encounter with a UFO but there is 
no interaction of the UFO with either the witness or the 
environment, or at least none that is discernible. The en­
counter must be close enough, however, so that the UFO 
is in the observer's own frame of reference and he is able 
to see details. The chance, therefore, of this sighting beings discernible. The en­
counter must be close enough, however, so that the UFO 
is in the observer's own frame of reference and he is able 
to see details. The chance, therefore, of this sighting being

--- PAGE BREAK ---n­
counter must be close enough, however, so that the UFO 
is in the observer's own frame of reference and he is able 
to see details. The chance, therefore, of this sighting being

--- PAGE BREAK ---

30 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
a misidentification of Venus or a conventional aircraft, etc., 
is quite small, particularly if the sighting is made by sev­
eral persons. 
Close Encounters of the Second Kind (CE II) 
Here the UFO is observed interacting with the environ­
ment and frequently with the witness as well. The interac­
tion can be with inanimate matter, as when holes or rings 
are made on the ground, or with animate matter, as when 
animals are affected (sometimes becoming aware of the 
presence of the UFO even before human witnesses). People, 
too, can be affected, as in the many reported cases of burns, 
temporary paralysis, nausea, conjunctivitis, etc. But in or­
der for a CE-Il to have taken place, the presence of the 
UFO must be established at the same spot in which the 
physical effects are noted. That is, if a burnt ring on the 
ground is noted, it must be at the exact place where the 
UFO was sighted hovering, or if an automobile ignition 
system is interfered with, such interference must have 
occurred at the time and place of the UFO sighting. 
The observed physical effects in these cases (often called 
"physical trace cases") must not be explainable in some 
other obvious way. That is, if holes in the ground ("land­
ing marks") are found, these marks must be unique, and 
not like marks found elsewhere in the vicinity. 
Close Encounters of the Second Kind are of particular 
interest to scientists who can, in a sense, bring the UFO 
"into the laboratory." Burnt grasses, samples of disturbed 
soil, etc., can be tested with a view toward determining 
what caused the burn, what pressures were necessary to 
produce the imprints on the ground, and to finding what 
chemical changes occurred in the soil samples by compar­
ing the affected soil with control samples from the vicinity. 
To this day, no "piece" of an actual UFO has ever been 
authenticated but the effects of the presence of UFOs have 
been amply attested to. A catalogue of over eight hundred 
cases in which the UFO was both seen and left physical 
traces has been compiled by Mr. Ted Phillips* and the cata­
logue continues to grow. 
• Available through the Center for UFO Studies, Evanston, III., 
60202ch the UFO was both seen and left physical 
traces has been compiled by Mr. Ted Phillips* and the cata­
logue continues to grow. 
• Available through the Center for UFO Studies, Evanston, III., 
60202

--- PAGE BREAK ---seen and left physical 
traces has been compiled by Mr. Ted Phillips* and the cata­
logue continues to grow. 
• Available through the Center for UFO Studies, Evanston, III., 
60202

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
3 1 
Close Encounters of the Third Kind (CE Ill) 
Here there is not only a close encounter with the UFO, 
but with its apparent "occupants" or "UFOnauts. " Close 
Encounters of the Third Kind bring us to grips witn the 
most puzzling aspect of the UFO phenomenon: the appar­
ent presence of intelligence other than our own, intelligence 
we can recognize but not understand. Hundreds of Close 
Encounters of the Third Kind have been reported all over 
the world in the past decades. A catalogue of over one 
thousand cases has been compiled by Bloecher; it, like 
other UFO catalogues, continues to grow. 
UFOs of other categories seem to demonstrate intelli­
gent action. Certainly this action does not appear to be 
random, but seems almost programmed or planned. As re­
ported, UFOs buzz airplanes and cars, prefer the lonely 
hours of the night, usually but by no means exclusively 
avoid crowds and urban areas, and make singularly "local" 
appearances rather than moving about a wide area of the 
country . 
. In Close Encounters of the Third Kind, where the oc­
cupants make their presence known, we find reported 
creatures who resemble humans but are predominantly 
shorter and slimmer, capable of communication in their 
own way and on their own terms. Their interaction with 
humans has been reported to be largely impersonal, neither 
overtly friendly nor hostile. There have been instances, re­
ported in all seriousness, of "abductions" of humans, os­
tensibly for "testing purposes." The details of such ab­
ductions have almost always been obtained through re­
gressive hypnosis since it appears that the abduction ex­
perience, whatever its physical reality, has proved so 
traumatic to the witness or witnesses that the conscious 
memory retains only a mere skeleton of the total ex­
perience. The details must generally be obtained from 
the subconscious. 
Clearly, Close Encounters of the Third Kind hold the 
most fascination for us because they bring into focus most 
sharply our fear of the unknown, the concept of other 
intelligences in space, and the possibility of intelligent con-Third Kind hold the 
most fascination for us because they bring into focus most 
sharply our fear of the unknown, the concept of other 
intelligences in space, and the possibility of intelligent con-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

32 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
tact with such beings, with all that such contact might im­
ply for the human race. 
These, then, are the six categories into which UFO 
sightings may be divided for the sake of convenience. It 
is important to note that this simple classification system 
carries with it no implication of a theory of UFOs, either 
of their origin or their nature. It simply differentiates the 
manner in which the UFO is perceived and what is per­
ceived. The same classifications apply equally if UFOs are 
indeed an objective physical reality or if they should prove 
to be something totally different. 
Blue Book contains examples of all six categories, al­
though with the Air Force philosophy operative (all UFO 
reports must, from the nature of things, be misidentifica­
tions of normal, conventional things) we can expect that 
short shrift would be made of the Close Encounter cases, 
especially those of the Second and Third Kind. Since Air 
Force files were arranged according to no system whatso­
ever (not even the simplest cross-indexing of cases, or in­
tercomparison, or classification, was employed) , knowledge 
of these six categories should be of tremendous assistance 
as we make our way through the maze of Blue Book files 
in the pages that follow.

--- PAGE BREAK ---sification, was employed) , knowledge 
of these six categories should be of tremendous assistance 
as we make our way through the maze of Blue Book files 
in the pages that follow.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3=============== 
IT CAN'T BE: 
THEREFORE IT ISN'T 
"The powers-that-be are anti-flying saucer and to 
stay in favor, it behooves one to follow suit." 
-Air Force officer quoted by Capt. E. J. Ruppelt, 
first Director of Project Blue Book, in The Report 
on Unidentified Flying Objects. 
In the earliest days of the modern era of "flying saucers," 
at the very inception of Project Sign-forerunner of 
Projects Grudge and Blue Book-there were two factions 
within the Air Force Intelligence system : those who be­
lieved that the mounting evidence was sufficient to take 
"flying saucers" very seriously--even to the belief that they 
were interplanetary spaceships-and those who believed 
that by no stretch of the imagination could the evidence 
be taken seriously. The latter group argued that with our 
advanced knowledge of the physical world around us, by 
the very nature of things these reports had to be nonsense. 
Rather quickly, probably because of the matter-of-fact 
nature of the military mind, the latter group won favor, 
and when Project Grudge replaced Sign late in 1948, the 
"anti-UFO policy" was set for all time. In the end, the 
Air Force "got rid" of UFOs altogether with a most help­
ful assist from the Condon Committee at the University of 
Colorado (see Chapter 1 2 ) . 
Once the decision was made that UFOs had to be fig­
ments of the imagination, the Air Force policy on UFOs 
never changed direction. "It can't be, therefore it isn't" 
became the guiding principle, and anyone associated with 
Blue Book, from Director down, learned to follow suit or 
else . . . . Even though the shifting winds of public opinion 
about UFOs often reached gale proportions (especially at 
such times of great concern as the great UFO scare over

--- PAGE BREAK ---or 
else . . . . Even though the shifting winds of public opinion 
about UFOs often reached gale proportions (especially at 
such times of great concern as the great UFO scare over

--- PAGE BREAK ---

34 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
Washington, D.C. in 1952 and the Michigan "swamp gas" 
episode in 1966), the Air Force held firm, like a rusted 
weather vane that stubbornly points in one direction only. 
When it became clear to me and others within the 
project (as a result of personal conversations with officers 
of colonel rank and higher) that the official Pentagon 
policy was to debunk UFO sightings, intelligence analysts 
and investigators alike (myself included, since at that time 
I felt the lack of "hard" evidence justified the practical 
"it just can't be" attitude) did their best to come up with 
"commonsense" explanations for each new UFO report. I 
stress the word "each," for there was no attempt to look 
for patterns in the reports; each report was regarded as 
though it were the only UFO report in the world. This 
made ' it easier to find some individual explanation, even 
though it was sometimes far-fetched. It might even be 
stated as a sort of theorem: "For any UFO report, when 
regarded by itself and without reference to similar or re­
lated reports, there can always be found a possible com­
monsense explanation, even though its probability may be 
small." There is safety in doing this because it is quite true 
that the great majority of UFO reports turn out to be or­
dinary things like balloons and ' aircraft that people mis­
identify, very often honestly. In a country where it rarely 
ever rains, the weather forecaster is quite safe in predicting 
fair weather! 
When I first became associated with Project Sign, I too 
was eager to do my part in dispelling what I sincerely 
thought at the time to be a public fantasy, a popular 
craze. I "distinguished" myself by dismissing the following 
reported UFO as an "atmospheric eddy"! Let us look at 
the report itself, frrst as it was reported by John Brosman 
in the Twin Falls, Idaho, Times News of August 15, 1947, 
and then as it appears in the Project Sign files : 
Just as Magic Valley and the nation were starting 
to let go of lamp posts after reeling under a welter 
of flying saucer reports, two more Twin Falls County 
men revived speculation on the mystery with vivid 
descriptions of discs they saw. 
From A. C. Uric, who operates the Auger Falls 
Trout Farm six miles west of Blue Lake Ranch in 
Snake River Canyon, came perhaps the most detailedmystery with vivid 
descriptions of discs they saw. 
From A. C. Uric, who operates the Auger Falls 
Trout Farm six miles west of Blue Lake Ranch in 
Snake River Canyon, came perhaps the most detailed

--- PAGE BREAK ---descriptions of discs they saw. 
From A. C. Uric, who operates the Auger Falls 
Trout Farm six miles west of Blue Lake Ranch in 
Snake River Canyon, came perhaps the most detailed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
35 
account of the fast flying object the nation has yet 
produced. 
The flying saucer Urie saw was skimming through 
Snake River Canyon at a height of about 75 feet 
at 1 P.M. Wednesday. At 9:30 A.M. the same day, 
L. W. Hawkins, Twin Falls County Commissioner, and 
former county sheriff from Filer, also saw two cir­
cular objects soaring along at a great height near Sal­
mon Dam twenty miles southwest of Twin Falls. 
Here is Urie's eyewitness description of the flying 
disks seen by him and his sons Keith, 8, and Billy, 
10: "I obtained a close-up view of the flying saucer 
as it passed by the trout farm at 1 P.M., Aug. 13, 
down Snake River Canyon at a height of about 75 
feet from the canyon floor. I would estimate the 
speed at about 1,000 miles per hour." Urie explained 
that the incident occurred while the two boys were 
coming across the river from the north side in a boat. 
He had become concerned about what was delaying 
them and had walked down toward the river to see if 
they were all right. "I had a side view at a distance 
of about 300 feet and almost on a level with the 
thing," Urie continued. "Two of my boys, Keith and 
Billy, were below me and they also saw it at about a 
45-degree angle. They both got a bottom and a side 
view, and we were all looking at it from the south 
side of the canyon . . . . It was all one color, sort of a 
light sky blue with a red tubular fiery glow at the 
side of the top, or hood," Urie continued. "The can­
yon floor is rough at that particular point and it rode 
up and down over the hills and hollows at a speed 
indicating some type of control faster than the re­
flexes of man. It is my opinion that it is guided by 
instruments and must be powered by atomic energy 
as it made very little noise, just a s-w-i-s-h as it passed 
by." Urie described the size as about 20 feet long by 
10 feet high and 10 feet wide, giving it an oblong 
shape. It might be described as looking like an in­
verted pie plate or a broad-brimmed straw hat that 
had been compressed from two sides. Pressed for his 
candid opinion of just what it was, Uric said that he 
was convinced that there was something to this flying 
saucer situation. "I know a number of people whompressed from two sides. Pressed for his 
candid opinion of just what it was, Uric said that he 
was convinced that there was something to this flying 
saucer situation. "I know a number of people who

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
have also seen them and I know that they're not just 
imagining something or trying to get their names in 
the paper," Urie commented. "I do know that it scared 
the boys ani;! made 
me feel pretty uneasy," 
he 
added. 
Tracing down a rumor that County Commissioner 
Hawkins had seen an unusual object in the air on the 
same day as Uric's experience, the Times News called 
him at his Filer home. "Yes, I did," he replied, with­
out hesitation. "I'll have to admit 'I've been skeptical 
all along until I saw it with my own eyes. I can't say 
what it was but I can say there's something in the 
air." Hawkins related that while at Salmon Dam 
Wednesday morning a sound resembling the echo of 
a' motor caused him to look upward and there he saw 
two circular objects that reflected light. They were 
traveling at a great speed and higher than most air­
planes, according to Hawkins. Aside from this he de­
clined to add details except to say, "There's some­
thing in the air." His general description, however, 
corresponded closely to those of hundreds of persons 
who reported seeing flying saucers. 
• 
• 
• 
Both the Idaho paper and the Sign account give almost 
identical sketches of the object (see below) : 
·r 
I 
10' 
l 
k:----
20' 
"'-----; 
END VIEW 
BOTTOM VIEW 
SIDE VIEW 
Reproduction of original sketch of the object seen by Mr. A. C. 
Urie and sons in Snake River Canyon. as it appeared in the Twin 
Falls, Idaho, Times News, August 1 5, 1 947. 
The Air Force account in Blue Book contains the fol­
lowing :

--- PAGE BREAK ---A. C. 
Urie and sons in Snake River Canyon. as it appeared in the Twin 
Falls, Idaho, Times News, August 1 5, 1 947. 
The Air Force account in Blue Book contains the fol­
lowing :

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN IÝEK 
37 
As the machine went by the Urie place, the trees 
over which it had almost directly passed (Mormon 
poplar) did not just bend with the wind as if a plane 
had gone by but in Uric's words, "spun around on 
top as if they were in a vacuum." 
Keith Urie, eight years of age, said he first saw the 
machine coming down the canyon, heading from east 
to west and following the contours of the ground. 
Billy, ten, saw it almost immediately. Both watched it 
fly out of sight behind a tree in a matter of moments. 
They said they ran to their father and learned that he 
too had seen the machine. 
Urie seemed completely sincere about the incident. 
He said his wife and daughter were in the house at 
the time and had not seen the machine. He ques­
tioned his brother, who also lives in the canyon, but 
his brother had been eating at the time and had 
seen nothing. Urie and his two boys maintained that 
they had never before seen one of the discs. Urie, 
when interviewed, appeared to be a sober, middle-aged 
man. John Brosman, the Times News reporter who 
originally furnished Special Agents with information 
about the incident, likewise stated that Urie appeared 
completely sincere about the machine. 
No further attempt was made to locate [two other 
men who repeatedly had seen the object] inasmuch 
---, who was with --- at the time were fish­
ing at șalmon Dam while 
--- was supposed to 
have been working in Twin Falls [thus is Science 
robbed of evidence]. 
In my report to Sign I wrote : 
There is clearly nothing astronomical in this inci­
dent. Apparently it must be classified with the other 
bona fide disc sightings. Two points stand out, how­
ever: the "sky blue" color and the fact that the trees 
"spun around on top as if they were in a vacuum." 
Could this, then, have been a rapidly traveling at­
mospheric eddy? 
The Air Force was only too happy to accept my conjec­
ture: "It seems logical," the Project officer wrote, "to con-in a vacuum." 
Could this, then, have been a rapidly traveling at­
mospheric eddy? 
The Air Force was only too happy to accept my conjec­
ture: "It seems logical," the Project officer wrote, "to con-

--- PAGE BREAK ---d this, then, have been a rapidly traveling at­
mospheric eddy? 
The Air Force was only too happy to accept my conjec­
ture: "It seems logical," the Project officer wrote, "to con-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

38 
Tim HYNEK UFO REPORT 
cur with Dr. Hynek's deduction, that this object was sim­
ply a rapidly moving atmospheric eddy." 
The fact that I have never seen such an "eddy" (or as 
far as that goes, never even seen one described in books) 
and that I blithely discounted other pertinent evidence, 
haunts me to this day. I wonder what would have hap­
pened had I written: ''We must believe these witnesses, 
especially in view of the many similar reports received 
during the recent past. This was indeed a strange craft, in­
volving technology far beyond ours. It is essential that, re­
gardless of cost, a major scientific effort be mounted not 
only to investigate each report in far greater detail than 
has yet been done and to carefully study the interrelation 
of these reports, but to set up observing stations at every 
military and defense installation in the country to attempt 
to gain vital scientific data." 
The late Dr. James McDonald, Professor of Atmospheric 
Physics at the University of Arizona, never forgave me for 
not having made such a recommendation in this and many 
other cases. He accused me of covering up data and told 
me that I had been derelict in my scientific duty in not pro­
claiming the seriousness of the UFO phenomenon to the 
world-a phenomenon which he 
considered the most 
serious problem to face the human race. 
What, indeed, would have happened had I done so? I 
fairly well know. Sitting where I could see the Pentagon 
scoreboard very clearly, I knew that my services would 
very shortly have been dispensed with on the grounds that 
they had no need of a "flying saucer nut." Had I been an 
Einstein, a Nobel Prize winner, at least I might nave been 
politely listened to-but as a young professor at a Mid­
western university . . . ! I decided to wait for more and 
better data. 
The "perfect" report never came. A report of a craft 
landing, say, at half-time at the Rose Bowl game, wit­
nessed by thousands, and photographed by hundreds-or 
close-up movies of a Close Encounter or an invited in­
spection of a landed UFO by a group of scientists and 
newsmen. To be sure, UFO reports continued to flow in; 
the UFO phenomenon did not "dry up and blow away" as 
in the early days we all had predicted it would. The same 
sort of anecdotal reports from persons of integrity con-reports continued to flow in; 
the UFO phenomenon did not "dry up and blow away" as 
in the early days we all had predicted it would. The same 
sort of anecdotal reports from persons of integrity con-

--- PAGE BREAK ---flow in; 
the UFO phenomenon did not "dry up and blow away" as 
in the early days we all had predicted it would. The same 
sort of anecdotal reports from persons of integrity con-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
39 
tinued to abound, but never the truly "hard data" the 
physical scientist demands. 
Little note was taken of another report from Twin Falls 
just six !;lays later, and of one from the Rapid City AFB 
in South Dakota at about the same time. The following 
is a memorandum from the Butte, Montana SAC base to 
the FBI. (Because this report is not in the public domain, 
the names of the individuals involved are fictitious.) 
Mr. Busby, who is the Executive Director of the 
Twin Falls Housing Authority, explained that he and 
his wife and Mrs. Henry Swift, a neighbor, were sitting 
on their front porch at approximately 9 : 30 
P.M., 
Aug. 19, 1 947. He said that Mrs. Busby suddenly 
shouted and pointed to the sky and thereafter stated 
that she had seen an object traveling at a terrific 
speed in a northeasterly direction. The object was out 
of sight before Mr. Busby and Mrs. Swift could see 
anything. 
Approximately ten minutes later, while they were 
discussing what Mrs. Busby had seen, all three saw 
ten similar objects proceeding rapidly in the same di­
rection, in the form of a triangle. A$ the group of 
objects was disappearing, three of the objects on the 
left flank peeled off and proceeded in a more northerly 
direction. The remaining objects appeared to close 
ranks and proceeded in a northeasterly direction. 
From three to five minutes later these same in­
dividuals saw another group of three objects proceed­
ing in the same direction, and again in the shape of a 
triangle. From three to five minutes later all three 
observed another group in a triangular formation con­
sisting of five or six objects. They were proceeding in 
the same direction. 
A few minutes later the three persons saw a large 
group of objects, estimated at from thirty-five to fifty, 
flying in a triangular formation in the same direction. 
Approximately twenty or twenty-five minutes after 
the large group of objects was observed, similar 
objects were noted coming hacƩ over the city in a 
southwesterly direction. These objects were generally 
in groups of three, five, and seven, and followed each 
other at approximately five-minute intervals . . . .oted coming hacƩ over the city in a 
southwesterly direction. These objects were generally 
in groups of three, five, and seven, and followed each 
other at approximately five-minute intervals . . . .

--- PAGE BREAK ---r the city in a 
southwesterly direction. These objects were generally 
in groups of three, five, and seven, and followed each 
other at approximately five-minute intervals . . . .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

40 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
On the night in question the sky was overcast and 
the objects could not be seen clearly; however, they 
were distinct enough so that all persons could observe 
what they described as a glow going through the air. 
They said the objects appeared to be lighted from the 
inside and were of a color similar to regular electric 
lights. 
Mrs. Busby called Detective Frazier of the Twin 
Falls Police Dept., who was then accompanied by 
Officers Rauch and Semans. The three officers watched 
for a few minutes and observed a group of about 
twelve objects flying in formation over the city. 
Both Detective Frazier and Mr. Busby stated that 
.
•
.
 they flew at a terrific speed and were visible for 
only a few minutes at a time. Both persons said that 
the objects could not have been geese or ducks and 
that the lights were not a reflection of the city lights 
on some objects . . . . None of the persons were drink­
ing at the time. No other persons in Twin Falls re­
ported seeing these objects; however, Mr. Busby and 
Mr. Frazier stated that it was purely by accident that 
they had seen the objects and that they would not 
have seen them unless they were looking for them, 
because of the speed at which they traveled. 
And now comes the finishing touch: "No further in­
vestigation is being conducted by · the Butte Office, and the 
case is being closed." 
The Air Force evaluation of this case and the following 
one was: Birds. And maybe they were. But certainly the 
investigation was quite insufficient to establish this evalua­
tion. It remains just a guess. 
The report from Rapid City AFB at about the same 
time came from Headquarters 28th Bombardment Wing, 
Office of the Intelligence Officer, Rapid City Air Force 
Base, Weaver, South Dakota. It reads (name changed) : 
Major Smith stated that shortly after dark one 
evening between 15-20 Aug. '47, he was sitting in 
the parking lot near the line area when he sighted 
approximately 
1 2 objects flying a tight diamond­
shaped formation, stacked down from the lead. They 
were approaching from the northwest in a shallowparking lot near the line area when he sighted 
approximately 
1 2 objects flying a tight diamond­
shaped formation, stacked down from the lead. They 
were approaching from the northwest in a shallow

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
41 
descent, leveled off at approximately 5,000 feet, made 
a gentle, large radius turn of about 1 10 degrees to 
the right about 4 miles from the observer and started 
cliğbing to the southwest. The angle of attack was 
estimated to be between 30 deg. and 40 deg., and they 
appeared to accelerate rapidly in the climb. They ap­
peared to be traveling between 300-400 miles per hour 
during the observed period. The objects were elliptical­
appearing in the plan view and appeared to be about 
the size of a B-29 in span. No estimate was made 
as to the aspect ratio but they didn't seem to appear 
unnaturally thick or thin compared to the overall conĠ 
figuration. There were no aircraft being run up on the 
line at the time but no noise could be heard nor any 
exhaust trail or flame observed. No other light could 
be observed except that the whole object seemed to 
have a yellow-white luminous glow. 
The following sketch accompanied the report. 
UFOs observed by Major Smith in August 1947, in Rapid City. 
South Dakota. A reproduction from original sketch by witness. 
Now birds might be the appropriate evaluation if one 
completely discounts Major Smith's background-intelli­
gence officer charged with the interrogation of all crews 
of the 28th Bomber Wing. If he, experienced in evaluating 
intelligence information from his crews, couldn't tell birds 
from 12 objects that fly in tight diamond formation, com-

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the 28th Bomber Wing. If he, experienced in evaluating 
intelligence information from his crews, couldn't tell birds 
from 12 objects that fly in tight diamond formation, com-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

42 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
ing down from 10,000 feet and leveling off at 5,000 feet, 
traveling at 300-400 miles an hour, climbing and ac­
celerating rapidly at an angle of 30-40 degrees-well, 
what are intelligence officers coming to? 
Yet this case was not investigated further. Why inves­
tigate birds, unless you belong to the Audubon Society? 
It is rather amusing that the evaluations "possible bal­
loon," "possible aircraft," "probably astronomical," were 
very widely used-but never "possible UFO." Since there 
are no such things as truly unidentified flying objects (even 
though some 600 "U nidentifieds" are listed in the files) , 
how could one possibly have a "possible UFO"? 
A few further examples from the files arc even more 
enlightening. 
January 7, 1966. Georgetown, Ala. Single witness 
reported that he saw a round object about 10-12 feet 
in diameter, silver in color, which had a ring or hoop 
extending 8 to 10 inches out from its equator. It had 
a 5-foot hatch on the bottom. Observer's watch stopped 
at the time of the sighting. Object hovered 5 feet above 
the ground when it was just 20 feet from him. After 
1-2 minutes, object disappeared in a gradual climb 
to the northeast after sound of engine increased, and 
then accelerated very rapidly and was gone in a mat­
ter of seconds. 
The observer was a student, eighteen, and, to quote the 
interrogating officer, ''appeared to be reliable, which was 
confirmed by a character witness. His instructions on how 
to get to the rural area were very accurate." The sighting 
was made three miles southwest of Georgetown, Alabama, 
on Highway 63. 
Now what does one do with a case like this, especially 
when one is not aware that very similar reports have been 
made from several countries? What are the chances for 
misidentification at twenty feet, in broad daylight, and 
watching it hover five feet above the ground for one to two 
minutes? Aircraft won't do; neither will star or mirage. 
Balloon? Possibly, but with a hatch and a hoop, and the 
sound of an engine, and disappearing in a few seconds? 
No, a balloon couldn't do that. Ah, we have it! It's psy­
chological (despite the character reference, and the ob-a hatch and a hoop, and the 
sound of an engine, and disappearing in a few seconds? 
No, a balloon couldn't do that. Ah, we have it! It's psy­
chological (despite the character reference, and the ob-

--- PAGE BREAK ---and the 
sound of an engine, and disappearing in a few seconds? 
No, a balloon couldn't do that. Ah, we have it! It's psy­
chological (despite the character reference, and the ob-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
43 
server's ability to give a detailed description of the phe­
nomenon and accurate directions to the place where .it was 
sighted). That the person might have seen what he said he 
actually .did would never even be considered-because it 
can't be! But then neither could telephones, radio, air­
planes, etc., be before they were invented. 
Readers may think that I have included here only very 
special cases. That is not so. They have been picked. al­
most at random. To establish this point, let us very quickly 
survey a number of others. We cannot stop for details, but 
the survey will emphatically demonstrate that Blue Book 
was definitely not a high-level scientific operation. 
Aug. 12, 19,58. 12 mi. NW of Las Vegas, Nev.: 
Round, orange object; diffuse light in area where no 
"treetop level" lights of any type have been seen be­
fore. Light moved down and to left to treetop 
level, then went back to original position. Repeated 
performance, then disappeared. 
Air Force evaluation: "Probably conventional light of some 
sort." 
April 10, 1952. 6 mi. W of Pecos, Texas.: A dia­
mond shaped object in upright position 50 ft. wide 
and 75 ft. high was observed for 5 min. Bright and 
shiny, like aluminum in bright daylight. Had the sound 
of a jet engine as it rotated once a second. Hovered 
a few minutes, then climbed straight up about 2000 
ft. and then slowly veered off to the NW. 
Air Force evaluation: "Unreliable source." [No reason 
given in the files as to why the witness was considered un­
reliable.] 
Jan 3, 1958. Old Westbury, L.l. Twilight: Round 
object with appearance of cloud or round ball, white, 
traveling very fast and very high toward the east, ob­
served for 8-10 seconds. 
Air Force evaluation: "This is no doubt a mistaken identity 
of conventional object due to unusual or adverse weathertraveling very fast and very high toward the east, ob­
served for 8-10 seconds. 
Air Force evaluation: "This is no doubt a mistaken identity 
of conventional object due to unusual or adverse weather

--- PAGE BREAK ---

44 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
conditions. [What conventional object, and what adverse 
weather conditions?] 
August 29, I957. Paso Robles, Ca.: One silver cir­
cular object was seen flying from N to W and was 
in sight for four minutes. 
Air Force evaluation: "Unreliable report." [Why?] 
April 6, I955. Beaumont, Ca.: •A 13-year-old boy 
observed a round silver object, approximately the size 
of a silver dollar held at arm's length. He observed it 
for an undisclosed time [why didn't the interrogator 
find out how long?]. The object then faded away. 
Air Force evaluation: "Probably airway beacon" [because 
it was seen in the general direction of airway beacon]. 
August I6, I956. Near the Azores: An Eastern Air­
lines flight en route to LaGuardia sighted a bright 
white light west of course. Object passed within 40 feet 
of aircraft coming in from above. Aircraft took evasive 
action. 
Air Force evaluation: "Military flight, heavenly body, or 
free balloon possible cause of sighting." [A heavenly body 
passing within 40 feet of the aircraft?] 
October 17, I958. Grand Rapids, Mich.: Twenty­
four round, amber-colored objects, size of dime, 
traveling at very high altitude. Two flights of twelve 
each. 25-second duration. 
Air Force evaluation: "Meteors." [Now, that really should 
make the Guinness book of astronomical records!] 
Sept. 7, I 96I. Cape Canaveral, Fla. : Object moving 
vertically in tracking scope. During missile launch. 
Military source. 
Air Force evaluation: "Image in scope was determined to 
be star Gamma Piscium." [Gamma Piscium is a relatively 
faint star, and quite stationary. It is absurd to think that a

--- PAGE BREAK ---ce. 
Air Force evaluation: "Image in scope was determined to 
be star Gamma Piscium." [Gamma Piscium is a relatively 
faint star, and quite stationary. It is absurd to think that a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
45 
person professionally qualified to track missile launches 
would be puzzled by one particular star out of a great 
many.] 
June 26, 1955. Ilolt, Fla.: Several witnesses, both 
civilian and military. "Disc-shaped, blue-white with 
1 0-14 blinking lights." 
Air Force evaluation: "Unreliable observer." [On the basis 
of interviewing one witness found to be "unreliable," the 
case is dismissed. What about the other witnesses? Get rid 
of the report, no matter how!] 
The final example (the list could go on and on) of the 
cavalier manner in which evaluations were guessed at (and 
which earned for Blue Book the facetious title of The So­
ciety for the Explanation of the Uninvestigated! ) requires a 
bit more space: 
[On January 5, 1963, at Nantucket Point, Long Island, NY] 
Mr. Cherrington was on the night shift 
•
.
•
 busy 
filling tanks about 3 A.M. The moon was on the way 
down. . . . He happened to look up from his work 
and hovering above. him at what he estimated to be 
about 1 000 feet was this craft, as he described it, 
perfectly round, in thickness like two saucers placed 
against one another; thicker in the middle and taper­
ing toward the edge. 
Because of the moonglow, and the clearness of the 
night, the shining metal structure was clearly visible. 
On top of the object, in the center, was a plume of 
bright blue light, like an exhaust of some sort. He es­
timated it to be about 75 feet in diameter. Every once 
in awhile it would execute a series of runs, flips and 
maneuvers, in all directions, at times at terrific speeds 
close to the ground but never lower than about 
500-1 ,000 feet. Finally after about an hour of ma­
neuvering, an airliner or large jet of some sort was 
headed by; and just as the plane, flying at about 15,000 
feet, arrived overhead, this craft zoomed straight up at 
a terrific speed, and as its shape blanked out the 
plane's running lights, he thought for sure that therethe plane, flying at about 15,000 
feet, arrived overhead, this craft zoomed straight up at 
a terrific speed, and as its shape blanked out the 
plane's running lights, he thought for sure that there

--- PAGE BREAK ---t about 15,000 
feet, arrived overhead, this craft zoomed straight up at 
a terrific speed, and as its shape blanked out the 
plane's running lights, he thought for sure that there

--- PAGE BREAK ---

46 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
would be a crash, but it seemed to swerve off at the 
last minute. This happened around 4 A.M. Then, after 
skirting the plane, it took off at a low altitude toward 
the west . . . . As it was leaving, one of his co-workers 
came out of the train and he saw it leaving as a "morn­
ing bright star." Mr. Cherrington was shaken by the 
experience, and his only reaction was "if something 
like this has to happen, let it be on someone else's 
shift!" 
Air Force evaluation: "Star and planet. Object has char­
acteristics of astronomical object with distortion due to the 
atmospheric conditions present and the interpretations of 
the object's behavior by the witness under these unusual 
conditions." 
Well, what unusual conditions? The night was clear, the 
moon was out (and apparently looking perfectly natural) 
and no atmospheric distortion. can make a star blank out a 
plane's lights, have a star appear to skirt a plane, and then 
take off at a low altitude toward the west. It would have 
been far better to evaluate this case as a hallucination-but 
stars!! 
My intention in citing the preceding examples is not to 
establish proof of the UFO phenomenon-but to illustrate 
the lackadaisical and irrt)sponsible manner in which many 
of the UFO reports were treated by Blue Book. "Get rid 
of the report quickly, no matter how" seems to have been 
the operative principle-except in cases when it was ob­
vious that an airtight case could be made for a misidenti­
fication; then such cases were given the full treatment and 
used extensively in Washington "briefings" to demonstrate 
what a good job Blue Book was doing in proving that there 
was absolutely nothing substantive to the UFO phenom­
enon. That way led to praise and promotion. 
It was fairly obvious to the public that the Air Force 
was not taking the UFO phenomenon at all seriously; Blue 
Book's small and relatively low-ranking staff made this 
abundantly clear. There has been much discussion as to 
whether Blue Book's get-rid-of-them policy was purpose­
fully contrived by the Air Force and the Pentagon as a 
smoke screen, while covert UFO investigations were being 
carried on at a much higher level. While secret manipula­
tions behind the closed doors of the Pentagon cannot beForce and the Pentagon as a 
smoke screen, while covert UFO investigations were being 
carried on at a much higher level. While secret manipula­
tions behind the closed doors of the Pentagon cannot be

--- PAGE BREAK ---on as a 
smoke screen, while covert UFO investigations were being 
carried on at a much higher level. While secret manipula­
tions behind the closed doors of the Pentagon cannot be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
47 
disproved, certainly there is no clear-cut evidence that they 
existed. There is considerable evidence that the interac­
tion of Blue Book with the higher echelons was far more of 
a foul-up than a cover-up (Chapter 12) . 
Despite the basic direction Air Force policy took, there 
were, from time to time, some shifts in secondary internal 
policies and procedures affecting the collection, investiga­
tion, and evaluation of UFO reports. Often it was difficult 
to ascertain how or why such changes occurred. It might 
happen that a policy or procedure would be established, or 
a long-standing policy reversed, by a mere internal memo 
from the Air Defense Command to bases under its jurisdic­
tion. Or a colonel or even a major in Intelligence might, 
via teletype dispatch or even by verbal order, make such 
changes. There was an element of the right hand not know­
ing what the left hand was doing. 
An illustration of this is the following Joint Messageform 
of October 17, 1952, from the Air Adjutant General of 
Air Technical Intelligence Center (ATIC), Wright-Patter­
son AFB, to the Commanding Officer of the Rock Island 
Arsenal, Rock Island, Illinois. 
Reference your TWX [teletype message] concerning 
the sighting made by Mrs. --- on 1 1 Oct. It is the 
policy of Project Blue Book that the reporting agency 
will use its own discretion in determining whether the 
sighting is of sufficient importance to transmit to 
this office. It is the opinion of this office that the 
sighting made by Mrs. 
--- falls into the unim­
portant category. [Italics added.] 
In short, A TIC was saying, "It's entirely up to your judg­
ment as to which reports you transmit, but you were dum­
mies to send us this one!" 
It is clear that the double-jointed policy expressed in this 
Messageform would tend to discourage local reporting 
agencies from sending UFO reports to Blue Book, or at 
least to persuade them only to send "safe" reports. And 
what would be a "safe" report? Obviously one that wouldn't 
cause criticism. It was also a part of the Blue Book policy 
-as I heard stated repeatedly over the phone and in cor­
respondence between Blue Book and air-base officers dur­
ing my visits to Blue Book-that local bases were toso a part of the Blue Book policy 
-as I heard stated repeatedly over the phone and in cor­
respondence between Blue Book and air-base officers dur­
ing my visits to Blue Book-that local bases were to

--- PAGE BREAK ---e Book policy 
-as I heard stated repeatedly over the phone and in cor­
respondence between Blue Book and air-base officers dur­
ing my visits to Blue Book-that local bases were to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

48 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
transmit only those reports which they could not solve at 
the "local level." 
That obviously posed a serious problem for the local base 
officers. If they "solved" one and it turned out to be in­
correct, was it worth their having taken the responsibility? 
Responsibility is a commodity that, especially in the mil­
itary, one tries to buck up the line. In the military circles 
I was associated with, and I expect elsewhere, "pass the 
buck" is more than a phrase; it is a way of life. If the local 
officer responsible sent in a report that Blue Book regarded 
as "unimportant," how to deal with the next one? Suppose 
it was a report phoned in by a distraught person, who said 
that when driving along a lonely road late at night a glow­
ing object landed in front of him, stopped his car, and that 
small creatures stepped out of the craft and accosted him? 
Wouldn't it be easier to say: "Let's play it safe--obvious­
ly a crackpot, so no point in sending this one over the 
military wires and getting criticized!" 
And then what should be done about reports of bright 
flaming objects streaking across the sky in a matter of 
seconds? Or about a battery dropped from a weather bal­
loon, or a piece of slag found lying in one's driveway? The 
first, obviously a meteor; the second, obviously a battery 
case, especially when the manufacturer's name was plainly 
visible; and the third-slag-well, all of these could easily 
be solved "at the local base level" but why take the re­
sponsibility? Send it in. Let Blue Book take the responsibil­
ity. 
So this explains, in my opinion, why Blue Book files 
are crammed with obvious IFO (Identifiable Flying Ob­
jects) reports and relatively few truly puzzling reports 
(which have been, and continue to be, reported through 
other channels) . This also undoubtedly contributed to the 
adoption by the Air Force of the "party line theory"­
that since so many UFO reports prove to have been due to 
misidentification of meteors, battery cases, and slag, etc., 
it follows that all reports have a similar origin if one mere­
ly digs deeper. (And, of course, the corollary: Since this is 
so, why bother to dig?) 
It is harder to understand why many truly puzzling UFO 
reports made by high-ranking civilians and military per­
sons (which came to my attention in other ways) fail to 
appear officially in the Blue Book files. In my experience,y many truly puzzling UFO 
reports made by high-ranking civilians and military per­
sons (which came to my attention in other ways) fail to 
appear officially in the Blue Book files. In my experience,

--- PAGE BREAK ---g UFO 
reports made by high-ranking civilians and military per­
sons (which came to my attention in other ways) fail to 
appear officially in the Blue Book files. In my experience,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
49 
the Pentagon wanted clear, crisp answers and solutions 
from Blue Book, not mysteries or vague answers. There­
fore, Blue Book didn't investigate cases unless they were 
officially reported; they did not go out after cases they 
only heard or read about. 
Thus, a UFO report filed by Astronaut Slayton in 1 95 1 , 
when he was a ·test pilot, does not appear in the Blue Book 
files, although, in a personal letter to me, Slayton con­
firmed both the event and that he had submitted an of­
ficial report "through channels." And time and again, when 
I have been asked by UFO witnesses to look up their cases 
in Blue Book to see what was done about it, I have found 
no report of it. These missing reports may well have died 
at the local base level, having been labeled either too "un­
important" or too "kooky" to transmit. 
Missing from Air Force files is the following case, re­
lated to me just recently by Mr. Philip Schumann of Mil­
waukee, Wisconsin (and sworn to before an attorney) . It 
was reported to the Commanding Officer at Ladd Air Force 
Base in Fairbanks, Alaska, in 1 95 1 . 
The case is an important one, practically unassailable 
as far as number and reliability of witnesses, instrumenta­
tion, and general circumstances are concerned. The UFO 
was allegedly tracked by gun-laying radars and visually 
sighted by twelve skilled Army observers using interlock­
ing field telescopes capable of tracking aerial objects both 
horizontally and vertically. Schumann, who was a first 
lieutenant in antiaircraft artillery at the time of this event, 
personally and separately interviewed all twelve of the 
witnesses and took a sworn affidavit from each of them. 
Schumann's comments to me (from taped interviews) 
are noteworthy : "I wish to God I knew what happened 
to those sworn affidavits. I personally presented them to 
the commanding officer, knowing that they'd get to the 
proper authorities that way. I never heard another word 
about them, but in the military you assume you are adding 
information to that which is already known by those in 
charge. You don't question what is done with it; you sim­
ply assume it is taken care of. 
"That morning, however, changed my whole life. Before 
the incident, I didn't believe in UFOs. In fact, afterward 
I didn't 'believe' in them either 
• . . I knew there were 
UFOs."is taken care of. 
"That morning, however, changed my whole life. Before 
the incident, I didn't believe in UFOs. In fact, afterward 
I didn't 'believe' in them either 
• . . I knew there were 
UFOs."

--- PAGE BREAK ---That morning, however, changed my whole life. Before 
the incident, I didn't believe in UFOs. In fact, afterward 
I didn't 'believe' in them either 
• . . I knew there were 
UFOs."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

50 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
Mr. Schumann is today a respected businessman in Mil­
waukee who can hardly be accused of perjury. So, what 
happened to those affidavits and the full report submitted 
to the commanding officer? Were they stopped at the source 
because the commanding officer "did not want to get in­
volved"? He surely could not have doubted the sworn 
statements of twelve of his men. If he doubted the tracking 
radar, could he dismiss the visual observations made by 
tracking telescopes? Did he submit them and were they 
stopped "en route"? Or did they get to Blue Book where 
they were considered too militarily important to be placed 
in the general files? One doesn't know. At this late date, 
Mr. Schumann does not remember any of the names of 
the twelve men and therefore cannot determine their 
whereabouts.* 
Quite apart from the incompleteness of the Blue Book 
files, I can attest to the frequent disregard of the rules of 
scientific procedures by some of the Blue Book staff, and 
to their disregard of their responsibility to the public. In 
their press releases, the Air Force deliberately led the pub­
lic to believe that they were being "leveled with" at all 
times. The public had no way of knowing that information 
about the truly puzzling cases was withheld from the media 
as a matter of principle. As Capt. Ruppelt pointed out in 
his book (p. 22) , "Very little information pertaining to 
UFOs was withheld from the press-if the press knew of 
the occurrence of specific sightings. [All italics added.] 
Our policy on releasing information was to answer only 
direct questions from the press. If the press didn't know 
about a given UFO incident, they naturally couldn't ask 
questions about it. Consequently such stories were never 
released. In other instances, where the particulars of a 
UFO sighting were released, they were only the bare facts 
about what was reported." 
. 
This is in itself an indictment of Air Force policy. 
If there was nothing about UFOs to be concerned about or 
to hide, why withhold this information? Further, the policy 
was reversed on occasions when, for some reason, Blue 
Book wanted information about a case that had been re-
*Should any reader of this book have heard of the incident, or 
be himself one of the twelve men, or in any way associated with 
oįe of them, it would be of scientific importance to communicate 
With the author, on a confidential basis if necessary. 
·cident, or 
be himself one of the twelve men, or in any way associated with 
oįe of them, it would be of scientific importance to communicate 
With the author, on a confidential basis if necessary. 
·

--- PAGE BREAK ---lf one of the twelve men, or in any way associated with 
oįe of them, it would be of scientific importance to communicate 
With the author, on a confidential basis if necessary. 
·

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
51 
ported to the press but not to Blue Book. They went to 
great lengths not to reveal that the Air Force was inter­
ested, using devious means of obtaining the information. 
Even apart from Capt. Ruppelt's statement, the Blue 
Book files themselves contain sufficient correspondence and 
memoranda to support an indictment of Blue Book meth­
odology. The "official" policy on dissemination of informa­
tion about UFOs and related matters was set forth in a 
document known as "AFR-190-6," dated April 21, 195 1 , 
and titled, "Air Force Public Information Program." Par­
agraph 2b contains the key language: 
Air information consisting of the collection, cor­
relation, analysis and dissemination to the public of 
unclassified information pertaining to the Air Force: 
This aspect of the program is based on the policy 
that the full record of the Air Force is available to 
the American people, subject only to security restric­
tions and the dictates of good taste. 
Of course, the record shows that UFO information was 
not available to the American people at all. But there were 
two outs: "security restrictions" and "dictates of good 
taste." 
Both "privileges" were invoked frequently. I can recall 
two cases in which the "good taste" rule was applied. In 
both cases, the witnesses asked that their names be ·with­
held, since they would not have wanted their actions at the 
time of the sighting made public. In one case a man was 
"parking" with .another man's wife in an isolated quarry; 
in another case, the UFO experience occurred while a 
group of men were in a private plane en route to Las Vegas 
for a weekend binge while their wives thought they were 
on a business trip! These were, of course, bona fide "good 
taste" cases; but Blue Book often used the violation-of­
privacy excuse to keep puzzling UFO cases from the 
media. 
On the other hand, Blue Book quickly and willingly 
released information about "solved" cases-those that 
were explained as misidentifications of common objects or 
phenomena, or which had been assigned an "explanation." 
An example of this is contained in the following excerpt 
from a "Record of Telephone Conversation" of Novemberfications of common objects or 
phenomena, or which had been assigned an "explanation." 
An example of this is contained in the following excerpt 
from a "Record of Telephone Conversation" of November

--- PAGE BREAK ---objects or 
phenomena, or which had been assigned an "explanation." 
An example of this is contained in the following excerpt 
from a "Record of Telephone Conversation" of November

--- PAGE BREAK ---

52 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
1 6, 1954. This conversation was between a Lt. Athens, 
Officer in Charge of Flight 3B of the 4602nd Air In­
telligence Squadron (the squadron utilized by Blue Book 
for investigative purposes) and Maj. C. Williams, Air 
Force Representative, of the Armored School, Fort Knox, 
Kentucky. 
a. Major Williams stated he had been approached by 
a Mr. George Hart, a reporter on the Louisville 
Courier Journal. Mr. Hart was soliciting information 
regarding an observation of an Unidentified Flying 
Object made over the city of Louisville, Kentucky, 
on Friday 12 November 1954. Major Williams stated 
that he had informed Mr. Hart, on direct query by 
that individual, that the object in question had posi­
, tively been identified as a high-altitude weather bal-
loon. Further queries were made by Mr. Hart regard­
ing the aforementioned. 
b. The purpose of Major Williams' call •
.
.
 was to 
obtain information regarding AF policy on the re­
lease of information to news media Tegarding UFOs 
and what his action should be should similar occa­
sions arise in the future. 
Lt. Athens informed Major Williams that in those 
cases where sightings have been positively identified 
as known objects, as was the case in question, then 
it was within Major Williams' authority to release 
such information to news media which may be mak­
ing inquiries. Major Williams was also informed that 
only in those cases where such sightings were not 
identified was he instructed not to release any infor­
mation but to inform the individuals making queries 
that such release would come from AF sources au­
thorized to give such information. AFR 200-2 was 
brought to the attention of Major Williams. 
Signed for the Officer in Charge 
It is clear from the above that when a case could be 
quickly disposed of, the Air Force was very cooperative 
with the media. Even officers at the base level, or assigned 
as representatives to a training school (as in this case)t when a case could be 
quickly disposed of, the Air Force was very cooperative 
with the media. Even officers at the base level, or assigned 
as representatives to a training school (as in this case)

--- PAGE BREAK ---be 
quickly disposed of, the Air Force was very cooperative 
with the media. Even officers at the base level, or assigned 
as representatives to a training school (as in this case)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
53 
could give out information. But, of course, quite the op· 
posite was true when the case was a puzzler. 
Sometimes the Air Force went into its "stall" pattern 
when there was a UFO sighting it couldn't explain, par­
ticularly when the press already had the report. For exam­
ple, an article entitled "Flyers Report· Saucers Near Atomic 
Plant" was featured on the front page of the Dayton Daily 
News on Sunday, July 6, 1952. At about 10:30 that night the 
ATIC duty officer was contacted to see if A TIC had had 
any word on this sighting. The answer was no. The next 
day, when the United Press representative of the Dayton 
Daily News called Capt. Ruppelt and wanted to know if 
the Air Force had any comment to make, he was told that 
all that Blue Book knew about the sighting was what had 
appeared in the papers. 
It is, however, on record in Blue Book that shortly after 
these calls, Colonel Bower of A TIC instructed Blue Book 
officers to "stall" off the press "with a no-comment answer."' 
My personal experience attests that the Air Force record 
was made available to the American people only as the 
Air Force saw fit, either when cases were "solved" or where 
an explanation of a sighting could be assigned with the 
hope that no one would question it. Sometimes this latter 
procedure would backfire and then the Air Force's fears of 
adverse publicity would reach crisis proportions, as hap­
pened in the Oxnard Air Force Base incident in California 
on March 23, 1957.* Note the panic expressed in the fol­
lowing decoded Joint Messageform dispatch from ATlC 
at Wright-Patterson Field to the Commander of the 4602nd 
Air Intelligence Service Squadron, ENT AFB, Colorado 
Springs, Colorado. (Headquarters for the Air Defense 
Command) : 
*The case itself was not spectacular 
(might even have been 
stars) and is mentioned here only to illustrate Blue Book methodol­
ogy. It involved several independent witnesses, including policemen 
on duty, who reported seeing five lights, some red, the rest blue, 
maneuvering in the sky for better than an hour. Interceptor planes 
were sent aloft, with negative results, but observers on the ground 
stated that on the approach of the planes the objects (lights) con­
verged and accelerated to extreme altitudes. There was no radar 
confirmation. The Air Force made no attempt to ascert-n th 
amplitude and scope of those motions, and thus either con rm 0 
rule out stars as the stimuli for the report.ltitudes. There was no radar 
confirmation. The Air Force made no attempt to ascert-n th 
amplitude and scope of those motions, and thus either con rm 0 
rule out stars as the stimuli for the report.

--- PAGE BREAK ---no radar 
confirmation. The Air Force made no attempt to ascert-n th 
amplitude and scope of those motions, and thus either con rm 0 
rule out stars as the stimuli for the report.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

54 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
PRT !-REFERENCE OUR MESSAGE AFOIN-4E4, 3-
398-E DATED 27 MARCH 57 REQUEStiNG INVESTIGATION 
OF OXNARD CALIFORNIA INCIDENT OF 23 MARCH, AS 
REPORTED ON TT-MSG 69-0PS-X FROM COMDR. 669 
ACWRON. NO DETAILS CONCERNING THIS CASE RECEIVED 
AS YET: ONLY COMMENT IN YOUR UFO SUMMARY WITH 
STATEMENT WAS ASTRONOMICAL. THIS INCIDENT REC­
OGNIZED BY THIS CENTER AS POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS 
IN THAT IT COULD GIVE AIR FORCE UNFAVORABLE 
PUBLICITY, IF EXPLOITED BY FANATIC OR DIE-HARD 
"FLYING SAUCER" PROPONENTS. THIS NOW DEFINITE 
POSSIBILITY, WITH RECEIPT OF LETTER FROM NA­
TIONAL INVESTIGATIONS COMMITTEE OF UFOS [NICAP] 
DEMANDING FULL DETAILS AND' ANSWERS TO CERTAIN 
ASPECTS OF OXNARD INCIDENT NOT SUPPORTED BY IN­
FORMATION IN FILE. 
OFFICIALLY, THIS INCIDENT DOES NOT WARRANT AC· 
TION REQUIRED, BUT --- 's ABILITY TO SLANT MA· 
TERIAL AND CREATE UNWARRANTED TROUBLE FOR AIR 
FORCE, HIS STOCK IN TRADE FOR ALMOST TEN YEARS. 
Apparently, in this case, the intelligence boys at Blue 
Book were embarrassed by NICAP, which had come upon 
evidence that the Oxnard case could not possibly have been 
"astronomical." Thus, the frenzied tone of the message in 
relation to the question of "unfavorable publicity." 
The fear of exposure to public scrutiny was not new in 
1957, but had existed since the early days of the Air 
Force's UFO investigations. In fact, there was so much 
concern about "image" that at times the Air Force's in­
vestigations took on cloak-and-dagger proportions. This 
"we are interested in UFOs, but don't want anyone to 
know we are interested" syndrome is best illustrated in the 
following memorandum of July 6; 1950, from the Chief of 
the Air Force's General Investigations Division to the 
Chief of the Counter-Intelligence Division of the Depart­
ment of the Air Force: 
Subject: Unconventional Aircraft (Unclassified) 
1 . At approximately 1300 hours ( 1 :00 P.M.) on 
this date Lt. Colonel O'Connell, District Commander, 
5th OSI District, called the undersigned and stated 
that he had received a request from AMC (Ed: Airt approximately 1300 hours ( 1 :00 P.M.) on 
this date Lt. Colonel O'Connell, District Commander, 
5th OSI District, called the undersigned and stated 
that he had received a request from AMC (Ed: Air

--- PAGE BREAK ---hours ( 1 :00 P.M.) on 
this date Lt. Colonel O'Connell, District Commander, 
5th OSI District, called the undersigned and stated 
that he had received a request from AMC (Ed: Air

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
55 
Material Command) , to make certain inquiries as in­
dicated below. He said that General Cabell, Director 
of Intelligence, this headquarters, had called Colonel 
Watson at AMC with reference to an article which 
appeared in the Louisville, Kentucky, Courier Journal 
concerning an individual who had taken moving pic­
tures of a flying disk. Headquarters AMC told 
Colonel O'Connell that General Cabell had requested 
that action be taken to obtain the moving pictures and 
to interview the person who had taken them; further 
that inquiries in this matter should be made in such a 
manner as not to indicate Air Force interest (all italics 
added ) . 
2 . Colonel O'Connell also stated that General Putt 
and Colonel Boushey, R&D (Ed: Research & Devel­
opment) Headquarters USAF, had made an inde­
pendent request upon Headquarters AMC similar to 
the request by General Cabell. 
3. Colonel O'Connell stated to the undersigned that 
he is reluctant to have one of his agents contact rep­
resentatives of the Louisville, Kentucky, Courier Jour­
nal and conduct the additional investigation indicated 
in this matter inasmuch as the identity of the agent 
as a representative of the Air Force must necessarily 
be disclosed and this would indicate the Air Force 
interest in this matter. Colonel O'Connell said that 
he feels the best procedure might be for him to con­
tact the FBI locally and request that a representative 
of that agency conduct the necessary investigation, 
thereby precluding any indication of Air Force inter­
est. However, Colonel O'Connell said that be would 
like to have the approval of the Director of Special 
Investigations before proceeding in this matter. 
4. I discussed the above with Major Nold and he 
subsequently informed me that he had talked to a rep­
resentative of the Office of the Director of Intelligence, 
this headquarters, and that his representative had 
stated that OSI should not directly (through the FBI) 
attempt to obtain the information indicated above. 
5. Inasmuch as this is a matter under the cognizance 
of the Counter-Intelligence Division, it is hereby re­
ferred for further action as necessary, including fur­
nishing telephonic advice to Colonel O'Connell, 5ththis is a matter under the cognizance 
of the Counter-Intelligence Division, it is hereby re­
ferred for further action as necessary, including fur­
nishing telephonic advice to Colonel O'Connell, 5th

--- PAGE BREAK ---

56 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
OSI District. (For your information, I told Colonel 
O'Connell that in the future when he has any questions 
on matters in this field, he should contact the 
Counter-Intelligence Division.) 
Signed by 
F. D. McGarrachy, Lt. Colonel, USAF, 
Chief, General Investigations Division. 
One may well ask, "Why Counter-Intelligence?" Well, 
according to the dictionary counterintelligence is an activ­
ity used in thwarting the efforts of an enemy's intelligence 
agents to gather information or commit sabotage. 
This cloak-and-dagger approach was indeed contrary 
to the official "open book" policy. The public was, in ef­
fect, ,placed in the role of "the enemy," against whom 
"counterespionage" tactics must be employed. From my 
personal experience, I frequently felt that those in charge 
did indeed consider people who reported UFOs or who 
took a serious interest in them and wanted information 
about them, as enemies. 
This became especially evident when Project Sign be­
came Project Grudge. Capt. Ruppelt pointed out in his 
book* that while there was to be no "official" shift in 
policy of using standard intelligence procedures, there was 
nonetheless a real change from "unbiased evaluation of 
intelligence data" to biased evaluation. Ruppelt stated: 
But it doesn't take a great deal of study of the old 
UFO files to see that standard intelligence procedures 
were no longer being used by Project Grudge. Every­
thing was being evaluated on the premise that UFOs 
couldn't exist. No matter what you see or hear, don't 
believe it .
•
.
.telligence procedures 
were no longer being used by Project Grudge. Every­
thing was being evaluated on the premise that UFOs 
couldn't exist. No matter what you see or hear, don't 
believe it .
•
.
.

With the new name and new personnel came the new 
objective: Get rid of UFOs. It was never specified 
that way in writing but it didn't take much effort to 
see that this was the goal of Project Grudge. This 
unwritten objective was reflected in every memo, re­
port and directive. 
*I have frequently quoted from The Report on Unidentified Flying 
Objects simply because I think so highly of it as a record of the 
early days of the Air Force involvement in UFOs, as seen through 
the eyes of the man who was most deeply involved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---jects simply because I think so highly of it as a record of the 
early days of the Air Force involvement in UFOs, as seen through 
the eyes of the man who was most deeply involved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
51 
Such "memos, reports and directives" did indeed solidify 
the official attitude toward UFOs, an attitude that kept in­
vestigation "in line." One example of such a memo, dated 
July 19, 1950, is from Col. Bruno W. Feiling, Chief, 
Technical Analysis Division, Intelligence Department, to 
Lt. Col. Hemstreet. The subject is: "Investigation of Fly­
ing Saucer Reports": 
Mr. ---'s memo dated 14 Jul 50 has been re­
viewed. Although investigation was requested in the 
matter, it appears that too much time was spent in the 
investigation. It is suggested that in future incidents 
we contact the individual concerned to get the story . 
. . . If, however, there have been no reports by other 
personnel on the same incident, it seems that there is 
no justification for contacting as many agencies as 
was done in this case [Is it being suggested here that 
a thorough investigation shouldn't be made, regard­
less of how credible the single witness?] It seems that 
if a legitimate sighting is made, it would be reported 
by a number of people. [There really is no justifica­
tion for this statement. And, what if the witness were 
the Governor of Georgia, or Michigan, or even the 
Secretary of the Air Force?] Excessive contacts can 
only serve to keep our interest in these matters a sub­
ject of discussion by more people than we would like. 
[Now we have the real reason!] 
If the public really felt that the Air Force wasn't inter­
ested, why did anyone even bother to report a sighting? 
Likewise, if they knew that the Air Force had adopted the 
"explain them all away" posture, once again, why did any­
one bother to report? The answer is that, in fact, many 
did not file reports. Even during my days as consultant to 
Blue Book I received an occasional letter stating, in effect, 
"I am not reporting this to the Air Force because I know 
it won't do any good." And in one letter I remember dis­
tinctly, I was asked to keep the report to myself and not 
transmit it to Blue Book! I also received many letters (as 
did Blue Book) protesting a tame evaluation as "star" or 
"balloon" when the person was very sure it hadn't been. 
Often the person wrote, in effect, that the Blue Book 
evaluation had been an insult to their intelligence.ing a tame evaluation as "star" or 
"balloon" when the person was very sure it hadn't been. 
Often the person wrote, in effect, that the Blue Book 
evaluation had been an insult to their intelligence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n as "star" or 
"balloon" when the person was very sure it hadn't been. 
Often the person wrote, in effect, that the Blue Book 
evaluation had been an insult to their intelligence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

58 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
The reluctance of witnesses to report to Blue Book be­
came more and more evident in the latter days of its ex­
istence. But the attitude existed early on, as the following 
Air Intelligence Information Report from the 7th Fighter 
Squadron, Presque Isle, Maine, referring to a UFO sight­
ing of January 29, 1953, shows: 
The information contained in the enclosure was re­
ported by TWX in accordance with AFL 200-5, dated 
29 April 1952. The object was also sighted by at 
least two fighter aircraft from other squadons. The 
conversation among the pilots and the ROs [Radar 
Operators] was heard by Al lC Ferdinand who was on 
duty at the ADDC [radar site]. Not knowing which of 
the pilots and ROs were talking the conversation went 
as follows: 
Pilot said, "Do you see that thing above us?" 
Answer, "No." 
Reply, "It sticks out like a sore thumb." 
Then somǿone said, "If I were going to catch it I 
would drop the wing tanks first." 
Another said that he would never admit what he 
saw. [Italics added.] 
Now, there's a smart fellow. Why report some strange, 
puzzling object in the sky that defies logical explanation 
when the Air Force "knows" it "can't exist" and "there­
fore doesn't"?* 
One wonders just how many "good" UFO sightings went 
unreported because of the Air Force's debunking attitude? 
How many were never tallied as "unknown" or "uniden­
tified?" because they were never reported at all, or never 
reached Blue Book if they were reported to some local air, 
army or naval base? We shall never know. 
There were many times during my twenty years as a 
scientific consultant to Blue Book that I also wondered 
whether the very best reports were being kept from Blue 
Book. Perhaps some cases were sent only to the highest 
*This attitude apparently still persists, despite the Air Force's 
present "hands off" policy. In a recent case investigation for The 
International UFO Reporter, an Air Traffic Controller confided. 
"Just between you and me, you never report anything really un­
usual. It takes only one, if you know what I mean."vestigation for The 
International UFO Reporter, an Air Traffic Controller confided. 
"Just between you and me, you never report anything really un­
usual. It takes only one, if you know what I mean."

--- PAGE BREAK ---International UFO Reporter, an Air Traffic Controller confided. 
"Just between you and me, you never report anything really un­
usual. It takes only one, if you know what I mean."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
59 
authority, particularly if they involved top-secret or crypto­
graphic information that was of an "eyes only" nature. 
There is, within military circles, some information of such 
a highly classified nature that it is for viewing by the "eyes 
only" of certain designated individuals who are specifically 
cleared for access. While I held Top Secret clearance, I 
was by no means permitted access to all Top Secret in­
formation in the Department of Defense. Such information 
is available only on a "need to know" basis. 
My own suspicions about this were reinforced by 
Richard Budelman, who assisted me in the preparation of 
portions of this book. He served in a sensitive position 
with a Top Secret Navy Squadron stationed at Port 
Lyautey, Morocco 
(the Navy had only one other air 
squadron like it) , from 1956 to 1958. He was responsible 
for writing all of the flight orders for this squadron's top­
secret missions for more than a year. He is firm in his own 
belief that had a UFO been sighted by the pilot or crew 
of one of his squadron's aircraft-arid several were ru­
mored-the report would never have reached Project Blue 
Book. Why? Let him tell it: 
The nature of our operation in VQ-2 (Electronic 
Countermeasures Squadron TWO) were so super se­
cret and sensitive tbe.t I cannot possibly believe a report 
of a UFO sighted by one of our crews would have 
been sent to Project Blue Book. The majority of our 
missions were so hush-hush that they were known 
only to a mere handful of people in the entire squad­
ron. Access to information about our flights was ex­
tremely limited. Reports and materials related to them 
went directly to the Commander-in-Chief, Eastern At­
lantic and Mediterranean (CINCNELM) , and the 
Secretary of the Navy. 
But there's another reason why I also believe Blue Book 
didn't have access to that kind of Top Secret information­
that it was in certain respects "low man on the totem 
pole." The low rank of the officer in charge of Blue Book 
was a dead giveaway. A mere captain doesn't have much 
authority. Capt. Ruppelt couldn't even get the Pentagon 
to give him a staff car to do his investigations when the 
great UFO flap hit Washington, D.C. in July, 1952, andre captain doesn't have much 
authority. Capt. Ruppelt couldn't even get the Pentagon 
to give him a staff car to do his investigations when the 
great UFO flap hit Washington, D.C. in July, 1952, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ave much 
authority. Capt. Ruppelt couldn't even get the Pentagon 
to give him a staff car to do his investigations when the 
great UFO flap hit Washington, D.C. in July, 1952, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

60 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
he was supposedly the key man in the investigation of a 
case that had captured the attention of the nation! In his 
own words: 
· 
"I called the transportation section at the Pentagon to 
get a staff car but it took me only seconds to find out that 
the regulations said no staff cars except for senior colonels 
or generals. Colonel Bower tried-same thing. General 
Samford and General Garland were gone, so I couldn't 
get them to try to pressure a staff car out of the hillbilly 
who was dispatching vehicles. I went down to finance office 
Ȁould I rent a car and charge it as travel expense? No­
city buses are available. But I didn't know the bus system 
and it would take me hours to get to all the places I had to 
visit, I pleaded. You can take a cab if you want to pay for 
it out , of your per diem was the answer. Nine dollars a 
day per diem and I should pay for a hotel room, meals, 
and taxi fa.res all over the District of Columbia. Besides, 
the lady in finance told me, my travel orders to Washing· 
ton covered only a visit to the Pentagon. In addition, she 
said, I was supposed to be on my way back to Dayton 
right now, and if I didn't go through all the red tape of 
getting orders amended I couldn't collect any per diem 
and technically I'd be AWOL. . . . 
" 
Obviously Blue Book and its chief didn't carry much 
weight. Every paper in the country was carrying banner 
headlines about UFOs over the Capitol and the chief of 
the UFO project was asked to take a city bus! 
Now, this was in 1956, 1957, and 1958, and the 
"cold war" that followed the Korean War was on. 
We were greatly concerned about Russia's missile 
capacity and our missions often took us right up to 
Soviet borders (and for all . I know, in light of the 
later U-2 incident, inside the Soviet Union itself) . 
There was simply no way possible that UFO reports 
out of VQ-2, had there been any, would have gone to 
Blue Book where someone without a "need to know" 
would have access to information about our secret 
missions. There is no doubt in my mind whatsoever 
that the same thing would hold true for UFOs sighted 
by SAC (Strategic Air Command) crews on Top Se· 
cret missions. It would be sheer folly to have that kind 
of information lying around.hatsoever 
that the same thing would hold true for UFOs sighted 
by SAC (Strategic Air Command) crews on Top Se· 
cret missions. It would be sheer folly to have that kind 
of information lying around.

--- PAGE BREAK ---same thing would hold true for UFOs sighted 
by SAC (Strategic Air Command) crews on Top Se· 
cret missions. It would be sheer folly to have that kind 
of information lying around.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
61 
On several occasions I had heard very sketchy con­
versations about UFOs sighted by our own flight crews, 
but I could never get anyone to discuss them, even 
though I had a Top Secret clearance. Needless to 
say, I couldn't prove today that those reports were 
anything but hearsay. The only proof would be in the 
Top Secret files of the Defense Department. I can't 
imagine how anyone would go about gaining free ac­
cess to that kind of information-nor do I advocate 
that just anyone should have access. 
These observations are well taken. In my years as scien­
tific consultant to the Air Force I saw extremely few re­
ports at Project Blue Book that were marked TOP SECRET 
-and not too many that were labeled SECRET-mostly 
they were classified as CONFIDENTIAL or RESTRICTED. 
We have been discussing the question of whether or not 
Blue Book actually received all existing UFO reports. 
What is of far greater importance is the manner in which 
the reports they did. get were treated. I close this chapter 
with reference to a report from the Blue Book files, which 
dramatically illustrates' the principle, "It can't be, there-
fore it isn't." 
· 
The following sightings were made at Los Alamos, 
New Mexico. The first report was made by an employee 
of the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory who was judged 
by the investigator to be a very reliable person. The wit­
ness stated : 
About ten A.M. on 29 July, 1 952, at Omega Site, 
Los Alamos Canyon, Los Alamos, New Mexico, I 
observed an object, white in color, that appeared to 
be changing perspective or going through gyrations. It 
had a fluttering appearance. I observed the object for 
a few seconds , and then stopped looking at it. At the 
time of the sighting there were a few small scattered 
clouds and the wind velocity was low. Five minutes 
later, jets appeared from Kirtland Air Force Base. 
A second witness, also a member of the Los Alamos 
Scientific Laboratory, stated: 
At approximately ten A.M. on 29 July, 1952, at LosFive minutes 
later, jets appeared from Kirtland Air Force Base. 
A second witness, also a member of the Los Alamos 
Scientific Laboratory, stated: 
At approximately ten A.M. on 29 July, 1952, at Los

--- PAGE BREAK ---, jets appeared from Kirtland Air Force Base. 
A second witness, also a member of the Los Alamos 
Scientific Laboratory, stated: 
At approximately ten A.M. on 29 July, 1952, at Los

--- PAGE BREAK ---

62 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
Alamos Canyon, Los Alamos, New Mexico, I ob­
served an undiscernible object, white in color, appear­
ing larger than a jet at thirty thousand feet. The ob­
ject was moving in a straight-line flight with an ap­
proximate speed of 1 .8 degrees per seconds. The 
brilliance of the object underwent changes as though 
light reflected variably with execution of twisting or 
turning motion. I viewed the object for approximately 
twenty· seconds before the canyon wall obstructed my 
view. The object did leave a vapor trail. Weather 
conditions were clear and no unusual wind in the can­
yon was present. 
And still another: 
'
on July 29th, I was north and west of the airport 
[approximately a mile to a mile and a half]. I had 
seen this thing for approximately thirty seconds. I 
had been watching these jets with my little ten-year­
old boy at my residence and we were pointing them 
out and two jets passed generally west to east [could 
he have meant east to west?], leaving vapor trails. I 
had just stepped in the door when my boy said he saw 
three of them. So, I stepped back out and looked 
and saw a shiny object just under the vapor trails, 
traveling in the same direction as the vapor trails, 
leaving no vapor trail. It seemed to be traveling 
slightly faster than the jets did that left the trails. It 
possibly could have been one of the jets that had 
doubled around and gotten at an altitude below, but 
it came into this position almost too fast for the 
jets to have made a complete circle. It is possible that 
it was a jet that swung around. and came back. Sworn 
to and subscribed to before me on the 3 1 st day of 
July, etc. 
And another independent witness stated : 
The length of time that I observed the object was 
very short, only a couple of seconds. I haven't had 
any previous experience as an observer but the oddity 
of this object was that the air was filled with burnt 
papers reflecting sunlight. At ground level, they hada couple of seconds. I haven't had 
any previous experience as an observer but the oddity 
of this object was that the air was filled with burnt 
papers reflecting sunlight. At ground level, they had

--- PAGE BREAK ---. I haven't had 
any previous experience as an observer but the oddity 
of this object was that the air was filled with burnt 
papers reflecting sunlight. At ground level, they had

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
63 
drifted about a third of the way across the airstrip 
and were slowly drifting in wind currents to the north. 
Soon, they attained quite a high altitude. This object 
was moving across the wind currents. It wasn't drift­
ing to the north, it was going more from east to west. 
Possibly just a little south to west. I saw it for just a 
few seconds. It was a distance up in the sky. The man 
I was with was using field glasses and stated that this 
object made a turn. It was right into the wind current 
that was blowing the papers in the opposite direction. 
He followed the object which disappeared behind a 
cloud which was to the west over the mountain range 
behind Los Alamos. This was the only mass of a 
cloud in that vicinity. As far as I could tell, this ob­
ject had no vapor trails to the naked eye. As I saw 
it, it was only a silver speck in the sky. 
And still another witness: 
At 1 0 :57 hours, 29 July, 1 952, at S Site, Security 
Station 6 1 0, I observed an object appearing egg­
shaped in structure directly overhead, the distance 
impossible to determine. The object was motionless 
and appeared to have wings. The object had no glare 
and appeared light brown in color. The object moved 
very fast when movement began, in a northwesterly di­
rection, taking about three seconds to disappear. I was 
unable to determine whether the object disappeared 
behind the horizon or disappeared in the distance 
close to the horizon. There wasn't any apparent sound, 
odor, or evidence of a vapor trail. There weren't 
any clouds in the sky when the object was sighted. 
My attention was attracted to the object while looking 
for jets from Albuquerque which had been reported 
previously over the radio from the air strip. This is 
the first object of this type that I have seen. 
Although there were even more witnesses, I think the 
above should fully suffice to demonstrate the application 
of the Air Force theorem, "It can't be, therefore it isn't." 
One witness, and one witness alone, described burnt papers 
flying in the wind. He carefully pointed out that the un­
known object was moving across the direction in which thee, therefore it isn't." 
One witness, and one witness alone, described burnt papers 
flying in the wind. He carefully pointed out that the un­
known object was moving across the direction in which the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

64 
THE HYNEK UPO REPORT 
paper was blowing and was traveling in a straight line. 
He deliberately contrasted the motion of the object with 
that of the fluttering papers. Yet, since "papers" had been 
mentioned, the Blue Book evaluator labeled this case as 
"probably papers in the wind." 
I have seen this sort of thing happen time and again. 
If a witness mentioned, generally for comparison pur­
poses, any likeness to a balloon, aircraft, bird, "papers," 
etc., this was all the encouragement the evaluator needed. 
The phenomenon was generally classified as that item men­
tioned by the witness, even though the item had been men­
tioned solely for comparison purposes. 
Scarce wonder that the public became more and more 
reluctant to report UFO sightings to the Air Force. In 
the Blue Book "closed court," the witness was guilty of 
misidentification even before the case was heard. The ex­
amination of the evidence showed the lack of any respon­
sible follow-up, and the evaluations, arrived at by a preset 
formula, serve as final indictment of the work of Project 
Blue Book.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n of the evidence showed the lack of any respon­
sible follow-up, and the evaluations, arrived at by a preset 
formula, serve as final indictment of the work of Project 
Blue Book.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4=============== 
VERY STRANGE LIGHTS AT NIGHT 
"Having accepted to a reasonable degree the objectiv­
ity of the experience, I tried to explain it in acceptable 
and natural terms. That what I had seen was an air­
craft of any kind or characteristic known to me was 
inadmissible." 
-Watch Supervisor 
Logan International Airport 
The majority of reports submitted to Blue Book were of 
mysterious lights in the night sky. A great many of these 
were reported by military officers, men that the Air Force 
had trained in technical effectiveness and responsibility. 
Despite their extensive training, even these mȮn were, on 
occasion, mistaken, fooled by bright planets, meteors, or 
twinkling stars. But sometimes there was no astronomical 
explanation for the nocturnal lights they perceived. 
Since Blue Book could find no justification for discount­
ing the testimony of such highly trained men, many of the 
Nocturnal Light cases were finally evaluated as "Unidenti­
fied." And unidentified they remain to this day. For some 
of these, however, the Air Force did try their hardest to 
come up with a natural explanation, as in the following in­
teresting case: 
The Case of the Puzzled Airport Tower Operator 
The undersigned is employed as a watch super­
visor in the Civil Aeronautics Control Tower at 
Logan International Airport, Boston, Mass. On the 
night of April 7, 1950, I was on duty in the Logan

--- PAGE BREAK ---is employed as a watch super­
visor in the Civil Aeronautics Control Tower at 
Logan International Airport, Boston, Mass. On the 
night of April 7, 1950, I was on duty in the Logan

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
Tower. Also present on duty in the tower were the 
following controllers: 
F.H., W.G.M., H.G.M.-all 
employed by the CAA and all holders of current se­
nior airport traffic controller ratings. 
The weather at 21 :30 GMT was measured 1 6,000 
overcast, visibility 1 5 + , wind NE . . . with gusts up 
to 43 MPH. 
At approximately 2 1 :55, I noticed a light due west 
of the tower which caught my attention because of 
its unconventional color, a deep blue. I focused bin­
oculars on the light to determine what aircraft would 
be showing such unorthodox light. Even through the 
glasses, the object appeared to have no clearly de­
finable mass and seemed to consist of merely an 
eJlipsoid pattern of light blurred at the edges and 
deep blue in color. It was moving in a path from 
southwest to northeast (wind was from the north­
east) , at what seemed to be a conventional rate of 
speed. I could not determine its altitude but it was 
about fifteen degrees above the horizon when I first 
saw it. As I continued watching, the light changed 
from deep blue to a sharply distinct white. At this 
point, I summoned the other controllers who verified 
what I was seeing in thȁ glasses. By this time, the 
light had again gone to the deep blue color I had 
originally noted. As we watched, the single blue light 
appeared to dissolve into two blue lights which then 
began to revolve around one another [!] in the man­
ner of two small searchlights at play. During this pro­
cess,· their trajectory took them from 1 5 to 45 de­
grees above the horizon. I was about to accept the 
lights as being two searchlights that someone was 
playing around with in spite of the absence of any 
beams and in spite of the ceiling height which pre­
cluded a "spot," when one of the blue lights passed 
from southwest to northeast on a horizontal course. 
I used the ceilometer light on the northwestern tower 
as a fixed base reference point and the object, now 
showing all white, passed the light in what appeared 
to be a conventional flight path and at a conventional 
rate of speed. The object was lost in the northeast. 
An immediate check was made with both Squantum 
and Bedford towers which ascertained that neither hadventional flight path and at a conventional 
rate of speed. The object was lost in the northeast. 
An immediate check was made with both Squantum 
and Bedford towers which ascertained that neither had

--- PAGE BREAK ---h and at a conventional 
rate of speed. The object was lost in the northeast. 
An immediate check was made with both Squantum 
and Bedford towers which ascertained that neither had

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
67 
any traffic reported in our area. The only reported 
traffic in the area was on a base-leg in the landing 
pattern at Bedford. [To the west of Logan] 
• 
• 
• the 
time encompassed between the moment when the 
objects first came and their final disappearance was 
. . . ten minutes. 
In evaluating the experience, the undersigned has 
rigorously ( and with misgiving) explored the possi­
bility of the incident being subjective, but the fact 
of four of us seeing it would seem to minimize the 
possibility. 
Having accepted to a reasonable degree the objec­
tivity of the experience, I tried to explain it in ac­
ceptable and natural terms. [Here we once again have 
the very familiar "escalation of hypothesis."] That 
what I had seen was an aircraft of any kind or char­
acteristic known to me was inadmissible. I learned to 
fly in 1936 and have been in aviation ever since that 
time, 
graduated 
from 
the Air 
Force 
Intelligence 
School in 1 942, served in the southwest Pacific as a 
squadron commander, and director of air support for 
the Fifth Air Force for two years, graduated from 
the short course at the Air Command and 
Staff 
School, Air University in 1929, and am currently 
deputy group commander of an aircraft control and 
warning group in the Air National Guard at the 
rank of Lt. Colonel. I think that it is a not unreason­
able assumption that I am familiar with aircraft types 
and capabilities. 
In examining the possibility of searchlights being 
responsible, I was forced to discard that possibility 
because I had seen a mass. Once when the object was 
glowing white and passing the ceilometer, and again 
when it glowed cherry-red. Furthermore, the ceiling 
was measured at 1 6,000' and any searchlight powerful 
enough to cast a spot on a cloud base at that height 
must surely show a definite beam. 
The only solution that seemed acceptable to me 
and I still do not know whether it is tenable, is that 
what we saw may have been stellar corona or some 
other luminous hydro-meteor. [He was really trying 
hard; these terms are meaningless.] The strong winds 
on the surface and aloft, the overcast (a thin one) wasmay have been stellar corona or some 
other luminous hydro-meteor. [He was really trying 
hard; these terms are meaningless.] The strong winds 
on the surface and aloft, the overcast (a thin one) was

--- PAGE BREAK ---ar corona or some 
other luminous hydro-meteor. [He was really trying 
hard; these terms are meaningless.] The strong winds 
on the surface and aloft, the overcast (a thin one) was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

68 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
moving at a tremendous rate of speed. A Pan Amer­
ican clipper from overseas had reported an hour 
earlier that he had picked up a heavy load of ice 
when descending through the overcast, so apparently 
the overcast was filled with ice crystals. Although not 
completely satisfactory, an answer of this theme [sic] 
did not eliminate the possibility that what we witnessed 
were meteorological phenomena of a sort with which 
we were not familiar. 
(For 
obvious 
reasons, 
no 
formal report of this incident was 
made to any 
source. With so many reports rah:pant developing 
from irresponsible or hysterical sources, one hesitates 
to solicit ridicule, but in view of the close similarity 
of what I witnessed and what is seen by others else­
where, I feel it incumbent to submit this report in 
spite of this risk.) 
A Nocturnal Light, varying from intense blue to white 
to red, under observation for some ten minutes, and mov­
ing against very high winds, splitting up into two lights 
which then for a moment revolve around each other, and 
then proceed merrily against the wind to the northeast, 
would indl'ed be a new and certainly unknown meteo­
rological phenomenon. But this report is just one of the 
many from intelligent, technically trained people who often 
tried desperately to find a normal, natural solution to 
what they saw, and were very unhappy when they could 
not. 
The official Blue Book evaluation of this case was "in­
version effects-distortion 
of natural phenomena/lights 
from unknown source." An inversion? With high winds 
aloft, and ground gusts up to 43 · MPH? Hardly a likely 
event! 
A UFO Dogfight 
Another example of Blue Book adopting a conventional 
explanation, even in the face of contradictory evidence, 
occurred on the night of November 7, 1950. In an official 
report, the military pilot described a "dogfight" with a 
single steady white light which at first was mistaken for 
another aircraft. The pilot got "on his tail" :f November 7, 1950. In an official 
report, the military pilot described a "dogfight" with a 
single steady white light which at first was mistaken for 
another aircraft. The pilot got "on his tail" :

--- PAGE BREAK ---In an official 
report, the military pilot described a "dogfight" with a 
single steady white light which at first was mistaken for 
another aircraft. The pilot got "on his tail" :

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
69 
In less time than it takes to tell, this light, with­
out making any kind of reversal turn, poured down 
on me in a slight dive, passing directly over my 
canopy at an incredible speed, about one hundred to 
two hundred feet above. . . . I then pulled into a 
tight "flipper" reversal turn in order to see this light 
again. . . . This time I was positive that we were .on 
his tail. 
Once again the light rushed at him and passed over 
him. Up to this point, it could easily be dismissed as a 
rather slow-moving balloon (lighted) whose apparent speed 
was merely the reflection of the pilot's own speed. The 
report goes on: 
In the meanwhile, after five or six passes, this object 
and I got into a port orbit. I frequently checked my 
instruments for altitude and engine limitations and 
flew in a sixty-degree climbing port bank, indicating 
130-135 knots. This light continued to turn about 
me in wide, climbing turns, making about two orbits 
to my one. At eleven thousand five hundred feet, I 
abandoned the chase and simply orbited to keep the 
object in sight. . . . Having had experience with jets 
against conventional (aircraft) in "dogfights" I have a 
good idea of their speed. But this object in the en­
counter described previously, was making at least 
twice that speed or approximately eight hundred 
knots. 
The evaluating officer from Director of Intelligence, a 
colonel in the USAF, concurred with the pilot. In his re­
port he stated : 
It appeared to circle his aircraft at a terrific rate 
of speed, even when climbing. The rate of climb 
was estimated to be over two thousand feet per 
minute; therefore, it would not be possible to class 
this incident as a lighted weather balloon, if the 
description is considered accurate. 
If the description is considered accurate. Well, we cer­
tainly could not condone a UFO investigator who un-s 
this incident as a lighted weather balloon, if the 
description is considered accurate. 
If the description is considered accurate. Well, we cer­
tainly could not condone a UFO investigator who un-

--- PAGE BREAK ---a lighted weather balloon, if the 
description is considered accurate. 
If the description is considered accurate. Well, we cer­
tainly could not condone a UFO investigator who un-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

70 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
critically accepted everything a witness had to say. But to 
discount everything a witness says, especially in those cases 
when there are several witnesses involved, is both irrespon­
sible and unscientific. 
The Case of the Michigan Spaceship 
Sometimes, when a natural explanation was simply not 
available, Blue Book resorted to the label "insufficient in­
formation." Anything but "unidentified"! I leave it to the 
reader to judge just how "insufficient" was the informa­
tion in the following case: 
I, 
---, was of the opmton that they [flying 
saucers] were objects of the U.S. government, but 
after my recent experience 
• 
• 
• it has changed my 
belief entirely. 
On Sunday night, April 27, [1952], my wife, two 
children, and myself were proceeding home. My wife 
and I both spotted a brilliant white object coming to­
wards us out of the sky from the northeast. It de­
scended so fast that by the time my wife could realize 
and state that it was a flying saucer, it had descended 
to its minimum height of a transport plane in flight It 
stopped abruptly and rocked slightly, similar to a 
rowboat in choppy water. It then settled at an ap­
proximate thirty-degree angle and the brilliant white­
ness diminished as to what appeared to be window 
lights. It sat in this exact position and spot for what 
was approximately three or four minutes, making 
it very easy for us to judge its size, shape, etc. We 
estimated it to be about two miles north of us, and 
three thousand feet high. The angle at which it 
rested made it very easy for us to estimate its thick­
ness and diameter. It appeared to have two tiers of 
windows, each about ten feet high, which resembled 
looking into the playing section of a mouth organ. 
The windows were all around the entire diameter 
making visible the round flatness. We estimate con­
servatively that the diameter of the ship was at least 
two hundred feet. 
After what seemed to me that they were gettinground the entire diameter 
making visible the round flatness. We estimate con­
servatively that the diameter of the ship was at least 
two hundred feet. 
After what seemed to me that they were getting

--- PAGE BREAK ---meter 
making visible the round flatness. We estimate con­
servatively that the diameter of the ship was at least 
two hundred feet. 
After what seemed to me that they were getting

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
71 
their bearings, they started drifting northwest towards 
the city of Pontiac, about one hundred miles per hour 
but stopped two or three times during the time of 
observation. At no time did it make a noise. 
Immediately, I realized that I should have witnesses 
to this phenomenon, so I speeded west on Fifteen 
Mile Road to a drive-in restaurant about a mile 
away. I ran in and asked some young men if they 
would come out and witness my experience. After 
persuasion, two of them went out and were amazed, 
causing others to follow. By this time it had drifted 
at least five miles northwest. At this point I called 
the Birmingham police and asked them to alarm all 
the airfields in this direction which they said they 
would do. I returned to my car and continued to fol­
low it, driving west on Fifteen Mile Road. During 
the next five minutes, the lights in the saucer went 
off and on three times. The fourth time, the lights 
changed from white to a brilliant yellow-orange and by 
this time we had reached the Grand Trunk Railroad 
Station, a half mile from Birmingham. Thinking this 
experience would make a good newspaper story, I 
stopped at the railroad station and called the Detroit 
Times, telling them my story thus far. 
After that, I again called the Birmingham police, 
and asked them if they had reported the incident as 
yet. They said they were thinking about it, so I be­
came provoked and said that I would call Selfridge 
Field myself, which I did. If anyone ever got the 
"brush," I sure did. I was transferred to five differ­
ent departments and finally got an officer who, I am 
sure, was awakened by my call, and was very peeved. 
I explained what was taking place and he mumbled 
something to another fellow and then said, "I11 report 
it. What's your name?" I gave him my name and ex­
plained, "If you ever want a close-up view of a flying 
saucer, get some planes in the sky at once," telling 
him the approximate location of the saucer. Then he 
repeated, "All I can do is report it, bud," [and] he 
hung up. 
During my telephone conversation, my wife had 
convinced the station attendant and railroad express 
truck driver to observe the spectacle. I secured thecan do is report it, bud," [and] he 
hung up. 
During my telephone conversation, my wife had 
convinced the station attendant and railroad express 
truck driver to observe the spectacle. I secured the

--- PAGE BREAK ---bud," [and] he 
hung up. 
During my telephone conversation, my wife had 
convinced the station attendant and railroad express 
truck driver to observe the spectacle. I secured the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

72 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
truck driver's name and then proceeded west on Fif­
teen Mile Road to Birmingham and out about seven 
miles due west, following the saucer as it vanished 
from my vision over treetops in the general direction 
of Flint at 1 1 : 15 P.M. (one half hour) . 
I contacted the Detroit Times on Tuesday A.M. and 
gave them my complete story. Their reporter phoned 
Selfridge Field and Radar Division and they both 
told him that it was impossible for anything to be in 
the air at that time because nothing was picked up 
by radar, so naturally, the Times dropped the story. 
[I am reminded of Groucho Marx's famous statement, 
"Military intelligence is a contradiction in terms."] 
What is to be believed here--the lack of a radar ob­
servation, or the eyeball testimony of many independent 
witnesses over a considerable geographical stretch? On 
what grounds should human testimony be rejected? If 
these persons had been witness to an automobile accident 
or an airplane crash, their testimony would have been 
taken seriously. Of course, in these cases, there would have 
been some wreckage strewn about. The lack of tangible 
physical parts or hardware from a UFO has been a stan­
dard stumbling block; but suppose such hardware doesn't 
exist? 
The witness continued his account: 
To prove my story, I started to track down my 
witnesses. After considerable difficulty, I found the 
two young men I had asked to come out of the drive­
in and obtained written statements from each. [These 
statements are not part of the Blue Book files.] Then 
I contacted the truck driver and he was very willing 
to write a statement of his observations. I again went 
to the Times with my proof and the editor turned the 
story over to another reporter who again phoned Self­
ridge Field. This time, they contacted the Intelligence 
Division. They stated that they were receiving at least 
two letters a day from people who had also sighted a 
saucer at different points. This assured the reporter 
of my story and he later stated that he thought that the 
complete story would be in the Sunday, May 4th,day from people who had also sighted a 
saucer at different points. This assured the reporter 
of my story and he later stated that he thought that the 
complete story would be in the Sunday, May 4th,

--- PAGE BREAK ---had also sighted a 
saucer at different points. This assured the reporter 
of my story and he later stated that he thought that the 
complete story would be in the Sunday, May 4th,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
73 
issue. However, for some unknown reason, it never 
appeared. 
I have no personal desire to see this story in print 
but I believe that it is about time the authorities, as 
well as the citizens, be openly informed of a system­
atic procedure for handling reports as important as 
this incident. I firmly believe that this saucer was mak­
ing a reconnaissance tour of the area and that if my 
report had been handled efficiently, we would be in a 
more intelligent position to know more of their in­
tentions. 
I further state that, with due respect to the Army, 
someone was sleeping at the switch, or if it is being 
kept "hush-hush," that the public reaction will be 
mass hysteria when the unknown definitely attempts 
to make contact with us (as has been proven in the 
past) . Experience has taught us that education toward 
events to come adjusts . the human mind to accept 
phenomena and cope with them. 
The Blue Book evaluation of this case: Insufficient In­
formation. 
It is clear that this evaluation was a copout. What 
information was not contained in the original letter could 
easily have been obtained through a proper Air Force In­
telligence investigation, and through interrogation of the 
numerous witnesses, whose names and addresses had been 
furnished to the Air Force. 
The Twin Dancing Lights 
Let us now turn to some of the Nocturnal Lights that 
Blue Book actually admitted they could not identify. The 
first such case involves high-altitude lights, traveling much 
faster than any known aircraft, and yet distinctly not as­
tronomical. They were observed from the deck of a yacht 
off the coast of New Jersey, from a boardwalk on the 
coast, and by a USAF pilot and his wife from the ground 
in a suburb located in the northern city limits of Phila­
delphia. The witnesses, separated by about seventy-five 
miles, were respectively a professor of chemistry at a majoris wife from the ground 
in a suburb located in the northern city limits of Phila­
delphia. The witnesses, separated by about seventy-five 
miles, were respectively a professor of chemistry at a major

--- PAGE BREAK ---und 
in a suburb located in the northern city limits of Phila­
delphia. The witnesses, separated by about seventy-five 
miles, were respectively a professor of chemistry at a major

--- PAGE BREAK ---

74 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
university in New Jersey, vice-president of --- Inc., a 
former major in the U.S. Army Ordinance Corps, II, and 
a rated USAF pilot with ten years' experience. 
Since professors at respectable institutions of learning 
rarely write to news desks unless profoundly motivated, 
Jet us start with the letter from the professor of chemistry 
to the City Desk of the Newark Evening News:· 
Enclosed is a report of an observation of two ob­
jects (lights) seen in the sky on the night of July 
1 9-20, 1 952, over Lavalette, New Jersey. Since these 
lights were very similar to those reported over Wash­
ington, D.C., the same night, and since they do not 
resemble any aircraft known to the observers, either 
in, appearance or in manner of motion or disap­
pearance, I am submitting a complete description for 
possible correlation with other similar reports. I have 
purposely delayed this report since I have no inten­
tion of allowing my name to be associated in "news­
print" with the so-called "flying saucer scare." There­
fore, while I am giving my name and position below, 
I request that they be used only for your files, or be 
given only to the Aii Force, should you judge this 
report worth passing on to them. 
The objects described were witnessed by myself and 
a companion. We had carefully compared our im­
pressions, and the description given consists of those 
impressions agreed upon by both. 
Sincerely, 
--, Ph.D. 
Professor of Chemistry 
--- University 
DESCRIPTION 
OF 
OBJECT: Two moving lights Were 
seen, each having the same appearance, approxi­
mately round, and orange-yellow in color with dull 
red alternately diffusing over much of the surface. 
They seemed about five times the apparent size of 
Venus or Jupiter, but only two or three times as 
bright. The "lights" were first seen towards the south, 
just off shore, about in the center of the Milky Way, 
at an approximate elevation angle of about fortyupiter, but only two or three times as 
bright. The "lights" were first seen towards the south, 
just off shore, about in the center of the Milky Way, 
at an approximate elevation angle of about forty

--- PAGE BREAK ---or three times as 
bright. The "lights" were first seen towards the south, 
just off shore, about in the center of the Milky Way, 
at an approximate elevation angle of about forty

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. G. ALLEN HYNEK 
75 
degrees. They moved northwards slowly, one behind 
the other, and followed nearly the same path. They 
appeared to be at least one quarter to one half mile 
apart and moving at less than one hundred miles per 
hour (assuming their apparent distance from the ob­
servers of five to ten miles) . At the point where they 
passed almost due east of the observer, they appeared 
to be at last five thousand feet high, the approximate 
elevation angle being forty-five degrees. The second, 
or trailing light, did not keep constant distance or 
course with the leading object. Shortly after passing 
to the east of the observers, both lights gradually be­
gan to turn westward towards land, passing over the 
coastline at approximately sixty degrees north of the 
observer. Continuing to circle, the lights passed to the 
west at approximately fifty degrees elevation, then 
around to the south, crossing the shoreline at about 
the same angle. During this first circling, both lights 
were smaller and fainter but more yellow in color; 
the trailing one grew fainter more rapidly, and ap­
peared to drop further behind and to shift course 
slightly to south of the leading one. At no time did any 
sound come from the lights. 
Out at sea, they continued circling, radius of turn 
being much smaller, but the brighter leading object 
crossed the shoreline once again just south of the 
observer at about an eighty-degree elevation. Both 
continued to grow much fainter, smaller, and more 
silvery in color, occasionally disappearing and .reap­
pearing as though passing over small, thin high 
clouds. The second light completely disappeared just 
over the shoreline. The first light continued west­
ward, growing very faint like a small star. It seemed 
many miles high and moving more rapidly. It finally 
disappeared in the west at about a fifty-degree eleva­
tion. The total elapsed time from first sighting to the 
final disappearance was about five or six minutes. 
NOTE : 
•
•
• their motion gave the definite impression 
of directed control, but the complete silence of the 
objects and their rapid climbing to very high altitudes 
did not resemble (to the observer) any known plane 
or dirigible.he definite impression 
of directed control, but the complete silence of the 
objects and their rapid climbing to very high altitudes 
did not resemble (to the observer) any known plane 
or dirigible.

--- PAGE BREAK ---on 
of directed control, but the complete silence of the 
objects and their rapid climbing to very high altitudes 
did not resemble (to the observer) any known plane 
or dirigible.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

76 
TilE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
The testimony of the six witnesses who were aboard the 
cruiser was summarized by Major King, USAF, who did 
the interrogation: 
At 1 2 : 15 A.M., 19 July, 1 952, two unidentified ob­
jects were seen streaking across the sky in a south­
westerly direction by six observers on a boat located 
at approximately 40° N 75° W. All members of the 
party observed two objects, and the three witnesses 
interviewed described the objects as follows: "The 
objects looked very much like stars, possibly slightly 
larger, and were of a yellowish-orange color. They 
were soundless and seemed to follow a very definite 
course across the sky. Both objects remained the .same 
distance from each other, and it was this fact that 
made the observers decide that the objects were not 
stars ( ! ) . The observers followed the objects with 
their eyes as long as they were in sight, aftËr their 
disappearance were unable to detect them again." 
Since all of the on-board observers clearly stated that the 
objects moved relatively slowly, almost drifting, the "streak­
ing" reference in this summary is hardly appropriate. How­
ever, if the objects were in view only two or three minutes, 
and crossed an appreciable portion of the sky, then they 
could hardly have been "drifting," either. There is little 
doubt, however, that these six persons out on the river 
were observing the same thing that the professor of 
chemistry reported. 
The third independent report comes from the USAF 
pilot and his wife, from Elk Park, Pennsylvania. From the . 
Air Intelligence Information Report: 
I first observed what appeared to be a star of aver­
age size and light intensity moving steadily on a head­
ing of approximately thirty degrees (north) . While the 
object was in this overhead position, I judged that it 
was moving at such a rate that it covered ten degrees 
of the sky arc in about a minute. I then noticed a 
second and identical-appearing object following the 
first. It was about ten degrees behind. My initial reac­
tion to sighting these objects was to accept them as the 
traveling lights of a very high-altitude, high-speed,appearing object following the 
first. It was about ten degrees behind. My initial reac­
tion to sighting these objects was to accept them as the 
traveling lights of a very high-altitude, high-speed,

--- PAGE BREAK ---lowing the 
first. It was about ten degrees behind. My initial reac­
tion to sighting these objects was to accept them as the 
traveling lights of a very high-altitude, high-speed,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
77 
aircraft. This impression was only momentary. In 
my experience, no aircraft lights at very high al­
titude look like these two objects, which could be 
most aptly described as moving stars of average size 
and light intensity. Since the night was dark, clear, and 
cloudless, it is pointed out that the stars appeared to 
be of more than average size and brightness. Further­
more, the movement of the object was estimated to 
be at least three times and no more than five times 
the apparent velocity of a conventional aircraft travel­
ing at four hundred miles per hour ground speed at 
twenty-five thousand feet altitude . . . . 
The rate of acceleration on the part of the trailing 
object was rapid enough to close the ten degrees of 
sky separation in about five seconds. After maintain­
ing such formation only momentarily, the trailing ob­
ject made a short, sharp ninety-degree turn to the 
left and again assumed "trail" position. [We have here 
the often-reported right-angle turn which has puz­
zled many UFOlogists over the years and has frequent­
ly led to the dismissal of the entire phenomenon on 
the grounds that right-angle turns are "impossible."] 
The witness also noted that during the period of obser­
vation there were no other aircraft sighted in the area. He 
concludes his excellent report with the statement, "Upon 
due consideration upon all that I saw and heard during 
the period of observation, I can offer no conclusion as 
to the identity of the sighted objects other than that they 
(a) were at very high altitudes, (b) were not recognizable 
as any kind of aircraft traveling lights I know about, (c) 
were moving with extraordinary velocity, (d) apparently 
had the capability of orderly flight on a single heading, 
plus the capability of flying in formation." 
Even -Blue Book had to evaluate this case "unidentified." 
This was in the days before satellites and, anyway, an 
unpowered satellite could never perform the maneuvers 
described. 
The Case of the Amateur Astronomers 
It has often been said that astronomers, and others verydays before satellites and, anyway, an 
unpowered satellite could never perform the maneuvers 
described. 
The Case of the Amateur Astronomers 
It has often been said that astronomers, and others very

--- PAGE BREAK ---es and, anyway, an 
unpowered satellite could never perform the maneuvers 
described. 
The Case of the Amateur Astronomers 
It has often been said that astronomers, and others very

--- PAGE BREAK ---

78 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
familiar with the skies, do not see UFOs. The fact of the 
matter is that they have and do.* 
When I was in charge of the United States Optical Satel­
lite Tracking Program during the International Geophys­
ical Year, we received many reports from our Moon­
watch stations concerning the strange lights that certainly 
weren't satellites. Many of these witnesses were amateur 
astronomers and generally well acquainted with the skies. 
Here is a letter, in the Blue Book files, from just such 
witnesses: 
First, I wish to make it clear to you that we are 
competent observers. We have been 
amateur as­
tronomers for many years and are well acquainted 
with all the constellations and planets. We are also able 
to recognize a meteor when we see one. During 
meteor showers we often watch the sky all night and 
we have seen many varieties and many spectacular 
meteors, and we knew them for what they were, of 
course. We are also very used to jet plane sightings, 
weather and observation balloons, helicopters, and all 
the other things, including inversions, that are often 
mistaken for UFOs. We have watched all the Sput­
niks and Echo. 
On the evening when we saw this strange object, 
we were sitting watching television when --- asked 
us to please come out and see if we could identify 
the strange thing that they were watching in the sky. 
So, we seized our binoculars and rushed out to see a 
staggering sight. It was an object a bit redder than 
Mars (orange-red) and was describing huge circles 
in the air. Then it would come to a sudden stop and 
hover. Through the binoculars it closely resembled a 
planet but it had something connected with it that a 
planet docs not have. The best way I can describe it is to 
*The Sturrock Survey of American Astronomers sets that record 
straight. More tban 4 percent of the astronomers who responded 
to the questionnaire on UFOs reported that at one time or another 
they had seen something in the sky that they could not explain. They 
jumped to no conclusion as to the origin of their sightings, but since 
these sightings remained unidentified to scientists experienced in 
observing the sky, they qualify as UFOs, since the "U" in UFOs" 
still stands for "unidentified."gin of their sightings, but since 
these sightings remained unidentified to scientists experienced in 
observing the sky, they qualify as UFOs, since the "U" in UFOs" 
still stands for "unidentified."

--- PAGE BREAK ---gs, but since 
these sightings remained unidentified to scientists experienced in 
observing the sky, they qualify as UFOs, since the "U" in UFOs" 
still stands for "unidentified."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
79 
say that it looked like a Fourth of July sparkler con­
nected to the side of the object and it appeared to go in 
and out. Then the red-orange glow went out and the 
sparkler part kept on making dashes at terrific speeds. 
It went way down into Mexico and then circled some 
more and then returned to where we were viewing it 
(San Diego) , went out over North Island and hovered 
some more. Kindly remember that seven people (three 
with binoculars) were viewing this object for a long 
time. Then it vanished and did not reappear. 
There was no noise connected with it. And there was 
not a plane of any description in the air that night. 
That is very unusual here, especially on clear nights. 
I felt that I should report the sighting to someone and 
so I called up Mr. ---, who is the head of Project 
Moonwatch here and described the sighting to him. 
He was interested and gave me his residence phone 
number so we could call him if we ever saw it again. 
Perhaps manage to triangulate it. 
None of the usual Air Force explanations could ex­
plain this sighting. We have not seen it again though 
we have looked every night. 
. 
We could not resolve the white light that seemed 
to go in and out from the red-orange light but we 
were able to resolve the red-orange light. It seemed 
to be very, very far away especially when directly 
overhead. The definition of the red-orange light was 
much smaller than we expected it to be. The sparkling 
white light seemed to move in and out a great dis­
tance, possibly as much as a hundred diameters (of 
the main body) . It left the impression of a very bright 
light passing on a long pole that could only be seen 
on one side of the long pole, and every time the 
pole would go round, you could see the bright white 
light go in and out on one side of the main body only. 
The whole thing maneuvered so much in circles, going 
to and from us, that we must have viewed it from all 
sides. 
This was the most mysterious, unexplainable and 
spectacular sighting that we have ever made and we 
would appreciate any explanation that you can make 
of it.we must have viewed it from all 
sides. 
This was the most mysterious, unexplainable and 
spectacular sighting that we have ever made and we 
would appreciate any explanation that you can make 
of it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---it from all 
sides. 
This was the most mysterious, unexplainable and 
spectacular sighting that we have ever made and we 
would appreciate any explanation that you can make 
of it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

80 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
The Air Force did not attempt one of its usual natural 
explanations for this one and has it listed as ''unidentified." 
The Night of the Full Moon 
Occasionally, Blue Book received reports of sightings 
that were several years old. This phenomenon is both dis­
turbing and frustrating. Why the persons concerned had 
delayed so long in reporting can only be conjectured; per­
haps it took them that long to "get their nerve up." But 
late reporting made any investigation virtually impossible. 
In · addition, records were difficult to trace, and often 
witnesses had moved, leaving no forwarding address. Still, 
some ,of the late reports are quite spectacular and worth 
mentioning here. 
Here is one that came in from the environs of St. Louis, 
Missouri. Its very artlessness seems to lend it authenticity. 
Blue Book may not have investigated this case at all, as 
there is no direct entry pertaining to it, and since the 
writer of the letter gave no definite date, it would have 
been extremely difficult to trace. An excerpt from the 
latter is, however, instructive: 
It may be a little late in trying to say I saw, or 
believe I saw, what my brother-in-law and father-in­
law probably seen [sic] in 1959. I am not sure it really 
was there, but whatever, it was. I never will forget 
it the longest day I live. [They were returning home 
from an errand, describing in detail exactly what route 
they took.] He states: "Now this exactly what has 
taken place. We had to go south onto U.S. 40, take a 
left turn to get upon the slab [?] to go west to Wenson­
ville, Missouri. In so doing, as we came upon the slab 
[?], we made a turn, the car lights headed in the sky 
SE to the N and directly south of us towards Weldon 
Springs, Missouri, where there is a government plant, 
making something to do with atomic works, was a 
large round object, spinning directly over this plant. 
Now there is nQ other lights in that neck of the 
woods, or airfields, or weather balloons that would 
hover that low and cast that kind of light as we seen. 
Sirs, I am not making this story up, because there is nQ other lights in that neck of the 
woods, or airfields, or weather balloons that would 
hover that low and cast that kind of light as we seen. 
Sirs, I am not making this story up, because the

--- PAGE BREAK ---s in that neck of the 
woods, or airfields, or weather balloons that would 
hover that low and cast that kind of light as we seen. 
Sirs, I am not making this story up, because the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
8 1 
three of us were scared to say anything and we 
stopped and got out and look up at this object for at 
least twenty minutes before it took off in a south­
easterly direction, and was out of sight in about ten, 
fifteen seconds, just leaving a vapor trail. Now there 
was a beautiful full moon that night and the three 
of us stood there with our mouths open, not saying 
a word until it was out of sight, then --- spoke 
up and said, "Did you fellows see that thing?" I said, 
yes, but it was as if someone else said it for me. I was 
scared stiff. Nobody else said anything else until we 
got in front. And we never spoke about what we saw 
that night to no one. But the three of us watched the 
papers to see if anyone else saw this thing and we 
never read of anyone seeing it and so we just kept 
quiet about the matter until I read your article about 
such things don't exist [apparently an Air Force article, 
.since this was directed to the Air Force]. I wonder a 
lot, did we really see it, or do people have the same 
vision of something at the same time. 
. 
• 
. I made a 
sketch or drawing of what I thought we saw but to 
me I am a firm believer in seeing is believing and yet 
I can not force myself to believe that we three really 
did see. Now I am sure that you understand in all this 
time that we are just plain people, not looking for 
publicity or newspaper write-up. If you do, you will 
have to consult with all three cause the only reason 
I am writing to you at this time, I still wonder about 
the whole thing. Was it really real or not? Now I am 
not asking no one to believe this, because any sane 
person would say it is too fantastic. I am sure that 
if someone came up to me with such a yarn as what 
we saw I would say that he was crazy as hell, or try­
ing to gain something through publicity. I am sure 
we three are sane and brave men. We hunt a lot in 
places where no one else will go on account of the 
ghost stories, but I am not afraid of anything that is 
in reason. Please tell us if there is such a thing as we 
really saw. We have never told even our families, 
You know you can confide in us. 
I wonder a lot, did we really see this or do people 
have the same vision of things (that are not there) at 
the same time?saw. We have never told even our families, 
You know you can confide in us. 
I wonder a lot, did we really see this or do people 
have the same vision of things (that are not there) at 
the same time?

--- PAGE BREAK ---old even our families, 
You know you can confide in us. 
I wonder a lot, did we really see this or do people 
have the same vision of things (that are not there) at 
the same time?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

82 
THE HYNEK UPO REPORT 
Philosophers have pondered this question of the nature 
of reality, yet this appealing letter obviously came from 
plain, simple people who were honestly perplexed by 
their UFO experience. 
The Vertical Red Dive 
Let's move on now to an "Unidentified" object involving 
a foreign sighting of a Nocturnal Light. According to Blue 
Book, on June 22, 1952, the following incident took place 
on the Korean Front: 
Two sergeants, working in the 
--- operations 
office reported sighting an object approximately four 
feet· in diameter and orange in color at 10:45 P.M., 
22 June 1952, just above the K-6 Airstrip in Korea. 
This object 
•
.
.
 was first spotted at the altitude of 
eight hundred feet above the "K-6 Airstrip, coming 
from the north. Immediately after the sighting, the 
object went into a vertical dive and suddenly leveled 
off at a point approximately one hundred feet above 
the west end of the airstrip. During the dive, ob­
servers noted a trail of bright red flame extending 
from two to five feet in length. Without delay, it 
headed in a westerly direction about one quarter mile 
(two to three seconds elapsed during this maneuver) , 
where it hovered briefly over. the crest of some hills 
nearby. 
The object then circled in a hundred-and-eighty-de­
gree turn to the right, spending about forty-five to 
sixty seconds in the turn. After the completion of the 
turn the object emitted a bright flash and headed in an 
easterly direction for a distance of about one-half 
mile. No trail was noted at this time. At this point, 
a second bright flash was noticed, followed by com­
plete darkness. No moon was shining at this hour and 
during the entire sequence of maneuvers, no sound 
was heard from the object. 
This is followed by a comment from the intelligence of­
ficer who prepared the report: 
As a result of the combined and individual interro­
gation of the two enlisted men concerned, there isobject. 
This is followed by a comment from the intelligence of­
ficer who prepared the report: 
As a result of the combined and individual interro­
gation of the two enlisted men concerned, there is

--- PAGE BREAK ---llowed by a comment from the intelligence of­
ficer who prepared the report: 
As a result of the combined and individual interro­
gation of the two enlisted men concerned, there is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
83 
little doubt in the writer's mind that they did see 
some sort of flaming object in the sky at the time 
and place mentioned. Both men hold responsible jobs 
in the operations office of their squadron. 
The Object Over the Air Base 
Continuing on our foreign tour of nocturnal lights, a 
most interesting Blue Book case was observed on March 
25, 1953, from Rabat, French Morocco. The Air Intelli­
gence Information Report reads: 
On the night of 25 March 1953, I acted as pilot on 
a routine night training flight from Sale Airdrome, 
French Morocco, to return to Sale via Safi, French 
Morocco; Nouasseur, French Morocco; Sidi Slimane. 
Also aboard was [a crew of four]. 
At approximately 9 :23 P.M., I observed what ap­
peared to .be an approaching aircraft directly ahead 
and some two thousand to three thousand feet above. 
The automatic pilot was immediately turned to the off 
position, which is customary when passing other air­
craft. There were no red or green running lights 
visible, but the light which was detected appeared to 
be of a normal size and intensity of a white aircraft 
running light. The rate of closure was quite rapid, 
and the light passed overhead and slightly to the 
right, still some two thousand to three thousand feet 
above our aircraft. There was no evidence of a trail or 
exhaust or of any red or green running lights. Major 
Rend who was acting as Instructor-pilot •
•
•
 watched 
the lights from the right window as they passed over­
head and, shortly . after, turned and remarked to me 
that this appeared to be a very unusual aircraft light. 
I immediately made a turn to the left to see if the 
object could be seen again. Upon completion of this 
turn, we were almost directly over Nouasseur Air 
Base, still at five thousand feet, and the light was 
visible at a slightly greater altitude than ours appar­
ently several miles south of Nouasseur. It was in a turn 
to the left at this time. We continued to turn and ob­
serve the light which continued to turn above us.tly greater altitude than ours appar­
ently several miles south of Nouasseur. It was in a turn 
to the left at this time. We continued to turn and ob­
serve the light which continued to turn above us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

84 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
During this time, the radius of turn was continually 
decreased [see sketch] and the speed noticeably dimin­
ished. 
At one time we reversed the direction of our turn 
in order to keep the light in sight and eventually 
were in an extremely tight turn to tpe right. 
During this period of some two or three minutes, 
I had contacted Casablanca Air Traffic Control and 
requested any information as to traffic reported over 
Nouasseur. Receiving a negative reply, I contacted 
t 
N 
Position report 
to 'sablanca 
control 2120 Z. 
Runway 
, 
Light stopped 
" 
here. Est. time 
2128 Z. Disappeared 
here est. time 2215 Z 
Red 
Descending rapidly 
speed estimated 
In excess of 400 
MPH 
Approaching light initially sighted 
at "X." Object closed rapidly and 
passed overhead slightly to right. 
Estimated altitude 7-8,000 feet. 
Time approx. 2123 Z. 
Nouasseur Air Base 
Passed through 
5,000-foot level here 
I 
Speed slowing 
rapidly, sudden 
increase In 
altitude 
noted by 
Maj. Radin 
Quite low and 
slowing rapidly 
-here 
Path of UFO as seen by captain and crew of training flight on 
evening of March 25, 1953, In French Morocco.

--- PAGE BREAK ---altitude 
noted by 
Maj. Radin 
Quite low and 
slowing rapidly 
-here 
Path of UFO as seen by captain and crew of training flight on 
evening of March 25, 1953, In French Morocco.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J, ALLEN HYNEK 
85 
the Nouasseur tower and inquired if there were any 
known jet air traffic in the vicinity. Again, the reply 
was negative. The behavior of the light at this time 
was certainly very different from the movement nor­
mally associated with aircraft, and this fact was reported 
to Nouasseur tower. There were noticeable and abrupt 
changes in direction and in speed, though generally, 
the motion was in a smooth curve. After several three­
hundred-and-sixty-degree turns which were required 
to keep the light in view, it moved off south of 
Nouasseur at a very rapid rate and in a turn of 
extremely large radius and began to descend rapidly. 
The speed at this time appeared to be a maximum 
and I would judge it to be well in excess of four hun­
dred miles per hour. The light passed a one-point 
spread between temperature and dew point. After re­
porting the position of the object once again, we ad­
vised Nouasseur tower that we were proceeding on 
our course to Sidi Stimane. We returned to five thou­
sand feet and advised Casablanca Control. During 
this entire period from the first sighting at approxi­
mately 9 : 23 to the grounding of the object at ap­
proximately 9 : 28, we were advised by Nouasseur that 
two other C-47 aircraft were in the area, at six thou­
sand feet to the north and one in the traffic pattern 
preparing for a landing. Both of these aircraft were lo­
cated visually and their positions checked continually 
during the period that the light was also being ob­
served. The landing C-4 7 was on base-leg and al­
most directly below us at the time that the light ap­
proached the nearest point to the field. The landing 
C-47 turned almost directly over it, or what appeared 
to be almost directly over it, on the final approach to 
landing. 
Outbound from Nouasseur we were again contacted 
by Nouasseur tower and requested to furnish our ex­
act position. The tower operator also informed us that 
Nouasseur VCA was reporting four blips on their 
radar screen but that only three aircraft were known 
to be in the area. Shortly thereafter, Nouasseur re­
quested that we return to the vicinity of Nouasseur 
and continue to circle in the vicinity where the ob­
ject was last reported. This was done after securinge area. Shortly thereafter, Nouasseur re­
quested that we return to the vicinity of Nouasseur 
and continue to circle in the vicinity where the ob­
ject was last reported. This was done after securing

--- PAGE BREAK ---eafter, Nouasseur re­
quested that we return to the vicinity of Nouasseur 
and continue to circle in the vicinity where the ob­
ject was last reported. This was done after securing

--- PAGE BREAK ---

86 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
the necessary clearance from Casablanca Air Traffic 
Control. 
Upon return to Nouasseur, the light was still plain­
ly visible on the ground and in the same location and 
still exhibiting the same irregular fluctuation in in­
tensity. This was reported to Nouasseur tower and 
we set up a circle at four thousand feet above the 
position. During this time, we were advised that the 
airdrome officer at Nouasseur was directing a ground 
party to the vicinity. The circling continued for what 
I estimate to be some fifteen to twenty minutes. At 
approximately 
1 0 : 15, my attention was distracted 
from the point on the ground momentarily; turning 
back, the light was no longer visible. This was also re­
ported to Nouasseur tower. The ground fog was in­
creasing at this time •
•
•
 however, judging from other 
lights in the area, the fog had not yet reached suffi­
cient intensity to cause this disappearance. 
Shortly thereafter, we were requested to fly over 
the area where the object was last seen and shine 
our landing lights directly over the spot. This was 
accomplished at an altitude of fifteen hundred feet. 
A second circle was made at an altitude of one 
thousand feet above the ground and we discharged 
a green flare to clearly identify the location. This 
green flare was answered with a red flare discharged 
from the ground party to show their location . . . . The 
ground fog was increasing in intensity and it became 
obvious that further search of the area was useless . 
. . , We were returning to Sale and we landed at ap­
proximately 1 1 : 1 5 P.M. 
The lengthy report ends as follows : 
To the best of my knowledge, there is no meteor­
ological condition which could account for this sight­
ing. At no time was there any evidence of form or 
shape to the object. It was particularly noticeable 
because the dark outline of the other two C-47 air­
craft in the area could be discerned. . . . The move­
ment of this object was observed almost entirely dur­
ing the period in question by all three officers in the 
aircraft, including myself.47 air­
craft in the area could be discerned. . . . The move­
ment of this object was observed almost entirely dur­
ing the period in question by all three officers in the 
aircraft, including myself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---area could be discerned. . . . The move­
ment of this object was observed almost entirely dur­
ing the period in question by all three officers in the 
aircraft, including myself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
87 
It is incredible to note Blue Book's evaluation of this 
sighting. Despite the minute details included in the report 
and the officers' concern, the evaluation is: "Aircraft/ 
ground light." To the military mind, there could be no 
other possibility. 
The Balloon and the F-94 
Continuing our world coverage of UFO sightings, and 
also Blue Book's fascination with balloons (this one was 
evaluated as "balloon with flare") , we take you now to 
Chorwon, Korea : 
On the morning of May 31, 1952, at about four 
A.M., the guard on post six called me by field tele­
phone and called my attention to a bright object in 
the sky northeast of my position. At this time I was 
on guard duty at post four. It seemed like a falling 
star at first. My post was about one hundred feet 
above the camp which is at approximately two thou­
sand feet above sea level in elevation. The object 
stopped falling at about two thousand feet and went 
straight back up again to about three thousand to 
four thousand feet. It started its fall first from about 
thirty-six hundred feet. 
The object started to head towards the east for 
about one-half mile and then it stopped and reversed 
its course and moved back to the northeast in a 
smooth flight at a speed of about one hundred to one 
hundred fifty miles per hour. Then it reversed its 
heading once again in an easterly direction and started 
to climb at a forty-five-degree angle away from my 
position. As it headed away, it picked up speed in a 
jerking motion and then faded from sight. The facts 
stated in this statement are all true to the best of my 
knowledge. 
The statement from the other guard is corroborative and 
adds further details : 
On the morning of 3 1 May, 1952, I was standing 
guard duty when I heard a jet in the north. It had af my 
knowledge. 
The statement from the other guard is corroborative and 
adds further details : 
On the morning of 3 1 May, 1952, I was standing 
guard duty when I heard a jet in the north. It had a

--- PAGE BREAK ---e statement from the other guard is corroborative and 
adds further details : 
On the morning of 3 1 May, 1952, I was standing 
guard duty when I heard a jet in the north. It had a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

88 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
pulsating sound like it was idling. I couldn't see any­
thing at first but after a few seconds a small light ap­
peared at about thirty-five hundred feet. I thought a 
helicopter was hovering there with a light on one 
side and turned that side to me. The light began 
dropping at a very slow rate and grew larger as it 
dropped. As it got larger, it took on a glow. It 
stopped falling at about twenty-six hundred altitude 
and it took the form of a disc. The center was duller 
in color with respect to the rim, which was much 
brighter. 
The object started moving to the east. It seemed to 
me to be moving with short, jerky movements. It 
moved a ways and then changed direction. The change 
s,eemed instantaneous. It started moving west. 
It 
traveled west but not as far as the point from where 
it had first started moving to the east. Again it 
changed direction and then the change appeared to be 
instantaneous. It started heading east again. It was 
climbing at an angle of approximately twenty-five 
degrees. It traveled cast for a while and started climb­
ing to the north at an angle of approximately forty­
five degrees. It kept climbing until I could no longer 
see it, or it had just faded out. I could still hear it. 
From the time when it first started climbing until it 
disappeared, took approximately three to four sec­
onds. The facts stated in this statement are all true 
to the best of my knowledge. 
But the best is yet to come. This unidentified object 
was observed from an F-94 sent to intercept it. A portion 
of the Air Intelligence Information Report follows : 
A brief description of the sighted object: 
SHAPE : round 
sizE : undetermined due to fact that there was no way 
to compare with any known object 
coLoR: brilliant white 
NUMBER OF OBJECTS : one 
TRAIL OR,EXHAUST : negative 
PROPULSION SYSTEM : unknown 
ESTIMATED SPEED: four hundred and fifty knots whenno way 
to compare with any known object 
coLoR: brilliant white 
NUMBER OF OBJECTS : one 
TRAIL OR,EXHAUST : negative 
PROPULSION SYSTEM : unknown 
ESTIMATED SPEED: four hundred and fifty knots when

--- PAGE BREAK ---with any known object 
coLoR: brilliant white 
NUMBER OF OBJECTS : one 
TRAIL OR,EXHAUST : negative 
PROPULSION SYSTEM : unknown 
ESTIMATED SPEED: four hundred and fifty knots when

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
89 
pulling away from the F-94 at thirty thousand feet 
altitude. 
AERODYNAMIC FEATURES: impossible to observe at 
close range due to blinding light of object 
ANY UNUSUAL MANEUVERS: none except that extreme­
ly capable of maneuvering 
MANNER OF APPROACH: F-94 descended in left turn 
to intercept unidentified object six thousand feet 
below on a ninety-degree course at altitude of eight 
thousand feet. Unidentified object began a port 
climb at the same time to intercept with the Sun­
beam F-94 and accomplished a maneuver which 
silhouetted the F-94 against a lighted dawn. The 
F-94 turned on afterburner and tried two quarter­
ing head-on passes with the unidentified object re­
sulting in neither being able to get astern of the 
other. . . . Maneuvers ensued at three thousand 
feet where more passes were exchanged for a few 
minutes. The unidentified object then increased its 
speed to an estimated four hundred knots on a 
forty-five-degree beading and began pulling away 
from the F-94. When last seen the unidentified ob­
ject had seemingly increased its speed to approxi­
mately four hundred and fifty knots whereupon the 
F-94 gave up pursuit at 3 : 55 A.M. and returned to 
base. 
ANY OTHER PERTINENT OR UNUSUAL FEATURES: the ob­
ject possessed a superior speed, superior climbing 
ability, and was able to turn equally well as the 
F-94. 
MANNER OF OBSERVATION : visual 
PROM AIR OR SURFACE: pilot and radar operator in 
the air and personnel on the ground radar station. 
ANY TYPE OF OPTICAL OR ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT 
USED: neither F-94 nor ground radar station could 
paint the unidentified object at any time. 
It is of interest that the ground observers did not appear 
to observe the dogfight in the air. A note by the preparing 
officer states: "This is believed to be the same sighting on 
which interception was attempted by an F-94." 
Now these could have been two separate reports, since 
the surface sighting was made at 3 : 50 A.M. and lasted ap-s believed to be the same sighting on 
which interception was attempted by an F-94." 
Now these could have been two separate reports, since 
the surface sighting was made at 3 : 50 A.M. and lasted ap-

--- PAGE BREAK ---same sighting on 
which interception was attempted by an F-94." 
Now these could have been two separate reports, since 
the surface sighting was made at 3 : 50 A.M. and lasted ap-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

90 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
proximately two minutes, whereas the interceptor pilot gave 
the time as 3 :45 A.M. but stated that he had observed it 
for approximately ninƍ minutes. It is nevertheless extremely 
puzzling that the ground observers did not see the F-94, 
unless the two-minute segment of the total nine minutes 
of pilot observation occurred at an "uninteresting" period 
of the interception, and the ground observers did not feel 
it important enough to report the presence of an F-94, to 
which they were fully accustomed on a daily basis. It is 
probably safer, however, to consider these as two separate 
incidents, both puzzling, both remaining "Unidentified." 
Let us conclude this parade of Nocturnal Lights by 
returning to the United States. These next three cases were 
"identified" by Blue book as "meteor," "conventional air­
craft,'1 and "inversion/reflections,'' respectively. We shall 
let the evidence speak for itself. 
The Jet and the Meteor 
This unpublicized case goes back to July 13, 1952, when 
the flight crew of National Airlines Flight 611, a DC-4 
en route from Jacksonville to Washington, D.C., observed 
an unidentified flying object at about 3 A.M. EST, approxi­
mately sixty miles southwest of Washington, D.C. The 
Blue Book report states: 
It was dark and the crew was unable to observe 
any form or shape within a round ball of bluish­
white light. It was hovering to the west of the aircraft 
when sighted, then it came up to eleven thousand 
feet, the aircraft altitude at the time, and hovered 
within two miles of the left · wing of the northbound 
aircraft, moving along with the aircraft. The airline 
captain turned on all the aircraft lights (taillights, 
landing lights, etc.) and the object took off up and 
away like a star [?] with an estimated speed of de­
parture of one thousand miles per hour. No other air 
traffic was reported in the general area at the time of 
the sighting. No activity or condition which might 
account for the sighting, no physical evidence, and 
no attempt to intercept or identify the object has been 
reported. 
·eral area at the time of 
the sighting. No activity or condition which might 
account for the sighting, no physical evidence, and 
no attempt to intercept or identify the object has been 
reported. 
·

--- PAGE BREAK ---e of 
the sighting. No activity or condition which might 
account for the sighting, no physical evidence, and 
no attempt to intercept or identify the object has been 
reported. 
·

--- PAGE BREAK ---

. DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
9 1 
Aircraft crew submitted information to Washing­
ton National 
Airport Control Tower. Controller 
Rudick of Washington Tower advised Washington 
Air Traffic Control Center. Senior controller Barnes. 
submitted information to Ohmsted Flight Service 
Center, 3 :40 A.M ., July 17, 1952. 
Due to the occupation and probable experience of 
the reporting observers, the reliability of information 
is considered to be excellent. 
Then why was it dismissed as a meteor? Meteors do not 
hover, do not move along with the aircraft, and then 
take off "up and away." The only way out of this one 
would have been for the evaluator to have claimed that 
both pilots were momentarily subject to a hallucination! 
A Bright Star Getting Brighter 
The following UFO report was evaluated as "conven­
tional aircraft" despite the maneuvers described by the two 
witnesses, one of whom had been a technical representa­
tive for Lockheed Overseas Corporation and the Curtis­
Wright Corporation in England and was also a scientific 
consultant to the Joint Chiefs of Staff. (He was part of the 
group which evaluated German aviation development 
after the end of World War II.) Here are excerpts from a 
letter sent to U.S. Air Force Headquarters by this tech­
nically qualified witness. 
Gentlemen: I would like to report an unusual aerial 
sighting. Saturday evening, April 28 {1956), at ap­
proximately eight-thirty P.M., my wife and I were 
sitting on our front porch steps in semi-darkness 
when we were attracted by what appeared to be a 
bright star getting brighter. For more than ten sec­
onds, its light increased to a white brilliance, and then 
it began to dim to a medium dull red. 
This observance was casual until the light started 
to move from east to west. A transport aircraft bound 
for Newport was passing in the same line of sight at 
two thousand feet altitude and was noted to be mov­
ing at a little more than double the speed of the light.to west. A transport aircraft bound 
for Newport was passing in the same line of sight at 
two thousand feet altitude and was noted to be mov­
ing at a little more than double the speed of the light.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t aircraft bound 
for Newport was passing in the same line of sight at 
two thousand feet altitude and was noted to be mov­
ing at a little more than double the speed of the light.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

92 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
The brightness of the light diminished after about 
thirty seconds' travel and it became dull red. Then 
its movement accelerated to what must have been 
enormous speed, considering its estimated high alti­
tude. Then its light became faint as it wobbled and 
disappeared. Elapsed time from first noting the grow­
ing brilliance of the light did not amount to more than 
three minutes. 
Lacking any equipment to record this phenomenon, 
I immediately drew a map of the southern sky as it 
was at the time of the occurrence. The enclosed map 
also details the movement of the light and other es­
timates which may help locate the area of the odd 
sighting. 
He then states his credentials and continues : 
Speaking from this background, I can assure you that 
the aerial object was not an aircraft of any revealed 
type, that it was not a meteor, nor a comet. I have 
always been skeptical about these things until now, 
and decided to write only after I talked with a radar 
man. I am sure that if what we saw was a solid body, 
it would have appeared on metropolitan area radar 
screens. 
In my opinion, a man who evaluated German aviation 
development after the war ought to know an aircraft when 
he sees one! The least Blue Book could have done was to 
have arranged a personal interview with the man by a 
qualified intelligence agent. 
The Two Red Bluff Policemen 
Finally, we have a Nocturnal Light case which Blue 
Book explained away as "atmospheric inversion." This 
evaluation is, once again, untenable, since the physics of 
atmospheric inversion simply won't allow mirages to display 
the' antics reported by these two police officers on patrol 
around midnight near Red Bluff, California, on August 
13, 1960. Unfortunately, lack of proper investigation has 
deprived us of the knowledge of a great many details;e two police officers on patrol 
around midnight near Red Bluff, California, on August 
13, 1960. Unfortunately, lack of proper investigation has 
deprived us of the knowledge of a great many details;

--- PAGE BREAK ---s on patrol 
around midnight near Red Bluff, California, on August 
13, 1960. Unfortunately, lack of proper investigation has 
deprived us of the knowledge of a great many details;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR, J. ALLEN HYNEK 
93 
however, the case is still a fine example of the Blue Book 
party line: "It can't be, therefore it isn't." A letter written 
to the Area Commander, Red Bluff, very shortly after the 
sighting states: 
Sir: Oftlcer Scott and I were eastbound on Hoag 
Road, east of Corning, looking for a speeding motor­
cycle when we saw what first appeared to be a huge 
airliner dropping from the sky. The object was very 
low and directly in front of us. We stopped and leaped 
from the patrol car in order to get a position on what 
we were sure was going to be an airplane crash. 
From our position outside the car, the first thing we 
noticed was the absolute silence. Still assuming it to 
be an aircraft with power off, we continued to watch 
until the object was probably to within one hundred 
to two hundred feet of the ground, when it suddenly 
reversed completely at high speed and gained ap­
proximately five hundred feet altitude. Then the ob­
ject stopped. At this time, it was clearly visible to 
both of us and obviously not an aircraft of any de­
sign familiar to us. It was surrounded by a glow, 
making the round or oblong object visible. At each 
end or each side of the object, there were definite red 
lights. At times about five white lights were visible 
between the red lights. As we watched, the object 
moved again and performed aerial feats that were 
actually unbelievable. At this time, we radioed to 
Tehama County Sheriff's Office to see if they could 
contact the local radar base. The radar base con­
firmed the UFO-completcly unidentified. [There is no 
record in the files of this radar confirmation.] Officer 
Scott and myself, after our verification, continued to 
watch the object. On two occasions, the object came 
directly towards the patrol vehicle. Each time it ap­
proached, the object turned, swept the area with a 
huge red light. [It was never determined, even rough­
ly, just how close, the object came and over what area 
it appeared, at what rate the area was swept with the 
red light, etc.] Officer Scott turned the red light on 
the patrol vehicle towards the object and it im­
mediately went away from us. We observed the object, at what rate the area was swept with the 
red light, etc.] Officer Scott turned the red light on 
the patrol vehicle towards the object and it im­
mediately went away from us. We observed the object

--- PAGE BREAK ---rea was swept with the 
red light, etc.] Officer Scott turned the red light on 
the patrol vehicle towards the object and it im­
mediately went away from us. We observed the object

--- PAGE BREAK ---

94 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
use the red beam approximately six or seven times, 
sweeping the sky and ground areas. 
The object began moving slowly in an easterly di­
rection and we followed. We proceeded to the Vina 
Plains Fire Station where we again were able to lo­
cate the object. As we watched, it was approached 
by a similar object from the south [the mating of 
mirages, no doubt]. It moved near the first object 
and both stopped, remaining in that position for some 
time, occasionally emitting the red beam. Finally, 
both objects disappeared below the eastern horizon. 
We returned to the sheriff's office and met Deputy 
Frye and Deputy Montgomery, who had gone to Los 
Molinos after contacting the radar base. Both had 
seen the UFO clearly and described to us what we 
saw. The night jailer was also able to see the object 
for a short time. Each described the object and its 
maneuvers exactly as we saw them. We first saw the 
object at 1 1 :30 P.M. and observed it for approximate­
ly two hours and fifteen minutes. Each time the ob­
ject neared us we experienced intense radio inter­
ference. 
Nocturnal Lights may be the most numerous of all 
the cases in the Blue Book files. The Air Force generally 
disregarded them unless a positive identification could be 
made. Then, any case that was "identified" was held up as 
a shining example of the good work Blue Book was doing 
in solving the UFO problem. 
The repetitive nature of some of these Nocturnal Light 
reports and the consistent lack of follow-up investigation 
by Blue Book remind me of a teletype message that came 
into the Blue Book office one day when I happened to be 
there. It was so representative of the ofihand manner in 
which UFOs were being treated at that time, that I had a 
copy pinned to my office wall for many months. It was 
an impressive message, at least 95 percent of which was 
made up of names and addresses of people who were to re­
ceive it-a long distribution list of officers and establish­
ments within t.lJe military and the government. 
The message: JUST ANOTHER UFO.s 
made up of names and addresses of people who were to re­
ceive it-a long distribution list of officers and establish­
ments within t.lJe military and the government. 
The message: JUST ANOTHER UFO.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5=============== 
FlYING DISCS IN THE DAYLIGHT 
Somebody will have to show me one of these discs 
before I will believe it. 
-1st Lt. J.C.M., Muroc AFB 
These words were spoken in the Post Exchange at Muroc 
Air Force Base in California's Mojave Desert, on July 9, 
1947, by the base billeting officer. It was 9 :30 A.M. and the 
conversation had turned to reports of flying saucers--a 
subject which had been headlining the local newspapers for 
the past week. 
The lieutenant's statement was soon to fall into the cate­
gory of "famous last words," for just moments later, as 
he left the Post Exchange, he witnessed a most startling 
event. His signed affidavit from the Project Blue Book files 
tells the story: 
Upon leaving the Post Exchange, I went directly to 
my office and before entering heard one of our local 
aircraft in the traffic pattern. Looking up, as I always 
do, I observed two silver objects of either a spherical 
or disc-like shape, moving about 300 miles an hour, 
or perhaps less, at approximately 8,000 feet heading 
at about 320° ( 3 1 5 ° is NW) . 
When I first observed these objects, I called S/Sgt. 
--- and T/Sgt. --- and Miss --- (names 
on file at the Center for UFO Studies) who immedi­
ately came to where I was standing. I pointed in the 
direction of the objects and asked them the question, 
"Tell me what you see up there." \¥hereupon, all the 
three, with sundry comments, stated, "They are flying 
discs." To further verify my observance, I asked them 
to tell me in what direction the objects were traveling,

--- PAGE BREAK ---pon, all the 
three, with sundry comments, stated, "They are flying 
discs." To further verify my observance, I asked them 
to tell me in what direction the objects were traveling,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

96 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
without indicating the direction myself, and again all 
three, in a consistent nature, stated that the. objects 
were moving towards Mojave, California. 
I had time to look away several times and renew 
my vision of the objects to make sure that they were 
not any result of eyestrain, or in any nature an optical 
illusion. The objects in question were not, repeat, were 
not, aircraft and the objects could not have been 
weather balloons released from this station since they 
were traveling against the prevailing wind and since 
the speed at which they were traveling and the hori­
zontal direction in which they were traveling disquali­
fied the fact that they were weather balloons. 
After the observance of this phenomenon, hoping 
tllat I might have time to enlist further witnesses, I 
immediately ran into the dispensary to get personnel 
who are medical officers to verify, for my own curi­
osity, the actual observance of these objects but by 
the time I reached the back porch of the dispensary 
. 
. 
• the objects had by that time disappeared due to 
the speed with which they were traveling. Upon fur­
ther investigation, two of us at the same time sighted 
another object of a silver spherical or disc-like nature 
at approximately 8,000 feet traveling in circles over 
the north end. I called the objects to the attention of 
[other medical personnel] and other personnel stand­
ing nearby. All of us saw the objects, with the excep­
tion of two out of seven personnel. All of us looked 
away from the objects several times to make sure [it 
was not] an optical illusion. 
From my actual observance the object circled in too 
tight a circle and [on] too severe a plane to be any 
aircraft that I know of. It could, not have been any 
type of bird because of the reflection that was created 
when the object reached certain altitudes. The object 
could not have been a local weather balloon for it is 
impossible that a weather balloon would stay at the 
same altitude as long and circle in such a consistent 
nature as did the above-mentioned object. 
I am familiar with the results of too constant vi­
sion of the sun or any bright object and am aware that 
optical illusions are possible and probable. I wish tore as did the above-mentioned object. 
I am familiar with the results of too constant vi­
sion of the sun or any bright object and am aware that 
optical illusions are possible and probable. I wish to

--- PAGE BREAK ---mentioned object. 
I am familiar with the results of too constant vi­
sion of the sun or any bright object and am aware that 
optical illusions are possible and probable. I wish to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
97 
make this statement, that the above-mentioned obser­
vance was that of actual subject matter. 
This statement has been given freely and volun­
tarily without any threat or promises under duress. 
Affidavits from two other witnesses, accompanying the 
lieutenant's report, confirm it and add that the speed of 
the objects was about 400 miles per hour. One of the wit· 
nesses, who had 20/20 vision, stated, "I have been flying 
in and have been around all types of aircraft since 1943 
and never in my life have I ever seen anything such as 
this." 
I was impressed with this case, one of the very first that 
came to my attention when I became Astronomical Con­
sultant to Project Sign. I remember wondering why the Air 
Force had not paid much greater attention to it and to a 
similar sighting that occurred at Muroc AFB (now Ed­
wards AFB) just two hours later. The witnesses were cer­
tainly excellent, independent military men describing the 
most unusual sighting on a clear sunny day. What more 
could the Air Force want? 
Capt. Ruppelt once asked: "What constitutes proof? 
Does a UFO have to land at the River Entrance of the 
Pentagon near the Joint Chiefs of Staff offices? Or is it 
proof when a ground radar station detects a UFO, sends a 
jet to intercept it, the jet pilot sees it, and locks on with 
his radar, only to have the UFO streak away at a phenom­
enal speed? Is it proof when a jet pilot fires at a UFO and 
sticks to his story even under the threat of court-martial? 
Does this constitute proof?"* 
Men have undoubtedly been convicted and sent to the 
gallows on less evidence, but science is a strict taskmaster 
when it comes to proof. It is somewhat easier, of course, 
for science to accept newcomers like black holes in space 
or quasars which fit into the already established field of 
astronomy. 
But since UFOs simply do not fit accepted patterns in 
science, far more evidence is demanded. The Catch-22 
here is that precisely because UFOs don't "fit," it hasn't 
been considered profitable to expend sufficient time, en-
*The Report on Unidentified Flying Objects.re evidence is demanded. The Catch-22 
here is that precisely because UFOs don't "fit," it hasn't 
been considered profitable to expend sufficient time, en-
*The Report on Unidentified Flying Objects.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ded. The Catch-22 
here is that precisely because UFOs don't "fit," it hasn't 
been considered profitable to expend sufficient time, en-
*The Report on Unidentified Flying Objects.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

98 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
ergy, and resources to try to get the solid evidence that 
would finally constitute proof. Certainly Project BlJJe Book 
didn't make the attempt, even though I often urged this 
upon project officers. 
Moreover, I, too, was looking for "final and positive" 
proof. In my own Project Sign report I had this to say 
about the above case: 
No astronomical explanation for this incident is 
possible. [As an astronomical consultant, my official 
responsibility ended there.] It is tempting to explain 
the objects as ordinary aircraft observed under un­
usual light conditions, but the evidence of the "tight 
circle" maneuvers, if maintained, is strongly contra­
dictory. This incident must be judged with reference 
to other similar incidents, which probably have a 
common explanation. 
The motion and general pattern of behavior are remark­
ably uniform in almost all cases of Daylight Discs. The 
Daylight Disc often appears metallic, and can vary in size 
fro¼ that of a small car to that of a commercial aircraft. 
The shape varies from circular to "cigar shape," but the 
circular or oval form predominates. 
Over the years, the Daylight Disc has been consistently 
reported as capable of both high speed and of hovering; 
capable of extremely rapid takeoffs and rapid stops; and 
being generally noiseless. It is capable of other maneuvers 
(reversal of motion, turning in tight circles, non-banked 
curves) which even our most modern aircraft cannot dupli­
cate. As for the "propulsion system" of these mysterious 
discs, it is as unknown to us as their origin. 
If these Daylight Discs really do exist, then they must 
represent a technology that is foreign to our own, and one 
that has remained foreign since they first appeared on the 
modern UFO scene. 
There are a far greater number of Daylight Disc re­
ports in the early Air Force Intelligence files than in later 
years, but there is no obvious reason for the decline in re­
ports.odern UFO scene. 
There are a far greater number of Daylight Disc re­
ports in the early Air Force Intelligence files than in later 
years, but there is no obvious reason for the decline in re­
ports.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ere are a far greater number of Daylight Disc re­
ports in the early Air Force Intelligence files than in later 
years, but there is no obvious reason for the decline in re­
ports.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
99 
The "First" Flying Saucer 
The classic Daylight Disc case of the early years-al­
though not the first-was the famous sighting of Kenneth 
Arnold near Mt. Rainier, Washington, on the afternoon of 
June 24, 1947. This story has so often been retold that it 
is almost a cliche. 
Briefly, Arnold, a salesman flying his own plane, re­
ported seeing nine crescent-shaped disclike objects (what 
we today would describe as Daylight Discs) flying near and 
around Mt. Rainier. His sighting made national headlines 
and the modern era of "flying saucers" was born. What 
most people don't realize is that Arnold's was not the first 
report that year; so those who ascribe much of the UFO 
phenomenon to the media hype surrounding Arnold's sight­
ing are incorrect. 
Nevertheless, during the 
following 
months, there were so many very similar sightings that 
some of us were tempted to call UFOs the "Arnold Phe­
nomenon." 
Arnold's sighting was "Incident # 17" of Project Sign. 
In my analysis, I simply stated: ''There appears to be no 
astronomical explanation of the later flying-saucer stories. 
It is impossible to explain this incident away as sheer non­
sense if any credence at all is given to Mr. Arnold's integ­
rity. However, certain inconsistencies can be pointed out in 
the facts as found in Blue Book files.* 
Although Daylight Discs are by no means the most ex­
citing UFO reports (the Close Encounters have this honor 
by far), they are certainly the best reports for establishing 
the reality of the UFO phenomenon. They cannot be dis­
missed as nonsense unless one chooses to label the thou­
sands of witnesses to these cases reported from all parts of 
the globe utterly bereft of their senses. 
*Arnold stated that the objects seemed about twenty times as long 
as wide. Let us assume the thickness was just discernible, which 
means that the object was just at the limit of resolution of the 
eye. Now, the eye cannot resolve objects that subtend an angle of 
appreciably less than three minutes of arc. If, then, the distance was 
25 miles, as Arnold estimated, each object must have been at least 
100 feet thick, and thus, about 2,000 feet long! This is in obvious 
variance with his estimate of length as 45 to 50 feet. Arnold's esti­
mates of distance and size are in obvious conflict.at least 
100 feet thick, and thus, about 2,000 feet long! This is in obvious 
variance with his estimate of length as 45 to 50 feet. Arnold's esti­
mates of distance and size are in obvious conflict.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hick, and thus, about 2,000 feet long! This is in obvious 
variance with his estimate of length as 45 to 50 feet. Arnold's esti­
mates of distance and size are in obvious conflict.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 00 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
The chances of all the reports being hoaxes is also mini­
mal, for Daylight Discs have been witnessed by people 
from all walks of life whose collective integrity cannot be 
seriously questioned. Further, if these witnesses had wished 
merely to fashion stories for the telling, why not some­
thing more spectacular than a Daylight Disc? Why not 
bizarre Close Encounters: strange craft that suddenly 
swoop out of the skies to stop cars or disturb animals; or 
brilliantly illuminated UFOs that land and disgorge small 
beings who engage in weird activities? These kinds of re­
ports would seem better to fit the psychology of the hoaxer 
and storyteller. 
Because Daylight Discs are pivotal to the whole question 
of whether UFOs really exist, it will be very instructive to 
examine some of the "unknown" cases from the Blue Book 
files; thƎ small sampling of cases that follows illustrate the 
prominent features of Daylight Discs as reported by a rep­
resentative' cross-section of witnesses. 
UFOs Are Not for the Birds 
The first to witness the Daylight Discs that "invaded" 
the skies of the Pacific Northwest on July 4, 1952, were 
a flock of pigeons in the parking lot of Precinct No. 1 of 
the Portland, Oregon, Police Department. 
Patrolman McDowell was feeding the pigeons in the 
'parking lot when they suddenly became excited by some­
thing in the air. Wings flapping madly, the flock quickly 
fluttered into the air and dispersed. What made the pigeons 
scatter? Here is what Patrolman McDowell described, ac­
cording to Blue Book files: 
Officer McDowell stated that in looking around to 
see what had disturbed them [the pigeons], he saw five 
large discs in the air to the east of Portland, two discs 
flying south and three in an easterly direction. Officer 
McDowell . . . advised they were dipping in an up­
and-down oscillating motion and were traveling at a 
great speed. He was unable to give an estimate of the 
speed or altitude of these discs as they were out of 
sight before any detailed observation could be made. 
Officer McDowell advised he notified the Police Radiowas unable to give an estimate of the 
speed or altitude of these discs as they were out of 
sight before any detailed observation could be made. 
Officer McDowell advised he notified the Police Radio

--- PAGE BREAK ---n estimate of the 
speed or altitude of these discs as they were out of 
sight before any detailed observation could be made. 
Officer McDowell advised he notified the Police Radio

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
101 
who immediately broadcast an alert. Officer McDow­
ell advised he saw no indication of any motivating 
force or heard any sound coming from these discs and 
could give no description other than round. 
The radio alert was heard by other patrolmen and the 
sighting of discs was confirmed almost immediately in 
Milwaukie, Oregon, several miles distant. According to 
Blue Book, patrolmen there ". 
. 
• saw three discs following 
each other at an undetermined altitude and at a terrific 
speed. No sound was made by the objects." 
In the city of Portland itself, a number of other credible 
witnesses observed the discs. Here are reports of their 
statements as summarized by the Air Force and reported 
to intelligence agents of Blue Book. 
By Patrolman Patterson, a former Air Corps pilot: 
He stated that at the time the radio alert sounded, he 
was getting out of his car and saw one disc flying in 
a southwesterly direction over Portland. Patterson 
advised this disc was aluminum in color, left no vapor 
trail and was traveling at a terrific speed, faster than 
he has ever seen any object flying before. Patterson 
further advised, although not knowing the exact size 
of the object . 
• 
. that he estimates its altitude at 
30,000 feet. He could not give any further description 
as its speed made observation difficult. He thought 
the disc was definitely some type of aircraft and 
thought it appeared radio controlled because the disc 
could change direction at a 90-degree angle without 
difficulty. 
By Patrolmen Lissy and Ellis : 
Both possess private pilot licenses. Both officers ad­
vised . that upon hearing the radio alert, they saw 
three flat, round discs, having a white color to them. 
These discs were, according to these officers, flying 
at a terrific speed in a southerly direction away from 
Portland. They described them as flying in a straight 
line formation. Both officers estimated the altitude 
at 40,000 feet. Both officers stated these discs were 
traveling so fast that they were out of sight beforeescribed them as flying in a straight 
line formation. Both officers estimated the altitude 
at 40,000 feet. Both officers stated these discs were 
traveling so fast that they were out of sight before

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing in a straight 
line formation. Both officers estimated the altitude 
at 40,000 feet. Both officers stated these discs were 
traveling so fast that they were out of sight before

--- PAGE BREAK ---

102 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
any detailed observation could be made. No sound 
was heard·. . . . All informants mentioned herein are 
known to this agent as very dependable and trust­
worthy officers, not being afflicted with hallucinations. 
The weather in the Portland area was clear with little 
or no cloud formation. Ground temperature was 82 
degrees. 
By members of the Harbor Patrol, Portland, who 
" •
.
.
 stepped out when they heard the all-car alert." 
Capt. Prahn, Pilot Austed and Patrolman Hoff all 
saw the objects and said they appeared to be going 
south high over Globe Mills at terrific speed. Capt. 
Prahn said the flashes kept them from ascertaining 
whether there were three or six. "The discs would 
oscillate and sometimes we would see a full disc, then 
a half-moon shape, then nothing at all," he reported. 
"The objects looked more like a shiny chromium hub­
cap off a cnr which wobbled, disappeared and re­
appeared." There was not a plane in the sky at the 
time, but all were emphatic that the discs were not 
planes. 
Another report of flying discs was made later the same 
day by a Captain Smith of United Air Lines and his flight 
crew. The Blue BooR report states: 
. . . that he and the entire crew of the westbound 
UAL plane saw nine flying discs near Emmett, Idaho. 
At first he saw 5 discs flying what appeared to be a 
"loose formation." They called Marty Morrow, stew­
ardess, to the cockpit to verify that they were actually 
seeing the discs. She saw them, too. Then they saw 
four more of them, three clustered together, and a 
fourth flying by itself, way off in the distance. Capt. 
Smith described them as "five somethings" which 
were thin and smooth on the bottom and rough­
appearing on top. Silhouetted against the sunset 
shortly after the plane took off·at 8 :04 P.M., "We saw 
them clearly," he reported, "and followed them in a 
northwesterly direction for about 45 miles. Finally 
they disappeared. We were unable to tell whetherer the plane took off·at 8 :04 P.M., "We saw 
them clearly," he reported, "and followed them in a 
northwesterly direction for about 45 miles. Finally 
they disappeared. We were unable to tell whether

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
103 
they outsped the plane or disintegrated. 
But 
whatever they were, they were not other aircraft, nor 
were they smoke or cloudsÅ" 
An interesting Blue Book notation was a "Memorandum 
from the Officer in Charge" referring to the sighting by 
Capt. Smith. The memorandum stated: 
On 12 July 1947 Capt. Smith of the United Airlines 
was interviewed at the Boise Municipal Airport .
•
•
•rom the Officer in Charge" referring to the sighting by 
Capt. Smith. The memorandum stated: 
On 12 July 1947 Capt. Smith of the United Airlines 
was interviewed at the Boise Municipal Airport .
•
•
•

Capt. Smith reiterated the statements originally made 
by him to the press as to what he (and his copilot and 
the stewardess ) had seen when eight minutes out of 
Boise on the route · to Seattle. It is the opinion of the 
interviewer that due to the position Capt. 
Smith 
occupies, he would have to be very strongly convinced 
that he actually saw flying discs before he would 
open himself for the ridicule attached to a report of 
this type. 
What was the Air Force evaluation of these sightings? 
Well, the discs that frightened the pigeons were described 
by Blue Book as "radar chaff"-bits of aluminum foil used 
to produce false radar targets--or flying debris. Now, this 
explanation is untenable because several different patrol· 
men, three to five miles apart, as well as other police offi· 
cers and civilians, reported defmite metallic discs flying at 
estimated supersonic speeds; some going east, others going 
south. Chaff flies with the wind, drops slowly, and has 
never been reported to startle pigeons enough to make 
them suddenly take to flight. 
As for the objects sighted by the United Airlines crew, 
whether they were the same as those spotted earlier in the 
day near Portland is strictly conjectural. They certainly 
were independent observations, by entirely credible wit· 
nesses, of objects that appeared to be identical to the 
earlier sightings. 
I personally reviewed this case for the Air Force. Un· 
fortunately, my review was made during my "debunking" 
period. In my report to the Air Force, I wrote: 
There is no astronomical explanation for this inci­
dent 
(United Airlines) 
nor for numerous others

--- PAGE BREAK ---as made during my "debunking" 
period. In my report to the Air Force, I wrote: 
There is no astronomical explanation for this inci­
dent 
(United Airlines) 
nor for numerous others

--- PAGE BREAK ---

104 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
(cases 6, 7, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16) which occurred in 
and near Portland on the Fourth of July, 1947. 
Besides being observed in the same vicinity and 
most of them at the same time, the objects seen have 
in common a round shape, "terrific speed," abrupt 
tactics, and quick disappearance. Abrupt tactics cer­
tainly suggest that the objects were of a very light 
weight. 
This investigator can offer no definite hypothesis, 
but in passing would like to note that these incidents 
occurred on the Fourth of July, and that if relatively 
small pieces of aluminum foil had been dropped from 
a plane over the area, then any one object would 
become visible at a relatively short distance. Even 
¯oderate wind velocities could give the illusion that 
fluttering, gyrating discs had gone by at great veloc· 
ities. Various observers would not, of course, in this 
case have seen the same objects. 
The above is not to be regarded as a very likely 
explanation but only a possibility; the occurrence of 
these incidents on July 4 may have been more than 
a coincidence. Some prankster might have tossed 
such objects out of an airplane as part of an Indepen­
dence Day celebration. If these were aircraft of either 
known or unknown type, it would be difficult to ex­
plain their appearance over only one locality and at 
only one time, their apparent random motion, the 
lack of any sound or obvious propulsion method, and 
the lack of aerodynamic construction. 
Well, I tried hard! But, in the face of flying-disc report 
data I've studied in the many years since, I can no longer 
support even the vague possibilities I offered at that time. 
Radar chaff? I hardly think so. But what then? Well, that's 
what the "U" in UFO means. These sightings are, in fact, 
unidentified. That, we might say, is the name of the game. 
The Case of the "Negligent" Officer 
Air Force Unidentified: April 24, 1949, Las Cruces, 
New Mexico. Time: 10:35 A.M. Since this case was de­
scribed to me personally by the chief witness, Charles. 
The Case of the "Negligent" Officer 
Air Force Unidentified: April 24, 1949, Las Cruces, 
New Mexico. Time: 10:35 A.M. Since this case was de­
scribed to me personally by the chief witness, Charles

--- PAGE BREAK ---Negligent" Officer 
Air Force Unidentified: April 24, 1949, Las Cruces, 
New Mexico. Time: 10:35 A.M. Since this case was de­
scribed to me personally by the chief witness, Charles

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
105 
Moore, in charge of a special Sky Hook balloon project at 
White Sands, New Mexico, my files on it are more com­
plete, more de.tailed than Blue Book's. The actual story 
follows : 
On a bright sunny New Mexico morning, a small bal­
loon was launched to test the winds aloft preparatory to 
the main experiment. Such small balloons are customarily 
watched through a theodolite, a small telescope that pivots 
in two directions to give accurate sighting angles. Moore 
watched the balloon as it ascended higher and higher, and 
then, having another duty to attend to, turned the · instru­
ment over to one of the Navy men on the team, admonish­
ing him not to lose track of the balloon. Glancing back a 
few minutes later, he was shocked to see the Navy ob­
server pointing his telescope elsewhere in the sky than 
where Moore could see the balloon with his unaided eye. 
He descended upon the unsuspecting observer and dressed 
him down severely for having lost the balloon. 
"But, I've got it right here!" the man exclaimed. 
Sure enough, he did have an object in his field-an 
elliptical object, two and one-half times longer than wide, 
moving rapidly enough to require skill in following it 
through the telescope. Moore grabbed the telescope and 
confirmed the sighting. Then he called it to the attention 
of the rest of the crew, all of whom had no difficulty in 
visually spotting the object. The precious balloon was for­
gotten. All eyes were on the unknown object. As the 
crew watched, the object suddenly stopped its horizontal 
motion and climbed very rapidly, vertically, and was soon 
lost to both telescope and eyesight. 
There could hardly have been better qualified observers. 
The desert was still that morning. There was no manmade 
noise. Yet, neither Moore nor his crew beard any sound 
from the unknown Daylight Disc! 
Moore was disgusted with the Air Force's and my lack 
of attention to this sighting. Who can blame him? It was 
typical of the Air Force's practice of spending a great deal 
of overkill effort pinning down cases for which there 
seemed to be an immediate logical explanation in sight and 
devoting only modest follow-up to a case that was truly 
baffling. The Air Force, however, did finally label this case 
unidentified.there 
seemed to be an immediate logical explanation in sight and 
devoting only modest follow-up to a case that was truly 
baffling. The Air Force, however, did finally label this case 
unidentified.

--- PAGE BREAK ---an immediate logical explanation in sight and 
devoting only modest follow-up to a case that was truly 
baffling. The Air Force, however, did finally label this case 
unidentified.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 06 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
A Daylight Disc in Arkansas 
In August 1952 (the exact date is not given in Blue 
Book files), two witnesses observed a disclike UFO in the 
vicinity of Skylight Mountain, Washington County, Arkan­
sas. It was 3 :30 P.M. The witnesses were sure the object 
they were looking at was real. They had a camera and 
tried to photograph it, but the quality of the picture turned 
out to be very poor. Their report was not submitted to 
Project Blue Book for several years; for this reason, there 
was no follow-up investigation by the Air Force, although 
in this case a follow-up would have been possible and 
advjsable. The witnesses used a magazine reproduction of 
a standard Blue Book form to make their late report. 
The object they reported seeing had "no protrusions, no 
exhaust, was about ʜ as thick as its diameter." The UFO 
"moved into and out of a cloud bank several times," and 
it looked "like two silver saucers glued together, one in­
verted over the other." The object was "shiny like a new 
tin building or even brighter!" The witnesses' description 
of its maneuvers were also interesting: "From a hover to 
a speed that took it through five-mile circles in five 
seconds." 
The principal witness, a Navy chief petty officer and 
combat veteran with six years experience, had this addi­
tional comment: 
I have been in the Navy since 1946 and have observed 
many planes and weather balloons and have never 
seen anything that looked like this object. I am pres­
ently a chief radioman stationed at Naval Communi­
cations Station, Washington, D.C. 
This man had flown numerous bomber missions during 
World War II and was familiar with all types of aircraft. 
He firmly believed that the object he and another witness 
observed was definitely not any type of known aircraft. 
This report could easily have been followed up by the 
Air Force since the individual was still in the Navy when 
the report was filed with Blue Book. It would have been 
an important case to follow up, since the principal witnessbeen followed up by the 
Air Force since the individual was still in the Navy when 
the report was filed with Blue Book. It would have been 
an important case to follow up, since the principal witness

--- PAGE BREAK ---the 
Air Force since the individual was still in the Navy when 
the report was filed with Blue Book. It would have been 
an important case to follow up, since the principal witness

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J, ALLEN HYNEK 
107 
was technically competent, particularly in the matter · of 
aircraft, and his competence was directly applicable to this 
sighting; he should certainly have been able to identify an 
aircraft! Yet the Air Force made no attempt whatsoever 
to gain additional information. Once again; Blue Book 
avoided a baffi ng case. 
Pive Witnesses and Five Discs 
Blue Book Unidentified: May 1, 1952, 10:50 A.M., 
George AFB, California, 5 witnesses. Four witnesses 
in Range Control Tower, one witness on golf course 
four miles away. 
Here we have truly independent witnesses, located four 
miles apart and not in communication with each other. 
They observed Daylight Discs for a short interval of lS-30 
seconds. The discs were very maneuverable, appearing 
almost to collide and then break away. The statement of 
one of the five observers follows: 
I, ---, Headquarters Squadron, 131st Air Base 
Group, do this date make the following statement 
concerning my observations on 1 May 1952: 
1. The objects, five (S) in number, appeared to be 
round and disc-shaped. The diameter of these objects 
seemed to be greater than the length of an F-51 
fighter plane. They were of a flat, white color and 
gave off no glare or reflection. They moved in forma­
tion (as per attached sketch) with the last two darting 
around in a circular motion. I noticed no vapor trail 
or exhaust. I estimated that the speed of the objects 
was about twice that of ordinary jet aircraft. 
2. I sighted the objects at approximately 10:50 
hours and they were in my sight for about 30 seconds. 
3. I observed the objects from a 20-foot control 
tower on the small-arms range. The control tower 
faces north, and George Air Force Base can be seen 
off to the left. It was a visual observation, and I esti­
mated the altitude of the objects to have been about 
4,000 feet. Speed was approximately twice that of 
ordinary jet aircraft:e can be seen 
off to the left. It was a visual observation, and I esti­
mated the altitude of the objects to have been about 
4,000 feet. Speed was approximately twice that of 
ordinary jet aircraft:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

108 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
4. From the observations I made at the tower, I 
would say that they came from the southeast over 
Apple Valley, Ca. They headed in a northwest direc­
tion toward George Air Force Base, then veered 
sharply · to the north and disappeared. 
5. I am 23 years of age, manied and have a high 
school education. I have spent close to six years in 
the "Army and Air Force. . . 
Daylight discs seen by four witnesses at George AFB, California, on 
May 1, 1952, at 10:50 A.M. 
The brief statement of the independent observer four 
miles away from the range tower follows: 
I, 
---, 
Headquarters 
146th Fighter-Bomber 
Wing, this date make the following statement con­
cerning my observations of an unidentified flying ob­
ject on 1 May 1952: 
1. The shape of the object was round. I could not 
see if it was shaped as a ball or .a disc. It was white 
in color, made no noise, had no visible exhaust and 
the speed appeared to be in excess of 1,000 miles per 
hour. The outline was very clear like the edge of a 
sheet of paper. 
2. I sighted the object at approximately 10:50 
hours and it was in my sight approximately 1 5 
seconds. 
3. I was standing on the golf course at Apple Val­
ley, California .
.
.
 about four miles from George 
Air Force Base. 
4. The object was not maneuvering in any way and

--- PAGE BREAK ---seconds. 
3. I was standing on the golf course at Apple Val­
ley, California .
.
.
 about four miles from George 
Air Force Base. 
4. The object was not maneuvering in any way and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
109 
was flying in a straight east direction. I could not 
estimate the altitude but thought it was very high. 
5. I am Wing Director of Personnel. 
6. The weather was clear and there was no breeze. 
The Case of the Missing Report 
Blue Book Unidentified: May 1, 1952, 9:10 A.M., 
Davis-Monthan AFB, Tucson, Arizona. 
This case is a classic. The late Dr. James McDonald 
made a v<lliant attempt to get details from original wit­
nesses after discovering that a major report, submitted to 
Blue Book by the "UFO officer" (who was one of the 
witnesses!) at Davis-Monthan, was missing. A small part 
of this was apparently recovered and now appears in the 
Blue Book microfilms. The story is as follows: 
An Air Intelligence officer (who had, as one of his 
regular duties, the analysis of UFO cases reported to the 
local air base), a B-36 crew, and an airman on the steps 
of the base hospital (just coming from having his knee 
treated) all attested to this event. Two shiny, round objects 
overtook a B-36, slowed down to the speed of the B-36, 
stayed in formation with it for about 20 seconds, then 
executed a sharp, no-radius 70-80-degree turn from the 
line of flight of the B-36, and resumed original s}leed and 
went to about one-fourth the distance to the horizon when 
one of the two objects made an immediate stop and hov­
ered. There was no sound other than that of the B-36. 
There were no contrails from either the objects or the 
B-36. 
Despite the detailed description (in the original report) 
of the maneuvers of the two shiny, silent objects, Blue 
Book dismissed this case as "Aircraft." The following let­
ter from Dr. McDonald dated July 14, 1966, was sent to 
Major Quintanilla, Blue Book head: 
Dear Major Quintanilla: 
Following our second unsuccessful effort to locate· 
in the Blue Book files any record of the B-36 incident 
at Davis-Monthan AFB, I have asked Maj. Pestalozzilue Book head: 
Dear Major Quintanilla: 
Following our second unsuccessful effort to locate· 
in the Blue Book files any record of the B-36 incident 
at Davis-Monthan AFB, I have asked Maj. Pestalozzi

--- PAGE BREAK ---Major Quintanilla: 
Following our second unsuccessful effort to locate· 
in the Blue Book files any record of the B-36 incident 
at Davis-Monthan AFB, I have asked Maj. Pestalozzi

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 10 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
to put down, in a letter to me, an account of such 
details as he can still remember with confidence (see 
Appendix) . 
Maj. Pestalozzi has told me, in previous conversa­
tions, that he was an Air Intelligence officer from 
about 1950 to 1960, and was stationed at Davis­
Monthan during 1951-53. Field investigation of UFO 
sightings was one of his routine duties, not only at 
Davis-Monthan but also at other duty stations. The 
B-36 case, which he believes occurred in 1952, was 
one in which he himself happened to be an observer. 
Although he has now made a number of efforts to run 
down clues to the precise date, the latter still remains 
uncertain, as I indicated to you in my last visit at 
WP AFB on June 30. 
lie recalls filing a rather thick report on this B-36 
case, the thickest he ever filed on a UFO. It included 
not only his own observations and those of the B-36 
crew which he personally interrogated, but also that 
of an airman who was standing beside him during 
most of the time of his own observation. The airman 
(whose name he has forgotten) was coming out of 
the base hospital just as the major was about to enter 
(for treatment of an injured knee) . He pointed out 
to me today that approximately six or seven other 
Air Force personnel at scattered locations around the 
base also reported seeing the UFOs from the ground. 
Because their descriptions matched closely those given 
by himself and the airman, he did not (at least as far 
as he now recalls) include them in his official report. 
I have queried Maj. Pestalozzi closely about the 
length of time during which he had the UFOs under 
observation. He estimates it at something like five 
minutes. He actually saw the two UFOs overtake the 
westbound B-36, and he held them under observation 
as the aircraft passed overhead until the objects de­
parted. His recollection, as of today, was that his line 
of sight to the B-36 at the time the UFOs moved into 
position was at an angle of elevation of about 50 de­
grees (estimated uncertainty about 5-10 degrees) ; 
and the UFOs departed when the line of sight to the 
aircraft was about the same angle above the western 
horizon. The aircraft was almost due east of the basemated uncertainty about 5-10 degrees) ; 
and the UFOs departed when the line of sight to the 
aircraft was about the same angle above the western 
horizon. The aircraft was almost due east of the base

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
l l l 
when the objects joined it, and it lay due west when 
they departed. Its heading was almost due west during 
the entire period of observation. (In an earlier con­
versation, he estimated the total time of observation 
at perhaps 3 minutes. The latter time would be a bit 
more compatible with an estimated flight altitude of 
20,000 ft. and the estimated angles of line of sight. 
But every one of these estimates is based on recollect­
ing of an event 14 years old, so perhaps all that is 
now warranted is the conclusion that the UFOs paced 
the B-36 for "several minutes." The latter time is 
compatible with the fact that all of the crew, save the 
pilot, were able to get back to the starboard blister 
to see the UFO before it left.) 
As he sketched the relative positions, he recalled 
an important detail. The UFO near the aircraft was 
View looking to south 
Estimated UFO dimensions 
r-
20' to 25' --4 
-E:> 10::0 12' 
The discs sighted by crew of B-36 and observer on ground, Davis­
Monthan AFB, Tucson, Arizona, May 1, 1952. Sketch shows paths 
of the two discs relative to the B-36.

--- PAGE BREAK ---:> 10::0 12' 
The discs sighted by crew of B-36 and observer on ground, Davis­
Monthan AFB, Tucson, Arizona, May 1, 1952. Sketch shows paths 
of the two discs relative to the B-36.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 12 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
at a level distinctly lower than the mid-section of the 
fuselage (see sketch) . He recalled that the crew de­
scribed looking somewhat down upon it, and the 
blister itself is below mid-section. This may explain 
why there was no marked aerodynamic disturbance 
of the aircraft's flight characteristics, one of the very 
puzzling features of the incident. 
The major's enclosed account does not directly 
state it, but he has mentioned to me that the B-36 
crew was a bit shaken ·by this experience. He pointed 
out to me that, after the UFOs departed, the B-36 
radioed Davis-Monthan control tower and demanded 
permission to land immediately. It was just after they 
landed that Operations called him over to interrogate 
the crew. 
Sincerely, 
James E. McDonald 
Senior Physicist 
I recall that at the time Dr. McDonald was regarded by 
Blue Book personnel as an outstanding nuisance. This was 
partly because he was interested in a scientific study of the 
"true" UFOs (those that completely defied simply natural 
explanation) and partly because he was so outspoken. He 
spoke his mind forcefully, and didn't hesitate to criticize 
Blue Book methods whenever possible. On occasion I, too, 
was the target of his criticism-criticism which was en­
tirely justified according to his very strict standards. It is 
unfortunate that Dr. McDonald couldn't understand or 
adjust to the political-military situation, and chose instead 
to act only according to strict scientific dictates. A care­
fully planned diplomatic approach to these military circles 
might have proved successful, especially if Dr. McDonald 
had consented to work with me in a much less antagonistic 
manner, as I invited him to do on several occasions. I fear, 
however, that he regarded me as a lost cause and that his 
temperament would hardly have permitted it. 
It is due largely to the industry and perseverance of Dr. 
James McDonald that this excellent case was resurrected 
at all.e as a lost cause and that his 
temperament would hardly have permitted it. 
It is due largely to the industry and perseverance of Dr. 
James McDonald that this excellent case was resurrected 
at all.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d that his 
temperament would hardly have permitted it. 
It is due largely to the industry and perseverance of Dr. 
James McDonald that this excellent case was resurrected 
at all.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
1 13 
The Case of the Three Baffled Engineers 
Blue Book Unidentified, Oct. 15, 1953, 10:10 A.M., 
Minneapolis, Minn. Three witnesses, all research engineers 
employed by General Mills Aeronautical Laboratories. A 
report of the Air Intelligence Service Squadron, Flight 2A, 
follows: 
The sighting described below took place during the 
theodolite tracking of a 79-ft. balloon . floating at 
approximately 80,000 feet, on Project 85021-Grab 
Bag. No sound was detected at any time during the 
observation. 
The object was first observed as it passed below 
the sun at an elevation (solar elevation) of approxi­
mately 25 degs. heading southward in horizontal 
flight. It was detectable by a smoke or vapor trail 
which extended some distance behind it, but which 
did not persist, or form a cloud. The object itself was 
not visible even through the theodolite during the first 
part of the sighting. During the horizontal part of its 
trajectory, the object moved across the sky at a rate 
of 10 degrees in 9 seconds. With an estimated altitude 
of 40,000 ft. this represents 15 miles per minute, or 
900 miles per hour. [All three men agreed that object 
could have been as high as 60,000 feet, which would 
give a speed of 1,200 miles per hour.] 
After about 10 seconds of horizontal flight, the 
object appeared to go into a vertical dive. The pos­
sibility that the appearance of a dive was produced 
by the object merely receding into the distance seems 
unlikely since the speed normal to the line of sight 
was undiminished in the dive. The dive lasted for 
from 10 to 1 5 seconds, at the end of which time the 
object was visible two or three times as it appeared to 
glow or reflect the light of the sun for perhaps a sec­
ond at a time. Just at this time the vapor trail ceased, 
and for a second or two thereafter the object, its out­
lines still unrecognizable, was seen through the t.Ƣeod­
olite not as a glare (reflected?) light, but as a gray 
mass in the act of leveling off. Its size in the theod-thereafter the object, its out­
lines still unrecognizable, was seen through the t.Ƣeod­
olite not as a glare (reflected?) light, but as a gray 
mass in the act of leveling off. Its size in the theod-

--- PAGE BREAK ---t, its out­
lines still unrecognizable, was seen through the t.Ƣeod­
olite not as a glare (reflected?) light, but as a gray 
mass in the act of leveling off. Its size in the theod-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 14 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
olite field was of the same magnitude as the 79Ɖfoot 
balloon, which means that, since it was nearer, it 
would not be as large [linearly]. 
The observers believe that the object was most 
likely a jet aircraft, but several features were unusual: 
1. The speed was higher than normally observed; 
2. The vertical dive was a highly dangerous if not 
suicidal maneuver; 
3. A jet aircraft in such a dive would be heard for 
miles, and would certainly cause a noticeable shock 
wave detectable in the area beneath it; 
4. Vapor trails do not ordinarily occur during ver­
tical motion though smoke trails could, of course. 
It was thought that the Air Defense Command 
would be interested in what was seen, if, 
a. They had no aircraft in the vicinity which could 
account for it; 
b. They had an aircraft accident which might be 
partly explained by this report. 
Well, even Blue Book evaluated this as "Unidentified." 
Perhaps the suicidal dive was too much for them. 
More Discs over New Mexico 
A sighting made at Walker AFB in New Mexico on 
July 29, 1952, involved four weather observers, including 
the base weather officer. They observ.ed a number of flying 
discs through a theodolite. The apparent speed of the discs 
required the theodolite to be turned at maximum rate in 
order to track them, much faster than the rate used for 
conventional aircraft flying at high altitudes. 
The Intelligence officer concludes his report with these 
words: 
· 
The scientific experience of the weather personnel 
making these observations is sufficient to warrant 
credence in their sightings and indicates an actual 
appearance of unidentified flying objects. 
Blue Book could allow some caso8 to be labeled "Un­
identified"; but it could never make the seemingly logicale in their sightings and indicates an actual 
appearance of unidentified flying objects. 
Blue Book could allow some caso8 to be labeled "Un­
identified"; but it could never make the seemingly logical

--- PAGE BREAK ---and indicates an actual 
appearance of unidentified flying objects. 
Blue Book could allow some caso8 to be labeled "Un­
identified"; but it could never make the seemingly logical

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
1 1 5 
step of supporting Field Intelligence officers who, like this 
one, often came right out and said, ". . . indicates an actual 
appearance of unidentified flying objects." Somehow the 
evaluation "Unidentified" is not quite the same as "Un­
identified Flying Object"; they are worlds apart in impli­
cation. The former suggests that some natural, everyday 
thing occurred but for one reason or another a positive 
identification was not made. The latter-well! 
The official Blue Book line to the public was that all 
UFOs could be explained away as misidentifications of 
normal objects or events. Pray then, what was the normal, 
everyday object that caused the above sighting, and those 
many others we have examined? 
The Case of the Tricky Disc 
Blue Book Unidentified, Jan. 10, 1953, 3:45 P.M., 
Sonoma, Cal. 2 witnesses (an Air Force colonel and 
a security agent) . The Air Intelligence Information 
Report on this case states: 
On 1 0 January 1953, between 3 :45 and 4:00 P.M., 
Col.
--- and Mr. ---, of the Federal Security 
Agency, San Francisco, California, observed an un­
identified flying object while eight miles northwest of 
Sonoma, California, from a knoll in the hills north­
west of the Sonoma Valley. The object was sighted at 
a 45° angle northwest from the location of the ob­
servers at a very high altitude, so high Läat the object 
was compared to the flat head of a pin held two feet 
from the eye. Speed was estimated at four times the 
speed of a jet aircraft with accompanying sound sim­
ilar to the USAF F-86 jet at high altitude. There was 
no change in sound tone or volume during maneuvers. 
Unusual maneuvers made by the object were: ( 1 ) 
Three (3) 360° tight turns to the right, taking two 
to three seconds to complete each turn; (2) two (2) 
right-angle (90°) turns, first to the right, then to the 
left; (3) the object slowed down to almost a com­
plete stop, then accelerated to high speed again, mak­
ing this maneuver twice. The object then rose ver­
tically and disappeared from view. Total time of; (3) the object slowed down to almost a com­
plete stop, then accelerated to high speed again, mak­
ing this maneuver twice. The object then rose ver­
tically and disappeared from view. Total time of

--- PAGE BREAK ---wed down to almost a com­
plete stop, then accelerated to high speed again, mak­
ing this maneuver twice. The object then rose ver­
tically and disappeared from view. Total time of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 16 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
observation was estimated to be between 60 and 75 
seconds. There were no radar contacts with the ob­
ject. No other observations of this object are known 
to have been made. 
The object made three (3 ) 360° turns to the right 
taking two to three seconds to complete each turn. 
These turns were made at five-second intervals still 
holding on the same course. It continued on and made 
an abrupt right-angle (90°) turn to the right, fol­
lowed five seconds later with an abrupt turn to the 
left which placed the object back on its original 
course. After this maneuver, the object slowed down 
to almost a stop and then accelerated to its previous 
speed, making this maneuver twice. The object rose 
vertically and disappeared from view. [The observer 
stated that the object could possibly have been climb­
ing when it seemed to slow down to a stop, but that 
he seriously doubts it.] The 360° turns were said to 
be very tight turns, about one-eighth of the area re­
quired for jet aircraft. 
· 
Here, we are certainly driven to the edge of reality! 
Either these men deliberately made this story up or it 
happened much as they said. Their qualifications argue 
strongly against a hoax, and their technical training would 
indicate that when they say the object made a tight 360° 
turn, it made a tight 360° turn! Surely, if this had been 
a one-witness case (the reader will note that all of the 
Daylight Disc cases included here had multiple witnesses) 
one might fall l::!ack upon simple hallucination as a solu­
tion. It could be said that what they saw was actually an 
airborne seed, or an insect much closer to them; but in a 
minute and a half, they surely would have discovered this 
for themselves. 
The Case of the Double Identity 
Blue Book Unidentified, seen at Terre Haute, In­
diana, and three minutes later over Paris, Illinois (15 
miles apart). 
One of the perennial objections raised by skeptics ise of the Double Identity 
Blue Book Unidentified, seen at Terre Haute, In­
diana, and three minutes later over Paris, Illinois (15 
miles apart). 
One of the perennial objections raised by skeptics is

--- PAGE BREAK ---tity 
Blue Book Unidentified, seen at Terre Haute, In­
diana, and three minutes later over Paris, Illinois (15 
miles apart). 
One of the perennial objections raised by skeptics is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
1 1 7 
that a UFO is not seen "cross-country" and by many peo­
ple. That, however, is one of the chief characteristics of 
the phenomenon itself, one of the "givens" in the problem. 
It is absolutely true that UFO events are generally isolated 
in space and time. They are seen in a specific locality and 
usually for a very short time. That's simply the way it is, 
like it or not. 
Here, however, is one of the rare cases in which ob­
servers in separate localities saw the same UFO at almost 
the same time: an aircraft communicator and friends at 
Terre Haute and a pilot flying near Paris, Illinois. This is 
the original message as it came over the teletype at Wright­
Patterson AFB: 
ATTN ADC FOR DEPUTY FOR INTELLIGENCE. FOR 
YOUR INFO A UNITED PRESS NEWS RELEASE APPEARING 
IN THE 10 OCT NEWSPAPERS RPTD MR. ROY MESSMORE 
CMA EMPLOYEE CMA AT HOLMAN MUNICIPAL APRT 
CMA TERRE HAUTE CMA IND. SAW A "HUGE METALLIC 
OBJECT SPEEDING ACROSS THE FIELD" ON 9 OCT. 
RELEASE STATES THAT MR. MESSMORE CMA "A HARD­
HEADED CAA OFFICIAL" JOINED THE RANKS OF THOSE 
WHO NOW BELIEVE IN FLYING SAUCERS. NO FURTHER 
INFO AVAILABLE AT THE TIME PAPA DO YOU DESIRE 
ANY INVESTIGATIVE ACTION BY THIS CMJD? QUERY? 
An immediate field investigation was requested by the 
Director of Intelligence, USAF. 
A Spot Intelligence Report from the OSI, Chanute Air 
Force Base, came to the Director, Office of Special In­
vestigation, Headquarters, United States Air Force, Wash­
ington D.C., dated October 25, 1951 [they lost no time]. 
It reads: 
Synopsis: Chief Aircraft Communicator, CAA, Hol­
man Municipal Airport, Terre Haute, Ind., reported 
to the Office of Special Investigations agent that on 
9 Oct. 1951, at 1342 hours [1 :42 P.M.], he observed 
an unknown unidentified aerial object directly over­
head at Hulman [sic] Municipal Airport. The object 
was approximately the size of a half-dollar coin held 
at arm's length and was flying in a southeasterly 
direction. The day was clear and the informant'st Hulman [sic] Municipal Airport. The object 
was approximately the size of a half-dollar coin held 
at arm's length and was flying in a southeasterly 
direction. The day was clear and the informant's

--- PAGE BREAK ---ipal Airport. The object 
was approximately the size of a half-dollar coin held 
at arm's length and was flying in a southeasterly 
direction. The day was clear and the informant's

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 1 8 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
VISion was unobstructed. Exact size and altitude of 
the object unknown. Informant advised that a pilot, 
one Charles Warren, sighted a similar object on the 
same date at approximately 1345 hours just east of 
Paris, Illinois, at approximately 5,000 feet. Object was 
last seen traveling in a northeasterly direction, south 
of the atomic energy plant at Newport, Ind. 
The following is a short note from the Air Force Direc­
tor of Intelligence referring to this second sighting by Mr. 
Warren: 
A second sighting reported approximately 30 miles 
distant three (3) minutes later indicates the "objects" 
may have been jet aircraft observed when the reflec­
tion of the sun may have distorted the aircraft in the 
eyes of the observer. 
It is somewhat difficult to see how the Director of In­
telligence arrived at this conclusion other than by using 
the theorem: "It can't be, therefore it isn't." Totally ne­
glected in this "solution" are the reported facts [of course, 
these may be wrong-but can all of these experienced ob­
servers be wrong?]-"size of a half-dollar coin held at 
arm's length," "no noise," "overhead to horizon in approxi­
mately 15 seconds," "no protruding fins or other protru­
sions on this aerial. object" [i.e., no wings]. 
Flying Discs and the Taffy Apple 
Our discussion of Daylight Disc Blue Book cases ends 
with a spectacular non-Blue Book case of many years ago 
which was communicated to me privately and which Mr. 
Keller, one of the principal witnesses, has given me per­
mission to publish. An excerpt from his original letter to 
me follows: 
Because of your interest concerning aerial phe­
nomena and related curiosities, I thought you might 
like to know of an incident that occurred in late 
spring, 1936 or 1937, when my famly and I saw be­
tween 10 or 12 "UFOs."concerning aerial phe­
nomena and related curiosities, I thought you might 
like to know of an incident that occurred in late 
spring, 1936 or 1937, when my famly and I saw be­
tween 10 or 12 "UFOs."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
1 19 
It was more or less a Sunday-afternoon routine to 
jump into the family car for a drive in the country for 
a change of scenery and a stop somewhere along the 
way for an ice-cream treat or some other concoction. 
On this occasion, we stopped early because of low­
hanging clouds, general overcast and what looked to 
be a threat of approaching inclement weather. 
We parked our car at Narragansett and North Ave­
nues where at that time existed a taffy-apple stand. 
After returning to our car, I, as a 13-year-old boy 
would do, began performing a neck-breaking act from 
the rear window to get a better "biting angle" by look­
ing skyward and holding my taffy apple directly above 
my face. There I saw my UFOs about 5° south of 
my overhead view. 
At this time in my life it was an exciting experience 
just to see and hear the approach of an airplane and 
to stop whatever one was doing just to admire and 
gaze in awe at this amazing feat. However, we really 
thought nothing more of this sighting of UFOs other 
than to say, "How curious" or, "Isn't that interest­
ing?" and other unexciting phrases. 
We watched these objects cavorting and doing their 
acrobatics for approximately ten minutes, when sud­
denly they converged, as if on signal, to one point 
under the clouds; stacking one above the other and 
climbing vertically up into the cloud bank and dis­
appearing from sight .
.
.
•tes, when sud­
denly they converged, as if on signal, to one point 
under the clouds; stacking one above the other and 
climbing vertically up into the cloud bank and dis­
appearing from sight .
.
.
•

I say between 10 or 12 UFOs because of their 
constant motion and eccentric darting movements 
which made it virtually impossible to make an accu­
rate count. Some were hovering absolutely still while 
a few would be darting haphazardly to and fro, com­
ing to stops that were unbelievable. Their darting mo­
tions were of one constant speed with no visible evi­
dence of acceleration or deceleration; comparable to 
sliding a checker piece on a checkerboard with one's 
index finger in quick, jerky movements. All this activ­
ity took place directly beneath the clouds within an 
area roughly 500 feet in diameter. They were all 
identical in size, shape and color .
.
.
•

Let me assure you that this is all quite true and 
factual and that I have no ulterior motive in relating

--- PAGE BREAK ---et in diameter. They were all 
identical in size, shape and color .
.
.
•

Let me assure you that this is all quite true and 
factual and that I have no ulterior motive in relating

--- PAGE BREAK ---

120 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
this episode other than wanting to share an experi­
ence of my sighting with someone interested in this 
type of phenomenon. 
Cordially yours for knowledge, 
Dick Keller 
Thus, more than ten years before Kenneth Arnold's 
famous sighting, which, in a real sense, ushered in the 
modern era of UFOs, Daylight Discs had been seen but 
not reported. 
Daylight discs observed near Mexico City, December 13, 1957, for 
a total period of about twenty minutes. 
Twenty years later, a very similar sighting was reported 
to Blue Book from Col Anahuac, Mexico. It was witnessed 
by several persons in the Mexico City area and was said to 
have performed in a manner similar to those discs reported 
by Mr. Keller. 
This parade of Daylight Disc cases from the Blue Book 
files certainly makes the cliche attributed to Dr. Carl 
Sagan, that "there are no reliable reports that are interest­
ing, and no interesting reports that are reliable" ring hol­
low. For these many cases of discs witnessed in broad day­
light were often tracked using sophisticated instruments, 
and observed by persons technically competent to report

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
121 
and interpret. They certainly cannot be disregarded! 
But whether the Daylight Discs represent a unique form 
of UFO, perhaps distant from and even unrelated to the 
Close Encounters cases and the Nocturnal Lights, cannot 
be determined at the present time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t Discs represent a unique form 
of UFO, perhaps distant from and even unrelated to the 
Close Encounters cases and the Nocturnal Lights, cannot 
be determined at the present time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6============== 
"ANGELS," "BOGIES," AND "BLIPS": 
THE RADAR UFOS 
The frequency of reports of this nature has recently 
increased; instructions have therefore been directed 
to all radar installations within this command to re-
. port scope sightings of unusual objects. 
-from an Air Force report, 
classified SECRET, March 9, 1950 
Of all types of UFO reports, those involving radar may 
be, strangely enough, the least reliable, owing to the 
vagaries of radar propagation. But there are many cases 
that cannot be easily dismissed. These include unusual 
multiple radar confirmation cases, radar-visual sightings, 
and ground-to-air radar-visual contacts. In a few cases, 
even single radar contacts with unidentified targets have 
proven to be extremely puzzling. The cases treated in this 
chapter have confounded and bewildered the experts. 
Interestingly enough, few of these cases were treated by 
the Condon Committee, in its study of UFOs. Those stud­
ied by them were, almost universally, evaluated as arising 
from the malfunctioning of radar equipment, false radar 
echoes (angels) , unidentified aircraft or other natural ob­
jects (bogies) , or unusual radar returns caused by meteo­
rological conditions. 
Since Project Blue Book operated on the theory that 
there couldn't be any such thing as "real" UFOs, the Air 
Force searched for almost any possible reason to explain 
away radar cases. 
Ultimately, even the Condon Committee had to admit 
that there was a "small, but significant, residue of cases 
from the radar-visual files . , . that have no plausible ex-

--- PAGE BREAK ---cases. 
Ultimately, even the Condon Committee had to admit 
that there was a "small, but significant, residue of cases 
from the radar-visual files . , . that have no plausible ex-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
123 
planation as propagation phenomena and/ or misinter­
preted man-made objects."* 
The Selfridge Sighting 
According to the Condon Committee a "good radar 
case" must be accompanied by a simultaneous visual con­
firmation. In my opinion, there are multiple radar sight­
ings without simultaneous visual confirmation that are of 
equal importance. One of those (not studied by the Con­
don Committee) was the case involving a multiple radar 
sighting of a UFO in the vicinity of Selfridge AFB, Michi­
gan, on March 9, 1950-the case about which the Air 
Force statement at the beginning of this chapter was made. 
The Selfridge sighting so impressed certain highly 
placed individuals in the Air Force that it led the Air 
Adjutant General, Headquarters Continental Air Com­
mand, Mitchel Air Force Base, New York, to send the 
following letter, classified SECRET, to the Director of In­
telligence, Headquarters, USAF, Washington, D.C. : 
1. Attached for your information are two narra­
tive reports concerning radar sightings of an uniden­
tified flying object. 
2. The fact that the object was sighted on the 
scopes of two (2) radars is considered worthy of 
special note. 
3. Comment of technical experts, this headquar­
ters, was solicited and is quoted in part for your con­
sideration. 
a. While it is relatively well known that various 
ionospheric conditions cause reflections at lower 
frequencies, it is usually considered that those lay­
ers have no effect at the frequencies used by the 
two radar sets mentioned except when temperature 
inversions or other atmospheric or tropospheric con­
ditions cause ducting and spurious reflections. Pre-
5uming that such idealized conditions existed at the 
time of these observations, it is conceivable that an 
*Condon Report, p. 175.pospheric con­
ditions cause ducting and spurious reflections. Pre-
5uming that such idealized conditions existed at the 
time of these observations, it is conceivable that an 
*Condon Report, p. 175.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ns cause ducting and spurious reflections. Pre-
5uming that such idealized conditions existed at the 
time of these observations, it is conceivable that an 
*Condon Report, p. 175.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

124 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
actual small change in physical lateral action in 
reference to the radar set could cause a seemingly 
greater change in relative position of the "object" 
as observed on the radar scope due to the varying 
path lengths the radar energy takes to and from 
the "object" as a function of the frequency-sensi­
tive layers and angles of incidence of the propa­
gated wave. However, the great difference in the 
frequencies of the L-Band CPS-5 and the S-Band 
CPS-4 radar sets and the evident correlation of 
observations between these two sets almost rule 
out the possibility of anomalous propagation effects. 
Further, the magnitude of velocity and accelera­
tions of the three-dimensional movements of the 
· "objects" reported are beyond the capability of 
known behavior of lighter than air vehicles in con· 
trolled flight. [Italics added.] 
b. Also substantiating this unlikelihood is the fact 
that the "object" was reported as remaining sta­
tionary in free space for a mean period of two 
minutes. 
c. Further validity is lent to the contention of the 
reports by statements that first indications, which 
were at high altitudes, were observed on the CPS-4 
height-finder before being observed on the CPS-5 
surveillance radar set. This follows logic and field 
experience, inasmuch as the high-altitude cover­
age of the CPS-5 is known to be poor and the an­
tenna is not capable of being automatically tilted 
as in the case of the CPS-4 on which the controller 
may tilt the antenna within wide limitations to 
observe any high altitude or .high-angle objects. 
It is to be noted that previous field experience with 
a CPS-5 surveillance radar set has indicated that 
targets picked up at ranges and altitudes indicated 
in subject report would probably have a reflection 
aspect ratio i.n the order of magnitude of a B-29 
or greater. 
d. In the absence of detailed vertical and horizontal 
coverage charts for the specific radar sites and com­
prehensive weather reports for the area during the 
period of time these observations were noted, ae absence of detailed vertical and horizontal 
coverage charts for the specific radar sites and com­
prehensive weather reports for the area during the 
period of time these observations were noted, a

--- PAGE BREAK ---d vertical and horizontal 
coverage charts for the specific radar sites and com­
prehensive weather reports for the area during the 
period of time these observations were noted, a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR • . J. ALLEN HYNEK 
125 
more complete study or evaluation at this time is 
not feasible. 
e. In summary, no known electronic phenomena, 
nor combinations of several electronic phenomena 
could conceivably produce all of the observations 
covered by the attached reports. [Italics added.] 
4. The frequency of reports of this nature has re· 
cently increased; instructions have therefore been di· 
rected to all radar installations within this command 
to report scope sightings of unusual objects. 
5. It is recommended that reports of unidentified 
object sightings be reconsidered for submission from 
all Zone of Interior Air Force agencies. 
S/ Neal J. O'Brien, 
Col., USAF, Air Adjutant General, 
for the Commanding General. 
The official Project Grudge record card on this case 
carried it as an unidentified sighting that probably was a 
balloon (although no reason was given for listing it as 
such). 
Could this sighting, verified by two experienced radar 
operators who observed it for several hours as starting 
and stopping and gaining and losing altitude up to 6,000 
feet in one second (at times the object attained speeds of 
1 ,500 miles per hour) , have actually been a balloon? 
The answer to the above question must surely be a re­
sounding NO! One might just as well attribute it to a 
high-flying spider spinning an enormous aerial web, or a 
gigantic duck on its northward migratory trek for spring. 
Indeed, in a later case (October 24, 1968 ) , involving radar 
and air and ground visual sightings of UFOs, at Minot 
AFB, North Dakota, it appeared that Blue Book was 
grasping at just about any and every possible explanation 
to close the case. In that one, Blue Book said the radar 
return was "possible plasma," the ground-visual sighting 
was "probable aircraft" and the air-visual sighting was 
possibly "the star Vega . . . or it could be a light on the 
ground, or possibly a plasma." In other words, anything 
but a UFO. 
The narrative report of this double radar sighting by 
the officer in charge of the radar installation at Selfridgea light on the 
ground, or possibly a plasma." In other words, anything 
but a UFO. 
The narrative report of this double radar sighting by 
the officer in charge of the radar installation at Selfridge

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd, or possibly a plasma." In other words, anything 
but a UFO. 
The narrative report of this double radar sighting by 
the officer in charge of the radar installation at Selfridge

--- PAGE BREAK ---

126 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
is quite interesting and is reported in full in Appendix C. 
In the absence of any specific details on why . the Air 
Force listed this double radar "Unidentified" as a "pos­
sible balloon," the case remains one of those puzzling 
"Unexplaineds." 
The Cose of the USS Philippine Sea 
One of the longest series of military radar sightings 
took place in and around the Korean War zone over a 
period of fifteen months from January 1951 to April 1952. 
These cases involved just about every type of radar sight­
ing, from single-radar contact with a UFO to . multiple­
radar ·Visual contacts, both in the air and on board naval 
vessels. Some twenty-four cases were involved and accord­
ing to Air Intelligence . Information Reports in the Project 
Blue Book files, "The majority of the reports remain un­
explained from the limited information available." 
These reports, accompanied by charts indicating the 
flight paths of the UFOs involved, provide some of the 
most interesting reading in the Blue Book files. Summa­
rized below are some of the highlights: 
On February 2, 1952, radar operators aboard the air­
craft carrier Philippine Sea picked up an unidentified 
high-speed UFO off the east coast of Korea. The object 
was first detected at a distance of twenty-five miles and 
when it closed to twenty miles it made a wide turn to the 
east. opening to a course directly away from the carrier. 
As excerpted from a message to the Commander Naval 
Forces Far East sent by the Philippine Sea, the report on 
the speed and unusual separation into two objects of this 
UFO contact stated: "Measured speed 10 miles per-min­
ute (600 MPH) for first minute, 15 miles per minute 
(900 MPH) for second minute, 30 miles per minute ( 1 800 
MPH) for third minute. Opened as 2 contacts 5 to 12 
miles apart." 
Three signal observers on the deck of the Philippine 
Sea also sighted the UFO visually and reported indepen­
dently to the bridge that they could detect three exhaust 
flames. The observers stated that the trail appeared to 
them as aircraft exhaust during the time the object re­
versed its course. However, no aircraft at that time wasey could detect three exhaust 
flames. The observers stated that the trail appeared to 
them as aircraft exhaust during the time the object re­
versed its course. However, no aircraft at that time was

--- PAGE BREAK ---e exhaust 
flames. The observers stated that the trail appeared to 
them as aircraft exhaust during the time the object re­
versed its course. However, no aircraft at that time was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
127 
capable of the incredible speeds attained by the UFO and 
no conventional aircraft were reported in the area. The 
position of the object, sighted at seventeen miles from 
the carrier, was also held on the radar scope at that time. 
The estimated altitude of the object was 52,000 feet and 
it faded from the radar scope at 1 10 miles. During the 
time it was in view, the coast of Korea and the island of 
Ullung Do were visible at a distance of twenty miles, and 
an escorting destroyer was visible on the scope 2,000 
yards from the carrier. 
· 
The comment of the intelligence officer who prepared 
the report on this case was as follows: 
A thorough debriefing was made of the radar op­
erator. Personnel stated that 'the operator was very 
intelligent, efficient and cooperative. Operator was 
cognizant of capabilities and limitations of the radar 
equipment and made careful plots, checking con­
stantly. At time contact was closing, he queried the 
aircraft controller and when it was determined that 
it was not a friendly aircraft, the general alarm was 
sounded. The three minutes of careful plotting were 
made after the object had turned and was heading 
away from the station. Operator was sure of the ac­
curacy of the plots for the three minutes, and was 
adamant that the speeds shown were approximately 
correct. 
A letter classified SECRET was sent on April 8, 1952, by 
the Commander Naval Forces, Far East, to the Chief of 
Naval Operations, enclosing a track chart of the UFO in 
question and stating, fn part: "Enclosure ( 1 ) is for­
warded for information and evaluation. This is probably 
the first instance of a visual and radar contact on a high­
speed aerial target being made simultaneously in the Far 
East." 
The Princeton Joins the Philippine Sea 
One year prior to the radar-visual UFO sighting by the 
aircraft carrier Philippine Sea, the ship was involved in a 
double radar UFO sighting with the carrier USS Princeton 
off the east coast of Korea. The Princeton had made radaral UFO sighting by the 
aircraft carrier Philippine Sea, the ship was involved in a 
double radar UFO sighting with the carrier USS Princeton 
off the east coast of Korea. The Princeton had made radar

--- PAGE BREAK ---

128 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
Ship's course 1 80ʛ; 
speed, 13 knots 
contacts faded 
at 1 10 miles 
Phenomena split and opened 
as two 
contacts 
on 
slightly 
zigzag course. 
7

I 
I I 
 Visual report from signal bridge 
\ + } -3 
exhaust flames at posi­
tion angle 3 
Radarscope 
map 
of 
unknown 
object 
observed 
from 
the 
USS 
Phi/llpine Sea. 
contact with several high-speed "Unknowns" during April 
and May of 1951, prior to the double contact involving 
radar aboard the Philippine Sea. The speeds of the "Un­
knowns" were estimated at up to 1,200 MPH. 
Excerpts from a letter to the Chief of Naval Operations 
from Commander Naval Forces, Far East, dated Sep­
tember 1 1 , 1951, and classified SECRET, contained this re­
port: 
The observation of rapidly moving targets on the 
PPI scope of the SX radar on the USS Princeton 
CV-37 has been reported by Lt. H.W. White, a CIC 
watch officer on the staff of Commander, Carrier Di­
vision 5. The targets were observed several times 
while operating with Task Force 77 during April and 
May of 1951. 
On one occasion the targets were observed by two 
ships simultaneously. The 8ame tar2ets were held by

--- PAGE BREAK ---eral times 
while operating with Task Force 77 during April and 
May of 1951. 
On one occasion the targets were observed by two 
ships simultaneously. The 8ame tar2ets were held by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
129 
both the USS Princeton and USS Philippine Sea on 
their SX radars. The ships were approximately 4,000 
yards apart at this time. The tracks made by the con­
tact on the radar of the Philippine Sea were the same 
as those on the USS Princeton. 
The targets were always 22 ° wide and sharply de­
fined. The presentation was exceedingly bright in 
comparison with normal air and surface contacts. 
Appearance of the target never varied. 
The SC radar was operating satisfactorily both 
before and after each incident. Very little sea return 
was observed. 
Although previous observations of high-velocity 
targets had been reported by aircraft, this report was 
the first reported shipboard occurrence of this phe­
nomena. This report is considered of particular inter­
est in that the contacts were observed by two differ­
ent radars at the same time, thereby reducing the 
probability that malfunctioning of the radar was the 
cause of the phenomena. 
The Radar Case Condon Couldn't Crack 
On August 13 and 14, 1956, between the hours of 9:20 
P.M. and 3 : 30 A.M. in the vicinity of Lakenheatb-Bent­
waters, England, occurred one of the most baffiing serieS 
of UFO radar-visual contacts ever to confront Air Force 
radar operators. This case was so confounding that it was 
eventually to cause the Condon Committee investigator 
who reviewed it to state all but outright that it was proof 
that UFOs did exist. But Project Blue nook, in its cus­
tomary manner, listed it as "anomalous propagation," the 
all-purpose out the Air Force applied to any radar con­
tact with a UFO that it could not explain. 
An extensive analysis of this case by Gordon D. Thayer 
of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
(and the member of the Condon Committee who con­
ducted its review of radar cases) was examined closely by 
the UFO Subcommittee of the American Institute of As­
tronautics and Aeronautics and then published in the 
September 1971 issue of its magazine, Astronautics & 
Aeronautics.was examined closely by 
the UFO Subcommittee of the American Institute of As­
tronautics and Aeronautics and then published in the 
September 1971 issue of its magazine, Astronautics & 
Aeronautics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y by 
the UFO Subcommittee of the American Institute of As­
tronautics and Aeronautics and then published in the 
September 1971 issue of its magazine, Astronautics & 
Aeronautics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

130 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
Thayer's report describes the case as "the most puzzling 
and unusual case in the radar-visual file. The apparently 
rational, intelligent behavior of the UFO suggests a me­
chanical device of unknown origin as the most probable 
explanation of this sighting . . . . 
" He did leave open the 
possibility that more conventional explanations could be 
applied to the case due to the fallibility of human wit­
nesses. 
According to Thayer, a report by the night-watch su­
pervisor in the Radar Air Traffic Control Center at Laken­
heath submitted to th(l Condon Committee years after the 
events of the night of August 13-14, 1956, provided the 
most coherent account. That report was not to be found 
in the Blue Book file at the time of Thayer's analysis for 
the Condon Committee in 1967, but it was contained in 
the files released in 1976 by the Air Force. Here is the 
account of the night-watch supervisor as submitted to the 
Condon Committee: 
In 1956, sometime between January and Septem­
ber (I can't remember the exact date or month), I 
was on duty as Watch Supervisor at Lakenheath RAF 
Station, England (a USAF base) , in the Radar Air 
Traffic Control Center. It was the 5 : 00 P.M. to mid­
night shift. I had either four or five other controllers 
on my shift. I was sitting at the Supervisor's Coordi­
nating desk and received a call on the direct line (ac­
tually, I'm not sure which line it was) . Anyway, it 
was Sculthorpe GCA Unit calling and the radar op­
erator asked me if we had any targets on our scopes 
traveling at 4,000 MPH. They said they had watched 
a target on their scopes proceed from a point 30 or 
40 miles east of Sculthorpe to a point 40 miles west 
of Sculthorpe. The target passed directly over Scul­
thorpe, England, RAF Station (also an USAF Sta­
tion). He said the tower reported seeing it go by and 
just appeared to be a blurry light. A C47 flying over 
the base at 5,000 feet altitude also reported seeing it 
as a blurred light that passed under his aircraft. No 
report as to actual distance below the aircraft. I im­
mediately had all controllers start scanning the radar 
scopes. I had each scope set on a different range­
from 10 miles to 200 miles radius of Lakenheath. Atactual distance below the aircraft. I im­
mediately had all controllers start scanning the radar 
scopes. I had each scope set on a different range­
from 10 miles to 200 miles radius of Lakenheath. At

--- PAGE BREAK ---w the aircraft. I im­
mediately had all controllers start scanning the radar 
scopes. I had each scope set on a different range­
from 10 miles to 200 miles radius of Lakenheath. At

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
131 
this time I did not contact anyone by telephone as I 
was rather skeptical of this report. We were using 
--- on our radar, which eliminated entirely all 
ground returns and stationary targets. There was 
very little or not [sic] traffic or targets on the scopes, 
as I recall. However, one controller noticed a sta­
tionary . target on the scopes about 20 to 25 miles 
southwest. This was unusual as a stationary target 
should have been eliminated unless it was moving 
at a speed of at least 40 to 45 knots. And yet we 
could detect no movement at all. We watched this 
target on all the different scopes for several minutes 
and I called the GCA Unit at Lakenheath to see if 
they had this target on their scopes also. They con­
firmed the target was on their scope in the same geo­
graphical location. As we watched, the stationary tar­
get started moving at a speed of 400 to 600 MPH in a 
north/ northeast direction until it reached a point 
about 20 miles north/ northwest of Lakenheath. 
There was no slow start or build-up to this speed­
it was constant from the second it started to move 
until it stopped. 
I called and reported all the facts to this point, 
including Sculthorpe GCA's initial report, to· the 
7th Air Division Command Post at London. They 
in turn notified 3rd Air Force Command Post and 
hooked into the line. I also hooked in my local AFB 
Commanding Officer and my Unit (AFCS, Communi­
cations Squadron) Commander on my switchboard. 
And there could have been others hooked in also that 
I was not aware of. I repeated all the facts known to 
this point and continued to give a detailed report on 
the target's movements and location. The target 
made several changes in location, always in a straight 
line, always at about 600 MPH and always from a 
standing or stationary point to his next stop at con­
stant speed-no build-up in speed, no set pattern at 
any time. Time spent stationary between movements 
also varied from 3 or 4 minutes to 5 or 6 minutes 
(possibly even longer as I was busy answering ques­
tions-listening to theories, guesses, etc., that the 
conference line people were saying) . This continued 
for some time. After I imagine about 30 to 45 min-even longer as I was busy answering ques­
tions-listening to theories, guesses, etc., that the 
conference line people were saying) . This continued 
for some time. After I imagine about 30 to 45 min-

--- PAGE BREAK ---busy answering ques­
tions-listening to theories, guesses, etc., that the 
conference line people were saying) . This continued 
for some time. After I imagine about 30 to 45 min-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

132 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
utes, it was decided to scramble two RAF intercep­
tors to investigate. This was done I believe by 3rd 
Air Force calling the RAF and, after bearing what 
the score was, they scrambled one aircraft. (The 
second got off after as I will mention later.) 
The interceptor aircraft took off from an RAF sta­
tion near London and approached Lakenheatb from 
the southwest. Radio and radar contact was established 
with the RAF interceptor aircraft at a point about 
30 to 35 miles southwest of Lakenheath, inbound to 
Lakenheath. On initial contact we gave the intercep­
tor pilot all the background information on the UFO, 
his (the interceptor) present distance and bearing 
from Lakenheath, the UFO's (which was stationary 
at the time) distance and bearing from Lakenheath. 
We explained we did not know the altitude of the 
UFO but we could assume his altitude was above 
1,500 feet and below 20,000 feet, due to the opera­
tional characteristics of the radar (CPS-5 type radar, 
I believe) . Also, we mentioned the report from the 
C-47 over Sculthorpe that relayed the story about the 
light which 
passed below him. 
His altitude was 
5,000 feet. 
We immediately issued heading to the interceptor 
to guide him to the UFO. The UFO remained sta­
tionary throughout. This vectoring of the intercept 
aircraft continued. We continually gave the intercept 
aircraft his heading to the UFO and his distance from 
the 
UFO 
at 
approximately 
1-to-2-mile 
intervals. 
Shortly after we told the intercept aircraft he was 
one-half mile from the U.FO and it was 12 o'clock 
from his position, he said, "Roger, Lakenheath, I've 
got my guns locked on him." Then he paused and 
said, "Where did he go? Do you still have him?" We 
replied, "Roger, it appeared he got behind you and 
he's still there." There were now two targets, one be­
hind the other, same speed, very close, but two sepa­
rate distinct targets. 
The first movement by the UFO was so swift 
(circling behind the interceptor) I missed it entirely, 
but it was seen by the other controllers. However, the 
fact that this had occurred was confirmed by the pilot 
of the interceptor. The pilot of the interceptor toldnterceptor) I missed it entirely, 
but it was seen by the other controllers. However, the 
fact that this had occurred was confirmed by the pilot 
of the interceptor. The pilot of the interceptor told

--- PAGE BREAK ---it entirely, 
but it was seen by the other controllers. However, the 
fact that this had occurred was confirmed by the pilot 
of the interceptor. The pilot of the interceptor told

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
133 
me he would try to shake the UFO and would try 
it again. He tried everything-he climbed, dived, 
circled, etc., but the UFO acted like it was glued 
right behind him, always the same distance, very 
close, but we always had two distinct targets. (Note: 
Target resolution on our radar at the range they 
were from the antenna [about 10 to 30 miles, all in 
the southerly sectors from Lakenheath] would be be­
tween 200 and 600 feet probably. Closer than that we 
would have got one target from both aircraft and 
UFO. Most specifications say 500 feet is the mini­
mum, but I believe it varied and 200 to 600 feet is 
closer to the truth and, in addition the tuning of the 
equipment, atmospheric conditions, etc., also help 
determine this figure.) 
The interceptor pilot continued to try and shake 
the UFO for about ten minutes (approximate-it 
seemed longer to both him and us) . He continued to 
comment occasionally and we could tell from the 
tonal quality he was getting worried, excited and also 
pretty scared. 
He finally said, "I'm returning to station, Laken­
heath. Let me know if he follows me. I'm getting low 
on petrol." The target (UFO) followed him only a 
short distance, as he headed south/ southwest, and 
the UFO stopped and remained stationary. We ad­
vised the interceptor that the UFO target had stopped 
following and was now stationary about 10 miles 
south of Lakenheath. He rogered this message and 
almost immediately the second interceptor called us 
on the same frequency. We replied and told him we 
would advise him when we had a radar target, so we 
could establish radar contact with his aircraft. (He 
was not on radar at this time, probably had just taken 
off and was too low for us to pick him up, or too far 
away-we had most of the scopes on short range, so 
we could watch the UFO closely on the smaller range.) 
The number-two interceptor called the number one 
interceptor by name (Tom, Frank-whatever his 
name was) and asked him, "Did you see anything?" 
Number one replied, "I saw something, but I'll be 
damned if I know what it was." Number two said, 
"What happened?" Number one then switched fre-is 
name was) and asked him, "Did you see anything?" 
Number one replied, "I saw something, but I'll be 
damned if I know what it was." Number two said, 
"What happened?" Number one then switched fre-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ked him, "Did you see anything?" 
Number one replied, "I saw something, but I'll be 
damned if I know what it was." Number two said, 
"What happened?" Number one then switched fre-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

134 
THE HYNEK UPO REPORT 
quencies to his home-base frequency. We gave num­
ber two the location of the UFO and advised him 
that we still didn't have him on radar, but probably 
would have shortly. He delayed answering for some 
seconds and then finally said, "Lakenheath 
--­
(identification, aircraft call sign) -can't remember 
what call sign those aircraft were using. Returning 
home, my engine is malfunctioning." He then left 
our frequency. 
Throughout this we kept all the agencies, 7th Air 
Division, 3rd Air Force, etc., advised on every aspect, 
every word that was said, everything. 
We then inquired what action they wanted to take. 
They had no more suggestions, then finally they told 
liS to just keep watching the target and let them know 
if anything else happened. The target made a couple 
more short moves, then left our radar coverage in a 
northerly direction-speed still about 600 MPH. We 
lost target outbound to the north . at about 50 to 60 
miles, which is normal if aircraft or target is at an 
altitude below 5,000 feet (because of the radiation 
loss of that type radar) . We notified 7th Air Divi­
sion Command Post and they said they'd tell every­
body for us. 
I made out a written report on all this, in detail 
for the officer in charge of my facility, and was told 
that unless I was contacted later for any further in­
formation, he would take care of it. . . . I heard no 
more about it . . . . 
At least three separate times that same night, prior to 
the telephone contact with the supervisor at Lakenheath, 
unidentified radar echoes were tracked by the GCA unit at 
Bentwaters. While those incidents are quite interesting 
themselves, ·there was no visual observation involved. 
UFOs with Radar? 
In the fall of 1948, Project Sign received a report from 
Kyushu, Japan, describing the encounter of an F-61 air­
craft with from two to six unidentified flying objects. In­
telligence reports from Far East air forces indicated· thatreceived a report from 
Kyushu, Japan, describing the encounter of an F-61 air­
craft with from two to six unidentified flying objects. In­
telligence reports from Far East air forces indicated· that

--- PAGE BREAK ---rom 
Kyushu, Japan, describing the encounter of an F-61 air­
craft with from two to six unidentified flying objects. In­
telligence reports from Far East air forces indicated· that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
135 
the UFOs might have "carried radar warning equipment," 
because the "object seemed cognizant of the whereabouts 
of the F-61 at all times." 
The sighting took place at about 1 1 :05 P.M. on October 
1 5, 1948, some 50 miles northwest of Fukuoka, off the 
northwest coast of Kyushu. A statement of January 28, 
1949, by 2nd Lt. Barton Halter of the 68th Fighter 
Squadron, who was radar operator of the F-61, explains 
the encounter: 
My present duties are Radar and Communications 
Maintenance Officer, 
and Radar Observer Night 
Fighter with 
the 
68th Fighter Squadron, 
347th 
Fighter Group (AW), APO 75. On 15 October 1948, 
my pilot and I started out on a routine mission off 
the northwest coast of Kyushu. When, at 2305 
( 1 1 :05 P.M.) , we were approximately 50 miles at 
330° from Fukuoka, I picked up an airborne target. 
It showed up at a range of five miles, dead ahead and 
slightly below us. We increased our speed to ap­
proximately 220 MPH and obtained an advantage of 
20 MPH. The target showed no evasive action at first, 
and we thought that it was probably one of the fight­
er aircraft from our home field. As we closed in, I 
noticed a slight change in azimuth and a rapid clo­
sure between us. Shortly thereafter, a matter of sec­
onds, the target gave the indication of diving beneath 
us. We dived in an attempt to follow the target and 
before we could get squared away to follow, it had 
. passed beneath us and was gone. I was notified by my 
pilot that we were diving at a rate of 3,500 feet a 
minute at 300 MPH. I had intended to ask the pilot 
to peel off after it split "S," but it was gone too fast. 
The next, or second, interception was from the 
rear of the target as was the first; however, the tar­
get added a burst of speed dead ahead and outdis­
tanced us immediately. On the third interception, my 
pilot called a visual at 60° portside. By the time I 
made the pickup it was at 45° port 3,000' and 5° 
below. My pilot made a rapid starboard turn in an 
attempt to head off the target. By the time we got 
astern of it, it was off again in a burst of speed and 
disappeared between nine (9) and ten ( 10) miles.y pilot made a rapid starboard turn in an 
attempt to head off the target. By the time we got 
astern of it, it was off again in a burst of speed and 
disappeared between nine (9) and ten ( 10) miles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

136 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
On the fourth interception, the pilot called to me 
that we had been passed from above from the rear by 
our target. I picked up the target as it went off my 
scope from five to ten miles dead ahead and slightly 
above. On the fifth and sixth interceptions, the target 
appeared at 9-plus miles doing approximately 200 
MPH. We had an advantage of 20 MPH taking our 
lAS approximately 200 MPH, a safe high-speed cruise 
for F-61 type aircraft. We closed in to 12,000 feet, 
then, with a burst of speed the target pulled away to 
the outer limit of my set which is 1 0 miles for air­
born targets. This took approximately 1 5 to 20 sec­
onds. 
In my opinion, we were shown a new type air­
craft by some agency unknown to us 
•
•
•
.e outer limit of my set which is 1 0 miles for air­
born targets. This took approximately 1 5 to 20 sec­
onds. 
In my opinion, we were shown a new type air­
craft by some agency unknown to us 
•
•
•
.

' According to a Project Sign intelligence report, the 
pilot of the F-61 was able to make out a silhouette of the 
UFO (it was a clear moonlit night) and he described it as 
translucent with a very short body and stubby appear­
ance. The object had clean-cut lines and no canopy was 
discernible. The entire six sightings lasted less than ten 
minutes with each individual sighting about a minute or 
so in duration. The UFO's speed varied from between 
200 MPH to 1,200 MPH. 
An excerpted dispatch from Headquarters, 3 15th Air 
Division, to the Commanding General of the Fifth Air 
Force, of February 28, 1949, relative to this case, con­
tained these interesting comments: 
2. It is believed that the object was not lost from 
the scope due to the normal skip "null" zones com­
mon to all radar equipment. The pilot and observer 
feel that it was the high rate of speed of the object 
which enabled it to disappear so rapidly. [Italics 
added.] 
The pilot of the F-61, 1st Lt. Oliver Hemphill, Jr., had 
this to say: 
I had an excellent silhouette of the target thrown 
against a very reflective undercast by a full moon. I 
realized at this time that it did not look like any type

--- PAGE BREAK ---d 
this to say: 
I had an excellent silhouette of the target thrown 
against a very reflective undercast by a full moon. I 
realized at this time that it did not look like any type

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
137 
aircraft I was familiar with, so I immediately con­
tacted my Ground Control Station and asked for in­
formation regarding any aircraft flying in the area. 
The ground control radar reported no other aircraft and 
at no time could they pick up the UFO. Hemphill stated 
that he again caught "just a fleeting glance of the aircraft 
(UFO) ; just enough to know he had passed me," on the 
fourth sighting. 
Project Sign reviewed the Kyushu, Japan, UFO case 
and ultimately classified it as "Unidentified." 
Wing size and shape undiscern­
ible at observer's visual angle. 
Vertical tail surfaces very small if 
present. 
Horizontal tail surfaces 
undiscernible at observer's visual 
Canopy or greenhouse .If 
present. Formed into main 
angle. 
\ 
Rear of body 
cut off sharply-. 
Power section
/------->Z 
undiscernible 
Body 
length 
approxi· 
1--- mately the same as con· -1 
verrtional fighter-type 
aircraft. 
body and was 
not discernible. 
Power section 
undiscernible 
Color or markings undiscernible other 
than very dull or dark finish. 
Silhouette of object seen by Lt. Hemphill and his co-pilot, from an 
F-61, against "a very reflective undercast by a full moon." 
Aircraft, Plasma, Stars??? 
On October 28, 1956, various missile-crew personnel at 
Minot, North Dakota, AFB, as well as the crew of a B-52 
aircraft, reported observing the erratic flight of one or 
more UFOs by means of ground visual, air-visual, and air­
radar sightings. In addition, the B-52 aircraft that tracked 
the flight of the UFO took scope photos of the target. The 
total length of observation of the · UFO by ground and 
airborne observers (combined) was four hours and forty­
eight minutes. 
Some of the more pertinent details of the sighting are

--- PAGE BREAK ---tal length of observation of the · UFO by ground and 
airborne observers (combined) was four hours and forty­
eight minutes. 
Some of the more pertinent details of the sighting are

--- PAGE BREAK ---

138 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
contained in the following excerpts from a Project Blue 
Book Memorandum for the Record, prepared by a Blue 
Book staff officer: 
At about 0300 hours (3 :00 A.M.) local, a B-52 
that was about 30 miles northwest of Minot AFB 
and making practice penetrations sighted an uniden­
tified blip on their radars. Initially the target traveled 
approximately 2Y2 miles in 3 sec. or at about 3,000 
mi/hr. After passing from the right to the left of the 
plane it assumed a position off the left wing of the 
52. The blip stayed of] the left wing for approxi­
mately 20 miles at which point it broke off. Scope 
photographs were taken. When the target was close 
to the B-52 neither of the two transmitters in the 
B-52 would operate properly but when it broke off 
both returned to normal function. 
At about this time a missile maintenance man 
called in and reported sighting a bright orangish-red 
object. The object was hovering at about 1,000 ft, or 
so, and had a sound similar to a jet engine. The ob­
server had stopped his car, but he then started it up 
again. As he started to move, the object followed him, 
then accelerated and appeared to stop at about 6-8 
miles away. The observer shortly afterward lost sight 
of it. 
In response to the maintenance man's call the 
B-52, which had continued its penetration run, was 
vectored toward the visual which was about 10 miles 
northwest of the base. The B-52 confirmed having 
sighted a bright light of some type that appeared to 
be hovering just over or on the ground. 
The Blue Book files contain the reports by fourteen 
members of missile maintenance crews from five different 
sights at Minot AFB who claimed to have seen a similar 
object. 
Lt. Quintanella sent a dispatch to Col. Pullen of the 
Strategic Air Command advising him that after reviewing 
preliminary information submitted by Minot AFB, it was 
his belief that the object sighted by the B-52 crew on radar 
and visually was "a plasma of the ball-lightning class."him that after reviewing 
preliminary information submitted by Minot AFB, it was 
his belief that the object sighted by the B-52 crew on radar 
and visually was "a plasma of the ball-lightning class."

--- PAGE BREAK ---wing 
preliminary information submitted by Minot AFB, it was 
his belief that the object sighted by the B-52 crew on radar 
and visually was "a plasma of the ball-lightning class."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
1 39 
How he made this determination is not explained. As for 
the sightings by the missile maintenance crew and security 
guards, he stated that some were "observing some first­
magnitude celestial bodies," although he did not explain 
how such celestial bodies could be magnified to the degree 
that they would appear to be "as the sun," or give the 
impression of landing, as reported. 
The official Blue Book record card on this case gave 
at least three "possibles" for the air-visual sighting by 
the B-52 crew. But no detailed analysis was made, and 
once again these explanations appear to have been straws 
grasped simply to close the case-quickly and quietly. 
The Provincetown Baffler 
Another interesting radar "Unidentified" is the case of 
a UFO tracked by a Massachusetts I˟stitute of Technology 
radar observer while in the process of conducting a wea­
ther radar project (under a contract with the U.S. Signal 
Corps). The sighting took place on September 2 1, 1950. 
An extract from his letter to Major Tuttle, Staff Weather 
Officers, 33rd Fighter Wing, Otis Air Force Base, Massa­
chusetts, explains the situation: 
An exceedingly puzzling event occurred during the 
3rd run when the planes were heading northeast at 
30,000 feet. We picked up another plane (?) in 
the radar beam traveling about due north on a 
converging course toward the F-86s. It was mov­
ing very rapidly and I told the pilots about it, 
its 
range 
and 
direction 
from 
them. 
The 
echo 
caught up 
with, 
passed, 
and 
then crossed 
the 
course of the 86s, suddenly went into a very tight 
(for the speed) turn to the right, headed back to­
ward Boston and passed directly over our flight. 
(Perhaps went under. ) The sketch represents, as 
closely as we can remember, the relative positions of 
the two planes. Two other observers were with me 
at the time and we have checked over the facts 
rather closely. The pilots will undoubtedly recall the 
incident. They said they didn't see anything which is 
not too surprising considering the speed of the ob-e and we have checked over the facts 
rather closely. The pilots will undoubtedly recall the 
incident. They said they didn't see anything which is 
not too surprising considering the speed of the ob-

--- PAGE BREAK ---d over the facts 
rather closely. The pilots will undoubtedly recall the 
incident. They said they didn't see anything which is 
not too surprising considering the speed of the ob-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

140 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
ject and the fact that it may have passed several 
thousand feet above or below them and still looked 
like coincidence to the radar. Figuring conserva­
tively, the speed of the object was · approximately 
1200 MPH, and the centrifugal force exerted on the 
ship during the turn amounted to something more 
than five g's. It gave an excellent radar echo which 
could not be mistaken for anything else and in all 
respects except for the velocity seemed a normal 
radar target. It passed out of the beam while we 
continued to track our flight, but we focused on it 
again for a few seconds shortly after it was rapidly 
approaching Boston . . . . 
" 
The letter continues with the radar observer expressing 
disbelief at what he has observed: 
The whole thing doesn't seem to make sense as 
you will discover when you reflect a moment about 
it. It was very evidently an interception of some 
sort on our flight, but what? The turn was utterly 
fantastic, I don't think the human frame could ab­
sorb it, but if the object was radio controlled, it had 
no particular business flying on such courses as 
planes occupied on legitimate business. A few rough 
calculations concerning control surfaces, angles, etc., 
only adds to the puzzle that this object must have 
been entirely unconventional in many and basic re­
spects. Perhaps the thing that bothers me the most is 
that it gave a very good radar echo, which implies 
irregular surfaces and comparatively large size, large 
enough so the pilots might have had a good chance 
to see it. 
It seems highly probable that I may be poking into 
something that is none of my business, but on the 
other hand, it may be something that the Air Force 
would like to know about if it doesn't already. I wish 
you would take the matter up with your intelligence 
officer or C.O. and get their reactions. The whole 
thing has us going nuts here and we don't know 
whether to talk about it or keep our mouths shut. 
Until I hear from you we will do the latter. 
Perhaps we could run another mission for theThe whole 
thing has us going nuts here and we don't know 
whether to talk about it or keep our mouths shut. 
Until I hear from you we will do the latter. 
Perhaps we could run another mission for the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
141 
purpose of luring it out again and this time track it, 
or at least get your pilots close enough for a look­
they'd never catch it I'm sure .
.
.
•or the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
141 
purpose of luring it out again and this time track it, 
or at least get your pilots close enough for a look­
they'd never catch it I'm sure .
.
.
•

" 
The officer was told that someone from Otis Air Force 
Base would contact him concerning the sighting. However, 
he was never approached and no further information 
about the case was released. 
Blue Book Boner 
On the afternoon of May 21, 1949, an F-82 fighter was 
dispatched from Moses Lake AFB, near Hanford, Wash­
ington, to intercept a flying disc that was observed hover­
ing in restricted air space over the Hanford Atomic Plant 
at an altitude of 17,000 to 20,000 feet. The silvery, disc­
shaped object had been visually sighted by crew and per­
sonnel from the Hanford radar station, and confirmed on 
radar. 
A call quickly went from the Hanford station to Moses 
Lake AFB, but before the F-82 was airborne, the disc 
suddenly took off in a southerly direction at a speed great­
er than that of a jet fighter! The Air Intelligence Informa­
tion Report on this case states that the pilot of the F-82 
was instructed to search for the object and "intercept it 
in hopes that it might be a disk." However, the object 
had sped out of the range of ground radar and the pilot 
of the F-82 was not able to locate it. A short time later, 
another aircraft was observed on radar in the restricted 
air space of the Hanford Atomic Plant. This one was 
positively "identified"-as a commercial aircraft drop­
ping leaflets announcing a rodeo! 
Yes, you guessed it, Blue Book files carry this UFO 
sighting under the classification of "aircraft," based on the 
assumption that the commercial aircraft and the UFO 
were one and the same object. This, despite the following 
comment by the investigating officer: 
It is believed that two separate and distinct alert 
conditions existed on the afternoon of 2 1 May 1949. 
The first was caused by the sightings of Flying Sau­
cers (noted) by Hanford using a telescope and theieved that two separate and distinct alert 
conditions existed on the afternoon of 2 1 May 1949. 
The first was caused by the sightings of Flying Sau­
cers (noted) by Hanford using a telescope and the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ate and distinct alert 
conditions existed on the afternoon of 2 1 May 1949. 
The first was caused by the sightings of Flying Sau­
cers (noted) by Hanford using a telescope and the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

142 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
operations crew of the 637th ADCC. The second was 
caused by the dropping of leaflets by an aircraft into 
the Hanford area. It is believed that there is no con­
nection between the two events. 
UFOs at Oak Ridge 
I have saved for last what I consider to be one of the 
most interesting radar and visual cases (although the 
radar and the visual were reported from different loca­
tions) in the Blue Book files. It is interesting not only for 
the sightings themselves, but because of the location-the 
Atomic Energy Commission's plant at Oak Ridge, Ten­
nessee, · the qualifications of the witnesses, and the com­
ments contained in the report, classified SECRET, from the 
FBI Field Office, Knoxville, Tennessee, to the Command­
ing General of the Third Army, and the Atomic Energy 
Commission's Security Division at Oak Ridge. 
In typical fashion, Project Grudge wrote off the radar 
contacts in a rather casual manner, calling them probable 
"weather anomalies," even though detailed weather re­
ports were never obtained. As for the visual sighting-a 
very good one, as we shall see-the Grudge report had this 
to say: 
While it is impossible to definitely explain the 
phenomenon observed visually by people in the area, 
many of the details reported follow the pattern of 
reports on other incidents on which conclusions were 
drawn to the effect that people saw weather balloons, 
peculiar clouds or smoke formations, aircraft through 
an overcast, etc. Evidence to the effect that such sight· 
ings were made by numerous people usually breaks 
down since, in most cases, a would-be object is first 
reported by one individual and the number of sub­
sequent reports is usually determined by the publicity 
surrounding the incident. 
There is no doubt that a number of incidents had oc­
curred at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, beginning in June of 
1947, when a photograph of a UFO was taken by a ci­
vilian. The source of this information is a chronologicalt that a number of incidents had oc­
curred at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, beginning in June of 
1947, when a photograph of a UFO was taken by a ci­
vilian. The source of this information is a chronological

--- PAGE BREAK ---ncidents had oc­
curred at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, beginning in June of 
1947, when a photograph of a UFO was taken by a ci­
vilian. The source of this information is a chronological

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
143 
FBI summary of the reported events between June 1947 
and October 16, 1950, in Blue Book files. But, was the 
Project Grudge investigating officer's analysis correct 
when he said that, based on prior experience, the wit­
nesses to this event were probably just seeing things that 
had a natural explanation? Perhaps one should read the 
report of the FBI field agent about these cases before 
arriving at a final conclusion. Here is the kernel of that 
report: 
. 
. 
• The most reliable sources available were utilized 
in the compilation of this report. The employment 
records and the Federal Bureau of Investigation re­
ports concerning the witnesses were inspected to as­
certain their reliability, integrity, and loyalty to the 
United States Government. 
The opinions of the officials of the Security Di­
vision, AED, Oak Ridge; Security Branch, NEP A 
Division, Oak Ridge; AEC Security Patrol, Oak 
Ridge; FBI, Knoxville; Air Force Radar and Fighter 
Squadrons, Knoxville; and the OSI, Knoxville, Ten­
nessee, fail to evolve an adequate explanation for 
SUBJECT; however the possibilities of practical jok­
ers, mass hysteria, balloons of any description, flights 
of birds (with or without cobwebs or other objects 
attached) , falling kites, objects thrown from the 
ground, windblown objects, insanity, and many other 
natural happenings have been rejected because of the 
detailed, similar descriptions of the objects seen by 
different persons; and because of impossibility. 
In my many years with Project Blue Book, I observed 
similar dismissals of radar cases. Indeed, in the Congres­
sional Hearings of April 5, 1966, * Major Quintanilla, then 
head of Blue Book, stated (but not under oath) in an­
swer to a question by Congressman Schweiker, that all 
radar cases bad been solved. 
Mr. Schweikcr: "No, the first question be asked you 
was, have any of the unexplained objects been sighted on 
*From the Hearing by Committee on Armed Services of the 
House of Representatives, 89th Congress, April 5, 1966, p. 6073.estion be asked you 
was, have any of the unexplained objects been sighted on 
*From the Hearing by Committee on Armed Services of the 
House of Representatives, 89th Congress, April 5, 1966, p. 6073.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

144 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
radar. I thought you said 'No' to that just a couple of 
minutes ago." 
. 
Major Quintanilla: "That is correct. We have no radar 
cases which are unexplained."

--- PAGE BREAK ---HE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
radar. I thought you said 'No' to that just a couple of 
minutes ago." 
. 
Major Quintanilla: "That is correct. We have no radar 
cases which are unexplained."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7 
UFOs CLOSE UP: CLOSE 
ENCOUNTERS OF THE FIRST KIND 
"I can assure you, once anyone has seen an object 
such as this so closely and for a. period of even one 
minute, it would be etched in their memory for all 
time." 
-from a June 1955 UFO report 
The above statement well characterizes the Close En­
counter of the First Kind, a sighting that is close up but 
which "does" little more than firmly impress itself into 
the memory of the witness. It is often a frightening experi­
ence, and always an awesome one, but when it is over 
there are no visible marks or other evidence of it. The 
event is so unusual, so traumatic generally, that even 
when a camera has been available (and many witnesses 
have confessed that they did have a camera in an auto­
mobile glove compartment or otherwise close at hand) we 
have no record of its having been used. 
Close Encounters of all types are hard to dismiss as 
misidentifications of familiar objects; it is hard to label 
a large object reportedly sighted just a few hundred feet 
away as Venus or a helicopter. Venus is obviously too 
small-appearing, and a helicopter at a few hundred feet 
could hardly fail to be recognized for what it was. Project 
Blue Book, operating as always on the hypothesis that 
such strange phenomena must have a simple, natural ex­
planation, was obviously hard pressed to find such, and 
therefore resorted to considering reports of this kind to be 
hoaxes or the results of fevered imaginations. Failing that, 
they reached for even the most remotely possible, though 
improbable, natural explanation. Occasionally they capitu­
lated and called these sightings "Unidentified."

--- PAGE BREAK ---Failing that, 
they reached for even the most remotely possible, though 
improbable, natural explanation. Occasionally they capitu­
lated and called these sightings "Unidentified."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

146 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
The Case of the Vigorous Weather Balloon 
Take the case of the "weather balloon" that on May 19, 
1960, in Dillingham, Alaska, reportedly picked up two 
empty five-gallon cans, swirled them in the air, and car­
ried them for many yards. It also swirled dead grass into 
the air. 
The sighting at Dillingham, Alaska, of May 19, 1960. Drawings by 
the witnesses taken directly from the Blue Book files.

--- PAGE BREAK ---for many yards. It also swirled dead grass into 
the air. 
The sighting at Dillingham, Alaska, of May 19, 1960. Drawings by 
the witnesses taken directly from the Blue Book files.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
147 
The original teletype message that came into Wright­
Patterson Air Force Base, and also went to the Secretary 
of the Air Force, to Headquarters, USAF, and to several 
other receiving points, read as follows: 
( 1 ) CIRCULAR IN PLAN, ROUGHLY FOOTBALL SHAPED 
CROSS SECTION. 
(2) TWENTY TO TWENTY-FIVE FEET IN DIAMETER, 
TEN TO TWELVE FEET IN THICKNESS. 
(3) METALLIC, SILVERY WHITE, COMPARED TO ALUMI· 
NUM. 
( 4) ONE OBJECT 
(5) N/A 
(6) TWO FLEXIBLE TUBES OR FLAPS APPROXIMATELY 
FOUR TO FIVE FEET LONG/DEPENDING/FROM 
EDGE. A SEMICIRCULAR, WHIRLING DEVICE IN 
CENTER OF BOTTOM. 
(7) THE SOUND WAS DESCRIBED AS A WHIRRING WITH 
A SUCKING SOUND WHEN FINALLY ASCENDING. 
THE OBSERVERS DID NOT SEE ANY WINDOW. 
The local investigator added: 
The natives who observed the object stated that 
it came within two hundred feet of them . . Several of 
the observers drew sketches that were very similar. 
When the object rose into the air, a sucking noise 
was heard and grass was sucked up from the ground. 
• 
. 
• In the past, natives have often proved to be ac­
curate and reliable observers of unusual occurrences 
in the Alaskan area. No reasonable explanation of 
the object is readily apparent. Request your opinion 
whether on-the-spot investigation and interrogation 
of the observers by this office is warranted. 
Is further investigation "warranted" indeed! One would 
think that natural curiosity alone, never mind national 
security or scientific considerations, would have made 
such a question academic. And in fact, a further investi­
gation of sorts was made. Following is the report to Blue 
Book by the chief of intelligence division of the local base 
in Alaska, who interviewed the witnesses:

--- PAGE BREAK ---further investi­
gation of sorts was made. Following is the report to Blue 
Book by the chief of intelligence division of the local base 
in Alaska, who interviewed the witnesses:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

148 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
Mr. --- saw the object at close range. He is a 
deaf-mute native and communicated his sighting to 
his brother, Ed. The following account was given by 
Ed, speaking for his brother. "Jim was in the yard of 
the --- house when he saw the object flying along 
the · ridge. He noticed that it created considerable 
suction, in fact, enough to pick up two empty five­
gallon cans and swirl them in the air below the 
object. He was alarmed because some very small 
children were playing in the area and he was afraid 
that they would be sucked up. The object passed 
about fifty to one hundred feet from him and just 
cleared electric wires, estimated to be about twelve 
feet from the ground. Apparently, the cans were car­
ri,ed from one side of the ridge on which the houses 
stand to the other, a distance of possibly one hun­
dred yards. The object passed between the houses, 
dipped slightly into the ravine and ascended at an 
extremely high rate of speed. As it ascended, it 
whirled dead grass from the meadow high into the 
air after it." --- drew a picture of the object and 
described it as follows: it was quite round with a pro­
jection on the ends at the center line. Whether this 
was "fore and aft" or a flange all the way around 
could not be determined. There was a red band 
around the object between the projections. On the 
bottom were two appendages which moved in an un­
dulating motion (the motion was described with arm 
movements) . Also, in the center bottom was a half­
moon object which whirled at varying speeds. Ap­
parently, when 
the object 
descended rapidly, 
it 
whirled very fast. According to ---'s account, the 
angle of incidence to the object of these appendages 
and the half-moon object changed, but because of 
language difficulties, it was impossible to determine 
what relationship this had with the movement of the 
object except that it possibly occurred when it 
turned. The object was about as big as an automobile 
and was silver in color. Ed felt certain that it was 
not a balloon and it was metallic. It was impossible 
to determine the three-dimensional shape of the ob­
ject. It is difficult to assess the reliability of these 
persons but it is probably at least average. Conversa-it was metallic. It was impossible 
to determine the three-dimensional shape of the ob­
ject. It is difficult to assess the reliability of these 
persons but it is probably at least average. Conversa-

--- PAGE BREAK ---was impossible 
to determine the three-dimensional shape of the ob­
ject. It is difficult to assess the reliability of these 
persons but it is probably at least average. Conversa-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J, ALLEN HYNEK 
149 
tion with --- indicated no reason to doubt die 
veracity of either him or his brother. There was some 
language difficulty in communication with ---. 
Blue Book files further indicate that at the time of the 
sightings, the weather was clear, that a breeze about fif­
teen miles per hour was blowing, and that the object was 
headed pretty much into the wind. 
Comments of the Preparing Officer were as follows : 
"There still appears to be no logical explanation of the 
sighting. It is quite obvious that an object was sighted. 
Whether all of the details of the sighting are correct can 
not be ascertained; however, there is no reason to doubt 
their essential accuracy. At any rate, it does not appear 
that a commonplace object such as an airplane or a bal­
loon was responsible for the sighting." 
Once again we have Blue Book grasping at a bit of ir­
relevant 
information 
undocumented, 
incidentally-the 
statement on the UFO analysis that "there was a WX 
balloon with a radar reflector which crossed the area at 
the time of the sighting." 
Where the information about the weather balloon came 
from is not stated, nor is launch time given. But Blue 
Book accepted the weather-balloon statement and com­
pletely disregarded the witnesses' reports that they saw 
the object within a range of two hundred feet. Further­
more, they disregarded the sucking noise, the swirling 
grass, and the reported movement of the empty five-gallon 
cans. And, finally, they disregarded the statement of the 
local intelligence officer. One can almost imagine the Blue 
Book train of thought: "There was a weather balloon 
around about that time; so, it has got to be t.l-tat!" 
The Incredible Flying Carpet 
Here is one straight out of Grimm's Fairy Tales or The 
Arabian Nights-a flying-carpet-type UFO (infant-sized) , 
observed by some ten employees of the McDonnell Air­
craft Corporation in St. Louis, Missouri! It is informative 
to read the Naval Speed Letter submitted by the Bureau 
of Aeronautics representative of the McDonnell Aircraft 
Corporation :Donnell Air­
craft Corporation in St. Louis, Missouri! It is informative 
to read the Naval Speed Letter submitted by the Bureau 
of Aeronautics representative of the McDonnell Aircraft 
Corporation :

--- PAGE BREAK ---orporation in St. Louis, Missouri! It is informative 
to read the Naval Speed Letter submitted by the Bureau 
of Aeronautics representative of the McDonnell Aircraft 
Corporation :

--- PAGE BREAK ---

150 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
/ 
Subject: 
Unidentified 
flying 
object; 
reporting 
of 
FLYOBRPT. In accordance with Ninth Naval Dis­
trict Instruction 3820.1 of 28 July 1954, the follow­
ing is submitted for information: 
1. Shape-irregular rectangle; size-18" x 1 8" x 
8"; color-pale milky white; number-one; aerody­
namic features-none; trail or exhaust-none; pro­
pulsion system-none observed; speed-3-8 . MPH; 
sound-none; maneuvers-approach from East, de­
scending from 30 feet to ground, stopped on ground, 
elevated to 4 feet, right-angle turn to North, ad­
vanced approximately 75 feet to 8-foot cyclone fence, 
rose over fence to disappear in overcast. Appeared 
· opaque and consistency of cotton candy or spun glass. 
2. Sighted approximately 0750 CDT on 14 July 
1 954 for approximately 3-5 minutes. 
3. Visual observation only from ground and auto­
mobiles. 
4. Location of observers-in driveway and park­
ing lot of Propulsion Laboratory, McDonnell Air­
craft Corpqration, St. Louis, Missouri. Location of 
object with respect to observers-4-200 feet. Object 
observed from ground, and from passing automobile 
affording downward view. 
5. Estimated 10 observers, 5 reporting. All Mc­
Donnell employees with aeronautical experience. 
6. 
Weather and winds-overcast, Southeast light 
and variable, 2-6 MPH. 
7. No activity or condition which. miglit account 
for sighting. 
8. No photographs taken. Search revealed no frag­
ments. 
9. Object followed by one observer at approxi­
mately 5-foot distance. No attempt made to contact. 
All observers believed completely reliable. Observ­
ers could not identify as any known material. Prox­
imity lends credence to experience. 
Lateness of report due to this activity having been 
only recently advised of sighting. 
C. H. S. Murphybserv­
ers could not identify as any known material. Prox­
imity lends credence to experience. 
Lateness of report due to this activity having been 
only recently advised of sighting. 
C. H. S. Murphy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
DISTRIBUTION LIST 
Director of Intelligence 
Headquarters, USAF 
Washington 25, D.C. 
Air Technical Intelligence Center (ATIAA-2C) 
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio 
Commander, Air Defense Command 
Ent Air Force Base 
Colorado Springs, Colorado 
Commander, Eastern Air Defense Force 
Stewart Air Force Base 
Newburgh, New York 
151 
This report went to the Director of Intelligence of the 
United States Air Force, Blue Book, the Air Defense 
Command in Colorado Springs, and the Commander of 
the Eastern Air Defense Force, and all of them let Blue 
Book get away with the evaluation "debris in wind." The 
wind, you will remember, was southeast light and variable, 
two to six miles per hour. This gentle wind allowed the 
object to descend from thirty feet to the ground, stop on 
the ground, elevate it to four feet, make a right-angle turn 
to the north and advance approximately seventy-five feet 
to an eight-foot cyclone fence, rise over the fence and dis­
appear upward into the overcast! Apparently, very little 
attention was paid to the contents of the report itself. 
The Case of the Dogs and the Derby Hat 
On March 13, 1957, the owner of a shooting preserve 
wrote the USAF Filter Center in Trenton the following 
letter: 
I have learned (belatedly) that your office is the 
proper place to report the sighting of an unidentified 
flying object described in the enclosed affidavit by my 
wife .
•
.
.
 We would be most interested to know if 
my wife's experience tallies in any respe9t with any

--- PAGE BREAK ---an unidentified 
flying object described in the enclosed affidavit by my 
wife .
•
.
.
 We would be most interested to know if 
my wife's experience tallies in any respe9t with any

--- PAGE BREAK ---

152 
THE HYNEK UPO REPORT 
'sightings by anyone else in this area on or about 
March 6. 
We wish absolutely no publicity for ourselves in 
this connection. 
The affidavit signed and sworn to by Mrs. --- reads 
as follows: 
Even at the risk of being called hysterical, hal­
lucinated or worse, I feel I must make record, on my 
oath as a woman, an American and a member of the 
human race, of the following: 
That I saw an airborne object which bore no re­
semblance to any airplane, helicopter or balloon ever 
made and flown by man, so far as I know. 
That I was in full possession of my senses and my 
sanity at the time, and all during the time, of my 
seeing this object, which lasted for at least one min­
ute. 
That I saw the object at a distance of not more 
than 150 yards at about 2 P.M. on Wednesday, 
March 6, 1 957, first from a rear window and then 
from out in the back yard of our home on the road 
from Great Meadows to Hope, New Jersey. 
That the weather was clear under a low overcast, 
and the position of the object hovering in the air 
over the slope below our house was such that I could 
see it-and hear it-with absolute certainty and with 
concentrated effort to observe and remember every 
detail. 
That my attention was first drawn to the object's 
presence by our dogs barking in their pens behind the 
house, and by their looking upward at the object, as 
they and I continued to do so easily until the object 
departed. 
That the shape of the object closely resembled that 
of a huge derby hat with a rounded domelike crown 
30 to 40 feet high, and at least 50 feet in horizontal 
diameter above a slightly curled-up "brim" that ex­
tended outward for 12 or 15 feet from the bottom of 
the crown. This brim or bottom surface of the object 
appeared to be sealed over smoothly and completely 
in a gentle curve, with no holes or ports or windowsard for 12 or 15 feet from the bottom of 
the crown. This brim or bottom surface of the object 
appeared to be sealed over smoothly and completely 
in a gentle curve, with no holes or ports or windows

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Offset i n 
triangular shape 
1 
Appearance of 
;X'"'·	 
4 r,t 
, 
1-1 1/;, ' 
1<---J 
5' 
Aluminum color 
I 
3 
f.--
30' ----4 
Donnybrook, N.D., Aug. 1 9, 
1 966. One of the indentations 
allegedly left by a 30 x 1 5 
foot dome· topped craft. 
reported by a Border Patrol 
officer who stated that the 
object first hovered 20-30 
feet over a reservoi r. The 
officer, in the process of 
taking a prisoner to Canada, 
stated that he wished no 
publicity and would deny any 
kAowledge of this event if his 
name was used. His first 
instinct, he stated, was to pull 
a revolver and empty it i nto 
the craft, but fear of the 
unknown restrained him. The 
officer is personally known to 
the author, and is at present 
an investigator with the 
Treasury Department. 
Drawing of object sighted by 
Border Patrol officer at 
Donnybrook, N.D., Aug. 19, 
1966.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

n• u'- - Œ - G 11T - -s'"•r.o• 
I 
I 
I 
I .... " I 
, 
I 
... _
- -,- -
!2!UL'T _ _ , 
•• 
I 
Examples of radar plots made in the Korean War Zone during 1952. 
Note the continuous tracks a nd the distances 
covered in succes­
sive minutes. No satisfactory explanation exists for these observa· 
tions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Officer Zamora (right), the principal witness to the Socorro landing 
case. Sgt. Chavez (left), who arrived mi nutes after Zamora said the 
craft had departed, verified the smoldering bushes and the "land­
ing marks" on the ground. 
\ 
A "UFO" photograph submitted to Blue Book from Japan. Photo· 
graph;c experts hold this to be merely a photographic defect.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ring bushes and the "land­
ing marks" on the ground. 
\ 
A "UFO" photograph submitted to Blue Book from Japan. Photo· 
graph;c experts hold this to be merely a photographic defect.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

....... 
·-... · 
The controversial Barra de Tijuca photograph-one of five taken by 
two photographers from 0 Cruzeiro magazine, Rio de Janeiro, on 
an expedition to the l lha des Amores for the purpose of photograph­
ing amorous couples. They returned with these photographs i nstead, 
claiming them to be absol utely authentic a nd asking $25,000 for 
the five negatives. They found no takers. Taken on May 7, 1952. 
Norway, July 24, 1 957. The photographer, an unsuspecting tourist, 
was photographing the Norwegian scenery and found to her surprise 
that a "UFO" appeared when the fil m was developed. The author 
interviewed the photographer and found that the photographs on 
the same roll taken just 
before and after the one shown were 
normal. No explanation for this "UFO" has been found.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Blue Book Unidentified: St. George, Minn., Oct. 21 , 1 965, 6:1 0 P.M. 
The dark sky was cloudless as five witnesses observed this pulsat­
ing light hover for five minutes and then shoot off "at a tremendous 
speed overhead." Color photo taken with 804 l nstamatic camera. 
Photo taken by a 15-year-old boy in Hampton, Va., on Jan. 25, 
1967. Object was stated to be the size of a Piper Cub airplane at 
1000 feet altitude. Capt. Cauley, the Air Force investigator, stated : 
" I n my opinion t h e photo is authentic. M r. 
--- seems quite in­
telligent for his age and I am including his description of this 
sighting as he presented it to his science teacher. The teacher in­
structed him to report it to the Air Force."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

U.FO 
I 
''Ill 
. 
,.. 
"' 
I 
.... 
'

--- PAGE BREAK ---f this 
sighting as he presented it to his science teacher. The teacher in­
structed him to report it to the Air Force."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

U.FO 
I 
''Ill 
. 
,.. 
"' 
I 
.... 
'

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The now famous Trent 
photographs taken at 
McMi n nville, 
Ore., 
May 1 950. Two 
i ndependent detailed photometric studies argue 
that these photographs are of a relatively distant object, and hence 
are not fakes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Two of the photographs of the Trindade, Brazi l, Daylight Disc.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Actual airport radar room and professional air traffic controllers. 
Although this is a scene from the motion picture Close Encounters 
of the Third Kind, it i l lustrates the manner in which an unidentified 
object would actually be observed on radar.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Landing site at 
Socorro, 
N.M. 
(April 24, 1964), showing "land· 
ing pod" marks 
and greasewood 
bushes, 
some of which 
were 
charred. 
Close-up of one of the four "landing pod" marks. 
(Stones were 
placed around these marks within a few hours of the event to pro­
tect and mark the evidence.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I 
I 
I 
\ 
' ' 
' '-
' 
-::. ..... 
ʚ· r+1 
* 
- - .... 
l j 
I I 
/ I 
Map by W. T. Powers of the dimensions and relationshi p of the 
various features at the reported Socorro landing site.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Flying Discs of 1936, as drawn from memory by the witness, 
M r. Richard Keller, now a professional commercial artist.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Artist's 
reproduction of the 
Kelly-Hopkinsville creatures, as seen 
by one male witness the day after the event. Drawing by Mr. Bud 
Ledwith, an associate of the author's for several years.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eproduction of the 
Kelly-Hopkinsville creatures, as seen 
by one male witness the day after the event. Drawing by Mr. Bud 
Ledwith, an associate of the author's for several years.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
153 
or vents of any kind, of whicb I could see none any­
where else on the entire object. 
That, in the absence of any openings into it, I could 
see no beings, human or otherwise, inside the object 
who might be operating and riding in it, and no crew 
or passengers were visible on the object's exterior 
during its visit. 
That the color of the object, all over, was a uni­
form white, dull but clean, with no spots, stripes or 
other markings whatsoever. Its texture was appar­
ently non-metallic but reminded me strongly of pipe 
clay. 
That a moderate breeze, from the northeast I think, 
was blowing in which the object hovered quite sta­
tionary except for a gentle rocking motion, like a 
boat at anchor on water. As the object rocked and in 
the same cadence it made a low growling or rumbling 
sound that rose and fell irregularly. 
That beneath the object, extending vertically to­
ward the ground, I seemed to see, and then not see, 
and then see again, a lot of streamers or lines of 
some material (or force) that twinkled like the frag­
ile strands of tinsel with which one decorates a 
Christmas tree. 
That without any marked change of sound except 
a soft rush of air, sucking away and not blowing to­
ward m·e, the object abruptly ascended almost verti­
cally, slightly northeasterly at immense speed into the 
thick cloud cover (maybe 300? feet up) and was 
instantly gone from sight and hearing. 
Within an hour of my experience my husband 
telephoned me from New York City. I told him 
what I had seen, and told him again in fuller detail 
when I joined him at 7:20 that evening in the city. 
At his insistence I later that evening repeated my ac­
count and answered many questions while my mem­
ory was still fresh at the home and in the presence 
of Mr. and Mrs. 
---, 35th Street, N.Y.C. I told 
my story reluctantly again to several other friends in 
the next three days (March 7, 8 and 9 ) , but made no 
formal report to any authorities, fearing ridicule. 
The Air Force got around this one by labeling it "in-tly again to several other friends in 
the next three days (March 7, 8 and 9 ) , but made no 
formal report to any authorities, fearing ridicule. 
The Air Force got around this one by labeling it "in-

--- PAGE BREAK ---other friends in 
the next three days (March 7, 8 and 9 ) , but made no 
formal report to any authorities, fearing ridicule. 
The Air Force got around this one by labeling it "in-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 54 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
sufficient information." Their summary card merely states: 
Huge white UFO shaped like a derby hat hovering 
low over field with shimmering rays below. Had a 
rocking motion, undulating rumbling sound. Finally, 
shot skyward to northeast. Dogs barked. 
The Air Force made no attempt to gain further infor­
mation. 
The "Incident at Exeter" 
"Incident" is hardly the term for this classic Close En­
counter case which is known to virtually all who have 
followed the UFO phenomenon. This encounter at Exeter, 
New Hampshire, gained national prominence, and caused 
both the original witnesses and the Air Force considerable 
embarrassment. Not only is this a fine example of a 
Close Encounter of the First Kind, but it is a showcase 
illustration of Blue Book negligence, put-down of wit­
nesses, attempts to explain away the testimony of respon­
sible witnesses with a parade of "official" explanations, 
and of capitulation on the part of the Pentagon which, 
months later, had to admit that the case should have been 
carried as "Unidentified." The file folders in Blue Book, 
however, still have the original evaluation of "Astro-Stars/ 
Planets" and "Aircraft from Operation Big Blast." (The 
astronomical evaluation is completely untenable and Op­
eration Big Blast terminated more than an hour before 
the incident at Exeter began. according to official records.) 
The story of this case is well documented in John Ful­
ler's book The Incident at Exeter, and in an excellent re­
port by Raymond Fowler and his associates, who did a 
far better job investigating the case than did Blue Book. 
I am indebted to Mr. Fowler for the excerpts from his re­
port that follow. Blue Book files on this case are fairly 
extensive in themselves although they draw heavily on the 
report by Mr. Fowler. 
Blue Book's first mention of the incident at Exeter is 
dated October 15, 1965, and comes in the form of a re­
quest from the Headquarters of the 817th Air Divisionvily on the 
report by Mr. Fowler. 
Blue Book's first mention of the incident at Exeter is 
dated October 15, 1965, and comes in the form of a re­
quest from the Headquarters of the 817th Air Division

--- PAGE BREAK ---by Mr. Fowler. 
Blue Book's first mention of the incident at Exeter is 
dated October 15, 1965, and comes in the form of a re­
quest from the Headquarters of the 817th Air Division

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
155 
(SAC) at Pease AFB, New Hampshire. Written by their 
Director of Information, for the Commander, and ad­
dressed to the Information Officer at Wright-Patterson 
AFB, it reads: 
There have been an unusually high number of re­
ported sightings of unidentified flying objects in the 
Pease AFB, New Hampshire, area which have been 
the subject of much discussion and numerous news­
paper, radio, and television reports. Many of these 
sightings have been reported to this base and your 
records will show that we have performed thorough 
investigations of them. . . . Several members of this 
command have actually been called to view UFOs by 
sincere and sober citizens but as yet, we have al­
ways been too late or "unlucky." The most interesting 
sighting, in the nearby town of Exeter, aroused spe­
cial interest as two policemen saw the object at very 
close range . . . . 
This office has, of course, not commented on sight­
ings reported to the Air Force other than to say that 
they have been or are being investigated, that the 
reports will be sent to your organization, that fur­
ther releases will be made from the Public Informa­
tion Office of the Secretary of the Air Force, etc. The 
fact that we cannot comment on the investigations 
has led to somewhat alarming suspicion of Air Force 
motives and interest in this area, the most popular 
belief being that " . . . the Air Force won't release the 
truth because if the truth were known, everyone 
would be panicked." I have attempted to counter 
this by explaining the USAF's interest in this matter 
every time I speak to the press or private citizens 
about this matter. . . . Still, however, an alarming 
number of people remain unconvinced [!]. 
Many members of the two nearby Military Affairs 
committees and key citizens from surrounding towns 
and cities have inquired concerning the possibility of 
an Air Force speaker on this subject. Do you operate 
a speaker's bureau or would you be able to suggest 
where I might be able to obtain knowledge of an Air 
Force spokesman who could explain the Air ForceForce speaker on this subject. Do you operate 
a speaker's bureau or would you be able to suggest 
where I might be able to obtain knowledge of an Air 
Force spokesman who could explain the Air Force

--- PAGE BREAK ---

156 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
UFO program and what happens to reports · sent to 
your organization? If speakers from your organization 
are available, it might be possible for us to arrange 
transportation via Pease Base C-47. Billeting poses 
no problem. 
Your assistance is greatly appreciated. 
For the Commander 
A.B.B., 1st Lt. USAF 
Director of Information 
The initial report which came in from Pease AFB on 
September 15, 1965, was the soul of brevity. 
The following report of an unidentified object is 
hereby submitted in accordance with AFR-200-2. 
A) Description of Object 
1 ) round 
2) baseball 
3 ) bright red 
4) five red lights in a row 
5) lights were close together and moved as 
one object 
6) none 
7) none 
8 ) none 
9 ) extremely bright red 
B ) Description of Course of Object 
1 ) visual sighting 
2 ) object was at an altitude of approximately 
100 feet and moved in an arc of 1 35 de­
grees 
3 ) object disappeared at an altitude cf ap­
proximately one hundred feet on a mag­
netic heading of approximately 1 60 de­
grees 
4) the object was erratic in movement and 
would disappear behind houses and build­
ings in the area. It would then appear at a 
position other than where it disappeared 
When in view, it would act as a floating 
leaf. 
5 ) object departed on a heading of 1 60 de-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ings in the area. It would then appear at a 
position other than where it disappeared 
When in view, it would act as a floating 
leaf. 
5 ) object departed on a heading of 1 60 de-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
157 
grees and was observed until it disappeared 
in the distance 
6) one hour 
C) Manner of Observation 
1 ) ground-visual 
2) none 
3 ) N/A 
D) Time and Date of Sighting 
1 ) 3/9/0600 z 
2) night 
E) Location of Observer 
1 ) 3 nautical miles SW of Exeter in New 
Hampshire 
F) Identifying Information of Observer 
1 ) civilian, Norman J. Muscarello, age 1 8 
. . . appears to be reliable 
2) civilian, Eugene F. Bertrand, Jr., age 30, 
Exeter Police Department, Exeter, New 
Hampshire, patrolman, reliable 
3 ) civilian, David R. Hunt, age 28, Exeter 
Police Department, Exeter, New Hamp­
shire, patrolman, reliable 
G) Weather and Winds 
1 ) weather was clear with no known weather 
phenomena. There was a five-degree in­
version from surface to 5,000'. 
2) winds at Pease AFB (the winds were uni­
formly from the west, low velocity near 
the surface to quite high above 10,000') 
3 ) clear (unlimited) 
4) 30 nautical miles 
5) none 
6) none 
H) None 
I) None 
J) 
None 
K) Major David H. Griffin, Base Disaster Control 
Officer, Command pilot 
1 ) at this time I have been unable to arrive 
at a probable cause of this sighting. The 
three observers seem to be stable, reliable 
persons, especially the two patrolmen. I 
viewed the area of the sighting and found

--- PAGE BREAK ---arrive 
at a probable cause of this sighting. The 
three observers seem to be stable, reliable 
persons, especially the two patrolmen. I 
viewed the area of the sighting and found

--- PAGE BREAK ---

158 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
nothing in the area that could be the prob­
able cause. Pease AFB had five B-47 air­
craft flying in the area during this period 
but I do not believe that they had any· con­
nection with this sighting. 
The report in Blue Book continues with the statements 
of the three witnesses involved. The first, from Norman 
Muscarello, follows: 
I, Norman J. Muscarello, was hitchhiking on Rt. 
150, three miles south of Exeter, New Hampshire, at 
0200 hours on the 3rd of September. A group of 
five bright red lights appeared over a house about a 
hundred feet from where I was standing. The lights 
were in a line at about a sixty-degree angle. They 
were so bright, they lighted up the area. The lights 
then moved out over a large field and acted at times 
like a floating leaf. They would go down behind the 
trees, behind a ho.use and then reappear. They al­
ways moved in the same sixty-degree angle. Only one 
light would be on at a time. They were pulsating: 
one, two, three, four, five, four, three, two, one. 
They were so bright I could not distinguish a form 
to the object. I watched these lights for about fifteen 
minutes . and they finally disappeared behind some 
trees and seemed to go into a field. At one time while 
I was watching them, they seemed to come so close 
I jumped into a ditch to keep from being hit. After 
the lights went into a field, I caught a ride to the 
Exeter Police Station and reported what I had seen. 
Signed, 
Norman J. Muscarello 
The statement from the first patrolman, who after be­
ing called to the scene also witnessed the UFO: 
I, Eugene F. Bertrand, Jr., was cruising on the 
morning of the 3rd of September at 0100 on Rt. 108 
bypass near Exeter, New Hampshire. I noticed an 
automobile parked on the side of the road and 
stopped to investigate. I found a woman in the car 
who stated she was too upset to drive. She stated8 
bypass near Exeter, New Hampshire. I noticed an 
automobile parked on the side of the road and 
stopped to investigate. I found a woman in the car 
who stated she was too upset to drive. She stated

--- PAGE BREAK ---r, New Hampshire. I noticed an 
automobile parked on the side of the road and 
stopped to investigate. I found a woman in the car 
who stated she was too upset to drive. She stated

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR • .J. ALLEN HYNEK 
159 
that a light had been following her car and had 
stopped over her car. I stayed with her about fif­
teen minutes but was unable to see anything. I de­
parted and reported back to Exeter Police Station 
where I found Norman Muscarello. He related his 
story of seeing some bright red lights in the field. 
After talking with him a while, I decided to take 
him back to where he stated that he had seen the 
lights. When we had gone about fifty feet, a group 
of five bright red lights came from behind a group 
of trees near us. They were extremely bright and 
flashed on one at a time. The lights started to move 
around over the field. At one time, they came so 
close I fell to the ground and started to draw my gun. 
The lights were so bright, I was unable to make out 
any form. There was no sound or vibration but the 
farm animals were upset in the area and were mak­
ing a lot of noise. When the lights started coming 
near us again, Mr. Muscarello and I ran to the car. 
I radioed Patrolman David Hunt who arrived in a 
few minutes. He also observed the lights which were 
still over the field but not as close as before. The 
lights moved out across the field at an estimated al­
titude of one hundred feet, and finally disappeared 
in the distance at the same altitude. The lights were 
always in line at about a sixty-degree angle. When 
the object moved, the lower lights were always for­
ward of the others. 
Signed, 
Eugene F. Bertrand, Patrolman 
From the third witness : 
I, David R. Hunt, at about 0255 on the morning 
of the 3rd of September, received a call from Pa­
trolman Bertrand to report to an area about three 
miles southwest of Exeter, New Hampshire. Upon 
arriving at the scene, I observed a group of bright 
red lights flashing in sequence. They appeared to be 
about one half mile over a field to the southeast. 
After observing the lights for a short period of time, 
they moved off in a southeasterly direction and dis-shing in sequence. They appeared to be 
about one half mile over a field to the southeast. 
After observing the lights for a short period of time, 
they moved off in a southeasterly direction and dis-

--- PAGE BREAK ---hey appeared to be 
about one half mile over a field to the southeast. 
After observing the lights for a short period of time, 
they moved off in a southeasterly direction and dis-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 60 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
appeared in the distance. The lights appeared to re­
main at the same altitude which I estimate to be 
about one hundred feet. 
Signed, 
David R. Hunt, Patrolman 
Blue Book's way of dealing with these witnesses' re­
ports was to make every effort to locate some type of air­
craft operation in the area in question; none was success­
ful. 
A news clip from the Amesbury News, Massachusetts, 
stated that the UFO was identified as an "ad gimmick"; 
but Ray Fowler checked with the Skylight Aerial Adver­
tising Company and was advised that their aircraft was 
not flying on the night of September 3. He was also 
informed that the company aircraft rarely flew into 
southern New Hampshire, and when it did, it was usu­
ally in the Salem and Manchester areas, miles away from 
Exeter. Furthermore, he learned that the "Skylight" air­
craft does not carry red flashing lights; it carries a rec­
tangular sign with white flashing lights. Yet the manager 
of the advertising company had stated to the Amesbury 
News that "perhaps some UFOs reported in the New 
Hampshire area could have been their aircraft." Unfor­
tunately, the press anxiously latched on to this bit of ir­
relevant information to "explain" the Exeter case. 
The two simultaneous investigations of this case are an 
interesting study in contrasts. The Air Force records are 
at best sketchy, and focus essentially on attempts at lo­
cating existing aircraft in the area; as usual, Blue Book 
started out its investigation with a negative premise. On 
the other hand, Raymond Fowler and his associates made 
an exhaustive examination of the case, keeping their 
minds open at all times. Their final reports were duly 
submitted to Blue Book. 
The following is excerpted from Fowler's report, which 
supplements Muscarello's statement to the Air Force in­
vestigator: 
Muscarello reported the incident to Desk Officer 
Reginald Tow land at about 1 :45 A.M. EDT. Side view 
and angle view seen. He was hit with fear and hardlystatement to the Air Force in­
vestigator: 
Muscarello reported the incident to Desk Officer 
Reginald Tow land at about 1 :45 A.M. EDT. Side view 
and angle view seen. He was hit with fear and hardly

--- PAGE BREAK ---Force in­
vestigator: 
Muscarello reported the incident to Desk Officer 
Reginald Tow land at about 1 :45 A.M. EDT. Side view 
and angle view seen. He was hit with fear and hardly

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
161 
able to talk. A radio call was made to Officer Ber­
trand asking him to return to the station, pick up 
Muscarello, and investigate at the scene of the sight­
ing which he did. Upon arriving at the Carl Dining 
field, the object was nowhere to be seen. After wait­
ing and looking from the cruiser for several minutes, 
Bertrand radioed headquarters that there was nothing 
there and that the boy must have been imagining 
things. It was then suggested that he examine the 
field before returning, so Bertrand and Muscarello 
advanced into the field. As the police officer played 
his flashlight beam back and forth over the field, 
Muscarello sighted the object rising slowly from be­
hind some nearby trees and shouted. Bertrand swung 
around and saw a large dark object carrying a straight 
row of four extraordinarily bright, red, pulsating 
lights coming into the field at treetop level. It swung 
around toward them and just clearing a sixty- to 
seventy-foot tree and seemingly only one hundred 
feet away from them. Instinctively, Officer Bertrand 
drew his service revolver (he stated that Musca­
rello shouted, "Shoot it!") , but thinking this un­
wise, replaced it and yelled to Muscarello to take 
cover in the cruiser. He told me (Fowler) that he 
was afraid that they both would be burnt by the 
blinding lights closing in on them. They ran to the 
cruiser where Bertrand immediately put in a radio 
call to headquarters for assistance. Officer Hunt ar­
rived within minutes, and the trio observed the ob­
ject move away over and below the tree line. 
Now let us return to the Blue Book coverage for a look 
at an interesting exchange of letters between the then 
Major Quintanilla and the police officers involved. Quin­
tanilla states: 
Our investigations and evaluation of the sighting 
indicates a possible association with the Air Force 
operation "Big Blast." In addition to aircraft from 
this operation, there were five (5) B-47 aircraft 
flying in the area during this period. Before final eval­
uation of your sighting can be made, it is essential 
for us to know if either of you witnessed any air-n, there were five (5) B-47 aircraft 
flying in the area during this period. Before final eval­
uation of your sighting can be made, it is essential 
for us to know if either of you witnessed any air-

--- PAGE BREAK ---5) B-47 aircraft 
flying in the area during this period. Before final eval­
uation of your sighting can be made, it is essential 
for us to know if either of you witnessed any air-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

162 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
craft in the area during this time period, either in­
dependently or in connection with the observed ob­
ject. Since there were many aircraft in the area, at 
the time, and there were no reports of unidentified ob­
jects from personnel engaged in this air operation, 
we might then assume that the objects observed be­
tween midnight and two A.M. might be associated 
with this military air operation. If, however, these 
aircraft were noted by either of you, this would tend 
to eliminate this air operation as a possible explana­
tion for the objects observed. 
Signed, 
Hector Quintanilla, Jr. 
Major, USAF, Chief, 
, Project Blue Book 
It is interesting to note that Maj. Quintanilla had used 
the term "before a final evaluation of your sighting can 
be made," whereas the Pentagon had in fact already is­
sued its evaluation (attributing the sighting to Operation 
Big Blast) some time before Quintanilla wrote his letter. 
Maj. Quintanilla received a prompt reply from Officers 
Bertrand and Hunt. Their letter of December 2, 1 965, 
reads: 
Dear Sir: 
We were very glad to get your letter during the 
third week in November, because as you might imag­
ine, we have been the subject of considerable ridi­
cule since the Pentagon released its "final evaluation" 
of our sighting of September 3, 1 965. In other 
words, both Patrolman Hunt and myself saw this 
object at close range, checked it out with each other, 
confirmed and reconfirmed the fact that this was not 
any kind of conventional aircraft, that it was at an 
altitude of not more than a couple of hundred feet 
and went to considerable trouble to confirm that 
the weather was clear, there was no wind, no chance 
of weather inversion, and that what we were seeing 
was in no way a military or civilian craft. We en­
tered this in a complete official police report as a 
supplement to the blotter of the morning of Septem­
ber 3rd (not September 2 as your letter indicates) .way a military or civilian craft. We en­
tered this in a complete official police report as a 
supplement to the blotter of the morning of Septem­
ber 3rd (not September 2 as your letter indicates) .

--- PAGE BREAK ---ivilian craft. We en­
tered this in a complete official police report as a 
supplement to the blotter of the morning of Septem­
ber 3rd (not September 2 as your letter indicates) .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
163 
Since our job depends on accuracy and the ability 
to tell the difference between fact and fiction, we 
were naturally disturbed by the Pentagon report is­
sued which attributed the sighting to "multiple high­
altitude objects in area" and "weather inversion.'" 
What is a little difficult to understand is the fact that 
your letter arrived considerably after the Pentagon 
release. Since your letter says that you are still in the 
process of making a final evaluation, it seems that 
there is an inconsistency here. Ordinarily, this would 
not be too important except for the fact that in a 
situation like this, we are naturally very reluctant to 
be considered irresponsible in our official report to 
the police station. One of us (Patrolman Bertrand) 
was in the Air Force for four years, engaged in re­
fueling operations, with all kinds of military air­
craft; it was impossible to mistake what we saw for 
any kind of military operation, regardless of alti­
tude. It was also definitely not a helicopter or bal­
loon. Immediately after the object disappeared, we 
did see what probably was a B-47 at high altitudes, 
but it bore no relation to the object that we saw. 
Another fact is that the time of our observation 
was nearly an hour after two A.M. which would 
eliminate the Air Force Operation Big Blast since as 
you say, this took place between midnight and 2 A.M. 
Norman Muscarello, who first reported this object 
before we went to the site, saw it somewhere in the 
vicinity of 2 A.M. but nearly an hour had passed be­
fore he got to the police station and we went out to 
the location with him. 
We would both appreciate it very much if you 
would help us eliminate the possible conclusion that 
some people have made in that we might have: (a) 
made up the story, (b) were incompetent observers. 
Anything that you could do along this line would be 
very much appreciated, and I am sure that you can 
understand the position we are in. 
We appreciate the problem that the Air Force 
must have with the number of irresponsible reports on 
this subject, and don't want to cause you unnecessary 
trouble. On the other band, we think that you prob-eciate the problem that the Air Force 
must have with the number of irresponsible reports on 
this subject, and don't want to cause you unnecessary 
trouble. On the other band, we think that you prob-

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat the Air Force 
must have with the number of irresponsible reports on 
this subject, and don't want to cause you unnecessary 
trouble. On the other band, we think that you prob-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

164 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
ably understand our position. Thanks very much for 
your interest. 
Sincerely, 
Patrolman Eugene Bertrand 
and Patrolman David Hunt 
They received no reply to this letter. They wrote again 
pn December 29 : 
Dear Sir: 
.Since we have not heard from you since our letter 
of December 2, we are writing this to request some 
kind of an answer since we are still upset about 
what happened after the Pentagon released its news 
that we had just seen stars or planets, or high-altitude 
air exercises. 
As we mentioned in our last letter to you, it could 
not have been the Operation Big Blast you mentioned 
since the time of our sighting was an hour after that 
exercise and it may not have even been the same 
date since you refer to our sighting as September 2. 
Our sighting was on September 3. In addition, as we 
mentioned, we are both familiar with all the B-47's 
and B-S2's and helicopters and jet fighters which are 
going over this place all the time. On top of this, 
Patrolman Bertrand had four years of refueling ex­
perience in the Air Force and knows regular aircraft 
of all kinds. It is important to remember that this 
craft that we saw was not more than one hundred feet 
in the air and it was absolutely silent with no rush 
of air from jets or chopper blades whatever. And it 
did not have any wings or tail. It lit up the entire 
field, and two nearby houses turned completely red. 
It stopped, hovered, and turned on a dime. 
What bothers us most is that many people are 
thinking that we were either lying or not intelligent 
enough to tell the difference between what we saw 
and something ordinary. Three other people saw this 
same thing on September 3 and two of them appear 
to be in shock from it. This was absolutely not a case 
of mistaken identity. 
We both feel that it is very important for our jobser people saw this 
same thing on September 3 and two of them appear 
to be in shock from it. This was absolutely not a case 
of mistaken identity. 
We both feel that it is very important for our jobs

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
165 
and our reputations to get some kind of letter from 
you to say that story put out by the Pentagon was 
not true; it could not possibly be because we were 
the people who saw this, not the Pentagon. 
Can you please let us hear from you as soon as pos­
sible? 
Signed, 
Patrolmen Eugene Bertrand 
and David Hunt 
More than a month later, the patrolmen received the 
following response from the Office of the Secretary of the 
Air Force: 
Gentlemen : 
Based on additional information submitted to our 
UFO Investigation Officer, Wright-Patterson AFB·, 
Ohio, we have been unable to identify the object 
that you observed on September 3, 1965. In nine­
teen years of investigating over ten thousand re· 
ports of unidentified flying objects, the evidence has 
proved almost conclusively that reported aerial phe­
nomena have been either objects created or set aloft 
by men, generated by atmospheric conditions, or 
caused by celestial bodies or the residue of meteoric 
activity. 
Thank you for reporting your observation to the 
Air Force, and for your subsequent co-operation con­
cerning the report. I regret any inconvenience you 
may have suffered as a result. 
Sincerely, 
John P. Spaulding 
Lt. Col., USAF 
Whether this letter satisfied the patrolmen, I do not 
know. Between the lines, it still says "It can't be, there· 
fore it isn't" and that therefore their sighting must un­
doubtedly have some natural explanation. At least, how­
ever, the patrolmen had the satisfaction of the final ad­
mission from the Pentagon that they had been unable to 
identify their sighting. 
So we close Blue Book's file on the Close Encounters

--- PAGE BREAK ---trolmen had the satisfaction of the final ad­
mission from the Pentagon that they had been unable to 
identify their sighting. 
So we close Blue Book's file on the Close Encounters

--- PAGE BREAK ---

166 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
of the First Kind-cases so extraordinary that they are 
real only to the person who has experienced one, just as 
snow is real to an inhabitant of the tropics only after he has 
experienced it by traveling to northern latitudes. The major 
difference, of course, is that snow is accepted by science; 
UFOs are not. But in failing to deal with the evidence, 
the scientific establishment, like the Pentagon, is actually 
admitting that it has no explanation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s accepted by science; 
UFOs are not. But in failing to deal with the evidence, 
the scientific establishment, like the Pentagon, is actually 
admitting that it has no explanation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8 =============== 
THE UFO LEAVES ITS MARK: CLOSE 
ENCOUNTERS OF THE SECOND KIND 
Lt. --- desired this incident reported to the Air 
Force but did not want the story to get to the news­
papers for fear that he may be the object of the 
ridicule that he has heretofore bestowed upon others 
relating similar occurrences. 
-from a letter written by Lt. Col. Smith to the 
Commanding General, Robbins AFB, 
Georgia 
The Case of the Whimpering Dogs 
Among the 587 Air Force "Unidentifieds," there are 33 
Close Encounters of the Second Kind (CE-lls), those 
cases in which associated physical effects were reported. 
There were also CE-lls among the cases which the Air 
Force evaluated as "Identified," though in many such 
cases "Identified" meant either "Psychological" or "Un-
reliable Report." 
. 
Here is one example of a case the Air Force declared 
"psychological" even though it involved two witnesses 
who observed the object for' several minutes. It occurred 
on the evening of February 24, 1959, in Victorville, Cali­
fornia. The intelligence officer described the principal wit­
ness as "an average young man of average intelligence . . . 
liked by his schoolmates and teachers." His CE-Il is sum­
marized below: 
The young man's attention was first captured by a 
bright light shining into the interior of his darkened bed­
room. It was a bright, white steady light which was re­
flected against the wall opposite his bedroom window. He 
realized that it was much too intense to be the headlights 
of a car. As his parents were at night school and he was 
in charge of the house and his younger brother, he got out

--- PAGE BREAK ---He 
realized that it was much too intense to be the headlights 
of a car. As his parents were at night school and he was 
in charge of the house and his younger brother, he got out

--- PAGE BREAK ---

168 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
of bed, dressed, and went out on the front porch of the 
house to see where the light was coming from. Also, the 
family's pet dogs bad by this time commenced to howl and 
run around as if terrified, and he wanted to let them into 
the house. 
He first sighted the object in a due westerly direction, at 
an elevation of about twenty degrees, but at an undeter­
mined distance. It resembled an elongated egg (see sketch), 
about 1 56 feet in length [derived from the boy's state­
ment that the object was slightly larger, top to bottom, 
than his band spread (7.5 inches) at arm's length (27 
inches) when at a distance of about 80 feet]. The object 
was about twice as long as it was thi;k. 
Front view 
Side view 
George AFB 
Traffic Control Tower 
0 
1 
8 miles 
 
ţ -
ʘ ʙ-
1 
,() 
Ţ 
-1::' .::- -
,_,. .,."""" 
ʗ 
- -=... "'--:...:- - - .... - - - -=- " 
25 miles --...:.= - . r=-=, 
2nd and 3rd 
ʖ L-...J 
passes 
The Victorville, California, UFO as observed by two witnesses and 
reported to Blue Book. Sighting occurred on February 24, 1959. 
Sketch shows (a) the shape of the large object and (b) the path 
of object (three passes) as viewed from the witness's home. 
Despite its brightness, the object bad a dull red color 
with purple waves coursing through its extremities. It 
emitted a sound which was described as similar to the hum

--- PAGE BREAK ---'s home. 
Despite its brightness, the object bad a dull red color 
with purple waves coursing through its extremities. It 
emitted a sound which was described as similar to the hum

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
169 
of a large transformer, but higher in pitch; or similar to, 
but vastly greater in volume from, a whip swishing 
through the air. 
The object came toward him, its first approach lasting 
about ten seconds. It flew directly toward his house, on 
a steadily declining altitude of approach, and passed over 
his front yard at an altitude of about eight to ten feet. It 
then veered gradually to the northeast. Oddly enough, he 
could hear the object only while he could see it. Even odd­
er, the boy was puzzled at his inability to see the object 
from the rear, when this should have been possible. 
He went back into the house to calm his younger broth­
er and the dogs. When he went outside again, after five 
minutes, he observed the object due west of the house 
and once again approaching him. It appeared that this 
time the object would pass closer to the house; by now 
truly frightened, he went back into the house to get a 
gun. But as the object sped past the house he lost his 
opportunity to use it. It was at this point that his younger 
brother saw the object through the front living-room win­
dow, which was covered by a split bamboo blind. About 
five minutes later the boy went outside again and once 
more observed the object to the west of his position, but 
this time approaching at a high speed. He re-entered the 
house as the object sped past. Twice more the object 
passed directly over the house, the last time some fifteen 
minutes after the first pass. By the last approach, the vi­
bration of the object could be felt throughout the house. 
In addition to the disturbance of the animals, it was 
reported that the radio, which had had very clear recep­
tion until then, was completely blocked by intense static. 
The static on the radio was not evident before 10:00 
P.M. nor after 1 0 : 1 5 P.M., which seems to indicate that 
some electrical or magnetic disturbance was present in 
the immediate area during that time. The witness further 
stated that each time the object passed overhead he could 
hear a very sharp cracking noise which he compared with 
the spark gap of an automobile spark plug, but of greater 
volume and intensity. He was emphatic that this noise was 
not that of a sonic boom, which he had heard many times 
previously. When his parents arrived home at approxi­
mately 1 1 :00 P.M. the incident was over; but the familys emphatic that this noise was 
not that of a sonic boom, which he had heard many times 
previously. When his parents arrived home at approxi­
mately 1 1 :00 P.M. the incident was over; but the family

--- PAGE BREAK ---noise was 
not that of a sonic boom, which he had heard many times 
previously. When his parents arrived home at approxi­
mately 1 1 :00 P.M. the incident was over; but the family

--- PAGE BREAK ---

170 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
pets were still whimpering and shaking and hiding under 
the furniture. 
Two neighbors living in the area were questioned sepa­
rately and admitted that at "about that time," they also 
experienced severe radio and television interference. They 
would not, however, give any details nor did they give the 
reporting officer permission to use their names. 
The interrogating intelligence officer stated that the wit­
ness "was sincere, did not change his story although ques­
tioned several times on different points and seemed gener­
ally convinced that what he saw actually exists." 
The parents testified to the strange behavior of the ani­
mals; and there was no evidence from either parents, 
neighbors, or friends that the boy was unstable. Neverthe­
less, Blue Book chose to label this case "psychological." 
The Case of the Terrified Bull 
We turn now to some of Blue Book's "Unidentifieds," 
and this next interesting case. The original report came 
from the State Police-Chautauqua Counfy Police Bar­
racks-and was followed up by an investigating officer and 
technicians from the Niagara Falls Municipal Airport. The 
incident took place in Cherry Creek, New York, on August 
1 9, 1965. The Blue Book summary reads : 
The witness was working in a barn (a few minutes 
after sunset) when .he noticed unusual AM radio in­
terference plus a beeping sound. When he went out­
side he saw an object which he described as being 
saucer-shaped like two plates lip to lip. The object 
was described as fifty feet long and twenty feet thick 
and its color was shiny silver with red glowing 
streamers projecting downward from the entire per­
imeter plus a trail from red to yellow color. The 
object appeared to land near the farm and when the 
observer sighted it, the object rapidly ascended into 
the clouds. The clouds then turned green (color of 
tree leaves) and an odor like burning gasoline from 
the object was also noted. 
Forty-five 
minutes 
later 
the 
object 
reappeared 
(this time observed by a second witness) descendingeen (color of 
tree leaves) and an odor like burning gasoline from 
the object was also noted. 
Forty-five 
minutes 
later 
the 
object 
reappeared 
(this time observed by a second witness) descending

--- PAGE BREAK ---leaves) and an odor like burning gasoline from 
the object was also noted. 
Forty-five 
minutes 
later 
the 
object 
reappeared 
(this time observed by a second witness) descending

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
171 
slowly from the clouds towards a wooded area and 
then almost immediately rose again into the clouds 
leaving a dim red trail. The clouds again turned 
green near the object. The object reappeared at 
nine P.M. (half an hour later) descending towards 
the surface. It then rose to a height below the clouds 
and moved away SSW all the while emitting yellow 
trail. The object was reported to have caused re­
duction in the milk from the farmer's cow from two 
and a half cans to one can, disturbed a buU in a 
field, and caused a dog to bark. 
The original repott from the State Police gave more 
details : 
The saucer-shaped object is reported to look like 
two dinner plates held face to face, silvery and very 
shiny, fifty feet long and twenty feet thick. It was 
reported that a bull tethered near the barn became so 
frightened that it bent the iron bar in the ground to 
which it was tethered. After the parents of the boy 
were questioned as well as the neighbors, regarding 
the character and reliability of the boys, the investi­
gating officer and three technicians were convinced 
that the sighting was not a hoax or fabrication. The 
fourth technician remained unconvinced. 
A follow-up report stated : 
The observers maintained their story exactly as reǗ 
ported in the initial report under polite but vigorous 
questioning. 
I remember when this case came into Blue Book. 
From the evidence at hand, it appeared that a total 
of three or four youths (farmboys) had seen the strange 
object descend from the clouds and ascend again, color­
ing the clouds green-a maneuver that was repeated sev­
eral times originally and then again a half-hour later. 
Physical effects apparently included static and beeping on 
the radio, the reaction of the dog, the reaction of the 
tethered bull, and the reduced milk production on the 
part of the cow.our later. 
Physical effects apparently included static and beeping on 
the radio, the reaction of the dog, the reaction of the 
tethered bull, and the reduced milk production on the 
part of the cow.

--- PAGE BREAK ---effects apparently included static and beeping on 
the radio, the reaction of the dog, the reaction of the 
tethered bull, and the reduced milk production on the 
part of the cow.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 72 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
There was a strong impulse at Blue Book to regard 
this case as a hoax, but the evidence pointed in the oppo­
site direction. In addition, the witnesses concerned were 
from a rural family and there seemed nothing to be 
gained from fabricating such a story. As a consequence, 
Blue Book reluctantly carried this case as "Unidentified." 
The Squad Car and the Glowing Sphere 
When NBC was preparing a documentary on UFOs, I 
was asked to participate in the re-interrogation, for TV 
purposes, of the witnesses involved in a most interesting 
case that was some nine years old by that time. It 
concerned two policemen and a fireman who had been 
cruising in a patrol car in the Chicago suburb of Elm­
wood Park, Illinois. After nine years, the two policemen 
were still employed on the force and all three were avail­
able for re-interrogation in the presence of NBC crewmen. 
The following is a letter that I wrote to Maj. Quintanilla 
on June 1 , 1965, summarizing the NBC-inspired re-interro­
gation : 
Dear Major : 
This is a report on the very old sighting of Novem­
ber 4, 1957, made by two police officers and a fire­
man riding in one patrol car at shortly after 3 :00 
A.M., in Elmwood Park, Illinois. 
I monitored the making of this part of the NBC 
documentary on UFOs, as I did on the previous night 
at Elk Grove Village, on the evening of May 27, 
1965. Fortunately, all three witnesses are still hold­
ing down the same jobs, but only two were available 
for interview on this evening. The names of the 
witnesses were Officer 
---, Officer -. 
-- and 
Fireman 
---. 
All men stated that the incident had been reported 
to --- but that --- had merely said that they 
had nothing on their screens. Here's another case 
where 
--- failed to follow through and report a 
sighting. 
Officer 
--- was ill on the night of the filming 
for the documentary, but I did talk at length withon their screens. Here's another case 
where 
--- failed to follow through and report a 
sighting. 
Officer 
--- was ill on the night of the filming 
for the documentary, but I did talk at length with

--- PAGE BREAK ---re's another case 
where 
--- failed to follow through and report a 
sighting. 
Officer 
--- was ill on the night of the filming 
for the documentary, but I did talk at length with

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
173 
Officer --- and with the fireman 
Both 
are --- in ---. Before passing any final judg­
ment, I would like to talk with Officer --- if I 
ever get the chance. If there had been only one wit­
ness of the caliber of either of the two I interviewed, 
I would tend to dismiss the incident as the product 
of an overwrought imagination. However, with three 
witnesses, with the two officers being on active duty, 
I feel that something was definitely sighted. Further­
more, the sighting occurred the day after the Level­
land, Texas, cases, and the description is quite simi­
lar. However, it was determined that these men had 
no knowledge of the Levelland sighting of the pre­
vious day. They stated that after they came back to 
the station house at dawn, the morning Tribune had 
just been delivered, and in thumbing through the 
pages, they then came across an account of the 
Levelland sighting. They made a definite point of 
the surprise with which they met the Texas account. 
I re-enacted the entire incident with them, riding 
in the car with the fireman, while the NBC people 
were in the squad car ahead. The officer and fireman's 
story agreed in the basic account, although they dis­
agreed somewhat on sizes and on the height at which 
the object was observed. 
At about 3 :00 A.M., a squad car was patrolling 
the alleyway behind a row of stores on Belmont St. 
They had proceeded about two blocks down the 
alley (the total length of which was nearly a mile) , 
when they perceived a n open window i n the back of 
one of the stores. They stopped to examine it with 
their spotlight, but just then the spotlight and their 
headlights dimmed very much, so much so that the 
officer said that a match would have been brighter. 
This being the case, they took a flashlight from the 
car and went out to examine the window and to look 
under the hood. At this time, they said they noticed a 
bright spherical object above and ahead of them. I 
questioned them very long on the size and appear­
ance and the best I could get was that it was like an 
iridescent orange beach ball except much larger. The 
fireman said that whenever after that he bounced a 
beach ball, it always brought back this incident tobest I could get was that it was like an 
iridescent orange beach ball except much larger. The 
fireman said that whenever after that he bounced a 
beach ball, it always brought back this incident to

--- PAGE BREAK ---s that it was like an 
iridescent orange beach ball except much larger. The 
fireman said that whenever after that he bounced a 
beach ball, it always brought back this incident to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

174 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
him. As the object moved down the alley, but above 
the alley, the car lights came back on. The engine, 
however, never had stalled but kept going. the whole 
time. They trailed the object and whenever they 
turned their . lights off, the object seemed to )lover 
and, so to speak, watch them. As soon as they turned 
their lights on, the object moved off. 
The men trailed down the alley for fully a half-mile 
to the end of the alley where it met a cemetery. 
They paused at the end and turned their lights off. 
The object slowly descended and hovered just a few 
feet off the ground. Here Officer 
--- kicked on 
the "brights" and the object ascended very rapidly 
"fifty or sixty miles an hour." It also took off west­
ward. The officers now jogged right for a quarter of 
· a block to join Belmont Street and pursued the ob­
ject down Belmont Street. Here Officer 
--- said 
that it cavorted from curb to curb back and forth 
as though "playing games with them." The' fireman 
maintained that the object was higher up. 
The color or brightness never changed throughout 
the entire episode, which lasted some ten or fifteen 
minutes. There is a stand of trees in the cemetery 
and alongside Belmont on both sides. The object 
periodically became lost behind the trees. After about 
a mile and a half, they made a U-turn and came back 
east on Belmont, having lost sight of the object. As 
they got back into Elmwood Park, the object ap­
proached them from the left from a stand of trees, 
passed over them and to the rear. They made another 
U-turn and pursued the object again westward. Very 
soon after this, they said the object ascended to a 
great height. 
Officer --- said to about five thousand (5,000) 
feet, but this may or may not be the case since I do 
not particularly rate his judgment about dimension, 
or facts for that matter, very high. But both the fire­
man and the officer agreed that the object disappeared 
as though a person pulled a black shade up from the 
bottom, or as though one were filling the spherical 
object with a black ink. After it disappeared, high in 
the air in this manner, it did not reappear. Appar­
ently, the only other witness to the incident was as though one were filling the spherical 
object with a black ink. After it disappeared, high in 
the air in this manner, it did not reappear. Appar­
ently, the only other witness to the incident was a

--- PAGE BREAK ---lling the spherical 
object with a black ink. After it disappeared, high in 
the air in this manner, it did not reappear. Appar­
ently, the only other witness to the incident was a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
175 
dog which was disturbed and barked at the object 
somewhere along the route. 
The story does not hang together very well. The 
men are 
--- but they certainly stand to gain 
nothing from having perpetrated a hoax and, in 
fact, it could cost them promotions. 
The object was described as bright but not hard 
on the eyes, and very beautiful. After considerable 
coaxing and trying to get the idea of simulation 
across, they agreed that if I brought in a balloon 
painted .bright orange and of a size of about an ordi­
nary moon, and held it in the sky, that it would 
look very much like the object they remembered. It 
must be remembered that this sighting happened some 
eight years ago, and memories over that length of 
time have probably deteriorated considerably. 
According to the men, the moon was out that 
night, but to the east, whereas the object at that 
same time was toward the west. The sky was basically 
clear, although there was a fog in the cemetery. 
One primary incident occurred when the squad 
car had stopped at the end of the first long alley just 
before they jogged on into Belmont Street. The lights 
were out and the object was descending. At this time, 
it lost its circular shape and took on a cigar shape 
surrounded by a fogginess which seemed to emanate 
from the object itself. There was disagreement as to 
how much fog, if any, there was in the cemetery that 
night. The crucial time of the incident seems to have 
been when the officer kicked on the lights as the 
object was descending and had assumed a cigar shape. 
As soon as the lights came on, the object rose up 
rapidly, resumed its circular shape, and sucked up the 
fogginess around it. 
One other high spot occurred apparently just be­
fore the second U-turn when the squad car was go­
ing east on Belmont. The object came at them from 
the woods to the left, and according to Officer --­
came so close to the car that he could have reached 
out and touched it. The fireman did not agree, feel­
ing that the object had always maintained a respect­
able distance. 
The similarity to the Levelland case is striking andat he could have reached 
out and touched it. The fireman did not agree, feel­
ing that the object had always maintained a respect­
able distance. 
The similarity to the Levelland case is striking and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ched 
out and touched it. The fireman did not agree, feel­
ing that the object had always maintained a respect­
able distance. 
The similarity to the Levelland case is striking and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 76 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
if we can believe (1 think we can) that they were 
unaware of the Levelland sighting at the time they 
rriade theirs, it becomes all the more interesting. The 
object definitely passed in front of objects from time 
to time and the object could not be seen through the 
light. The object, or the illumination, was not trans­
parent. 
No sound or noise was ever associated with the 
object. It seemed to glow and its color was compared 
by both men to the color of a setting sun, but not 
as bright. 
It is unfortunate that the incident did not occur 
to witnesses better trained as observers, and more 
articulate ones. 
· Other small items : --- said that his "hair stood 
on end" when he saw the object, and the other 
officer said that 
--- wanted to shoot at it, but 
was cautioned by Officer 
--- not to shoot until 
he knew more about it. 
' 
Meteorological conditions for this night should be 
checked to be compared with similar data from Level­
land. Likewise, comparisons should be made with 
the Lock Raven Darn case and the Swiss equivalent 
of the Lock Raven Darn case which occurred just 
two or three days before the Lock Raven Darn case. 
I would recommend that all cases of luminous 
globes of light which apparently do not appear to 
be attached to a tangible object be collected and be 
examined for similarities of behavior and ambient 
conditions. We may have here, and I say just pos­
sibly may, have an indication of something new in 
atmospheric physics. Cases should be limited, how­
ever, to more than one-witness cases. 
This case should not be closed until I have a 
chance to talk with ---. I have a feeling that he 
may provide something which will either strongly 
corroborate the above or throw it out of court. 
Sincerely, 
(signed) Allen 
J. Allen Hynekhave a 
chance to talk with ---. I have a feeling that he 
may provide something which will either strongly 
corroborate the above or throw it out of court. 
Sincerely, 
(signed) Allen 
J. Allen Hynek

--- PAGE BREAK ---lk with ---. I have a feeling that he 
may provide something which will either strongly 
corroborate the above or throw it out of court. 
Sincerely, 
(signed) Allen 
J. Allen Hynek

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
177 
The Case of the Baffled Businessman 
And now, another "incredible tale told by a credible 
witness." A businessman in the Williamsburg, Virginia, 
area, who was very anxious to have his name withheld 
from the press because of his professional status, made a 
report to the Williamsburg City Police Department. This 
report was subsequently released to the press by the police 
department and, in turn, prompted many other reports, 
mainly from the Richmond area. Most of these other re­
ports were passed on to the press and radio stations and 
not to the Air Force. 
At 8 :30 A.M. on January 23, 1 965, twenty minutes be­
fore the observer reported his sighting, he was driving 
near the intersection of U.S. Highway 60 and State 
Route 614, when his car (a late-model Cadillac) suddenly 
stalled. At about the same time, he spotted an object 
hovering over a nearby field, only four feet off the ground. 
The object was shaped like a mushroom or light bulb, 
about seventy-five to eighty feet in height, twenty-five feet 
in diameter at the top, and ten feet in diameter at the bot­
tom. It was of metallic gray, with a red-orange glow on the 
side closest to the observer and a blue glow on the farthest 
side. While the object was hovering, there was a sound 
similar to that of a vacuum cleaner. 
Frcm his stalled car he continued to watch the object 
which, after hovering for a short whil(}. performed a 
"rapid vanishing maneuver" by moving horizontally to the 
west. After it disappeared, the observer got out of his 
car and, noting that the car behind him also appeared to 
be stalled, walked over to it and asked the driver if he 
had also seen the object. Indeed, he had. 
Blue Book carried this case as "Unidentified" simply 
because they could find no natural explanation. And that 
was not for lack of trying. They investigated the possibil­
ity of an ascending weather balloon, a low-altitude tem­
perature inversion, a reflection of the sun, and possible 
isolated low clouds combining to form a mirage,* though 
*.The last explanation was based on a deputy sheriff's statement 
that low clouds had briefly moved in from the east at about the 
time of the sighting.low clouds combining to form a mirage,* though 
*.The last explanation was based on a deputy sheriff's statement 
that low clouds had briefly moved in from the east at about the 
time of the sighting.

--- PAGE BREAK ---to form a mirage,* though 
*.The last explanation was based on a deputy sheriff's statement 
that low clouds had briefly moved in from the east at about the 
time of the sighting.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 78 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
it must have seemed unlikely that any of these could be­
have in such a way as the object sighted-or have caused 
cars to stall. 
It is difficult to imagine a reputable businessman fabri­
cating a story like this one and reporting it to the police. 
One might wonder why there weren't more witnesses to 
the event; but, as we have already noted, one of the chief 
characteristics of UFO sightings seems to be their isola­
tion in time and space. This is, of course, a highly puz­
zling feature and has contributed greatly to attempts to 
discredit the phenomenon. 
The Case of the Leisurely Boomerang 
In all my years with Project Blue Book, I never ceased 
to be impressed with the phenomenon of mature adults 
with respectable positions in their communities reporting 
to the authorities (generally out of a sense of duty) the 
most incredible tales. In most of these cases there was 
no discernible motive for a deliberate hoax. Why then 
the report? Hallucination immediately suggests itself, but 
the witnesses generally have no previous record whatso­
ever of such an aberration. Furthermore, how can one 
exactly ascribe the same hallucination to two or more 
witnesses? 
This next case, which occurred during Capt. Hardin's 
term as Director of Project Blue Book, is outlined in a 
letter written by Mr. Jack W---
and Mr. Ernest 
A--: 
At about 1 1 :00 A.M. on Sept. 22, 1954, myself, 
Jack W---, and Ernest A---, both being 
employees of Webster Gas Company of Marshfield, 
Missouri, were returning from Bracken, Missouri, 
where we had completed a delivery. Approximately 
3 miles east of Marshfield, Missouri, on what is 
known as the Scout Camp Road, we observed far to 
the west three clouds, or formations of silver ob­
jects. They were far enough away or so small that 
they appeared as no more than a silver dot to our 
eyes; there were, as a rough guess, many thousands ofst three clouds, or formations of silver ob­
jects. They were far enough away or so small that 
they appeared as no more than a silver dot to our 
eyes; there were, as a rough guess, many thousands of

--- PAGE BREAK ---formations of silver ob­
jects. They were far enough away or so small that 
they appeared as no more than a silver dot to our 
eyes; there were, as a rough guess, many thousands of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J, ALLEN HYNEK 
179 
these objects. [Could have been birds.] I stopped the 
truck to .watch these objects and after about 2 min­
utes my partner noticed another object at what we 
guessed to be 600 feet high and about 200 yards SW. 
This object was somewhat like a boomerang in shape 
with the exception that one side or wing was very 
short and the other side or wing much longer. If the 
object was as close as we thought I would guess the 
entire width to be about 6 or 7 feet. This object was 
very thin in the wing section and the body as well. 
This object was silent. It appeared to be covered or 
made of some sort of plastic or very thin material. It 
revolved very slowly, the entire object revolved, not 
just the one wing. As it revolved and the wing came 
around near the sun it seemed to shine through or 
nearly through because of the changing in color; it 
would seem to be much lighter in color when the sun 
was behind it. The color was of a dark tan with 2 
black stripes near the end of the wing or rotor. After 
we watched the object for a few minutes it started to 
climb without changing its flight characteristics or 
without gaining any RPM of its wing. After rising to 
what we thought to be about 1,500 feet it then started 
to come down much slower than it had climbed as 
the climb took only about 20 seconds; after coming 
down to what we thought about 500 feet it changed 
its revolving action in that it started tumbling but 
not any faster than it had revolved. After falling a 
short distance in this position it emitted a puff of 
white smoke or vapor. This was not in a trailing form 
but just one big puff of smoke or vapor; [neither] at 
this time or any other time did we ever hear any 
noise, [and] after emitting this smoke or vapor it 
stopped all motion and fell straight into a small patch 
of timber; we did not actually see this object hit the 
ground because of the rough terrain but we did see it 
go behind the timber line. We then left our truck 
and went into the woods to see if we could find any 
other trace of this object. After some minutes we 
found two places in the earth completely pulv,erized 
but didn't show any sign of an animal track; this 
might or might not [have] had anything to do with 
it but it did seem strange in such soft dirt that ifo places in the earth completely pulv,erized 
but didn't show any sign of an animal track; this 
might or might not [have] had anything to do with 
it but it did seem strange in such soft dirt that if

--- PAGE BREAK ---h completely pulv,erized 
but didn't show any sign of an animal track; this 
might or might not [have] had anything to do with 
it but it did seem strange in such soft dirt that if

--- PAGE BREAK ---

180 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
an animal or human had made it that it did not 
leave any track. 
When we first noticed this object it seemed to 
hover at about the 600-foot level. The wing or rotor 
was slightly curved upward at the tip and near the 
two dark stripes. When this object stopped its ro­
tating and started to fall the wing or rotor was pointed 
up indicating the base of this wing which would be 
the body-the heaviest part. At no time was there 
much speed involved in any fashion. While falling it 
did not flutter or turn at all but fell straight down 
past the timber line. Before falling past the timber 
line we watched this object for about 15 minutes. 
After the two of us searched the area very thor­
oughly we returned to Marshfield, Missouri, and I 
called the Fordland Air Base and talked with CWO 
A.R. Justman about this object; he sent four men 
to Marshfield, Missouri, where they picked the two 
of us up and we returned to the area and made a 
more thorough search and of a much wider area but 
without finding any more traces of this object than 
we had found before. At about 6:00 P.M. CWO A.R. 
Justman and myself returned to the area and made a 
third try at finding the object but still failed to find 
anything at all other than the two places in the earth 
that [were] torn up. 
After leaving the truck in the beginning to start 
the first search Mr. A--- and myself did not see 
the silver object again that first attracted our attention. 
The two of us had time to study the object and it is 
just as I have described it. 
lsi 
JACK
-­
Marshfield, Mo. 
Is/ ERNEST A--
The Air Force investigator's report included the fol­
lowing: 
I dispatched several airmen to object site who 
combed the wooded area and found a patch of 
ground which appearerl to be literally pulverized, dirt 
was agitated on surface, and rocks, small in size,I dispatched several airmen to object site who 
combed the wooded area and found a patch of 
ground which appearerl to be literally pulverized, dirt 
was agitated on surface, and rocks, small in size,

--- PAGE BREAK ---airmen to object site who 
combed the wooded area and found a patch of 
ground which appearerl to be literally pulverized, dirt 
was agitated on surface, and rocks, small in size,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
181 
were disturbed in this spot. I examined area later in 
the day and observed that area had no prints of any 
animal, yet appeared to be beaten up by something. 
Nearby foliage was undisturbed with no signs of 
burning, scorching, etc. 
A rotating, boomerang-like propeller, maneuvering by 
itself in the daytime air does not fit the general UFO pat­
tern. One gets the feeling that the UFO phenomenon, 
whatever it · may be, is indeed "playing games with us" 
and leading us a merry chase. 
The Case of the Blue Egg 
lllue Book did not call the next two cases "Unidenti­
fied" but "Unreliable Report" and "Psychological," re­
spectively. In both cases there appears to be no evidential 
justification for these evaluations. 
The first of these occurred two evenings after the fa­
mous Levelland, Texas cases. * Blue Book attempted to 
dismiss the Levelland sightings as "ball lightning" but 
oddly enough did not dismiss these strikingly similar ones 
in like manner. 
In the first case, ·occurring in El Paso, Texas, a thirty­
five-year-old border inspector observed approaching his 
car an egg-shaped object with a bluish glow and with a 
whirring sound similar to an artillery shell. He did not see 
this object, however, until he got out of his car to investi­
gate why it had stalled and why all his lights had dimmed 
and gone out. It was then that he noticed the "blue egg" 
approaching him from the southwest at a thirty-degree 1 
elevation. It passed over his car at an altitude of one 
hundred feet and moved off on a westerly heading, while 
changing in altitude at irregular intervals. After it reached 
the Franklin Mountains, the object lifted vertically. The 
observer was at this time three miles southeast of the In­
ternational Airport at El Paso and the time was 7 : 30 P.M. 
Once again, Blue Book conducted no further investiga­
tion and labeled the case "Unreliable Report." "Insuffi­
cient Information" would have been more appropriate. 
*These Blue Book cases have been fulJy described in the author's 
The UFO Experience, pp. 141-7.d labeled the case "Unreliable Report." "Insuffi­
cient Information" would have been more appropriate. 
*These Blue Book cases have been fulJy described in the author's 
The UFO Experience, pp. 141-7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Unreliable Report." "Insuffi­
cient Information" would have been more appropriate. 
*These Blue Book cases have been fulJy described in the author's 
The UFO Experience, pp. 141-7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 82 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
The Case of the "Hypnotized " lieutenant 
This next case is a good example of Blue Book's appli­
cation of the label "Psychological." Somewhat more atten­
tion than usual was given this one by the Blue Book staff 
because the primary witness was an Air Force first lieu­
tenant who had just completed advanced survival training, 
and was on his way home to Delaware from Stead Air 
Force Base in Nevada when the incident occurred. 
III. SOURCE'S DESCRIPTION OF THE SIGHT­
ing: Source was returning to Newcastle County Air­
port, Delaware, after completion of USAF Advanced 
Survival School, Stead AFB on 23 Nov 1957 in his 
automobile. At about 061 0, he was approximately 
thirty miles west of Tonopah, Nevada, traveling 
towards Las Vegas at about eighty MPH when the 
engine of his car suddenly stopped. Attempts to re­
start the engine were unsuccessful and Source got 
out of his car to investigate the trouble. Outside the 
car he heard a steady high-pitched whining noise 
which drew his attention to four disc-shaped objects 
that were sitting on the ground about three hundred 
to four hundred yards to the right of the highway. 
These objects were totally unlike anything he had 
ever seen, and he attempted to get closer for a better 
look at them. He walked for several minutes until he 
was within approximately fifty feet from the nearest 
object [road hypnosis is a momentary thing; the ap­
parition does not last for several minutes!] The ob­
jects were identical and about fifty feet in diameter. 
They were disc-shaped. emitting their own source of 
light causing them to glow brightly. They were 
equipped with a transparent dome in the center of 
the top which was obviously not of the same material 
as the rest of the craft. The entire body of the ob­
jects emitted the light. They did not appear to be 
dark on the underside. They were equipped with three 
landing gears, each that appeared hemispherical in 
shape about two feet in diameter and of some dark 
material. The source estimated the height of the ob-he underside. They were equipped with three 
landing gears, each that appeared hemispherical in 
shape about two feet in diameter and of some dark 
material. The source estimated the height of the ob-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ere equipped with three 
landing gears, each that appeared hemispherical in 
shape about two feet in diameter and of some dark 
material. The source estimated the height of the ob-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
183 
jects from the ground level to the top of the dome to 
be about ten to fifteen feet. The objects were equipped 
with a ring around the outside which was darker than 
the rest of the craft and was apparently rotating. 
When the Source got to within fifty feet of the near­
est object, the hum which had been steady in the 
air ever since he had first observed the objects, in­
creased in pitch to a degree where it almost hurt his 
ears, and the objects lifted off the ground. The pro­
truding gears were retracted almost instantly after 
takeoff; the objects rose about fifty feet into the air 
and proceeded slowly (about ten MPH) to the north 
across the highway, contoured over some small hills 
about a half mile away and disappeared behind those 
hills. As the objects passed directly over the Source, 
he observed no evidence of any smoke, exhaust, trail, 
heat, disturbance to the ground, or terrain or any 
visible outline of landing gear doors or any other out­
lines or openings in the bottom. The total time of 
sighting lasted about twenty minutes. After the ob­
jects disappeared, Source examined the place where 
he had first seen them. [Imagine a victim of road 
hypnosis calmly examining the place of landing some 
twenty minutes later.] There was no evidence that 
any heat had been present or that the ground had 
been disturbed in any other way than several very 
small impressions in the sand where the landing gear 
had obviously rested. Impressions were very shallow 
and bowl-shaped, triangular in pattern (an equally 
sided triangle) . Source did not measure the distance 
between the impressions but estimated it to be about 
eight to ten feet. After his investigation of the im­
pression, Source returned to his car and the en­
gine started immediately and ran perfectly. [This is 
a typical reported experience after a UFO has stopped 
a car. After the disappearance of the UFO, the car 
is fully operable.] The car Source was driving was a 
1956 Chevrolet [thus a year or two old] and he did 
not experience 
trouble 
of similar nature 
before 
or after the incident. At the time of sighting, Source 
had driven from Reno, Nevada, to point of sighting 
during the night and had slept for about two hours in 
his car between 2400 and 0200 that same day [psy-incident. At the time of sighting, Source 
had driven from Reno, Nevada, to point of sighting 
during the night and had slept for about two hours in 
his car between 2400 and 0200 that same day [psy-

--- PAGE BREAK ---me of sighting, Source 
had driven from Reno, Nevada, to point of sighting 
during the night and had slept for about two hours in 
his car between 2400 and 0200 that same day [psy-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

184 
THE HYNEK 'UFO REPORT 
chologist maintains that witness was exhausted de­
spite the witness's own statement that he was feeling 
fine at the time]. Source had had no intoxicants or 
sleep-retarding drugs. He described his physical con­
dition at the time of sighting as excellent. After the 
sighting, Source proceeded to Indian Springs AFB, 
Nevada, where he reported the sighting to the base 
Security Officer. [It is most unlikely that a victim of 
road hypnosis would later, upon calm consideration, 
report such an experience to an Air Force base!] 
The times of day referred to above are given in 
Pacific Standard Time. At the time of the sighting, 
it was daylight although the sun was still behind the 
mountains. The sun was about to rise in front of the 
Source. (Source was traveling SSE and the sun at 
that season would rise well to the south of east. ) 
There were no stars or moonlight. There was no 
overcast. The weather was dry and rather cold and 
there was no wind. There were no other witnesses to 
the observation to the best of Source's knowledge. 
[Captain Gregory made much of the fact that the 
Nevada Highway Department indicated at that time 
that there might be some twenty-five to thirty cars 
passing along that road. In my opinion, there could 
have been five hundred cars passing whose drivers 
would pay little attention to some activity on the des­
ert some several hundred feet off the road.] 
The witness provides the following sketches of the 
objects. 
A memo in the Blue Book files points up the primary 
reason why the Air Force put as much effort into investi­
gating this case as it did : 
The damage and embarrassment to the Air Force 
would be incalculable if this officer allied himself 
with the host of "flying saucer" writers, experts, and 
others who provide the Air Force with countless 
charges and accusations. In this instance, as matters 
now stand, the Air Force would have no effective re­
buttal, 
or evidence to disprove 
any 
unfounded 
chargeŝide the Air Force with countless 
charges and accusations. In this instance, as matters 
now stand, the Air Force would have no effective re­
buttal, 
or evidence to disprove 
any 
unfounded 
chargeŝ

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
Landing gear 
Outside ring 
appeared to rotate. 
185 
The Tonopah, Nevada, object, sighted November 23, 1957, as d!!· 
scribed and sketched in original Blue Book files. 
The records show a several weeks' attempt to obtain the 
services of a nearby university psychologist to examine the 
evidence, an effort that was finally successful. The psychol­
ogist had this to say: 
This is indeed an unusual report. With one impor­
tant exception, it has many of the characteristics of 
a deliberate hoax and reports of psychopathological 
cases. This exception was that it was made by an 
Air Force officer, a pilot who presumably should be 
a most competent observer. On the basis of the evi­
dence, I can only offer conjectures on the nature of 
this incident. These conjectures may be helpful, ' how­
ever, in the collection of official evidence. 
First, there is the possibility of deliberate hoax, 
even in an Air Force officer. In order to check this 
possibility, I would recommend a discreet investiga­
tion that is conducted before granting a security 
clearance. 
Specifically, 
do friends, 
neighbors, etc., 
know of any evidence in the officer's background 
that would suggest a hoax? . . . It was possible that 
the officer was suffering from a temporary condition 
such as has been sometimes called "road hypnosis"

--- PAGE BREAK ---officer's background 
that would suggest a hoax? . . . It was possible that 
the officer was suffering from a temporary condition 
such as has been sometimes called "road hypnosis"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 86 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
brought on by excessive fatigue and loss of sleep. 
There are well-documented cases of truck drivers, for 
example, who have driven off the road to avoid (en­
tirely imagined) houses, buses, etc., ahead of them on 
the road. This is most likely to occur on long desert 
roads, especially at night. 
Thus. the psychologist, on very little evidence, dis­
missed the case as probable "road hypnosis." There is no 
record as to how he arrived at this conclusion. Nor is there 
any mention of the psychological stability of the witness. 
Did he have a history of mental instability? Did he have 
a medical record? What is so frustrating in these kinds of 
cases, and particularly in this one, is the readiness with 
which a "Psychological" explanation was grasped without 
adequate justification. 
The Case of the Flying Tadpole 
Blue Book also classified this next case which took 
place in Nederland, Texas, as "Psychological." Quoting 
directly from the Blue Book investigator's report: 
On Sunday morning 6 Feb 1966 at approximately 
0545, Mr. 
---'s eleven-year-old son came to 
their bedroom on the way to the bathroom and turned 
the light on in the bathroom, and in doing so, awak­
ened his parents. While the boy was in the bathroom, 
the lights went out causing Mr. --- to get out 
of bed and look out of the window to see if the 
streetlights were also out, which appeared to be the 
case. While looking out of the window, Mr. --­
was amazed to find that the lawn in front of his 
house and the surrounding area was engulfed in a 
reddish glow which appeared to be pulsating similar 
to a red flashing light on a police car. However, he 
did not see any police cars in the area. A few mo­
ments later, he noticed some peculiar yellowish type 
and reddish lights coming from an object approxi­
mately five hundred feet off the ground. The lights 
seemed to be moving back and forth in a horizontal 
direction and appeared to be similar to neon light 
tubes which he estimated to be eight in number.ly five hundred feet off the ground. The lights 
seemed to be moving back and forth in a horizontal 
direction and appeared to be similar to neon light 
tubes which he estimated to be eight in number.

--- PAGE BREAK ---off the ground. The lights 
seemed to be moving back and forth in a horizontal 
direction and appeared to be similar to neon light 
tubes which he estimated to be eight in number.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
1 87 
There was no apparent sound; however, both Mr. 
--- and his wife claimed that their . ears were 
bothered by what appeared to be a very high fre­
quency pitch. There was a high overcast with no 
stars or moon that night. Therefore, it was quite 
dark and Mr. 
--- was unable to determine size 
and shape of the object at this time. However, the 
object traveled approximately a mile :\nd a half to 
the west towards the Jefferson County Airport. About 
this same time an aircraft took off from the airport 
and turned in the direction of the unknown object. 
As the aircraft approached, the lights on the object 
went out. The landing lights on the aircraft remained 
on and reflected off the UFO, giving Mr. --- an 
opportunity to see what it looked like. He stated that 
the best way to describe the shape of the object was 
that it looked like a tadpole. He estimated that the 
object was about eight feet in diameter with a tail 
about six feet in length and two feet wide. There ap­
peared to be cone-shaped bulges on the top and in 
the middle of the object. The previously mentioned 
lights seemed to be coming from the tail of the ob­
ject. After the aircraft had flown over the object, 
its lights came on again and he noticed what ap­
peared to be three separate times when these lights 
were energized. Each time the object appeared to 
move up and about five degrees to the left. It dis­
appeared at about twenty to twenty-five degree . angle 
above the horizon, traveling in a westerly direction 
and in a slow rate of climb. Mr.
--- observed all 
this with the naked eye and was unable to get any 
pictures. 
Although Mr. -.-- was very fearful of ridicule 
from the local populace, he nevertheless had the op­
portunity to discuss the power failure with a man 
from the power company and determined that the 
reason for the power outage was . . . the failure of a 
transformer. He further found out that this trans­
former was located very near to his house and that 
the failure occurred at almost the same time as the 
sighting of the UFO. 
Mr. --- found it very difficult to describe the 
UFO and admitted that he was not very good atry near to his house and that 
the failure occurred at almost the same time as the 
sighting of the UFO. 
Mr. --- found it very difficult to describe the 
UFO and admitted that he was not very good at

--- PAGE BREAK ---and that 
the failure occurred at almost the same time as the 
sighting of the UFO. 
Mr. --- found it very difficult to describe the 
UFO and admitted that he was not very good at

--- PAGE BREAK ---

188 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
drawing pictures, but if the Air Force thought it was 
necessary, he could probably describe it well enough 
to an artist so that a fairly representative picture 
could be drawn. 
Mr. --- was unaware of any other residents 
who had seen the UFO but attributed this to the 
fact that he was very hesitant in mentioning it to 
anyone since he definitely does not want any publicity 
on the sighting. However, after the sighting, he did 
call the control tower at the Jefferson County Airport 
to determine if they had seen it also but found that 
they had not seen anything and laughed at his ex­
planation and request. 
coNCLUSION: preliminary investigation did not dis­
close any reasonable explanation for Mr. 
---'s 
sighting. A more detailed investigation and a personal 
visit will be accomplished if requested from your 
headquarters. 
Readers will no doubt recognize here a number of 
features commonly reported in UFO sightings: First, the 
reddish glow which "appeared to be pulsating similar to a 
red flashing light on a police car" (in other reports the 
identical comment has been made-"at first we thought 
it was a red flasher beacon on a police car") ; second, the 
object turning off its lights when approached by an air­
craft; and finally, the power outage, ascribable to a 
burned-out transformer. In this and many other cases, 
transformer damage or damage to electrical appliances 
very similar to that which occurs under ordinary circum­
stances or during a lightning storm seems to be coincident 
with the appearance of a UFO. This was true in the Cuer­
navaca, Mexico, case which I personally investigated. And 
during the granddaddy of all "power outages," the great 
Eastern states blackout of 1965, very definite UFO activ­
ity was reported near the geographical center of the black­
out! 
It is clear to . any serious UFO investigator that "coin­
cidence" is strained beyond all reasonable limits in these 
occurrences, and labeling them "psychological," attribut­
ing them to reports by "unreliable witnesses," or calling 
them "Unidentified" does not represent a step in the solu­
tion of the problem. Perhaps at this time it would be wellychological," attribut­
ing them to reports by "unreliable witnesses," or calling 
them "Unidentified" does not represent a step in the solu­
tion of the problem. Perhaps at this time it would be well

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR, J. ALLEN HYNEK 
189 
to quote Carlos Casto-Cavero, a general in the Spanish 
Air Force who, commenting on the dilemma of govern­
ments who have to deal with UFO reports, made the fol­
lowing statement: 
I believe in the existence of UFOs. The position is 
that it is as difficult for official quarters to admit that 
something exists as it is for the Church to affirm 
that this or that is a miracle. * 
Casto-Cavero went on to assert that the fact that gov­
ernments do not publicly recognize the reality of the 
phenomenon is due to their reluctance to venture an 
opinion in the face of what they consider to be intangible 
evidence. 
The general stated it well. The United States Air 
Force, as well as the military in other countries, does not 
appear to be guilty of some sinister cover-up; rather, they 
appear to be honestly baffled. Since the UFO phenomenon 
cannot be solved easily-but neither can it be ignored­
the military, in their bewilderment, does its very best to 
wave it away. 
The Willful Car 
Here is an interesting case which Major Quintanilla 
passed on to me for evaluation late in 1968-just about 
the same time as the Condon Committee was to make pub­
lic its report dismissing the entire UFO phenomenon as 
having no substance. I investigated the case; but Blue 
Book records contain only the following brief statement 
of my findings. 
The sighting was investigated and evaluated by Dr. 
J. Allen Hynek, Air Force Scientific Consultant on 
UFOs. The following represents a brief summary of 
his analysis and conclusions regarding this sighting 
[the analysis has apparently disappeared]. 
Witness saw a brilliant light directly above the 
road about two hundred feet ahead of him and fifty 
*Flying Saucer Re\'iew, 22, #3.

--- PAGE BREAK ---g 
[the analysis has apparently disappeared]. 
Witness saw a brilliant light directly above the 
road about two hundred feet ahead of him and fifty 
*Flying Saucer Re\'iew, 22, #3.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

190 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
to seventy-five feet off the ground, as he rounded a 
bend in the road in his 1967 Ford. [The dati) of the 
sighting is November 23, 1 968.] The 
area was 
sparsely settled. There was no definite object, just 
light. The car radio faded into static. The light it­
self emitted a beam downward that illuminated the 
nearby trees. 
Light was then retracted as if the beam were a 
ladder; it was five to six feet wide and well defined. 
The main light was fuzzy on the edges. Now the en· 
gine cut out as did the radio. Main light appeared 
scintillating with a subtended arc of several degrees. 
Light then disappeared after a few seconds, going 
straight up. Engine started by itself and the car had 
been left in "drive" gear. Conclusion: Unidentified. 
Another case of car-stopping-and this time, car-start­
ing-all by itself! Any physical scientist would say this 
was preposterous; yet it has been reported many times. 
The handwritten witness form contained the following 
statements : 
I observed what appeared to be a self-luminous 
oval-shaped object between forty and fifty yards in 
diameter which glowed with a yellowish-white light. 
It seemed to me to be non-transparent but I have no 
idea as to. how solid it may have been. It was much 
brighter than any other light present. There were no 
distinct edges but rather a fuzzy outline with a general 
oval shape . 
. . . 67-Ford Custom-(paved gravel road)-all 
windows were closed with the heater on. No other 
traffic on the road. 
As to the apparent size, I can only estimate that if 
I were to hold my entire thumb at arm's length, no 
more than one-tenth of the object would have been 
covered. 
As to how his attention was first called to the phenom­
enon: 
I topped a small hill and started into a curve coming 
up onto where this object was located. The bright-ject would have been 
covered. 
As to how his attention was first called to the phenom­
enon: 
I topped a small hill and started into a curve coming 
up onto where this object was located. The bright-

--- PAGE BREAK ---covered. 
As to how his attention was first called to the phenom­
enon: 
I topped a small hill and started into a curve coming 
up onto where this object was located. The bright-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
191 
ness, size, etc., immediately caught my attention. As 
I approached the light, a beam of light came down 
to my car causing the engine to stop and all electrical 
components to malfunction. 
As to the final disappearance of the object: 
The object changed colors from a yellowish-white to 
a brighter reddish-orange and moved straight up at a 
very high rate of speed. It was completely out of sight 
in less than fifteen seconds. 
Although this is a single-witness case, one gathers from 
the handwritten comments of this witness, and from his 
manner of expression, that he was a reasonably articulate 
young man. Since this case has much in common with oth­
er CE-lls, including the beam of light being retracted 
"like a ladder," it is hard to believe it could have been an 
out-and-out hoax, unless the witness was very familiar with 
UFO literature. My recollection of the investigation is 
simply that I was unable to find any logical, natural ex­
planation. Having no evidence to support a "Hoax" or 
"Psychological" evaluation, I simply had to classify the 
sighting as "Unidentified." 
The Lieutenant's Blimp 
Over the years, it has been my experience that some of 
the best reports come from previously militant skeptics 
who, after having had a UFO experience of their own, 
suddenly find themselves the butt of the type of ridicule 
that they had previously heaped upon others. Following is 
a letter from the Blue Book files from Lt. Col. Charles 
Smith, Jr., Commanding, 9325th Squadron, Gainesville, 
Georgia, to the Commanding General of Robbins AFB, 
Georgia, to the attention of the Chief, Intelligence Sec­
tion : 
On the evening of Oct 3 1 at 7 :40 P.M., while trav­
eling north on Highway 85, toward Atlanta, some 
four miles from Fayetteville, a strange object was 
seen flying overhead.ntelligence Sec­
tion : 
On the evening of Oct 3 1 at 7 :40 P.M., while trav­
eling north on Highway 85, toward Atlanta, some 
four miles from Fayetteville, a strange object was 
seen flying overhead.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n : 
On the evening of Oct 3 1 at 7 :40 P.M., while trav­
eling north on Highway 85, toward Atlanta, some 
four miles from Fayetteville, a strange object was 
seen flying overhead.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

192 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
This strange object appeared to be flying at treetop 
level as I approached it. It was of orange color and 
very similar to an air blimp. I was traveling at a speed 
of 60-70 MPH as I approached this object. It was 
coming down directly over the road some two hun­
dred 
yards ahead. 
So, 
I 
immediately thought of 
falling aircraft and tried to stop before traveling be­
neath it. However, as I went under, the object was 
moving very slowly across the road. As I passed under 
it, the radio on the car was silent as if traveling under 
a bridge or underpass. There was no static, just si­
lence until the object passed. 
As I quickly got out of the car, the object seemed 
directly overhead at an estimated five hundred feet. 
The length was estimated as four times the height and 
width ( 80' by 20' by 20' ) . A clear bottom view, side­
view and angle-view was seen. After lingering for 
about twenty seconds overhead, the nose seemed to 
point in a forty-five-degree-angle climb, steadily in­
creasing its speed and angle climb until it disap­
peared slightly to the left of the moon and in an east­
erly direction. The speed was tremendous and the 
object completely disappeared in approximately thirty 
to forty seconds. 
There were no sparks nor was there any sound. 
The night was very clear and the stars and moon 
very bright. There were no light beams visible and I 
looked all around. 
This object was very dull orange near the center 
line and was brighter near the outer edges. 
As the object passed between the view of the 
moon and my location on the upper climb, the color 
seemed to blend in with that ·of the moon but it was 
still visible. 
Signed, 
Lt. Col. Charles Smith, Jr. 
Cases reported by Air Force officers and Air Force 
pilots were particularly trying for Blue Book. Here were 
some of their own highly trained men reporting incidents 
which the Air Force itself was ascribing to misidentifica­
tion of natural objects or to hallucination. It wasn't easyr Blue Book. Here were 
some of their own highly trained men reporting incidents 
which the Air Force itself was ascribing to misidentifica­
tion of natural objects or to hallucination. It wasn't easy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
193 
for them to call one of their own officers a "psychologi­
cal" . case, nor did they wish to demean a military officer's 
intelligence; how different the attitude when it's one of 
your own! 
The Case of the Bawling Cattle 
I personally investigated this next CE-Il in the latter 
days of Blue Book. It was a single-witness case, if one 
does not count the cattle as "witnesses." The sighting took 
place near Groveton, Missouri, on February 9, 1968, at 
3 :20 A.M. The story begins with a letter: 
• 
To the Hon. Robert McNamara 
Secretary of Defense 
Department of Defense 
The Pentagon 
Washington, D.C. 20301 
Dear Sir: 
February 9, 1968 
I reside on a farm approximately thirty miles 
north of Kansas City, Missouri. The residence is ap­
proximately one quarter of a mile back from the 
highway with a pasture in front of the dwelling. I am 
employed in town and operate a cow herd and all­
grass farm. If there is a disturbance among the cat­
tle, I arise to their bawling as would a mother to her 
crying child. 
Last night I heard several cows bawl as if fright­
ened or scared. I immediately jumped out of bed 
and ran to the picture window in my living room. It 
was a dark night but there was a distinct glow giving 
off considerable light immediately in front of the 
house (approximately three hundred to three hun­
dred and fifty feet away) . It made sufficient light for 
me to maneuver around the card table left in the 
middle of the room and to see the cattle in the pas­
ture in a rough semicircle to the left of the light 
glow. 
As my vision adjusted from darkness to this mod­
erate light, I was able to see parts of what appeared

--- PAGE BREAK ---attle in the pas­
ture in a rough semicircle to the left of the light 
glow. 
As my vision adjusted from darkness to this mod­
erate light, I was able to see parts of what appeared

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 94 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
to be a tremendous circular object, reproduced as 
best I can on the attached sketch. 
The light was 
a yellowish-green and came from 
the concave side of the craft. I could not tell whether 
it came from the translucent surface or was reflected 
from the base of the craft against a shiny surface and 
then back to the ground. In any event, there was suf­
ficient light to see the major limbs on some of the 
walnut trees, a stump, the cows, the fence in the 
foreground, and other details. 
The object appeared to be at least one hundred 
feet in diameter, and to be hovering twenty to twenty­
five feet above the ground . . . although I could not 
say that it was not on the ground or possibly higher 
in the air. There were definitely seven openings or 
portholes in the approximate center of the concave 
side. Their spacing would indicate that if the craft 
were in fact round, there were probably sixteen of 
these equally spaced around the craft. I could not see 
distinctly enough to see if they were square, rectangu­
lar, oval, or round. It was difficult to arrive at a per­
spective to judge their size, but I would guess that 
they were two feet to approximately thirty inches in 
diameter. I saw no door or distinct opening. I saw no 
living thing enter or depart the craft. I have no idea 
whether I watched half a minute or five minutes, I 
was so entranced by the sight. 
I have been losing a cow or two now and then, 
undoubtedly stolen without a trace. My first reaction 
on hearing the cows was that someone was among 
them. On seeing the craft, I remember thinking, "No 
wonder I have found no evidence! They are being 
hauled off by air!" At that · point I had no idea of 
what I saw as being a possible UFO, but rather as 
some monstrous helicopter or other craft. 
Some of the cows were staring at the object from 
perhaps one or two hundred feet away. Cows with 
younger calves were bawling and some of the calves 
were answering. Finally, one cow whirled and ran 
with tail high towards the barn. The others followed 
and in only a few seconds, there were no cattle in 
sight. The craft remained some little time after the 
cows departed, but I have no idea whether this washigh towards the barn. The others followed 
and in only a few seconds, there were no cattle in 
sight. The craft remained some little time after the 
cows departed, but I have no idea whether this was

--- PAGE BREAK ---n. The others followed 
and in only a few seconds, there were no cattle in 
sight. The craft remained some little time after the 
cows departed, but I have no idea whether this was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
195 
half a minute or considerably longer. It was during 
this time that I concentrated on the object in an at­
tempt to make out all the details that I could. 
All during this time there had been a distinct noise 
that I had difficulty in describing. It sounded some­
thing like the swish of a piece of wire which one 
might whirl around above his head at a high speed 
and yet it had a pulsating rhythm of some kind. 
[Note earlier case which described the sound as simi­
lar to that of a "whip swishing through the air."] 
When the craft departed, this noise became two or 
three times louder and the sound of pulsations were 
more rapid. The craft moved away rapidly to the 
southwest, arising at about a forty-five-degree angle 
without the craft being tilted in any way from the 
horizontal position it had maintained at or above 
ground level. 
. 
. 
• 
Maj. Quintanilla asked me to look into this case via 
telephone and after doing so, I reported to him: "Mr. 
---'s manner of speech was careful, and he made no 
attempt to embellish his story or to do anything other than 
stick to the facts. He did not desire publicity and has 
not mentioned the incident to anyone other than in his 
letter. He feels no good could come of talking about it. 
I would have to give Mr. 
---
a very good rating 
as to stability and unexcitability. He is, however, near­
sighted and although he tells me that he can drive with­
out glasses, he rarely does. Had he had his glasses on, he 
feels that he could have observed more details than he 
did." 
Blue Book did not, of course, consider it worthwhile to 
expend time and money for me to visit this witness to 
get a face-to-face account. A visit to the actual point of 
sighting is immensely helpful, for it enables the investi­
gator to ask more relevant questions, questions that might 
not otherwise come to mind. But alas, in this case, such 
a visit never took place. Blue Book simply stuck on a 
label, [unidentified] and considered the case closed.questions, questions that might 
not otherwise come to mind. But alas, in this case, such 
a visit never took place. Blue Book simply stuck on a 
label, [unidentified] and considered the case closed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s that might 
not otherwise come to mind. But alas, in this case, such 
a visit never took place. Blue Book simply stuck on a 
label, [unidentified] and considered the case closed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 96 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
The Case of the Armed Witness 
Finally, we have a two-witness Blue Book case that 
stretches beyond all the boundaries of common sense. Was 
the witness fabricating such a bizarre story? You be the 
judge. The following Blue Book excerpt is from the rec­
ords of the FBI field office in Baltimore : 
Mr. 
---
was interviewed at his residence, 
---, May 10, 1952, and with reference to the 
incident in this case, he related in substance as fol­
lows: 
---, accompanied by his friend 
---, 
· [was] 
returning to 
Baltimore from Glen Burnie, 
Maryland, via the Richey Highway, on 29 March 
1952. They were in a 1949 Anglia Vampire, an En­
glish car, and were proceeding in a northerly direc­
tion, having just left a Howard Johnson's restaurant 
adjacent to the intersection of Richey Highway and 
U.S. Highway 301 . While approximately opposite a 
harness track, about three hundred yards north of the 
above-named intersection, --- related: "We ob­
served a strange-looking craft appearing on the hori­
zon ahead of his automobile. --- described the 
aircraft as being a flat disc with a cupola or dome in 
the center of one side. He described the dome as 
having what appeared to be a small porthole on one 
side and a shadowy outline of what appeared to be 
a "hatch" similar to those appearing on a ship. He 
stated that this craft approached his vehicle from a 
northeasterly direction and hovered above his auto­
mobile. 
He further described the object as being of a lumi­
nous silver color and emitting bright light around the 
edges, similar to neon tubing of high brilliancy. He 
stated that at the time that the incident occurred he 
had in the rear seat of his vehicle a Thomson sub­
machine gun with which weapon he left the automo­
bile and walked around the car several times, debat­
ing as to whether or not he should fire on the air­
craft. He advised that his companion --- re­
mained in the automobile and pleaded with him notbile and walked around the car several times, debat­
ing as to whether or not he should fire on the air­
craft. He advised that his companion --- re­
mained in the automobile and pleaded with him not

--- PAGE BREAK ---und the car several times, debat­
ing as to whether or not he should fire on the air­
craft. He advised that his companion --- re­
mained in the automobile and pleaded with him not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
197 
to discharge the weapon for fear of retaliation from 
the aircraft. Mr. --- declined to comment as to 
the origin, present whereabouts, or owner of the 
above-named weapon. 
--- stated that when the 
aircraft came to rest above his automobile, it ap­
peared to be at least fifty feet in diameter and wa­
vered slightly. While in sight, the aircraft gave off a 
sound similar to that of a vacuum cleaner. 
--­
averred that the aircraft maintained its position above 
the automobile fo.r approximately three minutes and 
then turned on its edge, thereby presenting its flat 
surface to his vision, and appeared to roll across the 
sky at a rate of speed greater than that of a jet air­
craft. 
--- estimated the horizon to the south­
west of his vision towards which the object was trav­
eling was approximately three and one half miles 
from his position and that the object as it disappeared 
across the horizon was approximately the dimensions 
of a five-inch disc held at arm's length. He advised 
that when the object first appeared, it appeared to 
be at an angle to the horizon of sixty degrees, and 
as he was proceeding north, it appeared on the north­
west horizon on the crest of a hill. He also advised 
that during the period that the object was within his 
vision, he noticed no sign of activity within it and 
discerned no odor from it. 
--- advised that during the time of the above 
observation of the aircraft, there was only one other 
automobile in the immediate vicinity. He described 
this to be a 1948 Pontiac convertible, yellow, with a 
1952 Maryland license plate, the first three digits 
of which were "600." He realized that the car was 
apparently occupied by a man and a woman and that 
the man had dismounted the automobile, looking at 
the aircraft but upon being hailed by ---, had 
returned to the automobile and driven off rapidly. It 
was Mr. 
---'s opinion that he did so on seeing 
the aforementioned Thomson sub-machine gun. Mr. 
--- informed the writer that he was not addicted 
to or a casual indulger in any form of alcoholic bev­
erages and was not under such influence at the time 
of the sighting. He further advised that he ' wore 
glasses only for the purpose of reading and that theual indulger in any form of alcoholic bev­
erages and was not under such influence at the time 
of the sighting. He further advised that he ' wore 
glasses only for the purpose of reading and that the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

198 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
only obstruction to his observation of the above­
described aircraft was the windshield of his auto­
mobile when first sighted; however, when he emerged 
from the automobile, he was able to observe the air­
craft without any trouble. 
--- contended that the above incident had a 
singular effect on his automobile in that it killed the 
motor and, 
apparently, 
magnetized his wiring. It 
also resulted in the paint on his car cracking. 
AGENT's NOTE: An inspection of ---'s automo­
bile revealed that it had been recently painted. 
Blue Book once again labeled this "Unidentified." 
We have presented here only a small sampling of the 
fascinating Close Encounters of the Second Kind. These 
cases seem to describe a UFO that is capable of leaving 
physical traces on its surroundings, but whose behavior 
does not correspond with our present technology and cer­
tainly not with the technology of 1947 or 1948. Since we 
are always inclined to believe in physical -evidence-what 
we can see with our own eyes-CE-lls tend to offer more 
convincing evidence than any other type of UFO sighting 
that the UFO phenomenon is "real."

--- PAGE BREAK ---ieve in physical -evidence-what 
we can see with our own eyes-CE-lls tend to offer more 
convincing evidence than any other type of UFO sighting 
that the UFO phenomenon is "real."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9=============== 
APPROACHING THE EDGE OF REALITY: 
CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF THE THIRD KIND 
"As we watched, men came out 
• 
. 
• on what 
seemed to be a deck on top of the huge disc. One 
figure seemed to be looking down at us. I stretched 
my arm above my head and waved. To our surprise 
the figure did the same . . . . All the mission boys 
made audible gasps." 
-Rev. William Gill 
Boianai, Papua, New Guinea 
If Project Blue Book officers refused to take seriously 
the "incredible tales from credible persons" that con­
cerned strange lights in the night, flying discs, and the 
Close Encounters thus far described, it is scarce wonder 
that they dismissed with alacrity the Close Encounters of 
the Third Kind, those in which "beings" were reported in 
association with the UFO sighting. 
Why should it be more difficult for us to accept en­
counters with "creatures" than with "craft"? Probably 
because once we dare to admit that beings alien to our­
selves exist, we are forced to face our deepest fear of the 
unknown, along with our more basic and specific fears of 
competition and hostility. But, as in the other types of 
UFO experiences, we cannot ignore the reports which 
do exist, for they are made by seemingly credible per­
sons and are widespread. 
Reports of Close Encounters of the Third Kind, wheth­
er they be single- or multiple-witness cases, are character­
ized by a high degree of strangeness and by the complete 
bewilderment of the witnesses. There is generally a great 
reluctance to report, and once the report is made, there 
is a strong desire to avoid further publicity. Since the 
majority of these sightings last for several minutes, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---great 
reluctance to report, and once the report is made, there 
is a strong desire to avoid further publicity. Since the 
majority of these sightings last for several minutes, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ǘ00 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
the witnesses are generally able to recall specific details, 
it seems highly unlikely that the witnesses are hallucinat­
ing; hallucinations are usually transitory in nature, and 
the "victim" is not generally able to describe things in 
detail. 
The circumstances under which Close Encounters of 
the Third Kind occur do not seem to differ at all from 
those surrounding other types of sightings. Like the others, 
they happen spontaneously and without warning to the 
witnesses, who generally find themselves engaged in per­
fectly ordinary tasks just prior to the sighting-driving 
the car to work, putting the car in the garage, taking out 
the garbage, or resting on the porch or lawn. 
Close Encounters of the Third Kind have been described 
so well in UFO literature that I will confine myself to 
relatively few cases in the Blue Book files, including three 
classic cases, the Father Gill case in New Guinea, the 
Socorro, New Mexico, case, and the famous Kelly-Hop­
kinsville, Kentucky, case. 
The Radio Man on the Highway 
Let us begin, however, with one for which virtually all 
information comes from the Blue Book files. This case 
occurred on the morning of August 25, 1952, in Pitts­
burgh, Kansas. The lone witness was doing what he had 
been doing routinely at that time of day for five or six 
years-driving from the farm where he lived to the radio 
station where he worked. On this date he left his farm 
at 5 : 30 A.M. CST and was driving a 1952 Jeep station 
wagon on a rough gravel road. He was just about a quar­
ter of a mile from U.S. Highway 60, when he noted an 
object off the right side of the road at a horizontal angle 
of about 40° and at a distance of about 250 yards. The 
object was approximately 70 feet long and 1 2 feet high. 
A number of windows were observed and the witness 
stated he distinctly saw a "man" inside who seemed to 
control the "object." The Blue Book report states : 
He immediately started slowing down his car and 
continued to view the object through the right-hand 
side of the windshield. When he came to a pointntrol the "object." The Blue Book report states : 
He immediately started slowing down his car and 
continued to view the object through the right-hand 
side of the windshield. When he came to a point

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Blue Book report states : 
He immediately started slowing down his car and 
continued to view the object through the right-hand 
side of the windshield. When he came to a point

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
201 
where the object was visible through the right door 
glass and about ninety degrees to the right of his ve­
hicle, he stopped and slid his body over to the right­
hand door of the vehicle, opened the door and 
stepped out onto the road. At all times, he attempted 
to keep the object in view. After he had stepped out 
to the side of the road nearest the object, it began a 
rapid vertiCal ascent. He estimated that he viewed the 
object for about one-half minute. At this time, he 
estimated that he was about one hundred yards from 
the object. When the object reached the height of 
about how high an airplane flies, the object then in­
creased aẽ;: eleration at a tremendous rate and rapidly 
disappeared from view, straight up into the broken 
clouds. Clouds did not obscure the view of the dis­
appearing object at any time. He described the ob­
ject as platter-shaped; by this he [meant to say] that 
it looked like two platters or bowls had been put 
together by reversing one platter and placing it over 
the first one. He estimated that it was almost seventy­
five feet long and forty feet wide and about fifteen 
feet through the midsection, measuring vertically in 
the center of the object. Object was about ten feet 
off the ground when first seen and remained in this 
position 
until 
starting its rapid 
ascent after he 
stepped to the side of the road. The object was hov­
ering or moving slightly up and down and to the 
side, or rocking slightly as it hovered about ten feet 
off the ground. Mr. 
--- then went on with a 
more detailed description of the object: it was of a 
dull aluminum color; smooth surface; one window 
in front section and the head and shoulders of a man 
sitting motionless [were] visible, facing forward to 
the edge of the object; clear glass, light in forward 
section, and medium blue continuous light. In the 
midsection of the object were several windows ex­
tending from top to rear of object; midsection of ship 
had a blue light which gradually changed to different 
shades. There was a lot of activity or movement in 
the midsection which could not be identified as being 
human as it did not have a regular pattern of move­
ment. There were no windows, portholes, doors, 
vents, seams, etc., seen by the observer in the rearsection which could not be identified as being 
human as it did not have a regular pattern of move­
ment. There were no windows, portholes, doors, 
vents, seams, etc., seen by the observer in the rear

--- PAGE BREAK ---not be identified as being 
human as it did not have a regular pattern of move­
ment. There were no windows, portholes, doors, 
vents, seams, etc., seen by the observer in the rear

--- PAGE BREAK ---

202 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
section of the object or under the object (viewed at 
time of ascent) . Another identifiable feature was 
that along the edges of the object 
. 
, 
• there were a 
series of propellers about six inches to seven inches 
in diameter spaced closely together; these propellers 
were mounted on a bracket so that they revolved in 
a horizontal plane on the edge of the object. The 
propellers were rotating at a high rate. 
The Air Force Investigator in this instance did a good 
job in obtaining character references (e.g., "prominent 
local businessman connected with the witness's radio sta­
tion advises that he has known the source for ten years 
and holds him in the highest regard. He considers him 
completely reliable") . There were also physical effects as­
sociated with the sighting. 
The object was reported as hovering over an open 
two-acre field used for cattle grazing. The general 
area is heavily wooded. In the field over which the 
object hovered, the grass was pressed down forming 
a circle of sixty-foot diameter impression with the 
grass in a recognizable concentric pattern. Loose 
grass lay over the top of the impression as if drawn 
in by suction when the object ascended vertically at 
high speed. Vegetation and grass are approximately 
four to five feet high. Matted grass was verified by 
several witnesses. Samples of soil and grass were 
sent to Dayton and analyzed by the Technical Analy­
sis Division with the results that the samples show 
no evidence of any radioactivity, burning, or stress 
of any kind. 
The Blue Book report adds that : 
After stopping his car, Mr. 
--- turned off 
his ignition and after stepping out of his car, he 
heard a deep throbbing sound coming from the ob­
ject. As the object started its ascent, it made a sound 
like a large covey of quail starting to fly at the 
same time. There was no visible exhaust or color de­
tectable by the viewer. There was only one object 
seen. Mr. 
--- described the weather as beingike a large covey of quail starting to fly at the 
same time. There was no visible exhaust or color de­
tectable by the viewer. There was only one object 
seen. Mr. 
--- described the weather as being

--- PAGE BREAK ---quail starting to fly at the 
same time. There was no visible exhaust or color de­
tectable by the viewer. There was only one object 
seen. Mr. 
--- described the weather as being

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J, ALLEN HYNEK 
203 
warm, and the sky dotted by clouds. He does not 
recall a wind at the time of the sighting. Mr. --­
said that the sun was just rising as he was going to 
work that morning, and it was light enough to see all 
objects in the area. The viewer cannot recall any air­
craft, trains, or vehicles in the area at the time of 
the sighting. He stated that to his knowledge, be was 
the only person to view the object. He wanted to go 
into the area over which the object had hovered; bow­
ever, he did not since the terrain was rough (ditch, 
fence, tall weeds, and he has an artificial leg which 
prevents normal movement) . Mr. --- said that 
the grass was moving under the object as it was hov­
ering. Mr. 
--- was at a total loss in attempting 
to explain the viewed object as being a "vision" [or] 
"optical illusion," or some other explainable phe­
nomenon. When pressed, he stated that he thought 
it was probably a new device of the government. 
I remember puzzling long and hard over this case, one 
of the very early ones received by Blue Book. My skepti­
cism was so great at that time that I was quite willing to dis­
miss it as a hallucination. In view of the great wealth of 
data that I have accumulated since then, I find that I can 
no longer take refuge in this hypothesis. 
I admit that I am still puzzled as to what level of "real­
ity" should be attributed to these "events"; but I no 
longer entertain any doubt whatsoever that the witness in 
this case and the ones that follow all sincerely believed 
that what they had had was a true, tangible experience. 
The Case of the Former Mayor 
One of the more interesting but isolated Air Force "Un­
identifieds" came to Blue Book in the form of a (then) se­
cret CIA document : 
Information from Foreign Documents or Radio 
Broadcasts. 
Country of origin : Germany 
Subject : military, scientific 
How published : daily newspaperin the form of a (then) se­
cret CIA document : 
Information from Foreign Documents or Radio 
Broadcasts. 
Country of origin : Germany 
Subject : military, scientific 
How published : daily newspaper

--- PAGE BREAK ---hen) se­
cret CIA document : 
Information from Foreign Documents or Radio 
Broadcasts. 
Country of origin : Germany 
Subject : military, scientific 
How published : daily newspaper

--- PAGE BREAK ---

204 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
Where published : Athens 
Date published: 9 Jul 1952 
Language : Greek 
Source : I. Kathimerini 
BERLIN-Furnished with sworn testimony of 
an 
eyewitness, Oscar Linke, a forty-eight-year-old Ger­
man, and former mayor of Gleimershausen, West 
Berlin, intelligence officers have begun investigating 
a most unusual "flying saucer" story. According to 
this story, an object "resembling a huge flying pan" 
and having a diameter of about fifteen meters landed 
in a forest clearing in the Soviet zone of Germany. 
Linke recently escap-ed from the Soviet zone along 
with his wife and six children. 
Linke and his eleven-year-old daughter Gabriella 
made the following sworn statement last week be­
fonŗ a judge : 
"While I was returning to my home with Gabriella, 
the tire of my motorcycle blew out near the town of 
Hasselbacht. While we were walking along towards 
Hasselbacht, Gabriella pointed out something that 
lay at a distance of about a hundred and forty meters 
away from us. Since it was twilight, I thought that 
she was pointing at a young deer. 
"I left my motorcycle near a tree and walked to­
wards the spot which Gabriella had pointed out. 
When, however, I reached a spot about fifty-five me­
ters from the object, I realized that my first impres­
sion had been wrong. What I had seen were two men 
who were not more than forty meters away from me. 
They seemed dressed in some shiny metallic clothing. 
They were stooped over and were looking at some­
thing lying on the ground. 
"I approached until I was only about ten meters 
from them. I looked over a small fence and then I 
noticed a large object whose diameter I estimate to 
be within thirteen to fifteen meters. It looked like a 
huge frying pan. There were two rolls of holes along 
the periphery, about thirty centimeters in circum­
ference. The space between the two holes was about 
0.45 m. On top of this metal object was a black 
conical tower about three meters high. At that mo-e periphery, about thirty centimeters in circum­
ference. The space between the two holes was about 
0.45 m. On top of this metal object was a black 
conical tower about three meters high. At that mo-

--- PAGE BREAK ---hirty centimeters in circum­
ference. The space between the two holes was about 
0.45 m. On top of this metal object was a black 
conical tower about three meters high. At that mo-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
205 
ment, my daughter, who had remained a short dis­
tance behind me, called me. The two men must have 
heard my daughter's voice because they immediately 
jumped on the conical tower and disappeared inside. 
I had previously noted that one of the men had a 
lamp on the front part of his body which lit up at 
regular intervals. Now, the side of the object on 
which the holes had opened began to glitter. Its 
color seemed green but later turned to red. At the 
same time, I began to hear a slight hum. When the 
brightness and the hum increased, the conical tower 
began to slide down into the center of the object. The 
whole object then began to rise slowly from the 
ground and rotate like a top. 
"It seemed to me as if it were supported by the 
cylindrical plant which had gone down from the top 
of the object through the center and had now ap­
peared on the bottom of the object. The object, sur­
rounded by a ring of flames, was now a certain num­
ber of feet above the ground. 
"I then noted that the whole object had risen 
slowly off the ground. The cylinder on which it was 
supported had now 
disappeared 
within its 
center 
and had reappeared on the top of the object. The 
rate of climb had now become greater. At the same 
time, my daughter and I heard a whistling sound 
similar to that heard when a bomb falls. 
"The object rose to a horizonal position, turned 
towards a neighboring town, and then, gaining alti­
tude, it disappeared over the heights and forests in 
the direction of Stockhelm." 
Many other persons who live in the same area as 
Linke related that they saw an object which they 
thought to be a comet (meteor ) . A shepherd stated 
that he thought he was looking at a comet moving 
away at low altitude from the height on which Linke 
stood. 
After submitting his testimony to the judge, Linke 
made 
the 
following 
statement: 
"I 
would 
have 
thought that both my daughter and I were dreaming 
if it were not for the following elements involved : 
when the object had disappeared, I went to the place 
where it had been. I found a circular opening in thet both my daughter and I were dreaming 
if it were not for the following elements involved : 
when the object had disappeared, I went to the place 
where it had been. I found a circular opening in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd I were dreaming 
if it were not for the following elements involved : 
when the object had disappeared, I went to the place 
where it had been. I found a circular opening in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

206 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
ground and it was quite evident that it was freshly 
dug. It was exactly the same shape as the · conical 
tower. I was then convinced that I was not dreaming." 
Linke continued: "I had never heard of the term 
tlying saucers before I escaped the Soviet zone into 
western Berlin. When I saw this object,. I immedi­
ately thought that it was a new Soviet military ma­
chine. I confess that I was seized with fright because 
the Soviets do not want anyone to know about their 
work. Many persons have been restricted in their 
movements for many years in East Germany because 
they knew too much!" 
The Rddio Announcer's Surprise 
I include this next Blue Book case because it con­
tains several elements that have recurred in many CE-Ills. 
On October 23, 1965, a radio announcer, of good reputa­
tion, was driving toward Long Prairie, a community west 
of Minneapolis. When he was just four miles from town, 
in rolling hill country, he rounded a curve and there, just 
before him in the road, was a rocket-shaped object, silver 
in color. 
It would almost appear that one's chances of seeing a 
UFO are greater if one is driving a car than if one is 
merely out in the open. In case after case, reports con­
tain the phrase "after rounding a bend in the road." While 
these objects are not always standing in the road, they 
seem to do so often enough. When there is open country­
side on either side of the road, one can't help but wonder 
why. 
What happened to the radio announcer next will be rec­
ognized by the experienced reader as a second common 
feature: his car engine stopped and his car lights went 
off. He remained in his car, transfixed by the object which. 
was standing on fins and was thirty to forty feet tall, about 
ten feet thick, and had light shining from its bottom. This 
young man's own narrative account states: 
I was driving west on Minnesota Highway 27 when 
I went around a bend in the road and my car en­
gine stopped running and my lights went off. I lookedThis 
young man's own narrative account states: 
I was driving west on Minnesota Highway 27 when 
I went around a bend in the road and my car en­
gine stopped running and my lights went off. I looked

--- PAGE BREAK ---wn narrative account states: 
I was driving west on Minnesota Highway 27 when 
I went around a bend in the road and my car en­
gine stopped running and my lights went off. I looked

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
207 
up and saw this object standing in the middle of the 
road. It was around 7 : 15 P.M. 
• 
• 
• I had just 
checked my watch a minute before, so I know what 
time it was. I finally coasted to a stop about twenty 
feet from it. 
.
.
•
 I tried to start my car but it would 
not start. I did not get any response to my starter. 
I then got out of my car with the idea to go up to it 
and try to rock the center of gravity and topple it 
over so that I would have the evidence right there 
in black and white. I got to the front end of my 
car and stopped with no further interest in going 
further because three little "creatures" came from 
around behind and stood in front of the object. I 
think that they were looking at me. I cannot be sure 
because I did not see eyes of any sort. I know that I 
was looking at them and I was quite fascinated with 
what I saw. You might ask why, since I was willing 
to go up to them before, I did not go up to them 
now. I used what I hope was common sense. I felt 
that if they could stop my car, they could surely do 
something worse to me and I wanted to live to tell 
the story so that the people of the United States 
would know that there were things of this nature. I 
can safely say that we "looked" at each other for 
about three minutes. Then they turned and went un­
der the object and a few seconds later, the object 
started to rise slowly. After it was about one quarter 
mile high (this is only a guess) , the light went out 
and my car engine started to run again (I did not 
have to touch the starter) , and my headlights came 
on. I looked at the area that it had been sitting on 
over and could see no evidence that it had been on 
the ground. I then drove to the Todd County Sher­
iff's Office and reported what I had seen to the sher­
iff. He went back out to the spot and could not find 
anything on the road that would show they were 
on the ground. That is what happened. I know that 
this is quite a wild story but if you do not believe 
me, well, ---, that's your tough luck. 
Signed, 
J.F.T.on the road that would show they were 
on the ground. That is what happened. I know that 
this is quite a wild story but if you do not believe 
me, well, ---, that's your tough luck. 
Signed, 
J.F.T.

--- PAGE BREAK ---uld show they were 
on the ground. That is what happened. I know that 
this is quite a wild story but if you do not believe 
me, well, ---, that's your tough luck. 
Signed, 
J.F.T.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

208 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
I personally investigated this case via telephone. In 
talking with the local sheriff, I learned that, according to 
reports, several coon hunters had also seen the object. 
And there were also corroborating witnesses (four of 
them) to its takeoff. The sheriff told me that Mr. T--­
had a good reputation, and that when he came in he was 
"really scared." There were streaks of oil and water on 
the road which were reported to have been found at the 
object's landing site. It was determined that radar had 
not picked up the object but that it had reportedly been 
seen in many other towns. The sheriff ·in nearby Anoka 
stated that he had seen it. 
There is another feature here, common to CE-Ills: The 
reported "creatures" generally climb aboard and take off 
without seeming to desire communication. One would 
think that if all these cases were hoaxes, imaginative and 
detailed descriptions of the "creatures" would be even 
more bizarre than Mr. T---'s statement that "the 
creatures were brown or black, cylindrical in shape, had 
very thin 'arms' and walked on two 'fins.' " 
In any event, Blue Book closed this case with no official 
investigation . . I conducted my personal investigation of 
it and did not submit an official report to the Air Force. 
The Mysterious Baseball Cap 
Here is another Close Encounter of the Third Kind ac­
count, this time by a civilian instructor at Sheppard AFB, 
Wichita Falls, Texas. According to Blue Book, he was 
driving his car along the highway when he spotted a 
strange-looking object parked so that it blocked the outer 
portion of a road curve sign (i.e., just before a bend in 
the road) . The object had the appearance of a conven­
tional aircraft but without wings or motors. There was a 
Plexiglas-like bubble on top, similar to a B-26 canopy. 
As the observer approached, he noticed a man wearing a 
baseball cap ( ! ) enter the object by steps from the back. 
After the man had entered, the object began to rise from 
the pavement and headed in a southeasterly direction at 
approximately 700 MPH. The object had forward and aft 
lights which were very bright. As it rose from the ground, 
a high-speed-drill-type sound was heard plus a sound likesoutheasterly direction at 
approximately 700 MPH. The object had forward and aft 
lights which were very bright. As it rose from the ground, 
a high-speed-drill-type sound was heard plus a sound like

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion at 
approximately 700 MPH. The object had forward and aft 
lights which were very bright. As it rose from the ground, 
a high-speed-drill-type sound was heard plus a sound like

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
209 
that of a welding rod when an arc is struck. The object 
was reported to be seventy-five feet long, nearly eight 
feet from top to bottom, and about twelve feet wide. 
There were some kind of supports on its underside. 
After the object had disappeared from view, the wit­
ness got back into his car and drove for several miles on 
the highway. Then he stopped his car to talk with another 
individual who was parked on the side of the road. The 
second man was watching some lights along Red River, ap­
proximately five or six miles to the southeast. 
An Associated Press report appeared in the Dallas 
Times-Herald on March 27, 1966. Its statements are not 
at variance with the Air Force's, but it presents the sight­
ing from a slightly different angle: 
Acquaintances and friends call Eddie Laxson, 56, 
a "calm, solid sort." And that's what the former 
newspaperman wants to stay in the eyes of his as­
sociates. 
So when Laxson saw what might be described as 
a flying saucer-fish shape, he decided not to say 
anything about it. But then he talked to C. W. Ander­
son, a truck driver, and decided to tell his story. 
Anderson said that he also saw the strange craft. 
"It takes more courage to report a thing like this 
than it does to forget it," he told newsmen this week. 
"I know that people will say that Laxson is durned 
crazy. But that's what I saw." 
Laxson said that he was driving west on U.S. 70 
in southern Oklahoma about five A.M. Wednesday 
morning when "I saw what I first believed to be a 
huge van or a house being moved, stalled on the 
highway," he related. "I got this impression because 
the red lights had flashed on and off." [We have here 
a familiar example of the escalation of hypothesis­
an attempt to explain something first in natural 
terms.] "Since I couldn't get by it, I parked my car 
about one hundred yards away and walked towards 
the object, thinking that I might lend it some as­
sistance. As I got closer, I saw that the vehicle was 
in the shape of a perch-fish, seen from the side. I 
noticed also a plastic bubble on the front. On the 
side I made out the [letters] 'TLA' with the last twoI got closer, I saw that the vehicle was 
in the shape of a perch-fish, seen from the side. I 
noticed also a plastic bubble on the front. On the 
side I made out the [letters] 'TLA' with the last two

--- PAGE BREAK ---that the vehicle was 
in the shape of a perch-fish, seen from the side. I 
noticed also a plastic bubble on the front. On the 
side I made out the [letters] 'TLA' with the last two

--- PAGE BREAK ---

210 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
figures '38.' " He said that the figure between the 
four and the three was either a seven or a one' but 
could not be sure. 
"When a man wearing what appeared to be a me­
chanic's hat with the brim rolled up, climbed a lad­
der into the object, I thought about the camera that 
I carried in my car and turned to get it. But just 
then, the object rose from the ground with the sound 
of hissing geese or welding torch and took off to­
wards Red River to the south. 
"The episode made the hair stand up on my 
head," Laxson smiled. "I then examined the spot 
where the vehicle had been parked and saw no sign 
of scorching." 
· Laxson had made up his mind not to tell the 
story, he said, but about a mile down the road he 
came upon Anderson, standing beside the truck 
which the Snyder, Oklahoman drives for Magnum 
Oil and Gas Company. 
Anderson said he, too, had watched the strange 
flying object and that he believed that it had been 
following him. He said that be watched it in his 
rearview mirror for several miles. . 
. 
. 
Laxson, pressed by newsmen about the craft, was 
asked if it could have been a helicopter. 
He said that he got as close as fifty feet to the 
reported craft, was familiar with military aircraft, 
and that the strange vehicle "definitely was not a 
helicopter." 
The Hunter in the Tree 
This next case took place on the night of September 5, 
1964, near Cisco Grove, California. Mr. S 
, a young 
man, out on a hunting trip, became separated from his 
two companions and, as dusk was approaching, decided 
to take shelter in a tree. He strapped himself to a branch 
with his belt to keep from falling off in his sleep. 
While seeking shelter, Mr. S--- witnessed three 
flying objects, each equipped with a protruding and 
rotating light that emitted cooing noises. Upon first no­
ticing the lights, he figured them to be helicopters outelter, Mr. S--- witnessed three 
flying objects, each equipped with a protruding and 
rotating light that emitted cooing noises. Upon first no­
ticing the lights, he figured them to be helicopters out

--- PAGE BREAK ---essed three 
flying objects, each equipped with a protruding and 
rotating light that emitted cooing noises. Upon first no­
ticing the lights, he figured them to be helicopters out

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
21 1 
looking for him (once again the escalation of hypothesis 
or seeking of a natural explanation first) . Mr. Ss---­
left his tree-nest and lighted signal fires on the ridge over­
looking Granite Creek Valley. The lights then appeared 
to be three silvery objects that were circling his position. 
Two unknown objects were dropped by them in their 
descent. Within a few minutes, he heard a loud crashing 
in the underbrush below and, frightened,. he took sanctu­
ary in the lower branches of a tall pine tree. He there­
upon witnessed two humanlike individuals approaching 
his signal fires. They were garbed in silvery collarless 
suits, had unusual, protruding eyes, and communicated 
to one another via an unintelligible cooing noise. Ac­
cording to Mr. S 
, they were trying to dislodge 
him from his tree position when a third "alien," deЯ 
scribed by Mr. S--- as a "robot," appeared on the 
scene. Mr. S 
fired some arrows at the "robot" but 
failed to distract or divert any of the strange individuals. 
Then he tried lighting parts of his clothing on fire and 
throwing it at them to frighten them away. The individ­
uals had violent reactions, and at the time their craft be­
gan to ascend upwards, emitting a vapor which caused 
him to black out. The only thing that prevented his fall­
ing was his bow wedged into a crotch of the living tree. 
Regaining 
consciousness in the 
early 
dawn, . Mr. 
S 
discovered that the UFO and its occupants had 
disappeared. He rejoined his hunting companions and 
told them his incredible tale. They remarked that it prob­
ably had something to do with the meteorite that the 
government was looking for. Later on, he related the 
story to his father-in-law, who persuaded him to get in 
touch with the authorities. Mr. S 
contacted a local 
astronomy instructor who subsequently notified Mather 
AFB officials. 
According to Air Force reports, Mr. S--- was ap­
proximately twenty-seven years of age, married, and em­
ployed at a local missile production plant. He appeared 
stable and consistent in telling his story and believed that 
the incident occurred exactly as described. The actual tape 
recording of his narration of the encounter were retained 
by the Air Force, as well as the arrows he fired at the 
aliens. Blue Book labeled this one "Psychological," but 
to the best of my knowledge, never studied the tapes.of the encounter were retained 
by the Air Force, as well as the arrows he fired at the 
aliens. Blue Book labeled this one "Psychological," but 
to the best of my knowledge, never studied the tapes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---re retained 
by the Air Force, as well as the arrows he fired at the 
aliens. Blue Book labeled this one "Psychological," but 
to the best of my knowledge, never studied the tapes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

212 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
The story of a bow-and-arrow hunter, held at bay 
high in a tree, setting flame to parts of his clothing and 
tossing them down onto the heads of his assailants until 
he was half-naked, passing out because of strange fumes 
emitted by "aliens," is certainly hard to believe, unless one 
considers it within the framework of the whole parade of 
stories similar to it. Apparently, however, the local as­
tronomy instructor believed Mr. S 
sufficiently to 
report his story. Would he have done so if the witness was 
obviously unstable? Yet Blue Book persisted in calling the 
case "Psychological" for the record. 
In the next three cases, Blue Book did not do much 
better; but independent of Blue Book a number of 
dedicated civilian investigators pursued them and did the 
best they could with limited time and funds. 
Since these cases are classic and much has been writ­
ten about them, the reader will do well to examine other 
sources for a lengthier analysis of each. It is very signifi­
cant that the more detailed independent investigations of 
these three cases failed to turn up evidence which would 
discredit" them : on the contrary, closer scrutiny increased 
the "reality" of these events. Let us consider these cases 
chronologically. 
The Kelly-Hopkinsville Sighting 
This case, which occurred on August 21, 1 965, on a 
farm in Kelly, Kentucky, is often termed the Kelly-Hop­
kinsville case since Kelly is just a local cluster of houses 
seven miles from Hopkinsville. 
Although the Air Force never officially investigated 
the case, Maj. John E. Albert "formally" looked into it. 
According to his statement from the Blue Book files : 
On or about August 22nd, 1 965, at about eight 
A.M., I heard a news broadcast concerning an inci­
dent at Kelly Station, approximately six miles north 
of Hopkinsville. At the time I heard this news broad­
cast, I was at Gracey, Kentucky, on my way to 
Campbell AFB, where I am assigned for reserve 
training. I called the air base and asked if they had 
heard anything about an alleged flying saucer report.st, I was at Gracey, Kentucky, on my way to 
Campbell AFB, where I am assigned for reserve 
training. I called the air base and asked if they had 
heard anything about an alleged flying saucer report.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Kentucky, on my way to 
Campbell AFB, where I am assigned for reserve 
training. I called the air base and asked if they had 
heard anything about an alleged flying saucer report.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
213 
They said they had not and suggested that as long as 
I was in the area, I should determine if there was 
anything to this report. I immediately drove to the 
scene and located the home belonging to a Mrs. 
Lenny Langford. 
Then appear in Blue Book the following series of state­
ments which later investigators showed to be untrue: that 
Mrs. Langford belonged to the Holy Roller Church (she 
belonged to the Trinity Pentecostal, which holds conven­
tional-type services) ; that on the night of the occurrence 
she had gone to a religious meeting; that her sons, their 
wives, and some friends had become worked up into a 
frenzy, becoming very "emotionally unbalanced." All of 
these statements are completely unsubstantiated. They 
were apparently obtained from Deputy Sheriff Patts, an 
avowed skeptic, and not from any of the witnesses.* 
Most of Blue Book's information on this case comes 
from local air-base officials who took a peripheral inter­
est in it. One of the captains from Campbell Air Force 
'Base wrote a letter which closes with the following state­
ment. 
. . I would like to point out that out of all the 
cases I investigated for the commander and out of 
all the incidents that happened around Campbell 
during my three and a half years there, this inci­
dent impressed me the least and furthermore, I was 
never even remotely connected with it. It follows 
then, that my memory concerning this incident is 
rather faulty, and I am not even sure when it took 
place. Therefore, I am afraid that I have not been 
of much help and for this I apologize. 
Even though he wasn't even "remotely" connected with 
it, the case impressed him very little! 
*The Center for UFO Studies is shortly to publish a detailed 
account of this case by Isabel Davis, incorporating much of the 
investigation of the incident performed by Bud Ledwith and there­
fore made before Mrs. Langford and her family had grown thor­
oughly disgusted with curiosity-seekers. Ms. Davis took up the 
trail a year later after things had completely quieted down, and 
obtaining the cooperation of the primary witnesses, reviewed the 
entire incident from this remove in time.rs. Ms. Davis took up the 
trail a year later after things had completely quieted down, and 
obtaining the cooperation of the primary witnesses, reviewed the 
entire incident from this remove in time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---p the 
trail a year later after things had completely quieted down, and 
obtaining the cooperation of the primary witnesses, reviewed the 
entire incident from this remove in time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

214 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
My synopsis of the case is based on material obtained 
directly from Bud Ledwith, who at that time was engi­
neer-announcer at radio station WHOP in Hopkinsville, 
and who on the morning after the event interviewed all 
seven adult members of the group. What follows are a 
number of relevant passages from the notarized account 
of the investigation he made on the morning following 
the sighting: 
Seven adults were interviewed in three groups: the 
three women at noon the following morning, the 
one man who had been in the field working since 
about eight A.M. the same morning, and the other 
three men after they had returned from an ali-day 
trip to Evansville, Indiana, about eight P.M. that 
evening. The following was a correlation between 
those three separate reports. None of the involved 
groups had an opportunity to talk to each other 
about the event since around eight A.M. that morn­
ing. 
All groups agreed that the height of the creatures 
was from two and a half to three and a half feet. 
They all agreed that the head was bald, the same 
color as the body; the head was rather oblong like 
an egg. Mr. Ledwith recorded the following com­
ments from various of the witnesses : many bullets 
were fired and a twelve-gauge shotgun was used. . . . 
Whenever it was hit, it would float or fall over and 
scurry for cover . . . . The shots when striking the 
object would sound as though they were hitting a 
bucket. The objects made no sound . • . while jump­
ing or walking or falling. The undergrowth would 
rustle as the objects went through it. . . . There was 
no sound of walking. The objects were seemingly 
weightless 
as 
they would float down from 
trees 
more than fall from them. 
When they approached the house in all cases, the 
arms were raised in a "stick 'em up" fashion, and 
they would approach very slowly on their hind feet. 
When struck with bullets or a flashlight, they would 
drop to hands position and run. Since the talon curlsaised in a "stick 'em up" fashion, and 
they would approach very slowly on their hind feet. 
When struck with bullets or a flashlight, they would 
drop to hands position and run. Since the talon curls

--- PAGE BREAK ---m up" fashion, and 
they would approach very slowly on their hind feet. 
When struck with bullets or a flashlight, they would 
drop to hands position and run. Since the talon curls

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
215 
much in the same fashion as a hawk's and the 
hands were raised above the head, it apparently 
looked rather like an attack position. However, it 
may have been a friendly gesture to indicate that 
they had no weapons. They would move slowly when 
in this position towards the houses and made no 
attempt to enter. They just stood and stared until 
they were frightened away. On several occasions, all 
lights were turned out back and front and then they 
would approach from any angle. My personal ob­
servations of the people involved are this: the three 
women know exactly what they saw and accepted 
drawing number one as the objects involved. I had 
them describe, to the best of their ability, each in­
dividual detail that is in the picture. I attempted not 
to lead them . . . but rather tried to follow their 
lead in drawing it part by part but the whole opera­
tion took about an hour and a half before the final 
drawing was made. As for the three men: I had laid 
the drawing on the table before the men came in 
. . . and one of them picked up the drawing and 
exclaimed, "That's it!" We sat down to make changes 
in accordance with what they saw . . . . The two main 
differences were the shape of the face . . . and the 
husky upper body. 
The story quite naturally met with complete disbelief 
on the part of most persons, except those who knew the 
family well. There is no question that Mr. Ledwith, who 
made the only serious investigation following the event, 
firmly believed the witnesses. He could find no motive 
whatever for a hoax-the simple folk were not seeking 
publicity, and indeed suffered horribly from curiosity­
seekers, reporters, and sensation-mongers. It is also highly 
unlikely that a hoax would involve that many persons and 
a midnight dash to a police station miles away. 
Although I had no official connection with the case, I 
did make an attempt to find out whether there had been 
any traveling circuses in the area from which some mon­
keys could have escaped. The monkey hypothesis fails, 
however, if the basic testimony of the witnesses can be 
accepted. Under a barrage of gunfire from Kentuckians,in the area from which some mon­
keys could have escaped. The monkey hypothesis fails, 
however, if the basic testimony of the witnesses can be 
accepted. Under a barrage of gunfire from Kentuckians,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ich some mon­
keys could have escaped. The monkey hypothesis fails, 
however, if the basic testimony of the witnesses can be 
accepted. Under a barrage of gunfire from Kentuckians,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

216 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
over a somewhat extended period, it is unthinkable that 
at least one cadaver would not have been found. Fur­
thermore, monkeys do not float down from trees: they 
either jump or fall. And anyway, I was unable to find 
any trace of a traveling circus! 
If, then, one assumes that the event did take place as 
reported, and if the creatures had a physical reality, why 
was not one of them killed under fire? Why did they 
flip over when hit? 
Bizarre? Yes. But Close Encounters of the Third Kind 
are by 
no means infrequent. Long after the end of 
Project Blue Book, during the months of September and 
October 1973, some seventy Close Encounters of the 
Third Kind were reported in the United States alone.* 
Buő even during the Blue Book period there were many 
more CE III events reported in the press and to private 
investigators 
than were officially recognized by Blue 
Book. In UFOCAT, the computerized data bank of UFO 
cases maintained by the Center for UFO Studies, there 
appear about twenty times as many CE-lli cases as appear 
in the Blue Book files for the same period. 
A Strange New Device of You Americans 
The classic account of Father William Melchior Gill, an 
Anglican priest stationed at the mission of Boianai in Pap­
ua, New Guinea, has been published in several places. 
However, the most extensive account, by the Reverend 
R.G. Crotwell, has unfortunately not had the wide circula­
tion that it deserves. In various forms, it was privately cir­
culated and then published in Flying Saucer Review, Spe­
cial Issue No. 4, August 1 971. More recently, A.H. 
Lawson, professor of English at California State Uni­
versity at Long Beach, has published a fifty-page treatise 
on the Father Gill case, reprinting the study by Reverend 
Crutwell.** 
*See 1973: The Year of the Humanoids, by David Webb, pub­
lished by the Center for UFO Studies, 924 Chicago Ave., Evanston, 
II. 60202. 
* *This and other publications in connection with Professor Law­
son's studies are available through the CSU library or through the 
Center for UFO Studies.s, 924 Chicago Ave., Evanston, 
II. 60202. 
* *This and other publications in connection with Professor Law­
son's studies are available through the CSU library or through the 
Center for UFO Studies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Evanston, 
II. 60202. 
* *This and other publications in connection with Professor Law­
son's studies are available through the CSU library or through the 
Center for UFO Studies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
217 
The Blue Book material on the case is almost entirely 
from the Air Attache in Australia, and does contain 
much of the same material appearing in Rev. Crotwell's 
treatise. What is different is Blue Book's "attitude" to­
ward the case, which they dismiss as "misinterpretation of 
astronomical bodies" despite the fact that many of the 
observations were made under an overcast sky. The 
Australian Air Force evaluation was no more satisfying: 
"RAAF could come to no definite conclusion on the 
report, and inquiries within the United Kingdom and the 
United States had no clues or answers. As a result, these 
sightings have been classified as aerial phenomena [sic] 
but most probably they were reflections off a cloud of a 
major light source of unknown origin." 
This case has always intrigued me and I was therefore 
grateful when the opportunity presented itself to visit 
Boianai with Rev. Crutwell. We located six of the original 
witnesses and even though the sighting was by then fifteen 
years old (it took place in the latter part of June 1959 ) , 
the event was rendered in great detail. Rev. Crutwell was 
to act as my interpreter with the natives. At first, many of 
them felt that I represented a government authority, and 
would not open up; but after a while the information 
flowed freely. How accurately, I have, of course, no way 
of knowing. But from the facial expressions and gestures 
of the natives, I sensed that the event had been real as far 
as they were concerned. 
· 
The reader should bear in mind that in addition to the 
Father Gill sighting, there were sixty-one others that year 
in the same general area. The following table shows that 
the distribution of the majority according to locality: 
Boianai 
18 objects 
Baniai 
1 3 
" 
Ruabapain 
7 
" 
Dagura 
6 
" 
Dabora 
5 
" 
Giwa 
4 
" 
The rest of the sightings were fairly well distributed 
around the eastern tip of Papua. 
When the famous sightings occurred at Boianai on 
June 26 and 27, 1959, Rev. Crotwell was away on a walk-" 
The rest of the sightings were fairly well distributed 
around the eastern tip of Papua. 
When the famous sightings occurred at Boianai on 
June 26 and 27, 1959, Rev. Crotwell was away on a walk-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

218 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
ing tour of the mountain stations in the Dago Country. 
While he was away, Father Gill wrote the following let­
ter to his old friend and confidant, the Reverend D. 
Durry at St. Aidan's in Dagura: 
Dear David: 
Life is strange, isn't it? Yesterday, I wrote you a 
letter (which I still intend to send you) expressing 
opinions on UFOs. [Although this letter is not on 
file, it apparently expressed grave doubts about 
UFOs because, in conversations with Crotwell, he 
told me of his great reluctance to believe in such 
matters. Visitations of that sort are not entirely ac­
ceptable in Anglican theology, or so I am told.] Not 
less than twenty-four hours later I had changed my 
views somewhat. Last night, we at Boianai experi­
enced about four hours of UFO activity, and there 
is no doubt whatever that they are handled by be­
ings of some kind. At times it was absolutely breath­
taking 
.
•
.
•night, we at Boianai experi­
enced about four hours of UFO activity, and there 
is no doubt whatever that they are handled by be­
ings of some kind. At times it was absolutely breath­
taking 
.
•
.
•

There have been many references to Father Gill's care­
ful note-taking while the event was in progress. This in 
itself is most unusual, especially when a flashlight was 
needed to record most of his observations. But I know 
Father Gill as a painstaking, methodical, and unexcitable 
person-just the sort to stand calmly by and take notes 
at the height of the exciting action. The Blue Book files 
contain these notes, since they were officially reported to 
the project by the Air Attache in Australia. Just a few 
will suffice to highlight the action: 
6:45 P.M.-Patches of low clouds. Sighted bright 
white light from front door. 
6 œso 
-Clear over Dagura and Menape. Call 
Stephen and Eric Langford. 
6 :52 
-Stephen arrives. Confirms not a star. 
Five hundred feet? Orange? 
6 : 55 
-Sent Eric to call the people. One object 
on top moves-man? Now three men, 
moving, glowing, doing something on 
deck. Gone. 
7 :00 
-Men one and two again.

--- PAGE BREAK ---feet? Orange? 
6 : 55 
-Sent Eric to call the people. One object 
on top moves-man? Now three men, 
moving, glowing, doing something on 
deck. Gone. 
7 :00 
-Men one and two again.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7 :04 
7 : 10 
7 : 12 
7:20 
8 :28 
8 :50 
9 :46 
10:50 
1 1 :04 
DR • .J. ALLEN HYNEK 
219 
-Gone again. 
-Cloud 
ceiling 
covered 
sky; 
ceiling 
2,000 feet [and thus, no stars or plan­
ets]. Men three, four, two [appeared 
in that order]. Thin electric blue spot­
light. Men gone. Spotlight still there. 
-Men one and two appear again. Blue 
light. 
-UFO goes through clouds. 
-Clear sky here, heavy cloud over Da-
gura. UFO seen by me overhead. 
Called station people. 
-Clouds forming again. Big one sta­
tionary and larger-the original? Oth­
ers coming and going through the 
clouds. 
As 
they 
descend 
through 
clouds, light reflected like a large halo 
on the cloud-no more than 2,000 
feet; probably less (height of clouds 
is judged by height of nearby moun-
tain) . 
, 
-Overhead UFO reappears; is hovering. 
-No sign of UFO. 
-Heavy rain. 
Gill had drawings made and obtained the signatures 
of witnesses. There were thirty-eight in all, of whom 
twenty-five signed the report (the children were ex­
cluded) . Apart from Gill, the witnesses included five 
Papuan teachers and three medical assistants. 
Father Gill told me, as he has told others, of the first 
sighting of the bright light. He had just had dinner, and 
as he came out the front door of the mission house he 
glanced up at the sky and saw Venus, but in addition to 
Venus he saw a bright white light, somewhat above 
Venus. Part of the sighting was made under an overcast 
sky, with the objects ascending and descending through 
clouds, casting bright haloes on clouds as they passed 
through! 
Blue Book labeled the sighting "stars and planets." But 
how could this have been possible? In all my career as an 
astonomer, I have yet to observe stars or planets appear­
ing to descend through clouds to a height of less than twostars and planets." But 
how could this have been possible? In all my career as an 
astonomer, I have yet to observe stars or planets appear­
ing to descend through clouds to a height of less than two

--- PAGE BREAK ---But 
how could this have been possible? In all my career as an 
astonomer, I have yet to observe stars or planets appear­
ing to descend through clouds to a height of less than two

--- PAGE BREAK ---

220 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
thousand feet, illuminating the clouds as they did so. In 
addition, Father Gill estimated the height of the disc to be 
three to four hundred feet, and its apparent diameter about 
five inches at arm's length. Teacher Stephen said that if 
he put his band out closed, it would cover about half of 
it. I have yet to see Venus appearing larger than my fist. 
Father Gill's account continues: 
As we watched it, men came out from this object 
and appeared on the top of it, on what appeared to 
be a deck on top of the huge disc. There were four 
men in all, occasionally two, then one, then three, 
then four: we noted the various times the men ap­
peared. And then later on all those witnesses who 
were quite sure that our records were right, and that 
they agreed [they] saw the men at the same time that 
I did were able to sign their names as witnesses of 
what we assumed to be human activity or beings of 
some sort on the object itself. 
The next night was even more interesting! One of the 
natives, Annie Laurie Borowa, ran into Father Gill's study 
in great excitement and asked him to come outdoors. The 
sighting he made then rules out Venus even more com­
pletely. Gill's first notes were at 6:02 P.M. when the sun, 
close to the equator, would not yet have set, although it 
would have been behind the mountains. Under no circum­
stances would Venus have been bright enough in the day­
time sky to have caused all that excitement among the 
natives. Again we have Gill's own words: 
. . . We stood in the open to watch. Although the 
sun had set (behind the mountains) , it was quite light 
for the following fifteen minutes. We watched figures 
appear on top-four of them-there was no doubt 
that they were human. This is possibly the same 
object that I took to be the "mother ship" last night. 
Two smaller UFOs were seen at the sarne time, 
stationary, one over the hills, west, and one overhead. 
On the large one, two of the figures .seemed to be 
doing something in the center of the deck-they 
were occasionally bending over and raising their arms 
as though adjusting or setting up something. Onethe large one, two of the figures .seemed to be 
doing something in the center of the deck-they 
were occasionally bending over and raising their arms 
as though adjusting or setting up something. One

--- PAGE BREAK ---f the figures .seemed to be 
doing something in the center of the deck-they 
were occasionally bending over and raising their arms 
as though adjusting or setting up something. One

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
221 
figure seemed to be standing, looking down on us ( a 
group of about a dozen) . 
Now comes the climax. Father Gill stretched his arm 
above his head and waved. To his surprise, the figure 
waved back. One of his companions waved both arms 
over his head and then the two outside figures did the 
same. There was more waving and now all four of the 
beings seemed to wave back! 
There seemed to be no doubt that our movements 
were answered. All the mission boys made audible 
gasps. 
As dark was beginning to close in, I sent Eric for 
a torch and directed a series of long dashes towards 
the UFO. After a minute or two of this, the UFO 
apparently acknowledged by making several waving 
motions back and forth (in a sideways direction, like 
a pendulum). The waving by us was repeated and this 
was followed by more passes with the torch and then 
the UFO began to become slowly bigger, apparently 
coming in our direction. It ceased after perhaps half 
a minute and came on no · further. After a further 
two or three minutes, the figures apparently lost 
interest in us for they disappeared below deck. 
Father Gill also indicated that the whole group had 
begun to shout and to make beckoning motions to the 
men to descend, but there was absolutely no response, 
other than that already noted. Finally, there were no 
sounds whatever emanating from either the beings or their 
machine. 
What Father Gill's notes state next has caused much 
controversy. At 6 : 30 P.M., he went in to dinner. How is 
it, skeptics ask, that in the midst of all this commotion, a 
person could calmly go in to dinner? One would really 
have to know Father Gill to understand this. He is a calm 
man-a man who takes things in his stride: furthermore, 
this was the second night of apparitions and he had 
watched for four and one-half hours the night before. 
When I spoke with Father Gill in Melbourne, I did, bow­
ever, ask him about this. His response was : "Looking back, 
I sometimes wonder about this myself. I thought, too,half hours the night before. 
When I spoke with Father Gill in Melbourne, I did, bow­
ever, ask him about this. His response was : "Looking back, 
I sometimes wonder about this myself. I thought, too,

--- PAGE BREAK ---before. 
When I spoke with Father Gill in Melbourne, I did, bow­
ever, ask him about this. His response was : "Looking back, 
I sometimes wonder about this myself. I thought, too,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

222 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
that it might be just a new device of you Americans." 
According to his notes, he came out from. dinner at 
7 P.M. and the UFO was still present, although it · appeared 
somewhat smaller. Then, everyone went into church for 
evensong. This fact also seems incredible to skeptics; but, 
for the Boianai group, going in to dinner and to evensong 
was a part of a rigid daily routine, something one did 
without question. 
I am reminded of a letter I received from an English 
schoolboy many years ago, describing a typical Daylight 
Disc, which he stated came down in a sort of "falling leaf 
motion." It apparently came down too slowly, for he wrote: 
"And then it was time for tea"-and he went inside, 
leaving the disc to its own devices. Perhaps we shall never 
be a,ble to account for human behavior, especially the Bri­
tish! 
After evensong, the visibility was poor, the sky was 
covered with clouds, and no UFOs were in sight. At 1 0:40 
P.M., Gill's notes read : "A terrific explosion just outside 
the mission house. Nothing seen." According to Crotwell's 
account, the explosion made Gill jump out of bed and 
gave him a tremendous shock. Remembering the UFO, he 
rushed out to see what had happened, but saw nothing 
unusual. The explosion, however, had awakened everyone 
on the station. Whether this "penetrating, ear-splitting,. 
explosion had anything to do with the UFO is obviously 
conjectural. It was just one additional item to be added to 
the bizarre catalogue of events. 
The five dozen or so separate events in Papua in 1 959 
perhaps lie too far back in time for any reliable documen­
tation now. Undoubtedly much data of potential scientific 
value was lost by the refusal of the military to conduct 
any sort of scientific investigation when the events were 
fresh. 
There is, however, one humorous sidelight: At precisely 
the same time that the events were occurring at Boianai on 
the 26th, a trader from Samurai, Ernie Evenett, saw an 
object approach from the north and heading northeast. It 
was greenish and very bright, with a trail of white flame 
behind it. It looked like a shooting star. 
It descended quite close to me, appearing larger and 
larger and slowing down until it hovered about fivenish and very bright, with a trail of white flame 
behind it. It looked like a shooting star. 
It descended quite close to me, appearing larger and 
larger and slowing down until it hovered about five

--- PAGE BREAK ---, with a trail of white flame 
behind it. It looked like a shooting star. 
It descended quite close to me, appearing larger and 
larger and slowing down until it hovered about five

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
223 
hundred feet above me at an angle of about forty-five 
degrees. The light on it faded out except for the port­
holes which were brightly illuminated. The object had 
a silhouette of a rugby football, and had a kind of 
ring or band around it with four or five semi-dome 
portholes below the band on the side I could see. 
On the next day, Mr. Evenett crossed over to Boianai on 
business and the natives asked him if he had seen the 
American Air Force last night. They said, "We did at 
Boianai." 
Apparently others besides Father Gill felt that the 
Americans had something to do with what they had ob· 
served (and thus it was safe to go to dinner) . Unfortunate­
ly, the Air Force cannot take credit for having a craft 
that can hover a few hundred feet above the ground, close 
enough for observers to make out individual men-and 
yet be completely silent! 
The Socorro Case 
For this next case I was sent by Blue Book to Socorro, 
New Mexico, as an official investigator. Despite my strong 
desire to find a natural explanation for the sighting (I was 
still unconvinced about the reality of CE-IIls) , I could 
find none; the case is therefore listed in the Blue Book 
files as "Unidentified." 
The Socorro case was basically a single-witness sighting 
(although several other more distant witnesses to the ob­
ject were reported) , but the witness was a policeman whose 
character and record were unimpeachable. Physical traces 
were left on the ground; and, as I personally observed, 
some of the greasewood bushes in the immediate vicinity 
had been charred. Even Maj. Quintanilla, then head of 
Blue Book, was convinced that an actual physical craft 
had been present. He attempted, however, to establish that 
it had been some sort of test vehicle, perhaps a lunar 
landing module. All of his efforts (and they were indeed 
considerable) failed to give any indication that a man­
made craft had landed at Socorro on the afternoon in 
question. 
The event took place on the afternoon of April 24,forts (and they were indeed 
considerable) failed to give any indication that a man­
made craft had landed at Socorro on the afternoon in 
question. 
The event took place on the afternoon of April 24,

--- PAGE BREAK ---indeed 
considerable) failed to give any indication that a man­
made craft had landed at Socorro on the afternoon in 
question. 
The event took place on the afternoon of April 24,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

224 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
1 964. By the time I arrived in Socorro, several days had 
passed and curiosity-seekers had played their part; but 
fortunately, the very early investigators, on the scene within 
hours, had placed small rocks around, the four "landing 
marks," so I was able to examine them in much their 
original form. 
· 
By a happy train of circumstances, an FBI agent was 
in the police station on some other business when the 
incident was reported. He called the executive officer at 
White Sands Proving Grounds, who in turn called Capt. 
Holder, the up-range commander of the installation. The 
presence of the FBI agent probably spurred the Socorro 
police and the White Sands personnel to treat the matter 
seriously from the start. Lonnie Zamora, the police officer 
who was the principal witness, was immediately inter­
viewed and a report written by one o'clock the next morn­
ing. Photographs were taken and measurements made with 
a tapemeasure. 
There was very little more that I could do technically, 
so I concentrated my efforts on exploring the human side 
of the matter, checking out as closely as I could (then 
and during several later visits) the character and relation­
ships of the persons involved. I was rather hoping, at the 
time, that I could somehow invalidate Lonnie Zamora's 
testimony, but I was completely unable to do this. He 
came through as a solid citizen, generally well liked and of 
a practical, down-to-earth nature, thus making his partici­
pation in a hoax seem extremely unlikely. 
Of all the Close Encounters of the Third Kind, this is 
the one that most clearly suggests a "nuts and bolts" 
physical craft along with accompanying noises and propul­
sion. Zamora's statement, made within a few hours of the 
sighting, was as follows: 
About 5:45 P.M., April 24, 1 964, while in Socorro 
Two police car, I started to chase a car due south 
from west side of the courthouse. Car was apparent­
ly speeding and was about three blocks in front. 
At point on Old Rodeo Street, near George Murillo 
residence, the chased car was going ahead towards 
the rodeo grounds. Car chased was a new black 
Chevrolet .
.
.d was about three blocks in front. 
At point on Old Rodeo Street, near George Murillo 
residence, the chased car was going ahead towards 
the rodeo grounds. Car chased was a new black 
Chevrolet .
.
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ocks in front. 
At point on Old Rodeo Street, near George Murillo 
residence, the chased car was going ahead towards 
the rodeo grounds. Car chased was a new black 
Chevrolet .
.
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
225 
At this time I heard a roar and saw a flame in 
the sky to the southwest some distance away-possibly 
one-half mile or a mile. Came to mind that a dynamite 
shack in that area had blown up, decided to leave 
chased car go. Flame was bluish and sort of orange, 
too. Could not tell size of flame. Sort of motionless 
flame. Slowly descending. Was still driving car and 
could not pay too much attention to the flame. It 
was a narrow type of flame. It was like a "streamed 
down" -a funnel type-narrower at the top than at 
bottom. Flame possibly three degrees or so in width­
not wide. 
Flame was about twice as wide at bottom than 
top, and about four times as high as top was wide. 
Did not notice any object at top, did not notice if 
top of flame was level. Sun was to west and did not 
help glasses. Could not see bottom of flame because it 
was behind the hill. 
No smoke noted. Noted some "commotion" at bot­
tom-dust? Possibly from windy day-wind was blow­
ing hard. Clear, sunny sky otherwise-just a few 
clouds scattered over area. 
Noise was a roar, not a blast. Not like a jet. 
Changed from high frequency to low frequency and 
then stopped. Roar lasted possibly ten seconds, I 
was going towards it at the time on a rough gravel 
road. Saw flames same color as best I recall. Sound 
distinctly from high to low until disappeared. Windows 
both were down. No other spectators noted-no traffic 
except the car in front. Car in front might have 
heard it but possibly did not see it because car in 
front was too close to hill in front to see flame. 
After the roar and flame, did not note anything 
while going up the somewhat steep, rough hill-had 
to back up and try again. two more times. Got up 
about halfway first time, wheels started skidding (roar 
still going on) , had to back down and try again before 
made the hill. Hill about sixty feet long, fairly steep 
and with loose gravel and rock. While beginning 
third time, noise and flame not noted. 
After got to top, traveled slowly on the gravel road 
westwardly. Noted nothing for a while-for possiblysteep 
and with loose gravel and rock. While beginning 
third time, noise and flame not noted. 
After got to top, traveled slowly on the gravel road 
westwardly. Noted nothing for a while-for possibly

--- PAGE BREAK ---e gravel and rock. While beginning 
third time, noise and flame not noted. 
After got to top, traveled slowly on the gravel road 
westwardly. Noted nothing for a while-for possibly

--- PAGE BREAK ---

226 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
ten or fifteen seconds. Went slow, looking around for 
the shack-did not recall exactly where the. dynamite 
shack was. 
Suddenly noted a shiny type object to south about 
one hundred fifty to two hundred yards. It was off the 
road. My green sunglasses over prescription. 
At 
first glance, stopped. It looked at first like a car 
turned upside down. Thought some kids might have 
turned it over. Saw two people in white coveralls very 
close to object. One of these persons seemed to tum 
and look straight at my car and seemed startled­
seemed to · quickly jump somewhat. 
At this time I began moving my car towards them 
quickly with the idea to help. Had stopped only about 
a couple of seconds. Objects were like aluminum­
was whitish against the mesa background, not chrome. 
Seemed like oval in shape and I, at first glance, 
took it to be an overturned white car. Car appeared 
turned up like standing on radiator or trunk, at this 
first glance. 
The only time I saw these two persons was when I 
had stopped for possibly two seconds or so, to glance 
at the object. I don't recall noting any particular 
shape or possibly any hats or headgear. Those persons 
appeared normal in shape-but possibly they were 
small adults or large kids. Then paid attention to road 
while driving. Radioed to sheriff's office, "Socorro Two 
to Socorro. Possible 10-40 [accident]. I'll be 10-6 
[busy]." Out of car, checking the car down in the 
arroyo. 
Stopped car, was still talking on radio, started to 
get out; mike fell down, reached back to pick up 
mike then replaced mike in slot and got out of car. 
Hardly turned around from car when heard roar 
(was not exactly a blast) , very loud roar-at that 
close, it was real loud. Not like a jet-know what 
jets sound like. Started low frequency quickly, then 
rose in frequency (towards higher tone) and in loud­
ness-loud to very loud. At same time as roar, saw 
flame. Flame was under the object. Object was start­
ing to go straight up-slowly up. Object slowly rose 
straight up. Flame was light blue and at bottom was 
sort of orange-colored. From this angle, saw whatlame was under the object. Object was start­
ing to go straight up-slowly up. Object slowly rose 
straight up. Flame was light blue and at bottom was 
sort of orange-colored. From this angle, saw what

--- PAGE BREAK ---bject. Object was start­
ing to go straight up-slowly up. Object slowly rose 
straight up. Flame was light blue and at bottom was 
sort of orange-colored. From this angle, saw what

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
227 
might be the side of object {not end as first noted) . 
Difficult to describe flame. Thought, from roar, it 
might blow up. Flame might have come from under­
side of object, at middle, possibly a four feet area­
very rough guess. Cannot describe flames further 
except blue and orange. No smoke except dust in 
immediate area. 
Object was oval in shape. It was smooth-no 
windows or doors. As roar started, it was still on or 
near the ground. Noted red lettering of some type. 
Insignia about two and a half feet wide, guess. Was 
in middle of object like drawing. Object still like 
aluminum-white. 
Can't tell how long saw object second time (the 
"close" time) . [Zamora was at this time seventy-five 
to one hundred feet from the object itself.] Possibly 
seconds-just guess-from time got out of car, glanced 
at object, jumped over edge of hill, then got back 
to car and radioed as object disappeared. 
As my mike fell as I got out of the car, at scene 
area, I heard about two or three loud thumps, like 
someone hammering or shutting a door hard. These 
thumps were possibly a second or less apart. This was 
just before the roar. The persons were not seen when 
I got up to the scene area. 
As soon as saw flames and heard roar, turned 
away, ran from object but did turn head towards 
object. Bumped leg on car, back fender area. Car 
facing southwest. 
After fell by car and glasses fell off, kept running 
towards north with car between me and the object 
(for protection in case object exploded) . Glanced 
back a couple of times. Noticed that subject arose 
to about level of car, about twenty to twenty-five feet 
(guess). (Car was appreciably above object which 
was in a gully.) Took, I guess, about six seconds 
from when object started to rise and I glanced back. 
I guess I ran about halfway to where I ducked down, 
just over edge of hill. I guess I had run about twenty­
five feet when I glanced back and saw the object 
about level with the car and it appeared directly 
over the place where it rose from. 
I was still running and I ducked just over the hillout twenty­
five feet when I glanced back and saw the object 
about level with the car and it appeared directly 
over the place where it rose from. 
I was still running and I ducked just over the hill

--- PAGE BREAK ---t when I glanced back and saw the object 
about level with the car and it appeared directly 
over the place where it rose from. 
I was still running and I ducked just over the hill

--- PAGE BREAK ---

228 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
-1 stopped because I did not hear the roar. I was 
scared of the roar, I bad planned to continue running 
down the hill. I turned around towards the ground, 
covering my face with my arms. Being that there was 
no roar, I looked up, and I saw the object going away 
from me in a southwest direction. When the roar 
stopped, heard nothing. It appeared to go at the same 
height and in a straight line, possibly ten to fifteen 
feet from the ground, and it cleared the dynamite 
shack by about three feet. The shack was about eight 
feet high. Object was traveling very fast. It seemed 
to rise up and take off immediately cross-country. I 
ran back to my car and as I ran back, I kept an eye 
on the object. I picked up my glasses (I left the 
S\.mglasses on the ground) , got into the car, and 
radioed to Ned Lopez, the radio operator to "look 
out of the window to see if you can see an object." 
He asked, "What is it?" I answered, "It looks like a bal­
loon." I don't know if he saw it. If Ned looked out 
of his window which faces north, he couldn't have 
seen it. I did not tell him at the moment which 
window to look out. 
As I was calling Ned, I could still see the object. 
The object seemed to lift up slowly and to get small 
in the distance very fast. It seemed to just clear Box 
Canyon or Six Mile Canyon Mountain. It disappeared 
as it went over the mountains. It had no flame whatso­
ever as it was traveling over the ground and made no 
smoke or noise. 
Just before Sergeant Chavez got to the scene, I got 
my pencil and drew a picture of the insignia. 
• 
• 
. 
Several days later, Zamora and I went to the site alone, 
and he kindly re-enacted the entire train of events. He 
showed me just how he had run from the scene, where he 
had hit the car and knocked off his glasses, and how he 
had crouched with his arm across his eyes, glancing back­
ward to see what was happening. 
I examined the site carefully and took photographs. I 
also made a point of wandering pretty far afield to see if I 
could spot similar "landing marks" in the area. If there 
had been any, they might have indicated that the marksand took photographs. I 
also made a point of wandering pretty far afield to see if I 
could spot similar "landing marks" in the area. If there 
had been any, they might have indicated that the marks

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
229 
were attributable to cattle or some other "natural" cause. 
But there were no other similar marks anywhere. The 
marks themselves were only two or three inches deep, 
sandy, clayed, and bard-packed, and they appeared to be 
scooped out, as though a heavy mechanical device had 
slid rather gently into position. 
Maybe there is a simple, natural explanation for the 
Socorro incident, but having made a complete study of the 
events, I do not think so. It is my opinion that a real, 
physical event occurred on the outskirts of Socorro that 
afternoon of April 24, 1964. 
Because close encounters of the third Kind are so odd­
sounding I suppose it is tempting to dismiss the many 
hundreds that have been reported as hoaxes or hallucina­
tions. But there is very little evidence to support this 
contrived solution and much more evidence to indicate 
that we are dealing with a most real phenomenon of unde­
termined origin.

--- PAGE BREAK ---But there is very little evidence to support this 
contrived solution and much more evidence to indicate 
that we are dealing with a most real phenomenon of unde­
termined origin.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 0============= 
UFOTOS: A PICTURE IS NOT 
NECESSARILY WORTH A THOUSAND 
WORDS 
This is not a trick photograph, because I don't know 
how yet. 
-from a young boy's letter to Blue Book 
There are hundreds of photographs of purported UFOs in 
the declassified files of Project Blue Book, but not one 
that the Air Force was ever willing to admit as evidence 
that UFOs were real. A photograph, of course, is just a 
UFO report, but in a different form, and like a written 
report depends entirely on the credibility of the persons 
offering it. And just · as the Air Force refused to accept 
any written report as evidence of a "genuine UFO," regard­
less of the credibility of the witness, so they refused to 
consider seriously any purported UFO photograph. 
The majority of the photographs in the Blue Book files 
are indeed obvious hoaxes or misidentifications. Some look 
remarkably like hamburgers, padres' hats, inverted teacups 
and saucers and plates tossed into the air, lenticular clouds, 
chicken brooders with light bulbs or halved Ping-Pong 
balls attached to their undersides, and a whole host of other 
familiar (and some not so familiar) objects. In many cases 
that is exactly what they are-photographs of familiar 
objects tricked up by hoaxers to make them appear to be 
strange-looking "flying saucers." 
There arc other photographs in the files that are not 
deliberate fakes. They are real photographs of real objects. 
However, in many cases, the real objects photographed 
were aircraft, balloons, meteors, stars, double exposures of 
the moon, a living-room light fixture, streetlights, or auto 
headlights which the photographer honestly mistook for

--- PAGE BREAK ---were aircraft, balloons, meteors, stars, double exposures of 
the moon, a living-room light fixture, streetlights, or auto 
headlights which the photographer honestly mistook for

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
23 1 
UFOs at the time the film was shot, or after it was devel­
oped and the UFOs were "discovered." 
There are still other photos of UFOs in the Blue Book 
files that are . . . well, what are they? One can only 
judge for one's self. While the Air Force could not prove 
that all UFO photographs it received were fakes (this was 
particularly true of those taken by military personnel on 
duty), double exposures, scratches or chemical blobs on 
negatives, light reflections from birds, balloons, 
air­
craft or other objects, neither could anyone prove to 
the Air Force's satisfaction that the photographs they 
had taken were anything out of the ordinary. 
Which Craft in Salem, Massachusetts? 
One classic "UFO" photograph that has made the 
rounds in just about every magazine and book on the 
subject (including a fall 1976 pulp magazine, and a book 
on Project Blue Book published in late 1976) is the famous 
Salem, Massachusetts, UFO lights, taken in 1952 by an 
official Coast Guard photographer. Unfortunately, not one 
of these publications has, to my knowledge, provided any 
significant details on the circumstances surrounding the 
photograph, other than that it was taken at a Coast Guard 
station by a Coast Guard photographer. 
The following is the report of the investigation into the 
photograph, made by R.G. Eastman, Treasury Depart­
ment, U.S. Coast Guard, dated July 17, 1952: 
This investigation was predicated on information re­
ceived from the CO, Coast· Guard Air Station, Salem, 
Massachusetts, concerning unidentified airborne ob­
jects sighted near the Air Station. 
--- (292-624) SN, official photographer for the 
Air Station, was interviewed at 0845, 17 July 1952, 
in the photo lab at the Air Station. 
Statement enclosed. 
--- (273-206) HMI, was interviewed in the 
sick bay at the Air Station at 0930, 17 July 1952. 
Statement enclosed. 
The above are the only known eyewitnesses tothe Air Station. 
Statement enclosed. 
--- (273-206) HMI, was interviewed in the 
sick bay at the Air Station at 0930, 17 July 1952. 
Statement enclosed. 
The above are the only known eyewitnesses to

--- PAGE BREAK ---tatement enclosed. 
--- (273-206) HMI, was interviewed in the 
sick bay at the Air Station at 0930, 17 July 1952. 
Statement enclosed. 
The above are the only known eyewitnesses to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

232 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
subject objects. No factual information could be 
learned concerning the size, shape, altitude, speed, 
sound or direction of motion, of the objects. 
All personnel interviewed or questioned were in­
formed that any information concerning the objects 
was "sECRET" and should not be discussed with any­
one without permission of the CO. 
Is/ ---
Blue Book's findings were as follows: 
On 16 July 1952 a photograph of four objects was 
taken by the USCG station photoаapher at Salem, 
Massachusetts. The photograph was submitted to 
A TIC for analysis and the analysis was completed on 
1 , August 1952. Analysis was made from the original 
negative which was returned to the Coast Guard at 
their request. The results of this analysis indicated 
that the photo was a hoax. Extensive photographs 
were taken under similar conditions. Failure of the 
light source to cast reflections on the highly polished 
cars below indicated that the light was not outside 
and it was assumed by the analyst at the time that the 
photo was a double exposure and for this reason a 
hoax. A subsequent examination of this photo was 
made in October 1963 and the following analysis is 
indicated as a more probable cause. 
The photo was taken through a window with a 
4/5 Busch Pressman Camera ( 135 MM F4.7 Raptar 
lens with Rapax shutter, loaded with 4/5 Super XX 
cut film) . The photographers observed several lights 
which seemed to be wavering. He observed the lights 
for 5 or 6 seconds and grabbed the camera, which had 
been on a nearby table. · The focus was adjusted to 
infinity. The photographer pulled the slide in prepara­
tion for the picture when he noticed that the lights 
had dimmed. He assumed at the time that the object 
he saw was a reflection. He ran out of the room to 
get an additional witness, and upon returning noticed 
that the lights were again brilliant. When they went 
to the window the lights were gone. He again stated 
!hat perhaps some sort of refraction or ground re­
flection could possibly account for the lights. 
The following points are deemed pertinent to analy-he window the lights were gone. He again stated 
!hat perhaps some sort of refraction or ground re­
flection could possibly account for the lights. 
The following points are deemed pertinent to analy-

--- PAGE BREAK ---were gone. He again stated 
!hat perhaps some sort of refraction or ground re­
flection could possibly account for the lights. 
The following points are deemed pertinent to analy-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
233 
sis. The camera was focused on infinity and the 
picture taken through a window. As the witness ap­
proached the window, the objects dimmed, as he re­
turned to his point of initial observation and at the 
second observation as he re-entered the room the 
lights were again brilliant. The objects as photo­
graphed appear fuzzy and out of focus. The cars 
and buildings outside are sharply outlined. The win­
dow frame inside the building is out of focus. All four 
objects have the same outline and general configura­
tion, in spite of the blurring. 
Conclusion : It is believed that the photos repre­
sent light reflections from an interior source (proba­
bly the ceiling lights) on the window through which 
the photo was taken. With the camera set on infinity 
the window would be more out of focus than the 
lights. The lights would still be out of focus since the 
distance from the lights to the window and back to 
the camera lens would still be shorter than the dis­
tance required for a clear picture with the lens setting 
on infinity. The objects outside the building would be 
in focus" The apparant [sic] brightness of the reflec­
tion would decrease as the photographer approached 
the window. The initial photo analysis indicating the 
magnitude of the light and substantiation of fact that 
the light source was not external is correct. There is 
no indication of any attempt to perpetrate a hoax. 
The photo received is similar to many others taken 
through windows which have been confirmed as reflec­
tions of an interior light source. Had the camera been 
focused for a shorter distance, the outline of the 
interior light source would have been sharper. It is 
believed that there is sufficient evidence to substan­
tiate the evaluation of this photo as reflections of 
internal light sources. 
My opinion on this widely publicized case may sur­
prise you : I'd agree with Blue Book's evaluation-that the 
photograph . was nothing more than misidentification of a 
light reflection in a window of the photo lab at the Coast 
Guard Station. But for some unknown reason, Blue Book 
never publicized its findings. This was a great chance tohan misidentification of a 
light reflection in a window of the photo lab at the Coast 
Guard Station. But for some unknown reason, Blue Book 
never publicized its findings. This was a great chance to

--- PAGE BREAK ---n of a 
light reflection in a window of the photo lab at the Coast 
Guard Station. But for some unknown reason, Blue Book 
never publicized its findings. This was a great chance to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

234 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
capitalize on their "it can't be, therefore it isn't" theory; 
yet they chose not to. Why? 
We may never know. But one thing we can learn from 
this particular case is that photographs of lights purported 
to be UFOs cannot be taken at face value. Indeed, in my 
opinion, they cannot be taken at any value as UFO evi­
dence without meeting the harshest criteria. 
As a scientist, I have been extremely suspicious of any 
"UFO photographs" that have been submitted to me. I am 
doubly wary of those in the Blue Book files, since the 
circumstances surrounding many of them were never 
investigated by Blue Book at all. The adage "a picture is 
worth a thousand words" simply does not apply when it 
comes to proving the reality of UFOs based on photo­
graphs , in the Blue Book files. 
In my book, The UFO Experience, I set down my own 
criteria for judging UFO photographs. They bear repeating 
here. A purported photograph of a UFO (particularly a 
Daylight Disc, because they are quite simple to fake) 
should not be taken seriously unless the following condi­
tions are satisfied: (1 ) there are reputable witnesses to the 
actual taking of the picture, and those witnesses also sighted 
the object visually at the time; (2) the original negative(s) 
is available for study, since no adequate analysis can be 
made from prints alone; (3) the camera is available for 
study; and ( 4) the owner of the photograph is willing to 
testify under oath that the photograph is, to the best of 
his knowledge, genuine, that is, that the photograph shows 
what it purports to-a UFO. (The last condition need not 
apply if the photograph in question is accompanied by 
several independently taken photographs, preferably from 
significantly different locations.) 
It is important 'to remember that in the case of UFO 
photographs, the photograph is no more reliable than the 
photographer. Thus, even when all of the above conditions 
have been met, the most positive statement that one can 
make about such photographs is that while the probability 
is quite high that they are genuine, the physical reality of 
the UFO(s) photographed cannot be established with 
absolute certainty. 
There are no cases in the Blue Book files which meet 
the above stringent conditions. What we do find in theysical reality of 
the UFO(s) photographed cannot be established with 
absolute certainty. 
There are no cases in the Blue Book files which meet 
the above stringent conditions. What we do find in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---he UFO(s) photographed cannot be established with 
absolute certainty. 
There are no cases in the Blue Book files which meet 
the above stringent conditions. What we do find in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
235 
files are several cases that meet nearly all of the conditions. 
Let's examine some of them. 
Navy vs. Air Force 
Officer Delbert C. Newhouse, a Navy chief photographer 
with over one thousand hours of aerial photography mis­
sions under his belt, was driving his wife and two children 
from Washington, D.C., to Portland, Oregon, on July 2, 
1952. They had just driven through Tremonton, ·utah, a 
small town north of Salt Lake City, when Mrs. Newhouse 
spotted a group of unusual objects in the sky. Alerted by 
his wife, Newhouse pulled to the side of U.S. Highway 
30S, parked his car, and got out to take a better look. It 
took him only seconds to realize that he was witnessing a 
most remarkable sight: A dozen or more disc-shaped ob­
jects were cavorting around in the sky in loose formation 
at about 10,000 feet, and they were like no aircraft he had 
ever seen or photographed before. 
Grabbing his 16mm Bell & Howell movie camera from 
his car, Newhouse quickly shot 1 ,200 frames of film of the 
shiny objects (about 75 seconds in duration) , managing 
to get a clear shot of one of the objects departing to the 
east, as the others in the group disappeared over the 
western horizon. 
Probably no UFO photographs ever underwent more 
rigorous and extensive analysis and evaluation by the 
military. (Even so, as we shall see, there were serious 
gaps in their investigation.) The U.S. Navy photographic 
laboratory at Anacostia, Maryland, invested more than 
1 ,000 man-hours analyzing every facet of the films, and 
the Air Force photo lab at Wright-Patterson Air Force 
Base-home of Project Blue Book-also subjected them to 
careful study and evaluation. The Navy analysts concluded 
they were photographs of intelligently controlled vehicles 
-not aircraft-but stopped short of describing them as 
space vehicles. Ultimately, the Air Force claimed the film 
images might have been light reflected from a flock of 
seagulls; they classified the Tremonton UFOs as "possible 
birds." 
How probable was the seagull theory? According to theorce claimed the film 
images might have been light reflected from a flock of 
seagulls; they classified the Tremonton UFOs as "possible 
birds." 
How probable was the seagull theory? According to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---m 
images might have been light reflected from a flock of 
seagulls; they classified the Tremonton UFOs as "possible 
birds." 
How probable was the seagull theory? According to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

236 
THE IITNEK UFO REPORT 
following Memorandum for the Record of February 1 1, 
1 953, from Blue Book files, not very probable at all. This 
memo is interesting from another standpoint in that it 
reflects, once again, the Air Force's fear of public disclo­
sure that its investigations of UFOs were not always con­
ducted with the greatest scientific care. Here is the memo: 
1 . During a trip to Washington, 
D.C., 
on 29 
January 1953 Capt. Ruppelt was informed that the 
press had learned about the Tremonton, Utah, movies 
and that Mr. AI Chop of the Office of Public Informa­
tion, 
Department 
of 
Defense, 
Col. 
Teabert 
of 
AFOIN-2, and others believe that the movies should 
be released in accordance with the promise made this 
summer to the press that no information on the sub­
ject of Unidentified Flying Objects would be withheld. 
Capt. Ruppelt agreed with this point and it was de­
cided that the factual data on this incident would be 
sent to Capt. Harry B. Smith, AFOIN-2A2, who 
would pass it on to Mr. Chop who in turn would 
write the release. The telecon also requested that the 
release be forwarded to A TIC for coordination. The 
subject telecon is TT1 5, 5 Feb 53, ltem 2. 
2. On 9 Feb 1953 Mr. Chop called that he had 
written the release and showed it to Col. Smith of 
AFOIN-2A. They believe that there would be a 
question asked as to the findings of the Air Force and 
Navy photo labs and that these reports would have 
to be released. If they weren't released, the press 
would begin to thisk they contained some "hot" ma­
terial and that the ATIC concurred that this could 
happen, and that if it did happen it could create a 
great deal of excitement. 
3. The Air Force lab analysis concludes that: 
a. They are reasonably certain that the brightness 
of the images on the film exceeds that of any 
bird. 
b. The objects are not spherical balloons. 
c. The objects could be aircraft. (Note: the ab­
sence of sound almost rules out aircraft. Aircraft 
in a "dogfight" can be heard at almost any altitude. 
In addition, the area of the sighting was not aThe objects could be aircraft. (Note: the ab­
sence of sound almost rules out aircraft. Aircraft 
in a "dogfight" can be heard at almost any altitude. 
In addition, the area of the sighting was not a

--- PAGE BREAK ---e aircraft. (Note: the ab­
sence of sound almost rules out aircraft. Aircraft 
in a "dogfight" can be heard at almost any altitude. 
In addition, the area of the sighting was not a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dʕ J, ALLEN HYNEK 
237 
restricted air space area and it is doubtful that such 
flying would be carried out in the airways.) 
The Navy report says the objects are: 
a. Self-luminous or light sources. 
b. Could not be aircraft or balloons. 
c. No bird is known to reflect enouib light to 
cause the · images shown on the film. 
It can be noted that the Navy people deduced this 
on each frame. This required about 1 ,000 man­
hours. It was brought out by two astronomers who 
heard a Navy briefing on the analysis of the 
movies 
that the 
method used to measure the 
brightness of each spot was wrong, therefore, the 
results of the entire study were wrong. 
4. The subject of the release was discus.sed with 
Lt. Col. Johnston and Col. McDuffy and it was de­
cided that the movies would be released without com­
ment as to what they were and hope that no questions 
were asked about the Navy report. This is a "calcu­
lated'' risk of another big "flap." [Italics added.] 
5. The other alternative is to quickly get more 
data on the subject. Several things can be done and 
are listed below in the order of how soon they could 
be accomplished: 
a. As far as gulls are concerned the big question 
is, how much light will be reflected? Can you see a 
gull reflecting light and not recognize that it is a 
gull? To check this it would be necessary to go to 
a location where you have a lot of gulls and bright 
sunlight and take movies with a 3-inch lens. It 
would be necessary to know how far the gulls were 
away each time a movie was taken. At this time 
of the year Florida is the only place where sunshine 
and gulls can be assured. 
b. Using special funds, have General Mills release 
a group of pillow balloons arranged in the same 
sequence as the objects are in the movies and 
measuring the distance at which the movies were 
taken. 
c. Have two aircraft do maneuvers at various alti­
tudes and photograph them. 
d. Request that the Navy re-do the study using thee movies and 
measuring the distance at which the movies were 
taken. 
c. Have two aircraft do maneuvers at various alti­
tudes and photograph them. 
d. Request that the Navy re-do the study using the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

238 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
methods of density measurement that are prescribed 
by the astronomers. 
Conclusion 
6. If it is deemed advisable to release the movies 
quickly, state that the Air Force cannot positively 
identify the objects but they are reasonably sure that 
they are balloons or gulls, consequently no further ef­
fort is going to be put into the incident. If the Navy 
and Air Force reports are requested, state that due to 
the 
meager data they used, the reports must be dis­
counted. It would be rather poor policy to state that 
the Navy had made an error in the beginning of their 
analysis. [Italics added.] 
7. If it is too much of a risk to do this (suggestion 
in paragraph 6) immediately go ahead with items a, 
b, and c of paragraph 5 on a high-priority basis. 
Recommendation 
8. It is recommended that the above plan be given 
to AFOIN-2A2 and let them confer with the Director 
of Intelligence on the subject of a release. 
The recommendation that additional tests be undertaken 
to determine whether the UFOs· could possibly have been 
seagulls or aircraft was never followed up; the case was 
dropped, and the possibility of seagulls or aircraft left 
wide open. 
What were the UFOs Newhouse photographed? In this 
case a paragraph from p. 224 of Capt. Ruppelt's book is 
worth one picture: 
After I got' out of the Air Force I met Newhouse 
and talked to him for two hours. I've talked to many 
people who have reported UFOs, but few impressed 
me as much as Newhouse. I learned that when he and 
his family first saw the UFOs they were close to the 
car, much closer than when he took the movie. To 
use Newhouse's own words, "If they had been the 
size of a B-29 they would have been at 10,000 feet

--- PAGE BREAK ---e UFOs they were close to the 
car, much closer than when he took the movie. To 
use Newhouse's own words, "If they had been the 
size of a B-29 they would have been at 10,000 feet

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
239 
altitude." And the Navy man and his family had taken 
a good look at the objects-they looked like "two pie 
pans, one inverted on top of the other!" He didn't 
just think the UFOs were disk-shaped; he knew that 
they were; he had plainly seen them. I asked him why 
he hadn't told this to the intelligence officer who 
interrogated him. He said that he had. Then I remem­
bered that I'd sent the intelligence officer a· list of 
questions I wanted Newhouse to answer. The question 
"What did the UFOs look like?" wasn't one of them 
because when you have a picture of something you 
don't normally ask what it looks like. Why the intel­
ligence officer didn't pass this information on to us 
I'll never know. 
Later on, the Condon Report concurred with Blue 
Book's "seagull" theory. While its analysis of the Tremon­
ton film quoted Ruppelt in several places, the above 
comment made by him was neither mentioned nor con­
sidered. The 
substance 
of Newhouse's 
observation, 
as 
related to Ruppelt, was included in the Condon Report, 
but it was written off on the basis that there was no such 
detail in the Blue Book files and this evidence was made 
known only after Newhouse had become associated with 
NICAP (the independent investigating group considered 
by the Air Force as its arch enemy) around 1955. 
The Tremonton, Utah, case is one in which the Air 
Force had the testimony of a reliable and credible witness 
(not to mention an expert in aerial photography) , a second 
adult witness (his wife), and motion pictures of the UFOs 
observed, but still could not or would not seriously consider 
a conclusion that the UFOs observed and photographed 
were real. 
Bear Mountain UFO 
Sometimes the Air Force described a photograph as a 
hoax even if there was no proof that a hoax had been 
perpetrated. The following case, involving the sighting and 
photographing of a UFO at Bear Mountain State Park, 
sixty miles north of New York City, on December 18, 
1966, was one in which I was prompted to challenge theowing case, involving the sighting and 
photographing of a UFO at Bear Mountain State Park, 
sixty miles north of New York City, on December 18, 
1966, was one in which I was prompted to challenge the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

240 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
official Blue Book evaluation of "Hoax." First, the details 
as reported in the investigating officer's questionnaire: 
A. Description of the Object(s) : 
1 . SHAPE : Long object with hump on its back. 
2. SIZE COMPARED TO A KNOWN OBJECT : Unknown 
except very big. Kept shape. 
3. coLoR: Goldfish-silver to brown. 
4. NUMBER: One. 
5. FORMATION, IF MORE THAN ONE : N/ A. 
6. ANY DISCERNIBLE FEATURES OR DETAILS: Long 
with hump on back. 
7. TAIL, 
TRAIN, 
OR EXHAUST, INCLUDING SIZE OF 
SAME COMPARED TO SIZE OF OB.JECT(S) : None . 
. 8. SOUND: if heard, describe sound: None. 
9. OTHER: pertinent or unusual features: No wings 
-flat. 
B. Description of Course of Object(s) : 
1 . WHAT FIRST CALLED ATTENTION OF OBSERVER(S) 
TO 
THE 
OBJECT(S) : 
Unknown, observer just 
looked up and saw it. 
2. ANGLE 
OR 
ELEVATION 
AND AZIMUTH 
OF 
OB• 
.JECT(S) 
WHEN 
FIRST 
OBSERVED: 45° moving 
northeast. 
3. ANGLE 
OR 
ELEVATION 
AND 
AZIMUTH 
OF 
OB­
.JECT (S) UPON DISAPPEARANCE: 45° angle. 
4. DESCRIPTION OF FLIGHT PATH AND MANEUVERS 
OF OB.JECT(s) : It appeared to wobble. 
5. HOW DID THE OB.JECT (S) DISAPPEAR: Went over 
and behind fire tower located on a 1 ,320-foot 
hill. 
6. HOW LONG (WERE) THE OB.JECT(S) VISmLE: five 
to seven seconds. 
C. Manner of Observation: 
1 . GROUI\'D-Visual. 
2. OPTICAL AIDS : Camera. Included are two pictures 
and a negative. 
3. N/A 
D. Time and Date of Sighting: 
1. ZULU TIME-DATE GROUP OF SIGHTING: 2140Z. 1 8 
December 1966. 
2. LIGHT CONDITIONS : Dusk. 
E. Location of Observer(s) : 
On shore 
of La.\e

--- PAGE BREAK ---. N/A 
D. Time and Date of Sighting: 
1. ZULU TIME-DATE GROUP OF SIGHTING: 2140Z. 1 8 
December 1966. 
2. LIGHT CONDITIONS : Dusk. 
E. Location of Observer(s) : 
On shore 
of La.\e

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
241 
Tiorati, Bear Mt. State Park, New York. On the 
east end of lake looking west. 
F. Identifying Information on Observer(s) : 
1 . MILITARY OR CIVILIAN : Civilian. 
2. NAME : Mr. ---
3. AGE: 23. 
4. MAILING ADDRESSES: c/o --- Bronx, N.Y. 
10465 
5. occuPATION: Labor Foreman. 
6. ESTIMATE OF RELIABILITY: I consider Mr. --­
a reliable source. 
G. Weather and Winds-Aloft" Conditions at Time 
and Place of Sightings: 
1 . OBSERVER(S) 
ACCOUNT 
OF WEATHER CONDI• 
TIONS: Clear. 
2. REPORT FROM NEAREST AWS OR U.S. WEATHER 
BUREAU OFFICE : Windy +48°F at 1400L. 
3. CEILING: Clear. 
4. VISIBILITY: Unlimited. 
5. AMOUNT OF CLOUD COVER: N/ A 
6. THUNDERSTORMS IN AREA AND QUADRANT IN 
WHICH LOCATED: N/ A. 
7. VERTICAL TEMPERATURE GRADIENT: N/ A. 
H. Any Other Unusual Activity or Condition: None. 
I. 
Interception or Identification Action Taken: None. 
J. Location, approximate altitude, and general direc­
tion of flight of any air traffic or balloon in the 
area which might possibly account for the sighting: 
Called in too late to check with FAA/First Air 
Force. 
K. Position, title and comments of preparing officer: 
l st Lt. Thomas A. Knutson, UFO Officer, 5713 
Defense Systems Evaluation Squadron, Stewart 
AFB, New York. 
The initial interview was by telephone. The pic­
tures were received 1-1 / 2 weeks after the call. A 
second interview (personal) was conducted after 
receipt of photographs and Mr. --- furnished· 
the negative. lAW Paragraph 12c of APR 80-17, 
request that the negative and photographs be re­
turned to Mr. --- upon completion of neces­
sary studies, analysis and duplication by the Air 
Force. Mr. --- is married and employed by

--- PAGE BREAK ---st that the negative and photographs be re­
turned to Mr. --- upon completion of neces­
sary studies, analysis and duplication by the Air 
Force. Mr. --- is married and employed by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

242 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
his father. He is quite interested in the object and 
has given these pictures to the newspapers. The 
only thing that can make the sighting valid is the 
negative which is enclosed. Mr. 
--- and his 
brother developed the photographs. 
L. Existence of physical evidence such as materials 
and photographs: Two photographs and one nega­
tive. Both attached. 
Photograph; (The following information is 
re­
quired for all photographs forwarded with this 
' 
form.) 
Type and make of camera: Fiesta Kodak (Kodak 
Star lite Camera) . 
Type, focal length, and make of lens: N/ A 
Brand and type of film: 127 Verichrome Pan Black 
Shutter speed used: 7 
Lens opening used, that is, "f" stop: No "f" stop. 
Filter used: None. 
Was tripod or solid stand used: Hand held. 
Was "panning" used: No. 
Exact direction camera was pointing with relation 
to true north, and its angle with respect to the 
ground: Few degrees. 
Additional Comments: 
No focusing necessary with the camera. No flash 
bulb used. One observer claimed that it was about 
1 / 2 mile to fire tower on distant hill so observer 
claims object is much closer. 
The official Air Force Photo Analysis Report of Feb­
ruary 20, 1967, concluded that the photograph was of 
"poor to fair" quality but appeared •genuine. The analysis 
of the photo by Douglas M. Rogers, Intelligence research 
specialist, stated : 
Examination of the negative has negated double 
exposure and/ or retouching. The photographs appear 
genuine insofar as content is concerned, however no 
satisfactory explanation could be made of the uniden­
tified object. The object appears to be circular in 
planform, basically flat in cross section with a domed

--- PAGE BREAK ---erned, however no 
satisfactory explanation could be made of the uniden­
tified object. The object appears to be circular in 
planform, basically flat in cross section with a domed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
243 
"superstructure." The object appears to be situated 
beyond the foreground trees, indicating a diameter in 
excess of eight inches, and the relative clarity indicates 
it to be substantially nearer than the background trees. 
The object could have a diameter as great as two or 
three feet . . 
No attempt at "panning" was indicated as 
is evidenced by the sharpness of the general scene. The 
object exhibits some small degree of blurriness indi­
cating motion, the direction of which could not be 
ascertained. 
The official Blue Book record card on this UFO photo 
contained the following "conclusion" about the case, with 
absolutely no valid justification for how such a conclusion 
was reached : "Photo hoax. Photo does not substantiate 
the witnesses" description of alleged UFO." 
In the face of this completely unfounded and unjustified 
conclusion, I sent the · following letter to Maj. Hector 
Quintanilla, then Chief of Project Blue Book; 
Dear Major Quintanilla: 
On re-examination I find no substantiation for the 
evaluation of hoax, particularly in view of the photo­
analysis report, No. 67-10, dated 20 February 1967, 
which contains no information upon which a hoax can 
be based. To the contrary, the report stated that 
close examination of the negative has negated double 
exposure and/ or retouching. The photographs appear 
genuine insofar as content; however, no satisfactory 
explanation of the unidentified object could be made. 
The Jack of a satisfactory explanation of the unidenti­
fied object does not constitute sufficient reason to 
declare a hoax. Further, the interviewer considers the 
witness to be a reliable source. 
After examination of the print by myself and by 
Mr. Beckman of the University of Chicago, we feel 
that the original negative should be requested for 
further examination. Mr. Beckman, a qualified photo­
analyst, disagrees with the photo analysis presented in 
the report as to the distance of the object. He points 
out that the depth of field extends much farther than 
indicated in the report. It will be noted, from thewith the photo analysis presented in 
the report as to the distance of the object. He points 
out that the depth of field extends much farther than 
indicated in the report. It will be noted, from the

--- PAGE BREAK ---sis presented in 
the report as to the distance of the object. He points 
out that the depth of field extends much farther than 
indicated in the report. It will be noted, from the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

244 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
print, that the focus is poor in the entire periphery 
of the picture regardless of the distance; only in the 
center of the picture is the focus good, and this good 
focus extends essentially to infinity. Consequently no 
judgment can be made as to the real size of the 
object, if this judgment is based on the quality of 
focus. 
My recommendation is, therefore, that the evalua­
tion be changed from hoax to unidentified. 
Sincerely yours, 
J. Allen Hynek 
Blue Book ignored my recommendation and maintained 
a file on the Bear Mountain photograph with the "Hoax" 
label intact; not really fair to either the scientific method 
or the character of the· witness. 
While I acknowledge the possibility that the Bear 
Mountain photograph could have been that of an identi­
fiable object, I don't think so. It is certainly unlikely that 
this was something small and conventional, tossed into the 
air by a tourist, because it was wintertime and Bear Moun· 
tain State Park is relatively quiet then. Had it been sum­
mertime, when numbers of tourists were likely to be in 
the area, such a consideration would be possible-but only 
if one accepts the Air Force's estimation of the size of the 
object, which is decidedly different from the witness's tes­
timony. 
The fact is, the Air Force was just not interested in 
finding out all of the possible facts-or a more thorough 
investigation might have been conducted. As usual, it was 
much easier for Blue Book to simply label this one "Hoax." 
The Misleading letter to McMinnville 
Perhaps the most interesting unidentified · UFO photo 
case of all, and one which the photo analyst for the Condon 
Committee all but declared a real UFO, involved two 
photographs taken by a farmer in McMinnville, Oregon, 
in 1 950. William K. Hartmann, the photo-analyst who 
evaluated the McMinnville UFO photos for the Condonbut declared a real UFO, involved two 
photographs taken by a farmer in McMinnville, Oregon, 
in 1 950. William K. Hartmann, the photo-analyst who 
evaluated the McMinnville UFO photos for the Condon

--- PAGE BREAK ---UFO, involved two 
photographs taken by a farmer in McMinnville, Oregon, 
in 1 950. William K. Hartmann, the photo-analyst who 
evaluated the McMinnville UFO photos for the Condon

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
245 
Committee, concluded : "This is one of the few UFO re­
ports in which all factors investigated, geometric, psycho­
logical, and physical, appear to be consistent with the 
assertion that an extraordinary flying object, silvery, metal­
lic, disk-shaped, tens of meters in diameter, and evidently 
artificial, flew within sight of the two witnesses." 
Hartmann's work has been recently re-examined, greatly 
extended, and fully substantiated by Dr. Bruce Maccabee. 
He concludes from a detailed photogrammetric study that 
the McMinnville object could not have been a small object 
close to the camera but that it was at a considerable dis-­
tance and hence not a fake.* 
Yet the following letter, from the Blue Book files, was 
sent on March 10, 1965, to a Mr. Case (apparently a 
civilian) by Lt. Col. John F. Spaulding, Chief of the Civil 
Branch of the Community Relations Division, Office of In­
formation of the Air Force: 
Dear Mr. Case: 
Your letter to the Department of Science has been 
referred to this office as a matter pertaining to the 
Air Force. 
The Air Force has no information on photographs 
of an unidentified object taken by Mr. & Mrs. Trent 
of McMinnville, Oregon. 
In this regard, it should be noted that all photo­
graphs submitted in conjunction with UFO reports 
have been a misinterpretation of natural or conven­
tional objects. The object in thesȚ photographs have 
[sic] a positive identification. 
Signed/ John F. Spaulding 
Lt. Col. USAF 
There are two glaring untruths in this letter--one, 
Spaulding's statement that the Air Force had "no informa­
tion" on the photographs; two, that the Air Force had 
positively identified all UFOs in photographs submitted for 
evaluation. 
*Proceedings of the 1976 UFO Conference, Center for UFO 
Studies, Evanston, Illinois 60202.aphs; two, that the Air Force had 
positively identified all UFOs in photographs submitted for 
evaluation. 
*Proceedings of the 1976 UFO Conference, Center for UFO 
Studies, Evanston, Illinois 60202.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

246 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
The Brazilian UFO Photos 
One of the most highly celebrated and controversial 
series of photos in the Blue Book files are those taken by 
an official photographer aboard the Brazilian Navy survey 
ship, A lmirante Saldanha, off Trindade Island, some 600 
miles east of Rio de Janeiro. 
The Blue Book reporting officer's concluding statement 
makes a mockery of the case: "It is the reporting officer's 
private opinion that a flying saucer sighting would be un­
likely at the very barren island of Trindade as everyone 
knows Martians are extremely comfort-loving creatures." 
Other comments by the same officer were filled with 
ridicule of the Brazilian government and its military. 
Frankly, I was astonished that these disparaging statements 
were not edited by the Air Force prior to their release. 
Such bias and flippancy have no place in scientific investi­
gations. 
Because this case has received so much attention over 
the years, and has been the subject of so much controversy, 
the full office of Naval Intelligence Information Report from 
the U.S. Naval Attache at Rio to Project Blue Book 
follows: 
Date of Information: 
21-27 Feb 1958 
From: 
U.S. Naval Attache, 
Rio de Janeiro 
Subject: 
Contact 
Press 
Serial No. 
39-58 
Date of Report 
1 1 March 1958 
Evaluation 
303 
BRAZIL-Navy-Flying Saucer Photographed from 
ALMIRANTE SALDANHA 
Encl: ( 1 ) Set of 4 Brazilian Navy photographs of 
subject 
1 . Announcement. On 21 February, two of the 
leading newspapers in Rio de Janeiro printed photo­
graphs showing alleged flying saucer photographed 
from Brazilian naval ship, ALMIRANTE SALDAN­
HA, at approximately midday on 1 6 January 1 958

--- PAGE BREAK ---rs in Rio de Janeiro printed photo­
graphs showing alleged flying saucer photographed 
from Brazilian naval ship, ALMIRANTE SALDAN­
HA, at approximately midday on 1 6 January 1 958

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
247 
while the ship was anchored off Trindade Island some 
600 miles east of Rio de Janeiro. The ship at the time 
was engaged in research as part of Brazilian Navy 
participation in the International Geophysical Year. 
2. Photographer. The photographs themselves were 
taken by a freelance [?] photographer, Almiro Ba­
runa, using his Rolleiflex camera set at speed 125., lens 
opening 8, and were developed in a laboratory in 
ALMIRANTE SALDANHA. This gentleman has 
a long history of photographic trick shots and is well 
known for such items as false pictures of treasure 
on the ocean floor. Another time he prepared a pur­
posely humorous article, published in a magazine, 
entitled "A Flying Saucer Hunted Me at Home," 
using trick photography. Baruna, after the release 
of his latest "flying saucer" photographs, told the 
press that the Navy secret service had interrogated 
him for four hours concerning his photos. "The 
negatives were projected in large size on a screen. 
If there were any trick, the gigantic projection would 
have revealed it. After questioning by officers of the 
Estado-Maior, the Chief of the Secret Service, the 
senior officer present said to me, 'I am going to ask 
you a few questions. Don't be offended because I 
don't doubt the authenticity of your photos but ,J 
need to hear from you. If you were going to make a 
flying saucer appear on a negative, how would you 
proceed?' 'Commandante, I am an able photographer 
specialized in trick photography but not one would 
withstand close and accurate examination.' " 
3. Brazilian Navy Stand. Immediately after the 
photographs of the flying saucer were publicized, the 
Brazilian Navy refused to make any official statement 
confirming or denying the incident. However, proofs 
from the original negatives were sent to the other 
armed forces and the President Yia an officer-mes­
senger who related the complete story. According to 
the press, the narration so impressed Mr. Kubichek 
that he became convinced of the veracity of the 
happening. 
On 24 February, three days after the photos were 
first publicized in the press, the Navy Ministry finally 
made an official statement: "With reference to theinced of the veracity of the 
happening. 
On 24 February, three days after the photos were 
first publicized in the press, the Navy Ministry finally 
made an official statement: "With reference to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---y of the 
happening. 
On 24 February, three days after the photos were 
first publicized in the press, the Navy Ministry finally 
made an official statement: "With reference to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

248 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
reports appearing in the press that the Navy is op­
posed to divulge the facts concerning the appearance 
of a strange object over Trindade Island, this Cabinet 
declares that such information has no basis. This 
Ministry has no motive to impede the release of pho­
tographs of the referred to object taken by --­
who was at Trindade Island at the invitation of the 
Navy, and in the presence of a large number of the 
crew of ALMIRANTE SALDANHA from. whose 
deck the photographs were taken. Clearly, this Minis­
try will not be able to make any· pronouncement con­
cerning the object seen because the photographs do 
not constitute sufficient proof for such purpose." 
4. Statements of SALDANHA Personnel. On the 
morning after the photos of the flying saucer were 
published in the press (February 22) , the ALMIRAN­
TE SALDANHA departed Rio to continue its mission 
in connection with the IGY. Two days later, how­
ever, the ship docked at Santos (February 24) for 
voyage repairs and this was the first chance that news­
papermen had an opportunity to interview officers 
and men aboard. The Assistant Naval Attache was in 
Santos at this time in connection with the visit of 
USCGS WESTWIND (Aluena Rio IR 36-58 of 10 
March) and had an opportunity to visit aboard. 
The commanding officer, Capitao-de-Mar-e-Guerra 
(CAPT) Jose Santos Saldanha de Gama, had not 
seen the object and was noncommittal. The executive 
officer also had not seen it but, arriving shortly there­
after, had formed the opinion that those on deck had 
seen it. The captain had reported that his secretary, 
a LCDR, had seen it but this officer when personally 
questioned avoided discussing the matter. Later, it 
was learned that the photographer was accompanied 
to the darkroom by an officer who waited outside the 
door while Baruna developed the negative alone. 
At the time of the official visit of the commanding 
officer of WESTWIND to ALMIRANTE SALDAN­
HA, Capt. Saldanha de Gama freely discussed the 
flying saucer and showed the original proofs to the 
callers but again did· not commit himself. 
5. Publicity. The press reports after the publica­
tion of the photographs covered a great deal of news-lying saucer and showed the original proofs to the 
callers but again did· not commit himself. 
5. Publicity. The press reports after the publica­
tion of the photographs covered a great deal of news-

--- PAGE BREAK ---wed the original proofs to the 
callers but again did· not commit himself. 
5. Publicity. The press reports after the publica­
tion of the photographs covered a great deal of news-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
249 
paper space for about a week, tending to prove or dis­
prove the authenticity of Baruna's photographs DIAR-
10 CARICCA reported that personnel of SALDAN­
HA were under rigid orders of silence. 0 GLOBO 
published a story with photographs by photographer 
--- of flying saucers (china) taken at Cabo Frio. 
Federal Deputy Sergio Magalhaes sent a note to 
the Navy Ministry on 27 February protesting the 
Navy's failure to secure sworn statements of witness· 
es. "For the first time in flying saucer history, the phe­
nomenon was attended by large numbers of persons 
belonging to a military force which give these latest 
photographs an official stamp. Threats to national 
security require official attention and action," said the 
Deputy. In the middle of all the publicity, other "fly­
ing saucer" sighting reports came out including a 
naval officer who saw a flying saucer a month before 
sighting from SALDANHA off the coast of Espirito 
Santo. CO and crew of ATA TRIDENTE said flying 
saucer several days before SALDANHA sighting but 
kept information secret. 
Preparing Officer's Comments: 
1 . Most flying saucer stories are not worth wasting 
much time or effort, but this story apparently sub­
stantiated by official Navy photographs taken in the 
presence of large number of Navy personnal under 
closely controlled 
and 
almost ideal circumstances 
should have absolutely proved the existence of an 
unidentified flying object. Unfortunately, further in­
vestigation provided only frustration at every turning. 
A number of Brazilian Navy officers profess to believe 
the story implicitly but whether they have more infor­
mation than we is unknown. 
2. There appear to be only two explanations for 
this peculiar incident: 
(a) Some overwhelming power has told the Bra­
zilian Navy not to officially verify this incident 
(which they should easily be able to do, if it oc­
curred) nor to deny it (which they should easily be 
able to do, if it is a fa-ke) . I personally do . not 
believe that anyone has told the Brazilian Navy toey should easily be able to do, if it oc­
curred) nor to deny it (which they should easily be 
able to do, if it is a fa-ke) . I personally do . not 
believe that anyone has told the Brazilian Navy to

--- PAGE BREAK ---able to do, if it oc­
curred) nor to deny it (which they should easily be 
able to do, if it is a fa-ke) . I personally do . not 
believe that anyone has told the Brazilian Navy to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

250 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
keep quiet about it because there has been no hint 
of such suppression in either Brazilian or U.S. 
circles; and. also because I doubt their control of 
the individual officers and men is good enough to 
hold the line. 
(b) The whole thing is a fake publicity stunt put 
on by a crooked photographer and the Brazilian 
Navy fell for it. This seems like the most likely 
considering Brazilians' love for sensationalism and 
gossip, their well-known propensity for never letting 
the truth stand in the way of a good story, and 
general bureaucratic inefficiency. 
3. In addition, the photographs furnished by the 
Brazilian Navy are unconvincing. Details of the land 
fll"e extremely sharp but the disc is hazy and has little 
contrast and shows no shadow effect. It also appears 
that the object was inverted in photograph 2 comparecf 
to 1 and 3. Also the papers have mentioned extremely 
high velocities and there appears to be no lateral 
blurring as would occur with any reasonable shutter 
speed. 
4. It is the reporting officer's private opinion that 
a flying saucer sighting would be unlikely at the very 
barren island of Trindade, as everyone knows Mar­
tians are extremely comfort-loving creatures. 
Prepared and forwarded: 
S!M. Sunderland 
Capt. USN. 
The Blue Book files on this case also contain a United 
Press dispatch from Rio de Janeiro of February 25, 1958, 
which stated that the Brizilian Navy Ministry confirmed 
the UFO sighting and photos as ·real. The dispatch stated: 
The Brazilian Navy Ministry vouched today for 
the authenticity of the photographs of a "flying 
saucer" taken recently aboard the Navy survey ship, 
Almirante Saldanha. 
Navy Minister Adm. --- said after meeting with 
President Kubichek in the summer presidential palace 
at Petropolis, that he also vouched personally for the 
authenticity of the pictures.e Saldanha. 
Navy Minister Adm. --- said after meeting with 
President Kubichek in the summer presidential palace 
at Petropolis, that he also vouched personally for the 
authenticity of the pictures.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nister Adm. --- said after meeting with 
President Kubichek in the summer presidential palace 
at Petropolis, that he also vouched personally for the 
authenticity of the pictures.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
251 
"The Navy has a great secret which it cannot di­
vulge because it cannot be explained," the minister 
said. 
One would think that our own government would have 
enough diplomatic contacts in Brazil to confirm or deny 
officially the authenticity of the photographs. In any case, 
the Brazilian UFO photos remain in the Blue Book files 
under the listing of "Hoax." Perhaps only the Brazilian 
government will ever know for sure. 
The Mariana-Go-Round 
This final case was the subject of intensive review 
and investigation by the Condon Committee and to this 
day remains highly controversial. 
At 1 1 :25 A.M. on August 5 or 1 5, 1 950 ( the exact date 
has never been determined) , Nicholas Mariana, general 
manager of the Great Falls (Montana) Electrics ' baseball 
team, was inspecting the local baseball stadium with his 
secretary when he looked toward the smokestack of the 
Anaconda Copper Company to the northwest and saw 
two stationary bright lights in the sky. After a short period 
of observation he determined he could not be watching 
aircraft, and ran some fifty feet to his car to get his 1 6mm 
movie camera. While he was filming, the lights moved 
from a stationary position toward the southwest against 
the wind and continued until they faded away. During the 
filming the objects passed behind a water tower, thus 
providing a frame of reference for measuring distance, 
size, altitude, azimuth, and time duration (thus the speed 
of the objects could also be approximated) . 
So much has already been written aboŘt the Great Falls 
UFO films that one might well devote an entire book to 
the various theories that have been advanced about them. 
Furthermore, there is still a controversy over whether 
thirty-five of the first frames of the film originally sub­
mitted to the Air Force were withheld by the Air Force, 
as Mariana claimed, or whether they ever existed to begin 
with. At any rate, Mariana stuck firmly to his position 
that those frames were submitted, and that they showed 
the objects as silvery in appearance with a notch or bandr they ever existed to begin 
with. At any rate, Mariana stuck firmly to his position 
that those frames were submitted, and that they showed 
the objects as silvery in appearance with a notch or band

--- PAGE BREAK ---

252 
THE HYNEK: UFO REPORT 
at one point on their periphery and having a rotating 
motion in unison. 
These films were reviewed several times by the Air 
Force (according to Ruppelt, they were rejected as images 
of two F-94 aircraft that were known to be in the area) , 
by the Robertson Panel convened by the CIA, by the 
Condon Committee, by the Douglas Aircraft Corporation, 
and as the subject of a documentary film about UFOs 
produced by Green-Rouse Productions in 1956. The most 
detailed analysis of the film was made by Dr. Robert M. 
L. Baker, Jr., for Douglas Aircraft. The in-depth papers 
on this case written by Dr. Baker can well be considered 
as the basis for validating the study of UFOs at least as 
anomalistic phenomena. 
Since the end of Blue Book, new techniques similar to 
those used in the analysis of photographs taken by space 
probes have been applied to the study of UFO photo­
graphs with considerable success. These techniques, in· 
volving sophisticated computer analysis of picture ele­
ments, have shown that a number of photographs for­
merly considered fake just might be genuine evidence 
that UFOs exist. 
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---olving sophisticated computer analysis of picture ele­
ments, have shown that a number of photographs for­
merly considered fake just might be genuine evidence 
that UFOs exist. 
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 1=============== 
THE AIR FORCE NUMBERS GAME 
He uses statistics 
as a drunken man uses lamp· 
posts, for support rather than illumination. 
-Andrew Lang 
Over the years, the Pentagon played loosely with statis­
tics to support their position that all UFOs are misidenti­
fications of natural phenomena-or outright hoaxes. Often 
statistical information was not fairly presented. 
An outstanding example of the Air Force use of sta­
tistics to support rather than to illuminate is their own 
Blue Book Special Report 14 (see pp. 272 ) , the results 
of which, properly and fully presented, • would have seri­
ously conflicted with the Air Force position. Instead, the 
statistical results of that report wert never presented. The 
study, commissioned by the Air Force, was circulated in­
ternally, with only a limited number of copies; in 1955 
it was made available for public inspection but still was 
not generally published. Carefully worded press releases 
were the only contact the public bad with the report, and 
these dealt only with generalities and did not mention 
the specific results of the study. ·They stated that because 
of the subjectivity of the data "the results of these tests 
·are inconclusive since they neither confirm nor deny that 
the UNKNOWNS are primarily unidentified KNOWNS," care­
fully avoiding the fact that a proper mathematical in­
terpretation of the tests indicated that the chance that the 
"Unknowns" were the same as the "Knowns" was less 
than one in a billion! It seems certain that bad the results 
*See "Scientific 
Investigation of Unidentified Flying Objects," 
Dr. 
Bruce 
Maccabee; 
available through the 
Center 
for 
UFO 
Studies, Evanston, lllinois.

--- PAGE BREAK ---that bad the results 
*See "Scientific 
Investigation of Unidentified Flying Objects," 
Dr. 
Bruce 
Maccabee; 
available through the 
Center 
for 
UFO 
Studies, Evanston, lllinois.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

254 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
of the tests indicated that the "Unknowns" were the same 
as the "Knowns," there would have been no mentiqn what­
ever of the subjectivity of the data! 
Since the Blue Book files are now open, we can assem­
ble our own statistics and draw our own conclusions. It 
would be difficult, of course, to match the extensive work 
done for Special Report 14, especially since we now have 
three times as many reports to consider, but let's do the 
best we can. 
The reader will note that our total number of Blue 
Book reports and Blue Book "Unidentifieds" (a faithful 
reflection of the complete contents of the Blue Book mi­
crofilms) does not exactly tally with previously published 
figures in Air Force press releases. Our totals are some­
what larger, while our number of "Unidentiti#ds" is some­
what smaller. This can probably be attributed to the ,fact 
that from time to time the Blue Book files of earlier years 
were reviewed and revised; an "Unidentified" of one year 
could easily become an "Identified" in a later year if an 
ambitious new officer felt that he could "improve" the situ­
ation, or, if, legitimately, new information came to light 
on an old case and justified a change in its status. In ad­
dition, in 1952, a banner year for UFO sightings, the 
flow of reports was so great that case evaluations had to 
be cursory and final evaluations left for much later. As I 
recall, the summary sheets for 1952 were not completed 
until several years later, and many cases hurriedly labeled 
"Unidentified" at first, were later declared "Identified." 
Our tally shows that the total number of all the various 
categories of reports is 13,134. As the following graph 
(Fig. 1 1 .1 ) illustrates, the number of reports varied greatly 
from year to year. These reports, of course, include both 
the "Unidentifieds" (the UFOs) and the "Identifieds" 
(the IFOs-Identified Flying Objects) . 
What accounts for the higher total of reports in some 
years? For some reason, UFO reports sometimes occur in 
bunches, or "flaps" as they have come to be known. The 
Air Force experienced three of these, in 1952, 1957, and 
1966. (The United States experienced another in 1973, 
four years after the Air Force and the Condon Commit­
tee had supposedly put the whole UFO question to rest.) 
Why flaps occur just inay be more of a problem for the 
psychologist than for the physical scientist; perhaps theyForce and the Condon Commit­
tee had supposedly put the whole UFO question to rest.) 
Why flaps occur just inay be more of a problem for the 
psychologist than for the physical scientist; perhaps they

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
2SS 
FIG. 1 1.1-YEARLY TOTALS 
1500 
1400 
1300 
1200 
1 100 
1000 
900 
800 
700 
600 
500 
400 
300 
200 
100 
are triggered by awakening of public interest that fol­
lows one or two well-publicized, spectacular sightings. 
But this explanation for the 1952 "flap" is too simple. 
Unlike the others, which seemed to consist mostly of 
an increased number of IFOs, the "flap" of 1952 was the 
only one to represent a genuine increase in the total num­
ber of "Unidentifieds." The 1952 flap is unique in another

--- PAGE BREAK ---y of 
an increased number of IFOs, the "flap" of 1952 was the 
only one to represent a genuine increase in the total num­
ber of "Unidentifieds." The 1952 flap is unique in another

--- PAGE BREAK ---

256 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
way: the "flaps" of 1957 and 1966 were in each case 
preceded by a two-year "buildup." The 1957 wave started 
from a low in 1954 and built to a climax in 1957. The 
1966 wave was simil:.u- in form, building from a low in 
1963. Each wave dropped off in two steps of a year each, 
reaching minimum in 1959 and 1968, respectively. (In 
1969, the dying year of Blue Book, and the year of the 
publication of the Condon Report, there were still fewer 
reports, but in my opinion this was largely due to the 
Condon Report publicity-there was nothing to UFOs, so 
why report them?) The 1952 wave, however, rose very 
sharply; even the earlier months of that year had few 
reports. The wave hit suddenly in June and July. Then, 
as the figures indicate, it subsided more rapidly than the 
other two. 
The graph of Blue Book reports starts at a low point 
in 1947 and returns to the same low in 1969. One pos­
sible reason for the low figure in 194 7 is that witnesses 
may not yet have known to whom to report anomalous 
aerial sightings; in later years the reporting mechanism 
was fairly well publicized. The 1969 drop-off was prob­
ably due to the reluctance of witnesses to report in the 
face of adverse publicity. Thus, those reports filed in the 
post-Blue Book and Condon Report days are particularly 
significant; they were made despite the "bad press" that 
UFOs bad begun to receive in the early 1970s! 
The sudden wave of reports in the fall of 1973 came 
as a complete surprise to me and my colleagues. Then, be­
cause nothing whatsoever was being done about it offi­
cially, we organized the Center for UFO Studies to serve 
as a focus for scientists and other trained persons who 
wished to learn more about the UFO phenomenon and to 
do something about it. In addition, a monthly review of 
current UFO events and investigations, The International 
UFO Reporter, of which I am the editor, is now avail­
able through the Center for UFO Studies. 
The Air Force Admits There Are Unidentified 
Flying Objects 
The Air Force never officially used the term UFO. Blue 
Book did, however, ru;e the term "Unidentified," and 
nearly six hundred of these are listed in the files. Bear inUnidentified 
Flying Objects 
The Air Force never officially used the term UFO. Blue 
Book did, however, ru;e the term "Unidentified," and 
nearly six hundred of these are listed in the files. Bear in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. .J. ALLEN HYNEK 
257 
mind that all statistics cited so far, and those which im­
mediately followed, refer to Air Force evaluations, not 
to the re-evaluations performed by the Center for UFO 
Studies which are discussed later in this chapter. These 
statistics can therefore be expected to be heavily influ­
enced by the assumption "It .can't be, therefore it isn't." 
FIG. 1 1.2-AF "UNKNOWNS" BY YEAR 
(208) 
• 
130 -
"'" 
120 
1 10 
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 J 
10 
0

--- PAGE BREAK ---y influ­
enced by the assumption "It .can't be, therefore it isn't." 
FIG. 1 1.2-AF "UNKNOWNS" BY YEAR 
(208) 
• 
130 -
"'" 
120 
1 10 
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 J 
10 
0

--- PAGE BREAK ---

258 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
Let us see how the number of recognized Air Force "Un­
identifieds" fluctuated over the years. 
Figure 1 1.2 represents the yearly distribution of the 
587 Air Force "Unidentifieds." This graph shows that the 
number of Blue Book "Unidentifieds" remained at a 
roughly constant low level over the years except for 
1952, when it reached a record high of 208. The existence 
of the one true "flap" of unknowns in 1952 can mean 
that there really were very many more unknowns in that 
year; or it may mean that after the Pentagon instructions 
in 1953 to "debunk" and play down the phenomenon, 
the classification "Unidentified" became most unpopular 
at Blue Book. Our own re-evaluations seem to support 
the first explanations; most of the -"Unidentifieds" remain 
so even after close re-examination. 
These statistics are also of interest if examined in terms 
of yearly percentages. Let us now look at the percentage 
of "Unidentifieds" as it changed from year to year-: 
TABLE 1 1 . 1-Percentages of Air Force "Unknowns" 
by Years 
Year 
% 
Year 
% 
1947 
7.4% 
1959 
3.1 % 
1948 
4.0 
1960 
2.0 
1949 
3.5 
1961 
2.3 
1950 
1 1 .4 
1962 
2.5 
1951 
12.6 
1963 
3.3 
1952 
19.3 
1964 
3.3 
1953 
7.5 
1965 
1 .4 
1954 
8.4 
1966 
2.8 
1955 
4.0 
1967 
1 .8 
1956 
1 .5 
1968 
0.7 
1957 
1.2 
1969 
0.7 
1958 
1 .8 
The relatively high percentage of "Unknowns" in 1950 
and 1951, preceding the "flap" of 1952, should not be 
overlooked. It represents about a threefold increase in 
percentage over the previous two years. This table also 
points out that after 1955, the percentage of "Unidenti· 
fieds" remained remarkably low and constant-with a

--- PAGE BREAK ---d increase in 
percentage over the previous two years. This table also 
points out that after 1955, the percentage of "Unidenti· 
fieds" remained remarkably low and constant-with a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN' HYNEK 
259 
mean of 2.0 percent. To some extent this was due to the 
"crackdown" on "Unidentifieds" as recommended by the 
Robertson Panel (p. 20) in 1953. But to a greater ex­
tent the low figures represent "unfair" statistical processes. 
All cases evaluated as "Insufficient Information" were 
considered by Blue Book to be "Knowns"; all cases evalu­
ated as "Possible Balloons" or "Probable Aircraft" were 
considered in the statistics as balloons and aircraft-the 
qualifying words "possible" or "probable" were dropped. 
Clearly, the "Insufficient Information" cases should have 
been excluded from the statistical computations altogether. 
Instead, these cases were treated statistically as if they 
had been solved! Thus, if the insufficient information 
cases are removed from the 1952 total, the percentage of 
unknowns rises to 23 percent. 
The following table shows the percentages of various 
known stimuli for reports of sightings that were. listed by 
Blue Book as "Identified." 
TABLE 1 1 .2-Total Numbers of IFOs 
Type of IFO 
Astronomical1 
Aircraft 
Balloons 
Radar Phen. 2 
PsychologicaP 
Hoax 
Meteorological4 
Birds 
Insufficient Information 
Other 
Number 
3,421 
2,237 
1 ,223 
152 
63 
1 16 
44 
85 
2,409 
2,807 
Percentage 
26.0% 
17.0 
9.3 
1.2 
0.5 
0.9 
0.3 
0.6 
18.3 
21.4 
1of which meteŐrs made up 56% , or 9.5% of the total number 
of Blue Book cases 
2such as anomalous propagation, weather returns, malfunctions 
"also includes unreliable reports 
•clouds, light phenomena, sundogs, etc. 
It is astonishing to note that nearly a fifth of the cases 
received by Blue Book were assigned to the category "In­
sufficient Information"! While some of these undoubtedly 
proceeded from old reports or unreliable witnesses, clearly

--- PAGE BREAK ---ases 
received by Blue Book were assigned to the category "In­
sufficient Information"! While some of these undoubtedly 
proceeded from old reports or unreliable witnesses, clearly

--- PAGE BREAK ---

260 
TI-m HYNEK UFO REPORT 
not all of these reports could be ascribed to these causes. 
This data makes it clear that Blue Book, too often, took 
the easy way out. 
The table also shows that most witnesses were said to 
have misperceived astronomical objects-twinkling stars 
(with motion attributed to them by autokinesis) , the set­
ting moon and sun, bright planets, and most often, me­
teors. Astronomical objects, aircraft, and balloons together 
make up nearly 53 percent of the total number of reports 
submitted to Project Blue Book. 
Another interesting fact that emerges is that despite 
the Air Force claims, less than 2 percent of the repprts 
were "Psychological" in nature or the result of hoaxes. 
Yet, consider the following excerpts from a Department 
of Defense Office of Public Information Press release 
dated December 27, 1949 : 
The Air Force said that all evidence and analyses in­
dicate that reports of unindentified flying objects are 
the result of: 
!-misinterpretation of various conventional ob­
jects 
2-a mild form of mass hysteria 
3--or hoaxes. 
There were only sixty-three cases labeled "Psychological" 
in the entire Blue Book file and 1 1 6 hoaxes, most of which 
were quite easily detected and dismissed! 
UFOs for All Seasons 
Apart from the variation in yearly totals of UFO reports, 
are there "seasons" for UFO reports? Well, as it turns out, 
there are seasons for UFO reports but not for "U nidenti­
fieds." Figure 1 1 .3 plots the total number of UFO reports 
received by the Air Force as a function of month of the 
year and also the total number of Air Force "Unidenti­
fieds" as a function of month. 
The graph shows that more reports are made during the 
months of July and August than during the rest of the year.

--- PAGE BREAK ---al number of Air Force "Unidenti­
fieds" as a function of month. 
The graph shows that more reports are made during the 
months of July and August than during the rest of the year.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR • .J. ALLEN HYNEK 
261 
FIGURE 1 1 .3-TOTAL MONTHLY TOTALS OF ALL BLUE BOOK 
REPORTS 
TOTAL NO. !r 
Of REPORTS 
1400 
1300 
1200 
uoot 
1000 t 
900 
NO. 
800 
700 
100 
TOTAL MONTHLY TOTALS OF AF,''UNI DENTIFIEOS" 
OF UNIDS. 
90 
80 
7
0t 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
JAN 
FEB MAR 
APR 
MAY 
JUN 
JUL 
AUG 
SEPT 
OCT 
NOV 
DEC 
Actually, this is quite logical and should be expected; dur­
ing the summer months, a greater percentage of the popula­
tion is outdoors, and since UFOs are an outdoor phenom­
enon, more people are likely to see them then. Also, it is 
likely that during the summer months there are more con­
vestional objects around to misinterpret! However, the 
Southern Hemisphere also has most reports in July­
when they are having winter! 
The second graph in Figure 1 1 .3 looks at the total num­
ber of Air Force "Unidentifieds" by month. At first glance,

--- PAGE BREAK ---e also has most reports in July­
when they are having winter! 
The second graph in Figure 1 1 .3 looks at the total num­
ber of Air Force "Unidentifieds" by month. At first glance,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

262 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
it would appear that there is indeed a season for "real" 
UFOs--once again, summer. However, if one removes the 
year 1952 (already noted as a "flap" year), ihe curve 
changes significantly and a more even distribution is indi· 
cated. Fundamentally, the true UFO is a constant occur· 
renee throughout the year, with a slight decrease in the 
months of extreme winter, January and December. The 
winter "slide" is probably due to the fact that most people 
are indoors at that time, and less likely to observe anoma· 
lous aerial phenomena. 
The UFO "Flap" 
And what of the "flaps"? We have already mentioned 
that the Air Force had three of them available for study­
those of 1952, 1957, and 1 966. First let us examine the two 
flaps of IFOs, those of 1957 and 1966. How did these years 
differ from non-flap years? Examining the statistics of per· 
centages of types of reports, it can be seen that both years 
did not differ strikingly from any of the other years; the 
only difference was simply an increase in the number of 
raw reports. Percentage-wise, no more stars, balloons, or 
aircraft were reported. Nor was there a greater percentage 
of "Unidentifieds." 
It seems extremely unlikely that these flaps were the 
product of "mass hysteria." As we have already noted, these 
flaps were not "sharp"; their coming was "predicted" by the 
rising number of reports in the two preceding years in each 
case. But we still can find no discernible cause for the added 
reports. One can suppose that public awareness may have 
increased in the two years preceding each of the flaps, and, 
as a result, more people went out and "looked" for UFOs. 
But this is only a guess. 
Now, let us turn to the flap of 1952. This flap was gen· 
uine in that it certainly did consist of a higher number of 
"real" UFOs, even by Air Force standards. Table 1 1 .3 illus· 
trates the month-by-month breakdown of UFOs versus 
IFOs.his flap was gen· 
uine in that it certainly did consist of a higher number of 
"real" UFOs, even by Air Force standards. Table 1 1 .3 illus· 
trates the month-by-month breakdown of UFOs versus 
IFOs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
263 
TABLE 1 1 .3-THE GREAT "FLAP" OF 1952 
Total Identified Unidentified % lnsufj. Information 
Jan. 
14 
12 
1 
8 
1 
Feb. 
1 8 
1 1 
2 
15 
5 
Mar. 
24 
1 5 
4 
21 
5 
Apr. 
84 
51 
21 
29 
12 
May 
71 
5 1 
12 
1 9 
8 
Jun. 
124 
64 
40 
38 
20 
Jul. 
366 
23 1 
55 
19 
80 
Aug. 
218 
134 
28 . 
17 
56 
Sep. 
105 
57 
27 
32 
21 
Oct. 
51 
3 1 
13 
30 
7 
Nov. 
44 
30 
8 
2 1 
6 
Dec. 
4 7 
3 8 
3 
7 
6 
1,166 
725 
214 
23 
227 
Total minus Ins. Infor. = 939 
The year clearly started out slowly, with an average num­
ber of UFOs and IFOs. However, the months of June, 
July, August, and September were distinguished by a far 
greater number of "Unidentifieds." 
What happened during 1952? All one can say is that if 
ever there was a UFO phenomenon, it certainly existed 
during that year. Both the revised statistics and the Air 
Force data show a sudden surge in the number of observa­
tions of Daylight Discs and Nocturnal Lights during the 
summer of 1 952. Even the overzealous attempts of the Air 
Force to find conventional solutions could not dismiss the 
excellent cases that occurred in that now famous summer 
which features the seriously discussed Washington, D.C., 
radar-visual cases (see p. 1 22) . 
At present we cannot explain flaps any more than we can 
presume to say we understand the entire UFO phenomenon. 
The only scientifically justifiable statement that can be 
made is that they exist. 
The Revised Blue Book Statistics­
What Really Was Going On? 
A member of the staff of the Center for UFO Studies

--- PAGE BREAK ---ically justifiable statement that can be 
made is that they exist. 
The Revised Blue Book Statistics­
What Really Was Going On? 
A member of the staff of the Center for UFO Studies

--- PAGE BREAK ---

264 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
and I have comprehensively re-evaluated all the cases 
which 
comprise 
the ninety-four reels 
of microfilmed 
Project Blue Book records. Despite Blue Book's inade­
quate follow-up and investigation of the bulk of these 
cases, it was possible for us to form some sort of judg­
ment as to whether or not the Air Force conclusions 
were, in each case, valid. In many cases we agreed with 
the Air Force-and in many we did not. So, let us now 
examine how things change when one grants the assump­
tion that there may indeed be some sort of unidentified 
aerial phenomena, source and nature unknown, which 
may have been, for the most part, accurately reported by 
over sixteen thousand witnesses. 
The following table illustrates the revised number of 
"Unidentifieds" for each of the twenty-two years of open 
Air Force involvement. 
TABLE 1 1 .4--Revised Unidentifieds 
Year 
Number 
Year 
Number 
1947 
10 
1959 
14 
1948 
16 
1960 
17 
1949 
1 8 
196 1 
1 4 
1950 
3 1 
1962 
2 
1951 
22 
1963 
4 
1952 
242 
1964 
9 
1953 
44 
1965 
7 
1954 
46 
1966 
36 
1955 
26 
1967 
19 
1956 
21 
1968 
4 
1957 
25 
1969 
1 
1958 
1 5 
What these statistics tell us is that out of 13,134 cases 
reported to the Air Force, of which 10,675 received a 
classification other than "Insufficient Information," a full 
5.8 percent remain unidentified even after re-examination 
many years later. Over six hundred cases, over as long a 
period as twenty-two years, is still a number to be reck­
oned with. And how many of the cases which are classi­
fied as "Insufficient Information" might actually have 
been placed in the "Unidentified" category bad further 
investigation been made?

--- PAGE BREAK ---And how many of the cases which are classi­
fied as "Insufficient Information" might actually have 
been placed in the "Unidentified" category bad further 
investigation been made?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
265 
Now let us see what kind of UFOs we are dealing with. 
The reader is by now well acquainted with the classifica­
tion scheme utilized in this book, and it is of interest to 
examine the 640 revised "Unknowns" to see how they 
divide themselves into these classes. 
TABLE 1 1 .5-Types of Revised Unknowns 
Type 
Number 
% of Unknowns 
Nocturnal Lights 
243 
38% 
Daylight Discs 
...... 271 
42 
Radar-Visual 
29 
5 
Radar 
10 
2 
Close Encounters of 
the First Kind 
46 
7 
Close Encounters of 
the Second Kind 
33 
5 
Close Encounters of 
the Third Kind 
8 
1 
640 
100% 
What is extremely surprising here is the great number 
of Daylight Disc cases reported. These cases, from Blue 
Book files alone, and neglecting the wealth of informa­
tion from the civilian UFO organizations around the 
world, involve many hundreds of witnesses, the majority 
of them with Air Force or some other technical back­
ground (sometimes scientific) . It is rather surprising that 
Nocturnal Lights do not lead the list, as they do in most 
other studies. 
Less surprising is the fact that far fewer "high strange­
ness" cases were reported to the Air Force, or to be exact, 
reached the Blue Book desks. • 
. A check of cases available in the open literature, not 
!Deluding the unpublished files of APRO and NICAP, 
*We have ample evidence, not only from the reports received by 
the Center for UFO Studies, which is a relatively new organization, 
but from the two oldest civilian UFO fact-gathering organizations, 
the Aerial Phenomena Research Organization and the National In· 
vestigations Committee for Aerial Phenomena, that a large number 
of "high strangeness" cases have, in fact, occurred-particularly 
Close Encounter cases of all three types.

--- PAGE BREAK ---l In· 
vestigations Committee for Aerial Phenomena, that a large number 
of "high strangeness" cases have, in fact, occurred-particularly 
Close Encounter cases of all three types.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

266 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
shows that, conservatively, at least five times as many 
high strangeness cases did not reach the Blue Book list as 
did. Probably the figure is closer to ten times the cases than 
five. I surmise that the factor was larger in the late years 
of Blue Book because by that time the "all is nonsense" 
approach of the Air Force was well known and it had 
become clear to the general· public that reporting strange 
UFO events to the Air Force was not only pointless as a 
serious scientific matter, but was apt to bring ridicule to 
the reporter. 
. 
There is another reason which we touched on in an 
earlier· chapter. Even if reported, cases of "high strange­
ness" would have had a tough time making it through 
channels and finally arriving at Blue Book. Reports of 
humanoids and of strange physical, physiological, or elec­
tromagnetic effects would almost always be "solved at local 
level," and not even be brought before a panel of con­
sultants. 
We have seen this "screening" process at work at our 
own Center for UFO Studies. The center operates a toll­
free hot line, used exclusively by police and other official 
agencies to relay UFO sightings to the Center, where these 
reports are then investigated and analyzed. But though the 
Center does receive reports of high-strangeness cases-in­
volving humanoids and the like-it very rarely gets these 
through the bot-line facility. When queried about this after 
the fact, the police departments who initially received the 
cases b.ut did not report them almost invariably stated: 
"Oh, we wouldn't bother you with stuff like that!" Appar­
ently, "stuff like that" is too far out to be possible; or 
perhaps the police feel less "threatened" by reports of discs 
undergoing gyrations in the daytime sky or by strange 
lights in the night! At any rate, it seems likely that a 
similar "screening" process took place at Project Blue Book. 
One important question arises upon examining these 
"Revised Unknowns"-namely,- what were they before? Do 
these represent the cases that the Air Force had labeled 
"Psychological" or "Hoax"? Have we finally caught the Air 
Force pulling a fast one? 
Unfortunately for those who want to hold to the idea 
that the Air Force threw its best cases into the "Psy­
chological" and "Unreliable Witness" bin, the answer is 
no. Indeed, very few of the cases classified by the Airse who want to hold to the idea 
that the Air Force threw its best cases into the "Psy­
chological" and "Unreliable Witness" bin, the answer is 
no. Indeed, very few of the cases classified by the Air

--- PAGE BREAK ---to the idea 
that the Air Force threw its best cases into the "Psy­
chological" and "Unreliable Witness" bin, the answer is 
no. Indeed, very few of the cases classified by the Air

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
267 
Force as "Psychological" had their classifications reversed 
the 
second time 
around on the 
basis 
of Blue Book 
evidence alone. 
Instead, 
the 
classifications 
most often 
reversed were "Aircraft" and "Balloons." (Aircraft that 
made right-angle turns at high speed and balloons that 
caused electromagnetic effects! ) There does seem to have 
been a slight tendency for the Air Force to classify CE-IIIs 
as "Psychological"; but with only eight cases reported, we 
can hardly draw any certain conclusions. 
Most of the Air Force "Unidentifieds" held up under 
scrutiny of the re-evaluation investigators, although some 
of them were re-evaluated as conventional objects (several 
turned out to be balloons, aircraft or meteors) . Conversely, 
many of the Air Force evaluations of conventional objects 
had to be reascribed as "Insufficient Information" when­
ever it was clearly evident that the Air Force percentages 
quoted previously for the various categories of IFOs still 
held, even after re-evaluation. 
The "Where" of UFOs 
We have answered the question of when UFOs appear; 
now let ·us consider where they appear. Breakdowns of 
the "revised" Unidentifieds according to geographical dis­
tribution appear in Table 1 1 .6 and in Figure 1 1 .4. 
While the map shows pretty much what one might expect 
(namely concentrations toward the states of greatest area 
and population) there are a few surprises. One of these is 
the great number of reports in the state of New Mexico and 
the District of Columbia. While moderately large in area, 
New Mexico has a low population; yet it evinces a fair 
number of bona fide unidentified sightings. Also, the Dis­
trict of Columbia, minuscule in area, has six "Unidenti­
fieds" to its credit. 
These results only serve generally to corroborate a study 
carried out by Dr. David Saunders of the Center for UFO 
Studies. Dr. Saunders examined the cases in the Center's 
computer data bank, UFOCAT, for evidence of a correla­
tion of frequency of all sightings with population and area 
of counties. As might be expected, the counties with larger 
areas and larger populations showed the greatest number 
of UFO reports, all told.of frequency of all sightings with population and area 
of counties. As might be expected, the counties with larger 
areas and larger populations showed the greatest number 
of UFO reports, all told.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FIGURE 1 1 .4-GEOGRAPH ICAL DISTRI BUTION

--- PAGE BREAK ---

;:;::::::;::::: = 10-24 
=== 
= 5-9 
ʔ = 1-4 
c:::J 
= 0 
OF REVISED UNIDENTIFIEDS

--- PAGE BREAK ---ts, all told.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FIGURE 1 1 .4-GEOGRAPH ICAL DISTRI BUTION

--- PAGE BREAK ---

;:;::::::;::::: = 10-24 
=== 
= 5-9 
ʔ = 1-4 
c:::J 
= 0 
OF REVISED UNIDENTIFIEDS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

270 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
This overall result can, however, be misleading,Even in 
states or regions of high population density there are iso­
lated regions. I investigated a Close Encounter case in 
Washington, D.C., a high population area, yes, but this 
particular sighting occurred at night in Rock Creek Park 
which was, at that time, a most isolated spot! So the studies 
of Dr. Saunders and the revised statistics do not necessarily 
vitiate the statement that cases of high strangeness tend to 
occur in isolated areas, away from human habitation. 
It would seem from the statistics that one is more likely 
to see a genuine UFO (whatever that may turn out to be) 
if one lives in the Southwest or the Northeast. What this 
TABLE 1 1 .6-Geographical Distribution 
of Revised Unidentifieds 
State 
% of Total 
State 
% of Total 
Alabama 
1 .0% 
Montana 
2.1 % 
Alaska 
0.8 
Nebraska 
0.4 
Arizona . 
2.9 
Nevada 
1 .0 
Arkansas 
0.0 
New Hampshire 
0.4 
California 
9.9 
New Jersey 
2.3 
Colorado 
1 .6 
New Mexico 
5.2 
Connecticut 
0.2 
New York 
4.5 
Delaware 
0.2 
North Carolina 
2.5 
Dist. Col. 
1 .2 
North Dakota 
0.8 
Florida 
2.3 
Ohio 
4.5 
Georgia 
1 .7 
Oklahoma 
1 .0 
Hawaii 
0.2 
Oregon 
1.7 
Idaho 
0.4 
Pennsylvania 
3.9 
Illinois 
1 .9 
Rhode Island 
0.0 
Indiana 
1.7 
So1.1th Carolina 
0.6 
Iowa 
1 .2 
South Dakota 
0.6 
Kansas 
0.4 
Tennessee 
1 .9 
Kentucky 
1 .6 
Texas 
8.7 
Louisiana 
1 .4 
Utah 
0.2 
Maine 
1 .6 
Vermont 
0.2 
Maryland 
1.9 
Virginia 
3.1 
Massachusetts 
3.5 
Washington 
3 .5 
Michigan 
3.5 
West Virginia 
0.0 
Minnesota 
1 .7 
Wisconsin 
3.7 
Missouri 
1 .9 
Wyoming 
0.2

--- PAGE BREAK ---Vermont 
0.2 
Maryland 
1.9 
Virginia 
3.1 
Massachusetts 
3.5 
Washington 
3 .5 
Michigan 
3.5 
West Virginia 
0.0 
Minnesota 
1 .7 
Wisconsin 
3.7 
Missouri 
1 .9 
Wyoming 
0.2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK. 
271 
fact may be telling us about the nature of UFOs is un­
known at the present time. 
The People Who See UFOs 
While examining the cases in Project Blue Book, my 
colleagues and I kept careful records of the occupations of 
witnesses (with special attention paid to the military and 
trained technicians of all kinds ) . The correlation between 
occupation and what was perceived--or misperceived-is 
extremely interesting, and appears below: 
TABLE 1 1 .7-Witness Reliability as a 
Function of Occupation 
Occupation 
Military pilot 
(single witness) 
(multiple witness) 
Commercial pilot 
(single witness) 
(multiple witness ) 
Radar technicians 
(multiple witnesses) 
Technical person 
(single witness) 
(multiple witness) 
Other 
(multiple witness ) 
% of Misidentification 
88 
76 
89 
79 
78 
65 
50 
83 
It would seem that, as a rule, the best witnesses are 
multiple engineers or scientists; only 50 percent' of their 
sightings could be classified as misperceptionĜ. Surprisingly, 
commercial and military pilots appear to make relatively 
poor witnesses (though they do slightly better in groups) . 
What we have here is a good example of a well-known 
psychological fact: "transference" of skill and experience 
does not usually take place. That is, an expert in one field 
does not necessarily "transfer" his competence to another 
one. Thus, it might surprise us that a pilot had trouble 
identifying other aircraft. But it should come as no sur­
prise that a majority of pilot misidentifications were of 
astronomical objects.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ght surprise us that a pilot had trouble 
identifying other aircraft. But it should come as no sur­
prise that a majority of pilot misidentifications were of 
astronomical objects.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

272 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
As one might expect, the statistics do show that multiple 
witnesses are slightly better than single witnesses, since it 
is unlikely that a group of people would misperceive the 
same stimulus, group pressure notwithstanding. 
Blue Book Special Report Number 1 4 
The great "flap" of 1952 was, as far as we can judge 
from statistics, a "real" flap and not the result of mass 
hysteria. Its reverberations in the Pentagon were sufficiently 
great to have the Air Force commission the Battelle Me­
morial Institute in Columbus, Ohio-a private, highly re­
garded industrial research organization-to examine this 
prime question : Do "Unidentifieds" differ in basic charac­
teristics from "ldentifieds"? That is, if one considers these 
two main classifications separately, and examines each in 
terms of reported colors, number of objects, shapes, dura­
tion of observation, speed, and light brightness (when ap­
plicable) , docs one find similar descriptions reported for 
both groups? If so, one might deduce that "Unidentifieds" 
and "ldentifieds" belong to the same statistical "universe," 
to use the statistician's term, and, therefore, that "Unidenti­
fieds" are really all misidentifications of ordinary things, 
perhaps seen under unusual circumstances. If, on the other· 
hand, descriptions of "Unidentifieds" and "Identifieds" 
differ significantly, then one could make a stronger case 
for the existence of "real" UFOs. 
In statistical theory there is a time-honored metbod of 
determining the probability (statistics deals with probabili­
ties, not certainties) that one set of things is truly different 
from another set. This is the "chi-square" test, which one 
can find described in any standard text on statistics and 
probability theory. If you were examining, for instance, 
two crates of apples (but didn't know they were apples) , 
the chi-square test on sizes, weights, numbers of objects, 
etc., would tell you that the probability was very high that 
tbe same sort of things were in the two crates. But if one 
crate contained apples and the other tennis balls, the chi­
square test would tell you that the probability that both 
crates contained the same thing was extremely small-not 
zero, but very small! 
. 
The Battelle report showed that when six characteristics­
square test would tell you that the probability that both 
crates contained the same thing was extremely small-not 
zero, but very small! 
. 
The Battelle report showed that when six characteristics

--- PAGE BREAK ---tell you that the probability that both 
crates contained the same thing was extremely small-not 
zero, but very small! 
. 
The Battelle report showed that when six characteristics

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
273 
(color, shape, number, duration of observation, speed, light 
brightness) were given the chi-square test, the results were 
as follows: 
Probability that "Unidentifieds" Are 
the Same as Identifieds 
coLOR: Probability less than 1 % 
DURATION OF OBSERVATION; Probability very much Jess 
than 1 % 
NUMBER: Probability very much less than 1 % 
LIGHT BRIGHTNESS: Probability greater than 5 % 
SHAPE : Probability less than 1 % 
SPEED: Probability much less than 1 % 
Now any statistician will tell you that statistical tests are 
not infallible. He will also likely tell you that examining 
any šme characteristic, such as color, might involve subtle 
subjective differences, or purely unknown causes that could 
negate the results. But he will definitely tell you that it is 
most unlikely that all six of the characteristics examined 
by the Battelle study could be subject to the same sorts of 
errors, leading to an erroneous result. A quick calculation 
shows that the probability of all six UFO-characteristic 
chi-square tests giving the same results by chance (and 
thus making the conclusions drawn from the tests wrong) 
is much less than one chance in a billion. 
Yet, the conclusion of the Battelle report completely 
disregards the results of these tests-almost brazenly, as if 
they did not exist. How else can one explain this con­
clusion: "The results of these tests are not conclusive since 
they neither confirm nor deny that the UNKNOWNS are 
primarily unidentified KNOWNS, although they do indicate 
that relatively few of the UNKNOWNS are astronomical phe­
nomena." 
Further, the press release on Special Report No. 14 went 
on to state: 
" .
.
•
 it is considered to be highly improbable 
that any of the reports of unidentified 
aerial objects 
examined in the survey represent observations of techno­
logical developments outside the range of present-day sci­
entific knowledge." 
Well, okay. Those who cry "Air Force cover-up"-there's 
all the evidence you need. But, hold on, look at that state-no­
logical developments outside the range of present-day sci­
entific knowledge." 
Well, okay. Those who cry "Air Force cover-up"-there's 
all the evidence you need. But, hold on, look at that state-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ents outside the range of present-day sci­
entific knowledge." 
Well, okay. Those who cry "Air Force cover-up"-there's 
all the evidence you need. But, hold on, look at that state-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

274 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
ment again. Notice that it never denies that, as the chi­
square tests show, "Unidentifieds" are truly different from 
"ldentifieds"; it merely sidesteps the question by saying that 
Unidentifieds do not represent technological development. 
Well, suppose Unidentifieds turned out to be something 
outside the realm of technological devices? Suppose they 
weren't "nuts and bolts" hardware after all, but holographic 
images or projections from the human mind or from some' 
intelligence far off? The Pentagon would then be safe in 
having made the statement they did. And since the Air 
Force's joh is military, and deals with defense problems 
arising from possible enemy use of technological devices, 
they can always claim to have fulfilled their obligation to 
the public. 
The following quotation, from the final section of the 
report, summarizes its general tone and its conclusions: 
A critical examination of the distributions of the 
important characteristics of sightings, plus an intensive 
study of the sightings evaluated as UNKNOWN, led to 
the conclusion that a combination of factors, princi­
pally the reported maneuvers of the objects and the 
unavailability of supplemental data such as aircraft 
flight plans and balloon launching records, resulted in 
the failure to identify as KNOWN most of the reports of 
the objects classified as UNKNOWNS. 
This conclusion is utterly incredible in view of the re­
sults of the chi-square tests-all six criteria tested showed 
that it was irrelevant whether aircraft flight plans or bal­
loon launching records were available. 
Perhaps it is no wonder that Battelle did its very best 
to keep this project a secret. Although Blue Book was, 
according to Pentagon press releases, completely unclassi­
fied, the Battelle project was considered top secret. On 
many occasions I was reminded by Project Blue Book offi­
cers that under no circumstances must the name of the 
research organization be mentioned. The report was not 
published until 1955 (I was never given a copy) and only 
about one hundred were distributed on a "for Official use 
only" basis. The Pentagon press releases which subsequently 
appeared were not only ambiguous, they were untrue. And 
this UFO report becomes the one blight on the record ofed on a "for Official use 
only" basis. The Pentagon press releases which subsequently 
appeared were not only ambiguous, they were untrue. And 
this UFO report becomes the one blight on the record of

--- PAGE BREAK ---l use 
only" basis. The Pentagon press releases which subsequently 
appeared were not only ambiguous, they were untrue. And 
this UFO report becomes the one blight on the record of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
275 
an otherwise flawless scientific research organization. 
A further falling from scientific grace can be noted. The 
report states: "All records and working papers of this study 
have been carefully preserved in an orderly fashion suitable 
for ready reference." A few years ago I personally visited 
Battelle Memorial Institute and asked to see those "care­
fully preserved" records. I was told they had been destroyed. 
It is hardly good scientific practice to destroy original data, 
which can easily be preserved on microfilm. 
However, little blame can be laid on the Battelle group, 
which went about its business in very rigorous, scientific 
fashion. In many ways the study itself was a model of 
scientific procedure and certainly rates far higher than the 
Condon Report in this respect. 
Battelle used as its time base the period from June 1 , 
194 7 , to December 3 1 , 19 52, thus including the flap of 
1952. The reports studied were primarily those received 
through military channels, but the panel of scientists that 
was used to evaluate this body of data included persons 
from many different fields. I was not invited to be a part 
of the panel, perhaps because of my close association with 
Blue Book; Battelle wished, quite legitimately, to have an 
independent look at the subject. 
Out of the approximately 4,000 reports, some 799 were 
found to be so nebulous or sketchy in nature that few 
"facts" could be extracted from them; this left 3,201 cases. 
Since some of the reports were duplicates, this finally came 
down to 2,199 individual cases to work with. 
The procedure used in dealing with these cases was as 
rigorous as the anecdotal nature of the original reports 
would allow. First, as many discrete facts were extracted 
from each report as possible, taking care "to insure against 
the deduction of discrete facts not warranted by the original 
data." 
Next they dealt with the observer's credibility and the 
self-consistency of the report itself, that is, the absence of 
contradictions within the report and its general consistency, 
part by part. The observers were rated in a complex way 
accordinto age, training, "attitude," fact-reporting ability, 
occupation, etc. Reports were then subdivided on the basis 
of all the above into Excellent, Good, Doubtful, and Poor 
(reinember that almost 800 of the poorest had already 
been eliminated from further consideration) .ports were then subdivided on the basis 
of all the above into Excellent, Good, Doubtful, and Poor 
(reinember that almost 800 of the poorest had already 
been eliminated from further consideration) .

--- PAGE BREAK ---ivided on the basis 
of all the above into Excellent, Good, Doubtful, and Poor 
(reinember that almost 800 of the poorest had already 
been eliminated from further consideration) .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

276 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
Now came the actual evaluation of the report as to its 
most probable cause. There were ten possible categories: 
Balloon 
Astronomical 
Aircraft 
Light Phenomena 
Birds 
Clouds, Etc. 
Insufficient Information 
Psychological 
Unknown 
Other 
Assign,ment to these categories was certainly not haphaz­
ard; in fact, there were several stages involved in the 
process. First the report was set forth onto a "worksheet," 
and a primary evaluation was made. Next the "identifica­
tion panel," unaware of what the first evaluation was, 
made theirs. The identification was accepted if both of 
these matched, and if they were not "Unknown." Disagree­
ment meant further consideration until a consensus was 
reached. If the evaluation was "Unknown," Report No. 1 4 
states that the entire panel bad to be brought in and "a 
group decision was necessary on all reports finally recorded 
as UNKNOWN, regardless of what the preliminary identifi­
cation bad been." In cases where a group decision was not 
made in a reasonable time, the report was put aside and 
later submitted to certain members of the panel of con­
sultants for their opinions. If, after this, the disagreement 
continued to exist, the report of the sighting was labeled 
"Unknown." 
It is especially important to note the great care that was 
taken, especially with "Unknowns," because Battelle's re­
sults in this particular category brought some interesting 
information to light. One would intuitively expect that more 
"Unknowns" would be generated by the less reliable ob­
servers, and that, therefore, we should find the highest 
percentage of "Unknowns" among the Doubtful or Poor 
reports. (Condon and others had indeed indicated that un­
explained sightings came invariably from poor observers. ) 
Quite the opposite proved to be the case: out of 970 
Excellent- and Good-rated reports, 259, or 27 percent wered indeed indicated that un­
explained sightings came invariably from poor observers. ) 
Quite the opposite proved to be the case: out of 970 
Excellent- and Good-rated reports, 259, or 27 percent were

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat un­
explained sightings came invariably from poor observers. ) 
Quite the opposite proved to be the case: out of 970 
Excellent- and Good-rated reports, 259, or 27 percent were

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
277 
classified "Unknown." But out of 1,229 Doubtful-
and 
Poor-rated reports, 175 or 14 percent were classified "Un­
known." If one limits oneself to the Excellent versus the 
Poor sightings (213 and 435 sightings, respectively) one 
finds that the "Unknowns" make up 33 percent of the 
Excellent reports and only 17 percent of the Poor reports. 
In tabular form we have: 
Reliability 
Rating of Report 
Excellent 
Good 
Doubtful 
Poor 
% Unknown 
33.3 
24.8 
13.0 
1 6.6 
Total 
Number of Reports 
213 
757 
794 
435 
2,199 
The Battelle study further differentiated between military 
observers and civilians and found nearly 3 8 percent of the 
Excellent reports turned in by military observers were "Un­
knowns" while only 21 percent' of the military reports 
rated Poor were "Unknown." 
More simply stated, the most reliable reports contained 
about twice as many "Unknowns" as did the poorer re­
ports! This surprising and significant result was nowhere 
mentioned in the report conclusions or in the later press 
releases. It was buried in the report itself, but how many 
reporters and media people bothered to dig it out? None, 
to my knowledge. 
That it was the prior intent of the Pentagon to use the 
Battelle report-whatever its results-to support the recom­
mendations of the Robertson Panel that UFOs be "de­
bunked," seems quite clear. This is further supported by 
a letter to Gen. Watson from Capt. Hardin, then head of 
Blue Book, dated February 1956. 
A review of recent books on Unidentified Flying 
Objects appearing in the New York Times issue of 22 
January 1956 is highly complimentary to our Special 
Report 14. Written by Jonathan N. Leonard, a science 
editor and author of Flight into Space, it gives con­
siderable credence and support to our UFO position. 
It would appear from this review that the downgrad-ritten by Jonathan N. Leonard, a science 
editor and author of Flight into Space, it gives con­
siderable credence and support to our UFO position. 
It would appear from this review that the downgrad-

--- PAGE BREAK ---. Leonard, a science 
editor and author of Flight into Space, it gives con­
siderable credence and support to our UFO position. 
It would appear from this review that the downgrad-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

278 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
ing and subsequent release of Special Report 14 is 
serving well the purpose for which it was .intended. 
[Italics added.] 
Science writer Leonard apparently missed the message 
of Special Report 14, for he writes in the same issue of 
The New York Times, " . . . the Air Force released the re­
sults of a massive, intelligent, painstaking and detailed 
analysis of all flying saucer reports. It employed excellent 
scientists and used elaborate apparatus. The conclusion is 
negative . . . the scientists found no evidence whatever that 
even the few surviving 'unknowns' were likely to have come 
from space." 
First of all, since when does 22 percent of reports 
studied in Blue Book No. 14 constitute a "few surviving 
'unknowns' "? Table 8 in that Air Force report shows that 
of the 2,199 reports that the Battelle scientists studied, 434 
were classed as "Unknowns," and 240 were classed as 
having "Insufficient Information" to allow study. Thus 22 
percent of all cases for which sufficient data were available 
for study in the "massive, intelligent, painstaking and de­
tailed analysis" were classed as "Unknowns." Hardly "a 
few." 
Second, the statement "were unlikely to have come from 
space" is irrelevant. The Battelle study was directed toward 
finding out whether a new unknown phenomenon existed­
not to designate its origin. It is first important to determine 
whether or not a phenomenon exists; only then should one 
consider possible origins. 
The conclusions of the Battelle report and the material 
in the Pentagon press releases that followed were clearly 
designed to give the impression that science had adminis­
tered the coup de grace to UFOs (the summary of the 
Condon Report, some years later, was fashioned to give 
the same impression)-except, of course, it wasn't science 
at all; only shamefully biased interpretation of statistics to 
support a preconceived notion. Once again, statistics which 
could have been used to illuminate were used instead to 
debunk the UFO phenomenon.only shamefully biased interpretation of statistics to 
support a preconceived notion. Once again, statistics which 
could have been used to illuminate were used instead to 
debunk the UFO phenomenon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 2 ============== 
BLUE BOOK END GAME: 
THE CONDON REPORT 
• 
This unusual sighting should therefore be assigned to 
the category of some almost certainly natural phe­
nomenon which is so rare that it apparently has never 
been reported before or since. 
-from the Condon Report 
The released files of Project Blue Book contain little that 
is specific about the events that led to the demise of Project 
Blue Book, particularly the role played by the Condon Re­
port and its complete endorsement by the National Acad­
emy of Sciences, an endorsement which, in my opinion, 
will come back to haunt this prestigious body just as the 
fall of meteorites came back to haunt the French Academy 
of Sciences more than a century ago. 
The events which led to the abandonment of Project 
Blue Book are, however, certainly an integral part of the 
Blue Book story-and deserve to be told. It was no secret 
to those on the Blue Book staff in Dayton, Ohio, that the 
Air Force had been seeking, for several years, an honor­
able way out of processing UFO reports. Project Blue 
Book had become more and more of a public relations 
burden to the Air Force, and as long as its methodology 
and attitudes remained unchanged, this burden was likely 
to increase. 
In 1965, paralleling the attempts to get Blue Book off 
the Air Force's back, there was. oddly enough, an effort 
being made within Blue Book itself to improve their pro­
cedures. I had made one of my periodic attempts in this 
direction, and, earlier that year, had sent a letter to Maj. 
Gen. E.D. LeBailly, strongly suggesting that a scientific 
panel from outside the Air Force be set up to review Blue 
Book procedures and that. unlike previous panels, these

--- PAGE BREAK ---Maj. 
Gen. E.D. LeBailly, strongly suggesting that a scientific 
panel from outside the Air Force be set up to review Blue 
Book procedures and that. unlike previous panels, these

--- PAGE BREAK ---

280 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
men come "prepared to do their homework." It was with 
considerable personal pleasure that I noted in a letter of 
Maj. Gen. LeBailly's, to the military director of the Scien­
tific Advisory Board of the Air Force, dated September 28, 
1 965, that some of my suggestions were used; he asked 
that "a working scientific panel 
. 
• . review Project Blue 
Book and advise the Air Force as to any improvements 
that should be made . . . to carry out the Air Force's as­
signed responsibility." He went on to note that I would be 
ready to fully assist such a committee. But my serv'ices 
were never requested. 
General LeBailly's letter did, however, lead to the for­
mation of the O'Brien Committee which met in February 
1966 and recommended that: 
"A UFO program be 
strengthened to provide opportunity for scientific investiga­
tion of selected sightings in more detail and depth than 
has been possible to date." The committee then made a 
most important recommendation which, had it been carried 
out, would very likely have led to quite a different result 
than the one achieved by the Condon Committee. It recom­
mended that the Air Force negotiate contracts "with a few 
selected universities to provide selected sightings of UFOs." 
[Italics added.] It went on to specify that a single university 
should coordinate the teams which, together, should study 
perhaps a hundred sightings per year, devoting an average 
of ten man-days to each investigation and the resulting 
report. These recommendations were put forth by the 
committee in the hope that such investigations would "pro­
vide a far better basis than we have today for our decision 
on a long-term UFO program." 
It is my opinion that those seeking to "get the Air 
Force out of the UFO business" saw here a chance to turn 
the recommendations to their own advantage. When, there­
fore, the notorious Michigan wave of sightings occurred 
in March 1966 (just a month after the O'Brien recom­
mendations were made), and Congressmen Gerald Ford 
and Weston Vivian called for a Congressional hearing on 
the UFO subject, the O'Brien recommendations were im­
plemented, but with a somewhat different end in view. 
In keeping with the O'Brien recommendation, several 
independent universities were to examine specific, interest­
ing UFO cases as they occurred, sending competent persons 
into the field, and to do this on a continuing basis untilommendation, several 
independent universities were to examine specific, interest­
ing UFO cases as they occurred, sending competent persons 
into the field, and to do this on a continuing basis until

--- PAGE BREAK ---independent universities were to examine specific, interest­
ing UFO cases as they occurred, sending competent persons 
into the field, and to do this on a continuing basis until

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
281 
conclusions could be reached as to whether or not the UFO 
phenomenon was worthy of scientific study. But note the 
great difference between "determining whether the UFO 
phenomenon was worthy of scientific study" and "de­
termining whether we were being visited by extraterrestrial 
beings." The first was true to basic scientific principles; the 
second was merely the testing of a given hypothesis. 
Although I was at the Congressional hearing that was 
set up to implement the O'Brien recommendations, I was 
not privy to the behind-the-scenes action that set them into 
motion. I was saddened when I later saw the UFO inves­
tigation located at one university rather than at several, 
and placed directly in the hands of one, and only one, 
prominent scientist. It came to pass that the contract was 
given to the University of Colorado, specifying that Dr. 
Edward U. Condon, a member of the Physics Department, 
be solely in charge. The Condon Committee was in exis­
tence from October 1966 to November 1968. The official 
title of their final report was "The Scientific Study of 
Unidentified Flying Objects" ; but it is more generally 
known as the "Condon Report." 
Almost from the start, the Condon Committee ran into 
troubles. The foremost of these stemmed from the person­
alities of the director, Dr. Condon, and his chief adminis­
trator, the late Robert Low. These are detailed best in Dr. 
David Saunders' book, UFOs: Yes!, and in less detail in 
my own book, The UFO Experience. The committee never 
worked as a coherent body and was torn by much internal 
strife. 
The report itself was issued early in 1969. The negative 
conclusions and recommendations in Dr. Condon's sum­
mary chapter were all that the Air Force needed to relieve 
itself of the Blue Book burden. At a top-level meeting at 
the Pentagon in March 1969, the fate of Blue Book was 
decided. From the moment the meeting opened, it was a 
foregone conclusion that Blue Book was through. 
But what of the Condon Report itself? Was it actually 
a negative report? Surprisingly, if one goes past Dr. Con­
don's summary, and Walter Sullivan's (science editor of 
The New York Times) introduction, and concentrates on 
the case investigations themselves, one will probably find 
the Condon Report to be a powerful document in favor of 
the reality of the UFO phenomenon.w York Times) introduction, and concentrates on 
the case investigations themselves, one will probably find 
the Condon Report to be a powerful document in favor of 
the reality of the UFO phenomenon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---uction, and concentrates on 
the case investigations themselves, one will probably find 
the Condon Report to be a powerful document in favor of 
the reality of the UFO phenomenon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

282 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
. I am reminded of a visit I had, about a year after the 
Condon Report was issued, from Dr. Claude Poher, of the 
French Committee Nationale Etudes Spaciaux (CNES) 
who had been conducting some rocket experiments at 
Cape Kennedy in Florida. In the course of our conversa­
tion, he expressed a very serious interest in the UFO phe­
nomenon and I asked him whence his interest sprang. He 
replied, "I read the Condon Report." I asked how that 
possibly could have spurred his interest and he replied in 
a most serious manner, "If you really read the Condon 
Report and don't stop with Condon's summary, you will 
find that there is a real problem there." I couldn't agree 
more. 
It is not the province of this book to enter into a critical 
review· of the Condon Report. This has been done quite 
adequately by several authors, notably Dr. Joachim Kuett­
ner/ Dr. Peter Sturrock,1 David Jacobs,8 David Saunders,' 
James E. McDonald,6 and myself.6 
Nevertheless, a few highlights from various critiques of 
the Condon Report are, I believe, essential in order for 
the reader to recognize its true value and the obfuscating 
nature of Dr. Condon's summary. 
A statement by the UFO Sub-Committee of the AIAA 
reads, "To understand the Condon Report, which is diffi­
cult to read, due in part to its organization, one must study 
the bulk of the report. It is not enough to read summaries 
such as those by Sullivan and by Condon, or summaries 
of summaries on which the vast majority of readers . 
• 
• 
seem to rely. There are differences in the opinions and 
conclusions drawn by the authors of the various chapters 
and there are differences between these and Condon's sum­
mary. Not all conclusions contained in the report itself 
are fully reflected in Condon's summary. 
. 
. 
• Condon's 
chapter, summary of the study, contains more than its title 
indicates: it discloses many of his personal conclusions . 
• 
• 
'Kuettner, Chairman of the American Institute of Aeronautics 
and Astronautics Sub-Committee on UFOs, November 1970 issue 
of Astronautics and Aeronautics. 
2Sturrock, "Evaluation of the Condon Report on the Colorado 
UFO Project." 
8Jacobs, The UFO Controversy in America. 
•saunders, UFOs: Y est 
"McDonald, The UFO Investigation, February-March 1969. 
'Hynek, Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, April 1969.he Colorado 
UFO Project." 
8Jacobs, The UFO Controversy in America. 
•saunders, UFOs: Y est 
"McDonald, The UFO Investigation, February-March 1969. 
'Hynek, Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, April 1969.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ject." 
8Jacobs, The UFO Controversy in America. 
•saunders, UFOs: Y est 
"McDonald, The UFO Investigation, February-March 1969. 
'Hynek, Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, April 1969.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
283 
the UFO Sub-Committee did not find a basis in the report 
for his prediction that 'nothing of scientific value will come 
of further studies.' Dr. Condon had stated in his summary 
that further studies of UFOs 'probably cannot be justified 
in the expectation that science will be advanced thereby.' " 
In making such a sweeping statement Condon should 
have kept in mind the dictum of Sir James Jeans: "It is 
the unexpected that happens in science.'' Suppose the early 
pioneers of science had adopted Condon's attitude and 
throttled human curiosity at its source whenever some­
thing new and unexplained appeared oil the horizon. As 
Dr. Anthony Michaelis, science editor of the London Daily 
Telegraph, once pointed out, "The reality of meteorites, 
of hypnosis, of the continental drift theory, of germs, of 
the city of Troy, and of Pleistocene man were in the past 
dismissed with· scorn and laughter . . . . 
" 
How does one know with oracular certainty that any 
investigation conducted along scientific lines will or will 
not be productive? To dismiss out of hand the thousands 
of UFO reports from all over the world, and from basically 
credible witnesses, on the grounds that one person does not 
believe any good can come of further investigation, seems 
to me the very length of tunnel vision. 
But let us look at some of the findings buried deep within 
the Condon Report, and draw our own conclusions. It 
seems incredible that Dr. Condon could have completely 
overlooked statements such as the following. 
In conclusion, although conventional or natural ex­
planations certainly cannot be ruled out, proba­
bility of such seems low in this case and the proba­
bility that at least one genuine UFO was involved 
appears to be fairly high. (Case #2 p. CR 251.) 
Or a statement that a regular staff member on the Colorado 
Project wrote, in summarizing a case he had been studying: 
This must remain as one of the most puzzling radar 
cases on record and no conclusion is possible at this 
time. It seems inconceivable that an anomalous propa­
gation (AP) echo would behave in the manner de­
scribed even if AP had been likely at the time. In 
view of meteorological situation, it would seem thatIt seems inconceivable that an anomalous propa­
gation (AP) echo would behave in the manner de­
scribed even if AP had been likely at the time. In 
view of meteorological situation, it would seem that

--- PAGE BREAK ---le that an anomalous propa­
gation (AP) echo would behave in the manner de­
scribed even if AP had been likely at the time. In 
view of meteorological situation, it would seem that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

284 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
AP was rather unlikely. Besides, what is the propa­
bility that an AP return would appear only once and 
that time appear to execute a perfect ILS (instrument 
landing system) approach? (Case #21, pp. CR 17-
171.) 
Or this passage concerning the now famous McMinnville, 
Oregon, photographs of May 1 1, f950 (Case #46, p. CR 
407) : 
This is one of the few UFO reports in which all 
factors 
investigated, 
geometric, 
psychological, 
and 
physical, appear to be consistent with the assertion 
that an extraordinary flying object, silvery, metallic, 
disc-shaped, tens of meters in diameter, and evidently 
artificial, flew within the sight of two witnesses. It 
cannot be said that the evidence positively rules out 
fabrication, although there are some factors such as 
the accuracy of certain photometric measures on the 
original negatives, which argue against such an asser­
tion.* 
With respect to the famous Great Falls, Montana, sight­
ing of August 15, 1950, the Condon Report states: 
The case 
remains unexplained. 
Analysis indicates 
that the images on the film are difficult to reconcile 
with aircraft or other known phenomena, although 
aircraft cannot entirely be ruled out. 
The work of Dr. R.M.L. Baker* * fully supports this 
statement and proves convincingly that the aircraft analysis 
is untenable. 
The above are just a few examples of Condon's blatant 
disregard of the contents of his own report. It would be 
*The author of that last comment, Dr. William Hartman, later 
had some misgivings about so positive a statement and issued, in 
effect, a retraction. However, recent work by Dr. Bruce Maccabee 
(Proc. CUFOS Con., pp. 152-163) bears out Hartman's original 
estimate: the detailed analysis of the original negatives provides 
strong evidence that the object photographed was at a distance of at 
least a mile from the camera, thus effectively ruling out a hoax. 
**Baker, Journal of the Astronautical Sciences, January-February, 
1968, Vol. XV, No. 1, pp. 1731-36.raphed was at a distance of at 
least a mile from the camera, thus effectively ruling out a hoax. 
**Baker, Journal of the Astronautical Sciences, January-February, 
1968, Vol. XV, No. 1, pp. 1731-36.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ance of at 
least a mile from the camera, thus effectively ruling out a hoax. 
**Baker, Journal of the Astronautical Sciences, January-February, 
1968, Vol. XV, No. 1, pp. 1731-36.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR • .J. ALLEN HYNEK 
285 
kinder to assume that he never read the report in full 
rather than to charge him with being guilty of the unsci­
entific procedure of choosing only those elements of the 
report which suited his own purposes. 
A more detailed critique of the Condon Report is not 
in place here; but it is appropriate to summarize rather 
quickly the main reason why the Condon Committee 
went astray. Jacobs, in his book The UFO Controversy in 
America, provides some of the explanation : 
Condon was unable 
to 
maintain a 
continuous 
project staff; out of the original twelve only Low 
(chief administrator) and two other full-time staff 
members remained with the project for its full dura­
tion. Much of the personal conflict was based on the 
philosophical issue of what assumptions to 
make 
when investigating cases. Neither of the two groups 
involved saw the primary focus as being to deter­
mine whether UFOs constituted an anomalous phe­
nomenon. 
Instead, 
one 
group 
with 
Saunders 
as 
spokesman thought that the committee should con­
sider the extra-terrestrial hypothesis and other the­
ories about the origin of UFOs; his group wanted to 
look at as much of the data as possible. The other 
group, with Low as spokesman, thought the extra­
terrestrial theory was nonsense and believed that so­
lution to the UFO mystery was to be found in the 
psychological make-up of the witnesses. The main 
conflict was whether UFOs were an extra-terrestrial 
phenomenon rather than whether they constituted 
a unique aerial phenomenon. 
Therein lies the fatal mistake. Had they adhered to the 
original recommendations of the O'Brien Committee and 
examined not whether UFOs were visitors from outer 
space but whether a phenomenon existed (regardless of 
origin) , which was worthy of scientific study, the final 
report might have been worthwhile. As it was, they be­
came embroiled in discussing one specific theory of UFOs, 
namely that they were extraterrestrial spacecraft. In so 
doing, they broke a cardinal rule of scientific procedure­
get the facts straight first be/ore attempting to theorize. 
Not only did the Condon Committee address itself torrestrial spacecraft. In so 
doing, they broke a cardinal rule of scientific procedure­
get the facts straight first be/ore attempting to theorize. 
Not only did the Condon Committee address itself to

--- PAGE BREAK ---. In so 
doing, they broke a cardinal rule of scientific procedure­
get the facts straight first be/ore attempting to theorize. 
Not only did the Condon Committee address itself to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

286 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
the wrong problem but it neglected to find a suitable 
definition for the problem under attack. The definition of 
UFO used by Dr. Condon led to an inordinate waste of 
time and money. He defined UFO as "an unidentified fly­
ing object 
. 
. 
• which is defined as the stimulus for a re­
port made by one or more individuals as something seen 
in the sky 
• 
. . which the observer could not identify as 
having an ordinary, natural origin." (Italics added. ) The 
sky is full of things which many observers find puzzling: 
bright planets, meteors, advertising planes, twinkling stars, 
etc. While it is true that the "U" in UFO means unidenti­
fied, we must always remember to ask "unidentified to 
whom?" A bright planet such as Venus shining through a 
cloud cover which is sufficiently thick to blot out the rest 
of the stars may appear strange and mysterious to a 
given observer, but it would not be to an astronomer. In 
my opinion, the definition Dr. Condon should have used 
is: "The reported sighting of an aerial phenomenon (close 
to or on the ground) which defies explanation not only by 
the original observer but by those persons technically com­
petent to make an identification in natural terms if pos­
sible." 
The use of Condon's definition lowered the floodgates 
to dozens of UFO reports which should not have been 
eligible for study by the Condon Committee. Lens flares, 
cloud formations, 
meteors, balloons, 
and 
other 
IFOs 
(identifiable 
flying 
objects) 
needlessly 
squandered the 
time of the Condon Committee. The Committee should 
have lived up to the title of its report: "The Scientific 
Study of Unidentified Flying Objects," and should have 
limited its survey to truly unidentified reports. 
Nonetheless, in spite of the loose definition of UFO 
used (which therefore greatly increased the chances of 
identifying the cases they had studied) the Condon Com­
mittee still could not identify about one-third of the cases 
it studied! Had the obvious IFOs been excluded from 
consideration to begin with, the Condon staff would have 
been left with the embarrassing situation of not being able 
to explain the great majority of the cases they examined; 
which, of course, is the true meaning of UFO--cases 
which remain unidentified even after examination by ex­
perts.uation of not being able 
to explain the great majority of the cases they examined; 
which, of course, is the true meaning of UFO--cases 
which remain unidentified even after examination by ex­
perts.

--- PAGE BREAK ---able 
to explain the great majority of the cases they examined; 
which, of course, is the true meaning of UFO--cases 
which remain unidentified even after examination by ex­
perts.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
287 
A correct interpretation of the Condon Report is thus, 
it seems to me, diametrically opposed to that which Dr. 
Condon stated in his summary. The great majority of the 
truly puzzling cases that the Committee set about to ex­
plain remained unexplained, and were therefore by defi­
nition, UFOs. Thus, the conclusion of the Committee 
should have been: "The UFO phenomenon is real." Once 
that was established, there should have been no question 
as to whether UFOs are a fitting subject for further scien­
tific inquiry. 
Had the results of the Condon Report been correctly in­
terpreted, its release would, most probably, have produced 
some constructive approaches to the UFO problem. But 
the media handling of the Condon Report, and its re­
sounding endorsement by the National Academy of Sci­
ences, led many to think that UFOs had "had it," and 
that the problem had indeed been solved. 
The endorsement of the report by the National Acad­
emy of Sciences is difficult to explain; one can only as­
sume that the very busy men charged with the responsi­
bility of reviewing the Condon Report found it too bulky 
and burdensome to read in detail and based their endorse­
ment largely on the heretofore solid scientific reputation 
of Dr. Condon. 
The Condon Report, as popularly interpreted by the 
media, did, however, admirably serve the purposes of the 
Pentagon. On December 17, 1969, after nearly a year 
had passed, Air Force Secretary Robert Seamans termi­
nated Project Blue Book. He stated, on the basis of the 
recommendations of Dr. Condon (and not, to be exact, 
of the Condon Committee, members of which had widely 
divergent opinions) that Blue Book could not be con­
tinued because it "cannot be justified either on the 
grounds of national security or in the interest of science." 
To the majority of the public this was indeed the 
coup de grfice to the UFO era. Science had spoken. UFOs 
didn't exist, and the thousands of people who had re­
ported strange sightings (and the probable many thou­
sands more wlto were reluctant to report) could all be 
discounted as deluded, hoaxers, or mentally unbalanced. 
The UFOs, however, apparently did not read the Con­
don Report. When, in the fall of 1973, a major wave ofe reluctant to report) could all be 
discounted as deluded, hoaxers, or mentally unbalanced. 
The UFOs, however, apparently did not read the Con­
don Report. When, in the fall of 1973, a major wave of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

288 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
UFO reports occurred in the United States, the cold, 
clammy hand of the Condon Report was at last lifted by 
the UFO phenomenon itself. 
And in 1971 the reports continue to flow.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

EPILOGUE 
Since 1947 many peoples of the world have become in­
creasingly . aware of that bizarre phenomenon we call 
UFOs-but it has been too strange, too unacceptable, and 
too uncomfortable for either the scientific world (which 
should have expressed at least some scientific curiosity 
about a subject that concerned so large a number of peo­
ple) and for the military (which should have been less 
interested in maintaining its public image of invincibility 
and omniscience) to accord it more than a passing (and 
disdainful) glance. 
Now that more than a quarter of a century has passed, 
and the UFO phenomenon is still with us (not having 
obliged the savants who declared it to be but a passing 
fad) a call for a reappraisal of the situation is in order. 
And so let us make one here and now : 
Let all who have, either through native interest, through 
reading, or through personal experience (and there are 
far more of these than appear in any statistics) a sincere 
interest in having a thorough and unbiased-and scien­
tific-ongoing study made of the entire UFO phenomenon 
lend their support to bringing such a study into being. 
The stage is set for this new adventure into uncharted 
fields; there exists today a growing number of scientifically 
and techncally trained persons who 
are 
ready to de­
vote their time and attention to the whole matter of the 
nature of UFOs, and to follow wherever the search may 
lead. 
Let us giv@ them our encouragement and our support.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y to de­
vote their time and attention to the whole matter of the 
nature of UFOs, and to follow wherever the search may 
lead. 
Let us giv@ them our encouragement and our support.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIX A 
For general help in the preparation of this book and for 
the following story about Astronaut Slayton, I am in­
debted to Richard Budelman, former press secretary to 
the mayor of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and currently con­
sultant on local governmental problems. He introduced 
the Slayton story in this way: "On numerous occasions 
at cocktail parties and other social gatherings, I discussed 
the subject of UFOs with numbers of people. Some told 
of their own sightings or experiences with these enig­
matic objects; not the least of which was a story told me 
as a reporter by Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, of Sparta, 
Wisconsin. 
"I was a general assignment reporter with the Milwau­
kee Journal at the time and had been assigned to cover a 
press conference kicking off the annual Easter Seal drive. 
Slayton was honorary chairman of the drive. Following 
his press conference, I asked for a separate interview on 
the subject of women ever becoming astronauts, my spe­
cial assignment from my editor. 
"During the interview I raised the subject of UFOs. I 
asked him whether the astronauts placed any credence in 
UFO reports. He said he had never discussed the subject 
with them but, after a pause, he calmly told me that he 
had once had an aerial encounter with a UFO over St. 
Paul, Minnesota. It was 1951 and he was maintenance 
officer and test pilot for a P-5 1 fighter group based in 
Minneapolis. A tornado had struck his base, damaging 
two full squadrons of P-5 1 aircraft. It was while flight­
testing one of the aircraft, in bright daylight, that he c;:n­
countered a disc-shaped object, pursued it, but lost it 
after it went into a climbing left turn as he closed in on 
it."

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing one of the aircraft, in bright daylight, that he c;:n­
countered a disc-shaped object, pursued it, but lost it 
after it went into a climbing left turn as he closed in on 
it."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
291 
Budelman told me that he thought he had the news 
scoop of the year-an astronaut had seen a genuine 
UFO! But his newspaper refused to print the story, on 
the grounds that their "science editor did not believe in 
UFOs"! 
Slayton confirmed this story in a letter to me, in which 
he stated : "During one of these test flights . . . I was 
cruising at about 10,000 feet. The only reason this num­
ber sticks in my mind is because my first reaction upon 
seeing the object was that it was a kite, and a few seconds 
later it occurred to me that this could not be the case. 
"Upon closer examination the object was obviously at 
about my altitude and seemed to be coming from the op­
posite direction, so I continued to watch it until it was 
directly off my left wing and about 500 feet below. At 
this point it appeared to be a round balloon of about the 
size of a weather balloon, and I assumed that was what 
it was. I decided to make a pass on it and did a 1 80-de­
gree turn which put me directly in trail of the object . . . . 
Upon getting in trail, it appeared to be a disc-shaped ob­
ject rather than round, sitting at about a 45-degree angle 
with the horizon. The object seemed to be somewhat 
slower than I at that point, but started to accelerate and 
went into a climbing left turn as I closed on it. I lost 
sight of it . . . and returned to home base. 
"I did make a report the following day to our intelli­
gence section and have discussed the subject with. numbers 
of people since, but attach no great importance to it. My 
only conclusion was that it was an unidentified object, at 
least to me, and I would not speculate as to what it might 
have been. Since it was a bright clear day, I have dis­
counted its being a weather illusion or an optical illu­
sion."entified object, at 
least to me, and I would not speculate as to what it might 
have been. Since it was a bright clear day, I have dis­
counted its being a weather illusion or an optical illu­
sion."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIX B 
Major Pestalozzi's July 7 Letter to Dr. McDonald: 
(See sketch, p. 1 1 1) 
Dear Jim: 
' The information you requested several weeks ago 
concerning a UFO report submitted by me, as re· 
porting officer, to the USAF Project Blue Book, fol· 
lows: 
The intervening years and a very mediocre mem· 
ory do, of course, preclude my recalling the exact 
date, report data such as time, meteorological condi· 
tions [these obtained later from existing Blue Book 
records of this case are: Weather clear, visibility 50 
miles, temp. 72 deg. F., dew point 50 deg. F., wind 
calm, sea-level pressure 143 millibars, station pres· 
sure 27.3 10 inches], flight altitude (which must have 
been about 20,000 feet), names of observers, etc. I 
will, however, relate the incident to you to the best 
of my recollection. 
While standing on the front entrance steps of the 
Davis-Monthan Air Force Base Hospital, I observed 
the approach of two UFOs upon a B-36 flying on a 
general east-west heading directly over the base. The 
UFOs appeared, from the ground, to be round in 
shape and metallic in color (the same color as the 
B-36) . The objects approached the aircraft from the 
northeast at a speed about three or four times that of 
the aircraft. 
The two objects appeared to be about the same 
size when first observed. One object appeared to gain 
altitude as it approached the aircraft because it 
seemed to grow smaller. It stationed itself, at the

--- PAGE BREAK ---to be about the same 
size when first observed. One object appeared to gain 
altitude as it approached the aircraft because it 
seemed to grow smaller. It stationed itself, at the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
293 
B-36 speed, just behind and to the port side of the 
B-36. The second stationed itself between the pusher­
type prop spinners and the leading edge of the star­
board elevators. The air crew, which landed the air­
craft at DMAFB, 
and were interrogated by me, 
confirmed the ground-observed stationing of this ob­
ject in this extremely close proximity to the aircraft. 
I can no longer remember the length of time of the 
observation, but all of the air crew members, ex­
cept one who flew the aircraft during the entire inci­
dent, were able to get to the starboard observation 
port to see the UFO. 
The objects were reported to be symmetrically 
convex top and bottom, about 10 or 12 feet thick 
from top to bottom at the middle and quite sharp at 
the edge. (The crew gave an approximate figure in 
inches which I cannot remember.) The object was 
reported by the crew, as I remember, to be about 20 
or 25 feet in diameter. (It fit rather snugly between 
spinners and elevator. ) 
Some of the air crew members reported seeing a 
pale band of red color about halfway between the 
top and the edge of the object All members did not 
see this color band, however. Upon questioning, the 
pilots denied that the objects interfered with either 
the flying characteristics of the B-36 or the naviga­
tion or radio equipment. 
Upon departure from the aircraft the UFO lost 
altitude, crossed under the aircraft, joined the other 
object, and the two departed at extremely high speed 
in 
a 
southerly 
direction. 
(Aircraft 
altitude, 
air­
speed, heading, UFO headings, approximate speeds 
and exact size estimates are in the original report, 
but I cannot remember them. ) [What a loss not to 
have the original detailed report! One can only won­
der how it disappeared.] During the close proximity 
of the object the pilots did not try evasive action. 
The aircraft and crew were from Carswell AFB, 
Texas, and were on a flight to March AFB, Cal. It is 
possible that this report is filed in Blue Book archives 
under either of those base names. [Unfortunately, it 
is not].were from Carswell AFB, 
Texas, and were on a flight to March AFB, Cal. It is 
possible that this report is filed in Blue Book archives 
under either of those base names. [Unfortunately, it 
is not].

--- PAGE BREAK ---

294 
THE HYNEK. UFO REPORT 
I hope this report and the diagram are of some 
help, Jim. 
Signed, 
[Maj. Pestalozzi]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ose base names. [Unfortunately, it 
is not].

--- PAGE BREAK ---

294 
THE HYNEK. UFO REPORT 
I hope this report and the diagram are of some 
help, Jim. 
Signed, 
[Maj. Pestalozzi]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIX C 
Selfridge Sighting: Officer's Narrative Report 
On the night of 9 March 1950, our radar station was in op­
eration monitoring night flying by units of the 56th Fighter­
Interceptor Group, Selfridge AFB, Mich. I came on duty 
approximately at sundown, relieved 1st Lt. Mattson at 
the PPI scope (of the AM/CPS-5 Radar Sight), and es­
tablished contact with the F-80s already airborne. Lt. 
Mattson, Sgt. McCarthy, and Cpl. Melton, who made up 
the rest of our crew for this night, mentioned to me at 
this time that an aircraft had been picked up intermit­
tently on the HRI scope of the ANC/CPS-4 height finder 
radar at 45,000 feet and over. I knew the highest assigned 
altitude of the F-80s was 24,000 feet; the target was not 
at that time visible on either radar scope, so I attributed 
the report of the high-flying aircraft to interference, crew 
inexperience, or both. Over the next fifteen minutes the 
rest of the crew, mentioned above, repeatedly reported this 
high-flying target at apparently rapidly changing altitudes 
without my being able to tum around rapidly enough from 
my monitoring of the F-80s in the area to observe for 
myself. Finally, however, I saw this target which was 
a very narrow and clear-cut presentation on the NRI 
scope. It was at approximately 47,000 feet about seventy 
(70) miles out, and the indication was definitely not that 
of a cloud or atmospheric phenomenon. I checked pilots 
in the area by VHF and was assured by F-80 pilot at the 
highest assigned altitude that he was at 24,000 feet. The 
clarity, narrowness, and definition of the presentation was 
definitely that of an aircraft. The target gave a similar 
presentation to that given by an F-80, and if anything, 
narrower. It was definitely at this time not presenting a 
very large reflecting surface toward our station and It. The target gave a similar 
presentation to that given by an F-80, and if anything, 
narrower. It was definitely at this time not presenting a 
very large reflecting surface toward our station and I

--- PAGE BREAK ---similar 
presentation to that given by an F-80, and if anything, 
narrower. It was definitely at this time not presenting a 
very large reflecting surface toward our station and I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

296 
THE HYNEK UFO REPORT 
could not at this time pick up the target on the CPS-5, 
ruling out B-36 or other large aircraft. Further. indica­
tions of this aircraft were picked up intermittently but 
with increasing regularity for the next 45 minutes or an 
hour, and entries were made of these occurrences in the 
controller's log; though relatively fairly correct, [they] are 
inaccurate, due to the extreme inaccuracy of Sgt. McCar­
thy's watch. During this period, approximately 1945 to 
2030 (7 :45 to 8 : 30 P.M. ) , this target seemed to stay in 
the area in which our fighters were flying, sometimes ap­
proximating their courses, but 20,000 feet above them. 
During this same 45-minute period, Lt. Mattson and 
other members of the crew reported, both from the HRI 
scope of the ANC/CPS-4 and another PPI scope of the 
AN/CPS-5, that the target hovered in one position and 
also that it progressed from a position given as 270°, 78 
miles at 45,000 feet to a position at 358°, 53 miles at 
roughly the same altitude in 4-5 minutes. This would give 
it a speed upwards of 1,500 miles per hour for this run. 
I cannot substantiate this speed. Coverage of target dur­
ing this run was reportedly intermittent and the times were 
not to my knowledge accurately tabulated at actual in­
stances of radar pickup during this run. Subsequent indi­
vidual questioning I undertook with members of the crew 
bears out the possibility of inaccuracy in timing during 
this run. I knew only that the target was very fast. I ob­
served during this period, by momentarily turning around 
and watching the HRI scope, several extreme instances 
of gaining altitude and losing altitude. I was not able at 
this time to take down the actual figures, but observed it 
losing and gaining up to 20,000 feet very rapidly. 
I was able, at 2046 (8 :46 P.M.) EST, to identify this 
aircraft on my PPI scope (AN/CPS-5 ) and simultane­
ously on the HRI scope. The only actual timing and fig­
ures I took down on this target I did during the six min­
utes from 2046 to 2052 (8 :46 to 8 :52 P.M. ) , during 
which time this aircraft was giving indications on both 
scopes without fade. I took down the range and azimuth 
on the minute for this period and Sgt. McCarthy took 
down the altitudes. (Sgt. McCarthy's times were off as 
aforementioned but in this case, due to the fact that we 
were both following the same target, I have reconstructed 
these times into my own, which were taken in grease. McCarthy's times were off as 
aforementioned but in this case, due to the fact that we 
were both following the same target, I have reconstructed 
these times into my own, which were taken in grease

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. J. ALLEN HYNEK 
297 
pencil directly on the scope head, and later transcribed.) 
Information recorded is as follows : 
Time 
Azimuth 
Range in miles 
Altitude in feet 
2046 
1 ,560 
45 
25,000 
2047 
1,510 
49 
29,000 
2048 
1,460 
56 
35,000 
2049 
1,420 
60 
33,000 
2050 
1 ,390 
67 
36,000 
205 1 
1 ,360 
73 
38,000 
2052 
1,330 
79 
33,000 
These figures, although not as spectacular as some of 
the climbs and speeds I observed, show definitely the er­
ratic speed and altitude changes. The differences in speed 
from one minute to the next were apparent to me as were 
the climbs and dives. At 2052 the aircraft faded from the 
PPI scope and was picked up for periods of one and two 
minutes up to 120 miles. It appeared to hover for two 
minutes at approximately 1 10 miles distant. It faded at 
120 miles for the last time. The height-finder carried the 
aircraft past the-six minute period listed above to a 1,230, 
87 miles, 3 1 ,000 feet where it faded for the night from 
the CPS-4. 
The CPS-5 was very accurate on this particular night 
which was supported by F-80 pilots' agreement with many 
geographical positions given them off the CPS-5. The 
AN/CPS-4, though a more erratic piece of equipment, 
could not, through any known or prevalent weakness in 
its operation, account for this manner of extreme changes 
in altitude. I went over all possible errors which could 
be induced by AN/CPS-4 error exhaustively with my 
technical personnel. 
We are continuing investigation at this station. 
I have been a rated pilot since 12 April 1943, and have 
been assigned to controller duties for aproximately 2lh 
years. 
S/Francis E. Parker 
1st Lt. USAF

--- PAGE BREAK ---gation at this station. 
I have been a rated pilot since 12 April 1943, and have 
been assigned to controller duties for aproximately 2lh 
years. 
S/Francis E. Parker 
1st Lt. USAF

--- PAGE BREAK ---

APPENDIX D 
Revised Statistics-Final 
Year 
NL 
DD 
RV R 
CE I 
CE ll 
CE Ill 
Total 
1947 
0 
9 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
10 
1948 
3 
10 
1 
0 
1 
1 
0 
1 6 
1949 
3 
12 
0 
0 
0 
1 
2 
1 8 
1950 
2 
21 
2 
2 
4 
0 
0 
3 1 
1 95 1 
7 
9 
1 
0 
4 
1 
0 
22 
1 952 103 
1 17 
7 
5 
4 
5 
1 
242 
1953 
19 
17 
2 
2 
2 
2 
0 
44 
1954 
19 
1 7 
3 
1 
3 
3 
0 
46 
1955 
10 
1 1 
0 
0 
3 
1 
1 
26 
1956 
10 
6 
2 
0 
2 
1 
0 
21 
1957 
7 
9 
4 
0 
2 
3 
0 
25 
195S 
2 
7 
3 
0 
1 
1 
1 
15 
1959 
7 
5 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
14 
1960 
12 
4 
.. 0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
17 
1961 
5 
4 
0 
0 
2 
1 
2 
14 
1962 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
1963 
2 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
4 
1964 
3 
3 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
9 
1965 
0 
1 
1 
0 
2 
3 
0 
7 
1966 
18 
6 
1 
0 
7 
4 
0 
36 
1967 
8 
1 
1 
0 
5 
1 
0 
16 
1968 
1 
0 
1 
0 
0 
2 
0 
4 
1969 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
Total 243 271 
29 
10 
46 
33 
8 
640 
% 
3 8.0 
42 
5 
2 
7 
5 
1 
Total No. 640

--- PAGE BREAK ---0 
36 
1967 
8 
1 
1 
0 
5 
1 
0 
16 
1968 
1 
0 
1 
0 
0 
2 
0 
4 
1969 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
Total 243 271 
29 
10 
46 
33 
8 
640 
% 
3 8.0 
42 
5 
2 
7 
5 
1 
Total No. 640

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Bowen, C., ed. : The Humanoids, Chicago: Henry Regnery, 
1969. 
Condon, E.J .. ; The Scientific Study of Unidentified Flying 
Objects, New York: Bantam Books, 1968. 
Fuller, J.G.: Incident At Exeter, New York: G.P. Put· 
nam's Sons, 1966. 
Hynek, J.A. : The UFO Experience, Chicago: Henry Reg· 
nery, 1972. 
Hynek, J.A. & Vallee, J.: The Edge of Reality, Chicago: 
Henry Regnery, 1975. 
Jacobs, D. ; The UFO Controversy in America, Blooming· 
ton: Indiana University Press, 1975. 
Maccabee, B.: The Scientific Investigation of Unidentified 
Flying Objects (to be published). 
Ruppelt, E.J. : The Report on Unidentified Flying Objects, 
New York: Ace Books, 1956. 
Sagan, C. & Page, T.: UFOs: A Scientific Debate, New 
York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1972. 
Saunders, D.R. & Harkins, R.R.: UFOs? Yes!, New York : 
The World Publishing Co., 1968. 
Sturrock, P.A. : Report on a Survey of the Membership of 
the American Astronomical Society Concerning the 
UFO Problem. Plasma Research Laboratory, Stanford 
University, 1977. 
Symposium on Unidentified Flying Objects-Hearings be· 
fore the Committee on Science and Astronautics, U.S. 
House of Representatives, 90th Congress, July 29, 1968 
-U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 
Valle, J. : Anatomy of a Phenomenon, Chicago: Henry 
Regnery, 1965. 
Webb, D.: 1973: Year of the Humanoids, Evanston: Center 
for UFO Studies, 1976.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nting Office, Washington, D.C. 
Valle, J. : Anatomy of a Phenomenon, Chicago: Henry 
Regnery, 1965. 
Webb, D.: 1973: Year of the Humanoids, Evanston: Center 
for UFO Studies, 1976.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF THE THIRD 
KIND 
STEVEN SPIELBERG 
WATCH THE SKIES 
Close Encounter of the First Kind: 
SiG:hting of an Unidentified Flying Object 
Close Encounter of the Second Kind: 
Physical evidence after UFO sighting 
Close Encounter of the Third Kind: 
Actual contact between human observers and UFO occupants . . . 
All over the world, millions of reliable witnesses, including 
respected scientists, have been reporting UFO sightings for 
the past thirty years. Experts everywhere concede the over­
whelming probability of intelligent life elsewhere in the Universe. 
From these indisputable facts, Steven Spielberg, brilliant young 
director of JAWS, has written a frightening and significant book. 
Now a major picture from Columbia Pictures. 
Fiction/ Film tie-in 
0 7221 8079 9 
85p

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sphere Books have produced a series of books dealing speci· 
fically with every aspect of the UFO phenomenon. 
UFOs: A SCIENTIFIC ENIGMA 
MYSTERIES OF TIME AND SPACE 
THE FLYING SAUCERERS 
UFO TREK 
D. A. J. Seargent 
Brad Steiger 
Arthur Shuttlewood 
Warren Smith 
THE BIBLE AND FLYING SAUCERS Barry H. Downing 
THE FLYING SAUCER VISION 
John Mitchell 
SITUATION RED: THE UFO SIEGE 
Leonard Stringfield 
MESSENGERS FROM THE STARS 
W. Raymond Drake 
STRANGE CREATURES FROM 
TI ME & SPACE 
John A. Keel 
MY CONTACT WITH UFOs 
Dino Kraspedon 
At·ai/able from newsagents and booksellers everywhere

--- PAGE BREAK ---S FROM THE STARS 
W. Raymond Drake 
STRANGE CREATURES FROM 
TI ME & SPACE 
John A. Keel 
MY CONTACT WITH UFOs 
Dino Kraspedon 
At·ai/able from newsagents and booksellers everywhere

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was the war to end all wars - and it seemed nothin¹ could 
stop it! 
THE CHINESE ULTIMATUM 
EDWARD MCGHEE & 
bestselling author of The French Connection 
ROBIN MOORE 
COUNTDOWN TO ANNIHILATION . . . 
It begins with a series of Sino-Soviet border skirmishes, small 
clashes between the troops of the two big Communist powers. 
But before iong these 'incidents' explode into monstrous pro· 
portions 
- and Russia and China are at war! When frantic 
negotiations fail, the Western powers are drawn into the mael­
strom, and the entire world teeters on the brink of nuclear 
devastation. Only twenty men, in six nations, have the knowledge 
and power to avert a holocaust that could destroy civilisation. 
The fate of the world is balancing on a desperate knife-edge! 
'This novel is too incredibly real . . . and damnably possible !' 
Anonymous US State Department Official 
Thriller fiction 
0 7221 5783 5 
95p

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE MITTENWALD SYNDICATE 
FREDERICK NOLAN 
THE FACTS : 
A fantastic fortune in gold and jewels lay buried in the mountains 
above the village of Mittenwald at the end of the Second World 
War. It comprised the last of the Reichsbank reserves, re­
moved by the Nazis too late for shipment abroad. None of it has 
ever been recovered. And no one has ever been arrested for its 
theft. 
THE NOVEL: 
Frederick Nolan's brilliant thriller dates to speculate on what 
could easily have happened to the Nazi treasure. It explores a 
violent world of greed, intrigue, betrayal, killing and revenge -
especially revenge. And, all the way, you will ask yourself where 
compelling fiction ends and terrifying fact takes over . . . 
'A splendidly exciting novel' - Daily Express 
'Genuine excitement' - Sunday Times 
Adventure Thriller Fiction 
0 7221 6427 0 
95pwhere 
compelling fiction ends and terrifying fact takes over . . . 
'A splendidly exciting novel' - Daily Express 
'Genuine excitement' - Sunday Times 
Adventure Thriller Fiction 
0 7221 6427 0 
95p

--- PAGE BREAK ---

All Sphere Books are available at your bookshop or 
newsagent, or can be ordered from the followine address: 
Sphere Books, Cash Sales Department, 
P.O. Box 11, Falmouth, Cornwall. 
Please send cheque or postal order (no currency), and allow 
19p for postage and packing for the first book plus 9p per 
copy for each additional book ordered up 
to a maximum charge of 73p in U.K. 
Customers in Eire and B.F.P.O. please allow 19p for 
postage and packing for the first book plus 9p per copy 
for the next 6 books, thereafter 3p per book. 
Overseas customers please allow 20p for postage and packing 
for the first book and lOp per copy for each additional book.

--- PAGE BREAK ---per copy 
for the next 6 books, thereafter 3p per book. 
Overseas customers please allow 20p for postage and packing 
for the first book and lOp per copy for each additional book.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

UFOs: WHAT ON EARTH-. 
AND OFF IT - IS THE· TRUTH . 
BEHIND THE ·OFFICIAL.· 
. 
I 
•• 
• 
• 
COVER -UP? 
Dr. J. Allen Hynek is one of the best-known names in UFO 
research today. He heads the Centre for UFO SJudies and was for 
twenty years scientific consultant to 'Project Blue Book: the 
. 
American Air Force's long-running and controversial investigation 
into the UFO phenomenon. Now, in THE HYNEK UFO REPORT, 
Dr. Hynek presents his uwn expert, detailed analysis of the fles 
of Project Blue Book - files which were only recently ma.de public. 
He covers such vital aspects of the UFO experience as: 
* Radar sightings - and how the authorities explain 
them away. 
* The way Government officials try desperately to 
produce 'natural' explanations for UFO sightings ­
even when such explanations are wildly unrealistic . 
* The various kinds of 'Close Encounter' (Dr: Hynek 
was the consultant to Columbia Pictures and 
Steven Spielberg on the blockbusting U FO movie 
CLOSE E N COUNTERS OF THE THI RD KIND). 
These and many other features of the whole UFO scene are 
covered clearly, objectively and fascinatingly in orie of the most 
important books on the subject ever written. THE HYNEK UFO 
REPORT may well cause red faces in top G overnment circles ­
but the truth is often a long way from what the authorities want 
us to believe , . . 
0 7221 4858 !i COSMOLOGY 
UN IHO KIN GDOM 95p · AUSTRALIA S2.95 · N EW ZEALAN D 52 95 
CANADA $2. 2 5 · EIRE E1 . 04 ; p · 
MALTA I OOc 
Ausor alia recommended pnco only