'V  '•\*£SV 
94tli  Congress  1 
1st  Session  / 
COUOUTTEE  PRINT 
COVERT  ACTION  IN  CHILE 
1963-1973 
STAFF  REPORT 
OF  THE 
SELECT  COMMITTEE 
TO  STUDY  GOVERNMENTAL  OPERATIONS 
WITH  RESPECT  TO 
INTELLIGENCE  ACTIVITIES 
UNITED  STATES  SENATE 
DECEMBER  IS,  1975 
Printed  for  the  Use  of  the  Select  Committee  To  Study  Governmental 
Operations  With  Respect  to  Intelligence  Activities 
U.S.  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE 
63-372  WASHINGTON  :  1975 
For  sale  by  the  Superintendent  of  Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office 
Washington,  D.C.  20402  -   Price  80  cents 
Stock  Number  052-070-03145-0

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SENATE  SELECT  COMMITTEE  TO  STUDY  GOVERNMENTAL  OPERATIONS 
WITH  RESPECT  TO  INTELLIGENCE  ACTIVITIES 
FRANK  CHURCH,  Idaho,  Chairman 
JOHN  G.  TOWER,  Texas,  Vice  Chairman 
PHILIP  A.  HART,  Michigan 
WALTER  F.  MONDALE,  Minnesota 
WALTER  D.  HUDDLESTON,  Kentucky 
ROBERT  MORGAN,  North  Carolina 
GARY  HART,  Colorado 
HOWARD  H   BAKER,  Jr.,  Tennessee 
BARRY  GOLDWATER,  Arizona 
CHARLES  McC.  MATHIAS.  Jr.,  Maryland 
RICHARD  SCHWEIKER,  Pennsylvania 
William  G.  Miller,  Staff  Director 
Frederick  A.  O.  Schwarz,  Jr.,  Chief  Counsel 
Curtis  R.  Smothers,  Counsel  to  the  Minority 
Audrey  Hatrt,  Clerk  of  the  Committee 
(H) 
pitjlf
1 
f  
-   '• 
'••VVv  -v

--- PAGE BREAK ---ederick  A.  O.  Schwarz,  Jr.,  Chief  Counsel 
Curtis  R.  Smothers,  Counsel  to  the  Minority 
Audrey  Hatrt,  Clerk  of  the  Committee 
(H) 
pitjlf
1 
f  
-   '• 
'••VVv  -v

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PREFACE 
The  statements  of  facts  contained  in  this  report  are  true  to  the  best  of 
the  Committee  staff’s  ability  to  determine  them.  The  report  and  any 
judgment  expressed  in  it  are  tentative.  Several  areas  are  merely 
touched  on;  investigation  in  these  areas  is  continuing.  The  purpose  of 
the  report  is  to  lay  out  the  basic  facts  of  covert  action  in  Chile  to 
enable  the  Committee  to  hold  public  hearings. 
This  report  is  based  on  an  extensive  review  of  documents  of  the  Cen- 
tral Intelligence  Agency,  the  Departments  of  State  and  Defense,  and 
the  National  Security  Council ;   and  on  testimony  by  officials  and  former 
officials.  With  few  exceptions,  names  of  Chileans  and  of  Chilean 
institutions  have  been  omitted  in  order  to  avoid  revealing  intelli- 
gence sources  and  methods  and  to  limit  needless  harm  to  individual 
Chileans  who  cooperated  with  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency.  The 
report  does,  however,  convey  an  accurate  picture  of  the  scope,  purposes 
and  magnitude  of  United  States  covert  action  in  Chile. 
(in) 
’  ,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.  •■  • 
. 
 ■ 
? •  ■'  ••>*•?& : ■:.  V  vsS^'v  % m-t&'&W-. 
TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 
.  
Overview  and  Background

A.  Overview :  Covert  Action  in  Chile

B.  Issues    .—u-M.*™*,  --  __u.ml.  -r-.    r-r   
C.  Historical  Background  in  Recent  United  States-Chilean  Relations. 
I.  
The  Range  of  Covert  Action  in  Chileert  Action  in  Chile

B.  Issues    .—u-M.*™*,  --  __u.ml.  -r-.    r-r   
C.  Historical  Background  in  Recent  United  States-Chilean  Relations. 
I.  
The  Range  of  Covert  Action  in  Chile

A.  Covert  Action  and  other  Clandestine  Activities   
B.  Covert  Action  in  Chile :  Techniques   
C.  Covert  Action  and  Multinational  Corporations   
II.  
Major  Covert  Action  Programs  and  Their  Effects   
A.  The  1964  Presidential  Election   
B.  Covert  Action:  1964-1969   
C.  The  1970  Election:  A   “Spoiling”  Campaign   
D.  Covert  Action  Between  September  4  and  October  24,  1970   
E.  Covert  Action  During  the  Allende  Years,  1970-1973   
F.  Post-1973

IY.  Chile:  Authorization,  Assessment,  and  Oversight   
A.  40  Committee  Authorization  and  Control:  Chile  1969-1973   
B.  Intelligence  Estimates  and  Covert  Action   
C.  Congressional  Oversight    
Y.  Preliminary  Conclusions   
A.  Covert  Action  and  U.S.  Foreign  Policy   
B.  Executive  Command  and  Control  of  Major  Covert  Action   
C.  The  Role  of  Congress

D.  Intelligence  Judgments  and  Covert  Operations   
E.  Major  Covert  Action  Programs   
Appendix.  Chronology :   Chile  1962-1975   
(V) 
Page 
1 
1 
3 
3 
6 
6 
7 
11 
14 
14 
17 
19 
23 
26 
39 
41 
41 
43 
49 
51 
51 
52 
53 
54 
54 
57

--- PAGE BREAK ---COVERT  ACTION  IN  CHILE:  1963-1973 
I.

Overview  and  Background 
A.

Overview:  Covert  Action  in  Chile 
Covert  United  States  involvement  in  Chile  in  the  decade  between 
1D63  and  1973  was  extensive  and  continuous.

The  Central  Intelligence 
Agency  spent  three  million  dollars  in  an  effort  to  influence  the  out- 
come of  the  1964  Chilean  presidential  elections.

Eight  million  dollars 
was  spent,  covertly,  in  the  three  years  between  1970  and  the  military 
coup  in  September  1973,  with  over  three  million  dollars  expended  in 
fiscal  year  1972  alone.1 
It  is  not  easy  to  draw  a   neat  box  around  what  was  “covert  action.” 
The  range  of  clandestine  activities  undertaken  by  the  CIA  includes 
covert  action,  clandestine  intelligence  collection,  liaison  with  local 
police  and  intelligence  services,  and  counterintelligence.

The  distinc- 
tions among  the  types  of  activities  are  mirrored  in  organizational 
arrangements,  both  at  Headquarters  and  in  the  field.

Yet  it  is  not 
always  so  easy  to  distinguish  the  effects  of  various  activities.

If  the 
CIA  provides  financial  support  to  a   political  party,  this  is  called 
“covert  action” ;   if  the  Agency  develops  a   paid  “asset”  in  that  party 
for  the  purpose  of  information  gathering,  the  project  is  “clandestine 
intelligence  collection.” 
The  goal  of  covert  action  is  political  impact.

At  the  same  time  secret 
relationships  developed  for  the  clandestine  collection  of  intelligence 
may  also  have  political  effects,  even  though  no  attempt  is  made  by 
American  officials  to  manipulate  the  relationship  for  short-run  politi- 
cal gain.If  the 
CIA  provides  financial  support  to  a   political  party,  this  is  called 
“covert  action” ;   if  the  Agency  develops  a   paid  “asset”  in  that  party 
for  the  purpose  of  information  gathering,  the  project  is  “clandestine 
intelligence  collection.” 
The  goal  of  covert  action  is  political  impact.

At  the  same  time  secret 
relationships  developed  for  the  clandestine  collection  of  intelligence 
may  also  have  political  effects,  even  though  no  attempt  is  made  by 
American  officials  to  manipulate  the  relationship  for  short-run  politi- 
cal gain.

For  example,  in  Chile  between  1970  and  1973,  CIA  and  Ameri- 
can military  attache  contacts  with  the  Chilean  military  for  the  pur- 
pose of  gathering  intelligence  enabled  the  United  States  to  sustain 
communication  with  the  group  most  likely  to  take  power  from  Presi- 
dent Salvador  Allende.

What  did  covert  CIA  money  buy  in  Chile?

It  financed  activities 
covering  a   broad  spectrum,  from  simple  propaganda  manipulation 
of  the  press  to  large-scale  support  for  Chilean  political  parties,  from 
public  opinion  polls  to  direct  attempts  to  foment  a   military  coup.

The 
scope  of  “normal”  activities  of  the  CIA  Station  in  Santiago  included 
placement  of  Station-dictated  material  in  the  Chilean  media  through 
propaganda  assets,  direct  support  of  publications,  and  efforts  to  oppose 
communist  and  left-wing  influence  in  student,  peasant  and  labor 
organizations.

In  addition  to  these  “routine”  activities,  the  CIA  Station  in  Santiago 
was  several  times  called  upon  to  undertake  large,  specific  projects.

‘Moreover  the  bareflgures  are  more  likely  to  understate  than  to  exaggerate  the  extent 
of  U.S.

covert  action.--- PAGE BREAK ---

‘Moreover  the  bareflgures  are  more  likely  to  understate  than  to  exaggerate  the  extent 
of  U.S. covert  action. In  the  years  before  the  1973  coup,  especially,  CIA  dollars  could  be 
channeled  through  the  Chilean  black  market  where  the  unofficial  exchange  rate  Into 
Chilean  escudos  often  reached  five  times  the  official  rate. e   ini° 
(1) 
• . jk.v.-  v*  >  •*<

--- PAGE BREAK ---PPM 
When  senior  officials  in  Washington  perceived  special  dangers,  or 
opportunities,  in  Chile,  special  CLA  projects  were  developed,  often  as 
part  of  a   larger  package  of  U.S.

actions.

For  instance,  the  CIA  spent 
over  three  million  dollars  in  an  election  program  in  1964.

Half  a   decade  later,  in  1970,  the  CIA  engaged  in  another  special 
effort,  this  time  at  the  express  request  of  President  Nixon  and  under 
the  injunction  not  to  inform  the  Departments  of  State  or  Defense  or 
the  Ambassador  
of  the  project.

Nor  was  the  40  
Committee *  
2  ever  in- 
formed.

The  CIA  attempted,  directly,  to  foment  a   military  coup  in 
Chile.

It  passed  three  weapons  to  a   group  of  Chilean  officers  who 
plotted  a   coup.

Beginning  with  the  kidnaping  of  Chilean  Army  Com- 
mander-in-Chief  Rene  Schneider.

However,  those  guns  were  returned.

The  group  which  staged  the  abortive  kidnap  of  Schneider,  which  re- 
sulted in  his  death,  apparently  was  not  the  same  as  the  group  which 
received  CIA  weapons.3 
When  the  coup  attempt  failed  and  Allende  was  inaugurated  Presi- 
dent, the  CIA  was  authorized  by  the  40  Committee  to  fund  groups  in 
opposition  to  Allende  in  Chile.

The  effort  was  massive.

Eight  million 
dollars  was  spent  in  the  three  years  between  the  1970  election  and  the 
military  coup  in  September  1973.

Money  was  furnished  to  media 
organizations,  to  opposition  political  parties  and,  in  limited  amounts, 
to  private  sector  organizations.

Numerous  allegations  have  been  made  about  U.S.

covert  activities 
in  Chile  during  1970-73.

Several  of  these  are  false ;   others  are  half- 
true.

In  most  instances,  the  response  to  the  allegation  must  be  qualified : 
Was  the  United  States  directly  involved,  covertly,  in  the  1973  coup  in  Chile?Several  of  these  are  false ;   others  are  half- 
true.

In  most  instances,  the  response  to  the  allegation  must  be  qualified : 
Was  the  United  States  directly  involved,  covertly,  in  the  1973  coup  in  Chile?

The  Committee  has  found  no  evidence  that  it  was.

However,  the  United  States 
sought  in  1970  to  foment  a   military  coup  in  Chile ;   after  1970  it  adopted  a   policy 
both  overt  and  covert,  of  opposition  to  Allende :   and  it  remained  in  intelligence 
contact  with  the  Chilean  military,  including  officers  who  were  participating  in 
coup  plotting.

Did  the  U.S.

provide  covert  support  to  striking  truck-owners  or  other  strikers 
during  1971-73  ?

The  40  Committee  did  not  approve  any  such  support.

However, 
the  U.S.

passed  money  to  private  sector  groups  which  supported  the  strikers.

And 
in  at  least  one  case,  a   small  amount  of  CIA  money  was  passed  to  the  strikers  by 
a   private  sector  organization,  contrary  to  CIA  ground  rules.

Did  the  U.S.

provide  covert  support  to  right-wing  terrorist  organizations  dur- 
ing 1970-73?

The  CIA  gave  support  in  1970  to  one  group  whose  tactics  became 
more  violent  over  time.

Through  1971  that  group  received  small  sums  of  Amer- 
ican money  through  third  parties  for  specific  purposes.

And  it  is  possible  that 
money  was  passed  to  these  groups  on  the  extreme  right  from  CIA-supported  op- 
position political  parties.

The  pattern  of  United  States  covert  action  in  Chile  is  striking  but 
not  unique.

It  arose  in  the  context  not  only  of  American  foreign 
policy,  but  also  of  covert  U.S.

involvement  in  other  countries  within 
and  outside  Latin  America.

The  scale  of  CIA  involvement  in  Chile 
was  unusual  but  by  no  means  unprecedented.--- PAGE BREAK ---

involvement  in  other  countries  within 
and  outside  Latin  America. The  scale  of  CIA  involvement  in  Chile 
was  unusual  but  by  no  means  unprecedented. *  The  40  Committee  is  a   Bub-Cabinet  level  body  of  the  Executive  Branch  whose  mandate 
Is  to  review  proposed  major  covert  actions. The  Committee  has  existed  in  similar  form 
since  the  1950'r  under  a   variety  of  names:  5412  Panel,  Special  Group  (until  1964),  .603 
Committee  (to  1960). and  40  Committee  (since  1969). Currently  chaired  by  the  President’s 
Assistant  for  National  Security  Affairs,  the  Committee  includes  the  Undersecretary  of 
State  for  Political  Affairs,  the  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense,  the  Chairman  of  the  Joint 
Chiefs  of  Staff,  and  the  Director  of  Central  Intelligence. 3  This  matter  is  discussed  extensively  in  the  Committee's  interim  report  entitled. Alleged 
Assassination  Plots  Involving  Foreign  Leaders ,  94  Cong.,  1  sess. (November  1975),  pp. 225-254.

--- PAGE BREAK ---imm 
B.

Issues 
Tlie  Chilean  case  raises  most  of  the  issues  connected  with  covert 
action  as  an  instrument  of  American  foreign  policy.

It  consisted  of 
long,  frequently  heavy  involvement  in  Chilean  politics;  it  involved 
the  gamut  of  covert  action  methods,  save  only  covert  military  opera- 
tions; and  it  revealed  a   variety  of  different  authorization  procedures, 
with  different  amplications  for  oversight  and  control.

As  one  case 
of  U.S.

covert  action,  the  judgments  of  past  actions  are  trained  not 
for  their  own  sake;  rather  they'  are  intended  to  serve  as  bases  foi 
formulating  recommendations  for  the  future.

The  basic  questions  are  easily  stated: 
(1)  Why  did  the  United  States  mount  such  an  extensive  covert 
action  program  in  Chile?

Why  was  that  program  continued  and  then 
expanded  in  the  early  1970’s?

.

.

(2)  How  was  this  major  covert  action  program  authorized  and 
directed?

What  roles  were  played  by  the  President,  the  40  Committee, 
the  CIA,  the  Ambassadors,  and  the  Congress?

, 
(3)  Did  U.S.

policy-makers  take  into  account  the  judgments  ot 
the  intelligence  analysts  on  Chile  when  they  formulated  and  approved 
U.S.

covert  operations?

Does  the  Chilean  experience  illustrate  an 
inherent  conflict  between  the  role  of  the  Director  of  Central  Intelli- 
gence as  a   producer  of  intelligence  and  his  role  as  manager  of  covert 
operations .

cejved  threat  in  Chile  justify  the  level  of  U.S.

response?

What  was  the  effect  o.f  such  large  concentrated  programs 
of  covert  political  action  in  Chile?

What  were  the  effects,  both  abroad 
and  at  home,  of  the  relationships  which  developed  between  the  intelli- 
gence agencies  and  American  based  multinational  corporations .

C.

Historical  Background  to  Recent  United  States-Chelean 
Relations 
1.--- PAGE BREAK ---

C. Historical  Background  to  Recent  United  States-Chelean 
Relations 
1. Chilean  Politics  and  Society:  An  Overview 
Chile  has  historically  attracted  far  more  interest  in  Latin  America 
and,  more  recently,  throughout  the  world,  than  its  remote  geographic 
position  and  scant  eleven-million  population  would  at  first  suggest. Chile’s  history  has  been  one  of  remarkable  continuity  in  civilian, 
democratic  rule. From  independence  in  1818  until  the  military  coup 
d'etat  of  September  1973,  Chile  underwent  only  three  brief  interrup- 
tions of  its  democratic  tradition. From  1932  until  the  overthrow  or 
Allendo  in  1973,  constitutional  rule  in  Chile  was  unbroken. Chile  defies  simplistic  North  American  stereotypes  of  Latin  Amer- 
ica. With  more  than  two-thirds  of  its  population  living  in  cities,  and 
a   1970  per  capita  GNP  of  $760,  Chile  is  one  of  the  most  urbanized  and 
industrialized  countries  in  Latin  America. Nearly  all  of  the  Chilean 
population  is  literate. Chile  has  an  advanced  social  welfare  program, 
although  its  activities  did  not  reach  the  majority  of  the  poor  until 
popular  participation  began  to  be  exerted  in  the  early  1960’s. Chileans 
are  a   largely  integrated  mixture  of  indigenous  American  with  Euro- 
pean immigrant  stock. Until  September  1973,  Chileans  brokered  their 
demands  in  a   bicameral  parliament  through  a   multi-party  system  and 
through  a   broad  array  of  economic,  trade  union,  and,  more  recently, 
managerial  and  professional  associations. 63—372 — 75 — ■ — 2 
§§111

--- PAGE BREAK ---imps* 
|f.

; 
 .

;-VV,yV.s;*?^V: 
8.

UJS.

Policy  Toicard  Chile 
Tlio  history  of  United  States  policy  toward  Chile  followed  the  pat- 
terns of  United  States  diplomatic  and  economic  interests  in  the  hemi- 
sphere.

In  the  same  year  that  the  United  States  recognized  Chilean 
independence,  1823,  it  also  proclaimed  the  Monroe  Doctrine.

This  uni- 
lateral policy  pronouncement  of  the  United  States  was  directed  as  a 
warning  toward  rival  European  powers  not  to  interfere  in  the  inter- 
nal political  affairs  of  this  hemisphere.

The  IJ.S.

reaction  to  Fidel  Castro’s  rise  to  power  suggested  that 
while  the  Monroe  Doctrine  had  been  abandoned,  the  principles  which 
prompted  it  were  still  alive.

Castro’s  presence  spurred  a   new  United 
States  hemispheric  policy  with  special  significance  for  Chile — the  Alli- 
ance for  Progress.

There  was  little  disagreement  among  policymakers 
either  at  the  end  of  the  Eisenhower  Administration  or  at  the  beginning 
of  the  Kennedy  Administration  that  something  had  to  be  done  about 
the  alarming  threat  that  Castro  was  seen  to  represent  to  the  stability 
of  the  hemisphere.

The  U.S.

reaction  to  the  new  hemispheric  danger — communist  revo- 
lution— evolved  into  a   dual  policy  response.

Widespread  malnutrition, 
illiteracy,  hopeless  housing  conditions  and  hunger  for  the  vast  major- 
ity of  Latin  Americans  who  were  poor ;   these  were  seen  as  communism’s 
allies.

Consequently,  the  U.S.

undertook  loans  to  national  develop- 
ment programs  and  supported  civilian  reformist  regimes,  all  with  an 
eye  to  preventing  the  appearance  of  another  Fidel  Castro  in  our 
hemisphere.

But  there  was  another  component  in  U.S.

policy  toward  Latin  Amer- 
ica.But  there  was  another  component  in  U.S.

policy  toward  Latin  Amer- 
ica.

Counterinsurgency  techniques  were  developed  to  combat  urban 
or  rural  guerrilla  insurgencies  often  encouraged  or  supported  by  Cas- 
tro’s regime.

Development  could  not  cure  overnight  the  social  ills 
which  were  seen  as  the  breeding  ground  of  communism.

New  loans  for 
Latin  American  countries’  internal  national  development  programs 
would  take  time  to  bear  fruit.

In  the  meantime,  the  communist  threat 
would  continue.

The  vicious  circle  plaguing  the  logic  of  the  Alliance 
for  Progress  soon  became  apparent.

In  order  to  eliminate  the  short- 
term danger  of  communist  subversion,  it  was  often  seen  as  necessary  to 
support  Latin  American  armed  forces,  yet  frequently  it  was  those 
same  armed  forces  who  were  helping  to  freeze  the  status  quo  which  the 
Alliance  sought  to  alter.

Of  all  the  countries  in  the  hemisphere,  Chile  was  chosen  to  become 
the  showcase  for  the  new  Alliance  for  Progress.

Chile  had  the  exten- 
sive bureaucratic  infrastructure  to  plan  and  administer  a   national 
development  program ;   moreover,  its  history  of  popular  support  for 
Socialist,  Communist  and  other  leftist  parties  was  perceived  in  Wash- 
ington as  flirtation  with  communism.

In  the  years  between  1962  and 
1969,  Chile  received  well  over  a   billion  dollars  in  direct,  overt  United 
States  aid,  loans  and  grants  both  included.

Chile  received  more  aid  per 
capita  than  any  country  in  the  hemisphere.

Between  1964  and  1970, 
$200  to  $300  million  in  short-term  lines  of  credit  was  continuously 
available  to  Chile  from  private  American  banks.

3.

Chilean  Political  Parties:  1958-1970 
The  1970  elections  marked  the  fourth  time  Salvador  Allende  had 
been  the  presidential  candidate  of  the  Chilean  left.--- PAGE BREAK ---

3. Chilean  Political  Parties:  1958-1970 
The  1970  elections  marked  the  fourth  time  Salvador  Allende  had 
been  the  presidential  candidate  of  the  Chilean  left. His  personality  and 
his  program  were  familiar  to  Chilean  voters. His  platform  was  simi- 
xmm 
  ,

•  ‘  .-\  .Vs.  -uirt  ’  «>•;

--- PAGE BREAK ---5 
lar  in  all  three  elections :   efforts  to  redistribute  income  and  reshape  the 
Chilean  economy,  beginning  with  the  nationalization  of  major  indus- 
tries, especially  the  copper  companies;  greatly  expanded  agrarian  re- 
form; and  expanded  relations  with  socialist  and  communist  countries.

Allende  was  one  of  four  candidates  in  the  1958  elections.

His  princi- 
pal opponents  were  Jorge  Alessandri,  a   conservative,  and  Eduardo 
Frei.

the  candidate  of  the  newly  formed  Christian  Democratic  Party, 
which  contended  against  the  traditionally  centrist  Radical  Party.

Al- 
lende’s  coalition  was  an  uneasy  alliance,  composed  principally  of  the 
Socialist  and  Communist  Parties,  labeled  the  Popular  Action  Front 
(FRAP).

Allende  himself,  a   self-avowed  Marxist,  was  considered  a 
moderate  within  his  Socialist  Party,  which  ranged  from  the  extreme 
left  to  moderate  social  democrats.

The  Socialists,  however,  were  more 
militant  than  the  pro-Soviet,  bureaucratic— though  highly  organized 
and  disciplined — Communist  Party.

Allende  finished  second  to  Alessandri  in  the  1958  election  by  less 
than  three  percent  of  the  vote.

Neither  candidate  received  a   majority, 
and  the  Chilean  Congress  voted  Alessandri  into  office.

If  Allende  had 
received  the  votes  which  went  to  a   leftist  priest — who  received  3.3  per- 
cent of  the  votes — he  would  have  won  the  election.

The  Alessandri  government  lost  popularity  during  its  tenure.

Dis- 
satisfaction with  it  was  registered  in  the  1961  congressional  and  1963 
municipal  elections.

The  FRAP  parties  made  significant  gains,  and 
the  Christian  Democratic  Party  steadily  increased  its  share  of  the 
electorate  until,  in  the  1963  elections,  it  became  the  largest  single  party.

The  1964  election  shaped  up  as  a   three-way  race.The  FRAP  parties  made  significant  gains,  and 
the  Christian  Democratic  Party  steadily  increased  its  share  of  the 
electorate  until,  in  the  1963  elections,  it  became  the  largest  single  party.

The  1964  election  shaped  up  as  a   three-way  race.

Frei  was  once  again 
the  Christian  Democratic  candidate,  and  the  parties  of  the  left  once 
again  selected  Allende  as  their  standard-bearer.

The  governing  coali- 
tion, the  Democratic  Front,  chose  Radical  Julio  Duran  as  their  can- 
didate.

Due  in  part  to  an  adverse  election  result  in  a   March  1964 
by-election  in  a   previously  conservative  province,  the  Democratic  Front 
collapsed.

The  Conservatives  and  Liberals,  reacting  to  the  prospect  of 
an  Allende  victory,  threw  their  support  to  Frei,  leaving  Duran  as  the 
standard-bearer  of  only  the  Radical  Party.

After  Frei’s  decisive  majority  victory,  in  which  he  received  57 
percent  of  the  vote,  he  began  to  implement  what  he  called  a   “revolution 
in  liberty.”  That  included  agrarian,  tax,  and  housing  reform.

To  deal 
with  the  American  copper  companies,  Frei  proposed  “Chileanization,” 
by  wliich  the  state  would  purchase  majority  ownership  in  order  to  exer- 
cise control  and  stimulate  output.

Frei’s  reforms,  while  impressive,  fell  far  short  of  what  he  had  prom- 
ised.

Lacking  a   majority  in  Congress,  he  was  caught  between  the 
FRAP  parties,  which  demanded  extreme  measures,  and  the  rightists, 
who  withheld  support  from  Frei  in  order  to  force  a   compromise  on 
the  agrarian  reform  issue.

Like  its  predecessor,  the  Frei  government 
lost  popularity  during  its  tenure;  the  Christian  Democrats’  portion  of 
the  vote  in  congressional  elections  fell  from  43  percent  in  1965  to  31 
percent  in  1969.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Lacking  a   majority  in  Congress,  he  was  caught  between  the 
FRAP  parties,  which  demanded  extreme  measures,  and  the  rightists, 
who  withheld  support  from  Frei  in  order  to  force  a   compromise  on 
the  agrarian  reform  issue. Like  its  predecessor,  the  Frei  government 
lost  popularity  during  its  tenure;  the  Christian  Democrats’  portion  of 
the  vote  in  congressional  elections  fell  from  43  percent  in  1965  to  31 
percent  in  1969. During  the  Frei  years  the  internal  strains  of  the 
Party  became  more  evident,  culminating  in  the  1968  defection  of  the 
Party’s  left-wing  elements. Frei’s  relations  with  the  United  States  were  cordial,  although  he 
pursued  an  independent  foreign  policy. His  government  established 
diplomatic  relations  with  the  Soviet  Union  immediately  after  taking 
power  and  in  1969  reestablished  trade  relations  with  Cuba.

--- PAGE BREAK ---j 
BfpiJ 
II.

The  Range  of  Covert  Action  in  Chile 
A.

Covert  Action  and  Other  Clandestine  Activities 
This  study  is  primarily  concerned  with  what  is  labeled  “covert  ac- 
tion” by  the  United  States  government.

Covert  action  projects  are 
considered  a   distinct  category  and  are  authorized  and  managed  ac- 
cordingly.

But  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  what  the  category  ex- 
cludes as  well  as  what  it  includes.

The  Committee’s  purpose  is  to 
evaluate  the  intent  and  effect  of  clandestine  American  activities  in 
Chile.

Some  secret  activities  by  the  United  States  not  labeled  “covert 
action”  may  have  important  political  impacts  and  should  be  considered.

The  CIA  conducts  several  kinds  of  clandestine  activity  in  foreign 
countries:  clandestine  collection  of  positive  foreign  intelligence; 
counterintelligence  (or  liaison  with  local  services) ;   and  covert 
action.

Those  different  activities  are  handled  somewhat  differently  in 
Washington;  they  are  usually  the  responsibility  of  different  CIA 
officers  in  the  field.

Yet  all  three  kinds  of  projects  may  have  effects  on 
foreign  politics.

All  three  rely  on  the  establishment  of  clandestine 
relationships  with  foreign  nationals.

In  the  clandestine  collection  of  intelligence,  the  purpose  of  the  re- 
lationship is  the  gathering  of  information.

A   CIA  officer  establishes 
a   relationship  with  a   foreign  “asset” — paid  or  unpaid— in  a   party  or 
(roveniment  institution  in  order  to  find  out  what  is  going  on  inside 
timt  party  or  institution.

There  is  typically  no  attempt  made  by  the 
CIA  officer  to  influence  the  actions  of  the  “asset.”  Yet  even  that  kind 
of  covert  relationship  may  have  political  significance.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A   CIA  officer  establishes 
a   relationship  with  a   foreign  “asset” — paid  or  unpaid— in  a   party  or 
(roveniment  institution  in  order  to  find  out  what  is  going  on  inside 
timt  party  or  institution. There  is  typically  no  attempt  made  by  the 
CIA  officer  to  influence  the  actions  of  the  “asset.”  Yet  even  that  kind 
of  covert  relationship  may  have  political  significance. Witness  the 
maintenance  of  CIA’s  and  military  attaches’  contacts  with  the  Chilean 
military  after  the  inauguration  of  Salvador  Allende :   although  the 
purpose  was  information-gathering,  the  United  States  maintained 
links  to  the  group  most  likely  to  overthrow  the  new  president. To  do 
so  was  to  walk  a   tightrope ;   the  distinction  between  collecting  informa- 
tion and  exercising  influence  was  inherently  hard  to  maintain. Since 
the  Chilean  military  perceived  its  actions  to  be  contingent  to  some 
degree  on  the  attitude  of  the  U.S. government,  those  possibilities 
for  exercising  influence  scarcely  would  have  had  to  be  consciously 
manipulated. ... Liaison  relationships  with  local  police  or  intelligence  services  pose 
a   similar  issue. The  CIA  established  such  relationships  in  Chile  with 
the  primary  purpose  of  securing  assistance  in  gathering  intelligence 
on  external  targets. But  the  link  also  provided  the  Station  with  in- 
formation on  internal  subversives  ana  opposition  elements  within 
Chile. That  raised  the  difficulty  of  ensuring  that  American  officials  did 
not  stray  into  influencing  the  actions  of  Chileans  with  whom  they  were 
in  contact. And  it  meant  that  the  CIA  was  identified,  to  some  degree, 
with  the  internal  activities  of  Chilean  police  and  intelligence  services, 
(6)

--- PAGE BREAK ---whether  or  not  the  U.S.

government  supported  those  actions.

That 
became  a   matter  for  great  concern  in  1073  with  the  advent  ol  the 
Pinochet  regime.

..

The  purpose  of  this  case  study  is  to  describe  and  assess  the  range 
of  covert  U.S.

activities  which  influenced  the  course  of  political  events 
in  Chile.

Most  of  the  discussion  which  follows  is  limited  to  activities 
labeled  and  run  as  “covert  action”  projects.

That  category  is  itself 
broad.

But  it  excludes  other  clandestine  activities  witli  possible: 
political  effects.

B.

Covert  Action  in  Chile:  Techniques 
Even  if  the  set  of  activities  labeled  “covert  action”  does  not  include 
all  clandestine  American  efforts  with  possible  political  effects,  that 
set  is  nonetheless  broad.

U.S.

covert  action  in  Chile  encompassed  a 
ran"0  of  techniques  and  affected  a   wide  variety  of  Chilean  institu- 
tions.

It  included  projects  which  were  regarded  as  the  framework 
necessary  for  covert  operations,  as  well  as  major  efforts  called  forth  by.

special  circumstances.

The  following  paragraphs  will  give  a   flavor  of 
that  range.

1.

Propaganda 
The  most  extensive  covert  action  activity  in  Chile  was  propaganda.

It  was  relatively  cheap.

In  Chile,  it  continued  at  a   low  level  during 
“normal”  times,  then  was  cranked  up  to  meet  particular  threats  or  to 
counter  particular  dangers.

.

.

.

.

.

,  , 
The  most  common  form  of  a   propaganda  project  is  simply  the  devel- 
opment of  “assets”  in  media  organizations  who  can  place  articles  or 
be  asked  to  write  them.

The  Agency  provided  to  its  field  Stations  sev- 
eral kinds  of  guidance  about  what  sorts  of  propaganda  were  desired.

For  example,  one  CIA  project  in  Chile  supported  from  one  to  five 
media  assets  during  the  seven  years  it  operated  (1965-1971).--- PAGE BREAK ---

The  Agency  provided  to  its  field  Stations  sev- 
eral kinds  of  guidance  about  what  sorts  of  propaganda  were  desired. For  example,  one  CIA  project  in  Chile  supported  from  one  to  five 
media  assets  during  the  seven  years  it  operated  (1965-1971). Most  of 
those  assets  worked  for  a   major  Santiago  daily  which  was  the  key  to 
CIA  propaganda  efforts. Those  assets  wrote  articles  or  editorials  favor- 
able to  U.S. interests  in  the  world  (for  example,  criticizing  the  Soviet 
Union  in  the  wake  of  the  Czechoslovakian  invasion)  ;   suppressed  news 
items  harmful  to  the  United  States  (for  instance  about  Vietnam) ;   and 
authored  articles  critical  of  Chilean  leftists. The  covert  propaganda  efforts  in  Chile  also  included  “black”  prop- 
aganda— material  falsely  purporting  to  be  the  product  of  a   particular 
individual  or  group. In  the  1970  election,  for  instance,  the  CIA  used 
“black”  propaganda  to  sow  discord  between  the  Communists  and  the 
Socialists  and  between  the  national  labor  confederation  and  the  Chilean 
Communist  Party. Table  I — Techniques  of  Covert  Action — Expenditures  in  Chile ,  1963-73  1 
Techniques  Amount 
Propaganda  for  elections  and  other  support  for  political  parties   $8,  000,  000 
Producing  and  disseminating  propaganda  and  supporting  mass 
media

Influencing  Chilean  institutions  (labor,  students,  peasants,  women) 
and  supporting  private  sector  organizations     000,  000 
Promoting  military  coup  d’etat 
   <200,  000 
1  Figures  rounded  to  nearest  $100,000. 
m 
■ 
Wi 
m 
-Sv. 
v 
•  v.  vTo.  -,.*c 
v :

--- PAGE BREAK ---In  some  cases,  the  form  of  propaganda  was  still  more  direct.

The 
Station  financed  Chilean  groups  who  erected  wall  posters,  passed  out 
political  leaflets  (at  times  prepared  by  the  Station)  and  engaged  in 
other  street  activities.

Most  often  these  activities  formed  part  of  larger 
projects  intended  to  influence  the  outcomes  of  Chilean  elections  (see 
below),  but  in  at  least  one  instance  the  activities  took  place  in  the 
absence  of  an  election  campaign.

Of  thirty-odd  covert  action  projects  undertaken  by  Chile  by  the  CIA 
between  1961  and  1974,  approximately  a   half  dozen  had  propaganda 
as  their  principal  activity.

Propaganda  was  an  important  subsidiary 
element  of  many  others,  particularly  election  projects.

(See  Table  I.) 
Press  placements  were  attractive  because  each  placement  might  pro- 
duce a   multiplier  effect,  being  picked  up  and  replayed  by  media  outlets 
other  than  the  one  in  which  it  originally  came  out.

2.

Support  For  Media 
In  addition  to  buying  propaganda  piecemeal,  the  Station  often  pur- 
chased it  wholesale  by  subsidizing  Chilean  media  organizations 
friendly  to  the  United  States.

Doing  so  was  propaganda  writ  large.

Instead  of  placing  individual  items,  the  CIA  supported — or  even 
founded — friendly  media  outlets  which  might  not  have  existed  in  the 
absence  of  Agency  support.

, 
From  1953  through  1970  m   Chile,  the  Station  subsidized  wire  serv- 
ices magazines  written  for  intellectual  circles,  and  a   right-wing  weekly 
newspaper.

According  to  the  testimony  of  former  officials,  support  for 
the  newspaper  was  terminated  because  it  became  so  inflexibly  rightist 
as  to  alienate  responsible  conservatives.--- PAGE BREAK ---

, 
From  1953  through  1970  m   Chile,  the  Station  subsidized  wire  serv- 
ices magazines  written  for  intellectual  circles,  and  a   right-wing  weekly 
newspaper. According  to  the  testimony  of  former  officials,  support  for 
the  newspaper  was  terminated  because  it  became  so  inflexibly  rightist 
as  to  alienate  responsible  conservatives. By  far,  the  largest— and  probably  the  most  significant— instance 
of  support  for  a   media  organization  was  the  money  provided  to  El 
Mercuric ,  the  major  Santiago  daily,  under  pressure  during  the  Allende 
regime. That  support  grew  out  of  an  existmg  propaganda  project. In  1971  the  Station  judged  that  El  Mercurio ,  the  most  important  op- 
position publication,  could  not  survive  pressure  from  the  Allende 
o-overnment,  including  intervention  in  the  newsprint  market  and 
the  withdrawal  of  government  advertising. The  40  Committee  author- 
ized $700,000  for  El  Mercurio  on  September  9, 1971,  and  added  another 
$965,000  to  that  authorization  on  April  11, 1972. A   CIA  project  renewal 
memorandum  concluded  that  El  Mercurio  and  other  media  outlets 
supported  by  the  Agency  had  played  an  important  role  in  setting  the 
stage  for  the  September  11,  1973,  military  coup  which  overthrew 
Allende. 3. Gaining  Influence  in  Chilean  Institutions  and  Groups 
Through  its  covert  activities  in  Chile,  the  U.S. government  sought 
to  influence  the  actions  of  a   wide  variety  of  institutions  and  groups  in 
Chilean  society. The  specific  intent  of  those  activities  ran  the  gamut 
from  attempting  to  influence  directly  the  making  of  government  policy 
to  trying  to  counter  communist  or  leftist  influence  among  organized 
groups  m   the  society. That  most  of  these  projects  included  a   propa- 
ganda component  is  obvious.

--- PAGE BREAK ---^ 
•  r>  •   h*m+  fiiL : C??

•  *u  ‘miL.

\^^*k  **  ■lsi*  r   fr  o.'  r '>  • '   .^1 
9 
From  1964  through  1968,  the  CIA  developed  contacts  within  the 
Chilean  Socialist  Party  and  at  the  Cabinet  level  of  the  Chilean 
government.

.

.

,  , 
Projects  aimed  at  organized  groups  in  Clnlean  society  had  more 
diffuse  purposes  than  efforts  aimed  at  government  institutions.

But 
the  aim  was  similar:  influencing  the  direction  of  political  events  in 
Chile.

Projects  were  directed,  for  example,  toward:  .

.

Wresting  control  of  Chilean  university  student  organizations 
from  the  communists;  .

....

,  , 
Supporting  a   women’s  group  active  in  Chilean  political  and 
intellectual  life ; 
 .

,  ,  ,   „   .

»  w   i 
Combating  the  communist-dominated  Central  Umca  de  Iraba- 
jadores  Chilenoa  (CUTCh)  and  supporting  democratic  labor 
k*  
Exploiting  a   civic  action  front  group  to  combat  communist  in- 
fluence within  cultural  and  intellectual  circles.

Major  Efforts  To  Influence  Chilean  Elections 
Covert  American  activity  was  a   factor  in  almost  every  major  elec- 
tion in  Chile  in  the  decade  between  1963  and  19T3.

In  several  mstances 
the  United  States  intervention  was  massive.

.

The  1964  presidential  election  was  the  most  prominent  example 
of  a   large-scale  election  project.

The  Central  Intelligence  Agency  spent 
more  than  $2.6  million  in  support  of  the  election  of  the  Christian 
Democratic  candidate,  in  part  to  prevent  the  accession  to  the  presi- 
dency of  Marxist  Salvador  Allende.

More  than  half  of  the  Christian 
Democratic  candidate’s  campaign  was  financed  by  the  United  States, 
although  he  was  not  informed  of  this  assistance.

In  addition,  the  Sta- 
tion furnished  support  to  an  array  of  pro-Christian  Democratic 
student,  women’s,  professional  and  peasant  groups.--- PAGE BREAK ---

More  than  half  of  the  Christian 
Democratic  candidate’s  campaign  was  financed  by  the  United  States, 
although  he  was  not  informed  of  this  assistance. In  addition,  the  Sta- 
tion furnished  support  to  an  array  of  pro-Christian  Democratic 
student,  women’s,  professional  and  peasant  groups. Two  other  political 
parties  were  funded  as  well  in  an  attempt  to  spread  the  vote. In  Washington,  an  inter-agency  election  committee  was  established, 
composed  of  State  Department,  White  House  and  CIA  officials. That 
committee  was  paralleled  by  a   group  in  the  embassy  m   Santiago. JN  o 
special  task  force  was  established  within  the  CIA,  but  the  Station  in 
Santiago  was  reinforced. The  Station  assisted  the  Christian  Democrats 
in  running  an  American-style  campaign,  which  included  polling,  voter 
registration  and  get-out-the-vote  drives,  in  addition  to  covert 
PlTheSUnited  States  was  also  involved  in  the  1970  presidential  cam- 
paign That  effort,  however,  was  smaller  and  did  not  include  support 
for  any  specific  candidate. It  was  directed  more  at  preventing  Allende  s 
election  than  at  insuring  another  candidate’s  victory. Nor  have  U.S. involvements  been  limited  to  presidential  campaigns. In  the  1965  Chilean  congressional  elections,  for  instance,  the  Station 
was  authorized  by  the  303  Committee  to  spend  up  to  $175,000. Covert 
support  was  provided  to  a   number  of  candidates  selected  by  the  Am- 
bassador  and  Station. A   CIA  election  memorandum  suggested  that  the 
project  did  have  some  impact,  including  the  elimination  of  a   number 
of  FRAP  (leftist  coalition)  candidates  who  might  otherwise  have  won 
congressional  seats. m 
m

--- PAGE BREAK ---5.

Support  For  Chilean  Political  Parties 
Most  covert  American  support  to  Chilean  political  parties  ■was  fur- 
nished as  part  of  specific  efforts  to  influence  election  outcomes.

How- 
ever, in  several  instances  the  CIA  provided  subsidies  to  parties  for 
more  general  purposes,  when  elections  were  not  imminent.

Most  such 
support  was  furnished  during  the  Allende  years,  1970-1973,  when 
the  U.S.

government  judged  that  without  its  support  paities  of  the 
center  and  right  might  not  survive  either  as  opposition  elements  or  as 
contestants  in  elections  several  years  away.

In  a   sequence  of  decisions  in  1971  through  1973,  the  40  Committee 
authorized  nearly  $4  million  for  opposition  political  parties  in  Chile.

Most  of  this  money  went  to  the  Christian  Democratic  Party  (PDC), 
but  a   substantial  portion  was  earmarked  for  the  National  Party  (PN) , 
a   conservative  grouping  more  stridently  opposed  to  the  Allende  gov- 
ernment than  was  the  PDC.

An  effort  was  also  made  to  split  the  ruling 
Popular  Unity  coalition  by  inducing  elements  to  break  away.

The  funding  of  political  parties  on  a   large  scale  in  1970-73  was 
not,  however,  without  antecedents,  albeit  more  modest  in  scale.

In 
1962  the  Special  Group  (predecessor  to  the  40  Committee)  authorized 
several  hundred  thousand  dollars  for  an  effort  to  build  up  the  PDC 
in  anticipation  of  the  1964  elections.

Small  authorizations  were  made, 
in  1963  and  1967,  for  support  to  moderate  elements  within  the  Radical 
Party.

6.

Support  For  Private  Sector  Organizations 
As  part  of  its  program  of  support  for  opposition  elements  during 
the  Allende  government,  the  CIA  provided  money  to  several  trade 
organizations  of  the  Chilean  private  sector.--- PAGE BREAK ---

6. Support  For  Private  Sector  Organizations 
As  part  of  its  program  of  support  for  opposition  elements  during 
the  Allende  government,  the  CIA  provided  money  to  several  trade 
organizations  of  the  Chilean  private  sector. In  September  1972,  for 
instance,  the  40  Committee  authorized  $24,000  in  emergency  support 
for  an  anti-Allende  businessmen’s  organization. At  that  time,  sup- 
porting other  private  sector  organizations  was  considered  but  re- 
jected because  of  the  fear  that  those  organizations  might  be  involved 
in  anti-government  strikes. The  40  Committee  authorized  $100,000  for  private  sector  organiza- 
tions in  October  1972,  as  part  of  the  March  1973  election  project. According  to  the  CIA,  that  money  was  spent  only  on  election  activities, 
such  as  voter  registration  drives  and  get-out-the-vote  drives. In  August 
1973,  the  Committee  authorized  support  for  private  sector  groups, 
but  with  disbursement  contingent  on  the  agreement  of  the  Ambassador 
and  State  Department. That  agreement  was  not  forthcoming. 7. Direct  Efforts  To  Promote  A   Military  Coup 
United  States  covert  efforts  to  affect  the  course  of  Chilean  politics 
reached  a   peak  in  1970 :  the  CIA  was  directed  to  undertake  an  effort 
to  promote  a   military  coup  in  Chile  to  prevent  the  accession  to  power  of 
Salvador  Allende. That  attempt,  the  so-called  “Track  II,”  is  the  sub- 
S'-  of  a   separate  Committee  report  and  will  be  discussed  in  section 
below. A   brief  summary  here  will  demonstrate  the  extreme  in 
American  covert  intervention  in  Chilean  politics. On  September  15,  1970— after  Allende  finished  first  in  the  election 
but  before  the  Chilean  Congress  had  chosen  between  him  and  the 
■*  f‘  '■  • 
 ‘>•7. ■  :

--- PAGE BREAK ---Us 
runner-up,  Alessandri,1 — President  Nixon  met  with  Richard  Helms, 
the  Director  of  Central  Intelligence,  Assistant  to  the  President  for 
National  Security  Affairs  Henry  Kissinger  and  Attorney  General 
John  Mitchell.

Helms  was  directed  to  prevent  Allende  from  taking 
power.

This  effort  was  to  be  conducted  without  the  knowledge  of 
the  Departments  of  State  and  Defense  or  the  Ambassador.

Track 
II  was  never  discussed  at  a   40  Committee  meeting.

It  quickly  became  apparent  to  both  White  House  and  CIA  officials 
that  a   military  coup  was  the  only  way  to  prevent  Allende’s  acces- 
sion to  power.

To  achieve  that  end,  the  CIA  established  contact  with 
several  groups  of  military  plotters  and  eventually  passed  three  wea- 
pons and  tear  gas  to  one  group.

The  weapons  were  subsequently  re- 
turned, apparently  unused.

The  CIA  knew  that  the  plans  of  all  groups 
of  plotters  began  with  the  abduction  of  the  constitutionalist  Chief  of 
Staff  of  the  Chilean  Army,  General  Rene  Schneider.

The  Committee 
has  received  conflicting  testimony  about  the  extent  of  CIA/White 
House  communication  and  of  White  House  officials’  awareness  of 
specific  coup  plans,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  U.S.

government 
sought  a   military  coup  in  Chile.

On  October  22,  one  group  of  plotters  attempted  to  kidnap  Schneider.

Schneider  resisted,  was  snot,  and  subsequently  died.

The  CIA  had 
been  in  touch  with  that  group  of  plotters  but  a   week  earlier  had  with- 
drawn its  support  for  the  group’s  specific  plans.

The  coup  plotting  collapsed  and  Allende  was  inaugurated  President.

After  his  election,  the  CIA  and  U.S.

military  attaches  maintained 
contacts  with  the  Chilean  military  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  intel- 
ligence.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After  his  election,  the  CIA  and  U.S. military  attaches  maintained 
contacts  with  the  Chilean  military  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  intel- 
ligence. Whether  those  contacts  strayed  into  encouraging  the  Chilean 
military  to  move  against  Allende ;   or  whether  the  Chilean  military — 
having  been  goaded  toward  a   coup  during  Track  II — took  encourage- 
ment to  act  against  the  President  from  those  contacts  even  though 
U.S. officials  did  not  intend  to  provide  it:  these  are  major  questions 
which  are  inherent  in  U.S. covert  activities  in  the  period  of  the  Allende 
government. C. Covert  Action  and  Multinational  Corporations 
In  addition  to  providing  information  and  cover  to  the  CIA,  multi- 
national corporations  also  participated  in  covert  attempts  to  influence 
Chilean  politics. The  following  is  a   brief  description  of  the  CIA’s  rela- 
tionship with  one  such  corporation  in  Chile  in  the  period  1963-1973 — 
International  Telephone  and  Telegraph,  Inc. (ITT). Not  only  is  ITT 
the  most  prominent  and  public  example,  but  a   great  deal  of  informa- 
tion has  been  developed  on  the  CIA/ITT  relationship. This  summary 
is  based  on  new  information  provided  to  this  Committee  and  on  mate- 
rial previously  made  public  by  the  Subcommittee  on  Multinational 
Corporations  of  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee. 1. 196 If. Chilean  Elections 
#  
During  the  1964  presidential  campaign,  representatives  of  multina- 
tional corporations  approached  the  CIA  with  a   proposal  to  provide 
1  Allende  received  30.3  percent  of  the  vote,  Alessandri  34.9  percent. Radomlro  Tomic 
the  PDC  candidate,  finished  third  with  27.8  percent. 63—372 — To   3

--- PAGE BREAK ---campaign  fimds  to  the  Christian  Democratic  Party.

The  CIA  decision 
not  to  accept  such  fimds,  as  well  as  other  CIA  contacts  with  multina- 
tional corporations  during  that  campaign,  are  fully  described  in  Part 
in.

2.

1970  Chilean  Elections:  Phase  I 
In  1970,  the  U.S.

government  and  several  multinational  corpora- 
tions were,  linked  in  opposition  to  the  candidacy  and  later  the  presi- 
dency of  Salvador  Allende.

This  CIA-multinational  corporation  con- 
nection can  be  divided  into  two  phases.

Phase  I  comprised  actions  tak- 
en by  either  the  CIA  or  U.S.-based  multinational  companies  at  a   time 
when  it  was  official  U.S.

policy  not  to  support,  even  covertly,  any  can- 
didate or  party  in  Chile.

During  this  phase  the  Agency  was,  however, 
authorized  to  engage  in  a   covert  “spoiling”  operation  designed  to  de- 
feat Salvador  xlllende.

Phase  II  encompassed  the  relationship  between 
intelligence  agencies  and  multinational  corporations  after  the  Septem- 
ber 1970  general  election.

During  Phase  II,  the  U.S.

government 
opposed  Allende  and  supported  opposition  elements.

The  government 
sought  the  cooperation  of  multinational  corporations  in  this  effort.

A   number  of  multinational  corporations  were  apprehensive  about 
the  possibility  that  Allende  would  be  elected  President  of  Chile.

Allende’s  public  announcements  indicated  his  intention,  if  elected,  to 
nationalize  basic  industries  and  to  bring  under  Chilean  ownership 
service  industries  such  as  the  national  telephone  company,  which  was 
at  that  time  a   subsidiaiw  of  ITT.

In  1964  Allende  had  been  defeated,  and  it  was  widely  known  both 
in  Chile  and  among  American  multinational  corporations  with  sig- 
nificant interests  in  Chile  that  his  opponents  had  been  supported  by 
the  United  States  government.Allende’s  public  announcements  indicated  his  intention,  if  elected,  to 
nationalize  basic  industries  and  to  bring  under  Chilean  ownership 
service  industries  such  as  the  national  telephone  company,  which  was 
at  that  time  a   subsidiaiw  of  ITT.

In  1964  Allende  had  been  defeated,  and  it  was  widely  known  both 
in  Chile  and  among  American  multinational  corporations  with  sig- 
nificant interests  in  Chile  that  his  opponents  had  been  supported  by 
the  United  States  government.

John  McCone,  a   former  CIA  Director 
and  a   member  of  ITT’s  Board  of  Directors  in  1970,  knew  of  the  sig- 
nificant American  government  involvement  in  1964  and  of  the  offer 
of  assistance  made  at  that  time  by  American  companies.

Agency  docu- 
ments indicate  that  McCone  informed  Harold  Geneen,  ITT’s  Board 
Chairman,  of  these  facts.

In  1970  leaders  of  American  multinational  corporations  with  sub- 
stantial interests  in  Chile,  together  with  other  American  citizens  con- 
cerned about  what  might  happen  to  Chile  in  the  event  of  an  Allende 
victory,  contacted  U.S.

government  officials  in  order  to  make  their 
views  lmown.

In  July  1970,  a   CIA  representative  in  Santiago  met  with  represen- 
tatives of  ITT  and,  in  a   discussion  of  the  upcoming  election,  indicated 
that  Alessandri  could  use  financial  assistance.

The  Station  suggested 
the  name  of  an  individual  who  could  be  used  as  a   secure  channel  for 
getting  these  funds  to  the  Alessandri  campaign.

Shortly  thereafter  John  McCone  telephoned  CIA  Director  Eicliard 
Helms.

As  a   result  of  this  call,  a   meeting  was  arranged  between  the 
Chairman  of  the  Board  of  ITT  and  the  Chief  of  the  Western  Hemi- 
sphere Division  of  the  CIA.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Shortly  thereafter  John  McCone  telephoned  CIA  Director  Eicliard 
Helms. As  a   result  of  this  call,  a   meeting  was  arranged  between  the 
Chairman  of  the  Board  of  ITT  and  the  Chief  of  the  Western  Hemi- 
sphere Division  of  the  CIA. Geneen  offered  to  make  available  to  the 
CIA  a   substantial  amount  of  money  to  be  used  in  support  of  the 
Alessandri  campaign. In  subsequent  meetings  ITT  offered  to  make  $1 
million  available  to  the  CIA. The  CIA  rejected  the  offer. The  memo- 
randum indicated  further  that  CIA’s  advice  was  sought  with  respect 
to  an  individual  who  might  serve  as  a   conduit  of  ITT  funds  to  the 
Alessandri  campaign.

--- PAGE BREAK ---randum indicated  further  that  CIA’s  advice  was  sought  with  respect 
to  an  individual  who  might  serve  as  a   conduit  of  ITT  funds  to  the 
Alessandri  campaign.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13 
^be  CIA  confirmed  that  the  individual  in  question  was  a   reliable 
channel  winch  could  be  used  for  getting  funds  to  Alessandri.  A   second 
channel  of  funds  from  ITT  to  a   political  party  opposing  Allende,  the 
National  Party,  was  developed  following  CIA  advice  as  to  a   secure 
funding  mechanism  utilizing  two  CIA  assets  in  Chile.  These  assets 
were  also  receiving  Agency  funds  in  connection  with  the  “spoiling” 
operation. 
During  the  period  prior  to  the  September  election,  ITT  represen- 
tatives met  frequently  with  CIA  representatives  both  in  Chile  and 
in  the  United  States  and  CIA  advised  ITT  as  to  ways  in  which  it 
might  safely  channel  funds  both  to  the  Alessandri  campaign  and  to 
the  National  Party.  CIA  was  kept  informed  of  the  extent  and  the 
mechanism  of  the  funding.  Eventually  at  least  $350,000  was  passed 
by  I  IT  to  this  campaign.  A   roughly  equal  amount  was  passed  by 
other  U.S.  companies;  the  CIA  learned  of  this  funding  but  did  not 
assist  m   it. 
3.  F ollovnng  the  1970  Chilean  Elections:  Phase  II 
Following  the  September  4  elections,  the  United  States  government 
adopted  a   policy  of  economic  pressure  directed  against  Chile  and  in 
this  connection  sought  to  enlist  the  influence  of  Geneen  on  other 
American  businessmen.  Specifically,  the  State  Department  was  di- 
rected by  the  40  Committee  to  contact  American  businesses  having 
interests  in  Chile  to  see  if  they  could  be  induced  to  take  actions  in 
accord  with  the  American  government’s  policy  of  economic  pressure 
on  Chile.  On  September  29,  the  Chief  of  the  Western  Hemisphere 
Division  of  the  CIA  met  with  a   representative  of  ITT.  The  CIA 
official  sought  to  have  ITT  involved  in  a   more  active  way  in  Chile 
According  to  CIA  documents,  ITT  took  note  of  the  CIA  presentation 
on  economic  warfare  but  did  not  actively  respond  to  it. 
One  institution  in  Chile  which  was  used  in  a   general  anti-Allende 
effort  was  the  newspaper  chain  El  Mercurio.  Both  the  United  States 
government  and  ITT  were  funneling  money  into  the  hands  of  in- 
dmduals  associated  with  the  paper.  That  funding  continued  after 
Aliende  was  in  office. 
•  6  ileal  ,of  testimony  has  been  taken  on  the  above  matters, 
initially  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Multinational  Corporations  The 
degree  of  cooperation  between  the  CIA  and  ITT  in  the  period  prior 
to  the  September  19 10  election  raises  an  important  question:  while 
the  U.S.  government  was  not  supporting  particular  candidates  or 
parties,  even  covertly,  was  the  CLA  authorized  to  act  on  its  own  in 
advising  or  assisting  ITT  in  its  covert  financial  support  of  the 
Alessandri  campaign  ? 
. .  •  •  •  ,.vparties,  even  covertly,  was  the  CLA  authorized  to  act  on  its  own  in 
advising  or  assisting  ITT  in  its  covert  financial  support  of  the 
Alessandri  campaign  ? 
. .  •  •  •  ,.v

--- PAGE BREAK ---III.

Major  Covert  Action  Programs  and  Their  Effects 
This  section  outlines  the  major  programs  of  covert  action  under- 
taken by  the  United  States  in  Chile,  period  by  period.

In  every  in- 
stance,  covert  action  was  an  instrument  of  United  States  foreign 
policy,  decided  upon  at  the  highest  levels  of  the  government.

Each 
subsection  to  follow  sets  forth  that  policy  context.

Without  it,  it  is 
impossible  to  understand  the  covert  actions  which  were  undertaken.

After  a   discussion  of  policy,  each  subsection  elaborates  the  covert  ac- 
tion tactics  employed  in  each  case.

Finally,  the  effect  of  each  major 
program  is  assessed.

Tlie  section  begins  with  the  first  major  United  States  covert  action 
in  Chile — the  1964  presidential  elections.

A.

The  1964  Presidential  Election 
1.

United  States  Policy 
The  United  States  was  involved  on  a   massive  scale  in  the  1964 
presidential  election  in  Chile.

The  Special  Group  authorized  over 
three  million  dollars  during  the  1962-64  period  to  prevent  the  elec- 
tion of  a   Socialist  or  Communist  candidate.

A   total  of  nearly  four 
million  dollars  was  spent  on  some  fifteen  covert  action  projects,  rang- 
ing from  organizing  slum  dwellers  to  passing  funds  to  political 
parties.

The  goal,  broadly,  was  to  prevent  or  minimize  the  influence  of 
■Chilean  Communists  or  Marxists  in  the  government  that  would 
emerge  from  the  1964  election.

Consequently,  the  U.S.

sought  the  most 
effective  wav  of  opposing  FRAP  (Popular  Action  Front),  an  alliance 
of  Chilean  Socialists,  Communists,  and  several  miniscule  non-Marxist 
parties  of  the  left  which  backed  the  candidacy  of  Salvador  Allende.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Consequently,  the  U.S. sought  the  most 
effective  wav  of  opposing  FRAP  (Popular  Action  Front),  an  alliance 
of  Chilean  Socialists,  Communists,  and  several  miniscule  non-Marxist 
parties  of  the  left  which  backed  the  candidacy  of  Salvador  Allende. Specifically,  the  policy  called  for  support  of  the  Christian  Democratic 
Party,  the  Democratic  Front  (a  coalition  of  rightist  parties),  and  a 
variety  of  anti-communist  propaganda  and  organizing  activities. The  groundwork  for  the  election  was  laid  early  in  1961  by  estab- 
lishing operational  relationships  with  key  political  parties  and  by 
creating  propaganda  and  organizational  mechanisms  capable  of  in- 
fluencing key  sectors  of  the  population. Projects  that  had  been  con- 
ducted since  the  1950’s  among  peasants,  slum  dwellers,  organized 
labor,  students,  and  the  media  provided  a   basis  for  much  of  the  pre- 
election covert  action. The  main  problem  facing  the  United  States  two  years  before  the 
election  was  the  selection  of  a   party  and/or  candidate  to  support 
against  the  leftist  alliance. The  CIA  presented  two  papers  to  the 
Special  Group  on  April  2, 1962. One  of  these  papers  proposed  support 
for  the  Christian  Democratic  Party,  while  the  other  recommended  sup- 
port of  the  Radical  Party,  a   group  to  the  right  of  the  Christian 
Democrats. The  Special  Group  approved  both  proposals. Although 
(14)

--- PAGE BREAK ---15 
this  strategy  appears  to  have  begun  as  an  effort  to  hedge  bets  and 
support  two  candidates  for  President,  it  evolved  into  a   strategy  de- 
signed to  support  the  Christian  Democratic  candidate.

On  August  27, 1062,  the  Special  Group  approved  the  use  of  a   third- 
country  funding  channel  and  authorized  $180,000  in  fiscal  year  1063 
for  the  Chilean  Christian  Democrats.

The  Kennedy  Administration 
had  preferred  a   center-right  government  in  Chile,  "consisting  of  the 
Radicals  on  the  right  and  the  Christian  Democrats  in  the  center.

However,  political  events  in  Chile  in  1062-1063 — principally  the 
creation  of  a   right-wing  alliance  that  included  the  Radical  Party — 
precluded  such  a   coalition.

Consequently,  throughout  1063,  the  United 
States  funded  both  the  Christian  Democrats  and  the  right-wing 
coalition,  the  Democratic  Front.

After  a   by-election  defeat  in  May  1064  destroyed  the  Democratic 
Front,  the  U.S.

threw  its  support  fully  behind  the  Christian  Demo- 
cratic candidate.

However,  CIA  funds  continued  to  subsidize  the  Rad- 
ical Party  candidate  in  order  to  enhance  the  Christian  Democrats’ 
image  as  a   moderate  progressive  party  being  attacked  from  the  right 
as  well  as  the  left.

2.

Covert  Action  Techniques 
Covert  action  during  the  1964  campaign  was  composed  of  two  major 
elements.

One  was  direct  financial  support  of  the  Christian  Democratic 
campaign.

The  CIA  underwrote  slightly  more  than  half  of  the  total 
cost  of  that  campaign.

After  debate,  the  Special  Group  decided  not 
to  inform  the  Christian  Democratic  candidate,  Eduardo  Frei,  of 
American  covert  support  of  his  campaign.

A   number  of  intermediaries 
were  therefore  mobilized  to  pass  the  money  to  the  Christian  Demo- 
crats.After  debate,  the  Special  Group  decided  not 
to  inform  the  Christian  Democratic  candidate,  Eduardo  Frei,  of 
American  covert  support  of  his  campaign.

A   number  of  intermediaries 
were  therefore  mobilized  to  pass  the  money  to  the  Christian  Demo- 
crats.

In  addition  to  the  subsidies  for  the  Christian  Democratic  Party, 
the  Special  Group  allocated  funds  to  the  Radical  Party  and  to  private 
citizens’  groups.

In  addition  to  support  for  political  parties,  the  CIA  mounted  a 
massive  anti-communist  propaganda  campaign.

Extensive  use  was 
made  of  the  press,  radio,  films,  pamphlets,  posters,  leaflets,  direct  mail- 
ings, paper  streamers,  and  wall  painting.

It  was  a   “scare  campaign,” 
which  relied  heavily  on  images  of  Soviet  tanks  and  Cuban  firing 
Suads  and  was  directed  especially  to  women.

Hundreds  of  thousands 
copies  of  the  anti-communist  pastoral  letter  of  Pope  Pius  XI  were 
distributed  by  Christian  Democratic  organizations.

They  carried  the 
designation,  ‘‘printed  privately  by  citizens  without  political  affiliation, 
in  order  more  broadly  to  disseminate  its  content.”  “Disinformation” 
and  “black  propaganda” — material  which  purported  to  originate  from 
another  source,  such  as  the  Chilean  Communist  Party — were  used  as 
well.

The  propaganda  campaign  was  enormous.

During  the  first  week  of 
intensive  propaganda  activity  (the  third  week  of  June  1964),  a   CIA- 
funded  propaganda  group  produced  twenty  radio  spots  per  day  in 
Santiago  and  on  44  provincial  stations;  twelve-minute  news  broadcasts 
five  time  daily  on  three  Santiago  stations  and  24  provincial  outlets; 
thousands  of  cartoons,  and  much  paid  press  advertising.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The  propaganda  campaign  was  enormous. During  the  first  week  of 
intensive  propaganda  activity  (the  third  week  of  June  1964),  a   CIA- 
funded  propaganda  group  produced  twenty  radio  spots  per  day  in 
Santiago  and  on  44  provincial  stations;  twelve-minute  news  broadcasts 
five  time  daily  on  three  Santiago  stations  and  24  provincial  outlets; 
thousands  of  cartoons,  and  much  paid  press  advertising. By  the  end 
of  June,  the  group  produced  24  daily  newscasts  in  Santiago  and  the 
provinces,  26  weekly  “commentary”  programs,  and  distributed  3,000 
•  £.*  v/.;  -V  
•   • 
 •  •   •’

--- PAGE BREAK ---16 
posters  daily.

The  CIA  regards  the  anti-communist  scare  campaign 
as  the  most  effective  activity  undertaken  by  the  U.S.

on  behalf  of 
the  Christian  Democratic  candidate.

The  propaganda  campaign  was  conducted  internationally  as  well, 
and  articles  from  abroad  were  “replayed”  in  Chile.

Chilean  newspapers 
reported :  an  endorsement  of  Frei  by  the  sister  of  a   Latin  American 
leader,  a   public  letter  from  a   former  president  in  exile  in  the  U.S.,  a 
“message  from  the  women  of  Venezuela,”  and  dire  warnings  about  an 
Allende  victory  from  various  figures  in  military  governments  in  Latin 
America.

The  CIA  ran  political  action  operations  independent  of  the  Christian 
Democrats’  campaign  in  a   number  of  important  voter  blocks,  includ- 
ing slum  dwellers,  peasants,  organized  labor,  and  dissident  Socialists.

Support  was  given  to  “anti-communist”  members  of  the  Radical  Party 
in  their  efforts  to  achieve  positions  of  influence  in  the  party  hierarchy, 
and  to  prevent  the  party  from  throwing  its  support  behind  Allende.

S.

U.S.

Government  Organization  for  the  1964  Chilean  Election 
To  manage  the  election  effort,  an  electoral  committee  was  established 
in  Washington,  consisting  of  the  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  In- 
ter-American Affairs,  Thomas  Mann;  the  Western  Hemisphere  Divi- 
sion Chief  of  the  CIA.

Desmond  Fitzgerald;  Ralph  Dungan  and 
McGeorge  Bundy  from  the  White  House ;   and  the  Chief  of  the  Western 
Hemisphere  Division  Branch  Four,  the  branch  that  has  jurisdiction 
over  Chile.

This  group  was  in  close  touch  with  the  State  Department 
Office  of  Bolivian  and  Chilean  Affairs.

In  Santiago  there  was  a   par- 
allel Election  Committee  that  coordinated  U.S.

efforts.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In  Santiago  there  was  a   par- 
allel Election  Committee  that  coordinated  U.S. efforts. It  included 
the  Deputy  Chief  of  Mission,  the  CIA  Chief  of  Station,  and  the  heads 
of  the  Political  and  Economic  Sections,  as  well  as  the  Ambassador. The  Election  Committee  in  Washington  coordinated  lines  to  higher 
authority  and  to  the  field  and  other  agencies. No  special  task  force  was 
established,  and  the  CIA  Station  in  Santiago  was  temporarily  in- 
creased by  only  three  officers. 4. Role  of  Multinational  Corporations 
A   group  of  American  businessmen  in  Chile  offered  to  provide  one 
and  a   half  million  dollars  to  be  administered  and  disbursed  covertly 
by  the  U.S. Government  to  prevent  Allende  from  winning  the  1964 
presidential  election. This  offer  went  to  the  303  Committee  (the  name 
of  the  Special  Group  after  June  1964)  which  decided  not  to  accept  the 
offer. It  decided  that  offers  from  American  business  could  not  be 
accepted,  that  they  were  neither  a   secure  way  nor  an  honorable  way 
of  doing  business. This  decision  was  a   declaration  of  policy  which 
set  the  precedent  for  refusing  to  accept  such  collaboration  between 
CIA  and  private  business. However. CIA  money,  represented  as  pri- 
vate money,  was  passed  to  the  Christian  Democrats  through  a   private 
businessman. 6. Role  of  the  Chilean  Military 
On  July  19,  1964,  the  Chilean  Defense  Council,  which  is  the  equiva- 
lent of  the  U.S. Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  went  to  President  Alessandri 
to  propose  a   coup  d'etat  if  Allende  won. This  offer  was  transmitted  to 
I: 
I 
ft

--- PAGE BREAK ---the  CIA  Chief  of  Station,  who  told  the  Chilean  Defense  Council 
through  an  intermediary  that  the  United  States  was  absolutely  op- 
posed to  a   coup.

On  July  20,  the  Deputy  Chief  of  Mission  at  the  U.S.

Embassy  was  approached  by  a   Chilean  Air  Force  general  who  threat- 
ened a   coup  if  Allende  won.

The  DCM  reproached  him  for  proposing 
a   coup  d'etat  and  there  was  no  further  mention  of  it.

Earlier,  the  CIA 
learned  that  the  Radical  candidate  for  election,  several  other  Chileans, 
and  an  ex-politician  from  another  Latin  American  country  had  met 
on  June  2  to  organize  a   rightist  group  called  the  Legion  of  Liberty.

They  said  this  group  would  stage  a   cowp  detat  if  Allende  won,  or  if 
Frei  won  and  sought  a   coalition  government  with  the  Communist 
Party.

Two  of  the  Chileans  at  the  meeting  reported  that  some  military 
officers  wanted  to  stage  a   coup  detat  before  the  election  if  the  United 
States  Government  would  promise  to  support  it.

Those  approaches 
were  rebuffed  by  the  CIA.

6.

Effects  of  Covert  Action 
A   CIA  study  concludes  that  U.S.

intervention  enabled  Eduardo 
Frei  to  win  a   clear  majority  in  the  1964  election,  instead  of  merely  a 
plurality.

What  U.S.

Government  documents  do  not  make  clear  is  why 
it  was  necessary  to  assure  a   majority,  instead  of  accepting  the  victory 
a   plurality  would  have  assured.

CLA  assistance  enabled  the  Christian 
Democratic  Party  to  establish  an  extensive  organization  at  the  neigh- 
borhood and  village  level.

That  may  have  lent  grassroots  support  for 
reformist  efforts  that  the  Frei  government  undertook  over  the  next 
several  years.

.--- PAGE BREAK ---

That  may  have  lent  grassroots  support  for 
reformist  efforts  that  the  Frei  government  undertook  over  the  next 
several  years. . Some  of  the  propaganda  and  pollin':  mechanisms  developed  tor  use 
in  1964  were  used  repeatedly  thereafter,  in  local  and  congressional 
campaigns,  during  the  1970  ‘presidential  campaign,  and  throughout 
the  1970-1973  Allende  presidency. Allegations  of  CIA  involvement  in 
the  campaign,  and  press  allegations  of  CIA  funding  of  the  Interna- 
tional Development  Foundation  contributed  to  the  U.S. reluctance 
in  1970  to  undertake  another  massive  pre-election  effort. B. Covert  Action  :  1964-1969 
During  the  years  between  the  election  of  Christian  Democratic 
President  Eduardo  Frei  in  1964  and  the  presidential  election  cam- 
paign of  1970,  the  CIA  conducted  a   variety  of  covert  activities  in  Chile. Operating  within  different  sectors  of  society,  these  activities  were  all 
intended  to  strengthen  groups  which  supported  President  Frei  and 
opposed  Marxist  influences. The  CIA  spent  a   total  of  almost  $2  million  on  covert  action  in  Chile 
during  this  period,  of  which  one-fourth  was  covered  by  40  Committee 
authorizations  for  specific  major  political  action  efforts. The  CLA 
conducted  twenty  covert  action  projects  in  Chile  during  these  years. 1. Covert  Action  Methods 
In  February  1965  the  303  Committee  approved  $175,000  for  a   short- 
term political  action  project  to  provide  covert  support  to  selected 
candidates  in  the  March  1965  congressional  elections  in  Chile. Ac- 
cording to  the  CIA,  twenty-two  candidates  were  selected  by  the  Sta-

--- PAGE BREAK ---tion  and  the  Ambassador;  nine  were  elected.

The.

operation  helped 
defeat  up  to  13  FRAP  candidates  who  would  otherwise  have  won 
congressional  seats.

Another  election  effort  was  authorized  in  July  1908,  in  preparation 
for  the  March  1969  congressional  election.

The  40  Committee  author- 
ized $350,000  for  this  effort,  with  the  objective  of  strengthening  moder- 
ate political  forces  before  the  1970  presidential  election.

The  program 
consisted  of  providing  financial  support  to  candidates,  supporting 
a   splinter  Socialist  Party  in  order  to  attract  votes  away  from 
Allende’s  socialist  party,  propaganda  activities,  and  assisting  inde- 
pendent groups.

The  CIA  regarded  the  election  effort  as  successful 
m   meeting  its  limited  objective;  ten  of  the  twelve  candidates  selected 
for  support  won  their  races,  including  one  very  unexpected  victory.

The  support  provided  to  the  dissident  socialist  group  deprived  the 
Socialist  Party  of  a   minimum  of  seven  congressional  seats.

The  303  Committee  also  approved  $30,000  in  1967  to  strengthen  the 
right  wing  of  the  Radical  Party .

A   number  of  other  political  actions  not  requiring  303  Committee 
approval  were  conducted.

The  project  to  increase  the  effectiveness  and 
appeal  of  the  Christian  Democratic  Party  and  to  subsidize  the  party 
during  the  1964  elections  continued  into  late  1965  or  1966,  as  did  a 
project  to  influence  key  members  of  the  Socialist  Party  toward  ortho- 
dox European  socialism  and  away  from  communism.

During  this 
period,  the  CIA  dealt  with  a   Chilean  official  at  the  cabinet  level, 
though  with  scant  result.

Covert  action  efforts  were  conducted  during  this  period  to  influence 
the  political  development  of  various  sectors  of  Chilean  society.During  this 
period,  the  CIA  dealt  with  a   Chilean  official  at  the  cabinet  level, 
though  with  scant  result.

Covert  action  efforts  were  conducted  during  this  period  to  influence 
the  political  development  of  various  sectors  of  Chilean  society.

One 
project,  conducted  prior  to  the  1964  elections  to  strengthen  Christian 
Democratic  support  among  peasants  and  slum  dwellers,  continued  to 
help  train  and  organize  “anti-communists”  in  these  and  other  sectors 
until  public  exposure  of  CIA  funding  in  1967  forced  its  termination.

A   project  to  compete  organizationally  with  the  Marxists  among  the 
urban  poor  of  Santiago  was  initiated  shortly  after  the  1964  election, 
and  was  terminated  in  mid-1969  because  the  principal  agent  was  un- 
willing to  prejudice  the  independent  posture  of  the  organization  by 
using  it  on  a   larg[e  scale  to  deliver  votes  in  the  1969  and  1970  presi- 
dential elections.

Jji  the  mid-1960’s,  the  CIA  supported  an  anti-com- 
munist women’s  group  active  in  Chilean  political  and  intellectual  life.

Two  projects  worked  within  organized  labor  in  Chile.

One,  which 
began  during  the  1964  election  period,  was  a   labor  action  project  to 
combat  the  communist-dominated  Central  Unica  de  Trabajadores  Chi - 
lenos  (CUTCh)  and  to  support  democratic  labor  groups.

Another 
project  was  conducted  in  the  Catholic  labor  field.

Various  CIA  projects  during  this  period  supported  media  efforts.

One,  begun  in  the  early  1950’s,  operated  wire  services.

Another,  which 
was  an  important  part  of  the  1964  election  effort,  supported  anti-com- 
munist propaganda  activities  through  wall  posters  attributed  to  fic- 
titious groups,  leaflet  campaigns,  and  public  heckling.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One,  begun  in  the  early  1950’s,  operated  wire  services. Another,  which 
was  an  important  part  of  the  1964  election  effort,  supported  anti-com- 
munist propaganda  activities  through  wall  posters  attributed  to  fic- 
titious groups,  leaflet  campaigns,  and  public  heckling. A   third  project  supported  a   right-wing  weekly  newspaper,  which 
was  an  instrument  of  the  anti-Allende  campaign  during  and  for  a   time 
after  the  1970  election  campaign. Another  project  funded  an  asset 
who  produced  regular  radio  political  commentary  shows  attacking

--- PAGE BREAK ---19 
the  political  parties  on  the  left  and  supporting  CIA-selected  candi- 
dates.

After  the  Soviet  invasion  of  Czechoslovakia,  this  asset  organ- 
ized a   march  on  the  Soviet  Embassy  which  led  to  major  police  action 
and  mass  media  coverage.

Other  assets  funded  under  this  project 
placed  CIA-inspired  editorials  almost  daily  in  El  Mercurio,  Chile’s 
major  newspaper  and,  after  1968,  exerted  substantial  control  over  the 
content  of  that  paper’s  international  news  section.

The  CIA  also  maintained  covert  liaison  relations  with  Chile’s 
internal  security  and  intelligence  services,  civilian  and  military.

The 
primary  purpose  of  these  arrangements  was  to  enable  the  Chilean 
services  to  assist  CIA  in  information  collection  about  foreign  targets.

^  
^ksidiary  PurPose  these  relationships  was  to  collect  information 
and  meet  the  threat  posed  by  communists  and  other  groups  of  the  far 
left  within  Chile.

2.

Effects  of  Covert  Action 
The  CIA's  evaluations  of  the  1965  and  1969  election  projects  sug- 
gest that  those  efforts  were  relatively  successful  in  achieving  their 
immediate  goals.

On  the  other  hand,  the  labor  and  ^community  devel- 
opment” projects  were  deemed  rather  unsuccessful  in  countering  the 
growth  of  strong  leftist  sentiment  and  organization  among  workers, 
peasants  and  slum  dwellers.

For  instance,  neither  of  the  labor  projects 
was  able  to  find  a   nucleus  of  legitimate  Chilean  labor  leaders  to  com- 
pete effectively  with  the  communist-dominated  CUTCh.

The  propaganda  projects  probably  had  a   substantial  cumulative 
effect  over  these  years,  both  in  helping  to  polarize  public  opinion  con- 
ce ruing  the  nature  of  the  threat  posed  by  communists  and  other  leftists, 
and  in  maintaining  an  extensive  propaganda  capability.For  instance,  neither  of  the  labor  projects 
was  able  to  find  a   nucleus  of  legitimate  Chilean  labor  leaders  to  com- 
pete effectively  with  the  communist-dominated  CUTCh.

The  propaganda  projects  probably  had  a   substantial  cumulative 
effect  over  these  years,  both  in  helping  to  polarize  public  opinion  con- 
ce ruing  the  nature  of  the  threat  posed  by  communists  and  other  leftists, 
and  in  maintaining  an  extensive  propaganda  capability.

Propaganda 
mechanisms  developed  during  the  1960’s  were  ready  to  be  used  in  the 
19 1 0  election  campaign.

At  the  same  time,  however,  in  a   country  where 
nationalism,  “economic  independence”  and  “anti-imperialism”  claimed 
almost  universal  support,  the  persistent  allegations  that  the  Christian 
democrats  and  other  parties  of  the  center  and  right  were  linked  to  the 
them  may  haVC  played  a   part  in  undercutting  popular  support  for 
C.

The  1970  Election:  A   “Spoiling”  Campaign 
7.

V nited  States  Policy  and  Covert  Action 
Early  in  1969,  President  Nixon  announced  a   new  policy  toward 
Latin  Amenta,  labelled  by  him  “Action  for  Progress.”  It  was  to 
replace  the  Alliance,  for  Progress  which  the  President  characterized 
as  paternalistic  and  unrealistic.

Instead,  the  United  States  was  to  seek 
mature  partnership”  with  Latin  American  countries,  emphasizing 
trade  and  not  aid.

The  reformist  trappings  of  the  Alliance  were  to  be 
cropped:  the  United  States  announced  itself  prepared  to  deal  with 
foreign  governments  pragmatically.

The  United  States  program  of  covert  action  in  the  1970  Chilean 
elections  reflected  tins  less  activist  stance.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The  reformist  trappings  of  the  Alliance  were  to  be 
cropped:  the  United  States  announced  itself  prepared  to  deal  with 
foreign  governments  pragmatically. The  United  States  program  of  covert  action  in  the  1970  Chilean 
elections  reflected  tins  less  activist  stance. Nevertheless,  that  covert 
involvement  was  substantial  In  March  1970,  the  40  Committee  decided 
that  the  United  States  should  not  support  any  single  candidate  in  the 
election  but  should  instead  wage  “spoiling”  operations  against  the 
lopular  Unity  coalition  which  supported  the  Marxist  candidate 
63-372 — 75- 
V   
V- 
*   
-   
Mi 
• 
 :: 
• 
 . •>. s'.-. | 
. $■  t&n. !fi§ 
■

--- PAGE BREAK --->V\t  V  
3^Ajfe  ;^v  vWi'^v  *'  '’’•^nv 
■ 
20 
Salvador  Allende.

In  all,  the  CIA  spent  from  $800,000  to  $1,000,000 
on  covert  action  to  affect  the  outcome  of  the  1970  Presidential  elec- 
tion.

Of  this  amount,  about  half  was  for  major  efforts  approved 
by  the  40  Committee.

By  CIA  estimates,  the  Cubans  provided  about 
$350,000  to  Allende’s  campaign,  with  the  Soviets  adding  an  additional, 
undetermined  amount.

The  large-scale  propaganda  campaign  which 
was  undertaken  by  the  U.S.

was  similar  to  that  of  1964:  an  Allende 
victory  was  equated  with  violence  and  repression.

2.

Policy  Decisions 
Discussions  within  the  United  States  Government  about  the  1970 
elections  began  in  the  wake  of  the  March  1969  Chilean  congressional 
elections.

The  CIA’s  involvement  in  those  elections  was  regarded  by 
Washington  as  relatively  successful,  even  though  the  Christian  Demo- 
crats’ portion  of  the  vote  fell  from  43  per  cent  in  1965  to  31  per  cent  in 
1969.

In  June  1968  the  40  Committee  had  authorized  $350,000  for  that 
effort,  of  which  $200,000  actually  was  spent.

Ten  of  the  twelve  CIA- 
supported  candidates  were  elected.

The  1970  election  was  discussed  at  a   40  Committee  meeting  on  April 
17,  1969.

It  was  suggested  that  something  be  done,  and  the  CIA  rep- 
resentative noted  that  an  election  operation  would  not  be  effective 
unless  it  were  started  early.

But  no  action  was  taken  at  that  time.

The  1970  Presidential  race  quickly  turned  into  a   three-way  contest.

The  conservative  National  Party,  buoyed  by  the  1969  congressional 
election  results,  supported  74-year-old,  ex-President  Jorge  Alessandri.

Radomiro  Tomic  became  the  Christian  Democratic  nominee.The  conservative  National  Party,  buoyed  by  the  1969  congressional 
election  results,  supported  74-year-old,  ex-President  Jorge  Alessandri.

Radomiro  Tomic  became  the  Christian  Democratic  nominee.

Tomic, 
to  the  left  of  President  Frei,  was  unhappy  about  campaigning  on  the 
Frei  government’s  record  and  at  one  point  made  overtures  to 
the  Marxist  left.

Salvador  Allende  was  once  again  the  candidate  of  the 
left,  this  time  formed  into  a   Popular  Unity  coalition  which  included 
both  Marxist  and  non-Marxist  parties.

Allende’s  platform  included 
nationalization  of  the  copper  mines,  accelerated  agrarian  reform, 
socialization  of  major  sectors  of  the  economy,  wage  increases,  and 
improved  relations  with  socialist  and  communist  countries.

In  December  1969,  the  Embassy  and  Station  in  Santiago  forwarded 
a   proposal  for  an  anti-Allende  campaign.

That  proposal,  however,  was 
withdrawn  because  of  the  State  Department’s  qualms  about  whether 
or  not  the  United  States  should  become  involved  at  all.

The  CIA  felt 
it  was  not  in  a   position  to  support  Tomic  actively  because  ambassa- 
dorial “ground  rules”  of  the  previous  few  years  had  prevented  the  CIA 
from  dealing  with  the  Christian  Democrats.

The  Agency  believed  that 
Alessandri,  the  apparent  front  runner,  needed  more  than  money;  he 
needed  help  in  managing  his  campaign.

On  March  25,  1970,  the  40  Committee  approved  a   joint  Embassy/ 
CIA  proposal  recommending  that  “spoiling”  operations — propaganda 
and  other  activities — be  undertaken  by  the  CIA  in  an  effort  to  prevent 
an  election  victory  by  Allende.

Direct  support  was  not  furnished  to 
either  of  his  opponents.

This  first  authorization  was  for  $135,000,  with 
the  possibility  of  more  later.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Direct  support  was  not  furnished  to 
either  of  his  opponents. This  first  authorization  was  for  $135,000,  with 
the  possibility  of  more  later. On  June  18, 1970,  the  Ambassador,  Edward  Korry,  submitted  a   two- 
phase  proposal  to  the  Department  of  State  and  the  CIA  for  review. The  first  phase  involved  an  increase  in  support  for  the  anti-Allende 
campaign. The  second  was  a   $500,000  contingency  plan  to  influence  the 
...... ... '

--- PAGE BREAK ---y* ™ -v 
v&y 
'^,..,,V".

21 
congressional  vote  in  the  event  of  a   vote  between  the  candidates  finish- 
ing°first  and  second.

In  response  to  State  Department  reluctance,  the 
Ambassador  responded  by  querying:  if  Allcndc  were  to  gain  power, 
how  would  the  U.S.

respond  to  those  who  asked  what  actions  it  had 
taken  to  prevent  it?

.

.

On  June  27,  the  40  Committee  approved  the  increase  in  f unding  for 
the  anti-AJlende  “spoiling”  operation  by  $-300,000.

State  Department 
officials  at  the  meeting  voted  “yes”  only  relunctantly.

They  spoke 
against  the  contingency  plan,  and  a   decision  on  it  was  deferred  pend- 
ing the  results  of  the  September  4  election.

CIA  officials  met  several  times  with  officials  from  ITT  during  July.

The  CIA  turned  down  ITT’s  proposal  to  make  funds  available  for 
CIA  transmission  to  Alessanclri  but  did  provide  the  company  advice 
on  how  to  pass  money  to  AJessandri.

Some  $350,000  of  ITT  money  was 
passed  to  Alessandri'  during  the  campaign — $250,000  to  his  campaign 
and  $100,000  to  the  National  Party.

About  another  $350,000  came 
from  other  U.S.

businesses.

According  to  CIA  documents,  the  Station 
Chief  informed  the  Ambassador  that  the  CIA  was  advising  ITT  in 
funding  the  Alessandri  campaign,  but  not  that  the  Station  was  aiding 
ITT  in  passing  money  to  the  National  Party.

The  40  Committee  met  again  on  August  7  but  did  not  give  further 
consideration  to  supporting  either  Alessandri  or  Tomic.

As  the  anti- 
Allende  campaign  in  Chile  intensified,  senior  policy  makers  turned  to 
the  issue  of  U.S.

policy  in  the  event  of  an  Allende  victory.

A   study  done 
in  response  to  National  Security  Study  Memorandum  97  was  approved 
by  the  Interdepartmental  Group  (IG)  on  August  18.policy  in  the  event  of  an  Allende  victory.

A   study  done 
in  response  to  National  Security  Study  Memorandum  97  was  approved 
by  the  Interdepartmental  Group  (IG)  on  August  18.

The  approved 
paper  1  set  forth  four  options,  one  in  the  form  of  a   covert  annex.

The 
consensus  of  the  Interdepartmental  Group  favored  maintaining  mini- 
mal relations  with  Allende,  but  the  Senior  Review  Group  deferred  de- 
cision until  after  the  elections.

Similarly,  a   paper  with  alternatives  was 
circulated  to  40  Committee  members  on  August  13,  but  no  action 
resulted.

3.

“ Spoiling ”   Operations 
The  “spoiling”  operations  had  two  objectives:  (1)  undermining 
communist  efforts  to  bring  about  a   coalition  of  leftist  forces  which 
could  gain  control  of  the  presidency  in  1970;  and  (2)  strengthening 
non-Marxist  political  leaders  and  forces  in  Chile  to  order  to  develop 
an  effective  alternative  to  the  Popular  Unity  coalition  in  preparation 
for  the  1970  presidential  election.

In  working  toward  these  objectives,  the  CIA  made  use  of  half-a- 
dozen  covert  action  projects.

Those  projects  were  focused  into  an 
intensive  propaganda  campaign  which  made  use  of  virtually  all  media 
within  Chile  and  which  placed  and  replayed  items  in  the  interna- 
tional press  as  well.

Propaganda  placements  were  achieved  through 
subsidizing  right-wing  women’s  and  “civic  action”  groups.

A   “scare 
campaign,”  using  many  of  the  same  themes  as  the  1964  presidential 
election  program,  equated  an  Allende  victory  with  violence  and  Stalin- 
ist repression.

Unlike  1964,  however,  the  1970  operation  did  not  involve 
extensive  public  opinion  polling,  grass-roots  organizing,  or  “commu- 
nity development”  efforts,  nor,  as  mentioned,  direct  funding  of  any 
candidate.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A   “scare 
campaign,”  using  many  of  the  same  themes  as  the  1964  presidential 
election  program,  equated  an  Allende  victory  with  violence  and  Stalin- 
ist repression. Unlike  1964,  however,  the  1970  operation  did  not  involve 
extensive  public  opinion  polling,  grass-roots  organizing,  or  “commu- 
nity development”  efforts,  nor,  as  mentioned,  direct  funding  of  any 
candidate. *The  minutes  of  the  Interdepartmental  Group  and  Senior  Review  Group  deliberations 
have  not  a3  yet  been  provided  to  the  Committee. |

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ms* 
jn  r'aVi^ 
22 
In  addition  to  the  massive  propaganda  campaign,  the  CIA's  effort 
prior  to  the  election  included  political  action  aimed  at  splintering  the 
non-Marxist  Radical  Party  and  reducing  the  number  of  votes  which 
it  could  deliver  to  the  Popular  Unity  coalition’s  candidate.

Also,  “black 
propaganda” — material^  purporting  to  be  the  product  of  another 
group— was  used  in  1970  to  sow  dissent  between  Communists  and 
Socialists,  and  between  the  national  labor  confederation  and  the 
Chilean  Community  Party.

The  CIA’s  propaganda  operation  for  the  1970  elections  made  use 
of  mechanisms  that  had  been  developed  earlier.

One  mechanism  had 
been  used  extensively  by  the  CIA  during  the  March  1969  congressional 
elections.

During  the  1970  campaign  it  produced  hundreds  of  thou- 
sands of  high-quality  printed  pieces,  ranging  from  posters  and  leaflets 
to  picture  books,  and  carried  out  an  extensive  propaganda  program 
through  many  radio  and  press  outlets.

Other  propaganda  mechanisms 
that  were  in  place  prior  to  the  1970  campaign  included  an  editorial 
support  group  that  provided  political  features,  editorials,  and  news 
articles  for  radio  and  press  placement;  a   service  for  placing  anti-com- 
munist press  and  radio  items;  and  three  different  news  services.

There  was  a   wide  variety  of  propaganda  products:  a   newsletter 
mailed  to  approximately  two  thousand  journalists,  academicians,  poli- 
ticians, and  other  opinion  makers;  a   booklet  showing  what  life  would 
be  like  if  Allende  won  the  presidential  election;  translation  and  dis- 
tribution of  chronicles  of  opposition  to  the  Soviet  regime;  poster 
distribution  and  sign-painting  teams.Other  propaganda  mechanisms 
that  were  in  place  prior  to  the  1970  campaign  included  an  editorial 
support  group  that  provided  political  features,  editorials,  and  news 
articles  for  radio  and  press  placement;  a   service  for  placing  anti-com- 
munist press  and  radio  items;  and  three  different  news  services.

There  was  a   wide  variety  of  propaganda  products:  a   newsletter 
mailed  to  approximately  two  thousand  journalists,  academicians,  poli- 
ticians, and  other  opinion  makers;  a   booklet  showing  what  life  would 
be  like  if  Allende  won  the  presidential  election;  translation  and  dis- 
tribution of  chronicles  of  opposition  to  the  Soviet  regime;  poster 
distribution  and  sign-painting  teams.

The  sign-painting  teams  had 
instructions  to  paint  the  slogan  Usu  paredon ”   (your  wall)  on  2,000 
walls,  evoking  an  image  of  communist  firing  squads.

The  “scare  cam- 
paign’ (campana  de  terror)  exploited  the  violence  of  the  invasion  of 
Czechoslovakia  with  large  photographs  of  Prague  and  of  tanks  in 
downtown  Santiago.

Other  posters,  resembling  those  used  in  1964, 
portrayed  Cuban  political  prisoners  before  the  firing  squad,  and 
warned  that  an  Allende  victory  would  mean  the  end  of  religion  and 
family  life  in  Chile.

Still  another  project  funded  individual  press  assets.

One,  who  pro- 
duced regular  radio  commentary  shows  on  a   nationwide  hookup,  had 
been  CIA.

funded  since  1965  and  continued  to  wage  propaganda  for 
CIA  during  the  Allende  presidency.

Other  assets,  all  employees  of 
El  Mer curio,  enabled  the  Station  to  generate  more  than  one  editorial 
per  day  based  on  CIA  guidance.

Access  to  El  Mer curio  had  a   multi- 
plier effect,  since  its  editorials  were  read  throughout  the  country  on 
various  national  radio  networks.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Other  assets,  all  employees  of 
El  Mer curio,  enabled  the  Station  to  generate  more  than  one  editorial 
per  day  based  on  CIA  guidance. Access  to  El  Mer curio  had  a   multi- 
plier effect,  since  its  editorials  were  read  throughout  the  country  on 
various  national  radio  networks. Moreover,  El  Mercurio  was  one  of  the 
most  influential  Latin  American  newspapers,  particularly  in  business 
circles  abroad. A   
project  which  placed  anti-communist  press  and  radio 
items  was  reported  in  1970  to  reach  an  audience  of  well  over  five- 
million  listeners. The  CIA  funded  only  one  political  group  during  the  1970  campaign, 
m   an  effort  to  reduce  the  number  of  Kadical  Party  votes  for  Allende. 4*  Effects 
The  covert  action  “spoiling  ? efforts  by  the  United  States  during 
the  1970  campaign  did  not  succeed :  Allende  won  a   plurality  in  the 
September  4  election. Nevertheless,  the  “spoiling”  campaign  had 
several  important  effects.

--- PAGE BREAK ---First,  the  “scare  campaign”  contributed  to  the  political  polariza- 
tion and  financial  panic  of  the  period.

Themes  developed  during  the 
campaign  were  exploited  even  more  intensely  during  the  weeks  follow- 
ino-  September  4,  in  an  effort  to  cause  enough  financial  panic  and  politi- 
idinstabTliS  to  goad  President  Frei  or  the  Chilean  military  into 
Second,  many  of  the  assets  involved  in  the  anti-Allende  campaign 
became  so  visible  that  their  usefulness  was  limited  thereafter  Several 
of  them  left  Chile.

When  Allende  took  office,  little  was  left  of  the  CIA- 
funded  propaganda  apparatus.

Nevertheless,  there  remained  a   nucleus 
sufficient  to  permit  a   vocal  anti-Allende  opposition  to  function  effec- 
tively even  before  the  new  President  was  inaugurated.

D.

Covert  Action  Between  September  4  and  October  24, 1970  * 
■ 
On  September  4,  1970,  Allende  won  a   plurality  m   Chile  s  presiden- 
tial election.

Since  no  candidate  had  received  a   majority  of  the  popular 
vote,  the  Chilean  Constitution  required  that  a   joint  sessionof  ^   
con- 
gress decide  between  the  first-  and  second-place  finishers.

The  date  set 
for  the  congressional  session  was  October  24, 1970.

The  reaction  in  Washington  to  Allende  s   plurality  victory  was 
immediate.

The  40  Committee  met  on  September  8  and  14  to  discuss 
what  action  should  be  taken  prior  to  the  October  24  congressional 
vote.

On  September  15,  President  Nixon  informed  CIA  Director 
Richard  Helms  that  an  Allende  regime  in  Chile  would  not  ^   
accepta- 
ble to  the  United  States  and  instructed  the  CIA  to  play  a   direct  role 
in  organizing  a   military  coup  d'etat  in  Chile  to  prevent  Allende  s 
accession  to  the  Presidency.The  40  Committee  met  on  September  8  and  14  to  discuss 
what  action  should  be  taken  prior  to  the  October  24  congressional 
vote.

On  September  15,  President  Nixon  informed  CIA  Director 
Richard  Helms  that  an  Allende  regime  in  Chile  would  not  ^   
accepta- 
ble to  the  United  States  and  instructed  the  CIA  to  play  a   direct  role 
in  organizing  a   military  coup  d'etat  in  Chile  to  prevent  Allende  s 
accession  to  the  Presidency.

Following  the  September  14  meeting  of  the  40  Committee  and  1  res- 
ident Nixon’s  September  15  instruction  to  the  CIA,  U.S.

Government 
efforts  to  prevent  Allende  from  assuming  office  proceeded  on  two 
tracks.3  Track  I  comprised  all  covert  activities  approved  by  the  40 
Committee,  including  political,  economic  and  propaganda  activities.

These  activities  were  designed  to  induce  Allende  s  opponents  in  Unue 
to  prevent  Ids  assumption  of  power,  either  through  political  or  mili- 
tary means.

Track  II  activities  in  Chile  were  undertaken  in  response 
to  President  Nixon’s  September  15  order  and  were  directed  toward 
actively  promoting  and  encouraging  the  Chilean  military  to  move 
against  Allende.

6 
 1.

Track  I 
A.

POLITICAL  ACTION 
Initially,  both  the  40  Committee  and  the  CIA  fastened  on  the  so- 
called  Frei  re-election  gambit  as  a   means  of  preventing  Allendes 
assumption  of  office.

This  gambit,  which  was  considered  a   constitu- 
tional solution  to  the  Allende  problem,  consisted  of  inducing  enough 
congressional  votes  to  elect  Alessandri  over  Allende  'with  the  under- 
standing  that  Alessandri  would  immediately  resign,  thus  paving  the 
way  for  a   special  election  in  which  Frei  would  legally  become  a   candi- 
date.--- PAGE BREAK ---

POLITICAL  ACTION 
Initially,  both  the  40  Committee  and  the  CIA  fastened  on  the  so- 
called  Frei  re-election  gambit  as  a   means  of  preventing  Allendes 
assumption  of  office. This  gambit,  which  was  considered  a   constitu- 
tional solution  to  the  Allende  problem,  consisted  of  inducing  enough 
congressional  votes  to  elect  Alessandri  over  Allende  'with  the  under- 
standing  that  Alessandri  would  immediately  resign,  thus  paving  the 
way  for  a   special  election  in  which  Frei  would  legally  become  a   candi- 
date. At  the  September  14  meeting  of  the  40  Committee,  the  Frei  gam- 
*  This  period,  and  particularly  Track  II,  are  dealt  with  In  detail  In  an  Interim  Committee 
Report. Alleged  Assassination  Plots  Involving  Foreign  Leaders ,  94  Cong.,  1st  Sebs. ^ °3V The  2 r   ma  Track  I  and  Track  II  were  known  only  to  CIA  and  White  House  official* 
who  were  knowledgeable  about  the  President’s  September  15  order  to  the  CIA.

--- PAGE BREAK ---2 r   ma  Track  I  and  Track  II  were  known  only  to  CIA  and  White  House  official* 
who  were  knowledgeable  about  the  President’s  September  15  order  to  the  CIA.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

( 
 ••  .          .... 
>v'»v.v 
24 
, -,.  __.  fiicfnsscd  and  the  Committee  authorized  a   contingency  fund 
erate  * 
 Alessandri  The  only  proposal  for  the  funds  -winch  was 
sional  votes  to  Alessan  . 
 >  
Chilean  Congressmen  to  vote  for 
^^riWTh“;mS?w«  ^b.  unworkable,  and  the  $250,000 
wm  ncier  aimed  at  bringing  about  conditions  in  which  the 
CTA^aUe^te^in^ect^t^^duce^^iden^Frei  at^ea^to^nsent 
ChurclTwere  promPESS.“  2WSS5SS&  iffti  -   «- 
Sorted Frei  refused  to.  interfere  with  the  constitutional  process,  and 
the  re-election  gambit  died. 
B.  PROPAGANDA  CAMPAIGN 
On  Sentember  14,  the  40  Committee  agreed  that  a   propaganda 
•  ^  
l  ij  uft 'undertaken,  by  the  CIA  to  focus  on  the  damage 
campaign  i  Chile  under  an  Allende  government.  The  campaign 
^rS“pport  to  tte“rei  re-clcction  gambit.  Accord, ng  to 
CT  V  memorandum,  the  campaign  sought  to  create  concerns  abou 
VS  Sure  WAllende  were  elected  by  the  Congress ;   the  propaganda 
S?i2j3  to  iSnce  Frei,  the  Chilean  elite,  and  the  Chilean 
mi The^ropaganda  campaign  included  several  component.  Predictions 
of  economic  collapse  under  Allende  were  replayed  in  CIA-generetcd 
articles  in  European  and  Latin  American  newspapers  In  response  to 
..  •'  • 
 f  pi  Mfiveurio  bv  candidate  Allende,  the  CIA,  through  its 
Sion  Soto  offimted  cables  of  support  and  protest  from 
newspapers  a   protest  statement  from  an  international  press 
foreign  n   p  P  >  P  coverage  of  the  associations  protest. 
iiS~ ssrswaJipt«a 
were  iournalists  from  ten  different  countries  in  or  en  remte  to 
Tlhs  Cup  was  supplemented  by  eight  more  journalists  from  five 
Countries  under  the  direction  of  high-level  agents  who  were,  for  the 
most  Dart,  in  managerial  capacities  m   the  media  held. 
Second  the  CIA  relied  upon  its  own  resources  to  generate  anti- 
Allondepropaganda  in  Chile.  These  efforts  included:  support  for  an 
uilrmmd  press;  placement  of  individual  news  items  through 
agents”  financing  a   small  newspaper;  indirect  subsidy  of  Patna  y  
Lib 
ertnd  a   o-roup  fervently  opposed  to  Allende,  and  its  radio  progiams. 
political  advertisements,  and  political  rallies;  and  the  direct  mailing  of 
foreign  news  articles  to  Frei,  his  wife,  selected  leaders,  and  the 
Chilean  domestic  press. 
■ 
. 
| 
- '  »V*s  •. 
,  '  4f*VK-.v.gtj *X:-.\^V1nVcv>Ls’.J'3:  V   
‘  '   ••  'V-.ng  of 
foreign  news  articles  to  Frei,  his  wife,  selected  leaders,  and  the 
Chilean  domestic  press. 
■ 
. 
| 
- '  »V*s  •. 
,  '  4f*VK-.v.gtj *X:-.\^V1nVcv>Ls’.J'3:  V   
‘  '   ••  'V-.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SISfll 
-•  •  .  ’  -<•/•  •  .  f  « 
 *  .•  •  **  •  *  •';  XM  •'  V‘V.  ••  / 
;•  •■;  T&.  >r\#^v;*V%V  *; i   
*!  *;v  * 
‘  *  V‘  •■•  V,:  
'* 
" 
' 
 • 
 . 
 ■ 
 . 
. 
 , 
■ 
 . 
 ' 
 - 
 ' 
*f*  i 
' 1  *  t   %X^ 
25 
Third,  special  intelligence  and  “inside”  briefings  were  given  to  U.S. 
journalists,  at  their  request.  One  Time  cover  story  was  considered 
particularly  noteworthy.  According  to  CIA  documents,  the  Time  cor- 
respondent in  Chile  apparently  had  accepted  Allende’s  protestations 
|of  moderation  and  constitutionality  at  face  value.

Briefings  requested 
by  Time  and  provided  by  the  CIA  in  Washington  resulted  in  a 
ciiange  in  the  basic  thrust  of  the  Time  story  on  Allende’s  September  4 
victory  and  in  the  timing  of  that  story.

A   few  statistics  convey  the  magnitude  of  the  CIA’s  propaganda 
campaign  mounted  during  the  six- week  interim  period  in  the  Latin 
American  and  European  media.

According  to  the  CIA,  partial  re- 
turns showed  that  726  articles,  broadcasts,  editorials,  and  similar  items 
directly  resulted  from  Agency  activity.

The  Agency  had  no  way  to 
measure  the  scope  of  the  multiplier  effect — i.e.,  how  much  its  “induced” 
news  focused  media  interest  on  the  Chilean  issues  and  stimulated  ad- 
ditional coverage — but  concluded  that  its  contribution  was  both 
substantial  and  significant.

C.

ECONOMIC  PRESSURES 
On  September  29,  1970,  the  40  Committee  met.

It  was  agreed  that 
the  Frei  gambit  had  been  overtaken  by  events  and  was  dead.

The 
“second-best  option” — the  cabinet  resigning  and  being  replaced  with 
a   military  cabmet — was  also  deemed  dead.

The  point  was  then  made 
that  there  would  probably  be  no  military  action  unless  economic 
pressures  could  be  brought  to  bear  on  Chile.

It  was  agreed  that  an 
attempt  would  be  made  to  have  American  business  take  steps  in  line 
with  the  U.S.

government’s  desire  for  immediate  economic  action.

The  economic  offensive  against  Chile,  undertaken  as  a   part  of  Track 
I,  was  intended  to  demonstrate  the  foreign  economic  reaction  to  Al- 
lende’s accession  to  power,  as  well  as  to  preview  the  future  consequences 
of  his  regime.SISfll 
-•  •  .  ’  -<•/•  •  .  f  « 
 *  .•  •  **  •  *  •';  XM  •'  V‘V.  ••  / 
;•  •■;  T&.  >r\#^v;*V%V  *; i   
*!  *;v  * 
‘  *  V‘  •■•  V,:  
'* 
" 
' 
 • 
 . 
 ■ 
 . 
. 
 , 
■ 
 . 
 ' 
 - 
 ' 
*f*  i 
' 1  *  t   %X^ 
25 
Third,  special  intelligence  and  “inside”  briefings  were  given  to  U.S. 
journalists,  at  their  request.  One  Time  cover  story  was  considered 
particularly  noteworthy.  According  to  CIA  documents,  the  Time  cor- 
respondent in  Chile  apparently  had  accepted  Allende’s  protestations 
|

government’s  desire  for  immediate  economic  action. The  economic  offensive  against  Chile,  undertaken  as  a   part  of  Track 
I,  was  intended  to  demonstrate  the  foreign  economic  reaction  to  Al- 
lende’s accession  to  power,  as  well  as  to  preview  the  future  consequences 
of  his  regime. Generally,  the  40  Committee  approved  cutting  off  all 
credits,  pressuring  firms  to  curtail  investment  in  Chile  and  approach- 
incr  other  nations  to  cooperate  in  this  venture. These  actions  of  the  40  Committee,  and  the  establishment  of  an 
interagency  working  group  to  coordinate  overt  economic  activities 
towards  Chile  (composed  of  the  CIA’s  Western  Hemisphere  Division 
Chief  and  representatives  from  State,  the  NSC,  and  Treasury),  ad- 
versely affected  the  Chilean  economy ;   a   major  financial  panic  ensued. However,  U.S. efforts  to  generate  an  economic  crisis  did  not  have  the 
desired  impact  on  the  October  24  vote,  nor  did  they  stimulate  a   military 
intervention  to  prevent  Allende’s  accession. 2. Track  II 
As  previously  noted,  U.S. efforts  to  prevent  Allende’s  assumption 
of  office  operated  on  two  tracks  between  September  4  and  October  24. Track  II  was  initiated  by  President  Nixon  on  September  15  when  he 
instructed  the  CIA  to  play  a   direct  role  in  organizing  a   military  coup 
d'etat  in  Chile. The  Agency  was  to  take  this  action  without  coordina- 
tion with  the  Departments  of  State  or  Defense  and  without  informing 
%   
the  U'S. Ambassador. While  coup  possibilities  in  general  and  other 
J   
means  °f  seeking  to  prevent  Allende’s  accession  to  power  were  ex- 
plored  by  the  40  Committee  throughout  this  period,  the  40  Committee 
l;,ibilities  in  general  and  other 
J   
means  °f  seeking  to  prevent  Allende’s  accession  to  power  were  ex- 
plored  by  the  40  Committee  throughout  this  period,  the  40  Committee 
l;,

--- PAGE BREAK ---26 
never  discussed  this  direct  CIA  role.

In  practice,  the  Agency  was  to 
report,  both  for  informational  and  approval  purposes,  to  the  \V  nite 
H   
Between  October  5  and  October  20  1970,  the  CIA  made  21  contacts 
with  key  military  and  Carabinero  (police)  officials  in  Chile,  those 
Chileans  who  were  inclined  to  stage  a   coup  were  given  assurances  of 
strong  support  at  the  highest  levels  of  the  U.S.

Government  both 
before  and  after  a   coup.

,  .

Tracks  I  and  II  did,  in  fact,  move  together  in  the  month  after 
September  15.

Ambassador  Korry,  who  was  formally  excluded  from 
Track  II,  was  authorized  to  encourage  a   military  coup,  provided 
Frei  concurred  in  that  solution.

At  the  40  Committee  meeting  on 
September  14,  he  and  other  “appropriate  members  of  the  Embassy 
mission”  were  authorized  to  intensify  their  contacts  with  Chilean 
military  officers  to  assess  their  willingness  to  support  the  “Frei  gam- 
bit.” The  Ambassador  was  also  authorized  to  make  his  contacts  in  the 
Chilean  military  awaro  that  if  Allende  were  seated,  the  military 
could  expect  no  further  military  assistance  (MAP)  from  the  United 
States.

Later,  Korry  was  authorized  to  inform  the  Chilean  military 
that  all  MAP  and  military  sales  were  being  held  in  abeyance  pending 
the  outcome  of  the  congressional  election  on  October  24.

The  essential  difference  between  Tracks  I  and  II,  as  evidenced  by 
instructions  to  Ambassador  Korry  during  this  period,  was  not  that 
Track  II  was  coup-oriented  and  Track  I  was  not.

Both  had  this  ob- 
jective in  mind.The  essential  difference  between  Tracks  I  and  II,  as  evidenced  by 
instructions  to  Ambassador  Korry  during  this  period,  was  not  that 
Track  II  was  coup-oriented  and  Track  I  was  not.

Both  had  this  ob- 
jective in  mind.

There  were  two  differences  between  the  two  tracks: 
Track  I  was  contingent  on  at  least  the  acquiescence  of  Frei ;   andl  the 
CIA’s  Track  II  direct  contacts  with  the  Chilean  mintary,  and  its 
active  promotion  and  support  for  a   coup,  were  to  be  known  only  to  a 
small  group  of  individuals  in  the  White  House  and  the  UlA.

Despite  these  efforts,  Track  II  proved  to  be  no  more  successful  than 
Track  I  in  preventing  Allende’s  assumption  of  office.

Although  cer- 
tain  elements  within  the  Chilean  army  were  actively  involved  in  coup 
plotting,  the  plans  of  the  dissident  Chileans  never  got  off  the  ground.

A   rather  disorganized  coup  attempt  did  begin  on  October  2-,  but 
aborted  following  the  shooting  of  General  Schneider.

On  October  24.

1970,  Salvador  Allende  was  confirmed  as  President 
by  Chilean  Congress.

On  November  3,  he  was  inaugurated.

U.S.

ef- 
forts, both  overt  and  covert,  to  prevent  his  assumption  of  office  had 
failed.

E.

Covert  Action  During  the  Allende  Years,  1970-1973 
1.

United  States  Policy  and  Covert  Action 
In  his  1971  State  of  the  World  Message,  released  February  25, 1971, 
President  Nixon  announced :  “We  are  prepared  to  have  the  kind  of 
relationship  with  the  Chilean  government  that  it  is  prepared  to  have 
with  us  ”   This  public  articulation  of  American  policy  followed  internal 
discussions  during  the  NSSM  97  exercise.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Covert  Action  During  the  Allende  Years,  1970-1973 
1. United  States  Policy  and  Covert  Action 
In  his  1971  State  of  the  World  Message,  released  February  25, 1971, 
President  Nixon  announced :  “We  are  prepared  to  have  the  kind  of 
relationship  with  the  Chilean  government  that  it  is  prepared  to  have 
with  us  ”   This  public  articulation  of  American  policy  followed  internal 
discussions  during  the  NSSM  97  exercise. Charles  Meyer,  Assistant 
Secretary  of  State  for  Inter- American  Affairs,  elaborated  that  correct 
but  minimal”  line  in  his  1973  testimony  before  the  Senate  Foreign 
Relations  Subcommittee  on  Multinational  Corporations : 
Mr  Meyeb. The  policy  of  the  Government. Mr. Chairman,  was  that  there  would 
be  no  intervention  in  the  political  affairs  of  Chile. We  were  consistent  in  that  we

--- PAGE BREAK ---;   {financed  no  candidates,  no  political  parties  before  or  after  September  8,  or 
• 
•  .*$,  ,v$?

•'••fjeptember  4.

.

.

.

The  policy  of  the  United  States  was  that  Chile's  problem  was 
i   Chilean  problem,  to  be  settled  by  Chile.

As  the  President  stated  in  October 
if  1969,  “We  will  deal  with  governments  as  they  are.”  ( Multinational  Corpora - 
ions  and  United  States  Foreign  Policy ,  Hearing  before  the  Subcommittee  on 
ultinational  Corporations  of  the  Committee  on  Foreign  Relations,  United  States 
mate,  Ninety-Third  Congress,  Washington:  GPO,  1973,  Part  1,  p.

402) 
Yet,  public  pronouncements  notwithstanding,  after  Allende’s  inaug- 
lration  the  40  Committee  approved  a   total  of  over  seven  million  dol- 
in  covert  support  to  opposition  groups  in  Chile.

That  money  also 
ed  an  extensive  anti- Allende  propaganda  campaign.

Of  the  total 
uthorized  by  the  40  Committee,  over  six  million  dollars  was  spent 
Juring  the  Allende  presidency  and  $84,000  was  expended  shortly 
hereafter  for  commitments  made  before  the  coup.

The  total  amount 
ent  on  covert  action  in  Chile  during  1970-73  was  approximately 
million,  including  project  funds  not  requiring  40  Committee 
ipproval.

Broadly  speaking,  U.S.

policy  sought  to  maximize  pressures  on  the 
llende  government  to  prevent  its  consolidation  and  limit  its  ability 
implement  policies  contrary  to  U.S.

and  hemispheric  interests.

That 
^jective  was  stated  clearly  in  National  Security  Decision  Memoran- 
lum  (NSDM)  93,  issued  in  early  November  1970.

Other  governments 
ere  encouraged  to  adopt  similar  policies,  and  the  U.S.

increased  ef- 
jrts  to  maintain  close  relations  with  friendly  military  leaders  in  the 
hemisphere.Other  governments 
ere  encouraged  to  adopt  similar  policies,  and  the  U.S.

increased  ef- 
jrts  to  maintain  close  relations  with  friendly  military  leaders  in  the 
hemisphere.

The  “cool  but  correct”  overt  posture  denied  the  Allende 
vernment  a   handy  foreign  enemy  to  use  as  a   domestic  and  inter- 
^tional  rallying  point.

At  the  same  time,  covert  action  was  one  re- 
fection of  the  concerns  felt  in  Washington :   the  desire  to  frustrate 
Jlende’s  experiment  in  the  Western  Hemisphere  and  thus  limit  its 
[ttractiveness  as  a   model ;   the  fear  that  a   Chile  under  Allende  might 
arbor  subversives  from  other  Latin  American  countries ;   and  the  de- 
rmination  to  sustain  the  principle  of  compensation  for  U.S.

firms 
^Rationalized  by  the  Allende  government.

Henry  Kissinger  outlined  several  of  these  concerns  in  a   background 
iefing  to  the  press  on  September  16,  1970,  in  the  wake  of  Allende’s 
ection  plurality : 
Now  it  Is  fairly  easy  for  one  to  predict  that  if  Allende  wins,  there  is  a   good 
•.

v   Imiice  that  he  will  establish  over  a   period  of  years  some  sort  of  Communist 
wernment.

In  that  case  you  would  have  one  not  on  an  island  off  the  coast  which 
^   
•  as  not  a   traditional  relationship  and  impact  on  Latin  America,  but  in  a   major 
itin  American  country  you  would  have  a   Communist  government,  joining,  for 
[ample,  Argentina,  which  is  already  deeply  divided,  along  a   long  frontier; 
ining  Peru,  which  has  already  been  heading  in  directions  that  have  been  diffi- 
ilt  to  deal  with,  and  joining  Bolivia,  which  has  also  gone  in  a   more  leftist,  anti- 
S.

direction,  even  without  any  of  these  developments.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In  that  case  you  would  have  one  not  on  an  island  off  the  coast  which 
^   
•  as  not  a   traditional  relationship  and  impact  on  Latin  America,  but  in  a   major 
itin  American  country  you  would  have  a   Communist  government,  joining,  for 
[ample,  Argentina,  which  is  already  deeply  divided,  along  a   long  frontier; 
ining  Peru,  which  has  already  been  heading  in  directions  that  have  been  diffi- 
ilt  to  deal  with,  and  joining  Bolivia,  which  has  also  gone  in  a   more  leftist,  anti- 
S. direction,  even  without  any  of  these  developments. So  I  don't  think  we  should  delude  ourselves  that  an  Allende  takeover  in 
le  would  not  present  massive  problems  for  us,  and  for  democratic  forces 
J  for  pro-U.S. forces  in  Latin  America,  and  indeed  to  the  whole  Western 
imisphere. What  would  happen  to  the  Western  Hemisphere  Defense  Board, 
to  the  Organization  of  American  States,  and  so  forth,  in  extremely  proble- 
tical. . . .It  is  one  of  those  situations  which  Is  not  too  happy  for  American 
terests. ( Multinational  Corporations  and  United  States  Foreign  Policy , 
wrings  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Multinational  Corporations  of  the  Com- 
ittee  on  Foreign  Relations,  United  States  Senate,  Ninety-Third  Congress, 
ashington  :   GPO,  1973,  Part  2,  pp. 542-3) 
As  the  discussion  of  National  Intelligence  Estimates  in  Section  IV 
this  paper  makes  clear  the  more  extreme  fears  about  the  effects  of 
lende’s  election  were  ill-founded:  there  never  was  a   significant 
03-372—75-

--- PAGE BREAK ---28 
threat  of  a   Soviet  military  presence;  the  “export'’  of  AHende’s  revolu- 
tion was  limited,  and  its  value  as  a   model  more  restricted  still ,  and 
Allende  was  little  more  hospitable  to  activist  exiles  from  other  Latin 
-American  countries  than  his  predecessor  had  been.

Nevertheless,  those 
feai-s,  often  exaggerated,  appear  to  have  activated  officials  in 
W   “cocrt  but  correct”  public  posture  and  extensive  clandestine  acti- 
vities formed  two-thirds  of  a   triad  of  official  actions.

Thethmd'vas 
economic  pressure,  both  overt  and  covert,  intended  to  exacerbate  the 
difficultiesPfelt  by  Chile’s  economy.

The  United  States  cut  off^conomic 
aid,  denied  credits,  and  made  efforts— partially  successful  to  cnl 
the  cooperation  of  international  financial  institutions  and  private  firms 
S  
tightening  the  economic  “squeeze”  on  Chile.

That  international 
“squeeze”  intensified  the  effect  of  the  economic  measures  taken  by  oppo- 
sition groups  within  Chile,  particularly  the  crippling  strikes  m   the 
mining  and  transportation  sectors.

For  instance,  the  combmed  effec 
of  the  foreign  credit  squeeze  and  domestic  copper  strikes  on  Chiles 
foreign  exchange  position  was  devastating.

Throughout  the  AJlende  years,  the  U.S.

maintained  close  contact 
with  the  Chilean  armed  forces,  both  through  the  CIA  and  through 
US.

military  attaches.

The  basic  purpose  of  these  contacts  was  the 
fathering  of  intelligence,  to  detect  any  inclination  within  the  Chilean 
armed  forces  to  intervene.

But  U.S.

officials  also  were  instructed  to 
seek  influence  within  the  Chilean  military  and  to  be  generally  suppor- 
tive of  its  activities  without  appearing  to  promise  U.S.

support  for 
military  efforts  which  might  be  premature.

For  instance,  in  November 
1971,  the  Station  was  instructed  to  put  the  U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

support  for 
military  efforts  which  might  be  premature. For  instance,  in  November 
1971,  the  Station  was  instructed  to  put  the  U.S. government  in  a   posi- 
tion to  take  future  advantage  of  either  a   political  or  a   military  solution 
to  the  Chilean  dilemma,  depending  on  developments  within  the  coun- 
try and  the  latter’s  impact  on  the  military  themselves. There  is  no  hard  evidence  of  direct  U.S. assistance  to  the  coup, 
despite  frequent  allegations  of  such  aid. Rather  the  United  States 
by  its  previous  actions  during  Track  II,  its  existing  general  posture  of 
opposition  to  Allende,  and  the  nature  of  its  contacts  with  the  Chilean 
military— probably  gave  the  impression  that  it  would  not  look  with 
disfavor  on  a   military  coup. And  U.S. officials  m   the  years  before  19 1 3 
may  not  always  have  succeeded  in  walking  the  thm  line  between  moni- 
toring indigenous  coup  plotting  and  actually  stimulating  it. 2. Techniques  of  Covert  Action 
A. SUPPORT  FOR  OPPOSITION  POLITICAL  PARTIES 
More  than  half  of  the  40  Committee-approved  funds  supported  the 
opposition  political  parties:  the  Christian  Democratic  Party  (PDL), 
the  National  Party  (PN),  and  several  splinter  groups. Nearly  half-a- 
million  dollars  was  channeled  to  splinter  groups  during  the  Allende 
years. Early  in  1971  CIA  funds  enabled  the  PDC  and  PN  to  purchase 
their  own  radio  stations  and  newspapers. All  opposition  parties  were 
passed  money  prior  to  the  April  1971  municipal  elections  and  a   con- 
gressional by-election  in  July. In  November  1971  funds  were  approved 
to  strengthen  the  PDC,  PN,  and  splinter  groups. An  effort  was  also 
made  to  induce  a   breakup  of  the  UP  coalition. CIA  funds  supported

--- PAGE BREAK ---the  opposition  parties  in  three  by-elections  in  1972,  and  in  the  March 
1973  congressional  election.

Monev  provided  to  political  parties  not 
only  supported  opposition  candidates  in  the  various  elections,  but 
enabled  the  parties  to  maintain  an  anti-government  campaign  through- 
out the  Allende  years,  urging  citizens  to  demonstrate  their  opposition 
hi  a   variety  of  ways.

Throughout  the  Allende  years,  the  CIA  worked  to  forge  a   united 
opposition.

The  significance  of  this  effort  can  be  gauged  by  noting  that 
the  two  main  elements  opposing  the  Popular  Unity  government  were 
the  National  Party,  which  was  conservative,  and  the  reformist  Chris- 
tian Democratic  Party,  many  of  whose  members  had  supported  the 
major  policies  of  the  new  government.

B.

PROPAGANDA  AND  SUPPORT  FOR  OPPOSITION  MEDIA 
Besides  funding  political  parties,  the  40  Committee  approved  large 
amounts  to  sustain  opposition  media  and  thus  to  maintain  a   hard-hit- 
ting propaganda  campaign.

The  CIA  spent  $1.5  million  in  support  of 
El  Mercurio ,  the  country’s  largest  newspaper  and  the  most  important 
channel  for  anti-Allende  propaganda.

According  to  CIA  documents, 
these  efforts  played  a   significant  role  in  setting  the  stage  for  the  mili- 
tary coup  of  September  11, 1973.

The  40  Committee  approvals  in  1971  and  early  1972  for  subsidizing 
El  Mercurio  were  based  on  reports  that  the  Chilean  government  was 
trying  to  close  the  El  Mercurio  chain.

In  fact,  the  press  remained  free 
throughout  the  Allende  period,  despite  attempts  to  harass  and  finan- 
cially damage  opposition  media.

The  alarming  field  reports  on  which 
the  40  Committee  decisions  to  support  El  Mercurio  were  based  are  at 
some  variance  with  intelligence  community  analyses.In  fact,  the  press  remained  free 
throughout  the  Allende  period,  despite  attempts  to  harass  and  finan- 
cially damage  opposition  media.

The  alarming  field  reports  on  which 
the  40  Committee  decisions  to  support  El  Mercurio  were  based  are  at 
some  variance  with  intelligence  community  analyses.

For  example, 
an  August  1971  National  Intelligence  Estimate — nine  months  after 
Allende  took  power — maintained  that  the  government  was  attempting 
to  dominate  the  press  but  commented  that  El  Mercurio  had  managed 
to  retain  its  independence.

Yet  one  month  later  the  40  Committee  voted 
$700,000  to  keep  El  Mercurio  afloat.

And  CIA  documents  in  1973 
acknowledge  that  El  Mercurio  and,  to  a   lesser  extent,  the  papers 
belonging  to  opposition  political  parties,  were  the  only  publications 
under  pressure  from  the  government.

The  freedom  of  the  press  issue  was  the  single  most  important  theme 
in  the  international  propaganda  campaign  against  Allende.

Among 
the  books  and  pamphlets  produced  by  the  major  opposition  research 
organization  was  one  which  appeared  in  October  1972  at  the  time  of 
the  Inter- American  Press  Association  (IAPA)  meeting  in  Santiago.

As  in  the  1970  period,  the  IAPA  listed  Chile  as  a   country  in  which 
freedom  of  the  press  was  threatened.

The  CIA’s  major  propaganda  project  funded  a   wide  range  of  prop- 
aganda activities.

It  produced  several  magazines  with  national  cir- 
culations and  a   large  number  of  books  and  special  studies.

It  developed 
material  for  placement  in  the  El  Mercurio  chain  (amounting  to  a   total 
daily  circulation  of  over  300,000) ;   opposition  party  newspapers;  two 
weekly  newspapers ;   all  radio  stations  controlled  by  opposition  parties ; 
and  on  several  regular  television  shows  on  three  channels.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It  produced  several  magazines  with  national  cir- 
culations and  a   large  number  of  books  and  special  studies. It  developed 
material  for  placement  in  the  El  Mercurio  chain  (amounting  to  a   total 
daily  circulation  of  over  300,000) ;   opposition  party  newspapers;  two 
weekly  newspapers ;   all  radio  stations  controlled  by  opposition  parties ; 
and  on  several  regular  television  shows  on  three  channels. El  Mercurio 
was  a   major  propaganda  channel  during  1970-73,  as  it  had  been  during 
the  1970  elections  and  pre-inauguration  period. • 
 . :

--- PAGE BREAK ---30 
•JL .

-4> •Adi •'} %Av^W>wt<jk*)^0 *\.*v  I 
The  CIA  also  funded  progressively  a   greater  portion— over  7;>  per- 
cent in  11)73 — of  an  opposition  research  organization.

A   steady  flow  ol 
economic  and  technical  material  went  to  opposition  parties  and  private 
sector  groups.

Many  of  the  bills  prepared  by  opposition  parliamentan- 
ans  were  actually  drafted  by  personnel  of  the  research  organization.

C.

SUPPORT  FOR  PRIVATE  SECTOR  ORGANIZATIONS 
The  Committee  has  taken  testimony  that  40  Committee-approved 
funds  were  used  to  help  maintain  and  strengthen  the  democratic  op- 
position in  Chile.

It  has  been  stressed  that  CIA  had  nothing  to  do  with 
the  truck  owners’  strike  and  the  disorders  that  led  to  the  coup,  lhe 
question  of  CIA  support  to  Chilean  private  sector  groups  is  a   matter 
of  considerable  concern  because  of  the  violent  tactics  used  by  several 
of  these  groups  in  their  efforts  to  bring  about  military  intervention 
The  issue  of  whether  to  support  private  groups  was  debatedwitiin 
the  Embassy  and  the  40  Committee  throughout  late  1972  and  1973.

In  September  1972,  the  40  Committee  authorized  $24,000  for  emer- 
gency support”  of  a   powerful  businessmen’s  organization,  but  decided 
against,  financial  support  to  other  private  sector  organizations  because 
o?

their  possible  involvement  in  anti-government  strikes.

lnUctohei 
1972,  the  Committee  approved  $100,000  for  three  private  sector  orga- 
nizations—the  businessmen’s  organization,  associations  of  larS®  a™1 
small  businessmen  and  an  umbrella  organization  of  oppos  t  on 
groups — as  part  of  a   $1.5  million  approval  for  support  to  opposition 
groups.their  possible  involvement  in  anti-government  strikes.

lnUctohei 
1972,  the  Committee  approved  $100,000  for  three  private  sector  orga- 
nizations—the  businessmen’s  organization,  associations  of  larS®  a™1 
small  businessmen  and  an  umbrella  organization  of  oppos  t  on 
groups — as  part  of  a   $1.5  million  approval  for  support  to  opposition 
groups.

According  to  CIA  testimony,  this  limited  financial  support 
to  the  private  sector  was  confined  to  specific  activities  m   support  of  the 
opposition  electoral  campaign,  such  as  voter  registration  drives  and  a 
get-out-the-vote  campaign.

,  j.

•,  i  .

.

After  the  March  1973  elections,  m   which  opposition  forces  failed  to 
achieve  the  two-thirds  majority  m   the  Senate  that  might  have  per- 
mitted them  to  impeach  Allende  and  hold  new  elections,  the  T  .b.

Government  re-assessed  its  objectives.

There  seemed  little  likelihood 
of  a   successful  military  coup,  but  there  did  appear  to  be  a^ssibility 
that  increasing  unrest  in  the  entire  country  might  induce  the  mi  Lit  ary 
to  re-enter  the  Allende  government  in  order  to  restore  order.

Various 
proposals  for  supporting  private  sector  groups  were  examined  in  the 
context,  but  the  Ambassador  and  the  Department  of  State  remained 
opposed  to  any  such  support  because  of  the  increasingly _  
high Aevel  o 
tension  in  Chile,  and  because  the  groups  were  known  to  hope  for  mili- 
^Ne^erXlei^on  August  20,  the  40  Committee  approved  a   proposal 
"•ranting  $1  million  to  opposition  parties  and  private  sector  groups, 
with  passage  of  the  funds  contingent  on  the  concurrence  of  the  Ambas- 
sador, Nathaniel  Davis,  and  the  Department  of  State.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There  seemed  little  likelihood 
of  a   successful  military  coup,  but  there  did  appear  to  be  a^ssibility 
that  increasing  unrest  in  the  entire  country  might  induce  the  mi  Lit  ary 
to  re-enter  the  Allende  government  in  order  to  restore  order. Various 
proposals  for  supporting  private  sector  groups  were  examined  in  the 
context,  but  the  Ambassador  and  the  Department  of  State  remained 
opposed  to  any  such  support  because  of  the  increasingly _  
high Aevel  o 
tension  in  Chile,  and  because  the  groups  were  known  to  hope  for  mili- 
^Ne^erXlei^on  August  20,  the  40  Committee  approved  a   proposal 
"•ranting  $1  million  to  opposition  parties  and  private  sector  groups, 
with  passage  of  the  funds  contingent  on  the  concurrence  of  the  Ambas- 
sador, Nathaniel  Davis,  and  the  Department  of  State. None  of  these 
funds  were  passed  to  private  sector  groups  before  the  military  coup 
While  these  deliberations  were  taking  place,  the  CIA  Station  asked 
Headquarters  to  take  soundings  to  determine  whether  maximum  sup- 
port could  be  provided  to  the  opposition,  including  groups  like  the 
truck  owners. The  Ambassador  agreed  that  these  soundings  should  be 
taken  but  opposed  a   specific  proposal  for  $25,000  of  support  to  the 
strikers. There  was  a   CIA  recommendation  for  support  to  the  truck

--- PAGE BREAK ---.

31 
owners,  but  it  is  unclear  whether  or  not  that  proposal  came  before 
the  40  Committee.

On  August  25—16  days  before  the  coup— Headquar- 
ters advised  the  Station  that  soundings  were  being  taken,  but  the  L1A 
Station’s  proposal  was  never  approved.

, 
The  pattern  of  U.S.

deliberations  suggests  a   careful  distinction  be- 
tween supporting  the  opposition  parties  and  funding  private  sector 
wroups  trying  to  bring  about  a   military  coup.

However,  given  tur- 
bulent conditions  in  Chile,  the  interconnections  among  the  CIA-sup- 
ported political  parties,  the  various  militant  trade  associations 
(gremios)  and  paramilitary  groups  prone  to  terrorism  and  violent 
disruption  were  many.

The  CIA  was  aware  that  links  between  these 
croups  and  the  political  parties  made  clear  distinctions  difficult.

&   The  most  prominent  of  the  right-wing  paramilitary  groups  was 
Patna  y   Libertad  (Fatherland  and  Liberty) ,  which  formed  following 
Allende’s  September  4  election,  during  so-called  Track  II.

Ihe 
CIA  provided  Patria  y   Libertad  with  $38,500  through  a   third 
party  during  the  Track  II  period,  in  an  effort  to  create  tension  and 
a   possible  pretext  for  intervention  by  the  Chilean  military.

After 
Allende  took  office,  the  CIA  occasionally  provided  the  group  small 
sums  through  third  parties  for  demonstrations  or  specific  propaganda 
activity.

Those  disbursements,  about  seven  thousand  dollars  in  total, 
ended  in  1971.After 
Allende  took  office,  the  CIA  occasionally  provided  the  group  small 
sums  through  third  parties  for  demonstrations  or  specific  propaganda 
activity.

Those  disbursements,  about  seven  thousand  dollars  in  total, 
ended  in  1971.

It  is  possible  that  CIA  funds  given  to  political  parties 
reached  Patria  y  Libertad  and  a   similar  group,  the  Rolando  Matus 
Brigade,  given  the  close  ties  between  the  parties  and  these 
Throughout  the  Allende  presidency,  Patriay  Libertad  was  the  most, 
strident  voice  opposing  all  compromise  efforts  by  Christian  Democrats, 
calling  for  resistance  to  government  measures,  and  urging  insurrection 
in  thearmed  forces.

Its  tactics  came  to  parallel  those  of  5ie  Movement 
of  the  Revolutionary  Left  (MIR)  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  political 
spectrum.

Patria  y  Libertad  forces  marched  at  opposition  rallies 
dressed  in  full  riot  gear.

During  the  October  19  i  2  national  truckers 
strike,  Patria  y   Libertad  was  reported  to  strew  “nnguelitos  (three- 
pronged  steel  tacks)  on  highways  in  order  to  help  bring  the  country  s 
transportation  system  to  a   halt.

On  July  13,  1973,  Patna  y 
placed  a   statement  in  a   Santiago  newspaper  claming  responsibility 
for  an  abortive  coup  on  June  29,  and  on  July  17,  Patna  y   Libertad 
leader  Roberto  Thieme  announced  that  his  groups  would  unleash  a 
total  armed  offensive  to  overthrow  the  government.

With  regard  to  the  truckers’  strike,  two  facts  are  undisputed.

First, 
the  40  Committee  did  not  approve  any  funds  to  be  ^.venJ^ire^  y, 
the  strikers.

Second,  all  observers  agree  that  the  two  lengthy  strikes 
(the  second  lasted  from  July  13,  1973,  until  the  Septembei r  1  1  J?) 
could  not  have  been  maintained  on  the  basis  of  union  funds.--- PAGE BREAK ---

First, 
the  40  Committee  did  not  approve  any  funds  to  be  ^.venJ^ire^  y, 
the  strikers. Second,  all  observers  agree  that  the  two  lengthy  strikes 
(the  second  lasted  from  July  13,  1973,  until  the  Septembei r  1  1  J?) 
could  not  have  been  maintained  on  the  basis  of  union  funds. It  remains 
unclear  whether  or  to  what  extent  CIA  funds  passed  to  opposition 
parties  may  have  been  siphoned  off  to  support  strikes. It  is  clear  t  a 
anti-o-overhment  strikers  were  actively  supported  by  several  of  the 
private  sector  groups  which  received  CIA  funds. There  were  extensive 
Finks  between  these  private  sector  organizations  and  the  groups  "JSf 
coordinated  and  implemented  the  strikes. In  7 
learned  that  one  private  sector  group  had  pas ^ft$pV8?0_iuPedyth^ 
strikers,  contrary  to  the  Agency’s  ground  roles. The  CIA  rebuked  the 
group  but  nevertheless  passed  it  additional  money  the  next  month. ■ 
 ■

--- PAGE BREAK ---^ft$pV8?0_iuPedyth^ 
strikers,  contrary  to  the  Agency’s  ground  roles. The  CIA  rebuked  the 
group  but  nevertheless  passed  it  additional  money  the  next  month. ■ 
 ■

--- PAGE BREAK ---

s.  United  States  Economic  Policies  Toward  Chile :  1070  1973 
A.  COVERT  ACTION  AND  EC0N03IIC  PRESSURE 
£.  tt  c   Oovernment  to  the  Allen.de  regime 
The  policy  response  of  the  %-S.  Ooveinmen  ^   mi]ita  and  eCo- 
consisted  of  an  interweaving  of  P  , ,  ’  
ti  United  States  formed 
nomic  strands.  Economic  the  effect 
— c  pressure  which  accom- 
pamed  it.  ^   CHile an  economic  dependence 
S'Stritlea,eA.>ee^ 
foS  change  earnings  on  a   
^SS^SSS^SS^M 
g^SsaijgittSaSMsg 
Western  European  countries,  and  Japan,  ana  Dy  <=> 
SSncTon  the  United  States 
remained  a   significant  factor  during  the  pcnod  of  the  Allenc  e  
| 
ornment  In  1970,  U.S.  direct  private  investment  in  Chile  stooa  at 
llTbilUon  out  of  an  estimated  total  foreign  investment  of  $1.6<i- 
i -ir  tt  nnrl  foreign  corporations  played  a   large  part  in  almost 
rule  “as  able*  through  the  Paris  Club,  to  re-negotiat*  $800  million  m 
LSTor  P^SSett  credits  were  “tied  to  specific 
patterns,  to  WTO  CMto  fcjSBj&rrf 
^°00  million  during  the  Frei  years  to  around  $o0  million  m   19* 2.  T 
rlrnn  q   result  of  combined  economic  and  political  factors,  seriously  a   - 
^pfprHlifi  \llende  government’s  ability  to  purchase  replacement  pai 
and  m*h“or”the  most  critical  £ctom  of  the  economy:  copper, 
steel,  electricity,  petroleum,  and  transport.

--- PAGE BREAK ---•  *•'  r   v-  •  \*v 
By  late  1972,  the  Chilean  Ministry  of  the  Economy  estimated  that 
almost  one-third  of  the  diesel  tmcks  at  Cliuquieamata  Copper  Mine, 
30  percent  of  the  privately  owned  city  buses,  21  percent  of  all  taxis, 
and  33  percent  of  state-owned  buses  in  Chile  could  not  operate  because 
of  the  lack  of  spare  parts  or  tires.

In  overall  terms,  the  value  of  United 
States  machinery  and  transport  equipment  exported  to  Chile  by  U.S.

firms  declined  from  $152.6  million  in  1970  to  $110  million  in  1971.

C.

THE  INSTRUMENTS  OF  UNITED  STATES  FOREIGN  ECONOMIC  POLICY 
TOWARD  ALLENDE 
United  States  foreign  economic  policy  toward  Allende’s  government 
was  articulated  at  the  highest  levels  of  the  U.S.

government,  and 
coordinated  by  interagency  task  forces.

The  policy  was  clearly  framed 
during  the  Track  II  period.

Richard  Helms’  notes  from  liis  Septem- 
ber 15,  1970,  meeting  with  President  Nixon,  the  meeting  which  ini- 
tiated Track  II,  contain  the  indication :  “Make  the  economy  scream.” 
A   week  later  Ambassador  Korry  reported  telling  Frei,  through  his 
Defense  Minister,  that  “not  a   nut  or  bolt  would  be  allowed  to  reach 
Chile  under  Allende.” 
While  the  Chilean  economy  was  vulnerable  to  U.S.

pressures  over 
a   period  of  a   few  years,  it  was  not  in  the  short  run.

That  judgment 
was  clearly  made  by  intelligence  analysts  in  the  government,  but 
its  implications  seem  not  to  have  affected  policy-making  in  September 
and  October  of  1970.

A   February  1971  Intelligence  Memorandum 
noted  that  Chile  was  not  immediately  vulnerable  to  investment,  trade 
or  monetary  sanctions  imposed  by  the  United  States.That  judgment 
was  clearly  made  by  intelligence  analysts  in  the  government,  but 
its  implications  seem  not  to  have  affected  policy-making  in  September 
and  October  of  1970.

A   February  1971  Intelligence  Memorandum 
noted  that  Chile  was  not  immediately  vulnerable  to  investment,  trade 
or  monetary  sanctions  imposed  by  the  United  States.

In  fact,  the  im- 
position of  sanctions,  while  it  would  hurt  Chile  eventually,  was  seen 
to  carry  one  possible  short-run  benefit — it  would  have  given  Chile  a 
justification  for  renouncing  nearly  a   billion  dollars  of  debt  to  the 
"United  States.

The  policy  of  economic  pressure — articulated  in  NSDM  93  of 
November  1970 — was  to  be  implemented  through  several  means.

All 
new  bilateral  foreign  assistance  was  to  be  stopped,  although  disburse- 
ments would  continue  under  loans  made  previously.

The  U.S.

would 
use  its  predominant  position  in  international  financial  institutions  to 
dry  up  the  flow  of  new  multilateral  credit  or  other  financial  assistance.

To  the  extent  possible,  financial  assistance  or  guarantees  to  U.S.

Erivate  investment  in  Chile  would  be  ended,  and  U.S.

businesses  would 
a  made  aware  of  the  government’s  concern  and  its  restrictive  policies.

The  bare  figures  tell  the  story.

U.S.

bilateral  aid,  $35  million  in  1969, 
was  $1.5  million  in  1971.

(See  Table  II.)  U.S.

Export-Import  Bank 
credits,  which  had  totalled  $234  million  in  1967  and  $29  million  in 
1969,  dropped  to  zero  in  1971.

Loans  from  the  multilateral  Inter- 
American  Development  Bank  (IDB),  in  which  the  U.S.

held  what 
amounted  to  a   veto,  had  totalled  $46  million  in  1970;  they  fell  to  $2 
million  in  1972  (United  States  A.I.D.

figures).--- PAGE BREAK ---

held  what 
amounted  to  a   veto,  had  totalled  $46  million  in  1970;  they  fell  to  $2 
million  in  1972  (United  States  A.I.D. figures). The  only  new  IDB 
loans  made  to  Chile  during  the  Allende  period  were  two  small  loans 
to  Chilean  universities  made  in  January  1971.4  Similarly,  the  World 
Bank  made  no  new  loans  to  Chile  between  1970  and  1973. However, 
the  International  Monetary  Fund  extended  Chile  approximately 
$90  million  during  1971  and  1972  to  assist  with  foreign  exchange 
difficulties. 4  As  with  bilateral  aid,  disbursements  were  continued  under  previous  commitments. $54  million  was  disbursed  between  December  1970  and  December  1972. (IDB  figures)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

0 
-J 
g 
1 
o 
£   v 
E   | 
o   o 
z   *° 
<   o 
a   £ 
o   5 
5   1 
S  I 
»-  *"* 
z 
ui 
s 
oocncM—»o*oocMinm 
r- 
2 
o>inc»iflOinVj^25} 
*• 
cn 
OO  QO  m   —   O   CT>  *»  JCM 
r*. 
2 
(d  ’Ncntn^o)  [in 
** 
CM 
■tfOCUDMI*)  CM  <»-• 
r** 
2 
r-<I  in  **  cJ  ob  >«m 
*  **  | 
to  mm  'r-rntr  .o 
N 
cn 
oo  «— •   to  ;ir>Wm  jcm 
o 
uJocMmoo^^mto 
cn 
ojoor*»"m  ‘ojoojm 
1969 
fiOMONCOMOlOO) 
ointno6*-‘*-o»^^i 
S 
-o>on»o»m 
cn 
assess  is 
n*. 
■«rmen<o  —   moooo 
cn 
ss-s^ass 
1966 
11.9 
93.2 
14.4 
.1 
10.1 
22.0 
72.0 
2.7 
62.2 
m 
♦   inNNOtmMMOl 
u> 
2 
gm^maigcM^M-' 
S 
r-O)O»«OF-«l0lfl 
cn 
Rfesss^ssss 
cn 
mm  o   cm  to  cn  cm 
«jO 
cn 
ssssissss  is 
CM 
oor«.toooooton-.  •  .-« 
to 
2 
ai  cm  to  'r^r-Cod  im 
to  —   oo—* 
rs.^NO«in«Nn. 
5 
*n 
{ntoMoj—’-tininin 
mrXcntoM- oomcn 
o> 
[S 
i  i  ;   ;   ;   M   ;q 
•••{*{•  Jj« 
i 
  i 
  i 
  i

Is  j  
13 
s   :   :   :   eg  |S 
i

i 
  -4  i=f  it 
5im 
to  —   oo—* 
rs.^NO«in«Nn. 
5 
*n 
{ntoMoj—’-tininin 
mrXcntoM- oomcn 
o> 
[S 
i  i  ;   ;   ;   M   ;q 
•••{*{•  Jj« 
i 
  i 
  i 
  i

Is  j  
13 
s   :   :   :   eg  |S 
i

i 
  -4  i=f  it 
5

•  is  if 
■O  St  I?  5,22 
•5  <5  0   -o  r,  2?  «=  Q 
0   [a!  Ew»°(fl  = 
E   »  s*T  2-o  ” 
w 
o> 
e   |W  t*.'?  C   °   S   ® 
>. 
1 
tz 
U.S.  
ecoi 
J.S.  
AID. 
J.
Food 
J.S.  
Expo 
U.S.  
eco 
Inter-Am 
3  sfi 
1-  l-F-K 
8 
£ 
"S  ""1 
3   8 
I* 
«   *5^ 
«0  S 
=   *»  C 
.2  C   = 
vs  o   g. 
«   S| 
£   «   ® 
®   *c  £ 
c=  o   □ 
=   ll 
to  <   O 
2   S« 
•   Se 
«*:  =« 
n.  ./.'•■■  ■
;.ry;v;>v.-: 
V',;;,,s.i,iV':. 
I  ,  1  *v 
r  •',v^ 
•  •  •-•  •  '  •  "   • 
 ■•  ’; ' 
 •'■•  • 
 . 
 . 
 '■•  •"  • 
 .;-v\ 
. 
--  •.'vA.--  -~w.  . .. 
. 
 *4>' 
..'.'V  v.'/i  .   .  ...:  tv,  .  <  »i.  •  ......  .  ■  if'i’iAVu'  .  .i*Sl  ,  ;fc

--- PAGE BREAK ---v\A  ;.V'^ 
.•  v1 
35 
Reaction  to  events  in  Chile  accounted  for  much  of  the  momentum  in 
the  United  States  Government  for  the  development  of  a   policy  on  ex- 
propriation.

In  what  came  to  be  known  as  the  Allendc  Doctrine,  Chile 
proposed  to  deduct  a   calculation  of  “excess  profits”  (over  and  above 
reinvestments  and  a   10-12  percent  profit  margin)  from  any  compen- 
sation paid  to  nationalized  firms  in  the  copper  sector.

By  this  calcula- 
tion, U.S.

copper  companies  were  in  fact  told  they  owed  money.

The 
reaction  of  the  U.S.

Government  was  strong.

In  .January  1972,  Presi- 
dent Nixon  announced  that,  when  confronted  with  such  situations,  the 
U.S.

would  cut  off  bilateral  aid  and  “withhold  its  support  from  loans 
under  consideration  in  multilateral  development  banks.

’ 
While  the  State  Department,  the  CIA,  and  the  Department  of  Com- 
merce  all  participated  in  the  United  States  economic  policy  toward 
Chile,  a   central  point  in  the  execution  of  this  policy  was  the  Depart- 
ment of  the  Treasury.

The  Department  instructs  U.S.

representatives 
on  multilateral  lending  institutions.

In  the  IDB,  for  instance,  ^ieU.S.

controlled  40  percent  of  the  votes,  sufficient  to  veto  any  “soft  IDB 
loans.

Loan  proposals  submitted  to  the  IDB  were  held  under  study, 
never  coming  up  for  a   vote  by  the  IDB  Board.

Whether  U.S.

actions, 
and  those  of  the  multilateral  institutions,  were  motivated  by  political 
interests  or  economic  judgments  of  Chile’s  “credit  worthiness  ’  is  a   de- 
bate not  yet  definitively  settled.

However,  it  seems  clear  from  the  pat- 
tern of  U.S.actions, 
and  those  of  the  multilateral  institutions,  were  motivated  by  political 
interests  or  economic  judgments  of  Chile’s  “credit  worthiness  ’  is  a   de- 
bate not  yet  definitively  settled.

However,  it  seems  clear  from  the  pat- 
tern of  U.S.

economic  actions  and  from  the  nature  of  debates  within  the 
Executive  Branch  that  American  economic  policy  was  driven  more  by 
political  opposition  to  an  Allende  regime  than  by  purely  techmcal 
judgments  about  Chile’s  finances.

.

v 
The  posture  of  the  Export-Import  Bank,  a   United  States  public 
institution,  reflected  the  tone  of  U.S.

economic  policy  toward  Chile 
during  the  Allende  period.

In  the  fall  of  1970,  the  Bank  dropped 
Chiles  credit  rating  from  “B,”  the  second  categoiy,  to  “D ,”  the  last 
category.

Insofar  as  the  rating  contributed  to  similar  evaluations  by 
private  U.S.

banks,  corporations,  and  international  private  investors, 
it  aggravated  Chile’s  problem  of  attracting  and  retaining  needed  capi- 
tal Tnflow  through  private  foreign  investment.

In  mid-August  1971 
the  Bank  decided  that  a   $21  million  credit  for  Boeing  passenger  jets 
would  be  deferred  pending  a   resolution  of  the  controversy  over  com- 
pensation for  nationalized  U.S.

copper  companies.

That  Bank  decision 
came  one  month  after  the  nationalization  and  two  months  before  the 
final  decision  on  compensation.

In  fact,  the  Boeing  decision  had  been 
first  announced  in  May,  before  the  nationalization  occurred.

The  United  States  linked  the  question  of  indemnization  for  U.S.

cop- 
per companies  with  Chile’s  multilateral  foreign  debt.

That  foreign 
debt,  an  inheritance  from  the  obligations  incurred  by  the  Alessandn 
and  Frei  governments,  was  the  second  highest  foreign  debt  per  capita 
of  any  country  in  tlic  world.--- PAGE BREAK ---

cop- 
per companies  with  Chile’s  multilateral  foreign  debt. That  foreign 
debt,  an  inheritance  from  the  obligations  incurred  by  the  Alessandn 
and  Frei  governments,  was  the  second  highest  foreign  debt  per  capita 
of  any  country  in  tlic  world. \   ct,  in  the  19^2  and  1973  Paris  Club. for- 
ei<m  debt  negotiations  with  Chile’s  principal  foreign  creditor  nations, 
the  United  States  alone  refused  to  consider  rescheduling  Chile’s  for- 
eion debt  payments  until  there  was  movement  toward  indemnization 
for  the  U.S. copper  companies. The  United  States  also  exerted  pres- 
sure on  each  of  the  other  foreign  creditor  nations  not  to  renegotiate 
Chile’s  foreign  debt  as  a   group. y 
 ■ 
 ■ 
 ■

--- PAGE BREAK ---36 
H 
4.

Z7.£.

Relations  with  the  Chilean  Military 
United  States  relations  with  the  Chilean  military  during  1970-1973 
must  be  viewed  against  the  backdrop  not  only  of  the  tradition  of  dose 
cooperation  between  the  American  and  Chilean  military  services  and 
of  continuing  intelligence  collection  efforts,  but  also  in  the  context  of 
Track  II— an  attempt  to  foment  a   military  coup.

Track  II  marked  a 
break  in  the  nature  of  relations  between  U.S.

officials  and  the  Chilean 
mQoscf personal  and  professsional  cooperation  between  Chilean  and 
U   S.

officers  was  a   tradition  of  long  standing.

The  American  military 
presence  in  Chile  was  substantial,  consisting  both  of  military  attaches, 
the  Embassy,  and  members  of  the  Military  Group  who  provided  train- 
ing and  assistance  to  the  Chilean  armed  services.

In  the  late  1960  s  the 
Military  Group  numbered  over  fifty;  by  the  Allende  period,  it  was 
reduced  to  a   dozen  or  so,  for  reasons  which  had  primarily  to  do  with 
U.S.

budget-cutting.

A.

PRE-TRACK  II 
In  July  1969  the  CIA  Station  in  Santiago  requested  and  received 
Headquarters  approval  for  a   covert  program  to  establish  intelligence 
assets  in  the  Chilean  armed  services  for  the  purpose  of  monitoring  coup 
plotting.

The  program  lasted  for  four  years:  it  involved  assets  drawn 
from  all  three  branches  of  the  Chilean  military  and  included  com- 
mand-level officers,  field-  and  company-grade  officers,  retired  general 
staff  officers  and  enlisted  men.

From  1969  to  August  1970,  the  pro- 
ject adhered  closely  to  its  stated  objective  of  monitoring  and  reporting 
coup-oriented  activity  within  the  Chilean  military.The  program  lasted  for  four  years:  it  involved  assets  drawn 
from  all  three  branches  of  the  Chilean  military  and  included  com- 
mand-level officers,  field-  and  company-grade  officers,  retired  general 
staff  officers  and  enlisted  men.

From  1969  to  August  1970,  the  pro- 
ject adhered  closely  to  its  stated  objective  of  monitoring  and  reporting 
coup-oriented  activity  within  the  Chilean  military.

During  August,  September  and  October  of  1969,  it  became  increas- 
ingly clear  from  the  agents’  reports  that  the  growing  dissatisfaction 
ancl  unrest  within  the  armed  forces  was  leading  to  an  unstable  military 
situation.

These  events  culminated  in  the  abortive  military  revolt  ot 
October  1969 — the  Tacnaso ,  named  after  the  Tacna  regiment  in  San- 
tiago.

How  close  the  amateurish  Tacnazo  came  to  success  was  a   lesson 
to  remember,  particularly  in  light  of  the  upcoming  Presidential  elec- 
tion of  1970  and  the  strong  possibility  that  Salvador  Allende  would 
emerge  victorious.

B.

TRACK  II 
The  Track  II  covert  action  effort  to  organize  a   military  coup  to  deny 
Allende  the  Presidency  caught  the  Santiago  Station  unprepared.

Its 
two  assets  in  the  Chilean  military  were  not  in  a   position  to  spark  a 
coup.

To  accomplish  the  mission  directed  by  Washington,  the  Station 
had  to  use  a   U.S.

military  attache  and  other  hastily  developed  contacts 
with  the,  two  main  coup  plotting  groups  in  the  Chilean  military.

These 
contacts  not  only  reported  the  plans  of  the  groups  but  also  relayed  the 
Station’s  advice  about  mechanics  and  timing,  and  passed  on  indica- 
tions of  U.S.

Government  support  following  a   successful  coup.

VY  ith 
the  death  of  Schneider,  the  plotters’  effort  collapsed  in  disarray,  leav- 
in**  t-lie  Station  with  only  its  initial  assets  in  the  military.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Government  support  following  a   successful  coup. VY  ith 
the  death  of  Schneider,  the  plotters’  effort  collapsed  in  disarray,  leav- 
in**  t-lie  Station  with  only  its  initial  assets  in  the  military. It  took  the 
Station  another  ten  months  to  rebuild  a   network  of  agents  among  the 
cautious  Chilean  military.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n  with  only  its  initial  assets  in  the  military. It  took  the 
Station  another  ten  months  to  rebuild  a   network  of  agents  among  the 
cautious  Chilean  military.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

$:■  i 
■■'  $$£'?  -:W  f-s 
.. 
>w: 
fp$$ 
As  part  of  its  attmept  to  induce  the  Chilean  military  to  intervene 
before  the  October  24  congressional  vote,  the  United  States  had 
threatened  to  cut  off  military  aid  if  the  military  refused  to  act.  I  hat 
was  accompanied  by  a   promise  of  support  in  the  aftermath  of  a   coup. 
However,  military  assistance  was  not  cut  on  at  the  time  of  Allenae  s 
confirmation  (see  Table  III).  Military  sales  jumped  sharply  from 
1972  to  1973  and  even  more  sharply  from  1973  to  19(4  after  the  coup 
fsee  Table  IV).  Training  of  Chilean  military  personnel  in  Panama 
So  rose  during  the  Allende  years  (see  Table  V). 
C.  1070-73 
\fter  the  failure  of  Track  II,  the  CIA  rebuilt  its  network  of  con- 
tacts and  remained  close  to  Chilean  military  officers  in  order  to  monitor 
developments  within  the  armed  forces.  For  their  part,  Chilean  officers 
who  were  aware  that  the  United  States  once  had  sought  a   coup  o   pre 
vent  Allende  from  becoming  president  must  have  been  sensitive  to 
indications  of  continuing  U.S.  support  for  a   coup.  . 
 ,   . , 
Bv  September  1971  a   new  network  of  agents  was  in  place  and  the 
Station  was  receiving  almost  daily  reports  of  new  coup  plotting,  ihe 
Station  and  Headquarters  began  to  explore  ways  to  use  this  network. 
At  the  same  time,  and  in  parallel,  the  Station  and  Headquarters  dis- 
cussed a   “deception  operation”  designed  to  alert  Chilean  officers  to  real 
or  purported  Cuban  involvement  in  the  Chilean  army.  Throughout  the 
fall  of  1971,  the  Station  and  Headquarters  carried  on  a   dialogue  about 
both  the  general  question  of  what  to  do  with  the  intelligence  network 
and  the  objectives  of  the  specific  operation. 
TABLE  III. — MILITARY  ASSISTANCE* 
Fiscal  year    Pr°8ramed   Delivered 
..  $8, 806, 000  $8,366,000 
!?§! 
   ..  4.143,000  4,766,000 
j-Ki 
 :::     1.801,000  7,507,000 
1252 
   ....  734,000  2,662,000 
        852,000  1,966,000 
      . 
 698,000  1,033,000 
—     870,000  2,227,000 
HE?—000 
!?§! 
   ..  4.143,000  4,766,000 
j-Ki 
 :::     1.801,000  7,507,000 
1252 
   ....  734,000  2,662,000 
        852,000  1,966,000 
      . 
 698,000  1,033,000 
—     870,000  2,227,000 
HE?—

941,000  918,000 
973  
   912,000  619,000 
13/4..         — —————— —

1  Figures  are  from  a  Department  of  Defense  response  to  a  Senate  Select  Committee  document  request  and  are 
unclassified. 
TABLE  IV.— MILITARY  SALES* 
Fiscal  year  0rders  DeUvered 
inee      $1,057,000  $1,490,000 
    __  2,559,000  1,690,000 
}967._. 
       4.077,000  2,100,000 
}■$* 
     IIZIII     1, 676,  000  2, 147, 000 
        7,503,000  9,145,000 
KK?

2,886,000  2,958,000 
J971—   -           6,238,000  4,583,000 
J973 
 -         76,120,000  4,860,000 
i  Figures  are  from  a  Department  of  Defense  response  to  a  Senate  Select  Committee  document  request  and  are 
unclassified. 
-■■mm

--- PAGE BREAK ---' 
Him 
3S 
TABLE  V.— TRAINING  IN  PANAMA!

Number  of 
Fiscal  year  people 
Number  of 
Fiscal  year  people 
1966...................— ••   .......

68 
1971 
   }« 
7  **’*”’"      57 
lqco      169 
iqcq      .....

107 
— — —   *   ...

unclassified.

The  Station  proposed,  in  September,  to  provide  information — 
some  of  it  fabricated  by  the  CIA — which  would  convince  senior  Chile- 
an Army  officers  that  the  Carabineros’  Investic/aciones  unit,  with  the 
approval  of  Allende  was  acting  in  concert  with  Cuban  intelligence 
(DGI)  to  gather  intelligence  prejudicial  to  the  Army  high  command.

It  was  hoped  that  the  effort  would  arouse  the  military  against  Allende’s 
involvement  with  the  Cubans,  inducing  the  armed  services  to  press 
the  government  to  alter  its  orientation  and  to  move  against  it  if  neces- 
sary.

A   month  later  CIA  Headquarters  suggested  that  the  deception 
operation  be  shelved,  in  favor  of  passing  “verifiable”  information  to 
the  leader  of  the  coup  group  wliich  Headquarters  and  the  Station  per- 
ceived as  having  the  highest  probability  of  success.

After  a   further  Station  request,  Headquarters  agreed  to  the  opera- 
tion, with  the  objective  of  educating  senior  Chilean  officers  and  keep- 
ing them  on  alert.

In  December  1971  a   packet  of  material,  including 
a   fabricated  letter,  was  passed  to  a   Chilean  officer  outside  Chile.

The 
CIA  did  not  receive  any  subsequent  reports  on  the  effect,  if  any,  this 
“information”  had  on  the  Chilean  military.

While  the  initial  concep- 
tion of  the  operation  had  included  a   series  of  such  passages,  no  further 
packets  were  passed.

.

The  Station/Headquarters  dialogue  over  the  use  of  the  intelligence 
network  paralleled  the  discussion  of  the  deception  operation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

. The  Station/Headquarters  dialogue  over  the  use  of  the  intelligence 
network  paralleled  the  discussion  of  the  deception  operation. In  No- 
vember the  Station  suggested  that  the  ultimate  objective  of  the  mili- 
tary penetration  program  was  a   military  coup. Headquarters  responded 
by  rejecting  that  formulation  of  the  objective,  cautioning  that  the  CIA 
did  not  have  40  Committee  approval  to  become  involved  in  a   coup. However,  Headquarters  acknowledged  the  difficulty  of  drawing  a   firm 
line  between  monitoring  coup  plotting  and  becoming  involved  in  it. It  also  realized  that  the  U.S. government’s  desire  to  be  in  clandestine 
contract  with  military  plotters,  for  whatever  purpose,  might  well 
imply  to  them  U.S. support  for  their  future  plans. During  1970-73,  the  Station  collected  operational  intelligence  neces- 
sary in  the  event  of  a   coup — arrest  lists,  key  civilian  installations  and 
personnel  that  needed  protection,  key  government  installations  which 
need  to  be  taken  over,  and  government  contingency  plans  which  would 
be  used  in  case  of  a   military  uprising. According  to  the  CIA,  the  data 
was  collected  only  against  the  contingency  of  future  Headquarters 
requests  and  was  never  passed  to  the  Chilean  military. The  intelligence  network  continued  to  report  throughout  19 12  and 
1973  on  coup  plotting  activities. During  1972  the  Station  continued  to 
monitor  the  group  which  might  mount  a   successful  coup,  and  it  spent 
a   significantly  greater  amount  of  time  and  effort  penetrating  this 
'

--- PAGE BREAK ---group  than  it  had  on  previous  groups.

This  group  had  originally  come 
to  the  Station’s  attention  in  October  1971.

By  January  1972  the  Sta- 
tion had  successfully  penetrated  it  and  was  in  contact  through  an 
intermediary  with  its  leader.

During  late  1971  and  early  1972,  the  CIA  adopted  a   more  active 
stance  vis  a   vis  its  military  penetration  program,  including  a   short- 
lived effort  to  subsidize  a   small  anti-government  news  pamphlet  di- 
rected at  the  armed  services,  its  compilation  of  arrest  lists  and  other 
operational  data,  and  its  deception  operation.

Intelligence  reporting  on  coup  plotting  reached  two  peak  periods,  one 
in  the  last  week  of  June  1973  and  the  other  during  the  end  of  August 
and  the  first  two  weeks  in  September.

It  is  clear  the  CIA  received 
intelligence  reports  on  the  coup  planning  of  the  group  which  carried 
out  the  successful  September  11  coup  throughout  the  months  of  July, 
August,  and  September  1973.

The  CIA’s  information-gathering  efforts  with  regard  to  the  Chilean 
military  included  activity  which  went  beyond  the  mere  collection  of 
information.

More  generally,  those  efforts  must  be  viewed  in  the  con- 
text of  United  States  opposition,  overt  and  covert,  to  the  Allende 
government.

They  put  the  United  States  Government  in  contact  with 
those  Chileans  who  sought  a   military  alternative  to  the  Allende 
presidency.

F.

Post-1973 
1.

Chile  Since  the  Coup 
Following  the  September  11,  1973,  coup,  the  military  Junta,  led  by 
General  Augusto  Pinochet,  moved  quickly  to  consolidate  its  newly 
acquired  power.Post-1973 
1.

Chile  Since  the  Coup 
Following  the  September  11,  1973,  coup,  the  military  Junta,  led  by 
General  Augusto  Pinochet,  moved  quickly  to  consolidate  its  newly 
acquired  power.

Political  parties  were  banned,  Congress  was  put  in 
indefinite  recess,  press  censorship  was  instituted,  supporters  of  Allende 
and  others  deemed  opponents  of  the  new  regime  were  jailed,  and  elec- 
tions were  put  off  indefinitely.

The  prospects  for  the  revival  of  democracy  in  Chile  have  improved 
little  over  the  last  two  years.

A   1975  National  Intelligence  Estimate 
stated  that  the  Chilean  armed  forces  were  determined  to  oversee  a 
prolonged  political  moratorium  and  to  revamp  the  Chilean  political 
system.

The  NIE  stated  that  the  Junta  had  established  tight,  authori- 
tarian controls  over  political  life  in  Chile  which  generally  continued 
in  effect.

It  had  outlawed  Marxist  parties  in  Chile  as  well  as  other- 
parties  which  had  comprised  Allende’s  coalition.

In  addition,  the 
Christian  Democratic  and  National  parties  had  been  placed  in  invol- 
untary recess.

These  two  parties  were  forbidden  from  engaging  in 
political  activity  and  restricted  to  purely  housekeeping  functions.

In  addition,  charges  concerning  the  violation  of  human  rights  in 
Chile  continue  to  be  directed  at  the  Junta.

Most  recently,  a   United 
Nations  report  on  Chile  charged  that  “torture  centers”  are  being  op- 
erated in  Santiago  and  other  parts  of  the  country.

The  lengthy  docu- 
ment, issued  October  14,  1975,  listed  11  centers  where  it  says  prisoners 
are  being  questioned  “by  methods  amounting  to  torture.”  The  Pinochet 
government  had  originally  offered  full  cooperation  to  the  U.N.

group, 
including  complete  freedom  of  movement  in  Chile.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The  lengthy  docu- 
ment, issued  October  14,  1975,  listed  11  centers  where  it  says  prisoners 
are  being  questioned  “by  methods  amounting  to  torture.”  The  Pinochet 
government  had  originally  offered  full  cooperation  to  the  U.N. group, 
including  complete  freedom  of  movement  in  Chile. However,  six  days 
before  the  group’s  arrival  in  Santiago,  the  government  reversed  itself 
and  notified  the  group  that  the  visit  was  cancelled.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2.  CIA  Post-Coup  Activities  in  Chile 
The  covert  action  bud™t  lor  Chil< rt. i   cat  1 
coup  and  all  the  anti-Allen  e  p   i,  ^   activities  in  Chile  following 
SKup  oc  adaptations  of  cavlicc  projects, 
assist  the  Junta  m   "   °o  
the  command  levels  of  the  Chilean 
abroad,  and  to  maintain  ,   .  t  through  work  done  at  the 
government.  Another  goal,  “   PS?  crnTwos  to  help  the  new 
Jmte'3  m05t  im- 
portant  economic  decisions.  pronawanda  proiect,  a   number  of 
1  
With  regard  to  the  continuing  propaganaa  pr  , 
 mili_ 
activities,  including  the  were.ter- 
tary  collection  program,  an  pi -i  n   media  outlets  was  retained 
mmated.  However  access  to  Chilean 
in  order  to  enable  the  Co^;f'^ent  as  weUas  to  influence  the  direc- 
public  support  for  the  ne  g  pressures  exerted  by  the  mass  media. 
tion  of  the  government,  through  pressures  exerr^.  ^   ^   mQSt 
These  media  owlets  at  emP  d  
£e  the  direc- 
public  support  for  the  ne  g  pressures  exerted  by  the  mass  media. 
tion  of  the  government,  through  pressures  exerr^.  ^   ^   mQSt 
These  media  owlets  at  emP  d  
£

P  
^   ^   assigt  foreigll  journalists 
w“tingt"" a,,<l  “ oiher 
foreign  capitals.  __  tt_pj  uaison  relations  with  the  Chilean 
After  the  coup,  the  CIA  renewed  Uaiso^i  which  had  been 
f0Verntm?nfbf S?t2  S?S  SS  was  expressed  within 
disrupted  liaison  with  such  organizations  would  lay  the  Agency 
the  CIA  that  haison  political  repression;  officials  acknowledged 
open  to  charges  of  aiding,  po  *  1  P  
various  Chilean  forces  would 
that,  while  most  of  CIAs  support ^

W   tne  van  abroad,  the 
be  desipied  to  assist  them  “   subversion  as 
support  coidd rb5.  PcK  made  it  clear  to  the  Chileans  at  the  outset 
7hnt  ,m °ClTsupport  ^mul d  be  provided  for  use  in  internal  political 
repression.  Furthermore  the  CIA  itM i   to 
HaSSS'of41 
“hid^doSy  followed  the  standards  on 
hnman  rhrhts  set  by  the  1949  Geneva  Convention.

--- PAGE BREAK ---•  ,..

•./:>•* v.

4vy ys&y.' 
vvVAuV^ 
iB® sSfefcStli 
r-:'^r*~7r~~ -^rrmr 
r.lil,mtfto^^^-'-  -   
  -*»  -   .^^U,u^:,.

_ 
IV.

Chile:  Authorization,  Assessment,  and  Oversight 
A.

40  CojijmTEE  Authorization  and  Control:  Chile,  1060-1973 
1.

Jfi  Committee  Functions  and  Procedures 
Throughout  its  history,  the  40  Committee  and  its  direct  predeces- 
sors—the  303  Committee  and  the  Special  Group— have  had  one  over- 
riding purpose;  to  exercise  political  control  oyer  covert  operations 
abroad.

The  40  Committee  is  charged  with  considering  the  objectives 
of  any  proposed  activity,  whether  or  not  it  would  accomplish  these 
aims,  and  in  general  whether  or  not  it  would  be  “proper’  and  in  the 
American  interest.

Minutes  and  summaries  of  40  Committee  meetings 
on  Chile  indicate  that,  by  and  large,  these  considerations  were  dis- 
cussed and  occasionally  debated  by  40  Committee  members.

In  addition  to  exercising  political  control,  the  40  Committee  has 
been  responsible  for  framing  covert  operations  m   such  a   way  that  they 
could  later  be  “disavowed”  or  “plausibly  denied  by  the  United 
States  government-or  at  least  by  the  President.

In  the  case  of  Chile, 
of  course  this  proved  to  be  an  impossible  task,  hot  only  was  CIA 
tavXSnt  fa  
Shi!,  “blown,”  but  in  September  1974,  Presutat  Ford 
publicly  acknowledged  at  a   press  conference  U.S.

covert  involvement 
111  
Before  covert  action  proposals  are  presented  to  the  Director  for 
submission  to  the  40  Committee,  an  internal  CIA  mstruction  states 
that  thev  should  be  coordinated  with  the  Department  of  State  and 
that,  ordinarily,  concurrence  by  the  ambassador  to  the  country  con- 
cerned is  required.In  the  case  of  Chile, 
of  course  this  proved  to  be  an  impossible  task,  hot  only  was  CIA 
tavXSnt  fa  
Shi!,  “blown,”  but  in  September  1974,  Presutat  Ford 
publicly  acknowledged  at  a   press  conference  U.S.

covert  involvement 
111  
Before  covert  action  proposals  are  presented  to  the  Director  for 
submission  to  the  40  Committee,  an  internal  CIA  mstruction  states 
that  thev  should  be  coordinated  with  the  Department  of  State  and 
that,  ordinarily,  concurrence  by  the  ambassador  to  the  country  con- 
cerned is  required.

“Should,”  and  “ordinarily”  were  underscored  for 
an  important  reason— maior  covert  action  proposals  are  not  always  co- 
ordinated among  the  various  agencies.

Nor,  for  that  matter,  are  they 
always  discussed  and/or  approved  by  the  40  Committee.

The  Chile 
case  demonstrates  that  in  at  least  one  instance,  the  so-called  I  rack 
II  activity,  the  President  instructed  the  CIA  not  to  inform  nor  coordi- 
nate this  activity  with  the  Departments  of  State  or  Defense  or  the 
ambassador  in  the  field.

Nor  was  the  40  Committee  ever  mformed.

Not  all  covert  activities  are  approved  by  the  40  Committee.

Projects 
not  deemed  politicals  risky  or  involving  large  sums  of  money  can  be 
approved  within  the  CIA.

By  CIA  statistics,  only  about  one-fourth 
of  all  covert  action  projects  are  considered  bv  the  40  Committee.

1   he 
Committee  has  not  been  able  to  determine  what  percentage  of  covert 
action  projects  conducted  by  the  CIA  in  Chile  were  approved  within 
the  CIA  or  required  40  Committee  authorization.

Despite  this  fact,  the 
Committee  has  found  evidence  of  projects  not  considered  by  the  40 
Committee,  thus  conforming  to  this  general  authorization  rule.--- PAGE BREAK ---

1   he 
Committee  has  not  been  able  to  determine  what  percentage  of  covert 
action  projects  conducted  by  the  CIA  in  Chile  were  approved  within 
the  CIA  or  required  40  Committee  authorization. Despite  this  fact,  the 
Committee  has  found  evidence  of  projects  not  considered  by  the  40 
Committee,  thus  conforming  to  this  general  authorization  rule. Tins 
is  not  to  imply  that  the  CIA  undertook  activities  in  Chile  behind  the 
back  of  the  40  Committee  or  without  its  approval. The  Agency  was 
(41) 
:   ■ 
 ■ 
 •

--- PAGE BREAK ---simply  following  the  authorization  procedures  for  covert  projects 
that  then  existed.

These  same  procedures  exist  today.

There  have  been  numerous  criticisms  of  40  Committee  procedures, 
some  of  which  follow : 
 .

.

The  criteria  by  which  covert  operations  are  brought  before  the 
40  Committee  appear  to  be  fuzzy.

The  real  degree  of  accountabil- 
ity for  covert  actions  remains  to  be  determined.

There  is  a   basic  conflict  between  sufficient  consultation  to  insure 
accountability  and  sound  decisions  on  the  one  hand,  and  secure 
operations  on  the  other.

The  risk  of  inadequate  consultation  may 
be  aggravated  by  the  more  informal  procedure  of  telephone  clear- 
ances^ which  lias  been  used  by  the  40  Committee  for  the  last  few 
years.

The  review  of  covert  actions  by  the  40  Committee  does  not 
appear  to  be  searching  or  thorough.

There  still  appears  to  be  a 
serious  risk  that  operations  will  end  only  when  they  come  to  grief.

2.

40  Committee  Approvals 
According  to  a   chronology  of  40  Committee  meetings,  the  Commit- 
tee met  on  23  separate  occasions  between  March  1970  and  October  19(3 
to  authorize  funds  for  covert  activities  in  Chile.1  During  this  period, 
the  Committee  authorized  a   total  of  $8.8  million  for  CIA  covert  activi- 
ties in  Chile.

Of  this  amount,  $6.5  million  was  spent.40  Committee  Approvals 
According  to  a   chronology  of  40  Committee  meetings,  the  Commit- 
tee met  on  23  separate  occasions  between  March  1970  and  October  19(3 
to  authorize  funds  for  covert  activities  in  Chile.1  During  this  period, 
the  Committee  authorized  a   total  of  $8.8  million  for  CIA  covert  activi- 
ties in  Chile.

Of  this  amount,  $6.5  million  was  spent.

The  range  of  CIA  activities  in  Chile  approved  bv  the  40  Committee 
included  “spoiling”  operations  against  Allende  prior  to  the  September 
4th  election,  assistance  to  Chilean  political  parties,  a   contingency  fund 
for  Ambassador  Korry’s  use  to  influence  the  October  24  congres- 
sional  vote,  purchase  of  a   Chilean  radio  station  to  be  used  as  a   political 
opposition  instrument  against  Allende,  assistance  to  specific  political 
candidates,  emergency  aid  to  keep  the  Santiago  paper,  El  Mercuno, 
afloat,  and  support  for  an  anti- Allende  businessmen’s  association.

3.

Policy  Splits  "Within  the  40  Committee 
Unanimity  was  not  a   hallmark  of  40  Committee  meetings  on  Chile, 
at  least  during  the  period  April  1969  to  October  1970.

Stated  simply, 
the  State  Department  was  generally  skeptical  about  intervening  in  the 
Chilean  electoral  process,  whereas  the  CIA,  the  U.S.

Ambassador  to 
Chile,  the  Defense  Department,  and  the  White  House  favored 
intervention.

The  question  of  whether  anything  should  be  done  with  regard  to 
the  September  1970  presidential  election  in  Chile  was  first  raised  at  a 
meeting  of  the  303  Committee  on  April  15,  1969.

It  was  not  until 
December  1969,  however,  that  a   joint  Embassy-CIA  proposal  for  a 
campaign  directed  against  Allende  was  submitted  to  the  Committee.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The  question  of  whether  anything  should  be  done  with  regard  to 
the  September  1970  presidential  election  in  Chile  was  first  raised  at  a 
meeting  of  the  303  Committee  on  April  15,  1969. It  was  not  until 
December  1969,  however,  that  a   joint  Embassy-CIA  proposal  for  a 
campaign  directed  against  Allende  was  submitted  to  the  Committee. At  this  December  meeting,  two  State  Department  officials  questioned 
iThe  use  of  the  term  “40  Committee  meetings"  must  not  ho  taken  In  a   literal  sense. At  the  outset  of  the  Nixon  Administration,  the  40  Committee  did  meet  frequently  to  discuss 
and  approve,  as  well  as  review,  U.S. covert  activities. Ilowevcr. within  a   relatively  short 
period  of  time,  these  formal  meetings  of  the  40  Committee  were  replaced  by  less  frequent 
meetings  and  a   system  of  telephone  clearances. Today  the  40  Committee  rarely  meets. Covert 
action  proposals,  prepared  by  the  DCI,  are  distributed  to  the  various  40  Committee  princi- 
pals and  approvals  or  disapprovals  are  obtained  over  the  phone  by  the  40  Committee 
Special  Group  officer,  a   CIA  officer  on  loan  to  the  NSC  staff.

--- PAGE BREAK ---MP™J 
43 
the  need  for  U.S.

involvement  in  the  election.

One  State  official  com- 
mented that  an  Allende  victory  would  not  be  the  same  as  a   Communist 
victory.

The  U.S.

Ambassador  to  Chile,  Edward  Korry,  who  had  been 
recalled  for  consultation,  disagreed.

He  stated  that  operationally  one 
must  treat  an  Allende  victory  as  the  same  thing  as  a   Communist  vic- 
tory.

Korry  went  on  to  state  that,  in  his  view,  an  Allende  government 
would  be  worse  than  a   Castro  government.

On  March  25,  1970,  the  40  Committee  approved  a   spoiling  opera- 
tion” against  Allende  and  approved  $125,000  for  this  purpose.

Again, 
however,  the  State  Department,  represented  by  Under  Secretary  of 
State  U.

Alexis  Johnson,  indicated  that  the  Department  remained 
lukewarm  to  any  involvement  in  the  election  and  informed  the  40  Com- 
mittee that  the  Department  would  be  quite  cool  to  a   more  positive 
aPOn°eaCfurther  example  of  policy  disagreement  within  the  40  Com- 
mittee was  evidenced  in  a   summary  of  a   September  29, 1970, 40  Com- 
mittee meeting.

This  meeting  occurred  a   little  more  than  three  weeks 
after  Allende  had  won  his  plurality  victoiy  on  September  4.

The  ques- 
tion of  applying  economic  pressure  to  Chile  was  raised,  with  the  hope 
that  this  pressure  would  create  the  conditions  which  would  lead  to  a 
military  coup.

After  a   run-through  of  possible  economic  pressures  that 
could  he  brought  to  bear  on  Chile,  provided  by  the  CIA’s  Deputy 
Director  for  Plans  Thomas  Karamessines,  Under  Secretary  of  State 
Johnson  noted  that  to  swerve  from  40  Committee-type  action  to  eco- 
nomic warfare  was  tantamount  to  a   change  in  foreign  policy.

Despite 
this  concern,  the  40  Committee  did  decide  to  increase  economic  pres- 
sures in  Chile.After  a   run-through  of  possible  economic  pressures  that 
could  he  brought  to  bear  on  Chile,  provided  by  the  CIA’s  Deputy 
Director  for  Plans  Thomas  Karamessines,  Under  Secretary  of  State 
Johnson  noted  that  to  swerve  from  40  Committee-type  action  to  eco- 
nomic warfare  was  tantamount  to  a   change  in  foreign  policy.

Despite 
this  concern,  the  40  Committee  did  decide  to  increase  economic  pres- 
sures in  Chile.

The  State  Department  was  not  happy  with  this  turn  of 
events.

Assistant  Secretary  of  State  Charles  Meyer  remarked  that 
should  Allende  be  confirmed,  the  U.S.

could  place  the  burden  on 
Allende  for  all  that  he  did,  and,  after  all,  he  would  not  be  around  for- 
ever.

This  view  was  not  accepted  by  the  CIA.

Director  Helms  remarked 
at  the  meeting  that  Allende’s  Marxist  pronouncements  should  be  taken 
at  face  value*  while  Karamessines  added  that  a   hands-off  policy  in 
Chile  at  this  time  would  be  read  as  the  U.S.

throwing  in  the  sponge.

As  evidenced  by  later  40  Committee  authorizations,  the  sponge  was 
not  thrown  in.

B.

Intelligence  Estimates  and  Covert  Action 
The  intelligence  community  produces  several  kinds  of  assessments 
for  policy  makers.

Of  these,  the  most  important  are  National  Intel- 
ligence Estimates  (NIEs)— joint,  agreed  assessment  of  foreign 
politics  and  capabilities — produced  by  the  U.S.

intelligence  com- 
munity.

This  section,  based  on  a   review  of  NIEs  and  other  intelligence 
memoranda 2  regarding  Chile  written  during  1969-1973,  will  trace  the 
intelligence  community’s  best  estimates  of  what  an  Allende  govern- 
ment signified  for  U.S.

interests.

NIEs  are  approved  by  the  United  States  Intelligence  Board 
(USIB) ;   dissenting  agencies  can  register  footnotes.--- PAGE BREAK ---

interests. NIEs  are  approved  by  the  United  States  Intelligence  Board 
(USIB) ;   dissenting  agencies  can  register  footnotes. Prior  to  1973, 
a   formal  Board  of  National  Estimates  supervised  the  production  of 
*  These  Include  Intelligence  Memoranda  produced  by  the  CIA’s  Office  of  Current  Intel- 
ligence (OCI)  and  Intelligence  Notes  produced  by  the  State  Department’s  Bureau  of 
Intelligence  and  Research  (INR). t® 
I. ;-

--- PAGE BREAK ---*•- >:.

v.y.v  .•>  vti.

•« 
drafts  by  a   special  Office  of  National  Estimates  In  1073,  that  struc- 
ture was  replaced  by  a   system  of  National  Intelligence  Officers 
(NlOs),  senior  analysts  drawn  from  the  CIA  and  other  intelligence 
agThere  have  been  persistent  criticisms  of  NIEs  and  many  of  these 
remain  with  the  new  structure:  the  documents  are  least-common-de- 
nominator compromises  and  thus  are  of  little  value  to  policy  makeis; 
they  are  oriented  toward  short-range  >   rather -than  tog; 
run  assessments.

Another  criticism  deals  not  ®   W   mVkers 
selves  but  with  their  use  or  abuse.

It  is  charged  that  Policy  makers 
ignore  NIEs  or  consult  them  only  when  estimates  confirm  their  pre- 
existing policy  preferences.

1.

The  Chile  Estimates 
Between  1969  and  1973,  five  Chile  NIEs  were  produced,  one  in  each 
year.

In  addition,  several  Intelligence  Memoranda  ^nc  I^t1elh1f^1c® 
Notes  relating  to  Chile  were  prepared  by  CIA  and  State.

1   he  li  y 
policies  and  goals  of  an  Allende  administration,  as  predicted  y 
intelligence  community,  follow.

A.

CHILE  UNDER  ALLENDE 
A   July  1970  Chile  NIE,  prepared  a   little  over  a   month  before  the 
September  election,  raised  the  question  of  what  an  Allende  victory 
would  mean  to  Chile  and  the  UmtedStates.

The  NIE  occasioned  con- 
siderable disagreement  within  the  Washington  community.

The  dis- 
agreement reflected  a   division  between  the  Department  of  State  on  one 
side  and  the  TT.S.

Ambassador  and  the  CIA  Station  on  the  other.

The 
latter  position  was  that  an  Allende  victory  wouid  mean  the  gradual 
imposition  of  a   classic  Marxist-Lemmst  regime  in  CMe.

Tins  position 
was  reflected,  with  some  qualifying  remarks,  m   the  W   IE.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 
latter  position  was  that  an  Allende  victory  wouid  mean  the  gradual 
imposition  of  a   classic  Marxist-Lemmst  regime  in  CMe. Tins  position 
was  reflected,  with  some  qualifying  remarks,  m   the  W   IE. The  1970  NIE  stated,  in  strong  terms,  that  an  Allende  administra- 
tion would  proceed  as  rapidly  as  possible  toward  the  establishment 
of  a   Marxist-Socialist  state. It  would  be  a   Chilean  version  of  a   Soviet- 
style  East  European  Communist  state. The  intelligence  community  pre- 
dicted that  although  democracy  was  likely  to  survive  in  Chile  over 
the  next  two  or  three  years,  Allende  could  take  Chile  a   long  way  down 
the  Marxist-Socialist  road  during  the  six  years  of  his  administration. To  do  this,  however,  he  would  have  to  surmount  some  very  important 
obstacles,  such  as  Chile’s  security  forces,  the  Christian  Democratic 
Partv  some  elements  of  organized  labor,  the  Congress,  and  the  Catho 
lie  Church. The  NIE  noted  that  Allende  undoubtedly  expected  prog- 
ccs  rm  bread  and  butter  issues  which  would  afford  him  an  op- 
to  S   
“SntS  of  the  Congress  in  the  1973  election  and 
thereby  enable  him  to  impose  a   socialist  state  of  the  Marxist  variety  by 
U   
Th^SSE  S?d' I' Chile;  in  Angnst  1971  teas  less  shrill  on 
the  threat  which  Allende  represented  to  Chilean  demociacy. He  had 
been  in  offiirnine  months,  PThe  NIE  stated  that  the  consolidation 
of  Marxist  political  leadership  in  Chile  was  n   ot  i 
Allende  had  a   long,  hard  way  to  go  to  achieve  this. The  NIE  warned, 
however,  that  although  Allende  would  almost  certainly  prefer  to  ad- 
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---45 
here  to  constitutional  means,  he  was  likely  to' bo: impelied  to  < use poljtj- 
cal  techniques  of  increasingly  dubious  legality  to  perpetuate  ms  coali- 
tfon  and  power.

Up  to  that  point,  the  NIE  observed,  Allende  had  taken 
great  care  toobserve  constitutional  forms  and  was  enjoying  consider- 
ab^popularhy^n  Ch  
e  ^   -n  june  1972.

The  prospects  for  the  con- 
tinuation of  democracy  in  Chile  appeared  to  be  better  than  at  any  time 
since  Allende’s  inauguration.

The  NIE  stated  that  the  traditional 
political  system  in  Chile  continued  to  demonstrate  remarkable  resi- 
Fiencv  Legislative,  student,  and  trade  union  elections  continued  to 
take  placed  normal  fashion,  with  pro-government  forces  accepting 
the  results  when  they  were  adverse.

The  NIE  noted  that  the  Christian 
Democratic  Party  and  the  National  Party  had  used  their  combined 
control  of  both  Houses  of  Congress  to  stall  government  initiatives  ajid 
to  pass  legislation  designed  to  curtail  Allende’s  powers.

In  addition, 
theo  imposition  news  media  had  been  able  to  resist  government  intimida- 
tion aifdnereisted  in  denouncing  the  government.

The  NIE  concluded 
that  the  most  likely  course  of  events  in  Chile  for  the  next  year  or  so 
would  be  moves  by  Allende  toward  slowing  the  pace  of  his  revolution 
in  order  to  accommodate  the  opposition  and  to  preserve  the  gains  he 
^On^final  NIE  on  Chile  was  issued  prior  to  Allende’s  overthrow  in 
September  1973.

That  NIE  focused  on  the  prospects  for  the  consolida- 
tion^?

power  by  Allende’s  regime.That  NIE  focused  on  the  prospects  for  the  consolida- 
tion^?

power  by  Allende’s  regime.

It  concluded  that  at  that  juncture 
a   political  stonLff  seemed  to"  be  the  most  likely  course  of  events  in 
Chile  The  NIE  stated  that  Allende  had  not  consolidated  the  power 
of  his  Marxist  regime;  the  built  of  low-income  Chileans  believed  that 
he  had  improved  their  conditions  and  represented  their  interests  ,  anc 
the  growth  in  support  for  his  coalition  reflected  his  political  ability 
as  w"ell  as  the  popularity  of  his  measures.

The  NIE  did  warn,  how- 
ever that  the  growing  polarization  of  the  Chilean  society  was  wearing 
away  the  Chilean  predilection  for  political  compromise  Nevertheless, 
the  analysts  predicted  that  there  was  only  an  outside  chance  that  the 
military  would  move  to  force  Allende  from  office.

B.

TJ.S.

-CHILEAN  RELATIONS 
Almost  two  years  before  Allende  was  elected,  the  intelligence  com- 
munity predicted  that  future  U.S.-Chilean  relations  would  be  under 
repeated1  strains,  regardless  of  which  party  won  the  1970  presidential 
election  A   I960  NIE  stated  that  whoever  succeeded  Frei  in  the  presi- 
dencv  was  likely  to  continue  to  stress  Chilean  independence,  to  be  less 
cooperative  with  the  U.S.

than  Frei  had  been,  1 and  to  explore ’^mewhat 
broader  relations  with  communist  countries.

This  NIE  noted  that  were 
\llende  to  win,  his  administration  would  almost  certainly  take  steps 
aimed  at  moving  Chile  away  from  the  U.S.

The  NIE  also  observed  that 
steps  toward  either  government  participation  m   or  outright  nationali- 
zation of  U.S.

copper  holdings  in  Chile  were >   inevitable.

A   1970  NIE.

issued  one  month  before  Allende  s  September  victory, 
was  quite  pessimistic  about  future  U.S.-Chilean  relations.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A   1970  NIE. issued  one  month  before  Allende  s  September  victory, 
was  quite  pessimistic  about  future  U.S.-Chilean  relations. It  stated 
that  if  Allende  were  to  win  the  election,  he  would  almost  certainly  take 
harsh  measures  against  U.S. business  interests  m   Chile  and  challenge 
U   S  policies  in  the  hemisphere. The  NIE  cited  several  foreign  policy 
* 
m 
    ^ 
^     . ^ 
. |

--- PAGE BREAK ---'  BpHfl 
'  u*  .nV .

v 
>'/ \f: ■ 
••■•■  '•  :•  ' 
■/  '••■•  ~ 
&&&!*■ 
problems  an  Allende  regime  would  pose  for  the  U.S.,  including  recog- 
nition of  Cuba,  possible  withdrawal  from  the  OAS,  the  deterioration 
of  relations  with  Argentina,  and  anti-U.S.

votes  in  the  United  Nations.

The  NIE  predicted,  however,  that  Ailende  would  probably  not  seek  a 
break  with  the  United  States  over  the  next  two  years.

A   1971  NIE,  issued  ten  months  into  Allende’s  term  in  office,  stated 
that  U.S.-Chilean  relations  were  dominated  by  the  problems  of  na- 
tionalization, although  Allende  himself  seemed  to  wish  to  avoid  a 
confrontation.

A   1972  Chile  NIE  noted  that  Allende,  to  date,  had 
sought  to  avoid  irreparable  damage  to  his  relations  with  Washing- 
ton.

Although  the  major  problem  concerning  U.S.-Chilean  relations 
continued  to  be  that  of  compensation  for  the  nationalization  of  U.S.

companies,  the  1972  NIE  stated  that  Allende  had  taken  pains  to  pub- 
licly stress  his  desire  for  amicable  relations.

A   1973  NIE  concluded 
that  Allende  had  kept  lines  open  to  Washington  on  possible  Chilean 
compensation  for  expropriated  U.S.

copper  companies.

C.

ALLENDE ?S  RELATIONS  WITH  SOCIALIST  COUNTRIES 
The  1969  Chile  NIE  predicted  that  any  new  administration  would 
explore  somewhat  broader  relations  with  communist  and  socialist 
countries.

The  NIE  noted  that  Allende,  in  particular,  would  take 
such  steps  but  that  even  he  would  be  deterred  from  moving  too  far 
in  this  direction  due  to  a   Chilean  nationalism  which  would  as  strongly 
oppose  subordinating  Chile  to  the  tutelage  of  Moscow  or  Havana  as 
to  Washington.

Allende  did,  over  the  years,  expand  Chile’s  relations 
with  socialist  and  communist  countries.The  NIE  noted  that  Allende,  in  particular,  would  take 
such  steps  but  that  even  he  would  be  deterred  from  moving  too  far 
in  this  direction  due  to  a   Chilean  nationalism  which  would  as  strongly 
oppose  subordinating  Chile  to  the  tutelage  of  Moscow  or  Havana  as 
to  Washington.

Allende  did,  over  the  years,  expand  Chile’s  relations 
with  socialist  and  communist  countries.

However,  Allende  was,  as 
a   1971  NIE  stated,  careful  not  to  subordinate  Chilean  interests  to  any 
communist  or  socialist  power  or  to  break  existing  ties  with  non-com- 
munist nations  on  whom  he  continued  to  rely  for  aid.

Chile  NIEs  in 
1971  and  1972  emphasized  that  Allende  was  charting  an  independent, 
nationalistic  course,  both  within  the  hemisphere  and  internationally.

Allende  was,  in  short,  committed  to  a   policy  of  non-alignment.

D.

ALLENDE’S  TIES  WITH  CUBA 
The  1970  NIE  on  Chile  predicted  that  Allende  would  recognize 
Cuba.

He  did  so,  shortly  after  he  was  inaugurated.

However,  the  pat- 
tern of  Chilean-Cuban  relations  was  described  in  a   1971  NIE  as  one 
of  ideological  distance  and  closer  economic  ties.

The  NIE  stated  that 
despite  Allende’s  long-standing  personal  relationship  with  Castro,  he 
had  refrained  from  excessive  overtures  to  him.

A   1972  NIE  noted 
that  Havana  had  been  circumspect  about  trying  to  use  Chile  as  a   base 
for  promoting  revolution  throughout  Latin  America.

E.

SOVIET  INFLUENCE  IN  CHILE 
Concern  about  the  expansion  of  Soviet  influence  in  Chile  under 
Allende  and  the  possible  establishment  of  a   major  Soviet  military 
presence  was  expressed  in  1970.--- PAGE BREAK ---

E. SOVIET  INFLUENCE  IN  CHILE 
Concern  about  the  expansion  of  Soviet  influence  in  Chile  under 
Allende  and  the  possible  establishment  of  a   major  Soviet  military 
presence  was  expressed  in  1970. A   1971  NIE  predicted  that  although 
the  Soviet  Union  would  continue  to  cultivate  channels  of  influence  into 
Allende’s  government  through  the  Chilean  Communist  Party,  it  would 
probably  be  unsure  of  its  ability  to  make  a   decisive  impact  on  key 
. I 
  Mg 
■

--- PAGE BREAK ---"   ,Jv8fc>  ■ ' 
mm&im 
lii 
47 
issues  given  Allende's  desire  for  an  independent  posture.

The  same 
NIE  noted  that  neither  Allende  nor  the  Chilean  military  establish- 
ment would  probably  tolerate  a   permanent  Soviet  military  presence 
in  Chile.

A   1972  Chile  NIE  focused  on  the  Soviet  attitude  to  the 
Allende  regime  and  noted  that  Soviet  overtures  to  Allende  had  thus 
far  been  characterized  by  caution  and  restraint.

This  was,  in  part, 
due  to  Soviet  reluctance  to  antagonize  the  U.S.

and,  more  importantly, 
a   Soviet  desire  to  avoid  with  Allende  the  type  of  open-ended  commit- 
ment for  aid  that  they  had  entered  into  with  Castro.

A   1972  Intelli- 
gence.

Note,  prepared  by  the  State  Department,  stated  that  a   Soviet- 
Chilean  communique,  issued  following  Allende’s  December  visit  to  the 
USSR,  reflected  Moscow’s  decision  to  continue  a   cautious  policy  to- 
ward Chile  and  to  avoid  a   major  open-ended  commitment  of  aid  to 
Allende.

According  to  the  Intelligence  Note,  the  Soviets  apparently  ad- 
vised Allende  to  negotiate  his  differences  with  the  U.S.

F.

CHILE  AS  A   BASE  FOR  LATIN  AMERICAN  SUBVERSION 
Prior  to  Allende’s  election,  concern  was  expressed  about  Chilean 
subversion  in  other  countries.

An  Intelligence  Memorandum,  prepared 
by  the  CIA  and  issued  shortly  after  Allende’s  September  4  plurality 
victory,  stated  that  Chile  had  long  been  a   relatively  open  country  for 
extreme  leftists  and  would  become  even  more  so  under  Allende.

The 
Memorandum  noted,  however,  that  Allende  would  be  cautious  in  pro- 
viding assistance  to  extremists  for  fear  of  provoking  a   military  reac- 
tion in  his  own  country.An  Intelligence  Memorandum,  prepared 
by  the  CIA  and  issued  shortly  after  Allende’s  September  4  plurality 
victory,  stated  that  Chile  had  long  been  a   relatively  open  country  for 
extreme  leftists  and  would  become  even  more  so  under  Allende.

The 
Memorandum  noted,  however,  that  Allende  would  be  cautious  in  pro- 
viding assistance  to  extremists  for  fear  of  provoking  a   military  reac- 
tion in  his  own  country.

The  Memorandum  went  on  to  observe  that  the 
degree  to  which  revolutionary  groups  would  be  allowed  to  use  Chile 
as  a   base  of  operations  would  be  limited  to  some  extent  by  the  orthodox 
Communist  Party  in  Chile  which  opposed  violence-prone  groups.

A 
State  Department  Intelligence  Note,  prepared  in  June  1971,  stated 
that,  contrary  to  some  earlier  indications  that  Allende  might  provide 
clandestine  assistance  to  neighboring  insurgency  movements,  evidence 
to  date  suggested  that  he  had  been  sensitive  to  the  concerns  of  neigh- 
boring governments  and  had  sought  to  avoid  action  which  woidd 
strain  bilateral  relations.

The  Intelligence  Note  stated  that  Chile  had 
warned  Argentine  and  Mexican  expatriates  that  they  could  reside  in 
Chile  only  if  they  did  not  engage  in  political  activities  and  that  some 
of  the  more  politically  active  Brazilian  exiles  had  been  encouraged  to 
depart  Chile.

The  Note  concluded  by  predicting  that  it  was  unlikely 
that  Allende  would  provide  financial  support  or  training  to  facilitate 
the  export  of  insurgency.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The  Intelligence  Note  stated  that  Chile  had 
warned  Argentine  and  Mexican  expatriates  that  they  could  reside  in 
Chile  only  if  they  did  not  engage  in  political  activities  and  that  some 
of  the  more  politically  active  Brazilian  exiles  had  been  encouraged  to 
depart  Chile. The  Note  concluded  by  predicting  that  it  was  unlikely 
that  Allende  would  provide  financial  support  or  training  to  facilitate 
the  export  of  insurgency. A   1972  NIE  stated  that  Allende  had  gone 
to  great  lengths  to  convmce  his  Latin  American  neighbors  that  he  did 
not  share  Castro’s  revolutionary  goals;  although  some  revolutionaries 
in  Chile  had  received  arms  and  funds  from  extremists  in  Allende’s 
political  coalition,  this  had  probably  not  occurred  at  his  behest. G. THREAT  ASSESSMENT 
The  most  direct  statement  concerning  the  threat  an  Allende  regime 
would  pose  to  the  United  States  was  contained  in  a   CIA  Intelligence 
Memorandum,  issued  shortly  after  Allende’s  September  4   election  vic- 
tory. The  Memorandum  summarized  tho  views  of  the  Interdepart- 
mental Group  for  Inter-American  Affairs,  which  prepared  the  re- 
■ 
 •

--- PAGE BREAK ---v 
48 
spouse  to  National  Security  Study  Memorandum  97.

The  Group,  made 
up  of  officials  representing  CIA,  State,  Defense,  and  the  White  House, 
concluded  that  the  United  States  had  no  vital  interests  within  Chile, 
the  world  military  balance  of  power  would  not  be  significantly  altered 
bv  an  Allende  regime,  and  an  Allende  victory  in  Chile  would  not  pose 
any  likely  threat  to  the  peace  of  the  region.

The  Group  noted,  however, 
that  an  Allende  victory  would  threaten  hemispheric  cohesion  and 
would  represent  a   psychological  setback  to  the  U.fe.

as  well  as  a   definite 
advance  for  the  Marxist  idea.

g.

Estimates  and  Covert  Action 
As  a   result  of  this  look  at  the  Chile  estimates,  a   number  of  comments 
can  be  made  concerning  them  and  their  relation  to  decisions  about 
t0(a)fc  Despite  the  view  expressed  by  the  Interdepartmental  Group, 
and  reported  in  a   CIA  Intelligence  Memorandum,  that  the  U.S.

had 
no  vital  national  interest  in  Chile,  the  decision  was  made  by  the  Execu- 
tive Branch  to  intervene  in  that  nation’s  internal  political  and  economic 
affairs,  before  the  election,  between  it  and  the  congressional  vote  and 
during  Allende’s  tenure  in  office.

.

.

.

, 
It  appeal's  that  the  Chile  NIEs  were  either,  at  best,  selectively  used 
or,  at  worst,  disregarded  by  policy  makers  when  the  time  came  to  make 
decisions  regarding  U.S.

covert  involvement  in  Chile.

40  Committee 
decisions  regarding  Chile  reflected  greater  concern  about  the  internal 
and  international  consequences  of  an  Allende  government  than  was  re- 
flected in  the  intelligence  estimates.

At  the  same  time  as  the  Chile 
NIEs  were  becoming  less  shrill,  the  40  Committee  authorized  greater 
amounts  of  money  for  covert  operations  in  Chile.40  Committee 
decisions  regarding  Chile  reflected  greater  concern  about  the  internal 
and  international  consequences  of  an  Allende  government  than  was  re- 
flected in  the  intelligence  estimates.

At  the  same  time  as  the  Chile 
NIEs  were  becoming  less  shrill,  the  40  Committee  authorized  greater 
amounts  of  money  for  covert  operations  in  Chile.

The  amounts  author- 
ized by  the  40  Committee  rose  from  $1.5  million  in  1970  to  $3.6  million 
in  1971  $2.5  million  in  1972,  and,  during  the  first  eight  months  ox  1 J  <  3, 
$1.2  million.

Covert  action  decisions  were  not,  in  short,  entirely  con- 
sistent with  intelligence  estimates.

.

.

....

.

(b)  45  noted,  NIEs  are  designed  to  provide  economic  and  political 
assessments  and  an  analysis  of  trends.

As  such,  they  are  vulnerable 
^   1 
 1"  _   1   
1   ^ 
 AllC 
to  being  interpreted  by  policymakers  to  support  whatever  conclusions 
’  polFcymakers  wish  to  draw  from  them.

Thi 
*     
i-1   
    ^ -C  iivt/tonfninfTT  oVimil 
the  policymakers  wish  to  draw  trom  tnem.

me  estimates  do,  however, 
serve  to  narrow  the  range  of  uncertainty  about  future  events  in  Chile, 
and  thus  narrow  the  range  of  justifiable  U.S.

policies.

But  a   range 
^For  example,  a   1971  estimate  stated  that,  on  the  one  hand,  Allende 
was  moving  skillfully  and  confidently  toward  his  declared  goal  oi 
building  a   re  volutionary  nationalistic,  socialist  society  on  Marxist  prin- 
ciples, but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  consolidation  of  the  Marxist  politi- 
cal leadership  in  Chile  was  not  inevitable,  and  Allende.

had  a   long, 
hard  way  to  go  to  achieve  this.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But  a   range 
^For  example,  a   1971  estimate  stated  that,  on  the  one  hand,  Allende 
was  moving  skillfully  and  confidently  toward  his  declared  goal  oi 
building  a   re  volutionary  nationalistic,  socialist  society  on  Marxist  prin- 
ciples, but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  consolidation  of  the  Marxist  politi- 
cal leadership  in  Chile  was  not  inevitable,  and  Allende. had  a   long, 
hard  way  to  go  to  achieve  this. As  a   further  example,  a   1973  NIE  which 
addressed  the  possibility  of  enhanced  Soviet  influence  in  Chile  stated 
that  the  Soviets  were  interested  both  in  increasing  their  influence  m 
South  America  and  in  Allende’s  successful  coalition  of  leftist  parties 
as  a   model  for  a   Marxist  revolution  through  election. Yet,  the  estimate 
went  on  to  say  that  the  Soviets  did  not  want  another  Cuba  on  their 
hands  and  they  were  reluctant  to  antagonize  the  U.S. ■ 
 '  •  7

--- PAGE BREAK ---49 
(c)  The  Committee  has  determined  that  the  analysts  responsible 
for  drawing  up  the  Chile  NIEs  were  not  privy  to  information  con- 
cerning covert  operations  approved  by  the  40  Committee  and  being 
implemented  in  Chile  by  the  CIA  operators.

The  explanation  for  this 
is  CIA  compartmentation.

Analysts  and  operators  often  exist  in  sepa- 
rate worlds.

Information  available  to  the  Operations  Directorate  is 
not  always  available  to  the  Intelligence  Directorate.

As  a   result,  those 
who*  were  responsible  for  preparing  NIEs  on  Chile  appear  not  to  have 
had  access  to  certain  information  which  could  have  added  to,  or  sub- 
stantially revised,  their  assessments  and  predictions.

That  flaw  was 
telling  It  meant,  for  example,  that  the  1972  assessment  of  the  durability 
of  opposition  sectors  was  written  without  knowledge  of  covert  Ameri- 
can funding  of  precisely  those  sectors.

Thus,  there  was  no  estimate  of 
whether  those  sectors  would  survive  absent  U.S.

money.

C.

Congressional  Oversight 
With  regard  to  covert  action  in  Chile  between  April  1964  and  Decem- 
ber 1974  CIA’s  consultation  with  its  Congressional  oversight  com- 
mittees—^-and  thus  Congress’  exercise  of  its  oversight  function — was 
inadequate.

The  CIA  did  not  volunteer  detailed  information ;   Congress 
most  of  ten  did  not  seek  it.

Beginning  in  1973,  numerous  public  allegations  were  made  concern- 
ing activities  undertaken  by  the  CIA  in  Chile.

In  response.

Congress 
began  to  assume  greater  control  in  the  exercise  of  its  oversight  func- 
tion  which  it  had  badly  neglected  in  the  past — both  in  the  number 
and  depth  of  consultations  with  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency.In  response.

Congress 
began  to  assume  greater  control  in  the  exercise  of  its  oversight  func- 
tion  which  it  had  badly  neglected  in  the  past — both  in  the  number 
and  depth  of  consultations  with  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency.

Prior 
to  19731  there  were  twenty  meetings  between  Congressional  committees 
and' the  CIA  regarding  Chile;  these  meetings  were  held  with  the 
House  and  Senate  Armed  Services  and  Appropriation  Committees 
in  their  Intelligence  Subcommittees.

From  March  1973  to  December 
1974  there  were  thirteen  meetings  held  not  only  with  these  Commit- 
tees but  also  before  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Subcommittee  on 
Multinational  Corporations  and  the  House  Foreign  Affairs  Subcom- 
mittee on  In  ter- American  Affairs.

Rased  on  CIA  records,  there  were  a   total  of  fifty-three  CIA  Con- 
gressional briefings  on  Chile  between  1964  and  1974.

At  thirty-one 
of  these  meetings,  there  was  some  discussion  of  covert  action;  special 
releases  of  funds  for  covert  action  were  discussed  at  twenty-three  of 
them  After  January  1973  these  briefings  were  concerned  with  past 
CIA  covert  activity!

From  information  currently  in  the  possession 
of  "the  Committee  and  public  sources,  several  tentative  conclusions 
emerge-  on  several  important  occasions  the  CIA  did  not  report  on 
covert  action  until  quite  long  after  the  fact;  and  in  one  case— Track 
n__it  omitted  discussion  of  an  important,  closely  held  operation, 
but  oiio  whose  outcome  reverberated  on  the  foreign  policy  of  the 
United  States  and  carried  implications  for  domestic  affairs  as  well.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At  thirty-one 
of  these  meetings,  there  was  some  discussion  of  covert  action;  special 
releases  of  funds  for  covert  action  were  discussed  at  twenty-three  of 
them  After  January  1973  these  briefings  were  concerned  with  past 
CIA  covert  activity! From  information  currently  in  the  possession 
of  "the  Committee  and  public  sources,  several  tentative  conclusions 
emerge-  on  several  important  occasions  the  CIA  did  not  report  on 
covert  action  until  quite  long  after  the  fact;  and  in  one  case— Track 
n__it  omitted  discussion  of  an  important,  closely  held  operation, 
but  oiio  whose  outcome  reverberated  on  the  foreign  policy  of  the 
United  States  and  carried  implications  for  domestic  affairs  as  well. Of  the  thirty-three  covert  action  projects  undertaken  in  Chile  with 
40  Committee  approval  during  the  period  1963-1974,  Congress  was 
briefed  in  some  fashion  on  eight.3  Presumbly  the  twenty-five  others 
were  undertaken  without  Congressional  consultation. These  twenty- 
J 
 action  622  of  the  Foreign  Assistance  Act  of  1974,  the  Director  of  Central 
Tntniu^nm'p8  1r  required  to  notify  six  Congressional  oversight  committees  of  every  40 
anDroval  once  the  President  has  issued  a   finding  that  the  project  Is  necessary 
for ““^natlSSSl  »I?urlty  of  the  United  States. - 
 • 
■  ■ 
 " 
 ■ 
*’  V’X; 
.Vov,  .'V  Y  s 
 . -Sf. v  A\)yy.-'  'V,  .'!■  •’SV' b'vV>vV. ,'v  . ' 
’  7  :V‘.

--- PAGE BREAK ---necessary 
for ““^natlSSSl  »I?urlty  of  the  United  States. - 
 • 
■  ■ 
 " 
 ■ 
*’  V’X; 
.Vov,  .'V  Y  s 
 . -Sf. v  A\)yy.-'  'V,  .'!■  •’SV' b'vV>vV. ,'v  . ' 
’  7  :V‘.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

five  projects  included:  the  $1.2  million  authorization  in  1971,  half  of 
which  was  spent  to  purchase  radio  stations  and  newspaperewhdethe 
the'  toti” ToC  thirteen  million  dollars  *^4  ton” 
ifter  the  fact)  on  projects  totaling  about  7.1  million  dollars.  Further, 
Congressional  oversight  committees  were  not  consulted  about  projects 
which  were  not  reviewed  by  the  full  40  Committee  One  ^  
these  was 
the  Track  II  attempt  to  foment  a   military  coup  in  1970.  The  other 
a   later  CIA  project  involving  contacts  with  Chilean  military  officers— 
was  an  intelligence  collection  project  and  thus  did  not  come  before  the 
40  Committee*  even  though  in  this  instance  the  political  importance  of 
the  project  was  clear. 
—   v> 
.  ■  • 
 mimm :   - 
 -p  ‘ 
 "   ■ 
 :   : 
••  -Aiv  .■  ■*- »1>£4&vv.v3  Jh-.’w1*.-  V-  ‘-’A  • 
 .   .  -r  i  * 
 3a  i.  '*  ic  '

--- PAGE BREAK ---V.

Preliminary  Conclusions 
Underlying  all  discussion  of  American  interference  in  the  internal 
affairs  of  Chile  is  the  basic  question  of  why  the  United  States  ini- 
tially mounted  such  an  extensive  covert  action  program  in  Chile — and 
why  it  continued,  and  even  expanded,  in  the  early  19  <   Os.

Covert  action  has  been  a   key  element  of  U.S.

foreign  policy  toward 
Chile.

The  link  between  covert  action  and  foreign  policy  was  obvious 
throughout  the  decade  between  1961:  and  1974.

In  1964,  the  United 
States  commitment  to  democratic  reform  via  the  Alliance  for  Progress 
and  overt  foreign  aid  was  buttressed  via  covert  support  for  the  elec- 
tion of  the  candidate  of  the  Christian  Democratic  party,  a   candidate 
and  a   party  for  which  the  Alliance  seemed  tailor  made.

During  19(0 
the  U.S.

Government  tried,  covertly,  to  prevent  Allende  from  becom- 
ing President  of  Chile.

When  that  failed,  covert  support  to  his  oppo- 
sition formed  one  of  a   triad  of  official  actions :   covert  aid  to  opposition 
forces,  “cool  but  correct”  diplomatic  posture,  and  economic  pressure.

From  support  of  what  the  United  States  considered  to  be  democratic 
and  progressive  forces  in  Chile  we  had  moved  finally  to  advocating 
and  encouraging  the  overthrow  of  a   democratically  elected  govem- 
ment.

__  _   _ 
A.

Covert  Action  and  U.S.

Foreign  Polict 
In  1964,  the  United  States  became  massively  involved  in  covert 
activity  in  Chile.

This  involvement  was  seen  by  U.S.

policy-makers  as 
consistent  with  overall  American  foreign  policy  and  the  goals  of  the 
Alliance  for  Progress.

The  election  of  a   moderate  left  candidate  in 
Chile  was  a   cornerstone  of  U.S.

policy  toward  Latin  America.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The  election  of  a   moderate  left  candidate  in 
Chile  was  a   cornerstone  of  U.S. policy  toward  Latin  America. It  is  unclear  from  the  record  whether  the  1964  election  project  was 
intended  to  be  a   one-time  intervention  in  support  of  a   good  cause. It 
is  clear  that  the  scale  of  the  involvement  generated  commitments  and 
expectations  on  both  sides. For  the  United  States,  it  created  assets 
and  channels  of  funding  which  could  be  used  again. For  the  Chilean 
groups  receiving  CIA  funds,  that  funding  became  an  expectation, 
counted  upon. Thus,  when  opposition  to  Allende  became  the  primary 
objective  of  covert  action  in  1970,  the  structure  for  covert  action  de- 
veloped through  covert  assistance  to  political  parties  in  1964  was  well 
established. A   fundamental  question  raised  by  the  pattern  of  U.S. covert  acti- 
vities persists :   Did  the  threat  to  vital  U.S. national  security  interests 
-posed  oy  the  Presidency  of  Salvador  Allende  justify  the  several  major 
covert  attempts  to  prevent  his  accession  to  power ? Three  American 
Presidents  and  their  senior  advisors  evidently  thought  so. One  rationale  for  covert  intervention  in  Chilean  politics  was  spelled 
out  by  Henry  Kissinger  in  his  background  briefing  to  the  press  on 
September  16,  1970,  the  day  after  Nixon’s  meeting  with  Helms. He 
argued  that  an  Allende  victory  would  be  irreversible  within  Chile, 
might  affect  neighboring  nations  and  would  pose  “massive  problems” 
for  the  U.S. in  Latin  America : 
(51) 
s 
% 
UK

--- PAGE BREAK ---‘V  lUwWwWIW  muV...

:t flfaUM!

j‘tw>i>u‘wii)ri>^i 
52 
I  have  yet  to  meet  somebody  who  firmly  believes  that  if  Allende 
wins,  there  is  likely  to  be  another  free  election  in  Chile.

.

...

Now  it 
is  fairly  easy  for  one  to  predict  that  if  Allende  wins,  there  is  a   good 
chance  that  he  will  establish  over  a   period  of  years  some  sort  of 
communist  government.

In  that  case,  we  would  have  one  not  on  an 
island  off  the  coast  (Cuba)  which  has  not  a   traditional  relation- 
ship and  impact  on  Latin  America,  but  in  a   major  Latin  American 
country  you  would  have  a   communist  government,  joining,  for 
example,  Argentine  .

.

.

Peru  .

.

.

and  Bolivia.

.

.

.

So  I  don't  think 
we  should  delude  ourselves  on  anAllende  takeover  and  Chile  would 
not  present  massive  problems  for  us,  and  for  democratic  forces 
and  for  pro-U.S.

forces  in  Latin  America,  and  indeed  to  the  whole 
Western  Hemisphere.

> 
 .

Another  rationale  for  U.S.

involvement  in  the  internal  affairs  of 
Chile  was  offered  by  a   high-ranking  official  who  testified  before  the 
Committee.

He  spoke  of  Chile’s  position  in  a   worldwide  .strategic  chess 
game  in  1970.

In  this  analogy,  Portugal  might  be  a   bishop,  Chile  a 
couple  of  pawns,  perhaps  more.

In  the  worldwide  strategic  chess 
game,  once  a   position  was  lost,  a   series  of  consequences  followed.

U.S.

enemies  would  proceed  to  exploit  the  new  opportunity,  and.our  ability 
to  cope  with  the  challenge  would  be  limited  by  any  American  loss.

B.

Executive  Command  and  Control  of  Major  Covert  Action 
In  pursuing  the  Chilean  chess  game,  particularly.

the  efforts  to  pre- 
vent Allende’s  accession  to  power  or  his  maintaining  power  once 
elected,  Executive  command  and  control  of  major  covert  action  was 
tight  and  well  directed.Executive  Command  and  Control  of  Major  Covert  Action 
In  pursuing  the  Chilean  chess  game,  particularly.

the  efforts  to  pre- 
vent Allende’s  accession  to  power  or  his  maintaining  power  once 
elected,  Executive  command  and  control  of  major  covert  action  was 
tight  and  well  directed.

Procedures  within  the  CIA  for  controlling 
the  programs  were  well  defined  and  the  procedures  made  Station  of- 
ficials accountable  to  their  supervisors  in  Washington.

Unilateral  ac- 
tions on  the  part  of  the  Station  were  virtually  impossible.

But  the  central  issue  of  command  and  control  is  accountability.

procedures  for  insuring  that  covert  actions  are  and  remain  accountable 
both  to  the  senior  political  and  foreign  policy  officials  of  the  Executive 
Branch  and  to  the  Congress.

The  record  of  covert  activities  in  Chile  suggests  that,  although  es- 
tablished executive  processes  of  authorization  and  control  were  gen- 
erally adhered  to,  there  were — and  remain — genuine  shortcomings  to 
these  processes : 
 .

.

Decisions  about  which  covert  action  projects  are  submitted  to  the  40 
Committee  were  and  are  made  within  the  CIA.

on  the  basis  of  the 
Agency’s  determination  of  the  political  sensitivity  of  a   project.

The  form  in  which  covert  action  projects  were  cleared  with  Ambas- 
sadors and  other  State  Department  officials  varied.

It  depended — and 
still  depends — on  how  interested  Ambassadors  are  and  how  forthcom- 
ing their  Station  Chiefs  are.

Once  major  projects  are  approved  by  the  40  Committee,  they  often 
continue  without  searching  re-examination  by  the  Committee.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It  depended — and 
still  depends — on  how  interested  Ambassadors  are  and  how  forthcom- 
ing their  Station  Chiefs  are. Once  major  projects  are  approved  by  the  40  Committee,  they  often 
continue  without  searching  re-examination  by  the  Committee. The 
Agency  conducts  annual  reviews  of  on-going  projects,  but  the  40  Com- 
mittee” does  not  undertake  a   review  unless  a   project  is  recommended 
for  renewal,  or  there  is  some  important  change  in  content  or  amount. There  is  also  the  problem  of  controlling  clandestine  projects  not 
labeled  “covert  action.”  Clandestine  collection  of  human  intelligence 
r.V.7. ifgg

--- PAGE BREAK ---■■ 
is  not  the  subject  of  40  Committee  review.

But  those  projects  may  be 
just  as  politically  sensitive  as  a   “covert  action”;  witness  U.S.

contacts 
with  the  Chilean  military  during  1970-73.

Similarly,  for  security 
reasons,  ambassadors  generally  know  CIA  assets  only  by  general  de- 
scription, not  by  name.

That  practice  may  be  acceptable,  provided 
the  description  is  detailed  enough  to  inform  the  ambassador  of  the 
risk  posed  by  the  development  of  a   particular  assets  and  to  allow 
the  ambassador  to  decide  whether  or  not  that  asset  should  be  used.

There  remains  the  question  of  the  dangers  which  arise  when  the 
very  mechanisms  established  by  the  Executive  Branch  for  insuring 
internal  accountability  are  circumvented  or  f  
rustrated.

By  Presidential  instruction,  Track  II  was  to  be  operated  without 
informing  the  U.S.

Ambassador  in  Santiago,  the  State  Department, 
or  any  40  Committee  member  save  Henry  Kissinger.

The  President 
and  his  senior  advisors  thus  denied  themselves  the  (jovernment’s  major 
sources  of  counsel  about  Chilean  politics.

And  the  Ambassador  in 
Santiago  was  left  in  the  position  of  having  to  deal  with  any  adverse 
political  spill-over  from  a   project  of  which  he  was  not  informed.

The  danger  was  greater  still.

Whatever  the  truth  about  communica- 
tion between  the  CIA  and  the  White  House  after  October  15, 1970 — 
an  issue  which  is  the  subject  of  conflicting  testimony — all  participants 
agreed  that  Track  II  constituted  a   broad  mandate  to  the  CIA.

The 
Agency  was  given  to  believe  it  had  virtual  carte  blanche  authority ; 
moreover,  it  felt  under  extreme  pressure  to  prevent  Allende  from  com- 
ing to  power,  by  military  coup  if  necessary.Whatever  the  truth  about  communica- 
tion between  the  CIA  and  the  White  House  after  October  15, 1970 — 
an  issue  which  is  the  subject  of  conflicting  testimony — all  participants 
agreed  that  Track  II  constituted  a   broad  mandate  to  the  CIA.

The 
Agency  was  given  to  believe  it  had  virtual  carte  blanche  authority ; 
moreover,  it  felt  under  extreme  pressure  to  prevent  Allende  from  com- 
ing to  power,  by  military  coup  if  necessary.

It  was  given  little  guid- 
ance about  what  subsequent  clearances  it  needed  to  obtain  from 
the  White  House.

Under  these  conditions,  CIA  consultation  with  the 
White  House  in  advance  of  specific  actions  was  less  than  meticulous.

C.

The  Role  of  Congress 
In  the  hands  of  Congress  rests  the  responsibility  for  insuring  that 
the  Executive  Branch  is  held  to  full  political  accountability  for  covert 
activities.

The  record  on  Chile  is  mixed  and  muted  by  its  incomplete- 
ness.

CIA  records  note  a   number  of  briefings  of  Congressional  commit- 
tees about  covert  action  in  Chile.

Those  records,  however,  do  not  re- 
veal the  timeliness  or  the  level  of  detail  of  these  briefings.

Indeed,  the 
record  suggests  that  the  briefings  were  often  after  the  fact  and  in- 
complete.

"The  situation  improved  after  1973,  apparently  as  Congres- 
sional committees  became  more  persistent  in  the  exercise  of  their  over- 
sight function.

Furthermore,  Sec.

662  of  the  Foreign  Assistance  Act 
should  make  it  impossible  for  major  projects  to  be  operated  without 
the  appropriate  Congressional  committees  being  informed.

The  record  leaves  unanswered  a   number  of  questions.

These  per- 
tain both  to  how  forthcoming  the  Agency  was  and  how  interested 
and  persistent  the  Congressional  committees  were.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The  record  leaves  unanswered  a   number  of  questions. These  per- 
tain both  to  how  forthcoming  the  Agency  was  and  how  interested 
and  persistent  the  Congressional  committees  were. Were  members 
of  Congress,  for  instance,  given  the  opportunity  to  object  to  specific 
projects  before  the  projects  were  implemented? Did  they  want  to? There  is  also  an  issue  of  jurisdiction. CIA  and  State  Department 
officials  have  taken  the  position  that  they  are  authorized  to  reveal 
Agency  operations  only  to  the  appropriate  oversight  committees. .•JSK  ;V,V. ; 
■

--- PAGE BREAK ---•  .

•  <*.•'  ■ 
 ••  •.

:%$kyy,±  j 
*-3 ;  v.v- 
5ipS^|« '  '-'i 
-  -V'  •.;•$>*  ■■ 
iii'i 
w'V  *  v   *v  iiv:  v<vvV&lV 
« 
.

ir“ 
54 
D.

Intelligence  Judgments  and  Covert  Operations 
A   review  of  the  intelligence  judgments  on  Chile  offered  by  TJ.S.

analysts  during  the  critical  period  from  1970-1973  has  not  established 
whether  these  judgments  were  taken  into  account  when  TJ.S.

P°hcy- 
makers  formulated  and  approved  TJ.S.

covert  operations.

This 
examination  of  the  relevant  intelligence  estimates  and  memoranda 
has  established  that  the  judgments  of  the  analysts  suggested  caution 
and  restraint  while  the  political  imperatives  demanded  action.

Even  within  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency,  processes  for  bring- 
ing considered  judgments  of  intelligence  analysts  to  bear  on  proposed 
covert  actions  were  haphazard — and  generally  ineffective.

1  his  situa- 
tion has  improved ;   covert  action  proposals  now  regularly  come  before 
the  Deputy  Director  for  Intelligence  and  the  appropriate  National 
Intelligence  Officer;  but  the  operators  still  are  separated  from  the 
intelligence  analysts,  those  whose  exclusive  business  it  is  to  understand 
and  predict  foreign  politics.

For  instance,  the  analysts  who  drafted  the 
government’s  most  prestigious  intelligence  analyses— NIEs— may  not 
even  have  known  of  TJ.S.

covert  actions  in  Chile.

The  Chilean  experience  does  suggest  that  the  Committee  give  ser- 
ious consideration  to  the  possibility  that  lodging  the  responsibility 
for  national  estimates  and  conduct  of  operational  activities  with  the 
same  person— the  Director  of  Central  Intelligence— creates  an  in- 
herent conflict  of  interest  and  judgment.

E.The  Chilean  experience  does  suggest  that  the  Committee  give  ser- 
ious consideration  to  the  possibility  that  lodging  the  responsibility 
for  national  estimates  and  conduct  of  operational  activities  with  the 
same  person— the  Director  of  Central  Intelligence— creates  an  in- 
herent conflict  of  interest  and  judgment.

E.

Effects  of  Major  Covert  Action  Programs 
Covert  Action  programs  as  costly  and  as  complex  as  several  mounted 
by  the  United  States  in  Chile  are  unlikely  to  remain  covert.

In  Chile 
in  1964,  there  was  simply  too  much  unexplained  money,  too  many 
leaflets,  too  many  broadcasts.

That  the  United  States  was  involved  m 
the  election  has  been  taken  for  granted  in  Latin  America  for  many 
^The  involvement  in  1964  created  a   presumption  in  Chile  and  else- 
where in  Latin  America  that  the  United  States  Government  would 
a   train  be  involved  in  1970.

This  made  secrecy  still  harder  to  maitain, 
even  though  the  CIA  involvement  was  much  smaller  in  1970  than 
it  had  been  in  1964.

.

When  covert  actions  in  Chile  became  public  knowledge,  the  costs 
were  obvious-  The  United  States  was  seen,  by  its  covert  actions,  to 
have  contradicted  not  only  its  official  declarations  but  its  treaty  com- 
mitments and  principles  of  long  standing.

At  the  same  time  it  was 
proclaiming  a   alow  profile”  in  Latin  American  relations,  the  U.S.

Government  was  seeking  to  foment  a   coup  in  Chile.

The  costs  of  major  covert  ventures  which  are  “blown”  are  clear 
enough.

But  there  may  be  costs  to  pay  even  if  the  operations  could 
remain  secret  for  long  periods  of  time.

Some  of  these  costs  may 
accrue  even  within  the  calculus  of  covert  operations:  successes  may 
turn  to  failures.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But  there  may  be  costs  to  pay  even  if  the  operations  could 
remain  secret  for  long  periods  of  time. Some  of  these  costs  may 
accrue  even  within  the  calculus  of  covert  operations:  successes  may 
turn  to  failures. Several  officials  from  whom  the  Committee  took 
testimony  suggested  that  the  poor  showing  of  the  Chilean  Christian 
Democrats  in  1970  was,  in  some  part,  attributable  to  previous  Ameri- 
can covert  support. Of  course  there  were  many  causes  of  that  poor 
showing,  but  in  1964  the  PDC  had  been  spared  the  need  of  develop- 
Sv  *-  £  
v

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing  some  of  its  own  grass  roots  organization.

The  CIA  did  much  of 
that  for  it.

In  1970,  with  less  CIA  activity  on  behalf  of  the  Christian 
Democratic  Party,  the  PDC  faltered.

Of  course,  the  more  important  costs,  even  of  covert  actions  which 
remain  secret,  are  those  to  American  ideals  of  relations  among  nations 
and  of  constitutional  government.

In  the  case  of  Chile,  some  of  those 
costs  were  far  from  abstract:  witness  the  involvement  of  United 
States  military  officers  in  the  Track  II  attempt  to  overthrow  a   con- 
stitutionally-elected civilian  government.

There  are  also  long-term  effects  of  covert  actions.

Many  of  those 
may  be  adverse.

They  touch  American  as  well  as  foreign  institutions.

The  Chilean  institutions  that  the  United  States  most  favored  may 
have  been  discredited  within  their  own  societies  by  the  fact  of  their 
covert  support.

In  Latin  America  particularly,  even  the  suspicion  of 
CIA  support  may  be  the  kiss  of  death.

It  would  be  the  final  irony  of 
a   decade  of  covert  action  in  Chile  if  that  action  destroyed  the  credi- 
bility of  the  Chilean  Christian  Democrats.

The  effects  on  American  institutions  are  less  obvious  but  no  less  im- 
portant.

U.S.

private  and  governmental  institutions  with  overt,  legiti- 
mate purposes  of  their  own  may  have  been  discredited  by  the 
pervasiveness  of  covert  action.

Even  if  particular  institutions  were  not 
involved  in  covert  action,  they  may  have  been  corrupted  in  the  percep- 
tion of  Latin  Americans  because  of  the  pervasiveness  of  clandestine 
U.S.

activity.

In  the  end,  the  whole  of  U.S.

policy  making  may  be  affected.

The 
availability  of  an  “extra”  means  may  alter  officials’  assessment  of  the 
costs  and  rationales  of  overt  policies.policy  making  may  be  affected.

The 
availability  of  an  “extra”  means  may  alter  officials’  assessment  of  the 
costs  and  rationales  of  overt  policies.

It  may  postpone  the  day  when 
outmoded  policies  are  abandoned  and  new  ones  adopted.

Arguably,  the 
1964  election  project  was  part  of  a   “progressive”  approach  to  Chile.

The  project  was  justified,  if  perhaps  not  actually  sustained,  by  the  de- 
sire to  elect  democratic  reformers.

By  1970,  covert  action  had  become 
completely  defensive  in  character :   to  prevent  the  election  of  Allende.

The  United  States  professed  a   “low  profile”  but  at  the  same  time  acted 
covertly  to  ensure  that  the  Chilean  elections  came  out  right,  “low  pro- 
file” notwithstanding.

A   special  case  for  concern  is  the  relationship  between  intelligence 
agencies  and  multinational  corporations.

In  1970,  U.S.

Government  policy  prohibited  covert  CIA  support  to 
a   single  party  or  candidate.

At  the  same  time,  the  CIA  provided  ad- 
vice to  an  American-based  multinational  corporation  on  how  to  fur- 
nish just  such  direct  support.

That  raised  all  of  the  dangers  of  ex- 
posure, and  eliminated  many  of  the  safeguards  and  controls  normally 
present  in  exclusively  CIA  covert  operations.

There  was  the  appear- 
ance of  an  improperly  close  relationship  between  the  CIA  and  multi- 
national companies  when  former  Director  John  McCone  used  contacts 
and  information  gained  while  at  the  CIA  to  advise  a   corporation  on 
whose  Board  of  Directors  lie  sat.

This  appearance  was  heightened  be- 
cause the  contacts  between  the  Agency  and  the  corporation  in  1970 
extended  to  discussing  and  even  planning  corporate  intervention  in 
the  Chilean  electoral  process.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There  was  the  appear- 
ance of  an  improperly  close  relationship  between  the  CIA  and  multi- 
national companies  when  former  Director  John  McCone  used  contacts 
and  information  gained  while  at  the  CIA  to  advise  a   corporation  on 
whose  Board  of  Directors  lie  sat. This  appearance  was  heightened  be- 
cause the  contacts  between  the  Agency  and  the  corporation  in  1970 
extended  to  discussing  and  even  planning  corporate  intervention  in 
the  Chilean  electoral  process. The  problem  of  cooperation  is  exacerbated  when  a   cooperating  com- 
pany— such  as  ITT — is  called  to  give  testimony  before  an  appropriate 
Congressional  Committee. The  Agency  may  then  be  confronted  with

--- PAGE BREAK ---when  a   cooperating  com- 
pany— such  as  ITT — is  called  to  give  testimony  before  an  appropriate 
Congressional  Committee. The  Agency  may  then  be  confronted  with

--- PAGE BREAK ---

w   -'  ™   —   w   .— -•'-^■•;r.  WT-  " 
■  ■.  ' 
 •■  ■  ■ 
 ' 
56 
the  question  of  whether  to  come  forward  to  set  the  record  straight 
when  it  believes  that  testimony  given  on  behalf  of  a   cooperating  com- 
pany is  untrue.  The  situation  is  difficult,  for  in  coming  forward  the 
Agency  may  reveal  sensitive  sources  and  methods  by  which  it  learned 
the  facts  or  may  make  public  the  existence  of  ongoing  covert 
OPTtos°report  does  not  attempt  to  offer  a   final  judgment  on  the  po- 
litical propriety,  the  morality,  or  even  the  effectiveness  of  American 
covert  activity  in  Chile.  Did  the  threat  posed  by  an  Allende  presidency 
justify  covert  American  involvement  in  Chile?  Did  it  justify  the  spe- 
cific and  unusual  attempt  to  foment  a   military  coup  to  deny  Allende 
the  presidency  ?   In  1970,  the  U.S.  sought  to  foster  a   military  coup 
in  Chile  to  prevent  Allende’s  accession  to  power;  yet  after  1970  the 
government — according  to  the  testimony  of  its  officials — did  not  en- 
gage in  coup  plotting.  Was  1970  a   mistake,  an  aberration?  Or  was  the 
threat  posed  to  the  national  security  interests  of  the  United  States  so 
orave  that  the  government  was  remiss  in  not  seeking  his  downfall  di- 
rectly during  1970-73?  What  responsibility  does  the  United  States 
bear  for  the  cruelty  and  political  suppression  that  have  become  the 
hallmark  of  the  present  regime  in  Chile  ? 
On  these  questions  Committee  members  may  differ.  So  may  Ameri- 
can citizens.  Yet  the  Committee’s  mandate  is  less  to  judge  the  past 
than  to  recommend  for  the  future.  Moving  from  past  cases  to  future 
guidelines,  what  is  important  to  note  is  that  covert  action  has  been 
perceived  as  a   middle  ground  between  diplomatic  representation  and 
the  overt  use  of  military  force.  In  the  case  of  Chile,  that  middle  ground 
may  have  been  far  too  broad.  Given  the  costs  of  covert  action,  it  should 
be  resorted  to  only  to  counter  severe  threats  to  the  national  security  of 
the  United  States.  It  is  far  from  clear  that  that  was  the  case  in  Chile.vert  action,  it  should 
be  resorted  to  only  to  counter  severe  threats  to  the  national  security  of 
the  United  States.  It  is  far  from  clear  that  that  was  the  case  in  Chile.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hould 
be  resorted  to  only  to  counter  severe  threats  to  the  national  security  of 
the  United  States.  It  is  far  from  clear  that  that  was  the  case  in  Chile.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mmm 
. 
V-  .-v:  -%;;S^i*--v?^  * 
Appendix 
CHRONOLOGY :  CHILE  1962-1975 1 
1962 
Special  Group  approves  $50,000  to  strengthen  Christian 
Democratic  Party  (PDC);  subsequently  approves  an 
additional  $180,000  to  strengthen  PDC  and  its  leader , 
Eduardo  Frei. 
1968 
April  8 
Special  Group  approves  $20,000  for  a   leader  of  Me  Radi- 
cal Party  (PR)  ;  later  approves  an  additional  $30,000 
to  support  PR  candidates  in  April  municipal  elections. 
Municipal  election  results  show  PDC  has  replaced  PR 
as  Chile’s  largest  party. 
1964 
April 
May 
September  4 
October  2 
Special  Group  approves  $8,000,000  to  ensure  election  of 
PDC  candidate  Eduardo  Frei . 
Special  Group  approves  $160,000  to  support  PDC  slum 
dwellers  and  peasant  organizations. 
Eduardo  Frei  elected  President  with  55.7  percent  of 
the  vote. 
Ralph  A.  Dungan  appointed  U.S .   Ambassador  to  Chile . 
1965 
March  7 
November  15 
808  Committee  approves  $175,000  to  assist  selected  can- 
didates in  Congressional  elections. 
PDC  wins  absolute  majority  in  Chamber  of  Deputies; 
becomes  largest  party  in  Senate. 
Salvador  Allende,  in  an  interview  reported  in  the  New 
York  Times ,  suggests  the  U.S.  was  among  certain 
“outside  forces’’  that  had  caused  his  defeat  in  the 
1964  presidential  election. 
1967 
Juyie  16 
Edward  M.  Korry  replaces  Ralph  A.  Dungan  as  U.S. 
Ambassador  to  Chile. 
808  Committee  approves  $80,000  to  strengthen  a   faction 
of  the  Radical  Party. 
1968 
July  12 
808  Committee  approves  $850,000  to  assist  selected  can- 
didates in  March  1969  congressional  elections. 
1969 
March  1 
April  15 
Congressional  elections  reflect  an  increase  in  support  for 
the  National  Party  and  a   resulting  loss  in  Christian 
Democratic  strength. 
At  a   meeting  of  the  808  Committee  the  question  is  raised 
as  to  whether  anything  should  be  done  with  regard  to 
the  September  1970  Presidential  election  in  Chile .  The 
CIA  representative  pointed  out  that  an  election  opera- 
tion would  not  be  effective  unless  an  early  enough 
start  was  made. 
1  U.S.  actions  are  italicized  throughout. 
(57) 
?he 
CIA  representative  pointed  out  that  an  election  opera- 
tion would  not  be  effective  unless  an  early  enough 
start  was  made. 
1  U.S.  actions  are  italicized  throughout. 
(57) 
?

--- PAGE BREAK ---& $ 
I  
^‘'-  V-'--'-"'^?': 
October  21 
March  25 
June 
June  21 
July  16 
August  18 
September  4 
September  8,  lit 
September  9 
September  15 
September  16 
September  29 
Tacna  and  Yungay  army  regiments  revolt,  ostensibly 
for  the  purposes  of  dramatizing  the  military's  demand 
for  higher  pay.

The  revolt,  engineered  by  General 
Roberto  Yiaux,  is  widely  interpreted  as  an  abortive 
coup.

1970 
40  Committee  approves  $125,000  for  a   “spoiling  oper- 
ation”  against  Allende’ 8   Popular  Unity  coalition  (UP).

The  possibility  of  an  Allende  victory  in  Chile  is  raised  at 
an  ITT  Board  of  Directors  meeting.

John  McCone , 
former  CIA  Director  and ,  at  the  time ,  a   consultant  to 
the  Agency  and  a   Director  of  ITT ,  subsequently  holds 
a   number  of  conversations  regarding  Chile  with  Rich- 
ard Helms ,  the  current  CIA  Director.

40  Committee  approves  $300,000  for  additional  anti - 
Allende  propaganda  operations.

John  McCone  arranges  for  William  Broe  (CIA)  to  talk 
with  Harold  Geneen  (ITT).

Broe  tells  Geneen  that 
CIA  cannot  disburse  ITT  funds  but  promises  to  ad- 
vise ITT  on  how  to  channel  its  own  funds.

ITT  later 
passes  $350,000  to  the  Alessandri  campaign  through 
an  intermediary.

National  Security  Study  Memorandum  (NSSM)  97  is 
reviewed  by  the  Interdepartmental  Group;  the  Group 
considers  options  ranging  from  efforts  to  forge  ami- 
cable relations  with  Allende  to  opposition  to  him.

Salvador  Allende  wins  36.3  percent  of  the  vote  in  the 
Presidential  election.

Final  outcome  is  dependent  on 
October  24  vote  in  Congress  between  Allende  and  the 
runner-up,  Jorge  Alessandri,  who  received  35.3  per- 
cent of  the  vote.

Allende’s  margin  of  victory  was 
39,000  votes  out  of  a   total  of  3,000,000  votes  cast  in 
the  election.

40  Committee  discusses  Chilean  situation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Allende’s  margin  of  victory  was 
39,000  votes  out  of  a   total  of  3,000,000  votes  cast  in 
the  election. 40  Committee  discusses  Chilean  situation. The  Commit- 
tee approves  $250,000  for  the  use  of  Ambassador 
Korry  to  influence  the  October  24  Congressional  vote. Harold  Geneen,  ITT’s  Chief  Executive  Officer ,  tells  John 
McCone  at  an  ITT  Board  of  Directors  meeting  in  Neto 
York  that  he  is  prepared  to  put  up  as  much  as  $1  mil- 
lion for  the  purpose  of  assisting  any  government  plan 
designed  to  form  a   coalition  in  the  Chilean  Congress  to 
stop  Allende. McCone  agrees  to  communicate  this 
proposal  to  high  Washington  officials  and  meets  sev- 
eral days  later  with  Henry  Kissinger  and  Richard 
Helms . McCone  does  not  receive  a   response  from  either 
man. President  Nixon  instructs  CIA  Director  Helms  to  pre- 
vent Allende’ 8   accession  to  office. The  CIA  is  to  play  a 
direct  role  in  organizing  a   military  coup  d’etat. This 
involvement  comes  to  be  known  as  Track  II. At  an  off-the-record  White  House  press  briefing ,  Henry 
Kissinger  warns  that  the  election  of  Allende  would  be 
irreversible,  might  affect  neighboring  nations,  and 
would  pose  “ massive  problems”  for  the  U.S. and  Latin 
America. A   CIA  official,  at  the  instruction  of  Richard  Helms ,  meets 
with  a   representative  of  ITT. The  CIA  officer  proposes 
a   plan  to  accelerate  economic  disorder  in  Chile. ITT 
rejects  the  proposal. 1969 — Continued 
•  V«l*

--- PAGE BREAK ---1970 — Continued 
October  CIA  contacts  Chilean  military  conspirators ;  following 
a   White  House  meeting,  CIA  attempts  to  defuse  plot  by 
retired  General  Viaux ,  but  still  to  generate  maximum 
pressure  to  overthrow  Allende  by  coup;  CIA  provides 
tear  gas  grenades  and  three  submachine  guns  to  con- 
spirators.

October  14  40  Committee  approves  $ 60,000  for  Ambassador  Korry's 
proposal  to  purchase  a   radio  station.

The  money  is 
never  spent .

October  22  After  two  unsuccessful  abduction  attempts  on  October  19 
and  20,  a   third  attempt  to  kidnap  Chilean  Army 
General  Ren£  Schneider  results  in  his  being  fatally 
shot 
October  24  The  Chilean  Congress  votes  153  to  35  In  favor  of  Allende 
over  Alessandri.

November  3 
 Allende  is  formally  inaugurated  President  of  Chile.

November  13  40  Committee  approves  $25,000  for  support  of  Christian 
Democratic  candidates.

November  19  40  Committee  approves  $725,000  for  a   covert  action  pro- 
gram in  Chile.

Approval  is  later  superseded  by  Janu- 
ary 28,  1971,  authorization.

December  21  President  Allende  proposes  a   constitutional  amendment 
establishing  state  control  of  the  large  mines  and  auth- 
orising expropriation  of  all  foreign  firms  working 
them.

1971 
January  28  40  Committee  approves  $1,240,000  for  the  purchase  of 
radio  stations  and  newspapers  and  to  support  munici- 
pal candidates  and  other  political  activities  of  anti- 
Allen  de  parties.

February  25  In  his  annual  State  of  the  World  message ,  President 
Nixon  states ,  “TFc  are  prepared  to  have  the  kind  of 
relationship  with  the  Chilean  government  that  it  is 
prepared  to  have  with  us." 
March  22  40  Committee  approves  $185,000  additional  support  for 
the  Christian  Democratic  Party  ( PDC ).1971 
January  28  40  Committee  approves  $1,240,000  for  the  purchase  of 
radio  stations  and  newspapers  and  to  support  munici- 
pal candidates  and  other  political  activities  of  anti- 
Allen  de  parties.

February  25  In  his  annual  State  of  the  World  message ,  President 
Nixon  states ,  “TFc  are  prepared  to  have  the  kind  of 
relationship  with  the  Chilean  government  that  it  is 
prepared  to  have  with  us." 
March  22  40  Committee  approves  $185,000  additional  support  for 
the  Christian  Democratic  Party  ( PDC ).

April  4 
 Allende’s  Popular  Unity  (UP)  coalition  garners  49.7  per- 
cent of  the  vote  in  280  municipal  elections.

May  10  40  Committee  approves  $77,000  for  purchase  of  a   press 
for  the  Christian  Democratic  Party  newspaper.

The 
press  is  not  obtained  and  the  funds  are  used  to  sup- 
port the  paper .

May  20  40  Committee  approves  $100,000  for  emergency  aid  to  the 
Christian  Democratic  Party  to  meet  short-term  debts.

May  26  40  Committee  approves  $150,000  for  additional  aid  to 
Christian  Democratic  Party  to  meet  debts.

July  6 
 40  Committee  approves  $150,000  for  support  of  opposition 
candidates  in  a   Chilean  by-election.

July  11  In  a   joint  session  of  the  Chilean  Congress,  a   constitu- 
tional amendment  is  unanimously  approved  permitting 
the  nationalization  of  the  copper  industry.

The  amend- 
ment provides  for  compensation  to  copper  companies 
within  30  years  at  not  less  than  3  percent  interest.

August  11  The  Export-Import  Bank  denies  a   Chilean  request  for 
$21  million  in  loans  and  loan  guarantees  needed  to 
purchase  three  jets  for  the  national  LAN-Chile  airline.

September  9 
 40  Committee  approves  $700,000  for  support  to  the  major 
Santiago  newspaper,  El  Mercurio.--- PAGE BREAK ---

August  11  The  Export-Import  Bank  denies  a   Chilean  request  for 
$21  million  in  loans  and  loan  guarantees  needed  to 
purchase  three  jets  for  the  national  LAN-Chile  airline. September  9 
 40  Committee  approves  $700,000  for  support  to  the  major 
Santiago  newspaper,  El  Mercurio. September  28  President  Allende  announces  that  “excess  profits”  will 
be  deducted  from  compensation  to  be  paid  to  national- 
ized copper  companies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---llllli 
Pillsl 
W-r  ^   V-  V.-  --r^--  •,  .<«  ;>- 
;  •;;%■•■  '•••'•'■■■ 
vv^^vivy.

•■■•.••{,••'■  '..-v  ,vv.

-^.'^v-  .,,•■.■•  v^;-Wy:v«v 
V:‘^;'  ^•'v, 
September  29 
September  29 
October 
November  5 
December  1 
December  15 
January  19 
April  11 
April  2k 
May  12 
June  16 
August  21 
September  21 
October  10 
October  26 
December  4 
February  12 
March  4 
March  22 
60 
1911 — Continued 
The  Chilean  government  assumes  operation  of  the 
Chilean  telephone  company  (CHITELCO).

ITT  hail 
owned  70  percent  interest  in  the  company  since  1930.

Nathaniel  Davis  replaces  Edward  Korry  as  U.S.

Ambas- 
sador to  Chile.

JTT  submits  to  White  House  an  18-point  plan  designed 
to  assure  that  Allende  “does  not  get  through  the 
crucial  next  six  months' 9  The  ITT  proposal  is 
rejected.

k0  Committee  approves  $815,000  support  to  opposition 
parties  and  to  induce  a   split  in  the  Popular  Unity 
coalition.

The  Christian  Democratic  and  National  Parties  orga- 
nize the  “March  of  the  Empty  Pots”  by  women  to 
protest  food  shortages.

kO  Committee  approves  $160,000  to  support  two  opposi- 
tion candidates  in  January  1972  by-elections.

1912 
President  Nixon  issues  a   statement  to  clarify  U.S.

policy 
toward  foreign  expropriation  of  American  interests.

The  President  states  that  the  United  States  expects 
compensation  to  be  “ prompt ,  adequate ,  and  effective:9 
The  President  warns  that  should  compensation  not 
be  reasonable ,  new  bilateral  economic  aid  to  the  ex- 
propriating country  might  be  terminated  and  the  U.S.

would  withhold  its  support  from  loans  under  con- 
sideration in  multilateral  development  banks.

40  Committee  approves  $965,000  for  additional  support 
to  El  Mercnrio.

40  Committee  approves  $50,000  for  an  effort  to  splinter 
the  Popular  Unity  coalition.--- PAGE BREAK ---

40  Committee  approves  $965,000  for  additional  support 
to  El  Mercnrio. 40  Committee  approves  $50,000  for  an  effort  to  splinter 
the  Popular  Unity  coalition. President  Allende  submits  a   constitutional  amendment 
to  the  Chilean  Congress  for  the  expropriation  of  ITT’s 
holdings  in  the  Chilean  telephone  company. 40  Committee  approves  $46,500  to  support  a   candidate 
in  a   Chilean  by-election. Allende  declares  a   state  of  emergency  in  Santiago  prov- 
ince after  violence  grows  out  of  a   one-day  strike  by 
most  of  the  capital's  shopkeepers. 40  Committee  approves  $24,000  to  support  an  anti - 
Allende  businessmen's  organization. The  Confederation  of  Truck  Owners  calls  a   nationwide 
strike. 40  Committee  approves  $1,421,666  to  support  opposition 
political  parties  and  private  sector  organizations  in 
anticipation  of  March  1918  Congressional  elections. Speaking  before  the  General  Assembly  of  the  United 
Nations,  President  Allende  charges  that  Chile  has  been 
the  “victim  of  serious  aggression”  and  adds,  “we 
have  felt  the  effects  of  a   large-scale  external  pressure 
against  us.” 
1918 
40  Committee  approves  $200,000  to  support  opposition 
political  parties  in  the  Congressional  elections. In  the  Congressional  elections,  Allende’s  Popular  Unity 
coalition  wins  43.4  percent  of  the  vote. Talks  between  the  U.S. and  Chile  on  political  and  finan- 
cial problems  end  in  an  impasse.

--- PAGE BREAK ---■ 
'  ■ 
.

*~u  ju».<i''i'  .

■t.CV'.^.'-.^^iL'u 
'■'■s 
, 
 ;  ■ 
■  
i  
*:  >M 
■ 
June  5 
June  20 
June  21 
June  29 
July  26 
August  2 
August  20 
August  23 
August  27 
September  4 
September  IT 
September  13 
September- 
Oetober 
October  15 
J   u   ne  2  
4 
September  16 
October  25 
December  50 
1015 — Continued 
Chile  suspends  its  foreign  shipments  of  copper  as  miners* 
strikes  continue.

Thousands  of  physicians,  teachers,  and  studwits  go  on 
strike  to  protest  Allende’s  handling  of  the  63-day 
copper  workers’  strike.

Gunfire,  bombings,  and  fighting  erupt  as  government  op- 
ponents and  supporters  carry  out  a   massive  strike.

The  opposition  newspaper,  El  Mercurio ,  is  closed  by 
court  order  for  six  days  following  a   government 
charge  that  it  had  incited  subversion.

The  following 
day  an  appeals  court  invalidates  the  closure  order.

Rebel  forces  seize  control  of  the  downtown  area  of  Santi- 
ago and  attack  the  Defense  Ministry  and  the  Presi- 
dential Palace  before  troops  loyal  to  the  government 
surround  them  and  force  them  to  surrender.

This  is 
the  first  military  attempt  to  overthrow  an  elected 
Chilean  government  in  42  years.

Truck  owners  throughout  Chile  go  on  strike.

The  owners  of  more  than  110,000  buses  and  taxis  go  on 
strike.

A0  Committee  approves  $1  million  to  support  opposition 
political  parties  and  private  sector  organizations.

This 
money  is  not  spent.

General  Carlos  Prats  Gonzalez  resigns  as  Allende’s  De- 
fense Minister  and  Army  Commander.

General  Pino* 
chet  Ugarte  is  named  Army  Commander  on  August  Z4.

Prats’  resignation  is  interpreted  as  a   severe  blow  to 
Allende.

Chile’s  shop  owners  call  another  anti-government  strike.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Prats’  resignation  is  interpreted  as  a   severe  blow  to 
Allende. Chile’s  shop  owners  call  another  anti-government  strike. An  estimated  100,000  supporters  of  Allende’s  government 
march  in  the  streets  of  Santiago  to  celebrate  the  third 
anniversary  of  his  election. The  Confederation  of  Professional  Employees  begins  an 
indefinite  work  stoppage. The  Chilean  military  overthrows  the  government  of  Sal- 
vador Allende. Allende  dies  during  the  takeover,  re- 
portedly by  suicide. The  new  military  government  names  Army  Commander 
Pinochet  President  and  dissolves  Congress. The  Junta  declares  all  Marxist  political  parties  illegal 
and  places  all  other  parties  in  indefinite  recess. Press 
censorship  is  established,  as  are  detention  facili- 
ties for  opponents  of  the  new  regime. Thousands  or 
casualties  are  reported,  including  summary  executions. JfO  Committee  approves  $3^,000  for  an  anti-Attende  radio 
station  and  travel  costs  of  pro-Junta  spokesmen. 191\ 
AO  Committee  approves  $50,000  for  political  commit- 
ments made  to  the  Christian  Democratic  Party  be- 
fore the  coup. President  Ford  acknowledges  covert  operations  in 
Chile . The  Inter-American  Commission  on  Human  Rights  of 
the  O.A.S. reports  “grievous  violations  of  human 
rights”  in  Chile. U.S. military  aid  is  cut  off .

--- PAGE BREAK ---s  in 
Chile . The  Inter-American  Commission  on  Human  Rights  of 
the  O.A.S. reports  “grievous  violations  of  human 
rights”  in  Chile. U.S. military  aid  is  cut  off .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MmmM 
-   *   *.*  .,0*  ’•'•r'  ,4  .V  ' 
■ 
v":'  •".:••;* 
■..■•  r-, 
■   ?V.‘  •■  ■•  ■  , 
v  v.i’W  ..*  v;. 
V?.«3Wf 
'■•  '.v 
J^vv:W: 
'ViV/VAV'.,'. 
1975 
June  20  Pinochet  declares  there  “will  be  no  elections  in  Chile 
during  my  lifetime  nor  in  the  lifetime  of  my 
successor.” 
July  4 
 Chile  refuses  to  allow  the  U.N.  Commission  on  Human 
Rights  to  enter  the  country. 
October  7  > 
 The  U.N.  Commission  on  Human  Rights  reports  “with 
profound  disgust”  the  use  of  torture  as  a   matter 
of  policy  and  other  serious  violations  of  human 
rights  in  Chile. 
Portions  of  the  above  chronology  of  events  in  Chile  were  extracted  from 
chronologies  prepared  by  the  Congressional  Research  Service  (“Chile,  1960-70: 
A   Chronology”;  “Chile  Since  the  Election  of  Salvador  Allende:  A   Chronology”; 
“Developments  in  Chile,  March  1973  to  the  Overthrow  of  the  Allende  Govern- 
ment”) and  from  material  contained  in  the  June  21,  1973,  report  of  the  Senate 
Foreign  Relations  Subcommittee  on  Multinational  Corporations  entitled  “ITT  and 
Chile.” 
o