This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at http : //books . google . com/|


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


HARVARD
COLLEGE
LIBRARY


Preservation facsimile

printed on alkaline/buffered paper

and bound by

Acme Bookbinding .

Charlestown, Massachusetts

2005


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


^ar&arlr College S/iftrarg

FROM THB DBqUBST OF

JAMES WALKER, D.D., LL.D.,

(Class of 1814),

FORMER PRESIDENT OF HARVARD COLLEGE;

** Preference being given to works in the
Intellectual and Moral Sciences."


y t^^MC^y /^-^ .


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ISooto bj? SU p^^tmetc*


THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

i6mo, $1.25.

ESOTERIC BUDDHISM.

New American Edition. With Introduction pre-
pared expressly for it by the Author. i6mo,
$1.25.

THE OCCULT WORLD.

New American from the Fourth English Edi-
tion. With an Introduction written for the
American Edition by the Author, and Appen-
dix. i6mo, $1.25.

HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN & CO.,
Boston and New York.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE RATIONALE OF
MESMERISM


BY

A. P. SINNETT

AVTHOK or ** BOTBUC BUDDHISM,** ** THS OCCULT WORLD,**
**lCA]tMA/* «TC, rPC


BOSTON AND NEW YORK
HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY

1892


Digitized by VjOOQIC


plo,l ^(oZZ.l


Copyright, 1892,
Bt HOUGHTOir, laVFLm &, CO.

AJd righu reserved.


The Siveriide Preu^ Cambridge^ Mass,, U, S. A,
Bleotrotyped and Printed by H. 0. Houghton & Company.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CONTENTS


L Old axtd Kxw Tbxobibs ... 1

n. Thx Mesmkbio Fobob 23

in. Thx Rxal Litxbatukb of Mismkbisx • 86

IV. Smx-LiaHTS oh Mbsmkbio PHBiroiixNA . 85

y. CURATIVB MXSIOEBISM .... 104

VL AvASTHxno Effbots aitd Rioiditt . . 128

Vn. ThB NaTUBB of SBHSmYBBBSS 140

ynL GUUBYOTANOB 168

IX. Mbsmxbio Pbaoticb 214

Imdbz 229


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE

BATIONALE OF MESMERISM.


CHAFTEBL

OLD AND NEW THEOBOSS.

It is neoessaij at the outset that I should
explain why I am writing about mesmerism
and not about hypnotism. Names are, after
all, but tickets put by conventional agree-
ment upon things or branches of Jknowledge,
and if, in the first instance, a hundred years
ago, when the matter began to attract notice
in Europe, the word ** hypnotism '^ had been
adopted to describe certain abnormal condi-
tions of the human body and the human
faculties, we need not, at this stage of the
proceedings, have quarreled with the ex-
pression.. But, though it has become so
strangely popular quite recently, the term
*^ hypnotism '^ merely represents, as regards
its actual origin, a misconception of the facts


Digitized by VjOOQIC


2 THE RATIONALE OF MESMEBISIf.

relating to the abnormal conditions just
mentioned, coupled with a very imworthj
disposition to slander the first important ex-
ponent of all this knowledge in modem
times and to cover a cowardly retreat from
denials which had become no longer tenable.
In so far as the term ^^hypnotism " is con-
sciously preferred by some modem investi-
gators, that preference rests on the idea that
the earlier belief in the days when nothing
of the kind was spoken of except ^^mesmer-
ism," has been shown by later experience to
be scientifically erroneous. The early belief
was that something in the nature of a subtle
fluid passed from the mesmeric operator to
the subject; whereas some experimentalists
of the modem school have ascertained that
results alleged to have been obtained by
mesmerism can be brought about where no
operator takes part in the undertaking.
Some people by simply working for them-
selves apparatus of a suitable sort, by gaz-
ing, for example, at the rapid flashes of a
revolving mirror, or by merely concentrating
their attention on a spot of bright light, will
be enabled to bring on a certain abnormal,
or shall we say cataleptic, condition of their
nerves, which will in its turn superinduce


Digitized by VjOOQIC


OLD AND NEW THEORIES. 8

ansBsihesia, perhaps, or even some imperfect
psycluo phenomena. But the discovery of
these people does not in the smallest d^^ree
disprove the other discovery of the earlier
mesmerists that a subtle fluid really does
pass when an operator, properly qualified
himself, is at work, and the fact that this is
so is proved by many more experimentalists
than have endeavored to maintain the bare
hypnotic hypothesis. Further than this,
many mesmerists of the higher order enter-
tain no doubt concerning the existence of
this fluid, for the simple reason that they
can see it.

Sight is a faculty which varies in its pen-
etrative power in a greater d^ree even than
telescopes vary. A tolerably simple experi-
ment to test this may be devised on the fol-
lowing plan: If a spectrum from a ray of
sunlight be thrown upon a screen, every one
who is acquainted with the most elementary
facts of optics will be aware that beyond the
colored band of light which is visible, there
are invisible rays, the presence of which can
be proved by means of photographic paper,
and the chemical power of which, indeed, is
considerably greater than that of the bright
rays actually seen. It is perhaps not so


Digitized by VjOOQIC


4 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

generally known, however, that the power
of direct vision extends with some people
much farther in the direction of those so-
called ultra-violet rays than is the case with
others. The majority of people, it is true,
will come to a tolerably dose agreement as
to the distance along the colored band of
light on the screen which they can see, and
if asked to mark the place at which the vio-
let tinge absolutely ceases will mark places
that are not very widely apart, but here and
there a small percentage of more peculiarly
endowed observers will be found to see
greatly beyond the usual stopping-place.

Just in the same way other visible pheno-
mena of nature besides rays of violet light
melt, so to speak, in others which are not
ordinarily visible, and the subtle fluid which
emanates from a mesmeric operator is very
close to the border-land of the phenomena
which every one can see, and therefore can
be discerned by, I should think, many more
people than will be able to see to any con-
siderable distance into the ultra-violet spec-
trum. A well-known writer. Baron von
Beichenbach, devoted himself especially to
this branch of mesmeric inquiry. He has
recorded with patient care, for which a pig-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


OLD AND NEW THE0BIE8. 6

headed generation inhabiting the earth
about the middle of this oentory gave him
no gratitude, a long series of results obtained
with a great many *^ sensitives'' whom he
employed, all having to do with their power
of seeing visible emanations from human
fingers, as also from physical magnetic ap-
paratus.

Baron von Beichenbach's experiments,
properly followed up, would have been found
to constitute a complete demonstration of
the theory of mesmerism, advanced by Mes-
mer himself in the first instance, and unre-
servedly adopted as entirely in harmony
with their own extensive observation and
practice by his immediate followers, de Puy-
s^gur and Deleuze. But before the Baron's
time the whole subject had been discredited
by reason of the fierce incredulity it encoun-
tered at the hands of the orthodox scientific
world at the beginning of the century. In
the long history of human blundering there
can hardly be any example more remarka-
ble than that afforded by the rejection of
mesmerism at this period. The facts illus-
trating the reality of mesmerism issued in
torrents from every centre of mesmeric ac-
tivity, but the passive opposition of bigotry


Digitized by VjOOQIC


6 THE RATIONALE OF ME8MEBI8M.

was not to be overcome. Hundreds of
people practiced mesmerism, employing it
solely as a curative agent; its highest psy-
chic aspects being at that time little under-
stood even by its warmest partisans, and
thousands of people benefited by its applica-
tion. But all the recognized societies and
corporations of science were arrayed in arms
against it, and professional persecution was
the lot of any medical man who identified
himself with the new discovery. This per-
secution in the end stamped it out aknost
entirely. Some further details on this point
will fall most naturally into their place when
I come to speak of the early literature of
mesmerism, but for the moment I pass on to
trace the genesis of the modem view of the
subject in connection with which we have to
congratulate ourselves on the broad fact,
that one of the most important avenues of
knowledge open to students of the natural
history of hmnanity is now again available
for general use, but in connection with
which, except for that broad fact, we have,
as a generation, little to be proud of.

Modem writers on hypnotism are almost
all building their conclusions on a negation
of truth concerning the forces really at work


Digitized by VjOOQIC


OLD AND NEW THEORIES. 1

in the production of mesmeric phenomena,
and are committed for the most part to a
theory which concentrates their attention al-
most entirely on what is rather a disease of
the science they deal with, than the science
itself. Nor do I think it a satisfactory plan
for people, who know something more of the
science in its loftier aspect, to ^^ divide the
records of the mind,'' and say ^^hypnotism
is one thing and mesmerism is another."
Of course the experiments practiced at the
SalpStri^re are one thing and the healthy
applications of animal magnetism are an-
other; hypnotic suggestion is one thing, and
the culture of the higher faculties under true
mesmerism is another. But people who
adopt the expression ^^ hypnotism" mean
thereby, or think they mean, to include in
its range all that is real and genuine in the
discoveries of Mesmer, all that was not im-
posture and charlatanry in the practice of
his immediate successors. Psychic students,
therefore, who really understand something
of the forces set in action, whether intelli-
gently by the mesmerist or unintelligently
by the hypnotist, cannot handle the term as
having a departmental significance. It is,
as a term employed in connection with this


Digitized by VjOOQIC


8 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

subject, the flag of error, so to speak. We
ought not to make peace with it at all.

The general use of the term dates back to
Mr. Braid of Manchester, a surgeon who is
called by MM. Binet and F^r^ "the initiator
of the scientific study of animal magnetism.^'

He was really a person who invented a
method of thinking which enabled people,
thus inclined, to handle and talk about some
of the phenomena of mesmerism, without
setting themselves in opposition to medical
orthodoxy, and without giving up the un-
grateful cry that Mesmer was an impostor.
For half a century the medical profession
had committed itself to the denial of patent
facts and the vilification of all who observed
and reported them. Mr. Braid, by a bold
manoeuvre, possessed himself of some, at any
rate, among the facts, and, by putting a
forged ticket upon them, justified himseU
before the world for continuing to vilify
their real discoverers — for continuing to
swim at ease with the stream of bigotry —
and so afforded his confreres an opportunity
of escaping from the inconvenience of being
at war with notorious experience without in-
curring the humiliation of confessing that
they had previously been in the wrong.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


OLD AND NEW THEOEIES. 9

Braid's theory of hjrpnotism was set forth
in the first instance in a little volume from
his pen, published in 1848, under the title
^^Neurypnology; or the Bationale of Ner-
vous Sleep, considered in relation to Animal
Magnetism. '^ This was an expansion of an
address Mr. Braid delivered at a meeting of
the British Association held in Manchester
in 1842. The author avows that he was led
to his conclusions by certain phenomena he
witnessed at a stance conducted by M. La-
f ontaine, a mesmerist, but he writes rather
irritably to maint4iin the originality of his
views that seem at once to have been referred,
on their first enunciation, by his critics to
previous experimentalists, especially M.
Bertrand and the Abb^ Faria. He is spe-
cially eager to make out that his processes are
quite different from anything previously
known. He says, '^I have now entirely sep-
arated hypnotism from animal magnetism.
I consider it to be merely a simple, speedy,
and certain mode of throwing the nervous
system into a new condition which may be
rendered eminently available in the cure of
certain disorders." He attended M. Lafon-
taine's stance because he considered mes-
meric phenomena '^a system of collusion


Digitized by VjOOQIC


10 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

or delusion, or of excited imagination, sym-
pathy or imitation. • • • That night I saw
nothing to diminish but rather to confirm
my previous prejudices. " However, " at the
next conversazione, six nights afterwards,
one fact, the inabiliiy of a patient to open
his eyelids, arrested my attention. I con-
sidered that to be a real phenomenon."

He watched this case especially and felt
assured he had discovered a cause. He at
once set to work with experiments of his
own to prove "that the inability of the
patient to open his eyes was caused by para-
lyzing the levator muscles of the eyelids,
through their continued action during the
protracted fixed stare." Operating with
subjects of his own and constraining them
to fatigue the muscles in question by a pro-
longed upward gaze, he soon obtained the
complete hypnotic trance, together with all
the now familiar symptoms — rigidity of the
limbs at the command of the operator, great
exaltation of the senses, liability to halluci-
nation, imposed by the operator, and cura-
tive effects in cases of illness where the hyp-
notic trance was induced with the curative
intention. There is something fairly ludi-
crous and not a little contemptible in the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


OLD AND NEW THEORIES. 11

way Mr. Braid calmly passes on to deal
with these phenomena as the results of his
method and his discovery, when he sets out
with the assumption that everything of the
same kind accomplished by his predecessors
was imposture, and that he picked out from
mesmerism the one fact that was true, — that
people could not open their eyes if the leva-
tor muscles were paralyzed by previous star-
ing. One can hardly understand how vanily
could blind him to the glaring absurdity of
his own position. If fatigue of the levator
muscles had anything to do with the matter,
that cause would not extend to effects rang-
ing beyond the eyelids. Mr. Braid dropped
upon the curious facts of phreno-mesmerism,
which show different propensities in a mes-
merized subject stimulated to unwonted ac-
tivity by touching the corresponding organs
of the brain. Piety, benevolence, cupidity,
can, by his own showing, be played upon in
this way with a subject who is "hypno-
tized," and yet he still keeps in the forefront
of his treatise on all experiments of this na-
ture, his original silly guess that the state in
which they become possible is due to the
fatigue of certain muscles in the eyelids.
Mr. Braid in reality must have been a


Digitized by VjOOQIC


12 THE RATIONALE OF MESMEBISM.

mesmerist of considerable force, without
knowing enough of the subject he arrogantly
despised to understand the methods by
which his results were accomplished; for he
evidently obtained an extraordinarily large
percentage of successes with the people he
experimented on. But he has received so
much undue credit of late from modem
writers on the subject, especially in this
country, that it is worth while to show, in
opposition to the indignant claim for origi-
nalily he puts forward, that there was no-
thing original even in his misapprehensions.
One of the best — or least objectionable —
modem books on the subject. Dr. Moll's
"Hypnotism" (translated from the Ger-
man), skims the history of mesmerism at
the outset, and says: "The whole doctrine
received a great impetus through the Abb^
Faria. ... In 1814-16 he showed by ex-
periments, whose results he published, that
no unknown force was necessary for the pro-
duction of the phenomena; the cause of the
sleep, he said, was in the person who was to
be sent to sleep; all was subjective." This
is the main principle of hypnotism and of
suggestion of which Faria, even then, made
use in inducing sleep. Two other investiga-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


OLD AND NEW THEORIES. 18

tors in Franoe must be mentioned, Bertrand
and Noizet, who paved the way for the doc-
trine of suggestion in spite of much indina*
tion to animal magnetism.

Thus Mr. Braid is glorified in modem ar-
ticles and books on hypnotism, as the man
who extracted the real truth of the subject
from the confusion left by foolish enthusi-
asts or impostors in the beginning, and put
us all on a scientific foundation, in spite of
the fact that his view is not only a gigantic
blunder, absurdly at variance with the facts,
even as reported by himself — but even as a
blunder, no better than a plagiary.

The Manchester surgeon's reasoning would
have been blown to atoms by contemporary
critics if it had been opposed to instead of
chiming in with conventional prejudice.
But fashion soon becomes an ample cloak
for bad logic, and, one after another, mod-
em writers, if drawn to the subject of
mesmeric phenomena at all, date their chro-
nology from the year 1 of the Braidian era.
Even the treatise on "Hypnotism,** by Al-
bert Moll, of Berlin, though in some re-
spects the best of the recent volumes of the
Braidian school, is infected with its funda-
mental principle. I hope to show shortly


Digitized by VjOOQIC


14 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

that the real literature of mesmerism lies in
the background, behind the shower of occa-
sional essays brought forth by the vogue of
Dr. Charcot's experiments, but it may be as
well, in the first instance, to complete the
account I have just given of Braid's own
work, by noticing some of those which follow
in his footsteps.

Dr. Moll's book is not without merit as an
epitome of the subject from the limited mod-
em standpoint. It contains a fairly reason-
able and impartial though hasiy survey of
the rise and progress of mesmerism from 4lie
time of Mesmer onward to the present day,
also an account of the different methods em-
ployed by different schools of mesmerists in
inducing the various mesmeric phenomena.
The writer chiefly errs in concentrating his
attention too much on recent results, and in
dealing with the phenomena of hypnotic sug-
gestion as though they constituted an en-
tirely new departure in human knowledge.
He justly rebukes some modem scientists
who treat hypnotic experiments with con-
tempt, but says *'so long as science does not
examine everything practically and without
prejudice, the great delusions of which ani-
mal magnetism, etc., make use will continue


Digitized by VjOOQIC


OLD AND NEW THEORIES. 16

to exist," — thus himself treating with con-
tempt the branches of his own subject with
which he happens to be unacquainted. In
conclusion, he says : ^ In spite of the progress
which the exact sciences have made, we must
not for a moment forget that the inner con-
nection between the body and the mental
processes is utterly unknown to us. Under
these circumstances we should not refuse to
examine the apparently inexplicable. " Cer-
tainly the representatives of modem physical
science are 'utterly without knowledge con-
cerning the relations of mind and body, but
that is not true of all mankind, as occult
students are aware, and the annals of the
higher mesmerism go far to point out hope-
ful paths of investigation in that direction.
But the value even of mesmerism as an aid
to such researches may be reduced to zero,
if we calmly ignore all that the greatest in-
vestigators of the past have accomplished,
and devote ourselves exclusively to the super-
ficial phenomena rediscovered in the last few
years by the hypnotists whose chosen desig-
nation marks them out as people who have
deliberately elected to ignore the greatest
work done by their predecessors.

Two French writers, MM. Alfred Binet


Digitized by VjOOQIC


16 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

and Charles F^r^, the latter assistant phy-
sician at the Salp@tri^re in Paris, have pub-
lished in London a book in English which is
called ** Animal Magnetism," perhaps sim-
ply to avoid repeating the title " Hypnotism, "
already so frequently used; but it might just
as well have been called by the expression
so popular for the moment. It is introduced
to the reader as written in the environment
of the SalpStri^re; it is based on the notion
that there is but one hypnotism, and that
Charcot is its prophet.

The keynote of the volume, as an inter-
pretation of the phenomena it deals with,
may be found in the following sentences
from the beginning of an early chapter:
^^ As far as its mode of production is con-
cerned, hjrpnotic sleep does not essentially
differ from natural sleep, of which it is in
fact only a modification, and all the causes
which produce fatigue are capable of produ-
cing hypnosis in those who are subject to it.
. . . Sensorial excitements produce hyp-
nosis in two ways, — when they are strong
and abrupt, or when they are faint and con-
tinued for a prolonged period."

It is difficult to criticise such a theory as
this in moderate terms. It is difficult to get


Digitized by Google I


OLD AND NEW THEORIES. 17

behind the mind of a man who can think
that a condition in which people can suffer
a leg to be cut off without knowing it is
something akin to natural sleep and to be
properly described as only a modification of
it. Certainly in one sense ^Meath and his
brother sleep ^' are akin, but rather in poetic
fancy than in the pages of sober science. If
one thing is said to be a modification of an-
other, the meaning surely is that it does not
differ greatly from it in essential character.
In the mesmeric trance not only do we meet
with astounding effects of ansBsthesia, —
when a pinch of the arm would be enough to
wake anybody from ^^natural sleep," — but
also an entirely new condition of the intel-
lectual faculties utterly cut off by oblivion
before the subject comes out of the trance,
from the waking consciousness. Who has
known the natural sleep in which the sleeper
is able to converse freely on recondite sub-
jects quite unfamiliar to him in his waking
state? and yet it is a common experience of
mesmerism that this is possible in the mag-
netic trance. If MM. Binet and F^r^ had
said, ^^In the narrow and limited phase of
mesmeric conditions, with which we are
alone concerned, there is some analogy be-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


18 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

tween what we call Hypnosis and ordinary
sleep/' the statement would hardly be accu-
rate ; but when put forward on the basis of a
general assumption that the so-called hyp-
nosis embraces all that is true and real in
mesmerism, it is nothing less than absurd.

In fact, the whole theory of the Charcot
school depends upon a studious disregard of
all the facts of experience that do not square
with it. For instance, in the book before us
we read of "manoeuvres which formerly led
to the belief that it is possible to magnetize
from a distance, '' and then this belief is dis-
posed of by the supposition that in such cases
the subject had been told to expect the effect
from a distance at a certain time, and there-
fore the results have only been due to "sug-
gestion in the waking state.'' In reality all
the records of mesmerism, both early and
recent, teem with illustrations of the way in
which magnetic influence from a distance
has been successfully exerted upon persons
quite unprepared to expect it. From de
Puys^gur's time down to some of the recent
experiments of the Society for Psychical Ke-
search, the fact has been substantiated over
and over again, but it does not fit in with the
favorite Braid-Charcot hypothesis, so tant
pis pour leaf aits as usual.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


OLD AND NEW TBE0BLB8. 19

The more attention we pay to modem
writers on Hypnotism, the more those of us
who are also familiar with the earlier writers
will be struck by the fact that above all their
other characteristics the modem hypnotists
from Braid downwards are not those who
have put the inrestigation of mesmeric phe-
nomena on a scientific basis. They have
done just the reverse; they have degraded
an inquiry which was opened just a hundred
years ago in a truly scientific spirit, into an
attempt to bolster up an unintelligent preju-
dice. For the truly scientific spirit leads
people to study aU the facts of experience in
the particular department of nature con-
cerned, and to refrain from premature the-
orizing in directions from which some of these
facts warn them off. There was no prema-
ture theorizing in the case of Mesmer and his
followers when they adopted the hypothesis
of a mesmeric or magnetic fluid. All the
facts known to them up to that time squared
with that hypothesis, and if their successors
had been loyal to truth and had gone on test-
ing the early hypothesis by later experience
Aey would have found it supported by every-
thing that has been disiM>vered since, and in
no way refuted by thei discq»very that some of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


20 THE RATIONALE OF ME8MEEI8M.

the phenomena produced by the agency of
the magnetic fluid were also susceptible of
being induced — more or less imperfectly —
in oilier ways as well. But latter-day inves-
tigators have not been loyal to truth. They
have chosen for consideration only those
facts and experiences which suited them and
have calmly ignored the rest. Incidentally,
it is true, they have done a public service;
they have set afloat a general belief that
mesmerism after all is a reality, and but for
them perhaps it would only at this day have
been a reality for isolated students of occult
science. But the limitations to which their
own theories and methods condemn their
thinking are deplorable, and stand at this
moment terribly in the way of any real pro-
gress in the cultivation of the public mind
along the channels of research which mes-
merism, correctly appreciated, opens out.

The principle of study, which it is my
foremost desire to impress on those who will
listen to me, is this: Let all who wish to
read about mesmerism go back to the foun-
tain-head of the subject and explore the vol-
luninous writings of the early French school,
of which I propose to speak more fully in
the next few pages. In that literature the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


OLD AND NEW THEORIES. 21

real foundations of our knowledge of mes-
merism were laid. There we shall find, it is
true, some traces of a most pardonable, if
not praiseworthy, excitement and enthusiasm
in reference to the wonderful beneficence of
the new revelation which mesmeric discover-
ies seemed to embody. There we shall read
of some procedure in which we shall fail to
discern the true working of Mesmer's own
ideas; but at the time a prodigious excite-
ment was operative with large numbers of
people deeply stirred by wonder and admi-
ration, and many cures were worked through
the influence of an overwhehning faith in
association with an external ceremonial that
probably had little, if any, objective effect.
Similar results have been observed within
recent years at Lourdes, and only the other
day at Treves, in connection with the exhi-
bition of the "Holy Coat." But persons
who justly conceive that touching a Holy
Coat, of which even the holiness is apocry-
phal, would not do them any good, make a
mistake unworthy of the superior sense they
take credit for if they fail to realize thatyt^K
hdiefm a Holy Coat or a holy anything is a
real force within the organisms of the per-
sons inspired by it. Mesmer's haquets and


Digitized by VjOOQIC


22 THE RATIONALE OF ME8MEBI8M.

de Puys^gur's magnetized trees may not have
worked in the same way as the ^^passes ''
and magnetic currents with which those
early experimentalists sought to coordinate
them, fiat they worked^ and therefore the
writers in question honestly recorded the
facts concerning them, not yet having
learned from Mr. firaid and the hypnotizers
that the way to put their inquiry on a scien-
tific basis was to pick and choose among
the experiences they acquired, so as only
to father those which were calculated to
please a self-sufficient public opinion around
them.

To put aside the writings and experiments
that relate to the present distorted revival of
mesmerism, under a misleading pseudonym,
and to turn back to the pages of de Puys^-
gur and Deleuze, Bicard, Gauthier, Teste,
and du Potet, is like passing from an evil
and stifling to a pure moral atmosphere.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CHAPTER IL

THE MESMERIC FORCE.

Before tracing our way back to the be-
ginnings of modem meamerism in the very
earliest years of the century, it may be well
to pause for a while about half-way back at
the stage attained by Baron von Beichen-
bach. His researches may fairly be taken
as the groundwork of a correct theory of
mesmerism. The book in which they are all
brought out, generally known to students of
this sort of literature as ^^Beichenbach's Be-
searches/' bears in reality a somewhat pon-
derous title. It is called on the title page
of the English translation by Dr. Ashbumer
"Physico-Phy Biological Besearches on the
Dynamics of Magnetism, Electricity, Heat,
Light, Crystallization, and Chemism in
their relations to Vital Force, by Baron
Charles von Beichenbach." The author had
lighted on the discovery that sensitives in ill-
ness could see liuninous emanations or flames
issuing from the poles of Qiagnets. At that


Digitized by VjOOQIC


24 TEX RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

time, as ire shidl aee later oo, tbe faculties
wlikh ooDstitiite a person irliat we nmr call
a sensiti ye, were sapposed to manifest them-
sehres dnrmg illiiess oiily, and they were
soa^it for by inqtiirers amcmg persons suf-
fering from some form of sidmess. With
tiie painstaking care of a tme man of sci-
ence. Baron yon Reichenbach repeated bis
experiments with magn^s witb a great nnm-
b^ of subjects, taking care of course to test
tbe reality of tfaeir power to see wbat they
said they saw, by making them find oat his
magnets in dark rooms, withont haying been
told where they had been placed, and in
other ways. Then he f onnd that the Inmi-
noos brashes or flames were to be seen
emanatingfrom crystals as well as from mag-
nets. The experiments which broaght oat
these facts were elaborate and protracted,
bat soon acquired a new deyelopment al-
most by accident.

Baron yon Reichenbach discoyered that
lominoos appearances, similar to those
emanating from magnets and crystals, pro-
ceeded from the human hand in a great
many cases, and he dropped upon this fact
quite by chance in the first instance, without
haying set out on this inquiry with any pre-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE ME8MEBW FORCE. 25

oonoeiyed theory. He was experimenting
with one of his sensitives with a magnet in
the dark, and she was playing with the lu-
minous flame which she could perceive com-
ing out of the ends, when he in the darkness
put his hand between her and the magnet.
She immediately began to play in the same
way with emanations from the hand, and
spoke to the bystanders of five little flames
which leaped up and down in the air. She
did not see the hand itself, and at first sup-
posed the five little flames to be some inde-
pendent phenomenon. Other persons pres-
ent then raised their hands befdre her, and
from various fingers she saw a similar light
emitted more or less energetically. This
sensitive, Miss Beichel, appears to have
been the first in connection with whom Baron
von Reichenbach broke down an erroneous
belief which had hitherto prevailed with all
the earlier mesmerists. As we shall see
when coming to review the early literature,
almost all the experimentalists, closely fol-
lowing on Mesmer, became possessed of the
idea that the clairvoyance they discovered in
their patients, and which almost always had
reference to the patients' illnesses, was ne-
cessarily extinguished on the recovery of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


26 THE RATIONALE OF MESMEMI8M,

Health; and they thus drifted into a way of
supposing that the power was in some way
morbid in its character, that it related
exdusiyely to pathological conditions, and
ceased to be effective when these were
no longer present. In reference to Miss
Beichel, Baron yon Reichenbach announces
as a wonderful fact that even after she got
well she continued to see the magnetic flames,
the crystal light, and the flames on the hand
whenever it was dark enough. On inquiry
it appeared that she had possessed this fac-
ulty even from childhood, and had two sis-
ters who, like herself, saw these luminous
appearances when other persons could see
nothing.

Further experiments with other sensitives
soon enabled the Baron to generalize as a
principle, and to declare, that fiery brushes
of light issue from the points of the fingers
of healthy men in the same manner as from
the poles of crystals. Eeaders who may
take up the Baron's book now, especially
with the object of getting information about
the vital mesmeric fluid, will be tantalized to
find how much more of his attention he de-
voted to mechanical sources of the luminous
effect than to those having direct reference


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE MESMERIC FORCE. 27

to mesmerio energy. But the tnith is that
this charaoteristio of his research gives it
peculiar importance at the present day to
students of mesmerism as a science, because
it links the vital energy of the human frame
with other great forces in nature, and brings
our thinking into line with those great phi-
losophical speculations which always seek for
unity in nature. A very disjointed and il-
logical conception of the cosmos is that
which regards anything in man as altogether
peculiar to himself as a manifestation of na-
ture. Just as his physique is related in va-
rious ways to the matter around us out of
which it is built up by the subtle chemistry
of living organisms, and just as philosophical
convictions must force us to the conclusion
that the highest spiritual element in the hu-
man soul has in some way a common origin
with the Universal Spirit from whose energy
the whole of what is called creation must
have proceeded, so also it is only reasonable
to suppose that these intermediate forces with
which we are now dealing, the vital forces
which are something intermediate in their
character between matter and spirit, mujst
themselves be related to some corresponding
agent of wide diffusion through the universe.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


28 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

Mesmer guessed at this with the inspiration
of genius, and ridiculed as he was by the
learned folly of his time, the latest coordi-
nation of all our knowledge having reference
to occult forces is steadily bringing us back
to the position he took up. Let us profit,
therefore, by von Reichenbach's researches
even where they do not directly refer to man-
ifestations of vital energy proceeding from
living organisms. Especially let us profit
by some very interesting and auggestive ex-
periments he tried with sunlight as a source
of energy discernible in the case of magnets.
He wished to ascertain whether sunlight fall-
ing on one end of a copper wire would su-
perinduce any conditions in the other end
when this should be examined in a dark room
by one of his sensitives. The copper wire
by itself presented no appearance that could
be remarked, but when the other end was
put out into the sunshine a crystallic lumi-
nosity became perceptible in a weak degree
as emanating from the other end in the dark
room. The next experiment had to do with
a superior arrangement of this apparatus.
The wire was attached at one end to a plate
of copper, and this plate of copper was ex-
posed to the sunlight. Under, these condi-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE MESMERIC FORCE. 29

tions a powerful manifestation of the lu-
minous energy, which Baron von Beichen-
bach eventually calls the ^^odic force/' was
manifested. The importance of this discov-
ery — which von Beichenbach checks in a
great many ways, and elaborates witha great
variety of substances besides copper — re-
sides in the obvious reflection that the sun's
light is the great source of vital energy
which evokes organic conditions of matter
from the inorganic world. The whole veg-
etable creation is the first storehouse of vital
energy, whatever it may be, and this it
clearly derives directly from the sun's rays.
That the animal kingdom derives its vital
forces from the translation of vegetable or-
ganisms into those adapted to its own re-
quirements is equally obvious, and the sun's
light must thus be regarded as indirectly the
source of animal life. How far it might
influence, refresh, or stimulate that life by
direct application is unknown to us, only
because modem science has been so densely
incapable of pursuing lines of thought which
do not hinge directly on to any of its own
material achievements.

Among Baron von Beichenbach's experi-
ments, one long series which I must not stop


Digitized by VjOOQIC


80 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

to recapitulate in detail, has reference to the
polar character of the odic force; distinct
analogies between the polar character of
ordinary magnetism and that of the vital
energy being elaborately traced.

Von Beichenbach's first volmne, though
published in the English translation in 1850,
relates to a series of experiments which were
apparently concluded about the year 1848.
Attacks of all kinds were of course leveled
against him, and his results treated as incon-
clusive. Recognizing himself that they
rested on a foundation which was narrow,
considering the importance of the principles
to be established, being the result of experi-
ments with five different sensitives, he set
to work in the two following years to expand
them enormously. When his second volume
was brought out he was enabled to supply a
list of sixty sensitive persons, men and wo-
men, mothers and maidens, children and
aged persons, high, low, rich, and poor,
with whom he had repeated the experiences
of his first investigation; and now he had
come satisfactorily to the principle that ill-
ness had nothing to do with the matter as
regards the power of perceiving the odic
fluid. Perfectly healthy and strong persons


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE MESMERIC FORCE. 81

are induded in considerable numbers in his
new list. It is little less than amazing that
such an enormous body of results as in these
two volumes von Beichenbach brought to-
gether should have remained for half a cen-
tury almost imnoticed by those who arrogate
to themselves the title of natural philoso-
phers, and that it should still be merely a
record of interest for an isolated few whose
intuitions and foresight enable them to dis-
cern in the forces appertaining to other than
the physical planes of nature, the possibili-
ties of an advancement for human know-
ledge that will far eclipse, some time in the
future, the achievements of which the nine-
teenth century has been so proud.

Even before Beichenbach's time some of
the early experimentalists of Mesmer's own
epoch had come into contact with the fact
that luminous emanations could be seen in
connection with hands employed to project
the mesmeric fluid, and even Bertrand, of
whom, amongst others, I shall have to speak
shortly, acknowledges that his sensitives as-
sure him that they see a fluid emanating
from his own flngers, although he himself is
not disposed to believe them, and constructs
an elaborate theory of his own almost as


Digitized by VjOOQIC


82 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

illogical as some of those presented to us by
the most modem writers, to account for the
already enormous accumulation of mesmeric
experience*

For the moment, of course, the mesmeric
fluid theory is altogether out of fashion, and
the most recent inquirers who have set to
work within the last few years to rediscover
the facts already included in books written
&om fifty to eighty years ago, have been con-
spicuous illustrations of one very common
human frailiy in reference to all advances
of knowledge. "When, for the first time,
their attention has been turned to a subject
neglected up till then, they have acted as
though their own conversion to an apprecia-
tion of the facts constituted a sort of new
departure for those facts. There is some-
thing positively ludicrous to readers familiar
with the earlier books in the great library of
mesmeric literature, in the way the least in-
telligent of modem students invariably treat
the whole subject, if they handle it at all, as
something which they, for the first time, at
last have ascertained to be really worth in-
quiry, and in reference to which it is now
important that mankind should begin, in
company with them, to observe facts and lay


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE MESMERIC FORCE. 88

a foundation for reasoning. We have been
confronted in the last few years with a del-
uge of hypnotic literature, but most of the
books written to amplify the hypnotic hypo-
thesis could hardly, one would think, have
been written if the authors had had the good
sense to acquaint themselves with all that
had been previously done in the line of their
own investigations. It seems, as I have
said already, rather as though the object of
the manoBuvre was to escape from an unten-
able position, than to exhibit any new truth,
when the first exponents of the hypnotic
theory adopted the principle they represent.

To identify those who were reaUy the first
exponents of this principle might be difficult
now. Bertrand at all events anticipated
Braidbyhalf a lifetime, though Braid was so
satisfied of his own originaliiy that he ridi-
cules, as we have seen, with the utmost pos-
sible indignation, some contemporary critics
who endeavored to introduce him to his
predecessors in error. Pereant qui ante nos
nostra dixerint.

Before leaving this branch of the subject
let me add that Reichenbach's experiments,
as will have been seen, lent a better justifi-
cation than is generally supposed to exist


Digitized by VjOOQIC


84 THE RATIONALE OF ME8MEBI8M.

for the habit into which early mesmeric
writers fell of calling the mesmeric fluid
^^ magnetism." This term has rather exas-
perated modem scientific thinkers, who com-
plain, not without apparent reason, that no-
thing in the behavior or phenomena of what
is called animal magnetism bears any more
relation to the force known as magnetism in
the laboratories, than to gravitation or chem-
ical affinity or any other force of nature we
like to name. But first of all the whole lit-
erature of this subject is so saturated widi
the expression ^^ magnetism " as applied to all
the phenomena with which mesmerists deal,
that it would be hardly possible at the pres-
ent day to comb it free of that expression;
and, secondly, we have, at all events, no
better term that can be employed to take its
place. Further than this, so very close a
correspondence is observed by people who
can see beyond the ordinary boundary of
visual perception, between the emanations
of physical magnets both of the permanent
and electrically excited orders, and, on the
other hand, the emanations proceeding from
the fingers and head of a mesmerist, — and
obviously concerned in some way with the
so-called magnetic tranC'C of his subject, —


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE MESMERIC FORCE. 86

that in the present state of our knowledge I
think it would be a great mistake to quarrel
too liastilj with the term ^^animal magnet-
ism." Personally, I believe that to be a
designation which much more aocuratelj
defines the great majoriiy of mesmeric phe«
nomena than any other we could employ.
It certainly covers a hundred such pheno-
mena for every one which fits in with the
hypnotic hypothesis, and is therefore the
best abstract term to employ next after the
still more convenient, because non-connota-
tive, expression derived from the name of
the unfortunate and much abused Mesmer.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CHAPTER nL

THE EEAL LTTERATUBE OF MTCflM^ ^ HTpM.

Mesmeb himself — Frederick Anthony
Mesmer — according to Picard, was bom at
Weiler on the Bhine, in the year 1734. He
studied medicine in his youth and settled as
a doctor in Vienna, where he ultimately mar-
ried advantageously. In 1766 he wrote a
dissertation on ^^The Influences of the Plan-
ets on the Human Body," which drew upon
him much ridicule and professional opposi-
tion. The attempt to account for this in-
fluence led him to make the experiments
which introduced him to the facts with which
his name has been since indissolubly associ-
ated. At first he worked entirely with mag-
nets, obtained some cures by this means, and
wrote "A Letter to a Foreign Physician on
the Magnetic Remedy." But he was much
persecuted for his audacity. For the fur-
ther development of his inquiries he estab-
lished a private hospital in his own house for
the relief of destitute invalids. He soon


Digitized by VjOOQIC


BJSAL LTTEBATUBE OF MESMEBISM. 87

came to the conclusion that the magnetic
rods with which his first experiments were
made, only served as conductors for a fluid
emanating from his own person. To this he
at once gave the name Animal Magnetism,
and theorized boldly concerning its diffusion
through nature. But he was accused of de-
ceiving his public, and of having magnetic
rods concealed about his person — an accu-
sation which is very amusing, in view of the
fact that, when he really used magnetic
rods, he was ridiculed for expecting to ob«
tain curative results by such means. His
reputation was assailed and his fortune im-
paired. He sought some more favorable
theatre for tihe development of his experi-
ments, and moved from Vienna to Paris in
1777. Two years later he published a short
treatise, entitied ^^M^moire sur la d^u-
verte du Magn^tisme Animal." The the-
ory put forward rested on Mesmer's convic-
tion that ^^ there exists a reciprocal influence
between the heavenly bodies, the earth, and
animated beings." The medium of this in-
fluence he conceived to be "a very subtie
fluid pervading the whole universe, which
from its nature is capable of receiving, prop-
agating, and commimicating every impulse


Digitized by VjOOQIC


88 THE BATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

of motion. The reciprocal action is subject
to certain mechanical laws which have not
yet been discovered. . • • The animal body
experiences the alternative effects of this
agent, which, by insinuating itself into the
substance of the nerves, affects them imme-
diately." Mesmer's suggestions to this ef-
fect were treated by the men of science in
Paris at the time with contempt. One, in-
deed, of the members of the medical faculty
of Paris, Dr. D'Eslon, became a warm par-
tisan of Mesmer's views. But, instead of
inquiring into them, the Faculty suspended
Dr. D'Eslon for a year, and ordered that,
at the expiration of this time, his name
should be erased from the list of the society,
unless he recanted his declaration of belief.
The public meanwhile became interested to
some extent in the new ideas, as the fame
of various magnetic cures had been spread
about. Various persons testified to the fact
that Mesmer had cured them, but the pub-
lic journals ridiculed him, and the medical
profession reviled him. In 1781 he pub-
lished a work entitled "Precis Historique
des Faits relatif au Magn^tisme Animal."
The opposition he encountered only stimu-
lated his own enthusiasm, and led him to


Digitized by VjOOQIC


BEAL LITEBATUBE OF ME8MEBISM. 89

prodaiin magnetism as a panacea. He de-
clared ^^there is but one Healih, one disease,
one remedy. '' An unfortonate private mis-
understanding between bimself and Dr.
D'Eslon led him to move from Paris to Spa.
Ultimately be returned to Paris, and then
took a step which has led to much animad-
version on his character. He established a
secret socieiy, imder the name of ^^The Har-
mony," where he initiated pupils into the
mystery of his process, taking from them
fees of a hundred louis d'or each. By this
means ^^he is said," according to Mr. J. C.
Colquhoun, a relatively recent writer on
mesmerism, to have realized a considerable
fortune. M. Deleuze, a leading writer on
the subject, justifies his action in this matter
by pointing out that his whole professional
prospects were merged in his magnetic dis-
coveries, which had ruined him as an ordi-
nary doctor. He took the fees from wealthy
people, and is said to have remitted them
when would-be pupils were less prosperous.
Morever, admits Mr. Colquhoun, it is very
doubtful whether he really acquired the large
stuns he is alleged to have received.

In 1784 a Boyal Commission of orthodox
savants was appointed to inquire into the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


40 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

daims advanced on behalf of the theoiy of
animal magnetism. The report was nn&-
Yorable, after an inquiry which the represen-
tatives of the new science declared to have
been improperly conducted; though one em-
inent physician (de Jussieu) refused to sub-
scribe to the report of his colleagues, and,
after a great deal of attention paid to the
subject, published an independent report
of his own, entirely favorable to Mesmer.
Even the general body of the Commissioners
admitted the effects produced by the mag-
netic treatment, but repudiated Mesmer*s
theory of a fluid, and preferred hypotheses
concerning ^^ sensitive excitement, imagina-
tion, and imitation."

Mesmer eventually retired in disgust to
Switzerland, and died at an advanced age in
1815, closing his career, as he had begun it,
by practicing magnetic cures gratuitously
for the benefit of the poor. Beyond a cer-
tain fancy for surrounding his mode of life
in Paris with a flavor of mystery and theat-
rical effect, it is difficult to find any circum-
stances in Mesmer's life that afford the slight-
est color for the offensive terms in which he
has constantly been spoken of, even by some
students and adherents of his great subject.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


REAL LITERATURE OF MESMERISM. 41

During Mesmer's life the phenomena of
animal magnetism, to wUcli attention was
chiefly called, were those connected with the
core of disease. Many societies were formed
as branches of that first set on foot, and
while on the one hand the orthodox medical
scientists of the day continued to treat with
contempt the belief of those who declared
that such and such results were accom-
plished, the volume of experience rolled on
for all who paid attention to the work in
progress. A very ludicrous aspect is thus
put, for students of mesmeric literature, on
the ignorant conceit of the dominant major-
ity, who were all the while denying the pos-
sibility of that which was actually occurring.
After the foolish bigotry of the doctors at
large had thus been at war with the plain
facts of the case for more than forty years,
medical mesmerism at last received a grudg-
ing recognition from orthodox science in
1881. At this date a committee of the med-
ical section of the French Boy al Academy of
Sciences was appointed to examine into the
alleged phenomena of animal magnetism.
The report made by this committee, after
long and careful investigations, constitutes
a remarkable record of experiments on the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


42 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

pliysieal phenomena of the mesmeric state;
it also goes at length into cases in which pa-
tients under medical mesmeric treatment
were dairyoyant in their trances, and accu-
rately prophetic concerning the subsequent
course of their maladies. The report,
signed by nine members of the Academy, is
apologetic in regard to its assurance that the
alleged phenomena were true; but the mem-
bers say in effect, How can we help our-
selves? We have taken every possible pre-
caution to guard ourselves &om mistakes,
and we cannot resist complete conviction.
An English translation of this report, by
Mr. J. C. Colquhoun, was published in
1833.

From this date the reality of the phenom-
ena of mesmerism, as far as those are associ-
ated with its aspects as a curative agent, as
a method of producing anaesthesia, and as a
means of producing abnormal mental states
in which a mesmerized subject may foresee
the future progress of his own disorder,
must be regarded as finally established, al-
though scientific and educated men up to our
own day maintain an attitude of incredulity
on the subject, which puts them, for better
instructed persons, on the intellectual level


Digitized by VjOOQIC


BEAL UTBBATUBB OF MS8MBBI8M. 48

of the African savage, who does not believe
in ice. Since 1881, moreover, the experi-
ence wliich has aooumnlated on our hands
concerning the higher and more purely psy-
chic phenomena of the mesmeric state is
such that the same remark really applies
to every one, however cultivated along some
lines of mental activity, who remains in an
attitude of incredulity concerning the typi-
cal phenomena of clairvoyance and mesmeric
thought transfer.

As far back as 1808, Dr. P^t^tin published
in Paris a book called ^'£lectricit^ Ani-
male,'' of which the well-known later writer
on the same subject. Dr. Esdaile, says:
*^Dr. P^t^tin's cases alone are sufficient to
establish the reality of natural clairvoyance."
Plentiful testimony will be found in this book
concerning the powers of mesmeric subjects
of a certain kind to read the contents of
closed letters and books, and to exercise
many other faculties of perception quite in-
dependently of the ordinary sense.

Among the earliest of Mesmer's disciples,
the Marquis Chastenet de Puys^gur has left
voluminous writings on the subject of his
own prolonged and varied practice as a cur-
ative mesmerist. The edition of his works


Digitized by VjOOQIC


44 THE BATIOlfALE OF ME8MEBI8M.

before me is in f oiHt Yolumes, the last dated
1809, but this is a second edition, and I
gather that the first must have appeared in
1807. This is entitled ^^M^moires pour
servir a Thistoire et a T^tablissement du
Magn^tisme Animal." The second yolnme
is a general continuation of tiie first, and the
third is more especially deyoted to ^^Be-
cherches, experiences, et observations physi-
ologiques sur Thomme dans I'^tat de som-
nambulisme naturel et dans le somnambu*
lisme provoqu^ par Tacte magn^tique.'' The
fourth volume, published in 1812, is entitled
*'Les Fous, les Insens^s, les Maniaques et les
Fr^n^tiques, ne seraient-ils que des Somnam-
bules d^sordonn^." The whole collection
of writings embodies an immense accumu-
lation of experiences witili persons clairvoy-
ant during illness in respect to their own
maladies. No recent writings on mesmerism
in its medical aspect have an equal value
witili these, for de Puys^gur, working with
straightforward and earnest faith in his own
power of alleviating suffering witii the help
of Mesmer's glorious discovery, attained
brilliant successes, and above all — for later
students of the subject — has done unrivaled
service in investigating the prophetic and


Digitized by VjOOQIC


REAL UTERATUBB OF MS8MEBISM. 46

dairyoyant faculties of mesmeric patients,
not only in reference to their own but in re-
spect also of other persons' ailments. On
this development of their powers he says:
^Qf all the facts of magnetism the most in-
explicable, and aboye all the least conceiy-
able, is, without doubt, that of the yision
possessed by patients in a perfect state of
somnambulism in reference to the sufferings
of others and the knowledge which they
show of the remedies and measures neces-
sary for their cure. . . . Anyhow, although
there is no known phenomena (in other
branches of science) to which one can com-
pare the faculty — the fact is neyertheless
real, as certain as the other manifestations
of somnambulism already recognized."

De Puys^gur gives full details of the cases
both of this and of the simpler kinds of
dairyoyance — in reference to the patients'
own ilhiesses — that he had the opportunity
of dealing with, and they are both nimierous
and remarkable. It seems strange that he
never apparently investigated the extent to
which the clairvoyant perceptions he evoked
could be directed to other subjects besides
those having to do with physical illness, but
in the beginning mesmerism was introduced


Digitized by VjOOQIC


46 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

to the world in lef eienoe almost ezdnnvelj
to its medical aspects, and it was reserred
for later inquirers to bring its p&ydiological
importance into yiew. De Pnys^iir never
seems to have expected the clairvoyance of
liis patients to be prolonged beyond the
period of their recovery.

J. P. F. Deleuze was a volnminoos, and
one of the earliest, writers on mesmerism.
He published several books on the subject,
amongst others a critical history of animal
magnetism. He himself was a Frenchman,
bom in 1753. He was attracted to the sub-
ject of mesmerism by reading accounts of
magnetic cures in 1785, and subsequently
accomplished many such cures himself. He
was a naturalist attached to the Jardin des
Plantes. In his '^Histoire Critique du
Magn^tisme Animal " (Paris, 1813), he very
effectually rebuts the accusations of impos-
ture brought against Mesmer. This ex-
traordinary man, he says, gifted with an
energetic character, was carried away by the
wonderful successes he obtained into an ex-
aggerated belief in the range of his discov-
ery, but the attitude of incredulity, on the
other hand, in regard to his achievements
M. Deleuze shows to be altogether unten-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


BSAL LTTEBATUBE OF MESMERISM. 47

able. Not only were his numerous pupils
oonyinced of the reality of his treatment, but
the assurances and proofs furnished by per-
sons who had been cured themselves, and
who had taken part in establishing societies
for the cure of others, were such that no op-
position or ridicule could arrest the progress
of so useful and well-established a discovery.
M. Deleuze himself, since he had occupied
himself with magneidsm, could attest that he
had known more than three hundred persons
who were occupied with it like himself, and
who had produced or experienced its vivid
effects. M. Deleuze deplores that Mesmer
had not the magnanimity to make public
his discoveries for the good of mankind with-
out deriving pecuniary benefit from them,
but points out that after all he had spent
money to acquire the right of practicing as
doctor, and by all ordinary considerations
was entitled to take money for teaching pu-
pils. M. Deleuze devotes himself chiefly to
establishing the reality of the magnetic influ-
ence as a curative agent by records of cases
and protracted arguments, and in his sec-
ond volmne gives an interesting summary of
the books on the subject that had appeared
up to the date at which he wrote. His


Digitized by VjOOQIC


48 THE RATIONALE OF ME8MEBISM.

** Practical Instructions on Animal Magnet-
ism '' were published in 1825, and haye been
translated into English. The book is de-
scribed by the translator as the result of a
consummate experience. In 1836 an earlier
admirer of Deleuze's work had written: "A
new era has commenced for magnetism.
Authentically recognized by the Royal Acad-
emy of Medicine in 1831, and regarded by
the commission as a very curious branch of
psychology and natural history, it has taken
rank among positive truths. The rising
generation will be prompt to cultivate the
new field laid open to them. What surer
guide can they take than the man who, by
the superiority of his intelligence, the saga-
city of his conclusions, and the example of
his own life, has so powerfully contributed
to the triumph of this noble discovery.'*

Deleuze says that his object is to give
plain and simple instructions for people who
wish to practice magnetism. *^It is not the
object of this work," he writes, "to con-
vince men who, otherwise well-informed,
still doubt the reality of magnetism." He
employs the expression, " the magnetic fluid,"
he says, because he believes in the existence
of such a fluid, though its nature is un-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


MEAL LITEBATURE OF MESMERISM. 49

known. The directions wliich he giyes go
into great detail in regard to manipulation
and passes, and most later handbooks of mes-
merism seem to have derived iheir inspira-
tion very largely from this code of rules.
The author also discusses tilie accessory
means by which magnetic action may be in-
creased, namely, mesmerized water, woolen
and cotton dodis, plates of glass, etc. The
purpose in view is abnost exdusively to in-
struct the reader in methods of mesmerism
to be employed for the cure of disease, and
the book is entirely concerned witili such di-
rections, or with criticisms on various modes
of mesmerizing, the risks to be avoided, and
the methods that may be employed for "de-
veloping and fortifying one's self in mag-
netic power.'' A voluminous appendix,
added to an American edition of the work
by the translator, Mr. Hartshorn, gives an
immense quantity of testimony collected
by him concerning curious and remarkable
cases of mesmerism.

J. J. A. Bicard, a Paris professor, is a
thoroughly satisfactory exgpnent of mes-
meric experience, who jfkiblished in 1841 a
volume entitled *^Trait6 th^orique et pra-
tique du Magn^tisme Animal." He must


Digitized by VjOOQIC


60 THE BATIONALE OF ME8MEBI8M.

have been liimself a mesmerist of most un-
usual force, and evidently combined with
this attribute characteristics which, properly
handled, would have made him himself a
sensitive of great value, for he appears
to have been a spontaneous somnambulist,
capable on some occasions of writing long
strings of verses in his sleep, in reference
to the production of which he retained no
recollection whatever in his waking state.
However, this fact crops up merely inci-
dentally; his book is devoted entirely to the
record of his work, which chiefly has to do
with curative mesmerism directed by the
pathological clairvoyance of his patients, for
with him it seemed as if almost every one
who approached could be thrown into a mag-
netic trance. There is something very puz-
zling to modem practical' students in the im-
mense advantage apparently enjoyed by the
early mesmerists, as compared with our-
selves, in reference to the ^ prevalent condi-
tion of people around them. In the present
day we may be able to get results which
when obtained are fully as good in all re-
spects as those described by the early French
writers; but the persons with whom such re-
sults are procurable seem to be dotted here


Digitized by VjOOQIC


BEAL LITEBATUBS OF MESMEBI8M. 61

and there about the world, by ones and twos,
whereas such mesmerists as M. Ricard seem
always to have been puzzled if they did not
succeed with the premier verm. Their rec-
ords of distinct successes run into percentages
like seventy-five or eighty of the total num-
ber of persons with whom they made experi-
ments. Ricard treats with scorn the pre-
tenses of some disputants to account for
mesmeric phenomena by imagination, fas-
cination, and other vague hypotheses in con-
flict with the simple and, to him, undeniably
true theory of mesmeric fluid. The falsity
of their judgment he thinks may easily be
demonstrated, and he records a case in which
in order to prove the reality of his own po-
sition he magnetizes one of his patients at a
distance, and puts him to sleep without any
expectation on his part that the experiment
was going to be tried. For psychological
students, however, Ricard's book has claims
on their interest which far transcend its im-
portance as, what it certainly is also, a very
advanced and intelligent treatise on curative
mesmerism. Ricard appears to me to have
been the first experimentalist, or at all
events the first writer, who gets entirely free
of the belief that clairvoyance is a merely


Digitized by VjOOQIC


52 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

pathological condition, and to whom the daz-
zlingly interesting phenomenon of clairvoy-
ance, having to do witili other states of na-
ture, presents itself in the light of its real
importance. He gives a very full account
of his first experience in this region of in-
quiry with a girl named Adele Lefrey, who
exhibited a new kind of lucidity at the con-
clusion of some curative treatment received
at her mesmerist's hands. It may be worth
while here to translate a short passage illus-
trative for all who have themselves been
privileged to work with sensitives qualified
to discern higher states of nature, of what
may be called the inevitable routine of im-
pressions such people go through in the first
instance. M. Ricard's Adele said to him
words conveying exactly the same ideas
which I have heard uttered. by sensitives
under my own influence, young girls to
whom the A B C of mesmerism as a branch
of knowledge was wholly imknown. M.
Ricard writes: "She was near the comple-
tion of her cure, when, in the midst of some
new medical instructions which she was giv-
ing, she said to me in a singular tone, * You
hear what he orders me ? ' * Who, ' I asked,
*is ordering you anything?' *Why, mon-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


BJSAL UTEBATUEB OF MB8MER18M. 63

sieur, do you not hearUm? ' ^No, I neither
hear nor see any one/ *Ah, that is true,'
she replied, ^you sleep while I am awake.'
^What do you mean? You dream, my dear
child; you pretend that I sleep, when I have
my eyes open and I can appreciate all that
passes before me, while I know that I actu-
ally hold yon in command by my magnetic
influence, and that it only depends upon my
will to bring you back to the state you were
in recently. You believe yourself awake be-
cause you speak to me, and you have to a
certain extent your free will, although you
could not open your eyelids, and might be
plunged in an instant into the most profound
slumber. You do not reflect upon what you
are saying.' ^You do not understand me,
monsieur, but that is nothing surprising.*
^You are asleep,' I replied. 'I am, on the
contrary, as completely awake as we shall all
be some day in the future. I will explain my-
self more clearly; all that you see at present
is gross, material; you distinguish apparent
forms; the real beauties escape you. How
could it be otherwise? Your spirit is
cramped, obscured, by the exterior impres-
sions that your niaterial senses give you.
It can only reach out feebly, while my cor-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


54 THE BATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

poreal sensations are actually annihilated,
while my soul is almost disintegrated from
its ordinary fetters. I see what is invisible
to your eyes, I hear what your ears cannot
hear, I understand what for you is incom-
prehensible. For example, you do^not see
what emanates from youi'self and comes to
me when you magnetize me; I, on the con-
trary, see it very clearly; at each pass you
direct towards me I see a little column of
fiery dust which comes from the end of your
fingers and seems to incorporate itself in me.
Then when you isolate me I seem surrounded
by an atmosphere of this fiery dust, which
is often the reason why objects of which I
seek to distinguish the fonns take a ruddy
tinge for me. I hear, when I desire it, a
sound that is made at a distance, sounds
which may arise a hundred leagues from
here. In a word, I am not obliged to wait
till things come to me, I can go to them
wherever they are, and appreciate them more
correctly than any one could who is not in a
similar state to that in which I find myself. ' "
This is a perfectly sound and correct ex-
position of the state in which the liberated
Ego of the sensitive finds itself. Phrases of
precisely similar import have, as I say, been


Digitized by VjOOQIC


BXAL LITERATURE 0F.ME8MEBI8M. 55

given to me more than once; and I yentore
to say that any one in whom the faculty of
dairyoyance, in reference to other planes of
nature, is possible will, on first entering into
that state, if questioned, take the same view
of the position.

Under the title ** Archiv fiir den Thieris-
chen Magnetismus," an immense collection
of writings on mesmerism in all its branches,
as then understood, was published in Ger-
many in 1817. This work is in twelve vol-
umes, edited by Dr. von Eschenmayer, Dr.
Kiefer, and Dr. Nasse. It consists of nar-'
ratives of experiments and magnetic cures,
and careful critical essays, including specu-
lations on the meaning of clairvoyant previs-
ion which show a more intelligent attitude of
mind on the part of the Grerman writers of
that date than was common in England.

Baron du Potet, sometimes called de Sen-
nevoy, after an ancestral domain, is to be
ranked among the early French writers on
mesmerism, though he lived to within a few
years ago. He was bom at Sennevoy, in
the Department of the Yonne, in 1796. He
has given us a sketch of his own career at
the beginning of one of his later books, and
it appears that he was first attracted to the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


66 THE BATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

stady of human magnetism in 1815. The
whole subject burst upon him as a revela-
tion. ^^ JS!n sortant de ce premier entretien^^*
he says, ^*'fetais magnitiseurJ*^ He at once
obtained the mesmeric trance with the two
pe^bns on whom he first tried his hand. He
became acquainted with Deleuze and de Puy-
s^gur. He imdertook the cure of some pa-
tients; dazzled with the results he entered
himself regularly for the study of medicine.
As a mesmerist he rapidly distanced his
teachers. He boldly confronted the ridicule
and opposition of conventional science. He
gave gratuitous courses of instruction in
mesmerism from the year 1826, and at the
same period began to write on the subject.
He published a Journal called the "Propa-
gateur du Magn^tisme;" also in 1838, in
London, a volume entitled "An Introduc-
tion to the Study of Animal Magnetism."
This is an admirable book. It shows us the
author still unable to believe that the tena-
city of ignorant prejudice could hold out
against an overwhelming demonstration of
the truth. "Hitherto," he says, "there has
been a disinclination to entertain this inves-
tigation, but I trust the evidence now ad-
duced will tend to dispel the prejudice that


Digitized by VjOOQIC


BEAL LITEBATUBE OF ME8MEBI8M. 57

can only have arisen from the science not
having been yet fairly represented." The
book opens with a good review of the history
of the subject. Speaking of Mesmer, the
Baron says: "Sun'ounded as he was by en-
emies, both public and private, his unassum-
ing manners, his manifest sincerity, his ear-
nest yet silent enthusiasm, and, above all,
his benevolent disposition, conciliated for
him the esteem of persons of almost all ranks
and pretensions." Later on the Baron goes
into a full and detailed description of the
physical and psychical phenomena of mes-
merism as illustrated by his own experience.
His records are of great instructive value
and would alone be sufficient to establish the
reality of clairvoyance as a fact in nature,
even if they were not, as they are, merely
one set of such experiences among a great
number.

The only fault that can be found with du
Fotet's books is, that their style is a little
inflated or bombastic. In this respect he is,
however, the product of French and not
English literary traditions, and throughout
he is immensely impressed with the prodi-
gious spiritual importance of the discoveries
with which he is dealing. As he himself


Digitized by VjOOQIC


68 THE BATIONALJE OF MESMERISM.

says, he felt a new philosophy forming itself
in his mind around these germs; it was neb-
ulous and undefined, but stupendous. He
was filled with ideas that he felt to be too
far advanced for his generation. He only
ventured in 1845 to give them some expres-
sion in a work entitled ^^Essaisurl'enseigne-
ment philosophique du Magn^tisme." But
though this volume is relatively timid and
reserved, the author was quickly outgrowing
the limits of magnetic practice as familiar to
his predecessors. He was becoming some-
thing more than a mesmerist — an occultist,
and eventually, under somewhat too theat-
rical or sensational a title, he printed an
important quarto called ''La Magie D^-
voil^e," which was never published, in the
ordinary sense of the word, but delivered
to a few persons under definite pledges taken
from them in regard to the use they would,
make of it. The experiments described in
this book, though startling and almost en-
tirely of psychological interest, do not really
outnm those related in the "Animal Mag-
netism " in scientific value for the student
of mesmerism. The Baron seems to have
been himself almost alarmed by the power
he acquired over all kinds and conditions of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


REAL UTEBATUBE OF ME8MEBI8M. 69

people by causing them to look at signs and
figures lie drew with charcoal upon the floor.
He got these signs from books on mediadval
magic, and was apparently inclined to at-
tach too much objectiye importance to the
diagrams themselves, thinking that other
people would be able to obtain his results by
following the same procedure, and that pow-
ers of a dangerous character might thus be
acquired through his teaching by persons
of evilly disposed nature if his instructions
were carelessly disseminated. He did not
realize how far the magic lay in his own
magnetic force — how little of it had to do
with the signs.

In 1840 Baron du Potet published an-
other volume called "A G)ur8e of Magnet-
ism in Seven Lessons," and in the course of
his addresses to his pupils, in themselves a
numerous body, to whom he dedicates this
volume, he indulges in some very scornful
language concerning the obstinate incredu-
lity exhibited by the scientific world at large
in regard to the accumulated facts of mes-
meric experience.

M. Alexandre Bertrand seems to have
been the first writer who quarreled with
the straightforward theory of the magnetic


Digitized by VjOOQIC


60 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

fluid adopted by Mesmer, de Puys^gur and
Deleuze. In 1826 he published a treatise
entitled ^'Du Magn^tisme Animal en
France," in which he promulgated a theory
of his own on what he calls VEoctase — the
condition of those whom the earlier writers
described as somnambvles. This is not a
work of any value in itself, and is chiefly
remarkable as showing how very little orig-
inality there was in Mr. Braid's later claim
to have put the whole subject on a new and
scientific footing. M. Bertrand incidentally
admits that his own somnamhulea bear testi-
mony to the reality of the fluid. Many of
these, he says, ''declare in fact that they see
the fluid by means of which I exert an effect
upon them coming out from my fingers."
The patients with whom he worked would
also declare that they discerned a peculiar
taste in water that he had magnetized, and
experienced pronounced effects from objects
he had magnetized, such as a handkerchief,
a glove, or a piece of money. For all this,
however, he found a sufiicient explanation
in the theory that they had been possessed
with such ideas before going to sleep; and
for him magnetism is "wwe pure chiniere.^^
That which he conceives to be a realiiy is


Digitized by VjOOQIC


MEAL LITEBATUBE OF ME8MEBISM. 61

Vextase — ^^a condition into which human
creatures are capable of falling, altogether
distinct from any states that had been pre-
viously recognized." The argument amounts
to nothing in itself, explains nothing, and is
only carried on by disregarding the larger
part of the phenomena admitted as facts and
requiring to be brought within the area of
any genuine mesmeric theory.

M. Aubin Grautier is one of the early
writers who must by no means be overlooked.
He seems to have written, to begin with. In
1840 a volume entitled ^'Introduction au
Magn^tisme," a volume written in a very
reverent spirit, and on the basis of much
careful research in ancient history, aimed at
showing the wide diffusion of magnetism in
one shape or another as a psychological
agent in Egypt, Greece, and Rome. M.
Gautier seems to have been amongst those
from the first who took the subject seriously
and in the spirit of an occult student.
Whoever expects to find these pages amus-
ing, he says in the beginning, '^ deceives
himself strangely. The study and practice
of magnetism demand an unheard of pa-
tience, silence, and self-control."

The book is more a review and a specula-


Digitized by VjjOOQIC


62 THE BATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

tion than a narrative. It rests, of course,
in complete reliance on the mesmeric fluid
theory, and only fails in bringing out really
scientific conceptions because the writer was
not himself in possession of those side lights
on mesmerism which I propose to deal with
directly, and wi^out which the various phe-
nomena themselves can never be coordinated.
In 1842 M. Gautier published his ''His-
toire du Somnambulisme," again sweeping
the wide areas of ancient history for illus-
trations of his theme. This volume, in-
cluding many narratives of more modem
origin, gives a full account of M. Pigeaire's
experience with the Academic de M^decine
of Paris. M. Pigeaire was a country doctor
who discovered fine clairvoyant faculties in
the youngest of his daughters, L^onide, aged
ten years. No experimentalists in those
days seemed to have realized the lengths a
clairvoyant faculty could reach to when prop-
erly cultivated, so that the only experiments
tried with the girl had to do with recogniz-
ing objects and reading from books when
blindfold. Her powers in this direction
were brought to high perfection in a long
series of private and domestic stances.
When at last M. Pigeaire decided to claim


Digitized by VjOOQIC


BEAL UTBBATUBE OF JiESMEBISM. 68

on his daughter's behalf, a prize which had
been ofEered bj a member of the Acad^mie
de M^ecine, the family genius was brought
out of her retirement and introduced in
Paris to a great number of learned obser-
vers. The prize in question had been ofEered
by Dr. Burdin to any one who could read
without the use of the eyes, of the sense of
touch, or of light. The Acad&nie de MMe-
cine was to arbitrate on any claims that
might be made. While the Figeaire family
were staying in Paris they seemed to have
given a series of private entertainments at
which L^nide's faculties were exhibited,
and a large number of persons distinguished
in science, literature, and social rank signed
records of the successful experiments.
When the time came, however, for M. Pi-
geaire to interview the committee appointed
by the Academic de M^decine, he foimd
them perfectly unprepared to investigate and
adjudicate upon what actually took place, and
only willing to deal with Mile. L^nide if
she would conform precisely to their own
arrangements and conditions, among which
were that she should wear a peculiar kind of
helmet mask which they had constructed,
and let one of tfieir number keep his hands


Digitized by VjOOQIC


64 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

onlier eyelidsall the time. In all its details
the story is instructive to any one interested
in looking back on the thoroughly unscientific
attitude of mind taken up by the represen-
tatives of physical science in those days in
their dealings with mesmerism. But I can
hardly give space here to all the ramifica-
tions of the story. M. Pigeaire tried to
make his surly inquisitors understand that
the whole psychic condition of his daughter
required delicate and gentle treatment, that
their own proposals were calculated to throw
her into convulsions rather than into the
clairvoyant state, that the bandages he em-
ployed, using masses of cotton wool to cover
the eyes completely, were of such a kind
that any pretense of distrusting their ef&cacy
was ridiculous, but all to no purpose. The
committee refused even to look at his band-
ages, and after he left them in disgust sent
in a report, the general drift of which was
that the proposed experiments had been de-
clined except under conditions which the
committee did not conceive bore evidence
of hona fides.

In their zeal to discredit the subject the
committee even ventured upon some state-
ments that were positively false, wishing to


Digitized by VjOOQIC


BEAL LITERATURE OF MESMERISM. 65

lead the reader into the belief that the j had
interviewed the proposed dairvoyante. But
nowhere in 1888 was any scientific body pre-
pared to observe the conditions of fair play
or common honesty in dealing with the rep-
resentatives of mesmerism.

In telling the story, however hastily, one
should not omit to mention one concluding
incident. A group of those persons who had
witnessed the earlier series of preliminary
stances with L^onide, took M. Pigeaire's
part very warmly. They raised a consider-
able guarantee fund and publicly offered a
prize ten or twelve times greater than that
originally offered by the Academy, to any
member of that body who should be able to
read a single word of print when his eyes
had been bandaged on the plan adopted with
Mile. L^onide by her father. It is need-
less to say nobody took up the challenge,
and that the whole incident thus constitutes
a very round and complete illustration of the
gross dishonesty with which the high author-
ities in medicine in Paris conducted the
war against the new discovery.

A year or two later, in 1845, M. Gautier
published a third book called a "Traits pra-
tique du Magn^tisme et du Somnambulisme.'^


Digitized by VjOOQIC


66 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

This is a well-arraiiged and well-indexed
treatise on magnetism in all the branches
then studied, and though very imperfectly
divining the real potentialities of psychic
mesmerism, is even to this day a solid book
of careful record and earnest thinking, im-
measurably better worth attention than any
of the recent volumes that play up to the
fashionable errors of the moment.

M. L. A. Cahagnet seems to have been
one of the very few French writers of this
period thoroughly alive to the psychic pos-
sibilities of clairvoyance. He undertook a
prolonged series of mesmeric stances with
clairvoyants whose attention he directed to
other planes of existence, and these are re-
corded in a book entitled ^'Arcanes de la
Vie Future D^voil^." The value of the
statements made by his clairvoyants in ref-
erence to the future life will of course be va-
riously estimated by different readers, but
from the point of view of mesmeric science,
the facts concerning the mental phenomena
exhibited by the subjects under treatment
are of the highest interest. An English
translation of this book has been published
in America.

Dr. Esdaile's "Mesmerism in India" is a


Digitized by VjOOQIC


REAL LITERATURE OF MESMERISM. 67

record of the author's extraordinary success
in the application of mesmerism to his sur-
gical practice at the goyemment hospital in
Calcutta, of which he was in charge. The
book was published about 1842. It includes
not only minute surgical reports of frightful
operations performed upon the mesmerized
patients of the hospital without any suffer-
ing or consciousness of what was taking
place on their part, but also corroboratiye
testimony from a great many of the most
distinguished people resident at Calcutta at
the time, who were called in by Dr. Esdaile
to be present at these wonderful perform-
ances.

A later work by the same author, ^'Nat-
ural and Mesmeric Clairvoyance," published
in 1852, includes, besides a quantity of
fresh testimony connected with the medical
aspects of mesmerism, an epitome of evi-
dence extracted from the " Zoist,'* and from
other sources, on the subject of clairvoyance
exhibited during the mesmeric state. In
this book Dr. Esdaile also recounts the
progress of his own struggle at Calcutta in
the effort to press the importance of mes-
merism upon the attention of the other doc-
tors of the place, who would only plod along


Digitized by VjOOQIC


68 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

the beaten path. This narrative is, in some
respects, the history of Mesmer's own career
over again. Instead of being treated bj his
professional brethren as a benefactor of hu-
manity, Esdaile was opposed and vilified by
all the devices that prejudice and professional
jealousy could suggest, and while it was no-
torious that he was daily performing painless
operations on patients under mesmerism, the
other doctors continued to torture their own
imf ortunate victims rather than confess that
they had been in error in resisting the use
of the new curative agent.

Dr. Esdaile's remarkable works are not
the only records of capital operations per-
formed without pain to the patient with the
help of mesmerism. A paper read before
the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society
of London, in 1842, and published as an
independent pamphlet, gives fuU details con-
cerning a case in which Mr. Ward,* a sur-
geon attached to St. Bartholomew's Hospi-
tal, had, about that time, amputated a man's
leg above the knee while he, the patient, re-
mained completely unconscious of the opera-
tion in a mesmeric sleep, put upon him by
the influence of Mr. Topham, a barrister
interested in the practice of mesmerism.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


BEAL LITSBATUBB OF ME8MEBI8M. 69

The pages of the ''Zoist/' to which I will
refer directly, are laden with reports of
other similar cases.

Dr. Scoresbj, the Arctic voyager and
well-known writer on various branches of
maritime science, was a careful experimenter
in mesmerism, and a work of his called
^'Zoistic Magnetism '' records a great deal of
his work. He had only a limited experi-
ence of the higher phenomena, but a very
extensive familiarity with the physical phe-
nomena of the mesmeric state, including
those on the border-land between the lowey
and higher, having to do with the traiisf i<?ir
of sensation from the mesmerizer to the sub-
ject. His book was published in 1849, aii4
is interesting for students of the eicienoe for
its careful observation in regard to the po-
larity of different parts of the human' body
in respect to the emanations of its animal
magnetism.

An interesting "Report upon the Phe-
nomena of Clairvoyance or Lucid Somnam-
bulism, from Personal Observation,'' was
published in 1843 by Edwin Lee, Fellow
of the Boyal MediQO-Chirurgical Society,
and of many other societies abroad of a sim-
ilar character. The cases here described


Digitized by VjOOQIC


70 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.


have reference altogether to elahrvoyance on
the physical plane, that is to say, to the ob-
servation by the dairvoyants concerned, of
distant places and houses, and also of ob-
jects in their own immediate neighborhood,
which they had no means of cognizing
through the usual senses. Mr. Lee also
wrote about the samo time a book on '^ Ani-
mal Magnetism," containing a comprehen-
sive review of similsr experiments by other
observers.

Another work well worth notice is entitled
** Facts in Mesmeri&m, with Reasons for a
pispassionate Inquiry into it," by the Rev.
Chauncy Hare Towiisend, first published in
1889. This opens "^nth a dedication to Dr.
EUiotson, from whose experiments, the au-
thor says, the greater part of the English
world have derived their ideas of mesmer-
ism. He quotes Dr. Wilson, of the Mid-
dlesex Hospital, wh(» having been present at
a lecture at Dresden, when several fish in a
large tub of water ¥'ere stimned by an elec-
tric shock, tiied th() effect of mesmerizing
the water. The fisl revived. The incident
suggested the propoi^al that great use might
be made of mesmerized water in medicine.
In a preface to his second edition Mr. Town-


Digitized by VjjOOQIC


BEAL LITEBATUBE OF MESMERISM. 71

send says: '*I now cast my mite into the
treasury of evidence that is aocumulating in
favor of mesmerism with a deep regret that
prejudice should yet stand in the way of so
much alleviation of human suffering as it is
calculated to afford." The book consists of
a patient record of the author's own experi-
ments, which were largely concerned with
interesting phenomena of ^' sleep waking,"
as Dr. EUiotson called it, or mesmeric clair-
voyance of the simpler kind. Mr. Town-
send began with incredulity, but was drawn
into serious inquiry in 1886. He worked at
this for a long time and with a great num-
ber of subjects. His records include a
great variety of facts in thought and sensa-
tion transference, and in connection with the
development, by a mesmerized person, of
perceptive faculties in nerve-centres not
usually betraying these. He also throws
out a good deal of intelligent speculation
concerning the media through which mes-
meric effects are wrought. Though priding
himself on ^piAg his experiments and in-
vestigations on a. relatively humble level,
and testing the faculties of his subjects by
applying them tQ the commonplace facts of
life, Mr. Townsend ^eats with contempt


Digitized by VjOOQIC


72 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

"the imagination theory" as "really too ab-
surd to merit a serious refutation. A thou-
sand times I have seen mesmeric patients
placed under circumstances where the action
of imagination was plainly impossible."
And later on he writes: "An elastic ether
modified by the nerves, and the conduction
of which depends on their condition; which
can be thrown into vibration mediately by
the mind of man and immediately by the
nervous system, which manifests itself when
thrown out of equilibrium, and produces
mental effects through unusual stimulation
of the brain and nerves, cannot but be al-
lowed to be a cause which answers to all the
conditions that we desire to unite, and which
is sufficient to accoimt for the phenomena
that we have been considering."

The "Zoist" was a magazine, published,
I believe, under the editorship of Dr. Elliot-
son, "to collect and diffuse infoimation con-
nected with two sciences — Cerebral Physi-
ology and Mesmerism." "The science of
mesmerism," says the inaugural article in
the first number, brought out in April,
1843, "is a new physiological truth of incal-
culable value and importance; and though
sneered at by the pseudo-philosophers of the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


BSAL UTEBATUBE OF ME8MEBISM. 78

day, there is not the less certainiy that it
presents the only avenue through which is
discernible a ray of hope that the more intri-
cate phenomena of the nervous system — of
life — will ever be revealed to man. Al-
ready it has established its claim to be con-
sidered a most potent remedy in the cure of
disease; already enabled the knife of the
operator to traverse and divide the living
fibre unfelt by the patient. If such are the
results of its infancy, what may not its ma-
turity bring forth? " The thirteen volumes
of this magazine, for it was continued up to
1856, constitute a splendid reservoir of infor-
mation on all branches of mesmeric science.
In the farewell address, published with the
last issue of the Beview, the conductors say
their mission has been accomplished. Their
object was neither gain nor worldly reputa-
tion, but the establishment of truth. For
thirteen years they have amassed fresh facts
in cerebral physiology and mesmerism, "and
presented them in such numbers, and with
such proofs, that to question them would be
absurd." They speak of the "glorious do-
ings of Dr. Esdaile in India," which the
"Zoist" has chronicled, and though mainly
dwelling on the achievements of medical


Digitized by VjOOQIC


74 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

mesmerism, they point to the examples of
clairvoyance which abound in their volmnes,
and which render the phenomenon unques-
tionable, though of course gross imposition
is practiced in regard to it by professional
clairvoyants and private persons "influenced
by vanity or wickedness."

Only less abundant than the proofs of the
reality of mesmeric phenomena with which
the pages of the "Zoist " teem, are the illus-
trations it gives of the senseless and bit-
ter hostility which was opposed to it by the
majority of the medical men of its time, and
of what Dr. EUiotson, in one letter to the
Eeview early in the proceedings, calls the
^^anti-mesmeric falsehoods of medical men.'*
The favorite theory of the anti-mesmeric doc-
tors in regard to celebrated surgical opera-
tions conducted painlessly under mesmerism,
used to be that the sufferers had "feigned"
insensibility. That any one could soberly
pretend to believe that patients undergoing
the frightful torture of first-class surgical
operations could subdue all outward signs of
suffering in the interests of the new "impos-
ture," shows us the depth of foUy to which
prejudice and bigotry may sink the under-
standings of people still capable of exhibit-


Digitized by VjjOOQIC


BSAL UTEBATUBE OF MESMEBISM. 76

inga form of intelligence in connection with
their own commonplace pursuits.

Dr. EUiotson says of his medical confreres
at large that they were as brainlesslj indif-
ferent tomeismeric phenomena ^^as the cattle
grazing in the meadows are to the wonders
of the steam carriages passing by them on
the railroads. " With sorrow we must recog-
nize that this contemptuous lament is hardly
even as yet out of date.

"Isis Bevelata, an Inquiry into the Ori-
gin, Progress, and Present State of Animal
Magnetism," by J. C. Colquhoun, 1836, is
a very comprehensive review of the subject,
up to the period at which the author wrote.
Its publication is justified, in the introduc-
tion, on the groimd that the report of the
French Academy of Sciences, of 1831, had
completely superseded the earlier unfavor-
able report of 1784. It had been supposed,
Mr. Colquhoun points out, that animal mag-
netism was a system of quackery and delu-
sion. " This objection, which might perhaps
have had some plausibility during the in-
fancy of the discovery, has now become
utterly ludicrous, and betrays either con-
siunmate ignorance of the subject or gross
dishonesiy." Mr. Colquhoun takes a highly


Digitized by VjOOQIC


76 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

favorable view of Mesmer's life and charac-
ter, and quotes a dignified letter in wliieh he
refuses an offer of a pension of 80,000
francs a year, made to him by the King of
France through the Minister Maurepas, on
the ground that the offer relates to his pecu-
niary interest alone, and does not recognize
the importance of his discovery as its princi-
pal motive. The question ought, Mesmer
thinks, to have been approached in a totally
opposite way. This, Colquhoun remarks,
"is not the language of avarice."

"The Modern Bethesda, or the Gift of
Healing restored," is a narrative, or rather
a compilation from letters, newspapers, and
testimonials of all sorts, relating to the al-
most innumerable achievements in healing
the sick, performed both in America and
England by Dr. J. K. Newton. This won-
derful mesmerist — a worker of miracles by
wholesale — was born in Shode Island in
1810. The earlier part of his life was spent
in a prosperous mercantile career, and his
peculiar gifts were not developed till 1868.
Then he began to travel about in the United
States, visiting thousands of patients, and
performing "those marvelous and inexplica-
ble cures which astonish the world and


Digitized by VjOOQIC


BSAL UTERATURE OF MESMERISM. 77

threaten to revolutionize all former laws and
experience of medical science." He had dis-
covered his own powers during a voyage in a
crowded passenger steamer, where tiie yellow
fever broke out among thirteen hundred pas-
sengers. In Ohio, where he began public
ministrations, he treated about one hundred
persons a day, performing in the course of
time many thousands of wonderful cures.

My purpose in reviewing the books men-
tioned above has not been to compile any-
thing resembling a complete bibliography of
the subject, but simply to show my readers
what a wide field the early literature of mes-
merism offers for their exploration. But
evpn this rapid survey of its resources would
be incomplete without a reference to one
which for many modem readers is the stand-
ard work on* the subject. Dr. Gregory's
^^ Animal Magnetism," first published, I be-
lieve, in 1851, and again in other editions at
later dates. It is a very fine review of the
whole subject in all its branches, and is a
good first book for any new student of mes-
merism to take up.

The "Mesmerist," a weekly journal of
Vital Magnetism, was published in London
in 1843. It was begun in May of that


Digitized by VjOOQIC


78 THE RATIONALE OF MESMEBISM.

year, and continued till September, when its
publication ceased. It abounds in interest-
ing records of mesmeric experience in all
branches and in good articles vainly combat-
ing the crass indifference and incredulity of
the public.

In contrast to this mass of literature,
which in realiiy renders any dispute as to
the truth of mesmerism equivalent to a
dispute as to whether Columbus was right
in believing that a continent exists to the
west of the Atlantic Ocean, we may use-
fully turn for a moment to the conventional,
orthodox notices of the subject in those mir-
rors of popular ignorance concerning all
psychic science — the encyclopaedias of the
day.

The Oxford Encyclopaedia, published in
1828, describes animal magnetism as ''an
appellation given to a pretended science,
which during the last century excited consid-
erable attention in several parts of Europe."
After giving a caricature account of Mes-
mer's operations, the writer goes on to de-
clare that in the end it became evident the
patients ''were impostors, or in a most
wretched state of debility both of mind and
body." The article concludes by remarking.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


BEAL UTEBATUBE OF MESMEBI8M. 79

*4t is needless to add that his doctrine is now
almost entirely exploded."

Dr. Eees' ** Cyclopedia of Arts, Sciences,
and Literature," 1819, disposes of the whole
subject in a very charming paragraph.
^* Animal Magnetism," it says, ^^is an ap-
pellation given by some designing or self •
deceived operators upon the credulity and
purses of mankind, to certain practices by
which, imder the pretense of curing diseases,
various effects were produced on the animal
economy, such as faintings, partial and even
general convulsions, etc. ; " and referring to
the "able investigation" of 1784, which de-
molished Mesmer's pretensions, the writer
concludes by saying that an account of it
will be found "under the article Imagina-
tion."

Chambers' Encydopsedia, in the edition
of 1884, after briefly glancing in a colorless
tone at the earlier history of mesmerism,
takes refuge in the investigations of Mr.
James Braid as settling the character of
mesmeric phenomena aU round. " Unfortu-
nately," it says, "the evil reputation which
the subject had so naturally obtained pre-
vented the due appreciation of Braid's dis-
coveries," — the discovery in question being


Digitized by VjOOQIC


80 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

reaUy litde more tliau an incomplete and
misleading theory concerning a subdivision
of mesmeric phenomena, unscientifically sep-
arated for the purposes of a preconceived
hypothesis, from others incompatible with
that hypothesis. The writer in the en-
cyclopaedia follows Braid's plan, however,
and confines his attention to incidents of
mesmeric experience which seem to lend
color to the hypnotic theory, lightly remark-
ing of the rest, *'no scientific observer has
ever confirmed the statements of mesmerists
as to clairvoyance, reading of sealed letters,
influence on imconscious persons at a dis-
tance, or the like; " a statement which might
be paralleled if we were to say, "no scien-
tific observer has ever confirmed the state-
ments of travelers and sailors concx^ming
the existence of an American continent
with trees, popidation, lakes, rivers, and the
Uke.''

The eighth edition of the EncydopsBdia
Britannica, in a brief account of Mesmer's
life, represents him as a detected impostor,
and without one word to indicate that there
is even any considerable body of opinion op-
posed to that view, ignores the report of
1881, and refers to the report of the com-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


REAL LITEBATUBE OF ME8MEBI8M. 81

mittee of 1784 in the following terms: ^^The
proceedings of Deslon, the pupil of Mesmer,
were scrutinized by a committee of inquiry,
consisting of the physicians Majault, Sallin,
d'Aroet, and Gtiillotin, and tibe academi-
cians Franklin, Le Boy, Bailly, de Bory,
and Lavoisier. The report drawn up by
Bailly thoroughly exposed the falsehood and
imposture of the mesmeric process. • • •
The disciples of animal magnetism attempted
to check the advance of their enemies by
forming themselves into societies. Mesmer,
more politic, escaped amid the general con-
fusion, carrying with him a subscription of
840,000 francs, and at the same time the
secret for which that sum had been given to
hun.''

A somewhat different tone is taken up in
the recent ninth edition. Mesmer is now
spoken of cautiously as a man who made
many converts, who was stigmatized as a
charlatan, but who was undoubtedly a mys-
tic, and who was honest in the belief that
the phenomena produced were real. A timid
reference to ReicheDbach*s discoveries in
odyllio force is then put forward. " The
idea that some such force exists has been a
favorite speculation of scientific men having


Digitized by VjOOQIC


82 THE RATIONALE OF MES31EBISM.

a bias towards mysticisiii, and it makes its
appearance not unfrequently," "The next
great step in the investigation of these phe-
nomena," the "Britannica" then proceeds,
"was made by James Braid, a surgeon, in
Manchester, in 1841," — and it goes on
to connect the whole remainder of a long
article with the weak and insufficient hy-
pothesis of this very shallow thinker.

To comment adequately on the attitude of
mind of writers who, remaining thus en-
tirely outside the area of knowledge concern-
ing psychic science in any of its branches,
have, nevertheless, the audacity to flirt their
incredulity in the faces of wiser and better
informed men, would claim the use of
stronger language than I care to employ.
No one, it is true, deserves blame for leaving
any subject that does not attract him alto-
gether unstudied. But in most cases people
who are conscious of limited inteUectuall
resources entertain a decent respect for
others better furnished. A man may be
nothing but a sportsman himself and yet
refrain from asserting that chemists and
electricians must be impostors. And a
chemist may know nothing of Italian art,
and yet may refrain from declaring that


Digitized by VjOOQIC


BSAL LITEBATUBE OF ME8MEBISM. 88

Baphael never existed. But all througli the
commonplace world, whether in its upper or
lower strata, people who are ignorant of
psychic science encourage one another in the
brainless and absurd denial of facts exhib-
ited in the encyclopaedias, and in an even
more grotesque and impudent fashion by
the newspapers of the day, whenever any of
its phenomena come up for treatment. The
average country grocer, the average news-
paper reporter, the average student of physi-
cal science, are all steeped in the same dense
incapaciiy to imderstand the propriety of
respecting the knowledge of others, even if
they do not share it themselves, whenever
they brush up against any statement relating
to the work of those who are engaged in any
branch of psychic inquiry. From the occult
point of view, indeed, one can understand
why this should be so. The incredulity of
unspiritual mankind is Nature's own protec-
tion against those unfit as yet to use her
higher gifts. That is all in the legitimate
order of things; but the more spiritualized
minority need not play up, on their part, to
that incredulity. It is their duty to war
against it, and in the course of that strife,
by slow degrees, the intelligence of the com-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


84 THB RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

monplaoe herd will be leavened, and their
minds, growing within them in spite of their
own complacent unconsciousness of the pro-
cess, be qualified gradually for a more pro-
gressive evolution.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CHAFTEB IV-
8n>£-LIQHTS ON ICBSMERIC PHENOMENA.

Ant one who goes patiently through any
considerable body of early mesmeric litera-
ture will be struck by the manner in which
each writer in turn handles his subject as
something expected to rest upon the body of
observation, whatever it may be, that he has
been enabled to imdertahe, and without
realizing the all - important consideration
that when we come to deal with natural phe-
nomena having to do with the subtle fortes
of vitality, and the even more subtle forces
which regulate the phenomena of conscious-
ness in higher states of nature, we cannot
make sense of any observations without being
in a position to comprehend something of
the general natural design of which they
form a part. The stars were seen in the sky
long before astronomers were fortified with
the mathematical and other knowledge that
enabled them to design a working hypothesis
of the universe sufficiently approximative to


Digitized by VjOOQIC


86 THE RATIONALE OF MESMEBISM.

the truth to render intelligent observation
possible; but until that time people who
merely looked at the heavenly bodies moving
about in the sky, and theorized on the basis
of such observations alone made a terrible
hash of their conjectures as to what was go-
ing on. Similar remarks may broadly be
made about every science in turn. Early
chemistry was a mere blind groping in the
dark amongst phenomena which could un-
dergo no coordination until some considerable
advance had been made in comprehending
the elementary structure of all bodies, and
the leading principles of chemical combina-
tion. Not of course until the molecular con-
stitution of matter was realized did chemistry
begin to assume anything like the dignity of
a fully matured science. Now the observa-
tion of the facts of mesmerism is exactly an-
alogous to the observation of stars carried
on from the point of view of an astronomer
knowing nothing of gravitation or of the
relations between the planets and the sim.

The mere facts are interesting, as the
mere sight of the heavens must have been
impressive even to the most uninstructed star-
gazer; but the facts themselves, however
carefully codified, will never enable students


Digitized by VjOOQIC


MESMERIC PHENOMENA. 87

to assign them to their proper reahns of na-
ture, or indeed to develop anything like a
rational theory of their causation. The only
scientific method by which they can be ex*
amined must have to do with some prelimi-
nary theory of psychic science, correspond-
ing, for example, to the theory of molecular
matter to which the influence of previously
observed facts in chemistry can be applied.

But truly to the world at large up till a
very recent date there Has been no theory of
spiritual science available, even as something
to be checked by the observed facts of mes-
meric experience; and of course even now
the great bulk of the cultured community is
neglectful of the important acquisitions in
this respect which have lately been made
and offered for the service of all who care to
make use of them, in some measure through
my own instnmientaliiy. With the full ex-
position and vindication of that teaching I
am not at present, as far as this voliune is
concerned, desirous of occupying my read-
ers; but I am in this dilemma, that while
believing I can bring into an orderly and
coherent science the hitherto disorderly and
apparently chaotic facts of mesmeric obser-
vation, I can only do this by constant refer-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


88 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

enoe to the body of spiritual teaching set
forth in modem theosophical literature.
Mesmerism can be explained by what is
called the esoteric doctrine, and certainly in
no other way, but a belief in mesmerism or
at least in some few of the facts that mesmer-
ism is concerned with has been recently dif-
fused to an enormous extent amongst my-
riads of people who have never heard of the
esoteric doctrine. These people cannot as
yet realize why it i&ust remain impossible
for them to understand mesmerism without
going behind it in search of mysteries about
which they are wholly uninformed; and yet
it is absolutely impossible by any simple
straightforward attack upon the problems
that mesmerism presents to us to bring them
into harmony with the workings of natural
law, or, in other words, to make sense of
them.

Reflection on the character of the prob-
lems to be dealt with ought, however, to
convince even those who know nothing of
occultism as a science, that there must be
such a science, or the potentialities of such a
science, lurking somewhere in the back-
ground. Straightforward investigation of
mesmeric phenomena shows us at all events


Digitized by VjOOQIC


MESMERIC PHENOMENA. 89

the magnetic fluid proceeding from the oper-
ator, and bringing about results — bow, no
one can guess. But though susceptible of
being seen by some people, the magnetic
fluid itself is imperceptible to most eyes
among those that may look for it, and clearly
belongs to a different order of natural phe-
nomena from those that are entirely subject
to sense perception. What ought to be the
effect of such an extremely impalpable agency
when it touches the organism against which
it is directed? If it is capable of producing
any effect upon that organism at all it must
be through some attributes inherent therein
which are of its own nature. The psychic
force, in point of fact, thrown out by the
will or thought of the operator, has got to
influence the will or thought of the subject
first, and then to get at the body, if that is
the object in view, through the corresponding
principles of the sensitive's organization.
Everything that has to do, therefore, with
the non-physical planes of Nature comes
within the purview of those who woidd arm
themselves for the purpose of comprehending
mesmerism in a scientific spirit.

This consideration is one of the most im-
portant that can be presented to the general


Digitized by VjOOQIC


90 THE RATIONALE OF ME8MEBISM.

reader in connection with the current revival
of mesmerism. The idea is simple; I have
expressed it already. Mesmeric phenomena
are either wholly or partially psychic in their
nature. We cannot understand them unless
it is possible to investigate the realm of na-
ture in which the laws governing our psychic
consciousness are really operative. Any
theorizing concerning external facts in mes-
merism which aims at accounting for these
by the materialistic science of old-fashioned
medical practice, must necessarily be doomed
to failure. But I must be pardoned for
dwelling a little more on the idea, because
until people recognize and act upon it, there
cannot be any such general progress in con-
nection with spiritual knowledge and
achievement as a truly intelligent apprecia-
tion of mesmerism might bring in its train.
Look at the way in which even the sciences
of the physical plane rest now upon one an-
other as their higher mysteries are explored.
Chemistry and electricity at one time seemed
lines of inquiry standing quite apart. Now,
of course, they are so intimately blended,
that electricity is as much a reagent of chem-
istry, in its relations with that science, as
hydrochloric acid. This is the case even al-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


MESMERIC PHENOMENA. 91

though the laws of matter to be investigated
are laws of matter alone. But when we
take a living human being and endeavor to
investigate Atm, it is not enough to be ac-
quainted with the organism that expresses
his consciousness. However deeply the ma-
terialistic physiologist may penetrate the in-
tricacies of this organism, he will always be
brought up abruptly on the threshold of
consciousness, and will frankly recognize that
farther than this it is impossible for him to
go. Too often indeed he is inclined to put
the idea in words that imply too much, and
he may say it is impossible for any one else
to go beyond the barrier he finds so impass-
able. That is just the mistake he makes,
and there is more pompous conceit than real
modesty in the commonplace phrases by
which people are in the habit of proclaiming
the orthodox boundaries of their knowledge.
"No one knows, no one can ever know, any-
thing of the mysteries lying on the other
side of death." So commonplace writers
will frequently affirm with absurd confidence
in the certainty of their own universal neg-
ative. This attitude of mind is what has to
be broken down on the part of modern Eu-
ropean thinkers generally, before the lines


Digitized by VjOOQIC


92 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

of study can be taken up whicli will really
conduce to the comprehension even of so
midway a series of phenomena as those of
mesmerism. When people say as above,
**No one knows, no one ever can know,"
etc., they are simply making a false state-
ment which vast bodies of experience con-
tradict every day.

In one sense, up till now, most people
eould afford to keep their eyes shut to the
superphysical realms of nature. The work
of their progress was strictly associated with
the exploration of physical nature. That
has been the function of this expiring cen-
tury in a preeminent degree; and the cen-
tury cotdd perform its work, so to speak,
without knowing anything about the spirit-
ual planes, but that will no longer be the
case with the next century. Here we are
already face to face with this complicated
question as to what mesmerism really is; we
are confronted by a mass of ill-understood
phenomena. But ill-understood though they
may be, they are now at all events so com-
pletely recognized that future generations
will infallibly be concerned with them to
a considerable degree; investigating them
intelligently or clumsily, pushing them to


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ME8MEB1C PHENOMENA. 98

beneficial or miaohieyous developments; but
every one wiU be hopelessly entangled with
them unless dealing with them as partly be-
longing to the spiritual planes. The living
man with his interior consciousness of self
and individuality is on two planes of nature
at once, as a ship is in two media at once,
half in the water and half in the air. To
manage your ship successfully you must take
cognizance of the laws governing each of
those media. To deal successfully with
your human being you must understand his
physiology no doubt, but you must equally
imderstand his psychology, and something
of the collateral phenomena of nature in
those regions or planes thereof, to which the
phenomena of the psychic man belong.

So now, though feeling by reason of the
double illumination which occult study has
provided for, fairly qualified to explain
many of the phenomena of mesmerism which
have hitherto been left the prey of inere un-
intelligent wonder, I am at the same time
constrained to say that no one can hope to
make head or tail of any really true and sci-
entific rationale of mesmerism unless he
will first take the trouble to comprehend oc-
cult teaching, up, at all events, to a certain


Digitized by VjOOQIC


94 THS BATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

point. We must realize something of what
occultists mean by the astral plane before
entering on the consideration of how the
consciousness of a mesmerized object behaves
when translated to that plane. But, on the
other hand, this book cannot be a treatise
on occult science at large. That should be
dealt with and investigated as an indepen-
dent study by any one who aims at a really
thorough grasp of its principles. What I
have to do therefore for the moment is to
make a statement concerning the esoteric
teaching which gears in with the facts of
mesmeric science, asking the reader to treat
this for the time being as simply a working
hypothesis. If as a working hypothesis it
be found that all the facts of mesmerism are
thus provided with a rational setting, that
perhaps may be regarded as a provisional
consideration in favor of the esoteric teach-
ing, and may perhaps impel students to in-
quire into it a little further. But of course
I will not delay my readers on the threshold
of the subject with which I am now specially
concerned, in order to set forth, in the ex-
planations it may here be necessary to give,
anything resembling a complete argument
on behalf of the occult theories concerning
life and the higher aspects of nature.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


MESMERIC FHENOMENA. 95

The esoteric or oocult science view of
man's constitution is the important branch
of the subject to be put here in the fore-
ground. This is represented as consisting
of several principles, and the classification is
at all events far more scientific in its char-
acter than that which sums up the human
being as consisting of a body and a soul.
We need not quarrel with the body and soul
division as far as it goes, but it does not go
far, and, above all, sins against accuracy in
overlooking the manner in which the lower
principles of man merge gradually into the
higher through some of an intermediate
character. It is with these intermediate
principles that mesmerism has especially to
do, and it is with a view of getting the
reader to understand the classification at all
events, even if he does not at the moment
accept it, that I wish now to describe what
is called the septenary division of man.

We have got clearly to deal first of all
with the matter constituting his body, mat-
ter which is analyzable into its organic ele-
ments, its carbon, phosphorus, oxygen, and
other gases. By chemical processes of na-
ture, carried on first of all in the vegetable
world, the inorganic matter of which the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


96 THE EATIONALK OF MESMERISM,

man's body is composed has somehow been
converted into organic matter before it ac-
tually takes part in the complete structure of
his bones and flesh. This life principle,
which differentiates organic from inorganic
matter, is the second principle of man, and
may for the moment be called vital force.
But thus far we are thinking merely of mate-
rial atoms, vitalized, it is true, but imder no
direction which impels them to assume the
form of a human body. People content
with a merely conventional knowledge of na-
ture trouble themselves little as to how or
why the atoms group themselves as they do
during the growth of a human being. Oc-
cult science, more penetrating in. its vision,
discerns an underlying pattern, so to speak,
consisting of materials wholly unlike those
of the physical plane, and belonging indeed
to what by the conventionalities of occultism
is called the astral plane; and this pattern,
or ground-plan, of the human being is recog-
nized as the third principle, and may be
called the astral body. It is quite visible
when detached from the physical body to
those who are gifted in any high degree with
clairvoyant vision.

The fourth and fifth principles of man to-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ME8MEBIC PHENOMENA. 97

gether oonstitate wliat may be held to corre-
spond with the ordinary idea of the sonl, but
occultiflm thinks of the soul as complex in its
constitution. As every one can see, it has
affinities for earthly and material sensations,
pleasures and pursuits, while at the same
time it is also gifted ¥dth sympathies in a far
loftier direction. That these very different
aspects of the soul are seated during the life
of the complete individual in different vehi-
cles — to use an oriental metaphor — is one
of the fundamental conceptions of the sep-
tenary division, and the lower of these two
vehicles, the fourth principle of man, is most
conveniently described by the term "animal
soul," while the fifth is the truly "human
soul,'' itself more or less pervaded by the
sixth, or "spiritual soul," which, though ex-
isting undeniably in germ in every human
being, is, for a great many of us unfortu-
nately, a potentiality rather than an accom-
plished fact. The seventh principle on the
occult scale is that infinite, sublime, in-
comprehensible imiversal Spirit in which all
the phenomena of nature are in some wholly
imfathomable way involved; out of whose
infinite potentiality all manifestation arises,
in which, whatever they may be, there re-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


98 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

side the attributes tliat human speculation,
vaguely groping after tlie unattainable, as-
signs to divinity.

Fine and elaborate as this division will
appear as contrasted with the more element-
ary conception of the soul and the body, it
is not by any means complicated enough to
account for all the phenomena which have to
do with either of these j)rinciples taken by
itself. I do not conceive, for example, that
the matter would be correctly put if I simply
said "that which we may call the mesmeric
fluid is the vital energy," or second principle
on the classification just described. But
certainly it has very close relations with that
force, and one of the correct interpretations
of mesmeric phenomena in the humbler lev-
els of these would recognize animal magnet-
ism as equal to the task of restoring lost vital
energy, and thus accomplishuig beneficial
effects on the human system where no spe-
cific illness has to be considered, and where
nothing but a healthy stimidus is wanted to
reestablish vigor.

The close relations between animal mag-
netism and vital energy may be observed in
very interesting experiments which have
sometimes been carried out, though rarely


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ME8MEBIC PHENOMENA. 99

by European mesmerists, in connection with
the vegetable kingdom. It is possible to
mesmerize a plant, and procore specific and
distinct results in connection ¥dth the direct
stimulation of its growth. That these re-
sults have sometimes been pushed to what
seemed at a first glance quite miraculous
lengths by some oriental adepts in mesmeric
science, is, I belieye, a fact, although unfor-
tunately the existence of such a possibility in
the background, as it were, of nature's re-
sources is but too often made the excuse in
India for juggling of a most commonplace
lype, which pretends to reproduce the
vaguely talked of feats of the great occult-
ists, just as amongst ourselves commonplace
conjurors derive from rumored wonders con-
nected with spiritualism suggestions for
their own illusions.

The various principles of man that I have
been describing make up the complete man in
the aggregate, just as, to use a rough illus-
tration, the sails as well as the keel of a ship
contribute to make up the complete vessel.
But the sails belong in their nature and are
adapted to one medium with which the vessel
is concerned, the air; the keel is adapted to
the other. Any one observing the keel from


Digitized by VjOOQIC


100 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

the point of view of the medium to which it
belongs, if himself a fish and imqualified to
take note of natural phenomena above the
surface of his own element, would not be
able to aocoimt always for its behavior.
What, for instance, could explain to him the
reason why the keel might sometimes be
slewed very much to one side as the vessel lay
over to the wind? The observer of the kind
I have imagined would be related to such
a phenomenon just as the mere physical sci-
entist amongst ourselves is related to phe-
nomena which have to do with the human
consciousness.

I rather ding to this illustration of the
vessel belonging to two media, because it
will help to show, in reference to the princi-
ples of man, that although the higher and
the lower principles during life are closely
intermingled with each other, the higher
nevertheless belong by their nature to other
planes than that with which our eyes and
senses make us familiar. Take, for exam-
ple, the astral principles of a man's body
and lower soul. All the time that the body
is in the physical plane (if one may use that
expression) these astral principles are in the
astral plane of nature, coextensive with the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ME8MEBIC PHENOMENA. 101

physical, permeating it everywhere, consti-
tuting its second aspect, and, above all
things, filled with the phenomena properly
appertaining to it, just as the physical plane
is filled with the scenery and decorations of
nature, with the animal and vegetable king-
doms as well as with the humanity which
presides over all. And this is the second
great idea amongst those taught by occult
science which I want my readers to keep
hold of, at all events as a working hypothe-
sis, — namely, that the planes of nature of
which I speak as higher or superior to those
which we see aroimd us, are all abundantly
stocked with the beings, things, objects of
creation, whatever we may call them, which
properly belong to their nature, while to a
consciousness which becomes translated to
any one of these planes such scenery or in-
habitants will be as fuUy perceptible as the
scenery and inhabitants of the earth are per-
ceptible to waking vision. These planes of
nature do not divide themselves in precise
accordance with the septenary division of
human principles of which I just spoke, but
for the purposes of what we are now consid-
ering we must realize two great phases of
nature, or planes, above that of the visible


Digitized by VjOOQIC


102 THE RATIONALE OF ME8MEBISM,

earth, the nearest to us being the astral, the
next what I will here call the spiritual plane.
It is towards this latter that the soul of a
human being should ultimately aspire, but
it is quite certain that with every human
being who is first released from the imprison-
ment of the flesh, whether by the solemn
process of nature at death, or by the inter-
vention of mesmeric influences during life,
it is quite certain, I say, that the astral
plane will be the first on which that con-
sciousness reopens after quitting the physi-
cal. The further progress upwards, indeed,
is one claiming so much from the soul that
aims at it, that a great number of very good
mesmeric sensitives may not be enabled to
accomplish it. The astral plane thus be-
comes much the most important for the pur-
poses of studjring commonplace mesmeric
phenomena.

When I come to deal with clairvoyance it
will be necessary to recur to this exposition
as bearing closely on the magnetic trance;
but as regards the simpler phenomena of
mesmerism, in so far as it afEects the health
of the body generally, it is only necessary to
realize the astral plane sufficiently to com-
prehend that there we find the bridge of com-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


MESMERIC PHENOMENA. 108

municaiion between the senses of the oper«
ator and the subject, and that all the be-
wildering experiences connected with sen-
sitives who taste what some one else tastes
under mesmerism, and feel the pins which
prick other people's bodies, cease to present
an incomprehensible or miraculous aspect
when we realize the manner in which the as-
tral plane afiEords direct communion between
the consciousness of the operator and the
subject when the two are brought into true
magnetic harmony.

Li regard to the spiritual plane, that has
to do solely with the higher spiritual phases
of consciousness which mesmerism can evoke
from a sensitive, and need not be thought of
except in connection with the most exalted
sort of clairvoyance; so that practically for
a rough comprehension of the rationale of
mesmerism all I am asking for the moment
is that my readers should recognize, or at
all events assume for the ptirposes of this
argument, the existence of what has here
been called the astral plane, the medium of
nature in which the human will operates
more directly on sensation than in the me-
dium of existence which is constituted by
the physical earth.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CHAPTER V.

CUBATIVE MESMERISM.

A CURIOUS tendency of the human mind
leads a great many people to suppose that
any given branch of knowledge has assumed
importance for the first time when it happens
first to have arrested their own attention.
Few people would confess this to be the
truth as regards themselves in a naked way,
but the whole body of modem literature put
forth under the hypnotic flag is a ludicrous
illustration that with society at large that
rule operates. The names with which "sci-
entific " hypnotism are most definitely associ-
ated in modern years are those of Dr. Char-
cot and Dr. Liebaidt. B:ut at the same time
it is a simple historical fact that far more
was done to establish the scientific truth of
curative mesmerism by Dr. Esdaile and Dr.
Elliotson fifty years ago, than either of the
modem physicians just named have had time
yet to accomplish.

For inquirers who at this stage of the pro-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CURATIVE MESMERISM, 105

ceedings wish to know what coratiTe mes-
merism really can aecomplisl^ Dr. Esdaile's
books and the ^^Zoist " remain immeasurably
the most fruitful literature to take up. The
only aspect in which, at the same time, they
are at all defective is that which has to do
with theory. Falling into a very natural
error, most of the early experimentalists
who obtained striking and important results
came to the conclusion that these would be
capable of attainment by anybody else who
tried for them in the same way, and with any
subjects on whom they might operate. They
knew they had failures in some cases, but
they probably did not know the extent to
which they were abnormally gifted with the
peculiar reserves of nervous energy required
to throw off animal magnetism, and one of
them, as we have seen especially, Baron du
Fotet, is almost ludicrously frightened lest
the world at large should immediately rush
forward to repeat his own experiments, the
bearings of which in some cases he saw, not
unreasonably, to be fraught with peril. He
failed to attach sufficient importance to the
Boeotian lethargy of his generation at large;
and we have not yet by any means passed
beyond that stage of human en^ghtenment


Digitized by VjOOQIC


106 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

in which we may still rely with a good deal
of confidence on the stupidity of our contem-
poraries as a safeguard against their prema-
ture invasion of occult mysteries.

But at all events, to go back to Esdaile
and EUiotson, these two great experimental-
ists have left volumes of 'results which it is
not my business here to reproduce, but on
which I will venture to make some comments,
inasmuch as they have made either little
effort, or obtained but little success in their
attempts, to account for their own achieve-
ments. It is enough for the moment as re-
gards the facts to say that both Esdaile in
Calcutta, and Elliotson in the North of Lon-
don, cured serious diseases of almost every
sort and kind by treatment which involved
the use of animal magnetism, and of no other
curative agent whatever. A common and
absurd allegation put forward by people who
preserve their opinions concerning the cura-
tive effects 'of magnetism, by carefully pro-
tecting their ignorance of all the facts from
the invasion of external knowledge, is to the
effect that mesmeric influence is only bene-
ficial, when beneficial at all, in cases of ner-
vous disorder. They might as well say that
a locomotive engine could only pull a car-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CURATIVE MESMERISM. 107

riage made of mahoganj, and not one con-
structed of any other wood. The statement
is simply untrue, and incompatible with all
experience on the subject, as also it is en-
tirely out of touch with the theory as to the
causation at work which we are now in a
position to frame.

The records of Esdaile's and EUiotson's
work will also show numerous cases in which
operations of the most excruciating order and
on the largest scale — operations like the
amputation of a leg, or the removal of some
internal tumor — have been performed pn
patients rendered entirely insensible to pain
by purely magnetic treatment. But we may
make a clear distinction between the ansds-
thetic effects of mesmerism and the curative
effects, and in the first instance I propose to
deal with the latter.

The first remark one has to make about
Esdaile's work to begin with is that the con-
ditions which surrounded him were extraor-
dinarily favorable. The hospital in which
he worked was at Calcutta, and the patients
almost entirely natives of India. As a race
natives of India are very much more sensi-
tive to magnetic influence than Europeans.
This question of sensitiveness is one which


Digitized by VjOOQIC


108 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

requires a great deal of explanation, but
may be dealt with more conveniently when
we come to consider the psychic rather than
the medical department of the subject. El-
liotson, it is true, worked entirely with Eu-
ropean patients, but never, as far as records
show, obtained such startling results as
those of Calcutta if measured by the propor-
tion of sensitiveness discovered. Specific
results in North London were just as good
in some cases as specific results in India;
but no intelligent mesmerist setting to work
in this country would expect for a moment
to be able to influence as many per cent, of
the people he might deal with as if he were
working in the midst of an oriental commu-
nity. Now, this difficulty about the non-sen-
sitiveness to mesmeric treatment of a very
great number of people all over the world,
and of an especially .great number in the
highly civilized communities of modem Eu-
rope, is one which no enthusiast for mesmeric
progress should blink in any way, or attempt
to underestimate. But, on the other hand,
we must remember that the highly insensi-
tive condition of Europeans, which may in-
terfere for the moment with the practical
value of magnetic cures, is itself a mental


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CURATIVE ME8MESISM. 109

ratJier than a physical phenomenon. It is
due to the prevalent attitude of mind which
highly educated and highly civilized Euro*
peans generally fall into, and it would un-
dergo a very great change if the scientific
nature of mesmeric facts became generally
understood and relieved, by the sanction of
high intellectual authority, from the torrent
of ribaldry with which the whole subject has
been so long inundated by ephemeral writers
playing up, as usual, to the greatest igno-
rance of the greatest number. All that we
have really to keep in mind is that mesmeric
influence is not a curative agent which is
imiversally applicable ; it is a curative agent
which is probably more influential than any
other system medical science has discovered,
and is certainly susceptible of enormous and
most advantageous extension.

But how does the system work? Let us
see what have been the conclusions as re-
gards their own part in the cures they have
worked, of the earliest exponents of mesmer-
ism who still remain the most remarkable of
its experimentalists. Esdaile seems never
to have got much beyond the perception of
the fact that he could by making passes, as-
sociated with the exercise of his own will.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


110 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

produce magnetic trances, out of which,
when it was his will that this result should
ensue, his patients would emerge either cured
or very greatly relieved. I doubt if Dr. El-
liotson developed any theory going much
beyond this, and indeed, if any mesmeric
books, old or new, embody any theoretical
explanations of such phenomena that are
worth the serious attention of students, I
know of none such.

Perhaps this assertion should be qualified
by some reference to what is called hypnotic
suggestion as a curative method, for here we
are certainly in close touch with a theory, or
if not exactly with a theory as to the inner
working of the remedy, with a theory which
advances us one step in that direction. The
exponents of hypnotic suggestion imagine
that they dispense in the first instance alto-
gether with any emanations; that they bring
about a condition of partial or complete un-
consciousness by inducing their patients to
adopt some auto-mesmeric process, iEind that
while in this state they throw into their
minds, simply by spoken assurance on the
subject, the idea that when they recover
their normal state they will find themselves
better. I am very far from wishing to im-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CUSATIVE ME8MEBI8M. HI

plj that this kind of suggestion is never
really effectual, but I suspect that in most
cases where it works well the operator who
directs the whole undertaking has really been
yeiy much more energetic in the matter than
he has supposed. After all, magnetic passes
are merely some among the methods by
means of which animal magnetism can be
projected. One of the most potent modem
mesmerizers whom I have encountered, a
person in no way associated with any pub-
licly known undertakings of this kind, has
never employed passes, but has obtained en-
tire control of his sensitives by looking at
them fixedly, and exerting that mysterious
force which we call the will, without any
physical manipulation. It would be difficult
for a doctor instructing a patient, and still
more difficult if he superintends that patient,
in the methods required to superinduce the
hypnotic condition, to avoid contributing
very largely to the result himself.

However this may be, operators of the
latest school are quite on the wrong track in
devoting themselves to the method of hyp-
notic suggestion. The leading fact of mes-
meric science which justifies this last remark
is that to which I have already referred —


Digitized by VjOOQIC


112 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

the actual objectiye existence as a fact in na-
ture, as unequivocal as the steam in a boiler,
of the mesmeric fluid. Until people who
are on the path of this inquiry convince
themselves of this, they will be stumbling
about in the dark. It is the first all-impor-
tant leading elementary principle of the sub-
ject, and any one who attempts to dispute it
takes up a position which is first of all ab-
surd to those who, as I said before, are in
a position to see the fluid in question — as
certainly, though a much finer phenomenon
is concerned, as an engineer can see the
steam pouring out from his exhaust-tubes.
Secondly, the denial of the fluid theory is ir-
rational in face of Reichenbach's researches,
and can only be maintained by virtue of a
preliminary declaration that these researches
are falsely recorded. If it is argued that
Beichenbach is yet almost alone as an ex-
plorer in that particular range of phenom-
ena, the answer is that a positive fact, if a
fact, is still a fact in nature, though it stand
alone; and nobody after its establishment is
entitled to construct a theory of nature with
which it is incompatible.

Now this being assumed as the fundamen-
tal state of our knowledge as to the way in


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CURATIVE MESMERISM. 113

wUcli magnetic cures work, let ns go a step
further in the direction of what I am quite
ready to treat for the present as a hypothe-
sis. It is not unreasonable to assume that
the magnetic fluid which emanates from a
powerful mesmeric operator is something
which, in varying degrees, is present in the
organism of all other hximan beings. Nor is
it unreasonable to suppose that a something
which is clearly allied in a very important
manner with the innermost vital functions of
the organism may be in some way or other
unhealthy when those vital functions are
manifestiy out of order. Now, if that be
the case, the object we have to accomplish
in effecting a magnetic cure is to withdraw
the unhealthy fluid which has accumulated
in the organism of the sufferer in the first
instance, and replace it with that of a more
healthy order from a vigorous and wholesome
constitution. And clearly when we want to
replace one thing by another it is possible to
do this in two ways; one a rough way, and
the other a neat and relatively scientific
method. We may simply force in the new
influence, trusting that it will by its own
abundance somehow expel and drive off that
of which we want to get rid, or we may, by


Digitized by VjOOQIC


114 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

an arrangement of our energies far more eco-
nomical as regards the expenditure of force,
get rid first of the evil entity, whatever it
is, fluid substance or magnetism, and then
replace it by as much as may be required
to fill the void, of a more wholesome order.
So far, it seems to me, the most successful
among well-known curative mesmerists have
blundered on the rougher of these two ex-
pedients. Without apparently stopping to
think the thing out, and certainly without
coming to the conclusion that the tmderlying
cause of illness must be an illness, so to
8i>eak, in the sufferer's own personal mag-
netism, they have simply drenched him with
the emanations of their own healthier organ-
ism, and have obtained, no doubt, from this
somewhat extravagant process, results which
were often highly satisfactory. An immea-
surably more scientific way of going to work,
however, is to withdraw first of all the im-
healthy, or to use a convenient expression,
the bad magnetism, and then replace it by
an entirely separate operation. How is this
to be done? some one may ask; and the an-
swer is, by a very much simpler method
than the apparent obscuriiy of the subject
would seem to foreshadow.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CURATIVE MESMERISM. 115

Whether people understand what they are
doing or not, if thej try to mesmerize, and
hold out their hands with that end in view,
making passes or simply pointing the fingers,
as they may choose, what they are really
doing is this : they propel the magnetic fluid
accumulated in their own system in the di-
rection they choose that it shall go — that
choice being really little more than empha-
sized in their minds by the fact that they
are perhaps pointing in the same direction
— by means of an exercise of will-power,
which, great or little in its intensity, is the
outcome of their wish to obtain success.
The magnetic fluid does not simply flow from
the fingers because they ai*e extended in one
direction or another. Nothing whatever
will pass without the hidden influence of the
will-force in the background, any more than
a bullet will pass out of a gun without the
expansion of the gases in the rear.

Now, that being so as regards the emission
of mesmeric fluid, how are you to reverse
the process and draw from a patient the bad
magnetism of which you want to free him?
By nothing more elaborate than the exercise
of the will to that end, associated with pre-
cisely the same mechanical method of em-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


116 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

phasizing your own will that would be em-
ployed in the other case. The fingers of a
mesmerist pointed to the forehead of a pa-
tient may be made to suck in or draw out
from the patient a current of magnetism, just
as with the other intention the same condi-
tion of things would be seen by a person
whose sight was properly developed to in-
volve the emission of a current. For all
such purposes, indeed, as the withdrawal of
bad magnetism, something more than the
mere contiguity of the operator's fingers is
desirable. The complete touch of the whole
hand is a mechanical arrangement lending
far more assistance to the will-power than
any other arrangement; and it will be seen
that in having arrived at this conclusion
along the path of purely scientific specula-
tion we have got back to the famous old bibli-
cal method, — the laying on of hands. The
hands laid on may be thought of in the op-
erator's mind with a view of intensifying
their influence to the utmost, as sponges ap-
plied to a wet surface with a view of sopping
up the moisture; that is to say, he will tliink
of them with reference to the bad magnetism
he wishes them to withdraw, in a way which
is precisely analogous to the illustration just
given.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CUBAUVE ME8MEBI8M. 117

But what is lie to do with the bad magnet-
ism when he has sopped it up in his hands?
And here at the veiy outset of the matter we
come to an extremely important consideration
which is constantly overlooked by the earlier
writers on mesmerism. You must get rid
of the bad magnetism in some definitely final
and specific way if you want to accomplish
any permanent cure of the patient, for one
very good reason; because, if you do not, it
is more than likely that the evil of which you
have relieved him will lodge in your own
system, and unless it happens that the store
of magnetic energy in your own system is so
extraordinarily abundant that it drives out
the intruding evil, you will set up in your
own physical conditions of health something
very like the disorder you have cured. On
a small scale it is worth while to acquire for
one's seK a mild disorder to bring this truth
home to the mind. I have repeatedly given
myself headaches by taking them away from
others, leaving out by deliberate intention,
or perhaps in some cases by carelessness, the
precautions which I knew ought to be taken
to guard against that result.

How, then, to get rid of bad magnetism
from hands which are laden with it; that is


Digitized by VjOOQIC


118 THE BATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

the problem with wUch we have now to deal.
Again, for all practical purposes the result
is obtained by a simple effort of will in that
direction, associated with gestures which
stimulate the intention. If the hands are
withdrawn trom the patient, and the gesture
is made in a free direction of throwing off
whatever they may contain, exactly as if they
were wet and the operator were trying to dry
them by flourishing them about in the air,
the desired end is reached under most of the
simple conditions which ordinary mesmerism
would be concerned with. To make the
matter theoretically clearer, however, we
must dive a little more deeply into the mys-
teries of the superphysical regions of nature
lying all around us. Of these I shall have
to speak a good deal more when dealing with
the higher spiritual aspects of mesmerism,
but up to the present time it has not been
necessary to touch that side of the subject.
The ordinary curative influences can be
worked wifliout reference to the higher
planes of nature, just because they are con-
cerned with the phenomena of the lower
plane — with mere physical illness. But
now in some degree the refinement with
which we are dealing does impinge on the
higher branch of the subject.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CURATIVE MESMERISM. 119

A well-known and even liackneyed expres-
sion describes dirt as ^^matter in the wrong
place," and involves, perhaps, a deeper phil-
osophy than Lord Palmerston, who was, I
believe, its real author, troubled his head
with at the time. Hardly any matter is ab-
solutely evil, and in its right place may fall
into the general scheme of natural processes.
So with what, for convenience' sake, I have
called bad magnetism. That may be very
bad indeed when concentrated in a human
organism, but may not necessarily be wholly
without suitable affinities in the vast field of
nature's operations. There are, according
to the teachings of occult science, entities in
nature on the superphysical plane in which
such bad magnetism would find its own
sphere, I wiU not say absolutely of utility,
because that would be begging a very com-
plicated question, but at aU events its own
appropriate sphere. A very prolonged dis-
sertation on the subject would be required
to elucidate, as far as that might be possible
for us, the real nature of the elemental en-
tities to which I refer, but at all events it is
to that destination the bad magnetism with-
drawn trom a subject in illness has to be
sent if the operator wishes to get rid of it


Digitized by VjOOQIC


120 THE RATIONALE OF MESMEBI8M.

entirely, as of course be does. The mere
gesture of throwing it off from himself with
the intention of getting rid of it will, in all
probability, throw it into what may be called
the sphere of attraction of those currents,
forces, or entities — whatever we like to call
them — which will carry it away from all
further relations with ourselves. But, of
course, if the operator is gifted with su£K-
cient astral sight or clairvoyance himself as
to see the process carried out, he will be
very much more successful in getting rid of
the evil.

And for those who realize the process I
have just described, a new interest may at-
tach to many biblical phrases in which it is
distinctly referred to for those who compre-
hend the symbology, and shown to be pres-
ent to the knowledge of those earlier occult-
ists who practiced mesmerism many thou-
sand years before Mesmer. For example,
the very well-known parable of the herd of
swine, in regard to which so much egregious
nonsense has been written both by those who
endeavor to represent it as a literal histor-
ical transaction, and by those who conceive
that the authenticity of the biblical narrative
is upset by dwelling on the immoral absurd-


Digitized by VjjOOQIC


CUBATIVS ME8MEBI8M. 121

ity of the story taken literally, is significant
for those who understand the affinities be-
tween certain orders of elemental currents,
and what we are here talking of as bad mag-
netism. The herd of swine simply stand as
a symbol for these elemental currents or en-
tities, and the meaning is that when the
devil cast out of the man who was afflicted
— or, in our more scientific phraseology,
when the bad magnetism withdrawn from
him — had to be disposed of by the supreme
operator concerned, it was disposed of in the
proper way, and not left to hang about the
aura^ of either himself or the bystanders.

^ Itit impoMiblo to explain the real tbeorj of inee-
merinn withoot using aome worda yery familiar to stn-
dents of ooonltisin in other branches, bnt perhaps requir-
ing a brief explanation here. The ^ aura '* is the term
employed to denote that cloud of astral matter, that is to
say, of matter belonging to the next plane of nature
abore the physical plane, 'which surrounds every human
being, and by a large number of adequately gifted peo-
ple can be seen by a finer development of that faculty
already referred to as enabling some people to see the
mesmeric fluid, or, as it would sometimes be called by
occultists, the magnetic aura. The condition of the
aura has almost an imlimited signification for those who
are properly instructed in the interpretation of its signs,
but without going into those of its aspects which have no
direct concern with my present subject, it is enough
to say that the aura in every case would be violently
affected by conditions of disease, and while the restora-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


122 THE BATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

When such bad magnetism is left to hang
about the aura of the operator it may, as al-
ready suggested, develop in himself the
very ailment from which he has cured his
subject, if his own physical constitution
present any weakness in that direction. Or,
if this does not take place, another very cu-
rious result may follow, which is illustrated
by an occurrence within my own knowledge.
A lady, troubled with very long-seated and
severe rheumatism, was cured by a mesmeric
operator in Paris, and went away well satis-
fied to another part of Europe. Four years
afterwards the old pain, which had never
troubled her in the interval, returned with
its old virulence, and she hastily sent to in-
quire after the operator who had dealt with
her so successfully. It turned out that he
had died at exactly the period when her com-
plaint returned. Other similar cases are
spoken of in some of the mesmeric books,
and the explanation simply is that in such
cases the operator has never got rid of the

tion, in a person who had been ill, of healthy conditions
-Would manifest itself in the purification of the anra, it is
eqnally a conyerse possibility that infiaences of a rela-
tiyely immaterial character in the first instance affecting
the aura, might afterwards express themselves in physi-
cal conditions.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CURATIVE MESMERISM. 128

bad magnetiain. It has never found a lodg-
ment in Us own system, because that has
been too healthy to allow of its ingress, but
when all the attractive forces of his own life
are broken up at its dose, the bad magnet-
ism, released from its temporary entangle-
ment, flies back to its own previous habitat,
like any electric current following the chan-
nel of least resistance.

At the present moment the most ener-
getic of modem physicians amongst ourselves
in England who are endeavoring to apply
some of the lessons of mesmerism to the cure
of disease, have drifted into the practice of
what is very well known now as "hypnotic
suggestion ; " and I am very far from wish-
ing to imply that that system is inoperative
or delusive. Within the system of every
human being there are springs of force
which can be called into activity by hyp-
notic suggestion, even to the expulsion of
bad magnetism, and the apparent production
of a cure. I say apparent, because imder
this arrangement no very great likelihood
that the bad magnetism will be finally ex-
pelled from the patient's aura is set up.
Moreover, this complicated reflection has to
be taken into account, one which all modem


Digitized by VjOOQIC


124 THE RATIONALE OF MESMEBISM.

followers of the hypnotic school have entirely
overlooked in dwelling on the existence of
another danger to which they assign perhaps
exaggerated importance. It is a common-
place of modem writing on the subject that
purely hypnotic treatment, that is to say,
the establishment of conditions of what we
call the mesmeric order in a patient's system
by means of external mechanical applica-
tions, like revolving mirrors, or what not, is
free from the peril attached to the influence
which a mesmerist obtains over his subject
if similar conditions are established by
means of passes in the old way. Now, of
course, it is perfectly true that to a certain
extent the mesmeric operator obtains influ-
ence over his subject, and if the same oper-
ator and the same subject go on working to-
gether for a long period of time, and trance
conditions are constantly reestablished, the
influence of the mesmerist becomes enor-
mous. That influence, however, does not
spring into sudden magnitude all at once on
a single occasion. Here again qualifications
have to be introduced which I will discuss in
their proper place in regard to the sudden
results obtained with entire strangers by
prof essional mesmeric exhibitors; but these


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CURATIVE MS8MEBI8M. 125

really &11 into a different category from the
cases with which we are concerned for the
moment. It is most emphatically true that
no mesmerist influencing a subject for a cura-
tive purpose would suddenly acquire fatal
supremacy over the morale of that subject;
but from the point of view which I fully rec-
ognize — that after a time when the influ-
ences had been frequently repeated such con-
trol would be possible — the reply is that
people who find the need of being mesmer-
ized must be exceedingly careful into whose
hands they trust themselves.

I think if the idea of medical science of
the ordinary type were presented to the
world now for the first time, timid people
would be inclined to say, "How frightful the
notion of following the prescriptions of a
doctor. If he were malevolently inclined he
might give us poison or drugs which would
be otherwise deleterious 1" Of course he
might. In this life we are continually rely-
ing with more or less confidence on our
fellow-beings. Sometimes that confidence
is misplaced, and terrible examples of trust
betrayed in every walk of life encoimter our
observation ; but as life is organized at pres-
ent we can only meet that condition of things


Digitized by VjOOQIC


126 THE RATIONALE OF ME8UEBI8M.

by taking care as to whom we do trust,
whether in affairs of everj-day life, in busi«
ness, in affection, in medical practice, or,
finally, in mesmerism. As for the notion
tiiat when a mesmerized subject may pass
under the curious invisible influence of the
operator, he or she on that account loses the
normal faculty of will, and is weakened or
d^raded in character accordingly, I venture
to declare that no shadow of justification for
that theory can be set up by any legitimate
appeal to established facts in the psychic
constitution of man. It is not even true
tiiat sensitiveness to mesmeric influence is
necessarily associated, although that some-
times may be the case, with want of individ-
ual energy of character. To that branch of
the subject, however, I must recur later, and
therefore leave it alone for the present.
But coming back now to the real danger,
such as it is, of hypnotic suggestion, as dis-
tinguished from the other danger, such as it
is, of mesmeric treatment, we must remember
that the hypnotic state may very roughly be
described as an abnormal physical condition,
and the mesmeric state as an abnormal as-
tral ^ condition. In some way the nerves are

^ Thk teim is of uniTersal application in all occult
-writing to that region o£ nature related to snoh phenom-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CUBATIVJS ME8MERI8M. 127

janed by the peculiar strain imparted to them
in the first instance through the optic nerve,
and a mysterious dislocation of the interior
mechanism of the nerve system is superin-
duced; and this dislocation once superin-
duced is very liable to recur under the stim-
ulus of some casual accident or thoughtless
act on the part of any person who has once
acquired the unfortunate art of throwing his
nervous system into disorder. Like many
other dangers that we have to recognize as
theoretically possible in all varieties of mes-
meric treatment, I am not arguing that this
one is of very great magnitude, but as far
as it goes it is a real risk, and the tendency,
therefore, of hypnotic treatment is distinctly
more injurious than the tendency of mesmeric
treatment, always assuming that we do not
fall into the improbable disaster of putting
ourselves too trustfully into the hands of a
consciously malevolent person.

ena m the aura I haye already described. It ii a realm
in itself, of yast oomplezitj, oo-eztensiye with, and qnite
as populous as the physical plane, and filled with as cpreat
a yariety of natoral phenomena. Vide books on occul-
tism generally ; in reference to which I cannot refrain
from adding that people who put them all aside as mi-
worihy of consideration will neyer make anything but
nonsense of their theories concerning either mesmeric or
hypnotic transactions.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CHAPTER VL

AK.£8THEnG EFFECTS AND BI6IDITT.

Rich as the old literature of mesmerism
is in evidence concerning the anaesthetic
effects of magnetism, and though in the ex-
periments often pablidy presented at the
present day nothing is more common than to
show how completely the mesmeric trance
may quench all sense of pain, I do not think
that any treatise on the subject has hitherto
made an attempt to account, in anything
that can be called a scientific manner, for
these remai'kable phenomena. Least of all
have the modem writers — limiting them-
selves willfully to a contracted view of the
whole subject — been in a position to inves-
tigate the real causation of mesmeric antes-
thesia. It would indeed be impossible to do
this with any prospect of success without
taking into account the deeper occult science
of the whole subject, and no ordinary know-
ledge acquired by the simple examination of
the human physique could enable any mere


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ANESTHETIC EFFECTS. 129

physician to guess at the manner in which
magnetic force operates to suspend the normal
activity of the nervous system. Any at-
tempt, indeed, to investigate the more subtle
characteristic of the human organism, with-
out taking into account some of those higher
principles which are not within the cogni-
zance of the ordinary senses, and still less
open to investigation by the instruments of
the dissecting room, must necessarily prove
abortive. The seat of consciousness is not
in the physical matter of the body, and thus
all questions having to do with the manner
in which consciousness of pain can be sus-
pended, must concern themselves, even if
they do not have to go higher, with the as-
tral principles of the subject.

Now I have already pointed out that that
force itself which differentiates organic from
inorganic matter is already one which apper-
tains to the astral plane, and I have also in-
dicated that the septenary division of prin-
ciples, described in a preceding chapter, must
be itself still further analyzed before we can
fully apprehend the working of consciousness
even in its least elevated forms. And thus
the force of which I have now to speak, al-
though not belonging to any higher stratum


Digitized by VjOOQIC


180 TEE BATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

of the human constitution than the second
principle, nevertheless is itself distinct from
vital energy in its simplest aspect. The
truth is, that when we talk of the nerves as
the channels for conveying sensation in the
one direction to the true Ego, or in the other
for conveying the will force of the Ego to
the bodily organism, we are talking, to use
a rough but not inaccurate analogy, of the
steam pipes connecting the boiler with the en-
gine, while omitting all notice of the steam.
That which really is the medium for the con-
veyance of consciousness or will, as the steam
is the medium for the conveyance of force in
the case of the engine, is what may be most
conveniently described as the "nerve aura.'*
And at this point I know that many read-
ers will make a pause, and ask by what
process of experimentation I have arrived at
the knowledge I possess with regard to this
nerve aura. My reply is, by the only
method of investigation which can possibly
be applied to such a problem. No physical
experiment can deal with the matter. No
knowledge to be disinterred from medical
speculations concerning the nerves and the
brain will help us one step on the road to-
wards the conclusions we seek. The only


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ANJS8THETIC EFFECTS. 181

way of acquiring information concerning
the liigher principles of the human body, is
by bringing to bear on the problem some of
those higher principles themselves. To il-
lustrate what I mean, let me remind readers
of any books worth speaking of concerning
curative mesmerism, that no observation is
more abundantly established, whether by
the early inquirers, or by those of a more re-
cent date, who inquire with a higher purpose
than the mere establishment of a precon-
ceived hypothesis, than those which show
that mesmeric patients in trance are enabled
to prescribe for themselves, to diagnose their
condition with a confidence completely sur-
passing the skill of any physical practitioner,
and above all are especially capable of de-
scribing the way in which magnetic influ-
ences work upon them, and to indicate any
modification that may be required in their
magnetic treatment. In point of fact the
mesmeric sensitive becomes clairvoyant in
reference to such problems as those we have
under discussion, and can discern the opera-
tions of nature in connection with the astral
principles of man which necessarily defy any
scrutiny from the physical senses.
Now the early mesmerists, though con-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


182 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

stanily availing themselyes of this fact to
guide them in the treatment of their pa-
tients, did not for the most part possess the
advantage of any occult knowledge to begin
with, which could prompt them to direct
their inquiries along fruitful channels such
as would lead them to generalizations con-
cerning the forces of the superior planes.
Kealizing myself enough of the esoteric laws
at work to give greater point and significance
to my inquiries, I have been enabled, by
working with sensitive gifts of an unusually
high order, in the case of some clairvoyants
with whom I have had to deal, to get these
mysteries concerning the nerve aura intelli-
gently explained, and to make out the man-
ner in which the vital magnetism of a mes-
meric operator may affect the action of this
nerve aura in the mesmeric state.

To realize what takes place, let us, in the
first instance, imagine a condition of things
which is not exactly what takes place, but
will pave the way for a comprehension of
the actual course of events. The nerve aura
belonging to any given subject is, in a cer-
tain sense, a portion of his organism. It is
in direct relation with the vehicles of the
higher consciousness — and though imdoubt-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ANESTHETIC EFFECTS. 188

edlj in tbe first instance leading along the
nerves to the brain, is merely at that point
articulated, so to speak, with the vehicles of
higher consciousness — with the soul, let us
say for the convenience of the moment.
Now, it is a fundamental fact concerning the
complex organism of which we are speaking,
that the higher vehicles which, in the normal
condition of things, are in close and inti-
mate union — so to speak, in admixture
with — the matter of the physical body, are
nevertheless separable therefrom in a way
that does not involve the final and complete
separation which takes place at death. Ad-
vanced students of occultism do not require
any other argument to support the statement
I have just made beyond their own constant
experience of actually separating the con-
sciousness from the body. But without ap-
pealing to quite such lofty testimony, the
records of clairvoyance are fertile in exam-
ples of cases in which people describe them-
selves as looking at themselves, — contem-
plating their own body as from an external
point of view.

Without the help of occult science to in-
terpret what is really taking place in this
case, some writers are inclined to invent


Digitized by VjOOQIC


134 THE BATIONALE OF MESMBEISM.

elaborate theories of complicated sabjective
pbenomena to account for Bucb transactions.
In realiiy they are very simple, and simply
what they seem. Questioned on this sub-
ject, any dairvoyant in a genuine magnetic
trance would describe his consciousness as
seated in something at all events external
to his body. Not being on the lookout for
such conditions, few of the earlier mesmer-
ists, if any, thought of asking questions
pointing to such a condition of things, and
clairvoyants are very rarely spontaneous in
pouring out information; they require to
be cross-examined before exhibiting their
knowledge in full perfection, or rather be-
fore bringing their emancipated perceptions
to bear on the problems they have to deal
with, so as to develop this knowledge if
required.

However, taking the fact to be as I say,
and leaving persons inclined to dispute it to
search for the evidence in its favor in books
dealing with occult science generally, let me
ask my readers now to consider what is the
situation of affairs as regards the conscious-
ness that the sensitive out of the body re-
tains concerning the body he has left behind.
How, to begin with, has it come to pass that


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ANAESTHETIC EFFECTS. 185

he is out of the body under the mesmerio in-
fluence? And here I bring in mj strained
situation in order to make the position more
intelligible. The magnetism of the mesmer-
ist has drenched the nervous system of the
patient, expelling and replacing the nerve
aura properly belonging to his organism.
That expelled nerve aura still unites the
brain with the true consciousness, but there
is no longer any nerve aura uniting the body
with the brain. Now, since it is wholly
along the nerve aura that the message of
sensation is conveyed, the nerve itself play-
ing the part that the steam pipe plays to the
steam, nothing which transpires in connec-
tion, let us say, with the patient's arm can
be in any way reported to the seat of con-
sciousness. The magnetism of the mesmer-
ist, though a fluid of the same kind in nature
as the nerve aura it has displaced, is not
proper to the subject, it does not constitute
a channel of communication which can reach
from his arm to his true soul, and all com-
munication of that kind is thus cut off.

It will be convenient here at once to bring
into the fleld of view another mesmeric phe-
nomenon besides ansasthesia, pointing out
that the explanation I am now giving equally


Digitized by VjOOQIC


186 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

accounts for the well-known immobility of a
mesmeric sensitive in a trance as regards any
spontaneous movement, and also for the ri-
gidiiy of the limbs when they are set in any
particular direction by the mesmerist. It is
his intention, working through his own aura
now intimately blended with the nervous
system of his subject, which determines what
state of the muscles shall be superinduced by
the machinery which the nerve aura controls.
He extends the sensitive's arm, for example,
desiring that it shall remain immovable in
the position in which he places it. By the
hypothesis no other desire can come into
play to interfere with that condition of
things,' and immovable, therefore, the arm
remains.

Now, in order Uiat what actually takes
place may be exactly appreciated, I must ex-
plain here that under no circumstances does
the magnetism of the mesmerist entirely dis-
place the nerve aura of the patient, but it
penetrates and, so to speak, dominates it,
subduing all its vibrations for the time
being, replacing it as regards all the activity
of its functions, and accomplishing in regard
to the phenomena with which we have been
dealing precisely what would be accomplished


Digitized by VjOOQIC


AN^aTHSTW EFFECTS. 187

gupposing the original aura were entirely ex-
pelled. The only portion of the sensitive's
aura which is not thus dominated is that
which has to do with the mechanical and in-
voluntary movement of the body, the action
of the lungs and the heart, and so on; and
here in the first instance the activity of such
nerves can hardly be thought of as directly
related to the consciousness of the soul. It
is not necessary to go into a minute exami-
nation of the way in which the involuntary
muscles ore governed by nerves and a nerve
aura of an equally involuntary character, but
it is obvious on the face of things that there
is a difference between such nervous energy
and the nerve energy of the voluntary mus-
cles ; and this may sufficiently explain for our
present purpose the fact, that whereas the
voluntary nervous system can be affected by
the mesmerist's aura in the way I have been
describing, nature happily guards the sensi-
tive from the stoppage of the lower vital
machinery during such a condition.

It will be seen that the principle of this
explanation equally covers such cases as I
have hitherto been thinking of, in which the
whole physical organism is drenched with
the operator's magnetism, and the conscious-


Digitized by VjjOOQIC


188 THE RATIONALE OF ME8MEEISM.

ness of the subject expelled from it for the
time being, and also those other cases in
which local ansesthesia can be produced by
mesmeric treatment, so that an arm, for ex-
ample, may be made insensible to pain while
the sensitive is fully awake, and able him-
self to experiment on his condition by stick-
ing pins into the insensitive flesh. In the
case where the operation is carried out in its
entirety, the nerve aura of the brain itself is
dominated by tiiat of the operator, and none
of the senses are in any degree of activity.
The true consciousness is then out of the
body altogether, sometimes to an extent
which makes it difficult for the subject to go
through the slight muscular movement re-
quired for articulate speech. In such cases
it will be familiar to every mesmerist who
has handled clairvoyant subjects that the
thing to do is to demesmerize the lips, — that
is to say, by a conscious effort of will asso-
ciated with the attractive force of the fingers,
to draw out the alien magnetism from that
portion of the subject's organism; then the
original nerve aura is restored to potential
activity, and the subject is enabled to speak
while still remaining in the trance condition.
In the case of the local effect the nerve aura


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ANAESTHETIC EFFECTS. 189

is simply dominated in the limb under treat-
ment; in the head and in the body generally
the normal condition of the nervoos system
continues, and the patient is to all intents
and purposes awake.

The familiar mesmeric phenomenon in-
volved in the transference of sense from the
mesmerist to the sensitive is precisely in ac-
cordance with this somewhat more elaborate
explanation of anesthesia and artificial cata-
lepsy.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CHAPTER Vn.

THE NATUEE OP SENSITIVENESS.

Many of the most familiar experiments in
that kind of mesmerism wliicli has latterly
been played with rather as an amusement
than seriously investigated, have to do with
the transfer of sensations or states of con-
sciousness from the operator to the subject
under conditions that have nothing to do
with the five senses. I do not propose to
burden these pages with elaborate records of
such experiments, with the names, dates and
places concerned. Books devoted to such
records teem with elaborate examples of the
phenomenon before us. Any sense may be
the nucleus, as it were, around which these
transferred impressions can be gathered. A
duly qualified mesmerized subject may be at
one end of a room, the operator may look at
the page of a book at the other end, and the
mesmerized subject will be able to read the
words as they pass across the operator's vis-
ion. If he hears a faint sound, quite incapa-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THS NATUBE OF SENSITIVENESa. 141

ble of making itself audible in the natural
way to the sensitive, the sensitive in turn
will hear that sound. If he receives a phy-
sical sensation, like the prick of a needle,
the sensitive in relation with him will start
and show by some appropriate movement
that the sensation was transferred to the cor-
responding part of his or her body, and in
exactly the same way phenomena of taste and
smell can be, and have been scores of times,
transferred from operator to subject. When
we approach the consideration of these phe-
nomena we find ourselves at once in a region
of mesmeric practice altogether out of gear
with those simple transactions having to do
with curative processes, with which some
people erroneously imagine that mesmeric
science comes to an end.

Of course such phenomena as I am now
approaching are only possible in reference
to persons whose susceptibility to mesmeric
influence is very acute, and this may be the
appropriate moment to enter more at length
on the consideration of what really consti-
tutes mesmeric sensitiveness. To analyze
this with as much precision as that which
might be applied to the treatment of a chem-
ical compound would not be possible, unless


Digitized by VjOOQIC


142 THE BATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

we started with as full an appreciation of
all the elements which go to make up the
psychic nature of man as we possess in re-
gard to the physical attributes of the elemen-
tary bodies. Without claiming any greater
admission than is surely involved in the view
of humanity which most people entertain, we
may recognize a human creature as at all
events a composite entity to this extent, that
he has a spiritual or psychic nature of some
sort in union during life with his body.
Furthermore, the fact that avenues of per-
ception, having to do with the psychic na-
ture, exist independently of the five senses,
may almost be proved as a broad proposition
by the experience of dreams, even before we
approach those far more scientific proofs in-
volved in mesmeric experiment. If any one
at the present day endeavors to cling to the
hypothesis tJiat only through the channel of
the five senses can states of consciousness be
conveyed to the real ego of a human being,
all we need say here is that so narrow and
ignorant a view of the subject unfits an in-
quirer for dealing with the Rationale of Mes-
merism. He must fijrst take the moderate
pains by which he will be able to acquaint
himself with notorious facts.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE NATUBE OF SENSITIVENESS. 148

But starting from the general principle
that the psychic nature of man has its own
appropriate channels of approach other than,
or over and above, those that lead through
the physical senses, we may recognize very
quickly that the complicated phenomena of
transferred sensations under mesmeric treat-
ment fall into their places as varied expres-
sions of one simple truth. The establish-
ment of the mesmeric condition has set up
magnetic relations between the auras of the
two persons concerned, and the conditions
of consciousness acquired by the operator
through his own senses, and then by a nat-
ural automatic process reflected in his own
aura, ore equally reflected in the aura of his
subject, and thence directly transferred to
those innermost centres of consciousness
which the subject's senses are equally able
to approach, and which, therefore, when ex-
cited in his own nature, seem to him to have
been excited in the ordinary way.

Take for example the simple case to which
I referred just now, of a mesmerist who so
arranges tlungs that a friend shall prick him
with a needle in the arm or hands held be-
hind his back, or in anyway not seen by the
sensitive, and in which the sensitive betrays


Digitized by VjOOQIC


144 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

immediate consciousness of the sensation. I
have seen a sensitive under my own treat-
ment move one hand hastily over the other
as though brushing off an annoyance, when
the back of my own corresponding hand be-
hind my back has been pricked by a third
person. Here we may conjecture that no-
thing really transpires in that particular
spot of the sensitive's person which seems to
feel the sensation, but whatever may be the
state of consciousness of the ego due to a
prick in the back of the hand, that state of
consciousness is superinduced, so to speak,
by a short cut in the case of the transferred
mesmeric sensation. Lodged in the inner-
most consciousness it suggests the idea of
having been occasioned in the usual way,
and hence the impression that it is a prick
in the back of the hand. Does the idea
seem fantastic, or unsupported by adequate
experience? The truth is that a precisely
similar phenomenon has been utterly famil-
iar from time immemorial, and every doctor
at all events knows that people who have
lost an arm or a leg will testify to the
strange fact that they constantly seem to
feel pain in the missing hands or feet.
They seem to feel that pain because in some


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE NATURE OF SENSITIVENESS. 146

way the centre of consciousness lias been
affected in the same way that it would have
been if the hands or feet had been present,
and had suffered injury. The subject as-
signs the sensation to its normal cause.

Very well, then, we have, in considering
what it is that constitutes sensitiveness to
the order of phenomena now under consid-
eration, to do with the psychic element in
the human constitution, and the question
turns entirely upon the extent to which that
psychic constitution is predominant, or al-
together absorbed in, and overwhelmed by,
the physical nature.

It will be understood that in the theory I
am going to define I am expressing conclu-
sions derived from the study of many other
departments in human psychology besides
those directly concerned with the explana-
tions given. To put forward these explana-
tions on what would be recognized as a sci-
entific method, I ought to start from the
basis of positively known facts, and build-
ing up, with the help of definite experi-
ments, fresh knowledge bit by bit, arrive at
the results offered for acceptance. Nor is
that scientific method to be found fault with
in regard to the investigations of the deeper


Digitized by VjOOQIC


146 THE RATIONALE OF UESMEBISM.

mysteries of man's constitution as a whole;
but we can only derive a comprehension of
the true theory of mesmeric results by first
of all getting a conception of that constitu-
tion as a whole, and then deriving from
such aggregate knowledge whatever specific
knowledge may be required to illuminate
the problem in hand. And as this little
volume does not profess to be a complete
compendium of human psychology in all its
bearings, it would be impossible to follow
step by step the whole investigation which
leads to that which I hold to be the correct
view of the subject, the theosophical view,
namely, of the psychic and spiritual attri-
butes of bimianity. That which I propose
to offer in reference to the branch of the
subject now coming forward for treatment
— the theory of mesmeric sensitiveness — is
a clear statement of theory deduced from
theosophic teaching at large, and claiming
attention, I think, at this crisis by all stu-
dents of mesmerism as at all events coherent
and rational, and subject in itself to exper-
iments directed to test its validity in refer-
ence to its most important elements.

Sensitiveness, to begin with, must not be
regarded as an absolute fact in anyone's na-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE NATUBE OF SENSITIVENESS. 147

ture, like his height in inches or his weight
in pounds. Sensitiveness and the comple-
mentaiy characteristics which may be called
mesmeric force, are subject to a practically
infinite degree of variation in different
persons, and the maximum degree of sen-
sitiveness will feel the impact of the mini-
miun degree of mesmeiic force. In the
same way the maximtim degree of mesmeric
force will enable the minimum degree of
sensitiveness to cognize its influence, and
between these two extremes the whole body
of phenomena connected with mesmeric ex-
periment are always moving up and down
along a double sliding scale. There are no
people living so densely involved in matter,
whose inteUigence, that is to say, has come
to immerse itself so entirely in the physical
brain, as to be utterly beyond the reach of
mesmeric jwwer in excdsis. Here let me
point out that I am taking as the example
of minimum sensitiveness a human being
very far removed from the bottom of the
scale of human evolution. The entangle-
ment of thought here is only superficial, but
may easily mislead those who have no clue
to the proper comprehension of the problem.
The bottom of the human scale for pur-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


148 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

poses of mesmeric sensitiveness is not to be
found in the person of the dull-witted clod-
hopper, without a conscious thought directed
to any subject more elevated than bacon
and furrows. It is quite possible that such
a clodhopper, however incapable of adding
two rows of figures together, might be
highly sensitive to mesmeric influence, and
it is equally true that the person who would
represent the very highest degree of mes-
meric influence imaginable must almost ne-
cessarily be also highly gifted in every intel-
lectual aspect. These statements fall into
a truly scientific shape in the mind if we
think of the three typical human beings
thus imagined as ranged, not along a straight
line, but along a cyclic curve. Our clod-
hopper, for the purposes of this broad illus-
tration, will represent the divine essence,
let us say, coming into human form. As it
accomplishes the cyclic process thus entered
upon, it first of all evolves to the highest
possible degree the physical aspect in which
it is struggling to express itself, and at one
point in the curve accomplishes the maxi-
mum degree of development possible as re-
gards the physical instrument with which it
is working. The race (here, of course, we


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE NATUBE OF SENSITIVENESS. 149

are speaking of the race as the continuous
unity, and the single individuals as points in
its progress) having accomplished its maxi-
mum physical intellectual development con-
tinues along the returning curve of the
cycle, and without losing an atom, or an at-
tribute, so to speak, of the advantage gained,
proceeds to reevolve its so far hidden psychic
attributes which express themselves in phy-
sical intelligence at the nadir point of the
cycle, and are afterwards destined to respir-
itualize themselves, plus all the acquisitions
due to the descent into matter. The centre
of evolution which is being carried round
the cycle of course does not return to that
same point in the fig^ure from which the cy-
cle sprang, but to the corresponding point
on a higher level. The further examination
of that idea, however, would take us beyond
the subject now specially before us. I shall
have to return to the cyclic idea directly,
but having for the moment broadly defined
the origin, subsidence, and re-development
of sensitiveness as a human attribute, let me
show what the same methods of thought
bring out in regard to the complementary
characteristics of mesmeric force.
I have called them complementary for con-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


160 THE BATIONALE OF MESMEBI8M.

yenience' sake, but let us not for a moment
imagine that one human bemg is exclusively
a sensitive, another human being exclusively
a mesmerist. The very maximum degree
of mesmeric JEorce is, on the contrary, ne-
cessarily associated with .the maximum de-
gree of sensitiveness, because the maximum
degree of either can only be due to the pos-
session by the person in question of supreme
knowledge concerning both aspects of his
nature. Remember, sensitiveness does not
necessarily mean liability to have the will
enslaved by another. That is only one of
the aspects of sensitiveness of one kind.
We shall map all this out clearly in a little
while, though at first the complications of
the problem cannot but appear rather bewil-
dering to those who are unfamiliar with this
system of thinking. That which I mean in
speaking of sensitiveness at this stage of the
explanation is the faculty of cognizing im-
pressions derived through the aura, and the
corresponding senses belonging to that ele-
ment of the human constitution which is
allied with its aura. The cultivation of
these senses and faculties, it will be seen on
a moment's reflection, when allied with a
clear comprehension of all they mean, is a


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE NATUBS OF SEN8ITIVXNX88. 161

power and not a weakness. To be percep-
tive of the feeblest effort of will or desire
thrown out by another human being under
conditions involving the full comprehension
of how that sensitiveness is brought into
play, is equivalent to possessing a faculty
by means of which the slightest impulse of
thought or desire in any olJier person can be
cognized or tested.

It does not follow that the sensitive of the
kind I am now describing must necessarily
give way or submit to that thought or influ-
ence, or to any thought or influence even of
a very much more powerful kind. If the
sensitiveness is of the supreme sort I speak
of, it is supremely under the control of the
being to whom it belongs, constituting in-
deed a part, and a very important part, of
his own power as a mesmerist; for his sensi-
tiveness would enable him to perceive exactly
what he was doing, to regulate the impulses
of his own magnetic emanations in such a
way that they would go precisely to their
mark instead of being wasted like those of
the non-sensitive mesmerist, even granting
him a good deal of force. In fact, the non-
sensitive mesmerist works, so to speak, in
the dark, and wishing to hit a mark before


Digitized by VjOOQIC


152 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

him, flings a great liandful of missiles at it
in the hope that one or other may hit. The
mesmerist who is supremely sensitive, works
as one seeing his mark in the light, and
projects with accurate aim, and correspond-
ingly small expenditure of energy, the single
missile required to touch it.

This reflection, once comprehended, will
enable any one to see how exasperating it
is to those who comprehend mesmerism in its
spiritual and psychic aspects to hear the silly
babble of the world about the supposed
weak-mindedness of all who come imder
mesmeric influence. There is no more
weak-mindedness necessarily involved in be-
ing sensitive on the psychic plane than in
being sensitive to the delicacies of musical
expression. Some people who are otherwise
very brainless may be very highly gifted as
musicians, but on that account we need not
assume brainlessness to be a necessary con-
dition of a fine ear. And this illustration
helps us to another which may be appropri-
ately offered for the consideration of any
one who boasts that his own strength of will
is such as to render him absolutely unap-
proachable by mesmeric influence. This
boast would be precisely analogous to one


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE NATUBE OF SENSITIVENESS. 163

aperson quite unable to distiiiguish one tune
from another might make, if he thought fit
to plume himself proudly upon the fact that
no one, not even Patti or Joachim, could
produce sounds possessing the smallest as-
pect of beauty to his senses.

However, it is true that a considerable de-
gree of mesmeric energy may reside in many
human organisms which have not yet
evolved the faculty — the high, exalted fac-
ulty — of conscious sensitiveness. Like the
other characteristic, it must be imagined as
following the evolution of the human race
round the inevitable cyde. But there is an
important difference to be borne in mind
when we are considering these two aspects
of psychic perfection, the positive and the
negative, or rather the active and the pas-
sive. Sensitiveness, just because in the
first or lower limb of the cycle it is unasso-
ciated with intellectual development, is a
purely passive faculty. The whole body of
faculties to which it belongs has not been
evolved to that point in which self -conscious-
ness becomes its leading attribute. The
distinction here, of course, is that conscious-
ness alone, an attribute shared by humanity
with the lower animals, does not bring with


Digitized by VjOOQIC


164 THE RATIONALE OF ME8MEBI8M.

it the tendency to reflect concerning its own
attributes. It is only the intellectual man
who, pondering on the problems of his own
being, and turning his observation inward,
renders himself the subject of his own re-
flections, and can be called self-conscious in
the significance with which I here employ
the phrase.

Well, then, there cannot be mesmeric
force until the point of self -consciousness is
reached in humanity, and that point reach-
ing its culmination in the highest degree of
mere intellectual development, the point of
such highest development may be conven-
iently regarded as the starting point from
which mesmeric power begins to show real
energy. Here again let me qualify this
broad statement of the case to guard against
what seem contradictions in experience.
Many of the most remarkable mesmerists
have not been men quite on the intellectual
level of some amongst purely materialistic
giants in science or literature, but that is
due to the fact that all growths in nature
are gradual. As the race approaches the
condition of its highest intellectual manifes-
tation the other faculties belonging to that
condition rise into activify, and in individual


Digitized by VjjOOQIC


THE NATURE OF 8EN8ITIVSNS8S. 165

cases some of these, by special effort di-
rected to that end, may be brought to per-
fection in advance of others with which they
are, properly speaking, bracketed. But I
do venture to assert with positive conviction
that the facts of nature must correspond to
the broad assertion, that, granting the same
conditions of full health, vitality, bodily
vigor, and habits of life conducive to the de-
velopment of magnetic energy, the man who
besides these attributes possessed a highly
developed intellect would be the more power-
ful mesmerizer of the two.

And now let us take our already evolved
mesmerist who as yet is nothing else, that
is to say, who as yet has not climbed the up-
ward limb of the evolutionary cycle, and
who has not yet developed the receptive
psychic faculties of his own nature, and let
us consider how his energy operates on the
various classes of sensitiveness with which he
may have to do. Let us begin with the
sensitives of the lower order; those in which
the psychic attributes have not yet been en-
tirely dissolved in matter, or, so to speak,
translated into their highest material equiv-
alent, and who are represented in most com-
plete perfection by our typical clodhopper.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


166 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

The free aura of the clodhopper is the attri-
bute on which I wish to focus the reader's
attention. In using this phrase, ^^free
aura," I venture to borrow an analogy from
chemistry, where we might speak of "free"
acid left in a solution in excess of that re-
quired to neutralize a basic salt. The whole
aura, to put the matter tLat way, of the un-
developed man has not yet been employed in
neutralizing matter. It is hanging about,
and may be spoken of as free, in the sense
of being uncombined. On that free aura
the mesmerist's influence readily finds a
lodgment. The idea conveyed from his own
mind to that of the subject does not present
itself to the subject's mind as something
coming from without. He has not yet
learned to analyze his consciousness to the
degree of being able to draw such distinc-
tions. He simply finds an impulse of some
kind arising in his own mind; he does not
reason about it, or question it in any way,
he simply acts upon it as he would act upon
any other impulses spontaneously arising
in his own mind, unless restrained by some
countervailing consideration having to do
with penalties of an easily comprehended na-
ture which would equally serve to restrain


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE NATUBS OF 8SNSITIVENSS8. 167

tlie impulses of a horse or a dog. And even
these are in abeyance when the question is
of an impulse implanted by the mesmerist's
wiU, because the very act of the mesmerist
in taking charge of the subject's aura, has
operated to suspend its normal activity as
an influence directing the brain, and with
the entrancement of the subject's lower
nature an almost absolutely blank field of
operations is left to the mesmerist, just
because so far there is no higher nature
consciously evolved in the person under
treatment.

Here we get the first broad idea interpret-
ing the phenomena of mesmeric subjection
in reference to which the hypnotists of the
present day are so much interested, and so
deeply anxious, M we may accept their as-
surances to that effect. All these phenom-
ena of hypnotic obedience carried to lengths
which startle the observer are phenomena
having to do with impressions left by the
mesmerists concerned on the subject's aura.
They may or may not spring immediately
into activity. If the impression on the aura
is that a certain delay shall be operative be-
fore the message, so to speak, is passed on,
that impression is obeyed like any other.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


168 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

It is the tinintellectaal psycliic nature
which is obedient in such a case, the psychic
nature which has not yet become self-con-
scious; which is so much abstract psychic or
spiritual energy in process of translation
into a self-conscious being, but for the time
being unqualified to reason about the right
or wrong of its impulses, simply because it
has not yet been converted into reasoning
faculty.

And, be it observed, that in order to
maintain the set of conditions we are now
contemplating, it is not necessary that we
should keep our mind fixed upon the ex-
treme example thereof, — the case in which
the human subject is as nearly imintelligent
as we can imagine a human being to be.
At a later stage of the process, though at
one still on the earlier side of the meridian
of our cycle, a great deal more of the
psychic nature may be translated into intel-
lectual capacity, and the person concerned
may be very far from being a fool or an ig-
noramus, and yet that which is still psychic
in the nature may have imdergone but a
comparatively small amount of evolution.
Let us always bear in mind the character of
the cycle we are thinking of, and the grad-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE NATURE OF SENSITIVENESS. 159

ual nature of all the processes with which
it is concerned. Education of that superior
element in the total consciousness, which,
for convenience of talking about it here, let
us call the Higher Self — the education of
the Higher Self may begin, it is true, long
before the nadir point of physical evolution
is reached, but on the other hand it may
not, — or its evolution may only have just
begun. It is the later period of the cydio
process to which the evolution of that
Higher Self properly belongs; and thus,
when a person still on the eastern side of
life's meridian, — to use a pretty figure em-
ployed lately by Dr. Huggins in application
to a cycle smaller than that with which I am
now dealing, but still analogous to it in
nature, — a person, I say, still on the east-
em side of the meridian may have a very
great degree of intellectual development,
and yet a Higher Self barely capable of
reasoning about the impressions it may re-
ceive from external sources when deprived
of the support of that physical intellect on
which it has been leaning to a very great
extent.

If the brain instrument becomes paralyzed
for the time being by any of the nervous influ-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


160 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

ences that may be exerted upon it by either
mesmeric or hypnotic processes, the psychic
nature may be almost as stupidly obedient
to the mesmerist's impulse as if there had
been no intellect in association with it at
all. So then in the case of a hypnotic sug-
gestion intended to operate at a period sub-
sequent to the establishment of the impres-
sion, such a person will find the impulse to
do whatever he may have been directed to
do rising up in his nund like a spontaneous
desire, and certainly if there is no glaring
reason why he should not do the thing, he
wiU do it. Supposing that there is a glar-
ing reason in morals or obvious duly why
he should not obey the impulse, a conflict
may arise in his nature, one issue of which
quite possibly is a reversion to the paralyzed
condition of the intellect which was opera-
tive during the original mesmeric process,
and then the immoral influence is worked
out without any impediment. Or, there may
be an interior convulsion in which the intel-
lect asserts itself as predominant over the
psychic impulse. And, again, it may be
that the Higher Self, although very imper-
fectly developed, has nevertheless reached a
certain stage of its growth in which it is not


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE NATURE OF SENSITIVENESS. 161

entirely without the power of controlling its
incarnate tendencies.

But now let us suppose that the mesmerist
is operating on some sensitive who belongs
to the other half of the cycle of which we
are speaking. Let us observe in passing
that he will not obtain any effect whatever
on the person who represents the nadir point
of physical evolution. The perfectly intel-
lectual materialist will not be subject, at all
events, to any mesmeric influence of the
kind of which we are now talking. He,
too, in spite of his lofty self-conceit, would
be as helpless as a straw in the wind if sub-
ject to mesmeric influence belonging to the
highest developments of humanity in the
upper half of the cycle; but we are dealing
still with our mesmerist who is but begin-
ning to be one, who belongs himself to the
nadir point, that is to say, who is an ordi-
nary person in the world, like the rest of us
all around. When he begins to apply his
influence to some one in whom sensitiveness
is beginning in any appreciable way to de-
velop itself in the shape of completely con-
scious psychic existence, independent of, or
over and above, that of the physical plane,
he may attain many results which are su-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


162 THE RA.TIONALE OF MESMERISM.

perflcially like those he has got at in the ear-
lier undertaking. All transferred impres-
sions of taste, sound, or touch will of course
be as readily operative through the Higher
Self of a human being in process of spiritual
exaltation, as through the EUgher Self, how-
ever, little capable of self-conscious thought,
of the undeveloped human being. And
when the task to be undertaken involves the
employment of anything resembling clair-
voyance — a branch of the subject which I
reserve for special treatment presently — he
wiU find the superior sensitive far more
readily available for that lofty employment
than the inferior, though the inferior is by
no means incapable of clairvoyance within
certain limits.

At the outset there is an immense practi-
cal difference between the sensitive who is
such by reason of belonging to the uppef
limb of the cycle and the other. First of all
it is very unlikely that the superior sensitive
could be mesmerized by any ordinaiy mes-
merist unless surrendering to that influence
by a deliberate act of submission in the first
instance. By the hypothesis the mesmeriz-
able portion of the nature — if I may use
that clumsy expression — is self-conscious in


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE NATURE OF SENSITIVENESS. 168

the case of the superior sensitive; therefore
it cannot be caught in a helpless state like
the other. If the superior sensitive were to
put the matter in words, he might say to
the mesmerist: ^^You may be able to hurt
me through faculties that you can hit at,
but you cannot control me. I can defend
myself even though I may be bruised in the
encounter.*' But supposing the sensitive
has no motive for taking up such an atti-
tude, but on the contrary is in sympathy
with the mesmerist, and quite willingly ac-
cepts through his psychic nature the guid-
ance of the mesmerist, an external appear-
ance of submissive obedience may arise, just
as in the ordinary waking life one person
may do what he is told through love, and
another through fear. The nature of the
obedience is quite different, though the ex-
ternal aspect may be nearly the same.

And here we come to the satisfactory as-
pect of that phenomenon which looks so
alarming to the merely empiric students of
hypnotic suggestion. Where the Higher
Self which receives the mesmeric impression
is a self-conscious and developed entity, it
will only obey as long as the currents of
sympathy between itself and the mesmerist


Digitized by VjOOQIC


164 THE EATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

which originally disposed it to submission
are maintained, and those currents will be
violently disturbed, if not destroyed, should
the mesmerist endeavor to impose an act on
the subject which is repugnant or revolting
to his own sense of right. I do not say
that, even with a sensitive on the superior
limb of the cycle, it would be theoretically
inconceivable that a mesmerist might enforce
obedience to an act to which the tmf ettered
instincts of the subject would be opposed.
If a voluntary submission, through currents
of sympathy, have been given in the first in-
stance, and if, through a very long and pro-
tracted mesmeric relationship, the subject
has for years been in the habit of acquies-
cing in the impulses of the mesmerist, a
habit of that sort might be very difficult to
break, even if an extraordinary change took
place in the nature and character of the mes-
merist. But this is only translating to the
higher plane (which, after all, is a region in
which human relationships exist just as they
do on this plane of being) of embarrassments
which might equally ensue in the waking
state. Take the case of a husband and
wife, where the wife, to make the illustra-
tion parallel, is quite the husband's equal in


Digitized by VjOOQIC


TEOB NATURE OF SENSITIVENESS, 165

intelligence, but well disposed to play the
feminine part in their relationship. If at a
very early period of this relationship the hus-
band suddenly shows unexpected impulses
towards evil, and endeavors to conduct the
wife along those paths, she would at once
revolt; her own intelligence and sense of
right would be in command of her actions.
But, supposing that the husband through a
long course of years acquires, by his mani-
festations of character and by all the acts of
his life, her perfect trust and confidence, so
that her habit of submission to an influence
that she always finds entitled to respect be-
comes very deeply seated; in such a case, if
we choose to suppose the husband suddenly
developing proclivities to evil, it is not be-
yond the possibilities of the strained suppo-
sition that the wife would surrender to his
example. The whole set of conditions is
morally absurd; they could not arise except
in something like an access of insanity,
which would again bring its own safeguards
with it; but just so do the obvious probabil-
ities of the case provide us with an answer
to the pet theory of persons who ignorantly
object to the practice of mesmerism in re-
g2U*d to the possibility that the mesmerist


Digitized by VjOOQIC


166 THJ! RATIONALE OF ME8MEBI8M.

might improperly control a sensitiye of the
higher order. In marriage as well as in
mesmerism there are many possibilities of
danger lurking, and the destiny which be-
falls a w^man who puts herself into the
hands of a thoroughly bad husband may be
deplorable to the last degree ; but that is the
analogy which exactly meets all talk about
mesmeric dangers. Nothing could be more
idiotic than for a sensitive to subject himself
to the continued influence of a mesmerist in
whose character he had no adequate confi-
dence, just as it would be equally idiotic for
a girl to rush into matrimony with a man of
whom she knew nothing; but the moral of
that reflection is that we should be careful in
choosing our mesmeric and our matrimonial
partners, and not that the institution in either
case is to be finally repudiated. Indeed, to
put a stop to marriage altogether because of
the examples which occasionally exhibit its
dangers, would be less intellectually absurd
than to adopt the same course in regard to
mesmerism; for, after all, mesmerism is a
very much more gradual process than the
other, and there is no moment at which the
fatal ring is slipped on to the finger of the
Higher Self. Even experiments must be


Digitized by VjOOQIC


THE NATURE OF SENSITIVENEaa. 167

cautioiisly oonduoted, but you can be mes-
merized a little and still draw back in time
to avoid disaster. Social science has not
yet evolved a corresponding saf egnard for
the marriage state.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CHAPTER Vra.

CLAIBVOTANCE,

We now approacli that department of our
subject but for which it might ahnost be re-
garded as one belonging rather to medical
practice than to the psychological inquirer.

Perhaps this is the place where I may
most appropriately deal with the attempt,
already made by some medical practitioners
just beginning to dabble in experiments
with mesmerism, to warn off all intruders
on that domain and reserve it exclusively for
themselves. That notion is one of the silli-
est among many which arise from ignorance
of what mesmerism really is, and the claim
of the doctors to have mesmerism reserved
by law for their own exclusive service is
doubly ridicidous, because medical men as
a body, in this country especially, exhibited
a bigoted intolerance of the whole subject
that was simply disgraceful until the growth
of independent knowledge forced them to
recognize some parts of the discovery as a


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIRVOYANCE. 169

natural trtitih, and liave shown themselyes
by all they liave done in the past as singu-
larly unqualified to handle the more subtle
investigations which the future progress of
this great science will bring into play. We
may do all honor to the few doctors who in
the past, and the greater number who in the
present, are identified with the therapeutic
developments of Mesmer's discovery; but
at the same time we must remember that for
every single Dr. Esdaile or Dr. EUiotson
there were scores of contemporary practi-
tioners who brutally refused to allow their
patients to enjoy the privileges which mes-
merism held out to them, and when one of
Dr. Elliotson's leading cases was brought
before the notice of the Medico-chirurgical
Society that body distinguished itself by
passing resolutions the shame of which it
will have some difficulty in getting rid of.
The case in question has already been
slightly referred to in an earlier chapter.
A surgeon, Mr. Ward, had cut off a man's
leg at the hospital over which Dr. EUiotson
presided, while the patient was under the
influence of a mesmeric trance brought on
by the treatment of Mr. Topham, a barris-
ter, who was studying mesmerism at the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


170 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

time. Frightful as the operation was, the
patient suffered it quite unconsciously, and
was entirely spared the torture to wluch he
would otherwise have been subjected. The
assembled body of physicians and surgeons
rose in revolt at this unheard of transaction
when it was described in a paper brought
before them by Mr. Ward. They passed
resolutions denying the paper any place on
the records of the Society, as something that
was manifestly incredible and absurd, and
linked themselves to the idiotic hypothesis
that, if any truth resided in Mr. Ward's
statement, the patient had probably been
trained not to express outward symptoms of
pain. They wound up by declaring that,
even if such an absurdity could be realized,
it would be flying in tiie face of Nature,
which had ordained pain as a necessary con-
comitant of surgical operations!

This is only a iypical illustration of the
spirit in which the medical profession gen-
erally welcomed the advent of the new dis-
covery, and the claim of that profession,
now that the reality of the discovery has be-
come too glaring for denial, to take it out
of the hands of all such inquirers as those
who have brought it to its present degree of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAISVOTANCE. 171

perfection, and reserve it for their own use,
is, to begin with, one of the most impudent
that could be adyanced. Doctors might as
well have claimed at an earlier stage in the
advance of science that because electricity
was susceptible of some therapeutic applica-
tions, it should be reserved by law for the
use of medical men, no one being permitted
to carry on electrical experiments, or to in-
vestigate the nature of that force, unless he
belonged to the faculty. We may imagine
how far electrical science would have ad-
vanced if that course had been adopted, and
its adoption now in reference to mesmerism
would interpose a barrier to the advancement
of human biowledge, the monstrous charac-
ter of which can only be appreciated by
those who know something of the higher psy-
chic or spiritual aspects of mesmerism, to
which the attention of the reader will now
be directed.

In the current manuals of the day which
deal with hypnotism very little is said about
its psychic aspects. The new departure
has been taken as far as possible with the
view of keeping it in harmony with the lim-'
ited series of facts brought to light by recent
medical experiments that have captivated


Digitized by VjOOQIC


172 THE RATION ALE OF MESMERISM.

poptilar interest. But it must not be sup-
posed that the real literature of mesmerism,
which altogether lies behind this modem se-
ries of relatively narrow and departmental
treatises, is deficient in the evidence required
to establish the reality of clairvoyance, both
as regards space and time, as a fact in na-
ture.

Deleuze has dealt with this branch of the
subject in a special memoir of very remark-
able interest, entitled '^M^moire sur la Fac-
ulty de Provision," published in 1886 in
Paris. Nothing in the more recent litera-
ture of the subject exhibits clearer common-
sense as applied to the investigation of the
delicate phenomena with which he is con-
cerned. He is not tainted with the foolish-
ness which has so beset more recent writers,
of disregarding all work in this department
done in the past. On the contrary, he
points out now that, since the faculties of
man are the subject of the inquiry before
him, those faculties, whatever they are, were
the same two thousand years ago as at the
present day. The progress of physical
science has given the modem world an im-
mense advantage in dealing with inquiries
of a purely physical character, and such in-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIBVOTANCE. 173

quiries as carried on by ancient writers are
now of little value. But the very &ct that
the attention of ancient philosophers was not
distracted by so many departments of physi-
cal inquiry rendered them the better, rather
than the less, able to arrive at a just appre-
ciation of those human attributes on which
their attention was fixed, and within the
period which was recent when M. Deleuze
wrote, the phenomena of magnetic ^^som-
nambulism " — to use the expression adopted
by the earlier French writers to describe
what we now generally call ^^clairvoyance''
— had been under observation for about fifty
years. Cases of prevision were recorded in
the medical journals, and he says: ^'Open
the 'Memoirs of the Society of Strasburg,'
and the 'Biblioth^que du Magn^tisme,' and
the accounts of medical experience connected
with somnambulism published in Germany,
Russia, and Holland, and you will find the
same class of facts; and the concurrence in
this way of a crowd of people attesting facts
of the same order which each of them has
observed separately, constitutes proof to
which there is no reply. It is impossible
that men of all countries, without relations
with one another, who do not even adopt the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


174 THE BATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

same theories, and amongst whom we find
many physiciansy should be in a conspiracy
to attest falsehoods."

I select a few other passages from the
essay as it proceeds : —

^^Most metaphysicians reason as if there
existed nothing in the world but that of
which our five senses demonstrated the exis-
tence. They admit only two orders of
things, sensible objects and the consciousness
which receives the sensations. They forget
that we perceive merely those objects which
affect our senses, and that there may exist
an infinity of objects unknown to these, and
to which our organs are inaccessible. The
faculty of comprehending the form of an ob-
ject at a distance would be inconceivable to
one bom blind but for the testimony of oth-
ers. If we had one sense the more, our con-
sciousness would be modified accordingly;
... let us then imitate the blind; let us
assure ourselves of the reality of phenomena
by the results, observing the somnamhule as
the blind observe us."

^^It is impossible, sometimes people say,
to see the future, for the future does not ex-
ist. The present only has real existence;
but, if the past has an existence relatively


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIBVOTANCE. 176

to oorselyes, that is merely because it has
left its traces. It exists by its effects; the
future exists by its germ. The past has pro-
duced the present, it was its cause; the fu-
ture will be produced by the present, it will
be its effect. When we consider the past
we behold the cause in its effects; when we
consider the future we see the effects in the
cause."

^^When a brilliant light illuminates the
landscape we may admire its richness, but
we do not see the stars which decorate the
celestial vault. The rays they send from
that incalculable distance reach our eyes in
the day as well as in the night. Our inter-
nal faculty even exists the whole time, but
it is only in the silence of other sensations
that our souls discern the innumerable rays."

This essay was written with the intention
that it should form an introduction to a
great collection of cases illustrative of clair-
voyant prevision. Deleuze had been a pro-
lific writer before he penned the present
memoir on the general subject of mesmer-
ism, but he says that he specially reserved
this prof otmdly interesting department for
treatment by itself. He was not left at his
work, however, long enough to complete this


Digitized by VjOOQIC


176 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

undertaking. The memoir itself was the
last of his writings, and it was published
after his death by a friend who had endeav-
ored, as far as he was able, to realize the
original idea of supplying the accumulation
of cases. Some of these are interesting and
worth attention, but to translate them here
at full length would involve an expansion of
this little volume beyond the limits I con-
template. I will be content with briefly
epitomizing one illustration which Deleuze
himself arranged to give, and of which he
seems himself to have obtained various
attestations. This is the famous case of
Gazette's prophecy concerning the French
Sevolution, often vaguely referred to, but
perhaps unfamiliar in its details to many
of my readers.

The prediction is recorded by La Harpe
in his collected works, published in 1806.
He describes himself as having been present,
at the commencement of the year 1788, at a
dinner party given by one of his confreres
of the Academy to a distinguished company,
including people of the Court, of legal and
literary distinction, and many Academicians.
The conversation during the evening ran on
the lines of Voltairean infidelity and atheism,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIBVOTANCK 177

then coming so widely into fashion. The
parly was convulsed ¥dth delight at one an-
ecdote told by a g^est, whose hair-dresser
had said to him, ^^Look you, sir, though I
am but a miserable carabin^ I have no more
religion than anybody else." The only
person who had not taken part in all these
pleasantries was Cazotte, an amiable and
original man, says La Harpe, but unfortu-
nately infatuated with the reveries of the
mystic. At last he spoke more seriously
than the others.

^^ Gentlemen," said he, ^^be satisfied; you
will see this grand and sublime revolution
which you desire so much."

^'No need to be a great sorcerer to foresee
that," replied some.

"True, but perhaps it is necessary to be
something of one to see the rest I have to
tell you, namely, what will happen during
this revolution."

Count D'Orsay said, with a sarcastic
laugh, that a philosopher need not be an-
noyed at encountering a prophet.

"You, Count D'Orsay," said Cazotte,
"will expire on the pavement of a dungeon.
You will die of poison which you will have
taken to escape the executioner — poison


Digitized by VjOOQIC


178 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

which the happiness of that epoch will
oblige you to cany always about you."

Some sensation followed, and Cazotte was
rebuked for giving them a story less amus-
ing than his ^^Diable Amoureux."

^^But what has all that in common with
philosophy and the Beign of Reason? "

^^It is precisely in the name of philosophy
and liberty, and under the Beign of Reason
and its temples, that these things will hap-
pen."

"Ma foil " said Chamfort; "you will not
be one of the priests of those temples."

"But you, M. de Chamfort, will be one,
and you will open your veins with twenty-
two cuts with a razor, and nevertheless you
will not die until some months afterwards.
You, M. Vicq d'Azir, will not open your
veins; you will have them opened six times
in one day, during an access of gout, and
you will die in the night. You, M. de Ni-
colai, you will die upon the scaffold. You,
M. Bailly, will die on the scaffold; you,
M. de Malesherbes, on the scaffold."

So far the ladies had taken no part in this
prophecy, and the Duchesse de Gramont
was laughingly congratulating herself that
evidently she would be protected by her sex.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIRVOYANCE. 179

^ Your sex, ladies, will not se<mre you this
time. You will be treated like the men,
without any difference. You, madame la
duohesse, you will be conducted to the scaf-
fold, you and many others with you in the
charrette of the executioner, the hands tied
behind the back.''

The conyersation still maintained an air
of ridicule, and Madame de Gramont said
something about hoping she would at lei^t
be allowed to see a confessor.

"No, madame," said Cazotte, "you will
not haye one, neither you nor any one. The
last yictim who will haye one through grace,
will be " — He hesitated a little while.

"Well, who is the happy mortal who is
to receiye this prerogatiye? ''

"It wiU be the King of France."

At this appalling blasphemy the party
seems to haye broken up, thinking Cazotte's
extrayagance had been carried to dangerous
lengths.

At first, says Deleuze, he regarded all this
as fiction by La Harpe, but he set himself
to work to get information and changed his
opinion. He obtained a letter from the
Comtesse de Genlis, who writes, "I haye
heard him (de La Harpe) state this story a


Digitized by VjOOQIC


180 THE RATIONALE OF KE8MEBI8M.

hundred times before the Bevolution, and al-
ways in exactly the same way that I have
everywhere seen it printed." M. Deleoze
then found out the son of M. Cazotte, who
declared that his father had always been
gifted with the faculty of prevision in the
highest degree, and had given numerous
proofs of it. Without being able to guar-
antee the exact language used by La Harpe
in his narrative, the son had no doubt
whatever about its general truthfulness.
A friend of M. Vicq d*Azir, inhabiting
Eennes, bore testimony that this celebrated
doctor had told the story of Cazotte's pro-
phecy, in his presence, several times before
the Revolution took place. Finally, M.
Deleuze appends a letter by the Baron de
Langon, in which he says, ^^I can assure
you on my honor that I have heard Madame
la Comtesse de Beauhamais repeat that she
had been present on this historic occasion.
She always told her story in the same way,
and her testimony corroborates that of La
Harpe."

A French writer, whose testimony on all
subjects connected with clairvoyance is ex-
tremely important, — M. A. Teste, a doctor
of Paris, — wrote in 1843 an interesting vol-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIRVOYANCE. 181

nme called ^^ Manuel pratique de Magn^-
tiame Animal," in which he records a multi-
tude of experiences coming under his own
observation. The sensitires witii whom he
worked, — chiefly those who were at the
same time sensitiyes and patients, — foretold
with exactitude the course and conclusion of
their various maladies. One of the most in-
teresting records has to do with the case of
a lady referred to as Madame Hortense, the
subject of a long illness for which M. Teste
treated her, and during which he constantiy
mesmerized her in the presence of her hus-
band, who was himself deeply interested in
the whole study. Many days before the
special event referred to, she told them that
at half past three on a certain day she would
have a fright that would cause her to fall
and sustain some serious internal complica-
tions. They were aghast at this intelli-
gence, and conceived that their care could
not but ward off a danger so definitely pre-
dicted. Of course, the sensitive herself
never retained the smallest recollection in
her waking state of her own prophecies, and
they told her nothing of this threatened
disaster. Questioning her about it in her
clairvoyant state, she maintained always that


Digitized by VjOOQIC


182 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

ihey would not be able to ward it off, but
that they need not be greatly concerned; she
would certainly undergo a great deal of suf-
fering and protracted illness, but would not
die, and would ultimately completely re-
cover. Still, they resolved to do their very
utmost to resist the threatened danger; and
both doctor and husband hovered round the
patient — not ill enough to be in bed — the
whole of that afternoon.

Well, I find it embarrassing to tell the
story with the simple, straightforward candor
of tihe French writer, because English ears
are so singularly sensitive to details tliat
seem to infringe decorum; but at the ap-
pointed time the lady insisted on a little
privacy, during which a rat suddenly ran
across her, frightening her in so unexpected
a way that she fell down and suffered exactly
the consequences which she had foretold,
happily with the ulterior recovery. This is
only one of a cloud of cases with which M.
Teste deals, and I must leave those readers
who wish to get personal touch with the
multiplied proofs he has accumulated to
search his writings for themselves.

A little thought will show that one essen-
tial difference between the phenomena of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIBVOYANCB. 188

Gkirvoyanoe and those coming into notice
nnder other departments of mesmerism has
to do with the essentially psychic character
of the dairyoyant achieyement. Everything
belonging to the r^on of so-called hypnotic
suggestion, however mysterious, may theo-
retically be accounted for by hypotheses
which leave the sensitive a highly organized
being, no doubt, but not necessarily one in
which the psychic attributes must be consid-
ered as something independent of the bodily
organism. And this reflection gives its real
importance to the inquiry into the possibil-
ities of clairvoyance. It is easy to miss the
real significance of a new discovery, and to
attach importance to the immediate practi-
cal outcome thereof, instead of to the light
thrown by the practical results on hidden
and previously obscure laws of nature. It
is preeminently easy to make iliis mistake
in dealing wil^ the psychic characteristics
of those mesmeric sensitives in whom clair-
voyance is exhibited. We may take the
thing in itself, a marvelous and enchanting
gift, and say that for its own sake it is worth
while to see if we cannot cultivate to a
higher degree of perfection a power so filled
with attractive interest. Any one who, by


Digitized by VjOOQIC


184 THE BATIONAJLE OF MESMERISM.

passing into a magnetic trance, is thereby
enabled to cognize events that are going on
at a distance, is clearly in possession of a
gift which cannot but be recognized as pre-
cious in itself. But when we begin to collate
the various manifestations of this power, and
to realize that no theory of latent senses at-
taining an unusual degree of delicacy and
perfection in the sensitive will account for
what takes place, we begin to perceive that
the study of this power, in the rare cases
where it is exhibited, may be a pathway
opening up before us possibilities of acquir-
ing real scientific knowledge concerning
those spiritual, or at all events superphysi-
cal, elements in a human being which, hith-
erto left as the subject of vague religious
faith, have never yet been regarded by the
world at large as liable to come within the
domain of exact knowledge.

Before going further, let me endeavor to
group the various kinds of power or faculty
exhibited by those whom I comprehensively
describe as clairvoyants. First, we have to
deal with that kind of clairvoyance which
simply enables the sensitive to discern what
is going on at some other place in the world.
Sometimes the discernment extends for a


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIRVOYANCE. 186

little distance only, sometimes it ranges half
across the globe; but mere distance does not
affect the nature of the faculty brought into
activiiy. This kind of clairvoyance let me
call ^'dairvoyaiice in space." Then we
haye to do with an extraordinary capacity,
which has been shown, as Deleuze points out,
so often as to make denial of the facts alto-
gether silly, but in regard to which the dif-
ficulties as to giving explanation are very
overwhelming. I refer to what Deleuze
calls '^prevision," that which in the popular
idioms of our own coimtry is known as ^'sec-
ond sight," and that which for the purpose
of this classification we may call ^^clairvoy-
ance in time." There is a third depart-
ment of the &umlty with which we are deal-
ing, in which the sensitive is enabled to take
note of phenomena in nature, whether near
him or far off, which do not belong to the
order of those phenomena perceptible to the
senses; that is to say, the clairvoyant may
see and converse with entities of some kind
which the ordinary, waking person does not
see at all, and cannot put himself into rela-
tions with by any means in his power.
Following the example of earlier writers,
who certainly knew a good deal about the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


186 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

realms of nature thus brought within our
purview, let us call this sort of sight '^astral
clairvoyance.**

There is yet a fourth sort of dairvoyance,
which, from the point of view of people un-
familiar with such phenomena as we are
dealing with, could hardly be distinguished,
perhaps, from the last, but which I feel my-
self bound to treat separately here, because
those who are students of anything really de-
serving to be called psychological science
will conceive "astral clairvoyance" as hav-
ing a limited and specific meaning. As
something no less distinct really from astral
clairvoyance, in the ascending scale of na-
ture's refinements, than that itself is different
from the phenomena of the physical senses,
we must recognize what I will venture to call
"spiritual clairvoyance" as a possibility of
this wonderful attribute, but it wiU be more
convenient to put off further explanations on
this head tiU I reach the fourth order in due
progress of time.

Again I say I am not engaged in this vol-
ume in recapitulating the enormously volu-
minous evidence on which our present know-
ledge concerning all these subjects, in a great
measure, rests; but I will venture a passing


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIRVOYANCE. 187

word of warning to an j one wlio may think
I am classifying fictions instead of facts.
To stop here and challenge the fondamental
bases on which my present interpretations
rest, will merely serve to rank incredulous
persons who do this with the bigoted doctors
who in the beginning scoffed angrily at rec-
ords having to do with the simpler aspects
of curative mesmerism, of which no person
acquainted with the experiences of the pres-
ent day would be indined to dispute the
authenticity.

In regard to all three varieties of clairvoy-
ance we shall arrive soonest at something re-
sembling an intelligent appreciation of their
ra^umoZe by assuming, atall events as a trial
hypothesis, that they all have to do with that
psychic side of the nature which, in analyz-
ing the peculiarities of sensitiveness, I have
already discussed pretty fully. What are
we to infer as probably taking place when
a sensitive sitting entranced in London be-
comes cognizant of some transaction going
on in Paris? It must be one of two things.
Either the transaction throws off emana-
tions or vibrations of some kind or another
into some medium pervading all space, just
as the luminous bodies throw off vibrations


Digitized by VjOOQIC


188 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

into the ether, and where these strike the
perceptions or finer senses of persons no
matter at what distance, they give rise to
corresponding impressions, just as the rays
emanating from a star affect the vision of
those endowed with vision, no matter at
what stupendous distances. And there is no
essential and inherent absurdity in such a
hypothesis, any more than in the actual facts
having to do with the transmission of light.
It might be alleged that transactions going
on in the world are too numerous for each
one to convey its own distinct impression,
jostled as it must be by contact with incal^
culable millions of other such impressions
hastening in aU directions across its path.
Impossible as it may be for us to compre-
hend the resources of nature by which such
entanglements are averted, the vibrations of
the luminiferous ether show, without going
further, that nature is not embarrassed in
dealing with such a problem. Take the act-
ual facts of the simplest illustration that can
be adopted; a group of people in a room.
From every point in the walls and ceiling of
the room, as from every point on the sur-
face of every particle of furniture it may
contain, complete spheres of radiation are


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIRVOYANCE. 189

flowing in all directions, as is necessarily
proved by the fact that anybody can see
each object from whatever point of view he
stands, and yet every one of those absolutely
innumerable spheres of luminous vibration
sends its waves across another's path with-
out interfering with the accuracy of each
series. It would not be an intellectually
extravagant hypothesis to assume that there
are conditions in nature under the operation
of which everything on earth, and every
process and action going on is perceptible to
appropriate senses from every other position
on earth that can be imagined. I do not
say that this is the case; but merely to pave
the way for subtle hypotheses which must be
applied to any attempts to investigate such
a profound mystery as clairvoyance, it is
well to train the mind to appreciate the way
in which no hypothesis must be rejected
merely because of its complexity, if it har-
monizes with the facts.

The other alternative hypothesis in regard
to our simple case of cl&irvoyance as between
London and Paris would be that something
material in the highest sense of the word, —
not physical as belonging to the orders of
matter perceptible to the five senses, — but


Digitized by VjjOOQIC


190 THE RATIONALE OF UE8MEBI8M.

something material, appertaining probably
to the psychic nature of the sensitive, is pro-
jected nnder the operation of a current of
thought or influence from the mesmerist or
from the sensitive, assuming that to be
awakened in some way by suggestion to him,
from the place in which he is seated to the
distant scene he is required to observe.
Now that something which is projected may
be either some portion of the psychic aura
in which for the time being the real ego or
spiritual consciousness of the person con-
cerned may be seated, just as it is seated in
the body during the activity of the body; or
it is theoretically conceivable that the true
ego, without quitting the physical organism
altogether, may project in the direction to
be observed some current of magnetic influ-
ence setting up a channel — if that expres-
sion win help to pass the idea from my mind
to my reader — through the all-pervading
medium, whatever it is, the luminiferous
ether, or something finer still, which is the
suitable medium in nature for the vibrations
which convey impressions to the psychic
organism.

Thus we have three hypotheses, either of
which would fit in with the facts as far as it


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIBVOYANCE. 191

goes, and I may say at once tliat I regard
all three hypotheses as. dimly shadowing
forth before our minds real actualities in
nature, although when the inquiries on
which it seems reasonable to hope this gen-
eration is now entering are pushed a good
deal further than they have generally gone
as yet, we shall be able to understand these
with very much greater precision than at
present. But how does it come to pass that
some persons subject to mesmeric influence
are found to be clairvoyant and some inca-
pable of exhibiting this quality, eyen in the
least degree? We need go no further in
search of an explanation than to the theory
of sensitiveness I have already endeavored
to lay down. The least developed psychic
nature may be susceptible to impressions
directly translated to itself from the aura of
the mesmerist with which it has become
blended, but if it is not developed on its 0¥m
accoimt into anything resembling a psychic
consciousness, it will not be able to exert it-
self witb an intelligent end in view at the
bidding of the mesmerist. In other words,
we shall never find our fine clairvoyants
among people who are on what I have pre-
viously described as the lower limb, or east-


Digitized by VjjOOQIC


192 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

em half, of the evolutionary cycle. It is
only when a human being is sufficiently ad-
vanced in the scale of nature to have passed
the point of full immersion in matter — at
which his psychic nature may have expressed
itself to the utmost of its capacity in the
form of physical intellect — that the second
process begins, ultimately evolving him, as
he passes through the ordeal of material in-
carnation, into that relatively superior con-
dition in which the psychic nature may truly
be spoken of as the higher self.

I am slightly embarrassed at this stage of
my exposition by the impossibility of setting
forth any really scientific theory of mesmer-
ism in its higher branches without drawing
largely at every turn on the resources of oc-
cult science in its relation with the finer con-
stitution of man. To go fully here into all
the considerations which fortify the theories
of occult science in their turn, would be to
convert this volume into a repetition of oth-
ers which have gone before, but just as I
leave the reader to fill up his mind, if he
wishes to do so, with details of mesmeric ex-
periments from other books, merely working
here with their significance and theoretical
value, so I must refrain from any attempt


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIBVOTANCB. 198

to vindicate on their own acoonnt the under-
lying principles xd occult science concerning
the constitution of man to which I may be
bound. occasionally to refer. Hitherto no
writers on mesmerism have attempted any
connected theory at all in regard to its
higher manifestations, for want of the clue
with which occult science now furnishes us;
and at least I may appeal to readers who may
be handling this volume without any special
preparation, to the coherence of the whole
body of theory I am now putting forward, as
involving a prima facie reason for looking
favorably on the teaching from which these
theories are derived.

Clairvoyance, then, in any of its higher
aspects should be regarded as a faculty of
the higher self. The qualification I put in
here is reqidred to guard me from being sup-
posed to mean that such clairvoyance as is
involved ih reading the time on a watch that
has not been opened, or the words in a closed
book, is a faculty of the higher self. That
does not deserve to be called clairvoyance at
all. It is an exercise of certain generally
undeveloped senses stimulated to an abnor-
mal degree of energy under the mesmeric
process, but where distances have to be dealt


Digitized by VjOOQIC


194 THE BATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

with which extend beyond the aura of the
sensitive, some degree of intelligence in his
own psychic envelope — if I may use that
expression — must be assumed. By this
phrase I mean to suggest the idea that,
whereas in the undeveloped man the psychic
nature is, so to speak, chaotic and imf ormed
— unorganized in the most complete sense of
the term — in the other case the man who
has passed the nadir point of material devel-
opment begins then to grow a psychic organ-
ism which may be thought of for the pur-
poses of our present explanation as a finer
kind of body to which his consciousness may
be transferred under suitable conditions,
and in which his mind can function as truly
as in the waking state it functions in his
physical body. The theory will not be com-
pletely intelligible without keeping hold of
the fundamental occult principle of reincar-
nation, because without imderstanding that,
all this talk on which I have ventured about
people being before or behind the nadir point
of material development would have very
little meaning. But without attempting a
complete exposition of the occult theory of
reincarnation with all the collateral consid-
erations which render it one of the most


Digitized by VjOOQIC


OLAIBVOYANCB. 196

vital truths of nature for every one con-
cerned with the study of esoteric teaching,
it will be enough to make my present theo-
ries intelligible if I say that according to
the esoteric view every human being passes
through a protracted series of physical lives
with long intervening periods of spiritual
experience, and that these successively rep-
resent the stages of growth in nature to
which each individual has attained, and in-
volve a r^;ular cosmic progress which may
be greatly hastened by abnormal efforts, and
may be seriously impeded by misapplica-
tions of energy.

How is the activity of the higher self, of
which the clairvoyant sensitive under ordi-
nary conditions of life may be, perhaps,
hardly conscious, to be set up? To answer
this question I must attempt a little more
fully to explain what students of occultism
mean by the higher self. I have referred
already to reincarnation as the method by
means of which nature accomplishes the evo-
lution of each individual monad. Between
each of the physical births the true being or
ego in question remains in the enjoyment of
that degree of spiritual evolution represented
by the siun total of all the efforts made, up


Digitized by VjOOQIC


196 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

to that time, in the stiecessive lives through
which he has passed. Crude and popular
conceptions on the subject of spiritual life
entertain the idea that directly death occurs,
the soul or spirit is set free, suddenly spring-
ing into a condition of angelic exaltation in
which higher perceptions and higher know-
ledge come into play. Occult science does
not recognize any proceeding so causeless in
its character. That which is set free at death
is the real ego at its then stage of evolution,
and as I have already indicated, with human
beings very little advanced along the cycle
of evolution the nature of the spiritual con-
sciousness is extremely torpid and imde-
fined. That is merely another way of say-
ing that, even in the realms of its higher
activity, nature produces her achievements
gradually. The gradual growth of the real
spiritual ego, or higher self, is the great pur-
pose in view throughout the whole imder-
taking of the successive lives. As already
explained, after the neutral point of evolu-
tion — the perfect infusion of spirit in mat-
ter — is passed, the spiritual life begins to
assert itself with renewed energy. The
consciousness of the ego on spiritual planes
then becomes a self • consciousness, and is


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIRVOYANCE. 197

associated with the power of independent
action.

Now, in the ordinary waking state the
Higher Ego is to a great extent engaged
with, and entangled with the physical plane.
It largely inspires the mental and moral ac-
tivity of the incarnate being, and although
even during the waking state it may have
some subtle relations with the spiritual
plane, to which we need not at this moment
pay attention, it is, to all intents and pur-
poses, functioning on the plane of matter.
But whenever the activity of the bodily or-
ganism is suspended, the ego is set free to
function on the other planes where it has al-
ready established a right of entr^. Even
during ordinary sleep that passage from one
plane to another takes place, at all events
whenever the sleep is healthy and profound.
The experiences which the Higher Ego goes
through on the spiritual plane in such cases
are by no means always transferred to the
physical memory on waking; on the con-
trary, such transfer is the exception and not
the rule. A great branch of metaphysical
study has been directed to the correct ap-
prehension of this dual consciousness, of
which every highly developed being is an ex-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


198 THE RATIONALE OF MJE8MJEBISM.

ample, and the most important work on the
subject to which the reader can be referred
is du Prel's " Philosophic der Mystik,"
admirably translated into English by Mr.
C. C. Massey, and called by him "The
Philosophy >of Mysticism." Du Prel shows
that by a careful analysis of ihe experiences
and facts within our reach it is demonstrable
that the waking brain does not "contain/'
in the metaphysical sense, the whole of the
consciousness of the human being function-
ing through that brain. More than this,
the threshold of psychic consciousness — to
use du Prel's expression — is constantly
subject to advance or recession, and the
process of pushing back that threshold so
that as much as possible of the higher con-
sciousness may be embraced within the area
of physical brain recollection, constitutes
the process which might in some of its bear-
ings be described as the evolution of psychic
faculties.

Now, this explanation fully apprehended
will afford, abnost without further words, a
clue to the comprehension of what really
takes place imder mesmeric influence in con-
nection with the higher clairvoyance. The
physical body is entranced by the magnetic


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIBVOYANCE. 199

influence, and the Higher Ego is set free.
It follows the natural bent of its own affin-
ities, and in so being set free passes at once
into the spiritual aspect of its consciousness
(occultists will understand that I am here
using the term ^^ spiritual" as embracing the
astral plane), but in so far as this partial
freedom does not inrolye the complete serer-
ance between the physical brain and the finer
astral organism, the latter continues in di-
rect relation with the physical body by mag-
netic threads or ligatures — one is obliged to
use materialistic phrases in endeavoring to
put such thoughts into words — and thus is
accessible to stimuli which act in the first
instance only on the physical organism, or
let us rather say on the astral aura of the
physical organism. Free as It is, the higher
self is thus in continued intellectual rela-
tions with the mesmerist whose magnetic in-
fluence has sufficed to entrance the body,
and to set its own activities at large. And
the plane of such activities which it has now
reached is entirely exempt from the re-
strictions that embarrass activity on the phy-
sical plane. Thought, will, or desire be-
come the agents of something which we may
think of as movement about the world, and


Digitized by VjOOQIC


200 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

the Highet Ego can be translated to any
distant place, or almost to any distant point
in space, with as much facility as a thought
may be turned towards some distant region
with which the thinker is familiar.

Just, however, as it is only to a place
with which he is familiar that any one can
turn his thoughts with precision, so as to re-
call images of what he has seen, so it is only
to some place with which the Higher Ego is
in some kind of magnetic relation that its
attention and perceptive powers can be
turned. Thus we find that while a clairvoy-
ant, however gifted, would be almost hope-
lessly embarrassed if asked to discover in
some distant part of the world a person
unknown to his waking self, and equally
unknown to the mesmerist, it would be
perfectly easy for such a higher self to dis-
cover the person to whom some specific
article, handed to his body and thus brought
into magnetic relations with his own aura,
originally belonged. The clue to the accu-
rate scientific comprehension of all the phe-
nomena of mesmeric clairvoyance, having to
do with what is called rapport j is thus read-
ily afforded. If you have a lock of hair cut
from some person's head, and put it into


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIRVOYANCB. 201

the hands of the deeping clairvoyant, the
magnetic vibrationB connecting that with its
original owner serve as a thread to guide
the emancipated ego to the goal. And the
truth is that what has now been said, simple
as it is, constitutes the whole explanation of
those phenomena belonging to the order of
^^clairvoyance in space/' You will never
get sucb clairvoyance out of a person whose
spiritual evolution is inferior to the neutral
point, and whose higher self has not been
evolved to any degree of self -consciousness.
Such a person may, as already explained, be
highly susceptible of mesmeric influence,
may respond with the most completely auto-
matic docility to all the so-called sugges-
tions of hjrpnotism, may be obedient to
quite a terrible extent to the commands im-
posed upon him by a mesmerist, but will
never be able to accomplish achievements
beyond the range of his own nature.

I am not going to attempt an explanation
which shall as completely cover the phenom-
enon of "clairvoyance in time." The mys-
teries of prevision are extremely bewildering,
and on them we can only throw such specu-
lative light as maybe afforded, for example,
by theories of metaphysics like those sug-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


202 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

gested by Dr. Oliver Lodge in his remark-
able address at the Cardiff Meeting of the
British Association. He says : —

^^ Aluminous and helpful idea is that time
is but a relative mode of regarding things;
we progress through phenomena at a certain
definite pace, and this subjective advance
we interpret in an objective manner, as if
events necessarily happened in this order
and at this precise rate. But that may be
only one mode of regarding them. The
events may be in some sense in existence al-
ways, both past and future, and it may be
we who are arriving at them, not they which
are happening. The analogy of a traveler
in a railway train is useful; if he could
never leave the train nor alter its pace he
would probably consider the landscapes as
necessarily successive and be unable to con-
ceive their co-existence. . • . We perceive,
therefore, a possible fourth dimensional as-
pect about time, the inexorableness of whose
flow may be a natural part of our present
limitations. And if we once grasp the idea
that past and future may be actually exist-
ing, we can recognize that they may have a
controlling influence on all present action,
and the two together may constitute the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIBVOTAKCE. 208

'higher plane' or totality of things, after
which, as it seems to me, we are impelled to
seek, in connection with the directing of
form or determinism, and the action of liv-
ing beings consciously directed to a definite
and preconceived end."

It is true that a good deal of clairvoyance
in time relating to events in the immediate
future and having to do with the course, for
example, of an illness, are explicable with-
out diving into any very great profundities
of metaphysical thought. A much clearer
perception of causes in operation in any
such transaction than is accessible to the in-
carnate consciousness may enable the higher
self to discern inevitable consequences, and
thus to predict them. But such foresight as
that concerned with the progress of an ill-
ness hardly deserves to rank with the Ga-
zette prophecy, for example, in connection
with the French Revolution, where the pre-
cise destinies of five or six people, who years
afterwards came to a violent end in the con-
vulsions of that period, were foretold with
exactitude. I do not wish to leave the
reader imder the impression that occult sci-
ence, even as expounded by its modern lit-
erature, is ^thout hypotheses which go far


Digitized by VjOOQIC


204 THS RATIONALE OF MESMEBISM.

to suggest explanations even of the most ex-
alted examples of clairyoyance in time; but
to make these theories intelligible would in-
volve a complete examination of the higher
mysteries associated with Elarma and the
agencies which control it, and would lie be-
yond the province of the present treatise.

Let us turn now to that variety of clair-
voyance which has to do with the observa-
tion of natural phenomena lying wholly out-
side the physical plane. On this branch of
our subject the older literature of mesmer-
ism is by no means so rich as in reference to
the inferior departments. But the very in-
teresting autobiography of Andrew Jackson
Davis, sometimes known as the Poughkeep-
sie Seer, inchides the narrative of his own
mesmeric treatment directed entirely to the
end that his higher self should be liberated
for the observation of nature on the spirit-
ual planes, and carried on, I have little
doubt, under the direction of agencies belong-
ing already to more highly evolved examples
of the human race than those aroimd us in
ordinary life. Davis was a bom psychic, to
whom visions and astral experiences of all
sorts were continually occurring, although
the external circumstances of his life would


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIBVOYANVE, 206

Beem at ihe first glance to have been terribly
unfavorable to the development of any higher
faculties. He was bom, that is to say, of
parents in the very humblest rank of life;
the father seems to have been a cobbler in
too small a way of business to be even called
a shoemaker, who worked hard for a miser-
able living in an outlying village of the
State of New York. Davis himself grew up
almost entirely without education, scarcely
able to read and write, and even when grown
up, some of his spiritual teachings, or those
which came through his lips, and which fill
many volumes, were written down for him
by friends. At about the age of seventeen
Davis was first mesmerized by a man named
Livingstone, and at once began to manifest
all the usual symptoms of clairvoyance, which
rapidly culminated in spiritual flights
through higher realms of nature, in connec-
tion with which by degrees were developed
dose relationship between the seer and be-
ings of some exalted order whom he encoun-
tered in the spirit, and from whom he re-
ceived teaching on spiritual subjects, the
accumulation and record of which became
tiie whole occupation of his life. It is not
my business here to criticise these, although


Digitized by VjjOOQIC


206 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

gladly bearing testimony in passing to the
fact that their tone and character is exalted
and ennobling, although they are less asso-
ciated with precise interpretations of hidden
mysteries in nature than some of those
which, during the progress of recent theo-
sophical developments, have enriched the
later literature of occult research. How-
ever, m regard to the particuLix matter in
hand, Davis's incidental explanation, which
he fortifies with diagrams, of the process
through which the spiritual clairvoyant
passes during his magnetic treatment under
the hands of a qualified mesmerizer, seems to
me the best exposition of that particular sub-
ject I have ever seen in print. When first
sitting down he represents the mesmerist and
sensitive as separately encircled by auras
which do not blend with one another. By
degrees these mutually expand, and their
limits intersect. As the magnetic process
goes on, and as the body of the sensitive be-
comes entranced imder the influence of mes-
meric emanations from the operator's hands,
the two auras become entirely blended, a
condition of things illustrated in Davis's
diagrams by a representation of the two per-
sons seated opposite one another surrounded


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIBVOYANCE. 207

by one oval, representing their combined
auras. Then as the magnetizer ceases to
throw out any influence the auras slightly
differentiate again without coming apart, a
magnetic emanation is thrown upward from
the sensitive's head, visible, of course, to
those who have faculties for seeing such
things, and thus the sensitive keeps in rela-
tion with his own higher self, which by that
time has taken flight, while the blending of
the two auras enables the mesmerist also to
remain in intelligible communication with
the absent consciousness.

To analyze all the possibilities which may
be associated with such a spiritual flight
on the part of the true ego of a human being
already sufficiently spiritualized in nature to
be capable of deriving definite, exact impres-
sions from spiritual planes, would be to
write a treatise on spiritual science and the
higher evolution of man rather than on the
mesmeric methods by means of which touch
may be obtained with these great realities.
But from the point I have now reached I am
enabled to handle the argument which to my
mind renders it so important at the present
age of the world that the loftier possibilities
of mesmerism should be properly under-


Digitized by VjjOOQIC


208 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

stood, and the subject guarded from the in-
discrimmatmg disapproval of those who are
animated in speaking of it by exclusive ref-
erence to its more ignoble and degrading
manifestations. Of course, let me acknow-
ledge at the outset, that anything like play-
ing with forces of nature so far-reaching, so
magnificent in some of their potentialities,
and at the same time fraught with so much
danger in association with some of their
worst, is to be condemned in the most un-
equivocal terms. I do not necessarily mean
that trifling experiments, even when they
are associated with some atmosphere of
amusement, may not be harmless enough
when colored with an intelligent curiosity
concerning an unknown subject, but at-
tempts at the practice of mesmerism may
very soon outrun the character of these ele-
mentary diversions, and then if people go on
with the matter at all, they ought to go on
with it in at least as serious a frame of mind
as they would handle any other branch of
natural study. Its continued use for petty
and degrading purposes, in which grotesque
effects are sought for even in preference to
those which would illuminate the inquiry,
is of course to be condemned without re-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIRVOYANCE. 209

serve. Indeed, if people only knew the real
significance of some lofty spiritual phrases
they are in the habit of employing in con-
nection with conventional religion, they
would feel that very formidable terms of
censure are due to any act involving the de-
gradation of natural forces having to do with
the spiritual life. In their way, and to the
limited extent that the thing is possible for
the modem ignoramus, such acts constitute
what early theologians meant by the ^^sin
against the Holy Ghost." But while at the
bottom of the scale it may be little less than
a deadly sin to employ mesmeric power with
evil ends in view, and while it is very wrong
to employ it with ignoble and sordid ends in
view, it becomes something more than per-
missible to employ it in the cure of diseases,
merely physical though such objects may be,
and ultimately the practice of mesmerism
rises into the region of the loftiest and most
ennobling pursuit when the great force is
employed to set free and stimulate to the
utmost the highest evolution of the highest
consciousness in man.

First of all we have to study the process,
and that can only be done in association with
its practice, in order that the scientific think-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


210 THE BATIONALJE OF MESMERISM.

ing of the present day may be rescued from
the slough of incredulity as regards all
psychic phenomena in which it is at pres-
ent, I will not say hopelessly entangled, but
at all events in which its further progress
meets with very great impediment. Then
as regards the further advance of practical
occult study in this generation, mesmerism,
as conducted by people who comprehend the
organization of that higher realm of exist-
ence into which they would introduce the
spiritual consciousness of their sensitives, is
certainly the most accessible avenue of
higher knowledge concerning the possibili-
ties of a spiritual evolution and the ulterior
destinies of man which the opportunities of
ordinary life leave at our disposal. And no-
thing is more entirely free than the higher
mesmerism — however frequently repeated
with any given sensitive — from the mis-
chievous consequences having to do with
the enslavement of the will, and the deteri-
oration of individual growth, which results
are undoubtedly associated with the ignoble
kind of mesmerism commonly known as hyp-
notism in the present day. Of course to
fulfill the conditions that I am talking about,
it is necessary that a mesmerist should, to


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIBVOYANCE. 211

begin with, be goTemed first and foremost
by a desire for the spiritual welfare of the
sensitive with whom he is dealing* How-
ever fascinating he may find, or rather I
should say he might find, the attributes of
that sensitive under mesmerism, he must
forbear from experiments which interfere
with the loftier spiritual growth of the
higher self, and refrain, for example, from
sending it about to different places on the
physical earth in pursuit of knowledge or
information, however innocent in its nature.
The higher self trained under mesmerism
to explore the physical plane will have
great dijfficully in getting clear of it, if that
should be desired at a later stage. Further
than this, the higher self which could be
trained under mesmerism to explore the
mysterious complications of the astral plane
will be equally impeded, perhaps even more
impeded, in that way as regards the finer
spiritual culture on which it might be capa-
ble of entering if properly directed. The
higher mesmerism, in fact, to be altogether
admirable and meritorious, must set out
from the beginning with being absolutely the
highest. There is no way of getting the
higher self of a sensitive under mesmerism


Digitized by VjOOQIC


212 THE BATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

into true relations, supposing these to be
possible in view of the whole karmic situa-
tion, with the loftiest spiritual teachers ac-
cessible to such a higher self, unless it is
from the beginning kept clear of all the en-
tangling defilements of lower experience in
that state of consciousness external to the
body ; but I say with a fixed conviction that
in this matter I am speakmg nothing but the
exact scientific truth, that there are great
numbers of people about the world bom with
psychic faculties indicating, by the very fact
that they exist, considerable development in
other lives along the lines of spiritual evolu-
tion, who may be put in relations with oc-
cult initiation of the loftiest sort imder the
influence of mesmerism conducted with that
end in view by an operator who knows what
he is about; and in such cases the glorious
result contemplated may be hastened to an
extent which by comparison with slower pro-
cesses of treatment is quite overwhelming to
the imagination.

Of course, whereas these greatest results
can only be secured where both sensitive and
mesmerizer are so circumstanced as to have
potentialities of relationship with the world
of occult initiation, there are good possibili-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CLAIRVOYANCE. 213

ties on a lower level within the range of
people who cannot be called occultists, and
even if these are associated with some theo-
retical perils, it would be hardly more rea-
sonable on that account to forbid their pur-
suit altogether, than to shut up Switzerland
because in their practical adoration of its
beauties some tourists will from time to
time, in the future as in the past, be lost
down crevasses. There is an extreme of
goody -goodyism in connection with the
study of nature's occult mysteries which op-
erates to retard progress in that department
of human energy as effectually as extreme
timidity would check it on the physical
plane. A reasonable comprehension of the
whole theory of mesmerism in its lower and
higher aspects such as — to make it no more
complete — is set forth in this volume, ought
to enable any well-disposed person to explore
the delightful wonders of this great science
without fear either of incurring unknown
pains and penalties, or of landing in still
less comprehensible disasters the soul or-
ganisms of those with whom he may experi-
ment.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CHAPTER IX.

MESMERIC PEACTICE.

The purpose I had in view in writing this
treatise has been much more that of opening
out an interpretation of mesmeric phenom-
ena than of guiding any new investigators '
in the practice of the art, whether with the
view of accomplishing mesmeric cures or
with that of exploring the higher mysteries
of human nature. However, just because
there has never hitherto been any clearly de-
fined rationale of mesmerism to guide the
practice of operators, we find the practical
manuals for the most part discordant in
their directions, and very often embodying
conceptions as to what ought to be done or
left imdone, that would be completely re-
versed by a correct appreciation of mes-
meric theory. It may be as well, therefore,
before bringing these remarks to a close,
that I shotdd indicate with some precision
the methods by which mesmeric energy
ought to be directed, and the leading errors


Digitized by VjOOQIC


MESMERIC PRACTICE. 216

wUch hare vitiated so many of tlie popular
manuals on this subject.

In tlie yery beginning Mesmer himself
seems to have adopted a great variety of
methods, some of them almost extravagantly
energetic, and some which were not in any
true sense of the term mesmeric at all. His
much talked of baquets belong to the latter
order of processes, and were adopted when
his patients became so importunate and nu-
merous that it was quite impossible for him
to work with each individually in the man-
ner he seems to have impressed upon his dis-
ciples as the most efficacious. The baqiiet
merely consisted of a trough or box with
magnetized water with rods or wires leading
from it which the patients held. Those who
were influenced by such an apparatus must
certainly have been in a highly susceptible
state, and in many cases may have been
hardly magnetized at all. If they came
under any influence, it would rather be that
of a nervous paralysis, such as the hypno-
tizers induce, although when the baqiLet was
employed with Mesmer himself walking
about the whole time amongst his patients,
it is likely enough that a good deal of his
Qwn fiiuperabuudant energy became infused


Digitized by VjOOQIC


216 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

into them. Then again he started a system
of mesmerizing trees, around which cords
were tied, which persons desirous of experi-
encing the influence were taught to hold.
Here, again, we can hardly call such a pro-
cess mesmerism in any true sense, although
just as at Lourdes and Treves results of an
astonishing character connected with patho-
logical conditions will constantly be devel-
oped amongst people associated with a widely
prevalent excitement.

The direct personal method of mesmerism
employed, at all events, by Mesmer's imme-
diate successors was, on the other hand, im-
necessarily and inconveniently energetic.
It has been copied ever since by a great num-
ber of operators, and their example has, not
unnaturally, been made use of by people
inclined to discredit mesmerism all roimd
by showing how objectionable, and in some
cases almost indecorous, its processes are.
The plan used to be for the operator to sit ex-
actly in front of the subject, each on sepa-
rate chairs, holding the ^ees of the subject
between his own, arranging that the feet also
should be in contact, and in this position
making downward passes, after in the first
instance holding his hands on the shoulders


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ME8MEBIC FEACTICE. 217

of the sensitive, and leaning forward so that
the magnetio influence of his breath might
be felt. Such an arrangement as this is
eminently unsuited, at all events, to cases
in which the operator is a man and the sub-
ject a woman, and large use has been made
of its obvious inconvenience, in such cases,
by writers opposed to the whole undertak-
ing. Where the patient and the operator
are both of the same sex the objection, per-
haps, cannot apply in the same way, and I
do not deny that tiie attitude and manipula-
tion in question would be of powerful effi-
cacy; but nothing could be worse for an
operator than to use one method which he
considered the best, and then, in all cases
where his patients might be women, to use
another which he in his own secret con-
sciousness believed less effective. It is far
better to adopt one system and stick to it
in all cases, taking care to design its details
so that it may never be unsuitable.

And as for the precise method which this
should be, I would not like to prescribe any
one as inevitably the right one, because
different mesmerists have with equal success
adopted very different systems, and each
person in turn must adapt his own customs


Digitized by VjOOQIC


218 THE HATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

to Us own inclinations and inner feeling as
to what is the best course to take, so that no
one could dogmatically prescribe any course
as the only right one. But a very convenient
arrangement, when the object in view is to
induce a mesmeric trance, is to put the sen-
sitive into a large and comfortable arm-chair
with good solid flat arms, like those familiar
to all clubs and places where people study
comfort, and then for the operator to sit
sideways on the arm of the chair. In this
way he practically fronts his patient without
any embarrassing entanglement in regard to
the knees, and the passes can be made with
perfect facility. He is also a little above
the patient, which is an advantage, and
nearer to him without any leaning forward
than would be the case if he sat on an oppo-
site chair. Having taken up this position
he should first endeavor to bring his own
magnetic system into some rapport with
that of his patient by holding the hands for
a time, or if he likes, which is perhaps the
best way, holding the thumbs only, so that
his own thmnbs press against those of the
patient, ball to ball. The thumb seems to
be a centre of nervous action in the hand,
which renders this arrangement efficacious.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


MESMERIC PRACTICE. 219

Then, after holding the liands or thumbs in
this way for a few minutes, during which
there is no necessity to be in any strained
condition of mind, but during which it may
be rather better than not that the operator
and patient should be quietly conversing in
reference to the business they have in hand,
the operator should transfer one hand —
presmnably the left if he is sitting, as I im-
agine him to be doing, on the right-hand
arm of the chair — to the patient's forehead,
continuing to hold both the patient's hands
in his own right. From this time it is de-
sirable that the conversation should cease,
and that the thought of the mesmerist should
be concentrated on the task he has in hand.
Bemember, it is this thought which is
the all-important matter; little or no effect
would be produced by manipulations, how-
ever exactly and faithfully carried out, if the
thought should in the mean time be wander-
ing off to other matters, or entangling itself
in the conversation of bystanders. And
from the first the thought must be directed
with a steady and continuous purpose to
some definite idea immediately within the
compass of the situation's possibility. If
he is endeavoring to induce a trance, the


Digitized by VjOOQIC


220 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

mesmerist must keep that idea in view, not
bothering himself for the moment as to
what may follow after, but simply imagin-
ing in his own mind that from his hand a
rain of subtle soporific influence is descend-
ing and drenching the nervous organism of
the sensitive. Perhaps it may enable any
one who tries, to realize this idea in his im-
agination all the better, if the study of these
pages may have induced him to comprehend
and believe, what is the actual fact, that
such an influence does descend under the
conditions supposed. Then, after a minute
or two of such concentration, the other hand
should be raised and the left moved slightly
to one side to give it room; both hands
should then be held on the forehead, the
fingers resting on the top of the head, and
the same thought be continued. After an-
other minute or two the hands should be
slowly parted downwards, stroking the side
of the head until at the shoulders they leave
contact with the sensitive, and are then car-
ried down about as far as the waist, or as
far as the position of the operator enables
him to carry them without inconvenience.
Then such passes are renewed, not again
with any contact as regards the head, but


Digitized by VjOOQIC


MESMERIC PRACTICE. 221

from a position in which the fingers point
downwards above the top of the head, and
then are drawn within an inch or two of the
face, and so down the body. Sometimes
people prefer to sweep them round the arms,
bringing them together at the sensitive's
lap, where the two hands may rest folded;
but this appears to me a matter of taste.
One thing which is not a matter of taste, but
a matter of great importance often over-
looked, is that the mesmerist should not, in
lifting his hands upwards to renew the next
pass after the last has been concluded, imdo
its effect involuntarily. He would undo its
effect in a great measure if he simply sweep
his hand back along the path it has traced.
In coming down, what should be done is to
close the hands completely at the conclusion
of each pass. Bring them back by an up-
ward, circular, outside course, and only
open them again when they are in a position
to begin the next pass. If the mesmerist is
at all sensitive, and if he darkens the room
in which he is carrying on his work to a
degree which just enables him to see the
features of his subject, but would not enable
him to read print, he will very likely see
the mesmeric fluid passing, or if he does not


Digitized by VjOOQIC


222 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

actually see it passing lie will see it steam*
ing up all round the subject's head; and
this, by the by, he will see all the more if
the person I have called the subject happens
not to be a sensitive but simply a non-recep-
tive subject. The true sensitive so readily
absorbs the magnetic fluid that but little of
it will be seen steaming up during the mag-
netizing process. A quite non - receptive
person, on the other hand, will take in
nothing, and from the first the doud of
wasted influence will be perceptible.

There is only one more point in connection
with this general prescription on which I
care to lay any emphasis. It is quite true,
as Mesmer conceived in the beginning, that
the breath is a powerful vehicle of magnetic
influence, but in order to bring this fact
into play it is wholly unnecessary to lean
down and puff in your sensitive's face.
Everything really turns upon the regulation
of your breath during the magnetizing pro-
cess; it is not necessary to puff at all in
any audible or obtrusive manner, but the
operator's breathing should be synchronized
with the passes; he should inhale his breath
during the upward movements of his hands,
and during the downward movement should


Digitized by VjOOQIC


MESMERIC PRACTICE, 223

exhale. This rule gives the true due to the
time which should be occupied with the
passes. Manj of the mesmeric manuals are
quite at sea on this point, some appearing to
think that the greatest efficacy is secured if
the pass is made to last as long as possible,
so that they would have it extend to aminute
or more. It should occupy just as much
time as the operator requires for slowly ex-
haling one lungsful of breath, without so un-
duly retarding that process as to induce any
strained feeling in the lungs or oblige him
to take rapid breaths to repair lost time.

The time which will be taken in putting
a subject off to sleep varies of course from a
few minutes to infinity. With some people
no ordinary mesmerist will ever succeed;
with those who are highly sensitive and with
whom he has already operated successfully
on former occasions a very few minutes will
be enough, and the earlier processes I have
described could be proportionately hastened.
But with any one who is being tried for the
first time it can hardly ever be worth while
to continue the process for more than half
an hour, because it is scarcely possible for
an operator to protract anything like vigor
and concentration for a greater length of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


224 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

time; but this, of course, must depend upon
the energy of the operator and the ardor of
his desire to succeed in any {>articular case.
Some people would be hopelessly exhausted
before the half hour was over, and others
would be able to continue for much longer.

The method I have described seems to me
the best and most convenient with the view
of inducing a psychic trance with what may
be called spiritual objects in view; but I
have known mesmerists who resort entirely
to the magnetic emanations of the eye, and
take no trouble to make passes at all, simply
staring at their sensitive with btense fixed-
ness of gaze. This process, to my mind,
bears too close resemblance to the hypnotic
method to be altogether wholesome, and
moreover requires that the sensitive should
keep his eyes open imtil paralyzed or fasci-
nated; and this is a less easy and natural
method for him than the one that I have de-
scribed, in which it is left to his own option
when he shall close his eyes, and in which
he passes off to sleep without any jarring of
the nervous system. I shall leave my read-
ers to seek for themselves, in books devoted
to the modern corruptions of this subject,
for an account of the methods employed to


Digitized by VjOOQIC


MESMERIC PRACTICE. 225

produce the so-called bypnotio sleep. These
inyolve no conscious gift of magnetism by
any operator, and simply provoke a diseased
condition of the nervous system, which ren-
ders the patient subject, it is true, to sug-
gestions that may afterwards be made by
the operator who is directing the undertak-
ing, but which also renders that patient
equally liable to come under the suggestive
influence of other persons, good, bad, or in-
different, and especially under suggestive in-
fluences with which the mere physicist has no
familiarity, but which nevertheless are facts
in nature, and as grave in their importance
as himself. But putting out of sight all the
mischievous devices of hypnotism, the mes-
meric method which I have been describing
does not by any means cover all the ground,
for if curative results are in view it may be
that a very different manipulation is required,
and a very different direction may have to
be given to his thought by the operator.

To produce a magnetic cure in a thor-
oughly healthy and natural maimer, the first
thing to be done (as I have already said in
speaking of the theory of curative mesmer-
ism) is to draw out the evil nerve aura, or
magnetism, of the sufferer. This has, by


Digitized by VjOOQIC


226 THE RATIONALE OF MESMERISM.

the hypothesis, been concentrated in some
portion of his organism, and it is to that
portion, whatever it may be, that the mes-
merist's attention must be directed. No
passes are called for here — not in the be-
ginning, at all events — and mesmerism re-
solves itself into a *^laying-on of hands," to
adopt a biblical expression, but receives its
scientific character when the mesmerist is
alive to the fact that in laying on his hands
he is using them as a sponge to sop up or
attract, and not as a jet of force through
which to exhale anything. His proceedings
must now be much more deliberate than be-
fore. The hands should be kept on the seat
of the ailment, whatever it is, for a minute
or two, then drawn off with a downward
movement and vigorously shaken as with the
idea that the bad magnetism is being thrown
off with the utmost possible energy, and, as
I have before described, impelled into those
elemental agencies in nature with which it
may be in affinity, and whose duly it may
be, as the matter presents itself to the op-
erator's mind, to carry it off. Then the
laying-on is renewed, and the whole business
must go on for as long a time within limits
as the operator's strength will enable him to


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ME8MEBIC PRACTICE. 227

protract it — a time which I am not suppos-
ing to exceed more than half an hour* Then
something else has to be done. If we have
been successful in withdrawing bad magnet-
ism from the patient's system, that has got
to be replaced with other magnetism of a
healthier character. To get rid of the last
traces of that with which he may have been
contaminating his hands, the mesmerist
should wash them, and then begin again,
either with a *Uaying-on" associated with
the idea of pouring in influence into the sys-
tem instead of withdrawing it, or by means
of downward passes of much the same kind
as those which he would employ with a view
of inducing a trance, but not with the same
thought; for remember it is the thought, in
all cases, in the mesmerist's mind which col-
ors the aura which he throws off, so to speak
— which gives its specific character to the in-
fluence he is bringing to bear on his subject.
Just as in the case of trance mesmerism he
should be thinking all the time of the force
he is throwing off as one of a somnolent
character, which will deaden his patient's
nerves and obliterate his active conscious-
ness, so in the case of the curative influence
he must think of it as a stimulating, exhil-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


228 THE RATIONALE OF MESMEBI8M.

arating influence, which will course along
the patient's nerves and refresh him, as
champagne might refresh him in another
way, though much less beneficially*

One more consideration in reference to
this curative manipulation. The effect of
hands laid on in the manner I have described
on the bare flesh, if that can be got at, is
simply tenfold more powerful than that
which would be conveyed through clothing.
Of course this hint must be made use of or
neglected according to circumstances. If
clothing must be retained, all one can say is
that in regard to intercepting mesmeric in-
fluence, the worst imaginable sort of cloth-
ing is that made of silk.

Certainly, as Esdaile's experience has so
largely shown us, immense curative effects
are wrought by nature during the magnetic
sleep, if that can be superinduced. But it
cannot always be superinduced, even in cases
where people might be highly subject to the
good influence of magnetic treatment with-
out losing consciousness ; and, secondly, even
if it can be induced, its effect will be enor-
mously stimulated if, besides putting the
patient to sleep, the manipulation here re-
conmiended be adopted.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


INDEX.


122.
Ann, the nenre, 130; how af-
fected by the -vital magnetism
of a meameric operator, 132 ;
maj unite the brain with the
true oonadottsneaa without
uniting body and brain, 136.

BaiUy,M..178.
Baquet^ Meamer'a. 215.
Beanhamala, Oomteaae de, 180.
Bertrand, Alexandre, 18, 81;

treatiae by, on animal magnet-

iam in France, 00.
Biblical phraMB, mesmeriam

firea a new interest to many,
20.

Binet. Alfred, and Oharlea Fdr4,
on Animal Hagnetlam, 16-18.

Braid. Mr., of Manchester, 8;
his theory of liypnotism, 9 ; his
experbnents, 10; nothing ori-
ginal eren in his mls^>prehenp
aiona. 12; his Tiewa gigantio
blunder and a plagiary, 13.


Oahagnet, M. L. A., 66.

Calcutta, Dr. Bsdaile^a work in,
107,108.

Casotte, prophecy of. concerning
the French Bevolution, 176-
180,203.

Chamfort.M.de, 178.

Charcot, Dr., 104.

Clairvoyance, formerly annpoaed
to depend on morbid physical
ooDdftiona, 2B, 26 ; real impor-
tance of, 02; separatee the
consciousness from the body,
183 ; the reality of, weU estab-
lished, 172 ; Deleuse*8 writings
on, 172 180; posslbiUtiesS,
iS, 184; four kinds of, 184-
186 ; why not manifested in all
peraons, 191 ; a faculty of the
higher self, 193 ; limitations of,
200,201.

Ooiquhoan^..C., on *' The Har-
mony,** 39 ; hia " laia Berel*-
ta,'»76.

Consciousneas, the seat of, not in
the physical matter of the
body, m ; the working of, 129 ;
be separated &om the
, 133, 138.

Daris, Andrew Jackson, autoU*
ography of, 204-207.

Deleuse, J. P. F.. on Mesmer*s
connection witn **The Har-
mony,** 39, 47 ; writinga of, on
mesmerism, 46-49, 172-180.

D*Salon, Dr., a warm partisan of
Mesmer's views, 38; private
misunderstanding between him
and Mesmer, 39.

D*Orsay, Count, 177, 17&


may 1
body,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


230


INDEX.


Sgo, the Ubentad, of tiM Moai.
tiT0, 62-54.

Smotwm, Dr., 72, 74, 75, 104;
ftnimal magnetUnn uaed by, in
treatiug Mriout dtoeaaea, 106-

SnoydopndiM, ndrrort of popn-
Ur igiionDoe of ptvchic ad-
•nco, 78, 83; daaenptknit of
monnerism in, 78-82.

Bachenmayer, Dr. von, 55.

Eadaile, Dr., the remarkable
worka of, 66-68, 104-107 ; ani.
mal magnetiam uaed by, in hoa-
pital practice, 106-110.

Xaoteric doctrine, the, 88, 99, 94.

Faria, Abbtf, expeiimenta of, 12.

F&r«, Charlea, and Alfred Binet,

on animal maguetitm, 16-18.

Gantier, Aubln, writinga of, on
maffnetiam and aomnambuliam,

Oenlia, Cknnteaae de, 179.
Onunont, Docheaae de, 178, 179.
Gregory, Dr., on animal magnet-

Handa, the laying on of, 116.

** Harmon v,^e,'* Meaner *8 ae-
cret BocMty at Paria. 39.

Hartshorn, Mr., American trana-
lator of Deleuze*a ** Practical
Inatmctiona on Animal Mag-
netism,*' 49.

Higher Self, the, 159-166, 197 ;
dairvoyance a faculty of, 193 ;
activity of, how set up, 195;
can be tnmslated to any dis-
tant place, 199, 200; trained
under mesmericm, 211, 212.

«* Holy Coat," the, at Trftvea, 21.

Hcly Ghost, tiie sin against the,

Hortenae, Madame, anecdote of,
181, m

Hypnotic suggestion, aa a cura-
tive meth(^, 110, 123, 126, 127 ;
operation of, alter lapse of
time, 160; moral dangers of,
163-167.

Hypnotic trance, or sleep, 10,16,

Hypnotism, the term represents
a misconception, 1 : why pre-
ferred by some moaem invea-
tigators, 2 ; modem writers on.


deal moetiy with a disease of
the science, 6, 7; distinction
between meameriam and, 7;
latter-day investigatora of, not
adentiflc or lovaf to truth, 19,
20; a distorted revivU of mea-
m«riam,22.

India, natives of, more aenattive
to magnetic influence than Eu-
ropeana, 107.

Inviaible raya of light, 8.

Juasleu, M. de, favorable to Mea-
mer, 40.

Karma, 204.
Kiefer, Dr., 55.

Lafontalne, M., s^ancea by, 9, 10.

La Harpe, Cazotte*s prophecy
concerning the French Revo-
lution, aa recorded by, 176-180.

Langon, Baron de, 180.

Lefrey, AdMe, one of M. Ricard'a
aensitives, 52; her statement
of experience, 52-54.

Lee, Eawin, on animal magnet-
ism and clairvoyance, 69, 70.

Liebault, Dr., 104.

Lodge, Dr. Oliver, addresa by,
202.

Luminous appearances, emanat-
ing from magnets, crystals, and
the hinnan hand, 24.

Magnetic influence from a dis-
tance. 18, 51.

Magnetism, bad, how to get rid
of, 118-118 ; may return to a
previous habitat, 122, 123.

Malesherbes, M. de, 178.

Man, not altogether peculiar aa
a manifestation of nature, 27 ;
esoteric view of the constitu-
tion of, 95-97 ; septenary divi-
sion of, 95-98.

Medico - chirurgical Society of
London, the, 169, 170.

Mesmer, Frederick Anthony. 5,
7, 8 ; guessed with the inspira-
tion of genius, 28; birth and
early life of, 36 ; writings of,
36-38 ; at first worked entirely
with magnets, 36; established
a private hon>itai in Vienna,
86 ; discovered animal magnet-
ism, 87; assailed fai reputation


Digitized by VjOOQIC


INDEX.


231


87; inoTed to
PwU, 87; MtablidMd «* The
Harmoov,'* a taoret todety.
89; unteTorabto report of
Trenob Bc^yal Oommiatioii on
the theory of. 40 ; retirement
to Switserleod, end death, 40 ;
letter of, to the klnf of IVanoe,
76 ; hiMbaquettt 216; trees mee-
merised by, 318.

Mennerlc enernr, methoda hy
which it oof^t to be dixected,
214, 218-2^^

Meemerib-flttid, 2 ; Tietble to many
meeminrlats. 8. 4, 26. 26, 60, 89,
112, 2217222; and the rital
en«rgy, 96; actoal objeotiye
exiatenoe of, the first element-
ary principle of mesmeric sol-
ence, 111, 112; present in sU
human beings, 118; propelled
by exercise m will-power, 116 ;
use of the hand In directing,
116-118.

Mesmeric force, 28-36, 147, 149,
160,164.

llesmerio patienta, enabled to
vresoribe for themaelrea, 181,

llesmeric sensitiTeness, 141, 142,
146, 146-149, 161, M

Ifesmerism, a better term than
hypnotiam, 1, 2; reieotion of
the scienoe a great blunder, 6 ;
extent of its early practice, 6 ;
professional persecution of ita
adherents, 6; distinction be-
tween hypnotism and, 7 ; value
of, in searching out the rela-
tions of mind and body, 16 ; in-
cidental aid given it by mod-
em hynnotists, 20; how to
study. 20 : hypnotism a dis-
torted reTival of, 22; the real
literature of, 86-$4 ; realitv of
the phenomena of, fully estab-
lished, 42, 43; efficacy of, in
surgical operations, 67, 68, 74 ;
can be explained only by the
esoteric doctrine. 88, 93 ; phe-
nomena of, psychic in their na-
ture, 90; applied to a plant,
99 ; curative, 104-127 ; not uni-
versally apioicable as a cura-
tive agent, 109 ; how it works,
109-118 ; gives a new interest
to many biblical phrases, 120;
really practioed thousa n d s of


yean before ICesDer, 120: dan-
gers in curative use oL 126,
127 ; anesthetic effects of. 128-
189 ; muscular rigidity induced
by, 186 ; moral dangers of, 168-
167 ; not the domain ci doetora
alone, 168 ; importance of un«
derstanding the loftier posai-
bOitles of, 207; jOi^rimr with,
to be condemned. 208,209 ; our
moat accessible avenue ci high-
er knowledge of ^iritual evo-
lution, 210.

** Mesmerist,** the, 77, 78.

Mind and body, possible value id
indetermin


ietermining the
relations of, 16.
MoU, Dr. Albert, his *• Hypno-
tism ** one of the least oojeo-
tlonable modem hooka on the
subject, 12-16.

Nasse, Dr., 66.

Newton, Dr. J. B., meamerio

healing Inr. in America and

BngUnd, 76, 77.
Kicolai, M. de, 178.
Noiset, M., 13.

Occultism, as a sdenoe, 88 ; how
it regards the soul of man, 97.
"•Odio force,** the, 29, 80.

Palmerston, Lord, 119.

P^t^tin, Dr., his ** Blectricit^
Animale,** 43.

Pigeaire, M., and his daughter
Ukmide, 62-66.

Potet, Bsron du, a successful
mesmerist, 66, 66, 68, 69 ; writ-
ings of, 66-69, 106.

Prel, du, his ** PhUosophy of Mys-
ticism,** 198.

Previsi<m, bewildering mysteries
of, 201.

Psychic foroe, infiuenoe of, 89.

Psychic organiam, a kind of body,
194.

Puys^nir, Marquis Ohastenet de,
wriungs of, on animal magnet-


Relohel, lOss, one of Baron von

Beichenbach*s sensitives, 26,

26.
Beiohenbaoh, Baron Oharlea von,

4.6; his **BeBearohes,** 28-81,

112.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


282


INDEX.


Betnomuitioii. the ooontt tlieoiy

of, lM-196.
Biourd, J. J. A., reeord of hit

work in ear»ti?e meaneiiam,

49-5i.

BooKMby, Dr.« hit *«Zdtlic Ibe-

iietitm,**60.
Bantttion, the trantfer of, from

ojwtetor to aat^ect, 1«), 141,

Benaea, the flTe, not the only
ftTemiaa of perception, 142.

BenaitiTea, at ilrat aonght for
only among aick peraona, 28,
24 ; experimenta with, 26, 28,
80, 62; not neoeaaarfly weak-
minded, 162.

Bool, ooouH idea of the, 97.

Bpiritnal plane, the. 88, 102, 108.

Bpiritnal adence, 87.

BunUfht, aa aooroe of energy, 28.

Bwine, pamUe of the h«ti of,
120, l&T


Teate, A., on animal magnetiam,

180-182.
Time, a relative mode of regard-
ing thinsa. 202.
Topham, lir., and ICr. Ward,

meameriam uaed by, in ampO'

tation,160.170.
Townaend, Ker. Ghaonoy Hare,

reoorda of meameric inveatiga-

tiona by, 70-72.
Tr^Toa, the ««H61y Coat** at,

2L

yicqd*Aair,M.,178.

Yiaion, oneqaal power of, in dif-
ferent peraona. 4.

Vital energy, and animal magnet-
inn, 98.

Ward, Kr., and Mr. Topham,
meameriam need Inr, in ampa-
tation, 169, 170.

"Zoiat," the, 07,89, 72-74.


2 7 "1^50 - /o Digitized by Google


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by Vjj|OOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC
