THENAFTA SHOWDOWNJFK:3O YEARS LATER
CANADA'SWEEKLYNEWSMAGAZINE
NOVEMBER22,1993 $2.95
acleans
Trudeau
On Trudeau
His Impact
Now

--- PAGE BREAK ---SPECIAL
REPDR'T
Johnsontakingtheoathof
town.

Chief Curry, an-
office; theold Texas School
gered by rumors that Os-
BookDepository anditsinfamous
wald had been beaten,
window(left);Leavelle,then
was determined tomove
and now (below):'I saw Ruby
him publicly so that the
standingtherewithagun.About
TV cameras would display
then,he made two short steps and
him undamaged.Shortly
double-actioned that.38into
after11 a.m., Secret Ser-
Oswald's stomach'
vice,FBI and other law n-
forcement agents had fin-
ished questioning Oswald.

“He had two different
sweaters there and he said
he wanted the black one,a
pullover,so welet him put
it on, Leavelle says.“I put
two sets of handcuffs on
him, one set on both his
wrists and thenI hand-
cuffed his right arm to my
left.I was kind of kidding
him.I said, Well, Lee, if
anybody shoots at you,I
hope they're asgood a
friend, had been shot.

shot as you are'He kind
At about 5 p.m.,he
of laughed,the only timeI
went toParkland hospi-
sawhim smileorlaugh
tal where he sat for a
when hewas in custody.

timewithNellieConnal-
He said, Aw, ain't nobody
ly while her husband un-
goingtoshoot atme.

derwent surgery.“Then,
You're justbeingoverdra-
I went home”Wade re
maticor something.'I
calls,“and shorly afr,
said,Well, if anybody does
got a callfrom Cliff Carter, who was a right-with I want a lawyer'and‘Police brutality.”
shoot at you, you know what to do'And he
handmanof[vice-presidentLyndon]John-
Henry Wade believes he could have won a
said, The captain said to follow you so Ill go
son's andhe said it's come over the television
conviction and thatOswaldwouldhavebeen
wherever you go.' I said, “In that case, you'll
that y'all are going to claim the Russians con-
sentenced todeath.Butdeath,asitturned
be on the ground pretty quick if anyone starts
spired to kill the presidentI said I didn't know
out, was imminent.

shooting.derwent surgery.“Then,
You're justbeingoverdra-
I went home”Wade re
maticor something.'I
calls,“and shorly afr,
said,Well, if anybody does
got a callfrom Cliff Carter, who was a right-with I want a lawyer'and‘Police brutality.”
shoot at you, you know what to do'And he
handmanof[vice-presidentLyndon]John-
Henry Wade believes he could have won a
said, The captain said to follow you so Ill go
son's andhe said it's come over the television
conviction and thatOswaldwouldhavebeen
wherever you go.' I said, “In that case, you'll
that y'all are going to claim the Russians con-
sentenced todeath.Butdeath,asitturned
be on the ground pretty quick if anyone starts
spired to kill the presidentI said I didn't know
out, was imminent.

shooting.

where that came from because as far as I knew
Oswald and Leavelle,wearing a pale gray
we had no evidence that there were anyRus
JimLeavelleis73 and comes from a village
Stetson andhis only Neiman Marcus suit,
sians involved.Johnson apparentlywas hung
called Detroit in Red River County,Texas.“I
rode the elevatorfrom thethirdfloor to the
up on that andwas scared to death the Rus-
thinkmy wife marriedmebecause she
basement and walked alonga short corridor
sians were going to release the atomic bomb."
thought I'd take her to the big city,”he chuck-
to the parking garage.

At Carter's insistence,Wade drove to police
les.Theirchildrengrown andlonggone,they
“All the floodlights from the TV cameras
headquarters at city hall to meet Oswald.“I
live besideLake Ray Hubbard in the Dallas
came on andwe were blinded momentarily,
asked him if he had a lawyer,”Wade says.“He
suburb of Garland.--- PAGE BREAK ---

where that came from because as far as I knew
Oswald and Leavelle,wearing a pale gray
we had no evidence that there were anyRus
JimLeavelleis73 and comes from a village
Stetson andhis only Neiman Marcus suit,
sians involved.Johnson apparentlywas hung
called Detroit in Red River County,Texas.“I
rode the elevatorfrom thethirdfloor to the
up on that andwas scared to death the Rus-
thinkmy wife marriedmebecause she
basement and walked alonga short corridor
sians were going to release the atomic bomb."
thought I'd take her to the big city,”he chuck-
to the parking garage. At Carter's insistence,Wade drove to police
les.Theirchildrengrown andlonggone,they
“All the floodlights from the TV cameras
headquarters at city hall to meet Oswald.“I
live besideLake Ray Hubbard in the Dallas
came on andwe were blinded momentarily,
asked him if he had a lawyer,”Wade says.“He
suburb of Garland. In 1963,Leavelle was a Dai-
couldn't see a thing,”Leavelle recalls.“Out of
said he did and named.a NewYork City
las police detective and on Sunday,Nov.24,
the corner of my eye,I sawRuby standing
lawyerprominent inthecivillibertiesmove-
was about tobecome one of the most widely
there with a gun at his side.About that same
ment who called back and said that he did not
recognized players in the assassination drama. instant,he made two short steps and double
know Oswald andhad no intention of repre-
That morning,police were preparing to
actioned that.38 into Oswald’s stomach.Ihad
senting him.Oswaid was defiant.I asked him
transfer Oswaldfrom the cityhallpolicelock-
Oswaidby thebelt in addition tobeinghand-
questions about where he was at the time of the
upto thebetter-equipped andmore·secure
cuffed tohim,andI tried tojerkhimbehind
shooting.He answered practically everything
cells attheDallasCountyCourthouseacross
me but all I succeeded in doing was turning
46

--- PAGE BREAK ---Clockwise, from left,
Jackie today,a book
editor in NewYork City;
son John,a lawyer,cycling
with actressDaryl Hannah;
daughter Caroline,a
lawyer and mother of three,
withhusband Edwin
Schlossberg; Jackie and
herchildrenon theCapitol
stepstheday of thefuneral:
America'sroyalfamily
But Lee Harvey Oswald
did not stay buried.In 1981,
British author Michael
Eddowes, who had written
a book contending that
the body in the Arlington
grave was that of a Soviet
spy,got a court order for
exhumation.Fort Worth
funeral director Paul
Groody，who had put
Oswald into the ground
18years before,returned
to dig him up.

is body a little bit so that instead of hitting
figured we'd charge himwithmurder but the
Now74,Groody says that he found some
im deadcentre,it hit himabout fourinches
grand jury would say,Jack,that's a bad thing
body had been there ahead of him.

The steel-
)the left of the navel."
you done shootin'Oswald,but sinceheneeded
reinforced concretevault containing the casket
Leavelle grabbed Ruby with his free hand
kilin'anyhow,we going to excuse you this
had been broken,probably when it fell while
nd shoved him backward.Other policemen
time but don't do it again'And he could stand
being lifted from the grave,Groody surmises.

eized both the gun and Ruby.An ambulance
at the front door of his club and people would
In any event,he delivered thebody to the Bay-
ook Oswald toParkland hospital,where he
come from far and wide to shake the hand of
lorMedical CenterinDallas where,twoyears
/asput in the same emergency operating
the man who shot the assassin."
later,a pathologist confirmed that the teeth
oom that had received Kennedy,and Dr.

That same day,while kings,emperors and
were indeed those of Lee Harvey Oswald.

MalcolmPerry,partoftheteamthathadtried
prime ministers bowed their heads inhomage
However,says Groody,the body he collect
)save the president,operated in vain on the
to the memory of a murdered president at Ar-
ed fromParkland hospital in 1963 had under-
ccused assassin.That same day,while kings,emperors and
were indeed those of Lee Harvey Oswald.

MalcolmPerry,partoftheteamthathadtried
prime ministers bowed their heads inhomage
However,says Groody,the body he collect
)save the president,operated in vain on the
to the memory of a murdered president at Ar-
ed fromParkland hospital in 1963 had under-
ccused assassin.

At 1:07 p.m., Oswald was
lingtonNational Cemetery nearWashington,
gone an autopsy that included a craniotomy--
ronounceddead.

Lee Harvey Oswald wasburied inRose Hill
opening the skull.“But when we dug him up，”
Cemetery at Arlington,Texas,between Dallas
he says, “I didn't see any evidence that the
Leavellehadhadenoughof televisedpolice
and Fort Worth.There were fivemourners-
skull had been autopsied."
ork.The next day,Monday the 25th,he
Oswald’s wife,Marina,his brother Robert,his
"You think the guy wasn't Oswald?”
hiskedRuby from City Hall to the county
mother and his two infant children.The Rev.

“Yup,P'm kind of convinced of that.”
ourthouse without telling evenhis lieu-
Louis Saunders,secretary of the FortWorth
“So what did they do,replace the teeth?”
nant-"and he got huffy about that."
District Council of Churchessays thathehad
"Replaced the head.

Somebody went in,
Ruby was badly frightened.

“On the way
calledfive different clergymen to perform the
changed heads and put the head of the real
own in the elevator,” Leavelle remembers,
service but all had made excuses.

Saunders,
Lee Harvey in there.--- PAGE BREAK ---

“On the way
calledfive different clergymen to perform the
changed heads and put the head of the real
own in the elevator,” Leavelle remembers,
service but all had made excuses. Saunders,
Lee Harvey in there. le was wanting to wear my hat and my coat
who had not conducted a funeral service in
“So who did you originally bury?"
id everything because hewas afraid some-
eightyearsnervouslyrecited scripturefrom
"Some guy who was groomed to look like
ody was going to shoot him.I said,Jack,you
memory:“The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall
him, but remember, it’s only a dumb old un-
n't worth killin', nobody's going to shoot you
not want; he maketh me to lie down in green
dertaker talkin'"
hen,I said,In all the years Ive known you,
pastures...." Now 84, retired and living in
u've never doneanything to hurt the police,
Dallas,Saunders says that he eventually got
For years after Kennedy's murder,Dallas
it you didn't do us any favor on this.'And he
more than 1,000 letters and postcards,only
was reviled acrossAmerica.Some newspaper
id,‘All I wanted to do was be a hero.'He'd
one of them critical. stories called it “Murder City”and dwelled on
MACLEAN'S/NOVEMBER22,1993 47