for Jane issue release
From Delaarva Poultry Industry, Inc.
Georgetown, Delaware
file delicious smell of frying, baking, broiling, and barbecued
/*LAU£)
chicken will fill the air this moms at Easton, Md., as more than
IS# of the nation's top heme chicken cooks vie for fame and valuable
prises at the National Chicken Cocking Contest finals, June 18, 19, 20,
Against a backdrop of the 17th Annual Delnarva Chicken Festival,
finalists fro® 45 state cooking contests and recipe eliminations will
fight it out on range, frypan nisi grill to determine the nation's
Chicken cooking champion, junior champion {under 18), who is the best
hand with a frypan, and who will be barbecue king.
More than $11,000 in prizes is at stake. winner of the Senior
division gets free tickets for two for a 5-country European tour by
Fan Am jet. Junior winner gets a trip to Chicago and a blank check
for $2,000 to shop at Polk Brothers, world's largest brand name
appliance center. The barbecue king {or queen) gets a free vacation
for two at the fabulous Bay Koc Hotel, Montego Bay, Jamaica, in the
sunny Carribbean. Portable appliance champ wins a houseful of electric
appliances from the Sunbeam Corporation.
A distinguished panel of 25 food editors and nationally known
heme economists will judge the four divisions of the contest. Co-
chairmen for the senior division are Eleanor Key ( Ann Chester )
tferaen's Editor, Westchester Publications, Hew York? and, Dora McCann,
(more)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Pi
station west, “McCanns At Bows'* show. Silvia schuman, Haw York,
8ditor~in~chie£ of ingenue Magazine is chairman of the junior panel.
Isabel McGovern, Director of the Home Institute for the New York
Berald Tribune heads up judges for the portable appliance division,
while Alvin Kerr of Gourmet Magazine, New York, is chairman of the
judges for the barbecue division.

--- PAGE BREAK ---New York
Berald Tribune heads up judges for the portable appliance division,
while Alvin Kerr of Gourmet Magazine, New York, is chairman of the
judges for the barbecue division.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

^^ugs. £ urn feathers and fest: bvifeia^ wi l r~m TfT^^rTdl^
calindaiNgn the Delmarva Peninsul i.
and 20, the famed apd^fabled
sapeake Bay apdthe Atlantic O^ean
n
For thr ee\day s, June 18, 19
Eastern Shore countr^between Che
will be the poultry showca^of tjie worl^as the Delmarva Ch-ick^
Festival makes its annual bow.
Chil
It
Feature event, as usual, Wxl
taken Cooking Contest which was
be she finals of the National}
launched Delmarva 16 years (ago,
btas brought thou squids of top heme chicken cookehere from all!
states except Alaska, and from many foreign countries\s well.
This year, finalists from 45
thejt <will be competing for some $j
gljfaaor of national cooking tit
state contests have filed RQtifce
111,000 worth of prizes, plus th<
esl.
Festival locale this year city of- Baaton-arn storied
Talbot County, Maryland. Here, at Wye Mills the famed Wye Oak stands,
one of the largest and best known trees in America. Near it is old
Wye Mill which ground flour for Washington's army at Valley Forge.
In Talbot also is the Third Haven Meeting, of Quaker faith, reputed
to be the oldest frame house of worship in continuous use in America.
The historic town of Oxford is also part of Talbot as is the Oxford-
Bellevue Ferry across the lovely Tred Avon River, known to tens of
thousands of tourists from all over the world.
9
(more)

--- PAGE BREAK ---wn of Oxford is also part of Talbot as is the Oxford-
Bellevue Ferry across the lovely Tred Avon River, known to tens of
thousands of tourists from all over the world.
9
(more)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
Food editors whose names are a byword to housewives throughout
America will be here by the score from all points to help judge the
carry news of the recipes far
and wide.
The cookoffs themselves will be held at the Easton High School*
For the moire than 100 entrants in the Senior division and the more
than 50 entrants in the Junior division (youngsters under 18), the
electric and gas utilities of the Peninsula will line up a battery of
40 spanking new ranges in the high school cafeteria on which the con-
testants will cook in two-hour shifts. There, too, the portable appli-
ance division finals will be held, while just outside the outdoor
barbeque experts will ply their art on a bewildering variety and
array of cooking devices.
Sharing honors with the junior cookoff on opening day, Thursday,
will be the Little Miss Delmarva Pageant featuring tots from three
years to school age who have previously won local pageant honors in
their home communities throughout the Peninsula. In the evening, the
opening round of the Miss Delmarva Pageant, for their older sisters
of 17 to 23, will be held. These finalists, too, have already won
community honors in the towns and cities which they represent.
On Friday, when the senior division cookoff is held to choose
the National Chicken Cooking Champion, the days events will include
an air show, and, in the evening, the finals of the Miss Delmarva
(more)