4/14/73 
Mr. Sandor Frankel 2- 2- ? — ^•'O 
225 Broadway 
New York, N.Y# 
Bear hr, Fronkel, 
A young lawyer from the midwest, .ho tea just passeu ilia District of Columbia 
bars and i3 familiar with my neod for a lawyer in New York City, lias suggested that 
1 write you. He knows a lawyer who loiows you. Sh^ild you care to check with him, ne 
ia James Le3ar, 1251 4 ot#f SW, 20024 ; 4o4-6G25« If tliac of which I write seems 
improbable of soioewhat paranoid, I an confident hr# Losar will assure you that it 
ia not. Ho in of counsel in a criminal case in which 1 have been the investigator. 
He has also assisted me in several Freedom of Information coses in which we havo 
been successful. 
In the 19’J0B I Va3 a Sonata investigator, I an not a New Yorker and have no 
connections with tliat city oxcopt through writing# A nunbor of book wholesalers 
owe me money. Whan 1 learned the address of a lawyer in Boston with whom I had 
worked for the Senate I asked him if he could help me with a Boston case and if 
he could refer me to a New York lawyer# While the response from the New York 
lawyer seemed to indicate lie would not be able; to represent me, it nonetheless 
prompted me to write hdro a summary of the legal matters between publishers and 90. 
I enclose a copy of that letter to give you an idea of what is involved. 
X will be in New York the week of £'*ay 6 or 15 to make a speech at a college wliich 
has not yet selected the exact date. If I hear from them before you respond, I will 
let you know. I do hope it will be possible for you tc represent oe, for our nee ds 
are urgent. If you cannot, perhaps you know a lawyor who cun? 
Hr. Lenar tells me you were an Assistant United States Attorney in Washington# 
When Dave Pine was U#S. Attorney, I worked with that office and him on some cases# 
Earlier I had worked with Brian McMahon when he was ^hief of the Criminal Hivicion 
of the Department of Justice# During World War II, when I wan an investigative 
reporter, I worked with the Anti-Trust division. My recent v/ritings and investigations 
dealing with political aafiassincitions am in no* sons* anti—government. However, 
because of whut they expose, they do, I think, make the government anti-mo# I hope 
this will not discourage you# However, it i3 what I regard os a reality of which I 
think you should know# 
Sincerely, 
Harold Weiaberg 
" • ■ ,*YV£ ;V-VM •••* • •• • ■   — V  —-