NITEDSTA'TESCOV
MENT
fernorandum
Loac
Lr.
W'ick
1
r.
Conrad
：x.Doioach
DATE:NovCnb3 1S,1SC6
1-Mr。Rosen'
TROM
W.C.Sulliva
kr.Sullivan
L'r。 Branigan
Tele.Rcr
Hola
Lir。Leniha
SENLDY
AOVELSER 22,
1963
Te purpose of this nerorandua is to recoiuend that
te Burcau cooperate with Lr.Richard J.lnalen in providing
cts fcr L. ithalen to uso in an article to appear in the
:“Saturcay Evenior Post" in the near future, ained at silenciag
cvitics of the
Tarren CormissionRoport.
Richard J.rtalen is an intellectual conservative.
is reliable ard trustvorthy and has an extreuely high opinion of
HO
te Bureau.Eo was born in 1935 in Ncv York City atd was
ccduated vith honors fron Queens Collego in l957. He foruerly
s associcted with the Richcond,Virginia,"Kews Leader" and
Liting on national affairs,and vas later an editorial writer:
fo the "all Strcot Journai." In 19s2, he joined the staff ox
Fortuae" magazine as an associate editor. He recently wrote'a
ccsk entitlcd "Tnc Founding Father: Tio Story of Joseph P.
:ocneay." Tiis book was written by Whalen over the Keanedys!.
objcctions. It was factual and not,praiseyorthy.of the Kenaedys.
Lr.lhalen has contacted
theBurongZncis
che Fsl cooperate with him in brirging fortheto
uested that
tig'knerican
OKMEE
Doople the full truth concerning the assissihatilaof the lato
Fesident Joln F. Kennedy. Ihalen states he fecls that this is
iabsolutely nccessary since be belicved heand tisBureau shared
ORIGINAL
la rising aporehension at the nev-ton respectability and possible
acceptarcc of the various conspiracy nongers.
vaat is pvofoundly disturbing in this developrent ls the fact
Ihalen stated
that'their attack is directcd against the person and the'
olicies -particularly the Vietnan policy -of Prosideat
:ennecy's succcssor..l'halen statcd in his opinion it is
icperative that tho defendcrs of the main findings of the
Ferren Coanission pronptly rogain tho initiative...
thalen specifically rcqucstod that he be allowed
jconcuct "not-fo-attribution interviews of the.rost.candid nature
and at the eaxlicst possible dato" Lith five Special centsot
this Burcau. Agents to bo Intorvieived wouldlag She:Xiro Special
gents of tho baltiroro Office wao wero prcsent at the Bothcsda
C2-109060...
CONTINUED-OVER
S
IAN
A106e dato" Lith five Special centsot
this Burcau. Agents to bo Intorvieived wouldlag She:Xiro Special
gents of tho baltiroro Office wao wero prcsent at the Bothcsda
C2-109060...
CONTINUED-OVER
S
IAN
A106

--- PAGE BREAK ---ecial centsot
this Burcau. Agents to bo Intorvieived wouldlag She:Xiro Special
gents of tho baltiroro Office wao wero prcsent at the Bothcsda
C2-109060...
CONTINUED-OVER
S
IAN
A106

--- PAGE BREAK ---

:rorandua Sullivan to DoLoach
ASSASSIRATION OF PRCSIDENT
JOIFETZGERAIDKENNEDY
RCVM3R22,1963
62-109030
ocpital cen thc autopsy was initially perforned oa President
cnnedy oa the evcning of 1l-22-63 and three Special Agents of
cho Fsl Lasoratory who furnisbcd exacting evidence to the ::
ren Concission produced in our invcstigation of the assassina-
01。
(Soocial Agents,Frazier,,Shaneyfclt and Gallagher).:i
Lr. lbalen also regucstod that restrictions be lifted
fvoa ccrtain docunonts now stored in the National Archivcs in
order that rnalen could revicw such data. He listed four docuronts
in particular bc dosircd to have acccss to and a review of.our
filcsdiscloscd all four 1tems aro alroaayavailable to the x
publicin the National Archives,
CSSRVATYONSS
At thg present tirc there is a considerable number of
books,articl.;and newspaper stories appearing in Acerican
rublications criticizing the Rcport of the Warren Cowission and
thc canner in :ich the lrarren Coinission arrived at its conclu-
sicns.Acong the core prorincnt critics are liark Lane, who
Vote "Fush to Judgcent":Ecward Epstcin,who wrote "Inqucst"
Forn Joncs, Jr., who wrote Forgivo Ly G:icf"; Leo Sauvage, who
Iotehe Osvaid Affair":and harold lcisberg.who wrote
".itewsh - Tae Report of tho harren Report. Each of these
wo:ks contain wild and unsubstantiated allcgations and all have
becr subject of separate review at Seat of Governnent..
Each or these writers, in criticizing the Harren
Co:nission, has also directly or inoirectly criticized the FBI.
cpd our investigation of the assassination.
vouid be in the best intercsts of this Bureau to cooperate with
It appears that it
L.lhalen in his efforts to bring the conplete truth before the
rovican people.
Our invcstigation Vas sound, Fe have absolutely
roving to hide, and no critic has brought forth even one scin-
H
ar.d chat there was no conspiracy invoived in the assassination'
y
in strict confidence with'no attribution to the FBl,on his currcat
tho attention of the Anorican pec)lo。
Thiswill necessitate、.....
pox:itting Ir.Fhalen to porronaliy discuss eyidcntial ratters
rerorts end cxhibits naintained in the National Archivcs. now
pislic donain, which clearly refute tho false allcgations or the cs
Verious critics of the Warren
Connission Rcport
L.2