DEEPER
UNSIGHTS
into the
ILLUMINATI
FORMULA
Part 2.
How help
about
comes
by
Cisco
Wheeler

--- PAGE BREAK ---DIAMONDS&DAISES,--TheGems,theGrandDruidCouncil hierarchy,theFairies
When our system first began doing collages as therapy, the third collage we did of
our system was this one of the Gems,the Grand Druid Council hierarchy, the daisy chains
and the fairy, and yet it was one of the last to be understood.

When our deeper alters got
done with the collage,ourfront alters didn't understand what theyhad done.It tookseveral
years to learn what all the pieces in the collage meant.

What the picture shows are the deeper workings of the system, which are run by early
splits.

In the background is a veil.In front of it are gems,and diamonds.

There are two
kinds of gems.

One are the gems which link to the computers, and the other are the
diamondsin therough,thecleanslate alterswhichhaveyettobeprogrammed.Adiamond
in the system (pyramid) acts as a radio crystal to receive direction and energy from Satan.

The energy is then distributed via the crystal and the gems to the system.

This diamond is
encapsulated within a gold womb-shaped crystal.

The gems in the system (ruby, diamond,
topaz, onyx, emerald, sapphire, opal, amethyst, obsidian, turquoise, etc.) are linked to the
book of Revelation's Heavenly City.

The 12 gems send out signals according to their color
coding,which are then transmitted by the correct color of ribbon to the correct colored
coded alters.

Their messages, the scripts, are acted out on the stage of life, which is
divinityin theIlluminati.

In front of that is the clock with the hierarchy.The clock is a crystal pyramid
representingthepyramidin themiddleoftheGrandDruid Council (akaExecutiveControl
Board).It's 12 hours are the12 positions of the Grand Druid Council which link to their
12 job responsibilities or characteristics and the 12 colors.

The 13th number is Satan's, and
it is color coded platinum.The Grand Druid Council like theKnights of the Round Table
sit around a circular table.

The pyramid is meant to have 13 stairs to it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 13th number is Satan's, and
it is color coded platinum.The Grand Druid Council like theKnights of the Round Table
sit around a circular table. The pyramid is meant to have 13 stairs to it. The daisy chains were used to link our early parts to their master. Our Daddy would
make daisy chains for us. Most people would never suspect something like this being mind-
controlreinforcement.Thesedaisychains were delicate andverysensitive totouch.We
werenottobreakortouch thedaisychains.Ourinternal daisychainslinktosmall 3year
old child alters. The daisy chains represent soul ties and the artificial programmed love they
wanted us to have toward our master. A severe pain in our head, like a hole being drilled
into our head, was reframed by the programmers as being a hole for the sun to shine
throughtoraisedaisyflowersforDaddy.Flowersareimportantfamilylinksinthe
programming. The bud protects a daughter. The root and stem the mother figure. The soil
ceremony protects the grandparents, and is grounded in the earth. TheFairy alters areinvolved in the hour glass and arethe creativeforce within the
system. Here Whisper (Tinkerbell figure) sprinkles Star dust on the light side. The yellow brick road, like a whirlwind that pulls the vehicle,leads to divinity,a
mother goddess figure.A gold crown rests upon this stone statue. A treeruns through the entire situation.Thosewho arefamiliar with the trees in the
system, realize that they are used to hang all the programming. The willow and oak roots
run through the collage. Although it is somewhat difficult to notice, off to the right side of
Satan are 9 chambers, which represent the various chambers on the Cabalistic tree of life. Interconnected bubbles areinterconnected worlds andgalaxies inthesystem. The numerous butterflies are a ring of light that lay at the base of the neck. 314
Cisco'sDEEPERINSIGHTSHowHelpComes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---ndgalaxies inthesystem. The numerous butterflies are a ring of light that lay at the base of the neck. 314
Cisco'sDEEPERINSIGHTSHowHelpComes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TheDAISYWORLD (previous page)
We have a special world of devotion to our master called the daisy world.An entire
world of alters who love him make up this world. The picture looks some what reminiscent
of some of the Fantasia scenes. The unicorn takes us into this magic world. The waterfall
cleans ourmindsof thetraumamemories.
A BOXED, SINKING DISCOURAGED SENSE ABOUT LIFE. (next page)
One of the traumas is to take a child, put him in a trunk and dump him into water.
The trunk fills up and the child passes out, and then is rescued in the nick of time before
it dies. This is a common programming trauma. It is this type of trauma that is attached to
programming. Feelings come in all shapes and sizes, and it is O.K. to have feelings. When
the system did this an alter wrote, "The way I feel, locked and sinking, red sails in the
moonlight."
The ROLE of a BETA-DELTA TEAM OF ALTERS.(overleaf after next page)
The hour glass controls the system. It's balance in relation to the clock and compass
is crucial. The robots stand in military ranks ready to serve their national leaders. The piano
cords at the left are codes for some alters. Maybe the reader will be able to figure out what
someof theimages mean on their own.
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS How Help Comes
317

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---some alters. Maybe the reader will be able to figure out what
someof theimages mean on their own.
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS How Help Comes
317

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PART2.HOWHELPCOMESABOUTFORMIND-CONTROLVICTIMS
ABUsE,what is theimpactof systematic a....405
Collages...p.314
ABUSERS, confrontations or not..411
Table of Contents...p.320
ALTERS, deep, how to work with...412
Introduction to Part 2...p.322
BACKACHES, suggestions for...415
BIOGRAPHY,chronologyofvictim'shistory...416
Overview of therapy...p.324
BURN OUT, of support team...420
CONFLICT, resolving c. between alters...422
Section A. Beginning Issues
CORE, issues of c...424
ACCESSING, how to prevent...325
DELIVERANCE, understanding...434
BOUNDARIES&ROLES,establishmentof...326
DENIAL, dealing with...438
COMMUNICATIONISSUES,undrstanding...330
DREAMWORK,understanding...440
DENIAL, how to deal with therapist's..331
EXTERNAL PROOFS, benefits of...447
DEPRESSION,how todealwithinitiald..332
FAMILY,rebuilding a shatteredf....448
DETECTION, of mind-control..334
FLOODING,how to deal with...449
EATINGDISORDERS,how to dealwith...337
GRIEF, how to deal with...450
EVALUATIONFORMS...340
GUILT, how to deal with...455
FEAR,how tohandle...342
HYPNOSIS,self,ins&outs of...456
FEAR ISSUES,whatkinds arefaced...343
IDENTITY, how to discover one's i....460
HOPE...345
IMPLANTS, dealing with...461
INTAKEQUESTIONNAIRE...347
INTEGRATION, understanding...463
INSOMNIA,suggestionsfor...348
INTERNALINFORMATION,howtOget...465
MULTIPLICITY, understanding...353
JOBS, new ones for alters...468
PANIC ATTACKS, suggestions...355
JUSTICE SYSTEM, dealing withbroken j.s...469
PROGRAMMING,howtounderstand...356
MAPPING, how to m. a system...470
PROTECTION, spiritual...364
MAZES,howtodealwith..472
SAFETYISSUES,of slave...369
MIRRORS,how to deal with..472
SAFETY ISSUES, of support team...371
PROGRAMMING,destructionoffoundation...473
SELF-INFLICTEDHARM,how tohandle...373
RATIONALES, understanding cult r....487
SPIRITUALISSUES, understanding...375
REALITYVS.PERCEPTION,dealingwith...489
STRUCTURING, consequences of...376
RESPONSIBILITY, tips toface new Ones...490
SUFFERING, how to deal with..378
SALVATION, to achieve...490
SUICIDALTHOUGHTS,how todeal with...380
SANCTUARYFORALTERS,howtocreate...495
SUPPORT TEAM, organizing one...382
SATANIC CULTS, understanding practices of...496
TRAUMAS,foundational...385
SELF-FORGIVENESS,toachieve...500
TRIGGERS,how to defuse...391
SPLIT-BRAINPROG.,how tounderstand...501
TRIGGERS,issues around...392
SURVEILLANCE, dealing with...503
TRUST,how toestablish...394
TIPS,for therapists...504
TRUsT, how to handle t. issues...394
TRANSFERENCE,issues of t...506
TRUTH, discernment of...397
TWINNING, understanding & dealing with...508
WORLD,external,how tounderstand...511
WORLDS,destructionofinternalw....514
Section B. Deeper Issues
ABREACTIONS,avoidance of...402
--bibliographicalnotes...523
ABREACTIONS,understanding...403
--index for entire book...527
320
Cisco'sDEEPERINSIGHTSHowHelpComeSnternalw....514
Section B. Deeper Issues
ABREACTIONS,avoidance of...402
--bibliographicalnotes...523
ABREACTIONS,understanding...403
--index for entire book...527
320
Cisco'sDEEPERINSIGHTSHowHelpComeS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WARNING:
to all yho enter these page...
1.AXITTLEKNOWLEDGEISDANGEROUS--INFACTLETHAL.
TsisNOTWRITTENfortheFAINTHEARTEDnorforthe
ERSON,whowantstoDABBLEINTHERAPY.REMEMBER,A
TTLEKNOWLEDGEISDANGEROUS.
2.Everyone who has sincerely tried to help victims of total mind-
AGAIN."
3.Everyvictimof totalmind-controlisauniquepersonwhoGod
cherishes.You must approach them with genuine love, patience,
discernment,understandingand accurateknowledge.Ifyou do not
have these qualities togive them,pleasestay outof thesevictim's
therapy,they have enough problemswithout yours.
PLEASEREADTHISWARNINGBEFOREATTEMPTINGTOUSEPART 2.
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS How Help Comes
321

--- PAGE BREAK ---ive them,pleasestay outof thesevictim's
therapy,they have enough problemswithout yours.
PLEASEREADTHISWARNINGBEFOREATTEMPTINGTOUSEPART 2.
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS How Help Comes
321

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INTRODUCTION
WHY should we bother struggling to save victims of mind-control?
Why should we bother with working with victims of mind-control?We can think of a
numberofexcellentreasons.
First, if we as a people do not stand up to the World Order's mind-control, then we are
givingthemagreenlight,afreetickettokeepondoingit.Andifvictimsofmind-controldonot
seepeoplewanting torescuethem,then theywill notfight themind-control,andif they donot
fight they will not getfree.It's that simple.Each of us by only trying to rescue one or two
persons is opening the door tofreedom for allvictims of mind-control.Do wewant the door left
open,or the door tofreedom shut?It is ourchoice.
Second,thepersonyousavefrommind-control may havebeensomeonewhowouldhave
beenusedinsomesecretoperationtoseriouslyhurtsomeoneelseortoseriouslydamagethe
fabricof afreesocietybysmugglingguns,ordopeor launderingmoney.Byhelpingvictims of
mind-controlyouaremakinglifeabetterplace.
Third, by helping a mind-control victim you will learn who you are, what gifts God has
placedwithinyou,howthehumanmindfunctions,aswellashavingyourownweaknesses
exposed so that they can be worked on.There is nothing more powerful than watching God
Almighty answer prayers of desperation with miracles.Bottom line,you will be a better person
forhelpingthosewhoareinsuchdesperateneed.
Fourth,by learning how themind-control operates and exhibits itself,youwill be able
topreventothersfrominfiltrationbydamageagents,andtopreventparentsfromunwittingly
allowing a day-care center orother institution to program their children.In otherwords,we will
bein a betterpositiontoprevent themyriads of harm thatcomefrom thewide-spreadcustoms
of mind-control.Intellectual awareness of how themind-control is doneisnot thetotalsolution,
but it does act as a buffer to help usfight thismind-control madness.
We still have much to learn, but we hope to pass on what wehavelearned to others that
wemightallmakethesoonestuseofthebesthelpavailableformind-controlvictims.Ifyou
knowAlmighity God,then youknow thatHis strength is perfected in our weakness.Hewill take
ourfewloavesofunderstanding,andmultiplyit.
TheHARVESTOFWEEPING
"Be not deceived: God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.
For he that soweth tohis flesh shall of thefleshreap corruption; but he that soweth to theSpirit
shall of theSpirit reap life everlasting."Galatians 6:7-8
Themind-control thathasbeencarried outsecretlyinthis20thcentury onsuchavast
scale has left us with a harvest of weeping. The children of this dispensation cry after the virtues
andtheonenesswithinthefamilyunit.Theirheartshavebecomebrokenthroughthelackof
knowledge,and instability of not knowing the security of a father's love.
Within this rising generation, many children walk in a famished land where there is no
real love.They receive only the remnant of broken homes and relationships,and overworked
parents.
322
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS How Help Comeson, many children walk in a famished land where there is no
real love.They receive only the remnant of broken homes and relationships,and overworked
parents.
322
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS How Help Comes

--- PAGE BREAK ---When the heart has gone out of thefamily,broken lives become as fragments of broken
glass.Formanychildrenfeel asthoughtheirheartshavebeenwashedawayinthesilenttears
of theirincompleteness.Having novoice within the kingdom to say"peace be still"they suffer
fromthescarsofemotionalabandonment.

In bondage they are unable to see their way through the journey of life.Where do they
go when they feel there's no place to turn?Who do they talk to,when there's nobody who
wantstolisten?Whodotheyleanonwhenthere'snostablefoundation?

TheSpirit of Darkness sooncovers this generation with shattered dreams.In this pool
ofcontamination,parentsriseagainstparents.Brothersandsisterbecomepulledbetweentheir
loyaltieswithinthefamily,causingaseveringwithintheheartof thefamilyunit.Intheturmoil
of confusion and uncertainty comes a brokenness within the hearts of the offspring,which
causes the soul to bleed with the emotion of inner loneliness.

Through a grieving process, the
scars of neglect turn in rebellion, screaming with avoice of"PLEASE SOMEBODY LOVE
ME."
Inplanting of a bad harvest,come therewardof"Ilooked thatI should bringforth
grapes,but I brought it forth with wild grapes."For when the kingdom has fallen and the hedge
is gone, the harvest will be overtaken and trodden down.

The landscaping and cultivation will
be athingof thepast.Therewill bebriers and thorns in thevineyard andtheharvestwill cease
toproducefruitofquality.

Woeuntothemanthathasrewardedeviluntohischildren.Astheextortionerisinthe
land,so theyoungwill turninsorrowand inangerandknowhimnot.Hemademenot,hehad
nounderstanding,Idonotlovehim.Asthechildrenofyesterdayandtodaywereoverthrown
in the wilderness, so will come the weeping for the fathers, for man's glory becomes his shame.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The landscaping and cultivation will
be athingof thepast.Therewill bebriers and thorns in thevineyard andtheharvestwill cease
toproducefruitofquality. Woeuntothemanthathasrewardedeviluntohischildren.Astheextortionerisinthe
land,so theyoungwill turninsorrowand inangerandknowhimnot.Hemademenot,hehad
nounderstanding,Idonotlovehim.Asthechildrenofyesterdayandtodaywereoverthrown
in the wilderness, so will come the weeping for the fathers, for man's glory becomes his shame. Ourleadershaveplantedpainandsorrow,andnowwehaveaharvestofweeping.We
thinkofthecountlesschildvictimswhowaitedfortheparents'tocome,whowaitedforlove
andacceptance,butwerenevergoodenoughfortheprogrammers.Iwanttoweepforthe
humaness thathas been stolenfromsomanychildvictimsofmindcontrol.Iweepforevery
scream that was never allowed, and for each child that could no longer fight for themself or
their ownmind.I weepfor the silent tears that were not allowed.And I grievewhenI think of
howgrievedAlmighty God must be.I grieve that the cycle continues,and that thereis novoice
for the new cycle ofvictims, the new generation of victims who are receiving sophisticated high-
techmind-control that hasbeen perfected over centuries andin theNazi concentration camps,
universities,hospitals,labs,and secret underground facilities.This book is meant to be avoice
forthosevictimswhohavenovoice. Butthisbookisnotonlyconcernedaboutwhathasbeenstolenfromthevictimsof
mind-control, but also about the sacrifices that sincere therapists and support persons have
endured. This next section is written in hopes that it will help therapists in their struggles.We
makenoclaims thatthisinformationwillworkfortherapists,wearemerelypassingonwhat
wehavelearnedfromonefriendtoanotherfriend.Bestwishes,andmayGodblessyourwork. Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS HowHelp Comes
323

--- PAGE BREAK ---thisinformationwillworkfortherapists,wearemerelypassingonwhat
wehavelearnedfromonefriendtoanotherfriend.Bestwishes,andmayGodblessyourwork. Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS HowHelp Comes
323

--- PAGE BREAK ---

AnOVERVIEWofWHATTHESUPPORTTEAMFACES
If the programming is not worked on, and
Whenthevictimfirstcomes intotherapy
dismantled,it will torment the person until they
it will typicallybefor some other problem,such
asan eating disorder.An astute therapist will
intimidatedtocontinue.
notice the clues which signal that mind-control is
If the victim is not given positives and
very probable, & then will follow up.
positive reasons to live, if they do not experience
There are four areas of therapy that
love, they will not value themselves, and will not
should not be neglected:
bemotivatedtoworkthroughthehorrendouswork
a. safety issues
that must be done.They need tohave positive
b. helping the victim get to know
worthwhile goals to work toward.
themselves,
This book is not the final word on this
c. building positives such as love, care, the
subject.This book will give the reader the most
Word of God into the recovering victim's life.
indepth look into the therapy of trauma-based
d.dismantling the PDE (the primal
mind-controltodate.There areonlyafew
dissociativeexperience),
along with
therapists who have worked withPDEs.These are
programming foundations.
dangerous,&it is hard to present the successful
Asalittlemethodtorememberthese
techniques on how to break the deeper
things, we came up with the word S-I-N-C-E-R-E,
programming without giving the other side the
which stands for Safety，Information, aNd,
knowledge on how to prevent such therapeutic
Creating positives, Ejecting, erasing, expeling, the
work. May God grant the strength & courage you
PDE&internal computers,R　realizing,
need.
Emancipation. Each of these areas are essential
for success.
Whatdowemean
Realizing
Emancipation?When we are talking about mind-
control, freedom is a state of mind. The victim
mustfreetheirmindfromthecontrolofthe
world and realizewho they are as God intended
and planned. It is not enough to erase the bad,
onemust realize one's identity and birthright in
God that was stolen. In fact, as our book points
out, a mind-control victim will not let loose of
theirmind-controlunlesssomethingbetteris
adopted.We sincerely praythat those victims
whowantoutwillfindJesusChrist,andrealize
the emancipation that is found in Christ Jesus.
Let us recap the four essential areas of
work.If the victim is not totallySAFE,thenvery
little work of substance willtake place,even
though the client might display a great healing
(which is a cover program.)
If the victim, does not get to know who
they are, what has happened to them, and what
mind-control is all about, they will likely go into
denial and leave therapy.
324
Cisco'sDEEPERINSIGHTS HowHelp Comesthe victim, does not get to know who
they are, what has happened to them, and what
mind-control is all about, they will likely go into
denial and leave therapy.
324
Cisco'sDEEPERINSIGHTS HowHelp Comes

--- PAGE BREAK ---ACCESSING
Before the support team and the victim can work on accessing issues, they need to
understandHOwamind-controlslavecanbeaccessed.

Allow us to give a summary of some of the more usual methods of accessing, that is
makingcontactwithamind-controlslave.(Infact almostallofthesewerestandardmethods
usedontheauthor.):
MEDIA: access codes/colors/story schemes/pictures in the newspapers, television, Christian
television, ads, radio, and news events that are broadcast in all fashions.

PERSON TO PERSON: Eye winks, eye blinks, hand signals, body gestures, clothing, colors,
words, karaoke song selections sung, other victims of mind control, taps such as 3 taps, and
the arrival of particular persons, one's children, one's boss, one's relatives.

TECHNOLOGICAL: Sounds in morse code, break lights done in code,head light flashes,
gunshots in area such as 3 gunshots, blank telephone calls, recorded messages left on
answeringmachine,telephone tones,late callsfrom master,airplanes flying certain patterns
in area, helicopters flying certain patterns, and lights on helicopters.

ITEMs: Keys, business cards, certain tokens or certain bills, letters such as chain letters,
colors on cars, statues at sites, signs, houses, and colors on houses, buttons,
SPIRITUAL: Astral projection, telepathy.

(Students can refer to our other books for more information on accessing methods
andcodes.)
As the casual reader of the above will realize, it is almost impossible for a victim of
mind-control to be isolated from being accessed.

This is why it is essential to remove the
victim from their ordinary environment and get them to a safe place where they are secure
andcanbe worked with,without interference.Up tonow,onlya handful of victims in
historyhaveeverreceivedthis,and thenonlytemporarily.(Students can refer to our other books for more information on accessing methods
andcodes.)
As the casual reader of the above will realize, it is almost impossible for a victim of
mind-control to be isolated from being accessed.

This is why it is essential to remove the
victim from their ordinary environment and get them to a safe place where they are secure
andcanbe worked with,without interference.Up tonow,onlya handful of victims in
historyhaveeverreceivedthis,and thenonlytemporarily.

Becauseit is sodifficult toisolatethevictimfromeverythingthatmightbe acode,
a few knowledgeable sincere therapists have resorted to desensitizing the codes, and putting
safetymechanisms that cause thevictim toget angry if someone tries to access them,and
allows them to block out the codes.

However, this is only part of the answer, because if they
physicallygetaholdofanex-victim,theycantraumatizethatpartofthemindthat is
resisting thecodes and destroyit so that theybreak the safetymechanisms.

The first step in desensitizing the codes is to look at them with the alters, to go over
it consciously and know that it is a trigger.

Once the conscious mind knows something is a
trigger, it is harder for it to work.

Most of the triggers, codes and cues work at the
subconscious (or unconscious mind).

I write unconscious--because they hit the mind at a very
deep level.

These codes are not something sitting close to the front of the mind.

A skilled victim that is undergoing therapy, may want to play along with the abusers
sothattheIlluminatidonothaveaclearideaofwherethesystemisrather thanbucking
thesystem cold turkey.Again each situationfor each victim is unique & calls for some
clever responses.

Running from the abusers rather than confronting them when they publicly
try to secretly access the victim may send the wrong signal that the victim fears the abusers.

The abusers love to see fear; fear only encourages them.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Running from the abusers rather than confronting them when they publicly
try to secretly access the victim may send the wrong signal that the victim fears the abusers. The abusers love to see fear; fear only encourages them. Hopefully, the support team can
develop their own strategies, without us having to spell it all out, & then having someone
mechanically"do it by the book." As a final note, we encourage readers who want to
understand thesubject of accessingbetter toreviewvariousrelatedpartsin ourbooks.For
instance,thereis alsosome informationin our twinning articlethat mightbehelpful. Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS HowHelp Comes
325

--- PAGE BREAK ---BOUNDARIES&ROLES
Because the therapists speak a special
bythosewhoaresincerelyinterestedin
language, and are recognized as experts, they
helping victims.

haveexercisedamonopolyonproviding
Thissectioncontainssomevaluable
informationon mind-control.Peoplewant to
suggestions on how to begin working with a
believe that the experts have answers, and
programmed
1multiple.Some
therapists have played the part.

The public
therapists/ministersareunderthe
mayhaveunderestimatedhowmuchthey
misconceptionthattheydonothavetowork
havewanted theirimage of theirtherapiststo
be true, and how reluctant they are to admit
of
mind-control.What
they
op
not
theshortcomingsoftheirexperts.Weare
comprehend is that the person they know and
callingforare-evaluationofthetreatmentof
see(whoisthehostalter)ISalsoonlyan
programmed multiples, and suggesting the
alter.Theygenerally
yworkunderthe
formation of support teams to assist
misperception that thehostpersonalityISthe
programmedmultiplesin
1gaining
their
person, and that other alters are"the alters"
freedomfrom mind-control.

(whichthesemisguided therapists/ministers
Dr.

Frank Putnam, one of the most
perceive as"the problem").

So rather than
famous psychiatrists who is recognized as an
work with any alters, they work with the host
expert by the psychiatric community and who
alter.

Their misperception, which leads to
worked as part of the DsM-IV Work group
suchunwittingcontradictorybehavioron the
on Dissociative Disorders,wrote in his book
therapists'part, would be hilariously funny, if
Diagnosis&TreatmentofMultiplePersonality
it were not for thegravity of the situation.

Disorder, (1989, pp.

133-134) "Very few of us
Hostalterscanbeextremelyresistentin
have had any formal training in the diagnosis
admitting that they are multiples.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Disorder, (1989, pp. 133-134) "Very few of us
Hostalterscanbeextremelyresistentin
have had any formal training in the diagnosis
admitting that they are multiples. In fact,
andtreatmentofMPD.Althoughsome
rather than argue and debate the issue with
therapistsbecome'instantexperts'upon
host alters,skilled therapists come in the
seeing their first case,most feel that they do
back door, by simply relating matter of fact,
nothavetheskillsnecessarytotreatthese
whatalltheotheraltershavebeendoing
patients." While having self-doubts about
during therapy.The accumulation
their abilities,the professional therapists
evidence over a long period of time will
have beenvery resistent to admittingto non-
eventuallyconvince thehost alter through the
professionals
their
shortcomings.For
back door that they are part of a multiple
instance，in 1995, one of the leading
system.On the flip side,many less visible
professionals told our co-author,whowanted
alters may carry anger toward the host for
tosharethematerialofourVol.2andthis
thehost alter's denial of their existence. bookwiththetherapeuticcommunitythat
Donot
expectstraightforward
"you have absolutely nothing to teach us."
evidenceofatranscriptofasessionwhere
Maybe a good place for all of us to
severalalters of a multiple appear,or a
startiswithhumilityandaspirit of
camcordertape of a sessionshowing different
teachableness.It is probably safe to assume
altersto automaticallyconvince ahost alter
that if you arereading this book,you already
thathe/or she isamultiple.Host alters will
have thedesire tolearn.Webelieve that the
oftenstudytheavailableliteratureabout
climate for learning has changed, and that
DID (MPD), and will often challenge the
the initial frosty reception that our material
therapist to debates to prove to the therapist
received many years ago will not be repeated
that they are not a multiple.Even though the
326
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTSHowHelp Comes

--- PAGE BREAK ---therapisthaswitnessedthemultiplicity,itwill
image for a mind-control victim's alters.

Is
be hard to"prove" anything to the doubting
thisgood or bad?Should the therapistfight
hostalter.

Remembert
the doubting
this transferenceissue?Pleaseunderstand
philosopherwhoafterlongthoughtfinally
thedynamics.99%ofthealtersinan
realized"I think,therefore I am"--if a person
Illuminati system are child alters.Granted,
IS
emotionally
investedindoubting
that someprofessionalsreportworkingwith
something, the mind has an amazing ability
altersystemsthattheyclaimare100%
to think up reasons to doubt obvious facts.

adults, but this only shows the limits of their
The support team for a multiple will need to
understanding of theirclient's alter system.

be skilledingetting themultipleto see things
ThesechildaltershaveNEVERhada
via"back door" techniques rather than head-
parent.

They have had cult figures who
on debates.

oversawtheirmind-control.Theyhavehad
It is a traditional therapeuticpractice
big giant adults in their life who have
toestablishcontractswithMultipleSystems.

manipulated and used them, but they have
Generally, therapists attempt to establish a
not had a genuine parent.

The therapist can
contract with as many alters as possible.

They
and needs to perform the role of a loving
willendeavor to explainin thelanguage that
parent for these child alters so they can grow
the child alters understand what is being
to maturity.

agreed upon when a contract is negotiated
The
intensedesireofmany
between thechild alter and the therapist.They
and needs to perform the role of a loving
willendeavor to explainin thelanguage that
parent for these child alters so they can grow
the child alters understand what is being
to maturity.

agreed upon when a contract is negotiated
The
intensedesireofmany
between thechild alter and the therapist.

therapists/ministerstointegrateallalters
The primary area that the therapist is
again shows their limited understanding of
concerned withis"hurt"by theMultipleto
thesituation.Hopefully thisbook(alongwith
anyoneelseortheMultipleSystem'sown
our other books), by providing the details of
body.The AmericanPsychiatric Association's
what is going on,will encouragerelatives and
contract reads at one point, "I will not hurt
outsidersto
havemorepatiencewith
orkillmyselforhurtorkillanyoneelse.

therapistswho arenotcomingupwithinstant
internal or external,onpurpose or accidently,
micro-wave-speed answers.Most of the heavy
now or in the future."
programmingtraumas are done to thevictim
The other major area of concern is
when theywere a child.Obviously,thousands
settinglimitsregardingthetreatment.

ofdissociatedpiecesof themindwhichhave
Traditionally,the therapistshave limited the
had nochancetoexperiencelifeday-to-day
client's time totheir help,thenumber of
as the host alter(s) has,have had no chance
phone calls they are allowed to make, etc.

to grow up.Integration of an entire system of
This worksfineforthetherapists.However,
child alters who have not grown up is only
the therapeutic community is in denial or
asking for problems.Integration of the real
under its owndelusions that itismaking
core with child alters is asking for problems.

significant progress with the programmed
Theoverallsituationthattrauma-based
multiplesthat arecominginfortherapy.By
mind-controlplaces thevictimand therapist
and large, the therapists are simply working
in, is extremely complex and difficult.

withthefrontworldsofverydeepand
The victim will transfer their feelings
complex systems of alters.--- PAGE BREAK ---

significant progress with the programmed
Theoverallsituationthattrauma-based
multiplesthat arecominginfortherapy.By
mind-controlplaces thevictimand therapist
and large, the therapists are simply working
in, is extremely complex and difficult. withthefrontworldsofverydeepand
The victim will transfer their feelings
complex systems of alters. The cults are
for their abusers to the therapist andsupport
continuingtheiruseofessentiallyallslaves
team.Whatelsecantheydo?Aspast
that are undergoing therapy today. The time
traumas areuncovered,thevictim mayeven
has come to turn that situation around and
hallucinate duringa drugmemory abreaction
get genuine help for these suffering slaves. and see the therapist as the programmer. The
The therapistwill become theparent
therapist may say or wear things that also
Cisco'sDEEPERINSIGHTSHowHelpComes
327

--- PAGE BREAK ---trigger transference.

Depending upon how
doesn't want to face its problems.

The mind
the various alters handled abuse, may
comes up with superficial solutions,declares
determinehowthedifferentaltersthenact
itself better and moves on.

(Unfortunately,
when theyperceive the therapist as another
the mind-control continues, only now it is
abusive person.Again,this presents another
simplybetterhidden.)
reason why support teams are worthwhile.

A great deal has been written about
Traditionally，therapists have
eset
howclientssabotage therapyand double-bind
spokenandunspokenlimits tothetime they
their therapists.Thebooks thathave covered
willgive the victim.Therapists have limited
thissubjecthavenot evenbeguntocoverthis
time in two ways,one is the amount of time
subject.Bookscouldbewrittenaboutthis.

per week, and the other is the length of
But anevenless understoodproblem,ishow
treatmentthatthetherapistwilldevoteto the
thetraditional therapeuticmethodsdouble-
victim before dropping him/her as a client.

If
bindtheclient.Thetraditionaltherapeutic/&
theclientperceivesthattheoveralltreatment
ministerialmethods aredouble-binding the
timeislimited,theywillnotraisethedeeper
clients from escaping the mind-control.

For
issues.Becausemost clients withmind-
instancewithintheChristiandeliverance
controlonlyseetheirtherapistsforshort
approach, if a client fails to get an instant
periods of time, they also can get by with
miraculoushealingduringadeliverance,then
lettingthetherapistonlyworkonsurface
theyaretoldtheylackfaith,andthey are
issues.Afterhavinginteracted with numerous
toldthatwithoutfaiththeycannotheal.In
mind-control victims and therapists,the
other words,they must deny the problem if
authorsof thisbookhaveseenfirsthandthat
theywant thesolution.If
bindtheclient.Thetraditionaltherapeutic/&
theclientperceivesthattheoveralltreatment
ministerialmethods aredouble-binding the
timeislimited,theywillnotraisethedeeper
clients from escaping the mind-control.

For
issues.Becausemost clients withmind-
instancewithintheChristiandeliverance
controlonlyseetheirtherapistsforshort
approach, if a client fails to get an instant
periods of time, they also can get by with
miraculoushealingduringadeliverance,then
lettingthetherapistonlyworkonsurface
theyaretoldtheylackfaith,andthey are
issues.Afterhavinginteracted with numerous
toldthatwithoutfaiththeycannotheal.In
mind-control victims and therapists,the
other words,they must deny the problem if
authorsof thisbookhaveseenfirsthandthat
theywant thesolution.

most therapists do not see a clear picture of
Are the therapists (or support teams)
what they are dealing with DURING THE
willing to put as much effort & attention into
THERAPY TIME.Putnam admits in his
the victimas the Illuminati or other
bookDiagnosis&TreatmentofMultiple
programming
cult?

Exceptforminor
Personality Disorder,(1989, p.

149),"1 have
exceptions, therapists have NOT been willing
discovered,muchtomychagrin,thatmanyof
tospendthesame amountoftimeas thecult
mypatients areverydifferentoutinthe
spends.

The Illuminati have Grande Dames
that continue ongoing guidance for the adult
thereal secret sides of theirclients arefar
slaves.They alsoare willing tohave their
moreprofoundlyshocking
than most
best programmers fly in from Europe and
therapists up to now have been willing to
other locations to reprogram a slave with the
imagine.Thetherapistsencouragethe
best equipment andtechnologyavailable.

superficialapproachmentionedabove,
Thecommitmentlevel bytheIlluminati to
because manyofthebestprofessional
their slaves has up to now been many times
therapistswillnotdealwithanythingexcept
greater than any of the professionals.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Illuminati have Grande Dames
that continue ongoing guidance for the adult
thereal secret sides of theirclients arefar
slaves.They alsoare willing tohave their
moreprofoundlyshocking
than most
best programmers fly in from Europe and
therapists up to now have been willing to
other locations to reprogram a slave with the
imagine.Thetherapistsencouragethe
best equipment andtechnologyavailable. superficialapproachmentionedabove,
Thecommitmentlevel bytheIlluminati to
because manyofthebestprofessional
their slaves has up to now been many times
therapistswillnotdealwithanythingexcept
greater than any of the professionals. Don't
the issues that the host or presenting alter
kidyourselfthattheslavesdon'trecognize
brings up in the therapy session. In other
this. That is why only superficial issues are
words,manyprofessional therapists REFUSE
being dealt with. That is why so many slaves
toguidethetherapy.Theclientisthen
appeartobegetting
better
rfromthe
double-binded.Theclientissomehow
professionals,but the professionals are not
supposedtoknowthe issues that they are
being eliminated from practicing. programmed not to know.It's a"patient-
The original Mother-of-darkness who
diagnose-and-heal-yourself approach". works as a programming assistant with the
Amazing result do occur,because the mind
head male programmer is putting in trees
328
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS How Help Comes

--- PAGE BREAK ---lf approach". works as a programming assistant with the
Amazing result do occur,because the mind
head male programmer is putting in trees
328
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS How Help Comes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

internallythataredesignedtolastforthe
Illuminatiwillbeperceivedasabusers.
entirelifeof the slave.That'sa longterm
Generally, it is quite the opposite. The
commitment on thepart of theprogrammers
Illuminati have the ability to give pain, but
and their programming. The fruit (programs)
they have the ability to take it away.The
that areplaceduponthetrees(which are
therapist has the ability to give pain, but
used asprogramming file systems),are to last
seldomtheabilitynorthetimetotakethe
thelifeof theslave.Theslaveknowsthat the
pain away. There often is little closure to the
fruit has been given his internal worlds for
mess therapists start, and most victims are
his lifetime.
very silent about the struggles they go
An example of a healthy productive
through,in part because they blame
role the therapist can take would be the
themselvesfor problems.Themaster or
following: The therapist assures the mind-
handlerisgenerallyseeasabenevolent
controlvictimthattheywillhaveasmuch
dictator, a wonderful god, and a friend all
commitment to examining and taking off the
rolled up into one. The therapist,in order to
fruit, as the other side has of keeping the
maintain their aloof therapeutic role,does
fruit in place.The victim doesn'tknowwhat
not want to be a friend to the victim. They
the issues are, so the therapist uses the back-
liketostay emotionally distant,perhaps
door approach to let the victim learn about
puffing on their pipe. The therapists are still
themselves. The therapist asks,"What do you
missing an obvious given,which is that most
think about trees?Would you spend the next
multiplepersonalities haveparents who are
week(s) drawing trees, talking to me about
multiples.
trees,andgoing outandtalkingtotrees.
Please journalwhatyoutalk tothetrees
about." The client may come back and say,
"Trees are very important to me. I don't want
to talk to anyone about trees.Trees arevery
sacred to me,and they are deeply rooted in
my mind, I am their caretaker?" Then the
therapistcontinues thebackdoor exploration,
"What do you mean you are their caretaker?"
Eventually, the mind begins to unravel. The
journaling can be an important vehicle to
track the unravelling of the mind.
Due to the heavy infiltration within
the therapeutic community，some
disinformationhasbeenassimilated intothe
beliefs of therapists.One of these is that
victimsofmindcontrol(whotheycall
"survivors") shouldn't spend time together.
Actuallyvictims areable tounderstandeach
otherandtriggerimportantinformation.
They canbeveryhelpful to each other,once
the host alter has done some basic stabilizing.
Another myth that the therapists hold to,is
that the therapist will be perceived as a
benevolentcaretakerbythevictimandthe
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS HowHelp Comes
329er has done some basic stabilizing.
Another myth that the therapists hold to,is
that the therapist will be perceived as a
benevolentcaretakerbythevictimandthe
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS HowHelp Comes
329

--- PAGE BREAK ---ic stabilizing.
Another myth that the therapists hold to,is
that the therapist will be perceived as a
benevolentcaretakerbythevictimandthe
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS HowHelp Comes
329

--- PAGE BREAK ---

COMMUNICATIONISSUES
Communication issues come in all
appearance will force the therapist to extend
shapes and sizes. The first that must be dealt
the therapy time. Many therapists stick to
with,andwhichwill neverfade away,arethe
their time schedules,and simplyadvisethe
issuesbetween thevictim and their therapist.
alter to appear at the next session. Many
The victim and therapist do not start this
opportunities
todevelop
linesof
marathontocommunicateatthestarting
communicationarelostduetothelimitations
point. They must work hard just to get to
ofthetraditionalonehoursession.Many
where most people begin.This is because the
alters only show up at special occasions, so a
victimhasbeenbetrayed by everyimportant
support person who is around the system for
person in their life. Trust is the foundation
long periods of time is in a strategic position
forcommunication,andbeforethetherapist
toreallyfacilitatesomegoodcommunication
can establish a shaky trust in the victim's
developing.
mind, little deep communication will occur.
The programmed multiple's system
The victimmust establishinternal
willalmostoverwhelmthetherapistwhen
communicationlines.This is equivalent to
they find out that they have a listening ear.
tryingtoget acity ofpeople to all like and
The therapist willhave anentirecity of
talktoeach other.The answerstohowa
people wanting to give their opinions and to
multiplecancommunicatewithsomany
voice their concerns.The needs of the alter
diversepeople should be used to helpsociety
system are sogreat, that it is no wonder that
at large.The same answers that multiples
many therapistshaveterminated theirclients
havebeendiscoveringfor theirinternal work,
becausetheyfeeloverwhelmedatthe
couldhelpsocietyatlarge.Alongwith
system's need to be heard. What is breaking
developingbetterinternalcommunicationis
is adamthathas heldbackinsilence
the task of developing common goals and
decades ofsevere abuse.Inthebestinterest
learning how to control a system's internal
oftheoverwhelmedtherapistandthe
switching.Common goals and control over
overwhelmed victim, we suggest support
one'sswitching aremajorpositivesteps.
teams deal with programmed multiples,
Initially,analtersystemwillnot havethese.
because theissuesreallydemandthatmuch
To develop cooperation in switching will also
help.
relievesomeofthetensionthatcomesfrom
alters competing for the body.
The next areaof communication
problems is in the area of what alters present
themselves when the therapist wants to work,
andwhichaltersdoesthetherapistwork
with.The temptation is toget rid of
troublemaking alters,but sometimes the
troublemakingaltersaretheonesthe
therapists really needs to work with.
Thestandardhour-longtherapeutic
sessiondoes not promote communication
with an alter session. Traditionally, alters will
appear as the session is closing, perhaps
subconsciouslyhopingthattheirimportant
330
Cisco's DEEPERINSIGHTS HowHelp Comeses not promote communication
with an alter session. Traditionally, alters will
appear as the session is closing, perhaps
subconsciouslyhopingthattheirimportant
330
Cisco's DEEPERINSIGHTS HowHelp Comes

--- PAGE BREAK ---nication
with an alter session. Traditionally, alters will
appear as the session is closing, perhaps
subconsciouslyhopingthattheirimportant
330
Cisco's DEEPERINSIGHTS HowHelp Comes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DENlAL, how to deal with the therapists or ministers
Apopularquestionwithministerswho
addresses and locations） and think to
have not worked in the area of programmed
ourselves how many millions of people are
DID's is, "Why doesn't God have an instant
practicing witchcraft today--doesn't it seem
miracle for these people?"
incrediblethattheFBIdoesn'tbelieveanyof
There are many parts to the answer,
thesewitches are capable ofkilling someone
but before getting into the answer, perhaps
for their religious beliefs. Christians,
theseministersshould askAlmightyGodwhy
Moslems,and Jews are capable of killing for
he has not chosen simplistic answers to so
theirreligiousbeliefs,butsomehowtheFBI
many things in life. If a room full of smokers
thinks witches are incapable?Doesn't that
are prayed for by any minister, how many
smack of a cover-up?
will no longer be smoking in a month's time?
The victim doesn't have time to deal
Smoking is a trivial mild addiction compared
withbull-headedcounselorswhoarein
totheprogrammedofacomplex
denial.The denial could be a sign that the
programmed multiple. Those ministers who
therapistaremixedupintheworld-wide
ask this question need to ask themselves if
satanic conspiracyhim or herself. The victim
God is so powerfuland theyknowhowto
shouldnottrytoconvincethetherapistabout
pray,why haven't they themselves cleared out
what is happening, the victim should find a
thisnation'shospitals.Thetraumasthathave
listening ear, and take their needs for help
put people in hospitals are generally mild
somewhere where they willget real attention.
compared totheprogrammingtraumas.
Whilemost licensed therapists are in
denial that the systematic programming of
thousands of infants is going on in this
nation,and that SRA exists,if theylook at
historyeveryelementoftheprogramming
has been carriedout andhistorically
documented.
Should we automatically dismiss any
suggestion that those in authority may
occasionally conspire to obfuscate the truth?
Consider this, most people can barely make
it through the day at work without engaging
inwhat are effectivelylowgradeconspiracies.
Perhaps they tacitly agree with another co-
worker not toreport the co-workers
misbehaviortotheboss.Sowhyshouldwe
expectthings to be different in the corridors
ofpower?
Everymajor and most minorreligious
group in history have had members that have
killed other humans.And yettheFBI
officiallyclaimsthatSRAdoesn'texist.Ifwe
look at the list of thousands of covens (and
ourco-authorFritzhasmanyoftheir
Cisco'sDEEPERINSIGHTSHowHelp Comes
331that have
killed other humans.And yettheFBI
officiallyclaimsthatSRAdoesn'texist.Ifwe
look at the list of thousands of covens (and
ourco-authorFritzhasmanyoftheir
Cisco'sDEEPERINSIGHTSHowHelp Comes
331

--- PAGE BREAK ---DEPRESSION (initial clientcomplaint)
Depressionismentioned,becausethe
The originalsequence of events was
originalcomplaintofmanyvictimsoftotal
createdbythelackoftrustworthy
mind-controlis adepressionthatthey
communicationbythe person's parents
can't figure out.

and needs to be addressed at that level to
Depression comes in different types.What
pull it out by the roots.

the therapist wants to identify is a.what
Sometimes depression is simply a
kind of depression is occurring and b.

reaction to a sad event.

This is not likely
what are the causes of the depression and
tocausesomeonetocometoatherapist,
c.

what kind of treatment modalities can
but such a triggering event should be ruled
be applied.

out if other causes are to be treated.

Often depression will be experienced as a
One of the most effective ways of
feeling of defeat, or a feeling of a loss, or
dealingwith depression is torealizehow
a feeling of no hope.

it is a lack of faith and a selfish self-focus
Sometimes depression is a symptom of
and a sin toward God, who will provide
programming going off of a total mind-
just what we need in life.If the client is
controlled slave.

If this is the case, unless
open to seeing that depression is a sin,
theclientiswellintotherapyforhis or
then this sin can be confessed,and all
her DID(MPD),the client willrarely
spirits attached to it delivered from the
have a clue about the real source.

person.

If the client is a total mind-
Some drugs have the effect or side-effect
controlled slave,the front alters may get
of causing depression.

These include
somerelieffromsuchaminiature
codeine, high-blood pressure medicines,
deliverance,butwill stillneed to address
indomethacin, steroids,and tranquilizers.

the deeperproblems.

The clientshould mentionwhatmedicine
The therapist can administer to the
they are taking,and the side-effects of
client a dissociation test, to determine if
thesenoticed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

the deeperproblems. The clientshould mentionwhatmedicine
The therapist can administer to the
they are taking,and the side-effects of
client a dissociation test, to determine if
thesenoticed. the client may have been a candidate for
Sometimesclients with depression canget
totalmind-control.Iftheclienttests
involvedinphysicalactivitiesandget
positive, then the therapist will need to do
involved with others and this will clear up
follow up work. Causes for this depression
a depression. maybeverydeeprooted&takesome
Sometimesclientscandeterminethe
serious long term investigation and work. underlying spiritual problems and
The therapist can also serve in the
significantlyhelptheirdepressionby
role of listener. If the client gets some of
workingonrootspiritualproblems or
his pent-up emotions & problems out, he
doing a deliverance. A few proper
mayfeel somerelief. If the client sees that
questions will soon discover if there are
someone cares,that can also have a
root
tspiritualproblemscausing the
positive effect. The client can also be
depression.If thepersonhadabreakdown
encouragedto talk aboutthesituationto
of communication with their parents,this
another trusted person. The therapist will
willeventuallyifnot correctedlead to
want to find out what kind of support
open rebellion, and then several steps
system (team) can be used to help the
later this will lead to a suicidal depression. client. 332
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS How Help Comes

--- PAGE BREAK ---pport
open rebellion, and then several steps
system (team) can be used to help the
later this will lead to a suicidal depression. client. 332
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS How Help Comes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(INITIAL CLIENT COMPLAINT) DEPRESSION
DEPRESSION
Ismedicinebeing takenthatcould
YES
Have client
causedepression?
see doctor
NO
Do you know the cause or what
YES
triggered the depression?
This is client's
perception of
NO
problem,write it
down forfuture
YES
reference.Cont.
Have you had thoughts of suicide?
this chart
NO
Treat all
suicidal thoughts
Takeaquickinventoryofsituation:
seriously. Go to pg.
·How depressed are you on a
on suicide.
Cont. this
scale of 1 - 10?
chart.
·Are you depressed some, most
or all of thetime?
· Do you have a plan of action?
Provideclient treatmentoptions:
·Spiritualdeliverance
· Drugs, hospitialization
·Involvementwithactivities
&others
NEXT
IF POSITIVE
Administerclienta testfor
Gooverresultsof test&haveclient
dissociation
cometoterms&acknowledgethetest
See test on pages
results.
Disclaimer: This chart is only to help
people make choices on what they
want to do. No results are implied or
promised.
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS HowHelp Comes
333

--- PAGE BREAK ---DETECTION OFMIND-CONTROL
The therapist,the victim and others
Ifyouactuallyhavethesubjectcome
haveseveralavenues theycan usetodetect
inforaninterview,askquestionsaboutthe
mind-control.

person's personal history.

The host alters of
One avenue in diagnosing mind-
multiples have some very typical methods of
controlwhichhas notbeen touchedupon by
handling personal history questions.

Don't
theprofessionalpsychiatricliteratureisto
expect the host to make it easy for you to
look at the subject's role inlife.

The reason
determine that they are a multiple.What you
thattheprofessionalliteratureisunableto
canexpect isthatyou willhaveadifficult
discuss  this  avenue,  is  because the
time with most multiples of getting a
professionals havehadverylittle
coherenthistoryoftheirlife.Youmay
understanding abouthowtheWorld Orderis
discover contradictoryinformation in what
constructed andran.Infactwewerethankful
they tell you.For instance, one multiple that
that God brought into our life, one of the
weinterviewedsaidhisfatherwasa.anazi
few outsiders that had a grasp of how the
submarine captain,b.

a jewish scientist that
Illuminati
controls the
world.

An
worked on the Montauk project from 1941
understanding of howtheIlluminatiuses
onwards.Theinformationwasobviously
front organizations,what those organizations
contradictoryandcontradictedwhathisex-
are,how theyinterlock,and how control over
wifesaid about his father.Thepersonal
thevarious sectors of life is managed by the
historycontradictionsofmanymultiples
Illuminatiwouldgreatlyhelptherapists
won't be this dramatic,but they might be.

identify people who have to be lluminati
Whenthehostpersonalityremembers
members.An
worked on the Montauk project from 1941
understanding of howtheIlluminatiuses
onwards.Theinformationwasobviously
front organizations,what those organizations
contradictoryandcontradictedwhathisex-
are,how theyinterlock,and how control over
wifesaid about his father.Thepersonal
thevarious sectors of life is managed by the
historycontradictionsofmanymultiples
Illuminatiwouldgreatlyhelptherapists
won't be this dramatic,but they might be.

identify people who have to be lluminati
Whenthehostpersonalityremembers
members.

It is an extremely high chance that
the details of their life they may say,"they
Illuminati members are multiples,and an
tell me that..."
evenhigherchancethattheyareundersome
Frequently, a person won't remember
form of mind-control.Even John DuPont,
if a detail happened before or after another
whorecentlywas head of theDuPontfamily,
event in their childhood.If you find
was plagued by implants.

chronological
problems and
1frequent
To identify people under mind-control
inconsistencies,then you can highly suspect
see if they are people with specialized
DID.

But you must continue.

training.

Next, identify if they are in a highly
The MPD really is apparent, when
structured job,where there is noroom for
therearelotsofspecificdifferencesbetween
grey--everythingisblackorwhite.Multiples
thetherapistandthesubjectinhowthey
doverywell inpositions thatcallforblack or
remember whattheclienthas said.The
white,structured thinking.Lookforeducators
differentepisodesarehardforthemultiple
inprincipalpositions,reformschools,catholic
toremember although they are confident of
andmilitaryschools,boyandgirl schools.

their perception
1oftheevent.The
Theseareplaces that thelluminati control
dissociative thinking makes it very difficult
inordertouse them
forauxiliary
for the multiple to see the differences, and
programming centers.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Next, identify if they are in a highly
The MPD really is apparent, when
structured job,where there is noroom for
therearelotsofspecificdifferencesbetween
grey--everythingisblackorwhite.Multiples
thetherapistandthesubjectinhowthey
doverywell inpositions thatcallforblack or
remember whattheclienthas said.The
white,structured thinking.Lookforeducators
differentepisodesarehardforthemultiple
inprincipalpositions,reformschools,catholic
toremember although they are confident of
andmilitaryschools,boyandgirl schools. their perception
1oftheevent.The
Theseareplaces that thelluminati control
dissociative thinking makes it very difficult
inordertouse them
forauxiliary
for the multiple to see the differences, and
programming centers. Many of your porn
theywillbeveryconvinced that thetherapist
stars,some ofyourmovieactors,almost all
is trying to deceive them.Theexperience can
of your brain surgeons, some of your CPAs,
be frustrating for both parties, but it is one
manyofyourpoliticians,allofyourCIAfield
more red flag that indicates that mind-control
agents, and most of your religious leaders are
is likely present. undertrauma-basedmind-control. Multipleswillfrequently explaintheir
334
Cisco'sDEEPERINSIGHTSHowHelp Comes

--- PAGE BREAK ---lack of detailed memories on having a"poor
fine-tunethe programming bylayering in
memory".They will often say,"I don't
covermemories.Still
lanexperienced
remember",which is truthful, and is better
therapist should be abletoseethroughthe
thantheoccasionalsituationwheresome
shallowness andthe confusionofcover
multiplestrytoinventsomethingtosayto
memories.

hidetheirlackofpersonal information,or to
Mind-controlcomesin
many
placate thewishes of theinterviewer.They
appearances.

With the more recent victims,
are also great at saying nothing but sounding
implants arebeingusedtodistractvictims
liketheyhave said something,and another
from realizing their DID (MPD).The
trick multiples have is saying something that
detectionof MPD(DID)underneaththe
appears to be one thing but is another.

incessantmanipulationsandvoicesofthe
Some multiples have figured out their
implants is a challenge.The "noise"created
multiplicity,but are secret about it,in fear
by the implants is a strong dissociating
thatotherswill think thatthey arecrazy.

mechanism.

Over the years, probably many more
There are strong natural defenses of
times than not the professional psychiatrists
themind that theprogrammers count on to
and psychologists have misdiagnosed MPD.

keep the mind-control hidden.

For instance,
Someoftheirfavoritedisorderstousewhen
thevictimhasbeenbondedtothe
misdiagnosing are: Adjustment, Affective,
programmer/master.To admit mind-control
Anxiety,Bi-Polar Affective,Borderline,Drug
istoexperience abandonment,andeven
Abuse, Eating, Histronic, Organic Mental,
death(because many alters’self-identity is
Paranoid Schizophrenia, PTS, Psychosis,
wrappedupwiththeperpetrator.)Itisnot
Schizoaffective,Somatization,and Transient
easy tokill oneself,which is often the mind's
Amnesia.When multiplestakes anMMPI,
perception of what admitting mind-control is.

theyhavehistoricallyansweredthesameway
Detection of trauma-based mind-control by
a schizophrenic answersonitems156&251.For instance,
Someoftheirfavoritedisorderstousewhen
thevictimhasbeenbondedtothe
misdiagnosing are: Adjustment, Affective,
programmer/master.To admit mind-control
Anxiety,Bi-Polar Affective,Borderline,Drug
istoexperience abandonment,andeven
Abuse, Eating, Histronic, Organic Mental,
death(because many alters’self-identity is
Paranoid Schizophrenia, PTS, Psychosis,
wrappedupwiththeperpetrator.)Itisnot
Schizoaffective,Somatization,and Transient
easy tokill oneself,which is often the mind's
Amnesia.When multiplestakes anMMPI,
perception of what admitting mind-control is.

theyhavehistoricallyansweredthesameway
Detection of trauma-based mind-control by
a schizophrenic answersonitems156&251.

thetherapistwillusually encounter strong
(At least 3 studies have documented this.)
denialmechanismsbythevictim.

These two questions elevate the Sc scale
The therapist should ask about
whichhas
been
taken
toindicate
flashbacks.If the client reports flashbacks
schizophrenia.Someofthetipoffsthata
that arenot drug-relatedflashbacksthatisa
person is misdiagnosed in a mental hospital
goodsignthatMPD
maybepresent.

is that the interact a lot with the staff, but
However, most flashbacks do not begin
have erratic behavior, that generally leads to
surfacing untilthe programming
and
the staff being upset.

They may be
dissociationbeginscrumbling.

responsible for a while and then surprise
Someundetectedadultvictimsof
everyonebynotbeingabletofunctionor
mind-control,when they arehaving sex with
handle a responsibility.

their spouses get intrusive flashbacks and
Typical
questions that help
the
images thatscarethem.This is anotherred-
therapist expose the programmedI
DID
flag that the person may be a victim of mind-
include questions about whether their school
control.Victims of mind-control will often
grades were erratic, whether they have gaps
have allkinds of issues aroundrelationships
intheirmemoriesof schooldays,ifthey
and sex.--- PAGE BREAK ---

responsible for a while and then surprise
Someundetectedadultvictimsof
everyonebynotbeingabletofunctionor
mind-control,when they arehaving sex with
handle a responsibility. their spouses get intrusive flashbacks and
Typical
questions that help
the
images thatscarethem.This is anotherred-
therapist expose the programmedI
DID
flag that the person may be a victim of mind-
include questions about whether their school
control.Victims of mind-control will often
grades were erratic, whether they have gaps
have allkinds of issues aroundrelationships
intheirmemoriesof schooldays,ifthey
and sex. remember getting test results on tests that
Anotherredflag is whenaperson
they don't remember taking, and a grade-by-
reports abilitiesorinformationthattheyhave
gradeyear-by-year history of theirlife.Bear
noidea where ithas come from.For
in mind,thattheprogrammersare trying to
instance,all of a sudden oneday theycould
Cisco'sDEEPERINSIGHTSHowHelpComes
335

--- PAGE BREAK ---r history of theirlife.Bear
noidea where ithas come from.For
in mind,thattheprogrammersare trying to
instance,all of a sudden oneday theycould
Cisco'sDEEPERINSIGHTSHowHelpComes
335

--- PAGE BREAK ---

understand someonespeaking German,or all
of a sudden they got the words to a song, or
all of a sudden theyjustintuitivelyknewhow
to play a piano, etc. The opposite of this also
hits DID mind-control victims. They may
haveanabilitythatsomehowstrangely
disappears. It takes time to realize that these
are co-conscious alters.
Victimsofmind-controlhavegreat
survivalmechanisms.Theyareexpertsat
changing the conversation to hide what they
don'twanttotalkabout.If thetherapisthas
the skill at being gently but firmly assertive in
getting what they want, the ability to be
gently persistent can pay off.
The therapist needs tobecome
acquainted with detecting alterswitches.This
involves eye shape changes, eye color
changes, eye movement changes, blinks, body
posture changes, voice pitch changes, word
usage changes, perception and value changes,
mood changes,etc.
Upon detection of this, the therapist
may gently ask, "Do you ever feel that there
is another part of yourself that comes out
and does things that you would not do?""Do
you ever feel that when you are alone,
someoneelseorsome otherpart ofyou is
watching you?" Any answer except a definite
"no" is a red flag, that reconfirms the
switching clues, and other clues that the
therapist has assembled.
Not allvictims ofmind-control have
extensivealtersystems.Inourprevious
books,we have covered situations when this
does not occur.
Another waythat therapists can
determinemind-controlwouldbeto
interview people close to the victim,and to
visit thevictim'sworkplace and home.Some
victimsofmind-control surroundthemselves
with
1
objectsthat
pertaintotheir
programming. For instance, the therapist may
find a man who has a passion for Mickey
Mouse objects, or a woman who loves white
rabbit figurines or star trek objects.
336
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS How Help Comesing. For instance, the therapist may
find a man who has a passion for Mickey
Mouse objects, or a woman who loves white
rabbit figurines or star trek objects.
336
Cisco's DEEPER INSIGHTS How Help Comes

--- PAGE BREAK ---EATINGDISORDERS(asanInitial problem,and aSaDeeper Issue)
ANINTRODUCTION
feel from society and their handlers that they
Eating disorders exhibit themselves as
 ..un ssun.op..e.r
makesmany
initialproblemsforvictimscoming infor
slavesidentifythinnesswith overcoming their
therapy.

For instance, they may find
self-esteemproblems.Unfortunately,if the
themselves having anirresistible urge to
host pursues starvation thinking that it will
overeatingfollowedbyvomitingorpurging,
overcomelow-selfesteem,they almost always
or they may be starving themselves, or have
are disappointed that it doesn't help, and if
phobiasaround
certain foods.

Eating
anything,starvation,only exacerbates the
disorders also may develop as problems as
original low self-esteem.

On the flip side, in
thesystemofaltersworkthroughtheir
order forthehost alter tofeel that shehas
memories and programming.

These eating
somecontrol over just onething inher life,
problems do have the possibility of becoming
shemayresort tostarvingherself toregain
life-threatening.

some sense of power over her own body.

Many victims of mind-control suffer
When striving for freedom, the mind may
from eating disorders.

There are certainly
think that starvation gives atleast a fraction
manyfactorswhichcausemind-control
of power over their body, after it has been
victims eating disorders.The more difficult
stripped of choice,beaten, and raped, and
disorderswhichresisttreatmentareoften
electroshocked.

created by multiple factors.This section will
One reason why somebulimics and
makeanattempttoprovidethetherapist
anorexics have eating disorders is that they
someofimportantfactorsbehindeating
have difficulty identifying theirfeelings,and
disorders of mind-control victims.

havelittleconfidenceintheirabilityin
Eating disorders are not limited to
relationships.Theyfeeltheymustdothe
victims of mind-control.

However, many
rightthingtoavoiddisapprovalandrejection.--- PAGE BREAK ---

havelittleconfidenceintheirabilityin
Eating disorders are not limited to
relationships.Theyfeeltheymustdothe
victims of mind-control. However, many
rightthingtoavoiddisapprovalandrejection. individualswhoarereferredorontheirown
Theyhaveanartificialidealizedimageof
come in to therapists for bulimia or anorexia,
what they should be. For instance, one
are actually sufferingfrom the severe effects
teenage girl was frightened that she was
oftrauma-basedtotalmind-control.Forsome
changing from a girl to a woman. Others due
therapists,the first primary complaint of
to their abuse have a hatred of their body,as
mind-control victims will be their eating
well as a fear. There are some young altars
disorder. They will be totally oblivious that
that may not want to have breasts and hips. anything else could be wrong. Another person felt that they were naughty if
Researcherswholiketoworkwith
they ate,and she became increasingly
statisticshavenoticedthatthereisahigh
disgusted with herself as she ate. incidence ofpeoplewith eating disorders who
have problems with abuse,depression,and
WHENMIND-CONTROLVICTIMSWITH
self-identity. Since mind-control will bring
EATINGDISORDERS
with it abuse, depression and self-identity
FIRSTCOME INCONTACTWITH
problems it is a given that the mind-control
THERAPISTS
victimwill have some eating problems at
One way victims come in to therapy is
some level of their being. thattheyarereferredbysomeonefortheir
ModernAmerican culture as well as
eatingdisorder.Anyonewhogets areferral
many of theslave handlers are obsessed with
should explainclearlywhy theperson is in
females being thin.Thepressure that females
foraconsultation.Iftheclientislivingat
Cisco'sDEEPERINSIGHTS HowHelpComes
337