Electmaal  Rev-ietf  -  N.  Y.

March  29,  1099,  pp.  195-197,  204,

SOME  EXPERIMENTS  IN  TESLA hS  LABORATORY  WITH  CURRENTS  OF  KISH  POTENTIAL  AND
HIGH  FREQUENCY.

To  the  Editor  of  Electrical  Review:

Since  the  unfortunate  accident  of  four  years  ago,  which  crippled  and  delayed  my
labors  in  a  number  of  lines  so  seriously,  I  have  had  but  little  time  to  devote  to
the  fulfillment  of  a  duty  which,  next  to  that  of  turning  his  best  efforts  to  dili¬
gent  inquiry  in  the  fields  he  has  chosen,  is  the  most  important  to  a  scientific  man;
namely,  that  of  giving  an  exact  record  of  the  results  obtained,  1  realize  with  sor¬
row  every  day  that,  despite  of  all  pains  taken  to  this  end,  I  am  gaining  but  very
slowly  on  the  material  accumulated.  Ideas  come  through  a  happy  inspiration,  appar¬
ently  without  much  exertion,  but  it  is  the  working  out  of  the  many  harassing  details
and  putting  into  a  presentable  form  which  consumes  time  and  energy.  It  was  impos¬
sible  to  abandon  research  in  new  directions,  in  which  I  have  felt  myself  irresist¬
ibly  drawn,  and  it  was  equally  impossible  to  do  full  justice  to  the  work  partially
completed,  and  I  can  only  hope  to  gradually  retrieve  my  losses  by  the  only  expedient
available,  which  is  to  redouble  the  real.  It  is  not  the  best  plan  to  follow,  1  con¬
fess,  and  is  in  radical  opposition  to  the  kindly  advice  given  to  me  to  the  effect
that  I  intended  to  live  200  years  by  sleeping  most  of  the  time!  It  may  also  show
that  it  is  not  this  mode  of  life  which  is  responsible  for  the  delay  in  the  commer¬
cial  introduction  of  my  system  of  vacuum  tube  lighting,  as  has  been  asserted  by
some  people  who  have  found  a  singular  satisfaction  in  dwelling  extensively  in  their
columns  on  my  proposed  glass  house  on  Long  Island,  which  was  to  cover  acres  of
ground,  and  which  was  to  be  built  for  the  purpose  of  catching  the  sun’s  rays;  on  my
claims  of  the  discoveries  of  Roentgen;  on  my  invention  enabling  me  to  move  and  ex¬
plode  torpedo  boats  by  will  power,  and  on  my  efforts  to  annihilate  the  entire  Brit¬
ish  navy.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  limit  of  patience  of  the  readers  has  been
finally  reached.

At  that  time,  still  painfully  remembered,  my  energies  were  taken  up  principally
by  some  mechanical  problems  of  great  importance,  and  the  few  observations  in  elec¬
tricity  which  I  was  fortunate  to  make  came  like  ever  so  many  refreshing  berries
found  on  the  road  by  a  weary  wanderer.  The  journey  is  not  finished  yet,  and  the
wanderer  is  well-nigh  exhausted.  He  longs  for  more  sweet  berries,  and  anxiously
asks,  "Did  any  one  pass  this  road  before?"

It  was  chiefly  in  three  directors  that  electrical  investigation  was  attractive
and  promising:  There  were  the  excessive  electrical  pressures  of  millions  of  volts,
which  opened  up  wonderful  possibilities  if  producible  in  practical  ways;  there  were
currents  of  many  hundreds  of  thousands  of  amperes,  which  appealed  to  the  imagination
by  their  astonishing  effects,  and,  most  interesting  and  inviting  of  all,  there  were
the  powerful  electrical  vibrations  with  their  mysterious  actions  at  a  distance.

What  better  work  could  one  do  than  inventing  methods  and  devising  means  for  enabling
scientific  men  to  push  investigation  far  out  into  these  practically  unknown  regions?
This  work  was  difficult  and  tedious  and  involved  a  certain  amount  of  material  sac¬
rifice,  but  promised  a  higher  reward  if  successfully  accomplished  -  the  gratitude
of  those  many  who  exercise  their  gifts  in  different  directions  and  are  compelled  to
rely  on  the  expert  for  providing  them  with  implements  suitable  for  their  special
purpose.  Who  can  estimate  how  much  science  has  been  advanced  by  the  beautiful  in¬
struments  of  measure  which  Lord  Kelvin  has  given  us?  Unfortunately,  in  many  of  the
new  fields  such  instruments  are  yet  to  be  invented.  Still  more  unfortunately,  in¬
formations  seems  to  be  more  needful  than  instruments,  if  one  is  to  judge  from  state¬
ments  frequently  made  in  technical  periodicals  on  a  variety  of  subjects.  An  experi¬
menter,  for  instance,  measures  the  current  through  a  make-and-break  device,  and,
finding  it  small,  he  infers  that  the  conversion  is  economical.  Another  suggests


to  determine  the  efficiency  of  conversion  through  such  a  device  by  the  calorimetri c
method.  Now,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  if  there  was  such  a  conti vance,  absolutely  per¬
fect  in  its  action,  which  would  behave  as  i  have  explained  on  another  occasion,  and
change  the  resistance  of  a  gap  from  zero  to  infinity  without  any  loss  in  the  gap
itself,  which  separates  the  terminals,  it  still  might  happen  that  99  per  cent  of
the  energy  supplied  to  the  circuit  would  be  wasted  in  radiations,  useless  for  the
purpose  contemplated.  The  calorimetric  method  would  in  this,  or  generally  in  any
other  instance,  in  which  the  disturbances  produced  are  very  sudden,  entirely  fail
in  giving  an  approximation  as  to  the  energy  dissipated  in  the  circuit,  for  the  sim¬
ple  reason  that  the  friction  encountered  by  a  wave  in  its  passage  throught  a  medium,
which  determines  the  amount  of  heat  generated,  is  no  measure  whatever  of  the  energy
of  the  wave.  Thus,  certain  well  understood  cases  excepted,  the  only  method  at  pre¬
sent  available  in  such  estimates  is  to  take  account  of  the  energy  consumed  by  the
source  of  supply.  This  remark  alone  will  show  that  the  economical  conversion  of
currents  by  make  and  break  devices  is  a  much  more  difficult  problem  than  it  appears
to  those  who  have  studied  it  superficially.  Not  only  must  the  devices  used  in  the
transformation  possess  certain  characteristics,  but  the  entire  circuit  must  be
properly  designed.  One  can  not  help  admiring  the  confidence  and  sel fpossession  of
experimenters ,  who  put  forth  carelessly  such  views  and  who,  with  but  a  few  days*,
not  to  say  hours',  experience  with  a  device,  apparently  unmindful  of  the  respons¬
ibility  of  such  a  step,  and  advance  their  imperfect  results  and  opinions  hastily
formed.  The  sparks  may  be  long  and  brilliant,  the  display  interesting  to  witness,
and  the  audience  may  be  delighted,  but  one  must  doubt  the  value  of  such  demonstra¬
tions.  There  is  so  little  novelty  in  them,  that  one  might  easily  perform  a  practi¬
cal  joke  on  the  lecturer  by  describing  in  advance  all  his  drawings,  apparatus,  ex¬
periments  and  theories,  this  placing  him  in  an  awful  predicament.  Though  such  a
course  would  be  naturally  impolite,  it  might  be  found  justified  and  excused  by  the
circumstances.,  for  premature  expressions  of  opinion  and  demonstrations  of  this  kind
are  responsible  for  much  evil,  one  of  these  being  the  erroneous  idea  which  they
create  in  scientific  circles  as  to  the  importance  of  an  advance  made.  It  grieves
one  to  observed  that,  for  example,  such  great  work  as  that  of  Professor  Dewar,  which
he  turns  out  with  clock  regularity,  is  scarcely  commented  upon  in  the  technical
columns,  whereas  a  worthless  trap  for  interrupting  currents,  which  usually  consumes
nine-tenths  of  the  energy,  and  is,  besides,  useless  for  other  reasons,  and  just
suitable  for  the  amusement  of  small  boys,  who  are  beginning  their  electrical  ex¬
perience  with  Leclanche  batteries  and  $1.50  induction  coils,  is  hailed  as  an  im¬
portant  scientific  discovery,  An  agreeable  contrast  is  afforded  by  those  who  pa¬
tiently  investigate,  contented  to  lose  the  credit  for  advances  made  rather  than  to
present  them  to  the  world  in  an  imperfect  state,  who  form  their  opinions  concien-
tiously,  after  a  long  and  careful  study,  and  have  little  to  correct  afterward.

The  importance  of  the  task  of  providing  proper  implements  for  research  in  these
fields  once  recognized,  it  became  the  question  in  what  line  the  efforts  to  this  end
would  be  likely  to  be  most  profitable,  A  little  thought  showed  that  it  was  in  in¬
vestigating  high  electrical  pressures,  for  these  were  needed  in  most  instances*

More  than  a  passing  thought  was  given  to  static  electricity,  with  the  experiments
of  Franklin  as  starting  point*  Various  forms  of  generators  of  static  electricity
were  experimented  upon,  and  some  new  ones  designed,  to  which  I  hope  to  revert  some
time,  as  they  present  some  features  of  interest,  The  most  valuable  outcome  of  these
experiments  was  a  method  of  conversion  which  I  have  described,  and  which  enables  the
operation  Of  any  kind  of  devices  of  low  tension  from  such  a  high-pressure  source
with  perfect  ease  and  safety,  no  matter  how  high  the  tension.  Soon,  however,  it  was
recognized  that  with  the  above  object  in  view  generators  of  steady  pressure  were
entirely  impractical,  quite  apart  from  their  incidental  limitations,  it  was  exactly
as  if  one  attempted  to  drive  piles  into  the  ground  by  the  application  of  continuous
pressure.  This  would  require  cumbersome  and  powerful  machinery,  and  would  be  very


inconvenient  An  incomparably  better  way  of  developing  high  pressure  is  by  deliver¬
ing  violent  l  iows  as  with  a  hammer.  In  such  a  case  the  motion  of  the  hammer  being
suddenly  arrested  pressure  is  developed  on  the  point  of  impact,  which  is  all  the
greater  the  smaller  the  displacement  caused,  and  if  there  were  material  absolutely
rigid,  incompressible  and  inelastic,  an  infinite  pressure  might  thus  be  developed
by  a  small  blow.  Hence  one  if  forcibly  driven  to  the  use  of  a  transformer  or  in¬
duction  coil  as  means  for  producing  great  electrical  pressures.  The  first  diffi¬
culty  encountered  was  that  of  insulation,  and  it  might  be  interesting  and  useful  to
show,  chiefly  to  those  who  are  less  familiar  with  this  special  subject,  haw  by  grad¬
ual  improvement,  from  the  ordinary  inductor! urn  capable  of  furnishing  currents  of
very  moderate  electro-motive  force,  an  apparatus  was  finally  evolved  In  which  there
is  practically  no  limit  as  to  the  pressure  obtainable.

Selecting  first  the  closed  core  transformer,  one  easily  recognises  that  it  is
unsuitable  for  the  attainment  of  the  object  in  view  for  obvious  reasons.  Neverthe¬
less,  by  adopting  the  plan  illustrated  in  the  first  diagram  of  Fig.  2,  I  succeeded
in  obtaining  nearly  200,000  volts,  and  I  think  that  more  than  twice  this  tension  is
practicable  by  means  of  such  an  arrangements  which  involves  the  use  of  independent
and  entirely  insulated  sources  of  supplying  the  primaries*  as  will  be  understood
from  an  inspection  of  the  diagram  without  further  explanation.  The  evident  limit¬
ations  of  the  closed-core  type  in  the  way  of  insulation*  rate  of  change  and  fre¬
quency  of  the  current  impulses*  led  to  the  adoption  of  an  open-core  type*  as  a  mat¬
ter  of  course,  and  the  various  diagrams  of  the  figure  referred  to  illustrate  the
modifications  as  they  were  gradually  made  in  the  manner  of  insulating  and  winding  of
the  coils*  In  diagram  2  the  old*  primitive  method  of  insulation  is  indicated.  In
diagram  3  the  succeeding  layers  are  insulated  by  material  increasing  in  thickness
gradually  from  one  end  to  the  other,  being  thickest  on  the  place  of  greatest  dif¬
ference  of  potential*  The  thickness  is  easily  calculated  beforehand,  and  is  such
that  all  the  insulation  is  as  nearly  as  possible  uniformly  strained.  As  it  was
impracticable  to  pile  up  many  layers  in  the  manner  illustrated  in  diagram  3,  natu¬
rally  the  modification  illustrated  in  diagram  4  was  made*  which  led  to  a  further  im¬
provement,  indicated  in  diagram  5.  It  was  recognized,  however,  that  there  was  no
advantage  in  winding  many  coils*  and  that  all  that  was  needed  were  two  secondary
coils  joined  in  the  middle,  as  illustrated  in  diagram  6,  the  secondaries  being,  of
course,  wound  as  shown  in  diagram  3.  Next*  in  order  to  increase  the  output  of  the
coil  and  gain  other  advantages*  the  relative  customary  position  of  the  primary  and
secondary  windings  was  reversed  and  the  coil  as  shown  in  diagram  7  produced,  the
two  secondary  coils  being  joined  on  their  outer,  instead  of  on  their  inner  ends,  as
before.  This  construction  was  considerably  better  than  that  illustrated  in  diagram
6,  as  the  primary  and  secondary  coils  were  placed  in  closer  inductive  relation.  But
when  with  this  coil  the  tension  had  been  pushed  far  enough,  it  was  found  that  the
iron  core  limited  the  spark  length,  and  then  two  insulated  cores,  one  in  each  coil,
were  re sorted  to,  which  were  finally  discarded,  and  so  the  coil  shown  in  diagram  8
resulted,  which  !  have  described  on  several  occasions  and  which,  of  all  other  con¬
structions,  permites  the  obtainment  of  the  highest  possible  tension  with  a  two-
terminal  coil  in  a  given  space*

But  even  in  this  perfected  type  it  was  not  possible  to  go  beyond  a  certain  po¬
tential  difference,  and  a  further  Investigation  led  to  a  new  type*  which  I  have  cal¬
led  a  single  terminal  coil,  and  which  is  illustrated  in  diagram  9  and  is  now  well
known.  In  this  coil  the  adjustment  is  so  made  that  the  secondary  is  nearly  equal
to  the  quarter  of  the  wave  length,  the  highest  potential  being,  under  these  condi¬
tions,  produced  on  the  free  terminal.  Subsequently  1  extended  such  adjustment  also
to  the  coils  in  diagram  3,  improving  the  same  materially.

During  these  efforts  I  fortunatly  discovered  the  important  part  which  air  played
in  the  breaking  down  of  the  insulation*  and  by  adopting  proper  methods  fur  the  ex¬
clusion  of  gaseous  matter,  3  was  able  to  increase  the  el ectro -motive  force  to  more
than  10  times  the  value  without  breaking  down  the  secondary,  I  have  described  this


method  since*  which  1  m  using  in  the  manufacture  of  coils  and  condensers,  and
without  which  it  would  be  entirely  impossible  to  reach  any  such  results  as  I  have
obtained,  The  industrial  world  has  profited  by  the  recognition  of  the  action  of
the  air,  for  it  has  helped  to  extend  power  transmission  to  greater  distances  than
heretofore  practicable.  It  has  also  been  useful  in  determining  the  limits  of  the
electro-motive  forces  with  ordinary  apparatus  used  in  power  transmission,  but  I  see
that  no  attempt  is  yet  made  to  overcome  the  streamers  by  a  suitable  construction  of
the  cables*  as  I  have  indicated,  and  thus  make  higher  electro-motive  forces  avail  -
able,

further  experimentation  with  the  original  single- terminal  coll*  before  referred
to,  finally  led  step  by  step  the  adoption  of  a  coil  of  large  dimensions,  which,  in
two  typical  forms,  is  illustrated  in  diagrams  10  and  11.  With  such  a  coil  I  found
that  there  was  practically  no  limit  to  the  tension  available,  and  it  is  by  it  means
that  J  discovered  the  most  important  of  all  facts  arrived  at  in  the  course  of  my
investigation  in  these  fields*  One  of  these  was  that  atmospheric  air,  though  or¬
dinarily  a  perfect  insulator*  conducted  freely  the  currents  of  immense  electro¬
motive  force  producible  by  such  coils  and  suitable  accessories.  So  great  is  the
conductivity  of  the  air,  that  the  discharge  issuing  from  a  single  terminal  behaves
as  if  the  atmosphere  were  rarefied.  Another  fact  is  that  this  conductivity  increas¬
es  very  rapidly  with  rarefaction  of  the  atmosphere  and  augmentation  of  the  electri¬
cal  pressure,  to  such  an  extent  that  at  barometric  pressures  which  permit  of  no
transit  of  ordinary  currents,  those  generated  by  such  a  coil  pass  with  great  fee-
dom  through  the  air  as  through  a  copper  wire.  Following  up  these  promising  revela¬
tions  I  demonstrated  conclusively  by  experiments  that  great  amounts  of  electrical
energy .can  be  transmitted  to  any  distance  through  upper  air  strata  which  are  easily
accessible,  and  since  this  truth  has  been  recognized  every  fiber  has  been  strained
to  realize  such  a  transmission  on  a  large  scale.  These  two  obvervations  explain
clearly  the  silent  discharges  noted  frequently  in  dense  air  strata,  but  three  or
four  miles  above  the  earth's  surface..  One  more  equally  important  fact  I  may  men¬
tion,  which  was  simultaneously  observed.  The  discharges  of  such  a  coil,  when  of
an  electro-motive  force  of  a  few  millions  of  volts*  excite  powerful  affinities  in
the  atmospheric  nitrogen,  causing  it  to  combine  readily  with  the  oxygen  and  other
elements,  particularly  in  the  presence  of  aqueous  vapor.  So  energetic  are  these
actions  and  so  strangely  do  such  powerful  discharges  behave,  that  I  have  often  ex¬
perienced  a  fear  that  the  atmosphere  might  be  ignited,  a  terrible  possibility,  which
Sir  William  Crookes,  with  his  piercing  intellect,  has  already  considered.  Who
knows  but  such  a  calamity  is  possible?  And  who  can  tell  with  certitude  that  that
periodical  cessations  of  organic  life  on  the  globe  might  not  be  caused  by  ignition
of  the  air  and  destruction  of  its  life-sustaining  qualities,  accidentally  or  as  a
consequence  of  some  accumulative  change V  A  lump  of  coal  will  lie  for  centuries
unaffected  in  contact  with  oxygen,  but  the  combustion  once  started,  the  process
continues  as  long  as  there  are  elements  to  combine.

While  improving  the  construction  of  the  transformers ,  every  effort  was  made  to
perfect  the  apparatus  for  generating  the  currents.  The  objective  point  from  the
outset  was  to  obtain  the  greatest  possible  rate  of  variation.  High-frequency  al¬
ternators  were  first  used,  but  their  limitations  were  soon  apparent,  1  then  turned
again  and  again  to  make  and  break  devices,  chiefly  with  the  object  of  using  them  in
connection  with  a  novel  form  of  transformer,  which  I  have  previously  described,  and
which  is  now  well  known  and  understood.  In  its  original  form,  as  I  first  showed  it,
it  is  illustrated  in  diagram  12,  which  need  not  be  dwelt  upon,  beyond  saying  that
one  of  the  characteristic  features  of  such  an  instrument  is  the  energizing  of  the
primary  of  the  induction  coil  by  the  rapidly  succeeding  discharges  of  a  condenser.

In  a  more  recent  type,  specially  adapted  for  ordinary  supply  circuits,  which  I
have  described  and  shown  before  several  scientific  societies,  the  transformer
comprises,  as  indicated  in  diagram  13,  three  coils,  there  being,  in  addition  to


the  primary  and  secondary  coils,  one  which  receives  the  currents  from  the  supply
circuit*  and  is  designated  the  charging  coil.  Preferably  the  latter  is  not  in  in-
ductm-  recation  with  the  former.  On  a  number  of  occasions  I  have  described  high-
frequency  apparatus  embodying  this  beautiful  method,  which  has  already  been  of  great

rial  1 in  mir.hands.^  as  ln  those  of  others..  But  a  defect,  to  which
Ih^h1  d  l11*"!1?!  confronted  me.  It  lay  in  the  make  and  break  devices

snrhhH£eff0MneK  furictTOn  of  char9in9  and  discharging  the  condenser.  Many  of
r^rrTPd  Ine!,>ka?hd  a  of  Principles,  formed  the  subject  Of  experiments

th^  I  ^  2  1th  aim  °f  d0ir>g  &my  wUh  this  i '^perfection*  To  cite  one  of  these,

ina  li^idtmIrS?afi*rtS?Ur“  °f’$UPpl£  pa55ed  through  a  minute  column  of  conduct-
IpL  ^  variety  of  ways,  and  in  this  simple  manner  rapidly  suc¬

ceeding  impulses  were  obtained.  Incidentally,  some  useful  results  were  secured  with

^HSthp°!I^rfVa+-eSt  l&1  for.e*flrnPle’  th?  generation  of  currents  of  differing  phase
tne  production  of  rotating  fields  moving  with  constant  velocity;  but,  interest-

Inmir!ithA5e  S1'-P  e  dfvices  were,  they  naturally  precluded  the  possibility  of  eco-
j-omi ca  conversion,  ;  nei  r  study,  however,  was  useful  as  a  means  of  recognizing  the
t  equipments  of  such  make  and  break  apparatus,  and,  finally,  led  to  Forms  based  on
scientific  and  economical  principles.  A  number  of  these  were  recently  described
in  tecnni cal  periodicals  and,  as  stated  on  a  former  occasion,  they  fulfill  their
difnruU  duty  surprisingly  well  and  make  it  possible  to  obtain  currents  of  very

From  ordinary  supply  circuits  with  great  economy.  These  novel  ton-
t  Ranees  lend  themselves  well  also  to  the  uses  of  the  ordinary  induction  coil,  and
A V;.  ern Ployed  them  with  equal  success  in  a  form  of  Plante's  rheostatic  machine

rhm!nh  °ther^Sefu1  purposes.  Thus,  after  a  continuous  effort  extending
through  a  number  of  years,  [  have  the  supreme  satisfaction  of  having  carried  this
hard  and  important  task  to  a  satisfactory  end.  9  *  -

The  annexed  photographs  will  serve  to  convey  an  idea  of  what  can  be  done  with

rh«rLPnh^^H  deferring  to  fig,  1,  illustrative  of  the  high  rate  of

change  obtained  in  the  current,  a  vacuum  bulb  of  about  12  inches  in  diameter  is

whirh  U  lAT  °f  a^C0!  f°ur  turns  of  specially  constructed  heavy  cable,  through
COn^Z  15  and’  ^though  at  a  distance  of  several  inches  9

93S  A  the  bulb  is  brought  to  intense  incandescence,  the  light
emitted  being  fully  equal  to  1,500  candles.  Such  a  powerfully  energized  coil^when
t  e  frequency,  as  in  this  instance,  is  measured  in  millions  per  second,  showslittle
repellent  action,  but  when  the  frequency  of  the  impulses  is  low,  closed  conductors
as  washers  of  conducting  material,  are  thrown  off  with  a  force  of  a  magnitude  which

nrtrVJh  aine1  0n  th&  as5urT1Pt!on  that  the  currents  have  maximum  values  of
many  hundred  thousand  amperes.

□lil?t  photogrspfs A11  be  understood  from  the  titles,  which  are  made  ex-

PI  :A  fo  LhlJ  PurP0se.  |  hope  to  have  in  the  near  future  an  opportunity  for  des¬
poil)9  m°re  ?uch  experiments,  and  dwelling  in  detail  on  the  appa ratus^sed .

.  .  e  present  I  arTl  compelled,  for  want  of  time,  to  merely  state  that  the  vibra¬

tions  used  in  most  Of  them  were  from  400,000  to  000,000  per  second,

..  I  wish  to  apologize  for  the  frequent  appearance  of  my  likeness  in

these  photographs,  which  is  distasteful  to  me,  but  was  unavoidable.  Most  of  the  id-

k^C+L1?dlCated%and  3  niJ[nber  °f  others,  have  resulted  from  the  application  of  the"
beautiful  principle  upon  which  the  operation  of  this  apparatus  is  based  Scientific

?r^we™  r?rd  meJy  it  ffly  nw,  *nd  i  have  ea™es??;

Irnip?  na  If  -°rt5ter  of  3reat  distinction  by  devoting  to  it  much  of  my  en¬

ergies,  No  desire  for  material  advantages  has  animated  me  In  all  this  work,  thouqh

LtT.hT^t  Sake  °f  the  c!rt1nTce  °f  lab0rs’  thdt  "***  will  soon  foiled
]llL ^LCORpenS!tl0lYf0r  valuable  services  rendered  to  Science  and  industry.
.OLhescienfi.Tc  experts,  who  are  familiar,  in  theory  and  experiment,  with  electri-
cal  vibrations,  the  results  here  shown  will,  I  believe,  speak  in  eloquent  language!

But  those  readers  to  whom  they  are  naturally  less  intelligible  will  ask:  What  are


"IG.  1  -  LIGHTING  A  DISCONNECTED  VACUUM  BULB
OF  1,500  CANDLE  POWER  BY  HIGH-FREQUENCY
CURRENTS  -  PHOTOGRAPH  TAKEN  SY  THE  LIGHT  OF
THE  9ULB  ITSELF,  EXPOSURE  ABOUT  TWO  SECONDS.


FIG*  7  TABLE  OF  DIAGRAMS  ILLUSTRATING  THE  EVOLUTION  OF
ENABLING  THE  PRODUCTION  OF  ELECTRO-MOTIVE  FORCES  OF  ft ANY


(


A  HIGH-TENSION  TRANSFORMER
MILLIONS  OF  VOLTS.


FIG.  3  -  PHOTOGRAPH  SHOWING  A  PART  OF  THE  LABORATORY

RESONATING  COIL  SUPPORTED  ON  AN  INSULATING  STAND,  AND
STREAMERS  PRODUCED,  OTHER  COILS  REMAINING  UNAFFECTED  -
IN  THE  RESONATING  COIL  IS  OVER  HALF  A  MILLION  VOLTS.


,  with  a  Disconnected
ILLUMINATED  BY  THE
THE  pressure  developed


FIG*  4  -  PHOTOGRAPH  SHOWING  AN  INCAN¬
DESCENT  LAMP  LIGFITED  BY  A  SYNCHRO¬
NISED  CIRCUIT  COMPOSED  OF  A  WIRE  LOOP
AND  CONDENSER,  AND  ENERGIZED  BY  WAVES
TRANSMITTED  FROM  A  DISTANCE*


FIG*  5  -  PHOTOGRAPH  SHOWING  AN  INCAN¬
DESCENT  LAMP  LIGHTED  BY  MEANS  OF  WAVES
TRANSMITTED  THROUGH  SPACE  TO  A  COIL  WITH¬
OUT  A  CONDENSER*


F|G-  6  "  EXPERIMENT  ILLUSTRATING  THE  ACTION  Of
A  SYNCHRONIZED  CIRCUIT  ENERGIZED  BY  WAVES
transmitted  FROM  A  DISTANT  OSCILLATOR  -  THE
ENERGY  received  is  transferred  upon  another

UNRESPONSIVE  CIRCUIT,  LIGHTING  THE  INCANDES¬
CENT  LAMP  ATTACHED  TO  THE  SAME  *


FIS-  7  -  EXPERIMENT  SHOWING  A  COIL  ENER¬
GIZED  by  the  waves  op  a  distant  oscil¬
lator  AND  ADJUSTED  TO  THE  CAPACITY  OF  THE
50DY  OF  THE  OPERATOR,  WHO  PRESERVES  HIM¬
SELF  FROM  INJURY  BY  MAINTAINING  A  POSI¬
TION  AT  THE  NODAL  POINT.,  WHERE  THE  INTENSE
wIBRATION  IS  LITTLE  FELT  -  THE  PRESSURE  ON
THE  END  OP  THE  COIL  TOWARDS  THE  READER,
WHICH  IS  ILLUMINATED  BY  THE  POWERFUL
STREAMERS ,  IS  NEARLY  HALF  A  MILLION  VOLTS.


PIG.  B  PHOTOGRAPH  OF  THE  EXPERIMENTER
STANDING  IN  THE  MIDDLE  OF  THE  LABORATORY
AND  LIGHTING  A  VACUUM  BULB  BY  WAVES  FROM
A  DISTANT  OSCILLATOR  -  HIS  BODY  IS,  IN
THIS  CASE,  SUBJECTED  TO  GREAT  ELECTRICAL
PRESSURE.


FIG.  9  -  THE  OPERATOR'S  BODY,
THIS  EXPERIMENT,  IS  CHARG¬
ED  TO  A  HIGH  POTENTIAL  BY
MEANS  OF  A  COIL  RESPONSIVE  TO
THE  WAVES  TRANSMITTED  TO  IT
FROti  A  DISTANT  OSCILLATOR,
AND  A  LONG  GLASS  TUBE  WAVED
IN  THE  HAND  IS  LIGHTED  TO
GREAT  BRILLIANCE  BY  THE  ELEC¬
TRICAL  CHARGES  CONVEYED  TO  IT
THROUGH  THE  BODY  *


FIG.  10  -  IN  THIS  EXPERIMENT  THE  OPERA¬
TOR'S  BODY  is  CHARGED  TO  A  GREAT  PRES¬
SURE  BY  A  DIRECT  CONNECTION  WITH  AN
OSCILLATOR  -  THE  PHOTOGRAPH  SHOWS  A
SHEET  OF  TIN  OF  DETERMINED  SIZE,  HELD
IN  HAND  -  THE  OPERATOR  IS  ON  THE  'POP  OF
A  STATIONARY  ELECTRICAL  WAVE,  AND  THE
BAR  AND  SHEET  ARE  BOTH  ILLUMINATED  BY
tHL  VIOLENTLY  AGITATED  AIR  SURROUNDING
THEM  -  ONE  OF  THE  VACUUM  TUBES  GLOWS
BRIGHTLY,  BEING  AFFECTED  BY  THE  VIBRA¬
TIONS  TRANSMITTED  TO  IT  FROM  THE  OPER¬
ATOR'S  BODY.


F‘^;  11  "  PHOTOGRAPH  OF  AW  ACTIVE  TERMINAL  OF  AN  IMPROVED  OSCILLATOR
USED  IN  TESLA'S  EXPERIMENTS  FOE  TRANSMITTING  ELECTRICAL  ENERGY  TO
GREAT  DISTANCES  WITHOUT  WIRES  -  WIDTH  OF  ILLUMINATED  SPACE  IS  IB  FEET-
THE  PRESSURE  ON  THE  TERMINAL  IS  ABOUT  EIGHT  MILLION  VOLTS.


th^  h°r'  ^  what  ,d0  th&*  or  have  ^ey  demonstrated?  To  them  it  may  be  said
that  hey  have  shown  and  proved  among  many  other  things;  That  ordinary  currents
can  be  transformed  with  high  economy  into  electrical  vibrations  if  any  pitch  which
ai e  needed  i r»  many  novel  arts;  they  have  shown  that  electrical  energy  in  great  am-
ounts  can  be  efficiently  and  safely  transmitted  without  the  use  of  wires  to  anv

a°dnnP“raHnr,9oft>bnd?Ar''e)I  d1s^nt;  they  ^ave  burnished  proof  that  the  movements
and  operation  of. bodies  and  machinery  carried  by  the  same  can  be  controlled  from  a

grc^  distance  without  any  tangible  connection  whatever  and  with  absolute  precision

they  have  proved  the  practicability  Of  a  system  of  si gnal i ng  without  wirls  no

with  the  imperfect  appliances  as  before  attempted,  which  car  not  be  tuned  and  are

rendered  driest  by  the.  pi  ay  of  a  small  induction ’coil ,  but  b^ean s  o?  apparatus


water  power,  and  that  light,  diffusive  like  that  of  the  sun”  can  be  produced  with
an^rcuiomy  gt  eater  than  obtainable  in  the  usual  ways  and  with  lamps  that  never  con-


Nh  Tesla,

New  York,  March  26 ,  1859
