So here you are, Clay Shaw, twenty months
and thousands of dollars after being
charged with conspiracy in the worst crime
of the century. What are you doing about it?

Surviving

by James Kirkwood


N

Jl low I ait in my hotel room in the French Quarter of New
Orleans, trying, and nowhere near succeeding, to ignore the insist-
ent laser-beam razzmatazz of an army of Dixieland combos blasting
out from Bourbon Street 1 sit practically on top of the wheezing,
gently vibrating air conditioner because it’s hot and muggy and
my eyes are giving me hell for making them read, in one day. all
491 pages of the Preliminary Hearing of the State of Louisiana
against Clay L. Shaw. Shaw had been charged with criminal con-
spiracy to assassinate President John F. Kennedy, a felony under
Louisiana taw carrying a penalty of one to twenty years in prison.

Without too much of a stretch, the transcript brings to mind the
Spanish Inquisition. Hearsay was freely allowed, dead men spoke,
objections by the defense were mostly overruled, those of the prose-
cution were mostly sustained, and even the state's star witness.
Perry Ruaso, it turned out. had been placed under hypnosis three
times -at District Attorney Jim Garrison's bidding to "refresh his
mind" and was. in fact, testifying in court under postbypnotic
suggestion.

It's a scarifying document in itself, regardless of one's opinion
of the guilt or innocence of the accused. I’m probably feeling the
heat and eyestrain all the more because, from the smell of things
in this charming, colorful, quaint, maddening, funny-farm of a city,
I'm afraid I've come to the conclusion that, yes — it could happen
to me. Or to you.

So — to get to why I’m sitting here in New Orleans in this far
from peaceful state, both of mind and of the Union. Last November
I was holed up in my East Hampton cottage, having made a reso-
lution to myself and friends that I now bad a stranglehold on the
final chapter at a new novel and that nothing, repeat nothing, was
going to lure me away from my writing machine and into New York
City. Not Bonnie and Clyde, nor Rosmcrants and Ouildenstem. Pd
even said to a weekend guest and old friend, author James Leo
Herlihy, that I wouldn't come into town if Marlene Dietrich asked
me to an intimate supper for G. Garbo — with de Gaulle serving.
That was on a Sunday evening as I drove Jim to the train.

Monday noon the phone rang and it waa Jim Herlihy saying in
a loud voice: "Guess who's coming to dinner?" I could hear the
smile on his face and I knew he had more than fair bait. I swore
generously at him before asking who.

"Clay Shaw," says Jim. knowing Pm an archfiend when it comes
to real-life trials of any kind and their participants. Celebrities
to me are not necessarily Liz and Dick, they are just as likely to be
Perry and Dick or Dr. Sam Sheppard or Candy and Mel. Jim went
on to say that a friend of his was a friend of Clay Shaw’s and had
suggested Shaw call Jim when he was in New York. Jim had in-
vited him to dinner. 1 swore a bit more and said I'd be there.

I’d seen pictures of Clay Shaw in the newspapers, briefly glimpsed
him on television, but I hod no idea what kind of a man to expect.
Mostly I'd seen New Orleans D.A. Jim Garrison who for a while
had turned up almost nightly on the six o’clock news. Pd read slews
of articles about the case and heard all sorts of people sound off
about it. The only person who hadn't really sounded off in detail
wu the accused himself, outside of a quiet but firm "Not guilty."

So. in meeting Clay Shaw, accused of participation in the "Case


of the Century," as Garrison has called it, you land of had the
feeling you were being introduced in person to a brand-new movie
star who’d had a blockbuster publicity campaign but whose first
big film hadn’t been released yet.

What do you do? You shake hands — mine got lost in his, he's
s barrel-chested, six-foot-four, two-hundred-twelve pound giant of a
man with close-cropped white hair, striking blue eyes and, at first
sighting, almost handsomely fierce of face — and sit down opposite
him while you're served your first drink, all the time trying hard
not to stare through him, inside him, to sec if you can possibly
detect the answer to the bald question that can't help rattle around
in your head : Say, listen, you didn't realty conspire to assassinate
the President of the United States — did you? I mean, did you really
hang out with Lee Harvey and all that bunch?

But you don't, you get your drink, hoist it, and say something
bland like, "Here's to your stay in New York." Then there’s more
light talk: Yea. I’ve been to New Orleans once, fascinsting city;
No, I've never been to Mardi Gras but I hear it’s wild, etc.

And finally, because 1 sensed s leveling something in the man.
I couldn't help but put my glass down snd ask: "Would you mind,
or does it bore you. to talk about your [oh-oh, watch the word]
predicament?"

"No," he said with a smile, adding he’d be a liar if be said his
“predicament” wasn’t the most ever-present, thought-consuming
experience of his lifetime.

He spoke with a combination of wisdom and wonderment and a
sort of Somerset Maugham knack for storytelling and also humor
— but certainly not flippancy — of this moat traumatic event from
beginning to middle, which is smack where he is, between the in-
dictment of a preliminary bearing and jury trial. By three in the
morning we were still listening to his account. You spend eight
hours with a man and though it’s only eight hours, you get a defi-
nite feeling about whether you'd trust him with his word, your
money, wife. life, or even whether he’d be on time for a luncheon
appointment. Call it the scratch teat, the intuition test, whatever
it la. Clay Shaw passed it. at least for me.

Back to work in East Hampton where I finally finished the novel.
In the meantime there were news flashes from New Orleans, dates
set for the trial appeals by the defendant's lawyers, appeals denied,
the trial rescheduled, and all the time 1 was thinking about this
man down in Louisiana and wondering what his life was like during
all this, wondering if my hunch about him had been one-hundred-
percent on the nose. Articles were appearing in almost every na-
tional magazine and all those authors who have stumbled upon a
second livelihood challenging the Warren Commission were courting
hemorrhoids, applying seat of pants to seat of chair, pounding out
their theories in staggering quantity that, if nothing else does,
should certainly bring on a paper shortage.

I finally wrote Clay Shaw a brief note, months later, telling him
I had enjoyed meeting him and wishing him luck. He replied soon,
thanking me and saying the evening in New York had been a wel-
come respite from the situation in New Orleans and that his trial
was tentatively set for April.

There waa no further correspondence and I started, haltingly


on little cat feet, into another novel. One morning I suddenly found
myself reaching for the phone and dialing my agent : “Say. do you
suppose you could get me a magazine assignment to cover the Clay
Shaw-Garriaon trial!” She was surprised. First, I’d never written
a magazine article; second, as far as a trial was concerned, a maga-
zine would be scooped by the daily papers ; and third, how had it
even occurred to me ! I told her of meeting Clay Shaw and of my
impressions, which time had strengthened. She said to jot them
down, send them to her. and she’d get them off to a magazine. But
not to hold my breath.

I didn't, but oddly enough in about ten days I found myself on
the Terrifying Silver Bird for New Orleans with a strong sugges-
tion to stick to Clay Shaw's impressions and go light on the actual
evidence in the case which had been presented at length all the way
from Playboy to The New Yorker.

Having forewarned Clay Shaw of my arrival. I rang from my
hotel and was invited for drinks and dinner. Toward the end of
the conversation, it was dropped that his lawyer, one of four, would
also be stopping by for a drink.

After cleaning up, I strolled the twelve blocks through the Vieux
Carrt, gawking at the undisturbed architecture of those hardy yet
delicate buildings with their shutters and balconies and iron grill-
work, until I came to a white brick wall on Dauphine Street with a
red door splashed in the middle.

Clay Shaw greeted me and again I realized what an impressive
figure of a man he is as he showed me into the high-wslled patio
bordered on two aides by ferns, with an oblong glass table at the
far end for outdoor dining. Then inside for a look at the immac-
ulate kitchen and good-sized living room which comprise the ground
floor of the small, charming carriage house he had restored with
loving care. The furnishings are French, grouped comfortably
around a low coffee table, the floors are polished cork topped by
several fine oriental rugs, there is a small desk and a splendid large
gold-leaf mirror. At the top of an angled, red-carpeted flight of
stairs, there is a large sparsely furnished bedroom and a bathroom.
To city dwellers, the house would be comparable to a duplex apart-
ment. Though it might be described as elegant, good taste and
simplicity of choice are manifest.

His lawyer of twenty years, Edward F. Wegmann, soon arrived
and it is difficult to describe him physically. His height, weight,
age, face and eyes melt into one word — concern. As he sat opposite
me I felt I was being looked into the same way I had looked into
Clay Shaw that evening in New York. I was being X-rayed, enough
to induce a twinge or two of stage fright. He was curious to know
how my interest in Mr. Shaw had come about and what my angle
would be. I did what I could to allay his concern. Later, when we’d
relaxed somewhat, I could still read the tacit message printed across
his face and imbedded in his eyes: Don't hurt this man: I'm not
only hie lawyer, I'm hie friend: he's been made a target and l f m
intercepting all possible potshots. If you've ever seen a lioness
guarding her cubs, you’ll know the look.

After Mr. Wegmann had gone, dinner was served in the patio
by Willie Mac, who keeps a quieter but nonetheless carefully con-
cerned eye upon her employer. During dinner the talk was easy
and I asked Clay Shaw about his political background. “I suppose
I’d describe myself as s Wilsonian-F.D.R.-Kennedy liberal. By that
I mean I agree with those men who have seen that the capitalist
system had to be adapted to give a better life to more people. These
days a man has some kind of income when he’s finished working,
what with Social Security, and now there’s even Medicare, so that
the fundamental needs for a basis of decent living have been as-
sured. I thought John Kennedy was in the same tradition, a man
who looked hard at the foundations of things and would move to
further adapt the system to provide a better life for the most peo-
ple. which is what any political system should be about. Most of
my friends consider me very liberal indeed. I remember when Ken-
nedy was running against Nixon. I went to visit friends of mine
at their farm and when the hostess asked me who I was going to
vote for and I told her Kennedy, she was extremely chagrined. If
■he hadn't been a well-brought-up Southern girl I don’t think she’d
have given me any lunch.”

After dinner, on the way back to the hotel, I stopped by a Bourboo
Street bar for a nightcap. The shapely barmaid, who’d blown at
least one full can of hair spray to concretize her teased souffle of
blonde hair, turned out to be Shirely. When Shirely asked me with


misty eyes and a baby-whisper voice if I'd care to feed the jukebox.
I figured I could ask Shirely a favor in return. "What do you think
of this whole Clay Shaw thing?”

“Clay Shaw?" she mused. "Oh, yes. Clay Shaw ... oh. well, I
wouldn’t know anything about him. You mean the whole thing?”
ahe purred.

"Yes — well. then, what do you think of the District Attorney?”

The eyes sharpened into baby-blue bullets, the voice unfurred,
and ahe boomed : "Garrison ! Garrison !” She leaned dose in over
the bar, threatening my Vodka and Tonic and, giving each word
equal Lime, drummed out the following message: “Baby, Jim Gar-
rison is on a bad trip.” This brought Louisiana State University
drama student Buddy Cambell up out of his glass of beer and into it
“Man, I’ll tell you something else. Shaw's on a bum rap.”

The following morning I arrived at the red door on Dauphine
Street with yellow legal pad and pencils, anxious to start at the
beginning. One day Clay Shaw was all of this: a respected business
and social leader of New Orleans, possessed of a fine war record
ending with an honorable discharge as a major in 1946, having
served as a Secretary to the General Staff and having been deco-
rated by the United States with the Legion of Merit and Bronze Star
and by France with the Croix de Guerre; a man who besides being
Managing Director of the International Trade Mart from its incep-
tion in 1946 until bis retirement in 1965, is widely known as one
of the pioneers who began the rehabilitation and restoration of
New Orleans’ famous French Quarter; a man who believes firmly
that hopes for world peace and understanding might well be en-
hanced by increased and closer trade between nations and who
worked to bring this about, at the same time drawing added reve-
nues into the Port of New Orleans ; a man who was present at and
supported most of the artistic and cultural events in the city from
theatre to symphony to opera ; the author of several published plays,
one of which, a one-acter called Submerged, has had thousands of
performances and is still widely played by amateur groups around
the country.

One day he was all of this, the next day his credentials were ir-
revocably smeared, squirted upon by inky stains charging him with
conspiracy to assassinate the President. How did this happen?
How does a nightmare begin? Very easily.

First off, why the retirement st such s comparatively early age ?
Clay Shaw smiles. “Well, I’d worked hard from the age of fifteen
and upon the realization of the new I.T.M. building, designed by
Edward Durell Stone. I felt I’d achieved what Td set out to ac-
complish in that area of my life. Although I wasn't a millionaire,

I had enough put aside to carry me along until the time at which
I reasonably expect to Bhuffle off. I wanted, from here on in, to
devote my life to writing. 1 also wanted to travel and I thought it
might be more pleasant to do this while I could still get up a gang-
plank unaided. So, in 1965. I retired Bnd on October 1 there was a
testimonial luncheon, all of that, and the Mayor presented me with
the International Order of Merit medal." Shaw smiled, took a deep
breath and smacked his hands together. "And I was free. Right
away I took a couple of months off and went to Mexico. Then in
the Summer of 1966 I boarded a freighter, spent a month in Barce-
lona and a month in London, getting back here in the early fall.

1 probably would have continued traveling if it hadn't been for my
father's death in November of 1966. This held me here, keeping
an eye on my mother who lives in Hammond, a small town very
near New Orleans. Then, when this period of transition for her
was over, I had every intention of—" Clay Shaw broke off, smiled
and held his hands out, palms up. "But the best-laid plans of mice
and men. . .

“When did you first have an inkling there was a diversion being
planned for you in New Orleans ?"

"On December 23, 1966. I had a call early in the morning from
a Detective Otiilio in the District Attorney’s office ; would I be good
enough to come down and answer some questions? I was curious
and asked what about. ‘Well,* he said, ‘well talk about that when
we see you.’ I said all right and he came by and drove me to the
D-A/a office where I was questioned by an Assistant D.A. named
Sciambra, who told me they’d come across the fact that Lee Harvey
Oswald bad known someone named Clay Bertrand when he was in
New Orleans. They’d gone over a list of Clays, thought about me.
and wanted to know if Td known Oswald. I said no. that I'd almost
met him when he’d come to distribute Fair Play for Cuba leaflets


ESQUIRE: DECEMBER


in front of the Trade Mart, but that my assistant had dealt with
him. I added, with what in retrospect seems irony, that I guess I
missed my tiny footnote in history by not meeting the bird. They
wanted to know more about the Cuban consulate — it was the pres-
ence of the consulate in the building that drew Oswald to that
point to distribute the leaflets — and most of their questions con-
cerned that. I was asked if I knew a man by the name of Dave
Ferrie. No, I hadn't Then Jim Garrison came in and we rehashed
what I’d already told Sciambra. It was all very friendly and then
they thanked me profusely for being s good dtixen, for being co-
operative and coming in and talking to them, and I left. Went on
to a Christmas party at City Hall/’

I asked Clay Shaw how he felt about this and he smiled and
waved a hand in the air. T felt it was interesting dinner conversa-
tion. You know, being called down to the D-A/s office and grilled.
I thought it was kind of entertaining. I didn't take it seriously st
all. After that I read in the papers about Garrison’s probe, read
about Dave Feme’s death and about someone named Russo writing
a letter to the District Attorney saying he’d known Feme. But I
had no more than a cursory interest in what was going on.

‘Then on Sunday evening. February 26. a Walter Sheridan from
the NBC Washington Bureau got in touch with me, wanted to
know if he could come over and talk with me. I said yes. and he
arrived soon after.” Clay Shaw hesitated and lifted a hand in the
air. one finger pointed up. "You know, it’s funny but a faint alarm
sounded when 1 asked him if he'd like a drink and he hesitated
perceptibly. I thought this was strange, but he recovered and said
he’d have one. I wondered why this man wouldn't want to take a
drink with me, but then I thought — oh. well. I'm imagining things.
I fixed our drinks and he said there were rumors in town I was
the mysterious Clay Bertrand that a man named Dean A. Andrews
Jr. had talked about in connection with Oswald. I pointed out to
him that it would be ridiculous for me to try to use an alias of any
kind, that I was well-known in the city. I’d been on television, given
speeches, my picture had been in the papers over a period of years
and. because of my size alone, I couldn't very well get away with
running around using a fictitious name. I told him I had no idea
what was going on. but I did know that I was not now, nor have I
over been. Clay Bertrand. We talked in general about Garrison’s
probe, then he thanked me and left. I still thought the whole thing
was silly," Clay Shaw added, sloughing it off with a shrug that
belongs back in time more than a year.

"Two days after Mr. Sheridan's visit, on Tuesday. February 28,
a friend of mine came over to see me and mentioned that there
were two men sitting outside in a car and that they looked like
detectives. I glanced out of an upstairs window and there were
two men in a car. but I thought if they were detectives they must
be watching someone else. Later on, after an hour or so, I answered
the doorbell and found two youngish men standing there, one dark,
one fair. The dark one presented me with a card, saying he was
from. I believe. Mutual of Omaha, that they were making a survey
of people's insurance needs and would I talk to them. I said it was
a bad time. I had company, and I also told him that I waa, if any-
thing, overinsured and was not a good prospect. The dark man —
I'd never seen him before, but he turned out to be Perry Russo at
the Preliminary Hearing — anyway, he asked if he might phone and
speak with me further sometime. I said yes. but again reiterated
that my insurance needs were well taken care of, and they left.

‘The following morning, March 1, I went to the office of a friend
of mine and a woman, a mutual friend, phoned about ten-thirty to
say that she'd heard on local television that the District Attorney
had issued a subpoena for me. I said. 'Well, that’s nutty, 111 find
out about it.' I called the D.A/s office, asked to speak to Mr. Gar-
rison and waa told he wasn’t there. I got a Mr. Ivon and said, *Do
you people want to talk to me?’ Well, yea, they did. Tou don’t have
to issue a subpoena, just call me up/ I told him. ‘What time would
you like to see me?’ Ivon said about one o’clock and I said fine, a
friend of mine would drive me out. I stopped by my house to pick
up my mail and there were two or three sheriff’s deputies in the
patio— I don’t know how they got in — and Detective Otilllo, my old
friend of December 23. They had the subpoena and asked me to
sign it I thought it was ridiculous and told them I’d just talked to
Ivon and had arranged to go out there at one, to check with him.
They did and then Otillio said, well, it waa getting on toward noon
and that I could either come out at one or drive out with him then."


I interrupted Clay Shaw. "Did you call your lawyer or — ’’ He
waved a hand in the air. “No. I didn't even think about it. Who
needs a lawyer?" he asked rhetorically. "I rode out to the D.A/s
and was kept waiting until about two-thirty in various offices talk-
ing to Otillio. who incidentally told me the story of his life." Shaw
grins but the grin soon disappears. "I began to get a little annoyed.
I was being cooperative but by this time I‘d been there two-and-a-
half hours. 1 hadn’t had any lunch and I was hungry and I began
to be a little sharp about the whole thing. Finally I was told that
Sciambra and Ivon wanted to talk to me. so I waa taken into a
room where they were. They got me a sandwich and a Coke — on
the State. I didn’t have to pay for it : however, the price turned out
to be rather severe. I asked them what they wanted and they began
to question me. Did I know David Ferrie, had I ever been to David
Ferrie's apartment? The answer was no. And on and on. They
showed me pictures of Ferrie and others. Did I know Lee Harvey
Oswald? No. Tou’ve never been to Dave Ferrie’s apartment? No.
Then finally : What would you say if we said we have three wit-
nesses who would testify that you’d been to David Ferrie’s apart-
ment?' I told them I’d say that either the three witnesses were
mistaken or lying — that Td never been there, period. This went on
for the better part of an hour or so. Finally I waa asked if I’d take
a lie-detector test. ‘No/ I said. Tve come down here, I’ve been
cooperative. I’ve told you the truth.’ They told me that if I wouldn't
take a lie-detector test they were going to arrest me and charge
me with conspiracy in the murder of President Kennedy."

Clay Shaw's eyes, even now. widen in disbelief and he flings his
arms out to the side of his chair. " TouVe got to be kidding,’ I
said, ’you’ve got to be kidding!* No, they said, that’s the way it is.
’In that case I want a lawyer and I want one now/

He called his lawyer, Eddie Wegmann, who was out of town;
called bis brother. William J. Wegmann, who was also unavailable;
finally contacted an associate of the latter. Salvatore Panzeca, who
said, "Sit tight, don’t say anything. I’ll be right down." Shaw was
left alone, locked in a room until Panzeca arrived, took out a pad on
which he wrote that the room waa bugged, the mirror was two-way.
and they’d best communicate in writing. He asked Shaw what this
waa all about and Clay, now completely stunned, could only scrawl :
"I don’t know." Panzeca then left to speak to the D.A., telling Gar-
rison that his client would not object to taking a lie-detector test
but that he, Panzeca, would like him to have a good night’s sleep
first and they wanted the right to look at the questions: anything
pertaining to the President's assassination was fine, but the ques-
tions should be limited to that.

Garrison, however, smarting from a baying press, from the world,
in fact, shouting for him to come up with something or someone
solid after days of dropping tantalizing hints that he had solved the
riddle of the assassination, swung into high gear and said: “No
deals, he’s got to do it right now or we’ll arrest him."

Panzeca immediately set about arranging bail and, with the Weg-
mann brothers now contacted and on their way and approximately
a hundred fifty members of the press and TV swarming all over
the building, Shaw waa formally arrested. The statement waa read
by William Gurvich, a chief investigator on Garrison's staff who
later defected, even going so far as to appeal to Robert Kennedy
to aid in calling a halt, and later appearing before the Grand Jury
under oath. After that Grand Jury hearing, he repeated publicly
that Garrison's probe had no basis in fact and that there were
absolutely no legitimate grounds for the charges against Shaw. At
the time of the arrest, however, on behalf of the District Attorney,
Gurvich read the formal statement which avoided any specific link of
evidence, bluntly saying: "Mr. Shaw is under arrest and will be
charged with participation in a conspiracy to murder President
Kennedy."

The nightmare was entered into. On the part of Clay Shaw,
what was it like? T could feel the ferment building around me."
Kaleidoscopic memories of detectives and flashbulbs, of handcuffs
clamped on. of being led through moba of shouting reporters, but-
tressed by his equally stunned attorneys, taken to Central Lockup,
mugged, fingerprinted, told a search warrant had been issued for
his house and he might as well give them his keys, they’d only
break in if he didn’t, and finally, by about nine-thirty in the eve-
ning, released on $10,000 bail.

There is still disbelief in Clay Shaw’s eyes as he says, “I drove
with Eddie Wegmann. neither of us knew (Continued on page


ESOUiat 0€CO4B£S ZZ1


SO HERE YOU ARE, CLAY SHAW, TWENTY MONTHS AND
THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS AFTER BEING CHARGED WITH
CONSPIRACY IN THE WORST CRIME OF THE CENTURY.
WHAT ARE YOU DOING ABOUT IT?


( Continued from pafft Sit) what to
say, until we parked near hia office.
There wai a bar, we went In and I
had two tremendous bourbons,” Clay
Shaw adds, nodding hia head, and a
flicker of an appreciative smile
crosses his face. “You know, I had
my first small bit of encouragement
then. The bar-
maid told us
she’d heard it
on television,
said she'd
known me for
years, knew I
never could
have been in-
volved In any-
thing like that
and absolutely
refused to take
payment for
the drinks.”

Shaw and
Edward Weg-
mann repaired
to the letter’s
office where
they talked for
a while in
tones of pure
Incredulity,
phoned a few
close friends
from whom they learned the aston-
ishing news that Shaw’s house was a
fortress besieged by policemen lug-
ging off cartons of his belongings
with a battery of newsmen and cam-
eras set up to record the indignity of
the proceeding*.


It was difficult for Shaw to ac-
cept this. He did not go home that
night, nor did he enter hia house for
the following six weeks. He went to
stay instead at the home of an old
friend, a woman ha’d been associ-
ated with in business and socially,
who Insisted he accept her hospi-
tality at this
time. At this
point in our in-
tervlewwe
broke off and
went to pick
up this very
same lady for
lunch. A 1 -
though there’s
no doubt that
the District
Attorney’s of-
fice knew of
his where-
abouts every
second, ha
asked me not
to use her
name, for fear
of harassment,
and I will re-
spect his wish-
es.

Whafs it
like to step out
in public with Clay Shaw, who twen-
ty months later is still out on $10,000
bail, still accused of this heinous
crime? It’s about like standing at
Hollywood and Vine with Paul New-
man. It does not cover one in a doak
of anonymity. A teeny-bopper in


Your wife wont wait till
December 25 to open this one.


The Instant your wife sets Ihe timer on her Radarange Oven, a
whole era of hot kitchens and late meals ends. A 20 lb. turkey roasts
table-ready In 2 hours— V4 the normal time. A potato bakes in 4
minutes. Bacon, 60 seconds. What a timesaver for the holidays!

The Portable Amana Radarange Oven fits on kitchen counters,
works on any standard 1 15-volt outlet. See your Amana dealer, or
write: Ann MacGregor, DepL 361, Amana Refrigeration, Inc., Amana,
Iowa 52203.


Am


'■ ana .


Backed by a century-old tradition of fine craftsmanship.

Amana Rofrigeration, Inc., Amana, Iowa. Subsidiary of Raytheon Company.


CM ESQUIRE: DECEMBER


*


He is lying flat on his back. Now,
having looked at her, he turns his
head and looks up at the railing,
smiles happily, contentedly, his arms
above the blankets and fist at his
sides. Eleanor follows suit, but she
is ready to have him all over her any
second now.

••Comfortable?" the asks.

"Aftw n hmn."

"Me too." She looks over at him.
He stirs, adjusting his body — this Is
shot from above — feinting first to the

right — her side As she quick-

ly reacts, rolling on her side
to meet him, he turns to the
left, his back to her. She has
put her arms out to embrace
him, is surprised as they
flounder emptily to the bed.

He has escaped. She looks at
his back. "Paul," she says
after a while, “are
atlsepl"

“Shh," he says.

She stares at him angrily
for a moment, then puts her
hand on his arm, strokes it
He twitches, shaking his arm
loose aa if a fly were walking
on It. She touches hia neck.

He bolts around to face her.

“Will you please stop fool-
ing around, Eleanor?"

She Is stunned.

"Go to sleep," he commands
angrily.

Frightened, and thus act-
ing under orders, she lie*
still. He turns on his back.
Following hia movements now
only with her eyes she
nervously waits for him to
act He sleeps. She doesn’t
know what to do. She doesn't
get out of bed and leave him,
for the situation is too ludi-
crous. and, too, she still en-
tertains the possibility that
he will yet make love to her.

When he doesn’t, she begins
to mutter to herself softly.

"Is that it? Is this whst it’s
all about? Big deal.” She
looks at him mockingly. "Big
jet-setter! Somersault-tarn-
erf Can’t cut the mustard,
that’s what. He can't cut the
mustard. I’ve teen religious,
bat this guy is something. ’He
play with she toys, she play
with he toya.’ What am I talk-
ing about? What the hell am
1 talking about?”

"Don’t aay h-a-i-l." Paul
says spelling it out, half
asleep. "It's nasty."

"An English teacher," she
says, jerking her head in
Paul’s direction. She shakes
her head unbelievingly, but,
despite herself, starts to
smile, acknowledging some
sort of grotesque joke played
on herself. Half- resigned now,
she closes her eyes and tries
to sleep. The camera moves
higher, is directly above them.

It studies the two of them
for several seconds. Then her
eyes open abruptly. She lies
there staring.

The tramp finds his wsy
back to Paul’s hotel. Waving
s gun he has stolen, he at-
tempts to arrest the uncom-
prehending Paul, but in the
excitement has a heart attack
and dies. Paul behaves even
more strangely than ever,
end Eleanor conclude# that
Paul Is the madman escaped
earlier that night from Death
Bow. She tells him he must
go back and Paul, thinking
■he means he should return
home, sgrccs. He sets out on


his bike. Outside his house two police-
men are staked out in a squad car —
the police sketch between them. They
spot him, get silently out of the car
and raise their rifles, training him
in their rifle sight* Paul lays the
bike down gently on the lawn. Afraid
of his impending spanking, he tries
to make himself more presentable.
He smooths his tom pants, and then
he straightens his tie. He wets his
Angers and rubs vigorously at his
beard.


Paul's back appears on the screen
with, superimposed on it. the grids
end gradients that appear on the
policemen's sights. Paul moves for-
ward. The superimposed sight lines
disappear. He rings the bell. He buffs


his shoes on his trouser legs. He
knocks. The policemen come from
around their car. They move in on
him from behind as he waits for
someone to answer the door.

The film ends. fH


The question: How can Christmas shopping — or any other
kind of shopping be made easier and thus happier?

The answer This issue is filled with happy ideas. And
‘ l-R I-S" will be an aid to easier shopping through the year.
See page 79.


You’ll like yourself
in Curlee clothes


Business or pleasure, indoors or out . . . you've
got a lot going for you in a Curlee suit and topcoat.
Styling that’s advanced without being extreme.
Colors and patterns that mark you as a man of
good taste. Fabrics and tailoring that reflect
your insistence upon quality. For the look of
leadership every time, you can count on
clothes by Curlee.


CURLEE

Clothes for Men


m of your name dnlcr. writ* CurU* Clothing Co, St. Louii, Mo. Cl 1 01


ESQUIRE: DECEMBER 253


viction and concern of the office of
District Attorney, of the pitiful state
of politics In New Orleans, of the
fact that Garrison is convinced of a
conspiracy, although he should know
Clay Shaw had nothing to do with It,
but that he is hanging onto anyone
and anything to keep the case open,
believing, as many reckless men in
history have, that the means, no mat-


ter the cost to others, will most cer-
tainly justify the end. When asked if
he would testify for Shaw if and
when his ease comes to trial. Gurvich
said : “Only one thing would keep me
from it — death." Hi* parting sen-
tence to me was a quiet and. in a way,
■ad one: “I feel sorry for Jim Gar-
rison. but I believe he's an extremely
dangerous man."


If this is a viable opinion, and it
seems to be among many good citi-
zens of New Orlea.ni, why hasn't
there been more of an outcry? May-
be they take their lead from the
Governor of the State of Louisiana,
John McKnithen, who, when asked
if he had any criticism of Garrison
and his probe, stated publicly to the
press that be did not but added, just


as publicly: “And even if I did I
wouldn't voice It. I have learned that
most of Garrison's enemies are buried
— politically speaking — and I don't
propose to join the list of the de-


terge, ripper ed lug-
gags compartment
with lemovable suit
bar and specially
designed hanger (or
crease resistant
travel.


Two full length out-
side expanding pock-
ets. Use one for
clothing and acces-
sories . . the other
for catalogs and Im-
portant papers.


HOLDS ALL THESE PERSONAL EFFECTS

Plus Your Important Papers

I

i

j

) | Ml. HttIMI | 4 ML I

- r


THE EXECUTIVE

Important events occur . . . you have to be there
fast. The new EXECUTIVE \ “Quick-Trip"
Business Case presents you at your best.

Light, spacious and rugged, the EXECUTIVE has all
the distinctive features found only in the finest cases.
It's made of SKAI — the new miracle material that’s superior to genuine leather, soft as
glove leather, rich and lustrous.

The unbreakable balanced handle makes carrying easy while rust-resistant locks and
zippers ensure long life— handsome appearance.

The EXECUTIVE wUI carry a complete change plus all your important papers — is
compact enough to store easily under airline seats. 21* x 121-4* x 2 , it weighs a mere
4 lbs. 7 ox.

Satisfaction Guaranteed $ 19.95

Orders of 6 or more — $17.95 each


Shipping CHg. SI. 00


ORDER

YOUR

EXECUTIVE

TODAY ►


3 UaOfSSHim { 3 UNDESSHOSTJ { TOIUT ARTICLE*


A. R. GEUMAN A COMPANY D.pt CC-4
27f East 44th Str»«t. N«w York. NT. 10017


"TOw E**cu !(»•“. ($19 93 *och plvii


Eodoiad It □ CKack □ Moiwy Order or chary# t* my occounf with
□ Dinars Club □ Am*«icon Eapraii.

Chary# card #-


N.Y. Slot# R»»id«nti odd appllcabla tolai to*


(Interesting note: Although major
newspapers ail over the United
States have featured editorials high-
ly critical of the methods of Jim
Garrison, neither one of the
New Orleans papers, The
Statee-Item and The Timeo-
Pieayuno, has so much as ut-
tered an editorial peep.)

So here is Clay Shaw,
twenty months, a battery of
lawyers, and many thousands
of retirement dollars later,
in the talons of the per-
sistent District Attorney with
the nasty shadow of conspir-
acy to murder the President
hanging over him. One has to
ask even if these charges
eventually dwindle and die. if
the accused will ever be com-
pletely free of the original
smear.

The press, for instance, has
frequently hinted at ■ duality
in Clay Shaw’s personal life
and when his house wss
searched and his personal
possessions were seized not so
much was made of “One Un-
derwood typewriter and case"
or "One calorie counter” or
"Three manuscripts” but
there was a flurry of chop-
licking over “One chain . . .
One black hood and cape . . .
Two pieces of leather . . .
Three pieces of rope . . ." etc.
It is also fascinating to note
that while the dossier con-
tained “Pour paperback books
and twelve hardcover books
...” it listed separately “One
book entitled A Holiday for
Murder."

I interviewed a longtime
friend of Clay Shaw’s, Mrs.
Lawrence Fischer, who de-
signs many of the floats and
costumes for Mardi Graa, or
as she puts it, “New Orleans
Annual Climactic of Civil Lu-
nacy!” and a snappier woman
I’ve never talked to. A day
or so after Shaw's arrest her
doorbell rang and an investi-
gator for the D.A. identified
himself. “Oh," she said,
curled up in her armchair
and reenacting the scene with
relish, “you come right on in,
you're exactly the man I want
to talk to.” She winked at
me. “I think 1 took him by
surprise. Anyhow, this joker
wants to spread a mulch of
sinister deeds over Clay
Wanted to know how long I'd
known him. Since he was
seventeen. Wanted to know
if we’d ever discussed sex.”
Mrs. Fischer slapped her leg.
“Well, it would be pretty un-
usual to go for over thirty-
five years with a good fnend
and never bring the subject
up, now, wouldn’t it? Of course
we had. Then this young man
asked, ‘Has Mr. Shaw ever
told you the intimate details
of his eex life?' ‘No,’ I shot
back at him, 'and further-
more I haven't told him the
intimaU details of my sex
life either. Are you here to
discuss his political leanings
with reference to the Garri-
son farce, or are you conduct-
ing a sort of Kinsey Report?’
Then he wanted to get into
the black robe and the hood


A A MtaM 1 Caaem. W L « U. *•# leAR I MU


A


'


faded blue denim jeans and
work ahirt topped by a con-
tradictory floppy yellow wide-
brimmed hat of the Thirties
Kyra ted gently in a sunny
noonday fra* on the porch of
an old unrestored cotta re
across the street. “A nest of
hippies,** Clay Shaw whis-
pered to me. Still frugging,
she waved and called out a
happy. “Hiya, Mr. Shaw!"

The walk coveted five or six
blocks; no one failed to react;
people either looked, waved a
hand, or shot a friendly, "Eli,
there. Mr. Shaw, how are
yon?", to which he Invariably
replies with a brief, smiling:

“Fine, what have I got to be
worried about?”

Clay Shaw's friend, a
charming widow, when ques-
tioned about the time he spent
at her house, laughs and
waves a fanieas hand in front
of her face. "Yea," she says,

"dear Clay 'shacked up'— I
guess that's what they call it
nowadays — with me, but then
I'm an aging matron type, so
I suppose that's all right"

(Aging matron type is an at-
tractive blonde with striking,
thin, rich-lady legs.) Over
lunch there was talk of his
arrest, his Ufa. and latar on 1
had a private chat with her.

"Here 1 was," she says,
perched in her comfortably
furnished living room, "sit-
ting right here watching
Huntley- Brinkley and — my
God, there’s Clay in hand-
cuff and they're announcing
that Jijn Garrison's arrested
him for conspiracy to amsas-
ainate the President. To as-
sassinate the Preridint]” the
repeats, still unable to com-
prehend it. “I was stunned,
shocked, this man has never
done nn unkind thing to any-
one In hia life. Well, of course,
all of Clay's friends, and he
has many, were on the phone
and we were all trying to find
out what the almighty devil
was going on. It was a mad-
house. Later on that evening,
when he was out on bail, t
told his lawyer to bring him
right on down hera. That
poor man, he was in a com-
plete daxe." I asked bar what
he did upon arriving. “He
didn’t do a thing," she says,
slamming a hand to her cheat.

“1 did, I fixed him a Beef-
eater Martini that waa the
strongest thing you ever
•etc." She laughs. “We call
that the thousand -dollar Mar-
tini. You know, out on 110,000
bail and tha bondsman gets
ten percent Then I fixed him
some eggs and bacon and put
him to bed. The worst day of
my life, absolutely the worst
"Clay waa In a state of "
shock for a week or so, every-
one was in New Orleans, no-
body could believe It But

Garrison wouldn’t let go and
then along came the preliminary
hearing and, of course, what can
you do? Then, after the hearing.
Clay hadn't been out in public since
hia arrest and one night he said, 'AH
right. I'm taking you out to dinner
tonight.' I got all dolled up and we
went to the Royal Orleans, and don't
you know we're sitting at our table
and who comes walking right by — ?"
Her voice rises several decibels and
once again her hand flies to her chest.

** Of nit peep/e, the Jolly Green Giant,


Tape your own
8-track stereo cartridges.


Cer Stereo Owner*. New you can tape your
favorite music, language-study courses,
sales messages or training tectures on
standard B- track cartridges


Use Any Sound Source, instantly con
nects te any home system to record
or play from home tape recorder,
phonograph. FM multiple*, or micro
phone. Also features tow impedance
‘ ejsck.


Cartridge-Alignment Indicator. Indicator light
ts Illuminated it cartridge ts inserted Improperly
to ensure perfect track alignment when record-
ing or playing back


Automatic Power Switch.
Power and mechanism is auto
maltcally activated when car
trldge is Inserted


Standby Switch. Allows track
to change automatically or to
shut oil at the end of each
track In both playback and re
cording modes


Soeymatic Recording Control Automatically
'adjusts recording level to guarantee perfect
'TBCprdmgi rvery time.


just $129 50. For your tree
* catalog, please write to
Inc., 8|48 Vineland Awr

"nor Bun Van*y. California 91352.


:k. Prevents accidental erasure
•f recorded tope cartridge.


EX331


You never heard it so good.


Garrison himself, end his guru,
Mark Lane. Ohhhl" the expels. "But
we just sat there staring straight
ahead until they'd gone by, then we
finished our dinner and left. You
know," she leans in toward me, "I
think Garriaon’s always been jealous
of Clay. People in thla town adore
Clay, wherever he goes people are
always swarming all ovor him, pump-
ing his hand, you can feel the
warmth go out to him. I don’t know
about any conspiracy but I know


Clay Shaw didn't have any part of it.
Why, he voted for Kennedy, he
adored him. Kennedy waa a builder,
just like Clay was, why would he
want to harm him?”

Later that afternoon, a reporter on
The T imna-Pieayuna said: “The

whole case has taken a turn hinging
on the personalities instead of the
facta. Look at Garrison and Shaw,
both tall, both middle-aged, both
handsome impusing figures, both ex-
tremely bright and both possessed


of charm. The similarity between
the two of them is so apparent it
would take a blind person not to
see it.”

William Gurvich. whose defection
from the D.A.'s staff has been men-
tioned, sat in the inside office of hia
private detective agency. He ex-
plained that he could no longer go
along with Carrison and his methods.
Like Clay Shaw, Gurvich speaks not
emotionally, no ranting about Gar-
rison, but he speaks with firm con-


ESQUIRE: DECEMBER 255


■nd the black hat and finally I Just
couldn't take it any longer and I said,
‘Listen, my good young man, I don't
know whether you’ve ever heard of it,
but we hare something here in New
Orleans every year and It’s called
Mardi Gnu f Everybody in town gets
dressed up in costumes. My God. you
could raid any apartment or house in
New Orleans and come op with some
pretty far-out ensembles — I can as-
sure you. While you were at it, why
didn't you take his Chinese costume
or the Western one or the Dutch
one?*** Mrs. Fischer chuckled with
pleasure. ”1 think that Investigator
was damned glad to get out of her*.”
She raised a hand to her
forehead and sighed. “Good
Lord, slnct this cose began
New Oreans — never what
you’d call a sane place any-
how. I mean think of Huey
Long end ell that — has
turned into one vast walk-
ing lunatic asylum.’’

Later that afternoon, I
spoke with a former business
associate of Clay Shaw’s,

"Clay was so completely
stunned and mystified by
the charges leveled against
him that we were ell wor-
ried, especially when it
dragged on end on, whether
he could withstand the
strain. After months of
trial of preliminary motions
by his lawyers, all of them
turned down, change of
venue, turned down, it was
one remark that let us know
he was going to come
through all right. At a din-
ner party we were discuss-
ing the morass of legal pro-
cedure. the endless entangle-
ments of the law. and Clay
finally shook his head and
said: ‘Can you see me for
the rest of my life running
around with stacks uf docu-
ments and sheafs of papers
tucked under my arm, knock,
ing on every judge’s cham-
ber in the land, crying oat :

”1 didn't kill Cock Robin, I
didn’t:"'"

Further sessions with
day Shaw gave sound in-
dications of his rationale
and the philosophy which
has enabled him to keep his
balance and remain on
course.

On the theory of conspir-
acy: *Tm no authority to
judge and it’s difficult to
sift through all that’s been
written about the Warren
Commission, the C.I.A., the
FJLL, the Attorney Gen-

el. the Right and the Left,
the Cuban situation and so
forth. I only know 1 had no
part in any plot. But I do
foel many people believe in
a conspiracy because when
death come* to the figure of
a Prince, aa it did to Ken-
nedy. struck down in hie prime, it
should come under a panoply at great
tragedy with oil the resulting high
court Intrigue — almost something out
of Shakespeare — not from some poor
little psychotic loser crouched with a
mail-order rifle behind a stack of card-
hoard boxes in a warehouse."

On tho question of what has sus-
tained him most during this trouble-
some year and a third. Clay Shaw
leans back in his chair, rests his head
against the high back for a long time
before sighing and leaning forward,
handa clasped in front of him. “It's
difficult to isolate any one factor in
your psychic makeup. To be perfectly


pragmatic. I suppose the knowledge of
my innocence has been the great sus-
taining factor and against that, I be-
lieve, nothing in the long run can fail
me. I have found religion helpful. Al-
though I’m not a member of any
church formally, i think of myself as
a religious person. I've found several
works supportive, Confiitiom of a
Guilt y Byatandtr, a book of medita-
tions by Thomas Merton and—" he
picked up a volume from the coffee
table " — this. of course, the Bible."
He puts the book down and adds with
a smile: "I might say that I’re par-
ticularly been reading the Book of
Job.”


has rather convinced me of the validi-
ty of Christian existentialism as far
as philosophy is concerned. In other
words, whatever plane you make, you
must be prepared, in ono moment, that
they can be demolished. Of course,
man being what he is, he must make
some plans for the future." He hoisted
a warning hand in the air. "Bear in
mind, however, that they might ail
collapse I Another hook I’ve found in-
teresting. Rtliffion and Ptraonality.
There’s a marvelous line in It: ‘Life
is not a puzzle to be solved, it’s a mys-
tery to be lived minute by minute, hour
by hour, day by day.’ Oh, and a fine
piece of advice givon to me by a Jesuit


listen!


ffc


those of private detectives plus news-
paper. TV and radio reporters.
ACTION is * must for boaters and

pilots, businessmen and sportsmen—
and spies. Has regular AM band. too.
Your electronic dealer is where the
ACTION is. Or writ# for marc details.
Only 9129.95.

nova-feoh eteotron/os oo.

a divide* si NOVA- TECH -<


Hear it all on the ACTION Receiver/
Radio Direction Finder. Riot I Armed
robbery! Homicide! Four alarm fire!
High speed chase! ACTION keep* vou
up on tbe action broadcasts of police
and sheriff cars and headquarters,
fire and emergence units, all radio
equipped cars and trucks including


24049 S. Fr amp ton Ave.. Harbor Citv, California 90710
ENGINEERED WITH THE ENGINEER IN HIND


At this point I mention that t would
have thought Kafka might have come
to mind and he react# with a hearty
bunt of laughter and smacks hia hands
together. "Oh, yes, by all means. Yes.
I’ve often had the feeling that I might
just be living in a Kafka novBL Ironi-
cally enough, 1 was always the one
who thought that Kafka rather over-
stated things — now, come on, all right
so K. can't communicate with The
Castle and man and God are incom-
mensurate, hut do you have to go on
at such tiresome lengths? Boy, have
I changed, what a fellow feeling I have
for K. now I

"Then, too, this entire experience


friend of mine, a quote from Ignatius
Loyola : ‘Work as though everything
depends upon you and pray as though
everything depends upon God.’ You
see. many people say : ‘Oh, well, let us
do God’s will,’ snd then they relsx.
It’s not quite that simple, it's a matter
of finding what God’s will is — not
easy, granted — and to find it moment
to moment and live accordingly."

How does this apply to his daily
life? A large smile from Clay Shaw, a
long drag on his cigarette followed by
■ deep cough. "I must give this habit
up,” he says, holding the offending
weed in front of him, "but at this
point in my life circumstances are not


all that conducive to it.” He sighs and
then continues: “Well, I’ll tell you,
soon after this bombshell was dropped
on me I had s long talk with myself,
told myself I was going to attempt to
lead my life, ss far os possible, os I
did before. This is not one-hundred-
percent possible, but within the limita-
tions placed upon me I decided I was
going to do the best I could. IVe pretty
well carried this out. 1 have to admit
that there has never been a twenty-
four-hour period when this current
situation hasn't occupied some of my
mental concentration. Because of this,
writing is not as easy as it was before.
Incidentally, I’m keeping a journal,’*
he chuckles and adds a
wink, "in the hopes that one
day it might help keep me.
I find that when I wake up
in the morning. I’m at my
lowest — heavy, heavy still
hangs over my head — but
then as I begin to distract
ntyself with the activities of
the day I work out of it. I
then try to enjoy each and
every minute to the fullest,
whatever it is, a book I’m
reading, tha birds in the
patio out there, a sunset,
an enjoyable meal, the com-
panionship of friends, a
game of bridge. Perhaps,
with the Sword of Damocles
hanging over me. I’m even
made more aware of the
simpler pleasures of life."

What about tho future?
"Hard to say," Shaw says,
shaking his formidable head.
"There's no way of knowing
how long this will drag on.
My most cherished dream
would be to continue what
I originally planned, my
writing, to combine it with
travel. Of course, I might
not have any money left to
do that, I might have to —
as they say — open up the
shop again." A rueful smile.
"Justice may or may not he
blind, but she’s the most ex-
pensive gal I've ever walked
around with! But 111 go on
writing, I'll work it out. I’m
working now on a play
which deals with the age-
old problem of tha human
race. Namely, if we’re go-
ing to be a society at all, we
have to give power to ad-
minister things to some-
body. But we’ve never
worked out any satisfactory
solution as to what happens
when this power is abused,
when it hardens into a privi-
leged cast of nobles. The
dynastic principle doesn't
work, because a good king
is followed by a weak kin*.
Democracy has tried to put
institutions in the place of
the dynasty, but then the
institutions must be headed
by individuals, either elected
or appointed. So we still
have the problem of what to do when
somebody in high office totally abuses
this power, or even becomes mad. Wit-
ness Hitler, Mussolini, Joe McCarthy.
This is implicit in the theme of the
play. If my reach is equal to my grasp.
If I have the technical ability to do It
as I see it, I think it will be a good
play.”

Obviously, I ask, the germ of this
Idea came from his recent experiences
with a certain someone in power. He
grins. "Let’s just say this has been a
watershed in my life; anything I write
hereafter will have to be influenced
directly or indirectly by it."

What about friends, have any of

ESQUIRE; DECEMBER


257


Exactly
how did you
ever get along


without the


Helbros
Day & Date
Calendar Watch?


Helbros creates a masterpiece of accuracy and longevity. 17 Lifetime
Jewel Movement. ..unbreakable mainspring. ..self-winding, shock-resistant
and waterproof* Ask for the HELBROS "DATE-KING” wherever quality
timepieces are sold. One of over 200 styles for men and women. Suggested
retails from 127.50 to $450. Helbros Watches • 2 Park Avenue • New York.
N. Y. 10016. Also available in Canada. «•«. i^t.i


291 ESQUIRE: DECEMBER


them dropped out of light during
this period? "Not friends, perhaps
a few acquaintances have shied away,
but not friends, they’ve been closer
than ever. You know,” ha smiles,
"immediately after my arrest, there
waa something almost every night on
the evening news. It waa extremely
painful to have to sit and hear of
the charges against me, but one had
to keep in touch with all the devel-
opments, it was something that
couldn’t bo ignored. I was speaking
about this unpleasant task to a
friend who immediately volunteered
to come over every evening when I
turned the set on— and writes for
me!"

Has he made any new friends as
s result of his trouble? Clay Shaw’s
face light* up now. "About ten days
after my arrest I called a cab to take
me to my lawyer’s, almost a daily
pilgrimage. The cab arrives, I get
in, the driver flips the flag and off we
go. He could really have boen sent
by Central Casting; dark, stocky,
Italian. I see him looking back at
me in the mirror and Anally he says,
'Haven’t I driven you before?’ ‘No,
I don’t think to.’ He kept an eye on
me. ‘You look so familiar. I could
swear I know you.* I Anally thought,
what the heck, and I said, ’Well, you
probably recognise me from the pa-
pers, I’m Clay Shaw.’ ‘Oh, Mr. Shaw,
of coarse,' and he flips the flag off.
‘No charge for you, everybody knows
it’s a Hum rap.’ I insisted on paying
when we arrived at my lawyer’s but
he wouldn't hear of it, wanted to
know how I waa going to get home.
1 told him I’d call a cab. ‘No/ he
said, pointing to the opposite curb,
‘you take your time. I'll be parked
right over there.’ I told him I
couldn’t impose upon his time, I


wasn’t even sure when I’d be leav-
ing, it might be an hour or so. ‘Are
you kiddin’ — I got the whole Da Uy
Racing Form to figure out.' Sure
enough, when 1 came out, there he
was. Again he refused to flip the
flag. Now I really had to protest,
but he wouldn't give in. ‘No charge,
Mr. Shaw — listen, your lawyers are
gonna cost you enough. Now, you
know, Mr. Shaw, it’s going to be
tough for you to get around, every-
one knows you. I want you to use
my services. Pm either in my cab
or at homo and my wife knows bow
to reach me all the time. I want you
to take my number and call me any-
time. I don’t give a damn, three in
morning and you want a carton of
cigarettes, s bottle of booze, a maga-
zine — you call me/ ”

Clay Shaw shrugs. ‘‘That’s the
way it’s been for almost a year and
a half. He's never charged me. Oh,
I’ve given presents, to him, to his
wife snd kids, sent them to my doc-
tor. no bills, things like that. I go
out there for Sunday dinner, they're
part of my family. You can’t realize
what this has meant to me. Here's
a man who saw injustice being done
and had nothing to offer against it
but himself and his cab. It reminds
me of the tale of the Juggler of Notre
Dame. He hud no money to offer,
only his talent, but that he gave
freely. He juggled In front of the
statue of Our Lady and surely
enough — the statue smiled." And
Clay Shaw does mors than imile
when be speaks of his cabdriver
friend — he beams.

This eshdriver friend, whom Clsy
Shaw requests I refrain from naming
— “After all, he’s in business here,
he could be caused trouble" — PH call
’Tony.’ It waa Tony who drove me


Tequila Mariachi.

It makes a lady out of
Margarita. 1


Because Tequila Mariachi is made for
north -of- the -bonier tastes, whatever
you mix with it becomes that much
more civilized. Like the Mar-
garita:!^ <w. Triple Sec, I uz. lime
juice, 2 07- Tequila Mariachi.

Tequila Mariachi-
tequila for gringos.


Shhh!

You might wake
your audience.


Moat home movies put people to sleep. Mostly
because most home movies don’t move. Every-
body stands and stares at the camera, and it
Just stares back, often from one monotonous
location, often improperly set for exposure or
out of focus.

We can show you eight ways to keep your
audience awoke and interested. Eight Bauer
Super B movie cameras. All with professional
features, so your home movies won’t look home-
made. Features like: bright, reflex viewing sys-
tems for perfect focus; B-to-1 power zoom
lenses for smooth, long, dramatic zooms; an
automatic wiping mask for professional fade-ins
and fade-outs; plus the only really slow motion
In Super 8.

Exposure control in all but one is fully auto-
matic, even when you use slow motion or filters,
bocause Bauer's light meter Is behind the lens.

Your camera dealer will show you all
eight Bauer Super B cameras, priced
from less than $50* to under $420*, V
Including the new C-2M with 5-to-1
power zoom, less than $275*. And three
Bauer Super 8 projectors (including
the most advanced sound projector),
from less than $80* to about $350*.

s ~ ,h “ y ' Bauer


For Intarmation. wftla Allied Impel Corporation. 300 Park Avanua South. Naar York 11X110.

Chicago. Dallas and Qlandaia. California In Canada: Ktagaaay Film Equipment Ltd.. Toronto.

Oar a van. Sand n SO* and M* name at |W favorfia homa-mowa Sore. Wall aond you A oaftlllcata
you can baatom upon him In recognition ot hJl lalanl. Mayka ha'll got tha maaa ape.

*atuaa sctt**.«i* raw i* mu. »*»*•• aum uaia luitiaaii an amnan aan

For Instant Wharo-io-buy-ir

260 ESQUIRE. DECEMBER ■■ MlrmillMtiClII Mt-F$.S*epag«


on tho next to last day of my viait
to the Criminal Court Building
which houses the District Attorney's
office. I had been warned, hy almost
everyone with whom I’d spoken, to
make it easy for myself and stay
away from Garrison. 1 might be
subpoenaed, harassed, and a few
other things. 1 was also warned that
he can charm the birds, when he
wants to. But curiosity had me by
the throat and 1 wanted to get a
close look at this controversial man.
A newspaper reporter asked me
what I had In mind to say to him.
"I’m just going to say I think Clay
Shaw is completely innocent and see
what As says."

"You’re going to — Jesus — " He
shook his head and walked away
from me.

Lest the reader’s hopes rise, I
didn’t see Jim Garrison. I walked
into his most impressive office and
found the switchboard operator and
several secretaries at the tail end of
a Kaffeeklatsch. When they’d acmt-
tered. 1 straightened my tir and ap-
proached the lemst-formldable-look-
ing one. “I'd like to see the District
Attorney," I said, unable to come up
with anything more original and
sounding like a bad actor in a 1940's
B-picture. She asked what my busi-
ness was ; 1 told bar 1 was writing an
article and wondered if I could just
speak with him for a few minutes.
She asked me what publication I rep-
resented.

“Esquire," I said.

“Eaquire!” the secretary trilled.
“Esquire! — Oh, honey, ft's a good
thing the District Attorney’s in Cali-
fornia. Don't you know Esquire
named him Bigmouth of the Year
last year?"

"No," 1 replied. (And I hadn’t


recall od that fact.)

“Well, If you really want to see
him. leave your name and number
and I’m sure hell be in touch with
you when he gets back next week.”

“I'm going to New York tomor-
row."

“That’s good.” she said, pointing
toward the door, “have a nice trip."

It was Tony who drove Clay Shaw
imd me for a last lunch at Antoine's
in New Orleans. Megatons of warmth
exploded from the employees of this
famed eatery as we entered. “Ah.
Mr. Shaw, good to see you," the mai-
tre d* said, reaching for his hand.
“How are you. Mr. Shaw?"

And the familiar, smiling reply:
"Fine, what have I got to be worried
about?"

Over our meal a few last questions
to him. “Has anything particularly
humorous happened as a result of
all this?"

"Nothing really hysterical," he
grins. “Except when I was In New
York, I was waiting for a stoplight
on Lexington and 1 noticed a woman
eyeing me closely. She finally sidled
up to me and said: ‘Aren’t you the
man who’s being bothered by that
lawyer down in New Orleans?’ I had
to smile; that’s one way of putting
It — Department of Understatement.
’Well,’ the woman added, ‘my family
and I saw you on television, we think
It's terrible and we’re all praying for
you.’ "

“Has anyone ever done or said any-
thing vicious to you since your ar-
rest?"

“No, I must say they bavo not," he
says without hesitation, then quick-
ly adds: “1 most also express my
cynicism by saying I’m surprised.
Oh, there have been a couple of un-
pleasant predictiona. In the early


Special Christmas gift offer: Send $2.00 for generous gift wrapped fiacon.

TUB STEVEN LEWIS COMPANY
eats ao.vm blvc,, uollywood, calif, eooaa


IN ESSENCE. A MASTERPIECE

DA VINCI

MEN'S COLOGNE


. . . adding to your 'collection’7

Use the classic approach .


Companion products: WET COLD, OCEAN MIST, L.S.D. colognes
and “IN" SET men's hsir spray, otore inquiries invited)


days of my arrest, Mr. Gar-
rison said to a journalist that
I’d never come to trial. I'd
commit suicide first. That
gave me very little worry —
not the type. And I’ve heard
it said by those who are
aware of such things that I
wouldn't come to trial because
I’d be assassinated." Clay
Shaw shrugs and waves it
away. "What can you do? If
somebody really wsnU to kill
you, seems they have a good
chance, witness Lee Harvey
Oswald being killed on tele-
vision with an entire phalanx
of Dallas policemen standing
by.

"So, while it’s not pleasant
to contemplate, since there's
nothing one can do outside of
taking tbe reasonable precau-
tions, I just try to put it out
of my mind."

"Have you received any
mail and, if so, what kind of
mall?**

“To date, about three hun-
dred letters have arrived
from all over the world. All
of them were sympathetic,
except for three, which were
hostile”

“Did you answer any of
them?"

"Yea, I hired a secretary
and answered all of them. I
figured if people could take
the time and the effort, tho
least they deserved was a
reply from me."

“Did you answer the hos-
tile ones, too?"

"No, none of the three was
signed, as 1 1 the way with
crank letters. I suppose. Oh,

I must tell you about one let-
ter from a retired minister in
New Jersey and with it a
large photograph of me. He’d
gone to the bother of contact-
ing one of the wire services
and he’d bought this photo-
graph for five dollars. At the
end of the letter he asked if
I*H please autograph it and
send it back to him. He said
he was going to hang it in his
study next to a picture of
Captain Dreyfus."

When we said our good-
byes. I wished Clay Shaw
well, and then Tony, refusing
to flip the flair, drove off to-
ward the airport. "I sure
hope this thing is over for
Mr. Shaw soon." Tony said.

“I worry about him. I wish
he’d be more careful, like
maybe even hide out for a
while until his trial comes up.

But he goes right on living
the way he always lived. See,
if you never done anybody
harm, you don’t expect any-
one to do you harm. But
they’re out to convict Mr.

Shaw. I tell you. he’s deal-
ing with a dangerous man."

Tony glanced over at me.

“You know what kills me
about Mr. Shaw? He doesn’t
even run down the guys that
are running him down. He’s
got this great outlook on
life." Tony grinned and be-
gan to thump the steering wheel.
"He’s really hanging on good!"

Aa the plane circled New Orleans,
gaining altitude, I looked back down
at the city with tbe Mississippi curl-
ing around it like a giant python and
realized that Clay Shaw is hanging
on down there in his own quietly
tenacious way. There’s no doubt that
the District Attorney has dedicated


Give am
old f riend
am old
friend.


Look for the oldest name
in Scotch In the nowest
of holiday cartons. The red
band slides off to create a
pristine all-white gift package.


HAIG BLENDED SCOTCH WHISKY. SB PROOF
RENFIELO IMPORTERS, LTD., NEW YORK.


himself to getting a conviction but
the scapegoat is being stubbornly re-
sistant about playing the villainous
part assigned him. And trying to
assemble the tenuous evidence and
make it stick is about like trying to
stuff twelve pounds of Jell-0 Into a
ten-pound bag. But watch out — Mr.
Garrison is determined to pull ofT
this stunt. Hang on, Mr. Shaw. -Hf


There are a quarter of a million children in these United
States who do not have the simple ability to walk because
they were born with cerebral palsy. The greatest thrill in
their young lives would be to take a few steps without canes
or crutches. Help them to happiness. Give to United
Cerebral Palsy. Send a check today in care of your local
Postmaster.
