‘Declassification Diplomacy’: Lessons Learned on The Argentina Declassification Project (ADP)

Published: Sep 22, 2021 | Briefing Book # 776 | Edited by Carlos Osorio and Peter Kornbluh

National Security Archive-organized Debriefing Papers on the ADP Posted on H-Diplo, Preeminent website for Diplomatic History
Archive Hails ‘Declassification Diplomacy’ Project as Precedent-Setting for Future Use of Declassified Documents to Advance U.S. Foreign Policy and Human Rights

[In what is called the first part of a “tasker,” this document provides background on the Argentina Declassification Project (ADP) and asks the agencies to support and prioritize it. Suzanne A. George, Executive Secretary at the National Security Council, sends this memorandum to eight Executive Secretaries and Deputies at the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Department of Justice, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Central Intelligence Agency, the U.S. Agency for International Development, and the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), affirming the Obama administration’s “[continued] support efforts to clarify the facts surrounding human rights abuses, acts of terrorism, and political violence in Argentina during the ‘Dirty War’ period from 1975 through 1984.” The administration is committed to expand the “… declassification effort, to include documents from the Intelligence community, law enforcement departments and agencies, [as well as] the military.” “Your department or agency is asked to prioritize support for this effort consistent with further direction from the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) and National Security Council (NSC) staff.”]

ADP key players

The Argentina Declassification Project was conducted under the extraordinary leadership of John Powers. He wrote about his experience supervising the ADP in the H-Diplo forum . “John Powers's essay in particular was so detailed and generous in its advice to those who wish to follow his lead,” according to H-Diplo chief editor, Diane Labrosse.

On September 19, 2019, Argentine Ambassador Fernando de Roa, honored John Fitzpatrick, Senior Director, Records Access & Information Security Management of the National Security Council (NSC); Sara Berndt, Historian in the Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State, who participated in the H-Diplo forum; Gregory Koch, former Deputy Director of Access Management, NSC; Ellen J. Knight, NSC Director for Access Management who participated in the H-Diplo forum; and, John Powers, former NSC Director for Access Management, who also participated in the H-Diplo forum, for their work on the ADP. On January 16, 2020, in a discreet ceremony, the Director of National Intelligence’s Office of Civil Liberties, Privacy, and Transparency recognized a team of employees from multiple agencies with the 2019 Intelligence Community Transparency Team of the Year Award for their work on the ADP.

Three other key players in the ADP and participants in the H-Diplo ADP forum are Sofia Machado, former First Secretary, Embassy of Argentina in Washington, DC; Keri Lewis, former Branch Chief in the FOIA Division and Project Manager for the ADP at the Department of State; and Benjamin Gedan, former South America director at the National Security Council.

The number of agencies involved in the ADP is reflected by the various officials attending the ceremony to formally transfer the declassified documents to Argentina: John Demers, former Assistant Attorney General for National Security; Corin Stone, former Deputy Director of National Intelligence for Strategy & Engagement (ODNI); Karen Meyers, Director of the Executive Services Directorate (ESD), (WHS), Department of Defense; Germán Garavano, Argentine Minister of Justice and Human Rights; David Ferriero, Archivist of the United States; John Fitzpatrick, NSC Senior Director for Records, Access, and Information Security; John Dinkelman, Acting Assistant Secretary for Administration Department of State.

Previous Postings

Argentina’s Military Coup of 1976: What the U.S. Knew Mar 23, 2021

Argentina’s House of Horrors Jul 21, 2020

A Human Rights Hero: The Legacy of Franklin Allen (Tex) Harris (1938-2020) Mar 10, 2020

Inside Argentina’s Killing Machine: U.S. Intelligence Documents Record Gruesome Human Rights Crimes of 1976-1983 May 30, 2019

Declassification Diplomacy: Trump Administration Turns Over Massive Collection of Intelligence Records on Human Rights and Argentina Apr 12, 2019

Declassification Diplomacy: Trump Administration to Turn Over Trove of Declassified Records to Argentina on Human Rights Violations Committed During Military Dictatorship Mar 24, 2019

Stolen Babies Argentina Convicts Two Military Dictators Jul 5, 2012

Operación México: rendición extraordinaria revelado por documentos desclasificados Dec 8, 2009

Timerman Case Threatened Argentine Military Regime (in English) Dec 3, 2009

Southern Cone Rendition Program: Peru’s Participation Feb 22, 2008

1978: Operación Clandestina de la Inteligencia Militar Argentina en México Jan 20, 2008

On 30th Anniversary of Argentine Coup New Declassified Details on Repression and U.S. Support For Military Dictatorship Mar 23, 2006

Kissinger to The Argentine Generals in 1976: "if There Are Things that Have to Be Done, You Should Do Them Quickly" Aug 27, 2004

US Declassified Documents: Argentine Junta Security Forces Killed, Disappeared Activists, Mothers and Nuns Dec 8, 2002

Argentinian Military Believed U.S. Gave Go-Ahead for Dirty War Aug 21, 2002

State Department Opens Files on Argentina's Dirty War Aug 20, 2002

Washington D.C., September 22, 2021 - In an effort to advance a novel foreign policy tool known as “Declassification Diplomacy,” the National Security Archive today posted key administrative papers on the Argentina Declassification Project (ADP), begun by President Barack Obama and completed during the Trump administration. The records, which include the original White House “taskers” initiating the project, supplement a special set of essays written by the key government and nongovernment players involved in the ADP that were published last week in a joint Archive project, by the leading diplomatic history website, H-Diplo .

The H-Diplo posting on September 16, “ The Argentina Declassification Project: A Model of “Declassification Diplomacy” to Advance Human Rights—and History, ” provides a behind-the-scenes set of after-action reports on one of the most consequential discretionary declassification projects in recent memory. In his introduction to the essays, Archive Senior Analyst Peter Kornbluh described them as extraordinary “debriefings” on the ‘lessons learned’ from the ADP that “will provide future officials, policy actors, academics, and right-to-know activists with a detailed, multi-faceted assessment of how the project began, progressed, and dramatically concluded.”

Between March 2016 when President Obama announced the project during a trip to Buenos Aires, and April 2019 when the Trump administration handed over 6000 revealing intelligence records to the Argentine government, several hundred archivists, analysts, Freedom of Information Act officers, and records managers, representing 16 different government agencies, devoted over 30,000 hours to identify and process approximately 47,000 pages of CIA, FBI, Defense Intelligence Agency, National Security Council, State Department and White House documents. The revelations of the special declassification project significantly advanced the historical record of repression in Argentina; the formerly top secret documents are now being used to prosecute human rights crimes, according to examples posted today by the Archive.

Like the declassified documents, the H-Diplo forum also significantly advances the historical record, according to Archive Southern Cone analyst Carlos Osorio who organized the insider presentations and played a leading role in the ADP itself. “The H-Diplo forum shares the inside story of the motivations, decisions and process of a precedent-setting declassification project and its impact on foreign policy and human rights,” Osorio said.

The H-Diplo forum includes presentations by former Obama White House officials, State Department historians, NSC records managers and Argentine diplomats who played a key role in organizing and advancing the ADP, as well as an essay on NGO participation by Osorio. The centerpiece of the forum is a detailed memoir by John Powers, the former NSC Director for Access and Information Management who supervised the ADP for the first two years. “The ADP can serve as an exemplar for future declassification projects,” Powers concluded in his essay, “Reflections on Leading the U.S. Declassification Project for Argentina: Challenges, Triumphs, and Lessons for the Future.” The ADP “demonstrated how important records can be for processes of justice and accountability.”

intel.gov Argentina

ADP Historic relevance

Declassification Diplomacy: United States Declassification Project for Argentina, April 12, 2019

More video and audio in Southern Cone Project Media Library

Documents

NSC, “Argentina Declassification Project,” June 13, 2016.
Jun 13, 2016 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, intel.gov

NSC, “Argentina Declassification Project: Tasking Information and Schedule,” June 20, 2016.
Jun 20, 2016 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, intel.gov
NSC Director of Information and Access Management John Powers issues the second part of the tasker to support the 13 June 2016 memorandum (Document 1). It provides details on how to conduct and complete the project, outlining schedules, deliverables, guidelines, and expectations to the seventeen agencies and departments that will participate in the Argentina Declassification Project. “Agencies should conduct a detailed search of their documents and records series, documenting those series and keywords searched. Attached at Tab A is a list of search terms and supporting information intended to assist agencies in the identification and retrieval of documents for declassification review that shed light on human rights abuses, terrorism, and acts of political violence between January 1, 1975 and December 31, 1984.” ntification and retrieval of documents for declassification review that shed light on human rights abuses, terrorism, and acts of political violence between January 1, 1975 and December 31, 1984.” In reviewing documents, “the President has directed that agencies release as much information as possible. Public disclosure is in the foreign policy interest of the United States.” The first of five tasks outlines an intense chronogram directing “Agencies [to] search their records and records series …. provide [a] detailed list of potentially responsive documents …. conduct [a] public access review …. The ODNI completes all quality control processes …. and provides copies to agencies by November 30, 2017 …. The Department of State provides the Government of Argentina with CDs of declassified documents by December 15, 2017 [and all] Agencies make the declassified documents available on their website by December 30, 2017.” Tasks 3 reads: “The CIA searches for, identifies, and conducts discretionary public access review, including any referrals to other agencies, on potentially responsive portions of the President's Daily Brief,” while Task 4 instructs the Department of State to “Make Previously Withheld Documents Available to the Public.”

NSC, “Argentina Declassification Project: List of Names, Terms, Events, Places, and Dates,” June 22, 2016.
Jun 22, 2016 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, intel.gov
In the words of NSC staff member John Powers, “The third part of the tasker, the list of terms, was also critically important—perhaps the most important. Once finalized, it was a detailed 19-page list of names, key dates and events, places, terms, and organizations that I created to help the agency records managers, declassifiers, and others who were searching for responsive records within their agencies’ files. None of the staff participating were experts, so this detailed list was critical in that it provided them with the information that was needed to conduct comprehensive and thorough searches.” Powers in his presentation at the H-Diplo forum states, “I began creating the list but quickly realized that I needed help. I thought the ADP could benefit from outside expertise.” So, he sought the support of two historians, Sara Berndt, a historian at the Department of State, and Carlos Osorio, Director of the National Security Archive’s Southern Cone Documentation Project.

“Central Intelligence Agency - Argentina Declassification Project narrative,” April 11, 2019.
Apr 11, 2019 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, intel.gov
On January 4, 2017, John Fitzpatrick, NSC Senior Director for Records, Access, and Information Security, requested that all agencies provide an ADP status update and reaffirmed the need for agencies to complete narratives that detail all aspects of their work in completing the project, including search information, methodologies used, and declassification review information. need for agencies to complete narratives that detail all aspects of their work in completing the project, including search information, methodologies used, and declassification review information. This narrative states that the “CIA searched all electronic databases and paper records likely to contain responsive records [at] The Directorate of Operations … the Directorate of Analysis … the Office of the Director of CIA, the Office of Congressional Affairs, Office of Public Affairs, and the Office of General Counsel … ” The “CIA approved for release 124 records in full and 691 records in part, and denied 103 records in their entirety … [this] involved approximately 40 officers and approximately 12,000 hours spent … ”

“The Federal Bureau of Investigation's Response to Presidential Tasking on the Argentina Declassification Project,” April 11, 2019.
The FBI narrative reports it released ”815 responsive documents consisting of 2,155 pages,” including “the majority of the 1,358 pages which were redacted or denied in full in 2002 [which] are now releasable either in full or with other government agency redactions … A total of 30 employees worked for approximately 850 hours for this project.” Page two in the narrative is an earlier version of page three revealing that all the records were “scheduled to be released on November 29, 2018 ... ” Although the Argentina Declassification Project was complete and ready to be handed to Argentina during the G20 Summit gathering in Buenos Aires at the end of 2018, an expected meeting between President Trump and Argentine President Mauricio Macri did not take place.

Department of State “Report on Methodology: Argentina Declassification Project,” March 29, 2019.
Mar 29, 2019 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, intel.gov
The Department of State reports on the various releases it has carried out since 2016 under the ADP. In April 2017, President Trump handed President Macri a batch of more than 800 documents “that had been redacted or denied in their entirety in 2002 [that] were now releasable either in full or in redacted form ... ” and “119 high-level documents selected for inclusion in two chapters of a forthcoming Foreign Relations of the United States volume on South America, 1977‒1980.” “Today,” the report reads, “the Department is pleased to release 2,154 records to both the Government of Argentina and to the public … Thirty-five State Department experts in various fields, invested just over 2,500 hours into the search, review, and processing for this project … ”

National Archives [NARA], “Argentina Declassification Project Narrative,” circa April 11, 2019.
In response to the final task of this project, the National Archives and Records Administration “identified 1,004 responsive Federal documents totaling 7,165 pages relating to human rights abuses in Argentina during the period specified. After review of these records, NARA, in consultation with equity-holding agencies, is pleased to release 804 documents in full (totaling 5,713 pages), and 186 documents in part (totaling 1,394 pages).” NARA reports that earlier, in August and December 2016, “1,664 pages [were] released by Presidential Libraries ... ” These releases included an unprecedented number of CIA Presidential Daily Briefs of the Ford, Carter, and Reagan administrations. “In all, twenty-five NARA staff members spent 1,280 hours searching for and reviewing responsive records for public access.”

“Department of Defense Response to National Security Council Argentina Declassification Project,” April 3, 2019.
Apr 3, 2019 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, intel.gov
Overall, the Department of Defense [DOD] narrative reports its components “located 872 records totaling approximately 11 ,302 pages. DOD declassified 217 records in full consisting of 3,360 pages, declassified 540 records in part consisting of 7,142 pages (589 pages from this set were withheld in full and therefore were excluded from the partially released total). Further, 115 records were fully withheld from release totaling 211 pages. DOD assigned more than 240 personnel and spent more than 13,000 hours working diligently to complete the task.” At 51 pages, the DOD narrative is by far the most voluminous of the six published by all agencies. It has the merit of including the three-part historical “Tasker” that gave shape and guidance to the Argentina Declassification Project. The document states that “The individual summaries of the processes and the methodologies used by the DoD Components that had responsive records, the staff and time involved in the search, and a list of all record series searched, along with the results are provided in TABS C-J.” The narratives for the Defense Intelligence Agency, Department of Air Force, the Department of Army, the Department of Navy, the National Security Agency [NSA], the Office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the United States Southern Command, are not attached to this report. All the mentioned agencies released records. The National Security Agency refused to declassify any of its records.

Department of Justice “Argentina Declassification Project: Records Search Methodology,” March 26, 2019.
Mar 26, 2019 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, intel.gov
This report from the Justice Department notes: “The Department identified and reviewed 458 pages in the legal and physical custody of the National Archives and Records Administration and 32 pages in DOJ's legal and physical custody that were responsive to this tasking.”

U.S. Embassy cable, “Human Rights: Ruben de Gregorio,” Secret, January 4, 1978.
Jan 4, 1978 | Source ADP Release [Tranche III]: Department of State re-Review, April 27, 2017
On November 16, 1978, Oscar Ruben De Gregorio, considered the commander of the Argentine Montoneros in Uruguay and Brazil, was arrested by Uruguayan authorities. The previously redacted section in this document reveals that "After interrogation by GOU authorities at the Fusileros Navales facility in Montevideo, De Gregorio was quietly turned over to Argentine authorities in keeping with close cooperation between GOU and GOA security forces." De Gregorio was transferred to the Argentine Navy and last seen at the infamous Navy Mechanics School ESMA clandestine detention center before being disappeared. The National Security Archive introduced this document, released as part of the ADP, as evidence in the appeal of the Rome Operation Condor trial in May 2017, just a couple of weeks after its release by the Department of State. The document was part of the evidence in the sentencing in Rome of the head of the Uruguayan Fusileros Navales [FUSNA] in July 2021. It provides evidence of the collaboration between the Argentine ESMA and the FUSNA. In its appeal, the Rome prosecutors point that “Jorge Nestor TROCCOLI FERNANDEZ, Uruguayan, head of the intelligence service of FUSNA (S2) ... periodically went to Argentina, at the ESMA-Escuela de Mecanica de la Armada Argentina, with the task of coordinating the repressive activity.”

CIA Intelligence Information Cable, “Kidnapping and Assassination of Argentine Ambassador to Venezuela by a Group Associated with Argentine State Intelligence Secretariat (SIDE) Without SIDE Knowledge or Authorization,” Secret/"Exclusive for" Document, September 8, 1977.
Sep 8, 1977 | Source ADP final Release, April 12, 2019
Based on unidentified sources in Argentina, this CIA intelligence cable indicates that agents of the State Intelligence Secretariat (SIDE) were responsible for kidnapping, torturing, murdering, and disappearing Argentina’s own ambassador to Venezuela, Hector Hidalgo Sola, in July 1977. Misspelling the street name Bacacay, the cable reports that “When Hidalgo Sola was kidnapped, he was taken to a house at Bacabay 3570 in the federal capital which SIDE rents and uses for official operations of Gordon's group.” Thanks to this document, in his court filing on June 11, 2020, Judge Daniel Rafecas announced the discovery of “a new clandestine detention and torture center that would have been in operation from at least the beginning of the year 1976.” Until the release of the precise address in the CIA document, according to Albertina Caron, an assistant to Judge Rafecas, the judiciary “lacked sufficient evidence” to identify its location.

FBI cable, “Non-Symbol Source Page,” Secret, April 15, 1975.
Apr 15, 1975 | Source ADP final Release, April 12, 2019
The FBI records released through the ADP are unusually free of censorship. This cable from the FBI legal attaché in Buenos Aires, Robert Scherrer, lists more than a dozen sources within the Argentine intelligence and security apparatus. The National Security Archive introduced this document as evidence in the “Contraofensiva” trial in August 2020, to give the judges on the tribunal a sense of the sources and methods of intelligence contained in the declassified records and to validate the quality of the evidence the documents provide.
