Religion and Governance
UROPEAN, COMMISSION
WORLD ACADEMY
FORWARD STUDIES :U NIT
OF ARTS AND SCIENCE'
Religion and Governance
by Harlan Cleveland and Marc Luyckx
Seminar on Governance and Civilizations
Brussels, May 14-16, 1998
How will religion impact government and foreign policy
in the 21st century? This joint paper, prepared by the
World Academy of Art and Science and the Forward
Study Unit of the European Commission was presented
to representatives from various Foreign Offices of
European countries in preparation for the "Brussels
Seminar, "May 26, 1998, as a way of thinking about
Europe's approach to "Religion and Governance . "
I -Introduction
II- Shifting ways of thinking
III
Impact on religions and governance
IV- Synthesis
I- Introduction
Modern era: separation of religion from government
In the modern era, the separation of religion from
government has been a doctrine often repeated and as
often ignored, bypassed, honored in the breach . That
separation was in turn a subhead of the distinction
between "prig ;
''and "public," a dotted line fading fast
as governments farm out to private entities a growing
proportion of the public business, and private
organizations play a more muscled part in making public
policy.
Transmodern: "religion" will play a weightier role
In the postmodern era, however it comes to be
described, we already use the word "governance" to
http://www.wnrf.org/articles/govem .htm

--- PAGE BREAK ---dern: "religion" will play a weightier role
In the postmodern era, however it comes to be
described, we already use the word "governance" to
http://www.wnrf.org/articles/govem .htm

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Religion and Governance
http://www.wnrf.org/articles/iovern .'htrn
suggest that the organized functions required for a
people to govern themselves go far beyond what
"governments" can effectively fund or cause to happen .
Within this framework, it now seems overwhelmingly
likely that "religion" (defined as "organized spirituality")
will play a weightier role in governance-and indeed, that
individual spirituality will be an increasingly important
element of leadership in every domain .
Understanding the changing dynamics in governance and
spirituality
Both concepts, "religion" and "governance," will carry
into the 21 st Century a great deal of cultural baggage,
the heritage of long spiritual traditions and of theory,
trial, and error in organizing human beings to work
together toward common goals . It will be important to
understand this inherited mix of wisdom and unwisdom,
to analyze the changing dynamics of spirituality as they
interact with the changing dynamics of governance
.
II - Shifting ways of thinking
It may be useful to think of our time as a time of
transition, from a modern way of thinking, still besieged
by the backlash of premodern mindsets, toward a
worldview that (because not even its advocates know
just how to describe it) we will call simply transmodern.
The premodern worldview
The premodern worldview is an enchanted vision which
evidently was functional in primarily agrarian societies of
the past. There is one Truth, given to all people by a
higher wisdom ("our God" or plural gods), the source of
authority and the foundation of values . Spiritual
authority is delegated to religious intermediaries ; they, as
surrogates for the spiritual authority, are responsible for
making the rules of behavior for individuals and
supervising the morality of political authorities .
Authority of many kinds is exercised mainly by men,
who in turn oversee the functions of women and children
and are responsible for their behavior . The core values
of society are stable ; the sacredness of tradition is
society's unshakable foundation .
The modern view was a healthy reaction
The modern outlook began as a healthy reaction against
religious authorities who feared scientific discovery,
resented independent thinking, and resisted technological
development. Modernity pushed the clerical authorities
aside; in the resulting secular societies, it relegated
religion to the "private" sphere-making it harder in
"public" affairs to raise questions of meaning, ethics,
intuition, or the spirit . If premodern society, asserting aecular societies, it relegated
religion to the "private" sphere-making it harder in
"public" affairs to raise questions of meaning, ethics,
intuition, or the spirit . If premodern society, asserting a

--- PAGE BREAK ---relegated
religion to the "private" sphere-making it harder in
"public" affairs to raise questions of meaning, ethics,
intuition, or the spirit . If premodern society, asserting a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Religion and Governance
h ttp://www.wnrf.org/articles/govem .htm
sacred foundation for values, was "enchanted," modern
society was "disenchanted ." Rational analysis and
empirical proof were in the ascendant; truth was what
could be discovered, rationalized, and proved by the
scientific method. Science was itself sacralized, and
religious intermediaries were no longer required as
channels to the Truth .
Crisis of the modem view
The pedestal of Reason has in this century been eroded
by experience that scientific discovery and technological
innovation can lead not only to miracles of change but
also to unprecedented dirt, damage, and disease ; by
repeated demonstrations that rational planning can take
us efficiently to where we don't want to be when we get
there; by new kinds of science, such as chaos theory,
that seem to depend as much on intuition as on
reasoning; by testimony of some scientists about how
much they don't know and can only guess, or pray to
understand ; and by the increasingly obvious limitations
of the hierarchical, pyramidal, bureaucratic structures
which had earlier seemed the rational way to organize
human cooperation .
A transmodern way of thinking is emerging
A transmodern way of thinking is now emerging . It
features a creative mix of rational and intuitive
brainwork ; an enthusiastic embrace of new information
technologies; a tolerance, even celebration, of diversity ;
a conviction that protection of the physical environment
has to be a central concern for every human being ; a
dawning realization that scientific discovery and
technological innovation have made human beings the
dominant actors in their own future evolution ; a new
openness to spiritual guidance as a basis for "private"
behavior and "public" policy; and a move away from
vertical authority systems toward "flatter," more
"horizontal" organizations, away from
"recommendations-up-orders-down" management and
toward more consensual decision-making .
It is important to observe that the very concept of
"transmodern" indicates that the best of modernity has to
be kept, but that there is an urgent need to go beyond .
Modernity has brought us indeed excellent and
indispensable progress . It has helped us to distinguish
what was confused. As Ken Wilber rightly explains,
modernity has enabled us to create art, science and
morals, in installing the distinction between those
disciplines which were interrelated before . This
"distinction" has been crucial for the intellectual, artistic
and ethical and religious progress of humanity . Thelling the distinction between those
disciplines which were interrelated before . This
"distinction" has been crucial for the intellectual, artistic
and ethical and religious progress of humanity . The

--- PAGE BREAK ---n between those
disciplines which were interrelated before . This
"distinction" has been crucial for the intellectual, artistic
and ethical and religious progress of humanity . The

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Religion and Governance
http://www.wnrf.org/articles/govem.htm
problems began when an innovation became an excess :
when the distinction became separation. It is indeed at
this stage that the problems began to arise . Because the
separation became exclusion . And as we have so greatly
gained in civilizational level in shaping a space for ethics,
aesthetics and science to be able to develop, we also
suffer from those distinctions which have become
separations and even exclusion of ethics and religion
from science and public life .
A growing minority. . .
The transmodern way of thinking is still a minority
mindset, but it can no longer be discounted as a
neglectable fringe. In the United States, recent survey
research suggests that it is gaining ground with
astonishing speed. In 1996 The Integral Culture Survey,
by Paul Ray, counted 24 percent of U .S . adults, or 44
million, as "cultural creatives," who "are coming up with
most new ideas in American culture, operating on the
leading edge of cultural change ." Two-thirds of this
large category are women . The cultural creatives are of
course a statistical category, not a "group" and certainly
not "organized ."
Global consciousness change
Duane Elgin's study of Global Consciousness Change,
also published in 1996, finds five recurring themes as
defining "the emerging worldview:" global networks of
information technology; global ecological awareness and
concern; a shift in social values (toward environmental
sustainability, toward greater tolerance for ethnic, racial,
and sexual differences) ; a new interest in and practice of
.--} "lay spirituality ;" and "shifts in work, diet, consumption
patterns, transportation, relationships, or other areas that
express a desire to live more sustainably ."
World values survey
The most ambitious effort, so far, to measure shifting
values worldwide was the 1990-91 World Values
Survey ; it collected and collated a mountain of data from
43 countries containing almost 70 percent of the world's
population, "covering the full range of economic and
political variation ."
Ronald Inglehart, its global coordinator, found what
he called a "postmodern shift" well under way in about a
dozen countries, all in North America and northern
Europe. As summarized by Duane Elgin, people in these
countries "are losing confidence in all kinds of
hierarchical institutions" and in traditional institutions as
well, "placing more emphasis on personal authority or
the authority that comes from an inner sense of what is
~` appropriate." They feel materially more secure, so theyin traditional institutions as
well, "placing more emphasis on personal authority or
the authority that comes from an inner sense of what is
~` appropriate." They feel materially more secure, so they

--- PAGE BREAK ---itutions as
well, "placing more emphasis on personal authority or
the authority that comes from an inner sense of what is
~` appropriate." They feel materially more secure, so they

--- PAGE BREAK ---

l
value "more meaningful work and the quality of the
work experience, and tend to rank environmental
sustainability over economic growth." Declining
participation in organized religion is "linked with a
growing interest in discovering personal meaning and
purpose in life ." In these countries especially, there is "a
greater tolerance for ethnic, sexual, and political
differences. And new roles for women are emerging
"that allow for greater self-realization ."
Generalizations such as these cannot draw a neat
picture of so complex a moving target as shifting ways
of thought by millions of individuals . Anything said in
this mode is likely to overstate the shifts where they are
most prominent, and understate similar shifts of thinking
among smaller proportions of people elsewhere .
Impact of the changes
Some of the "global mind shift" that is obviously going
on can be attributed to opportunities stemming from
quite recent technological change-the marriage of
computers and electronic telecommunications, the
stunning developments in genetics and biotechnology,
the new choices opened up by space exploration and the
chance to observe our home-planet with a genuinely
global perspective .
Tools do not guarantee mind shifting
Tools for thinking and communication don't guarantee
mind shifting. The spread of knowledge in our time is
quite as much the result of social choices and political
leadership-expressed in the starvation or feeding of
quality schooling, vigorous or tepid support for higher
education, protections or violations of the freedom to
question and explore and invent and create
.
. . . citizens have been slow to change
Many countries' citizens have been slow to change their
minds because their leaders fear the consequences of
"many flowers blooming"-as Mao Tse-Tung did, even
though he popularized the phrase-in gardens they wish
to control . But it's dangerous not to take full advantage
of new learning technologies; the breakdown of
Communist regimes in Eastern Europe and the Soviet
Union bears witness .
III - Impact on religions and governance
The transmodern mind-shift-still far from dominant
even where it is noticeable-has important implications
for religions and their impact on governance in the early
part of the 21st century. One of these is that organized
religions will be sharing their turf with "unorganized
spirituality." Another is that their leadership, traditionally
http(/wWW.wnrf.orgIarti6l66~gov rn .htmst century. One of these is that organized
religions will be sharing their turf with "unorganized
spirituality." Another is that their leadership, traditionally
http(/wWW.wnrf.orgIarti6l66~gov rn .htm

--- PAGE BREAK ---hese is that organized
religions will be sharing their turf with "unorganized
spirituality." Another is that their leadership, traditionally
http(/wWW.wnrf.orgIarti6l66~gov rn .htm

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Religion and Governance
h ttp://www.wnrf.org/articies/govem .htm
a
monopolized by men, will be increasingly shared with
women. Yet another is that in the emerging worldview,
the rigid separation of "us" from those professing other
faiths will no longer be saleable doctrine or feasible
politics ; the acceptance of variety, the protection of
diversity, and doctrines of tolerance seem more and
more essential to security and survival . A fourth result of
the transmodern worldview is this : the pervasive and
continuing impact of globalization on every human
activity is reinforced by the growing acceptance of
globalization by those "coming up with new ideas
.
. . on
he leading edge of cultural change ."
Unorganized spirituality
Toward the end of our current century, one of the
striking current trends is the large number of people
who, professing a belief in God by whatever name, are
moving away from the institutions which have
traditionally intermediated divine worship and provided
blessings on births, deaths, and everything important in
between. In so doing, many of these people have by no
means abandoned spirituality ; they have found outlets
for their spirituality in small-group practices that "search
for God" in ways that are genuine alternatives to
traditional practices in churches, temples, mosques, and
synagogues .
Decreasing membership in mainline religions
In the U. S., the membership in "mainline" religious
denominations is already down by some 25% from
earlier peaks
this certainly counts people who
drop out
"organize
ligion" while actively
searchin , in New Age
other environments, for
personal r small-gro
ways to express their natural
spirituality .
hcrc
ay also be more "shopping around"
and switches of allegiance between organized religions
than ever before ; the growth of Islam in the United
States is one example .
These trends thus do not betoken a veering away
from "spirituality ." Human beings often seem naturally
to reach out for more satisfying belief systems . In the
absence of settled certainty, every organized religion is
bound to be a "temporary home" to a good many
restless spirits in its constituency .
Growth of "unorganized spirituality"
The growth of "unorganized spirituality" certainly
complicates the interaction between organized religions
and the institutions of governance (governments, but
also corporations, associations and the many other
elements of "civil society") . Among the people who
don't feel the need for spiritual guidance from largenstitutions of governance (governments, but
also corporations, associations and the many other
elements of "civil society") . Among the people who
don't feel the need for spiritual guidance from large

--- PAGE BREAK ---nance (governments, but
also corporations, associations and the many other
elements of "civil society") . Among the people who
don't feel the need for spiritual guidance from large

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Religion and (Govemance
established human institutions will be a good many
activists on secular issues-such as human rights,
environmental protection, or economic fairness-who
will nevertheless present their case as motivated by
spiritual concerns with wide political appeal
.
Transmodem : "religion" will play a weightier role
As we move toward the changes implied by the
transmodern worldview, it appears that women are often
quicker to understand and more open to adaptation than
men. That is, for example, the lesson of Paul Ray's
finding that two-thirds of the subset of Americans he
calls "cultural creatives" are women . Why would this be?
And what does it portend for the nature off the coming
changes and for the leadership in bringing them about?
Less identified with patriarchal
First, why? One reason that leaps to the eye is that in
every modern society women are on the average less
identified with or beholden to the patriarchal structures,
pyramidal management, and vertical leadership styles
characteristic of modern industrial society . Women are
also typically more intuitive than men. If moving toward
"transmodern" ways of thinking and acting implies a new
openness to spiritual guidance, women can be expected
to be among the frontrunners . Even in traditional
religious institutions, a majority of congregations have
been women, and the same seems to be true-anecdotally
but observably-of communities where "unorganized
spirituality" is strong .
Improving their situation without having to dig up the roots
The transmodern mindset gives promise of dialogue that
avoids trying to persuade the not-yet-modern first to
"modernize" (a goal now freighted with cultural baggage
from the industrial era, including vertical authority
systems and super-rational thinking) . If women in other
cultures can see a possibility of improving their personal
situation (in terms of subsistence, rights, equality, and
love) without having to dig up the roots of their cultural
identity, the resulting dialogue might well be more
fruitful than if it starts with "modernization" as the first
requirement . Within non-Western cultures, there seem to
be a growing number of women who are reinterpreting
their scriptures (the Koran, the Bible) in post-patriarchal
ways-to produce a softer, more tolerant approach that
doesn't threaten the basic faiths themselves . Such a
dialogue might best be initiated by Western women
accustomed to the uses of indirection in improvising on
a general sense of direction .
Diversity and toleranceen the basic faiths themselves . Such a
dialogue might best be initiated by Western women
accustomed to the uses of indirection in improvising on
a general sense of direction .
Diversity and tolerance

--- PAGE BREAK ---themselves . Such a
dialogue might best be initiated by Western women
accustomed to the uses of indirection in improvising on
a general sense of direction .
Diversity and tolerance

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The emerging transmodern image is a round table,
around which people of both genders and all races,
cultures and faiths sit to consider how to manage our
common planetary home in a way that is responsible not
only to its current inhabitants but to their grandchildrens'
grandchildren as well . There is plenty of room in this
pluralistic scene for striving toward an ultimate,
universal Truth-but the search requires tolerance of
other peoples' chosen paths to the elusive goal, and of
the differing liturgies with which they celebrate the goal
and describe their search . And it doesn't require any
seeker to concede that any of the other seekers has
already found the Holy Grail-or that the
universal/pluralistic search can now be called off.
This image is a far cry from today's reality, either in
secular governance with its mostly two-sided processes
for resolving conflict, or in the mostly exclusivist politics
of organized religions .
Indeed, just when individual human rights have
achieved superstar status in political philosophy, just
when can-do information technologies promise what the
U.N. Charter calls "better standards of life in larger
freedom," distortions of cultural difference have
scattered big, ugly boulders in the road called Future .
No overenthusiasm
Cultural diversity is not the villain, but "culture" is being
used-as Kultur has been used in other times and places
_as a reason for repression, exclusion, or extinction .
The trouble lies in overenthusiasm for cultural loyalties,
which can create something akin to a runaway nuclear
reaction. Without the moderating influence of other
enthusiasms in civil society-acting like fuel rods in a
nuclear reactor-the explosive potential gets out of hand
.
What's needed is the counterforce of wider views, global
perspectives, and universal ideas . Equality is not the
product of similarity ; it is the cheerful acknowledgement
of difference .
"The goal," as John Gardner says about communities
large and small, "is to achieve wholeness incorporating
diversity. That is the transcendental task for our
generation . "
Globalization
The rapid spread of knowledge through global networks
has already required business and finance, and the news
and entertainment media, to adapt their workways, their
marketing, and their planning to appeal to worldwide
audiences. And this is only the front end of a long-range
trend; the so-called "global networks" are still far from
global in a world where some two-thirds of the peoplelanning to appeal to worldwide
audiences. And this is only the front end of a long-range
trend; the so-called "global networks" are still far from
global in a world where some two-thirds of the people

--- PAGE BREAK ---worldwide
audiences. And this is only the front end of a long-range
trend; the so-called "global networks" are still far from
global in a world where some two-thirds of the people

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Religion and'Govemance
don't yet have a telephone .
New opportunities for the organized Religions
It is not, therefore, surprising to find each of the Great
Religions operating in a more and more global context
.
They proselytize beyond their traditional geographic
regions. They become more eclectic as they try to appeal
to more and different kinds of people . And, since
religious experience depends heavily on how it is
expressed and received, they are interpreting or
modifying their stories to make them more
understandable in more languages .
Moreover, world religions are more and more
universally available . Pilgrimages to Mecca or Rome or
Jerusalem-or China or Tibet or India or Sri Lanka-have
been speeded up by jet aircraft ; and their virtual
equivalents are now coming into homes by television and
into personal computers via Internet .
New opportunities for unorganized spirituality
The opportunities are also enhanced for "unorganized
spirituality ." Teachers, preachers, and therapists
representing hundreds of varieties of specialized
inspiration are spreading wherever freedom of speech,
freedom of communication, and freedom of peaceable
assembly are protected .
In other domains the globalization trends illustrate an
ambiguity of outcomes : global standards coexist with
global diversity. In matters of cuisine, for example, the
standardization of healthy hamburgers and tasty fried
chicken is spreading in every world city, but no faster
than the proliferation of ethnic restaurants in those same
cities. The new information technologies helps exclusive
faiths to spread beyond traditional jurisdictions ; they also
may amplify the voices of those reaching for a wholeness
that incorporates the religious diversity .
"No one can speak for the world of faiths," says the
Episcopal Bishop of San Francisco, William Swing, in
his forthcoming book about a United Religions . "But
someone must shout to hear an echo . I do believe that an
echo will be coming from the indigenous, from women,
from spiritual margins, from the restless pious, from
children, from refugees of religious intolerance, even at
last from religious leaders .
.
. . I have an utter urgency
because of the squandering of the treasure chest of
spirituality which religions could offer the world if they
could grow beyond mutual hatred to a place of mutual
respect . "
IV- Synthesis
This paper is prepared in preparation for the Brusselshest of
spirituality which religions could offer the world if they
could grow beyond mutual hatred to a place of mutual
respect . "
IV- Synthesis
This paper is prepared in preparation for the Brussels

--- PAGE BREAK ---which religions could offer the world if they
could grow beyond mutual hatred to a place of mutual
respect . "
IV- Synthesis
This paper is prepared in preparation for the Brussels

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Religion and Governance
h ttp://www .wnrf.org/articies/govem .htm
Seminar, May 1998 ; to draft now a strategy for Europe's
approach to "Religion and Governance" would be
presumptuous and premature. But some synthesis is in
order .
The wall between religions and governance becomes porous
It is clear that the wall between religion and government
is so porous as to be an unreliable guide to attitudes and
actions. "Governance" describes a scene in which
decisions about public policy are formulated and carried
out by multiple organizations, "public," "private," and
(mostly) mixed . "Religion," organized and unorganized,
is therefore likely to play a growing part in the making
of public policy and carrying it out .
Important role of Religions in the future?
If, in the early part of the next century, world religions
come to play the important role that Andre Malraux
foresaw and others are forecasting, what kinds of
conflicts are most likely to occur?
Conflicts are more likely inside every religion and culture
Based on our analysis, it seems likely that conflicts will
not mostly be either (a) because organized religions
collide in the historic "clash of civilizations" envisaged in
the recent writings of Samuel Huntington, or (b) because
politics inside and between nations reverts to another
historical precedent, the clash between clerical and
secular authority (i.e., between "premodern" and
"modern") .
Premodern against transmodern
But a third kind of clash, increasingly visible both in
internal and international politics in recent years, is now
making its way to center stage . It is the split between
"fundamentalists" of many varieties who see their
traditional scriptures and teachings as so absolute as to
divide humankind into irreconcilable believers and
infidels, and others who see their ancient traditions or
new spiritual insights as raw materials for wider human
reconciliation, as the basis for an intensified search for
common purpose among people- of differing races,
creeds, and national origins . In short: the split is between
"premodern" and "transmodern ."
Who is intolerant?
"Fundamentalists" of many faiths-in Eric Hoffer's
language, "true believers"-often feel threatened by
modern society and modern worldviews. The reverse is
equally true . Huston Smith suggests that we are all both
absolutist and tolerant-but about differing beliefs
.
"Conservatives" often fear the messiness and
disintegration that tolerance of pluralism can produce
.. Huston Smith suggests that we are all both
absolutist and tolerant-but about differing beliefs
.
"Conservatives" often fear the messiness and
disintegration that tolerance of pluralism can produce
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---sts that we are all both
absolutist and tolerant-but about differing beliefs
.
"Conservatives" often fear the messiness and
disintegration that tolerance of pluralism can produce
.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rejigjon an&Govemance
h ttp://www.wnrf.org/articies/govern.htm
"Liberals" often do not understand "the wholeness that
certainty can bring" to the human psyche ; because
humans are fallible, some absolutes seem required as the
glue that holds communities together .
Active tolerance
The "transmodern" way of thinking outlined in this paper
is actively tolerant. It acknowledges that it's important
for all civilizations to be receptive to that which is alien,
whatever form this may take . It is open to the
transcendental, while resisting any a
n
imposition of religious certainty. T
at the
center of things ; each person conve
and it with
his/her own culture, along his/her own path . Nobody has
a monopoly of the Truth any more-yet it does exist
.
Truth telling
To begin a constructive dialogue with societies
immersed in cultures different from our own, we might
do well to start with a moment of truth-telling, along
these lines :
"We, for our part, are products of a secular industrial
society. But we realize that we can no longer discuss
political futures without also discussing questions of
meaning, spirituality, and cultural identity . We are
therefore asking you to join us in a serious effort to
project mutually advantageous futures for our societies .
In order to do this, we will all have to set aside our
superiority complexes, our intolerances whether based
on scientific rationalism or on spiritual tradition, and our
dreams of having our views prevail in the whole world ."
Copyright 1988 by Harlan Cleveland and Mark Luyckx
Posted with permission.
Dr. Marc Luyckx is the director of the Forward Studies
Unit, in Brussels, a think tank with connected with the
president of the European Commission . Dr. Harlan
Cleveland, eminent political scientist and public
executive, is the former U.S. Ambassador to NATO
under President Johnson and Nixon. Today he is
president of the World Academy of Art and Science,
located at the Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs,
University of Minnesota .
RELATED ARTICLES :
--Reli ion and Governance: A Res onse b John J .
Reilly
--World Academy of Art and Science
--The International S stem - What works and wh
--Toward a "Coalition of the Willing"