7627 0ld Receiver Road
FrederickMD2l701
Dr.James Barger
Apri1 28,1983
Bolt Beranek&Newman
50 Moulton St.
CambridgeMA 02138
ErnestAschkenasyandMarkWeiss
ComputerScience Department
Queens College,CUNY
Flushing,NY1l367
In C.A. 78-0322/o420 combined,my FoIA suits for the JFK assassi-
nation records of the FBI's Dallas and New Orleans offices,I
brought to light the only proof I recall of the fact that the FBI
did indeed have its own tapes of the Dallas police radio broad-
casts. What strikes me as remarkable is the diligence with which
it has sworn to a series of lies about this under oath and the
fact that nowhere in any of the several JFK assassination main"
files i there the slightest indication of this.Its dedication
to and practice of Orwell is so complete that there is no mention
ofthis in thelo linear feet of itsonce-secret.indexto those
Dallas main files for the year and ahalf beginning with the
assassination..,
While extensive experience with the FBI in court in FoIA cases
persuades that it can and does get away with anything, and within
theless believe that its current chain of sworn untruths, some
openly contradicting others,is out of the ordinary.It would
have been much simpler,cheaper, safer and easier to merely dub
the tapes for me.  This is especially true that now,although it
has tainted all the cases,Iam making FBI false swearing a major
point in litigation that, the FBI knows,may reach a relatively
unprejudiced panel at the appeals court.
It always stonewalls,but given the possibilities,however remote,
that the FBI can be seriously embarrassed by this,that it has
already stonewalled for more than five years, and that Congress
is holding FoIA hearings,Iam inclined to believe that it is
possible the FBI has some special purpose in running risks to
continue towithhold its l96ldubs of theoriginal recordings.
care, because the FBI had to transcribe them and live with its
transcriptions.（It had found it impossible to use the belts and
discs.)Care could have eliminated recording skips and jumps of
track,which did occur.e the FBI had to transcribe them and live with its
transcriptions.（It had found it impossible to use the belts and
discs.)Care could have eliminated recording skips and jumps of
track,which did occur.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nscribe them and live with its
transcriptions.（It had found it impossible to use the belts and
discs.)Care could have eliminated recording skips and jumps of
track,which did occur.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Although as I received these records I sent copies to Dallas
people who were interested,none ever let me know what,if any-
thing,they didwith those copies.On the chance that you did
not receiveit,Iencloseaxerox ofDallas record 89-43-l0553.
(This is the "main"assassination file.）I draw your attention
to several parts with paperclips in the right margin.
Ihavethe details of the broadcasting equipmentreferred toif
itinterestsyou.
Iam certain I sent a copy to those who have more interest in this
than I can now.Those machines could be used for playback while
they were recording, as Irecall it, and because there were no
other machines, they were.The only means of dubbing was to
record with a microphone the audible sounds on playback.It was
notpossibleto patch fromeithermachine to atape recorder.
It seems to me that there thus are two possibilities of accounting
for the broadcast onthe wrong channel that Barber and the NAS
needlejumpedtrack。
IwishIcould tell you that I expect to get a dub of this origi-
nal FBI rerecording of the police broadcasts,but with a judge
who has said inopen court that he takes his leads from the FBI
and then demonstrates that he does, the prospects may not be very
go0d。
For whatever it may mean to you,when the Justice Department
finally got around to making the requested analysis, it arranged
for the body to be.outside FolA.In fact,it repeatedly'almost
chortles in glee over this in several Department （not FBI)
turecouldgetthepanel's workpapers.
You may have devoted more time to this matter than you originally
visualized, something with which I am quite familiar,but you can
not have become subject experts.For whatever it is worth to
you,the actual evidence,asdistinguished from the officialcon-
clusions (which turn out to have been instant FBI preconceptions)
leaves absolutely no doubt that more than three shots were fired.
TheFBIhasnotattemptedeven proformarefutation oftheexten-
sive evidence in anothen lawsuit in which adducing that proof was
pertinent。
Some of this other evidence it refused to confront is in its own
files。It reports other shooting the FBI refused to investigate.evidence in anothen lawsuit in which adducing that proof was
pertinent。
Some of this other evidence it refused to confront is in its own
files。It reports other shooting the FBI refused to investigate.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

My work centers on the body of the crime,and it is this evidence
thatIrefertoabove in sayingthatthereisandwasnodoubt
that more than four shots were fired. If you should ever want
more detail,please let me know.
So you can appreciate how soon the FBI decided upon the bird-in-
hand lone assassin, I also enclose a copy.of a record created
before Oswald was charged,on the very day of the criue.The
FBI then refused even to consider any other suspects or conspira-
tors "as true subject located."
It happens that the FBI had received a number of reports just
before the assassination of threats against JFK by the cited
dnoJb
While Ido not believe that your interests will go in that direc-
tion,I tell you that I have all the disclosed FBIHQ,Dallas and
New Orleans records and the Dallas index to which I refer above.
If you ever need any of this information,Iwill be happy to help
asmuchas I can。
Sincerely,
Harold Weisberg

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C.A.78-0322/0420
GTICN
Consolidatod.
.
Exhivit 13
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
DATE:
11/22/63
BAC, DALLAS
r
IC ROBKRT G.RENFRO
SUBJECT:
ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT KENNED
gt.A.C.8HERRIL,
Richard on,/Texas,PD,tolophouo
AD 5-5213, adviBed JIMY GEORGE BORUSON.and members of tbo
Wational Btaten Rights Party Bhoyld/be considered possible
BuBpects in the assassination of President KENNEDy, due to
their strong feeling against him. He reminded that BoBINsoN
18 the individual who burned a croes on the lawn of
Richardson residence approximately  year ago. He adviced
ROBiNsoN, white male,age 25, runs a ervice Btation locatod
at Belt Line Road and Mayfield Road,Garland,Texas.
mTmlreooar
Coreata
Dallas
GR:
SEARCHED
INDER.
SERIALZO.F
NOV 221963

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed
ROBiNsoN, white male,age 25, runs a ervice Btation locatod
at Belt Line Road and Mayfield Road,Garland,Texas.
mTmlreooar
Coreata
Dallas
GR:
SEARCHED
INDER.
SERIALZO.F
NOV 221963

--- PAGE BREAK ---

U.S.DeparimcntofJustice
Federal Bureauof Investigation
In Raply, Ploose Relor o
Dallas, Texas
File Ne.
October 1,1980
ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT JOHN FITZGERALD KENNEDY
DALLAS,TEXAS
NOVEBER 22,1963
On August 27,1980,and September 15,1980,Captain
James C.Bowles, Community Service Division, Dallas, Texs
Poifce Department, furnished the following information:
Captain Bowles was a supervisory police sergeant
in the Communications Division of the Dallas,Texas Police
Department from 1956-1966. Captain Bowles stated that he
does not have a great deal of expertise concerning the
technical specifications of the Dallas Police Department
communications equipment 1n use on November 22,1963.
Captain Bowles stated that he thinks he probably has the
best over-all knowledge of all the personnel still
employed by the Dallas Police Department of the way the
communications system generally operated at the Dallas
Police Department during that period of time. Captain
Bowles stated that he obtained this knowledge by working
in the Communications Division during 1963 and by considerable
89-43-10553
This document contains neither recommendations nor conclusions
ofthe FBI.
Itis the property of the FBI and is loaned to
4-Bureau
aaoo
-nallas

--- PAGE BREAK ---g 1963 and by considerable
89-43-10553
This document contains neither recommendations nor conclusions
ofthe FBI.
Itis the property of the FBI and is loaned to
4-Bureau
aaoo
-nallas

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ASSASSINATIO:OFPPLSIDENT
JOHN FITZGFRALD KEANEDY
researcb he has done on his own concerning the communications
system of the Dallas Police Department during approximately
the past three years.
Captain Bowles stated that since he did not bave
personal knowledge of the technical specifics of the radio
system in operation at that time,he would like to refer
specific equipment questions tothe City of Dallas Communications
(b)(7)(c) Services.He recommended that
Communications Services employee, be initially contacted
along time
concerning this inquiry.
Captain Bowles stated that he has personal.knowledge
that Channel One was utilizedfor routine communications
and operations on November 22,1963.All radio traffic
on Channel One was recorded at the Dispatch Center of the
Dallas Police Department using a Dictaphone A 2TC Model 5
belt recorder. The output of the bridge mixer was connected
directly into the voice operated relay of the recording
device. The recordings were alternated between two dictaphone
machines so as to allow the recording belt to be changed with
minimal interruption of the recording process. He noted that
the worm gear on the dictaphone was characteristically
unreliable inasmuch as it often failed to maintain proper/
tracking.Improper tracking caused repeating of tracks ln
the playback mode.
Channel Two on November 22,1963,was utilized by
motorcade associated with the visit of President Kennedy'to
Dallas, Texas.  Channel Two radio transmissions were recorded
at the Dispatch Center by means of a Gray Audograph disc type
recorder connected in the same fashion as the dictaphone recorder
was to Channel One. A companion unit was provided to maintain
uninterrupted'coveruge.
The original belts and discs, containing recordings
of radio transmissions at or about the time of the assassination
of President Kennedy were provided to the FBI within a few
days of that event. Several days later an FBl Agent returned
the belts and discs to Captain Bowles personally,with the
explanation that the FBl was experiencing difficulty in preparing
a transcript of those recordings due to a lack of familiarity
with the Dallas Police Department radio parlance and terminology.
2the
explanation that the FBl was experiencing difficulty in preparing
a transcript of those recordings due to a lack of familiarity
with the Dallas Police Department radio parlance and terminology.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---t the FBl was experiencing difficulty in preparing
a transcript of those recordings due to a lack of familiarity
with the Dallas Police Department radio parlance and terminology.
2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT
JOHN FITZGERALDKEANEDY
Captain Bowles maticulously reviewed the original belts and
discs in order to prepare a transcript. It was necessaryto
stop and start the playback machine many times in order to
prepare an accurate transcript. The stylus of the dictaphone
playback machine was inserted into previously recorded track
on many occasions and in many different locations. It 1s
Captain Bowles' opinion that the playback process,including
the numerous placings of the stylus on the previously recorded
track,may have created degradations of the original recorded
material,as well as actually adding new'impulses to the
track.
Captain Bowles stated that he madea reel-to-reel
tape recording of the original dictaphone belts using
Kollensak recorder provided him by the FBI·during the time
he was transcribing the original belts in the early part of
1964.One original copy was provided to the FBI,and he
personally retained another copy.The reel-to-reel recordings
were made by playirg the originals on the appropriate playback
devices and placing the microphone of the tape recorder next
to.the playback speaker.There was no direct wire connection
between the playback device and the tape recorder.
(mle)
On September171980
bnXe)
Communications Services,
CIty or DallaS, 3920 Forest Avenue, Dallas,Texas,was
rabre)
contacted and advised that he would prefer that Mr.
(9)
Communications Services, City
btrlas, be initially contacted for the desired equipment
information.
On September 19,1980,Mr.
Communications Servlces
ctyo
Uuask920Forest
AVenue,DallasTexns
(b1>xC)
and
sor Yor the City of Dallas. furnished the following
(的
information to Special Agents
and Radio Maintenance Technician
(xXe
·IW
and Mr
stated that the information
they are proviurng concerning the Dallas Police Department
Communications System as it existed on November 22,1963,18
(99
based on Mr.
personal recollection and the composite
(b)(）（)
recollection oi other employees.with whom Mr.
discussed
this matter.
3tment
Communications System as it existed on November 22,1963,18
(99
based on Mr.
personal recollection and the composite
(b)(）（)
recollection oi other employees.with whom Mr.
discussed
this matter.
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---System as it existed on November 22,1963,18
(99
based on Mr.
personal recollection and the composite
(b)(）（)
recollection oi other employees.with whom Mr.
discussed
this matter.
3

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ASSASSINATIONOFPRESIDENT
JOHNFITZGERALDKEEDY
The radio system consisted of two channels,namely
Channel Oneand Channel Two.
Channel One was a duplex repeater operation. The
main transmitter was a Motorola device located at Fair Park,
Dallas,Texas, and transmitting on 45.66 M/Hz. The auxiliary
transmitter operated on the same frequency, was manufactured
by RCA, and was located on the Fifth Floor of the Dallas City
Jail,1o6 South Harwood. Two Motorola receivers were utilized
operating on 45.74 M/Hz. One was located on the Jefferson
Tower Building in the 200 block of Kest Jefferson,Dallas,
Texas,and the other was located on the Stoneleigh Hotel.
Dallas, Texas. These were connected by dedicated telephone
line to the Disptach Center,lo6 South Harwood.All antennas
were Andrews quarter-wave trombones with ground plane.These
audio lines.The lines were interfaced with the receivers by
use of Kestern Electric lliC repeat coils. The lines entered
a select switch to enable muting of either receiver.The
received signal then entered a Collins monitor amplifier and
from that went into a loudspeaker on the dispatch console.
The signal from the monitor amplifier also fed a Testern Electric
type 52A headset,a bridge mixer which was connected to a
dictaphone recorder, and a dispatcher and mobile audio mixer.
The headset microphone fed a Collins pre-amplifier. That device
fed the bridge mixer and the dispatcher and mobile audio mixer,
supra. Both of these mixers were active amplifiers utilized
to isolate the input signals,one from the other. The dispatcher
and mobile audio mixer fed a Collins line amplifier which was
then connected to the main or auxiliary transmitter by use of
a selector switch. The main transmitter was connected by
high grade audio quality dedicated line, and the auxiliary
transmitter was connected by house cable.
Mobile units transmitted on 45.74 M/Hz.Motorcycles,
both two and three wheel models,were equipped with Motorola
Style teardrop microphone, using a transistorized element.
The Channel Two system was a simplex operations
utilizing 45.78 M/Hz.''The equipment designations and
connections were the same as for Channel One except for
the deletion of the dispatcher and mobil audio mixer,the
substitution of a Gray Audiograph disc recorder attached to
the bridge mixer rather tha a dictaphone, and the substitution
for the Stoneleigh Hotel receiver site by & receiver located
on the Southland Center,Dallas, Texas.Audiograph disc recorder attached to
the bridge mixer rather tha a dictaphone, and the substitution
for the Stoneleigh Hotel receiver site by & receiver located
on the Southland Center,Dallas, Texas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---order attached to
the bridge mixer rather tha a dictaphone, and the substitution
for the Stoneleigh Hotel receiver site by & receiver located
on the Southland Center,Dallas, Texas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT
JOHNFITZGERALD KENNEDY
Mr.
displayed a radio of the type believed
to bave been used during November,1963. It carried the
following designation:
"Transistorized Dispatcher Radiophone
Serial Number G26786
Transmitter type cci500
Model T31BAT-1130A
Motorola,Inc.,Chicago,Illinois".
(61))
The technical specifications for the transceiver
includina the microphone are not knoun to Mr
Mr.
and
These specifications should be avairaole
through Motorola,Chicago,Illinois. They noted that
S!mXe.!
a former Communication Services employee,who
hou works for Motorola at Biloxi, Mississippi,might have
further recollection of the details of the radio system
as it existed during Noyember, 1963.
The telephone interconnection circuits were
specified by the technical personnel of Radio Station WRR,
astation ouned by the City of Dallas.It is believed
the circuits were of the same type utilized by the broadcast
industry. The exact frequency response of the lines is not
known,but is believed to be greater than the response of
lines commonly in use for this purpose in 1980. The response
is believed to have been at least 200-3000 Bz.
6)(X)
It is the opinion of Mr.
that
the frequency limitations of the final recording made of the
radio transmissions were caused by the limited frequency
response of the recording devices themselves.He noted that
the 45 M/Hz band is inherently noisy,with numerous bursts
of static caused by sunspot activity and other factors.
)()
Mr.
noted that the audio in the Motorola
transceiver was swftched directly by the push-talk button
on the microphone. This feature indicates that audio cannot
be broadcast without the:push to talk button being depressed
or physically broken so that the switch contacts inside the
microphone are jammed. If there was an internal malfunction
of the transceiver and the push to talk button were not depressed,
only an unmodulated carrier would have been emitted.
5ontacts inside the
microphone are jammed. If there was an internal malfunction
of the transceiver and the push to talk button were not depressed,
only an unmodulated carrier would have been emitted.
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ASSASSINATIONOFPRISIDENT
JOHNFITZGERALDKENEDY
(6)()(e)
Rr.
noted that on the tape recordings made
from Channel One at or about the time of the assassination
of President Kennedy,there appears a sound of a chime or bell.
That sound has been said by motorcycle patrol officers to be
identical to the sound caused by driving'a motorcycle across
ametalmanholecover.
Attachedberetoare twochartsdepictingthe
Dallas,Texas Police radio system as of November 22,1963.
These charts were drann by Special Agent
(6)()(e)
FBI,
Dallas,and are based on information provrueu by
Darras,
Police Department personnel as set forth above.