Ilr* (Saul Collacclii 9/10*93 
101 Donahue St «, 
IIculo Pali:, CA. 94025 
Dear tir. Collacclii, 
At pact GO and surviving wore illnesses and li itations tliafrf I want to thinlc of, 
lettjra like your of the'^th are good medicine, if not ths best, for 
I appreciate it and the understanding it reflects. I add to tliatai^n new book 
about ‘..inch I can tell you very little er.copt that it will be published before long, 
when i do not know. The / title & 1ETO ACAEM ALJfi Vf CLj/jES tityfr YOU EBj/oBIVEn 
sorry, forward in both broader and narrower focus. Save for adding that it is also a 
broad overview I'll say no more about it now. 
I have over so much more than I've boon able to use. I filed a dozen FOIA lawsuits, 
some precodental and one leading to th" 19T4- amending of the investigatory-files ex- 
emption to open CIA. FBI and similar filer-, to FOIA access. I've at out a ixnabcEfx 
tliird of a ndllion pages of once-withheld government records. Eventually they will be 
a pcn:taiient public arcliive at local Hood College, a fine small one. Ultimately they 
plan to Biake it all available to al - libraries by some modern optical teclinology I 
do not understand ai ah but tl\?lnk is wonderful. They have to raise the monet^ for it 
and plan to. They will also have all of my work with it. 
I Inou little about computers save that they are wonderful and that it impossible 
for me, from my many limitations, to use them.'dell, I also know about ^llpfi^and recently 
I've been confronting a remarkably effective and no less dishonest GIGO*/ s used by 
Gerald P0cner in w^ndstitlod book that is worse than worthless. It represents misuse 
of this modem wonder. By him and to a degree by Failure Associates who, I take it , are 
near you. I had to wait to get an address before writing them. I'd like to have all they 
did for the ABA, which Posner hides along with hiding that they did both sides, for 
deposit in the arcliive at the college, but to place it there when I finish using it. I 
think for my purposes their desription of the defonso would be Adequate, I am doing a 
bobk on POsnor and his book, without knowing that it will ever be published but with the 
intent of making a record for our history. 
I'm a bit tired, I wander in thanking you#t , and i/ll enclose a list of the other 
book s in the evnt any’ may interest you. The first ono covers the fij£d as broadly as 
I then coi’ld, all of it stocks, not a word has been refuted, and unlike the books 
jjeorizing solutions by theorized conspiracies, it is entirely factual. 
Again, inapy thunks, sincerely, 
Harold ..eisberg 
«.wv*.na»» *T?'V- ■ 
1