Harold Weisberg
Routo 8,Frederick,Mid。21701
2/25/73
Mr.AoloWirins
Loa Angeles, Calif,
7
Dear Al.,
A voice from the past,aftor 36 1/2years!
Intermittently over these yeare I've kept up with your career of dedication to
ofit in the Washington Post.I've been in L.A. about three times since the end of
Bxoopt for some years in semi-retirement as a farmer,forced in part by the ralent
lessnesg of the Hill reactionaries who never forgave me for gotting a Dies agent indicted
and convicted,I've baen more or less the kind of activiat we both were.Would it sound
familiar wero I to say RcA?
branch,plus a few aupposedly friendly.I write about one of theae.My recent work ia
the most thoroughgoing exposure of the abuses and inproper methods of the FBI yet. My
knowledge of the literature goes back to Max Lowenthal, whose friend I was.Thus I have
been the subject of their interest,as I can prove only by the inds of vitmeases I would
not take to court, and of the CLas, where I have carbong of their surveillance on me.
the villain of the whitewashing of the investigation ot the JEK assassination,have
to Light leas than I now have about Oswald's intelligence connections.In the latter
connection, there is a prima facie case of E.Howard Hunts adverso intarcegsion when,
Ican8t tell you how many thousands of pages of FBI reporta Ihave （all properly),
but there are more than two thougand I have not yet had a chance to read.One of the
great diaappointments of the work I've done and alone atill do of those with original
intereat,is that no university has realize the value of what I have as an unofficial
archive.My investigations of the FBI have led me to nue it with success.I got a sumnary
judgement in one of the early Freedom of Infornation suits.(I tried without success
later,before I filed the first of thege suits.)I have what will undoubtedly be precedent
on the investigatoryfiles ezemption before the DC court of appeals now,with decision
long overdue. That Inhave them dead to rights and should win does not mean I'll prevailll undoubtedly be precedent
on the investigatoryfiles ezemption before the DC court of appeals now,with decision
long overdue. That Inhave them dead to rights and should win does not mean I'll prevail

nation was being considered by thh Judiciaxy comnittee
Anyway, as Ipressed my investigation oi the FBI in its role in the assassination
investigation,beginning in 1966 I started to publish F'BI reports in facsimile. Also &
smaller nuaber of those of the Seoret Service.In my third book, which dates to May,1967,

nature. There was more pressure against this book than any other。
Others in the field preferred maniacal generalities unsupported by proofs ofany
kind and generally their own inventions.For the less responsible elements of the minor
I became umattractive. One example is the LA Free Press. It went gumg ho! for Garrison.
If it ever mentioned my name,I an unaware of it。Art unkin asked for an interview

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and didn t keep the date.e also asked for copies of the book vith all tho FBI reports
them.He did acknowledgo receipt of them, copy encloaed.I have written him whenever myterview

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and didn t keep the date.e also asked for copies of the book vith all tho FBI reports
them.He did acknowledgo receipt of them, copy encloaed.I have written him whenever my

why.I lmow he is addicted to Garrdaon and muat have heard fron Garrison what that
ambulatorgtragedy thinks ofme
Anong thoso who ar not rosponsible,those who are are at least umpopular.Against me
the pressuzes have bacn so hoavyI think alnost anyone would wonder ifI'n paranoid
It io easier for mc to undorstand the orookedness of commercial elementsin pub
thousand copies of the book with ail the PBI reports in it, asked that I make up @
flyer for him with solectiona in facsinine for a special mailing to his customerg (cost
And,never paid for them,either.
(If as I presume you are not familiar with the field,I had to be my own pub
lisher.At the/autsetno publiaher would touch tho subject gnd once I invonted the
indorground book,maIwasunwelcone among established publishers。)
are anong the Kinkins.A recent example is an eminent pathologist who has flipped his
lid on the subject and done an enormous disservice without contributinganything to
what waskmown.Thisis what isreforred to in myuanswered letter of1/15/73 to Art
Kunkin,alsoenclosed.
Whether ar not what tho Froep did is plagiarism within the meaning of the lawI
dont,kmow。Ian nota lavyer.It is in fact ifnot in law。If itis legally plagiarism
I don't know if anything can be done about it.Broke as I am,there is not much I can
dosboutanythingo
However, the books they bought and didr t pay for plus the interest Ihave actually
paid on thia money,a relatively small sum bit sigmifioant to me today,is important to
me today。would you be kind cnough to forget that you are retired,give theni a call
asking then to payme th9 approximately S107.50,which includesintarest at71/2%,
what I pay? Even if the statute has run, they still might pay.
Whether or not you get to Wuahington I, of course, do not know. But if you do,
We are en hour out of towm,partway up the first of the moumtains to the northwcste
He live in a wocds, with wild animals whose apvearances are not prediokable, in rola
Thenks for anything you can do for me.And for all the truly fine things you
have doneovertheyearse
Sinceroly,
Harold Weisberg