The Coup In Chile: CIA Releases Top Secret 9/11/1973 President's Daily Brief

Published: Aug 25, 2023 | Briefing Book # 838 | Edited by Peter Kornbluh

After 50 years of Secrecy, Archive Applauds Release; Calls on Biden Administration to Declassify Remaining Secrets on Chile

BOOKS

The Pinochet File By Peter Kornbluh, The New Press , Updated edition (September 11, 2013)

Pinochet desclasificado By Peter Kornbluh, Un Dia en La Vida/ Editorial Catalonia (August, 2023)

The Condor Years: How Pinochet and His Allies Brought Terrorism to Three Continents By John Dinges , The New Press (A ugust 1, 2012 )

Los años del Cóndor (Spanish Edition) by John Dinges, DEBATE (June 1, 2021)

Washington, D.C., August, 25, 2023 - On the morning of the U.S.-backed military coup in Chile, the CIA briefed President Nixon that Chilean military officers were “determined to restore political and economic order” but “may still lack an effectively coordinated plan that would capitalize on the widespread civilian opposition,” according to the President’s Daily Brief (PDB) dated September 11, 1973, declassified today almost 50 years after it was written.

After withholding this document in its entirety for decades, the CIA finally released the September 11, 1973, PDB today in response to a formal petition from the Chilean government of Gabriel Boric for still secret records as the 50th anniversary of the coup approaches. The CIA also partially declassified a second PDB, dated September 8, 1973, which erroneously informed President Nixon that there was “no evidence of a coordinated tri-service coup plan” in Chile and said that “should hotheads in the navy act in the belief they will automatically receive support from the other services, they could find themselves isolated.”

The two PDBs are among the most historically iconic of missing records on the September 11, 1973, military coup because they contained information that went to President Nixon as a military takeover that he and his top advisor Henry Kissinger had encouraged for three years came to fruition.

In a press release, the State Department said that “the U.S. Government completed this declassification review in response to a request from the Government of Chile and to allow for a deeper understanding of our shared history.” The State Department said the release of the PDBs was “in accordance with our commitment to increased transparency.”

Peter Kornbluh, the Archive’s Chile specialist, who last year called on the Biden administration and the CIA to fully declassify the Chile PDBs, applauded the release. But he questioned why these two documents, which he said “contain not a single sentence that could compromise U.S. national security,” had been withheld in their entirety for decades. “I’m happy that the Freedom of Information Act, together with some positive diplomacy by the Chilean government, broke a secrecy barrier that has kept us from knowing this history for 50 years.”

Kornbluh noted that the Chilean government has asked the Biden administration to release other historically valuable, but still secret, U.S. records on Chile relating to the coup and its aftermath. “I hope the administration will reinforce its commitment to transparency by releasing all the documents that, inexplicably, remain secret after all this time,” he said.

CIA Director Richard Helms (L) and President Richard Nixon

Documents

CIA, "The President's Daily Brief," Top Secret, Briefing Paper, September 11, 1973
Sep 11, 1973 | Source CIA release

CIA, "The President's Daily Brief," Top Secret, Briefing Paper, September 8, 1973
Sep 8, 1973 | Source CIA release
