June 30, 1G68 
Mr, Frank Wright 
The Freedom Institute 
Iowa Wesleyan College 
Mount Pleasant, *owa 
Dear Mr, Wright, 
This letter is written at the suggestion of David Fluke, director of 
the war/peace program of the American Frlenda Service Committee, who is eons hst 
familiar with my work and writings, 
I an the author (end .perforce publisher) df the first critical 
analysis of tha Warren Report and the only one of the origins! "critics" to 
continue investigation and writing* I am tha only one to here made an in- 
depth examination of the once-secret files in the National Archives, I have 
a considerable file of these documents, including com© said hot to exist, 
some of which all copies ar-» thought to heve been eliminated In one way ©r 
another and, in fact, proof of the destruction of some. 
Publisher resistance OT thic* subject is incredible* Those with 
experience on "controversial" subjects (as though this should be onei) will 
not be ready to believe the actual history. The fesr and dislike that I esrned 
by self-publication, which really opened tha subject, added to this publisher 
fear of government on thia iasua, makea me virtually unpunishable. 
Four of my books have been printed. Three * had to publish myself, 
by offast reproduction of the retyped manuscript# These are, perhaps, our 
first "underground" books, I become co-publicher of the fourth in lieu of 
en advance and royalties, Thia and my continued work havr> been bankrupting, 
despite the auocesB of my first book, TOOTED ^SH-TOE REPORT ON THE WARDEN REPORT. 
So, 1 nave three move books that x have bean able to publish in only limited 
(xerox) editions. As my work continues, I will have more, I also have partial 
manuscripts for a number of ofher books. Whether they can ever be printed I 
do not know. But * am satisfied thia work must continue. 
In the course of this rather large inquiry Into the facta of the 
murder of tha President (and those subsequent murders I think it would be 
wrong to assume ere entirely unconnected) andxlta official Investigation, I 
hhve assembled extensive files that I think will ultimately make the nucleus 
of o valuable university archive, I think ray files now constitute an unusual 
archive on the functioning of government under and after major stress and on 
popular reaction to both* These flics, in addition to my analysis end the 
documents. Include extensive government correspondence, correspondence with 
many of the principals, r^joranda or/and tape-recordings of interviews with 
some of the witnesses and those who dioult have bean and were not called es 
witnesses. 
There ia no doubt In ny mind that tha murder of the President wasda or/and tape-recordings of interviews with 
some of the witnesses and those who dioult have bean and were not called es 
witnesses. 
There ia no doubt In ny mind that tha murder of the President was

--- PAGE BREAK ---'.vcS.'.-.v • VM.....

Nwri\\\ViV^\V4\Al^»V:V\AVk’A&^^^ t._.

i.^Vv;i.

1 ^,...,i ..

VuvV.'' V .V.

.

iiii*2Jk5^VC.'', a 
followed by immediate changes in policy, especially military and diplomatic.

I 
have a book on this already reeearched.

I have a tape-reco'ded interview with one 
of the lete President's closest military advisers confirming the specific change 
in Viet Nam policy that immediately ensued.

There likewise is no doubt that et the beet the federal investigative 
agencies imoodistely engaged in on enormous cover-up.

Thle I have thoefraghly 
documented from their own records.

To thia day they continue it end to this day 
oil are silent ot officiel conclusions that are contrary to their own.

The evidence I have assembled shows that without the murder of John 
Kennedy there would not have been the subsequent history in Viet Nam.

The 
subsequent murders of leading politicians served to make impossible changes in 
policy back to thet to which John Kennedy had shifted.

One of my limited 
editions is entitled COUP D'ETAT.

One of the by-products inevitable in this work has been the accumula- 
tion of a record on the FBI, its procedures, mthodc, excesses and outright 
dishonesties of various sorts unlike anything ftlsa, and I am familiar with the 
literature on it.

Included here IP what it suppressed (with Commission collabora- 
tion) on the involvement of the radical right« Here I have some of the suppressed 
flies and eoma of what *as suppressed ovtn from them - what the Commission 
never saw.

For example, I have the records on fbur separate Netiocel States 
Fights Party threats known to officialdom, one including what amounts to blue- 
prints of the Presidential and King murders and the name of the men plotting 
both - plus what may be e solution to tLe Birmingham church bombing.

Need I, in 
thia connection, note the possible significance of the feet that this party is 
how "defending" James Eerl Key?For example, I have the records on fbur separate Netiocel States 
Fights Party threats known to officialdom, one including what amounts to blue- 
prints of the Presidential and King murders and the name of the men plotting 
both - plus what may be e solution to tLe Birmingham church bombing.

Need I, in 
thia connection, note the possible significance of the feet that this party is 
how "defending" James Eerl Key?

r 
Odtfg D'ETAT deals, among other things, with the King murder.

I am 
now writing a large eddition to it.

It contains and will contain more of what 
is not publicly known and understood.

It is a totally shocking story, document- 
ing the total abdication of all leadership end responsible elements in ou;*-'society# 
Even more is this true of the two completed books of the three 1 plan on the 
Presidential autopsy.

Here I have documented from what is suppressed and mis- 
represented a deliberate federal misrepresentation of virtually every feet, 
with destructions of evidence, misrepresentation of what wsa not destroyed and 
whet wee - I connot, really, beginxto desc:ibe this briefly in a letter when 
three books will not exhaust it.

There is, I believe, nothing like this in 
history, certainly not in modern timas.

I also believe that without exomination 
of the evidence I hove ray word will not be credited.

Mr.

Finks thinks you raey be interested in ray work end possibly in 
helping with it.

I have, without success, esked a number of fbundations for 
help.

There is a permeating fsar of thia subject and what it involves end gets 
into# Because of President Johnson's shrewdness in appointing Earl Warren to 
hosd the Coraaission (whose members were manipulated by the staff and federal 
agencies end, largely, did not know what wes going on), liberals most of sll 
are efraid.

Thus they make defense of him impossible and play Into the h^nde of 
the extremists.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There is a permeating fsar of thia subject and what it involves end gets 
into# Because of President Johnson's shrewdness in appointing Earl Warren to 
hosd the Coraaission (whose members were manipulated by the staff and federal 
agencies end, largely, did not know what wes going on), liberals most of sll 
are efraid. Thus they make defense of him impossible and play Into the h^nde of 
the extremists. It la 8 strange anomaly that 1 have had no help from the libs rale 
but have gotten help from the rndicol-right. If you xight get interested in this work, I suggest the best wny is 
not to taka ray word for anything but to see for yourself what J hove. NoT^ only 
is this the rational way but without seeing what you fright regard as the impossible 
you would not be willing to believe it. Therefare, if you ere interested, I in- 
vite you or anyone ycu trust to aee parts of my file a, with the one restriction 
that my confidence be preserved, that no one be told of the contents. If you

--- PAGE BREAK ---re interested, I in- 
vite you or anyone ycu trust to aee parts of my file a, with the one restriction 
that my confidence be preserved, that no one be told of the contents. If you

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ilWlwNW • »cn>- AAUVattWtf.'. 
.‘.w^uW.v.A .> iuV~u., 
1 
accept this invitation, we are at Frederick, about t half mile from the closeet 
boundary of Fcfrt Detrick (J), about an hour from either Washington or the 
Baltimore airports. I would gladly moot a plane and providp transportation 
from and beck to it. Vt can also provide overnight accoroo'detion. 
If it will help your decision, or if you ero interacted* I will 
send you copies of what I have printed. My financial condition is so precarious 
I do not wont to send you whet you may have in person cr in your library. There- 
fore I enclose a list. Check whet you want and I will send them at* no coot. 
You will find no significant error in these books and none has ever been alleged. 
This subject is too enormous for many people to hare looked into it 
thoroughly. Moat of us writing about it know too little. It was made enormous 
end complicated as pert of the ^cver-up, to defy proper understanding and 
analysis. Therefore, those interested in peace ere without practical scans of 
learning that the assassinations end their official investigations are the 
b.6ort end eoul/ of today’s peace issue. 
1 
I think you cannot look into this at ell without agreeing that 
this is also the essential question about the integrity on^our society, 
including that of government, that all possibility of msn^s freedom is 
inextricably entwined with it, and that Q3 a consequence we hove great or 
danger of and pressure toward authoritarianism. Until we can establish sal 
get public understanding of the truths, society in any form like that we 
have known is in considerable Jeopardy. 
I do look forward to hearing from you and that you will 
interest yourself. 
Sincerely, 
cc Ur. Franklin Littell 
Harold Weisberg